On the Track of Unknown Animals (Heuvelmans, 1958)
==================================================
The founding text of cryptozoology: Heuvelmans' worldwide survey of unknown and out-of-place animals in seven parts and nineteen chapters — from the orang-pendek and the yeti to sea serpents and the mammoth of the taiga — in Richard Garnett's 1958 English translation, public domain. Scan via Internet Archive.

BERNARD HEUVELMANS


With an Introduction by
GERALD DURRELL


$7.50


At the beginning of the nineteenth century
Georges Cuvier, the “Father of Palaeon-
tology,”’ categorically stated that there was
little hope that any large animals were still
unknown. Since then have been discovered
the largest species of bear and gorilla, a white
rhinoceros, the pygmy elephant and hippo-
potamus, the bizarre okapi and the fabulous-
looking Komodo dragon, and dozens of other
large and unusual animals. Yet official zoo-
logy is still apt to repeat Cuvier’s dictum.
Dr Heuvelmans thinks otherwise, and with an
immense wealth of reference, ranging through
scientific literature in many languages from
classical writers to obscure monographs in
East Indian journals, examines the evidence
about the animals which may yet be found
and are still unknown to science. When na-
tives’ and hunters’
reports
of mysterious
animals and palaeontologists’ descriptions of
fossil species now thought to be extinct begin
to converge, may it not be that, like the
Coelacanth, the animal is not extinct after


_ all?


The creatures examined range from animals
like the spotted lion of Kenya and the Queens-
land marsupial tiger, which are unsensational
enough to be almost admitted in the official
catalogue of zoology, to the more mysterious
but equally well-documented
abominable
snowman and other lesser known ape-men
that have been reported in south-east Asia.
The author traces the history of the moa, the
giant sloth and the mammoth, all of which
were contemporary with man and are now
known to have survived until much later than
was at first thought, and argues that it is not
impossible that they may still exist. He shows
the close and fascinating similarity between
various animals such as the agogwe and the
kongamato which are firmly believed in by
many natives although they seem so strange
and terrifying as to be barely credible, with
the indisputable palaeontological discoveries
of such fossils as the Australopithecus, a tiny
ape-man, and even the Pterodacty]l.


The drawings of the animals on the cover are by
Monique Watteau. More information about them
will be found on pages 32, 112, 129, 193, 214
257» 303) 314, 413 and 474.


ZA Feerusey 1960 cero


ON THE TRACK OF UNKNOWN ANIMALS


—_


Ameranthropoides loysi, the only “unknown”? animal of which there is
a good photograph.


ON THE TRACK OF


Unknown Animals


sy Bernard Heuvelmans psc.


TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH BY Richard Garnett


WITH 120 DRAWINGS BY Monique Watteau


AND AN INTRODUCTION BY Gerald Durrell


W


HILL Ann WANG


NEW YORK


1959


Originally published in French in 1955 in two volumes as
Sur la Piste des Bétes Ignorées
Original French edition © Librarie Plon, 1955
English Translation © Rupert Hart-Davis, 1958


Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 59: 8519


Manufactured in the United States of America


TO
DR SERGE FRECHKOP


who first led me into the muddy field of mammalogy,


in deep gratitude


and in the hope that he will not take amiss


this excursion on the frontier of science and fantasy


Contents


INTRODUCTION BY Gerald Durrell
x7,


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
21


PART ONE


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


1. There are Lost Worlds Everywhere
25


2. Cuvier’s Rash Dictum
38


3. The Survivors from the Past
71


PART TWO


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


4. Nittaewo, the Lost People of Ceylon
87


5. Orang Pendek, the Ape-Man of Sumatra
108


6. The Not So Abominable Snowman
127


PART THREE


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


7. The Surrealist Dinosaur of New Guinea
185


8. The Incredible Australian Bunyips
191


9. The Queensland Marsupial Tiger
210


10. The Moa, a Fossil that may Still Thrive
221


11. Waitoreke, the Impossible New Zealand Mammal
246


fi


CONTENTS


PART FOUR


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


12. The Patagonian Giant Sloth
253


13. The Giant Anaconda and Other Inland “Sea-
Serpents”
284


14. Apes in Green Hell
305


PART FIVE


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


15. The Mammoth of the Taiga
331


PART SIX


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


16. Three Large Pygmies: the Forest Rhinoceros,


the Water Elephant and the Spotted Lion
357


17. The Nandi Bear, an East African Proteus
373


18. Mngwa, the Strange One
415


19. The Little Hairy Men
421


20. The Dragon St George Did Not Kill
435


21. Kongamato, the Last Flying Dragon
485


PART SEVEN


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


22. Tratratratra, Vorompatra, etcetera
499


BIBLIOGRAPHY
519


INDEX
543


Photographs


Ameranthropoides loysi (Musée de
Homme)
frontispiece


The Tatzelwurm (Balkin-Ullstein)
facing page 40


Cotton’s white rhinoceros (Antwerp Zoo)
40


Pygmy hippopotamus (Marcel Fraas)
40


Okapi (Congopresse)


Giant forest-hog (Goldner)


Grévy’s zebra (Lucien Rollet)


Przewalski’s horse ( Y/la—Rapho)


Mountain gorilla (Black Star)


Gelada (Rapho)


Giant panda (Suschitsky-Rapho)


Komodo dragon (Suschitsky-Rapho)


Pygmy chimpanzee (Antwerp Zoo)


Andean wolf (Umschau)


Spider (Sciences et Avenir)


King-crab (Popper-Atlas Photo)


Barramunda (Sciences et Avenir)


Latimeria (Sciences et Avenir)


Tuatara (Breckon—Elsevier)


Crocodile (Lucien Rollet)


Giant tortoise (YJ/a-Rapho)


Hoatzin (Popper—Atlas)


Fossil Archaeopteryx (Sciences et Avenir)


9


between pages 40-1


4I


4I


48


48


49
64


65
65


a2


72


between pages 72-3


73


73


PHOTOGRAPHS


Orang-utan (Popper—Atlas)
facing page 136


Swartkrans ape-man (Jllustrated London News)
136


Gibbon (Suschitsky-Rapho)
136


Abominable snowman’s trail
_
(Eric Shipton) \ between pages 136-7
Brown bear’s trail (Marcel Couturier)


Head-lama of Khumjung holding asnowman’s scalp
137


(Keystone)
The Pangboche scalp (Keystone)
137


Two-toed sloth (Popper-Atlas)
256


Three-toed sloth (7.-M. Baufie)
256


Armadillos (Suschitsky-Rapho and Popper-Atlas)
257


Jaguar (Popper—Atlas)
272


Otter (Popper—Atlas)
272


Anaconda (Popper—Atlas)
273


Frontispiece of John Browne’s Affecting Narrative
273


Spider-monkeys (Popper—Atlas)
312


The Berezovka mammoth (R. Viollet)
313


Mammoths’ tusks (R. Viollet)
313


Skin of the spotted mountain lion
368
(K. C. Gandar Dower)


Lion-cub (C.I.D.)
368


Cheetah (Yila-Rapho)
369


Mandrill (Yila-Rapho)
384


Spotted hyena (Antwerp Zoo)
385


Ratel (London Zoo)
385


East face of Ishtar Gate (Koldewey)
480


Reconstruction of Ceratosaurus by Charles R. Knight
481


Sirrush or dragon of the Ishtar gate (Koldewey)
481


Flying-fox (Popper—Atlas)
496


Hammer-headed bat (Popper—Atlas)
496


Lemurs (Popper—Atlas)
497


Io


22.


23.


Illustrations in the Text


Drawn by Monique Watteau


Naive drawing of the Tatzelwurm, 1836
A more plausible picture of the Tatzelwurm, 1841
The Mexican escorpidn (Heloderma horridum)


. White-backed tapir


. Water-chevrotain


Pygmy hippopotamus, compared with the large
species
The Himalayan takin
The mi-lu, or Pére David’s deer.
The giant panda’s closest relative, the panda
The gerenuk or Waller’s gazelle


. The peculiar pattern of the skin of Grévy’s zebra


The monkey-eating eagle of the Philippines


. The white rhinoceros compared to the black rhino-


ceros


. Mountain gorilla


. Mural drawing at Oued el Djerat of an animal


similar to the okapi


. Head of the giant forest-hog


. Lipotes vexillifer, the freshwater dolphin of Lake
Tung-Ting


. Congo peacock


The Lingula, a brachiopod, or lamp-shell, 400
million years old


. The crinoids or sea-lilies go back for some 300


million years


. The tuatara of New Zealand is older than the


great dinosaurs
The young hoatzin still has claws on its wings
Reconstruction of the Archaeopteryx


II


24.
25.
26.


. Gibbon walking on its hind-legs


. The Ceylon sloth-bear


. Man with a tail as a result of a rare atavistic freak


. Reconstruction of the Java ape-man


. The proboscis monkey of Borneo


. The orang pendek


. Footprint attributed to the orang pendek, found


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


A typical Negrito, an Aeta from the Philippines
Typical Veddah of Ceylon
The wanderoo or lion-tailed monkey


in 1915 by Dr Jacobson near the Danau Bento
swamp
Imprints made by the foot and second phalanges
of the hand of a walking orang-utan


. Footprints attributed to the orang pendek found on


21 September 1918, the left at Roepit and the right
on Boekit Kaba, by Lambermon


. Footprints attributed to the orang pendek found by


Mohamad Saleh; in the S. Aro forest, 25 January
1920; and near Air Roepit, January 1921
Footprints attributed to an orang pendek and its
young, found near Air Masoedje by Raden Kasan-
redjo


. Footprint attributed to the orang pendek which was


found on the Aer Teman estate compared with
that of the hind-foot of a Malayan sun-bear


. Malayan sun-bear on its hind-legs


. Reconstruction of the abominable snowman


. Comparison between a human trail and a bear’s


. Roxellana’s snub-nosed langur


. Himalayan langur


. Mouse’s trail


. Hypothetical trail


. Otter’s trail


. Outline of the left footprint of gorilla, snowman,


man, and bear


. Orang-utan walking in an upright, but still


quadruped, position


. First upper molar of Gigantopithecus compared


with the corresponding tooth in man


12


89
92


93
98
100
102


109
III
112


116


116


116


116


116


122
123
129


135
140
141
147
147
147


149


150


152


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


. Fragment of the jaw of Meganthropus compared


with the corresponding piece of a human jaw


. The arrangement of hair-tracts on a quadruped’s


back, the supposed snowman’s
scalp, and a
gorilla’s scalp


. Diplodocus


. Triceratops


. Stegosaurus


. Drawing of the New Guinea row based on Charles


Miller’s description


. Reconstruction of Struthiomimus, the ostrich-


lizard


. Spectral tarsier standing up


. Platypus suckling its young


. Reconstruction of the Diprotodon


Australian dugong


. Thylacine or Tasmanian pouched wolf


. The Queensland marsupial tiger-cat


. The New Zealand kiwi


. The conventional reconstruction of a large moa


. Probable appearance of some moas


. The takahe of South Island, New Zealand


. The cahow, or Bermuda petrel


. Sea-otter carrying its young


. Platypus swimming


. Giant anteater


. Reconstruction of the Megatherium


. Asian pangolin


. Piece of Mylodon’s hide


. Plan of the chamber in the Cueva Eberhardt


. Naive drawing of the su or succarath


. Portrait of an ai


. Major Percy Fawcett’s encounter with a 62-foot


anaconda


. Reconstruction of the Glyptodon


. Capuchin monkey


. Spider-monkey of Brazil


. Comparison of the shape and structure of the face


of the Ameranthropoid and the Pithecanthropus


13


154


17I


188


188
188


189


193
195
201


207


211
213
214
223


226
238


242


245
248


250


255
257
261


262
267


279
280


285


303
309
310


314


103.
104.


105.


106.


107.


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


. Comparison of the profile of a spider-monkey


and a capuchin


. The uakari, a South-American short-tailed mon-


key


. Head of a male walrus


85. Fantastic drawing of a mammoth, obtained by
Baron Kagg in 1722


. Woolly rhinoceros drawn on the side of a cave at


Font-de-Gaume in the Dordogne


. The mammoth as drawn by Boltunoff


. The mammoth as it really was


. Mammoth carved in reindeer horn found at


Bruniquel in 1868


. Picture of a mammoth on the wall of the cave at


Les Eyzies


. Mammoth in the cave at Font-de-Gaume


. Welwitschia mirabilis, a vegetable relic of the


Palaeozoic era


. Forest elephant compared with the larger savan-


nah elephant


. Footprint of the “strange beast” found by


Schindler on the Magadi railway


. Lion’s footprint


. Spotted hyena’s footprint


. The aardvark


. Reconstruction of a giant baboon


. When the ratel turns black with age it is very like


a bear


. Badger’s footprints


IOI.


102.


Reconstruction of the Chalicotherium
Early drawing of a chimpanzee (after Tyson,
1699)
Reconstruction of the Australopithecus
Wooden carving of the Jau by a native artist of
Iramba


Outline of the snout of the chief African croco-
diles


African catfish of the genus Clarias
Reconstruction of the Dinotherium


14


108


109.


II0.
IT.


II2.


£Y3.


II4.


II5.


116.


‘492


118.


119.


120.


ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


Australian monitor lizard, showing its con-
spicuously long neck
Reconstruction of the Iguanodon
Reconstruction of the Tyrannosaurus
Reconstruction of the Pterodactyl
The “flying dragon” or “‘butterfly-lizard”
Reconstruction of the Rhamphorhynchus
Head of the flying-fox
Head of the hammer-headed bat
Head of the false vampire bat
Aepyornis’s egg compared with an ostrich’s,
hen’s and humming-bird’s
The thanacth after André Thévet
The indris, the largest known living lemur
Skull of Hadropithecus


Maps


Drawn by K. C. Fordan


South-East Asia
Australia
New Zealand
South America
Siberia
Central Africa
Madagascar


15


475
481
483
486
488
489
492
493
494


501
508


509
512


Introduction


WHEN I was asked to write this introduction I agreed to do so with
somewhat mixed feelings, as for a number of years I had been collecting
material to write just such a book myself. However, after reading Dr
Bernard Heuvelmans’s book, my feeling of chagrin vanished, for I


realised that the amount of information I had collected and the amount


of research I had done were infinitesimal compared to his efforts.


Nowadays, to say you believe that in some parts of the world there
may be quite large animals unknown to science is tantamount to admit-
ting that you are slightly weak-minded. Come back from a remote
part of the world and report that you have seen something which does
not fit in with any category of known animal from that area, and you are
branded immediately as a drunkard or a liar—or preferably both. It
seems to me a very odd attitude to adopt, when you consider the vast
areas of the world that, although they may be adequately mapped, are
inhabited by only a scattered handful of people, most of whom have


little knowledge of, and little interest in, the local natural history. I am
referring now, of course, to what are laughably called “reliable sources
of information,” i.e. white officials on the spot. The indigenous in-
habitants are well known to be most unreliable, since they have spent
their whole lives on the spot and know most of the local countryside
intimately. The fact that the officials on the spot have generally very


little time for observing the animal life around them, and are in most


cases uninterested in natural history is, I think, one of the strongest
arguments in favour of finding unknown species.


I remember once in West Africa, after I had spent three or four
months there collecting animals for zoos, I had my collection housed
in a large marquee, and a local official paid me a visit to see the animals.
I had at that time some 250 different kinds, and as I led him from cage


to cage he became more and more amazed.


“I have spent twenty-five years on the coast,” he said to me, “and
I thought I knew it pretty well, but I have never seen any of these
things before. Are they all exceedingly rare?”


B
17


INTRODUCTION


Of course, the majority of the animals were not rare; some of them had
been caught in fact within a couple of hundred yards of this official’s
bungalow. As he had never taken the trouble to look for them, he had
never seen the creatures that inhabited his backyard in such quantities.


To say, therefore, that such a thing as a Nandi bear or an abominable
snowman cannot possibly exist is an extraordinary attitude, and you feel
that the people who adopt this argument would, on being presented
with a hand-tame abominable snowman in a wrought-iron cage, remark
—like the Irishman on seeing the giraffe for the first time—“I don’t
believe it.”


In the last 150 years an astonishing number of large animals have
come to light in the most odd places: the pygmy hippo, for example, in
Liberia; and the okapi. This latter animal, incidentally, was known
only as an extinct relative of the giraffe until it was discovered living and
breeding in the Congo forests. In more recent years there was the dis-
covery of the Congo peacock; the Indo-Chinese forest-ox; the Komodo
dragon; and the king cheetah. This latter is, perhaps, the most surpris-
ing, since it was found in Rhodesia almost within a stone’s throw of the
capital of Salisbury, in an area that had been so well traversed by big-
game hunters and zoologists that you would have thought nothing as
large as this could have remained undiscovered so long. Most of these
animals were known first from native reports about them, and, of course,
in many cases the reports were disbelieved, since, as everyone knows,
primitive tribesmen all over the world spend their spare time making
up stories about animals in order to confuse and delude European
zoologists.


It is curious how little faith is placed in a native report. The fact that,
in the case of large predatory animals, the reports will naturally be
highly coloured and exaggerated is surely no reason for dismissing them
out of hand. When I was collecting in the Cameroons once, I obtained
some rather unusual forest tortoises and lavished upon them all the
foods that are normally beloved of the tortoise family: fruit, succulent
leaves and occasional pieces of meat. To my extreme annoyance the
tortoises refused to touch any of this food and grew thinner and thinner,
An elderly native hunter one day, watching me trying to persuade the
reptiles to eat, informed me, with ill-concealed amusement, that I was
giving them the wrong thing. He went off into the forest and after some
time returned carrying a calabash full of small white forest mushrooms.
Before my disbelieving eyes he scattered these in front of the tortoises,
and they fell upon them with avidity. Now, had he informed me that


18


INTRODUCTION


these creatures ate forest mushrooms, I would, I regret to admit, have
dismissed it as just another native tale.


So the argument of the sceptics runs: native reports are unreliable,
and in any case the country is so well traversed that how could any large
unknown species escape observation.
Of all the parts of the world
where you would think this argument held good you could hardly pick
two better places than Bermuda and New Zealand. You would imagine
by now that both would have been pretty thoroughly explored and
worked over by zoologists and ornithologists, and yet since the end of


the war two supposedly extinct species have been rediscovered, in


Bermuda the cahow and in New Zealand the Notornis. When you think


that these birds have been living and breeding in little pockets, as it


were, under the very eyes of competent observers for so long without


discovery, it is surely not straining credibility too far to imagine that in


the vast, sparsely inhabited, or completely uninhabited areas of the


world, such as the Congo forests, the great swamps of Africa, the Matto


Grosso, the thick evergreen forest of Patagonia, or on the huge shining


ramparts of the Himalayas, there may be found animals unknown to


science.


Take the unfortunate, long-suffering sea-serpent as an example.’ So
much scorn and ridicule has been poured on the heads of those who
stated in the past that they had seen curious monsters in the sea, that
nowadays if one hauled itself ashore on Brighton beach during August
Bank holiday, you would probably have difficulty in obtaining twelve
witnesses who would be willing to come forward and risk the storm of
disbelief that would descend upon them. Why, the experts would cry,
don’t we see them more often if there are such things? Why have their
dead bodies never been washed up on shore? Of course, the reason we
don’t see them more often should become reasonably obvious to anyone
who takes the trouble to glance inside a school atlas and work out the
proportion of the world that is covered by sea, and the proportion of


the sea that is covered by regular shipping routes. As regards the sea-


serpent’s corpse, one could point out that round the land masses of the


world there is a fairly extensive shore-line, and most of it so sparsely


inhabited that a couple of dozen sperm-whales could lie and rot in the


sun without even being noticed. I wonder what proportion of people


(even interested naturalists), who have spent all their lives in Africa,


have seen the corpse of an elephant that has died from natural causes?


1 The sea-serpent, with other unknown marine animals, will be dealt with in
a separate work.


19


INTRODUCTION


But the chief argument against the sea-serpents appears to be that if they
do exist they must of necessity be a form of “prehistoric monster.” Why
everyone should consider this so impossible, I have yet to discover. The
crocodile and the tortoise have come down to us almost unchanged
through millions of years. The tuatara, of New Zealand, is a living


fossil, as also is the okapi. And it is difficult to deny the prehistoric
qualities of the Coelacanth.


Of course, the scientists want positive proof of the existence of these
“mythical” creatures in the shape of skins and skulls, but they would
make much better use of their energies in looking for them, rather
than wasting their time desperately trying to disprove the few bits of
evidence we have. It would be more to the point if they tried to obtain
an abominable snowman rather than trying to prove that he does not


exist by the curious argument that his enormous footprints are created
by a leaping monkey the size of a dog.


Up to now most zoologists have treated the whole subject of sea-
serpents, abominable snowmen and similar creatures as something that


is not quite nice. It is as though they feel there were some gigantic
conspiracy afoot to undermine their ideas of what does and what does
not exist in the world. This attitude has made it extremely difficult to
get at the facts behind reports of these alleged creatures. Whether they


exist or not, it was essential for someone to collect all the reports and


sift them through for publication. If the animals do exist and are
discovered, this book will prove a valuable piece of research. If, on the
other hand, it is proved that they do nor exist, the book loses none of its
value, for it becomes an important contribution to zoological mythology.


In this book Dr Bernard Heuvelmans has marshalled an astonishing
parade of unknown animals, and he has done so with great skill and


scientific detachment, resisting the temptation to sensationalise.
To
anyone who is interested in animal life it will provide a spur, making him


feel he should leave immediately on the trail of one of these strange
creatures. In these days of high-speed travel the world has become a
rather drab place from an explorer’s point of view, so it is nice to think
that in the few remaining inaccessible parts of the globe there may
be animals unknown to science, awaiting discovery. It is pleasant to
imagine that the grandeur of the Himalayas shelters an abominable
snowman, or that in the swamps of Africa there may be scaly monsters
sporting in the waters, as their ancestors did millions of years ago, but it
is to be hoped that they occasionally allow themselves to be discovered,
if only to confound the sceptics.
GERALD DURRELL


20


Acknowledgments


THIS English edition is in many respects better than the original
French edition published in 1955. It has been brought up to date and
many errors and inexactitudes corrected; moreover, while much sub-


sidiary matter has been abridged by the translator, a vast amount of


unpublished material has been added. Some important chapters have


been rewritten and several new illustrations have been included.


I am deeply grateful to the large number of people who, by giving me
information which has often been invaluable, have helped me to compile
my dossiers, particularly: Excellentissima Senhora Anna Isabel de Sa
Leitdo Teixeira of Rio de Janeiro; Professor A. Ledoux of the Faculty
of Science at Toulouse; Dr Serge Frechkop and Dr André Capart of
the Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences; Professor Paul Bonnivair,
Honorary Inspector-General of Agriculture in the Belgian Congo; M.
Lucien Blancou, Chief Game-Inspector of the French Colonies; Pro-
fessor N. Boeff of the Faculty of Biology and the Zoological Garden at


Sofia; M. Georges Sandrart, formerly the Resident in Ruanda-Urundi;
the late Dr Walter Tamm, Director of the Hospital at Soerabaya;
M. H. Dumont, French Consul at Bombay; M. Henri Pitaud, Director
of the Sociedad de Estudios Franco-Paraguayos of Asuncion; Count
Guy de Germiny of Florence; Count Christoph Vojkffy of Schloss Zeil,
Wiirttemberg; M. Pierre Srinati of Geneva; M. Robert Kirch of Spiez;
M. Jean Delaborde, formerly Chief Paymaster of the French Navy;
Colonel Alex Godart, late of the Belgian Congo Police; Commandant
Imbard, of the Territory of the Ouargla Oases in Algeria; M. Henry
Thétard, Founder of the Colonial Zoo at Vincennes; Dr Sam Thomas
of London; Maitre Marcel Bouquet of Casablanca; M. Morel, the
chemist at Rosendaél; Sefior Léo Bottenwieser of Buenos Aires, M.
Jacques Blanchard of Paris, M. C. A. Loverdo of Athens; M. Pol Caput
of Bordeaux; M. Cyrille de Neubourg and Charles H. Dewisme, the


writers; and finally Mr Richard Garnett, the author of the present


translation, who has proved to be not only a translator, but also a


most diligent and valuable collaborator.


21


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I should like to thank in advance any readers in Britain and America
—which have given so many travellers, explorers, naturalists and
scholars to the world—who can help me to complete my dossiers, either
with their own evidence or by pointing out published material that I
have overlooked.


I should like to take the opportunity of thanking those distinguished
figures in the world of Natural History who have encouraged me in my
researches into animals as yet undescribed by science, particularly
Professor Roger Heim of the National Museum of Natural History in
Paris and President of the International Union for the Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources, Professor Edouard Bourdelle, also of


the Paris Museum, and Dr Maurice Burton, late of the British Museum
(Natural History).


I must also acknowledge my debt to those who have gone before me


‘fon the track of unknown animals,” in particular Philip H. Gosse, the
Victorian naturalist, Willy Ley, Frank W. Lane, Dr Ingo Krumbiegel,
and especially Ivan T. Sanderson, some of whose writings gave me the
idea of this book.


Finally I should like to thank those who have given me permission to
quote lengthy passages from their books: William Heinemann Ltd for
The Spotted Lion by Kenneth Gandar Dower; Funk & Wagnalls for
Lost Trails, Lost Cities (published in England under the title Explora-


tion Fawcett) by Percy H. Fawcett; The Viking Press for The Lungfish,


the Dodo and the Unicorn (published in England under the title The
Lungfish and the Unicorn) and Dragons in Amber by Willy Ley; Simon
& Schuster for Trader Horn by Alfred Aloysius Horn; Doubleday &
Co. for The Abominable Snowman (published in England under the
title The Abominable Snowman Adventure) by Ralph Izzard; Museum
Press Ltd for Cannibal Caravan by Charles Miller; Mrs J. G. Millais
for Far Away up the Nile by J. G. Millais; E. P. Dutton for The Mount
Everest Reconnaissance Expedition by Eric Shipton.


BERNARD HEUVELMANS.


22


Part One


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY
ARE NOT DONE


And no one has a right to say that no water-
babies exist, till they have seen no water-babies
existing; which is quite a different thing, mind,
from not seeing water-babies; and a thing which
nobody ever did, or perhaps ever will do.


“But surely if there were water-babies, some-
body would have caught one at least?”’


Well. How do you know that somebody has
not?


“But they would have put it into spirits, or into
the Illustrated News, or perhaps cut it into two
halves, poor dear little thing, and sent one to
Professor Owen, and one to Professor Huxley, to
see what they would each say about it.”’


Ah, my dear little man! that does not follow at
all, as you will see before the end of the story.


CHARLES KINGSLEY, The Water-Babies.


—
\
ie
EN
ee page t=
as
5
Pos:


™
ch
Se
he Set


CHAPTER ONE


There are Lost Worlds Everywhere


I think it is arrogant from a scientific point of
view to deny the existence of things one does not
Know. I am not one of those scientists—respect-
able ones at that—who decree from their studies
that the surprising stories of seeing unknown
giant animals are mere fables.
I maintain that
the world still hides numerous species of giant
and monstrous animals.


LORENZ HAGENBECK,
director
of Hamburg
Zoo, to a journalist.


Even to-day there are in every part of the world
inaccessible areas where there certainly exist wild
creatures unknown to naturalists.


JOSEPH DELMONT, the great animal-catcher.


MosrT zoologists are sceptical about the possibilities of discovering new
species of large animals, and some of them do not, with legitimate
scientific scepticism, keep an open mind until the species is proved to


exist, but categorically deny that it can possibly do so until they have
been forcibly proved wrong. Their obstinacy is based on three pro-
positions: the world has now been completely explored; no new animals
have been discovered for a long time—at least not since the okapi; and
many of the animals alleged to exist are fossil species and therefore long
extinct. All three propositions are fallacies, as I hope to show in the first


three chapters of this book.


Since this is the official attitude it is hardly surprising that the man in


the street is contemptuous of the stories of unknown animals, often


circumstantial and from reliable sources, so often and so summarily


reported in the Press. Small wonder too that journalists are apt to treat


the subject with facetious irony. And all too often their suspicions are


justified.


25


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


In 1950 a photographic agency circulated a picture of a huge beast
stranded on a beach near Suez, which according to the caption was a
“mystery Sea-monster.” The creature in the photograph seemed to be
a big whale with large curved tusks, but to the informed eye there was no
doubt that it was an ordinary whale whose jaw-bones had been pushed
out of its jaw by an accident: it had probably hit a mine or a ship’s
screw.


Just before the war, a number of newspapers and magazines an-
nounced that a living ape-man, called Azzo, had been discovered in
North Africa, and published a photograph of him. Actually he was a
poor microcephalous idiot, one of those cretins with a stunted skull that
one sometimes finds among freaks in fair-grounds.


But a few bloomers of this kind do not mean that all reports of un-
known animals are untrustworthy. Because one has been taken in by a


liar there is no reason to disbelieve honest men. Yet this is what the
public and the journalists do. And often this has disastrous results. The
Press made such a laughing-stock of the Loch Ness monster, even
though most of the local inhabitants had good reason for believing in it,


that no scientific commission has ever dared to tackle the problem of
what may be one of the most exciting zoological discoveries of the
century.
All because of the pernicious official attitude, based upon
three fallacies.


The world is by no means thoroughly explored. It is true that we
know almost all of its geography, there are no more large islands or
continents to be discovered. But because a country is on the map it
does not mean that we know all about its inhabitants. There are still
more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in Horatio’s
philosophy.


Let us begin with the most unknown but least hopeful continent,
Antarctica.
It covers 5 million square miles, the area of the United
States and Western Europe put together, and even after the Inter-
national Geophysical Year is over I doubt if more than half of it will
have been explored. Of course it is the most inhospitable country in the
world, and boasts no known terrestrial mammals, The only amphibious
ones, the seals, rarely venture far from the coast, nor do the penguins,
petrels, gulls and skuas, which are all sea-birds. There is little hope of
finding unknown mammals or birds in the middle of Antarctica, but
there is a faint chance. During Admiral Byrd’s great 1947 expedition
to explore the continent, some of his airmen flying over Wilkes Land
near the Knox Coast found an area the size of a small county, quite


26


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


free of snow and ice, 5 miles inland and 110 miles from the open sea.
Bunger’s Oasis, as it was named after David Bunger, who was the first


to see it, was visited by helicopters and found to be scattered with


small pools of salt water, full of seaweed of different colours. No doubt


Antarctica holds other surprises.1


Greenland is hardly any better known. The central and northern
parts have never been trodden by the foot of white man. But all this
country has frequently been flown over by low-flying aircraft, from
which you can clearly see seals lying in the sun and polar bears which


are sometimes found 500 miles inland.
On this white background
everything stands out like a flea on a white sheet. This is why Paul-


Emile Victor, the great French polar explorer, writes: “Perhaps one


day hitherto unknown species of animals will be discovered in these


regions.
But it should be understood that they will only be small


animals, like insects for instance.”


Africa is infinitely better explored, but holds more promise for the


naturalist. Although none of it is utterly unknown, except for a few
patches in the middle of the Kalahari Desert, and thus there are few of
those intriguing white blanks left on the map, much of it has been
mapped but not explored. The geographer has only to take a series of
geodesic bearings, often from mountains a long way off, to follow the
course of rivers by canoe or along their banks and to fill in the gaps with


aerial photographs. The naturalist’s work often begins where the geo-
grapher leaves off, and the use of aerial photography gives the illusion
that the world is much better known than it is. For there is not the
least hope of finding out from an aerial photograph of forests or steppes
of tall grass and bush what animals live there, even if they are as large


as an elephant or a rhinoceros. There is even less if they are aquatic
animals like the hippopotamus, the manatee and most of the large


reptiles.


The likeliest country to contain large unknown animals is the great
equatorial rain-forest in which six of the most important zoological


1 It does. I have just learnt that in April 1958 the Soviet ship Ob discovered a
new island 18 square miles in area, 450 miles from Vincennes Bay. What is far
more extraordinary, Youri Technik of April 1958 reports that a Soviet expedition
from Mirny found a warm lake 55 miles inland on the Antarctic continent in
which there were baby seals less than a month old. Presumably they had been
born there, but even so it is almost impossible to imagine their mothers crawling
55 miles—and what could they find to feed on?


27


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


discoveries of the present century have been made. The American
naturalist Herbert Lang writes of it:


Whoever penetrated here was, so to speak, “‘on the wing,” and wings
beat doubly fast across these inhospitable regions.
The numerous
sportsmen who had visited nearly all parts in Africa found no attraction
in these forests.
Indeed, the many pale, haggard faces that emerged
from the western half of equatorial Africa were no incentive for
pleasure-seeking people. The immensity of the wilderness is appalling;
for over eighteen hundred miles without a break it stretches more than
half-way across the continent, from the coast of Guinea to the Ruwen-
zori. In spite of tropical luxuriance, it is one of the most dismal spots
on the face of the globe, for the torrid sun burns above miles of leafy
expanse, and the unflagging heat of about one hundred degrees day and
night renders the moist atmosphere unbearable. Over the whole area
storms of tropical violence thunder and rage almost daily.
Here
natives have become cannibals, and the graves of thousands of white
men are merely a remembrance of where youthful energy and adven-
tures came to a sudden end.


Other little-known areas in tropical Africa are the mountainous parts
of Kenya and Katanga and the areas of swamp or scattered lakes which
might shelter large unknown animals; that is to say the Rhodesian lakes,


the Addar marshes, which cover 1,500 square miles, or those of the
Bahr-el-Ghazal, a tributary of the White Nile in Sudan, which are even
more vast and some parts of which have never been crossed.


In Asia the Arabian desert of Dahana is, according to the geographer
Maurette, ‘‘the least explored in the world.
It is infinitely less well-
known than the poles.” But this arid and sterile tomb of ancient


civilisations is chiefly of interest to the archaeologist. There is more for
the naturalist in the foothills of the Himalayas and the valleys in the
north and south-east of this great mountain range and in the vast
Siberian coniferous forest, the taiga. In 1955 Soviet geographers were
surprised to discover that whole ranges of mountains in the Kolyma and
Indiguirka areas, the general shape of which was supposed to be known,
actually stretched in quite unexpected directions. Where mountains
can so long remain unknown, there is good hope for the naturalist.


Zoologists have far from exhausted the wealth of the tropical jungle
in such supposedly known lands as India, Burma, the Moi country in
Indo-China, Malaya, central Borneo and Sumatra. Nothing whatever is
known about the mountainous centre of New Guinea except that
various tribes, many of them pygmies, still live there in the Stone Age.
In 1938 the American naturalist Richard Archbold accidentally dis-


28


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


covered in the western part of the island an excellently irrigated valley
inhabited by 60,000 people. And in June 1954 patrol aircraft found
quite unknown tribes in valleys in the south-west. Their population
was estimated at 100,000, a third of the number of Papuans already
known.


Most of the interior of Australia is covered with deserts of sand, salt
and thorny bush. Even the least inhospitable parts are steppes of tall
grass scattered with stunted shrubs. Hardly anybody goes there except


a few prospectors, who come back with tales of animals so fantastic that


they are usually thought to be drunken visions. But anything can hap-


pen in a continent where there are ranges of mountains which have


never been seen except from an aeroplane.


The continent that holds the most mysteries is certainly South
America. There are dozens of blank spots on the map. On the more
accurate surveys the Amazon basin is as full of holes as a Gruyére
cheese. Bertrand Flornoy, who has spent much of his life exploring this
country, calls it “a vast night of trees which stretches for two million
square miles.” Four centuries of exploration have not got to the bottom
of it, because, as Flornoy says:


The virgin forest constantly opposes man’s efforts with its irresistible
power which transforms all decay into new life in a matter of hours. A
path is no sooner opened than the jungle wipes it out. And, if you fly
over the Amazonian forest, towns like Belem and Manaos in Brazil and
Iquitos in Peru look like clearings. As to the clearings in which the
Indians live, they are invisible.


Besides the heart of the Matto Grosso, a large part of Colombia is
unknown, at least in practice, and so is the hinterland of Venezuela and
Guiana and a large chunk of the Cordillera of the Andes. The wooded
part of Patagonia is far from being thoroughly explored.


There is one part of South America which is of special interest, since


it is a perfect example of an almost inaccessible nature reserve. It lies


in that corner of Venezuela which includes the sources of the Orinoco.


There, among the almost impenetrable jungle of the Gran Sabana, rise


the mesas, vast limestone plateaux cut off from the rest of the world by


sheer cliffs between 3,000 and 10,000 feet high. Some of these mesas are


almost 20 miles long, great islands of thick vegetation about which often


nothing is known. On those which have been explored rodents have


been found that are unknown in the local forests but recall those of the


Venezuelan Andes hundreds of miles to the west. In any case these


29


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


plateaux are not easy to reach. In 1937 Jimmy Angel tried to land his
aircraft on the top of the Auyan Tepui mesa (or Devil’s Mountain) but
crashed in a swamp not far from the edge of the cliff. Even so, he was
able to explore only a few hundred yards from the site of the crash, for
the mesas are split by a network of deep crevasses. It was on this same
mesa that Jimmy Angel recently discovered a waterfall fifteen times
higher than Niagara. From the sheer 5,000-foot wall of Auyan Tepui
gigantic columns of water fall 3,200 feet. As the top of the waterfall was
usually hidden in clouds, the Taurepan Indians long ago told the
conquistadors that there were terrible waterfalls that fell directly from
the sky. Naturally they were not believed.


This may give some idea how little we know of the Venezuelan Gran
Sabana. If the highest waterfall in the world should have remained so
long unnoticed, how can we be sure that this country does not still
conceal some unknown animals, even quite large ones? I do not suggest
that we can hope to emulate Professor Challenger’s success in Conan
Doyle’s famous precursor of science fiction, The Lost World, when he
found on a similar plateau all the enormous reptiles from all parts of the
world in the Mesozoic era and even some ape-men.! But it is absurd to


insist that there can be mo unknown animals in such little-known
country.


In any case, animals of a past age do not need to be imprisoned on a
small island or on the top of a mesa to be preserved from destruction by
their subsequent competitors. A continent or large island will do as well.
Australia is the marsupials’ “lost world” ;
Madagascar the lemurs’; and
New Zealand that of the rhynchocephalous reptiles and a once-flourish-
ing empire of birds. Even on continents a particular habitat, unsuitable


for most other creatures, can provide a very safe retreat for the species


that have managed to adapt themselves to it.


But in fact for the zoologist the whole world is terra incognita, and
not only for the ichthyologist who may bring up a new species every
time he hauls in his net. On land there is still hope of finding many
new species—especially of small animals.


1 As the great Colonel Fawcett has pointed out, this story was based not on
the mesas but on the very similar Ricardo Franco Hills, farther south on the
borders of Brazil and western Bolivia.


* During a systematic fishery of the Gulf of California in 1952 no less than
50 néw species of fish were found. Yet the ichthyologists later realised that
some of them could have been picked up with less trouble in the Mexican
markets where they were regularly offered for sale.


30


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


The entomologist can make a scientific discovery by exploring his
own garden. Nor need those concerned with other small freshwater or
land invertebrates go far afield. In deep wells, caves and underground
streams they can be sure of new and interesting finds. Cave-explorers
bring so many new and unknown forms of life to the surface that a whole
new branch of science has been formed to record and study their


discoveries.


But if we are content with small things [writes Dr Maurice Burton],
insects, spiders and the like, there is no need to search the inaccessible
places; we may quite easily find new forms on our doorstep.


The entomologist has the largest haul, which is hardly surprising,
since three-quarters of a million kinds of known animals belong to the
troublesome insect empire. On the average 5,000 new species or sub~
species of insects are described each year.
Discoveries of new land
vertebrates—which are what we are concerned with here—are obviously


less frequent, since there are altogether only 60,000 species and sub-
species of amphibians, reptiles, mammals and birds known today. The
following table will give some idea of how the numbers of known forms
have increased since Linnaeus made his fundamental classification. The
subsequent stages are marked by the works of those who have attempted


a census or estimate of this kind. The figures for 1960 are, of course,
approximate and have been obtained by extrapolation, producing the
curve formed by the earlier figures.


Leunis
:
‘
Karl
W.
Ee Libra)
VLadoig (Mobius |. Amdt “|
¢rggoy
(1886)
(1898)
(1939)


Amphibians
& Reptiles
.
181
239
3,400
5,000
5,461
6,000
Mammals
;
183
386
25300
3,500 | 13,000 | 17,000
Birds
.
-
444
765
10,150 | 13,000 | 28,000 | 37,000


These figures imply that since the beginning of this century an


average of about 15 reptiles or amphibians, 220 mammals and 400 birds


have been described each year. Of course this does not mean that they


were all really new and hitherto unknown.
It is a pet foible of many


zoologists to create new species and sub-species on the strength of barely


perceptible differences, often by arbitrary divisions of known forms. All


the same, we can reckon that one in ten of these descriptions refers to a


clearly distinct species. Therefore each year the catalogue includes some


31


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


40 birds and 20 mammals that were hitherto unknown. The former are
usually small song-birds, the latter little rodents or bats or even small
marsupials or insectivores. Reptiles and amphibians are much rarer and
almost an exception: there are no more than one or two a year.


As soon as you set about looking for large animals the area of the
world to be searched becomes much smaller, and is generally restricted
to the places I have detailed above. All the same, we should not forget
that even without Antarctica, the regions that are little known or quite
unexplored amount to no less than one tenth of the land surface of the
globe.


Anyone who has travelled will agree that even in the supposedly
best-known parts of the world there are less accessible areas where
unknown animals might hide. In the Swiss, Bavarian and Austrian
Alps a sort of stumpy “lizard” at least 2 to 3 feet long has frequently


1. Naive drawing of the Tatzelwurm from a Bavarian hunting manual
published in 1836.


been reported, although no one has succeeded in capturing a specimen.
In fact the Tatzelwurm, or ‘worm with feet,” is well known to all the
Alpine people, though its name varies from valley to valley; sometimes


it is Bergstutzen (“mountain-stump”’), sometimes Springwurm (“jump-
ing worm”) in Tyrol, and sometimes Daazlwurm or Praatzelwurm. In
the Bernese Oberland it is usually called Stollenwurm (“tunnel-worm’’).


It even appears in a Bavarian handbook for sportsmen and naturalists,
the Neues Taschenbuch fiir Natur- Forst- und Jagdfreunde auf das Fahr
1836, where there is a curious picture of a sort of scaly cigar, with
formidable teeth and wretched little stumps of feet. This picture was
not drawn by the author himself, but from a description given by a
friend who had shot one.


In the Alpenrosen, a Swiss almanac, for 1841, there is a picture of a
Stollenwurm that is more probable and less of a caricature. At all events


it is a better likeness of the beast described by the famous Swiss


naturalist Friedrich von Tschudi in 1861 in his classic work on Alpine


fauna, Das Thierleben der Alpenwelt:


32


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


In the Bernese Oberland and the Jura the belief is widespread that
there exists a sort of “‘cave-worm’’ which is thick, 3 to 6 feet long, and
jrabinks short legs; it appears at the approach of storms after a long dry
spell.


He says that “many honest and respectable people swear that they
have seen it with their own eyes,” and that at one time its identity was
near to being discovered:


In 1828 a peasant in the Solothurn canton found one in a dried-up
marsh and put it aside intending to take it to Professeur Hugi. But in
the meantime the crows ate half of it. The skeleton was taken to the
town of Solothurn, where they could not decide what it was and sent it
to Heidelberg—where all trace of it was lost.


This was a good opportunity missed, for even today no skin or
carcase of what may be the largest reptile in Europe has ever been
examined by a naturalist.


There can be no doubt that it exists. An inquiry made in the 1930’s


od a0) R D>


8th 7 4.
Rt
Es


Sy
Ey
R
IK
HY?
REV TN
%
ADO Ty RD a
Ys
Sey ee yeaa -
pa


2. A more plausible picture of the Tatzelwurm from the
Swiss almanac Alpenrosen, 1841


by local newspapers and scientific magazines brought to light the evi-
dence of some 60 witnesses. They all agreed that it was between 2 and
3 feet long and more or less cylindrical in shape, the tail end of the body
ending rather abruptly. It was brownish on the back and lighter under-
neath. It had a short and thick tail; there was no narrowing at the neck;
and its heavy and blunt-nosed head had large, round eyes. Its legs were
slender and small; and some even maintained that it had no hind-legs


at all. Some, but not all, said it had scales, but in any case it hissed like


a snake,


Naturally some of the legends about the Tatzelwurm are suspect. It


is said to be able to jump 2 or 3 yards, to be oddly aggressive for a lizard,


to attack and wound cattle, and even to be venomous—so venomous that


“its breath alone can kill you.”’ But not all of these superstitions are so


exaggerated. In 1908 a professional hunter, in whom A. von Draseno-


vitch had complete confidence, told this Austrian Privy Councillor that


he had met the beast near Murau in Steiermark some 5,000 feet up. It


looked like a monstrous worm 18 inches long and 3 inches thick, but


Cc
33


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


with four very short legs. Knowing its reputation, the hunter prudently
drew his knife before approaching. As soon as he came close the beast
flew in his face; he replied with his knife, but the blade would hardly
penetrate its leathery skin. The “worm” made half a dozen attacks
before it retreated into a crack in the rock to nurse its wounds. Despite
the hunter’s persistent attempts he could not make it come out or even.
find it again.


Although the stories about the Tatzelwurm are so common and so
similar, many people have doubted its existence.
One of the most
frequent versions is that it is a stray otter; and indeed this animal could
make fairly long jumps and hiss like a snake (or like a cat, for that
matter). Another suggestion, made by the Swiss naturalist Revilliod,


is that it is a mangy badger that has lost its fur. But those who had seen
the beast, many of whom knew the local fauna well, insisted that they
were not such fools as to mistake an otter or a bald badger for a
Tatzelwurm.


Other sceptics have asserted that the legend will not hold water, since


lizards are never venomous. This may be true as a rule, but there are
two exceptions: the Gila monster of Texas and Arizona (Heloderma
suspectum) and the Mexican escorpidén (H. horridum). These big lizards,


3. The Mexican escorpién (Heloderma horridum).


which may reach a length of 2 feet 6 inches, well deserve all their names,


for on their lower jaw they have a whole row of venomous fangs. When
they bite they bury their hooked teeth in so deep it is impossible to
make them let go. But though it is very painful to be bitten by one, it is
not fatal for man.


They are squat, with a short, thick tail and fit the Tatzelwurm’s des-


cription so well that Jakob Nicolussi, an Austrian schoolmaster, went so


34


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


far as to baptise it Heloderma europaeum. He was too hasty, for the
beast’s identity is far from being definitely established.


On the other hand, the Tarzelwurm’s venom may well be merely a
myth invented by the popular mind. There will be many instances in


this book where people have tried to justify their fear of the unknown
by pretending that a creature they rarely see is more terrifying than it


really is. A correspondent of mine, Robert Kirch of Spiez in the


Bernese Oberland, thinks that the Tatzelwurm may be a kind of large


slow-worm, adding: “As to its terrible and dangerous character, it


would seem merely that it is not so gentle as the slow-worm, that it


doesn’t like being tormented, and defends itself when it is attacked.”


The slow-worm or blind-worm—or glass-snake as it is called in
America—is of course neither a worm nor a snake, but a legless lizard.
This tendency towards leglessness is noticeable in several families of
burrowing lizards. Thus the skinks have legs so small that they barely
touch the ground, and the two-legged worm-lizard of Mexico (Bipes
caniculatus) has no hind-legs at all. This makes the statement that the
Stollenwurm has only the two legs in front at once seem much less
fantastic—indeed it helps to vouch for the animal. For how should the
peasants in the Swiss mountains, who have certainly never heard of the
Mexican worm-lizard, know that lizards may in fact have only two legs?


The worm-lizard is quite as stumpy as the Tatzelwurm, and so are
certain skinks, such as the Australian Tiligua rugosa. Nor are skinks
found only in distant countries; there is one species, Chalcides striatus,


that is 2 feet long and lives in the French maritime Alps, which are
an extension of the Tatzelwurm’s habitat. Even the Tatzelwurm’s size
would not be extraordinary; in south-eastern Europe there is a giant
slow-worm (Ophisaurus apodus) called sheltopusik in Russian, which
reaches a length of 4 feet.
It is not at all unlikely that there may
be a large skink in the Swiss and Austrian Alps; and it would provide


a most matter-of-fact explanation for the persistent Alpine legend.


According to an Austrian schoolmaster, who met one in 1929 while
exploring a cave on the Tempelmauer, the Tatzelwurm is not a reptile
but an amphibian. His account is as follows:


Well-equipped, I started out on a spring morning (near the end of
April 1929) and after a short climb I reached the top of the Tempel-
mauer.
After a short rest between the cliffs I started to look for the
entrance to the cave. Suddenly I saw a snake-like animal sprawled on
the damp rotting foliage that covered the ground.
Its skin was almost
white, not covered with scales but smooth. Its head was flat and two very


35


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


short feet on the fore-part of the body were visible. It did not move
but kept staring at me with its remarkably large eyes. I know every one
of our animals at first glance and knew that I faced the one that is un-
known to science, the tatzelwurm.
Excited, joyful, but at the same
time somewhat fearful, I tried to grab the animal but I was too late.
With the agility of a lizard the animal disappeared in a hole and all my
efforts to find it were in vain. I am certain that it was not my imagina-
tion that let me see the animal but that I observed with a clear head.


“My” tatzelwurm did not have large claws but short and atrophied-
looking feet; his length did not exceed 4o or 45 centimetres (16-18
inches). Most probably the tatzelwurm is a rare variety of salamander
living in moist caves and coming only rarely to the light of day.


Here I should mention that in the south of the United States there


is a species of salamander (Siren lacertina) which has fore-legs only and
may reach a length of 3 feet. It can survive long dry periods by burrow-
ing in the mud and coming out only after the first rains. Might it not
be for the same reason that the Tatzelwurm is most likely to be seen in
the first storm after a long drought?


Towards the end of 1934 a Swiss photographer called Balkin claimed


to have photographed a Tatzelwurm by accident. He was out taking
photographs of views around Meiringen and saw what he thought was
a very photogenic fallen rotten stump. Just as he pressed the shutter to
photograph it, the stump began to move and proved to be a large and
very hostile lizard. He took to his heels, and when he developed his film
found that he had a picture of a quite unknown animal (see photograph
facing page 40). It looks remarkably like a head-on view of Fig. 1, even


to the markings on the head and the projecting teeth.
It could be a
genuine photograph, but it looks more like a photograph ofa model of the
beast in Fig. 1 than a living animal. At all events the Berliner Illustrirte
Zeitung published it twice and financed a systematic search for the
creature. The winter soon put a stop to this project. In the spring the
beast was no longer news, and the search was shelved indefinitely.


Whether the Tazzelwurm is a European species of Heloderma, an
enormous skink, a giant salamander or some completely new animal,
there is little doubt that it exists. Even in a country every corner of
which is known, not all the fauna is known to science. It will bea long
time before all the world is really thoroughly explored. Many zoological
surprises await us. And those who have listened to the tales and rumours
which are current in various parts of the world, and which I shall re-
count here, will spare themselves a lot of trouble, for they will know
where to look.


36


THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


I think it safe to prophesy that it is in the most remote places that the
strangest creatures will be found, creatures ill-adapted to the struggle
for existence which have taken refuge in inhospitable and almost im-
penetrable country, creatures which are relics of once-flourishing groups
which have been driven there by newer and more successful species. If
there is any chance of finding really extraordinary animals on the earth,


it will be in those very places where we have not looked—not exactly


“lost worlds,” but in those worlds almost all over the earth, which we
have not yet found or not thoroughly searched.


at


CHAPTER TWO


Cuvier’s Rash Dictum


You must not say that this cannot be, or that that
is contrary to nature.
You do not know what
Nature is, or what she can do; and nobody knows,
not even Sir Roderick Murchison, or Professor
Owen, or Professor Sedgwick, or Professor Hux-
ley, or Mr. Darwin, or Professor Faraday, or Mr.
Grove... They are very wise men; and you
must listen respectfully to all they say: but even
if they should say, which I am sure they never
would, ‘““That cannot exist. That is contrary to
nature,’’ you must wait a little and see; for per-
haps even they may be wrong.


CHARLES KINGSLEY, The Water-Babies.


Moke than a century ago, in 1812, Baron Georges Cuvier was rash
enough to pronounce that “there is little hope of discovering new
species of large quadrupeds.”” The living fauna of the world was well
enough known for him. The animals even of such newly explored lands


as America and Australia had been numbered and described. Naturalists
should now concentrate on extinct animals, remains of which were being
disinterred in such quantities. Zoology was out of fashion, palaeonto-
logy, the new science which Cuvier had fathered, was all the rage.


This pronouncement, like others of his, would not have mattered had
he not been such a despot. Brilliant anatomist though he was, the ill-


effects of his tyranny are still felt, and reactionary scientists still repeat


his dictum, though it has been disproved over and over again.


In 1819 Cuvier had not long uttered his words when his pupil Diard
sent him a drawing from India of a white-backed tapir saying:


When I first saw the tapir—of which I send you a picture—at
Barrackpore, I was astonished that such a large animal should still be
unknown, especially as I had seen at the Asiatic Society the head of a
similar animal which Governor Farquhar had sent there on 2 April
1806, saying that the tapir was as common in the Indian forests as the
elephant and the rhinoceros.
38


4. White-backed tapir.


Actually the tapir had been known to the Chinese and Japanese since
time immemorial, but whether Cuvier knew of the oriental descriptions
—which is most unlikely—or not, he scorned all popular legends and


beliefs of simple people. Indeed, he even distrusted all travellers’ tales.
Hence it was that he was still maintaining that the tapir was a specifically
American animal, after Wahlfeldt mentioned a little black-and-white
“rhinoceros” that looked very much like a tapir in Sumatra in 1772.
Marsden had described it less equivocally in the same island in 1783.
Sir Stamford Raffles had learnt about it in 1805, and Farquhar had shot
one near Malacca and described it to the Asiatic Society in 1816.


But when Cuvier received Diard’s letter and drawing he swallowed


his scepticism for once and hastened to publish an official description,
but he was too late. Someone else had beaten him to it.


The Indian tapir was only the first of a long series of large animals
which were gradually discovered. I cannot hope to list them all here,
but will confine myself to the most striking examples: animals which
were quite new or could not easily remain undetected.


Three primates deservedly open the list. In 1820 Anselme Gaétan
Desmarest, the French mammalogist, announced the existence of a
monkey (in the narrowest sense) big enough to be called an ape: the
black or Celebesean ape (Cynopithecus niger), which is really a sort of
would-be baboon with a very prominent snout. A year later Sir Stam-


ford Raffles described the largest of all the gibbons, the siamang of


Sumatra, which required a genus of its own (Symphalangus syndactylus) ;


it stands more than 3 feet high on its hind-legs. And in 1835 the German


39


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


naturalist Riippel discovered the largest of the baboons, the gelada
(Theropithecus gelada) in the rocky mountains of southern Abyssinia.
When it stands up on its hind-legs this ““dog-headed” monkey which
does not have a dog’s head—its nostrils are not at the end of its nose!—
may be as tall as a man, even though its legs are much shorter.


The water-chevrotain (Hyemoschus aquaticus) described by Ogilby in
1840 from a specimen brought back from Sierra Leone is admittedly


5. Water-chevrotain (after Frechkop, 1947)


not a large animal—it is only a foot high at the withers—but this little
ungulate is important because it is the only living representative of a
large group which lived in Europe during the second half of the Tertiary


era.
It was the first of many living fossils to be found in the great
equatorial rain-forest.


In the same year an affair began which was not finally settled for
another fifty years. The vice-president of Philadelphia Academy of
Natural Sciences heard from a traveller who had returned from a long
journey in Liberia, that in the inland rivers of that country there was a
little hippopotamus hardly as long as a medium-sized heifer. The
natives hunted it for its meat, and the traveller had not only seen the
beast several times but had eaten it himself. Dr Morton was rather
sceptical about this story, but in 1843 his friend Dr Goheen sent him a
set of mammals’ skulls from Moravia, among which he was astonished
to find two not unlike a hippopotamus’s but very much smaller. He


40


=
:
\
’


As


%


A photographer called Balkin
laims that this is the legen-
dary Tatzelwurm.
But is it a
genuine photograph?


he largest of the rhinoceroses,
otton’s white rhinoceros (/eft)
was unknown until 1900.


he
pygmy
hippopotamus


right) was first described
in


1849,
but
its existence
was


ot universally admitted until
1912.


In the nineteenth century the okapi was thought to be mythical.


The largest of the pigs, the giant forest-hog was almost unknown in 1904.


Grévy’s zebra was
not discovered un-


til 1882—in a zoo.


Przewalski’s horse, the


last surviving species of
wild horse, was found
in Mongolia in 1881.


The mountain
gorilla (above)
was thought to
be
legendary
until 1903.


sive
gelada


(left)
is
the
largest of the
baboons,
and
was the last to
be discovered.


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


described them in 1849, naming the species Hippopotamus liberiensis, but


his colleague Joseph Leidy soon showed that it differed from the ordi-
nary hippopotamus in so many respects that it deserved to be put ina
new genus, Choeropsis.
Despite the two skulls most scientists still denied its existence,


Blainville in his Mémoire sur les hippopotames wrote:


I have just learnt from R. Owen during his recent visit to Paris that


last year Dr Morton described and drew under the name of Hippopota-
mus minor,‘ a little hippopotamus, probably from Gabon in Africa. It


6. Pygmy hippopotamus, compared with the large species.


seems however, from what I hear from R. Owen who has seen the skull
that the specific differences depend upon the size, and that the rest are
of little importance.


Actually the pygmy’s skull is only a little over half the size of the
ordinary hippopotamus’s and is obviously different to any layman’s eye.
Leidy, who had studied it thoroughly, wrote:


In the anatomical details of the upper part of the skull, the differences
are so great between Cheeropsis and Hippopotamus, that any one find-
ing a fragment constituted by this part of the former, from his previous
knowledge of the latter alone, would not suspect it even of being closely


allied to the genus Hippopotamus.


1 This was Dr Morton’s first name, which it turned out had been already used
for a fossil species, so he at once changed it to Hippopotamus hberiensis.


41


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


But “R. Owen” had said otherwise. And he was Professor Sir Richard
Owen, the greatest British palaeontologist, a fervent disciple of Cuvier
and as brilliant an anatomist as his master, but none the less intolerant,
prejudiced and sceptical. He was a man who could deny evidence when


it was before his eyes, and, unfortunately, like Cuvier’s, his word was
taken as gospel.


Around 1870 a young pygmy hippopotamus, which weighed barely
30 pounds, was sent to the Dublin Zoo, where it lived for several weeks.
Twenty years later Johannes Biittikofer, curator of the Rijksmuseum at
Leyden, came back from two long visits to Liberia with much informa-
tion about the pygmy hippopotamus’s habits and even several skulls and
skeletons in a rather poor state.


At the beginning of the twentieth century there were at least a score
of specimens—many very fragmentary, it is trtue—in museums in various
parts of the world. Yet many naturalists still thought Choeropsis was
more or less mythical, some alleging it was just a young hippopotamus,
others that it was an individual freak. A few more daring than the rest
supposed that it was a small variety of the ordinary hippopotamus.
There was even one natural history museum in which a badly mounted
specimen was classified with the fossils—an original way of denying that
the creature was extant!


Eventually, of course, its existence was established so that no one
could deny it, but not for many years. For the moment let us leave the
poor beast temporarily buried alive, and proceed to other discoveries.


The last century also had its own “‘abominable snowman,” or rather
“abominable man-of-the-woods,” a terrible hairy giant that according


to travellers’ tales lived in the Guinea jungles. There were the same sort
of rumours about it as are now current about the Himalayan yeti, which


is said to be as strong as ten men, to be able to stun a yak with its fist, to
strangle men and to carry off children but look after them well. The
rumours about the African “man-of-the-woods” seem to go back to
the fifth century before Christ, when the Carthaginian navigator Hanno
fought and killed “hairy savages” on his famous journey. The inter-
preters called them gorillas. This incident occurred in a rather unlikely
place, so it has been said that these gorillas could not have been gorillas,
yet it is strange that their name should be so like that still used to de-


scribe the large ape in some dialects, for instance n’giya in Eveia and
n’gila in Bakoueli.


For a long time there was a great confusion between the gorilla and


42


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


the chimpanzee. The two apes were, however, clearly distinguished in
the sixteenth century by the English adventurer Andrew Battel, who
was taken prisoner by the Portuguese, enrolled in their colonial troops
and thus spent many years in Africa, chiefly in the forests around the
River Banya and Mayombe.
His story was published in 1625 in a


collection of travels entitled Purchas his Pilgrimes. I have extracted the


relevant passages.


The Woods are so couered with Baboones, Monkies, Apes, and Par-
rots, that it will feare any man to trauaile in them alone. Here are also
two kinds of Monsters, which are common in these Woods, and very
dangerous.


The greatest of these two Monsters is called, Pongo, in their Lan-
guage: and the lesser is called, Engeco. This Pongo is in all proportion
like a man, but that he is more like a Giant in a stature, then a man: for
he is very tall, a hath a mans face, hollow eyed, with long haire vpon
his browes. His face and eares are without haire, and his hands also.
His bodie is full of haire, but not very thicke, and it is of a dunnish
colour. He differeth not from a man, but in his legs, for they haue no
calfe. Hee goeth alwaies vpon his legs, and carrieth his hands clasped
on the nape of his necke, when he goeth vpon the ground... . They
goe many together, and kill many Negroes that trauaile in the Woods.
Many times they fall vpon the Elephants, which come to feed where
they be, and so beate them with their clubbed fists, and pieces of wood,
that they will runne roaring away from them. Those Pongoes are neuer
taken aliue, because they are so strong, that ten men cannot hold one
Of them...


Purchas adds that Battel, who was his neighbour,


told me in conference with him, that one of these Pongos tooke a Negro
Boy of his, which liued a moneth with them. For they hurt not those
which they surprise at vnawares, except they look on them, which hee
auoyded. He said, their highth was like a mans, but their bignesse twice
as great. I saw the Negro boy.


Naturalists as enlightened as Buffon and Lord Monboddo, who lent


a keen ear to travellers’ tales and collected evidence to confirm Battel’s,


admitted that the great ape existed. But, of course, as Radermacher
remarked in the 1780s, “‘the large species, described by Buffon and


other authors as of the size of a man, is held by many to be a Chimera.”


It was not until the middle of the nineteenth century that the Ameri-
can Protestant missionaries Savage and Wilson collected the usual
legends about the large ape in Gabon, and also some skulls which found


their way back to America. In 1847 Savage in collaboration with Pro-
fessor Jeffries Wyman of Boston published a first brief description of


43


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


the gorilla, calling it Troglodytes gorilla to distinguish it from the
chimpanzee, then known as 7. niger. It was Isidore Geoffroy-Saint-
Hilaire who, after studying two well-preserved specimens, recognised
that the gorilla was quite different from the chimpanzee, and who
created a new genus, Gorilla. Today, after a century of research, the
“abominable man-of-the-woods” has not entirely lost the largely un-
justified aura of terror with which it was surrounded in the legends.


When B. H. Hodgson was exploring Tibet and the neighbouring
countries in 1850 a certain Major Jenkins gave him three skins and
several skulls of sheep with grey wool which seems to be as large and
heavy as a small buffalo. He christened it Budorcas taxicolor.
It was


well known to the Mishmis of Assam as takin and to the Khamtis as kin,
but Hodgson was never able to see one himself. We now know three
quite different species of takin. The golden takin (B. bedfordi), not
discovered until 1911, is even more interesting than the two others,
the first of which comes from Bhutan and Assam, the second from the
Chinese province of Szechwan. It is very rarely seen, for the good reason
that it lives in the Kansu and Shensi provinces in eastern China at a
height of between 8,000 and 14,000 feet, and spends most of the daylight


7. The Himalayan takin.


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


hours in thickets of rhododendron and dwarf bamboo, emerging to
browse on the grassy slopes only at dusk. It is by no means certain
which group of ruminants the takin belongs to, since it has features in
common with the ox, sheep and the antelope. It used to be thought to
be related to the chamois, but it is now classed with the musk-ox.


The first takin brought back alive from Assam to Europe was a male
which was presented to the London Zoo by J. C. White on 22 June 1909,
59 years after the beast was discovered.


Schomburgk’s deer (Rucervus schomburgki), which was described by
Blyth in 1863, is remarkable not only for its curiously forked antlers
which may boast as many as 20 points, but also because it has never
been seen in its natural habitat in Siam by a single white man. All that


is known about it has been learnt from rare specimens captured by the
Siamese or born in captivity. There is indeed little hope that any
European will ever see it in its natural state, for it is quite likely that it
has been extinct for several years.


The same fate awaits many animals known only from rumours and
legends, which makes one all the more impatient with those who
obstinately refuse to listen to evidence of this kind.


Occasionally an intelligent naturalist with his ears open has been
able to save a species. When the French missionary Father Armand
David crossed eastern Asia between 1865 and 1869, he not only recorded


a great number of new plants but also discovered three new kinds of
large mammals. Had he not been incurably curious there would be no
mi-lus alive today.


When he was in Pekin in 1865 he heard that sacred animals were kept
in the Nan Hai-tzu Imperial Park several i south of the city. His
curiosity was aroused, but he knew that entry to the park was strictly
forbidden; so he eluded the Tartar guard by climbing the 45-mile wall
that encircled the park and protected it from curious eyes. He was most
excited by what he saw. Besides the animals that he knew well, there


was a large herd—some 120 head—of deer so strange that the Chinese


called them sze-pu-hsiang or “like none of the four.” This meant that


they were “not like a deer,” “not like a cow,” “not like a horse” and


“not like a goat”; presumably because they resembled each of these


four animals, but only in a few particulars, having the general anatomy


and antlers of a deer, a tail as long as a cow’s but ending in a hank of


horsehair like a horse’s, and large spreading hooves like a goat’s. For-


tunately the beast also went by the less cumbrous name of mi-lu.


45


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


By bribing some of the keepers, Father David managed to procure a
pair of antlers, which he rightly valued as the piéce de résistance of the
collection he was about to send to the Paris Museum. The following
year he obtained two skins in a fairly good condition. As soon as it was
known in Europe that a new kind of deer was kept in the Imperial Park
at Pekin, the diplomats of séveral countries set about trying to obtain
specimens. Thanks to the Imperial Minister Hen-Chi, the first three


8. The mi-lu, or Pére David’s deer.


living mi-lus were presented to France. They did not survive the voyage,
but Alphonse Milne-Edwards was able to study their remains and
publish a description in 1866, christening the species Elaphurus davidi-


anus. It is a graceful and sad-eyed deer, with light tawny-brown fur in
a shaggy coat which rises to a mane on the neck. Unlike most other
species it sheds its antlers twice a year.


Further specimens were sent to other countries at the instigation of


their respective ambassadors, and fared better than their predecessors.


46


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


In 1895 floods destroyed a large piece of the wall round the park, so
that some of the mi-Ju escaped and were slaughtered and eaten by the


starving population.


The Boxer Rebellion in 1900 was even more fatal. The rebels invaded
the Emperor’s grounds and slaughtered all the deer but one.
This
turned out to be the only surviving mi-Ju in the whole of China, for the
species had been completely exterminated in the marshy plains of
northern China several centuries before.


Fortunately Father David had climbed the wall, and thanks to him a
few rare individuals of what is generally called ““Pére David’s deer” had
been preserved in Europe, where the Duke of Bedford was able to save


the species from extinction. In his park at Woburn Abbey, 15 breeding


survivors have so multiplied that now, after half a century, there is a


herd of 250, from which several zoos have been provided with spe-


cimens.


On Chinese vases and silk-paintings you can sometimes see a sort of
grinning demon with a turquoise-blue face and tail. All the front of its
body is as red as fire—which is natural enough for a demon—but in-
congruously it has an impertinent little retroussé nose.
This beast,
which no European naturalist dreamt could exist, was Father David’s
second great discovery. It turned out to be a not so very stylised picture
of a monkey that lived in the snowy heights of eastern Tibet, and this
only increased the sceptics’ incredulity, since everyone knows that
monkeys prefer a warm climate. Nevertheless it was perfectly true that


this monkey (see Fig. 42) was found at altitudes of over 10,000 feet and
well deserved to be called “‘snow-monkey.” In 1870 Milne-Edwards,


after examining its skin, christened it Rhinopithecus roxellanae after
Roxellana, the beautiful snub-nosed slave who married Suleiman II and
thus showed that fairy-tales could sometimes come true.


Father David was taking tea and eating sweets with a rich landowner


called Li in Szechwan on 11 March 1869 when he made his third


great discovery. In his host’s house there was a curiously marked fur


which he recognised as that of “the famous black-and-white bear”


which he had several times heard tell of. In Yunnan they gave the name


bei-shung (or pai-hswung) to an animal which was said to live in the


bamboo forests on the mountain-sides.
As far as I know, the first


mention of the bei-shung is in a manuscript dating from A.D. 621, during


the reign of the first of the T’ang emperors.


Father David was convinced that this legendary animal existed, and


47


a
“
ail
>
.
:
“a


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


urged the Chinese hunters to get him a specimen. Twelve days later,
on 23 March, they brought him a young bei-shung which they had
caught alive, but had killed in order to carry it home with less trouble.
Thus he was the first westerner to obtain the fur of what we now call the
giant panda. It is white all over its body except on its legs, the top of


its chest, its shoulders, its ears, the tip of its nose and around its eyes,
where it is dark brown, almost black. Unlike a true bear, it has hair
even on the soles of its feet.


9. The giant panda’s closest relative, the panda.


On 1 April the hunters brought Father David the skin and skeleton
of an adult bei-shung, and six days later he obtained a pretty little flame-
coloured animal already known te science, the panda (Ailurus fulgens).
The word panda is thought to be a corruption of the native name
nyala-ponga, “‘bamboo-eater.”” Actually the Chinese more often call it
hun-ho or “fiery fox.” In English it is sometimes called ‘Himalaya
raccoon” because of the rings round its tail, and it is in fact related to the
American raccoons.


Father David certainly never guessed that this kittenish little creature
was related to the big black-and-white “bear” whose remains he had


48


> giant panda
was


- discovered in 1869,
no living specimen
captured until 1936.


> Komodo
dragon
ow) is the largest of


lizards.
It
was
ught to be a legen-
y monster until 1912.


The pygmy chimpanzee was first discovered in a museum in 1928.


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


just collected, and it remained the “bamboo-bear” or “Pare David’s
bear” for some time. But when Milne-Edwards had studied its denti-
tion and its skeleton he realised with a touch of genius that it was re-
lated to the Procyonidae, the raccoons, and gave it the name of Ailurop-
oda melanoleucus, or “the black-and-white animal with panda’s feet.”


It only remained to find the giant panda in its natural habitat and
capture a specimen. But this was sooner said than done. The expedi-


tions organised to look for it came to nothing. General Pereira, who


travelled from one end of Tibet to the other, found not a trace of the
animal even in the native tales.


The giant panda had hardly been discovered when it seemed to
disappear without leaving a trace. No more was heard of it for over
half a century.


The crested rat (Lophiomys imhausi) is certainly the most conspicuous
of rodents. It may reach a length of 16 inches and its body is covered
with a coat of long black and white hairs, which stand up to make a
striking crest along its spine. Yet this creature, which lives among the
rocks in the mountains of East Africa, was not discovered until 1867,
when it was immediately described by Alphonse Milne-Edwards, who
was then having a remarkable run of luck. This rodent was so unusual
that a whole new family had to be created to accommodate it.


Six years later another no less extraordinary rodent came to light and


also added another family to this order. It was the Dinomys branickit,
often known by its native name of pacarana. This beast looks like a
marmot, and so is much less striking than the crested rat, but it is
nearly 2 feet long—the size of a fox-terrier. Yet, though it is one of the
largest rodents in the world, it was not known until 1873, and then not
particularly well. Professor Walter Henricks Hodge of the University
of Massachusetts, one of the greatest experts on the pacarana, writes:


This giant rodent is at home in the region of mountain rain forests
in the eastern Andes from Peru to central Colombia. For many years
the Pacarana was known only from the original specimen that was


captured in 1873 as it wandered about in a hacienda building at the


hamlet of Vitoc, Peru, at the headwaters of the Perené River just east


across the Andes from Lima. Until 1904 the species remained out of


scientific headlines, but in that year two living Pacaranas were seen in


Pard from the upper Rio Purus in Brazil. In 1922 a series of specimens


was obtained from the forested Andean area to the east of Lima 3 and,


finally, in 1925 the New York Zoological Garden obtained a living


specimen for exhibition.
In 1930 two additional Pacaranas were


D
49


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


obtained and about the same time the species made its zoo debut in
Hamburg and London. Thus all our present knowledge of this animal
is based on less than fifty individual specimens. The information con-
cerning this giant rat has remained in fact so scanty that as recently as
1942 it was included among a list of extinct and vanishing mammals of
South America. Rare it seems to be but whether on the road to extinc-
tion is another question. Pacarana territory includes some of the most
precipitous and consequently inaccessible and unknown forested
country in the world. Only a few trails or roads cut into this terrain
and only after this terra incognita is better known to field zoologists can
we state with certainty the status of this rare rodent, which may be
much more abundant than the few existing records would indicate.


Between 1869 and 1882 a good half-dozen new animals were added


to the Ungulates, the order which includes most of the larger land
animals. In 1869 Blyth described a new species of African antelope
with corkscrew horns, the lesser kudu (Strepsiceros imberbis). In 1870
Swinhoe announced a new kind of deer in the Chinese marshes, the


to. The gerenuk or Waller’s gazelle with its unusually long neck.


11. The peculiar pattern of the skin of Grévy’s zebra (c), compared
with that of Burchell’s zebra (a) and the mountain zebra (6), (after
Frechkop, 1947).


Chinese water-deer (Hydropotes inermis), which was an ancient type,
being quite without horns. The following year Milne-Edwards kept up
his brilliant series of descriptions with another Chinese deer, the tufted
deer (Elaphodus cephalophus), which had short antlers consisting of
mere stumps almost hidden by tufts of hair on the crown of the head,
but the male was armed with protruding canine teeth.


In 1872 and 1878 Sir Victor Brooke christened two African gazelles.
The first, Grant’s gazelle (Gazella granti), was merely a new species, but
the second, Waller’s gazelle (Litocranius walleri), belonged to a quite
new genus. It is a most unusual-looking beast with a neck as long as its
body—a sort of giraffe-gazelle. It is confined to Somaliland and British
East Africa. The natives call it gerenuk and have known it since time
immemorial, and it appears in Egyptian bas-reliefs dating from the


sixth century B.c.


All too often zoologists make the mistake of underestimating ancient


or primitive art as a source of information. Had they studied Egyptian
murals more carefully they would not only have noticed the gerenuk,
but also a zebra with particularly narrow and numerous stripes. The
Scottish explorer James Augustus Grant—after whom the gazelle was
named—claimed to have seen one of these zebras in Abyssinia in 1860,
but the experts were still sceptical.


51


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


In 1882, however, Menelik I, Emperor of Abyssinia, gave the French
President, Jules Grévy, a zebra which exactly fitted Grant’s description.
When it was brought to France and desposited in the Jardin des Plantes
everyone could see that it was a new species, which was larger than the
other zebras and had a different pattern on its coat. The poor brute
was worn out by its long journey and had a fit and died several days
after its arrival. All the same, Oustalet was able to add another new
large quadruped (Dolichohippus grevyi) to the world’s fauna.


At about the same time the news reached Europe that the Russian
explorer Nikolai Mikhailovitch Przewalski, the first to explore Central
Asia, had discovered a species of wild horse in Dzungaria in Western
Mongolia. Actually, though he was a cavalry officer, Przewalski had
taken it for an ass, for it had a large head and relatively short legs. I. S.
Poliakoff, who published the first description of it in 1881, needed all
his patience to convince him that it was really a horse, a horse (Equus
przewalskii) which immortalised a name all too difficult to remember
correctly.
It is the only living example of a truly wild horse—and
not a descendant of tame horses that have gone wild, like those in
America. The very last specimen of the only other surviving wild horse,
the tarpan (Equus gmelini) of the Polish forests and southern Russian
steppes, died in the Ukraine at Christmas 1879. Hence the special
importance of Colonel Przewalski’s discovery. In 1955 Street alleged
that Przewalski’s horse had disappeared in its wild state, but in the same
year the Soviet zoologist Professor Bannikov estimated the number in a
wild herd at some 40 individuals. There are small herds in zoos at
Munich and Prague which breed and have thus been able to supply
other zoos. Whipsnade received a pair in 1954.


In 1891 Oldfield Thomas christened another large quadruped, the
dibatag antelope (Ammodorcas clarket), commonly called Clarke’s gazelle
because it was discovered in Somaliland by W. H. Clarke.


Here I wish to add a large bird to the list. You may object that no
bird, however big, can be a large quadruped, and that Cuvier never
suggested that there was little hope of finding new species of large birds.
True, but this was certainly because he thought there was no hope at all.
There are no more conspicuous creatures than birds. Their ability to
fly away at the first alarm means that they do not have to hide so much


as mammals. For the same reason they can wear brilliantly-coloured
plumage without suffering for it. Certainly it is very rarely that a large
and quite unknown bird is discovered.


52


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


Nevertheless Father Jeffery Whitehead discovered one. In the island
of Samar in the Philippines he shot a large crested eagle—or rather a
harpy-eagle—with several very un-


usual features.
Its beak was un-


usually long and was used for the


grim purpose of dismembering small
monkeys. In 1896 W. R. Ogilvie


Grant christened
it Pithecophaga


iefferyi, “Jeffery’s monkey-eater,”


an apt name as well as a pleasantly


informal tribute to Father White-


head.


Strange though it may seem, it
was not until 1898 that white men


first heard of the largest carnivore
in the world, the huge brown bear
of Kamchatka, Manchuria and the
Sakhalin islands (Ursus beringianus).
There is another very similar variety
on the other side of the Bering
Straits—the Alaskan Kodiak bear.


It has been given various names,
:
among them Ursus middendorffi, for
a “Pies aig io mid
the systematics of the bears in this
part of the world is abominably confused. But we are not concerned
with the name; the point is that it was not until the end of the last cen-
tury that science knew that there were monstrous brown bears 10 feet
long and weighing more than 1,600 pounds. Until then the largest bear
was thought to be the grizzly (Ursus horribilis), which is considerably
smaller, hardly more than 6 feet 6 inches long and never weighing much
more than 1,100 pounds.


It was likewise not until 1900 that a variety of the second largest land
animal was found to exist in part of the world where it had been quite
unknown. The beast was the white rhinoceros 1 (Ceratotherium simum),


1 Actually the white rhinoceros is the same greyish hue as the black rhinoceros.
It has been said that its name is merely due to its habit of rolling in pools and in


the dust, covering it with a crust of dried mud which protects it from insect-bites
and gives it a bloom of white dust. The so-called black rhinoceros lives in the


forest, and so keeps its natural colour.
In reality the misnomer arises from a


mistranslation of the Boer name for the beast, which is weid rhino. This comes


53


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


which had been thought to be confined to South Africa south of the
Zambezi. It is 15 feet long, more than 6 feet high and may weigh more
than 2 tons. Its longer horn may be 5 feet 2 inches high, the height of
asmall man. It is the most impressive of all the rhinoceroses.


Then Captain A. St H. Gibbons brought a white rhinoceros skull
from Lado on the Upper Nile, some 2,000 miles farther north than the


13. The white rhinoceros (/eft) differs from the black rhinoceros (right)
in having a shorter and broader upper lip.


area in which it had hitherto-been found. Other specimens were col-
lected by Major Powell-Cotton, enabling the great Lydekker to describe


it as a new geographical race or sub-species of the white rhinoceros
(Ceratotherium simum cottoni).
Its area of distribution stretches from
north-east of the Uele into the Belgian Congo. That such a huge beast
could have remained unnoticed in a country generally thought to be
well-explored seemed almost like a joke.


The next discovery was of the largest known ape, the mountain


gorilla.
Its existence was established in 1901, and two years later
Matschie christened it Gorilla beringei in honour of Captain Oscar von
Beringe, who brought the first skin back from Kivu on the eastern
side of the Belgian Congo. Until then only one species of gorilla was
known (Gorilla gorilla), whose habitat stretched from Gabon to the


from the Dutch wijd, which means “‘wide”—not “white”—and refers to its
broad, square nose; for the essential difference between the two species is in the
shape of the upper lip and the distance between the nostrils.


54


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


Cameroons and the French Congo. Yet as early as 1860 the natives of
Rumanika in Ruanda (adjacent to Kivu) had told Speke of a monster
which hugged women so savagely that they died. The negroes in the


east of the Belgian Congo had always been full of tales about what was


Fj;
A
ae


| ae
:


14. Mountain gorilla.


called ngagi in Kiniaruanda and ngila in Kiswaheli and Kingwana. But
even though the whites had known the Gabon gorilla for some 40 years,
they refused to believe these “absurd legends” until Beringe killed the


first specimen.


The Kivu gorilla is certainly a fearsome beast. It may be as much as
6 feet 6 inches high—taller than the coastal gorilla, which has never


55


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


been known to exceed 5 feet 11 inches. An old male with its arms
outstretched can sometimes span more than 9 feet, its chest measure-
ment being 67 inches and its biceps 25 inches. Its weight may be as
much as 600 and possibly 700 pounds. That such a huge brute could
remain unknown until the beginning of the twentieth century shows
what a shy and pacific beast it really is.


But the greatest sensation of the 1900s was the okapi. As Dr Maurice
Burton has said: one can have no idea today of “the romance surround-
ing the discovery of the Okapi, nor of the excitement caused in natural
history circles, first by the vague reports of its presence, and later by its


actual finding.”


The first evidence of the okapi’s existence was extremely slender, and
consisted of no more than three lines in H. M. Stanley’s In Darkest
Africa, published in 1860. In his linguistic notes he remarks of the
Wambutti pygmies in the Ituri forests of the Congo:


The Wambutti knew a donkey and called it ‘‘atti.”” —They say that they
sometimes catch them in pits. What they can find to eat is a wonder.
They eat leaves.


There was no reason to doubt Stanley’s statement, journalist though
he was, but no one had ever heard of wild asses in the Belgian Congo.
The only Equidae known there were zebras, but these specifically run-
ning beasts never lived in forests, certainly not in the thick jungle
inhabited by the shy pygmies. So the experts were sceptical.


All the same, Sir Harry Johnston, then Governor of Uganda, was
intrigued by Stanley’s remarks and decided to gather more information
about the ati on his visits to the Congo. He had an unusually good
opportunity at the end of 1899, when he saved a party of pygmies from
being carried off by a German showman to be exhibited as curiosities at
the 1900 Paris Exhibition. They were his guests in Uganda for several
months until he could take them back to their native forests. Meanwhile
they became firm friends and Sir Harry was able to question them
through an interpreter about the horse-like animal which lived in their
forests.


They at once understood what I meant; and pointing to a zebra-skin
and a live mule, they informed me that the creature in question, which
was called OKapPI, was like a mule with zebra stripes on it.


Okapi or o-apt is evidently the name that Stanley mistook for arti.
When Sir Harry arrived in Fort Mbeni in the Congo Free State, he
questioned the Belgian officers stationed there and learnt that though
56


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


they had never seen the animal alive, their native troops hunted it in the
forest and killed it with spears. They brought back the meat to add to
the fort’s provisions and cut up the skin into strips to make belts and
bandoliers. One of the officers said that there should be a new skin
somewhere in the fort, but Sir Harry was bitterly disappointed to find


that it had already been cut into pieces, and hé was able to salvage only


two of them.


On 21 August 1900 he wrote a memorable letter to Dr Sclater of the
Zoological Society of London telling of this partial success of his in-
vestigations. He said that the precious strips of skin would be sent off


at once and that the Belgian officers had promised to get him a complete
skin and send it to him in Uganda.


All this time [Sir Harry remarks] I was convinced that I was on the
track of a species of horse; and therefore when the natives showed the
tracks of a cloven-footed animal like the eland, and told us these were
the foot-prints of the okapi, I disbelieved them, and imagined that we
were merely following a forest-eland.


Sir Harry was very wrong to disbelieve the natives. Had Dr Sclater
known that the beast had cloven hooves he would have been saved from
making a bloomer. When he received the strips of skin he hastily
christened the beast Equus johnstoni, though he cautiously added a
question mark after the generic name Equus.


Meanwhile Karl Eriksson, a Swedish officer in the Belgian service,
sent Sir Harry a whole skin of an okapi and two skulls. The skin and
one of the skulls had come from a young male. Gradually a picture of
the beast was built up from the pygmies’ descriptions and the anatomi-
cal specimens.
It was an odd animal—reminiscent of those mythical
monsters made up of bits from different creatures.
It was as big as a
medium-sized horse, a little like a giant antelope in shape, but without


visible horns; on the other hand it had a long tongue like’an anteater’s


and ears as big if not bigger than a donkey’s; its thighs and hindquarters


were covered with stripes. Because of this last detail alone it had been


taken for a new species of zebra. Actually, as Sir Harry wrote:


Upon receiving this skin, I saw at once what the okapi was—namely,
a close relation of the giraffe.


The shape of the skull, the structure of the teeth, the ruminant’s
cloven hoof are all evidence that it is a sort of short-necked giraffe, a


creature related to its long-extinct ancestors, a cousin, no doubt, of the


ae


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


Helladotherium whose remains Albert Gaudry had disinterred from
Miocene deposits in Greece.


Sir Harry sent his new trophies to Professor Ray Lankester in London
suggesting that it should be called Helladotherium tigrinum. But Lan-
kester was better versed in comparative anatomy, and came to the
conclusion that the okapi was closer to the giraffe than to the Hellado-
therium, almost half-way between the two, and that it deserved a genus
of its own no less than Sir Harry deserved the credit for discovering it.
He therefore named it Okapia johnstoni.


It was soon noticed that, unlike the quite hornless Helladotherium
but like the giraffe, the male okapi had little miniature horns hidden
under the skin, making a bump on the forehead.
It undoubtedly
belongs to a vast group of primitive Giraffidae (such as the Hellado-
therium, Samotherium, Palaeotragus, Sivatherium and so on) which
flourished in Africa and Asia in the Miocene and even more in the
Pliocene.


As soon as the okapi’s existence—which most people had doubted—
was firmly established, everyone began trying to prove that it had been
known for thousands of years. Archaeologists and Egyptologists kept
thinking they had found its features in Neolithic rock-carvings in the
Sahara and on predynastic Egyptian painted vases or bas-reliefs dating
from the Pharaohs. Sometimes there is indeed a striking resemblance.


In 1935 R. Perret pointed out


3
three pictures of animals very


like okapis among those carved
on the side of a wadi called
Oued el Djerat between Fort-
Polignac and Djanet in the
Tassili-n-Ajjer.
There is no


aN
doubt that if the animal illus-
trated in Fig. 15 is not an okapi


15. This mural drawing at Oued el
it is very closely related to


Djerat in the central Sahara, shows that
it. Professor Léonce Joleaud


about 3000 B.c. the Egyptians knew an
thinks
it
i
;
:
animal similar to the okapi.
;
ine les he eee
which lived in the savannah in


Egypt and the Sahara and became extinct when it vanished several
thousand years ago. Meanwhile the okapi was better protected in the
virgin forests of the Semliki and the Ituri and survived in peace until
today, proving, as the water-chevrotain did, that the African rain-forest


is the perfect habitat for preserving creatures from a past age.


58


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


When Sir Harry Johnston came home from Uganda he met Stanley
in England. Naturally they discussed the new animal they had both
helped to discover. Stanley told him that he thought that the okapi was


only one of the many animals that would eventually be discovered in the


tropical rain-forest and said that he had seen a huge hog 6 feet long and


some antelopes of a quite unknown type.


After the harvest of new species reaped by zoologists during the last
few decades the atmosphere was optimistic. The okapi had shown that
the natives’ tales could be trusted, and people took an eager interest in
the rumours which had been current for a quarter of a century about a


sort of monstrous wild boar in the Ituri forests. This senge was said to
be a fierce beast as black as the night and as big as a rhinoceros—or, at


least, as a little rhinoceros. Stanley’s evidence lent weight to this legend.


In 1904 Captain R. Meinertzhagen of the British East Africa Rifles
happened to acquire a skin of the beast. It had come from the forests
around Mount Kenya and was unfortunately in a poor condition. A


little later the same officer obtained a skull of the same animal, which


this time had been shot in the forests bordering Lake Victoria. This
enabled Oldfield Thomas to give a scientific description of this par-


ticular senge and christen it Hylochoerus meinertzhagent, or “‘Meinertz-
hagen’s forest-hog.”


It is true that it was nowhere near the size of a rhinoceros—even a
small one; all the same it was the largest of wild boars, since it may reach


a height of 4 feet at the shoulder and a length of over 8 feet. It is also
the blackest boar ever seen and its tusks are long and massive.


16. Head of the giant forest-hog.


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


This monster was no sooner added to the zoological catalogue than a
similar-looking beast was rumoured to live in the other end of the equa-


torial forest. The up-country natives in Liberia claimed that a large
black pig called nigbve lived in the forests of this area. As early as 1668
Dr Dapper had noted in his compilation, Naukeurige Beschryvinge der
Afrikaensche gewesten van Egypten, that in the Greyn Kust, or Pepper


Coast, which is now Liberia,


There are two sorts of swine, the red called Cowja, which are the size
of our own, and the black called Couja Quinta which are much larger
and more dangerous; for they have teeth so sharp that they break every-
thing they bite as if they were so many axes.


The Couja is evidently the red river-hog (Potamochoerus porcus). As


to the black pig, some suggested that it was not a giant forest-hog at all,
but one of those pygmy hippopotami reported from the same area so
long before.1 To which it was objected that the migbve was a forest
animal, whereas the hippopotamus was by definition aquatic, and the
pygmy hippopotamus’s survival had by no means been established.


Carl Hagenbeck, the great German animal-dealer, decided to get


to the bottom of the confusion and sent his agent, Hans Schomburgk,
out to Liberia in 1909. The expedition got off to a bad start. The
natives insisted that the migbve was such a very fierce beast, with teeth
sharp enough to cut a man in two, that they stoutly refused to help
Schomburgk, whom they thought was mad to want to capture such a
monster. Nevertheless he eventually managed to persuade them, and on
13 June 1911, after months of searching, he came upon the creature


10 yards away in the forest. It was a shiny black and did look like a big
pig, but it was obviously related to a hippopotamus. Unfortunately
Schomburgk—who was the first white man to see a pygmy hippopota-
mus in its natural surroundings—had no means ready to catch it and
had scruples about shooting an animal which was thought to be extinct
and was certainly very rare.


Back in Monrovia no one believed his story: the migbve was a mere
superstition, or at best a legend based on a long-extinct animal. Schom-
burgk could do nothing. The rainy season was setting in, and he had to
return to Hamburg empty-handed. But now he knew he was not hunting
amyth, and by Christmas 1912 he was in Liberia again. This time he was
luckier, On 28 February 1913, having made sure that the species was


1 In spite of what immediately follows, I am by no means convinced that the


Couja Quinta
is a pygmy hippopotamus, for the giant forest-hog was later found
also to live in Liberia.


60


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


much less rare than he had thought, he shot the first specimen. The
next day he managed to capture one alive and found that though its
teeth looked unpleasant it was actually much easier to tame than an
ordinary hippopotamus. Besides being smaller it was much less heavy


in outline, had smaller jaws in proportion and was blacker and shinier.


Moreover it was a forest animal which went into the water only occa-


sionally to drink or bathe. Leidy had been right in putting it into a new


genus, Choeropsis, since the word Hippopotamus, or “river-horse,”’ does


not describe its anatomy or its habits. The name “pygmy hippopota-


mus” may be superficially descriptive, if only as a comparison and an


indication of relationship. An okapi could as well be called a pygmy


giraffe.


Five months later Hans Schomburgk confounded the sceptics by
bringing back five live pygmy hippopotami to Hamburg. These little
beasts weighed one-tenth of the weight of a true hippopotamus. An
adult male was no more than 2 feet 6 inches high and 5 feet 10 inches
long.


It is little over half a century since the largest of the bears and the
largest of the apes were discovered and the largest rhinoceros was found


to exist in a country where it had been quite unknown. The largest of
the lizards was not discovered until 1912, when an airman made a forced
landing on Komodo, an island 20 miles long by 12 miles wide between
Sumbawa and Flores in the Lesser Sundas in the Malay archipelago.
The only men who lived there were convicts deported by the Rajah of
Sumbawa. The airman came back with a tale that he had met fierce
and monstrous dragons, at least 12 feet long, which according to the
inhabitants ate pigs, goats and deer and even attacked horses. Needless


to say nobody believed a word of his story.


But soon afterwards the existence of these giant reptiles was confirmed
by Major P. A. Ouwens, curator of the Botanical Gardens at Buitenzorg.
He had been corresponding with J. K. H. van Steyn van Hensbroek,
the Civil Administrator of Flores, about them since December 1910.
The islanders had told this official that around Laboean Badjo, on their
own territory, and on the neighbouring island of Komodo, there was


a boeaja darat, or “land crocodile.” Van Steyn was interested, and pro-
mised to find out more about the beast and even obtain a specimen at


the first opportunity. When his duties took him to Komodo he learnt


from Kock and Aldegon, stationed on the island with the pearl-fishing


fleet, that the lizards were sometimes over 20 feet long. Aldegon boasted


61


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


that he had killed several of this size. But fishermen are proverbially
unreliable judges of size.


Van Steyn was more modest. During his stay he obtained the skin of


a specimen 7 feet long and sent it with a photograph to Major Ouwens,
saying that he would try to catch a bigger one, but it would not be easy,
since the natives were terribly afraid of its teeth and its thrashing tail.


The Zoological Museum at Buitenzorg sent a Malay animal-catcher


to van Steyn, who had the bad luck to be posted to Timor, so he missed
the first successful capture. Rajah Ritara lent his hunters and dogs to
the animal-catcher, who managed to bring back four specimens alive,
the largest being 9 feet 6 inches and 7 feet 8 inches long. A little later,
according to van Steyn, a Sergeant Beker shot one 12 feet long.


Major Ouwens at once recognised that these monstrous prehistoric-
looking lizards were a giant species of monitor lizard. He described it
under the name of Varanus komodoensis in the Bulletin of the Buitenzorg
Botanical Gardens.


When the Komodo dragon was better known it was found that it
was only rarely dangerous to man. All the same it is a fearsome-looking
beast which certainly kills and eats buffaloes, wild pigs and deer. It is
now to be seen in several zoos, where you have only to watch at feeding
time to witness its extraordinary gluttony, which may perhaps explain
why, although Komodo means “‘rat island,” there is not a single rat
there now.


Later it was found that the dragon also lived on the small islands of
Rintja and Padar at the eastern-end of Flores, and that the Bima archives
had expressly mentioned its existence in 1840, when the Rajah of
Sumbawa had taken steps to protect the monster from extinction.


While we are in the East I should mention in passing that in 1918 a
freshwater dolphin of a quite unknown genus was discovered in Lake
Tung-Ting, 650 miles from the mouth of the Yangtze Kiang. It was


yywell
len
hy


—


17. Lipotes vexillifer, the freshwater dolphin of Lake Tung-Ting.


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


all white, 8 feet long and had a long beak. The local name was pei-ch’t,
meaning “‘white flag,” an allusion to the dorsal fin, which the American
zoologist Gerrit S. Miller retained in its Latin name, Lipotes vexillifer.


Meanwhile there were plenty of zoological discoveries still to come
from Africa. In 1908 Lydekker described a new species of spiral-horned
antelope from Abyssinia, the mountain nyala (Strepsiceros buxtont).
More interesting from our point of view were the pygmy gorilla and
pygmy chimpanzee.


The American zoologist Daniel Giraud Elliot described the pygmy
gorilla in his monumental three-volume monograph on the primates in
1913. His description of Pseudogorilla mayema is based solely on a few
skeletons and skins from the delta of the Ncomi and the Rembo near the
mouth of the Ogowe south of Fernan Vaz. Even its appearance is still


little known.
Its coat is dark grey, except on the head and shoulders,
where it is a slightly reddish chestnut. The male rarely exceeds 4 feet
6 inches—the height of a female -chimpanzee—while the two sub-
species of large gorilla may be as high as 6 feet and 6 feet 6 inches.


After forty years we are still waiting for further and more detailed
news of this “pygmy giant ape,” which apparently has never been seen


alive except by the hunters who provided the skins and skeletons, no
doubt by shooting the beast the moment they saw it. Yet, strange to


say, the existence of this species about which we know so little has never
been doubted, although the pygmy elephant, which is much better
known, has been so bitterly disputed that I have had to treat it as an
unknown animal in a later chapter in this book.


The pygmy chimpanzee was discovered in a museum, of all places!
In 1925 Ernst Schwartz examined the skins and skeletons sent to the
Congo Museum at Tervueren in Belgium from the country between the


left bank of the River Congo and its tributary, the Kasai, he realised
that there must be a new and quite distinct variety of chimpanzee. The
pygmy species is thinner, its limbs are slenderer; its bones are all more


delicate (the skeleton weighs only half of that of the ordinary chimpan-


zee, Pan troglodytes) and it is shorter by 15 per cent. Its face and ears


are quite black from birth, except around the mouth—like a music-hall


coon—while the other chimpanzees are born light and darken with age.


Later the pygmy chimpanzee was observed in its native forest, and
Professor Urbain of the Vincennes Museum and Zoo brought a live
specimen from the French Congo, on the right bank of the river.
Though every care was taken it lived only for a year, from 1939 to 1940,


63


i
wie


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


in the Vincennes Zoo. A few specimens can now be seen in the zoo at
Antwerp.


Another no less sensational discovery was made in the same way—
and in the very same museum. It is true that the animal was not one of
the large quadrupeds with which we have been refuting Cuvier, but
merely a bird the size of a pheasant. However, since it also comes from
the equatorial forests of Africa, still so full of surprises, and since the
discovery of a quite unknown genus of bird is almost unheard of, the


story deserves to be told here.


In 1909, while Schomburgk was on the pygmy hippopotamus’s track
in Liberia, an expedition was organised by the New York Zoological
Society in order to bring back a live okapi to the Bronx Zoo: Herbert
Lang and his young disciple Dr James P. Chapin took part in it. The
attempt failed. But they did not return quite empty-handed. When
Lang and Chapin got home they found that the tall native head-dresses
they had brought back from Avakubi as curiosities included two reddish
feathers striped with black, which none of the experts could identify.


The problem remained unsolved until 1936, when Chapin happened


to recognise some similar feathers on two stuffed birds, thrown out
among the lumber in the Tervueren Museum. At first he did not believe


his eyes, especially as one of the birds was labelled “‘Pavo cristatus,
juvenile, imported.” All the same he had no difficulty in proving that


it was not a common peacock, but a hitherto unknown genus of Congo
peacock which he named Afropavo congensis and described in the Revue
de Zoologie et de Botanique Africaines for November 1936. It was the


first unknown genus of bird discovered for more than 40 years.


Chapin could not wait to capture a living specimen. On 19 June 1937
he flew to Stanleyville in the Belgian Congo, where he found that the
news of his discovery had gone before him and no less than eight speci-
mens had been shot and were waiting for him. He was astonished to
learn from the natives in the forests of the Ituri (the site of so many
discoveries) that though the Congo peacock had a restricted habitat it
was very common in the vast stretch of country between the Ituri and
the Sankuru.


This was the sixth species of largish animal to be discovered in the
equatorial rain-forests of Africa in less than 50 years, and it was not the
last. In 1919 Glover Allen discovered near a stream in the darkest part
of the Ituri forest a genet of aquatic habits which lives on fish. It is the
size of a domestic cat with a splendid chestnut coat, marked with white


64


The Andean wolf (/eft), compared with the wolf of the pampas (right), was described
from a single skin in 1949.


This spider belongs to a group 300 million years old.


The horseshoe- or king-crab has not altered since the days of the great dinosaurs.


18. Congo peacock (after Frechkop, 1947).


spots on its face, and with a thick black bushy tail. This is all we know
about it. No one has ever found any specimens since. The natives had
apparently never even heard of it and so it has no local name. In English


it is generally called water-civet, in Latin Osbornictis piscivora.


1929 takes us back to China, where Father David’s bei-shung had been
vainly searched for since 1870. It is true that Dr Weigold of the first
German expedition to south-west Tibet had seen one in 1915. He had
even kept a young specimen, given him by the natives, for several days,
but it died for lack of proper food. The black-and-white “bear” was on
the point of being considered an extinct species when two sons of Presi-
dent Teddy Roosevelt—Colonel Theodore Roosevelt and his brother
Kermit—saw one dozing in the top of a hollow pine-tree. A salvo of
shots pitched the poor brute into its last sleep, and its stuffed skin was
soon being admired in the Field Museum at Chicago.


E
65


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


This did not prevent further slaughter. Dr Ernst Schaefer shot one
in 1931, Dean Sage, Jr, and W. G. Sheldon in 1934, Captain Brockle-
hurst in 1935 and Quentin Young in 1936. By now it was quite clear
that Alphonse Milne-Edwards had been quite right in thinking that
the bei-shung was not a bear but closely related to the panda and
also ate bamboo shoots. So it came to be called the giant panda—a
name still unfamiliar to the public—with odd results. When William
Harkness announced to the Press that he was off to Szechwan to catch
a giant panda and bring it back alive, the teleprinter-operator misunder-
stood him. Next morning most of the newspapers reported that he was
going to China in quest of a “giant panther”—and another unknown
animal was born!


In 1936 Floyd T. Smith succeeded in catching the first giant panda


alive, but it died at Singapore. That same year Harkness died suddenly
in Shanghai before he had a chance to catch his panda. But his widow
was determined to carry on his task and set off on the panda’s track in
1937. She knew next to nothing about the animal, and still less about
China, and for months she searched the jungle with extraordinary


pertinacity. She had the luck she deserved, and, where the most ex-
perienced explorers had failed for 70 years, she succeeded. One day she
found a baby panda in a hollow tree. It was crying as if its heart was


fit to break.
She picked up this child of her husband’s dreams and
nursed it in her arms.
It survived a delirious welcome to the United


States, but in the Brooksfield Zoo at Chicago it swallowed a branch too
gluttonously and died in March 1938. The second time Mrs Harkness
was luckier. She brought back another female giant panda, called Mei-
mei, who settled happily in her new home.


Soon there were toy pandas in the nursery and pandas in the comic


strips, but for the zoologist the problem had only begun, for no one
knew how this apparent carnivore which ate nothing but bamboo-shoots
should be classified.
Eventually the great American expert William
King Gregory, agreeing with Alphonse Milne-Edwards’s opinion, put


it in the Procyonidae along with the raccoons, the coatis, the kinkajou
and various other purely American animals. Dr Frechkop has since
suggested that the pandas and the kinkajou alone should form a family
of Ailuridae
of their own, which would fall between the bears and the
-
cats.
Other writers have gone on classing the giant panda with the
bears, and the recent serological work by Leone and Wiens supports
their view. Perhaps Father David was right after all in thinking he had
brought back the skin of a bear.


66


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


The last great zoological discovery in Asia aroused bitter controversy.
The inhabitants of Cambodia have long known that in clearings in
the forests in the north of the country there is a wild ox which is neither
the gaur (Bos (Bibos) gaurus) nor the banteng (Bos (Bibos) banteng). It


is called kou-prey, or grey ox.


It had been reported by Dr Dufossé in 1930 and R. Vittoz in 1933,
when Professor Achille Urbain, director of the Vincennes Zoo, went to
Indo-China in 1937. There he saw some handsome horns of this beast


among the trophies of a veterinary surgeon called Dr R. Sauvel who


lived in northern Cambodia, and he persuaded him to try to catch a live


specimen. Sauvel succeeded in doing so—a young male which was sent


off to Vincennes Zoo post haste. He also enabled the professor to ex-


amine an adult male which he had just shot near Chep. Whereupon


Urbain promptly named the beast Bos (Bibos) sauveli.


They grey ox [he wrote] is an animal which differs from the banteng
in its greater height, for some specimens reach 6 feet 3 inches. More-
Over its coat, which is entirely grey in juveniles and females, is a fine
matt black in the old bulls with lighter patches on the shoulders and
the rump. These animals have a very marked dewlap and four long
light grey “‘stockings.’? The horns are cylindrical and widely spread;
they are curved forward in the male, and lyre-shaped in the female.


At their last curve the male’s horns always have a cuff of hairlike,
shredded horn-fibres. These characteristically frayed and worn horn-
tips seem to be due to the bull kou-prey’s habit of butting its horns
into termite-heaps, presumably to sharpen them. Unlike the other wild
oxen in the area, the kou-prey has only a slight dorsal ridge. The gaur
reaches the same height, but has no dewlap. The gayal, the third
Asiatic ox in the sub-genus Bibos, is probably a domesticated or half-
domesticated variety of gaur, which it much resembles. It has a dewlap,
but only a slight one.


It was after the scientific description had been published that the
trouble arose. The Cambodians, when questioned, said there were two


kinds of unknown ox in the north of the country, the kou-prey and the


kou-proh. The first had whitish horns, while in the second they were


greyish green and curved more inwards. Then it turned out that the


kou-prey was merely the kou-proh’s calf. A more damaging aspersion


was that the kou-prey (or kou-proh) was often seen mixed with herds of


banteng. Might it not therefore be a hybrid of a banteng with some


other ox? Other naturalists even suggested that it was a hybrid between


a half-domesticated gaur and one of the wild species.


67


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


Naturalists, it seems, will invent anything to avoid admitting that a
new large animal has been discovered. None of this criticism was


justified. Professor Urbain had watched a whole herd of kou-prey near
the borders of Cambodia and Laos. And the minute anatomical study
which Harold Jefferson Coolidge made in 1940 showed that the kou-prey
was so different from the other Asiatic oxen that he thought it should
be put in a new genus, Novibos; but I think this is going too far.


The last great zoological acquisition, the Andean wolf, is known only
from one skin. Today it is in exactly the same position that the pygmy
hippopotamus and the giant panda were in at the end of the last century,
half way between a myth and a real animal; there are palpable remains,
but there is still bitter controversy about the creature’s identity.


In 1926 Lorenz Hagenbeck, the famous German animal-dealer who
carried on his father Carl’s business, happened to buy in Buenos Aires
the skin of a large and quite original-looking canine animal which was
said to come from the Andes. The skin was sent to Germany, where it
was passed from museum to museum, ending up in Munich. In 1940


it came into the hands of Dr Ingo Krumbiegel, who agreed with Pro-
fessor Krieg that it was a mountain species of the maned wolf. But he
did not dare to undertake a description of it on the evidence of only
one skin; for with the Canidae you never know whether it may not be a
mongrel offspring of some unusual cross. No zoologist could survive
the blow if his new species turned out to be a cur from the gutter.


Dr Krumbiegel shelved the matter until 1947, when he learnt from
Lorenz Hagenbeck that when he bought the skin he saw three others
exactly similar to it. There was therefore little danger that they were
hybrids, especially as the skins had so many peculiarities.


Dr Krumbiegel then related this skin to a skull which he had ex-
amined many years before and which had come from a group of speci-
mens collected in the Andes. At that time he had thought that it could
only belong to a maned wolf from southern Brazil, Paraguay and the
Argentine (Chrysocyon jubatus), which the Indians call aquara quazu or
“big fox,” 1 although it measured a little more than 12 inches, while the
average of twenty maned wolves was a little less than 10 inches.
It
therefore probably belonged to the same species of Andean wolf as


1 The maned wolf looks like a tall fox, and I have always thought it has been
mistakenly put among the dogs and wolves (Canis), when it is in every re-
spect like the foxes (Vulpes), Dr Frechkop tells me that he examined the speci-
men that recently died at Antwerp Zoo and found that its pupil was slightly oval,
which confirms my suspicions and the justice of its Indian name.


68


CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


Hagenbeck’s skin. And on these two pieces of evidence Dr Krumbiegel
published a first summary description of what he called Oreocyon
hagenbecki, ““Hagenbeck’s mountain-dog.” As usual, Oreocyon turned


out to have been used to describe a fossil, so he altered it to Dasycyon or


“‘thick-furred dog.”


Dr Krumbiegel’s unwearying attempts at reconstructing the animal
from a single skin eventually resulted in some excellent drawings, which


are reproduced here facing page 64, and clearly show how much the
Andean wolf differs from the maned wolf of the pampas. Its blackish-


brown fur is not only darker but also much thicker; the hairs on the back


are 8 inches long. The legs are shorter and more solid, and the claws


are more powerful. The ears are smaller and rounder; and the jaws are


a little heavier and stronger. It is clear at once that one is an animal of


a cold climate and that the other runs on the plains.


These differences are so marked that Dr Krumbiegel has provisionally
put the Andean wolf in a new genus, though one day its skeleton, the
pads of its feet and other details of its anatomy may show that it is
merely a new species of Chrysocyon. The question will not be finally
settled until we have further and more complete specimens.


But in fact the fauna of the Andes is so little known that it looks as if


it will be many years before the question of the mountain wolf is solved.


There should be no need to refute Cuvier’s dictum any further.
The world’s zoos can boast of the Indian tapir, Cotton’s white rhino-
ceros, Grévy’s zebra and Przewalski’s horse, of Schomburgk’s and Pére
David’s deer, the okapi, the water-chevrotain, the pygmy hippopotamus
the Assam takin, the gerenuk, dibatag and a host of other new deer and
antelopes, the kou-prey, the giant panda, the gelada, both lowlands and
mountain gorillas, the giant siamang and the pygmy chimpanzee, the
snub-nosed monkey, the Kodiak bear, the monkey-eating eagle, the
Congo peacock and even the Komodo dragon. In our museums there


are stuffed skins of the giant forest-hog, the pygmy gorilla, the white


dolphin of Tung-Ting, the water-civet, and the Andean wolf, and no


doubt the skins of many unknown animals besides.


The lesson should have sunk in by now, yet there are some zoologists
who will never learn.
In 1934 Dr C. Anderson of the Australian
Museum could still write:


Although there are many kinds of land animals yet to be discovered


and described, they are mostly of small size, and it is safe to say that
there is no mammal, bird, or reptile of large dimensions and unusual


69


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


structure which is entirely unknown, and which would not fall naturally
into some well recognized group.


What can I say? I must leave him to be dealt with by the zoologist
who in 50 years’ time compiles the list of the great zoological acquisi-


tions of the second half of the twentieth century.


Era


Quaternary


Tertiary


Mesozoic


Palaeozoic


Archaean


SUMMARY OF GEOLOGICAL PERIODS


Period


Recent
Pleistocene


Pliocene


Miocene
Oligocene
Eocene


Cretaceous
Jurassic


Triassic


Permian
Carboniferous
Devonian
Silupian
Ordovician
Cambrian


Pre-Cambrian


|
Millions of
years since
the beginning
of the period
(approximate)


Animal activity


Man appears


The mammals multiply and
expand


Rise of the mammals


; Collapse of the reptile empire


First birds, peak of the reptile
empire


First mammals, decline of the
amphibians


Amphibian empire
First reptiles and insects
First amphibians
Fish multiply
First fish
Reign
of the
marine
in-
vertebrates


Single-celled
animals
sponges


and


7O


CHAPTER THREE


The Survivors from the Past


She liv’d alone, and few could know
When Lucy ceased to be...


WILLIAM WORDSWORTH
“She dwelt among th’ untrodden ways’’.


WHAT is a “living fossil”? The term is not an insult, it merely shows
surprise that such an anachronism in flesh and blood should still sur-
vive; and its exact meaning is relevant here since we shall often be
concerned with the possible survival of animals universally thought to
be extinct. For it is a fact that some animals still unknown to zoologists
seem to be well known to the palaeontologist, though only in a fossil


state. Yet many zoologists and most palaeontologists steadfastly refuse


to admit that they can possibly survive, and their reason for doing so is


all the more obscure since the world teems with “living fossils.” What
then is a “‘living fossil’?


Everyone has a general idea, but its exact meaning is hard to describe.
One might reasonably say that it meant a creature that was still alive
when it ought logically to be extinct, but this does not solve the problem.
What logic condemns a creature to extinction?


For the man in the street “‘living fossils” are extraordinary-looking
and very rare creatures which are confined to a strictly limited area and
date from a vanished age. Yet, as likely as not, he washes himself
in the
morning with the skeleton of a sponge which has hardly altered since
the Cambrian period at the beginning of the Palaeozoic era, hundreds of
millions of years ago. And when there is an R in the month he may well


eat mussels dating from the Triassic and oysters from the Jurassic. Nor


are they necessarily so rare.
The horseshoe- or king-crab (Limulus),
which is actually more of a scorpion than a crustacean, existed as a genus
in the Triassic and is still so common after nearly 200 million years that


71


~


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


its crushed body is used as fertiliser.1 And in Lake Kyogo in the,
Belgian Congo there are fisheries which catch 4,000 tons of the
Devonian lungfish Protopterus every year. Nor do you need to go to the
ends of the world or dive into the sea to find a “‘living fossil” as old as
the much-publicised Coelacanth.
In your cellar
there are probably dozens of “‘living fossils” from
the Devonian and Carboniferous periods spinning
their webs. The tarantulas in the lower red sand-
stone in Aberdeenshire are very like our modern
spiders; likewise spiders of a modern type have
been found in seams of coal in England, Bohemia,


Silesia and Illinois. Nor need they be confined to


a limited area. Australia, the kingdom of the mono-
tremes and marsupials, is inhabited by no land
animals which are not “living fossils.”
All the
others have been imported by man.


There is no doubt, however, that all “living


fossils” do date from a vanished age. But in fact


all the surviving groups of animals were born in the
course of distant geological periods. The most
recent of them, the mammals and the birds, arose
during the Mesozoic era. And not a single com-
pletely new type of organism arose during the
whole of the Tertiary era.


It therefore seems better to confine “living fossils”


to those creatures which are among the few sur-
vivors of otherwise extinct groups, and ought “‘logi-
cally” to be extinct themselves. Yet from this point
of view one might reasonably say that all the am-
phibians and all the reptiles are “‘living fossils”


19. The Lingula,
since there are now relatively few survivors of
a brachiopod, or
these once-flourishing groups.
The amphibians
lamp-shell,
400
ruled the earth in the Carboniferous and Permi
million years old.
an


periods but now they consist only of inconspicuous
salamanders and newts, frogs and toads, and humble caecilians without
legs.


In fact it ‘is generally agreed to limit “living fossils” to very small
groups of survivors which have perpetuated themselves throughout the


1 For instance, half a million horseshoe-crabs were used for this purpose at
Bowers in Delaware in 1927.


74


The barramunda, a lungfish from the Triassic period, caught inan Australian river
in 1869.


Latimeria, a Coelacanth thought to be extinct for 70 million years, which was caught
off the South African coast in 1938.


he tuatara of New Zealand, which springs from the end of the Palaeozoic era, often
shares its burrow with a petrel.


The crocodiles have hardly altered since the beginning of the Mesozoic era.


A “living fossil’’ that carries its age well: the giant tortoise of the Galapagos Islands,
which has remained almost unchanged for 190 million years.


The hoatzin of the Amazon, whose chicks still have claws on their wings.


Fossil imprint of the Archaeopteryx, the reptile-bird of the Jurassic period, which
had claws on its wings and also teeth.


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


ages while the larger
groups have been undergoing vast changes and still
giving birth to new types. It is thus a relative term. For why should
we deny it to a class (like the
amphibians) when it is often


applied to an order (like the


tortoises and turtles or the


crocodiles, which have hardly
changed since the beginning
of the Mesozoic era)?


Other authors are more ex-
clusive and include only those
Sa2eThe cinolae or sac
unique and solitary survivors
lilies go back for some
of once-considerable groups;
“gS
300 million years.
the pearly nautilus, for in-
stance, that odd shelled cephalopod which lives 25 fathoms down in
the Pacific and the Indian Ocean and, like the horseshoe-crab, has re-
mained unaltered since the Silurian period in the middle of the Primary


era; or the Latimeria, better known as the Coelacanth, that crossoptery-
gian fish which comes straight out of the Devonian period; or, finally,
the New Zealand tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus), the sole survivor of the
order of Rhynchocephalia, which dates from the end of the Primary era,
before the days of the giant dinosaurs. The tuatara is a large olive-green


lizard, some 2 feet 3 inches long, which still has a vestige of a third eye
on the top of its skull. This is called the pineal eye and is found in the
higher vertebrates in the shape of the epiphysis or pituitary gland.


A recent addition to these lone wolves of evolution is the Neopilina
galathea, which was first described in 1957 by Dr Anton Bruun without
benefit of sensational newspaper headlines. Yet from a zoological point
of view it is even more extraordinary than the Coelacanth. It is a small
mollusc like a limpet which the Danish oceanographic vessel Galathea


1 The layman may be glad of a reminder of the main lines of the zoological
hierarchy. The animal kingdom is divided up into phyla, each phylum into
classes, each class into orders, each order into families, each family into genera,
each genus into species.
For instance man belongs to the phylum of verte-
brates, the class of mammals, the order of primates, the family Hominidae,
genus Homo, species sapiens.


These divisions are sometimes further subdivided or grouped into sub-orders,
super-families or infra-classes—and every conceivable sub-, super- and infra—
but when carried to extremes this only creates more confusion.
It is well to
remember that in nature there are only individuals, and that all these man-made
categories are purely arbitrary and are invented to clarify our knowledge not to


obscure it.


73


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


fished up off Costa Rica in 1951. When carefully examined in the
laboratory it proved to be the sole representative of a whole class which
had been extinct since the Palaeozoic era, the Monoplacophorans.
Neopilina is the missing link between the chitons (Polyplacophorans or
segmented molluscs) and the most primitive of the Gastropoda, the
Patellids or cone-shaped shells, that is to say the limpets. As Professor
Roger L. Batten, who now teaches invertebrate palaeontology at the
University of Wisconsin, has shown, this discovery has meant that the
classification of the molluscs has had to be completely rearranged.


The size of the “‘once-considerable group” is also relative. There are
many families of animals which now consist of only one genus, yet no
one would call them “‘living fossils.” On the other hand, to admit
nothing but sole survivors would exclude such authentic examples as


21. The tuatara of New Zealand is older than the great dinosaurs.


the brachiopods or lamp-shells, aberrant worms which imitate clams
and of which there are still 59 genera today, and the Crinoids or sea-


lilies, those graceful echinoderms attached like plants to the bottom of
the sea, of which there are now 12 surviving genera. ‘Though they are
by no means sole survivors, they are all that is left of two groups which
once spread all over the earth and have remained quite unchanged for
300 and 500 million years respectively.


This brings us to a new idea, that “living fossils” can be defined as
stationary species. There are quite a number of types of animal whose
evolution seems to have stopped long ago, for their structure has not
altered appreciably since distant ages. Admittedly it is not always easy


to say for certain that an organism has not changed for millions of years,


for our knowledge of past creatures is often slender and based on no
more than a shell, a skeleton or a mere impression in the mud. We


74


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


cannot be sure that the flesh which has perished has not undergone any
change in its physiology or cellular structure. A creature could develop


a means of regulating its temperature, poison-glands, lungs; its kidneys


could alter, and it could perfect its heart, the circulation of its blood and


the delicate balance of its endocrine glands, increase the complexity of


its.sensory and motor organs and the co-ordination of its nervous sys-


tem: all these important changes could take place and leave next to no
mark on the animal’s solid remains. So we must be cautious.


Thus we can at last define “living fossils” as creatures that belong to
an ancient type of organism which has survived until today without
undergoing any great anatomical change. We may even grant the name


22. The young hoatzin still has claws on its wings.


to creatures which have preserved a set of important and archaic charac-


teristics, though they would be “‘living fossils” only in respect of these


particular features.


The hoatzin (Opisthocomus hoatzin) of the Amazon is a good example


of this. When fully grown it looks ordinary enough, like a sort of crested


pheasant, yellowish in colour with an olive back and dull red belly.


But the young bird still has well-developed claws on the first two fingers


of its wings, thus betraying its distant origin. When hoatzin chicks use


their clawed wings to climb branches, crawl on the ground or swim after


tadpoles, they look just like little reptiles, and remind one irresistibly of


the Archaeopteryx, the reptile-bird of the Jurassic, when birds had teeth.


The hoatzin has also preserved other significant archaic features. It does


not cry like a bird, but croaks like a frog and gives off a strong smell of


75


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


musk like a crocodile and some of the turtles. To deny that it is a
“living fossil’? would be absurd.


The fact of the matter is that there are “living fossils” surviving from


all past ages. The oldest are the radiolarians, unicellular creatures with


a flinty shell convoluted like a filigree jewel, remains of which have been
found in Pre-Cambrian strata, that is to say they date from 2,000 million
years ago, before the beginning of the Palaeozoic era. But the most
recent are not the least interesting. The opossums, the very rare West
Indian almiqui (Solenodon), the armadillos, the spectral tarsier and the
tapir all date from the Eocene, almost 70 million years ago. The shrews,
the pangolins and many of the monkeys in the Old World are relics of
the Oligocene. The hedgehogs, the okapi and the aardvark come from
the Miocene, and so on.


In all justice we should admit that there are not only genera of “living


fossils” like the pearly nautilus, the horseshoe-crab, the tuatara and
Neopilina, but also families of them like the kiwis and the opossums,
orders like the phyllopod crustaceans, the scorpions and the mono-
tremes or egg-laying mammals, classes like the sea-cucumbers, the sea-


lilies, the chitons, those still-segmented molluscs, the peripatus or
worm-insects and fish with legs or lungs like the coelacanths and lung-


fish,1 and even whole phyla, like the brachiopods.


The point I have been trying to make in discussing all these “‘living


fossils” is that there is no creature, however “‘primitive,”’ which could
not have survived until today, and that in fact we find lingering ex-
amples of most of the groups which once flourished on the earth.


Yet the mere suggestion that a dinosaur, a flying reptile or an ape-man
might survive will exasperate most scientists. These creatures, they say,
have been completely extinct for a long time, the argument being that


their fossil remains have not been found in geological strata later than
some remote period.


This is to rely unduly on the hazards of fossilisation. The conditions
necessary to ensure that a body is fossilised, that it is preserved from
scavengers of all kinds and from the destructive effects of air and water,
occur only once in a thousand million times. Generally it is some ex-
ceptional accident that produces them; the animal falls into a salt lake


1 There are three existing genera of lungfish of the group of Dipneusta which
flourished in the middle of the Primary era, especially in the Devonian period,
some 300 million years ago. The best-known is the barramunda (Neoceratodus
forsteri), a cylindrical fish almost 5 feet long which was not discovered until 1869
in a river in Queensland. The others are the African Protopterus, of which there
are four different species, and the South American Lepidosiren.


76


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


or a frozen marsh that never thaws again, is swallowed up in mud, a lake
of pitch or a puddle of resin, or is suddenly smothered by an avalanche,


a stream of lava or a sandstorm. The characteristic fossils of any
geological stratum are therefore far more likely to belong to the com-
monest and most widespread groups of animals of the corresponding
period, to the species with a virtually indestructible shell or carapace


23. Reconstruction of the Archaeopteryx.


and also to the most vulnerable species, that is to say the slowest and


least intelligent. This may be why we have so little physical evidence


about the past history of apes and man.


The absence of fossils of a certain type in a geological stratum may
mean that the type was not common at the time, or that it had no hard


parts (or no very hard parts, as in the toothless mammals), or that it was
nimble and cautious enough to escape accidents that might cause


fossilisation, or merely that it had the good luck to escape any such


77


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


accidents. It is the first alternative that interests us. Since we still have


a great deal to learn about the world’s living fauna (as is proved every
year by the discovery of new species, whose habitat is sometimes limited


to areas not easily accessible), it follows that we know next to nothing
about the animals of the past which were not widespread, and of which
we have but a few rare fossils.


To show where the line should be drawn between a common species
and one that is not widespread, I would say that the common land ani-
mals today are man and his domestic animals, a lot of rodents and bats, a
good many birds and vast numbers of insects and small molluscs. All
the other animals—most of the mammals, in fact—can be considered as


rare and on the road to extinction.


Moreover, as Professor Caullery has pointed out, ““even those organ-
isms which are fossilised do not all reach us, by a long way. Many of
them subsequently disappear as a result of a series of accidents; strata


fold and laminate, change shape, dissolve and are eroded.” And he
adds:


Finally, if we consider the fossils which have actually survived until
our time, we must not overlook the fact that we can reach only an ex-
tremely smali proportion of them. A large part of the sedimentary
formations is today submerged beneath the seas and is thus quite
inaccessible to us. Of the sediments on the dry land of our continents,
we can normally examine only the outcrops, that is to say an infinitesi-
mally small part.


The late Professor Leon Bertin of the Paris Museum, whose vast
learning gave him a broad and comprehensive outlook, stated quite
categorically, “In palaeontology negative evidence means nothing.”
There are any number of groups of animals which must have existed at
certain times, although not the slightest trace of them has been found
in the corresponding strata. And while fossils are occasionally found
where they have been deduced to be, they are more apt not to be
there.


The Latimeria chalumnae which was fished up in a drag-net off the
South African coast on 22 December 1938 is a striking proof of this.
The group of Crossopterygia, which gave birth to this large fish with
lobed fins at the same time as it spawned the main body of land verte-
brates, had been extinct since the end of the Primary era, some 200
million years ago. Remains of some members of the Coelacanth family
have been found in the Jurassic, and a single one, Macropoma, at the
end of the Mesozoic era. But for some 70 million years there have been


78


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


no more. Nor did the tuatara appear from nowhere, yet no trace has
been found of any rhynchocephalian in strata less than 135 million years


old. The Neopilina belongs to a group which had been thought to be


extinct for 280 million years. There could be no better proof of the


limitations of palaeontology.


The refusal of many zoologists to consider that certain fossils could
have survived seems to be due to a traditional attitude rather than


to legitimate scepticism—and this is all the more absurd since the


attitude is founded on naive and ancient notions which have long been


rejected,


When it was first shown that fossils were not just freaks of nature,
but the actual remains of long-dead animals, this discovery had to be
made to agree with what happened in Genesis. This led to the theory
that the ancient fauna had been destroyed by universal disasters, the


last of which was Noah’s flood. Cuvier’s mind was too commonplace
and dogmatic to admit anything which would disagree with the letter
of the Scriptures, so he invented his famous theory of the Revolutions
of the Globe. Each of his supposed periodical disasters must have been
followed by a new creation, at least if one is to account for the appear-
ance of new forms—or so his pupil Alcide d’Orbigny concluded, reckon-
ing that twenty-seven successive creations were necessary to explain all
the known fossils.


Poor d’Orbigny is still ridiculed, but he was the only upholder of the
Revolutions of the Globe whose theories were perfectly consistent.
Cuvier was more hypocritical. “I do not pretend,” he said, “that there
had to be a new creation to produce the existing species: I only say that
they used not to exist in the places where they are now seen, and that
they must have come there from elsewhere.”


I have never understood how any sensible man could be taken in by


this absurd explanation. For it implies that originally the fauna on the
earth was rich and diversified in the extreme, and that it included all the


species that have ever existed. After each almost universal disaster the


earth would have been repopulated by the species that had escaped


destruction and thus the world’s fauna would have been gradually


impoverished.


This theory completely disagrees with the facts of palaeontology
which the Father of that Science had taken such pains to learn, The
deeper the geological strata the less varied the forms of life: there are no


birds below the Jurassic, no mammals below the Triassic, no reptiles


79


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


below the Carboniferous, no amphibians below the Devonian, no fish
below the Ordovician, and in the Pre-Cambrian there are nothing but
sponges and the most primitive invertebrate creatures. Far from becom-
ing impoverished, the fauna has continually become richer with the
passage of time.


Moreover Cuvier’s explanation explicitly contradicts his own theories,
for he maintained that man could not have been contemporary with the
so-called antediluvian animals. But if man did not exist at the beginning
of time and has not descended from more bestial creatures, where on
earth did he come from? ‘From elsewhere,” replied Cuvier, without
the courage of his religious and philosophical opinions, and all the world


cried Amen.


Cuvier’s baneful influence was felt for a long time and had the worst
consequences. In 1854 the Torquay Natural History Society refused to
publish a note about some palaeontological discoveries, even though
they were confirmed by three reliable witnesses, because of its “lack of
probability.” Some tools of worked stone had been found with the
remains of extinct animals.


In 1860 the Académie des Sciences at Paris used the same pretext


to refuse to publish Edouard Lartet’s note on the geological antiquity
of the human species in western Europe. He was obliged to have it
published in Switzerland and in England, where it was received with
enthusiasm.
Not long after the great Boucher de Perthes died, his
family, who were horrified by his heretical opinions (for he too believed
that man was contemporary with extinct animals), had his works with-
drawn from sale and sent them to be pulped.


We may smile at this ludicrous behaviour, but even today (and for
the same reasons, which have now become more or less unconscious)
many scientific journals refuse to publish any contribution, however
seriously documented, that deals with the possible survival of certain
species which date from a past age.


It is not so easy to be rid of doctrines forcibly imposed. When the
Theory of Evolution won the day, it was at first naively interpreted by
minds loath to disturb the old dogmas too suddenly. There was no longer
the notion of a discontinuous series of fauna, but of a continuous chain,
with the corollary that every ancient species could be considered as the


direct ancestors of its more recent relatives. This principle implied that
the existing lizards of today were descendants of the dinosaurs of the
Secondary era. Hence it followed that an animal that belonged to one
age could not be found in a subsequent one, for it was constantly alter-


80


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


ing. Thus there was a new reason for automatically ruling out the
survival of archaic forms.


Latterly the notion of “living fossils” has become more familiar, and
the evolutionary tree is seen to be not a straight bamboo of successive


stages, but a complex of almost parallel branches bursting occasionally


into bushes of twigs.


A truly original type is never the outcome of a high degree of spe-
cialisation. It does not spring from the end of one of the twigs of the
last bush, representing the previous group to burst out in sudden expan-


sion. It always derives from a flexible, unspecialised type on the stem
of the bush. After an uneventful evolution, and inconspicuous be-
cause it is usually small, commonplace and of unspecialised habits, the
type that is trying to find its way eventually comes upon the most
favourable conditions and then gives birth with almost explosive sud-
denness to a host of very varied forms, making a bush on the family


tree. Meanwhile another humble and inconspicuous scion leaves the
base of the bush, one day to burst into another new group. And so on.


Thus each new form evolves parallel to the older forms, but is a little
behindhand. The various groups in the animal family tree are joined
only at the base. The animal empires do not take turns at ruling the
earth. They encroach upon one another and destroy one another when
they are both competing for the same habitat. ‘Living fossils” are crea-
tures which have escaped these massacres, either because they have
never found opponents of their own size, or, as more often happens,
because their territory has not yet been disputed or has only just begun


to be conquered.


For this reason we can expect to find them chiefly in the remotest
corners of the earth: islands, high mountains, underground caves, virgin


forests, swamps and deserts.


In the previous two chapters I have shown that the earth may still
hold plenty of large unknown animals and that in fact the zoological
catalogue is constantly being added to. We now know that among the


future zoological discoveries there may well be animals that are known


but thought to be extinct.


The history of the discovery of an unknown animal almost always
follows the same pattern. At first it is utterly unknown to the Western
world. Then, by questioning the natives, travellers or merchants first
come to hear of its existence. There is not a single example of a large


F
81


THE GREAT DAYS OF ZOOLOGY ARE NOT DONE


animal which has remained quite unnoticed by the people who live
nearest its habitat.! The local descriptions of the beast are often only
roughly accurate and exaggerated in some respects.
Sometimes the
animal is said to have supernatural powers. Nevertheless the different
versions of the story, even those told by tribes far removed from one
another, agree so well that they eventually arouse the interest of a few
naturalists.
Finally white hunters’ or prospectors’ tales confirm the
native legends. But not until the animal is brought back, dead or alive,
do the sceptics admit the evidence. There is only one variation in this
pattern. Sometimes the animal described by the natives is thought to
be a fossil by the Western world, and its bones, or even its mummified
hide, appears in palaeontological collections.


If we want to have an idea of the still unknown animals that may be
discovered in the future, our best plan is determined by this fixed pat-
tern of events. First we should listen carefully to the native tales, pick-
ing out the details that agree in accounts from different sources. Then
we should try to see whether this description fits any species in the local


fossil or sub-fossil fauna, that is to say one that is thought to be recently


extinct. Actually, when it is a species that is supposedly very recently
extinct we shall have to be particularly careful since it is possible that
the animal’s description has been handed down by tradition from ancient
times. All the same we should remember that van Gennep, who has
made a very thorough study of the process by which legends are formed,
considers that “the memory of a historical fact does not continue among
communities which do not use a written language for more than five or six
generations, that is to say for 150 years on the average, and 200 years at
the most.” It therefore takes only two centuries to corrupt or wipe out
the memory of historical facts or events among peoples whose traditions


are purely oral. This knowledge will be most useful to us.


The reader may be surprised at the trust I generally put in the
evidence of what are somewhat condescendingly called “primitive”
peoples. But because their conception of the world is utterly different
from ours there is no need to say that they are all liars.


Hyatt Verrill, the American explorer, has affirmed that during his
long experience of primitive tribes he had always found that even the
most fantastic and incredible traditions always had an origin in fact, for
primitive man was incapable of inventing such stories and making up
such monsters in their entirety.


1 The water-civet, though small and amphibious, and therefore inconspicu-
ous, may perhaps be taken as the exception which proves this rule.


82


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


Westerners are much more severe on the metaphors and similes
of primitive peoples than they are on their fellow-countrymen’s tales.
They do not mind if you say that after walking through a fog you could
“cut with a knife” you saw an animal with an “interminable” tail which
made off “‘like lightning.” But if some Australian blackfellow tells them
of a “devilish worm”? that “spits fire” and which it is ‘‘death to look at,”
they shrug their shoulders and will have no more of it, when they ought


to realise that this merely means that the blackfellows know of an animal
that is worm-like (or snake-like, it comes to the same thing), has a
forked tongue like a flame and which it is wise to avoid as its bite is


fatal.


83


Part Two


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF
SOUTH-EAST ASIA


And there be mungrell and ambiguous shapes,
between a humane and a brutish Nature.
MONTAIGNE, An Apology of Raymond Sebond.


es Sy axe
ee “eC ow SS
ilon Ps
me itr an
‘A s/s
am


Benares


Calcutta


Hyderabad


Kistag


Deccan
Plateau
p
Andaman ‘so
Nilgiri Hills
v


2 Anaimalai Hills
)


Trincomalee
Tammankaduwa
a
Colombo
Nicobar Is.°
CEYLON
:


© P
4 aeong ainan
°
NOS
eM Kerint)l 4
Jam j


5
imou


ae QMoeara Blitiy 2


:
Lai ey “sf
) Palembang ae
Benkoelen Con stu
h
=
Miles
fas
9
100
200
300
400
Q
[a
ae
ees


Masoeaje


gos
go"
JAVA


CHAPTER FOUR


Nittaewo, the Lost People of Ceylon


. .. that Pigmean Race
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Faerie Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forrest side.
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees.
JOHN MILTON, Paradise Lost.


IT may seem odd that the first unknown animals to be investigated
should be described as “people.” But from India to the Malay archi-
pelago we shall constantly run up against the same question about the
mysterious creatures reported to live there: are they men or beasts?


Asia may still hide unknown apes whose mental development is
higher than that of the anthropoid apes and thus comes close to our
own. Or it may be inhabited by men more primitive than the Australian
Aborigines, the Veddahs or the African Bushmen, and still at the
Neanderthal stage. Or yet again, a few survivors of those strange ape-
men, the Java Man and the Pekin Man, may linger on today not far
from the places where their bones were found.


The slightest evidence about the anatomy, physiology, genetics, rela-
tionship, habits or mentality of creatures to which we may be closely
related would be of enormous value. Whether they are “sub-men” or
“super-beasts,” we should learn much if we could meet creatures which
showed, even if distantly, what we had once been, or were descendants
of our rivals which were once near to exterminating us and which we
may hardly have exterminated.


The first place in which “‘beast-men” are reported to have survived


into historic times is India. Pliny the Elder wrote at the very beginning


of the Christian era:


Duris maketh report, That certaine Indians engender with beasts,
of which generation are bred certaine monstrous mungrels, halfe beasts
and halfe men.


87


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


We can pass over the fanciful and salacious theory of their origin for
the moment and still admit the report of monstrous half-men and half-
beasts. They need not have been cross-breeds. The Greek historian
Duris of Samos also mentions a whole race of “human beasts” on the
banks of the Ganges called Calinges and all born with tails.


How far are Pliny’s second-hand reports to be credited? He mingles
the wildest fables with the most exact and careful observation. But it is
unjust to laugh at his credulity. His work of natural history is a patient
compilation of all the available evidence. And when it is evidence about
the Mediterranean world he is by no means uncritical in his judgment.
For instance, he strongly attacks the Greeks’ fertile imagination and
explodes more than one of their myths. He could not verify everything
he reported—especially when it came from a distant land. And distant
lands were as strange and little-known to him as Mars and Venus are to


us. Besides, Pliny has often had the last laugh. Several “ridiculous
fables” in his Natural History have been chuckled over for centuries,
only to be proved true in the end. It is not very scientific to dismiss
evidence because it seems unlikely or fantastic. There are thousands of
“marvels of nature” which common sense would reject out of hand.


Let us look at the sources on which the account quoted by Pliny is
certainly based: Ctesias and Megasthenes of the fourth and third cen-


turies B.c. They were, as far as we know, the first western writers to
speak of the Indies.


Ctesias, a Greek, was physician to Artaxerxes II, King of Persia.
When he returned from the east he wrote a book about Persia, and then


a second about India, although he had not been there. It was based
entirely upon rumours that he heard in Persia and on reports from


travellers.
His original work is lost, but fortunately many extracts
appear in the Myriobiblon, or Book of Wonders, of Photius, Patriarch
of Constantinople in the ninth century.
It includes the first known
mention of pygmies in the east, whose existence was not admitted by
science until 1887 as a result of work by the great French anthropologist
Quatrefages de Bréau.


In the middle of India there are black men called Pygmies. They
speak the same language as the Indians and are very small. The largest
are only two cubits high; most of them are only one and a half. Their
hair is very long; it reaches to their knees and even further. They have
a bigger beard than any other men; when it is fully grown they cease to
wear clothing, but bind it round with a girdle and so make it serve for
a garment. They are snub-nosed and ugly.


88


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


This description, though far from exact in its details, would cause no
surprise today. The existence of oriental pygmies or Negritos is firmly
established. But the Negritos are much larger than Ctesias’s pygmies.
I} to 2 cubits is about 2 feet 6 inches to 3 feet. In fact the smallest men
known in Asia, the Tapiros of New Guinea, discovered only in 1910,
vary between 4 and 5 feet high, most of them being about 4 feet 9


inches.?


There is good reason to believe that the Negritos once inhabited the
whole of the south-eastern corner of Asia and probably Burma and
Indo-China. During the last Ice Age the sea-level dropped slightly,
joining the Philippines and the Andaman Islands to the mainland, and
some of these people reached these islands on foot. They could not have
reached them by sea, for some of
them have still not learnt to build
canoes and use the crudest of rafts


to cross rivers, while others, like the
Andamanese, who do build them,
never venture far from the coast.
When the sea-level eventually rose
again the Andaman pygmies and
the Aetas of the Philippines were
saved from extermination by being
cut off from the mainland, where
a larger race mercilessly drove the
Sn
oth


little black men before them until
2% eer ake Pence
today there are only a few isolated
groups at the tip of the Malay peninsula. These are the Semang, and
there are hardly 2,000 of them altogether.


The Negritos of the Malay peninsula, the Andamans and the Philip-
pines are still all one race although they have been cut off for so long.
Sir Hugh Clifford, who lived with the Semang for some time at the end
of the last century, described them as “‘like African Negroes seen through
the reverse end of a field glass.” Hence their name, which was given to
them by the Spaniards who landed on the Philippines in 1521 and


brought back reports of little black men which were disputed for several


centuries.


The Negritos vary in colour from dark chocolate to sooty black. The
hair on their heads is short and woolly in tight curls like astrakhan.
The rest of their bodies is practically hairless. The skull is slightly


1 And these are not true Negritos; they are more like pygmy Papuans.


89


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


brachycephalic, face very round, forehead narrow and rounded, and chin
receding. The lips are fairly thick. The rounded fleshy part of the
upper lip is very characteristic. The nose is broad and flattened with
very distended nostrils. Their limbs are well proportioned, but their
feet are large and clumsy and turned inwards a little. The Aetas exag-
gerate this with a very splayed big toe.


The Negritos live almost naked. Hidden in thick jungle they live in
family groups on what they can catch and only rarely cultivate the soil.
They eat yams and other wild roots, fish, sun-dried monkey-flesh and
animals of all kinds. Usually they have no fixed dwelling, camping
wherever the game is most abundant. They shelter in makeshift huts of
palm-leaves spread casually over clumsy posts. Their habits are still
incredibly primitive. The Andaman islanders do not even know how to
make fire, they merely keep alight a flame originally lit from a still-


active volcano on the neighbouring Barren Island.


The Semang have long been exposed to the Malay slavers and have
never known the security which isolation had given their island brothers.
Certainly they are the shyest of all. Their sharp senses usually enable
them to disappear before the intruder arrives, but if one does come upon
them, they manage to escape by climbing very nimbly up into a tree.
The whole family moves from tree to tree by means of hastily rigged
ropes of rattan. In their habits the Semang would seem to be the nearest
men to the monkeys. The Malays call them orang utan or “men of the
woods,” a word which we confusingly use for the reddish-brown anthro-
poid ape from Sumatra and Borneo.


But to return to Ctesias.
His description hardly seems to fit the
Negritos. There are no pygmies of this race in India now, and their
short and curly hair does not agree with the long mane which Ctesias
gives his pygmies. There is another much better identification which
I shall come to soon.


When Ctesias wrote of the odd races of India he did not only mention
pygmies. He also speaks of men with a more animal appearance.


In the hills there are men who have a dog’s head, and whose clothes
are the skins of wild beasts. They have no language; they bark like
dogs and so make themselves understood to one another. Their teeth


* In 1641 Nikolaas Tulp, a Dutchman, was probably the first European to
apply the name “orang-utan” to an ape—it was a chimpanzee from Angola.
What misunderstanding led him to use a Malay word for an African ape, which
he gave the Latin name of Saryrus indicus (Indian satyr), is still a riddle. A few
years later Jacob Bontius, another Dutchman, more wisely applied the name to
the big reddish anthropoid ape from the Sunda islands.


90


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


are longer than those of dogs; their nails are like those of animals, but
longer and more curved. They are black and very honest, like the rest
of the Indians, with whom they trade; they understand the Indian
language, but they cannot reply except by barking and making signs
with their hands and fingers like deaf-mutes. The Indians call them
Calystrians in their language, which means dog-headed: They live on
raw meat. Their population may reach 120,000.


After mentioning that these dog-headed men live in caves and sleep
on beds of leaves, that they use bows and spears and wear very fine
tanned skins, he adds:


All of them, men and women, have a tail like a dog’s, but longer and


more hairy.


Shelving this tail for the moment (I shall have more to say about it


later), let us pass on several centuries to Marco Polo, who also noted a


trace of dog-headed men in the island of Angaman (doubtless one of the
Andaman islands). Did he refer to the Negritos? Perhaps. But perhaps
his imagination had merely been influenced by tales in Pliny and Ctesias
which were very popular in the Middle Ages.


Ctesias (who knew India only by hearsay) and Pliny (who quoted
Ctesias, his Calinges are obviously the same as the Calystrians) may
seem unreliable witnesses, but Megasthenes, an Ionian, must have been


to the banks of the Ganges when ambassador from Seleucus Nicator to
the court of King Chandragupta. One is therefore all the more sur-
prised to find that he merely quotes Ctesias. But even this is not certain,
since his work is known only by quoted fragments, and when Pliny
reports what Ctesias and Megasthenes have said of the wonders of India


it is sometimes difficult to tell who said what.


The problem of the Indian “‘beast-men” seemed to be solved in the
year 400 when Bishop Palladius mentioned a race of strange pygmies in
Ceylon, the Veddahs, oné of the most primitive peoples in the world.


The Veddahs, who long ago took refuge in the mountains and forests
of the eastern part of the island, are not strictly speaking pygmies, for


their average height is not less than 5 feet. But they are barely an inch


outside the limit. They are very different from the Negritos. Their


skull is clearly dolichocephalic, their hair is long and wavy. Their skin


is often lighter than the Negritos’, though it is still very dark. They are


not at all negroid. Their profile is remarkably orthognathous. Their


lips are thin, their nostrils wide beneath a slender nose which is de-


pressed a little at the root. Their most remarkable feature is their


gI


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


receding forehead and strikingly heavy brow, beneath which their eyes
seem very deep-set. Their beards are weak, and they have hardly any


hair on their bodies.


Like the Negritos they are timid creatures, who run away from
strangers. They live in separate families in caves or crude huts made


f 4
Ey
/:
4
43
F


bh
i
i


.
*


25. Typical Veddah of
Ceylon.


of branches. Before the Sinhalese arrived
they were still in the Stone Age, but
since then they have used iron-headed
arrows. The cult of spirits of the dead


is their only religion.


There is every reason to believe that


this people, of which there are now only


a few hundred pure-blooded survivors,
once covered a vast territory.
In India


itself there are tribes with Veddah charac-


teristics
weakened
by cross-breeding.
These are known as the “jungle tribes”


or “hill tribes” of the mountains west
of the Deccan plateau, the Kadir of the
Anaimalai hills and the Paniyan, Irula
and Kurumba of the Nilgiri hills. Geo-


logically the mountains of Ceylon are
part of the same range and were cut off
only after the Ice Age, when the Andaman
Islands and the Philippines were separated
from the mainland.


There is little doubt that the Veddahs


are Ctesias’s long-haired pygmies. Only
the enormous beard and small size seem


to be exaggerated—and there is also the
long hairy tail. Probably the hill tribes
have been confused with a monkey that


also lives in the Western
ghats, the
wandereroo or lion-tailed monkey (vetulus


silenus), a black macaque with a large grey
mane like a prophet’s hair and beard.


In the Malay peninsula there are also tribes similar to the Veddahs.
These are the Sakai or Senoi—men of the jungle—a chiefly nomadic
people. They wear no more than a bark loincloth and a fringe of stringy
black fungi made into a girdle. They are armed with blow-pipes and


92


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


cultivate the ground with nothing better than a pointed stick. All the
same they are in some respects more civilised than the Veddahs of Ceylon.
They build villages of square or conical huts ; they fear demons and sacri-


fice to gods, especially to Peng or Tuhan, the supreme being, and Grand-
mother Longpaps, the giantess who washes sinful souls in boiling water.


Louis Lapicque gave the name of Pre-Dravidians to these Veddah-


like tribes, because they occupied the whole of India during the Ice Age


before it was invaded by the black Dravidians, who in their turn were


26. The wanderoo or lion-tailed monkey.


invaded in about 1500 B.c. by the lighter-skinned Aryans. The yellow


hordes of Genghis Khan broke over India in the thirteenth century,


Tamburlane came in the fourteenth century and then Baber and Akbar


in the sixteenth. These repeated tides have filled India with a mixture


of many different races, and thus perhaps instigated the caste system.
The Veddahs were the poor relations in this motley world and were


driven into the hills and cut off in Ceylon. Were they Pliny’s “‘beast-


men”? Could they have been the civilised monkeys described by the great


traveller Ibn Batita, who landed in Ceylon in the fourteenth century?


93


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


This apostle of Mahomet says of the monkeys in Ceylon:


animals which are in great numbers in the mountains of these parts.
These monkies are black, and have long tails: the beard of the males is


like that of a man.


This description probably refers to the purple-faced langur of Ceylon
(Kasi vetulus).1 Its fur varies from silvery grey to jet black, and it has
flowing white whiskers and a very long tail. But Ibn Batuta goes on:


I was told by the Sheikh Othm4n and his son, two pious and credible
persons, that the monkies have a leader, whom they follow as if he were
their king. About his head is tied a turban composed of the leaves of
trees; and he reclines upon a staff. At his right and left hand are four
monkies, with rods in their hands, all of which stand at his head when-
ever the leading monkey sits. His wives and children are daily brought
in on these occasions, who sit down before him; then comes a number of
monkeys, which sit and form a sort of assembly about him. One of the
four monkeys then addresses them, and they disperse. After this each
of them comes with a nut, a lemon, or some of the mountain fruit, which
he throws down before the leader.
He then eats, together with his
wives, children, and the four principal monkeys; they then all disperse.
One of the Jogees also told me, that he once saw the four monkeys
standing in the presence of the leader, and beating another monkey with
rods; after this they plucked off all his hair.


These monkeys can hardly be langurs. If the story is not a fable
they must be more human creatures, though hardly so human as the
Veddahs. They seem more like Pliny’s ““beast-men.”


At the end of the nineteenth century new evidence lent weight to
these ancient reports and showed that the Veddahs could not be the
“‘beast-men,” or, if they were, then there must be other even more
beastlike men in Ceylon. In 1887 Hugh Nevill, a British explorer, was
told a strange story by a Sinhalese hunter about a people called the
nittaewo who agreed remarkably well with Pliny’s description. The
hunter had heard the story from a close friend, one of the last Veddahs
in the Leanama region in the south-east of Ceylon. This old Veddah
had been told by a relative called Koraleya a great deal about the
nittaewo and their final extermination. They were a race of pygmies
who inhabited the almost inaccessible mountains in the Leanama area
which lay in the south of the Veddah country and extended from Bagura


in the Panawa Pattu in the east to the confines of the Kattaragama hills
in the west. There were also said to be mittaewo at Tammankaduwa.


1 The local name is wanderoo, which has been applied in error to the conti-
nental species. The common specific name, vetulus, given to both these distantly-
related monkeys, only increases the confusion.


94


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


If the mittaewo seemed savage pygmies to the Veddahs, who were
themselves extremely primitive and quite small, they must have been
remarkable creatures. They were said to be perfect human beings, but
even smaller than the pygmies, being between 3 and 4 feet high; the
females, as usual, were rather smaller. They walked upright and had


no tail. Most accounts say that their legs at least were very hairy, but


others give them thick reddish fur over most of their bodies; and, very


rarely, they are described as hairless and dark in colour. All agree that


they had remarkably short and strong arms.
Their hands were also


short, with long claws. They had no articulate language, and spoke


with a sort of burbling, or birds’ twittering understood only by a few


Veddahs. They lived in small parties, sleeping in caves or on platforms


of branches in trees covered with a roof of leaves. They fed on what


they could catch: squirrels, small deer, tortoises and even lizards and


crocodiles. They did not use arms. They ripped open their prey with


their long claws and gluttonously devoured their entrails, a habit which


disgusted the Veddahs, who disliked even more their habit of stealing


meat that had been left to dry in the sun.


The Veddahs and the mittaewo were constant enemies. The little men
had no defence against the Veddahs’ bows and arrows, but they made
up for it by mischief and cunning. When they found a Veddah asleep
they would disembowel him with their claws.
But the stronger and
better-armed race won in the end. In the late eighteenth century, or so


it would seem, the last mttaewo were rounded up by the Veddahs of
Leanama and driven into a cave. The Veddahs then heaped brushwood
in front of the entrance and set fire to it. The bonfire burnt for three
days, and the trapped nittaewo were all suffocated.


Unfortunately all record of the cave’s position was lost when the
Veddahs of Leanama became extinct themselves a few generations later.


It was the last of them who told Hugh Nevill’s informant. We know that
he got the story from his relative Koraleya, who heard tell of the end of
the nittaewo when he was very young. Koraleya died in about 1870,
which means that it must have been around 1800.


Hugh Nevill’s report is, of course, based on information at fourth


hand. One of the four links of the chain could have invented the whole


story. But it was decisively corroborated at the beginning of this century


when Frederick Lewis, who had never heard of Nevill’s stories, explored


eastern Uva and the Panawa Pattu district. At Salavai, he found one


family who admitted that their grandfather was a real Veddah belonging


to a clan from the confines of the River Kumbukkan. From the oldest


95


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


member of this family, who had adopted the Sinhalese name of Dissan
Hamy, Lewis obtained a mass of information about the habits and
customs of the Veddah people, and also of the pygmies, called ““Nittawo,”
who used to harass them. According to this information the mittaewo
had not been exterminated more than five generations earlier—Dissan
Hamy’s grandfather had taken an active part in burning out one of their
encampments—and their appearance and habits agreed very closely
with Nevill’s version.


I may here mention [remarked Frederick Lewis] that as I was
sceptical as to the story about this race, I took particular care to make
inquiries at the distant village of Waradeniyama (the furthest in-
habited spot on the south of the Buttala-Wedirata) if the oldest in-
habitant of that place could give me any confirmation of it. This
inquiry was made when Dissan Hamy was not present, and it would
have been impossible for my questions to have been anticipated. -To
my surprise, a very old man of the village completely confirmed in
detail Dissan Hamy’s description.


I also made further inquiry at another village from a headman, and
he repeated the same story, adding that the Nittawo were destroyed by
the Veddas out of fear.


It is difficult to reject as false a story, told devoid of the usual fan-
tastic embellishments that characterize the history of mythical creatures,
such as Yakko, when it is completely confirmed by parties ignorant of
what the others have said. Even though tangible evidence is not forth-
coming and it would be difficult to find any, of a people so primitive as
these creatures appear to have been, I see no valid reason for dis-
believing the statements made to me.


Moreover there is still an oral tradition among the Veddahs about the
nittaewo. Quite recently Wilfred Mendis heard of them from a Sinhalese
guide of Veddah extraction.


Accounts of the nittaewo by the Sinhalese, or even by the Veddahs,
may well have given rise to ancient legends about “‘beast-men” in Cey-


lon. Frederick Lewis has shown that certain places on the south-east
coast were used as ports of call by western navigators several centuries
before Christ. In fact the River Kumbukkan, which runs right through


this area, was well known at that time as a permanent supply of fresh
water.


The existence of the mittaewo seems to be established without much
doubt. It remains to be discovered what they were. The eminent expert
on the primates, Professor W. C. Osman Hill, has set about this task
with much patience and perspicacity.
First, what does the name


96


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


mittaewo (sometimes spelt mittavo) mean?
Nevill derives it from
nishdda, the name given by the Aryan invaders to the more primitive


tribes, citing nishadiwa or migadiwa as the Sinhalese form which in
Veddah would become nittaewa or nittaewo. But, Professor Hill writes:


This suggests, quite apart from other evidence, that the Veddahs
themselves are not synonymous with the Nittaewo, even though their
mainland relatives would be included under the category of Nishdda
and they themselves would also have been, had the invaders reached
Ceylon.


But might not the mittaewo be Negritos, who are in fact slightly
smaller than the Veddahs, though only by about 2 inches, and are in
some respects even more primitive? R. L. Spittel favoured this theory
in 1933. He pointed out that there were still primitive tribes of the
Negrito type in southern India, especially the Kadars of the Nilgiri


hills and that pure-blooded Negritos lived in the Andaman islands.
India and Ceylon might therefore have been originally inhabited by
Negritos of whom the mittaewo were the last survivors.‘ But Spittel is
mistaken
in thinking the Kadars (obviously
the same as the Kadir) are
of Negrito type. They are unquestionably nearer the Veddahs. All the
same it is true that there are traces of cross-breeding with Negritos
among the hill-tribes of India, and even among the Veddahs in Ceylon,
particularly at Tammankaduwa.
Moreover Professor Hill considers
this very fact as a decisive proof that the nittaewo are not Negritos:
since the Veddahs and mittaewo were perpetually at war it is not likely
they would intermarry, as the Veddahs and Negritos do whenever they
meet, for instance in the Malay peninsula where the Semang (Negritos)
cross with the Sakai (Veddah type). Professor Hill also rightly points
out that the Negritos do not look in the least like the description of the
nittaewo.


If the mittaewo are not the most primitive of men perhaps they may


1 As Aubrey Weinman has pointed out, there even seems to be concrete
evidence of this:


Most important evidence that pygmies must have lived in Ceylon in the pre-
historic era is to be found in the small but extremely valuable collection of
stone implements in the Colombo Museum, collected, I believe, by Mr C.
Hartley, Principal of the Royal College for many years. In this collection
there is a whole sequence ranging from bigger to smaller ones, and the latter
are so minute in structure that they could only have been used by a race of
pygmies who inhabited the island in the dim and distant past.


But I do not think that he is right in considering this a proof of the past
existence of the mttaewo. These minute tools are evidence of true pygmies, not
of the mittaewo, who, according to all traditions, did not use implements.


G
97


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


be anthropoid apes, the most advanced of the monkeys. When Jacob
Bontius first described the orang-utan he added a legend that “the
Javanese say that they are born of Indian women who couple with


27. Gibbon walking on its hind-legs.


monkeys under the influence of a vile sensuality.”” This shows that the


tales Pliny reported were also told of anthropoid apes. But could the
very detailed Veddah tradition have referred to an ape? According to
Nevill the mittaewo has been compared to the orang-utan in at least one


report. But this ape (see Fig. 48, p. 150) is too large, too heavy, too


98


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


strictly vegetarian and arboreal, and too solitary in its habits to agree
with the description of the nittaewo.1


Actually the gibbon is a much better candidate. It is small: the largest
species, the siamang of Sumatra (Symphalangus syndactylus), is 3 feet
high when it stands upright—the same height as the nittaewo. It habitu-


ally walks upright on its hind-legs only, and it is the only ape that does


so. It lives in troops. And it is not entirely vegetarian; besides insects it


will eat birds and swallow their eggs. All this is a long way from the


savage and bloody habits of the mittaewo, but the Veddahs may well


have blackened the character of their greatest enemy, and according to


Professor Hill a giant gibbon would make a very plausible nittaewo. It


would have to be a species as yet unknown, for the siamang’s fur is


black and the other gibbons are black, grey, light fawn or brown—never


reddish with long hairs. Moreover, gibbons are only found east of the


Ganges and south of the Brahmaputra. It would be surprising to find


them in Ceylon. But, of course, this is not a conclusive argument.


The theory that the ittaewo are not an anthropoid ape but an ordinary
monkey without a tail really won’t hold water. It is true that a pig-tailed
langur (Simias concolor) has been discovered in the Malay archipelago,
but only on the Mentawai Islands off the west coast of Sumatra, where-
there also lives a pygmy siamang (Symphalangus (Brachytanites) klosst)
which fills the bill much better. Apart from its small tail this langur is
quite unlike the mttaewo.


It has also been suggested that they were bears. Bears sometimes
stand upright on their hind-legs and leave footprints very like those of
human feet. The nittaewo’s hairy skin has also been compared to that of
the only bear known in Ceylon, the Ceylon sloth-bear (Melursus ursinus).
But there the comparison stops, for this bear rarely stands upright, its
fur is black—though it sometimes turns red on the surface—it is not
gregarious, and is carnivorous only in exceptional cases.
It is well
known to the Veddahs, who call it aswai] and fear it because of the
damage it does to beehives. According to Professor Hill the burbling,
babbling language of the nittaewo might be made by bears, which lick


and suck their paws noisily, sometimes for a quarter of an hour together,


making a strange sing-song chirping as they do so. Thus they might be


the origin of some of the stories about the nittaewo.


1 There is a Sinhalese legend about very primitive creatures called vanara, or
men-of-the-woods, corresponding to the Malay orang utan. Since the Malays
used orang utan to describe the Semang Negritos, vanara may apply as well to
the Veddahs as to the mittaewo.


99


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


But, according to Professor Hill, the most likely theory is still that
the nittaewo were true ape-men, for the discovery of bones of the
Pithecanthropus in Java and the very similar Sinanthropus in China,
shows that ape-men (the morphological link between the anthropoid
apes and man) once inhabited a large part of Asia and that they were no
doubt driven into the Malay archipelago by more human invaders.
They could have reached Ceylon when it was still attached to the main-
land, and have then survived until very recently. It is clear enough
that


true ape-men (which according to some authors may have been giant
gibbons that had given up living in trees) fit exactly with the Veddahs’
description of the mittaewo.


I cannot quite understand why Professor Hill thinks that their small


28. The Ceylon sloth-bear (Melursus ursinus).


size helps to identify them with the Pithecanthropus—which was cer-
tainly much nearer our own, as is proved by the size of the skull and
length of the femur. But it is very likely that if the Pithecanthropus was


cut off in Ceylon it would develop into a pygmy race, as isolated species


so often do.


But, you may say, since the nittaewo are extinct, we shall never be able


to prove the truth of this theory.


This is not quite true. Systematic excavation in the Leanama region
might bring to light bones of the mittaewo in a relatively fresh condition,
and thus clinch the problem.


But surely there is no hope of ever examining one of these strange
ape-men in flesh and blood?


100


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


Even this is not quite certain. For if the nittaewo are a vanished race


in Ceylon there are other places in south-east Asia where hairy pygmies


or “beast-men” are believed to exist.


Henri Maitre, who explored the Moi hinterland of Cambodia, Cochin-
China, Annam and Lower Laos at the beginning of the century, has
shown how widespread such rumours are in Indo-China:


Besides the two-horned rhinoceros which may very well be found
there, the natives say Nam-Noung also shelters a more peculiar and
certainly more legendary beast: I refer to the “‘wild men.’’ It is not the
first time that I have heard this curious legend of nomadic human
creatures, living in mountainous forests, and having (according to the
Moi) a tail like
a monkey. They are almost unknown on the Darlac
plateau where the gently undulating country is easy of access and
covered with no more than grass and scrub, but were reported to me
around the Great Lake and in all the hilly area of the Annam range.
According to these local reports the “‘wild men’’ of Nam-Noung are
small—less than five feet high—covered with a thick coat of reddish
hair, and arms or legs which they cannot bend at all. The back of the
forearm has a sharp membrane like the blade of a knife which they use
for cutting away the bush to make a path through the forest. They
cannot climb up trees, since they have neither knees nor elbows, so
they sleep leaning against tree-trunks. They live on roots and stalks of
plants, and do not know how to build huts, living the same wandering
life as other beasts of the forest. The villagers used to run them down
and eat them, but the “‘wild men’’ have become scarcer and are no
longer found. But one sometimes still comes upon the footprints that
they leave behind them, like those of other men, but smaller.


This description of “‘wild men’’ is almost identical among all the
villagers who believe in them, whether in the remote Nam-Noung
district or in the heart of the Annam range. As I have already remarked
they are almost unknown to the Radé of Central Darlac. One village
on the plateau, however, not only knows them but even pretends to be
directly descended from one of them named Kjhat. Their habitat is
near the village B. Mé-Nguol, a Radé-Kpa hamlet about a mile to the
east of the Darlac Residence on the main Annam road.


The two striking details about these “‘wild men” are the tail—like
Ctesias’s dog-headed hill-people—and the strange anatomy of their
forearms. Otherwise these russet pygmies agree well enough with the


description of the mittaewo.
As to the tail, it seems to me significant that the Annamites used to


allege that the Moi themselves had tails. The name Moi includes all
the savage tribes inhabiting the mountains and plains of Annam and
Laos. They are a mysterious race, of medium size (average height 5 feet


10!


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOTUH-EAST ASIA


2 inches), with reddish tanned skins, the colour of a sunburnt European.
They do not have slit eyes or prominent cheek-bones. Their noses are
rather straight and they sometimes have fair or even reddish hair. Some
authors have compared them to the Mediterranean race, with whom they
may have been closely connected, for according to their traditions their
ancestors came from a far country in the west. When the Moi became
better known it was seen that they had tails no oftener than any other
people,! on the contrary they attributed them


to another race, more savage than themselves.
But this does not mean that the “‘wild men”
of Nam-Noung really have tails.
A tail is
simply a symbol of bestiality.
It is not with-
out reason that we give the Devil a tail. It is
the Mark of the Beast. In which case it may
seem odd that stories of men with tails should
be especially frequent in an area inhabited by
anthropoid apes
(i.e. tailless monkeys), the
gibbon and the orang-utan, proving that men


are not the only bipeds without tails. On the
other hand, if all the baser brethren of the
higher apes have tails, it might seem logical to
believe that any really primitive race of man
would also bear tails.
29. Man with atailas = Thus many modern commentators say that


a result OF f Gaeta
ooeane dog-headed
people
the Lh
vistic freak.
4
people
were
the
Lhopa
of Bhutan, whom the Indians actually call
Calystisi, or dog-faced men.
There is nothing particularly primitive
about these people, but the fact that they live in remote mountains is
enough to make them seem very savage to those who live in the plains
and on the coast. Hence their imaginary tail.
Henri Maitre recalls that when the Cambridge Expedition embarked


at Klang in 1899 on their way to Bangkok their Malay friends told them


1 At the age of five weeks the human embryo normally has a well-formed caudal
appendage.
While an adult has 34 vertebrae, the embryo at this age has 38.
Four or five at the end are later joined together to form the coccyx. But occasion-
ally, by some freak of atavism, these vertebrae remain separate or even multiply to
form a proper tail which may be as much as 4 or § inches long. Sometimes it is
merely a fleshy appendage without bones, but when it is properly formed, with
muscles and nerves, it can be moved like an animal’s.
It is usually bare but some-
times covered with hair. This malformation does not seem to be hereditary, nor
is it commoner in some races than others, and it certainly could not be a charac-
teristic of an entire people.


102


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


to be careful not to be eaten by the tailed savages—a monstrous slander
on the refined Siamese. But then everyone thinks himself better than
his neighbours and gives them beastly habits or animal appearance.
Most of the ancient travellers gave tails to the savages they found, espe-


cially on islands. Marco Polo mentions men with tails in Sumatra.
Gemelli-Careri finds them in Luzon, Jean Struys in Formosa, the


Jesuit missionaries in Mindoro near Manila, Képing, a Swede, in the
Nicobar Islands. And when Turner visited Tibet he was told of a race


of men with tails living in the mountains. The tail was so stiff that they


had to make a hole in the ground for it before they could sit down.


Jose Ribeiro, a missionary, lends tails to a tribe of American Indians
called Mesayas. Louis Franck, a French doctor, reports from Africa
that in the slave-trains “one can recognise cannibals by their little tail
which the Ghellabis, or slave-dealers, cut off so that they will fetch a
better price.”


Even in Europe in the seventeenth century the Spaniards believed
Jews had tails, in France the people of Béarn attributed them to the
Cagots who lived at the foot of the Pyrenees, and in England the Devo-
nians believed the same slander about their Cornish neighbours.


The legend of tailed men has been fostered by totemic tribes, who
boast of their animal ancestry, and often therefore wear a false tail.
The Niam-Niams wind the skin of a colobus monkey round their waists,
letting the tail hang down behind. The Murut of Borneo do much the
same, and so do the Australian Aborigines, who use skins of different
animals according to their clan.


Every savage believes in someone more savage than himself. In their
great work on the pagan races of the Malay Peninsula, Skeat and
Blagden report the following Sakai legend:


The “Orang Ekor,”’ or Tailed Men, who are spoken of all over the
Malay Archipelago as if they were real human beings, are described as
appearing from time to time in various parts of the Malay Peninsula.
They are said to resemble human beings, and are not believed to be
dangerous; but they will have nothing to do with men, and vanish at once
into the forest as soon as they are seen. They wear nothing but a loin-
cloth of tree-bark, beneath which may be seen a short tail. Both the
men and women have tails, but they are not numerous, and their
children are never seen.


From what we have seen of legends of tailed men this may not neces-
sarily mean that there are even more primitive men than the Sakai in
the Malay jungle. Another Sakai legend reported by Skeat and Blagden


103


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


is more interesting from our point of view. It tells of a race of hairy
pygmies, the hantu Sakai (demon Sakai) living in the lonely forests
where they are very rarely seen. They are very timid and have such an
extremely keen sense of smell that they can tell at once if a man is near
and so escape from him. Their appearance and habits are like those of
the nittaewo.


These “demon Sakai’? (Hantu Sakai) have a sharp blade-like bone in
their right forearm which they use in the felling of trees. To gather the
fruit from the topmost sprays of a tree they climb the stem, and seat
themselves upon a branch, whilst they cut the spray through with this
sharp blade. Although they fall to the ground together with the branch
they never hurt themselves.


This reminds one of the cutting forearm of the “wild men” of Nam-
Noung. Two explanations spring to mind. These blades are either a
garbled allusion to the long forearms of the gibbon, which are indeed


so long that they might well be mistaken for a normal arm lengthened by


a sort of bill-hook; or they are actual knives such as certain jungle people


use to hack a path through the forest, and carry so habitually that in the
end they are mistaken for part of the body. The first explanation is hard


to apply to the ‘“‘wild men” of Nam-Noung, for they are said to be quite
unable to climb trees, and the gibbon is of all the monkeys probably the
most suited to living in trees, swinging gracefully from branch to branch
and hardly coming to the ground except to drink. On the other hand,
the Moi believe that the arm has no joint, and obviously if one thought a
gibbon’s forearm was a sort of bill-hook, the arm itself would be joint-


less. In Malacca there is a gibbon with white hands (Hylobates lar), and
from a distance they might look silvery and be mistaken for a metal blade.


In fact a thorough study of the legends of the whole Indo-Malayan
region shows that a great confusion reigns in the native mind between
human races who live in the forest and the local apes, the orang-utans
and various gibbons. This may be partly explained by the numerous
successive invasions, both of animals and men, which this country has
undergone. Some relics of these occupations have survived here and
there on islands, in inaccessible mountains, and in jungles that are hard
to penetrate.


In the Miocene period there were gibbons (Pliopithecus) even in
Europe; in the Pliocene they came no farther west than Egypt (Prohylo-
bates); and now they are found only in Asia east of the Ganges. Up till
the Pleistocene period there were still orang-utans in China; now they


104


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


are confined to Borneo and Sumatra. Much the same thing seems to
have happened to the Pithecanthropus except that none is supposed to
have survived. Then came the tiny Negritos, who once occupied all
Burma and Indo-China, and now survive only in the Malay peninsula,
the Andaman Islands and the Philippines. They were followed by the


little Veddahs, whose vast empire once stretched across India, but who


now consist only of a few hill tribes on the Malabar coast, and have fled


to the islands, where they are gradually dying out in their forest retreats


in Ceylon, Sumatra and the Celebes, as well as in Malaya. All these


little creatures have been beaten, massacred and driven out by larger


and better-armed invaders. The struggle for existence is essentially


fratricidal. Your bitterest enemies are those most like yourself and who


want the things that you do.


Thus, in a series of tidal waves, India passed from the reign of the
monkeys to the reign of modern man. The succession was not that of
our family tree, for, though related, the invaders were not directly
descended from one another. Nor was it a regular progress towards
man. No doubt there were ups and downs. The battle went to the
strongest, and the strongest is not necessarily the most intelligent. A
race of gregarious monkeys—like the baboons—could easily conquer


a country occupied by men living in scattered families. And even today
there are places where man cannot conquer the insects.


But in the end the battle would always be won by a combination of
intelligence, brute strength, ferocity and force of numbers.


The problem, then, is: to which of these waves of invaders did the


nittaewo, the “wild men” and the ‘‘demon Sakai” belong? All these
hairy pygmies seem to have preceded the Negritos and the Veddahs.
But many of their habits and traits are not those of even the highest apes
which lived there before the first men. Can they belong to the race of the
Pithecanthropus which no doubt occupied the whole of south-east Asia


at the end of the Pliocene period—that is to say in an intermediary age?
They are too small to be the Pithecanthropus erectus of Java or the
Sinanthropus pekinensis of China, which were the size of modern man.
The Dutch palaeontologist von Koenigswald discovered in Java in 1939


and 1941 remains of the. skulls of even larger ape-men which he called


Pithecanthropus robustus and Meganthropus palaeojavanicus.
If these


creatures were proportioned like men—and this is pure surmise—the


first would have been 6 feet 6 inches high and the second between 8 and


10 feet. Thus there are at all events considerable variations in the size


105


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


of the Pithecanthropus.
It would not be at all odd if we also found a
pygmy Pithecanthropus like the African Australopithecus. And if the
nittaewo and their Malay and Indo-Chinese brothers really are creatures
between men and apes, they must certainly be pygmy Pithecanthropi.


All this is based on a very slender scaffold of hypothesis. However,
Professor Hill, who believes the nittaewo to be a Pithecanthropus, points
out that in Sumatra there is a legend about an almost identical creature


called the orang pendek. And this time it is not a case of vague and
fantastic tales among primitive people—like the reports of the forest-
demons with cutting arms. The orang pendek has been talked of since
time immemorial.
It has been seen by educated Malays and even by
whites, and its description is therefore quite matter-of-fact. We shall
pursue it more closely in the next chapter.


Meanwhile, before leaving for Sumatra, we must report another
account of presumed ape-men. It was Christmas day, 1953, in a rubber
plantation at Trollak in the south of Perak on the Malay peninsula. A


little distance from the other workers, a young Chinese girl of sixteen
was tapping a rubber-tree. She was carefully cutting the channel in the
bark, down which the gum would run, when she felt a hand laid gently
on her bare shoulder. She started and quickly turned her head. And
what she saw made her freeze with terror. A woman stood behind her,


if one could call such a hideous and hairy female
a woman.
She was
more like a monkey. Her long black hair hung in a tangie all down her
back, in striking contrast to her white skin. She had hair on her arms
and on her chest, her eyebrows were large and bushy, and she even had


a moustache. She wore nothing but a sort of loincloth of yellow bark,
and had a strong animal smell. Her intentions were certainly peaceful.


It even seemed as if she had been sent by two no less hairy males, who
stood some distance off, as though trying not to frighten the girl. But
the female gave a friendly grin, showing long fangs like a beast and gave


a sort of croak like a bird. The Chinese girl screamed in terror and fled


as fast as her limbs would carry her.


It was not a nightmare. The next day the girl saw the three creatures
swimming in a river. A Tamil rubber-tapper, who had also seen the
strange trio, confirmed every detail of the girl’s account and added that
the creatures were of fairly large size and that the males had moustaches
which fell down to their waists. When the manager of the plantation
heard of this encounter he immediately reported it to the police at


106


NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


Kuala Lumpur, for his people were terrified and did not dare return to
work. Two patrols of the Malay security force were sent to the place to
hunt the intruders. Corporal Wahab of the Malayan Home Guard saw


the three strange creatures on a river-bank, but did not fire on them
because he thought that they might be men, such as the Sakai. They


dived into the water before his eyes and vanished into the jungle on the


far bank. During the next few days the three ape-men, as they were


now called, were seen by a good half-dozen people. All their descrip-


tions were the same, and agreed that the creatures were about 5 feet


10 inches high, well built and very hairy all over their bodies. They had


been referred to as apes, but they seemed so human in some respects


that the police gave the order to bring them back alive.


Local scientific circles began to be excited. Mr G. de G. Sieveking,
director of Malayan museums, said that he hoped to organise an expedi-
tion to search the Trollak plantations in the hope of tracking down and
capturing one of these strange creatures. He pointed out that they wore
a strip of skin or bark round their waists and that they ran like men,
never using their arms as the anthropoid apes do. In these respects they
were human. But their receding foreheads, projecting brow and bushy
eyebrows were those of more primitive creatures. These traits and their
long canine teeth, which projected even when their mouths were shut
showed, Mr Sieveking cautiously remarked, “‘that these creatures could
be the survivors of one of the first wandering tribes which came to
Malaya.”


Which wandering tribe? Certainly not the Veddah-like Sakai, nor the
pygmy Semang which are too small, dark and hairless. Was he really
thinking about a Pithecanthropus? Certainly no human being has canine
teeth which project beyond the level of the others. Even in the Pithecan-
thropus they project only very slightly. But possibly these large canines
seemed so strange in a human face that the witnesses exaggerated them.
In any case it may have been partly due to a self-inflicted mutilation.
The Semang, among others, file their teeth to a point.


Mr Sieveking thought that these hairy men must have already had
some contact with civilisation, for they recognised guns and were afraid


of them. An inquiry revealed that several of the same creatures had been


seen in the states of Kelantan and Perak in 1937. If they had happened


to see hunters with guns they would soon realise the danger of firearms.


Such is the story. No trace of these three creatures has been seen
since, and Mr Sieveking is now inclined to be sceptical about the
original reports. I can only leave the reader to draw his own conclusions.


107


CHAPTER FIVE


Orang Pendek,


the Ape-Man of Sumatra


... or Pan himself,
The simple shepherd’s awe-inspiring God.
WILLIAM WorRDSWORTH, The Excursion.


THE natives of Sumatra believed in an ape-man long before remains of


a Pithecanthropus were discovered in the neighbouring island of Java,
and indeed long before Ernst Haeckel had even invented the idea of
such creatures in 1865.


In The Origin of Species, Charles Darwin did not carry his theory of
evolution to its conclusions about the descent of man lest he should
shock religious opinion. His German colleague had no such qualms,
and coolly put forward a complete family tree showing how man had
risen step by step from the animal kingdom. As imaginative as he was
learned, he even invented new
creatures to fill the gaps in the genealogy.
The nearest direct ancestor of man that he could suggest was the Dryo-
pithecus, an anthropoid ape of the Miocene period, but it seemed too
large a jump between this beast and Pleistocene man, so he invented a
quite hypothetical creature half way between the two, which must have


lived, he said, in the intervening Pliocene period. He called it Pithecan-
thropus, or “‘ape-man.”


The existence of this imaginary beast was so well rooted in the minds
of Darwinians and Haeckelians that on his sixtieth birthday they gave
Haeckel a painting by Gabriel Max of a family of ape-men. It showed a
male, accompanied by a female suckling her child; they were rather


fearful creatures, being a mixture of men and apes in equal proportions.
Like men, their skin was bare, their hair long and loose, and they walked
upright. Like apes, they had a receding forehead, beetling brow, reced-
ing chin and slightly splayed big toes.


108


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


When this present was offered to Haeckel no one in the West knew
that remains of an actual ape-man had been discovered in Java by one
of his disciples. A young Dutch doctor called Eugéne Dubois had


joined the Medical Service of the Colonial Army in the hopes of being


posted to the Dutch East Indies, for


he thought that in Indonesia, the


country of the gibbon, man’s closest


relation according to Haeckel, he had


the best chance of finding the bones
of an ape-man. And the fact remains


that in Java, at Trinil on the bank of


the River Solo, he dug out of the


Pliocene volcanic tufa a fragment of


a skull with heavy brows and a re-


ceding forehead. Its cranial capacity
seemed to be between that of an an-
thropoid ape and a man. There were


also two molars and a pre-molar, as


well as a human-looking femur which


indicated that the creature walked


upright. On the basis of these re-
mains Dr Dubois announced in 1894


that he had discovered the “‘Missing
Link.”
The evolutionists were de-


lighted, and at the 1900 Exhibition


the public were able to admire a


reconstruction
of Pithecanthropus


erectus
made
of painted papver-


ma&ché in the Dutch East Indian


gee a
:
:
o. Reconstruction of ‘ie Java


Dr
Dubois’s
conclusions
’ ate
pa
Sonan th
the
Dutch East Indies
severely criticised—and not without
pavilion at the 1900 Exhibition.
reason—but in the end they were ae aie hisohmaivecnr oe!
confirmed as a result of systematic
P iiaeaas YY oy
excavation in Java from 1936 to 1939
organised by the Dutch palaeontologist Ralph von Koenigswald, which
brought to light three more fragmentary skulls of ape-men.
The


discovery at Pekin of rather more complete remains of a similar ape-


man (which has been named Sinanthropus, but should more logically


have been Pithecanthropus pekinensis) has increased our knowledge of


109


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


these creatures. Were they really man’s ancestors? It is hard to main-
tain this view. Most anthropologists see them as a branch which split
from the human family tree at the end of the Tertiary era. But others
think they were giant gibbons which had given up living in trees; and
this was Dr Dubois’s eventual opinion.


At all events they existed in Java. And across the Sunda Straits in
southern Sumatra ape-like men have been believed to exist since time
immemorial. Marco Polo was the first to bring this story to the West,
writing of Lambri (probably the province of Jambi) he says:


In this kingdom are found men with tails, a span in length, like those
of the dog, but not covered with hair. The greater number of them are
formed in this manner, but they dwell in the mountains, and do not
inhabit towns.


William Marsden, who was Secretary at the Residence at Benkoelen
in Sumatra and edited an English edition of Marco Polo in 1818, thought
that this fable arose from the actual existence of two types of native in
the Sumatra hinterland who lived in the woods and avoided all contact
with the other inhabitants. They were known as orang kubu and orang
gugu. The first were fairly numerous especially in the country between
Palembang and Jambi. They had their own language and ate anything:


deer, elephants, rhinoceroses, dogs, snakes and monkeys. The gugu
were much rarer, and were covered with long hair. Marsden’s orang
kubu are very well known today (they are usually given the Dutch spell-
ing koeboe) and are a tribe of natives who live in the mountainous forests
in the south-east of the island, in fact exactly where Marsden put them.
The orang gugu seem at first to be orang-utans, for, as Bontius remarked,
“The Javanese maintain that these animals can speak but refuse to do


so for fear of being made to work.”


One thing is certain: neither of them has a tail. But we have already
seen that a tail is merely a symbol of savagery. Besides, Marco Polo had
certainly not seen these appendages himself, he was trusting to a legend
which already existed. More recent stories, which are still current today,
say nothing about men with tails in Sumatra: on the contrary, they tell
of little wild creatures which walk upright like men and are hairy like
apes, like the mittaewo of Ceylon. The Dutch settlers call them either
orang pendek (sometimes spelt pandek), which means “little man,” or
orang letjo—“‘gibbering man.” Orang pendek is the local name only in
the north of Benkoelen and the south of Palembang. In other districts
the name is atoe pandak, atoe rimbo, sedapa, ijaoe, sedabo or goegoeh.
This last is plainly the same as Marsden’s gugu.


IIO


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


The natives insist that the orang pendek is not any of the three species
of gibbon to be found in Sumatra, nor is it an orang-utan, though
people ignorant of the Malay language have often been misled into
thinking the two names are connected because the first word is the same,
and that the natives therefore believe in several species of orang-utan.,
Actually orang merely means “‘man”—or “‘man-like creature,” whether


it is used in such phrases as orang pendek (little man), orang malayu
(Malay man) or orang utan (man-of-the-woods). (Incidentally orang-
utang—a frequent mispelling—means “man in debt”!) The Malays


31. The proboscis monkey of Borneo, which the natives call
orang blanda or “‘Dutchman.”’


also use the word orang for non-anthropoid apes. In Borneo the famous
proboscis monkey (Nasakis larvatus), the male of which has a nose 2}


inches long, is called orang blanda, which means “Dutchman.” The


illustration, and the fact that the Malays themselves have rather short


noses, may explain the reason why.


The orang pendek, according to reports, is a very shy biped which
speaks an unintelligible language. It is between 2 feet 6 inches and 5
feet high. Its skin is pinkish-brown and, according to most versions,
covered all over with short dark brown to black hair. It has a head of
jet-black hair forming a bushy mane down its back. It has no visible


tail. Its arms are not as long as an anthropoid ape’s. It hardly ever


III


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


climbs in trees, but walks on the ground. It is supposed to walk with


its feet reversed, the heels facing forwards.
Otherwise its habits are
very ordinary. It eats young shoots, fruit, fresh-water molluscs, snakes
and worms, which it finds by turning over stones and even, with her-
culean strength, the trunks of fallen trees. It is very partial to durian


fruit. And sometimes it raids
banana or sugar-cane planations,


or the natives’ gardens.
This
man-faced beast is known all
over southern Sumatra below
the equator. As Marsden’s note
shows, western
travellers had
heard of it at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, but it
was not for another hundred
years that the Dutch settlers
began seriously to believe that it


existed.


In 1917 it was mentioned in
an article in a Dutch scientific
journal by Dr Edward Jacobson,


a settler interested in natural


history. He told how two natives
whom he employed to collect
specimens had come upon
a
mysterious animal known locally


as orang pendek.
Dr Jacobson
was camping in the forest at the


foot of Boekit Kaba, near the
Soban Ajam plantation, on 10
July 1916, when hunters came
and told him that they had seen,


at a distance of some 20 yards,


an orang pendek
looking
for
larvae in a rotten stump. The creature was black and agreed with the


traditional description of the legendary beast. When it realised that it
had been seen it made off, running along the ground on its hind-legs.
Dr Jacobson realised that it could not be an orang-utan, which would
have made its escape from branch to branch of the trees. Near Mount
Kerintji, a little farther north, hg was able to examine a footprint which


112


Cig
oR
rs


:
>
we :


32. Drawing
of the
orang pendek
based on the traditional descripitions.


ORANG .PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


his guide said was an orang pendek’s, and it was not at all like an orang-


utan’s.
It was like a little human foot, but broader and shorter. He
concluded that there must be an unknown anthropoid ape in Sumatra.
This would not have been surprising, for several new animals had just
recently been discovered on that little-explored island, among them the
Sumatran hare.


A year later, another settler, L. C. Westenek, produced some more
evidence about this creature. Like everyone else, he had not at first
believed in the legend of the orang pendek, but he had enjoyed hearing


about it along with other such creatures as the orang boenian, or cave


spirits, the river-babies and the si bigau, those gnomes whose toes point


backwards and who keep wild pigs. One night, around the fire, he heard
how there lived in the forests of the Barissan mountains between the coast


at Painan and the crest of the hills some little men with whom it seemed


you had to be on friendly terms. When you went off into the jungle, it


was wise always to be provided with tobacco or, failing that, dried moss


to use as a substitute, to offer these pygmies if you met them. If you


did not leave a handful of tobacco in front of your camp they would


torment you all night, making a continual shindy or coming and


stealthily pulling branches off your hut. Westenek had been much


amused by these delightful tales, but one day in 1910 the following


events altered his opinion:


A boy from Padang employed as an overseer by Mr van H:
had
to stake the boundaries of a piece of land for which a long lease had been
applied. One day he took several coolies into the virgin forest on the
Barissan mountains near Loeboek Salasik.
Suddenly he saw, some 15
yards away, a large creature, low on its feet, which ran like a man, and
was about to cross his path: it was very hairy and it was not an orang-
utan; but its face was not like an ordinary man’s. It silently and gravely
gave the men a disagreeable stare and ran calmly away. The coolies ran
faster in the opposite direction. The overseer remained where he stood,
quite dumbfounded, and when he returned to camp he set down in
writing what he had seen. His little note is in my possession.


After citing Dr Jacobson’s account, which I have already mentioned,
Westenek goes on to report an adventure which happened to Mr


Oostingh, manager of the coffee plantation at Dataran. At the end of


1917 he lost his way in the virgin forest during an expedition in the


eastern foothills of Boekit Kaba between the rivers Aier Kembang


and Aier Roeso. After going round and round in the thick forest for


several hours until about two o’clock in the afternoon, he saw someone


sitting on the ground about 10 yards away who looked as if he were


H
113


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


lighting a fire. Oostingh would have been very glad to meet anyone who
could tell him how to get home to Dataran, but before he could ask the
way he was struck by what he saw:


I saw that he had short hair, cut short, I thought; and I suddenly
realised that his neck was oddly leathery and extremely filthy. “That
chap’s got a very dirty and wrinkled neck!’ I said to myself.


His body was as large as a medium-sized native’s and he had thick
square shoulders, not sloping at all. The colour was not brown, but
looked like black earth, a sort of dusty black, more grey than black.


He clearly noticed my presence. He did not so much as turn his
head, but stood up on his feet: he seemed to be quite as tall as I (about
5 feet 9 inches).


Then I saw that it was not a man, and I started back, for I was not
armed. The creature calmly took several paces, without the least haste,
and then, with his ludicrously long arm, grasped a sapling, which
threatened to break under its weight, and quietly sprang into a tree,
swinging in great leaps alternately to right and to left.


My chief impression was and still is: “What an enormously large
beast!”’ It was not an orang-utan; I had seen one of these large apes
a short time before at Artis [the Amsterdam Zoo].


It was more like a monstrously large siamang, but a siamang has long
hair, and there was no doubt that it had short hair. I did not see its face,
for, indeed, it never once looked at me.


For lack of a better explanation, Westenek wondered whether
Oostingh had not seen a siamang after all, a great black gibbon which
had reached a venerable age.


Might not the orang pendek be the same among the gibbons as the old
solitary bulls are among elephants?
Lone, ill-tempered great-grand-
fathers, hated by all the females in their tribe, who have lost most of
their hair as a result of mange or age?


This seems to me one of the most reasonable theories that have been
put forward about the strange creature of the Barissan mountains. Goril-


las, when they grow old, soon become too heavy to go on living in trees.
Might not the same be true of gibbons, except that in their ease it would
have to be for some other reason, such as rheumatic old age?


Unless, of course, the orang pendek were a very special sort of gibbon:
one that had decided to stick to its two feet, while its cousins still swung
acrobatically in the trees; and one which as a result had grown enor-
mously large, or, perhaps, because it had grown so large, no longer felt
at home except on the ground. But such a gibbon would be more like a
Pithecanthropus—and why not? Certainly it would be less odd than
the conclusion drawn by Dr Dammerman, curator of the Museum at


114


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


Buitenzorg. He says that the various descriptions of the orang pendek
make one think of an orang-utan, “especially Mr Oostingh’s account,
apart from the detail that the animal was black and had short hair.”
This reminds me of the old riddle: “Why is Moses like Napoleon?—
They both have beards, except Napoleon”!


Westenek’s article encouraged other settlers to give details of their
own experiences. Dr Jacobson reported the evidence of Mr Coomans,
manager of the State Railway at Padang.


Once when I was prospecting for minerals in Benkoelen footprints
of pygmies were found by one of my European foremen, a man on
whose word I could rely, in the valley of the Oeloe Seblat, between the
north Redjang and the coast, that is to say, in the Barissan mountains.
They were like a child’s footprints, but broader. Later the same in-
formant found the same prints near Soungei Klomboek between Lais
and Air Dingin. He noticed the circumstance that along this créature’s
path the stones had been turned over here and there, as though it was
looking for food beneath them.


Dr Jacobson also spoke of his own experiences. In 1915 at Sioelak
Deras several natives told him that they had once or twice seen an
orang pendek. They all insisted that it was not a siamang; besides, it did
not move through the trees but walked on the ground. They said that
in the days when there were more rhinoceros in the Kerintji area they
saw orang pendek more often. The rhinoceros were caught in pits
which trapped them with their feet in the air, and one sometimes saw an
orang pendek perched on the rhinoceros’s belly, eating the flesh. Dr
Jacobson therefore concluded that it could not be an anthropoid ape, for
no known species is carnivorous, though some will eat birds and small
mammals. But there is no reason why a carnivorous species of anthro-
poid ape should not exist.


From Sioelak Deras Dr Jacobson then went to the edge of the Danau


Bento, a huge swamp south-east of Mount Kerintji surrounded by


virgin forest stretching all the way to the River Jambi. On 21 August


1915, while out in this uninhabited country, where some hunters go to


trap deer, his guide Mat Getoep drew his attention to some curious


footprints on the bank of a stream (Fig. 33). They could not be confused


with the very peculiar trail of the orang-utan (Fig. 34). The Sumatran


maintained that these prints, which were not more than 5 inches long,


had been made by an orang pendek.


Captain R. Maier, an official surveyor at Benkoelen, made quite a
collection of such footprints. His work frequently took him into the


115


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


interior and he gathered what information he could about the orang
pendek. Mr Lambermon, manager of the coffee plantation at Kaba


AND


33. Footprint attributed to
the orang pendek, found on


._
21
August
r915
by Dr
Jacobson near the Danau
Bento swamp.


U


35. Footprints attributed to the
orang pendek found on 21 Septem-
ber 1918, the left at Roepit and
the right on
Boekit Kaba, by
Lambermon.


37. Footprints
attributed
to an


orang pendek and its young, found
near
Air Masoedje
by Raden
Kasanredjo.


34. Imprints made by the foot (/eft)
and second phalanges of the hand


(right) of a walking orang-utan.
Bo


36. Footprints attributed to the
orang pendek found by Mohamad
Saleh; (eft) in the S. Aro forest,
25 January 1920;
(right) near Air
Roepit, January 1921.
oY


Wetan, gave him a drawing of two sets of footprints, both found on 21
September 1918, at Roepit and the sides of Boekit Kaba (Fig. 35).
‘Later Mohamad Saleh, a native surveyor in Captain Maier’s service,


I16


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE~MAN OF SUMATRA


brought him a sketch of a footprint found in the forest at Marga Ambat-
jung on 25 January 1920. A year later he found another very similar
print near Air Roepit (Fig. 36). Another Sumatran surveyor, Raden
Kasanredjo, sent Captain Maier a drawing of a double track found near
Air Masoedje, made by one animal of the usual size and another much
smaller, presumably its young (Fig. 37). There are very clear differences
between these prints: while Lambermon’s and Raden Kasanredjo’s are
much alike, Mohamad Saleh’s squarer prints seem to belong to a dif-


ferent animal, or at all events to the feet at the other end of the same one,


for the hind- and fore-feet of the same creature often produce very


different prints. None of these prints seems to be identical with those


drawn by Dr Jacobson.


By far the most exact description of the orang pendeh’s appearance is
that due to a Dutch settler called van Herwaarden. In 1916 he was
prospecting for valuable timber in the state of Palembang, and heard
tell of a mysterious creature called
a sedapa. But the accounts
were so
fantastic and so contradictory that he could not believe that they re-
ferred
to an unknown “man-of-the-woods.” In 1917 he returned to the
town of Palembang, where the Malay traders who often went into the
oeloe told him something of the orang pendek. But he could not credit
these stories that this creature had only one eye in the middle of its
forehead, that it walked with its heels forward, climbed up trees like
a gecko and could turn itself into a tiger. It came at night and stole
wool off the sheep’s backs to make itself a mattress to sleep on, but it
helped lost rattan-pickers to find their way. This was too much for van
Herwaarden, and he abandoned his inquiries about the creature.


But at the beginning of the following year he was exploring the
Semangoes district of Moesi Oeloe when he was surprised to see prints
of bare feet, very much like a man’s, alongside a small river. There were
two trails, one large and one small, which he thought must have been
made by a mother and her young one. He made a careful sketch of the
prints, but it was lost when he accidentally fell into a river. Some days
later he met a Mr Breikers, who had also found similar footprints, and


realised that perhaps all the fantastic rumours about the sedapa might


after all be based on an animal by no means mythical. He therefore


began collecting information about it again, especially among the forest-


dwelling Koeboes. None had ever seen an orang pendek: its senses were


so keen, they said, that no man could come near it. But eventually he


met three Koeboes who had each seen a sedapa. Their descriptions


agreed perfectly: they all said that it was a creature that walked upright


117


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


and stood between
4 feet 11 inches and 5 feet 3 inches high. It had a
hairy body, long hair on its head and unusually long canine teeth.


Then several years passed without van Herwaarden hearing anything
about the strange beast, until one day he learnt that in the forest near
the village of Pangkalan
Balai, in the Banjoeasin
district, a local Malay
had recently found the bodies of two dead sedapas, a mother and child.
He had tried to bring his find back to the village, but the bodies were in
such an advanced state of putrefaction that he had to give up this
unpleasent task. He died soon afterwards; the villagers said it was
because he had touched a sedapa. And there is no need to bring in
magic to see that they may have been right; humping a stinking carcase
about through tropical forest is not a healthy occupation, with the
jungle scratching at one’s limbs and leaving open wounds ready to be
infected by one’s septic load.


Van Herwaarden also learnt that near Sebalik, in the same district, a
party of Malays in canoes had encircled a sedapa in the water, but the
creature dived and escaped them.


In October 1923 [he writes] I was travelling in the same region and
was on the island of Poeloe Rimau ! most of which is leased to Mr G.
Fischer. For several days from early morning to late afternoon I had
been tracking a sounder of wild pig in the cleared part of the island.
But, alas, it was to no purpose, although there were countless tracks.


Finally I decided to have one last try and lay in wait, crouching down
and well-hidden. For an hour nothing happened. Then I happened by
chance to look round to the left and spotted a slight movement in a
small tree that stood alone. By now it was time for me to be going
home, for it was not advisable to journey through such country after
sundown. But all the same I was tempted out of curiosity to go and see
what had caused the movement I had noticed. What sort of animal
could be in that tree?


My first quick look revealed nothing. But after walking round the
tree again, I discovered a dark and hairy creature on a branch, the front
of its body pressed tightly against the tree. It looked as if it were trying
to make itself inconspicuous and felt that it was about to be discovered.


It must be a sedapa. Hunters will understand the excitement that
possessed me. At first I merely watched and examined the beast which
still clung motionless to the tree. While I kept my gun ready to fire, I
tried to attract the sedapa’s attention, by calling to it, but it would not
budge. What was I to do? I could not get help to capture the beast.
And as time was running short I was obliged to tackle it myself. I tried
kicking the trunk of the tree, without the least result. I laid my gun on


1 This island in the State of Palembang does not lie off the coast. It is part of
the mainland surrounded by rivers.


118


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


the ground and tried to get nearer the animal. I had hardly climbed
3 or 4 feet inte the tree when the body above me began to move.
The creature lifted itself a little from the branch and Jeant over the side
so that I could then see its hair, its forehead and a pair of eyes which
stared at me. Its movements had at first been slow and cautious, but


as soon as the sedapa saw me the whole situation changed. It became


nervous and trembled all over its body. In order to see it better I slid
down on to the ground again.


The sedapa was also hairy on the front of its body; the colour there
was a little lighter than on the back. The very dark hair on its head fell
to just below the shoulder-blades or even almost to the waist. It was
fairly thick and very shaggy. The lower part of its face seemed to end in
more of a point than a man’s; this brown face was almost hairless, whilst
its forehead seemed to be high rather than low. Its eyebrows were the
same colour as its hair and were very bushy. The eyes were frankly
moving; they were of the darkest colour, very lively, and like human
eyes. The nose was broad with fairly large nostrils, but in no way
clumsy; it reminded me a little of a Kaffir’s. Its lips were quite ordi-
nary, but the width of its mouth was strikingly wide when open.
Its
canines showed clearly from time to time as its mouth twitched ner-
vously. They seemed fairly large to me, at all events they were more
developed than a man’s. The incisors were regular. The colour of the
teeth was yellowish white.
Its chin was somewhat receding.
For a
moment, during a quick movement, I was able to see its right ear which
was exactly like a little human ear. Its hands were slightly hairy on the
back. Had it been standing, its arms would have reached to a little
above its knees; they were therefore long, but its legs seemed to me
rather short. I did not see its feet, but I did see some toes which were
shaped in a very normal manner. This specimen was of the female sex
and about § feet high.


There was nothing repulsive or ugly about its face, nor was it at all
ape-like, although the quick nervous movements of its eyes and mouth
were very like those of a monkey in distress. I began to talk in a calm
and friendly way to the sedapa, as if I were soothing a frightened dog
or horse; but it did not make much difference. When I raised my gun
to the little female I heard a plaintive “hu-hu,”’ which Was at once
answered by similar echoes in the forest nearby.


I laid down my gun and climbed into the tree again. I had almost
reached the foot of the bough when the sedapa ran very fast out along
the branch, which bent heavily, hung on to the end and then dropped
a good 10 feet to the ground. I slid hastily back to the ground, but
before I could reach my gun again, the beast was almost 30 yards away.
It went on running and gave a sort of whistle. Many people may think
me childish if I say that when I saw its flying hair in the sights I did not


pull the trigger. I suddenly felt that I was going to commit murder. I


lifted my gun to my shoulder again, but once more my courage failed


me. As far as I could see, its feet were broad and short, but that the


sedapa runs with its heels foremost is quite untrue.


119


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


For a year van Herwaarden kept silent about this moving encounter,
for he wanted to catch one of these creatures first rather than expose
himself without evidence to general disbelief. When he had to return


to Europe he decided to speak, so that others could benefit from his


experience.


Some most surprising opinions have been expressed about van
Herwaarden’s encounter. Thus although Professor Hill, the expert on
the nittaewo, seems to be convinced that a genuine ape-man exists in
Malaya, he thinks that it must have been a gibbon which van Her-
waarden took for an orang pendek at Poeloe Rimau. But quite apart
from its size, a gibbon with hair hanging half way down its back is no
ordinary gibbon. Besides a gibbon makes off through the trees, never
by running on the ground. The opinion of Dr Dammerman, curator of
the Museum at Buitenzorg, is even more staggering. He remarks that
no white man except for van Herwaarden has ever seen the creature
(what about Oostingh?) and adds:


But this writer is almost too exact in his description of the animal, so
that it does not seem impossible that the incident was either based on
his imagination, or, that he has written it strongly impressed by the
stories about the orang pendek.


I leave the reader to judge for himself the credibility of van Her-
waarden’s account. Personally I find it refreshingly sober. Dr Dam-
merman betrays his determination to be sceptical at all costs when he
concludes:


But even while admitting the general truth of the story, would it not
be more likely that the aninfal in question was an orang-utan?


More likely? A black orang-utan with long flowing hair, a face not


at all ape-like, distinct and even bushy eyebrows, with arms that do not
reach to its knees, and moreover running on its hind-legs? It is hard to


criticise such an opinion and remain civil.


In fact the most striking thing about van Herwaarden’s story is the
very human character of the creature, so that one is rather surprised to
find that he keeps calling it a “beast.” Its only two features which are
not human are its relatively long canine teeth and extremely long arms
(a man’s arms reach half-way down his thighs, in chimpanzees and goril-


las they reach the knee, and in gibbons and orang-utans to the middle
of the shin). Otherwise the description of the creature could apply to
aman. The long hair reminds one of the Veddahs and their allied races,
but they have bare skin, whereas the sedapa was very hairy. The prob-
lem remains unsolved.


120


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


In August 1924 Dr A. Steinman brought from Sumatra to Buitenzorg
in Java a photograph of an apparently human footprint, supposed to be
that of an orang pendek. This time there was an incontrovertible piece
of evidence, and not an unreliable tracing; and thanks to the kindness of
the Resident at Palembang, Buitenzorg Museum was able to possess the


actual footprint; it had been found in the Aer Teman estate, near
Moeara Bliti in Upper Palembang. Molten paraffin wax was poured


into the footprint to hold the dry surface earth together, and, when it had


set, the thin solidified crust was lifted out of the earth into which the


wax had not penetrated.


P. van Kan, administrator of the Aer Teman estate, related the
circumstances in which the footprint was discovered in a letter to the
Resident at Palembang.


Last March I was surprised to find my coolies were going about
armed in the palm-oil section at Taba-Pingin.
Several people, among
them the mandoer [overseer], were carrying spears when they went to
work. When I asked them why they were doing so, the mandoer told
me that a strange animal had been through the area several times.


I then examined the various tracks in person and thus discovered a
curious footprint, which I had never seen before. I am sending you a


cast.


The natives maintained that the footprints must have been made by
an orang pendek, which they greatly feared. One of the men even said
that he had seen these animals by moonlight with his own eyes. There
were two of them walking on their hind-feet. They were between 4 feet
6 inches and § feet 6 inches high, and were entirely covered with hair
except on their faces, which were much less hairy. They had broad
chests and short legs. Their canine teeth were large and striking. They
fan away, giving a sort of whistling noise.


After examining the footprints with care Dr Dammerman of Buiten-
zorg Museum had little difficulty in showing they they belonged to a
Malayan sun-bear (Ursus (Helarctos) malayanus), the little coconut bear,


called bruan in Sumatra. Besides, they were found in two very different


forms, those of the fore- and the hind-feet, which conclusively proved


that the creature was a quadruped. But the mistake was very easily


explained, for the perfectly plantigrade hind-feet of a bear—“the beast


that walks like a man,” as Kipling called it—leave prints very like those


of human feet. The claws do not always leave a mark, for they are


sometimes retracted when the creature is walking.


I have examined the lead casts of these prints sent to the Brussels


121


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


Royal Institute of Natural History by O. J. Rookmaker, chief admini-


strator of the Rokan district, and I cannot but agree with Dr Dammer-


man’s conclusion:


The peculiar belief that this mysterious ape-man walks with his heels
turned to the front may find its origin in the bear tracks. The Malay
bear often turns his feet in, that is to say with his toes turned in and the
heel turned out.


Moreover a bear’s feet are the “wrong way round” in one sense.
The striking feature of its foot-
°


:
oes
prints is that the most con-
oer
°
spicuous toe, slightly separated
from the others, which seems to


:
correspond to our big toe, is
really the little toe, that is to say
the outside one. Thus it is true


Ae hela
reenty the
in one sense that the trail of a
38. Footprint attributed
to the orang
eee
satya
pendek (left) which was found on the
bear’s hind-feet looks
as if ' It
Aer Teman estate.
It is obviously
had been made by a man with


of a Malayan sun-bear (centre) whose
;
:
:
front footprint is shown on the right.
This may well have given rise to
the legend that the orang pendek


walks with its feet ‘‘back to front.’’!
Dr Dammerman also adds:


Most likely some other details told about the orang pendek may be
brought home to the bear, as:for instance the turning over of tree-trunks
and stones, and the partiality to the fruit of the durian tree.


These arguments are much less convincing, for bears are not the only
creatures to look for larvae or insects in logs of wood, and the succulent
durian fruit is also the orang-utan’s favourite food.


One thing is certain: the Malayan sun-bear is, of all the bears, the
one which most often stands on its hind-feet; the position is habitual.
But it never walks upright. Can one say that it is responsible for ail the
footprints attributed to the orang pendek? Yes, if one maintains that
the triangular prints drawn by Dr Jacobson, Lambermon and Raden
Kasanredjo were made by its fore-feet, and the more rectangular prints
sketched by Mohamad Saleh by its hind-feet. But, while the latter is
undoubtedly true, the former is more questionable. The reader can
compare for himself the drawing of the print of a bear’s fore-foot and


? An alternative explanation will be found on page 135.


122


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


the various triangular footprints. On the other hand I should point out


that when a bear is walking it almost always puts its hind-feet on the


prints left by its fore-feet, and so
generally leaves a blurred com-
posite trail.


To sum up, it is clear that some
of the reports of the orang pendek
have been inspired by the foot-
prints of the Malayan bear, and
even by this flat-footed creature


itself, which stands about 5 feet
high on its hind-legs.
Its very
short blackish hair, lighter face
and projecting canine teeth might
account for some details reported
of the mysterious ape-man. An
engineer called Nash whose work
occasionally
took him to the
}
Rokan district was disappointed
one day when his guide told him


to stop because he had spotted
an orang pendek; he lifted his
gun, aimed, fired and killed a
bear. In his book, La Chasse a
Java, H. de Wals tells of a simi-
lar misadventure. What he had
taken for an orang pendek was an
old bear whose neck and back
were entirely bald.


But it is doubtful whether the
legend of the orang pendek can be
based solely on an animal which
most Sumatrans know well by the
name of bruan. There are many
superstitions about the legendary
beast, so it is not surprising that


.
aaa
.
g. Malayan sun-bear on its hind-
the natives give it the credit for Pa an attitude it often adopts.
any strange tracks in soft earth
cen


or barely distinguishable shape glimpsed through the thick jungle


vegetation.


123


THB MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


In 1927 there were new rumours about the orang pendek in southern
Sumatra. One day a tiger trap was found sprung, but the animal which
had sprung it escaped without being seen. To judge by the tracks left
in the vicinity it must have been an orang pendek.


But on the trap [writes Dr Dammerman] some hair and traces of
blood were found; only the discovery was not made at once, but a few
days after the animal had escaped. The blood and the hair were ex-
amined; it was impossible to obtain any positive results with regard to
the hair, but the blood pointed faintly to human origin. However we
may not accept for a fact that the blood found came from the escaped
animal: it is quite possible that it came from some native who had
injured himself while handling the trap.


Dr Dammerman’s comments puzzle me. Why was it “impossible
to obtain any positive results with regard to the hair”? The analysis of
hair is an advanced science which gives very precise indications about
the nature of the animal. It should at least have been possible to say
what animal could not have left the hair. To know, for instance, that it
was neither a bear nor an ape would be infinitely precious. Note also
the subtlety of the phrase “the blood pointed faintly to human origin.”
The analysis of the blood must have shown that it was either of human
or of animal origin. But that it could “faintly point” to a human origin
passes understanding. Does it mean that the creature from which the
blood came was almost
aman? Or that Dr Dammerman could not bring
himself to admit the human characteristics of the orang pendek in ques-
tion? This is what his suggestion of “some native” lends one to believe.


It is clear that the analysts have not been able to identify either the
hairs or the blood with those of any known creature.


On 22 May 1932 it looked as if the mystery would at last be solved.
The West Sumatran newspaper, the Deli Courant, announced that it
had received a despatch from O. J. Rookmaker in Pasir-Pengojaran in
the south of the island saying that the Rajah of Rokan had surprised two
orang pendek, one of them a baby. He had fired at them and had brought
back the body of the smaller one.


Actually the news was incorrect, for the Rajah had not done the deed
himself, though in 1912 he and a friend had seen four orang pendek
looking for bamboo shoots 15 yards away. They agreed with the usual
description and were the size of a child of 12 or 13. The Dutch settlers
had not heard of this incident until 1931, when similar accounts were
reported by people prospecting for rattan and rubber. They had


124


ORANG PENDEK, THE APE~MAN OF SUMATRA


begged the Rajah to do all he could to capture the beast. A large reward
was offered to anyone who succeeded; and in May 1932 four natives of
Rokan had decided to organise an expedition to bring back one of these
jabbering men, dead or alive. According to their story they had sud-
denly come upon an orang letjo in the River Rokan Kiri. It was some
60 yards away, collecting small shellfish on a half-submerged tree-


trunk, and looked more human than ape-like. They had fired at it all the


same and wounded it in the arm, whereupon it had dropped a pale object,


a baby Jetjo which had been mortally wounded by the same bullet that


had hit its mother.


A few days after its first despatch, the Deli Courant published a more
detailed report: the new-born Jetjo was 164 inches high and seemed very
human in its anatomy.
Its skin was bare, the hair on its head was an
even grey. It was sent to the Zoological Museum at Buitenzorg to be
examined. On 9 June more details were published in the Deli Courant
together with a photograph. The creature’s arms were rather short;
and it could not therefore be an anthropoid ape. On the other hand it
could not be new-born, for its teeth were well-developed. It seemed as
if a surviving specimen of a “Missing Link” had at last been discovered.


But a few days later the results of Dr Dammerman’s examination of
the young “ape-man” were published. The whole thing was a colossal
hoax. The supposed baby was merely an ordinary lotong (Trachy-
pithecus), a sort of langur, which had been shaved all over except on the
top of its head. To complete its appearance, its nose had even been
stretched with a piece of wood, its cheek-bones had been crushed and its
canine teeth filed to a point.


There was nothing new about such hoaxes in Sumatra. Marco Polo
had exposed them seven centuries before, when pedlars selling curiosi-
ties from the Far East to Western travellers asked a high price for the
mummified bodies of “little men” which they said came from the


Indies.


It should be known that what is reported respecting the dried bodies
of diminutive human creatures or pigmies, brought from India, is an


idle tale, such pretended men being manufactured in this island in the


following manner.
The country produces a species of monkey, of a


tolerable size, and having a countenance resembling that of a man.
Those persons who make it their business to catch them, shave off the


hair, leaving it only about the chin and those other parts where it


naturally grows on the human body. They then dry and preserve them


with camphor and other drugs, and having prepared them in such a
mode that they have exactly the appearance of little men, they put them


125


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


into wooden boxes, and sell them to trading ‘people, who carry them to
all parts of the world. But this is merely an imposition, the practice
being such as we have described; and neither in India, nor in any other
country, however wild (and little known) have pigmies been found of a
form so diminutive as these exhibit.


Annoyed at being taken in by the same trick that had been played on
innocent travellers in the Middle Ages, the world of science has ever
since remained obstinately silent about the orang pendek, and shelved it
with the unicorn and the phoenix.


But is this logical? The fact that a forger of genius painted “Ver-
meers” which took in experts of the highest repute does not mean that
the great Dutch painter never existed or that he did not paint his own
pictures,


It is quite possible that the problem of the orang pendek may even
have already been solved. Last March several newspapers published the
following despatch which clearly seems to refer to the mysterious beast
in question, though it has been given another name:


FIRST CAPTURE OF A “‘SINDAI’’ (ANTHROPOID APE) IN SUMATRA


Jakarta: The Indonesian authorities announce the capture of a
sindai in the jungle in South Sumatra. The sindai is an anthropoid
ape which is known to exist (the Dutch once offered a reward of 5,000
florins to anybody who could produce one) but no specimen has ever
been captured.


The animal caught is a female, about 4 feet high, very hairy and with
very long nails. It will be taken to Palembang.


Unfortunately a revolution broke out in Sumatra soon after this news
was announced, and so far I have been unable to discover anything more
about this sensational capture. It may of course be yet another hoax,
perhaps even a code message to the rebels to rise! Who knows?


126


CHAPTER SIX


The Not So Abominable Snowman


There was exactly the very Print of a Foot, Toes,
Heel and every Part of a Foot; how it came
thither, I knew not, nor could in the least imagine
...mor is it possible to describe how many
various Shapes affrighted imagination represented
things to mein...


DANIEL DEFOE, Robinson Crusoe.


AFTER his sixth attempt on Everest, Eric Shipton was exploring the
neighbouring Gauri Sankar range with Michael Ward and the Sherpa
Sen Tensing. At four o’clock in the afternoon of 8 November 1951 they
found a very clear trail of enormous human-looking feet in the powdery
snow on the south-western slopes of Menlung-tse. They followed this
strange trail for about a mile until they lost it in a moraine of ice. Being
unable to follow the mysterious creature any farther, they took photo-
graphs of its footprints.


Roughly oval in shape, they seemed to have been made by human
feet—but feet more than a foot long. Shipton remarks that they were
“slightly longer and a good deal broader than those made by our large
mountain boots.” A man on this scale would stand about 8 feet high.
The big toe was clearly visible, slightly separated from the rest, but
there seemed to be only three other toes. Of course it was possible that
two toes might be held so close together that they left only a single
print in the snow. ‘Where the tracks crossed a crevasse,” Shipton goes
on, “one could see quite clearly where the creature had jumped and
used its toes to secure purchase on the snow on the other side.”


Ever since 1899, when explorers still had to disguise themselves as


pilgrims or itinerant merchants in order to enter Tibet, strange rumours


had been reaching the West about the giants that lived in the icy heights


of the Himalaya. In that year appeared Major L. A. Waddell’s Among


127


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


the Himalayas, in which he tells how in 1889 he found large footprints in
the snow leading up towards the high peaks in the north-east of Sikkim.


These were alleged to be the trail of the hairy wild men who are
believed to live amongst the eternal snows, along with the mythical
white lions, whose roar is reputed to be heard during storms. The
belief in these creatures is universal among Tibetans.


During the first attempt to climb the North Face of Everest in 1921
the rumours became more detailed. On the way from Kharta to the pass


at Lhapka-la, Colonel Howard-Bury and his companions saw dark
spots moving over the snow in the far distance—there were living crea-
tures in these almost inaccessible heights well above the snow line.
Then, on 22 September 1921, when they reached the place, about 23,000
feet up, where they had seen them, they found enormous footprints—
more than three times as big, they said, as normal human footprints.
The leader of the expedition attributed them to a large stray grey wolf,
but the Tibetan porters thought otherwise. To them there was no
doubt that these were footprints of the metoh kangmi or “‘abominable
snowman.” They trembled with fear as they gave an alarming account
of the creature.


From the native reports, which agree in the main, one can compile
the following description of the monster. The snowman is a huge
creature, half man, half beast; it lives in caves high and inaccessible in
the mountains. The skin of its face is white; the body is covered with a
thick coat of dark hair. Its arms, like those of the anthropoid apes, reach
down to its knees, but its face looks rather more human. Its thick legs


are bowed; its toes turn inwards—some even say they turn backwards.
It
is very muscular and can uproot trees and lift up boulders of remark-
able size. The female can be recognised by her long breasts which she
throws over her shoulders when she runs.


These monsters are said usually to feed on yaks’ meat and snow-
worms. Sometimes, when driven by hunger, they come down into the
valleys, carry off people and devour them gluttonously. They are so
savage that in time of famine the females will occasionally eat their
mates. Naturally there are few details of their habits, for those who see
them from close rarely live to tell the tale. But you can escape from
the abominable snowman by rushing down a snowy slope as hard as you
can go; if it tries to follow you, its hair falls into its eyes and it cannot


see. Some say that abominable snowmen are the wandering spirits of
women who have died a violent death and that they are not dangerous
if they are not provoked.


128


40. Reconstruction of the abominable snowman based on the most
detailed evidence available.


These legends are found for thousands of miles all over the Himalayan
range, from the Karakoram to northern Burma, in Tibet, Nepal, Sikkim,
Bhutan and Assam, and the creatures have many different names in
different countries.


Henry Newman, a very reputable columnist in the Calcutta States-
man, seems to have been the first to publish the Tibetan name metoh


I
129


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


kangmi (“abominable or filthy man of the snow”), which he misspelt
metch kangmi; Frank Lane says that the Indian peasants on the high
plateaux call the abominable snowmen bhanjakris (but Mr M. P.
Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal, has pointed out that the name
banjhankris, or “forest wizards,” refers to almost unknown forest tribes
“credited with great powers of healing”); the Sherpas call the snowmen
yeh-teh (hence yeti) or mi-teh, words whose very controversial meaning


will be discussed later; Ernst Schaefer asserts that the same creatures
are called migu around the Green Lake at the foot of the Kangchen-
junga range, and Frank Smythe quotes the faintly similar names of
mirka and ui-go, all of which are probably misheard variants of the mi-go
known to linguists; in Sikkim we find the name sogpa or shukpa, but
this is also applied to the Tibetans of the eastern plains and valleys, and
even to all the Mongols; finally it seems that in the mountains of Burma
the snowman is known as tok or “‘mouth-man.”


As one might expect, most naturalists dismissed the legend of the
abominable snowman with its ludicrous details. But uneducated Tibe-
tans or Nepalese were not the only people to spread this story. Some
decades ago an Englishman called Hugh Knight on his way to Tibet
reported that. he met a creature whose description agreed with the
legendary monster. In order to let his mount get its breath he halted in
a sort of amphitheatre surrounded on all sides by mountains capped in
snow. Suddenly he heard a sound of stones rolling down a slope and
turned his head. Some 30 yards away a sort of large blond gorilla was
standing up on its bow legs. When it realised that it had been seen it
made off, running sometimes on its hind-legs and sometimes on all-
fours. But the most astonishing part of Knight’s description is that with
one muscular arm the creature was holding a bow and arrow!


Be that as it may, Knight is not the only educated man to tell of such
an astonishing encounter. In 1925 a Fellow of the Royal Geographical
Society called N. A. Tombazi reported a no less startling story in his
Account of a Photographic Expedition to the Southern Glaciers of Kang-
chenjunga in the Sikkim Himalaya. About 9 miles from the Zemu


glacier, at an altitude of some 15,000 feet, he noticed his porters waving
and pointing at an object lower down.


The intense glare and brightness of the snow prevented me from
seeing anything for the first few seconds; but I soon spotted the “‘ob-
ject”? referred to, about two to three hundred yards away down the
valley to the East of our camp. Unquestionably, the figure in outline
was exactly like a human being, walking upright and stopping occasion-


130


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


ally to uproot or pull at some dwarf rhododendron bushes. It showed
up dark against the snow and, as far as I could make out, wore no
clothes. Within the next minute or so it had moved into some thick


- serub and was lost to view.


Such a fleeting glimpse, unfortunately, did not allow me to set the
telephoto-camera, or even to fix the object carefully with the binoculars;
but a couple of hours later, during the descent, I purposely made a
detour so as to pass the place where the “‘man”’ or “beast”? had been
seen. I examined the footprints which were clearly visible on the sur-
face of the snow. They were similar in shape to those of a man, but only
six to seven inches long by four inches wide at the broadest part of the
foot. The marks of five distinct toes and of the instep were perfectly
clear, but the trace of the heel was indistinct, and the little that could be
seen of it appeared to narrow down to a point. I counted fifteen such
footprints at regular intervals ranging from one-and-a-half to two feet.
The prints were undoubtedly of a biped, the order of the spoor having
no characteristics whatever of any imaginable quadruped.
Dense
rhododendron scrub prevented any further investigations as to the
direction of the footprints, and threatening weather compelled me to
resume the march. From inquiries I made a few days later at Yoksun,
on my return journey, I gathered that no man had gone in the direction
of Jongri since the beginning of the year.


When the news reached Darjeeling, the press, as usual, headed their
comments with captions of ““Wild Man,”’ ““Snow-Man,”’ and the like,
seen near Kangchenjunga by an “‘Italian’’ traveller...


When I asked the opinion of the Sirdar and the coolies they naturally
trotted out fantastic legends of ‘““Kangchenjunga-demons.”’ Without in
the least believing in these delicious fairy-tales myself, notwithstanding
the plausible yarns told by the natives, and the references I have come
across in many books, I am still at a loss to express any definite opinion
on the subject. However, I can only reiterate with a sufficient degree of
certainty that the silhouette of the mysterious being was unmistakeably
identical with the outline of a human figure. I personally rejoice in
particularly acute vision and am sufficiently familiar with the appear-
ances of mountain fauna to be able to distinguish a bear, monkey,
snow-leopard, ostrich, kiwi (if you like) —and even a man. I am also
somewhat versed in the simple analysis of spoor, and can unhesitatingly
state that the prints were those of no wild animal common to the Sikkim
Himalaya.


Tombazi goes on to suggest his own theory, somewhat tentatively,
since it does not agree with the shape of the footprints, which were too
broad in proportion to their length to be a man’s:


I conjecture then that this “wild man” may be either a solitary or else
a member of an isolated community of pious Buddhist ascetics, who


1 The Manchester Guardian had suggested that what he had seen was a running
bird of some kind.
131


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


have renounced the world and sought their God in the utter desolation
of some high place, as yet undesecrated by the world.
However,
perhaps, I had better leave these conclusions to ethnological and other
experts.


The explanation often put forward that the snowman is a sadhu, one
of those Hindu hermits who do in fact live at altitudes up to 15,000
feet in the Himalaya, is superficially attractive, but it agrees neither
with the beast’s alleged appearance nor with the size and shape of the


tracks it leaves in the snow.


Unquestionably the strangest account we have of the abominable
snowman is that given by Jean Marqués-Riviére in L’Inde Secréte et sa
Magie. It comes from an Indian pilgrim, that is to say a well-educated
person who could be expected to know several languages and often be


as well-informed in Western learning as in the philosophy of his own
country.
His description therefore deserves to be quoted in full,
strange though it is:


Yes, there is a race of giant men, who are neither monkeys nor bears,
and who live in certain forests in Nepal. I have met witnesses who have
seen them from afar and have heard them talking in an unknown
language; I -have seen them myself once...
.


When I was going to certain Tibetan monasteries on the northern
frontier of Nepal, some Nepalese friends told me one day that foot-
prints of the snowman had been seen and that a small armed expedition
was going off in that direction. I joined them; for eight days we walked
through jungle ten feet high. . .
. At last, one day, we heard in the still-
ness of noon, a continual rumbling sound: the place was wild and
desolate. The snow sparkled above us, and crumbling rocks, huge trees
and imposing waterfalls formed a splendid landscape.
At first we
thought it was a far-off avalanche; but to an attentive ear the continual
rumbling had.a certain rhythm. We thought that a tribe of aborigines
was somewhere near and decided to go and question them...


Suddenly, as we were approaching the place from which we supposed
the noise came, one of us noticed some footprints in the moist and clayey
ground we were walking on; in front of us the tracks of enormous naked
feet about two feet long disappeared in irregular lines. A gust of terror
shook the little party. ‘“Snowmen!’’ they cried, and fled, forgetting
that they had come to look for them. In the end we found that there
were three of us willing to go on; we told ourselves that after all these
creatures could not be more savage than tigers and wild elephants; we
had survived those, so we should be able to survive these.


We went forward cautiously; the noise grew louder. Suddenly one
of us made a sign to stop and look. In front of us, in a natural circle of
high rocks, among the huge hunks of broken stone, an extraordinary
spectacle met our eyes: some ten giant ape-men, ten to twelve feet high,


132


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


were gathered in a ring. One of them was beating a primitive tom-tom
made of a hollow tree-trunk.
The man’s strength must have been
terrific to judge by the noise he was making. The others swayed silently
in time with the tom-tom.
It was some religious ceremony, no doubt,
for their solemn manner and attitude showed that they were performing
a magic rite. Their bodies were covered with hair and their faces were
half-way between a gorilla’s and a man’s. But there was nothing of the
animal about their attitude, and the one that was beating the tom-tom


stood quite upright like a human being. They were quite naked, in


spite of the bitter cold in this desolate region, and a strange sadness


could be seen on their frightful faces.


We looked for a long time at these representatives of an unknown
race that fled from man. Where did they come from? What were they?
There was no tribe of men in this neighbourhood, and they were only
known in these areas by the huge footprints that they left in the snow
and the muddy clay. How did they live? What did they eat? The men
and women that they sometimes carried off had never come back to
tell us.


It is more than likely that this story is a little embroidered and poeti-
cised in the oriental tradition of narrative, but this does not mean that


it is a complete invention.


Inevitably most of the descriptions of the snowman come from very
simple people: peasants and porters, who are terrified of it. The guides
who accompany travellers threaten to turn back when fresh prints of
bare feet are found. Frank Smythe tells how during the 1930 Kang-
chenjunga expedition the noise made by a yak bursting in unexpec-
tedly set his porters in a real panic; they thought they were being at-
tacked by snowmen. When he learnt the actual cause of the commo-


tion, one of the Sherpas called Nemu told Smythe that he had several
times seen “bad manshi,” as he called them in pidgin-English, with his
own eyes. He said that they were huge white men covered with thick


fur. A Miss MacDonald of Kalimpong also told Smythe how, when she


was passing through a defile at a great height on a journey to Tibet, she


heard a terrifying roar, unlike any animal’s cry that she had ever heard.


Her porters were panic-stricken; they dropped their loads and left her


there alone. According to the numerous witnesses who have described


the snowman’s cry—some even trying to imitate it—it is a “loud yelp-


ing,” often compared to the sad sound of “the mewing of a sea-gull,”


but of course much louder.


Western explorers had no way of verifying the snowman’s existence
except by studying the strange tracks of bare feet in the high snows.


133


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


~ During the summer of 1931 Wing-Commander E. B. Beauman, a pilot
in the R.A.F., saw them on a glacier some 14,000 feet up near the source
of the Ganges. In 1936 Eric Shipton also saw them 16,000 feet up on
his return from Everest. ‘““They resembled a young elephant’s tracks
except that the length of the stride suggested a biped.” When they saw
these tracks, the porters refused to go any farther on the excellent
pretext that several of their friends had been victims of this Himalayan
ogre and that they did not want to suffer the same fate.


A little later the well-known ethnographer and botanist Ronald
Kaulback also met them looking ‘‘exactly as though they had been made
by bare-footed men” some 16,000 feet up in the south-east of Tibet, on
the main route between the valleys of the Ge-chu and the Upper
Salween. As there were no bears in the region as far as he knew, he
thought they must have been made by a snow-leopard (Panthera (Uncia)


uncia). The porters, of course, at once spoke of ““Mountain Men.” And
one of them who had happened to see one from fairly close described it
it as like a man with white skin, naked, with long hair on its head,
shoulders and arms. Kaulback thought that the lack of food at this
altitude was enough to refute the legend, but this objection applied
equally well to the snow leopard.


‘In 1937, 20,000 feet up in the Bhundhar Valley, Frank Smythe found
footprints in the snow, and followed the trail up to the entrance
of a
cave. He gives a strange description of the prints.


On the level the footmarks averaged 12 to 13 in. in length and 6 in.
in breadth, but uphill they averaged only 8 in. in length. The stride
was some If to 2 ft. on the level, but considerably less uphill, and the
footmarks were turned outward at about the same angle as a man’s.!
There were well-defined imprints of five toes, 14 inches to 1} inches
long and } of an inch broad, unlike human toes, arranged symmetric-
ally. Lastly, there was what appeared to be the impression of a heel
with two curious toelike impressions on either side.


Footprints of this kind gave rise to the belief sometimes held by the
Sherpas that the yers has extra toes and walks with its feet back to front.
This is yet another version of the legend current in Sumatra about the
orang pendek it was believed since time immemorial, for even in Megas-
thenes’s Indica of the fourth century B.c. we read, “In the mountains
called Nulo there are men whose feet point backwards and have eight
toes on the ends.”


Smythe’s photographs of the trail showed that it was indisputably a


1 They were not, as I shall explain, but they looked as if they were.
134


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


bear’s. The marks of the extra toes were really those of the side toes of
the hind-feet, for when a bear
is walking it usually puts its hind-feet
down in the footprints of its fore-feet. Moreover it turns its feet in-
wards, so that from the position of the prints alone the trail looks as if


it is going in the opposite direction.1 Then the toes are seen to be on


the wrong end of the foot, and so
the legend of the men with their
feet back to front arose. Since these
men lived in the same places as the
snowmen, and had similar habits,
the character was sometimes trans-
ferred from one to the other.
To many zoologists it seemed


that the affair of the abominable
snowman could now be shelved.
But this view was premature: true
snowman’s footprints, as we shall


see, never show the same charac-
teristics
as a bear’s trail. All the


same, the idea that its feet were
turned backwards seemed to be
firmly rooted in local tradition. A
curious letter written in 1915 by
J. R. O. Gent, a forestry officer in
the Darjeeling Division, to H. J.
Elwes, the celebrated botanist and
nee ieeeMer besielaangr rs:
Himala
:
tr
and
a
bear’s
(right).
yen explorer, who read it to
Actually a bear’s prints are never
the Zoological Society of London
0 clear, since the prints of the
n 27 April of that
year, should be
_hind-feet are rarely exactly super-
: cl nae th
Be
ae $s dossier
imposed on those of the fore-feet.
oe
a
Mie
*
At a superficial glance the bear’s
I have discovered the existence
trail may look as if it is walking
of another animal but cannot
down the page, with its toes turned
make out what it is, a big mon-
outwards.
key or ape perhaps—if there were any apes in India. It is a beast of
very high elevations and only goes down to Phalut in the cold weather.
It is covered with longish hair, face also hairy, the ordinary yellowish-
brown colour of the Bengal monkey. Stands about 4 feet high and goes
about on the ground chiefly, though I think it can also climb.
The peculiar feature is that its tracks are about eighteen inches or two


feet long and toes point in the opposite direction to that in which the


1 A bear’s feet are also “back to front” in another sense (see page 122).


135


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


animal is moving. The breadth of the track is about 6 inches. I
ta
it he walks on his knees and shins instead of on the sole of his foot. He
is known as the jungli-admi or sogpa. One was worrying alot of coolies
—


working in the forest below Phalut in December, they were very
frightened and would not go into work. I set off as soon as I could to
try and bag the beast, but before I arrived the Forester had been letting
off a gun and frightened it away, so I saw nothing. An old choukidar of
Phalut told me he had frequently seen them in the snow there, and
confirmed the description of the tracks.


It is a thing that practically no Englishman has evet heard of, but all
the natives of the higher villages know about it. All I can say is that it
is not the Nepal Langur, but I’ve impressed upon people up there that
I want information the next time one is about.


Gent’s explanation is certainly very ingenious, but no known monkey
moves in this unusual way; and if it did it would not leave separate foot-
prints, but two continuous furrows.


As a biped 4 feet high could hardly leave such enormous footprints, it
seems that they could not have been made by the monkey which Gent
describes, and which is probably the Himalayan langur, unless they
were made by its four feet together. I shall returm to this point later.


After Smythe’s mistake, many other Himalayan explorers found
strange footprints in the snow at unusually high altitudes. Among them
was a correspondent of The Times who signed himself “‘Balu.” In 1937
he was surveying in the Karakoram, in the north of the Himalayan
range, when he was brought up short by a perfect row of large foot-
prints, more or less round and about a foot in diameter. They were
about 9 inches deep in the snow and 18 inches apart. “‘Nor was there
any sign of overlap,” he remarks, “‘as would be the case with a four-
footed beast.” The Sherpas, who identified them as footprints of the
snowman, unhesitatingly recognised a bear’s trail which they found in
a valley several days later. They could not have mistaken the two.


In the same year, John Hunt discovered footprints in the Zemu Gap.
Then in 1938, H. W. Tilman found them in the same place during a
new attempt on Everest.


It was on one of the glaciers of the Menlung basin, at a height of
about 19,000 feet, that, late one afternoon, we came across those curious
footprints in the snow the report of which has caused a certain amount
of public interest in this country. We did not follow them further than
was convenient, a mile or so, for we were carrying heavy loads at the
time, and besides we had reached a particularly interesting stage in the
exploration of the basin. I have in the past found many sets of these
curious footprints and have tried to follow them, but have always lost


136


.


- Sih
che
i ee
hl
te
Pi
es


Reconstruction
of the Swartkrans
ape-man drawn by Neave Parker on
evidence by anthropological experts.


Is the abominable snow-
man a giant orang-utan?
The
orang-utan
looks
puzzled, but observe the
shape of his feet.


The gibbon (right) is the
only ape that is a biped
by nature.


The abominable snowman’s trail, photographed by Eric Shipton in 1951 with
(inset) a single footprint compared to an ice-axe. Note how the footprints alternate
regularly to left and right.


The brown bear’s trail photographed on the Col de la Gentiane, Basses-Pyrenées
by Dr Marcel Couturier.
Note how the footprints are often superimposed and
blurred, and the claw-marks visible.


“4
8


The head-lama of Khum-
jung holding
a
snow-
man’s scalp.


(Below) The Pangboche
scalp, views of the side
and the inside


#


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


them on the moraine or rocks at the side of the glacier. These particular
ones seemed to be very fresh, probably not more than 24 hours old.
When Murray and Bourdillon followed us a few days later the tracks
had been almost obliterated by melting.
Sen Tensing, who had no
doubt whatever that the creatures (for there had been at least two) that
had made the tracks were “‘Yetis”’ or wild men, told me that two years


before, he and a number of other Sherpas had seen one of them at a


distance of about 25 yards at Thyangbochi. He described it as half
man and half beast, standing about five feet six inches, with a tall


pointed head, its body covered with reddish brown hair, but with a


hairless face. When we reached Katmandu at the end of November, I


had him cross-examined in Nepali (I conversed with him in Hindu-


stani). He left no doubt as to his sincerity. Whatever it was that he had


seen, he was convinced that it was neither a bear nor a monkey, with


both of which animals he was, of course, very familiar.


At a reception given at the British Embassy in Katmandu, Sen Ten-
sing confirmed every detail of his description of the animal he saw near
the monastery at Thyangboche, adding that “it moved mostly in an
upright stance but when in a hurry dropped on all fours.”


The snowman became news: Prince Peter of Greece, who was en-
gaged in anthropological research in India and Tibet, wrote a long letter


to the Indian newspaper, the Statesman, for he too had recently picked
up some fairly detailed information about the mysterious creature.


For some time one of these snowmen—which were actually large
monkeys—had been in the habit of coming in the night and drinking
from a cistern at the mouth of the Jalap valley in Sikkim. Alarmed at
the mere idea of sharing their drinking-water with such an unwelcome
visitor, the villagers prepared for it a bucket full of fermented liquor.
The brute came, drank as usual, and eventually collapsed, dead-drunk.
The men found it in the morning and lashed it firmly to a pole. When
it sobered up it recovered not only its senses, but also all its strength;
it
burst its bonds and escaped.?


When Dr Wyss-Dunant’s Swiss expedition made its assault on
Everest in 1952 it also found footprints exactly like those that Shipton
had photographed the year before. On 18 April, René Dittert, André
Roch and the famous Sherpa Tenzing Norkey set off on a reconnaissance


along a glacier. There was a pea-soup fog. When the three men came


1 Professor René von Nebesky-Wojkowitz of Vienna University tells another
version of this story in Wo Berge Gétter Sind (published in English under the
inverse title of Where the Gods are Mountains).
It was told hirn by one Nyima
who was agent for the Tibetan minister Kabshopa and was said to have happened
at the Natu Pass, an adjacent pass to Jalap-la. Otherwise the story is identical
and may be taken as confirmation of Prince Peter’s version.


137


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


back they found that at an altitude of 19,000 feet their own trails
crossed those of a group of yetis, which had perhaps been shadowing
them in the fog.


On the clearest footprints one could see a separate big toe and four
other toes. In a statement to the Press Dr Wyss-Dunant declared that
they had been made not by a biped but by a quadruped, probably
related to a bear and weighing between 12 and 154 stone.


In 1953, when the successful Everest expedition was at Thyangboche,
Sir John Hunt took the opportunity of making inquiries about the -yeri
among the lamas at the monastery which lies some 15 miles south-west
of the mountain at a height of 14,000 feet. He learnt from the second
senior abbot that the monks occasionally saw snowmen on the heights
above their settlement, and did not think there was anything mysterious
about them. The last time they had seen one, in November 1949, it came
out of a large clump of rhododendrons and played for some time in the
snow no more than 200 yards away. “It was,” Sir John reports, “a
largish animal, five feet or more in height, covered with greyish-brown


hair, It went mainly upright and occasionally dropped on all fours: it
was also seen to scratch itself monkey fashion.”” The monks made a
shindy with trumpets and cymbals, which soon drove the intruder back


to its lair.


Actually this lama’s report merely confirms the main details of Sen
Tensing’s; for he was present on this occasion with several other
Sherpas.


The yetis were not welcome among the mountain people. Several
miles away, on the northern slopes of the mountains, in Tibet, a party
of snowmen made themselves thoroughly unpleasant by stealing crops,
smashing outbuildings, fouling linen left out to dry and tearing the
roofs off houses. Like the people in Prince Peter of Greece’s story, the
villagers put out bowls of chang (a sort of beer) near their dwellings.
When they found the beasts sleeping off their liquor they slaughtered
them without mercy. This massacre may seem a little improbable in a
country where Buddhism teaches men to respect all forms of life. But
the story also relates that after this outbreak the authorities took strict
measures to prevent anyone in future from maltreating these simple if
savage brutes.


At the end of 1953 Chemed Rigdzin Dorje Lopu, another Tibetan
lama, drew a much more attractive picture of the abominable snowman
than that of the legend. According to him it was a large and harmless
monkey, not in the least “abominable,” and it never went for human


138


tp
hdint
the


THE NOT $0 ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


beings unless it-was attacked or threatened. This monk’s teacher, the
lama Tsultung Zangbu, one of the most learned men in Tibet, found
himself face to face with a yeti one day when he was going to pray in the
Chari hills in Assam, The snowman, which was carrying two large
chunks of rock under its arms, went on its way without molesting the


holy man.


Like all animals, the yeri is sacred, and its remains are worshipped as


relics in lamaseries. This was how Chemed Rigdzin maintains he was
able to examine the mummified bodies of two of these creatures, one in
the monastery at Riwoche in the province of Kham, the other in the
monastery at Sakya on the road from Katmandu to Shigatse. They
were enormous monkeys about 8 feet high. They had thick flat skulls
and their bodies were covered with dark brown hair about 1 inch to 14
inches long. Their tails were extremely short.


What exactly did the lama mean by “thick flat skulls”? It would be
impossible to tell if there were not other corroborative accounts of the
shape of the yeri’s head. Sen Tensing said it had “‘a tall pointed head,”
and the famous Sirdar Tenzing Norkey confirmed this description
when he told Sir John Hunt how his own father had once met a yeri “at
the yak-herds’ village of Macherma” at the mouth of the Dudh Kosi.


The elder Tenzing was driving his herd to pasture in the valley when
a sudden disturbance among his animals drew his attention to a sort of


little hairy man who was rushing down the mountainside in leaps and
bounds. Tenzing was terrified and led his yaks to a stone hut in which
they were usually penned, but the yeri was furious and leapt on the roof
and started tearing off the shingles, which were merely held down with
stones. The shepherd was forced to light a fire of dwarf juniper boughs
and dried chollies, which gave off acrid smoke and eventually drove
away the yeti, but not until it had let off its fury in a typically monkey
fashion by dashing chattering round the hut, tearing up small shrubs
and hunks of rock.


According to the elder Tenzing, the animal walked upright like a
man, was about 5 feet high and its body was covered with reddish-
brown fur. It had a large ape’s features, “but the mouth was especially


wide, showing prominent teeth.”
Its skull was high and conical in


shape, and covered with hair so long that it fell down in front of its


es.
i therefore seems as if Chemed Rigdzin meant by “thick, flat skulls”
that the sides were particularly flat, making them pointed and conical
in shape.


139


42. Roxellana’s snub-nosed langur.


This was how the snowman’s dossier stood at the end of 1953. On
the whole it was treated with utter disbelief. When I tried to talk
seriously about the creature to a fellow-scientist he gave me an old-
fashioned look and asked whether I believed in Father Christmas. But
the footprints in the snow could not be imaginary. How did science
explain them?


Colonel Howard-Bury, as we have seen, attributed them to a grey
wolf and Ronald Kaulback, though with some reservations, to a snow-
leopard. Neither hypothesis in fact accords with the shape of the foot-
prints. But in 1937, other and better supported explanations were put
forward in The Times, the best arena in the world for passionate and
learned controversy.


Guy Dollman of the British Museum (Natural History) believed
in most of the natives’ descriptions and pointed out that in the Himalaya


140


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


there were two species of monkeys of reasonable size. One was the
Himalayan langur (Semmnopithecus schistaceus) a stout quadrumane
closely related to the hanuman, the sacred monkey of India (Semnopithe-


cus entellus): it had been recorded in Tibet up to an altitude of 13,000


feet. It had a tougher constitution and longer and fleecier fur than the
common species. The other was Roxellana’s snub-nosed langur (Rhino-


B
Het
4
)


—.


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


pithecus roxellanae) which the Chinese called the snow-monkey. It was
a primate of much heavier build than the langur, with thick fur and a
comically snub nose which made its face look very human. These
monkeys were very rare and then still unknown in captivity; there were
only a few stuffed specimens in museums. Thus it would be rather
surprising to come upon a wild one.


The size of these creatures does not of course agree with the tradi-
tional description of the snowman, for the largest hardly ever exceed
4 feet 6 inches in height when standing on their hind legs. Moreover,
the langur’s area of distribution does not reach the places where the
snowman’s footprints are usually found: the snub-nosed monkey is
found in country to the north-east of the Himalayan range, eastern
Tibet and western China, whereas it is on the south-western slopes that
we seem to hear most about the snowman.


All the same, most zoologists favoured the monkey theory when Eric
Shipton brought back his famous photographs. They were supported
by no less an authority than Dr T. C. S. Morrison-Scott, of the Mam-
mals Section of the British Museum (Natural History), and went so
far as to specify the race of langurs the pseudo-monster belonged to.


It was a Presbytis [alias Semnopithecus] entellus achilles, they said, a
langur which may stand as much as 5-feet high: the type specimen
of this sub-species came from a place 12,000 feet up and some 50
miles north-west of Katmandu in Nepal. It was a graceful quadrumane,
mainly fawn in colour with a black face and silvery head and neck. Its
description, these zoologists maintained, agreed fairly well with that
given by Sen Tensing, Shipton’s guide.


Against this theory it was shrewdly objected that the footprints of a
langur with long toes were not in the least like those in Shipton’s photo-
graphs made by a large solid foot with short toes, and in any case an
animal with feet no more than 9 inches long could not leave footprints
13 inches long. This latter objection was ingeniously evaded by an
argument which a newspaper put thus:


The colossal dimensions of the footprints_are no doubt to be ex-
plained by the fact that they are made in the night in fresh snow and in
the day-time they melt in the snow and increase in size. When night
comes the footprints freeze again, retaining their shape so well that it
is easy to attribute them to a race of giants.


Unfortunately, a few lines above, the same newspaper rashly observed
that “the footprints are so far apart that it is impossible that they could
have been made by a human being.” A little thought should-have made


142


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


it obvious that if a small animal’s footprints were enlarged by the snow
melting the length of its stride would appear to decrease, the prints
might even merge.


Oliver Jones, Curator of Mammals at the London Zoo, put forward
a very ingenious theory in an attempt to explain how a small langur
could have left giant footprints.
His view was that the footprints
Shipton photographed had been made by all four feet at once. As it
bounded across the snow the langur first put down its two hands side


by side and then its hind feet, also held close together, immediately


behind them. This would produce a string of large bilobate footprints.


This explanation seemed to be confirmed by W. W. Wood, a South
African who had spent some time in Kashmir. In 1944, when on a trip
in the mountains at Liddarwat near Srinagar with Major Kirkland and
Captain John B. Maggs, he saw a monkey which he took for an abomin-
able snowman. He wrote to Country Life:


We were somewhere near the timber line—about 13,000 feet—when
we saw a large animal bounding towards us down the snow-covered
khud on the opposite side of the river. Its gait appeared to me to be
that of a monkey in a hurry, with all four paws off the ground together.
Maggs’ recollection is that its rear legs were longer than the forelegs and
its running not very different from that of a rabbit...


The animal came up the mountain side, crossed our path and then
sat down, monkey fashion, among the boulders to look at us. It obviously
found us as strange as we did it... . It was tawny in colour, with a
fringe round its face, was about the size of a man and had a long tail
with a tuft on the end, like a lion. Maggs thought that its tail was more
bushy than that of a lion and its coat of longish hair—reddish brown in
colour—rather like that of a bear. The Kashmiris said that it was
bandar (monkey).


This strange creature was certainly neither bear nor langur. Can it,
wandering alone at these altitudes, have been abominable snowman?


To which the editor replied:


Despite our correspondent’s assertion to the contrary, the creature
was almost certainly a langur, for he gives a good description of Semno-
pithecus entellus ajax, a species of langur that lives at high altitudes
among the head waters of the Indus drainage basin and is often found
above the snow line. Admittedly this langur measures only about 30


inches head and body, but size is notoriously hard to judge in the


mountains.?


1 This is very true, and one may as well underestimate the size as exaggerate


it. Thus the yeti could easily be larger than the 5 feet 10 inches to 6 feet 6 inches
which some witnesses have reported. The huge size of its footprints would seem


to show that it is.


143


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


All the same Wood’s description of the monkey’s strange progress in


leaps and bounds corroborates Oliver Jones’s theory. The snag is that


some of Shipton’s prints are too clear to have been made by four feet
merged into one. You can distinctly see the general outline of the foot
and the details of most of the toes. Moreover if you look clearly at the
photograph of the trail you can see that the footprints alternate to


left and right. This is proof that the animal is walking, for why the devil
should an animal jump alternately to left and to right with absolute
regularity? And a monkey like a langur would have left marks in the
snow with its tail.


The footprints so often found in the snow were not made by a mon-
key, at least not by a tailed monkey standing hardly 4 feet 6 inches high.
But this does not mean that no one has ever mistaken a tall Himalayan
langur or a snub-nosed monkey for the legendary snowman.
This is
what Wood probably did and what Sen Tensing was thought to have


done; but he did not; for it is unlike a man who knew the mountains so
well not to recognise a monkey with which he must have been familiar.
Nor was he the only person to think that the animal in question was a
yeti; several other Sherpas and monks from the Thyangboche monastery
were there and confirmed his opinion.


The party who maintained the yeti was a bear were in a stronger
position, especially after Frank Smythe’s mistake. According to their
champion, Reginald I. Pocock, the creature responsible for the giant
footprints could only be the red bear (Ursus arctos isabellinus), a local
Tibetan species of the European brown bear. This bear, which rarely
exceeds 6 feet 6 inches in height, could easily leave footprints 13 inches
long, and what is more they would be astonishingly like a man’s. Like
the rest of the plantigrades, it sometimes stands on its hind-legs. If it
were surprised in that position might it not give rise to the legends of
hairy giants? And if some natives were attacked and eaten by an old
male that had turned carnivorous (being often enough starving in coun-
try so poor in food) it would substantiate the rumours of ogres with a


taste for human flesh.


This argument was firmly supported, among others by G. S. Cans-
dale, Superintendent of the London Zoo, and there were many good
arguments in its favour. What, one might reasonably ask, could an
entirely vegetarian monkey—a specialised leaf-eater like the langur—
find to eat at an altitude of 19,000 to 23,000 feet? For these monkeys
have never been reported above 13,000 feet—that is, above the tree line


144


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


—and this height is very exceptional. Major R. W. C. Hingston of the
Indian Medical Service, who took part in the tragic attempt on Everest
in 1924 and has collected much information about Himalayan fauna and


flora, tells us that the plant Parnassius is sometimes found at 18,000


feet, but higher up all vegetable life seems to have disappeared. Never-


theless the 1952 Swiss expedition found traces of vegetation up to 21,000


feet. Vegetarian animals never go above this limit, except on rare occa-


sions when driven to take refuge there. Certain rodents do so, for in-


stance the pika or Everest mouse-hare (Ochotona wollastoni), a large


tailless “rat,” actually related to the hares, which is common up to 17,400


feet, but may stray as high as 20,000 feet. In the rocky country between


the tree line and the perpetual snow there are also: wild boar; musk-


deer; wild yaks; goat-antelopes like the serow and goral (Naemorhedus);


the takin (Budorcas), a strange “‘ox-goat” related to-them; the chiru


(Pantholops), a gazelle-goat; such true goats as the Kemas tahr (Hemi-


tragus) and the markhor (Capra falconeri); and the bharal or blue sheep


(Pseudois). Certain species of agamid lizards of the genera Phrynoce-


phalus and Leiolepis are often found on Everest above 16,000 feet. The


Daily Mail expedition confirmed this in 1954. “In fact,” the leader


wrote, “we have found that wild life abounds as high as we have been


able to climb—that is, certainly to 20,000 ft.”” Above 20,000 feet there


seem to be only birds, but of many kinds. Climbers say that there are


choughs above 26,000 feet and near the highest summits. While carni-


vores, such as snow-leopards, leopard-cats, wolves and Tibetan foxes,


manage to live at 13,000 to 20,000 feet or even higher by coming down


every day (or almost every day) to hunt for food at a lower altitude,


vegetarians could not possibly live at such a height, for they cannot sur-


vive on large but irregular meals: they have to feed or chew the cud for


most of the day.


For bears the problem of food does not arise the whole year round.
During the bad season they leave off feeding and become lethargic and
sluggish. Thus there is no theoretical reason why some species of bear
should not spend the cold months of the year at high altitudes where it


would be absolutely safe from attack. And it is at the beginning and at


the end of the hibernation season that footprints are usually found at


unusual heights. The snowman generally leaves its tracks in autumn


snows.


So far the bear theory seems very satisfactory. Indeed I favoured it


1 In Europe, it is true, the contrary happens: bears leave the heights in autumn
and come down into the valleys to hibernate.


K
145


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


at first myself after carefully comparing Shipton’s photographs with
various bears’ footprints. Some so-called experts maintained that if the
snowman were a bear, one would have seen signs of its claws. This is
not so at all. The plantigrades stand mainly on the fleshy part of the
sole of the foot and on the toes, and their claws do not always touch the
ground. If it is indeed a bear one can even specify which of the bear’s
feet made the print in Shipton’s clearest photograph. First of all it is
plainly a hind-foot, for the fore-feet leave a much rounder print (see Fig.
38, p. 122). Secondly, if it was really made by a bear it was by the right
hind-foot—though the layman would think, from the position of the big
toe, that it was the left. But as I have already remarked what looks like a
bear’s big toe is actually its little toe. Everyone involved in the contro-
versy seems to have overlooked this fact. And, knowing it, an expert
would only have to glance at the trail to see whether the “‘big toe”’ was
on the outside or the inside to know whether it was that of a bear or of
some kind of primate.


It is a pity, therefore, that Shipton did not take a close-up of several
successive footprints instead of just publishing a close-up of a single
print and some general views of the trail as a whole, taken at an angle
which completely distorts the shape of the footprints. All the same,
when I examined them carefully they told me that it was wrong to think
the creature was a bear on the sole evidence of a single footprint, how-
ever clear. For though the details of the footprints are lost in the photo-
graphs of the trail, their position is very clear; an almost straight track
with each print a little off-centre, alternately to left and to right. The


first explanation that springs to mind of such a trail is that it was made
by a biped. Thus:


left foot
left foot
right foot
right foot


But is it impossible for a quadruped to make a trail like this? Cer-


tainly such a close and regular trail could not be caused by a gallop, not
that a large animal would be likely to gallop across fairly steep snow-
slopes. So there is no need to worry about the very peculiar way in
which a quadruped puts its feet down when moving fast. The trail
that a quadruped makes when walking or trotting can be considered as if
it were made by two bipeds, one behind the other, moving at the same
speed. It makes no difference whether it ambles or walks in the usual
way, the feet may be put down at different times, but not in different
places.


146


i
apa
Ah


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


The snowman’s trail could not have been made by a quadruped with
front-feet a different distance apart than its hind-feet or they would be


*
&
<€
:
*
a
<


44. Mouse’s trail.


out of line. A mouse’s trail shows this effect very well: there are four


lines of footprints. But the snowman’s trail is in only two lines.


This leaves three possible kinds of quadruped’s trail:


(1) The animal might put its hind-feet down exactly in between the
footprints of its front-feet, thus:


oa
DP
-
-
oo
d=
=
=
es.


left front
left hind
left front
‘left hind


oo
= :
—


2.


right hind
right front
right hind
right front


45. Hypothetical trail.


(2) Most animals put their hind-feet down nearer to their front-feet,
thus:
€
€
€
€


left
left
left
left


hind
front
hind
front


right
right
right
right
hind
front
hind
front


46. Otter’s trail.


(3) Finally the animal might put its hind-feet directly on top of the


prints of its front-feet, thus:


(left hind and front)
(left hind and front)
(left hind and front)


(right hind and front)
(right hind and front)


Only the third of these kinds is arranged like the snowman’s trail.


147


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


Every single mark is made by two footprints superimposed, and


therefore the track is made up entirely of blurred prints. Now Shipton’s


footprints do not look at all like two superimposed prints (for surely they
would never fit into one another perfectly). They are clearly outlined in


the snow and their shape is very regular. They are not, as some have
maintained, half obliterated and blurred by the wind.
Shipton has
stressed that they were fresh. Therefore unless the footprint so carefully
photographed was an exceptional one—for instance when the animal
was leaping across a crevasse—the track could only have been made by


a biped. “Balu” too insisted that in the track discovered in 1937 there
was no “sign of overlap, as would be the case with a four-footed beast.”
So if the animal was a bear, it was a bear that walked on its hind-legs.


It is indeed true that bears occasionally adopt an upright gait when they


are inquisitive or threatening; but I do not think they would ever do so
for several hundred yards or that they could even manage it if they
tried—especially on such sloping ground. Shipton followed the yezz’s
track for about a mile.


It seems much wiser and more honest to adopt Sir John Graham
Kerr’s opinion. The Emeritus Professor of Zoology at Glasgow Univer-
sity replied to these hasty theories by acknowledging his ignorance; and
admitting that, as far as he could judge, the footprints belonged to no
animal known to zoologists.


If the species is unknown, one may still ask which zoological group
of animals the yeti is most likely to belong to. The only plantigrade
bipeds are man and those tree-dwellers the gibbon and the indris—all
primates. Could the yeti be a large anthropoid ape as yet unknown?


There are two points against this hypothesis.
Firstly, that all the
anthropoids have an opposable big toe—like a thumb—clearly separated
from the other toes, indeed almost at right angles to them when the foot


is put on the ground. But in the snowman’s footprint the big toe is
almost as close to the other toes as a man’s. Secondly, the anthropoids


are usually quadrupeds. This is particularly noticeable in the gorilla,
which soon grows too heavy to live in trees. The orang-utan seems to
stand more upright, but this is just because its arms are so long that
even when they are on the ground it can stand erect. It uses them like
crutches. The gibbon uses its long arms in an original way, like a tight-
rope-walker’s balancing rod, when walking on its hind-legs. They would
both walk like quadrupeds with their bodies horizontal if their arms were
not too long. Unlike man, the anthropoid apes are not built to walk on


148


eet
Sees


Waite


47. Outline of the left footprint of (from left to right) gorilla,
snowman, man, and bear.


their hind-legs. Their skull does not sit upright with the centre of its
base on the top of the spinal column, nor is the spine curved inwards at
the small of the back and the nape of the neck. They always tend to fall
over forwards, and only crutches or balancing rods can prevent them
from doing so. Their arms fulfil this purpose.


Nevertheless it is not impossible for anthropoid apes to walk on their
hind-legs, even if they find it hard going. With patience it is possible to
train a chimpanzee to walk some distance on its hind-legs. Certain
climates may even naturally encourage such a gait, or so it would seem
from the evidence of Dr Sydney W. Britton, Professor of Anthropology


at the University of Virginia. Snow had fallen, and he was curious to


see how a chimpanzee that had arrived from Africa during the previous
year would react to a phenomenon so utterly new to it. He did not
expect it to walk erect in the snow, but to his surprise it stood up after
the first few steps and went on walking in the same position. The
American anthropologist thought that this showed that snow had played


a vital part in man’s evolution into a biped. Be that as it may, his
evidence undoubtedly throws light on the problem of the snowman: it
shows that in the Himalayan snows an ape could easily have learnt to
walk on its hind-legs in an attempt to reduce to a minimum its painful
contact with the ice beneath the snow. The “human” formation of this
ape’s big toe could also be explained in the same way. The French zoo-
logist Albert Gaudry pointed out in the last century that man has
retained the plantigrade feet of a primitive mammal and that they cannot
have evolved from the apes’ prehensile feet, specialised to suit their life
in trees. It is the other way round: apes’ feet seem to have evolved from


feet like man’s. If a quadrumane’s feet were really primitive they would


be identical with hands because they would have undergone the same


149


a ot) ee
THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


evolution from fish’s oval fins. Actually an ape’s foot is still a true foot
with a well-developed heel, lengthened and curved toes, and a big toe
~
which has gradually separated from the rest and become opposable. In


48. Orang-utan walking in an upright, but still quadruped, position.


1936 and 1937 Dr Serge Frechkop of the Belgian Royal Institute of
Natural History published original arguments, independent of Gau-


dry’s, arriving at the same conclusion.


A primate that, like man, had not become specialised to living in
150


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


trees would, like him, have retained truly plantigrade feet. It is easy
to see how if a line of apes evolved in increasing size they would very
soon have to give up living in trees. But a habitat in thick forest is
hardly suitable for a giant species (this, according to Urbain and Dekey-


ser, shows that the gorilla is nearing the end of its evolution or more


probably has already reached it). A giant ape would have a better chance


of surviving in open country, and being relatively ill-armed for the


struggle for existence and too exposed to its enemies in the plains, the


mountains would be its ideal habitat, and there the snow would en-


courage it to become a biped. Thus, in theory at least, a race of giant


apes, with primitive plantigrade feet and a tendency to stand on their


hind-legs, could have arisen in the mountain snows.


So, in the end, had we not better humbly accept the evidence of those
who describe the snowman as a giant ape, a sort of hairy ogre? Most
people may reply that giants have never existed, but have merely arisen
in popular imagination, and that science has never found the least trace
of their existence. This view might have been defensible a dozen years
ago, but not today.


In 1934 Ralph von Koenigswald, a young Dutch geologist and
palaeontologist, who later contributed so much to our knowledge of the
Pithecanthropus (the famous Java ape-man), was wandering about the
streets of Hong Kong looking for curiosities. He went into an old-
fashioned Chinese chemist’s shop. It was not so much a dispensary as


a junk-shop where magical drugs were compounded of such diverse
ingredients as rhinoceros-horn and the intestines of flying lizards, and
he vaguely hoped to pick up something odd or even interesting. He had
come to China to study its fauna, and among this junk one sometimes
came upon stuffed specimens of rare animals, dried insects, shells or
even pieces of fossils sold as lung tchih (dragon’s teeth) or lung koo
(dragon’s bones). On the counter he noticed a jar full of teeth of all
sorts and picked up a handful. It was child’s play for him to recognise
what animal they belonged to, for teeth, especially those of mammals, are


like identity cards to an expert. Suddenly he stopped with a shiver, so


astounded, as he later recalled, that his hair actually stood on end. He


held in his hand a tooth that looked to be human—he could tell that it


was a third lower molar—but a tooth far larger than any man or ape had


1 This argument can be checked by applying it to a hypothetical carnivore
instead of a hypothetical primate, and reaching the conclusion that a race of
giant carnivores, with primitive plantigrade feet and a tendency to stand on their
hind-legs, could have arisen in the mountain snows. They have. They are bears.
151


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


ever possessed. Its volume was five or six times greater than the corre-
sponding tooth of aman. It was a giant’s molar.


“Where did you get that?” he asked the chemist in a faint voice.
The Chinese did not know. It had been in that batch of teeth for a
very long time. No doubt his father or his grandfather or even some
more distant ancestor had got it from some peasant. They often found


“‘dragon’s teeth” in the fields.


Von Koenigswald set about scouring every shop in the district. Two
years later, across the water in Canton, he found another tooth similar


to the first, this time an upper molar. In 1939, in just the same way, he


49. First upper molar of Gigantopithecus (right) compared with the
corresponding tooth in man.


finally added to his collection another third lower molar, much better
preserved than the first, for it still had the root as well as a perfectly


intact crown. All these teeth, while undoubtedly belonging to a primate,
were twice as big as those of an adult male gorilla. If the rest of the giant
were in proportion it must have stood between 11 and 13 feet high.


Was it man or ape? It is hard to say; for the teeth of men and the
larger anthropoids are much alike. On the evidence of the first tooth,
damaged though it was, von Koenigswald named its putative owner
Gigantopithecus, or “giant ape.”
But the German scientist Franz
Weidenreich, who made a careful study of the three teeth at von Koenig-
swald’s request, observed that their crowns were less finely indented
than an anthropoid’s and were more like a man’s. He therefore thought
that Gigantanthropus, or ‘giant man,” would be a more suitable name.


A considerable difference in size between creatures belonging to the
same zoological order usually involves numerous variations in the details
of their anatomy. The distinction between ape and man here seems
premature. Perhaps it is even meaningless. After all, we have many
more relics of the Pithecanthropus than a handful of teeth, yet scientists


still cannot agree whether to call it man or ape. It is therefore more


152


ett
Ae
ead


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


prudent to say no more than that the Gigantopithecus was a giant ape-
man.’ But no one can dispute Weidenreich’s words when he writes:


_ This man-beast must have struck with terror all who looked upon
him. His stature and constitution were double that of the gorilla.


Where did this monster live?
Von Koenigswald established that the fossil teeth usually found with
those of the Gigantopithecus in the Chinese chemists’ collections were
those of the tapir, the orang-utan and of the Stegodon, an elephant be-


longing to the beginning of the Quaternary era, whose remains have


been discovered in the muddy soil of certain caves in southern China,


south of the Yangtze. In the cavities of the teeth were found particles


of yellow earth, which, according to the researches of Father Pierre


Teilhard de Chardin and other palaeontologists, are characteristic of
.


these sedimentary deposits. They are variously dated in the Middle or


Lower Pleistocene. On the strength of this geological evidence it has


been asserted that the giant lived some 500,000 years ago in caves in the


Chinese province of Kwangsi. Actually it could, geologically speaking,


be much later and have lived barely 100,000 years ago.


Von Koenigswald’s discoveries about giants did not end there. After
his sensational find of new remains of the Pithecanthropus in Java, he
followed up these excavations, organised with the help of the Dutch
Government, in the same island in 1941, by digging up a fragment of an
enormous jaw-bone in which there were still three teeth. They were
even more human in appearance than those of the Gigantopithecus, but
were only three-quarters of the size. The creature to which they be-
longed must, by this reckoning, have stood between 8 and Io feet high.
It was duly christened Meganthropus palaeojavanicus, the Great Man of
Old Java.


A further palaeontological discovery proved that the giant’s domain
stretched farther than anyone had dared to imagine. In April 1948
J. T. Robinson, assistant to Dr Robert Broom of the Transvaal Museum,


1 The recent discovery of a jaw-bone belonging to the Gigantopithecus in a
mountain cave in Kwangsi Province, South China, settles the controversy. Dr


Pei Wen-Chung of the Laboratory of Vertebrate Palaeontology, Academia Sinica,
who studied the jaw-bone, reports in the American Anthropologist (October 1957)


that it is definitely of an ape, not a man.
It is between 400,000 and 600,000 years


old (Middle Pleistocene period). Wear on the teeth shows “the animal had a


mixed diet of meat and vegetables, quite different from that of modern apes


which live on fruit.” Dr Pei adds: “‘. .
. this anthropoid was closer to man than


any other ape yet discovered.
It is estimated to have had a height of some


12 feet.”


153


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


unearthed in a cave at Swartkrans, in South Africa, the larger part of a
huge jaw-bone, still containing three premolars and four molars. Near-
by were an upper wisdom tooth, two incisors and an upper canine tooth.
The jaw was very slightly
smaller than that of the Meg-
anthropus.
The premolars
were one and a half times as
big as a man’s, but strange


to
say
the
incisors
and
canines were of the same


size as the corresponding


50. Fragment of the jaw of Meganthropus
human
teeth.
Dr Broom
(left) compared with the corresponding
cajjed this African cousin of
PISO Baas
the Meganthropus, closely


related to the little Australopithecus of the same region, by the
name of Paranthropus crassidens.
It is the best known of all giant
primates. In 1949 and 1950 Broom and Robinson unearthed a good
dozen fragments of its bones, including two almost complete skulls and


a pelvis which showed that the creature stood more or less erect. Un-
fortunately the bones were embedded in chunks of extremely hard red
sandstone, and dynamite had to be used to get them out. Naturally they
were damaged and most of the pieces were crushed and shattered.


Nevertheless the general structure of the Paranthropus’s face emerges
very satisfactorily from a study of these fragments. It did not have such


a prominent muzzle as the anthropoid ape’s. Its face was broad, fairly


flat and apparently almost noseless. By far its most striking feature were


its huge jaws, which contrasted oddly with its relatively small cranium.


It is not therefore surprising to find that this huge-jawed creature had a


crest along the top of its skull like that to be seen on old male gorillas,


for these crests are closely linked to the muscular strength of the jaw,
the terminal tendons of which are attached to the parietal bones near the
top of the skull.


From the dimensions of the jaw-bone and the remaining parts of the


skull, Broom estimates that the cranial capacity of Paranthropus crassi-


dens is more than 900 cubic centimetres.


Quite possibly the brain of a large male Swartkrans ape-man may be
over I,000 c.c., and thus as large as the brains of Leibniz or Anatole
France.


He thus concluded that he had at last found the true “Missing Link”
between the apes and man. But, one may object, it signifies nothing


154


we
A les
hole


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


that a giant should have a larger brain than man; whales and elephants
have much larger brains but their intelligence certainly is not in propor-


tion. No doubt it was in order to forestall this objection that Dr Broom


later denied that his Paranthropus was a giant, with the implication that


neither were its cousins from China and Indonesia. According to him
the creatures whose huge jaws and teeth have been found were com-
parable in size to a man or at the very most to a gorilla, and differed only


in having abormally developed jaws.


An examination of the skulls of the Paranthropus shows that their
faces were no higher than a man’s. But as Weidenreich pointed out in
Apes, Giants and Man, the last book he wrote before he died,


In most cases, and especially in the Primates, large teeth necessitate
large jaws, and large jaws necessitate a large body, as we know from
fossil giant lemurs of Madagascar.


Therefore until there is proof to the contrary it seems more reasonable


to suppose that the Swartkrans Paranthropus is a large ape-man with
powerful jaws and a relatively small brain. As to the giants of Java and
China, there is no proof that their jaws were disproportionately large
since we still know nothing about the formation of their skulls. But
even if the Gigantopithecus had a disproportionately large jaw, Broom
himself admits that it would stand between 8 and 1o feet high. Can it
not still be called a giant?


Finally Weinert reported in 1950 the discovery made by Dr Kohl-
Larsen in Tanganyika in 1939, but not published or studied owing to
the war. Twenty-five miles north of Lake Eyasi this German doctor
found in upper Quatenary deposits the remains of a palate, nasal
bones and jaws of a giant primate. As the molars were comparable in


size to the Meganthropus’s molars, Weinert considered it as an African
cousin of the Java giant and called it Meganthropus africanus. All the
same I think it much more likely that it is more closely related to the
Paranthropus, a fellow-African, than to the Indonesian Meganthropus.


The discovery of authentic remains of prehistoric giants has revived
a very old riddle, which has always puzzled the learned. It concerns this
passage from Genesis:


And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the
earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw
the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of
all which they chose.


155


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.


There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when
the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare
children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men
of renown.


It is not really surprising that the ancient Jews should have thought
that giants, or nefilim as they called them, were the offspring of women
and the strange “sons of God” who seem so incongruous in the sacred
books of a monotheistic religion. For primitive people it is a natural
step from greatness in size to greatness in spirit; and this change con-
tributes to the distorted interpretations which historic events undergo in
the course of thousands of years.


The point for us about Moses’s text is that the oldest chronicles report
that man lived on earth at the same time as a race of man-like giants.
The Pentateuch is not the only work of antiquity to mention the exist-
ence of giants. According to Brahmin mythology a whole hegemony of
giants preceded the advent of the primitive red race which founded the
present human civilisation on the southern continent. This version is
very widespread and has been believed all over the world since time
immemorial. And stories of giants—usually man-eaters—are found in
the folk-lore of all the peoples on earth. They are always considered as
man’s worst enemy and all the purest heroes of legend have a victory
over some giant or other to their credit. Ulysses blinding Polyphemus’s
one eye, Sinbad the Sailor following his example, Odin and Ymer, David
and Goliath, the battle of the Hottentot warriors and the great Haitsi-
Aibab, ““He-who-hurls-to-the-ground,” the stories of gigantic bogy-men


that are told in America from Peru to the country of the Eskimos, the


fear of Asourikes in Siam, of Assouras in India and Aessouri in Mongolia,
the processional giants that are part of the folk-lore of so many towns in
Europe (Gog in London, Druon Antigon in Antwerp, Gayant at Douai
and so on), are not all these fables based on the memory of battles
which our ancestors actually fought with giants more than twice their
size?


Sceptics have never failed to counter these legends with the complete
absence of tangible remains. Where were the bones of these giants?
At first they were improvised. Empedocles found fossil elephant-bones
in Sicily and was misled by the single hole formed by the joined nasal
fossae into thinking it was a Cyclops. In the Middle Ages a surgeon
called Mazurier went all round France with a Mastodon’s skeleton


156


lied
bind)
ttl


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


found in the Dauphiné which he said was that of Teutobochus, King of
the Apes. As comparative anatomy progressed and palaeontology was
born, scientists soon exploded these errors. They remained obstinately
against the giants, until quite suddenly official science came to provide
arguments for those who believed in the truth of legend and biblical


infallibility.


Von Koenigswald’s and Broom’s giants would have left an indelible
mark in the memory of ancient man. These huge brutes, not yet entirely
graduated from bestiality, must have made life hard for our ancestors.
Weidenreich and von Koenigswald would have it that we are their
direct descendants, but this is as absurd as to suppose that a Diplodocus
could have given birth to the small lizards of today.


Quite apart from the question of size, there is no reason for thinking
that these creatures had human intelligence. No doubt they were no
more than clumsy and monstrous sketches for man which were swept
aside just because they were so ill-adapted. Perhaps the gorilla and
orang-utan may even owe the fact that they have not been totally
exterminated to cunning greater or at least equal to that of these
giant primates. The offspring of the sons of God and the daughters
of men must have been very stupid, to be dethroned by puny little
men.


No doubt these stupid or too peaceable great brutes, weary of always
being beaten by man, gradually fell back into country where their
adversary could not reach them. For giant apes, still agile but no longer
able to live in trees, mountains were evidently the most suitable habitat
and safest refuge. For the Gigantopithecus which used to live in China,
the high Himalaya was the obvious shelter.
There, out of reach
of their enemies, they could have survived until today, just as their
contemporaries have survived in the marshy forests of Borneo and
Sumatra.
This theory, which is utterly hypothetical, provides the
only entirely acceptable explanation of the mystery of the abominable
snowman.


Similarly, if we suppose that the Meganthropus of the Sunda Islands
had also taken to the mountains—especially those of Sumatra—it would


also explain the mystery of the giants in that island. For rumours very


similar to the Himalayan ones are reported there, and human-looking


footprints with an unusually large big toe have been found in the


mud. These prints were enormous: about 2 feet long by 8 inches wide.
A native who claimed to have seen an orang gadang (big man), which was


supposed to have made the footprints, put its height at 10 feet; it was


157


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


built like a man, and had long hair on its head, but otherwise its skin
was bare. All that is certain is that the Rajah of Rokan has examined


this creature’s footprints himself.


I had already related the legends of Himalayan ogres to von Koenig-
swald’s discoveries for some time when in December 1951 the first
photographs of clear footprints of the snowman were published. I took
the opportunity to write a series of articles on unknown animals which
appeared in Sciences et Avenir (Paris) in the following January, March,
May and August. In the issue of May 1952 I published the gist of what
I have written above, and put forward for the first time my view that the
snowman was a giant and biped anthropoid no doubt closely related to
the Gigantopithecus.
At this time scientific opinion almost unani-
mously rejected the idea that the snowman was an unknown animal.
Apart from Sir John Graham Kerr, who gave the yeti the benefit of the
doubt, all the zoologists who expressed an opinion tried to identify it
with some known animal and were not sparing in their sarcasm of those
who put any faith in the Himalayan legend. Nobody took much notice
of me.


But little by little opinion began to change as the conquerors of
Everest brought back the same persistent rumours, Sherpas gave more


detailed accounts, a lama claimed to have examined the mummified
remains of what he called “‘big monkeys,” and Sir John Hunt himself
declared after his interview with the second senior lama at Thyang-
boche: “There is an interesting problem for an enterprising party to
investigate.”
;


By the end of 1953 scepticism was breaking down, and scientists
in several countries thought that it was possible that the Himalayan
giant might exist and be a new and unknown species. The Daily Mail
decided to send an expedition to look for the abominable snowman.
When this news was announced a Pole called Slavomir Rawicz, who had


settled in the Midlands and married an Englishwoman, came out with a
strange account which was taken down by Ronald Downing, a Daily
Mail reporter, and printed in that newspaper. Subsequently Rawicz’s


entire story was published under the title of The Long Walk. Eastern


travellers have been very sceptical of this tale, and Rawicz offers not the


1 But two years later, on 20 February 1954, a Russian zoologist called Wladimir
Tschernezky published an article in the Manchester Guardian putting forward a
theory identical with mine, down to the details of the argument. A completely
revised version of it was included as an appendix to Izzard’s The Abominable
Snowman Adventure in 1955. The fact that we have both independently come to
the same conclusions should add weight to our arguments.


158


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


slightest guarantee of his veracity. All the same, although no one has
come forward to corroborate any part of his story, certain details in his
description of the yeri are remarkably confirmed by evidence that has
come to light since.


At the beginning of 1941 Rawicz was sent as a political prisoner to
Soviet Labour Camp No. 402 in Siberia, some 200 miles north-west of
Irkutsk and Lake Baikal. One day seven prisoners managed to elude
their guards’ vigilance and escape. Then began the long walk. They
covered more than 2,000 miles on foot in country where nature was even
more hostile than man. They crossed Mongolia, Sinkiang and Tibet,
and in June 1942 the four survivors, indescribably thin and exhausted,
were taken in by Indian soldiers.


In May 1942 there were still five of them and they were near the
frontier of Sikkim and Bhutan in the narrow Chumbi valley which
leads from Tibet into the Indian plains. When they saw two black dots
moving over the snow in the distance they hurried towards them, in the
hope of catching some creature they could eat. But when they reached
an overhanging rock about 100 yards from the two creatures and 12 feet
above them, they saw their hopes were vain.


They were massive creatures, nearly 8 feet tall and standing erect.
They were shuffling around on a snow-covered shelf which formed part
of the obvious route for us to continue our descent. Armed as we were
with only one knife and one axe the whole five of us together would have
stood no chance against them.


We thought perhaps they would go away if we waited.
It was
obvious that the pair had seen us. They looked at us and were quite
indifferent. They certainly were not frightened of us.


I wanted to climb down the rock and get a little closer but my com-
panions refused to join me. So we just sat there, our legs dangling over
the edge of the rock, and watched them.


For two hours we watched them. One of the party said that if we
waited long enough we should be bound to see them descend on all
fours. But they never did. They moved around quietly on their hind
legs with an almost comical swinging motion.


As a regular officer in the Polish Army in 1939 I was specially trained
in assessing distances and heights for setting gun sights. I have not the
slightest doubt that they were at least 7 feet high, but probably nearer
8 feet. One was slightly smaller than the other, and we decided they
must be male and female.


Their faces I could not see in detail, but the heads were squarish and
the ears must lie close to the skull because there was no projection from
the silhouette against the snow. The shoulders sloped sharply down to
a powerful chest and long arms, the wrists of which reached the knees.


159


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


Seen in profile, the back of the head was a straight line from the
crown into the shoulders, as somebody remarked at the time, “‘a typical
Prussian.”


I tried to decide what they were and the nearest I could get was
an idea of a cross between a big bear and an orang-outang type of
ape.


P The nearest I can get to describing their colour is a rusty camel.
They were covered with a long loose straight hair, which, in the light,
seemed to have a greyish tinge, but the bodies seemed to be covered
also with a very short reddish fur.


They were doing nothing but move around slowly together and
occasionally just standing and looking about them, like people admiring
the view. So eventually we had to move off in another and more diffi-
cult direction.


On the way down the little party found half-blurred footprints of these
creatures. They were more or less oval in shape and were about 20
inches long by 8 inches wide at their widest point. The change of route
was fatal for one of the Poles: he slipped off a narrow ledge of rock and
crashed to his death.


If we accept this story, what can we deduce from it? Firstly, that the
animals were certainly not bears, for bears never stand on their hind-
legs for long and, when they do, their front-legs are too short to come
down anywhere near their knees. Moreover their ears stand up on
the top of their heads and would certainly have been visible in their
silhouettes against the snow. And they do not have particularly power-


ful chests. The only bear-like feature is their short and presumably
thick fur. Everything else points to an anthropoid—which might well
have adapted its coat to suit the climate.


The Prussian neck is most interesting. Old gorillas also have a thick-
ened nape like a stiff-necked and muscular soldier. And it is clear that


this effect would be exaggerated in an anthropoid which had become a
permanent biped in order to save its precious hands from painful con-


tact with the frozen ground. Most monkeys have a very concave nape of
the neck as a result of holding up their heads when walking on all four


legs. This makes them look a little hunchbacked. The yeti’s remarkably
straight neck no doubt implies that it is a biped of very long standing—
which would confirm the deductions I have already made from its
primitive plantigrade foot, with no marked sign of having derived from


a tree-dweller. May not the snowman, unlike all the primates but man,
have by-passed this stage? Yet the long arms seem to imply that once it
swung from branches like the larger anthropoids.
Perhaps the yeri
developed into a giant so soon that its life in trees had not entirely left


160


ik
wnat
neil
| im


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


its mark upon it before it had to take to the ground. This may be why


its big toe is so slightly separated from the smaller ones.


On the other hand, the yezi’s long arms could be not a sign of a past


life in trees but a necessary consequence of being a biped. A man’s skull


sits upright with the centre of its base resting on the spinal column,
which is curved in the small of the back so as to stand erect; very straight


legs complete the tall but perfectly vertical structure. A monkey, as I


have already remarked, is very ill-balanced when it stands on its hind-


legs, and is obliged to use its arms as crutches or as balancing rods.


Perhaps the yeri’s ancestors used their long arms as balancing rods be-


fore they learnt to walk quite upright like man.


Being a long-standing biped would have a much more important
effect on the Himalayan giant than merely giving it a stiff neck. In the
evolution of mammals and in their individual growth there is a very
clear opposition between the development of the occipital part of the
skull which contains the brain and the facial part which includes the
jaws. An upright position allows the brain to develop freely on the end
of the spine rather like a flower on its stalk, while the jaws are confined
and inhibited by its growth. But when the body is horizontal, as in
quadrupeds, the brain is compressed between the spine and the facial


part; the jaws, on the other hand, can lengthen into a snout. In other
words, it is impossible to have the large spherical brain that goes with
higher intelligence at the same time as a beast’s snout; and the prepon-
derance of the one over the other is related to the angle of the body.
Thus monkeys, which use their hands to climb in trees and tend to be
in a half-upright position, are half-way between man—a complete biped
—and the quadrupeds with their horizontal bodies. Those monkeys—
baboons and the like—which have given up living in trees and become
quadrupeds have much longer muzzles than the others and are known


as Cynocephala or dog-headed monkeys. The Asian anthropoids—the
gibbon and the orang-utan—unlike the African apes which often walk
on the ground, live almost exclusively in trees.
They are expert


trapezists and have developed such long arms that when they come
down to the ground they are still as vertical as when they are swinging


from branch to branch. Their upright position ought logically to have


favoured the growth of their brains and inhibited that of their jaws.
This is what one finds, but it is not very noticeable, because they have


retained, from having once been quadrupeds, a very backwards position


of the occipital condyles, which form the articulation between the skull


and the spinal column. Therefore, unlike man’s, their skull does no¢


L
161


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


sit in equilibrium on the top of the spine, but is as it were stuck on in
front of the body. They have in fact taken the wrong road towards
standing upright. Nevertheless the orang-utan and the gibbon have
higher, rounder foreheads than their African cousins, and their jaws,


after growing forwards, have begun to grow downwards as a result of the
change in angle of their bodies. This is most striking in the orang-utan,
the most different from the other apes of the two, which once it is adult
has a thick and heavy jaw, as well-developed in height and breadth as in


length.


The yeti’s evolution must have run in the same direction as the orang-
utan’s, but, having become a biped much sooner, the downward growth
of the jaw would have started at an earlier stage. Consequently one
would expect to find not only a much higher forehead and very slight
prognathism, but also considerable development in the depth and
breadth of the jaws. Comparing this with the only giant primate of
which we have a more or less complete skull, the Swartkrans Paran-
thropus (see reconstruction facing page 136), we find that its face is
rather flat, and the development of the jaws, considerable though it is,


is almost entirely in depth and thickness, hence the impressive size of
the molars. Ifthe snowman is closely related to the Gigantopithecus,


as I believe it is, Professor Broom is right in thinking the Asian giant
primates are not of a size proportionate to their teeth. According to his
calculations the Gigantopithecus must have stood between 8 and 10 feet
high, which, according to most witnesses, is about the height of the yert
and agrees with the size of its footprints. Thus it is legitimate to
consider equating the two creatures.


If the snowman, then, like his African cousin the Paranthropus, had


a remarkably over-developed masticatory apparatus, without any marked
prognathism, he would have exceptionally powerful jaw-muscles and


like him would have a considerable sagittal crest on the top of his already
high skull, comparable to the crest of an old male gorilla.


This conclusion, reached by a priori argument and comparison with
various known species, not only agrees with the Sherpas’ accounts that
the yeti has a pointed or conical head, but is also confirmed most strik-
ingly by the discoveries of the Daily Mail expedition.


The expedition set off from Katmandu in January 1954. Including
the Nepalese porters it consisted of some 300 men. Besides a veteran
mountaineer John A. Jackson, the adventurous reporter Ralph Izzard,
and a first-class camera-man Tom Stobart, who made the film The


162


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


Conquest of Everest, the team contained several scientists: Charles
Stonor, former Assistant Curator of the London Zoo; Dr Biswamoy
Biswas, a young Indian zoologist of the Zoological Survey of India
specialising in mammals and birds, and Gerald Russell, an American
naturalist who went on William Harkness’s expeditions to central Asia


in the 1930s and took part in capturing the giant panda in 1936.


Charles Stonor had already set off in December 1953 on a reconnais-
sance of the route to Namche Bazar, the Sherpa’s capital, when he met


a Sherpa of about 30 called Pasang Nyima, who said that he had seen
a yeti three months before when he went to a remote area to take part in


a religious ceremony in a sacred place. He heard that there was a yeti
about and went off with several companions to investigate. When they
reached the spot they saw the yeti some 200 or 300 yards away on a flat
piece of ground sparsely covered with bushes.
It was the first yeri
Pasang had seen. According to him it was the size and build of a small
man.
Its head, its body and its thighs were covered with long hair.


Its face and chest looked less hairy and there were no long hairs on the
legs below the knees. The colour of the fur was “‘both dark and light”
and the chest was reddish. It walked nearly as upright as a man and
bent down occasionally to grub in the ground for roots. When it
realised that it had been seen it gave a loud, high-pitched cry and ran off
into the forest, still on its hind-legs, but with a sidling gait. Never once
did it go on all fours. As all the villagers insisted that Pasang was speak-
ing the truth, Stonor slyly asked him:


“Ts the yeri a flesh-and-blood animal, or is it a spirit?”
To which the Sherpa replied with disarming logic:
“How could it have been a spirit since we saw its footprints after it
had run away?”


Stonor went on collecting yeri lore and soon had several other first-
hand accounts of the beast’s appearance.


One afternoon in 1947 or thereabouts a yak-breeder called Dakhu
who lived in Pangboche saw one some 50 yards away.
It walked


upright, was the height of a small man and was stocky and covered


with hair.


In March 1949 another Pangboche villager called Mingma heard
something like a stentorian human cry while he was driving his herd to
pasture, then he saw something among the rocks coming down towards
him. He took refuge in a stone hut, but was able to see the yet: through


a large crack in the wall and to examine it very carefully. Stonor reports
his description as follows:


163


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


A squat, thickset creature, of the size and proportions of a small man,
covered with reddish and black hair. The hair was not very long, and
looked to be slanting upwards above the waist, and dcwnwards below
it; about the feet it was rather longer. The head was high and pointed,
with a crest of hair on the top; the face was bare, except for some hair
on the sides of the cheeks, brown in colour, “not so flat as a monkey but
flatter than a man,’’ and with a squashed-in nose.
It had no tail. As
Mingma watched it, the Yeti stood slightly stooping, its arms hanging
down by its sides; he noticed particularly that the hands looked to be
larger and stronger than a man’s. It moved about in front of the hut
with long strides... .


When the beast saw that it was being watched through a crack it
growled and showed its teeth; Mingma was very struck by their size.


In about 1950 Lakhpa Tensing saw a yeti sitting on a rock some 30
yards away. It turned its back to him. It seemed to be the size of a
small boy and was covered with rather light reddish hair.


And in October 1952 a villager from Thamnu called Anseering and


his wife surprised a yett among the rocks when they were going to collect
medicinal roots at the upper edges of the forest. The animal was dark
brown, smaller than a man and thick-set. It made off, climbing over the
rocks on four feet.


All these accounts, and also the elder Tenzing’s, Sen Tensing’s and
Pasang Nyima’s, agree most strikingly. But some of the tales Stonor
heard seemed to refer to creatures which had little to do with the snow-
man. So he came to the conclusion that there were two types of yeti, the
larger being the Himalayan red bear, a fairly rare animal in those parts,
but the smaller was the creature they were looking for and that every-
thing pointed to its being an ape. He decided that they should con-
centrate on it entirely. His theory of two unknown creatures was based
on linguistic inquiries.
Yeti, he found, was derived from two Tibetan
words, yeh (rocky area) and reh—which he did not define. The largest
of these yeh-teh was called dzu-teh, and seemed to be the Himalayan red


bear. It went on all fours and had long shaggy reddish hair. Dzu meant
“livestock” and Stonor thought that dzu-teh therefore meant a teh


that was dangerous to cattle. Then there was the mih-teh which was the


size of a fourteen-year-old boy but as heavily built as a man.
It was
covered with light reddish hair and had longer hair on its strikingly
pointed head. Mzh meant “man” and Stonor was uncertain whether the
mth-teh was so called because it was dangerous to men or because it was
like aman. The first alternative seems most unlikely since he goes on
to remark:


164


i.
fr


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


‘ There is no certainty about its food, but many people believe it to
live on rock-rats (picas) and other small beasts which abound in its
home. It is not thought to be particularly aggressive towards man, but
is very shy and very intelligent.


Let me digress a moment to clear the philological problem of the


snowman’s many names out of the way. Prince Peter of Greece, who
knows the Himalaya well, was the first to explain what teh meant. “It


is, I believe, a rather vague colloquial term for ‘brown bear’ (spelt dred


and pronounced ¢(r)e).”” He added that in the Kalimpong area where he


was living mi-go (wild man) was the usual Tibetan name for the snow-


man.
A really thorough philological study of the problem was published in


1955 by an Indian scholar Sri Swami Pranavananda in the Journal of the
Bombay Natural History Society. He confirmed that tre (with the r so


softly pronounced as to be almost inaudible, thus making it te or teh)


was indeed the name for the brown bear. He explained that there were


three bears known to the Tibetans: the black bear which they called


tom, the brown bear called te, and the mi-te or “‘man-bear” (from mi,


“‘man,” and te, “‘bear’’) so called because it walked on its hind-feet like


aman. Pranavananda asserted that this is certainly the red bear, adding:


‘Since the mi-te walks sometimes on all fours and sometimes on hind-


legs only, it is but natural that the tracks of footprints are sometimes seen


in pairs and sometimes in single files.”


He went on to say that the name of metoh kangmi (from metoh or
meteh, “‘abominable,” kang, “snow” and mi, “‘man’’) was an unjustifiable
conjunction of different names for the red bear: mi-te (man-bear) and
kang-mi (snowman), the former having been misunderstood and mis-
translated. The term mi-go usually translated as “wild man” according


to this Indian scholar actually meant “‘beast that walks like man” and
was the name for the snowman in Tibetan provinces of Amdo and Kham
(which are now part of China) and was also used by the Tibetans on the
Indian frontier with Kham. As for yeh-te (yi-te, yih-dah or yeh-da) it
was a quite mythical creature “with the throat as thin as a needle and
stomach as big as a mountain, hence a glutton.”


Sri Swami Pranavananda’s article was welcomed by the sceptics.
Newspapers reported that the legend of the abominable snowman had
been exploded once and for all. And the distinguished anthropologist
William L. Strauss, Jr., of Johns Hopkins University repeated the Indian


scholar’s conclusions in Science with evident satisfaction.


Actually Pranavananda would have done better to have stuck to the


165


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


linguistic side of the problem, for his zoological conclusions are quite
absurd. There are only two known species of bear in the high Himalaya:
the black or collared bear (Selenarctos thibetanus) and the local variety of
brown bear known as the red bear (Ursus arctos isabellinus). It is true
that in Tibet and Kansu there is another variety of brown bear called
the blue bear (Ursus arctos pruinosus), but it does not spread as far as the
Himalaya. So if the mi-teh is a third bear, even more mysterious than
Graham Greene’s Third Man, in these great mountains, it must be an
unknown species. And if this third bear really walks on its hind-feet as
often as its name implies, and does so for miles at a time as its tracks
show, it is a truly extraordinary bear, much more extraordinary to the
zoologist than a large biped ape.


From Pranavananda’s article we can conclude that the people who


live in the Himalaya know a creature which they call mi-teh, probably
because it resembles both bear and man; no doubt it is the same beast
which in some areas is called mi-go because it walks like a man, and in
others kangmi because it sometimes leaves tracks in the snowfields;


lastly it is often nicknamed yeh-te, a word originally meaning an all-
devouring demon, just as we sometimes call an actual but particularly
savage and voracious beast a monster.


If Pranavananda has really unmasked the snowman he has revealed


that it has a much more agreeable face: it was originally called abomin-
able in error and unjustly maligned ever since.


Continuing his reconnaissance Stonor finally found some tracks of
the yeti 14,000 feet up near Namche Bazar. They were the human-
looking footprints so often seen by travellers, but smaller than any
reported before: the average length was Io inches, the maximum width
5 inches and across the heel 3 inches. Stonor was much encouraged.


““My own view,” he wrote, “is that we are concerned with some quite
unknown and extremely interesting beast.”


When the main body of the expedition had arrived and were split into
three columns so as to search the largest possible area, more yeti tracks
were soon found. Jackson and Jeeves went up the Khumbu glacier and
discovered one two or three days old which had undoubtedly been made
by a biped. The prints were ro to 11 inches long by § to 6 inches wide.


In the upper Dudh Kosi valley Russell and Izzard came upon a second
trail, little fresher than the first. The prints were even smaller, having
originally been some 8 to 9 inches long by 4 to 5 inches broad. At the
edge of a plateau they could see that this usually biped animal had


166


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


dropped on all fours, no doubt to reconnoitre the ground more cau-
tiously, thus making “‘smaller indentations” with its hands and knuckles.
The two men followed the trail until they were forced to abandon it:
but they picked it up again at the top of Lake Lang Boma. Here they
were disconcerted to see that it seemed to have been made by a quad-
ruped until it split to go round a boulder, when they realised that it had


been made by two bipeds, a second yeri had been following in the first’s


tracks. They followed the trail for some 8 miles and found signs that


the animal liked to slide down snowy slopes on its behind, a very playful


pastime for a creature that had been called abominable.


Several days later they found a third and then a fourth trail of foot-
prints, very similar in size to the smaller of the tracks they had found
before, then they found some more, and yet another trail, so that Izzard
wrote to the leader of another column, “You will excuse us if the report
of a single Yeti’s tracks now leaves us rather cold.”


Meanwhile members of the expedition also found occasional heaps of
excrement along the trails they were following. On his reconnaissance
Stonor had twice found a large animal’s droppings containing fur,
rodents’ bones and a certain amount of earth. The natives that he had
asked had all unanimously told him that the yeti ate small mammals that
lived among the rocks (marmots and pikas or “‘mouse-hares”’) and large


insects, besides consuming clayey earth “perhaps for bulk or for some
mineral value.” Only a few of the natives thought that the beast also
preyed on young yaks, tahr and musk-deer as well as on birds and their


eggs. Gerald Russell’s analysis of yeti droppings left no doubt that it
was omnivorous:


a quantity of mouse-hare fur; a quantity of mouse-hare bones (approx.
20); one feather, probably from a partridge chick. Some sections of
grass, or other vegetable matter, one thorn, one large insect claw, three
mouse-hare whiskers.


Unfortunately although the three columns moved in pincer move-
ments for 15 weeks the Daily Mail expedition did not succeed in


seeing a single specimen of the elusive animal, at least not for certain,


let alone watching it carefully, photographing or capturing it. But they


did not draw a complete blank, as Izzard’s and Stonor’s books prove.


The most interesting information they collected was about the various
scalps supposed to belong to the yeti. It will be recalled that the lama
Chemed Rigdzin Dorje said that remains of snowmen were venerated


as relics in several monasteries and that he had seen two of them


167


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


himself. Relations with Tibet were so strained that it seemed unlikely
that Western scientists would soon be able to check his assertion. But
on 9 October 1953 a group of four mountaineers, Rusi Gandhy, J. A
Gaitonde, P. V. Pattankar and Navnit Parikh of the Bombay Natural
History Society, stopped on their way back from an expedition at the
monastery at Pangboche, 5 miles beyond Thyangboche in the direction
of Everest. The monks there told them that there was a yeti’s scalp in
the local gompa (or small temple), and after a good deal of hesitation
showed it to them and to Dr Charles Evans of the successful British
Everest expedition, who happened to be passing. An Austrian anthro-
pologist, Professor Christoph von Fiirer-Haimendorf, was also present.
The Indian mountaineers photographed this oddly conical specimen,
and the head lama kindly presented them with a single hair, which was
sent to the world’s greatest expert on the subject, Dr Leon A. Hausman,
professor of zoology at the New Jersey College for Women at New
Brunswick.


He found on a first examination under the microscope that “‘the struc-


tural elements of the hairshaft agreed with those of an Ursus or of an
anthropoid of some sort (not Homo).” But though he compared it with
the hairs on the head and back of a langur, a brown bear and even a
takin it did not agree with any of them. He then burked the question
by stating that from the photograph it might after all be a “moulded
and sewed artifact” brought there by some traveller. The hair might
therefore come from a species that was not Tibetan, which, he said,
made it impossible to identify it.


This statement is obviously far too categorical: it shows that Dr
Hausman was either unable to identify the hair with that of any known
species, or that he did not want to waste time examining what he
thought, for no good reason, was a fake.


During his reconnaissance Stonor was eventually able to lay his hands
on this relic of the yeti and learnt that it dated from the fifth reincarna-


tion of San-Dorje, the lama in whose honour the gompa was founded.
The present lama was the twelfth reincarnation. Every lama was chosen


as a child and remained in office until his death, so, allowing 50 years
for each reincarnation, the scalp would be about 350 years old.


Naturally Stonor was not allowed to take this holy relic away—the
most he could do was to remove several hairs and send them to London


to be analysed—but he took some excellent photos (see plate facing
page 137) and gives a very detailed description of what he believed to
be a true scalp.


168


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


It is quite obviously the skin from the top of the head of an animal,
cut off symmetrically above the ears (of which there is no trace). The
inside surface is quite clean and absolutely entire, in that there is not the
faintest possibility of its having been sewn together or fashioned into
shape. I was utterly unable to identify it with any animal known to


science.


It was 73 inches high, 9? inches long and 62 inches wide. The length
from back to front over the crown was 17} inches. The circumference


at the base was 26} inches. All these measurements are larger than those
of aman. Thus the circumference of an adult man’s head averages 21
inches and the length of the medial line of the skull rarely exceeds 13
inches. The thickness, } inch, was also remarkable.


The texture is that of brittle leather: quite uniform throughout, and
the skin blackish in colour.
.
.
. The shape at the base is a broad oval:
it may be slightly misshapen from age and usage.
.
. but in view of
the very tough texture, I do not think this to be the case.


The outer surface is now largely bare and the skin fairly smooth: but
it was quite clearly covered with hair in its original state and is still
minutely pitted all over with hair bases. A fair proportion of hair still
remains. The hair is foxy-red in general colour, barred with blackish-
brown. The individual hairs are a very few inches in length and are
extremely stiff and bristle-like.
It is impossible to say if there were
formerly hairs of greater length. From what is presumably the forehead
the hair slopes backward, and slightly downwards along the sides, much
as in man: while at the back of the head it slopes almost vertically down-
wards. This is quite noticeable and I think it to be the natural con-
formation.


An extraordinary feature is a crest or “keel’’ which runs from the
base of the forehead straight upwards over the crown and down the
back. It has a uniform width of almost exactly one inch. It is covered
with bristle-like hairs of the same colour as the rest, which are no more
than 1-25 in. in length and which slope inwards from each side so as
to meet in the centre and form a crest, which is thus triangular in cross-
section. In common with the rest of the hairs much of the crest is gone,
but it is distinctly marked as a slightly raised ridge in the skin.


When Dr Biswas, who was also a professional naturalist, examined
the Pangboche scalp soon afterwards he also categorically confirmed


Charles Stonor’s view that it could under no circumstances be false or


imitation. Only the ciné-cameraman Tom Stobart had doubts. ‘“Per-


sonally,” he said, “I would not rule out its being a ‘made article.’
When one considers the shrunken heads made in South America it is


by no means impossible. I should think that a boar would supply the


basic materials.” I shall discuss this question later.


169


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


When the expedition visited the Thyangboche monastery, the head


lama, with whom they had made friends, told them that there was a
second yeri’s scalp at the lamasery at Khumjung, 2} miles away. This
proved on examination to be the same size as the first, more battered
and with scantier fur. According to the tradition the two scalps had
come from a pair, the Pangboche one from a male and the Khumjung
one from a female.


Despite much bargaining the monks would not lend either of the
scalps to the expedition, but their friend Sanghi Lama got them a piece
of skin 3 inches long by 1} inches wide which he said had come from an
entire yeri’s skin that had long belonged to the village of Khumjung but
had recently disappeared in mysterious circumstances.


The expedition was subsequently able to examine a third yert’s scalp
in the temple at Namche Bazar, but it turned out to be merely a faked
version of the other two: it was made of pieces of hairy skin, identical
with that of the true scalps, but sewn together to form the same shape as
them. Doubtiess it had been made to satisfy Namche Bazar’s local
pride. Izzard suggests that “An impious thought is that possibly
the Namche Bazar scalp is the explanation of Khumjung’s missing
hide.”


Professor F. Wood Jones, the expert in comparative anatomy who
examined some hairs from the Pangboche scalp in London, said that he
was unable to determine what animal they came from. After comparing
them with those of an orang-utan and a black bear, he was convinced
that they were not those of an anthropoid ape nor of a bear, but thought
they might come from the shoulder of some coarse-haired hooved
animal, not from its head. In his opinion the hairs and the photographs
showed that it was not a true scalp, for he did not believe that any animal
would have a crest running from the base of the forehead right across
the top of the head and ending at the back of the neck.


The Daily Mail team were discouraged by this pronouncement. But
in fact one could hardly hope for an opinion more favourable to the
scalp’s authenticity. For it is clear enough that the scalp of a huge biped
anthropoid ape, a sort of animal as yet unheard of, would have to be
quite original in structure. One should not be in the least surprised to
find that it had a raised crest of standing hair. The ridge along the crest
of the scalp indicates that there was a bony sagittal crest beneath it, and


this, as I have shown, is what we should expect to find in a giant biped
primate closely related to the Gigantopithecus. The yeri must therefore
be like the Paranthropus, a primate with a heavy and powerful but not


170


-


Eo
3
7


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


very prominent jaw. This is also confirmed by such witnesses as
Tenzing’s father and the yak-herd Mingma, who were struck by the


size of its teeth. Clearly its very flat face and high forehead would give


it a remarkably human expression. This would be accentuated by its


crest, like a gorilla’s, which in some individuals, old males no doubt,


seems to be furnished with long hair looking like the hair on a man’s


head. Its biped gait would clinch the resemblance and justify the name


of snowman.


Thus the unusual shape of the alleged yeti scalps agrees better than
one could possibly have hoped with what I deduced the beast must be
on the evidence of its footprints alone. To make quite certain, I set
about trying to find out if it would be possible to make a fake scalp from
the shoulder of some hooved animal.


Let me explain at once that it would be by no means essential to use
the skin of a hump, like a camel’s or that of an Indian humped ox, to
produce a sort of conical mitre. Suitably moistened and stretched on a
mould any piece of flat skin could be made this shape. Nevertheless a
study of the skins of camels, various cattle, including the yak and the
Indian humped ox, and of wild boars, convinced me that the skin of the
shoulder or back of these animals could not have been used to make the
Pangboche and Khumjung scalps. There is no need even to refer to the
texture of the hair (which rules out creatures like the camel and yak
which have characteristically woolly coats) in order to settle the ques-


tion. In fact no quadruped’s back can provide a skin from which these
scalps could be faked, for the hair-tracts are arranged in quite a different
way. It would be utterly impossible. On a quadruped’s back the hairs


all point towards the hindquarters, parallel to the median line in what is
technically called “the primitive cranio-caudal stream”: and even if
there happened to be a tiny spiral hair whorl, on the top of the shoulder


51. The arrangement of hair-tracts on (left) a quadruped’s back, (centre)
the supposed snowman’s scalp, and (right) a gorilla’s scalp. In all three
diagrams the animal is facing towards the top of the page.


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


for instance, this would not alter the general direction of the hairs. On
the other hand, the hairs on the alleged snowman scalps begin parallel


to the median line on what is thought to be the forehead, soon turn at
right angles to it and remain at an angle until the nape of the neck where
they return to their original parallel direction. Since these scalps have


crests of standing hairs it is obviously impossible that they could be
made of the skin of any part of an animal’s body except the skull, the
nape of the neck and the back.


As a comparison I examined the skin on the heads of several large
apes, and found that the pattern of hair-tracts was much nearer to that
of the Pangboche and Khumjung relics. In the orang-utan the hairs
spread out in all directions from that part of the back of the head known


as the great fontanelle, like the hair-style affected by some monks, many
Amazonian Indians, the ancient Romans and Marlon Brando (early
period). They spread out on the sides of the head, but point forward on
the top of the head; and in this they are different. In the gorilla on the
other hand the hairs on the head are arranged like those on the alleged
scalps, even above the eye-sockets and on the forehead.


Incidentally I must contradict Charles Stonor when he says that the


first scalp was “astonishingly thick,” the actual thickness being 4 inch;
for I measured that of several gorilla-skins and found that they were
always around 4 inch (between 3 and 4 mm.).


The Pangboche and Khumjung scalps therefore offer all the guarantee
of their authenticity that one could wish. The fact that the people of
Namche Bazar did not succeed in making a fake which would pass as
the real article, even with the aid of similar skin, provides an additional
guarantee. I challenge those who have said that these scalps are fakes to
concoct one out of the shoulder of some hooved animal or indeed from
the skin of any animal they choose. The result may well be an attractive
fur cap, but I am certain that not even the most shortsighted of experts
would ever mistake it for a relic of the snowman.


Ever since the Daily Mail expedition the yeti has been in the news.
In May 1955 the French expedition on Makalu (a 27,190-foot peak 13
miles south-east of Everest) came upon several tracks; one of them, on
the Barun Col, had been made that very morning or late on the previous
evening. The Abbé P. Bordet, the team’s geologist, who photographed
the imprints, produced indisputable evidence that the beast was a biped:
even where the yeti had jumped down into the snow from a small wall
of rock there “were no tracks of its forefeet.”’


172


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


I have followed a yeti track for more than a kilometre [he writes], and
seen nearly 3,000 footprints. They are all of the same kind. They are
deep marks made by a foot somewhat resembling a human foot. The


sole of the foot is roughly elliptical and rounded underneath. In front


of it are the more or less circular marks of four toes (not five), the first


on the inside is larger than the rest and perhaps not quite so far for-


ward, the other three lie on the front edge of the sole of the foot and


very close to it. These toes are much larger than human toes. There


are no marks of claws. ...In the best imprints there are still little


ridges of snow dividing the toe-marks and showing that the toes are


slightly separated when the creature walks. The length of the foot-


prints is about 20 centimetres. ...


The animal walks with its feet almost parallel and only slightly
splayed.
Its stride was about 20 inches, a little less than my own on
this slippery ground....


The second track that I saw was that of an animal coming down to a
lake, no doubt to drink there. The prints were in a perfectly straight
line and the stride was much longer, sometimes as much as three feet.


All the same all these tracks were those of a biped which even in
difficult conditions had no need to use its front legs.


Professors Berlioz and Arambourg of the Paris Natural History
Museum, whom the Abbé Bordet consulted, admitted ‘‘there is no
known animal which leaves such footprints, and none which is a true
biped as this is.”” But they refused to draw any conclusions as to what it
might be. “Whether it is a kind of bear or ape,” Bordet concludes, “‘it
seems too soon to decide, our information being what it is at present.”
This opinion shows considerable ignorance of the problem and the
work that has been done on it. As I pointed out in 1952, one need only
look at a track to see if the big toe is on the inside or the outside to decide
whether it was made by a primate or a bear. Since the Abbé Bordet tells


us that “‘the first on the inside is larger than the rest,” the yet: cannot
possibly be a bear, even if it is an unknown biped species. Bordet also
points out, apropos of the yeri’s identity, the odd fact that:


The Indian map of the Himalaya marks the area round Everest as
the Mahalangur Himal (the mountains of the great monkeys). As no
monkey is known to live there this name may refer to the yeti, a charac-
teristic inhabitant in the natives’ eyes.


A month later, on 12 June 1955, two members of the Royal Air Force
Mountaineering Association expedition to the Himalaya, Wing-Com-
mander A. J. M. Smyth, the leader, and Sergeant J. R. Lees, also found


fresh yeti tracks 12,375 feet up in the Kulti valley. They summoned
the transport officer Squadron-Leader L. W. Davies who came and


173


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


photographed the track and sent a signal about it to the Air Ministry.
The official communiqué gives some interesting details.


There were many prints, each measuring about 12 inches by 6
inches, and indicating that the creature who made them was two-
legged, with five toes a quarter of an inch wide on each foot.


The prints were sunk 11 inches into the snow, compared with the
one-inch impression made by the R.A.F. mountaineers.


This shows that the creature which made such deep tracks must have
been several times as heavy as a man. (A gorilla, by the way, rarely
exceeds 40 stone.)


Less reliable than the Air Ministry communiqué is the agency report
published in January 1956 to the effect that a snowman had been caught
in a trap, killed with arrows and eaten by Naga head-hunters on the
frontier between Assam and China. The creature was reported to be


10 feet high, white as milk and with human features. Although the
incident itself is not improbable, the description of the beast killed
seems so fantastic that one is tempted to write the whole thing off as a
hoax. But this may be unjust, for a story told to a regional army officer
and passed on to a group of Indian journalists travelling in the frontier
area, must have been much altered in transmission especially if first told
in a dialect very difficult to understand. The Naga Angami which the
Naga speak, as R. B. McCabe has pointed out, is “‘still in a very primi-


tive stage of the agglutinating class,” and ‘peculiarly rich in intonation,”
although “for one Naga who clearly marks these tonal distinctions
twenty fail to do so.” It is easy to see what misunderstandings might
arise in a translation from such a language.


Professor René von Nebesky-Wojkowitz, who spent three years of
ethnographic research in Tibet and Sikkim from 1950 to 1953, tells
several stories about the abominable snowman in his admirably docu-
mented book. They agree very well with those that Izzard and his com-
panions heard in Nepal. He draws the following conclusions from the
evidence that he had obtained by questioning many witnesses:


It is a remarkable fact that the statements of Tibetans, Sherpas and
Lepchas concerning the Snowman’s appearance
largely coincide.
According to their description a warrant for the arrest of this most
“wanted” of all the inhabitants of the Himalayas would read as follows:
7 feet to 7 feet 6 inches tall when erect on his hind legs. Powerful body
covered with dark brown hair. Long arms.
Oval head running to a
point at the top, with apelike face. Face and head are only sparsely


174


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


covered with hair. He fears the light of a fire, and in spite of his great
strength is regarded by the less superstitious inhabitants of the Hima-
layas as a harmless creature that would attack a man only if wounded.


To this description, which confirms in every detail what we know
already, he adds some more interesting information about the crea-


ture’s habitat:


From what native hunters say the term “snowman”? is a misnomer,
since firstly it is not human and secondly it does not live in the zone of


snow.
Its habitat is rather the impenetrable thickets of the highest


tracts of Himalayan forest. During the day it sleeps in its lair, which it


does not leave until nightfall. Then its approach may be recognized by


the cracking of branches and its peculiar whistling call. In the forest


the migo moves on all fours or by swinging from tree to tree. But in the
open country it generally walks upright with an unsteady, rolling gait.
Why does the creature undertake what must certainly be extremely
wearisome expeditions into the inhospitable regions of snow? The


natives have what sounds a very credible explanation:
they say the
Snowman likes a saline moss which it finds on the rocks of the moraine


fields. While searching for this moss it leaves its characteristic tracks


on the snowfields. When it has satisfied its hunger for salt it returns to


the forest.


This suggests that—as I suspected—the snowman owes the accidental


fact that it is a biped to snow beneath its feet, and also that the places
where the creature and its footprints are usually seen are not its normal
habitat. If its desire for saline food is not the only cause that drives the
snowman to venture into open country, where it is more likely to be
seen, it is a strong enough reason to explain such journeys: moreover
they are strangely reminiscent of the long pilgrimages that elephants
sometimes make in search of saline soil.


In the spring of 1957 an American expedition led by a Texas oilman
called Tom Slick also searched for the snowman in eastern Nepal. Dur-
ing three months wandering among the Himalayan foothills the leader


collected much new data about the elusive animal. Not only did he


examine three sets of footprints, excrements and even hairs that had


come from yetis, but he also questioned some 15 Nepalese who


claimed to have seen the animal. From all this information he inferred


that the snowman must be a large ape like a gorilla or an orang-utan. It


had a pointed head and walked upright like a man. It was strong enough


to kill a yak with its bare hands, though it does not seem to eat these


animals. On the other hand when it happens to kill a man it eats his


175


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


eyeballs, fingers and “other parts,” but has no special taste for human


flesh. Small rodents and bamboo shoots are its chief food.


Tom Slick’s most important contribution to the problem is, I think,
his belief that there are two kinds of yeris: one with blackish hair and
about 8 feet high, and the other reddish and smaller. This conclusion is
based on differences in the accounts he heard from the natives, on find-
ing two kinds of hair along the tracks and examining two kinds of foot-
prints. The largest, like those photographed by Shipton, were as much


as 13 inches long; the smaller are more like a medium-sized man’s.


This would explain the discrepancies that the reader cannot fail to
have noticed in this chapter. While some witnesses say the snowman is
a giant, all the Sherpas who have seen it say that it is smaller than a man


or about the same size. It is significant that all the reports which say
the yeti is a giant (Marqués-Riviére’s pilgrim, the lama Chemed Rigdzin
Dorje, Slavomir Rawicz and Professor von Nebesky-Wojkowitz’s
witnesses) come either from Tibet or from the very north of Sikkim


or Nepal, that is from very high places on the edge of these countries.
I should also mention that a teacher at Namche Bazar told Ralph Izzard


that there were two kinds of yetis. Since this man, who had recently


arrived from Darjeeling, was, according to Izzard, not “the most know-
ledgeable authority,” the reporter did not take his remarks very seriously
when ‘‘The larger lived ‘there,’ he said, pointing vaguely in the direction
of Mount Everest, and the smaller ‘there,’ waving equally vaguely in the
direction of the lower Dudh Kosi valley.”


This opinion was confirmed in 1957 by a Tibetan lama called Punya-
bayra, high priest of the monastery at Budnath, who spent four months
in the high mountains and brought back the surprising but valuable
information that the Tibetan mountain people knew three kinds of
snowmen: the nyalmo, the rimi and the rackshi bompo. The nyalmo are


real giants, between 13 and 16 feet high, with enormous conical heads.
They wander in parties among the eternal snows above 13,000 feet. In
such empty country it is hardly surprising that they should be carni-
vorous and even man-eating. The rimi are smaller, but still between
7 and 9 feet high. They live lower down between 10,000 and 13,000


feet, feeding on plants as well, and are thus omnivorous. Their favourite
place is the Barun Khola valley in eastern Nepal. The rackshi bompo are
about the size of a man.


What are we to make of these distinctions? Some may say that they
are the absurd supersitions one might expect a Tibetan lama to spread.
But we should not forget that he is an educated man with the rare


176


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


privilege of questioning mountain people in the remotest parts of the
Himalaya in their own language. Punyabayra also offered to capture a
specimen of each kind of yeri if the Katmandu Government would help
him. This is evidence of his sincerity. Moreover his account agrees in


part at least with what we already know. The rackshi bompo must be the
Sherpas’ reddish yeh-teh or mi-teh which leaves the footprints 8 or 9
inches long that the Daily Mail expedition and the Abbé Bordet found


in such quantity. The rimi must be the large black snowman described


by Nebesky-Wojkowitz’s Tibetan and Sikkimese informants, and the


one whose mummified bodies Chemed Rigdzin Dorje saw in Tibet, and


which leaves footprints 12 to 13 inches long. It was in fact in the Barun


area or in eastern Nepal that Shipton and Slick found footprints of this


size. The nyalmo remind one of Marqués-Riviére’s pilgrim’s sad-faced


giants. Do they really exist, or are they just a myth? It is true that


J. R. O. Gent spoke of footprints 18 inches to 2 feet long, which logically


could only have been made by yetis even larger than the rim. But here


the evidence is far too slender for us to draw any satisfactory conclusions.


Possibly the myalmo are an invented addition based on the belief that


yetis increase in size the higher you go.


Meanwhile we can say that the existence of two kinds of yetis of dif-
ferent size and colour is well-established. No doubt they are different
geographic races of the same species. But it is also possible that they
may be merely the result of sexual dimorphism. Old male gorillas grow


so large that they can travel only on the ground, while the females still
climb trees. Thus the male yeti—stronger, more heavily built and con-
sequently better able to stand cold—might be the only one that could
venture into the higher parts of the mountains to hunt. Nor is it im-
possible that the small reddish yetis may be the young of the large black


ones.
In gibbons the colour may change completely with age, from
white with hardly a touch of grey at puberty to the deepest of blacks.
Here again the yetis may go up to greater heights as they become
tougher and stronger with age.


We can now even give a detailed description of the giant biped
anthropoid of the Himalaya, a shy survivor of the empire of giant
primates which once ruled a large part of the earth.


Only four giant ape-men are so far known to palaeontology: the
Chinese Gigantopithecus, of which we have only a few molars and a jaw-
bone more recently discovered in 1957, the Java Meganthropus, re-
presented by a fragment of jaw-bone with its teeth, the Tanganyika


M
177


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


Meganthropus, consisting only of jaw and facial bones, and the South
African Paranthropus, of which several skulls and a biped’s pelvis have
been excavated. If I seek to relate the snowman to the Gigantopithecus


it is obviously for geographical reasons and because most reports of its
size agree with Dr Broom’s estimate of that of the Chinese giant.


It is high time that the snowman was also recognised by a scientific
name and since the palaeontology of giant primates is so slender, I
would give it a new name, Dinanthropoides nivalis,' or “terrible anthro-
poid of the snows.” If one day its teeth are examined and found to be
identical with those of the Gigantopithecus, its name will have to be
changed, according to the rule of priority, to Gigantopithecus nivalis, the
present species being no doubt quite distinct from the Pleistocene pri-
mate from Kwangsi. The layman may be surprised that one should give
an animal a scientific name on the mere evidence of some footprints and
a description of a scalp. In fact this procedure is not only universal in
palaeontology, but happens fairly often in zoology. The giant panda
and the wolf of the Andes were described merely from skins, the takahe
was first known only from a skeleton, the first description of the pygmy
hippopotamus was based ona
skull. And the first (mistaken) name given


to the okapi was based on shapeless strips of its skin which were taken
for those of some kind of zebra. Naturally the name Dinanthropoides


risks a similar mistake—firmly though I am convinced to the contrary
—but zoology cannot go on ignoring an animal which we know far more
about than many fossil species.


We have reason to believe that it is a large biped anthropoid ape, from
5 to 8 feet high according to its age, sex or geographic race, which lives
in the rocky area at the limit of the plant line on the slopes of the whole
Himalayan range. It has plantigrade feet, and the very conspicuous big


toe, unlike that of most monkeys, is not opposable to the other toes. It
walks with its body leaning slightly forward; its arms are fairly long and
reach down to its knees. It has a flat face, a high forehead, and the top
of its skull is shaped like the nose of a shell; its prognathism is slight,
but its thick jaws have developed considerably in height, hence the
disproportionate size of its molars. To this outsize masticatory appara-


tus are connected very powerful jaw-muscles. On the cranium there is
a sagittal crest which is revealed by a thickening of the scalp in the adult
male, at least, and the presence of upstanding hair. It is covered with


1 In the French edition I suggested the generic name of Dinopithecus, but as


Broom has already used this for a South African fossil baboon in 1936, it cannot
be retained.


178


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


thick fur, which in the smaller specimens varies from fawn to dark
chestnut in different places with foxy-red glints, but the face, chest and
the lower legs are much less hairy. In the larger specimens the fur is an
even dark brown or almost black. It appears to be omnivorous: roots,
bamboo shoots, fruit, insects, lizards, birds, small rodents and occasion-


ally larger prey like yaks are all grist to its mill in such barren country.


Its cerebral capacity should be about equal or even greater than man’s.


But the development of the brain must have been affected by the strange


shape of the skull giving rise to mental qualities very different from those


in which man excels.


The position of this Dinanthropoid in the system of zoology is still
uncertain, as is that of the other giant primates, which to my mind do
not form a homogeneous group, but are the separate peaks of the evolu-
tion of different families of primates: the Paranthropus is the last stage
in the evolution of the Australopitheci into giants, the Meganthropus is


a giant Pithecanthropus. Just as the Pithecanthropus may be merely a
large biped descended from the gibbons, so the Dinanthropoid may
have evolved similarly, but on a parallel branch, from the orang-utan.
Gates and Remane consider that the Gigantopithecus is a giant of the
Ponginia, the family to which the orang-utan belongs.


Of course it is not until an actual specimen of the snowman is ex-
amined that my deductions can be checked and its provisional descrip-
tion completed. The Daily Mail expedition, alas, was unable to provide
one, although four columns of men carried out pincer movements over


a vast area, and Tom Slick had no better luck. The chances of success
seem to be seriously compromised for the future. Slick had no sooner
announced his intention of returning to the Himalaya in the autumn of
1958 and Punyabayra had also offered to capture a yeti when the Govern-
ment of Nepal announced that it required a fee of 5,000 rupees from
anyone wishing to look for the yeri. It strictly forbade anyone to kill


one except in self-defence.
The Nepalese were not allowed to give


information to strangers without permission from the Government,


which claimed a right in the creature, dead or alive, and even in any


photographs that might be taken.


This decree has not discouraged the enterprising. Now, in the spring
of 1958, no less than four expeditions, two American, one Scottish and
one Russian, are looking for the yeti, which has recently become news
in Russia.


Marxist diehards have often maintained that the snowman was a pure
invention, a pretext to enable Western expeditions to spy on the frontiers


179


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


of Nepal and Tibet. But in January 1958 a Soviet scientist, Dr Alex-
ander G. Pronin, announced that he had seen a galub-yavanna (or snow-
man) the previous August in the Baliand-Kiik valley in the Pamirs, thus
extending the animal’s area of distribution enormously. Dr Pronin, a
senior scientist of the Geographic Scientific Institute of Leningrad
University, was in the Pamirs leading the hydrological section of the
International Geophysical Year joint expedition of the Uzbek Academy
of Science and Leningrad University. It was on 10 August that he first
saw the snowman outlined against the top of a 1,500-foot cliff.


At first [he told Komsomolskaya Pravda] I thought it was a bear, but,
having collected myself, it became clear that this was no bear but a man-
like creature. It walked out of its cave for a distance of some 200 yards
and then disappeared beyond the edge of the cliff.


He had observed the creature for some five to eight minutes, and
three days later he saw it again at the same spot. He described it as “a
man-like creature walking on two feet in a slightly stooping manner and
wearing no clothes. Its thick-set body was covered with reddish-grey


hair, and it had long arms.”


Dr Pronin’s report was much criticised. Some asked why he had
waited so long before publishing his discovery. The meteorologists at
Glacier Fedchenko 2, in the area in question, were even more severe.
They had never seen any snowmen and said ““We do not believe Pronin’s
statement, and we think that a true scientist would not publish a dis-
covery until it had been verified several times.” Nevertheless they in-
tended to go and look for this non-existent beast at the earliest oppor-
tunity. Many first-rate Soviet scientists, the late zoologist P. Sushkin,
Professor N. Sirotinin of the Ukrainian Academy of Science, Professor
S. Obruchev of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Science and the greatest of


their zoologists, E. N. Pavlovsky, had, however, all come out on the side
of the snowman’s existence.


Soon after Dr Pronin’s announcement a Chinese ciné-cameraman
confirmed that there were snowmen in the Pamirs. In 1954 when he
was filming three colleagues on Mount Muztahl-Ata, 20,000 feet up, he
saw two of these creatures one morning. They were not very tall and
stooped slightly as they followed one another about half a mile ahead of
him.


Actually it is not absolutely necessary to examine a living yeti—nor


to kill a specimen, which would be needlessly cruel—to clear up the


180


THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


problem once and for all. The lama Chemed Rigdzin Dorje may be
right when he says that some monasteries possess mummified snowmen.
A study of one of these specimens would settle the question. It might


also be possible to get hold of the rest of Khumjung’s missing hide.
There must be many other relics of the great ape in a part of the world


that bristles with temples and is ruled by clerics. Professor David Snell-


grove, the expert on Tibet at London University, told the Daily Mail
team that he understood that at Pangboche monastery there was


not only a scalp but also
a mummified hand, much larger than a


man’s.


In May 1957 the Katmandu Commoner revealed that a snowman’s
head has been kept for 25 years in the remote village of Chilunka, 50
miles north-east of the capital. It was preserved to commemorate the
bravery of the men who killed the beast. A quarter of a century ago 32
Nepalese soldiers marching towards Kuti, on the frontier of Tibet, were
attacked in the middle of the night by a yeti which killed 31 of them.
The sole survivor gave the alarm and a patrol of 10 men armed to the
teeth were sent off to the place. They found the monster there, sleeping
off its meal after eating several of its victims. Ten guns were fired at it


at once, but a second salvo was needed to polish it off. The leader of the
patrol still kept the beast’s head as a trophy.


If an informed zoologist could examine a hand, or better still a skull,
he would be able to obtain most valuable information. Even so the
diehard sceptics would still suspect that these specimens were in a fossil


or sub-fossil state. General incredulity will not be overcome until we
can see a good photograph or film of a living yett.


The expedition which may one day bring back these trophies will be
able to benefit from the lessons of the Daily Mail team, who never suc-
ceeded in overtaking a yeti although their trails abounded. Each time
they lost track of the strange ape-man, which could move faster over a
terrain to which it was better suited and was no doubt more accustomed


to the lack of oxygen at those heights, while its pursuers had to stop for


breath more and more often. And, as Izzard remarked, “‘a party is as


conspicuous as a line of black beetles on a white tablecloth.” They


would probably have done better to follow Gerald Russell’s plan. He


was a greater expert in catching animals than anyone else in the party,


and he thought that rather than keeping on the move, they should have


chosen a good strategic position and remained hidden there, if necessary


for a week at atime. As it was, Izzard was a sadder and a wiser man for


this experience, and concluded that:


181


THE MAN-FACED ANIMALS OF SOUTH-EAST ASIA


The Yeti is more likely to be met in a chance encounter round, say, a
rock, than by an organised search. A reconnaissance party of two or
three Sahibs needs about 30 Sherpa porters to support it over a period
of about three weeks. We found it impossible to introduce such a
large body of men into an “empty quarter’”’ of the Himalayas without
disturbing all wild life within it.


We shall find the same situation recurring in most of the problems of
unknown animals, and it is this that makes them so hard to solve. It is


difficult not to be exasperated when all the pieces of evidence run away


as soon as the experts arrive on the scene.


182


Part Three


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF
OCEANIA


Forth from the dead dust, rattling bones to bones
Join; shaking convuls’d, the shiv’ring clay breathes,
And all flesh naked stands:
WILLIAM BLAKE, The Song of Los.


CHAPTER SEVEN


The Surrealist Dinosaur of
New Guinea


Alice laughed. ‘““There’s no use trying,” she said:
“one can’t believe impossible things.’’
LEwIs CARROLL, Through the Looking-Glass.


FEw newly married couples can boast of having met a dinosaur on their
honeymoons. Mr Charles Miller and his socialite bride decided to spend
theirs among the cannibals of New Guinea. Mummified heads and
braised babies eaten by expectant mothers were minor attractions of
this resort, compared with their encounter with a prehistoric monster
from the Mesozoic era. When they and their bodyguard of Javanese
head-hunters had climbed up the River Merauke and reached the
Sterren mountains, they discovered an unknown tribe, the Kirrirri,
between the virgin forest and the snowline. One day Mrs Leona Miller
saw a woman in the Kirrirri village breaking a coconut with a strange


tool which looked like a rhinoceros-horn or the end of an elephant’s
tusk. She was intrigued and told her husband, who found that there
were quite a few such tools in the village.


The tusks, if that is what they were, were composed of a substance
resembling horn, applied in cone-shaped layers like a nest of conical
paper drinking cups, gradually diminishing in size until the top one
came to a sharp point. The tusks were about eighteen inches in length
and about six inches through at the base. There was a small, cone-
shaped hollow in the bottom, but even so they must have weighed
about twenty pounds apiece.


When he asked Wroo, one of the village worthies, where these tusks
came from, he drew a sort of lizard in the sand. ‘‘It had a large neck, a
huge bulging, hump-backed body terminating in a long tail. At the end
of the tail, Wroo indicated, the horn fitted like a cap.” Thinking he had
misunderstood, Miller made him draw the picture again. This time the


185


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


animal was more carefully depicted: its head was adorned with a broad
collar, and large triangular scales bristled on its spine. “Just as shown
on reconstructions of dinosaurs in the museum back home,” Miller
remarks. To show the length of the beast, Wroo made two marks in the
dust with his toe 30 feet apart. He stood back and considered the dis-
tance he had marked out. Then he added another 10 feet. So, according


to him, the animal was about 40 feet long.


Miller’s laughter having met only looks of stern reproof, he asked
where these monsters lived. Two or three days’ journey away, towards
the hills in the north-west, they replied by signs. The explorer, who
was also a camera-man and hoped for a sensational story, managed to
persuade several Kirrirri to lead him to the giant lizard’s lair. This was
not easy, for the natives were very afraid of these creatures, which they
called row in imitation of their cry, a cross between a roar and a snake’s


hiss. The expedition was fixed for the next day.


The first night, after having climbed all day up fairly steep slopes,
they reached an immense grassy plateau where they camped with their
native guides. At dawn they set off westwards along the edge of this


' plateau which became steeper and steeper until it was a cliff that fell
some 50 feet. When they reached the western end of the plateau, their
guides headed north; they seemed nervous and went more carefully.
At last they reached their goal and urged the explorers to lie flat in the
grass before looking over the edge of the cliff. Muller was surprised to


see a vast triangular marsh covering some 40 acres. It was wedged be-
tween the plateau that he was on, another similar one opposite, and the


side of the mountains, from which a small stream ran down into the
marsh. But he soon stopped admiring the view, for suddenly the reeds
began to move.


Miller was paralysed with terror at what he saw. When his wife
joined him, she saw in her turn and fell to the ground. Miller thought
she had fainted, but she was merely so terrified that she clutched at the


grass and dared not raise her head. Slowly Miller lifted his camera and
aimed it at the beast whose long neck rose among the reeds.


As if in obedience to my wishes, the colossal remnant of the age of
dinosaurs stalked across the swamp.
Once its tail lashed out of the
grass so far behind its head I thought it must be another beast. For one
brief second I saw the horny point. I heard it hiss—Roooow—Roooow—
Rooow.


When he started the camera running the row seemed to hear it whirr-
ing,


186


THE SURREALIST DINOSAUR OF NEW GUINEA


for it suddenly stopped, reared up on its hind legs, its small forelegs
hanging limp, and shot its snaky neck in our direction. It was a full
quarter mile away, it couldn’t possibly hear the camera, but I found
myself cowering back as if that snapping turtle-shaped beak would lash
out and nab me. I gasped with relief when the creature settled back.


Just then Miller was annoyed to realise that the monster was a fairly
light yellowish-brown, just the same colour as the reeds through which


it was moving. Moreover it was covered with irregular scales, like pieces
of armour, as if they had been designed for camouflage. As he was film-
ing in colour, this was most irritating.


Twice more the row reared up, giving me a good view of the bony
flange around its head and the projecting plates along its backbone.
Then with a click my camera ran out just as the row slithered behind a
growth of dwarf eucalyptus.


What are we to make of this strange tale, more like a passage from
Conan Doyle’s Lost World than an incident in a travel book that pre-
tends to be true?


I must confess that I have quoted it here in such detail merely in
order to give a typical example of the sort of evidence that cannot pos-
sibly be accepted. I am not saying that “Cannibal” Miller, as he likes


to call himself, is an arrant liar, but he offers not the slightest guarantee
of his veracity.


There are many reasons for rejecting Mr Miller’s story. It is worth
stating them here to show what credit can be given to the other accounts
I have cited, which have all withstood a no less severe criticism.


What has happened to the horn from the end of the row’s tail? Did
Mr Miller bring it back (for the Kirrirri were supposed to have several
specimens) so that it could be examined by a palaeontologist? Not that
I have heard of—and it would have made some noise in the scientific


world. Although his book is lavishly illustrated, there is no picture of


this hunter’s trophy from a vanished age.


What happened to the film that Mr Miller brought back from Papua?
His book was published in London in 1950, and in it he more than once
describes showing parts of his film to British film magnates. But not a
word about what they thought of the dinosaur sequence. And even if
the creature merged into the background, since it was a quarter of a mile
away, and only looked like a lizard of indeterminate size moving through


grass, the scene would have been worth showing. Any zoologist would
have been able to draw valuable conclusions from enlargements of the


film.


187


§2. Diplodocus.


53. Triceratops.


54. Stegosaurus.


THE SURREALIST DINOSAUR OF NEW GUINEA


Supposing the film had been completely spoilt and Mr Miller failed


to bring back a horny point of a row’s tail, we should have to rely en-


tirely on his word (his wife, in science as in law, can testify neither for
nor against him), and many of the accounts in this book are unsupported
by any physical evidence. But one can still make the following criti-
cisms of his story.


This is, as far as I know, the only report we have of a rozw, or of any-
thing like it, in New Guinea. Likewise it is the only report of the
existence of the Kirrirri, from whom one might be able to obtain further
evidence of the creature and its habitat. For nothing but a sheaf of
similar reports can establish the veracity of such a story. This rule may


55. Drawing of the New Guinea row based on Charles Miller’s
description.


be waived for a reputable zoologist or naturalist, but not for Mr Miller,
who has no scientific standing. Instead of pursuing his studies as an
engineer, he became a professional racing driver of cars, motor-cycles
and hydroplanes. During the 1914-18 war he became an airman, and,
having learnt to fly, he afterwards turned to stunt flying for a circus.
Nor does the fact that he was also a wholesale pastry-cook’s rounds-
man help to complete his scientific education.


This need not discredit his evidence: I shall cite many other reports
from witnesses much less educated, for very often a detail noticed by a
layman may be particularly significant when no one but a few specialists
know or guess of its existence.


There are no such details in Mr Miller’s account. On the contrary,


189


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


his row does not even resemble “the reconstructions of dinosaurs in the
museums back home.” It is an odd jumble of features from well-known
but very different animals. It has the long neck and interminable tail of
the huge Sauropoda (Brontosaurus and the other Diplodoci), the head
(without the horns) and the bony collar of Triceratops, and the body,
with its crest of triangular scales along the spine, of Stegosaurus
(except that this creature has a double row of scales). None of these
creatures has a horn on the end of its tail, though Stegosaurus has a
double row of them along the tail continuing the crest along its spine.


It is not a dinosaur. The row looks more as if some surrealists had
produced what they called an “exquisite corpse,” by playing their own
highbrow version of “‘heads, bodies and legs” with extinct animals. It
would be rash to assert that such an animal is impossible—zoology and
palaeontology are full of surprises—but the dinosaurs from which the
row has collected its features belong to two distinct and very different
groups: the Sauripelvians as far as the long neck and tail are concerned,


all the other details come from the Avipelvians. Moreover the Stego-
saurians are known only in the Cretaceous period in North America,
and it would be rather surprising to find that they had reached the south-
eastern tip of Asia, which seems never to have been joined to the North
American Continent.
It is also most unlikely that New Guinea was
ever invaded by large Sauropoda with long necks and tails.


Indeed, until there is proof to the contrary, the row looks damnably


like an ill-digested memory of a bad Science Fiction film made by a
producer ignorant of zoogeography.


No doubt, you may argue, New Guinea is so little explored that any-
thing is possible there. In fact it is just because this island, as big as
France and Italy together, is so little known that one must be particu-


larly cautious of accepting any unproved reports about it. For in this
paradise of head-hunters and cannibals there is hardly any chance of
other witnesses confirming a report made by a lone explorer. And so it


will remain until there are more expeditions to Papua and the settlers
establish peaceful relations with the natives in the very heart of the
largest of tropical islands.


190


CHAPTER EIGHT


The Incredible Australian Bunyips


I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed
monster.
SHAKESPEARE, The Tempest.


LonG before the white man set foot in the Australian continent and
before the present race of black men was born, the country was in-
habited by two kinds of beings. The first were half-men, half-animals,
the spirits of the wind, thunder, lightning and all the other natural
phenomena; the second were all the totemic animals from which man
was descended.
So runs the Aborigines’ myth; and according to the
Australian blackfellows, some of these legendary creatures stili exist.


There are a whole series of huge snakes, such as the wollunqua, the
totem-snake of central Australia, and the rainbow snake, called mindi
on the lower Murray River. The rainbow snake has a large head, and
when it hisses its tongue is seen to have three points. When it slides
over the top of a tree, hanging on to the branches with its prehensile


tail, it looks just like a rainbow. But this sight is hardly to be recom-
mended, for to see the mindi is death. Fortunately the monster gives off


a disgusting smell, and so warns one of its approach.
It also leaves
outbreaks of smallpox in its path.


The legendary mindi is no doubt based on a distorted picture of the
diamond python, found only in the coastal region. It measures up to 15


feet long; its body is covered with spots in almost all the colours of the
rainbow—which phenomenon, by the way, must be extremely rare in


a continent where the rainfall is less than 20 inches a year except in a
coastal strip in the north-east. The aborigines who mostly live in the
dry interior could never have seen a diamond python or a rainbow
themselves. One can see how imaginary versions based on hearsay or
distorted by tradition could combine the two into a fantastic creature.
Moreover, in minds dominated by sympathetic magic, whereby the


191


suotbay
348S3g


vy?


sqsasoy


spa1dosJ


©
sony


0


oF:
foqpse®


Y 69 2265.
piaiysunyy®
H
“erat 64,
PISI4SUDWY
© poomy2]
&


;
wos
S8Dg
Q
oolaqupp,
“e
?
Vilvuisny
Aauphs
luapsD}ye
=


Fsyny7
ayysvoma,


Ja9S32N0/Dy
Tay
S3I1VM
ALNOS
MIN:


-
Sie
cg
unig
s09s01iN:
L
2%


fea
iotts
top
age tte
aaeeag
ATVAWLS
My
iit
deeteaaia‘
20009
-


44IDYS
SW
Wak
So
:


Gat
Baie
ee
be
24277105
©
LES23"
J


AvOLTEW aL:


°
$5
/J2mps


Ang


woyburys0y


fog
Kits


2


NYZHILYON


er
iy


pag sous
may
oO


G


3
eo
-
ro)


DispzuadsD)


pjnsutuag


uao07”
0 od
J9
F199


°


ete


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


character of any object may be transmitted to any other that it touches,
the similarity between a snake’s scales and the scabs of smallpox would
naturally imply a connection between the two.


Much more mysterious is the legend of the yero, an enormous water-
snake or eel which lives in certain lakes in the north-east.
Its head is


large, like the mindi’s, but it is also covered with red hair. Its throat
must be enormous, since the natives believe that it is the source of rapids
and are naturally very afraid of it. “On the Atherton Tableland, in
Queensland,” writes Gilbert Whit-
ley, Curator of Fishes at the Aus-
tralian Museum, “an aboriginal
would never take one across the
centre of a lake in his bodt be-
cause of some mythical animal
which lived in its depths.”


Is the yero really mythical? It
would be very rash to assert that


it was a complete invention. Per-
haps it is just a personification of
some other natural danger such


as a treacherous reef.
Primitive
people do not write novels.


The most puzzling of all are
the rumours about the gauarge.
This strange, half-aquatic animal


is supposed to drag into a whirl-
pool anyone who bathes in its


Mpa Fugen eg
aes
56. Reconstruction of Struthio-
but without any feathers.
mimus, the ostrich-lizard.


Now if one of these Australian
ostriches be mentally plucked, as it were, the result is extraordinarily


like one of the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic era: Struthiomimus, whose
name means “mock-ostrich.”


The dinosaurs were not all enormous. The smallest was not much
bigger than a domestic fowl; the Gigantosaurians were 70 to 130 feet
long. There were two very distinct orders of dinosaurs, differen-


tiated by the shape of the pelvis: the Sauripelvians, those with a lizard’s


pelvis; and the Avipelvians, those with a bird’s pelvis, The Ornitho-


pods, one of the many kinds in the latter order, were strange bipeds,


N
193


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


mostly vegetarian, which looked very like a running bird, but with more
of a lizard’s tail. The Iguanadon, 12 to 15 feet high, was one of the


largest, but some carnivorous species, like Podokesaurus and Comp-
sognathus, were tiny. They ran about in the grass like featherless
hens, except that they were armed with teeth and their rump ex-
tended into a long, fleshy tail. Between these pygmies and Iguanodon
there were forms like Struthiomimus which lived in the shallows near
the shore, but could if necessary take to the water entirely. It was in fact
exactly like the gauarge in appearance, size and habits.


It would be rash to conclude that the aborigines knew or had handed
down a tradition of some belated Ornithopod.
But the comparison
between the two animals must be made; and the problem of the
gauarge deserves to be pursued, not dismissed. There is more chance
of finding something if you know where to look.


It is much easier to interpret the old Australian legend of thaballa,
the little laughing boy, who never dies. Many zoologists have long
since identified him with the bird (Dacelo gigas) known as the laughing
jackass. Its cry can easily be mistaken for a human laugh, and heard in
some lonely corners of Australia, this hysterical, irrepressible laughter
could easily play upon one’s nerves.


The most terrifying of these nightmarish creatures of legend is cer-
tainly the yara-ma-yha-who: the little toothless frog-like man. It lives
in fig-trees and has suckers on its hands. It is said to fall upon children
playing under the trees, clasp a with its suckers and drain them of
their substance.


I am surprised that no zoologist seems to have identified this creature,


for, apart from its vampire’s habits and savage attacks, it should be im-
mediately recognisable to any expert as the spectral tarsier (Tarsius
spectrum) the strangest of all the primates.! It is a little furry creature
with a flat round face and enormous round eyes. It lives in trees, where


it sometimes stands up on its hind-legs when it is threatened.
Its out-


line, and some features of its anatomy, are so like man’s that Professor
Wood Jones, the British anatomist, and his Dutch colleague A. W.
Hubrecht have gone so far as to consider it as the closest living species


to man. This view is hard to maintain, for many of its features are far
too specialised, yet, although it stands only 5 to 8 inches high, it does


1 There are three distinct species of tarsier: T. spectrum of the Celebes is the


type of the genus, but there is also a Philippine form (T. syrichta) and a Borneo-
Sumatran form (T. bancarus).


194


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


look very like a little man. Besides its monstrous eyes for seeing at night


it has enormously long fingers and toes ending in little pads which act


as suckers. The length of its feet, and especially its tarsal bone, led


57. Spectral tarsier standing up when threatening or alarmed.


Buffon to give it the name of tarsier, and their structure means that it
has to stand on its toes (it is the only primate that is not more or less
plantigrade) and is admirably suited to moving by leaps and bounds,


like a furry and far more agile frog. Although it weighs hardly 5 ounces,


it can manage a long jump of 2 yards or a high jump of 2 feet. And


195


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


though it is far from toothless, it seems to be so when it shuts its mouth
in a V-shaped and rather devilish little smile.


Does not this description agree with the yara-ma-yha-who in every-
thing except the demon’s savagery? And even this, though much exag-
gerated, is not without foundation, for the tarsier is the only primate
which is almost entirely carnivorous. True, it eats fruit occasionally,
but its chief diet consists of insects, lizards, birds and perhaps even small
mammals, It may seem a charming and delightful creature to us, but
for its size it is a bloodthirsty beast of prey. Being nocturnal, and thus
rarely seen, it naturally arouses weird superstitions in all the countries
where it lives. In the Philippines there are tales of “wood-demons,”
mysterious little ape-men who glide like ghosts through the forests, and,
though many of them may refer to the pygmy Aetas who live in the
mountains, the tarsiers have some of the devilish marks of these crea-


tures. Only one white man is supposed to have seen a “wood-demon.”
After the American troops conquered the islands in 1898, guerilla
fighting with Filipino partisans went on into the beginning of the pre-
sent century. One day an American soldier got lost on a patrol in the
jungle; he wandered for hours and hours until he was utterly exhausted
and lay on the ground and slept. He awoke into a nightmare. A wood-
demon was standing before him. Then it suddenly vanished as if by
magic. This, at least, was what they deduced from his incoherent
babble when they found him several days later, haggard and raving mad.
One phrase kept recurring in his delirium:


“Its eyes, its terrible eyes!”
The tarsier certainly has more striking eyes than any other creature on
earth, and in the dark its enormous eyeballs shine with a bright yellow


light. It is easy to imagine the soldier waking among strange and sinister
noises to see one of these grinning little gnomes, that had come, full of
curiosity like the other primates, to have a look at the sleeping man.
Perhaps it even jumped on his throat. Dazed and bleary-eyed and per-
haps suffering from jungle fever, which oddly distorts one’s sense of
distance, he must have thought he was looking at a demon from Hell, a
demon that could vanish in a single bound.


Most people are bewildered, if not alarmed, the first time they see a


tarsier, for it really does look like a sprite. It is not surprising that the
naturalists called it “spectral” and that many people still believe it is a real
ghost. The only reason why it has not been identified with the yara-ma-
yha-who is that it is found only in the Malay archipelago: in Sumatra,
Borneo, the Celebes and some of the Philippines—never in Australia.


196


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


Tarsioids, of which the tarsier is the only remaining survivor, were
once very widespread. In the Eocene period at the beginning of the
Tertiary era these strange mannikins were found in the whole of North
America and in Europe. But, apart from species imported by man—the
dingo and the rats—and several bats which could have flown across the


sea, there are no wild mammals in Australia with placentas.


125 million years ago, in the middle of the Cretaceous period, the
marsupial mammals ruled the earth and were found over most of it.
Presumably Australia was then connected to the other continents and
accessible to land animals. At the very end of the Mesozoic era or at the
beginning of the Tertiary, Australia and New Guinea, still joined, were
cut off from the rest of the world. When the placentary mammals over-
ran the earth in their turn they had to stop short at the Wallace Line,
that invisible zoological frontier which runs between Bali and Lombok
and between Borneo and the Celebes. They could not reach New
Guinea or Australia, where the marsupials were able to develop in
peace until the arrival of man.


Thus it is unlikely, if not impossible, that there have ever been tar-


siers in Australia.
Small mammals might be carried across a narrow


strait of sea on a floating tree-trunk, and the tarsiers have in fact crossed
the Wallace Line and are found east of it in the Celebes. But that they
should have stowed away and made the perilous voyage, drifting across
the Timor Sea or through the Moluccas and the Banda Sea, is too


fantastic. They did not have a Kon-Tiki raft.


If there can never have been tarsiers in Australia, the legend of the
yara-ma-yha-who may throw some glimmer of light on the history of
the Australian people. John Mathew has suggested that men of Malay
race have infiltrated northern Australia at a relatively recent date. This
theory has been rejected, for it is in the north that the Aborigines are
particularly black and fuzzy-haired, and an invasion of Malays with fair


skin and straight hair would have diluted these features. But is it likely


that legends about tarsiers should have been handed down since the


Pre-Dravidian tribes came to Australia from the Celebes, Borneo or


Sumatra, an event usually put in the middle Pleistocene, at least 50,000


years ago? Most authors maintain that this invasion took place in a


1 In America there are now only two families of marsupials, the Didelphidae,
the American opossums, and the very rare Caenolestidae. Doubtless the former
have survived because they are small, can hibernate, and are extraordinarily
prolific. The opossum has two litters a year, each averaging 9 young.
It may
have as many as 21, but there are no more than 13 teats, so the youngest born


cannot survive.


197


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


series of waves as the Aborigines were driven out by the Malays. The
legend of the yara-ma-yha-who is a small scrap of evidence that the last
of these waves, whether of Malays or Pre-Dravidians, did not arrive long
before the discovery of Australia by white men.


These creatures of aboriginal legend may seem strange, but it was
when Europeans began to meet the animals of Australia that the really
fantastic stories started circulating. Almost all of them proved to be
well-founded. So we should be less sceptical about those which are still
unexplained.


When, at the beginning of the seventeenth century, the brave seamen
sent out by the Dutch East India Company set about exploring the
eastern seas for spice islands, they several times set foot on what seemed


to be a very vast new land, which they loyally named New Holland.
There they said there lived an animal as large as a man, with head like


a deer and a long tail. It stood on its hind-legs like a bird and could hop


like a frog. In 1640 Captain Pelsart gave an accurate description of


it, only to be greeted with derision at the tall stories told by seamen.
In 1770 Captain James Cook landed in Trinity: Bay to repair the
Endeavour, which had been damaged on the Great Barrier Reef. On 9
July Sir Joseph Banks, the famous naturalist and patron of the sciences,
went off with one companion to look for game to replenish their rations.
In Cook’s words:


Going in pursuit of game, we saw four animals, two of which were
chased by Mr. Banks’s greyhound, but they greatly outstripped him in
speed, by leaping over the long thick grass, which incommoded the dog
in running. It was observed of the animals that they bounded forward
on two legs instead of running on four.


Later Cook learnt that this sort of giant jerboa was called kangaroo.1
His evidence had to be believed. But the world was in no hurry to do so.


It was twenty years before Dr George Shaw gave the kangaroo its Latin
name. Cook had overlooked its strangest feature: the pouch on the
female’s belly in which she carries her young. Marsupial pouches were
not new to zoologists. It had long been known that the opossum had a


1 It is often said that this word does not refer to the animal in question but
merely represents the puzzled natives’ reply to the English explorers’ questions.
Some say that it means “I don’t understand” ; others that it is a garbled repetition
of the beginning of the question, “‘Can you tell me. ... ?”? These stories are a
complete fabrication.
In 1901, Dr W. E. Roth, in charge of native affairs in
Queensland, confirmed that the animal had always been called ganguru around
Cookstown; and Cook included the name in his vocabulary of the Koko-
Yimidir tribe.


°198


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


similar pouch (though, as it was a quadruped, the opening was at the
back, whereas the biped kangaroo’s opened at the front, or top). But
they were so convinced that it was peculiar to the opossum that when
Seba described an “eastern philander” or cuscus, a pouched animal


that had been sent him from Amboina, Buffon thought that there had
been a mistake.


Soon it was found that all the indigenous Australian mammals had
pouches. What was the rarest exception elsewhere was the rule here.
More surprises were to follow. In 1797 a settler in New South Wales
found an animal which he called an “aquatic mole.” Actually it was


more like an otter, but it had a duck’s webbed feet and, what was even


more extraordinary, a duck’s beak. When the first skin arrived in Lon-


don and was examined by the Zoological Society it was almost unani-


mously thought to be a fake, like the confected mummies that travellers


brought back from China. Nevertheless Dr George Shaw examined the


skin minutely and found no trace of glue or stitches. He announced that


the skin was genuine and in 1799 published the first scientific descrip-


tion calling it Platypus anatinus, or “‘the flat-footed animal with a duck’s


beak.” The skin was sent to the German zoologist, Blumenbach, then


considered the greatest authority on classification. He described the


animal in 1801 and gave it the name Ornithorhynchus paradoxus “the


paradoxical animal with a bird’s beak.” The name Platypus had to be


discarded, having been used in 1793 for a small beetle, and Ornithorhyn-


chus it has remained to this day.


It was one thing to give the strange animal a name, it was quite an-
other to classify it in the system of zoology. As it was covered with hair,
Shaw had no doubt that it was a mammal. But in which order did it
belong? Blumenbach put it in the Edentates, that rag-bag of unclassifi-
able mammals. Then in 1802 two more specimens, this time preserved
in alcohol, arrived in England. One of them was a female, and the zoo-


logists were astounded to find that this presumed mammal (or “animal
with teats”) hadn’t any teats at all! Moreover neither of them had a


separate anus and genital duct like the rest of the mammals, but a single


cloaca like the reptiles and birds. Yet they could not belong to either of


these classes since they were covered with fur, not scales or feathers. The


anatomist Everard Home therefore proposed to create a separate order


to include this duck-billed animal with another creature with a cloaca


which had been discovered in Australia in the meantime: the echidna,
a sort of porcupine whose long snout also looked like a beak. This was
done a year later when Etienne Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire created the new


199


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


order of monotremes or “animals with a single hole.” But he prudently
refrained from stating which class this order belonged to. Lamarck
more boldly wanted to create a completely new class, the Prototherians
or “first mammals.” For one could hardly include an animal without
teats among the true mammals, and a creature covered with fur could
not be a reptile.


Then news arrived from Australia that the platypus laid eggs, or so
Sir John Jamison wrote on 17 March 1817. This brought it even closer


to the birds and reptiles; it certainly could not be a true mammal. But
in 1824 the German scientist Meckel, examining the animal more care-


fully, found that it had mammary glands. They had not been noticed
before because they were very small except in the breeding season.


Impossible! argued Etienne Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire and his son
Isidore, supported by Blumenbach. If the Monotremes lay eggs—and
they do lay eggs—they cannot have mammary glands. The glandular
formations must be musk-glands.


No, replied Meckel, they are true mammary glands. The mono-
tremes are true mammals and they are therefore certainly viviparous.
The legend that the platypus lays eggs is absurd.


And such eminent scientists as Cuvier, Oken and Blainville agreed
with him. There were others, like Richard Owen and Home, who subtly


sat on the fence and averred that perhaps they had mammary glands
and perhaps they did not, but as they seemed to belong both to the vivi-
parous mammals and the generally oviparous reptiles, they must be
ovo-viviparous—that is to say, they formed eggs which hatched inside
the body and so the young were born alive.


In 1829 Robert B. Grant claimed he had found four platypus eggs and
sent a very careful drawing of them to Europe. The triumph of the
Saint-Hilaire clan was short-lived when experts identified the eggs as
those of an Australian long-necked tortoise (Chelodina longicollis).


In 1832 Meckel, Cuvier and Co.’s victory seemed complete when an
Australian naturalist, Lieutenant Maule, established without a shadow
of a doubt that the glands on the platypus’s belly actually produced


milk. There was a small fly in the ointment, however: Maule had found
eggshells in the platypus’s burrow. But these eggs could have—indeed
they must have—come from some other animal.


Some thirty years later, on 21 September 1864, Dr Nicholson sent a
letter to Professor Owen in which he told how a platypus that a workman
had caught and put in a gin-crate laid two eggs during its first night in
captivity. The Professor was not convinced. He had stated once and


200


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


for all that the monotremes were ovo-viviparous, The platypus must
have had a miscarriage from fright.


It was not for another twenty years that the matter was settled. The
reproduction of the monotremes had been disputed for almost a century
when on the same day in 1884 two naturalists—Dr W. H. Caldwell, who


58. Platypus suckling its young (after Hartwig, 1910).


was working on the platypus, and the German Professor Wilhelm
Haacke, who was studying the echidna—simultaneously announced that
they had proved that the monotremes were oviparous.+


Everybody had been wrong.
I have related the platypus’s history at such length in order to show
that an animal which all the scientists think impossible may actually


exist. The bunyip is not half so impossible as the platypus.


What is a bunyip? Not an easy question to answer. Nowadays the
Australians use it to mean a “bogey,” something at once frightening,
shadowy, imaginary and rather ludicrous. But to some men it is a flesh-
and-blood animal with a clearly-defined appearance and habits. Origin-
ally it was a native word meaning “devil,” “angel” or perhaps even
“sod”; for the totemistic religion of the Australian aborigines is so
different from our own that exact translation is impossible. It might,


I believe, derive from the word bunyil (or pundjel) which the Vic-


torian aborigines use to signify their Supreme Being. At all events it


1 It was later discovered that the monotremes were even stranger than had
been thought. They are the only mammals in the world to have not only poison
glands but an inoculatory apparatus in the form of a spur which is found only in
the male. Moreover their body temperature is only 82° F., much lower than the


other mammals.


201


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


is constantly used to refer to the author of anything inexplicable, and
hence white settlers came to use it for any mysterious beast. The strange
thing is that so many accounts of bunyips should agree in so many


particulars.


The first report that Gilbert Whitley of the Australian Museum in-
cludes in his dossier of the bunyip comes from the French explorers in
the crew of the Géographe. In June 1801 Charles Bailly and his com-
panions made their way into the interior, having named a bay on the
southern tip of the west coast after their vessel. Suddenly they heard a


terrible roar, louder than a bull’s bellow, which seemed to come from
the reeds in the Swan River. They were terrified and took to their
heels, convinced that it was some great water-beast.
Later the ex-
plorer Hamilton Hume confirmed the existence of some such monster,
but at the other end of the continent. He said that in Lake Bathurst he
had seen an animal, which from his description must have been some


sort of manatee or hippopotamus. Five scientists of the Philosophical
Society of Australasia at once promised to pay all his expenses if he
managed to procure a skull, a skin or a skeleton of his unknown animal.
Hume never found one, but he had not invented the story, for many
similar tales at once began to come in from various places in Australia,
especially in the south-east. Thus Lieutenant W. H. Breton wrote of
Lake George, “‘It is pretended that a species of seal, or, as it was called,


a devil, has been seen in it.”


By the middle of the nineteenth century the legend of the bunyip was
well established. Everyone began to be interested in the beast, which
was soon saddled with anything mysterious that happened. In 1846 a
fragment of a skull was found on the banks of the Murrumbidgee, a
tributary of the Murray River.
It was sent to the naturalist W. S.
Macleay as the skull of a “true bunyip.” He identified it as the deformed


skull of a colt. But when Professor Richard Owen saw a drawing of it in
London he immediately decided that it was a calf’s. One of the experts
must be wrong. So the problem was not so puerile as they seemed to
imply. Quite possibly they were both wrong. We shall never know;
the specimen was deposited in the Australian Museum, but, as one
might expect of a bunyip, it has mysteriously disappeared.


In 1847 Governor Latrobe managed to get hold of copies of native
drawings of two kinds of bunyips from Victoria. He sent them to Tas-
mania, but, alas, they too seem to have vanished.


In 1848 one turned up in the Eumeralla River near Port Fairy in


Victoria. Those who had seen it said that it was a large brown animal


202


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


with a head like a kangaroo. It had a long neck with a hairy mane, and


its mouth was enormous. When questioned about it, the natives said


that it had the strange power of drawing its victims irresistibly towards it


across the water.


In 1872 a strange and possibly similar animal was said to have been
seen in Lake Corangamite, Victoria. It came so close to a boat that the


terrified people on board dashed to the opposite gunwale and capsized
the vessel. It was said to be an “animal like a big retriever dog, with a
round head and hardly any ears.” Many people had also seen one in
Lake Burrumbeet near Ballarat.


The wee-waa which was seen more than once at this time and then
again a year later in a lagoon near Narrandera was also compared to a
retriever by those who saw it; but it was only half the size, and its body
was covered with long black hair, shining and as black as jet. It can
hardly have been a very fearsome apparition. In 1873, also, a creature
with a seal’s head was supposed to have been seen rising out of the water
near Dalby in Queensland. It had a-double but asymmetrical caudal


fin. In 1876 a hairy animal of unusual appearance turned up in Crystal
Brook in South Australia. A price was put on its head, but to no


effect. And reports went on coming in—from the Malmsbury reservoir,
Wagga Wagga, and many other places in Victoria and New South Wales
—and becoming more detailed. Most of them sounded like distorted
descriptions of a seal or a dugong.


But not all were as sober as those I have just quoted. The Rev. George
Toplin described the moolgewanke, or bunyip of Lake Alexandrina, as a
weird creature, half-man, half-fish, with hair like a sort of wig of reeds.
Unlike the sweet-voiced mermaids, this merman had a voice like the
rumble of a distant cannon; and unlike them it did not lure you to
destruction—it merely gave you rheumatism.


The tunatpan of the Port Phillip area was even more picturesque and


recalled the Eumeralla bunyip.


It was as big as a bullock, with an emu’s head and neck, a horse’s
mane and tail, and seal’s flippers, which laid turtle’s eggs in a platypus’
nest, and ate blackfellows when it was tired of a crayfish diet.


In 1886, horsemen fording the River Molonglo saw a creature,
“whitish in colour and about the size of a large dog. Its face was like
the face of a child.” All the same they had no qualms about throwing
stones at it and driving it away. The bunyip of the Tuckerbil swamp
near Leeton which was reported until the summer of 1929-30 takes
one into the realm of the marvellous.
It was described as “a two-


203


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


headed Bunyip which could swim both ways without changing gear.”
It was hardly surprising that it escaped its pursuers! But other reports
must have had more of a ring of truth, for in 1890.a team from the Mel-
bourne Zoo made a systematic attempt to capture a bunyip-like monster
in the Euroa district in Victoria.


Similar water-monsters have several times been reported in Tas-
manian lakes, outside the Australian continent. In the autumn of 1852
one of these big devils was seen in Lake Tiberias. It was between 4 feet
and 4 feet 6 inches long, had a bulldog’s head, and was covered with


_ shaggy black hair. It was seen at first in shallow water, giving a glimpse
of its crooked feet, but quickly disappeared into deeper water. No
doubt they were similar animals which were often seen in the Great
Lake. The length was always between 3 and 4 feet and the head was
round like a bulldog’s. Often they splashed water 6 to 10 feet into the


air. Between 1860 and 1870 there was no lack of reports about them in
the same terms. In 1863 someone was able to observe one for some
time and described it as a sort of sheepdog with two little fins, like small
wings. It moved at the considerable speed of about 30 miles per hour.
The dam at Waddamana and all the vicissitudes which the Great Lake
suffered for the Tasmanian hydro-electric schemes did not drive the
bunyips away, for they reappeared several times in 1932.


‘Apart from the most extravagant fabrications,” Whitley concludes


after reviewing the most consistent rumours, “‘we must be struck with
the comparative uniformity of bunyip description over a long period.”
Generally it is a large furry animal, the size of a dog and with a dog’s
head, but with very small or even invisible ears. It swims with fins and


lives in rivers, marshes and inland lakes.


This description reminds one irresistibly of a seal or a sea-lion; and
there are several genera of these animals in Australia and Tasmania:


seals (Hydrurga, Lobodon and Leptonychotes), sea-lions (Arctocephalus
and Zalophus) and even the great sea-elephant (Mirounga). But could
these sea animals reach inland waters? There is no reason why they
should not, for a species of seal exists which is never found in the sea:
the Calocephalus that lives in the lakes and inland seas of Asia, the
Caspian, the Aral Sea, Lake Baikal and Lake Oron. Moreover in Aus-


tralia seals and sea-lions are said sometimes to reach the drainage basin
of the Murray River and its tributary, the Darling. Dr Charles Fenner
mentions a seal killed at Conargo, on the Murrumbidgee in New South
Wales, 900 miles from the river’s mouth. A maned sea-lion was also
captured at the junction of the Kangaroo and Shoalhaven Rivers. A


204


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


sea-leopard was killed in the latter river in 1870. When it was cut open
an adult platypus was found in its stomach. As Whitley remarked,
“Surely a bunyip within a bunyip!”


Thus it seems well established that seals can travel long distances in
fresh water, and it is possible that they may go a short way over dry


land. Most of the reports about “‘water-devils” come from the south-


east of Australia, that is to say from the drainage basins of the only two


large rivers on that continent.


The sight of a seal or a sea-lion far inland would be very unusual, and


it is therefore hardly surprising that these strange animals should be
described as bunyips. It is worth recalling that when the Aborigines’


tales of specially formidable bunyips were investigated they turned out


to be merely Indian cattle (genus Bibos), which white settlers had im-
ported, and which had occasionally escaped and returned to a state of
nature. The sight of these huge and utterly unknown horned beasts


terrified the blackfellows.
They were quite unlike any indigenous
animal and thus well deserved to be called bunyips. Their bellowings
may account for some of the terrifying roars attributed to bunyips, but
not that heard by Bailly and his companions before these cattle had been
introduced into Western Australia. Whitley suggests that these dreadful


cries could have been made by seals or sea-elephants. Even if they were


a long way off their calls would have a terrifying effect in the lonely
western deserts. “*. . . in some parts in Western Australia,” he observes,
*T have known silence so utter that it was quite oppressive, and that the
sound of my solitary footsteps seemed, by contrast, to be a crunching
roar.”


The dreadful cries attributed to the bunyip in the south-east are more
likely to come from a much smaller but equally loud creature, the brown
bittern (Botaurus poiciloptilus), a bird whose booming voice has earned


it the name of “Murray Bull.”


It is, however, by no means certain that the legend of the water-
bunyip is based on stray seals and sea-lions. Many reports come from


places that these animals could not reach. Australian scientists have


therefore put forward much bolder theories to explain it.


The Bunyip [writes Whitley] has been thought to have been an
extinct marsupial otter-like animal, rumours of whose existence have
been handed down in aboriginal legends, the latter corrupted and con-
fused with crocodiles in the north of Australia and seals in the south.


Why “extinct”? The reports that have cropped up over a century
and a half speak of a living animal, not a ghost. There are marsupial
205


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


equivalents of most types of placentary mammals: running, jumping,
climbing, tree-dwelling, gliding and burrowing types. “Nevertheless,”


as Jean Piveteau has remarked, “certain types of adaptation are missing ;
there are none truly aerial or truly aquatic.” Might not the bunyip be an
example of the missing aquatic type? In any case the insistence of some
zoologists that legends of unknown animals are based on extinct species
seems to be an idée fixe. Thus Dr Anderson, Director of the Australian
Museum, writes, “There may be aboriginal legends of the former
existence of the Diprotodon, which is commonly believed to have haunted
rivers, swamps and inland lakes.”’ But that is another story.


When. Mary Ellen Chase wrote Harvey, a play about a drunk whose
best friend is a rabbit 10 feet high that no one else can see, she must have
chosen this eponymous and invisible animal for its very improbability.
Yet there are plenty of people in Australia who claim to have seen crea-


tures not unlike Harvey. They were gold-prospectors who had pene-
trated into the vast sandy western desert and the waste of thorny scrub
in the central depression, which together are several times the area of
the British Isles. When they returned, exhausted and feverish, from
their gold-panning expeditions, they brought back ludicrous tales about
rabbits 10 feet long..Naturally there were hints that these monsters,


like Harvey himself and the pink elephants so beloved of humorists,
were a by-product of alcohol; for gold-mining is not an abstemious
trade.


But these stories recurred so insistently that in the end they aroused


the interest of some scientists, among them Ambrose Pratt, the great
Australian naturalist. He seriously asked whether these Brobdingnagian
rabbits might not be surviving specimens of the Diprotodon, a gigantic
wombat, as large as a rhinoceros, which once wandered the Nullarbor
Plain, before the increasing drought turned most of the continent into


a desert. The skulls that have been found of these giants of the marsu-


pial kingdom are as much as 3 feet long. There is no lack of information
about their anatomy, for more than a hundred more or less complete
skeletons were discovered in the Salt Lake at Callabonna.


This creature’s fat body reminds one more of a huge bear than of a


rabbit, but the same is not true of its head. Like the kangaroos, it has


a face very like a rabbit’s or a hare’s, with two conspicuously large in-


cisors in the upper jaw under a typical “‘hare-lip,”” hence the name of
Diprotodon (“with two teeth in front’’), a characteristic of the vegetarian
marsupials. As, according to several accounts, these harmless great


206


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


beasts made off at top speed as soon as they met a man—who did like-
wise—the mistake is easily understandable. But, whether the Diproto-
don looked like a rabbit or not, could it have survived until today?


The climatic upheavals which have transformed the appearance of
Australia at a comparatively recent date are usually blamed for the
Diprotodon’s extinction. This placid vegetarian’s habits are supposed


to have been like-a tapir’s; it enjoyed a semi-aquatic habitat among the


lush vegetation which still covered the continent at the end of the last


Ice Age, between 12,000 and 30,000 years ago, until the ever-increas-


ing drought ate away the country like a leprosy.


No doubt the Diprotodon tried to survive in various oases, and, as
they dried up one by one, vast hordes of these brutes must have set off


59. Reconstruction of the Diprotodon.


to wander in search of new water-holes until they perished of thirst in
the sandy desert or died in herds most conveniently for the palaeonto-


logists. Thus in June 1953 Professor Ruben A. Stirton of the Univer-
sity of California returned to Adelaide from the dry north-west of
South Australia where he had found a Diprotodon graveyard con-


taining between 500 and 1,000 skeletons in a superb state of preserva-


tion. A vast herd of these poor beasts, dying of thirst, had apparently


ventured on to the hard crust where a lake had recently dried up to no


more than a few tempting pools. The crust gave way under their


weight and they gradually sank into the soft clay, which preserved their


skeletons from the weather. Some of them had their paws folded be-


neath them, as if they had met their death calmly welcoming the mois-


ture of their muddy grave.


207


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


How long can one say for certain that the Diprotodon survived?
According to more cautious estimates they must have been known and
probably hunted and eaten by the first blackfellows who came to Aus-


tralia. Among some aboriginal tribes legends are still current which
seem to refer fairly exactly to them. Professor John Walter Gregory is
firmly convinced that the central Australian aborigines’ mythical kadi-
kamara is based on knowledge of living Diprotodon. And in 1872 Dr
George Bennett, a palaeontologist of the Australian Museum, reported


that:


I have had a long conversation with ‘Charlie Pierce’, an aboriginal,
relative to these fossils; and he avers that they are those of an animal,
long extinct, known to the natives by the name Gyedarra. Tradition
among them has handed down the appearance and habits of the
animal for generations, but Charlie says he never paid much attention
to the descriptions that have been given to him, but imagines the
animal was as large as a heavy draught horse, walked on all fours the
same as any other four footed beast, eating grass, never went any dis-
tance back from the creeks to feed, and spent most of its time in the
water, chiefly in enormous holes excavated in the banks.
I told him he
must mean some other animal; but he spoke most positively, and
asserted that the bones we have been finding are those of the animal
he was speaking of, and that at one time the bones were very numerous
*
about the Gowrie water holes, where his forefathers had seen the
animals themselves sporting about. I again asked him if they did not
live on the leaves of trees, and his reply was that they were never
seen to feed on them, but always on grass, the same as a horse or
bullock.


Now van Gennep considers that an oral tradition cannot originate
more than two or three centuries ago, without being radically distorted
and transformed.
Thus even the boldest estimates, according to
which the Diprotodon still haunted the central plains hardly 2,000 or
3,000 years ago, would seem to be too cautious, and one should take
the more heed of prospectors’ tales of “giant rabbits.” For the drought
which certainly decimated the Diprotodon need not have exterminated
them entirely, any more than it has the other vegetarians—and the
carnivores that feed upon them—that are found in the continent. More-
over, Australia is by no means waterless: there are still lakes, marshes
and streams where the Diprotodon might find shelter as other animals
do.


All the same, the “giant rabbits” have, according to the prospectors’


tales, a habit that has made some zoologists pause before identifying
them as surviving Diprotodon. Witnesses have often stressed the extra-


208


THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


ordinary speed at which the “rabbits” made off—some even thought
that they literally vanished into dust. Indeed, these giants may have
been likened to rabbits because of their sudden flight as much as their
general appearance. Was Ambrose Pratt’s identification wrong? For it


is hard to imagine a heavy animal like the Diprotodon running like


lightning. Are not these “rabbits” more likely to be a gigantic form of


kangaroo, which can vanish in one jump? The larger species, like the


red kangaroo (Macropus rufus) and the grey kangaroo (Macropus


giganteus), which are almost as high as a man, can jump 30 feet in one


bound. And some reports have referred explicitly to “kangaroos 12 feet


high.”


The discovery of fossil remains of similar giants (Palaeorchestes) has
given added weight to these rumours, especially as it is well-established
that these animals lived recently. Even so, it is not impossible that the
rumours are based on encounters with much heavier and no less recent
animals like the Diprotodon. “Australians who hunt the water buffaloes
that now run wild in huge numbers in the north of their continent will


tell you that this great beast can literally vanish before your eyes even in
fairly open country,” Ivan T. Sanderson remarks—a cloud of dust, and
the beast has gone, disappeared, no doubt behind a convenient bush.
What is true of these cattle could clearly also apply to the Diprotodon,
of comparable size.


Whether it is a Diprotodon or not there is little doubt that an animal
of unusual size lives in the deserts of Western Australia, but what it is


still remains to be settled. Even the boldest naturalists hesitate to ven-
ture into this hostile country, remembering perhaps the tragic fate of
Dr Ludwig Leichhardt. He arrived in Australia in 1841 and imme-
diately went right across the whole continent to Fraser Island, cover-
ing some 2,500 miles.
He tirelessly carried out several other ex-
plorations, and his researches gradually led him to the belief that the
Diprotodon was not extinct. In 1847 he organised an expedition with


the secret hope of bringing’ one back alive. He set off enthusiastically


into the dry heart of the continent and it is known that he reached the


River Cogun on 3 April 1848. Nothing more was ever heard of him or


his companions. The trail of unknown animals sometimes leads to Hell.


CHAPTER NINE


The Queensland Marsupial Tiger


“You'll see me there,”’ said the Cat, and vanished.
Alice was not much surprised at this, she was


getting so well used to queer things happening.
LEwIs CARROLL, Alice in Wonderland.


To the zoologist Australia is indeed an upside-down country. While the
animals found there were strange, if not extraordinary—the marsupials,
and especially the monotremes, exceeded the scientists’ wildest hopes—
explorers and settlers constantly but vainly looked for familiar animals,


as if to reassure themselves that this bewildering place was somehow
normal.


Thus when that famous buccaneer, William Dampier, discovered a
bay on the west coast of Australia in August 1699 and named it Shark
Bay, he reported that it was inhabited by a quite imaginary hippopota-
mus. They had caught an 11-foot shark (hence the name of the bay):


Its Maw was like a Leather Sack, very thick, and so tough that a
sharp Knife could scarce cut it: In which we found the Head and
Boans of a Hippopotomus; the hairy Lips of which were still sound and
not putrified, and the Jaw was also firm, out of which we pluckt a great
many Teeth, 2 of them 8 Inches long, and as big as
a Mans Thumb,
small at one end, and a little crooked; the rest not above half so long.


Actually it was merely the head of a dugong, a large herbivorous
water-beast that ends in a mermaid-like tail and has a head vaguely like


a hippopotamus’s; the male has two bevelled tusk-like upper incisors,
larger than the rest and also reminiscent of that animal.


Thereafter explorers searched Australian waters for a non-existent
animal. It would have been most surprising to find a true hippopotamus
in the open sea, even though it is fond of brackish water. Settlers have
always been inclined to rediscover familiar animals in their new land
and name them after the species they knew at home. So Australia was


210


THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


soon full of “native” rats and “native” mice—to say nothing of rabbits,


squirrels, moles, wolves, foxes, badgers and cats which had only a


superficial connection with the real ones.


Crocodiles were also reported in places in Australia where there were
none. There are in fact two species of crocodile in Oceania: the double-
crested crocodile (Crocodylus porosus), a huge monster that may reach


a length of 22 feet, and Johnston’s crocodile (C. johnstoni). The first,


the only crocodile to enter the sea, is also found in the Indies and in


the Fiji Islands; the second is purely Australian. Both are found only in


the north. One would not expect to meet one in New South Wales.


But in November 1939 an engine-driver on the light railway to
Angourie beach in the north of that province was astonished to realise


60. Australian dugong.


that a log near which he had stopped his locomotive was actually a 15-
foot crocodile. The beast opened its jaws threateningly. The driver
hurriedly started his engine and made off at full speed.


When he told his story several people remembered that they too had
seen a crocodile in the district. Then others recalled that several years


earlier a sick circus crocodile had been brought to Yamba. Did it really


die, as was said at the time? Sinister roars were heard at night. This


sort of thing could not go on; and politicians, ever anxious for glory,


helped the police to comb the district. They even went so far as to


dynamite suspicious holes in the ground, bagging a lot of snakes and


even a 5-foot goanna lizard which was exhibited for some time in a local


hotel. At last, the circus crocodile’s remains were exhumed, eliminating


it from the suspects once and for all.


211


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


Soon crocodile-hunting became a local attraction: even the Christmas
holiday-makers joined in. But no one managed to flush more than a host
of goannas and four courting couples. The blackfellows began to whis-
per that a devil hid in the lake, and a sense of fear gradually took the
place of the first excitement. People were careful to lock their doors
after dark.


Then tracks were discovered that looked as if they had been made by


a huge pigeon. Casts were taken and sent to the expert on herpetology


at the Australian Museum in Sydney. He recognised that, both in size
and shape, they agreed with a crocodile’s footprints. But as nothing
more was heard of the monster in the next few weeks the obsession
about it gradually dwindled and died. The roars heard in the district
were attributed to bitterns, and crocodile hunting was out of fashion.
But the footprints had been real enough—and must have been made by


a large reptile.


Was it really a crocodile? May it not have been an unknown species
of large lizard? Until quite recently Australia .was inhabited by a giant
monitor lizard (Varanus priscus) beside which the Komodo dragon would
have seemed quite small. It was 20 to 25 feet long, whereas I doubt if
the Komodo dragon ever reaches 12 feet. Such a monster could easily be
mistaken for a crocodile. And it would be much more likely to live near
the forests of New South Wales than would a crocodile.


The marsupial tiger is the most important of these apparently familiar
animals to be found in Australia. Its existence is no longer in doubt—
though it is still not officially recognised—but the first reports were
based on misinterpreted rumours.


In November 1642 Captain Abel Janszoon Tasman on board the
Heemskirk sighted land which he took to be the southern tip of New
Holland. He named it Van Diemen’s Land in honour of the Dutch
governor on whose orders he was seeking a southern sea-route between
America and the Orient. It was none of his business to explore new
lands, and he did not set foot on the island that was later to bear his
name;
but he sent his chief pilot, Francoy Jacobszoon, ashore with a
handful of men. They came back with some alarming tales. Besides
notches in trees which they thought had been made by giants they had
seen footprints with claws like a tiger’s.


There is no doubt that these had been made by a Tasmanian or
pouched wolf (Thylacinus cynocephalus), a sort of marsupial wolf, which,
by an odd chance, is striped like a tiger on the middle of the back, rump,


212


THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


thighs and tail. It has five toes on its fore-feet, the footprints of which
cannot therefore be confused with a dog’s or cat’s. It has only four toes
on its hind-feet like a dog or cat, but whereas they walk on their fingers,


it puts the whole sole of the foot on the ground, and so leaves a relatively


larger footprint. Hence the confusion with tigers.


Nevertheless Dutch explorers confirmed the presence of a tiger in
Australia half a century later. The administrators of the Dutch East
India Company at Batavia used to make reports on information collected
from pioneers’ log-books. Thus in an anonymous report dated 1705 and
quoted in Major’s Terra Australis, “snipe, a tiger and a large number of
black birds” are said to have been found in Australia. The birds are


61. Thylacine or Tasmanian pouched wolf.


no doubt black swans or black emus—now vanished—but the tiger is
much more of a puzzle. Was it also a thylacine? One would hardly
think so, for this creature is much more like a dog—its Latin name
means “the pouched dog with the wolf’s head’”—were it not that


settlers persisted in calling it a “marsupial tiger.”
Furthermore,
although fossilised remains have been found on the Australian mainland,


it has long been confined to Tasmania.1


What then is the origin of the tales of tigers—and even lions—that
have been current all over Australia since it was first colonised. There is


1 It may even have disappeared in Tasmania during the last few years. The
most recent scientific expeditions have found no traces of it. But early in 1957
an airman took a photograph from a helicopter of a striped beast on the deserted
beach at Birthday in the west of the island.
It was probably a thylacine. An
expedition was at once mounted in order to capture a specimen, which would
be released again after it had been studied.


213


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


nothing vague about them as one can see from R. W. Mackay’s résumé
in the Sydney Morning Herald of 9 December 1939:


There are records from Pipers Creek, Mansfield, Lockwood, Chil-
tern, Briagolong, and other places in Victoria; from Harden, Tanta-
wonglo, Goulburn, Gloucester, Wellington, Jamberoo, Orange and
other places in New South Wales; from the Three-Mile Scrub, Bris-
bane, the St. George district, and Normanton in Queensland.


All these places are on the eastern coastal strip among the wooded
mountains of the Australian Cordillera and its continuation, the Aus-
tralian Alps. But the most relevant rumours seemed to be confined to
the York Peninsula, at the extreme north of the mountain range.


62. Drawing of the Queensland marsupial tiger-cat based on all the
evidence about it.


In 1871 the first detailed report about an unknown cat in Queensland
was published in the Proceedings of the Zoological Society. It consisted
of a letter written on 2 August of that year to the famous zoologist
Sclater by Brinsley G. Sheridan, a Police Magistrate at Cardwell:


One evening strolling along a path close to the shore of Rockingham
Bay, a small terrier, my son’s companion, took a scent up from a piece
of scrub near the beach, and followed, barking furiously, towards the
coast-range westwards. My boy (thirteen years of age, but an old bush-
man, who would put half those described in novels to the blush)
followed and found in the long grass, about half a mile from the spot
the scent was first taken up, an animal described by himself as follows:—
“Tt was lying camped in the long grass and was as big as a native Dog;


its face was round like that of a Cat, it had a long tail, and its body was
striped from the ribs under the belly with yellow and black. My Dog
flew at it, but it could throw him. The animal then ran up a leaning
tree, and the Dog barked at it. It then got savage and rushed down the
tree at the Dog and then at me. I got frightened and came home.”’


214


THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


Sheridan made inquiries and found that this was not the first time


that such an animal had been seen in the district.


Tracks of a sort of Tiger have been seen in Dalrymple’s Gap by
people camping there, and Mr. Reginald Uhr, now Police Magistrate at
St. George, whilst one of the native mounted police officers in this dis-
trict, saw the same animal my son describes.


This letter did not fail to impress the Fellows of the Zoological Society
to whom Sclater read it on 7 November 1871. But more exact informa-
tion was needed before they could pronounce unequivocally on the
creature’s existence. They did not have long to wait. On 4 December
1871 Walter J. Scott, C.M.z.s., also wrote from Cardwell with recent
news of the “tiger.” A licensed surveyor called Hull, and five men work-
ing with him on the banks of the Murray and Mackay Rivers north of
Cardwell, were woken up one night in their tent by a “loud roar.”
‘They leapt to their guns and cautiously explored the neighbourhood.
The animal had gone, but around the camp there were tracks of a largish
carnivore. A picture of a footprint was published with the letter in the
Proceedings of the Zoological Society. Scott also recalled that in 1864 a
bullock-driver said that he had met a tiger face to face in the area, but as
he was a notorious liar no one believed him. Perhaps, after all, he had
seen a similar animal.


Nonsense, wrote Gerald Krefft in another British scientific journal;
the bullock-driver was certainly a liar, and Scott’s footprint was an
ordinary dog’s! He was shocked that the Zoological Society should
waste its money publishing such stuff.


Meanwhile, on 5 June 1872, Scott sent another more detailed report
about this mythical cat from the Valley of Lagoons in Queensland.
Robert Johnstone, an officer of native police, who was in the scrub with
several of his men in the coastal area west of Cardwell, saw a large animal
perched in a tree some 40 feet from the ground. When they approached


it leapt 10 feet into another tree, clung to it, and then slithered down tail


first. It was larger than a pointer and its:colour was fawn with darker
patches. Its head was quite round; they did not see its ears.
Its tail
was long and thick.


In 1895 there was serious alarm and a great deal of noise—at all events
in the Press—about a “tiger” at Tantanoola in South Australia. The
beast was hunted and finally shot.
Its dismembered carcase was ex-
hibited for all to wonder at. Alas, it was soon recognised to be a calf’s,
the show was closed, and those who believed in the “tiger” theory were


21§


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


much disappointed, and consoled themselves by accusing the cowardly
hunters of making a scapegoat of a poor calf. Another theory soon pre-
vailed: that cattle-thieves had kept the “tiger” legend alive so that they
could steal in ‘peace and blame that bloodthirsty creature for their thefts.


Certainly there was plenty of talk of “tigers” at this time: one was
reported at Moruya, another in Gippsland, a third in the forest near
Colac and a fourth in Riverina. When the second was killed it proved to
be a pig that had gone wild; the third was merely a wild dog that had
escaped from captivity. There was now a tiger complex and people
were seeing them everywhere, which naturally did not tend to make
young Sheridan’s story believed. But a shrewd observer would have
remarked that whenever a report came from the north of Queensland it
was more positive and more precise.


Thus in 1900, at Kairi,
J. MacGeehan came upon a “‘striped mar-
supial cat” being attacked by a pack of dogs and crying piteously. It
was Clearly striped in alternate dark brown and white rings about 24
inches wide. Its head was like a Pomeranian dog’s and the length of the
whole animal must have been more than 2 feet. No doubt it was a young
one.


On another occasion the animal was even seen by a well-known
naturalist, George Sharp, who was then looking for the eggs of the
golden bower-bird (Prilonorhynchus) near the source of the Tully River.
One evening, as he was about to turn in, he heard a rustle in the scrub
and came out of his tent. It was not yet dark and he could see an animal
“larger and darker than the Tasmanian Tiger, with the stripes showing
very distinctly.” It had gone before he could raise his gun. A little


later one of its brethren attacked a farmer’s goats on the Atherton Table-
land and was killed. Sharp heard of it and at once set off to the place
where he was able to examine the animal’s skin. It was about 5 feet long
from the tip of its nose to the end of its tail. As he had no means of
preserving the pelt at hand, it soon decayed. Wild pigs had already eaten
the head and body.


A Mr Endres of Mundubbera in Queensland caught one of these
“tigers” alive. He said it was “about-18 inches high and as long as a
large cat; very short head and neck; striped, but not right round.” It
was “‘very savage when caught.”


Ion Idriess, an Australian writer who spent his whole life in the wild
north-east of the continent, mainly in Coen, has written an account that
deserves to be quoted. He speaks of the mysterious creature as if it were
a very familiar beast.


216


THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


Up here in York Peninsula we have a tiger-cat that stands as high as
a hefty, medium-sized dog. His body is lithe and sleek and beautifully
striped in black and grey. His pads are armed with lance-like claws of
great tearing strength. His ears are sharp and pricked, and his head is
shaped like that of a tiger. My introduction to this beauty was one day
when I heard a series of snarls from the long buffalo-grass skirting a
swamp. On peering through the grass I saw a full-grown kangaroo,
backed up against a tree, the flesh of one leg torn clean from the bone.
A streak of black and grey shot towards the ‘roo’s’ throat, then seemed


to twist in the air, and the kangaroo slid to earth with the entrails


literally torn out. In my surprise I incautiously rustled the grass, and


the great cat ceased the warm feast that he had promptly started upon,


stood perfectly still over his victim, and for ten seconds returned me


gaze for gaze. Then the skin wrinkled back from the nostrils, white


fangs gleamed, and a low growl issued from his throat. I went back-


wards and lost no time in getting out of the entangling grass.


It was not the only encounter.


The next brute I saw was dead, and beside him was my much-prized
-staghound, also dead. This dog had been trained from puppyhood in
tackling wild boars, and his strength and courage were known by all the
prospectors over the country.


This happened not far from the Alice River.


Among more recent reports I should mention P. B. Scougall and
G. de Tournoeur who were riding from Munna Creek to the little town
of Tiaro. Suddenly their horses shied.


We dismounted [they wrote to the Brisbane Courier] and were
startled to find the cause to be a large animal of the cat tribe, standing
about twenty yards away, astride of a very dead calf, glaring defiance at
us, and emitting what I can only describe as a growling whine. As far as
the gathering darkness and torrential rain allowed us to judge he was
nearly the size of a mastiff, of a dirty fawn colour, with a whitish belly,
and broad blackish stripes. The head was round, with rather prominent
lynxlike ears, but unlike that feline there were a tail reaching to the
ground and large pads. We threw a couple of stones at him, which only
made him crouch low, with ears laid flat, and emit a raspy snarl, vividly
reminiscent of the African leopard’s nocturnal ‘wood-sawing’
cry.


Beating an angry tattoo on the grass with his tail, he looked so ugly and


ready for a spring that we felt a bit ‘windy’; but on our making a rush
and cracking our stockwhips he bounded away to the bend of the


creek, when he turned back and growled at us.


Finally I should mention that the large striped cat has been known
by the Queensland aborigines since the earliest times.
It is not therefore surprising that the eminent zoologist E. Le G.
217


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


Troughton, Curator of the Department of Mammals in the Australian
Museum, should write:


Although there is some divergence concerning the size of the animal
and the disposition of the stripes, there seems some possibility that a
large striped marsupial-cat haunts the tangled forests of North Queens-
land.


Nor would there be anything very odd about finding an Australian
animal that looked like a cat. That this “tiger” or (more modestly)
“tiger-cat” is a marsupial is very likely, since it lives in an almost ex-
clusively marsupial world. As I have already remarked, Australia has,
by a curious phenomenon of convergence, marsupials that resemble
most types of placentary mammals. Besides kangaroos, which take the
place of deer and antelopes, there are shrews (Marmosa), moles (Noto-


ryctes), mice (Sminthopsis), rats (the various potoroos), rabbits (Pera-
meles), squirrels (Petaurus), dormice (Cercaertes), jerboas (Antechinomys)
and even large rodents of the coypu type (the wombats); genets (Dasu-
ridae), wolves {Thylacinus), little bears (the Tasmanian devil or Sarco-
philus) and even lemurs (the koala and the cuscus).. Not long ago there
were large ungulates between tapirs and rhinoceroses (Diprotodon),
which may still not be quite extinct. It is also relevant that in South
America there was once a whole group of marsupials corresponding to
the larger carnivores of Africa and Asia: the Borhyaenidae. There was
even a “sabre-toothed tiger” among them, the Thylacosmilus. More-
-


over, in Australia there was until quite recently a sort of marsupial lion,
the Thylacoleo. It would be quite natural to find a smaller species of the
same group on the same continent.


This large striped animal which has been well described as “‘a cat just
growing into a tiger” is, of all the unknown animals dealt with in this
book, the one nearest to being officially admitted by science. Although
there is neither skeleton nor skin of it in any museum in the world, the
“striped marsupial cat” of Northern Queensland was included in a
standard work on Australian fauna in 1926 on the strength of the field
observations which I have quoted from its text. The authors, A. S.
Le Souef and H. Burrell, put forward a very subtle argument that the
animal is a marsupial.


Although there is nothing to indicate directly to what order this
animal belongs, we believe it to be a marsupial, from the fact that it
apparently cannot live in competition with the dingo. It inhabits the
only country that the wild dog cannot penetrate.


218


THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


I have already stressed the merciless war between marsupials and
placentary mammals of the same type. The dingo, a mammal imported
by man and now run wild, has driven out the larger carnivorous mar-


supials, especially the thylacine, wherever it has gone.


On the other hand, in South America it has been noticed that mar-
supials can survive perfectly well when there are no placentary mammals
of their type, and fill the gaps that they leave. As Sir Richard Owen has


remarked, if a fauna is to be in equilibrium it must have its carnivores,


its insectivores, its herbivores, and so on. All the gaps must be filled.


One can almost say that for this reason there must be a predatory mar-


supial in the mountainous forests of Queensland.


Le Souef and Burrell describe the “striped marsupial cat” of York
Peninsula thus:


Hair short, rather coarse.
General colour fawn or grey, with broad
black stripes on flanks, not meeting over the back. Head like that of a
cat; nose more produced. Ears sharp, pricked. Tail well haired, in-
clined to be tufted at end. Feet large, claws long, sharp. Total length
about five feet; height at shoulder eighteen inches.


It would be almost as big as the small clouded leopard (Neofelis nebu-


losa), or a cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) with short legs.


So far it seems to be confined to Northern Queensland, where its
habitat is “the rough, rocky country on top of the ranges, country usually
covered with heavy forest, and inhabited chiefly by tree-kangaroos and
rock-wallabies.”” But Le Souef and Burrell add:


We have had a striped carnivorous animal described from North-
west Australia, and Lord Rothschild states, from native reports, that
a similar animal exists also in New Guinea.


And they point out very succinctly why such animals as the York
Peninsula tiger-cat are not better known to science.


This animal is rare, or, to be more correct, it lives in country that man
seldom penetrates, and when he does so he creates such a noise in
getting through the tangled undergrowth that any wary animal makes
off.


There is a rather similar phenomenon in physics.
It is theoretically
impossible to shine a ray of light on to a particle in order to ascertain its
relative position and velocity, without the impact of the light altering
them and giving a false result. This impossibility of making extremely


219


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


small measurements led the German physicist Wernher Heisenberg to
formulate his now-famous Principle of Uncertainty in 1925.


There ought to be a similar zoological principle, based on the diffi-
culty of making field observations of large animals, man’s natural rivals,
which tend to disappear as soon as man arrives on the scene. The degree
of difficulty depends on their habitat: obviously it is greater in the water
than on land, and greater on land than in the air; greater in mountains
than in plains; greater in the forest than in the savannah or the bush, and
greater in the bush than in a sandy desert. This is why we know so little
about the creatures of the sea and so much about birds—except those
species that cannot fly, The difficulties are almost insuperable when
two coincide, as they do in mountainous country with thick vegetation.
‘That is why most unknown animals live in marshy or mountainous
forests. It is a mere matter of logic.


220


CHAPTER TEN


The Moa,


a Fossil that may still Thrive


Of fowles every kinde
That in this world han fetheres and stature
Men myghten in that place assembled fynde...
GEOFFREY CHAUCER, The Parliament of Fouls.


THE moa is the oddest of birds. It is, as far as we know, the largest bird
that ever lived. Not only is it unable to fly (like the other running birds,


or Ratitae, such as the ostrich, the emu and the cassowary, which it
resembles a little in outline), but it has not the smallest trace of wings.
There is not even a sign of the collar-bone with which a vertebrate’s
front legs are almost invariably connected to the thorax. It is the truest
of bipeds, and its feathers are so primitive that they seem more like
hairs.


But though a wingless furry bird might be a freak elsewhere it would
not be out of the ordinary in New Zealand. There is a marked tendency
among many different groups of birds on those islands to lose their
powers of flight. There are rails which have forgotten how to fly, such


as the weka or Maori hen (Ocydromus) and the takahe (Notornis), to
which I shall be returning later. There used also to be wingless cranes
(Aptornis). And there is a parrot known as the kakapo or owl-parrot
(Stringops), which has not only become nocturnal (an odd enough thing


for a parrot to do), but has also turned burrower, which is thoroughly
odd for a bird. Its wings are well developed, but it has lost its breast-
bone, that bony keel indispensable to flight. It lives in holes under rocks
and the roots of trees.


New Zealand is the sole home of two families of wingless and tailless
birds with hair-like plumage: the kiwis and the moas, known to science


as Apterygidae and Dinornithidae; while the kiwis have vestiges of wings


221


Bay
of Islands


NORTH


ISLAND


Afrowhenua
ery


Forests’ {5 OG, 0. Si


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


beneath their feathers, the moas are completely wingless. Only one
genus of kiwis, Apteryx, seems to survive today; it includes three very
closely related species. The kiwi is a nocturnal forest bird as big as a
chicken. Its appearance, a little head and long beak sticking out of a
bunch of dark brown silk, is familiar from the many pictures of it as the


national emblem of New Zealand and a trade mark for boot-polish. It


is less well known that its nostrils are in the tip of its burrowing beak


and it is the only bird that finds its food by smell—indeed the only one


that has a highly-developed sense of smell. While the African ostriches


have only two toes on each foot and their Australian cousins the emus


have three, the kiwi still has a dim vestige of a fourth toe at the back


of the foot. It is better developed in the other family of New Zealand


63. The New Zealand kiwi.


running birds, the Dinornithidae. These are the moas, of which various
authors have described from 21 to 38 species belonging to five distinct
genera, though they are all—officially at least—said to be fossils.


It is usual to talk of kiwis as dwarfs and moas as giants. The truth is


less simple. The largest moas, such as the Dinornis robustus, stood nearly


12 feet high—3 feet higher than the tallest ostrich—but some, like the


Anomalopteryx parva, were no bigger than a turkey. On the other hand,


it is generally admitted that not long ago there was—and perhaps still is
—a giant Apteryx (Apteryx maxima) which was just the same size. But


it has not been proved that the pygmy moa and the giant kiwi are not


one and the same animal, for the latter is known only from the vaguest


evidence. Where do kiwis end and moas begin? If one is to go only by


external appearance there is no difference except for the length of the


223


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


beak, and this is not an absolute criterion. One also has to know the
exact position of the nostrils, not an easy thing to verify without the
bird in the hand. In fact all these wingless, furry-looking birds would
be remarkably alike even if they were not so closely related.


Why, you may ask, is it in New Zealand rather than elsewhere that
birds tend to lose the use of their wings, and even their wings them-
selves? The answer is to be found in a fact which Captain Cook was
observant to notice when he explored the New Zealand archipelago in
1773, and found no quadrupeds except dogs and rats.


These dogs and rats were obviously introduced by the natives, so
there were no indigenous quadrupeds in this country. Thus there were
no carnivores that eat birds.


In islands where there are no predatory mammals, birds no longer
need to take to the air at the least danger, but can relapse into a lazy
terrestrial existence—with fatal results. It is hardly surprising that most
birds that have become extinct in historic times have lived on islands,
inaccessible to carnivores, where they have given up flying. For sooner


or later man and his parasites, the dog and sometimes the cat, come to
disturb the peace. The most celebrated victim is the dodo of Mauritius
(Didus ineptus), a huge flightless pigeon which man exterminated in less
than a century. Its name is a very symbol of extinction: as dead as the
dodo.


Of all the islands of any size, the most isolated from any mainland are
the North and South Islands of New Zealand. They are more than 1,000
miles from Australia, the nearest land. In the middle of the Mesozoic


era, during the Jurassic period, these islands were attached to South-East
Asia by a broad causeway that included New Caledonia, the New
Hebrides, the Solomon Islands and New Guinea. It even reached to
Australia. But before the end of the following period, the Cretaceous,


it sank under the waves, leaving only a few scattered islands and cutting
off New Zealand for ever from the rest of the world. This happened
shortly before the great invasion of marsupials, which were thus unable
to spread beyond Australia. Since then the only access to New Zealand
has been by air or by sea. There the only known indigenous mammals
are two species of bats, both called pekapeka by the Maoris; one,
Chalinolobus, also lives in Australia, the other, Mystacina, is found only
in New Zealand. This country could hardly be accidentally populated
by creatures carried there on floating tree-trunks, a common enough pro-
cess between the galaxies of islands, each close to the next, in Oceania.


224


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


When land mammals first set foot on New Zealand it was because they
had deliberately steered the tree-trunks there which they had hollowed
out into boats, for they were men. They brought with them their faith-
ful companion the dog, kararehe, now vanished. The rat kiore (Mus
exulans) had certainly not been invited, but its arrival was no accident.


Any species of land quadruped that existed in New Zealand before


this invasion would have to be very ancient, for it would have to have
been there since the Jurassic period at the latest. Such a quadruped


exists. It is the only remaining survivor of the Rhynchocephalians, a
group of reptiles older, geologically speaking, than the dinosaurs, the
tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus), a strange three-eyed lizard which usually
shares its home with a petrel (see plate between pages 72 and 73). Just


as Australia is the last retreat of a past age of marsupials, so New Zealand
shelters the last representative of a reptilian empire that flourished
nearly 200 million years ago.


During the long period between New Zealand’s isolation and its
invasion by man, birds were able to develop richly and into the wildest
forms, such as the giant moas. After losing their power of flight, the
birds in the two main islands evolved along different lines, as is explained
by Professor Ferdinand von Hochstetter of Vienna, one of the greatest
experts on the natural history of New Zealand.


.
.
.as the Apteryx species of the two Islands are different, so also the
Moa species of North Island seem to be different from those found on
South Island. Cook Strait, now separating the two islands, may have
proved to these birds, which could neither fly nor swim, an unsur-
mountable obstacle, preventing them from migrating from one island
to the other. New Zealand was perhaps a large continent when the Moas
were first created. And if we suppose this or at least that the two
islands were formerly contiguous to each other, we of course suppose
also, that the separation took place so long a time ago, that the originally
identical species, after the separation of both islands, may have been
changed in course of time into the present varieties or species.


According to Prof. Owen, the birds of South Island present stouter
proportions, a compact, rather bulky frame of body, such as Dinornis
robustus, elephantopus, crassus and Palapteryx ingens, while those of
North Island are distinguished by more slender and lengthy forms, like
the Dinornis giganteus and gracilis.


These various species inhabited the plains and valleys and had their
hiding-places in forests and caves.
Their food doubtless consisted of


vegetables, especially fern-roots, which they dug up with their powerful


feet and claws. To assist the process of digestion, they swallowed small


pebbles.


P
225


64. The conventional reconstruction of a large moa.


This we know because heaps of small round stones, usually chalce-
dony, cornelian, agate and opal, are often found with the bones of moas


or occasionally by themselves. Presumably these round pebbles came
from the moas’ stomachs, for their cousins the ostrich and the emu are in
the habit of swallowing small pebbles to help grind the food and of
regurgitating them from time to time when they have been worn quite
smooth.


The formation of the skull [Professor yon Hochstetter goes on] leads
us to infer that they were stupid, clumsy birds, which we must not
suppose to have been swift runners like the ostrich, but sluggish diggers
of the ground, the nature and habits of which demanded no larger
scope, than such as the limited territory of New Zealand presented.


226


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


Indeed the moa hardly seems to deserve its scientific name of Dinor-


nis, or “terrible bird,” given it by Sir Richard Owen. On the contrary,


it is the very type of a bird that has grown soft from too easy a life and
whose days will be numbered as soon as the first enemy arrives. But did
man exterminate the moa? Yes, say some, going so far as to cite the


evidence of Maoris who point out a Totara tree on Lake Rotorua as the


place where their ancestors killed the last moa.


But for those colossal birds [says von Hochstetter], it would be indeed
utterly impossible to comprehend how 200,000 or 300,000 human
beings could have lived in New Zealand, a country which even in its
vegetable world offered nothing for subsistence, except fern-roots.


And he attributes the Maoris’ cannibalism to their lack of meat when


these wonderfully large and plump birds began to fail. But we know
today that habitual cannibalism is never merely the result of famine, and
that it derives from a magical belief that one can acquire the virtues of
the dead by digesting their bodies. No doubt the Maori cannibalism is


as old as the race itself.


Others no less hotly deny that man exterminated the moa, but this
denial can have two diametrically opposite meanings. Some say that the
moa could not have been exterminated by man, because it was already
extinct when he arrived. The degeneration of this overgrown bird,
reflected in its bones, made the moa die out. Perhaps floods drowned
many of these birds that could no longer fly, and doubtless the violent
volcanic eruptions, of which traces have been found, helped to destroy


a large population. But others say that the moa has not been exter-
minated by man because it is not yet utterly extinct, and this giant bird,


or at all events some moa of smaller size, survives in unexplored regions
of New Zealand. The extraordinary diversity of opinion on this subject


is largely a result of the bitter controversy aroused by the original
discovery of the moa.


The history of the discovery of the moa is even more confused than
the history of the moa itself. For more than a century men have been
©


trying to solve the mystery that surrounds it; and there is no doubt that
some of them, whether from vainglory, incompetence or disbelief, have


ironically only helped to darken the mystery the more. When the moa


was discovered it was variously pronounced to be a contemporary of


present-day man, a bird only recently extinct, and a complete fossil,


Each of these opinions had its own belligerent faction which became


ever firmer in its own conviction, after searching systematically for


227


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


arguments to support its theory and neglecting any evidence that might
weaken it. Let us try to follow the moa’s discovery without any such


bias.


It officially entered the world of science in 1839 when a fragment of a
huge bone was brought back from New Zealand by a traveller named
Rule and eventually reached the hands of Professor Sir Richard Owen.
The bone seemed to have belonged to an ox, but after careful study he
realised that it was a bird’s femur. On 12 November 1839 he read a
note on this sensational discovery to the Zoological Society of London
in which he said:


Any opinion . . . as to its specific form can only be conjectural; ...
but so far as my skill in interpreting an osseous fragment may be
credited, I am willing to risk the reputation for it on the statement that
there has existed, if there does not now exist, in New Zealand, a Stru-
thious bird nearly, if not quite, equal in size to the Ostrich.


There was no doubt that such a bird had once existed when Rule’s
bone had been identified by such a leading comparative anatomist as
Owen. But that it could still exist or be known to man seemed unlikely
to many people. Captain Cook had heard nothing of it when he visited
New Zealand in 1773 and questioned Chief Tawaihura at some length
about the local fauna. And plenty of travellers had been there since, and
not a single work about the country made the least mention of this
extraordinary bird. This latter objection may have been true until 1839,
but it was so no longer. A Jewish merchant called J. S. Polack had just
published two volumes about New Zealand. He had spent more than
two years, between 1834 and 1837, on the east coast of North Island,
where he said:


That a species of the emu, or a bird of the genus Struthio [ostrich],
formerly existed in the latter island, I feel well assured, as several large
fossil ossifications were shewn to me when I was residing in the
vicinity of the East Cape, said to have been found at the base of the
inland mountain of Ikorangi [Hikurangi]. The Natives added that, in
times long past, they received the traditions, that very large birds had
existed, but the scarcity of animal food, as well as the easy method of
entrapping them, has caused their extermination.


This would have satisfied those who thought the moa was recently
extinct and explained why Captain Cook had heard nothing of such a
monstrous bird being still alive. But Polack goes on to say:


Yet, doubtless, the future ornithologist will be surprised by dis-
covering, among the hidden mountain-gorges and wilds of the Island
228


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


of Victoria [i.e. South Island], many birds at present supposed to be
no longer in existence.


I feel assured, from the many reports I received from the natives
that a species of struthio still exists on that interesting island, in parts,
which, perhaps, have never yet been trodden by man. Traditions are
current among the elder natives of Atuas,! covered with hair, in the
form of birds, having waylaid native travellers, among the forest wilds,
vanquishing them with an overpowering strength, killing and devouring,


&c. The traditions are reported with an air of belief that carries con-


viction to the younger natives, who take great delight in the marvellous
and the improbable.


Although a New Zealand printer and amateur naturalist called Wil-
liam Colenso was later to maintain that Polack did not even know how


to write—so that he could pretend that he himself was the first to men-
tion the moa—the book is still the first record of the giant bird. Thus
when Owen published his first article on the subject he mentioned in a
discreet note that Polack’s fossil bones were those of a bird and that
therefore the native traditions he reported were correct. But we should
note in passing that Polack never spoke of “‘fossil” bones, that he said
himself that the giant bones shown him were those of a bird, and that
his book came out before Owen had pronounced favourably upon Rule’s
femur. There is no proof that the zoologist had not read Polack’s book
before he published his conclusions.


Colenso can, however, claim to be the first to mention the name moa
in print. In December 1837, the Rev. William Williams, a protest-
ant missionary, had just published the New Testament in Maori, and
decided to take several weeks’ well-earned holiday with his printer and
friend, Colenso. They left the Bay of Islands on 1 January 1838.
Colenso reported in the Tasmanian fournal of Natural Science:


During the summer of 1838, I accompanied the Rev. W. Williams
on a visit to the tribes inhabiting the East Cape District.
Whilst at
Waiapu, (a thickly inhabited locality about 20 miles S.W. from the
East Cape) I heard from the natives of a certain monstrous animal;
while some said it was a bird, and others “‘a person,” all agreed that’
it was called a Moa;—that in general appearance it somewhat resembled


an immense domestic cock, with the difference, however, of its having a


“face like a man;’’—that it dwelt in a cavern in the precipitous side of a


mountain ;—that it lived on air;—and that it was attended, or guarded,
by two immense Tuataras [Sphenodon], who, Argus-like, kept incessant
watch while the Moa slept; also that if any one ventured to approach


1 The Maori name for all supernatural beings from the supreme being down
to mere demons.
229


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


the dwelling of this wonderful creature, he would be invariably
trampled on and killed by it.


On the strength of this Colenso pretended that he was the first
white man to learn that a giant bird existed in New Zealand. But it
seems clear to me that he did not believe a word of these fantastic
legends, or he would have discussed them with Williams. For when this
missionary returned to the east coast a year later in January 1839 with
a brother missionary, the Rev. Richard Taylor, he had obviously never
believed any story about giant birds—he may not even have heard them.
So it would appear from Taylor’s narrative:


In the beginning of 1839 I took my first journey in New Zealand to
Poverty Bay with the Rey. Wm. Williams (the present Bishop of
Waiapu). When we reached Waiapu, a large pa near the East Cape,
we took up our abode in a native house, and there I noticed the frag-
ment of a large bone stuck in the ceiling. I took it down, supposing at
first that it was human, but when I saw its cancellated structure I
handed it over to my companion, who had been brought up in the
medical profession, asking him if he did not think it was a bird’s bone.
He laughed at the idea, and said, what kind of bird could there be to
have so large a bone? I pointed out its structure; and when the natives
came requested him to ask them what it belonged to. They said it was a
bone of the Tarepo, a very large bird which lived on the top of Hik-
urangi... and that they made their largest fish-hooks from its bones.
I then inquired whether the bird was still to be met with, and was told
that there was one of an immense size which lived in a cave, and was
guarded by a large lizard, and that the bird was always standing on one
leg.


Having bought the bone from the headman of Waiapu for a little
tobacco, Taylor sent it to England, where it eventually reached Owen’s
hands through Sir Everard Home, but not until he had already seen
Rule’s femur and published a note about it. So Taylor’s claim is as


unjustified as Colenso’s when he writes in Te Ika a Maui, or New Zea-
land and its Inhabitants (1855), “I first discovered its remains in 1839, at
Tauranga [Gisborne] and Waiapu.”


When Taylor returned to the Bay of Islands in February he met another
person who had come from Taranaki on the west coast and also claimed


to have heard of the moa, the German naturalist Dr E. Dieffenbach of
the New Zealand Company. When he tried to climb Mount Egmont, a
native chief dissuaded him because the mountain was guarded by a moa
or movie.


Colenso was then a neighbour of Dieffenbach at the Bay of Islands, so
he probably learnt the German traveller’s story and was reminded of the


230


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


fantastic tales he had heard earlier about a devil-bird with a human face.
When, like Dieffenbach, he had an opportunity of examining the bones
that Taylor had brought back—in particular a toe—he must have


realised for the first time that the native legends were not utterly without
foundation.


Two years later Colenso decided to find out more about the mys-
terious bird. He set sailon 19 November 1841 from the Bay of Islands on


alittle boat for Poverty Bay. But he landed much sooner, at Wharekahike,


in Hicks Bay, between Cape Runaway and East Cape, and continued his


journey south on foot, to Rangitukia, a large settlement of the Ngati-


porou tribe on the left bank of the River Waiapu. There he obtained his


first moa bones: five femurs, a tibia and one unidentified bone. At Pov-


erty Bay he met his old friend the Rev. William Williams, who had been


installed as archdeacon at Turanga a year before. He had also collected


a number of moa bones from the natives, intending to send them to


Professor Buckland at Oxford. Colenso added some of his finds to this


collection, but we shall see later that he tried to send his own specimens


to the highest authorities. Leaving the archdeacon, he went on scouring


the east coast, asking the Maoris everywhere whether they knew of moa


bones, and eventually reaching the neighbourhood of the chalky head-


land of Whakapunake, where, according to the traditions he had col-


lected four years before, a moa lived in a cave and terrified the whole


district. But the local natives sent him away elsewhere under the pre-


text that the moa now lived in the Whai-iti Mountains. Another time


the natives showed Colenso a footprint in a clayey rock, a little beyond


Hicks Bay. They said it was that of Rongokako, one of their famous


ancestors. The next footprint was near Poverty Bay, more than 80


miles away—outdoing even the seven-league boots of fable! Colenso


did not guess that it had been made by the creature whose bones he was


collecting, but later it was found to be a moa’s footprint.


When he returned to the Bay of Islands in April 1842 he feverishly set
about completing his collection of moa bones so that he could send them


post-haste to his friend Sir William J. Hooker for Sir Richard Owen.


Meanwhile he wrote an account of his own views about the giant bird,


which he sent to the Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science where it


appears in the volume for 1846.


Determined at all costs to be the first to have told the world of the
giant fossil bird, Colenso always swore that he had never seen Owen’s
1839 note, nor to have heard of it or have met any settler that knew of it.
In fact the New Zealand papers, as one might expect, were full of echoes


231


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


of this local wonder after Owen’s note appeared, and more than a hun-
dred offprints of the note itself were distributed in New Zealand. The
missionaries, in whose wake Colenso followed, were the most educated
of the settlers and in closest contact with the natives and would have
certainly been the first to receive copies.


Many people in New Zealand claimed to be the first: the first to hear
legends of the giant bird, the first to hear the native name of moa, the


first to collect its bones. And’as they often distorted the truth and con-
tradicted themselves in order to establish their claim, the first reports
have often seemed suspect since. They seemed even more suspect
when there were obstinate rumours that the moa survived. It was no
longer possible to pretend to be the first to have seen bones or heard the
name, so perhaps people were looking for another claim to fame: to be
the first to see a living moa? The seed of scepticism was sown.


In 1842 Archdeacon Williams sent a vast quantity of moa bones
packed in huge wicker baskets to Dr Buckland, who gave them to the
Royal College of Surgeons. From these bones Sir Richard Owen was
able to reconstruct among other things the enormous legs of Dinornis


giganteus, which must, by his reckoning, have stood more than Io feet
high. He also established that there were at least four different species
of varying height and bulk. These were the conclusions of a second note
on the moa which Owen published in January 1843 in the Proceedings
of the Zoological Society.


Then moa bones were found in South Island for the first time, at the
mouth of the Waikouaiti, on thé north of the Otago peninsula, by Percy
Earle and Dr MacKellar. But the richest harvest of all was undoubtedly


that which Walter Mantell, Secretary for Crown Lands and son of the
famous geologist and palaeontologist Gideon Algernon Mantell, col-
lected on both islands between 1847 and 1850. It included no less than
1,000 separate bones and even pieces of the shells of huge eggs that
would have been as much as Io inches long. All these precious remains
were acquired by the British Museum of Natural History, and com-
pleted the rich material upon which Sir Richard Owen based his now
famous monograph On Dinornis. Among Mantell’s bones was the skele-


ton of a moa hardly 5 feet high, but so heavy and massive that Owen
called it Dinornis elephantopus (‘the terrible bird with elephant’s feet”).
Thus there were not only versions of attenuated giraffes and small
turkeys among the moas, but even of pachyderms.


But when did these legendary birds live?
Disregarding native


232


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


traditions completely, one can draw valuable conclusions from the bones
and from the geology of the material in which moas left their footprints.
Some of the disinterred bones are, it is true, unquestionably fossilised
and can be dated from the middle of the Miocene period some 15 to 35


million years ago. But most moa bones are in a sub-fossil state. That is


to say they have not had time to “petrify,” or be impregnated with


mineral salts.


The almost undecomposed state of the bones [writes von Hoch-
stetter], their occurrence in the sands of the sea-shore, in swamps,
forests, river-beds, and in limestone caves, together with bones of
animals still living in New Zealand, all this proves beyond the shadow
of a doubt, that those birds belong to the recent period of the earth, and
that their age can only be counted by hundreds, instead of thousands of
years.


As the Maoris had hardly settled in New Zealand two or three cen-
turies before it was sighted by Tasman in 1642, the relative freshness of
the bones is not enough to prove for certain whether man ever knew the
living moa. Moreover, in exceptional conditions bones may remain in


a sub-fossil state for as long as 20,000 or 30,000 years. We must there-
fore turn to the local traditions.


The legends that Polack collected, to say nothing of Colenso’s, hardly
indicate an intimate knowledge of the living bird. Nor does the devilish
and savage nature that the natives along the east coast attribute to the
moa agree with what one can infer about the bird’s habits, which must
have been more sluggish than the ostrich’s. Its description as a sort of
giant cock with a man’s face seems very fanciful. And the fact that the
Maoris attributed its footprint to legendary heroes or demigods seems


to prove that they could not have known it. These arguments drove a
New Zealander called H. Hill to conclude in 1914 that “not a single
Maori known to the missionaries and early settlers ever saw or heard of


a moa, or of its having been’seen by any of their ancestors.” According


to him everything that the natives said about the moa was a myth based


on the discovery of huge bones and on what they had learnt from white


men. He even went so far as to ask if the very word moa was not derived


from English. On 16 July 1912 Urupani Puhara, an old Maori chief of


88, had told him at Pakipani that:


The ‘“‘moa”’ was not the name by which the great bird that lived in
this country was known to my ancestors. The name was ““Te Kura,” or
the red bird; and it was only known as “moa’”’ after the pakehas [white
men] said so.


233


; THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


Hill consulted an expert on Maori folklore, Colonel P. Porter, c.B., of
Gisborne, who had an amusing version of the word’s origin that he had
heard from an educated half-caste: when the remains of the moa were


first discovered, the missionaries and other travellers pestered the
natives with demands for “more bones” which the Maoris had under-
stood as “‘moa bones,”’ taking “‘moa”’ to be the name of the vanished bird.
But Colonel Porter was sceptical of this tale, since he recalled a very old
proverb Ngaro a moa (lost like the moa), an odd Maori equivalent of “‘as
dead as the dodo.”


According to Berthold Seemann, the word moa in the Fijian form,


toa, means a domestic fowl, while the Polynesian name for a flying bird


is manumanu, and that since the Maoris used the word moa they must
have known that the moa could not fly and hence they knew the living
bird. Colenso aiso produced several convincing arguments that man and
the moa lived at the same time. The word moa appears in many names
of people and places: for instance Pukumoa (moa’s belly or entrails),
Taramoa (moa’s spur), Moawhanganui (moa long waited for), Tawake-
heimoa (Tawake able to yoke a moa). It is true that the word moa is
sometimes also used for a hairy waving flaccid and coarse growing sea-
side grass (Spinifex hirsutus) but it may well have been named after the
bird’s hairy plumage. And not only its leaves, but also a local variety of


flax (Phormium), which provides a textile fibre, are called raumoa or


*“‘moa’s feather.” However, it is clear enough that the personal and
place names mentioned above could not refer to a plant.


Colenso says that maimoa is the Maori word for the false birds that
they use as decoys for hunting. Perhaps their ancestors dressed in moa-
skins to deceive the huge birds into letting them come within striking
distance. The fact that ostriches seem to find it refreshing to open their
beaks wide into the wind may explain why the Maoris of the east coast
believed that the moa, which doubtless had similar habits, lived on
nothing but air. Colenso also tells us that moamoa or hamoamoa is the
native name for the little round and shiny stones that are sometimes
found in small heaps. It has since been discovered that these pebbles
come from moas’ stomachs. Their name shows that the Maoris knew


this fact long before we did, and evidently from direct observation.
Colenso, who did not have this last vital piece of evidence, concluded
that New Zealanders had known the moa until prehistoric times (long
before the beginning of their tribal history which went back twenty-five
generations, or about 500 years).


Hill came to exactly the opposite conclusion: that the moa died out


234


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


in the Pleistocene period, and probably at the beginning of it, between
300,000 and a million years ago. This is contrary to the palaeontological
evidence and betrays surprising ignorance of some aspects of the prob-
lem.


All the first reports about the moa—upon which Hill based his argu-
ments—came from North Island, and especially from the east coast. It
seems likely that the natives in this area did not know the moa directly.
But could they have known that the huge bones belonged to a bird?
They were not expert palaeontologists. One might argue that since


almost all the other animals on the islands were birds they would have


assumed it to be a bird, and the remains ofits eggs would have confirmed


the theory. For there is little doubt that the Maoris knew these eggs and


thought they had magical properties.


In 1865 a London naturalist called J. S. Stevens received from New
Zealand a Dinornis egg in almost perfect condition. According to the
Wellington newspapers this egg, which was 104 inches long by 7?
inches wide, had been discovered in an ancient tomb at Kaikoura in the


district of Marlborough. A human skeleton, in a sitting position, had
held the egg in its hands.


The natives could have deduced the bird’s existence from the same
evidence as white man, but how did they come to know what its plumage
was like? Polack, it will be recalled, refers to ““Atuas, covered with hair,
in the form of birds.” Of all the New Zealand birds only the kiwi has
feathers like silky hair, and it is incredible that the natives should have
known that the bones and eggs belonged to an outsize kiwi and not to
some other type of bird.


Thus everything tends to show that if the Maoris of the east coast of
North Island did not know the moa themselves or from their immediate
ancestors, their legends are still originally based on an exact description
of the bird. Other men must therefore have known it, travellers, per-
haps, from more southerly corners of New Zealand. And, indeed, when
Governor Fitzroy had a friendly meeting in 1844 with the Maoris at
Wellington at the very south of North Island he had to admit that they
knew the huge birds as well as one would expect these huntsmen to


know their favourite quarry which was now, alas, no more. Hauma-


tangi, an old Maori of 85 who boasted that he had seen Captain Cook in


1773 when he was only 14, said that he had seen a moa for the last time


two years before that memorable date. Kawana Papai, another no less


ancient native, maintained that he had himself taken part in moa-hunts


235


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


on the Waimate plains in South Island some 50 years before. He gave
very exact details of this sport. The birds were rounded up, encircled
and then killed with spears—not an easy task or a safe one, since the
moa, like the ostrich, fought hard, laying about it with terrible blows of
its feet. The Maoris made use of the fact that it had to stand on one leg
in order to kick with the other. One party attacked it in front and
goaded it into lifting one leg while another party attacked the other leg
with long sticks from behind. The moa-hunters used special spears
which were designed to break off inside the bird’s body. Once dead, it
was cut up with an obsidian knife, and eaten at gargantuan feasts.


This seems to be confirmed by the fact that on both North Island and
South Island, Mantell and another naturalist called Cormack often
found mounds full of charred moa bones near native camps and settle-
ments, the remains, no doubt, of these meals.1 Thus, for the natives of
South Island and of the south of North Island, the moa, which might
weigh as much as a quarter of a ton, was as welcome in the larder as a
Christmas turkey, and became more and more appreciated as the game
grew scarcer. It aroused none of the terror that one finds in the tales
from the east coast of North Island, which perhaps had come from much
further south and been confused in the telling.


On South Island, not only have fresher remains of moas been found,
mummified pieces of the body, the skin and brownish feathers with
white tips still preserved, but much more widespread and detailed
native traditions have been collected. Von Hochstetter relates some of
the more common legends:
©


Ngahue, one of the discoverers of New Zealand,—so tradition says,—
describes the land as the haunt of colossal birds. There are yet some
Maori poems extant, in which the father gives his son instructions how
to behave in the contests with the Moas, how to hunt and kill them... .


The birds being unable to swim, were driven towards a river or a
lake, or towards the sea-coast, until they could escape no further, and
thus slain. That also small heated stones were thrown into their way,
ae they swallowed and of which they died, is probably a mere Maori
able.


I wonder. Remembering how stupidly and gluttonously an ostrich
will swallow any bright little object that it finds in its way, sometimes
causing a fatal haemorrhage (most ostriches in zoos come to this end),


1 According to the recent research by Dr R. A. Falla of the Dominion


Museum, Wellington, the moas which the Maoris hunted were mainly if not
entirely of the species Euryapteryx gravis.


236


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


I think it very likely that one could kill equally stupid birds by strewing
their paths with white-hot pebbles. In any case, whether this technique
was imaginary or not, it could only have been invented by someone who
knew the moa’s habits very well. Hochstetter also cites from Maori


tales the use that was made of the moa:


The flesh and eggs were eaten; the feathers were employed as orna-
ment for the hair; the skulls were used for holding tattooing powder;
the bones were converted into fish-hooks, and the colossal eggs were
buried with the dead as provision during their long last journey to the
lower regions.


The Maoris said it had a brilliant plumage and a high crest on its head.
Altogether it looked like a huge Cochin cock, a fat, gallinaceous bird
with feathered legs. This apparently absurd description has been used


as evidence that the Maoris had never seen moas. Actually it is our
reconstruction that is more likely to be absurd. It is largely based on
one of the running birds still extant in Australia, the emu, which has
bare legs and sober greyish-brown plumage. But we have no proof that
some moas at least did not have brilliant plumage like that other Aus-


tralian bird, the cassowary. The brown feathers that have been found
may belong to females, usually duller in colour than the males. Why do
we always draw the moa with a bare neck like an ostrich, when it could
have been as thickly feathered as an emu’s, which would have com-
pletely altered its outline? And there is no evidence that the moa did
not have feathered legs like a Cochin hen and like the kiwi itself. Only


a fast-running bird of the plains has any advantage in bare legs, and the
moa was not one. In any case the largest moas were not built for run-
ning. Finally, the cranial structure of some of the Dinornithidae in-
dicates that they had a sort of crest on their heads, thus confirming the
Maoris’ picture.


Thus it seems that innumerable moas still lived in New Zealand when


it was first invaded by man. He came from the north, and both islands


would logically have been invaded from the north or north-west and


the moa would have been driven farther and farther to the south. On


both islands moa bones have been found in the largest quantities in the


south-east. Likewise North Island was almost certainly invaded before


South Island, and the moas were therefore exterminated there first. In


any case there is little doubt that most of the moas on North Island had


vanished 500 years before man arrived on the island, which explains why


the Maoris whom Cook questioned, in the north and west of the island,


had never heard of the bird. Perhaps a few isolated flocks of birds were


237


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


~
killed as late as 1800 in the extreme south of the island, as the remains
of feasts indicate, but almost all of the accounts reported by Governor
Fitzroy were either based on tradition or came from Maoris on the other
side of Cook Strait. In South Island it is well-established that the moa


65. Probable appearance of some moas, according to the Maoris
who knew them.


—particularly Euryapteryx gravis—was not only well known to the
Maoris at one time, but played such an important part in their lives that
Roger Duff could write a learned work entitled The Moa-Hunter Period
of Maori Culture (1950). According to him this period ended in the
sixteenth century. But there is also proof that in South Island the moa
survived until very recently and certainly existed when New Zealand
238


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


was discovered by white men. All that remains is to discover just when
the last of the moas died.


Colenso thought that the moa survived in South Island at the begin-
ning of the nineteenth century. The Rev. Richard Taylor remarked in
the middle of the same century “that it was by no means certain that it
was extinct even then.” In Owen’s second note, published in 1843, he
repeats rumours heard by Archdeacon Williams that moas still lived in
“‘Middle Island” (the old name for South Island). And in 1863 von


Hochstetter wrote lyrically in his excellent book about New Zealand


—a country that he knew very well—‘“‘It is by no means impossible that


in lonely and inaccessible places live a few scarce diehards of the giant


family: the last of the Mohicans.” There is some evidence to support


this theory. At the beginning of the nineteenth century American


sailors and sealers claimed to have seen monstrous birds 12 to 15 feet


high (an exaggeration, no doubt) running to and fro along the coast of


Cloudy Bay, on South Island, and on the inhospitable shores of the


south-west of that island. According to a letter from Taylor published


in April 1850 in the New Zealand Magazine a sealer called Meurant


found moa bones still covered with flesh in 1823 at Molyneux Harbour


on South Island. Finally there is this report quoted from the Nelson


Examiner of 12 January 1861 by von Hochstetter:


In June, while Messrs. Brunner and Maling, of the Survey Office,
were surveying on the ranges between Riwaka and Takaka, they ob-
served one morning the foot-prints of what appeared to be a very large
bird, whose track, however, was lost among the scrub and rocks. The
foot-prints were 14 inches in length, with a spread of 11 inches at the
points of the three toes. Similar foot-prints were seen on a subsequent
morning, and as the country is full of limestone-caves, it is thought that
a solitary Moa may yet be in existence.


Von Hochstetter did not believe all these stories. According to him


the largest living running bird in New Zealand was certainly a giant


Apteryx (Apteryx maxima), although actually no more is known about


this bird, which is included in the present fauna of New Zealand, than


about the supposedly extinct moas.


Three species of kiwis are well known today, although they are rarely
seen because of their nocturnal habits: Apteryx mantelli confined to
North Island, Apteryx australis confined to South Island, and Apteryx
oweni found in both. Where two kinds are found together the Maoris


239


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


differentiate them by their size, calling the larger Aiwi-nui and the smaller


kiwi-iti. None of them is larger than a domestic fowl. But there is every
reason to believe that there was once a much bigger species called by
the very different name of roa-roa. Von Hochstetter writes:


Mr. John Rochfort, Provincial Surveyor in Nelson, who returned
from an expedition to the western coast of the province while I was stay-
ing at Nelson, in his report, which appeared in the Nelson Examiner, of
August 24th, 1859, describes this species, which is said to be by no
means uncommon in the Paparoa ranges, between the Grey and Buller
rivers, in the following terms: a Kiwi about the size of a turkey, very
powerful, having spurs on his feet, which, when attacked by a dog,
defends himself so well as frequently to come off victorious. My friend,
Julius Haast, writes to me in a letter dated July, 1860, from ten miles
above the mouth of the river Buller, on the mountains of the Buller
chain, which at the height of from 3000 to 4000 feet, were at that
time, it being winter in New Zealand, slightly covered with snow,
that the tracks of a large Kiwi of the size of a turkey were very com-
mon in the snow, and that at night he had often heard the singular
cry of this bird, but that as he had no dog with him he had not succeeded
in getting a specimen of it.


The news in the Nelson Examiner came soon after the publication of
Darwin’s The Origin of Species, zoology was in fashion, and everyone
was interested to know if some primitive bird of the moa tribe still lived
in remote New Zealand mountains. Darwin himself had said it was
possible.


I do not believe that any bones of this mysterious large kiwi have ever
been found. There are only a few scraps of skin covered with feathers
which adorn a Maori chief’s ceremonial cloak.
So why have some:
authorities considered it as a member of the genus Apteryx? Kiwis
have no “spurs” or well-developed hind claws. Would it not therefore
be more likely to be a small moa, an Anomalopteryx for instance, which
was exactly the size of a turkey? Perhaps they preferred to call it an
Apteryx so that they could assert categorically that every moa was
extinct. But is it more reasonable to assert that there is a giant kiwi that
no one has ever seen?


Sir George Grey confirms Maori reports that a little moa survived
very recently. He is quoted in Sir Walter Buller’s classic work, A His-
tory of the Birds of New Zealand:


Sir George Grey tells me that in 1868 he was at Preservation Inlet
and saw a party of natives there who gave him a circumstantial account
of the recent killing of a small Moa (?Palapteryx), describing with much
spirit its capture out of a drove of six or seven.


240


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


And one must accept the word of a man who was to become Prime
Minister of New Zealand. Indeed it is not impossible that much larger
moas may have survived until today. We know from Maori evidence
that they were shy birds that liked to be alone. It has always been sup-


posed that the Dinornithidae, like other running birds, preferred to live


in grassy plains. Actually they were a very varied family, large and


small, slender and squat. It is very likely that the different kinds had no


less different habitats, and that there were slim moas of the plains, little


moas of the forests, and heavy moas of the marshes—like the Madagas-


can Aepyornis. And some of them may well have taken refuge, like the


kiwi, in nocturnal habits. Nocturnal moas, living in forests, would have


a good chance of eluding all our searches.


The most encouraging tangible evidence is a discovery made by Dr
R. A. Falla in 1949. In a Maori fowler’s shelter in a confined valley
west of Lake Te Anau in the extreme south-west of South Island, he
found the broken and dismembered skeleton of a single Megalapteryx.
There were also unfaded feathers of wekas, kakapos and takahes, pre-
served flax sandals and weka snares, which could not haye been more
than two hundred years old, and may have been less than a hundred.


In 1950 an expedition of New Zealand and American scientists went
into the almost impenetrable forests around the fiords in the south-west
of South Island. There were reports that they had found some more
evidence that small moas had lived more recently than is generally ad-
mitted. There was never any official announcement to this effect. Per-
haps this was due to the reserve—or caginess bordering on timidity—
of zoologists nowadays; perhaps, too, they did not want to advertise this
thread of evidence until they had followed it up on another expedition.
There is still one honour to be won—to be the first to capture a living
moa.


That New Zealand can still hide an unknown animal of fair size is


strikingly proved by the story of another odd bird, the takahe. It is a


good story, but I have not room here for more than a brief summary.
The reader will find more details in Willy Ley’s Dragons in Amber.


When the moa-hunt first began in North Island, the Maoris often
mentioned another bird, the moho that they had formerly eaten, but it
had now vanished. It was as big as a goose, and it could not fly although


it had wings and feathers that looked like real feathers. But in all the


harvest of moa bones there was none of the less interesting moho, and
the bird was shelved with other Maori myths until 1847, when Walter


Q
241


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


Mantell obtained near Waingongoro in North Island a sub-fossil skull
and several bones which seemed to have come from a very fat rail. The
bird had a breast-bone and could not therefore have been a kiwi or a
moa. He sent them to his famous father, the geologist, in London, say-
ing that they must have come from the bird known as moho in North
Island and takahe in South Island. Owen confirmed the truth of the
native reports and gave the bird the name of Notornis mantelli.


In 1849 sealers pitched their camp on Resolution Island, one of the
largest islets at the jagged south-west tip of South Island. Their dogs
led them on the trail of a large bird in the snow until they saw it furiously
screaming and flapping in a dog’s jaws.


Its plumage was beautifully coloured
with dark blue and violet on the head
and neck, olive spotted with brighter
green on the back and wings, metallic
blue on the primaries and rectrices (the
largest feathers of the wing and tail),
purplish-blue on the chest and sides, and
white under the rump. The thick beak
and solid legs and feet were brilliant red.


The sealers naturally put the bird in
the pot, but they kept the skin in the
hope of getting some money for it. By


an extraordinary stroke of luck it was
bought by Walter Mantell, who was


*able to let them know in London that


rant Ganges ue
the bird that had vanished from North
Island still lived on the South. In 1850


a Maori caught a second takahe on Secretary Island, not far away from


the first. It was also obtained by Mantell, who sent its feathered skin
home to join the other in the Natural History Museum.


Then the bird vanished for thirty years. When von Hochstetter
landed in New Zealand in 1858 he tried hard to come by a takahe but
on his return to Europe he was obliged to write:


The specimen of Notornis Mantelli caught by seal-hunters in 1850 on
Dusky Bay, South Island, and preserved in the British Museum,
London, has, as far as I know, hitherto remained unique; and it appears
to me, that this family of birds is now totally extinct.


No one had any luck, although a Maori of the fiords said that the bird
was not at all rare on the shores of Lake Te Anau. In 1861-2 a Dr


242


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


Hector found takahe tracks near Thompson Sound and by the central
part of Lake Te Anau; in 1866 a botanist called Gibson actually saw one
in tall marsh grass near Motupipi; and in the same year the Maoris who


told Sir George Grey about hunting small moas insisted that the takahe
was very common. But nothing happened. Scientists in Europe grew


tired of waiting and wrote it off as extinct.


And extinct it would have remained had not a dog come to the rescue
again. This dog was out rabbiting in the Province of Otago near the


fiords in December 1879 and brought back a takahe still breathing to its


master, who dispatched the bird and hung it from the ridge-pole of his


tent, intending to eat it. Fortunately the Station Manager, Connor, hap-


pened to pass the next day, and recognised it. He carefully prepared the


skin and skeleton of this rarest of birds and sent it to London. There it


was sold by auction and bought by the Dresden Museum—to the dis-


may of the curators of the British Museum, who had told their man “‘to


bid as much as 100 pounds sterling for it.”” The Germans had bought it


for £105.


A detailed examination of the first complete skeleton of a takahe at
Dresden showed that it differed noticeably from that of the moho found


at Waingongoro. The new species was called Notornis hochstetteri as a
consolation prize for the scientist who had searched so hard to find it,
and with so little luck.


Then the takahe played hide and seek for another 20 years. Nothing
was found except an incomplete skeleton in 1884 and a complete
one in 1892—both near Lake Te Anau. They knew where to look,
but the best-organised hunts still yielded nothing. The country was
marshy and covered with thick bush, where a bird could easily hide and


a man could hardly go.


The next live takahe, in 1898, was once again caught by a dog, whose


master, a Mr Ross, recognised the bird and preserved it entire—viscera


and all. This specimen, the only one in the world, was sold for £250


to the New Zealand Government, who offered it to the Dunedin


Museum.


Then half a century went by without a sign of the takahe (whose
name means “the wandering one” or “the one that wanders at large”).


It seemed ta the world of science as if Mr Ross’s specimen really was the


last Notornis. There were, it is true, still vague rumours about foot-
prints in the snow and reports from old Maoris who said that the birds


lived in the mountains and only rarely came down near the lakes. But


these tales were of just the sort that most zoologists obstinately refuse to


243


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


notice. This book is full of animals known only from their footprints
and from native legends: evidence that is always greeted with amused
disbelief. The story of the takahe shows how exaggerated and unjusti-
fied this scepticism is. Every time that this bird managed to avoid its
hunters—and their dogs—for a decade the authorities decided that it
must be extinct.


By 1947, just a century after Walter Mantell had proved the existence
—or former existence—of Notornis, only four living specimens of the
bird had been found and there seemed little hope of seeing a takahe
again. But Geoffrey Orbell, a doctor at Invercargill, was undaunted, and
optimistically set off with several companions into the thick forests on
the eastern shore of Lake Te Anau. Three thousand feet up in the
mountains he was surprised to find a small lake which scouts had told
him of, although it did not appear on any map. This lake was well
known in Maori tradition as Kohaka-takahea—“‘‘the nesting-place of the
wandering one.” If one could still discover a whole new lake in this
country, surely there was hope of finding something so inconspicuous as


a bird that could not fly? They had no such luck. They heard unusual
bird-cries and found fresh footprints that might have been made by


their quarry. But no takahe. Dr Orbell was not discouraged. He re-
turned to the place in November 1948, loaded with cameras and ciné-
cameras. His optimism was rewarded. Two takahes were caught in a
single snare. They were tethered by one leg, photographed from every
possible angle, and then released.


A year later Dr Orbell’s third expedition was able to establish several


facts about the takahe’s habits. It was purely vegetarian, it built its nest


level with the ground, and seemed to have only one young one—which
was quite black—a year. A dozen adults were seen. The population of
two colonies in neighbouring valleys was estimated at between 50 and
100.


If it had not been for dogs, which could find the birds when they were
invisible in high forest and scrub, we should pfobably still be unaware
of the takahe. There is therefore all the more reason to think that the
moa may survive. And Dr Orbell, encouraged by his success, has set
about trying to capture a living Megalapteryx. The sceptics will object
that the takahe never vanished for very long, but that the moa has been
lost for a century or two. The recent resurrection of the cahow should
answer this objection.


244


THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


Until lately it was universally thought that the Bermuda petrel
(Pterodroma cahow) had disappeared between 1609 and 1621, exter-
minated by settlers hungry for its flesh and eggs. The annals of the
period report that some pioneers sent to Cooper Island, at the eastern
end of the Bermudas, stuffed them-
selves with cahows until they died
of indigestion.
This orgy, which
the famine in the Bermudas helps
to explain, was equally fatal for the
poor birds, who seemed to have
been exterminated.


But in 1951 a team of American
naturalists working with Dr Robert
Cushman
Murphy,
Curator
of
Oceanic Birds in the American
Museum of Natural History, were
staggered to come upon cahow nests,
apparently in use, on the cliffs of
small islands off Castle Harbour.
Five live birds were caught in run-
ning nooses on the end of bamboos,
examined,
ringed and
released.
Seventeen nests were counted in


67. The cahow, or Bermuda
petrel.


the crevices of the cliff, which showed that the population did not
consist only of the few individuals that had been seen.


The Bermuda petrel had been thought to be extinct for more than


three centuries, and it is a flying bird, far more conspicuous and visible


than any flightless bird, however large. Today it is resurrected, and one
day the moa may well be resurrected too.


245


CHAPTER ELEVEN


Waitoreke, the Impossible New
Zealand Mammal


If Cleopatra’s nose had been shorter, it would
have changed the face of the world.
PASCAL.


PASCAL was exaggerating, of course, but his hyperbole would have
been literally true of those much less conspicuous organs, the waitoreke’s


teats. This animal, which has such cataclysmic implications, is a shy
and ordinary-looking little beast. But it seems to be a mammal, and it


is reported in New Zealand, the only country in the world, apart from
small islands, that contains no indigenous mammals. There is geological
evidence that New Zealand was joined to Australia only until the Jur-


assic period, when reptiles still ruled the world, and was cut off before
the marsupial invasion in the middle of the following period; and there


is the argument that not a single species of indigenous mammal has been
found in New Zealand. If it should turn out that a hitherto undis-
covered animal with teats inhabits that country, palaeogeographical re-
constructions would have to be completely revised and the date of sub-
mergence of certain continental bridges would have to be changed by
several tens of millions of years. For the waitoreke to reach New Zealand
dryshod, the sea would have to have parted, as the Red Sea did for
Moses, and closed again behind it in time to stop the advancing mar-


supials. Thus the face of the world at the beginning of the Cretaceous
period literally depends on whether the waitoreke was
a mammal. But
was it? The creature is certainly supposed to have fur—but in this part
of the world even birds, like the kiwi and moa, look as if they are covered
with hair.


Such a puzzling creature with such revolutionary implications might
be expected to arouse the constant and active curiosity of zoologists.


246


WAITOREKE, THE IMPOSSIBLE NEW ZEALAND MAMMAL


Actually most specialists have never even heard its name, and those who
have find it simpler to ignore the problems that it implies by denying its
existence out of hand. Nevertheless the waitoreke has good credentials.
In about 1850 Walter Mantell first heard of a mammal which he


called kaureke, He was the son of a famous scientist and was a respon-


sible man, destined to take an important part in New Zealand politics
—not one to spread tall stories. When he was camping at Arowhena,


not far from the present-day coastal town of Timaru on South Island,


the Maoris told him that the kaureke was found some 10 miles inland.


It was a very rare animal, they said, and because of its nocturnal habits


there was little chance of seeing it. But its fur was very light in colour,


almost white, and they said they had several times had a glimpse of it at


its drinking-places. Mantell at once offered a large reward. The Maoris


set off into the heart of the country, but eventually came back empty-


handed. They would not have hunted so hard for a mythical animal.


Their good faith was plain enough, Mantell told his father, adding that


the beast might be extinct, but if so it had only died out recently. A


few years later much more was heard of the creature, and the informa-


tion was far more detailed.
In his great work on New Zealand, first published in 1863, Ferdinand


von Hochstetter is quite explicit:


From certain terms occurring in the Maori language, and from the


most recent observations we may infer beyond a doubt, that New
Zealand still harbours some few sporadic mammalia, which have thus
far escaped the searching eye of science....


After reviewing the Maori names for the various mammals (pekapeka
the bat, kiore the little native rat and kararehe the native dog), which
could all have reached New Zealand after it was cut off, he remarks:


Besides these names we find the name Waitoreke, which has been
only lately clearly defined, having been hitherto applied sometimes to an
otter-like, and sometimes to a seal-like animal. According to the reports
of Dr. J. Haast, the existence of this animal has been recently estab-
lished beyond a doubt; it lives in the rivers and lakes in the mountain


ranges of the South Island, is of the size of a large cony with a glossy
brown fur, and is probably to be classed with the otters.


This information was based on a letter of 6 June 1861 from Dr
Julius Haast, who wrote:


Ata
height of 3500 feet above the level of the sea I frequently saw its


tracks on the upper Ashburton River (Prov. Canterbury, South Island),
in a region never before trodden by man. They resemble the tracks of


247


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


our European otter,—only a little smaller. The animal itself, however,
was likewise seen by two gentlemen, who have a sheep-station at Lake
Heron not far from the Ashburton, 2100 feet high. They describe the
animal as dark-brown, of the size of a stout cony. On being struck
at with the whip, it uttered a shrill, yelping sound, and quickly dis-
appeared in the water amid the sea-grass.


There is so little likeness between the kaureke (whitish and seen at its
drinking-places) and the waitoreke (dark brown and aquatic) that one
may well wonder whether they are not two different animals, or the


first a distorted hearsay version of the second. Certainly we have more
information about the second, which has been reported by white wit-
nesses, so let us concentrate upon it for the moment. As far as I know
nobody has met either animal since.


The description of the waitoreke, vague though it is, reminds me of
three separate creatures. First one thinks of the Australian bunyip which


is sometimes described as a seal, sometimes as an otter. But the bunyip is
too problematical to be used to explain another problem. Then, like von
Hochstetter, one is reminded of an otter—yet how.could a placentary
mammal like an otter have reached New Zealand when Australia, the
previous stage in the colonisation of Oceania, contains nothing but
marsupials? If it is a true otter it could have come by sea, for there is a
purely maritime species: the sea-otter (Enhydra lutris). It sleeps in the
open sea, floating on its back, in which position it usually swims. It
does not even land—as the seals do—in the breeding season. It mates
and gives birth in the sea. When its young are too small to swim under
their own steam it carries them on its belly.


This large animal is much hunted for its fur and has consequently
become much rarer. Now it is said to be found only around the Aleu-


tians and other North Pacific Islands; but in 1938 a pack of 400 were
seen swimming down the Californian coast, and the Marquis de Chat-
teleux, that indefatigable. globe-trotter who signs his travel-books


68. Sea-otter carrying its young.


WAITOREKE, THE IMPOSSIBLE NEW ZEALAND MAMMAL


“Stany,” says he has seen large numbers along the coast of southern
Chile, which seems to imply an extraordinarily long migration.


If this was possible on the east of the Pacific, it could also have hap-
pened on the west, and the sea-otter could thus have reached New
Zealand. It would have been a more hazardous voyage, for after visiting


all the archipelagos between the Kuriles and the New Hebrides—Japan,}
the Philippines and New Guinea—the sea-otter would have had to cross


a wide stretch of sea without a single landmark on the way. It could, of


course, have been driven there involuntarily by the Equatorial Current


from the New Hebrides, that washes the east coast of Australia, turns a


half-circle and warms the west coast of New Zealand. Once the sea-


otter had reached New Zealand waters it could not have returned against


the current, and could easily have given up its migratory habits and


made its way up the rivers to live like its ancestors in fresh water. All


this is pure hypothesis—but only a hypothesis can explain the waitoreke.


Perhaps it might be some kind of platypus. The Australian animal is
very like an otter, and it would not have so far to come as the sea-otter.
To find it—or a relative—in New Zealand would fit in with the family


tree of the mammals and the geography of past ages.


It is wrong to try—as many authors do—to derive each group of
mammals by direct descent from another. The monotremes, marsu-
pials and placentals should be considered as three separate and succes-


sive attempts with varying success at a type of vertebrate with a constant
temperature and able to suckle its young.


The marsupials have often been considered to be the ancestors of the
placentals [writes Jean Piveteau, Professor of Palaeontology at the
Sorbonne]. An anatomical study free of all preconceived ideas shows
that they are nothing of the kind. These two great subdivisions of
mammals developed independently of one another, while still remaining
closely parallel in their adaptations.


At first sight the oviparous monotremes, which have many reptilian


features, look as if they derive from the reptiles, rather than from the


amphibians, the probable ancestors of the other mammals. But a study


of their brain, heart and diaphragm shows that they are indeed true


mammals, but have diverged very early from the original stock and


become very specialised along peculiar lines.


Be that as it may, the three groups of mammals certainly grew and


1 Sea-otters were found in Hokkaido until they were exterminated in the
Western Pacific by fur-traders in the nineteenth century.


249


THE LIVING FOSSILS OF OCEANIA


expanded at quite different periods—as is usual with rival types. There


is not the least doubt that the marsupials spread and flourished before
the placentals. But practically nothing is known of the monotremes’
ancestors. The most one can say is that there was a great crop of repti-
lian mammals (or mammalian reptiles) in the Jurassic period, and that
the monotremes were probably among them. During the Age of Rep-


tiles they could have spread across the world from Asia to Australia and
thence to New Zealand, which were then all connected, without being
noticed much, although the reptile empire would still have been able to
crush any rising of true mammals. If there is an indigenous mammal in
New Zealand which has been there ever since the islands were cut off,
there is a good chance that it is a monotreme. And as it is supposed to
look like an otter—that is to say like a platypus—the most likely theory
is that it is one of this creature’s close relatives. The distribution of the
three groups of mammals would then fit in perfectly with the geological


69. Platypus swimming (after Hartwig, 1910).


changes of the past. The main expansion of the monotremes would
have been in the Jurassic period. Then in the middle of the Cretaceous
the rising tide of marsupials swept them off the earth except for a few


rare species in Australia and New Guinea, and one, the waitoreke, which
escaped when New Zealand was cut off. Finally the placentals, at the
end of the Cretaceous and beginning of the Eocene periods ousted all
the marsupials but a few in South and Central America and the
Southern States of the U.S.A., from everywhere except the now isolated
countries of New Guinea and Australia.


If, despite all this theorising, it should turn out that the wazitoreke is
neither a sea-otter nor a monotreme, it must have been introduced by
the Maoris when they came to New Zealand. But while it is easy to see
how they carried dogs on purpose and rats by accident it is hard to
understand how they could have brought this strange animal, let it run
wild and then forgotten that they had done so. If the waitoreke is not a
myth it is certainly the devil ofa puzzle.


250


SE


Part Four


RIDDLES OF THE
GREEN CONTINENT


‘Now, down here in the Matto Grosso’”’—he
swept his cigar over a part of the map—‘“‘or up in
this corner where three countries meet, nothin’
would surprise...”
SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE, The Lost World.


NOOR Th


ASTORIA TROTTING


Matto \Grosso


)


Rio de Janeiro


tayahy
ataring


Ax Cate
AL Nel
(ee


L,Nahuel Huapi >


Os Gere
Au N


EE
vn
“OO:
.
L.Buenos Aires eS t{Colhuapi


i? Santa
is


Mi
oie
SS EC CS Ce CE a SE VER aa


Tropical Forests


CHAPTER TWELVE


The Patagonian Giant Sloth


Only one fault he had, which cock-robins have likewise .
.
. that when any
one else found a curious worm, he would hop round them, and peck them,
and set up his tail, and bristle up his feathers, just as a cock-robin would;
and declare that he found the worm first; and that it was his worm: and,
if not, that then it was not a worm at all.


CHARLES KINGSLEY, The Water-Babies.


THE conquistadors who first discovered Central and South America
must have been disappointed to find that although the fauna was so rich
and new, there were no monsters. From the beginning, naturalists have
seen the so-called neo-tropical zone, which stretches from Mexico and
the West Indies to the very tip of South America, as a region of small
animals. The llama, the tallest of its quadrupeds, is merely a rather
thin, humpless small camel, a dwarf compared to a giraffe. The deer


are small and have small horns, the tiny pudu standing only 144 inches


at the shoulder. The tapir, the most massive of the indigenous mam-
mals, is far from the size of its distant African cousins the elephant and
the rhinoceros. The peccary is merely a miniature wild boar. The
jaguar and the puma or cougar are smaller than the lion and tiger.
There is only one bear, the spectacled bear (Tremarctos ornatus), which


lives in the Equatorial Andes of Bolivia and Chile, and it is small in
height and bulk. None of the monkeys is as big as a gorilla or orang-
utan. And the pygmy marmoset (Cebuella pygmaea) is so small that
you can hold it all in the palm of your hand.


Among the birds the phenomenon is less obvious, for South America
can boast one of the largest living flying birds: the condor of the
Andes (Vultur gryphus), which disputes the title with the wandering
albatross, is 4 feet long and its wing-span may exceed ro feet. But the


rhea, the largest South American running bird, is at least a third smaller


253


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


than an ostrich, and the most typical neo-tropical birds are the family
of humming-birds (Trochilidae) which are found only in America.


On the other hand, the orders of mammals that are usually small are
relative giants in Central and South America. All the largest rodents


are found there—the subungulates as they are called, the paca, agouti
and the capybara, a sort of huge guinea-pig 3 feet long with webbed toes
and weighing as much as 150 pounds. Among the insectivores there is
the very rare almiqui (Solenodon paradoxus) of Cuba and Haiti which
looks like a shrew with big ears but is as large as a rabbit. Its tail alone


is 8 inches long. And there are giants among almost all the groups of
smaller animals, particularly the insects. Some South American Lepidop-
tera—the Atlas moth (Coscinocera hercules), for instance—have a wing
span of over 13 inches. There are wasps and ants (the terrible tucandera,
for example) which are the size of mice; and the largest of the spiders, a
tarantula (Gramostola), is 10} inches across (the body alone is 34 inches
across) and is not afraid to attack chickens and snakes and sometimes
even succeeds in bleeding a rabbit to death.


There is, however, one group of mammals in the neo-tropical zone
which cannot be compared with those in other zones, for they are pecu-


liar to it: the Xenarthra, consisting of the anteaters, sloths and arma-


dillos.1 These creatures, which are odd in more than one respect, vary
considerably in size. The giant anteater (Myrmecophaga jubata) is
sometimes nearly 8 feet long—thanks to its enormous plume of a tail
which is as long as the rest of its body. The pygmy anteater (Cyclopes
didactylus) is hardly as big as a squirrel. The armadillos range from the
giant armadillo (Priodontes gigas), 5 feet long, to the pichiciago (Chlamy-
phorus truncatus), a mere 6 inches. The sloths, the most phlegmatic of
mammals, are never larger than a young chimpanzee.


As a general rule the animals in the neo-tropical zone are fairly small.
So, even though much of South America is still unexplored, one is not
inclined a priori to put much credit in certain legends there about quite
enormous beasts.


In Patagonia travellers have collected from the Tehuelche Indians ?


1 The creatures of the Old World, which are occasionally called ‘‘anteaters,”
belong to different zoological orders. They were originally included in the order
of Edentata with the anteaters, sloths and armadillos, but now the aardvarks
are included in the ungulates, and the pangolins form an order of their own, the
Pholidota.
5


2 These are the tall Indians (5 feet 6 inches to 5 feet 11 inches) whom Magel-
lan called Patagons (Spanish for “‘big feet’”) because they wore shoes of llanva’s
fur. Tehuelche is the name given to these pampas Indians by their mountain
neighbours, the Araucans. They call themselves Tzoneka.


254


—


:
i)
Vl GY


4
Sih:
UY
Fy
;
aed
bs
Ai
ak Vy


ype


WW ZA,
A? Za
4


70. Giant anteater.


a description, very vague it must be admitted, of a large nocturnal
animal, of which no trace can be found among the living fauna of the


continent.


It is a large heavy beast, as big as an ox but with shorter legs and
covered with thick short coarse hair. Its appearance is very frightening.


It is armed with enormous hooked claws, just like an anteater’s, with
which it digs a huge burrow, where it sleeps all day: that is why it is
hardly ever seen. According to some versions its habits are amphibious.
There is some doubt whether it is savage or not, but all agree that it
cannot be harmed by arrows or bullets, and oddly enough, this last
fabulous-looking characteristic is the best evidence that the monster is
not a fable.


The a prior reasons for discounting such tales are somewhat weak-
ened when one learns that South America was not always inhabited only
by relatively small mammals. The first irrefutable proof of.this was
established in 1789, when gigantic bones which seemed to belong to an
animal almost as large as an elephant were found in mud on the banks
of the Rio Luyan not far from Buenos Aires. The peons were the only
people not to be surprised at this discovery: it was a giant mole, they


said, which died whenever it had the misfortune to be exposed to sun-


light.1 This naive explanation satisfied no one else, so the Marquis of
Loreto, then Viceroy of the colony, had the bones sent to King Charles
IV of Spain, who presented them to the Royal Museum of Madrid,
where they were entrusted to José Garriga. This naturalist at once set


1 Curiously enough we shall find the same legend in Siberia and China where
it refers to the carcases of frozen mammoths which have appeared in thawing
glaciers. See page 332.


255


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


about preparing, assembling and mounting the skeleton so that he could — 7
make a detailed description. The results of his slow and painstaking
work were published in 1796, to the great excitement of the entire —
scientific world. Goethe wrote an essay on the monster in which some
have seen the beginnings of a theory of evolution.
Meanwhile a French diplomat had visited the Spanish scientist and
had taken to the Paris Museum five remarkable engravings of this skele-
ton which Juan-Bautista Bru had made to illustrate the preliminary
description of the fossil. A young naturalist called Georges Cuvier, who
was just beginning to be talked about, saw another opportunity here to
add to his reputation. The future ‘‘Father of Palaeontology,” who had


a certain skill in comparative anatomy and even more temerity, set about
placing the monster in its zoological classification on the mere evidence
of these drawings. This was not unusual for him.


He used to talk about all kinds of sciences [wrote de Blainville], and
to write about all parts of them so interestingly, without even having
studied them; for this it was enough to have had a conversation with the
specialists or to have read some of the notes that they had written, and
he had the art of connecting and linking everything together making it
so wonderfully interesting that one would have thought that he under-
stood the subject thoroughly.


This facility coupled with ambition and utter lack of humility led
him to make several memorable bloomers—which he always knew how


to cover up—but this time he was in the right and added considerably


to his fame.
.


In a communication to the Académie des Sciences he gave the name
of Megatherium (“large mammal”) to the animal which he recognised as


a sort of “giant sloth.”


Its teeth [he wrote] prove that it lived on vegetables, and its sturdy
forefeet, armed with cutting claws, lead us to believe that it was prin-
cipally their roots that it attacked. Its size and its foreclaws would have
provided sufficient means of defence.
It could not run fast, but it was
not necessary for it to do so, as it had no need either to pursue or to
flée;.k.%


Cuvier was convinced his contemporaries had a complete know-
ledge of all the large animals that recently inhabited the earth; the mon-


ster must therefore have perished, and, what is more, perished during a
general cataclysm before man spread over the whole earth.
So he
concluded somewhat airily:


256


ie
Megatherium’s
sest living relatives:


- two-toed sloth, or
au (above), and the
ee-toed sloth, or ai


(right).


The armadillos ;
even
more
hea
armoured than th
distant
cousin
1
Mylodon.


9


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


It would be very hard to find the causes of its destruction in its struc-
ture alone; but if it still existed, where could it have hidden from all the
searches of hunters and naturalists?


Its similarities relate it to several kinds of edentates. It has the head
and shoulders of the sloths. The legs and feet provide a strange mix-
ture of characteristics belonging to the anteaters and the armadillos.


We can now see that there is nothing monstrous in this mixture, since


all the ingredients come from very closely related animals. But everyone
was surprised at the size of this South American animal. When it stood
on its hind-legs it was about 15 feet high.


Unlike present-day sloths, it could not have lived in trees. From all
W/


71. Reconstruction of the Megatherium.


that we now know about it, it seems to have been a sort of huge and
hairy bear, armed with terrible claws like so many sickles. It must have
usually stood upon its hind-legs. Its heavy and powerful tail, the struc-
ture of its pelvis and hind-legs forming an enormous supporting base,
the type of articulation of its vertebrae, all show a clear tendency to an
upright posture. Subsequently, at Carson City in Nevada, huge foot-
prints, 18 inches long by 8 inches wide, were found to confirm this


theory.1 If the creature sometimes put its fore-feet on the ground (like


1 These footprints, imprinted in hard rock, were discovered in a prison yard.
For a long time they were taken for a giant’s because of their human appearance.
Mark Twain wrote a humorous article about them in which they were the result
of a memorable binge.


R
257


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


the kangaroo when it walks without jumping), it must have been so
lightly that the heavy hind-feet at once obliterated all trace of them.


The Megatherium’s great height enabled it to feed on the foliage
of


trees, hooking its claws firmly on to their branches so that it could
browse lazily with the least effort. With its powerful claws it must even
have been able to uproot taller trees so that it could graze on their


leaves. Certainly it was strong enough to do so, but if it was as indolent


as its little nephews the ai and the unau, it might well have scorned the


effort.


Naturalists were so impressed by the size and strangeness of this
creature that at the end of the eighteenth century and for most of the
nineteenth they did not dream that it could possibly have survived until
our time. In Europe the large animals, like the ancient elephant, the
mammoth and the rhinoceros, had been extinct since a geological era
which according to Cuvier’s Theory of Revolutions of the Globe had
preceded our own. On this analogy the Megatherium was thought to
have perished in the Tertiary era. Man could never have known this
monster of a past age.


This did not prevent King Charles IV from being so struck by the
description of the animal that he at once ordered the officials of his
transatlantic colony to send him one dead or alive. Several generations
of scientists laughed at the King’s folly. But since then much evidence
has shown that the King was nearer to the truth than the scientists.
Today no zoologist dare swear that it was impossible to grant at least
part of the King’s wish and send him the body not of an actual Mega-
therium, but of a relative almost as large. For the Megatherium is not
the only giant in the group of sloths, which collectively are known as
gravigrades.
In pampean and even in post-pampean deposits they
were represented by a whole series of giants, among which were the
Mylodons (Mylodon, Glossotherium, Grypotherium) which were very like
the Megatherium, except that they were about the size of an ox and had
much longer tails.


The Tehuelche Indians’ legend seems much less absurd than it did


at first. But other evidence was soon to give it a peculiar weight. Little
by little as the years went by it became evident that the giant gravi-
grades, though huge and fantastic, were not such old fossils as the extinct
‘pachyderms in Europe. And scientists eventually had to admit that
the mammoth and the rhinoceros had been contemporary with man
during the Quaternary era, when pictures of them were found in caves.
258


id ieee
en
etl
le


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


Given the clearly recent date of the pampean deposits, to say nothing of
the post-pampean, in which the remains of the Megatherium and other
no less impressive creatures were found, they could only date from the
very latest geological period, either the Upper Pleistocene or even the
present period, the Holocene. That is to say they lived less than 30,000


years ago. But as it was almost universally believed that man did not


invade America, by way of the Bering Strait, until quite recently—


between 2,000 and 20,000 years ago according to various estimates (and


in the nineteenth century scientists inclined to the shorter period 1)—no


one thought at first that human beings could have known these monsters.
And no prehistorian had ever been able to show the smallest drawing of


the giant edentates comparable to the French cave-paintings of mam-


moths and reindeer.


In 1870, however, the first evidence was found that man in South
America had been contemporary with some of the vanished gravigrades.
In a terrace of the little valley of the Rio Frias near Mercedes the famous
Argentine palaeontologist Florentino Ameghino discovered some very
decomposed human bones, and with them were some cut stones, char-
coal and some animal bones that had been pierced or incised, the re-
mains of another huge monster: the Glyptodon (see illustration on page
303). This was not a giant sloth but a giant armadillo that had evolved
a rigid carapace like a tortoise’s shell, which alone was sometimes as
much as 12 feet long. Everything outside this armoured dome was
covered with plates, and in one of them (Doedicurus) the massive tail
ended in a spiny ball like a mediaeval mace. It was a living tank.


In 1881, near the Rio Arrecifer, Professor Santiago Roth found in
deposits at Fontezuelas an almost complete human skeleton curled up
under, or at least very near to, a Glyptodon’s carapace. Further similar
finds—carapaces that had been tipped up or turned over by man;
worked flints and traces of hearths under these animal cupolas—soon
showed that the first South Americans used Glyptodon carapaces either


as houses or as tombs.


I need hardly say that these discoveries, which flatly contradicted the
accepted theories of the day, were bitterly disputed. Anthropologists


refused to believe that man could have come to America as early as the


date when giant edentates were supposed to have lived. Palaeontologists


1 From recent archaeological discoveries and the method of dating organic
remains absolutely by measuring the radio-active Carbon 14 in them, it now
seems certain that the oldest human remains in America date from the end of the
Pleistocene. “This would be 10,000 or 12,000 years ago, or 15,000 at the very
most.”—Boule and Vallois, Les Hommes Fossiles, 4th ed., 1952.


259


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


denied that these creatures could have survived so Jate as man’s arrival
in the continent. Both proved to be wrong.


It could no longer be pretended—somewhat disingenuously—that
recent Indians had merely been using fossil carapaces, when the
charred bones of gravigrades were dug up and found to bear marks of
crude implements it was clear that after cutting off the meat the Indians
had split the bones to get at the marrow. And one day a giant sloth’s
skeleton was found at the bottom of what had once been a pit in a posi-
tion which made it possible to reconstruct exactly how it had died. The
four legs were still complete, but all the middle of the body had been
more or less destroyed and had been replaced by charcoal and ashes.
Obviously the sloth had been trapped in the pit, and as they were unable


to get it out the Indians had roasted it im situ by lighting a fire under its


belly.


There was now no doubt that the Megatherium had lived at the same
time as man. But for how long had it continued to do so? Man’s first
migrations in Alaska, according to the most exact estimates, seem to
have happened about 12,000 years ago, around 10,000 B.c, But when
did the first men reach the very tip of South America? Several thousand
years later, no-doubt—let us say 7,000 B.c.1 Thus the first American
Indians could equally well have caught giant edentates and eaten their
flesh in historical times or several thousand years earlier. The date the
monsters had become extinct was still very much in doubt—if they really
were extinct. No one, it is true, has yet killed one or shown one in a
zoo, but Patagonia is huge and little known, especially the almost
fathomless boscosa, the forest region between the pampas and the Cor-


dillera of the Andes. And there was still the Tehuelche legend.


Then, in 1898, someone brought Professor Florentino Ameghino, of
the Buenos Aires Museum, a lot of little bones the size of beans from
southern Patagonia and asked him what animal they could have come
from. They had been extracted from a piece of leather ? inch thick and
covered with long reddish-grey hairs in which they had been embedded


like small cobbles in a road. This skin belonged without the slightest
doubt to a large ground-sloth, and Ameghino was even able to deter-
mine its origin more exactly. It was already known from palaeonto-


1 In the cave of Palli-Aike, near the Straits of Magellan, hearths have been
found containing half-charred bones of horses, guanacos and Mylodons. Thanks
to the Carbon 14 method Libby and Arnold have recently been able to fix their
age exactly at 8,700 years.


260


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


logical discoveries that the Mylodon, the Pseudolestodon and the Glos-
sotherium were protected all over with these little bones, which were
contained in the skin and were presumably a stage on the way to the
more highly developed ossification to be seen in the armadillos. Nothing
of this kind had been noticed in the remains of the Megatherium, Lesto-
don or Scelidotherium. From the size and shape of the bony nodules,


Professor Ameghino reckoned that they had come from the fresh


remains of an animal similar to a Mylodon.


Ameghino was a bold and original man—reckless and too quick to
leap to conclusions, his enemies often rightly said—and this was enough
for him to publish in 1898 a first note upon “a living representative of
the ancient fossil gravigrade edentates of the Argentine.” He had a good


72. Asian pangolin.


reason for being so positive. A friend of his called Ramon Lista, who
was the Argentine Secretary of State and a well-known geographer and


traveller, had seen a curiously similar animal with his own eyes several
years before. During an expedition into the heart of the province of
Santa Cruz, in southern Patagonia, Lista and his companions saw an odd
quadruped resembling an Asian pangolin (Manis) both in shape and


size, except that instead of being covered with scales it had long reddish-


grey hairs. He was sure it was not a pangolin—an animal unknown in


the New World—but thought it must be some sort of edentate closely


related to one. They shot at the beast several times, but this did not


seem to trouble it in the least, and it vanished into the bush apparently


unharmed.


The Tehuelche had not lied.
It is not surprising that a creature,
armoured as some of the gravigrades are, could endure volleys of arrows


261


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


and even gunshot without injury. And the legend at once loses its aura
of incredible fable.


In spite of the authority of Lista [wrote Ameghino], who, besides
being a learned traveller was also a skilled observer, I have always con-
sidered that he was mistaken, the victim of an illusion.


Now it really seemed it was not an illusion, and Ameghino concluded
that the gravigrade from which his bony nodules had come was of the
same species as that seen by his friend. It must be a close relation to the
Mylodon, a long-tailed ground-sloth remarkably similar in outline to


a pangolin. The Mylodon, while not so vast as the Megatherium, was by
no means so small as the Indian
pangolin, which is never more
than 4 feet 3 inches in length,
of which 1 foot 9 inches is tail
alone.
But as the Tehuelche
spoke of a rather large animal,
might not Lista have seen a
young specimen? At all events
the possible existence of a sur-
viving ground-sloth of small


size was of immense zoological


interest, and in his original 1898
description, Ameghino never
identified the mysterious crea-
ture with the Mylodon, which


73. Piece
of Mylodon’s
hide,
still
was as big as an ox.


bearing hair and small bones in the
At the moment
wh
=
skin. (Palaeontology gallery of the am eaine Sey bes ADE £
Paris Museum)
D. cROSSCSSID..D


his
sensational
little
bones,
Lista had just been killed by the Tobas Indians while he was exploring
the Pilcomayo region.! The Professor named this new little Mylodon
Neomylodon listai in his honour.


Ameghino’s note caused sensational headlines all over the world, and
soon everyone was eager for more news of the mysterious creature. The


first thing to be found was the piece of fresh hide which he had referred
to—though not very explicitly. This did not take long, for similar
pieces of skin had come into the hands of several scientists: the Swedish


1 And not by political enemies as Willy Ley reports, presumably under the
impression that this is the normal death of all South American politicians.


262


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


explorer, Dr Otto Nordenskjéld in 1896 and Dr Francisco P. Moreno,
Director of the La Plata Museum in 1897.


These samples had both been cut from a piece of leather 5 feet long
by about 2 feet 6 inches wide which had been casually hung from a tree


to mark the boundary of an estancia belonging to a retired German cap-


tain called Eberhardt, who was farming at Shemenaiken near the Rio


Gallegos close to the Straits of Magellan.


Some said the skin was a cow’s, others a llama’s—at all events the
animal must have had a strange skin disease. No one was certain, not
even Eberhardt, who had found the skin in January 1895 while he was
exploring a cave with several companions.
This cave, as vast as a
cathedral, in which they also found a human skeleton in a little niche,
lay on the shores of a fiord called Ultima Esperanza—Last Hope


Inlet. One thing was certain, the skin, which was found buried in the
ground, carefully rolled up inside out, had been prepared by human
hands.


After it had been hung up it excited the curiosity of several visitors,
who took the liberty of cutting off little pieces as souvenirs—a task which
needed an axe or a saw because of the embedded bony nodules. Dr
Otto Nordenskjéld visited Eberhardt in 1896 on his first expedition to
Terra del Fuego and systematically excavated the Cueva Eberhardt and
brought to light the horny sheath of a ground-sloth’s enormous claw.
He took his finds back to Sweden, where Einar Lénnberg published a
description of them in 1899. This zoologist agreed with Ameghino about
the animal the skin had come from: the bony nodules, and also the claw,
showed that it was related to the Mylodon. But, from the size of the
whole skin, the Neomylodon must be about the size of a small rhino-
ceros—which happened to be the size of one of the Mylodons whose
remains were found in pampean deposits. He thought that the creature
Lista had seen must have been a quite different animal. But this does


not necessarily follow, since even a rhinoceros is no bigger than a calf


at one stage of its existence. Finally he pronounced that the animal was


certainly no longer extant:


It is absolutely impossible to think that this animal, if it was still
among living beings, could have eluded the sharp eyes of the native
Indians.
Even if it had exclusively nocturnal habits, and hid itself
during the daytime in the most desolate places, the hunting Indians
must have come across it now and then, and they must certainly have
observed its tracks, its traces where it had broken off branches and
twigs when feeding, its scratchings or diggings in the earth, its excre-
ments, etc.


263


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


This opinion is all the more surprising since Ameghino had already
noted the Tehuelches’ tales about the animal.
It is true that he had
spoken rather vaguely and that it was only in his second note that he
completed his inquiries on the subject.


Subsequent visitors to Eberhardt’s estancia, most of them Chilean


officers, carried off small pieces of the skin, and presumably it was one
of these souvenirs that eventually found its way to Ameghino’s desk. In
1897 Dr Francisco Moreno, of the La Plata Museum, excavated the
Cueva Eberhardt with the geologist Rudolf Hauthal and Dr Emile
Racovitza, who had been zoologist on the famous Belgica Expedition.
An engineer called Luis A. Alvarez, who had been with Eberhardt when
the cave was first discovered, acted as their guide. In the cave they
found nothing but the remains of a large rodent (Miolania); but Alvarez
had already taken them to Eberhardt’s farm, where Moreno saw that


all that was left of the giant sloth’s skin was a scrap about 18 inches
square. This was better than nothing. With Eberhardt’s permission
Moreno took it back to the Museum of La Plata in July 1898. Ameghi-
no’s bombshell burst a few months later.


Dr Moreno, who had to go to England at that time, took with him the
square of skin, and on 17 January 1899 showed it to the members of the
Zoological Society of London, who could hardly contain their excite-
ment. Nevertheless he claimed not to be astonished by his examination
of the skin, which was obviously fresh and had been cut off by human
hands. For it had now been established that Mylodons were contem-
porary with man farther north in the Argentine. Moreover Moreno had
himself found in a neighbouring cave another mummified body, also
very well preserved, of a man of an extinct race quite unknown to the
Tehuelche who now inhabited the area. He therefore maintained, with
Professor Seeley’s support, that the Mylodon’s skin could have remained
in an apparently fresh state untold ages, just like the moa’s skin and
feathers.}


The whole meeting disagreed with this view, and were sure that the
skin belonged to a recently dead animal; it was still fairly supple, and
one could see remains of muscles and ligaments and a “‘coating of dried
serum was still preserved on the old cut edges,” as Sir Arthur Smith


1 As we have already seen, the moas, even if they were completely extinct, had
not been so for more than a century, so this argument is worthless. G. E. H.
Barrett-Hamilton was more to the point when he recalled, somewhat later, that
very fresh remains of the Norway lemming (Lemmus lemmus) had been found in
Portugal. Even in the Pleistocene period no traces of this rodent are found
south of England.


264


ited
te


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


Woodward who undertook the official description remarked. Sir Arthur
“would, indeed have unhesitatingly pronounced the skin to belong to
a recent animal killed quite lately, had not Dr Moreno been able to give


so circumstantial an account of its discovery.”


It was at this point that Professor Ameghino’s second note appeared.
After remarking that the Tehuelche name for the strange quadruped he
had already mentioned was iemisch, or in Spanish tigre de agua (water-


tiger), he said that he was now in a position to reveal more about this


creature, thanks to the discoveries of his brother Carlos, who for two


years had been constantly travelling in Patagonia collecting fossils and


doing geological research. In the middle of the previous year, 1897, he


had written to Ameghino as follows, sending him several little bones:


I have at last obtained some valuable data about the famous iemisch,
which is not a myth as we imagined but actually exists. I have seen in
an Indian’s hands a piece of the iemisch’s skin in which were embedded
the little bones that I am sending you, similar to those we have found
in a fossil state with Mylodons’ skeletons. Moreover Hompen, another
Tehuelche Indian, has told me that when he was going from Senguer
to Santa Cruz he had met a temisch on the road which had barred his
way: he opened fire and shot it dead. According to the Indians the
animal is amphibious and walks as easily on dry land as it swims in the
water. Today it is confined to the centre of Patagonia, in caves and
lairs on the banks of Lakes Colhué, Fontana, and Buenos Aires, and the
Rivers Senguer, Aysen, Huemules etc.
But according to tradition, it
once spread north as far as the Rio Negro; and in the south, as old
Indians recall, it used to live in all the lakes on the eastern slopes of the
Andes, right down to the Straits of Magellan. Thus, around the middle
of the century, a iemisch, which had come down from lakes in the Andes
by the Rio Santa Cruz, landed on the northern bank of this river near
Pavon island. The terrified Indians fled into the interior, and as the
only reminder of its inopportune arrival gave the deserted place the
name it still bears today: Jemisch Aiken (that is, ‘‘temisch’s harbour or
port of call’’). This animal is of nocturnal habits, and it is said to be so
strong that it can seize horses with its claws and drag them to the bottom
of the water. According to the description I have been given, it has a
short head, big canine teeth, and no external ears; its feet are short and


plantigrade, with three toes on the fore-feet and four on the hind; +


these toes are joined by a membrane for swimming,
and are also armed


with formidable claws. Its tail is long, flat, and prehensile. Its body is


covered with short hair, coarse and stiff, of a uniform bay colour. Its


size is said to be larger than a puma’s, but its paws are shorter and its
body thicker.


1 Professor Ameghino later altered this to four fore-toes and three hind-toes,
to agree with the anatomy of the Megatherium.
265


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


Professor Ameghino seems to have gone completely astray in accept-
ing this theory of his brother’s that the armoured skin came from the
Patagonians’ iemisch, which hardly agrees with one’s idea of a ground-
sloth like a Mylodon. A monster of this kind might have been rather
frightening because of its enormous size and impressive claws, but it is
too much to believe that this undoubted vegetarian seized horses and
drowned them. It is especially suspicious that a vegetarian should have
canine teeth, or indeed that an edentate should have ordinary teeth
that looked like canines. The iemisch’s alleged amphibious habits—
which its webbed feet confirm—are a long way from the traditional pic-
ture of the Mylodon, not that a creature’s habits are necessarily certain
from its skeleton. Several large vegetarians, like the tapir and hippo-
potamus, lead an amphibious life, although nothing in their skeletons
betrays the fact. It would be very strange for a water animal to have
huge burrowing claws—but it would not be the first paradoxical feature
in an animal. More information about the Mylodon’s habits was needed.


Meanwhile several more scientific expeditions had been to the Cueva
Eberhardt.


The first consisted of Swedish scientists, led by Erland Nordenskjéld,
cousin of the Otto already mentioned, who excavated the cave and
brought back a large quantity of the little bones mixed with dung and
finely chopped hay which constituted the soil in the place where the
skin had been found. After a very thorough comparative study Norden-
skjéld remarked that the little bones and the skin itself could be attri-
buted to aknown Mylodon, Glossotherium darwini, whose fossil remains
had been found in pampean deposits and described by Sir Richard
Owen. Assuming, for lack of information to the contrary, that Ameghi-
no’s bones had come from the Cueva Eberhardt, his name of Neomylo-
don listai was a needless synonym for Glossotherium darwini. This was a
blow to the professor, who had a passion for naming animals, and had
baptised such astronomical numbers, especially of fossils, sometimes
hastily and often mistakenly, that many palaeontologists refused to
accept his names for them. I am not surprised that after Nordenskjéld’s
statement he should have hastened to publish his second note to prove


that his bones had not come from the Cueva Eberhardt; and I should
point out that whereas in his original note he said that he had received
them from someone who asked him what animal they could have come
from, in the second note his brother tells him what animal he thinks
they came from.


266


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


This suspect behaviour does not mean that Ramon Lista did not see
his mysterious animal, or that the Eberhardt skin was not strangely


fresh. Albert Gaudry, the famous French palaeontologist who went to
Sweden to examine all the evidence brought back by the Norden-
skjélds, wrote:


The pieces of skin which M. Lénnberg showed me at Uppsala with
their hairs still firmly attached, a bone with dried muscles still clinging
to it, bones which do not stick
to the tongue, as I saw for
myself,
droppings,
finely
chopped hay in a fresh state,
and several horny parts of
claws intact, are inexplicable
unless the Neomylodon took
refuge in the Cueva Eber-
hardt at a fairly recent date.
There are no reasons
for
doubting M. Ameghino’s be-
lief that one might find it
alive.


After the Swedes an Argen-
tine
expedition
under
the
geologist Rudolf Hauthal, Dr
Moreno’s assistant, set out in
April 1899 and put the con-


tents of the cave of Ultima
Esperanza through a fine sieve.


It turned out that Eberhardt’s
skin had not been found in
the entrance of the cave, but
in an inner chamber, where
the human skeleton had also
been found. A crude wall of
boulders closed the entrance
except for a narrow lateral pas-


sage.
Some 50 yards inside


pene


ae


74. Plan of the chamber in the Cueva
Eberhardt, where the two rolled-up
mylodon skins (a and b) were found.
E: narrow entrance left at the side of a
rough boulder wall. S: niche contain-
ing human skeleton.
7: raised plat-
form. M: small mound. p: chopped
hay. 7 (dotted line): line where ashes
and layer of dung meet.
m: mussel-
shells (after R. Hauthal),


the chamber a second and very thick wall barred the way and formed


a raised platform. In the middle of this part of the chamber rose a


little artificial mound. The ground was covered with a layer of dust


and pebbles varying between 1 and 3 feet in depth, in which were


found obvious remains of a kitchen: mussel-shells and charred pieces


267


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


of guanaco and deer bones. Under this superficial layer, near the plat-
form, they came upon a great mass of excrement belonging to some
herbivorous animal: part of it had been burnt and reduced to ashes.
Nearer the central mound they dug up a heap of dry hay in a good


state of preservation. In this lower layer of dung, fodder and rubbish
they found numerous broken bones of the so-called Neomylodon (alias
Glossotherium), as well as remains of a fossil horse and a large unknown
carnivore.
Finally, near the place where the first rolled-up skin was
found, they found another 3 feet 8 inches by 3 feet in size.


The peculiar arrangement of the place, the skeleton that Eberhardt
and his companions had already found there, the kitchen midden, the
various walls, the heaps of dung and fodder, 3 feet deep in some places,


all seemed to show that giant sloths had been kept alive in this special
enclosed part of the cave. The excrements were obviously those of a
large animal, since the best-preserved ones had kept their shape and
were almost as large as an elephant’s. Moreover, an examination of the
skull of a sloth revealed that man must have brained it with large stones.
Clean-cut bones showed that the beasts had then been dismembered
with sharp cutting-tools and were, of course, finally eaten.


The men who lived there ages ago [concludes Dr Hauthal] were
accustomed to stable their domestic animals in this part of the cavern,
reserving the rest for their own dwelling place.


It seemed indisputable that giant sloths were kept alive in the cave.
Subsequent analysis of the excrements by a British expert called Spencer
Moore showed that the animal’s food was too cleanly cut at the end to
have been done only by its blunt teeth. It must have eaten fodder that
had been reaped by man.


Can one call these sloths true domestic animals? Dr Nehring and
other scientists think not. Is it not more reasonable to suppose that the
Mylodons were accidentally caught in the cave and that the Indians kept
them prisoner as a supply of fresh meat? Or rather, since the depth of
dung shows that a series of sloths were stabled there, that the Indians
were in the habit of catching them and keeping them alive as a reserve
in case food ran short? The most likely, considering the prodigious
strength of these animals, which, though not savage, were well armed,


is that men used to drive them into such caves, just as in India wild
elephants are caught by driving them into stockades. This is far more
probable than that they were really domesticated. No species of animal


is less likely to become extinct than a domesticated one—and with good


268


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


reason. If the sloths were actually domesticated by the Indians—that


is to say they bred in captivity—why does this happen no longer? No
other instance is known of an animal which has ceased to be domes-


ticated, and it is hard to see why anyone should abandon such an
advance so useful to a people who live in dry plains where famine always


threatens. But whether truly domestic or not, the giant sloths certainly


lived side by side with men who fed them with grass, leaves and roots.
This does not in the least agree with the terrifying description of the


Tehuelches’ monstrous iemisch.


The bitter controversy between the various factions about the beast’s
nomenclature and classification, too complex to be explained in detail
here, was complicated even further when Dr Santiago Roth, Hauthal’s
colleague, took the fatal step of dragging in the native word iemisch and
using it as a scientific name for the large carnivore, the end of whose
femur had been found in the dung in the Cueva Eberhardt, justifying
himself thus:


This animal coincides in part with the description that Ameghino
gives of the Neomylodon, even if it does not agree entirely, and I pro-
pose to give it the specific name of listai, replacing the generic name of
Neomylodon, which is not adequate, by that of Iemisch.


This habit of deducing an entire animal from no more than the re-
mains of a femur is all too frequent among palaeontologists misled by
Cuvier’s principle that “any sort of creature can, strictly speaking, be
recognised by any fragment of any of its parts.” Cuvier himself was led
wildly astray by it, mistaking some pieces of a dinosaur first for those
of a rhinoceros and then a hippopotamus. And as to this femur, it was


at first thought by Sir Arthur Smith Woodward to belong to a fossil bear
(Arctotherium) and finally attributed by Erland Nordenskjéld to a large
jaguar many of whose bones he had found in the Cueva Eberhardt.
Professor Roth was still firmly convinced that his own temisch was the
origin of the Tehuelche legend, remarking:


It is very probable that it lived at a not very distant period, on the
banks of lakes and rivers in the Andes and that it was the tiger
nahuel, which gave its name to Lake Nahuel-Huapi.


Although certain cats swim very well, like the jaguar, for example,
which prefers to live near rivers and lagoons, I do not think, however,
that there can have been a species of the Felidae which dwelt both in
the water and on land.


269


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


He concludes that the present Indians knew the iemisch only by


tradition and that no doubt they confused it with several other animals.


It is more than likely, he says, that the amphibious creature they speak
of is “‘the large rodent, a portion of whose femur I possess,” which he
had received from his colleague Hauthal who found it in the cave in 1897.
Obviously he is determined that no light shall be shed'on the problem
unless it springs from his heap of old bones.


Professor Ameghino’s feelings were no less proprietary, and he was
not the man to suffer his Neomylodon to be so lightly dismissed and the
iemisch to be turned into a feline. He brought out a third note in which
he disingenuously and with great cunning combined the legendary
beast with the remains from the Cueva Eberhardt, shamelessly inflating


its size and altering the shape of its head:


Neomylodon listai . . . is as big as a large ox but with shorter legs ..
.
it is about a third smaller than Mylodon robustus.
Its body is covered
with long, thick, coarse hair. .
.
. The very thick skin bears little bones
identical to those in the fossil genus Mylodon in the deepest layer of the
dermis. .
.
. The head is longer than the Mylodon’s, ending in a pointed
snout, and the external ears are only rudimentary.
.
.
. The front tooth,
though not separated by a diastema from the rest, is a little longer, a
shade more canine in shape and more curved than the others.
.
.
. The
feet are flat; the toes are joined by a swimming membrane, and also
armed with large sickle-like claws as in Glossotherium, Catonyx and
Mylodon.


Finally, in a note published in German in March 1900, he went so far


as to claim that the meaning of the word temisch in Tehuelche was “‘little
pebbles” (kleine Steinkérnchen) or “‘that-which-has-little-pebbles-on-it”
(etwas das kleine Steinkérnchen besitzt oder trdgt), But no expert on
Patagonian dialects ever confirmed this etymology.


Without falling into the same error as Roth and Ameghino, who each
insisted that his own little pile of remains had come from the iemisch, or
believing, with Hauthal, that it was mythical, other scientists began to
wonder what this animal might be. In 1900 a French traveller called
André Tournouér wrote to his old professor, Albert Gaudry, that he had
himself seen the mysterious animal, which he spelt kymché. He is a
credible witness who had lived in the Argentine for a long while and
made several expeditions to southern Patagonia to collect fossil mam-
mals for the Paris Museum. On 14 January 1901 Professor Gaudry read
Tournouér’s letter to the Académie des Sciences in Paris;


270


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


My travels have enabled me to obtain from the Indians some in-
formation about the famous hymché (the Neomylodon according to F,
Ameghino) but the superstitious terror that it inspires is such that it is
difficult to disentangle the truth from the legends that their imagination


has created. I shall only relate here two facts which have convinced
me of the existence of a new animal in these parts.


Lying in wait one evening on the bank of a river in the interior, be-
side which I had pitched my camp, I saw emerge in the middle of the
stream the head of an animal the size of a large puma. I fired, the ani-
mal dived and did not reappear.


As far as I could see in the dusk, its round head had dark brown fur,
its eyes were encircled with light yellow hair, stretching in a thin line
to the ear-hole. There was no external ear.


I described it to the Indian who acted as my guide; he seemed very
frightened and assured me I had seen the mysterious hymché.


I was obliged to proceed on my way; but on a bank of river sand, a
few miles further on, my Indian showed me some large feline-looking
footprints which he said were those of the hymché.


With that patient care, of which only the Germans seem capable, Dr
Robert Lehmann-Nitsche,
anthropologist of the Natural History
Museum of La Plata, undertook to discover the zemisch’s identity by
searching through the old accounts of Patagonia and all the dictionaries
of the Tehuelche and Araucan languages. He found that various words
very close to the word iemisch all referred to one or other species of otter.
Thus in the zoological section of Claudio Gay’s Historia Fisica y Politica
de Chile of 1847 the popular names for the Lutra felina described by
Molina are gato del mar (Spanish for sea-cat), nutria (Spanish for otter),
chimchimem and chungungo. In 1806 Luis de la Cruz had already re-
ferred to “‘guillins or chimchimems, which are a sort of marine cat.” And,


to go back to even more ancient sources, Andres Febres’ dictionary of
Araucan which appeared in 1765 included:


Chimchimem: sea animal like a cat.
Sea cat: coypu,! chimchimem.
Coypu: river animal like a cat.
Otter: ghuyllin.


In a Patagonian vocabulary appended to an account of Moreno’s


travels in 1879 there is a word still nearer to the Tehuelche semisch:


1 The coypu (Myocastor coypu) is actually a large rodent. When the first
Spaniards arrived in South America they called this creature nutria, Castilian
for otter, an error still current among furriers. Its local name was corpo, coypu or
guiyd.
Spanish-speaking South Americans are now obliged to call the otter
nutria verdadera (true otter) and the coypu rata nutria (otter-rat) or nutria
roedora (rodent otter).


271


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


yem’ chen, translated as tigre de agua (water-tiger) with the scientific
name of Lutra. Moreno also says that in the Rio Santa Cruz lives a


little otter which the Indians call tigre de agua. He says it is the Lutra


chilensis or hiillin (obviously the same as giullin or ghuillin); it is very


rare in Rio Chubut and the Rio Negro, where it is known as Jobito de
agua (little water wolf).


Finally in the Vocabulario Tzoneka 6 Tehuelche published by the


ill-fated Ramon Lista in 1885 we unexpectedly find that the Tehuelche
name for the otter is jemechim. And in a supplement to his Viaje al Pais
de los Tehuelches he adds:


The otter, or water-tiger as the Indians call it, is, after the deer, the
most remarkable of the species of animals in the area of the sources of
the Rio Chico (territory of Santa Cruz). It is darker in colour and larger
in size than the Lutra platensis. Certain travellers identify it with the
Lutra chilensis, but I am inclined to believe that it represents a species
peculiar to southern Pantagonia.!


In short, the words chimchimen, jemechin, yem’chen, hymché and
temisch, whose common origin is evident, all describe a sort of otter—
Lutra felina, according to Dr Lehmann-Nitsche probably.


But, he goes on to remark, how could a harmless creature like an otter
have acquired the iemisch’s terrifying reputation? The fact that the
name “tigre de agua” was so often associated with an otter seemed to
him to be due to a misunderstanding on the part of an English traveller,
Captain George Musters, who was intrigued by the name Nahuel-
Huapi, translated by Febres as ““Tiger Island,” of an island in southern
Patagonia, and assumed that it must be named after the otters in the
surrounding waters, since the jaguar, universally known by the Spani-
ards as tigre, was not found south of La Plata. Captain Musters did not
know that the jaguar’s area of distribution once reached to the Straits of
Magellan. It was in fact the jaguar which gave Nahuel-Huapi its name


* According to the standard work, Mamiferos Sud-americanos (1940) by


Cabrera and Yepes, there are three species of the genus Lutra in the southern
half of South America:


1. In the north-east, L. platensis, from La Plata to the Matto Grosso in
Brazilian territory.


2. In the west, L. felina or chimchimen, all along the Chilean coast and.
islands to Terra del Fuego (this species ventures into the sea and deserves the
name of gato de mer).


3. In the south-east, L. provocax or huillin, found in the Argentine, from


Colchagua province to the tip of the country, and also extending to the other
side of the Andes.


272
8


he jaguar (above) is an excellent swimmer, but it seems to be extinct in Patagonia.


[he natives have therefore transferred some of its evil character to a fabulous
version of the otter (below).


The anaconda is never officially
more than 20 feet long.


But there have always been tales
of much larger snakes, some
of
them more
plausible
than
this
frontispiece
of John
Browne’s
Affecting Narrative.


Silt aslraised tbe pece fo take atm at them
bead, it bad reached lbe Howing Frain of ¢ bmp:
and wih a dradtil ifs lore ber down trom ber
bu


OFT SY ,


Loadon, Pik, April ra hoa he


*
THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


and was the only animal to earn the name of “water-tiger” as we shall see
from the early chronicles.


In his
history of the Abipons (a people in the extreme north of the
Argentine), published in 1783, the German Jesuit Martin Dobrizhoffer
writes :


In the deepest waters there usually hides an animal larger than any
hunting-dog, called tigre de agua by the Spaniards and yaguaro by the
Guaranis.
It has a woolly hide, a long and tapering tail, and powerful
claws. Horses and mules swimming across these rivers are dragged to
the bottom.
Soon afterwards one sees the intestines of the animal,
disembowelled by the tiger, floating on the surface.


A similar, but more detailed, description, is found in a book by an-
other Jesuit, Thomas Falkner, A Description of Patagonia, and the
Adjoining Parts of South America, 1774:


In my first voyage to cut timber, in the year 1752, up the Parana, be-
ing near the bank, the Indians shouted yaquaru, and looking, I saw a
great animal, at the time it plunged into the water from the bank; but
the time was too short, to examine it with any degree of perfection.


It is called yaquaru, or yaquaruigh, which (in the language of that
country) signifies, the water tiger. It is described by the Indians to be
as big as an ass; of the figure the size of a large, over-grown river-wolf 1
or otter; with sharp talons, and strong tusks; thick and short legs; long,
shaggy hair; with a long, tapering tail.


The Spaniards describe it somewhat differently; as having a long
head, a sharp nose, like that of a wolf, and stiff, erect ears...


It is very destructive to the cattle which pass the Parana;
for great
herds of them pass every year; and it generally happens that this beast
seizes some of them. When it has once laid hold of it’s prey, it is seen
no more; and the lungs and entrails soon appear floating upon the
water.


It lives in the greatest depths, especially in the whirlpools made by
the concurrence of two streams, and sleeps in the deep caverns that are
in the banks.


That the jaguar should be described as an amphibious animal is not at


all surprising. Its habits may not be so aquatic as the otter’s, but it is an
excellent swimmer, always ready to leap into the water to catch its prey


(especially otters) or to flee from danger. The great naturalist Felix
de Azara in his Apuntamientos para Historia Natural de los Quadrupedos


1 “River-wolves” writes Father Falkner elsewhere, “(which I take to be of
the same kind as our otter in England).”


8
273


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


de Paraguay y Rio de la Plata (1802), tells a story, which he verified
personally, how,


a yagouareté, after crossing a broad and deep river, came and seized the
horse in its teeth and, dragging it sixty paces across ploughed land,
recrossed the river and reached the other side with its prey.


These early descriptions of the “water-tiger” remind one very forcibly
of what the Tehuelche believed about their temisch.
The jaguar’s
physical appearance, its large size—larger than the puma—its impressive
claws, its aquatic habits, its grim fondness for dragging horses and mules
under water—everything fits.
Dr Lehmann-Nitsche thinks that confusion has arisen in the Patago-
nians’ minds between the local species of otter (Lutra felina) and the
jaguar (Felis onca), because the jaguar used once to spread to the very
tip of South America, but is now known there only by hearsay. The
Indians have gradually transferred its characteristics to the only aquatic
beast of prey they know: the otter. That the jaguar was once found in
the whole of Patagonia is proved by the early accounts, which assert that
the country is infested with “tigers,” and by the number of place-
names in which the Araucan word nahuel appears. Rivers, lakes, islands
and even farms are all named after the tiger. In the Province of Buenos
Aires alone Dr Lehmann-Nitsche found no less than 43 places named
after the tiger, of which 29 referred to watercourses or other aquatic


sites, the jaguar’s favourite habitat. And these names are found even in
southern Patagonia. Moreover, the tiger, nahuel, plays a great part in
Araucan legend. Finally, Antonio de Viedma reports in 1781 that the
Indians in the Santa Cruz territory told him that the local fauna included
“the tiger or nahuel and the lion or pagi (the puma).” There were
jaguars near the Straits of Magellan until the end of the eighteenth
century. It is only since then that they have gradually withdrawn to the
north. The actual presence of jaguars at the very tip of South America


is confirmed by the palaeontological discoveries, including the remains
of the large jaguar found in the Cueva Eberhardt, to which Professor
Roth gave the scientific name of Jemisch.


Dr Lehmann-Nitsche also collected, through his Araucan friend
Nahuelpi, the traditions corresponding to the zemisch in the folk-lore of
this neighbouring people. They told of an aquatic animal, with webbed


feet, known as niiriifilu, or zorro-vibora (Spanish for viper-fox)—a good
description of the otter’s serpentine movements in the water.
This
monster, which the Araucans fear more than anything else, is reputed


274


wae
ae


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


to drag people into the water by winding its tail round them. Since the
otter has no huge claws with which to snatch its victims, its supple and
flattened, though not actually prehensile, tail has acquired this evil
power in popular belief.


We now have all the details of the Tehuelche iemisch, which is surely


a composite of the jaguar and the otter, and it is difficult not to accept
Dr Lehmann-Nitsche’s argument. There is still Tournouér’s evidence
of an animal the size of a large puma, but the German anthropologist


does not reject out of hand the theory that larger species of otters live


in some little-explored Patagonian lakes. Such rumours are not new,


nor confined to the Argentine. Buffon in his Addition al’ Article de la


Saricovienne (a name for the La Plata otter) wrote:


M. Aublet, a botanical scientist, whom we have already quoted, and
M. Olivier, surgeon to the King, who have both lived for a long time in
Cayenne and the Oyapok country, have assured me that there are otters
so large that they weigh as much as ninety or a hundred pounds; they
keep to the large rivers which are little frequented, and one sees their
heads above the water; they give cries that can be heard from very far
off, their fur is very soft, but shorter than the beaver’s; their ordinary
colour is a very faint brown: these otters live on fish, and also eat any
seeds that fall on the water from the river-banks.


The existence of this giant otter is now well established.
It is the
Pteronura brasiliensis known to the Brazilians as ariranha and to the
Guaranis as arirai. The Uruguayans call it Jobo corbata (cravat-wolf) or
lobo gargantilla (collared wolf); it frequents certain rivers in eastern
Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and the north-eastern tip of the Argentine.
It may reach a length of 7 feet, of which 3 feet are tail. It is as large as a
puma. It is by no means impossible or even improbable that an equally
large species of otter may live in southern Patagonia. The otter is one
of the hardest mammals to see because of its shy and amphibious habits.
This is no doubt the reason why there are so many legends and super-


stitions about otters and other such amphibious mammals as the water-


opossum or yapock (Chironectes) among the marsupials and the platypus
among the monotremes.


After all, what is the iemisch but a Patagonian version of the Australian


bunyip?


With the iemisch out of the way, the problem of the survival of a
ground-sloth is still unsettled, though many zoologists seem tempted to
think otherwise. What was the “hairy pangolin” that Ramon Lista


275


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


vainly shot at? And we must not forget that several people reported
Tehuelche legends not about a large, savage and amphibious carnivore,
but a burrowing and harmless animal that was said to be invulnerable.
Its description agrees much better with one’s idea of a sloth which had
not, like the ai and unau, decided to live in trees. We must start again
at the beginning and try to ignore the bitter controversy that poisoned
the whole atmosphere and from which few of the protagonists emerged
with honour.


Our first witness is Dr Moreno, whose evidence cannot be suspect
because he does not believe that giant sloths survive. He reports that
the Tehuelche and the Gennake tell of a sort of terrifying hairy beast,
which is very rare, and of which they have received traditions from their
ancestors. And in 1875, an old chief called Sinckel showed him a cave
which was said to be the lair of one of these unknown animals which
were called ellengassen. But the Indians never told him that the animal


still lived.


Our second witness is Ramon Lista, whose works are still the authori-


ties on Patagonian ethnography and geography. He says that the Te-
huelche believe that in the Sierra Carhuerne (Santa Cruz territory) live
evil spirits and monstrous quadrupeds which, according to their tradi-
tions, once carried off a whole family of Indians who were returning on
foot from an excursion to Charre. (the Patagonian name for Lago
Argentino). This story can only be pure surmise, since no one lived to


tell the tale. The only fact is that people attributed this family’s dis-
appearance to terrifying wild beasts.


Professor Santiago Roth is’ the third witness. The Tehuelche chief
Kankel told him several times that his grandfather used often to speak
of a very savage beast in the neighbourhood of Lake Buenos Aires
(Santa Cruz territory). When this beast roared, all the other animals
fled; and one day when his grandfather was hunting rheas near the lake


it killed a herd of his horses. Poor Kankel was so frightened of this
monster himself that no promises Roth could make would induce him
to go within half a mile of the lake.


Our fourth witness is Rudolf Lenz, an authority on Araucan folk-lore.
In one of the epics that he reports there appears a wild beast whose
name the Araucans translate into Spanish as Jofo-toro (that is lobo-toro)


or, as Lenz translates it, “wolf-bull,” the “wolf” being used as a sign
of the beast’s savagery. But he seems to me to have fallen into the mis-
take, natural to a German or an Englishman, of assuming that the first
word is an adjective qualifying the second, whereas Latin languages are


276


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


constructed the other way round. Thus when the Araucans describe
the otter in Spanish as zorro-vibora they mean a viperish fox, not a foxy


viper. The name Jofo-toro therefore means a bovine wolf, and not a
wolvish bull. If one has only the actual Patagonian animals as terms of
reference, one can hardly describe the appearance of a Megatherium or
Mylodon better than by calling it a wolf
as big and heavy as a bull, for


the wolf is the only coarse-haired and rather shaggy beast, fairly low on


its feet, in the country, and the bull introduced by the whites is the


largest animal known there. Of course this is only very indefinite evi-


dence, but it helps to reinforce what has been cited above. There is


therefore little doubt that the Tehuelche and the Araucan traditions


include a memory of a large and frightening hairy beast. From what we


know of the present and the sub-fossil fauna of this area it can only be


some kind of large ground-sloth.


It may be objected that the terror that these monsters arouse in the
legends about them is incompatible with the domesticated or half-
domesticated state in which gravigrades lived in the cave at Ultima
Esperanza. But the people who kept Mylodons in these stables were not
Tehuelche or Araucan but a preceding race, and in India many peoples


are terrified of wild elephants, although others tame them.


Dr Lehmann-Nitsche thinks that all these legends refer to the past
existence of jaguars and to oxen that have gone wild, and that there is no
trace of any tradition among the Patagonians that recalls a memory of
giant sloths; to imagine otherwise is needless and far-fetched, since he
believes that these animals, once domesticated by a vanished race, have
been extinct for many thousands of years. Personally I think it is going
too far to say that these animals were extinct so long ago, for reasons that


will follow.


Professor Florentino Ameghino was not always so misguided as when
he introduced his iemisch into the controversy. After the publication of


his first note, while other scientists were excavating the Cueva Eber-
hardt, he began burrowing no less busily into the early accounts of the


discovery of the New World. In the Historia de la Conquista del Para-


guay, Rio de la Plata y Tucumdn (1740-6) by a Portuguese Jesuit called


Pedro Lozano he read that from the frontiers of the province of Rio de


La Plata to Patagonia there was a large and very savage beast called su


or succarath, which was in the habit of carrying its young on its back.


The natives were said to hunt it and make cloaks out of its skin. There-


fore, thought Ameghino, it must be too thick and stiff to be used for


277


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


-
finer garments; this all fitted the Eberhardt Mylodon.
Its method
of carrying its young is a characteristic of existing sloths and also
of the anteaters which, apart from their size, fit the succarath fairly


well.


The name su reminded other scholars that Father Lozano’s animal
had long been known even in Europe and had been mentioned in the
Historia Animalium (1551-8) by that Swiss Pliny, Conrad Gesner. This
vast work was certainly not compiled in the critical spirit of modern
zoology, and it includes several fantastic monsters alongside familiar
animals. It is, however, a summary of all the zoological knowledge avail-
able in the sixteenth century and remained a work of reference for 200
years. It mentions the su (de Subo) after the Descriptionis Americae (cap.


Ivi) of Andreas Theuetus.


To get to the bottom of the matter let us refer to André Thévet’s
original work, which turns out to be called Les Singularitéz de la France
Antarctique, Autrement Nommée Amérique et de Plusieurs Terres et Isles
Découvertes de Nostre Temps. This book, published in 1558, is un-
fortunately little known and its author quite unrecognised. It describes
a long peregrination made three years before by Father Thévet, who
was to become almoner to Catherine de Medici and then historiographer
and cosmographer to Charles IX. It was not only one of the first works
in French about America, but also one of the first to describe the natural
history of the New World, since it appeared only 23 years after Oviedo’s
famous Historia General -y Natural de Las Indias (1535). Thévet, who
was to publish a universal cosmography in 1575, was one of the most


brilliant and learned minds of*the French Renaissance.! Being curious
about “‘prodigies of nature,” he made a natural history collection, and
despite the slanders current about his “bad faith and extreme credulity,”
his writings show that he was a very shrewd observer. In his description
of his travels there are sober and exact descriptions of many strange
birds, such as the penguin (which he calls aponar) and the toucan, as
well as such mammals as the agouti, armadillo, ai (raiit or hatit) and the
manatee, which, I should point out, he does not mistake for a mermaid
—despite all the tales he had heard about those fabulous creatures.
There is thus some reason to credit what he says about the region
“of the Straits of Magellan.”


1 It was he who first introduced the use of tobacco into France—not Jean
Nicot who is credited with this deed in most works of reference and has lent his
name to nicotine. He brought back from Brazil some petun or tobacco which he
described in 1556 as herbe xaintongeotse. Nicot did not send his leaves of tobacco
to Paris until 1560.


278


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


This region is of the same temperature as Canada and other countries
that approach our Pole: thus the inhabitants dress themselves in the
skins of certain beasts, which they call in their language su, which is as
much as to say water: for, in my judgment, this animal lives for most>
the time on the banks of rivers. This beast is very wonderful, made in
very strange fashion, wherefore I have chosen to show it in a picture.
Another thing: if it is pursued, as many of the people of this country do
in order to have its skin, it takes its young on its back, and covering
them with its long and large tail, escapes by fleeing with them. How-
ever the Savages use a trick to catch this beast: making a deep pit near
the place where it is in the habit of making its abode, and covering it
with green leaves, so that when running, without suspecting the am-
bush, the poor beast falls in this pit with its young. When it sees that
it is caught, it maims and kills its young (as if maddened): and gives
such terrible cries that it makes the Savages very fearful and timid.
Yet in the end they kill it with arrows and then they flay it.


The naive picture which accompanies the text shows a very emaciated


sort of lion with a plume of a tail like an anteater’s and a grotesque head
somewhat reminiscent of a bearded man.
On its back crouch half


a dozen young ones. It is more than likely that this picture was not
drawn by Thévet himself but by someone else relying on his verbal
description, for this was the usual practice at this time, and explains
why so many animals which are eorrectly described in the text are so


75. Naive drawing of the su or succarath, after Father André
Thévet (1558).


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


_
strangely distorted in the pictures. The text, for instance, makes it quite
clear that the bison is a sort of hairy and hump-backed bull, but the
picture is not in the least like one. If we bear this in mind, our picture
could very well refer to one or other of the giant sloths, especially the
Mylodon, which, unlike the Megatherium, had a long tail. It was no
doubt because the artist was told it had claws that he gave it paws like


a lion. The human-looking head shows that it was not an anteater—
for they all have tube-shaped skulls. On the other hand it could have
been a sort of sloth. Compare it with a recent portrait of an ai drawn
from nature by I. Cooper
and you will see that the
gravigrades have faces like a
caricature of a man.


The word su does not seem


to mean water, as Thévet sug-


gests.
Professor Ameghino
claims that the old Tehuelche
use the word su or suc to
mean cloak or covering, and
that carth or carrath means


a
skin.
Hence,
he
says,
Lozano’s
word
succarath
means ‘cloak of skin” and
supports the theory that the
animal was hunted for its


76. Portrait of an ai (after a recent
hide. Dr Lehmann-Nitsche


water-colour by I. Cooper).
confirms part of this, stating
that the Patagonian word for


covering is sokga, but thinks that the Portuguese Jesuit’s description
shows that the su was not a giant sloth, for he took the trouble to weigh
the piece of skin 3 feet 8 inches by 3 feet in size from the Cueva Eber-
hardt and found that it weighed no less than 39 pounds, although it was


far too small to make a cloak. But this is no reason why the sw’s skin, if


it really was full of bony nodules, should not have been used for making
armour. The word su can mean any kind of covering, whether it is
worn for warmth or for protection. And the armour worn by knights
sometimes weighed more than 100 pounds. On the other hand, even if
the su was a ground-sloth, there is no reason why its skin should have
contained bones. There are no bones in the skins of the Megatherium,
Lestodon or Scelidotherium, which no doubt were thick and heavyy—but


280


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


not much heavier than some furs worn even in our mild climate by
the fashionable.


All in all it seems quite likely that Father Thévet’s su is some kind
of ground-sloth, and that these animals lived in Patagonia until a fairly
recent date—let us say the Middle Ages.


At the turn of the century many scientists’ scepticism had been much
shaken by the accumulation of converging evidence: Ramon Lista’s
hairy pangolin—so very like a Mylodon;
the discovery of such well-
preserved remains; the Tehuelche
and Araucan legends, and finally
Father Lozano’s story, whose original source I have just quoted. Even
the Director of the Natural History Museum in London, Sir Ray
Lankester, eventually admitted that large ground-sloths might survive
in some little-known or almost unexplored part of Patagonia. The Daily
Express sponsored an expedition to bring back a living Mylodon, thus
resuscitating King Charles IV’s command, this time with more en-
couragement from the scientists. But when the first searches yielded
nothing, the leader of the expedition, Hesketh H. Prichard, grew im-
patient before he had even reached Last Hope Inlet and went home to
England in a huff, hardly concealing his disappointment and furious at


his own failure, telling everyone that he had been hoaxed and that the
Patagonian legends were a complete invention. This was almost as good


as saying that the Tehuelche were liars, Lozano and Thévet romancers,
the remains of Mylodons were illusions, Ameghino a madman and Lista


a visionary.


Today, half a century later, the matter is still at a dead end. Caven-
dish’s and Koslowsky’s expeditions came back as empty-handed as
Prichard’s, and scientists have therefore concluded that living Mylodons
no longer exist. It has also been pointed out, very justly, that the Te-
huelche accounts never come from direct witnesses but always refer to
third parties, who doubtless never saw the fabulous beast either. Dr
Carlos Rusconi of the Natural History Museum of Mendoza came to


this disappointingly negative conclusion when he drew up a summary of
the affair, putting things in their proper perspective, in 1949. All the
same he had in all honesty to admit that people still regularly came to


him with “more or less trustworthy reports about the existence of a


large animal in certain lakes in the mountains to the west of the Santa


Cruz territory.” The inhabitants of the south of Malalhue in the pro-


vince of Mendoza told him of “‘the existence of rare and fierce animals


which gave a howl like a wolf but were neither foxes nor pumas: in fact


281


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


~
they are very well-known to these people as much by their habits as by
their tracks which they leave in moist earth where they are known to
come to attack their prey.”


Who knows what may be found when the most hidden corners of
Patagonia are more thoroughly explored? F. Outes has pointed out that
in the area of the Rio Salado and the Tapalqué stream the bones of two
other supposedly fossil animals have been found in a surprisingly fresh


state: the Glyptodon (Doedicurus), a sort of living tank which I have
mentioned above, and a sabre-toothed “tiger,” the Smilodon. And in
1884, in a cave near the Rio de los Patos in the Cordillera of the Andes,
Dr Moreno found paintings in ochre which he thought represented a
Glyptodon’ s shell.


But is Patagonia the right place to look for any survivors of these
animals? There is not the slightest doubt today that in South America
man knew all these giant mammals that seem to belong to a vanished
age. It is also well established, on irrefutable palaeontological proof,
that many of them once migrated to North America, where they were
contemporary with man about 10,000 years ago. From the Miocene to
the end of the Pleistocene, and even at the beginning of the present
period, giant sloths spread north through Uruguay, Brazil, Bolivia,
Colombia, Central America, Mexico and even part of the United States,
where their remains have been found in kitchen middens.


It is now proved beyond a doubt that the remains of Mylodons un-
earthed at the southern tip of Patagonia have been preserved in their
cave for many centuries and that these huge and harmless beasts were
exterminated there by the Indians who preceded the Tehuelche. The
Carbon 14 method of dating has fixed the age of the dung in the Cueva
Eberhardt in which the Mylodon’s bones and skin were found at about
10,000 years (to within 400 years either way). On the other hand, one.
may suspect that giant sloths—or at least smaller related ground species
—were known farther north in the Argentine at the time of the conquest
of America, as appears from the old chronicles. And perhaps some few
survivors were responsible for the legend current among the Tehuelche
during the last centuries and for Ramon Lista’s more recent report.
No doubt the sloth empire covered its greatest area some 10,000 years


ago. At this time there must have been a large number of intermediate
forms between the giant species in the savannah and the little species in.
the forests. Slaughtered by the nomadic hunting Indians, both in the
pampas of the south and the green prairies of the north, the largest


sloths would have retreated, as the jaguar did, to the tropical forests,


‘
282


THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


where they could find a safer refuge. All the same, it is unlikely that the
really gigantic species could have adapted themselves to the inextricable
virgin forests, the habitat in which the small tree species flourished. On
the other hand, it is not difficult to see how the medium-sized ground-
sloths might have survived in wooded savannah or sparse forest, or even
on the fringes of or in clearings in the densest of jungles. For the great
ground-sloths were not destroyed by any revolutionary geological or
climatic change. From the number of their remains in kitchen middens
it is clear that these large and peaceable beasts, like so many other spe-


cies, were victims of man’s gluttony. If such is the case, what has hap-
pened to them in their impenetrable retreat in the vast Amazonian selva
and the boscosa of the Andes, through which they passed in the course of
ages? Itis hard to see what, in the peace of these forests rarely inhabited
by man, could have led to their extinction. Only human traps were able


to put an end to these armoured brutes against which beasts of prey were
powerless. Might they not still live in this “green hell” and find it a
heaven of peace? At all events, as we shall see, this would explain some
of the rumours that are still current in an area where “nothin’ would
surprise.”


283


CHAPTER THIRTEEN


The Giant Anaconda
and Other Inland ‘‘Sea-Serpents’’


Th’old Dragon under ground
In straiter limits bound ..
.


.
.
. Swindges the scaly Horrour of his foulded tail.
JouHN MILTON, On the Morning of Christ’s Nativity.


IN 1906 the race for rubber was on, and to get it dirt cheap settlers did
not shrink from enslaving the Amazon Indians, flogging, torturing and
even killing them at the slightest whim. The tribes that resisted were
massacred, their villages pillaged and burnt. Officials and soldiers sent


to keep order were as savage and cruel as the seringueiros. In the rich
rubber plantations along the Rio Abuna and the River Acre (Rio
Macarinarra), which marks the southern boundary of western Brazil,
the northern frontier of Bolivia and part of that of Peru, a bitter dispute
arose between the three countries about the exact position of their
frontiers. War was on the point of breaking out.


The Royal Geographical Society of London was called in to act as
mediator and sent Major Percy Fawcett, an artillery officer of 39, to
make a thorough survey of the area in dispute. It was to perform this
thankless task that he first penetrated the vast forests of the Amazon,
in which he was to vanish without trace 20 years later.


It was in January 1907 that he first heard of gigantic snakes in the


little out-of-the-way hamlet of Yorongas, a mere barraca of two or three
of the seringueiros’ sheds, not far from the source of the River Acre.
It was the last outpost of civilisation on the fringe of utterly unexplored
country.


The manager at Yorongas [Fawcett writes in his memoirs] told me he
killed an anaconda fifty-eight feet long in the Lower Amazon.
I was
inclined to look on this as an exaggeration at the time, but later, as I
shall tell, we shot one even larger than that.


284


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


This happened two or three months later on the Rio Abuna, upstream
of its junction with the Rio Rapirrao:


We were drifting easily along in the sluggish current not far below
the confluence of the Rio Negro when almost under the-bow of the
igarité there appeared a triangular head and several feet of undulating
body. It was a giant anaconda. I sprang for my rifle as the creature
began to make its way up the bank, and hardly waiting to aim smashed


a .44 soft-nosed bullet into its spine, ten feet below the wicked head.
At once there was a flurry of foam, and several heavy thumps against


the boat’s Keel, shaking us as though we had run on a snag.


77. Major Percy Fawcett’s encounter with a 62-foot anaconda (from a
drawing by his son Brian).


With great difficulty I persuaded the Indian crew to turn in shore-
wards. They were so frightened that the whites showed all round their
popping eyes, and in the moment of firing I had heard their terrified
voices begging me not to shoot lest the monster destroy the boat and
kill everyone on board, for not only do these creatures attack boats when
injured, but also there is great danger from their mates.


We stepped ashore and approached the reptile with caution.
It was
out of action, but shivers ran up and down the body like puffs of wind
on a mountain tarn. As far as it was possible to measure, a length of
forty-five feet lay out of the water, and seventeen feet in it, making a
total length of sixty-two feet. Its body was not thick for such a colossal
length—not more than twelve inches in diameter—but it had probably
been long without food. I tried to cut a piece out of the skin, but the


285


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


beast was by no means dead and the sudden upheavals rather scared
us. A penetrating foetid odour emanated from the snake, probably its
breath, which is believed to have a stupefying effect, first attracting and
later paralysing its prey.1 Everything about this snake was repulsive.


Such large specimens as this may not be common, but the trails in
the swamps reach a width of six feet and support the statements of
Indians and rubber pickers that the anaconda sometimes reaches an
incredible size, altogether dwarfing that shot by me. The Brazilian
Boundary Commission told me of one killed in the Rio Paraguay
exceeding eighty feet in length!


This did not prevent Fawcett from being called an arrant liar when
he came back to London and claimed to have shot an anaconda 62 feet
long. Yet one can read through his notebooks from end to end without
finding any trace of exaggeration about the size or ferocity of the animals
which he met on the Amazon. On the contrary, one is more apt to find
notes like the following, written after he had been attacked by a suru-
cucu or “bushmaster” (Lachesis muta) upon which he had nearly
stepped:


It was quite nine feet long and about five inches thick, and the
double fangs, if in proportion, would be over an inch in length. Experts
claim that these snakes reach a length of fourteen feet, but I have never
seen one so big.


Fawcett was certainly a dreamer, and his dreams sometimes led him


to cherish the wildest hopes, but he was not a liar. What he saw he
always reported in a very matter-of-fact way; his interpretations are
sometimes fantastic, but his observations never are. The most striking
thing’in his memoirs is the contrast between the sordid hell he describes
and the splendour of the lost cities that he searched for till his death.


What then is the official record size for an anaconda (Eunectes murinus)
in the zoological textbooks? Most of them will allow 30 feet. The
American herpetologist Thomas Barbour, the great Brazilian expert Dr
Afranio do Amaral of the Institute at Butantan and Dr Jose Candido de
Melo of the Rio de Janiero Zoo all agree on 45 feet; but other experts


are more cautious. Hyatt Verrill, for instance, writes:


Personally I do not believe the anaconda ever attains a length of
more than twenty feet. Dr. Ditmars is even more conservative and sets


1 While snakes’ breath has, of course, none of the stupefying properties with
which it is often credited, it can clearly be very foul, like that of other carnivores.
A lion-tamer has wittily said that the chief risk in putting one’s head in a lion’s
mouth is of being asphyxiated.
Here it is more likely that the insufferable
stench comes from the snake’s cloacal musk-glands which play some part in
sexual attraction.


286


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


the limit at nineteen feet. But as I have personally killed anacondas
which were within a fraction of an inch of twenty feet from tip of nose
to tip of tail, I add one foot to this famous scientist’s limit. But until
I have seen a living ‘anaconda, or an unstretched skin which actually
measures more than twenty feet, and no one has produced such yet, I
shall maintain twenty feet as the greatest length reached by this largest
of American snakes.


A tanned snakeskin is always noticeably longer than it was on the
living animal, since it has to be stretched in the drying. If itis unscrupu-
lously overstretched it can be considerably lengthened. Hyatt Verrill
claims to have seen the skin of an anaconda which measured only 18 feet
alive but had been stretched to 23 feet. But a skin which has been
treated in this way can, he says, easily be recognised by anyone familiar
with the large snakes. “‘A stretched hide is always too narrow in propor-
tion to its length, and moreover, the scales will be separated and out of
place and the markings on the skin will be distorted.” All this is very
true. Nevertheless it is well-known that the Institute at Butantan in
Brazil has an anaconda skin 33 feet long. I do not think it could have
been stretched to this length from only 20 feet, or that such a reputable


scientific institution would have allowed it to be so overstretched.
It
must have come from a snake at least 26 feet long. Besides, if we are to
believe Curran and Kauffeld, the greatest American experts on snakes,
the largest specimen which has been exhibited in a zoo measured 26 feet.
And you can’t stretch a living snake.


According to F. Angel, the late expert on herpetology in the Paris
Museum, the largest snakes of any kind of which we have certain records


are pythons from the Old World:


A French traveller, Charles Mayer, brought back alive to Europe a
reticulated python from Asia which was 32 feet long. Another natural-
ist, William Hornaday, killed a 30-foot python. These are the largest
specimens which are known with certainty.


Verrill admits the second, but seems ignorant of the first.
I should also add that at El Fayum in Egypt, parts of the spinal column
of a python called Gigantophis belonging to the Middle Eocene period


were dug up; the entire animal was reckoned to be between 42 and 65


feet long. Fawcett’s snake would not necessarily have been the longest.


Verrill maintains that the much exaggerated lengths that travellers
and Indians often attribute to anacondas are due to the difficulty of
judging the size of a living snake. It is a fact which I have proved for


287


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


myself that it is extremely hard to judge the length of a creature coiled
upon itself or wriggling along, often at high speed. The eye, which finds


it hard enough to judge the length of a straight line exactly, is generally
helpless when dealing with a curve. Ask anyone to tell you the length
of a circle, the perimeter of a pool, for instance, and you will be sur-
prised what huge errors they make. ‘You always have to resort to a
formula to measure a curve.1


Verrill saw an anaconda curled up on a ledge of rock in Guiana and
made the experiment of asking each of his companions to guess its
length:


The camera man, who had never before been in the jungle, said sixty
feet. The missionary who had spent seven years in the interior and had
seen scores of big snakes was more conservative and said thirty feet.
The Indians’ estimates varied from twenty to forty feet; my camp boy,
who had accompanied a party of snake collectors a few years earlier,
said thirty feet, while the grizzled old “‘captain’”’ remarked, ‘“Takin’ all
de fac’s of da case in consi’ation, I don’t can state posritively, chief, but
Ah knows for de truf tha’ camudi (anaconda) is jus’ too long.”’


A twenty-two rifle bullet through the.head brought an end to the big
anaconda’s career and when he was straightened out and measured he
proved to be exactly nineteen feet and six inches in length. But what
a monster! About his middle he measured thirty-three inches and a
fraction and he weighed over 360 pounds and was a heavy load for five
Indians. So huge were his proportions that even after we had measured
the creature it was difficult to believe that he was so “‘small.”’


Verrill’s argument is sound enough, but is his experiment as instruc-


tive as he would have us think? The Indians who judged that a coiled
up snake was 20 feet long were remarkably accurate in their observation,
while those who put it at 40 feet would surely have been much more
accurate if they had seen the snake uncoiled. And even if, on the evi-
dence of the missionary, we must halve the dimensions of snakes re-
ported by people who know the country well, we shall still find many
instances of specimens much larger than the record skin in the Institute


at Butantan.


Fawcett could not have misjudged the length of his snake, at least not


to any great extent, since he measured it dead on the river-bank. His
phrase “‘as far as it was possible to measure” may mean that he could


1
therefore suggest a coefficient of 1:5 (about 7/2) to be multiplied by the
distance between the snake’s head and tail when crawling on the ground to give
the length of its body. This assumes that the snake consists of semi-circles on
each side of the straight line of its path and is very approximate, but it gives
better results than trying to “unwind” the snake mentally.


288


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”?


not measure the 17 feet in the water, but more probably that he had no
exact means of measurement at hand and so in the usual British fashion
paced out its length with his feet—and could not have gone so far
wrong. If he had merely guessed its length he would not have given
exact figures but have written “about 50 feet out of the water and 15 feet
in the water.”


Other more recent explorers of the Amazon country mention anacon-
das much longer than the 20 feet that Verrill and Ditmars grudgingly
concede. Let us begin with the Marquis de Wavrin, who is admittedly
not a professional zoologist, but he is a careful observer and his reports


are always unromantic and unemotional. I remember him as a great,
lean fellow with cool, inquiring eyes, for I was to have gone with him in
1940 as zoologist on his attempt to find the sources of the Orinoco, a
project which was foiled by the war. I can confirm that he can be trusted


to speak the truth. He has much to say about anacondas:


Those generally met with along the rivers measure between 20 and
25 feet long. I have seen some over 30 feet long and there are even
larger ones, if the natives are to be believed.


He once shot an anaconda about 25 feet long; it fell into the water
from the branch around which it was coiled, and he said he would like


to fish up the body, which could still be seen quivering in some 3 feet of
water. His canoe-men replied that it was a waste of powder to shoot
such a small snake and a waste of time to stop and pick it up. They also
told him:


On the Rio Guaviare, during floods, chiefly in certain lagoons in the
neighbourhood, and even near the confluence of this stream, we often
see snakes which are more than double the size of the one you have just
shot. They are often thicker than our canoe.


These snakes need not belong to a new species. They could be out-


size individuals of a known species. Dr Maurice Burton has pointed


out that


there is always a percentage, admittedly small, of individuals in every
species which grow to an unusually large size. I have shown elsewhere
that if the average height of a male Londoner be taken as § ft. 8 in.,
then an unusually tall man would be one 6 ft. 4 in. high, but the record
height is 9 ft. 3 in. If we take the various species of mammals for which
reliable measurements are available, we find that the outsizes of species


are: 68 per cent. above average size, and 40 per cent. above the unusu-


ally large.


t
289


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


Of course, anacondas are not mammals, and reliable measurements
are not available. All the same this rule should hold good for reptiles,
and if, as the seringueiros and many hunters and explorers maintain,
anacondas 30 feet long are quite often seen, there might be unusually
large specimens 38 feet long and monstrous freaks over 50 feet long—
which is not so very far from Fawcett’s 62 feet.


The stories of anacondas 70 feet long seem to be quite incredible.
Yet I have heard from the witness’s own mouth a circumstantial
account of how a specimen of this astonishing size was killed. Having
questioned and cross-questioned my informant for several days, I am as
convinced of his sincerity as if I had witnessed the incident myself.


In 1947, after the Chavantes had massacred several Brazilian officials,
Francisco Meirelles, of the Service for the Protection of the Indians,
organised a new expedition to try to establish peaceful relations with


this wild tribe on the Middle Araguaya. This undertaking, which lasted
from February to July, was eventually crowned with a faint measure of
success. The party of some 20 men included two Frenchmen: the very
young explorer Raymond Maufrais, who was later to disappear in the
Tumac-Humac in Guiana where his father continues to search for him
with untiring courage, and the painter Serge Bonacase of Paris, who told
me this story.


At the end of March the expedition had reached Ilha do Bananal, an
island between two branches of the Araguaya, and set up its base camp
there. The members of the expedition spent several days preparing
themselves for life deep in the sertdo, as the wilderness is called, by going


off on long reconnaissance and hunting expeditions, as much as 60 miles
from their base camp. During one of these trips a party of seven or
eight men went hunting capybaras in the swampy area between the Rio
Manso—known as the Rio das Mortes, or River of Death, because the
Chavantes killed anyone who crossed it—and the Rio Cristalino.


The guide [Serge Bonacase told me] pointed out an anaconda asleep
on a rise in the ground and half hidden among the grass. We approached
to within 20 yards of it and fired our rifles at it several times.
It
tried to make off, all in convulsions, but we caught up with it after
20 or 30 yards and finished it off.
Only then did we realise how
enormous it was; when we walked along the whole length of its body
it seemed as if it would never end. What struck me most was its
enormous head, which was like this. [He stretched out his arms in
front of him with his hands together, thus forming a triangle with
2-foot sides and an 18-inch base.]


290


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


As we had no measuring instruments, one of us took'a piece of string
and held it between the ends of the fingers of one hand and the other
shoulder to mark off a length of 1 metre. Actually it could have been


a little less. We measured the snake several times with this piece of


string and always made it 24 or 25 times as long as the string. The


reptile must therefore have been nearly 23 metres long [75 feet].


Even if the piece of string was only 90 centimetres (3 feet) long—and
I don’t think we can allow a margin of error of more than 10 per cent—
the snake would have been between 72 and 75 feet long.


Serge Bonacase added that the animal’s diameter was almost half the
length of the measuring-cord, probably nearly 18 inches. The beast was
so heavy that they could not lift it up in the middle of its body. They
could only guess at its weight.


No doubt the reader will wonder, as I did, why they did not take
photographs of such a trophy. The reason is simple. The Service for
the Protection of the Indians had forbidden them to take cameras—
which could easily have terrified the Chavantes and caused another
massacre—on their particularly tricky mission.


But why didn’t they think of bringing back its skin or its head?
Serge Bonacase’s answer to this question was:


First of all, none of us seemed to realise that there was anything ex-
ceptional about our prize. There were no zoologists among us. The
Brazilian officials who had spent much of their lives in this country did
not seem to be particularly surprised. As for me, I had heard so many
tales of giant snakes that I supposed the whole of the Amazon was
crawling with monsters of this size.


Of course, we should have liked to take the snake’s skin back, but we
had neither the time to skin the beast nor to prepare its hide. We were
also very tired, and in that country you must never let yourself linger by
the way or encumber yourself with extra luggage. Think what a piece
of skin more than 60 feet long by 4 feet 6 inches wide would have
weighed! We should have had our work cut out to carry it—or for that
matter the head. Besides, who would have been crazy enough to lug a
piece of rotting meat on his back in that heat through country infested
with insects?


It was undoubtedly an anaconda of the known species. “It was a very


deep dark brown,” Bonacase told me, “‘marked on the sides with almost


black irregular oval rings.”


This would seem to imply that a length of 30 feet, which is supposed


to be exceptional for an anaconda, is really less than the normal size of
an adult. Or are there two geographic races of Eunectes murinus of
different sizes?


291


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


To return to the Marquis de Wavrin, let us proceed to what may be
another kind of snake. His canoe-men went on to tell him of many en-
counters with real monsters, fresh-water sea-serpents, as it were:


During a flood some Piapoco Indians tried to go directly from their
hut well upstream of the Rio Uva to the Rio Guaviare by taking short
cuts through the marshes and lagoons. They had just crossed one of
these little lakes, when they heard a sound behind therm like thunder;
yet the sky was clear and there was no wind. However, they saw the
surface of the lake in turmoil; waves broke even on the bank which they
had just reached.
It must therefore be an animal thrashing about in
mid-water. For an instant they could see a monstrous snake’s head.
The reptile swam for a moment on the surface and then dived. If their
canoe had been out in the lagoon they would probably have been
devoured; as it was they were capsized. They vowed never to risk
going that way again.


Naturally. It was also natural that the Marquis de Wavrin should have
been inclined to believe their story when later he reached the Rio
Putumayo the day after an ox had been carried off by a monsttous
snake. The people “wete all still shaken by what had happened.”
Which was also very natural.


Lorenz Hagenbeck, late director of the Hamburg Zoo, also seemed
convinced of the existence of a kind of South American water-snake
larger than the largest afiaconda and of quite staggering size. The son of
the great Carl, he was brought up to the business. For more than a
century travellers and animal-catchers sent zoological information from


all over the world to the Hagenbeck dynasty, who were proud to supply
zoos in every country with specimens of rare and sometimes even sup-
posedly extinct animals. It was an explorer sent out by a Hagenbeck
who caught the first pygmy hippopotamus. But the Hagenbeck family
papers also include several reports, transcripts of which I have seen,
about an aquatic snake from the Amazon which is much larger than the
largest anaconda and which the Indians seem also to distinguish by the
name of sucuriju gigante or “‘giant boa.”


Here I should explain that the anaconda (Eunectes murinus) is a mem-
ber of the boa family and is often called the water boa, meaning thereby


that while other boas only occasionally diye into the water, the anaconda,
whose nostrils can close hermetically, remains immersed much longer
and is more truly aquatic. There is only one species of anaconda: it is
marked with oval or lozenge-shaped spots and rings of dark or blackish
brown on an olive-green, grey or brownish background. Among the


292


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


many species of boas the colour varies greatly. The back is often
marked with light oval patches, generally pinkish, on a darker back-
ground, usually a rich brown. The boa-constrictor is the largest known


to herpetologists, who state that no specimen caught or killed has been
much longer than 12 feet. Nevertheless there have always been stories


of much larger boas. One John Browne wrote of an “‘ibibaboka” so


fearsome and monstrous (see plate facing page 273) that one is sur-


prised to learn that it was only 27 feet long. But this story of the sole


survivor of a party of six deserters from the garrison of artillery at St


Helena who got lost in the virgin forest in 1799 and found themselves


in the middle of one of the most romantic of love stories has never gairied
much credit.


George Gardner’s evidence in his Travels in the Interior of Brazil is
much more trustworthy. After stating that boa-constrictors are found
throughout the Province of Goyaz, especially on the wooded banks of


lakes, marshes and rivers, he adds that some are found which reach the
enormous length of 37 feet.


The largest I ever saw was at this place, but it was not alive. Some
weeks before our arrival at Sapé, the favourite riding horse of Senhor
Lagoeira, which had been put out to pasture not far from the house,
could not be found, although strict search was made for it all over the
Fazenda.
Shortly after this, one of his vaqueiros, in going through a
wood by the side of a small river, saw an enormous Boa, suspended in
the fork of a tree which hung over the water; it was dead, but had
evidently been floated down alive by a recent flood, and being in an
inert state, it had not been able to extricate itself from the fork before
the waters fell. It was dragged out to the open country by two horses,
and was found to measure thirty-seven feet in length; on opening it, the
bones of a horse, in a somewhat broken condition, and the flesh in a
half digested state, were found within it, the bones of the head being
uninjured; from these circumstances we concluded that the Boa had
devoured the horse entire.


Gardner’s incredible 37-foot boa is a dwarf compared to the sucuriyu
gigante, of whose existence Lorenz Hagenbeck was firmly convinced,


being a close friend of the two priests, Father Heinz and Father Frickel,
who reported it, and never doubting their sincerity for a moment. The


first report comes from Father Victor Heinz himself:


During the great floods of 1922, on May 22 at about 3 o’clock to be
exact, I was being taken home by canoé on the Amazon from Obidos;
suddenly I noticed something surprising in midstream.
I distinctly
recognised a giant water-snake at a distance of some 30 yards. To


293


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


distinguish it from the sucuriju, the natives who accompanied me named
the reptile, because of its enormous size, sucuriju gigante (giant boa).


Coiled up in two rings the monster drifted quietly and gently down-
stream. My quaking crew had stopped paddling. Thunderstruck, we
all stared at the frightful beast. I reckoned that its body was as thick as
an oil-drum and that its visible length was some 80 feet. When we were
far enough away and my boatmen dared to speak again they said that
the monster would have crushed us like a box of matches if it had not
previously consumed several large capybaras.


South of Obidos one of these monsters was killed, it seems, just as it
was swallowing a capybara on the muddy river-bank. Its stomach con-
tained no less than four adult specimens of these huge rodents. Else-
where two large round excrements were found full of animal hair and
with a bone from an ox’s foot sticking out of one of them. Father Heinz
also writes:


My second encounter with a giant water-snake took place on 29
October 1929. To escape the great heat I had decided to go down the
river at about 7 p.m. in the direction of Alemquer- At about midnight,
we found ourselves above the mouth of the Piaba when my crew, seized
with a sudden fear, began to row hard towards the shore.


“What is it?’’ I cried, sitting up.
“There, a big animal,”’ they muttered, very excited.
At the same moment I heard the water move as if a steamboat had
passed.
I immediately noticed several feet above the surface of the
water two bluish-green lights like the navigation lights on the bridge of
a river boat, and shouted:


““No, look, it’s the steamer! Row to the side so that it doesn’t upset
us.”
,


“Que vapor que nada,” they replied. “‘Una cobra grande!’?
Petrified, we all watched the monster approach;
it avoided us and
recrossed the river in less than a minute, a crossing which would have
taken us in calm water ten to fifteen times as long. On the safety of dry
land we took courage and shouted to attract attention to the snake. At
this very moment a human figure began to wave an oil-lamp on the
other shore, thinking no doubt, that someone was in danger. Almost at
once the snake rose on the surface and we were able to appreciate clearly
the difference between the light of the lamp and the phosphorescent
light of the monster’s eyes. Later, on my return, the inhabitants of this
place assured me that above the mouth of the Piaba there dwelt a
sucuriju gigante.


Father Heinz now began to study the subject with fervour, and to
collect the reports which he eventually sent to Hagenbeck. One witness
was a Portuguese merchant called Reymondo Zima, well known to
Father Heinz, who had lived for nine years opposite the town of Faro


294


ins
ee
ore


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “‘SEA-SERPENTS”


on the Rio Jamunda. His story was published by a newspaper in Rio
de Janeiro.


On 6 July 1930 I was going up the Jamunda in company with my
wife and the boy who looks after my motor-boat. Night was falling
when we saw a light on the right bank. In the belief that it was the
house I was looking for I steered towards the light and switched on my
searchlight. But then suddenly we noticed that the light was charging
towards us at an incredible speed. A huge wave lifted the, bow of the
boat and almost made it capsize. My wife screamed in terror. At the
same moment we made out the shape of a giant snake rising out of the
water and performing a St Vitus’s dance around the boat. After which
the monster crossed this tributary of the Amazon about half a mile wide
at fabulous speed, leaving a huge wake, larger than any of the steam-
boats make at full speed. The waves hit our 43-foot boat with such
force that at every moment we were in danger of capsizing. I opened
my motor flat out and made for dry land. Owing to the understandable


"excitement at the time it was not possible for me to reckon the monster’s
length. I presume that as a result of a wound the animal lost one eye,
since I saw only one light. I think the giant snake must have mistaken
our searchlight for the eye of one of his fellow-snakes.


At this same place during a motor-boat journey in 1948 Paul Tarvalho,
an old pupil of Father Heinz, saw a giant snake emerge from the water
some 250 to 300 yards away; he reckoned it was about 150 feet long.
For a moment it followed the boat, which made off at top speed.


The Franciscan Father Protesius Frickel, priest at Oriscima, was
more courageous. When he was on an expedition on the upper reaches
of the Rio Trombetas, he noticed the head of a giant snake lying in the
water near the bank. He disembarked above the spot and cautiously
approached to within half a dozen paces of the beast, whose spotted
belly lay partly out of the water. “Its eyes,” he wrote, “were as large


as plates.”


Father Heinz gives us an idea of the titanic strength of such monsters:


On 27 September 1930, on an arm of water that leads from Lake
Maruricana to the Rio Iguarapé, a Brazilian named Jo’o Penha was
engaged in clearing the bank to make it easier for the turtles to come up
and lay their eggs. At a certain moment, behind one of those floating
barriers made of plants, tree-trunks and tangled branches, against which


- steamers of 500 tons often have to battle to force a passage, he saw two


' green lights.


Penha thought at first that it was some fisherman who was looking for
eggs. But suddenly the whole barrier shook for 100 yards. He had
to retreat hurriedly for a foaming wave 6 feet high struck the bank.
Then he called his two sons, and all three of them saw a snake rising


295


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


out of the water pushing the barrier in front of it for a distance of some
300 yards until the narrow arm of water was finally freed of it.


During all this time they could observe at leisure its phosphorescent
eyes and the huge teeth of its lower jaw.


Besides these witnesses’ accounts there are also two striking photo-
graphs of incredible monsters, killed 15 years apart. They were pub-
lished in a Rio de Janeiro newspaper. Photographs can be faked, so to
make quite certain Father Heinz sought out the proprietor of the Bazar
Sportivo at Manaos who had developed them both. It may seem odd
that both rolls of film should end up in the same shop so many years
apart, but Manaos is the largest town on the central Amazon and lies
near the confluence of many tributaries to the great river; it is the first
really civilised place that anyone coming in from the Amazon basin
would reach and it cannot have many shops equipped to develop photo-
graphs. At all events the proprietor assured the priest that the negatives
had not been retouched.


The officials of the Boundary Commission, who brought the first
photograph to be developed in 1933, told him how they had killed the
giant snake with a machine-gun. The wounded animal had, it seems,
risen up some 30 feet, smnashing bushes and even small trees in its fall.
Four men had been unable to lift its head.


The second photograph was taken in 1948. The snake, which was said


to measure 115 feet in length, crawled ashote and hid in the old fortifica-
tions of Fort Abuna in the Guaporé territory. It needed 500 machine-
gun bullets to put paid to it. The speed with which bodies decompose
in the tropics and the fact that its skin was of no commertial value may
explain why it was pushed back in the stream at once.


On the strength of all these reports Hagenbeck asserted that the
sucuriju gigante was not a myth, and that it might reach a length of 130


feet and a diarheter of 2 feet 6 inches; its weight would be 5 tons. Its
general colour was dark chestnut, and its belly was spotted with a dirty
white. Its eyes were surprisingly large, and their terrifying appearance
was increased by their phosphorescence.


There are also sighs that giant snakes are found north of the Panama
Isthmus: Frangois Poli, a young Frenchman who went out to the West
Indies and Lake Nicaragua to study shark-fishing, tells in his exciting
but thoroughly factual book, Sharks are Caught at Night, how he
met a German called Brennecker, who had lived in Nicaragua for 20
years and had met one in the triangle of “disputed territory” between
Nicaragua and Honduras.


296


=


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”?


“TI was driving a jeep [Brennecker told him] along a sort of natural


_ track winding between two lines of trees when I saw, about fifty yards


ahead, a huge fallen tree-trunk which barred the way. I told the boy
who was with me to go and find some way of shifting it. He came back
atarun. It wasn’t a tree-trunk at all, but a snake. It stirred and began
moving slowly towards us... .”’


There was a silence, and then he added:
“T’ve seen the most incredible snakes in this country during the
past twenty years—and I can assure you that I know how to handle a
gun. But that day I left the revolver where it was; I just stepped on the
gas and drove off.”’


Even if we admit that the dimensions of these monsters are very likely


to be exaggerated by the alarmed witnesses who saw them, we must also
admit that the arguments against their existence are even less reliable.
The purely negative attitude of the sceptics who refuse to believe any of
these stories, and insist that the witnesses must be liars and the photo-
graphs fakes, need hardly be discussed. But there are others who have
tried to prove “scientifically” that such monsters are impossible, and
this deserves discussion.


A very learned naturalist Louis Marcellin has attacked the legends on
mathematical grounds:


Let us be generous and allow a certain margin to these proportions:
40 to 45 feet as serious authors have supposed without however adduc-
ing the beginnings of a proof. We are still a long way from the 130 feet
in question and even more from the actual weight of a snake 30 feet
long which weighs 250 lbs. Let us allow an average of 9 lbs. per foot. A
“‘monster’’ of 130 feet would weigh at the maximum half a ton.


M. Marcellin (who incidentally is not so generous as he pretends, since


Verrill’s 194-foot snake weighed 360 pounds, an average of nearly 19
pounds per foot) is a poor mathematician. And Dr Jose Candido de Melo
has made a similar mistake in asserting that a 5-ton snake would have to
be 500 feet long. The weight of a snake would be directly proportional
to its length only if its thickness were constant, and no one has been so
foolhardy as to pretend that the diameter of a 130-foot snake is the same
as that of a 20-foot one. If the proportions of the two are the same the
weight depends upon the volume, that is upon the cube of the length.
Worked out correctly, the weight for M. Marcellin’s snake would
therefore be just under 7} tons, and if it had the proportions of Verrill’s


it would be no less than 45 tons. Both these calculations assume that
the proportions of these giant boas are the same as those of smaller


shakes. Since Hagenbeck has given us the snake’s diameter as well as its


297


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


length we can go to work another way (calculating for ease of arithmetic
in the metric system). His snake is 40 metres (130 feet) long, 80 centi-
metres (2 feet 6 inches) thick and it weighs 5 metric tons (almost equal
to § British tons). Now, since it is an aquatic snake, it must, like all
other aquatic animals, have a specific gravity almost equal to that of
water. In other words, every cubic metre of snake weighs the same as


a cubic metre of water: I metric ton. Now assuming that it tapers
considerably at the tail, and Hagenbeck’s 80 cm. is a maximum dia-
meter, let us consider the snake as a cylinder of, say, 50 cm. diameter,


i.e. 25 cm. radius. Its weight is then 40 x 0:25? < 7, which is about
7} tons. By the same method we can say that if a perfectly cylindrical
40-metre snake were to weigh 5 tons, its diameter would be 39 cm.


All in all, I think 5 tons a very reasonable weight for a 130-foot snake,
and I am surprised that the people who shot it and had no means of
weighing it at hand were able to judge its weight so accurately.
_


If this is the normal weight for these monsters it is less surprising that
none of the people who claimed to have shot one should have brought
back a specimen, or waited until the flesh had rotted off the bones to
bring back a bone. In the tropics flesh putrefies quickly, and the stench


that would rise from § tons of rotting flesh defies the imagination.


Five-ton snakes are not the only monsters reported from this part of
the world. The Marquis de Wavrin writes:


Around the Upper Paraguay they give the name mifiocao to a more or
less fabulous snake; the natives say that it can reach the size of a canoe.
They suppose that it is.a sucuriju or boa-constrictor that has grown very
old and turned into a water-snake.
On the Upper Rio Parana, in
Brazilian territory, I have also been told of these enormous snakes,
capable of dragging a canoe to the bottom. These monsters frequent
deserted places, and never leave a river. The fear they arouse is quite
superstitious.


The mifiocao or, in its more usual Portuguese spelling, minhocao,
“sounds at first as if it were one of the giant boas we have been discussing,
a sucuriju gigante. But when we have looked more carefully at the legen-
dary description of the minhocao and reports of eye-witnesses who have
seen it we shall find that it is neither an anaconda nor a boa-constrictor,
and may eventually doubt whether it is a snake at all.


The first scientist to be interested in the minhocado was Fritz Miiller
(1821-97), a German, who, after studying the embryology of certain
crustaceans, noted that the various forms the individuals took in the


298


q
:


:


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


course of their development corresponded to those their species had
taken in the course of its evolution. This novel idea inspired Ernst
Haeckel to formulate his famous Recapitulation Theory: ontogenesis
reproduces phylogenesis—or, in plainer language, during its life-history


an animal climbs up its family tree.


It was in Brazil, where he had gone as a trader, that Fritz Miiller
spent his spare time studying the development of crustaceans and where
he was able to collect numerous tales about the fabulous minhocao. At


first he took no notice of what seemed absurd stories about an animal
50 yards long and 15 feet across, covered in bony armour, overturning


trees like blades of grass, shifting the courses of rivers and turning dry
land into fathomless marshes. But gradually he collected evidence from
people who claimed to have seen it and spoke of it not as a monster but


a very large unknown animal, until he wrote a report on the probable
existence in Brazil of a huge amphibious creature. The word minhocdo
was, according to Miiller, the superlative of sinhoca (earthworm), and
thus meant “giant earthworm.” In the late 1860s it made a very re-
markable appearance in the neighbourhood of Lage. Some six miles
from the town, a certain Francisco de Amaral Varella who lived in
Baguaes saw a strange animal of gigantic size on the banks of the Rio
das Caveiras. It was 3 feet thick, but not very long, with a pig’s snout,
but he couldn’t say whether it had any feet. He dared not attack it
alone, but when he called his neighbours it lumbered off clumsily, leav-
ing a trail of deep furrows about 3 feet wide before it disappeared into
the ground.


Some weeks later, a similar trench which could have been made by
the same animal was seen on the other side of Lage, nearly four miles
from the first. They followed the animal’s track which finally led under
the roots of a large pine and then were lost in swampy ground. A Ger-
man merchant called Friedrich Kelling, then living at Lage, was an eye-
witness of this.


Another German, Emil Odebrecht, was surveying a route for a road
from Itajahy into the uplands of the province of Santa Catarina, and in
a broad, swampy plain intersected by a branch of the Rio Marombas his
progress was held up by winding trenches along the course of the stream.
They were too wide for him to step across, but not too wide for him to
jump them. Thus they were about the same width as Kelling’s. At the
time he did not know what to make of them, but later attributed them


to the minhocao.


In January in the early 1860s Antonio José Branco who lived on a


299


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


tributary of the Rio dos Cachorros 6 miles from Curitibanos, and had
been away with his whole family for eight days, came home to find the
road undermined, huge heaps of earth thrown up and a grooved track
10 feet wide and about half a mile long, ending in a swamp. It had
turned a stream from its old course. The anirnal’s route was mostly
underground, and where it went down under the stream, several pine-
trees were overthrown. One of the trees with its bark rubbed off was
still to be seen in 1877. Hundreds of people came from Curitibanos and
other towns to see the minhocdo’s work. They thought it must still be
in the swampy pool because the water was sometimes suddenly and
inexplicably disturbed. On still nights a rumbling noise and faint
earth-tremor was heard in the buildings near by. Miller was told this
story by two eye-witnesses, Branco’s son, José, and his stepson, Cres-
centio Fernando da Maia who had lived in Branco’s house at the time.
He remarks that the minhocdo’s appearance was supposed to presage
rain.


One evening in 1849, after a long period of rains, a sound of falling
rain was heatd in Jodo de Deos’s house near the Rio dos Papagaios, a
tributary of the Iguassu in Parana province, but the sky was clear and


starry. Next morning a large piece of land on the other side of a hillock
was completely undermined: deep furrows led to a stony plateau—
locally called a lageado—where heaps of reddish-white clay showed the
route the beast had taken into the bed of a stream that ran into the
Papagaios. Three years later a rich landowner called Lebino José dos
Santos, who lived at Guarda-mér near Curitibanos, sought out the place,
found the tracks still there, and concluded that there had been two
animals some 6-10 feet thick.


Senhor Lebino also related that in the same district, a negress, who
was going one morning to draw water, found the pool destroyed and saw
an animal “‘as big as a house” crawling away on the ground. She called
her neighbours, who arrived too late to see the monster itself, but they
saw its track where it had passed over a rock and disappeared into deep
water. In the same neighbourhood a young man saw a big pine-tree
suddenly fall without visible cause. He hurried up, found the surround-
ing earth moving and saw a huge worm-like black animal, “no longer
than a lasso” (about 80 feet) with two movable horns on its head lying
close to its body. It was wallowing in the mud.


Senhor Lebino also told Miiller that there was a place called Char-
quino, or Little Marsh, on the Campo do Tinga not far from the Ypa-
nema itt Sio Paulo province, but a minhocdo had driven a trench through


300


ie,
Ln
tet
Mie
)


THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”?


it and turned it into a stream running into the Ypanema. The same
Senhor Lebino was told near Arapehy in Uruguay that a few miles
away one could see a minhocdo which had got stuck in a crack in the
rock and had died. Its skin was supposed to be thicker than the bark
of a pine, and to have scales like an armadillo’s.


From all these stories [Miiller remarks] it would appear conclusive
that in the high district where the Uruguay and the Parana have their
sources, excavations and long trenches are met with, which are un-
doubtedly the work of some living animal. Generally, if not always, they
appear after continued rainy weather, and seem to start from marshes
or river-beds, and to enter them again. The accounts as to the size and
appearance of the creature are very uncertain.
It might be suspected
to be a gigantic fish allied to Lepidosiren and Ceratodus; the ‘“‘swine’s
snout,’ would show some resemblance to Ceratodus, while the horns on
the body rather point to the front limbs of Lepidosiren, if these par-
ticulars can be depended upon. In any case it would be worth while
to make further investigations about the Minhocio, and, if possible, to
capture it for a zoological garden!


Fritz Miiller is not the only authority for the minhocdo, nor is his
theory about its identity the only or the most likely one.


The Gaceta de Nicaragua of 10 March 1886 published a letter from
Paulino Montenegro telling how during a journey to Concordia in
February he heard that a gigantic snake had settled in a place called La
Cuchilla. He went there with some friends and saw tracks which con-
vinced him of the existence of some large animal. Five years earlier a


sort of platform of earth had appeared for no apparent cause at the foot
ofa hill. A peasant trustingly planted some fruit trees on it, but in 1863
the ground collapsed, laying bare a large rock; yet there was no water to
cause the subsidence.
Little by little, trees were loosened, great oaks
were even overturned, and huge chunks of rock thrown up until in
December they barred the road between Chichiguas and San Rafael del
Norte. The ground still showed many crevasses and in places it had
caved in. It had clearly been undermined. When Montenegro arrived


the last track was three days old, and revealed that there had been two


animals, The track lay in loose ground, and one could see where the


beast had pushed ovet an oak and then retreated apparently frightened


at the crash. Two tracks led from there, one directly into a pool, the


other larger one first went over some stony ground, where it was 4 feet


deep, and then straight down into the same pool. Roots of trees on the


way were worn through and rocks weighing more than a ton and a half


had been pushed aside. The animals seemed to have scales from the


301


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


imprints they had left in the mud. Montenegro thought they must have
been about 40 feet long (but how can one judge Jength from a groove in
the ground?), 10 feet high and 5 feet wide. They had been known locally


as sierpe, serpents.


Fawcett also seems to refer to the minhocao when he writes:


In the Paraguay River there is a freshwater shark, huge but toothless,
said to attack men and swallow them if it gets a chance. They talk here
of another river monster—fish or beaver—which can in a single night
tear out a huge section of river bank. The Indians report the tracks of
some gigantic animal in the swamps bordering the river, but allege that
it has never been seen. The shark exists beyond doubt;
+ as for the
other monsters—well, there are queer things yet to be disclosed in this
continent of mystery, and if strange, unclassified insects, reptiles and
small mammals can still exist there, mightn’t there be a few giant
monsters, remnants of an extinct species, still living out their lives in
the security of the vast unexplored swamp areas? In the Madidi, in
Bolivia, enormous tracks have been found, and Indians there talk of a
huge creature described at times half submerged in the swamps.


The reports are usually rather vague about the animal’s size and shape.
Indeed it has been assumed on too little evidence to be a monstrous
earthworm, merely because it leaves grooved tracks like a worm’s. It
might well have feet concealed below the earth or mud, although no
observer mentions them. Dr Budde, who summarises Miiller’s report
in his Naturwissenschaftliche Plaudereten, remarks:


If the animal has no feet, we must allow that it moves by crawling
like a worm: its scales would serve to give it a grip when forcing a
subterranean passage. The pig’s snout and the horns, if they can be
trusted, remind one of certain reptiles that lead a similar life to the
minhocdo’s.


This last phrase seems to refer to the horned viper which burrows in
the sands of the Sahara and Arabia Deserta.
But according to Dr
Budde, the minhocdo could just as well be some kind of gigantic arma-


dillo, one of those alarming living tanks that I have mentioned in the
previous chapter. The bony carapace sometimes mentioned, the snub
nose and the horns—which are merely the upstanding ears—all recall
some kind of Glyptodon. Given that this animal, which had powerful


1 It has been claimed that sharks sometimes go up the Amazon as far as
Manaos, about 1,000 miles from the coast. Zoologists have always treated these
reports with great reserve, but early in 1953 Felipe Ancieta of the Peruvian
River and Forestry Department published a report and a photograph of a shark
of the genus Carcharinus—the most voracious type—caught near Iquitos,
2,300 miles from the mouth of the river.


302


Sa


78. Reconstruction of the Glyptodon, a giant armadillo,
12 feet long.


claws, was a burrower like the present armadillos, to which it is related,
the picture is in some respects a very good likeness. As it was over II
feet long the passages it dug must have caused considerable subsidence
in the ground. In Africa the burrows dug by the aardvark, a much
smaller animal, often make whole slices of road collapse and hold up
the traffic. Dr Budde thinks it possible that the minhocdos may be
survivors of this group which have escaped destruction and the
notice of naturalists by their underground habits. And the editor
of Nature, which also published a version of Miiller’s report, shares
this view.


Only one of the minhocdo’s habits seems surprising in a Glyptodon: it


is amphibious. Armadillos certainly are not, though it is now known
that they are excellent swimmers. They cross narrow streams by run-
ning across the bottom, and for larger rivers they fill their intestines
with air until they float in spite of their heavy armour. There is no
reason why a giant armadillo should not take up a semi-aquatic life.
It would not be the only mammal to be both a burrower and amphi-
bious: besides the platypus there is the insectivorous water-shrew
(Neomys fodiens) and rodents like the beaver and the muskrat. Like the
giant dinosaurs, such as the Diplodocus, it might have taken to a medium
denser than air, where its heavy body, laden with its great carapace,
could move more easily. With its scales it. could easily be mistaken for
a giant snake if only its head and the huge dome, more than 3 feet
wide, of its carapace were visible above water.
The legends about
gigantic reptiles might be due to people seeing Glyptodons and very
large water-boas and mixing the two together. More evidence is needed


303


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


before one can draw such a bold conclusion, but given the compara-
tively recent date of the Glyptodons, which have certainly been con-
temporary with men, their survival would not be so surprising.


Personally I am inclined to think that a third animal may have con-
fused the story. The monstrous water-snakes are so similar to the great
sea-serpent—which is certainly not a snake, since it wriggles up and
down, and not from side to side—that I wonder whether they may not
be primitive Cetacea (Archaeoceti). As Remington Kellogg suggested in
1936 in his Review of the Archaeoceti, the first stages in the history of the
Cetacea (whales, etc.), which are mammals that have reverted to the sea,
may have occurred in freshwater lakes and rivers. Some of the Archaeo-


ceti had a coat of mail consisting of rings of horny scales around the
body. The rows of nodules on the skin on some porpoises’ backs (genus
Neomeris) are a vestige of this ancient armour.


If a primitive cetacean had survived today, its head, rising above the
surface on a neck as flexible as a seal’s, and its scaly back would make it
look very like a monstrous serpent. Ivan T. Sanderson no doubt had
this in mind when he wrote:


Perhaps there are Acrodelphids still cruising the oceans, Zeuglodonts
browsing in lakes, lochs, and fjords, the ancestors of these in tropical
rivers, and even some “First Ancestors’? [Archaeoceti] on their banks.


But all this can be no more than a theory, for we know far less about
the minhocdo than about the great sea-serpent or the Loch Ness monster.
At all events it is more probable than that the surviving giants should
be those dinosaurs that seem to leap into romantic minds whenever they
learn of the discovery of huge footprints or glimpses of vast aquatic
animals in the Green Continent.


304


CHAPTER FOURTEEN


Apes in Green Hell


For mine owne part I saw them not, but I am re-
solued that so many people did not all combine or
forethinke to make the report.


SIR WALTER RALEIGH on the tales of hairy
men that he heard in South America.


CANDIDE and Cacambo were lost in the Amazon jungle when they
heard faint cries that seemed to be uttered by women.


They could not tell [writes Voltaire] whether they were cries of pain
or of joy; but they rose hastily with that alarm and uneasiness caused by
everything in an unknown country.


The cries came from two completely naked girls who were running
gently along the edge of the plain, while two monkeys pursued them
and bit their buttocks. Candide was moved to pity; he had learned to
shoot among the Bulgarians and could have brought down a nut from
a tree without touching the leaves.
He raised his double-barrelled
Spanish gun, fired, and killed the two monkeys.


“God be praised, my dear Cacambo, I have delivered these two poor
creatures from a great danger; if I committed a sin in killing an In-
quisitor and a Jesuit, I have atoned for it by saving the lives of these two
girls. Perhaps they are young ladies of quality and this adventure may
be of great advantage to us in this country.”


He was going on, but his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth when
he saw the two girls tenderly kissing the two monkeys, shedding tears
on their bodies and filling the air with the most piteous cries.


“I did not expect so much human kindliness,”’ he said at last to
Cacambo, who replied:


“You have performed a wonderful masterpiece; you have killed the
two lovers of these young ladies.”’


‘Their lovers! Can it be possible? You are jesting at me, Cacambo;
how can I believe you?”’


““My dear master,’’ replied Cacambo, “you are always surprised at
everything; why should you think it so strange that in some countries


U
305


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


there should be monkeys who obtain ladies’ favours? They are quarter
men, as I am a quarter Spaniard.”


"
“Alas!?? replied Candide “I remember to have heard Dr Pangloss
say that similar accidents occurred in the past and that these mixtures
produce Aigypans, fauns and satyrs; that several eminent persons of
antiquity have seen them; but I thought they were fables.”


“You ought now to be convinced that it is true,”’ said Cacambo.


The ancient myth that satyrs and fauns were hybrids between men
and beasts is now known to have been based on garbled descriptions of
anthropoid apes.


Voltaire was of course more interested in the women’s behaviour than
the monkeys’ existence. AH the same he garnished Candide with fact
wherever possible. What made him think that there were large apes in
South America when in fact the only species of monkeys there known to
science are small and have long tails? One cannot be certain, but it is
more than likely that he drew his information chiefly from the memoirs
of those Jesuit missionaries whom he so loved to make fun of. The
Noticias Curtosas e Necesarias das Cosas do Brasil by Father Simao de
Vasconcellos, s.J., provincial of Brazil, is a mine of curious information
and contains several references to man-faced monsters that haunted the
Brazilian forests. There are, for instance, dwarfs called goazis or guaya-


zis; the matuyus, wild men with their feet the wrong way round;
curinquéans, giants 16 spans (about 11 feet) high, the most courageous of
creatures, with their lips and nostrils adorned with nuggets of gold, for
whom everyone showed the greatest respect.


These legends are so like those which had been known in the East
since time immemorial that one might easily suppose that the first ex-
plorers, who thought they had arrived in Asia, had innocently fathered
on the new continent the wonders that Ctesias and Megasthenes had
reported of the Indies; in which case it would hardly be surprising that
the legend of Indians who coupled with beasts ‘“‘under the influence oe


a vile sensuality” should also be found in America.


But subsequent explorations showed that it was not the Conquista-
dors who had introduced these tales; they were current among the most
remote tribes which had had no contact with the whites. Moreover,
most of them had a foundation in fact. The first reports about the New
World therefore deserve careful attention. During their discovery of the
“Empire of Guiana” in 1595 and 1596 Sir Walter Raleigh and his con-
tinuator Laurence Keymis heard tell of monstrous creatures remini-
scent of the “‘Aigypans, fauns and satyrs” of the Old World. And of


306


APES IN GREEN HELL


course at this time, long before the idea of evolution was dreamt of, any
animal whose characteristics were a mixture of those of two known
animals—in this case man and the ape—were thought to be monstrous
crossbreeds, as can be seen from the following passage from the


Spanish historian Pedro de Cieza de Leon’s Crénica del Peri:


It is also said that in other places there are (though for myself I have
not seen them) very large long-tailed monkeys which live in the trees
and which the natives (tempted by the devil who seeks to find where and
how he can make man commit the vilest sins) use like women and, it
is affirmed, some of these monkeys are supposed to give birth to mon-
sters which have a man’s head and privy parts and a monkey’s hands
and feet. They have, it is said, a thin body, and a great stature. They
are hairy. Indeed they resemble (if it is true they exist) the devil their
father. It is also said that they have no language but a plaintive moan
or howl.


Some such story as this must: have been the origin of the incident in
Candide.


Rumours of large apes, like the chimpanzee or the gorilla, have per-
sistently come from South America, and sometimes significantly from
remote places where they could not have been introduced from Europe.
In 1769 Dr Edward Bancroft brought from the heart of Guiana a report
about an “orang-utan”


much larger than either the African [the chimpanzee] or Oriental, if the
accounts of the natives may be relied on. . .
. They are represented by


the Indians as being near five feet in height, maintaining an erect posi-
tion, and having a human form, thinly covered with short black hair;
but I suspect that their height has been augmented by the fears of the
Indians, who greatly dread them....


When, some 30 years later, Alexander von Humboldt reached the
still-unexplored rapids of the Upper Orinoco, he heard tell of “a hairy
man of the woods” which was reputed to build huts, carry off women
and eat human flesh. The Indians of the region, and even the mis-


sionaries in the neighbouring country, believed that this animal existed


and called it vasitri or “big devil.” The alleged habits of this lascivious


beast remind one of those attributed to the gorilla, which, however, was


stili utterly unknown in Europe. According to Humboldt this fable


could be based on “‘one of those large bears, the footsteps of which


resemble those of a man and which are believed in every country to


attack women.” In 1860 Philip H. Gosse pertinently asked what “large


bear” could inhabit Venezuela, for the only known South American


bear is of very modest size. ‘Is not such a bear in South America quite


307


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


as gratuitous as the monkey himself?” Rejecting Humboldt’s explana-
tion as unconvincing, Gosse affirms that it is possible that in South
America “there may exist a large anthropoid ape, not yet recognised by
zoologists”—a prophetic phrase, as we shall see. And today there is no
lack of rumours about fantastic man-faced monsters in the Green
Continent, much of which is still little known. Frank W. Lane writes


Gold prospectors, working on the River Araguaya, which flows near
the Matto Grosso, have heard roars coming from the depths of the
virgin forest. Cattle have been found dead and every time their tongues
had been wrenched out by the roots. Two prospectors have seen foot-
prints in soft sand by the river, which resembled those of a man, but
were 21 inches long.


Henri Pitaud, director of the Sociedad de Estudios y Empresas
Franco-Paraguaya of Asuncion, told me in 1955 that a similar event had
caused a sensation in the Ybitimi region in Paraguay a few years before.


In an estancia about a hundred cattle were found dead without any
wounds except that the tongue was torn out and gone. This went on
for nearly eight months. Everything returned to normal, then, sud-
denly, two or three years ago, the same events recurred in the same area
but in a different estancia: another hundred cattle suffered the same
fate.


As to the large footprints, these are puzzling enough without even
invoking such legendary monsters as the curinquéans and the vasitris, for
though human-looking tracks may be made by an ape, a bear or even a
large reptile, in this area there is no known animal that leaves footprints


21 inches long. In fact they cami only be attributed to certain prehistoric
(or supposedly prehistoric) animals, such as the Megatherium or a dino-
saur Prestosuchus chiniquensis, whose remains have been found in Brazil
and whose footprints looked as if they had been made by enormous
human hands,


But this could not explain the torn-out tongues, for surely it needs a


true hand to grasp a cow’s tongue, and extraordinary strength to succeed
in ripping it out. .Must it not really be some kind of ogre? The idea is
so fantastic that it is hard to take seriously, but since there is now proof
that more or less human-looking giants once inhabited a large part of the
earth and may still survive in the Himalayas, it is impossible to banish
this nightmarish notion.


It would indeed be odd if the vast basins of the Amazon and the Ori-
noco did not still hold several surprises for the zoologist, but so far most
of the evidence about unknown animals there comes from isolated wit-


308


APES IN GREEN HELL


nesses and for lack of confirmation is not accepted by serious naturalists.
There is one great exception: the large ape, very human in appearance,
which has been met several times and has even been photographed,
though its identity is still in dispute.


In 1917 Francois de Loys, a Swiss geologist, set off with a handful of
men deep into the Sierra de Perijad, a range of mountains covered with
impenetrable virgin forests, which lie astride the borders of Colombia
and Venezuela and are inhabited by the dangerous Motilone Indians.
The expedition went on for three years. It was an exhausted party of
men, decimated by fever and
skirmishes with the savages,
who in 1920 were in the forests
along the River Tarra, a tribu-
tary of the Rio Catatumbo,
south-west of the lagoon of
Maracaibo.


There, not far from the river,
Loys and his companions sud-
denly met two tall monkeys
which advanced towards them,
walking upright and holding
on to bushes. They seemed to
be beside themselves with rage,
screaming, waving and tearing
off branches and brandishing
79: Capuchin monkey, a typical Platyr-


‘
rhinian monkey (with splayed nostrils)
them like weapons.
At last
ofthe New World.
they reached such a pitch of
fury that they defecated into their hands and hurled their excrement at
the intruders. Loys and his companions aimed their guns at the male,
who was in front and was the most threatening of the two, but he
stepped aside and let the female pass. It was she who was killed by the
salvo from the guns. Whereupon the male fled. The dead animal was
then carried to the river bank, seated on a petrol-crate and held upright
by a stick under its chin. In this position it was photographed (see


frontispiece).


Professor Georges Montandon, to whom Loys reported the incident
and who informed the learned world of it, points out that this monkey
was “an utterly new apparition to the Creoles who accompanied the
leaders of the expedition, though not perhaps to the Motilone savages.”


309


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


What was this large monkey? At first glance the only photograph we
have of it reminds one irresistibly of a spider-monkey, but with a strik-
ingly human expression on its face—more human than that of any an-
thropoid ape. The nostrils are very wide apart, separated by a broad
wall of cartilage: it is thus a Platyrrhinian, like all the other American
monkeys. As Professor Joleaud has remarked, its face shows features
typical of the spider-monkeys, for instance:


In the general arrangement of the ocular region, where the eye-socket
cavity is surrounded by a projection of bone which is almost equally
prominent everywhere and is carried on just as markedly across the
cheekbones as in the eyebrows.


The thumbs of its hands are extremely small—also a characteristic of
the spider-monkeys. The genitals (which are not a penis but a clitoris,
for it is indeed a female) are strikingly large. All female spider-monkeys
have
an _ over-developed


clitoris, and though it has
often been said that in
Loys’s monkey it was even
more exaggerated, I have
seen for myself
by examin-
ing a black spider-monkey
in
Antwerp
Zoo
and
several other living speci-
mens, that it was not.
I


also noticed that it has a
deep groove on the rear
BERL
SNS
side, down which the urine
;
2
;
runs, thus increasing the
resemblance.


This anatomical peculi-
arity may be the origin of the South American legend that apes couple
with women.
Since all the spider-monkeys seemed to be males, their
mates would have to be of another species: Indian women.
The
bastards supposed to be born of these bestial amours are called coatds-
tapuyas, coata being the Brazilian name for spider-monkey.


Had Loys’s monkey merely been a spider-monkey—as many of its
features suggest (to say nothing of the habit, frequent among these
beasts, of hurling its excrement at its enemies)—he would hardly
have gone to the trouble at such a critical moment of his explorations to
photograph such a common animal. Besides, if he is to be believed, the


310


80. Spider-monkey of Brazil.


APES IN GREEN HELL”


monkey in question was far larger and more massive than any spider-
monkey he had ever seen, and it had no tail. All the spider-monkeys
have tails—and what is more they are long and prehensile.


This absence of tail, a feature in common with the African and Asian
anthropoid apes, is, alas, not visible in the photograph. On the other
hand, it is hard to deny that Loys’s monkey has a more massive body
and thicker limbs than the ordinary spider-monkeys. A detail which I
do not think has been pointed out is that its thorax seems to be flattened
dorso-ventrally, like an anthropoid’s—as one can see from its broader
shoulders—and it is much longer than a spider-monkey’s. Its face is
also much more oval. Its hind-legs seem to be shorter than its fore-legs,


like those of the anthropoids, but this is not enough to put it into a
different genus; all the spider-monkeys have a similar tendency.


There is one other very important characteristic in which the Platyr-
rhinian monkeys of the New World differ from the Catarrhinians of the
Old World. The former have 36 teeth, the latter 32. Loys asserts that
the animal he shot had only 32. We cannot verify this figure without
examining the monkey’s dentition in detail. Alas, the expedition’s cook
who prepared and preserved the animal’s skull was rash enough to turn


it into a salt-box. It dried and disintegrated in the heat and little by


little the pieces were lost.


If Loys has given the number of teeth correctly, the monkey might


still have a Platyrrhinian’s normal dentition, if the last molars had not
yet appeared, though this would be most extraordinary in an apparently
adult animal. It would have to be a freakish reduction in the basic num-
ber, which, as Dr Charles Bennejeant has pointed out, is extremely rare:
the American monkeys are more apt to increase the number of their
molars. Nevertheless, in an unpublished treatise quoted by Professor
Beccari, Dr Schultz of Baltimore, who collected some 400 specimens of
monkeys in Nicaragua and Panama, has shown that the spider-monkeys


are an exception to this rule and often lack the third molar.


If Loys’s ape is, as it seems, a highly developed spider-monkey, one
would expect that what is a tendency in the rest of the group would be a
normal characteristic for it, in which case de Loys was telling the truth,
and we should be all the more inclined to trust the rest of his account,


especially about the absence of tail.


There remains its size. The largest American monkeys, howlers,
spider-monkeys and woolly spider-monkeys, are no more than 3 feet


7 inches high when they stand up on their hind-legs. Loys swears his


monkey was much larger. At first, relying on his memory, he gave a


311


RIDDLES QF THE GREEN CONTINENT


“height of 4 feet 5 inches, but later he found a note he had sent home
to


his mother giving the exact dimensions: 1 metre and §7 centimetres—
5 feet 13 inches. So large an American monkey would be an animal


quite new to science (though it agrees exactly with the native tales re-


ported by Dr Bancroft), and the sceptics at once began to call Lays’s


assertions in question and to dispute his measurements. But the prob-
able size of the petrol-crate will determine the animal’s size fairly accur-


ately, as was demonstrated at the session of the Académie des Sciences


at Paris on 11 March 1929, at which the “monkey of anthropoid appear-
ance” described by Professor Montandon was presented.


According to M. Cintract, a photographer, who judged from the
number of planks in the crate, it must have been about 20 inches high,
and the animal’s height was between 5 feet and 5 feet 3 inches. On the
other hand the standard size for petrol-crates is 17$ inches high, and
as the animal is three and a third times the height of the case, this
implies a height of 5 feet.


Which confirms the accuracy of Loys’s measurements. The monkey
would therefore be taller than the chimpanzee, the female of which
rarely exceeds 4 feet 3 inches in height. No wonder Loys was so sur-
prised. On the strength of this photograph and information given him
by the geologist, Professor Montandon published a careful description
of the unknown animal in 1929, naming it Ameranthropoides loysi, to
mark its anthropoid characteristics and honour its discoverer. Gosse’s
prediction had come true.


This talk of an American “anthropoid” shocked some zoologists who
wanted to keep this term strictly to a few of the Catarrhinians. Actually
it has no ptecise meaning in systematic classification, but is generally
used to embrace two distinct families, the Hylobatidae or gibbons and
the Anthropoidae (or Pongidae) the gorilla, the chimpanzee and the
orang-utan. To my mind the family of Anthropoidae is by no means
homogeneous: in some characteristics the orang-utan is nearer to the
gibbons—which are Asians like itself—than to the African chimpanzee
and gorilla. I am very tempted to believe that the gibbons and orang-
utans are giant types derived from the Asian langurs, while the gorilla
and chimpanzee have sprung from a group of little African monkeys
related to the baboons. Thus the term “anthropoid” merely means


all the large tailless apes with arms longer than the legs and a flattened
chest, irrespective of their origin. These characteristics betray a special
form of locomotion: brachiation, that is ta say moving usually by swing-
ing from their arms (the other monkeys which employ cruriation, or


312


The spider-monkey is undoubtedly like Ameranthropoides loysi, but it is much
smaller and has a long prehensile tail.


ey
Se
;
es ee


The Berezovka mammoth reconstructed in the Leningrad Museum as it was found,
with the trunk partly eaten by wolves. The fur is original.


Mammoths’ tusks brought from the Liakhov islands to a trading post in Yakutsk.
This trade goes back to the earliest times.


4


APES IN GREEN HELL


ordinary quadruped gait, have legs longer than their arms, and the
thorax is deeper), Therefore if there is an American ape, descended
from the spider-monkeys and showing all these characteristics, there is
no reason for not calling it an anthropoid.


To his description of Ameranthropoides loysi, Dr Montandon ap-
pended two curious documents which showed that large monkeys were
not utterly unknown in America. The first was the passage from Pedro
de Cieza de Leon which I have already quoted and which applies very
well to de Loys’s monkey. The second is an account in the American
Science News Letter of archaeological discoveries made in the peninsula
of Yucatan in Mexico:


Monstrous stone statues like gorillas, coming from the gorilla-less
country of the Mayas, are one of the unexplained curiosities of the
archaeological and historical Museum of Merida (Yucatan). There are
two of these creatures without legs, but standing upright more than five
feet high on the stumps of their thighs . . . they were found near the
town of Tekax in Yucatan. ... One of these statues seems to be bisexual,
for although it has male features, it carries a child on its left arm, like a
mother.
The figures have a strikingly apelike position. They have
pronounced eyebrows, broad chests and a bent back. There is no trace
of any legend which explains their significance, and the inhabitants of
Tekax know only that these stone statues have been for a long time in
their lonely position on the hill. (Emma Reh Stevenson.) 4


Professor Montandon also remarks that according to the Indians,
pygmies still live in the Motilone area. He thinks that these “little men”
might very well be large apes, especially if they had particularly human
features and sometimes walked upright on the ground. But this theory
must be rejected, since the Marquis de Wavrin has shown that these pyg-
mies really are men. He lived for a long time among these 5-foot Marak-
shitos and returned with a wealth of photographs and films of them.
Thus we see that the legend of those dwarfs the guayazts is by no means
far-fetched. Montandon goes on to make higher claims:


If our subject’s well-developed forehead is not merely the result of an
optical illusion, it is not impossible that this creature is a new genus of
the Hominidae which would put it on a level with the genus Pithe-
canthropus.


All the same it would be absurd to consider Ameranthropoides as a


sort of “Missing Link” between monkeys and man, not so much for the


1 This passage has been retranslated from Professor Montandon’s French


text, since I have been unable to find a copy of this issue of the Science News


Letter (Translator’s note).


313


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


palaeogeographical reasons which lead most anthropologists to rule out
America as a possible cradle of mankirid, but because the hypothetical
common ancestors of men and monkeys belong to a very early period in
the history of the primates.


Even so, we may still consider Loys’s monkey as a priiieees which has
developed by convergence as many human traits as the Pithecanthropus
of Java or his cousin the pet) ULE. of Pekin. This was the late


Professor Leonce Joleaud’s view:


I see the new monkey discovered on the Rio Tarra taking its place
in the world of the Cebidae and in particular of the spider-monkeys, in
a position determined by a stage of evolution comparable to that of the
Pithecanthropus in relation to the group of gibbons.


It is now known that in the Sinanthropus, which was no doubt a


variety of the Pithecanthropus, “the jaw was,” in Professor C. Aram-
bourg’s words, “‘strongly prognathous, the nose platyrrhinian, and that
altogether it had a pronounced pithecoid appearance.” So it is hardly
surprising that there should be such a striking resemblance between the


81. Comparison of the shape and structure of the face of the Ameran-
thropoid (shown here with its mouth shut) and the Pithecanthropus
(after an unduly humanised reconstruction by von Koenigswald, 1938).


Ameranthropoid and a reconstruction of the Pithecanthropus made by
von Koenigswald in 1938, even though he has humanised it unduly. The
bare skin, hair only on the head and eyebrows, lips, sclerotic visible in
the eyes—all these are features which cannot be inferred from the bones
alone, and must therefore have been invented. If you disregard them
you will see that the shape of the face is the same in the two. Indeed it
is very possible that the Pithecanthropus looked more like Loys’s monkey
than like the suspiciously humanised reconstruction of it.


On the other hand, the Ameranthropoid’s face is clearly different from


314


APES IN GREEN HELL


that of an ordinary spider-monkey’s. It is oval in outline instead of be-


ing rather triangular. The bottom of its face is much heavier, and its


jaws are more powerful. And though it has been photographed full face,


one can see that its profile is more like that of a capuchin monkey, an-


other smaller American species, than like a spider-monkey’s, in which


the upper jaw recedes sharply, giving it a fairly pointed snout, while the


capuchin’s is more rounded. No
doubt Loys’s monkey has a simi-


larly slight prognathism.


It would be extremely interesting


to know
the Ameranthropoid’s
cranial capacity.
If the develop-
ment of its brain has reached the
same level as the Java ape-man’s,


its habits and psychology would
be a fascinating study. The best-
preserved
Pithecanthropus
skull
(skull 11) has a capacity of 775 cc.,
between the gorilla (600 cc. aver-
age) and a modern European (1,320


cc. average).
The Sinanthropus,
though so similar to the Java ape-
man, is better off with an average
of about 1,040 cc.


The cranial capacity is the only
evidence from which the anthropo-


logist can judge a mammal’s cere-
-
bral development, and it has to be
82. Siete SB elinoee | >
considered not absolutely (since an
* SP? De EchiA bel ae
elephant’s brain weighs four times


as much as a man’s and a whale’s five times as much), but relatively to
the weight of the body as a whole. Even so, a man’s brain is only one
forty-sixth of his total weight, whereas a capuchin’s or a spider-monkey’s
brain is between one fifteenth and one seventeenth.
But as man is
undeniably more intelligent than these monkeys, all sorts of formulae
have been invented, with varying degrees of success, to calculate a
“cephalisation index” which will give man his pre-eminent place. The
weight of the brain and the body are always the main factors, but many


authors also take into account the height. Be that as it may, the cerebral


315


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


development of the monkeys of the New World, as regards both weight
and height, is much more remarkable than that of those of the Old
World, even including the anthropoid apes. And as Bierens de Haan,
the Dutch psychologist, has proved, the intelligence of the capuchin
monkey, even though it is no bigger than a small cat, can very well be
compared to that of the remarkably intelligent chimpanzee.


If, as in the African and Asian monkeys, the intelligence of the Ameri-
can monkeys is very roughly proportional to their size, the Ameranthro-
poid’s intellectual faculties must be much higher than those of the
chimpanzee or gorilla. Even if it is merely a giant spider-monkey, its
cranial capacity would be much larger than theirs. No doubt it is larger
than the Pithecanthropus’s and perhaps even than man’s. If a spider-
monkey or a capuchin kept its usual proportions but were as large as a
man it would obviously have a larger brain than his; and the Ameran-
thropoid (5 feet 13 inches) is the height of a human pygmy (5 feet or


less) or even a short man. Even though it certainly has an intellect far
inferior to the most backward of men (otherwise it would have con-
quered the world!), a comparative study of its anatomy and physiology,
especially that of its brain, with those of a man of the same size would
be of immense interest and might enable us to establish for certain the


relation between the weight, volume and shape of the brain and the
degree of intelligence.


The zoological problem of Loys’s monkey demands a solution.
Some eminent naturalists, like.Sir Arthur Keith, have coolly avoided
the issue by maintaining that it is merely a variety of ordinary spider-
monkey and that the tail has been hidden in the photograph—thus im-
plying that Loys is a fraud. Quite apart from the size of the animal—
which can still be disputed, though unfairly—it seems to me that the
photograph proves that this is an unknown kind of monkey, and I am
forced to the irreverent conclusion that Sir Arthur has never had a good
look at an ordinary spider-monkey.
Philip Hershkovitz, an excellent
American mammalogist who during the War prospected the area that
Loys had explored but found no trace of the Ameranthropoid, even
claims to have determined the species of spider-monkey to which it
belongs, the mulatto spider-monkey (Ateles hybridus). I therefore spent


a long time in the Natural History Museum in Paris studying the “‘type”
of this species, collected by Le Plée in Colombia in 1826, but I was not
in the least convinced. While it is true that the mulatto spider-monkey
has much thicker limbs than the other spider-monkeys (at least it had


316


APES IN GREEN HELL


in this specimen which had been mounted from a skin in poor condition)
and fur not unlike the Ameranthropoid’s, its size, the length of its thorax
and more especially the shape of its face quite refuted this identification.


Legends of large monkeys are not confined to the Colombo-Vene-
zuelan border, but are found all over the country of the Amazon. The
Marquis de Wavrin writes:


I have been told of the existence of large monkeys in the region of the
vast forest north of the Matto Grosso, between the Paraguay and the
Amazon basins. I have not seen them. Although large monkeys are
reported everywhere in the Amazon basin, if relatively rarely, it is
around the Orinoco that they seem to be more frequent. They are
called maribundas.
Their height when standing upright, a position
they readily adopt to walk on the ground, is supposed to be about § feet.
The only civilised man who lives with his family on the Guaviare on
the upper reaches of this river, told me he had brought up a young
maribunda at his house.
It was very friendly and amusing in all its
pranks; finally its owner had to kill it because it did too much damage.


The maribunda’s cry sounds strangely like a human call. On the
Guaviare in particular I several times thought at first that it was Indians
calling.


Once maribundas spread panic among his servants, who thought they
were being attacked by the terrible Guaharibo Indians. Are these mari-
bundas the same as Loys’s monkey? I think not. In fact maribunda
or marimonda is the native name for what in English is called the
marimonda spider-monkey (Afeles belzebuth)—but this is never more
than 3 feet 7 inches high. And Wavrin adds: “According to what the
Indians told me, this monkey’s body is rather slim. It likewise has a
prehensile tail”-—which does not agree at all with Loys’s description.
Rather than suppose that there is a giant species of marimonda spider-
monkey, might there not be a confusion in the Indians’ minds between
a marimanda of ordinary size and our large tailless spider-monkey which
according to Loys is greyish brown?
In any case the Marquis de
Wavrin’s observations are far from solving the problem.


At first sight Roger Courteville’s evidence appears more helpful. A


civil engineer who once led an ethnographic expedition in South
America, he was, in 1926, the first man to cross the entire continent,
from Rio de Janeiro to La Paz and Lima, by car. He claims that in the
area that Loys explored he twice met a large tailless ape. He informs
me that his encounters occurred in 1938 and 1947.
In his book
Les Indiens Inconnus de ? Amazanie he tells how he was in virgin forest


317


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


between the Rio Catatumbo and the Rio Tamandua Bandeira, a tribu-
tary of the Rio Aiquaissa, not far from the Colombo-Venezuelan fron-


tier.


Only a few yards away, a creature resembling an Indian of unknown
race, stared at me with a vacant eye. A prominent brow overhung its
very soft grey-blue eyes. A dark hairless face rose above its receding
chin. It had a tuft of thick hair on the crown of its forehead; a powerful
neck towered above its broad V-shaped thorax; long reddish hair
covered its limbs and body. Its bestial appearance contrasted, however,
with its peaceful attitude.


Was it a man? Was it a monkey? It seemed rather a monstrous
hybrid of the two, a creature born of the unspeakable amours of an
Indian woman and a spider-monkey.
Its upper arms seemed longer
than its forearms, just as its thighs seemed longer than its shins. The
footprints left in the fine sand showed me that it walked on the outside
edge of its feet, as the chimpanzees do.


Protected by the bowie-knife fastened to my belt which would be a
great help to me in the event of a hand to hand struggle with those un-
usually muscular arms, I rose gently from my crouching position, with-
out taking my eyes off the Pithecanthropus for a moment.
Slowly I
approached it.


Its restless eyes did not stop rolling from side to side without daring
to look directly into mine. When I was two yards away from it, its
upper lip drew back, exposing its incisors and the edge of its gum.


Suddenly in one leap backwards it disappeared with disconcerting
rapidity into the shadow of the forest. —The branches and underbrush
closed after it as if to hide its flight.


The apparition had not lasted a minute. But I think that I shall never
forget it as long as I live.
°


He knew of Loys’s monkey, and recognised that his “‘Pithecanthropus”’
was the same creature. As a result of an article he published in Caliban
in May 1951 I wrote to him for additional information. He was positive


it had no tail, otherwise how could he have mistaken it for an Indian?
He also told me that “‘the Indian tribes on the frontiers of Brazil, Colom-
bia and Venezuela, including the Ningueno tribe, know these creatures
and call them by the onomatopoeic name of ofluahi.”


This name, which seems to be derived from the animal’s cry, is
strangely like that of the uakari (Cacajao), a little monkey, normally no
bigger than a cat, which lives on the Upper Amazon and has a rudi-
mentary almost non-existent tail 4 or 5 inches long. There are many
species, the best known being the bald, the red and the black-faced
uakaris. Their sad expression is always very human and their bodies are
covered with long hair varying from silvery-white to reddish-brown


318


aa
itduis
scinanirialianiil


83. The uakari, a South-American short-tailed monkey.


according to the species. E. G. Boulenger, for many years Director of
the Aquarium at the London Zoo, writes:


The monkey’s chief glory is its face which is of a scarlet or brick-red
hue, and glows as though illuminated from within.


Its appearance, combined with the apparent absence of tail, is so
striking that Boulenger, who does not know Loys’s photo, thinks that
the “enormous tailless ape” which attacked him was one of these tiny
uakaris and that “large specimens of both sakis and uakaris” may be the
origin of “the many Indian legends of an unidentified semi-human
animal believed to haunt the depths of the Amazon jungle.” May not
Courteville’s Indians have suffered the same confusion as Boulenger?


It shows once again how many different creatures may make the iden-
tification of an unknown or little-known animal so difficult.


In his book, Courteville also reveals that “in 1938, Dr de Barle met
another of these ape-men in the same area and this discovery was the


319


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


subject of an official paper.” Although I have written at length both to
Courteville and to Dr de Barle I can find no trace of this paper. Courte-


ville’s circumstantial account does not, alas, help to confirm Loys’s
description. He has a perfect right to maintain that his “Pithecan-
thropus” is an “intermediate stage between monkey and man” or even
“a hybrid arising from a monkey mating with an Indian woman, or of
certain primitive men living in a state of nature mating with a female
monkey”—though to me they both seem wild hypotheses. But he has no
business to publish in his book a photograph of his “Pithecanthropus”
waving its arms among the branches, with the caption “Dr de Barle’s
document,” when this is obviously a crude fake. Loys’s photograph has
been cut up, its limbs rearranged into a threatening posture and the
whole thing stuck on a background of virgin forest, thus leading the
innocent reader to believe that the animal has been photographed a
second time and in a position in which the absence of its tail is indisput-
able. Science cannot tolerate such a mischievous act.


What are we to say of the sketch of the “‘Pithecanthropus” which
Courteville drew on brown paper to “‘fix my impression of the encoun-
ter” except that it seems peculiarly suspect? It shows a creature more


like a young gorilla than Ameranthropoides loysi, which, like the other
American monkeys, does not have its brows in a straight line, nor
nipples so low as a man’s or an anthropoid ape’s (they are almost under
the armpits), and certainly not human lips. He says that the shape of


its footprints indicated that it “walked on the outside edge of its feet,


as the chimpanzees do.”
But in fact the spider-monkeys (and the
Ameranthropoid had a spider-monkey’s feet) put the whole sole of the
foot flat on the ground, just as a man does.


It is quite possible that Courteville really met an Ameranthropoid, as
he says he did, but because hé has attempted to bolster up his story with
suspect details, he cannot be trusted. Which is a great pity. I fear that
his picture of the animal is chiefly based on what he had read about it.
If he had not read Professor Montandon’s article, which quotes Pedro
de Cieza de Leon, refers to the Yucatan “‘pseudo-gorillas” and compares
the Ameranthropoid with the Pithecanthropus, would he ever have
thought that it was a cross between a monkey and an Indian woman,
given it a gorilla’s features and called it Pithecanthropus? I hardly
think so.


This suspect evidence must not be allowed to cast suspicion on Loys’s
account, which is supported by an indisputable document in the correct
sense of the word.


320


hen
ie


APES IN GREEN HELL


This great ape appears not to be confined to a narrow strip in the
north-west of South America. In 1868, a century after Dr Bancroft,
Charles Barrington Brown, who was then Government Surveyor in
British Guiana, heard new rumours on the Upper Mazaruni on the
Venezuelan frontier that a sort of hairy men lived there. Oddly enough,


it was after hearing the “plaintive moan or howl” which Cieza de Leon
also alleged these ape-men made.


The first night after leaving Peaimah we heard a long, loud, and most
melancholy whistle, proceeding from the direction of the depths of the
forest, at which some of the men exclaimed, in an awed tone of voice,
“The Didi.’’ Two or three times the whistle was repeated, sounding
like that made by a human being, beginning in a high key and dying
slowly and gradually away inalowone....


The “‘Didi’’ is said by the Indians to be a short, thick set, and power-
ful wild man, whose body is covered with hair, and who lives in the
forest. A belief in the existence of this fabulous creature is universal
over the whole of British, Venezuelan and Brazilian Guiana. On the
Demerara river, some years after this, I met a half-bred woodcutter,
who related an encounter that he had with two Didi—a male and a
female—in which he successfully resisted their attacks with his axe. In
the fray, he stated that he was a good deal scratched.


In 1931 Professor Nello Beccari, an Italian anthropologist, Dr Renzo
Giglioli and Ugo Ignesti, made an expedition to British Guiana, where
one of their secondary objects was to attack the problem of Loys’s ape.
For in this area the fauna, flora, climate and indeed the whole ecological
pattern—what is now called the “biotope”—are the same as in the Sierra
de Perija4; and Beccari had read in Elisée Reclus’s geographical encyclo-
pedia that according to Indian legend the. forests in British Guiana
were haunted by fabulous hairy men called di-di, which all the Indians
fear, although they have never seen them. But it was not until he was
just about to return to Italy that he heard any definite information about
where this beast lived.


On his return from several months in the interior, he met the British
Resident Magistrate, Mr Haines, who was then living on the Rupununi.
Haines told him that he had come upon a couple of di-di many years
before when he was prospecting for gold. In 1910 he was going through
the forest along the Konawaruk, a tributary which joins the Essequibo
just above its junction with the Potaro, when he suddenly came upon
two strange creatures, which stood up on their hind-feet when they saw
him. They had human features but were entirely covered with reddish-
brown fur. Haines was unarmed and did not know what he could do if


x
321


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


the encounter took a turn for the worse, but the two creatures retreated
slowly and disappeared into the forest without once taking their eyes
off him. When he had recovered from his surprise he realised that
they were unknown apes and recalled the legend of the di-di which
he had been told by the Indians with whom he had lived for many


years.


When Miegam, the guide of the Italian expedition, heard this story
he remembered that he had had a similar adventure in 1918. He was
going up the Berbice with three men, Orella, Gibbs and an American
whose name he had forgotten. A little beyond Mambaca they saw on a
sandy beach on the river-bank two creatures which from a distance they
took for men, and hailed them to ask if the fishing was good. The un-
known creatures did not reply but merely slunk away into the forest.
The four men were puzzled and landed on the beach, where they were
staggered to find that the footprints were apes’ not men’s. Miegam
could not say whether the creatures had a tail, but it could hardly have
been conspicuous, or he would not have mistaken them for men. He
did, however, say that two other settlers called Melville and Klawstky
had similar adventures in other places.


Professor Beceari obtained further information about the di-di from
an old negro at Mackenzie, famed for his wisdom, learning and ex-
perience. Everyone on the banks of the Demerara called him “Oncle
Brun”—presumably he had come from French Guiana or the French
West Indies—but the few Indians that survived in the neighbourhood
respected him so much they nicknamed him “The Governor.” ‘‘Oncle
Brun” had been told by the Indians that the di-di lived in pairs and that


it was extremely dangerous to kill one of them, for the other would
inevitably revenge its mate by coming at night and strangling its mur-
derer in his hammock. Beccari did not trust the more fanciful part of


this story, but felt that it must have a kernel of truth. Loys, like Haines
and Miegam, had also met a pair, and so had Barrington Brown’s
woodcutter. Most South American monkeys live in largish troops, and


this habit alone suggests that this is a very peculiar species.


The only difference between the Perijad ape and those described in
Guiana is in the colour of the fur, the first being greyish brown and the
second reddish. “Assuming Haines and Loys both described the colour
with scruptilous exactitude,” Professor Beccari observes, “we may think
the Guiana ape is a distinct variety of the Venezuelan species, or even a
different but closely related species.” He adds that orang-utans vary in
colour from a dark mahogany to a bright foxy red, though nobody yet


322


APES IN GREEN HELL


knows whether they belong to different races or species, or whether they


are merely individual variations.


In Brazil the tales of a large manlike ape sometimes become quite
fantastic. They are not found in the north of the country near Vene-
zuela and Guiana—the Ameranthropoid’s alieged home—but in the
south-west in the provinces of Amazonas, Matto Grosso, and Goyaz as
well as Acre and Guaporé on the frontiers of Bolivia. The creature has
various names: mapinguary, pelobo and pe de garrafa or bottle-foot, for


it leaves footprints that look as if they were made by sticking the bottom
of a bottle in the ground. Its tracks are always regularly spaced and
exactly aligned.


I need hardly say that the attempt to imagine what creature could
leave such extraordinary footprints has produced some bizarre results.
This is how it was described in about 1954 to Rui Prado Mendonga, Jr.,
a Brazilian hunter, by one of the oldest inhabitants of the Upper
Araguaya:


It is an animal of a fair height, distinctly human-looking, with long
flowing hair on its head, and it has only one leg, with which it makes
enormous leaps, always leaving a track of deep prints like the bottom of
a bottle. Hence its name. As it has only one leg it cannot walk like
other animals, but always stands erect. It is extremely savage and never
crosses obstacles in its path. It always goes round them, and is there-
fore reputed to move in endless zig-zags. When it meets an enemy it
fixed him with its eyes with such intensity that the victim is quite
hypnotised and falls unresisting into its claws.


It is hardly surprising that this monster terrified even such a brave
jaguar-hunter as the old half-breed who told this tale.


He also told Prado Mendonga that several years earlier a flood swept
the banks of the Araguaya, spreading panic among the wild beasts.
Many of them came and sheltered on rising ground near the half-breed’s
village. When he went to round up some stray cattle he found hundreds
of footprints very clearly marked in the moist ground. They were
strange round holes that looked as if they were made with the bottom
of a bottle. A pe de garrafa had been that way! Now was the time to
solve the mystery about this beast. The bravest men in the village set


off at dawn, with their guns ready and their knives sharpened, towards
the place where the tracks had been seen. The tracks led from the plain
towards thick jungle in the heart of which lay a huge lake. To begin
with the footprints lay in a straight line, but at the first trees they began


323


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


to wind about, as if the creature was keeping well away from every


obstacle. The legend was confirmed.


Little by little as the village was left farther behind the men grew
more and more frightened, until the moment when their dogs stood


stock-still in terror refusing to go any farther. Everything in the forest
.


was silent. Then suddenly a terrible roar rang through the forest and
the terrified men took to their heels. Even the boldest of hunters was
not ashamed to admit he was afraid of the pe de garrafa.


There is not the slightest doubt that tracks which look as if they were
made with the bottom of a bottle do exist. They have been seen by
witnesses whose veracity is above suspicion, among them Francisco
Meirelles who pacified the Chavante Indians. He thought that the track
attributed by the Chavantes to the mapinguary was made by a deer with


a broken leg, though it is hard to see how a limping animal could have


left such a regular track, or indeed how anything short of a race of three-
legged deer could have accounted for all the tracks of the pe de garrafa
seen in the Amazon jungle.


These tales may seem too far-fetched and far from home, but a hun-
dred years ago a.similar phenomenon in England gave rise to even more
fantastic legends. On the morning of 8 February 1855 tracks very like a
pe de garrafa’s were found in the snow around no less than 18 towns and
villages in Devon. They were almost circular, or rather horseshoe-
shaped, and in perfectly straight lines. But this beast did not seem to
be afraid of obstacles, there were footprints everywhere, on roofs, the
tops of walls, in walled gardens as well as open fields, and on both sides
of the Exe estuary. The beast must have walked more than a hundred
miles. Commander Gould wrote:


A natural explanation of the facts seemed impossible to find, and
difficult even to suggest; while any explanation certainly postulated the
visit of something very uncanny—something which walked upon small
hooved feet with a very short, mincing stride, which sought darkness
and solitude, which had never rested, which had covered something
like a hundred miles in a single night, which had crossed a river two
miles wide, which had hung round human habitations without daring
to enter them, and which had on some occasions walked up walls and
along roofs, while at other times it had passed through such obstruc-
tions as if they did not exist.


Pe I owe this information, like most of the rest about this problem, to a close
friend of his, Senhora Anna Isabel de Sa Leito Teixeira, a regular correspondent
of mine in Brazil.


324


had
dial
Ait
Sin


APES IN GREEN HELL


There was a period of panic, during which people dared not go out


after dark, and, as The Times wrote, “The superstitious go so far as to


believe that they are the marks of Satan himself.”


Far be it from me to suggest that both the pe de garrafa and the
“Devil’s hoof-marks” are due to the same hellish and ubiquitous beast,


or to survivors of the Sciapods of antiquity, hiding in Brazil and Devon.
But they may well have a common origin—a meteorological origin as
Dr Maurice Burton has suggested might be the cause of the “Devil’s
hoof-marks,” though no meteorologist has been able to put forward a
phenomenon that would explain them. There is no proof that the
bottle-like marks in Brazil have anything to do with the tales of ape-men
current in the area. It would not be the first time that two sets of facts
have been wrongly related, just because they were both mysterious. All
the same, I should point out that an ape with feet much adapted to tree-
dwelling and therefore with very curved toes, is obliged to walk on the
outside edge of the foot, thus leaving a more or less ring-shaped mark.
An orang-utan’s footprint tends in this direction (see page 116). But,
of course, this could not explain the Devonshire abominable snowman.


The fact that the footprints were in a dead straight line does not
necessarily mean that the beast that made them had only one leg. It
could have been a biped. The few people who have seen a mapinguary
describe it much more prosaically than the old half-caste from the
Upper Araguaya, as we shall see from an account told to the Brazilian
writer Paulo Saldanha Sobrino, who has lived much of his life in the
Amazon jungle. My Brazilian correspondent knows him well and
vouches not only for his veracity but for his judgment of his informant’s.
This informant was a half-caste called Inocéncio, who is now the skipper
of a steamboat which runs each week from Villa Bela to Guajara-Mirim
on the Rio Guaporé, but who once took part in several expeditions into


the jungle.


In 1930 he went on an expedition of 10 men led by one Santanna.
They went up the Uatumi towards the sources of the Urubu. When
their boat came to an impassable waterfall they cut across the jungle to
reach the Urubu watershed. After two days they reached a stream which
the leader decided to follow. Inocéncio was in the party going upstream,
but after two hours’ march he was led astray by a troop of black monkeys
which he followed in the hopes of shooting one. When he realised that it
would take him some time to reach the stream again, it was already too


late. He shouted and fired his gun, but there was no reply except the


chatter of monkeys and squawks of angry birds. So he began to walk


325


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


almost blindly, feeling he must do something in such a critical situation,
until night fell, when he climbed into a large tree and settled himself
in
a fork between the branches. As it grew dark the night was filled with
jungle noises, and Inocéncio rested happily enough until suddenly there
was a cry which at first he thought was a man calling, but he realised at
once that no one would look for him in the middle of the night. Then
he heard the cry nearer at hand and more clearly. It was a wild and
dismal sound. Inocéncio, very frightened, settled himself more firmly
into the tree and loaded his gun. Then the cry rang out a third time and
now that it was so close it sounded horrible, deafening and inhuman.


Some forty yards away was a small clearing where a samaumeira had
fallen and its branches had brought down other smaller trees. This was
where the last cry had come from. Immediately afterwards there was a
loud noise of footsteps, as if a large animal was coming towards me at
top speed. When it reached the fallen tree it gave a grunt and stopped.
... Finally a silhouette the size of a man of middle height appeared in
the clearing.


The night was clear. There was no moon, but the starry sky gave
a pale light which somehow filtered through the tangled vegetation. In
this half-light Inocéncio saw a thick-set black figure “which stood up-
right like a man.”


It remained where it stood, looking perhaps suspiciously at the place
where I was. Then it roared again as before. I could wait no longer
and fired without even troubling to take proper aim. There was a
savage roar and then a noise of crashing bushes. I was alarmed to see
the animal rush growling towards me and I fired a second bullet. The
terrifying creature was hit and gave an incredibly swift leap and hid
near the old samaumeira. From behind this barricade it gave threaten-
ing growls so fiercely that the tree to which I was clinging seemed to
shake. I had previously been on jaguar-hunts and taken an active part
in them, and I know how savage this cat is when it is run down and at
bay. But the roars of the animal that attacked me that night were more
terrible and deafening than a jaguar’s.


I loaded my gun again and fearing another attack, fired in the direc-
tion of the roaring. The black shape roared again more loudly, but
retreated and disappeared into the depths of the forest. From time to
time I could still hear its growl of pain until at last it ceased.


Dawn was just breaking.


Not until the sun was well up did Inocéncio dare to come down from


his perch. In the clearing he found blood, broken boughs of bushes
and smashed shrubs. Everywhere there was a sour penetrating smell.


326


APES IN GREEN HELL


Naturally he did not dare to follow the trail of blood for fear of meeting


a creature which would be even more dangerous now that it was
wounded. Taking a bearing on the sun he at last reached a stream and


rejoined his companions, who fired shots so that he should know where


they were.


I maintain I have seen the mapinguary [Inocéncio said to Paulo
Saldanha]. It is not armoured as people would have you believe. They
say that to wound it fatally you must hit the one vulnerable spot: the
middle of the belly. I can’t say where it was wounded by my bullet,
but I know it was hit, for there was blood everywhere.


This story has the ring of truth, and is told in more sober fashion than
most Brazilian hunters’ tales, true though they often are. Inocéncio
claims to have done nothing to boast of, and he does not make the
animal in the least fantastic. It has two legs like everybody else. Like
the legendary pe de garrafa it emits terrible roars, but they do not send
the hearer mad, and likewise it gives off a strong smell, but it is not
really asphyxiating.
Its behaviour is just what one might expect of a
powerful great ape—a great ape like the one shot by Loys in Venezuela
and seen by Miegam and Haines in Guiana.


Charles H. Dewisme, the writer, and I decided several years ago that
we ought to try to get to the bottom of the matter by going through the
forests of the Sierra de Perija4 with a fine toothcomb in the hopes of
catching or at least photographing one of these mysterious great monkeys.
We still hope to make this expedition when we can raise the money to
do so. Meanwhile, in December 1953 Dewisme went to Colombia to


collect first-hand information on the spot. He talked about the Amer-
anthropoid with Dr Parra, director of the Institute of Ethnology at
Magdalena, who was a close friend of Gerardo Reichell-Dolmatoff, of
the Colombian Institute of Anthropology, who had several times visited
the Motilone Indians in the Codazzi area.
These Yuco as they are
called, told Reichell-Dolmatoff that a large tailless ape did in fact live in
the Sierra de Perija4, they spoke of it as an animal as familiar as the


tapir or the jaguar.


Dewisme showed Loys’s photo to many hunters who all agreed that
the animal was not a marimonda, although it looked slightly like one.
During a reconnaissance expedition in the Sierra de Santa Marta, my
friend also met the female chieftain of the Arawak Indians, Maria
Eufemia Solis, who was of the same opinion.


327


RIDDLES OF THE GREEN CONTINENT


Among the Arawaks he heard the legend that I have already men-
tioned about the men with their feet the wrong way round.! This, for
reasons that I have explained in the chapter on the abominable snow-
man, is based on a bear, the spectacled bear (Tremarctos ornatus) which


lives in the Cordillera of the Andes from Colombia to the north of Chile
and Bolivia. Thus we see again how the most absurd legends may be
based on actual fact. Neither the dwarf guayazis nor the matuytis whose
feet are the wrong way round are myths. One day we may even discover
the origin of the curinquéans, those ogres of South American folk-lore.
As to the Venezuelan satyr, the only unknown animal of which we have
an excellent photograph, its existence cannot, I think, be disputed except
by the disingenuous and the blind.


1 The Arawaks also spoke—though not so seriously—of a sort of hairy
monster, half-man half-spider-monkey, called mojan. It lived-in a cave on the
upper Rio Cordoba;
at night it came and threw stones on the roofs and tried
to drown anyone out late. May this not be a version, which has been altered
and embellished in transmission over a distance, of the tales about the Amer-
anthropoid whose habitat is much further to the south?


328


ii
ist
eee


Part Five


THE GIANTS OF THE
FAR NORTH


The creation of the mammoth was a blunder of
the Superior Being. In creating such an enor-
mous animal, the Creator did not take into con-
sideration the size of the earth and its resources.
One earth could not stand the weight of the mam-
moth and its vegetation was not sufficient to feed
the mammoth race. The mammoth fed on tree
trunks which he ground with his teeth, and in a
short time the whole North of Siberia was de-
prived of trees. Hence is the origin of the north-
ern tundra. In the beginning the earth had the
form of an even plain, but by his weight the
monster animal in moving about caused the
formation of valleys and ravines in which rivers
originated. In swampy or sandy places the mam-
moth sank into the ground and disappeared under
the earth, where he froze during the winter.
Often in the hole over him water gathered into
a lake. In this way the mammoth gradually dis-
appeared from the earth’s surface. This is why
now whole cadavers of the animal are to be found
in the frozen soil.


Yukaghir
tradition
quoted
by WALDEMAR
JOCHELSON.


Barents


x
8 x
=.


iymsk,


Se


ry
of
[i
i


:
Mammo


-( Discover,


Komandorski
/s.


>°


Okhotsk


~ c ~)


f<


i.


TUNGNG
pincers


° 2%


got
Pee
e
ey
. 6


Peooees®


-«
Coniferous
Forests[tT
¥) Discoveries
of
frozen


mammoths
®


28
eee,


——-,-


Py


CHAPTER FIFTEEN


The Mammoth of the Taiga


This Creature, though rare, is found in the East
of the Northern Siberian Zone.
HILAIRE BELLOC, The Frozen Mammoth.


THE Lapps believe in monstrous beasts which live under the eternal
snows; and throughout northern Siberia we find the same belief in a
hairy monster of underground habits. The Chuklukmiut Eskimos on
the western shore of the Bering Strait call it kilu kpuk or “the kilu
whale.” This whale fought with the sea-monster ag/u and was driven
on to the land, but was too heavy and sank into the ground. Thereafter
it moved underground using its tusks like shears, for they could move
freely sideways in their sockets.


The Chukchi, who live in the north of the eastern tip of Asia be-
yond the River Kolyma, think that a similar monster is the evil spirits’
reindeer or mount on which they ride. It lives beneath the ground and
moves along narrow passages. When a man sees the monster’s tusk
sticking out of the ground he must dig it up at once, otherwise it dis-
appears again and carries curses in its train elsewhere.
Once some
Chukchi saw two tusks coming out of the earth. They began their
incantations and the beast miraculously appeared and provided them
with a winter’s supply of meat. From their descriptions there is no
doubt that the monster is none other than the mammoth known to
palaeontologists.


The Yukaghir, whose territory stretches beyond the Arctic Circle all
along the Arctic Ocean from the Lena delta to beyond the Kolyma, also
speak of the mammoth in their traditions and call it xdlhut. Its spirit
(xdlhut-dibi), like that of many living animals, guards the soul of certain
shamans or very primitive priests. A shaman who is protected by a nfam-
moth’s spirit is thought to be by far the most powerful. “According to


331


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


this notion,” wrote Waldemar Jochelson, who reported these traditions


at the beginning of this century, “one might say that there was a time
when the mammoth was contemporary with man.”
According to
Jochelson, who was in charge of the Riabouschinsky Expedition to the
Aleutian, Kurile and Komandorski islands, the Yukaghir even have a
traditional memory of the mammoth’s disappearance (which I have
quoted as an epigraph to this part). Oddly enough many scientists today
explain its extinction in the same way. Among the Yukaghir of Nizhni
Kolymsk who have come under Russian influence, the story has altered
and taken on a biblical flavour. Noah, they say, wished to take a pair of
mammoths aboard the Ark, but when the first of them put its feet on
board, the ship almost capsized. So Noah hurriedly put to sea, leaving
the mammoths behind, and thus they all perished.


Farther south, both among the Yakuts and the Ostiaks, who are true
Mongols, and among the Koriaks, who are a Siberian race of whites who
have settled on the shores of the Sea of Okhotsk, there are very similar
legends about a sort of giant rat called mamantu or “‘that-which-lives-
beneath-the-ground,” from which the word “mammoth”
is derived. It
cannot survive the light of day. The moment it comes into the light it


is struck dead.
Its wanderings underground are the cause of earth-
quakes. Among the Kamchadals on the peninsula of Kamchatka we
find a debased form of the legend; at all events it tells of a legendary
figure called Tuila who moves underground on a sledge drawn by a dog.
When he halts, the dog Kozei ene the snow out of his fur, and this
causes earth tremors.


In Mongolia and Manchuria the mammoth’s ghost appears as a gigan-


tic mole called tai-shu in Chinese classics written before the beginning
of the Christian era. It is a hairy monster with tiny eyes and a short


tail; and it digs enormous tunnels in the snow with its two teeth shaped


like picks. In The World of Animals, an encyclopaedic work attributed


to K’ang-Hsi (1662-1723), the first emperor of the Manchu dynasty,
there is also an allusion to the Siberian legends:


One can read in the ancient book Chin-I-King about the fen-shii, the
underground rat of the North, which is also called yen-shii, the self-
concealing mouse, or shii-mu, the mother of the mice, and in The Mirror
of the Manchu Language, jukhensinggheri, that is to say “‘the rat beneath
the ice.”” There is in the North in the country of the Olosses near the
sea, a kind of rat as big as an elephant which lives underground and dies
as soon as it comes into the air or is reached by the sunlight.


The royal author adds some more matter-of-fact details:


332


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


There are fen-shil which weigh as much as 10,000 pounds. Their
teeth are like those of elephants: the natives of the North make bowls,
combs and knife-handles, etc. out of them. I have myself seen these
teeth and these tools made from them, and so I believe in the truth of
our ancient books.


The Mirror of the Manchu Language (1771 edition) gives curiously
exact information about the mammoth:


The rat of the ice or of mountain streams lives in the earth in the
countries of the North, under thick ice. One can eat its flesh. Its hair
is several feet long, and is used for weaving cloth upon which damp
mists condense.


The natives of Siberia support their stories with the tangible evidence
of ivory tusks, some of them as much as 16 feet long and weighing 450
pounds. There was once a flourishing trade in this ivory. At the beginning
of this century the province of Yakutsk exported an average of 152 pairs
of tusks per annum. During the last 200 years the tusks of some 25,400
beasts must have been sent out of this province alone. Altogether some
60,000 tusks have been sold during the same period. The trade is very
ancient: it was mentioned in Chinese chronicles before the Christian


era. Pliny the Elder had heard of it from the writings of Theophrastes,
a pupil and successor to Aristotle, who reported that ivory was extracted
from the ground, and, like the Siberian traders, made a distinction be-
tween white ivory and the less valuable black ivory. As early as the
ninth century the Arabs entered the industry, buying their ivory at a
market at Bolgari on the Volga near Nizhni-Novgorod (now called
Gorki). Mammoth-ivory was certainly sold in Europe from this time,
but as it came from merchants from the south no one was surprised.


In 1611 an English traveller called Josias Logan exhibited in London
an elephant’s tusk that he had brought back from Russia. Everyone
knew that elephants were only found in Africa and India. It was true
that their remains had been dug up in Europe, but these were thought


to have been left by Hannibal’s armies. Yet Logan seemed to be an
honest man. He said that he had obtained his astonishing trophy from


a Samoyed, near the mouth of the Pechora, which flows into the Barents


Sea.


In 1692 a Dutch diplomat called Evert Ysbrants Ides went to China
on Peter the Great’s behalf to make a peace treaty with the Emperor


.K’ang-Hsi. He reported that:


Amongst the Hills which are situate North-East of, and not far from


hence [the village of Makofskoy near Jenizeskoy], the Mammuts


333


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


Tongues and Legs are found} as they are also particularly on the Shoars
of the Rivers Fenize, Trugan, Mongamsea, Lena, and near Fakutskot, to
as far as the Frozen Sea. In the Spring when the Ice of this River
breaks, it is driven in such vast quantities, and with such force by the
high swollen Waters, that it frequently carries very high Banks before
it, and breaks off the tops of Hills, which falling down, discover these
Animals whole, or their Teeth only, almost frozen to the Earth, which
thaw by degrees. I had a Person with me to China, who annually went
out in search of these Bones; he told me as a certain truth, that he and
his Companions found a Head of one of these Animals, which was dis-
covered by the fall of such a frozen piece of Earth. As soon ashe opened
it he found the greatest part of the Flesh rotten, but it was not without
difficulty that they broke out his Teeth, which were placed before his
Mouth as those of the Elephants are; they also took some Bones out of
his head, and afterwards came to his Fore-foot, which they cut off,
and carried part of it to the City of Trugan, the Circumference being as
large as that of the wast of an ordinary Man. The Bones of the Head
appeared somewhat red, as tho’ they were tinctured with Blood.


The Yakuts, Tungus and Ostiaks told him the usual legends about a
subterranean monster:


But the old Siberian Russians affirm that the Mammuth is very like
the Elephant; with this only difference, that the Teeth of the former are
firmer, and not so straight as those of the latter. They also are of the
Opinion, that there were Elephants in this Country before the Deluge,
when this Climate was warmer, and that their drowned bodies floating
on the surface of the Water of that Flood, were at last wash’d and forced
into Subterranean Cavities: But that after this Noachian Deluge, the
Air which was before warm was changed to cold, and that these Bones
have lain frozen in the Earth ever since, and so are preserved from
putrefection till they thaw, and come to light; which is no very un-
reasonable conjecture.


This very reasonable conjecture seems to have been overlooked, while
the absurd tales of elephants that behaved like moles discredited these
reports, and many European naturalists gradually came to the con-
clusion that they probably referred to an animal only distantly con-
nected with the elephant, but also having large tusks of fine ivory: the
walrus (Odobaenus rosmarus). Remains of this huge pinniped, which may
reach a length of 16 feet and have tusks 2 feet long, had no doubt been
confused with an elephant’s. The tusks were of course much smaller,
but the animal did at least live on the Siberian coast.


The ivory-merchants confused matters by selling their wares under
the name of mamontova-kost, which means mammoth’s “horn”? and not
its “tusk” or “tooth.” The Yukaghir, who normally supplied them,


334


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


called it xélhut-onmun, or mammoth’s “horn” or “antler.”? But this did
not mean they had a false idea of its appearance; they always described
it as having thick fur and horns which
came out of its mouth. This misnomer
had unfortunate results.
Willy Ley in
Dragons in Amber tells how:


In 1722 a Swedish
officer, Baron
Kagg, colonel of the Royal Swedish
Cavalry, returned home from Siberia,
where he had been not as an explorer
but as a prisoner of war.
One of his
fellow prisoners, Ph. J. Tabbert von
Strahlenberg, had spent whatever time
he had in inquiring about those rumors
84, Head of a male walrus.
of a large ivory-bearing creature, pos-
sibly of subterranean habits, and had found a Russian who claimed to
know about it and who drew him a picture which is reproduced on
page 100. It was this picture which von Strahlenberg handed to Kagg
to take with him to Sweden, where it is still preserved in the library of
Linképing.
It is hard to decide whether the Russian who drew this
clawed and twisted-horned super-cow was sincere in his belief or
whether he was indulging in a heavy-handed joke on his imprisoned
enemy.


Ley adds:


Baron Kagg obviously believed in the picture. Scientists didn’t.


While the scientists in Europe were puzzling over the problem to no
purpose, Peter the Great, whose curiosity had been aroused by Ides’s
reports, sent a German naturalist, Dr D. G. Messerschmidt, of whom he
had a particularly high opinion, to explore Siberia and try to solve the


85. Fantastic drawing of a mammoth, obtained in Russia by
Baron Kagg in 1722.


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


question of the incredible burrowing elephants. Either by good luck, or
because mammoth’s carcases were extraordinarily common, Messer-
schmidt happened to hear that one of these beasts had just emerged from
the melting ice of the Indigirka. In 1724 a Russian soldier had arrived
just in time to examine the remains, already largely putrefied and eaten
by wolves. There was little left but the head. However, another witness
called Michael Wolochowicz had also seen a huge strip of rotten skin
which was sticking out of a sand dune there. It was thick and brown and
covered with hairs like a goat’s. But he declared that, “I could not mis-
take this skin for a goat’s; it must rather be that of a Behemoth, since I
could not attribute it to any animal I know of.”


Dr Messerschmidt was so impressed by this theory that he had little
difficulty in concluding that the mammont was no doubt the same animal
that was mentioned in the Bible by the name of Behemoth.
Sub-
sequently there were even philologists who maintained that this name,
pronounced mehemoth by the Arabs, was the origin of the word mam-
mont. In fact, though its exact origin is unknown, there is not much
doubt that it derives from ma, the word for “earth” among the Finns
and Samoyeds, according to Olfers, and that it means “earth animal,”
or “that-which-lives-beneath-the-earth.”


Actually Samuel Bochart had already conclusively and brilliantly
proved in his Hierozoicon (1692) that the biblical Behemoth was really
the hippopotamus. Fortunately his work seems to have been overlooked,
since the hippopotamus had nothing whatever to do with the matter and
would have been sought in vain in Siberia. On the other hand, the
rhinoceros did find its way into the picture. In 1771 the great German
explorer and naturalist Peter Simon Pallas found among the melting
glaciers of the Vilyui, a tributary of the Lena, part of a carcase still
covered with thick dark-brown fur, mixed with long black hair like
horsehair, He thought it must be a mammoth, yet there was no doubt
that it was a rhinoceros. He therefore came to the conclusion that this
beast was the origin of the legendary mammoth. For who would have
expected that Siberia should yield not only hairy elephants, but also
woolly rhinoceroses: the two-horned rhinoceros with divided nostrils
(Tichorhinus) and the one-horned Elasmotherium?


At the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth cen-
turies the first palaeontologists established that animals of this sort had
once lived in western Europe. In the Middle Ages when fossil remains
of mastodons, mammoths or rhinoceroses were accidentally dug up in
Europe they were thought to be relics of giant men, Titans or Atlantes.


336


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


Bones of these animals were preserved in churches and attributed to
dragons. And the mammoth’s tusks were thought to be unicorns’ horns.
Now, in 1799, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, of Gottingen University,
solemnly announced on the evidence of the bones he had collected that


86. Woolly rhinoceros drawn on the side of a cave at Font-de-Gaume in
the Dordogne (after the Abbé Breuil).


an elephant had once lived in Europe, and that its tusks were curiously
curved in an arc of a circle, quite unlike those of living elephants. He
named it Elephas primigenius—not very aptly, since it was more spe-


cialised than modern elephants, and had been preceded in earlier ages
by many other trunked animals, Naturally he did not identify it with
the huge hairy mole that the Siberians called mammont.


While this was going on in the west a mammoth appeared in flesh and
blood to a Tungus chief called Ossip Shumakhoff. The beast was
embedded in a block of melting ice somewhere in the Lena delta and
only a distorted picture of it was visible through its glassy case. Ossip
fled in superstitious terror, but curiosity overcame his fear and he came
back from time to time to see if it was still there. Two years after he had


first seen it, one of the tusks emerged from the ice, and he was much
tempted by the value of the ivory, but still terrified that the mammoth
might come right out of the ice after its long sleep, for he had heard tales
of people who had died from the mere sight of the monster. Indeed it
preyed on his mind so much that he fell ill and thought he was dying.
Fortunately there was a Russian merchant called Boltunoff in the vil-
lage. He saw a chance of a profitable bit of business and managed to
make Ossip forget his fears and take him to the mammoth. In 1804 they
went. and violated its tomb, and found the beast now quite free of its
shell; at first Ossip nearly died of fear, but soon he was helping Boltunoff


to remove the tusks, and the shrewd Russian merchant immediately
bought them for the miserable sum of 50 roubles.


Y
337


Te


<%'
/
‘eh
aa"
Ay ‘Sh hee
iy


87. The mammoth as drawn by Boltunoff.


Boltunoff also made a crude sketch of the beast which eventually came


into Blumenbach’s hands. This mammont did not look much like an
elephant—its trunk had no doubt been ripped off by hungry wolves;
the pressure of the ice had strangely twisted its tusks; its ears had come


off, and as a result of decomposition Boltunoff had mistaken the ear-
holes for eye-sockets! But Blumenbach had no difficulty in recognising
his Elephas primigenius. Boltunoff’s sketch of one of the molars left no
doubt that it was the mammoth, and that the legendary beast was neither
mole, super-cow nor rhinoceros.


Meanwhile a Russian botanist called Professor Adams had got wind
of the rumours that a mammoth had been found preserved whole, and


set off to see for himself. When he arrived he found wolves, arctic foxes,
wolverines and even the Yakuts who had heard there was a stock of meat


for their dogs, had all been there before him. Apart from the skeleton,
from which one foot was missing, there was not much left of the beast:


an ear covered with silky hair, an eye, the brain, some tendons, and the
lower part of the legs. Three-quarters of the skin had been preserved.


It was dark grey and covered with a reddish woolly fleece, with scattered
black hairs like horsehair which on the neck were as much as 27 inches
long. Adams set about collecting these relics. His native guides helped
him to remove the skin which was almost an inch thick in places and
needed ro men to lift it. Then they carefully swept the ground and col-
lected 37 pounds of hair. Everything was packed up with infinite care and
sent to St Petersburg, where the skeleton was scrupulously remounted.
The curators of the “Cabinet of Rarities” founded by Peter the Great


338


— CC


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


had bought it from Professor Adams for 8,000 roubles—160 times as
much as poor Ossip got for his precious tusks. It may still be seen in
the Zoological Museum at Leningrad. The skin had lost all its hair on
the journey, but it was now known for certain that the mammont was a
hairy elephant, though many details about its appearance were still a
mystery.


At least a score more frozen mammoths were discovered in northern
Siberia between the Ob and the Bering Strait, the most recent being in
1935 (Wrangel Island) and 1948 (Taimyr Peninsula), and there is no
reason why many more should not come to light as erosion gnaws away
ceaselessly in the subsoil at layers of clay which cover the beds of fossil
ice where the hairy giants sleep.


In April 1901 the Imperial Academy of Science of St Petersburg
learnt from the governor of Yakutsk that a mammoth in a perfect state
of preservation was imprisoned in a melting glacier on the banks of the
Berezovka, 2 tributary of the Kolyma which flows through eastern
Yakutsk. The Tsar offered 16,000 roubles to the Academy, who hast-
ened to send off an expedition under Dr Otto Herz, Curator of the
Academy’s Zoological Department, an entomologist whom one might
expect to chase nothing larger than butterflies. This time wolves and
other scavengers had not been able to eat all the carcase. Only the head
emerged from the ice and had begun to thaw; and only the trunk, the
chief delicacy, had been eaten. But bacteria were already hard at work,
and an appalling stench arose from the putrefying meat.


To cut up a carcase which would gradually turn into an ever fouler
cesspit was certainly a task to make any but the most devoted scientist
blench. Besides Dr Herz, the expedition included D. P. Sevastianov, a
geologist from Yurievsk University, a Cossack called Innokenti Iav-
lovski, who had already been to the place, and a young German taxi-
dermist, E. W. Pfizenmayer. This 36-year-old Swabian who had always
dreamt of excavating prehistoric monsters found his wish coming true
with a vengeance. He was able to dissect the animal and study the
smallest details of its anatomy. As he had several more opportunities
again later, his work on the mammoth eventually became the world’s


greatest authority.


As a result we now have an excellent idea both of the habits and exact
appearance of the Siberian mammoth (Elephas berezovkius).
It was
covered all over its body with a reddish-yellow woolly fleece and also


with long black hairs like horsehair, between 1 foot and 2 feet 3 inches


339


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


in length, which hung from its cheeks, lower jaw, shoulders, flanks and
abdomen, making a sort of overcoat which reached almost to the ground.
The colour of the wool has faded with time and the beast was probably
mainly reddish-black. It had a short tail, under the root of which was
a flap of skin which protected its anus from the cold.’ Its thick skin
was lined with a layer of fat about 3} inches thick, and on the crown of


i‘
‘ith
WN
We


Mi,


4
\\


tii)
Nit Mit


a
I,
r
i it
ti: ny \


i cat in
|
dil’
\\ Wr \h
i
Nu
His
ih,
l
Hy |
H
Me
"NY
\
i
bl
ANY


‘
la |
;
Le


88. The mammoth as it really was.


its head and on its withers it had two fatty humps, which, like the
camel’s, served as a reserve of food.


Its concave forehead and small ears remind one of the Indian elephant
(Elephas indicus). Between the frozen animal’s stomach and diaphragm
a large mass of clotted blood was found. This was carefully preserved
and subsequent serological reactions proved conclusively that the
Siberian mammoth was closely related to the Indian elephant. If for
example you inoculate a rabbit with the blood of a known animal, it


1 The Indian elephant has a similar flap which probably acts as a protection
against insects. This common feature shows the close relationship between the
two species.


340


sei
tar
jal


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


forms an antibody to its serum, which will then precipitate the serum
of animals of the same kind. Thus it has been shown that a rabbit’s
serum which has been rendered “anti-mammoth” precipitates the
serum of the Indian elephant but has no effect on that of the African
elephant (Loxodonta africana).


Here I should say a word about the size of the mammoth. In Le Petit
Larousse Illustré you will find under Mammouth a picture of a man look-
ing at a reconstruction of the hairy elephant. From their relative sizes
the animal seems to be about 20 feet high at the withers. No mammoth
was ever so enormous. True, there are various species of mammoth;
there was once a giant North American species (Elephas imperator)
which was a little over 13 feet high. Fraas’s German mammoth (E.
fraasi) was no doubt some 18 inches taller, but the Siberian mammoth
was not even 10 feet high. It was a little smaller than the Indian ele-
phant, which sometimes reaches that height, while the African elephant
may be as much as 12 feet high at the withers. All the same the Siberian
mammoth’s humps and its shaggy coat must have made it an impressive
mountain of fur.


We also know exactly what the Siberian mammoth ate. Thanks to
Pfizenmayer, who in his first dissection removed from the stomach over
30 pounds of food which had been chewed but not digested, botanists were
able to reconstruct its diet: the menu began with a species of gentian,


its main dish consisted of grasses and sedges seasoned with wild thyme,
for dessert there were two kinds of mosses, all flavoured with alpine
poppy, upright crowfoot and a sort of northern orchid. The seeds
present showed that the beast had died in the autumn. As Pfizenmayer
pointed out:


The mammoth’s food is composed of the same plants that still grow
today in the close neighbourhood of the site of the discovery, plants that
we have gathered and preserved in order to compare them.


All this might have served as a good argument that mammoths still
existed, as many peoples near the Arctic Ocean believed, had not modern
science strangled these legends at birth. Cuvier’s Theory of the Revolu-
tions of the Globe, by which it was a priori impossible for any creatures
of a past age to have survived, convinced most scientists in the beginning
of the nineteenth century that the mammoth, whose fossil remains had
been found almost everywhere, in Europe as well as North America, was


a vanished species. The specimens found intact frozen in glaciers, with
flesh that could still be eaten, must therefore have been preserved in


341


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


deep-freeze for 10,000 to 100,000 years according to various estimates.
Nevertheless, John Frere had shown in 1797 that man was contemporary
with large extinct animals when he found in Sussex worked flint weapons
mixed with their bones. In 1823 the French geologist Ami Boué sent
Cuvier a human skeleton excavated from ancient deposits which also
contained the remains of extinct animals. Cuvier hushed up the awk-
ward discovery. Similar discoveries soon became ever more frequent—


as a result of systematic excavations, until Tournal in 1829 and Schmer-
ling in 1833 came to a categorical conclusion. Cuvier died very oppor-
tunely in 1832, leaving his successors to carry on his theory and make


fools of themselves all over the world. But ridicule works slowly.


When Jacques Boucher de Crevecceur de Perthes, an Abbeville Cust-
toms officer and keen amateur of fossils, suggested that the “diluvian
axes” he had excavated in the Somme valley might have been used for
hunting mammoths, there was much laughter at the Académie des
Sciences. Corroborative discoveries by Rigollot and Noulet in France,
and by the great English scientists, Falconer, Flower and Lyell, even
Albert Gaudry’s detailed work—all made no difference. In 1863, Elie
de Beaumont, Permanent Secretary of the Académie, was still able to


state categorically: “I do not think the human species was contemporary
with Elephas primgenius. Cuvier’s opinion was the work of a genius, it
has not been overthrown.”


A year later, Edouard Lartet, the founder of human palaeontology,
whose fundamental thesis the Académie had refused to publish, dis-
covered at La Madeleine a flat piece of ivory upon which a Stone Age


89. Mammoth carved in reindeer-horn found at Bruniquel
in France in 1868.


man had engraved a masterly drawing of a mammoth. Naturally this
was thought to be a fake. It clearly shows the fatty hump on the skull,
which at that time no one knew anything about. Not until the Bere-


342


—
-


—
7


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


zovka mammoth was dissected in 1901 was it conclusively proved to be
genuine.


Two points were now established: firstly that the mammoth, whose
remains had been found all over Europe from the Arctic to the Alps and
the Pyrenees, once spread over a vast territory; secondly that the strik-
ingly accurate drawings of it in caves in the Dordogne showed that it had
been contemporary with man. These murals and carved ivory and rein-
deer-horn figures usually date from the Magdalenian period, that is to
say the upper Palaeolithic. As the mammoth had vanished, but man
survived, Cuvier’s notion of a ‘Revolution of the Globe,” or universal
cataclysm that spared hardly anyone, was no longer tenable. Lyell had


90. Picture of a mammoth on the wall of the cave at Les Eyzies in the
Dordogne (after Capitan, Breuil and Peyrony).


shown that folds in the earth’s crust, like sedimentary deposits and
erosion, were the result of slow and persistent forces which may still be


felt. But if there was no universal deluge or cataclysm, what had caused
the mammoth’s extinction?


Mammoths had certainly survived in northern Siberia much longer
than in central and western Europe—and for obvious climatic reasons.
The Siberian tiger is hairier than the Indian; the Alaskan bear has longer
fur than its Malayan brothers; the bison and musk-ox, unlike the cattle
of warmer regions, are covered with thick fur. Any animal with thick
fur is plainly adapted for a cold climate. The mammoth’s thick coat, in
contrast to the Indian and African elephants’ smooth and bare skia,
shows that it belongs to a cold region. If it once lived over most of
Europe and North America, the temperature was then much colder


343


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


there than now. And in fact Goethe’s penetrating deductions, Charpen-


tier’s observations and those of his friend Louis Agassiz, the famous
Swiss geologist, and finally Otto Martin Torell’s brilliant synthesis
showed that glaciers, which now are found only in Scandinavian moun-
tains, formerly spread for a long period over the whole of northern
Europe, transforming what had been a world of lush vegetation in-
habited by animals now found only in the tropics into a Siberian tundra.
Penck and Bruckner later proved that since the end of the Tertiary. era
this ice-cap has advanced and retreated four times. The Quaternary
era therefore consists of alternate glacial and interglacial periods, each
with its own peculiar fauna.


AA
Hat
iy
f Vl
:


91. Mammoth in the cave at Font-de-Gaume (after the Abbé Breuil).


In Europe the mammoth (Elephas primigenius) and the rhinoceros
(Rhinoceros tichorhinus) belong to the last, so-called Wiirmian, glacial
period, which, according to the most exact estimates, took place not
more than about 12,000 years ago. It seems logical to suppose that
these hairy elephants and woolly rhinoceroses followed the retreating
glaciers northwards when the temperature grew too warm for their liking
after the long Wiirmian winter, which (if we include a calm of some
25,000 years) had lasted more than 50,000 years. But if they deserted
the countries that had become too warm as thick forest gradually
spread over the ancient steppes and even the tundra, this does not ex-
plain why they vanished from northern Siberia; for there they could


still have found what seems to be their favourite climate.


At the end of the last century one of the greatest experts on the mam-


344


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


moth, Frederic Lucas of the United States National Museum, had to
admit that he could not explain the extinction of an animal which was
not only well protected against the cold, but also seemed actually to


prefer low temperatures. Perhaps many of them were washed out to sea
by floods caused by melting river ice, but this was not enough to account


for total extinction.


In 1919 this unsolved problem led the French zoologist Neuville to
wonder whether the mammoths were really so well protected against the
cold as had been supposed. Had they not become extinct because of the
cold rather than in spite of it? After all, they must have suffered a very
low temperature for their carcases to remain preserved until today. In
their stomachs had been found remains of plants which are not charac-
teristic of a severe climate. Apart from the Alpine poppy and one other
plant which grow in the tundra in the summer, they are not typical
plants of this so-called “permafrost,” the area where the ground is
permanently frozen. On the contrary they_are typical meadow flora.
Does this mean that a sudden wave of cold had destroyed the vegetation
and starved the mammoths? Neuville thinks not, since such a sudden
cataclysm could not account for their extinction over so wide an area.
And it seems to me that if this had happened their stomachs would have
been found empty, their reserves of fat exhausted and their bodies
wasted away.


Their extinction does not seem attributable to any outside cause.
Neuville therefore made a careful study of the mammoth’s skin com-
pared with that of living elephants. He found they were identical.
Neither had any sebaceous or sweat-glands. Without them, without a
constant flow of sebum and sweat to oil the hair and keep the fleece
waterproof, the mammoth’s thick fur would be no protection against
cold and damp. Snow and icy rain would be able to penetrate its thick
coat, soaking it through and through until it became a wretched cloak of


ice, frozen to its skin. Neuville also pointed out that the exaggerated
curve of the tusks, which sometimes form three-quarters of a circle,
made them useless weapons, indeed nothing more than rather cumbrous
ornaments. Moreover the hind-feet are usually provided with horny
excrescences like extra nails, which, according to Neuville, must have
made it very hard for it to walk. In short, its extinction was due to pro-
gressive degeneration, due to its lack of adaptation to cold, aggravated
by other causes and perhaps accelerated by an increasing lack of food.


Neuville’s arguments do not seem to me very conclusive. The perme-
ability of the mammoth’s fur is largely compensated for by the unusually


345


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


thick layer of fat beneath its skin. Moreover, the flap of skin covering
its anus shows that its smaller details were well-adapted to very low
temperatures. The horny excrescences on the feet, far from hindering
it, may have acted as snowshoes to prevent it from sinking too deeply
into snow or soft earth. And obviously if it was so ill-protected against
the cold it would have stayed in Europe after the Wiirmian glaciers re-
treated. At all events it would not have fled from the heat of the south
to die of cold in Siberia. Even the argument about its excessively curved
tusks is not very convincing. The elephant uses its tusks as clubs as
well as spears; it does not usually transfix its enemies, it crushes them.
A mammoth’s tusks are not therefore such negligible weapons.


If the mammoth did not perish for external climatic reasons, nor
because of its own degeneration, why is it extinct? The latest and most
generally accepted theory blames its extinction on a series of accidents.
The Berezovka mammoth died as a result of an accident, its post mortem
showed that its hind-leg and its pelvis were broken. Apparently it had
slipped, and fallen into a deep crevasse, which was no doubt hidden by
a layer of earth and plants. In its struggles to escape from this natural
trap it brought down vast quantities of frozen earth which eventually
buried and froze it. In certain conditions such accidents might have
happened on a large scale. The very size of the brutes might be the
reason not only for their extinction, but also for the perfect preservation
of their corpses. When the hordes of mammoths followed the last of the
retreating glaciers they were gradually led to the north-east. When they
inadvertently ventured on to the marshy plains of North Siberia, their
own weight made them sink into the icy mud, where they have been
preserved ever since. This explanation certainly agrees curiously well
with that given by the Yukaghir traditions, quoted as an epigraph on


page 329.


That such catastrophes were often repeated is more than likely, but


is it right to explain the total extinction of a species by a series of acci-
dents, that is to say by blind chance? Animals do not leap into nature’s
traps with their eyes shut; on the contrary they are always cautious and
distrustful of anything they do not know. It is hardly likely that all the
mammoths in the world would have chosen to live in the one place where
they had the greatest chance of being buried alive.


It is all very well to try to establish the reason why the mammoth is
extinct and to be dissatisfied because none of these reasons is convinc-
ing, but first of all ought we not to prove conclusively that it really is


346


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


extinct? The reindeer, elk, musk-ox, Przewalski’s horse, wolverine,
arctic fox, lemming and mouse-hare all lived in western Europe with the
mammoth during the Wiirmian glacial period. They all left it, but they


all found refuge in other countries that were more to their liking, such


as Alaska and Siberia. Why not the mammoth? Many palaeontologists
have admitted that it could have survived until “relatively recently.”
Could it not have survived until today in a land as little known as the


country of the Yakuts, the Ostiaks and the Yukaghirs? Legends of


“hairy giants” have always been current. What are we to make of these


legends?


Van Gennep has observed that a memory of a past event, if trans-
mitted only by oral tradition, hardly lasts two centuries. The tales of
encounters with mammoths cannot possibly have been handed down for
tens of thousands of years. It seems to me that these legends, which
may be thought to be a strong argument in favour of the mammoth’s
survival, are more likely to be due to frozen specimens in a perfect state
of preservation, some of which were discovered in dramatic circum-
stances. One of them was enshrined in a block of ice, standing up and
facing the sea. It began to thaw, the beast was already partly free of the
glacier, it seemed to be rearing up with its huge tusks raised in a threat-
ening manner. The man who saw it was struck with terror and was said


to have gone on for a long time about “the evil light in the giant’s eyes.”


A sudden encounter with the great hairy beast in the middle of lonely


icefields would naturally excite the imagination of simple people, most
of whom, when they saw it from afar, never dreamt that it could be dead,


let alone dead for thousands of years. This explains the legend about
the giant mole living in burrows under the snow, which seems so out of
keeping with an elephant; it refers to the fact that they are always seen
rising out of the snow, and they die as soon as they are exposed to the
light, since they are never seen to move. The discovery of giant foot-
prints and huge excrements can be explained by the thawing out of


tracks where mammoths once passed.


Here one might close the question of the living mammoth. Indeed I
did so in an article in La Marche du Monde in 1952 in which I con-


cluded,


No doubt the theory that the mammoth survives is attractive to the
naturalist and fit to arouse the imagination of adventurous minds, but
the legends which refer today to this once fabulous animal can be
interpreted in a more prosaic fashion.


347


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


Afterwards I had a slight sense of uneasiness, a feeling that there was
something that I had overlooked, or rather something which everyone
had taken for granted without inquiring whether it was true. And then
suddenly I realised what this was: the assumption that the mammoth
was an animal of the tundra and the arctic prairies. What is it based on?
Apparently on the fact that it is almost always in the tundra that the
carcases of frozen mammoths have been found. But is this a sufficient
reason? Obviously they are most likely to be frozen whole in these icy
and marshy plains; but might they not prefer to live elsewhere? For
instance the fact that fossil remains of monkeys, lions and hippopotami
have been found in Europe does not mean that these animals belong to
temperate regions. On the contrary it is taken to imply that our coun-


tries once had a warmer climate.


The present tundra is an exactly similar case. The temperature in
the whole of Europe was once much higher than it is today, particularly
between the second and third (Mindel and Riss) glacial periods. Now


it has been shown that the Scandinavian glaciers did not reach beyond
the Urals: in fact the whole of Asia escaped them. Thus the higher tem-
perature was especially marked in Asia, where the glaciers did not come.
Therefore it is likely that the taiga, the vast forest which covers all the
middle of ‘Siberia, once stretched farther north and covered the very
place where most of the remains of mammoths were found. Must not
the temperature have been milder to lead such animals as elephants and
rhinoceroses to venture into these regions?


The analysis of the Berezovka mammoth’s stomach contents shows
that at the end of the summer it ate typical meadow flora. But subsequent
analyses of other mammoths have proved that in winter the mammoth
browsed on the leaves and branches of conifers, arctic willow and other
dwarf northern trees.
It therefore seems that in winter at least the
mammoth did as the reindeer does today and went into the taiga, the


vast forest of conifers, willow and birch in central and eastern Siberia.
I think it must have spent most of the year there and only in the spring
and arctic summer—the four months during which the surface layer of
ground thawed—did it venture out into the plains, which were suddenly
covered with tasty grasses and scented flowers.


Neuville has very truly observed that the mammoth’s skin, which


lacks. sebaceous and sweat-glands, is a poor protection against snow and


rain. But, as I have pointed out, though the mammoth is ill-armed
against the wet, it is not so against the cold. And there is one place
where a beast of the mammoth’s size could shelter from rain and snow:


348


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


in the forest under trees. Certainly not on the bare and icy plains. To


insist that the mammoth is an animal of the tundra is as foolish as to try
to raise frogs in the Sahara. There is not a single animal which lives
alongside the type of country to which it is best adapted—except, of
course, for man, who adapts himself to any climate he chooses.


The theory that the mammoth belongs to the forests was confirmed
after the original edition of this book was published, by the recent work
of the Soviet academician E. N. Pavlovsky on a mammoth’s carcase,
partly dismembered by beasts of prey, which was excavated in 1948
from the banks of the River Mamontova in the Taimyr Peninsula. Vege-
tation dating from the same period was found beside the animal, chiefly
large branches of willow and dwarf birch. This showed that the climate
was less severe when the mammoth perished, for willows are not now
found less than 500 miles to the south. Pavlovsky concluded that. the
mammoth lived in a country of which at least half was forests and peaty
plains.


Professor Raymond Vaufrey, of the Institute of Human Palaeontology
of Paris, sums up the final conclusions, reached after a thorough inquiry
by many Soviet scientists, as follows:


The mammoth is not an arctic mammal; the climate in the areas
where its frozen carcase is found was warmer than today; the forest
zone reached much further north.
In the spring and summer it is
probable that the mammoths migrated to the north, perhaps to escape
being bitten by blood-sucking diptera (as in the case of the reindeer).


When the glaciers retreated and the mammoths apparently left west-
ern Europe and followed the moderately cold climate to the north-east,
the great beasts must have moved slowly after them, and taking into
account the impassable barriers formed by rivers too big for mammoths


to ford they must have passed through at least 600 miles and sometimes
more than 2,500 miles of taiga to reach the places where their frozen
bodies were found. In this endless forest of pine and birch, broken only
by lakes and marshes, they would have found plenty of food (the same
plants grow in the taiga as grew in Europe during the glacial period),
a choice of drinking-places, and perfect shelter under the scattered trees,
where they could graze in peace and move their bulky bodies with ease
under the protecting branches.


I should hasten to explain that there is no need to assume that hordes
of mammoths had carried out a vast organised retreat from Moscow in


reverse. No doubt they once lived wherever there was a moderately


349


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


cold climate and great pine-forests like the taiga. They died out where-
ever the forest became too warm or thinned out so much that it was no
longer any protection. In which case is it not possible that they may
survive in the Siberian taiga? I think it is more than possible.


The taiga is the largest forest in the world: it covers nearly three
million square miles, more than thirty times the area of Great Britain,
and about three-quarters of the area of the United States of America.
This vast forest is largely unexplored, or little explored. Herds of hun-
dreds or even thousands of mammoths could easily live there without
running the least risk of being seen by man. In fact the extraordinary
thing is that some of these mammoths sometimes are reported to have
been seen by the Ostiaks and Yakuts who live in the forests.


There is also a more circumstantial account of an adventure which is
supposed to have occurred to a Russian hunter in 1918. He told his
story in 1920 to M. Gallon, who was then chargé d’ affaires at the French
Consulate at Vladivostok. In March of that year an employee of the
Russian Asiatic Bank came to ask if he might introduce his brother, who
had recently returned from four years in the taiga. Gallon gladly
accepted the offer; he had few opportunities to question anyone about


this huge area inhabited only by animals; for the few hunters who ven-
tured into it never went far from the Trans-Siberian Railway, for fear
of hungry wolves, bears and Usuri tigers. The brother proved to be a


tall, elderly man, with very bright eyes, white beard and hair, and a
tanned face seamed with scars. He was an almost illiterate peasant, but
the French diplomat was taken with his conversation and invited him to
lunch, during which he told the following extraordinary tale:


The second year that I was exploring the taiga, I was very much
struck to notice tracks of a huge animal, I say huge tracks, for they were
a long way larger than any of those I had often seen of animals I knew
well. It was autumn. There had been a few big snowstorms, followed
by heavy rain. It wasn’t freezing yet, the snow had melted, and there
were thick layers of mud in the clearings. It was in one of these big
clearings, partly taken up by a lake, that I was staggered to see a huge
footprint pressed deep into the mud. It must have been about 2 feet
across the widest part and about 18 inches the other way, that’s to say
the spoor wasn’t round but oval. There were four tracks, the tracks of
four feet, the first two about 12 feet from the second pair, which were a
little bigger in size. Then the track suddenly turned east and went into
the forest of middling-sized elms. Where it went in I saw a huge heap
of dung; I had a good look at it and saw it was made up of vegetable
matter.


Some 10 feet up, just where the animal had gone into the forest, I


350


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


saw a sort of row of broken branches, made, I don’t doubt, by the
monster’s enormous head as it forced its way into the place where it had
decided to go, regardless of what was in its path.


I followed the track for days and days. Sometimes I could see where
the animal had stopped in some grassy clearing and then had gone on
forever eastward.


Then, one day, I saw another track, almost exactly the same. It came
from the north and crossed the first one. It looked to me from the way
they had trampled about all over the place for several hundred yards,
as if they had been excited or upset at their meeting. Then the two
animals set out marching eastwards, one following some twenty yards
behind the other, both tracks mingling and ploughing up the earth
together.


I followed them for days and days thinking that perhaps I should
never see them, and also a bit afraid, for indeed I didn’t feel I was big
enough to face such beasts alone.


He had a good hunting gun, bought in his native village of Nikolski-
Usuriski, which would take ball as well as shot, but he had only five
cartridges loaded with ball left, hardly enough with which to attack such
enormous game. All the same he followed the trail as fast as he could,
and thought from the freshness of the tracks that he was gaining on the
beasts. Meanwhile it was growing bitterly cold, and he had no way of
getting warm in the evening except by drinking scalding tea and building
a maida each night. This is a sort of tent of leaves and branches which
keeps in the warmth of a wood fire for a long time.


One afternoon [he went on] it was clear enough from the tracks that
the animals weren’t far off. The wind was in my face, which was good
for approaching them without them knowing I was there. All of a sud-
den I saw one of the animals quite clearly, and now I must admit I
really was afraid. It had stopped amiong some young saplings. It was
a huge elephant with big white tusks, very curved; it was a dark chest-
nut colour as far as I could see.
It had fairly long hair on the hind-
quarters, but it seemed shorter on the front. I must say I had no idea
that there were such big elephants. It had huge legs and moved very
slowly. I’ve only seen elephants in pictures, but I must say that even
from this distance (we were some 300 yards apart) I could never have
believed any beast could be so big. The second beast was around, I
saw it only a few times among the trees: it seemed to be the same


size.


1 This could not possibly have been deduced from the tracks, and could only
be based on what he subsequently saw of the beast in motion. The hunter may
well have been carried away by his story; and in any case we should not forget
that M. Gallon, who certainly did not take this tale down verbatim in the middle
of a meal, must have retold it and perhaps embroidered it himself.


351


THE GIANTS OF THE FAR NORTH


All this time he had been hiding behind a big larch. He had put down
his bag and was ready with his gun loaded and his axe pulled out of his


belt. When evening came he reluctantly left his point of vantage, be-
cause he could no longer bear the cold. Next morning when he returned
the beasts had gone. Winter had set in and the weather was too bitter
for him to go on tracking them. It was time for him to find a sheltered
place to settle for the winter, and in any case he had not the ammunition


to open war on the beasts.


Such [Gallon remarks] was the tale of this man who was too ignorant
to know that what he had actually seen were mammoths. And when I
told him the name, he did not show the least sign that he understood
what I meant.


He had seen elephants “in pictures”—that was all.
When Gallon returned to France that same year he told this strange


tale to his friends, but the political situation after the revolution was so
confused that there was no hope of exploration. Not until 1946, when
the Allies were still warm friends in the first flush of victory, was he per-
suaded to publish this story.


This report is very different from those of the tribes who live on the
shores of the Arctic Ocean where mammoths’ carcases have merely been
seen emerging from melting glaciers. The best evidence, to my mind,
of the truth of the story, is that the hunter says he met his mammoths
in the forest, a place which is not usually supposed to be their natural
habitat. Had he—or M. Gallon—been inventing the story he would
surely have tried to give his tale authenticity by putting it in the


traditional setting that one sees in all the reconstructions: the great
hairy beast advancing with heavy steps through a desert of snow. This


is a very unusual background for the animal.


If mammoths happened to leave the taiga in fine weather and go out


to pasture on the flowers in the tundra it was often at peril of their lives.
For they could easily be taken unawares, especially in September, by
the first falls of snow or a sudden frost. Most of the carcases found in a
perfect state of preservation are victims of winter which hid treacherous
crevasses and marshes under a white blanket of snow. As the tempera-
ture gradually fell, the eternal ice spread, driving the forest and its huge
inhabitants southward and imprisoning for thousands of years the stray-
ing mammoths that had been killed by the sudden arrival of the last
winter.


The Soviet experts on the subject seem to have come round to the


352


THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


view that the mammoth is a forest animal, The discovery i in 1948 of the
Taimyr Peninsula mammoth aroused new interest in the problem, and
a scientific expedition was organised to investigate the problem of the
mammoth’s habitat. It is significant, as M. Marmet has pointed out,
that this expedition was not asked to explore the country bordering the
Arctic Ocean, where nine-tenths of the frozen mammoths have been
found, but the forests round the Gulf of Ob, just where living specimens
have several times been reported.


Let me conclude with evidence from a much earlier date, which is
also quoted by M. Marmet. At the end of the sixteenth century the
Stroganoff family, who owned salt-mines in Siberia, were concerned
because they were being pillaged by brigands. They therefore decided
to send Don Cossacks to set things to rights, and dispatched them on


this police mission under Yermak Timofeyevitch in 1580. These Cos-
sacks took their task so much to heart that they eventually conquered
the whole of Siberia. They split into small bands, living on what they
could pillage, and went down rivers, explored vast tracts of quite un-
known country on their own account, set up towns and called upon
Russian workers and their families to help them. After some 60 years
of continual fighting with the native tribes, these Cossacks, or rather
their successors, reached the Sea of Okhotsk on the Pacific Ocean.
They had crossed the whole of Asia, rather like the Huns and the Mon-
gols, but in the opposite direction. Right at the beginning Timofeye-
vitch reported that beyond the Ural mountains he met “a large hairy
elephant.” According to the natives it was part of the wealth of the
Kingdom of Sibir, valued as food and known as “mountain of meat.”
This happened at a time when even the Slav world had never heard of
the mammoth,


353


Part Six
THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Ati, bwana! Thereis a story you will not believe,
because you are a white man. White men laugh
at the stories told by the black men. They say
this is not so, and that is not so. We have not
seen this or that, so how can it be? They say, Ho,
Ho! Black men are like little children, telling
tales to each other in the dark. But remember,
bwana, white men have been in this country for a
time that is less than the life of one man, so how
can you know all the things that have been known
to black men for a hundred lifetimes and more?
ALI, an old African hunter quoted in ROGER
COURTNEY’S A Greenhorn in Africa.


+
yeeasuey*™
quasaq
:


JI2YD(PH


31


ud


Vv


“GNVIVNYNHIIG
toa Mm


HiINOS
our
00g@
=
909
OOF
9002
3}


sqsasoy
sp2Idouy


oO;
N 3
;
A iokemejng®


tee eernes


SPF visaaony 3 000.....
2
vA: Aingsies
LW
he) _ Me
*-.WHLAO
aud a
fae,
eeecereee
mh WN lig
ben ile
art"


VIS3GOHY


ONVIVSVAN::
*


psvky


yf
|


=


pteete,
wage
te
orth
te


pysAuobuoy’


C{/YHXIANVIONVE
UID


ih.
24squiay


Nog
bqUiity
“7H
Cu
6q
NEDSS
8
PLO
13U99
24
pec
tegles
Comoe
arley
2d


QT
B06
3
F%.VoR
SI
/IAIIGIT
°


<
see rerdeescect


)
<


An


o


a


02
7


2 eOve.!


¢


ry


re
Bites vii
.
ONVINvHWos ™.,
:
2


ze
cn
ao
*


<


te


<
88 e8** oon ee


Br*Pescee


°
eee
ot Pe esee®
"Fe, ote


CHAPTER SIXTEEN


Three Large Pygmies: the Forest


Rhinoceros, the Water Elephant and


the Spotted Lion


There’s a sort of tiny potamus, and a tiny
nosserus too—
... And I think there’s a sort of a something
which is called a wallaboo—
A. A, MILNE, When We Were Very Young.


“In Africa,” Trader Horn has sagely remarked, “the Past has hardly
stopped breathing.” Several legends of unknown animals seem to refer
to creatures of a long-vanished age and are rejected by sceptical scien-


tists on that account. Yet the negroes have not had lessons in palaeonto-
logy and they could not know what prehistoric animals looked like.
Though they interpret what they see in a most original way because their
minds are dominated by sympathetic magic, and though they tend
either from fear or from natural braggadocio to exaggerate the facts they
report, there is always a real observation at the bottom of their stories—
not a dream or a vision. More than once they have shown that they are
good observers and that their interpretations of facts are not so ridicu-
lous as was at first supposed. They were ridiculed for thinking that
fevers were caused by mosquito-bites at a time when western medicine
gave malaria its name in the belief that it was literally caused by “bad


air.” Now the negroes have been proved to be right.


In any case, animals thought to be extinct are more likely to have sur-
vived in Central Africa than elsewhere.
Its climate has remained un-
changed since time immemorial. The Ice Ages had no effect except to
produce long rainy seasons. Geologically it has not changed for tens of
millions of years, and it is the only continent which has not been largely


357


92. Welwitschia mirabilis, a vegetable relic of the Palaeozoic era,
found only in a strip of the south-west coast of Africa.


submerged at some time since the beginning of the Primary era. It has
also escaped the great upheavals of the Earth’s crust. While the Alps
were gradually forming from the end of the Mesozoic era until the pre-
sent day, and the Rocky Mountains, the Andes and the Himalayas were


all appearing, Africa had long been physically settled. So it is not sur-
prising to find in Central Africa living specimens of types which once
flourished in a large part of Europe: macaques, elephants, rhinoceroses,
hippopotami, giraffes, lions and hyenas. The fauna of equatorial Africa


like its flora (which includes the Cycas from the Mesozoic era and even
the extraordinary Welwitschia from the end of the Palaeozoic) has always
been several geological periods behind. For example, in Central Africa
Dinotheriums have been excavated which were only 100,000 years old,
although they vanished from Europe 5 million years ago.


As Dr Frechkop has pointed out, the fact that animals like the okapi,
forest-hog and water-chevrotain (Hyemoschus) are found in Africa
proves that “the equatorial forest is the nature reserve of primitive forms
which have not been able to survive elsewhere.” As it is almost im-
possible to penetrate this dense, dark and unhealthy jungle without dis-
turbing the shy creatures that inhabit it, many of them may live there
without our having the least chance of meeting them except in excep-
tional circumstances. Only the natives who live on the verge of the
jungle, and more particularly the pygmies who live within it, are likely
to know of some of these animals. So it is natural that the legends likely
to interest us are mainly found along the vast equatorial rain-forest.


When Hans Schomburgk brought a pygmy hippopotamus back alive


to Europe in 1913, and thus proved that at least one native legend was
well-founded, he was probably more inclined to pay heed to others, one


358


-
Seay
de


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


of which referred to a sort of pygmy rhinoceros which, according to the
Kroo, also lived in the mountainous part of Liberia. At first he thought
the tales must refer to the forest-hog, a big black pig with large tusks, a
variety of which is in fact found in eastern Liberia. But he soon found


that the Kroo made a clear distinction between the large forest-boar and


the little mountain rhinoceros, and he eventually came to believe they


were right. Unfortunately all his attempts to discover a specimen of this


absolutely unknown species failed—it was a harder task than looking for


a needle in a haystack, since here the needle was on the move, constantly


eluding its pursuers.


There is a good argument to show that this part of Africa may still
conceal a pygmy rhinoceros. Professor Trouessart has said of the pygmy
hippopotamus:


The presence of this pygmy species in this particular area in the loop
of Niger leads one to suppose that this country was an island separated
from the continent at the time when the Atlantic still penetrated the
north of West Africa, that is to say during the Eocene.


It has long been noticed that land animals which live on islands are
generally smaller than the same or similar species living on the nearest
continent. Thus the deer and the rhinoceroses on Java and Sumatra are
smaller than those in India and Indo-China. In the Tertiary era a whole


series of pygmy elephants and rhinoceroses lived on the Mediterranean
islands of Sicily, Sardinia, Malta and Cyprus. This phenomenon, by
which a creature’s size seems to be related to that of the territory it lives
in, has been attributed to what Moritz Wagner calls segregation, in
which the lack of choice of sexual partners, the lack of variety in diet,
and perhaps a less favourable climate all play a part. If the country in
the loop of the Niger was once an island, one might expect its ancient
fauna to have insular and therefore dwarf characteristics. If there were
pygmy hippopotami, why not pygmy rhinoceroses?


No known rhinoceroses, fossil or living, are found in the area south of
the Niger and Senegal rivers. This is odd, since the hippopotami and
the elephants (which like them are pachyderms of similar habits, dating
from the same geological period) spread over this territory. Perhaps the
rhinoceroses in this area have remained unknown, because they are so


small and can shelter in mountains covered with thick forests. The


natives of Liberia are ignorant of this palaeontological argument, so it


is all the more interesting that they should put the pygmy rhinoceros in


the one place in Africa where we have reason to expect to find it.


359


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Liberia is not the only part of Africa where rhinoceroses have been
reported in quite unexpected places.
Both the black rhinoceros
(Diceros bicornis) and the white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum) live
in open country, mimosa-covered steppe and wooded savannah; they
sometimes venture through forest paths to the rivers where they bathe,
but they never live in the heart of thick wet forest. The vast area they
occupy in the eastern half of Africa hardly touches the tropical rain-
forest except around the foothills of Mount Kenya and Kilimanjaro.


Now in January 1931 an official of the French colonial administration
of the eastern Cameroons, Géraud de Galassus, told Lucien Blancou
that there were rhinoceroses in the forest in the south of the Batouri
subdivision which he administered. At that time Blancou thought that
they must be the remnants of a population of savannah rhinoceroses,
for he did not know the area in question. But when he became chief
game inspector in French Equatorial Africa his opinion changed. Be-
tween 1949 and 1953 he collected, from three other French officials,
Millet, Rolland and Rozan, information confirming the first report:
according to the natives of the Kellé, Ouesso and Dongou districts on
the Middle Congo River there was a species of rhinoceros in the very
depths of the thick forests in those districts. This was confirmed by an
engineer in the Forestry Department called Moiraud who had heard the
same story from Europeans living at Epéna. In such a very peculiar
habitat, the rhinoceros could hardly belong to either known genus.
Blancou concludes:


The Africans in the north of the Kellé district, especially the pygmies,
know a forest animal larger than a buffalo, almost as large as an elephant,
but which is not a hippopotamus.
Its tracks are only seen at long in-
tervals, but they fear it more than any other dangerous animal. The
sketch of its footprint which they drew for M. Millet is that of a rhino-
ceros. On the other hand they do not seem to have said that it has a
horn, though they have certainly not sajd that it has not. While M.
Millet was at Kellé, in 1950 if I am not mistaken, one of the best known
African chiefs in the district came several days’ march to inform him
that “‘the beast had reappeared.”” Unfortunately that is all I can say,
for M. Millet left the district in 1951 and I have not been able to go
there myself. The rewards in kind which this official offered the pyg-
mies for a tangible proof of the animal’s presence yielded no result.


Around Ouesso the natives talk of a big animal which does have a
horn on its nose—though I don’t know whether it has one or several.
They are just as afraid of it as the Kellé people.


Around Epéna, Impfondo and Dongou, the presence of a beast
which sometimes disembowels elephants is also known, but it does not


360


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


seem to be so prevalent there now as in the preceding districts. A speci-
men was supposed to have been killed twenty years ago at Dongou, but


on the left bank of the Ubangi and in the Belgian Congo.


Blancou admits that all the evidence is pretty thin; but points out that
the evidence upon which the okapi, forest-hog and Congo peacock and
many other creatures were discovered was equally thin. He remarks that
in the great wet forest where several of the least-known large species of
mammals survive, there seems to be an “ecological niche” for a well-
adapted rhinoceros. No doubt, like so many other animals, this species
was once widespread but has gradually retreated into a small area of
swamp and steep and thickly wooded mountains. In this it resembles
the forest rhinoceroses of Java and Sumatra to which it may perhaps be
related.


The latter rhinoceros (Dicerorhinus sumatranus) is by far the smallest,
due no doubt both to its insular and forest-dwelling habits. The red
buffalo of the forests is smaller than the black buffalo of the savannah,
and probably the African forest rhinoceros is smaller than its brothers on
the steppes; perhaps it is a true pygmy like its hypothetical Liberian
cousin.


The African elephant is exactly parallel to the African rhinoceros.
There are three sizes, one of which is still excluded from the official list.
At the end of the last century Paul Matschie had already noted that
there were two quite distinct races of elephants in Africa. The first
(Loxodonta africana oxyotis) had rather triangular ears, while in the
second (Loxodonta africana cyclotis) they were definitely rounded.
Matschie thought these sub-species belonged respectively to East and
West Africa, but it has since been shown that actually both types are
spread over most of Africa, the pointed-eared elephant preferring to


live in the savannah or bush, while the round-eared one chooses the


forest. Moreover the first is much larger than the second. A male bush
elephant often stands more than 11 feet high and may occasionally reach


as much as 12 feet 8 inches, while the male forest elephant is never more
than 10 feet high and is generally about 8 feet. The first has light-grey
rough-looking skin and tusks tending to point outwards, while the
second has dark-grey smooth-looking skin and tusks which tend to point
more inwards. Moreover the bush elephant has only four toenails on


the fore-feet and three on the hind-feet, while the more primitive forest
elephant has five on the fore-feet and four on the hind-feet.


They are thus so different that Glover M. Allen has considered that


361


93. Forest elephant compared with the larger savannah elephant.
Note the different shape of the ears.


they are actually different species, and that the savannah elephant (by
the law of priority) should be called Loxodonta africana, and the forest
elephant Loxodonta cyclotis. These two species do not seem to Keep
strictly to their respective habitats. On 19 May 1938, when he was
exploring the Albert National Park in the Belgian Congo, Dr Serge
Frechkop happened to see two herds of elephants feeding close to one
another only 100 yards or so from his camp at Ishango north of Lake
Edward:


One of these herds consisted of larger elephants with brownish-grey
skin; the other included individuals measuring about three-quarters of
the height of the specimens in the first herd and having skin of a blackish
dark brown colour. The two herds moved side by side without mingling
with one another.


Although he could not get close enough to examine the shape of their


ears, he was convinced that one herd consisted of Loxodonta africana
and the other of Loxodonta cyclotis.


Besides these two there seems to be a third much more controversial
species, the pygmy elephant, in which the adult does not exceed 6 feet
6 inches at the withers. There is no doubt that such elephants exist.
Specimens have lived in the Antwerp and New York zoos, but some


362


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


zoologists maintain that this does not prove they are separate species
(like those once found on Malta and other Mediterranean islands); they
may merely be the freak offspring of normal elephants. It is often diffi-
cult to distinguish between true pygmies and pathological dwarfs. To


settle the question one would have to observe the reproduction of pygmy


elephants or prove that there are whole herds of them.


The pygmy elephant was first officially described in 1906 by a German
professor, Theodore Noack of Brunswick from a specimen which was six
years old and came from Ndjoléin Gabon. He called it Loxodonta pumilio.
In 1923 Hornaday reported it in the same area, around Lake N’Gobi,
80 miles south-east of Fernan Vaz, and in 1926 Pohle reported it in
Fernan Vaz itself. Not long ago Professor Bourdelle, one of the world’s
greatest experts on mammals, and Francis Petter published a remark-
able study of a pygmy elephant, killed on 11 March 1948 at Aloombé
on the coast of Gabon between Libreville and Port-Gentil.
It was a
solitary old male, thought to be very aged. It was barely 6 feet 5 inches
high. Lucien Blancou, who has made a careful study of the mammals of
French Equatorial Africa, notes that the negroes make a clear distinc-
tion between the pygmy elephant and the larger species; he remarks that


it is usually hairier than the ordinary elephant and he is convinced that


it is a distinct animal.


In the Congo the pygmy elephants are often said to be aquatic. A


settler living near Lefini in the Upper Congo area, showed Hans Schom-
burgk a piece of thick skin like an ordinary elephant’s but covered with
a fleece of reddish hairs. He said it came from an animal which the
natives called “‘river-elephant” and which had amphibious habits like a
hippopotamus. There were persistent rumours all round Lake Leopold
II about this curious animal, but Schomburgk was unable to find out
the truth of them himself.


In 1911 Professor Trouessart reported that a certain Le Petit had
seen five of these water-elephants at Tomba-Mayi on the north bank of
Lake Leopold II, in the Loukeni region of the Belgian Congo. Their
trunks and ears were remarkably short but their necks, on the other
hand, were longer than an ordinary elephant’s, and they were not more


than 6 feet 6 inches high. At the sight of man they jumped into the


water, leaving only their trunks and the crowns of their heads above it
and swam out into the lake.?


Dr Henri Schouteden, Director of the Congo Museum at Tervueren


in Belgium, thought that Le Petit must have been “the object of a


1 Le Petit’s elephants will be discussed in greater detail on pp. 472-4.


363


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


complete illusion and that the natives, as often happens in the Congo,
had given a free rein to their imagination.” He was soon to change his
mind. Lieutenant Franssen, a Belgian officer, had promised to make a
systematic search for the animal and send a specimen to the Museum
at Tervueren. “If the animal exists,” he said, ‘I will come back with it;
otherwise I shall not come back at all.”


Lieutenant Franssen came back, as he had promised, with the remains
of a water-elephant captured “after spending thirty-six hours in mud
and water.” Exhausted by his sufferings on this expedition, and shaken
with violent fever, he did not long survive his return. Dr Schouteden
named the water-elephant, or waka-waka as the natives called it,
Loxodonta fransseni in his honour. Although his specimen was one of
the largest in the herd it was only 5 feet 5 inches at the withers. Its
tusks were 2 feet 2 inches long and together weighed under 43 pounds.
They were thus considerably longer than those of an ordinary elephant
of the same size, as Dr Schouteden points out.


According to him the shape of the ears and the fact that there are two
finger-like appendages on the tip of the trunk (L. pumilio, like the Asian
elephant, is supposed to have only one) are enough to justify a new spe-
cies of pygmy elephant. Personally I cannot see much difference in the
shape of the ears in photographs of L. pumilio and L. fransseni, and I find
it hard to believe that there are any elephants in Africa with only one
finger on the tip of the trunk.
It is more likely that L. fransseni is
merely a synonym for L. pumilio—which is hard luck on Lieutenant
Franssen.


Pygmy elephants have been reported in other widely separated parts
of the Belgian Congo, where they do not seem to be particularly amphi-
bious. In 1932, Major P. Offerman, director of the elephant-taming
station at Gangala-na-Bodio, reported that two pygmy elephants had
been captured in the Api (Uelé) area. They measured 4 feet 3 inches
and 4 feet 9 inches at the withers, but had “long and stout tusks almost
touching the ground.” The natives called them abele as distinct from
tembo, the larger elephant.


A.-J. Jobaert, an honorary assistant game-warden in the Belgian
Congo, several times saw pygmy elephants in the Lusambo province,
and thinks that this species lives in “all the large forests in the northern
territory of the province.” These little elephants were never more than
6 feet 6 inches high and they always travelled “in fairly large herds.”


Glover M. Allen maintained in 1936 that pygmy elephants (L. pumilio
and L. franssent) are merely forest elephants (L. cyclotis) which are not


364


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


yet fully grown. All the same there is no doubt that adult pygmy ele-
phants exist which are less than 6 feet 6 inches high. The specimen at
the New York Zoo, whose growth Dr Hornaday followed to the end,
reached a height of only 6 feet 5 inches and a weight of 1 ton 24 cwt.
An adult of the larger species weighs between 5 and 7 tons. The evi-


dence I have already cited shows that there exist small groups and even


large herds of pygmy elephants, so that Allen’s view is hard to maintain


today. Bourdelle and Petter also point out that the pygmy elephant


appears to have a habitat of its own:


Up to the present the pygmy elephant has appeared to be mainly an


inhabitant of the African rain-forest, and especially the marshy parts


of it; this seems to justify its name of ‘‘water-elephant’’ which the
population often give it and which certain authors have used in their
turn.


Thus there are three species of elephants in Africa, corresponding to
three different habitats: the bush elephant, naturally the largest and
with the most developed ears, as is usual with animals that live in fairly
open country; the forest elephant, smaller, darker and with rounder
ears; and the marsh elephant, even smaller and hairier. (In this respect


it is like the Negrillo pygmies which differ from the other negroes in the
same way; perhaps a moist jungle habitat causes these racial differences.)
The size of the adults seems to range roughly between 5 feet and 6 feet
6 inches in the pygmies, between 6 feet 6 inches and Io feet in the
forest elephants, and ro and 13 feet in the bush elephants. There is no
gap between the species, which has always made it difficult to tell them
apart. But to deny that the pygmy elephant exists, even as a sub-species
of Loxodonta cyclotis, shows a most obstinate prejudice. W. R. Foran, a
British big-game hunter, has even affirmed that the pygmy elephant was
invented by ivory-traders. It is forbidden to kill elephants that are not
full-grown, so when poachers shoot a young one they pretend it is a


pygmy.


Many zoologists are still no less incredulous, but with no justification,
especially when one recalls how ready they are to create new species


or sub-species, distinguished only by the slightest difference in colour


or a few extra whiskers.


The reader may feel that the evidence for the pygmy rhinoceros is too


vague and that the pygmy elephant is too well-established to be un-


known. No such objection can be made against the marozzt, the little


spotted lion of the Kenya mountains.


365


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Colonel R. Meinertzhagen, who was the first to collect remains of the


giant forest-hog, heard of it several times between 1903 and 1908, but


not until 1931 was any more official notice taken of it. Then Captain
R. E. Dent, a Kenya game-warden in charge of the Fisheries section,
saw four of these large cats crossing the path in front of him, between.
10,000 and 11,000 feet up, near the sources of the Kathita above Meru.
They seemed to him smaller than ordinary lions and of a very different
type. No doubt he would have forgotten about it if a few months later
his boys, who had set leopard-traps all along the eastern slopes of the
Aberdare Range, had not come and told him excitedly that they had
caught an unusual animal. It was neither a lion nor a leopard, but a sort
of cross between the two. Unfortunately for some unknown reason they
were not able to bring the specimen back.


A little later a white farmer called Michael Trent shot two small lions
with strange fur which had been attracted by a waterbuck that he had


fixed as bait some 10,000 feet up in the Aberdares. He was not a
naturalist and did not think their peculiar appearance was important.
Luckily an official in the Game Department happened to see the skins
preserved as trophies and thought them so unusual that he at once took
them back to Nairobi to Captain A. T. A. Ritchie, then Chief Game-
Warden, who recognised that there was something unusual about them
(see photograph facing page 368). They were those of a lion and a


lioness, for one of them had a mane, though it consisted of little more
than side-whiskers.


From their size they seemed to belong to lions at least three years
old—the age of puberty—which was perhaps confirmed by the fact that
they were a lion and his mate. But their skins were spotted. Now lion-
cubs are always born with fur speckled with fairly faint spots, but these
usually disappear quite soon and have quite gone before they are three
yearg old. These skins. were clearly spotted, and the spots showed not
the slightest signs of fading. But without a complete skeleton, or at


all events a skull, which could have definitely established the speci-
men’s age, it was hard for the Game Department officials to give a
verdict.


It was recalled that in 1924 the late Blayney Percival, a famous game
warden and a brilliant naturalist, reported he had killed a lioness and
her cubs which were all very clearly spotted. Might not some indivi-
duals retain their juvenile spotted coat until later than usual? It was
best to be cautious. But Kenneth Gandar Dower, a big-game hunter
who also examined the skins, was more positive about them:


366


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


They appear to belong to lions two or three years old—the male had
a whiskery mane—and yet the cub spots with which almost every lion is
born showed no signs of fading. Certain freak lions do keep their spots
to an advanced age, but not in a degree comparable with these rosettes
which were distributed not only on the legs and flanks but right up to
the spine itself...


They so convinced Gandar Dower that there was a separate species
of spotted lion, that in 1933 he organised a safari to try to find a speci-
men of this unknown animal. He found nothing but some footprints too
large for a leopard’s and too small for a lion’s; nor could they be mis-
taken for a young lion’s.


Undaunted, he published an exciting book about the spotted lion in
1937. It made a good deal of noise in the British Press and brought to


light more evidence, the most interesting of which came from G. Hamil-
ton-Snowball, who had an interesting adventure in the Aberdare Range.
In a letter to the Field he recalls that one day when he had shot an animal
he took for a leopard, although it was unusually large and dark in colour,
his Kikuyu boys told him that it was a damasia, not a chui (leopard), and
that it was as different from a leopard as a lion from a marozt. When he
asked them what a marozi was, they at once replied that it was an animal
smaller than a lion, which one usually met in pairs, though this hap-
pened rarely and only at high altitudes.
It was spotted. Hamilton-
Snowball adds:


Later, in the spring of 1923, I crossed the Aberdares on foot from
Laikipia to N’jabini on the Kinangop plateau and on the second day
out, about 4 p.m. in poor light (it was drizzling a bit) at 11,500 ft. I saw
what I thought at first were two very tawny and washed out looking
leopards about 200 yards away.


As I turned to my bearer for my rifle (I had been carrying a shot gun)
I heard an unfamiliar name being excitedly murmured by all the boys,
who had seen the beasts as soon as I had.


“Marozi, Marozi,’”’ they repeated. As I pushed off the safety catch,
with one movement, the beasts (or cats) turned and in two bounds had
gone into the belt of forest in front of which I had surprised them.


By now I remembered what Marozi meant and asked the boys if they
thought it was likely a couple of lion would ever come up from the
plains to such a height and in such cold conditions! “Certainly not,”
they said, “but Marozis live here!”’


Well, I can only say or tell of what I had seen and I must add that
the “pugs” certainly were those of lion, and not of leopard, that the


beasts looked spotty and tawny, but except for the natives, I never


could get confirmation that there even were such things as “spotted


lions.”


367


uae. - er
Lid
-<


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


An inquiry among the Kikuyu confirmed that they did in fact make a
clear distinction between simba, the lion, and marozi, the little spotted
mountain lion.


Raymond Hook, the hunter who accompanied Gandar Dower’s ex-
pedition and whose knowledge of the high parts of Kenya seems to be
unique, thinks that the marozi is largely mythical, but adds that in
theory it is not impossible that a small race of lions, descended perhaps
from lions which took refuge in the forest when the plains were colonised,
might survive in a few confined areas. This sub-species, if it exists,
would have undergone a change in colour to suit its new environment.
But Hook thinks that there is not enough evidence to prove its existence.


Other experts are less cautious. Powys Cobb of Elementeita, who
knows African big-game well, is convinced that a species unknown to
science lives in the thick and little-explored Mau forest. He surprised a
strange beast of the cat tribe, between a leopard and a lion in size, which
had attacked cattle grazing in a corner of his farm near the edge of the


forest. He mounted his horse and pursued the animal into the forest,
where he had to give up the chase without having come any nearer to


it. Its footprints were like a small lion’s.


These two opinions were quoted after Gandar Dower’s death, by
another East African settler, J. R. T. Pollard, who had known him well
during the last war. Pollard also writes:


My own view, based on talks I have had with Kikuyus, many of
whom assert that lions occasionally visit the high moors of Mount
Kenya, is that it is quite possible that an unknown member of the cat
tribe inhabits the upland rain forests, for large areas have never been
visited by man.
‘


The natives of Embu told Major G. St. J. Orde-Brown about “a


lion-like forest cheetah” on the south-eastern slopes of Mount Kenya.
There is no doubt that this is our “spotted lion,” for the cheetah is like
the lion in outline: both have high shoulders and usually walk with the
head raised, while the leopard holds its head farther forward and lower
than its shoulders. No doubt this is because the lion and cheetah are
animals of the savannah, while the leopard and tiger usually live in
forests ; and animals living in tall grass have more need to lift their heads
to get their bearings than those which slink through bushy under-
growth.


E. A. Temple-Perkins, a big-game hunter who is usually inclined to
be sceptical about unknown animals, tells of a similar animal called
ntarago, in which he is inclined to believe, having heard its voice.


368


Skin of the spotted mountain lion’shot by Michael Trent.


Lion-cub showing the spots on its juvenile coat which later vanish.


The nsui-fist, which was thought to be a cross between a leopard and a hye
proved to be a freak variant or possibly new species of this cheetah.


TH*EE LARGE PYGMIES


The voice I heard that evening at Kichwamba was strangeness itself,
and beyond my power to describe with sufficient accuracy, although I
heard it at ranges of about one mile to fifty yards from my camp inter-
mittently for two hours. All I can say is that it sounded harsh and
guttural; it was not the cough of a leopard, but more like that than any-
thing else if you add the word liquid or gurgling.


Four natives, one of them an old and trusted tracker, all independently
told Temple-Perkins that it was the ntarago. He was unable to catch
sight of the beast in the firelight, nor could he find any spoor. All the
same he is very insistent that animal is a feline, and is quite emphatic
that it has nothing to do with another frequently reported animal, the
giant hyena.


For some fifty years, then, rumours have been current about this
strange cat in Upper Kenya above Meru, despite the scepticism of some
experts who maintain that it is merely an ordinary lion that has retained


its juvenile spotted coat. Each witness has reported the same features:
the size is smaller than an adult lion and nearer that of a cheetah, the
spots are like a leopard’s, and there is little or no mane.


Most naturalists are apt to be reserved about the spotted lion’s
existence, but not ill-disposed to it. Reginald Pocock, a great authority
on the felines, is distinctly favourable, and brings grist to Gandar
Dower’s mill:


There is, as a matter of fact, some independent evidence, unknown to
Mr Gandar Dower at the time, of the evidence of a small lion in Kenya.
Several years ago, Messrs. Rowland Ward showed me the skulls of an
adult lion. and lioness received without skins or more precise locality
from that Colony. Their unusually small dimensions puzzled me a good
deal. The skull of the lion was less than 4 an inch longer than the
longest lioness’s skull, from Laikipia, in the Washington collection, and
the same width; and the skull of the lioness was nearly 1 in. shorter
and over } an inch narrower than the smallest lioness’s skull, from
Kapiti, in the same collection.


Since these skulls are decidedly smaller, sex for sex, than any out of
the very large numbers that have been measured from many localities
in the plains of East Africa, it seems probable that they came from some
place in Kenya where few sportsmen have shot and preserved lions.
That place may have been the mountain forests of the Aberdares ...


Colonel C. R. S. Pitman, a game-warden and one of the most know-
ledgeable experts on African fauna, writes:


The evidence, so far, is inconclusive, though there is no reason to
discredit the probability of a small race of lion occurring permanently
AA
369


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


at these high altitudes [10,000 and 11,000 feet]. My own ideas support
the claim that a small mountain race does exist in Kenya.


The sceptics are less convincing. G. Flett of Aberdeen attempts to
explain the marozi as an optical illusion:


On two occasions during my two years’ continuous stay in the re-
moter parts of Kenya, I met with lions at very close range during the
middle of the day; on both occasions the bodies of the animals were
patterned by the shadows thrown by the tree branches and the shadow
effect was indeed striking. I thought then that I had seen a species of
lion unknown to science and I can well understand how Mr Pollard’s
friend was deceived.


But how does he explain the fact that Michael Trent’s lions did not
change their spots even after they were shot, skinned and examined by
numerous naturalists?


Major W. R. Foran, whose sceptical views about the pygmy elephant
we have already heard, takes the line in an article on ““The Legendary
Spotted Lion” that it is not a new sub-species, while adducing evidence


to the contrary!


On two different occasions in 1906 I shot a lion and a lioness on the
slopes of Mount Kenya, each definitely not younger than five years old;
the spotting-was clearly visible on belly, flanks and legs. Both were
.
somewhat smaller than the average lion and the male was quite mane-
less. It struck me that these animals were abnormal in the retention of
their spotting, but were possibly a rare occurrence.


What makes him think these were individual freaks and-not members
of a different race? Elsewhere he makes a remark which contradicts this
point of view:
;


There is nothing unusual in lions being found at such high altitudes:


they are customarily styled “‘forest’’ lions, and on average, they are
smaller than normal beasts found on the plains at lower altitudes.


Certainly it is not unusual to find lions on mountains, but to find them
in thick forests like those on Mount Kenya is quite extraordinary. The
lion is an animal of the savannah. It never ventures into thick forests.
So if one finds lions in such forests they must therefore be a very special
kind of lion. Since racial differences are always shown in differences in
form and colour, it would be quite normal for forest lions to be smaller
and have a spotted coat. As Dr Serge Frechkop has noted about
leopards, “‘there is as a general rule a type of larger size with a lighter
coat in the savannah, and a type of smaller size with a darker coat in
the forest.” Why should not this also be true of lions?


37°


THREE LARGE PYGMIES


Major Foran does not explain the legend of the marozi very convinc-
ingly. He recalls that zoologists allow only two varieties of lion in East
Africa, the Masai lion (massaica) and the Somali lion (somalica). The
second is smaller, has practically no mane but larger ears; it is always of


a lighter fawn, almost cream-colour. Perhaps, he suggests, the Somali


lion has come into Kenya and settled there. But he seems to forget that


the Somali lion like the other lions, but unlike the marozi, is not sup-


posed to retain its juvenile spots when it is fully-grown.


In any case these varieties of African lions need some qualification.
Dr Frechkop remarks that:


It does not seem that today one can distinguish more than one species
of the genus Leo, unless perhaps the differences between the African
lions and those which are still preserved in a region of India are con-
siderable enough for the latter to be treated as a species (Leo goojraten-
sts) different from that which lives in Africa (Leo leo).


As to the African lions, it is certain that there are fairly marked
differences between the lions found in Algeria [Leo Jeo Jeo (Linn.), the
Atlas or Barbary lion] and those found in Cape Colony, called Leo leo
capensis (Fischer) or Leo leo melanochaitus (H. Smith), as well as be-
tween those which live in Senegal—Leo leo senegalensis (Meyer)—and
those in East Africa.


Dr Frechkop goes on to deplore the creation of a host of sub-species
which he considers to be “‘the exaggeration of systematicians who do not
take into account the animals’ life, nor the complex play of heredity and
individual variation.” “I am far from denying that these names may


refer to different races,”’ he writes, “but it is also necessary that each
specimen from one region should have the characteristics attributed to
the race belonging to that region.” And he goes on to show that even
in the Albert National Park in the Belgian Congo there are two extreme
types, with every possible intermediate form: one is a lion with an
undeveloped mane, confined to the neck and consisting of tawny hairs
with only very few blackish ones; the other has a thick dark mane, reach-
ing beyond the shoulders and even under the front legs where it forms


tufts on the elbows. Obviously this is not a case of separate races but


of individual variations. As most of the sub-species of lions are based


on such slight characteristics as the relative size of the mane or the


relative colour of the fur, I doubt whether they have much value. Yet,


paradoxically enough, the same systematicians who are so ready to


create new species on such trivial data, refuse to admit that the


spotted lion is a separate variety, even though the differences observed


in its size and marking are so distinct that they may well justify the


371


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


creation of a new species, which could have no better name than Leo
maculatus.


At all events there is little doubt that a race of lions with juvenile
characteristics could have arisen in Kenya, where it has taken refuge in
the thick forests at high altitudes. Cut off there from the lions of the
plains, they must have undergone considerable changes as a result of
the phenomenon of segregation. From all accounts they seem to have
dwindled appreciably, for they are generally said to be between the size
of a lion and a leopard. If a large lion (omitting the tail) is 5 feet 3
inches long, and a large leopard is 4 feet, an adult spotted lion would
be about 4 feet 8 inches from the tip of the nose to the root of the tail.
Perhaps its size is even smaller, since it has several times been compared


to a cheetah, which rarely exceeds 3 feet 3 inches, in which case one
could clearly call it a “pygmy lion,” and, like the pygmy forms of hippo-
potamus (Choeropsis), rhinoceros (Dicerorhinus), siamang-gibbon (Hylo-
bates klossi) and chimpanzee (Pan paniscus), it would deserve to be
raised at least to the status of a new species. Its exact position in the
zoological scale cannot be settled until its skeleton and perhaps also its
internal anatomy have been studied. And we have yet to capture a
specimen.


372


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN


The Nandi Bear,


an East African Proteus


Shouting we seize the god: our force t’evade
His various arts he soon resumes in aid:
A lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden, our hands a spotted pard restrain;
And last, sublime, his stately growth he
rears,


A tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
ALEXANDER Pope’s translation of HomER’s


description of Proteus.


THE bravest native hunters in Kenya will tremble at the name of the
chemosit. Men who are not afraid to meet a lion with no weapon but a
spear, turn back at once if they come upon its footprints. It is said that
no one who has heard its hideous cry ever forgets it. But if you ask a


settler, whether he be game-warden or professional zoologist, about this
nightmarish creature, he will give you nothing but vague theories, a
frank denial or a sceptical shrug of the shoulders. Yet it would need a
whole book to detail all the tales told by whites and negroes in British
East Africa and the neighbouring part of the Belgian Congo about a


sort of large “bear” of unparalleled ferocity. The British call it Nandi
bear, from the name of the people in whose territory it is chiefly found.


_ Now the odd thing is that there is virtually not a single species of bear
in the whole African continent.! Of course there is no certainty that the
Nandi bear is really a bear, but it looks like one; and the features re-
ported by numerous witnesses are so characteristic that it seems a


1 The only possible exception is a variety of brown bear (Ursus arctos crowtheri)
which may still survive in a small corner of Africa nearest to Europe, Spanish
Morocco, though many authorities think that it is now extinct. It is a descendant
of bears that came from Spain before the Straits of Gibraltar joined the Mediter-
ranean to the Atlantic.


373


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


reasonable supposition. Moreover, despite the total absence of bears in
black Africa, the Wa-Swahili and the tribes bordering the River Tana
have long used the word duba, presumably derived from the Arabic
dubb (bear), to describe a fearful beast that haunts the forests along
the river.


Ancient accounts of travels sometimes mention bears even in the
heart of Africa. Herodotus, who was always scrupulous, reports that in
Libya there were “huge serpents [pythons] . .
. the lions, the elephants,
the bears, the asps, and the horned asses. ete too are the ‘dog-heads’
[baboons]” and many other animals of the local fauna. Pliny, on the
other hand, disputes the existence of bears in Africa. But in his very
detailed description of Africa, Dr Dapper, who renewed our knowledge
of the continent in 1668, writes that in the Kingdom of Congo “there


are squirrels which have tails much larger than those in Europe, bears,
wild cats, snakes and very venomous vipers... .”


In the centuries that followed, all naturalists agreed that there were
no bears in Africa. It was not until 1905 that Europeans first saw what
came to be known as the Nandi bear on the Uasin Gishu tableland; and
their accounts were not published until there was a particularly persis-
tent crop of rumours in 1912. Geoffrey Williams, who had taken part in
the famous Nandi Expedition at the beginning of the century, wrote with
apparent reluctance in the Journal of the East Africa and Uganda
Natural History Society:


I am asked to describe the strange beast that I once saw up on the
Uasingishu, and it is with some diffidence that I make the attempt since
experience has taught me that descriptions of unrecorded animals do
not meet with much credence.


However, as I now hear that it has been seen again, I feel encouraged
to do the best I can.


Several years ago I was travelling with a cousin on the Uasingishu
just after the Nandi expedition, and, of course, long before there was any
settlement up there. We had been camped on the edge of the Escarp-
ment near the Mataye and were marching towards the Sirgoit Rock
when we saw the beast. There was a thick mist, and my cousin and I
were walking on ahead of the safari with one boy when, just as we drew
near to the slopes of the hill, the mist cleared away suddenly and my
cousin called out ‘What is that?’ Looking in the direction to which
he pointed I saw a large animal sitting up on its haunches not more than
30 yards away. Its attitude was just that of a bear at the ‘Zoo’ asking
for buns, and I should say it must have been nearly 5 feet high. It is
extremely hard to estimate height in a case of this kind; but it seemed
to both of us that it was very nearly, if not quite, as tall as we were.
Before we had time to do anything it dropped forward and shambled


374


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


away towards the Sirgoit with what my cousin always describes as a
sort of sideways canter. The grass had all been burnt off some weeks
earlier and so the animal was clearly visible.


I snatched my rifle and took a snapshot at it as it was disappearing
among the rocks, and, though I missed it, it stopped and turned its head
round to look at us. It is in this position that I see it most clearly in my


mind’s eye. In size it-was, I should say, larger than the bear that lives


in the pit at the ‘Zoo’ and it was quite as heavily built. The fore quar-


ters were very thickly furred, as were all four legs, but the hind quarters
were comparatively speaking smooth or bare. This distinction was very


definite indeed and was the first thing that struck us both. The head


was long and pointed and exactly like that of a bear, as indeed was the
whole animal. I have not a very clear recollection of the ears beyond


the fact that they were small, and the tail, if any, was very small and


practicaliy unnoticeable. The colour was dark and left us both with the


impression that it was more or less of a brindle, like a wildebeeste, but


this may have been the effect of light.


The mist had entirely lifted and the beast stood out quite plainly
against the rocks. Unfortunately I had no second cartridge ready, and
it had vanished before I could get another shot. Owing to the extreme
hardness and dryness of the soil at the time and the number of stones
there was no definite spoor to follow, and though we sought for it for
some time we never saw it again.


When Williams asked the boy who had been with him to pick out the
beast from a book full of illustrations of animals, he plumped for the
brown bear. Another Nandi boy confronted with Kipling’s Jungle Book
identified Baloo, the Indian bear, as chemosit, a beast whose description
Williams found tallied with the unknown animal he had seen.


I have also heard [Williams adds] of the same thing in the Kakumega
country near Kabras [about 20 miles south of the Uasin Gishu], and
was twice warned by the people not to sleep with my tent door open for
fear of the ‘Shivuverre,’ which they describe as a nocturnal beast some-
thing like a hyzena only infinitely larger and very savage. I heard of a
skin in Kabras and tried very hard to obtain it; but could not do so.


The Nandi say that they once killed one years ago owing to its having
climbed upon the roof of a hut and broken through.


It killed the people in the hut, but others burnt the place down with
the animal inside. They say the reason it is never killed is because it is


entirely nocturnal, is very rare, and only attacks solitary people, who
never return to tell the tale.


When I saw it, it was quite early in the morning, and the Nandi ac-
count for its being about at that hour by the fact that the mist prevented
its realising the approach of daylight.


I might add that the beast was not the least like either a baboon or ar
ant-bear, of this I am quite certain.


375


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


The tales which were current when this very circumstantial account
was published are strangely confusing, and the reader may well be
puzzled to find me citing reports which unquestionably refer to different
animals, But these discrepancies are a vital part of the problem. Too
many authors have picked out a set of consistent reports, discarding the
others, in order to prove that it is some known animal. On the other
hand it is only right to point out that the settlers invented the name
Nandi bear on the slender grounds of their first observations of it and
that they were gradually led into using it for any mysteriaus—or
apparently mysterious—animal they failed to recognise.


A whole set of reports were collected by the British anthropologist
C. W. Hobley. The first comes from Major Toulson, a well-known


settler on the Uasin Gishu, to whom the following incident occurred in
1912:


It was getting dark when one of my boys came into my room and
said that a leopard was close to the kitchen. I rushed out at once and
saw a strange beast making off: it appeared to have long hair behind and
it was rather low in front. I should say it stood about 18 in. to 20 in. at
the shoulder; it appeared to be black, with a gait similar to that of a bear
—a kind of shuffling walk. Unfortunately it was nearly dark at the time
and I did not get a fair view of the head.


Several Dutchmen had asked me a few days before what the strange
animal was on the plateau; they said it was like a bear, but they had only
seen it at dusk; it turned on their dogs and chased them off. They de-
scribed it as a thick-set beast and it was making a peculiar moaning cry.


In March 1913 N. E. Fs Corbett, the District Commissioner of
Eldoret, saw what he thought was the Nandi bear.


I was having lunch by a wooded stream, the Sirgoi River, just below
Toulson’s farm, and afterwards went a little down-stream to fish, and
to my surprise I walked right into the beast. It was evidently drinking
and was just below me, only a yard or so away. I heard something going
away and it shambled across the stream into the bush. The place was
overgrown and I was without my specs, so could not get a very good
view, but am certain that it was a beast I have never seen before.
Thick, reddish-brown hair, with a slight streak of white down the hind
quarters, rather long from hock to foot, rather bigger than a hyena,
with largish ears. I did not see. the head properly; it did not seem to be
a very heavily built animal. The annoying thing was that I had been
past exactly the same place half an hour before with my gun after a
duck, and when I returned I had nothing but a fishing-rod.
I saw it
about 12.30 midday—almost the same time that Mr. Kennet saw one at
another place.


376


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


The next reports come from people working on the Magadi railway,
which was being built at this time. They all say that they found foot-
prints of a strange animal on the rough track
-
which they had cleared before beginning to
°«-
A/\/A


lay rails. One of them, called Schindler, who
ON 00 0


discovered particularly clear prints in the dried
mud where a pipe-line ran out, drew a sketch
which is reproduced here.


An engineer called Hickes who was in
charge of building the railway also ran across
the animal.
It was his account which led
the previous witnesses to recall their own
encounters.
94. Footprint of the
“strange beast’’ found
On March 8, 1913, I was travelling alone
py Schindler Sor tha


on our motor trolley along the Magadi Rail-
Magadi railway.
way. At about 9 a.m., when I was at Mile 16,
I saw, about fifty yards ahead of me, what I took to bé a hyena.


It was almost on the line when I first saw it and at that time it had
already seen me and was making off at a right-angle to the line—which
is straight at this point.


I wondered at seeing a hyena out so late in the morning, and looked
at it with interest, especially as, owing to the speed I was travelling
(about twenty-five miles per hour) I should pass so close to it before it
had time to get away.


There had been heavy rain the night before but at the time I saw the
animal it was clearing up, although the sun was not shining.


The country is quite open, with grass about eighteen inches high, and
the ground is ‘black cotton,’ with many projecting whinstone boulders.


As I got closer to the animal I saw it was not a hyena. At first I saw
it nearly broadside on: it then looked about as high as a lion. In colour
it was tawny—about like a black-maned lion—with very shaggy long
hair. It was short and thick-set in the body, with high withers, and had
a short neck and stumpy nose.


It did not turn around to look at me, but loped off—running with its
fore-legs and with both hind legs rising at the same time.


As I got alongside it, it was about forty or fifty yards away, and I
noticed it was very broad across its rump, had very short ears, and had
no tail that I could see.


As its hind legs came out of the grass I noticed the legs were very
shaggy right down to the feet, and that the feet seemed large and were,
of course, covered with black mud.


I could not at all think what animal it was, and it was only after I was
actually past that I realised that it must be the strange beast of which
we had all heard, and which has been seen several times during the
construction of this railway.


377


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Directly I realised what I had seen my first impulse was to go back,
especially as I had a .350 Rigby with me.


I could still see it loping away, but I remembered that a slight wash-
away had been reported at Mile 29, and our engines were held up and
waiting for me to get them through.


I therefore went on, intending to stop on my way back and take care-
ful measurements of the spoor. Unfortunately, however, when I was
returning in the afternoon very heavy rain was on, so I did not stop, as
nothing would have been left of the spoor, the whole country being
under water.


This strange beast was first mentioned to me by Mr. Clifford Hill,
who, on the first survey of this railway, had a young Dutch boy with
him who came across one on the Koora Plains (Mile 71).


He had seen nothing like it and could not describe it, so Mr. Hill
showed him a picture-book of animals, and he picked out the bear as
being like the animal he had seen.


The first we heard of it during construction was when we had our
pipe-line discharging water to waste at about Mile 71. Several engi-
neers saw a strange spoor in the mud so formed—all the rest of the
country being dry. It has been sketched to me and described as that of
a bear. [See Fig. 94.]


A native servant of one of the engineers, Mr. Archibald, also reported
that he saw this strange animal, which, he says, stood on its hind legs
and looked at him, but would not run away.


The only other instance of its actually having been seen is reported
by a sub-contractor, Mr. Caviggia, who saw one at Mile 38, and his
description is very similar to mine.


I have been in Africa—East, South, and West—in the wilds in ad-
vance of civilisation, building railways during a considerable part of the
last eighteen years, and I cannot think of any animal I have not seen
in its wild state, but I have never before seen anything like this beast.


The last of Hobley’s reports does not seem at first sight to refer to the
animal in question.


There are also stories of another unknown beast from the lower and
middle valley of the Tana River. Mr. Cumberbatch, the District Officer
of that region, tells me that the German missionaries who have lived
for many years at Ngao state that the Pokomo natives know of a forest
beast called the ‘Koddoelo,’ and is said to have been killed near Ngao
some years back. On one occasion one of the missionaries found that
the whole population of the biggest Pokomo settlement in Kina Kombe
district had deserted their village and crossed the river because this
animal was roaming about in the bush near the village.


The animal was described to the District Officer by a Pokomo (who,
however, admitted that he himself had not seen it) as being as large as a
man, as sometimes going on four legs, sometimes on two, in general
appearance like a huge baboon, and very fierce. The Pokomo native is


378


eee


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


not a highly strung or imaginative person, so it is possible that there is
some undiscovered anthropoid beast in the dense bush which is found
in the Tana Valley.


An “undiscovered anthropoid beast” may seem a long way from a
“bear,” but in fact the Nandi think the chemosit is more like a large
monkey. And when Hobley soon afterwards received further details
about the koddoelo from a Mr Rule who had made a thorough inquiry
among the Wa-Pokomo, he published a description which agrees in
many details with that seen by Hickes beside the Magadi railway.


Colour, reddish to yellow; length, about 6 feet; height, about 3 feet
6 inches at the withers; hair long, and all accounts agree on the point of
a thick mane;
tail short and very broad; claws very long; head, fairly
long nose, teeth long but not so long as lion; fore-legs said to be very
thick.


The Pokomo state that several have been killed, and one man says
that he killed one himself a good many years ago. It is said to be very
fierce, and to visit villages and carry off sheep. On these occasions the
natives either cross the river until it leaves the neighbourhood or
frighten it away by beating drums. The Waboni hunters know the
beast well, but say that they prefer to leave it alone.


Hobley goes on to give further information which comes even nearer,
in some details at least, to the descriptions of the alleged Nandi bear.


The Assistant District Commissioner on the Tana also sends a
further account of the animal, based on recent inquiries, and it was
described to him by Pokomo, who said they had seen it, and their
account was as follows:—Light in colour, long hair on neck and back;
usually goes on fore-legs but can go on its hind-legs, not known to
climb trees, rather smaller than a lion, tail about 18 inches long and
some 4 inches broad, is nocturnal in its habits, fore-legs very thick; said
to leave a track with one deep claw mark behind the marks of its four
toes (this is rather obscure). They are agreed about its ferocity and
say it attacks a man on sight. One is said to have killed a rhino near
Makere, but this is rather difficult to credit. One tried to raid a goat
kraal last January, but was driven away by the noise made by the
villagers when the alarm was given.


The Wa Pokomo are an agricultural people on the river and do not


1 Further south, in the very north of Tanganyika, the local monster is even
more ape-like. Captain Hichens calls this ngoloko “‘the man-ape of the Isansu
hills, a weird creature that prowls the dismal stretches of Yaida Lake.”


2 Perhaps it should be “‘beyond the marks of each of its four toes,” or it may
mean that there is a mark of a fifth toe, bent and perhaps opposable like a thumb,
possibly more deeply impressed, further back on the foot. In the latter case the


beast must indeed be an ape or baboon.


379


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


usually hunt, but Waboni hunters might possibly be induced to locate
one if anyone had leisure and means to devote to the matter.


As the rumours grew all over Kenya, people began to interrogate the
natives to find out whether they knew any bear-like creature, and little
by little it began to appear that an animal like one in some respect or
another was well known to the natives since time immemorial. On the
coast the Moslem Swahili peoples, who from long contact with Arabs
had learnt of the existence of bears, had not been influenced by the
whites in calling the mysterious beast by a name derived from the
Arabic for bear: duba. In the uplands, beyond the reach of Arab in-
fluence, the Lumbwa name is geteit which means “‘brain-eater.” This
becomes gereit, kereit, keteit or kerit on the slopes of the Mau escarp-
ment and in the Nandi country, where it is also called chemosit and chimi-


set or “the devil.” In Ruanda this is altered to 1kimizi, though other
parts of the same country use the quite different name of kikambangwe,
The Ba-Gishu and Sabai of Mount Elgon call it sabrookoo.


But, whatever the name, there is no doubt that the native descriptions


are often very exaggerated, or perhaps one should say poeticised. Ali,
Roger Courtney’s guide, speaks of it as “great, white and hairy, that
walks upright like a man and eats only the brain of its victims.” The
Nandi chief Kitapmetit Kipet described it to Captain William Hichens


as “half like a man and half like a huge, ape-faced bird, and you may
know it at once from its fearful howling roar, and because in the dark of
night its mouth glows red like the embers of a log.” Such tales were
naturally taken for mere superstitions until white men started to see the
Nandi bear and show that they might have a real foundation.


There seems little doubt that there is confusion in the Nandi mind
between a real animal and a devil in their local mythology. Perhaps this


is because they call the beast chemosit in a figurative sense, just as we call
various animals, such as the predatory Tasmanian marsupial, by the
name of “devil.” In his standard work on The Nandi, their Language
and Folklore, published in 1909, A. C. Hollis drew a fantastic picture of
the local devil, some of whose features are apt to turn up in descrip-
tions of the Nandi bear.


There is also a devil called Chemosit, who is supposed to live on the
earth and to prowl round searching to devour people, especially chil-
dren. He is said to be half man, half bird, to have only one leg but nine
buttocks, and his mouth, which is red, is supposed to shine at night like
a lamp. He propels himself by means of a stick which resembles a
spear and which he uses as a crutch.


380


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


Subsequently I. Q. Orchardson, a settler who had lived among the
Kipsigis (another name for the Lumbwa) for 16 years, maintained that


the chemosit should not be considered as entirely mythical.


Among the Kipsigis one finds no belief that the Chemosit is a devil or
spirit or god or man. The only reference to its being like a man is that
some say that at a distance it looks like a huge man because it stands up
on its hind legs. Even those who say it has only one leg say that it has
no arms and that its footprint is something between that of an elephant
and a rhino and insist very strongly that it is only an animal. A few old
men even say that they have seen it at night and give descriptions—very
wild ones but all quite unlike man or spirit, for they include fur, whis-
kers (“‘wawechik’’ = whiskers or antennae of animals and insects only).
The crutch of Hollis’s book is quite unknown here for they say how
could an animal use a crutch. A curious detail is that the urine of the
Chemosit is said to be so evil smelling that no man can stay near it. All
the young men deny having seen it or knowing what it is like, but love
to tell children and unsuspecting Europeans fancy tales of it.


The name Chemosit however might not be said at night just as in the
case of the Chief Witch Doctor. At night it was given another name,
viz. Gononet, of which I do not know the derivation. Chemosit is a fairly
common man’s name and it is also used by mothers to make their chil-
dren obey, e.g. “If you don’t eat your food the Chemosit will come and
eat you.”


Because mothers frighten children with bugbears in our country, it
does not mean that all bears are imaginary beasts. To the Nandi the
chemosit seems to be sometimes a bugbear and sometimes a real bear—


or at least a real animal rather like one.


When settlers tried to set about finding out what this animal was they
could count on little help from the natives, who were all too apt to turn
grey with fear at the mention of its name. “Anyone who has lived in a
‘Nandi bear atmosphere,’” writes the game-warden C. R. S. Pitman,
“cannot doubt the reality of the dread the brute inspires.” Indeed it is
supposed to be a more bloodthirsty monster than any other animal in
Africa. Not only does it slaughter domestic animals, but every year it is
blamed for the death of many natives found with their skulls smashed in


or the top of the head literally torn off.


Charles T. Stoneham, a well-known big-game hunter who searched
for the mysterious animal in the Mau forests, gives some details:


Men told me it came down to the villages at night and murdered the


- inhabitants in their huts. It made its entrance through the roof, killed
the occupants, and ate their brains. That was one of the beast’s pecu-
liarities ; it ate only the brains of its victims. Women gathering firewood


381


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


in the forest would be missed, and later their bodies would be dis-
covered, always minus the tops of their skulls.


One of the brute’s tricks is supposed to be to lie along a low branch
above a path and wait till someone comes past. Then with a savage blow
of its great clawed paw it rips open his head and eats his brain.


Without going into the way the beast ambushes its victims, but relying
only on the wounds it is said to cause, we can say at once that no cat


kills in this manner. It is much more like that of a large bear, which
would generally stand up to its full height and use its powerful claws to
hit its adversary, very likely scalping him as if he were
aman. The cats
on the other hand almost always finish off their victims by crunching


their teeth into the nape of the neck or the small of the back.


In 1919 a farmer in the Lumbwa country called Cara Buxton told a
circumstantial story which may perhaps provide the key to this parti-
cular problem:


A short time ago a ‘Gadett’ [obviously the same word as geteit]
visited this district. This name is given to the animal by the Lumbwa
and signifies the ‘brain-eater.’


Its first appearance was on my farm, where the sheep were missing.
We finally found all ten, seven dead and three still alive. In no case
were the bodies touched, but the brains were torn out.


Buxton appends “‘a tracing from a photograph of one of the sheep that
was still alive.” The hole through which the brain has been removed is
tiny, no more than an inch across.


During the next ten days fifty-seven goats and sheep were destroyed
in the same way; of these thirteen were found alive. The Lumbwa were
allin a state of great terror, and weird stories were told of the ‘Gadett’:
how it walked on its hind legs, pulled babies out of huts, and was even
able to killa man, Finally it was tracked to a ravine and killed by the
Lumbwa with their spears. It turned out to be a very large hyena of
the ordinary spotted variety.
It had evidently turned brain-eater
through some sort of madness.


This anecdote can hardly be said to clear up the whole problem of the
Nandi bear. The spotted hyena does not agree with the various descrip-


tions of the unknown animal, nor is it completely proved that the beast
the Lumbwa killed was the real culprit. This theory would imply that
spotted hyenas are often seized with a strange “madness” which drives
them to swallow the brains and spurn the rest of the body. Anyway,
how do they set about trepanning the skulls so neatly?


But the most suspicious thing about the Nandi bear is not the way it


382


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


attacks, but that it attacks at all. Most so-called savage beasts never
attack man unless they are wounded, startled or provoked. I therefore
think it is a safe rule that the more nervous the animal the more dan-


gerous it is. The large carnivores usually take no notice of man, whom


they rightly distrust. If they do charge him deliberately it is in excep-


tional circumstances: usually when they have been starving for several


days because they have been unable to obtain the game that is their


usual diet. Hyatt Verrill observes:


As a rule the man-eaters are old, decrepit tigers or lions which, being
unable to bring down fleet footed, wary, wild animals, are forced to
resort to killing easier prey and find human beings the easiest of any.


More general and serious famine affecting beasts of prey of all ages


—and thus indirectly man who is liable to become their victim—may
occur if disease or intensive hunting makes their normal prey scarce.


Famine may also be seasonal, particularly for the lion in the rainy
season. In dry weather he cannot go for long without drinking and must
always remain close to a water-hole where his prey must also come to
drink. Thus he always has food to hand. But when the heavy rains
begin, little puddles form here and there in the bush, and the herbi-
vorous animals leave their usual dangerous drinking-holes. Now the
lion must hunt for food; and if he is an old solitary male with no family


ties he may wander very far afield. Bad luck in hunting may lead to
long days with little food, and then he becomes a public menace, attack-
ing the lonely traveller or leaping over stockades and killing cattle and
even villagers in their huts. If his first attempts sueceed, this way of life
becomes a habit.


This happens but rarely, and serious naturalists are apt to be sceptical
when an animal is said to be a man-eater. The Nandi bear’s reputation
in this respect is, however, based on unequivocal facts. A. Blayney
Percival, the celebrated game-warden, is responsible for what is perhaps
the only report of a chemosit being killed for its misdeeds: it happened in
the Maraquet district not long before 1914.


It is said that at one time one of these animals was so bad that great
preparations were made to kill it, and at last it was killed by a party of
men who put a dummy man in the doorway of a hut and sat inside and
waited till the animal came and tried to take the dummy;
it was then
shot with arrows.


The following story is more circumstantial: in 1925 a village had
suffered so much from one of these brute’s depredations that the vil-
lagers asked the Government of Kenya for help. They said that it had


383


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


carried off a six-year-old girl one night after having cut a hole chrongh
the mud wall of her hut. What is more it had managed to force a way |
through a thorny hedge 8 feet thick and drag away some calves. Now —
the surprising thing about this is not that it should have carried off a
person or a calf. A large beast of prey can carry a man or even a whole
ox; in fact it is even capable, as many witnesses have affirmed, of leaping
over a 6-foot palisade with such a burden in its mouth! The astonishing
thing is the way the brute reached his victims. Lions and leopards never
try to force a way through the thick and thorny fences round native


cattle compounds because their noses and the pads on the feet are far too
sensitive and vulnerable. They jump over the fence. A brute which
could force its way through such a thicket of thorns must not only have
strong burrowing claws but also an armour of thick hair and hide. Only
a creature like a bear could perform such a feat.


The government official who was sent to investigate these raids has
told the story in Chambers’s Fournal for 1927 in an article signed with
the pseudonym ‘“‘Fulahn,” concealing the identity of Captain William
Hichens of the Intelligence and Administrative Services of East Africa.


Although Chief Kitapmetit Kipet gave such a fantastic description
of the chimiset which was supposed to be to blame, Hichens set to work


as if he were after a real beast.


Kipet informed me that the chimiset seemed to come from a small
forest-clad kopje or boulder hill some five miles from his nganasa.
I
circled that kopje with spearsmen, and, gradually closing in, beat every
bush and twig on it till we got to the summit. We put up baboons,
rock-rabbits, some mongooses, some dik-dik antelopes, a bush-buck
and its does; we put to flight owls, hawks, bats, and guinea-fowls. We
found the lair of a porcupine family and a hyaena hole; we dug both
out. We put up some wart-hogs, and the dogs turned out innumerable
rats, mice, and lizards, and not a few scorpions and snakes. But we
found no chimiset; nor trace of it. Nor did we find a trace of the spoor
of lion or leopard, which might have been the culprits.


I thought of a score of such hunts after the chimiset, all of which had
proved futile, and decided to make quite sure. A huge forest, some
twenty miles square, stretched away from the kopje. I could not search
that forest, but I could make certain if any beast came to the kopje from
the forest and then left the kopje by night for the village.


Around the kopje ran several sandy bush-tracks, which led to water-
holes. Cutting down the bush between, Kipet’s men joined these paths
until they made a sandy track completely encircling the kopje. We
brushed this track clean and smooth, so that even a beetle walking over
it would leave its trail.


Then I went to bed. I had a small khaki-coloured pi-dog named


384


‘


he mandrill may look as savage as a lion. A giant species might be the origin of
the Nandi bear.


a
XS


«A
:


The spotted hyena has bee
blamed for the Nandi bear
crimes.


The ratel (below) which be
comes quite black with ag
has certainly been mistake
for the Nandi bear at time’
Moreover it is a savage an
aggressive beast.


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


Mbwambi with me, a mongrel, but a ferocious, plucky, little beast, and
I tied him up to the door of my tent.


It was well after midnight when he gave a sharp, alarmed, whiny
growl and woke me. But before I could get out of bed the whole tent
rocked; the pole to which Mbwambi was tied flew out and let down the
ridge-pole, enveloping me in flapping canvas. At the same moment the
most awful howl I have ever heard split the night. The sheer demoniac
horror of it froze me still, and not for some seconds did I hear the
clatter of poles in Kipet’s nganasa, which told of his men, having been
aroused, unbarring their hut doors,


I heard my pi-dog yelp just once. There was a crashing of branches
in the bush, and then thud, thud, thud of some huge beast making off.
But that howl! I have heard half a dozen lions roaring in a stampede-
chorus not twenty yards away; I have heard a maddened cow-elephant
trumpeting; I have heard a trapped leopard make the silent night miles
a rocking agony with screaming, snarling roars. But never have I heard,
nor do I wish to hear again, such a how] as that of the chimiset.


A trail of red spots on the sand showed where my pi-dog had gone.
Beside that trail were huge footprints, four times as big as a man’s,
showing the imprint of three huge clawed toes, with trefoil marks like a
lion’s pad where the sole of the foot pressed down. But no lion, not
even the giant 9 feet 44 inches long which fell to Getekonot, my hunter,
at Ussure, ever boasted such a paw as that of the monster which had
made that terrifying spoor.


At the first streak of dawn we followed those tracks; they led to the
kopje. Over our sandy path they showed as plain as the print on this
page; on the farther side of the kopje were more footprints leading to
the forest, where, searching with our hearts in our mouths every day
for a week and more, we found and lost and lost and found them. But
we found no chimiset.


This “terrifying spoor”’ is not at all like that found beside the Magadi
railway, which was undoubtedly that of a plantigrade animal like a bear


or an ape. Captain Hichens’s imprints seem to be those of a digitigrade


oe
aia
O 06,


95. Lion’s footprint
96. Spotted hyena’s footprint
(one-quarter size).
(one-quarter size).


BB


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


animal like a cat, or rather a hyena, since its claws were not retracted.
Obviously these must be due to two different animals. Roger Courtney
in Africa Calling describes some footprints of an alleged Nandi bear
which are more like those of Hichens’s chimiset:


One day, when hunting in the forest, I was shown by a palpitating
game-scout a pair of very peculiar animal footmarks. They were two
enormous pug marks, the size of dinner-plates, in a soft patch of ground.
They were spade-shaped and turned inward. The claws must have
been non-retractile, as I could distinctly see the small cuts where they
had dug into the earth. The fact that they turned inward revealed a
bear-like character; otherwise I would have said that they had been
made by the grandfather of all hyenas.


But, then, a hyena enormous enough to leave footprints as big as
those would have himself been a fabulous beast.


There have been rumours that the Nandi bear has six toes on each
foot—which have helped to discredit it in zoologists’ eyes. This absurd
story is based on imprints with six toe-pads and six claws. In Nature
Parade Frank Lane has published a sketch of one of them, found in the
sand “in dry-season river-bed of Dalumo River, Iyambi.” It is obvi-
ously a composite print made by an animal which normally puts its
hind-feet down on the imprints of its fore-feet.


On one point everyone who has examined a supposed chemosit’s track


is agreed: it cannot be a feline animal with retractile claws.


From all over East Africa and for almost half a century generally
consistent rumours about the beast have come, and still regularly come.


It may even be responsible for the depredations of an unknown animal
in much of north Cape Province and the Transvaal in the thirties.
Captain William Hichens writes in 1937, this time signing his own
name:


No one has seen the animal, but its spoor is known and its sav-
age depredations have caused widespread alarm. The natives call it
the khodumodumo, or “gaping-mouthed-bush-monster.”?
In stealthy
silence, under cover of the darkest nights, this marauder invades the
kraals and farms, clambers over six-foot palisades which pole in the
cattle-byres and stock-pens and then, seizing a sheep, goat, or calf,
leaps back over the fence, to disappear with its quarry.


Its spoor on the kraal pathways and bushveld tracks only serves to
shroud the animal in deeper mystery. Its footprints are “round, saucer-
like spoor, with two-inch toenail marks,’ a pug which has so far
puzzled hunters to identify, since it does not fit the paw of any known
wild beast that raids stock. The khodumodumo’s attacks were especially


386


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


predatory in the Graaffreinet area, where a posse of over a hundred
settlers turned out to hunt the beast down, a large reward having been
placed on its head.


While this may give an indication of the Nandi bear’s area of distribu-
tion, it tells us little about its possible identity. Major Braithwaite and
C. Kenneth Archer, two experienced British settlers in Kenya, are more
helpful in this respect. They were lucky enough to be able to watch
what they thought was a Nandi bear in the tall grass and shrub of the
savannah. At first they took it for a lioness, but when they saw its


profile they got the impression it had a snout. Its head was very large.
At the withers, which were very high, it was about 4 feet 6 inches
high.


The back sloped steeply to the hindquarters, and the animal moved
with a shambling gait which can best be compared with the shuffle of a
bear. The coat was thick and dark brown in colour. ... Finally the
beast broke into a shambling trot and made for a belt of trees near the
river, where it was lost.


Reports were so common during this century that C. R. S. Pitman
could write:


Not long ago there was scarcely a white man in those districts who
had not at one time or another either actually seen the beast or had some
experience connected with it.


Among the naturalists, game-wardens and hunters, many of whom
stated their belief that the Nandi bear existed—whatever its precise
zoological identity might be—were F. C. Selous, a distinguished
naturalist and one of the greatest experts on African fauna, A. Blayney


Percival, late of the Kenya Game Department, and Captain William
Hichens, who quotes a Uganda game-warden as saying “I believe in the
Nandi bear; it may be a giant hyaena; it may be something different
from anything we know,” and himself adds, ““Some fearsome monster,
named kerit, lurks in the forests of East Africa and yet awaits capture and
identification.”


The Nandi bear has even appeared in official publications. The
Report of the Game Department of the Colony and Protectorate of Kenya
for 1932-1934 contains several accounts gathered by the Chief Game-
Warden Captain A. T. A. Ritchie about “‘our old friend the Nandi bear.”
The first comes from Captain F. D. Hislop, District Commissioner of
Kapsabet, and describes a beast which certainly sounds like a bear.


I have to announce that we believe we saw a Nandi bear! Naturally,
I cannot be positive. Just at dusk, we were about half a mile short of


387


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


the point where the Londiani and Eldama Ravine roads fork. Sud-
denly, loping along the right-hand side of the road which is bordered by
forest, we saw a dark grey creature, about three feet high to the back,
round and even podgy, with a small pointed head. It moved on all four
legs, but with a slight pronounced power in the hind legs. It went on
for about fifty yards until it found an opening into the forest and
disappeared.


I am unable to say what it was if not a bear. It was not a hyena or a
baboon—of that I am certain. I have never seen any other animal like
this.
Its whole appearance and action was like a bear, and obviously
not afraid of the car, as it moved quite sedately until it found a chance
to cut into the forest. I really think it must have been the legendary
animal, but of course I cannot assert this as a fact.


The second account comes from Gunnar Anderssen at Kaimosi on
the Zinga Estate and seems to refer to the same animal. One rainy day
he heard his boys shouting:


When I came to see what was wrong I found them still shouting, a
few hundred yards from my house, round a killed forest pig. At the
same time I heard a roar from the forest—not like anything I have ever
heard before. That the pig had been killed by a very powerful animal
could easily be seen, and to judge from the roar he was not very pleased
to be driven off.


I asked the boys to help me to track, but they refused absolutely,
explaining that they would not have anything to do with the “Sheitani”’
as it was translated to me from Nandi language. It was no use me going
alone into the forest, so when the boys had cooled down a bit, I took
their description of the beast, without making any suggestions to them:


“Very big, with long black hair and a long tail.”’
“With long black hair, the tail carried like a dog’s, the head not very
big, but baya sana.”’


Very big and powerful it must have been from the way the pig had
been handled. As regards black hair, we found long black hair lost in
the battle, soft hair: this was not from the pig, which had coarser hair.
The boys could not explain in what way the head was baya sana, but
they all agreed that it was very bad.


I could not get a clear foot-mark in the grass. What I could see
looked very large, something like the mark of an old leopard which could
not draw in his claws properly. The pig appeared to have been killed in
an extraordinary way, as if it had been hit with, say, a log, breaking the
backbone; it had then been turned over and the stomach, heart, etc.,
had been eaten.


I suggested to the boys that it must have been a hyena with longer
front legs than hind legs, but they said no. They knew about the very
big forest hyena, but that hyena was not black, more the colour of my
washed-out corduroys. No: this was the “devil” and they would not


388


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


have anything to do with it. However, they got the pig, and they did
not seem to mind who or what had killed it


As rain started again, I could not follow the tracks to get the foot-
marks on softer ground. This story may sound a bit funny—I think so
myself—but so it happened.


Finally, to complete the record, I shall add the strange encounter
which Charles T. Stoneham tells in his book Hunting Wild Beasts with
Rifle and Camera (1933). He had set up a trading-station at Sotik on
the edge of the Lumbwa Reserve.


My bedroom was a little round hut, some distance removed from the
others. Beside it grew a patch of evergreen bush, behind it the grass
sloped away to a valley wherein a narrow stream gurgled along the
declivities to join the Kipsanoi river, half a mile below.


One night, thinking I heard a noise, I sneaked quickly from my hut
and stood against the wall of it, shaded by the thatched eaves. ..
. Mist
hung over the feathery grasses, pale silver and quiet; there was not a
breath of wind. I saw some beast travelling towards me through the
mist, and I could not think what creature it could be. It was the size of
a lion, but its movements were unlike Simba’s slouching stride. The
grass came up to its belly, its head was held low before its bulk, it
appeared to have an enormous tail. Slowly and quietly it approached,
and I waited, intensely interested, knowing it could neither smell nor
see me. The moon passed behind a cloud; the animal became indistinct
in the mist. When within a dozen paces it stopped, and at that moment
the moon shone out again clear and brilliant.


I received a dreadful shock. The beast was like nothing I had ever
seen or imagined.
It had a huge square head, and the snout of a pig;
its eyes, two black spots, were fixed upon me in an observant stare.
Large circular ears, the size of plates, stood up from its head, and they
were transparent—I could see the grass through them. The creature’s
body was covered with coarse brown hair, its tail was the size of a tree
trunk.


There is an ant-eater in Kenya, a survival of the age when the cave
bear and the woolly rhinoceros roamed the earth, but this beast, though
like to that rare species, was not of it.


Stoneham ran indoors to fetch his rifle, but when he came back he
saw the beast’s hindquarters disappearing into the mist. He did not fire


for fear of merely wounding it and making it dangerous.


When he told his friends about his adventure the next day they all
were inclined to think he had seen the Nandi bear.


But I am inclined to think I saw some weird, hybrid ant-eater, and
am sorry I had not the pluck to go after it and find out all about it.


389


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


That is the chief evidence for the Nandi bear. Now for the experts’
opinions. Blayney Percival writes:


The stories vary to a very large extent, but the following points seem
to agree. The animal is of fairly large size, it stands on its hind legs
at times, is nocturnal, very fierce, kills man or animals.


C. R. S. Pitman, who does not believe that the Nandi bear is an
unknown species, has underlined the contradictions in the numerous
reports he had collected personally:


By day, a dark rufous or tawny-hued creature resembling either bear
or gigantic ape, almost invariably viewed indistinctly at a distance and
usually in longish grass; and by night a long-haired brute having the
appearance of a bear, abnormal hyena or South American giant ant-
eater.


And indeed the beast would have to be Proteus himself in order to
look like all the animals it has been said to resemble: a gorilla, an ant-


eater, a hyena and a bear, and to be black, tawny, red and grey in colour,
sometimes tailless and sometimes with a brush, sometimes earless and
sometimes with distinct ears.


The most obvious conclusion is that it is an animal belonging to one
of the types just mentioned, and that all these puzzling divergences are
due to people observing other animals which have nothing to do with
the question. Let us begin with C. R. S. Pitman’s list and proceed by
elimination. We can discard the giant anteater at once, for it is a spe-


x 1G


97. The aardvark.


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


cifically South American animal, belonging to a group found only in
America. I feel sure that the animal actually referred to by this term


is the aardvark, an African burrowing anteating animal whose Latin
name is Orycteropus and whose English one is the Afrikaans for “earth-
pig.” This animal is very rarely seen, since it spends the day in burrows
under the earth and prowls only at night. It has a pig’s snout and huge


ears. Its skin is usually almost bare with only scattered bristles, though


sometimes it is hairier, especially on the lower part of the body (this is


a distinctive characteristic of the South African species, Orycteropus


capensis, compared with the Central African and Abyssinian, O. aethio-


picus), and then its coarse yellowish-brown to russet hair does remind


one a little of a bear’s. It has a powerful tail, upon which it can lean


like a kangaroo, and often stands on its hind-legs: a second bear-like


feature. And it is often known as an ant-bear. Could the Nandi bear be


an aardvark?


Certainly it is so rare to see one that people might easily be bewildered
by meeting an aardvark. Personally I am almost certain that it was an
ordinary aardvark that Charles Stoneham saw, whatever he may think.
No doubt he had seen this beast only in drawings and photographs, and
in the moonlight and mist it seemed to him even more extraordinary
than it really is. His description is so full of features that betray the
animal’s identity—the pig’s snout, round ears that sometimes hang
down on the side of the head and have skin so thin as to be translucent,
the brown fur, the tail as long as a tree-trunk—that there can be hardly
any doubt. We can therefore dismiss this report.


It is also possible that the aardvark’s footprints may have sometimes
been attributed to the Nandi bear by puzzled witnesses; for when it
stands up on its hind-legs it may put a large part of the sole of its
foot on the ground and leave the marks of five toes with stout claws:
which are actually little pointed hooves with which it digs in the


earth.


Though this elusive and infernal creature (for the infernal regions are
always underground) is treated with superstitious fear by the Watussi


of Ruanda, there is no justification for their fear. The aardvark cannot


be blamed for any bloody depredations; it eats ants and termites, and


has nothing to gain by slaughtering cattle or human beings. It does not


look in the least like most of the descriptions of the Nandi bear. Wil-


liams and Hickes both stress the small ears and inconspicuous tail; and


the aardvark has the thickest tail and most conspicuous ears of any of


the larger mammals.
Corbett is the only witness besides Stoneham to


391


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


describe large ears, but he says the animal he saw was not heavily built
and rather long from hock to foot.
Anderssen’s boys spoke of a long tail, and the “long hair behind” on


Major Toulson’s beast also suggests a tail, but both these beasts were
»


quite black. The mane and large canines of the koddoelo and the little
pointed head of Captain Hislop’s animal do not agree with an aardvark,
which has one habit that nobody has attributed to the Nandi bear.
When it is alarmed it starts digging for all it is worth, sending clouds of
dust flying. Our mysterious beasts have always made off at top speed.
So the Nandi bear is not an aardvark.


It might seem self-evident that the Nandi bear is a bear. Most wit-
nesses compare the chemosit to one, and the Wa-Swahili give it the Arab
name of duba. The zoogeographical argument that bears are conspicu-
ously absent all over Africa is not conclusive, since they are found in the
mountains of Spanish Morocco—or were found there until lately. If
they could reach Africa from Europe before the Straits of Gibraltar
were formed, why could they not continue their journey to Central and
East Africa?


This argument is sound enough, but most of the accounts do not
agree with a bear. Many of them mention a clearly visible tail, and the
others never speak of a stump of a tail, so characteristic of the bear, but
say that it was indistinct or not visible, implying that it could well have
been tucked between the legs. There are also descriptions of a slender
beast, and of one with short legs. And what are we to make of those that


insist that it has a mane and smoother, less hairy, hindquarters? All the
bears, whether long- or short-haired, are remarkably evenly covered
with fur. Moreover, when in a hurry, but not actually galloping, they
adopt a gait which is so characteristic that it is not easily overlooked.
Now although some witnesses have said that it had “‘a gait similar to
that of a bear—a kind of shuffling walk” or “‘a shambling gait which can
best be compared with the shuffle of a bear,” no one has actually said
that it ambled, that is to say that it ran by simultaneously moving both
legs on one side of the body. This is most important, since no ape runs
in this way, and the only carnivores to do so are the bear, the hyena and
the South American maned wolf. That a heavily-built animal should
shuffle or shamble is quite natural, but so would a gorilla, a bear, an old
lion or a wild pig. At one moment I thought I had found an exception
when I read in Geoffrey Williams’s account, quoted in an American
magazine, that the beast “ambled away.” But on checking with the


392


_—


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


original text I found that he had actually written “shambled away.” It


is always best to check one’s references.


The only witness who has described the beast’s gait in detail is Hickes,
who followed it for a good while along the Magadi railway. He says it
“loped off—running with its fore-legs and with both hind legs rising


at the same time.” This is none too clearly put, but it does imply that
when the beast trots or gallops its two hind-feet always leave the ground
together, while its fore-feet do not move together. This irregular gait
in which the fore-legs touch the ground in turn, while the hindquarters
move as a single unit, is like the so-called “‘pithecoid” gallop so charac-


teristic of monkeys in a hurry. The fore-feet always move forward at a
slight angle. Williams’s cousin’s phrase “‘a sort of sideways canter” is a
good description.


This brings us to the next theory: is the Nandi bear an ape? The
negroes of the Mau and Nandi country usually think of the chemosit or


Rerit as a sort of giant ape, and the Wa-Pokomo describe the koddoelo as
an enormous baboon. The beast that the Nandi villagers killed because


it had climbed on the roof of a hut could hardly have been a lion or a
hyena. It sounds more like an ape. Even the white men’s descriptions
often suggest an ape. “In most stories,” Blayney Percival points out,
‘the resemblance to a monkey of sorts is very noticeable, but the fact
that the animal is nocturnal, a point on which all native accounts agree,


at once makes this impossible.”


This a priori argument is not really tenable. Primates as a whole
show a clear tendency towards a nocturnal life, natural enough for such
generally defenceless animals.
The tarsiers and most lemurs have
chosen this life and are partly adapted for it. Among the true monkeys,
there are several species with nocturnal habits, especially in America.
The douroucouli (Aotes) is purely nocturnal. The howlers belong more


to dawn and dusk. And many of the American monkeys may be fond
of excursions at night. I have a little capuchin monkey from Brazil,
which when I am in the south of France enjoys complete freedom and


can if he wishes go and play in the bushes around my bungalow. Very


often he goes out on moonless nights, and although it is far too dark for


me to see him, I can hear him jumping about among the leaves with


perfect confidence. He is usually timid, but at night he is not only not


afraid of the dark, but actually seems to enjoy it, and even to be able to


see clearly.


It would not be so extraordinary if an African ape were to have


393


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


nocturnal habits.1 This may even be the reason why it is unknown to


science.
Hichens writes about this theory:


Some of us who have hunted the brute share the view that it may be
an anthropoid.
Its raids invariably occur on the skirts of forest land,
which might be the haunt of one of the great apes. To those who would
object that the apes are not man-killing carnivores, the answer is that
one is not so sure; the chacma baboon is a desperate ‘carnivore’ and is
a serious menace to sheep-farmers in South Africa, where the baboon-
packs raid the flocks, ripping up lambs with their long-clawed thumbs
and lion-like fangs and carrying off the carcases to their kopje haunts.


It is quite true that most people, even naturalists, have a mistaken
idea of monkeys’ and apes’ diet. A few are strict vegetarians; most are
omnivorous, and prey on such small creatures as insects, lizards, small
birds and rodents. But this is not always so. South American farmers
find capuchin monkeys as troublesome as foxes; if they manage to get
into a chicken-run they slaughter all the poultry, even if they carry off
only a few scraps of the meat. When my own little monkey was only
three months old and spent his days clinging to his mother’s back, he
had already started to slip out between his bars at night and kill pullets,
which he always brought back to his mother in her cage. Unless one
has seen a troop of marmosets ravenously tearing up a bird’s carcase it


is hard to realise quite how savage these attractive little devils may be.


Despite many assertions to the contrary, the gorilla has been proved
to be partly carnivorous.
Colonel C. R. S. Pitman saw one catch a
mouse and skin it neatly before eating it. He says that the gorilla some-
times eats birds and rodents and even small antelopes. Cestoda, the
group of parasitic worms to which the tapeworms belong and which are
peculiar to meat-eaters, have often been found in gorillas’ intestines.”


All the same, a large and bloodthirsty anthropoid ape is a rather ab-
surd notion. The gorilla, despite its enormous strength, is essentially a
peaceful and timid creature, and prudent enough to avoid man and his


1 “Although it is unusual for any of the larger primates to move about after
dark, I once came across a large troop of baboons about half-past eight in the
evening moving in file through long, wet grass. If it had been a belated troop
returning from feeding grounds in the savanna this unusual behaviour would
have been explicable. But as, on the contrary, the troop was moving away from
its customary night quarters in the dense cover fringing a river, I am at a loss to
offer a satisfactory explanation.” —Colonel C. R. S. Pitman.


2 In captivity the gorilla is apt to eat its own dung, often with fatal results.
This tendency to coprophagy may well be due merely to the lack of meat in its
prescribed diet.


394


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


deadly weapons. The French explorer Albert Mahuzier has well ob-
served: “It is very difficult to make contact, since man is very afraid of


gorillas, and gorillas are very afraid of man.”


It is true that in 1920 at Kayonsa an unprovoked gorilla killed a native.
But one cannot be sure that the native did not provoke the gorilla un-
awares by approaching a thicket or a tree in which a baby gorilla lay
hidden; and the gorilla may well be vindictive.
It is a shy beast, less
amenable in captivity than the chimpanzee, but decidedly more intelli-
gent. It might very well revenge itself on men who had killed its mate or


its young. But there is no doubt that gorillas are not in the habit of
attacking men, still less of raiding villages and carrying off cattle. Indeed
such behaviour is quite inconceivable.


One cannot say the same of the Cynocephala or dog-headed monkeys,


like the South African chacma, the Abyssinian gelada or the mandrill of
the equatorial forests. As Captain Hichens has pointed out, they often
attack lambs and disembowel them. They are often even accused of
carrying off children and assaulting women. Reliable nineteenth-cen-
tury observers thought these accusations were well-founded. Brehm
writes that Schimper had assured him that


The hamadryad readily attacks man and even succeeds in killing
him; two old males without the least provocation assaulted some girls
gathering wood and killed them when they resisted. Rippel for his
part considers this hideous monkey among man’s most dangerous
enemies.


Colonel Pitman writes of baboons:


One year, in a part of the Bunyoro District, five native children were
attacked and severely bitten within a few days of each other: two of
them died. .
.
. Children, while protecting crops, are sometimes killed.
The ape’s method of attack is to seize the little watchman in its arms
and then virtually disembowel him with terrible, downward strokes of


its muscular feet.


E. G. Boulenger adds:


So utterly without regard are baboons for native women that in some
remote parts of Natal washing clothes or filling water-vessels can be
done only under cover of an armed guard.


I do not think that baboons attack women from mere lack of “re-


gard,” but from sheer lust. Certainly apes are sexually stimulated by


the sight of women. I have several times seen a young tame baboon,


whose master had brought it to the Mediterranean coast, assault women


who were sunbathing and attempt to abuse them. And it was hardly a


395


98. Reconstruction of a giant baboon.


year old and had not reached the age of puberty! When this happens in
nature, and the monkey is an adult male almost as big as man and almost
mad when in rut, there could obviously be a bloody scene if the victim
tried to resist. A large baboon’s teeth are quite as formidable as a hyena’s


or a leopard’s. It is hardly surprising that even the larger beasts of prey
avoid these quarrelsome and brutal apes and that natives refuse to
venture in the forests where they dwell. Does the so-called “Nandi
bear” agree with the description of any kind of baboon? The koddoelo
certainly does, since the Wa-Pokomo themselves compare it to one. The
long hair on the back and neck where it forms a mane, thicker fore-legs,
long snout, long canine teeth, four powerful claws, short and thick tail:
the picture is complete. Even the baboon’s gait is described exactly: it
can occasionally stand on its hind-legs but it very seldom climbs trees.


What about the beast of the uplands, seen on the Uasin Gishu
plateau and at Magadi, and called chemosit or kerit by the natives? If


396


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


we compare the three best European accounts, Williams’s, Hickes’s and
that of Major Braithwaite and Kenneth Archer, we find they agree


perfectly in the following particulars: }


1. Thick stocky body.


2. High withers, sloping back.


3. Forequarters covered with thick fur, hindquarters smoother and
barer.


. Long rather pointed snout.


. Small ears,


. No visible tail (the mandrill and the drill have tails no longer than
a bear’s).


7. Colour tawny (like a lion or hyena) to dark brown.


Nn
>


These significant features are completed by several details given by
Hickes, who stresses that it was broad across the rump, had a short
neck and “‘stumpy”’ nose, and that the legs were shaggy right down to
the feet which seemed large.


One could hardly wish for a better “‘pen-portrait” of one of the Cyno-
cephala, the dog-headed monkeys which include the gelada, drill and
mandrill as well as the baboons proper. One wonders why Williams
insisted that it was not the least like a baboon. Presumably he had
the ordinary green baboon in mind, and perhaps the beast’s size was the
reason, for he reckoned that it was almost 5 feet high when sitting up.
Hickes thought it was the size of lion which may reach 3 feet at the
withers. Braithwaite and Archer put its height at the withers at 4 feet
6 inches—the height of a deer. The Wa-Pokomo said that their kod-


doelo was about 6 feet long and 3 feet 6 inches high.


The largest known baboon, the gelada (Theropithecus gelada), is no-
where near this size, being no more than 3 feet high whether sitting up


or on all fours. But Schimper affirms that ‘“‘old males may reach the
height of a man” and Colonel Pitman writes:


Several years ago I was informed that an outsize race of baboons
frequented certain parts of the [Mabira] forest. They occurred either
singly or in small parties, were reputed to be nearly the size of a full-
grown man, extremely wary and rarely seen. Further, it was stated that
the attitude of these nasty creatures towards unarmed natives was ex-
tremely truculent and, naturally the local folk were very afraid of them.


1 T am shelving for the moment reports like Major Toulson’s, Captain Hislop’s
and that of Anderssen’s boys, which all refer to a clearly different animal, all


black and with short legs, to say nothing of Corbett’s beast which is different


again.


397


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


I was promised a specimen if one could be obtained. Eventually an
enormous example was collected, but though interesting it proved to
be nothing new, the scientific verdict given at the British Museum
(Natural History) identifying it with Papio anubis anubis—the green
baboon.


Alas, he does not say exactly how “enormous” it was. So, referring
only to known baboons, we can say that the Nandi bear is between
one-and-a-half and two times the size of an ordinary baboon and a
third larger than the giants in the group. It was natural enough for the
witnesses to compare so large a beast to a bear, with which, I think, a
large baboon could easily be confused. Topfel thought that the mandrill
was the Arctocyon or dog-bear of the ancients who believed it was a cross
between the two animals.


Now, while there are no known baboons as large as the “Nandi bear”
—though the last to be discovered, the gelada, is the biggest—they
existed in the past. Palaeontological discoveries have established that in
India there was once a sort of giant baboon, the Simopithecus, which was
twice as high as the present baboons. Moreover Dr Broom has found
remains of giant baboons in Africa itself; and he has given them the


scientific name of Dinopithecus. May not their descendants have given


rise to the widespread legends about the chemosit and koddoelo? At all
events a reconstruction of a giant baboon is extraordinarily like most of
the natives’ and many of the settlers’ descriptions of them. And if such


a beast survived it is easy to see why the chemosit arouses such terror.
The mere thought that there may be a living animal as huge and strong


as a gorilla and as brutally sayage as a baboon is frightening enough.


This theory, which I do not think anyone has put forward before, is
too daring for the sceptical zoologists who prefer the more common-
place explanation of a giant hyena, a familiar animal in Africa. This was
the view of R. I. Pocock, Superintendent of the London Zoo. He has
maintained that the Nandi bear is merely the common spotted hyena
(Crocuta crocuta), which has a head and general outline strikingly like a
bear’s and which moreover ambles like a bear. It is also savage enough
to be the monster.


The spotted hyena is very cowardly, and often shrinks from attacking
herds for fear of their hooves. It usually makes do with carrion. But
carrion is often short where the vultures are always the first on the scene.
Then the starving hyena creeps into the native huts to seize someone
asleep. The children are usually put to sleep in the passage at the en-


398


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST“AFRICAN PROTEUS


trance to the hut, and thus become the hyena’s prey. Natives often bear
the scars of horrible mutilation on their faces, a sign that they were
attacked as children. Like all timid beasts, the hyena is sometimes in-
credibly audacious. Several reliable witnesses have told me that they
have seen hyenas attack people in broad daylight when they were resting


a little way from their party. One day the Mwami of Ruanda’s sister
was travelling in a jeep, the journey was so jolting and hot that she had


to get out into the bush to be sick. Suddenly a huge hyena burst out of


a thicket and attacked her. Luckily there were some crack shots in her


escort and the hyena was stopped dead.


Colonel Pitman has also pointed out that the spotted hyena seems
to grow fiercer with age:


Some of the older animals not infrequently become abnormally large.
Development in size seems to be coincident with increased ferocity.
Tales of ‘“man-killing”’ usually refer to “giant”? hyenas. For instance,
a giant hyena dragged an old woman from a hut in Karamoja, and
devoured her. In the same district another giant marauder killed and
ate a seven-year-old boy, who was sleeping out in the thorn scrub.


The Nandi bear’s fur is sometimes described as black, sometimes as
reddish. Pocock has pointed out that the spotted hyena varies greatly in
colour in the course of its growth; and just as there are white mutations
(albinism) in many mammals, that is to say abnormally coloured off-
spring of normal parents, and black mutations (melanism) of the panther,


so there are red mutations (erythrism) of the spotted hyena, which
Pocock suggests may be the origin of the legend of the Nandi bear.
These mutations are commoner in the north (Somaliland and Sudan)
than in East Africa, where they might be taken for unknown monsters.
Pocock therefore thinks that the red hyena is “the Chemosit, Kateit, and
Gereit of the Mau Escarpment and the Nandi country; the Sabrookoo
of the Bagishu and Sabai of Mt. Elgon; the Engargiya of Buganda and
parts of Bunyoro; the Entarargo 1 of the Kigezi and Ankole,” and so on.
He backs up his argument with a skin sent him from Nyasaland by a
man who thought it came from a Nandi bear. Actually it belonged to


1 The entarago—or ntarago—is quite a different animal from the Nandi bear.
Temple-Perkins (see page 369) has shown that it is an unknown animal of the cat
tribe. Pocock’s error arises from a mistake of Colonel Pitman who thought the
ntarago was a “mysterious hyena-like animal” and that it was responsible for a
freak skull of a hyena shot at Katunguru by Temple-Perkins and for a hyena’s
skin and leopard’s skull which some Kigezi pretended belonged to the local
monster. This seems to be a very common form of joke in Africa.


399


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


an unusually red spotted hyena, and the skull sent with it was that of an
unusually large leopard.


I do not think this skin clinches Pocock’s argument. If he had re-
ceived only the skin one could conclude that some people at least thought
that the red hyena was an extraordinary creature worthy of the name
‘“‘Nandi bear.”? But as it is, all we can say is that Pocock’s correspondent
was either the victim or the author of a hoax. Besides, Nyasaland is too


far from the scene of the Nandi bear’s crimes for it to be responsible


for the skin.


There have been similar hoaxes about most unknown animals. They


are more often the work of some wag trying to confuse the issue than of


a forger trying to make money. Sometimes they even come from a
convinced believer, who, for lack of proof of his sincerity, fabricates


false ones, thus discrediting the well-founded legend he was trying to
prove.


Charles Stoneham tells a story which is much better evidence for the
hyena theory:


In 1930 a man brought me a skull like a hyena’s skull, but of larger
size. He had a farm at Koru, where at about that time cattle and sheep
had been killed by some mysterious agency. The Lumbwa herdsmen
ascribed these deaths to the chemoiset. The farmer had set numerous
traps, and one day, on returning from a week’s holiday, his boys in-
formed him that the marauder had been caught. It was a young che-
moiset, they said. Being unwilling to lay hands on the beast’s body they
had tied a rope to it and towed it away into the bush. There the farmer
found all that remained of the body, and he brought the skull to me.


I am no zoologist, so I turned the skull over to the Game Depart-
ment, with a request for their opinion. They pronounced it to be the
skull of a hyena. A few days later Mr. Leakey dropped in; without com-
ment I showed him the skull. He was puzzled and interested. Accord-
ing to him the teeth were not those of either the striped or the spotted
hyena; he wanted the brains and hair of the beast to send to the British
Museum.


A short while later he wrote to say that the skull was that of a solitary
brown hyena, a species observed in Rhodesia, but never before seen in
Kenya. I communicated with the farmer, and managed to procure some
scraps of hair and a few bones, which were sent off for classification.
After a lapse of months I heard from Mr. Leakey that he had found
other specimens of the same beast, and did not think it much of a rarity.
So once again the trail of the Nandi bear led to an impasse.


The brown hyena (Hyaena brunnea) was described in 1820 by the
explorer and zoologist Carl Peter Thiinberg. It is closely related to the
striped hyena (Hyaena hyaena), and is the same size—smaller than the


400


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta). It can be recognised by its uniform
dark-brown colour, marked only with a few whitish spots on the legs,
and by the length of its shaggy fur, which forms a lighter mane on its
shoulders and falls like a coat on its sides. It is the one hyena massive
enough to remind one of a bear. But its plume of a tail and its parti-


cularly long and upstanding ears make it difficult for one to see how


there could be any confusion.


The brown hyena lives chiefly in South Africa, where it roams at
night on the edges of streams or on beaches. For this reason the Afri-
kaaners call it “strand wolf.” It feeds mainly on crabs and dead fish, but
sometimes attacks young cattle.


The brown hyena is not usually supposed to be found north of the
Zambezi, but its area of distribution seems once to have reached as far


as Kilimanjaro. Thus it is not impossible that there may still be very


rare specimens in Tanganyika and even in Kenya. Naturally the un-
usual appearance of one of these dark-maned hyenas would be most dis-
concerting and liable to produce plenty of fantastic interpretations. And
Stoneham’s story shows that even the natives could mistake a brown
hyena for a young chemosit.


Pocock’s skin and Stoneham’s relics made the Nandi bear a laughing-
stock for a while, and much bitter controversy flew back and forth be-
tween sceptics’ armchairs in London and embattled witnesses in Africa,
for whom Captain Hichens speaks as follows:


As to the oft-repeated suggestion that the beast accounted for by
Africans as a Nandi bear is really no more than a hyena, I have never
been impressed by that explanation which seems to me to be an evasion
rather than an explanation.
Hyenas are as common around most
African villages as rabbits around English villages; their habits, appear-
ance and spoor are thoroughly well known to every villager and to sug-
gest that, not once, but dozens of times in many places, kraalsmen would
mistake a hyena for a Nandi bear is on a par with suggesting that
countryfolk all over England could mistake a rabbit for, say, a fox.


It is quite clear from almost all the descriptions that the beast cannot
be a hyena, unless it is some strange crossbreed with a spotted hyena’s
round ears and an even shorter tail, combined with the brown hyena’s


thick dark fur. The hyena is a digitigrade animal and would find it as


hard to stand up on its hind-legs as a dog or a cat. And a hyena that


stood 4 feet 6 inches at the withers would be an unknown animal as


remarkable as a giant baboon.


Moreover, as Captain Hichens has pointed out, the khodumodumo’s


cc
401


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


method of stealing cattle in the Transvaal would be impossible for a
hyena, which drags its victims. It is as incapable of leaping over a 6-foot
fence with a calf in its mouth as it is of forcing its way through a wall of
thorns. Besides, the hyena is a noisy brute: it wails before killing its
victim and gives piercing cries immediately afterwards.


So the Nandi bear is not an aardvark, bear, known ape or ordinary
hyena. We have been multiplying possibilities without simplifying the
problem. And indeed it is the very quantity of evidence that makes it so
complex, as Blayney Percival implies when he writes in A Game Ranger’s
Notebook (1924):


For many years now I have been trying to discover upon what
foundation rests the native report of an animal called the ‘‘chimiset,”’
said to inhabit the Nandi forests. The more I hear, the more difficult it
becomes to reconcile this creature with any known species. ... Time
will show, no doubt; meantime I do no more than state my belief that
there is an animal of arboreal and nocturnal habit in the Nandi forests
awaiting discovery, description and Latin name.


Earlier, in 1914, when the Nandi bear was much talked of in Kenya,
he had been more sceptical about its existence and positive with his
explanations:
.


Personally, I am quite in the dark about the beast, and am still a bit
doubtful about its existence as a new animal.


During my many years in Africa I have investigated so many stories
of this sort and in the end found that the real thing was something that
would have been easy to identify if it had been seen by a naturalist who
would have noted the more valuable points by which one could have
easily got an idea of what it was...
.


My own view of the chimiset is that it consists of a number of animals.
The chimpanzee as a base, ratel, leopard, lion, baboon, bush pig, and
hunting dog; amongst the natives the stories are, I think, half legendary
and are kept alive by any cases of persons or cattle being killed in any
out-of-the-way manner. Amongst white men on the Plateau or in the
Nandi district any animal that cannot be recognised is apt to be put
down at once to the ‘undescribed’ animal.


But he adds:


The strongest point in favour of there being such an animal is that it
has a native name, and appears to be well known amongst the Nandi.


Certainly his attempt to divide up the settlers’ accounts into different
animals seems sound enough when we compare the various descriptions
of the time. Major Toulson’s and Corbett’s animals are obviously not


402


te
tl
ed
eee


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


the same as Hickes’s. The same animal could not leave plantigrade foot-
prints in one place and digitigrade ones in another. There must be


several quite different animals. Blayney Percival remarks:


I look upon the reports from the Nandi and from Magadi as referring
to totally different animals, and they should not be considered together.


Now he was certainly right in considering the Nandi bear as a com-
posite of several animals. What made him alter his opinion to a declara-
tion of ignorance? The fact that many of the descriptions applied to an
unknown animal, and that other known animals had crept in to blur
the picture. Let us see what these known animals are,


Here I am glad to be able to offer a very pertinent description of
what at first seems to be an unknown animal given me by Georges Sand-


rart, who did some ethnological research in the Belgian Congo when he
was the Resident in Ruanda-Urundi.


In 1936 I was on an excursion on the ridge of the Congo—Nile water-
shed, at an altitude varying between 8,000 and 11,500 feet, where some
of the last patches of virgin forest still survive. One day in broad day-
light about noon I saw a little bear, slightly smaller than a Carpathian
bear, round a bend in the path. I was astounded, so I took great care to
examine it minutely.
Its fur was shining blackish brown and I could
see a triangle of silver hairs on the peak of its forehead. The apparent
absence of tail, the shape of the head, the large snout, the little round
ears, the slope of the back, the relatively long legs, everything about the
animal reminded me of a bear. But a bear in Africa....


He wasn’t dreaming. The late Chief Semu Geshi, who happened to
be with him, confirmed every detail of his description. Another Euro-
pean had seen the animal; and two pygmies had seen one attack a forest-
antelope and furiously try to bite its leg. They called it zsata, or “honey-
eater,” and even produced a skin. It turned out to be an animal that is
rarely met, because it is both nocturnal and burrowing, but which is
well known to zoologists: the honey-badger or ratel (Mellivora ratel),
which G. S. Cansdale says is probably seen less often than any other
small carnivore. All the same it is found all over Africa as well as in
Arabia and India.


The ratel is not strictly speaking a bear, even though it has a similar


head, general shape of the body, thick coarse hair and powerful claws,


and, thanks to its almost plantigrade feet, also tends to stand up on its


hind-legs. It belongs to the closely related family of Mustelidae and is a


sort of plump badger, all black except for the top of the head and the


403


99. When the ratel turns black with age it is very like a bear.


back, which are covered with a clearly defined band of silver hair. As
both its Latin and its pygmy name imply, it is reputed to eat honey.


Was this then what so many people took for a bear? There is no doubt


it is what Sandrart saw (the triangle of silver hair on the forehead is very
significant), but even so he is convinced that it was a giant species, still
unknown to science.


I must admit that for a long time I believed that the ratel was a small
creature, not so big as a European badger, but Sandrart’s account set me
researching, and I was astonished to find that some ratel skins from
Central Africa are as much gs 3 feet 6 inches from the nose to the tip of
the tail (which is quite small and no more than 8 inches long). It is al-
most as big as the smallest of the bears, the Malayan sun-bear.


But if some of the Nandi bears were ratels, why had nobody men-
tioned the conspicuous band of white down the head and back? This
puzzled me for some time, until I discovered that in 1906 Lydekker had
described, under the name of Mellivora cottonit, a West African ratel
which had no silver band and was therefore entirely black. As his
description was based on a single specimen, he suggested that it might
be an individual case of melanism, though this did not prevent him from
describing it as a new species.


We now have proof that in Africa one may meet a little-known animal,
looking very like a small black bear; and this explains some of the de-
scriptions of the Nandi bear. There is no doubt that what Major Toul-


son, Captain Hislop and Anderssen’s boys saw was a black ratel. A


404


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


“round and even podgy” beast, 3 feet long and between 18 and 20
inches high, with short legs and covered with long black hair, a small
pointed head, the tail carried like a dog’s with non-retractile claws—
what else could it be?


Blayney Percival tells how he had to go and inquire in the Sotik
country about an animal very like the Nandi bear. It was supposed to be
fairly large—the size of a pointer—and it stood on its hind-legs and was
very fierce. It turned out when he showed them a picture of the ratel
that this was what it was. I think the ratel may also be the answer to the
problem of the too, an animal Schomburgk heard rumours about in
East Africa, “as big as a goat, with teeth like a dog’s, dark black fur and
an evil character.”


Pursuing the question of black ratels I found that the truth was more
relevant than I had expected. In 1909 Pocock published a note on the
ratels in Africa listing no less than four species, differing only slightly in


size and in the extent of the silvery grey band on the back. Mellivora
leuconata, for instance, had a light strip all along the back, but as it grew
older the hindquarters darkened. In the London Zoo was an old speci-
men with no white except for a crescent on the top of its head, its back
being merely sprinkled with grey. He cautiously added that “It may be
that the datk hue of the dorsal surface is a sign of age,” but did not
draw the logical conclusion that differences were not due to different
species but to different individuals of different ages. Far from it, he pro-
ceeded to describe yet another species, Mellivora signata from Sierra
Leone, on the evidence of a young specimen in which the dorsal patch
was already no more than a crescent on the top of the head.


Soon afterwards Dr F. D. Welch gave a much more detailed account
of the changes of colour which a ratel may undergo. He had observed
the old specimen in the Zoo for more than 12 years and remarks, “It is
now very different from what it was when first observed.” When this


ratel of the characteristic East African species, Melhvora ratel, arrived


at the Zoo in 1890 it appeared to be adult. It was therefore more than
20 years old in 1909 when Dr Welch wrote:


When I first knew it twelve years ago its colour was as follows :—Scalp,
back of neck, and dorsal surface were very pale grey with a few black
hairs scattered at intervals over the posterior half of the back, no black
hairs whatever on scalp, back of neck, and anterior half of back;
this
dorsal patch of grey was very sharply defined from the black of the
under parts by a straight, very distinct line. Tail was quite black on
upper and under surfaces, as I shall remark on later.


405


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


It was then as large as now, and much larger than a female Mellivora
ratel which lived with it many yéars and was adult.


It retained its original colour, not altering in any way, till the begin-
ning of 1907, when the pale grey dorsal patch commenced turning
black, the change being very gradual and evenly distributed over the
posterior half of the back and not in patches, and later on spreading to
the anterior half of the back and neck.


This change went on very gradually, the well-defined margin of the
dorsal grey patch at its junction with the black of the under surfaces and
limbs and tail becoming gradually lost; the black of the under surfaces,
limbs and tail becoming gradually continuous with the new black of the
back, leaving only scattered grey hairs mixed with black where formerly
there was the well-defined line of all grey hairs.


At present all the back is “black merely sprinkled with grey,” as Mr.
Pocock remarks, but on the scalp there are more grey hairs in propor-
tion to black than on the body, and the black of the dorsal surfaces
cannot now be distinguished from the black of the under parts...


Mr. Pocock has suggested senility as the cause of this change, and as
the animal is otherwise in good health, I do not think there is any doubt
on this point.


Almost entirely black ratels may not therefore necessarily belong to a
dubious species (Mellivora cottoni) confined to West Africa, nor need
they be exceptional melanistic mutations. It seems to be quite normal
even for East African ratels (Mellivora ratel) to become black at the end
of their lives, when their size is largest. The largest ratels are therefore
also the blackest, and would naturally not be recognised as the same
animal as the young ratels, which are smaller and strikingly marked.


This does not necessarily mean that Sandrart was wrong in thinking
the Nandi bear to be a distinct species of giant ratel. Dr Welch has
pointed out that the ratel which he watched blackening with age was
much larger than another adult ratel living with it. On the basis of the
measurements of five living animals and 26 skins and skulls, all from
Africa and Arabia, he concludes:


There is in this species considerable range of size, which in my mind
raises the question as to whether the skins hitherto regarded as M. ratel
may not be divisible into two species differing only in size. However,
most of the skulls have no sex stated, so no definite conclusion can be
come to on this latter point, as the male would be naturally larger than
the female skulls.


In short, some descriptions of the Nandi bear may refer either to very
old males of the species M. ratel or to elderly individuals of a larger
species—or rather sub-species, since there is no reason to create a new


406


jt atin
S


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


species on the mere basis of size—which I suggest should be called
Mellivora ratel maxima if its existence is definitely proved.
And there are some fairly trustworthy reports of giant ratels. In 1932


a famous French big-game hunter F. Edmond-Blanc reported in his
memoirs of an expedition in Ubangi-Shari:


The existence of a large ratel was borne out by one I saw; unfortu-


nately I did not have time to fire. I bitterly regretted it because of the
_beast’s size which seemed to me to be really gigantic.


My friend Charles Dewisme has suggested that the legend of the
Nandi bear may be based on two separate animals: the spotted hyena
and the ratel, the hyena’s bloody deeds being attributed to the mysteri-
ous little “bear” which is so rarely seen.
It is natural for any little-
known animal to be blamed for every crime, just as a stranger in a village
is always the first to be suspected.


Patrick Bowen has suggested to Frank Lane that the Nandi bear may
be a scapegoat in a more sinister sense and that native witch-doctors may
well be responsible for the massacres attributed to the mysterious ani-
mal. They are very clever at imitating animals’ cries and making false
tracks as a means of stealing cattle and revenging themselves on their
enemies with complete impunity. Just as in the Belgian Congo and
Nigeria there is a secret society of leopard-men called Aniotos, and in
Europe in the Middle Ages there were men who were werewolves, there
may well be a sect of bear-men, based on Arab folklore, hyena-men, or
even ratel-men in Kenya and Uganda. The Aniotos cover their heads
and backs with leopard-skins and use mummified paws on the end of


sticks to imitate the beast’s tracks. They attack their enemies at night
and maul their necks with gauntlets armed with iron claws, thus pro-
ducing horrible wounds indistinguishable from those made by a large cat.
In the same way they might easily imitate the bear’s method of killing.


This would explain those native descriptions of the chemosit as half-
man, half-bird, with an ape’s head and walking upright. And the foot-
prints like those of an old leopard which could not draw in its claws
properly could well have been made by a lion’s foot stuffed with straw or
sand, or worn on the real criminal’s foot. All this is pure conjecture. But
the terrible atrocities of the Mau-Mau in Kenya have shown the cruel
lengths that the Kikuyu would go to, and make this theory all too possible.


Actually there is no need to consider the ratel as a harmless scapegot
blamed for hyenas’ or witch-doctors’ misdeeds.
It is not always so


407


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


harmless. True, it is fond of honey (like the bear) and also feeds on
small mammals, birds, reptiles and insects (also like the bear). It is one
of the poultry-farmers’ worst enemies. In Algo-abai, where the peas-
ants were battling with it over the eggs their hens had laid, it won the
day by breaking all the hens’ necks one night—there were some 30
of them—and carrying off three to its lair. The pygmies’ report of see-
ing it at grips with an antelope shows that it will attack animals much
bigger than itself. Brehm says that “at the time of rut it is so excited,


so furious, that it will even attack man and bite him savagely.”


Guy Babault, a French naturalist who has been observing the fauna
of Central and East Africa for 30 years, writes of the ratel:


The courage of this little animal is unparallelled. A lion will let a
determined man pass, but not the ratel. When disturbed it will attack
and only retreat in order to return more bitterly to the charge.
It is
wonderfully tenacious and brave. Moreover it is armed with strong
jaws and powerful claws, for it is a burrower that can dig itself deep
earths.


Professor Pierre Grassé notes in his monumental Encyclopédie de
Zoologie that ‘‘Besides honey and brood-comb the ratel eats insects,


small mammals and even small antelopes.”’ Its lust for meat must some-
times be very~-violent, since in India it has the odious reputation of
stealing corpses from cemeteries. It is as gluttonous as the hyena, whose
cowardly thirst for blood often drives it to atiack solitary or sleeping
people.


This behaviour is not surprising. The ratel belongs to a very fierce
family of carnivores. The Mustelidae have not the panther’s or the


tiger’s reputations only because they are smaller. But relative to the


size of their victims, they are really much more cruel, fearless and ag-
gressive than the felines. The wolverine or glutton (Gulo Juscus) of the


arctic, which is no bigger than a large ratel, well deserves its name, since


it lives upon large herbivores like the reindeer and even small elk. The
tiny stoat (Mustela nivalis), hardly 15 inches long, is even more voracious.


It has been known to attack horses and cows and even man, causing
frightful wounds, Nothing can be more sadistic than the stone-marten
(Martes foina), which causes wholesale massacres among the inhabitants
of hen-houses and rabbit-warrens, without the least excuse, since it
carries off only one of its victims. Finally the badger, the nearest ap-
proach to a ratel in Europe, is justly renowned for its courage. I have
even found a case of one attacking a young man. It is described thus
by Jean Mathis, the victim’s father:


408


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


I recently sent my fourteen-year-old son to draw water in a pasture
600 yards from the farm. The boy fell off his bicycle on the way; he got
up unhurt, but was not a little surprised to see a greyish brown animal
charging at him, snarling and showing its teeth. Leaving his bicycle on
the ground, my son took to his heels with the animal just behind him,
climbed over a fence and ran towards a hut where he hoped to take
refuge; but he was still pursued and had to run round the cabin several
times with the beast at his heels. Finally he managed to get hold of a
large stick and to give the animal a heavy blow on the skull. He only
succeeded in increasing its fury and a desperate battle ensued until the
beast was completely stunned.


It was a male badger, about a year old and weighing 16 pounds. In
all my experience of hunting I have never before heard of such a
pugnacious badger.


All of which shows that a large ratel about the size of a wolverine
might well kill pigs, sheep and even cattle; and that it might possibly


kill a man.


Moreover the ratel is one of the few mammals one might suspect of
penetrating a wall of thorns to reach its prey. Its dense fur and a thick
layer of sub-cutaneous fat make it impervious to the stings of wasps and
bees when it raids their nests. Brehm reports that the Indian ratel


prowls round native dwellings at night; it passes through thick thorn
hedges, or burrows an underground passage beneath them.
In ten
minutes it will dig such a passage into the hen-roost which it is raiding.


The African ratel, which is larger and stronger than its Indian cousin,
could well kill much larger prey. But could it carry them off? The
following passage from Frank Lane’s Nature Parade may provide an
answer:


It is an interesting fact that strength in the animal world seems to in-
crease in inverse proportion to the size of the creature. Big-game hun-
ters say that a large carnivore is capable of carrying a full-grown bullock
over a five-barred gate practically without pausing in its stride... But
such a feat is eclipsed by a weasel dragging a hare. Worked out on the
basis of cubic capacity, the smaller animal’s feat is equivalent to a lion
dragging an elephant at five miles an hour.


In its method of killing its prey by a blow with its paw on the top of


the head and then disembowelling, the Nandi bear is much more like


an animal with powerful claws, like the ratel, than one with powerful


fangs, like the hyena or lion. The ratel is therefore perfectly capable of


committing many of the misdeeds attributed to the Nandi bear.


Bears, which are usually peaceable and gentle and live on fruit and


409


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


insects, sometimes become complete carnivores when they are old soli-
tary males, and none but old bears are ever dangerous to man. Might
not the same be true of ratels, whose habits are relatively little known,
but which are closely related and very similar in appearance and
behaviour?


This theory is now a simple demonstrable theorem:
The Nandi bear is described by the Kenya settlers as a small black
bear of bloodthirsty habits. But a dangerous black bear is an altogether
unusual sight in Africa.


When a ratel grows old it changes so much in its appearance and its
nature that it is also a very unusual sight.


Now when an old ratel turns black all over, reaches its full size and
becomes a more bloodthirsty carnivore, it looks and behaves just like


a small black bear.


Therefore the Nandi bear is an old ratel. Q.E.D.


Of course this theorem is valid only if you begin by accepting that the
Nandi bear looks like a small black bear. As I have already shown, the


settlers have often used the name for an animal which seems more like


a giant baboon. Moreover the chemosit or kerit is described by the
natives as a big hairy biped, and the koddoelo as an enormous baboon.
I believe the whole confused question of the Nandi bear was based on
a misunderstanding.


When Geoffrey Williams and his cousin saw a strange animal, which
I think may have been a giant baboon, they compared it to a bear. The
natives to whom they described it claimed to know the beast and to know


it by the name of chemosit, but Williams did not realise that they con-
sidered it to be a sort of devilish ape. When Hickes saw a similar animal
beside the Magadi railway, the previous encounter came to mind, and
word got around that there was a sort of bear in Kenya. At once a whole
string of people, Major Toulson, the Dutchmen on the Uasin Gishu and
several other witnesses who doubtless had met large black ratels, con-
firmed the truth of this rumour, which was supported by the fact that
the Wa-Swahili knew an animal which they called duba from the Arab
name for bear. No doubt this was also the ratel.


Finally some plantigrade footprints were found which might have
been made by a giant baboon, a monkey that sticks to the ground and
has a big toe a little splayed from the rest, by an aardvark, or by a giant
ratel, a beast which is almost as plantigrade as a bear. In any case when
the ratel puts its hind-foot down very close behind its fore-foot, as it


410


|


~


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


generally does, it makes a composite print remarkably similar in shape


to the one discovered near the Magadi railway.


So the picture of the Nandi bear became blurred and confused, and
people began to imagine that any beast they did not recognise must be
the mysterious animal. Corbett, handicapped by having forgotten his
spectacles, was one of these. He describes a not very heavily built ani-
mal with largish ears, not in the least like either a baboon or a ratel, but


| ( ¢


o OU),
eA,
Pe em,


age
a0 00,
O


pee
OCG!
Ot


100. Badger’s footprints. Left: separate prints of fore-foot followed by
hind-foot. Right: composite print formed when they overlap.


which may well have been a Cape hunting dog (Lycaon pictus) or even


a brown hyena. The white spots on this hyena’s limbs might account
for Corbett’s “slight streak of white down the hindquarters.” And, of
course, the settlers who saw an unusually red hyena, or a little-known
brown hyena, added it to the Nandi bear’s confused dossier. Any bloody
raid made by a hyena or other man-eater, and any slaughter of cattle or
men by a “brain-eating” maniac, whoever he may be, would be attributed


to the legendary bear without the least proof. And perhaps witch-
doctors took advantage of this atmosphere of terror to carry out their
own crimes, leaving false clues and further confusing the affair.


The Nandi bear is now a bear no more. It is a whole Apocalypse of
beasts, and an Apocalypse as obscure as St John’s. All the same I trust
I have been able to disentangle the four horsemen: the giant baboon,
the old black ratel, the unfamiliar hyena and the witch-doctor.


Only the first, the chemosit, the Nandi’s terrible two-legged demon
that prowls at night, is a real mystery. Obviously its nocturnal habits
have helped it to remain a mystery. It was for this reason that the okapi


was unknown for so long. And the atmosphere of terror aroused by the


chemosit’s cattle-raids in Kenya did not encourage anyone to capture it


411


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


alive or dead. Even so, attempts have been made. Frank Lane tells of
an enthusiastic hunter who “was so confident of success that he had a
large cage in readiness which required 40 porters to move when empty!”
I need hardly say that his optimism was not rewarded. On the other
hand, K. R. Williams, who lived in Uganda, is said to have killed a
young chemosit by accident with some poisoned meat intended for
hyenas. One day when he went to examine his traps he found a strange
beast lying stiff and dead beside his poisoned bait. It was much larger
than a spotted hyena, though it had the same dirty yellow fur. Its head
was just like a bear’s. An old witch-doctor said it was not a hyena but a
beast whose name he did not know. Alas, while Williams went back to
his camp to get something to skin it with, real hyenas arrived and carried
off this specimen which might have solved one of the most puzzling of
zoological mysteries.


Scientists have put forward the most daring theories in their attempts


to explain the Nandi bear. In 1923 Dr E. G. Wayland, Director of the
Geological Survey of Uganda, made a sensational discovery on the
Bunyoro side of Lake Albert in a very recent stratum, probably dating
from the Pleistocene. This happened on the scene where the engargiya
(the local version of the chemosit) had committed its crimes. The bone
that he disinterred was an incomplete phalanx belonging to a member of
one of the strangest groups of mammals the earth has ever known, the
Chalicotheria or Ancylopoda.


These Perissodactyls, which are distantly related to the horses, were a
headache for the palaeontologists for a long time, because, while they
have an ungulate’s skull and teeth, their feet have three toes armed with
formidable claws. When the first sparse remains of these beasts were
discovered in 1823, Cuvier attributed the feet to “‘a giant pangolin” and
the teeth to some sort of Perissodactyl: according to his Law of Correla-
tion between the Organs an ungulate with claws was an impossibility,
and his word remained law until the day when a whole skeleton was
found. It showed that the pangolin’s feet really did belong to an ungu-


late, despite the Father of Palaeontology’s edicts.


It is now thought that the Chalicotheria used their claws to tear
down the leaves which were no doubt their food.


The remarkable thing about Dr Wayland’s find was that it was the
first time that remains of one of the Chalicotheria had been dug up in
Africa. Until then several species had been discovered in Europe, Asia
and even in America, but never in Africa.


When the precious phalanx reached the British Museum of Natural


412


THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST AFRICAN PROTEUS


History, it was identified without any possibility of doubt by the great
expert Dr Charles William Andrews, who was struck by the apparently
recent date of the fossilisation. He also recalled that remains of Chali-


cotheria had been found on the island of Samos, where they were


ae ge


101. Reconstruction of the Chalicotherium by Professor
Othenio Abel, 1920.


associated with those of the Samotherium. They had shared the same
habitat as this Greek okapi, so might they not also have a living repre-
sentative hidden in the African forests?


These clawed ungulates, with their short hind-legs and very sloping
back, their heavy head and short tail, must have been very like a hyena
in outline—but a hyena as big as a horse. Dr Andrews therefore won-
dered whether some belated Chalicotherium might not be at the bottom
of the persistent rumours in Africa about the so-called Nandi bear.


Of course this indisputable vegetarian could not be saddled with the
crimes attributed to the chemosit—which could often be due to spotted
hyenas. But there is no doubt that if a Chalicotherium were clad in a
furry coat—which is pure supposition—it would agree perfectly with


413


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


most witnesses’ descriptions. And that is all that one can say for the
moment.


Science is a long way from officially adding the Nandi bear to the list
of African fauna. We have only the most dubious remains of it. Ivan T.
Sanderson says that in the British Museum of Natural History there is a
piece of fur covered with long brown hair which may come from the
animal about which arm-chair experts are so sceptical, but whose exis-
tence it is rash to deny in many villages in Kenya.


414


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN


Mngwa, the Strange One


At night all cats are grey.
French proverb.


IT is dawn in a small village on the coast of Tanganyika. Suddenly the
silence is broken by a woman’s shrill scream. On the still-fresh sand in
the market-place lies a shapeless heap of flesh, the unrecognisable body
of a man, ripped and pounded to mincemeat by some incredible killing-
machine. The scavenging birds fly off their carrion, and one by one the
villagers gather round in a circle, silent until one of them notices a few
greyish hairs among the drying blood and exclaims: ““Mngwa.”


The mngwa is the most feared of all Africa’s mysterious beasts, al-
though the whites do not know it at all, and even to the blacks it is largely


a mystery; for its name comes from the Kiswahili mu-ngwa, which
means “strange one.” East African settlers often confuse this animal,
which the natives also call munda, with the Nandi bear. But the terrors
of Africa do not all come in one shape. Whereas the chemosit is a lum-
bering beast reminiscent of a bear or a huge baboon, the mngwa is dis-
tinctly feline, a silent machine with muscles like steel springs, control-
ling an armoury of teeth and claws. And while the chemosit’s misdeeds
occur all over the interior of East Africa, the mngwa is found only along
the coast of Tanganyika. If the »mgwa can be compared to any unknown
animal in the uplands it is to the ndalawo of the Uganda forests, a savage
man-killing carnivore, which is said to be the size and shape of a leopard,
but with black fur on its back, turning to grey beneath its body. The
mngwa is supposed to be larger. The natives who have seen it say that it


is as big as a donkey and striped with grey like a tabby cat. It may seem
extraordinary that Africa should conceal an unknown feline the size of
lion, and Captain William Hichens writes:


It can be said that such a beast is “impossible’’; but, having trekked
many a long mile in its reputed haunts and helped to patch up more


415


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


than one of its mangled victims, I am convinced that some beast an-
swering to the mngwa’s description does lurk in the dense jungle which
fringes parts of this coast. Patches of this dark jungle-growth have not
been trodden by human foot for centuries, as may be judged from the
fact that a large town of ruined stone mansions has stood in the bush
not an afternoon’s car-drive north of Mombasa, for over five hundred
years, and was utterly unheard-of until rediscovered about four years
ago [i.e. around 1933].


The mngwa appears in many Swahili songs and tales. Hichens quotes


a war-song dating from about I150 A.D.


Sikae muyini kewa kitu dunt
Nangia mwitunit haliwa na mngwa
(I dwell not in the city to become a worthless idler,
I plunge me in the forest to be eaten by the mngwa!)


From the legend of the Sultan Majnin quoted by Edward Steere in


his Swahili Tales, the beast seems to perform the same function in
folklore as dragons did in Europe in the Middle Ages.


One day the Sultan’s cat escaped and slaughtered its master’s poate
The Sultan’s soldiers asked him if they might kill the cat, but he re-
plied: ‘““The cat is mine, and the poultry are mine.”


The cat went on to eat sheep and goats and, presumably growing
larger and stronger on this diet, soon was eating cows, horses and
camels. But each time the Sultan replied that the cat as well as its prey
were his, so there was no occasion to kill the cat—until the day when the


cat devoured three of the Sultan’s sons. Then he changed his tune: “It


is no longer a cat,” he said; “its name is munda.”


The Sultan’s seventh son was a wily and fearless hero. He decided to
seek out the monster and kill it. He killed a large dog and came home
singing:


Mamé wee, niuldga
Nundd mla watu
(O Mother, I have killed
The nunda, eater of men.)


But his mother disillusioned him, and he proceeded to kill a civet, a
zebra, a giraffe, a rhinoceros and an elephant, one after the other, think-
ing each time that he had killed the munda. And each time his mother
told him his mistake.


At last, after announcing that he would not return without the nunda’s
body, he set off into the forest with his servants. And one fine day he
saw the monster,


“This must be the nunda,” he said. ‘““My mother has told me that its


416


ve
a
alae


eh
Ai


MNGWA, THE STRANGE ONE


ears are small and these are small; she has told me that the nunda is
broad and not long, and this is broad and not long; she has told me that


it has two blotches like a civet, and this has two blotches like a civet; she
has told me that its tail is thick and this tail is thick; and all the peculiari-


ties she told me of are here.”


Convinced that this time he was not mistaken, the young man shot the
monster with his gun. When he came back his mother greeted him
singing:


Mwanangu, ndtyiyi
Nundd mla watu.
(O my son, it is he
The nunda, eater of men.)


The story ends in the usual way: the youngest son inherits his father’s
kingdom, marries a fair wife and enjoys a long life much loved by his
people.


The moral of this interesting legend might well be: Never mistake a
nunda for any ordinary creature.


What is a nunda or mngwa? Until the 1920s it was thought to be quite
imaginary, but then, as Frank Lane remarks,


a series of events took place in some of the fishing villages on the coast
of Tanganyika which brought the nunda from the realm of native fan-
tasy to that of Government reports.


One of these villages was Lindi where Captain William Hichens was
Native Magistrate, and where he tells us that the following events took
place in 1922:


It was the custom for native traders to leave their belongings in the
village market every night, ready for the morning’s trade; and to pre-
vent theft and also to stop stray natives sleeping in the market place,
an askari or native constable took in turns with two others to guard the
market on a four-hour watch.


Going to relieve the midnight watch, an oncoming native constable
one night found his comrade missing. After a search he discovered him,
terribly mutilated, underneath a stall. The man ran to his European
officer, who went with me at once to the market. We found it obvious
that the askari had been attacked and killed by some animal—a lion, it
seemed.


In the victim’s hand was clenched a matted mass of greyish hair, such
as would come out of a lion’s mane were it grasped and torn in a violent
fight. But in many years no lion had been known to come into the
town.


We were puzzling the problem at the boma next morning when the
old Arab Liwali or native governor of the district hurried into our office


DD
417


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


with two scared-looking men at his heels. Out late the previous night,
they said, they had slunk by the market-place lest the askari should see
them and think them evil-doers; and as they crept by they were horri-
fied to see a gigantic brindled cat, the great mysterious nunda which is
feared in every village on the coast, leap from the shadows of the market
and bear the policeman to the ground.


The Liwali, a venerable and educated man, assured us that within
his memory the nunda had visited the village several times. It was an
animal, not a lion or a leopard, but a huge cat as big as a donkey and
marked like a tabby. I had heard this tale, and had put it down as silly
superstition, but the Liwali’s assertion put a different light on things.


That night we kept watch with two armed askaris at the market:
nothing happened. On parade next day we read the native constable a
lecture on the stupidity of supersitions.


It seemed that we were slightly premature. That same night another
constable was torn to pieces, and clutched in his hands and scattered
about the buckles of his uniform was more of that grey, matted fur...


The native constables refused to mount watch at night, even though
the guard was doubled, and no doubt had some pretty caustic things to
say among themselves about the stupidity of the white man’s scepticism.
All the same Hichens was still convinced that the culprit was a lion. He
sent the bunch of grey hair, which he thought must have been torn out
of the mane, to headquarters for an expert opinion. The reply was: “It
was a fur and not a hair as you state: probably cat.”


For a month the mngwa kept up its terrible depredations in the coastal
fishing villages and every attempt was made to kill it. Pits, traps and
poisoned meat were set in its way. Armed police patrolled the district.
A few cautious sallies were even sent into the skirts of the forest. But
the beast went on with its slaughter unseen and untouched. Then as
suddenly as they had begun the raids ended—but not for good. Years


later they began again, and this time Hichens was less sceptical of the
native “superstition.” In 1937 he wrote:


Not long ago a man was brought in to me at Mchinga (a small Tan-
ganyika coastal village) on a litter and terribly mauled by some great
beast. He said it was a mngwa, and as he himself was a brave and skilful
native hunter, who had often tracked down lions, leopards and other
“killers’’ with me and other white men, why should we suppose that in
this case he mistook a lion or a leopard for some other beast? He had
nothing to gain by telling me lies; on the contrary, as a hunter he
depended for his livelihood on being absolutely truthful and trust-
worthy. ...


Nor is the African native a fool in the ways of the bushveld and its
beasts; he does not assert that a beast is a mngwa when any old woman


418


Oe
> 4
elt
hd)
oe
eee


MNGWA, THE STRANGE ONE


in the kraal could tell by a glance at its spoor or by the way that it
attacked that it is a lion, a leopard or a hyaena. Native hunting lore
clearly distinguishes the bush beasts. One well-known hunting-song
tells of the simba (lion), msui (leopard) and the mngwa all in one verse,
plainly showing that there is no confusion in the native mind between
these three great carnivores.


Even Patrick Bowen, who was so sceptical of the Nandi bear, attribut-
ing its misdeeds to witch-doctors, was very positive about the mngwa’s
existence, because he saw its spoor after a raid in which a little boy was
carried off by the beast. Bowen and another hunter went to the village
where the raid had taken place and followed the culprit’s tracks. At


first he thought it was a lion, but eventually the track crossed some hard
wet sand, where the spoor was exceptionally clear, and then there was
no doubt that it was not a lion. “The spoor we were following,” he told
Frank Lane, “appeared to be that of a leopard as large as the largest
lion.” The beast’s hairs, found on the stakes where the mngwa had
forced its way into the kraal, were brindled and quite different from a
leopard’s.


And that is all we know about the mngwa. What are we to make of it?
It would not be the first strange and unknown feline animal to be dis-
covered in Africa in our time. The story of the msui-fisi is most instruc-


tive in this respect. Alarming tales about this beast, whose name means
*“‘hyena-leopard,” have long been told in Rhodesia, where the natives
believe it is a cross between these two carnivores. It is supposed to look


like a leopard, but it is striped with black and white like a striped hyena
and its claws are not retractile. As one might expect of such a hybrid,


it is extraordinarily swift, crafty and ferocious.
It always attacks at
night, forcing its way through the gates of cattle-kraals or between the
branches that form their roofs, turning them into a slaughter-house and
always carrying off a goat or a sheep. As usual, the whites disbelieved
these tales and thought them mere superstitions.


Then one day in 1926 Major A. L. Cooper saw a most unusual cat-like
beast near Salisbury in Southern Rhodesia and immediately shot it. It
proved to be a strange animal very like a cheetah but covered with fur


as thick as-a snow-leopard’s and marked with spots which ran together to
form stripes. Cooper was puzzled by the beast and wrote to the Field
(October 1926) suggesting it might be a cross between a leopard and a
cheetah. Then other specimens were obtained; they all had non-retrac-


tile claws—a feature peculiar to the cheetah—and there was now no
doubt that they belonged to a new variety of cheetah distinct from the


419


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


one species, Acinonyx jubatus, found in both Africa and Asia. R. I.
Pocock, the famous British zoologist, baptised it Acinonyx rex—or, in
plain English, king cheetah—remarking that it was “most extraordinary
that so large and distinct a species should remain for so long unknown.”


It is not at all extraordinary. As we have seen, it has happened dozens
of times; and it will go on happening so long as the whites go on thinking
the people they are apt to call “savages” are liars or fools.


Nevertheless it is by no means proved that the king cheetah is a new
species. Many zoologists think it may merely be a matter of individuals
with abnormal markings. From an evolutionary point of view, the
spotted coat of many felines derives from a primitive striped coat; the
spots are due to the stripes breaking up. In domestic cats one can some-
times see several intermediate stages between spots and stripes all in the
same litter. In the spotted species of felines stripes may reappear as a


result of atavism in certain individuals. Thus several very rare cases of
striped leopards have been described, and there is no doubt that they
belong to the Known species.


It is therefore not impossible that striped cheetahs may also be mere
abnormalities. The fact that the few known specimens all come from
the same area does seem to contradict this theory. But there could well
be ecological reasons which favoured these abnormal offspring, or these
abnormalities could be connected with the genetical ancestry of a group
of animals in a confined area. For instance black panthers are fairly
common in Indonesia but very rare in Africa.


The reader may wonder whether the legend of the mngwa may not


also be based on abnormally coloured individuals of a known feline
species. It is possible, but it is hard to see how the odd brindled coat of
the “strange” beast could be an individual variation of lion or leopard.
The mngwa is much more likely to be an unknown species than the


nsui-fist.


Perhaps the best observation is yet another line of Swahili, which seems


to have been made by some negro Hamlet to a no less black Horatio:


Si taajabuni, waana Adanu, mambo yalio duniani
(Do not wonder, O sons of men, at the things which are in
this world.)


CHAPTER NINETEEN


The Little Hairy Men


Up the airy mountain
Down the rushy glen
We daren’t go a-hunting
For fear of little men.
WILLIAM ALLINGHAM.


TERROR is more dreadful when it wears a human face. The werewolf is
more fearful than any ordinary wolf, since it is a man turned into a wolf.
The most terrifying monsters of antiquity had human features: the
Cyclops, the Sphinx, the sirens, the Gorgon, the manticora and the in-
numerable host of ghouls, vampires and harpies. The most successful
horrors manufactured by the film industry, Frankenstein’s monster, Mr
Hyde, Dracula and the Phantom of the Opera, all have human faces. It
may seem paradoxical that we should be most frightened by something
most like ourselves. But while mere brutality is the act of brutes, evil is
the prerogative of man.


This explains why the Nandi make their most feared animal, the


chemosit, so man-like—while on the other hand the man-like anthropoid
apes are unduly dreaded as ‘‘man-faced monsters.” In the areas where
they live they are often feared by the natives, and credited with the most


evil instincts; naturalists and explorers are usually powerless when the
natives are too frightened to help. And of course these great apes’ in-
telligence enables them to elude our attempts to observe or approach
them, which also helps to prolong our ignorance, thus giving rise to
much confusion.


The mountain gorilla, which is the largest of all, the pygmy gorilla,
which has never been observed in nature and of which we have only a
few skins and skeletons, and the pygmy chimpanzee were still unknown
in the last century. So it is not impossible that Africa still hides some
anthropoids unknown to science.


421


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


By far the most mysterious of African tales about man-faced monsters


are those about the agogwe, little hairy men, barely 4 feet high, which
walk on their hind-legs. Captain Hichens, whom I have had several
occasions to quote, tells how:


Some years ago I was sent on an official lion-hunt to this area [Ussure
and Simbiti forests on the western side of the Wembare plains] and,
while waiting in a forest glade for a man-eater, I saw two small, brown,
furry creatures come from the dense forest on one side of the glade and
disappear into the thickets on the other. They were like little men,
about four feet high, walking upright, but clad in russet hair. The
native hunter with me gazed in mingled fear and amazement. They
were, he said, agogwe, the little furry men whom one does not see once
in a lifetime. I made desperate efforts to find them, but without avail
in that wellnigh impenetrable forest. They may have been monkeys,
but, if so, they were no ordinary monkeys, nor baboons, nor colobus,
nor Sykes, nor any other kind found in Tanganyika. What were they?


When he made inquiries in the neighbouring villages, the natives told
"him the strangest stories about the agogwe: if you put a large gourd full
of ntulu beer and a bow! of food in the grain plantations, these little men
would collect these gifts and come and weed and hoe at night to show


their gratitude. ‘““That,”’ remarks Hichens, “I can well believe, is myth;
but my little brown men were real enough.”


Personally I find this legend disturbing, to say the least. It is like
those in northern Europe about those elves called leprechauns in Ire-
land, brownies in Scotland and mutons in Scandinavia. Unless they are


all based on authentic and similar facts it is hard to see how they could
have arisen independently in countries as far apart as northern Europe
and East Africa. And as to these facts, let me recall the discovery at the
end of the last century at Schweizersbild near Schaffhausen in Switzer-
land, of bones of tiny men, pygmies of the Later Stone Age. Kollmann,
who examined the bones, maintained that they were certainly not patho-


logical dwarfs. James Geikie, the Scottish geologist, has written:


It is possible, as Dr, Ntiesch suggests, that the widely-spread legend
as to the former existence of little men, dwarfs, and gnomes, who were
supposed to haunt caves and retired places in the mountains, may be
a reminiscence of these Neolithic pygmies.


But that is another story.
The East African leprechauns seem to be more than a remini-
scence. S. V. Cook wrote as follows in the Journal of the East Africa and
Uganda Natural History Society in 1924:


422


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


Fifteen miles east of Embu Station there rises from the Emberre
Plains the lofty hills of Kwa Ngombe, nearly six thousand feet high.
They are inhabited, the Embu natives say, by buffalo and a race of little


red men, who are very jealous of their mountain rights. Old Salim, the


interpreter at Embu, tells mé with great dramatic effect how he and
some natives once climbed to near the top when suddenly an icy cold
wind blew and they were pelted with showers of small stones by some


unseen adversaries. Happening to look up in a pause in their hasty re-


treat, he assures me that he saw scores of little red men hurling pebbles
and waving defiance from the craggy heights. To this day even the


most intrepid honey hunters will not venture into the hills.


Cook naturally disbelieved this story and thought it no more than a
charming fairy tale. But Hichens’s report puts it in a different light.
After all the Kwa Ngombe hills are only 350 miles north-east of the
Ussure and Simbiti forests.


In support of Hichens’s story, Cuthbert Burgoyne wrote a letter to
Discovery, in which it had appeared. This was published in a subsequent
issue, and the gist is as follows:


In 1927 I was with my wife coasting Portuguese East Africa in a
Japanese cargo boat. We were sufficiently near to land to see objects
clearly with a glass of twelve magnifications.
There was a sloping
beach with light bush above upon which several dozen baboons were
hunting for and picking up shell fish or crabs, to judge by their move-
ments. Two pure white baboons were amongst them. These are very
rare but I had heard of them previously. As we watched, two little
brown men walked together out of the bush and down amongst the
baboons.


There were certainly not any known monkey and yet they must have
been akin or they would have disturbed the baboons. They were too
far away to see in detail, but these small human-like animals were
probably between four and five feet tall, quite upright and graceful in
figure. At the time I was thrilled as they were quite evidently no beast
of which I had heard or read.


Later a friend and big game hunter told me he was in Portuguese
East Africa with his wife and three hunters, and saw a mother, father
and child, of apparently a similar animal species, walk across the
further side of a bush clearing. The natives loudly forbade him to
shoot.


Now there is no known ape, even among the anthropoids, which
normally walks upright on its hind-legs. While a monkey may stand up


on its hind-legs for a moment, the position is unusual, if not uncom-


fortable. In fact only the gibbon, which is found only in the Far East


and the Malay archipelago, is a biped, its long arms acting as balancing


423


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


rods; but it is specially adapted to swinging from its arms in trees and
rarely descends to the ground.


Perhaps the agogwe are therefore really little men. Their description
seems at first sight to apply pretty well to the African pygmies. Pure-
blooded pygmies are never more than 4 feet high, and their bodies are
not so smooth as those of the other Africans. Their skin, sometimes very
dark and dull, but more generally a reddish or yellowish brown, is
covered with yellow down, especially on the back, arms and legs. Their
short and woolly hair is a dark rusty brown. Their arms are relatively
long and their legs short, like those of some monkeys.


It may seem odd that these little men should live on good terms with
baboons—but it would not be miraculous. If all wild animals run away
from man, it is man’s fault, since he cannot see a wild animal without
using it as a target. But in uninhabited countries, like the Antarctic,
we find that seals and penguins and many other animals can be man’s
neighbours without being afraid or hostile. The same is true in Bud-
dhist lands where all animals are sacred.1 Some supposedly savage
beasts even seek man’s company, and it was only after much treachery
on man’s part that he broke off relations with the puma, which the first


travellers called el amigo del Christiano, the Christian’s friend.


It would not-be so very extraordinary to find unknown tribes of pyg-
mies in Tanganyika or Mozambique, where there is thick forest, which


is the pygmies’ favourite habitat. Driven southward and eastward by
the Masai, they could easily have reached the great lakes.


Georges Sandrart who used to be the Resident in Ruanda-Urundi has
suggested to me that the little men could equally well be full-blooded
Bushmen, who are hardly taller than the pygmies, varying in height
between 4 feet 8 inches and 5 feet 2 inches. Their skin is the colour of
light tan leather, much lighter than the rest of the Africans. It is true
that today pure-blooded Bushmen are confined to the Kalahari Desert,
driven there by the Kaffir tribes. But they once covered a very large area
and many tribes know them. The Zulus call them Aba-twa, the Bechu-
ana Ba-roa and the Hottentots Saan. The influence of their language is
found in place-names all over Africa south of the Zambezi. Sir Harry
Johnston has even found their characteristic stone implements farther


1 “One of the charms of this strange country is the friendly terms on which
the Tibetans live with wild animals; which are of course never hunted in
Buddhist countries. Riding along on a pony one often got quite close to them— .
hares, marmots, foxes, otters, wild asses, and once even a magnificent leopard;
homo sapiens did not worry them unduly, for they had been taught no reason to
fear him.”—André Migot in Tibetan Marches.


424


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


north at the northern end of Lake Nyasa and even at the southern tip of
Lake Tanganyika. The stones, rounded in a special way and pierced
with a hole to take a stick, were used by the Bushmen to dig up the wild
roots which are part of their food. These stone-age men rarely build a
hut and prefer to live in holes dug in the ground or in natural caves; their
habits in fact agree very well with the description of little men living in
complete savagery.1


It is easy to see how one party of Bushmen could have taken refuge in
the forests of Mozambique and Tanganyika while another went to the
Kalahari Desert. But their very bare and quite hairless skin makes
them poor originals for the agogwe—hairy little men. In any case the
East African negro traditions make a clear distinction between the pyg-
mies and these small bipeds which they think are nearer monkeys. Here
again I must quote Roger Courtney’s guide, Ali: ““But have you heard,”
he.asked his master, “of the little people who live on the Mau—small
men, who are less men than monkeys? Less than shenzi,’ these little
men, and almost monkeys in their lives and ways.” And he went on to


tell how his own father, who was driving his sheep to pasture on the
slopes of Mount Longenot, fell into the hands of these gnomes when he
went into a cave, following the trail of blood left by one of his cattle that
had been stolen. He was stunned from behind, and when he came round
he found he was surrounded by strange little creatures. ““The Mau men
were lower even,” he told his son, “‘than those little people of the forests
[the pygmies] for, though they had no tails that I could see, they were as
the monkeys that swing in the forest trees. Their skins were white,
with the whiteness of the belly ofa lizard, and their faces and bodies were
covered with long, black hair.” To his great surprise the shepherd
noticed that his spear was still lying at his side. “The Mau men who


are so nearly monkeys did not know what was the spear. It is possible
they did not know I could have fought with it and killed many of them.”


This may be only a legend, or rather a tale based on much-distorted


fact. Obviously the Mau men with their white skin and black hair hardly
agree with the brown or reddish agogwe, but it has been found time and
again that African legends contain a grain of truth. Some other much


1 Jacques Mauduit, who went on the Panhard—Capricorne expedition to the
Kalahari Desert, reports that “‘an old Bushman said that he was able to under-
stand the baboons’ present language.” This would imply neighbourly if not
friendly relations between Bushmen and baboons.


2 Wild men. Just as the Greeks thought all foreigners were barbarians, the
African tribes think outsiders must be more primitive than themselves.


425


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


more detailed reports from a part of Africa about 3,000 miles from the
agogwe country may be more helpful.


In the Ivory Coast, almost at the opposite end of Africa, there is a
legend of reddish hairy dwarfs identical in every respect with that in
Tanganyika, as I learn from private information kindly supplied by
Professor A. Ledoux of the Faculty of Science of Toulouse University.
In 1947 he was the head of the Zoological Department of the Institute
of Education and Research at Adiopodoumé, which was then being
formed 12 miles from Abidjan.


One evening a young African who worked in his laboratory came and
saw him after dinner and went rather furtively about asking him the
simple question whether there were pygmies in Africa. The professor
told him that they were found in Central and Equatorial Africa and lent
him a book on the subject. All the same he was puzzled at his con-
spiratorial manner and asked him why he wanted to know. Because, the
African replied, one of his colleagues in another scientific department of
the Institute had seen one not far away on the previous day.


The professor raised his eyebrows.
“A pygmy, here?”
“Yes, about 500 yards from here.”
The professor nearly fell out of his chair in surprise. The Institute
was surrounded by forest, but though it was thick in places it was very
well known and natives were constantly passing through it. The story
seemed most suspect.


“Why didn’t your friend come and tell me at once?” he asked suspi-
ciously,
:


The young man explained that since the whites disbelieved the
rumours about pygmies in the neighbourhood his friend had been loath


to be laughed at or thought to be mad. But he knew the man well
enough to know that he had not made it up, so he decided to make in-
quiries for him himself.


Professor Ledoux was more and more intrigued and insisted that the
eye-witness should come and see him. He promised that he would not
make fun of him and would not tell anyone of his story.


The next day [the Professor tells me] I had a visit from the boy re-
sponsible for the observation. He was well-educated and had a certifi-
cate for primary studies. I asked him about the circumstances in which
he saw the “pygmy.”


It had happened near the Meteorological set when they were taking
their daily readings at 8 o’clock in the morning. Among the roots of a


426


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


silk-cotton tree [Bombax] there suddenly appeared a little man with
long reddish fur and long hair on his head—“same like white man”—
but also reddish.


At once the little red man and the large black one took to their heels
in opposite directions. For, according to the legends, the little forest-
men brought bad luck. You only saw them once in a lifetime and you
had to be alone.


I went to the place with my two informants. It lay in the shadow of
thick forest, but was not too overgrown since the silk-cotton tree grew
near a path. It was very likely that if there had been anything there it
would have been easy to see.


I asked to be informed at once if a similar meeting occurred again,
but this never happened.


Professor Ledoux admits that he was then very incredulous.
It
seemed unthinkable that within 12 miles of a big town like Abidjan, and
500 yards from huts inhabited by six Europeans and some 300 Africans,
there could be unknown creatures in forest which though thick was far
from virgin. Moreover the African who claimed to have seen the mys-
terious pygmy did not come from the Lower Ivory Coast but from the
Middle Coast, which is wooded savannah country. Perhaps the great


forest, which is most impressive, had over-excited his imagination. And
in his solitary walks in the forest the professor had often put up bush-
buck. If the African had seen the russet back of one of these antelopes
among the bushes it was not impossible that his imagination should have
led him to think that it was one of the “little hairy men” of the legends.
At all events when the professor showed him a book containing pictures
of Central African pygmies he insisted that his creature was not like
them.


Despite his scepticism Professor Ledoux decided to make discreet in-
quiries about the native legends and what they were based on. He ques-
tioned several Africans who trusted him, and he pretended that he fully
believed their stories, thus putting them at their ease and getting much
more detailed information.
In this way he came to visit most of the
neighbouring villages.


As a matter of fact I did not obtain any important information, for
while there were plenty of men who “‘had seen”’ (?) them, they were
reticent on the subject, always concluding that they were probably
mistaken for all the encounters had taken place at nightfall. This is
likely enough.


1 The long hair on the head, like a European’s, was reported by all the Africans
Professor Ledoux questioned. This feature could obviously not apply to true


pygmies.


427


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


There was one relatively exact fact. In March 1946 a team of work-
men under one Djaco—who later became my lab-boy and my informant
and who died of poisoning in 1949—together with a European of whom
I can find no trace, were supposed to have seen one of these little red
men, at about 8 in the morning, in a tall tree in a very wooded little
valley about half a mile from the future site of the station. The Euro-
pean asked what it was and the negroes explained what a rare thing it
was to see such a creature and the evil effects of doing so.


I was at once deluged with stories of dwarfs with their feet back to
front, people who lived half in the lagoon and half on land (I think that
manatees must be responsible for this legend). These tales were of
no interest to me, but I mention them so that the record should be
complete.


He then questioned the Europeans who had travelled in the Ivory
Coast:


One of them told me the following:
During one of his expeditions in the course of 1947 the great
elephant-hunter Dunckel killed a peculiar primate unknown to him; it
was small with reddish-brown hair and was shot in the great forest
between Guiglo and Toulépleu, that is, between the Sassandra and
Cavally rivers. Its remains disappeared while it was being carried home,
no doubt having been disposed of by superstitious porters. Dunckel
even offered to take my informant to the place and he in his turn invited
me to go with them.


Unfortunately this expedition never took place for practical reasons.
All the same I doubt whether it would have been successful since en-
counters with the animal were so rare.


In 1951 the professor’s new boy, in reply to his usual barrage of ques-
tions, told him that when he was young, probably around 1941, he had
himself seen a hunter at Seguéla bring back a little man with red hair in
a cage. The local official had put clothes on it for decency’s sake and
sent it to Abidjan by way of Bouaké. The boy did not know what hap-
pened to the little prisoner afterwards.


This tale seems to me to have been embroidered somewhat. If the
creature was really human it would not have been put in a cage, and if it
was an ape the official would not have worried whether it was decently
dressed. Either it was.a creature half way between man and an ape, or
more likely, it was an unknown primate which had been dressed up as a
joke, as tame monkeys so often are.


Professor Ledoux remarks that these tales of an unknown reddish-
brown primate in the Ivory Coast are overlaid with the very firmly held
belief that there are pygmies in the forest between the Sassandra and
Cavally rivers.


428


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


According to an African technician of mine from Toulépleu called
Méhaud Taou, an intelligent boy keenly interested in these questions,
there was recently a system of barter between the negroes and these


forest creatures; various manufactured goods were left in the forest in
exchange for various fruits. This was supposed to have gone on until


1935. The little men who practised this barter were hardly known even


to the negroes themselves. The Guérés called them Séhité.


It is possible that these Séhités may be true pygmies like those in
Central Africa.


The professor’s inquiries among the Europeans brought out a sig-
nificant fact. Those who had never spent any length of time between
the Sassandra and the Cavally denied out of hand that there could be
any little men in the forest, whether they were true pygmies or unknown
primates. On the other hand those who had lived in this area were
seriously prepared to consider that pygmies might have lived there in
the past and also that there might be a real basis for the legend of the
red dwarfs. His own impression was that the legends and rumours in
the Ivory Coast were based on the fairly recent presence of pygmies
and the present existence of reddish-haired primates whose exact nature
was still problematical.


Although the “‘little hairy men” reported in Mozambique and Tan-
ganyika as well as the Ivory Coast agree with nothing known to the
zoologist or the anthropologist, their description could not agree better
with a creature well known to palaeontologists by the name of Australo-
pithecus, which was still living in South Africa, not more than 500,000
years ago, at a time when all the existing African species were already
formed.


The Australopithecus, which once lived on the grassy plains in the
valley of the Vaal, was a little creature, about 4 feet high, with a face like


a chimpanzee, although its dentition was almost human, but which
walked upright on its hind-legs and was proportioned like a miniature
man. The first skull of one of these odd gnomes was discovered in 1924


at Buxton in the Taungs area of British Bechuanaland by men quarrying
limestone in one of the caves filled with chalky tufa which have been


exploited in the broad Harts River valley since the first world war. The


skull, which was embedded in a block of stone, was sent to Professor
Raymond Dart of the University of Witwatersrand, who gave its owner


the name of Australopithecus transvaalensis. It was so strikingly human


that the people who found it are said to have thought it was a Bushman’s.


Professor Dart maintained that this creature had a much better claim


429


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


than the Java ape-man to be considered as the “‘Missing Link” between


the great apes and man.


At first sight the skull seems to be merely a juvenile chimpanzee’s, and


a study of the teeth shows that this specimen was about six years old.
But a more thorough examination
reveals that the cranial capacity of
500 cc. is much greater than that of


a chimpanzee, in which the male
averages 370 cc. and the female 280


cc. Indeed it is as great as in the


gorilla, where the female averages
450 cc, and the male 510 cc., al-
though its body is so much smaller.
In a fully grown specimen the
cranial capacity might reach 650 cc.,


as subsequent palaeontological dis-


coveries were to show; for the re-
mains of at least 30 Australopitheci
have since been found, and they in-
clude babies, children and adults.


The Australopithecus’s dentition


is also significant. As in man, the
teeth are set in a semi-circle and
the canines barely project beyond
the others, nor is there the diastema
characteristic of the apes, that is
panzee
(after Tyson,
1699)
is
to say the gap behind the upper


extraordinarily
reminiscent
of canine to take the lower canine
the modern reconstruction of the
Australopithecus (see opposite),
When the mouth is shut.


But the most interesting point is
that the hole in the bottom of the skull through which the spinal cord
passes is farther forward than in the anthropoids. This shows that the
head, like a man’s, sat plumb on the top of the spinal column and implies
that the Australopithecus stood upright. This is also confirmed by the
pelvis. There is no doubt that this little large-brained chimpanzee
walked on its hind-legs.


It is true that the relatively large volume of brain is only a rough in-
dication and no proof of a higher mentality. But other evidence seemed


to show that its intelligence was higher than any recent anthropoid’s. In
1948 Professor Dart found fairly complete remains of an Australopithe-


430


— ee


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


cus at Makapansgat in the heart of the Transvaal. With these fossils
were some remains of charred bones and some charcoal. The professor


_ therefore concluded that the Australopithecus knew how to use fire, on
the strength of which he named it Australopithecus prometheus.


There was no sign that this crea-
ture had stone tools or weapons, but
Professor Dart thought that it made
clubs of the femurs of animals it


killed, for these long bones were
found with knobs at the end ap-
parently battered with use.
The
Australopithecus was believed to eat
antelopes, since their bones were
found in its dens, but as it could not
have
caught
such
nimble-footed
creatures with nothing but a club,
one could only suppose that the little
ape-men hunted in a pack and either
surrounded their prey or drove it
into
a blind alley—which clearly
showed they had social habits.


Baboons’
skulls, smashed
in a
peculiar way, and found with the
Australopithecus’s remains, seemed
to imply that it ate its victims’
brains. But Australopithecus skulls
103. Reconstruction of the Aus-
were also found to be similarly ee aaa oe oa ae
crushed, which led some authors to
suppose that this little Prometheus was also a Cain and a cannibal.
Many primitive peoples eat their neighbours’ brains, especially in
Borneo and New Guinea, where it is a magic rite by which one ingests
one’s enemy’s spirit. Some would have it that the Australopithecus
had no less metaphysical reasons for its behaviour; but since the baboons
had suffered the same fate, perhaps it just liked the taste of brains.


Other authors suggested that the baboons and the Australopitheci had
both been killed and eaten by man—much to the indignation of the
South African anthropologists, who were determined that their little
protégé should be the “Missing Link,” the direct ancestor of man, and
insisted that he belonged to the beginning of the Pleistocene period,
nearly 2 million years ago.


431


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Actually the Australopithecus’s remains were found in caves and not


in geological strata, so that it is very difficult to reckon their age. The


estimates are based on the kinds of animals found with them; but this
method has not the slightest scientific value, since it is impossible to


state for certain the date at which a species became extinct. Today
many palaeontologists admit that the Australopithecus must have been
contemporary with man, indeed man has been blamed for its extinc-


tion.


Loren C. Eiseley, head of the Anthropological Department of the
University of Pennsylvania, affirms


That the Australopithecines have vanished while many simple
arboreal relatives of ours survive is not surprising. The man-apes tried
to occupy the same environmental niche as man, and as a consequence
man destroyed them.


This mass-extermination cannot have happened more than 500,000
years ago.


But if the Australopitheci were really as intelligent as everyone thinks
they were, would they have let themselves be killed without flinching?
Surely, like many less cunning animals they would try to move out of
range of an obviously stronger enemy, by taking refuge in a less agree-
able but safer area. Since man meant to be master of the plains, the


little hairy hordes would have adapted themselves to the forest, just as
the East African pygmies were to do when driven by the invading Masai.
The forest would have suited such ape-like creatures well.”


In the thick forests of Africa, the last refuge of so many “‘relic” spe-
cies, might not the Australopithecus’s descendants still survive? Cer-
tainly the agogwe are extraordinarily like Dart’s “intelligent, energetic,


erect, and delicately proportioned little people.” And the account of
them mixing freely with baboons agrees with the fact that the two crea-
tures’ remains are so often found together. Perhaps there might be
some sort of “gentleman’s agreement” between these two very distantly
related primates to live together in a sort of symbiosis, so frequent among
animals. The baboons have a more highly developed social instinct than


1 This was confirmed in 1954 by a study of the sites by Dr Kenneth P. Oakley,
an anthropologist from the British Museum, who believes that the Australo-
pithecus did not live in the caves, but was killed and taken there by beasts of
prey. The layer of ashes—what is solemnly called the “basal hearth”—upon
which the name prometheus rests, was analysed and shown to be bats’ dung
which had probably ignited spontaneously!


* Oakley thinks that even in South Africa man lived along the river-banks
while the Australopithecus dwelt in the bushy gorges called kloofs.


432


ca:
tint
iis


THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


any other monkey; the structure of their societies, which Professor Sir
Solly Zuckerman has so carefully studied, is quite complex. Many
authors have pointed out the astonishing way baboons will help one
another in difficulties. They might well extend this spirit of co-operation
to another no less social species. A partnership between Australopitheci
and baboons would be a good bargain for both. The intelligence and


_ organising mind of the first would be an excellent complement to the
brute force and ferocity of the second. The baboon would guarantee his
partner’s safety, while the ape-man used his ingenious hunting methods


to provide food for both. Thus they could have made a common front
against that newcomer man with his treacherous traps and strange
weapons.


If the agogwe are an unknown race of human pygmies living with
baboons, they could give us most valuable information about the most
primitive of societies and strangest of partnerships. If they prove to be
surviving Australopitheci, our present notions of man’s origin would
surely be radically changed. We should at last know exactly what these
so-called ape-men really were. These are important problems which
deserve to be solved.


EE
433


CHAPTER TWENTY


The Dragon St George Did Not Kill


David Doldrum dreamt he drove a dreadful
dragon. If David Doldrum dreamt he drove a
dreadful dragon, where’s the dreadful dragon
David Doldrum dreamt he drove?


Traditional tongue-twister.


AT half-past eleven on the morning of 23 December 1919 Captain Lei-
cester Stevens boarded the Southampton train at Waterloo station on his
way to hunt the Brontosaurus in Central Africa.


“T am leaving for Cape Town on Christmas Eve,” he told a news-
paperman who followed him to his compartment. ‘From Cape Town
I shall go 1,700 miles north to Kafue, where my expedition will be
organised.”


His only companion was his faithful Laddie, a former “barrage dog,”


a mongrel of dog and wolf, which had often carried messages under
heavy artillery fire during the,first world war, and was to help its master
track the monstrous dinosaur and win the million-pound reward offered
by the American Smithsonian Institution.
Captain Stevens put his


trust in his Mannlicher rifle, for the huge reptile was supposed to have a


vital spot.


“Where that spot is,” remarked the new St George with an unduly
mysterious air as the train moved off, “is one of my secrets.”


His brown, weather-tanned face broke into a broad smile and his very
light blue eyes twinkled as he waved goodbye. He was a tall muscular
fellow in his thirties, and seemed perfectly sane.


This story is not a science-fiction writer’s dream but is taken from the
Press of the time. To go dinosaur-hunting in the twentieth century is
surely madness—yet plenty of people were infected by it. When Cap-


tain Stevens first announced his bizarre intentions, he was flooded with


letters from hunters, sportsmen and bored demobilised officers all asking


434


~~
ae
T


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


to come with him. An old lady who had long been a member of the
Wild Birds’ Protection Association sent him a four-page letter entreating
him to spare the beast’s life if he found it.


For several weeks the most exciting news in the papers were Carpen-


tier and Beckett warming up for their famous boxing match and that two
different travellers had recently met a prehistoric monster in the Belgian
Congo.


On 17 November The Times had published a small news item; it was,
as usual, under the smallest and most discreetly unsensational of head-
lines:


A TALE FROM AFRICA
Semper aliquid novi


The Central News Port Elizabeth correspondent sends the following:
The head of the local museum here has received information from a
M. Lepage, who was in charge of railway construction in the Belgian
Congo, of an exciting adventure Jast month. While Lepage was hunting
one day in October he came upon an extraordinary monster, which
charged at him. Lepage fired but was forced to flee, with the monster
in chase. The animal before long gave up the chase and Lepage was
able to examine it through his binoculars. The animal, he says, was
about 24 ft. in length with a long pointed snout adorned with tusks like
horns and a short horn above the nostrils. The front feet were like those
of a horse and the hind hoofs were cloven. There was a scaly hump on
the monster’s shoulder.


The animal later charged through the native village of Fungurume,
destroying the huts and killing some native dwellers. A hunt was at once
organised but the Government has forbidden the molestation of the
animal, on the ground that it is probably a relic of antiquity. There is
a wild trackless region in the neighbourhood which contains many
swamps and marshes, where, says the head of the museum, it is possible
that a few primeval monsters may survive.


The dinosaur which the animal described in this dispatch most re-
sembles is the Triceratops (Fig. 53, page 188), which was some I9 to
26 feet long, and did have a horn on its nose. But it had “horns like


tusks” rather than the other way round, and all four feet were thick and


heavy like a pachyderm’s. For some reason (mere journalistic ignorance


is the most likely one) everyone began calling it a Brontosaurus, though


this dinosaur is related to the Diplodocus (Fig. 52, page 188) and shares


its characteristically long neck and tail, and, like it, has neither horns


nor tusks.


The Brontosaurus seems to have first reared its head in this affair in


a delayed Reuter message from Bulawayo, dated 4 December but not


435


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


printed in the London papers until the twelfth. It was all the more
uncalled for as the beast described in this new report was even more like


a Triceratops, or rather its cousin the Monoclonius, the two “tusks like
horns” (or vice versa) having disappeared.


News apparently corroborating the report of the existence in the
Congo of a monster known as a Brontosaurus (the thundering Saurian)
comes from Elisabethville.


A Belgian prospector and big game hunter named M. Gapelle, who
has returned here from the interior of the Congo, states that he followed
up a strange spoor for 12 miles and at length sighted a beast certainly of
the rhinoceros order with large scales reaching far down its body. The
animal, he says, has a very thick kangaroo-like tail, a horn on its snout,
and a hump on its back. M. Gapelle fired some shots at the beast, which
threw up its head and disappeared into a swamp.


The American Smithsonian expedition was in search of the monster
referred to above when it met with a serious railway accident, in which
several persons were killed.


Now the Brontosaurus, which is a reptile, is certainly not “‘of the
rhinoceros order.” As all the rest of the description—thick and power-
ful tail, large scales on its sides and humped back—seems to refer to
some horned dinosaur belonging to the group of Ceratopsians (Tricera-
tops, Monoclonius, etc.), perhaps M. Gapelle meant that it was like a
rhinoceros in general size and appearance and particularly in that it had


a horn on the end of its nose. Or perhaps “rhinoceros” was a mistake
for “dinosaurus” on a bad telephone line? Certainly the animal de-
scribed is no more like a Brontosaurus than a hedgehog is like a horse.
But the news that so important a scientific body as the Smithsonian
Institution had sent an expedition on the beast’s track would perhaps
have allayed the sceptics’ doubts. And there was no doubt that this
Institution had in fact sent an expedition led by Harry C. Raven to ex-
plore this little-known corner of Africa, and that on 28 November the
news had come that three of its members—Lendeman, Armstrong and
Howell Farr—had been killed in a railway accident in the Katanga area
of the Belgian Congo.


Soon the Press was buzzing with the tale that as this disaster had
brought the expedition to an end so prematurely, the Smithsonian
Institution had offered a reward of a million pounds to anyone who
brought the mysterious monster back dead or alive. No more encour-
agement was needed, especially for men like Captain Stevens, to take up
Brontosaurus-hunting, which did not seem so crazy now that various


letters were turning up in the Press from old colonials who had also


436


a
ale
le
el
eS


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


heard tales from the negroes about the existence of a large unknown rep-


tile in Africa. Walter Winans, a big-game hunter of the highest reputa-
tion (according to the Press), said in an interview that the famous animal
merchant, the late Carl Hagenbeck, had told him before the war that
two of his travellers on different expeditions at different times had seen
a Brontosaurus in the swamps of Central Africa. These travellers were
used to recognising animals at a glance and their evidence ought to be
trustworthy.


One cannot say the same for Winans’s zoology. His picture of the
Brontosaurus published in the Daily Mail certainly looks a terrifying
monster, but
it is equally unlike the true Brontosaurus and the alleged
one described by Lepage and Gapelle. Under the drawing of this mon-
grel offspring of a lion and a medieval dragon was a caption which must
have made the palaeontologists of the time burst their sides with laugh-
ing or their blood-vessels with just indignation:


Mr. Winans, famous as a big game hunter and a world authority on
animals, says that the Brontosaurus is a reptile, which crawls on its
belly. He believes it is built very light in front, with short rudimentary
legs.


This news, and that of Captain Stevens’s project, induced a brigadier-
general to write to the Daily Mail and offer some more sober advice:


Sir, May I, as an experienced hunter of big game, say that Captain
Lester Stevens would do well to take a more effective battery of guns
than those described in a recent issue of the Daily Mail if he is going to
hunt the brontosaurus in Central Africa?


If the animal is anything like the monster conjured up by Mr. Walter
Winans, the hunter had better take a Tank instead of his ‘barrage dog.”
To receive the charge of eighty feet of primeval monster, armour plated
and exuding poison from fangs and skin (Mr, Winans’ conception of the
brontosaurus), Mannlicher and repeating Winchester rifles are quite
inadequate.


I would be sorry to face even a charging tiger with such weapons,
while the shot-gun, unless it is for the purpose of scattering salt on the
tail of the creature, will prove worse than useless. He should take no-
thing less than a field gun—say an 18 pounder.


Armed with a Tank, with heavy artillery and with a supply of poison
gas, the modern St. George might make “merry music’”’ against this
‘dragon of the prime,” and have a fair chance of taking the million
pounds offered by the Smithsonian
Institution when he comes
galumphing back with the skin.
All sportsmen will wish him good


sport.
R. G. BURTON.


437


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


But the gallant captain did not alter his plans or his armoury.
Meanwhile the world’s Press was adding embellishments to the
Brontosaurus story almost daily. Lepage and Gapelle were now said to
have been together when they saw a beast “like a lizard or a crocodile”
which reared on its hind-legs when it saw them. The languid vegetarian
Brontosaurus (which looked like a Triceratops) had turned into savage
carnivorous Ceratosaurus. Later it was said that Captain Stevens had
succeeded in finding the monster, at all events that “che declared he saw


it crashing through the reeds of a swamp, and that it was the Bronto-
saurus—a huge marsh animal, ten times as big as the biggest elephant.”
The number of members of the Smithsonian expedition killed in the
railway accident increased dramatically, and this institution was said to
have raised a fund of 5 million dollars to finance the monster’s capture.


These tales have been current for so long that now they are some-
times repeated by perfectly serious authors concerned with the problem
of unknown animals. Everyone seems to have overlooked or forgotten
the following letter, which was published in The Times on 23 February
1920:


Sir, I am authorised to contradict the statement that the members of
the Smithsonian African Expedition who proceeded to this territory
came here to hunt the brontosaurus. There is no foundation for this
statement.
I may-also state that the report of the brontosaurus arose
from a piece of practical joking in the first instance, and, as regards the
prospector “‘Gapelle,”? this gentleman does not exist except in the
imagination of a second practical joker, who ingeniously coined the
name from that of Mr. L. Le Page.


‘
Yours faithfully
WENTWORTH D. GRAY
Acting Representative of the Smithsonian African
Expedition in the Katanga.
Elisabethville, Jan. 21.


This was enough to discourage the most earnest of dinosaur-hunters
and to make a permanent laughing-stock of any naturalist who dared to
suggest that prehistoric animals might survive. Similar rumours were


still current in much of Africa, and there were always a few people to
note them down, but few dared to report them except under their breath.
Even the practical jokers thought it wisest to wait until the affair was
forgotten before trying to repeat the trick. It was twelve years before a
dinosaur-hunt found its way into the Press again.


In 1932 a young South African big-game hunter called F. Grobler
returned to Cape Town after five years in Central Africa and told the


438


ee


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


Press about a monstrous lizard which lived in the huge marshes where
the Belgian Congo, Angola and Northern Rhodesia meet. Different and
sometimes contradictory versions of his story were printed in different
newspapers—even his name was misspelt \—but as I shall later show
where he got his information from, this hardly matters. The version of
his remarks about the animal which was published in the Rhodesia
Herald of 15 July 1932 is as follows:


It is known by the native name of ‘“‘Chepekwe.’’ The natives in Cen-
tral Africa used to call it the water lion.


It can best be described as a huge leguan [iguana], the weight of
which is estimated at about four tons or more. It was discovered about
six months ago by a German scientist in the Dilolo swamps in Angola,
and while I was in that country I saw photographs of it.


I went to Lake Dilolo myself to look for it, but I did not see it. The
natives say it is extremely rare and seldom seen, but they are convinced
as I am of its existence.


It lives only in swamps, and from what I was told it attacks rhino,
hippo and elephant. I have seen a photograph of the ‘‘Chepekwe’’ on
top of a hippo it had killed.


Grobler also told the Press that he had acted as guide to an expedition
led by the famous explorer Hans Schomburgk, who had returned to
Germany not long ago, after spending a year filming big-game in
Africa. The whole team had gone to the Dilolo marshes in the wild hope
of taking some sensational shots of the chepekwe, but they did not man-
age to see the beast.


Grobler’s good faith seemed indisputable, and in fact Major Schom-
burgk had said during a lecture in Germany the previous February that
there was a native tradition that a huge reptile existed in Central Africa,
adding that the prospect of finding this animal was the one thing that
might tempt him to return to this inhospitable wilderness.


Since he made this pronouncement [the Rhodesia Herald goes on] a
Swede, J. C. Johanson, who is an overseer in a Belgian rubber planta-
tion in the Congo, wrote to the “Cologne Gazette” from Mai Muene,
Kassai district; enclosing photographs purporting to establish the
existence of the animal in question.


The photos, so the journal says, were anything but clear, yet they
revealed a discovery of great importance.
Johanson stumbled on a
unique specimen of a dinosaur family that must have lived milleniums
ago.


1 Ivan Sanderson, quoting the Cape Argus, spells it ‘Gobler”—mercifully
with only one “‘b.”


439


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


I have not so far managed to find Johanson’s letter in the Kélnische
Zeitung (where it may not even have appeared) so I will quote the extract
published in the Rhodesia Herald:


On February 16 last I went on a shooting trip, accompanied by my
gun-bearer.
I only had a Winchester for small game, not expecting
anything big. At 2 p.m. I reached the Kassai valley.


No game was in sight. As we were going down to the water, the boy
suddenly called out “‘elephants.’’ It appeared that two giant bulls were
almost hidden by the jungle. About 50 yards away from them I saw
something incredible—a monster, about 16 yards in length, with a
lizard’s head and tail. I closed my eyes and reopened them. There
could be no doubt about it, the animal was still there. My boy cowered
in the grass whimpering.


I was shaken by the hunting-fever. My teeth rattled with fear. Three
times I snapped; only one attempt came out well. Suddenly the mon-
ster vanished, with a remarkably rapid movement.
It took me some
time to recover. Alongside me the boy prayed and cried. I lifted him
up, pushed him along and made him follow me home. On the way we
had to traverse a big swamp. Progress was slow, for my limbs were still
half-paralysed with fear. There in the swamp, the huge lizard appeared
once more, tearing lumps from a dead rhino. It was covered in ooze. I
was only about 25 yards away.


It was simply terrifying. The boy had taken French leave, carrying
the rifle with him. At first I was careful not to stir, then I thought of
my camera.
I could plainly hear the crunching of rhino bones in the
lizard’s mouth. Just as I clicked, it jumped into deep water.


The experience was too much for my nervous system. Completely
exhausted, I sank down behind the bush that had given me shelter.
Blackness reigned before my eyes. The animal’s phenomenally rapid
motion was the most awe-inspiring thing I had ever seen.


I must have looked like one demented, when at last I regained camp.
Metcalfe, who is boss there, said I approached him, waving the camera
about in a silly way and emitting unintelligible sounds. I dare say I
did. For eight days I lay in a fever, unconscious nearly all the time.


Dinosaur-hunters had become better journalists since the days of
Lepage and Gapelle, not only in making the most ofa sensational story but
also in realising the value of pictures. The article in the Rhodesia Herald


is illustrated with a photograph reproduced from a German newspaper,
presumably the one taken by the Swede and referred to by Grobler,
though one says the beast it is eating is a rhinoceros and the other a
hippopotamus. The photo itself is so indistinct that one cannot possiby
recognise the monster’s prey. Indeed, there is little doubt that this pic-
ture published in several newspapers and magazines is a crude fake. A
Komodo dragon has been transplanted somewhat clumsily into an


440


ops
seen


ol
Ai


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


African swamp scene, where it is perched ballerina-like on the tips of its
toes on the carcase of a hippopotamus or rhinoceros, thus making it look
enormous.
This faked evidence is enough to destroy any remaining
belief in the truth of Johanson’s story. Once again the dinosaur has
proved to be a hoax.


All the same, the hoax has brought to light a few facts which cannot
so easily be dismissed. In 1920 Walter Winans had quoted an authority


as trustworthy as Carl Hagenbeck. This time Grobler had called on the
evidence of the great animal-merchant’s faithful agent, Hans Schom-
burgk. In both cases fact and fiction were closely intermixed, the hoax-


ers were inspired by rumours founded on authentic facts. Hagenbeck
really held the beliefs he was credited with, and Schomburgk had cer-
tainly been the first to talk to Grobler about the chepekwe, a beast
which he had first heard-of at the beginning of the century and had
mentioned in a book in 1910. Grobler had done no more than to con-
fuse or embroider the facts and make the mistake of thinking that
Johanson’s letter and photograph were a confirmation of them.


I shall do my best to explain what these facts are—though it will not
be easy. I cannot promise that it will be the “sober truth,” since the


facts are quite as fantastic as the sensational but disappointing stories
based upon them. For what could be more fantastic than the fact that
Captain Stevens, who set off to the heart of Africa as a result of a double
hoax in the hope of winning a quite imaginary fortune, might well have
succeeded in capturing a dinosaur and winning immortal fame? At all
events the animals we are concerned with in this chapter are, if not
actual dinosaurs, large unknown reptiles extraordinarily like them.


Rumours about creatures of this kind have been reported in a ring of
country 2,000 miles in diameter encircling the whole basin of the Bel-
gian Congo, the Cameroons, Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Uganda, Rhodesia
and thence to Angola, that is to say in the upper reaches of the Congo,
the Nile and the Zambezi.


Before we go into the question of the beast’s identity, let us consider
the facts, such as they are, without drawing any conclusions and taking
care not to mix up reports from widely separated areas nor to assume
that all the tales of an ‘“‘African dragon” necessarily refer to the same


animal.


Let us begin a tour of the Belgian Congo, arranging the evidence by


place rather than time. We shall start with Alfred Aloysius Horn, whose


stilted Victorian narrative of his adventures Miss Ethelreda Lewis


441


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


amplified with racy comment, taken down from his own mouth, almost
phonetically, and included in his Trader Horn. He has this to say about


a large water-monster:


Aye, and behind the Cameroons there’s things living we know no-
thing about. I could ’a made books about many things. The Fago-
Nini they say is still in the swamps and rivers. Giant diver it means.
Comes out of the water and devours people. Old men’ll tell you what
their grandfathers saw, but they still believe it’s there. Same as the
Amali I’ve always taken it to be. I’ve seen the Amah’s footprint. About
the size of a good frying-pan in circumference and three claws instead
o’ five. There are some very big lakes behind the Cameroons. Used
to be full of nice seal! at one time. Manga, they callit. But thejago-
nint’s wiped ’em almost out, the old natives say... .


What but some great creature like the Amali could account for the
broken ivories we used to come across in the so-called elephant ceme-
teries? Fine old green ivory that’s valuable for inlaying wood. Snapped
right across in the thickest part and left in splinters. Aye! There’s
places in Africa where you get visions of primeval force.


Later in the book he returns to the question:


That amali. I told you I’ve seen a drawing of him in those Bushman
caves. I chiselled one out whole once and gave it to President Grant for
a souveriir....


Aye, the little fellers that drew those creatures, and manacled slaves
and so on I told you about, were not ordinary savages. They sure were
paleolithic men from the North. They sure were remembering things,
on those walls. . .
. Nice little fellers, round about four feet and a little
over.


When Trader Horn was published it was enthusiastically received as
literature, but hardly as scientific fact. Those who knew Africa and its
fauna better realised that he was a keen and truthful observer of nature.
“Apart from a few unimportant slips the statements made by Trader
Horn about the country are generally accurate,” writes Dr Albert
Schweitzer.


In 1902 Sir Harry Johnston drew attention in his great work on
Uganda to the mysterious creature in Lake Victoria, the third largest


lake in the world, a vast stretch of water as big as the whole of Eire.
It could hardly have come into the world with a more propitious god-
father than the man to whom we owe the discovery of the okapi.


There are also persistent stories amongst the natives that the waters
of the’Victoria Nyanza are inhabited by a monster (known to the Bag-
anda as “Lukwata”).
This creature, from the native accounts, might


1 The manatee, which is in fact called manga by the Bapunu and Eshira.


442


ss.
aay


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


either bea small cetacean or a large form of manatee, or, more probably,
a gigantic fish.
So far, however, only one European has caught a
glimpse of this creature.


The European was Sir Clement Hill. He told his story to the an-
thropologist C. W. Hobley, who writes:


The late Sir Clement Hill was proceding from Kisumu to Entebbe
in a steam launch some years ago, and when off Homa Mountain a


beast appeared out of the water and tried to seize a native sitting on the
bow of the launch. It did not succeed, and Sir Clement (who was under


the awning aft) told me that he distinctly saw it some little distance be-
hind the boat; only its head visible, it was of a roundish shape and dark


in colour. He was quite certain it was not a crocodile.
m


This was not the first time that Hobley had heard of this puzzling and
impudently aggressive creature. The natives on both sides of the lake
had told him of a water-monster which the Baganda called lukwata. Ja-
Luo fishermen said that it sometimes attacked canoes.
At first he
thought these tales referred to big pythons sometimes found in the local
folk-lore, but later realised it must be an unknown animal.


Mr. W. Grant, late Provincial Governor, Jinja, once had his attention
called to a beast which was swimming down the Napoleon Gulf with
its head out of the water, but it was unfortunately too far away to
describe.


In 1910 an American sportsman called Edgar Beecher Bronson told
an odd story in his book In Closed Territory. He was hunting in the
country west of Sotik when he met another hunter called Jordan, who
told him of an encounter with a terrible monster called the dingonek.
This took place on the Gori River, which runs into Lake Victoria on the
eastern shore near what was then the Anglo-German frontier. Jordan
said the beast was 14 or 15 feet long, with a head the size of a lioness’s,
but marked like a leopard’s, with two long, straight, white fangs in the
upper jaw. It was covered with scales like an armadillo, as broad as a
hippopotamus and spotted like a leopard. It had a long and broad tail.


Its footprints were as big as a hippo’s, but had claws like a reptile’s.


At the time this story appeared [observes C. W. Hobley] it was con-
sidered that this was probably a traveller’s tale, told to entertain a new-
comer, but I have since met a man who a few years back was wandering


about the Mara River or Ngare Dubash which rises in Sotik, crosses the
Anglo-German boundary, and runs into Lake Victoria in German
territory. He emphatically asserts that he saw this beast. He was at
the time about where the Mara River crosses the frontier, and the river
was in high flood. The beast came floating down the river on a big log,


443


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


and he estimated its length at about sixteen feet but would not be
certain of the length as its tail was in the water. He describes it as
spotted like a leopard, covered with scales, and having a head like an
otter; he did not see the long fangs described by Mr. Jordan. He fired
at it and hit it; it slid off the log into the water and was not seen again.


I made inquiries of the District Commissioner, Kisii, Mr. Crampton,
and he wrote recently and said he had visited the Amala River and made
inquiries from the Masai in the neighbourhood, and they knew of the
beast, which they called Ol-umaina, and described it as follows: About
fifteen feet long, head like a dog, small ears marked somewhat after the
fashion of a puff adder, has claws, short legs, short neck, is said to lie
in the sun on the sand by the river-side and to slip into the water when
disturbed; when in the water only its head is visible.


This description agrees fairly well with the dingonek if not with the
lukwata.


It turned out that tales about an unknown amphibious creature were
found not only in Lake Victoria, but also in some of the rivers that ran
into it. Hobley thought that there was a sensational new zoological dis-
covery to be made, and bearing in mind the creature’s scales, added: “A
survival of some extinct race of saurians is a thing to thrill the imagina-
tion of the scientific world.” This phrase—and in a scientific journal,
too—stuck, and it was no longer a question of a large cetacean or gigan-
tic fish, but “‘some extinct race of saurians.”” There were rumours that
the officers of a steamer on Lake Victoria had seen a strange prehistoric
animal with a long neck in the lake. And Arnold Drummond-Hay
claimed to have met a “‘sea-serpent”” on Lake Nyasa.


This only tended to discredit the previous reports, for the experts had
no difficulty in showing that what he had seen was merely a large python;
for pythons may be more than 20 feet long. Sir Frederick Jackson saw
the skin of a specimen 22 feet long killed in the Mabira forest. It must
have been almost a foot in diameter. A snake as thick as a man’s body
would be a most impressive sight. Moreover the python is a good swim-
mer and seems able to cross wide stretches of water. Colonel C. R. S.
Pitman writes:


I have come across this great serpent on Nkosi Island, the southern-
most of the Sese group, in the open lake. Unless it had been deliberately
placed there by man—which seems unlikely—it must have made
numerous water journeys from island to island before arriving so far
south,


1 The puff-adder has no external ears.
Perhaps Hobley means the small
horns on the horned viper, but the text is by no means clear.


444


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


All the same, the first reports quoted above hardly remind one of a
python—especially when they refer to the monster’s feet! And fuller
information came to light to show that this explanation was untenable.
In the 1930s Dr E. G. Wayland, Director of the Geological Survey of
Uganda, stated that he had been shown a piece of the Jukwata’s bone.
The natives of the Kavirondo country told him that they firmly believed
in the Jukwata; it fought with crocodiles and during the Homeric
struggle lost pieces of its skin, which were much prized as amulets. They
said that the monster’s bellowing voice could be heard a long way off;
indeed, Wayland said he had heard it himself. He could not explain
these roars unless they were made by the Jukwata—whatever this beast
might be.


Here I should mention that snakes have no vocal cords at all, are quite
dumb and can make no noise but a “hiss,” which in a large specimen
sounds like a jet of steam at high pressure. A bellowing reptile is much
more likely to be a large saurian than an ophidian.


In 1923 a study of the Nuer people of the Upper Nile Province was
published by the British Deputy Governor, H. C. Jackson. He speaks


at some length about an enormous snake, the /au, which the Nuer told
him lived in all the swampy area of the sources of the White Nile.


Various fantastic attributes attach to it, which may be mere embel-
lishments on the part of the Nuer without necessarily disproving the
existence of some hitherto unknown serpent of exceptional size.


Thus some say that it has a short crest of hair on the back of its head
not unlike that of a crowned crane: others that it has long hairs,
reminiscent of some of the mud-fish of the Nile, with which it entangles
its unwilling victims and drags them into the river. In certain years,
particularly during the rainy season, its belly is said to gurgle like the
rumbling of an elephant. This noise was heard in the year 1918 in the
Bahr-el-Arab.


The Nuer state that it inhabits holes in the banks of rivers or swamps,
and spends most of its time in swamps. They are in mortal dread of it,
and if they see the furrow in the ground that announces its presence,
they run as fast as they can in the opposite direction.
If a Nuer sees
this serpent before it sees him, all is well, but if the serpent happens to
sight even a large party of them first, all are expected to die.


The Addar swamps extend for some 1800 square miles: those of the
Bahr-el-Ghazal and its tributaries must cover an area of many thou-
sands of square miles. Neither of these vast morasses has ever yet been
explored, and many parts of them have never even been visited.
It is
therefore not improbable that some addition to our zoological know-
ledge may ultimately come from these places.


445


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


There are so many stories of this creature from places as far apart as


th
ti)
ae


Bahr-el-Arab, Addar swamps, Bahr-el-Ghazal and Bahr-el-Zeraf, that
_
it is difficult to dismiss as untrue the existence of some hitherto un-
—


known serpent not unlike a gigantic python. The existence of a bone or
hornlike substance near the tail would illustrate a step further back in
the development of the serpent creation, the small rudimentary legs of
the python marking an intermediate stage between the Lau and the
ordinary snake as we know it.}


The common factor in the various accounts given of this creature is
that it differs in colour from a python, in the shape of its jaws, in its
greater length and girth, and there is no doubt that it is held in the
greatest dread by the Nuer. They have a definite name for it, and there
seems no particular reason, if this serpent were not distinct from the
python, why the Nuer should fear a twelve-foot Lau more than he does
a twenty-foot python.


This information soon aroused the curiosity of J. G. Millais, the great


British naturalist, who had at this time set about following the Nile to


its sources. During his travels he heard of a Sergeant Stephens who
was supposed to be firmly convinced that the /au, a huge reptile un-
known to science, lived in the vast Sudanese marshes. Stephens was an
old hunter, and as he was in charge of a considerable stretch of the tele-
graph line on the east bank of the Nile, his duties gave him many oppor-
tunities of living with the negroes and travelling on the river and
through the bush. Millais sought him out at Malakal and took down the
following statement from him:


The Lau is said to inhabit the great swamps of the Nile valleys from
below Malakal to Rejaf and Lake No to Shambe. The natives, whether
Shilluk, Dinka or Nuer, have the same name for the great serpent.? It
is said to be extremely rare and seldom seen by man more than once in
a lifetime. Natives who are said to have seen a dead one describe it as
forty to one hundred feet long, with a body as big as a donkey or a
horse. The colour is said to be brown or dark yellow, and not green and
black like the python. On its vicious-looking, snake-like head it has
large tentacles, or thick, wiry hairs, with which it reaches out and seizes
its victims. If a man sees a Lau first, the creature at once expires, but
if the Lau is the first observer the human dies on the spot.


In the time of Bimbashi B. (a well-known telegraph inspector), one
Abrahim Mohamed, in the employ of the company, saw a Lau killed
near Raub, at a village called Bogga. The man I knew, and closely
questioned. He always repeated the same description of the monstrous


1 On either side of its anus the python has a conical spur which is thought to
be the vestige of a leg. Jackson’s remark seems to imply, what he has not stated
explicitly in the text, that the /au has legs.


2 The python they know as Nyal [Millais’s note].


446


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


reptile. More recently one was killed by some Shilluks at Koro-a-ta
beyond the Jebel-Zeraf (Addar Swamps). I obtained some of the neck
bones of this example from a Shilluk! who was wearing them as a
charm. These I sent to Deputy-Governor Jackson (now of Dongola
province), who in turn sent them to the British Museum for identifica-
tion, but no satisfactory explanation was given, nor was it suggested
what species of snake they might belong to.?


Abrahim’s story of the size and shape of the great reptile was cor-
roborated by one Rabah Ringbi, a Niam-Niam from the neighbourhood
of Wau in the Bahr-el-Ghazal, who had also seen a similar monster
killed in some swamps near that place.


Dinkas living at Kilo (a telegraph station on the Zeraf) told me that
the Lau frequents the great swamp in the neighbourhood of that station
and they occasionally hear its loud booming cry at night.


A short time ago I met a Belgian Administrator at Rejaf. He had
just come up from the Congo, and said he was convinced of the exis-
tence of the Lau, as he had seen one of these great serpents in a swamp
and fired at it several times, but his bullets had no effect. He also stated
that the monster made a huge trail in the swamp as it passed into deeper
water.


Captain William Hichens has produced an interesting piece of con-
crete evidence that the negroes know the Jau well—a carving of a Jau’s
head, a photograph of which he published in Discovery. This effigy,
which seems to be one of those masks worn in dances over a huge hank
of raffia, was carved by Mshengu she Gunda of Iramba, a singer as well


as sculptor. In a letter to Frank Lane, Hichens writes:


Mshengu lived on the south-east side of the Wembare swamps and,
as a young man, had travelled and hunted around and over Victoria
Nyanza and the Nile swamps. To my suggestion that there was no /au
he said, “I might have said, as a young man, when I was ignorant, that
there is no such thing as a motor car. I had never seen or even heard of
one then. But there is your motor car in the sight of my eyes and I have
sat on its chairs and heard its bowels digest inside it. It is thus of the
Tau.”


I do not see why the Jau of the Upper Nile marshes and the /ukwata
of Lake Victoria should not be the same animal—or at least animals of
the same genus, for the great East African lakes are connected by the
Bahr-el-Djebel with the huge marshes around the sources of the Nile.


1 The Shilluk’s name is Bilaltut. The complete skeleton was found in 1914
[Millais’s note].


2 Mr Jackson told me the neck bones were not unusually large, as did also
Sergeant Stephens in describing them, so they might have belonged to the
ordinary African python [Millais’s note].


447


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


The fact that relics of both animals are used to make amulets with the
same magical properties also agrees with this theory.


It also seems as if the Jau’s evil reputation, if not its actual area of
distribution, stretches to that part of the Belgian Congo nearest to the


104. Wooden carving of the /au by a native artist of Iramba.
(After a photograph by Captain William Hichens.)


Upper Nile and Uganda, where its description is known, as will be seen
from the following story told to my father by a close friend, Colonel Alex
Godart, a Belgian hero of the 1914-18 war.


At the beginning of 1912, when he was a lieutenant in the Belgian
Congo Police, Godart was going up-river on the Aruwimi in order to set
up an outpost, later called Pengé, on the highest navigable point on the


river. He had pitched camp in the middle of the virgin forest on the left
bank of the river, which in these upper reaches was called the Ituri,
when he was surprised to feel a violent earthquake. He was even more
surprised when the one soldier who formed his escort rushed off to the
riverside with his Albini rifle in his hand.


Some time later the negro came back rather sheepishly and said as if
to excuse himself:


“Tt had already gone back into the water.”
“What? What do you mean?” asked Godart.
“The beast [nyama] which makes the earth shake when it comes out
of the water—it has to be killed, but I didn’t see it.”


The lieutenant was amused at this charmingly naive explanation, but
he did not want to humiliate the negro, who had shown nothing but
courage, so he asked him several questions.


“Ts it dangerous? Does it eat men?”
“No, it leaves their bodies. But it kills them, and opens their head to
eat the brain.”


448


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


“‘Have you ever seen one?”
“T haven’t, but my brothers ! five!
m


“Oh, and what is it like?”


“Tt’s a very big beast like a hippopotamus, but with a little head with
feathers—and a crest like a cock’s comb.”


The reader will have recognised the “short crest of hair . . . not un-
like that of a crowned crane,” in the Nuer description of the Jau. But
Godart found this detail so absurd that he had to cut short his interroga-
tion so as not to burst out laughing. All the same, he admired the
negro’s courage in not only coming with him into country which was
then up in arms in revolt, but also in dashing off with only one cartridge.
in his rifle to attack what he thought was a terrifying monster.


In later years Colonel Godart would tell this story as an instance of
the native soldier’s courage. When my father told him about my book,
the French edition of which had just been published, he saw the story
in a new light, and he agreed to write down the conversation which
I have here reported word for word. I must point out that Colonel
Godart could not have been influenced by the descriptions quoted in
my book, because he wrote his note before he had read it. Since then
his admiration for the native soldier’s courage has increased, and he
wishes that he had never laughed at him, even though he only did so
inwardly.


Naturally this story does not prove that in the Ituri itself there is a
beast related to the Jau of the Upper Nile and perhaps to the /ukwata of
Lake Victoria. It may just be that echoes of their existence have reached
this area. At all events the tradition refers to a fairly heavy and powerful
animal if it is to make the earth shake—as elephants, rhinoceroses and
hippopotami do—and be popularly credited with seismic earth-tremors.
Incidentally only an animal with feet can make the earth vibrate as it
moves.


But can we truthfully call these monsters dinosaurs? No, there is
nothing in the reports I have so far quoted to justify the name, for while
it is often hard to dispute their existence, their various descriptions
might variously apply to a stumpy and heavy snake, a giant monitor


lizard, an unknown species of crocodile, or even some very odd kind of


fish.


It is only the rumours that have come from other parts of Africa over
the last fifty years which have gradually suggested the notion that dino-


saurs, or rather some dinosaurs with characteristically long necks, may


1 J.e, men of his own tribe.


FF
449


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


survive. But we shall see that this shape was arrived at very slowly,
usually under the influence of suspect reports and hasty interpretations.


In 1909 a German traveller, Lieutenant Paul Gritz, succeeded in
crossing Africa from the Indian Ocean to the mouth of the Congo in a
motor-boat. This remarkable feat led him to visit Lake Bangweulu, in
Northern Rhodesia, where he noted:


The crocodile is found only in very isolated specimens in Lake
Bangweulu, except in the mouths of the large rivers at the north; but in
the swamp lives the msanga, much feared by the natives, a degenerate
saurian which one might well confuse with the crocodile, were it not
that its skin has no scales and its toes are armed with claws. I did not
succeed in shooting a msanga, but on the island of Mbawala, I came by
some strips of its skin.


When Hans Schomburgk also crossed Central Africa at the beginning
of the century, he was surprised to find when he reached this same Lake
Bangweulu that, although this huge lake, 78 miles by 22, seemed an ideal
habitat for hippopotami, there was not a trace of one on its banks. When
he expressed his astonishment to his native guides, they told him that
there was an animal in the lake which killed and ate the hippopotami,
although it was smaller than they were. It was an amphibious creature,
but apparently it never came ashore, for its footprints were never seen.


When he reached the Dilolo marshes, 500 miles farther west, where
the Congo, Northern Rhodesia and Angola meet, ponomuaies heard
similar tales about a beast called the chimpekwe.


Unfortunately [wrote Schomburgk in 1910] I thought this story was
a fable and did not pursue my inquiries further. Later I talked about it
to Carl Hagenbeck, and I am now convinced that it is some kind of
saurian.
Hagenbeck has received from other sources reports which
entirely agree with my own observations and with what I was told by
the natives I questioned.


This is confirmed by Hagenbeck himself in his book Beasts and Men:


Some years ago I received reports from two quite distinct sources of
the existence of an immense and wholly unknown animal, said to in-
habit the interior of Rhodesia.
Almost identical stories reached me,
firstly, through one of my own travellers, and, secondly, through an
English gentleman, who had been shooting big-game in Central Africa.
The reports were thus quite independent of each other. The natives, it


1 These may not have been the only stories: “Mr Sandford of Fort Jameson
reports that two trustworthy Europeans have seen a hitherto unknown animal in
two little lakes.”” Hans Schomburgk, Meine Freunde im Busch, 1936.


450


—
eC


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


seemed, had told both my informants that in the depths of the great
swamps there dwelt a huge monster, half elephant, half dragon. This,
however, is not the only evidence for the existence of the animal. It is
now several decades ago since Menges,! who is, of course, perfectly
reliable, heard a precisely similar story from the negroes; and still more
remarkable, on the walls of certain caverns in Central Africa there are
to be found actual drawings of this strange creature.? From what I
have heard of the animal, it seems to me that it can only be some kind
of dinosaur, seemingly akin to the brontosaurus. As the stories come
from so many different sources, and all tend to substantiate each other,
I am almost convinced that some such reptile must be still in existence.
At great expense, therefore, I sent out an expedition to find the monster,
but unfortunately they were compelled to return home without having
proved anything, either one way or the other. In the part of Africa
where the animal is said to exist, there are enormous swamps, hundreds
of square miles in extent, and my travellers were laid with very severe
attacks of fever.


Victor Forbin, a French writer and a great adventurer, wrote in 1920
that Hagenbeck was not discouraged by his failure and was always ready


to spend fortunes to solve the problem of the African dragon:


In the winter of 1912 a friend who had long lived in Dar es Salaam
(German East Africa) introduced me to a Frenchman who had adopted
the tough and dangerous profession of natural history collector, wan-
dering in unexplored areas in search of unknown animals and plants.


He had just come back from the Lake Tanganyika area where he told
me he met “amphibious animals, of gigantic size, similar in various
respects to the elephant, the rhinoceros and the hippopotamus.”


At his request I gave him a letter of introduction to Carl Hagenbeck,
the famous Hamburg wild animal dealer, with whom I used to corre-
spond. ...I learnt later that Hagenbeck had welcomed my animal-
collector, and offered him the considerable sum of 100,000 marks for a
skin or a skeleton of his mysterious animal, but negotiations broke
down, the Frenchman distrusting the German, who tried to extract
information from him about the place where he had made his discovery.


On 14 April 1913, the great Carl Hagenbeck, the King of the Zoos,
died without succeeding in solving the mystery which had puzzled him


for so long.


Fortunately a British settler called J. E. Hughes who had spent
eighteen years on the shores of Lake Bangweulu published a book in
1933 in which he gives us more information about a beast which he calls


1 Joseph Menges, a famous German traveller who collected animals for


Hagenbeck.
'
Se


2 This confirms what Trader Horn says about the Bushmen’s mural paintings.


451


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


chipekwe—a remarkably similar name to Schomburgk’s chimpekwe al-
though Lake Bangweulu is 500 miles from the Dilolo marshes. Hughes
made a thorough inquiry among the natives and collected several ac-
counts about it, the most interesting undoubtedly being that of Kan-
yeshia, son of the paramount chief of the Wa-Ushi. His grandfather had
been in at the death of one of these monsters in the deep waters of the
Luapula, which, with its tributaries, links Lake Bangweulu to Lake
Mweru.


A good description of the hunt has been handed down by tradition.
It took many of the best hunters the whole day spearing it with their
large ‘“‘Viwingo”’ harpoons—the same as théy use to-day for the hippo.
It is described as having a smooth dark body, without bristles, and
‘armed with a single smooth white horn fixed like the horn of a rhino-
ceros, but composed of smooth white ivory, very highly polished.
It-


is a pity they did not keep it, as I would have given them anything they
liked for it.


Hughes also heard from H. Croad, a retired magistrate in Northern
Rhodesia, some. evidence which seemed to confirm the native reports.
One evening Croad had pitched his tent beside a small but very deep


lake. In the middle of the night he heard a loud splashing noise, and in
the morning
he found huge footprints of an utterly unknown kind on
the bank—he was reputed to be able to recognise all the animals in the
area by their tracks. Croad also told Hughes that R. M. Green, who
settled on the Lulimala in 1906, was told by the natives of a hippopota-
mus being killed by a chipekwe on the adjoining River Lukulu. Its throat
was torn out.


Hughes moreover reports that Robert Young, formerly Native Com-
missioner for the Chinsali, after whom Lake Young was named, shot at
something in this lake: “It dived and went away, leaving a wake like a
screw steamer.” Young thought that the chipekwe still survived there;
Hughes himself was more sceptical. He scoured the marshes and offered


large rewards, with no result. He therefore came to the conclusion that
the chipekwe survived until very recently—only a few years ago if
Croad’s evidence was to be believed—but that it was now extinct. Millais
also writes:


I have met only one practical hunter and man of observation actually
believing in the existence of a great beast that is unknown to science.
This is Mr. Denis Lyall, who has written many books on the game of
Central Africa. He is convinced that there is, or was till recently, some
large pachyderm, somewhat similar in habits to the hippopotamus, but
possessing a horn on the head, which frequents the great marshes and


452


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


lakes of Benguelo, Mweru, and Tanganyika. He calls it a water rhino-
ceros, and can adduce good evidence for his theory.


I think Lyall and Hughes are being too timid in insisting that this
animal is necessarily extinct, when it has been reported so recently.
Why should unknown animals suddenly die out as soon as there is good


reason for thinking they exist? Probably this timid attitude is a sort of


insurance against failing to find the beast. And it is as hard to find an


animal in a swamp covering hundreds of square miles in area, even if it


is as big as a Diplodocus, as to find a needle in an Everest of hay.


Clearly Lyall’s “water rhinoceros” is the same as the chipekwe, since


it agrees in its habits, size and single horn. It also agrees in its area of
distribution, and upon this subject I must also quote from a letter writ-
ten to Frank Lane by Commander H. C. Maydon, a well-known big-
game hunter:


I met a man, an old hunter-prospector in Livingstone, Rhodesia,
who swore that he had seen a water monster in Lake Mweru and had
studied its tracks.


Here we must call the evidence of C. G. James, who had lived 18 years
in Africa and wrote to the Daily Mail during the pseudo-Brontosaurus


affair. His letter, which was published on 26 December 1919, was cer-
tainly handwritten, for the compositor misread several of the proper
names, which I have corrected within square brackets.


Sir, I should like to record a common native belief in the existence
of a creature supposed to inhabit huge swamps on the borders of the
Katanga district of the Belgian Congo—the Bangmeolo [Bangweulu],
Minero [Mweru], the Kafue swamps. The detailed descriptions of this
creature vary, possibly through exaggerations, but they all agree on the
following points:


It is named the Chipekure [chipekwe]; it is of enormous size; it kills
hippopotami (there is no evidence to show it eats them, rather the con-
trary); it inhabits the deep swamps; its spoor (trail) is similar to a hip-
po’s in shape; it is armed with one huge tusk of ivory.


Lake Mweru is connected to Lake Bangweulu by the river-system of


the Luapula (where the Wa-Ushi killed their monster) and also to Lake


Tanganyika, since the Lualaba runs out of Lake Mweru and is joined
by the Lukuga, which runs out of Lake Tanganyika. So there is no


reason why we should not find the same animal in all three lakes.


Moreover in the area round the Lualaba, which links Lakes Mweru
and Tanganyika, the natives believe in a fairly similar animal. I owe my


453


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


information about this beast to Professor Paul Bonnivair, of the Insti-
—
tute of Agronomy at Gembloux in Belgium, who lived in the Belgian —
Congo from 1910 to 1932, ending his colonial career there as Inspector-
—
General of Agriculture and Forests.


It was soon after the first world war that he learnt of the existence of
the nzefu-loi from a friend and subordinate called Maurice Vermeersch,
who was then an Agricultural Inspector, and knew the Congo well,
having been there since 1906. He was particularly familiar with the
Baluba tribe, to whom his servant-boys belonged, and with whom he
had lived. The African who had been his tracker for six years, and in
whom he had perfect trust, gave him the following details about the
beast, which he passed on to Bonnivair.


The name nzefu-loi meant “‘water-elephant,” but did not necessarily
refer to a true elephant of semi-aquatic habits, as the pygmy is supposed


to be. Apparently the Baluba of the Kamolondo, called the beast nzefu-


lot for lack of a better name. According to Vermeersch’s tracker, it was
an amphibious animal with a body almost as big as a hippopotamus’s,
but with a very long neck and a hairy tail like a horse’s (the negroes
thereabouts were quite familiar with the horses at Lusambo and on
various farms). It had short and heavy ivory tusks—probably like a
walrus’s, Professor Bonnivair suggests. I suppose this may be why it is
called ‘“‘water-elephant.”


It shared, according to the tracker, the same evil potency that the
Nuer attributed to the Jau, and which is indeed generally alleged of any
rarely seen and supposedly dangerous animal in Africa. ““When you see


it you die.” But he added, ‘‘All the same, our fathers used to kill the
nzefu-loi in traps which we have forgotten how to make. They even
used to trade in its ivory. One day a Portuguese went off in a canoe to
hunt the nzefu-lot. He didn’t come back.”


The nzefu-loi used to inhabit the whole of the Kamolondo, the area of
lakes on the Lualaba between Bukama and Ankoro. There are more
than a dozen lakes between Bukama (9° S.) and Kaniamba (7° 30’ S.);
the largest being Upemba with its substantial fisheries, and Kisale, a


sea of papyrus similar to the swamps of the Upper Nile, where the Jau
dwells. Today much of the Kamolondo is included in the Upemba
National Park.


From the beast’s description Bonnivair could not help suggesting that
it might be a belated dinosaur of the Brontosaurus type. Certainly with
its long neck rising from a pachyderm’s massive body, the nzefu-loi is
very reminiscent of one of these extraordinary Mesozoic reptiles. The


454


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


horse’s tail should have raised some doubts on this score, but most
people are reluctant to abandon the notion of a surviving dinosaur.


Professor Bonnivair suggests that this theory of his, casually put for-
ward in conversation, might have been the remote cause of the Bronto-
saurus-hunt described at the beginning of this chapter.


My friend Maurice [he writes to me] went on leave in April 1918, and
as we were at war and as he liked South Africa and the Boers so much
that he was thinking of settling in the Transvaal, he spent his leave
there. Probably he told the above tale in some club or bar adorned with
slaughtered antelopes . . . besides true scientists and naturalist-sports-
men there are always braggarts of the Tartarin type. .
.
. Around 1920,
a Johannesburg weekly announced that a British South-African was
coming to the Congo to hunt the Brontosaurus in Katanga with dogs
specially trained for the purpose (how?) and anti-tank guns!


This must be our old friend Captain Leicester Stevens, but we cannot


tell whether Vermeersch, who died at Lomami in 1949, played Lepage’s
(or Gapelle’s) part, or whether he gave someone else the idea of the joke
which tempted Captain Stevens to have a crack at being St George.


Examined objectively, none of the trustworthy reports that I have
mentioned so far justifies us in using the word “dinosaur.” So far the
animal has never been a large reptile that stands on its hind-legs or an
animal with both a long neck and a long tail, which would be reasons for
calling it one. In many cases it is by no means certain that the beast is a
reptile: it is more like a mammal. Hagenbeck talks of “a huge monster,
half elephant, half dragon,” using the word “dragon” in the same sense


as the Komodo dragon. Unscientific reasons seem to have caused the
elephant half to be deliberately forgotten.


But the negroes cannot have been influenced by semi-digested
palaeontology, memories of Conan Doyle’s Lost World or horror-films.
Their evidence is therefore often more valuable, despite their tendency


to embroider. As a result of his inquiry about the /au, John G. Millais


was able to produce one of the only really significant reports about an


African animal which might be a sort of dinosaur.
It comes from the


remains of the Barotse “Empire,” on the middle Zambezi between its


tributaries the Chobe and Kafue, some 450 miles from Lakes Bang-


weulu and Mweru, where the chipekwe is supposed to live. Schomburgk


had heard rumours of a similar animal in Lake Dilolo, the source of one


tributary of the Zambezi. The Barotse monster seems at first sight to


belong to the same species as the chipekwe. Millais writes:


455


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


The late King Lewanika, who was much interested in the study of
the animals of his kingdom, Barotsiland, frequently heard from his
people of some great aquatic reptile, possessing a body larger than that
of an elephant, and which lived in the great swamps near his town. He
therefore gave strict orders that the next time one was seen he should be
told, and he would at once go himself and visit the place. In the follow-
ing year three men rushed into his court house one day in a great state
of excitement, and said they had just seen the monster lying on the edge
of the marsh, and that on viewing them it had retreated on its belly, and
slid into the deep water. The beast was said to be of colossal size, with
legs like a gigantic lizard, and possessing a long neck. It was also said
to be taller than a man, and had a head like a snake.


Lewanika at once rode to the spot and saw a large space where the
reeds had been flattened down, and a broad path, with water flowing
into the recently disturbed mud, made to the water’s edge. He de-
scribed the channel made by the body of the supposed monster to
Colonel Hardinge, the British Resident, ‘‘as large as a full-sized wagon
from which the wheels had been removed.”’


The Boers’ wagons were about 4 feet 6 inches wide. Millais does not
say what the Barotse called this beast, but Captain William Hichens
made inquiries and found that the natives always called it isigququmadevu.


Continuing clockwise around the Belgian Congo, we come to eastern
Angola, by following up the Zambezi—the middle reaches of which are
haunted by the tsiguqumadevu—towards the Dilolo marshes, where the
chipekwe lives. It is not surprising to find tales of similar amphibious
monsters there.


In 1932 a Swiss scientific expedition set about exploring Angola, its
aim being partly zoological. This project was announced in the Lisbon
newspapers in the previous December, whereupon A. da Paz Colaca, a
former agent of the Diamang, who had lived in this part of Africa for a
long time, wrote to the expedition’s zoologist, Dr A. Monard, about a
problem which had long interested him. He said that in that country
there was a large unknown reptile, compared to which “‘the common croc


is amere baby.” He had at first doubted whether the rumours he heard
were founded on fact, but little inquiry was needed to convince him
that there was something at the bottom of them. In the correspondence
that followed he gave so much detailed information that Dr Monard
eventually decided to go and see what it was all about. He said that the
libata, as he called it, was


amphibious, of huge size, and very voracious; it is extremely rare and
is seen only in the Chiumbe area. It is larger, much larger than a croco-
dile or a hippopotamus; there are none in the Luaximo, but only up in


456


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


the Chiumbe and in the Cuilo; it appears only at the beginning of the
rainy season or at the end of the cacimbo (July, August and September).


Fortunately Dr Monard. was one of that fairly rare breed of scien-
tists who keep an open mind:


The existence [he writes] of a large saurian descended from the rep-
tiles of the Mesozoic era is by no means theoretically impossible.
Though every continent has been crossed and recrossed, most travel-
lers follow much the same track, and there are still holes in the net to
be explored.
There have been several reports that some kind of
“Brontosaurus” survives, and several expeditions have even gone to
look for it; the fact that they failed may merely prove that this prehis-
toric beast is very rare or that it lives in country as inaccessible as the
great swamps still are.


There are some reasons, based on the history of the continents and
of the great reptiles, for thinking that they could survive only in those
continents which had already been formed at the end of the Mesozoic
era, in Gondwana, which consisted of southern and central Africa,
Madagascar, South America (chiefly Brazil), India and Australia.
India seems to be too populous and Australia too dry to be included—
which leaves Africa and Brazil. While it is not scientific to be too credu-
lous, it is no better to be incredulous; and there is no reason for saying
that the survival of some types of Mesozoic saurians is impossible.


In this admirably unpreiudiced frame of mind Dr Monard set off
into north-eastern Angola with C. E. Thiébaud as his companion, and
reached Dala, the Portuguese agent’s outpost on the right bank of the
Tyihumbwe—or Chiumbe. They camped there three days and then
went Io miles up-river to a village called Tyipukungu, where they
pitched camp on the bank ofa stream and remained there for four weeks:


We questioned the soma [chief] of Tyipukungu [Dr Monard reports]
and all the more intelligent natives; whenever we could we went to the
banks of the Tyihumbwe and paddled in the marshes in sun and rain.
The soma set two natives to watch the river when we could not do so.
I went and slept under the stars for three nights 6 miles from the camp
at a place where the /ipata was supposed to live; I put out a small pig
as bait, with a bag of strychnine tied to its leg. In fact we did all we
possibly could in the hopes of seeing the animal at least; but in vain.


The rains began to threaten, so the two explorers, who had come to
their own conclusions, packed their bags and returned the way they had
come. Dr Monard was able to establish the following facts about the
mysterious animal:


1. Its name is pata, and not libata as my correspondent wrote. All
the natives pronounce it in the same way.


457


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


2. It exists only in the upper Tyihumbwe and in the Kasai; I have
heard nothing of its presence in the Kuilo.


Around Tyipukungu there are only two, one some 6 miles upstream
from the other. Some natives say that there are three, others that there
are many. Later we were told that the upstream lipata (the one I set
the bait for) had left its favourite haunt to settle even further upstream.


3. It is almost always hidden in the water; it does not appear on the
surface except in the morning between 9 and 10 o’clock. Others say
that you can see it in the evening before the sun goes down. All agree
that it is very active when rain falls and that there is the best chance of
seeing it then.


It rarely comes out of the water; all the same we were shown some
faint tracks made by the /ipata on a little beach; they were too obli-
terated for us to make anything of them.


On 1 September 1932 a man from Tyipukungu saw it sleeping on dry
land around 9 or 10 a.m.


The women on the Tyihumbwe who are in the habit of fishing on the
river have almost all seen it at one time or another. They make a point
of shouting before going into the water and this drives the beast away.


As soon as it hears or is aware of man it dives and disappears.
4. It attacks animals of all kinds: goats, pigs, cattle and even men
which it swallows in one mouthful.
It will also eat crocodiles. The
year before (1931), it took an ox and a goat belonging to the natives.
This year it had taken nothing so far. Our correspondent knew of its
existence in 1927 when he was on the way to Dala; the natives came and
asked him for guns to kill it with, for it had just taken one of their cattle.


5. Several lipatas have been killed. When the soma was a boy (which
must have been 40 to 45 years ago), the natives set a trap after a lipata
had taken three of their cattle. The animal took the bait and was killed.


A white man who had shot a hippopotamus one evening came back
in the morning to haul his-quarry out of the water. He saw two lipatas
eating its meat and succeeded in killing one.


6. We showed the natives a drawing of a crocodile; they unhesitat-
ingly called it pata. They called the larger of two other drawings
lipata and the smaller ngandu (crocodile). Of a second pair, one broad
and the other narrow, they called the first /ipata, the second ngandu.


The animal is said to be 13 to 20 feet long; like the crocodile it has
a serrated ridge of scales along its tail; its mouth is larger, its throat
wider and its eyes are closer together on the top of its head—an in-
teresting detail.


One native said that the pata is a ngandu; but they all distinguish
between the two animals. If you try to find what the difference is, the
answer is always the same: lipata big, ngandu small. They do not seem
to know of the existence of young /ipatas, nor of big crocodiles.


Dr Monard draws the following conclusions:


From all these inquiries my impression is that the /ipata is merely a
crocodile: its habits and its description agree with what we know of


458


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


crocodiles. The experiments made with drawings confirm this opinion.
There can be no question of a prehistoric animal or fantastic dinosaur.
For us the problem is solved. If the /ipata exists it is a crocodile.


But which? From the Africans’ sense of zoology, it may well be that
we have two species of crocodile here. Only four species are known in
Africa: Crocodylus vulgaris, C. cataphractus, C. frontatus and Osteo-
laemus tetraspis. The first is spread all over Ethiopian Africa; the others
are rarely found except north of the Congo. The native descriptions are
far too vague for one to be able to say for certain which species it is.
There are therefore three possibilities:


1. The [ipata consists merely of large and old specimens of C.
vulgaris (niloticus).


2. The /ipata is one of the other African species, in a new habitat to
the south of its area of ditribution.


3. The lipata is an as yet unknown species of crocodile, either related
to the known African species, or of an American or Asian genus.
It
may even belong to a new genus of these large reptiles.


I need hardly say that only an examination of a skin or skull can settle
the question.


These conclusions, though based on a thorough inquiry, call for some


criticism, The fact that some natives describe the /ipata as a large ngandu
does not mean that it must be a true crocodile, for the inhabitants of
Flores call the Komodo dragon a “land crocodile.” I also think it is
going too far to say that “its habits and its description agree with what


105. Outline of the snout of the chief African crocodiles. Left: Nilotic
crocodile (Crocodylus niloticus).
Centre: West African dwarf crocodile


(Osteolaemus tetraspis). Right: African slender-snouted crocodile (Croco-
dylus cataphractus).


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


we know of crocodiles.” To leave the water but rarely and hunt only


at night does not fit in with these far from shy reptiles. Nor should he
maintain that it cannot be a “prehistoric animal or fantastic dinosaur.”
All the crocodiles are prehistoric animals: the existing genera have re-
mained almost unchanged since the beginning of the Tertiary era. The
dinosaurs did not all have the Sauropods’ familiar long neck and tail.
They varied greatly, some resembled the ostrich, kangaroo and rhino-
ceros in outline. Others, such as the primitive Stegosaurians, especially
the Ankylosaurs, actually looked like crocodiles.


Dr Monard cannot, of course, be accused of sceptical bias, but he is
not entirely free of prejudice. Perhaps the stories of ““Brontosaurus-
hunts” mentioned earlier led him to hope that he might discover a rep-


tile of this particular type. When he realised that the pata looked like —


a common crododile he made up his mind but, I think, somewhat pre-
maturely. The way he abandoned the search for what might be an
unknown species of crocodile—or at least a new geographic race of a
known species—makes one think he was moved to do so by a fit of
disappointment.


If Dr Monard really wanted to find an unusual type of animal in
Angola he may have been looking in the wrong place. In the Upper
Cuango and Upper Cuanza we shall find detailed rumours about a much
more extraordinary creature than the /ipata. Ilse von Nolde, who spent


10 years in eastern Angola, reported in 1930 that the natives believed
that there was an amphibious monster known in Kimbundu as coje ya
menia or ‘‘water-lion.” This may be because of the sound of its roar.
They often drew her attention to distant rumbling sounds they said
were made by this beast, which generally lived in the water but quite
often climbed out on to the bank. During the rainy season, when the
Cuanza was usually in flood, the coje ya menia moved to smaller rivers
and swamps, and it was at this time that one had the best chance of
seeing one. Thus the Angola “‘water-lion” roars like the Jukwata and
lau of the Nile marshes; it also slaughters all the hippopotami, even
though it is smaller than they are, like the chipekwe of the sources of the
Congo. And like the nzefu-loi of the Lualaba it is said to have tusks or
large canine teeth which it uses for killing.


One day Frau von Nolde met a native wearing splendid hippopota-
mus-skin sandals and happened to ask him where he had killed the
beast that provided the leather. The native replied at once that he had
not killed the hippopotamus himself: he had found it dead, killed by the
coje ya menia. A Portuguese lorry-driver who ran a service along the


460


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


Cuango told Frau von Nolde a strange story. One day on the Cuango
around 9° S. latitude he learnt that a coje ya menia had chased and killed


a hippopotamus the night before. He went off with several native hun-


ters and found the tracks of this chase. For several hours they followed


this trail through the savannah. It consisted of the tracks of a hippo-
potamus that was obviously in a hurry, mixed with unknown tracks


smaller than a hippopotamus’s, a little like an elephant’s but within the


circular print there was “‘the mark of toes beneath the sole of the foot.”


At last the trackers reached a place where the grass and bushes had been


crushed and smashed, and in the middle of this battlefield lay the carcase


of a hippopotamus hacked and ripped as if with a huge bush-knife.


Nothing had been eaten.


Frau von Nolde stresses the skill with which the natives are able to
interpret spoor and the accuracy of their deductions, and adds,


I have seen negroes crouching over a track, and from grains of sand,
crushed grass and animals’ footprints, follow every stage of a battle
with as much interest as we follow an exciting story at the cinema.


She also insists that the lorry-driver, a perfectly sober man of average


education, told her the story quite objectively, concluding,


There can be no question of confusion with the crocodile, as one


might be tempted to suppose.
In all the tribes the crocodile is called
gandu [ngandu according to Dr Monard], and the hippopotamus gufu.


Crossing the Congo estuary we come full circle in the Cameroons.
In 1913 they were still
a German colony, and Kaiser Wilhelm’s
Government sent out a reconnaissance expedition, the Likuala~-Kongo
Expedition, to map the country and report on its mineral and vegetable
wealth. In charge of the expedition was Freiherr von Stein zu Lausnitz,


a captain in the colonial forces. His official report was never published,
because Germany lost interest in the Cameroons when she lost the
colony itself after the 1914-18 war, but it still exists in manuscript, and
Willy Ley has published the passage about “‘a creature feared very much
by the Negroes of certain parts of the territory of the Congo, the lower
Ubangi, the Sanga and the Ikelemba rivers.” They called the creature


mokéle-mbémbe.
Captain von Stein points out that his information is


based on the accounts of “experienced guides who repeated characteris-


tic features of the story without knowing each other.”


The creature is reported not to live in the smaller rivers like the two


Likualas, and in the rivers mentioned only a few individuals are said to
exist. At the time of our expedition a specimen was reported from the


461


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


non-navigable part of the Sanga River, somewhere between the two
rivers Mbaio and Pikunda; unfortunately in a part of the river that
could not be explored due to the brusque end of our expedition. We
also heard about the alleged animal at the Ss6mbo River. The narra-
tives of the natives result in a general description that runs as follows:


The animal is said to be of a brownish-grey colour with a smooth
skin, its size approximating that of an elephant; at least that of a hippo-
potamus.
It is said to have a long and very flexible neck and only one
tooth but a very long one; some say it is a horn. A few spoke about a
long muscular tail like that of an alligator. Canoes coming near it are
said to be doomed; the animal is said to attack the vessels at once and
to kill the crews but without eating the bodies. The creature is said to
live in the caves that have been washed out by the river in the clay of
its shores at sharp bends. It is said to climb the shore even at daytime
in search of food; its diet is said to be entirely vegetable. This feature
disagrees with a possible explanation as a myth. The preferred plant
was shown to me; it is a kind of liana with large white blossoms, with a
milky sap and apple-like fruits.


The information collected by Freiherr von Stein was confirmed in
every detail in 1938 by Dr Leo von Boxberger, another German who had
been a magistrate in Africa for a long time when Germany still had


colonies in that continent. He adds,


My own contribution to the subject is unfortunately very small. At
the mouth of the- Mbam in Sanaga in Central Cameroons and on the
Ntem in Southern Cameroons, I collected a variety of data from the
natives about the mysterious water-beast, but, alas, all my notes and
also the local description of the animal were lost in Spanish Guinea
when the Pangwe attacked the caravan carrying my few belongings. All
that I can report is the name mbokdlemuembe given to the animal in
Southern Cameroons. ..
.


The belief in a gigantic water-animal, described as a reptile with a
long thin neck, exists among the natives throughout the Southern
Cameroons, wherever they form part of the Congo basin and also to the
west of this area, doubtless wherever the great rivers are broad and deep
and are flanked by virgin forest.


Ivan T. Sanderson writes to me that in 1932 he came upon “vast
hippo-like tracks” on the Upper Cross River above Mamfe Pool, where
there were no hippos because this creature—whose name he transcribes
from Anyang as mbulu-eM’bembe—drove them away. Some months


later,


Gerald Russell and I with two boys in two small canoes entered this
river from below through a gorge into the Mamfe Pool at dusk, as we
passed some all-but-submerged caves in the cliffside, got the shock of


1 This refers to the outbreak of the World War [Ley’s note].
462


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


our lives when the most terrific noises I have heard outside of warfare
issued from one of the said caves and something (and it was the top of a
head we both feel sure) much larger than a hippo rose out of the water
for a moment, set up a large wave and then gurgled under.


In the northern Cameroons the natives also fear a water-monster,
which, though it seems very different from the mbokdlemuembe or
mokéle-mbémbe, is reminiscent in name at least of the coje ya menia or


“water-lion” of eastern Angola. This is told by another German colo-


nial called Naumann of Ulm, who once belonged to the German Im-


perial Defence Corps in the Cameroons:


In the New Cameroons, which we had retaken from the French in
1912, I was in the Kaja territory north of the Uam which runs into Lake
Chad. The Kaja who live among the granite rocks were astonished to
see me ride a horse. They had never seen one. This is what they told
my interpreter:


In their country there was also a big beast with a large mane which
lived in the water. The animal was very dangerous, it was
a much
feared wild beast. It was only very rarely seen.
Its name in the Baya
language was dilai, or ‘‘water-lion.”’


Although I promised a reward of 50 marks, no one was able to show
me this animal. In another area they were called “‘water-leopards.”’ In
the Foulbé language there was also a name for them.


I have had independent confirmation of this information, and also had


it much completed by Lucien Blancou, formerly Chief Game Inspector
in French Equatorial Africa, one of the greatest experts on the fauna of


this area; moreover he has helped to tidy up the confusion a little.
“Throughout the Ubangi-Shari,” he writes, “there are traditions and


tales concerning at least two hitherto unknown animals.” One is what
the Baya call dilali (and not dilai)—which in fact does mean “‘water-
lion”—the Banda mourou-ngou (“‘water-panther”) and the Youlou gas-
singram. It is a wild beast generally described as aquatic, except by the
Youlou, who live in mountainous country.
“The dilal,” remarks
Blancou, “is supposed to have been looked for in vain by a German


lieutenant when this country was occupied by the Germans from 1912


to 1914.” More than likely this is our Naumann of Ulm.


The other unknown animal is called diba by the Baya, badigui by the
Banda, who also call it ngakoula-ngou (water-devil) in another dialect,
and songo by the Banziri. It is said to be a sort of huge snake which
occasionally strangles hippopotami but does not eat them.


Let us see what Blancou can tell us about the first of these mysterious
water-beasts. On 26 May 1930, when he belonged to the Civil Service


463


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


of French Equatorial Africa, he had shot his first hippopotamus in the


little River Mbari, a tributary of the Ouaka in the north of the Ippy sub-
division. This happened in the heart of Ubangi-Shari, deep in the bush,
several days’ march from the nearest villages.


The animal still had not floated at nightfall, so we camped near by
until the following day waiting for the carcase to come to the surface.
During the night there was a high wind and small rain. At dawn the
porters and trackers told me that they had heard a mourou-ngou calling
near the dead hippo. When the beast had been dragged ashore I saw
that there were signs that the carcase had been bitten, apparently by
crocodiles. But all my men knew crocodiles well. Unfortunately they
had not thought it necessary to wake me so that I could hear the


9699
“‘water-panther’s”’
cry.


Blancou’s curiosity was aroused and he lost no chance of finding out
more about the mysterious beast, elsewhere known as the “‘water-lion.”
In 1932 at Bozoum in eastern Ubangi-Shari an interpreter called Ghazi
said that the diJai—though he had not seen it himself—had a horse’s
body and a lion’s claws. A native guard of Zandé origin who was pre-
sent during the conversation added that it had large tusks like a walrus’s.
He maintained that it ate fish, though the Baya said it ate nothing but
leaves, and it was shown not to be a carnivore by an old chief’s story
that they had found a hippo and a crocodile, some two miles from the


river, which had been bitten by the di/ai but were otherwise intact.


When Blancou was at Ndélé in central Ubangi-Shari in 1934 a Banda
guard called Abdoulaye told him that the mourou-ngou even killed ele-
phants, especially on the Iomba River. He was told this again, four years


later, by another African guard: according to certain negroes in the
south of Ndélé there was a mourou-ngou at the source of the River Bami-
ngui (one of the main branches of the eastern Shari). It killed elephants
and dragged them to a cave in the middle of the forest.


It was also in 1934 that the old interpreter and veteran rifleman,
Moussa VII, brought a Morouba Banda tribesman, about 60 years old
and also called Moussa, to see Blancou. This old man told a story which
Blancou relates as follows:


In 1911 (this date has been cross-checked) when he was porter with
a detachment of riflemen going from Fort Crampel to Ndélé, Moussa
saw one of these soldiers seized by a mourou-ngou at the junction of the
Bamingui and the Koukourou. The animal was shaped like a panther,
a little larger than a lion but with stripes, and about 12 feet long. The
background of its coat was likewise the colour of a panther’s, but its
footprint was oddly described as containing a circle in the middle (?).


464


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


The soldier was in a canoe when the animal came out of the Koukou-
rou “like a hippo,’ just where the rivers met, seized the man in the
canoe and dragged him into the water capsizing the boat, surfaced once
more with the soldier in its mouth and then disappeared. The man
paddling the canoe swam safely away, but the soldier’s rifle and kit
remained on the bottom of the river. After this drama the detachment


decided not to cross the river there but went some three days’ march


farther east before doing so.


Moussa told me that he never saw the mourou-ngou nor its footprints
again. He had found them some time before, in almost the same place,
when he was driving Sultan Snoussi’s cattle to Fort Crampel. They
were beside the Koukourou, and larger than alion’s. Moussa had never
heard this animal cry, nor had he heard tell of its cry. This seems to have
happened in the middle of the rainy season, in August or thereabouts.


This story struck me at once, because I had just been checking the
records of the outpost at Ndélé and found signs that a rifleman had been
lost about this time.


In 1936 Blancou was told at Fort Crampel in central Ubangi-Shari
that the mourou-ngou had carried off men from a village called Dogolo-
mandji into the River Gribingui without leaving a trace, and that this had
persuaded a party of villagers to move away from the river. The Banda
in this area had never seen the “‘water-panther,” and so could not de-
scribe it, but they could tell it was not a crocodile because it left no
remains of its victims.


About a decade later, in 1945, the same Game-Inspector’s gunbearer,
called Mitikata, drew the following sketch of the mourou-ngou for him.
It was about 8 feet long. It had a small head, fangs like a lion’s, a plump
body which was brownish above and below, and a panther’s tail. It
lived in the water all the time, raising its head above the waves only in
the evening, and killed men by dragging them into deep water. Mitikata
added that he had never seen a “‘water-panther” himself but old men had
described it to him. It was supposed to live in the Ouaka and Kotto rivers.


In 1937 the village chief of Ouanda-Djalé, in eastern Ubangi-Shari,
told Blancou about a mysterious beast called gassingrém which haunted
the district. He said it was larger than a lion and reddish-brown all over.
Moreover its footprints were larger. It had been seen abroad in the


daytime, thought very rarely, carrying off its prey to caves in the moun-


tains. At night its eyes shone like lamps.


Blancou thinks this animal is the same as the di/ali and the mourou-


ngou because they are all described as large cats, but it seems to me that


the striking difference in habitat confutes this view. To introduce a land


animal into this chapter of amphibious monsters can only confuse it


GG
465


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


even more, and God knows it is confused enough already by animals
very different from one another.


Let us proceed to the second unknown animal in the Ubangi-Shari,
the snake-like badigui, also known as ngakoula-ngou.


In 1930 or thereabouts it was described to Lucien Blancou by the
Linda Banda of Ippy as a gigantic snake that killed hippos without leav-
ing any sign of a wound and browsed on branches of trees without leav-
ing the water. This would of course be a very odd diet for a snake,
which in any case would not be able to lift its head out of the water
unless it was resting on the bottom, so one may well suspect that there
might be a bulkier body behind the snake-like head and neck. Like the
isiququmadevu and the mokéle-mbémbe, it really does remind one of a
dinosaur.


The chief of the Yetomane division, a great hunter thoroughly at
home in the bush, and other Linda Banda told Blancou that a year be-


fore he took over his post, that is to say in 1928, one of these animals had
crushed a field of manioc belonging to the chief and had left tracks
between 3 and 5 feet wide. The same beast was said to have killed a
hippopotamus at about the same time in the River Brouchouchou near
Chief Mapouka’s village. The villagers had no qualms about eating the
“water-devil’s” prey.


The Baya gave Blancou a similar description of the monster, which
they called diba, at Bozoum in 1932, and so did a young Banziri secre-


tary, who said that it was traditionally called songo. In 1934 he learnt
more precise and definite details about the beast from old Moussa,
whose information about the mourou-ngou has already been quoted. In-
deed the reason why the old man was brought to see the white man who
was interested in animals was because he was known as “‘the-man-who-
had-seen-the-badigui.”


When he was about 14 years old [Lucien Blancou relates], and the
Whites had not yet come (about 1890, I suppose), Moussa was out lay-
ing fish-traps with his father in the Kibi stream, which runs into a tribu-
tary of the Ouaka called the Gounda in what is now the Bakala district.
It was one o’clock in the afternoon in the middle of the rainy season.
Suddenly Moussa saw the badigui eating the large leaves of a roro, a tree
which growns in forest-galleries. Its head was flat and a bit larger than
a python’s (Moussa spread his hands and put them together to show
me the size). Its neck was as thick as a man’s thigh and about 25 feet
long, much longer than a giraffe’s; it had no hair, but was as smooth as


1 This figure is, of course, Blancou’s, based on Moussa’s
indications; “much
longer than a giraffe’s” is a more valuable yardstick. Now a giraffe’s neck is 7 or


466


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


a snake, with similar but larger markings. The underneath of its neck
was lighter—also like a snake’s. Moussa did not see its body.


His father told him to follow him and run away. The animal gave no
cry, but Moussa said that he had heard its cry at other times when he
had not seen the beast himself. He did not imitate it for me.


According to him, the old men believed the badigui was dangerous,
but he had never heard of anyone else meeting one. He had seen its
tracks out of the water, but only on the bank, and they were as broad as
a python’s. Finally he said that the badigui does not frequent places
where you find hippopotami, for it kills them.


In 1945 Mitikata, Lucien Blancou’s gun-bearer, whom I have already
mentioned, told him about the ngakoula-ngou, saying that it was a huge
snake which left tracks as broad as a lorry. He said he had seen one of
these tracks 15 years before, near the outpost at Ndélé, but not the
animal itself.


I should add [remarks Blancou], that the Africans in these parts kill


hundreds of pythons of all sizes every-year, so they know them perfectly
well.


So much for the reports. Do they all refer to the same animal?
Hardly. In fact there is only one respect in which all agree. They are


all amphibious. Indeed, this has been my criterion in including them in


this chapter. They are also not so very different in size. The /ukwata is
the size of a small porpoise or a large manatee, the dingonek’s back is as
broad as a hippo, the /au is as thick as a donkey or horse, the chipekwe
and the coje ya menia a little smaller than a hippo, the mokéle-mbémbe,
the nzefu-loi and the “‘beast-that-makes-the-earth-shake” as big as a
hippo, the isigugumadevu and the lipata bigger than a hippo, and the
mourou-ngou bigger than a lion—the differences are not great—no more
than might be due to the animal’s age and sex and the narrator’s degree
of exaggeration. Where figures are given the only real discrepancy is in
the size of the Jau. The negroes’ estimates varied between 40 and 100


feet. As they were all referring to the same carcase, someone must


obviously have been exaggerating considerably, especially as Jackson


says the Jau is usually smaller than the python. Old Moussa’s reckoning


that the badigui’s neck alone was 25 feet long, may well be a mistake, as


I have suggested above. Moreover half a century had passed since he


8 feet long. If the badigui’s neck was really 25 or even 15 feet long Moussa would
surely have said “‘two or three times as long as a giraffe’s.” I think a length of 10
or 12 feet is a reasonable interpretation of Moussa’s evidence.


467


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


saw the beast, and it is common knowledge that dimensions increase
with time.


We can therefore say that all the reports refer to an amphibious animal
with a body roughly as thick as a hippopotamus’s—rather less according


to most of them. This has led some authors into thinking all the animals
are the same. Yet in other respects they are very different. Here are
some of the more glaring discrepancies:


The skin is sometimes said to be covered with scales, sometimes bare


or smooth. In some the neck is short; in others it is long, even very long
and flexible. The tail is at one time compared to a crocodile’s, at another


to a horse’s or to a panther’s. Finally it is surprising to find that some
have tusks or fangs like a walrus’s, while others have a little horn on the
nose and one even has a crest and barbels. While these features do not
mutually exclude one another, they are too conspicuous to have been
noticed in some animals and not in others. They might all of them be
features peculiar to the male as a result of sexual dimorphism; but it is
most unusual to find a female with a feature absent in the male. For
instance, it is hard to imagine a species in which only the male had large
tusks and only the female had a horn on the nose. Nature is not chival-
rous, the males get all the finery.


In short, the various descriptions of African “dragons” obviously


refer to at least three quite different types of animal—so it is not sur-
prising that a mixture of these creatures has produced an absurd and
fantastic beast, which it is difficult to believe in, let alone identify.


The thorough inquiry that Lucien Blancou was able to make when
he was game-warden in French Equatorial Africa has shown that in a
particular area the natives believe in two distinct amphibious animals,
both unknown to science. One is a beast of prey, with large fangs and
hooked claws, which swallows its victims leaving nothing behind, the
other is a long-necked vegetarian which kills hippos but does not eat
them.


Two more different animals can hardly be imagined, yet even among


the natives there is some confusion between the two, doubtless because
they are so rare and because their names, which are similar, have been
misunderstood. Thus the Baya, who say that the diJali or “‘water-lion”
has a horse’s body and a lion’s claws, claim that it eats nothing but


leaves. A Zandé who was present when this information was elicited
believed that it had large tusks and lived on fish. The name dilali there-
fore seems to have been applied to two different animals.


The converse is equally true. Blancou, like Naumann, thought that


468


<2
Sy
Ps


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


different peoples used the names, “‘water-panther” and “‘water-lion” to
describe the same animal; but the first is supposed to leave no scrap of
the elephants and men it attacks, which hardly agrees with the second
being supposedly a vegetarian.


Sometimes known animals have similar names, which only confuses
descriptions which are vague enough already. Thus the Banda do not
use the term mourou-ngou (water-panther) only for a savage monster; it


is likewise the name for the giant water-shrew (Potamogale velox), which


is also called kovoro. This animal is a giant for an insectivore, but it is
barely 2 feet long and feeds chiefly on fresh-water snails, clams, frogs
and fish. Moreover the panther itself may have added to the legend of
the mourou-ngou: for it is not afraid of water, swims well and catches fish
in shallow water.


The whole question is extremely muddled, and if we are to make any
sense of it we must try to eliminate the various animals which have no
business here.


Let us deal first with the animals which seem to have short necks: the
dingonek (or ol-umaina) of Kenya, Lieutenant Gritz’s “degenerate
saurian,”’ the nsanga of Lake Bangweulu, and the voracious ipata which
Dr Monard searched for in Angola. The mourou-ngou with its spots and
projecting fangs is probably similar to the dingonek and should therefore
be included in this first group.


Now all these are rather heavily-built quadrupeds, between 12 and
16 feet long, reminiscent in shape of a crocodile, giant lizard or theore-


tically even an ultra-gigantic otter.


There seems little doubt that the /ipata is some kind of crocodile: the
saw-like ridge of scales on the tail, and particularly the eyes close to-
gether on the top of the head, are very characteristic.


One cannot be so positive about the others, though the dingonek or
ol-umaina has several of a crocodile’s features. It is covered with con-
spicuous scales and has a broad, long tail. It is spotted like a leopard,


as crocodiles not infrequently are. But only with a great deal of exag-
geration can a crocodile’s largest teeth, like canines, be compared to a
walrus’s tusks. Moreover, the dingonek’s head has been compared to an


otter’s, a dog’s and lioness’s, and this hardly agrees with the Nile croco-


dile’s characteristically long skull and jaws. And what are we to make of
the sort of ears it is alleged to have, which may be like the horns of a
horned viper?


It is only among prehistoric reptiles that we find true tusks. Without


469


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


going so far as to maintain that it must be one of them, we can safely say
that the dingonek belongs to a very special genus. In the jungle rivers of
West Africa there lives the little black crocodile (Osteolaemus), which


differs from the other African crocodiles, all of which belong to the
genus Crocodylus, in being darker, smaller (not much over 6 feet long),
and especially in having a shorter rounder head like a cayman’s. Per-
haps, unknown to us, there may be a giant species, slightly larger than
the Nile crocodile, and doubtless on the road to extinction.
If small
colonies of such a species survived in Kenya, Ubangi-Shari and Angola,


it might explain the legends of the dingonek (or ol-umaina), the mourou-
ngou and the lipata.


The nsanga alone of this first group cannot possibly be classed among
the crocodiles, from which it differs in its smooth skin and in having
claws; for, while the crocodiles do have claws, they are short and more


like nails, and cannot be compared with the hooked claws on some toes
of most lizards. As lizards’ scales are sometimes so small and incon-
spicuous that the skin seems smooth, it is more than likely that the
nsanga is a large lizard. A smooth-skinned crocodile with claws reminds
one irresistibly of a giant monitor like the Komodo dragon.


As the monitors have fairly long necks—at all events longer and more


flexible than those of crocodiles—the msanga will serve as a link with the
next group of African “dragons,” those which, in part at least, are shaped


like snakes: the Jau of the Upper Nile swamps, the nzefu-loi of southern
Belgian Congo, the isigugumadevu of the Upper Zambezi, the mokéle-
mbémbe of the Cameroons and the badigui of Ubangi-Shari.


We can set the /au quite apart from the rest of this group, from all of
which it differs in so many peculiar features that its identity seems to me
quite transparent. It is described as a thick, short water-snake, with a


crest of “hair” and barbels on its head; it makes a loud, rumbling noise,
comes out of the water and leaves a broad track on land and lives in holes
burrowed in the banks.


Apart from the beast’s size, this description perfectly fits a fish of the
catfish family (Siluridae), of which there are many species in all the
muddy waters of tropical Africa. The catfishes may be recognised by
the long barbels around the very wide mouth, some of which sprout
from the nose itself. Some catfishes have a dorsal fin which might be
mistaken for a crest. They all tend to have long bodies, the extreme
being Gymnallabes and Channallabes, which have no pelvic or pectoral


fins and look exactly like eels—or snakes. Those of the genera Clarias
and Heterobranchus have complex organs inside their gill-cavities,


470


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


thus allowing them to breathe air on the surface. At night they come
out of the water and crawl on land in search of animal food. Clarias
lazera of the Sudan even spends the dry season in burrows, from which


it also emerges on the prowl at night. And Ewurropius has long air-


sacs as further aid to respiration. Although they have no vocal


cords, these fish can still make a growling noise which can be heard a


long way off. Finally, in front of some of their fins, certain catfishes


have poisonous spines which can cause appalling wounds, and there is


one, the electric catfish (Malopterurus), called raad or “thunder-fish” by


106. African catfish of the genus Clarias.


the Arabs, which produces violent electric shocks. It is hardly surpris-
ing that such fish should be much feared and surrounded with all sorts
of superstitions. Indeed, it would be natural enough if it was eventually
believed that you could be thunderstruck if some of them so much as
looked at you.


There remains the Jau’s alleged size. In Africa none of the known cat-


fishes is very large: the electric catfish is the biggest at 5 feet long. But


the giant catfish or wels of European rivers is sometimes more than 10


feet long and weighs more than 400 pounds. Professor Osmond P.


Breland writes with his usual caution: “This fish is said to attain a


length of fifteen feet and a weight of over 700 pounds, but I have not


471


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


been able to confirm these figures.” It seems to be the largest known
freshwater fish. It is enormously voracious, attacking not only other


fish, but also small land animals like birds and mammals.


Thus it would not be so strange if there were an unknown and per-
haps formidable giant catfish in Africa. My friend André Capart,
Assistant Director of the Laboratory of the Belgian Royal Institute of
Natural History, who led the Lakes Kivu, Edward and Albert Expedi-
tion in 1953-4, tells me that they discovered a large unknown catfish
(genus Heterobranchus) about 3 feet long in Lake Edward. The native
fishermen used to believe it was an evil spirit called giricho, and that to
catch it or even to see it brought bad luck. Naturally nobody took any
notice of them.


The lukwata of Lake Victoria, which Sir Harry Johnston thought was


“more probably a gigantic fish,” is also very likely a huge catfish. Sir
-


Clement Hill, who saw one, said that it had a rounded, fish-like head.
The head of a catfish 4 feet long may be as much as 16 inches wide, so


it is easy to see how terrifying the gaping maw of a similar fish would be


if it were two or three times the size.


The nzefu-loi or ““water-elephant” is a particularly thorny question,
but it may give a clue to part of the problem. Since it is alleged to have


a hairy tail like a horse’s, it cannot very well be a reptile. But why on
earth should it be one? The reference to a “‘very long neck” has sug-
gested the notion of some sort of Brontosaurus. May it not really be an
elephant, as its name implies, one of those little “‘water-elephants”’ that
I have already discussed? The “‘water-elephant’s” neck is longer than
that of the ordinary elephants, and it certainly has hair like horsehair on


its tail, as all the elephants do. Moreover, may not the tales of amphi-
bious monsters as much like an elephant as a hippopotamus or “‘half-
elephant, half-dragon” be founded on the same kind of animal?


Here it may help if I quote the first circumstantial account ever pub-
lished about elephants of aquatic habits. We owe it to one Le Petit; and
Ihave referred to a summary version of it on page 363. He also
gave a British naturalist called R. J. Cuninghame a much more detailed
report about them. During the five years he spent travelling. in the
French and Belgian Congo, Le Petit twice saw water-elephants. The


first time was in 1907, and they were swimming in the Congo River
near its junction with the Kasai. He saw them a second time in the
swampy area between Lake Tumba and Lake Leopold II, “‘near to
where the M’fini River finds its exit from Lake Leopold II.”


472


3 ht
ate


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


On the second occasion [Cuninghame reports], he saw five of these
animals on land and was able to look at them for fully one minute
through his glasses and, as they were in tall grass 400 yards distant, hé
had a good opportunity to observe. He took a shot at one of them and


hit it in the shoulder, but though he offered the natives an ample
reward they never were able to recover it.


Height at shoulder, 6 to 8 feet. Legs relatively short. Back curved as
in E. africanus. Tail not observed. Neck about twice the length of E.
africanus with ears similar in shape to those of that species, but rela-
tively smaller. Head most distinctly long and ovoid in form, with trunk
only about 2 feet in length. The shape of the feet was seen in the spoor
on sand and showed four toes distinctly separated as in the hippopota-
mus, but the weight of the body seemed to be carried by the toes
largely, while the plantar impression of the sole was not very pro-
nounced. The ground was level where this spoor was seen.
All the
animals observed had no traces of tusks. Skin is apparently hairless,
smooth and shiny resembling that of a hippopotamus, only darker. The
gait was elephantine, and the last seen of those five water-elephants was
their disappearance into the water, which was deep.


In habit they are nocturnal, coming out to feed on strong rank grass
after sundown. They spend the day in the water much as hippopotami
do. The Babumas (fishing natives) know this animal well and have a
name for it, ‘Ndgoko na Maiji’, meaning the water-elephant, and they
fear it greatly as it is known to rise from the water and with its short
trunk capsize canoes.
It is also very destructive to the nets and reed
fishtraps of the natives. Its locality is apparently very restricted, and the
natives maintain they are not very numerous.


Cuninghame goes on to remark that the primitive forms of the Pro-
boscidea had a “long-shaped, ovoid type of skull” like modern tapirs and
that “the cervical vertebrae were antero-posteriorly much longer than


is now the case in modern elephants.” He concludes: “These two
characteristics are very marked in the water-elephants, and M. Le Petit


is most emphatic that the heads reminded him more of enormous tapirs
than of any other existing animal.”


Le Petit’s strange Proboscidea are so much more like certain primi-
tive and supposedly-extinct elephants than any modern species that one
cannot help wondering whether the pygmy elephants so far reported,
Lieutenant Franssen’s, for instance, really belong to the same species.
None of the published photographs and descriptions showed the odd


features noticed by Le Petit, the short trunk, long neck and thinner toes.


Some fossil elephants have survived until very recently in Africa,
where they were certainly contemporary with man. The huge Dino-
therium, with tusks curving downwards like a walrus’s, was one of them.
The largest species (D. giganteum) was 16 feet high at the shoulder. The


473


107. Reconstruction of the Dinotherium.


remains of a smaller species (D. hopwoodi) have been excavated from
Pleistocene deposits not more than 100,000 years old in Kenya and
Tanganyika.


At the end of the last century some zoologists refused to admit that
the Dinotherium was quite extinct. Might not a small aquatic species


still survive in the swampy areas of the Congo basin? Nor is the nzefu-


loi the only “dragon” in the upper reaches of a tributary of the Congo
which might be a sort of elephant. Frau von Nolde says of the usual
description of the coje ya menia or “water-lion” of the Upper Cuango
that it “always seems to apply to some pachyderm armed with powerful


teeth which it uses as weapons,” and the animal’s tracks were described


to her as like an elephant’s with “the mark of toes beneath the sole of
the foot.” And according to the Zandé I have already quoted, the dilak


or “‘water-lion” of the Upper Ubangi had tusks like a walrus’s.


All these “‘water-lions”—a name which ‘may be an allusion to their
ferocity, power or sovereignty over other beasts—are supposed to kill
hippopotami, but not to eat them. It would not be at all surprising to
find a water-elephant behaving in this way. The hippopotami would
occupy the same habitat and claim the same territory and vegetable
food, so they would be particular enemies.
It is easy to see how the
water-elephant might chase a hippopotamus ashore, stabbing savagely
with its tusks, and eventually leave it in the state in which the beast was


474


a yee
6 |
tk


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


found that had been so appallingly lacerated by a coje ya menia. This is
certainly the way a Dinotherium would fight, with its tusks pointing
down like a walrus’s or a sabre-toothed tiger’s canines.


Now that we have eliminated a short-nosed crocodile, a giant catfish
and water-elephant (which nonetheless deserve attention from the zoo-


logists), the African dragon’s dossier still contains the legends and re-
ports about large amphibious animals with very long necks, called
mokéle-mbémbe (or mbokdlemuembe) and badigui to the north of the
Belgian Congo and tsiguqumadevu (perhaps also chipekwe and nsanga) to
the south of that country. They are the kernel of the problem. They
alone are relevant to any discussion of the possible survival of a dinosaur
in Africa,


First let us consider the msanga and chipekwe, which can be included
in the long-necked group only on the slenderest evidence.


Lieutenant Paul Gratz spoke of a “degenerate saurian” in Lake
Bangweulu.
It was a sort of smooth-skinned crocodile with curved
claws called nsanga. Meanwhile Schomburgk, C. G. James and J. E.
Hughes said that an animal called chipekwe lived there.
It also had
smooth skin, but bore a single ivory horn on its forehead. Of course it
is quite usual for the same animal to have several names in different


dialects, or even in the same dialect. But we do not know enough about
the appearance and habits of the msanga and chipekwe to say for certain


that they are the same.


The nsanga, as I have already mentioned, might be a large monitor


lizard. Now, although the monitors may be compared to crocodiles in


108. Australian monitor lizard, showing its conspicuously long neck.


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


general shape, they have a relatively long and slender neck, especially in


Ps


certain species. This and the apparently smooth skin are strictly speak- _
ing the only features in which the msanga, if it is a monitor, resembles
—


the mokéle-mbémbe and the rest.


The chipekwe also seems to have several points in common with them.
Not only is its skin smooth, but it has the odd reputation of killing
hippos but not eating them. Only Schomburgk reports that it devours
them, but this may be his own opinion, since all the other legends and
reports unanimously contradict it. The chipekwe and mokéle-mbémbe


are, moreover, linked by a secondary anatomical feature: the single horn
which they both have on the nose.


Yet if the chipekwe really belongs with the mokéle-mbémbe, isiqguquma-
devu and badigui, it is odd that no one has mentioned that it has a long
neck. Perhaps their necks may not be so conspicuously long after all.


The isiququmadevw’s “long neck” and the mokéle-mbémbe’s “long and
very flexible neck” might indeed be only relatively long, like a monitor’s
compared with a crocodile’s. A giant monitor whose body was 8 feet
long from shoulder to rump would have a neck half that length—that is,
4 feet. But in this case how are we to explain old Moussa’s description
of the badigui? A neck longer than a giraffe’s, that is to say I0 or 12 feet
long at least, could hardly be said to be relatively long. And it is cer-
tainly not a feature that could be overlooked, especially if it was as thick


as a man’s thigh.


In short, we must isolate one or the other from the long-necked
group: the chipekwe because its neck seems too short or the badigui be-
cause its neck is too long. The chipekwe is the better choice, as all the
others have more points in common. But it need only be provisionally


isolated; if it is shown in the future that the chipekwe also has a long
neck, but our authorities have merely omitted to mention the fact, then


its quarantine will be over. Actually we know so little about this animal’s
appearance that it is impossible to say what it may be. Denis Lyall may
have had good reasons for calling it a “water-rhinoceros,” so may
Schomburgk for thinking it was “‘a sort of saurian,” but neither of them
has told us what they were.


So let us concentrate on the mokéle-mbémbe, badigui and isiguquma-
devu. The badigui is the least known of the three, but it may well be


identical with the mokéle-mbémbe, since they both have a snake’s head, a
long neck and smooth skin. Moreover they both eat leaves, and though
they attack and kill anything which annoys them, whether it be
hippopotami or men in canoes, they do not eat them. They also live


476


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


in neighbouring areas, the Ubangi-Shari and the Cameroons, both
watered by tributaries of the Ubangi.
.


The mokéle-mbémbe and isiququmadevu are no less alike, though one


lives in the Cameroons and the other in Northern Rhodesia, at least
1,200 miles apart. They both have a body almost the size of an ele-
phant’s, a long neck and long powerful tail like a crocodile’s or a


lizard’s. The isiguqumadevu has a snake’s head, and both it and the
badigui leave a track about 5 feet wide. The isiququmadevu is the only
one of the three whose legs have been described: they are said to be like


a lizard’s. No doubt this means that they are rather to the side of the
body, with the knees and elbows well away from it. This would seem to
be confirmed by the evidence that the beast sometimes slides on its belly
with its feet off the ground.


The mokéle-mbémbe’s skin is said to be brownish-grey. The badigui’s,
on the neck at least, is marked with pattern like a python’s but bigger.
The only adornment on the three is the mokéle-mbémbe’s single tooth,
which is presumably a horn. It may well be an inconspicuous bump or
a feature peculiar to the male, and might thus have been missed by some
of the witnesses.


We now have a fairly detailed picture of the African “dragon,” pro-
vided we assume as a working hypothesis that the three amphibious
animals are of the same kind. This is reasonable enough, for while the
various information we have about them is sometimes complementary,


it is never contradictory. This gives us a picture of a large quadruped
with a small, rather triangular head adorned with a little inconspicuous
horn on the end, a long and flexible neck, a thick thorax a little bigger
than a hippopotamus’s, legs on the sides of its body and a long and
powerful tail.
Its skin is smooth, brownish-grey and marked with a
large dark pattern. From the bulk of its body let us say that it is roughly
25 to 28 feet long or even more than 30 feet if its tail tapers very
gradually.


It is amphibious and spends most of its time in the water, making its


lair in a hole in the bank. It also ventures on land in search of its food,
which is basically vegetable. Although it is not carnivorous, its terri-


torial instinct impels it to kill its rivals the hippopotamus and probably
the manatee too. No doubt the same instinct impels it to capsize canoes
stupidly mistaking them for rivals too.


What, then, is its zoological identity? The first step is to assume that


it is a reptile. But it need not necessarily be one. Denis Lyall thought


477


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


the chipekwe was a sort of aquatic rhinoceros and he may be right in this


eng
Ais


case, but a long-necked monster, even if it has a horn on its nose like the
mokéle-mbémbe, can obviously not be a rhinoceros. Moreover an animal
—


may look like a rhinoceros without being one. In North America there
were once horned dinosaurs, the Ceratopsia, which looked like early
versions of a rhinoceros. A Swiss scientist, Dr Martin Wilfarth, has
attempted to show that the African “dragon” may be a single-horned
Ceratopsian called the Monoclonius. This theory could apply only to
the chipekwe, and it still remains to be proved that any of the Ceratopsia
ever lived in Africa.


Other scientists, feeling that surviving dinosaurs are too strong meat,
have recalled that there were once large herbivorous mammals with fairly
long necks and formidable claws, which were probably amphibious into
the bargain, and that the “dragon” might be one of them. As Hichens
remarks, “‘According to some it may be a Chalicotherium, that remark-


abie beast from the end of the Miocene which had a horse’s head, ‘feet
with toes, and looked like a cross between a horse and a sloth.”


Some of the Chalicotheria survived in Africa until the Pleistocene, so


this is not too daring a theory. But the likeness is only partial, for the
beast lacks the long tail and legs sticking out from the sides of the body.
Moreover, it has been shown that the Chalicotheria were not amphibi-


ous, as was at first thought. One of them would make a much better
Nandi bear than a “‘water-dragon.”


No doubt it is the “dragon’s” smooth skin that has led people to
think it is a mammal rather than a reptile. But some living lizards have
such small close scales that the skin merely seems to have a very fine
grain; and there is no reason why large aquatic reptiles should not have


lost their scaly skin. Moreover, those who have seen the beast, while
comparing it in size to an elephant or a hippopotamus, generally describe


it as a snake, a lizard or a crocodile. A reptile’s stiff, jerky and hesitant
movements can be told at first glance from the more graceful and
continuous action of a mammal.


Assuming it is a reptile, what kind is it? In outline it is certainly like


a dinosaur; that one can hardly deny. But it could be a giant species of
monitor. These reptiles are found in all the hot countries in the Old
World. The Australian monitor has a relatively long and slender neck;


its cousin, the Komodo dragon, stands upon very substantial legs; and
until very recently there was a giant monitor (Varanus priscus) 25 feet
long in Australia.


Those naturalists who do admit that there is probably a large reptile


478


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


unknown to science in Africa much prefer to think it a large monitor
than a little dinosaur. This is not because the monitors belong to a more
recent group than the dinosaurs. There are, as I have already remarked,
two main groups of dinosaurs: the Sauripelvians, which include the


most enormous species, and the generally smaller Avipelvians. The


latter group gradually ousted the first during the Jurassic and Cretaceous


periods. The monitors also derive from the Jurassic period. The zoo-


logists’ objection to the “dragon” being one of the dinosaurs is that they


all seem to have been extinct since the Cretaceous period. This, of


coursé, is negative evidence, based on the absence of any trace of dino-


saurs’ remains in Tertiary and Quaternary deposits, and is far from


conclusive. The latest traces of the Rhynchocephalians, which preceded


the dinosaurs, belong to the very beginning of the Mesozoic era, yet there


is a living Rhynchocephalian in New Zealand. It is the tuatara.


There are two more trivial objections to surviving dinosaurs. Firstly,
they are far too large to remain hidden even in African swamps—this
overlooks the fact that some dinosaurs were not much larger than a
pigeon. Secondly, the idea of a dinosaur is far too “sensational” to be
admitted by serious zoologists—this, apart from its irrelevance, could
hardly be more absurd, for what is there “‘sensational” about a medium-
sized vegetarian dinosaur, when the world still produces man-eating
crocodiles more than 20 feet long?


All we can really say is that there seems to be a large and unknown
reptile in Central Africa. Its identity remains to be determined, and in
view of its size it is probably, like the crocodiles, the Komodo dragon
and the giant tortoise, a relic of the great reptile empire that flourished
in the Jurassic period. I have already mentioned the remarkable geo-
logical and climatic stability in Africa, which could hardly be better
suited for preserving such an ancient type.


The most surprising aspect of the Congo “dragon” has been bril-
liantly expounded by Willy Ley. He shows that pictures of the beast


are found not only in Central Africa but even on one of the most re-
markable of ancient Babylonian monuments, the Ishtar Gate.


In 1902, after three years of excavation, when Professor Robert
Koldewey brought to light the splendid arch raised by King Nebuchad-


nezzar to the glory of Marduk, supreme god of the Babylonians, he


found that walls were decorated with glazed brick bas-reliefs represent-


ing alternate bulls and dragons. The king had proudly stated in a Cunei-


form inscription:


479


he


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Fierce bulls [rim] and grim dragons [sirrushu] I put onto the gateyar
[meaning the gateyard’s walls] and thus supplied the gates with such
overflowing rich splendour that all humanity may view it with wonder-
ment.


The “‘fierce rim” (plural of rim), often referred to in the Bible by the
Hebrew word re’em, have been shown to be the aurochs (Bos primi-—
genius), the terrible wild bulls which survived in Europe until the Middle
Ages, the last survivor dying near Jaktorova in Lithuania in 1627. The
sirrush (singular of sirrushu) is much more of a problem. It is a scaly
quadruped with the front-legs of a lion and the back-legs of an eagle, —
with a snake’s head on the end of a long neck. A forked tongue darts —
from its mouth, and it bears on its head a single horn, various wattle-like.
ornaments and even ashort mane.
_


Bizarre though this animal is, it seems to be intended to be a real
beast, since it has been alternated with very realistic bulls, and in the
passage leading to the gate there is a double row of no less realistic


lions. The three beasts seem to have been chosen as the three most
powerful and savage creatures known. What can the dragon be?


If the Ishtar Gate had been excavated a century earlier [Willy Ley
remarks],.this combination of catlike forefeet and birdlike hind feet
would have been sufficient proof that the “Glamour Snake”’ was no whit
more credible than the winged bulls and man-headed birds of Assyrian
and Babylonian mythology.
During these hundred years, however,
Georges Cuvier had become the “‘Father of Paleontology,’’ Professor
O. C. Marsh in America had earned the title of ‘‘Father of Dinosaurs,’’
and our conceptions of what was biologically possible had changed
greatly.
Paleontologists “had discovered fossil animals that sported
endless necks and endless tails, big bodies and small heads, serpent
heads with horns on them—and possibly even forked tongues (although
unfortunately tongues do not fossilize)—and similar attributes. They
had even found a special group of dinosaurs, the ornithischians, or
“‘bird-footed ones,” + that walked upright on their birdlike hind legs,
waving smaller five-toed forelegs in the air.


Koldewey did not make this identification at once, though in his first
report he admitted that the sirrush did agree in most of its features with
some extinct saurian. “If only the fore-legs were not so emphatically and


characteristically feline,” he remarked, “such an animal might actually
have existed.”


1 Ley has made a slip here.
He means Ornithopods.
Ornithischian, a
synonym for Avipelvian, means “with a bird’s pelvis” and refers to a much
larger group which includes the Ornithopods, Stegosaurians, Ceratopsidae and
Ankylosaurians.


480


East face of the Ishtar Gate showing alternating dragons and oxen.


Charles R. Knight.
Modern reconstruction of the Ceratosaurus by


The sirrush or dragon of the Ishtar Gate.


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


In his sumptuous work Das Ischtar-Tor in Babylon, published in
1918, Professor Koldewey was bolder and more definite:


If a creature like the sirrush existed in nature it would belong to the
order of Dinosauria and the sub-order of Ornithopods. The iguanodon
of the Cretaceous layers of Belgium is the closest relative of the dragon
of Babylon.


The Chaldeans were not palaeontologists. The sirrush cannot be a
reconstruction of a long-dead animal. Nor is it likely to be one of the
many Babylonian mythical beasts, constructed of a hotch-potch of other
beasts, for while they had a very short life in Chaldean art, the sirrush,
like the lion and the aurochs, was depicted over a period of nearly 2,000


109. Reconstruction of the Iguanodon, a running dinosaur
that was herbivorous.


years from about 2800 B.c. to the reign of Nebuchadnezzar (1146-1123


B.C.). These figures, by the way, are based on the most recent informa-
tion about Babylonian chronology, which differs considerably from
Koldewey’s.


There is also explicit reference to a live dragon at Babylon in the
book of Bel and the Dragon in the Apocrypha:


And in the same place there was a great dragon which they of Babylon
worshipped.


And the king said unto Daniel, wilt thou also say that this is of brass?
lo, he liveth, he eateth and drinketh. Thou canst not say that he is no
living god: therefore worship him.


Then said Daniel unto the king ..
. give me leave and I shall slay
this dragon without sword or staff. The king said I give thee leave.


1 The sirrush is more like the Ceratosaurus in having a little horn, but I shall
show later why this identification is untenable.


HH
481


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Then Daniel took pitch, and fat, and hair, and did seethe them to-
gether, and made lumps thereof: this he put in the dragon’s mouth,
and so the dragon burst in sunder...


Whether or not this living “dragon” in Babylon is anything more
than apocryphal, it does not seem to have served as a direct model for
the one on the Ishtar Gate and on many other Babylonian monuments;
for the sirrush is certainly not an accurate picture of the Iguanodon or
Ceratosaurus. But it is a good stylised likeness. Willy Ley thinks that


the faults and absurdities in the sirrush’s picture, like those in the
aurochs’s, arose because the Babylonians thought both animals were
‘monsters of a far country,” for he adds that the rim was then extinct in
Mesopotamia.


The sirrush could have lived in Central Africa, where it has been
proved that the Chaldeans went, and where they could have seen a giant
lizard. When Hans Schomburgk came back from Europe with native


tales about the chipekwe, he also brought several glazed bricks of the
same type as those on the Ishtar Gate. Naturally he had no idea that the
beast and the bricks could have any connection—which Willy Ley was
the first to recognise. It is therefore possible that one of the amphibious
species of Congo “dragon,” whether tsiququmadevu, mokéle-mbémbe or
badigui, was known to the Chaldeans 5,000 years ago from travellers’


tales, and that this beast was the origin of the strrush on the Ishtar Gate.


This can be demonstrated by a simple experiment. Ask someone
who has never seen a picture of a dinosaur—a child, for example—to
make a drawing from your own verbal description of the Congo
“dragon.” They will begin by drawing a quadruped, similar in outline
to some well-known beast (horse or cow, dog or cat), and then go on to
give it the long tail and snake’s neck and head. When you mention that


it has large claws on its feet they will give it a lion’s or a cat’s paws.
They will add the required ornament to its head, and when you say that
it is a reptile, they will cover it with scales. There is every chance that
the result will look very like a sirrush apart from the hind-legs. Repeat
the experiment with another naive and amenable artist, this time draw-
ing a picture of a dinosaur, such as Charles Knight’s Ceratosaurus facing
page 480, from a dictated description, and the result will probably be a
sirrush again, even down to the bird-like hind-feet.


1 This seems to me debatable. On an Assyrian obelisk a king who is probably
Tiglath-Pileser I (1115-1093 B.C.) is called “destroyer of the wild rimi, which he
killed at the foot of the Lebanon.” That this was worthy of mention implies that
the rim was either very rare, or so savage that few dared to approach it. Hence
certain mistakes in its picture.


482


THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


All this seems to me to imply: (1) that the sirrush is based not on a
direct knowledge of the Congo “dragon,” but on a description derived
by oral tradition from travellers’ tales; (2) that the Congo “dragon,”


like the sirrush, had bird-like hind-feet; (3) that both animals are a rep-


tile very similar to some of the bird-footed dinosaurs. This does not


prove that the Congo “dragon” is a dinosaur, but the theory should not


be rejected-out of hand. We may even make a guess as to what dinosaur


it is.


The Ornithopods, the group to which the iguanodon belongs, are not
the only ones with birds’ feet. The Theropods also have them, and
include the Ceratosaurus, which has a little horn on the end of its nose,
and which I have already
suggested was particu-
larly like
the
sirrush.
But while the Ornitho-
pods are herbivorous, the
Theropods are formid-
able
carnivores.
The
Congo
“dragon”
is a
vegetarian, and cannot
therefore be one of the
Theropods.
It is more


like the Ornithopods, but
not the Iguanodon, not
only because
it has a


peur apres : oe
110. A running dinosaur that was
but because it is essen-
carnivorous, the Tyrannosaurus.
tially aquatic, while the
Iguanodon is a running beast that normally stands on its hind-legs.
The “dragon” seems to be more similar in its habits to the Tracho-
dontidae or duck-billed dinosaurs, which spend most of their time in
the water and often move on four feet. But the Trachodontidae do
not have the long and flexible neck so characteristic of our “dragon.”


Actually we only know a minute fraction of the dinosaurs that once
inhabited the whole earth, and the Congo “‘dragon” does not exactly
agree with a reconstruction of any that have been disinterréd.


If the argument based on the sirrush has any value, the beast must


be an Ornithopod. If it has none, we must admit that the animal’s de-


scription is a much better likeness of a Brontosaurus, the animal with


which by some strange irony of fate ignorant journalists confused the


483


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


imaginary Ceratopsian invented by those hoaxers Lepage and Gapelle:


it would not be a true Brontosaurus, of course, but a long-necked and
much smaller Sauropod of the same family.


All this supposes that it is a dinosaur, which is far from being proved.


I need hardly say that despite all the evidence, many zoologists are as
sceptical as ever about its existence. In 1953 Willy Ley published in a
new American magazine an article on the Congo Dragon, being a revision
of his chapter on “The Dragon of the Ishtar Gate”. In his first para-
graph he remarks that it is


an animal that may be a surviving dinosaur. At any rate it is an animal
which looks like one, even though zoologists, after examining it, may
conclude that it is not, strictly speaking, a dinosaur but a different
reptilian type.


This article brought a thundering reply from Dr Edwin H. Colbert,
Curator of Fossil Reptiles and Amphibians in the American Museum
of Natural History in New York:


This digs up all the old specious arguments on whether dinosaurs still
exist and hashes them over again. This is the type of stuff one might
expect in a Sunday supplement of one of the less reputable newspapers.
But why does it have to be brought into a magazine that is trying to
represent itself as an authoritative and carefully written journal devoted
to animals?


The race of Cuviers and Owens is not extinct. So much the better.
Heraclitus of Ephesus used to aver that Polemos, strife, was the father
of everything, and that without opposition and competition nothing
could grow and prosper. Modern biology maintains that life is a conflict
between a conservative stabilising principle of heredity and a dynamic
and creative force of evolution. Without the stabilising effect of heredity


it would have fallen into chaos, offspring being unable to succeed their
parents; an< without the adaptability that evolution gives it, it would
have been at the mercy of the smallest change of climate. So long as
zoology is to be a living science it must have a conservative element of
rigorous, positive and dogmatic minds and also a revolutionary element
of adventurous, ardent and imaginative spirits.
It needs both Cuvier
an
Lamarck, Owen and Darwin, Lehmann-Nitsche and Ameghino,
Edwin Colbert and Willy Ley.


484


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE


Kongamato,


the Last Flying Dragon


People call them Pterodactyles: but that is only
because they are ashamed to call them flying
dragons, after denying so long that flying dragons
could exist.


CHARLES KINGSLEY, The Water-Babies.


PROFESSOR CHALLENGER had returned triumphant from his expedi-
tion to his Lost World, and was lecturing to the Zoological Society of
London in Queen’s Hall, not without interruption from the sceptical
Dr Illingworth, when the following dialogue occurred:


Professor Challenger: “. .. upon the domestic habits of the ptero-
dactyl we can throw a flood of light. I can exhibit to you from my port-
folio a picture of that creature taken from life which would convince
you:
2?


Dr Illingworth: “‘No picture could convince us of anything.”’
Professor Challenger: ‘““You would require to see the thing itself?”
Dr Illingworth: “‘Undoubtedly.”’
Professor Challenger: “And you would accept that?”’
Dr Illingworth (Laughing): “Beyond a doubt.”’


A large packing-case was brought on to the platform, while the horri-


fied audience watched, and suddenly the most hideous of beasts leapt
out of it like a jack-in-the-box.


The face of the creature was like the wildest gargoyle that the imagi-
nation of a mad medizval builder could have conceived.
It was mali-
cious, horrible, with two small red eyes as bright as points of burning
coal. Its long, savage mouth, which was held half-open, was full of a
double row of shark-like teeth. Its shoulders were humped, and round
them were draped what appeared to be a faded grey shawl. It was the
devil of our childhood in person.


485


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Thus it is not impossible that flying lizards might have survived until
today in places inland without leaving the least trace of a fossil.


There is in fact a sort of aerial lizard living today, the “flying dragon”
(Draco volans) of the Malay archipelago. But it hardly deserves the
name, for it does not really fly, but merely glides from tree to tree on
folds of loose skin supported by movable extensions of its ribs, like the


ribs of an umbrella. It is barely 4? inches long and may glide as much


as 15 feet, losing about 5 feet of height in doing so. The more modest
name of “butterfly-lizard,” sometimes given it because it looks like a
huge butterfly, certainly suits it better than “dragon.”


This little beast has nothing in common with the Pterosaurians of
the Mesozoic era which probably flew like bats, though actually we
know very little about them. A flying reptile seems a contradiction in
terms, a creature that both flies and crawls; and the result is naturally
bizarre. When Cuvier reconstructed the Pterodactyl from its fossil
remains he described it in language no less romantic than Conan
Doyle’s:


From this data one can draw the Pterodactyl in its living state; but
the picture will be so extraordinary that it seems the result of a diseased
imagination rather than the normal forces of nature.


112. The “flying dragon”’ or “‘butterfly-lizard.”’


KONGAMATO, THE LAST FLYING DRAGON


To complete the confusion, these reptiles very likely did not share the
most typical features of the class to which they certainly belonged. True
flight needs powerful wing-beats involving a great expenditure of energy.
To avoid a fatal loss of heat the Pterosaurians must have had a fairly


efficient system for regulating their body temperature, like that of the
birds and bats. Now, for an organism to remain at constant temperature


it must have fur or feathers to prevent it from losing too much heat on


its surface. The flying reptiles do not seem to have had feathers, the


imprints of their bodies show that they had wings of membrane. Some


of them may have had fur. On the Rhamphorhynchus’s enormous tail


113. Reconstruction of the Rhamphorhynchus.


traces have been found of hairs and of the sebaceous glands that secrete


an oily fluid to keep the fur in good order.


Most of the Pterosaurians ranged from the size of a sparrow to that of


an eagle, but there was also a vast American species, the Pteranodon,


with a wing-span of 24 feet—double that of the largest living flying ani-


mal, the wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans), which reaches 12 feet.


The Pteranodon was an incredible beast. Its head was flattened in such


an extraordinary way and extended behind in such a long bony crest


that it must have been used as a rudder and performed the normal func-


tion of a tail.


But the rumoured flying lizard in Africa is a much smaller beast—no
more than 7 feet in wing-span. If it is a Pterosaurian it is most like the


489


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA
|
pat
ley.


Pterodactyl itself, which is notable not for its long tail like the Rham-
~
phorhynchus, but for its long jaws which betray its carnivorous habits. —


It is a little flying crocodile.


Colonel C. R. S. Pitman tends to confirm Melland’s story. In A :


Game-Warden Takes Stock (1942) he writes:


When in Northern Rhodesia I heard of a mythical beast which in-
—


trigued me considerably.
It was said to haunt formerly, and perhaps
still to haunt, a dense, swampy forest region in the neighbourhood of
the Angola and Congo borders. To look upon it is death. But the most
amazing feature of this mystery beast is its suggested identity with a
creature bat-bird-like in form on a gigantic scale strangely reminiscent
of the prehistoric pterodactyl. From where does the primitive African
derive such a fanciful idea?


Professor C. Wiman of Uppsala University attempted to answer this
question in 1928, when one of his sons who was living in Northern
Rhodesia drew his attention to Melland’s book. Wiman’s solution was
simple enough. In the Museum fiir Naturkunde in Berlin there are the
bones of Pterosaurians excavated by the Germans from Cretaceous de-
posits in East Africa. At Tendagaru whole families of natives took part
in this great work. Dr Wiman thinks that during these excavations the
Africans were shown pictures of Pterodactyls, and he concludes:


Hence it is quite natural that a legend of living Pterosaurians should
have arisen. Nevertheless it is remarkable that after its long migration
from Tendagaru to north-western Rhodesia this legend should have


still retained a kernel of truth.
Since there is this kernel it is to be
feared that in the future this legend will remain alive even in the minds
of Whites.


It is certainly remarkable, as Dr Wiman says, that in Africa, where
the communications are so poor (especially 30 years ago), the legend
should have travelled 1,000 miles without perceptible alteration. If his
explanation is correct, why did the Northern Rhodesian natives put the
beast in the Jiundu marshes and not in the lakes of Tanganyika, where
the legend had come from? Besides, we shouid expect to find a similar
legend all along the route it had travelled, especially around Lakes
Mweru and Bangweulu which lie half-way. But there is no trace of one.
On the contrary it is found in a different direction. Professor J. L. B.
Smith the celebrated “father” of the Coelacanth writes in Old Fourlegs:


The descendants of a missionary who had lived near Mount Kili-
mandjaro wrote from Germany giving a good deal of information about


490


KONGAMATO, THE LAST FLYING DRAGON


flying dragons they believed still to live in those parts. The family had
repeatedly heard of them from the natives, and one man had actually
seen such a creature at night. I did not and do not dispute at least the
possibility that some such creature may still exist.


A. Blayney Percival in A Game Ranger on Safari (1928) reports that:


the Kitui Wakambza tell of a huge flying beast which comes down from
Mount Kenya by night; they only see it against the sky, but they have
seen its tracks; more, they have shown these to a white man, who told
me about them, saying, he could make nothing of the spoor, which
betrayed two feet, and an, apparently, heavy tail.


But the most convincing disproof of Dr Wiman’s explanation is that
a similar report comes from the opposite corner of Africa, the British
Cameroons, and here the beast was seen by a naturalist sent out by the
British Museum.


Ivan T. Sanderson, the well-known zoologist and writer, led the
Percy Sladen Expedition to West Africa in 1932-3. When they were in
the Assumbo mountains in the Cameroons, Sanderson and one of his
companions pitched their camp on a little tongue of grass surrounded
by wooded mountains. A very steep-banked river ran near by, and they
were obliged to wade along it or leap from boulder to boulder when they
wanted to go hunting. It was while working along the river in this way
that Sanderson shot a large fruit-eating bat, which fell into the river. He
went into the water to fish it out, but stepped on something which
moved—probably a turtle—lost his balance and was nearly carried away
by the current. He was floundering back towards his rock when sud-
denly his companion, George, shouted, “Look out!”


And I looked. Then I let out a shout also and instantly bobbed down
under the water, because, coming straight at me only a few feet above
the water was a black thing the size of an eagle. I had only a glimpse of
its face, yet that was quite sufficient, for its lower jaw hung open and
bore a semicircle of pointed white teeth set about their own width
apart from each other.


When I emerged, it was gone. George was facing the other way blaz-
ing off his second barrel. I arrived dripping on my rock and we looked


at each other.


‘Will it come back?” we chorused.
And just before it became too dark to see, it came again, hurtling back
down the river, its teeth chattering, the air ‘“‘shss-shssing”’ as it was cleft
by the great, black, dracula-like wings. We were both off-guard, my
gun was unloaded, and the brute made straight for George. He ducked.
The animal soared over him and was at once swallowed up in the night.


491


a?
Sx,


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA
¥


Sanderson and his companion returned to their camp, where they —
found several native hunters who had come miles in order to sell them
specimens of animals.
!


“What kind of bat is it,” asked Sanderson, spreading his arms, “that _
has wings like this and is all black?”


“Olitiau!” replied one of them, and there was a short palaver in
Assumbo. At last one old hunter asked:


‘“Where you see this beef?”
“There,” replied Sanderson, pointing towards the river.


With one accord the hunters grabbed up their guns and ran out of


camp, straight across country towards the village, leaving their hard-
earned goods behind them.


This evidence comes from a first-rate naturalist whose works are
authorities all over the world. He has refrained from making any com-
ment about the strange animal in this book, but as it happens this is
evidence of his good faith. He speaks of it as a sort of bat, but we may
be certain that it is no known species. Indeed, it is so obvious to a zoo-
logist that he did not think it worth mentioning. For the general reader
I will explain why.


The bats, which form the order of Chiroptera, are divided into two
very distinct groups: the Megachiroptera or greater bats and the Micro-
chiroptera or lesser bats. They differ not only in size but also in diet.
The Megachiroptera are called “fruit-eating bats.” The most typical
of this sub-order is the flying-fox (Preropus), the largest known bat.
The edible Malayan species (P. edulis) may have a wing-span of


as much as 5 feet 6 inches. By comparison eagles are often more


114. Head of the flying-fox.


KONGAMATO, THE LAST FLYING DRAGON


than 6 feet 6 inches in wing-span and sometimes reach as much as
8 feet,


The flying-fox, which does indeed have an attractive fox-like head, is
a shy and timid animal; in captivity it is easily tamed and makes an
affectionate and lovable pet. There are several species of Megachirop-
tera in Africa, but their wing-span never exceeds 4 feet. One of the
largest is the hammer-headed bat, which well deserves its Latin name of
Hypsignathus monstrosus, though only for its appearance, since it is a
perfectly harmless beast, the last creature in the world that one would
expect to dive and attack a man.


It is true that Sanderson’s story may make one wonder whether the
creature that attacked him was not a parent or mate of the bat he had


115. Head of the hammer-headed bat.


just shot. In grief and despair, even the most peaceable of animals are
sometimes capable of acts of unusual bravery to revenge a dead mate or
young. Moreover, the Megachiroptera do have the very widely-spaced
teeth that Sanderson noticed.
The hammer-headed bat belongs to
West Africa, and as Sanderson himself pointed out in his Living Mam-
mals of the World, these bats “for reasons unknown do a lot of dipping


into water,” so one might be tempted to suggest that it was one of these
monstrous animals which had innocently attacked the naturalists wading
in the river. But there are two objections to this identification. The
unknown beast was black all over, while all the African flying-foxes


are a brownish, or even a yellowish mahogany colour. Moreover the


negroes’ terror implies that the animal was habitually aggressive, which


a beast that fed only on fruit would hardly be.


493


THE TERRORS OF AFRICA


Only the Microchiroptera are carnivorous; their food varies with the


species: insects, fish, frogs, small birds, small mammals and even the
—


blood of large mammals, Some also eat fruit. Not all of them are so
very small. Many of them are larger than many of the Megachiroptera. :
The species usually considered to be the largest, the Australian giant
—


false vampire (Megaderma gigas), has a wing-span of 2 feet 6 inches,
which is by no means contemptible.! Moreover, the false vampires are


. admittedly fierce and bold: they attack smaller bats and even birds. An
angry Megaderma might very well dive


at a man who had wounded or upset it.
But the largest African species, the yellow-
winged bat (Lavia frons), never has a


fond of certain aquatic insects and always
stays close to the water and, unlike most


“-
bats, hunts for its food during part of


116. Head of the false
he day.
It is therefore tempting to


vampire bat.
suppose that Sanderson’s beast might
have been a Megaderma, its dimensions


exaggerated by fear. But the yellow-winged bat has wings the coppery
colour of dead leaves, which is far from the alleged even black.


Thus we see that the large bats are usually gentle and are by no means
aggressive, and that only the little bats are rapacious and often fierce.
Neither agree with the description of the huge and formidable olitiau,
which, if it is a bat at all, belongs to a quite unknown and extraordinary
species, But perhaps it is not a bat.?


There is no doubt that the o/itiau can be compared with the kongamato
of Northern Rhodesia. The general appearance, the size, the long jaws
bristling with teeth, the habitat by the water’s edge, and the panic it
causes among the natives all agree. And Sanderson’s story may help to
explain one of the kongamato’s alleged habits which might otherwise
have seemed absurd: its reputation for capsizing canoes.
Professor


1 The giant false vampire bat is probably not the biggest of Microchiroptera
in the world. In 1934 Raymond Ditmars showed that the javelin bat (Vampyrus)
of the Amazon may have a wing-span of as much as a yard, and that it will attack
birds as big as a pigeon.


* Sanderson is convinced the olitiau is a bat. He wrote to me just before this
book went to press: “This whole Pterodactyl bit was wished on me by Frank
Lane, but I never even suggested such a thing. . . I plunk fora
bit rather than a
Pterodactyl and I wish to God Frank had not thought that up. I have enough
trouble with other people’s facts let alone being clobbered with a fancy of my
own.


494


wing-span of more than 15 inches; it is
—


KONGAMATO, THE LAST FLYING DRAGON


Wiman had already remarked that this was hardly the behaviour one
would expect of a Pterodactyl—nor, I might add, of a bat. But if the
kongamato like the olitiau is in the habit of diving at men crossing its
territory—perhaps trying to drive them away—it is easy to see how it
could make canoes capsize by suddenly terrifying the men at the paddles.
Accidents of this kind would not have to happen very often—the men
in the water being eventually eaten by crocodiles—for the kongamato’s
terrible reputation to be firmly established on the survivors’ tales.


Whether the kongamato—or olitiau—is a true Pterodactyl or a mons-
trous bat, its mystery remains to be solved. And the first naturalist who


lets a specimen out of a box in the middle of a meeting of a learned
society will make a mark in the annals of zoology.


495


€
a
+
-.
site
ns ee
SSE MEE
TE


PGR
eh SY Rae Res ok baited dae = =.


Bie:
wes
ies ee
De ep dehy Beta tag
Slt


“iS at 1?
Sage Re
a Sener” oe He


Ao
a
fut
2
ce ee ‘Sate 2a Peer ies iy a CEN


an
ER
ae,
ot =e
gett:


~
5
-
—
ne
*
?


'
a
+
4
ip


*
&
¥
=
7


é


+
a
re
toe


am
+
~
Fl


be


The flying-fox is the largest of the bats.


The hammer-headed bat looks monstrous but is quite harmless.


The lemurs of Madagascar which
recently had much larger relatives. (Ab
Maki gidro.
(Left)
Maki
vari.
(Be


Macaco, an example of sexual dimorp
rare in mammals.


;


Part Seven


THE LESSON OF THE
MAJ.AGASY GHOSTS


In one moment I’ve seen what has hitherto been
Enveloped in absolute mystery,
And without extra charge I will give you at large
A Lesson in Natural History.
LEwIs CARROLL, The Hunting of the Snark.


It


{\
Comoro fs.
C.d'Ambre


ees]


8)
sz :
cs
Port Leven
Nosy BEQ
oe


Book


Ankaizingna:


:
%
i
Ss
_
on
Lake Itasy
he nae
Nees
-.
woe?
‘


&
Belo
one)
\
‘ee
;
Betafoe “Aneiacbe
ae
zc
ee $38


9
Fianarantsoa *,™
Mananjary
Mad qok
i
ones


eAnkazogbo
IManakara


e
: xX


Farafangana


‘
:
‘ort Dauphin
Miles


9
100
200


Mountain Grassland and Woad/land


C. Ste Marie


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO


Tratratratra, Vorompatra, etcetera


Madagascar is another land of promise. Here,
too, mountair and forest prevail; situation is
favourable; and we know almost nothing of the
interior.


P. H. Gossz, The Romance of Natural History.


ONCE upon a time there was a famous doctor who cured all his patients


(this is a fable, of course); his one fault was that he was very incredulous.
One day a little girl came running to him, quite distracted, and begged
him to leave everything and hurry to her mother’s sick-bed.


“Your mother is all right, my child,” he replied with a smile, “she
imagines she is ill, but actually she’s as sound as a bell. Don’t worry,
she will get well by herself.”


“But, doctor, she is in terrible pain!”
“Never mind. Run along now, I have other things to do.”
The little girl went. The mother died. And the doctor proved that


it was not enough to have complete mastery of his art. His first duty
was to examine his patients.


Many zoologists have this doctor’s fault, with equally tragic results in
a different sphere. While they remain obstinately deaf to rumours about
unknown or supposedly fossil animals, these animals die out, some are
already extinct, and we have lost the opportunity of studying them ex-
cept as wretched remains. Their intellectual deafness may well have
prevented the zoologists from finding the solutions to some problems
they are concerned with. This thesis is amply borne out by the history
of our knowledge of the animals of Madagascar.


When Admiral Etienne de Flacourt published his Histoire de la
Grande Isle de Madagascar in 1658 after a long stay in that country he
gave a great deal of very exact information about the fauna which was
so different from that of the African continent.
But some of it was


499


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


disbelieved as mere travellers’ tales and was only proved to be true after
several centuries. Among the woodland birds he mentioned:


Vouroupatra, a large bird which haunts the Ampatres and lays eggs
;
like the ostrich’s; so that the people of these places may not take it, it
_
seeks the most lonely places.?


Subsequent travellers told more detailed but also more fantastic tales
about the bird’s size, saying that its eggs were enormous, eight times as
large as an ostrich’s, big enough for the natives to use as tanks for drink-
ing-water. Needless to say, hardly anyone believed these tales. The
ostrich was already a monstrously large bird at 8 feet high. A bird that


laid eggs eight times as large would have to be impossibly huge. Orien-


talists suggested that these tales were just another version of the legend
of the roc which Arab seamen believed could carry off a whole ship and
her crew. Sinbad the Sailor ran across one in his second voyage after he
found a roc’s egg, which at first he mistook for a white dome of prodi-
gious height and bulk: “I drew near it and walked around it, but per-
ceived no door to it . .
. I made a mark where I stood, and went round
the dome measuring its circumference, and, lo, it was full fifty paces.”
This is a long way from the two-gallon shells reported in Madagascar.


Herodotus was told by Egyptian priests about a race of gigantic birds
“‘beyond the sources of the Nile” which were strong enough to carry off
aman. As the most powerful eagle cannot lift more than a rabbit or a
small lamb, this would be a staggering feat, though nothing to that of
the Arabian roc.
.


In the thirteenth century Marco Polo claimed that Kublai Khan had
shown him a bird’s feathers 90 spans (about 60 feet) long and two eggs
of prodigious size.? He said that he thought the roc came from some
islands to the south of Madagascar. But the roc and the huge bird of
Madagascar were assumed tu be equally fabulous.


Nevertheless in 1832 the French naturalist Victor Sganzin actually
saw an enormous half-eggshell in Madagascar. The natives were using
it as a bowl. They would not sell it to him, so he drew a sketch of it, and
in 1840 sent it to a renowned ornithologist from Paris, Jules Verreaux,
then in Cape Town. In the meantime a traveller called Goudot found
remains of similar eggs in Madagascar and showed them to Professor


1 The word vouroupatra has certainly been misunderstood or misspelt by de
Flacourt, the Malagasy word for bird being voron.
Probably it should be
vorompatra. The Ampatres are now known as the Antandroy; de Flacourt used
the name of this tribe to describe the area they inhabit.


* The “feathers” may well have been palm-leaves.


500


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


Paul Gervais, of the Paris Museum, who attributed them at first to a sort
of ostrich.


In The Dodo and its Kindred Dr Hugh Strickland suggested that on
de Flacourt’s evidence there might be a large Brevipennate bird in
Madagascar (at this time the Ratites or running birds were known as
Brevipennates because of their short
wing-feathers).
After the publica-
tion of his book in 1848 he received
the following information from F. R.
Surtees, who was then Her Majesty’s
Commissioner of Arbitration at the
Cape of Good Hope.


In October 1848 John Joliffe, the
surgeon of H.M.S. Geyser, made
friends
with
a passenger
called
Dumarele who was a French mer-
chant in his sixties from Réunion.
He noted in his private journal that


After giving an account of some
curious monkeys with white silvery
hair M. Dumarele casually men-
tioned that some time previously,
when in command of his own vessel
trading along the coasts of Mada-


117. Aepyornis’s egg compared
with
an
ostrich’s,
hen’s
and
humming-bird’s.


gascar, he saw at Port Leven, on the north-west of the island, the shell
of an enormous egg, the production of an unknown bird inhabiting the
wilds of the country, which held the almost incredible quantity of thirteen
wine quart bottles of fiuid!!!, he having himself carefully measured the
quantity. It was of the colour and appearance of an ostrich egg, and the
substance of the shell was about the thickness of a Spanish dollar, and
very hard in texture.
It was brought on board by the natives (the race
of ‘‘Sakalavas’’) to be filled with rum, having a tolerably large hole at
one end, through which the contents of the egg had been extracted, and
which served as the mouth of the vessel. M. Dumarele offered to
purchase the egg from the natives, but they declined selling it, stating
that it belonged to their chief, and that they could not dispose of it
without his permission. The natives said the egg was found in the
jungle, and observed that such eggs were very very rarely met with, and
that the bird which produces them is still more rarely seen.


Joliffe thought that Dumarele was certainly telling the truth, but be-


lieved that he “was imposed upon in some way by the roguery of the


natives.” All the same he added:
501


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


M. Dumarele’s story should not be despised or discredited in these


times, when such extraordinary discoveries are constantly made in every 4
branch of science, but publicity should be given to this statement, that
—


persons visiting Madagascar may, if possible, collect fresh information
on the subject, and clear up the mystery. The sight of one sound egg
would be worth a thousand theories.


Dr Strickland published these extracts from Joliffe’s diary, making no
comment except


It is a singular circumstance, if nothing more, that Marco Polo refers
the Roc, of Arabian Nights celebrity, to the island of Madagascar; but
as the Roc, however gigantic, was decidedly not brevipennate [since its
feathers were 90 spans long!] a discussion of its history would be
irrelevant to our present subject.


Other naturalists concluded that both birds were equally fabulous, for
nobody took much notice of these reports; they were not much pub-
licised and seemed too fantastic to be true.


In 1851 the existence of a giant bird in Madagascar was at last officially
admitted when a merchant captain called Abadie found three eggs and
some fragmentary bones on the south-west coast of the island. They
were presented to the Académie des Sciences at Paris by a certain M.
Malavois. The two largest eggs were 13§ inches by 8} inches and
12% inches by 15% inches, one being more elongated than the other.
Their capacity was nearly 2 gallons. Each egg would have held six


ostrich’s eggs or 148 hen’s eggs—enough to make an omelette for 70
people.


On the strength of these éggs and bones and with the precedent of
Owen’s Dinornis, described in 1839, Isidore Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire
christened the Madagascar bird, naming it Aepyornis maximus, or “the


tallest of the high birds.” This name was not entirely deserved. The


tallest of the birds was not the Aepyornis but the moa, or rather one
of the moa tribe, which reached a height of over 11 feet. Geoffroy-
Saint-Hilaire deduced that the Aepyornis must be 16 feet high partly
because its egg was double the dimensions of an ostrich’s. Actually the
Aepyornis very rarely reaches 10 feet: it is a bulky rather than a tall
bird.


In 1866 the explorer Alfred Grandidier fished out of pools at Ambo-


lisatra some huge bones in a perfect state of preservation. At first sight
they seemed to belong to some large pachyderm, but when examined
they proved to belong to the mysterious Aepyornis which was at once
nicknamed “elephant-bird.”” Soon enough other bones were disinterred


502


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


for the huge bird’s whole skeleton to be deduced. The complete skeleton
of Aepyornis maximus reconstructed at the Paris Museum is 8 feet 9
inches high—a very respectable size for this bird.1 There is no constant
ratio between the size of a bird and the eggs it lays. The kiwi’s eggs are


as big as a medium-sized ostrich’s, 5 inches by 23 inches, although the
bird itself is hardly any larger than a hen. Its body is only three times


as heavy as its egg.


All the same, even if Aepyornis maximus is not the tallest known bird,
it is the largest and weightiest. Dean Amadon, an ornithologist of the
American Museum of Natural History, has measured the principal
Aepyornis and moa bones and compared them with those of the most
similar living birds, the ostrich, rhea and emu, and has deduced that the
Aepyornis maximus weighed 965 pounds, while a 10-foot moa weighed
only 520 pounds. The smaller, dumpier moas were no doubt propor-
tionately heavier and more like the Aepyornis.


Gian-Giuseppe Bianconi, a zoologist from Bologna, was so convinced
that the Aepyornis and the roc were quite identical, that he published no


less than 18 notes between 1862 and 1865 in his attempts to prove that
the remains of birds found in Madagascar belonged to a giant bird of
prey related to the Andean condor. But in due course a more thorough
study of the Aepyornis’s bones made it clear enough that, unlike the
legendary roc, it could no more fly than the ostrich, cassowary, emu and
other running birds. Like them, it had no breastbone, and its wings
were useless stumps. All the same, there is little doubt that it was the
bird that de Flacourt described by the name of Vouroupatra. Does this
mean that it was still alive then? There is no doubt that the eggs found
in the sand-dunes and mud around the great pools in the south and
south-west were sometimes so fresh that they seemed to have been laid
quite recently. The bones were equally fresh. And the natives said that
the giant birds lived in the thickest forests of the island but were very


rarely seen.


Unfortunately most naturalists were still so soaked in Cuvier’s ideas
that they refused to believe that such a monstrous bird could survive
and, instead of looking for the bird itself, racked their brains to find out
why it was extinct. Man could not be directly responsible. Unlike the


moa, the vorompatra had not been slaughtered for its meat. There is no


local legend to this effect, and the natives were not thought to be well


1 Aepyornis maximus is the largest of the three known species. The smallest,


A. hildebrandtii, is no bigger than an ostrich. A. medius is intermediate in size.
The Aepyornis differs from the ostrich much more in weight than in height.


503


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


enough armed to hunt it—though, since the Maoris killed moas with
nothing but stone-headed spears, this argument is rather weak.
&


Some have even gone as far as to allege that noxious natural gases 3
escaping from the ground killed off the Aepyornis. But to find the most
likely explanation we should consider the bird’s habits. It is generally
thought to be a bird of the bush, like the ostrich, though the natives
insist that it lives in the forest. Certainly it is more likely that a slow and
heavy bird would take refuge in the forest. On the other hand, the con-
—
ditions in which its eggs are found lead one to believe that it laid them
on the rushes like a moorhen. From its anatomy it might well have been
largely aquatic and spent its time paddling in wooded swamps.


The fairly recent and drastic change of climate, when the rains
dwindled, dried up the immense lakes in the high plateaux and the
swampy areas of Antsirabé and Betafo. Forced to huddle in ever more
wretched little pools, the Aepyornis would have eventually become ex-
tinct for lack of food and suitable shelter. The heaps of their remains in
peat-bogs support this theory.


No doubt the thoughtless deforestation perpetrated by Bantu, Malay
and Arab invaders had a decisive effect on the change of climate, and
thus man indirectly hastened the vorompatra’s end. Since he has only
arrived in the island fairly recently—for no prehistoric human remains
have ever been found on Madagascar—it is very possible that the great
bird survived until not at all long ago. The consequences of the gradual
destruction of the virgin forest would have taken quite a long time to
make themselves felt, and until 1867, if not later, the natives maintained
that the voromparra still lived in some remote areas. Today there is no
hope of finding a living specimen, because the swampy forest that was


its peculiar habitat has decreased so dramatically.


If the naturalists in the last century had not been so incredulous of
Malagasy legends and travellers’ tales, but had searched systematically
for de Flacourt’s Vouroupatra, we might know much more about this
extraordinary bird which may have aped the hippopotamus in its habits,
as it did in its structure.


eT


The change in climate exterminated other Malagasy birds, among
them the Muillerornis, a large cassowary from the Ankaratra area, and
the Centrornis, a relative of the spur-winged goose of the African main-
land. It was also said to be the death-knell for several giants of very
different groups; so that today Madagascar’s fauna consists only of
small or medium-sized species. But is this necessarily true? The


504


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


change in climate was not sudden and was so recent there is still a faint
hope of finding some survivors of these giants of the past.


Like the neighbouring Mascarene and Seychelle islands, Madagascar
once boasted a giant tortoise (Testudo grandidieri), which was consider-
ably more than 3 feet long and weighed more than a ton. It liked to bask
in the sun, half-submerged in shallow water, and seems also to have
been a victim of the same drought. But Raymond Decary, former head
of the colonial service associated with the Paris Museum and author of
the authoritative work on Madagascar’s fauna, writes:


It has been established that a mysterious animal which may be a large
tortoise lives in certain lakes in the caves in the south-west: is it a last
survivor of Testudo grandidieri?


Besides the species of crocodile known today (Crocodylus madagas-


cariensis) which is identical with the Nile crocodile, there was until
recently also a giant species (C. robustus), with a skull 2 feet 6 inches
long. Specialists have long debated whether there are one or two species
of crocodile on the island, and the question is still far from settled. So


it would not be at all surprising if C. robustus, found in a sub-fossil state
by Alfred Grandidier, proved to be surviving today. In any case there
seem to have been giant crocodiles in Madagascar until recently, for in
1802 the French naturalist Pierre Denys de Montfort, speaking of the
incredible length that some crocodiles were alleged to be, said that “new
and trustworthy accounts say that there are some in Madagascar which
reach 60 feet.” Even allowing for obvious exaggeration, this is a long
way from the maximum length of present African crocodiles which is
20 feet.


Another victim of the disastrous drought is the hippopotamus. There
was once a small species in Madagascar related to the Pleistocene fossil
hippopotami found in Africa. Its extinction is usually thought to have
occurred several thousand years ago. Yet it is odd that the great naviga-


tor Dumont d’Urville mentioned in that fictitious omnibus of facts
about the world, his Voyage Autour du Monde, published in 1829, that
there were hippopotami in the rivers of Madagascar. Moreover the
hippopotamus, or a distorted traditional picture of it, is said to be the
origin of the legend of the rsomgomby, a fabulous monster described as a
humpless water-buffalo or as an animal not unlike a horse or a mule. If
the tsomgomby really derives from a memory of the hippopotamus,
which may have abounded in ancient times but must have become very
rare after the Europeans’ arrival, it has certainly been much altered on


595


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


the way, for some of the Malagasy say that the monster
has huge hanging


ears, a cry that freezes you with terror, and savage and cannibalistic
_
~


habits. Decary adds that:


a ‘


8


*


The Mahafaly and Antandroy think that it lays the large eggs from _
the south which are really Aepyornis eggs. One day when I was ex-
cavating bones from a deposit near Ambovombé, the Antandroy told
me that the largest (which are those of an Aepyornis) belonged to the
famous tsomgomby. In the Sakalava country this animal’s tracks were
pointed out to me; after examining them I was convinced, despite their
poor condition, that they had been made by . . . a crocodile which had
—


come a long way from the water.


Thus one may suspect that the legendary tsomgomby is based not only
~
on a memory of a sub-fossil hippopotamus, but also upon some kind of
|


reptile, especially in view of the Malagasy tales about the razlalomena
which means “‘father—or ancestor—of the hippopotamus.” This beast


is supposed to live in the swamps and to have a single horn in the middle
of its forehead—like the Congo dragon. Did the Bantus bring the legend
of this mysterious great reptile to Madagascar, or was there a species in
the island itself? Either is possible. Certainly both animals seem to be
mixed in the native mind. The hippopotamus may be the origin of the
tsomgomby and the pseudo-dinosaur of the railalomena, but some details
have been transferred from one to the other.


The two monsters have many of the Congo dragon’s features; a
hippopotamus’s body, a single horn on the forehead, hanging ears
(which may be the fleshy crest hanging on each side of the head as
clearly shown in the dragon of the Ishtar Gate), they lay eggs like a rep-


tile, live in the marshes, are rather aggressive and emit a terrifying cry.
If the dragon lived in Madagascar its amphibious habits would make it
one of the first victims when the swamps and lakes dried up—unless it


is the mysterious animal like a giant tortoise, reputed in lakes and caves
in the south-west and unless the tracks which Decary attributed to a
wandering crocodile must really be attributed to a tsomgomby, a tsom-
gomby with reptile’s feet.


Madagascar is the land of sub-fossil creatures. No other place in the
world gives so strong an impression of having just emerged from Pre-
history. The excavated remains of huge animals, whether they be


birds, reptiles or mammals, are sometimes so fresh that one cannot help
wondering whether the species they come from are really extinct. The
native traditions often make it perfectly clear that they were known by


596


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


man until quite recently, for, according to van Gennep’s principle, which
I have already quoted, the memory of an event dies out in two centuries
when there are no written traditions. This makes the old accounts


of voyages so valuable to our knowledge of recently extinct animals.


Admiral Etienne de Flacourt did not only speak of the Aepyornis as a
living bird. He also mentioned another animal which no zoologist has
yet been able to trace:


Trétrétrétré or Tratratratra is an animal as big as a two-year-old calf,
with a round head and a man’s face; the forefeet are like an ape’s, and
so are the hindfeet. It has frizzy hair, a short tail and ears like a man’s.
It is like the tanacht described by Ambroise Paré.! One has been seen
near the Lipomani lagoon in the neighbourhood of which it lives. It is
a very solitary animal, the people of the country are very frightened of
it and run from it as it does from them.


Most naturalists, of course, took this animal to be mythical. No such
grotesque beast could have lived in Madagascar, where there are no true
monkeys and therefore no man-faced beasts with ape’s feet. De Fla-
court’s tale was no more to be trusted than his repetition, in the middle
of the seventeenth century, of the fable about dog-headed men that had
been told by Ctesias, Marco Polo and many others. The sceptics re-
ceived their first blow when the indris (Indris brevicaudatus) was found


to exist. It is the largest of the lemurs known today and is extraordi-
narily like a little man with a dog’s head. Three feet high and with no


tail but an inconspicuous stump, the indris is astonishingly like a man
in outline.
Like the other lemurs, or half-monkeys, it has a fine and
pointed muzzle, which makes its head more like a fox’s or a dog’s.
When you have seen one it is easy to understand why the Betsimaraka


1 Ambroise Paré quotes André Thévet who writes in book 2, chapter 10, of his
Cosmographie Universelle (1575):


At the time when I was on the Red Sea, certain Indians came from land,
from the banks of the River Vachain, at one of the ends of Calicut, going west-
wards. They brought a monster the size and shape of a tiger, with no tail, but
a face just like a well-proportioned man’s except that the nose was snub: the
hands in front like a man’s and the feet behind like a tiger’s, all covered with
tawny fur. As to the head, ears, neck, and mouth, they were like a man’s,
with somewhat black and frizzled hair like the Blacks you see in Africa. The
Indians had brought it from their country as a curiosity for us to see, out of
their kindness and courtesy: and call this noble beast Thanacth: of which I
have had a portrait drawn for you from nature.


This thanacth could conceivably have been the same animal as the tratratratra
—or at least a related flat-faced lemur, but only if the Indians had brought it
from Madagascar (partly populated by Malayan tribes) and not from Calicut.


507


A
ae


i
Wit
WA iis)
)


118. The thanacth after André Thévet.


tribe both fear and worship the beast they significantly cali babakoto, or
“‘child-father.” They believe it is a descendant of the men who used to
hide in the forest to avoid working for the tribe. All the lemurs are fady,


or taboo, to many of the tribes, for they are thought to have once been
men. The indris is undoubtedly the most human-looking and therefore
the most revered.


Since the legend of the dog-headed men proved to be so well-
founded, more notice should have been taken of de Flacourt’s report of
the tratratratra. I don’t know whether anyone ever iooked for it “‘near
the Lipomani lagoon”’; certainly they never found it.


Palaeontological discoveries were, however, to prove conclusively
that it might very well have existed. To explain the full significance
of these man-faced demons’ actual existence, about which many


tales are still current, I must first say something about the way
Madagascar’s fauna reached that country through the ages and how it
evolved.


One might reasonably expect to find the same fauna in Madagascar as
in Africa except for a few insular differences. Actually the animals on


508


Stay
soht


119. The indris, the largest known living lemur.


the island are sometimes quite original and sometimes related to crea-
tures from as far afield as South America and South-East Asia. The most
typical of Madagascar’s fauna are the lemurs, which, like the monkeys,


are primates, but have many distinctive features in their anatomy: the
longer muzzle with a “wet nose” like a dog’s, the claw on the second toe,
the large ears and even more highly-developed eyeballs. It was because


599


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


of their wide, staring sleep-walkers’ eyes that the old naturalists called
them Jemures, the Roman name for the ghosts of the dead.
The lemurs are so closely connected with Madagascar that few people


realise that at the beginning of the Tertiary era they were found all over
—
the world. They are often found in Eocene strata in North America and
—


even in Europe. From Madagascar’s size and position one might think
that it had been the last refuge of these defenceless beasts, just as New
Zealand was for the last rhynchocephalous reptile and Australia was
for all the marsupials. But here the situation is a little different. The
lemurs were not driven to Madagascar; it was the home from which
they spread over the world, where they were almost all eventually ousted
by the monkeys. Just then Madagascar was cut off from Africa and the
island which had been their cradle remained their undisputed empire.
—


Although three-quarters of the species of lemurs are found in Mada-
gascar, there are galagos, pottos and angwantibos in Africa and the
slender and slow loris in Asia, which have managed to survive by all
becoming nocturnal.
In Madagascar itself there are almost as many
species which are active by day or at dusk as there are which are
thoroughly nocturnal.


Madagascar is also the home of some small carnivores of quite a
special type, the Galidia and Galidictis, genets with longitudinal stripes,
the fanaloka (Fossa fossa), the odd anteater-civet (Eupleres), which has
become insectivorous, and the strange fossa (Cryptoprocta ferox), a sort
of cat with plantigrade feet. Madagascar is also the original home of the
chameleons and boasts no less than 35 different species.


So much for originality. What is much more extraordinary is to find
quite un-African forms of animals in this island off the African’ coast.
All the insectivores there except the shrews belong to the family, ex-
clusive to Madagascar, of tenrecs, whose nearest relatives are the almi-
quis (Solenodon) of the West Indies. The truly indigenous rodents also
reveal secret links with America, the various species of Malagasy voles
(the sub-family Nesomysinae) are closer to the American Cricetinae than


to any in the Old World. There are also two kinds of iguana, though all
the rest of this large family of lizards are found in South America.


On the other hand, the fauna of Madagascar, as I have remarked, is
related to that of India and the Malay peninsula, where there are two
nocturnal lemurs, the slow loris (Nycticebus) and the slender loris (Loris).
This relationship is confirmed by the typically Asian frogs (Racophorus,
Dyscophorus and Calophrynus) which are found in Madagascar.


This strange assortment of animals derives from very ancient geo-


510


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


graphic links. In the Palaeozoic era, the whole of the southern Atlantic
and Pacific was filled by the vast continent of Gondwana, which em-
braced South America, Africa, South-East Asia and Australia. Mada-
gascar lay almost in the middle, which explains how it came to be the
centre from which various groups spread. It was the heart of the oldest
continent.


During the Mesozoic and Tertiary eras this continent of Gondwana,
upon which the sun never set, was gradually disintegrated and whittled
away. First the eastern arm submerged into the ocean in the Jurassic,
leaving nothing but Australia and the neighbouring islands. Gondwana
was then merely a South Atlantic continent, but a huge promontory
stretched right across the Indian Ocean and remained there until the
Cretaceous period. This spit of land has been called Lemuria, for it is
the centre from which the lemurs spread. The fact that it reached from
East Africa to the middle of India helps to explain their present dis-
tribution.


Not until the Cretaceous period was the bridge broken between South
America and Africa. The almiquis in the West Indies and the odd
iguanas in Madagascar are the only living evidence of it that remains.
Madagascar remained attached to India for a little longer, allowing a
few lemurs to be exchanged for the frogs it had already received. Dur-
ing the Tertiary era it was only occasionally attached to Africa, to be
finally cut off for ever in the Pliocene. These connections can only have
been tenuous, for Madagascar has never had any of the ungulates that
are the pride of Africa—with two exceptions: the hippopotamus, which


is recently extinct, and the Malagasy wild pig (Potamochoerus larvatus),
closely related to the bush pigs and the red river-hog of the African
mainland. Both these are semi-aquatic species, leading one to believe
that during the ungulates’ period of expansion Madagascar must
have been already cut off from Africa, but only by a narrow strip of
water.


There is also a breed of wild oxen on the island, but they seem to be
descended from tame cattle imported by the Bantus and returned to a


state of nature. Some people connect them with a sub-fossil ox (Bos


madagascariensis), but this does not disprove the theory that Madagascar


was cut off only by a narrow strip of water. Cattle are not afraid to swim


across quite wide rivers.


Safe from the large beasts of prey, almost without herbivores, and
innocent of any monkeys, Madagascar was a perfect place in which the
511


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


lemurs could expand and flourish and become almost as varied as the
marsupials in Australia.
-


This phenomenon of differentiation is not very striking in the species
that are still extant. Apart from the aye-aye (Daubentonia), which, be- —
sides the other peculiar features of its anatomy, has a specifically rodent
dentition—even though it is omnivorous—the rest of the lemurs seem
fairly similar. All the same, it is a mistake to think that they are all
small, long-tailed, nocturnal, arboreal and vegetarian quadrumanes of
social habits: Some are tailless, others live in rocks, some are quite di-
urnal, many are insectivorous or even omnivorous, and according to the
natives eat birds. And there are some which live alone or in pairs.


The sub-fossil lemurs, which survived until quite recently, were much
more varied in their habits and
©


structure.
The
Megaladapis,
with its concave rhinoceros-like


skull and vast jaw-bones, was a
true tree-dwelling pachyderm.
Although it was as big as a cow


it must have been able to haul


itself slowly through the thickest
of trees with its long, strong and
Silat
bike
prehensile fingers. The Palaeo-


oe, ae ~ we
eS
pithecus evolved by convergence


‘° astonishingly human profile.
®2 SPe in Madagascar very
similar to the African chimpan-


zee. The Hadropithecus aped man himself. Professor C. Lamberton
of Tananarive, who has done remarkable work on the sub-fossil
fauna of Madagascar, writes:


Its round head, its broad flat face, its almost straight nose standing
well clear of the face, its eyes close together, the upright symphysis of its
lower jaw all tend to make it look not merely ape-like, but almost like a
human.


The Hadropithecus had stout limbs and probably usually moved on
the ground. The bones of other, no less extraordinary lemurs have been
found, and there may well be many more still undiscovered.


De Flacourt’s description of the tratratratra no longer seems fantas-


tic, and one must admit that it could well apply to what we know of the
Palaeopithecus, for example. All the standard works say that tratratratra


1 Generally speaking the small lemurs are nocturnal and live in pairs, while
the large ones are diurnal and social.


512


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


is the vernacular for the Megaladapis, which, however, never had around
head and a man’s face. This error has arisen because the Megaladapis
was one of the first fossil lemurs known and was over-hastily used to
explain the tratratratra. This obvious mistake has now been given the
approval of science, and has unfortunately been accepted by such a work


as Professor Osman Hill’s monograph on the primates.


What of the other Malagasy tales of animals unknown to science?
What, for instance, is the tokandia in the old saying “‘the tsomgomby
goes straight ahead but the rokandia moves in jumps”? Legend says
that it is a huge jumping quadruped, which climbs into the trees, where


it lives. Its face is not like a man’s, but it cries like a man.


Surely it is not pure chance that this barely credible legend of a large
arboreal quadruped should be found in the only country where such an
animal—the Megaladapis—has ever lived?


And what are we to make of the kalanoro, the Madagascan gnomes
that Raymond Decary speaks of ?


All the tribes believe in the existence of little creatures similar to our
gnomes and elves. Their name varies with the district: Biby olona,
Kokolampo, Kotokely, and so on. The Kalanoro is, if I may say so, a
sort of amphibious variety. In Lake Aloatra, the Kalanoro are women
like naiads or mermaids, with hair that falls to their waists; they live at
the bottom of the water in watertight palaces, seducing canoers and
fishermen and luring away children. The Betsileo, on the other hand,
believe that Kalanoro is a little land dwarf, which is not more than two
feet high, entirely covered with long hair and is the wife of another
dwarf called Kotokely; Kalanoro lives in caves where she lies on a fairy’s
bed made of silkworm cocoons.
She is interested in the children of
men, stealing them and substituting her own young; she makes the
babies she has stolen drink special potions which prevent them
from growing.
Ill-favoured new-born children are sometimes called
“sons of Kalanoro,’”’ and in the country the parents still keep careful
watch at a birth to see that Kalanoro does not succeed in making an
exchange.


Around Lake Kinkony the Sakalava have a very different notion of
the Kalanoro. This rather more masculine creature lives in the thickets
and reeds on the edges of lagoons. It is less than three feet high; it has
long hair and only three toes on its feet. It has a sweet woman’s voice,
lives on fish and raw food, and walks in the country in the evening. If
you meet one, it will accost you and hold you in conversation while it
gradually leads you away until you disappear into the lake. Farther
north, on the other hand, the Kalanoro lives in woods and caves, and
does not try to lead human beings astray, but it has hooked nails with
which it can give cruel wounds to anyone who tries to capture it; it lives
on milk, which it sometimes comes and steals even from the natives’


KK
$13


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


huts. In short, young and old fear the Kalanoro, whose name parents
invoke to make their children keep quiet.


These legends may be fantastic, but they are found all over Madagas-
—


car, and it would be odd if they were utterly without foundation. —
Professor Lamberton wisely says:


The freshness of the bones found in the south-east, as well as the
state of the deposits, seems to show that the Hadropithecus must have
lived until quite recently, at least in the Bara country, and one may well
wonder whether the legend of the Kalanoro, which still thrives espe-
cially in the Ankazoabo district, does not refer to these animals. Ac-
cording to the Bara, the Kalanoro are little long-haired men who still
live in the forests in the district and come out at night to prowl the vil-
lages in search of food. They run and climb very nimbly.


All this agrees well enough with what we might expect of the Hadro-
pithecus, and it is not impossible that the natives who lived in this area
only a few centuries ago saw these animals, the memory of which has
been handed down from generation to generation, gradually being
altered to become more and more mysterious, as is the rule among
primitive peoples.


But as some areas of Madagascar are still almost unexplored, such as
the Ambongo reserve and the lonely Isalo mountains, and there are still
some 8 or 9 million acres of virgin forest, it would be rash to assert
categorically that not a single giant lemur survives. After all, the okapi,
which is as big as a horse, remained unknown for a long time because of


its nocturnal habits.


Raymond Decary, who has written about the mysterious beasts of
Malagasy legend at some length, thinks that most of them are mythical,
though they derive in part from the sub-fossil hippopotami and lemurs
“which haunted the forests and waters only a few centuries ago, and the
memory of which has been confused, giving rise to legendary beliefs.”
But there are others which he thinks look more real—the habéby, for


instance, which the Betsileo call fotsiaondré, or white sheep.
It is a
purely nocturnal beast, which is said to be sometimes seen by moonlight
in the uninhabited wastes of the Isalo range. It is as large as a sheep and


is also supposed to have a cloven hoof and a white coat, somewhat
spotted with buff or black. It has a long muzzle, long furry ears and
large staring eyes. Some say that it is a beast of prey, but another ver-
sion, according to which it is vegetarian, is more likely to be correct.
Little-known animals are commonly assumed to be more savage than
they really are.


514


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


Personally I very much doubt whether the habéby is really a sort of
sheep, for sheep are not in the least nocturnal. Besides, no one seems to
have ever seen a habéby ram, at all events they have never mentioned
horns.


On the other hand, some of the lemurs are curiously specialised.
Perhaps there are some types we have never dreamt of, and perhaps a
branch has developed parallel to the Megaladapis and has chosen to live
on the ground because of its great weight. This would not be odd.
Even among the monkeys there are the baboons, which have completely
given up living in trees. The habéby’s large and staring eyes, which all
witnesses insist upon, are not at all like an ungulate’s, though they are
a striking feature of the lemurs, especially the nocturnal species, which
are the most ghostlike of all.


Admiral de Flacourt reports yet another puzzling Malagasy animal:


Mangarsahoc is a very large beast, which has a round foot like a
horse’s and very long ears; when it comes down a mountain it can hardly
see before it, because its ears hide its eyes; it makes a loud cry in the
manner of an ass. I think it may be a wild ass.


Ten years later, in 1770, the Comte de Modave said that the animal
lived some 10 leagues from Fort Dauphin, describing it as follows in his
correspondence (hitherto unpublished):


This animal is much feared by the negroes, who give terrifying
descriptions of it; at bottom it is but a wild ass; many are found in this
part of the island, but you must look for them in the woods, for they
never leave these lonely places and are hard to approach.


Decary says that in Anosy they still speak of an animal called man-
garisaoka (literally “‘whose ears hide its chin”), which is of course the
same as de Flacourt’s Mangarsahoc, and thinks that the tokatongotra
from the lonely south may be a similar animal. Its name means “single-
footed,” in the sense that a horse or a donkey is a “‘soliped,” and it is not
unlike these animals.
Decary thinks it may derive from an ancient
tradition that wild horses used to live in the south.


A wild ass has several times been reported in the Ankaizinana forests
and the Bealanana and Manirenjy districts. Tracks of its hooves have


been found. This harmless beast (if it really is an ass) has a vile reputa-


tion among the natives, who think that the mere sight of it will bring


bad luck. It was the subject of a manuscript report by the administrator


Bollon in 1936.


It is significant that several naturalists are almost ready to admit that


515


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


in Madagascar there is a wild ass or horse which no white man has ever
seen and of which not the slightest remains have been found, yet they


flatly refuse to consider the possibility that any large lemurs can have
survived. These nimble, intelligent creatures which live in forests and


are nocturnal in habits would have a much better chance than a horse or


ass of eluding our searches. And their ghostlike, owlish eyes would be
able to arouse the greatest superstitious terror among the natives. The
survival of sub-fossil animals in Madagascar is denied out of the same
obstinate prejudice that I have attacked throughout this book. It all
stems from an obsolete scientific doctrine, Cuvier’s Revolutions of the
Globe.


Madagascar seems to have its own variety of many of the unknown
animals that belong elsewhere.
The railalomena echoes the Congo
dragon, the kalanoro is a pendant to the tales of the mittaewo, orang
pendek, agogwe and other African dwarfs. It has a version of the konga-
mato (or olitiau) in its fangalabolo, “that-which-seizes-the-hair,” a giant
bat which dives upon belated travellers and tears their faces and hair.


Madagascar even has its own version of the Australian bunyip or the
Patagonian temisch: it is the kavay of the Ankaizinana mountains, the
terror of the Tsimihety. This aquatic animal is supposed to creep
craftily out of the water to tear the eyes out of incautious travellers.


The Malagasy also believe in a gigantic hydra, a three-coloured ser-
pent with seven heads called fanampitoloho, which is rather like the
Australian bushmen’s rainbow snake and other similar myths. When it


rises above the water its heads touch the sky, and the wash that it makes
can destroy a whole village.


This fantastic monster turns out to be a poetic personification of the
waterspouts that sometimes arise on large lakes like Alaotra and Itasy.
Surely there is some truth behind the more prosaic legends of the fanga-


labolo, the kRavay and the other mysterious animals described in this
chapter, and surely the simplest solution is that they derive from a tradi-


tional memory, distorted in the handing down, of sub-fossil animals.
Are we to believe that during the last few centuries we have let them all
die out without having so much as a glimpse of one of them: the giant
birds, giant tortoises, giant crocodiles and giant lemurs—the Brob-
dingnagian inhabitants of this Lilliputian continent?
It would be a
remarkably bad run of ill-luck. If there is the faintest hope of finding a
single one of these creatures alive, we should be mad to neglect it.


Some of them have certainly vanished. They have been lost to zoo-


516


TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA, ETCETERA


logy forever because modern zoologists have been too incredulous or too
incurious. We must not repeat their mistake.


Most of the giant forms of all the zoological branches disappeared all
over the world before man had even arrived. Those evolutionary bursts
of activity, when forms diversified, always tending to giant types in the
end, belong to the past.
I have already remarked that the Tertiary
era did not see the birth of any really new type of animal. Our own
era is hardly likely to witness anything sensational in evolutionary
enterprise.


This does not necessarily mean that the animal world is in decline.
But the period of life’s great experiments and multiple attempts, which
©
were often extravagant and destined to failure, certainly seems to be
past.
Palaeontological collections are like museums of early flying
machines or the first locomotives: mines of inspired discoveries, but
how many clumsy failures!


Constantly weeded out by the merciless forces of natural selection,
only the most flexible, the most adaptable to changing conditions have
survived today: at least they are the only ones to show real vitality. Mice
and men, swallows and flies are the most characteristic examples. The
battle has been won by simplicity of line, balance and harmony of form,
medium size, light weight and sober colours; economy of weight and
strength, economy of means.
The age of giants is past. The giant
amphibians, reptiles and birds have all disappeared with only a few
exceptions. In 50 or I00 years the last of the very large mammals—
rhinoceroses, elephants, hippopotami, buffalo, antelopes, deer, zebras,
bears, lions and apes—will have vanished, except in those museums of
obsolete zoology, the nature reserves and national parks.


In Madagascar fortunate circumstances have almost enabled us to
watch the extinction of the giant fauna of the past, but we have missed
our opportunity. We should take the lesson to heart, for there are still
numbers of strange or giant forms of animals hiding in the more remote
corners of the world, as is shown by the persistent and often exact re-


ports that I have recorded here. Are we to let these monsters die out


without attempting to know them? Surely the inquiring spirit of Aris-


totle and Pliny, Gesner and Aldrovandus, Buffon and Darwin is not


dead?


In a sense I hope that it may be. Now that I have reached the end of


this book I feel a vague sense of regret—regret that I have revealed the
still-undisturbed retreat of so many unknown animals. When I think


517


THE LESSON OF THE MALAGASY GHOSTS


of what man has done with a rifle, I am horrified that I should offer him
new targets.


The most dreadful of the monsters I have mentioned attacks man
—
only in self-defence or to provide himself with food. Only man kills for
pleasure. I hope that the International Union for the Conservation
of Nature and Natural Resources, which has already begun to do such
good work, lays down an absolute prohibition to protect the creatures
which are still unknown to science and are obviously interesting to all.


No sooner is one of them discovered than the hunt for trophies be-
gins. These maniacs must be stopped at once. History shows how
alarmingly quickly man can exterminate a whole species. We have
hardly known our noble cousin the gorilla for more than a century, yet,
despite the tireless efforts of those institutions set up to protect him,
he has been ignominiously slaughtered, and perhaps will soon vanish
without our having learnt anything about his habits, so full of signifi-
cance from our own point of view.


Tomorrow we may know one of our other relatives: the abominable
snowman, for instance, who is surely a shy and gentle great ape; or
perhaps an even more human primate like the tiny agogwe or the elusive
orang pendek. 1 hope with all my heart that when he is captured there
will be no needless murder.


Have pity on them all, for it is we who are the real monsters.


Paris, 1958.


518


Bibliography


‘The abbreviations of the titles of periodicals follow Smith and Kent’s World
List of Scientific Periodicals, 1900-1950.


CHAPTER ONE
THERE ARE LOST WORLDS EVERYWHERE


Genera


ANON: “Fifty New Species of Fish Found in California Gulf” (Sci. News Lett.,
Washington, 24 January 1953)


“Thousands of New Life Forms Discovered Annually” (ibid,
15 March 1952)


ARNDT, W.: “Ueber die Anzahl der bisher in Deutschland (Altreich) nachge-
wiesen rezenten Tierarten” (Zool. Anz., Leipzig, 128, pp. 113-23, 1939)


BURTON, Wy
gaumed The Story of Animal Life (London & Cambridge, Mass.,
1949


CUVIER, GEORGES: Le Régne Animal (Paris, 1817)
agi 3
SIR Cont
Conan: The Lost World (London & Hollywood-by-the-Sea,


mee toh


Fawcett, Percy H.: Lost Trails, Lost Cities (New York & London, 1953;
London edition entitled Exploration Fawcett)


FLORNOY, BERTRAND: ‘“‘Les Derniéres Inconnues du Monde’? (France-Soir,
Paris, 24 March 1951)


Goss, Puitip H.: The Romance of Natural History [first series] pp. 271-96,
(London, 2nd ed., 1861)


KOo..er, H.: Daten zur Geschichten der Zoologie (Bonn, 1949)
KRUMBIEGEL, INGO: Von Neuen und Unentdeckten Tierarten (Stuttgart, 1950)
LANG, HERBERT: “In Quest of the Rare Okapi” (Bull. N.Y. zool. Soc., New
York, 21, pp. 1601-14, 1918)


LEUNIS, JOHANNES: Synopsis der Thierkunde (3rd ed. revised by H. Lupwie,
vol. ii, Hanover, 1886)


Ley, Witty: The Lungfish and the Unicorn (New York, 1941, London, 1948;
revised edition, New York, 1948, entitled The Lungfish, the Dodo and the
Unicorn


VICTOR, aia eae “Les Derniéres Inconnues du Monde” (France-Soir,
Paris, 15 March 1951)


Tatzelwurm


ANON: Alpenrosen, ein Taschenbuch fir das fahr 1841 (Aarau, 1841)
Neues Taschenbuch fiir Natur- Forst- und fagdfreunde auf das fahr 1836


(Weimar, 1835)
.
y
‘
FREKSA, FRIEDRICH: “Der Tatzelwurm Wiedergesichtet” (Woche, Berlin, 37,


no. 13, 1935)
SOR
3
-
bs
KoutruscH,
C.:
Schweizerisches
Sagenbuch
(‘Von
den
Stollenwiirmen,
PP. 47-9, 170, Leipzig, 1854)
KOniG, F. N.: Retse in die Alpen (p. 127; Berne, 1814)
‘
Ley, WILLY: “Un Animal Inconnu dans les Alpes” (Nature, Paris, p. 366,
I June 1938)
;
,
The Lungfish and the Unicorn (op. cit.)


519


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Nico.usst, JaKkos: [Description as Heloderma europaeum] (Der Schlern, Bozen,
March 1933)
;
.
4
Rupotr, Hans: “Razzia auf den feleseint eed: ce Illustrirte Zeitung,


Berlin, no. 16,
pp. 551--58, no. 17, pp.
601-4, 1935
ar
TSCHUDI, VeoecH yO Das Thierleben der Alpenwelt (p. 152, Leipzig, 1861)
Wyss, I. R.: Reise in das Berner Oberland (vol. ii, p. 423, Berne 1816-17)


Voyage dans l’Oberland Bernois (vol. ii, pp. 19-21, Berne, 1816-17)


CHAPTER TWO
CUVIER’S RASH DICTUM


General
ANDERSON, C.: ““The Sea-Serpent and its Kind” (Aust. Mus. Mag., Sydney, §;5
no. 6, p. 204, 1934)
:
:
Ate
nei
CuvIER, GEORGES: Recherches sur les Ossements Fossiles (““Discours Preliminaire,
Paris, 1812
BuRTON, Mines “Some Mammals Discovered during the Last Century”


’
(Ill. Lond. News, London, 217, pp. 28-31, 1950)
FRECHKOP, SERGE: Animaux Protégés au Congo Belge (Brussels, 1947)
KRUMBIEGEL, INGO: Von Neuen und Unentdeckten Tierarten (op. cit.)
Ley, Witty: The Lungfish and the Unicorn (op. cit.)
Dragons in Amber (London & New York, 1951)
SIMPSON, GEORGE GAYLORD: “‘The Principles of Classification and a Classifica-
tion of Mammals” (Bull. Amer. Mus. nat. Hist., New York, 2§, 1945)


Indian Tapir
BreEHM, A. E.: Les Mammifeéres (“L’Homme et les Animaux,” vol. ii, pp. 727—
30, Paris, 1878)
:
MARSDEN, WILLIAM: History of Sumatra (London, 1783)
RAFFLES, SIR THOMAS STAMFORD: The History of fava (London, 1817)


Gelada, Celebesean Ape and Siamang
DeEsMaAREST, A. G.: Mammalogie ou Description des Espéces de Mammiféres
(Supplement, Paris, 1820)
RAFFLES, SIR THOMAS STAMFORD: The History of Fava (op. cit.)
RUPPELL, E.: Neue Wirbelthiere zu der Fauna von Abessinien Gehoerig (p. 5,
Frankfurt, 1835)
is


Water-chevrotain
OaiLBy, W: “On a New Species of Musk Deer from Sierra Leone” (Proc. zool.
Soc. Lond., London, p. 35, 1840)
Gray, J. E.: “On the African Musk, Moschus aquaticus, Ogilby” (Ann. Mag.
nat. Hist., London, (1), 16, p. 350, 1845)


Pygmy Hippopotamus


Beaux, O. DE: ““Lebende Liberianische Zwergflusspferde in Carl Hagenbecks
Tierpark in Stellingen” (Zool. Anz., Leipzig, 40, pp. 227-33, 1912)


BUTTIKOFER, J.: Reisebilder aus Liberia (Leiden, 1890)
CHAPMAN, H. C.: “Notes on Choeropsts liberiensis (Morton) (Proc. Acad. nat.
Sci. Philad., Philadelphia, pp. 185-7, 1893)


Dapper, O.: Naukeurige Beschryvinge der Afrikaensche Gewesten van Egypten,
Barbaryen, Libyen, Biledulgerid, Negroslant, Guinea, Ethiopen, Abyssinie
(Amsterdam, 1668)


Hornapay, W. T.: “Our Pygmy Hippopotami” (Bull. N. Y. zool. Soc., New
York, 16, no. 52, pp. 877-9, I912)


Lerpy, J.: “On the Osteology of the head of Hippopotamus and a Descrip ion
of the Osteological Characters of a new Genus of Hippopotamidae”
(.
Acad. nat. Sct. Philad., Philadelphia, vol. ii, p. 3, 1852)


520


BIBLIOGRAPHY


LYDERKER, R.: “The Pygmy Hippopotamus of West Africa” (Country Life,
London, 24, pp. 473-5; 1908)


MacALISTER, A.: “On the Visceral Anatomy and Myology of a Young Female
which died in the Dublin Zoological Society” (Proc. R. Irish Acad., Dublin,
2, i, PP. 494-500, 1873)


Marx, E.: “Das Zwergflusspferd von Liberia” (Ber. senckenb. naturf. Ges.,
Frankfurt, 44, pp. I-5, 1913)


Morton, S. G.: “Additional Observations on a New Living Species of Hippo-
potamus of Western Africa (H. liberiensis)” (Ff. Acad. nat. Sci. Philad.,
Philadelphia, 1, (2), 3, August 1849)


RITCHIE, J.: “Distribution of the Pigmy Hippopotamus” (Nature, London, 126,
PP. 204-5, 1930)
;


ScHOMBURGK, H.: “On the Trail of the Pygmy Hippo: an Account of the
Hagenbeck Expedition to Liberia” (Bull. N. Y. zool. Soc., New York, 16,
no. §2, pp. 808-84, 1912)


“Distribution and Habits of the Pigmy Hippopotamus” (Rep. N. Y. zool.
Soc., New York, 17, pp. 113-20, 1913)


Lowlands Gorilla


BuFFON, G. L. LECLERC DE: Histoire Naturelle, Générale et Particuliére (vol.
xiv, Paris, 1766)


GEOFFROY-SAINT-HILAaIRE, IstporRE: “‘Note sur le Gorille” (Ann. Sci. nat., Paris,
3rd ser., 16, pp. 154-8, 1851)


Hanno: The Voyage of Hanno trans. Thomas Falconer (London, 1797)
HARTMANN, ROBERT: Anthropoid Apes (London, 1885)
MONBODDO, JAMES BURNETT, LORD: On the Origin and Progress of Language (2nd
ed., vol i, Edinburgh, 1774)


PuRCHAS, SAMUEL: Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchas his Pilgrimes, Contayning a
History of the World, in Sea Voyages & Lande Travels (vol. ii, pp. 981-2,
London, 1625)


RADERMACHER, J. C. M.: “Beschrijving van het Eiland Borneo, voor zoo ver
Hetzelve tot nu toe Bekand is” (Verh. batavia Genoot., Batavia, 2, 1780)


SAVAGE, THOMaS S.: “‘Notice of the External Character and Habits of a New
Species of Troglodytes (T. gorilla Savage) recently Discovered by Dr.
Savage near the River Gaboon, Africa” (Proc. Boston Soc. nat. Hist.,
Boston, 2, pp. 245-7, 1847)


SAVAGE, THOMAS S., and WYMAN, JEFFRIES: ‘“‘Notice of the External Characters
and Habits of Troglodytes gorilla, a New Species of Orang from the Gaboon
River . .
. Osteology of the same...” (tbid., 5, pp. 417-43, 1847)


YERKES, ROBERT M. and ApA W.: The Great Apes (New Haven, 1929)


Takin
Hopseson, B. H.: “On the Takin of the Eastern Himalaya: Budorcas taxicolor
mihi”? (F. Asiat. Soc. Beng., Calcutta, 19, pp. 65-75, 1850)


Schomburgk’s and Pére David’s Deer
Davin, ARMAND: Journal de mon Troisiéme Voyage d’Exploration dans l Enxpire
Chinois (Paris, 1875)
;
'
]
Gigs, F. H.: “‘The Riddle of Cervus schomburgki” (F. Siam. Soc., Nat. Hist.


Suppl., Bangkok and Leipzig, pp. 1-34, 1937)
HOooljer, be A.: “De Geschiedenis van Pére David’s Hert” (Levende Nat.,


Amsterdam, §5, pp. 205-10, 1952)


JoNnES, FREDERICK Woop: “‘History and Anatomy of Pére David’s Deer” (Proc.
zool. Soc. Lond., London, 21, pp. 319-68, 1952)


MILNeE-Epwarps, ALPHONSE: “Note sur l’Elaphurus davidianus, espéce nouvelle
de la Famille des Cerfs” (C. R. Acad. Sct., Paris, 62, pp. 1090-2, 1866)


Roxellana’s Snub-nosed Langur
Davip, ARMAND: Journal de mon Troisiéme Voyage d’Exploration dans l Empire
Chinois (op. cit.)
521


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Mitng-Epwarps, ALPHONSE: “‘Sur quelques Mammiféres du Thibet Oriental”
(C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 70, p. 341, 1870)
F
/
Recherches pour Servir al’Histoire Naturelle des Mammiferes (vol. i, pp. 233-43,
Paris, 1868-74)


Giant Panda


Carter, T. D.: “The Giant Panda” (Bull. N. Y. zool. Soc., New York, 40,
Pp. 6-14, 1937)
7
Z
CHAWORTH-MusTERS, J. L.: ““The Discover of the Giant Panda: P. Armand
David, 1826-1900” (Zoo Life, London, 1, pp. 70-1, 1946)


Davin, ARMAND: Journal de mon Troisiéme Voyage d’Exploration dans l’ Empire
Chinois (op. cit.)
‘


Grecory, W. K.: “On the Phylogenetic Relationships of the Giant Panda (Ailu-
ropoda) to Fes Arctoid Carnivora” (Amer. Mus. Novitat., New York, 878,
pp. I-29, 1936
HARKNESS, RUTH: The Baby Giant Panda (New York, 1938)


The Lady and the Panda, an Adventure (New York, 1938)


LANKESTER, SIR Ray: “On the affinities of 4luropus melanoleucus A. Milne-


Edwards” (Trans. Linn. Soc. Lond. (Zool.), London, 2, viii, pp. 163-72,
~


1901)
LEONE, CHARLES A. and WIENS, ALVIN L.: “Comparative Serology of Carnivores”
(7. Mammal., Baltimore, 37, no. I, 1956)
MiILNnE-Epwarps, ALPHONSE: “Sur quelques Mammiféres du Thibet Oriental”
(C. R. Acad. Sct., Paris, 70, p. 342, 1870)
Recherches pour Servir a Histoire Naturelle des Mammiferes (op. cit., vol. i,
pp. 321-38 and 394)
:
.
Pocock, R. I.: ‘‘Some External Characters of the Giant Panda (Ailuropoda
melanoleuca)” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, pp. 975-91, 1929)
“The Panda and the Giant Panda” (Zoo Life, London, 1, pp. 67-70, 1946)
RAVEN, H. C:: “Notes on the Anatomy
of the Viscera of the Giant Panda
ser oe melanoleuca)’” (Amer.
Mus. Novitat., New York, 877, pp. I-23;
193
ROOSEVELT, ory **The Search for the Giant Panda” (Nat. Hist., New York,
30, 1930
Sacz, D.: “Hunting the Giant Panda” (China 7., Shanghai, 22, pp. 35-40, 1935)
“In Quest of the Giant Panda” (Nat. Hist., New York, 35, pp. 309-10, 1935)
Soe K. ve “Von Bambusbiaren” (Natur u. Volk, Frankfurt, 82, pp.
275-83, 1952
°
SowErBY, A. DE C.: “The Pandas or Cat-Bears” (China #., Shanghai, 17, pp.
296-9, 1932)
_
aes
‘Hunting the Giant Panda” (tbid, 21, pp. 20-32, 1934)
“The Lure of the Giant Panda” (tbid., 28, pp. 251-4, 1938)
piety W. E.: “The Giant Panda” (Ill. Lond. News, London, 208, p. 662,
19
WEIGOLD, H.: “Weitere Bemerkungen Dr Weigolds zu den Gesammelten
Saugetieren” in “Zool. Ergebn. Walter Stétzners Exped. Szetschwan, etc.
(Teil 3)? (Abh. Ber. Mus., Dresden, 16, no. 2, pp. 71-6, 1924)


Crested Rat


Mrng-Epwarps, ALPHONSE: “Memoire sur le Type d’une Nouvelle Famille de
oe des Rongeurs” (Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. nat., Paris, iii, pp. 81-118,
18607,


Pacarana


Hopceg, WALTER HENRICKS: “The Pacarana” in MAURICE BURTON: The Story
of Animal Life (op. cit., vol. ii, pp. 303-4)


GOELDI, E. A.: “On the Rodent Dinomys branickii” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond.,
London, ii, pp. 158-65, 1904)


§22


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Lesser Kudu


BLYTH, Epwarp: “Notice of Two Overlooked Species of Antelope” (Proc.
1.
Soc. Lond., London, p. 52, 1869)
:
ee


Chinese Water-deer and Tufted Deer
MILNE-EDwarpbs, ALPHONSE: In ARMAND Davip: “Rapport sur un Voyage au
Tibet” (Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. nat. Paris, Paris, 7, Bull, p. 93, 1871)
SWINHOE, ROBERT: “‘On Chinese Deer, with the Description of an Apparently
New Species” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, p. 90, 1870)


Clarke’s, Grant’s and Waller’s Gazelles
BROOKE, SiR Victor: “On a Supposed New Species of Gazelle from Eastern
Africa (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, p. 601, 1872)
“On a Species of Gazelle from Western Africa” (ibid., p. 939, 1878)
Tuomas, O: “On some Antelopes Collected in Somaliland by Mr. T. W.’H.
Clarke” (ibid., pp. 206-14, 1891)


Grévy’s Zebra
GRANT, JAMES AuGusTUS: A Walk across Africa (Edinburgh & London, 1864)
OusTALET, E.: “Une Nouvelle Espece de Zébre: le Zébre de Grévy (Equus
grevyi)” (Nature, Paris, 19, (2), p. 12, 1882)
RZASNICKI, A.: “Zur Kenntnis und Entdeckungsgeschichte des Grévy-Zebras”
(Zool. Gart., Leipzig, 8, pp. 283 ff., 1936)
SCHERREN, H.: The Early Literature of Grévy’s Zebra (London, 1905)


Przewalski’s Horse
BANNIKOV, A. G.: “‘Distribution Géographique et Biologie du Cheval Sauvage
et du Chameau de Mongolie” (Mammalia, Paris, 22,
1, March 1958)
FRECHKOP, SERGE: “‘Le Cheval de Prjewalski’’ (Zoo, Antwerp, 23, no. 2, October


1957)


PoxtrakorFF, I. S.: [Description] (Bull. Soc. russe Géogr., St. Petersburg, pp. 6-20,
1881)


STREET, P.: ““The Wild Horse from Mongolia” (Country Life, London, 118,
no. 3055, 1955)


Mountain Nyala
LYDEKKER, R.: The Game-Animals of Africa (London, new ed. 1926)


Monkey-eating Eagle
GRANT, W. R. OaiLviz: “On a New Species of Bird from the Island of Samar’
(Bull. Brit. orn. Cl., London, vi, pp. 16-18, 1896)


Cotton’s White Rhinoceros


Lake, ALEXANDER: [On the etymology of the name “white rhino”) Killers ‘in
Africa (New York, 1953)
Lane, H.: “The White Rhinoceros of the Belgian Congo” (Bull. N. Y. zool.
Soc., New York, vol. 23, no. 4, 1920)
LyYDEKKER, R.: [Description] (Field, London, p. 319, 22 February 1901)
The Game-Animals of Africa (op. cit.)


Mountain Gorilla
ANON: “Le Gorille” (Bull. Soc. zool. Cong., Leopoldville, 4, 1, 1941)
Matscuig, PAuL: “Ueber einen Gorilla aus Deutsch-Ostafrika” (S. B. Ges.


naturf. Fr. Berl., Berlin, pp. 253-9, 1903)
,
OMS
PrTMaN, C. R. S.: A Game Warden among his Charges (Chaps. x & xi: “Gorillas,


pp. 208-42, London, 1931)


523


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Okapi


BouLg, M.: “Un Fossile qui Ressuscite” (Nature, Paris, 1901)
Burton, Maurice: The Story of Animal Life (op. cit.)
;
COLBERT, EDWIN H. ‘snark Relationships of the Okapi” (F. Mammal., Baltimore,


.
47-63, 1938
:
Buseivoet Spon, “De l’Okapi et des Affinités des Giraffidés avec les Anti-
lopes” (Bull. Mus. nat. Belg., Brussels, 22, no. 1, February 1946)
JoHNsTON, SiR Harry: The Uganda Protectorate (vol. i, pp. 352-470, London,


1902
“The Okapi” in CHARLES J. CoRNISH: The Living Animals of the World (vol.


i, pp. 267-70, London, 1901)
:
:


JoLEauD, LEONCE: ‘‘Remarques sur les Giraffidés Fossiles d’Afrique” (Mamma-
lia, Paris, 1, no. 3, pp. 85-96, March 1937)


LANKESTER, SIR Ray.: “On Okapiajohnstoni” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, 2,
pp. 279-81 and 472-4, 1901)
;
=


SciaTerR, P. L.: “On an Apparently New Species of Zebra from the Semliki
Forest” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, 2, pp. 50-3, 1901)


STANLEY, H. M.: In Darkest Africa (London & New York, 1890)


Giant Forest-Hog


Mor, E.: “Das Riesenwaldschwein Hylochoerus meinertzhageni Thomas”
(Zool. Anz., Leipzig, 14, pp. 177-91, 1942)
;


Tuomas, O.: “On Hylochoerus, the Forest-Pig of Central Africa” (Proc. zool.
Soc. Lond., London, ii (1905), pp. 193-9, 1904)


Komodo Dragon


BrouGHTON, Lapy: “A Modern Dragon Hunt on Komodo” (Nat. geogr. Mag.,
Washington, September 1936)


BURDEN, D.: Dragon Lizards of Komodo (New York and London, 1928)
HooGeERweErRF, A.: “Le Lézard Géant de Komodo” (Science et Nature, Paris,
no. 9, May-June 1955)


“The Indonesian Giant”’ (Nat. Hist., New York, 67, no. 3, March 1958)


Ouwens, P. A.: “On a Large Varanus Species from the Island of Komodo”
(Bull. Fard. bot. Buitenz., Buitenzorg, 2, 6, pp. I-3, 1912)


R&TTICH, M.: “Wie der Drache von Komodo Entdeckt wurde” (Arche Noah,
Hamburg, 1, p. 188, 1949),


““White-Flag” Dolphin
Hoy, C. M.: “The ‘White-flag’ Dolphin of the Tung Ting Lake, Lipotes
vexillifer” (China F., Shanghai, 1, pp. 154-7, 1923)
°
MILLER, GERRIT S.: ““A New River-Dolphin from China” (Smithson. misc.
Coll., Washington, 68, 9, pp. I-12, 1918)


Pygmy Gorilla and Pygmy Chimpanzee


Coo.incE, H. L.: “Pan paniscus, Pigmy Chimpanzee from South of the Congo
River” (Amer. J. phys. Anthrop., 18, 1, pp. I-57, 1933)


ELLIOT, D. G.: A Review of the Primates (New York, 1913)
Rong, P.: “Etude d’un Chimpanzé Pygmée Adolescent” (Mammalia, Paris, v,
2, Pp. 49-68, 1941)


SCHOUTEDEN, H.: “Le Chimpanzé de la Rive Gauche du Congo” (Bull. Cerclé
zool. congol., Ghent, v, p. 70, 1928)


“Das Vorkommen des Schimpansen auf dem Linken Kongoufer”’ (Rev. Zool.


Bot. afr., Brussels, 16, 4, pp. 423-5, 1929)


URBAIN, A. and Rong, P.: “Un
impanzé Pygmée (Pan satyrus paniscus
Schwartz) au Parc Zoologique du Bois de Vincennes” (Mammalia, Paris,
4, I, pp. 12-14, 1940)


524


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Congo Peacock


CHAPIN, JAMES P.: ““A New Peacock-like Bird from the Belgian
Congo” (Rev.
__Zool. Bot. afr., Brussels, 29, p. 2, 1936)
Sect
aes
“The Birds of the Belgian Congo” (Bull. Amer. Mus. nat. Hist., New York,
ceq 752, 1939)
In Pursuit of the Congo Peacock” (Nat. Hist., New York, 40, no. 5, Decem-
ber 1937)
“How the Congo Peacock was Discovered” (Animal Kingdom, New York,


1948)


Water-civet


ALLEN, GLOVER M.: “Preliminary Notes on African Carnivora” (7. Mammal.,
Baltimore, 1, 25, 1919)


Kou-Prey


Coo ince, J. H., Jr.: “The Indo-Chinese Forest Ox or Kouprey” (Mem. Mus.
comp. Zool. Harv., Cambridge, Mass., 54, 6, 1940)


DUFOSSE, rel Chasse et Tourisme au Cambodge et dans le
Sud Indo-Chine (Saigon,
1930


LEKAGUL, B.: “On the Trail of the Kouprey or Indo-Chinese Forest Ox (Bibos
sauveli)” (F. Bombay nat. Hist. Soc., Bombay, 50, pp. 623-8, 1952)


SAUVEL,
T.: ““Le Kou-Prey ou Boeuf Gris du Cambodge” (Terre et la Vie,
Paris, 96, no. 3, pp. 89-109, 1949)
:


“Distribution Geographique du Kou-Prey (Bibos sauveli Urbain)” (Mamma-


lia, Paris, 13, pp. 144-8, 1949)


Ursaln, A.: “Le Kou-Prey ou Boeuf Gris Cambodgien” (Bull. Soc. zool. Fr.,
Paris, vol. lxii, no. 5, pp. 305-7; 1937)
;
;
;


“Le Kou-Prey ou Boeuf Sauvage Cambodgien” (Mammalia, Paris, vol. is
no. 6, December 1937)


“Note Complémentaire sur le Boeuf Sauvage du Cambodge (Bos (Bibos)
sauveli Urbain)” (Bull. Mus. Hist. nat., Paris, vol. xi, no. 6, pp. 519-20,
December 1939)


ViTToz, R.: ‘Etude Zootechnique de I’Elevage et de l’Exploitation des Bovins
du Sud Indochinois ou Cochinchine” (Bull. econ. Indochine, Saigon, p. 947;
1933)


Andean Wolf


KRUMBIEGEL, INGO: “Der Andenwolf, ein Neuentdecktes Grosstier” (Umschau,
Frankfurt and Leipzig, 49, no. 9, pp. 590-1, 1949)
Pare
.
“Der ‘Andenwolf’? Dasycyon hagenbecki (Krumbiegel, 1949)”
(Sdugetierk.
Mitt., Munich, 1, pp. 97-104, 1953)


CHAPTER THREE


THE SURVIVORS FROM THE PAST


ARAMBOURG, C.: ‘“‘Découverte d’un Nouveau Coelacanthe Vivant” (Naturalia,
Paris, no. 2, pp. 45-7, November 1953)
:


BATTEN, RoczR L.: “The Need to Classify” (Nat. Hist., New York, 67, 3,
March 1958)
;
;


BERTIN, LEON: Géologie et Paléontologie (Paris, 1939)
BurRTON, Maurice: Living Fossils (London & New York, 1954)
CAULLERY, Maurice: Le Probleme de I’ Evolution (Paris, 1931)
CoxserT, E. H.: “A Fossil Comes to Life” (Nat. Hist., New York, 43, 5, May


I
pea) beens “Discours sur les Revolutions du Globe” in Recherches sur


les Ossemens Fossiles (op. cit.)


525


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Decuais, A.: Le Vieillissement du Monde Vivant (pp. 26-33, Paris 1941)
Furon, R.: La Paléontologie (pp. 246-61, Paris, 1951)
|
GENNEP, ARNOLD VAN: La Formation des Légendes (Paris, 1910)
‘
:
GREGORY, WILLIAM K.: “Australia, the Land of Living Fossils” (Nat. Hist.,
New York, 24, 1924)
‘
Hem, R.: Destruction et Protection de la Nature (pp. 27-44, Paris, 1952)
Mi110T, J. H.: “Le Troisitme Coelacanthe” (Naturaliste malgache, Tananarive-
Tsimbazaza, Suppl. 1, 1954)
2
:
:
ORBIGNY, ALCIDE D’: Cours Elémentaire de Paléontologie et de Géologie Strati-
graphiques (vol. ii, p. 251, Paris, 1849-52)
SCHAEFFER, B.: “The Triassic Coelacanth Fish Diplurus with observations on
the evolution of the Coelacanthini”’ (Bull. Amer. Mus. nat. Hist., New York,
99, 1952)
aes
Shee
SMITH, J. L. B. ‘“‘A Surviving Fish of the ers Actinistia” (Trans. Roy. Soc. S.
Afr., Cape Town, 27, pp. 47-50, 1940
“A Living Fossil (Latimeria chalumnea J. L. B. Smith)” (Cape Nat., Cape
Town, 1, pp. 187-94, 1939)
;
“A Living Ccelacanthid from South Africa” (Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Afr., Cape
Town, 28, I, pp. I-106, 1941)
“The Living Ccelacanthid Fish from South Africa” (Nature, London, 143,
PP. 748-50, 1939)
Old Fourlegs: the Story of the Celacanth (London, 1956)
SwInToNn, W. E.: “The Geological Record” and “Living Fossils” in MAURICE
Burton: The Story of Animal Life (op. cit., vol. i, pp. 55-66)
TERMIER, H. and G.: Histoire Géologique de la Biosphére (Paris, 1952)
TROUESSART, E.-L.: La Distribution
Géographique des Animaux (Paris, 1922)
VERRILL, A. Hyatt: Strange Prehistoric Animals (Boston, 1948)


;
CHAPTER FOUR
NITTAEWO, THE LOST PEOPLE OF CEYLON


Nittaewo
a Historiae Naturalis et Medicae Indiae Orientalis (Amsterdam,


165


Crestas: “Indica Opera” in PHotius: Myriobiblon (Geneva, 1612)
HILL, W. C. OsMAN: “‘Nittaewo, an Unsolved Problem of Ceylon” (Loris,
Colombo, 4, pp. 251-62, 1945)


Ipn BaTOTa: The Travels of Ibn Batata, trans. Rev. Samuel Lee (pp. 187-8,
London, 1829)


LEWIS, FREDERICK: “‘Notes on Animal and Plant Life in the Vedda Country”
(Spolia Zeylanica, Colombo, 10, pp. 119-65, 1919)


GASTHENES: “‘Indica, fragmenta” in E. A. SCHWANBECK: Megasthenis Indica


(Greek text, Bonn, 1846)


MENDIS, WILFRED: “‘Where the Pygmies of Ceylon Lived” (Loris, Colombo,
p. 262, December 1945)


NEVILL, HuGu: ‘‘The Nittaewo of Ceylon” (Taprobanian, Bombay, pp. 66-8,
February 1886)


PALLADIUS, BisHoP: Palladii de Gentibus Indiae et Bragmanibus (Latin and
Greek texts, London, 1665)


PLINY THE ELDER: The Historie of the World, commonly called the Naturall
Historie, trans. Philemon Holland (vol. i, p. 157, London, 1601)


QUATREFAGES DE BREAU, ARMAND DBE: Les Pygmées (Paris, 1887)
SPITTEL, R. L.: Far-off Things (pp. 61-74, Colombo, 1933)


“Leanama, Land of the Nittaewo” (Loris, Colombo, 1, pp. 37-46, 1936)
TULPIuS, NICOLAUS: Observationum Medicarum Libri Tres (Amsterdam, 1641)
Tyson, EDWARD: Orang-utang, sive Homo Sylvestris, or the Anatomy of a


Pygmie Compared with that of a Monkey, an Ape and a Man (London, 1699)
WEINMAN, Ausrey: “‘Nittaewo” (Loris, Colombo, 4, no. 2, p. 337, 1945)


526


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Men with Tails


BarTELs, M.: “Die Geschwanzten Menschen” (Arch. Anthrop, Braunschweig,
15 PP. 45-132, 1884)
“Uber Menschenschwinze” (ibid., 13, pp. I-41, 1881


CLIFFORD, SIR HuGH: In Court and Kampong (London, 1897)
Bers J. H.: “Les Hommes a queue” (Hist. nat., Paris, st series, p. 243,
1862


Enjoy, P. p’: “L’Appendice Caudal dans les Tribus Moi” (Anthropologie, Paris,
7> PP- 531-5, 1896)


Frnor, L.: “A propos des Moi 4 Queue” (Bull. Amis Vieux Hué, Hanoi, Hai-
phong, no. 4, pp. 217-21, 1928)


» L.: Mémoire sur le Commerce des Négres (Paris, 1802):


GEMELLI-CaRERI, G. F.: “A Voyage Round the World” in J. CHURCHILL: A
Collection of Voyages and Travels (vol. 4, p. 410, London, 1745)


LE Bret: “Notice sur |’Existence d’une Race d’Hommes 4 Queue” (Arch. gén.
Meéd., Paris, February 1855)


Lez DouBLz, A.-F., and Houssay, FRANCOIS: Les Velus (Paris, 1912)
Maitre, HENRI: Les Fungles Moi, Exploration et Histoire des Hinterlands Moi du
Cambodge, de la Cochinchine, del’? Annam et du Bas-Laos (Paris, 1912)
PoLo, Marco: The Travels of Marco Polo, a Venetian, in the Thirteenth century,
being a Description by that Early Traveller of Remarkable Places and Things
in the Eastern Parts of the World.
Translated with Notes by William
Marsden (London, 1818).


SKEAT, W. W., and BLaGpEN, C. D.: Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula (vol. ii,
pp. 281-3, London, 1906)


Struys, JEAN: Voyage en Tartarie, Perse, Inde (vol. i, pp. 88 and 100, Rouen,
1791)


TURNER, SAMUEL: An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama, in
Tibet (London, 1800)


VircHow, R.: ‘De la Queue chez l’Homme” (Zbl. Chir., Leipzig, p. 539, 1885)


“L’Appendice Caudal chez Homme” (Gaz. hebd. Méd. Chir., Paris, p. 29,


1885)
Sa
ee: S.: “Les Hommes a4 Queue” (Bull. Soc. Anthrop., Paris, series 4,


8, pp. 28-32, 1897)


CHAPTER FIVE
ORANG PENDEK,
THE APE-MAN OF SUMATRA


BrassEr, J. C.: Mes Chasses dans la fungle de Sumatra (Paris, 1938)
CHENU, J. C.: Encyclopédie d’Histoire Naturelle (Paris, 1850-8)
DAMMERMAN, K. W.: “(De Orang Pandak van Sumatra” (Trop. Natuur, Welte-
vreden, 13, 12, pp. 177-82, 1924)
;
:
“The Orang Pendek or Ape Man of Sumatra” (Proc. 4th Pacific Sci. Congr.,
vol. iii, Biological Papers, Batavia~Bantoeng, 1930)
;
“De Nieuw-ontdekte Orang Pendek” (Trop. Natuur, Weltevreden,, 21, 8,
Pp. 123-31, 1932)
‘
pigs
He
Dusots, EUGENE: Pithecanthropus erectus: eine menschenahnliche Ubergangsform
aus Java (Batavia, 1894)
;
FRECHKOP, SERGE: “Le Pied de Homme” (Mém. Mus. R. Hist. nat. Belg.,
Brussels,
13, 19, 1937)
.
:
HAECKEL, ERNST: Generelle Morphologie der Organismen (Berlin, 1865)
HERWAARDEN, VAN: “Een Ontmoeting met een Aapmensch”
(Trop. Natuur,
Weltevreden,
13, pp. 103-6, 1924)
JACOBSON, E.: “Rimboeleven in Sumatra” (Trop. Natuur, Weltevreden, 6, p.


69, 1917)
a
“Nog eens de ‘Orang pandak’ ” (ibid., 7, pp. 173, 1918)


527


BIBLIOGRAPHY


KognIGswaALp, G. H. R. von: “Search for Early Man” (Nat. Hist. N.Y., New
York, 56,1,1947)
Me
LONNBERG, E.: “Ett avsléjat swindelf6rsék meddenfelan de lanken”
(Fauna och
Flora, Uppsala, pp. 249-54, 1932)
%


Maier, R.: “De Orang pandak of Orang pendek”
(Trop. Natuur, Weltevreden,
12, p. 154, 1923)
‘
j


MarsDEN, WILLIAM: The History of Sumatra (op. cit.)
Poto, Marco: The Travels of Marco Polo (op. cit., p. 604)
;


SCHLEGEL, HERMANN, and MULLER, SALOMON: “Bijdragen tot de Natuurlijke
Historie van den Orang-oetan (Simia satyrus)” (in Verhandelingen over de
Natuurlijke Geschiedenis der Nederlandsche Overzeesche Bezittingen, door de
Leden der Natuurkundige Commissie in Indié en Andere Schrivers (p. 12;
Leiden, 1839-44)
ed


STAUDINGER, P.; ‘‘Einige Angaben tiber den Orang Pendek oder Orang Letjo
(S. B. Ges. naturf. Fr., Berlin, 1932)


WALs, H. bE: La Chasse a fava (Paris, 1938)
WESTENEK, L. C.: “Orang Pandak (Boschmenschen) of Soematra” (Trop.
Natuur., Weltevreden, 7, p. 108, 1918)


CHAPTER SIX
THE NOT SO ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN


Snowman


ALI, S., and SANTAPAU, H.: ‘“The Abominable Snowman” (7. Bombay nat. Hist.
Soc., Bombay, §2, pp. 594-8, 1954)
‘


BEAUMAN, E. B.: ‘““The ‘Abominable Snowmen’” (Letter to the editor, The
Times, London, 17 July 1937)


BorDET, PIERRE: ““Traces de Yeti dans l’Himalaya” (Bull. Mus. nat. d’ Hist. nat.,
Paris, 27 (2nd series) 6, 1955)


BRITTON, SYDNEY W.: In ““Man Walks Upright Because of Snow” (Sci. News
Lett., Washington, 23 April 1955)


Coss, E. “i “The Abominable Snowman” (Country Life, London, 111, p. 163,
1952


DoLLMAN, Guy: “‘The ‘Abominable Snowmen’” (Letter to. the editor, The
Times, London, 19 July 1937)


Downlinc, RONALD: “‘The Snowman: the Strangest Story Yet” (Daily Mail,
London, 7 January 1954)-_
’


Exwes, H. J.: ‘‘On the Possible Existence of a Large Ape, Unknown to Science,
in Sikkim” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, p. 294, 1915)


HEUVELMANS, BERNARD: ‘‘L’Homme des Cavernes a-t-il Connu des Géants
Mesurant 2 4 4 Metres?” (Sciences et Avenir, Paris, no. 61, May 1952)


Howarp-Bury, C. K.: Mount Everest, the Reconnaissance (London, 1922)
IZZARD, RALPH: The Abominable Snowman Adventure (London, 1955; New
York, 1955, entitled The Abominable Snowman)


KAULBACK, RONALD: “20 Months in Tibet” (The Times, London, 12 July 1937)


“The Mountain Men”. (ibid, 13 July 1937)


LANE, FRANK W.: Nature Parade (New York, 4th ed. revised, 1955)
Ley, WILLY: Salamanders and other Wonders (Chapter 4: ““The Abominable
Snowmen’”’, New York, 1955)


MaArqués-RIvizRE, J.: L’Inde Secréte et sa Magie (Paris, 1937)
NEBESKY-WOJKOWITZ, RENE VON: Where the Gods are Mountains (pp. 151-61,
London, 1956)


Noyce, bs pai “The Ascent of Everest” (Asian Rev., London, p. 128, April
1954


PRANAVANANDA, SWAMI: “The Abominable Snowman” (¥. Bombay nat. Hist.
Soc., Bombay, 54, pp. 358-64, 1955)


“Footprints of Snowman”’ (ibid., pp. 448-50, 1955)
REUBEN, D. E.: “The Abominable Snowman” (ibid., §4, 3, 1955)


528


BIBLIOGRAPHY


SCHAEFER, E.: Grandes Chasses sur le Toit du Monde (Paris, 1951)
SHIPTON, ERIc: The Mount Everest Reconnaissance Expedition (London, 1952;
New York, 1953)
“A Mystery of Everest: Footprints of the Abominable Snowman” (The Times,
London, 6 December 1951)
SMYTHE, F. S.: The Kangchenjunga Adventure (London, 1930)
ieee Snowmen” (Jil. Lond. News, London, p. 848, 13 November


37)
The Valley of Flowers (London, 1938)
STONOR, CHARLES: The Sherpa and the Snowman (London, 1955)
TILMAN, H. W.: Mount Everest 1938 (New York, 1938; London, 1947)
When Men and Mountains Meet (London, 1946)
Tomsazi, N. A.: Account of a Photographic Expedition to the Southern Glaciers
of Kangchenjunga in the Sikkim Himalaya (Bombay, 1925)
TSCHERNEZKY, W.: “Nature of the ‘Abominable Snowman’” (Manchester
Guardian, 20 February 1954)
“On the Nature of the ‘Abominable Snowman’” (Appendix E in Izzarp, op.


cit.)
WADDELL, L. A.: Among the Himalayas (p. 223, London, 1899)
Woop, 4 W.: “Snowman or Monkey?” (Country Life, London, 103, p. 1234,
1948
WyYnTeR-BLyTH, M. A.: “A Naturalist in the North-West Himalaya” (7.
Bombay nat. Hist. Soc., Bombay, §0, pp. 559-723 1952)


Orang Gadang


DAMMERMAN, K. W. ““De Nieuw-ontdekte Orang Pendek” (op. cit.)
Piyt, L. vAN DER: “De Orang Pendek als Sneeuwman” (Tropische Nat.
Weltevreden, 27, p. 53, 1938)


Giant Primates


Broom, R.: Finding the Missing Link (London, 1950; New York, 1958)
“‘Swartkrans Ape-man Paranthropus crassidens” (Transv. Mus., Mem. no. 6,


1952)


Beotee R.,and RoBINSON, J. T.: ““Man gerne vara with the Swartkrans
Ape-Man” (Amer. F. phys. Anthrop., Philadelphia, 8, pp. 151-5, 1950)


utes or Man?” (Nature, London, 166, pp. 843-4, 1950)


HILLaBy, JOHN: “The Kwangsi Jaw” (Amer. F. phys. Anthrop., Philadelphia,
15, Pp, 281-5, 1957)
Hooyer, D. A.: “Some Notes on the Gigantopithecus Question” (Amer. J. phys.
Anthrop., Philadelphia, 7, pp. 513-18, 1949)


“The Geological Age of Pithecanthropus, Meganthropus and Gigantopithecus”
(ibid., 9, pp. 265-2, 1951)
.
:
4
:
Kiet
KOENIGSWALD, G. H. R. von: “Eine fossile Saugetierfauna mit Simia aus


Siidchina” (Proc. Acad. Sci. Amst., Amsterdam, 38, (8), pp. 872-9, 1935)
Per WEN-CHUNG: ‘‘New Material on Man’s Origins” (China Reconstructs,
Peking, August 1956)
In “Find Man-Like Ape” (Sci. News Lett., Washington, 5 October es,
TEILHARD DE CHARDIN, PIERRE: “‘Sur une Mandibule de Meganthropus”’ (C.
Soc. géol. Fr., Paris, 1§, pp. aay 1947)
URBAIN, A., and DEKEYSER, P. L.: “Le Gorille” (Naturalia, Paris, no. 3, Decem-
ber 1953)
WRN F.: Apes, Giants and Man (Chicago, 1946)
WEINERT, H.: “‘Menschenaffen oder Affenmenschen, das Unlésbare Problem
der Neuen Africa-Funde”’ (Orion, Munich, 4, pp. 169-74, 1949)
“ber die Neuen Vor- und Friithmenschenfunde aus Afrika, Java, China und
Frankreich” (Z. Morph. Anthr., Stuttgart, xlii, 1946)
“Zur Frage des Gigantenproblems der Summoprimaten” (Anat. Anz.,


Leipzig, 98, pp. 279-87, 1951)
LL
529


BIBLIOGRAPHY


CHAPTER SEVEN
THE SURREALIST DINOSAUR OF NEW GUINEA


MILLER, CHARLES: Cannibal Caravan (London, 1950)


CHAPTER EIGHT
THE INCREDIBLE AUSTRALIAN BUNYIPS


ANDERSON, C.: “The Sea-Serpent and its Kind” (op. cit.)
“The Largest Marsupial” (Aust. Mus. Mag., Sydney, 2, pp. 113-16, 1924)
“The Wellington Caves” (Aust. Mus. Mag., Sydney, 2, p. 374, 1926)
BENNETT, GEORGE: “A Trip to Queensland in Search of Fossils” (Ann. Mag.
nat. Hist., London, April 1872)
BuRRELL, H.: The Platypus, its Discovery, Zoological Position, Form and Charac-
teristics, Habits, Life, History, etc. (Sydney, 1927)
CooK, pat Account of a Voyage round the World in 1769-1771 (London,
1773
FENNER, C.: Bunyips and Billabongs (Sydney, 1933)
GLAUERT, L.: “The Development of our Knowledge of the Marsupials of
Western Australia” (7. roy. Soc. W. Aust., 34, pp. 115-34, 1950)
HusrecuT, A. A. W.: The Descent of the Primates (New York, 1897)
JENNISON, G.: Noah’s Cargo (New York, 1928; London, 1929)
JoNEs, FREDERIC Woop: The Ancestry of Man (Brisbane, 1923)
Man’s Place Among the Mammals (London, 1929)
LEICHHARDT, L.: Fournal of an Overland Expedition in Australia from More-
ton Bay to Port Essington (London, 1847)
MATHEW, JOHN: Two Representative Tribes of Queensland (p. 30, London, 1910)
pers 2° Ivan T.: “‘Nature’s Nightmares” (This Week, New York, 10: April
1949
‘TROUGHTON, E. Lg G.: “Australian Furred Animals: their Past, Present and
Future” (Aust. Zool., Sydney, 7, pp. 173-93, 1932)
Furred Animals of Australia (New York, 1947)
WuitTey, G.: “Mystery Animals of Australia” (Aust. Mus. Mag., Sydney, 7,
Pp. 132-9, 1940)
;


CHAPTER NINE
THE QUEENSLAND MARSUPIAL TIGER


BurToNn, Mavricg: “The Supposed “Tiger-Cat’ of Queensland” (Oryx, London
I, pp. 321-6, 1952)


Living Fossils (op. cit., pp. 263-8)


DAMPIER, WILLIAM: A Voyage to New Holland, &c. in the Year 1699 (pp.
125-6, London, 1703)


KReFFT, G.: “Fabulous Australian Animals” (Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., London, 4th
series, 2, pp. 315-16, 1873)


Lg Souer, A. S. and BURRELL, H.: The Wild Animals of Australasia, Embracing
the Mammals of New Guinea and the Nearer Pacific Islands (pp. 329-32,
London, 1926)


MacGeeuan, J.: [Report] (N. Od. Nat., 6, p. 3, 1938)
PIVETEAU, J. “L’Histoire Biogéographique des Marsupiaux et le Probléme de
PAntarctide” (Mammalia, Paris, §, no. 2, June 1941)


Scott, W. J.: “Letter from, Addressed to the Secretary, Respecting the Sup-
posed Fach Tiger’ of Queensland” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, p.
355, 1872


“Second Letter from, on the Existence of a ‘Native Tiger’ in Queensland”
(ibid., p. 796, 1872)


539


BIBLIOGRAPHY


SHERIDAN, B. G.: “On the Referred Existence in North Queensland of a Non-
descript Animal, etc.” (bid., p. 629, 7 November 1871)


Tate, G. H. H. : “Mammals of Cape York Peninsula, with Notes on the Occur-
rence of Rain Forest in Queensland” (Bull. Amer. nat. Hist., New York,
98, pp. 563-616, 1925)


‘TROUGHTON, E. LE G.: Furred Animals of Australia (op. cit., pp. 48-50)
WHITLEY, G.: “Mystery Animals of Australia” (op. cit.)


CHAPTER TEN
THE MOA, A FOSSIL THAT MAY STILL THRIVE


Moa


Buick, T. L.: The Mystery of the Moa, New Zealand’s Avian Giant (New Ply-
mouth, N.Z., 1931)


BULLER, SIR WALTER L.: A History of the Birds of New Zealand (vol. ii, p. 88,
London 1888)
eee
oe “On the Moa” (Trans. N. Z. Inst., Wellington, 12, p. 63,
1679


“Account of some enormous Fossil Bones, of an unknown Species of the
Class Aves, lately discovered in New Zealand” (Tasmanian f#: nat. Sci.,
Launceston, 2, no. 7, pp. 81-107, 1846)
5
ac
tag Ernst: “On the Geology of New Zealand” (ibid., 2, p. 451,


134
Travels in New Zealand (i, pp. 140 and 417, London, 1843)


Durr, RoGer S.: ‘““Moas and Man” (Antiquity, Newbury, 23, pp. 172-9, 1949
and 24, pp. 72-83, 1950)
;
:


The Moa-Hunter Period of Maori Culture (Wellington, 1950)


Hm, H.: “‘The Moa: Legendary, Historical and Geological, Why and When the
in Reeresaet (Trans. N. Z. Inst., Wellington, 1913, 46, pp. 330-51,
I9I4


HOCHSTETTER, FERDINAND VON, New Zealand, its Physical Geography, Geology
and Natural History (Stuttgart, 1867)


IREDALE, T.: ““Moas” (Proc. R. zool. Soc. N. S. W., 1949-50, p. 69, 1951)
LyYDEKKER, R.: ‘“The History of the Moas, or Extinct Flightless Birds of New
Zealand” (Nat. Sci., London, 1, pp. 588-95, 1892)


Murpuy, R. C.: “A New Zealand Expedition of the American Museum of
Natural History” (Science, Lancaster, Pa, 108, 2809, pp. 463-4, 1948)
OwEN, SiR RICHARD [On a bone of an unknown Struthious Bird] (Proc. zool.


Soc. Lond., London, pp. 169-70, 1839)


PARKER, W.: “‘Classification and Phylogeny of Dinornithide” (Trans. zool. Soc.
Lond., London, 13, 1895)
:
Ks


Potack, J. S.: New Zealand: Being a Narrative of Travels and Adventures
During a Residence in that Country between the Years 1831 and 1837 (pp. 303;
307-8, London, 1838)


QUATREFAGES DE BREAU, ARMAND DE: “Moas et Chasseurs de Moas” (Trans.
N.Z. Inst., Wellington, 25, p. 17, 1892)
‘
2


Taytor, RICHARD: Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants (p. 398.
London, 1855)
:


“An Account of the First Discovery of Moa Remains” (Trans. New Zealand


Inst., Wellington, 1872, 5, p. 97> 1873)


Takahe


Fata, R. A.: “‘Notornis Re-discovered” (Emu, Melbourne, 48, 1949)
HocuHsTETTER, FERDINAND VON: New Zealand (op. cit)
Ley, Witty: Dragons in Amber (op. cit., pp. 155-67)


531


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Morpny, R. C.: “The Lost World of the Takahe’’ (Nat. Hist., New York, 58, 9,
meee 399-402, November 1949)
ELL, G. B.: “In Search of a ‘Extinct’ Takahe” (JI]. Lond. News, London,
a January 1949)


Cahow


Ley, WILLY: Us pomote and Other Wonders (op. cit., Chapter 9: ““The Case o
the Cahow’’)


Murpnuy, RoBert C. and GRACE, E. B.: cart Cahow Still Lives” (Nat. Hist.,
New York, 60, 4, pp. 152-6, April 19


SHEPARD, PAUL: “‘Can the Cahow Survive?” Cia.
|.) 61, 1952)


CHAPTER ELEVEN
WAITOREKE, THE IMPOSSIBLE NEW ZEALAND MAMMAL


Bon, R.-L.: “‘Reappearance of the Southern Sea-otter along the California
Coast” (7. Mammal., Baltimore, pp. Boe 1938)


HOCHSTETTER, FERDINAND VON: New Zealand (op. cit., p. 160)
KRUMBIEGEL, INGO: “Das ‘Waitoreki’, ein angeblich neues
Saiigetier von
Neuseeland” (Z. Saiigetierk., Berlin, 1950, 18, pp. I10-5, 1952)


Von Neuen und Unentdeckten Tierarten (op. cit., pp. 70-1)


LENDENFELD, ROBERT VON: Neuseeland (Berlin, 1901)
Ley, WILLY: Salamanders and Other Wonders (op. cit., chapter 11: “The Furry
Old Man of the Sea’)


PIVETEAU, J.: “L’Histoire Biogéographique des Marsupiaux” (op. cit.)


CHAPTER TWELVE
THE PATAGONIAN GIANT SLOTH


AMEGHINO, FLORENTINO: ‘Premiére Notice sur le Neomylodon Listai, un Représen-
tant Vivant des Anciens Edentés Gravigrades Fossiles de I’ Argentine (La
Plata, 1898; English translation in Nat. Sci., London, no. 81, p. 324, 1898)


“El Mamifero Misterioso de la Patagonia (Neomylodon listai), un Sobrevi-
viente Actual de los Megaterios” (Piramide, La Plata, 1, pp. 51-63, I5
June 1899, and pp. 83-4, I July 1899)


[Third Notice] (Sinopsis Geoldgico-Paleontoldgica, Buenos Aires, July 1899)
“Grypotherium, Nom de Genre a Effacer” (Comun. Mus. nac. B. Aires, 1, pp.
257-60, 1900


, FELIX DE: Apuntamientos para Historia Natural de los Quadrupedos de


~
Paraguay y Rio de la as (Madrid, 1802)


BARRETT-HAMILTON, G. E. H.: “A pe Parallel to Neomylodon listai”?’
(Nat. Sci., London, 15, Pa
"462, 1
CLEMENS, SAMUEL (““MARK TW ea i Caisen Footprints” (Daily Record-


Union, Sacramento, 25 March 1885)


Cruz, L. DE La: “Descripcion de la naturaleza de los terrenos que se compren-
den en los Andes, poseidos por los Peguenches, etc.” (in Colleccion de obres y
documentos relativos a la historia antigua y moderna de las provincias del Rio
de La Plata, illustrados con notas y disertaciones por Pedro de Angelis, 1, 35
pp. 24-5, Buenos Aires, 1836-7)


» GEORGES: Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles (4th ed. viii (1), pp. 331-8;
atlas ii, pl. 217, fig. 1, Paris, 1836)


DOBRIZHOFFER, M.: Geschichte der dboone (i, pp. 404-6, Vienna, 1783)
FALKNER, THOMAS: A Description of Patagonia, and the Adjoining Baws of South
America (pp. 62-3, Hereford, 1774)


FEBrRES, A.: Arte de la Lengua General del Reyne de Chile (Lima, 1765)


532


BIBLIOGRAPHY


GALLARDO, A.: “Bibliografia: II, Ciencias Naturales” (An. Soc. cient. argent.,
Buenos Aires, 48, Pp. 340-6, 5 November 1899)


GarriGA, Don J.: Descripcién del esqueleto de un cuadri:pedo muy corpulento y
raro que se conserva en el Real Gabinete de Historia Natural de Madrid,
(Madrid, 1796)


Gaupry, A.: “Sur le Neomylodon” and “La Grotte de Glossotherium (Neo-
mylodon)” (C. R, Acad. Sci., Paris, 129, 1899)


Gay, eo Fisica y Politica de Chile (vol. i, Zoologia, Paris and Chile,
1847


GESNER, CONRAD: Historia Animalium (Tiguri, 1551)


Icones Animalium (Tiguri, 1553)


HauvrHAL, R.: “Resefia de los Hallazgos en las Cavernas de Ultima Esperanza”
in “El Mamifero Misterioso de la Patagonia, I’ (Rev. Mus. La Plata, 9,
PP. 411-20, August 1899)


“Quelques Rectifications Relatives au Grypotherium de la Caverne Eber-
hardt” (Comun. Mus. nac. B. Aires, 1, pp. 241-52, 1900)


“Die Haustiereigenschaft des Grypotherium domesticum Roth, die Glacial-
verhaltnisse bei Ultima Esperanza und die Berechtigung des Namens
Grypotherium domesticum” (Globus, 78, nos. 21-2, pp. 333-8 and 357-60,
December 1900)


KRAGLIEVICcH, L.: “Contribucion al conocimiento de Mylodon darwint Owen y
especies afinis” (Rev. Mus. La Plata, 35, pp. 255-92; 1934)


LAMING, ANNETTE: Découverte du Passé (Paris, 1952)
LEHMANN-NITSCHE, R.: “‘Coexistencia del Hombre con un Gran Desdentado y
un Equino” (in “El Mamifero Misterioso de ia Patagonia, III’ (Rev. Mus.
La Plata, 9, pp. 454-72, August 1899))


“Der Mensch und das Grypotherium in Sud-Patagonien” (Verh. Ges. dtsch.
Naturf. Arzte, Leipzig, pp. 129-31, 1900, and Bull. Mus. Paris, p. 343,
1901)


“Zur
Vorgeschichte
der Entdeckung vom
Grypotherium
bei Ultima
Esperanza” (Naturw. Abh., Berlin, 29, 1901, and Naturw. Wschr., Jena, 15,
NOS. 33, 35, 36, 48, 1900)


‘“La pretendida Existencia Actual del Grypotherium” (Rev. Mus. La. Plata, 10,
Pp. 269-79, 1902)
:
:


Lipsy, W. F.: Radiocarbon Dating (rev. ed., Chicago, 1955)
Lista, R.: “La Patagonia Austral” in Viaje al Pais de los Tehuelches (pp.
53-4, Buenos Aires, 1879)


“Vocabulario Tzoneka 6 Tehuelche” (Rev. Soc. geogr. argent., Buenos Aires,
3> PP. 334-5,1885)
“Fragmento del segundo viaje 4 los lagos del Payne (Andes Australes)” (An.
Soc. cient. argent., Buenos Aires, 41, p. 336, 1896)


LONNBERG, E.: “On some remains of Neomylodon listai Ameghino, brought
home by the Swedish Expedition of Tierra del Fuego 1865-1897” in
N. O. G. NoRDENSKJOLD:
Wissenschafftliche Ergebnisse der schwedtschen
Expedition nach den Magellanslandern (vol. ii, pp. 149-70, Stockholm, 1899)


Lozano, P.: Historia de la Conquista del Paraguay, Rio de La Plata y Tucumdn
(1740-1746) (pp. 285-6, Buenos Aires, 1873)
CERAT, A.: ‘Sur le Neomylodon listai Ameghino” (Comun. Mus. nac. B. Aires,
I, 5, December 1899)


Moreno F. P.: Viaje d la Patagonia austral emprendido bajo auspicios del Gobterno
Nacional 1876-1877) (i; p. 395, Buenos Aires, 1875)


Moreno, F. P., and WoopwarD, SIR ARTHUR SMITH: “Ona
Portion of Mam-
malian Skin, named Neomylodon listai, from a Cavern near Consuelo Cove,
Last Hope Inlet, Patagonia” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, pp. 144-56,
1899)


Musters, G. C.: At Home with the Patagonians (p. 99, London, 1871, or pp.
104-5, 2nd ed. 1873)
;


NEHRING, A: “Einige Bemerkungen iiber die Hausthierqualitit des Grypo-
therium domesticum aus Siid-Patagonien” (Globus, 77, no. 4, pp. 61-2,
27 January 1900)
533


BIBLIOGRAPHY


NorDENSKJOLD,. E.: “Neue Untersuchungen tiber Neomylodon listai” (Zool.


Anz., Leipzig, xxii, pp. 335-6, 1899)
Aveta
“Takttagelser och Fynd i Grotter vid Ultima Esperanza i Sydvestra Patago-
nien” (Svenska Ak. Handl., Stockholm, 33, no. 3, 1900)


PRICHARD, HESKETH H.: Through the Heart of Patagonia (London & New York,
1902)


Rotu, SANTIAGO: “Descripcién de los Restos Encontrados en la Caverna de
Ultima Esperanza” in “‘El] Mamifero Misterioso de la Patagonia, II” (Rev.
Mus. La Plata, 9, pp. 421-53, August 1899)
:


Ruscont, C.: “La Supuesta Existencia de Milodontes en la Patagonia Austral
(Milodon listai)” (Rev. Mus. Hist. nat. Mendoza, 3, pp. 252-64, 1949)


T, A.: Les Singularitéz de la France Antarctique, Autrement N
Amérique et de Plusieurs Terres et Isles Découvertes de Nostre Temps (Paris,
1558)
TorceLLi, A. J.: Obras completas y correspondencia cientifica de Florentino


. Ameghino (La Plata, 1936)


Tournousr, A.: “Sur le Neomylodon et l’Animal Mystérieux de la Patagonie”
(C. R. Acad. Sct., Paris, 14 January 1901)


- VIEDMA, ANTONIO DE: “‘Catologo de algunas voces que ha sido posible oir y
entender 4 los indios Patagenes .. .” in Coleccion de Obras y Documentos
Relativos d la Historia Antigua y Moderna de las Provincias del Rio de La
Plata, por Pedro de Angelis (vol. vi, Buenos Aires, 1837)


Woopwarb, SiR ARTHUR SMITH: “The Supposed Existing Ground-Sloth of
Patagonia” (Nat. Sci., London, 15, pp. 351-4, 1899)


“On some remains of Grypotherium (Neomylodon) ‘listat and associated
Mammals from a cavern near Consuelo Cove Last Hope Inlet, Patagonia”
(Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, pp. 64-79, 1900


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
THE GIANT ANACONDA AND OTHER INLAND “SEA-SERPENTS”


AMARAL, A. Do: “‘Serpentes Gigantes” (Bol. Mus. Goeldi, Para, 10, pp. 211-37;


1949)


‘ANGEL, F.: Vie et Maeurs des Serpents (pp. 54-6, Paris, 1950)
ANon.: “A New Underground Monster” (Nature, London, 17, pp. 325-6,
21 February 1878)


Loupe: Se Reptiles and Amphibians (Boston and New York, 1926, rev.
ed., 1934
8


BROWNE, JOHN: An Affecting Narrative of the Extraordinary Adventures and
Sufferings of Six Deserters from the Artillery of the Garrison of St Helena in
the Year 1799 (London, 1802)
©


BuppbE, E. A.: Naturwissenschaftlithe-Plaudereien (Berlin, 1891)
BUONO, JR., A.: ““O Minhocio” (A Noite Illustrada, Rio de Janeiro, 1 June 1948)
BuRTON, MAUvRICE: Living Fossils (op. cit., p. 269


» CHARLES H., and KAUFFELD, CARL: Snakes and their Ways, New York,


1937
Ditmars, R. L.: Reptiles of the World (New York, 1946)
FAWCETT, PERCY H.: (op. cit.)
GARDNER, GEORGE: Travels in the Interior of Brazil (pp. 356-7, London, 1846)
KELLOGG, ARTHUR REMINGTON: A Review of the Archaeoceti (Washington, 1936)
LackpEDE, E. DE: Histoire Naturelle des Quadrupédes Ovipares et des Serpents
(pp. 310-16, Paris, 1836)
MakCELLIN, L.: “Les Monstres de la Légende ont-ils Existé?: Serpents géants”
(Chasseur Frangais, Saint-Etienne, May 1953)
MULLER, Fritz: “Der Minhocio” (Zool. Gart., Frankfurt, 18, pp. 298-302, 1877)
POLt, FRANCOIS: Sharks are Caught at Night (p. 141, London, 1958)
SANDERSON, IvAN T.: Follow the Whale (Boston, 1956; London, 1958)
Taunay, A. DE E.: “Monstros e monstregos do Brasil” (Rev. Mus. paulista, 21,
PP. 9II-1044, 1937)


534


BIBLIOGRAPHY


VeERRILL, A. Hyatt: Strange Reptiles and Their
Stori
sie ent to
ep
eir
Stories (pp. 53-75, London &


WAVRIN, MARQUIS DE: Les Bétes Sauvages de l’ Amazonie (Paris, 1951)


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
APES IN GREEN HELL


ARAMBOURG, C.: La Genése de I’ Humanité (p. 89, Paris, 1943)
BANCROFT, EDwaRD: An Essay on the Natural History of Guiana (pp. 130-1,
London, 1769)


BECCARI, NELLO: “Ameranthopoides loysi, gli Atelini e l’importanza della mor-
fologia cerebrale nella classificazione delle scimmie” (Arch. Antrop. Etnol.,
Florence, 73, pp. I-I12, 1943)


BENNEJEANT, C.: Anomalies et Variations Dentaires chez les Primates (Clermont-
Ferrand, 1936)


BIERENS DE Haan, J. A.: “Werkzeuggebrauch und Werkzeugherstellung bei
einem niederen Affen (Cebus hypoleucus Humb.)” (Z. vergl. Physiol., Berlin,
13, Pp. 640-95, 1931)


BONACASE, SERGE: [Private information]
BOULENGER, E. G.: Apes and Monkeys (pp. 169-71, London 1936; New York, 1937)
BROWN, CHARLES BARRINGTON: Canoe and Camp Life in British Guiana (pp.
87-8, London, 1876)


BURTON, Maurice: Animal Legends (pp. 197-207, London, 1955; New York, 1957)
CIEZA DE LEON, PEDRO DE: Parte Primera de la Crénica del Perti (Seville, 1553)
COURTEVILLE, ROGER: Avec les Indiens Inconnus de l’ Amazonie (pp. 156-64,
Paris, 1951)


“Jai vu PHomme-singe d’Amazonie” (Caliban, Paris, May 1951)


GossE, PHitip H.: The Romance of Natural History (pp. 280-1, London, 1860)
GOULD, RUPERT T.: Oddities (pp. 9-22, New York, 1928; London, 1944)
Honore, F.: “Un Nouveau Singe 4 Faciés Humain” (J/lustration, Paris, 13
April 1929)


Hooton, E. A.: Up from the Ape (New York, 1946)
HUMBOLDT, A. DE: Voyage aux Régions Equinoxiales du Nouveau Continent fait
en 1799-1804 par A. de Humboldt et A. Bonpland (Paris, 1814-25)


JoLeaup, LEONCE: “‘Remarques sur |’Evolution des Primates Sud-Américains,
4 propos du Grand Singe du Vénézuela” (Rev. sci., Paris, pp. 269-73,
11 May 1929)


KEYMIS, LAURENCE: A Relation of the Second Voyage to Guiana, Performed and
Written in the Year
1596 (London, 1596)


KeitH, Sir A.: “The Alleged Discovery of an Anthropoid Ape in South
America” (Man, London, 29, pp. 135-6, 1929)


LANE, FRANK W.: Nature Parade (op. cit.)
—


Loys, F. DE: ““A Gap filled in the Pedigree of Man ?” (III. Lond. News, London,
15 June 1929)


MonTANDON,
G.: “Découverte
d’un
Singe d’Apparence Anthropoide en
Amérique du Sud” (7. Soc. Américanistes Paris, n.s. 21, 1929)
j


“‘Singe d’Apparence Anthropoide en Amérique du Sud” (C. R. Acad. Sci.,
Paris, 11 March 1929)


“Précisions Relatives au Grand Singe de l’Amérique du Sud” (Arch. zool.
(ital.), Turin, 14, pp. 441-59, 1930)


Prraup, HENRI: [Private information]
,
:


PraDo MENDONGA JR., Rut: “Pé de Garrafa” (Caga e Pesca, Rio de Janeiro,
December 1954)
J
;


RALEIGH, SIR WALTER: The Discoverie of the Large, Rich, and Bevvtiful Empyre
of Guiana, &c. (p. 70, London, 1596)
;
:


RECLUS, ELIszE: Nouvelle Géographie Universelle (vol. xix, p. 46, Paris, 1894) _
Rioja, E.: “El hallazgo en Venezuela de un Mono Platirrhino en Apariencia
anthropoide” (Conf. Soc. esp. Hist. nat., Madrid, 4, pp. 119-21, 1929)


535


BIBLIOGRAPHY


SALDANHA SOBRINHO, PauLo: “Encontro em Selva” (Caga e Pesca, Rio de
Janeiro, January 1956)
:
t


Taunay, A. DE E.: “Monstros e Monstregos do Brasil” (op. cit.)
_


Ursain, A. and Rong, P.: Les Singes Anthropoides (pp. 34-6, Paris, 1946)
WAVRIN, MARQUIS DE: Les Bétes Sauvages de I’ Amazonie (op. cit.)


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
THE MAMMOTH OF THE TAIGA


AsHE, T.: Memoirs of Mammoth and Various Other Extraordinary and Stu-
pendous Bones of Incognita, or Non-Descript Animals (Liverpool, 1806)


BarzILai: I] Beémot, Saggio di Paleontologia Biblica (Trieste, 1870)
Bocuart, SAMUEL: Hierozoicon (vol. ii, 5, chapt. 15, Leiden, 1692)
Dicsy, Bassett: The Mammoth and Mammoth-Hunting Grounds in North East
Siberia (London, 1926)


Furon, R.: La Paléontologie (pp. 232-41, Paris, 1951)
GALLON: “Mammouths” (Saint-Hubert, Paris, October 1946)
Hertz, O. F.: ‘Frozen Mammoth in Siberia” (Rep. Smithson. Instn., 1903,
Washington, 1904)


HILZHEIMER, M.: “‘Wie hat das Mammut ausgesehen?” (Aus d. Natur, Stuttgart,
5, PP. 455-63, 1909)
:
2


“Das Mammut, die Allmahlich Wachsende Kenntnis von Seinem Aussehen”
(Natur, Leipzig, pp. 398-403 and 413-17, 1912)
Howortu, Henry H.: The Mammoth and the Flood (London, 1887)
“The Mammoth in Siberia” (Geol. Mag., London, 7, 1880)
“The Sudden Extinction of the Mammoth” (ibid., 8, 1881)


Ipes, E. Y.: Three Years Travels from Moscow Over-land to China (London,
1706)


JOCHELSON, WALDEMAR: ‘‘Some Notes on the Traditions of the Natives of
North-Eastern Siberia about the Mammoth” (Amer. Nat., Lancaster, Pa.,
43, Pp. 48-50, 1909)


LANG, HERBERT: “Problems and Facts about Frozen Siberian Mammoths
(Elephas primigenius) and their Ivory” (Zoologica, New York, 4, 1925)
LEROI-GOURHAN, A.: ““Le Mammouth dans la Zoologie des Eskimos” (Terre et


la Vie, Paris, July 1935)


Ley, WILLy: Dragons in Amber (op. cit., pp. 96-126)


T, M.: ‘A la Recherche des Traces des Derniers Mammouths” (Science
et Vie, Paris, 77, no. 388, March 1950)


NEUVILLE, H.: “On the Extinction of the Mammoth” (Rep. Smithson. Instn.,
1903, Washington, 1904)


Osporn, H. F.: “The Romance of the Woolly Mammoth” (Nat. Hist., New
York, 30, pp. 227-41, 1930)


Proboscidea (vol. ii, pp. 929, 1127 and 1167), New York, 1942)


PavLovsky, E. N.: “Quelques Considérations sur les Conditions Ecologiques
de PExistence du Mammouth” (Amn. Sct. nat. (zool.), Paris (11), 16, pp.
413-18, 1955)


PECCADEAU DE L’ISLE: “‘Notice sur les Objets Sculptés et Gravés des Temps
Préhistoriques Trouvés 4 Bruniquel” (Rev. archéol., Paris, 1868)


PFIZENMAYER, E. W.: Mammutleichen und Urwaldmenschen in Nordost-Sibirien
(Leipzig, 1926)
x


PoLutTorF, N.: “(Das Mammut von Taimyr: Neue Erkentnisse zur Okologie des
Sibirischen Mammuts, Eiszeitalter und Gegenwart” (¥b. dtsch. Qudrter-
verein., 6, pp. 152-58, 1955)


SANDERSON, I. 'T.: Animal Tales (New York, 1946)
Toitmacuorfr, I. P.: ‘““The Carcasses of the Mammoth and Rhinoceros found in
the ue ee of Siberia” (Trans. Amer. phil. Soc., Philadelphia, 23,
pt. I, 1929


VAUFREY, R.: “Proboscidiens Fossiles” in P. Grass: Traité de Zoologie (vol. xvii,


I, pp. 844-50, Paris, 1956)


536


BIBLIOGRAPHY


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
THREE LARGE PYGMIES


Forest Rhinoceros
BLancou, LuctENn: “Notes sur les Mammiféres de l’Equateur Africain Frangais :
un Rhinocéros des Foréts?”” (Mammalia, Paris, 18, 4, December 1954)
FRECHKOP, SERGE: Animaux Protégés au Congo Belge (op. cit., p. §7)
Ley, WILLY: The Lungfish, the Dodo and the Unicorn (op. cit., pp. 150-1)
get E.-L.: La Distribution Géographique des Animaux (p. 270, Paris,
1922


Water Elephant


ALLEN, GLOVER M.: “‘The Forest Elephant of Africa” (Proc. Acad. nat. Sci.
Philad., Philadelphia, 88, pp. 15-44, 1936)


BLancou, Lucien: “L’Eléphant Nain” (Mammalia, Paris, 14, 1950)
BOURDELLE, E., and PETTER, F.: “‘Notes Relatives 4 un Eléphant Nain du Gabon”
(Mammalia, Paris, 14, 1950)


Brown, E.: “Captive Pygmy Elephants in America” (#. Mammal., Baltimore,
15, Pp. 248-50, 1934)


CUNINGHAME, R. J.: ““The Water Elephant” (7. E. Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc.,
London, 2, 4, pp. 97-9, 1912)


DoLLMAN, G.: “Pygmy Elephants” (Nat. Hist. Mag., London, 4, no. 31,
pp. 266-71, 1934)
;


Foran, W. R.: “Is there a Pygmy Elephant?” (Field, London, 196, p. 866, 1950)
FRECHKOP, SERGE: Exploration du Parc National Albert. Mission S. Frechkop
(1937-38) (pp. 110-14, Brussels, 1943)


,» R. L.: “Pygmy Elephants of Africa” (Bull. N. Y. zool. Soc., New
York, 49, pp. 830-3, 1912)


HORNADAY, WILLIAM T.: “Our Second Pygmy Elephant’”’ (ibid., 26, pp. 2-4,
1923)


JoLeAup, LzoncE: “Les Eléphants Nains” (Bull. Soc. Acclim. Fr., Paris, 67, 45
Pp. 54-6)


MaATSCHIE, PAUL: “‘Saugethiere”’ in Deutsch Ostafrika ed. KARL MOstus (vol. iii,
Berlin, 1896)


Morrison-Scott, T.: “A Revision of our Knowledge of African Elephants’
Teeth, with Notes on Forest and ‘Pygmy’ Elephants” (Proc. zool. Soc.
Lond., London, (B), 117, 1948)


Noack, T.: “Eine Zwergform des Afrikanischen Elefanten” (Zool. Anz., Leip-
zig, 29, 1908)


Pontz, H.: “Notizen iiber Afrikanischen Elefanten” (Z. Sdugetierk., Berlin,
I, pp. 38-64, 1926)


ScHOUTEDEN, HENRI: “L’Eléphant Nain du Lac Leopold II” (Rev. zool. afr.,
Brussels and Paris, 3, pp. 391-7, 1914)


TrouessarT, E. -L.: “L’Eléphant d’Eau” (Nature, Paris, no. 1964, 14 January
I9II


Veni *y
: “Autour des Eléphants Ngins” (Notes Africaines, Dakar, no. 16,
Pp. 2-4, 1942)


Spotted Lion


Dower, K. C. GANDAR: The Spotted Lion (London, 1937)
Fett, G.: “Spotted Lion” (Field, London, 193, p. 76, 15 January 1949)
Foran, W. R.: “Legendary Spotted Lion” (ibid., 196, p. 535, 30 September
1950
ees SERGE: Exploration du Parc National Albert. Mission S. Frechkop


1937-1938) (op. cit., pp. 66-78)
gee ee Cees G.: “Spotted Lions” (Field, London, 192, p. 412, 9


October 1948)
Pitman, C. R. S.: A Game Warden among his Charges (London, 1931)
Pocock, R. I.: ‘Note on the Spotted Lion of the Aberdares” in K. C. GANDAR


Dower: The Spotted Lion (op. cit., pp. 317-21)


537


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Po.xarD, J. R. T.: “Spotted Lions” (Field, London, 192, p. 553, 13 November
1948
3
Tiree E. A.: The Kingdom of the Elephant (pp. 228-33, London, 1955)


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
THE NANDI BEAR, AN EAST-AFRICAN PROTEUS


ANDREWS, CHARLES W.: [short account] (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, p. 1095;
23 October 1923)
“An African Chalicothere” (Nature, London, 10 November 1923)
“Notes on the Occurrence of a Species of Chalicothere in the Uganda” (7. E.
Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc., London, 20, p. 22, November 1924)
BABAULT, G.: ‘“‘Notes Ethologiques sur quelques Mammiféres Africains”
(Mammalia, Paris, 13, 4, December 1949)
BOuLENGER, E.
G.: Apes and Monkeys (op. cit., p. 104)
BREHM, A. E.: Dinos et les Animaux: les Mammuferés (i, pp. 83 and 592-4,
Paris, 1878)
BuxTON, Cara: “The ‘Gadett’ or Brain-eater” (7. E. Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc.,
London, 15, p. 498, November 1919)
CANSDALE, G. S.: Animals of West Africa (London, 1951)
CourTNEY, RoGER: Africa Calling (pp. 200-4, London, 1935)
A Greenhorn in Africa (pp. 37-49, London, 1940)
DAPPER, oa Naukeurige Beschryvinge der Afrikaensche Gewesten van Egypten &c.
(op.


EDMOND-BLANC, F.: “En Mission dans ’Oubangi-Chari” (Terre et la Vie, Paris,


1932 ae
Hon L.: “La Mellivora (Mellivora capensis) abyssinica” (Natura, Milan, 29,
PP. 36-41, 1938)


“RULAHN”: ‘On the Trail of the Brontosaurus (Encounters with Africa’s
Biyaicty Animals)” (Chambers’s Journal, Edinburgh, pp. 693-4, 1 October
1927


HICHENS, WILLIAM: “African Mystery Beasts” (Discovery, London, pp. 369-73;
December 1937)


Hickgs, G. W.: “Notes on the Unknown Beast seen on the Magadi Railway”
(Ff. E. Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc., London, 3, no. 9, pp. 53-4, 1912)


HOBLEY, . W.: “On Some Unidentified Beasts” (sbid., 3, no. 6, pp. 48-§2,
1912


“Unidentified Beasts in East Africa” (ibid., 4, no. 7, pp. 85-6, 1913)


Ho tis, A. C.: The Nandi, their Language and Folklore (p. 41, Oxford, 1909)
LANE, FRANK W.: Nature Parade (op. cit., pp. 149-54 and 162)
Luck, C. CARDALE: “The Origin of the Maasai and Kindred Tribes and of
Bornean Tribes” (7. E. Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc., London, 7, 3, pp. 9I-193;
1926)


LYDEKKER, R.: [Description of Mellivora cottoni] (Proc. zool.
Soc. Lond.,
London, 1, p. 112, 1906)


Matuis, J.: “Un Blaireau Féroce” (Chasseur Francais, Saint-Etienne, no. 668,
October 1952)


OrcnHarpson, I. Q.: “The Chemosit” (Letter to the editor, 7. E. Afr. Ug. nat.
Hist. Soc., London, 28, p. 23, January 1927)


PERCIVAL, A. BLAYNEY: “The Chemosit” (ibid., 4, 8, pp. 127-8, 1914)


“Concerning Baboons” (ibid., 14, p. 415, July 1919)
A Game Ranger’s Notebook (p. 26, London & New York, 1924)


PITMAN, C. R. S.: A Game Warden among his Charges (op. cit.)


A Game Warden Takes Stock (London, 1942)


Pocock, R. I.: “Description of a new form of Ratel (Mellivora) from Sierra
Leone, with Notes upon the Described Forms of this Genus” (Proc. zool.
Soc. Lond., London, 1, pp. 394-8, 1909)


“The gos of the “Nandi bear’” (Nat. Hist. Mag., London, 2, pp. 162-9,
1930


538


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Ritcuig, A. T. A.: Colony and Protectorate of Kenya, Game Department Annual
Report, 1932, 1933, and 1934 (Nairobi, 1935).
Seeger Ivan T.: “‘Nature’s Nightmares” (This Week, New York, 10 April
1949


SANDRART, GEORGES: [Private information]
STONEHAM, CHARLES T.: Hunting Wild Beasts with Rifle and Camera (pp. 151-7;
London, 1933)
LE-PERKINS, E. A.: The Kingdom of the Elephant (op. cit., pp. 228-31)
VERRILL, A. Hyatt: Strange Animals and their Stories (p. 180, London, 1939)
We cu, F. D.: “‘On Change of Colour in a Specimen of Mellivora ratel Living


in ere Society’s Gardens” (Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, pp. 889-91,
1909


WILLIAMS, GeorFEy: “An Unknown Animal on the Uasingishu” (7. E. Afr.
Ug. nat. Hist. Soc., London, 2, no. 4, pp. 123-5, 1912)


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
MNGWA, THE STRANGE ONE


Mngwa
““FULAHN”’: “On the Trail of the Brontosaurus’”’ (op. cit.)
HICHENS, WILLIAM: “African Mystery Beasts” (op. cit.)
LANE, FRANK W.: Nature Parade (op. cit.)
STEERE, EDWARD: Swahili Tales (London, 1889)


King Cheetah


Cooper, A. L.: ‘‘Notes on Acinonyx rex (Cooper’s cheetah)” (S. Afr. F. Sci.,
Johannesburg, 34, pp. 343-5, 1927) |
;


DOLLMAN, Guy: ‘“The King Cheetah (Acinonyx rex)” (Nat. Hist. Mag., London,
2, pp. I-6, 1929)
;


HICHENS, WILLIAM: “‘African Mystery Beasts” (op. cit.)
Pocock, R. I.: “Description of a New Species of Cheetah (Acinonyx rex)”
(Proc. zool. Soc. Lond., London, pp. 245-52, 1927)


CHAPTER NINETEEN
THE LITTLE HAIRY MEN


Broom, R.: The Coming of Man (London, 1933)
Finding the Missing Link (op. cit.)


BURGOYNE, CUTHBERT: “Little Furry Men” (Discovery, London, p. 51, Febru-


ary, 1938)
A
Cook, S. V.: “The Lepracauns to Kwa Ngombe”’
(#. E. Afr. Ug. nat. Hist. Soc.,
London, 20, p. 24, November 1924)


CouRTNEY, ROGER: A Greenhorn in Africa (op. cit.)
Dart, RAYMOND: “The Makapaansgat Proto-Human Australopithecus prome-
theus’ (Amer. F. phys. Anthrop., Washington, September 1948)


EISELEY, LOREN C.: “‘Man’s Rivals are Waiting” (Harper’s Mag., September


I


Same). G.: “The Prehistoric Rock-Shelter at Schweizersbild near Schaff-
hausen” (Scot. geogr. Mag., Edinburgh, p. 472, September 1897)


HIcHEns, WILLIAM, “African Mystery Beasts” (op. cit.)
'


KOLLMANN, J.: “Die Pygmien und ihre Systematische Stellung innerhalb des
Menschengeschlechts” (Verh. naturf. Ges. Basel, 16, 1902)


LANE, FRANK. W.: Nature Parade (op. cit.)
Lepoux, A. [Private information]
,
are


OAKLEY, KENNETH P.: “Evidence of Fire in South African Cave Deposits
(Nature, London, 7 August 1954)
P


“Dating of the Australopithecinae of Africa” (Amer. 4. phys. Anthrop.,


Philadelphia,
12
.
9-23, 1954)


SuceuaaN, Sie Sores The Social Life of Monkeys and Apes (London, 1932)


539


BIBLIOGRAPHY


CHAPTER TWENTY
THE DRAGON ST GEORGE DID NOT KILL


ALLUAUD, C.: “Complément 4 la communication de M. Racovitza sur le Grand
Serpent de mer” (Bull. Soc. zool. Fr., Paris, p. 31, 1903)


Anon.: “A Tale from Africa” (The Times, London, 17 November 1919)


“Dragon of the Prime” (ibid., 12 December 1919)
“The Brontosaurus” (Daily Mail, London, 12 December 1919)
“Brontosaurus Hunter” (ibid., 24 December 1919)
“Monster Lizard of Central African Swamps” (Rhodesia Herald, 15 July 1932)


BLancou, Lucien: [Private information]
BOLSCHE, WILHELM: Drachen (Stuttgart, 1929)
Bonnivair, PAuL: [Private information]
BoxBERGER, LEO VON: “‘Ein Unentdecktes Grosstier in Innerafrika?” (Umschau,
Frankfurt and Leipzig, 42 Jhr., Heft 49, 1938)


BRONSON, EpGar B.: In Closed Territory (pp. 131-3, Chicago, 1910) _
Burton, R. G.: “The Brontosaurus”’ (Letter to the editor, Daily Mail, London,
21 December 1919)


CAPART, ANDRE: [Private information]
:
;


CARRINGTON, WILLIAM: ‘‘The Brontosaurus” (Letter to the editor, Daily Mail,
16 December 1919)


COLBERT, E. H.: The Dinosaur Book (New York, 1951)


[Letter to the editor] (Animal Life, Jersey City, 1, no. 2, May 1954)


CUNINGHAME, R. J.: “The Water-Elephant” (op. cit.)
ForBIN, VicToR: ‘“‘Les Patientes Recherches des Savants ... ont Permis de
Reconstituer les Squelettes des Animaux de l?Epoque Tertiaire. Des Ex-
plorateurs Affirment Avoir Rencontré ces Animaux au Cours de leurs
Voyages” (Sciences et Voyages, Paris, 27 May 1920)


ULAHN’’: “On the Trail of the Brontosaurus” (op. cit.)


GoparT, ALEx: [Private information]
GRATZ, PAUL: Im Motorboot quer durch Afrika (p. 135, Berlin, 1912)
Gray, WENTWORTH D.: “The Brontosaurus” (Letter to the editor, The Times,
London, 23 February 1920)


HAGENBECK, CARL: Beasts and Men (pp. 96-7, London, 1909)
HICHENS, WILLIAM: “‘African Mystery Beasts (op. cit.)
:


Hos ey, C. W.: “On Some Unidentified Beasts” (op. cit.)
Horn, ALFRED ALoystus, The Life and Works edited by Ethelreda Lewis (vol. i,
pp. 272-3, London, 1927
New York, 1927, entitled Trader Horn)


Hucues, J. E.: Eighteen Years on Lake Bangweulu (pp. 146-8, London, 1933)
JACKSON, H. C.: “The Nuer of the Upper Nile Province” (Sudan Notes, Khar-
toum, 6, pp. 187-9, 1923)


James, C. J.: “Congo Swamps Mystery” (Letter to the editor, Daily Mail,
London, 26 December 1919)


JOHNSTON, SIR Harry: The Uganda Protectorate (vol. i, p. 79, London, 1902)
KOLDEWEY, R.: Das Ischtar-Tor in Babylon (Leipzig, 1912)
KRUMBIEGEL, INGO: “Was ist der ‘Léwe des Wassers’?’’ (Kosmos, Stuttgart,
PP. 143 ff., 1947)
:


Von Neuen und Unentdeckten Tierarten (op. cit., pp. §7-68)


LANE, FRANK W.: Nature Parade (op. cit.)
Ley, WILLY: The Lungfish and the Unicorn (op. cit.)


“Congo Dragon” (Animal Life, Jersey City, 1, no. 1, December 1953)


MIL als, J. G.: Far Away up the Nile (London, 1924)
Mownarp, A.: “Sur Existence en Angola d’un Grand Reptile encore Inconnu”
(Bull. Soc. neuchdtel. Sci. nat., Neuchatel, §7, pp. 67-71, 1932)


NOLDE, ILSE von: “Der Coje ya Menia: ein Sagenhaftes Tier Westafrikas”
(Deutsche Kolonialzeitung, Berlin, §1, 4, pp. 123-4, 1939)


SANDERSON, IvAN T.: “There Could be Dinosaurs” (Saturday Evening Post,
Philadelphia, 3 January 1948)


[Private information]


540


BIBLIOGRAPHY


SCHOMBURGK, Hans: Wild und Wilde im Herzen Afrikas (Berlin, 1910)
Meine Freunde im Busch (Berlin, 1936)
WILFARTH, MarTIN: “Leben Heute noch Saurier ?” (Prisma, Frauenfeld, 4, 6
PP. 279-82, October 1949)


>


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
KONGAMATO, THE LAST FLYING DRAGON


CUVIER, GEORGES: Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles (op. cit).
Ditmars, RAYMOND: The Making of a Scientist (New York, 1937)
Doy Le, SIR ARTHUR CONAN: The Lost World (op. cit.)
MELLAND, F. H.: In Witchbound Africa (London, 1923)
PERCIVAL, A. BLAYNEY: A Game Ranger on Safari (pp. 241 ff., London, 1928)
PITMAN, C. R. S.: A Game Warden takes Stock (op. cit., pp. 202-3)
SANDERSON, IvAN T.: Animal Treasure (pp. 300-1, London & New York, 1937)
Living Mammals of the World (pp. 54-62, London, 1955)
[Private information]
SMITH, J. L. B.: Old Fourlegs: The Story of the Coelacanth (op. cit., p. 189)
“STANY”: Loin des Sentiers Battus,
IV: Douze femmes (pp. 217-32, Paris, 1953)
Wiman, C.: “Ein Geriicht von einem Lebenden Flugsaurier” (Natur u. Mus.,
Frankfurt, §8, pp. 431-2, 1928)
YOUNG, J. Z.: The Life of Vertebrates (London & New York, 1950)


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
TRATRATRATRA, VOROMPATRA ETCETERA


General


DAHLE, L.: Specimens of Malagasy Folklore (Tananarive, 1877)
DeEcARY, RAYMOND: La Faune Malgache, son Réle dans les Croyances et les
Usages Indigénes (pp. 203-8, Paris, 1950)


DENyYs DE MONTFORT, PIERRE: Histoire Naturelle des Mollusques (vol. liii, Intro-
duction; Paris, 1801-2)


FLAcourT, ETIENNE DE: Histoire de la Grande Isle Madagascar (Paris, 1658)
GRANDIDIER, ALFRED: Histoire Physique, Naturelle et Politique de Madagascar
(Paris, 1875-9)
a


LAVAUDEN, Louts: ““Animaux Disparus et Légendaires de Madagascar” (Rev.
Sci.) Paris, pp. 297-308, 1931)


LittLe, H. W.: Madagascar: Its History and People (London, 1884)
SIBREE, JAMES: A Naturalist in Madagascar (London, New York & Philadelphia,


1915)
:
The Great African Island (London, 1880)


LEpyornis


Cauperay, H.: “Etude sur l’A&pyornis” (Oiseau, Paris, pp. 624-4, 1931)
Decary, RAYMOND: “La Faune Malgache, son Réle dans les Croyances et les
Usages Indigénes (op. cit., pp. 54-7)
4


Dinier, R.: “‘Sur les Apyornis” (Rev. frang. Orn., Paris, 7, pp. 11-13, 1915)
Furon, R.: La Paléontologie (pp. 198-9, Paris, 1951)
GEOFFROY-SAINT-HILAIRE, ISIDORE: ‘“‘Notes sur des Ossements et des Oeufs
trouvés a Madagascar dans des Alluvions Modernes et Provenant d’un
Oiseau Gigantesque” (C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 32, pp. 101-7, 1851)


GERVAIS, PAUL: [The article headed ‘“‘Autruche”’ in] Dictionnaire des Sciences
Naturelles (Supplement, vol. i, p. 524, Paris, 1840)


GRANDIDIER, ALFRED: “Observations sur le Gisement des Oeufs de l’Epiornis”
(C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 65, pp. 476-8, 1867)
;


Lang, E. W. [translator]: The Arabian Nights’ Entertainment edited by S. Lane-
Poole (London, 1925; New York, 1955)
;


Monnier, L.: “Les Aipyornis” (Ann. Paléont., Paris, 8, pp. 125-72, 1913)


541


BIBLIOGRAPHY


STRICKLAND, HuGH EpwArbD: The Dodo and its Kindred (London, 1848)
“Supplementary Notices Regarding the Dodo and its Kindred: 8. Supposed
Existence of a Gigantic Bird in Madagascar” (Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., Edin-
ee 23, pp. 338-40, November 1849)
THONE, FRANK: “Giant Birds Restored” (Sci. News Lett., Washington, 2
October 1948)


Sub-fossil Lemurs


GRANDIDIER, G.: “Description de l’Archgolemur robustus, nouvelle espéce de
Lémurien subfossile de Madagascar” (Bull. Mus. Hist. nat., Paris, 6, p. 323,
1900)


“‘Sur les Lémurieris Subfossiles de Madagascar” (C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 28
May 1900)


“Observations sur les Lémuriens Disparus de Madagascar” (Bull. Mus. Hist.
nat., Paris, nos. 7 and 8, 1902)


“Recherches sur les Lémuriens Disparus” (Nouv. Arch. Mus., 4th series,
Paris, 8, 1905)


“Un Nouvel Exemple d’Extinction de Formes Animales Géantes Voisines
pita Actuelles” (C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 154, p. 399, 5 February
I9I2


Hii, W. C. OSMAN: Primates: I. Strepsirhini (Edinburgh, 1953)
LAMBERTON, C.: “Contribution 4 la Connaissance de la Faune Subfossile de
Madagascar: Lémuriens et Ratites” (Mém. Acad. malgache, Tananarive,
part 17, 1934 and part 27, 1939)


“Les Hadropithéques” (Bull. Acad. malgache, 20, pp. 127-70, 1937)


THEVET, ANDRE: Cosmographie Universelle (bk. ii, chap. x, Paris, 1575)


542


Index


Aardvark, 76, 303, 389-92,
410


Abel, Othenio, 413
g


Aberdare Range, 366-7, 369
Abidjan, 426-8
Abipon Indians, 273
Aborigines, Australian, 83, 103, 191, 193-4,
197-8, 205-8, 217


Abuna, Fort, 296; Rio, 284-5
Abyssinia, 40, 51-2, 63, 459
Académie des Sciences, Paris, 80, 210, 312,
342, 502


Acinonyx jubatus, 368, 419-20; rex, 419-20
Acre, River, 284
Adams, Professor, 338-9
Addar swamps, 445-6
Aepyornis,
241,
500-4,
506;
hildebrandtit,
503 0.3 maximus, 502-3; medius, 503 n.


Aer Teman, 121-2
Aessouri, 156
Aetas, 89, 196
Africa, climatic stability, 357-8
Afropavo congensis, 64
Agassiz, L., 344
Agogwe,
4223;
encounters,
422-3,
426-83
legends, 422-3, 425, 427-8; identity, 424-5,
429-33


Agouti, 254, 278
Ai, 258, 278, 280
Aier Kembang, 113
Aier Roeso, 113
Ailuropoda melanoleucus, 47-9, 65-6, 163
Ailurus fulgens, 48
Air Dingin, 115
Air Roepit, 116-7
Air Masoedje, 116-7
Alaotra, Lake, 513, 516
Albatross, wandering, 253, 489
Albert, Lake, 412
Albert National Park, 362, 371
Aleutians, 248
Alexandrina, Lake, 203
Alice River, 217
Allen, Glover M., 64, 361, 364-5
Almiqui, 76, 254, 510
Aloombé, 363
Alvarez, Luis A., 264
Amadon, Dean, 503
Amala River, 444
Amali, 442
Amaral, Afranio do, 286
Amaral Varella, Francisco de, 299
Amazon, 29, 283-4, 286, 289, 292-6, 302 n.,
308, 317-19
Ameghino, Carlos, 265-7
Grae domes Florentino, 259-67, 270-I, 277;
280-1


Ameranthropotdes loysi, 309-22, 327
American Museum of Natural History, 245,
484, 503
Amerindians, 284-5, 287-9, 306-7, 317, 32I-
2;
see
also Abipon,
ucan,
Arawak,
Chayante, Guarani, Gennake, Marakshito,
Motilone, Piapoco, Tehuelche, Tobas.


Anaconda, 286-93
Ancieta, Felipe, 302 n.
An
Islands, 89-9, 91, 97, 105


Anderson, C., 69-70, 206
Anderssen, Gunnar, 388-9, 392, 397 n., 404
Andes, 49, 68-9, 253, 265, 269, 282-3, 328
drews, C. W., 413


Andrews, R. C., 431
Angel, F., 287
Angel, Jimmy, 30
Angola, 439, 441, 450, 456-61, 469-70, 487
Angourie, 211
Aniotos, 407


izinana, 515-6


Annam, IOI
Anomalopteryx parva, 223, 240
Anseering, 164
Antandroy, 500, 506
Antarctica, 26-7, 424
Anteater, 280; giant, 254-5, 390; pygmy, 2543
see also Aardvark.


“Anthropoid,” meaning of, 312-3
Aotes, 393
Ape, anthropoid, gait of, 148-9, 423; black or
Celebesean,
39;
large
South
American,
305-28; origin of Nandi bear, 393-8


Ape-men,
87,
I06—-10,
120,
125;
see
also


Australopithecus,
Gigantopithecus,
Megan-
thropus,
Paranthropus,
Pithecanthropus,
Sinanthropus.


Apteryx, 221-33 australis, 239; mantelli, 2393
maxima, 223,
239-40; oweni, 239


Aptornis, 221
Araguaya, River, 290, 208, 323
Arambourg, C., 173, 314
Arapehy, 301
Araucan Indians, 271, 274, 276-7, 281
Arawak Indians, 327-8
Archaeoceti, 304
Archaeopteryx, 75-7
Archbold, Richard, 28
Archer, C. Kenneth, 387, 397
Arctocephalus, 204
Arctocyon, 398
Arctotherium, 269
Argentine, 273, 275, 282
Argentino, Lake, 276
Armadillo, 76, 278, 303; giant, 254; see also
Glyptodon.


Arndt, W., 31
Arnold, J., 260 n.
Art, primitive, as zoological evidence, 51, 58,
202, 282, 337, 342-3, 442) 447-8, 451


Aruwimi River, 448
Ashburton River, 247
Asourikes, 156
Ass, Madagascar wild, 515-6
Assam, 44-5, 129, 139, 174
Assouras, 156
Assumbo Mountains, 491
Asuncion, 308
Ateles belzebuth, 3173 hybridus, 316-7
Atherton Tableland, 193, 216


543


INDEX


Atoe
pandak,
rimbo,
110;
see also Orang
Soe
Rk.
.
:


Atti, 56
Aurochs, 480-2
Australia, 191, 219, 224-6, 249-50


* Australian Museum, 202, 206, 208, 218


Australopithecus,
106,
154,
179,
429-333
prometheus, 431, 432 0.3 transvaalensis, 429


pethen Tepui, 30
ye-aye,
512


Azara, Helix de, 273-4


Babakoto, 508
Babault, Guy, 408
Baboon, 161, 374, 379, 394-5, 423-5, 431-35
chacma, 394-5; giant, 393, 396-8, 410


Babylon, 479-82
Badger, 34, 408-9, 411
Badigut, 463, 466-7, 470, 475-7, 482
Baganda, 442-3
Ba-Gishu, 380, 399
Bahr-el-Arab, 445-6
Bahr-el-Djebel, 447
Bahr-el-Ghazal, 445-6
Bahr-el-Zeraf, 446
Baikal, Lake, 204
Bailly, Charles, 202, 204
Baliand-Kiik, 180
Balkin, 36
Ballarat, 203
“Balu,” 136, 148
Baluba, 454
Bamingui, River, 464
Bananal, Ilha do, 290
Bancroft, Edward, 307, 312
Banda, 463-8
Bangkok, 102
:


Bangweulu, Lake, 450-3, 455, 469, 475
Banjhankris, 130
Banks, Sir Joseph, 198
Banteng, 67
;


Bantu, 506, 51r
Banziri, 463
Barbour, Thomas, 286
Barissan mountains, 113-5
Barle, Dr de, 319-20
Barotse, 455-6
Barramunda, 76
Barrett-Hamilton, G, E. H., 264 n.
Barun, 172, 176-7
:


Bat, 224, 492-5; giant false vampire, 4943
hammer-headed,
javelirl,
4943
yellow-winged,
494;
see
also
Fanga-
labolo, Flying-fox, Olitiau.


Bathurst, Lake, 202
Batouri, 360
Battel, Andrew, 43
Batten, R. L., 74
Baya, 463-4, 468
Bear, black or collared, 165-6, 170; blue, 166;
grizzly, 53; Kamchatka, 53; Kodiak, 53;
Moroccan brown,
373, 392;
red, 134-6,
144-6,
160, 164-6, 168; spectacled, 253,
307, 328; see also Nandi bear, Sloth-bear,
Sun-bear.


Beauman, E. B., 134
Beaumont, Elie de, 342
Beaver, 302-3
Beccari, Nello, 311, 321-2
Bechuana, 424
Bechuanaland, British, 429
Bedford, Duke of, 47
Behemoth, 336
Bel and the Dragon, 481
Belgian Congo, 56, 361-4, 371, 373, 403, 407,
4355 438, 441, 448, 450, 453-6, 470, 472,
475> 497


Belgian Royal Institute of Natural History,
122, 472


Benkoelen, 110, 115


Bennejeant, Charles, 311
Bennett, George, 208
Berbice, Rio, 322
Berezovka, 339, 342, 346, 348
Bergstutzen, see Tatzelwurm.
Beringe, Oscar von, 54-5
Bering Strait, 259,
331


Berliner Illustrirte
Zeitung, 36


Berlioz, J., 173
Bermudas, 245
Bertin, Leon, 78
i
tiger
etsimar
507
4


Bhanjakris, see Banjhankris.
Bharal,
145
Bhundar Valley, 134
Bhutan, 44, 102, 129, 159
Bianconi, G.-G., 503
Bible, 480; see also Bel and the Dragon,
Genesis.


Bibos, 205; see also Bos.
Biped, consequences of being, 160-2; evolu-
tion, 149; trail, 146


Bipes canticulatus, 35
Birds, flightless on islands, 224-5; prospect of
discovering, 52, 64
.


Birthday (Tasmania), 213
Biswas, Biswamoy, 163, 169
Bittern, brown, 205
Blagden, C. D., 103-4
Blainville, see Ducrotay de Blainville.
Blancou, Lucien, 360, 363, 463-9
Blumenbach, J. F., 199-200, 337-8
Blyth, Edward, so
er


Boa, 292-3, 303; giant, see Sucuriju gigante
Boar, 169-71
Bochart, Samuel, 336
Boekit Kaba, 112, 116
Bogga, 446
Bolivia, 253, 282, 284, 302, 323
Boltunoff, 337-8
Bombay Natural History Society, 165, 168
Bonacase, Serge, 290-1
Bonnivair, Paul, 454-5
Bontius, Jacob, 90, 98, I10
Bordet, Abbé P., 172-3
Borneo, 105, 111, 194, 196-7, 431
Bos (Bibos) banteng, 67; (Bibos) gaurus, 673;
(Bibos)
| sauveli,
67-8;
Madagascariensts,
S113 primigenius, 480-2


Botaurus poiciloptilus, 205
Boucher de Perthes, Jacques, 80, 342
Boué, Ami, 342
Boule, M., 259 n.
eR re E. G., 319, 395
Bourdelle, E., 363, 365
Bourdillon, T., 137
Bowen, Patrick, 407, 419
Bower-bird, golden, 216
Boxberger, Leo von, 462
Boxer Rebellion, 47
Bozoum, 464
Brachiopods, 72, 74
Brahmins, 156
“Brain-eater,”” 380-2, 411, 431
Braithwaite, Major, 387, 397
Branco, A. J., 299-300
Brazil, 275, 278, 282, 289-91, 293-300, 308,
323-7


Brazilian Boundary Commission, 286, 296
Brehm, A. E., 395, 408-9
Breland, O. P., 471
Brennecker, 296-7
Breton, W. H., 202
Breuil, Abbé, 337
Briagolong, 214
Brisbane, 214
Brisbane Courier, 217
British Museum (Natural History), 140, 142,
232, 242-3, 398, 400, 412, 414, 432, 447


544


INDEX


Britton, Sydney W., 1
Brocklehurst, H. C. 6a.
Bronson, E. B., 443
Brontosaurus,
190, 434-8, 451, 454-5, 4575


Buenos Aires (city), 255; Lake, 276; Museum,
260; (province), 274


Biittikofer,
Johannes, 42


Budorcas, 44, 145
Buffon, Count, 43, 195, 199, 275
Buganda, 399
Buitenzorg, 61-2, I1§, 120-1, 125
Bulawayo, 435
Buller, Sir Walter, 240
Bunger, David, 27
Bunyip, appearance, 202-4; etymology, 201;
food, 208;
identity,
204-9,
248;
native
description,
208;
native
drawings,
202;
reports, 202-4;
skull, 202;
two-headed,
204; voice, 202, 204.


Bunyoro, 395, 399, 412
Burgoyne, Cuthbert, 423
Burma, 89, 105, 129-30
Burrell, H., 218-9
Burrumbeet, Lake, 203
Burton, Maurice, 31, 56, 289, 325
Burton, R. G., 437
Bushbuck, 427
“Bushmaster,” 286
Bushmen, 424-5, 429, 442, 451 n.
Butantan Institute, 286-8
Butterfly-lizard, 488
Buxton, 429
Buxton, Cara, 382
Byrd, R, E., 26


Cabrera, A. L., 272 n.
Cacajao, 318-9
Cachorros, Rio dos, 300
Cahow, 244-5
Caldwell, W. H., 201
California, 30, 248
Calinges, 88, 91
Callabonna, 206
Calocephalus, 204
Calophrynus, 510
Calystrians, 91, 102
Cambodia, 67-8, Io1
Camel, 171
Cameroons, 360, 441-2, 461-3, 470, 476, 491
Candide, 305-6
Candido de Melo, Jose, 286, 297
Cannibals, 103, 185, 190, 227
Cansdale, G. S., 144, 403
Canton, 152
Capart, André, 472
Cape Argus, 439
Cape Province, 386
Cape Town, 434, 438
Capra falconeri, 145
Capybara, 254, 290, 294
Carbon 14 dating, 259 n., 260 n., 282
Carcharinus, 302
Cardwell, 214-5
Carhuerne, Sierra, 276
Carson City, 257
Caspian Sea, 204


MM


Castle Harbour, 245
So universal, see Globe, Revolutions


of.


Catatumba, Rio, 309, 318
Catfish, 470-2
Catonyx, 270
Cattle, Indian, 205
Caullery, Maurice, 78
Cavally River, 428-9
Caveiras, Rio das, 299
Cebuella pygmaea, 253
Celebes, 39, 105, 194, 196-7
Centrornis, 504
Ceratodus, 301
Ceratosaurus, 438, 481-3
Ceratotherium
simum,
53-4,
cottoni, 54


Ceylon, 87-100, 105
Chalcides striatus, 35
Chalicotherium, 412-4, 478
Chalinolobus, 224
Channallabes, 470
Chapin, J. P., 64
A


Charles IV, King of Spain, 255, 258, 281
Chatteleux, Marquis de, 248-9, 487 n.
Chavante Indians, 290-1, 324
Cheetah, 368; king, 419-20
Chelodina longicollis, 200
Chemed Rigdzin Dorje Lopu, 138-9, 167,
176-7, I81


Chemosit (=chimiset), 373, 378, 380-1, 383-6,
onde S
396, 398-400, 402, 407, 410-3, 421


ep,
67
>


Chepekwe, see Chipekwe.
Chicago, 65, 66
Chichiguas, 301
Chico, Rio, 272.
Chile, 249, 253 |
Chiltern (Victoria), 214
Chilunka, 181
Chimchimem, 271-23 see also Iemisch,
Chimpanzee, 43, 63, 90, 149, 307, 312, 316,
4303 pygmy, 63-4


a, 44-8, 62, 66, 100, 104-5, 142, I5I-3,


174, 332-3


Chipekwe, 439, 441, 450, 452-3, 455, 460, 467,
475-8, 482


Chironectes, 275
Chiru, 145
Chitons, 74
Chiumbe, see Tyihumbwe.
Chlamyphorus truncatus, 254
Chobe, River, 455
Choeropsis, 41-2, 60-1
Chrysocyon jubatus, 68
Chubut, Rio, 272
Chukchi, 331
Chuklukmiut, 331
Chumbi valley, 159
Chungungo, 271
Cieza de Leon, Pedro de, 307, 313, 320-1
Clarias, 470-1
Clarke, W. H., 52
Clifford, Sir Hugh, 89
Cloudy Bay, 239
Coatds-tapuyas, 310
Cobb, Powys, 368
Cochin-China, 101
Coelacanth, 73, 78, 490
Cogun, River, 209
Coje ya menia, 460-1, 467, 474-5
Colac, 216
Colbert, E. H., 484
Colenso, William, 229-34, 239
Colombia, 282, 309, 318, 327
Colombo Museum, 97 n.
Commoner, Katmandu, 181
Compsognathus, 194
Conargo, 204
Concordia, 301


360;
simum


545


INDEX


Condor, 253, 503
Congo “dragon,” 434-84, 506; see Badigui,
Chipekwe, Coje ya menia, Dilali, Dingonek,
Gassingrdm,
Istququmadevu,
Lau, Lipata,


Lukwata,
Mokéle-mbémbe,
Mourou-ngou,
Nsanga, Nzefu-loi Ol-umaina.


Congo, River, 63, 360, 363, 441, 450, 458,
460-1, 472, 474
Convergence between marsupials and placen-
tary mammals, 210-1, 218-9


Cook, James, 198, 224, 228, 235, 237
Cook, S. V.. fe 422-3
Coolidge, H . J. 68
Coomans, I15
Cooper, A. L.. 419
Cooper, I., 280
Cooper Island, 243
Corangamite, Lake, 203
Corbett, N. E. F., 376, 391, 397 nN.) 402, 411
Cordoba, Rio, 328
Coscinocera hercules, 254
Couja, 60
Country Life, 143
Courteville, Roger, 317-20
Courtney, Roger, 355, 386, 425
Coypu, 271
Crab, horseshoe or king, 71-2
Crampton (on ol-umaina),
444


Cranial capacity, 315-6, 430
Crinoids, 73-4
Grisulings Rio, 290
Croad, H., 452
Crocodile, 73, 76, 459-61, 464, 469-70, 479,
505;
alleged Angourie,
211-2;
double-
crested, 211; Johnston’s, 211; tracks, 212


Crocodylus cataphractus,
593 frontatus, 4593
johnstoni,
211;
madagascariensis,
5053
niloticus, 4593 porosus, 2113; robustus, 505


Crocuta crocuta, 382-3, 398-402, 407, 413
Cruz, Luis de, 271
Crypto rocta ee 510
Crystal
Brook, 203


Ctesias, 88-02, IOI-2, 306, 507
Cuango, River, 460, 474
Cuanza, River, 460
Cuba, 254
Cuninghame, R. J., 472-3
Curinquéans, 306, 308, 328
Curitibanos,
300


Curran, C.
H., 287


Cuscus, 199
Cuvier, Baron Georges,
31, 38-9, 42,
52,
79-80, 200, 256-8, 269, 341-3, 412, 480,
488, 503, 516


Cycas, 358
Cyclopes didactylus, 254
Cynopithecus niger, 39


Daazlwurm, see Tatzelwurm.
Dacelo gigas, 194
Dahana, 28
Daily Express, 281
Daily Mail, 158, 434-7, 4533 expedition, 158,
162-72, 177, 179, 181-2


Dakhu, 1
Dala, 457-8
Dalby, 203
Dalrymple’s Gap, 215
Dalumo River, 386
Damastia, 367
Dammerman, K. W., 114, 120-2, 124-5
Dampier, William, 210
Danau Bento, 115-16
Daniel, 481-2
Dapper, O., 60, 374
Darlac, ror
Darling, River, 204
Dart, Raymond, 429-32
Darwin, Charles, 38, 108, 240
Dasycyon hagenbecki, 68-9


Dataran, 113-4
Daubentonta, 512
David, Father Armand, 45-9
Davies, L. W., 173
Decary, Raymond, 505-6, 513-5
Deer, Pére David’s, 45-6; Schomburgk’s, 453;
.
tufted, 51


Dekeyser, P. L., 151
Delt Courant, 124-5
Demerara River, 321
Dent, R. E., 366
Denys de Montfort, Pierre, 505
Deos, Joao de,
Gtad


Desmarest, A
“Devil’s ee peo ?? 324-5
Dewisme, Charles H., 327, 407
Diba, see Badigut.
Dibatag, 52
Dicerorhinus sumatranus, 101, 115, 361
Diceros bicornis, 53-4, 3
ere 321-2


lus ineptus, 224


Dieffenbach, E., 230-1
Dilali, 463-5, 468, 474
Dilolo, 439, 450, 452, 455-6
Dinanthropoides mvalis, 178-9
Dingo, 218
Dingonek, 433-4, 469-70
Dinka, 446-7.
Dinomys branickti, 49-50
Dinopithecus, 178, 398
Dinornis, 227, 502; elephantopus, 225, 232;
crassus, 2253; giganteus, 225; gracilis, 2253
robustus, 223, 225; see also Moa.


Dinosaur, alleged African, 434-41,
449-51,
455, 457, 466, 478, 482-4; Miller’s alleged,
see Row; types of 190, 193-4, 479-84; why
aquatic, 303


Dinotherium, 358, 473-4
Diomedea exulans, 253, 489
Diplodocus, 188, 190, 303, 435
Diprotodon, 206-9
Discovery, 423, 447
Dissan Hamy, 96
Ditmars, R. L., 286, 289, 494
Dittert, René, 137
Dobrizhoffer, Martin, 273
Dodo, 224
Doedicurus, 259, 282
Dog, Cape hunting, 411
Dog-headed men, 90-1, 101-2, 507-8
Dolichohippus grevyt, 52
Dollman, Guy, 140-1
Dolphin, ‘“‘white
»” 62-3


Domesticated
animals, unlikelihood
of ex-
tinction, 268-9


Don Cossacks, 353
Dongou, 360
Douroucouli, 393
Dower, K. C. ieee 366-9
Downing, Ronald, 158
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 30, 187, 251, 455,
485-6, 488


Draco volans, 488
Dragon, see Butterfly-lizard, Congo “dragon,”
Komodo dragon, Sirrush.


Drasenovitch, A
Dravidians, 93
Dresden Museum, 243
Drummond-Hay, Arnold, 444
Dryopithecus, 108
Duba, 374, 380, 392, 410
Dubois, Eugéne, 109-10
Shere
e Blainville,
H. M., 41, 200,


Duik Kosi, 139, 166, 176
Duff, Roger, 238
Dufossé, Dr, 67
Dugong, 203,:210-1
Dumarele, 501-2


A. von, 33


546


INDEX


Dunckel, 428
Dunedin Museum, 243
Durian fruit, 112, 122
Duris of Samos, 87-8
Dusky Bay, 242
Dutch East India Company, 198, 213
Dyscophorus, 510
Dzu-teh, 164


Eagle, 491-2, 500; monkey-eating, 53
Earle, Percy, 232
East Cape (N.Z.), 228-31
Eberhardt, Captain, 263-4; Cueva, 263-4,
266-70, 274, 278, 280, 282


Echi
199


Edmond-Blanc, F., 407
Edward, Lake, 362, 472
Egmont, Mount, 230
Egypt, 104, 287
Eiseley, Loren —
432


Elasmotherii
Elephant, ee hei 341, 343; African forest-,
361-2,
365;
ican
sa’
-,
361-2;


Indian, 340, 343; pygmy,
359, 362-5, 473;


water, 363-4, 472-3; see
also Nzefu-loi.
Elephas berezovkius, 339-423 imperator fraasi,
a indicus, 341, 3433 primigenius, 337-8,


Eiken cephalophus, 51
Elaphurus davidianus, 45-7
El Fayum, 287
Elgon, Mount, 380, 399
Elizabethville, 436
Elk, 347
Ellengassen, 276
Elliott, D. G., 63
Elwes, H. J., 135
—— 368, beg


docles, 1
es (of Sie acsbeist 216
fas iva, 399, 412
Enhy > lutris, 248
Epéna,
Zocatecal rain-forest, 27-8, 40, 58, 64, 358
Equus gmelini, 52; przewalskit, 52
Eriksson, Karl, 57
Escorpién, 34
Eumeralla River, 202
Eunectes murinus, 286, 292-3
Eupleres, 510
Euroa, 204
Euryapteryx gravis, 236 n., 238
Eutropius, 471
Evans, Charles, 168
Everest, Mount, 127-8, 134, 136-8, 145, 158,


176
Evolution, Theory of, 80-1, 249-50
Eyasi, Lake, 155
Eyzies, Les, 343


Fakes, 36, 125-6, 170, 199, 320, 400; see also
Hoaxes.


Falconer, H., 342
Falkner, Thomas, 273
Falla, R. A., 236 n., 241
Fangalabolo, 516
Farquhar, Sir Robert, 38-9
Faweett, Brian, 285
Fawcett, Percy H., 30, 284-8, 290, 302
Febres, Andres, 271
“Reet back to front,”
I12,
117, I19,
122,
134-6, 306, 328, 428


Felis onca, 253, 269, 272-5; 277, 424
Fenner, Charles, 204
Fernando da Maia, Crescentio, 300
Fernan Vaz, 63, 363
Field, the, 367, 419
Field Museum mate 65
Fischer, G., 118
Fitzroy, Sir Charles, 235, 238


Flacourt, Etienne de, 499, 503-4, 507-8, 512,


Flett, G. 370
Flornoy, Bertrand, 29
Flower, W. H., 342
Flying-fox, 492-3
Font-de-Gaume, 337
Fontezuelas, 259
Footprints,
abominable
snowman’s,
127-8,
132, 134-8, 140, 142-9, 160; Ameranthro-
poid’s, 320; badger’s, 411; bear’ s, I2I-3,
135, 146, 1493 coje ya menia’s, 451; com-
posite,
386, 411;
“‘Devil’s
hoof-marks,”
ee
24753 Bor
gorilla’s, 149; hyena’s, 385; large
American, 308; lion’s, 385; mam-
nek 350; Nandi bear’s, 3772 379, 385-6,
403,
410;
orang
gadang’s
1573
orang
pendek’s,
113,
115-7,
122;
orang-utan’s,


I 15-6, 3253
water=
pe de garrafa, 323;
elephant’s, 473; see also Trail.
Foran, W. R., 365, 370-1
Forbin, Victor, 451
Forest-hog, giant, 59, 358
Forest-ox, Indo-Chinese, 67-8
Fort Crampel, 464-5
Fort Jameson, ase n.
Fort Mbeni, 56
Fossa fossa, 510
Fossilisation, hazards of, 76-8
Fossil species, survival of, 71-9, 81
Fotsiaondré, see Habéby.
Fox, Arctic, 347; Tibetan, 145


» Louis, 103
Franssen, Lieutenant, 364, 473
Frechkop, Serge, 5, 66, 68n., 150, 358, 362,


370-1
Aire Equatorial
Africa,
360,
363, 463,
4
Frere, John, 342
Frickel, Father Protesius, 293, 295
Fiirer-Haimendorf, Christoph von, 168
“Fulahn’’, see Hichens, William.


Gabon, 41, 43, 363
Gaceta de Nicaragua, 301
Gadett, see Geteit.
Gaitonde, J. A., 168
Galassus, Géraud de, 360
Galidia, 510
Gallon, 350-2
Gandhy, Rusi, 168
Ganges, 88, 91, 134
Gapelle, 436-8, 440, 455, 484
Gardner, George, 293
Garriga, José, 255
Gassingradm, 465
Gates, R. R., 179
Gato del mar, 271
Gauarge, 193-4
oo
Albert, 58, 149, 267, 270, 342


Gaur, 6
Gay, Cimadio} 271
Gayal, 67
Gazella granti,
51


Gazelle, Clarke’s, 52; Grant’s, 51; Waller’s,
51-2


Ge-chu, 134
Geikie, J. G., 422
Gelada, 40, 395, a7
Gemelli-Careri,
> 103


Genesis, 79, 155
Gennake Indians, 276
Gennep, Arnold van, 82, 208, 347, 507
Gent, J. R. O., 135-6, 17,7
Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire, Etienne, 199-200
Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire, Isidore, 44, 200, 502.
Géographe, 202
George, Lake, 202
Gerenuk, 51
Gervais, Paul, sor


547


INDEX


Gesner, Conrad, 2
Geteit (=gereit, ae etc.), 380, 382, 393;
396, 399, 410


Getoep, Mat, 115
Ghellabis, 103
Sala see Guillin.
Giants, legendary, 151, 155-7, 306-8
Gibbon, 98-9, 102, 104, IO9-IO, I14, 120,


148, i
179, 312, 314, 423
Gib ons, A
t. H., 54


Gigantophis, 287
Gigantopithecus, 152-3, 155, 157-8, 162, 170,
177-9


Gigantosaurians, 193
Giglioli, Renzo, 321
Gila monster, 34
Gippsland, 216
Giraffidae, primitive, 58
Gisborne, 230, 234
Glacial periods, see Ice Ages.
Glass-snake, see Slow-worm.
Globe, Rees of, 79-80, 256, 258, 341,
343, 5
Ghoiiien 258, 261, 270;
darwini, 266;
see also Neomylodon.


Gloucester (N.S.W.), 214
Glutton, see Wolverine.
Glyptodon, te 282, 302-4
Godart, Alex, fas —9
Goegoeh, see Orang gugu.
‘Goethe, W. von, 256, 344
Goheen, Dr, 40
Gondwana, 457, SII
‘Goral, 145
Gori River, 443
Gorilla, 114, 148-9, 150, 152, 154,
157, 171-2,
174, 307; 315-6, 394-5, 430, 518; coas
42-3,
54; mountain,
54-6; pygmy, 633
statues of, 313, 320


Gorilla beringet, 54-6; gorilla, 42-3, 54
Gosse, Philip H., 307-8
Goulburn, 214
Gould, R. ae 324
Goyaz, 29
Gratz, Paul, 450, 469, 475
Gramostola, 254
Gran Sabana, 29-30
Grandidier, Alfred, 502, 505
Grant, J. A., 51-2
Grant, Robert B., 200
Grant, W., 443
Grant, W. R. O., 53
3


Grassé, Pierre, 408
Gray, Wentworth D., 438
Great Lake (Tasmania), 204
Green, R. M., 452
Greenland, 27
Gregory, 1 W.
+9 208


Gregory, W. K., 66
Grévy, Jules, 52
Grey, Sir George, asin 243
pth River, 464
Grobler, F., 438-41
Guanaco, 260 n., 267
Guaporé, 296
Guarani Indians, 273, 275
Guarda-mér, 300
Guaviare, Rio, 289, 292, 316
Guayazis, 306, 313, 328
Guérés, 429
‘Guiana, any 290, 306-7, 321
Guiglo, 428
‘Guillin, 271-2
‘Gulo luscus, 347, 408
‘Gyedarra, 208
Gymnallabes, 470


Haacke, Wilhelm, 201
Haan, Bierens de, 316
Haast, Julius, 240, 247


Habéby, 514-15
Hadropithecus, 512, 514
Haeckel, Ernst, 108-9, 299
Hagenbeck, Carl, 60, 292, 4375441, 450-1, 455
Hagenbeck, Lorenz, 68, 292-4, 296-
Haines, 321-2, 327
Hair, identification of animals by, 124, 168,


Hanno,
42


Hantu Woket 104-5
Hanuman, 141
Harden, 214
Hare, Sumatran, 113
Harkness, Ruth, 66
Harkness, William, 66, 163
Hartley, C., 97 n.
Harts River, 429
Hausman, Leon A., 168
Hauthal, Rudolf, 264, 267-70
Hedgehog, 76
Heinz, Father Victor, 293-6
Heisenberg, Wernher, 220
Helladotherium, 58
Heloderma, 35


> 4
Heraclitus of Ephesus, 484
Hermits, Hindu, 132
Herodotus, 374, 500
Heron, Lake, 249
Hershkovitz, Philip, 316
Herwaarden, van,
117-20
Herz, Otto, 339
Heterobranchus, 470, 472
Hichens, William, 379%, 384-7; 394-5, 401,
Hikes GC
oy” 447, 456, 478


ckes,
G.
Ws 377; 391, 393, 397, 403, 410
Hicks Bay, 231
“rm 228, 230


Hill, Sir —— 443, 472
Hill, Clifford, 378
Hill, H., 233-5
Hill, WwW. C, Osman, 96-7, 99-100, 106, 120,


S13
Himalayan fauna and flora at high altitudes,


145


Hingston, R. W. C., 145
Hippotamus, 41-2, 60-2, 202, 266, 336, 505-6,
511, 514; Dampier’s imaginary, 210; beast
that kills, 450, 453, 460, 463-4» 466-8, 474-
63; pygmy, 40-2, 60-1, 358-9


Hislop, F. D., 387, 392, 397.n., 404
Hoatzin, 75-6
Hoaxes, 185-90, 399-400, 435-41; see also
Fakes.


Hobley, C. W., 376-9,
443-4
sige) Has F. von, 225-7, 233, 236, 239,


247-


Hodge, Professor W. H.
Hodgson, B. H., 44
shy


Hog, see Morea Noe and River-hog.


Honey-badger, see Ratel.
Hong Kong, 151
Hook, Raymond, 368
Sacer TPL:
» 231
orn,
re
oysius, 357, ar? sin.
Hornaday, W. T., 287, 363, 365
:
Horse, fossil American, 260n., 268; Prze-
walski’s, 52, 347
Hottentots, 424
Howard-Bury, C. ev
Apa 140
Hubrecht, A. W.,
Hughes, J. E., 451-35 475


548


INDEX


Humboldt, Alexander von, 307-8
Hume, Hamilton, 202
Humming-birds, 254, 501
Hunt, Sir John, 136, 138, 158
Hybrids, between men and monkeys, 87, 98,


305-7, 310, 318, 320
Hydropotes inermis, §1
Hydrurga, 204
Hyemoschus aquaticus, 40, 358
Hyena, brown, 400-1, 411; giant, 369, 385,


387, 398, 401; spotted, 382, 385, 398-402
407, 413; striped, 400
Hyena brunnea, 400-1, 4113; hyena, 400
Hylobates lar, 104
Hylochoerus meinertzhagent, 59, 358
Hymché, 270-2; see also Iemisch.
Hypsignathus monstrosus, 493


Ibn Batita, 93-4
Ice Ages, 89, 207, 344, 347-8, 357
Ides, Evert Ysbrants, 333-5
Idriess, Ion, 216
Iemisch, 265-6, 268-72, 274-5
Ignesti, Ugo, 321
Iguana, 510
Iguanadon, 194, 481-3
Iguarapé, Rio, 295
Ijaoe, 110; see also Orang pendek.
Ikelemba, River, 461
Ikimizi, see Chemosit.
Impfondo, 360
Indigirka, River, 336
Indo-China, 89, 101, 103-6
Indris, 148, 507-9
Inocéncio, 325-7
Iramba, 447-8
Isansu hills, 379 n.
Isata, 403
Ishtar Gate, 479-82; see also Sirrush.
Isiququmadevu, 456, 466-7, 470, 475-75 482
Itajahy, 299
Ituri, 56, 58-9, 64, 448-9
Ivory Coast, 426-9
Izzard, Ralph, 158, 166-7, 170, 176, 181-2


Jackson, Sir Frederick, 444
Jackson, H. C., 445-7, 467
Jackson, John A., 162, 166
Jacobson, Edward, 112-3, II1§-7, 122
Jacobszoon, Francoy, 212
FJago-nini, 442
Jaguar, 253, 269, 272-5, 277
Jalap, 137


amberoo, 214
Jambi. River, 115; (state), 110
James, C. G., 453, 475
Jamison, Sir John, 200
Jamunda, Rio, 295
Japan, 249
Java, 100, 105, 108-9, 153
Java ape-man, see Pithecanthropus.
Femechim, 272; see also Iemisch.
Jews, 156
Jiundu, 487, 490
Jobaert, A.-J., 364
Jochelson, Waldemar, 332
Johannesburg, 455
Johanson, J. C., 439-41
Johnston, Sir Harry, 56-9, 424, 442, 472
Johnstone, Robert, 215
Joleaud, Leonce, 58, 310, 314
Joliffe, John, 501-2
Jones, F. Wood, 170, 194
Jones, Oliver, 143-4
Jongri, 131
Jordan (on dingonek), 443-4
FJungli admi, 136


Kaba Wetan, 116
Kabshopa, 137


Kadikamara, 208
Kaffirs, 424
Kafue, 434, 453, 455
Kagg, Baron, 335
Kaimosi, 388
Kairi, 216
Kaja, 463
Kakapo, 221, 241
Kakumega, 375
Kalahari Desert, 27, 424-5
Kalanoro, 513-4
Kalimpong, 133, 165
Kamchadals, 332
Kamolondo, 454
Kan, P. van, 121
Kangaroo, 198, 209, 217-8
Kangaroo River, 204
Kangchenjunga, 130-1
K’ang-Hsi, 332-3
Kanyeshia, 452
Karakoram, 129, 136
Kararehe, 225, 247
Kasai, 440
Kasai, River, 63, 458, 472
Kasi vetulus, 94
Katanga, 436, 438, 453
Katmandu, 137, 142, 177
Kauffeld, C., 287
Kaulback, Ronald, 134, 140
Kaureke, 247-8
Kavay, 516
Keith, Sir Arthur, 316
Kelantan, 107
Kellé, 360
Kelling, Friedrich, 299
Kellogg, A. Remington, 304
Kenya, 365-414, 443-4, 470, 474
Kenya, Mount, 59, 368, 370, 491
Kerintji, Mount, 112, 115
Kerit, see Geteit.
Kerr, Sir John Graham, 148, 158
Keymis, Laurence, 306
Khodumodumo, 386, 401
Khumbu glacier, 166
Khumjung, 170-2, 181
Kichwamba, 369
Kigezi, 399
Kikambangwe, 380
Kikuyu, 407
Kilimanjaro, 401, 490
Kimbundu, 460
Kiore, 225, ai
Kipet, Chief
Kitapmetit, 384-5
Kipling, Rudyard, 121, 375
Kipsanoi River, 389
Kipsigis, see Lumbwa.
Kirch, Robert, 35
So ay 185-9


sale,
454
Kiswahile 415
Kivu, 54-6
Kiwi, 76, 221-3, 235, 239-40, 503
Klang, 102
Knight, Charles, 482
Knight, Hugh, 130
Koddoelo, 379, 393, 396-8, 410
Koeboes, 110, 117
Koenigswald, G. H. R. von, 105, 109, I5I-3,


157-8, 314
Kohl-Larsen, L., 155
Koirala, M. P., 130
Koko-Yimidir, 198
Koldewey, Robert, 479-80
Kollmann, J., 422
Kolyma, River, 331
Komodo, 61-2; dragon, 61-2, 212, 440, 470
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 180
Konawaruk, Rio, 321
Kongamato, 487, 490-1, 494-5
Koraleya, 94-5


549


INDEX


Koriaks, 332
Kotto, River, 465
Koukourou, River, 464-5
Kou-prey, 67-8
Kou- °C 67
Krefit,
Gerald, 215
Kroo, 359
Krumbiegel, Ingo, 68-9
Kudu, lesser, 50
Kulti valley, 17
Kumbukkan, River, 95-6
Kurile Islands, 249
Kwa Ngombe, 423
Kwangsi, 153
Kyogo, Lake, 72


Lachesis muta, 286
Lage, 299
Laikipia, 367, 369
Lais, 115
Lakhpa Tensing, 164
Lamarck, J. B. de M., 200
Lambermon, 116-7, 122
Lamberton, C., 512, §14
Lamp-shell, 72, 74
Lane, Frank W., 130, 308, 386, 407, 409, 412,
417, 419, 447, 453, 494


Lang, Herbert, 28, 64
Lang Boma, Lake, 167
Langur, Himalayan,
136, I41!, 143-4,
168;
peed 99;
purple-faced,
94;
Roxel-


a’s snub-nosed,
47,
140-3;
see
also
Lotong.
Lankester, Sir Ray, 58, 281
Laos, ror
Lapicque, Louis, 93
La Plata, 272, 2773 Aauaeum: 263-4, 271
Lapps, 331
Lartet, Edouard, 80, 342
Last Hope Inlet, 263, 267, 277, 281; see also
Eberhardt, Cueva.


Latimeria chalumnae, 73, 78
Latrobe, C. J., 202
Lau, 445-9,
454-5, 460, 467, 470


Laughing jackass, 194
Lavtia frons, 494
Leakey, L. S. B., 400
Leanama, 94-5, 100
Lebino José dos Santos, 300-1
Ledoux, A., 426-9
Lees, J. R., 173
F
Leeton, 203
Legends, formation and duration of, 82
Lehmann-Nitsche, Robert, 271-2, 274-5, 2775


280
Leichhardt, Ludwig, 209
Leidy, Joseph, 41, 61
Lemming, Norway, 264 n., 347
Lemmus lemmus, 264 0., 347
Lemuria, 511
Lemurs, 393, 507-16
pe nets 331


ningra
Lenz, Radiol? 276
Leo, 371
Leone, C. A., 66
Leopard, 367-70, 372; see also Snow-leopard.
eines
as
Leopold
II,
€, 363, 472
Lepage, L., 435-8, 440, 455
Lepchas, 174
Le Petit, 363, 472-3
Lepidosiren, 76, 301
Leprechauns, 422
Leptonychotes, 204
Le Souef, A. S., 218-9
Lestodon, 261, 280
Leunis, J 2
Tina
ng, 456
Lewis, Ethelre a, 441


Lewis, Frederick, 95-6
Ley, Willy, S45; 262 N., 335, 461-2, 479-82
Lhapka-la, 128
Lhopa, 102
Libata, see Lipata.
Libby, W. F., 260 n.
ote 40-2, oor 359


therium, 58


ti darwat, 143
Likuala, River, 461
Limpets, 74
Limulus, 71-2
Lindi, 417-8
Lingula, 72
Linnaeus, 31
Lion, “man-eating,” 383; spotted, 365-72;
varieties, 371


Lipata, 456-60, 467, 469-70
Lipomani, 507
Lipotes vexillifer, 62-3
Lista, Ramon, 261-3, 267, 272, 275-6, 281-2
Litocranius walleri, 51
Lizard, agamid, 145; monitor, 61-2, 212, 470,
475-65 478
lama, 253


Lobito de agua, 272
Lobodon, 204
Loch Ness monster, 26, 304
Lockwood, 214
Loeboek Salasik, 113
Lonnberg, Einar, 263, 267
Lofo-toro, 276-7
Logan, Josias, 333
London, Royal brie ri oe Society, 284
London, re
er ociety
of, 135,
214-5, 228, 232, 264


Longenot, Mount, 425
Lophiomys imhaust, 49
Loreto, Marquis of, 255
Loris, 510
Lost World, The, 30, 187, 251, 455, 485-6
Lotong, 125
Loukeni, 363
Loxodonta
africana,
341,
343, 361-2, 4733
cyclotis, 361-2, 365; fransseni,
364, 4733
pumilio, 359, 362-5


Loys, Francois de, 309-22, 327
Lozano, Pedro, 277-8, 280-1
Lualaba, River, 453-4, 460
Luapula, River, 453
Luaximo, River, 456
Lucas, rae 345
Ludwig, H > at
Lukulu, River, 452
Lukwata, 442-5, 447, 449, 460, 467, 472
Lumbwa, 380-2, 389, 400
Lungfish, 72, 76 n.
Lusambo, 36
Lutra_
chalensis, 2725 felina, 271-2, 274-53
platensis, 272 n.; prevocax, 272 n,


Luyan, Rio, 255
Lyall, Denis, 452-3, 476-8
Lycaon pictus, 411
Lydekker, R., 54, 63, 404
Lyell, Charles, 342-3


MacDonald, Miss, 133
MacGeehan, J., 216
Macherma, 139
Mackay, R. W., 214
MacKellar, Dr, 232
Macleay, W. S., 202
Macropoma, 78
Macropus giganteus, ee rufus, 209
re bas 499-518; climatic changes, 504-
63 iain
of fauna, 508-11


Madeleine,
La


Madrid, Ro
‘oval Karen 255


Magadi railway, 377, 393, 396, 403, 410-


1995


359


INDEX


Magellan, 254 n.; Straits of, 260 n., 263, 265,
272, 274, 278


Malalhue, 281
Malay Peninsula, 89-90, 103-7
Malays, 89-90, 102, III, 197-8
Maling, 239
Malopterurus, 471
Mamantu, 332
Mambaca, 322
Mamfe, 462
immoth, anatomy, 339-40; area of distribu-
tion, 343-4; etymology, 332, 3363; European,
3373 extinction, 341-7; food, 341, 345, 3483
frozen, 334, 336-9, 347; habitat, 343-4,
348-53;
identity,
334-6;
ivory,
333-53
legends, 329, 331-4; North American, 341;
reported living, 350-3; size, 341


Mamontova, River, 349
Man, contemporary with extinct animals, 80,
258-60, 336, 342-3
pe 296, 302 a
-
anate¢e, 202-3, 278, 428, 442-3


Manchester Guardian, 131, 158
Mandrill, 395, 398
““Man-eaters,” 383
Manga, 442
Mangarisaoka, 515
Manis, 76, 261-2
Mansfield (Victoria), 214
Manso, Rio, 290
Mantell, Gideon A., 232
Mantell, Walter, 232, 236, 241-4, 247
Maori hen, 221
Maoris, 224-44, 247, 250
Mapinguary, 323-7
Mara River, 443
Marakshito Indians, 313
Maraquet, 383
Marcellin, Louis, 297
Marche du Monde, La, 347
Marga Ambatjung, 117
Maribunda, see Spider-monkey, marimonda.
Markhor, 145
Marmet, M., 353
Marmoset, pygmy, 253
Marozi, see Lion, spotted.
Marqués-Riviere, Jean, 132, 176-7
Marsden, William, 39, 110, 112
Marsh, O. C., 480
Marsupials, 197-9, 205-6, 210, 212-9
Martes foina, 408
Maruricana, Lake, 295
Masai, 424, 432, 444
Mascarene Islands, 505
Mastodon, 156
Mathew, John, 197
Mathis, Jean, 408-9
Matschie, Paul, 54, 361
Matto Grosso, 308
Matuyus, 306, 328
Mau, 380, 381, 393; 399, 425
Mauduit, Jacques, 425
Maufrais, Raymond, 290
Maule, Lieutenant, 200
Mau-Mau, 407
Maurette, Fernand, 28
Mauritius, 224


551


Max, Gabriel, 108
Maydon, H. C., 453
Mayer, Charles, 287
M
Rio, 321


oo J. F., 200


egaderma gigas, 494
Megaladapis, 512-3, 515
Megalapteryx, 241, 244
Meganthropus
africanus,
155,
178; palaeo-
jJavanicus, 105, 153, 1§7) 177, 179


Megasthenes, 88-9, 134, 306
Megatherium, 255-8, 260-1, 265, 277, 280, 308
Meinertzhagen, R., 59, 366
Meirelles, Francisco, 290, 324
Melland, F. H., 487
Mellivora cottoni, 404, 406; leuconata, 4053;
ratel, 403-113 signata, 405


Melursus ursinus, 99-100
Mendis, Wilfred, 96
Mendoza, 281
Menges, Joseph, 451
Menlung basin, 136; -tse, 127
Mentawai Islands, 99
Merida, 313
Meru, 366, 369
Mesas, 29-30
Mesayas, 103
Messerschmidt, D. G., 335-6
Metoh kangmi, 128, 130, 165-6
Mexico, 34, 282
M’ fini River, 472
Miegam, 322, 327
Mi-go, 130, 165-6
Migot, André, 424 n.
Mth-teh, 164-5, 177
Millais, J. G., 446, 452, 455-6
Miller, Charles, 185-90
Miller, Gerrit S., 63
Milne-Edwards, Alphonse, 46, 49, 66
Mi-lu, 45-7
Mindt, 191, 193
Mingma, 163-4, 171
MinhocGo, 298-304
Mhiolania, 264
Mirka, see Mi-go.
Mirounga, 204
Mirror of the Manchu Language, 332-3
“Missing Link,” 108-9, 125, 154, 313, 430-I
Mt-teh, 130, 164, 166, 177
Mitikata, 465, 467
Mngwa, 415-20
Moa, anatomy, 221-3, 226, 502-3; appear-
ance, 226, 229, 237-8; area of distribution,
225, 2353; bones, 228-37, 239; causes
of
extinction,
227;
classification,
223;
dis-
covery, 227-32; eggs, 232, 235; etymology,
233-4; feathers, 236-7; food, 225; foot-


rints,
231,
233;
hunted,
236-8,
240;


egends, 229-31, 233, 235; nomenclature,
local, 229; reported living, 239; varieties,
223, 225, 241


Modave, Comte de, 515
Mobius, Karl, 31
Moesi Oeloe, 117
Mojan, 328
Mohamad Saleh, 116-7, 122
Moho, 241, 243
Moi, 101-2, 104
Mokéle-mbémbe,
461-3, 466-7,
470, 475-8,


8
482
Mole, giant, legends of, 255, 331-4
Molina, C, de, 271


INDEX


Molonglo, River, 203
Molyneux Harbour, 239
Mombasa, 416
Monard, A., 456-61, 469
Monboddo, Lord, 43
Monkey,
capuchin, FA
315-6: 393-45
howler, 311, 3933
jon-tailed, see Wan-
deroo;
proboscis, III; see also Spider-
monkey.


Monoclonius, 436, 478
Monotremes, 200-1, 249-50
Montandon, Georges, 309, 312-3, 320
Montenegro, Paulino, 301-2
Moolgewanke, 203
Moore, Spencer, 268
Moreno, Francisco P., 263-5, 267, 271-2,
276, 282


Morocco, 373, 392
Morrison-Scott, T. C. S., 142
Mortes, Rio das, see Manso, Rio.
Morton, S. G., 40-1
Moruya, 216
wee Atlas, 254
Motilone Indians, 309, 313, 317
Mourou-ngou, 463-7, 468-70
Mouse-hare, see Pika.
Moussa, 464-7, 476
Movie, see Moa.
Mozambique,
423-5, 429


Mshengu she
Gunda, 447-8


Miiller, Fritz, 298-303
Mullerornis, 504
Mundubbera, 216
Munna Creek, 217
Murau, 33
Murphy, Robert Cushman, 245
Murray River, 191, 202, 204
Murray, W. H., 137
Murrumbridgee, 202, 204
Murut, 103
Mus exulans, 225
Musk-deer, 145
Musk-ox, 347
Muskrat, 303
Mustela nivalis, 408
Musters, Captain George, 272
Muztahl-Ata, Mount, 180
Mweru, Lake, 452-3, 455
Mylodon, 258, 260-70, 277-82
Myocastor coypu, 271
Myriobiblon, 88
Myrmecophaga jubata, 254
Y


Mystacina, 224


Naemorhedus, 145
Naga, 174
Nahuel, 269, 272-4
Nam-Noung, 101-2, 104
Namche Bazar, 163, 170, 172, 176
Nandi, 373, 380, 402-3, 399
Nandi
bear, 373-414;
appearance,
375-9,
387-90; encounters
with,
374-9,
384-5,
387-9; footprints, 377, 379, 385-6, 403,
410; gait, 375-7, Pie ies 392-2; identity,
382, 390-4145
d,
378-9,
383, 412;
native legends, 375, 3
378-81, 386; nomencla-
ture, local, 374-5, 380, 399; relics, 375, 414;
victims, 382-5


Narrandera, 203
Nasalis eda III
Natal, 3
Native heaende: value as evidence, 82-3, 357
Natu Pass, 137
Nature, 303
Naumann, 463, 468
Nautilus, pearly, 73
Ncomi, River, 63
Ndalawo, 415
Ndélé, 464-5
Ndjolé, 363


Nebesky-Wojkowitz, René von, 137, 174-5,


177
enemas gaan 479, 481
Nefilim, 156
Negritos, 89-92, 97, 10
sie be Rio (Patagonia),


Waking A., 268
Nelson ws.
Z.), 240


Nelson Examiner, 239-40
Nemu, 133
Neoceratodus forsteri, 76
Neomerts, 304
Neomylodon _ listat,
Grypotherium


Neomys fodiens, 303
Neopilina galathea, 73
Neo-tropical zone, 253-4
ik ome 129-30, 132, 142, 166-70, 175-7, 179-


I


Neuville, Henri, 345-6, 348
Nevill, Hugh, 94-8
New Caledonia, 224
New Guinea, 28-9, 89, 185-90, 197, 219, 224,
249-50, 431
New alebrices, 224, 249
Newman, Henry, 129
New Zealand, 221-44, 246-50
New Zealand *Magazine, 239
Ngahue, 236
Ngakoula-ngou, see Badigui.
N’Gobi, Lake, 363
a See 379
Niam-Niams, 103, 447
Nicaragua,
296,
311;
see
also
Gaceta
de
Nicara;


Nicholson, J ohn, 200
Nicolussi, Jakob, 34
Nicot, Jean, 278
Nigbve, 60
Niger, River, 359
Nigeria, 407
Nile, 441, 445-7, 449, 460, 470
Nilgiri
hills, 92, 97


Nishdda, 97
Nittaewo, 94-101, 104-6
Nizhni Kolymsk, 332
N’jabini, 3
Noack, oe 363
Noah, 332, 334
Nolde, Ilse von,
460-1, 474


Nordenskjéld, Erland, "266-7, 269
Nordenskjéld, Otto, 263, 267
Normanton, 214
Notornis, 221; hochstetteri, 243-4; mantelli,
242


Noulet, ~ 342
Novibos, 6
Nsanga, 450 469-70, 475-6
Nsui-fisi, 419-20
Ntarago 368-9, 399 n.
Ntem, River, 462
Niiesch, Dr, 422
Nuer, 445-6, 44
449, 454
Uy


Nullarbor Pisin, 206
Nunda, see Mngwa.
Nutons, 422
Nutria, 271
Nyala, mountain, 63
Nyalmo, 176-7
Nyasa, Lake, 425, 444
Nyasaland, 399-400
Nycticebus, §10
Nyima, 137; see also Pasang Nyima
Nzefu-loi, 454, 460, 467, 470, 472-4


Oakley, Kenneth P., 432 n.
Ob, Soviet ship, 27 n.
Obidos, 293-4


265, 272; (Brazil),


262-71, 278;
see also


552


INDEX


Obruchev, S., 180
Ochotona wollastoni, 145, 165, 167, 347
Ocydromus, 221
Odebrecht, Emil, 299
Odobaenus rosmarus, 334
Oeloe Seblat, 115
Offerman, P., 364
Ogilby, W., 40
Okapi, 56-9, 76, 358
Okapia johnstoni, 56-9, 76, 358
Oken, Lorenz, 200
Olitiau, 491-5
Ol-umaina, 444, 470
“Oncle Brun”, 322
Oostingh, 113-5, 120
Ophisaurus apodus, 35
Opisthocomus hoatzin, 75-6
Opossum, 76, 197; water-, see Yapock.
Orang boenian, 113; blanda, 1113; ekor, 1033


gadang,
157-8;
gugu
(=goegoeh),
1103
kubu (
= koeboe),
110;
Jletjo,
1 10, 125 ;
pendek
(=pandek),
106,
110-126;
utan


(=“‘man-of-the-woods ”), 90, 99n.,
III;
utang (=‘“‘ man in debt ”’), 111.


Orang-utan (ape), 90, 98, 102, 104, I10-6,
120, 122, 148-9, 153, 157, 160-3, 170, 172,
179, 307, 312, 322


Orange (N.S.W.), 214
Orbell, Geoffrey, 244
Orbigny, Alcide d’, 79
Orchardson, I. Q., 381
Orde-Brown, G. St. J., 368
Oreocyon, see Dasycyon.
Orinoco, River, 289, 307-8, 317
Oriscima, 295
Ornithopods, 193-4
Ornithorhynchus
paradoxus,


303
Oron, Lake, 204
Orycteropus,
76, 303,
389-92;
aethiopicus,
391; capensis, 391


Osbornictis piscivora, 64-5, 82 n.
Osteolaemus tetraspis, 459, 470
Ostiaks, 332, 350
Ostrich, 500-4
Othman, Sheikh, 94
Otter, 34, 271-5; see also Sea-otter.
uaka, River, 464-6


Oued el Dijerat, 58
Ouesso, 360
Oustalet, E., 52
Outes, F., 282
Ouwens, P. A., 61-2
Oviedo, G. F. de, 278
Owen, Sir Richard, 38, 41-2, 200, 202, 219,
225, 228-9, 231-3, 239, 242, 266


Owl-parrot, 221
;


Ox, eaten
by Sucuriju gigante,
292,
2943
Indian humped,
171;
Madagascar
wild,
511; South American, 277; see also Forest-
ox.


Oysters, 71


199-201,
215,


Paca, 254
Pacarana, 49-50
Padang, 113, II5
Padar, 62
Painan, 113
Palaeontology, limitations of, 74-5
Palaeopithecus, 512
Palaeorchestes, 209
Palaeotragus, 58
Palapteryx, 2403 ingens, 225
Palembang, I10, 117, 118 n., 121, 126
Palladius, Bishop, 91
Pallas, P. S., 336
Palli-Aike cave, 280 n.
Pamirs, 180
Pan paniscus, 63-43; troglodytes, 43, 63, 149,
307, 312, 430


Panawa Pattu, 94-5
Panda, 48; giant, 47-9, 65-6, 163
Pangboche, 163, 168-72, 181
Pangolin, 76, 261-2, 275, 281, 412
Panther, 469; melanism in, 420
Panthera (Uncia) uncia, 131, 134, 145
Pantholops, 145
Papagaios, Rio dos, 300
Paparoa Range, 240
Papio anubis, 398
Papuans, 89
Paraguay, 275, 308; Rio, 298, 302
Parana (province), 300; Rio, 273, 298, 301
Paranthropus crassidens,
154-5, 157, 162, 170,


178-9


Paré, Ambroise, 507
arikh, Navnit, 168


Paris Natural History Museum, 46, 173, 256,
270, 287, 316, 501, 503, 505


Parnassius, 145
Parra, Dr, 327
Pasang Nyima, 163-4
Pasir-Pengojaran, 124
Patagonia, 254, 260-77, 281-2
Patos, Rio de los, 282
Pattankar, P. V., 168
Pavlovsky, E. N., 180, 349
Pavon island, 265
Paz Colaga, A. da, 456
Pe de garrafa, 323-5
Peacock, Congo, 64
Pei Wen-Chung, Dr, 153
Pekapeka, 224, 247
Pekin, 45-7, 109°
Pekin ape-man, see Sinanthropus.
Pelobo, 323
Pelsart, Captain, 198
Penck, A., 344
Pengé, 448
Penha, Joao, 295
Perak, 106-7
Percival, A. Blayney, 366, 383, 387, 390, 393,
402-3, 405, 491


Perijaa, Sierra de, 309, 321, 327
Perret, R., §8
Peru, 284
Peter of Greece, Prince, 137-8, 165
Peter the Great, 333, 335, 338
Petit Larousse Illustré, Le, 341
Petrel, Bermuda, 245-6
Petter, Francis, 363, 365
Pfizenmayer, E. W., 339, 341
Phalut, 135-6
Philippines, 89, 105, 194, 196, 249
Philosophical Society of Australasia, 202
Phormium, 234
Photius, 88
Phrynocephalus, 145
Piaba, Rio, 294
Piapoco Indians, 292
Pichictago, 254
Pierce, Charlie (Aboriginal), 208
Pig, Malagasy wild, 511
Pika, 145, 165, 167, 347
Pilcomayo, 262
Pipers Creek, 214
Pitaud, Henri, 308
Pithecanthropus erectus, 100, 105-9, I14, 152,
179, 313-6, 4303 robustus, 105


Pithecophaga jefferyi, 53
Pitman, C. R. S., 369-70, 381, 387, 390, 394-
5» 397» 399, 444, 490


Piveteau, Jean, 206, 249
Platypus, 199-201, 249-50, 275, 303
Pliny the Elder, 87-8, 91, 93, 94, 97, 333>


74
PRopihecus, 104
Pocock, R. I., 144, 369, 398-401, 405-6, 420
Podokesaurus, 194
Poeloe Rimau, 118, 120


353


INDEX


Polack, J, S., 228-9, 233, 235
Poli, Francgois, 296-7
Poliakoff, I. S., 52
Pollard, J. R. T., 368, 370
Polo, Marco, 91, 103, II0, 125, 500, 502, 507
Porpoise, 304
Port Elizabeth, 435
Port Fairy, 202
Port Leven, 501
J


Portuguese East Africa, see Mozambique.
Potamochoerus larvatus, 5113; porcus, 60, 511
Potamogale velox, 469
Poverty Bay, 230-1
Powell-Cotton, 54
Praatzelwurm, see Tatzelwurm.
Prado Mendonga, Jr., Rui, 323
Pranavananda, Sri Swami, 165-6
Pratt, Ambrose, 206, 208
Pre-Dravidians, 92-3, 197
Presbytis, see Semnopithecus.
Preservation Inlet, 240
Prestosuchus chiniquensis, 308
Prichard, H. H., 281
Priodontes gigas, 254
Prohylobates, 104
Pronin, Alexander G., 180
Protopterus, 72, 76
Przewalski, N. M., 52
Pseudogorilla mayema, 63
Pseudots, 145
Pseudolestodon, 261
Pteranodon, 489
Pterodactyl, 485-90
Pterodroma cahow, 245
Pteronura brasiliensis, 275
Pteropus, 492
Pterosaurians, 487-90
Ptilonorhynchus, 216
Pudu, 253
Puff-adder, 444
Puma, 253, 265, 271, 274; 424
Punyabayra, 176-7, 179
Purchas, Samuel, 43
Putomayo, Rio, 292
Pygmies, 56, 88-90, 95, 97, 104, 113, 313,
358, 365, 424-9, 432;
hairy, see Agogwe;
Neolithic, 422


Pygmy species of animals, 359, 3723; see also
Anteater, Chimpanzee, Elephant, Gorilla,
Hippopotamus, Lion (spotted), Marmoset,
Rhinoceros, Siamang.


Python, 287, 443-6, 4675
reticulated, 287


Quatrefages de Bréau, J. L. A. de, 88


Rabah Ringbi, 447
Rabbits, legends of giant, 206, 208
Racophorus, 510
Rackshi bompo, 176-7
Racovitza,
Emile, 264


Raden Kasanredjo, 116-7, 122
Radermacher, J. C. M., 43
R.A.F. Mountaineering Association, 173
Raffles, Sir Stamford, 39
Railalomena, 506
Rainbow snake, r91
Raleigh, Sir Walter, 305, 306
Rangitukia, 231
Rapirrio, Rio, 285
Rat, 225; crested, 49
Ratel, 403-11; giant, 406-7; Indian, 409
Raven, Harry C., 436
Rawicz, Slavomir, 158-60, 176
Reclus, Elisée, 321
Redjang, 11
Reichell-Dolmatoff, G., 327
Reindeer, 342
Rembo, River, 63
Resolution Island, 242


diamond, 1913


Rhamphorhynchus, 488-90
Rhea, 253
Rhinoceros, black, 53-4, 360; pygmy, 359-
61; Sumatran forest, 361; two-horned, ror,
115; “water”, 453, 476, 478; white, 53-4,
360; woolly, 336, 344
Rhinoceros tichorhinus, 336, 344
Rhinopithecus roxellanae, 47, 140-3
Rhodesia, 419, 439, 441, 450, 452, 477, 487,


490
Rhodesia Herald, 439-40
Ribeiro, Jose, 10
Ricardo Franco
Hills, 30


Riwoche, 139
Robinson, J. T., 153-4
Roc, 500, parg
Roch, André, 137
Rochfort, John, 240
Roepit, 116
Rokan, 122-5; Rajah of, 124-5, 158
Rookmaker, O. J., 122, 124
Roosevelt, K. and T., 65
Roth, Santiago, 259, 269-71, 274, 276
Roth, W. E., 198
Rothschild, Lord, 219
Rotorua, Lake, 227
Row, 185-90
Ruanda, 380, 391, 399, 403, 424
Rucervus sc
urgki, 45


Ruppel, E., 40, 395
Rule (discoverer of moa bones), 228, 230
— (on koddoelo), 379


Russell, Gerald, 163, 166-7, 181, 462


Sabai, 380, 399
Sabrookoo, 380, 399
Sage, Dean, Jr., 66
St George (Queensland), 214-5
St Helena, 293
Sakai, 97, 103-4, 107; see also Hantu Sakat.
Sakalava, 501, 506, 513
Sakya, 139
Salado, Rio, 282
Salamander, 36
Saldanha Sobrino, Paulo, 325, 327
Sa Leitio Teixeira, A. I. de, 324-5
Salween, 134
Samar, 53
Samotherium, 58, 413
Sanderson, Ivan T., 209, 304, 414, 439, 462,
491-4


Sandford, 450 n.
Sandrart, Georges, 403-4, 406, 424
Sanga, River, 461-2
Sanghi Lama, 170
Sankuru, 64
San Rafael del Norte, 301
Santa Catarina, 299
Santa Cruz (province), 261, 272, 274, 276,
281; Rio, 265, 272


Santa Martha, Sierra de, 327
Sao Paulo, 300
Sapé, 293
Saricovienne, 275
Sassandra River, 428-9
Savage, Thomas S., 43-4
Scelidotherium, 261, 280


554


INDEX


Soe Ernst, 66, 130


mper, 395; 39
Schindler, 377
Schmerling, P. C., 342
Schomburgk, Hans, 60-1, 358-9, 363, 405,
439, 441, 450, 452, 455, 475-6, 482
Schouteden, Henri, 363-4
Schultz, Dr, 311
Schwartz, Ernst, 63
Schweitzer, Albert, 442
Schweizersbild, 422
Science, 165
Science News Letter, 313
Sciences et Avenir, 158
Sclater, P. L., 57, 214-15
Scorpion, 76
Scott, W. J., 215
Scougall, P. B., 217
Sea-elephant, 204-5
Sea-leopard, 205
Sea-lilies, 73
Sea-lions, 204-5
Seals, 27, 202-5
Sea-otter, 248-9
Sea-serpents, 304, 444; fresh-water, see Min-
hocGo and Sucuriju gigante.


Sebalik, 118
Secretary Island, 242
Sedapa (= sedabo),
110,
Orang pendek.


Seemann, Berthold, 234
Segregation, phenomenon of, 389
Seguéla, 428
Séhité, 429
Selenarctos thibetanus, 165-6, 170
Selous, F. C., 387
Semang, 89, 20s 97, 99 ND.» 107


17


II7-20;
see
also


Semnopithecus
entellus,
141-4,
168; entellus
achilles, 142; entellus ajax, 143; schistaceus,
136, I4I


Semu Geshi, Chief, 403
Senegal, River, 359
Sen Tensing, 127, 137-9, 142, 144, 164
Serology, 66, 124, 340-1
Serow, 145
Seychelle Islands, 505
Sganzin, Victor, 500
Shark, freshwater, 302
Sharp, George, 216


haw, George, 198-9


Sheldon, W. G., 66
Sheridan, B. G., 214-6
Sherpas, 127, 130-I, 133-4, 136-9, 144, 158,
162-4, 174, 176-7, 182


Shilluk, 446-7
Shipton, Eric, 127, 134, 137, 142-4, 146, 148,
176-7


Shivuverre, 375
Shoalhaven River, 204
Shrew, 76
Shukpa, see Sogpa.
Shumakhoff, Ossip, 337, 339
Siam, 45, 102-3
Siamang, 39, 99, 114-53 pygmy; 99
Siberia, 331-53
Sierra Leone, 405
Sieveking, G, de G., 107
Sikkim, 129-31, 135, 137, 159, 174, 176
Simbiti, 422-3
Simias concolor, 99
Simopithecus, 398
E


Sinanthropus pekinensis, 100, 105, 109, 314-5
Sindai, 126
Sioelak Deras, 115
Siren lacertina, 36
Sirgoit, 374-5
Sirotinin, N., 180
Sirrush, 480-3, 506


Stvatherium, 58
Skeat, W. W., 103-4
kink, 35
Slick, Tom, 175-7, 179
Sloth, giant, see Glossotherium, Grypotherium,


Lestodon,
Megatherium,
Mylodon,
Neo-
mylodon,
Pseudolestodon,
Scelido therium;
ground-,
possible
survival
of,
_ 261-4,


267-8, 275-83; three-toed, see Ai; two-
toed, see Unau.
Sloth-bear, Ceylon, 99-100
mbps
35
mallpox, 191, 193
Smilodon, 282
Smith, Floyd T., 66
Smith, J. L. B., 490
Smithsonian Institution, 434, 436-8
Smyth, A. J. M., 173
Smythe, Frank, 130, 133-6, 144
Snakes, mythical, see Rainbow Snake, Yero;
size, difficulty of judging, 287-8; smell, 286;
stretched skins, 287; voice, 445; see also
Anaconda, Python, Sucuriju gigante.
Snellgrove, David, 181
Snow-leopard, 131, 134, 145
Snowman, abominable, appearance, 128-30,
133, 137-9, 159-60, 163-4,
174, 178-803
area of distribution, 129, 142, 144-5, 176,
178-80;
encounters
with,
131-3,
137-9,
159-60,
163-4,
179-81; excrement,
167,
175; food, 165, 167, 175-6, 179; footprints,
127-8, 132, 134-8, 140, 142-9, 160, 166-77;
habitat, 175; hair, 168-72, 175-6; identity,
I3I-2, 135-8, 140-51, 158, 162, 168, 170,
178-9; intoxicated, 137-8; killed, 138, 181;
legends, 128, 134, 165, 177; nomenclature,
local, 128, 130, 164-6, 176; nomenclature,
scientific, 178; relics, 139, 158, 167, 1813
scalps, 167-723 size, 132, 137-9,
142-3,
159, 163, 174, 176; skin, 170; skull, shape of,
137, 139, 159-62, 170, 174-6, 178-9; teeth,
164, 171, 178; varieties, 176-75; voice, 133,
163, 175
Snow-monkey, see Langur, Roxellana’s snub-
nosed.
Snow-worm, 128
Sogpa, 130, 135
Solenodon paradoxus, 254, 510
Solis, Maria Eufemia, 327
Solomon Islands, 224
Somaliland, 51-2
Songo, see Badigut.
Sotik, 389, 405, 443
Soungei Klomboek, 115
Speke, J. H., 55
Speleology, 31
Sphenodon punctatus, 73, 225, 229
Spider-monkey, 310-6; marimonda, 317, 3273
mulatto, 316-7; woolly, 311
Spiders, 72
Spinifex hirsutus, 234
Spittel, R. L., 97
Sponges, 71
Springwurm, see Tatzelwurm.
Ssémbo River, 462
Stanley, H. M., 56, 59
Stanleyville, 64
:
“Stany,” see Chatteleux, Marquis de.
Statesman, Calcutta, 129, 137
Steere, Edward, 416-7
Stegodon, 153
Stegosaurus, 188, 190, 460
Steinman, A., 121
:
Stein zu Lausnitz, Freiherr von, 461-2
Stephens (on Jau), 446-7
Stevens, J. S., 235
Stevens, Leicester, 434-8, 441, 455
Stevenson, Emma Reh, 313
Steyn van Hensbroek, J. K. H. van, 61-2
Stirton, Ruben A., 207


395


INDEX


Stoat, 408
Stobart, Tom, 162, 169
Stollenwurm, see Tatzelwurm.
Stoneham, Charles T., 381-2, 389, 391, 400-1
Stone-marten, 408
Stonor, Charles, 163-9, tee
Strauss, William L., Jr., 16
Strength of animals, 384, nn
Strepsiceros buxtont, 633; imberbis, 50
Strickland, Hugh, 501-2
Stringops. 221
Stroganoff, 353
Struthiomimus, 193-4
Struys, Jean, 103
Su, 277-81
Succarath, 277-80
Sucuriju gigante, photographs, 296; reports,
292-7; weight, 296-8


Sudan,
441, 471
Sumatra, 39, 103, oe 108-26, 157, 194, 196-7
Sumbawa, Rajah of, 61-2
Sun-bear, Malayan, 121-3, 404
Surtees, F. R., 501
Surucucu, 286
Sushkin, P., 180
Swahili wey 420; see also Kiswahili, Wa-


Swan River, 202
Swartkrans, 154; see also Paranthropus.
Switzerland, 422
Symbiosis, 424, 432-3
Symphalai
(Brachytanites)
syndactylus, 39, 99, 114-5


Swinhoe, Robert, 50
Sydney Morning Herald, 214
Szechwan, 44, 47


Rlossi,
993


Taba-Pingin, 121
Tabbert von Strahlenberg, P. J., 335
Tahr, 145
Taiga, 349-50


8s, men with, 88, 91-2, 101-3, ITO


Taimyr
Peninsula, 339, 349, 353


Takahe, 221, 241-4
Takaka, 239
Takin, 4475
:
Tamandua Bandeira, 318
Tammankaduwa, 94, 97
Tanacht, see Thanacth.
Tana River, 378-9
Tanganyika, 379, 401, 415-9, 422-5, 42954743
Lake, 425, 451, 453


Tantanoola, 215
Tantewonsta: 214
Tapalqué, 282
cist 76, 153, 253, 266, 473; white-backed,
3 ee’)


Tapiros, 89
Tapirus indicus, 38-9
Taranaki, 230
Tarantula, 254
Tarepo, 230
Tarpan, 52
Tarra, River, 309
Tarsier, spectral, 76, 194-7, 393
Tarsius
bancarus,
1943;
spectrum,
syrichta, 19


Tarvalho, Paul, 295
Tasman, A. J., "212, 232
Tasmania, 202, 204
aay: 32-6
Taungs, 4
Taylor, Rev. Richard, 230-1, 239
Te Anau, Lake,
241-4


Teeth, Gigantopithecus, 151-3; Paranthropus,
154; snowman, 164


Teh, 165; see also Yeh-teh, Mi-teh.
Tehuelche Indians, 254, 258, 261-5, 268-72,
274-7, 280-2


Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 153


194-75


2
313
Recta Perkins
» E. A., 368-9, 399 n.
Tendagaru, 490
Tenrec, 510
benny Norkey, 137, 139; father of, 139, 164,


Tien del soe 263
Tervueren, ore 363-4
Testudo grandidteri, 505
Thaballa, 194
u, 164
Thanacth, 507-8
Theophrastes, 333
Theropithecus gelada, 40, 395, 397
Thévet, et 278-81, 507 n., 508
Thiébaud, C.
E., 457
Thomas, Oldfield, 52, 59
Thompson Sound, 243
Three-Mile Scrub, 214
Thiinberg, C. P., 400
Thyangboche, 137-8, 144, 158, 170
Thylacine, 212-3, 219
Thylacinus cynocephalus, 212-3, 219
Thylacoleo, 218
Thylacosmilus, 218
Tiberias, Lake, 204
Tibet, 44, 65, 103, 127-30, ao 138-9,
I4I-2, 159, 165, 168, 174, 181, 424
Tiger-cat, marsupial, 212-9
Tiglath-Pileser I, 482 n.
Tigre de agua, 265, 272-4; see also Iemisch.
Tiliqua rugosa, 3 see
Tilman, H. W.,
Times, The onion), 136, 140, 325, 4355


438
Tobacc 278
Tobas Indians, 262
Tok, 130
Tokandia, 513
Tokatongotra, 515
Tomba-Mayi, 363
Tombazi, N. A., 130
Tongues arated out of cattle, 308
Too, 405
Toplin, Rev. George, 203
Tosell O. M., 3.
Torquay Na’
istory Society, 80


Tortoise, 73; Australian long-necked, 200;
giant, 479, 505-6
Totemism, 103, 191, 201
Toulépleu, 42
Toulouse, 426
Toulson, espe 376, 392; 397 N., 402, 404, 410
Tourn
Pecans G
217


Tournouér, Peis 270-1, 275
Trachypithecus, 12
Trails, analysis of, 146-73
3 interpretation of,
351, 4613 mouse’ 8, 1473 Otter’s, 147; see
also Footprints.


Transvaal, 386, 402, 431
Transvaal Museum, 153
Tratratratra, 507-8, 512
pis see Teh.
remarctos sige eke 307, 328


Trent, Michael, 366
Cerda = Taltedos.
riceratops, 188, 190, 435-6,
438


Trinil, 109
:
Clie Bay, 198
Troll
Trombetas, Rio, 295
Trouessart, E. L., 359, 363
Troughton, E, Le G., 217-8
Tschernezky, Wladimir, 158
Tschudi, Friedrich von, 32
Tsomgomby, 5056 513
Tsultung Zangbu, 139
Tuatara, 73-4, 225, 229, 478
Tucandera, 254


556


INDEX


Tuckerbil swamp, 203
Tully River, 216
Tulp, Nikolaas, 90
Tunatpan, 203
Tun
348
Tung-Ting, Lake, 62
Tungus,
334, 337
Turner,
Samuel, 103
Turtle, 73, 76
Twain, Mark, 257 n.
Tyihumbwe, River, 456-8
Tyipukungu, 457-8
Tyson, Edward, 430
Tzoneka, see Tehuelche.


Uakari, 318-9
Uam, River, 463
Uasin Gishu, 374, 376, 396, 410
UVatuma, Rio, 325
Ubangi River, 361, 461, 474
Ubangi-Shari, 407, 463-7, 470, 476
pee
leet
ganda, 407, A12s 415; 442, 445, 448
Une Reginald, 215
Ui-go, see Mi-go.
Ultima Esperanza, see Last Hope Inlet.
Unau, 258
Uncertainty, Principle of, 220
Upemba, Lake, 454
Urbain, A., 63, 67-8, I5I
Ursus arctos crowtheri, 373; arctos isabellinus,
134-6,
144-6,
160,
164-6,
1683;
arctos
pruinosus, 166; (Helarctos) malayanus, 121-3,
4043 horribilis, 533 middendorffi, 53


Urubi, Rio, 325
Uruguay, 275, 282, 301; Rio, 301
Urupani Puhara, 233
Urville, Dumont d’, 505
Ussure, 422-3
Uva, 95
Uva, Rio, 292


Vaal, 429
Valley of Lagoons, 215
Vallois, H. V., 259 n.
Vampyrus, 494
Vanara, 99 n.
Varanus komodoensis, 62, 2123 priscus, 212
Vasconcellos, S. de, 306
Vasitri, 307-8
Vaufrey, Raymond, 349
Veddahs, 91-9, 105, 120
Venezuela, 29-30, 307, 309, 318, 321
Vermeersch, Maurice, 454-5
Verreaux, Jules, 500
500


Verrill, A. Hyatt, 82, 286-9, 297, 383
Vetulus silenus, 92-3, 94 Nn.
Victor, Paul-Emile, 27
Victoria, Lake, 59, 442-4, 447, 449
Viedma, Antonio de, 274
Vilyui, River, 336
Viper, horned, 302, 444, 469
Vittoz, R., 67
Vladivostok, 350
Voles, Mamie 510
Voltaire, F. M. A. de, 305-6
Vorompatra, 500, ‘503-4
Vultur gryphus, 253


Waboni, 380
Waddell, LA 127
Wagga Wagga, 203
Wahlfeldt, 39
Waiapu, 229-31
Waikouaiti, River, 232
Waimate, 236
Waingongoro, 242
Waitoreke, 246-50
Wallace Line, 197


Walrus, 334-5
Wals, H. de, 123
Wambutti, 56
Wanderoo, 92-3, 94 n.
Wa-Pokomo, 378-9, 396-7
Ward, Michael, 127
Ward, Rowland, 369
Wa-Swahili, 374, 380, 392, 410
Water-chevrotain, 40, 35
Water-civet, 64-5, 82 n.
Water-deer, Chinese, 51
““Water-lion,” see Coje ya menia, Dilali.
Water-shrew, 303; giant, 469
Watussi, 391
Wa-Ushi, 452-3
Wavrin, wwe de, 289, 292, 298, 317
Wayland, E.
G., 412, 445
Wee-waa, 203
Weidenreich, Franz, 152-3, 155, 157
Weigold, H., 65
Weinert, H., 155
Weinman, Aubrey, 97 n.
Weka, 221, 241
Welch, F. D., 405-6
Wellington (N.S.W.), 214
Wellington (N.Z.), 235-6
Wels, 471
Welwitschia mirabilis, 358
Wembare, 422, 447
Werewolves, 407
Westenek, L. C., 113-5
Whai-iti Mountains, 231
Sl sr Sere 231


> re
whe l fe
Whitehead, fa ery, 53
Whitley, Gilbert, 193, 202, 204-5
Wiens, A. L., 66
“Wild men” “of Nam-Noung, I01, 104-5
Wilfarth, Martin, 478
Williams, Geoffrey, 374-5, 391-3, 397, 410
Williams, K. R., 412
Williams, Rev. William, 229-33, 239
Wiman, C., 490, 495
Winans, Walter, 437, 441
Witch-doctors, 407
Witwatersrand, 429
Wolf, Andean, 68-9; grey,
128, I4I,
1453
maned
or
pampas,
68-9;
Tasmanian
pouched, see Thylacine.


Wollunqua, 191
Wolochowitz, pie 336
Wolverine, 347, 408
Wombat, 206
Wood, W. W., 143-
“Wood-demon,” Philippine,
Yara-ma-yha-who.


Woodward, Sir Arthur Smith, 264-5, 269
Worm-lizard, Mexican, 35
Wrangel Island, 339
Wyman, Jeffries, 43-4
Wyss-Dunant, E., 137-8


196;
see
also


Xenarthra, 254
Xélhut, 331


Yaguaro, 273-4
Yaida Lake, 379
Yak, 128, 145, 171, 175
Yakuts, 332, 338, 350
Yakutsk, 333
Yangtze-kiang, 62, 153
Yamba, 211
Yapock, 275
Yara-ma-yha-who, 194-8
Ybitimi, 308
Yeh-teh (=yeti), 130, 164, 166, 177
Yem’ chen, 272, see also Iemisch.
Yermak Timofeyevitch, 353
Yero, 193


nw


Yeti, see Snowman, abominable.
Yoksun, 131
York Peninsula, 214, 217, 219
Yorongas, 284
Young, J. Z., 487
Young, Quentin, 66
Young, Robert, 452
Yourt Technik, 27 n.
Ypanema, Rio, 300-1
Yucatan, 313
Yukaghir, 331-2, 334
Yunnan, 47


Zalophus, 204
Zambezi River, 401, 424, 441, 455, 470


INDEX


Zebra,
Burchell’s,
51;
Grévy’s,
51,
$25
mountain, 51


Coreg 8°: ioe,
Zima,
Reymondo, 294—


Zoos, Amsterdam
erdien (hatle 114; Antwerp, 64,
68n.,
310,
362;
Bronx,
64;
Chicago
(Brooksfield), 66; Dublin, 42; Hamburg,
23; 50, 61, 292; London, 45, 50, 143-4, 163,
328» 495; Melbourne, 204; Munich, 52;


ew
York, 49, 362, 365; Paris (Jardin des
Plantes,
52, Vincennes, 63-4, 67); Prague,
52; Rio de Janeiro, 286; Whipsnade, 52


Zee obengs 274,
276


Zuckerman, Sir
Solly, 433


Zulus, 424


cor?
=


THE AUTHOR


with his woolly monkey Belinda


Bernard Heuvelmans was born in Le Havre in 1916 of
Belgian parents in exile. From the first he was fascinated
by animals and has kept all sorts of them, being now
particularly devoted to monkeys. At school he shocked
his Jesuit teachers by an unholy interest in evolution
and jazz, and at the Université Libre of Brussels he
received a doctorate of zoology with a thesis on the
aardvark’s dentition (hitherto thought to be unclassi-
fiable) as well as winning first prize for small bands at
an International Congress of Amateur Jazz. He had
no sooner been called up for military service in Belgium
than war broke out. Captured by the Germans he
escaped four times before he was able to eke out a living
as a professional jazz singer until he was given the
chance of writing a regular column on the history of
scientific humanism.
This entailed
a study of all
branches of science, in the spirit of the humanist
thinkers of the Renaissance, for he was already con-
vinced that many problems could not be solved by a
single scientific method. Although the Germans were
so offended by his writings that they arrested him, the
Belgians did likewise after the Liberation because he had
written at all. Despite this discouragement he continued
to publish articles on all kinds of scientific matters until
he was able to migrate to Paris, where he became more
and more interested in the subject of unknown animals.
He is at present working on a book about unknown
marine animals, the first volume of which has recently
been published in France. But the subject which has
always interested him most is that of man’s origin,
“most of the accepted theories about which are based
on false premises.” He is married to Monique Watteau,
who drew the delightful pictures in this book, and who
gave up a promising career on the stage to prove her-
self a talented and original novelist.


HILL anp WANG, Inc.
104 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK II


Publishers of Dramabooks


With an Introduction by
GERALD DURRELL


BERNARD HEUVELMANS


