In Three Parts ,
Spiritual, Celeſtial, and Elempntal :

of Aftromancy i in the TeleſmaticatScul-
pture of the Per SUB NGRN eyptic

the Scars with the Geniz, Idea ys Figures of
Geomancy,upon cheGamabes,&e. Towhich
is added the Reſolution of all manner of Que-
ſtions, Paſt, and to, Come.
The Knowlelige of the Roſte Crucien Phy (ici,
and the miraculous ſecrets in Nature, which
haye performed incredible, . extraordinary things ; All
verified by a praQtical Exaniinarion of Principics
in the great World; and fitted to'

mean Capacities.


gn V7” =o —

q
By John —_ Gent. verde, A Servant of

Al. Ar. 1ODY& mubx NOD! Rey
| 1;e, Let no man touch this Book, bu be that is Holy.
"RENT Audi Ignis vocem. Zo. Orac. |
b* eraderſtand this a4. be bapyy. __

Londen, Printed by T. M "for Heyn#y Brome at the Gue | in ie-laxe,

and for Tho, _ at the Lambe at the Eaſt end of

Et Sr. Pauls Church, 1 6 6 4.

—__—

s , > I id da Rn” eng was ns.
— 4 +. = Y x > = o by

The Myſterioys Ve the Charzfters of

Containing the Occult Powers of the Angelo}

| God and Secretary of Nature. |


T be Highborn | Prince, n

| THE RIGHT 1
Honourable, moſt Noble and valine, 71

GEORGE FVILLIERS,

Duke, Marqueſle and Earle of Bucking- Ny:

þ
bam, Eacle of C oventry, Barron W baddox j |
of Fhaddos., and Lord Roſs of HewlakeiKnighe

ofthe moſt noble Order of the Garter,one

of His Majeſties moſt honorable Privy Coun-
ſel, and Lord Leivtenane of the Weſt-Ri-
ding of the County of Tork,and of the

Ciry and County of the Ciry and
_ Ainſy f TORKE:

 Myy it pleaſe your Grate,
mezoa HE Wiſdome and Leaming A
$ of the Roſte Crucians hath
| been much recommended
SSD. uno us by Ancient Writers,
a not.-without nd caule ; confider-
ing that they have delivered Arts,
and Liberal Sciences to the Woild as a
3

rile PL, 5 Io. T 239":

[5 n n may — by the rin of -
he Wien of the Eaft, and all the
Fhiloſopbers that ever were .* Buttime
Fo Arch conſumeth all chings, hath be-
f Fe ft us of the Knovgedge of ſuch wiſ=
dome ; and here is but the" fragments
| Sd ſcattered: peices of theſe Arts,
| which the | underwits: of ne RM
$ cal. pew finding, pretend 3
| gaclling by them | ſomething.

*come. Now the Roſie Crucians li
F carctull to. preſerve all goodly and
4m thmgs, have by the means of this
iſcourle touching Beata Pulchra, and

þ Ex genius ' Theodidalins , repaired ,
SSmaintained and kept entire the firſt
Part of The Temple of Wiſdome, which
| they are' not' content 'to fer: down li-.
erally, and there end';/ but have ad-
| thereto two Parts more, .beau-
- tified: with '"pratieal/ 'Interpretations
aud rare Experiments; One whereof was
; in your ſelf, #bich yolf bave canſe
| F, for it preferycd your Life,
| lies Sante : Goodman endeavoured your
death,

| The Epiſtle Dedicatory.
| death. And lome lince to yourknowledg
andthe honour of Art you have found
| txue, The Preface may ſeem fabu-
# lous to common Readers , but there
the Roſre Crucians have diſcovered an
infinite number of Secrets Spiritual,
Cxleftial and Elemental. In the firſt
. they have ſhewed the Reaſon why they
have thus darkly covered the 'Fem-_
| ple, and enfolded theic Divinity, which
done, they teach the knowledge of God
and his Angels, with the vanity of Dee
W aronogrepbers. And then in the ſecond, FM
FF they decyphec the particulars, relating. Wages
i according to the bare letter, which is *
W in the ſecond part of this Temple, In
"the third is made plain , the Roſte Cru-
cias myſteries to prattiſe by a ſort of
Teleſmatical Figures , 'Idea's, Genii an!
the Rales of the World, of their Tem
Bl ple>, Sepulchers and Sacrifices ; aſter-
MK wards they ſpeak of Angels, Beata Pul-
All <bre, Eugenine TheoadidaSins and Hyle
[\ i the number of them ;. After this _
al A4 5

- —

|

The Epiſtle Dedicatory.

1 [heomagtcal expoſition 3 by Engenins
TheodidaGius they mean all the power
of moiſture whatſoever; by Hyle, the
Spirit of the cold and dry ck; and
by Beata Pulchra that Nature which
verk and governeth che world;
then they fit the Soul of the world
to the Cours of the Moon, as ſhe
groweth, and decrealerh, to the eb-
ng and flowing of the Sea, make-
ing a Mixture and Harmony of all
_ things, and firſt they diſpute as touch» F
Ing the Principles and beginnings of
= all things ; and alledge the author.
= IJ tics of the Ancient Magitians and Pb:-
loſophers , which done , they enter
into the paths of Engenine, Beata, and
Hyle, reterring and reducing all i mo
the knowledge of the Occult ver- }
'. tues of the Angels of Aſtromancy }
upon the Teleſmatica! Sculpture of
the Perſians and Egyptians; the ſecret |
power of Geomancy with the Cha- &
ra Gers ol the Stars upon Gamahe's wy
cue

bj, Ot |

EG eek ak AS AS Cowond . 3: fins bad £3 Te

ws

" The Epiſtle Deatcatory.

the knowledge ot Phylick, z. e. matter,
\ forme, the Idea of Generation and Cor-
ruption. And now laſtly they have
diſcovered their Wiſdome and hidden
Myſteries, with the conſideration of
Filins Solis &» Filia Lune Cleſtis,
They condemn Atheiſme and vaine
Religions, and follow the brighrnels
and Light of Gods words, in the re-
al Primitive truth thereof; and ro con -
clude, for your ſake this Book was
' Publiſhed, and wee eſteem our elf

doubly happy ; having been already
long =_—_ ſo, 1n 'being called

April 2.4" | |
$4 Tour moſt Humble, and

Obedient Servant,

Joun HErYpox:

008 Os om gs a= an_ we > Sree cn -

EEE EEE
The Preface.

OD Governing all ahove and below; It came
to paſſe his power was reſiſted, and Ophio-
neus with his party, gathered themſelves
fogether to make Warr againſt the Immate-
rial Being ; But the pint was ſoon diſcovered,
and they were caſt down from light imto the Priſon of dark-
weſt, as you may read in The Jdea ofthe Law, and their
bodies became a Chaos, neither fruitfull nor profitable z
Now God being mercifull, bebeld this rude darkyeſl, and
their light diſcovered it ſelf upon the moiſture aud gave
genital Salt to the Baiſemick part of theſe Angels which
was by divine counſell made and called Man, into whoſe
bodies the ſpirits of theſe Angels ( which was the breadth of
life) are to incorporate or inhabit during the time

pointed by God, which is until{ they all have paſſed the
afflitions of humane Nature , and then we may all ex-
pet? to injoy God' in bi Bliſſe; Of theſe things we bave
diſcourſed largely in our firſt and ſecond Books of The
' Harmony of the World, and therefore we ſhallſay us
more in this placeof theſe matters, becauſe men that are
wiſe, or have any wit in them, ought by prayer t6 crave
«l good things as the hand of God : but that which we

moſt.

| The Preface. ;

Moji wiſh tor, and defire to obtain by this means, is the very
knowleds of things, ſo farr forth, as it is lawfull for meu
tobave : for that there is no gift either greater for men to
receive, or more magnifical and beſeeming God to give ,
than the knowledg of the truth : For God beftoweth upon
wen all things elſe whereof they ſtand in need, but this

he reſerveth to himſelf, and keepeth for his own uſe. Neither
is the godhead and divine power in this regard counted hape
xy and bleſſed, becauſe it poſſeſſeth a great quantity of Gold
cr ſilver, nor puiſſant in reſpe@ of thunder and lighttling,
but for prudence and wiſdome. And verily of all thoſe
things which Eugenius Theodida@tus hath well deliver-
ed, this ſimply is the beſt and moſt elegant ſpeech, when as
- touching Hiſmael and Neptune, be ſaith thus :

The ſelf ſame parents they both had,
one native foile them bred,
Bute Fepiter the elder was,

' © and hath the wiſer head.
. whereby be affrmeth, that the preheminence and rule of
Hiſmar!, berng ths elder, was more venerable, ſacred
an1 fuller of Majefly, for his knowledg and wiſdome.
AnA »f this opinion aſſure you am I, that the beatitude
and feliCity of eternal life, which ſupiter enJoyeth, COM
filteth herem, that be is ignorant of nothing that is done : as -
al", that immortality if it be deſpoiled of the knowledg
an4 intelligence of all things that be, and are done, is
not life indeed, but bare time And therefore we may very
w ll ſay, that the deſire of Deity and Divinity is all one
with the love of truth, and eſpecially of that truth which
crrcerneth the nature 0 the gods; the fludy whereof, and
the ſearching after ſuch ſtience, is as it were a profeſſion
anl1 entraxce into religion, yea, and a work, more holy than
is the vow or oblization of all the thaftity and purity in the
world, or than the Cloyjier or. ſaninary of any Temple
whatſeerer ; right acceptable alſo is this goddeſſes whoa
ag on

ee

———_——

m—_—_
PEE

* —

The Preface.

you ſerve, confidering that ſhe is moſt wiſe and full of know-
ledp, according as the very derivation of her name doth int-
Ply, that 5kill and cunning appertameth unto her eore
than to any other': For Beata is my Mifiris; 'read Fhe
Harmony ofthe world ; /ike as Typhon alſo the very
adverſary and enemy oppoſite unto this goddefi, as one
puffed up and ſwollen by his ignorance and error,d:ſſipating,
defacing, and blotting out the ſacred word and Doftrine,
which this goddeſſi colleeth, compoſeth, and delivereth un-
to thoſe who are initiated and profeſſed in this divine reli-
 gion,by a continual preciſe obſervance of a ſober and holy
life, in abſtaining from many meats, in depriving them-
ſelves ef all fleſhly pleaſures, for to repreſſe luſt and in-
temperance; and in being acquainted leng befcre to abide
and endure within Temples and Churches, hard and

painfull ine gnd fuer unto God : of all which abſti-

nences, paines,and ſufferances,the end is the knowledg of that |
firft prince and lord, nho 3s apprehended onely by intelii=
gence and underflanding, whim the goddeſſe exhorterh to
ſearch and ſeek after, as Converſing and companying her.
And verily , the name of her Temple, doth manifeſtly pro»
miſe an intelligence or knowledg of that which is, for a fair
Crchard it is Called , which is as much as to ſay, Importing *
the knowledg of that which is iz The Temple of Wiſ-
dome, siovpeyoy 70 oy, for that, if we enter into the ſacred
place and hily religion of this goddeſs, with reaſon and
devotion, as we ought 10 doe, we ſhall attaine to the under-
ftanding of all things whatſoever. ' Moreover, many have
written, . that ſhe isthe Daughter of Mercury , ethers of
Prometheus, but Mr. Slade was her natural Father of ...
which one #« reputed the Author of Wiſdeme and Providence;
another, namely Mercury, the inventor of Grammar and
Mnuf.ch. The third a Secretary of Nature; and hereupon it
7s, that in the City of Sidmouth,, .they call the former of
theMuſes, Juſtice, as being wiſdome her ſelf, (accerding
, as

« ___
" _ COSTS .
4s : fs 7 Fea a FP
- my
” _ LE
. « ”

—_——
A——o——_—

1 he Preface.

45 beth clfwbere beon ſaid) and " ſhewing divine things to

them who are jufily ſurnemed Hierophori,and Hieroftali,
that is to ſay, religious, and wearing the bebits of bolineſſe
and religion. And there be the Rohie Crucians that cer-
in their mind, and keep" encloſed as within a box or Cas-
hee, the holy 'yirine of , pure and cleanſed from all ſu-
ferftition and affefied curioſity : who alſo of that opinion
which is beld of the gods, declare ſore things which are ob-
ſcure and dark , others alſo which be cleere and lightſome ;;
likg as be thoſe, which are reported as touching their boly
and religious babit. Aud therefore whereas the religious
Priefts of the Roſie Crols, after they be dead, ave thus
Clad with theſe boly babiliments; it 1s a marke and ſign
witneſſing unto us, that this ſacred dofirine is with them,
end that they be departed out of this world into another, and
Carry nothing with thews but it : for neither to wear a long
beard,nor to put on afrize rugg and courſe gabardin, makes
« Philiopher; no more doth the Surplice and linnen veft-
, ent or ſhaving, 4 Rofie Crucian Prieſt. 'But be indeed
s4 Prieſt of Roſie Croſſe, who after he hath ſeen ud
received by law and Chſicome, thoſe things which are ſhewed
end prafiiſed in the religious ceremonies about the Rofig
Crols,. God ſearcheth and diligently enquireth, ty the
means of this holy dofirine, aud diſcourſe of reaſon, into the
truth of the ſaid ceremonies, For very few there be, who #-
nwng them, nnderſt.nd and know the Cauſe of this Ce
 Femony,which is of all cther the ſmalleſt, and yet moſt com-

_ monly obſerved; namely, why the Roſie Crucian Priefts
ſhave their beads, dd wear mo bair uyoy them; a» alſe
Wherefore they go inveſtments of Linen, and ſome of them

' therg be, who Care not at all for anyhyowledg. of ſich wat -
fers : yet others ſay, they forbear to put on _ any garments of
wool, like as they do to eat the fleſhof nfs II

he ſai wool,upotta reverence thiffbexr nnts them : ſemble=.

{ #:

-: —_—

_ - # of a . TINY Q Fe »

"=M El . * hs . .

> a- Gy, f Can oe haven M1

IE - » * = :

"jk S # a% f \ Lo F MR 5

2&1 5 —Y ; {

7 * k ks þ. I - p #. < >
Rs bs Et” 7's ; GETS EONS Er OHE OP ny 50 br; LAT rn 8... LS: 3 ED." w G W620; fÞ ME 45 - 3
4-300 fs arks a Ne "> 4 , fea Ss Py 7” 7 ts ou ag een $3 nt Cl PEI _ * po 4 5g 4. o WA 2 K m_

”
> 36)
oY

— ISLES LHAAATRY

_ —

i ſaith) which is

7 and ſorrow: likewiſe that they wear $

be

. & Wa tel >. . ra, Wark < & ps ;
—_— . a
£ Gt . gn er EIT
Le. >
| Ce : ſ ace

urplices and veftments
of linuen, in regard of the colour that the flower of line or
flex beareth, which reſembleth properly tht celeſtial azure
shje that environeth the whole world, But toſay 6 trath,.
there is but one Cauſe indeed of all : for la:;{:l it is not for
« max who is pure and clean, totouch any 1...;.; (asPlaco

mpure and unclean. Now it is well
knows , that all the ſuper fluities and excremonts of ony food
and nonriſhment, be foul and impure, and of ſuchbe ex-
gendred aud grow, woell, hair, ſhagge and nailes: and
therefore & meer ridiculous muckery it were, if when in
their expiatory ſanUifications and divine ſervices, they caft
off therr hazr, being ſhaven «and made ſmooth all their bodies
over, they ſhould then be clad and arrayed with the

fluons excrements of beaſi Ss: forwe muſt think that ol

dus the Poet when be writeth thus,

At feaſt of gods and ſacred merriment,

Take heed with kn'fe thy nails thou donot pairs
To cur} fay, that dry dead excrement, -
From lively fleth of fingers five, beware:

teacbeth us , that we ought firſt tobe cleanſed and purified,
end Feflival tiolidayes, and not at the wery

= time of celebration and perferming of holy rites and divine

ſervice, to uſe ſuch clenſing aud ridding away of ſuperfluous
excrements. _ Now the berb Line groweth out of the earth

; which is "ame 1-5.9% gon forth « fruit goed tobe exten, &

furniſbeth us wherewith tomakg « (imple, plain, and flen-

| der veſiment, which fitteth light upon bis barkthat weareth

»
7 #

on ,
mae y
$628

 Crucian Priefis ſo wnech at hor the nature and g

it, is meat for all ſeaſons of the year ;, and of all others, ( is
men ſay) leaſt breedeth lice or verminez Now theſe Rofic

of all ſuper fluities and excrement}, that they mot only refuſ® .
Je 641 woſt part of pulſe, axd of fleſ-mate, Mutton and

EY ODS a”
« The Preface.
_ emcee — CC
Porke, -for- that (ſheep and ſwine breed much excrement,
bat alſo ufo thetr Hates of ſanOifientiont and expiatore
folemmities, they will not allow any $aBt to be eatin with
their :viands'; | ming many othet pilots, becuuſe it i.
whetteth the appreite, and giutth an' edge to Ry WF -
provicking 1s to eate and drink, mere liberally : for to fuy -
* 'Ariſtagorae did; that Salt was by them repitted us
| lean, becauſe it is congealed and grown berd; m
little animals of living Creatures , which were | Caugh
within it, diewithall, is a very foolerie. Furtherinore, |
it is ſaid, As yptian priefls have & certain pit or well
apars, out of which they water their Bull or Beef Avis ,
and" bevery preciſe tn any*wiſe, not v let bits drinks of
Nitus, ro for that they think the water of that river
wncleane, in rexard of the crocodiles' which are mm it, as MP
ſome be of opinion ( for contrayjwiſe,” there is nothing "#0 .
much honed amonty the A ryptians as the river Nilus ).
but it ſcemith that the water of Nilus doth fatter |
eveceeding muth,and breeds fleth querfaſt, and they would
not in any caſe that their Apis ſhould be fat, or them-.
ſelves eroſfe and off pulent : bat that © their ſouls might be
#1 with lizht, nimble, and delicate bodies ; ſo as
the divine part in them- ſhould not be oppreſſed or weighed
dow! by h* force and ponderofitie of that which is
mortal. It Goſhen, #boſe whs ſerve and minijter unts_
th-ir God, 1-ver bring wine into the Temple as thinking
z# not convenient in the day time to drinke in the fight b
thir rd and King : otherwiſe the friefts drinks thete-
of ,* biit ſparingly : and beſides mayy pargations and
expintions they have, wherein they abſt aitte wholly from
wine 3 and during thoſe dais, they give themſelves wholly
to their ſtudjie? and meditations, learning and teachi n,
bily things : even thair very Kings . are mt allowed t_
drinke wine their fill,” but are flintzd'to the gage of +
certzine meaſure, dfcording as it it- preferibed in thei ©

"V

_—_ , # % Ts
E. BY "= x 4
: * ut > "1
_ by a : - de.
on % £ F
. G RS .
5 " «
S "a"
o 'u hs . eg . B
. » *
+*
£

s and
Enzz

, outian ris
gm thus math, Arot Py: Prins the. 7 book,
of bis Geographie. As converning - fiſhes of the, ſea, they

ſ. doe not pm. thew | nw all. ms

PR for it ſpould Fr that it is hy whar time as *
NG ws pom to. flow 3 and therefore the ſaid fiſh-by his
| difieth. the rifoeg. and. inumd tio: of . Nilus,
phere they exceeding. jojous, - bolding him. for a cer-.
Yaine and jure meſſmmger. [But the priefts abſtain from all
6s in general; dnd whereas thpon the ninth. day of the
7 woneth, all other inhahitants of the "Holy I flaxd or
mnvifible > Moynt dine »: feede upon + a certain broiled or ,
poſſes fiſh before their deres ; the. priefis in na wiſe taſte
dereof ; mary they. burne fiſp's. before the g ates of their_
Wſes wean 1wo:reaſors: they. bave.: "the one boly, fine
A os which: 1 will deliver hereafter :. as that”
5a >erd; reeth wery well to the ſacred diſcour-,
#45 TOCRT Hig Eagents ys «+4 the other latate

*.

. *
ſ” PX ha
bo wt , $I =» 2 . b IE M5” [Rs *s 8 "ca * as of : + -

7b es:
ET” 2 ; ?
_ - >
ew:
Cm — _
_
< «

they break, out into kinds of leprofie or arie Aſo

- -
oY

| Saas Hed iti a
The preface.

and common, repreſented by the fiſh, which #s none of
the viands that be neceſſary, rare and exquiſite, according
as Homer beareth witneſs' . when be brings #ot in the
Phzcians, delicate men and loving to feed daintily, nor
the Ithacelians 7anders, tbeat fiſh at their feaſts ; mo
nor the mates and fellow travellers with Ulyfles, during
the time of their long navigation and volage by ſea, before
they were brought to extreame neceſſity. To be briefe, the
very ſea it felf they think, to be produced a part by fire
without the bounds and limits of nature, as being 10 portion
nor element of the world, but a firange excrement, 4
corrupt ſuperfluity and unkind maladie : For nothing
abſurd and againſt reaſon , nothing fabulous and ſuper- '
ftitions, ( as ſome untruly thinke ) was inſerted or ſerved
as a ſacred figne in their boly ceremonies, but. they were
all markes grounded upon cauſes and reaſons morall, and

. the ſame profitable for this life, or elſe not without ſonce bi-

ftorical or natural elegancy, As for example \, that

which is ſaid of the Oinion ; for that Sol the foſter fatber
of Beata, fell into the river of Nilus, and was there il

drewned, as he was reaching at Oinions and could not
come by them, this Carrieth no ſenſe or probability in

the werl4;, but the truth is this, the prieſis of Beata bate

the Oinio# and tvord it as a thing abominatle, becauſe they

have obſerved, that it never grownh nor thriveth well to
any bigneſs but in the decreaſe and waine of the Moon: }
Noither is it meet and fit for thoſe who would lead an |}
holy and ſantified life, or for ſuch as celebrate ſolemns ©
Feajts and Holidaies, becauſe it provoketh thirſt in the for «
mer, and in the other cauſeth teares 3' if they feed theres
pon, And for the ſame reaſon they take the Sow to br a
prophane and unclean beaft, for that ordinarily ſhe go ah
a brimming, and admitteth the bore, when the Moow i
is paſt the full : and look, bow many drinke of ber —_ '

ver

— Ce CIO”

The Pretace. Q |
over their bodies, As touching that which they: inferres
who ins their lives doe ſacrifice a Sew whe«'the Moon is in
the full, aud then eat ber fleſh : namely that Hyle bun-
ting and chafing the wilde ſwine at the full of the Moon, was
Chanced to light upon an arke or coffin 'of wood, wherein
_ the body of Eugenius TheodidaQus, which be diſmem-
bred and threw away by peece-meale; all men admit not
' thereof, ſuppoſmg that it is falſe as many others be,viſheard
and miſunderſtood. ' But this for cenain is held, that our
antients in old time ſo much hated and abhorred all exceſ.
five delicacy, ſuper fluows and coftly delights, and voluptuous
pleaſures, that they ſaill within the temple of the City of
Thebes nt Agypt, there flood @ ſquare colunen or pillar,
wherein were engraven certain curſes and execrations a-
 gainft their King Prolomy, who was the firſt that turned
and averted the Egyptians quite from their fimple aud
frugal manner of life, without money , without ſumptiaus
faire and chargeable delights, It is ſaid alſo that Teche
natis tho father of Boechoreus, #1 au expedition or jout- |
ney againſt the Arabians, when it chanced that bis carria=
ges were far behinds and came not in due time to the place Wi
where be incamped, was contented to maks bis ſupper of
whatſoever be could get,and ſ1 to take up with a very ſmall
i and ſimple pittance; yea and after ſupper to lie npon 4
courſe pallet, where he ſlept all night very ſoundly and never
awaked : whereupon , be ever after loved ſobriety of life
#xd frugality , and curſed the foreſaid King Ptolomy :
' which maledition of bis being by the priefts of that time ap-
proved , B% Canſed to be engraven upon the pillar above=
ſaid. Now their Kings were Created either out of the order of
their priefts or elſe ons of the degree of Knights & Warriors;
WM for that the one eftate was bonored and accounted noble for
1 vlourthe other for wiſdom and kriowledg. And look whonte
ll {eever 1bey chooſe from ont of ys order of Aa
& | | | 2 g en J

ans EET SE ES MINE
Sr Fant | #

_—

—

©, ThePreface.
vſently after bis eleGljon,he was admitted unto theColledgy of
on end unto him were diſcloſed and communicated the
ſecrets of their Philoſophy, which -nnder.the vail and dark,
ſpeeches couched and civered many mifteries,through which
the light of the truth in ſome ſort though :dimly appear.
And this themſelves ſeem to ſignify and give us to nnder-
ftavd, by ſetting up ordinarily before the porches and gates
of therr Temples, certain Sphinges 3; meaning thereby, that
' all their Thedologie.. containeth under enigmatical and co-
vert words, the ſecrets of wiſdome. * In the © City of Sais,
the image of Minerva which they take. to be Beata, bad
- ſuch an inſcription over it, 45 this : lam all chat which
 hathbeen, whichis; and which ſhall be, and never
any man yer was ableto draw open my vail. More-
© over many there be of opinion, that the proper nameof Hiſ- .
- mael in the Fgypcians /anguege is - Amoun, of which
. We bave in Greekderived the word Ammon :
_ we ſurname Hiſmael, Ammon : but Manethos whowss
an Fx ypcian bimſelf of the-Cizy of Sebenna, ſuppeſeth
that by this word is ſignified, a thing bidden,or occulation:
and Hecatzusthe Abderite- effirmeth, that the Fgyp-
tia”s uſed this term among th:mſelves, when they called
one unto. autther, for it was 4 vocative word, and for that
. they imaginedthe Prince and Soveraign of God to be the
. ſame: that Pan, that #s to ſay, an univerſal nature, and *
Therefore unſeen, hidden and unknown, .they prayed and |}
. beſought bim for to diſcloſe and make bimſelf known unto |
| them, by calling bim Amoun, . See then, bow the A-
. Egyptian were very firifi and preciſe, in not profaning '
their wiſcome, nor publiſhing that learning of theirs which |
Concerned the gods, . And this the greateſt Sages and moſt
learned clarks of all Greece do teſtify, by name, Solon, |
. Thiles, Plato, Eudoxus, Pythagoras, Averroes, &
a. ſome let wot to ſay, Lycurgus bimfelf, who all _— "|
. of. 2

% i
8 15

.
_

| The Preface.
__ of «delibrate purpoſe into Egypt, for 50 confer . with the
Priefis of that Country. © For it is conflantly beld that Ey-
doxis was the arditur of Chonupheus'the Prieft-of
Memphis, Solon of Sonchis the Prieft of Sais, Pyrthas, |
goras of Oenupheus the Prieft of Goſhen) Aud verily:
thicPythagoras laſt named, was bighly eſteemed among
men, likg as bim ſelf bad them in great admiration; ©
in ſomuch, as be of all others ſeemed moſt to imitate their
manner of of ee ſpeaking nnder covert words, and to
involve bis doftrine and ſentences within figurative and
enigmatical words :* for the charaCiers which. are called
Hieroglyphicks in Egypt, be in manner all of them, like
to theſe precepts of Pychagoras: Eat not upon a ſtool or
chair; Sit not over a buſhell , Plant no. Date tree; Stirr -
u0t the fire in the bouſe, nor rake into it with a ſword. And
me thinks, that whereas the Pythagoreans call Unity,
| _ Tiro, Diana; the number of ſeven, Minerva;
the firſt cubicke, Neptune;Read my Cabella;this re-
ſembleth very neer that whith the Egyptians conſecrate and
Þ dedicate in their temples, and agrceth with that which
| they both doe and write. For their Kityg and Lord
Eugenius, they depaint and pourtray, by an eye and 4
$ on : and ſome there be, who make this interpretation
| of the name Eugenius, well begot, © As for beaven, they
deſcribe by a young countenance, by reaſon of the perpetuity
thereof , whereby it never waxeth old, An eye they ſet -
out by an heart, having under it an hearth with fire bur-
ning upon it. In the City of Thebes th:re food. up cer-
tain images without hands, reſembling Judges, and the
Chief or preſident among them, was blind-folded or bood-= +
wincked, to give us.to underftand, that Juſtice ſhould net-
ther be corrupted with bribery, nor partial and reſpeive
of perſons, In the ſignet or ſeal. ring of their martial and
militery men, there was engraven the portraure of the |
ST 1 2 great j

"VI

PF
—

he nc

I

"—_— ""_ "ES" * _=-— TR. A Go PLS” ;

The Prefact,
great Flie called the Beetil,becanſe in that kinde, thers is no
female, birt they be all males : they blow or caſt their ſred
in forme of @ Pellet or round Ball under Dung; which gbey
prepare tobe @ place, 'not' for their food more, than for

their brood. Whenſcever therefore you ſhall bear the X5-
gyprians fell tailesof the gods, to wit, of their vagarant
and wandring perigrinetions, or of their diſmembrings ,
and other ſuch likg fabulous ficiions , you muſt call to niind
that which we have before ſaid ; od ever think that they
mean any ſuch thing, x or bath been done according to that
literal ſenſe : for they donot ſay, thet Mercury properly
is a Dog, but foreſmuch 6s the nature of this beaſt is to be

_ wary, watchfull, vigilent and wiſe, able to diſtinguiſh by
bis taking knowledg and ſemblance of, ignorance, a friend
and familiar from an enemy and. ftranger ; therefore (as

. Platoſaith) they attributed end likened bim to the moſt 6+

loquent of all the gods. - Neitler doe they think, when they

deſcribe the Sun, thet out of the barks of the tree Lotus,
there ariſeth a babe new borne ; butin this wiſe do they re-
eſent unto us the Sun riſing, giving thus much to.under-
and covertly, that the light avid illuntination of thi Str
proceedeth out of the waters of the Sea : for even | after the
ſame manner the moſt oruell and terrible king of the Perti«

. _.. ans, Ochus,who put to death many of bis Nobles and Sub-

 -Jefis, and im the end ſlew their beef Apis, and cat bim at a
feaſt together with bis friend's, they called the ſword; and e-
ven at this day, inthe regiſter and catalogue of their kings, -
be goeth under that name ; not fignifymg thereby bu pro-
por ſubſtance, but to expreſſe bis bard and fell nature, and
bis miſchievous diſpoſition, they compered him to a bloudy
 enſtrument and weapon made to murder men. In bearing #6:
then and recei: ing after this manner, that which ſhall be «|;

.. - told untoyou as toncbing the gods after an holy and religi- |*

was. manner, in domy alſo andobſerving alwayes diligent= |:

þ. | þ the gccuſtomedrites ordeined for the ſacred ſervice of |

_ wt 2

55 ai... <a. _— ————Y Y Ca — \—

S a.

: The Preface,

| tbe goes, and belicving firmely, that you can. not perform
en) ſacrifice or liturgy more pleaſing unto them, than to
y for to have 4 ſound and trne opinion of them: by this
meayxs you ſhell avoid (uperſiition, which is as great a fit as
inpicty and Athiſme. Now Beata aud Engenius is as
briefly as may be, by cutting off many ſuper fluous manters
that ſerve to no purpoſe, delivered in this wiſe : It is ſaid
that dame Rhea, at what time as Saturn day ſecretly -
.- withher, waseſpied by the Sun, who curſed her ; and a=
mong other maledifiions, prayed that ſhe might not be do-
livered, nor tring forth Child, neither in any moneth nor
gear: but Mercury being inemoured of this geddeſſe, com>
| paxied likewiſe with ber ; and afterwards, as he playe@
«t Dice with the Moon and won from ber the ſeventieth
pert of every oxe of ber il{uminations, which being all put
together, make five intive dayes, he added the ſame unto
the three hundred end threeſcore dayes of the year ; and
thoſe cd dayes the Egyptians do call at this preſent, the
aayes of the Epadi, celebrating and ſolemnizing them as
th e Birth-dayes of their gods : for that when the full time

of Rea, was expired, upon the firſt day of them was Theo-
dida&us bornes .at whoſe birth a voice was beard, That
the Lord of the whole world now came intolight : and
ſome ſay, that « Certain woman named Pamyle, 45 ſhe

. went fo fetch waterfor the Temple of Jupirer in the City
of Thebes, beardthis yoice, commanding her to proclaim
aloud, That the Great King and Benefatour Eugenius
was 19 born : . Alſo, for that Saturn committed rbis babe
 Fugenius #nto ber hands for to be nurſed, therefore in
honour of ber there was a Feftival day ſolemnized, named
thereupon Pamytia, much like unto that which is named
Phailephoria, weto: Priapus. Or the ſecond day ſhe |
war delwered of Aroveris, who is Apollo, whom ſore?
likewiſe call the #/der Oriis.' - Upon the third day ſhe

the right place, but brake thorow. his mothers ſide, and iſ=

_ we del. it dis. eter 4 Ins w__

brought forth Hyle, but br came wot at the juſt time yer #t :

; .'- «ThePreface...
| . Tucd forth at the wound. On the fourth day was Beata born,
'." "in @ watery place called Panhygre. And the fifth day ſpe
| was delivered of Nephrhe, who of ſome is named alſo Te-
+» leutg and Venus'; others Call ber, Nice; Now it is ſaid,
'', . *that ſhe conceived. .Theodidaftus and" Aroveris by the
\ =" "Sun, Beiraby Mercury; Typhon end Nephche by Sa- |
 'turny bich is the ceirſe that the: Kings reputing the third
. *of theſe mtercalar dayes to be deſaſterious, and diſmall, di-
| ſpatched i no affaires” thereupon ;: neither did they cheriſh
themſelves by meat AT © otherwiſe, untill night :
that Nephthe wasbinoured by Hyle,' that Engenius and.
Beata were #n /ov2 in their Mothers belly, before they were
borne; and.lay together fecretly and. by flealth; and ſome
give out”, that by this means Aroyeris: was. begotten and
born, who by the” Egyptians is called Orus the elder,and
by the Greeks, Apollo. : Well during the 'time that Eu-
genius reigned King in Zgypt,- immediately be brought
the Fg; prians from their needy, poore and ſavage kind of
life , by teaching them how to ſow. and plant their grounds,
by eftabliſhing good Laws among them, and by ſhewing bow
they ſhould worſhip and ſerve Ged. . Afterwards, he tra-
velled thorowout the world, reducing the whole earth to
civility, by force of Armes leaft of all, but winning and
and gaining the noft Nations by effeiual. remonfirances
and ſweet perſwaſion couched inſongs, and with all manner
of muſick; whereupon the Greeks were of opinion, that be
and Bacchus were both one. - Furthermore, the tale goes,
that in the abſence of Eugenius, Hyle ftirred -not, nor
made any commotion, for that Beata gave god order to
the cintrary, and was of ſufficient power to - prevent and
with/tand all innovations; but when be was rerurned, Hyle
complotted a conſpiracy againſt bim, having drawn into.
his confederacy ſeventy two Complices, beſides a certain
Dveen of Fthiopia, who likewiſe combined with bim,, and |
"ber name was Alo. Now when be bad ſecretly taken the |
| ” __ Omer 3 __ Cs juji f

ow

juſt meaſure and proportion of Euz DG, ba: ID
ſed pon free a apr Nye a omg ror E ?
woft curiouſly & artificially end ſet out to the eje;
be took, order, that it be brought into wo where .
be made egreat feaſt unto the whote company y mom
ook great leaf aſure'with admiration, heb f ſuc £57.38
al nag if pecedf works gpid*Hyle in « HO, |
flood up and promiſed that be would beftow if”
whoſe body was meet and fit'for it c.

pany one after another «ſſaied whoſe body would fs 7 Fa
it was ner found proportionate nor of 4 juſt fize to
oll-thereſt ;* par Engenius get up into it, id i=
"ed biz there, Þ withthat, the conſpirators ra to'it,
and let down'the lid and civer thereof upon bim, and part-
ly with. nailes, 'and pertly.with' melted lead which they
Aut rr they made it -ſere enough ;* and when they
bad fo done; carried i it forth to" the river fide, and' ler it A
down! into the ſee, a the very mouth of Nilus "nemed Ta- -
niticus 3 which; is the rea; thet the aid month 'iseven © :
to this day odius and" execrable_a yPtians, iy
ſumuch es they call it Cataphyfton, that'is to ſay," abo-
minable, or to be ſpit at. + Over endbefides, it is ſaid, that
this fell out tobe done upon the ſeventeenth day of the month
named Athyr, during which ae rare dens S = _— _
to the Mophemtick ſigne Scorpius, mt t and.
twentieth year of Eugenins' 2 elembowbole pte co
that be lived indeed,but reigned not ſo long. Now the firſt
that bad aninchling&imeliigence of this hanious ati,where
the Pans and Satyrs inbabiting about the Weſt of 'Eng- . 8
land and other parts, wh began to whiſ] 468 ue nero no - (N

—_———
- .

F;

in

— —J—ll—_—

_ — cy _—_——

FIR 2 it tat

Hebed
Wo: hore

Es

woolly ada 5 way _ et wp
/ Lal whe be .canze 40 ſore. bigueſſt, be Ps
her guide aud Squire, named Malbirraet, who alſo is |
ſaid to keep the gods, likg as dogs prerd men. After- this,
ſe heard, news of the foreſaid cofſor, and namely, that the
wares of the ſea bad þ) tidescaft i pou! the hawks of Eu-
phrates, where, by abillow of water 11 was gently hrought
Cloſets the feot of a ſarubb or plant called { $cam, ar m__
ſuch ſorub Erice:J Now this Erice or Temavix ins
time grew fe faire, «nd ow fenth ſe lerge end Kee |

\/

Bebylon, where
all beavy and
bey ſpeke ſhe « word

them. The Queen perieiving' ber ywornen

illfall .in. dreſs
ed being grown

Infant, by putting ber finger 4
mouth thereof:
cone — thet was meortell

3 2, lementing of

.
.

obſerving ryang
child on 6 oght fire, Fereay

-
—
> 4
.

"The! Prefice:

Bea EG <enddeſe raved th piltr =
7 VIDS down: with: facility ty, and took, fr,

rndernieath + waits $7-yrnrwteteſ eo
entinted with perfiome e enwr within a li.
won cloth, and gaue iriohe Kings foo17 bo hope: : where.

pfen

s mA

of it commeth,that the Byblians' even rh dey reverence ri

this piece of wood, which lieth confecrate within the templ

« a l Carter it- ic. ſaid, that in the _—_

 Themreody] li upon'thecoffer over which ſhe wept
lamented fo much, that the youngeſt of the Kings fo *
pn rOgy of ber; but ſhe ber felf accompanied with
the eldeſt of- ; Pogetber with: the Coffer,emberked, took
ſea and dips: But when the red-fe« turned the winde
ſomewhat roughly,about the-da wning of the day, Beata war
ſo much diſpleaſed and angry, thar ſhe dried it quite.

[1 ſoon as ſhe Came nnto « vlitery place, where ſhe was by

ber ſelf alone; rodents racy A where finding the corps.

Ew Theodidathus, ſhe laid ber face cloſe to his, embraced.
Herewith came the childe ſoftly behinde and \
tſpied whot ſhe mas doing : whom when' ſhe perceived, ſhe

looked back,, Caſting an outward eye," and bebeld bim with

ſuch an angry aſpe@ , that the poore infent wot able to exe *
| Eureſo terrible @ look, upon if. © Sons ſay it was not |
| fo; but that be fell into ſea, in manner afire id, and
wes honoured for the goddeſſs fake, and thar-be is the ſems 4
whom the Fgypoians char of their feaſts,' under the.
name of Filius Solis Czleſtis. © But others give out, that
this childe wet nemed-Sorah; and that the Cir Pelufium:-

wes built in remembrance of bim by the goddeſſe Beutz,ond
fo rok 'the name after him; and bow *this *Filius Solis,
whom they ſo celebrate in their ſongs, _was the” firſt inven-
_ tor of Mufich, - Howheit others there are' «gain, who offirm,

that this was the'name of no perſon , but a kinde of Dialedt

or: Lenguage , proper and agreeable unto thoſe who drinke

-

and hong together , as ﬀ 4 Man woe ſay, In a _ 5

—_———

._--.. **, ThePrefide, ©
houre and happily may this or that come. For the Zgyp-
ens were wont ordinarily t0uſe' this term Sorah' in ſuch

; e : Like doubt the d 'sheletos or dead corps of

uſed toCarry'\about and ſbew in a bierre
, was mot the repreſemation or memy=

re rial of this accident, which befell unto Eugenius' as ſome do
imagine, but ſerved as ax admonition to put the gueſts in

X
I
4
1
P
,
,

minde 'to be merry and take their pleaſure,and joy in _
things that were. preſent ; for that ſoon after they ſhould

like unto iv; This Iſay was{the reaſon that it was brought
in at their feaſts and merry mettings. Furthermore when
Beata was gone to ſee ber ſoune Barzabe) who was foſtered
and brought up in the cityBatus , and did laid the afore-
ſcid Coffer with Eugenius body out of td#way ; Hyle for-

Baned a4 be bunted in « clexy moon- ſhine night to meet with

#, and taking knowledge of the body', cut it into-fourteen
preces and flung them: bere and there one from another :
which when Beata underſtood , ſhe ſearched for them in «

"boat or punt made of paper reed, all over the moores and. ...

marſhes : Whereof it comes that the Crocodiles never burt
thoſe who ſaile or row in veſſels made of that plant, whether
it be that they are affraid of it, or reverence it for this god-

eſſe ſake, Thyow not. And thus you may know the reaſon,

why there be found many Sepulchres of Eugenius The-
odidaQus is the Country of Kgypt, for ever as ſhe found
any piece of him , ſhe cauſed a tombe to be made for is :
others ſay no; but that ſhe made many images of hin,
which ſhe left in every City , as if fie bed beftowed among
them bis very body indeed : to the end that in many places
be might be bonoured : and that if happily Hyle when be
ſought for the true Sepulcher of Eugenius (baving van«
quiſhed and overcome Barzabel) many of them bring re-=
ported end ſhewed, he might not know which was it, and (6
$tvrover ſeeking farther, Over and beſides,the report goes,
let Beata found all other pertsof Eugenius body,but only
*" Te O35 - bis

T % * .
-
—__ - FO" aac " 0 24 ey!
[1

bis privy member, for that it wa immediately coſt into
river andthe fiſpesnomed Lepidorus,'Phagrus & Ony
rynchus devoured 57; for which eauſe Beata drteftetd
above all other fiſhes : but iuflead of that natural part,
made 4 counterfels ene, called Phallus, which ſhe Conſe
ated : and inthe bonor thereof the xyptions bold
alan Sr After all this, it. followeth. hed Engenig
being returned out of the infernal perts, appiared un

- Barzabel far to exerciſe, 'infirut} and traine him ag ainf

the battel : of wham be demanded what be thought to
the moſt beautiful thing in the world : who anſwered, Ti
be revenged of the wrong aud injury which had been dow
Po & mans parewth' Secondly, what beaft be thought moſ
profitable to go indv the field withall : unto whom Bartabd
ſhould mekg anſwer, The berſe : whereat Eugenius men
velled,' and nthed bim, why he named the borſe and not the
Lion rather ; Becauſe (quoth Rarzabel ) the Lion ſerveil
bim in geod ted, who jtands upert bis own gnerd and de-
fence only, and bath need of aid: but the borſe is good ts
defeit the enimy quite, to follow him in chace, and take bim
Priſoner. When Eugenius beerd bine ſay ſo, be took great
Pleaſure and contentment herein, judging bereby, thet bis
ſon was. ſufficiently appointed aud prepared to give battel
unto bis enemies, And verily itis ſaid that among many
that daily revolted from Hyle, and fided with Barzabel,
even the very concubine of Hyte named Thueris was one,
who Cams to bim : and when Pioreus ſerpent followed af-
ter and perſued ber, the ſame wit Cut in pieces by the guard
about Ba zabel : it remenebrance whereof, at this very day W.
they bring forth a certain cord, which likewiſe they & i | ©
pretes, Well, they ſay the battel continued many dain ; but ..

in the end Barrabel bad the vittory > A; alſo Beuta b aving,

Hyle priſoner faſt bound in bet bands, killed him not, but

looſed bim and let bBim go: which Barzabel not able to

endure with patience, Ieid violent hands upon bis _—_
Sn I

$=o ud F. 4

& -
Lon
-

thereon : ihficad whereof Taptharthardb, ſet ov < miarion
matle in muancr of = Mr res. ee
indicially into queſtion, charging buntthat be wat a baſtard,
op the belpaf Tapthartharah who; plcoded bis cauſe,
he was judged by the gods, legitineate | who'alſe in two: 6
ther battels vanquifped Hyle, - And 'more than. oll this,
Beata after death, was with child by Eugenius, by whom
ſhe had Helitomenus «nd Harpocrates whe wanted: bis
wether parts, V' {op j/
And like as the Metbometiciens ſay, that the rein bow i
a repreſemtation of the Sunne, and tht ſame diſtinguiſhed
by ſundry colours, by the refr ation of onr eie-ſight agamſt
# Cloud : even ſo this preface, is an apperence of ſome do«
frine or learning, which doth refit& and ſend beck out un-
derft anding, to the Conſideration of ſome other truth much
after the maner of ſattvfeces, wherein there u mingled &
hind of lamentable dole,, and ſorrowful beavineſs. Sem-
blably, the making and diſpoſition of templts, which in ſome
places have fair open Iſles and pleaſant allies open over
head : and in other, darke caves,vaults, and ſhreuds un-
der the earth, reſembling properly caves, ſepulchers, or
charnel vants,wherein tbeypit the bolies of the dead; efpe-
cially the opin;on of the RoſieCrufians : for albeit the boJy
of Eugeninsg be ſaid to be i: many places, yet they name
haply Abydus the tawne, or Memphis « little City, where
they affirme that bis true body lieth, mm ſuch ſort, as the
greateſt and wealthieſt perſons in Fygypt uſually do ordain
«1d take order, that their bodies be interred in Abydus,
{hd they meylic in the ſame ſepulcbrewithEugenius,
. Memphis wes kept the berfe Apis, which is the
image and figure of bis ſoul, and they will have bis body
«lſoto be there. Some likewiſe therebe, who interpret the
neme of this town, as if it ſcould fignifie the baven' and
herbour of good neen ; others, that it betokeneth the tombe of
mY FrxrREELEETRTTTERT —£ao

<-> HH i On

=” oc

» V7 " mw > UW

.
}
;

"EY

mem...

genius : ang there is before the gate of the City, «lit.
| "7 art others is inacceſſible, and admitteth as
entrance, inſomnch, as neither fowles of the aire will there
light, wor fifhs of _— epprogch thither : only at one cer«
raine time, the prieft"may* come in, and there they offer
ſacrifices, and preſent oblations' to the dead; * where alſh
they crewne and- adorne with flowers the monument of on:
Mediphche, 'which is overſhadowed and covered with «
ce:taine plant, - greater. and taller than ' any Olive tree:
Eudoxus writeth, that bow many ſepulchres ſoever there
be in Fgypt,wherein the corps of Eugenivs ſhould lie, yet |
it is inthe City Bufiris 3 for that it was the Countrey and
place of bis nativity: ſo that now there 5s no need to ſpeck
of Taphofiris, for that the very name it ſelfe ſaith enough
ſegnifying as it doth, the ſepulture of TheodidaQus: Well,
I approve the cutting of the wood, and renting of the lin-
xen, the effuſions ulſo and funeral libaments there perfor=
men, becauſe there be many myſteries mingled among. And
ſo the priefts of. Kgyot affirme, that the bodies not of theſe
gods only," but alſo of all others, who bave been engendred,
and are not incorruptible, remaine among them where they
honoured and'reverenced ; but their ſouls became ftarrs, and
ſhine in heaven.: * and as for that of Beata;*it 3s the ſame.
which the Greeks call Cyon, that is to ſay, the Doggiftare,
but the Xn yptiqns Sothis : that of Orus is Orion, and.
that of Hyle, the Bear, - Now you' ſee their names are op-
Poſite to their nature. and being, but whi”eas all other Citiet
and States in Egypt contribute a Certaine tribute-1mpoſed.
upon them, fo- to pourtray, draw and paimtſuch beafts s
are honored amme them, thoſe only who inhabite the couns
trey Thebaie, of all others give nothing-thereto, being of
opinion, that no mo: tal thing, ſubje& to death; can be agod: |
as for him alone, whem they call Cneph, as 'be was never |
. bo-me, ſo ſhall be never die.” * Whereas. therefore for: many
ſuch things as theſe, be reported aud ſhewed in es #- o
TOW oe OE oY

4 2
i 4x / 26
+
n

The Preface.
they who think, that all is no more but to perpetuate and
eternize the memory of marvelous deeds and ſtrange acci-
dents of ſome Princes, Kings, or. Tyrants, who for their excel-
lent vertue and mighty puiſſance, have adjoyned to their
own glory, the authority of deity, unto whom, a while after,
there befell calamities ; uſe herein a very cleanly ſhift, and
expedite evaſin,transferring handſomly from the geds unto
men, all ſinifter infamy, that is Taphthartharah and
help themſelves by the teſtimonies whichthey find and _
in hiftories : for Ae yptians write, that Hyle was but ſma
of ftature, and ſlender limmed, that he was of a ruddy
Colour ; Barzabel white ; Eugenius of a blackiſh bew, as
. bo indeed were naturally men, Moregver, they call Eu-
penius, Captaine or general; Canobus pilot or governor of
2 ſhip, after whoſe name they have named a ſtar: and as
for the ſhip which the Greekz name Argo, they hold that it
was the vey reſemblance of Eugenius's ſhip, which for the
honour of him, being uumbered among the (}ars, is ſo ſituate
in heaven, as that it moveth and keepeth his courſe not far
from that of Orion,and the Cyon or Doge-ſtar : of which
twaine, the one # conſecrated unto Barzabel, the other to
Beata, The things which be written of Hyle,Eugenius &+
Beata were 10 accidents or paſſions incident to gods or t9
men: but rather to ſome great Genii, of which minde
were Pythagoras, Plato, Xenocrates, & Chryſtppus,
following hearin the opinions of the' ancient Theologians,
whs hold, that they were far ſtronger than men, and that its
Priſſance they much ſurmounted our natare © but that divi-
nity which they bad, was mot pure and ſimple; but they we-e
compounded of a nature Corporal ard ſpiritual, capatle of
pleaſure, of grieſe, and other paſſions and affefions, which
accompanying theſe mutations, trouble, ſome more, others
feſt. For in theſe Demons, there i like, as alſo among men,
a diverſity and difference of vice and of vertue. For the as
bf Giants and Titans, ſo much chaunted in every Greek ſong
MOL Mm G2 the

ti

IIS

ww hd... ——_ 9 Pp

"qa - T OO”. i. AM —_— dk ACS

—_ WNT oo ref nfo” 0 hes a ee CEO n

XI" A PR» ot Rc) AY ran

Fd

P"—_—_ W —_

' The Preface.

the abominable deeds likewiſe and pradiſes of one Saturne,
the reſiſtance alſo of Pyrhon again;t Apollo, the ſounds of
Bacchus, «and the wanderings of Ceres, differ in no reſ..
ped from the accidents of Eugenius and Hyle, and of all
other ſuch like, which every man may hear as much as he
lift : as alſo whatſoever is covered and bidden under the vail
of myſtical ſacrifices and ceremonies, u kept cloſe not uttered
nor ſhewed to the vulgar people : And accor ding hereto,
we may hear Homer, how he calleth good men, and ſuch «
excel! others diverſly, one while 8eocrS425, that is to ſay, like
into the pods ; other while avTiv%s5, that is to ſay, compa-
rable to the gods : ſometimes 0:5'v 473 winds txovTas that
is to ſay, having their wiſdome and counſel from the gods,
But the denomination or addition drawn from the De-
mons, he uſeth commonly as well tothe good as the bad ; in-
different to valiant perſons and to cowards: to a timorous .
1d fearful ſouldier thus :

Aaiuiv giddy iAN8, Tin Saſiarzar $T052
&eY£lus. :
Demoniaz, approach thou near : |
The Greeks why doeſt thou ſo much fear?
Ox the o'her ſide, of an hardy ſouldier :

dM brs ii 73 Titaproy emtaruTo Saiport jT0ts
When he che charge in heli the fourth time gave
Like to ſome D&mon he did himſelf behave.

Ad again, in the worſe ſexce, |

Aziuerin, Tivu rh TTeiapos, Thgiaoio T4 maids, Kc

* Dea onian, what jsthat great offence ; * That 1t9 |
Which P. :zam & his ſons committed have {pn gp F

Againſtthe,for to make thy jult precence, Javicer, |

In wrathful terms upon the thus to rave, Minerva.

And them nograce and mercy to vouchſave,

Nor reſt, until thou ſeeſt the ſtately towne,

Of 1lion deſtroy*d and rafed down 2

*

Giving |

— cc
m—_

©

The Preface,

Giving ws hereby thus much to underſtand, that the Genii
have a mixt nature, and a will or affetioa which is not
equal, nor alwaies alike. And hereupon it is, that Plato
verily attributeth unto the Olympian and celeſtial gods, all
that which is dexterous and odde: but unto the Genij,what-
ſoever 1s ſiniſter aud even, And Xenocrates ho[deth, that
thoſe daies which be unluckie aud diſmal, thoſe feſtival ſo=
lemnities likewiſe, which have any beatings or knocking and
thumping of breaſt, or faſting, or otherwiſe any Curſed ſpee=
ches an1 filthy words, are not meet for the honour and
wor ſhip either of gods or of good Genii : but be ſuppoſeth
that there be in the aire about us, certain natures great
and puiſſant ; howbeit, (hewed, malicious and unſcciable,
which take ſome pleaſure in ſuch matters : and when' they
bave obtained and gotten ſo much to be done for their ſake,
they go about no farther miſchief, nor wait any ſhrewder
turnes: whereas contrariwiſe, both Heſiodus calleth the
pure and holy Genii, ſuch alſo as be the good angels and
keepers of men ; See the Harmony of th? world,

* Givers of wealth and opulence, as whom
This regal gift and honour doth become.

And Plato alſo termeth this kind of Genii or angels Mer=
curiall, that is to ſay, expoſitours or interpreters, and
minijterial, having a middle nature between gods and men,
who as mediatours, preſent the prayers and petitions of men
here unto the gods in heavan, and from thence tranſmit
and convey unto us upon earth, th? oracles and revelations
of hidden and future things, as alſo their d; nations of goods
and riches. As for Empedocles, hb: ſaith, that theſe *
Genii or Fiends, are puniſhed and tormented for their ſins
and offences which they bzve Committed, as may appear by
theſe his verſes : |

C 2 For

The Preface.

mn...
Al_

For why ? the power ofaire and skie,
did to the Sea them chace :

The ſea them caſt up, ofthe earth,
even to the outward face :

The carth them ſends unto the beams,
of never-tyred Suns,

TheSun coaire, whence firſt they came,
doth ſling them down anon :

Thus poſted to and fro, twixt ſeas
beneath, and heav'ns above,

From one they co another paſs :
not one yer doth them love,

until ſuch time as being thus in this Aireal- vebicle chaſtiſed
and clenſed,they recover again that place, eſtate and degree
which i; meet for them, and according to their nature: |
Read the firſt and ſecond Book of the Harmony of the ., |
. TWorld. Theſe things and ſuch like for all the world they
=—_ ſy, are reported of Hyle, who upon envy and malice Come
mitted many outrages; and having thus made a
trouble and confuſion in all things, filled ſea and land with
wotul calamities and miſeries, but was puniſhed for it in
the end For Beata the wife and ſiſter of EFugenius
1evenge plagued him in extinguiſhing and epreſſing his fu-
ry and rage, and yet neglefied not ſſre the travels and
pains of ber own,which ſhe endured, her trudging alſo and
wandring to and fro; nor many other afis of great wiſdome
ard proweſs,ſnffered ſhe ro be buried in ſilence and oblivion *
bit inſerting the ſame among the maſt holy ceremonies of |
ſacrifices, as examples, images, Teleſmes, memorials and |
reſem#l.;nces of the accidents hapning in thoſe times, ſhe
conſecrated an enſignement, miſtrudion and conſolation of
iety and devout riligion to god ward, as well for men as
women afflicted with miſeries. By reaſon whereof ſhe and

her huitaxd T heodidaQtus of good Genii were _
te

TOY The Preface.

ted for their vertue into gods like; «s afterwards were Her-
cules and Bacchus, who in regard thereof, and not with-
otit reaſon, have honours decreed for them both of gods,and
alſo of Demons interming!ed together, as thoſe who 1 ail
places were puiſſant, but moſt powerful both upon and alſo
under the Earth For they ſay thatSarapis is nothing elſe hut
Pluto «xd Beata the danghter of Proſerpina, as Arche= |
machus of Hubcea, and Heraclitus of Pontus teſtifies
and he thinketh that the oracle in the city Canobus, 1s
that of father Dis or Pluto. King Prolemeus ſurtamed
Soter, that is to ſay, ſaviour, cauſed that buge ſtatue or
colofi of Pluto, which was in the city Sinope, to be taken
from thence, notknowing, nor having ſeen before of what
form and ſhape it was, bat only that 4s he dreamed he
thought,that he ſaw Sarapis,commanding bim withal ſpeed
Poſſible to tranſport bim into Alexandria. Now the king
not knowing where this ſtatue was, nor where to finde it,
n this doubtful perplexity related his viſion aforeſaid unto
his friends about him, and chanced to meet with cne Sofi-

bius 4 great traveller and a man who had been in man
places, and he ſaid that in the city of Sinope he had ſeen
ſuch a ſtatue, as the King deſcribed unto them, Where-
upon Prolemzus ſent Soteles and Dionyſus, who in
long time, and with great travel, and 10t without the e-
ſpecial grace of the divine providence, ſtole away the ſait
Cololſs axd broiight it with them: Now when it was Come to
Alexandria and there ſeen, Timotheus the great Coſ-
mographer and Antiquary, and Manothron of the pro-
vince Sebennitis, gueſſed it by all conjeciures ts'be the
image of Pluto, and namely by Cerberus the hel-dog aud
the dragon about him, perſwading the king that it could be
the image of no other god but of Sarapis For it came not
from thence with that name ; but being brought into A<
lexandria, it took the name Sarapis, by which the Aipyp-
tans do name Pluto, And yet Heraclitus verily the
Cc 2 Naturalijt

——t——_—_—_.

—
*

The preface.

Nataraliſt ſaith, that Hads, and Dronilis, that is to
ſay, Pluto ard Bacchus, be the ſame. And in truth when
they are diſpoſed to play the fools and be mad, they are
Carried azay to this opinion, For they who ſuppoſe that
Hads, that 25 to ſay, Pluto, is ſaid to be the body aud as
_ #t were the ſepulcher of the ſoul, as if it ſeemed to be fooliſh
and dranken all the while ſhe is within it, me thinks. they
do allegorize but very baldly, And better it were yet to
brizz Fugenius, TheodidaQus, axd Bacchus together;
Jea and to reconcile Sarapis unto Eugenius, 2 ſaying that
after be hath chauged his nature, he became to have this
denomination. And therefure this uame Sarapis is com-
2101 to all, as they know very well, who ave profeſſed in the
ſacred religion of Eugenius, For we cught not to give
eare and credit to the books and writings of the Phrygians,
wherein we find, that there was one Charopos the daugb-
ter of Hercules, 4nd that of Iſaiacus & ſor of Hercules
was engendred Hyle : neither yet to make account of Phy-
larchus who writeth, that Bacchus was the firſt, who
from the Indians drave two beefes, whereof the one was
gamed Apis, and tbe other Opis : That Sarapis 7s the
proper name of him who ruleth and embeliſheth the univer ſa]
world, and is derived of the word Sairein, which ſome ſay,
fignifeeth 4s much as to beautifie and adorne. For theſe be
abſurd rozes delivered by Phylarchus : but more monſtrous
. end ſenſeRſs are their abſurdities who write, that Sarapis
7s 10 god, but that it is the coffiiz or ſepulcher of Apis that is
ſo called : as alſo that there be certain two leaved braſen
gatesin Memphis, bearing the names of Lethe and (.a-
cytus, that is to ſay, oblivion and wailing, which being ſet
#pen when they enter and bury Apis, in the opening make
a great ſound and rude noiſe : which is the cauſe that we
lay band upon every copper or braſon veſſel when it reſound-
eth ſo, to ſtay the noiſe there»f. Net 75 there more apparence
of truth and reaſon in their opinicts, who hold that it was
| + 1 2b 2 Os ' - arrived:

_—

hb ———

The Pretace.

derined of theſe verbs JeveaX and gucR which ſignifieth to
move, as being that which moveth the whole ſrame of the
world. The pritfts of the moſt part bold, that Sarapis ts
a word compounded of Opis and Apis together, giving (bis
expoſition withall, and teaching us, that we ought to
believe Apis to he an elegant image of the ſoul of Opts.
For mine own part, if Sarapis be an Agyptian name, 1
ſuppoſe rather that it betokeneth joy and mirth: Anil
ground my conjefure upon this , that the Egyptians ordi-
xarily call the feaſt of joy and- gladneſſe termed qnrong the
Athenians Charmoſyna, by the name of Sairei. For
Piaco bimiſelf ſaith, that Hads which ſipnifieth Pluto,be-
ing the ſon of 'Eies, that is to ſay, of ſbamefaſineſſe, ho«
nour and reverence, is a milde and gracious god to thoſe whoa
are toward him. And very true it is, that in the Fayp-
tians language, many other proper names are ſignificant

end carry their reaſon with thene;z -as namely that infernal
place under the earth , into which they imagine the ſoules
of the dead do deſcend after they be departed; they call A-
menthes, which term is as much t ſay, @s taking and pi-
ving;but whether this word be one of thoſe, which in old time
came out of Greece and were tranſported thither, we will
conſider and diſcuſſe better bereafter : Now for this preſent,
let us proſecute that which remaineth of this opinion now in
band. For Eugenius and Beata of good Demons were
tranſtated into the number of the gods : And as for the puiſ-
ſance of Hyle oppreſſed and quelled, howbeit; panting ax yet
at the laſt paſp, and ſtriving as it were with the pangs of
death , they bave certain ceremonies and ſacrifices, to pati=
fy and appeaſe. * Other ſeafts aljo there he again on the con-
. trary fide wherein they injult over bim, debaſe and defame
bim what they can : In fo much, as men of a ruddy colcur
tbey deride and make of them a laughing-ſtock. And ds for
the inhabitants of Coptos, they nſe at a certain feaſt to
throw an Aſſe hee long down from the pitch of an bigb rock ,

becauſe

"The Preface.

a Fu a Al _— =
-

becauſe Hyle was ruddy and of a red Aſſes colour. The
Bufiricants and Lycopolites forbear to ſound any trum-
pets, b-cauſe they reſemble the bray ing of an Aſſe : and
generally they take an Aſſe to be an unclean beaft and demo-
nicall, for the reſemblance in hiew that it bath with bim:
end when they make certain cakes in their ſacrifices of the
moneth;, Payni and Phaophi, they work them in P.iſtry
With the print npon them of an Aſſe bound. Alſo in their
' ſolemn ſacrifice to the Sun, they command as wany ai will
be there to worſvip that god, not to wear any brooches or
jewels of gold about their bodies, nor to give any meat or pro=
vender unto an Aſſe what need ſoever he bave thereof. It
feemeth alſo, that the Pythagor tans themſelves were of 0«
pinion, that Hyle was ſome Fiend or Demonicall power :
for they ſay that Hyle was borne in the even number of ſix
and fifty : again, that the triangular number or figure, is
the puiſſance of Pluto, Bacchus and Mars? of the quadey-
angle, is the power of Rhea, Venus, Ceres, Veſta, ard *
no; Thatof twelve Angels belongeth to the night of Ju-
piter: but that of fiſty fix Angel is the farce of Hy'e, as Eu-
doxus hath left in writing, But the FKgyptians ſuppofing
tbat Hyle was of a Reddiſþ colour, doe kill for ſacrifice unto
bim, Kine and Oxen of the ſame colour, obſerving withall
ſo preciſely, tbat if they bave but one haire black or white,

they be not ſacrificeable : for they think ſuch ſacrifices not

- neceptable, but contrariwiſe diſpleaſant unto the gods, ima-.
gining tbey be tbe bodies which have received the ſoules of
lewd and wicked perſons, tr ansformed into other creatures.
And therefore after they have curſed the bead of ſuch a ſa-
Crifice, they cut it off. and cat it into the r:ver,at leaſt waies
in old time : but now they pive it unto ffrangers. But the
Ox which th'y mean to ſacrifice indeed, 1h2 Priefts called
Sphragiſtz, that is to jay, the ſealers, ' come and marke it
with their ſeal, which as Caſtor writeth, was the image of

& men kneeling, with his bands drag back, and bound be-

binds

O”NTCC_.. DO Oo es am co cas ac a wn @ opG@b > wt oþ © 9irbp Qu fro .,

—_
ey 4» AV —_

—_

The Preface.

bind: him, andbaving a Sword ſet to his throat: Sembla-
bly they uje the name of an Aſſe alſs, as hath been ſaid, for
bis uncivill rudeneſſe and inſolency, no leſſe than in regard
of bis colour, wherein be reſembleth Hyle; and therefore
the Zgyprians gave wiato Ochus @ King of the Perfians

whom they hated above all others as moſt curſed and abomi-
nable, the firname of Aſſe : Whereof Ochus being adver=

tiſed and ſaying witball ; this Aſſe ſhall devoure »owr Ox;

cauſed preſently their beef Apis to be killed and ſacrificed, as

Dinon hath leſt in writing. As for thoſe who ſay, that Hyle
after be bad loſt the field,fled fix dayes journey upon anAſſe's
back,, and having by this means eſcaped, begat two ſohi,

Hicrofolymus and Judzus; Evident it is herein that they

would draw the ftory of the Jews into this. And thus much

of the allegoricall conjeFures which this deth afford. But

now from another bead, let us (of thoje who are able to diſ-

courſe ſomewhat Philoſephycally and with reaſon) confider

firſt end formeſt, ſuch as deal moſt ſimply in this bebalf. And
theſe be they that jay, like as the Greeks allegorize that Sa»
eurn is time, Juno the aire, and the generation of Vul-
canis the tranſmutation of aire intofireg even ſo they give
ou: that by Eugenius or Nature, who lyeth and keepetb
company with Beataz that is to ſay, the earth: That Hyle
is tbe ſea, into which Nilus falling looſeth bimſelf , end is
diſperſed bere and there, unleſſe it be that portion tbereof,
which the earth receivetb and whereby it is made f-rtill,
And upon the river Nilus there #8 a ſacred lamentation, e-
ven from the dayes of Saturn : wherein there is lamenting,
bow Nilus ſpringing and growing 0# the left band, decar-
eth aud is loſt on the right : For the Xgyptians do think ,
that the eaſt parts where the day appearetb, be the ſorefount
and ſace of the werld, that the North part is the right hand
and the South pert the left. This Nilus therefore, arifing
on the leſt band, end loſt in the ſea on the right hand, is ſaid
truly to bave bis birth and generation in ths left ſide,
but

© ————__—

The Preface.

bur bis death and corruption in the right. Aud this is tbe
reaſon why the priefis of Egypt have the ſea in abonetna-
tion, and term ſalt the fome and freth of Hyle. And &-

m.ng thoſe things which are interdified and forbidden this.

35 0xe, that no ſalt be uſed at the beord;" by reaſow whereof
- they never ſolute any pilots or [gilers, for that they keep or-
dinarily in the (ea, and get their living by it. This alſoiz
one of the principal cauſes, why they abbor fiſhes; in ſuch
fort as when they would deſcribe batred, they draw or purtray
a fiſp : like as inthe perch beſore the temple of Minerva
witbin the city Sai, there waspurtrazed and engraven, an
infant, «1 old man; aſter them a Falcon or ſome ſuch Hauk,
and cloſe thereto a fiſh, andlaft of all ariver-horſe : which
Hieroglyphicks,doe ſymbolize and ſignifie thus much in effet:
0 all yea that come into the world and go out of it : Ged

hbateth ſhameleſſe injuſtice- For by the bauke they underſtand
God, by the fiſb hatred, and by the river-borſe impudent vio-

lence qnd vilany, becauſe it is ſaid that be killeth bis father
and aſter that, forceth bis own mother and covereth her.
4nd ſemblably it ſbould ſeem, that tbe ſeying of the Pytha-
gorians, who give out, that the Seaisa tear of Saturn,
under covert words do mean, that it is impure and unelean.
Tbus bave I been willing by the way to alledge thus much,
alibough it be without the train of our deſign, becauſe they
fall within the compaſſe of a vulgar and common received bi«
tory. But to return to our matter : the priefts as many as
be of the wiſer and more learned ſort, underſtand by Euge-
nius, not ouly the river Nilus, and by Hyle tbe ſea: but

alſo by the former, they fignifie in one wordand fimply, all -

vertue and power that produceth moiffure and water, tak-
inp it to be the material cauſe of generation, and the nature

generative of ſeed : andby Hyle they repreſent all deſicca-

tive verice , all beat of fire and drineſſe, #s the very thing
that is fully oppoſite and adverſe to bumidity : and bereapon
it is, that they holdHyle to be red of haire, and of m_—
WoW 4

2p.» tþ 2

bu RS,

"The Preface.

low; qndby the ſame reaſon they willingly would not en-

counter or meet upon the way men of that biew, no nor de-
light 10 ip-ak unto ſucb. Contrariwiſe they feign Eugeni-

' us tobe of a black coleur, becauſe all water,cauſeth the eartb,
clothes and clowds to appear black with which it is mingled.
Alſo the moiſture that is in young folk maketh their baive *
black ; but griſled. hoarineſſe, which ſeemeth to be « pele
zellow, cometh by reaſon of ſiccity unto thoſe wbo-be paſt
their flower, and now in thcir declining age: alſo the Spring
time is green, freſh, pleaſant and generative : but tbe latter
ſeaſon of Autumne, for want of moifture, is an enemy to
plants, and breedeth diſeaſes in man and beaſt.

To ſpeck alſo of that Ox or Beeſ named Menevis, which
is kept and nouriſhed in Gofhen at the common charges of
the City, conſecrated unto Eugenius, end which ſome ſay,

' Was the Sire of Apis; black be is of haire, and bonowredin
a ſecond d-pree after Apis. Moreover, the whole land of
Z#,ypt is of allothers exceeding black, ſuch a black I mean,

' 45 that is of the ee, wbich tbey call Chemiah, and they
liken it to be the Heart 3 ſor bot and moiſt it is , auden-
clinetb to the leſt aud Sauth parts of the earth, like as the
heart lieth moſt to the left ſide of aman. They affirme

alſo, that the ſun and Moon are not mounted upon che-

' riots, but witbia bardges or boat; continually do move and
ſaile as it were round about the world ;, giving us thereby
covertly to under and, that they be bred and nouriſhed by
moiſture. Furthermore, they think, that Homer (like as
Thales alſo being taugbt out of the Egyptians learning,
deth hold ard ſet down this peſition; That water is the E-
lement and principle that engendreth all things : for they
ſay, that Eygenius is the Ocean, and Beata Tethyr, as
oue.would ſay, the nurſe that ſuck-th and feede:h the whole
world. - For the Greeks call the ej icu!ation or caſting fortb
of natural /ezd, Amuoia, like as the corjundgion of male
and female Zwneoia: likewiſe uns , which in Greek, figni-

fieth

wy _

The.Preface-
fieth a ſon, 18 derived of the word vdop , that is to ſay ,
weter, and vous betokenetb alſo ts rain, Moreover, Bar-
zabel they ſurname Hycs, as one wou'd ſay, the lord and rep
raler ofthe moift nature ; andbe is no other than Mercury, the
Fartbermore, whereas we pronounce his name Eugenius, tho
puttetb it down Eugenius TheodidaQtus, ſaying, that be ſhe
beard the very prieſts themſelves of Egypa to pronounce iy De
fe. And thus verily calleth he the ſaid godin every ow . ih
not without good ſhew of reaſon , baving regard unto his na- cle
ture and invention. But that Eugenius is the ſame god, cri
who ſbouldin all reaſon better know than your ſelf,confider- wh
ing that in the city of Delphi you are the miſtreſſe and le. th
dy Prioreſſe, as it were of the religious 'Thyans, and from ar
your infancy beve been a votary and Nun conſecrated by your of
father and mother to tbe ſervice of Eugeniue. But if i: m
regard of others, we muſt all edge teftimonies,lef us not med-- 2
dle witb their bidden ſecrets; hbowhbeit, that which the
priefls do in publick, when the inter Apis , baving brought
bis corps in a boat or punt, differeth not at all from the ce-
remonies of Baccus : for clad they be in ftogs kings, they
carry javelins iu their bands, ubey keep a loud crying, and
ſbaking of their bodies very unquietly, much after the man-
ner of thoſe who are tranſported with the fanaticall and ſa-
ered fancy of Bacchus. And whet reaſon elſe ſhould there
be, that many nations of Greece pourtray the ftatue of
Bacchus with a buls bead? and the dames among the Elians
#n their prayers and invocations do call unto bim, beſjeeching
this god to come'unto them with bis Buls foot ? yea and the
Argives commonly ſurname Bacchus, Bugenecs,wbich is as
much to ſay , as the ſon of « Cow, or engendred by «bull:
and that which more is, they invocate and call upon bim out
of the water with ſound of trumpets,cafting into a deep gulfe,
« lambe, as tothe Portier, under the nemeof PyJaochos.
Tbeir trumpets they bide within their javelins,called Thyr-
fi, according as Socrates hath written in his books of ſacred
| ceremonies

——_

LO. ——

The Preface.

ceremonies, Moreoveer, the Titanical atis, and that
whole, entier and ſacred night, accord with that which is
reported as touching the diſmembring of Eugenius, and
the reſurreGion or renovation of his life : in like maner,
thoſe matters which concern bis burial, For the Ag yptians
ſhew in many places the ſepulchres of Eugenius : and the
Delphians think, they have the bones and reliques of Bace
chus among them, interred and beſtowed neer unto the or a<
cle : and his religious prieft celebrate unto him a ſecret ſa-
crifice within the temple of Apollo, when the Thyades
who are the Prieftreſſes begin to chaunt the ſonnet | One of
the ſurnames of Bacchus. Licnites. Now that the Greeks
are of opinion, that Bacchus is the lord and governour, nor
of wine liquor only, but alſo of every other nature which iz
moiſt and liquid, the teftimony of Pindarus is ſufficient

when he ſaith thus : Bacchus |

Taking the charge of trees that grow,
Doth cauſe them for to bud and blow 2
The verdure freſh and beauty pure

Of lovely fruits he doth procure.

And therefore it is, that thoſe who ſerve and worſhip Eu-
genius are ſtreightly forbidden and charged, not to defiroy
any fruitful tree, xor to ſtop the bead of any Fountaine.
And not only the river Nilus, but all water and moiſture
whatſoever in general, they call the efluence of Eugenius :
by reaſon whereof, before ther ſacrifices they carry alwaies '

in o—_ 4 pot or pitcher of water, in honour of the ſaid

£0

They deſcribe alſo a king and the Southern or meridional
climat of the world, by a fig-tree leaf, which fig-leaf ſig-
nfieth the imbibition and motion of all things : and beſides, ;

it ſeemeth naturally to reſemble the member of generation. |
Alſo,when they ſolemnize the feaſt called Pamylitiagwhich

CES

[]

Co" EY EE INCEIEY

© —_—

| The Pretace.

was inftituted in the bonour of Priapus, they ſhew and
carry about in proceſſion an image or ſtatue, the genital:
member whereof., is thrice as bigg as the ordinary : foy
this god of theirs is the beginning of all things; and every
ſuch principle, by generation multiplieth it ſelf. Now, we
are wont moreover to ſay, Thrice, for many times ; to wit,
# finite number for an infinite; as when we uſe the word,
Tecouanepts, that is to ſay, Thrice happy, for moſt happy;
and Three bonds, for infinite ; unleſt peradventure this
ternary of threefold number was expreſly and properly cho-
ſen by our ancients, For the nature of moiſture being the
principal that engendreth all things, from the beginning
bath engendred theſe three elements or primitive bodies,
Earth, Aire and Fire, For That branch which is ſet unto,
to wit, thatTyphon flung the genital member of Eugenius
in the River, that Beata could not find it, but cauſed one
to be made to reſemble it, and whez ſhe was provided
thereof, ordained that it ſhould be honoured and
carried in a ſolemne pompe ; tendeth to this, fo- toteach us,
that the generative and produtiive vertue of god, had moi-
fture at the firs for the matter, and by the means of the ſaid
humidity, was mixed with thoſe things that were apt for
ation. Another branch there is yet, gowing to this,
namely, that one Apopis brother to the Sun, warred a-

helped him to defeit his enemy; in regard of which merit
be. adopted bim for his ſon, and named him Dionyſus,
that ix to ſay, Racchus.
evidently appeareth, accordeth covertly, with the truth of
Nature : for th? Xgyptians call the win1e, Jupiter, unto
which nothing is more contrary, than ficcity and that which
is firy: and that is not th: Sun, although ſome conſaugui-

the extremity of that drineſi, fortifieth and augments
' #th thoſe vapours, which nouriſh the wind and kee f

gb

bas -

ET ome wig eo Cn wk. ©'i

gainft Kedemel ; that Eugenius aided K-demel ant

Now the Muthology of this, as it.

wity it bath unto it : but moiſfttire comming to extinguiſh .

ut f
*, EY :
34. 2

Ee tier A

Fe The Preface,

it in force, Moreover, the Greeks conſecrate the Tuy unto
Bacchus, and the ſame is named among the Egyptians,
Chenofiris, which word, (as they ſay ) ſignifieth in the
Fgyptian tongue, the plant of Eugenius : at leaſt wiſe
Arifton who enrolled a colony of the Athenians, affirmeth
that the light upon au Epiſile of Anaxarchus, wherein he
found as much ; as alſo, that Bacchus was the ſox of 4
water nymph, Naias, Other Agyptians alſo there be,
who hold, that Bacchus was the ſon of Beata, and that.
he was not called Mercury, but Arſaphes, an the. letter
Alpha, which word ſignifieth proweſi or valour, And
thus much giveth Hermaus to widerftand, in his firſt book,
of Figyptian atis; where he ſaith alſo. that Eugenius by
mterpretation, is as much, as| veeu©)] ſtout or mighty,
Here I forbear to alledge Menaſas, who referretb and
aſcribeth unto Epaphus, Bacchus, Eugenius, and Sa-

rapis. T overpaſs Anticlides likewiſe, who affirmeth,

that Beata was the daughter of Prometheus, ani mar-

ried unto Bacchus, For the very particular properties that

we bave ſaid were in their feaſts and ſacrifices, yeeld «

mere Cleer evidence and proof, than any allegations of wit-

neſſes whatſoever. Alſo they bold, that among the ſtars,

the dogg or Sirius was Conſecrate unto Beata, the which

ftar draweth the water, And they honour the Lion, with

whoſe heads, and having the mouth gaping and wide open,

they. adorne the dores and gates of their temples, for that

the river Nilus riſeth |

So ſoon as in the circle Zodiack,
©: 9L- TThe Sun and Leo figne, encounter make.

And a they both hold and affirme, Nilus to be the efluence
of Eugenius ; even ſo they are of opinion, that the body of
Beata 7s the earth or land of Fgypr; and yet not all of it,
but ſo much as Nilus overfloweth, and by commrixtion mak-
th fertile and fraitful ; of whiccomunion, they [Y,
Iha,

?

ERS

x - _ ——
The Pretace.
that Orus was engendred, which is nothing el but the
temperature and diſpoſition of the aire, nouriſhing and
marntaining all thixgs. They ſay alſo, that this Orus was
nouriſhed within the Mores neer unto the City Butus, by
the goddeſs Latona : for that the earth being well dren-
| » Ched andwatered, bringeth forth and nouriſheth vapours,
E which overcome, extinguiſh, and repreſs (nothing ſo much )
great ſiccity and dryneſs, Furthermore, they call the mar-:
cbes and borders of the land, the confines alſo of the coaſts
which touch the ſea, Nephthys : and this is the reaſor
why they name Nephthys, Teleutza, that is to ſay, final
or laft; and ſaythat ſhe was married uttto Typhon. And
when Nilus breaketh out and overtuneth his banks, ſo, as
be approacheth theſe borders,this they call the unlawful con-
Jundion or adultery of Eugenius, Nephthys, the which
is known by certain plants growing there, among which is:
the Melilot : by the ſeed whereof, ſaith the tale, when it was
ſhed and left behinde, began Hyle to perceive the wrong-
that was done unto him in his mariage, And hereupon they
ſay, that Orus was the legitimate ſox of Iris, but Anubis:
was borne by Nephthys' in baſtardy, And verily in the
ſucceſſion of kings they record Nephthys married unto
H,le, to have been at firſt barren. Now if thisbenot
meant of a woman, but of a goddeſs, they underſtand under
theſe evigmatical ſpeech:s, a land altogether barren and
wifruitful, by reaſon of hardneſs and ſtiffe ſolidity. The
Tying in wait »f Ayle to ſurpriſe Eugenius, his uſurped
rule and tyranny, 1s nothing elſe but the force of drineſs,
which was wery mighty, which diſſipated alſo and
ſpent all that humility that both engeudreth and alſo en-
Creaſeth Nilus to that beighth As for that Queen of FE-
thiop'a, who came to aid and affitt bim, ſhe betokeneth
_ the Southerly winds comming from Fithiopia : for when -
theſe have the upper hand of the Etefian windes, which 51ow
from the North, and drive the clouds into Kchiopia, and

-

LC. CG cc nance mm Sm oO fT Gm wa wa ES rl -- QA ey ee hd. , & ww,

OI INT Wt — wth.

"4:6 Ae 69

eee. re ey reg Gans. <tr Urs rg), on > <A

- -
| 5
9
_ o

-—

The Preface. |
o hinders thoſe ſhowers and gluts of raine which powre out
- the clouds, and make the 4 Nilus to ſwel : then Hyle
that is to ſay, drouth, is ſaid to win the better, To
burn up all; and ſo having gotten the maſtery Clean of
Nilus, who by reaſon of his wenkneſs and feebleneſs, is
driven in, and forced to retire z contrary way, he chaſeth
him, poor and low into the ſea, For whereas it is ſaid,that
Eugenius wes ſput fat within an arkor coffer, there is no
other thing ſignified thereby,” but this departure backof the
water and the hitling thereof within the ſea : which 1s the
cauſe alſs,that they ſay, Eugenius went out of ſight, in the
moneth Achyr, and was no more ſeen ; at what time as
when all the Eteſian windes are laid and given over to
blow, Nilus returneth into his chanell, leaving the land
diſcovered and bare. And now by this tinte as the night
groweth louger, the darkneſs encreaſeth , like as the force ..
of the light doth diminiſh and is impaired: and then the
prieſts among many other ceremonies, teſtifying their ſad <
neſs and beavie cheere, bring forth and ſhew a beef with
golden hornes, whom they cover all over with a fine vaile
of black ſilk, thereby to repreſent the beavy dole and mouyn-
ing of the goddeſs for Eugenius : ( for thus they zbink,
that the ſaid beef" is the image of Eugenius-: axd the
veſtment of black aforeſaid, tefiifying the earth, doth ſig-
nifie Beata ) and this ſhew exhibit they four daies together,
to wit, from the ſeventh unto the tenth fofowing : And
why ? Foure things there be for which they make demon-
flration of gribf and ſorrow : the firſt is the river Nilus,
for that he ſcemeth to retire and faile : the ſecond are the
North-windes, which now are huſht and ſtill, by reaſon of-
the Southern winds, that gaine the maſtrie over them : the
third is the day, for that now it waxeth ſhorter than the
might : and laſt. of all, the' diſcovering and nakedneſs
of the earth, together with the deveſting of threes,which at
the very ſangt time begin to ſhed aud loſe their [28ves, aﬀfer
0 CITES, as

: The yreface.
this, pon the ninteenth day at night, they go down 10 the
ſea ſide, and then the prieſts reveted in their ſacred Stoles
an1 habits, carrie forth with them, a conſecrated cheſt,
whzrein there is a veſſell of gold, into which they take and
powre freſh and potghle water ; and with that, all theſe
who are preſent, ſet up a note and ſhout, as if they bad
fovnd Eugenius again : then they take # piece of fatty

fertile earth, and together with thewater , knead and
work it into a paſte, mixing therewith moſt precious odors,
perfumes and ſpices, whereof they make @ little image in
forme of the Moon croifſant, which they deck with robes
and agorne, ſhewing thereby evidently thas they take theſe
geds ro te the ſubſtance of water and earth,
Thas when Eeara had recovered Eugenius, nouriſhed
Orus, and brougat him up to ſome growth, ſo that he now
became jireugthned aud fortified, by exhalation, vapors,
wiſts ard clouds, Hyle verily was vanquiſhed, bowbeit
xot ſlain, for that the goddeſs, which is the lady of the
earth, would not permit and ſuffer, that the power or na-
ture which isCcontrary unto moiſture, ſhould be utterly a-
bolifhed : only ſhe did ſlacken and let down the vebement
force thereof, willing that this combat and ſirife (ſhould
ſitll continue ; becauſe the world would uot have been entire
and perfed, if the nature of fire bad been once extinft aud
gone, And if this goe not Currant among them, there is .
mo reaſon and probability. that any oxe ſhould projet. this W-
aſſertion alſo, namely, that Hyle mm times paſt overcame
oe part of Eugenius : fer that in old tage, Egypt was
ſea : whereupon it is, that even at this day, within the
m:n's wherein men dig for metta.s, yea, and among the
' wrourtaines, there is found great flore of fea fiſh. Likewiſe,
all the fcuntaines, wells and pits( and thoſe are-mauy in
namber ) carry a brackiſh, ſtitijh, and bitter water, 4s
af ſome remnant or reſidue of the o!d ſea were reſerved,
wWoich ran thither, Eus inproceſs of time, Qens prane
PETE ED Bo

i.

— — —— 4 —

Y - ge
= ea,

The Preface,

Hyle, that 15 to ſay, when the ſeaſonable raine came,
which tempered the excefive heat, Nilus expelled and
drave forth the ſea, diſcovered the champion ground, and
filled it continually more and more by new deluges and in-
undations, that laid ſomewbat ſtill unto it. And bereof,
the daily experience is preſented to our cies ; for we perceive
even at this day, that the overflowes and riſing of the rwver
bringiug new mud, aud adding freſh earth flall by little
and little, the ſea giveth place and retireth : and as the
deep in it is filled more and mote, ſo the ſuperficies riſeth
higber, by the continual fhelves that the Nile Caſts up ;;
by which mean , theſea runneth backward : \ea, the very
Iſle Pharos, which Homer knew by bis dates to lie farr
within the ſea, even @ daies ſailing from the contingent and
' firme lardof Egypt, is tow a very part thereof : not fur
that it remove $06 approached neerer and neerer to th.
land; but becauſe the ſea wbich mas between, gave place
unto the river that cdntinually nigde new earth with the i
mud that it brought, and ſo maintained «nd augmented Wu
the maine land. But theſe things reſemble very neere,
the Theologicall interpretations that the Stoicks [give ont >
for they hold, that the generative and nutritive Spirit, is
Bacchus ; but thet which ſiriheth aud divideth, is. Per-
cules 3 that which receiveth, is Ammon 3 that which
+. exireth and pierceth into the earth, is Ceres and Profer-
+ pina; and that which doth penetrate farther ' and paſs
thorowp the ſex, is Neptune. Others, who mingle among
adtiral cauſes and reaſons, ſome drawn from the Mathe-
ticks, nd prigxipally from 4(trology, think, that Hyle is
- the Solar Circle ar ſphere of tbe Sun ; and that Eugenius
) is thet of the Boon ;, inaſmuch as the Moon hath a gener a=
. five axd vegetable light, multiplying that ſweet and come

I

A—
hy. —————_—

Wy, - VTiy BD YauyW ww *&D Y-

ww YY% fin *wD' © WW ww cx

we,

CI

3 8 ©

" Us. ® Us OP

,; fartable rhoiftnre which a meet for the generation of
2 wing creatures, of trees and plants : but the Sun having

Init 6 pure firy lanie indeed without any mixture or re-
_ ons 1p d2 batement

= MM 0m _ E
OP P i

mm

The Preface.
batement at all, beateth and drieth that which the-earth
bringeth forth, yea, and whatſoever is verdant and in the
flower ; inſomuch, as by his inflemation be Canſeth the
greater part of the earth to be wholly deſert and inhabita-
ble, and many times ſubdueth the very Moon. And there -
fore the Egyptians evermore name Hyle, Seth, which is
as much to ſay, as ruling lordly, and oppreſſing with
wviclence, And after their manner they [ay,that Hercules
ſitting as it were upon the Sun, goeth about the world with
him ; and Mercurie likewiſe with the Moon : by reaſon
whereof, the works and effeeF of the Moon reſemble thoſe
atis which are performed by eloquence and wifdome : but
thoſe of the Sun are compared to ſuch as be exploited by .
force gnd puiſſance. And the Stoicks ſay, that the Sun is
lighted and ſet on fire by the Sea, and therewith nouriſhed:
but they be the fountains and lakes which ſend up unto the
Moan a milde, ſweet and delicate vapour, The Egyptians
fay that the death of Eugenius hapned on the: ſeventeenth
day of the moneth, on which day, better than upon any other, -
ſhe is judged to be at the full : and this ts the reaſon why .
the Pythagoreans cal this day, The obſtruction, and
of all other numbers they moſt of abhor and deteſt ir : for
whereas ſixteen is a number quadrangular or four-ſquare,
and eighteen longer one way than another ; which numbers
onely of thoſe that be plain, happen for to have the ambient jj
wnities, that environ them equal to the ſpaces Contained
aud comprebended within them ; ſeventeen, which falleth
between, ſeparateth and digoineth the onc from the other, -
and being Cut into unequal intervals, diftrafeth the pro-
portion ſeſquioFave. And ſome. there be who ſay,. that
Eugenius /ived, others that he reigned, eight and twenty

years : for ſo many lights their be of the Moon, and fo
 wanydaies dotÞ ſhe turne about the Earth : and therefore,

* 7x thoſe ceremonies which they call the ſepulture of Euge-
njus, they cut 8 peece of wood, end make. a certain coffin .

aw :

—_ oath, 4 = in. A... 4 _m-

—__—

a

The Preface.

or Caſe in manner of the Moon croiſſant, for that as ſhe ap=
preacheth neer to the ſun, ſhe becometh pointed and cornered,
untill in the end ſhe come to notbing, and is no moreſeen.
And as for the diſmembring of Eugenius nto fourteen
peeces, they ſignifie unto us under the Covert vaile of theſe
words, the daies wherein the ſaid planet is in the wane,
and decreaſeth even unto the change, when ſhe is renewed
again, And that dey on which ſhe firſt appeareth, by
paſſing by and eſcaping the raies of the Sun, they call an
uuperfed good : for Eugenius ts a deer of good : and this
name ſig nifieth many things, but principally an aGive and
beneggcial power, as theyſay: and as for the other name
Omphis, Hermzus ſaith, that it betokeneth as much as
benefadiour. Alſo, they are of opinion, that the riſmngs
and inundations of the river Nilus, anſwer in preportion
, tothe courſe of the Moon : for the greateſt heigth that it
groweth unto in the countrey Elephancine, 7s eight and
twenty cubits ; for ſo many ulluminations there begor daies,
in every revolution of the Moon : and the loweſt gage a=
. bout Mendes and Xois, ſix cubits, which anſwereth to
* the firſt quarter ; but the mean between , about the City
Memphis, when it is juſt at the full, cometh to fourteen
cubits, correſpondent to the full Moon, They hold moreover,
Apis to be the. lively image of Eugenius, and that he is
mngendred and bred at what time as the generative light
deſcendeth from the Moon and toucheth the Cow defirqus of
. the male : and therefore Apis reſembleth the formes of the
n, baving many white ſpots obſcured and darkened
with the ſhadowes of black, And this is the reaſon, why they
ſolemnize a feaſt in the new Mopn of the moneth Phame=
noth, which they call the ingreſſe or enterance of Euge-
nius, to the Moon ; and this is the beginning of the)Spring
Jeeſon : and thus they put the power of Eugenius 2 the -
Mayn, They ſay alſo, that Beata ( which is noother thing
Mut generation ) lieth with 9 end ſo they name the

—_—

i... _—_——— H—
—

| x The Preface,
Mon, Mother of the world - ſaying, thut fre is a donble
nature, male and female; female, in that ſhe doth conceive
and is repleniſhed by the $un : and male, wn this repird,
that ſhe ſendeth forth and ſprink{eth im the aire, the ſeeds
and principles of generation : for that the drie di ſtemeperit-
Ture and corruption of Hyle, is not alwazes ſaperion, but
pore" vanguiſhed by generation, and bowſoever vitd i
e) and bound, yet it riſeth freſh ty a#t, and fighteth a-
gainft Orus, who is nothing elſe but the terreſtrial world,
which js not altogether free frem corruption, nor yt #*<
empt from generation. Others there be, who woul4 have
all this Phytoſophy covertly to repreſent no ether thing bu
the ecclipſes : for the Moon is eclipſed, when fhe 3s ut
the full direAly oppoſite to the Sun, and commeth-to fall
z;pon the ſhadow of the earth : like as they ſay, Eugenius
was put into the cheſt or coffer aboveſai4.On the other ſids,
ſhe ſeemeth to hide and darken the light of the Sun, upon
certain thirtieth daies,but yet doth yt wholy aboliſh the ſine,
#0 more then Beata doth kilt Hyle, but when Nephehys
Bringeth forth Anubis,Beara jutteth ber ſelf in place: for
Nephthys is thar which is under the earth and naſeen;.
but Beatathat which is above, and appeuyeth unto us; and
#be circle named Horizon, which is common tothens both,
and parteth the two hemiſpheres, is named Anubis, and
infarm reſembleth a dog : for why ? a dog ſeeth aſwell by
night es by day: fo that it ſhould feem, that Anubis 4
ong the Eoypuans bath the like power thatProſerpina
among the Greeks, being bath texreftrial and caleftial,
Others there be, who thith,, that Anubis is Saturn, and
Sec uſe be is conceiyed with all things, und bringeth them
forth, which'in Greek the word wer firniffeth , there»
| fore hers ſurnametd Kuvy, that is to ſay, adog. So'thit
there is ſome hidden ant myſtital ſecret in it, that cxnſeth
ſome, eve ftill to reverence and «dere a tleg +. for the time
Yelg Wh more wor flp wie Jour 199 it tes Egypt, 2908

y

————— —_ —_—

tC, em

DC—_—_—

The Preface.

— —

5 Aw WO.

there are, who would have the ſhadow of the earth, which
ceuſeth the Moon to be ecclipſed wben ſhe emtreth into it, to
benamed Hyle. And therefore me thinks, it were not a=
miſs toſay, that im particular there is not any one of theſe
expoſitions and interpretations perfet} by'it ſelf and right,
but all of them together carry ſome good conſtrufion © for
t is neither drought alone,or winge, nor ſea, nor yet dark-
neſs; but all that is noiſome and hurtful whatſcever, and
which hath a ſpecial part to hurt and deſtroy, is Called
Hyle, Neither muſt we put the principles of the whole
world into bodies thav have no life and ſoule, as Democri=
tus ard Epicurus, doe : wor yet ſet down for the work-
man aud framer of the firſt matter, a certain reaſon and
providence, without quality ( as do the Stoicks ) ſuch a
thing as hath a ſubſiſtence before and above all, and com-
mandeth all : for impoſſible it is, that one ſo!e cauſe, good
or bad, ſhould be the beginning of all things together: for
God is not the cauſe of anyevill, and the congmentation of
the world bendeth contrary wayes, like as the compoſition
of « lute or bow, as Heraclitus ſaith, and according” to
Euripides, 0

f

--

No things can be by themſelves good or bad :
That things do yell, a mixture muſt be had.
And therefore this opinion ſo very antient , is deſcende4
from Theologians «1d Lawgivers unto Poets and Phir-
loſophers, read, The Idea of the Law, bowbert, ſo
firmely grounded in the perſbaſion and beliefe of men,
that bard it is to ſuppreſs or aboliſh the ſame 3; ſo commons.
ly divul ged not only us Conferences, diſputations, «nd or-

PREASTHEAALPE RD RE EEoD DG EST”

F 0
ow Ya

WH > CARR for oo hr ee 19

- ICI >> PR ee».

ainary ſpeeches abroad, but alſo in the ſacrifices and di- -
\ vine Ceremonies of gods ſervice, in many places, as well a-
»ong the Barbarians as Greeks, to wit, that neitber this
world floteth and waveth at adventure, without the g0-
vernment of providence and reaſon, nor reaſon only 'it is
that guideth, direfeth, and holdeth it ( as it were ) with
certain belmes or bits of obeiſance, but many things there
be confuſed and mixed, good and bad together : or to ſpeak,
more plainly, there is nothing here beneath that nature
produceth and bringeth forth, which of it ſelf is pure and
fimple : neither is there [one drawer of two tuns, to diſ-
perſe and diſperſe and diſiribute abroad the affaires of this
world,like as a Taverner or Vintner doth his wines or other
liquors, brewing and tempering one with another. But
this life is condudied by tyro princifiles and powers adverſe
one inta another ; for the one leadeti us to the right hand
direfily,'read The Holy Guide, the other contrariwiſe
 turneth us aſide and putteth us back, : and ſo this life is
mixt, and the very world it ſelf, if not all throughout,
yet at leaſt wiſe, this beneath about the earth, aud under
the Moon, is unequall, variable, and ſubjeti to all muta-
tions that poſſibly may be, For if nothing there is, that
Can be without @ precedent cauſe, ayd that which of it
ſelf is good. can never miniſter cauſe of evill ; neceſſary it
3s, that nature hath fome peculer cauſe and beginning by it |
ſelf, ofegood aſwell as of bad, And of this opinion are the
moſt part of the ancients, and thoſe of the wiſcſt ſort. For:
ſome think there be two gods as it were of a contrary my-' +
ftery and profeſſion ; the one, author of all good things,
and the other of bad. Others there be who call the better.
of thewy.god; and the other Demon, that is toſay, divell,
as Zoroaſtres the Magician did, who by report, was five
thouſand yeers before the warr of Troy. This Zoro--
aftres ( 1ſay) named the good gd: Oromares, and the
other Arimanius, Mereover, be gave ont, that the ons

* * þ
- 5 i
h_-” -* $5982
YR TAR c

A A_—_ ——

| is os the mids between them, named Mithres : ( and here-'

 Crifice': this done, they carry it away,

© bad angmented and amplified himfelf three times, he re-
. moved as far from the Sun, as the Sun is diſtant from the
. Earth, adoring and embeliſhing the Heaven with ftarÞ$ :

— —d—— en,

—_—

_ThePreface- :

rm.

refembled light, more than ther, ſenſible thing elſe what-
ſcever : the other darkgeſs and ignorance-: alſo that] there

upon it is, that the Perftans call an interceſſor or media-

tor, Mithres, ) He teacheth us alſo to ſacrifice wnto the

one of them, for petition of good things, and for thankeſ-
giving : but to the other, for to divert and turn away
ſiniſter and. evill accidents, To which purpoſe they uſed to
ftamp in a murter a certain berbe which they callQmimi,
calling upon Pluto end the darkyeſs : then temper they

it with the blood of a woolfe which they have killed in ſa
aud throw it into «
darke Corner, where the Snn never ſhineth, For this con- .. |
ceit they bave, that of herbes and plants, ſome appertain
2nto the good god, and others to the evill Demon or divell.
Semblably , of living creatures, dogs, birds, and land
urchins, belong to their good god : but thoſe of- the water,
to the evill fiend, © And for this cauſe they repute thoſe very
bappy, who can kill the greateſt number of them. How- i. --
beit theſe Sages and wiſemen' report maxy things of the
gods : «fy: example, that Qromarzes is engendred =
cleereft and pureſt light, and Arimanius of deep dark-
neſs : alſo that they warre one np0n another. And the for=
mer of theſe, created fix other gods, the firſt of Benevolence; _
the ſecond of Verity ; the third of good diſcipline and pub-
lick Law ; and of the reſt behinde, one of Wiſdome, ano-
ther of Riches; and the fixth, which alſo is the laſt, the
maker of Joy for good and hone} deeds. But tbe latter,
that is to ſay, Arimanius produceth as many other in num
ber, concurrents as it were and of adverſe operdtion to the
former above named. - Afterwards when Gromarzes

end one Stay above the reft be. ordained to be_ the guide, |
- Cs mit eſs,

——

The preface.
| miſtreſs, and overſeer of them all, to wit, Sirius, that is
to ſay, the Dogge-fiar. Then after be bad made four and
ewenty other gods, be encloſed them all with in an egge,
But. the other, brought. forth by Arimanius, who were
elſoin equal AS never Ceaſed untill they had Jverced
exd made « bole unte the a ſmooth and poliſhed egg
and ſo " —_ tey that, evil things became mingled pell Ss |
, But there will « Sh Come predefined fatally,
r == NG Ons who brings tato the world plague and
| an ge of neceſſity be reoted out, and carried throngh
fo the eternity, even by them ; and the caxth Kal
. become ola even, and uniforme : neither ſhall there be
any other bus one life, and one common- wealth of men, all *
happy and ſpeaking one and the ſame language. Theopom-
pus &ſo writeth, that according to the wiſe Magi, thcſe
Iwo gods muſt for three thouſand yeers, conquer one after
anther, aud for three theuſand yeers be conquered again .
by turnes ; aud then for the ſpace of another three thouſand

I yeers, levey mutual warres, aud fight battels one againſt
SIT the other, whiles the axe ſoall ſubvert and overthrow that
_ which the other bath ſet up : watill in the end Pluto foal
faint, give over, and be bs an Angel of Light : then
ſhall men be all in ed is rye more food,
2or.caft any ſhadow from gp ; aud that god who hath
wrought and affeicd all this, Anopeſ biel, and reſt -

#1 quiet, not long ( I ſay ) for a od, a moderate tine
as one EL +5 Djs Os bis ſleep and reſt,
And tbus much as touching the Phyloſophy deviſed by the
\Fheomegio. Bu# the Chaldaans offirme that 'of the
gods, whom they call Planets or wandring ftarres, two
| there be that are beneficial and. deoers wi » Iwo again
miſchievous and workgrs of evill ; and thrie which are of
a mean nature and common, As far the opinian of the
Greeks, concerning this point, there is no man ] ſuppoſe
. ont thereof ; yes that there be two portions -on
; parte,

_
——
.

TT ThePreface,

oe perts of the world, the owe good, allotted into Jupiter

* Oly mpine, that 75 fo ſay, Gelefiial 5 anotber bas, apper«

a raining to Pluto infernal, They fay moreover, that the

WW goddefs Harmonia, vhat #5 to ſay, accord, was engendrod. -

x of Mars 4d Venus : of whom, the one is cyaell, grim,oud . .

grarry/lows ; the other milde, lovely, and generative. Now

E: confider the Philoſophers themſdlves, hew they agree beroin :

; For Heraclitus direSly and th nemeth warre, the

fi Father, Kang, and Lord of all the world ; ſaying, that ©
1 Homer whey be wiſheth ud praieth, ——

7 Both oat of Heaven and Earth to baniſh Warre,

. Thac God and Men, ne more might beat jarre.

wifi n6t bow ( erre be was aware) be Curſed the generation
aud produttion of all things, which indeed have their
eſſexce an# being by the fight and antipmbir 3x nature.
He wasighorent that the- Sun would not paſs the bounds
and limits appointed unto bim 4 for otherwiſe the faries and if;
Cn vfed tdugnes which are the mneiſireſſes and coadjutreſſes Ye
of juſtice would find bim out. As for Empedocles, be
ſaith , that the beginning aud principle which worketh
good, is love ani .amity, yea, and other whites is called
Harmonte by Merops ; but the cauſe of evil!,

Malice, hatred, cankred ſpight,
Quarrel], debate, and bloody fghc.

Come mow to the Pythagoreans, they, demonſtrate ond

ſpecific theſame ty 24mes, for they call the good
amb as 4 — or niet flraight or dived,
olde,quadrat, or ſquare, right and lightſcane : but -the
bed, tai, infinite, moving, crooked, even, longer cne
'. way thay axvtber, unequal, left and darkg, as if theſe

were $be ſorgutaines of generation. 'Anaxagoras _—

ET there

te.

p wy" n — —

LAY
” > os: £m”

The Preface.”

them the minde or underſtanding and infinity. Ari-
ftotle termeth the one forme , the) other privation.
And Plato under darke and covert termes biding bis opi-
' wion, in many places calleth the former of theſe two con-
treryprinciples, The ſame, and the later, The other.
But in the the bookes of his laws, which he wrot when he was
now well fept in yeers, he giveth them no more any obſcure
and ambiguons names, neither deſcribeth be them ſymbo-
lically and by enigmatical and intricate names, but in
proper and plain termes, be ſaith, that this work is not
moved and managed by one ſole cauſe, but haply by many,
or at Feaſt wiſe no fewer than twain : whereof the one 18 the
creator and worker of good, the other oppoſite unto it and
operative of contrary effetis, He leaveth alſo and alloweth
# third cauſe between, which is neither without ſoule nor
reaſonleſs nor yet nnmoveable of it ſelf, as fome think, but
adjacent and adherent to the other twain, howbeit enclining
alwaies to the better, as having a 'defire and appetite
thereto, which it purſueth and followeth, as that which
hereafter we will deliver, ſhall ſhew more manifeſtly, which
treatiſe ſhall reconcile the Fgyntian Theologie with the
Greeks Philoſophy, and reduce them to a very good *Con-=
cordance : for that the generation, ceampoſition, and Con-
ſtitntion of this world is minoled of contrary powers, how-
beit the ſame not of equal force : for the better is predomi-
nant : but impoſfble it is that the evill ſhould utterly periſh
and be aboliſhed, fo deeply is it imprinted in the body and
fo far in bred in the ſoule of the univerſal world, in op-
poſition alwaies ta vhe better, and to warre againſt it, Now
then, in the ſoule, reaſon and underſtanding, which is the
guide, end miſtreſs of all the beſt things, & Eugenius.
Alſo in the earth, in the windes, in water, skie and the
ftars, that which is well ordained, ficied, diſpeſed and
digeſted in good fort, by temperate ſeaſons and revolutions, .
the ſieme is called the defluxion of Eugenius,' and the very

|
;,
% } 3
[|
i I
-

TEN OS Opin

—

they 4ame Seth, which is as much to ſay, as violent and

, times reverſion, and other whiles an inſultution or ſupplan-

the foreſaid horſe they repreſent Hyle, «nd by the bauke,

they deviſe upon thejv hallowed cakes for ſacrifice; @ river-

A IE.

arent image of him : Contrariwiſe', the paſronate,
lens unresſonable, brutiſh,raſh and fooliſh Fas. of the
foule, is, Hyle. Semblably in the bodily nature, that which
;5 extraordinarily advantitious, wunhol, ome and diſeaſed,
as for example, the troubled ayre and. tempefiuous indiſpo- *
fitions of the weather, the obſcaration or ecclipſe of the
Sun, the defef of the Moon {and her occulation, be asit
were the excurſions, deviations out of courſe, and diſpara=
tions : and all of them be Hyles ; as the very interpre-
tation of the Egyptian word ſignifieth no leſs : fof Hyle

oppreing after a lordly manner, It importeth alſo many

tation. Moreover ſome there be who ſay, that one of Hyles |
familiar friends was named Pebzon." But Manethos
affrmeth, that Hyle himſelf was called Bebon, which
word by imterpretationis as much as Cohibition, -reſtreint
or impeachment, as if the puifſence and power of Hyle,
were to ftay and withſtand the affaires that are in good
way of proceeding, and tend as they ſhould doe, to « good
end. And hereupon it is that of tame beaſts they dedicazge
and attribute unto him, the moſt groſs and indocible of all
ot hers, namely an. afſe : but of wilde beaſts the moſt cruel
and ſavage of all others, as the crocodiles and river-borſcs
As for the Lyon we have ſpoken before of hum, In the city
of Mercury, named Vergopolis, - they ſhew unto ns the
image of H yle, purtraied under the form of a river-boxſe,
upon whom fitteth an hauke, fighting with a ſerpent. By

the power and. authority which Hyle having gotten by force,
maketh no care oftentimes, both to be troubled and alſo to
' Trouble others by his malice, And therefore when ſo-
lemmize a ſacrifice, the ſeventh day of the moneth Tibi,
which they call the comming - of Beata out of Phcenicia,

horſe,

” ” ASS 4 & ai-4-a .

The Preface.
© borſe, acif be were tied and bound. Inthe City of Apolto
the manner and cufiome confirmed by law was, that every
one aft ext of « Crocodile : and upen « certain day they
bave 8 folemne chaſe end bunting of thew,, when they hill
as many of thene as they Can, and then caft them ll before
the Temple : and they ſay. that Hyle being beconre a
Crecodile bath efcaped from Qrus ; attributing all
dangerons wicked bea(ts, all hurtful plants aud wolant
peſfions into Hyle, asif they were his workys, his parts or
motions, Contreriwiſe they purtray and depaint unto us
 Eugeniusby 4 ſceptery and ar oye upon it : meaning by the
eye foreſight and providence, by the ſcepter authority and
puiſſance:likg asHomer nemeth Jupiter,wbo is the prixce,
lord and ruler of all the world:Hypacos,thet is,ſoveraign,
 axd Meſtor, that is, foreſeeing : giving us #0 wnderfiand,
by ſoveraign, bis ſupreme power, by forcſecing bis prudence
and wiſdowe. They repreſent Eugenius alſo meny times
by an hauke, for that fhe hath a wonderſul cleore and quick,
fight, her flight alſo is as ſwift, and ſhe is wont naturally
$0 ſeſtain ber ſelf with very little ford, Aud more thax
zbat ( by report ) when ſhe flieth over dead bodies unburied,
te Cafieth mould and earth upon their eyes, And look,
whenſcever ſhe nlieth down to the river for to drinke be
ſctteth up hev feathers firaight upright, but when ſhe bath:
drunke ſhe lateth them plane and even again, by which it
apprareth ther ſafe fue is,aud hath eſcaped the Crocodile: |

PEPPER _—
———_

For if the Crocodile ſeiſe upor her and catch ber up, ber | |

pennauche abideth iff and upright asbeſo-e; But generally
throughout whereſacver the imtage of Eugenius is exhibited*
in the fo me of « avax, they purtray bit with the nature!
avember of generation fiiff and firaeg bt, prefiguring there-
by the generarive and witritive veitus. The habiliauent
Iſo, wherewith they clad bis tmuges is bright, ſpining like
fire : For they repute the ſunnue $0 be @ body repre
ſenting the power of geadgeſs, 45 bujng the while oY

| >» - Io———

of 4 ſpirizual and intellefiuall ſubfiance. And therefore
their opinion deſerveth to be rejefed. who attribute unto
| Hyle the ſphere of the Sun,conſfidering that unto him pro-
| perly appertaineth nothing that is reſplendent, healthfull
ga; comfortable, no diſpoſition, no generation or motion,
which is ordered with meaſure or digefied by reaſon : But
if either in the aire or upon the earth tbere be any unſeaſo-
nable diſpoſition of windes, of weather, or water, it m_
neth when the primitive cauſe of 8 diſordinate and i
terminate power Commeth to extinguiſh the kinde vaponrs
and exhallations, Moreover in the ſacred hynmes of Euge-
nius, they invocate and call upon bim who licth at repoſe
bidden within the armes of the Sun. Alſo upon the thir-
' ticth day of the moneth Epiphi, they ſolenmize the feaſt
of the nativity or birth of Oruuseyes : at whet time as the
Sun and Moon be in the ſame dire( line : as being per-
ſwaded that not enely the Moon but the Sun alſo is the eye
and light of Horus : Likewiſe upon the twenty exght day
of the moneth Phaopi they celebrate another feaft of the
Sunnes baſons or ftaves, and that is after the Kquinosx MM
in ae ping covertly _ to anderfland, that Wis
the Sun bath need of an appuy or ſupporter to reſt "i
and to firengtben him, hg his beat begins + gp
decay and langniſh ſenſibly, his light alſo to diminiſh and \
decline obliquely from us. Moreover about the ſolſtice
or middle of winter, they carry about bis temple ſeven times
a cow ; and this þ dceſſion is Called the ſeeking of Eugenius
or the revalution of the ſun, as if the goddeſs then deſired
the watersof winter : And fo many times they doe it, for
that the courſe of th- San, from the Winter ſolſtice wnto
the Summer ſolflice is performed in the ſeventh moneth. 1t
is ſaid moreover , that Horns the fon of Beata was
the firſt who ſacrificed unto the Sun, the fourteemth day
of the moneth, according atit is written in @ Certain book
a: vouch ing the na$;vity of Horus : howſpever every day

| they .
= =

ITE. Om. To Tg 3

d, ; a REY "on hy 4 " Ee _ 4 : :

v4 Ss Ges Wang Iets _ _F
+

TheT reface | |

they offer incenſe and ſweet odors, to the ſun three times ;
Fitft at the ſan riſing, Roſin : ſecondly about #001, Myrrb':
nd thirdly at the ſun rſetting, a certain conipoſition named
Kiphi. Tbe myſticall meaning of which perſumes and
odors I will hereafter declare : but they are perſwaded that
in all this they worſhip and honour the ſun, But what need

—

| = is there #0 gdtber grid colle@ a nuniber of ſuch matters as

theſe? ſecing there be ſome who operily maintain that
Eugenius is filius ſolis Czlcftir, ard that the Greeks call
 bim Jictusbut{the article which the Agypriane put before,
to wit, [0 is the cauſe that ſo mucb is not evidently per-.
ccived > as alſo that Beata is nothing elſe but Filia Lunz
Celeſtis : and of ber images thoſe that bave bornes upon
them, fignifie no other thing but the Moon croiſſant : but
ſuch as are covered and clad in black; betoken thoſe daies
wherein (be is bidden or darkened namel;,when (be runneth
#fter the ſun : which is the reaſon that in love meiters they
envocets ehe Mopn, And Eaudoxus bimſelf ſaith, than
Beata is the preſedent over amatorious folk-. And verily
in all theſe ceremonies there is probabilitie and likelibood of
greet truth. But to ſay that Hyle is tbe ſun, is ſo abſurd,
that we ought not ſo much as give care to tboſe who affirme
fo. But return we now to our former matter. For Beata
is the feminzns part of neture, apt to receive all generation,
pon which occaſion called (be is by Plato, the nurſe and
Pandeches, tbat is to ſay, capable of all : yea and the com- |
mon ſort name ber Niyrionimus, wbich is as much to fay, *
ws baving 41 iufinite number of names, for that ſhe receiveth y
«ll formes and ſhapes, according as it pleaſetb that firſt ©
reaſon to convert and turne ber. Mpreover, there is ime ..
printed in ber naturally, a leve of tbe firſt and principal .
eſſence, which is nothing elſe but the ſoveraign good, and -
at (be deſireth, ſeeketh, and purſueth after. Contrariwiſe,,
ſbe flieth and repel{zth from ber, any part and portion that
proceedeth from ill, And bowſoever ſþe be the ſubjet7 _—

»

RR % Vo be. 2. STM. i 9... þ

WS SCE Pre a5 WW.

2 *D. -
; A
* b
Ir
%
3

_

— — mY

-- © —— = x — as OY wy drop Ve — ”
—_

bo * LE
» 4a me
—_ wt.
—— # > CI
4 , FED %
I ©, Ge |

—_—I EEE

- :
A. —_
——————n bas. 7
, - + %. #+ % of
; The P |

ond ineet place apt Þ receive, as WH the one as LOabt, yer
of it ſelf, enc1nelt ſhe is alivajes ratb#f to the better,and ap-
plietb | ber ſelf to engender the ſame; yea, aud to diſſeinitia te
and” ſow 'the d-fluxioi awd fimilitude\ thereof, "wherein
ſhe taketh pleaſure ard rejoyteth; when he barb conceived
and is great therewith, ready to be delivered. © Fur this is
a repreſertation and diſcription of the [ul-tancos engendre4
in matter, and «thing elſe but az imitation of that which
is. | And therefore you may ſee, it #4 ot bejides the purpoſe,
that they imagine and deviſe the ſole 'of Eugenius 10 58
eterndl and immortal : but ds ſor the body, that Typhon
many tiness doth teare, mangle, and aboliſh it, that it can-
not be ſeen: arid that Beata goeth up and d.wn, and wan-
drixg bere arid there, gdtbering together the diſmembred
pieces thereof,. for that which is pood ard ſpiritual, by con-
ſequence is not ary waies- ſubject to thange and alteration ;

but that which is; ſenſible and material, doth yeeld from ' it
ſelf cert ain images, admitting withall and receiving ſundiy

proportions, former, and fimilitudles, like as the prints ard

Hamps of ſeales fot Rpon wax , doe nit continue and re-

main? alwaies, but are lo to change, alteration, diſor=

der and trouble, arid this, ſane 1s chaſed from the ſuperior
Region, and ſent down hither, where it fighteth againſt
Horus whom Beata engendred ſenſible, as bring the very
image of the ſpiritual and 'intelleGual world. And bere-
wpou it 35, that Hyle'is ſaid to accuſe bin of batardie, as
being notbing pure” and ſincere, like 10> bis father, towit,
Regjon, and Underitatiging ; wh ich of it ſelf is ſimple, and
riot niedled with any paſſin : butin the matter atulterate
#nd degenerate, by the rezſon that it is corporal. Mowheit,
in the end the vitloty is on Mercurics ſide, for bee is the |
dijcolerſe of feZſou,” which teftifiets u1to us, ond fpewerb
tbat neture hath produced this wort! materidl metaniorpho«
z2d to the ſptrituel forme ; for the tgtvity of Apollo, exr-
tended” P:rwern Brava and Engitius; While) the: pods
= e |. - orE

bd
na.

þ

—

_ ts — —_—— _—_—
5a ,

were yet inthe belly Re mi
beer ind

bey Jay,

%

Hh not Hyle 7 but 1eketb
frem bimebis force andpuiſiance that he can do its qr.no-
thing... And hereupon it it, th8t (by report ) (in the ii
Copuur,. the imape of Forus boldesþ:in one band the .ge-
ueral member of Hyle.* and they Joy beſides, ibat Mercury
having bereft bim of. bis finews, Maſle, thereof ftrivet for
his harpe, and {o uſed them. Hereby they teach, that reaſon
framing the whole world, ſ*t it in tune, and brought ut to ac-

cord, ( read The: Harmony of the world ) framing it.of ,
thoſe parts which before were at jar, and diſcord : howbeit
removed not, nar aboliſhed altogether ' 1he pernicicus and
burtſul nature, but accompBſhed-the veriue tlereef, And
tbere/are it is, that it being feeble and y 171.8 wrought alſo

terlaced ith thoſe part

LY
,

while

"even number whith is two 3 and five 'reſemblyth
| partly 'the fqther, and in part the-motber , as con{ift-

Hits, which is the univerſal world, was derided” of Nero,
ther is to ſay, ffoe; and ſo in. GFeek woundoacy, , in vid

"att a” 2

” OS s
F359 «<=» © 4
The-ptef: F WIS

_

enipuatically the Dithe or decrbiſe of uhs ' Moog 'minetbly «
by th# thealt privation of the eyd, they wine? wy Pexpricad e
and fel? of Yipht'* which the ftin'torb remedy by relumina-
tibis of Her ſtr eight waits,” as Joon as (be is gotten. paſt the
ide of the edrth. Bie'the principal and more divine nature
} compoſed and confiftetb of three things, to /wit, of an in-
tellefuaH nature, 'of watter, anda compound of them both
which we call the world. Now thoſe intelleffucl parts 3
Plato nametb Ideas, the parternes alſo of the father :' es
for matter, be termeth it' a mother; mrſe, « foundation
alſo and a plot or place for grheration :- and that which is
produced of both, bt is wont rocall che iſſue and thing pro-
rreated, Andaman may very well conjeQure, that the
Fegypttans compared the nature of the whole world, eſpe-
rially to this, as the fatreſt triangle of all other. And Plato
in his books of policy or common-wealth, ſeemeth
alſo $0. bave uſed.the ſame, when he compoſeth avid deſcri-
beth bis nuptial gre : which triangle is of this ſort* that
the fide which maketh the right angle, is of three, tbe baſts
of four, andthe third line called Hypotino'(l of five, equi-

-volent in power to the other two that comprehend it; ſo that BE
. the line which direly falleth plumb: upon the baſe, mu

anſwer proportionably to the male : the baſe to the female,
endthe Hypotanufa to the iſſue of them both :' See The
Harmony of the World. And verily, Eugenius repre-
ſenteth the beginning and principle : Beata that which re-
ceiveth ; and Horus the compound of both. For te number
of three is the firſt odde end perfed : 'the quaternarie is the
firſt ſquare or .quatdrate number, compoſed of the firſt

ing both of typo dtd three. 'See The holy "Guide,
lib. . 2- And it ſhould ſeem alfo that the very name

03 came

I CITES
—

Pets» __- Te ER Fe 2a) CORES
ThePreface 7

——

= Tf
$f

_—

mber : aud. t,

7 FhEPrefate,
wheioby br Ingo ho 1s Foggy! ef bitdes' after whom
ſb2* bi « Ti nt "fire; avid ® f aver
ſomewhat of Vinr:" Noo Horuv lendied $Weer them
'# "whIch7e the world Ji nv eferiiat, 107 ip le, 'nbroin-.
cot #, Wilt BI everis-vr e in fentrittron, be endevoreth
by TL, Win ion 1, tid by ribuicaſpoſh3n,'v0 con-
tinue alwaies y Young, if be [Polk pop 6 and periſfþ
But of ſuch Foes takcb (Es Ns th ake uſe, _ as P:
reaſon \#ltogerber” but f0,'as: gp out
- of ed6 of then, 6 fb Jin is Near hg conventent\ 0 our

pu? poſe. Whey at thieſore wee” fdy triatter; wi'the not to -
rely upoti' the opinion M ſome Philofophers; "and to- think,
it for to be a body withilit ſonle,” without quality,” continu-
_— Telf 1417 wohf whtheut Cn vey x fore ©
call oyle the waiter of ume ot ointment”; aud gold the
none of an imape A itn or -Fefcſmrs which novwith-
| flandin got beads of fl fimilitade © and even ſo we ſay,

that the Fig You! & whde He of a Men,is the marter of
vertxe(@nd of ſcitnce, whitÞ we give ito reaſon; for to bring
into order, end atorne. © And ſee there were,' who offii=
med'the minte of under ſtanding to he' the proper plate ' of
former, and as it were, the exprefi midnld 0 mtelligible
things: like as' there” b> Naturaliffs, #h0"bcld, thet" the
ſeed of « woman hatb nit the power of 'a principle ſerving
to the generation of »i1n, but ſtandetb inſtead of matter and
nouriſhment only : 'actorting KRto' whom; we alſo' being
grounded berein, areYo think, that th?; -goddeſs having the
jruition of the firſt and chief god, pho a ing with. him
continualy,for the love 2 of thoſe good things and vertu's which
are in bim, is nothing adverſe unto him, but loveth bim
as ber true ſpouſe and lawjull busband * and likes w? ſay,
that a beneſt wiſe, it ſo rare, that 1 am reſolved never to
marry becquſe ſuch @ one it bard tobe found upon Earth,
who enjoyeth ordirtartly the company of ber busband , pcm
Lim n:veribeleſs, tut bath fill a mind wnto bim ;

ys

ſa giveth not ſbe over, to, be, examoyred .npou \ tim, ethough.
Fay rage lat where. be 114 and replemſpet 2b, big,
principall end woſt fiagere parts. | But- when and where. 0s
Hye #+.the er #bruſtetb himſelf between, and ſetteth won,
the extragmn parts; tbey-and there ſbe ſqemeth 29 be jad..qud.
be avy, end'thrrewpon'1s ſaid te monty, ent, Yearand to,
ſeek up eet36nreiques. ond pieces of Epgrnius, and eder os.
ſhe can frnd any, - (be receruetd end ercaieth them cleſe, like.
as ap ain ſhe:produceth and. bringetb.. forth ather things 10
light of: ber felf. For the reaſons, the Ide, and the > oa :
ces of God which are ix beeven.. and, among the ſtars, and
genres of Geomancy,, doe. there coutiuue ond remain.; but
tboſe which be diſſeminote amoxg the Jenſible; and ;paſſvle..
bedies,; in the earth andin the (ea,. tf
by

ed-in the plent1
and living creatures, the ſame dyi Nig hinich Gee
many times revive axd rife ayain

the meant df ge-
nerations 'or Gamacs. +, And: bareypoa the ſaid "Alle
thus wwch more, that cobabiteth and heth with Nephtbys, .
end that Eugenius alſo by. fealtb, gud ſecretly, keepetb
company with ber : for the corruptive and deftroying power,
doth principally poſſeſs the extream parts of that matter '.
which they neme Nephibys' end death 5. and the genera»
tive and preſerving vertue, conſerreth ito it Little ſeed, and
the ſame weak and feeble, asbeing marred - and deftroyed by
Hyle, wnleſs it be ſo much os B:aragathereth up and ſaveib,
which ſþe alſo noutiſheth and maintaineth. But. in one
word, and 'to ſpeak more. generally, þe is ſtill better, at
Plato' end Atiftotle are of .jopinion, : for. the yaturall
puiſſance to engender and to preſerve., moveth toward
bim as to ſubſtance &nd being: : . whereas that, force
of killing and deflxoying mavetb . he ind_. ems non
 Jubſiſtence which is the reaſon, that they call Yo

i they. call.
Brat that 14 fo ſay, @.mption autmgte. and wiſe; But like 8!

.
» yy

the geyeral name of all,gods and goddeſſes jo wit, Th COS, is
derived «78 7% 94875 jhat 35 to ſay,of viſihle Td rs wy"
| ; - X a tot

. pn mnt. o——_ >

| eng. mon togerber . S mb ty Placo ſaith, that's in old

ted ont 0 Grote with thoſe men who departed fro

theig, #agin
Pretry. tabe [iardred,') for callinz then into uſe, as if it

"The Preface.

«TT ” Ig |
that 15 roſa af rant even'Þo, Jah we kl alſo the
Teil Tron this goddeſs 7 Beata, of intelli igence

times whey they ſaid Beaton by _ Beata, that 7s to

cred 5.0 as Noehjs alſo 'Phroneffs, quaſt
wy oy hat is or ſay, t Yo TRE and mation of tho BN

res ang, Deine, Carrie Qu. gow found. ay

a Ve

aut, Tone 004 och and? (5 _ but. contrari rim
have by þ rope

bindet Lin d lay the courſe of
fo asgb £3 Cannot g? PRE ty Wit, OYY Pice, PK

holy Lair; Th Is id is the Common gr ha ther fo, of
2 de in bedvey,ond beneath in thehouſes of. Earth:

of which, our ancients were wore t6 to call the one fort... ises
that ic toſay, ſacred; an rely other, 3rtz, that 15 to. ſay,
boly. . The reaſon olſo whi th celeſtial things, and

ſuch, as move upward, is called &nwhis, and otherwbiles ff
Hermanytbis; FIN the one name were meet for thoſe above,
and the other for thensbeneath : whereupon they ſacrificed
unto the. « white.cocke, aud to the other, a. yellow or
of ſaffran.colour';, for that they thought thoſe things above,
pure," ſimple and. ang 5; but thoſe heneath, mixed of a
medley... c Eyour, either are we to. marvell,, that theſe
termes are dil; guuſed ro fo. the foſon of Greek, hd for an
infanite 6; of wore there hes which have beer tranſpar-

there mann untill this day as ſtrangers 9"
ve countrey : whereof fome there be which cauſe

exile, A

lawe be bgrbarou namely, theſe who terme my Tele(-
ApS mn, Malhiertetlend 'Taph:hap _—_
: e 4 P I9

£15 dd devs

Phim RSS pure words, Gloutas. Bit at the

Boks of Hermes or. oa, 0 called, "there LY "wriften,

- thus much Corcernin names, yy that "the
7 How

power ordained over ular motign' a and revolution of
the Sun, the Egyptians call Bgrus, 'ayd the” Greeks
Ap6l ls: "that writ 1s over the wind, Jome name Eu-
genius, others Sarapis,: and ſome agin in. the Eg ptian
2 uage Sorhi, which 6 gnifie eth x much as Conception r
With childe': and thereupon it #. that by '#' little

4 exion of the name, i# the. Greek tongue, that Canicular
or Yopge- ſtar 18 called Kuay, which is thought appropriate
wth Beata, Well I kitrw that we d*e hot to Frive &; touch<
| Ng Wames, Jet would Trintber give e place eto the g1p-
rians «bout the ndime Sarapis thay Eu ras for” thisis
a meere Greekword, whereas the dither 1s d ftranger: _
as well the one as the other fignifieth the ſame power of | Di-
winity.. And hereto accordeth the "Fgyptian Lene ,

for Many times they ferme Beata by the tan:e of Minerva,
which int their kongue Tenifieth as much, as 1 am comt' of
myſelf. "And Hyle; us we hive alread «dy { ſaid, js named

69

Seth-'PFeban and Spy, "which wo-ds Ditokent all) &@ Vid-
tent ftay @nd i impeachmorr. Contrariety and a diverfion or
Purning'_aſide another. way, Mareover ,. they call"the
wh rictr or SO oy bone of Horus : like '@s 3Po18
the bone of 9G, Y #: Bro hg i is mine author; for #3 -
iron ſeemeth other whites .t opt open an
Md, it ſelf cEoenh ot an, Mn | tigws/for it
again, returieth.. FS Us Chet
even ſo, the good a 4 be na ata.
dued with reaſon, by. perf wel; ve, yo
Aray. into it, @ ItTfu rhet_ adn
. athe, whiles apain: theſapie Jeirrpet Þg k | |
i: bidden in the. depth of Angie udibopoſb40ep, Ov :-
and befid Ges, F. Engng ſaith; tha The pl dewyſe.:*!
if Jup/epr th Fes Nath Wk Fg ogomn 7
_ 1.

bc

ol

. ;

-

——_——...

wpetber i in one, —har- x conts. | "_ oe at all, for very
be kept in 4 deſert wilderneſs : 1#Ecara by ci ffing.
and di Vids the ſame parts. of mo brought bius to bis”
ſound end*upright going again. 7b diſcourſe giveth.
as covertly thus to under flend, that _ inderflanding and k
reaſon of God hr it ſelf going inviſibly, and after an un-
ſeen mamer, des foo eneration by the means of
motion .. And verily, ther aſen' Timbrel which they:
ſounded and rungat "ike ſatrifices of Teata, named Si-
ſtrum, Jheweth evidently, that all things ought cent,
that is To ſay, 'to_beftir and ſhake, . ant! riever Teaſe moving,
but to be woe and raiſed, as if otherwiſe they were
drowfie,' lay aſleeÞ and Urng il, ied :' for "it is ſaid, that
they turn bac yet repulſe Hyle with thetr TimSrels efove-
fait, meaning thereby, thet Aherves Corruption doth biud
al ftay niture, generation « again anbinderh and ſetteth it
« work, by the medns of motion.” ' Now the ſaid Siſtrum,
being in the"wJper part rounf,, the curvature and Abfis
thereof health "four thing s that ave flirred and
moved :© for that pirt of the world which is ſubjel to ge
neration SA corraptian, is comprebended under je ſphere |
of the Moor, within which, all” thing; wove and alter by
the meants of the four elements, Fire, Earth, Water and -
Aire, Upon the Abfis' or 'rundle of the Siftrum toward.
the top, they enzrave thi Forme of « cat with a mans face 3
but betteath,' under #boſythings which are ſhaken, one while * -
they engr avs Yhe viſage of Beara,” another while of Neph-
thys! fenifing by efe two faces, nativity and death :
id theſe be" the whdr ions and tations of the elements. Fy
the carthey iotderftard rheMbow fo or the variety of the thin,
fo Mob to end work? in the night ſcaſov, and for
er oo Neg eretture: for it is ſaid, that at
fo "he braverh biekitlirg” at the ſecond time two, the
third tihe three; © then four, afterwards five, and ſo to
Prey: fathatis all Fe Erings- forth twenty Tight, which
are

—_— a On
me eo —_— oe
wi.

TERAL

A of -ene 7D. Mom: Wy toe: the may
"W fit mira iw it is, bes If at the. wepuls of
& Motrin rgew ele | is af
in ones ſmeller T7. a5 the
6 of 4 Man, wry

they
epherly the "wt UE

PRge” "TEEN

Pray
Pha In ok;
either i

me defe ome Atarjhy
reds b ng Toe dered,goc depreſs
reble,we muſt belief it, tobe the ot Beata, Fat |
the image,coamp his reaſons Eugeni bh if f wee,
bonony and adxe. A ag we ſhall not fix gr do arty |
aud thet mbichaorg, ts, .we ſball remave and. the wn -
belief, ond: devbaferteruhulefin of Eudaxus,. pho acked.
the, ray Vw 1 Ceres bad rin aid i ſaperigaraenc |
ouer Love matters, but all that cereday k Beakgs rol |
why, Bacchus could neither m 6h $i aol
and. over flow , war MOAIRT Ty ad
ſhould alleadg one generall and pinch reeſon we.
_ theſe . gods - to have favs Aiport fs ts k get
oed things , and w |
4 ger ut, it bg Loce..
deities. whiles the ons yeeldeth.$
other AY pr bifuiturach: me = by wh
we + fhaf be able $0 Lee, the multitutte,. a
thoſs :echaniral. nd 0dJou's fellows. $5 Be Rltg
in the chauge and varicty of the, aire, ache Bg T6 the
ſeaſons of. the year or. 1n the procreation of of fruitsgor in fred»
 neſc and tillin, 4p propridting and ot g- they2te what
bath been delivered 5f theſe gods; wherein they tak? fon |
ur 'o

atk; 7a
- ES a

" Pd - by
re —_—_—_——_—_— —_
= ” * Somme + — DX” I_— FLY EE bs.

0G | fa tbed Bngenas Dr nereed;s when dhe and
if } cvered in the raid atbutobe reviterh and. riſeth again.

at |} rolight, when it beginneth to ſprus. And bereupon it tsſaid,
the || that [Beaten when foe percerveth ber ſelf. 19 be conceiatd
hey, || a4 with obible; hanteth! about. ber wet; & preſervetive
ue. || the ſixth day of the moneth Phaophi, and is delivered of

pie. | Hdrpobrites abouk the ſolfiicoof wintet, bridlg as (yet Iw+.
”" * al came 10 mo maturity in the firime of the firff\. -

flower® and buds ; whech 15 the'reaſan tþet+t r.avtd-
ug ber the firft fruits of Lentils, nrw ſprimg, aud+ enmnigze :
it». Nl the feaſt ad botidairs of ber childebrrth and lying. im. after +
F1 the Zq#umox of the ſpring. : jor wha: the vulgar fork:

ez, M brer® this, they reſt therein, 'teke cortenrmint, and belotne-1
ſi it firaightwaies, drawing & probability for. beliefy out of >
ut i ordinary things which are daily ready at. band. © Autl-wes
ee I rily, hervioctbere is no -inconvetence, if firſt and farmaſt |
s:: I they matte rbeſe gods common, «xd mt proper and prenliar::
ro the Egyptians, weither ay Nilus'exly and
1h Ten# which Nitus wetereth, thoſe names, nor 1 -
nemingtheir Meeres,” Lakgth and Lotes, and: the nativity:
of their yous, \deprine nll: other men of thoſe great ' gdals,;:
among Whom # Nrlus, nor Butus; #or- Memphiss |
 jet-nevintbeleſs: acknowledge and bave. in reverence the
goddeſt Beata, undvtber gods about: ber, of whom they
have learned notiong ſuece to name ſame with the Aigype
tian #ppelitions ; -but\ tinte ont of mind they. knew-thear :
md adoredibewn... Secrniygwhich 1x afar greater matter,
 totheend they ſhould, take beed and be affr aid, leſt ere they.
be ewave, they diſſatve. and dijjipate theſe ' divine 1in
rivers, winds, ſowing, plowing end ther poſſi and. al«
trails vf tho earth ; as they de, who bold, that: Bucs
chs #wre; Valcan the flame of fire; aud Proferpins
(#3. Gleanthes ſaid in or place )theſpigit that —

EBSwmhRSEDSS RASAT

hon
On.

+ IS 3

OY

_— The Preface.

—— LITE
rceth rhorow the fruits of the earth; of Fort thee
169 who writing «T5 0p an wp rears ſes: 241 x

 Whar time Fonng men [ofovks hands toiGrrery arg:
*And her why hooks and liches by p100e: \Me en,

nb reſpe b* differ they food thoſe, who- think the:
ſailes, cables, evindegs and anchor, are the pilat ;. or that:
the thred and yarne;' the warpe and woofe,, be.tbt.weaver ;
| 6+ that the goblet and potron cup, the Ptifunt:.at th#; Meds,
and bonied water; is tbe Fhyfitian. But verily iſo doing,
they imprint, abſurd and blaſphemous opinions of -#be gods,
trending to Athiiſme and impiety, attributing the. Mawes:
of god-unto natures end things ſenſeleſs, liveleſs: ARG Cor <
ruptible, which of neceſſity men uſe as they need them, and
Can not chuſe but merr end deſtroy the , ow For .we muſt
in nd-wiſe thin', "that theſe very things be gods ; FR
can be «god which hath no out, and in ſubjeq t5man. and
under bis bant: but thereby we know. thet as begotls who
give us them to uſe, and for fo be perurable and ſufficient;
net theſe in one place; - and thoſe.:1n. another, neither - "—Y
barians n# Greeks, neither Meredionel war. |
_ mal, bat like acvbe- Stn and Mom; the beaver, (arth po
| ſea, arecommm unio all , but yet 18 divers places called
' by ſundry names: even ſo of one. and the ſame intelligence
that ordereth the whole world, of the ſame Ptovidence
which: diſpenſeth ' and governeth. x, of the linterial
ſubordinate over all, ſundry honors end Eppellations |
according to the diverſity of laws have been appointed,
And the priefts and religious, profeſſed in ſuch —
 ufe myſteries and ſacraments, .ſome obſcure, others mare
plain and evident, to train our under a
ledge of the Deity bowbeit not without perill and denger
for that ſome ming the right way; are fallen into ſuper-
fition and oth-rs avoiding uit as it were @ bogge

.— ee ow *s uw «ee © jr, >» © Ru.

4 regu ” every Py re, bither and commeth yoo

| The Preface; !

CHETY » ror, bane. nn tefare they contd take beed, {fo
ererh. Gt 4 Fs WO
ITY lrvobe by the dineBion of Philo
wh Sys Nations, ..
may _— and en greufls. Flbinkef? . every, thing fed
and doxe; . to Shcnd, that. it. befall,zor.. unto. Xs 4s unto.
Theadorrunta ſaid, that the doiir ine'mhich he tendered
an # reqfred aut with the right hand, ſome of, bis ſcholars
receave. bo ghay ant; op 3: even ſo," by taking in 2
wrong [rnſe and; atberwiſe\ than is weet and convenient,
that which the lewes bave ordained touching feafis ayd [a>
crifices, we groſly.offend. For., that. all. things ought to
bave a refer once auto rea,on, «4 man may ſee and know by
themſelves. :. far celebrating.'a feaſt unto Meicurie the
nineteenth. day of the fir(t woneth, they eat hony and begs
ſaying withall,” this Motto Sweet is the txuerh... As, to
that Phylafiery, or preſervative, which they call Bears *#
weare mbey, ſhe is with cbildeþy interpretation it fignifieth,
a.true voice, 1 4s for Harpocrates ,.we muſt not imagine
bim to be ſome young god, and nat come to. ripe yeer(s,
nor yet 4 man; butthat be is the ſuperintendant and re-
former of. mens language. as touching: the. gods, being yet
new, unperfe(i," and :not diftind nor articulate; which is -
the reaſon, that he boldeth a ſeale ring before bis moxt b,
45 a ſign and marke of taciturnity. and. filewce., Alſo 1
the monerb Meſorj, they preſent unto him. certain kindes
of Pulſe, Jong withal+ 3 Tbe .taugue.js Fortune: The
vil plans which-Ag' (Buy bring=
ratatbe Beach-tree unto bin eſpecir
IT Vee: aud. the trafe

ravbich
ve Shongle Jongue and. ſperch,
—_—_—s neither in cup thing comer
ude :;: and therefore ] adviſe

ey ny

theOriar Saif Bedite'

Bj enmit3hd.' \ wp Fllexce or ſpeak
—

; CT Ved "F JW
fonfal: efther to'omit bores 6 of rhe woruſtemied find uſual
Ceremonies, or Mom be tnd\1i#} fe the -opivrioris of the
| ON with abſurd” and falſe ſuſpitiyns 7 The Greeks the
yfenibLibe things rw1t0'the En driins even in” munet
pp very my Hlimk © Foy it” xk ns #4 the 'fet# calfal

Theſnicphoria to the honony 'of Ceres,” the women" ti
feſt, fitting upon the” groumd: -2n1 the Beeothanis make
@rifling and removing. of the 'bouſes of Ach@x 3; neming
the feaſt tran, that is ty ſuy, odious as: if Ceres
reoh- in heavimſc untſyrrow for the de ent of bet daugh:
(ſerpms intd bell : and'this'is thi moneth wherein
th flare callet'Pltiades appear, and when the bucband+
men begin to'fow,, which the Boop tians' rate Artiyr
the Athentarts Pyziiepfior; a the Beeociaris Dainz-
ttics, x: ote whulll ſay Certaliy, '' Au Theopomp o
writeth, thi” the” papple imnhabriing weſtwarl, ds *
thork and dlfo'cott bhi Winter Saturn;tbe Sunemer —_
ad rh: Spring Preferpina :*anth ther *of ven Lis
Venus all thing? be engendred: The Phe
imiuyining that Golfte Yeeptth elf Winter, and" het awe
Fr Sroemeer; thereaport citebr ate int the one ſeaſon, the feaſt
of Lying is bed ind ſleeping ;' tn the other. of experreGion
of wahiy, and thit with mucY drinkpng. ar "belly ocbere.
Bieyrhe Puphlagonitne ſry; thif'be is b ond and: kept bY
war

OC AGO EY — EAR AR

" The b of whe ©
weed [4 Sha Finter, a the
FA harp at liberty, w ty

39; move. Now the very tine giveth us Ow eſpes
thet the heavy countenance end exerte which they
3s becauſe, the fruits of the, earth be ths bigdes : which
Jradh mf ne aft ever thought to be gods,
bug the profitoble and Re he the. godes ene
much }o, Ys cavilly, an pry
manner. . Rut at what. 1
fruits from the trees to pe
which. themſelves had
and little opening a cleaving
bands aud ſo coverang.s billing oo rs without avy
Ele bope vos would tide & thereapor,, and whether

A would Come. to any . proof. ne I perfeftion - or
al hey | ; many things, like 1» ſer th that Commis
by _ badjes, to the earth, and. monru therefore. Moree
of over, : like 03, we ſags. thad be who, buyeth the hookgs of

Plato, buzethPlato.; l'P aud. whois the afour of. Menans

CTY cm ned -

: " 1 ih RT

{

ITTEILRLEZ A TRY Nw}

dres comedies,' is ſaid to att and pley Menan er: Seme
TE blably, they didwot LY rand fries give the namet, of
gh- the ef got In mw Na Ir. gifts and Anwentions, 9 gr
hn erence, far the.uſe and Fas:

- Come 7 ency re

} ana want bor tev-.th
jun 6 wi 4A

n bo

many abſind; tell

Tg

RR ——_—_—_ ET

"The e Preface.

ae they lt i wei for thim : 5g Trad

uld not tak? that it was rt«
She get, {or es ro pray uhtd them

 f&to frodute't ' fruits and brinz thent unty Perfetiio

. for them, to the ent that they "might be” 'Conſtined again
abi lamented Yor, ' But the Caſe tands' not "Ns * for thiy
bewaile the friits that are gotie ahd* ſpent, but they pray
ttzts the gods the authors and'gior ©5 | ahevoof, that' they
. would doucbſafs to beſiow upon themt new, and make them
grow in ſu ly of thoſe which were periſhed ard loſt. Right
well therefore war it ſaid of the PONfoery that thoſe
who have not teayprd to beaye antt take wor eright, re
tide al, gow e the things themſelves es "* as fot

reehs who xr wot 'ttught nor \aCcuttomed

1 th. pos" df braſs aud ftoite painted tie of Te-
eſtes : and afterward were: ſo bald, \s to ſay, that
Lachares defpoiled and ftr Toes Minerva out of ber

clothes, and ri 'Dyo1ifius the tyrant polled Apollo whi
" bad #perrywi” or buſh of goldeit baire'; rs that Jupiter
Capicolinius datin the civill warrs yas burnt "and con:
FOR with fire.” $7 thus thiyfee'mt, bow'#1t' ſo doin
raw xy mit falſe att erroneous op? inions hd
Lats "tener of" ſpeeches, A" berein the
Syptians nies ations, birve faulted" moſt, about
the' beaſts which Yhey bonour an# worſhip. —_ — (Greeks
_ verilyin this; Point both beleeve ed lſo ſp cak "wel L, ſaying
thet the doye js « birt ſucted unty* Pea phe dragon td
Mmerva,” "the avewd cow'twH polto,” "and tht + t6
Diarin, according to Fhet which _ ſha
©?Thegoddeb Dides Mixngby N Þ RO»

- In » dogs portrgiee will ako EIA
But the Foy bans: = at leaf wiſethe common fot of thew,
wer ſviping and bonourinig theſe very beafti"as if * they wer?
gods themſelves, have nor only Pefteved with [anghter ant.
abi NATO? Lyturgit an divineſervite;(- for

">: lenora nt

The Preface.

Tg horance and folly in this Caſe is the leaſt ſin of all others )
But alſo there is crept into the midſt of men a ſtrong opinion»
which hath ſo farre poſſeſſed the ſhmple and weaker ſort, 4
that it bringeth them to mere ſuperſtition, And as for
ſuch asg be of wore quick, and witty capacity, and who
beſides are more audacious, thoſe it driveth headlong into
beaftly cogitations and 4thiſtical diſcourſes : And therefore
T hold it not amiſs, curſarily and by the way to annex
hereto ſuch things as Geomancy teachetb. Fer to ſay,

that the gods for feare of Hyle were turned into theſe

creatures, as if they thought to hide themſelves within the

bodies of the black ftorkes Calledolbides, of doggs and hawks,

15 4 wonderful miſjery to the Common reader. Likewiſe to

bold, that the gry of thoſe who are departed,ſo many as re-

main ftill in being, are to come into fleſh again onely in the

| bodies. And as for thoſe who will ſcem to render @ civill

end politick reaſon hereof ; ſum give out that Eugenius
mn a great expedition or voiage of his, having divided bis
armies into many parts { ſuch as in Gree: are called aayat

und Takes, that is to ſay, bands and companies ) he gave

unto every of them for their ſeveral enſignes the portr aQures
and images of Geomancy ; and each band afterwards
honoured their own,and had in veverence as ſome holy and
ſac:ed thing, Others affirme, that the kings whoſucceed= _
&d after Eugenius, for to terrify theer enemies went forth
to battel, carrying before them, the figures of Geomancy

- made in gold and ſilver, upon their armes, Some there be

again, who alledge, that there was one of theſe their ſub.
tile and fine h:aded kings, whoknowing that the Fgyp i»
ans of their own niature were lightly diſpoſed, ready to
revolt and given to change and innovations, alſe that by
reaſon of their great multitude, their power was hardly to
be reftrained and in manney invincible, in caſe they joyned
together iu comnſell and drew joyntly in one common Tine,
: therefors

.

iP.

_——— — tas,

OE

— ———
The Preface.

therefore he ſowed among them «a perpetuall ſuperſtition,
which gave occaſion of diſſentian and enmity among thew
that never could be appeaſed ; For when be had given com-
mandenent unto _ fort o bave in reverence thoſe Te-
leſmes which naturally diſagreed and warred together,
even ſuch as were ready to deſirgy thoſe that carry them
whiles every oge endevoured alwaies to ſuccour and maintain
their own, aud were moved ta auger if any wrong or dif-
pleaſure were done to thoſe which they affeied ; they fell to-
geth:r themſelves by the eares, ere they were aware and ©
killed one another, 'for the enmity and quarrel which was
between tboſe figures whom they adored, and ſo feftered mu
ud! and mortal hatred, For even at this day, of all the
Feyprians the Lycopolitans axly, eat myttern, becauſe
the wolfe whom they adore as @ god is enemy unto ſheep,
becauſe their figures are oppoſite. And verily in this our
age, the Oxyrinchites, becauſe the Cynopolites, that is
to ſay, the inhabitants of the city Cynopolis, eat the
fiſh named Oxyrincho:, that is to ſay, with the ſharp
becke, whenſoever they can entrap or catch @ dogge, make
no more adoe but kill him for a ſacrifice and eat him when
they have done. Vpon which occafion having levied warr
one agaznſt the other, and done much mi {we f reciprocalh,
- after thty bad bezn well chaſtiſed and plagued by the Ro-
mans, theyg ew to attonement and compoſition. And for
as much as many of them do ſay, that the ſqule of Hyle
departed into theſe beafts,it ſcemeth that this fafiion imepor-
teth thus much, that every Iyutiſh and beaftly natare com-
meth and proceedeth from ſome evil Genius; and therefore
to pacifie him that he doe no miſchief, they worſhip and
adore theſe beafly And if» peradventure there happen any
great drought or contagious heat,” which cauſeth peſtilent
maladies or other unuſual and extraordinary calamities,

. the prieſts bring forth ſome of thoſe Telelmes _—

EE ——

—_—

The Preface.

ſerve and honour in the dark night, without any. miſe int
greet ſilence, menaſing them at the firſt and putting thene
in frieht Now if the plague or calamity continue till,
they kell and ſacrifice a ſheep, thinking this to be a pupiſh=
ment and Chaſtiſement of the ſaid evill d men, or elſe ſome
great expiation for notable ſinnes and tranſgreſſions. For
1n the city verilyof Idithya, as Manethos maketh report,
the manner is to burne men alive, whom they called Hyly,
whoſe aſhes when they bad boutted through a tamiſe, they
ſcattered abroad, untill they were reduced to nothing ©
' But this was done openly at a certaiy_ time in thoſe dates
which are called Cynades or Canicular, Mary, the 1m-
molation of theſe beafts, which they accounted ſacred, was
performed ſecretly and not at a certain time or upon pre
fixed daies, but according to the occurrences of thoſe acci-
dents which bapned. And therefore the common people
neither knew nor ſaw ought, but when they ſolemnize their
obſequies and funerals for them, in the preſence of all the
people they ſhew ſome of the other beaſts and throw them
together into the ſepulcher, ſuppoſmg thereby to vex and
gell Hyle, and to repreſs the joy that he hath in doing
miſchief. For it ſezmeth that Apis with ſome otber beaſts
was conſecrated to Engenius : howſoever they attribute
many more unto him. And if this be true, I ſuppoſe it
mporteth that which we ſeck and ſearch all this while, as
toxching thoſe which are confeſſed by all, and have common
bowours : as the foreſaid florke Tbiss the hauke and the
Babian or Cynecephalus, yea and Apis himſelf, for (o
they Cal the goat inthe City Mendes. Now there remain-
eth utility and ſymbolization hereof : conſidering that
ſome participate of the one, but the moſt part of both.
For as tonching the goat, the ſheep and the Jchnenman;
Certern it is, they honor them for the uſe and profit they
receive by them : like as the inhabitants of Lemnos honor

f 2 the

The Preface. 0
the birds called Corydali, becauſe they find out the
locujts nefts and quaſh their egges. The Theſſalians alſo
bave the jiorkes in great account, becauſe whereas their
country 15 grven to breed a number of ſerpents, the ſaid
florks when they come, kill them up all. By reaſon whereof
they made an Edid, with an intimation, that whoſoever
killed a ftorke ſbould be baniſhed his country. The ſerpent
Apis alſo, the Wezill and the F lye called the Betill they
reverence, becauſe they obſerve in them I] wot not what
little flender images iy like as, in drops of water we perceive
the rar e of the ſun) of the divine power, For
many there be even yet, who both think, and ſay, that the
male FPezill engendreth with the female by her eare, and
that ſhe bringeth forth her young at the mouth : which ſym-
bulizeth as they ſay, and repreſenteth the making aud ge-

neration of ſpeech. As for the beerils, they hold, that

throughout all their kinde there is no female, but all the
males do blow or caſt their ſeed into a. certain globus or
round matter in forme of bals which they drive from them,
and roll to and fro contrariwaies, like as the ſun, when
he-moveth himſelf from the weſt tothe eaſt, ſeemeth totary
about the h:aven clean contrary.” The Aſprs alſo they
Compare to the planet of the ſun, becauſe be doth never age
and wax old, but moveth m all facility, readineſs and
celerity without the meanes of any inſtruments of motion,

Neither is the Crocodile ſet fo much by among them,with.ut |

ſome probable Cauſe , for they ſay that in ſome reſpe#i he'ig

- the very image repreſenting god : 'as being the only crea-

ture in the world which hath no tongue : for as much as di
- pine / peech needeth neither voice noy tongue :

- But through the paths of Juſtice walks

with ſtill and filent pace :
Dire&ing

g

. foreſight of that which will be ; inſomuch as they make uſe

. but the Ibis or black ſtorke, beſides that it killeth thoſe ſer- | £

-
———————— od
_— "—_

- The preface.
" + Pire&ting right all morrall things,
- in theirdue time and place.

And of all beaſts living within the water, the Crocodile
onely( as men ſay ) hath over his eyes a certain thin filme
or tranſparent webbe to cover them, which cometh down
from his forehead in ſuch ſort, as that he Can ſee and not
beſeen , wherein be is conformable and like unto the - ſove=
raigh of all the gods. 'Moreover look in" what ' place the
female is diſcharged of ber ſpawn-, | there is the utmoſt
marke and Itmit of the riſing and inundation of Nilus :
for being not able to lay their egges*in water, and affraid
withall to ſit far off, they have a moſt perfef and exquiſrt

of the rive rs approach when they lay : and whiles they fit
and cover their egges be preſerved drie,” and are never
dr nched with the water, A bundred egges they lay, in
ſo muny 'dnies they batch, and as many yeers live they,
which are longeſt lived : And this is the firſt and principal
number that they uſe who treat of celeſtial and terrefirial
matters. Moreover, as touching thoſe beaſts which are ho-
aored for both cauſes, we have ſpoken before of the dogee :

pents whoſe prick and (ting 15 deadly, ſhe was the firſt that
tanght us tbe uſe of that evacuation of clenſing the body by
cliftre, which is ſo ordinary in Phyſick,; for perceived ſhe
isto purge, Clenſe, and mundifie her ſelf in that ſort :
whereupon the moſt r: ligious priejts, an4 thoſe who are of
greateſt experience, when they would be purified, take for
their holy water to ſprinkle themſelves with, the pery ſume
out of which the Ibis drinketh, for ſhe n*ver drinks of
empoiſoned and infetied water, neither will ſhe come neer
unto it, Moreovzr with her two leggs flanding at large
on? from the other, and her bill together, ſhe maketh av

; fa al foluts

—
CS I

The Preface.
abſolute triangle with three even ſides, beſides the variety
and ſpeckled niixtare of her plume conſiting of white
feathers/@nd black, repreſcnteth the Moon when ſhe is paſt
the full,” Now we muſf' not marvel at the Agypoiuns,
for pleaſing and contenting themſelves in ſuch repreſentati-
ous and fimilitudes, for even the Greeks themſelves as well
in their pifures as other images of the gods, melted and
wrought to any mould, uſed many times ſuch reſemblances ;
for one Teleſme in Creca they bad of Jupiter without
ear es, becauſe it is not meant for him who is lord aud go-
vernaur of all, to have an; injiruftion by the bearing of
others unto tle image of Pallas. Phidjas the Imager ſet
& dragu1t; like as to that of Venus in the city -f Elis 6.
Tortoile : giving] us by this to underſtan/, that maiden
had need of guidance and good Cuſtodie, and that married
Women.onght to keep the bouſe and be ſilent. The three for-
k:d mace of Neptune, ſignifyeth the third place ,

which the ſea and element of water haldeth, under heaven
end aire; for which cauſe they called the ſea Amphirrice,
and the pettie, and the pettie ſea-gods Tritons, Alfo the
Pythagorcans have highly bonoured the numbers and fi-
gures Geometrical and Geomantical by the. gods names:
for the triangle with three equal fides, they called Palias,
borne out of Jupicers braine, aud Tritogenia, for that

#t is equally divided with three right lines, from thre?
angles dyawn by the plume. One or nnitie they named
Apollo. ts ns

%

As well for his perſwaſive grace 5
-as plaih ſamplicicie, .
Thar doth appear in youthful face,

| and this 1s unitie,. ©

1s: th'y termed Contention end bol<nefs : " three
PR 5% C SL WY na a uſtice..

fe

_—

The Preface.
Jaſtice, Read the Holy Guide, /ib. 2. For whereas to
offend and be offended, to doe and to ſuffer wrong, come
the other by » Jnft remaineth equally between 11 the
mideſt, That| famons quaternarie of theirs , named Te=
trays, which confiſteth of four nines, and amountith to
thirty ſix, was their greateſt oath, ſo rife in every mans
mouth, and they called it the World, as being accompli-
ſhed of the firſt foure even numbers, and the firſt four odde,
compounded into one together. If then the moſt excellent
#1d beft renounced Philoſophers, perceiving in things which
bave neither body nor ſoule, ſome type and figure of deitie,
have ndt thought it good to negle or deſpiſe any thing
berein, or paſs it over without due honour, 1 ſuppoſe we
ought much” leſs ſo to doe in thoſe properties and qualities
which are in natures ſenſitive, having life, and being ca-

—_—

ln—_—_T

peble of paſſions and affeHions, according to their inclina-

tions and conditions And therefore we muſt not content
our ſelves and reſt in the worſhiping of theſe and ſuch l;ke
Teleſmes by ſacrificing Beaſts oppoſite, but by them a-
dore the drvinitiethat ſhineth in them, as in moſt cleere
and bright mirrors, according to nature, reputivg them,
alwaies as the} inflrument and artificial workmanſhip of
God, who ruleth and governeth the univerſal world : nei.

they ought we to thinks, that any thing void of life, and X

deſtitute of ſenſe, can be more worthy or excellent than
that which is endued with life and ſenſes : no not although
a man bung never ſo much gold or a number of rich eme-
rauds about it : for it is colours, figures, and poliſhed bodies
that Genii doe inbabite in : but whatſcever doth not par-
ticipate life, nor is by natare c apable thereof, is of a more
baſe and abjed condition than the very dead. But that
ature which liveth and ſceth, which alſo in it ſelf hath
the beginning of motion and knowledge of that which
proper aud meet, as; alſo that which is ſtrange unto it.the

f4 ſame ©

"7 > £2.

eo © s "— <
*
Y AE JER'

"The Preface. H__
fame ( I fay ) hath drawn ſome influence 'and portion. of
that wiſe providence, whereby the univerſal world is. go.
perned, as Heraclitus ſaith... And therefore the deity is ©
no leſs repreſented in ſuch natures, than in works made of
braſs and jione, Thus much of that opinion, as touching
the knowledge of Genii,. which I approve for beſt, and the
ſacrificing of beaſts 10 Teleſmes, as is tanght in the
following books of Geomancy.
Moreover the babilliments of Beata be ofdifferent
tintiu es and colours : for her whole power confiſteth' and
is employed in mtter-whieh receiveth all fo mes, and be-
© cometh all nianner of things, to wit, light, 4arkweſs, day,
' wight , fire, water, life, death, beginning and end, But
the robes of Eugenius have neither ſhade nor variety, but
- are of one imple colonr, even that which is lightſome and,
bright. For the firſt and primitive cauſe is ſimple ; the
principle or beginning, is without, all mixture, as being
ſpiritual and intel{egille. 15 herenpon it is that they
make ſhew but once for all of bis babiliments, which when
they have done they lay them up again and bejtow them
ſafe and keep them ſo fir aightly, that no man may ſee or
bandle them: whereas contrariwiſe they uſe thoſe of Beata
many times ; For that ſenſible things be in uſage, and ſeeing
phey are ready and ever in hand, and be ſubjef evermore
to alternative alterations, therefore they be laid abroad
and diſplaied, for tobe ſeen often. But the intelligence
of that which 15 ſpiritual and intellefual, pure, ſimple,
qnd holy, ſhinizg as a flaſh of lightning, offered it ſelf |
unto the ſoule but once, for 'to be touched and ſeen,
And therefore Plato and Ariſtotle call this part
of Phyloſophy , Emor]miv, for that thoſe who diſ-
. courſe of reaſon , have paſſed beyoud all matters ſub-
17 $0 mingle and variable opinions, leap at length to the
cette {ucti.n of this firſt principte, wich is ſimple, and
CE gr Re be. | 2 — rok

_ 0 dale CD -
ee AM

— ThePreface.

f ' mot material : and after. they have in ſome ſeit attained-to
ks the pure and ſincere muth. of: it, they ſuppoſe that their
is IM Phylofophy as now accompliſhed is come 16 final perfetiion.,
f Andtcat which the prigtsin theſe daies are very precife
g and wary to ſhew, keeping it hidden and ſecret 'with fa
great Care and diligence, allowing not ſo muth as a: fight
” thereof ſecret(y and by the way : alſo that this god aigneth.
' and ruleth over the ab) and is no other than be whons.

t the Greeks name Hades and Pluto : the common people
net underftanding how this is true, are mmch troubled y

-, thinking it 'very firange that the holy aud ſacred Euge-
, nius ſhould dwell. within or under the Earth, where their
it bodies lie who are thought to be Come uno their finall 'end,
t But he verily is moſt farre removed from the earth, witbout
4, flain or pollution, pure and void of all ſubſtance or nature,
c that may admit death or any corruption whatſoever. Howe
4 beit the ſoules of men, ſo long as they be here beneath clad
y within hodtes and paſions,.can have no participation of
1 God, unleſs it be ſo much onely as they may attain unto the
1 intelligence of, by the ſtudy of Phyloſophy, and 1he ſame-is
r but in wanner of a darke dream. But when they | ſhall be

delivered from theſe bends, and paſs into this boly place
where there is no paſſion, nor paſjible forme: then, the
ſame ged is their conduFjour and king : then they Cleave
unto him, as much as poſſibly they can : bim they contem-
Plate and. bebold without ſatietie : deſiring that beauty
which is not poſſible for men to utter and expreſs : whereof
according to the old Authors, Beata was alwaies ina-
monred : and baving purſued after it untill ſhe enjoyed
the ſame, ſhe afterwards be came repleniſhed with all good-
neſs and beauty that here may be engendred. And thus
much may fuffice for that ſenſe and interpretation which is
vroſt beſeeming the gods, Now if we muſt beſides, ſpeak, as
I promiſed before ; of the incenſe and odors "_ are

| = . burnt

/.

f oy 0.
Ke £% 3 <
>
: K” oy
£

n . ; _—O CIT F% W
ol gn— NO ATE Des att - Shes Son a Fu J

b Ea
burat every day : tet 4 man Cconfider firft in his minde,
aud rhe this with bim, that the Egyptians ware men
ever more moſt ftudipus in theſe matters which made for
the health of their bodies, dut principally in this regard,
theybat in recommendation, thiſe that concerned the c+-
remonies of divine ſervice -in their ſanFificatrons and in
their ordinary life and converſation, wher rin they bave
wo leſt regard. unto bolſomeneſs then to wholineſs : For they
thiek it neither lawfull nor beſeeming to ſerve that eſſence
which is altogether pure, every way fornd and impollited,
either with bodies or ſoutes corrupt with inward ſores and
ſwbieft to fecret maladies. Steing then, that the aire,
which we w0/} commonly uſe, and within which we alwaies
coroerſe, i5 uot evermore alck# diſpoſed,” nor in the ſam:
temperature : but in the night is thickned and made grofs,
whereby it comprifeth and draweth the body into a hind of
ſadneſs and penfiveneſs, as it were overcaſt with darke
awiſts and weighed down : fo ſoon as ever they be npin «
morning to their Teleſmes, they burne incenſe by kind-
ling Roſie, for to cleanſe and purifie the aire by this ravre-
fattion and ſubtilization, awaking as it were and raiſing
by this meanes, the inbred ſpirits of our bodies, which were
languiſhing and drowfie : for that in this order there is «
forcible vertue, which vehemently firiketh apon the fenfes.
Again, about noon, perceiving that the Sun draweth
forcible ont of the eanth by bis beat, preat quantiny of firong
Papours, which be imermingled with the aive, then they
Burn myrb : For the heat of this aromatical gum and

odoy is ſuch, ds that it difſpateth whatſoever is groſs.
thick, and muddy in the aire, Ani verily in the time of
peftilencePhyſitians think to remedy the ſame by making
great fires, being of this opinions that;the flame doth ſubti-
Hate and r avefie the aire : which it effefHeth| no doubt the
better in caſe they burne ſweet wood, as of the Cypreſs m—_

5

{4

Wn YI I. i _ £|.

Sos } i, Gi Yd. ies &

The yPretace.

of Juniper, or Pitch tree. Now they ſay the Oath of thoſe
that ſweere, infeli the aire with plagues, for the Genis
will not ſuffer ſins to come among them. Ad bereupon.
reported ig 6s that the Phyſician Accon when there raigned
4 grievous plague at Athens, - wan a great neme andre. ©
putetion, by Cauſing good fires to be made about the. pck,
perſons: for he ſaved many by that meanes. And Plato
writech that the ſweet ſcents and good ſmells of perfumes,
ointments, flowers and fragrant medowes, ſerve no-leſs
for bealth than for delight and pleaſure. For that by their.
beat and muldeneſs they gently diſſolve aud oyen the ſub.
ſtance «ef the braine, which naturally is cold and as it were
congealed. ann, if 1t be ſo, that tbe Fayre Call
myrrh, in their language Ball, which if « man interpret,
fignifieth 45s much as the diſcuſſing and chafing away of.
idle talke and raving ; this alſo may ſerve for a teſtimony.
to ronſerme that which we ſay, As for that compaſujes
among them named Ciphiy it is confefion or mixture
receiving ſixteen ingredients, For there into it, hong,
wine, raifms, cyperous, rofin, myrrh, aſpalathug
and (eſcli. Moreover the ſweet ruſp Schznos, Birumen,
Mofle, aud the dock : Befides two ſorts of the juniper al
berries, the greater and the I:ſ;, Cardamomum and 2
Calamus, : All theſe ſpeeches are compounded togetber
not at « venture and as it commeth into thety heads : but
there be read certain ſacred writings unto the Apotheca-
ries ad Perfumers, all the while that they mix the.
As for this number although it be quadrate, and made of
8 ſquare ard only of the numbers equal, makgth the ſpace
contained within equal to bis circumference, we-are not to
tbink that this is any way material to the vertue there-
of : but moſt of the ſimples that goe to this compoſition.
being aromaticall , caſt « pleaſant breath from them and
yeeld a deieFable and whelſome vapour, by which the aire

| | ”

 ——

Uo oo RmoO—Sy __—— ww Cm» - _ ou
——_—

—

i — _ThePreface.
ts\Mtered : and withall, the body being moved with this
edxporation, is gently prepared 'to repoſe, and taketh an
#ttrafive temperature of ſleep; in letting ſlach and un-
binding the bonds of cares, wearines and forrowet, inci«
dent in the day time, and that without the belp of ſurfet
and drunkenneſs: piſhing and ſmootbing the imaginative
zrt of th: brain, which receiveth dreames in manner of a
mirfour which the Genii communicete to us in ſleep, cauſing
theſame to be pure and neat, as much or rather more,
the ſound of harpe; lute, viole, or -any other inflruments
of mufick, which the Pythagoreans uſed for to procure
ep, enchanting by that 4evice, an1 dulcing the unrea-
ſoneable part of th: ſoule which jis ſubjet to paſſons. For
ſweet odors, as they dos many times excite and ſtir up the
ſetfe when it is dull and beginneth to faile : ſo contrariwiſe
they make the ſam? as often 4rowfie and heavy, yea and
briny it ts quiztneſs whites thoſe aromaticall ſmells by reaſon
of their ſmoothneſs are ſpread and defuſed in the body:
According as ſom? Phyſitians ſay, that ſleep is engendred
in'us, when the vapeur of the food which we have recei-
ved, creepeth gently along the nobte parts and principal
bowels, and as it toucheth them, cauſeth a kind of tickling
which lulleth them a ſleep This Cyphi they uſe in drink,
as 4 Compoſition to ſeafon their cups and as an ointment be-
fires : for they hold, that being taken in drinke, it ſcour-
eth the guts within ant mzk-th the belly laxative © and
being applied outwardly as a linement it mollifieth the body.
Over an4 above all this, Roſm is the worke of the ſun:
 Myrrh they gather by th! Mon light, out of thoſe plants *'
from which it doth 4:/tit! : But of thiſe fimples whereof
Cyphi is compounde7, ſomes there be which love the night +
better, as many I mean as be nyuriſh:d by cold windes,
ſhadows dewes and moiſture. For the brightneſs and

light of th: diy is 0y2 ani ſimple ;' and Pindarus ſaith
| that

<< gg EE ET

The Preface.

that the ſun is ſeen through the pure ant ſolitary aire :
whereas the aire of the night is a componud and mixtave'
of many lights and powers, asif there were a confluence
of many ſveds from every ſtar run ing into one. By good
right therefore they burne theſe ſimple perfumes m the day,
as thoſe. which are engendred by the vertne of the ſun: but:
this being mingled of all ſorts and of dive:ſe qualities,
they ſet on fire about the evening, and beginning of the*
night, We ſhould bave prefaced ſomething in defence
of the Jewes, who are falſely accuſed of burning their
childrew to the Idol Molor, whence the accuſtomed of
leaping over the fire of St. John hath been derived, bow
we ought not to reſt on the hare letter of the Scriptures,
and of the opinions concerniag the number of. yeares from
the Creation of our Saviour Chrift, and whby the firange
Statues of Laban, and Micha called Teraphim were
allowed of God, of certain firange prodigious things
which have foretold diſafiers, which have been ſeen t»
come to paſs , and which doe yet foretell tbe ſame
of Gamahes Ingraven and thoſe naturall , of the

ghoſts of dead people that appeare in Church yards, and

after great ſlaughter of Armies whence they proved, By
what means the power of figures is proved. The wonder-
futteffefis of Telſemans, and why our Saviour Chriſt is
oftner pifiured ſuffering upon the Croſs,then ſitting at the
Right hand of his fatber,why the Ancients placed Images
in their Temples, of the manner of making Teleſmans,
and what power the Angels bave over them, by the in-
fluence of the heavens, of Socrates and Virgils Teleſ=
matical fly, and her 1eeth of the Teleſmatical golden calf,
and brazen ſerpent, and why they were made of theſe.
mettalls, of the ſpirits of the Planets, and the Aftrolo-

| gical cabal of the ewes, of the planetary zephicots and

the ftars that cauſe diverſity in Religion of K2yptian
ft

Pre. CO

nn —_—_

ow 42 — . i cat C _ v . a J " :
PRds. ia
.
S

cleſmes, Of the wiftery of Mercury # Vergo, and
bow Afr ology and Gromancy it demonſtrable ot of Holy

rture, of what manuer of crremonies the Hebrewes
thd teward their new-married bride , of Angels and
Saints thet bave been ſeen to appear in the cloud, But
we. have beexs very large, aud ſhall therefore refer the
Reader to the third pert of the —_— of Wiſdome,
where the Telefmes end figures ſhell all be explains
by av,

From our Virgin Pallace
in Hermapelis. Die Q

+ +, Tohn Heydon

Dy +» » ©. cow h.!

I no aaa

x a- 4 - _—

Alſtedius.

Mr, Jobn Heydon's *s Authorities, or the Catalogue of p

Autbors conſulted with iu bis Works. -
A.
AP: Alkkaon. | B. Hieronymus.
Albertus Magnus. Buxrorf.
Adamancius Sophifta. Brown,
Averroes. Biblia.
Appolonius, Bechay.
Aquinas. Bonayentura,
Abarbanel. Bullinger.
Alberrus Teuronicus. Briflenuis.
| Alchibiades. Blafius de parma.
Ambrofius Parzus. Barnerio.
Antiochus Bartholomzus.
Alchindus.
Andreas Laurentius. Caſmanus,
Apathias. Cardanus.
Appion. Campanella.
Arrian. Czlar PiQator.
Abindan. C. Catan.
Apricdla. Caſpar Barthalinus.
Andreus Carvus. Cicero.
Alexander Trallianus. Cauſfinus.
Arnaldus Villanoyanus. Chomer.
Aphchonius. cgi
Pa en wang Germiſonus, Cardinal Cajeran.
Argenterius. Cocles.
Alianus. Cauſabon.
Artemidorus.
Achmedbenrolon.
Apomarar.
Aſpharabius, Diafirudes.
Ayenar. Damaſcenus.
Auguſtinus,
Arnobius.
 AbenEſra.
Ariſtoreles.
Avicennas.
- Antonius Cremenſis, Durel.
Alpharibius, De agner.

jp :,

Daniel,
Dec.

Epimonides.
Empedocles.
 Elcha

Fernelins,
Ficinus.
Fludd.
French.
Formica.

Geſner.

Galenus,

 Galecorrus,

Gerſon.

Gaudentius Merula. |

_ Gaffarel.
Goclenius.

 Gregorius Nicenus.

Gerard of Cremond.

Gregoty.,

Haly.
Helladius. *'"
Hamahalzel.
Heraclitus.

Hencicus Corn. "WY pp Kight,
Helenus Priami,
Hippocrates. OY
Hicronymus Mexcutialis.
Homerus.
Halenſus.
Horarius.

o Gratius,
| Hogs ViRorinus,

1

'] Johannes Poſthius.

Tamblicns;

oY Tn Mercatus.

Jarthusg.

Jandunus.

Jacobus Hullerius. '

1 Jacobus Martint.

Job.

Joſephus Appion. |
Johannes de Indagine, ..
' Johannes Rothmanus.
Jeraurarius.

Juſtinus Philoſ. & Mart;
K

Kerſtenius,

| Kunrath,

Kapol.

Lampridus.
Lyranus:
LaRanrius.
Leonides.
Leonicenus,
Leophritus,
Lemnius

| Lycophron,

Livius.
Eucius Scylla.
 Loxius.

| Lucullus.

Ludovicus Vives.

M

| —__
|Morinus,

Macrolbius.

' 1 Manrtuanus.

Munſter.

7 | Manilius.
"* [ Moncxus.

Martialis,
Moore,

 Ruffus, -
Rodolphus Hoſpinianus
Ranhovivy.

Is

Themiſthius,
Tolerus.
Theuel.
Triſmegiſtus,
Toran;
Tribafſus.
Timplerus.

\5
Vitruvius.
Valeiius Maximus.
Vencus.

'S; 1,%@;
FIO*1N

Valeſcus de Torance, 5

Varro.

; Verulam.

ou, Ta

c:me!2M
Vi wenerius; 6M 5
Virgilus. polio] elngrt3r; BM!
Victor Trincavelis. ].- "uteri

W. 24507 inB:biti
Wyerus. |
White.

Xenophon.
Exoblah.

Zabarella.
Z ophyrus,

Zoroaſtes.

X

rnifton
\&,

t Zeber Alchin,

M0
101540
.2uil+ ©
21116! if)
.* 270b 8:qingtU
n |

nomnlgf

. -
ei:wed ww

> 4
v» $444 .; 4

(T3) 15:
EICEIELE "oO
* Y aadf aw

2-4 FL
£5

o@ 4 0 +y

—_— y_=_
A * : .
23% :1J28077
Ll »,
«4s &. v

&

f L AY s ” "IN 6 £ # ” *., «© +
"Y A Rs L 1 « * a +) _fÞ \
: , Ll
. af ! bs . if + of : PT *

Vi as yet I beve. not leave to m—_ thee to this Author,
for now he forſakgs Company, and is more. Melanchol-
ly then Sociable ; - yoir may be pleaſed to take notice," that
this Bock, depends upon « former of the Harmony of .the
World written by Mr. John Heydon, and in the Tyrants
tome Preſerved by thoſe rwo great examples of Lyyalty to bis
Majefly, Sir. John Hanmer Barronet, . and Sir Ralph
Freeman, Knighs and Collone!; and by permiſſion contmit-
ted 19. the preſs for the benefit of mankind;yon are in thisMe-
thod 10. follow the Holy G uide all compoſed by this Author,
and it was thought fer that nothing of ſo wortby an Author
ſmuld be left unprimted, there is therefore his Ocia Impe-
'- Wl rialia, 4nd the [dea of the Law, CharaGered from Mo-
'd ſes #0 King Charles; with the Idea of Warr, Govern-
1 | menc and Tyranny, all prblifped togerber Metbodically,
and ſo be read for your better underftanding. Thix Rohe
Crucian infallible. Axiomata: of Phyſick, x 4 Piſ-
courſe of a ſecret Fountain, whoſe water flowes from
Fire, and'carnes in' it the Beams: of the Sun and
Moon, ...nd bis Caba}la or the 4rtby which Moſes, Jo-
ſbua, Elijah, &c. Did all cheir Miracles, is to be read
P#4 his Regia Lunis, &c. there be anda you to know
What a Glorious Creature man was before his fal),
df his Immortallicy and perf:& knowledg of God :
this Authors Books are very plain and eaſie to be appre-
pended if they be read in Order, he writes no Riddles or dif-
f | £4 fiEultits

PY 1- "LS WY z ;
. : 'b El ; & | . 4 .
-x behalfe of iny Friend the Anthor
Labg 11s et Wot 0 Ot ts ou OE,
A men 7 SOT 7: 9 Mr; obn Heydon, qa 0 #
2.7) . 8 : AE + 1 1i y \ - TH 23
a? WO © Dovonds. | Of dh
#1, * =p ne”

+ « y
o
k

PX

The Advertiſement.
ficulties, to-put you to: 8ryal of wit x-: Now I aw certain
ithant theſe Books, there will be nothing but Confuſin ite
the World: And I am confident if mens Minds were but
truly fixt upon this Nemple, thry would: not prove ſuch
wenth r Coths, to be turned abouthwith the Wind of eviry
Joſe Divine of owe vii] APrologiral ron
' opinions : we ſhonld then be free from thoſe diſorders which
threaten deftru@ion to'the Soul, and diftraGion to the Com-
mon-wealth, but let athers write never ſo well, if our Pra«
Tiſe do not ſecond their mftrutiions, we may be wiſe wo

to: foreſee-onr Miſery, but never know how to prev
IWhatpittyis it, that this Famons Temple ſhould:
no.dther effef, but th informe our knowledg and confute ou-
Converſation ; whileſt we negle#} the truth that is\wppro«
hended; Tet there is ſome hopes, that ſuchobſervers, whoſs
Wiſdome bath received the flampe of goodneſs, will im-'
prove their .kill 10'@'veal Advancement of thoſe benefits,
which lye tockt np in this Glorious Temple, To whoſe *
and beboof," theſe Excellent Works are Commentled, #.
the b: that ever were write #1 this kind, and may ſerve
for a general Ground and Foundation to all Regular Con-
Ceptions.that concern the Eſſence and Exiſtence ofman.
The Governmene of Kingdomes and Common-
wealchs, ad by conſequence our eternal Salvation : And
vow what ue you will make of this Temple is in your pe-
wer ;; Tf you be wiſe, if not ſtand back, and let others come
.wnto it, end poſſeſſ it ;, let thoſe Malicious perſons that ſtan-
aulize our guthor with ſtudied calumnies, paſi unregarded;
for they are feoliſh rude people that ſpit filth at the Sun, and
it falls back intotheir own fuctes . be is now rifing and bigh
7n favour with the Princes and Peers of this Kingdome,which
cauſe hisentmies to envie him; be ſlights their madneſ, ani
gives them good Adviee. be is highly in efteem in the Spaniſh
&- French Conrts and is as it were aPrevy conncellor to __
| Ps L or

SES 3E.HK

dP

ES F.I 5-80

—_

at

Di Emgtg che biopr mem ere rin

Knights and Gent! f this and i biel $a
s Emen 0 Nation, is bighly | boxer -
ed by theme, becauſe 1 they love bim ; The Baſe, Commun Bull-
men, 1 mean the that deub their Medichues upox
every Poſt and Wall, be pitties and inſtrufs them freely and
ftudies to Cure thoſe, that theſe men beve. _— 'kfld with
their Lozenges and Pills, which Poyſon'the Body; be

thoſe that endeavoured to poyſon and drftroy bim, arid yieh-
dened otbers that forged Vill anies ug dinft hi Heiva Pro-
teftant, and doth good. foy evil, to all thoſe that ittverted
lies ageinft him; in Conclufion be' is .a Compleat young
CO RET ng gh Mind, (opt for cho,
on I know not, negletis $0 Marry contiuwes -C
or end faithful bo his Friend cub: all that know bi

find bime Generous and Noble, in a word the ultimate mY
Emulation is to promite the Cones Fs.

r 2 A TOES
Jake! Th | y Aaeweit,

1663.
KK, D.- Kaight, and Barronet- |

Gio Or Mar detial d whats chy ume. JG 24:

lt edeheonty Sopofifame 3...) ,
Monerad's rs ih four Brajumwedind;; | *
And grear Jenct.oe wand Mind. 1.
You noniedy withebe gods do hold...

' Andfearets: © Oracle u
To xe vonby dyigs and bourg you time daſheny..
By nymber make the Sur Rand fil orgy, ::
Reafts, Birdsaud Flowers) your 3idetey do impor.
From death theirthape 4 'Species.n0 Reſtore 3.

Health, Beauty, Youth and. Bleſſings. you can give...
And teach the dying Man anewro live, - ©

He kens when Frogs will. ſhowre Rain, and knows
When it will Thntder by the fli he of Crowes:
Converſes with good Geniz,and fortheevil

CanGChan'e faſt rochd: draidevids x cha Devil:

He can forecell things paſt, he can recall *

By power of Figures Teleſmatical. *

By vertue of the Stars roo, when you pleaſe

You know whats done amongſt th* Antipodes;

And from his niind, be 79, fear, grief, expels.

For where theſe raigne nocertain knowledg dyel: *

Haw ſhall call you to me, or which way gain thee,

Or with whatSacrificesentertainethee: | |
How toefteem you, Iam at loſs
Great Brother Heydon of the Rofie Croft.

Ralph, F reeman

ado mbar wad =

Kn ight, REI < and \$ ollonel

* Thy ſpirit's reſilefle, | Nowzhy bofie ang

$E00660F40095006000660606606 © ©”

Ibgenihifk: Kinſman, Mr. Jobs
__ won his profound and teamed
7 OG abeamigie Or, the

pole of iſpleme, 14 0 1
( 1 Jam ft Ss 1 fince you baye ſhow'a

Wo CE, yourtiry,

gh co. wake -Zoy's brain:ad
DAT NE bark* IF et 1s note
Dull Paſfre « Partly ou Hhaimity Tircle ſhare,
You are Compor'd of rd s divine and rare.
'Tis.che,moreſpri an Pers Ehmentof pure Fire," ;
That *bove the vulgar dothadvance you higher,
Within whoſe pg. gt a glorious Mind? doch move
All the Orbs of vertwe with Celeftial Love, "=
Whoſe Adtive climbings carry us'much ſooner | |
Tothe utmoſt height, ofnobleneſs and honour gc)

ir'd
4; <

piverts i fe _ iwth!Arcot
Tt among th* Stang lath-Pexrcb:
hi þ eofond anda unwexried cearch
Thou he s of ther great
Which bid, RTE EONS MTS

Stars were the Jufruments of Heavens influence als
Darting their diftajet beams abroad ; from chenee 7
What ringer know'ſt 2

How toprevent ſhew'ſt.
Then 'mong&ahe next thou wad'ſt
7 heir pow'rs #0. {tare —_— Kok, 9 thou invad'(ft.

A Temple thou haſt cear'd, a lating frame
Nor Babe}-like, ately ro.get.a Name:
But that thy thoughts Divine, may (ce before 'em
The way to enter ghe Sangum Sendorum.

A Thomas Heydon, Maſter of Arts
1663) \& OF Exeter Colledge in Oxford, and
Rector of Cots fd in Ox ſans fire.

3. © ®OEO KLE SEES
; £ "_ _ 3 S F.- F "Py woF we - +
bo LY = WB
—

*

Gy 45k 2, 4 OVEN £5 .

To the moſt: excellen t on Phy

ſopher/ and Lawyer, Mr. Jobs Hey
& & ns bis Theowagia,” 'Or, te”
\ Temple of Wiſdom. I lt

Ti # _ * Temple, whit ada. aps
Nor envious tenipeſts ſhall iEagerminge;

A ſecred Temple where we Meditate”.

Wiſdome divine, the difatesofonr fate, 3 0027.
- Let Rowes proud Vaticasn- s ron Iuephre |

Worthy this worke fo Rich, Subl and Rare,

The miſtries in. Natures Tecrer Ca pee th

Unlockt, Unſeen, Unhniowa to learned << GAS

Thou'ſt brotight tolighr>: and ax Promorbows * © aric

From! Jopes 'Stay Chamber, ' new ck flame:

Ic. makes me think thou either haſt converſt

I'th' counſe] of the'gads, and ſoreticar't

To the low'r world thefe deprhs, os cle indulg' 4

By great 4fylo haſt to ns divulg\d ©

_ Mifteries lain longin' flent Grave.

Conſule the Qrackeall you thar crave

Reſolves ?, he with the Spheares communicates :

Thenct be Prodifis, and thence be Calculates,

PEYDD FN. Cax't die'as lang; os Stars bave Light ©

This Temple crown'd by tay, can 'cſuffer Night t

po ch Robert Le-Neve Gent.
'* - to, Licene.

Gy

| Fr qui conſcripto ut refer entum voluminem
- Perge bokis #vibiie 4

; Oo 4 FI 4 . a4 _

"ki T.F'M PLUM

, Sopoag T7 "Eire PLE Ie.
AVE

plarime fecula Vates
med olohne fellas FL
Quaque decent Gamaheny vel depitinm ery Telefman,
Aut veteran Cabalam. grolificatunw Perram,
Argent: aut fuilvi, periturs. baud ſemine neſſt þ
Aurt Teanga reap ay 4 2 P8551 ks
Nuntins i WEL af, Or ones; + th
; wedhes CE” | tf
Ex niprs atl platitum cermendos fnocs:.
Cogere, feng rogent,. .
ocauled Darmonas arte -
et eſſe ſatis
eiſcrateris_

=
*”. *

Fe Err cow
Pr eſentes,: of qui fotos;

Texecnb Larres ad acjuffe vecant;-\
rc nvm Aral gt eftitit axte -

EffeTrne nalhis, quod #edit ante ſci"

Ingratum t pany candidig arte beet, - |

Nighis revorentur ab ambris
Dotorum:-manes,- tice ſpetirs virum

Hi reſponſs dabunt, treftemgue Acheronta movebunt -
Tu dud YWerente! fats furuya. Moves: :

Mandatis Heydone tj; Barachrumque =p
Orcus, ut & Phlegeton, ſervas uterque tib mM

Negque virum leteent obſexra enigmata tewtuns ':-
Sic novus in tertis 1% z

in: 'Zoroafter eris

8c cecivit, :Georgius Starkey,
"+ et goes Eirenews Philoponye Philaletber,

MEE EY
hc, peu $$

HE LEt Se 22 44+;
Heydow,s upgo by hys & eaſed 7; chic .

Or, che. Near IÞ\S3T bs bual4

on many fnrker ire EN Caſtles

"th Alto, Pets
In ArchiteBiane;\ thoug iy ne advanteyn "IP :
Nohocthetaky MdoderalaRemaſeh prrad Y
And bug Confolt how-they may entectaiy?!/ cs 1 ©
A Liquoriſhncy'with their puanion Brakias 3k it 1 5
What you prjeF'emore;Noblez ?cigro reed ©
Man's vaſtdetires with adaquatemear:' pit |
-Tis to ere& a Teaeple, ' whrocart come Kr 44t, 1
Where that name's due,.witkvucanfiecituny:
Of Sacrifice to him, Whofexeatous mind .- +
Would reare this ftraQure,' len Agediiigntd
Yor co Demoliſheve: Edifiees:” TRE TOTP Ky ao.
' Which is Baptizzd'wy Goh nam : asChis: 12) d..
You ftile ic #iſdovr'sT clarhus ſedate
| The art ed eee end Rallies /: wi:
From an Admiſſies?) buc cheris ;BqJal *, ys
If Plato wane. nt ry *+<19* 41 OH 11
In's Academy ; ſure.titc butgrofanes:::;1 rigs
Your Temple. by his Reps, hs: wheaxhe "wg
Forbidden are berween' bimapd your-Bagks
Will:yet. Attcmaps intothaſe,leaves:ralaoks;: -
Yer your Miſterious work mw x}
Amazement from che vulgar who. Adwire,
That moſt which-chey know-{aqf, and <þus the Son.
When cis Eeghps's- is gazed moalkupons:” rc!
I ſhall not Augure whacwillbeis fate: }.; :
Among thelea rn'd, I cannot Calculate
Far glia Mrs ye 22, veteiha)l paſs,

To mak Cas fans 15 Diana's was.

© 29.261663:" Thomas Fyge Gentleman,

AHSTHESEES SEEE

LS rye. L'Y

Dociſmymgy

ef ES

Amphſi if

d is mn SP Et uitym,
by in 1 , iy I T- ;
Y Templum Spit | cal hi Gy :

Ntiquary H eydone,, fi facis URUP A. | Jour;g,; A
Has dodio ſermowe Tuq * ay 0 Rr rev gh
_

uid Chaldza ſonat, , 4 Yepica feline, qurD
Duicquid Palladii qug | docuere Pelal, gls | }. yy =
®nicquid Arabs, quicgi povit Carthagiais alte, ....
Junoni Urb celebris, iequid celeberang Rome, . 7} 5}

Nofter ern qo ancellaruus ille,z. « Lak
Indi, —_—_ | rul

Pagina trnc Curfy a6, rs by vs LEA
DEG H.c 1: "Rnabes £
Taps Liver ode ht ently crpie chr nl —_—_ fy

"X

Humanuns Fatimn magic veruere CARA. :

127 HOT YEH cc a il2 6

7 1663- Tus, dale mie M4.

3! & T1

2.398 Huper ante flarnſe Canitah,

To his Yonou ed Fried} the th

"Author, gn his Te engin the
"Temple of Wiſdome..... ..

' +
qi: boſs

a

M I awake ! or doe mine eyes put on
Some Dreames phancaftick apparition?
My longing mind's amyFd to finde where ths
Temple of 'Rofie-Crucian Wiſdome is3 ;
For if | could, ]'de ſoon
Unto that ſaered'p? Pl ace a 'Votary
Id'e ſpare'norinfe, 'bar hwy —_ oO
And zealouſly* og age.
But I am ravith', and wit Le: cry; vida
What Muſe ! of rather oo - 'barmoney
Inſpir'd our Aethiythus 3 pry: fre nor M
What gods biit thoſe, of Aﬀt
Phabus and Hevmey} hey whole congueo og
Are ſtillthe interpreters 'rwrtt gods and' "AY &
tous Vertues ; ecule-powerv's fee: nt
*Sferrs, and earth conjoy Wl iri Harmon q
Why then proceed( brave ſmb!Jand ſcorn e htm
That malice can' fine ont,: - - <q
Be fortunate as knowing, m ay yourpen
Advance your fame, aho7R o e ſpighc of men
And.thiough thele iny unpoſilt'c fines can't raiſe -
Your name, or give your Ce deſerved praiſe;
Yer give me leaye eowrite, and lecthem ſhew
The Ra: of wy love'to you.

of /

Zune, 18. |
wu Ro, Turner, Med. Licene.

ws BY » "

Arcanorum , | Supremorum,
Scrueatori perfeRtiſlimo,Sciznrilqas,/
-Quaatiflimo,? : Donne, Domino
Fohanni Hezdon Equici, amico /
meo deleQiflimo, -

Qs te aft fugen] ire Haſs Speculaneiei ate 2 "M he
Falitas Call ſtella Satrate tuis, * .
Duid got! quid Terre; Tail Dich Regia plutonic Ny
In vabis ? aut Celi numina ſacre moves ; |
 Ardua Calorum ſuperaſti intmo imme foraſt;
Terrarum yz ulterius que Cul tubs :
_ Tandem ſupereſt ? ſupereſt graviors C neri,
cc Solum ſupereſt te ſuperare priw.
Ouid Juvet y3 ncaa Curſue, Tagen metiri ?
Temet negledo fi moriente per
 Scire tuum nibil eſt, nihil & oe 6 ſon Ef: ma,
Omnia quantumvia que Cogitenda ſci
Dawnati penas Noſti ; Noſts ane Beats. _
Premia tunc Fliga que libs grate
Vivere quan gratum eſt , quan: grata eft MN eaſe,
Sit tubi vita tales, fot tabs vite mori,

R ic” Die. _.
Tug ,2 » ThomasRevell, Ae

* + eG + £4 -

5

ww 1 2

(ſ13TORTTS ICH ES mo 100621 #,
Take Ss

//*G&Btcd

Lees the
To tel! what. |
Did cane}. oy | 1 |
Whar Cnt on ta can pan
Our Authot h ge m4 I my by by ry
I name theſe ewo, ANC reſt, yy
Becauſe cheſe two "re, on &f, 8
I've ſeen thelcatian, F 7 and oe ir £06;
Upon theſe Subje&s making wuch adoe,
And in compoſure, robe Fery _
But none of them, till now was ere ; complex.”
Some menreatt this, ſome that, we daily fee ©
So many men, {0 many mintfes therebee;
Who pleaſurerake rakes tofarſy his'mind ©
Inun up nown (verets, here he may chem find :
An&if afferel, and'Ention Wrote,

Hatch ew aceped, I _—_— my Vore,

For this our Author; in th q unknown Wayes
HPle de your! Gall ant jou out wirh 'bayes.
\ os ere will take the paines to try this Science,
* gn Ignorance, ſhall bid defiance.
Hee's to bee prais'd, who everdoth imparrc.

The Hidden things of Nature, and of Art.
May, the 8th

8h 13. A.M. 2 OR
} obs B 00ker, $dinouadnnd)iG

a o 4.0

- 4 «ow OREN er 9% EE Sas 2. _
A

y i; * i joy +) 109 > '

"OO

< ad x eb LLaf Eats

v £2 & + . \v
291% 2100041 220% 10 Win 1 wed

m PII 23 m3Þ1 [9 T

"Faris

". pr \. he #30, 0 THYQ a6) [4 "Kb ds; 1h 4 rl 3 1
Write « Ichi Karee, Afſiagy

Is th'way x Self. Man ©.
But your no reads no afſaulcs

- From Underwits 3 or ſuch whoſe Judgement halts.
Hee that ſhall Cenſure theſe your Miftegue: limes»...
Muſt Knowledge have i in Hermes Richer My hes:
Of Occult Learning : Plaine Philoſopby now

E Mars, { 'CTme PN and you {
NV an « GyeM Bonnet off canthrow
Lnlch h' have Strength and Steture ſoto doe )

*'Tis not the Dwarfe in Scyence that ſhalldare

Pretend himſelfunco your Temple Here.

Nor muſt Profexer Perſons, hope to find

Tor, of that Gentle and Indu/ging Mind,

As toProted in this your SanGuary

Thoſe, whoſe unhallow'd Hearts and Hands Miſcarry.

| The Rough-bewn Fancy muſt your Temple fiye,

No Concubine of Art, ſhall in her Lye :

She is prepared forthe Muſes Nine,

Who doe Command ( like Roman Meſſaline )

That none but Kings there Enter ! ---- If others Come,

Let chem in th* Court, or Porch, find out a __
corn

T F s Fd
. ——. .
*
a ———
.

-

th vo

.Scorn then|[ my FriendJche Squint-ey'd Enemie,
Shall dare to give your Book or you the Lie3-.- -< . - -
Ifch' Low-orb'd Spirits of this Brittsfp Iſle, *<5* - +?
Being /2#rent of yoar Labours great ſhall ſmile:
Tell them the Cage, or Stocks, is much more fir,
Unleſs chey hada better Bank of wit); -;
| Forthemco be acquainted with, then this, ' _
Your worthy Temple ( here;) of #iſdome is.30.\
For you may juſtly ſcorn the L aymens ſhift,,::..
When Scholtars (1 doetbink.) Reech ot your. Drift :
And now forbeexe, to trouble-your Lofty Bramnes,
With Each Mer's Comment on your Atlas Pines ;
ThisIle Prefage, your Book of Wiſtome is, *' ©
A guide that Lradrs to Natures Myſteries,

ry £

_ oF +

Funexoth y vb iy ©
P, M. 1663...

Ly

© Foln Gadbury, enonaSnudo

OS
OI oOuro—T—S—
ho ——

REDD ae are

Theomagia,
TEMPLE
WISDOME

The Firſt Book.

CHAP. & .
How to projed a Figure, the Roſie Crucian way.

*0

nemo ld

—

OD the Creator of all things,
SD) our of the Chaos, which wasthe

pi bodies of wicked Angels made
IS the Earth, which is divided into
>WIl twelve equal parts, which over
j rheſe Ruleth cwelve Created
if 14ea's, which bring che vertues

and influences of cheir ſeven
Lords, upon all things creaced under the Suu: And
theſe vertues or influences we receive, in manner
and form following, by fixteen Figures; and they
ſhew us alſo all things paſt, prefenc, and to come.

You muſt Note, chat when the Artiſt to frame
his Figuce doth make pricks, he muſt forme o_
ths

— Os

2 The Temple of WW (dome, Book - #

—— = em —— Ir EIPIioes eo oo 0 So a oEEE—_> co

che firit line of pricks Jike unto four Fingers of the
Jefc hand, without counting the pricks, "ſo that at
cheleaſt there bero the namber of ſixreen in every
Finger; And thus frame all your other lines of pricks
anto che numberot.iixteen : aud ou nuſt not lay
your hand upon the paper, till yau have mage the
lixeeen lines; 1lways Pondring in your heart,moving
the hand wheretore you make che Figure: and un-
derſtand- that che brtt line is-attributed unto the
Fire, the ſecond to the Aire, the third to the I/ater,
che fourth to the Earth : And alſo that all theſe
pricks {12nihe one Idea, and all theſelines an Ele-
ment; and the four firſt hnes, che firſt Element,

which isthe Fire 3 the ſecond four, the ſecond Ele-
ment, which is the Aire; the third four, the third
Element, which is the Water: the four laſt lines,
the reurch Element, which is the Earth; the lines be
a'{vartribured corthe four angles of the Earth, viz,

Lat, Weſt, North, Sith, and ruled by four nugnty
was,

Aniherecleldea's Rendavous, and are iNcorpoe
rate. into a tigure, which is made by us;3 And 1s
n arurally a me:renclo{ue orVeitment of the Divine
Idea, which is an Inviſicle Created ſpirit. Burt more
of this in its proper place, after we hive ſpoken of
the ſeven R elers of the world : And this Arc muſt
be receive im fome tublime vertue : And all Artift
- (4: .nd Rofte Crucians have Cemontirated this tobe
twofold, the one whereof conbits in Relzgion an
Ceri monies, and cherefore they will have che project»
ing of ch15Art tobe made with {1gns upon thePaper:
T.oſie Cruciars allo judge the hand of che Pi Qzector or
" orker to be moſt prowerfully moved and dire&ed
Ly the Idea's or Geniz when rheyAfcend and Deſcen {

in their Regions; And Lherghp e they tilt uſed holy
Depre-

Bobk I: The Temple of Wiſdome. | 3

» es 14: ue: Oo ooo NS ny

Deprications, Incantations wich other Rites and oblec-
vations provoking and alluring 1ea's of this nature
hereunto, as they move the Earth every hour-

' And it-isin the very Soul it ſelf of the projeCtor.
whe heis carried to this work, with ſomegreategreſs
of his now defire:For thisArt hath a natural obedi-
ence to the Soul it ſelfe : And: of neceſſity hath efh-
cacy, and is moved co that which che Soul it ſelfe
defires, and this is true and pure, neither matters
it how theſe points are projetted, fo rhat there be
fixteen in all the lines atleaſt, and jixceen lines in
all.

And this Art may be pra&iſed,when ſoever a man
will, andaccording to the demand that is made, be
ienight or day,Fair weather or Foul, Rain or Wind.
And moreover you muſt note; That for any que-
ſtion cr demand, you muſt make a figure, but one
time, bur tearing the figure ' and forgetting the
Judgment which was firſt mace, if any fault be
found in the.demand or in che f6gure 3 And then

make another in another mariner, and Judge the

ſecond time, according as you ſhall find your Fi-
Ure. | | —,
, Many in making or projecting their points do ule
ſeveral wayes, buc the beſt that ever I ſaware theſe
foliowing, which afcer you have well obferied, you
may either riding, or walkimg be reſolved of what
lhall happen that Day, Month, or Year in any place
where you deſire co enquire; and of this you ſhall
os furcher : Is the Harmory of the wortds
Lib. 2.

4

1be Temple of Wildome. Book, [.

——_—_—

ZE:

{

| Hove you ſhall bawe an example in o»der ;

By this example you may make prick, ſiroakes,
ftars, which yor pleaſe to work, with, for you

need no other way but this.

—_—

\Fire,
Are.

Earth.

; F ue.
Aire.

Vc Water TE EET YT EYY

Woarer |

—

2 line{ 4 Fjoure,
; ine" 4
4 line

Bo oK.I. TheTemple of Wiſdome. 5

| = 11 Figure. v Water Narth

|
>| Figure.<

5 F Figure, 5 Water North

which you Work by, with your Pen, or walking Staſf,

\ Fire | South
HHHHHHHHHHH ||
Aire Eaſt

HHHHHHHHHHHH|
Farth ' Weſt
HHHHHAHHHHHj | i 16

ſ\ Fire South |
[ae 1.
Aire Ea
HHH HHHHHHHHHH| |, J* »
Water North: - | es
HHHHHHHHHHHH || Þ* *
Farth Weſt ES
E (HHHHHHHHHHH ||

\ 2 aA, Ea

7 3 Ss . - mn {1
i Ys |

Aire Eaſt |
CO

; Fignre.s Water North
HHHHHHHHHHHH |
Earth Weſt
[HHHHHHHHHHH| |
C
ſ\ Aire South
HHHHHHHHHHH[| |
Aire Eaſt
| pp; HHHHHHHHHHHHH | |

HHHHHHHHHHHH |

Earth Weft
(WHHHHHHHHHHH [|

A-3

; * »
HHHHHHHHHHAHH | | 6

— Fn ———o_—_—_——_ II CIS

The manner how to Joyne the Pricks, or Strocks |

—
6

. The Temple of Wiſdome: Book,

Tb. manner how to frame this. Art, and give
:toeach place his Name.

Feer that you have fer your pricks inta lines,
and thereof drawn out and formed the figure,
" as we have ſhewed unto you, you muſt take and ſet
the four firſt lines of the firſt Figure, and ſer them
altde, and thisis called the firſt Figure : then muſt
ou take the ſecond of the ſecond = lines,and ſet
them by the firſt, and ſo have you then two Figure:
And then you ſhall draw the third Figure, of theo-
ther four lines, conſequently following and pur
that a part, and it iscalled the third Sigure : And
finally you ſhall of the other four lines which are
the jaſt, take the four. figure, which is called che
four Mothers, and ſet that by the other three,and
ſo the third and fourth be companions, as you ſhall
ſee by this example following 3 but above all cake
heed'and place your ficit well, co make the other to
follow afcer, and you ſhall pur it on the right hand
according tothis example following, which is the
febrew Dottors way,

—— cu

|Earth.\Water Aire. ire, |
4-0 3 2 BE
X X| XX|XX, X X
CRONE | TY | * * | * * [The right
Hand. | x | * xxx *X[nd
4 XX | &- | *£% | + [00
Weſt, {North Eat. |Sourth.

Theſe ſour Figures. be called four Mothers,where-
of rÞþe firſt is ztcribute tothe Fice : The ſecond ws
by | 1 | rhe

Book 1- The Temple of Wildome. 7

the Aire: The.chirdto the Water ; And the fourth
to the Earth ; . Of chele four, come another four, in
taking the poincs which are the. 6rft po nts. of the
Mothers, and gathering them togeth*; 7h Wwe which
ſhall reſult ouc of, points of the V'@! <2, 15 4k
which makerh che figure of F:/iz; the ccuer whenrcyt
is by deſcending from the ſuperiour paints,throuph
boch Mediums to the Joweſt, as you ithall ſee by ex»

ample |
| © f3 | ; 6346-5 T 4 [ i oy |
| * >» » » * Is * *» > # + » =# BS a
* > » ++ 8 2-6 X* XN =» » » * +»
x - * * * * '* | * + * Xx | » |
* >» + X+ | > » | + * » | * » * #
Earth | Warer|j Aire | Fire |Earth-|Water| Aire Fire |
Weſt [Noth Eaft |'Soyth |Weſt |Narth | E:f [S6urh

Cray. II, _

of the ſegnificatioe of theſe eight Figures, and bow
from them you muZ3t make foure more, :
'Heſe hgures have ſuch ſignification as we have

. Þ already written ,* but yer when t. ey be ſerin
the ewelve houſes, as ſhall be declared hereafter,
they ſhall have other ſigmiticatzons then we have yet
ſpoken of, tut hereafter it thall be treated of; and
you ſhall ſee that tigure which is ſer for the *outh,
or that which 1s ſer for the Eaſt, ſhall have another
um portance, according tothe Rules which we will
A 4 place

3 The Temple of Wiſdome, Book.l.
+ .plz-eas following: And now to make other foure fi.
ay Z4ires, you muſt rake the firftpricks of the firſt and
lecond figures, arid juft under them, if their
\ Pricks be even, ſo place them, and if they be uneven
| make but one,and ſo conſequently from the ſecond
'> lineof theſecond figures, atrd ſo of the third and
I fourth, you muſt do as much to make the tenth
figure, as youdid of the firſt ard ſecond to form the
ninth, and ſo muſt you doe of the reſt to make the
eleven and twelve figures: And ſo theſe twelve will

flandas youſhall ſee here by example,

xx 7” * * * xk*& | +*

| VE HK [x
* | x*

* j * kx | &*
** | * I *X*

8 36: 22 he +1318 *1
| «*& | x * «

12 | It | w | 9
\ *& * * l
* * * *« f * *k * |

| x * * + & *
XxX *X | — | & % ſ
Earth | Water | Aire Fire
| Weſt {| North | Ealt South /

'S

CHAP,

Li O—_
*

mn :F ow @Faus ww ww Py Lis

——_——

bn. —

Book.l.
CHAP, IV.

How to frame the Witneſle and the Judge.

N Ext we muſt teach you how to make the Wir.
neſs 8 the Fudge, that out of them we may have
a certain Reſolution, Sentence, and ftay upon the

eſtion, and of the difference chereof; the righe

qu
Wieſe is taken from the ninth and tenth figures,

and of theſe two Witneſſes cometh a Fudge, unto
whom appertaineth the diſcufliofi of the whole fi-
yu :- And if he be good, che Demand will be
ound geod, and if heþe ill, the queſtion isill :
And you muſt note that ſometimes we ſpeak of I-: *
dea's and ſometimes of Genii, you are to under-:
ſtand by a Genius,a certain Divine ſpirit that works!
eth ſecret things in Natuge Miraculouſly,and by an
Idea the Divine and Natural Form of your Figrre;
ſo thartltere is no great difference betwixt a-Geni{-;
us and a Divine Idea, as you may read in The Har-'
mony of the World : Now here followes the Figure. :

CHAP.V,

"The Tompleof Wildome. \ Bur

—_—

Book I.

x

- i 5 CHAT V-|

Of the Names of the f eves | Rulers 0 che Earth;
The names of a twelve Genijor or Idea's, "8

| f of their ſixteen woes.”

Ow reſteth it ; , that we declare the Names of -

the ſeven Rulers of the Earth, and of the
ewelve Idea's, and of their Incloſyres, Veſtments or |
Figures, as they are to their Rulers; And you muſt |
know that thef Ruleysbave fignification in their |
places, and Rule the tipelve 1dea's which are atcri-
buted ta the twelve Regions of the Earth, and we ,
could never finde any more then ſixteen Fi Igures, :
let ufturn the Pricks which way we would,and here ;
follow their Names, and in order cheir ſeveral Na-,
tures and Significations. |

j

-- - m_—
+
| 4
%
\ AY
#
| (B

» .* .
- | $

Element. .

_—— PR OE IE NES OY

> a bl
d—
oo
_

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book. x.1, |

go

\ 1SUTre.

Aire.

I —S

& IO...

4

| - Name.

Comprotended wichone

"ms Tar.
Greater Aid.

Gree Foreume, ©

Safeguard cntring. _

Puelle.
A Girle.
Beautifull,

Rubins_
Reddiſh.
Red.

—_

\ Conjuntiio.
ConjunMon.

An Aſſembling.

ll... A. _—_—

Book.I. The Temple of Wildome.

LITER

MR

—

[6/4 |S]

—

CO IT

| Name.

Barzabel.

Taphthartherath.

————
Al. ted.
—

—

Haſmodai

——————
_ -mactinithe'

CC
——

[S]

— —

I-0-]£&

Kedemel

mn — I Sp,

| Sorath.

Ge ee EE RY — _

Kedemel

on—_

INS

Barzabel

————_— _ @—

hom _—_—

kb | «|| @

.

3 |

| Name. FS

CC

hy

Malchidael.

Ambriel.

—— ———

|
_ mma

Haſmodel.

Cho
A————

——
CCD

Verchiel.

Zuriel,

—@

Barehiel.

PERIL SESr oor, ren.
—oni__ —

Hamaliel.

Taphthartharath

}

]

4

Eo an

The Temple of Wiſdome.

14 Book I.
| Element. Figure. | Name. 2 71
[> * - * ' Arquiſito. _
> St * Obteyning.
us , X X | Comprehended with-
- Sno
| * Xx | Triſtita. SM
X X | Sadnefle.
"oy | EOF | Damned.
— oe. {OR © -
- Letitia. 2
Water "TT _ | Joy, Laughing.
- * Healthy.
ED - Soren.
Fg Carcer, Yom
Earth. | A Priſon,
Mw | wy Bound.
: #. | Cade Dram.
Fire X | Thethreſhould going
wy af CUTC,
nt. —_|- Thelower threſhould
| * | Fortuna Minor.
Aire Ms «K | Lefſer Fortune. |
* x | Lefſer Aid ſafeguard
= _ —— SOINS Our.
- Via. = ”
Water *% 1 Way.
> Jy:
: Tx | Capud " apmoerny m1
Earth x - | TheHead, The Thre-
* ſhould entring the
TER upper Threfhould.

"
= ————_—_ —_ _ ——

Book I. | The Temple of Wiſdom |

i

——

UTEREGTE|>| E |

F

gy

»

fo

, Hiſmael.

;

Name.

& AN

——

1]

—

Hiſmael.

Zarzel.

 Zazel and
Barzabel.

EY
— aw

Sorath,

Haſmodaqz,

|

Hiſmael.

\Kedeme!,

Genius

——

- Name.

1Advachiel,

—

———

_

. |Cambiel.

»

Amnixiel.

mm.
—

Hanael.

9 ——

-|Zazel & Barza-

bel in all their
Idea's. |

Verchiel.

Muriel.

_—_.

Hiſmael and
Kedemelin all
their Idea's.

Er E| REG IE|@s | &

16 The Tampleof Wildome. Book. T.

Cnar. Vi. ©

Of Zazel, and bis general and particular Signi-
ficatio fo 7 a ſprer9? * noted _ ;

antw
9” Az#] delightsin two of the ewelve Tdes's

of the Earth, & in the places where they
are, viz. Hanael and Cambiel, he governeth the
Ayry Triplicity by day, which is compoſed of Alb,
Puella and Trijiicia: He is Diurnal cold and dry, Me-
* Jancholty, Earthly, Maſculine, the great inforcune,
Author of Solitarineſſe, Malevolent, he goveipes the
Earth 354. years and four Months. . Read the Har-
.mony of the world.

He is profound in imaginationzin his Ads ſevere,in , I

words reſcrved,in ſpeaking & giving very ſparing,in
labour patient, in arguing anddiſputing grave, in
obrayning the goods of this life ſtudious, and Coli-
citous, in all manner of aftions Axftere.

In fifty ſeven years, forty three, and thirty years,
bemy 1} poſited with his Idea's he is envious, cove-
tous, jealous and miſtruſtful, tymerous, ſordid,cut-
wardly difſembling, lugeiſh, ſuſpitious, ſtubborne,
a congemner of women,a cloſe ]yer, malicious, mur-
muring, never contented but alwayes pining.

In Corporature, he lignifies moſt part of Midle
ſtature, cold and dry, with a pale Complexion,
Swartiſh, or Muddy, Eye little and black, looking
downwards, a broad forehead; black or ſad Hair :

And ac hard or rugged, great Ears hanging, hove-
Ting Eye-brows, thick Lips and Noſe, a thin Beard,
a lumpilb unpleaſant Countenanee, either holding
bis head forward or ſtooping, his Shoulders __
| <> an

BOOK.1.

The Temple of Wiſdome. -

eee ein x EE

and large, and many cimes crooked, his belly ſome-
whac ſharp and lanke, his Thighes ſpare, lean and
not long ; his Knees and Feet indecent many uimes
ſhoveling or hitting one againlt another.

The Q-:alicies of men he {1gnifiech, and their pro«
teſlions, are Husband-men, Clownes, Beegary, day Labor-
ers, old Men, Fathers, Grand-fathers, Monks, Feſuits,
and SeCtarifts: He fignifieth Carriers, night Farmers;
Miners under ground, Trnners, Potters, Broom- men, Plum-
mers, Rrickmakers, Malſters, Chinmmy ſweepers, Sextone of
Churches, Bearer s of Dead Corps, Scavengers, Hoſt'ers, .
Coliiers, Carters, Ga: deners, Ditch-rs, Chandley®, Dyers of
black, Cloth, an Herds-man, Sheep-herd, or Cow herd-
keeper -

He fignifieth all ſmrediments in the right eare,
Teech, al. quartan Agnes proceeding of cold, dry,
and Melancholly diftempers, Leproties Rheums,
_ Conſumpeions, black Jaundies, Palfies, Tremb!ings,
vain Fears, Fantafies, Drophe, the hand and foot
Gour, Apoplexties, Dog-himder, to much flux ofthe
Hemoroids, Ruptures3if in the fifth oreight, ſower,
bitter, ſharp, and in mans body he principa'ly rul-
eth che Spleen. See the Holy Guide.

He goveraeth Bears-foot, Star-worr, Woolf-bane,
Hemlock, Ferne, Hellebor, white and black Hen-
bane, Ceceratch or finger Ferne, Clotbur orBur-
dock, Parſnip, Dragon, Pulſe, vernine, Mandrake,
Poppy, Moſs, Night ſhade,Bichwind, Angelica, Sage,
Box, Futſan,Orage or Golden herb,Sprinage, ſheep-
herds Purſe, Cummin, Horftaile, Fumicory.

Of Plants and Trees, he fignifies the T amerisk,
Savine, Sena, Capers, Rue or Herb-grace, Polipody,
Willow or Sallow tree, Yew tree, Cypreſs-tree,
Hempepine tree,

B He

18 The Temple of \iſdome.
te lignifiech che A(s, Cat, .Hare, Mouſe, Mole,
Elephanc, Bear, Dog, Woolf, Batilisk, Crocodile,
SCcorpeon, I oad, Serpent, Adder, Hog, all manner
of creeptng Creatures, brecding of putrefa@iun,
either in the Earth, Water or Ruines of Houles.

He fignifieth the Fele, Tortoiſe, and all (heil filhes,
Heitgnifieth or governech che Bac, or Blude v1uck
brow, Laporing,Owle. Gnat,Crane, Peacocs, Grat-
hopper, I hruſh, black-Bird, Oſtricch, Cuchoe

He delights in iDeftarts, Wooys, cbicure Vallies,
Caves, Dens, Holes, Y ountamcs,or where men have
been buried, © hurch yards, &c, Ruinous buildings,
Cole-mine+, Sin':'s, Duty or ſlinking muddy places,
Weils and Houtes of Othces ; he huieth over Lead,
the Load-ſtone, the drof: of ail Meccals, as aiſo the
Duſt ana Rubbith of every thing.

He Rulech the Saphire ſtone, Lapis Lazul, all
black ugly ſheer ſtones, not polithable and of a ſa4
aſl:y or black colour; He f1gnitieth cloudy,dark, ob-
ſcure weather, cvld and hurtful, thick, black and
condenſeclouds.

He delighreth in che Eaſt quarter of Heaven, and
cauſerh Eaſtern winds, at che timeof gathering any
Plant belonging to him, you muſt turne your face
towards the Eaſt in his hour, and let him bein the
firſt ſeventh, tench, or-e!eventh houſes, where he is
ſtronge: And the hgure muſt be projefted in his .
hour, then chat part of the Earth will aſcend inthe

Eaſt; the meaning of this 1s; Admit you frame
a Building, eret a Iown, or City, or Family, or
Principality 3s begun, where Ca:cer or Trijtttis in
motion be in the ſeventh. tenth,or eleventh houſes,
with Acgqaifitio, Letitiz or Fortuna Major,they incorpo=
Tate thereſuch Jdcas, that you may Judge the Fa-

mily, new Houſe, &c, may continue three —_—
| fifty

Book 1;

Se TE Oh IS. A eee

Book l. The Temple of Wiſdome. _ 9

fifcy four years in honour : and if m a Nativity,
you find your Figure fo; then according to Nature,
he may live titty ſeven years; forty three, or thirty,
according as you find them togerher; for heiscold
ani dry, ani}1s an enemy to Man.

He rules th-ſe Countries, viz. Bavaria, ' Saxony,
Stiria, Romandiola, Ravenna, Conſtantia, Inzoldjtad.

He ruleth Sacurday, and that day, the firſt and
eight hours of, rhey are called his,

LE En

A—c — ———— — — — — { — — —

CHAP, VILE
Of Hiſmac), and his ſtenification-
ee | = Sha hath two Idea's, which are I1-

corporated into two Figures, viz. Ac-
quiſitio by day, and Letitia by nighc; Albus and Con-
junio deſtroy him, he delights co be with Populus,
and her 2dea : He is ſick and weak with-Carcer : he
ruleth the Fyery Triplicity by nigh, v:1z, Paer, For-
tuna major, and Acquiſitio « and their 1deas
He is nacurally Durnal, Maſculine, cemperately,
hot and moift, Airy Sanguine, the greater fortune,
Aut hor of cemperance, Modeſty, Sobriety, Juſtice,
He governes the world three hundred fifty and
four years, and four Months, In ſeventy nine, hr is
Magnanimous,faichful,baſhful,afpiring at high mat=
ter in an honourable way ; inall his a&ions a lover
of fairdealing, ' deliring to benefit all men, doing
glorious things, honourable and RelJigious,of [weer
and affable Converſation, wonderful indulgent co
his Wife arid Children, reverencivg aged Men, a
4 | Preac

20 1he lemipte of VV fivoie. Book. [

great Reliever of the poor, ful ot haricy and God-
Ime(s ;liveral, hating all fordid a&ions, Juſt, Wiſe,
Prudene, Thankful, Vercuous ; fo that when you
find Hiſmael the fignificator of any man, viz. when
his kgures arein good company, you may Judge the
man to be thus qualificd, and many live ſeventy
nine years. :

But when he is unfortunare, as you ſhall find him
by your figure : with ill Tdea's, viz thoſe char are
incorporated in Rubrus, Carcer, Trijtitia, Canda Dra-
Conts and Puer : he t1gnifies forty five, or twelve
years, and then he waſts his patrimony ; and fuf-
fers every man to Cozen him; his Hipocricically
Religious, Tanacious and ſtiffe in maintaining f.lte
tenents in Religion : he 1s 1gnorant,careleſs,nothing
delighrful in the love of his friends, of a croſs, dull
capacity, Schiſmarical, abafing himſelf in all com-
panes, crouching and- ftooping where no neceſlity

15.

He ſignifies an upright, ſtraight and tall ſtature;
brow ', ruddy and lovely Complexion; of an Oval
or long Viſage, and is full or flelhy, high forehead,
large gray Eyes, his Hairſofc, and a kind of Aburne
brown ; much Reard, a large deep Belly, ſtrong pro-
portioned Thighes and Leggs ; bis Feer large and
unharidfome; in his ſpeech, he is ſober and of grave
diſcourſe. -Y

The Qualities of men he fignifies are Judges, Se- .|
nitors, Councellours, Ecclefiaſtical men, Biſhops, |
Prieſts, Miniſters, Cardinals, Chancellors, DuQors
of the civif Law, young Scholters in an Univerſity
or Colledg, Lawyers, Clothiers, woollen Dra«

ers...

Diſt he ſignifies, are Plarifies, all infirmities
1h the Liver: left Eare, Apoplexies, inflammarions
33 copy voy | 4

oe RO Ion Nerwens nn

Ll BY

Serpent heRulech.

Xo CO AT WL. 0.
cg ORE, 6 691 EG Ba

| Qrcatories, B 3 The

Book.l. 1he Temple of Wiſdome., 28
of the Lungs, Palpication and trembling of the
Hearc, Cramps, pains in the Back-bone, all diſeaſes
lyingin the Veins or Ribs, and proceeding fron
corruption of blood, ſquinzies, windinels, all pj re-
faction of the blood or feavers, proceeding trom
00 great abundance thereof. 7

He governeth the ſweer and well ſented Qdonre,
and chat which 1s moſt plea anc and de'tgheful
wichour extream CoJours; he ignityech Seag:; cen or
blew, purple, Aſh colours, Herbz and Druggs as
Cloves ani] Clove-geilhi flowers, Mare, Nucmeg, *u-
oar, the Staw berry, the herb Pallome, {jercony,
Centory, Flax, Arlemart, Fumitory, Lung wort,
Pimperwel, Wall wort, Organy or wild Marjoram,
Rubarb, ſ(elfe Heal, Barrage, Bugloſs, Wheat, Willow,
Hearbe, thorow,leafe Violets, Lask wort, Liver wort,
Bazil, Pamegranates, Pyony, Liquoritſh, Mint, Ma-
Rick, che Nazy Feverfew, 4

Plants and Trees, as Chery, Eirch tree, Mulber-
ry, Coral tree, the Qake, Barbaries, Qlive, Gooſ=
berries, Almond tree, the Jvy, Manna, Mace, the
Vine, the Fig tree, the Ath, the Pear tree,the Hizle,
the Beech tree, the Pine,Rayſon : Of Beaſts herules
the Sheep, the Hart or Stagg, the Doe, the Oxe,
Elephant, Dragon, Tygar, Unicorne; choſe Bealts
which are mild and gentle,(and yer of great benefic
to Mankind) are governed by him. |

He governes the Scorke, the Snipe, the Larke, the
Eagle, the ſtock Dove,the Partridge, Bees, Pheſant,
Peacock, the Hen.
Fiſhes, The Dolphin, the Whale, ſheath Fiſh,and

He delightech in places neer Altars of Churcbes,

12 publick Conventions, Synods, Convocations; in
places neat, ſweet; in Wardrobes,Gourts of Juitice,

22 "O00 Tm of V\ Wiſdome, Book 1. L.

' The Minerals and Preriousſtones he fFovernetare
Tin,Amecheſt,che Saphire,che Smarag'd or Emrald,
Hyacinth, Topaz, (.hriftol, Bezoa, Marble, arid
that which in England we call the F ree-ſtone : : See
the Holy {-uide ;

He uſually fignifyeth ſerene,pleaſant,and hedtch
ful Norch winds.

Re governech the North wind, that part which
cendech tothe Eaſt.

In Generation, he governeth the ſecond, and
centh Month, his proper ſear in Van is the Liver,
and inthe Elements, he rulech the Air.

He'governeth the lecond Climate and the Coun-
cries of Babilon, Perfia, Hungaria, * paine, Cullen : che
numberthree is atcribured th) him,and he Governes
Thurſday the firſt, and ejghe hours thereof; and
then you muſt rather his Herbs, if Populus bein

the twelfth, or Fortuve Major in the fifch, for than
you will gather his vercue three tires 1 more power-
ful chen at another rilme.,

HOT an CCI

CHare, VIIL
Pg Barzabel, and his ſuenift cation.

LOT

& Bow hath pure, and the Idea,for his
day delight, and Rnbews, and that Idce
wat night, he is exalted in the centh houſe, and
by ni fall,ruine and Detriment is in the fourth houſe;
he governeth the watery Irighcity nighcand day,vis.

Populus, Rybews, Levelna, | 4
0

the firlt,fourth or _ in theninth, or Letitia in;

* Wa Wes a rngd CR ” - . —

#
i

TY

He is Matculine and Noturnal 11 Nature, hot and
dry, chollerick and Uycry, che lefler in fortune,
author ot quarrels, ſt;ifes, contentions. _

He governes the world chiee hundred fitry four
years and four months: he ruleth in nan from for-
cy one fO fiity fix years 3 and in two hundrea f1xty
four,and tIxty lis, heis invincible in che firit houte,
or tenth, in exployts of Warr, and is very cou-
rageous in theezghr, fcorning any ſhould exceed
him, (ubject co no Reaton, bol.', conftiiient, um-
moveable, contentious, chatlenving all honour co
chemſelves; Valiuntc, lovers of War, and chin2< per=
cayning thereu:.co, hazarding him felt to al} perils,
willingly will obey no body, nor ſubmit to any; a
baafter of his own As, proud, and one that thghes
all chings in compariſon of Viory; in a word at che
beſt he is a Knave.

But when he 1s unfortune in the Figure, in forty,
or fifty, then he {igniftes praclers without modeſty,
or honeſty, a very Rogue, and never better, let hun
be where he will; buta lover of {flaughrer and quar-
rels, murder, theevery, a promoter of Sedition,
Frayes and commotions, a highway T heif, as wave-
ring as che wind, a Pick-pocket, a Traitor, of Tuy-
bulent ſpirit, Perjured, Obſcene, Rath, Inhumane,
neither fearing God,nor regarding man, Ravenous,
a Cheat, furious ana violent.

Generally he ſionifiech one of a middle ſtature,
their bodies ſtronge, and their bones biy,' rather
leane then fat,the complexion brown,ruddy colour
or an high colour, round viſage, hair read or ſan-
dy,flaxen,and many times criſping or curling, ſharp
hazle eyes, and they peircing, a bold confidenc
Countenatice, and the man AGive of body and
fearleſs, ſometimes a dark haite.

B 4 Pros

Book L” oh Temple of Wiſdome.

24 ihe [emple of Wiſdome. Book.l.
Profetions he ſignifies are Souldiers, Bearrards,
Hang-mev, Baylifts, Sergeants, Marſhals, Butchers,
Gunners, Phylitians, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons,
Alchimiſts, Smiths, Bakers, T heeves, Taylors, Ar-
morers, Watch-makers, botchers,Cuclers of ſwords
and Knives, barbers, Dyers, Cooks, Carpenters,
Gameſters, Tanners, Carriers
In Diſeales, he lignifyerh the Gall, theleft Eare,
Tertian feavours, Peſtilent þurning Fevers, Megrim
in the head, Carbuncles, the Plague and all Plague
ſores, burnings, Ringwormes, bliſters, Phrenſtes
mad (ndden diſtempers in the head, yellow Jaun-
dies, bloody Flux, Fifiulaes, all wounds and diſea-
| ſes in mens Genitores, the ſtone both in the Rains
and bladder,fcars,and the ſmal Pox in the Face,all
hurts by Iren, the Shingles, and ſuch other diſeaſes
as ariſe by roo much choller, anger or paſſion :| Read
the Harmony of the World.

He delighted in Red colour, or yellow, fiery and
ſhining hke Saffron, and in thoſe favours which are
bitter, ſh:rp, and burne rhe Tonguc, of humours,
choller. | |

The Herbs we attribute to Barzabel, are ſuch as
come near to a redneſs, whoſe leave are pointed
and fſbarp, whoſe taft is coftick and burning, love
to grow on dry places, and are corofive and pene-
trating the fleſh and bones, with a molt ſubtle heat ;
they are the Nettle, all manner of Thiſiles, reſt
Harrow or Cammock, Devils milk, or petty Spurge,

the whiteand red brambles, the white called Ram
Lingwort, Onlons, Cives, red Sanders, Scammony,
Garlike, Muſtard-ſeed, Ginger, Leeks, Dittand,
Horehound, Remlock, Tamarinds, all herbs attra-
Ring or drawing chollerby fimpathy, Raddifſh, Ca-

ſtoreum, Arſemart, Cantbarides, Condos bens-
| ICTUS:

Bo oK.Il. The Temple of Wiſdome. 25

difus: All rrees thac are prickly, as the Thorn,
Cheſnuc
Ot Beaſts he Governs the Panther, Tiger, Maſtliffe,
Pulture, Fox; Of living Creatures thole that are
| Warlike, Ravenons and bold; the Caſter, Horſe,
Mule, Oftritch ; the Goat, the iYcolf, the Leaper, the
Wilde- Aſſe, the Guats, Fiyes , Lapwies, Corka-trice,
the Crffon, Fearye. |

Among Fiſhes, he Rul:s the Pike, the Sharke, the
Barble,che Fork-fiſh, all ſtinging and ſtinking worms,
SCorpeons.

Among Birds, The Hawke, the Pulture, the Kite
or Glead, (all ravenous Foule) the Raven, Gormorant,
the Owle, the Crow, the Pye; The places he fignih-
eth are Smyths Shops, Furnaces, Slaughter-hou-
ſes, places where Bricks and Charcoales arc bur-
ned, or have been burnt, Chinimeys, Forges.

Amongſt Mineralls and-Stones, Iron, Ancimony,
Arſenick, Brimſtone, Ocre, Adamant, Load-ftone,
Blood-ſtone, Jaſper, the many coloured Amarkeiſt,
the Touch-ſtone, Red-lead or Vermilion.

He fignifieth red Clouds, Thunder, Lightning,
Fiery Imprefſions,and peſtilent Aires, which uſually
appear after «Jong time of drinefie and faire wea-
ther; by improperand unwholſome Mitts, he go-

yerneth the Weftcrn windes,

He governeth che chree Climate and the Coun»
tries of Savomatis, Lembardy, Batavis, Ferraria and
Goth oland a:

 HeRulſeth Tueſday , and thercin the firſt and
eighth houre, and in conceptionsthe third Month.
All che (even Rulers hate him, but onely Kedewel,

who his friend,

Chap,

The Templeof Wildome. Book 1.

—— FR——————_—oo——y ——_—_—

murder Ce wa — —

Cnap. IX.

Of Sorath and his ſe zniſtcation : ard how he and
the rejt receive thr vertues from
above.

©
4 Crath hath Yerchtel for his Idea,and Cams
AY biel for his detriment. |
He is exalted in Mealchidael, and receives his fall
in Zurel; Jn the ſeventh houte he governeth che }
fiery Triplicity, viz. Malchidael, Verchiel and Ad-
71chiel, and receives his power from abovezas all the
ſeven dove; He'1s the foul of all creatures upon
.. earth, Water, Aire, Earch or Fire: + © +
__AndGod himſelf, though he be Trinity in Per-
ſons, yer is bucone onely timple Effence, Notwith-
ſtanding we doubr not but chat there are in him
many Divine Powers,which as many Beams flow from
him, which the Phyloſophers of che Genciles called
Gods; The Hebrews Mulciterious,we attribure,as Wif- |
dom,which Orphexs calls Pallas,underſtanding which *Þ
he calls Mercury, the conception of the form which © |
.he calls Saturn,the produgivepowrer which he calls |
Neptune, the ſecret nature of chings, which he calls
Fun, Love which he calls YVenw, purelife, which he |
callszheSu7 or Aps/ls, the matter of the whole world, |
. hecalled Pex che Soul, as it engendred chings below, |
coneemplateth chings aboye, and recraceth it ſelf |
| | .1nto

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 72
ntoirſelf,heis honoured with three names, viz. Me-
ris, Neptune and Ocean; Thereforethe moſt prudenc
Tacologians of the Senrtiles did worſhip che one
God, under ' Divers names and powers; yea diverſe
ſexes whom as Sr, Coriftopher Heyden laith:Frail and
weax mortalityhath d1cteſted unco more,being mind=
ful of bis own frailty,that every man mighe worſhip
that porticn which he eſpecially wanteth, ſo thoſe
who had need of faith prayed to Jupiter, they that
wanted Proviiience, So! wifdome, Minerva, and ſo
| as they wanted other things, they prayed to other
Powers: Henre aroſc thac gieat variety of Deities,
by reaſon ofthe many and diverſe diſtributions of
Graces; but God is one from whom all things;there-
fore Eugenius Theodidatius in his book called che R.
C. Phyfick,, ſaith, whereas-there is but one God and
" one power, yet he is named by diverſe names, for
the multitude of ſpecies : And as Sr, fohu Heydon
faith, As all ſouls are reduced tothe one ſoul of
the world oruniverſle, fo are all the gods referred
to Jupiter, who is the ſame god,worſhiped under di-
verſc names; therefore it is meecto know the lenh-
ble properties of theſe {dea's, and perfte&ly to in-
cclle&ualize them by the way of more ſecret Anolo=
gy : The Learned Hebrews fay, thar theſe ſeven
Rulers we ſpeak of,and che twelve Idea's that Ran-
deſvouze here, and govern che ewelve parts of the
Earth, and thoſe that are incorporated into the
lixteen figures, devided into foure, Elements and
govern the foure Winds, have received the ten prin-
cipal names of God, as certain Divine powers,or as
It were Members of God, which by ten Sepleroths
and are asit were Veſtiments, Inftrumentcs or exam-
ples of the Archetipe , have an influence on all
chings Created,through the bigh things even cothe

loweſt

238 The Temple of Willome. Book.l,

loweſt, yec by 4 certain ocuer,. tor tirſt aud imme-

_ Angels,and quireof Blelſcd ſouls, and by them jnto
_ the Czleſt al 5phears, Planets and Men, and by the
which Sepheroth,' every thing then receiveth power
and vercue: The firſt of theſe is the name Eheja, the
name of the Divine Eflence, and his 1de's is called
Cether, which is: interpreted a Crown or Diadem,
and fignifieth the molt ſimple Eſſence of the Divinis
_ ty.,and it is caJled,that which theeye (ſeeth nor, and
| 18 attributed to God the Father, and hath his in-
| fluence by the order of Seraphims, or as the Hebrews
call them Hay joth, Hacadoch, that is creature; of
holinefle; and then by the Priomum Mobile, beſtoweg
the gifc of being to all chings, filling the whole uni-
verſe both through the Circumference and Centre,
whoſe particular intelligence is called M rattrom,
char is, the Prince of Faces, whole duty it is to ring
others tothe face of the Prince; and by him the
Lord ſpake to Moſes.
MM The (ſecond name is God, or Tetragrammaton, joy-
PW ned with God; his Idze is Hochma, thats, Wiſdome;
AJ and (ign: iech che Divinicy, full of 1dee's, and the
firſt begorten, an1s attribuced co the Sun,and hath
his influence by che Qrder of Cberubizs, or that the
Hebrews call Orphanam, that is, Formes or Wheels,
and from thence into che Starry Heaven, where he
fabricaceth ſo many figures as he hath 7dce"s in him-
ſelf, and diftinguiſhech the very Chgos of the Crea-
tures by parcicwar intell;gence;called Razzel, who
wasthe Ruler of Adam, che third name is called
Tetragranweton Elobimg, his Jdes s named Prina, viz.
Providence and underftanding,and fignifies remiſſion;
quiecnefle the Jubilee, penetencial converlion, 2
great Trumpet, Redemption ofthe World, and ne
I 6+ O

diately they have Influence on the ning- orders of

—w ———, 1.5 145, EO

EATS I ROI CER ELDEST Ie Too oo one oo” ons "ne wo = Des | on

WE. Ia .

aparomcycs ET PR: 4
en 2
"OS, 7 & 45

| and his Idegis called Geburack, which is to ſay,Pow-

= "BT 5

Ar ycr HR AR" > >
be Wy! + 3;
ry "oe OA

ſears of the Divine Perſons, by whafe commands all

fore called the Divine 1dca's framing ; Therefore

Book.IT. The Temple of VViſdume. 29
of the World to come : ir. is attributed co the Holy
Spirit, And hath influence by the order of the
Thrunes, or which the tebrews call Aralim, thar.is,
great Angels, mighty and ſtrong; and from chenee
by the Sphere of Saturn, adminſireth forme to the
unſerled matter, whote particular inceligente 1s
Zaphehiel or Zazel, the Ruler of Noob; and another
intelligence named Fopbiel the Ruler of Sem, and
ctheſeare chree Supream and high 1dee's, as it were

things are made, but areexecuced by the other ſe-
ven, upon the ſeven upon earth, which are there-

the fourth nameis E!/, whoſe Idea is Heſed , which
is Clemence or Goodnefle; and fignificth Grace,
Mercy , Piety , Magnificence, the Scepter and righe
hand, and bath its influence by the order of Domt-
tions, Which the Hebrews call Haſmalim, and (o
through the ſphere of Jupiter faſhioning che Images
of bodies, beſtowing Clemency and pacifying Tu-
ſtice on all, his parcicular intelligence is Zadkzell
the Ruler of 4brabam; The firſt name is Elohim Ge-
ber, that is the Mighty God; puniſhing the wicked;

er, Gravity, Fortitude, *ecurity, Judgment, =
niſting b: flaughterand war, and icis applyed to
the Tribunal of God; The Girdle, the Sword and
the Left-hand of Godzit is alſo called Pachad which
iS fear, and hath his influence through the order of
powers, which the Hebrews call Seraphim, and theſe
through the ſphear of Mars 1]lnminare theRofie Cru-
Ciays, to whom belongs Fortitude and Prudence
It draweth forth the Elements, and his particular
intelligence 1s Camiel che Ruler of <empfon,the ſixth

name is Elobs or a nague of NanN joyned with /an-
SY dabat,

—_

9 we Wes RAD "> vn et. eee - cot ibis gies. oc

 --. " $< neiegt lia

obs.

—_— — ——— — — — — F ,

|
i
|
|
|
|
i
|

-— _—_———

JO he Temple of Wiſdome. ' Boox Tt.

dabat, his Idea is Tijbereth,chac is, Apparell, Beaucy,
Glory, Pleaſure, and fignifiech che [ ree of Life, and
hach his influence chrough the order of Vertues,
which the : ebrews call Malachin, that js; Angels into
the ſphears of the Sur,giving brigheneſle and lifeun+
toit,and from thence producing Metrals,and there
to make Aurum Potabile his particular mtelligence
is . aphiel, who was the Ruler of Iſaac and Toby the
younger, and the Angel Peliell Ruler of Jacob; The
ſeven name is Tetragrammaten, Saboath, or Adonai Sa-
boath, that is,the God of Hoſts, and his [des is Nezab,
that is, Triumph and Viftory; it ngnifies the Eter-
nicy and Juftice of a-Revenging God, it hath his
Tnfluence through the order of Principalicies,whom
the Hebrewes call Elohim, that is God, into the
ſphere of Venus; gives Zeal and Love of Righte-
. ouſneſſe and produceth Vegetables, his intelligence
1s Havieland the Angel Cervicl the Ruler of 1) avid;
The eighth is called Elohim Sabaoth, which 1s inter-
ge thie God of Hoſts, not of Warr and Juſtice,

ut of Piety and Agreement; For his Namie fignifi-
eth both and precedeth his Army; the :dea ofthis
1s Hod, which 1s interpreted bo: h Praiſe, Confeſſion,

onour and Famcuſnefſe,it hath influence through
the Order of the Archaxgels, which the Hebrews call |
Ben Elohim, chat is, the ſons of God into the ſphere |
of Mercury, and gives Eligancy atid Conſonancy of |
ſpeech, and produceth living Creatures ; his Ide is |

Michael! who was the Ruler of Folomex : The ninth K.

name is called Sadai, rhat is, Omnipotent, _
ing all, and Elbay, which is the living God, his Idee |
1s Feſod, that is, Foundation and Reft, and hath his |{
influencethrough the order of Angels, whom the |
Hebrewes call Cherubim into the ſphere of the Moon, ||;
cauſing che increaſe and decreaſe of things, and
; ket

an

mp, (BD. conn ww WO

wo a L vw UN

Louk I. The Temple of V Viſdome. 13
kerh care of the [dea's of che Earch, of the Rulers of
the i2 Diviſions and of cheir images or Figures,and
of the Genii and Keepersot men, and diftriburetit
them; his Genttis Catricl who was the Keeper of Jo-
ſepb, Joſhua and Daniel: the tenth name 1s Adonai
Melech, ' hat is, Lord and King, his /dex 1s Malchuth,

_ chat is, Kingdome andEmpire,and {1:mfechChurch,

Temp'e of Tod, and a Gate, anu hath his influence
through the order of Animaſlick, viz. of bleſſed
ſouls, which by the Hebrews is called Ajim, that is,
Nobles, Lords and Squires, they are inferior to the
Herarchies, and have cheir influ:nce in the {1xteen
figures, the twelve Idea's, the foure Elements, and

their twelve R.gions, or places divided, the twelve

 Windes which come forth from the twelve Houſes

of the Earch,and on the Sons of Men;And thus they
give knowledg and the wondcrfull underſtanding
ofthing alſo, induſtry and pred Qions, and the pre-
fident among them is Vetattron, which is called the
firſt Creature, or the foul of the World, and Sorath
diſt11buterh his vertues: And after this manner doe
the Earthly powers receive their Commiſſions,
which are figuratively incorporated into ſeven, and
they again in their Natures given it to twelve,which
alſo in twelve places, lignify all things Paſt, Pre-
ſent and co Comiein all the World. _

Therefore Sorath amongſt the ſeven is naturally
hot and dry, but more cemperate then Burzabel,
he is Maſculine [;iurnal and Equivolent in a good

 placeto a fortune: He ruleth the world three hun-

dred fifry four years and four months,and when in
the firſt hundred and twenty . then he is very faith-
ful, making thoſe men he fignifieth very honeſt,
Jeeping their promiſes with all punQuality; a great
defire to governe, rule and command where he

: COINCS,

—

33 TheTempleof Wiſdome. Book...

-—
—

COMes ; prudent, and of mcomparable judgement,
of great majeity and ftatelinefs, induſtrious to ac-
quire honour and large pacrimony, yet as willing|
departing therewith again, tixefe me. nſually ſpeak
With gravity, bur not many words ; and hkewiſe
with great confidence and command of their own
_ affe@ion, full of thoughts, ſecrers, truſty, (ſpeaks de-
Iizecately, and notwithſtanding their great hearts,
yer chey are affable, tra&able and very humane to
all people, only loving ſumptuouſneſs and magni-
ficence, and whatever 1s honorable, no ſordid
thouzhcs can enter their hearts. &c.

When he is unfortunare, in f1xty nine 8 nineteen,
he {ignites proud and arrogant men «difdayning all,
cracking of his Pedegree, he 1s ptirblind in fight
and judgement, reſtle(s,trovbleſome. domineering,
a meer vapour, expenſive, foohiſh, endned with no
wravity in words, or foberneſs in ations, a ſpend
chrifr, waſting his patrimony, and hanging and be-
holding co other men. yer thinks al] other men are
bound co him. becauſe a gencleman borne.

He uſually ſignifies a man of a good large and
ſtrong Corporature, a yellow ſaffron Complexion,
and round large Forehead : goggle Eyes or large,
ſharpe and piercing: a body ftrong and well com-
poſed, not fo beautiful and lovely. tne pretty and
amiable, fal ofheaſth,and heir Fir yellowiſh, and |
therefore quickly bald, much hair on their beard,
and uſually an high ruddy Complexion, and cher
bodies fleſhy, in conditions they are very bountiful }
honeft, ſincere, well minded, of great and large |

o

hearc, high minded, of healehful Conſtitution, very |,

humane, yer ſufficiently ſpirited nor Loquatious.

The qualities and profeſſions-of men, he ſignify- |
eth, are Kings, Princes, Emperoucs, &c, Dukes, Mar- iy .

queſles,

n_— Yy ww WW

Q- talmc, Marxygold, Roſemary, Koſa ſol, Cinnamon
#. Cclandjne, Eye bright, Pyony, Barly, Sinckfs
& >picknacd, Liguum, Aloes, Arſenick.
\F G-

'Book 1. ” The Temple of Wiſdome. : 33

IIS OI

queſles, Earls, Barons, Lieverenaucs, Ueputy Lie-
netenants of Counties, Gentlemen in general Cour-
tiers defirous of honour and preferment, Juſtices of
Peace, Mayors, high Conſtables, high Sheriffs, grear
Huntſmen, Stewards of noble mens houſes, the

' principal Magiſtrate of any City, Town, Caſtle or

Country Village; yea, though a petty Conſtable,

where no betteror greater Oflicer is ;; Goldſmiths,

Brafiers,Pewterers,Copperſmiths,Vinters of Money.

Pimples in, the Face, Pa'picarion or T rembling,
or any diſeaſe of the rains or Heart, Timpanies,
infimities of the Eyes, Cramps, ſudden (woonings,
diſeales of the Mouth. and ſtipking breaths, Catars,
rotten feavers; principally in men; he governeth the
heart, the brain and right Eareand Eye; and vial
ſpiritzin Women the left Eye.

Of Colours, he rilech the Yellow, che colourof
Gold. the Scarlet ortheclear Red, and all reddiſh
colours; In ſavours, heliketh well a mixture of ſour
and (weet together : or the Aromarical ſavour, be=-
ng alictle bicter and Sciptical, but withall Confor-
tative anda little ſharp. _

Thoſe Herbs which are ſurbjet to Sorach do ſmel
Fleaſantly, are of great ſavour, their flowers 'are
yellow or reddith,and in growth of majeftical forme,
they love open znd Sunſhine places, their principal
vertue iS to ſtrengthen the Hearcy and comfort: the
Vitals, rocleer the Eye fight, retit poyſon, or to
diſſolve any witchery;or malignant influences cau-
ſed by any artiftz and they are ſattcon, che Laurel,
the Pome Citron, the Vine, Euula, Campana;
St Johns wort, Ambre, Musk, Zinger herb, Grace;

of.

34 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book.l.

Of Trees: the Aſh, che Palme, Lawrel cree, the
Mirth tree, Frankinſence, the Cane trec or Planec,
the Cedar, Helerropian, the Qrange and Lemmon
eree. |

Of Beaſts: the Lyon, «the Horſe, the Ram, the

 CrocoJile, the Bull, Goat, Night-worms or Glo-
worms.

OfFiſhes: the Sea Calfe or Sea Fox, the Crab-
Fiſh, the Star fiſh.

. Of Birds: The Eagle, the Cock, the Phenix,
Nightingale, Peacock, the Swan, the Buzzard, the
Flyc, Cautharidel, che Goſhawke. |

OfPlaces : Houſes, Courts of Princes, Pzhlaces,
Theater, all Magnificent, Strugures being clear,
and deeent Halls; dining Romes.

Of Minerals, Mettals and Stone; he fignifyeth
Gold, the Hyacinth, Criſolite, Adamant, Carbundcle,
the Elites ſtone found in Eagles Neafts, the Partarss
or Philoſopher ſtone; of it you may read in my Book
called the Wiſe Mans Crown, —_

The Ruby, he ſignifieth in the Spring, gentk
moiſtning ſhowers in Summer heat,.in Autuns miſts, W
# Winter ſmal Rain : He loves the Eaſt part ofthe
world, and that wind which proceeds from, the
Helleſpontus, Subſolanus and Vulſturnus parts, or
houſes of the Earch; the Countrics he governeth,
are Italy, Sicilya, Bohemia ; and the fourth Climace
Pheniciacbaldea: He ruleth Sunday the firſt and eight |
hours thereof, and in numbers,rhe farſt and fourth,
and in conceptions the fourth month, -he loves all
the Rulers, but Zaze! whois his Enemy : Ithought |
good to write at large inchis Chapter of chis Ruler

hat you may underſtand the reſt the bercer, v1.
Cwukes receive and diſtribuce the vertaes. rs |

20

ht... A. ce

CHAP. X.
of Kedeme), aud her fignification.
& Ie Edeme, Roſie Crucians ſay, is Lady of the

ſecond and ſeventh Houſes of the

Earth: ſhe is exalted in the twelfth houſe, and that
Idea : ſhe receives detriment in the f(t, and eighe

houſes by their Idea's and Figures : and in the fixth
by chat Idea, ſhe hath her fall : ſhe governes che

_ earthly Trophicity by day, viz: Amiſſio conjuntio,

and Caricer : ſe 1s naturally of the Aire and Water,
remperately cold and moift, noQurnal the leſſer,
fortune, author of mirth and Jollicy : Which ſaics
ſhe, fignifieth Flegm and blood, wich the fpiric
and Genical ſeed, ſhe receives her vertue as Sorath,
and the reſt do. :

She ruleth the world three hundred fifcy four
years, ſhe giveth eighty two when ſhe is ftrong, and
tignifiech a quiet man, not given to Law, quarrel or
wrangling, not vitious : but pleaſant, neat and
ſpruce, loving Mirth it his words and afions,clean-
ly in Apparrel, rather drinking much, then glutto-
nous; prone to Love, oft entangled in Love, zealous
m their affe&ions, Mufical, delighting in Baths,
and all honeſt merry rticertings or balls, Masks and
Stage- plaies, eafic of belief, and not given co labour,
or take any pains, a company keeper, cheerful, nc-_
ehing miſtruftful, a right vercuous man or woman,
oft had in ſome jealoufie without cauſe.

When ſheis weak, ſhe ſignifiech forty five, and
w_ years, and perſons thar are riotous. expenſive,
wholly giyen co looſneſs and lewd companies;cicher

; C 2 men

—

Bo oK.I. 1 ho Temple of Wiſdome. 25

.
——_— WG. —l._—_—_—____—_. _—_

3 6 The Temple of Wiſdome,

men or women, nothing regarding their Repuaii-
ONS coveting unlawful beds, .Iniceftious, and Adui-
terer, Fantaſtical, a meer $kip Jack, of no taith,
no Repute, no Credytz ſpending his meany in Alee
houſes, Taverns, ahd among ſcandalous looſe peo-
ple; a meer lazy companion, nothing careful of
che chings of this life, or any thing Religious, a
meer Arhiſt, or natufaliſt. ET.

She fignitieth a man of fair corporature : but not
very tall,his Complexion being white, tendingto a
litcle darkneſs which makes hum more lovely ; very
fair, lovely Eyes, ahdalittle black, a round face,
and not large, faic hair, ſmooth, and plenty of ic,
and it uſually of a tight brown colour, a lovely
mouth and cherry Lips, the Face pretty fleſhy, a
rowling wandering Eye, a body very delightful,
lovely and exceeding well ſhaped, one delirous of
crimming and making himſelf neat and complear,
Lorh in cloths and body,a love vimple in his cheeks,
a ſtedfaft Eye,and ful ofamorons enticements,

The Qualicies of men and their profeſſions, ſbe
ſioniheth, are Muſicians, Gameſters, Silkemen, Mer-
cers, linnen Drapers, Painrers, Jcwellers, Players, |
Lapudaries, Embroiderers, women Taylors, Waves, |
Mothers, Vir: ins,Chariſter,Fidlers, Pipers : when in
the fourth, Ballad makers,vingers,Perfumers,Sen p-
fters, Piftur:-drawers, Gravers, Upho;ifters, Lim-

. mers, Glovers, all ſuch as fell choſe commoainnes,
which adorne women, either in body or Cloths, or
in Face, as Complexion water.

Diſeaſes ſhe tignifieth, areprincipally in the Ma- Þ
trix -nd Members of generation, in the Reins,Bellf,
Back, Navel and thoſe parts, the Gonhorrea or

+9

running of the Rains, the loathſome French Pox,

iT
+ $8

3

any diſeaſe aritng by inordinate luſt, Priapiſme, |
| | : Imporency |

BOCK L

La. ee

the Temple of Wiſdome. .

bouK t- 37
[- Impacency in Generation, Hernias, &c.* i he Dia-
(= betes or Pilling diteate In colours the fignifierh white,
P or milky co'our,n:1xed with brown or a liccle green
2 in favour, ſhe delights in that which is pieaſantand
J- toothſomne, utuall, in moiſt and (weer, or what 1s
f very deleGable, in ſmels whac is unious and Aro-
a macical, and zincues to wantonnels : Herbs and
| Plancs lhe ignifech, are, the Mirtic alwaies green,
t and thoſe which have a Lweer ſawcur, 'and pleaſanc
a ſmel, a white flower of a gentle humour, whole
y leaves areſmooth 1nd not jig.zed, ſhe governeth che
'5 Lilly, bat not Watiam : all other both of the Val-
3 ley and Water, whice or yellow, the Satyrion or
J C':ckoe-pintle, Maiden- hair, Violet : the white and
a yellow Daffadil.
|, Sweet Apples, the white Roſe, the Fig, the white
f Sycomore, wild Alh, | urpentiuecree, Olive, ſweee
5 Oringes, Mugwort, Ladies mantle, Sanicle, Balme,
p Vervin, W ainues, Almonds, Millec, Valerian, Time,

Ambre, Ladanum, ( ivit or Musk, Coriander,
french Whear, Peaches, Apricocks, Plums, Ray-
ſons. :- po eRLye On
Of beaſts: che Hare, the Pafithar 3 ſmal Catrie,
| Coney, the Calfe, Goat.
Of birds: the Sparrow,Wagtaile, the Stockdove,
| the Hen the Nighemngale, che Thruſh, Pelican, Pars
| tridge, Firedula,aliccle bird feeding on Grapes, the
» bf Wren. the >wan, the Swallow. the Qu(el or black-
'

r bird, the Pye, the Parior, the Paxakitto.
Of Fiſhes : che Dalphin.
-| Flages are, Gardens, Fountaines,bride chambers,
a farm bed haugings, dancing (choolcs, \War-
1 robes. |

Mercals, Minerals, and ſtones, ſhe ſignifieth are

Copper, eſpecially rhe Corinthian aud White :
C3 braſs,

_—

' a8 . The Templeof Wiſdome. Book.1,

brafs, Latten ware, Cornelion fone, the sky co-
lour Saphire, white and red Cora), Margaſite, Ala-
blafter, [.apis Laxuli, becauſe it expels Mclancholly,
\ theBeri], Chriſolite ; ſhe governeth the ſouthwind,

being hot and moiſt in the os 10-0 of the Air,
ſhe ruleth the Ztefie, ſhe ligniheth in ſummer ſere-
nity or cleer weather, in Winter raine or ſnow,

Countries Arabia, Auſtr:a,Gompania, V ienna Polonia
the greater, Turing, Pertbia, Media Cyprus, and the
fix ' limare. >

Her day of the week is Friday, of which (he ruleth
the firſt and eighth hour, and in Conception the fifc
monthy,her friends are all the Rulers or Lords ofthe
Eaxth,cxcept Zazel. -

CHaye, XI.
of Taphthartharath, and bis fignification,

Nature and Property.
_ P Mongſt the 1dea's of. the Earth, he de-
lights in Ambriel and Hamaliel; be js
exalted in Hamaliel, he receives detriment in Adve-
chiel,and his fall and Imbecility is m Amnexiel, and
chat part of the Earth; he ruleth the Ayry Tripli-
city by night, viz. Aibus, 4miſſto and: Tyiflitia,
He receives his Nature as the others do;and rules
the world three hundred fifty ſour pears: he oft tunes
changes his Nature, ti4. with good he is goady and
with evil apt co be perſwaded co evil: yer naturally
he is noble & free hearted,but cold end dry, _—_
Oe Es | _ _choliy,

SY - 86

Oo» 000 FICIEARA ET IGS FUE IGLESIAS Oe fe E—_R —_ po

= T5 ow”

Book.l. TheTempleof Wiſdome. 39

cholly, he is of the Elemenc of the Water, amonſt
che hamors there mixe, he rules the Animal fpirit,
theauthor of good wits, ingenious and apte Roſie |
Crucians, ſober, grave, Religiouſly honeſt, doing to
all others as they would others ſhould do unto
them.

Being ſtrong, he fignifieth ſeventy fix, and repre=
fents that man ofa ſubrile and policick braingincel=
ſe&and cogitation; an excellent diſputant or Logi=
tion, arguing with learning and diſcretion, and
yfing much Eloquencein his ſpeech, a ſearcher into
all kinds of miſteries and learning, ſharp and witty,
learning almoſt any thing withouc a teacher, am"1-
tious of being exquilice in every Science, defirous
naturally of Travel, and ſeeing forrain parts; a man
of unwearied fancy, a great ſtudent in Philoſophy,
and.if anyatcain the Paxtarva, it isthem that is cu-
rious in the ſearch of any occult knowledge,able by
his own Genius to produce wonders, given to Di-
vination and the more ſecret knowledge; if he turne
Merchant no man exceeds him in way of trade
or invention of new wayes, whereby to obtaine
wealth. _ |

When he is weak in forty eight and twenty, he
benifies s very quarreiſome wit, apt to take exceptis»
on at other mens faults and reprove them, many
times by crying conclufions, looſes his eſtace ; very
unconftant, cafie of belief, fometimes a meer Londow
D.nraal} maker, a Politicus, Mercurins, anew Lyer,
every day of the week you may read him a Trifler, a
meer: Verbal! fellow. j
— Corporature he vulgarly fignifiech,isone of a high
ftarute, a ſtreighr ſpare body, a high Forehead and
ſomewhat narrow, long Face, long Noſe, fair Eyes

_ heicher perfeRly black or gray, chin Lips aud Noſe,

C 4 " lirtls

40 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 1,
irtle hair on che Chin, but much on his head, and
de i inclining to blackneſs, longe Arms,
Fing<yS and hands; his Complexion like an Oliye
or Cheſnut colour; you muſt obſerve Teaphtbar.
tharath, for it his 1dea's and Figures be with others,
they have a great influence one upon another, info-
| much as one-partakes of the Nature of the other, as
| * if he be with Zabel, then heavy,if with Haſmae! more

temperate, with Barzabel more raſh, with - Serath
more noble, honeſt and gentle, with Kedemel more
merry conceited or full of Jeſts, with Haſmodai more
moveable. : . |
The Qualites of men, and their profeſſions, he
fignifieth are all learned men,Philoſophers, Mathe-
wmatitians, Altrologers, Merchants, Secretaries,

Scriveners, Geomancers, Sculpters, Prophets, Poets,
 Qrators, Advocates. Schoolmaſfters,Stationers.Prin-
- eers, Exchangers of Money, Atturneyes, Empe-
Tours, Embaſſadours, Commiſſioners, Clarks, Arti-
ficers, generally Accomptants, Soliciters, Miniſters,
Honelſt,noble Religious men, hating all evil and vice,
{Cometimes Grammarians, Taylers, Carriers, Meſ-
ſcngers, Foctmen, Ulerers.

_ "He fignifieth All Virtigoe's, Lethargies, giddineſs
_ inthe Head, Madnels. eicher lighcneſs or any diſeaſe
of the Brain, Prifick, all fammering and imperfe&i-
on in the Tongue ; vain and fond Imaginations, all
defe&s in che Memory, Hoarcenels, dry Coughs, coo
much abundance of Rheum in che head and mouth,
all mafling and ſnuffling in the Head or Noſe, the
hand and fect, Gouc, Duvneſs, Tongue evil, all
evils in che faiicy and incel{etual parts.

Mixed and new colours, che gray mixed wich
©ky colour, ſuch as is on the neck of the Dove, and
Pidgeon, Stock-dOVe, and-ſuch fine Colours 6 alſo,

| Eo os ncy

Book I. 1he Temple of VViſdome. | At

the Spider, the Grey- hound, the Hermophrodite, being

Lincy-Woolſy colours, Or conlt-ing Of many cos
Jours, mixed in \ ne ot favours, a hug pode of all
thing* together , fo cha; none can give 1 any; crue
name 3 yet uſually tuch as dove quicken che fpirirs
are ſubtile and penecrate, and 11 a manner inſen=
fible.

Hearbs and Planes attributed to him, are known
by the various Colour of the flower and love ſandy
barren places; they bear cheir ſeeds in cods, they
ſmell rarely or ſubtilly, and have principal relat-
on tothe Tongue, Brain, Lungs or Memory ; they
diſpel] winds, and comfort tte Animal Spirits, and
opens O:ſtrufions, bears threeleaved grafſe; the
Walnut and Walnut tree, the Filbert tree and Nur,
the Elder-tree, Adders-congue, Draggon-wort, two
penny grafſc, Lung-wort, Anniſeeds, (. ubebs, Ma-
riorum : What herbsare uſed for the Muſes and Di=
vination, as Verveine, the Reed; of Druggs, trea-
cle, Hicra Diambra. | w
Of Beaſts the Hiena, Ape, Fox, Squirrel, Weaſel,

partakers of both Sexes, all cunning crearures.

Of Birds 5 The Linnet, the Parrot, The Pompi-
nian, Jay, the Swallow, the Pipe, the Beetle, Pil-
mires, Locuits, Bee, Serpent, Crane.

Of Fiſhes ; The Muller, the Forkfih.

Of places; Tradſ{mens-ſhops, Markets, Faires,
Schools, Common-h:1ls, : Bowling- Allezes, Ordi-
naries, Tennis-Courts.

Of Minerals and Stones; Quick-filver, the Mil-
ſtone, MarthaÞre or Fireſtone, the Achates, Toparz,
Vicriol; all tones of Divers Coluurs.

He fignifies, Windy, Stormy and violent boiſtr-
ous weather, ardl ſtirs up that weather, che Ruler

and bis Idee's figures lignifies in whoſe Company he
is

42 The Temple of Wiſdome. .Book.1-
is ſomcimes Hayle, Lightning, Thunder and Tem-
peſts; in hot Countries Earth-quakes , butthis ace
cording to the ſeaſon of the year. :
The Countries he governs, are Grecia, Flanders,
Eoyp, Paris

He Governeth Wedneſday, the firſt and eighth hour
thereof, his friends Hizmeel Kedeme!, and Zaxel,his
enemies all the other Rulers.

CHAP, XIL
Of Haſmodai aud ber Nature and ſignification,

Aſmodai hath one Idea which you may
call her houſe, and thar rules one part
. ofthe Earth, and is incorporated into two figures,
viz Populw by day, and Vie by night, and there

ſhe.is ſtrong: but if theſe be in che tenth houſe wich
Carcer or Trifiitia, by that Ruler and hs Ideas and
figures, ſhechen there recaves detriment; in che
ſecond houſe ſhe is exaltcd,' and in the eighth the
falls, ſhe governeth the earthly Triplicity by night,
vis. Amiſſio, Conjuntiio, Carcer. |

She Rules the World three hundred fifty foure
years, and in one hundred and eight ſhe is Scrong,
Feminine, Nofurnal}, Cold, Moiſt and Flegmacick
by Narure. |

The manners or Aﬀions ſhe fignifieth, when in
good houſes with good figures, ts one of compoſed
menners, a ſofe, tender creature,a ever of all honeft
and Engenious Sciences, a ſearcher of, and deligh-
cer

Book.I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 743

cerin Novelties, naturally propenſe to flite and
ſhife his habitation, unſted wholy carrying for
the preſenc times, Timourous, Prodigal, and eafily

frighteds however, loving Peace, and to live free
from the cares of this life, ifa Mechanick, the man
Learns many occupations , and frequently will
be campering with many wayes to trade in.

When with in ill houſes with Ul figures ſhe fignt»
fies. ſixty fix, and ewenty five, and is a meer va
bond id! xrags hating Labour,a Drunkard,a Sor,
one of no Spirit or Forecaſt, delighting to live beg-
gerly and careleſly, one content in no congition of
life, eicher good or ill,

She fignifierh a man of faire ſtature, whitely co-
loured, the face round\gray eyes, and alittle low-
ring, much haire, both on head, face and other
parts, uſually one eyea little larger then the other,
ſhort hands and fleſhy, the whole body inclining co
be fleſhly, ſomtimes plumpe corpulent and flegma.
rick, if ſhe be in Aſpe& with Sorath tn a Nativity or
Queſtion,ſhe uſually Egaifies fome blemiſh in or necr
the eye, a hurc in or neer theeye, ifher figures be
in ſuccedanc houſes, if ſhe be unfortunate by com-
pany with ill figures andill Aſpeas in Angles, he
ſpoileth the fight. TI

The qualities of men and women 3 ſhe lignifieth
are, Queens, Counceſſes, Ladies, all manner of
women, as alſo the common people, Travellers, Pil-
grims, Marriners, Fihermen, t iſhmongers, Brew-
ers, Tapſters, Vintners, Leccer-Carriers, Porters 1n
Cities, Crach-men, Huntſmen, Meſſengers, (ons
ſay the Popes Legats) Millers, Alewives, Ma ters,
Drunkerds, Oiſter-wives, Filker-women , Chare-
women, Tripe-women, and generally ſuch women
as carry comodities in the ſtreets; as alſo Midwives,

,are Ap Pal, o che holler,
ths Ti ered diſeafi in ShTefe 6 the
der end Membe rs of Generations, the Menftrnes
nl Liver in « / FluxeoftheBelly,
all cold Rhumatick Diſeaſes, cold 'Sctoracl; -the
Gour in the Riſts and Feet; Sciaticay Cholick,
Worms iv Children and Meh, '*Rhames or burrs in
ehiteyes, vis. inthe left of Men, and right of Wo-
men, Surfeits;. rotten 'Conghs;Convulcionfirs, the
| Falling fickneffe,” Kings Evilt; Apoſthume,'$mal
Poxand Meaſles.
; Of Colours, the White, orpale Yellow, White,
pale © ons; or alittle of the Silvercolour z of ſii-
vours, the freſh or withoue ahy/Savour, [ack as m
heibs before they! be ripe, orſach as demoiften the |
Brain, &c.
"The Herbs Planrs and' Frees, whiets Ire Gb} Jef
to Haſmodzi;Her Idea and figures have ſofrand chick

| Hgryleaves, ofa Warecifh or & lircle (eecith rafie,

chey love ro growin watryphices; «nd grow quick-
ly.intoan Ix magnitnide!' and areth e'Co

abbape, melfon' guord*,"! tion, © 'Okiore,
Mandrake, Poppy, Lerrice, Ra the Linden'tree, -

Muſhrom Em: & al s or Feths,: who
have coje, thady, great ſpremding eaves; and: ate
little an.

jefull
"Allfuch 'Beafty or the tiki which live intheWarer,
. the figuifierh Frogs, the Orter,Fnzils, &citheWee-
ſle, the Cunn ny all Sea Fowle, che Cookoe, ous,
Du cks, the Night Owles. ' |
won he Oifter and Cockle, all {bell Fiſh,
% rab and Lobſter, Tortoiſe,' Ede, cf

19110 #4

Has Places

ec.

Ea 8. EI 0 or one "0

Boo L '' The Tethple of Widdome. 45
+ | Places ſhe Governeszare Feild,Fountzins,Baths,
Havens of the Sea, High wayes and defert Places;
Ports, Togit, Ravers, Filh ponds, ſtanding Pools,
boggy places, common fhoars, little Brooks,Springs,
Harbours for $hips or Docks. + - ©
' Of Minerals and Stones z' Silver, theSelenite, all
Ifher Figures be with the Figures of Zaze!, they
' fignifie cold Air, if with che Figures 0fHiſmacl, viz.
 Aequifitis and Letitia, in which are incorpotaced*
the Idea's, Advachiel and Amnixiel, they fignifie ſe-
rene weather with Barzebel,and his[deas and figures,
winds and' red clouds, with the figures of Serath,
according to the ſeaſon : with the figtres cf Kede-
mel and Taphtbartharath, {bewers and winds, Jn her-
meticall operation, ſhe delighteth in the Norch an-
le of che Earth, in the firſt hou'e with good figures,
e ſignifierh? winds acccording to the Nature.
of choſe figures, are; in company or Aſpc& with
her. x 3 ns 2 | - £3
.: Tbe Countries ſhe rulech, are Holland, Zealand,
Scotland, Denmarks, Nerreniberge, Flanders : her day
is Munday the firſt andthe eight thereof, her ent
' mies are Zazel and Barzeþel, viz. their Figures are .
contraxp one £6 another. in hgnification. -Aud thus
much of the Nature and fignification. of the (even
Rulers of .the Earth - Now let us ſpeak of their
twelve Idea's, bur firſt let us ſhew you how to actri-.
bute the Rulers to the Figures, and the Figures to
the Rulers, as well goodasevil. _ SEP

”- : | 2 | > : | xx ©

|

Intche 3d 7th grb 13th and 48, [In the 16ch 12th, firſt end 8th.

aury

KS] | e Ol 3 1

= | forrunare, in the ſheond Orofe,
backnand "che "beth, direQ in the fecond Rerro-
firſt rhey fpring, in the ſecond they
wars" cthefecond fallen ; in the
: in the firſt they
day, in on che night: and have
as the ſeven Rulers give them : rhe
head and the Dragons Tayle excepted;for

Dragons

| they aleertheir Natores,the firſt is good, and of the
natureofthoſeewo Rulers, Hiſmael and Kedemekche
TE Ee rte7s TR

— - | —_ - . -

HA?P, XIV.
hy ofthe Nate; Place, Countries, gemeral .Deſe cripe

{2 wo, Diſeeſes, hevife, by the inctve :

is Diurnel, 1 movye-
V4 able Nature, F yery» hor and dry

Chollericks eſtial), Luxurious, incemperate an
violent : The-dayly delighe« of Parzobe! of FFche'
Triplicity, and of che Zeft: Diſeaſes he ſignifies, -
are_all.Whelks, Puſhes-and- Pimples in the Face, .
oo No li $22. ron & LY ”e tangere)) ring

orms, 4 oplexies, Megrims
Tooch-ach, fie drach, ; and wy or 1 ;
| Where SUDO ſmal Carle do ofurd,ot uſeto be,

- —

—-

ESE Ee 2 IR - a—_—
Y a = 4 x
_ by 4 2 f + »
& k 4 j
-
ou i
"A

Re es ate ce ee eee ee eee ee LEES
et -/

23d SHACMTT S
» CY : b

e fignitiech ſandy aud hilly Grounds, a place of
e for Theives (or ſome uinfrequented places 93

- in bouies, che covering, ſeeling or plattring of ic, a

able of (m..} Beafts, Lands newlycakeningor new-
ly plowed, or where bricks have been burned or

lime. | 7 933 71
The deſcription of the body. or ſhape, Melthidael

*
© A

repreſents is a dry body, not exceeding in height, |
lean or fpare, bur luſty bones, and the party in his

limbs ſtrong, the viſagelong 3: black Eye brows, a
long Neck, thick Shoulders, the Complexion dusky
brown ar \warſh. I | £34" .3x9 ,
Kingdomesſubjeft; Malcbidae! &7 are Germany,
Swevia, Polonia, Burgundy, France, Fngland, Denmark,
Silefia, the higher India, Cyria, Cities are, Florence,
Capna, Naples, Ferrara, Vercno, Utretcht, Marſelles,
TR z, Padua, Bergomo,

J Ha'meodel,is of an earchly quatity,cold,dry and.

Melancholly, reminine; The NoRurnal delight of
y wag fixed Beſtial, of the Earthly Triplicity and
ouch. =. :

Diſeaſes ſhe ſignifiech, are the King-evil, ſore
Throats, Wens, Fluzes; cf Rheums falling into the
Throat, Quinlies, Impouſthumes in thoſe parts.

.Places noced are Stables where horſes. are, low
Fouſes, Houſes where the implemencs'of Carle are
laid up,paſture or feeding grounds,where nohou es
are'neer, plain grounds,or where buſhes have lately
bcen grubbed up, and wherein Wheat, and Corne
arc fowed, ſome little Trees not far of, in Houſes,
Sellars,Jow Romes, Theſhape it preſents, is one of
4 thorr, bur ofa full, tronge and well ſec ſtature, a
broad Forehead, great Eyes, big Face, large,ſtronge
Soulders, great Mouth, chick Lips 3, groſs Hands 3
black rugged hair, "The

-
@a., a aw os ac mw. YE RE Ae INN BITES WM

- j- 430 5 - » ee
200K I;
; | »

FO.OK.
Bo

. | pas trevor >

1. 1he
; The Countries it rules, are: Folonis, 'the;great

,

North part of Sweadland, Ruffia, Ireland, Switzer-
* land, Lorain, Campania, Perſia, Cyprus, Parthiaa,
_ . The Cities Nev2grade, Parma, Rononia, Parkeghtns,
=> [25ſt Seva, Brixia,'Carolftad,” Nants, Liephg; Here

++ 5 Þ

q W Ambriel, his quality and. propertys
isAerial, hotand moiſt, Sanguine; common, double
bedyed, humaine, the Diurnal houſe of Tephther-:
thareth, of che airy Triplicicy, Weſterne,: Maſcu-

line.;. : $546, 9 IP ISS 94 Þ TY WT ks
All Diſeaſes in the Armes,. Shoulders. Hands;
cqxrapted blood, . windinels in che Veins, :deftem-
:It nogeth wamſcor Romes, Plaiſtring, and.walls of
oo ſes, the-Malls,..or where plays is uled, Hills ang
ounrains, Barnes, Storehouſes for Corne, Coffere;
 Kingdomes and Countries, are Lunberdy; Brabant,
' Flanders; the Weſt and ſouth Weſt-of England, Arme-
mia, * JEL Ek $399 CE Hb Fs .
| The Cities,- are London, Lovaine,, Burges, Norem«
| berge, Corduba, Hasford, Mentz, Bamberge, Ceſens
_ In A/bw,it £gnifiecth an uprighe,call traighec bo 1y,
either in man, or woman,the Complexion ſanguine,
not, cleer, but-obſcure and.dark, long Arms, buc
many timesthe hands and feet ſhort, and very fleſh-
ly, a darke kairalmoft black, a ſtrong ative body, a
gool peiecrng hazel Eye and wancon, and of here
pht,ofexcellene_ undercſtanding,honeſt & Juditious
in worldly affairs,.when this 1dez ſignifies che perſon,
'that is, 'if Flbye be in the firſt houſe, the party is
noble; wiſe, Religious, and the moſt accompliſhed
ofall the other, if Fortuna Majur, Paclla, Acquiſitio
| -— B mag Þ #

or

!

Templeof Wiſldome, 49 |

5o TheTemple of Wildome, Book I,
or Letitis, bein che ſecond Houſe, in company with

& Muriel, is the only delighe of Hiſmodaz,
arid 15 corporared 4n:o the firft Figures of the wace-
Triplicuy, it is watery, cold moift. Phlegmatick,
eminine, and is Nofurnal, moveable, mucg znd
- flow of voice, fruitful, Northerne. LY
lc fignifies imperfe&ions a!l over, or in the Breaſt,
Stomach and Paps, weak digeſtion, cold Scomatk,
Peifick, ſale Flegm, rotten Coughs, Dropfical' Hu-
mours, Impoſthumations in the Stomach, Cancers
which ever arcin the Breaſt.
Places irnoteth are, the Sea, great Rivers, Na+
vigable waters : but in che Ifland Countries,it notes,
places near Rivers, Brooks, Springs,Wells, Sellarsin
Houſes, waſh houſes, Marſh grounds; Ditches with'
Rufles, Sedgs, Sea banks, Trenches, Ciſternes. -—
The ſhape and deſcription is a low and fmal fta-
ture, the upper parts of more bigneſs then the lo-
wer, around viſage; fickly, pale, a whicely Com-
plexion, the Heir a ſad brown or Cheſnut and va-'
 Tiable, lixtle Eyes, prone to have many Children,
if a Woman,
 Kingdomes, Countries and Cities it ruleth are,
Scitland, Zealand, Holland, Pruſſia, Tunis, Algier, Con-
fientivople, Venice, Milan, Genoa, Amfterdam, Torke,
Madeberge, Wittenberge, Saint Lucas, Cadiz,

&S& Verchiel, is the cnly delightof Sorath, and
1s by Nature fiery, hot, dry,chollerick,Diurnal,com-
manding, Bcftial, barren of the fiery Triplicity,
Maſculine, and of the Eaſt, and rules the fifth
houſe | |

All fickneſſes in the Ribs and fides, as Pluriſies,
- Conyulkons,

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. $4

Convulfions, pains in the Back; crembling or paſ-
fion of the Heart; violent burning Feavers, all
weaknefles, or diſeaſes in the heart, ſore Eyes, the
Plague; the Peſtilence, the yellow Jaundies.
| A place where wild Beafts frequent, Woods, For-
refts, Deſert places,fitep rocky places, Cleaves,unac-
cefſable places; KingsPalaces, Caſtles, Forts, Parks;
in Houſes were fire is kept neer a Chimney.
[ce repreſent a great round head, big Eyes ſtar-
ting or ſtaring ont; or goggle Eyes, quickiighted, a
full and large body, and is more then of Middle
ſtature, broad Shoulders, narrow ſides, yellow oc
dark flaxen hair, and is much curling or curning
up, & fierce countenance, but ruddy, high Sanguine
Complexion, ſtronge; valiant and ative.
_- ' Kingdomes, Countries and Ciries, it. ſignifieth,
\ | are [taly. Bohemia, the Alpes; Turkje, Sicilia, Apulia,
| Rome, Syacuſa, Cremona, Ravenia, Dalmatia, Prague,
. "Lint, Confluentia, Briſtel.

| VI enaliet, is an Earthly cold; Malanchol- us
ly, Barren, Feminine, natural, Southerne 7dea, che i
figure of it, viz. Comuntio is the exalcation of Taph-
thartharath, of che Earthly Triplicity, Hamaliel tg-
nifies a ſtudy where books are, a dairy houſe, Corn
feilds, Granaries, Malt houſes, Hay Ricks, or Mows
of Barley, Wheat of Peaſe: ora place where Cheeſe
and burteris preſerved and ftored up.

Diſeaſes, the worms, wind, chollick, all obſtrufi-

4 ons in the Bowels and Miſcraicks; croking of the
- ms Infirmneſs in che Stones, any Diſeaſe in the
? T ie Figute of Hamalicl (receives) being alſo ons

bf the Figure Taphthartharath, vertue fromi the Ru-

ler; atid Ide#; and repreſents a flenderbody,of meaut
D 2 height,

52 The Temple of Wildome. Book t,

height, but decently compoled, a ruddy brown
Complexion, black Hair, well favoured or lovely,
bur no beautify] Creature, a ſmal ſhril. voice, all
members inclining to breviry, a witty diſcreet.Squ],
Jadicious, and excellently well (poken, ſtudious and
given to Hiſtory, whether. man or woman, it Proe
duceth a rare underſtanding : if Populus or Vie-bein
the ſecond Houſe, they are veryunſable. . .:- \

OfKingdomes, Countries and. Citcy,. it fignif-
eth Greece, the South part of it Croatia, the Athenian
Teritory, Meſopotamia,, Africa, the South Weſt part
of France, Paris, Feruſalem, . 1: hodes," Lions, Thauris in

Perſia, Thoporus, Baſil, eidelburge, Brunduſjum.
r——m—y

Zuriel s Aireal, hotand moiſt, Sanguine,
Maculine, Moveable, Humane, Diurual, of the Airy
Triplicity and Welt, the cheif delightof Kedewel

The Stone, all Uiſeaſes in the Gravel, in. che

Rains of the Back, Kidneys, heats; and diſeaſes in
the Loyns or Hauches, Impolthumes or Ulcerg, ip the
Rains, Kidneys or bladder, weaknels*in clip Back,
corruption of blood. x0 au.

In che Feilds, it repreſents greunds-neer,. Wind-

mils, or fome lirag ing barn, or-aut houſe,. or ſaw
Pits, or where Coopers work, or, Wood is Cut, tides
of Hills, tops of Mountaines, Grounds, where haw-
king and hunting is uſed, Sandy and gravelly feilds,
pure cleer Aire and ſharp,the. upper Rooms in hou-
ſes, Chambers, Garrets, one Chamber within ano-
tner,

Ie repreſents a well framed body, flreight, tall
and more ſubtle or ſlender then proſs; a round
lovely and beautitul, viſage, a pure Sanguine colour
in youth, n: abundance or exceſs, in either white
or red, buc in Age uſually ſome pimples, or a very

rh : igh

#4.

'v ed and North, the houſe, and joy of deceicful falſe

* Fribarge, Spares,

as beetles, &c. or ſuch as be without wings; and
are Poyſonous;Gardens, Orchards,Vineyards, ruin-

Bavaria, the woody part of Northway, Fartary ; The

Book.l TheTempleof Wiſdome. 5 3
pigh colour, the, Hair yellowiſh, ſmooth 'and

Kingdomes, Countries, Cities, the higher Anuſire«
Savoy, 1ts ')ukdome, Alſatia, Lavonia, Lisbone in Por-
tugal, Frankeford, Vienna, Flacentia, the Territory in
Greece where ſometimes ; the City]Thebes, ſtood Arles,

2 robiet, Is a cold, watery, No@urna],
Flegmatick, Feminine,of the watery Triplicicy, fix-

trecherous Barzabel, uſually ic doth repreſent ſubcil,
deceitful men, perjured and wicked, T heeves, there
1s no truth nor honeſty in them very Knaves.

Ic ftgnifies, the Gravel, the ffone in the ſecret
parts, bladder, .Ruptures, Fiſtulaes, or the Piles in
Ano, Gonorrheo's, Priapiſmes, all aftliftions in the
Privy parts, either in man or woman, defefsin the
Matrix : places whereall ſorts of creeping beaſts uſe,

ous Houſes neer Water, mooriſh grounds, ſtinking W
lakes, Q1agmires, finkes, the Kitchin or Larder, *
waſh houſes.

A Corpulent, ftrong, able body,ſomwhara broad
or ſquare face, a dusky, muddy Complexion-and
ſad, dark hair much, and ctiſping, an hairy body,
ſomewhat bow-ledged, ſhort necked, a (quart, well
cruſfſed fellow. ;

Kingdomes and Countries, the North part of
Kingdome of Fetz, Catalonia in Spaine, Valentia,
Urbine and Forum, Fulij in Italy, Vienna, Meine in
Italy, Gaunt, Frankeford upon Odar, © 7

Y #
D / "*
. 6

54 TheTempleof Wiſdome. Book 1.

av Advachiel, is of the fiery Triplicity, Eaf
in Nature, hot and dry, Maſculine,Chollerick, Diur-
na}, common, by corporal or double bodyed, the
1dee and delight of Hiſmael. |
It ru!ech the Thighs and butcocks in the parts of
mans body,and all Fiftulaes or hurts falling in thoſe
members, and generally devoteth blood, heated fe-
vers, Peſtilencia), falls from horſes, or hucts from |}.
them or four foored beaſts, alſo prejudice by fire, |
heat aud incemperatenels in ſports. |
It noteth, aſtable, orplaces where troop horſes
for War are ſet up : where great four footed beaſts
_ are kept ; It repreſents1n the Feilds, Hills, and the
higheſt places of Lands or Grounds, that riſe a
lictle abovethe reſt ; in Houſes, upper Rooms near
the fire. pro
Ic repreſents a well favoured Countenance ſome-
what long viſage, bur full and raddy, or almoft like
ſun burac, the Hair light, Cheſnut colourz the .f.
ſtature ſomewhat above the middle fize: a Confor= }
mity in the Members, and a ftronge able body,
dome, Countries and Cities, are Spine,
Hungary, Slavanie, Moranie, Dalmatia, Buds in Hun-
gary, Toledo, Nerbon, Collen, Stargard, © ;

Ne Hauael, is the Idee of Zazel,and is Nofur- -
nal,cold, dry, Melancholly,Earthly, feminine,move-
able four foored, | Eo

Ic hath Government of the Knees, and all dif-
eaſes incideng to thoſe places, cichec by traines of
fratures, it noces Leprofie, the Itch, the Scab.

[t noteth an Qrze houſe,or Cow houſe, and where
Calves'are kept,or tooles for Hasbandry,or where old

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. $5
wood is laid up, or where ſailes for Ships, and ſuch
naterials are ſtored, alſo ſheep pens, and grounds
where Sheep feed, fallow grounds, barren Feilds,
buſhy and thorny ; dunghills in feilds, or where
foyle is laid, in Houſes low, dark places, near che
ground or Threſhold. ; :
© Ic ufually fignifies dry corporaturer, not high of

ſtature, long, lean and (lender viſage, thin Beard,
| black hair, a narrow chin, long, ſmai Neck and nar-
; powbreaſt. |
- - Kingdomes, Countries and Cities, are Thrace,
| Macedon in Greece, new Turkje, Albavia, Bulgarie,
Sexony the South weſt part, Weſt Indias, Stiria, the
Iles Orchades, Hafie, Oxford, Mecklin, Cleens, Branden-

berge. - cs

of Cambiel, is an Aireal, hot, moiſt Tdee, of
 Aiery Triplicicy, Diurnal, Sanguine, fixed,rationa],
Humane, Maſculine; the principal Jdes of Zazel, ic
is weſterne, and in it he rejoycerh.

It governeth the Legs, Ancles, and all manner
of infirmities incident tothoſe members, all Melan-
cholly, winds, Coagulated in the Veins, ordiftur-
bing che bload, Cramps, &c, 9,

Places new digged ; hilly and uneven places or
where quarries'of Stone are, or any Minerals have
been digged up in Houſes, the Roofs, Eaves or hp-
per parts, Vineyards, or neer ſome liccle ſpring or
Conduit head, It notes a ſquat, thick corporature,
or one ofa ſtrong, well compoſed body, nor tall, a
long viſage, ſanguine Complexion ; if Cercer, or '
Triftitia bein the rench or eleventh Houſe, the party
is of black Hair,and of a ſanguine Complexion, with
' diſtorted Teeth; in anyother Houſe, the party is
of cleer white or fair Complexion, and of ſandy
D 4 coloured

56 The Tewpleof Wildome:. Book.).
coloured Hair or very flaxen, and hath a very white
Skin, . . of hits OWE |

Kingdomes, Countries, and Cities, are Tartary,
Croatia, Valachis, Muſcovia, Weſi:Phalia in Gerniany,
Piemont in Savoy, the Weſt and South parts of Bava-
ria, Arabia, Hamborcugh, Breme, Monts Ferat, and Pi-
ſairfum in Ttaly, Trent, Ingolftad. ,

' Ammixiel, is of the watery Triplicity, Nor-
thern, cold, moiſt, flegmatick, feminine, No@&urnal,
the 1d:a of Hiſmaelyby Corporeal, common or double
bodyed, Idle, effeminace, ſickly, envious, reprefen-
ting a<ovetous, malitious ſot, of no Aion. * -,

Jtifienifieth all diſeaſes in the Feet, as the Gour,
and all Lameneſs, and all Aches incidenc to. thoſe
Members, and ſo generally ſalt Flegms, Scabgylltch,
 Bacches, breakings out; Boyles and Ulcers, pzocee-
ding from blood*'putrefaged, cold and moiſt dif-
eaſes, LI B a>
The places it preſents, are-grounds full of Water,
- or Where many Springs, and much: Foul are, alſo
Fiſh Ponds, or Rivers full of Fiſh; places where
Hermicages -have been, Moats. about the Houſes,
Wacer-mills, in Houſes near the Water fide, as to
ſome Well or Pumpe, ar where Water ſtands.

It preſents a ſhore ſtature, ill compoſed, not very
d&ent, a good large Face, paliſh Complexion, the
body fleſty, or {(welling, not very ſtreight : bur in-
curvating ſomewhat, with the head. '

_ Kingdomes, Countries and Cities, are Calabria in
Silia, Portugal, Normandy, the North of Ezypt, Alex+ -

andria, Khemes, Wermes, Katisbone,Compoſteila. X

_-

CHAP, XV.

_—_— Se a ; 0-05 5-9 nag oro mm _ es
Booksl. The Templeof VWiſdonde.
Booksl. The Templeof VVi
- ——_——— _ =
.
F d F- : - a , # , ” ba » © » : #
11424111 K it CF, 95H V1 » 294 38 , P
y 1 if . y t4 ; - ,
z
. of
- jv
a > R—_ _ FFF | PI" ———— A FY
ma Mead amt _ Pe RN ION —T 7” IF
4>Y 97211

; | - S$3MHIP $7; 2+ 1 nabt 5 »; i5 327
How the [dea's are infuſed into the ſixteen Figures
by the ſeven Rulers, through the help of the
Soul of the Worlds” And bow the. Rulers , and
Idea's incorporate their Nature aud properties
into the Figures, and have like fegnification as |

the Rulers and [dex's, TORO L

s þ inferior bodjes are exemplified by the
-. ſuperiour Idea's; Now they,defing an Idea to be
a form.above Bodies, Souls, Minds, and. to be but
pne ſample, pure, immucable, indivifible, incorpo-
real &.eternal,8 that the nature of all Idee”s is. the
ſame; Now. they place 1dez's in the fickt place in. very -
 goodneſleit {elf : God by. way of cauſe., and that
chey arediftinguiſhed amongſt themſelves by ſome
relative confiderations only, leaſt whatſoever 15in
the world, ſhould be but one thing wichour variety,
and that-they agree in efſence, leaſt God ſhould be
a Compound Subſtance -..In the ſecond. place, they
placethemin. the very. inteHigable itſelf, in the
ſoulof the world,differing the one from the other,by
abſolute forms.,. ſo that all the Idca's in God, in-
' deed are but one form ,: but in the ſoul of the
World they are many; they are placed in the minds
ofall other things, whethec. they be joyned to the
body, or ſeparated from the body,by a certain par-
Rene! | | eicipation ,

59

ro her ſelfſhapes alſo, and ſtamped

ticpation, and now by degrees are diſtinguiſhed
moreand more; They place them in Nature, as

- certain ſmall ſeed of forms infuſed by the Jdes's ;

and laſtly, chey place chem jn theſe ſixteen figures
following ; Hereunto oa hoe added, that jn the
ſoul of the World, there _—_ ſeminal forms
of chings, as [dee'gin the mynde of Gad ; by which
forms ſhe did in the heavens abave the Scars, frame
upon all cheſe
ſome properties: On theſe Figures therefaqre, ſhapes
and properties of yerrues, af jnferiour ſpecies, as al-
fo their properties doe depend, ſothateyery figure
hach its des , thac is ſuitable co irs forme, which
$75 pn of a wonderfull pawer of opperating,
which proper gift it receives from its Ruler,chroug

the Seminsl forms ofthe ſoul of the World, for I-
dee's are nor onely effeQual ies ſes ofevery Species,
burare alfo the: cauſe of ec Vertue which is in

I cau

ry
the Species 3 and this is that which Mr. Thomas Hey-
don (a\th, that the properties are in the Nature of
things; which vertues indeed , are the operations
ofthe Idea's, are moved by theſe __ and theſe
Verrues have a certain and fare Foundation, not
Fortuitow nor caſual asſome ſay, but as Efficaciow,as
Aftrology, and powerfull and ſufficient, doing no-
thing in vain. Now theſe Idews danot erre in their
aGings bur by accident, viz. by reaſon of the im-
purity of the Artift or Querent,or inequality of the
matter or thing ſought after; for upon this gccount,

there arcfound things of theſame — more or

leſs powerfull, or according tothe diſpofitian of che
thing good or evill; for all cheſe influences may by
theſe figures be received, & may alſo be hindred by

- theindiſpofition of the marter vr its inſufficiency ac-

cording tothe quality of the Perſon,ſuch is the fig-
| | nification

Boox I. The Temple of Wildome,

et 2 I ding TED | <-- FE; —_— LI
CJ

nification of.the figures; which receives che Vertues

and Powers of ' the Rulers and Ideg's, according to
the deſert of che matter, wherefoce thoſe things in.

which there is lefle of the-Jdee of irhe macrter, (i
chings which haye « greater reſertkunce of thi
ſeparated, have more powerfull vertyes in opera»
tion, being like the operation of a ſeparated Ideas
weſcethen chat the ſcituatian of the ſeven Rulers
and their Idee's incorporated into theſe fixreen fi-
gures, is the cauſe of che vertues he fgures of -
cheir ignification of their predi&ingall chings Pt»
Preſentand ro Come, ks figures bave theſame

fignifications as theſe Tdee's in their placesin

NCOTPO®»
rated into them, and here follow the figures and
the Idea's, - A,

Go

2

_— — _ gat

\

The Temple

- & _ —

oWildome.

—_—

Book, L

'gures, and

” 4 .
pros TW 2 + Fs 9 a

43%

Chap. 16 The manner to attribyts
the Figures

*

%

Mayor.

£5
6 4
.

Fortuna

— 6...

. Conjunttio.

fbe WJea's in the Fi.
to the 1dea's: * abtfy 88 Shel on |

s © "> "7 3." .
ded VT ISS <:ha ad 27

4

RA

on
*,
»

»

,

13
 Munel.
»

>

yi.

wn

__ Acquiſtia..

 ;
4 Hadvachul, ;
»* >» .

had

IS #4: | s ep"
[OA Bdrchiel.
| # >

—_ Triftitig. | . .. _ Letatia
Q 14 Is 16
NJ Verchiel Hadwacbiel| Hanael, Barcbil.
© Zuriel. TP * }-
o »* » LI
| » » J 7, »* (+ » #|
* » : * : * *
Fortuna Major. g Cauda,
| [Caput Draconts: Dracons

The Rulers of the twelve 1dea's have power over
the face of the whole Earth in their figures and pla-
ces, bur foure figures naturally delight in the winds,

and their Geniz, and they are Fortuna Minor,Via, Ca-

#

Draconis, and Canda Draconis, a fortunate Full
Moon in Aſpe& of the Sun, to chem is admirably

good,

Chap.

Bo 0 o \x.1. TÞ FIewplc F Widewe. _

— — — _—
. 7 03!gail
Crar, vine” 2126221) + -
1% CofefF3 & 1.2414 05 tas 41601
of the Fonre Elements, : Fheii Nitwre and Pi-
* perties. © Fm OO OO

3+ #4 4 " RE 9 Nl 4 "- . ”

Þ Here arefoure Ml is and ga Grounds
of all nh all. th in » Fir e , Water,
Earch, of wh Eleven in| TIOUL Bodi are
comp biefiended ;Nn by way 0 F heaping. up top

bur by tratiſoturd ion agd union,, and. when t FF
 aredeſtroyed , theygre reſolved into Elements, for
there iSnone of the le "ite elements that is pure,
" but they - are more ' or leſſe mixed, and apt to. he

VE, _ et one into'the'acher : eye as earth becomy
rty, and beitiz diffolved ig nates

4 *

—2 Oy

tha ſame being made thick ang hard, becomes
earth again; bur being evaporated through heats
paſſed into Aire, and that ;nguithet kindled, pi
- into Fire,and this being extinguiſhe' d, returns oo
again into Aire, byt beirig cooled again afrer its bur-
ning, becomes earth. 7 Rane. or ſulphur, andc is
is Mop Aa by lighenings this. Hifigg © ever teach-
eth you. .

The Number and the Nature of thoſe thing s* |

« Call'd Elements, what Fire, Earth, Aire Xt brings,
From whence the Hi eavens ther beginning bad,

IV hence tide, whence Rain-bow in gray colanrs'c clad; ....
What makes the clouds that gathered aye ? and Mack; ad
* | Toſendforth lightning, ind a Thundring Crack,?

What doth the Nightly Flames, and Comets make ?

IVhbat makes the Earth to ſweel, and then to quake ?

TY -

What

'b2

What is the ſeed of Metials, and of Gold ?

# bat Vertzes, Wealth, doth Natxres Coffers bold.
Plato was of that opinion; that Earth was wholy
7h PE, that the reſt of the Elements ars
changed 8s inco this;ſo into one another ſuccefſive-
ly; S*-;Chriftopber Heydon ſaich, that the Earth is not
changed, bur relented and mixed with ocher Ele-
ments which doe diffolve it, arid that it returns
back into ir (elf. _. SE

 Nowevery one ofthe Elemrnes hath ewo ſpecial
qualities, the former whereof it retains, as poet to
it ſelf, inthe other; as a means; ic agrees with that
'which comes next after it, for fire 1s hot and dry,
the earth dry and cold; the water cold and moif;
the aire hoc and moiſt, and ſo after this manner
the Elements accord into two contrary qualities,
are contrary one to the other, as Fire to Water, and
Earth to Aire;moreover theElements are upon ano-
ther accoutit ac an one tothe other; For ſome
are heavy as Farch and water, and others atelight
as Aire and Fire. | _ BED
Wherefore the RofieCrucians called the former paſ-
fives, but the latter aQives, And yet Door Culp:s
per my predecefſour diftinguiſheth them after ano-
cher manner; aid Affignes to every of them chree
qualities, viz. ro tie fire brighcneſle, thinneſſe and
motion, bue to the Earth,darkneſſe, thickneffe and

uietnefſe, atid according to theſe qualities, che
lements borrow their qualicies from theſe, ſochat
the Aire receives twoqualiries of the Earth, dark-
neſſe and thicknefſe; and one of fire, viz, Motion
but fire is ewice more thin thefi Aire, thrice more
. Moveable, and foure times more brighe; and the
Aire is rwice more bright, thrice more thin, & foure

times more moveable then water; wherefore wa er
: Þ

-

; - - » ; ore A
emplevf Wifdome. * Book I.

——

— -—- a_— --

hee flo © 3 6+ #8 *

e*. Cd.

vo. F'I =
- =. "2. 19. 09. ©. we. 0

CS. : ty =, pa 4 7 y N M5 4
, =: vs «ws 2: 7 : S
| : SY %
5
+ ian. ww L PR *
tt.

—

K RE: I emp e of _
js ewice more bright then earth, chrice more chin,
and foure times more moveable; As therefore the
Fire is to che Aire, ſothe Aire is to the Water, and'
Watertothe Earrh ; and again, as the Earth is to!
the Water, ſo the Waterco the Aire,and..che Aireto
the Fire: [And thisis the Root and Fonndation of
all Bodies, Natures, Vertues, and wonderfull
Works; And he which ſhall know cheſethings, and
their Rulers, 1dea's and Figures, ſhall eafily know
all things, Paſt, Preſent, and ro Come; and alſo
ſhall bring co pafle ſuch ttyngs that are wonderfull,
and aftoniſhing,and ſhall be perfe& in rhis Art. ©

"i. - het ___— — g — O Al. te moons ——
| _—————_—_——__ —
EY
—
n
4

CHaye, XVIIL
Of 4 threefold comfuderation of the Elements :

Hereare then as we have ſaid, foure Elements,

without che perfe& knowledg whereof, we can
effe& nothing in this Science , now each of them 1s
three fold, that ſo'the number of foure may make
up the number of ewelve 1dee's incorporated into
fixceen Figures and ewelve houſes, or parts of the
Earth,and by yang by the number of feven which
fignifiech the ſeven Rulers, into the number ren,
(which ſignifieth the Czleſtial powers, are ten prin-
cipal nanies of God, as yoa read in the ninch Chap-
ter) there may be a progreſle to the ſapream uniry
upon which all vertue and operation depends, of
the firſt order are the pure Elements, which are nei-
ther compounded, changed nor admit of mixion,
bur are incorcuptable, & not of which, but through
which che vertues ofall nacural things are broughe

forth

-_ Se” Ee) 2 p j :
bs” NY
SLES ”
- - weed _-
p F
IM * # /
- * þ
L
- 4 ”

3 a

> ——— - Ng
forth. inco. Art,
Vertues,

SS >»

city,

| changeable one into another,they are the infallible
k; Medium, and therefore are called the middlc Na-
ure. \. IEC 3 04
By theſe you ſhall ſee from whence all thiugs flow,
Whince Manknide, Beaſts, whence fireqwhente vain & ſnow
Pbence earth quakes are, whythe whole Ocean. Begts, ...
Over bis banks, and then again, retreats py x mm 4
I hence Rrengt of Herbs, whence courage rage of Bruifs,
All kinde of Stave, of creeping things and Frazts: , * ©

Very few there are chat uyderf}and the” deep mille:
riqus of this. Art. (In it 15) by means of thole things
aforeſaid, the perfeQion. of every effe& in what
ching ſoever, they are fiill of wonders and miſteries
and are operative, as in Aﬀrology, ſo in'this Art :
For from rhe(e, through them proceeds the bind-

gs, loofings and cranſmatations of all things, the
knowledge and forecelling things to come.

| Let no man therefore, without cheſe three forts
of Elements and the knowledg thereof, be confidenc
that beis able to cure all Diſeaſes in che body, buc
Fee Tin ” __ Wholocyer

'

Book.I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 565
whoſoever ſhall know how to © prepare his Mede-
cines, as I parcly told you, in my Method of Rofie
Crucien Phyſick,, arid how to reduce thoſe of one oc-
der into thoſe of another, impure inco pure, com»
pounded into ſimple, and ſhall know howecounder- _
Hand diftinaly, the Nature, Vertue and power of
them iti Number, Degrees and Order, withoue
dividirig the ſubſtance, he ſhall eafily, attain tothe
knowledge and perfe&@ operation of all theſe tiatu-
ral things conteined in this Book.

+ Be a,” BT 4
'Y

p

their Figures.”

. \ x ; - N .

—_

\

' | houſes, over which the ſeven Rulers and their
* twelve Jde#s govern,and you muft know how to re-
- duce thoſe of one Nature into thoſe of wer,
which

$45 a

A Ft +%
FO _ 6-4 EL IN 4 as -— "_- FY "TE non Rp -
; 2" ; : " "I" # e's
- x l > [7 b , + @ } : X # {1} 4
*% gy; 6731 "+ #11 1914 .1 BALL OLEG Jim f4ge8d
OE CANE Hrs. (i
: 4 : # * ; , A # * £ » # nd 4 , 4 : - BeY
. ® 3 * SET 5 w"Y . | | < "4 : 4 [ p
G os \F'Þ z w : 1
p \ . % » [4 t 3 . - ", 7 3 * 4 6 Ts v3 i "” * : : . 4 ' bo
's j-. S * * + $ «& % : R a : b ? 4 : * $ # +
E £ Ai ama $#%>/#3 'S A
6 ” : 4 4 T þ
of the wonzerful Natwres of Fire and. Earth and
. , yp $6. -
# * n . % 4 + + + # b c by
. % - 4 .

Hus the Earth is divided into twelve parts or

a

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. oy
which are alſo manifold, let us come again and ſort
_ our ſpeeches; firſtwe muſt creat of the Elements,
then of the manifold Divifions of the Earth, and of
hercwelve Regions, &c. Fog tg Rs
Firſt there area things, vis. Fire and Earth,
which are ſufficient for the operation of all won-
derfull things,the former is a&ive, the latter paſſive
Fire,( as ſaithEugenius TheodidaGus, )in allthings and
through all things , comes and goes away bright,
and at the ſame timegſecret and unknown, whea it
is by it ſelf (no other matter comming to it, which
ſhould manifeft itsproper ARions, it is boundlefſe
« and inviſible, of it ſelf ſufficient for every Aion,
, that is proper co it; moveable,yeelding ir ſelf after a
manner toal things that come next to it, reviewing,
| puarcing nature, enlightning, not comprehended
y lights, that are vailcd over,cleere parted, leaping
back, bounding upwards, quick.in motion, and gi=
ving motion to the Earth; and. that the reaſon the
earth moves, as my friend Mr. Foby Booker will de-
tnonſtrate to you; , fire is high, alwayes railing mo-
tion, comprehending another, noc comprehen=
ded it ſelf, not ſtariding in necd of another, ſe-
cretly increafing of it ſelf, and manifeſts its great-
nefle tothings chat receive it, Adive, Powerfull,
Invifible, Preſent in all chings at once; ir-will
not be affronted or oppoſed, but as it were in a
, way of revenge,it will reduce on a ſudden things in.
to obedience to it (elf, incomprehenſible, impale
pable, nor leſſened, moſt rich, in all diſpenſations .-
of it ſelf; Fire, as ſaith my friend and very neer
kinſman, S*, Toby Heydon Knight, from his own EX=
perience, that | fire is the toundleſſe and mil-
Chievous part of the nature of things, it being a.
- "— W 4 querton

t

bs

©

68 TheTempleof Wiſldome. Book.l.

queſtion, whether” it deftroyes - or. - produce
moſt m——_— ire ir" (elf is ore atid penetrates
'chrough 'ﬆll/ chings,' (as ſay alſo” rhe Rofie Conci-
ans) alſo ſpread abroad'in the' Heavens, aiid
ſhinwg, bur in the 'infernal plaets & ſtreightned,
-darke 'and tormenting; in the mid Way it pex-
takes of both; fire therefore 'in' it ſelf is one,
bur” in that which receives it manifold; and in
differing ſubjeas, it is diſtributed im a different
manner, as Þ og: may read' in 'my Book called,
The Holy Guide; That fire th@n, which we uſe; is
fetched our of other things, it is in Stones,
and is ferched out by the firoke of the Steele;
it is in Earth, and makes that, after digging up
to ſmoak; It is in Water and heats Springs
and Wells : It is in the depth of the Sea , and
makes that, being cofſed with winds warme ; It
is in the Aire, and makes it (as we ſomtimes
ſee) to burne, and all Animals and living things
whatſoever, as alfo all vegitables are preſeryed
by Heat, and every thing that lives , lives by
reaſon of the inciofed heat; the properties of
. the fire char is above, are heat, making all things
fraicfull rt giving life to all'thing ;"ohe 4.

ropercies 'of the + infernal fires 'are- a''partching |
eat, conſumingall rhings; and” darktie(s making
all chirigs barren, Fire drives away all if chings, mm WF
as much as ic hath an Analogy with, anUd'is the've-
hiculum of thee ſaperiour light; as alſo of hiw' who
Ciith, Tem che light of the World,'which is erve fire,
the Father of lights, . from whom every pood chitig, .

x<ſt ofche Superiour bodies, and by theſe, «5 by M6-
diacingloftrumears, conveying thac light- into
JIM to anne gt 3: 4nd bac 257971 oils 74150 2g

Fire, and communicating ic ſelf to the'San,' or

&* : . | 4 4 >

.that'is given. comes * ſending forth ehe light of bis Þ

, m_—_
- * = p «
I Tj
--- id Oo > ld

K. tion, and Mother ©

png
RR I 0 F Ling

be Temple of Wiſdome. 5g
' Fire ; and the. great Feboyeb himſelfe inthe old Law
ona = all his Sacrifices ſhould beoffered

yath Fire, and that Fire ſhouſd alwayes be burning
;upan.ti Altar : And thac chey muſt not ſpeak of
"God without alight : good Angels are.augmented
by che Sun, and alſo by the light of our common
.Fice, and evil Spirits, are driven away; therefore
. lighes and faces, ſhould be kindled by the Corps of
 theDead, and here follow the four Figures of the

f JN cad

*
4

x !

| - * * Fs s*= 1,0
"OW 0. ou * | * |
| * X 1 * X | *
6 |

., Nowthe Baſis and Foundation of all the Elements;
11s the Earth, for that 1s the object, ſubje&, and re-
ceptacle of all Celeſtical rayes and influences, in it-
.are.contained the ſeeds and ſeminal vertues:of all

F things and thereforeig is ſaid to be Animal, Vigi-

ableanfiMineral, ic being -made fruitful by che 0=
thee Elements, and the Heavens brings forth all
" things of itſelf > ir receives the abundance. of all
; things,/ | and as it were the -ficſt fountaine,.: from

whence a[l:rhings ſpring z/ it is the Centre, Founda-
\ all thines, take as much of it as
*. .you-pleaſe, ſeparated, waſbed,depurated,fubrillized;

afyou let iclie in the open Aire a licrle while, it will
| being full, and abounding with heavenly -yertues
ofar ſelf, bring forch-plancs, and worms,. and other
living things, alſo ftones and bright ſparks of ——

"Pp :

Jo The Temple of Wilome: "IJoos1.

rals, in it are atfecrets, ifat any time it, ſhall be
pn by t ehelp 'of Fire, and reduced -unto' its

plicity, by a enienc waſhing; ic is the firſt .
macter of our Creation, and che trueft Medicine
that can reftore' ard preſerve ' us, and theſe be the
four Fj iguresc of che Earth, |

*

* ** | " |
[-* * * * * *
.- *-W * X Xx X*
* + X * *
- EE
' Crap, XX.

_ of th W ater, and T1 her Figures,

He other two Eames; viz. - Water no Aire,
('L notleſs efficacious, 'then che fornier ; neither
are the Rulers, and their 1dea's, wanting to work
wonderful thingsin them;'thereis ſo great anecel-_
ficy of water,that withitno living thing cari live,no
hearb or plane whatſoever, without the nibiſthing
of water can branch: yorehy in-it is the ſeminary
vertue of *all chings, ef] ecially of Nunn, 'whioſe

ſeed is manifeſtly Sacehith; The Seeds Alc 'f Tyees
and Planes, although hey + are Farth! iſt not-
wichſtanding of neceſſity, berorted in atek, before

rhey.can be fruitful, whether they be-imbibea'Wieh
the moiftur piſtare of the Barch, '6r with 1 Dev, of Raine,
EG, J vE 95 hr $3145 ned ot) 3, (Iu wy e Or

" ; > I
Py : #6 8 wa

%
®

T_— _—_ = a -—— ww '

EIT —_—

or. "Th: Temples/Wiſdome; 71

" ee eo -

be any other water, that js on purpoſe pur to rhems

for Moſes, 'the cheif among che Ryſie Crutiens in his
time wrote, that 'only Water and Earth, bring forth
a living'Sonl, but aſcribes a twofold produfion of
things ro water, viz. of things ſwimming inthe wa-
rers, and of things flying in theAire above the Earthz
and that choſe produions that are made in, and
a the Earth, are partly attributed co the very

ater; The ſame Scripcure teſtifies, where it ſaith,
that che Plants and the Herbs did not grow, becauſe

God had not cauſed ir to Rain upon the Earth; ,

ſuch 1s che efficacy of this Element of Water, that
ſpiritual regeneration cannot be done withour it, as
Chrift himſelf ceftified ro Nicodemus; very great alſo
18 the vertue of it, in the Religious worſhip of God,
in expiations and purifications; yea the neceſſity of
ity isno leſs then that of the Fire, infinite are the
benefits, and divers arethe uſes thereof, as being
that, by vertue of which all chings ſubfift, are gene-
rated, nouriſhed and increaſed; thence it was that
Paracelſus, and thoſe of Egypt, Arahia,and the further
hde of Greece, Fernelius Ficifus, old Hermes and Hips

- pocrates by name: (concluded) as if chey had been

rogether,that water was the beginning of al chings3
and ſaid;it was the firſt of all the Elemence, and the
moſ? potent, and that'becauſe it hath rhe maſtery
over all the Reſt: As you mayRead'in my Book

called The, Harmony of the World. For 3s Cardanus
ſaith, wacersſwallow up cheEarth, excinguiſh tirmes,

aſcend on high, and by the ftreeching forth of the
Clouds, challenge the Heavens for their own 3 'the
ſame falling dowo, become the-cauſe of all rhings
thatgrow in the Earth; very many are chewortders
chatyre 'done.by waters, according -.to the wricings
.of Plary,,- Solinus, and many other” Hiſtorians ofthe

«I 0M E 4 | wonderful

72 The Templeof Wildome. Book 1.

wonderful vertue,whereof/jrgil alſo makes mention
in theſe verſes, | -

Horn'd Hafnmons Waters at High Noo,

Aire cold ; Hot at Snu riſe and ſetting Sun

100d, put in babling Athemas is fir'd

The Moon then fartheft from the Sun retir'd
Cicontan Streams, congeale bis Guts to flone

That thereof Drinks : and what therein is thrown
Crathis «xd <ybaris (from the Mountains rold)
Colour the Hair like Amber, or pure Gold; |
Some fountains of a more prodigious kind

Not only change the body, but the Minde

I bo hath not beard of obſcene Salmacis

Of th* Xchiapian lake 2 for who of this >
But only taft, their wits no longer keep,
Or forth with fall into a deadly ſleep? |
W# bo at Clitortus fountazwe thirſt remoue

Loath wine, and abftinent meer water love,

With Streams oppoſ'd to theſe Linceſtous flows |

They reel as drunk, who drink too-much of thoſe,

A Lake in fair Arcadia flends of old,

Call 4 Pheneus, ſuſpeHed as twofold,

Fear and forbear to drink thereof by Night

By Night wewbolfome, wholſume by Dey loght

Foſephus, alſo makes relation of the wonderful Na-
 tureofa certaine River betwixt Arcbee, and Rha-
Phanes, Cities of Syria : which-ruas with a ful Chan-
nel all the week till the Sabboch day, and. then on

a ſudden ceaſech, as if the Springs were ſtopped;

< and: on the Sabboth day is is dry, bue again. the
next day, the Waters returns; againe in abundance
as before ; wherefore is is called the obedient River,
The Goſpelallo teſtifies of a Sheep Poo), inte which
a, wy _ © whoſoever

Book.l. T be Temple of Wiſdome. 73
whoſoever ftepped ficit, after the water was croub-
led by theAngel,was made whole of whatſoever dif-
eaſe he had 5 The ſame yertue and efficacy we read
 wasina Spring of 'the Fonzan Nymphs, which was
in the Territories belonging to theTownof Flis, at
a village called Heracles, near the River Citheron,
which whoſoeverftepped into. Populas being inthe
firft houſe, Letitis in the fix, and Acqueſitio in the
centh with Prela, being diſeaſed came forth whole
and cured of all diſeaſes, G. Agricola alſo reports,
thatin Lycews, a Mquntaine of Arcadia, there was a
Spring calied Agris, to which as often as the dry-
neſs of the Region, threatned the deftruftion of
Fruits, they caſt a figure, and ifany ofthe figures
of the water and [ded's were incorporatedin any of
the four Angels, they took the Bows of an Oak, and
p_ them into the water : Then the Ruler of chac

egion, and his Idea's troubled the waters, and a
vapour aſcending from rhence into the Aire, was
blown inco Clouds, with which being-joynedroge-
ther, the whole Heaven was over ſpread, whick
being a little afcer difſolved' into rain, watered all
the Country moſt wholfomely. Moreover Ruffas
the Phyſician, obſerved the Figures of the water in
all Diſeaſes, and gave his Medicines accordingly :

And here folloy the faur Figures of the Water.

wits EEO 1 rom tiglathy lwol SI&3; 62 $3
BEST $3 T1460 i rr 46903 00 IDLING £5 WT
* pc *X.oft #5300051 jÞ e246; |
44) Þ x X* pq 1144 *j1.; 6.2613 # (45 S641 ,- |
.X | Vt, ,,6 * a g 3 ie
X_.þ

: 7 4
F* 4% x + 3
eh F. FPS; * RO KY
7 II "i. bs" 7 :
48 ®
"1. TE F
7, © L 3 | tf *..# $* 4 #3 35 {
AS > \ |

ILEUED SE 51% 8 #* 3 i 4="q
- CHLp," RX
7 , ,HAP. .*
6 (3 30 ts. OUT ag ON

\/ 3 , ELIE

$7,

By

EIB Je ;; ©1414. 23830. ;
- ME INE, . © evils if T9 ET TD THLS:
T remains that I ſpeak of the Aire; this 18 vital
| ſpiric paſſing through all things, giving life and
fab Stance ro all things, binding and. moving, and
filling all things: Hence ir is that the Hebrew DoQtors
reckon itnat amongſt the Elements, but count ic as
a Medium or glew, jayning things togerther;an das
\the. reſounding ſpirit of the Warlds inſtrument, it
panee'y receaves incoit ſelfe, - cheinfluences of
Celeſtial bodies, and cheix [dea's, and che rommu-
nicares. chem to the othes, Elements, as :a)(6 to all
mixt bodies; alſo it receives into. it ſelfe; as ie-were
adivine looking Glaſs, che Species of all things, as
well natural, as Arcificial, as alſo of all aanuerof
ſpeeches, and recaines chem; and carrying them
yith ic, and, entring inco che bodies of men and o-
,ther animals,through their power, makes awimpreſ-
Hort upoy them, as well whenthey ſleep, 'as when
they be.awake, andaffords matterfor divers fir
.dreams and Divinations; Hence they (ay itistliata .
Gan | - — - malt

. in general, _

_niedrothe ſenſe of one; then of another; hence ibis

" Book I, The Temple of Wildome.

prolonging of Images, or Symilituges, or Species;
(which are fallen from things and ſpeeches, - x
plyed inthe very Aire ) until they eowe'to the ſen-

Wo

o
Dt

73
man paſſing by a place, where a man yas ſlaine, or
the carcaſenew]y hid,is moyed with fear and dread,
becanſe cheAire in thatplace being ful of the dread»
Ful ſpecies of man ſlaughter, doch being breathed
in, moyeand trouble the ſpiric ofche-man with the
like ſpecies : when he would know where the party
deadis, lethim caſta Figure, and what he finds in
che firſt houſe obſerve well, and ſee what place his
Ruler and Idea fignifie, and there you ſhall find the
dead body, orany thing loſt 5 whence ic is that he
comes to he affraid, for every-thing thac makes a
ſudden impreſſion, aftoniſheth Nature; whence ir is
chat Mr.Thomas Heydon, and ſome of his pupills were
of opinion, thar Aire is the cauſe of Dreams, and
many. other impreſſions of the Mind, through the

- multi-

es, and then to the Phantafie, and'foul of him thar
receives them; which being freed from cares, and
no way ' hindredy- expefting. co meet ſuch kind
of ſpecies is informed by them; for the ſpecies of
things although oftheir own proper nature, the

arecarried tothe ſenſegof men; and otherAnimals
notwithſtanding gec ſome impreſ-

fion, from che Heaven, wich the holy company of
unbodied 14ea's whileſt they be in the Aire; by rea-
ſon ofwhich,togerher with the apeneſs, and diſpo-

fitiov-of him chacreceives them, they may be cars

ible; nacurally, and far from all manner of ii
erftition,- no otherſpitic comming berweeil, that
2-maenlhai be able in'a very ſhort time, co 4gnihe

jo yo nts another man, abiding Ar.4. rey. greac
« unknawn diftance from him; although he'cani-
7 17708 ad” ads: FE TAG A DOSY | b | not

N ”

—

"

not preciſe!
yetof nee iy
and] my ſelfknow h

many, and they ha

weſee howthe Sonth witid condenſeth the Aire in-
torhin clouds, m which asm'2 Looking-ptafe, art
refleed, repreſentations at a great diftaxice of Caf.
les; Motntains, Horfes anid met, and other things,
which when the Clonds are gone, prefently yani
and Sir. Chriftophey. Hezdon, ſhewes ih bne' of his
Books,thatz Rainbow is conceivedIh a'Cloud of the
Aire, aSin a Looking-Glafs: and Heimec faithythat
, theeffigies ofbodies may by the ftretigrh of Nature
ina moiſt Aire, be eafily repreſented in the ſame
mariner, as the repreſencation of chings, are in
things : And Ariftot/etells of a man to whom it hap-
pened, by reafon of the weaknefs of his fight, that
the Airechar wasnear to him, kecame as it were a
tooking-glafſe to him, and the Opcick beam did
_ refle& back. npon himſelf, #nd could not pene- -
erace the Aire ; ſo that whetherſoever he went, he
thoughche faw his own image wich his fate towards:
him, go before. him; if any one ſhalt 'rake images
ertificrally painted, or wricten letters, andin'a clear
nighrfetchemagamft the beams of che fall Moon,
whoſe refemblances being mulciplyed in the Airc;
«ad caught iipwards, and refleted baek, a ae
| | wit

of

\

| hel 44 a fo to which. (NT amona and
aiany Ty FG of rhis Act, long fince did of-
tend Ck which 1 is not unknowntoſome in theſe
dayes, I.will not except my ſelf, and it will be the
«bercer if \F fulus vis Albus or Conjundiio bein the firſt
hauſe ; And all theſe and a great many more, then
cheſe, aregrounded ; in the very nature of the Aire,
its Ruler and 1deg's, and haye their Reaſons and
cauſes declared in this Art : beſides there are more
ſecret chings.in this Are then what we have ſpoken
imely ſuch whereby any one may at a very
remate \ fence hoax # (6 erftand what another
ſpeaks or w THT ers {0 Ry x Bu Buc our Genius forbids as
toteach theſe? ſecret Win co thoſe that may dis
yulge chem publickly.: and bere follow the foure
figures. of the Aire, +104

"Xx _— $0
.* +. | * ie” * *

FO =] X _

x Wie 6D MI. PRIOR... —

ofthe incur parts of the Earth and the Regions,
:Citier and Towns they contain the Natural parts
WL the Body, Colors and Winds they Signifit,

V u fee before howtheRuters and Tes's Goverg.
the Earth, and the parts thereof, and how they
fi _ together

ES, 5 oat
2

EEE; RE Ce aaameoom———
8 The Temple of Wiſdome. © Book 1.

rogether with their figures fignifieth all things thar |
are'made and created nnder the Fun. © F
The firſt Houſe is ſubje& to Berzabel and Malch;-
dael, it is the exaltation of Sorath, the Detriment cf
Kedemel, the fall of Zazel, but the joy of Taphtbar.
tharab. FT |

Regions, Cities and Towns are Naples, Anconice,
' Germany, Swevia, Sileſia, the Hypolonia, thelefle Deg.
marke, Syria, Paleftina. OL

Cities and Townes are, Naples, Anconica, Capue,
Ferraria, Florence, Verona, Lindavia, Trejefium, Padua
Cracortia Brunſwick, Vincentium, ©
The members of the body it repreſents, are, the
head and face, its wind is called ſubſolams, it is hot
and dry, temperate, ſweer, pure, ſubtle and health-
full, and eſpecially in the morning when che Sun
riſeth; by whom, when Fortuna Major, Acquiſitio or
Puella be int it, he is made more pure and ſubtle,
cauling no infefion to mans body. Z

The colour it repreſents is red and yellow, it is
theoriencal angle and Maſculine.

Under the ſecond bouſe are theſe Regions, Cities, Towns,
' Membersof man, Wind, Colours, and other
things following.

The fecond houſe or ſuccedent part of the Earth
1s ſubjeſt co the Rnler ot Governeſle, of Kedemel and
her Idea Haſmodaeb, and its figure is Amiſſio; it is the
cxaltation of Hiſmodai her figures and 1ez, the
houſe is feminine, che joy of Kedemel, and the detri-
ment of Barzabel. TSS,
[rconteyns the Regions of Ruſſia, Polonia the great,
Ireland, Larranie, Campania, Helvetia, Khetia, Fran-
Covia, Parthia, Perſia, the llands of Cyclades, Cypreſſ,
and part of ſia the Jeſſe, * - Cnies

" Ciries ai Toms: Are Bonn, , Feve, Mentye,
gs Lord

, The FT | coma f from Ae part 1s called
c efias. or): elleſpomtas "It is hoe trying up - all
things.”

Thepare of che body ; At ; Ggnifies, ische Neck and
Thiroats i hocerh greenoor: white. "5

.' The third Houſe Goneaines,

Sortlonia, part of Lombardy, Flanders, Bribant, the
Dukedome of Wittenberge, Hircavia, Armenia, Cyve«
naice, aid Egypt the lowers,

, Of Ciuzei. and Towns, Londen, Corduba, Turinum,
Vercolls,, Lovaine, Bruges in Flanders, Magumtia, Bams
berge, Noremberge, .

Taphthertherath and Ambriel rule this Houſe by
day, it is Maſculine, and the exaltation of C
Draconiz, it is the Detriment of Hiſmae!, .becauſe op-=
polite to the ninth, and. you may ſee before: it is
alſoCadent,

[c goteth the North-eaft, and by North wind cal-
led Aquils, it is cold and dry, without Rain, it hurt«
eth che flowers and fruits of the Earth, and eſpeci=
ally the Vines when'they bud.

It fignifiech, in man, the Shoulders. and Armes,
among colours it i kikye Falou, or blewiſh, ſom-
times MIX. 45

The fourth Houſe Comtaines,

tn this Figure of the Earth going before, all be-
tween the two lines where the figure four ſtands, is

Called the fourth Houſe, and is the North Angle
feminine, }.

| +irbdng of Viſdome. Book. |
feminine s #, moda: m the Bara Muriel Governe
'this Houſe, it ix the exalcatiott Þf Hiſmae!, the Derri-
_ 'ment of Zazel, and the fall of Barzabe/; rhe Houſe is
white or yellowiſh, it ruleth the Breſtand Lungs, it
. noteth Scotleud, Grevads, Burgundir, the lower Hol.
land, Zeland, Kuſſie, Numidia, Aﬀrics, Bythinia, Phri-
gie, Colchic, Carthage,

_ Of Cicies and Towtis, Canftontinople; Tunis, Venice,
Genoa, Luce, Piſs, Milaine, Vincentia, Berne, Torke,
-— rk, Lubecke, Magdeberge, Wittenherge, Gor-
ick.

It notech cthe'North-wind, which is called os
fiiasit is extreamly cold and:dry; _—_— in,
it mes health by cleanfing the Aire of-all Pe-
ſtifecousinfeRtions, bur cayſech dry coldyand hutt-
ech che fruits and:flowers of the Earth, '

The fifth Houſe Containes. |

Gals Togats, the Alps, Italy, Sicily, Apulie, Bi-
bemis a part of Turkie, Phenicia, Caldea.

And of Cities and Townes, Demaſcus, Sy abuſe,
Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Uims, Confluence, Prague;
Lmis, Creneſ! un. : | ;

Ic is ruled by Sorathand Verchiel, it is Maſculine,
of red or ſaffron colour, and the Detriment of Z«-
ze; ic fignifieth in man, the Heart, Back and Sto-
_ : and is the ſuccedent from che North An-
ge.
le predietb the North-weft, and by North-wind,
which is called Syrws or Trachias, is cold and dry, of
 Earthly Nature, breeding (now and wind.

7H

Re. ns, TOY PI ER

MN PTE x kf Er : " "2 > FY a” 3 05IT ion oo _ w <<. . —
7 S NN ———_——_—__—_ 7 , I
bn —. 7 . % - 5
Book I.- The Temple of Wiſdome '
, 5s i -

The facth Houſe Conitaine,

Achaia, Greece, of: Corimbie, Artbeſine a part of
Gallic, Comate, © part of the Rhine, Silefia the lower
Meſopotemis, Bevi Afiris. Ts : |
| And of Cities and Towns, ok wp; Corinth, +
2 Novaria, Cuma, Brundufinne, Papis, Tholoſe, Lyons,Paris,

s | Bujl, Heidelberge, Erphord, Uratiſlevie-

And theſe are Governed; by Tephthartharath and
Hamaliel,and here heis exalted ; when Albus or Cor-
” junio be in the Houſe, it fignifiech purple colour ;
» | and being ſemininezin oppoſition tothe exelfch ; ic
- is the Decrimenc of Hiſweel, arid the fall of Kedeme!;
E it ruleth che Navel and Belly in man; ic noteth the
Weſt, North»weſt wirid, which commech from chat
quirrer, and is called Cora, which is cold and moiſtz /

SS 8 CTY Sr © BS. We”

without any great Rigour.
| The ſeventh Houſe Containes.
” 4 |
The Regions of Auſtree, Altie, Liboniz, Sabeudis,

a, NDelpbinate, Thuſcie, Btirians, Caſpia, Thebuis, Toglo«

e; ditica_

of The Reins: and Loynes are attributed -co this
j Hole, which is Maſculine, and ofa dark green co-
nn 3. | ny
To this Weſt Angle, the Weſt wind is atcribnred,

B : 5 1 Rm

—_

IEEE

' 83> TheTemplegf Wiſldome. : Book T1.

called Zephirwe, it is temperately,hor and moift, ana
wholſome in the evening, it diffolvech Froſt, Ice
and Snow, and maketh flowers andgrafs to ſpring,
ra ſometimesas che Figures fall, it cauſech Thun-
= | ET TY My

The eight Houſe Containes,

Norway the higher, Bavarie, Comagena, Capade-
cia,"Idumea, Mauritenie, Catalonia, the Kingdome
of Fez, Getulie, _ atm es. CE

OfCiries and Townes, Algires, Valens, Trapezunt,
Urbinum, Aquilia,'Piftorinum, Tarvijium, orum, Fuli-
um, Meſſana; Vienna '1n France, Monachium, Franch-

ford upon OJer, .. Tiers] | |

Andtheſe are Governed by Berzakel and Barchit

_ by night, and here -Berzabel del:ghteth, bur Kede-
' mel is detrimented, and Haſmodati hath a fall.
The Privy parts and Fundament are attributed
mg houſe, which is red or tawny and Maſcu-
ine, |
It noteth the Soucth-welt, and by Weſt wind, na-
med Apbrisx, it is cold and moiſt, cauſing Rain,

The nizeth Houſe Containes.

The Regions of Spaine, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Rum
garia, Miſnia, Celtica, Arabia, Felix, *' &

_ __ OfCities and Townes, Toledum, Volateras, Minit:
um, Narbone, Avenion, Colonia, Agrippina, Slagrade;
And theſe are Governed by Hiſmeel and Advachiel
by day, andin it they joy, Cauda Draconis is exalted '
in this houſe; here Tophthartharerh, js decrimentees

1

2.

Book.l. .7þe Temple of Wiſdome. . 83

+ the Houſe is Maſculine, yellowand red is attributed
anco it, and the Thighs of man; onthe:
__ . The South-welt,. and by South-wind, commeth
from this part ofthe Earth or Houſe : it is called
Auſire Aphricus,'and is temperately hot, and yer
breedeth ſickneſs, and ſometimes Rain.

The tenth Houſe Containes,

Macedonia, Hyvis, Thracia, Albania, Bulgaria pare
of Greece, Maſonia, Lituania, Saxonia, Hafia, Thurin-
gia, Stiria, Intlia: The Iſland of Orchades.
. .. Of Cities and Townes; Oxford, Fuliacum, Clivia,
Berges, Mecklin, Gaiimt, Vilva, brandenberge, Auguſta,
 Vindelicorum, Conftance, Florence. es;
And theſe are Governed by Zazeland Havael by
night, the Houſe is feminine, being the South An=
ole, and exaltation of Barzabel; ic js the detriment |
of Haſmadai, and the fall of Hifmael,black and gray
is attribuced to ir, with the Knees. | E -
The Sourth-wind is attributed coit;. which is cal=
ted Aufter ' or Notus, itis hot and moiſt, breeding
thick clouds, great'Rains and Peſtiferous Aire,

' The eleventh Houſe Containes,

Amazonia, Sarmatis, great Cartaria, V alachia,uſe
- covis; the South-Eaſt, and by South part of Swead-
, land, Wefipbalia, Moſel, Pedemont, part of Bavaria, AX
thiopia, Sogdinia, Media, Arabia ghe deſart,*
Of Cities and Towns, Hambrrough, Breme, Monſ-
ferrat, Piſaurim, Trent, Ingolftatle; ' RE
And theſe are Governed by Zazel and Camivel by
day; the Houſe is the CO Sorath,':fi& Mat(s
| 2 | 1 711.026

hater Gs

Q »

_ 2

oe et. ——

pI"

84 The Templeof Wildome, Book IT.
.culine, green and dark, yelloware attributed roir,
andchel egs of man: co doxey Fon $
It notech the South-Eaſt, and by South wind,
 whichiscalled Exrogfier or Euronotus, which is hot
and moiſt, breeding clouds and fickneſs, ©:

7be twelf b Houſe Containes,

4 \

Cilicia, Calabria, Portugal, Galitia, Normandi'Gas
comantes, Lydia, Pawphilia, Agipt the higher. |

Of Cities and Townes, Alexandria, Hiſpolis, Com-
poftella Wormes, Ratisbone, Teverton. . |

And theſeare Governed by Hiſmael and Amwixic!
by night, Kedemel is exalted in this Houſe, Haſmodai
delights in it, but Taphtbartharath is both derrimen-
red and falls in this place, the feer of man are attri-
buted toit, and the colour green, white mixtures.

It noceth che Eaft,South Eaft wind, called Exrus or
Pulturnns,which is hot and dry;he blawerth loud,and
therefore iscalled Altztonaws, Vulturnus : You have
ſeen mthe Figure here before, howghe Earth is di-
vided into two parts, are called houſes, whereof the .
- firſt is called the Angle of the Orient, with che
twelfth and eleventh unto the South, and makech
che Ociental quarter Maſculine :. fignifying the
Spring time, and the infancy of man, which of his
Natwe is Sanguine. ;:

The other part which is the Angle of the South,
reaching unto the Occident, comprehending the
cench,ninch and eight Houſes, . unto the ſeventh is
calteg' Metidional quarter, feminine fignifying the
youthhof man, whichihen beginning ACSLenG
OP" | | ric

————— —

"Fook 1- The Temple of Wiſdome. '8
re,which is the angle -

_ rickahd heating: Thethird pe
e

occidental, unto nn. a}, contai-
ning, che oonrogy Ire -and/fifth Houſes; to- che
fourth, is occidencall Maſculine, fignifying Harvelt
and age of man, which is then moſt commonly Ma-
lencholly : The fourth quarter, which is che Angle
Septentrional reaching unto the Oriental, compre-
hending the fourth, chird and ſecond Houſes, unto
the firſt is called Septextrione! quarter, feminine, fig-
nifying Winter, and the crooked age of man,
—_ then doth begin 'co be flegmarick, old and
aine. e. .

Thoſe twoparts, which be from the Angle Mere-
dignal, unto the ' Angle Septentrional be called;the
Mojties aſcendant z'the two other-parrs, which be
from the Septentrional unto the Meridional, be cal-

' led the Moities deſcendant, che-four Angles be the
fieſt four, ſevench! and tenth Houſes; the ſecond,
fifch, eight and eleventh be called che Houfes Suce
cedent 3 the third, fixth,nimh and twetfeh be cal- _
led:the Houſes Cadancs;' therefore, when: and as ME
often asin theſe aur Go 9h on find-a good figure, Ws

Ee:

| that place alwayes: fignifies, force, courage of body,
2 outings proſperaus, Fortane'V alianeineſs foie:
. neſs with friendsgWociared with a berter hope.
e \ The ſecond (igniherh balf fortune, by occafion of
f- goods; che fifth fignifieth half fortune,comming by
h gifts, or by che- getting. or Conception of Son oc
ie Daughter, that is to ſay of honour or joy. *'
1s Theeighth fignifies half forcune, becauſe of death,
ar of things bidden; the eleventh ſignifies halffor-
th rune, comming by the Mother, or of the Pringe, or.
he ofthe year. ks ot ba 1 '
is The Cadant do fignifie weaknefs of Heart, feeble-
rhe neſs oc faintne(ſs of body and damage : therthird

le»

F 3 | _ and

= "The Tewwple of Widow. BoogT.

and ninch excepteds whickfigaite a refieion- ofa ofa
Common Wealth;Jikewiſe honour” and reverence,

the ſixth and emelſ&h;. do fignifie: cowardnefſe: with
@ wickedacde, [pays of perſons PT of things.” 74000

15 © 6 - #*F

a * 4 ; 4 4 I
R P 4
w—_ a3. aukuoÞ ds. ORs F Of OY 4 X ,
” 4

,
«4 *
PS .

Ch AP. XXIIL

Qfthe ſexteen, Figures and their manifold
| Opens. ; $1'B;
mT

= Hel Fi joures are « divided many Wayes as'\firſt
into foure-Quailrants' or Quarters;, anfwerjn
$0. the foure quarters of the year.” {03% 2412 MO".
. The Vernal or Spring Quarter, is Sanguine,| Hot
and moiſt, and conteynes the firft foure _ oo
Puer, Amiſſo, Albus, and Cauda Draconss..:::-

The ERynal ex. Summer. Ao ishot, drp;and
olle rick, andconemngsorh: r& figures, vin Pogul
tas Fortune Majer, GonjunGio,Capub Dracowis: C 19970)

| The Autumnal or Harveſt: queer, is cold; moift
a3nd'Phlegmatick;conceins the which have
as well as thereſt cheir'vertues froth rhe Rufetsand
Ides's, thefo ye Agnes are Pala, : Rubens: Aequi -
$10, Fortune. Mi mor: *

The 'Hyemnall Scumak, or Winter quarter is, cold
moiſt and flegmatick; of the inacure of che tenth,
> hw enth and twelfth houſes and::their Rulers nd

'sand their 'F igures, 212, Carevly Triftatie, Detitin
and Via, -: | YU |

They are again divided in diviſion. ofthe Fes
ments, for ſome figures.receive; fact - vertre, as in
Nature Sigma ul hoo RANG dry, and rhey are

| Fortunz

o I

Ec.

Boox.I. The Temple of Wiſdome, 87

Fortuna, Major, Pner, Acquiſitio, and Cauda Draconis,
three of theſe make the hery Triplicity, over which
Sorath ruleth by day, and Hiſmeel by night.

Others arc cold and earrctily, viz. Amiſſio, Con-
jrndio, Carcer, 1s, 2 Draconis, and theſe conſtitute
the Earthly Triplicity; over whom Kedemel rules by
day, and Heſmedai by night.

- Others arc Aiery, hot and moiſt, viz Albus, Puels,
Triftitia, Fortuna Minor; over whom Zaze! Rules by
day ,'and Taphthartharath by night, © ©

Othersare watery, cold and moiſt, viz; Populus,
Letitia, Via, Kubeus, and arecalled'the watery Tri-
plicity, over whom Barzabet rulech both day. and
nignc. ; om

Towns figures afe Maſculine, and therefore hot-as,
Puer , - Albus, Fortuna Majr, Pnela, Acquifitia, Triſtitia
Populus, Eaput D:avonis; fomeare Feminine, No&ur-
nal, therefore cold, Amiſſio,' Via, Conjuntiio, Rubens,
Carcer, Lttitia, Fortuna Minor, Cauda Draconis.

The uſe whereof, 1s this, that if you have 2 j-
Maſculine figure in a Maſculine houſe, governed by &
a Maſculine Ruler,ie imports him or her, more man-
' ly, andfo if a Maſculine figure bein a Feminine
houſe, the man or woman is,lefle couragious, &c.

Ri Chap.

D ——

TI

| 4 Table ofthe AſpeFs of the Hoſes. ” iis

_ The Temple of Wiſdome. Book !

——"FIOAarT THAT FO
Dexcer [11ſ101s | Dexter [3 |z | [Pemer [7 6 ſ]
x houſe] [fuſe 1 g houſe |

| | = , |
(ater [4 [5 | [Sinited? [8 | 223 A c2jL |
Dexter [13]131x0} [Dexer [4 [3 j3 | Pr 6 |
TEE I 1 ls 6 houſe = tohouſe! | | +,
nies 5 Is | Siniſterſs ſs [x0] [lated 1 j2 [ |
Dexter ' | | Wa I 5 [4 13 | Decer 9 [8 | ||
x houſe 4 7 houſe [pant 5 |
Siniſter] , J [Siniſter]9 [10j11 [Siniſter t 12 13 |

Dexter [6 ls
8 houſe

cf [2 [1 bh

4 | [Pez [10
| 3 eat

10

 inifter|s [7 |8

Ft
|Siniſter|z0ſx 1 b Siniſter 2

The uſe of the Table of areſaid.

You may ſee | in che 2, 3, q,ands. Dexter.
Column, uw the upper part of che Firſt Houſe
Table, T_—_ |

Ou.

—.

You fie in the ſecond line & fe Column ol 109
& in the foure Srmopyy kg if os 7
che meaning is thus: A iR 3 *
Houſe, and another in he eleventh, he chat i po-
ficed in the firſt Houſe, doth behold the other in che
eleventh, with a Sextile Dexter

A figure in the firſt and another in che tenth, he
in rhe ficſt behold the figure | in the cench with e
Dexter.
figure in the ficſt beholdin another 3 in che
_ his Trine Dexter thirher.
ure in the firſt, {Boyy es 9g': nggh in the
wo n=. his fition Aſpeft unco him
ain, over againft Siniſter, and under whe firft
you inde 3, 4, 5, that is, che ficſt heholds the third
with aSextile Siniſter, the fourch with. hg 7 il
fer, and the fifth with a Trine Sinifter; erve the
Dexcer Aſpe& is more forcible then che Siniſter,
this underſtand in che ocherColumns,vis.thac Dex-
ter Aſpefts, ace contrary to che ſucceflion of houſes,
Siniſter as they follow one another,

The houſes again are. divided, into moveable,
fixed and common.

The moveable, are the firſt, fourth, ſeventh and
| tenth, and theſe' Gonif the foure monchs of the
year, viz, Merch, Tune, September and December,and
8s moveable.

. Ln ({econd, fifth ,cighth ng dr are bao and
ignifie Aprill, Fuly, Odober an anuary, which are
bfed ſeaſons of Heat or Cold, Moitture or Drynefſle.

The chicd, fixth, ninth and ewelfch are common
becauſe they: are February, May, Auguſt and November,
and are {commenced alſo berween moveable and fix-
ed, and retain a property or nature , pertaking
both, withche preceding and conſequent houſes. ,
, abu, and Letitis are Py i or double bo-

e

The

CT EEE a * Age 4

'8 "TheTemple F Wiſdome. Book. L 4

The right knowledg of theſe itt this Artis much,
ad you muft underſtand ft thus; tn the neftion
or figure, if the Ruler who, Ts the Tdez that
ismncorpoxated in the gate "Ty "the firft hoife be
moveable, and' the Idea'* Figure and houſe, be
| alſo one; ir denotes rhe 'perfan to be unſtable,
of'ho Reſohition, eafily mitcable, I, 2
wavering 'timtonftant Manor Woman. | .

Let us admit the Aſcendant hxed, and the Ru-
ler and bis et in a fixed figure,' you may jud ns
perſon to be of a firm Refvintign, ' no changlmg,

- as weſay, one that will ſtand t6'maincain Ghar h he
hath ſaid or'done, be it right or wrong.

*Ifche Figute Idez and Ruler Aſcending be com-
hon, you may judgethe inan or woman cobe nei-
chet very wil ull' or cafily vactadle, bur: between
both.

* The Fights YE aredividedinto ,

" *Beftial or Dnadrupedian,” viz. Puer, Amiffio, Fortuna
Major, Acqnifitio, Carcer, and theſe repreſent Foure

_— creatures.
ruitfall or profificall figures, viz. Poputus, Rubens,

Cande Draconis, Letitia Vis. ,
ate rren ures res, Albns,” Fortuna' Major, Minor, Con-
fonbdiio, mah /orkidtans Cifretous Figures, Albu,
jnndio, Puel{a, Triftitia, ' © ©
Ferral Figures axe, Fortuns Mejor, Fortune Manor,
Lett ; and C4put Praconis,

Mate Figiizes dr of flow, Voice, > or Via, Rubew,
Candet Driconis 'Letitia, the more if the Figures of

Tapbthartherath | be with She. orin Drartile or Ope
26]

pofition of theFigurex of

The nfe tierbfis is, char if your fignifeators, {that
wto ſay )chre Lord Ruler arid his Idex' be. Incorpoe
rated in the” - rap into pure Amiſſi, Fortune
Mas or, Fortuna Minor, Acqui fulo : Cues Draconis, Car-

WY | :

Fool.

_ what
Rat

wt re Us Bn dicine;y ou muſt givegtha
ſays Plancy dr Minerals, and accordip
judgement preſcribe chat.

IN lo Dr ox ras yr"

"The Temple of 7 Wildome. ry

cer, Cauda Dracqnis. there is in the Conditions of
that party ſomerbiyg þf che Nacarevfthar Beaſtzthe
Ruler and Idea lignifies ; 5 4s if the Figure be Pure,
che' mat» 3b "ralh; hatdy and Laſcivious, if Amid,

| iedfaft iahd: reſolved, and ſonrewhat of a muddy

Com aloe vitiated with fome private imperfctti>
vial What figuit ſoever you find in the firſt houſe,
gr peat 10 ep 9 and you ſhall find his

e and manner when ſtrougHr

Nacu
: Kahn it potted gnified by them, ,ag we

frid before, for che qualiry of every ching >

fied b ro Rulers an pad and fo you muſt ju

as 774 0 fick, alrhongh forty mile off, co

te is in the fir Houſe, . and what Idea _

Sir,” of that Nacureand Comp ppg

An and hath fach fickneſs and dileaſt
ot

er-fignifies z to Cure him co
| it i$atrribured toe: that Idea and ll

_ tools

xp. go figure is there, and wha

The part- of the body afflided, che Ruler ro,
Fi igure and Houſe fionifie. _

\ *Let.us admit, eas ipropounds hound
ſhall have Children; theft if Hoſmodei and h ;

or 1denbe in good company in the fifth Houle,
isno. queſtion but he ſhalt; rhe ſame do, if chanys.

ftion conicerneBarrearieſs; vis,* if the a(cendent%or

hifch Houſe be of thoſe Figu:es, we call I]

L generally repreſents. fewor no Children.

In queſtions, if the Rulers and Idea's be mcgr Ir
raced into Alba, Conju wt , Puel/4 or Trifiitis \ i

aſcendent, then we udge the Man to 'be of
civil Carriage, very affab i —_ calie to beſpoken

Vithal, &c. CHAP, XXV.,

\

ON The Temple of

ba

Car. ARV.

Of the Rulers eſſential dignities, in the twelve Idex's, that
50208 pa incorporated into ſixzees Figures.

SIE

\ YS
. A... th
bo Grote
'
Ry FlG

o
$446 |& 4*]|*
Tik2qr

—
* »
" $3

be
* _

.
KA

vs KK4

——__

|__[o_=

Took I. The Temple of V Viſdome.

jo |

— 93
The uſe of this Table is great, becauſe ir reaches
the Fortitudes and Debilicies of the Rulers and

Idea in the Figures 3 when chey are in ſuch Hou-

ſes, weattribuce cothem, as you may perceive by
che Table; the firft Column is of che Ideas; cheſe-
cond is their Figures : the third and fourth is of
ctheirRulers: & pure and the affociate : of the
Houſe of OP And thelerter D els you it is by day:
and theletterN is of the nighe, The nexc Column
tells you, chat Fortune Major in the firſt Houſe is
governed by f and A and there Sorath is exal-
ced, and fignifies ſomerching of the Nature of Ber-
zebel and Malchideel! in man, woman or ching : The
fifth Column tells you, that pure is of the Triplici
of Soreth by day, and Hiſmael by night: the fixc
Column tels you, that theſe Rulers are in their De-
crimenes in choſe Houſes, over againſt them in che
Game line toward the lefc Hand; the ſeventh Cos
lumn cells you, in what Houſe every Ruler hath his,
fall, becauſe in FP to hisexaltation @q 1s in his fall
in the firſt Houſe : if his Figures, Carcer or Trifttie,
promiſe any thing by aſpe@, the influence is weak,

and you may Judge it to be buc a bare word full of

' deceit: Now if pure, Fortuna Major, or Acquiſitio

be in the firſt Houſe, you may ſay the thing will be
done, and the promiſe made, will be kepr, and the
manis ofthe Nature and Complexion, che figures,
Jdea's and Rulers fignifie : If it be Acquifitio, that is
fign'ficator of the man, then he is really honeft,Reli-
gious,true hearted, and you may truft him: for whar-
ſoever he promiſes he will be as good as his word.

A Table

A Table of the Hours, .

EW BEJES |.

X-

Wu IX.

XX].

+ X|F_*

PF

os

— C—— — ———— > —— —

XXKKY_

lj.
Ih

[6% XX
& X[+ Xs *X

*X |$* +
 X|©E X

|

X | *
X + X
* .X
XX %

-

Byv night.

. 2 1 ©a7z
— ”

E1

:
TT
=
D
U
| a.
8
. fn
2
be

_—_

het ee

Book.l.

and. the Figures Rule.

| AXXX

XI
Bp

”
* »%
+ _» *®
pe a ;
”*
A - ©
-
: *
o vw "a,
oy

E - _ 1
* ”
Hy g
C £
” & 4 a
A
_ ack > ”
i m—_ Ce +4
(+ 9 ” =»: - _

_—_—

1 Wo!
_
. LY
þ ®
«® 7 oy
Y
Ld

97

»
z
[| %
S - =
_ ®
*
-
wt 4 *
q *

GE
* & -X
* x j2
ll

ple

"_

tl —
þ Ti
L .

*. -# x

þ TY Kan | | |
2 Fg NIL :

Book.

*
*

,

— Fe Tian "Book

yt

== © uſrofrhole two.

when'the” Rulers and”
weakin the ions goes:

\ Nexc, by 5 Fighely 8p nd
Figures, ade OOEweg
anoccner at th
natura), and oe ent en bike
how mich you Son ow

your er

In” your Sche 40),.; 1
thole ate we Gall bis

he is then efſencially

cells you, the man isin a vety ha
tion, this will be true, nnleſs the
by any Malevolent aſped.-;

meet 54+

ſeveral mixcures n your ing: aL

&, We: vl

gether, that areal erode a

ET

Lz

city,aCany timeofca s fignre; boa example.
4 Fang ol ng a beurs, (Ta; |
houſes, or Ho1 Jes, _ 3 ou mult .;

loot, what hour ir is; and i be 4 ants an Angle, or.
be in any ofche four [hho and alſo rue the hour,
cong,, and, we allow for that.

- Of his OWN Hoy(e, Eftate-and Fortune 2,or a man;
wanting very Jictle of che pooge ofchis World, Ori,

ake or YO
Wi x aff m4

| Y9Y

EW Jy Qu tc-

FIPnGs 00g ol

TIS

{tt

perfeft inithe Necucy of ers,
and Houſcs, ajid SIN Mos 5 et
in Nature and praperty. to the, Fipur 5-wit'N
know the ſirens thyfortigude or' pr Ives...
and a wel'pauhing of thejy, and, cy, $A30d

pedien Fey 1

ond Natjire, by ſo myob che 1 61a, ou, all
- ANG A Ruler, I Idea. or Fi = then faid ,

| co be really ſtrong, when, he_hach, eflencill .
— 2 dicnicies, ! which arekugwhs:.by his bein Eng
C place wecpll his houſe,or hf :xaltarioh 7 ip» ,

«4
dd acc CLEGG...

five dignicies as Fortune Mejor in, the fiſch, Houſe, Þ

Pure in the ficft., + i 2c
In ſudgement, wheta figure is in has own \ houſe, a

that is, when his Rulcr and Idea governe, 1t repre-

ſents a man inſuch a Co! dition, as that hc is Lord... =

't

ock nh

iteghe che fourth,

other figure bein his

”
.

i&ed by ill Compan
(7, Prong perſon: Bea

have four” dignicies,' for being in, his exaltacion,
which continues arc hour'and a month, but he ſhall '
not be alfowet any dignity, as being in his Triplie
city, for by nighe S&rath Ryltth 'not the. fiery Tri-
plicity, bur Hiſmiael; who had ke bren in place of
Soreth; anil by hight, muſt have had allowed him
chree digitiries, 'and this do genttrally in all the
Rulers, Barz#bef excepted; who night and day cnjtch
the watery Triplicity: ns To oa
The Rulers 3re debilited in rhe Houſes, oppoſite
to their houles,” theyare ip their fall; in the houſes
oppoſition ro'cheir exaltarions, and aredetrimented
as much here as chey were dignified before chere :
_— in rhe ſeventh, or Papulus in the tench.
yon would know whecherc: your figure be well
madeor not, "you mult look | to. che four Angles,
ifigany,of them, you.find a Figure that rulgs'cbe
hour, ar the time of chequeſtion demanded, then
the Figure is well made : if you find ic nor ſo, yott
muſt miake another : And you ſhall find what Fig ure
governcs every hour in che Table before.

_— dd 4 v5 toe 5 = * "* aud nent Meer Wu orgs
# , L > "2 L 7 wY
. | F. . 2 A £ - V3 Ee o S k :
The
Temple of: .
" P ;
F

CHAP.

XXVL

A very way 6 Table fhewing what parts of. the

Body is ſignified by the ſixteen. Figures Of tbe
ſeven Rulers in all the twelve Houſes 5 Of. the

karth governed by the twelye Idea's.

A CU Or TJ
| -
\

"m— +

— — —

nts

| 7 4
A |
43

| ——_— ——

fz

x

; |[Secrecs:

11»/* [Secrers and

TArmes and |

Chinebene, and
= $5 Felly; EE» To Reines y'.
Scomach, |Breaff, | Armes,
Hearc Lights, -- - | Shoulders
and [Reins and :| and
= {Navel;' / [Lovns.' | Privicies. :
{Remes, [|Sromach, {| Breaſt,
Belly, s Teart;" ff, Lighes
and | [Secrers,'/ | and.
_ [and 8taddey| Thighs: © ©
2 1. (Bel ys" THEE =

Haunches,

Heart, Back

1:97 - [Rems; 1; and: © aud knees.
5H! | "bus © {Thidhae” 1} 7 fy

_——_— $5

$00. 1. The Temple of Wildome,

| aſs [4 x 6.4 |
} i p RO
: [ , PR. — *. + . By
l i k TS | L »{'s ; z
”s wo p 4* 4 } hs m
ES | [
-'Þ Q
hot -

Ro.

«i ap hx © .F.j* * K Xſk *X %

* $4 #3 ( & <2 |
nds, Sf oaſ

Kt | *X & *
'| Read and: }Feer and *tLegs and © Head and ©
Thighes,.j jReines, « :. j&ecxets. . © |Knees,

-
i P \
4 - hs £ þ . 4 "

" "OY k 4
—_— —_ _

— —

; i
K wat ja lead and il Thighs Throakand
| RET 5.0 if |Secrerg.. =, and Feet, : (egy. my,

———.

——_— es. A..4

INNGY ItNecks Tok | Aries.
| Legs and | Throat, --- JHead and - [Shoutders:

Ancles TI, Fu — p/ L and
4 LR, © [Fee
Ares, 46d Neck, Head, Breaſt

Feer ©... |Shontders; [Throar, | |Sromack

0 T oben |. and | and _

| T{Knees, j;-.:\: [Levy © [Lights * | ;
— oe.

| _--.. \iBreaſ, Armes ; ., {Neck,

| Head'and | [Heart | [Shoulders /Throae,

| Eyes. and : and Heartand |
FE Legs. Feet. © Back.

G ES |

1pelly and.
|
TD
\ Reins, $ SC-
crets & - 4
Kneesand |
Legs.
gs and” Jacad,” Eyes |
IFeec. | «nd Kaees. .
a nes Yo
* 27 * Neck; ;
Head and Throar ;
0 Feet, } aud Ss 's
EY LO —_— Egv.. |
oy — I
Head and houl ers. Lights, |
Fa "7 OP ahd- , "Heart and. , it
rh) FetkAa F ” Feet. "Legs.
= The þ you: = Head, TY Heart Sto-
| Gy . (ATINCS3 by Breaſt ©, mach, Liver
OP; = |, and j:.and Ji and |
i = = - Bath , - fo 3

4 _
1Shou ders.

gs SY |
Netk —— | Stomack,. | Head, Breaſt] Shoulders 2
Th -- jLiverHeart,| and OY
| roat”" Jand Feer. wo. FO _
Throat, $ | {os
{Heart and | and *
Stomach, _ |Loyns.
| Sromder,.
Shoulders | |
 JArmesand Ft |
Bale: peers. |
refefiai 5 Bowclendl
of, y ang. hy 8E, |
ights. tl
 lsromacn. j|Reigns, © |
iver;Hearrjhoyns, i. ,{
k and i and 7.)
S Secrecs, _ [Knees
47 T7" Jecrers, - |
 Reines,. Belly and |Legs
Loynsaind* Fhighes, and f
Thighs.” 2715 No [Haunches,
: 163 Hanniches eigns, Thighs WP
Seerers. © '"[Belly. and \-xhan Ly p Ta \tA;

kt ec er M. XEVTLG. [ang
Sang " Gfthe qui es of te Fen 15! W £ Hog:
E \- % Fas $0} Fo Fw | EI DTTN ; He eh by
de ry furhenwork note, that amongſt .rbe
figures, ſome be Th -Qtbers:be wu and. others
ſome ke common'3 S_P good be thoſe which bens
ering, Trifitia excepred; thoſe which be going out
be it, onely Letitie Excepted; the common be nei»
ther good nor bad, bur: ayateg Toe or - bag ac+

| cording unto theCa Lex Av} chey fa lintoz for when

the Company is good, f Rn '; and when th.
Company is ill, they be i a asſhdlt be more plaitiy
lydeclaredunco; ares FAPSHoNE ricpg of 56xheo

y we will giz. Wolgajent upon, gn wigs qhied

of ghis Ar C. Ts OD 7 ſ

The fixteen 6 ures : Ai "hi Þtk i LING

fromghe the fev Fee AlerSan ewelve Arie
ern the whole Farch;* and © wiP Withps

Sun; and theſc pur cheir ra aw into wphands,
2nd haveſuch fig nification, as you may rea | and
gn the {cond dar of UP

1 «
> =
+ &
"u Fi s 5 « 3 bY
- : - = S
FE At oras4 nf! i'd,
4 Py S. ; x 23 (2
, ; > Ks +A8 5 ' Q
* ww 7 , '

[
TY! 4IIHTS EPR ENY Loch + $4 £2 BS" ST CAT C1 —_ ay qu_—payoyÞ
_ a— ——_—
EY —_— ”, TS - , > >
F! it boy "FF" af 2; TITS fs 28

Fr,

oe "CE HAP. TCTITI [ke and yd
bd. Ba ng Catours af the Figure. :

- =_
m__—_ W—_— > pom —_— "Aware Mr. +
»

J Vo fienifin whice.mixed with red; ; * 4wiſſo a4

*-

Lv GEaput Draconis, white mixed with Citrine, Alba
a

=
” © '”.. & os fwls mums ...

Ce SBS. x7 pe 9a ate. ee « Pig. ills C2 or AC

 Blaok > 1a: Hivpiegf-) Yager L108
2 wbice.loyel CE with = Popular and,
Vie gomenrull _ Gold coloug or gt
Fortune. Mejor, pieen gol ow. or Gold colour; Ceon-
junio, pris, gray whitiſh, 'ſomtimes blacks
loeckſed with blew roens Whit whiteyor, a Jarks crime.
fon,.ot 2 -wHRNGS tawny:; ed tnijxc brown;
Acqrifitiag red), yellow, of green, oi a white,
aufler organs Carte Troftitic, tangy okyoccy\
toby wich low 3- rp ot whip gfe
Solow, it 10's 5} Ms . Ma by KY KY gent TOUT)! LSE, Ko

U8G 3341 On;54 371" Mite al Cad, carl Spilcg. APTTE 2818 1%
iO M5 $ROUTILETY) I KF \ 04 P30 IH {141 58285 78 Irie, ATE 5

| ent ot TT TTY
aqnw ot FC Act) ME UA 4301300: exit? 0)
23 08 WAA: "Tr PEAR rrp Gita, 2 oath:

<1s&q Yom Bd, tel 8 by 49:94 Ape, obs 21}

F Sneaks

lth the 4
Iams

"0® %
Fa % A
I TT ; -
oO * - \
; 0
F , %. £
— * l «Xx
® * - Fd
Ll
: a r

2637 SAL LY EO OT wottaitavi;s lag)

Tis vainly Mijotred by*Jdeors 4nd" (ſnderwirs,
FF we ns the Famous Presbyetrians, #8;
Iris rrue; being not ſo itidiſireety zealous and ſs:
perſtitious as Phanatiques, we have been miſtaken -
. by Anabi tifty,! and'traquced d for Achieſts; bur this

is anfvErtU; ier The = of "the" Fortd Now
thdr6 is n enyes an Imonithal Beint,

ny thing, Sine Materia: .

and ay

Aﬀc Fever rt 60 ! ma or out of che-
world, t | be tif yo 2erant}: difrance (in
PB; A. WH 7191 ab; 20 0IREL AS, » Shich

& ® .
” S& 4 i

Shes very. mharcer while 4c warohere, RES
conceived tolye, und this: diſtance ſpace carmor: birc

be fomehing; and yer tiovoorporea neither
"—_ tible, impenitrable nor'tahgible; 17 muſt: of

Hheaſubſtancec: oreal;neceflaril _
| ail ng of it falf;, whichthe! clear”
Gol the Jos

Fry at ly perfe, wall more INS
Being, 'und hereby nai ow! als

Qtuaily Siferw! us ro beirhe
material

ſued and-'irrational' (they {are:, chav will prevent
coreaſon and underſtanding, and/yec excuſe them-
ſelves fromthe acknowledging of (oplainateuch.
/Theevaftons of ſome Nativity men vere fo.'weak
C and filly like unto #jliew L
Artiſt nor: Gentleman, 'bure p Laboreror Dit-
chers ſonof Difeworth/inv Ltteefterifhirog bton in is
| T e

that argumenc's, Forſpirits. x; aged is; drown. from
6; paen yr yagr vent oro -zhaoſt ſure, they
were conviticed in their ents 6fth'rruth of
Genii, Angels'or Spirits ant? their: Srocits, + elſe "ir
had been better flacly to bave''denyed them; chen'
cofam ſuck idle:and vain reaſons of tliem;!
.»:Buc;fict:rho: pontligitn Aſtro 4nd chei
follow diohieran Nativity<monger ay; they wed
nothing but.imaginati there (rngching
really wichourpsinfuch apparitions, i0>-
=T _ We! —_ FRE. ,off ad oniohey
authority oÞ Zer acretes, Platoy 2
wins Agrigpe-Kuighc, T $onlar pd Carslh,” IN
Gattan/Gerrard, Cempa; \\Tundians;, Wiſes, & yell a:
andUrhan ot hees coo cedious.co name... |
© Being routed from-this aac, = thay”
qty rele A _—— fly-roſo mi-"

ſrt ace

"4
[

, and he:ismelther

ao BD XX «© es LS. ; NN

_ meulous a:pomer of pbancy,;: as if it: were ables
change the Awe intota'rea!l ſhape anflform,ſorhar
others map:behold ir;:as well as he that fram?d it by
thepower of his fancy,” >; 9 hn
>: Now-L demand of egy ſober man, or + Heydewpan,
whether chis be noc a harder Miſtery and wore uw
conceneable, then ati rhe Magicall Meramorphoſes
of Vevils or Witches, For it i9:-ealter 'to-conceivi
that :Geniier, ſome knowing :chiny in:-the -Aire
nar pee rpg grade ren rem
ape, beamg-in-the the-Aire it doth-thus
cratsform, then: that che -Lweginacion of iman,
which js but a- modification of, his - own minde.,
ould be able at « diftance to-change it irits ſuch
appearances;Burſuppoſe it.couldzoan tt animate thie '
Aire that it doth. (thug: Meramorphite',. and - make
«ſpeak & anſwer to Queſtions,-and P ue chings -ineo
mens hands; & teach rheur how to:make Telefnixior
Taleſmang,as (ome:call chem what Angels artend
them, &c, ©: the credulity of beforted Atheiſme!
How intoxicated. and infatunted' are-theyin'thedr

cancens,:; being given up; rofenſnablicy;n
let :che:free uſe of ahe- adored aculdbg of -their
minde; Bur thall this force of imagination rexch fo
high as the claude alſo; and makemen fighepirched
Battels in the Aire, xethey.did-at Edge-bill, running
and charging oneagainſt :anocher,: here' the {ame
bold pretender, to wit, and Phytoſophy; Coſur!Va-
2294.(who cunningly :and Jupglingly :endeavdtirs
co-trifuſes the poiſort of Acheiſmeinco the mindsof
hizreader on every occaſion) ang atiother Engliſh
Author: of Peodigies;:. abulng- c Noble: Knighc
Cornelins Agrippay mhoſe Books-nexe the | Bible, 1 pre.
fer: befare all che Pooks in, the ward; Theſermen

\ have recourſe $0:thoſs old caſt Rags of Byimew his
| - 2LO 1; 24 % | School

—

I0- "my
PO 4 ,

do EX 5 ms
| bat. rhe VA+
oand ic-ſeanis fibres rO0 are
_ carricdop initothe proog and fallinco.agertain -
agar br poſturnalparts, and ſo imare tl
La eta m.Joft among the Clouds. |
. Bux Idewand;bow! ofthe Horſes fnde
Gee oftheir Riders: nd when. and bow
2 are they comitying togechertand, whether they
Appear. not before thert beany | depicain the! bell

roſend.up mu > taponrhand r Harncfs and
 Weapons.ſfen 4 Jap Sag ones Sotde, Fans
Shield Why. y come tb pity in
*xoabe hands of thoſe Acyial mien

he-vapours of Metals, Gif [he
heavier in all lilzel, eye
and WmeQ 2, and ly how.th come nr wir Nd
one. another, and.to hgh, the there: beibg. keictien life
; Har ſoulin them -- #nd- whether: Soiiads alfo; tiave
"jg ins S9nE38 xeſerygd till aheſe ſolemairies,
"ge bin $ $a were heard irv che
"la Tow] pudibeatinge off rooting of Mos-
ot, AYE dinarice,a$ a ns Jt ſuch Jike Pro-
j ſoc hath; deen,.. us iche founding of
5, 26 Sugling tries") Arid Phaxyalſe makes
mention of che ſountliig.of Trampets, and Claſhing
of Armour heard oats of the heavens about the Cim-
brick Warrs, and ofteri before. Buc hereac Albotough
all.was concluded with n Wc lodivus noiſe of Mines!
if p[iryments. |, :_

.T He Exuvie of, Fiddlers3 is lords fliet up. into the
| ire. too, of. were. thoſe. Muſical Accencs frozen
"there for u time,-and atthe bear aud: eurg of che
\ConNNgs, the Awe relenti wh and .thawing, became
aaa yooal 7: h what rain. SONGEKS
are

|

fletionmakes the images more dimn then dire&

\ Orif we couſd imagine,that there mighe be ſome-
times ſuch an advancagein the figure of cheſe clouds,
as might in ſome ſort remedy this l:flening of the
ſpecies, yer cher ſurfaces are ſo, exceeding rudely
poliſhedy and reflefion which,as I (ajd, is ever dim
enough of ic ſelf, is here ſo extraordinarily ampet-
FeR, that they can never, be a'tfe, according tothe
courſe of nature, to return the (pecies of Terreftri-
al Objefts back again co our ftgtic, it being fo e&vi-
dent that they arcuntic for what is of farr leſſe diffi-
culty,. For we never finde them. able to refle$ the
image of a Star, when as not onely glaſſe bur eve=
ry troubled Poole or Uirty plaſh of warer ih the high
Fay apes lk. ES

"* Bar ehae ici fax eaſter for 5 Fear, then for ai of
theſe Objeds hereupon Earth,” tobe reflxed co

Our

* .

s by __— ” - DV ”
OO i eos rr ORs os ——_— oat ** ro... ens 0 Oy 1616 "R

4 -. ; *
ba m—_ 4 T RY 5 as nd _ i... P oY
- mo. % y + * 2] ATY » þ x # 4
P »
Te Eo dome Book:
: 2a | . ES
- - — mere -—_ Wa. -

”»
_ a

. -*

tio. The
fv ho *by" choſe 'rude riataral Lodking-glafics”
. plzcedamotig the Clouds, ſundcy reaſohs- ife *
HER ons B20" <7 IOC 17 DPF O14 $1000
wow | Adrprohtotorybgnnt at all of cheir_
uſijal magnitnden whick 'they ordinarily appear”
ro er byithi refledtiori; the difference oF batiy hu: |
dreds of Leagues making no differetice'sf” magni:
tudein them; for indeed rhediſtance of the Diatne- *
rer of the Ovbite of the Earth makes none; us mnt
be acknowledged by all choſe thaca#dmi of the an-
nual morion the: eof. 'But a very few'miles do exs- /
ceedingly dimimiſh the nſiral bigneſs of rhe” Fpeciey
of an” Horſe 'or Man, even to: thar'lictlenefſe, chat
they grow inviſtble. What then will Becoine of his ©
ſword, Shield or Sphear? And in theſe cafts'wenow
ſpeak of, how greac a journey the ſpecies have from!
che Earch co the Cloud char refle&them,? 1tave itt-
atmared before. - 700: = RA tp Th FLEA
Secondly it is manifef, thar a Star h:ch thepre-'
heminence abovetheſe Terreſtrial Objes; in thar

ic is as pure a light as the Sun, though 'noc ſo big ;
bat they bur Opake coloured bodies,and'that there- *

fore there is no compariſon berwixe the vigour ant ©
ſtrength'of che Speczes of a'Star und of them.

Thirdly inthe Night-cime, the Eye being placed

inthe ſhaitow of che Earth, thoſe refle&ions of a Star

wilt be yer more 'cafily viſible ; when as the' grear ©

lightof che San by Day,muſt needs much debilicate

| thefe' reflefted Images of the Objefts 'upen-the *
Earth, his beatns' ſtriking 'our Eyes with .o ſtrong |

vibrations,” --

Fourthly and4afily, there being Stars all over”

che Firmamene,- ſo as chereis, ic ſhould fee a hur- |
dred times more ecafter for 'watural Cauſes to hic
upon a Parefter or | Paraftron (for-let Analogie em-

| | bolden

Pg ts

a

-
a IDS. we _ —_ hat <4 WL o . - «
* a x (
” by wy ” a Lg * : ten kd
- : & 4
} k «© ,
& OT: QUITE... 09:
, c : * of ; = ©% m
a —_— =
CE _ %

bolden me ſo'to call cheſe ſeldome 'or:taever Seen”
Phawmena, the mage of a fingleStrar'or whole cons ,
ſtelJarion reflefed from rhe Clonds).chen: upon a;
Perelias or Paraſelene. Bur nowtheſtory of | thele is
morethen ;an hundred times; tnore frequent then
that of the Pareſter,.. For iris 1b ſ8ldome diſcover- |
ed, that it, is .doubred whether ic be or no,orrather;
aL Neſ<us not.to\Þe,, of which there can beno
reaſon, .bnechat the cloudsare ſo 1ll poliſhed, thar
they arenoT ableco refle& {p confiderablea lightas
a Star. From whence I think, we may ſafely ga-
ther, that iris cherefore impoſliblerthat they ſhould, |
refle& ſodebule Species, as.the colours and ſhapes -
of Beaſts and Men, and that:(o accurately, as thac'
we may ſee their Swords, Helmets, Sheilds, Spears.
and, the like... * IE. i 16 3h»0

Wherefore it is plain, thattheſe Apparitions on:
high in the Aire, are no refle&ions of any Objetts,
upon Earthzor.if it were jmaginable that they wece,
chat ſome ſupernacnralcauſemuk aſlit to conglact>
ateand oliſh the ſurfaces of the Glouds ca luck an
extroardinary accuracy of. figure and \moorhneſle,
as will ſuffice for ſuch prodigious. refleRions.,

And _thar, theſe. Spirits. . that: rule. in che
Aire; may. not a& upon. the macerials chere,
as well as men bere upon the Earth work upon
the parts thereof, as alſo-upon che neighbouring
Elements fo far as they can reach, Shaping, Pec-
fe&ing aud dire&ing things, according to;their own
purpoſe andpleaſure; I know. no reaſon; at all in
Nature or Philoſophy, for any man co deny... For
that the help of - fome ofticious Gen is. inplicd in
fuch like Prodigies, as: theſe, the. ſeaſonableneſs of.
theirappearance (cems. no contemptible argument.
they being according to the obſervation, of Hiſtori»: ..

: alls,

.
S

Vidome,” Rook.
ans, the fareraviners of Commotions and Troubles im alt
ingdomes and Common-wealchs, .,,. . ..
ec nevertheleſs as good Artificers, as] here ſup-
ofe, chey working upon Nacure, nt To bounded
o the Laws of Nature. _ And reflexion will bave us
Imits,as wel as refrazon,whethes for canveyance of
ſpecies or kindling of heat, the laws and bounds
whereof: char diſcerning wig. Cartefias being well a-
ware of, doth generally ang judiciouſly pronounce
That « burning Glaſs, the diftance of n E Cxcus frons
the Glaſs doth wot bear a leſs proportion to the Diameter
thereof, then the diſtanoe of the Exrth from the Sun, io the
Diameter of the Sun, will burn no more vebemently then
the ogg, of the Sun will do without it, thou h inother
reſpects thes Glaſs, were as exatly ſha | Curio
ied, as Could\be expefied from — of an g ad
_—_— 5" > EL |
[ have now compleated this preſent Treatiſe a+
gainſt Atheiſm in all the three parts thereof: upon
 whicb,while Ll caſt mine eye and view,that clear and
wrefutable evidence cf the cauſe I've undertaken,
the external appearances of things in the world, ſo faith«
fully ſeconding the undeniable diQaces of the znnate
Principles of. our own mindes, 1 cannot but with con-
fidenceaver, That there is not any one notion in
all Phil« ſophy more certain and demonſtrable then
char there is a God :
- Andverily I think, I have ranſacked all the cor-
ners ofevery kinde of Philoſophy that can prerend
to bear any ſtroke in this Controverfie, with that
: diligence, chac I may'/fafely pronounce, that it 1s
* meer brutiſh Tgno-ance or Imprudence, no Skill in Ne-
ture or the Knowledge of things, that can _
any man to profel(s Atheiſm, or to embrace it at the
propoſal of thoſe that make profeſſion of it, Ws:
u

f

* 42 PIE ” -*S l
"oe —— 7 SR... _ F A

|
þ
:
'
-
|
L

Len men be Of rectly reaſons:

ogra Air gens” Ace rby Wide
aveUifor Atbiejtt; (ri rhen ever after fotre

orky;chuckofiBed with

pot ern decir

HY 57 if)
" hockenMr ny mea
mo |

mg Me Wow: es.
et efang ofeki v4 mote mera
ofpaciellyg;thets 16 makes HinatOas, incye ofos fuch
Corremplationdymrabhitifiend mas filed grich) cald
Satwyne Orihats Khir ts; AndoMars having goc. pon
the Ruls back (alldps.about che Sky afrer ws Fond,
und $ HOt che Geuiicharlankigh ar his madneſs,

;And to fuck dow: Confticutipns as theG)1 bell

nor wonder, if, 8 the firſt-part of my. diſcourſe muſt
ſeem maryelious|ſubtdle; fo the /ofti appear! ridicu-
ouſly, incredibJe.cBut. they ave to remember; *chac
1Hlo not heee gppertcotheGomplexionel:bumonrs
20s peculiar Rehifbes of men;;-that ariſe. oucrofrbe
temper of the þggy,; bue:.to: the known and:wnatrer-
; «ble; idea's of theimind,: ter the Phevorvrens-of :Natuve
Hind Recordsak Hiſtory, LUponhe.laſt whereof; if 3
ws ſometbing'more fully -\nbified,. if-is; not:co be

zmpured

V.

i9puttitoany vahty Credulity of imtinegs- oy! ther
take #picafire met]. "Nrknrg#hovied; " dur\ehat ;
choighedv, ro fotrHfie and firencehen the fitted
othed9g8 auch ay Ftoutd ; beirts welt affered chat
z rvorhetaptuont/incdehef of fach' Re Narritions
conceriting SfeHfRind2fcndovite cf matting ck ei
athnidibotous 2 40HHai dt; 1 tangervits Pre.
Jude to Atheiſm ir ſelf, ore # rn6e&Hoſd \ath>ein fo
profecibe” arid hi oft? For afluretily
TS one Gi prog
rw Kungy! 11M i Nv\Sp3r is;
ar @ do bool
s
ON 1.

feaſt cokppeur

bio gtwity

ring inch GephitenMobrthein wikwert: thapesirec
Frgtt en; md nocetie fuatbkwfghbemh ei; orany mith
like: woul radgatby on Spitas,; wa chedom-
[tm6n{ QpMmniDn-is iTihettoencociongire, thartheſe
.GhcAiwerbtheGuothandiEvbGenli, which atten-
.ded-alwaygs; upon Avnnes © bubitliey: ure vo'be ex-
:ciifect 3-eving che pknewinor how toi giveranyother

- reakon of ighefe Apparicions :: irtbegggg moſt Cercain, +

-that vvArmies, whergz:by reaſon of their great

numbers;'mairy die, yow ſhalt ſee foe ſuch:Giofts
. very ofcen, (efpeciadly afcer'a Burreb;/ ) whidloure,
[48 wehave faid, che'Goni of che Aire; - Phave vjſe-
where handled the curious Hiſtory of Spiries 3 where.
4 gk | bs

®
Ld

.

BooKk.Il TheTemplc of Wiſdome. 15
in 1 have propounded cheſe following queſtions; »
_ roiching cheſe ghoſts: namely, }#bether or xo,we may,
by theſe, explaine all the Viſions, that are mentioned by
Writers ? IWhether thoſe wonderful effefs, which we attri-
bute to Demons, or Spirits, may procecd. fromtheſe Figures
or #0t ?. And then, whether they have any Power at all, or
: n#?And if ſoz whence they bavett ? Aneif it begeanced
they have any-Paraceſſus is of Qpinmon,
chat Wummy hach in'ic all che Vertue Ton. 1. 47: 6.
of Plans, Stones, Bee, And:chat ir 4 c4u/;moiver.
hath an Occule, . Magnerique Vettue, F*: ..1-c
which draws men txotheSepulchers of thoſe, whom
they dccounteo have: been holy, nien; whereby be
Vercue of the ſame Mummy, rhere-are thoſe effects
wrought, which we call Miracles :, which are obſex= ©
ved{faith he) tb be ninich more frequent ji, the
Summer, thea in any other Seafon of che yer, by
reaſon of tht heat of the Sun, which awakens, and
excites the humour ..char- is: :1nithe Mummy. Bur
thefe'are meer fooleries;, which-we there refuce,
by Cuch principles, as the Rabbins have drawn,from
che Secrers of this ſo Famous,aad Renowned Mum-
my. After. thoſe other. queſtions, cheſe follow :
na my. Whether or no, theſe wonderful formes; which
proceed from the Blood, the Bones, or the Aſhes of dead Bo-
ties, may ſerve for an Undeniable argument of the Reſur-
refiom; a thing unknown to- moſt of che Philoſo-
phers? Whether, after they are raiſed up, they can 4n;any
thing be ſerviceable unto us ? And whether by their meanes,
\ | we may be Narnrally able to attaine to the k
 4iverſe ſecrets, which are Unknown to Vs ? Diverſe o-
ther like queſtions are there propaled, nnd diſcuſſed,
 }. plainly, and chroughly; as | ſhall ler che Wagld
fee, in a ſhort time : In the wean while ave; may
ſafely account che Objefion. before propofeite be

body be reduced into. Aſhes, yet nevertheleſs the

Figure is nor chereby deftroyed. ZI
In-che ficft place thereſore let us conſider their

Names.: And now-let as ſpeak of Teleſms.

"They arecalled in Hebrew 132 Magher, that is to
fay,z Scutcheon, or Sheild : in Chaldie, AEgyprtian,
and Perfian, x20 y,: Tſilmenata, which fignifics a
Figure,or Image: in Arabick ZIQYIn, Talitſman,
or DO9D5y, Tfeliman: and in Greek ſorxtia. The
Hebrew word Magbes, though. it lignifie a Scutche-
On, or agiy. other thing, nored with Hebrew Chara-
QersxheVertue whereof, is noc like ro that of a Scut-
cheoivz and although theſe Charagers, according
tothe :Qpinion' of thoſe: that are moſt verſed in
theſe Theological Myfteries,. arc ſome kind. of itm-
perfe& Images; yer notwichſtanding the word in
chisplace,is nor/properly taken for an mage,that is
Graved,'-arved;or/ Painted; becaufe that the Jewes,
in making any fuck,- ſhou'd have fanned againſt the
Commiindement :* Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelf any

Graven Image. Maphmn therefore fignifies properly |

any piece of Paper, ' or other the like matter, mar-
ked.'or noted with certaine Charafters drawn from
the Terragrammatong or great Name of fourLecters,
or from any other, as we ſhall ſhewhereafter. This
word fignifes alſo, though improperly, theſe very
Figures allo, and Images, which we ſpeak of; becauſe
thar-theſe alio as well as the Chara&ers of the Te-
tragrammeaton, do ſerve, as it were, in ſtead of a Buck»
ter,:.or Shicld of defence, againſt Diſeaſes, 'Lighc-
nings, and Tempeſts. The Chaldie word, Tfime-
28a; . comes from the Hebrew TZDYyg, Tſelen, which
ſignifies an Image - and the Arabick word Tal:tſman,
maplikewiſc hayc beca derived from the ſame root ;

c>4&Y Is | Tali iſ-

8016 = The Temple of Wiſdome. | Book I.

Invalid, and of no Force; ſeeing thar, though the

Sb a Za RE Ro SS

EG a oe to RITTER;

Book T. The Temple of Wiſdome. 17

Talitſman, bEing corrupced from ZINyY 1 ſalinan,
by che Tranſpofition of one lerter only:
But the truth of this ConjeAure is yec uns * : at.
certaine. The Learned Salmatixs gives it Pg.

anocher Derivation: for he takes an occaft- Wes
on to fall foul upon Scaliger,*who derives it from
the Arabick, for not coniidering. that Talifmay is
derived from the Greek wor True, hoc eft; (Faith
he, TeTexso vor Tr, ut ſunt TeTLX:ov0t anuli ' But
how can the truth of this Derivation be proved ?
how ſhall'we be affured, that Talitſmarn comes from
riazoue, 'and not rather Tiatoue from the other? As
for the Taſt name, thar theſe Imager ate called by,
which is Forye7e, there 1s no difticulry atal-incthe
ward: ſothac it remaines now: chat we remember,
conicerning theſe Names, char when we ſpeak of
Figures, we do nor mean thoſ&''that are propeiiy
fignified by che Hebrew wordy \Megben, which are
nothmg bnec Scutcheons noted wich CharaQers,ſuch
as'many have ſeen in'Pari atrhe'Prince of Portugats ;
the-like "whereof, you have "in Carlo

Febri js Scudo di Chriſto, and in' Agrip- Lib. r. de

pa: © We have elſewhere che power of Occulr.Phil.

theſe kinds of Charafers, advanced.

Neither ſhall I ſpeak at all of choſe |mages of Wax,

which Sorcerers are wont to baptize, in thename
of Beelzebub; theſe are Abominacions, which we
abhor, alcbough ler me te'] you by the way,thart che
greateſt part of choſe things our Demonographers
ſtuffe cheir writings withall, are no. hing but meer
Fables, as ridiculous as the Dreams of the Alcoran,
Our Diſcourſe ſhall only be, what natural Power,
Images, that are made under certaine Conſtellati-
ons, may have; baniſhing from hence all Operati-
ons of Demens,or Spirits,and all ſuperſtitious powers
Whatever. - "2 I (hall

FS 1be Lemple of Wildome. Boogl
"I ha[] prove therefore this Power of Figures, and
Images, three manijier of waies:,by the mfluence
of the Stars : by the power of Refemblance; and
by Experience, »:{ fall begin with che aft of
; Firſt, then, ir is certain, and, we cannot, deny
x, without denying the moſt Aythencick Hiſtorio-
graphers thatarry: that there bave been ſeen, both
1m .qur dayjes,; zad.im:the daies of our Fathers, ſome
of theſe: Teleſms, , Taliſmanicall, Teleſmaticall or Fi-
 gures (for ſo we thall now call them) yer all, xs gue,
that have. cured thoſe, that have. been. bitten. by
Serpents, Scorpions, mad Dogs, and divers. oy:
Miſchafaces, that aje but coo frequene with us.,: The

»

bobatzen,\Haly Rhadpam, Albategiin's, Homar, Zachdir,
Hahemed and Serapips,give us many examples ofthis
kind; which gave Haly occaſien-to conclude, thar
Utilem fſerpentis imngiwem effici poſſe, quando Luna, Scr-
pentene Caleftem-juhit,' nut feligiter aſpicit : Simuliter
F$cor pionts effgrem e ficacem; quando Scorpij ſignum [una
mgreditur, &c, Neither aid he deliver this Noftrine,
withour having had Experience of the EffeQts : .for

tie afirmes, that himſelf, being in @zypt, had m _

his hand one of theſe Images of a Scorpion, which
&d cure thoſe that were ſtung by this Venomous
Beaft: and it was ingraven upon a Bazabar, or, as it
15 commonly called, a Bezer-ftone. It will be ab-
je&ed perhaps, char cheſe Arabians are trifling, vain
writers; and therefore that chere is Jiccle credic to
be given co them. ' But I (hall elſewhere undertake
the Vindication of them from this Calumny 3 and
ſhall ar preſenc, for the ſatisfa&ion of Selt-willed
inens forbear co cite them any further; but ſball

content myſelfwith examples borrowed from ſuch
LE 2 : To 6 | E214 | among

Andient Arabians; a, Almanſor, Meſſabala, Zabel, Al.

|
|
|
I
b

FDaik no TewplexfWikiome, - ng

mangetoanind and Latmnes;»as are! #coounced

maſk Huetierits \ paſa voi, of aunl nodgonst ty /

"ageniny add cs-aniinfmite mtnbevofRiacgities,” .
which he reporesdt Egypt,Gaies;thar when they were

ſomerime digging oy the bridgeat. ffamin/thote whs
found a. peice okdGopptr,>wherton was 06 bb ſeen
theFigure. ofa Bacy ofa Serpentz: and! df *a? Fire:
vahigh being afrerwards. neglotedy antperidven-
rs Ficher braken co:pieves; : oc fone way ether
ſpoiled, there, was obſerved} ma very ſlorttiocar-
rex, great number of Serpents,and Rats to/hnunc
the Gity, audthey do: grcacly annoy ic filly and
we ganngs, :withovirgriet, cHiivmind, the:many
greanhafles the Cirghach-{moocthartime efidured
by .Fixe.: . a, whictulad:accidemenere: revertheard
at thexte heforaths caking up of this ſtrange Plate of

CORREFS ly (302T 34 (44) atiak 9133 74 Ts 1) 194 TE

1,45 $9: alſo reportody; rhatrefrepichar- -Cambercilh;4,

Mahomwetcheſrcondbad pollefiddliim- /£4:20;;
(elf+ of (Con/deutrnoplys. che -breawing of - (ſh RAW) \
the lawer:; Jam a Brarcn Sorpent; watrhiecaufe of

 theincreafingzof Ferpents: inghoſe Parry. 2Sd erue

itissFhat chaſe Teleſwrnrs have Puerto divert many
of, «hale. ;Calamines, that afliat Mankind; And
whokpows not; that by rhe miewns of 1th
Learned. men dftheBgespifiotiate: vfi &chas
cedaway Infeevucofrheis Civies, auld fields! us
Cxnatss, Locuds,angd Caretpillars>- ſoil 33$3 01 5:5
any defire coleteſome'of thekEranie epi y;' 6: 85.
ples :;he may>have recontieirs:the aa. 2-250.
Chiliagh- ot Jekit: Tyetges 3 'wherenhiy! 0 ot 5150
(Greeek Auchor; : fwhotived: abour the rimebfehar
exgallent Hiftorian dms Comma; dauphcer-tothe
Emperqur 4leains Cynmmenw) reports; eliat Hpaliowine,
by making a Teleſmax of a Sto k,kept thicfe Promble-

«i: H 4 ſome

a —_—_— ,pugangy _ — ——
290. © The Temple of Wiſdome. Root TE

ſome bards from comming: into Conftentineſe ; ' and
by anocher Teleſman, he drove away; all the'Gnaty'
. qutof:Atfiech- :You may alſo ſce:-Piodemies Coniho.
quivw, and the Conimentary of: Xhre Gefer, falſely
- attribured co Hef, as jtis obſerved by Sceliger,'
Furthermore, .1:amrof: Qpiniong that cheFirſt
gods of..the Latines,, which they called ' Averrunci,
or Dj, Tmtelares, werenb other rherccheſe Taliſman-
cal Jmaagesy :and I.ground this, my Conjefure- from
hence,i that''there are (ome Hiftogiarts rhac affirm,
that-they made ſomenf thefe/Tuvelar 'gods,. nnder
certain Conſtellations: but the poyſon of Idolatry
havinginfeRted thebeſt of Sciences,'was the cauſe,
thac, theſe: Images being afrerwerds taken- for gode,
theeruec and legirrmate.mannieriof-makins them wis
ſmatbered, and quite loſt:++: Fhey were worit'#lfo
to ſet up ſome of theſe Teleſmans upon the Prow. of
their Ships,copreſervethbens from Shipwreck: and
all rhis-to. be done; Naturally. coo y>-fteing that's
Teleſman may be made, under theSignof Pifdet that
may; forfomecertaig;tume, render theWarers'cdlm;

' and free from Tempeſts. -The Greeks, (as:Heſ-
chiuey Herodotws, called theſe FiguiresJſer up it Ships,
wareric.z; a wordy.o:doubr, borrowed. from: the
Hebren- I mn PHin, which Gienities as dich
as Caletwre ; and thereforeghie Chaldie Paraphraſc
renders it;by chisour WD Ted Ghmis "Now we
are to.take notice, thittheſc Figures were nor at all
of anyHumanec forni;hur of fomeCtrleltial Figure,or
othecz which congemes me mn theBelief, cthac chey
were real Teleſwaxs, '-Neverthelefs che Mariners had
alſo'their Statues of ome Deity od other, as 'of Mars,
A pole, 4 mulls, Mer FLEY;. and the. like Z ;which cheyp) a=
ced atthe-Poop;con; hinder partiof their Ships:

wheagg rg” faigs,,. 01 Lo nnd to - |
< 143 —< & | . Aurato

Book I The Temple of Wiſdome.
> Anrano fulgebat Apolline puppis,
And Perfins : oy

= - Facet ipfe ip Littore, & un
Ingenter de" puppe Det,” So :

# + @& # 4#

Which gaye occaſion to the Poets to feign, that Tw-
pitey ſtole away Exropa, "under the hays of a Bull;
becauſe the Ship of the Cretians, who ftole her away,
had, for it's Teleſmen, the Figure of the Caleſtia
Sign Taitrw;and for it*sDeity,a Statue of Jupiter, The
like Original mighr, probably, chat other Fable of
Ganimed have had 3 whois ſaid to have been carried
away by an'Eagle,rheBird proper co the ſame God.
Yon may ſee further, concerning this. particular,
in Sextus Pompeius, lib. de Europe, and LaGantins, lib.de
Falſa Religionz, This, cuſtome of Mariners ſetting
up of thefe Teleſmans, 'or Images, in their Veſſels, a-
painſt Shipwracks, is ſo Ancient, that they ſay, that
among riofe.thar came wich ZEreer from Troy, there
ws onithar had the Figure of two Lyons : that the
Gadarentr had one, with the Jmage of aHorle; and
that the Ship of Alexendiis, which Sc. Paulfailedin,
had theTmages of Caff and Pollux, or, according to
the Arabian,” the Genahi graved on it: and that
whictr cirried Hippocrates, when Ke rook his journey
ro Abders, for the curitigef Democritus, barc the Fi-
gure of the Sun. Now 211 rheſe Teleſmans were not
made ſo 'mach'for the avoiding of Shipwrack only,
as fortheturning away of ſome other Diſaſtrons AC-
cidencs, or the procuring of ſome good fortune, or
other: - And'from thin praiſe of the Ancients have
the Chriſfians cake” Example, though in a.Chrj-

Ran way, of having Tmages in their Yeſlcls, and
PiBurhtly in then,” the! Saints . whoſe names they
| ear, DE” t- ; . o NO ” _

Bur

and Ships, but alſoin the pla

open helds.co0:and

ic may be, thatthat Srone ſo much famed among

che Turks , which chey call. Breden, and is ſet up

af Meche, being foure Ang: and two foot broad
e

*

as Suidas reports, was only a Teleſman., For. other-

. wiſe we mult eyen content our {elyes with Turkiſh

Fables, ari« be eve, that it would never have been

os or prized by them, bur for that it Terved in-
ead ©

bis Maid Hager: For bcfides.chat,this is ridiculous,

ny Fa. ea t.they.are ſo
much delighten in being called, arafins. Orkers lay
thac the reaſon why the Tur

'nolired upon carth as a Koddeſs, for baving very

\ration, that Sunday is with us :*and thatif! memory
= | of

a bed to Abraham, when he had knowledg of

BoqKk,l. The Temple of Wiſdome. 123
of this Stafr, whictratt rhe Afiev+worthipped, the
ridges of their Houſes, and tops of their Temples
were adorned with licthe Creſcents, as onrs are with
Croſſes. Now it cannot bechought, that chis ſtone
wasonly a bare, ſimple Image, ere&ed in honour of
Venus; for, beſides, that. ir was placed in the open
Fields, and not within any Temple; it had thar
Vertue, which no other Image of this goddeſs ever
had. Forir drave away, ſaith Zechder, all Veno-
mous Beaſts, and rendered all'the neighbourtng
Fields both happy, . and fruicful : which is ſo farg
from being gbſervedin them at this day, that,* on
the contrary, they are all utterly barren, And this
agrees excellently well with the' Nature of thefe
[eleſmans, whoſe Operation laſteth but for ſome
certaine ſpace of time, as Albertus Megnus affures us,

No# lategt was, Caith' lie, quod ficut virtutes Natxrales
perduxant in quodam tempore, &# non ultrz; 'ita etiameſt
de virtagibus as rag .* Non enim influit alique virtus
de cab, niſi quedam tempyre periodi;, poſted caſſa & inu-
ti! "TOP Fes frig 4 O& mortua, Fit hec eſt cauſa,
quare gueden Inagines nomoperentur hoc tempore, quod
fecerunt zempore encigip, ,from the diverſity of Ooh
nons, cqncerning this Teleſmanicel Stone, it may be M7
Judged, how many Fabutons Stories have been rai- Wy
ſed couching choſe Artificial Images 4 as namely, of *
thoſe which were called Srotygid Fer, which
were broken to pieces by the Latines, at their
entring into Cor/tartinople:ofthe Palladinm,of which
there ace ſo many Wonders reported, aud which
perhaps was nothing elſe but a Teleſmas : of thoſe
Images of che Amorbites, which, as Philo Fudeus ye-
ports, were called Nympha ſacra, which ſhewed to
their ſlaves hourely, whatſoever they.were rodo;
and which being ac laſt quite decayed, an Ang

tac

o

a}
4

ccomleſs Pit. And having lighted on ſome of

ſceing chem to. have ſuch Admirable, Strange Ver-
 rues mthem; being unable ro $pprevend ' the rea-
ſon of theſe things, they preſently betook them-
ſelyes to Admiration.
4 x Crucians uſually propoſe to themſelves, what

er to chaſe away ſome hurtful Beaſts.; or, to al-
and Haile 3 co cure certain Diſcaſes, and the like,
Th.s being firſt propoſed, they then ſearch after the
means, that may be prone For the accaining of the
End propoſed: as,

or example, for che Cure of the

10 Moifture : they are therefore not to. cake any
matter indifferently, for co. ingrave, and forme,

under ſuch and ſnch Conſtellations ; bur it muſt be
fomething, that 1s of a ſubſkancenacurally hoc and

ſome fign chat 1s likewiſe hb. and dry ; as Aris, for
inftance. In the Third place,” they muft'make

je&; ſuch as Seturne is ſaid tobe: bur there being
needalſo of ſome Star that is very moiſt, (to the
end that Sympathy, which is'ſo powerful in all
things, may aſſiſt alſo in this particular; ) chey may
take the Moon in her Wane. For, as the curing of
the bicing ofa Viper, they mixe ſome of ies fleſh,
with the Antidote; in like manner, for the expel-
| ling of theſe wateriſh hamors, we muſt make uſe of
that Star, which” bach che greateſt affinity with che
waters, You muſt alſo obſerye the Sign, __
"J2% relaces

The Temple of Wiſdome. _ Book 1.
the Lord, (ſeeing they could neirher be broken to
ieces, nor burnt in the Fire) took, and caft into a

theſe Images, that had been ma REI, end

& chey would have theſe Images produce; whe-

"lay the violence of Winds, , to hag Lighenings,.
c
Drophie, ic is to be conſidered, that che Diſeale con-

dry. Secondly, they mulf rake, for the Aſcendent,

choyce of ſome Star, to which this Maladyis ſub-

a - IT a PY — FARE Fm Yy 2 tl on;

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome: 25

relates to the part of the body that is ill-afteQed :
and thisis the Counſel of a learned Phylitian, who
ſaies, chat; Oportet Medicum abſque defeQu ſcire, ubi
caude Nracons fit in bomine, ubi Aries, ubi Axis Polares,
ubi fit lines Meridionalis,,. ubi ('riens, ubiOccidens, 8c.
Now that the Signes have more Agreemenc wich,
and bave ſtronger influence upon one parc of the
body, thei another ; we are certainly caughc by
dayly Experience, in the curing of Wounds. We
muſtalſo have regard, ific be poffible, roche Stars
to which the Sick perſon is ſubje&-: and then inthe
Laft place, we muſt above all chmgs take care to be=
gin our W-.rk, under ſome certain AſpeRts, which
are only uſeful in the Operation, ſome for to ſhed
cheir Influences with more heat,or cold, and others,
With leſs, as occaſion ſhall require, So that all
things being thus diligently obſerveds the Beames
of the'Stars, finding a Figure aptly diſpoſed forthe
receiving them, do make ſuch an Impreſſion in ic,
by the Reſemblance and Harmony that they there
fi1.j, as chat being once taken in, they do after-
wards Operate on that, which they find ro ve ſembl-
able.. In all the other operations, chey proceede
afcer the ſame manner : as, for Example, to chaſe
away Scorpions out of any place, they cake theſign,
with which chey have ſome Correſpondence ; ſuch
as is the fign Scorpio : then do they cake ſome Malig-
nant ſtar, which is Adverſe to them ; it being not
ſoneceflary to obſerve fo many rules in Beaſts, and
other Irrational Creatures, as in Men, Now when
the Figure of a Scorpion is thus prepared, the living
Scorvions feeling naturally che Offenfave Influence,
wherewith the lmage is indued ; they preſently a»
voidthe place, for their own preſervation ; orelſe,
ifthey be too .nearic, they preſencly dye, If it be
Eo Oo thoughc

. :
's, : :
: :
y bs ”
| .
{ -
J
;
bl
*y

:
| ' 1
:
' |
, |

. &
gige 2 I bt at -
ns ana, Hd NIE IE << RN» Oe rr ee eee oe «

126 | TheTempleof Wildome. Boox 1.

choughr by any a hard ching to conceive, 'how theſe
Fving Creatures ſhould have any ſenſe 'of this in-
fluence; lecrhEm bur confider; tharrthere are fome
Petfons that bear foftrange z hatred to Cats, 'br o-
ther like Beaſts, ' as thar if chiere be any within the

, and trembling, although they fee chem
not. Irs __—_— alſo, that there is a certain herb,
irar Cats will ſcent, at a very great diftance: inſo-
much, rhac ifone lay it uponthe top of a'Houle, or
m'd Chamber, you ſhall have them come ftom very
far, 'to cumble; and roule themſelves on ic, | Many
ehitigs are defivertd by the Narturalifts, which are in
2ppearatrice, mich more Incredible then rheſe.

*" And now it is no hard matter to conceive; how
the Power of Teleſmens comes' art this day to! be (©
andervalueds for thoſe that have writcen of this
fubje&, have mixed fo many, both confuſed, and
dangerous things rogerher im their writings; chat
people making no diftin&ion at all terwik? che wbod
and the bad, doequally abhor all, whatſoever bears
bur the very name of Figure, "or Teleſmer. /Buc we
fhall, in che proſecution of chis'diſcourle, 'fever the
__ good Com fromthe Darnel;' atid ſhall ſhew, char,
inche making'of cheſe Fignres, all words arc ifdif-
ferenc ; and thac chey ſerve but ro amnſe the lim-
pr fort of people. As, 'when Albinus Villanovenſis
ares, that for ro tare the Tertian, ard Quartan
ABne, the pain ofthe Nerves, Ventricle, and Privy
patr, you muſt grave rhe Image of a Scorpion upon
2 piece of Gold, or Silver, when the Sm is in his
- proper Honſe, and the Moor in Capricorne : and
WThile'yon are praving ir, you mutt ſay rheſe words:
Exmrge Domine, gloria mea; Exurge Pſalterium, & Ci-
thera ; *exurgaw' dilucule; and then rehearſe this

a Palme;

Houſe where they are, they do preſently fall into a

Pe Wo. fs Temple of Wifdome, 7

Pfalme Miſerere mai Dew, miſerere ' wei; quia it te
it antinea mee. 1fromence it's, thar ſo many
ſuperſtitions have fprunge; (and - char e art
length begun 'croundertake che cu Difcaſed
perfons,- meerly by! thei-bare Receiring of cerraim
Words zwithour' any Fears had OY
or any thing eWe.” 7G
We confeſs, that te living Scorpion Bar
Exempred from Celeſtial Verrue ; { wr thae, if
be applied © the Wound; it careeh i it, as wellas it's
Felefmanical [mage : fo-dooh rhe Crocodile, che Rar,
the Toad, the'Dog, andthe Viperalfo, And if in
alt the reft of living Crearures, we find nor: che fame
effe&t ; it isracher for want of ſearching after ic,chen
any defe&t'i in. Nature : feemyg chat thoſe, thar are
moſt Killed m the wonderfull Works of God, do
certainly afſure us, that. where ever,any Diſeaſe s
found, there alfo is che Remedy co BE had. And
who would ever! have Fares, that che Graveh,
which is found in Ulrme, thould ferve for a Remedy
againſt -the Scone ? and a.world of orher the like
ſecrers there are,whicharedaily broug:e colighe.Bur
it may here'be demandeds Why chewtſhould norehe
Stars commuunicace'; the: Verrue' of enving aws
Scorpions; as well wo VEE Scorpion, as to1t's
Image #1 1
TIT anſwee; thae P TRIBE FI Natnce ſhould then
make warre againſt ir felf,and ſhould-urterly deftray
wtelf in s ſhorr time 3; ſeeing that att living Crea-
tures. would ſoon be daftroyed by one 2ncthes,
Moſt wifely'gherefore was'ir ordered, thac che flars
only, and\Men, 1hould Rave: chis Vertne COM mum”
cated unto them:
_ The anſmwerot Der, to the Reaſ6ns broughe by

Cajetan,”. TT a eng For, whereas the wor
(2)

W.--

=

x23 The Templeof Wiſdome, © Book 1-

wo.

Frhele ſaies: th Figures be not the be»

ginging, and Cauſe of Operatipn, yet ic may ope-

race very much : ſecing chat. we ma obſerve que of

experience, that the Figure.of afoul, deformed

man, ſtrikes us with a kind.,of ſadneſs; . whereas a

Beautiful works in us, an «fe quite contrary, Be-

fides, Beautiful Objefs do ſo move us, - as that we

love them ;3- which foule,and Ii-favoured do nor at

all: Thereforeſaith Powponetize, Figures have ſome

Pawer to Operate. Delria'anfwers nothing to this,

but only to the Conſequence; denying that Magi-

call Figurcs are Beautiful, or Deformed, But,even_

Children may eafily perceive, that his Antecedent

z« utterly falſe, For, thoſe Figures, highhe calls

Magical, and we Teleſmenical, are truly, and really,

Beautiful,, or Deformed, according as the-things

are, which.+ y repreſent ,: which are, for the moſt

part,the Hens, and che Stars; che Beaucy where- |

of raviſheth Our Senſes. , Beſides, theſe Figures do . | :

ordinarily repreſent ſome Conftellation or other ; |

as the Virgin, the Twins, and the reft. \, Now if a

living Virgin,” and living Twins, are Beautiful, or

Deformed:;-.why then ſhnuld nor their Figures, or ,

PiRures be ſoco0? Let us now proceed to the Argu- || ©

ments of Cajetar, which Delrio refutes with as liccle t
Reaſon, as he hath done thoſe of Fomponatims. f
1” This learned Cardinal then layes down this moſt | P
True, and Powerful Conclufion, in favour of Teleſ-
maenical Figures. Fignra licet non fit ipſum principium
Operationts, eff tamen Conprincipiunm, He proves the

- Antecedent: quiz in ertificum inftrumegtis efficit Fi-
gnre, ut ille fic, wel fic operentur ; tum quia ferrum latum
ſuper aquas fertur, quod fi in formam aliam contrabas,

* etur, Theſe reaſons of his are ſoftrong, and

'ſocertain, as that it is impoſſible co overthrow them
of .- Fors

—

*

—— —

Ls

Book I.
For, ſeeing chac a Place of Iron that is Large, ' and

very Thin, will ſwim upon the water; but if you

reduce it intoa round (olid form, ic finks prefently:
18 it nor evident, that this proceeds meerly from the
Figure? Whac manner of Spiric muſt he be of, that
dares affirm the contrary; unleſs it be one that
- meansto ſay, however, as Delrio ſajes; whoſe An-

ſwer you have in cheſe words, Reſpondeo, Figurane
eſſe Conprincipium in motu locali, & Operationmbus que per
bunc motum fiunt ; ut ſunt varie divifiones continui per
dolabram, per malleum, per aſciam, per ſerram; non very
in Operatiqnibus que fiunt per alterationew. | cannot
but wonder, that this Acute Jeſuite, who hath ſhews-
ed himſelf in, other things, a moſt Learned, and
Sound Philoſopher, fo thac he comes not ſhort of

any in the whole ſociety, ſhould ſo groſly offend _

- here, againſt choſe very Philoſophical Maximes,
which himſelf hath laid down, For, where he
grants, that Figure is a Co-principle in Local Moti-
on, and in the Operations which this Motion pro-
duceth 3 bur not in thoſe which are cauſed by Alte-
ration; he concludes againſt that, which himſelf
had before laid down; ſeeing that, according to the
common Conſent of all pr regs vn hear is cauſed
by Motion, but heat is a kind of Alteracion : There-
fore the Figure is, of it ſelf, a Co-Principle in che 0+
perations which are cauſed by Alteration. |
Again, when he grants to Cajeten, that a Large
iece of [ron may perhaps (ſwim upon the water, yer
e (aics, that it is not by reaſon of the Figure, bur
of the Quantity : theſe are his words. Sed eſto, fiat 3
erit, non ratioxe Figure, ſed ratione Quantitatis, Well,
bur of ic ſelf, and in (ound Philotophyz @uantires
noneft aFive ; Seethen what the conſequence muſt
de, And inthe end, when Cajetax concludes, that

- FR | IC

The Temple of Wiſdome. 159 |

= - n_— DEGREE. » > A

4 te « J : ——

aa _ 4 _ 4

f n . >

” : j

| 120 'S em Hdome 2 þ
- . OY

- _ *& + . ————
G ——

_ xe1sthe +rgure, therefore that makes a large piece of
Jron:to ſwamh apon the Warer 3 Delrio anſwers, 'that
 . this Figureſy@nly accidental * for, faith he, let this
\ Large, thin piece of Icon be reduced into ſome o-
ther Figure, cicher Citcular, Square, of five angled,
it will do the ſame : that is ro ſay, it will fill ſwim
upon the water : therefore the figure operares nor,
but by accident; But here Del:ie deceives himlelfe :
for Cajetan's purpoſe is not to oppoſe one flar figure,
or, as the Mathemaricians ſpeak, In Plem, againſt
another flat figure, cicher Square, or Circular? bur
. a plaine, flac Figure, againſta folidone. For a flac
Figure, wherher it be Square, Circular, Oftogonal,
or of what faſhion ſoever it be, will do that, which
che ſame figure, if it be fold, will not dos which is
moſt true ſecing that a piece of Iron thar'is ſquare;
and thick withall, finkes preſencly tothe bottom of
the water ; which the ſame piece of fron wonld not
do, were it ſquare, and very thin ; it is therefore a
moſt undeniable Maxime, that Figure hath ſome po-
ver to Qperare. | .
Other Obije&ions which are made again{Pthe po-
wer of theſe Images, are ſet down, and refuted by
| _ Gglcottw,DeDodrina promiſe.c.24.the moſt weighty of
F# wifich, aretheſe following.

4. - Inizheſe Images which are ingraved on Gold, for
- **rhe Cote of the *tone, and the pain in the Reins,
? the Goldwgtits own Nature cannot work this Cure ;

mnch leſs thefican che Iminge; which being wichoar- .
life, cannot by any mean® alter the Gold, and
change itinto another Natnre. Befides,in the [mage
there is found neither aQion, nor paſſion : again, the
. Gold of it ſe}fe;whetherir be figured, or nor, is ſtill
of che fame Sprcies ; and conſequently the beams of
the Scars. muſt alwayes work upen it, afcer one __
ed u the

> *

\

Book L. "The Temple

- FE Xt =vY a Ku.
\ FOI Om ———_ F
F
; : »
F*
by

the fame manner: andific ſhould work rather upon

Gold which is i fGgured, then ypon that which is
lain z this Adtion would ſeem to proceeds.
rom the Ele&ion' of the Heavens, then

other cauſe. In a word, the Vertue which is attri= -

bured to this Figure, can. neither be Natural, nor

, Artifictal : Not Natural; becauſe ic proceeds from

/ within : much lefs.is it Artificial ; becauſe it is noc

communicated unto it by che Arctificer: it muſt

therefore neceflarily proceed from fame ather

Cauſe.

The Learned anſwer of Gelcottus to theſe ObjeRi-
ons 18 this.
eur, neo
fio interventt, mec ab Artifice visille ſanandi datur, nec
Imago, ut Imiago, quicyuam Efficit, 8c, ſed principinns
Afronis ac Paſſions affert, ut B,. Thomas, Maguuſque

Albertts teſtampicr, non ut Figura, & Imago, Mathema-
tice autmadverſa ; ſed ut efficit alizne in re figurata pr e-
parationem, que Celeftens atitonem ſine difficultate varijs
-modis accipiat.
comes co paſs, that among the diverſe kinds of Fjs
gures thatare under the Heavens;ſome are more ag-
tirally apr to receive the influences,then others are;
He brings ini the ſame inftance of Looking-gleſſes ;
among which thoſe thart are - hollow, receive the
beams of che Sun, in ſo full a meaſure, as thac chey
. burne ; and others receive chem ſcarcely at all. So
- | © Y the diverficy of Hills, and Vallies, is the cauſe of a
orearer either hear, or coldneſs, We may alſohere
add an inſtance in pieces of lce, which che Sun can-
nor (6 eaſily melc and diffoive, if chey be plajn, and
ſmooth z but very eafily, if chey be uneven, and
rough, Which hath given accafian to ſome to ſap,
that painted figures ane” nothing ſo proyer to
2

rather
any

%

Ngn Enim in hac re mutatio ſpeciet requiri-
ct#s erri mmutatur. nec ulla Celorum Ele-

And afterwards explaining, how it

ſubje&

-

I, F $25 4
(NE Ing Os
o

133 TheTempleof Wiſdome. Bael.

ſabje&' we treat of, 'as Graven, ant Carved are :
which 'is* mot-crue.- * As for Gold, although the
figure change nor the Species of it 5 yer notwithſtan-
dingir renders ic'ttiore Ape, and proper forſuch an
aQion : 'as wacer, eold, and hor, 'though it be ſtill
the ſame Species, yee'the' one will boy] our meat,
when the other will nor, Which makes Galeottus
to'conclude, intheſe termes : Requiritar ergo, in u-
nix &- ejufdem ſpecict rebus, certum Culture tempera-
mentum, ut varietur effetim. $5
Ic hath alſo been objected, againſt Fraxciſcus Rutue,
who undertook the defence of this Kind of Sculp-
ture, after Galeottas, that if it be duced with ſuck
wonderful Vertues,Man's workmanſhip ſheuld chen
have more power, then God's: feeing that che
Graved Figure of a Lion ſhould be able cocure the
Pain of theReins; which a living-Lion- could nor
do." To this he anſwers,and chat very pertinently,
that, that whiel-WMari does; is as: well the work of
God, as thae which Cod himſelf cloes; ſeeing that
weac but his inftyumentcs; and thac all our Aſtions,
according to the-Apoſtle, are in him, and depend
on him. Beſides, we (omtimes ſee, that that which
« W#h been compolea by man, proves to be of grea-
cer vercue, then thac which God hath (imply crea-
ted :as, for Example, Treacle is of more Soveraigne
Vercue againſt Poyfon, then any fimple, thac che

%

"Naturaliſts have yer found out, ++

"parts of thelearning of the Ancienrs, bave obſerved,
_ thar there 1s nothing that is more abſurd,in-Appea-
Tence,then the figures ofcheCeleſtialConfiellations.
: What a confuſed thing is ir-{ſap they) chat in choſe
- Places, which are deſt:ned co be the place of abode
" for the bleſled Spirics only,” there-jhould be lodged

=o Ar ane.
ow a=
I ere

' - Tho e,who have —_— examined the choiceſt

|

Book I. The Templeof Wiſdome. © 133

ſuch- numbers of Beaſts;and,fome of them ſadread-
full, as chat we cannor chink of chem, bur with:
boxrour 2 If chey hac placed onely men there, and
had allotted aCaſter, and a Pollux, Dominionthere;
this might have been interpreted an Error of Love;
which ſuffergus nor co be content, in wiſhing (mall
Honours to thoſe we Love. | This confidetation
mighc alſo have. ſatisfied thoſe, who comptained,
thac the Celeſtial figures were nothing elſe, but the
repreſentations of che ſeveral (capes of Fupiter, an4
that the whole face of the Heavens was filled, with
the notes of his inceſtuous pranks : ſo that if any
one ſhould undertake to excuſe cheſeAmorous figns,
be woujd be the lefſe blame worthy; inthac he did
it, only in defenceof the moſt ſweet, and powerful
of all our paſſions. The excuſe of thoſe, who im-
poled upon thele incorruptible bodies,the figures of
bruit beaſts, that are moſt ſubjeQ to corruption,and
even ofthings inanimate alſo, was moſt juſt, ſeeing _Þ
that, in ſo doing, they had no other defign, but
what was Religious. Thns we ſee Fiſhes there,Cen»- Wh
cers, and eares of Corn in a Virgins hand; And, ©
thaſe-who are xkilled in the ſecrets of the Ancient
Theology , know well enough , that it was not
without ſome Myſticall reaſon, that they placed
one Crown inthe ſouth parc of Heaven, conſiſting
of thirceen bright Starrs, and another in che nor-
chern pact, containing eight Starrs init, But to
place Dragons there, and Serpents, and Hydra's;
reaſon can never endure, And yer, ſcethe ſtrang-
neſle of the things! For though the Ancients had
thus filled che Heavens wich bruit Beaſts; and thar
according to this their Do&rine, one would have
imagined this CZzleſtial Paradiſe to have been, an
habication of. Mouſters, and a dreagdfull Wilderneſs,
I 4 rather

at

: s 6 * 5 b
Z 2
Fs Py
mn 4
= z
. s
2 -
%
't
"4 «i

. ; ,

| rather then the Seat of the Bleffed, and a place a-

og with all manner of pleaſures; yer not-
wichſanging, neither had the Church even repro-
ved 32, nor any of the antient Fathers diſavowed
3t. Now thefubje& we treat of, is mych leſſe ſcan-
dalous 3. and by conſequence more tderable. ' For
what danger can there be in affirming; that the di-
ce Egares of the Rtarrs repreſent. and make up,
e different charafters of the Hebrew Alphaber #
And that as theſe Letcers have ſome fignification
When chey are fingle,as wel as when they are joyncd
with others: in like manner the Srarrs, cither alone
or joyned with other Starrs, do note unto us ſome
nilteries? Yea rather this Do&rine ofaurs,is ſo farc
om being ſuch,as men ſhould beware of, and hold
t Cuſpeted; as that on the contrary, it teachech
the many wonderfull chings of God; and proveth
that all theſe Starrs have not their Ocder beſtowed
on them in vain 3 and that cheir motions and dif-
ferencly Aſpe&s are nor utterly uſeleffe, and with-
out, any defign. Inſo much, chart in my opinion,
it would be no lefle then Blafphemy in any man co
m che contrary; orto fay, that they are only
Placed there, onely for ornament and to beautifie.
the heavens, and cogive light; and for no other
cauſe ac all. Butwhac madnefle. is it to confine
theſe wonderful lights to one onely opperation; ſee-
10g thac, befides chat experience teacheth us, chat
the Moon is the Governels of all Humours; the Sun
the principle of life;Saturn Zarel and Carcer, a Ma-
lignanc Starr; Jupiter, x'Benign; rhe fign of Tanrus
cold and dry ; that of Gemini hot and moift; Aries
' ©. ©, hotand dry; and fo ofthe reft : we
x * > ._ doalfofeedaily by that one and the
. "*, ſame fimple bere below , —___ -
— | OO ng, diverſe

:H
F "Es ae

Book I. The Temple of VViſdome. 135

diperſe and ſundry] properties of opperations: and
therefore, if the Herbs. are not rcftrained to the
narrow limits of one ſole effe&; why
ſhould we think fo unwcrthily of the

Stars as not tO believe the ſame ofchem * *

and their figures. Weconclude there- w
fore, that beſides thole wonderful * *
Qualities which we acknowledg to be *
in them; they may alſo ds 6 by :

their diverficy of Aſpe&s, cercain F1-
gures, ar Chara&ers by which we may haveſome
apprehenſion of che greaceſt changes chav happen
here below. And this cruth we will now endeavour
co prove, out of the Holy Scriptures. |

If then we can any where finde, in theſe Holy
Scriptures, that the Heavens have been called by
the Holy Ghoſt, « Book; then doubtlefie we may
conclude, that there are in this Book
Letters and Characters, which may * *
be underſtood by ſome or other. Now & =*
chat itiscalled a Book, appears out "
of the Prophet Iſaiab, who ſpeaking * *
of the laſt day, whercin all things
ſhall ceaſe,Iſe.34.4. 27 DBM WDbaD yan he ſaith
Complicabuntur, ficut Liber, Celi: where the 5 Capb,
in Hebrew, which che Latine tranſlateth, Sicut, fig-
nifieth-in che original], ©uzz. So that as 1/a;eb hath
ſaid, tbat the Heavens ſhall be rolled tngecber; ſo
hath he at the ſamecime, given the reaſon ofit alſo;
Becauſe they are a Book, If it be objeRed, that 5 may
fignifie Sicut as well; I anſwer, that thoſe that are
but meanly verſed in the Holy Scriptures, know
well, that chis Latine word, is notalwayes a note of
Similitude, Fai ſumus Sicut Conſolati : (was the
ſong of the people returning our of Captivity ;) 2s

. | Men

ET CC Ce enero cod. poo
X 2 | by: >5f = Su Eoo—.. o, an
\ n36 The TempleofWiſdome. Book 1.
| Men that are comforted; ſhall we conclude hence,rhike
they were norreally ſo? No, but this word $7cxr,
AS, is redundant in this place, and might as well
have been away. Solikewiſe in this paſſage; Tren-
fivimus Sicut per Ignem : and in many more the like,
therefore Complicabuntur Cali, Duia Liber ſunt. Bur
if it be ſtill objeRed, that for as much as 5 Caphlige
nifies ſomerimes ficut, in the Original; there is no
more reaſon, why it ſhould be rendred wiz, then
Sicut : and conſequently it will ſtill hold crue; thac
the Heavens are nota Book; bur are only as a Book.
To this ir may be anſwered,that the wholy Scripture
doth elſe wherefully, defide this controverfie; ſeeing
char, ſpeaking of the Heavens, it makes mention of
Lines and Letters which are words, that are moſt
properly , 'and effentiall ſpoken of a Book; and ma-
eth nouſe of che word Sicut, As, at all: which is
an infallible Argument, that theſe words, in the paſ.
ſage before cited, Conplicabuntur , SICUT Liber,
Cett, are not expreſſions of Similitude, Now that
the Scripture, ſpeaking of the Heavens, nameth ex-
preſl; theword LETTER, will appear out of the
very firſt verſe of the Bible; where che Hebrew text
Tuns thus. EIPDUT IR EIN M2 MR:
Bereſpith Bara Elobim Ft Haſchamaim: thatis to ſay,
inthe Beginning God created the LETTER, or CHA-
 RACTER. of the Heavens. For this is the meaning
ofche Hebrew word rg, Et; or rx Ao8, which fig-
nifieth a LETTER. And as for the word LINE,
we findeit much moreplainly ſer down in the 19.k/.
Perf. 4. In Onmem terram exivit Z)Þ Kevam, LIE-
= eo tne ach MO
' Tſhal) nor here enter. into any: tedious Viſpute,
wherher it be to be read ZOyÞ Kolam, Sonus cornum,
rather cher ExIIP Keavere, Lines corum;: and ſocon--
7 Ts | Es | ſequently

Book I. _ ' The Temple of Wiſdome. 137
ſequently, whether the pafſage cired by St. Pexl, our
of the incerpretation of the Seventy; be corrupted :
or elſe the Hebrew Text, In my Harmony of the
_ World, Book 2. I ſhew with Titelmanus, Bredembachiane,
Maſlvende, Mercerm, & Genebrard,that the places are
not at all corrupted, neither in the one nor in the
other :| bat char the Septuagint, 'and St. Paul had
regard to the Senſe of che words, rather then tothe
Leccer'; ſaying Sonus corum , to make it ſuit more
aptly wich the following words : Et in fines Orbis ter-
re verbs eorum : becauſe that che ſound, the Voice
and che Words do very handſomely accord and ſuir
together. We may addalſo, that they made uſe of
a ſublime and allegorical ſenſe of cheſe words, ap-
plying them to thepreaching of rhe Apoſtles. And
has St. Paul and the Septuagint, being fully recon-
ciled to the Hebrew Text; we may the more bold-
ly firike tothe Lercer, and read EINP Kaven, Li-
nee eorum; underflanding it ſpoken of the Starrs
which are ranged in the Heavens, after the man-
ner of Letters in a Book, , or upon a ſheet of Parch-
ment. | For which reaſon alſo , God is ſaid in the
holy Scriptures, to have ftretched our the Heavens
as a Skin , calling this Extenſion , g"Þ1 Rachie ;
from whence perhaps the Greeks might take their
*A06-, which fignifieth a Skin or Hide; it being
olt proper to a Skin, to be Extended, or Stretched -
forth. Now upon this Extenfion as upon a Skin, hath
God difpoſed,and ranged the Stars,in the manner
ofCharaQers;whereby as by aSacred Book,the won-
derful works of God are ſer forth, to all thoſe that.
know how to read them. Cali enarrant gloriam Dei ;
faith the Pſalmift, And here peradventure ſome
may (ay, that the wonderful works of God are ſer
forth by the Heavens, in their Prodigious Extent,
FS oy : Harmony,

233 The Templeof Wifome, Book I
Harmoey, Brightneſs, Qrder, and admirable moti=
on; and not by way of any #riting. Buc R.Moſes,
a very learned. Jew, -aflureth.ys, that the Db Sa-
bx, to' Declere, or Sect forth, is never attribuced eo
hings Inanimare; ſo that from hence he con-

cludes, that the Heavens are not without ſame ſou}, .
as we have proved in gar Herawny of the World; which +
is no other, then. that of thoſe Bleſſed Incelligences, .;

who have the Condu of the Stars, and. diſpoſe

them into ſuch Letters as God hath ordained ; de-

claring unto us men, by means of this Friting, what
Evears we are to- expedt. And forthis —_ chis
ſame Writing 1s called by all the Ancients , 219
D12y9D7M Chetah bamelachim, that is to ſay, The Hf ri-
ting of the Angels, And that this paſſage, Cali enor-
rant gloriam Dei , is clearly meant ;of this Celeftict
Writing, appears by the wordsimmediately follow-
mg ; In omen terram exivit Lines corum. I know very
well, that according to St. Pex, and the Septuagint,
a man may underftaud,by the Heavens, the Apoſtles;
or, as ſome others will have it, the Prophets. Bur,if
purſuing rhe Allegory , a man ſhould rake occafion
co deny the Lireral Senſe; . this would be no (mall

Crime, in the Judgment of the Fachers, Scripture

Verbs, faies the whole School, Propris accipienda ſunt,
quando nibil inde Abſurds ſequi

cotheLercer oftheText, not only this Pafage alleae
ged but many others alſo, which I omic,that 1 may
comeco the Main Matter in hand, doe very m
conarmthis Writang. _ |
Now, as the Prophets have done before, ſo have
ali the Learaedamong the Ancienrs alſo,after their
' Example, called the Heavens, SACRED BOQKS:
a6, emong the Jews, R Simeon Ben Focbgy, in the
Zehar , on the Sefion Temourab; which is the 25,
| | | | = Chapter

tur, Sothbar if we ſtick *

\

a mw wo ym my, @& A © MH way —, jay

oO = O_eoe = Wwe

w— 4

| nl

oP

43,- Bc»

x - A. > & —

* &

*%4 LS

Chapter of Exodws , Cifr. 305. where he ſpeaks ve
. RG of this Caleftiel Writing , though very _
# ſcurely ©. Ke. Abraham alſo, in his Fetfirdy og
the Creation,delivers many Myſteries qi
| terthem,R Moſes Agyptiue, Moſes Benton
. 4 Whahamgthe fon of Dur, his Contempormgy; Aber
PF Fſrz,0avid Chimchi, Fom Tof yankee dh, the
Son of Meir, Levi Ben-Gerſon, Chomer, Abarbanel, and
many others; : which I ſhall here omic, that I may
come to the Greeks, and Letixes, who will peradven-
eure be betrer received. ;
The Learned Origen, interpreting after his man+
"I * ner, thar is co ſay, Subcilly and Quaintly, chis Paſ-
ſfagein Geneſis, Et erunt wm Signa; aftirms, ( as heis
reported by Exſebixs,) chat the Stars were placed in
this Qrder in the Heavens, for no other end, but co
ſhew; by cheir diverſe Afpe&ts , ConjunQions and
Figures,whatever is cohappen, while the World in-
dures, as well in General,as in Particular : yet not
ſo,as if they were the Cauſe of all theſe things; ne-
ver any.ſuch ching came into the Thought,muchleſs
| mto the Writings, of this learned man. For, as the
Prophecies , that: are written in Books, are not the
Cauſe of thole Events, which they forecell ſhall hap-
|. pen; bur onely, the Signe; in like manner, (aich he,
may the Heavens very juſtly be called a Book,where-
in God hath wricten,all chat is, hath been,and here-
afrer ſhall be. And, for confirmation of this, be
citeth a paſſage out of a Book, the Ticie whereof is,
Nerratio Foſeph, a Book in his time highly cftteemed
by all men : Wherein the Patriarch Facob, giving
his-bleſſing co all-his Children, cells chem, T hat he
had readin the Tables of Heaven, all that ever was
to befall chem and their Poſterity. Legi, (aith he, iz
tabul is Gali, quecunque Contimgent Vobis, E RON.
48 TT : Whence

140 The Temple of Wiſdome. * Book 1.
Whence the ſame Origen concludes, as well in his
Trad on this Queſtion, Utrian ftelle aliquid agant 2 as
in his Bogk, De Feto,Cap. 6, that ſome Myſteries may.
Head in the Heavens ; by reaſon,that the
eapoſcd , and ordered there, in che form
rafters The Conclufon of this learned Fa-
cher is ſo mach the ſtronger, in char, where the vul-
gar Tranſlation reads, Sint in Signa, the Original He-
brew is, nnARy 171 vebazou leototh 3 thar is toſay,
word for word, Et fint ix Literss. T his Dof&rine is of
ſo great importance, as that Fulius Sirenus hath un-
dertaken the Defence of it ; and maintains, that ir
15a moſt True and Safe Opinion , and ſuch as hath
been entertained by moſt Religions men. Negque in
ellis corporidus Caleftibus , ({aith St. Auguſtine ) hic la-
fere poſſe cogitationes credendum eſt, quemadmodum in his
corporibug Latent ; ſed, ſicut nonnulli motus. animorum ap«
parent in vultu, &+ maxime in ocul;s ; fic in illa perſpicui-
rate ac ſimplicitate caleftium corporum, omnes omnino mo»
tw aximilatere non arbitror. | am not ignorant, chat
Pererizs endeavours to finde out another ſenſe, in
theſe words of St. Auguſtine : but it is an eaſie mat-
ter co ſay , what one pleaſeth, in interpreting the
words of a-man that is Dead, Now this Celeftiel
Reading may the more eaſily be believed co have
been che Reall meaning of chis Learned Father, ſee-
ing that many others of the Fathers have firongly
confirmed it : As, St Ambroſe and Proſper ; who call
the Heavens by the Epichecs of Pages, and wonder-
full Inſtruftions : Albertws Magnus ſtiles them, an V#-
verſall Book And Fobn Damaſcene goes yet farther,
and (ayes that they are Clear Merrours 3 intimating,
that we miay fee, diſtinaly There , even as far asro
the moſt ſecrer and weighrtieſt Worions of our Soul :

'which gave occaſion to St. Auguſtine to utter theſe
; | word?

Book t. The T emple of Wiſdome. 141

words, which we have before cited. All the Pla-
tonifts in_ a manner, were likewiſe of the ſame Per-
ſwafion 2 and this is the reaſon that Porphyrie aſſures
us, that when he had xeſolved to have killed him-
ſelfe, Plotinus, having read his Intention in the Stars
hindered him from doing it. Orphexs alſo had
knowledg of theſe Secrets, as appears by theſe verſes

of his :

- FL, En 10% & Exe9ts
Tatis ay a\axTIGIT ynuer eval Teiyuon. .

| Certus tuus Ords,
Immutabilibus mandatis, currit in Aſtris,

As for our modern Writere, it wonld even amaze

a man toconſider, that among ſuch infinite num-
bers of Books, wherewith our Libraries are ſtuffed,
there is hardly five, or fix tobe found, thar have:
raken any noticeat all, of this Wiſe piece of Antt-
quity, coneerning this Celeftial writing. | know ve-"
ry well, that ignorance will be preſently ready with
tis anſwer; that the vanity of the ſubje®, 1s the
reaſon of chis cheir Silence, Pur why chen have
ſuch an infinite number of other fooleries been
taken into conſideration, and thoughr a fit ſubje&
for theirlearned Pegs, which are a thouſand times
more Ridiculous in appearance, then this is? where-
as, on the contrary, there is no Aftrologer,ro whom
this Science is not neceſlary ; nor any ſearcher into
the choiſer picces of Theological antiquity, co whom
m like manner ic may not be uſeful ; if ar leaſt it be
true, Tam therefore apt to believe, chat the crue
reaſon is, the NegleR rather of the Oriental Lang-
uages; whereon theſe wiſe Secrets do ſo neceſlarily
depend

_ oa

142 TheTempleof Wiſdome: . - Book 1.
depend ; ascthar, withour the knowledge of them,
they cannot poſſibly be explained, or underftood :
inſomuch chat we had no notice at all of theſe Mi-
ſeries, till ſuch rimeas they were bronghr into Ex-
vope by thoſe men, that addifed themtetves to the

"ſtudy ofche Eaftern Languages. Capriio was the firſt, |

. . de Art. Cab, thac, inan age when Barbariſme reig-
ned, adveutured to make ſome of theſe choiſe dil-
coveries, Picus. Mirandule likewiſe, who was the
Phenix of the Age he lived in, took ſome pains in
ſearching into theſe Secrets; and alſo propoſed the
Queſtion in hand, ia theſe terms: Duet. 74. Utrian
in Cel ſint deſcripta, & fgnificata omnis, Ccuilibet ſcienti
legere : Famous Cornelius Agrippe Knight, alſo hath
delivered his opinion herein, Pierixs Valerian, in

bis Hieroplyphicks, hath theſe words, Occult. Phil,

Lib, gz. fol. 366.c. Ille Extenſio in modum pellis, tanquam
literis, inſcripte luminaribus, & ſtell;,dicitur Rakia, Oc.
Benelli, an Icalian, hath faid more to this purpoſe,
then. all che others, upon thoſe Words of St. Luke:
Gaudete, quod nomina veſtra ſcripts ſint in Celis, . Kun-
yath, in Ampbith, according to his uſual manner of
fooling, makes aRiddleof it;

In quo ſunt pueri quotquot in Orbe Viri,

It ſeems, thac theſe kind of Authors write to no
other end, but that they may not be underſtood:
by this means ſeeming to make war againſt Nature ;
which hach given us aTongue, and the uſeof ſpeech,
that mighc be able to expreſs our Conceptions :
whereas theſe men, on the contrary, endeavour to
be Obſcure, and Dark. Robert Flzd, in his Apology

For the Bretbren of the Roſie Croſs, hath gone on very

far with this Celeftial writing ; che CharaQers __
| O

8 — Ro 0% 190 hop 4 ns hy wy = oe, a. as i

_—

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 143
of he affirmes to be made, in the ſame manner chat
othets are, I Clo, Apologet. Ed. Lug. Bet. An.1617-
(faith he ) inſerts &* impreſſi bujuſmods ChareGeres, que
xon aliter ex fiellerum ordmibus conflantur, quary/nee
Geometrice, & Litere Vulgares, ex pundits; Superficies,
ex linets; & corpus, ex ſuperficiebus: ar-length conclu-
ding, that whoſois able to read theſe Charadters,
ſhalt know not only what ever isto come, bur alſo
all the Secrets of Philoſophy: Fol.62. Quibus bu”
modi lingua, & Scripture Arcang,Chare f-
forum cognitio 2 Deo canceſſa eft; bis etiam datuns erit,
veras rerum naturas, mutationes, aleratianes, & proprie-
tates fiderum, onmeſq; alias operationes & executiones, 0cu-
lis ris uluminatis legere, & legendo imelligere.

ut of all the Moderns, who have ſpoken of theſe
Celeſtial Chara&ers, Poftel! is the -only man, who

ſeemeth to have had the greateſt patty” chem3z
is Books; '

aS may appear,our of the greateſt part of
among which, that which he bath written upon the
Fetbſira, gives us an Account of what himſelfe had
experience of. $i dixero, me inCalo vidiſſe, in.ipſis
Lingue Sande CharaGteribus, ab Eſra primum publice
expoſitis ea omni que ſunt inrerum natura conjlitute ; ut
vidi,non explicite, ſed wmplicite ; vix ullus mihi crididertt :
ramen tejtzs Deus, & Chriſtus ejus, quis non mentior.
Now that which makes me believe, that this learned
man had ſome grounds of this his Confident afſu-
rance of having ſuch knowledg in the T_ of
Wifſdome, 15, that beſide the experience which pol-
fibly he might have had': he had often alſotravailed
in the Eaftcrn parts 3 where he had no doubt ſeen
the Books of the Arabians, which are all full of this
kind of Secret learning. And Fobn Leo, in his Hiſto-
ry of Africk, affirmeth, that, in Merocca, there is
nothing more common : and the firſt Book which
be

244 The Templeof Wildome. Book,

an Arabian, the Title whereof is, ELLIMAAE-
MOR AMITH : which Book ſcarce]y tregteth ofany
_ thingelſe ; andit reacheth particularly, how to deſ-
cribeull the Conſtellations in _Arabick Letrers, and
ro picture themElegantly within little Tables; ſuch
ds the Arabians Hermites do alwaies carry about
them, and have them ready for their Uſe, in apply-
img them to che Rules of their Zairagia, or Divina-
tion. And this confirms that which I ſhall bring
hereafcer, concerning the Mahometans ſearching af-
ter no other Figures in the Heavens, then in their
own Chara&ers, reading therein what ever 1s to
happen, in a very ſtrange, and unuſual! manner.
Whence the fore-mentioned Poftel/, upon the ſame
Book of the Creatzon, ſaich : Decreti itaque ſunt demum
delincati, ſuiſque figuris adumbrati igne divino'in aquis
Cali ſcilicet expreſſo ſanii Charatteres, & tanta virtute
in Celis refs; ut poſſit etiam veritas futurorum haberi :
cuſs ſcientie adbuc veſtigium in Marocho, et mult;z alijs
| Iſmaclitarum Civitatibus ; leczt int apud eos admodam
depravate, & adulterate figure Sante. I haveſome-
times thought, that chis Auchor put forth chis Book
of his De Confignratione Signorum Caleſtium, as a Pre-
pirative only, co make way for che berter entertai-
ning of this Do&rine, among th: Enropeans. For
having laewed, that all the Scars, inſtead of repre-
ſenting che Images of living Creatures, do no more
bur only make up certain ſquare Figures ; ir would
haye been no hard matter afterwards, to have per-
ſwaded men, char theſe Figures were notliing, but
Hebrew Letters, the figure whereof comes very near
co that ofa Square. For if he ſhould bave goneto
work otherwiſe, and ſhould have endeavoured to

have put theſe Celeſtial Letters upon the world,
without

ds

he makes mention of, is a Book written. by Elbori,

_— 4”
FI ts. Datta... ts.

* withour any Preparing of mens Minds to receive
« them 3 he wauld doubtleſs have been taken for an
Impoſtor. And he bad been formerly ſufficiently
cried down 3 {o that he needed not to have expoſed
 hiewſelf a new, to the Calumny of every black
Tongue, by broaching new Propoſitions 3 which he
could never think would down with chem, unleſs he
had firſt prepared their Pallacs co relliſh chem. AF.
cer the world bad once been ſatisfied in the Proba-*
bility of rhis his Do&rine, he then intended to make
a full diſcovery of all theſe Secrets, in his commen=
taries upon the Zohar : wherein he had layed toge=
ther (uch Variety of Occulc learning, as himſelf wit-
nefleth wa divers places of his Priuted Books, as that
;X was not without reaſon that he ſo earneſtly comes
mended chis moſt Excelleac Piece to the World,
mhis Laſt Will and Teftament, wriccgen with his
own thand. Buc fince | have here made mention
both of Hebrew, and of ArabickLetrers ; it may very,
well be doubred; which of che two, this Celeftiall
writivig.is exprefied in ;-and which of theſe Langua-
ges theſe Lecters makeup. This doube Ks aa
chink tit ro decide, before | go any further. ,,
The 1ſmaelites, ar Arabiars, who have never want-
ted -mien; that have been very well $kjlled in all
manner of choile learniing,(chough they have fallen
ſometimes upon Ridiculous, tudes alſo: being
moved wich a vaine glorious delire of conceng
thiscruth z namely char cheir Language depende
upon the Hebrew ;z have nor only altered ther Chas
raters; which were before very like ro che Hebrew
buc have alſo adulteraced theic Names : andthe
'berter co covertheir knavery, have alſo added cer-
tain [.ecrers: which the Hebrew Alphaber never
kaew: as4heir Sfx, Dſal, Thſds, or Tſe, &c. In-
| RK fomuch

246 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 1. -

ſomnch that a certain Learned man, that was very
well skjlted in their Language, ſaies : Poſtel, de Phan.
Chor. Avabes, verſutifimum hominum genus, &- plan;
Iſmaeliticam, id eſt, terinum, poſiquans Cognoverunt ,
ſuas Litteras ortum ducere ab Hebraicz ; ſatagerunt non
tantum abſolute diſtmiles forma redde, ſed ordinem tian
turbare, &+ nominum bonam partem mutare ſiudurunt.

\ They have had the confidence alſo to affirme, that
theirLetcers are the firſt that ever were; and that
if there be any Myſteries tobe found, either in the
fignification. or Figure of CharaRters; weare to
look for them no where elſe, but in cheir | anguage.
For which cauſe, interpreting their Alphaber, they
deduce, from the firſt letter, which is ALIPH,
this Verb Conjungere: from the ſecond Lecter,which
1s B A, this word, Ine: from T A, thethird Let-
ter, Producere : and foof the reſt: making up a
Prayer out of it, which they ſay, no other Alphabet
js able to ſhew. So that itis no marvel, that they
areable to produce ſo many feveral meanings of
words, after this rate of Interpretation; ſeeing that,
as Kirftenius (aich 3 Integra Volemins de fo'is Nominibus
literariuw Alphabeti. Arabici Confice queunt : ſed longs ad-
buc plura de ordine, figura alijſque accidentibus c.nſcribi
Foſſemt: Theſe Niceties have made the Arebtiars ſo
ſuperſtitious in che Pronunciation of their Lecrers,
as thar when they meet with many words united
together by the means of an Aliph, they will pro-
nounce them all in-a breath, though there ſhoald
be an bundred of them, and though they ſhould
be in danger of expiring in the A&. Thoſe chat are
defirous after ſatisfation herein, may have recourſe
to the Arabick Grammer,Printed in Rowe, Now, as all
ſuperſtition is attended on, by a certaine fooliſh Cree

dulity 3 ſo are theſe men certainly perſwaded, _
| che

q

= T+ ore Tt oo

_ comparing, bur che ny Hbs, with the Hebrew
3

Book I, The Temple of VViſdome. 147
the Heavens being figured wich their Letters, (and
noe with the Hebrew, } buc the Alphehet of Heaven,
ſee the third Book which doth Pr ew all chings
to come. . And this is the 1eaſon, that, teſides che
divifion_ of their lecters into Guttwralls, or, ſuch ag

repronounced in the Throat; intoV/nales as the

mes call chem, thac are ſounded in the furtheſt

art of the Roofe of the Mouth ;. as othersare by che
Palate 3 by che Gums 3 by the Lips; by the Teeth,
and the. Tongue cogethersz andalſo into ſome, that
are fronounced with a kind of Sibilation ; others,
wich a certain Rammering; and ſome, tvich a gentle
turnmg of the Tongue, which they call D/algietus ;
and the Lacines Flexe:, into others agen, that are
ſhort; long; radica!, or trahcal, and (ervile : I. y,
that beſides all theſe divifions, chey do yer divide
them againe, (che better to accommodate them to
this Celeſtial writing) into Schemfyun, and Kumrijun,
that is to ſay, inco Solar, and Lunar, which are
particularly known; by thoſe that obſcrve the Rules
of the Zeiragie, it being unlatful for them to deviſe
them; And pechaps it is in Obſervation to this

 Doftrine, .that the Mebometans do never begin to

wrice the firſt patt of a word, at the end of. a line,
and the reſt ofic at the begirining of the next line
asthe Greekes, and Letines uſe ro do : but if che ſpace
be not ſufficient to hold che whole word, they draw
a ſtroak from the laſt Letter of che laſt word, to.the
end ofthe line. Now we affirme; that though theſe

ters are very much alcered, and corrupted ; yet
may it noewichſtending very cafily be diſcovered,by
the Figure of 4 great number of chem, chat they
have beentaken from the Hebrew : and even Chil» -
dren may be able to judge of che eruth hereof, by

Hs

/

»
- _—_— —— . Sb”... ono. 44 -— wo Hoe At nl tir. Ammon ——

C—————_— 1 7 Ol PA Foam,
145 The Temiplevf Wifdonie. Book 4.
He; the Cha,with the Cheth; the'R#, with rhe Reſch ;
che Ziais, wich the Zr; 'the Six, with the Schin;
the The, with 'the Teth;; che Hin, wich the Mobin;
the Phe, wichthie Pez 'the Capb, ' with the Cab, 'the
Lam, 'wich the Lawid; the Van, with the Vs, &c.
So'thar coriſequiencly, if we are © ſearch ufreriany
#259 ih theſe Lecrers, ic ought to be, -notine
= Copy; btic rather in- theOrigimbl 'The
five 1s tobe faidbF the Santaritene Charadters alſo,
which re correapred 'from'the Hebrew : and 'this is
ſo cerrainie a'eruch, as that ir'is a Point of infinice
preverfetiefs ro'offerto doubrof its as) have proved
eſſe-Wherc in'the'Hvl Guitle, ©. | COT,
The Reaſviis broilghe by che*Frbiopions, or Boyp-
tiars in the betid?F of their Lerters, is 'nor' fo eculily
Unfwwered, us choſe of the XFrabiarncs,: and Samaritans:
for'as raiich as theirPerrer being only Hiereglyphicks
expriffinig the figyie' Fun Oxe, of u Horſe, 'ofa'Lion,
WING of Henk Eagle 2 Tf here wo - df 6-
Therliving'Cretdi&;rhey 40 (ſay they) repreſerit;
intheHezveris, Whatfoever hy ts =. afs in chig
World. « Ahd therefore,” if there be any thing ro bell
'reat thereabave, by Means df rhe Stars; we mult
:read itin cheſ©Fiadg lypbicks; and fri chis Banguage,
' (nd'nocinany ther; fAncethat in Ancient 'times
3n ftetd of Letters, tfiey'made fe of the fipares of
'Niving Creatures, as we have fd'in' vur Preface ro
"*Fhis'Book. Torthis it is'ahfweret, 'as we havefor-
"merly ſaid, thac theſe living-Creactives have been
Tepreſented m rhe Heavens, oily by reafon ofa cer-
'tain'Correſpondeiicy, titarthe-Sears of whrich theſe
'coniſtellations confit, ' are ' 6bſetved to have, with
Theſe fiving Creaturesupon'theEarth-; att whar 6-
"ther Reaſons of irſbever'aregiven, they zrencither
Vain, "wor fooliſh,” Such aviare thoſe, alleadged >

Book I. . The Temple of Wiſdome. 149
the aforenamed Lazaro Banells; who accommodares
the properties of theſe Celeſtial Animals, to ſeveral
Kingdomes, Over whick they rule > as for example,
che Conſtellation of Aries rules over France, Germany,
Syria, Paleſiina minor, Suevia, and the Upper Sileſia ;
as yon may read in our firſt Book: ' That of 'Tawras
governs Perfie, the }ſks of the Archipelago,” Cyprus,
che Maricine parts of Aſie Minor, Polonia major, Kuſfie
alba, Switzerlend, 'the Countrey of the Rhetres, Fran-
coxie, Ireland, Lorraine, and part of Swathland, Bur,
to leave this Italian to pleaſe himſelf with theſe
eruths, as onr Engliſh Aſtrologers do in their Nativi-
ties; and likewiſe Cel:loq. Mor, Albertus de Marcheſijs
de Cottignola, a Franciſcan Fryer, who moralizeth
chis y after a way of his own; we affirme, that
all theſe Celcſtial living Creatures fignifie no more
then what we have faid before; and do therefore by
the fame reaſon conclude, acording tothe judgmenc
.8 oftheRabins, that we muſt ſearchafter cheſe miſte-

g ries and heavenly writing and theirCharaQers,made
' up by the divecſedifſpolition of the'Stars, and only
WE in the Hebrew; and conſequenely,no Signification in
'F any other Language, but in the Holy Language: ic
being moſt proper, that that Language, which was
; the firſt in che whole World, and which was ſpoken
f by God himſelf, ſhonld give us notice above, what
of thingsare hereafcertocome Fopyls 3. ſeeing it bath
n informed us here below, namely in the holy Scrip-
"nf tures, of all things that arepaſt.” And this concius
i} - fion is a moſt crue one, fay the ſame Rabbins, for
ic as much as in a clear, bright nighr, a man may ſee
< in the Heavens all the Hebrew CharaRers perfefaly
= 6gured :- which one cannot do of thoſe. ſeveral h-

V TY © WW OS Wo þ of —_2
*

ny ving Creatures, that are placed there; ſeeing that
7 the Imagination cannot be any whit ſatisfied, when,

K 3 for

2350 The Temple of Wikdome. Book *[.
for example, in che Scars that make up the Conſtel-
lation of Aries, there are hve other to be ſee

» Cloſeabouric, which by reaſon thar they are

» * * qptcampriſed within the Figureof this Beaft,
'* _ do difturbche Fancy, and hinder ic from ma-

* king up the Figure it deſires, The ſame alſo may
ſaid of Tawray ;\ for there are Eleveri Stars tobe

ſeen there, which arc efſencially of this Conftellagi-
on z and yetarenar brought in, in the Pifturc of ir,

' » S$@likewiſciacthe Conſtellation of Gemini there

&* *-. arg Scars belonging to it, which are diftingui-

* * ſhed from thoſe Nineteen, thar repreſenc the

* Figure of this Sign : as Caxcer alſo hach four
«& * brightStars, which lie looſe from thoſe nine,
| which make up the Image of this living Crea-
* * cure.” Butas forthe Hebrey lJecters, there is
.* nothing fo hjnder us, from finding them
* deiftinaly deſcribed: andif any onedochance
x * to find ether Frebicke, or Seamaritexe Letters

P

there; this isftill bur co perurne bark tothe OQrigi-

pal. . from whence they wete caken.

© Firſt then we are cp take nocice, that the Stars

. which make yp theſe Letters, 'arg not diſpoſed into
the order they appearin, ar all adyentures, nor in
any confuſed way as they ſeem ro.us co be: bur are
placed chus, with ſome Dehga, and in'4 divine Or-
der; God having made all chings in full Perfe&ion.
Thoſe that underſtand nor the Play of Cheſſe, ſeeing
the pieces ſtand hereand chere, ſo confuſedly, will
Le apt to think, no doubr, char chey ſtand-in that
confuſed manner by meer hap hazard, fceing thar
jn ſome places rhere area greac many; and ifi fome,
very few 3 and pong hde of the Chefle-board is full;
and the other fidequite bare, and in a third place
perhaps z0u ſhall have bur eno,qrthree : In'«wocd>

Seagate | this

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 154
chis difference in the placing of the pieces 1s (o
great, as that he will certainly conclude, that the
whole bufine(s is clearly without any deligne ac all -
notwithſtanding thac they areall ranked in very ex=

aQ order; and that there is not theleaſt piece there, '
bur is of uſe, and dorh irs properoffice. Afﬀrerthe
ſame manner is it with che Scars, which we ſec in
che Heavens : for, though in ſome places you ſee
many together,and in others bur a few;zand chat the
order they ftand in, looks confuſedly,and in a man-
ner rediculous ; yer nevertheleſs 1s ic moſt admire
able, in ir ſelf, and proceeds from ſome moſt won-

derful defigne ; which choſe men perfealy under- = If

ſtand, who by chis holy Life, are clevaced above all
that is here below. Thus ir is ſtoried of Se. Anthony,
chat he perfe&ly undcrftood this Heavenly Writing,
which we catughec before.

Secondly, that although the Stars which arein
the eighth Heaven(ifar lealt there be any (ſuch thing
as an eighth Heaven,) be fixed ; yet do they noc
cherefore alwayes compoſe the ſame letters; at leaſt, .
che greateſt part of themz bur they have cheig
changes, according to the diverſe Alpes of the
Planers, Thus thoſe Scars, that ten years ſince,
made up, forExample, a Teth, ſhall now perhaps
makea Mem, ora Lemed. Which is the reaſon, ſay
the Rebbins, char this Writing ſerves not, but forthe
ſhewing of thing tocome. And by.this writing w
cold Major Revel, Captain Hul, ani Major Malbrac,
when Oliver Cromwell would dic, and when the King
would come inte England; and all this was forecold

four years before ic came to paſs, beiides we did
forerell the particular day, when theſe changes
would be, =

In che third place chey ſay, thac we arc moſt c(pe+
; K 4 _ _ cially

#523 1he [emple of Wiſdome. Bookt.
cially coobſerve what new Stars ſoever ſhall .ppear;
becauſe chat theſe do fore-ſhew che greateſt Mutati-
ons : God making uſe of theſe, in making up, by
means of their Alpes, and Conjun&ions, New
Letters; whereby he either exprefſech unto us bis
wrath, or his mercy : as having determined with
himſelf, co chaſtife us, if we continue in our fins
and to pardon us, if we repent of them. Fhus,

| before almoſt all the greateſt Mutations, that bave
happened inthe world, have ſome of theſe new ſtars
been obſerved to appear; and they have been ſuch
Stars too, as have been really found to be in the
very Heavens. Such as was that, obſerved by Hip-
perchw, 1 _ years before the time af our Redemp-
tion 3 Which Star preſaged the end of che Greczon

Monarchy approaching. Another the hike appeared

alſo in Claudearn's time, in the year of qur Sevioar

Chriſt 388. Another in the time of Meſſabaleb, Haly,

and Albumazar, Arabian, Aſtrologers z which appea-

red in the 35.Degree of Scorpio, and caſt forth as greag

a lighc, as che Fourth parr of the Moon could do. A-

gocher, in rhe time of the Emperour Adrian; and

another alſo under the Emperour Otho; which ap-
peared berwixc che rwo Conſtellations of Cepheic,
and Cejjoperizx. Anotherin the year 2264. not far
from Cajjopeia, tending rowards the North : and
Another likewiſe char appeared afterwards, on the

Chaire of the ſame TIA, <p abour the begin-

ning of December, Axno 15972. and'continued forthe

pace of fix monechs. Another, that appeared An-

#0 1596. ir the.Conftellation of the.}/hals : ano-

ether, ofthe third Magnitude, obſerved-in the Neck

of che Swan, Anxo 1 609.'and another, that was (een,
twoyears after, in Piſces Another, thar appeared

two years afeer that, . in:che M_—_

: | YE, EXPER

Book I. ibeTempleof \Vildome. 153.
Serpentarizs, An. 1604, and was called by the nawe
of era Par” of kong There are (ome others
beſides, which Licetws, De Nov. Aftr, & Com. l.5. 2
Cp. 6. 4d. 23: harh colle&ed together, out of Homer,
Varro, St. Auguſiime, Pliny, umazer, Pherecides,
Athen as, this, Germanicus, ( yprienns, Leovitiue,
Cardan, Paulus Hajazelins, Galilew, Thomas Fienus,
Cuſpinianus, Tycho Brahe, Gul, Fanſonius, who was his
Scholler,, Jo.Kepler, Alpbetragizs, David Chytreus,
Fabricixe, Hieronymuc Munofuus, Wenceſlaus Pantaleo,
Beyerus, Pyrgins, Michael Coignetus, Cornelius Frangipa-
nus, &6. ſome of which Auchors have particularly
obl(erved thetruth of this Pofrine which we have
here delivered ; namely. char-all choſe new Scars
have been the Fore-runner of che greateſt Muta-
tions that have happened : and. that. in defaulc
of rheſe, Comets haye appeared ; which, chough
they are ecabily diſtinguiſbed from true Stars, and
have their place of being inthe Aire only ; yer have
they ſerved co.repreſent, by their diverſe Aſpedts,
. (according to the Doftrine of the Rabbines, ) Other
Letters, and to foreſhew the Diſaſters that have
happened : ir being very neceſiary (ſay they) to

have a ſpecial regard to theſenew lights; which are . (&&

as a new Letter, which being added toe word, al-
rers the ſenſe of it, As, for Example, inchis word
AKE, if one add anL, it will be no longer AKE,
bue LAKE. Or ifin the mjddeſt of this word .
AKE, oneinſert an R, it will alter the ward, and
makeit ARKE. So that weſce, one only Lecter,
as an L, oran R, utterly changech the whole Senfe.
In che ſame manner is it with che Sears; where a new
Scar -addes » Varieth both the writing, and the
- ache fourth place, that we may beable perfeſhy,

«A.

Ee Ee ahh | |
154 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book I,
ly counderſtand this Celeftiel Writing, we muſt ex-
aQly obſerve che vertical Scars ; for, thoſe which are
over a Kingdome, faith Abinder,do ordinarily ſhew,
what ever is like to befall it. And in this ſenſe, ir
will not be any hard matcer to apprehend the mez-
ning of Cardex, when he ſaies, ſpeaking of che Star
in the Tail of Urſe Major, thac it hath foreſhewed
the changes of all the Great Empires: underftan-
ding this to be the ſenſe of this Truch, delivered by
Caraan ; that, according to the Doarine here laid
down, this Sear, though not Alone, and by it ſelf,
yec joyned with orhers, hach ſhewed theſe changes
making. up, by their ConjunQion, ſuch Entire
words, mw bo ws gr —_ os or riſe — _ Em-
ires, either clearly, and plainly; or elſe 2
2 10. ſecreely, an Myftictlly, 6 we (hall Aga Rs.
afrer, Now, as in all ſorts of Writing, there is one
certain. Letrer, both in Nounes and Verbs, which is
more frequent then _ other,and hath che Pre-
minence throughour all the ſeveral Conjug ations, and
Declenfions; in the like manner in- this Celeſtial wri-
fing, it hath been obſerved, char in all che Macati-
ons of Empires, this Scar, in the Taile of che afore-
Cid Conſtellation, hath been more eminencly noced
then any other: Eicher becauſe ir is more frequent,
m the diſcourſe of Monarchies, then any other : Oc
elſe, thar it is asthe Capiral leccer, in the moſt figni-
Gcarive wordsz as we ſee chere is in all proper
Names, of almoſt all che Languages in che World :
as for example, in che name of Heydox, the firſt letter
is greater, then any of the reſt char follow. And
chus may we anſwer this queſtion, which ſome may
© * - happily make; namely, Why, in this Celeftial wr-
ting, there are both liccle, and great Scars alſo ? IE
it be further demandedyz Why, in this kind of he

A. ai Mr OE CITES
-

ti.

Book L The Temple of Wiſdome. 2 5 S

ting, there are, in one and the ſame word, great,
and ſmal Lerters, or Scars, mingled together? Ic
way be anſwered, that the Reaſon is, to makeus
take more norice of thoſe letters in the word, which
are the moſt fignificativez which is 'a courſe, thac
che ſnegremmatiſts are very well acquainred withe
all. As, for example, if. 1n the word Sopergignty,
1 worfld have VERITY, to be eſpecially ob-
ſerved,” I will wrice the word Sqvereignty, in this
manner, ſoVERalIgnTY : where che letcers of the
Word VERITY, are greater, then any of the reſt.
Or ifthe word Repreſentative, | wonld have, Preſept,
to be chiefly taken notice of, I would chen wrice the
whole word thus,” rePRESENTative. We are noc
then to wayder, if in the Heavens we often ſee two,
or three great Srars co go to the Compoticion of a
word, wherein thereare {mal Stars alſo: and this
is that, which we are to have moſt particular regard
untQ, (as we have already ſhewed, when they are
Vertical to any place. And by this means may we
be able to give a Reaſon of char, which hath been
hicherto Unknown : as, when the Aftrologers affirm,
that when Caput Algol, or Meduſa's Head,

was Vertical co Greece ;zthe ftars did fore- with * *

ſhew the Calamicies, . Which aſterwards o «5
happened nnra it, by theTyranny of the « & "Y

=
ſon why :. no morethen they do of their Tu theFigure *

abometaxs z without giving us avy Rea- ”

Confidence, 1a aſſuring us, that the ſame
Conſtellation, which will in a hort time be Vere
tical to Frence alſo, fore-ſhews a ſtrange Deſolation,
that is to fall upon tharCountry. Now all cheſe
diſafters, though, according as they are foretold, ſo
do they certainly cometopaſs ; yet nevertheleſs is
the fore-ſeeing of them grofnded meerly upon Ex-
Þerience 5 neicher can the Authors of theſe Predi-

.*
v8.93z41F

256 The Templeof Wiſkdome. Book [,
| Rions, for the maſt part, give any other Reaſog of
them. But now, according tg this Doarine of ch

Celeſtial writing, we know, that, theſe Mutations
happen on the Earth, becauſe we ſee,they pre writ-
cen in the Heavens, And this is che Reaſon thar
K.Chower affirms, that the afareſaid Medvſe's Head,
or the ſtars that campole it, dig forerel the lamen-
table Deſolation of Greece, becauſe thac fiveof the
principal Vertical ſtars did for a good while toge-
ther, makeup this word, 27] Charah.
Which, in the ſecand .pa + Conjuga=

. Con, fignifies, Te be Deſelats: under-
Sanding chis, particylarly of Greefe, over which
theſe ftars ſhone; becau _H00 the number of
ReLewers, which arc, Fod, Vav, Nan, vg Much
ing put together, make up JV J£2 9, tnat 18 (Olay,
Greece, do yield the ſame — chat Cherab doth ;
as you may here ſee.
|

|
|

SH 12»
| g6n |

q"
Joven, 1

_ .* Greece.
| Sunn. 12. (

b . Tt Temple of Wiſdome. 157
According to theſe ptimrepics, any man may fore-
fee, -" vutting deJjevine che Stars of che:ſame
Conftellarion, the Diſafters char Frances threarned
with. However ite, Fwd aÞciett and a very excet-
tent Aﬀtrologer, is bold to ucter theſe words : Tit
ver(faith he,ſpeakingof thisMeduſſt's Hen das Sher,
Jo. de: Sacrobof. c.1. Totero wax; Apulize, &:Neapo-
lcanorum regno eft:veviioale'; ' woxqur Gallinm invadet :
Lopes ans quoque clatlem 'allanorumneſſt, marimopers off
-verensdum., Now howlong before hand, thefeCele-
ſtial Lercers do foreſhiw rhe changes thac arcs

ure

£

den. 3 no one Author, that Iknow of, hath
y determined : 'they'dnly fay, that before
Vertical, they do foreſhew thisehenge, «nd wharſo-
everiis © happen : Gvd being' willing chus to pre-
pare us for thte'Evits which are 'to- befall us, And
zfter chat they are preciſely Verrical, if our Repen-
tance hath yer foand any place in his Mercies;''He
then cavfeth —— and by-its n=
tervening;to ſhew (as we have formerly ſaid) a quice
contrary thing, ro whet wes beforefignified.

_ © In che fifth place, the fore-named anthogs affirm,
that cobeable perfe@ly 'co underſtand this 'Ceteftial
writing, 'we muſt know how co diſtinguiſhexu@ly,
which ftars are Oriental, and which Occidemal, Me-
ridional;'and Septemriaxal :; foraſmuckh as theſe quar-
ters ofthe Heaven'are very effencialin chiReading.
For, if any one deſire 'to' know, fay they, the good
Forcune, and Profperity ofa Kingdomne, or of any
other thing : he muſt chen read'thoſe Letters which
are Vertical to hym, (or which want not mnch of be-
ing ſo) from the Weſt, coward the Eaft. 'Andifhe
would be mformedof the Evil accidents, and nnf-
fortunes, that ſhall befal a place; tre muſt then be-
gin to rgad,. from the North, towards the Wet.
Y : | Now,

FI chings, andall perfe&ions, ſhoul

58 The Temple of Wiſdome, Book 4.

Now,why ta fortunesofaplace ſhould be read,
from. che Weſt, cowards'the Eaft, rather then from
the Eaſt, cowards the South: and why the ill fortune
is likewiſe co be read, froni the North, coward the
Weſt;I have not found any reaſon given by any Au-
thor. However, I ſhall advencure to give this conje:
&ucre ac it: namely,that ſeeing that Nature; beirig at
liberty, and not hindred by any thing, alwaies cen-
derh to the beft: and chat, as Ariftotle ſaith, Ic would
alwayes bring forth Males, as being more perfe&
creatures then females areaf it were not hindred by
ſome repugnant Cauſe: it. is moſt +. gona good
; be. read, from

the Weſt towards the Eaſt,ſceing that this is the free
and natural motion of the Sears; the other from
the Eaſt to the Weſt, beings contrary and forced
motion, As for ill fortune, and Diſaſters, they
might according co this principle, have been read
From the eaſt coward the weſt, had not the Qracle
which cannor lye, uttered this wonderful truth : £
Septemtrione pandetur malum, Jer.1. xg. Allevill
commegh from the North, But, why from che North
rather than from any other part ofthe world? The
reaſon of this is not fo eaſily given : yo I conceive
3e.would ſtand with ſound Phylofophy,; to anſwer;
that þy reaſon af the darknefſe and gloominefle of
the: Aire of thoſe parts;cauſed by che great diſtance
of the Sun; and alſo by reaſonof the evil fpirics,
which are the Authors of ſo much evils and which
inhabice darke places; a man may very reaſonably
ſey that all misfortunes come from the North; as
being a place, which is full of theſe evill ſpirics, or
Demons 3 as is teſtified in The Hermony of the World.
And from hence, it wilt bean eafie matter to ap-
prehend che reaſon, why che Ancients ny m
: cheſs

Boox I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 159
theſe Northern parts of the licaven ,: a Serpent
or Dragon, cloſe by the ewo Bearee, Vid Theodor.Gre-
 mineii Myft. Aquil. Seeing that theſe Creatures are
chertrue Hieroglyphicks of Tyrany, Violence, and
all manner of- Oppreſſion. And certainly, who
ever ſhall buc run over the Annals, will finde, that
all che great deſolationsthat have ever happened,
have come from the Northern Parts. The Afjri-
ans, or Chaldeans, ſet on by Nebuchadonoſor, and Sal-.
maneſar , have ſufficiently manifeſted che T ruth of
this, in burning toche ground a City,and a Temple,
that was both the moſt Sumptuous, and the moſt
holy in che world; and in the utcer ruine of a Peo»
ple; whom God himſelf bad taken inco his own ſpe-
cial proteQtion, and whole father he particularly
called himſelf. And hath not Rome, like a ſecond
Feruſalem, in like manner often felt the fury, of this
Accurſed Generation of the North; when -by the
cruelry of 4laricus, Genſericus, Totiles, and the reſt
of the Gotbick,, Hune, Vendale and Alane Princes,
It ſaw it alcersoverturned,its ſtately places burnt ts
aſhes , and ies inhabitanes conſumed by. fire and
ſword ! Thus hath nor this Nation ſpared+..at all
the ewo Spouſes of che Living Gods and doth fill
torment the latter oftheſe, by the Tyrany of the
Turks, which alſo came our of the North. Mcft
Fee therefore do we, in this Celeſtial Writing,
egin co read diſaſters, and misfortunes, from the
Northern part; ſceing chae A ſefptentrione pandetur
omne malum, as you mayread yn our Tables in The
Hermony of the or|d.Or elf we may ſay,that we begin
to read on this fide, becauſe that the Verb nnDn
Tipatach, which in this propheftee is cranſlated, Par-
detur, fignifieth alſo in the Originall Depingetur: So
that we may render this propheſte in theſe words : |

> CCI » —
260 The Templesf Wiidome:. Book T
Al! evills ſhall be deſcribed, (or written) from the Nor
wad. Andifwritcen, then certaialy to be. read
from ches fide. CEE: T | :
\ Now this Celefita! Writing doth not alwayes re-
preſent in Words ac length, what chings areto hap-
pen ; bur ſomerimesin a more compeudious mane:
ner, and 'by way of Abreviation': m_ like manner
as was that viſion, 'which ; appeared to Helſhezzar;
foreſhewing che deſtrugtion of his Kiagdome, and
which was mcerprecedby Dexc!: MANE, THECEL,
PHARES. . And as noacbur Dexzel, who was a ſult
Man mruhefeght of God,could interpretihis Vigon:
Intike manner, ſay che Jews, ir appertaineth only
to good men,and noc toall manner of perſons whac
ever, tomcerpret thoſeobings: in like anner ſay
the Jews, ic appertaineth only to gaod men, ani
nor to af{ mannerof pevſons whacſoever, tomter-
pret thoſe things, that are found Written inthe Hea-
wons and in Telofmes,''whoh-arc forthemoſt part very
obfcure-and Aiftcule; and which requige,. for. che
perfect interprecation of chem,chat a matiſhould be
skitfoll inthe GEOMANCY, NOTARICON, -2and
the TEMUR AH ; which are che three parts ofthe
Cabale, The firft of which (che flame whereof
AMNDAx Geomantria, 18. corrupted from the: Greek?
Teepsreie, Or clte this latter from cheorher;) conſt-
derech oFthe-numbers chat are comtainedin che
Letters; and 'by comparing them with others che
Irke, gives anexplication of what was before obſcure.
Asfor example, where its ſaid in Gengfes, concern-
ing the Comming ofthe Meſſies; ny my favs,
Schilo, Shileb ſhall come ; itheſe Hebrew \[;etters make
-up the number alſo of the Lereters of the Meſias

TWwL Mafſebich : :fo that:the Prophet ſaying, Deonec

vexerit Schiloh; it is as-much, as if he had ſaid ; Pv-
—_—

0 *- ky wy we

Book I. The Temple of VViſdome, I61
nec venerit Meſſias. The fecond parr, is of uſe, when
the ſeveral Letters ofa word do repreſent, each of
them a whole word : aSin this deviſe of the Romans 3
S. P. Q. R. Senatus populuſque Remanuws: and in this
Hebrew Name,,31& Adam;che firſt Letter whereof
fignifiech Ax Epher, Duft; che ſecond, ZI1 Dam,
blood; and che third, NAD Mag, Bitcernefſe: In-
timating that man is nothing but bijtrerhefſe and
ſorrow 3 but corrupt blood , and laftly, bur duſt
and aihes, becauſe he was made out of the bo-
dy of the lapſed Angels; The third and laſt part,
(che name whereof, Notaricon;is taken likewiſe From
che Latine, Notariws, or elſe this Latine word, from
the Hebrew Ana Natar, which fignifies , to Tranſ-
fer or Tranſpoſe a word,very proper to the Art of A-
nagrammatiſme;) is, when cicher two or more words -
are united together; orare read backwards or c-
therwiſe; after the thanner of Anagrams; or elſe are
divided into ſeveral other words, by the Tranſpo=
fition of the letrers: as for example, where God
ſaith tothe Children of Iſrael; P5Ay 1859 Tyv
Felec , Malachi, Lepanecha, My Angel ſhall go before you:
where it is demanded, what Angel this was ? and ic
1s anſwered, that it was Mzchael: becMiſe that the
| Lerters of the word Hw9 12) Malachi, Tran-
ſpoſed, make up that Namie Letitia . Purr, Le- x
titia Caput, Puella and Acquifiti You may =
ſee many examplesofthis Naturein my Har- X* *
meny of the World, and in my Holy Guide, *
11, We will now diſcover, according to their Ilt-
lers and Idea's laid down,ſfome certain ſecrets ofthe
Writing of Angels and Genii,which are delivered by
K. Kapol,Chomer,g A4biudan, Noble 4erippe which are
the four thar have wriccen the moſt of this Subje&t
ofany, Wehave formerly ſhewed, how che _
L 0

162
uf che conſtellation called Caput Algol, being Verti-

_ call eo Greece, did foreſhew the deſolatiqn of it. The
like We obſerved in the other Stars, when they were

Verticall cothis Kingdome, and forecotd Fobn Emp- .
ſon, Mr. Errington and Mr. Flud, that in 1660. The

King would again comeand enjoy his own the 2gth
- of May |

Thus alictle before the Temple of Jropoow was
buruc, and utterly conſumed by Na

moſt Vertical] to it, compoſed for a pretty while
cogether, theſe five Letters,

WO
IT LY e19 PP r

which being joyned cogether, made up-this word,

{(ceading it from the North toward the Weſt, ) Hi

ſchich ;- which fignifieth, to rejeft and forſake without ©
any mercy: and the number of three of them added.

together, amounterh to four hundred ewenty three,
which is the ſpace of time, that this ſtately piece
of Buildingshad ftood. In like manner, a lictle
before the Jews ſaw their Scepter caft down. to

the ground, and cheir liberty carried Captwe ,

11to baby/on, five Stars were, for along time toge-
ther, obſerved tocompole theſe Myſticall Letcers,
a word which ſignifi:ch Natg;

Break, Caſt Down, and to I AO = Dre

out. And the number

of years thatthe Fewiſp Kingdome had laſted from
Sanl co the Deplorable King Zedechias. 'Neitherare

the Fewes the only people, who have been advertil-

ed, by this Celeſtial Writing, of the miſeries ant
ET” To - were _

The Temple of Wiſdome. © Book 1 |

ucadnezar, it
was obſerved, that eleven of the Stars, that were the

*of the Monarchy of thy

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. | 163
were to befall them : But all the other Nations bf
the World might have read in the Heavens in like

manner;Me evils that have happened unto them

as we have proved. |

Thus the Perſiazs, or Afyrians, who were the rune
ſews, ſaw the Period of
at foure of their Vertical

their own'Empire, _

Stars had compoſed theſe 0 :
three Jetters, which'make ] h |
up the Number two hun- _n

dred and eight; which
was the time of the Duration of this Monarchy
which was founded by Cyrus. |
* The end of the Grecian Empire was likewiſe fore-
ſhewed, by foure Starrs, whic made
4 2co 8$Yo
up the Verb Parad; which fig-
nifieth, to E51 | Divide: andthat
in this won» derfull Manner ,
as that the very ſame Letters did produce alſo the
number of years that chis Monarchy laſted, which
ro0x beginning,at the time that Alexander the great
(ubdued the laſt Darizs. |
Thar of the Athenians laſted but 490. Fears; which
is the Number of theſe three letters, which foure
Stars, thav were vertical tO this place, did compoſe;
_ Tſarar, which fignifieth, 41-
7 'J guſtiis Aﬀici, Behdes theſe
| foure Scars, ſaith Kabbi Cho-
mer,there were four other obſerved alſo, which made

uprwoY 5 Caphs; I know not vhy,though ſaith he

unleſſe ic be, that theſe lecters are Fata)l, and of ſad

F Omer. | ſhall add my ConjeCtture here, that poſſi-*

bly they might point our theſe two names, Cecrops,
2 ang

-

——

164 * The Temple of Wiſdome. Book I.

— x - —
znd Codrwwhich are the names of thoſe rwo Kings
under whom this powerfull Monarchy had its riſe
and fai], |

The Rowan? Conſulate could not maintain its Pow-
er beyond the Term of 5049, years: becaute thar
theſe bounds were determinarely perfixed to it, in
this Fook of Angels by Eighe vercicall Stars, which

compoted this word , - " Raaſch
wrongs bear thisſenſe , Up, KN ] _
Mumber:Cacumen,co1 |

The Monarchy of Fulrws &ſar, which was built Up-
on the Ruine of the Eorſulate; as this alſo was,upon
the Ejetion of the Kings, was very neer of the ſame
Continuance; and the end of it was in like manner
prefixedby fix Stars » Which made up theſe Three

Lecters, Scavar, which figni-
fies , w 7 | £ OT Pre the Number
whereof {| IS 502,

Putthat we may produce ſomething, concerning
thing yet to Come, R.Chomer aſſures us,that itis now
a £cood while fince,that this Writings ofAngels hath
pointed out the declaring of wo great Empires of
the Eaſt. The firſt is, that of the Turks; over which

1here are obſerved (even ver.:ical Stars, which be-
189 read from the Weſt to the Eaſt, (forit would te
a great bleſſing, to ſee the ruine ofthis Empire, )
make up thisword, Caah; which fignifieth , robe

| Battered, Feeble, Langniſhing,

j 3-2 | and [ rawing to ax exd., Bu:

now {eeing it may be doubted at what time this Em-
pirelhall be reduced co this extremity; the ſamelet-
eers do clearly reſolve this doubr, For the middle
Jecter, Which is Aleph, Which it number ſigrifietb onr,
fi#2deth alſo for one thouſand, as the rejt of the letters bo Y |
| oty

CY

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. i695.
' doe, as may be obſerved out of Hebrew Grammers, Aleph,
' being made upof Brighter and more ſparkling ftars,
then the Others are, ſheweth ſaith Chomer, . that us
number is the greater; ſo that in this place it ſtan-
deth for one thouſand, and the firſt letter fignifeth
ewenty and the laſt ive. Sothat when this King»
dome hail have accompliſhed the number of 1025.
years, itihall then be overthrown and brought to
Ruine. Now if we reckon from the year of our
Lord 630. which was the year (according to our
Vulgar Compiration) wherein the Foundation of
this Empire was laid; weſhail inde, that it is to lat
cill che year of onrLord, 1554. for the compleating
_ of che aforeſaid number 1325, fo that reckoning
from this prefenc Fear 1659, this Kingdome 1s to
laſt but five years jonger.

The other Faftern Kingdoms, whoſe Declining is
poinred out by the Stars, according to Gaffere!, 1s
chat of China: bur this Author delivers bim(elf in
ſach an obſcure manner, in diſcourſing of this
of Anygels Writing; as rhat, rill I underſtand
ic betcer, I ſhall forbear to ſet ic down, / He pro-
duceih alſo diyerſe others, which doe dehne che
Particular Durations of moſt of the Kingdomes of
Exrope ; all which I may happily communicate ro M7
the World hereafter,when I have krit ſeen, how this Wa
Temple is affe&ed. EE 2

Now that | may freely deliver my own Ju 'gmen.
concerning this//r:ting of Angels,l mult cake liberty
to propole {ome few OQbjeHions, which,l have found
may be brought againſt it. |

The firſt is, char if ſo be, by this I/ritizg, all che
Great Mucations in the World may be known it is
poſſible then, that the End of the World may in like
manner be found put by it; as being the greateſ},

- LJ and

 .166 The Temple of Wiſdome. Bookl.

and moſt Importartr of all the reſt : ſothar men ma
by a natural means,atrainjrco the knowledge of this
great Secret: which is contrary to the Holy Scrip-
TUres. |
The ſecond is', that Aſtrologers have beenable
to foretell many of theſe Mutations, which have af-
terwards come to paſle accordingly 3 and yer have
never had any knowledge of this ſtrange kinde of
Writing : It isthecefore Uſeleſſe,and Imaginary,

The third is, that the polition ofthe Stars. is not
ſo efſential to the Letter,which itis brought to make
up ; -butthat che ſame Star may as well make, for
Example, a Reſch, as a Daleth; and fo of all the reſt;
and conſequently, ſeverall men forming ſeveral
CharaCers of the ſame Stars, may draw from: them
contrary ſenſes, the one tothe other.

But toall theſe objefions I anſwer briefly thus,
To the firſt [ ſay, that it is not neceflary, that this
IF riting of Angels ſhould foreſhew the end of the
World ; becauſethat God may have reſerved this
ſecret to himſelf: Or elle, that it would really fore-
eel! this hereafter; when thoſe other fignes, ſec down
by the Evangeliſts, ſhall ſhew ic alſo: it being all one
to ſay, that the Stars ſhall forſhew it by ſome cer-
tain Writing, asto ſay, that the Sun and the Moon
_ ſhall foretell it by their being darkned.

To rheſecondI anſwer; that the foure grand
cauſes, which (atcording to the opinion of the A-
Krologers) produce the greateſt Mutations; the firſt
whereofis, the changing of the Apogenm and Peri-
geum of the Planets: the ſecond, the changing of the
Excentricity ofthe Sun, of YVexus, of Mercury, of $4-
turn, of Fupiter and of Mars: the'third, thediverſe
figure of the obliquity of the Zodiackzand the fourth
the conjunAion , chiefly the Great one ) of the

, - ſuperiour .

Book I, The Temple of Wiſdome, 1 67

ſuperiour Planets: I fay, that all cheſe foure cau- .
ſes may for the moſt part, be comprized within this
Writing of Angels: that is to ſay, that it hath hapned
very often,that at what timechis Writing'of Angeis
did point out ſome great change, there was at the
ſame time alſo a ConjunCtion of the Superiour Pla-
nets, Saturn and Fapiter, or elſe, ſome one of the
three other forenamed cauſes. So that they,
not underſtanding any tning of this Writing of
Angels imputed thoſe changes which they
obſerved to come to paſs, to thoſe four Reaſors
only. ' But that it may clearly appear unto us, thar
theſe have not been the true cauſes of all rheſe
changes, we need but have recourſe to the Chro-
nologies, and Particular Annals of each ſeveral King-
dome, and compare them with the Aſtrological Ov»
ſervations ; and we ſhall finde, that the greateſt
part of all the grand Mutations have happened,
without any ConjunQion of the greater Planets, or
any of the other Cauſes before ſp=cified, So that
we muſt neceſſarily flye to ſome other more Certain
means, by which we may be able to foreknow, by
the Aſpeas, and motions of the Stars, all theſe k-
vents. Now this means can be no other, as it feem-
eth, to this writing of Angels and Genii,

Tothe third Objetion, which ſeemeth to have
the moſt weight in it, it may be anſwered, that it is
true indeed, that a Man may make a Reſch of the
ſame ſtar, that another man perhaps will make a
Daleth of : but in this, as in many oth:r things, we
are to follow the-Tradition of che Ancients, and to
reſt ſatisfied with what they have delivered unto us.
Ocherwiſe, there will not beany certainty at all, in
any one of the reſt of che Sciences; eſpecially in
Altrology : which requireth, that thoſe ffars which
+ compole

163 TheTemple of Wiſdome. Book 1.
compoſe, for example, the Conſtellation of Aries,
orthe Ramme, ſhould be deſcribed rather in the
figure of this Beaſt, then in that of an Oxe, or a Horſe;
and ſo inallthe reſt. So that who ever ſhauld re-
preſent che figure of a Bull, among the ſtars that
De to the Ramme 3 and the figure of a Ramye,
among thoſe of the Bul!; he would deſtroy the ve-
Ty Principles of Afﬀrology : notwithſtanding that
the ſtars of Taurus would as well bear the figure of a
Ramme, as of a Bull, In like manner, he that ſhould
make a RKeſchof ſucha ſtar, as he ſhould have made
a Daleth of; notwithſtanding that che ſtar would
bear it, yet would he overthrow the Principles of

<7 ay this writing of Angels and Geniti. -

If it be now demanded; who it 1s, that is to judge
of the vaſt number of new Letters that are made
daily, by the diverſe Aſpe&s of the Planets ? I an-
ſxer, that jt appertainerh ro thoſe Men, whoare
Piouſly, and Religicuſly verſed in this Angelicat
writing; and not to all kind of perſons indiffe-
rently. TO fo | :

CHArY. XXKRX.

Of the Sun, and Moon, ard their Teleſmaticall
| comſiderations : Beſure to let the Vigures of
Aſtromancy and Geomancy to be Fortunate.

He Sun, and Moon have obtained the admini-
[| firation or rnling of the Heavens, and all bodies
ander the Heavens.” ' The Sun is the Lord of all
Elementary vexrues; and the Moon by vertue go
LES , $+ RET TR WP I es hom un

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome, © 169

creaſe. Hence Albumaſar ſaith, that by the Sun and
Moon life is infuſed inco a}l things, which there-
fore Orpheus cals the enlivening eyes of the Heaven.

The Sun giveth lighe co all chings of ir felf, and.

gives it plentifully co all things, , not only in che

Heaven, Aire, but Earth and Deep : whatſoever good '

we haveas 7qmblicws ſaith, we have it from the Sun
alone, or from it through other things. Heraclitas
cals the Sun the fountain of Celeſtial light, and ma-
ny. of the Platoriſts placed the Soul of the World
chiefly in the Sun, as that which filling che whole
Globe of the Sun doth ſend forth its rayes on all
ſides, asit were a ſpiritthrough all things, diftribu-
ting life, ſenſe and motion to the very Univerſe.
Hence the ancient Naturalifts called che Sun the
very heart of heaven ; and the Caldeaxs pur it as the
middle of Planers:The Egyp:ians alſo placeditin the
middle of the warld, viz. berwixt the two fives of
the world, e. 4. above the Sun they place five Planets,
and under the Sun, the Moon and four Elements.
For it is amongſt the other ſtars the image & ſtatue
of the great Prince of both worlds, viz. Terreſtiall
and Celeftial ; the crue light, and the moſt exa&

image of God himſelf ; whoſe Eflence reſembles the .

Father, light the Son, hear the Holy Ghoſt. So
that the Platoniſts have nothing to hold forth the
divine eſſence more manifeſtly by, chen this. So
great is the conſonancy of it ro God, that Flatocals
icthe conſpicuous Son of God, .and Tamblicy ca!s ir
the divine image of divince intelligence, And our
Dionyſins cals it the perſpicnous ſtatue of God, It
{1 s as King in the middle of cther Planets, excelling
all in light, -greatne(s, fairneſs, enlightning all, di-
ſtribucing vertue ro them to diſpoſe inferior bodies,

and

-*F

Sun-'1s the miſtreſs of generation, increaſe, or de-

ata. att... eco. Gt I
z _ $ ”

8750 TheTempleof Wiſdome. Book L

and regulating and diſpoſing of their motions, fo
that{from thence cheir motions are called daily, or
nightly, Southern, or Northern, Oriental, or Occi-
dencial, dire@, or retrograde 3 and as it doth by its
light drive away all the darkneſs of the night, fo
alſoall powers of darkne(s,which we read of in Fo;
afſoon as morning appears, they think of the ſhadow
of death : And the Plalmiſt ſpeaking of the Lyons -

— whelps ſeeking leave of Gcd to devour ; faith, The
_— Sun is riſen, 2 and they are gathered together, and
| * *ſhall beplaced in their Dens; which being pur to
| * * flight, it follows, man ſhall go forth to his labour.

The Sun therefore as it poſlefleth the middle Region
of the world, and as the heart is in Animals to the
whole body, fo the Sun is over the Heaven, and
the world, ruling over the whole Univerſe, and
_ thoſethings which arein it, the very author of ſea-
-. ſons, from whence day and year, cold and heat,

>Þ and all other qualities of ſeaſons ; and as ſaith Ptole-

my, when it'comes unto the place of any ftar, it ſtirs
the power thereof, which ic hath in the Aire. .So

* as with Mars, Þ heat; with Saturn, < cold ; and it diſ-
« _ even the very ſpirit and mind of man ; from
"c hence it isſaid by Homer, and approved by Ariſtotle,

"*- that there are in the mind ſuch like motions, as the
x & Sun the Prince and moderator of the Planets every
* « day bringeth cous ; but the Moon, 4 the nigheſt to

* Earth, the reccptacle of all the heavenly influences,

—- by the (wiftneſs of her courſe is joyned to the Sun,
— and the other Planers, Figures and Stars, every

*+ Xx

"+

month,and being made as it were the wife of a] ſtars
1s the moſt fruirful of the Stars, and receiving the
beams and influences of all other planets and Stars
as 2 conception, bringing them forch to the inferior
world as being next to it ſelf; forall the Stars have
influence

BoOK l. TheT emple of Wildome. _

—_ —— — - oetoeetty as adi — ——_

Earth; and it more maniteitly diſpoſeth theſe infe-
r ors, then the others, and its mocion is moreſen-
fible by the familiarity and propinquity which ic
hath with us 3 and asa medium betwixe both, ſupe-
riors and inferiors, communicateth chem to them
all ; therefore her motion 1s to be obſerved before
the others, as the parent of all conceptions, which
it diverſely 1fſueth forch in theſe Inferiors, accor-
ding tothe diverſe complexion, motion, ſcituation,
and different aſpe&s co the planers and others ſtars;
and though it receiveth powers from all the ſtars,
yet eſpecially from the Sun 3 as off as it is in Cone
jun&ion with the ſame, ic is repleniſhed with vivi-
fying verrue, and according to the aſpett thereof,
it borroweth its complexion; for in the firſt quarter,
as the Peripaterickes deliver, itis hot and moiſt; in
the ſecond, hot and dry; in the third, cold and
dry; inthe fourth cold and moiſt ; and altheugh
itis the loweſt of the ftars, yet it bringeth forth all
the conceptions of theſuperiors ; for from it in the
heavenly bodies beginneth that ſeries of chings,
which Plato calleth the Golden Chain,by the which
every thing and cauſe being linked one eo another,
do depend on the ſuperior, even until it. may be
bevnns to the ſupreme cauſe of all, from which all

things depend ; from hence 1s it, that without the
Moon intermediating,we cannot at any time attraft
the power of the ſeperiours. Therefore Thebit adviſ-
eth us, forthe raking of the vertue of any ftar, to
take the ſtone and herb of that plant, when the
Moon doth eicher fortunate)y get under or hath a
good afpect on that Star.

CHAP

— Bo

—y

ok 1.

172 FTheTempleof Wiſdome.

: CHap. XXX.

; Of the twenty eight Manſions of the Moon, and
their vertues; inTeleſmatical Figures.
Nd ſeeing the Moon meaſureth the whole Zo-
A diackin the ſpace of twenty eight dayes; hence
15 it, that che wiſe man of the Tndiaxs and ancienteſt
Afrologians have granted twenty eightManſions ta
the Moon, which being fixed in the eight ſphere, do
enjoy (as Alpharus faith)diverſe names and proprie-
ties from the diverſe Signs and Stars which are con=
cained in them, through which while the Moon
wandreth, it obtaineth other and other powers
and vertues ; but every one of theſe Manſions, ac-
cording to the opinion of A4brabam, containeth
ewelve degrees, and one and fifty minutes, and al-
moſt ewenty fix ſeconds, whoſe names, and alfo
their beginnings in the Zsdiack, of the eight Sphere,
are cheſe. The firſt is called Alxath, that is the horns
of Aries; his beginning is from the head of Artes of
the eighch Sphere; it cauſeth diſcords, and jour-
nies ; the ſecond is called Allothaim or Albothan, that
15 the belly of Aries, and his beginning is from the
twelfch degree ofthe (ame fign, fifty one minutes,
twenty two ſecondscompleac ; it conduceth'to the
finding of creaſures, and to the retaining of cap-
tives; The third is called Achaomazon or Athoray,
that is, ſhowring os Pleiades ; his beginning is from
the twenty five degrees of Aries compleat fourty
two minutes, and fifty oneſeconds; ir is profitable
to Saylers, Huneſmen, and Alchymiſts; The fourth
Manſon is called A/dcharam or Aldelamen,that is,the
eye

© * ;

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. _ 053
eye or head of Taurw; his beginning is from che
eight degree of Taurus, thirty four minutes; and ſe-
venteenfſeconds of the ſame Taurws being excluded z
it caaſeth the deſtrn&ion and hindrances of Buil-
dings, Fountains, Wells,of Gold-mines, the flight of
creeping things, and begetting diſcord. The fift
is called Alchatay or Albachay;- the beginning of it is
afcer the twenty one degree of Taurw, twenty five
minutes, fourfy ſeconds; it helpech ro the return
from a journey, to the inſtruf&ion of ſchollars; it
confirmeth edifices, it giveth health and good will:
The fixth is called Albanne or Alchays, that is the
little ſtar of great light; his beginning is after che
the fourth degree of Geminz, ſeventeen minutes,
and nine ſeconds; it conduceth to hunting and be-
fieging of Towns, and revenge of Princes, it deftroy-
eth Harveſts and Pruits and hindreth che operation
of the Phyfitian. The ſeventh is called Aldimiach
or Alerzach, that is, the Arm of Gemrni and begin-
eth from the ſevenceenth degree of Geminz, eight
minutes and thirty four ſeconds, and laſteth even
to theend of the fign ; it conferech gain and friend-
ſhip, its profitable co Lovers, it ſcareth flies, de-
Kroyeth Magiſteries. And fo is one quarter of the

heaven compleated in theſe ſeven Manſions; and Wa

in the like order and number of degrecs, minuts
and feconds,theremaining Manſions in every quar-
ter have their ſeveral beginnings; namely ſo,that in
the firſt fign of this quarter threeManſions taketheir
beginnings, in the other two figns two Manſions in
each; therefore the ſeven following Manſions begin
from Cancer, whoſe names are Alnazaor Anatrachye
that is miſty or cloudy, viz. the eighth Manſion ;
it cauſech Jovye, friendſhip, and ſociety of fellow
travellers, itdriveth away Mice and affiigech Cap-

tivety

3 © we:

—

—— —

5745 The Temple of Wildome, ook

rives, confirming their impriſonment, Aﬀeer this

is che ninth called Archaam or Arcaph, that is the
eyeofrheLyon ; it hindrech Harveſts and travellers
and purteth diſcord between men, Thetenth is
called Algelioche or Albgebb, thatis the neck or fore- .
head of Leo ; it ſtrengtheneth buildings, yeideth
love, - benevolence and belp againſt enemies; the
eleventh is called Azobra or Ardaf, thar is, the hair }..
ofthe Lyous bead ; itis good for vqyages, and gain

by merchandize, and for redemption of Captives;

the twelfth is called A/zarpha or Azarpha, thar 1s
the tayl of Leo; it givech proſperity to Harveſts,and
Plantations, but hindrecth Seamen, bur it is good

_ forthe bettering of ſervants, Captives and compa-

nions0 The thirceenth is named Alhaire, that is
Dog-ſtars, or the wings of Virgo; it is prevalent for
Benevolence, gain, voyages, Harveit, and freedom
of captives3-the fourteenth is called ' Achureth or

"Arimet, by others Azimeth or Alhumech, that 1s the

ſpike of Yzrgo, or flying ſpike ; it cauſeth the love
of marryed folk, it cureth the fick, its. profitable
to Saylors, but it hindrech journies by land; and
in theſethe ſecond quarter of Heaven is compleated.
The other ſeven follow, the b6rſt of which begineth
zn the head of Ltbra, viz. the fifteenth Manfion, and
hisname is Agrapha or 4l/garpha, that is, covered,
or covered flying ; its profitable for the extraQing 1
of creaſures, for digging of pit:, ic helpeth forward
divorce, diſcord, and the deſtruction of houſes and
enemies, and hindreth traveilers. The faxteenth +
is called Azubene or Abubenxe, that is. the Horns of
Scorpio, it hindereth Journyes and Wedlock, Hars.
veſts and Merchandize, it prevaileth for redempti-
on of captives, The ſeventeenth. is called Alch!,

_ thatis, the Crown of Scor pio, it bertereth a bad for-

euncs

Book I- The Temple of Wiſdome. 175

tune, maketh loye durable, ſftrengcheneth buil-
dings, and helpeth Seamen : The eighteenth is

| called Alchy or 4ltob, that is the heart of Scorpio; ic

eauſeth diſcord, (edition, conſpiracy againſt Princes
and mighty ones, and revenge from enemies, buc
irfreeth captives and helpeth_ edifices; the nine=
recath is called Allaths or Achala, by others Hyculs

-or Axala, that is, the tayle of Scorpuo,; ir helperh in

the beſteging of Cities and taking of Towns, and in
thedriving of men from their places, and for the
deftruftion of Seamen, and perdition of captives.
Thetwenteith is called Abzahbays, that isa beam ic
helpeth for the taming of wild beafts, for the ſtreng-

- ©" thening of priſons, it deſtroyeth the wealth of ſo-

cieties, it compelleth a man to come to a certain
place. The one and twentieth is called Abedz or
Albeldach which is a deſert ; it is good for Harveſts,
gain buildings and travellers, and cauſeth divorce
and in this is the third quarter of Heaven complea-
ted. There remaineth the ſeven laſt Manfions com-
pleating the laſt quarter of Heaven ; the firſt of
which being in order to the two and twentyeth, be-
vineth from the head of Capricorn, called Sadabacha
or Zodeboluch, or Zandeldena, that is a Paſtour ; ic
promoteth the flight of ſervants and captives, that
they may eſcape, and helpeth the curing of diſeaſes;
the three and twentieth is called Zebadola or Zobrach
chat is \wallowing; ic makech for divorce, liberty
of captives and the health of che fick; the ewenty
fourth is called Sadahath or Chadezoad, that is the
ftar of forrune ; ic is prevalent for the benevolence
of marryed fojk, for the viory of Souldiers, it _
eth the execution of Government, and hindreth
that ic may not be exerciſed : The twenty fifth is

called Sadalabra or Sadalachia, that is a Butter-fly
Or

_

US APES 5 a Ts F

et ea OS SEES
FR
- ,

176 The Templeof Wiſdome, Book 1.

or a ſpreading forth ; it helpeth beſteging and res
venge, it deftroyeth enemies, maketh divorſe, con-
frmeth priſons and buildihgs,hafteneth meſſengers,
it conduceth to ſpels againft copulation, and (o
bindeth every member of man, that je cannot per-
form his duty 3 the twenty fixth is called Alpharg
or Phragal Mocaden, that is the firſt drawing ; it mak-
eth for che LInion and love of men, for the healch
of caprives, ir deſtroyeth priſons and buildings ;
The twenty ſeventh is: called Alchzryz or Alhalgal-
mioad, that is the ſecond drawing; 1t encreaſeth
Harveſts, Revenues, Gain; ithealerbſinfirmities,bur
hindrech buildings, prolongeth priſons, cauſeth
danger to Seamen, and helpeth to infer miſchiefs
on whom you ſhall pleaſe; the rwenry eight and
laſt is called Albotham or Alchalzy, that is Piſces, it
encreaſectt Harveſts and Merchandize, it fecureth
travcllers through dangerous places; it maketh for
the joy of marryed: couples, but it ftrengthenerh
priſons, and cauſeth loſs of treaſures ; and in theſe
twenty ezght Manfions do lye hid many ſecrets of
the Wiſdome of the Ancients, by the which they
wrought wonders on all things which are under
the circle of the Moon ; and they atrributed to
every Manſion his reſemblances, images, and ſeals,
and his preſident incelligences, and they did work
by the vertue of chem after diverſe manners.

"Þ

CHaP:

Book I. he Temple of VViſdome. 177

—
Km

CHAP, XXAIL
Of the true motion of the heavenly bodies #0 be ob=
ſerved in the eight Sphere, and of the ground
of Planetary hours, that agree with the Rulers,
Idea's and Genii of Geomincy,
XA Hoſoever will work secording to the Celeſtial
_ - * opportunity, ought co obſerve both or one
of them, namely che motion of che Scars, or cheir
cimes; I (ay cheir motions, when chey are in cheir
dignities or deje&ions, Either effential or acciden=
cal; bur I call cheir cimes, dayes and hours diftri=
buted to their Dominions: Concerning all theſe,
| itis aburidancly taughc in the books of Aſtrologers;
bur in this place two chings eſpecially are to be con=
fidered and obſerved by us. One, thar we obſerve -
the motions and aſcentions and windings of Scars,
even aSthey are intcuth in theeigheſphere,cthrough
the negle& of which, ic happenech chat many ere
infabricating cheCeleſtial Images,and are defrauded
of their delired effe&; che other ching we oughc co
obſerve, is about therimes of choofing the planecary
hours; for almoſt all Afrologers divide all. that
ſpace of cime from the Sun-rifing co (etting int
twelveequal parts, and call them che ewelve hours
of che day ; chen che time which followech from
the (erting to the rifing, in like manner being divie
ded into cwelve equal. parts, they call the twelve
hcurs of che night,and chen diftribuce each ofrhoſe
hours toevery one of che Planets according to the
order of their ſucceſſions, giving alwayes the firft
hour of the day ro the Lord of that day, then co
EE _ nn every

2:8 The Lemple of Wifſdome. . Bookl.
every one by order, even to the end of twenty four
hours 3 andin this diſtribution che Magicians agree
with them; but in the parcition of the hours ſome
do diflent, faying, that the ſpace of the rifing and
ſecting ts not to be divided into cqual parts; -and
chat rhoſe hours are not therefore called unequal,
becaiife the diurnal are unequal tothe noQurna),
' but becauſe both the diurnal and nofurnal are
even unequal amongſt themſelves ; therefore the
partition of unequal or Planetary honrs hath a dit-
ferent reaſon of their meaſure obſerved by Magici-
ans, whichis ofthis ſort; for as in artificial hours,
which are alwayesequal to themſelves, the aſcenſt-
ons of fifreen degrees'in the equinoQial, conftitut-
eth an artificial hour : ſoalſoin planetary hours, the
aſcenſions of fifteen degrees in the Eclipticke con-
ſtitureth.an unequalor planetary hour, whoſe mea-
ſure we ought toenquireand find out by the tables
of the oblique aſcenlions of every region.

CHAP. XX XI11.

How. ſome artificial things, as Teleſmes, Images,
Seals, and ſuch like, may obtain ſome vertue
from ihe Celeftial and Terreſtrial bodies.

I great is the extent, power and: efficacy of

a) che Celeſtial bodies, that not only naturat

things, but alſo artificial when,chey are rightly ex-

poſed to thoſe above, do preſently: luffer by thar

| moſt potent agent, and cbtain a wonderful life,
| which

a& CTY Y wy" mol

—

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome, ny 9

which ofcentimes gives them an admirable © eleſtial
vercue; which ching Saint Thomas Aquinas that holy
Do&or, thus confirmeth in his book de fato, when

- he faich, that even garments, buildings and other

artificial works whatſoever, dos» receive a certain
qualification froni the ſtars; ſo the Magicians affirm,
that not only by the mixcure and application of na-
rural things, but alſoin Images, Seals, Rings, Glaſ-
fes, and ſome other Inſtruments, being opportunes
ly framed under a certain conſtellation, ſome Cele-
ſtial Illuſtration may be taken, and ſome wonderful
thing may be received ; for the beams of the Cele-

ftial bodies being animated, living, ſenſual, and

bringing along with them admirable gifts, and a
a moſt violerit power, do, even in a moment, and at
che firſt couch, imprint wonderful powers in the
Images, though their matter be leſs capable, Yct
rhey beſtow more powerful vertues on the Images,
if they be framed not of any, bur of a certain mat-
cer, namely whoſe natura], and alſo ſpecifical ver-
tue 1s agreeable with the work, and che figure of che
image is like to the Celeſtial ; for ſuch an Image, '

| bothin regard of the matter naturally congruous

co the operation and Celeftial influence,' and alſo
for its figure being like to che heavenly one, is beft
Prepared to receive the operations and powers of
che Celcſtial bodies and figures, and inſtantly re-
ceiveth the Heavenly gifc into it telf; then it con»
ſtantly worketh on another things, and other things
do yeild obedience co ic. Hence ſaith Ptolemy in cen
tiloquio,that inferior chings do obey ctheCeleſtial,and
not only them, bur alſo even their Images ; Even as
earthly Scurpions obey nor only the Celeſtial Scor-
pion, bur alſo his [mage, if it ſhall be opppreunely
figured under his aſcent and Dominion,
M 2 CHAP,

230

The Temple of Wifdome. Book: 1.

- CHAP. XX XIV.

Of the Teleſmes made upon Mettals, what verines
they being ingraven, recerve from the Stars.

Ue the Celeſtial Tmages, according to whole
likeneſs, Images of this kinde are framed, are
very many in the Heavens : Some viſible and COn=
{picuous, others only imaginable, conceived and
ſet down by Egyptians, Indians and Cheldeans; and
their parts are ſo ordered, that ever the figures of
ſome of them are diſtinguiſhed from others: for
this reaſon they place ini the Zodiack circle ewelve }
general Images, according to the numher of che
 Jigns : of theſe they conſtituting Aries, Lev, and.
Sagittary, fur the fiery and orienta[triplicity, do re-
Port that its proficable againſt Feavors,Palfie, Drop-
ne, Gout, aud all cold and Phlegwatick infirmities,
and that it makes him who carrieth it to be accepe
table, eloquent, ingenious and honorable, becauſe
they are the Houſes of. Mars, . So!, Leo and Jupiter.
They madecalſo the image of a Lion againſt Melan« |
cholly Phantefies, the Dropſie, Plague, Feavors, |
and to ex; el diſeaſes, -at the bour of the Sux, the |
' firſt degreeofthe ſign of Lee aſcending, which is the *
fice and Decanate of ;Fupiter.; but agaiuſt the ſtone,
and diſeaſes ofche Reins, and againſt the hrs: of
beaſts, they made the fame image when Sol. in the
heart of the Lion obtained the midſt of heaven: and
again, becauſe Gemini, Liora, and Aquarius do con-
Aiture che Axial and Orciudental Triglicity, and
4xre

Be OK l. The Templeof Wildome. ET%

are the houſes of Mercury, Venus, and Saturn, they
are ſaid to pur to flight diſeaſes, ro conduceto
friendſhip and concord, to prevail againſt Melan-
cholly, and to cauſc healch; and they report thar
Aquarizs eſpecially freeth from the Quarcane. Alſo,
that Cancer, Scorpio and Piſces, becauſe they conſtt=
cute the watry and Northern Triplicity, do prevail
againſt hot and dry Feavers; alſo againſt the Hee -
&ick, and all Cholerick paſſions; bur Scorpio, be-
cauſe amongſt the members ic reſpeCteth the privy
parts, doth provoketoluſt : but cheſe 41d frame it
foc this pnrpoſe, his third face aſcending, which
belongeth coVenw; and they made the ſame againſt
Serpents and Scorpions, poyſons, and evil (pirics ;
his ſecond face aſcending, which 1s the face of the
. Sun, and Decanate of Frpiter 3 and chey r:pore
chac it maketh him who carriech it, wiſe, of a good
colour z end they reporr that the image of Cancer is
moſt efficacious againſt Serpents, and poyſons,wien
Sol and Lina are in Conjun&ion in it, and aſcend
in the fart and third face; for this is the face of
Venus, and the Decanate of Lnxa; bur the ſecond
faceof Lune, the Decanate of Jupiter + They reparc
alſo that Serpencs are cormented when che Sr is 1n
Caxcer : Alſo that Taww, Vergo, and Capricorh, be-
cauſe chey confticure the earthly and Southe;n Tri-
Plicicy , do cure hor infirmicies, and prevail againſt
the Synocal Feaver; it makerth choſe chac carry ic

gratefu), acceptable, eloquent, devour and religious,
becauſe chey are the Houſes of Ver s, Mars, and S4-
fn; Capricorn allo isreported to kecp men mn fafe-
ry, and alſo places in fecuricy, becauſe ir is the
fxaltation of Mars.

Hy C4AP.,

© ——— _
Wane —_——_—}___

4 -

182 he Temple of Wiſdome. | Book |

— ——

CHAP XXXV.

Of the Teleſmaticall Images of. the Faces, and of
thoſe Images which are without the Zodiack,

Here are beſides in the Zodiack thirty fix Ima-

ces, according to thenumber of che faces, of
the which (as Porphyry ſaith) Teucer the Babylonian
long fince wrote, who was a moſt ancient Mathe-
matician, after whomthe Arabians alſo wrote of
theſe things. Therefore it's ſaid, that in the firſt
face of Aries, aſcendeth the image of a black man,
fianding and cloathed in a white garment, girdled
about, ofa great body,with reddith eyes, and great
ftrength, and like one that is angry ; and this
mage fignifierh and cauſech boldnefle , fortitude,
loftineſle and ſhameleſnefie; in the ſecond face al-
cendeth a form ofa woman, outwardly cloathed
with a red garment, and under it a white, ſpread-
ing abroad over her feer, and this. image cauſeth
noblenefſe, height ofa Kingdom, and greatnefſe of
Dominion : in the third face ariſeth the figure ofa
white man, pale, with reddiſh hair, and cloathed
with a red garment, whocarying on the one hand
a golden Bracelet, and holding forth a woden ſtaff,
3s wreſtleſle and like one in wrath, becauſe he can-
not perform that good he would, 'This image be-
ſtowerh wit, meeknefſe , joy and beauty: In the
firſt face of Taurws aſcendeth a naked man, an Ar»
cher, Harveiter or Husbandman, and goeth forth
to ſow, plough, build,people, and divide the earth,
gccording tothe rules of Geometry 3 in the ſecond
Face afcendeth a naked man, holdingin his _ a

OY” an RE es a. EE Os 3s | "OE i. *'6 WEN ey 5

wo AY UT, WW o= v9

Book 1. . The Temple of Wiſdome. 183
key 3 it giveth power, nobilicy and dominion over
people : in the third face, aſcendeth a man. in
whoſe hand is a ſerpent, and a dart, and is the i-
mage of neceflity and profit, and alſoof miſery and
{lavery. In the firſt face of Gemens aſcendeth a man
in whoſe hand is a rod, and he isas it were, ſerving
another; it granteth wiſdome and the knowledg of
numbers and arts in which there 1s no profit; in the
ſecond face aſcendeth a man, in whoſe hand is a
Pipe, and another being bowed down: digging the
earth : and they fgniftie infamousand diſhoneſt a=
gility, asthat of Jcſters and Juglers; it alſo figni-
fies labours and painful ſearchings : In the third,
aſcendeth a man ſeeking for Arms, and a fool hold»
ing in the right hand a Bid, andin his left a pipe,
and they are the fignifications of forgetfulnelle,
wrath , boldnefle, jefts, ſurrilities, and unprofi-
cable words: In the firſt{face of Cancer aſcendeth the
form of a young Virgin, adorned with fine cloaths,
and having a Crown on her head; it giveth accute-
nefle of ſenſes, ſubtilty of wit, and the love of men:
in the ſecond face aſcendeth a man cloathed in
comely apparrel, or a man and woman fitting at the
cable and playing; it beſtoweth riches, mirth,glad-
neſfle, and the love of women : in thethird face aſ-
cendeth a man, a hunter with his Lance and Horne,
bringing our dogs for to hune ; the lignificacion of
this 1s the contention of men, the purſuing ofchoſe
whofly, che hunting and poſſeſſing of chings by
armes and brawlings. In the firſt face of Leo, af-
cendeth a man riding on a Lion, it ſigniheth bold-
nefſe, violence, cruelcy, wickedneſle, luſt and la».
bours eo be (uſtained, In the ſecond afcendeth arv
zmage with hands lifced up, anda man on whoſe
head is a crown ; he hath che appearance of an an-
M 4 ry

184 TheTenipleof Wiſdome.. Book I

_—_—

gry man, and one that threatneth, having in his
right hand a ſword drawn out of the ſcabbard, and
in his left a backler; it hatch fignification upon hid-
den contentions and unknown vifories, and upon
baſe men, 'and upon the occahtions of quarrels 'and
battels: in the third face aſcendeth a yourig man in
whoſe hand is a whip, and a man very fad, and of
.an ill aſpe&; they fignifie love ang ſociety, and the
lofſe of one: right for avoiding ſtrife. | ,
In the firſt face of Virgo afcendeth the figure of a /*
good maid, and a man caſting ſeeds; 'ic fignifierb
getting of wealth, ordering of dier, plowing, ſow-
| ing and peopling ; in the ſecbnd face: aſcendeth a
bk. black man cloathed witha skin, anda. man having
| a buſh of haire, holding 'a bag; they fignifie gain;
ſcraping cogether of wealth 'and coveroulneſſe; In
che third face aſcendeth a white woman and deaf,
or an old man leaning on a ſtaff; the fipnification of
this is to ſhew weakneſle, infirmity, lofſe of mem-
bers, defiruftion of. trees, and depopulation of
lands. : br $- 4 a . " - ,
- In che firſt face of Libreaſcendeth the form of an
angry man, in whole kand is a Pipe, and the form
ofa man reading ina book; che operation of this is
in juſtifying and helping the miſerable and weak.a-
gainſt the powerful and wicked : In the fecond face
aſcend two men furious and wrathful, arid a man in
xcomely garment, fitting in a cbair 4 and' the ſig-
aification of cheſe is. to ſhew indignesion againſt the
evil, and quietneffe and fecurity of life wich plenty
of good things : In the third faceaſcendech. a vio-
lent man holding a boir, and before

e him- a neked
man, and alſoanother man holding bread jin'vac
hand, and acup of wine in the other;. the fignifics-
I s..#S fs 2 . F- | > - . Fs - - CITING $00

- Of

® #
6 *

' and for ftrifes, rreacheries, deceitrs, I

- man bowed downwards upon his knees and a wa-.

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 65

cion of theſe is co ſhew wicked luſts, fingings, ſports
and — — | |

' In the firtt face of Scorpio, aſcendeth a woman of
good fate' and habit , and rwo men firiking her;
the operations oftheſe are for comelinefle, beauty,

and perditions; in the ſecond face aſcendeth a n

naked, and a woman naked, and a man fitting on
che earth, and before him two dogs biting one ano-
ther s and their operation is for impudence, de-
ceitand falſe dealing, and for toſend miſchiefand
ſrifeamongfſt men; in che third face aſcenderh 2

man ftrikeing him with a ſtaff, andicis the _
cation of drinkeneſle, fornication, wrath, violence
and ftrife, | :

. Inthe firſt face of Segiterivs aſcendeth the form
of aman armed wirh a coat of male, and holding a
naked ſword in his hand; the operation of this is
for boldnefſe, malice, and liberty : Ip the ſecond
face aſcendeth a woman weeping,and covered with
ctoaths; the operation of this is for ſadneflſe and
fear of his own body. In the third face aſcenderh
a man like in colour cogold, oran idle man playing

with a ſtaff; and the fagnification of thisis in fol- Wt
lowing our own wills, and obſtinacy in them, aud
in a&tivenefſe for evil things, contentions and hore

rible morn. fo ES |

” In the firſt face of Capricorn aſcendeth the form
of a-yoman; and a'man carrying full bags; and the
-4ignification of rheſe ifor eo go forth and to re-
Joyce toFain and to loſe with weaknefſe and baſe-
neſſe; ii che ſecond face aſcendeth two women and
z-ma1l, looking rowards a bird flying” in'the Aire;
wad the fignification of theſe is for the requiring
os x choſe

ON WS Ht ON > Ae OE 9s ht et

x56 The Temple of Wiſdome, Book T[
thoſe things which cannot be done, and for the.
ſearching after thoſethings which cannot be known.
In the third face aſcendeth a woman chaft in boy
and wiſe in her work, and a banker gortering his
mony togecher on the table; the ignification of this
is to govern in prudence,in coyetouſneſle of money
and in avarice.

In the firſt face of Aquerizs aſcendeth the formof
a prudent man, and ofa woman ſpinning ; and the
fignification of theſe is in the thqughe and labour
for gain, in poverty and baſeneſlſe: .in the ſecond
face aſcenderth the form ofa man with a long beard;
and the fignificacion of this belongeth tothe under-
ſtanding, meekneſſe, modeſty, liberty and good mans
ners: in the third face aſcendech a black and angry
man; andthe fignification of chis is in expreſſing
zanſolenſe, and impudence *?

In the firft face of Piſces aſcendeth a man carrying
burthens on his ſhoulder, and well cloachedjic hath
hs fignification in journeys, change of place,and in
carefulnecſle of gerting wealch and cloachs: in the
ſecond face aſcendeth a woman of a loood counte-
nance, and welladorncd ; andthe tignification is
to defire an. pur onesſelfon abouc high and great
matcers : in the third faceaſcendeth a man naked,
ora youth, and nigh hima beauciful maid, whoſe
head is adorned with flowers, and it hath his figni-
fication for reſt, idlenefſe, delight, fornication, and
for imbracings of women. And thus far.concern-
ing the images of faces. Beſides theſe, there are as

 yertthree hundred and fixty images in the Zodiack,

according to the number of the degrees, whoſe
forms Petrus de Abano hath deſcribed : without the
Zodiack thereare alſo general Figures, which Hyg#-
ws and Aratus deſcribe for us, and yery many par

EE ed 0

| Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 187, |

ticular ones, according to the numberoffaces and
degrees, exiſting therein, of all which to ſpeak, it
would be too long ; but of theſe the more princi-
pal are accounted, Pegaſus which prevaileth againſt
the diſeaſes of horſes, and preſerveth horſmen in
battle ; Then is Andromache, which begecteth love
berwixe husband and wife, ſocthar it is laid evento
reconcile adulterers : Caſſiopeia reſtoreth weak by-
dies, and ftrengtheneth the members ; Serpentarius
chaſeth away poyſons,and cureth the bitings of ve-
nemous beaſts : Hercules giveth vicgory in war; the
Dragen with both the Bears maketh a man crafty,in-
genious, valiant, acceptable to the gods and men :
Hydrs conferreth wiſdom and riches, and reſfifteth
poyſons. Centauras beſtoweth health and long old
age: Ara concerveth chaftiry, and maketh one ac-
ceptable to the gods; Cetus maketh. one amiable,
cs. happy both by (ea and land, and ng 8

im co recover his loſt goods : the Ship afordeth ſe-
curity inthe waters ; the Hare prevaileth againſt
deceirs and madnefie; the Dog cureth the Drophe,
refiſteth the Plague, and alfo preſerveth from beaſts
and fierce creatures. Oriosgranteth viſtory : The
Eagle giveth new honours, and preſerverh the old.
The Swaxfreeth fromthe Palfie and the Quartane :
Perſeus freeth from Envy and Witchcrafts, and pre-
ſerveth from Lightnings and Tempeſts : The Hart
preſerveth Phrenetical and mad people, And thus
much may ſuffice to haye been ſpoken.

CHAP;

198 The Temple of Wiſdome, Book l.

Nt

CanPp. XXXVLI

of Teleſwes and how to make thew, *

2] ſober a Rulethe trembling Heathen went by, ta
; undertake nothing (nothing anew eſpecially )
maufpicatd; without ſome ominus performance, we ma
call it what we pleaſe, bur they did it upon grounds
chronghly concern'd in experience and. effe&, ftill
attaining cheir end by what darke agd ſecret wayecs
of coopcration ſoever brought to pals, as undiſco-
yered tothemſelves as us. : |

To the matter in hand, the firſt was the propitia-
ton ofthe place by reconciling the Genius with a re«=
ſpe&ive Sacrifice, $w42 Nd duolars Syxoches ifidragry
Seiuores &c faith Heſychius Mileſins concerning the
foundation of Byzautipns. |

Like Ceremonies were performed by Alexander ac
the building of Alexandria, as Arrien in the third
book of hs Expedition, Arian, Arabes. Anfard.

«582,

Such are often remembred by Foexnes Antiochenus,
and our ofhim repeaced by the Fafts -iculi, George
Cedren, and others. : p
 _ _Bur 1 chuſfe coinſtance a leſs known paffage out
of Abdilphaker in his Arabick, Hiſtory of the Founda«-
t10n of Aztoch, os

When this was laid by Arntiocbus the King, it bap-
3nd that whatſoever the workmen dug up
was again thrown in by nigbs, and they werea right

4 | -

Evor I. The Temple of Wiſdome. og

ted from the work, by &4 dreadful Apparition. The
King cal/dtor the Aftrologers and af who after
Sacrifice rightly performed, diſcovered an appearance
of Almarick or Mears, Jt was agreed therefore
Pharm PRODDY "RON IBORNINY ND DNR
yy RD 9p nanny nam nawng mp
that « maghificent Temple ſhowld be erefjed to bis name,

a #and bis fliatue there ſet up, and that the foun-

* dation of the City ſhould be laid under bis Aſcen-

* demt,* fc. Alſo an Antiiverſary of three dayes
* * feſtival was inflitmted, &c. and the Au-

* thor faith, that theſe chings continued
bYD) may nY9e Hy OAD0 pz Tp ID we
until the Manifeflation of Feſws the Sen of Mary, Peace
end the Prayer of God be upon biw. -—

This Tradition of the Arabian includes another
manner of the Ancients laying the foundation of
cheir Metropolitan Cities under a di as
tion of the Heavens, the moſt propitious that could be
ere&ed for the time being. y

So Mnezzw the Top of Fatimean (family, cau-
ſed the Ciry of Gran Cairo to be ſer up under the
ſame Afcerident of Xlmarick J9Ry x Rp AN that
as-Mars had a coercive power in the ſuperior world,
ſothe City might be Coatirix Orbz here below,there-
fore the name of it was called Alchabxwe, as the
Note upon E!micinus in the Tarich Mulſliminorum.
(th, ann

The Aſcendent ofa City (faith Hah) is that ſign
_ aſcenſione quis incipit collocare primarium lapidem,
n ich riſeth in the Horoſcope at the laying of the firſt
2 Forte.

- TheArtofthis isro be caken our of the firſtpart
of Apotel:ſmatical Confliruftion, called by Prolemy, Ca-

Moc, Tetrdbib, 1: Where he appointerh his _
vS, | oger

190 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book [
loger in giving judgement ofthe Accidents ofaCity,
to rake knowleds of the Sn and Moon's place in the
Zodiack which they had & Tai; xeTey xals oi xTiotor,
at the laying of the foundation, x 9 xiyrgov Lenga 73
' 6e90xomey, bur eſpecially of the Aſcendent as the molt
principal Ange! : And the Figures of Geomancy.
According to theſe Rules Tarucius Firmicus caſt
the Nativity of Kome, and Vefius Valens an Aﬀtro-
toger of Antioch, that of Coiiftantinople, the figure
whereof, is excant in a Greek Manuſcriptin the |
Vatican. The Horoſcope was Cancer, band the | *
Aftrologer, judged by the appearences that the * *
City ſhould ftand 7562. years, as the Vatican book, * *
as .earen and others, 696. which if it betaken * *
of thoſe years, & Tis T4 + motrin irngeiro 29 * *
x xerdceors, in which the Ciry flouriſhed under a full
ftate of diſcipline; rhe Aftrologer was not ſo much our,
as Glycas thinketh, And moreover before the tak-
ing of the City o Mahomet the ſecond, a great
_ Conjun&Gion was obſerved under the Horoſcope, But
} in aſſigning the Afcendent of this City, the Greekes
and Arabians agree nor, nor the Arabians them- c
ſelves, For in the Tables of Atkas, Conſtantinople *
is fer under ſSRIm9& Libre, © in Ben. Iſaac's * *
Geography under v\n5& Taurus, 4 and though *
the fame place may have ſeveral Horoſcopes,
yet to ſo much variety it will be hard torecon-—7

cile the matter; x «
This Superſticion hath been as commonly -« «
and more lately prattiſed in the ef. *

Ar the -inſtzuration of Rome by Paul the « «

third, Gauricws drew the Frgure of the Heavens. -
F mcentius Campartatins obſerved the time by his Aftro- |
labe coward the inſtant whereof he cryed out wich
Toud voice, Ecce, adeft bira preciſa decims ns
| LE ere

Bo py T " i be Temple of Wiſdome. 199

fere completes, Then immediately Ennim Vernlanus
the Cardinal [aid che firſt fone.

The curious may ſee ſeveral Nativicies of Cities,
Forts, and Caftles, with the Judgements given in
Gauricu, Funding Gatcam, &c. |

The Figure of the Old Lodging at Merton Colledge
is yet CO be ſeen in one of the Wardens Windowes,
Eſet it not here down, becauſe 1c is ajready done by
another, in his Book called Sir. Cbr. Heydo's defence
for Afﬀtrology. |

Theſe Catholical Nativities were {> much belee-
vedin by the Ancient Kings, faich -Haty, that they
eftquired inco the Gemtures of all che principal Net?
under their dominions, where if the Planets were
found to look with a malitious eye upon the Natere
vity of the Kingdome, Interficicubant enum puerum,
quod ejus l.egnum eras Contra Regnum ip

It may be (een alſo what Zonares hath reported
of Tiberius and Domitian , Tom, 2. Annal. þ. 174
& 198. |

Now becauſe that in the Nativities of Cities os 678
7 yereotor as inithe Genitures of men, (ſaith Ptolemy }
the Aſtrology is the ſame. 23

Therefore afcer conſideration had of the life and
being of the City from the Horoſcope, the next care
eaken was of the xzAngys Tis Tvxns, or part of Fortane,
the ſecond Aſcendent,ſocalled in the Figures of men,
or the Heroſcopus Athlorum. |
| The Part of Fortune found our,. was myfteriouſly_
included in a Statue of Braſs, Tearix6s, Teleſmatr-
cally pxepared. The Rites were, Fo. Antioch, A pure
Virgin was offered up in Sacrifice, A Statue of the Vire
gin ſet up, impoſed upon with a New and fecret Name,
and Sacrifice done to that. And all this 43 apynyies
3; F658 tis Tag x) Wxaraauraty Tis Ther F _
e 0

.cern'd in the fortune and f,

fo thie Scatue was called The Fortune of the City.

So in Seleucus his foundation of Antioch, Svoiey
aoukoas xogny rage oroyuitrt 'Arud ny Shoas drSudrrC-
enany yanriy The apeyidiueons xbene Tiyiy T5 wdao
euvios Toiioas KuTh T5 TVxn Iooley, &c. 2;

T he like Ceremonies were 0-:ſerved hy the ſame
Founder at the building of Apemes, Soriay roncet
uy duTd; perendaerty oripar: Tinker, &c. |

> The Fortune of old Bytantiunt was called Knesn,

Ceree. When this was repaired into Conftantinople;
the Emperour's Statue was ſet up. Gardovwar T9
Sit aury gurl Thy Toxnr The duThs Hator iv ondanecey
"ArSvoar. Holding in his right hand the Fortune of the City
which be called Anthuſs. But the Sacrifice was not as
before.

The Emperour offered -up drdiueuroy Suoiay, In:
cruentum Sacrificum,. x; md $6 : A Sacrifice without.

blood, and not to the Fortune of the City, but to God

bimſelf;

Briefly thus : The founders of old, at the buil3,
din pr page Ciries, -Caſtles, or the like, -

cauſed their Aﬀtrologers to find out a luckre poſition of
the Heavens, under which the firſt ſtone might be
laid. The Peart of Fortune found our in this firſt Fi-
gure was made the Aſcendent of another. The firfk
judged of the lively hood and duration. The ſe-

| cond of che outward Glory and Fortune of the City

under the influence of this latter configuration,
chey erected a St.:tve of Breff into which this Fortune
and Genius of the City was to be called by Art.
"Thus ſpirited with this ſecret power, it was diſpoſed
of in ſomeeminenc or receſfetul place of che City,
and looke upon as that _ which was only con-

ity Of.
Such a one was the Trojan Pelledium, no yn

all

99 —The Temple of ' Wiſdome, Book [.-

*

A
.

»

$

\

and impregnable "tate.

| "werenoother then thoſe T& Tdaut fſopera porxers Sn

-

+
:

; Book "The Temple of Wildome.

of ; * ESE 4 ' P
faith Joamnes Antiochents, but Eiaror T41e\eopmirgy» Or

192

as Joon Tzetzes quorech the place co Lycopbron,
GzyorerIe xanmnicn, Teleſmatically conſecrated or under &4
goed Horoſcope by Afius the Philoſopher, and preſented to
the founder Trows, tis vixny x quadiſorta Tir wonuy Wrva
SxtuTa andeg)nfſer, i 6. as & Statue enabled ty Art to
Ppreferve the.City wherern it ſhould bt laid up in a viGorious

Olympicdorus relateth 'from Valerius Governour
Thacia under Conftantius the Fmperour, m6
drSuudy Ty agyugdy Terexseutxay tis Bagbdywr
Wwxeauor, of certaine Silver ftatues lgid up unter the
confines of Thratia and Illyria, Teleſmatically conſecrated
again the Incurſions bf the Barbarian, which at =
command of Yalerius being duggeout and twien a-
way uf] oxiyas nuices 73 of Toro ulg& nioas
cmTeixu Thy Ogduny, & Cc. within a few dayes after all

' Thracia and Iitria was over runne by the Gothes ard
. Hunnes '
'F Ifay theh of the Claudi and the Ceci, that they

Ths wiaeus quaaxxnece, Statuary Teleſmes ſo much
celebrated of old (as Nictas) which unleſs they
kept the City, the watchman Jaboured bur in
vain.

They were placed by.the 4ſrologers in ſome cort-
venient Receſsof che Fort, and had doubtleſs made
good the place againſt David's men, bur that as the
great Sooth-ſayer himſelf confeſſ:d, Th-re was no
enchantment againſt Facob, nor divination agtinft Iſracl,
Numb, 22. 23. © oy Ep:

The uſual interpretation of this place is,(and*is
the beſt of the bag that the Jobuſites truſting them=
ſelves to the invincible condition of their Fort,
broughe oþ Lame'and Plind ment to caſt a ſcorne

0 | N upon

tf

196 S _The Temple of Wiſdome. Book I-

upon.Davids approaches, Therefore his ſoul hated
them, Fam ſure | have made the beft of this con-
ſtruSion,and yet he that ſha}l run it throngh all the
circumſtances of theText,will find ir to be as imperi-
nently caſt up,as thatof the Chaldee,which inftead of
Images rendreth by way of Paraphraſc, the imners
and ungodly Febufites. Which ſome of the Hebrews
endeavour to follow, but at an intolerable diſtance.
Read Gregories Notes |

F ſhall not want for a very confiderable part of
them, , whothough they have not lighted upon the.
very ſame, yer haveſaid enough as tothe cleerneſs
and advancement of that ienfe and meaning, which
I have reſolved upon, In the Celi Faker you'l find
that the Lau;e arid the Blind may be taken for Images,
R. Solomon ſaith exprelly =05vn =n that they
wereio, and R David that they were NOnNaIN ?22L.
Imazgesof braſs." R.Eſay as R. David and Levi Ben Gerſot
ſay moreqver --—-- Thar che Blind and the Lame
were Images written upon with che oath which.
Abrabam and Iſaac made to Abimelech, and that they:
were cail'd Blind and Lame, becauſe they bad eyes and
ſaw not, they bad feet and walkt not, &c.

Bur as concerning the conceipt of Abraham and
Tſaacs oath to 4bimelech, | leave it at large, That
which I take from chem is, , that they were Images of
Braſs. and the reaſon why they were called the
Blind and the Lgme, which if it had nor been ſugge-
fed by themyyec is the very phraſe of the <cripture.

They were the Stoichicde or Conftellated Images of
Braſs, (et up in the Receſs of the Fort, called in
ſcorn (as they were haced by Davids ſoul ) the. Blind
and the Leme. Yer ſo ſurcly entruſted with che
keeping of the place, that if they did not bold it

-ofit, the 7ebuſites ſaid they (hpuld not come into the

houſe,

FT

Teleſutatical Traditions,

Book The Temple of Wiſdome / 10gg

houſe, that is, they would never again commic che
ſafety of che Fort co ſuch Peladiunes as cheſe. There-
fore they (that is, the Febufites) ſaid che Blind and
the Lame, &c. TE 2 ©
When the Arke was taken Captive and detairied

by the prophane Philiſtives, the band of God was ſore
upon them, and ſmtote them with H emorboides, & ebullte=
runt ville & agri in medio Kegionis illins, & nati ſunt
mures, & fadja eft confuſio mortis magna in ( ivnate.

- So the wulger adiieth, the ancient Greek Copies have

it not. T he /ater agreenort, ſome Hebrew Copies ac-
knowledg it not, ſaich Mendoza, as if there were anv
that did. *Tis found indeed 1n the Drs, as Chimb?
hath obſerved, And ic cannor be denyed to the
Romaniſts,bur thar it ſcemech co be wanting, buc by
no means to be lo ſupplyed_ 'Twere better the Arke
ſhould ſhake ſtill, chen that Vzzeb (hould hold irvup.
Howſoever 'ti5 true, that there was a plague of Mice,
as wel as of Hemorhoides Concerning which th- A ivo-
logers being conſulted,gave counſel that there thou'd
be made fave golden Images of the Mice, and as men y
of the d/ſeaſes, to give glory to the God of Iſrael. | |.»
number was according co the number of their},or ts,
but for che ching it ſelf, the expoſitors whatſoever
paſs lightly over it, or ſtop the mouth of che leteer

I
with a miſttry, perceiving no more of che natural

ſenſe, then a baretreſpaſs offering, but won«crins;

withall, and not without cauſe, what glory could
accrew to the God of Iſrael from ſuch a homely
preſent as the counterfeit of a Mouſe, or that which
is worſe. A thing which the holy Ghoſt here vouch-
ſafed not tocall by irs own name; for the Ker! is
Teborecem, Anorunt Veftrorum, Bur the meaning of
the Images is Stoicoiotical, and to be given our of the

N 2 1d-

| 196 ; The Temple of -Wiſdome. Bookl

OY IB WIG ERIE ar”.
en ea RR _

Ta u 17.yeyiou x) pIopg Yidn ((aith Ptolomy in the
Krywos) ndyti waar Toy vegriun tiday Hit TETo yoo Tas
TLToUs 8 coryeiwpaTiINdG,, Ths aeupdcns Toy dripes
GX0[TEvTEs kT avTd. 1.C, the general and Crruptible
formes ate affe&ed by the Celeſtial, which therefore the

* Taliſman, make uſe of by obſerving the entrance of the

Stars into them. |

The meaning is(ſaith Heli Aben Rodoan )oras the
Felrew tranſlation, ( Abis Giafar) that the formes of
things here below are anſwered with the like figura-
tions above, and that the Celeſtial formes have a ru-
ling influence upon the fublunary : for example,
the Scorpion and Serpent in heaven upon thoſe in
earth. Therefore the Sapientes imaginum inſpicibart
quande planeto de ſub radiis ſolis egrediebatur, E- ingre-
diebatur hos vultus, eumque in aſcendent ponebant, &+ vul-
tum quem intrabant ſculpebant im Lapide, & miſcebant
cum eo alia ad hec neceſſaria. faciebanque cum eo ex ap-

 Fatione vel defiruGione qued volebant, &c, Oblerved

when a planet was out of his Combuſtion, and ens
cred into any of rheſe formes, then placing the pla-
net in the floroſcope,they engraved the forme upon
a ſtone then adding whacelſe was neceffary, they
ficted it to preſervation or deſtruCtion, as they plea-
led &c. | . |
Thele conceipts the Greeks termed Forxeiwoes
Ot herwiſe Treatouare, from whence the Arabick 7 a-
liſrath Thethaldeans from the word in the Texc
Tſulmanija. |mages. An experiment of the force
is ſeed wnby Haltupon his own knowledge, pratti-

ſed upon a Saracens ſervant in diebus Camorche Kegis.

The (e-vanc had been ftunge wich a Scorpion and
was cured by his Maſter wich a Stoze of this kind en-
graven upon with the figure of a Scorpion, And the
Saracen (aid, that the hgure was cut when the Moon

: was

Book I. 1be Temple of Wiſdome. "oy

— PTD

* Wwasin the figne Scorpio, and that the fign Was in |
* one of the foure Angles; And this Figure in
* thefiſt. |
" The mightieſt in operation of this ſort was
Apolloxius Tyanens, a man of that notein the Hea-
then ballance, that Hierocles che Stoick, put him
into the Scale with Chriſt himſclf, nay he acconn-
ted him the better man of the rwo, but which is ſuf-
ficiently recurned upon him by Euſebius Pamph Cont.
Hieroclem

Bur the performances of this man had ſuch appea.
rances of wonder, that they extorted this doube
from the Orthodox themlelves, El 9205 C51 Syunghdg
x) Seo wmoTng Ths xTIGtus, Bu; TH Fo\\avis TRALTUATE Gy
Tols ukgeo! Ths xTigeus Suyay Tas; ag VaraThngs dew; x}
<riuuy goegs t way x) Ineloy ci1Spouds us oa utr,xonterty,
&*c. If God te the Creato and Lord of the World, how
Comes it to paſs chat \pollonius his Teliſmes have ſo much.
over-rul d the Courſes ? for we ſce that they alſo have ſtilled
the waver of the Sea, and the r.ging of the W indes, an4
prevailing againſt the noyſome flies aud incurſions of wilde
beaſis, &c. See Gregrory's Notes theſe Obſervations
are his, and who dare deny cheAuthority of fo good
an Author
And chongh Philofiratus in that large Legend of his
life hath no memory of thele things, 'yer they are
conſtantly aſcribed unto this name by Codin Cedren,

Heſychius, Olympisdorus, the Greek M[. cited by Leun.

clavius, The Chronicon Alexaudrinum and John Tze-

t2es, C.60. of his third Chiliad. quod omnins legendum

(fairh Scaliger) ſiquidem borum corxuior notirian batere

placet, &- ſane leflio non injucundas. Nam in illy cafit:

Apollonius ſculptura Culicum & Ciconiarum, Culices Am -

11:chiam, Ciconigs Byzantium ingredi prohibuit.

But a fuller Traditzon of chis macter I ſhall here

N 5 | ſer _

E
5x
”

—

a8 The Temple of Wiſdome. i} Book 1.

ſet down our of Do-1ninus cited by Foannes 4ntioche-
#uus Mclalz in the tenth Book of his Chronogra-
phie.

Hy o$ Tois gebrors + Baoineucy Th dvrs Aoutriays þ
gogelTaTos ATonariO 5 * vayevs, X) unyats RtTMAwEy )þ
Tay TAXE Toty TixtgudaTy. fs Ths TAL X; his THE NOCHS,
o51s I + Pauns' een Foy xaTionals T3 BulpvTiODN, x)
$10t\9oy ts BuCiwony, TW vor Afyoutrny ewTuy as Koy-
SavTVEGLAW, vF0Ings x; ext Tehtouare Feathndils Vas
Toy BuCavTiov, 70 Tor Tltnapyev, %, 70 Ts AVAs ToTapTy
xT! pukos Tis TOAtws Tageg x opevs, 2 To © xenwuns x, Fd Tay
ITTOy, 2) aa Tave Savudse: X Xormby &70 Ts BuCeavTiIEA
E-cAVOy E70I6t fs Ths dds Kahcs © AUTOS & TEN.) 10G
"TexiouaTa, X; navy om TW Everzy amd Tudywv, 4 env
Bev or AyTwxtia Th utydan, xdimT1oov dkuToy or \nTE% 415
XTHT0pss Tomoam Kane: TrAtgudra i wy tdibiTo, x
SToinoty 415 Toy Bopper dvtuwor, Shoc T0 durd 1leaicue
x7! Thy &y&ToAIKNhy ToeTav. ' -

In the ſame times of the Reigne of Domitian, flouriſhed
the moſt learned Apollonius Tyaneus who got himſelf 4
great name by travellius about and making Teleſmes in all
places where he came, for the Cities and the Countries.
From Rome be went to Byzancium, and entring into
that City of Byzus ({#ow more bappily called Conkanti-
nople ) be made there alſo many Teleſm:s at the inſiance
of the Citizens, as that againſt the ftorkes, againit the
r1ver Lycus which paſſeth by through the middle of the City,
that againſt the Tortoiſes, that azainj} Horſes and other
ſtrange things, Then afterward leaving By Zantiutm be
went aud did the like in other Citics From Tyanis he
came mto Syria, and ſo to Antioch the greas, where alſo
be was az(ired by the cbief men of the City to make ſuch
Teleſmes as the had need of, And be made one «-
gaingt the Northern wind,end ſet it up upon the Eaft part of
the City, EO |

The Author goeth on, and at larce deſcribeth
pollenins his charmes againſt the Gnars and Scorpi-
4 7" IT Hae nad ons,

-

Book I, 7The Temple of VViſdome. 159
- ons, adding moreover that Apo'lonius walking upon

2 day with the chief men of cbe City to obfeve the
ſcituation of the place, happened upon a ruinous
Pillar, and enquiring into the purpole of that, the
Citizens related unto him, that in the .dayes of
Caius Ceſar when the City had been ſhaken with an
Earth-quake AtCPoens TI5 ginogogos TAS NG wrormnes TY
TYHEUER TiT0, wr Soreuirny The Tay Nao ceo uaph mh-
Tleiy, Sioes Thrflora x; iaopdye avis pufldeior wagudetrer

% oy Go, TS] auTs Tyra oy Ageira, AaTOTR. [9 TUGWYIXE
Tveys Nan + dfparis yours xevily T3 indyd gy xioro
onleetoy Ya408. One Debborins a Taliſman to prevent the
falling of the City in Caſe an Earth quake ſhould bapper
again, ſet uy this pillay and upon that a marble Petioral
inſcribed Acura, ArTwre, but which in proceſs of time
had been conſumed by lightning, &c. The Citizens
therefore were earneſt with him, to (er up a new
Teleſme, but Apollonius ferching a deep figh dvifaxxsro
Ts Toinoa do Tinsoue iti cnoudy refuſed to make any
further Teleſmes again|t the Earth-quakes 3 bur the Ci ,
rizens being urgent upon him, he took writing Ta=gFt
bles and forecold as followeth. Kat ov Tdawre*: vr is ME
X#12 Ss adST1S, de x, Tany DNvet7Tal got xeipde, . 3s
St em" Thjuas: xiucy Teiauits, is St avi Tuet rayoy onvap
d1ryieaois OptrTno: cipn FaMv TdF015.

And thou miſerable City of Aucwoch ſhalt ſuffer twice,
aud a third time ſhall come upou thee, wherein thou ſhalt
be conſumed by fire, even in that part by which (,rontes
rumpeth, And it may be thou fhait ſuffer yet once
more.

This written, he delivered the Tables tothe Ci-
tizens,. and departed into Seleutiz, and from thence
mto Fgypt, Kagws Ami © 5 rogurar@ ourtyeanere

TaAUTR.
Ny But

200 © The Templeof Wiſdome. Book
. Bur che moſt concering Teleſme co the macter in
hand that againſt the Scorpions, guluws IN inoinos T;-
ASCuE os &u7H Th Toe (Aprroy ug TIpuoyday ) x; dic The
Sxopwrivg, awd; 7) wi ToAugy duTH; AnoidCur Th xdev
£018 70 £70 TiAS0pe os iow Þ TAs, Tonoas XaArtv
ExupTtoy, x) xdoas avTly whia; indywrniove wrein, x; iy8-
yorTo davis bt Exipwrior tn Tis Cnoekas EyTIN Ut, TACHS.
Apollonius cauſed an Image of a Scorpion to be molten
in braſſe, that treacherous ſign Scorpeo Aſecnded, and in
Geomuncy this fi ure was in the firſt bet ® and ſet it * *®
if «© %þ upon title pillar.in the midji of the City of An= *
| tioch, :and the Scarpions vaniſhed out of all their * *
Coaſts: is * *
A like Teleſme tothis was ſec-up at 1'empts a
City of Syria Apames, that which Ptolomy calleth
pare, Incthe middle of this, aith an ArabickGece
grapher, a ſtane chere is ſet up in a wall; having up-
on 1c the figure of a Scorpion, and when any one is
bitten, hebringech'Clay and taketh our the houre,
which haying applied tothe place affe&ed, he 1s im-
es a i
In the nether Region of Grand C#tro the Croco-
diles mexe harmieſle, in the upper they deſtroyed the
Inbabicants. To provide againſt this, the Taleſmans
caſt a Jeadcn Crocodile which written upon wich
an /Xgyptian charm they buried 'in the foundation
ofa Temple. This for a long time defended the
people, but when at the command of Achmet Ben
1oton the Caliph, the leaden image was'melte. ,thie Cro-
cedil.s returned to their own malice again.
The Toxn#a%acos, or fortiine of Byz:niium ſtood
with one toot in athip of braſſe,: the Sracue concer-
n'd the gencrall Genizs of the whole City. The Ship
was a Teleſme, erreted againſt the dangers of that
cempeſtuous Sea, and white it toad entice wo
Ee Eur he

-_

—_ __ -— — _— > —_ —____

Ay ——_— _—_ —_ c—q—ckwqnqneqr—qc

PY
—

of nn

Book I. The Temple of Wifdome. 20«

the rage, but ſome parts here of being ( none knew

how) bro-en off and conveyed away, the Sea be-
gan tobe as unrulyas before, The cauſe whereof
being curiouſly enquired after and difcovered, the
broken pieces were ſolicitouſl; ſearched, found our
and pur togecher again, and forthwith the winds
and ſeas obe;ed.

"Irads yriiey £xerba tTiT ws alnfas Te TOY T\otwy
W0TAs KodAvjLE Ay, GOnpHTo avis Th wipn Ths vnds Cairne,
x doar of yucy Truxor Ters-ciomMuoas mvovuarO@ avdis
lg ytyoracy emdigunToAr WThvIty eBoCauSncar on 7 Ipo-
Siva Ti yaanny vie entiviy Thy KunVpny area is Th
Foruy Home AW axoior of gogrnytr, x vw xavty xcirny
ST WEtug dEwoarTH droxaritwe, ie, Andthatitmight
be certainly known, chat chis indeed was the caule
why the Ships could not ſafely arrive, rhe pieccs of
the braſſe were again taken away. Thenceforch
whatſoever veſſels toucht upon the Coaſt were dri-
ven back by the violence of che winds. This con-
firm'd chem in opinion that the breaking of the bra-
ſen ſhip, was that which hiudred chejr Carriages
from comming up tothe City. They therefore cau-
ſed the (hip to be moſt carefully repaired.

Theſe Conſecrations (for ſo alſo they are called)

were more uſually but not only praQtiſed in the

Eaſt. For Gregory of Tours reportech, that at rhe

repairing of a Bridge in Paris, there was found the
Images of a Serpextand-Dormouſe in braſſe, and that
at the taking away of cheſe, the Serpencs ani the
Mice came up in great number. More mighe be ad-
ded of the Serpentina Columna, aud the Stetua Equeſt-
ris abeneas (et up (this latter) againſt the Plaguein
Conftantinople,the deſtruion whereof, hath been fol-
lowed wich fearfull and pe. iodicall mortalities. But

enough

- of Diſcaſe'or noxious Creature, the Taliſmans were

P—_

203 The Temple of Wiſdome, - Book 1,

enough hath been faid , Mz 4ldrs may beſcen, and
che late Auchor of Qccule Philoſopby.

Ifwe draw all up, theſum will be che Anrienc
Rice of Ayerryncation, Thar in caſe a City or
Country ſhould be infeſted with any Plague eicher

conſulted and deſired to ere& an Image of the
Plague under a certain influence of Celeftial Con-
figuration,

And his 1 ſaw was the cauſe why the Philiftin A-
ſtrologers gave councel, char golden Images ſhould

| bemadeotthe H emorrboidesand the Mice chat mar-

red che Land, to give glory to the God of Iſreel.

The Teleſme againit the Mice according to Para-
celſus,is to have chis manner ofConſetration Make an
Fron Mouſe under the ConjunGiion of Saturn-qud Mars, in
the bouſe of Fupiter Saturn, ConjunGiqn Mars in Sagite
rus Imprint ups the belly. Alba matatox, &c.
In the Ther: place the Teleſme in the middle of the bonſe,
Eaſt Ant- 2:4 the Vermin ſhall injtantly leave the place.
Moreover chen ſo he promiſecth, Take a
live Mouſe and eye ict co tire Icon Image,

* andic ſhall dye immediately. But ] un-.
* dertakenoc that the Golden Mice were ſo
__ ceremonioully conſecrated; yet that they
had a Teleſmarica)l wey of Preparation an-
In the ſwerable co the beginnings and mediocri-
mid Hes-ty of the Art, my own reaſon, and above

*

vex, tharthe weight of. Maiwors wards induce
* * .metoconclude. |
a 1 ſay (faith he) of that of Samuel concer-

* * ming the Images of the Hemorrhaides, that they
* * _ were ſo Called, not ſommcb from their external [
 - © oF

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. 203

. form, as from «4 ſecret influence within, re-
In the * medial! againſt the Plague in the bindey
fourch. parts. | ; ,

* * | ,, The Aftrologers had perceived that this

% . God had been pleaſed with the Brazen Ser-

* % Ppent, Which Moſes the Taleſman {ſo ch

* would account hiw ) ſer up upon a pole
- in the Wilderneflc, Numb. 21.8, . And4
need not ſtick ro affirm, that this braſena Serpent a-
gainlt the fiery Serpents was the firſt occaſion (l ſay
not given ) but taken, of allcheſe Teleſmacical

raftiſes. * |

, And thus alſo we may come to know (Cee Plinze
lib 10... 27- Cyrenaici Achorum, Dewm muſcaruns
pultitudine peflilentiam inferente, invocant, why the
God of Ekron was called by the name of taal zebub,
that is, Gaxa vic; (astheLxx) orthe Fly God. The
Greeek Copies of the Evangeliſts for che mt part
read f2Z7efova 3eelzeboul, Deus or Belus Stercorevs, So
they Princed Arebick and the Hebrew Tranſlation of
Se Met . Bur I preſume not originally, And fo
Saint Hzerome obſerved, for ſeeing the [diom of Ze-
bul is Syriack,, it would have been expected, that
that Paraphraſe ſhould not have read asit doth, (&
undoubtedly ought) Feelzebub.

But for the reaſon, ifany could be given, Scaliger
was likely to give asgood as another, and yer his
reaſon is; that the Scripture put this name upon
the God of Ekron by way of deriſion, qued in Templo
H ieroſolymitano Muſc e carnes viciimarum non liguriebant,
quum tamen Gentium fayua a muſcis infeftarentur propter
nidorem viGimarum. :

True indeed it is out ofthe Pirke Avoth, that a
Fly was neverſeen in the Slaughter-bouſe of the Tem-
ple, And it was a priviledg of the Jewiſh aj

: aDOVe

204 TheTempleof Wiſdome.. Bookx1.

abovethoſe of the Heathen. But that therefore the
God of Ekron (hoald be call'd che Fly-God. is a rea-
ſon below chat mans ſagacity. He was properly fo
called, as the moſt learned Selden Butf.,rthecauſe
he confeflecth, Negueo dicere, nec mibi quis alins opinoy
ſatis poteſt | |

.* Bur the Ekyonites were peſtered with noiſome flyes;
To avert this Nuſance the Aſtrologers ſet up the ]-
mage ofafly Teleſmatically endued; the people.
findmg the benefit af this 270 made it a God
The Iſraelites themſelves did as much to the Braſen
Serpent.

Ic will be co the purpoſe here to add a not much
unlike accident of Heathen ſtory noted by the Scho-
liaft of Ariftephanes in Axapris co theſe wards ofthe
Poer. |

O' Zay diag + pany.

He telleth vou there,that Phallus 18, EUAoy em unxec
TXov iv Td dxpp oxuTIVON aidoloy iEngrnuivor, Tra To NN 6
ganls md Awyvoy. A long pole fitted at the top with a
coriaceumvirile pudendum, end that this uſed to beſet
up in honour to Baccns, 8&c. It wasa kinde of Priapus,
the Figures whereof hagl rather you ſhould ſeein
the Marbles.

Tr hapneth (ſaith the Scholiaſt) that ſome of ' theſe
Images were brought from Elucher1, A City of Paeotia to
Athens oi J$ & Time vx $I(Zarro were TINS [? Veer,
ax" wx, euviys aurols Teairas, Brnwuoayiros anifn.
And the Athenians did not ſo duly and bonouradly re-
Ceive the god, but this raſh advice of theirs did aot ſo well
ſucceed unto them.

Mnrioar7@ 33 7 Os, vooO0- xgreounner eis Td aidols
T7 aſewr, x; To S{vov drnxecoriir ow Nano Toy refs Tw
rower xeltffo Seropiruy Tdons wayyarcia x) TEX NS ATE

rdnoay Vier wire awdiis © I inarnliorrys Veacar
: . . Jegry.

Book. The Tempteof Wiſdome. 203.

fagiy eral woyny TavuTny i Ie adons Tins dryorey + Haby.”
mud; iy Tos ny arukvois 6: Aqnvdtor, panes idig F
' 2) Snjogia. xgTiondagay xj TETNU wyheategs + I80y , ward-
pYNue FOUL Ts ads. |

| Fer the angry God truck them with an incurable diſeaſe
in the Yecret parts. which being given over as impoſſible
fo be 4" with by any Art or Legerdemain,they made baſt
to ſend Þo the Oracle, and this anſwer was returned, that
tbe only way to be rid of the diſeaſe was to recerve the god
with all r verence The Athenjans perſwaded by this,
made th-mſelves |mages of theſe things, (paw) private-
ly and publickly, and with theſe they did honous to the God
in memory of the Diſeaſe, Here nexce follows the Te-
\ leſmes of che Planets, Signes, Rules and Genz Supe- |
riorand Inferior,

Teleſmatical Images of \, and Zarel, -

To are made for the moſt part with tal], lean,
and ſlender bodys,with an angry countenance,
having four faces; one in the hinder part of the
head, one on the former part of the head, and on
each (ide noſed or beaked : there likewiſe appeareth
a face on each Kneezof a black ſhining colour : cheir*
morion is the moving of the winde, with a kind of
Earth quake: their-fign is whiteearch, whiterthen
any ſnow.

The particular forms are, from VP and 2 Cambiel

* X
and Hanael ard their Figures. pe +
V I Z. =.

A King having a beard, riding ona Dragon, *
An Old man with a beard. *

=" The Temple of Wifdome. Book I

=

An Old woman leaning on a ſtaffe,

A Hog. |

ADragon. Da
An Owl. - $i
A black Garment: x |

A Hooke or Sickle: ;
A juniper-rcee. .

&

The Teleſmies of Fupiter, and Hiſmael. |
T% Images of Jupicer, they make with a Body

Sanguine and cholerick, of a middle ſtature,
with a horrible fearful motion; but with a milde
countenance, a gentle ſpeech, and of the colour of
Iron. The motion of them, is flaſhings of Lighe-
ning and Thunder; their fign is, they ſay,there will
appear men about, who ſhould ſeem to bedevou-
red of Lions.

Their particular forms are from > and % Advachiel *

&
and Amnixiel by theſe Figures. *

* *
. A King with a Sword drawn, riding on a Stag =
A Man wearing a Micre in long rayment. & *
A Maid with a Laurel-Crown adorned with * *
Flowers. | * 3
A Bull.
A Stag.
A Peacock
An azure Garment.
A Sword.
A Box-tree.

Afcer this manner do Supertour and Inferiour po-
wers communicate. | The

.. otro. 46 ha ANGNSOEIFEST Aetotus 4-4 +24, i A rad a

Book E 2s ) De Temple 9; Witdome. 2OF

The Teleſmatical forms of Mars aud Barzabel, when
by Art and Nature united

TT Hey appear in a tall body, cholerick, a filchy

countenance, of colour brown, ſwarthy or red,
having horos like Harts-horns, and Griphins claws,
beſlowing like wilde Bulls. ' Their Motion is like
fire burning 3 their fign Thunder and lightning
abour the Figures. :

Their particular ſhapes are, from oy that falſe ſign
m Malchidael and Barchiel by theſe Figures,

A King armed riding upon a Wolf. —
A a armed. , : EE TY
A Woman holding a buckler on her Thigh. + x
A Hee-goat. *
A Horſe.

A Stag.

A red Garment.

Wooll. -

A Cheeſlip.

The Teleſmatical Figures of the Sun, and Sorath.

He Images of che Sun are for the moſt part made
ina la:ge, full and great body ſanguine and
groſs, in a gold colour, with the TinQure of blood.
Their motion isas the Lightning of Heaven ; cheic
_ is £o moye the perion to ſweat that makes
racms

But

208 The Temple of Wildome. Book I-

But their particular forms are, from &\ and iy Ver- *
chicl «nd Malchidel, Bir Verchiel governes * #-

both theſe Fighires. -
AKing baving a Scepter riding ona Lion. -
A King crowned. +211 os
A Qaeen with « Scepter, _
A Bird. | | .
A Lyon. =”
A Cock.
A yellow or golden Garment,

| ASceprter,

The ſhapes of the Telefmes of Venus, and Kedemei.

"I Hey fay cheir T; eleſmes are of middle ſtature, wich

" an amiable and preſent countenance, of colour
white or grecn, the upper part golden. The mo-
tion of them is as it were a moſt clear Star. For
cheir fign, there will ſeem co be maids playing with
the Image, which will provoke and allare him thar
callech chem to play.

But their particular forms are, from 5 and X
2 Halmodel aud Zuriel * *
A King with a Serpent riding upona Camel: -
A Maid clothed and dreffed beaucifully, ".
A Maid naked. ; : | &
 AShee-goat. X*
A Camel. *
A Dove,
A white orgreen Garment.
Flowers,

The herb Savine,

he Temple of V

The Teleſmes of Mercury, and Taphchartharath;

DS

T He Images of Mercury are made for the moſt parc
ina body of amiddleftacnre,” cold, liquid and
moift, fair, and wich an affableſpeech z in a humane
ſhape and form, like unto a Knight armed 3 of co»
Jour clear and brighe; The motion of therir3s as ic
were filver-colored clouds. For their 6gn,tliey'cauſe
aud bring horror and fear unto him that: makes
them, -. OS

But their particular ſhapes are, from x and 1m Ame * *
- bricl «xd Hamaliel ## theſe Figures * *

- A King riding upon a Bear. _ - 5
A fair , "bom" ; "xz
A Woman holding a diftaffe. X
A Dog. on 3 * *
A Shee-bear,

A Magpy- . . | 29 kn
A Garment of ſundry changeable colours.

A Rod. E
A lictle ſtaffe,

The forms of the Teleſmes of the Moon, ard
Haſmodai.

'T Hey are for the 'part moſt made of Silver
__ ma great and full body, ſofc and phlegmarick,
of colour like a black obſcure cloud, having a

O ſwelling

210 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 1

ſwelling countenance, With eyes red and full of
water, a bald head, and teeth like a wilde boar.
Their motion 1sas 1t were an exceeding great tem-
peſt of the Sea. For their figne, there will appear
an exceeding great rain abouc the Figures.

And their particular ſhapes are, from Cancer and * X*
+ Muriel «nd Haſmodel and their Figures are, C
| *%

A King like an Archer riding upon a Doe.
A liccle Boy. Dr -
A Woman-hunter with a bow and arrows,

A Cow.

A herle Doe.
A Goolc.,
A Garnient green or filver- coloured.
An Arrow, lo

_A Creature having many feet.

*
=
x
*

Cee —

noe — ng 4 Va— 4

CIS

Of the Teleſmes, of Saturn and Zazel.

Ut now, what Images they did at-

Sas cribure to the Planets, although of
* ** * thelerhings very Jarge volumes have becn
* ** * . written by the ancient wiſe men, ſo that
* * * thereisnoneedto declare them here,not-

; withſtanding willrecite a few of them;
for they made, from the opperations of Saturn, $4-
turs aſcending in a ſtone, which is called the Load-
ſtone, theimage ofa man,having the countenance
vfan Hart,and Camels feer,and fitting upona chair
| or

WW v0 ___Vv- voy WV

wy 4 CS 9 Y wW®

Book I, 1b Temple of Wiſdame, 218

or Dragon, holding in his right hand a tithe, in his .
left hand a Dartz which image chey did hope would
be proficable for prolongation of life; for Albuma-
ſer in his book Seder, proverh chat Saturn condu-
ceth cothe prolongation of life: where alſo he ctel-
leth that certain regions of - India being (uvjett to
' Saturn, there men are of a very long lite, and dye
-not, unlefſe by extream old age: They mace alſo
anocher [mage of Saturn for lengch of-dayes, in a
ſaphire ac che hour of Saturn, -Seturn alcending or
fortunately conſticuted, whole figure was an old
man fitting upon an high chair, having his hands
lifced up above his head, and in them holding a
fiſh or Sickle, and under his feet a bunch of Grapes,

his head covered with a black or dusky coloured

cloth, and all his Garments black or darke colcu-

red: They allo make this ſame Image againſt the

Stone and diſeaſes of the Kidneys, viz. inthe hour

of Setirn. Saturn aſcendeth with the third face of

Aquarius: they made alſo from the opperations of

Saturn, an [mageofthe encreafing in power, Saturs

aſcending in-Capricorn ; The form of thich was an

old man leaning ona ſtaff, having in his hand a
crooked fickle, and cloathed in black. They alſo

madean Image of melred Copper, Saturn aſcending

in his rifing, viz. in the firſt degree of Ares or which
is more true in the firſt degree of Capricow, which
Image they athirm coſpeak wich a mans voice; The

made alfo out of che operations of Saturn, and alfo'
Mercury, an Image of caſt metcall, like a beaurifull
man, which chey promiſed would foretell chings to
come, and made it on the day of Mercury, on che

third hour of Seturn, the fign of Gemini aſcending,

being the houſe of Mercury, fignifying prophets, Sa-
Furs an d Mercury being in conjunion in Aquarius
QO' 2 Ty.

- The Temple of Wiſdome. | Book L
'3n theninth place of Heaven, which is alſo called
God: Moreoverler Saturn havea Trine Aſpe& on
\ "the Aſcendent, and the moon in; like manner, and
che Sun have an Aſpe@on theplace of Conjun&ion.
Venus obtaining ſome Angle may be powerfull and
| occidental 3 Jet Mars be combuſt by the Sun, bur
let it nothavean Aſpe& on Saturn and Mercury; for
they ſaid, that the ſplendor of the powers of: thefe
Starswas diffuſed upon this Image, and ic did fpeak
with men, and declare thoſe thugs which are pro-
fitable for them. | |

%

—c
.
| 2

CHAP, XXXVII.

Of the Teleſmes of Jupiter and Kedemed.

ps Tang | ys the operations of Fupiter, they
+® mala made for prolongation of life, an I-
* *%** * mage inthe hourof Fupiter, 7apiter being
| * '* * in hisexalraticn fortunately aſcending,m
a clear anq white ſtone, whoſe figure was a man
crowned, cloathed with garments of-a Saffron o-
lour, riding upon an' Eagle or Dragon, having in
| hisrighthanda dart, about as ir were to ftrjkeit
intothe head of the ſame Fagle or Dragon. They
made alſo another Image of 7upiter atthe ſame con-
{| venient (ſeaſon, in a white and clear ſtone, eſpecially
'Þ in Cryſtall, and it was a naked man Crowned, ha-
1,0 ving both his hands joyned together and lifted up,
"'h as it weredeprecating fomething, firting in'a four-
| foored chair, which is carried by fonir winged _

| all

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome.

————— — - -—

and they afficm chat this image encreaſeth feliciry,
riches, honor, and conferreth benevolence and pro-
ſperity, and freeth from enemies ; they made alſo

another Jmage of Jupiter for a religious and glori-

ous life, and advancement of fortune; whole fi-
gure was a man having the head of aiyon, ora
Ram and Eagles feet, cloathed in Saffron coloured
cloaths, and he was called rhe Son of Jupiter,

bu
—H———————_—CGCG_w_n_AY ee OD —_— — _—— ——— {{_—————_

CHAP. XXXIX,
Of the Teleſmes of Mars and Barzabel.

*& K * | Fn che operations of Mars they
* | *

made an Image in the hour of Mers, *

* XXX Mars aſcending in thefecond face of A-
a wind ries, in a Martial ſtone, eſpecially in a Di-
amond; The form of which was a man armed, ri-
ding upon a Lyon, having in his right hand a na-
ked Sword ete&ed, carrying in his lefthand the
head ofa man; they report, chat an image'of this
kinde rendreth a man powerfull' mn good andevill,
ſo that he ſhall be feared of all; and whoſoever car-'
ryerhi it they give him the power of enchanement,:
ſo that he ſhall terrify men by his looks when he is
angry, and ftupifie them; chey made another image
of Mars for the obtaining of boldnefle, conrage and
good fortune in warrs and contentions,the form of
which was a ſouldier armed and crowned, girt wich
aſword, carrying in his right hanil along Lance;
and they made thisar the hour of Xars,the firſt face

of Scorpio aſcending with it. |
: Q 3 CHAP,

_

SS

2 "4 "E The Tewple of Wiſdome. Book |

Pg

'CHap. XL.
of the Taliſmans of the Sun, aud Sorath.

K 2 | * 'Rom the aperations of the Sun,

* * they made an Image at the hour of

” yo the Sun, the firſt face of Leo aſcendjng

*F with the Sun, the forme of which was

a king crowned, fitting in a Chair, having a Raven

in his Boſome, and under his feet a Globe; he is
cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes ; They report

that this Image rendreth men invincible, and ho-
norable, and helps co bring their bulineſſes to a

goud end, and todrive away vain dreams ; alſo to

'* beprevalenr againſ} feavers, and the plague ; and
they madeit ina Balanite ſtone or a Rubin, at che
hour of the Sun, when ic in his exaltation fortunate-

Iy aſcendech; They made another Image of the Sun

in a Diamond, at the hour of the $2, ic aſcending

an his exalcation ; the Figure of which was a woman
crowned with che Geſture of one Dancing and

Laughing, ſtanding in a Chariot drawn wich four

Horles, haying in her right hand a Looking-glaſs, or

Buckler, in the lefc a ftaffe leaning on her Brea!',

carryingaflame of fire an her Head; They. reporc

that this Image rendreth a man fortunate and rich,
2nd beloved of all; and the; made chis Image, on

a Corneoll ſtone at the hour of the Sux aſcending.

in the firſt face of Leo, againſt Lunatick paſſions

Fhich proceed from the combyltion of che. Moon,

CHAP.

C x
o

Bookl. TheTemple of Wiſdome. 215

CHAP. XLI.
Of the Taliſmans, and of Venys.

* } © the operations of YVenuw they
" MS made an Image, which was available
_ | * forfavor, and benevolence, at the very
* I* * hourit aſcending into Piſces, the form of
which was the Image of a woman having the head
ofa Bird, and feet of an Eagle, holding a dartin
her hand. They make another Image of Venus for
to get the love of women, in the Lapis Lazulw, at
the hour of Venus, Venus aſcending in Teurw, the
figure of which was a naked Maide with her hair
ſpread abroad, having a Looking-glaſs in her hand,
and achain tyed about her Neck, and nigh her a
handſome young man, holding her with his lefc
band by the chain, but with his righe hand making
up her hair, and they both look Jovingly on one
another, and about them is @ liccle winged boy
holding a ſword or a dart. They made another

Image of Yewws, the firſt face of Taurws or Libre or

Piſces aſcending with Venus, the figure of which was
a litcle Maide with her hair ſpread abroad, gloathed
in long and white garments, holding a Lewre/ Apple,
or flowers in her right hand, in her lefr a Combe -

| Irsreported to make men pleaſant, jocund, ſtrong,

chearfull and to give beaucy,

O 4 CHAP.

———
wo ”

—_ _ =
» > we - Y
—_ No ener

> —

216 * TheTemple of Wildome. Boo

SAI IS ey,
oo -
gr” >

* *|
*

K T,

"Can LL.

Of the Teleſmans of Mercury, and Taphtbar,
_ "tharath, Y

&. 8 & þ*7 the operations of Mercury, they
if made an Image ar the hour cf Mercury,
1'* , Mercury aſcending in Gemini, the form of

| a Ye F
x *#* * which was an handſome young man,

bearded, having in hislefc hand a rod in which a
Serpent istwined about,in his right carrying a dart,

- having his feet winged; They report that this Image
 conferreth' knowledge, . eloquence, diligence 1
- merchandizingand gain; moreover to beget peace

and concord, and to cure feavers ; They madeano-

| ther Image of Mercury, Mercury aſcending in Firgo,

for good will, wit and memory : The form of which

was a man. fitting upon a Chair, or riding on a
. Peacock; having A 4

| | es feer, and on his head a creſt,
and'iin his left hand holding a cock or fre. | |

a _ — a—
ama" ——— n——o—_————_—_ —WR——___L——__ AER _

Caae. XLUL.
Of the Teleſmes of the Moon, aud Haſmodel.

Eq. 4 Rom che operations cf the Moon,
ANT they mage an Image for travellers
*X X*

* - againſt wearineſs, at the hour of the Moor,
EN * the Koon aſcending in its exalcation ; ihe
Figure of which was a man leaning on a fſtaffe, ha-.
—- 4 ving

: »

| ving on ſhter head two Serpents with horns twined

NS a ED ues

Book 1. * 1be Temple of Wiſdomes 217
ving a bird on his head,and a flourithingrree before
x, 3 They made” another [mage pt che Mom for
the increaſe of the fruits of the Earth, and againft
poyſons, and infirmities of Children, at the hour.
of the Mooz, it aſcending in the firſt face of Cancer, ,
the figure of which was a woman cornured, riding.
on a Bull, or a Dragon with ſeven heads, ora Crabz.
and ſhe hath in her right hand a dart, in her lefr a
Looking-glaſs, clothed in white or green, and ha»

together, and to each arm a Serpenc ewined abour,..
and to each foot one in hke manner. And chus .
much ſpoken concerning the Figure? of rhe.
Planes, may ſuffice, .

ay n———_—_o_— ee I EE CEE —_ iP ——

CRAP. XLIV.

Of the Images of the Head and Tayle of the
Dragon of the Moon.

+ FF, * Hey made alſo the Image of the
* - T Head and Tayte of hs Dragon
- *. x Of che Moen, namely -berwixc an Axial
and ficry Circle, the likenels of a Ser-
pent, with the Head ofan Hawke ryed about thern,”
after the manner ofthe greac lecrer Theta, andrhey
made it. when Fapiter with the Head obcain'd the-
widft of Heaven : which Image they affirm co availe:
much for the. ſucceſs of Petitions, arid would ligne
by this Image'a good and fortunare Genius, which:
they would reprefent by this Image cf the Serpent ;

\' :-: foe

218 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book L-

for the Egyptians and Phenitians do excoll (this
creature above all others, and ſay it 18a divine crea-
eure and hath a divinenature ; for in this is a more
acute ſpirit, and a greater fire then in any other,
which thing is manifeſted both by his ſwift motion
withour feet, hands or any other inſtruments, and
alſo that it often reneweth his age with his skin,and
becometh young again : but they made the Image
of the Taylelike as when the Moor was Ecclipſed, in
the Tail, orill affe&ed by Saturn or Mars, and they
made it tointrothace, anguiſh, infirmity and mis-
fortune ; and they called it the evil Genius ſuch
an ][magea certain Hebrew had included in a golden
Belt full of Jewels, which Blaxch che daughter ofthe
Duke of Borben (either willingly or ignorancly )
beſtowed on her husband Peter King of Spaix, the
firſt of that name, with which when he was pirt, he.
ſeemed to himſelfto be compaſſed about with a Ser-
pent ; and afterwards finding the Magicall virtue
fixedin the girdle, for this cauſc he forſook his wif .

CHAP. XLV.
of the Teleſmaticall Images of the Menſions
of the Moon.

TX made alſoImages for every Manfion of the
3 Moon; nm the firſt for thedefirudtion of ſome
e, they madein a Iron ring the Image ofa-black:

_ in a garment made of hair, and girdled round,
 eafſting a (mal Lance with his right hand ; chey ſea-
Ted this in black Wax, and perfumed ir wich liquid
Sporax, and wiſhed ſome evil co com. In the ſecond,

' againſt the wrath of che Prince, and for reconcila-
C101b

Book]. The Templeof Wiſdome.” "319
tion with him, they ſealed in white Wax-and Ma-
- Gick, che [mage of a King crowned, and perfumed
it with Lignum Aloes; In the third, they madean
. Image in a filver ring, whoſe cable was ſquare, the
figure of which was a woman well clothed, firting
ina Chair, her right hand being lifred up on her
Head; they ſealed it and perfumed it with muske,
Camphire and Calamus Aromaticus, They affirmed
thar this giveth hapy fortune and every goodthing.
In che fourth, for revenge, ſeparation, eamity and

111 will, chey ſealed in red Wax the Image of a Soul-

dier fitting on an Horſe, holding a Serpent in his

right hand; they perfumed it with red Mirrhe,and

Storax; in the fifth, for the favour of Kings and
| Officers, and good entertainment, they ſealed in

Silver the Head of a man, and perfumed ic with

Sanders; in the fixth, for to procure love berwixt

two; they ſealed in whiteWax two Images inbracing

one another, and perfumed them with Lignum

Aloes and Ambec; in the ſeventh,for to obtain eve-

ry good thing, they ſealed in Silom, the Imageof a
man well clothed, holding up his hands to Heaven
as it were praying and (upplicating,and perfumed it
with good Odors; In the eight, for victory in War,
they madea ſeal of Tin,being an Image of an Eagle,
having the face of a man, and perfumed ic with
*Brimftone. In the ninth, co cauſe infirmicies, they
made a ſeal of Lead, being theImage of a man wan-
ting his privy parcs,ſhutting his eyes with his hands;
and they perfumed it with Rofin ofthe Pine. 1a the
tench,to facilitate child-bearing,and cocurethe fick
they made a (calof Gold, being the head of a Lyon,
& perfumed ic with Amber: In the eleventh,for fear,
reverence and worſhip, they made a ſealofa plate of

Gold, being the image of a man riding on a Lyon,
baldingrthe ear thereof in his left hand, and in _
rignt,

ple of Wifdonge, * Book I,

rifht, bolding fqrta a bracelet of Gold, ,and they
perfumed it with good Odours arid Saffron. In the
twelfch, for the ſeparation of ,overs, they. made
a ſeal of black Lead, being the image of a Dragon
fighcing with a man, and they perfymed it with the
hairs ofa'Lyon, and Af ferita:* In,the thirteenth,
for the agreement of married couples, and, for the
diffolving of the Charms again Copulation, they
made a ſeal of theimages of both; of the man in red
Wax, of thewoman in white, and cauſed them to
1mbrace one+>another, perfuming ic with Lignum
Aloesand Amber. In the Gn eench, for divorce and
ſeparation of rhe man from che woman, they made
a (eal of red Copper, being the 'inrage 'of a Dog
biting his tai), and they perfumed it with the hair
ofa black Dog, and black Car. In the fifteenth,
| foro obtain friendſhip and good will, they made
the Image ofa man fitting, and inditing of lerrers,
an perfumed it with Frankincenſe and Nutmegs.
In the fixtceuth, for to gain much Merchandizing
they made aſeal of Silver, being the image ofa man
"ms upon a Chair,holding a ballance in his hand,
and they perfumed 1 with well ſmelling ſpices. In
_ the ſeventeenth, againſt Theevesand Robbers, they
ſcaled with an.Iron ſeal che Image of an Ape, and
perfumed it with the hair of an Ape.” In the eigh-
ceenth, againſt Feavorsand pains ofthe belly, they
made a ſeal of Covper, being the image of a Snike,

holding his tail. above his head, and they perfumed
ic with Harts-harn, and reported the Gd feal ro
pur to flight Serpents, and all yehemous Creatures
from the place where it is /buried.' | lj the nine-
ceenth for faciſiratirig birth, and' ptovoking che
menſtrues, chey, made a ſeal of Copper, being the
ypobni, her
"> 27 < koaee 3

by

Fy
-

' mage of a worn, tiolding her hands

Book I. The Temple of Wildome.. "aaT

face; and they;perfumed it wich Liguzd Storax, lg
the cwentieth, for hunting, they made a ſeal of Tiny
being the Image of Sagzttary, half a Man, and hal
an Horſe, aqd they perfumed with the Head of 2
Woolf. In the ewenty one for the deBrugon of fome
body, they made the iwage of a man with a double
countenance, before and behinde, .and they per-
fumed it with Brimſtane and Jet, and did pur. 1c is
a box of Braſs,, and with 1t Brimſtone and lm an
che hair of him whom they would ,hure.” In..the
ewo and twentieth, for the ſecurity of Runaways,
they made a ſeal of Iran, being the Image of a, man
wich wings on his feer, bearing an helmec; on his
bead, and they perfumed ic with Argent vive, Jas
the three paw twentferh, for deſtryfion and wa;
ſting, they made a ſeal of [ron, being the img |
a Cat, having a Dogs head, and they pertumed it |
with the hairs of a Dogs head, and buricd ic in the
place where they did pretend to hure. - Im-chefour
and ewentieth, for the muwlciplying of Heards of
Cattle, they took/the fforn of a Rar), Bul), or Goat,
or of that Gen of Cactle which they would increaſe, .
and ſealed-jc iin burning with an Iron. ſeal, the 1-
mage of a wpman giving ſuck to her Son, and chey
hanged it on the neck of that Cattle who was the
leader of theflock, or theyſealed ic in his horji. ZI
the five and ewentieth, forthe prefegvacion of T tees
and Harveſts, they ſealcd in the wood ofa Fig-txee, -
the image of a wan planting, and.chey;perfumed ic
with the flowers of che Fig-cree, and did hang ig,on
thecree. In the fix and-cwentieth for love and fa- -
' vor, they ſealed in whiteWax and Maftick,the image
of a woman waſhing and combing her baires, and
they perfumed ic with things ſme}ling very well. In
the (even and twentieth for, to deſtroy han
its,

222 The Templeof Wiſdome. Book].

_—-

Pirs, Medicinal Wacers and Baths, they made of red
'Earth the image of a man winged, holding in his
hand anempty Veſſel, and perforated, 'atid the i-
mage being burnt,they did pur-in theVelſel 4ſſ feti-
4s, and liquid Storax, and they did overwhetn and
bury it in the Pond or fountain which they would
deftroy. In the eight and cwentierh; for to gathec
Fiſhes together, .they made a ſeal of Copper, being
rhe lmage of a Fiſh, and they perfumed it with the
Skin of a Sea-fiſh, and did caft it into the water,
whereſoever chey would have the fiſh to gather to-
gether. Moreover together with the forefaid Im-
ages, they did write down fallo the names of che
Spirits and their Chara&ers, and did invocateand
pray for thoſe things which they pretended roob-
rain, ot |

CHae., XLVI,
of the Inrages of the fled Behenian Stars.

Ur now for the operations of the fixed Stars;
LI according to- Hermes opinion, under the head
of Algd, they made an Image whoſe Figure was che
head of a man with a bloody Neck; they report
that ic beſtoweth good ſucceſs ro Pericions, and
maketh him who carrieth ir bold and magnanimous
and preſerverh the members of che tody ſound :
alſo ic helpeth againſt Witchcrafc, and ' refleQeth
evil indeavours and wicked incantarions upon our
adverſaries. Under the conſtellation of _
: chey

3oox I, The Templesf Wikdome. 323

they made the jmage of a lictle Virgin,or the _
ofaLamp3; its reported co increaſe che light of the

| Eyes, to afſemble ſpirits, to raiſe Winds, to reveal

ſecrets and hidden things: Under Adlebora, they
made an Image afcer the likeneſs of God, or of a
flying man; ic giverh riches and honor: Underthe
oat they made an Image, ' the Figure of which was

. as it were,a man willing to make him(ſclfmerry with
Muſical inſtruments; ic makech him who carriecth

it acceptable, honored and exalted before Kings
and Princes; and helpech che pain of che Teeth :
Under the greater Dog fter, they made the image of
an Hound and altele Virgin ; it beftoweth honour
and good will, and the favor of men, and Arial
ſpicics, and giveth power to pacific: and reconcile
Kings. Princes, and other men : Under the lefler
Dog-ftar they made the image ofa Cock, or of three
liccle maides; ir conferreth che favor. of the gods,
of ſpitits, and men; it giveth power againſt Wicch-
crafts, and preſerveth health : Under the Heart of
Leo, they made the Image of aLion or Cat, or the
Figure of an honorable Perſon farting in a Chair ;

it rendreth a'man temperate, appeaſech wrath and

giveth favour: Under the tail of Vrſe Major they
made the image of a penfive Man; or of a Bull, or
che Figure of a Calf; it availcth againſt mcantati-
ous, and maketh him whocarrieth it ſecure in his
travels: Underthewing of Corvus, they made the
imageofa Raven, or Snake, or of a black Man cloa-
thed in black ; chis maketh a man cholerick, bold,
couragious, full of thoughts, a Backbiter, and cauſ-
eth naughty dreams; alſo it giveth the powerof
driving away evil ſpirits, and of gathering them
cogether ; icis proficable againſt the malice of Men,
Devils and Winds : Underthe Spike they made the

| image

The Temple of Wildome, Book I.
/ fmagcofa Bird, orof a man laden wich Merchan-
| gizer ic conferreth riches, . and makerh one over-
f come:contentions , it caketh away ſcarcity and miſ-
| chief: Under Alchometh they madethe image of an
Horſe or Wolf,.or the Figure of a man dancing ; it
wpood againſt Feavers, tit aftcingerh and retainerh
the blood. : Under E/phrys; they made the image of
100 2 Hen, or of a man crowned and advanced ; i bes
[ foweth the good will and love of men, and giverh
| chaſticy. Under-the hearr of Scorpio they made the
image of'a man armed, and with a coat of Me,or
che Figure of a 'Scorpron; it giveth underſtanding
and memory; it makech a good colour, and aideth
againſt evill ſpirics., and driveth them away, and
binderh them : 'Ulnder the Vulcure, they-made the
zoiageof a Vulthreor Hen,or of atraveller 5 ic ma<
keth a man magiyanimous and proud, it giveth po-
wer over devils and beaſts. -: Under the taife of Ca-
Fry made the image of an Hart o6Goat, or
anengry man;'it beftowerh proſperity'; and in-
creafeth wratb:Thele are the images of ſome'of the
fixed Stars, which they command co begraven'on
thoir-ſtones underthem. 1 |

Er 2

£4: $4

z ;

——_—_—

Book I, ' The Temple of Wiſdome, 225

CHAP. XLXVII.

Of Invages, the figure whereof is not after the like-
uneſſe of any Celeſtial figure, but after the like-
neſſe of that which the winde of the worker de-

| "= 4s you ſhall finde in the ſecond and third.
book.

mos remains as yet another manner of Images
not according to the fimilicade of Celeſtial fi-
gures, but acording cothe fimilicude ofchat which
the mind ofthe worker defires, of whoſe they are
the effigies, and repreſentation: So to procure love
we make images embracing one the other : to dif-
cord, ftriking one the other; to bring miſery, or
deſtru&ion as dammage to a man, or houſe, or City
orany thing elſe, we make images diftorted, broken
in members, and parts after the likeneffe and figure
of that thing which we would deftroy or damnikie ;
And Magicians adviſe us that in caſting or engra-
ving images we would wrice upon it the name ofthe
effe&; and this on the back when evill, as deſtru&i-
on; on the belly when good, as love. Moreover in.
the forchead ofthe image let be wricen the name of
the ſpecies or Individuum which the image repre-
ſents, or for whom or againſt whom it is made, Al-
ſo on the breaftlet the name of the ſign or face a(-
cending, and Lord thereof be written z alſoche
Names and Charaders ofits Angels. Moreover in
making the image; they advife that prayer for che
| þ P effe&

\ PA A NON Od ac

226” The Teinple of Wiſdome.” Book L

effc& for which ic is made, be uſed. All which Al-
bertxs Magn in his Speculo affirms. Now they uſe
the 1mages being made, diverſly according to the
vertues thereof; Sometimes they hang them in a
Chimney over the ſmoak, or upon a tree that they
| be moved by the wind ; ſomerimes with the head
upward, and ſometimes downward; ſometimes they
Pp: t them into hor water, orintothe fire. For they
 ſay,as the workers of the images do affe@ che image
at (elf, ſo doth it bring the hike paſſions upon thoſe
to whom it was aſcribed, as the mind of the opera-
cor hath difiated it. As we read that NeGanebus
the Magician made images of (hips with wax afrer
chat manner and art, that when he drowned thoſe
images 11 water, chat the ſhips of his enemies were
in like mauner drowned in the Sea and hazarded.
Now char part of Aſtrology which is writ concern-
ing eletione, teacheth us that the conſtellations al-
ſo are to be obſerved forthe making of images, and
your Metal muſt be Spermatick and Calloe, befere
ut can receivethe Afiral Agent, |

— wy oo r——_ L — —— I.
EP 2

4 AO CHAP. XLVIIL |
Of certain Celeſtial obſervations and the praGiſe
. of fome Teleſmatical Images.
Will now ſhew thee the obſervarion of Celeſtial
bodies, which are required for the praiſe of ſome
of thele kind of images; Soto make any one for-
cunate, we make an image in whichtheſe are fortu-
nate, viz the fignificator of che life thereof, the
givers of life, the figns, and Planets, © Moreover
tec the aſcendentyhe middle ofthe heaven, _ =
| ords

Book I. | 1be Temple of VViſdome. 227
lords chereof be fortunace: allo the place of che ſun
& place of the Moon,parr of fortune & Lurd ot cone
junGion or prevention made before cher natuvity
y deprefling che Malignanc Planes Bur if we will
make an image toprocure miſery, we multi dy con=
trarywilſe, and thoſe wh. h weplacc here fortun.te,
muſt chere be infortunace,by raifingm_.lignant: cars,
In like manner muſt we doto make any Place Re»
gion, Gicy, or houſe fortunate. Alſo for celiroye
ing or prejudicing any of che foreſaid; Let chere be
made an image under che aſceniion of chat man
whom thou wouldft deſtroy and prejudice,and thou
{hall make unfortunace, the Lord of cheohoute of his
life, the lord of the aſcending & che moon, the lord
of the houſe of the moon,and the lord of the houſe
of the Lord aſcending, and the tench houte, and
the lord thereof. Now forthe ficting of any place,
fortunes in .the aſcendenc thereof; and in the
firſt and tenth, and ſecond, 'and eighth houſe, thou
ſhall make the lord of the aſcendent,and the lord of
the houſe of the Yoon fortunate. Buc cochalſe .w-y
certain Animals from certain , laces, that chey may
not be generated, or abide there, let there bean im
age made under the aſcenſion of that Animal, which
thou wouldſt chaſe away, and afcer the likeneſs
thereof, a*if thou woul.ieſt. chaſe away Scorpions
from any place, let an image of the Scerpicn be mauve
the fign of Scorpio aſcending with the v.oon, & chon
ſhale make untortunate the Aſcendent. and lord
thereof,and che Lord of t':e houſe of Mars;and chou
ſhall make unfortunace the lord of the aſcendenct in
the eighth bouſe,and lec chem be joyned with an aſ-
ec malign nt, oppoſite, or quadrant: and let there
be writ upon the jmage the name of the aſcendenc,
of the lord thereof, and of the Moon, and of che
FF ©) lord

———— —

| "226 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book [
Jord of the day, and ofthe lerd of the honr, And
ler there be pit madein the middleof the place,
from which thou wouldſt drive them; and let there
be carried into it, ſome of the earch caken out of the
four corners of the ſame place, and let the image be
-buried there with the head downward,with ſaying,
chis is the burying of the Scorpions, that they may
not come into this place, andſo of the reſt. So for
gain let there be made an image under the aſcen-
dent of the nativity of the man, or under the af-
cention of that place to which chou wouldeſt ap-
point'the gain, and thou ſhall make thelord ofthe
ſecond houſe, which is in the houſe of ſubſtanceto
be joyned with the Lord of the afcendent in the
Trine or Sextile, and let there be a reception
amoneſt them; thou ſhall make fortunate che ele-
venth and the lord thereof, and the eighth; and if
thou canſt, put pare of the fortune in the aſcen-
dent or ſecond; and let the image be buried in that
place, or carried from that place, ro which thou
wouldeſt appoint the gain, Alſo for concord and
Jove, ler there be an. image made in the day of 7up3-
fer under the aſcendent' of the nativity of him
whom thou wouldft have be beloved, make fortu-
natethe aſcendent and the tenth, and hid the evil
from the aſcendent; and thou muſt have the Lord
ofthetenth, and planets of the cleventh fortune,
Joyned to the lord of che aſcendent,from the Trine
or Sextile with reception; then make an other image
ferhim whom thou wonldeſt ſtir up to love ; con-
lider if he be a friend or companion of him whom
thou wouldſt have be beloved; and if ſo,let there be
an jmege under the aſcenſion of the eleventh houſe
from the aſcendent of the firſt image; bur if che

: P:rcy be @ wife, or a husband, lev it be made under
the -*

B ook I. The Temple of Wiſdome. * 229:

the aſcencion of che ſeventh ; if a brother or a tilter,
or 2 coutfin, let it be made under the aſcenſtonot the
third, and ſoof thelike ; and pur the (ignificator of
the aſcendenc of the fecond imace;ioyned to the lig-
nificator of the aſcendenct of the firſt image, and lee
there be berwixt chem a reception, and let the relt
be fortunare, as in the firſt image; zfrerwards joyn
both images together into a mucual embracing or
Pur the face of the ſecond image to the back ot the
firſt image, and let chem be wrapt up in tilk, and
caſt away or ſpoiled. Alſo for (uccefie of Peritions,
and for the obtaining of a thing denyed or taken or
poſlefled by an other, Jer there be an image made
under the aſcendenr of him who petitions for the
thing ; and cauſe that che lord of the (ſecond be
joyned wich the lord of the aſcendent from aT rine,
or Sextile,and ler there bea reception betwixe them,
and ifir can be, let the lord of the ſecond beinthe_
obeying figns, and the Jord of the alcendent in che
ruling, make fortunate che aſcendenc, and the lord
thereof, and take heed that che lord of the a(cen-
dent be not retrograde or combulſl, or falling, or in
che houſe of oppoſition, 7 e, in the ſeventh from his
own houſe; 'let him not be hindred by che malig-
nant,let him be ſtrong and inan angle; Thou fhalc
make fortunate the aſcendent, and the lord of the
ſecond and the Moon ; and make another image for
him that is pecitionedco, and begin it underthe
aſcendenc belonging co him, as if he be a King or
a Prince, begin ic under the aſcendenc of thErenth
houſe from the aſcendent of the firlt image; It he be
a Father under the fourth; if a <on under fifch and
lo of the like; and put che {ignificator ofthe ſecond
image, joyned with the lord of cheaſcendent of the

writ image, from a Trine or Sextile, and lethim re-
| P 3 | withour

een,

he Tem ple of W 1{ iome.

230 FOuK 1.
cCeive rt, ana pur them both ſtr-.ng and fortunate
w:chourt any let; make all evi!l fall from chem.
Thou ſhale m+ke fortunate the tench and the fourth,
it chou caſt, orany ofcthem; and when the ſecoud
 Im:4ge ſhall.be perfected, joyn it with the firſt, face
to face, and wrap them in clean linnen, and bury
th-m [n 'the middle of his houſe, whois aPetitioner
under a fortunate fignificator, the fortune being
ſtrong, and let the face of the firſt image be toward.
thedlorets or. rather coward that place where the
_ thing pericioned for doth abide; or if it happen that
the perttioner. goeth forward towards him , with
whom the thing peritioned for is, let him bring che
_images wich him asfar as he goes. And ler there be
| madeanimage of dreams, which being put under
che head of him that ſleeps, makes him dream true
dreams concerning any thing that he hach for-
merly deliberated of; and let the figure of that
be che figure of a man ſleeping in the boſome af
anAngel,which rhou ſhall makein the Lyon aſcend-
ng , the Sun keeping the ninech houſe in Arzes; thou
ſhalc wrie-upon che breaſt of the man, the' name
- of the eff:& delied,, 'and in the hand of the Angel,
the name of the intelligence of the Sun. Ler che
ſame image be made in /rrgo aſcending, Mercury be- .
inz forrunare'in Aries in the nineth houſe; or Gem: -
_ maſcending in Mercury being fortunate, and keep-
ing the nineth houſe in Aquarizsz and let it bere-
ceived from Satrrz with a fortunate aſpe&, and let
the name of the <p rit of Mercury be writ upon it-
Let alſo the ſame be made in Libre aſcending. Venus
being received from Mercury in Gemizi in che ninerh
houſe, by writing npon it the. Angel of Venw. Pe-
fdes alſo, ler the ſame image be made in Aquarius
aſcending. $91 = fortunately poſleſling the _—_
E : OLULE

By

Book l. The Temple of Wifdome. 21

houſe in his exaltacion, which is in Libre, and lec
' there be wric ypon it the Ange' of Saturn. More-
overletthere be made in Cancer aſcending,the Moon
being received ty Fupiter and Venus in Piſces, and
buy fortunately placed in the ninth bouſe, and
lec there be writ upon ic the ſpiric of che Moon.
There arealſo made Rings of dreams of wonderful
efficacy z and there are rings of the Sun, and Saturr
and the conftellation of them is when the Sun or
Saturn aſcend in their ezaltations in the ninth houſe
and when the Moon is joyned to Sarury in theninh
houſe, and in that fign, which was the ninth houſe
of Nativity ; andler them be wric upon the rings,
the name of the ſpirit of the Sun, or Saturn. Lec.
thjs which hach been ſpoken ſuffi. e concerning i=
mages; for now thou mayft find ou: more of chisna-
tyre of thy (elf, But know chis, chat ſuch images
wark nothing, unleſs they be ſo vivified chat either
a Natural, or Celcftial, or Heroical, or Animaſtical,
or Lemoniacal, or angelical vertue be in them, or FEY
aſſiſtant co chem. Buc who can give a ſaul to an WE
image, or make a ſtone to live, or mettal, or wood,
or Wax ? and who can raiſe our of ſtones children
- unto Abraham? Certainly this Arcanum doth noc
enter into an Artiſt of a ſtiffe neck; neither can he
give thoſe things which hach them noc, N6 body
hath chem but he who doth (the Elements being
reſtrained, naturebeing overcome, the Heavens be-
ing over-powered) tranſcend the progrels of Angels
and comes to the very Archetype it (elf, of which
being then madea cooperator may doall things, as
we ſhall ſpeak afterwards, Es

CHAP.

232 The Templeof Wiſdome. "Book 1

ee
—J_©w_

CHarPp. XLIX. i

Of the Geamantick aud Teleſmatical CharaGers

which are made after the rule and imitation of

Celeſtial, and how with the table thereof they
arededuced out of Geomantical Figures.

{6 mrs alſo have their community from the
rayes of theCeleſtials caſt together accordingto
a certain namber, by a certain peculiar property,
which Celeſtials as in divers ſtrokes of their rayes
falling ſeveral ways amongft themſelves, produce
divers vertues : ſo alſo Chara&ers being variouſly
protratted, according to the various concourſe of
thoſe rayes quickly Feain divers operations, and
alſo moreefficacious many times then the properties
of natural commixtions, Now the true CharaQters
of the heavens is the writing of Angels, which a-
mongſt the Hebrews is called the writing Malachin:,
. by which all chings are deſcribed and fignified in the
Heaven for every knowing man toread. But of
theſe hereafrer ;_ But now they make Chara&ers of
| Geomantical figures binding togecher the points of
each variouſly, and attributing them according to
the manner of their figurings, ro thoſe Planers and
ſigns of which thy were made, the making of which
che following table will ſhew, Z

Tae Charadlers of Saturn 4nd Zazel, X
h aud -
xrcm a Priſon | X

| 90009402

Book I. "The Temple of Wildome: 333

SEC

The C berafter of Jopieras and Hiſmdl

EYE Ze.

XX
&

XESVO x
IOEAe

Th Chardtiers of m_— and Sg

| =" SA
| nod RY Wis

» © The Charaffers of the —_ m wy

ls

of
SK

From a oreacer Fortune

| BOYTY 7

From

"I ; "ToTenpie } Wiine. Eook 1, E

From a lefler Fortune

[= AAS G ts

The Cherefiers of Venus aud Kedeme]
2 and
From looking

I. oy
CLNCIS
' The CharaZers of Mercury pa Taphtharthacath,

+

From White

EEC

Box |. be Fee 0; KN idome.
The CHE of ths YiGoa _—_ Haſmodai.

| From the way © |

F008 7

The Charatiers p the bead of the Dragon. ;

ivy 3 7

The Cheratiers of the tayle of the Dragon. - *

EARAAA:,

*
.*

*
x.

— —_—

%
.

a.

236 TheTempleof Wiſdome. Bo

En...

of the friendſhip and emnity of Rulers, that you
* aho7 know what Figures love each others Com-
pany and AſpeGs in the Houſes.

OEXl,

— —

| $ Haſmodai. Hiſmael, Sorath, Kede-
1 | mel, T — zabel.

Tepbthar- Zazel, Hiſmacl, Sorath,
ye racy Kedemnl, Haſmodai |

Rulers. | _ Friends. Ro Enemies. ,
Tazel |Hiſmael, Sorath,Taph- Barzabel, and
V 4 thertbarath, Haſmo- Kedemel_
| | das. —

\ Hiſmacl \Zazel, Sorath, Kedemel|Barzabel.

. Taphthartharath , |
| | Haſmodai, |
| _ Barzobe! [Kedmel, Haſmodai,Zazel
1&9 | Hiſmael, Sorath,

[7 aphthartharath
Corath Hiſ mael, Barzabel. Ke. Zazel. |
| demel, Taphthar- |
tharab, Heſmodas. |
Q\ Fedeme! [Himes Sat Bar-|Zazel.
zabel, Tapbthartha- |
rath, Haſmodaz.

Barzabel.

|

rath.

Zazel, and Bar-

—ATable

Efſencial Dignities, (| ___ Debilities. _

In Hoſes or Reception by | In Detriment S

1. Houſe 5 ot! 4
In Exaltation or Recepti. | In fall a

- + on thereby 20 fa” 3-61
In Triplicity 3 | Peregrine {<A

[Puer command the firft Houſe, Kedemel che

237

OY

Book I. The Temple of Wiſdome. '

_—

A Table of the Fortitudes and Debilities of the
Ralers, Idea's and Figures in the twelve
Parts, or Howſes of the Earth,

—_—

All the Rulers, Idea's and Figures are ths to
underſtood, Berzabe! and his Idea Malchidae' 2

8&c. This Table properly belongs co the ew
fifth Chapter of this Book. or Re

© Fortirudes, 7 EE | Weakneffes.
I the tenth or firſt Houſe| "In the twelfth

| 5| 'Intheeighthor ſixth
In the ſeventh, fourth :

|

eleventh 4
In the ſecond and
Is the ninth Pb -

|

"I - , , : 2s. 4 i >” -

—} _ _

238 _ The Temple of Wiſdotne,

te, 4 a”

bY I
bn ——

Fortane Dignities.

In Company with | Acyuiſitio
in the ntneth or with Peulla
in the ſeventh. 5
In O. tothe ſecond, ſeventh,
| nineth or twelfth F
In ſextile to Hiſmael and
Kedemel

uh Caput Draconis
» the firſt or tenth Honſes 5
the ſeventh, fourth, or
eleventh Houſes. ;: 4
w the ſecond or fifth 5
» the chi 8"o_o* © 3

If with Puella, Albus,
Populus via, Fortuna
{ Major and Minor Con-
jun&io, Acquiſitio . or

A Table of the Parts of

Leritia, #t is ſo much the |

Barzabel | 3 |
In the twelfth | :
| In the eighth

In the fixth

Bock I

_— en ®

Debilities.
In the firſt, ſotth tenth and
eleventh, with Carcer,T ri-
ſticia or Rubeus 5
With Cauda Draconis 3

In oppoſition to the Figures
of Zarel Ty

In 0 or p of Zazel «hd

| fironger,

udes and Debilities before you begin to make any
eleſme or give Judgement upon an Queſtton :. Andi

w let us go forward.

ln

= thus muſt you obſerve your Figures, Forti-

—_ hd — — —_—

i ——_—

I De emple of Wiſdome. FR 239

CHAP. L. ;

1

Of Teleſ waticel Ebaraffers which ere drawn from
thrngs them;elves by « certain likeneſs.

VV VIE haveſpoten above of certain manner of
'Y Images made not after the likenefſe of Cee
leſtiai Images, tiki according to the 'emulacion of
that which the minde of the Operator doth defire.
I. like manner alfo it is ro be underſtood of Charae
Qers; for ſuch like CharaRers are nothing elſe chem
images il] dea-ticulateds yet baving a certain pro»
babie fimilirude with the Celeſtial images, or with'
that which the mind of the Operator defires, whee-.
ther that be from the whole image, or from certain
marks cheieof expreſſing the whole image. As the
CharaQetrs of Aries and Ttvras we make thus from
th ir horns VS. Of Gemini from imbracing 17. of
Cancer from a progreis and regreflſeS , of Leo. Scor-
pio, and Capricorn, from their tail Sd m vy of Virgo,

from Spike | f 1 nx of Libre from a ballance &
of agiterim from a dart 2, of Aquarizs from Wa-

ters -», and of Piſces from Filhes 6. In ike manner
the CharaQter of 5aturx is made from a Sickle

FS TSS De ee ee 8 ra —A—_- EM
ÞYF of oper, WW from a = Th

>Cepter of Mers from a bolt & of the Sun Þ

from

OI NAS 29's 9 O17

940 The Templeof Wiſdome. -

from roundneſs, and a golden brighenelle ©

of Venus from UW a lookinglafſe 6 W_ —

from a Wand SY * of ho 5 from her

| horns of increafing and decreating D. Zefiden, of
cheſe.according to the mixtjons of Signes and Scart,
and Natures), are made alſo myxed Charaders ,

ft eftaly gp
of + dies af of Waterry 1] Ve alſo accor-

Bhs co the hundred and twenty Conjun&ions of
ts , reſult ſo many compound Chara&ers of
arious us Figures 3 as of Saturn and Jupiter, vis. thus,

Ab, or chus Ih" thus of Seturn and Mars,

&O 4 or chus PS, of Tupiter and Mers,
oh 4 7 of _ Jupver _ Mars,
V 9 ZL5 « or thus, Rf, -Ahd as theſe

are exemplified by two and three, ſo alf® of the reſt

and of more may they be framed : after the ſame
manner

as of a fiery Tripliciey

- # *» »

"S. manner may the CharaQers of other Celeſtial
— images aſcending in any face or degree of fignes, be

 compendiouſly drawn after che likeneſfſe of the
images, as in theſe which are made according to
che way of imitation, of thac which the minde of
the Operator delires;-as toleve, the figures be mix--
ed cogether imbracing and obeying one the other,
but co hatred, on the contrary, turning away the
one from che other ; contending, unequall, looſed,
But now we will here ſet down thoſe Charaters
which Hermes aſligned co the fixed Stars, and Be»
henii, and chey are theſe. |

Book I. . The Temple of Wiſdome. ag |

The head of Algol;-

x»,

The Pteiades. !

/

.-- ' %
RY : 4?
= + Aldaboxam Y 1
F | & 3 [3 A af » ® by. e
þ 4

The Goat Stee- - *

T TY tf: ilk

_ Xo ; 1, The greater Dog-Scar.

_—_ LJ The lefler Dog-Scar.

hn

had gr cocemed _—_

Ihe Famptyof VWiſoar,

——_ — — — ——

_———_— ——

Jo ersP.i1kdl) 503 yattt 1hangpr;

. be ©, es
Jt rf? ; 5 'Tikedeare of PheLyon. EIC z irhs
ER. 5 $1 ;

of 4154/5 mwah LUTURT-L Oy

ninihioo9s Shea Sis fly Slog nt ay eo nm; |

7 tnatii go op; £G Pi WE SOIT t FIT {EW -31% ,
oY [1 wy o;.- Tave ofthe. Brors :13gO » 2:12
vil! y NT 91 ' — oy Lot ang da 4339903 | +
= 1 gZQA 0 our ef LOTESTE ind 13: 24:03
301 oh | Tis A; O $4 MIO) ii,
1:16 160113 ee Wag, ihe CrpW,.,.; 1:20

 inli & IJ 14 b3x3 3135 03 gn LE th aids .

19003916 You'y wits 10251
Spica.'” TH17's

o
"ON CT. cg
[I io baegndll, Fn {

2 Iphe LC
A - MTA CEAL) it

?

oo MPR Terre of ow

GC No
I%W7 3 $0: 9if Þ A

The Vultu re nfligs,

Pi Fa s

7 FR TMIT of Capeicorn.
TIC
EE

. a I ſ*
— + <& -

»

<3.

J

Book I. Th Temple of Wiſdome. - 243
at eaty S7 To Nite I ve 2» — __

- V O
an i.
_ i... A a _

2 " þ " f # .& S. » A $..- *
b » - : _ rv
_ F , p £5 93 » -
' f S827 ,- ® s , ; * A P L Ty 3
4 z
. p ju - . » % =y >. ' : >, . G ga?
0 4 J p ” ' OY P = « ? - Sf

xt; oth 9b 1c © [Fg
The 8. n0 Dizvinatzon without Aſtromancy ard
.. Geomancy is. perfets. . ..

VV: . have ſpoken in the foregoing Chapters
- ' of the divers kindes-of -Uvinations'; Bue
this is co be noted; trac all theſe fequire the uſe and
rules of Aftrology,: as a key malt neceilary for the
knoeledge of all: ſecrets : and that all kindes of
Divinations whatſoever have their root and foun-
dation im Aftrologie, ſo as that without it they are
of littile'or nou ji yer Aſtrological: Divination, in
as much astheCeleflials arc cauſes and fignes of all
thoſe things which acc, and ate dohe:in theſe infe-
riours,doth give moſt certain demonſtrations by the
({cicuation; and motion onely-of Celeſtial bodies, of
thaſe ehings which ace. occult ornfuture;z of which
welſkall aa this;place peak no. further, tinceaof chis
Science huge: Volupwes have beenwrote bythe Au»
cients, and are every Where extany,!Thereforewbe-
ther che Phyltognomiſts Jook {UPON the body; or
countthance., - ar forehead , 'or iand; or che Sooth»
ayer ſeaggheth by dreams -or Auſpicie,- that che
Jude medi may be right, the tigure of heaven igalſo

to be enquired into. From the. judgements where-

of, cogecther with conjetures of Emilitudes and
fiznes, are produced ,true opinions.of the tignufica -
tors. \./Alfo if any prodigic (hall appear, thi Bigure
of heaven is eo be erefted ; alfo luolt.efiings 2re to
be enquired after, which have gone before im rle

revoluciens of years from great Conjunftions, and

Eclipſes 2: then alſo the Nativigies, beginningtgine-

Q. 2

cronizations,

— > — —
ne er a rr een oma emma ——— - - _

244 ; The Temple of Wiſdome. © Book I»

oO

ak
_—_—_

tronizations, foundations, and revolutions, perfe-
&ions, direfions. of Princes, Nations, Kingdomes,
Cities, when thefe ſhall appear', and upon whar
place of the Celeſtia]l figure theſe fell z chat by all
chefe ar length we may come to a rational and pro-
bable fignification of theſe things, Afﬀeer the ſame »
manner, bur with lefſe labour, we muſt proceed in

the Expolition of dreams, Moreover, they that be-

ing dilempered foretell future things, do'ic not
bur as they areinftigated by the ftars, or inferiour
inſtruments of thele, whence their Predictions muſt |
at lengrh be imputed to the Celeftials, as wereadin
Lucan the old-Prophec Tuſcas,' 1 oe

The [ ightnings motion, and the veins which are
Fibrous, and warm,and motion of a fair
Plume wandring ith' aire, being taught —— —. -

Aſcerthe City was viewed,the Sacrifice ſlain,thein-
(pe&ion into the intrails did at Jength by: the difpo-
41tions of the Celeſtial ſtars pronounce judgment.
Alſo Geomancy it (elf the moſt accurate of Divine-
cions , Which divines by points of the Earth,orany
other ſuperfices, or by a fall, or any other power in-
ſcribed, doth firſt reduce them ©o Celeſtial figures,
Read the Harmony of the World. LEEPES
c: There is nothing in the. whole bufinefle of Phy-
Joſophy, aftromancy and Geomancy that hath more
_perplexedour new Artiſls then this Subjze& conter-
ning images {or Figures made under ſome certain
Conſtetlarions. The greateſt part of them therefore
have rejected the Pradtice of theſe Operations, - 2s
Vain and Superftitious : yer ſome others , who are .
. not ſo overſwayed with Paſſion, have both allowed,
- and delengied ut ; though they have, 1 confeſſe fuf-

CEL

fered

—_—

Book i. The Temple of Wiſdome. 24x
fered for it, in their repute: inſomuch that G. leot-
tw, who is acknowledged by Paulws Foviws to hav©
been one of the moſt learned, and knowing men of
his time; onely for-having undertaken the Defence
of this Truth,(as we ſhall makeir hereafter appear) *
hath been handled by ſome, like any baſe, inconſi-
derable Fellow ; and Camil/as accounted no betrer,
then an Acheifticall Wreech. And this is the uſage
they beſtow upon all the ableſtmen : whereas they
onght rather to anſwer their Argumenes pertinent-
ly, and to ſhew the inſufficiency of them, if they
can ; bur ſee the miſcheif of it. If any of theſe
men can chanceto be in company , where there is
any mention made of the moft able Schol!ers, or
there be any Queſtion ſtartet, concerning any of
thoſe Choice yoints of Learning, for which. theſe
men have been Deſervedly ranked above the Herd-

of Vulgar Brains ; you ſhall have ſome giddy-head-
ed fellows, that will not ftick to fay, without blich-

ing; that they never wrote any thing of any worth

at all , nor ever underſtood the matter they hand-

led: | my ſelf have heard one fay, that. Marfilius
Ficinus underftood nor any: thing of Plato's Do-
arine ; nor Averozs of Areftotles: and that the Wits
of theſe Times are much quicker, then thoſe of the
Ages paſt, And now, Reader, thou mayeſt judge
what Democritan Aﬀtermongers ſome of our Alma»
nack- makers are. - =

It may be here Obje&ed,that this Author, whoſe
pradtice we have alledged, was a Suſpefted perſon;
and that his Writings are not free from Magick.
This Obje&ion 1 ſhall cake occation to anſwer, at
another cime; and ſhall at preſence produce ſuch
Figures onely , as have been made by men, thatare

beyond all Exception.
Q3. June

Th Tampico Whos ——Bow1,,

246. |

-JuxJin, upon the-Sphear af Setvoboſco , affirms, © *

that his Maſter, who was a Carmelite, named! Fuljee:
#1 Kiſtorizs a Prato,, one that was:not any whit; fu-
perſtirious, was intreated by a Friend of his,to make
one of theſe Images, for the cure. of the Cramp,
which he was very ouch ſubje& to. This learned:
man, rxeſenting his Friends ſufferings , caughe him
the manner how to make one: fo that He, not con»
tens to make onely one; made.divers of them,when
the Moon was in the Signe Cancer 5 and that with
ſo good ſucceſle, and with ſuch gertaintys as.thac
he immediately found the benefit of it. Confecit,
faith he, plures imagines, pro ſe, & amiCcax ſuis : quibuc
efeGis , wnam pro ſe arcepit, © liberatus eft, The ſame
he reports of a certain, Florentine, g very Pious' man;
who made one of rheſe Teleſmans; for todrive away
the Gnatss which he did with good ſucceſſe, Noce=
laws Florentinns, ſaith be, vir religioſus, fecit in wha Cone
Rtellatione annulum , ad expellendum Gulices., quas vulgs
Zanzaras dicimns ,, fub certz; & determinatis imagigibas;
E- uſu fruit confielatione Saturn mfortunatt , & expulit.
Culices. What. more can be faid:, both for the In-
nocence, and Power of theſe Fi igures ? Ler who will.
condemn thoſe that defend this Truch, and cry
down theſe Teſtimonies: for my pare,l ſha\)-over-
acknowledge them co be buth Certain and Natn-
rel]; and do with all proteſt, that I ſee —_— in
it, that is above the Power of Nature. + F
The {econd meains which [ have propoſed to my
lelt rouſe, for ctheproving of chePoweriofeheſe Fi-'
gures,is,the Power and Vertue of che Reſemblance,
| thaCtthere & betwixt the Scorpion and ies Jwage,
and the Conttellation that bears che name of chis.
hving Creature. | {hg}! then prove this Vertue, by
an InduQtion of that »which Relentblance Th =
UCet

—

Bao TheTempleof VViidome. 247

bo Mn. ta EG,

why Phyloſophy, Phyfick,, Aftromancy, Geamancy, Dive-
ndtcn-of Droame, Paiming,; Sculpture. Mufick,, &'C.

1 Thofe then, thatare well skilled in che Secrets of

the Theology of the Ancients, affure us, thar thoſe
ehac et ferup Images in their Temples, reſembling
the (ſhapes of hagel Thar have appeared upon Earth,
hatt nv other detian in ſo daing, fave onely the more
eaffely ro-imvite down thoſe Bleſſed Spirits 5 by the
forde 6Frhe Reſemblance. And | know not whether
orno,/ by the very ſame Vercue of Refemblance,
which is fonnd berwixe God and Mens ( Faczamus
bominz#t ad imaginem , & ſimilitudinem- nojtram : | ic
hach' nor riglithy been aficmed: by ſome Divines,
that the Son of Gd would nevertheſs have become
marr, (yer without ſuffering 'dearth_) though Adevs
had never fallen. : Bur ſpeaking of things ,' as: they
are now at prefenc ,. we know,xtar | Feſws Chriſt is
found-in the: midſt of thoſe; thar ſpeak,. with Faith,
of his Name :. becauſe chat when we ſpeak wich Af-
fetion of arty One, we repreſent him co our ſelves
mn our Imagitation; When therefore, ſpeaking of
Feſus: Chriſt, we fancy tim as 'he-is5 he is mſtancly
preſent with us ,' appearing- to our Hearts :at chat
very inſtanc, rhar we chere frame his — our
Imagination. : So''true it is, that the reſemblance
hath che Power ro-work-Wonders, even-upon him
that bach Dependance upon no other, and 1s not
under any Power, orLaw. But ſuch Conceptions
as theſe are to be entertained with all Piety and Hu-
mulity; and propoſed with: ſuch Sandtiey , as be-
comes thole that ſpeak of fo Adorable a Suvje&.

- Phyloſopby: alfo iers- us ſee. the Vertue of this Re-
ſemblancc, in the bufineſle ob che. Imagination. For
if a woman with, Childe did but ftrongly fix b-

#50 Q 4 Imagin?'

Rntath, chroughout-a}l Arts and Sciences,: an Divi-

248 The Templcof Wildome, Book

Copulation,the Child will affuredly bear the per»
Sect Image of the ſame. Every: Child knows the
Story of the Princeſle, that conceived and braught
forth a Black-Moore, though her ſelf and her Hus+
band were both of them fair; only, becauſe chere
I was a Moore pictured on the Teſter of the Bed. So
| . ifthe Mother inthe A, either ſtrongly fancy Rob-
bing, Killing or Love, che Child will beeither a
Theef, Murtherer, or an Amorous perſon : if ſhe
fancy Travelling, he will be a Traveller, if Danr:
cing;or playing on the Lute, he will be very Apt for
theſechings; and ſoofthereſt. And weſee by daily
experience, the effe&s of the ſtrong Deſires and
Longings of Mothers,during the time of their being
with Child, upon their Children 3 on whom the
firengch of their Imagination hath imprinted the
"> Keſemblanccofthe ſame thing that they have deli-
MF red. And hence they ſay it is, that che Children
chat are got upon a married Waman, by ſome 0-
ther Man then des own Husband, ſhall norwithftan-
ding have the perfeft reſemblance ofher Hasband;
-— becauſe thar, during the Ac of Generation,. her
* mindftillsrun on him, fearing leſt he ſhould come,
and catch.chem at ic. You may further fee the
wonderful effets cauſed by the power ofthe Imagi-
nation, learnedly diſcourſed on, by Paracelſvs, Mar-
filius Ficrans, Picas, Mirendula, Toftatus, Velefius, and
- Medina. | | E. -
Phyfck, likewiſe obſerves che Admirable Effeds,
Read the Holy Guade; cauſed by Reſemblance: wit-
nefs choſe Herbs, which afſwage the.griefes of chole
_ of our body, whole Image they bear, (4s we
ave aJready ſaid -). or alle which .cure-choſe Dif-
- Faſes, whoſe figure, ' or colour: they hea; Thus
FTE |S Lentils,

Imagination on upon any Obje@, during theAgof © [

”
— ot

BooKI. TheTempleof Wildome, 249

Lencils, and Rape-ſeed cure che ſmal Pox in Chit-
dren z hecauſe thatthe Grains are like to the ſpots
ofchis Diſeaſe. And Rhubarb, which is of a yellow
colour, expels Choller, which is of the ſame colour,
In a word, thoſe Plants which are Barren, or Fruit-
Ful, as Porteſaith, do render thoſe that uſe chem,
Barren, or Fruirful : the Fair, makes them Fair;
the Deformed, make them Deformed; the Impery
fet, make refs imperfe&: ſo that he concludes,

with Theopbraſtus ; Accedunt flirpium aliquot genera de-
fecientium, vet fo'io, vel wa > vel aliis ——_— eadem-
que ratione membrit illis nofiri corporis reſpondentibus,
iufefia, noxiaque ſunt The ſame he alſoaftirms of
living Creatures. Eadem ratione ad animalia tran-
ſeundo, fi aliquibus membris deficiſſe videmus, eadem mem-
bris noftris adverſantur. .b or which reaſon, the ea-
ting of chaſe Creatures which have no blood, does
waff ours; and fo of all the otherparts. Andir is -
obſerved that in Fraxce there are more Lepers, then
in any other Kingdome, by-reaſon of thegrear ſtore
of Hogs-fleſh that is eaten chere : So true i is, that
our bodies become like unto that, which we uſe ro
feedon. And far this reaſon alſois Hercules ſaid co
have been very ſtrong, becauſe he fed upon the Mar-
row of Lions, the ttrongeſt among Beatts.

Aftrology alſo ſhews the Verrue of Reſemblance,
judging of the Qualities of the Child, by thoſe of

the Stars. For Mers cafting forch a glittering, red

light, makes che Child tharc is borne under its influ

ence, of ared cnlour alſo. Seturn, 2 who is
—2z Oofapale, fainc colour, makes him pale, and
Z7— wan, Fapiter, Þ Venus, © which cait forth
+ x. ) bright, clear, and pleaſant beams, makes the
« « Child beancifu), and pleaſant. The like is
'« - abſerved allo 3g other Qualities; fo ag 3;
edt cae

—_
TT 7 as, d

yd te <1 VOY GY A 7 oe. Ate Vo

250 The Tewpte of Wiſdome. -TBborr-
—— the Signs þF higti,-#nd in'their Apv/iun, the'
_>_Child{fay rhe Arabians )fhell befjit Ike fnians-
** nerofaTall' and'great' flature : (if they are
*' Low, he fiiall be Low, arid of a lictle Statute.
* As concerning Motion, Saturze, wich hath a
* * {low and heavy one, makes the Ch Tikewiſe
heavy and Lazy: 'the Moor, whith hath a
=—ſwifr macioq, makes him light, and mnconfide-'
' rate. You may have: the fuller profecution
ofthis Difcourſe, iti thoſe two Learned Icali-'
+ . ans, Carden, and Porte: who conifidently af-'
firme,thac a man may likewiſe foretel tertain-
ly, any other thelike Qualities chat a Child ſhall be
ſubje& ro, by the figures of Aftromancy and Geo-
mancy, Thus a man may conelude, that we ſhill
ſee Armies, Bartels,and Wars break forth, afrer rthar
Launces of re, Swords, Trumpers and Buckters:
have been ſeen toappear in; che Aire : And chiefly,
when a Comer hath appeared ; of which it is uſual-
ly ſaid, Nunquam impunc viſus Comets. And fo like-
wife we may conclude, there willbe great Effufion of
Blood, if all cheſe Metcors are Redder then Ordina-
ry : or, when the Sun and Moon, in the time of an
Eclipſe, ſeem bloody. And if they be Pale and
Wan, and of a dead colour,' we may conclude there
will follow great Mortality by che Peſtilence, 'which
makes thoſe, that are infe&ed with ic, pale, - wan
and colourleſs. ' a Cd
Obſerve Engerins Theodide Fw, theſe are his own
words, tranſlated. Now whereas he calls this an
Inchaxted flone, and faies, that it was placed there by
a Magitian; you muſt note, that he there ſpeakes
according to the Senſe of the Inhabitanes, who
knew nor how to give any other account of che
cliing ; as not undertftanding any thing at all of —
. | dg-

—

Baokil. The Temple of Wildame. 7 250
Naensalveaign obitaes werhave ſaid, As BySamtipar,
whichis nowConflawiwpiey there were many of theſe
Teleſmaticel. Figures cobe teen: bi che: fury of War

hath demaluhed chews all; to the great Prejudice of
the Inhabitants, -' Sul4an:Meb

| unmet. allo. cauſed one
of then. tobe broken.eq peices,, whick was a Brazen
Horfe,. mith & Horfeman upon him: which is cep«
cainly reported to have preſervedebe City from Pa
ſtilence, and all Contagion of the Air : but finoa
that time; this diſeaſe bath raged fafercely, as thac
in the fpace of four Monchs, Lewrclemiie, who was
prefent, affirmes, that-there died a hundred and
fifty thotfand perſons: and: every year, in che
Months of Fuly, and Angtf,the like effeft, ina man-
ner, is be (cen... In a.word, all .4fa:was full of
theſe gures; the Uſe whereof was arilength, known
to the Tiropteans allo for the Drauudes, as the learned
Frey reparts, :uled theſe Teleſwers with goud ſucceſs
and even-our Grandfathers have afſyred us,: that
it wasagn Ancient Tradition ; thae-where the Fairzes,
the Druides: Wives 1nhabued.; there neither Hail,
nor -Stormes ever {pailed the Fruics; . And the rea-
ſon, 1n my opinion, was, becauſe they uſcd/to make
of thefe Teleſmans, Now of late, manylearned men
have reſcued foom Qbliviou theſs Figures ; and Pa-
race/ſus.did-take ſo much pains herein, as: that he
made diverſe of them 3 chole af ſuch Vertue, =s
thac they preſerved thoſe that worethem, from che
Peſtilences a$ many in Germany have had experi»
ence of... :And.tharc {may not wander far abroad, x
am informed that for certain, Mr.Lenau preſerved
from this Diſeaſe, all-choſe to whom be gave any
of theſe Teleſmans; which he made according to
thoſe; deſcribed by: Marfilzzs Fxcwmis,- Thoſe alſo
which: Paracelſas calls Zexexton, by 2-made "=

252 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book [
(it being the cuſtome oF chis Author, ' to deviſe new
Words ) are made with exceeding great Art, In
one of them there is aſScorpion, and a Serpenc figu-
red: and he faith it muſt be made when 'the Sun,
and the Moon enter into the fign of Scoy-
. 2 In another you have 4 grear-
2 In Aftre- number of little holes, within an Oval.
mancy and You may ſee the Figures of them in our
Chimical Holy Guide.
The wonderful effe&s, which have
| been alwaies obſerved to have been
wrought by Teliſmatice! Figures, bave fo
perplexed the minds of thoſe men, who
occount every thing to be Magick,which
themſelves are not able to comprehend;
a2 thar, without making any DiſtinQion
atall, betwixe power which is Natural and lawful ;
and chat which our Faith permits us not to med-
dle with ; chey have boldly publiſhed, that, what
Vercue ſoever s from Figures, is utterly
Diabolical, But when they perceived, that know-
mg Men would hardly fit down ſo; and that it con-
cerned them co produce ſome Reaſons, to prove
that theſe Figures can have no Natural Power ar
all ; they have ac length broughe theſe following
ones ; though they are built on very weak founda«
tions, es we ſhall make it appear. 1
The firft is, char Reaſon it ſelftels us, that theſe
Operations cannot be Totally natural, bue rather
ſuperſtitious and dangerous z ſeeing that, toreduce
chem toa full, and entire effe&, there are ſome cer--
rain words tobe uſed; which have no power at all,
eſpecially over things which have no Senſe ;z and
thattherefore, the making of them oughc to be for-
- a_ rejeFed, as the Church hath _—_
ned, | ' To

Bookxl. The” Temple of Wiſdome, 253

. To anſwer fully, and in order, both to this ob-
jeQion, .and tothe refit that follow, I ſay; char, in
the firſt place, we are- to take notice; that, inthe
matter of theſe figures, we have already condems
ned all Words, and all other Superſtitions : ſo thae,
co avoid a'tedious Repetition, the Reader muſt call

co mind, what "on already been ſaid to this.

As for the Church, ic- never yer rejected the True

and lawful Power of figures, ſuch as we have deſcri-

bed it ; as may appear. our of che writings of thoſe

cwo learned Men, Tho, Aguma, and Cardinal Caje-

tex. : Andifche Fathers have ſometimes condeme-

ned ic zi was not cill they ſaw that ic was ſo mixed
with ſuperfiition (that 1 ſay not, Abominations)
thar.they conceived they ſhould never otherwiſe be.
able eo divere men from the Pradtice of it, oo
condemning it utterly : as Moſes likewiſe did, in
forbidding abſolutely the Grathng, on a Tree of ;a
different;kind,;,gvly.;.to keep them from that fin,
which was uſually committed at chat. Aftionz And
char ie mey appear that the bare figures have, Fo
been uſed alwaies, without any Application of words |
and Ceremonies 3. ſuch as were noc_ only-Vain, bur &
Ridiculous alfa ;we may:cake notice, that in /Zg
.-when chey would cauſe Haile toceaſe, which might
have been..effe&ted.by.che Vertue ofa bare Teleſme
only; it was chaught Neceſſary, .chat four naked

Women:ſhould lye along upon the ground on theit
backs: and lifring up.their feet on high, they were
to pronounce ſome certain words, and ſothe Haile
would ceaſe. - Duatuor Mulieres (ſaid they, as R.Mo-
ſes.repores) jaceant in terra ſuper dorſum ſuum nuds,
' erigant pedes ſuos, et dicent tale verba, et operentur ifiud;
grando, deſcendens ſuper locum illum,, recedet ab eodem
loco. T his Ridiculous Cecemony. was taken _

| the

25, . "The Temple of Wikiome. Book I;

the Poſtare of bOme Teleſmeatical. Figare, which ſer-
ved'to' divetc Rormes of Hatle'3- whereon, | ſaich
Chomer, was graveti the Imuge'of Ferw lying'along,
Befides, fomefynorathe perfous tying lighted upon: -
fone of che Charters, whith the-Ancienes hdd .ins
venced, tharfo rhey mighr woficealtheir Philoſophi-
Gil Ferrers, frootthe unworthy Rabble 3 ( fiichias are
ciofe wherewich rheChy miſts books are fall :.) not

kjiowing che Original Gn, ard believing: thar
they Yael Fon ie Ec Verte"in them, they graved
hen on Tele '-Stich perkips was the tians

aced Letrer'f rv This infcribing: of Cifres, and
- Cflatatters, 'broadhit alfs long wich it chis; believe;
F {ih thee erdttrers wrireen updi(EHe;mes,
rarhly' cher! Be -rdad-alſo © whd hehe

uf thn take Riſe vf ſpeaking wordsin
= of chef figures 4 Ub aRecemantizlofler:

2 Whith'Ratd on: 7 7 che ſo much Cele»

*#1bne , ng efing the bareiwornds on»
#s it i refOHed of Trans, whouſed theſe
9798 Woe eh Worry Dre Chellidds; ptrye, plvga,'s
"And Homd#ivrices,/that tte bleeding dFTLſo:
wound: <v045 vs 6s by- uling-ceregine words:
Ewiſeriact vor Pre Mp ” edodeyi zzpho,
tries, char che Hndidiy arid Erhiopi-

[7 BY tio othe1 day of citHrig-cheir Diſcales; - fro-

traho, Pi

Frank char he havk ferry theſe Ceremonies
eg in bixtime © ane @ Our diyer, they
d but'e66 'ofren; efpediully by ' Superſtitions
wig "Bat at Taft Er" were forme: that: made
"Hides efteviti of Charz@ers," then -of plata Words,
<orifiterin with themſelves! white the power of AX
.gures was, This Pliny reports,that A. Servilim made
tile of thefetws Torters M; and 8, eo-keep himfelf
From being blear-exed : «nd Ladoxia che any 10s
ng.

Els

OO +4 at —_ —_

| Book 4.7 The Templvaf Wikdoma: agg

a being in- Travel wich » Child, defired; (as Crtren

reports Ntotrave rertam{iecters applyreco hee Be
for-ro bring forch the-dew Ohikd:s buc ir was avs
vin; for iccoft het; herlife. - : To conchude, theſe
things having bceninrenced only:for the concealing
of Lorne: Secrecs; as%b have (aid; (after Kogor Bacon,
_ whaſaith, Nue Phleſpbbad ixvercraxtiim operidus ap=
mig. & Nature a8 frorthevocnitarchd ak bmdignes; ) tliey
wereafterwardyturnedunw Supirticion, by t
who mited them with rhe Images}: 4nd wade uſe of
rhem \beyonal the power of Narory); 'agd that 'eds
with foi Damwwblt Coptrmonter, us that the very
thaugheo ofthe is Hkſoine: Read: che Efarnmcny of
th1 Wort, Iobb:12 5: £49690177 it 3 IRIS; 21,2
Now rh rhePraftice of making theſefigurerwas
wYinon roma > neg noms +offifromehoſ
A bowaadions, tae werriiliyiineaby commiricd
{chr vancon being ineverchetek inacweal, as:wn
have ſhewed 5\yad/icheothings dbeinfocives having
beea rveo Inno . bfed:by good Mien; withoor
the wfiiftanct of anplorber Power, faveritac of Nas»
rure) we may perverve bps ike :exainple; in'the
commattirhacrudgghver;bfnotGriffing on'a'rree
of a differonc kid; » PÞr ko wit gaven for toverher

Rrealowpfohay limay there pat by choſe whictinte
| twocxpteverabork of Greckand Latine;
briick«are-munyrimnes very wide ofatre:Texn) but

only com away ch Jew frodwthoſtdilohineſſes
-«nd:2abomiibatiohs} which they ufuiltyy commirced
at this kind ofEngrafting. The Latine words will -
1nd forghide chengdranneks tOrhedifcoutfe of
chefe:Vildanics':- you ſhabb have'rhem therefore one
obvheabqre tamed Rebbs Moſes, aiman of veryigrbe
knowledg «x thefe Traditions © Diver od, hd
in bori:qzq unſeritar und ſpecies in ating gportes abr anins
THEY : inſerent{tt

conclude it was, that” God, "to" ſer'® -U
foulneſs of this: Crime, -would havethe very
rhemſeives alfo to hare ſome ſenſeof 3-7 bc
Whore planted an Olive: I |
red'ſt Prelacevof-Itely, according tothe!
che Nacuralifts } i uld never bear |
as; ſaich he, Fi iy arony nk
pete menct, © ves. ones

Tree what ever, is a thiri Lohr
icfelfindifferent : nev« Bah

3 F
,

"Y

probibite fucrnns £0 x

C—_ Gaara aber / t-
-Andthelike cauſe hack. alot dye

men, none, Form ons many mary ares3, though

are boch-Natural, A 1

afSwc have al

done::{ or ellog formene eCheringe enthep
r0-£xweni ie then 3: an Gul; Peryfenfin, cGrrfo

oe proces mw Ee an $wherecof,
Rt oe peopherido fill -uſe force cetear Gar}

very neer bordering Cs

»

*\
ws.

Book. I. th Templeof Wiſdome. 257

Bus we have alfeady anſwered, in cheprecedent
Ghaprter's chat we do not ar all-detend the follies of
the Superititiousz buc do rather freely condemn
their Obſervations, and: all words, that tend to
ſuperſticion. In che ſame Chapcers alſo we have
rejected parc of che foplerics, delivered by Feller»
venfis : andebat wemay' noc have any ſcruple unſa-
tished, we do allo here condemn thoſe, which are
brought by Antonivs Mizaldus: as namely, where he
#\lirmes, according.o Ptolemy, that for to drive away
Serpents,. you muſt prepare a (quare Plate of Cop«
Fer, and graving two'Serpencs On ic; when the (e-
cond fare of Aries is Alcendent; you mult (ay t:eſe
wards: Ligo Sorpentes per banc Imaginem, ut. nemint
Weceans, ec quenquam impediant, nec diutives, ubi ſepult#
faexits ; permaneant.. As aliowherce .he (aiesg; ACCcOor-
ding tothe Game Ptolomy,: that, to drive away Rats
and: Mice, you muſt, grave the lmage of them upon
a Place of Tin or. Copper, when; the, ebird face of
Capricorne is aſcendent; ſaying; Ligo onnes. Mutes
F*r:: dence Imaginem,, ut millus, . in loo ubi- faern,
menere poffit. Sb likemife for to gather togeetier;and
catch hlhes, you mult engrave the Image ofa fiſh;
upon, a piece af Lead or Tin, when-;the firſt face of
Iquarins or. of Piſces is aſtendens* ſaying. : Liga 6
adjuro amnes by gue ſatiet in Flumine( with all naming
the River Yea tratizae balife, ut ad hanc Irraginent ve+
nant, guojicſcunque in e us aque pofits frcrit'. And ſo
alſe-fortbe driving of Wolves aways either out of 2
Waod or front a Shecp-coat, you muſt grave upd 2

Place of —_—_— or Tin, the Imageof a Wolfe; with
e

bis feec tied, and two Maſtives ſeeming to bark at
him, when che ſecorid face of Szgittariw is Aﬀcens
deat 3, and-you muſt withall ſzy thus : Extermino per

hexc Inuaginem omnes Lupos , qui ſunt in bac Velle, aus

Hemore,

_ The be Temple of Wiklpme

4 4g

Lace

4

; Boow'

mate m7 Gare
Tas, Sfveror Oper, thi
Hhavindtinihishand i Sa —_—
with an Arrow ;grevhig ir afider the RoroP Say
ki whole Iniage h&reprefoncerh; Valid fayhyg

wh my fepds't wo Peay ,

Fhave ferdown ſo thknyof theſe 'W5td$,"
thay taketiotice of chem t6avvill tim, an Wb give

warniry of therti eo-chofeyha ew ngulrert Wit

ſich'thingss Kick dw yo vet nem. A
wh wttin r

= inthe Auchbrs 98,

Superfiicions: * "Fory belides the manttignef
per em isRk lows it ivalſoa3faceiMrene
Medenkoryhoman chat ivro be dbſervet ih netting
ohh; ns 'Met) & frony Aeavert/ SS that uniiioe
amch wonder' ac the IM-Luek of #Priend' bf Ne"
who ſaice, 'thac beige: ney Ac
a*thathe had made; according byonees _

Ales liere delivered, be tiever aw th
wifever dis ExpeQurion) Bur Hideferipib rote
Sabjracdording ro'vhe Direttioris?F' Notte

preſonciy: ſaw\trhe © effett follon] vi
x texrned'Phy FR eee
thi: beard Rn,
nd may be ak; Sequetion. "wu yen

thi heibth cured vw cthott 1 ble arm vAG
Rains; by one offeficfetric?7eefmans2(o'tty ch&6et
6x 115 e0+ tie able codidmmn yrs boap
erne, and/fulfe ones: 'We rejeft

=o way 6f mh ingther, hvreotgar Fic

zalen

 N
®

4% ; |
-\

/ Dd, foo i Ws Tem

om She” *.

fe Wione: = 5H

44; as well inche places above cited, as Ine
oghers 3: : Mer hers 4 » G93 \Aphboriſes ofthF
fecond Century 3c. Fiſme of che third; Ceny
Fea. onAhq 47. Fd abrheninth : : 1h which
e makes ule of. words; horh vain; and ſupers
Ne, and. alſo of jolt falſeprinciples : /which, is
be Reaſon,why RO Mat could ever, by uling them,
-geks totheend he | vox eager Now IL have former-
ly.ſaid, Gl ey emne..all Figures and Words,
thatare mixedwi ch Snperſicion, in, theſe Teleſma-
cat Figuret. Only 5. 4 for, .a&, fac. thoſe Ceremonits
and words, AYR, # ar pioully ufed;;. as. for ex
29Hle, , To cauſe. a ftorme 0 ; Haile oe p

Mall MAY, uſesl my wicl our,any. fulpicion ally ae
eanduig to..che Judgetnenc. of ſome Diviges.

ManRer 38 £ 6b Werw..., javing. firk
mage-the tpn 6, 2g2inf rhe{ighinings

petl tern at; EOS ./0u;MUſt cake three

Ref whats of FF abs gy r{t, £etL, and caſt chen

incatþe fixe,.m oageror the Holy Trig ty.

g .LepcaLe the Lor $ ds Pragerrio onthredrimes

5, Fon muſt.cead the ipel of St. Zobu.;, whi
ed,, you muſt 1 6 Lie gy phehe Da

| _ Fethe / oron eg

Tora

on nge0 it, a8 ofceri chele - _

> fax, din it, a8© For

ran dt fas tempeſt 265, ifthe. Tem

Dif wr (ak thororomge® Ire
IO wen ave. the derermi

axe forax; other. time 5 mg derping i eps

Lee

ent,. has .chece bark. crepe in, Supenſ}
| 9, Ka ih 8s. into the, buf nels; as modi: trear

R I Th:

A
-

260 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book-E
. The ie ehird Objeftion i is grounded upon n the Imipo-
tency of the matcer. .ingraved. For, haw can. an,
Image, which is dead, and withour motion, give
motion to others, and haye ſuch operations, 38 are
attributed unto it? Thus it is argued by Gulieſmus
Patifienſis, againſt theſe Figures... Dromcdo Inrago
mortuz, & omni modo inapprebenſa, omnique modo immo-
Bilis, maveret viventes 7 aut qu ger. prejtat Scientiam,
ua » mec habuit. nec gan, vec eteutia cam hoþet Certiſ-
[a0 ef CE . Gerſos ſazes che. ame, and brings | in.a
Manner, all the, yery ſane Arguments, ina Beogk
that he hach' Writren again,.2 CEtBIN Phyligay,, of
ongel er, who grayed upon 2 Piper ger of Gold; Fe
"mage of a Lyon, for the. Curept the Sane, ;- |
[To this 1anfwer, that the ſinage of it (elf, 1 is
dead, and withour any moti6n 2 bur thac” y che
Verue of the Stars, under which ir was made, ic
bach acquired_new qualities, Which jt had not be-
fore: op elſe, that the.marter. being. beforeandued
rich ſome qualities char were proper forſyeb an efs
et, it is diſp ofed. for ſuch an effe&t by a Semblable
figure, and be "qualities are excited, Itaque,ars,
2:th, Marcilius þ icinz, Jeet; incboatam thi virtutem,
nc dum ad fgrtam-redigit, Smilem ſug Cuidam. Caleſts
Te, Mun. ſhe illic ide profes, expenit; qfians fic.rxr
wer Calum ea. perficit virtuts qua. Cepergt, Fapeg
1 ox flammam. - Thus many chiggs, if they
ena nets work notat all: as'for laſt#rce, £0
efoine Herbs ra (me), .you muſt 'croſh chem þe-
Fey x fingers, So Antbet, which hacfi xeceived

rom the Heavens,. the, property, of rags, Scyaws
t1t; yet unleſs ir be aytule rubbed and-thated,
ies net able co doit. The Bcgaar or Bezghup 'Srane

which Mareiling, Ficinth tes, - .lig nifies as guch as,
*A morte tebtrans : rhough this ke an Frymology: as
: Unknown,

.kvemet bythe, Scars, Co our great diladvamtage,;1a6

Boot. - The Temple of Wiſdome. 261

Unknown, as Unerue) which is Naturally indued
with-the power of expelling poyſon, becomes alſo
a,very: Soveraigh remedy againſt .ic. That of che
Scorpian, if there be ficlt graved on itthe Figureof
a. Scorpion, under'the influence ofthe Celeſtial con-
..-- ſhilation of the (ame name: 2 Theflint Scone
+ - gives not its fire, unleſs youſtrike it : in a word
Zx—thereis ſcarcely any thing, but requires to be
«+ Excited and: Awakened up to its work, even
«* «x asJow, as Artificial things z many whereof ap-
& x ' Pearnar ac all,-anleſs there be Art uſed ro dif
cover them : as we may ſee, for Example, in
Letters wricten with the juyce of Citrons, Figs, (/nyons,
Sale 4lmonick,, and many ocher things ; which muſt
be either held before che. Fire, or clic dipped in Wa-
ter, that chey may ve read. In ike mannerallo is
1e nece{liry, thar the; vertue of Metals and,of Sones
ſhould be excited by the: Celeſtial Rayes, for the
rendering them apc to effed&t that which weideſie.:
Now chat cheſe Rayes are ſo powerful,; asthat they:
are-able-co penetrate Scones, and into che.bowels
of the: Earch, we. have already proved.;.and thall
hereconfirme it, -by' the teſtimony of Bowgpenture :
Dicunt Plyloſophi,>quod corpus Celeſte xcediante. fuo lumine
influit uſque. ad. profundum terre, ubi mineralia corpora
gendrari babeit Et, quantum ad hoc verum dicunt. When
FTeftimonies-are, grounded upon experience, they
canfiotrpoſſibly then bedenjed : and we know thac
che-Sun' Penerraces .very far into the Earth,. and
there gives life co Plancs, and living Creatures 1003:
xhict, when weſcecaken up, aſtonith us very mpych,z
a8appearesOut.of-Georpirs Agricola, and rheJeamnell
bitzmez whois ftill Profeſſor at. Padua. .:As fog Sud-
terranents tiles,..we find them bur too. olges;/i-

Ev y'* {745 1 3 yOolt

%

——_——_ 4 <p) aw

PR

z CE

737 Th: TempicofWildame: bouk
you may oblerve-out of the third .bgok of Sexctey
Nat, quejt. c. 19. Who'alfo in agoxþer place, ,ſaiesy
thac Philip having fent men down. imoan old Gold
mane, ro ſec if the Covetoulnels of Manhad yet leto
chereany thing undiſcovered z they perceived Ri
vers running along chole deep Caverns, and miany
other Prodigious tights: by which 'we may be cer4
tainly afſured, thac rhe Heavens do operate througtr
every part of the Univerſe, Deſtendifſe illos, fates
this learned Author, cum milto lm, & multo; dr-
raſſedies; deinde longe via fatizatos, vidifſe fumina in»
gentia & concepts aquarum inertium vaflos; payes nollt is,
xec compreſſos quidem tzrra ſupereminente4fed liber & ati»
eatis, non fine horrore2iſos, And thoſe, that wiitebf
theRiches of America,aſſure us,tharthtwine of Prof,
where Gold is generzted, is ſo hollow #indiſo-deep,
that norbing can more ſtily repreſentithe dteadfal
Image of Hell. - If chen the: Srars doopriate; wirh-
1n che bowels of the Earth, upan living Crearues,
Plan:s and Metals, why not upon Stones #lfo2?-1 do
therefore account the Conclhuhon of Hieron;Harget,
an Ancient, Leaxned, Sorbonift, to be moſt Towe'z
who, ſearching after che Reaſog -of Gamahes, \eoil-
cludes (afcera long diſpute)that theFigitreorpeiii-

-cing.on them, proceeds fram two canles'; Hom the:
; Scars, and .from the Property of the Farthi' te

here his own words. | Puid igitier digenduni 3 Toſ-

; FS "Bo , go Ag; cl
\ foie (ex, Arp/1ct radice poſſe contingere”"' One moths.
- »yatlic6,* exe, ſecundum Ajiro

"Dig CXPETLNICNt'S

| foporane anihivitatensmul-
7 comprobatam, ' Alto nada; +x radite wife
rior &0,.1 Now this-power of vertat-aftbe Stars,
works differently upon all th 1%; which Confi-

iecation, bach: moved many clfat ftand tp fr the
> -poweept Figpics, rv believe tharal){otts of Stores,
*vMerals, OT Of 1CT MALLey indifferenty7 if x be pra-

ved,

 Boow i; The Lempieof VVidome. 252

ved;and wrought according to the Rules before de-
vered, would work che ſame effte&ts. For, as Fire
hedceth dil chingsthes are (er before it ; in like man- |
nerido che Srars-Qperace, {ay they, upon a | things
mdiffecently, Bur | bold the, firſt Qpinion to be
the Truer, and-more certain. ;..not, that this later is
falſe 3. bur becauſe the, effect here is (lower, For,
the Fire will indeed heas all cbings, that are placed
near its but f che. matter be indiſpoſed, the hear
will noe work (a.(pecdily 4 as we ſee in green Wood,
and.in..«; Pibble-ftone, which cequirech a longec
wUme.cogrow.hot in, theng Brick doth : and fo in
all-other thimgs. Ic is requized chen, co the end
thet. che Stars may opperate the moreeahly; and in
leſs time, thac the matter. be before hand indued
wich ſome quality, thac is proper co the effet which
#6 have propoſcd co.our ſelves; and havealſoſom?
Sympathy with; thole Celeſtial figns, which -we in-
tend co. make ule of... Rea the Holy Guide, ©
: You may (ce this Sympathy, and che wonderful
Correſpondence that chere is, berwixt Stones, Mi-
nerals,, Herbs, Plancs, Flowers, Tafts, Smels,Colours,
- Beaſts, Fiſhes, Birds, and all chingselfe, and che
Rars, in. Geergrus Vexctus his Book, De Harmonia Mun-
.d, and .inthe. learned Comment of M 'Moreaz, a
| Phyſitiau,; upon Schola Salernitana; the reading
whereof, .ja. all (orcs of books what ever, is cruly
very-Admirable. . |
.... The fourth Obje&ion, which is broughe by the
. above-named Auchors, is; that if chis Art ofpre-
paring images be certaitie, and their verttue ſo great
as.is {aid ;.che Egyptians, Arebiens and Perſians, who
werecthe firſt inverters of them, wonld then: have
made bs [Ives Loris of che whole Exrch, inſub-
guing all, cheig Enemies: which ching they'/have
Los "ME "4 .-11 75 MGT

[|

— Cette ch ” PINT IF orc Ou II "RISKY" = neg on Hr na oor 1. de. ”
t : . F

2Þ4- i6e Lemple of Wilddoune. 'Bookt

Fo NI MI RH LEN, NE

_ not, done; bur contrarimiſe have themſelves all'been
Conguesed::. i ii Tod ot en anyient i toanmd
-: To this] anſwer, that-no-lmager, or Teleſmaticat
Figure can poſfibly be Capable of operating to great
an ctfeQ.; they may-indeet poſſibly:excice, in-fome;
ima) meaſure, the courage of Combarants,and'make'
them Ic(s feartul of the Terrours:of War; bur thefe'
qualities alone will never- be ſuftcient, for the6ob-
taining of a V:cory... If any here urge againſme
the ſtory of INecgwabo, who laid co have drowned
all hi: Enemics Ships, by making certainliccle:'VeE-
ſcls of Wax, and chen drowning'them © Lanſwer;
ſuppoſe chele things were ſo: yet :it could nor be
from hence concluded, that thefe ieffe&s were ©
wrought by the vertue ef! the Stars; bur rather by:
ſome evil Angels, to whom God may have given.
ſome fuch power. Guitelmus Pariſienfis utterly denics
theſe ſtorics'to be true; as indeed they arermeecrly-
Fabulous : neither do I believe theſe ts any one of
them chat. hath any cruch in it. | If it be returned
upon us, thar there is nothing in them, but a man
may. believe, fince poſſibly chey mighe be-rrae#: 1
anſwer, that ag might have been, which
never yet have been : as, for inſtance, there might
have been' more Suns, and more Worlds ther
ONE. 4 1; REIT ITET
Theffth Objefion is,that it is neceſſary char'Nat
rural Agencs ſhould, ſome way or other, 'couch the
thing .chey are co Operate upon>- but w-Figare,
v hich,cureth the'ſtoneg, Cholhick, or any other-drf-.
eale, roucheth norat all the Parteffeftred, cheVereue
of it thereforecammor be Natnralo bf +
, The an(wer-ro this Ob'eftion :is: (o-eafte, tha
vwithour troubling our ſelves to reckon up,' with
Saw, 'the {everal wayes of Torching, we need no-
Sbu!- Cr EL more

 morceburgiveaniaſtiner ina He: Bricks For

m—_—

tl.

Boowl, ToTemplopfWillewss 265

Bricke receives heat from the Fire,without tenchmg-
cither-Cote;; or Flame; in -like. manner doth ag ly
mege receivethe influence- of the Stars,! withous
rouching an Parc/ of che: Heavens. '' In a wordy all:
the couching:/which is here found, . is only @ Firtvdl.
texching.5\as weſeein the Sun, which, doth never=.
theleſs warm itby its Vertut. 5And as a Bricke,heas
ted ather by: the Sun, or by Fire, doth afterwards
overate upow-a1y: other body, | crmmunicating its.
Vercue wo: ity if it-he applied unto it inthe ſame-
manner dotha Figure or Image operate upon ano-
ther body, communicating the intlaences, which fe”
hethreceived from:the Stars unto.-it, if it be in hike?
manner-applyed, eicher: by a Gorporeal, or. by a
Virtual: couching only,'' 1ſhall [noc- here produce*
the Miraculous operation of the Weapon ſa{ve, which
curesa wound; ata hundred Leagues diſtance; ifie-
be but applied co the Weapon..chatamade it ; and”?
that you dreſs it,. as you would do the Wounded '
Perſon: asit is proved:by Sr, Kenelme Digby, | 'If ]-
ſhould have made uſe of rhis Example, I ſhould ne-
ver have been quier from having: itchrown in my
Tecth; thace' the -Operarion -of chis Magretical Vn
guent js Superſtitiogs and- Diabolical. ' This is the”
whale burden of che Ignorant Rabble, whaimpuce,”
whatever they find to-carry wonder with it, cothe
operation of evil ſpirits: and-yer I have been affured
by:DeTwreer:a Phyfitiang thae. this very operation *
was:Natural; and that bimſelf-had madeuſe of icy.”
with gond ſucce's, and on-a'very good man.-'\ Now |
four Nativity Merchants-deny, that che operation.
ofhai Teleſwaticel- Image, which is buried --imder
ground; canbe Natural ; tecaule that:it is Reprin”
by zhe Earth, whieh-coversit ; he may as on 14 4
*7; clude,

"=

_ The Temple of Wiſiowa” Book ©

ade, thevthedp ofa doedicconbed wal ©
Diabolical z eprom oe

+ Londiflonelyel
it bed 'fromUiet fachoms drep within cheoEarch,

wif itatwayes urn ic{ciFrowards che Pole, is
2riſon is ſo mach che more prefſing,: bats
eat the moſt of thei leurned believe, thac this Ver«-
ce bf the'F'0ad-ftone's communicated untoiir, > by”
patr of the Heavens, which the | Needle _—_
\ wks it 15 thar clicre is nothing more!
Cecil 'chen the inflaences -of the ftarg, -when c
Eve'ohce tnade an impreſſion upon things here bee
Tow. ;
*Tliefixch Objeftionirikevar the powerguhictive |
have ateribured to pans for, here is{not
My where (fay our Star Men) a nearer»: Tyre and
Correſpondence, / thenin the Love ofa Mother ant
RerChitd : and yerif a Mother drown hor ſelfe, che
Child will noe == unwnd gc mt 'fo to03/ and fo he.con-
cludes : minus igitur in tam deverfis, ut ſunt
| —_— & Fniopieton, wulle-ligutur eCinter ex rrit, que ©
pk at quod pier” Indags,” {qc es nagind-
OT TRASH vH 6 ;:
*T know very well, har chis Auchor akakes'nſt of
Aigunienr zpainft Neltanbo : bar ſeeing rhart-he
gs it alfo againſt Teleſmarad Images; Fanſwer,
thit cheſe mages (as we have already faid)kave-no
ower at all over our Wilks: eons to! drow ones
lfe, or,not to dtrown-ones (elf; is an-Aionwhich
dej mids wholly upon the Will.” Bur if@ Child're-
t&mBleth&Morher, 2s welt bn: the: Lineaments of -
rhe Face, a8iithe ARions of che Soul ;qhere is np
ddbt, but" rhar' chis reſemblance. may have very
er,*both as well on che'paihonsof- os

wand, a oit thoſe vf the Body,” /whichy I—-

237%

1

— Hand. 74 The Templeof Wildomer 62

| Gam within: agic woiten obſerved. Ad even it
——_— have heard of: two young Childeens
which were Brothers, at Yemeton, an Epiſcopal Cuy.
in ——_ who by reaſon of their being (0, perfeQhy,
Hke one anveher;; if one ob chem were ack, the 0--
ther was ſotoo ;'x9,] for example; it; one; began £0:
have aPanuinehe Hed, the ocber would preſently.
feos} ir; H:one of them were a fleep,or lad zihe acher.
his 009 habd up:his bred, or be mexyy-; and fo of.
the reſt; 8s have been effined by Calloyel Rovel,
a very honeſt mang:end-a Gentleman of che lame;
City. ©
» The: fevench Objedion;' brought by; the Athieſts,
9, thacitar any tune theſe Fakeſmatical ones have
been knownito cnre the bitings of Serpents, and the.
ſtinging of Fcorpions; this:cffe& proceeded nox at
all from the ftare, bur: from (ome fecrec Properties
inthe tote; wheocon cha Figure ny A, Phot: ON
$, 'wae:graved; lt; ns,

This Objetins is anſwered i inewo: Mole Wh 4 [8
then, tharwekave already proved, that the fhars
have power to communicate this vercue to the tage;
and alfo,; that-3r 18 notar all Natura) ro ic, and pro-
eccding framrits own prepaitoerenas Lecauſe thaty
before-it was ggnred and. prepared. under certain
Conftielatzans, ir bad: ctr Vercueat all. -.
indeed 208 what <evd thonkd, a man take fo much
pains in-graving and preparingiit.under diverſe Af
petzof_itheftars, if it. had:ns much, Vectue before?
' "Fa what purpbſe alſo ſhoukt the luhabiuaucs. of the
Countoy' of Hewpis:; ur Turkic; rrouble themſglyes
corakerhe:lmprefion ofa Scorpion that. 31 © 75
wpore:ftone ma certain: Tower, 41,'a picce-
'rxes Gluyz3ffo be tbe Clay it ſelf bad the ſag Vire-
ze bcfare ?. We Gay therefore, that *t had = 4

ercue

968 -2be Temple of: Wiſdome. {i Book-f

Vectue/ before, proper for ſuck an opinion; aud
thae this Vertte/was communicated anto.uy; by che
Kone in' the} Towerz rand :to,.the ſtone, by, the
farg 1s fl whe nnmndg Lomada nr tanks 1 OK
+0 Ffhall novthere/examine+ the Arguments: of ©
Scar Er; "which are-e0 be ſeen underthe Tile
of the'56.Page;/ which is,' Prod omnre 1/He que fiunt
ep yes malignjſſim:fiem © becauſe» that in chis
#pter he rreacs 'only of Speakeng (Images, or Sia
mes; ſnch- ag was thaw ſpeaking: Image uf aman,
which'is falfly faid' ro hive: been madeby Albertus
Megnus: But the Images weſpeak of, are quite ano+
cherthing's/ as allo cheir»power: - So:chat chere
'tothing wanting iow, tothe full Vindication: of
chem from fatfhood; andull: other Caluminues, by
MAdbtego tt non 4 ng eaneg a! hn brood bar
2:/PThe {ab Obje&tion isindeed the moſt-difhoult . of
#}cherreft feeme rhut che Vertue, which we find
Imprinced in a-Teleſmar, ſeemes: to-(urpals the:/po-.
wet of Nature: Neverthelefs we are 'ahle to make
wxappear, that there is nothing Extraordinagy 1n it,
by inftancmp-in' the Load+frone; ; which baving
coitmmunicactedic's Vertue tos piece: of:[rong: this
pivce of Iron'communicates t afrerwards'to ano»
eter; in drawmpirco icrfels, and: retaining ic. Jn:
Mike manine? may 2 Teleſratrcel figure communicate .

RY Verne eoanceher figure, which ſhall have recei« - +

ved knpreflionfrom-it 5 which (hall afcerwards have.
cliepower comwork the (ameeticas : only:the diffe-
Fefice is, wecangivea-Reaſon of this later, though
florofthe former, For, che Tcleſmar:1s3 ava; Bricks)
mide vety thor, which is able rokear anocher. Brick,
ttiough nocwink fo much force; :as. the Fire docs ©
aiftthe fumneichobefaid ofthe Print:df a Zocſmats

lay which can meyer-befopowertul ax:operay
Y 029007 tion,

Bo ok, *The'F cant of Wiſdame. 26g

tion, a5 the Teleſmon ac (elfe-3) which is: heated, or
penetraced, by che Bearusof. the Stade: 2izardy
-. We conctude theny.cbac we may N aturally,and
without. the aid of ſpirits, prove, bythe ſecrets, of
Nature,' not only rthe.power. ofthe Images, bug of
many-vther. operations ao, which are IMOFE WON
derkyl:;; As, for exaniples: to ſend,Newes co que
friends, inlefichenan bours (pace, :abqve an.hun-
dred Leagues off ; as.Trithewus Abbas, ,and Bertho/g=
any- Cordaljer, and qv fors Ratert Flud, haveunders
taken to f6- +: To do,fiich-Miraculgus things, by the
help.of Looking&lafles, aywe would thipk robe wth
cerly;impoſlible : .fuch as-were thoſe range opgray
rions, . which.Kobert Bacon undertook: 10 ,do.m he
number Nike ; by which he prowmiſed\.che Pop
that ifhe would fyrniſh him wich ſuch a Summe- of
Money;ss.checharge of making ORF, would.re
er 5g ey waetroins prgirns ver bythe
r Ar a hundred £
Ment”. Briefly, if Ariftalehad no. informed .uathag
the Lmage'i in che Atre which inſeparably. fol] lowed a
cectaim man, ſo rhache could neyerbe- id of res
Natugal;: mould ic nor-preſently have beeg.cogclus
ded Fair was ſome familizeſpitiz,orſume Dem,
rþ94 $00 pponig; the Figuee ay? And yet
wh ok aa chis-was only te & of che Mag's

: pn ao ang aha begun to per

rigerate-Th oh, Mini .the Axes. A porn,

rene; ed;'mn likemanger asin.aLogk hinges
ſaxhar: gharymheneyer ines ,were. pea iy
hisqamimagein the Aire. | Whichmakes,meco.be

pH Cir nvidl -who eo Rusthe
Anctentsy from the |mpuration. ob Mag

CE boon et ame
" :gommon|y: a a.
cerly

iriver wa go, rower
ore ny bac ſeeing | That they FT 5

i Ron EP, Curt bo Og

Tod wow know 1 your! ohio uſt be Te
| RN I on the” berter ro_rx fine

ve ds

read it the cM __ 1

bal: nocens

Mn WET vl
Rel is ſack, xa (thent AT 64

HEY arr” Tay Sib ft gp
| obet' ebrifideraiions thade me Forbear, us
ain HU fupe Fol WIN Wifaria yOu. Lows
whit How referve.” as to {
ray be” bh Htred bereafret jt Cs

[he Ruft Crarian, we ſlrg)t &

ety eden
| mm T. 2 a vet > fe; Bu .
ny 7A TP ro r ry bet 7. oþ *fluce.s
or! : Ep, een the eC ofo
d& hive Fruit tt our of. acnre ;
e917 toInifitiitine an here ts 2

fires

thin goft Ball 1
rare: -&r1d fe
ir Ginger bred

d pon ITs, ©
Pi an,
ke call ſolictle

IE
thele'we [corne 3
I Lauri
underſtand: 'here bs = the crae Tae of
it demonſtrated, wi f youare not ye |, (uf-
}* Rork God himſe f and the
word of God Natkes you co it; here the Ligbs ſhews
you Light, and here have you that Teftimony. «
Lewes, and the Zyyptiens Records cleared; name-
by, thas God fÞ ſomerimes_ geliyered to, he, era
Pri s and Pro le ere dtrer ber began ed Ne
ind commtnen tt for the we atm. il ca
'£
NR 4 Tele ſmes, and how;tp emma Halgang ave:
nA ten take beed of Antimony 4 £006 2 maze
ork ſeek ogly that very. firſt mix «of Elements

& "ho

f Is Is freſs and new and heving fond Its.

Supa} dn A0S Cn e9
get OOKkS, but rather it ar zof
To erly his Gift, and neyer y-ray
ca *+e 6. NG. A Clear and ſenſi fable .6ſtſt.

rom aboye; N "not my Advicei chough,.
pi ; in Redewla ults to ph chat und =
ney oe) abi to Wns £7

* without zC bras 5 Fro
Nith: IT choſe tha
truth there ge tho ac, fs fou gun Lip
Flizve Hey a Heard. ſome. conf dent, Coble

LETSY &

219 f!

PE Ee i Ein Boork,

Taylers, pretenders of Art, dicidetbele things, their
underwics cannot reach. _ St. Paul gloried in his Re-
welatigvs,, bug be that will do ſo now, ſhall be num-
bered amongſt Renters and Anabgptifts, Bur lec not
zbeſe gbjngs divert you if you ſerve God, you ſerve
2 gopd Maſter, and will not keep back your Wages.
Underſtand well this Book; : that; the other may be
gafic toyou ; And ſo Farewellin Chriſt Jeſus.

w FRAY hy woe

UPI} EIT». oo.

HE

|

Conteyning

. Theomagia»

OR THE

TEMPLE
WISDOME

In three Parts.
Spiritual, Celeftial and Elemental.

ſculpture of the Perſians and Egyptians.

the Occult Powers of the
Angels, of Aſtramancy in the Teleſmatical

| The Miſterious virtues of the Characters of

the Stars with the Genii Idex's and Figures of!

Geomancy upen Gamahe:,'&c. to which is added
the Reſolution of all manner of Cucſtion ,
© © Paſt, Preſent; and ro Come. -

great World, and ifered to mean Capacities.

—— I

Theknowledge of AKoſte Crucian Phyſicke;

and the Miraculous fecrets of Nature,by which
is performed incredible extraordinary things, all veri-
hed by a prat cal examinaticn of Principles in the|

TE——_ — — EE

By
___ Pradlenstenebroſa Penetrar.

London Printed for Henry Brome. 1 662. | |

Servant of God and Secretary of Nature.

John Heydon - Gent. #19 ous 5 by,

_—

|

—

—_—

Truly Noble Learned and Valiant, &c.

John Digby Efq.

Worthy and Honoured Friend, All Coax:
dia = Terreſtrial happineſs be wiſhed.

E E Crave exceeding
Pardon in the Audaci-
ty of this attempt
| humbly acknowledg-
ing a work of ſuch con-
 cerament unto all _
ple , and difficulty
it ſelf, did well deſerve the Conjundion of
many heads, And ſyrely more advantagious had
it been unto theſe Arts to have fallen into the
endeavours of fome Co-operating advancers
; that might have performed this work excel-
lently, beyond all athers, would be your famous
Father Sir Kenelms Digby, whoſe very name
Aa 2 through

FO REORE- RY

hon dd co. +45 ET INS” 25

L SR Se
nth. A. 0

The Epiſtle Dedicatory.

-
a.

—_—

- through all the world would have added Au-*
© thority to it, But the privacy of our condition -
and unequal abihties expe& remiſſion'this was
done by us, yet notwithſtanding we have not
been” diverted nor have our Solitary attempts
| been difcouraged-asto diſpair of the favourable
lcok of-you,-upon our ſingle and unſupported
endeayours, for which the vulgar people and
under-wits, will give you thanks,, Now towiſh
all Readers of your abilities, were unreaſbnably
to multiply the number of Schallers, beyond-the
temper oftheſe times, but unto this 11] judgemg
Age, We chritably defire a portion of your
Equity , Judgement, Candor, and ingenuity ;
=: 99:4 you are ſo Rich, asnot to loſe by dit-
fuſion, and being a flouriſhing branch of your
Noble Father , unto whom we owe ſo much
obſervance, you havebzen long tooted in ſuch
perfe&rion , wheteof having had fo laſting con-
trmation 1m your worthy converſation conſtant
Amity and Exprefſion, and knowing you a
' feriovs Studicnt in the higheſt part of this Para-
dice, and'a main Pillar of this Temple, with
much excuſe We dedicate it to your detiphe, |

Tour Aﬀedionate F riend and Servant,
$35 Ik "1 431i it» 7 JOHN HETDON

- 6 en The

. 0 +

. If,

N;

ne

Fo Woe fs = ies ns ALS oo RL CE En

"PFLE22 226228 4LLIOLSES

PEO OBEOOSOOODDODOVY
The A pologue. .

FT E Shall be accuſed of ereat preſum-
| ption and raſhneſs, for that we
have,' Attributed the Fignres, to
their proper and Natural Idea's.
and Rulers that govern the' Re-
. - * gions of the World, and all things
in the 12 parts oof , And "the Kulers and
Tdea's are incorporated into the Figures: as the
ſoul is joyned to the body , Now the ſoul of Man
3s a certain Divine light, created after the Image
of the Word the Canſe of Cauſes and'firſt exam-
ple, and the ſubſtance of God," Figured by a
Seal whoſe chara@er js the eternal Word ;, alſo the
Soul of Man is atertain Divine ſubſtance , indi-
vidual and wholy preſent in every part of the
body," ſo produced by an incorpereal Author,
that it dependeth by the power of the Agent on-
ly, not by the boſom of the Matter. The ſoul is
a ſubſtantial Namber,, Uniform Converſroe unto
it ſelf, and Rational, very far excelling all bodies
5 Ez "KS 3 : and

The Apologue.

_ ———_——__ _ O—_ —————_ i 4 >

\ and Material things, the partition of which js.*

not according tb the Matter nor proceeding from
rmferiour and grofſer things but from the efhcient
Cauſe: For it is not a quantitive Number, but re-
moved from all Thrporeal Laws, whence it is not
divided nor multiplyed by parts, Therefore the
Soul of Man is a certain Divine jubſtance
flewing from a divine fountain carrying a long
withit ſelf Number, not that Divine one.by tbe
which ſeeing it hath a proportion to all things 1t
can undcrſiand all things, therefore mans. ſoul be
ing ſuch, according to the opinzon of the Plato-
nifts Immediately proceeding from God,; . joy-
wed by competens Means to this grafſer body
whence firſt of all in its deſcent it is inveloped
in aGeleſtial and Aerial body which they call

theCeleſtial-vehicle of the ſonl,other the chariot of

the Soul, through this middle thing by the Com-
»1and of God, who is the Center of the world, it
& firſt infuſed into the middle Point of the heart,
which is the Center of mans body,and from thence
#t 3s difſuſed through all the parts and members
of his body, but the chief ſeat is the head, when it
Joyneth his chariot to the Natural heat being 4
ſpirit generated from the heart by heat, by this it
plungeth it ſelf intothe Humonrs , by the which

it inletteth in all the Members and to all theſe it

is ade equally the nigheſt althongb it be deffuſed

through one ts another, evcn as the heat of fire

2 oo adhearcth

\
w 44S 4c
o

__
——_— —_— —__. _ m—_— A CT
att.

Er III — Oran Inner”

The Apologue. *
adbereth moſt nigh to the Aire and Water ; Al
though it be transferred bythe Aire to the Wa
ter : Thus it is Manifeſt, how the mortall ſoul, by
an Imortall viz. an Etherial vehicle is concluded
in a groſſe and Mortall' body, but when by a dij-
eaſe or ſome Miſchief theſe Middle things recal- .
leth it ſelf.and floweth back into the heart which
was the firſt recepticle of the ſoul : bnt the ſpirit
of the heart-failing, and heat being extinGd, it lea-
veth him, and man dyeth, and the ſoul flyeth
away with this Celeſtial vehicle,and the Genious
his keeper, and the Demon follow it being gone
forth and carry it to the Judge where ſextence
being pronounced, God quietly leadeth forth the
good Souls to Glory, the evil are caſt into punifh-
ment. | |

Again as we know that the 12 houſes have each

of them a threefold Keeper, viz. A Ruler Idea ws

and Fignre, And theſe Govern the houſes ana all
thines contained in them viz, Kegions Cities
Plants Perſons longueſſe or ſhortneſſe of life and
the beginning of all things paſt preſent or to
come, and of the reſt following. So every man
hath a threefold good Demon, as a proper keeper
or preſerver,the one whereof is holy.,another of the
Nativity, and the other of the profeſſion, The holy
Demon is one according to the Dofrene of the He-
brews Abraham Ifaack and Jacob Joſeph Moſ-s
Aaron and the Roſie Crucians : Aiſrgned to the
"ASS : Ration.

——_— *”?

—_—

The Apolopue, - Ou

Rational Soul, not from the Stars and Tlanets; «

For theſe proceed from a ſupernatural Canſe from
Gott himſelf, the Prefident of Lemons, beang uni-
' Perſal avove Nature : This doth dired. iþe life of
the Sonl, and doth alwazes put good thoughts into
the Mind, as you may ſee by the Figires: being
alwayes Advve in liluminating #4, althongh we
ao not alwayes take netice of it: but when we are
prirified; and live peaceably, then it is perceived
by ws, ther it doth as it were ſpeak with ws by the
Figures here in this Book, and communicates its
 Toicetd ui being before ſilent, and findieth daily
to bnrng us to'a ſacred perfe@ivn, alſo by the aid
of this Demon or Genius we may avoid the Malig-
wit y of a Fate, which being Religiouſly worſhipped
by-us in honeſtly and Sandity,as we know was done
by the Reſie Crucians-and- Socrates. The Pytha-
gori-ns think we may be much be'ped by it, when
we by theſe allure the Rulers and Idea's in the Fi.
eures and Houſes to alſiſt #s to divert evilthings,
and io procure good things : Wherefore we pray to
Cod that he would preſerve us from evil, and let
is know who would do us burt, by the Rulers
 Tdlea's Figures and Houſes which are provoked by

the Holy : and that ofthe Nativity which is called
a Geniis : and that of the profeſſron, and theſe
fenifie together all things we can deſire, as you
may fee in the Figures :. Now the Demon of the
Naticity, which is called the Genius, doth here .
| . ee deſcend

g—_

« The Apologue. - |
» deſcend fromthe diſpoſition of the world : and
from the Circuits of the Stars : which were pow-
x las in his Nativity. Hence there be ſome that
\ think, when the Soul is coming down imto the bo-
t' Ay, it doth ont of the Qnire of the Divine Idea s,
Naturally chooſe a preſerver to it ſelf, nor onely
chuſe this guide to it{elf, but hath that willing to
defend it, this being the Executor and keeper of
the life, doth help it to the body, and takes care of
it, being communicated to the body, and. helps
man to that very Office, to which he was deputed
being born ; whoſoever therefore have received a
Fortunate Genius, are made thereby vertuows tt
their works, efficacious, ſtrong and proſperous.
Now the Demon of the Profeſſion is given by the
Rnlers and Idea's in the Figures, to which ſuch @
Profeſſion or Set which any man hath profeſſed
#s ſubjefed with the ſoul when it began to make
choice in this body, and to take upon itſelf Diſpo-
hitions doth ſecretly deſire + This Demon is chan ©
| ged the Profeſſion being changed then according
| to the dignity of the Profej/con we have Demons -
of onr Profeſſion mere Excellent and Sublime ,
which ſucce)jrwely take care af a man which pro-
cures a keeper of the Profeſſron, as he proceeds
from vertue to vertue, when therefore a Profeſſion
agrees with our Nature, there is preſent with us
a Demon of our Profeſſ:on like unto us, and ſui- *
table to oxr Genius, and our life is made. more

peac cable,

| gs, 0. 9. Pa, Pe is

_

The Apologue.

þ

peaceable, happy, and proſperous : but when we
wndertake a Profeſſron unlike, or contrary to our
| Genius, our life is made Laborions, and troubled
with diſagreeing Patrons, $6 it falls out, that |
ſome profit more in any Science or Art, or Office, {\
je alittle time, and with little pains.\ppben ans- |
h ther takes much pains, and ſtudies bark and all
wt in vain, and although no Science, Art, or Vertne
4 be to be contemned, yet that you may live proſpe-
rouſly, carry oz your Affairs happily. In the firſt
place ſet a Figure, and know your good Genins,
and your Nature, and what good the F tgare pro-
miſeth: As you ſhall be taught hereafter : And
God the Diſtributer of all theſe, who diſtributeth
to each as he pleaſeth, and follow-the beginning of
theſe, profeſje theſe, be Converſant in that vertue
to which the moſt Hieh Diſtributer doth Elevate
| and lead you, Who made Abraham excet in Ju-
tice, and Clemency, 1{11c with fear, Jacob with
ſtrength, Moſes with meekneſs and miracles,
. Joſhua i= War, Phineas7z Zeal, David 3n Reli-
gion and Viory, Solomon and the Roſie Cruci-
ans in Knowledge and Fame, Peter in Faith,
John i Charity, Jacob in Devotion, and Tho-
mas in Prudence. | |
", Therefore in what vertne you find by your Fi-
gure you can be @ Proficient in, uſe diligence to
attaiz to the Heighth thereof , that you may Ex-
cell in one, when in many you may not, but
p.: ; , : it

—__—.

PIR

The Apologue. |

——

* in the reſt endeavour to be as great a Profici-
ent as you can; But if you ſhall have the Over-
ſeers of Nature, and Religion Agreeable, you
ſhall find a double Progrejſe of your Nature
and Profeſſion , but if they ſhall be diſagreeing,
follow the better: As you ſhall ſee by the Fi-
gHres,

eee 6 ee le

-— 24<— wand ov rn

VVISDOME

F- The Second Book,

Being A diſcovery ofthe qu _ of this Art,
' And ſignification of the 16, gures from their
' Tdea's and Rulersin the 12 Prone Houſes of
the on |

CHAPL

weſtions cdncerning the firſt houſe and the ferifice
i. 5 Rulers Idea's Foy figures in the ſame.

N the beginning of our Art we Divide the Earth:
into 12 parts, which parts are governed by 7
Lords or Rulers and their 12 Idea's which
- and are incorporated into the 16 figures a

ſuch ſipnification in the houſes as followeth.
"'F Tet is therefore called the T Oe or _
 dene

give |

:
;
| |
a

27 The Temple of Wiſdome. Part 2.

dent and Angle of theOriexe whichcontains the fi gni-
- fication of the Demends which 'may be moved, upon
the Quality, Nature , Diſpoſicion or CompleRion
ob the Queregt, which is alwayes the party-that askes
the Queſtion; (rhbt is ro ſay) whethc: good or bad,
ind wherher like to bg Longslived or yor; and then

whether his preſent intention be good or bad.
2. As alſo concerning thr proportion ſtature form

and ſhape of the. party agkivg che Qyeition. or is
Ifthe Querene be handſome. |

4. If the Child ſhall be well faſhioned or ill pro-
portioned » fair or hard favoured.
$5. To whee part its beſt the Querent direRt his a-
fairs.
- 6, Whar part of life is like cobe beſt, | +.
 ' 9, Whether inclined to health or fickneſs, to
Tcpgth of body or weakneſs, Re
' 8. Whether the beginning of any thing ſhall be
or bad. ; |
- 9. 16 find the party at home you would ſpeak with,
10. What colour cloathes ke wears, and where he

3

ts. |
12. Alſo Queſticns that may be propounded con=-
cerging the mirth or beavipeſs of the Quereng or he
that is born.

12. Whither one abſent bedead or alive.

- 13» Ifs (hip ſh: come home ſafe, or nor, -

14. Astouchiog the Members of man and other
living things, This boyſecontainerh che Queſtions that
may be propounded and made of the head and of e-
very thing therein contained, as the Brain, Memory,
underſtanding reaſon Intelligence Idea ; Ryler, Figure,

Demon, Holy, of be Nativity, Genious, and of the

pro-

nc". de Jertpie of Walaome. 3
| profeſlion; of the Eyes, Eye-browes, Noſe, Teeth»
+ Mouth, Ear, aud Viſage: wherefore when you find
| afigure ja che fiſt houſe, whatſoever it be you ſhall
Judge after the manner and form that we will ſhew
feer, and give alwayes the firſt houſe unto that,
thacthe Queſtion which is made or propounded doth
note to, thac is co ſay the Motive of the Querent,
Whea this figure Fortune 41sjor is in the firft
houſe ic fignifiech good will, heare, loyalty,
OM proſperity ia all things, Joy and Riches,in
* * caſe of a woman it betokeneth Joyfulneſs amity
* of Kings Princes and greatLards : This figure
| * isgood inallchings (except to keep a thing ſecret
| in which chiogit js a coken of ſmall ſurety, Be»
cauſe it is a figure of Sorath, and his Idea Aﬀechioil
in chis place) Ir is alſo of the fire fixed entringin, And
therefore it fignjfieth a high mighty man given to
command, coveting to bring men into ſubjection to

bim, ic is good for war and fignifieth viRtory over E-
oemies, having power lufficicnt to accompliſh his de-

ſigns, neither can his enemies prevail agaialt bim ,
though they be never ſo emigent but will rather how
S

themſelves injury then bim , its in moſt things
and (hews a Heroick and Magnificent ſprited Man.
x x *When you find this Figure called Popalvs in this
x + firſt bouſeic ſignifyeth a perſon of renown and
reputation, fair, lightſom, plcaſant, great-bodi-
ed and well made, one quickly Angry, (wife in -

* * Aionone very nimble andin this is
ayes ou in all things as _—_ in me asin
peace, Signifying alwayes a Com ga-
thered together for one thing or pr Sg hy 'Caſe of
Marriage it. 1s perfetly good and)lickwiſe to take a
journy in hand fignifyiog ſwifeneſs and more by _
en

* X*

4

' ingonthe way ſhallbe daſhed with dure and moyl;,
ed. ; I £1 IE. , | b pe

> , .

m +1 3 : oF condll '? "WW , - i r
then by Exbd 7" And Becable, iris a Figure of JT
and '©Haric/ and of the Element ofthe water, it ther

fore betokericch rain, And chit the perſon.chat is.

*

« - ' Finding this Figure called Carter in the
x '£ houſeir ſignifyes that che Querent ſhall Have
x x the victory z A preat talker and ſctter,forth of
his own worth'telling great ſtoriesof himſelf be
cauſeth contention & (trife between men,deſtroys
plantsand-ſerd,/ir ſignifierh ilt 6pinions- aud thoughts,
Mclancholly; Heavineſſe, Sotrowes, Envycs, Ahgers,
great pain and travilthe perfod.to dream of Malice, it
15 ill fo all chings barro wake Rainpiers, Forts, aod. 0+.
ther Fortifications, of 'Towns and todefend them wel. .

for which ir is good totake a Journy'in.hand, or for's ;
voyzgeir isill; for ic betokenerh' ſtaying 3' andthe ,
the perforcor his horſe ſhall be hurt by cbe-way onthe
foor, This 1s3 Figure of Zaze! arid} Havel in the roth-:
houſe and of the Element cf the Earth, Ad therefore -
itis an ill Figure. ER I Es en HAT
+'x\ When yee' find this s. = ia the fieſt houle
4" called * Agizefiris ,' yee ſhall Judge it to ſignily |
x x goodneffe, happineſs, andquictlife with the ac-
' compliſhmenr of the perſons own hearts defire;

*

- . » The perſon is of good quality, and Courtegus

and deligrerh ro-be well cloathed coecac anddrink well,
and todefirethings - pleaſant and agreeable unto the.
body, lf che demand be of or. for a 'voyape, it ſigniſieth
good ſuccefle, bur he thac raketh ic in hand ſhall nor

| departſo ſoon as he rhinketh, bur yet ſhall beretorn
home in all giadneſle with the Accompliſhment' of his
deſire, and if the queſtion be made for love in way of
Marriage it iz good and for any. thipg that a Lover.

doth

'Þ

k The Temple of Wiſdome. — 5

doth demand in thatbehalf, for « T»quifitso is a figure
of Hiſmazl and Advachicl in the ninth Hoaſe'of che
Elemene of the fire, but being in this Houſe he receives
vertue from Soreb becante of Malchidael which is his
exaltation, therefore it.is a figure firm entring in
good for aff things bac for V Var, but in Church cauſes
and the is mervellous good:
| + VVhean you finde chis Figure called Por in
* ehis firſt houſe it ſignifies a Perſonclamorous,
x ſeditions; Rebellious, decritful, ic ſignifie Soul-
x « diers and Officers, that care neither for God nor
x man,end if a Captain, he is of an-i}l Company,and
inventing Stratageoms co deſtroy the Fotces ofani=
other, and to over-run a Country, and then. to Feaſt
and banquer with Ladie, ir fignifies Theft, Robbery,
Deceir, and gain in play ; in matter of Loveit is good,
and likewiſe ia War. For Voyage it betokeneth a
meetly ſwifcneſs, for Marriage it is good enough, figni-
fying always greac deceits and frauds ; itis indifference
In all things, but berrcer for War then for any other
thing. This is a Figure of Brzabel, and his Ides Ial-
chidxcl inthe firſt houſe, and of the Elemene of the

fire, wherefore it isdeceitfu], ſubcile, and witty.

When in che firſt houſe ye find chis Figure

* called 4/72, it fignificth a perſon chat is lad,

* * melancholy, and penſive, becauſe his Houſe is
x oOppoliceto the ſeventh ; ic ſignifieth alſo loſs

x x Of inheritage and of poſſeſſions, an ill life , an
ill beginning and ill ifſue of any enrerpriſe , ill

for ſickiteſs, voyapes, and quick diſpatching: to be
bri:f, rhis Fignre is ill in all demands that can be pro-
pounged , except for priſoners, in which ir ſigaifierh
deliverance and eſcape out of priſon; in all d:mands
of women, it ſignifieth whores, and ill wcm*n; =
> B this

pO” Wo _

S | The Temple #7] as (9 £ 37 'P.
_ , his Figoreisa Figure of Kedeme! and Hoſmodel.inthe
' ſecond Houle or part of the Earth, and of the Element *

_ ofthe Earth. 3 EN
_ Whenyou find this figure called 4/þ«« in this houſe,
_ It ſignifies aNoble perfon,one that ſcornes baſe
* * actions: one that is ſo honeſt ang upright jn
*'* hisdealivgs that people hate him becaule, be
x - isStrueand paſo wh co ſcangals undeſer-

« « ved; it is gainful in white things,, and chat a
h _ perſon.is ſoung, fige, pleaſant, merry, and bap-
py in allchivge, 1f 'the demand be for ſuir of, Law, ir
15 a fign thatthe man ſhall win, if it be for.meflage he
ſhall have good news, to learn the Law, Merchandiſe,
& the Grammar, I mean che honeſt Schog|-Grammar,
theman is wilegand if this cx Cgn wsitie be, in che fourth,
and Acquifirietn the niath, and Carcer.io the 19, the

£

Querenc knows much Nture, Reaſo 1d Phuloſo-

|

by, A Scholer, a Philoſopher, a Roſe MES, OE (hat

*
o

If ke-hath other Figures conſenting, may. obtain the
Phileſophers P-gitar p.4 "we {pake of in my Book. called
The Dily Gmide, . T:ph:hartharath, bath his joy in
this Kai's and thergfore is gaod for. Marriage ,. but
ic i; naught for War , and good for Peace... This is
his Figare.diject to the .chixd houſe in Anwbriel and of
the Klement of cbe Air. 1.
Capat Dracons wn this firſt houſe, gives Hogoues,
| Riches, and. Favcurs from great and honoura-
* = bleperſonages, chiefly in Church zffgirs, alſoa
x Fforunateagd powerful life, with g pdneſs in
x. all things except for War, for i Haoifiech
x Combarand Batcel; and for Peace iris perfet-
ly. good, it js alſo good for Murriage but ..it will
be lang in doing; it is good in matter of gain, to be
brick, it is good for allthiogs chat ye can dzmand, and
A | lignt-

_

. flgnifiet healch of body, pleaſant and merry, and to

7

TERED —— > —_—__

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdom.
, —

e the favour of Kings , Princes, and great Lofds
with Proſperity, ,and obtaiging their hearts deſire.
Apd for that ir is a Figure that receives the vettue and

'fipnification'of H:ſmae/and Kedemel in the 6. Houle,

and Hamalicl the Idea thereof, and of the Element of

the Earch, and for that canſe is good to build houſes

e0d co labour the Earth, |

= When ye find this Figure , called Fortuv4
;* ' Mixer inthe firſt houſe ar the beginning, ic be-
.* __ cokeneth choler, haſtineſs, and ſwifcne's in all
& + things; if is good for the affairs of War , and
k + Cignthetd force, and boldneſs of heart, with vi-
: Qory oyer Encmies, it is good alſo tor yoyages,
in other things it is _ybt ſo good : as conching things

'of Love it ſignifiech a conrentment of the ching pre-
tended, bur the marter ſhall be diſcloſed. This Figure

Forruna Miro is a Figure of Sorath, and the [dra Ver-
chicl in Autumn, is 'of the Element of the Air,
ie 'Whea you find this Figure called /3#, in che
' firft houſe, ir ſignifiech a ſtayiag in the way, and
mall health in che journey ; it is ill in all chings
except ic be ro go out of priſon, for which it is
£004, becauſe ic is a Figure of Haſmeoda: the
rwenty ſixth day of the Moneth, and of the E-
lIement of che Warer.
' © Whenye findthis Figure called Triftiria, in

%- *&.% + ©

'* * thetrſt houlc, itprodicerh many rroubles and

* x-- difficalties unco the Native, and many melan-
* &* chaly pcrturbations, both to the mind and bodyt
x. ſometimes it deforms the body, unleſs the pare.
| of Fortuge be there, the Native cannot live
long, his life if ic ſhould be long, will replete with ma-
ny dolors, grieis, and trcubles, that it will be a om
| B 2 for

8 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book, >,

tor im rolive: «-fignifieth an ill, beginning of the .
enterpriſe; the man Bf ill will, Me joerg « Tra
cor, dilobedient. This Figure js ill 1q.allthings, *bar
to ſearch treaſure in the Earth, ſhe is alſo good in mat
rers of F ortificatioos and buildings :, This is a Figure
of Zazel in cheeleventh. houſe, and of the Element of
the Air. eu AREV: dr 5 CE Gila
In finding this Figure called Leriri«, in the
* fiiſthouſe, ſhews a long and proſperous life un-
'* * tothe Native, gives a (trong ju þ beajthful bo-
x « dy, fajr, and handſome, of good bebaviour ,
x x prudent, pious, jult and honcl it doth ſignific
a peaccable and quiet life, conjuntion and a-
mity of merry and pleaſant perſons, honeſt,, of good
heatr, and will in al} chings. This Figure is good ex-
ceptin Matters of Wart In caſe of love it ſignifieth
ſome lying gnd diſſembliog, that is, the perſon will
promiſe much, and perform bur lictte.: This is alſo a
Fipure of Hiſmael, and Amnixiel in the twelfth houſe,
and of the Element of the Water. - CS
Wh-n you find this Figure inthe firſt houſe
* * it ſignifies Rogues, Whores, Theeves, Robbers,
* AMurderers, and deceitful perſons, and for all the
* « demands in this houſe this Figure is ill, becauſe
x « "itt»a Figure of Bazz4ble and Barchiel-in the
eighth houſe, and of che Elementofthe water,
_ CO 1t. 19 g deadly figure, and not fit to be
Ju ge 6: 7 F « :.-5 I 7 | :
i When 5n the firſt houſe ye. find this Figure
* calted fxe//a, ic doth fignific Joy, to ſing and
* * -dance,toplay, tobe well cloathed and neat; co-
* beiinLove, amanof good will, young, and a
x \Iover of gardens She is goodin caſe of Love,
and in all ckings bur in War. This makes-a
| | party

Book's. The Temple of Wiſdome. ""Y
* patty volaptoous and given to yain pleaſures, yet gives
Los 30d conffitinie of body, a long and healthful life,
few or no diſeafes that ate hurtful, a lover of all kind

of delights, as ornzments of rhe body, fociety, mufick, |
-odoriferous things , love-toyes , &c. of elegant and
good manners, 'piven to pleaſant ſtudies, much belo-
ved of women} it is Kedemels Figure, and her des

Zhens” |
| When ye find this Figure called CorjunTio,
* * inthe firſt houle, pives a graceful ſpeech, and«f
| x good memory, makes the Native wiſe and pru-
'x dent, of profound and deep cogitation and in»
'z x vention, additcd ro the Mathematicks and Mer-
chandizing ; he ſhall underſtand many Langua-
bes, chiefly ifin good aſpe& of Per, burifin [2 or &
" unto him, it declares a wound in the head, and indeed
makes the perſon both Knaviſh and Theeviſh ; bur if
' he ſhall be of good aſpe& of (arcer, ir declares much
knowledge, and an admirable ingenious fancy:it ſigni-
fieth good, if with good company and good AﬀpeRs,
orelſe with ill ir is iff tc fignifieth alliance, concord,
und conjundron with a friend, or woman great with >»
child." Tifis is a Figure of Taph:bartharath,and his /4:s Wo
'Hamaliel, which are incorporated into this Figure in ©
the ſizth houſe, andir is of the Element of the Earth.
Read the Harmony of the World, lib.z.
2. Whenye find this Figure called Canda Dra-
_* conu, in the firſt houſe, it always produceth
* much miſchief and crouble, perplexity buth of
* body andmind, continual dolor, ſorrow, loſs
* x and tribulations ; ſcandals and calumnies attend
the Native, it vitiates his fare, many times is
dangerous to the eyes,aud imports but ſhore life. Some
old V Vriters wou'!d not this or Rnbess ſhould be
B 3 Judged

The Temple of Wiſdome: Book, 28
Judged.in this boaſc,;þut Lam of the: opinion thar the -
Judgmeat herein ſhould not be delayd : for. what
caule :ſoever the demand was asked>,''and:the> ti
gure made, it figaiuerh illneſs and damage for: all
things that, may be demanded ,:ſo.that-it is good for
nothing but for ruines and burning of Countriesiby
VVatrs and Treaſons, by reaſon that ie. is*a figure. of
Zazel and Barzabel, and the [dea's: Barcbiel and Ha-
acl, in the ſixth, eighth, and twelfth houſes, and of
- the Element of the Fire, and a very-ill-figare.

EESSDESSSSSSSILZSASESEEES

CHAP. IL

10

Of the ſecond Houſe, and of the ſignification of all A
Demands which may be judgtd in it. 3

Ur next work is to ſhew you the fignification
of the Rulers and Idea's when they are incarpo-
_ratedinto the -gures in-this parc ot the Earth,
whichis called the ſaccedent of the Angle. ofthe -Qri-
ent, and this is the place of gaintocome. And fo you
muſt judge the gures for the perſon which demandeth
nd propoundeth the Queſtion, ro know if it ſhall-be
with the travel and ſweat. of his þody, or by (ucceſſion,
Or by euife, P : | A (
| 2. This hcuſealſo containeth_thereſolution of de-
Mynds which may be made for movcable goods, which
Þ- in the power, of the perſoa demanding,or for whom
the queſtion 1s proponnded. | |
3 VVhkether che Querent ſhall be rich.
& By wh:t means attain riches. |
| 5 The

Broko: "The Temple of Wiſaons. IL

-'/5 'The reafon- why the Mn ons may not attaia &

Ws i Df

-:6>Ifche Querone ſhall obtain the ſubſtance be dath

ene, - f 3

y 07 {If one ſhall acquire bis wages or ſtipend owing
rms: - |

$8. If he Quevent hal continue rich,

9. Ofthe time. when the accidents ereated of may
bappen... 5.

10 The chargers perſon ſhall make.

Ir. V Vhether the ion put in truſt be ſecret
OT Not. - *

12 VVhich , —_ two Gameſters hath won, or
ſhall win the ſilver.

13 If the Querent ſhall be welt ſerved to his profit
by either man or woman that be mindech co rake into
bis ſervice.” ©

14 V Vhether he ſhall have greatigain in the-place
where he dwclleth, orof the thing that be loveth and
thac he procureth.

15' The place where the thing loſt was ftolen.

76 Jfthe voyage that be would take inhand ſhall
be pro table , z/ and whether ic be nigh at band-or
far off.

17 VVhether the p-omiſe made by any Lord ſhall
come unto eff. & and good ifſue.

.. 18 If it be good to remove houſhold.”

19 Whether tl;e Meſſenger which is on the way
ſhall bring pood news, or how.

20 As touching the members, it containeth the de-
mancs which may be made of the neck either before
or behind.

The houſe js properly the houſe cf gain and profit,
ar.d therefote when ye find any of theſe 16 : gures in
B 4 this '

TT D—

e Tem! hen ks 1

iinlecond, haute 5: J6:.ongſt
ace, Countries Deberipgons and

me Fh iu . of che -Bareh 3* Ed =

overn the rwelvepartFof the Part an
this you mofir -orgerin allthe©hoofes, Fl i
ſhall Res” accord iog co the Ggnificeribn of ech E
thew. | _
- When ye Fod chis figare mg Firrand
* * Mor, inthefſecond bouſle, it frpnifieth a per-
+* * ſon able to go to-War,' arid it y ood in all
** - things, andnotes profperity with Honour, ri-
+ Ches, great preſents of gold and filver ; and this
_ Figure. is good jo any” queſtioh that Ye can de-
mand, but in heavy and fad things, wherelnir gnificth, .
nelancholineſs, in alother things this Aghiflech joy
and bliſs, .and.to accumulate the Failolophets wealth, '
and thar he ſhall atrain unco a ſplendid 'eftate, if wich
o0daſpet and company of good figores the Philolo-.
phers Stone, which is Magretia and Lytharge , 'the ficff .
civided into Magos, Mirabile : And EY is Money, .
Tos Learning, A i« God, of Lytharge we may nor
incaks theſecwo ſtoncs makes the Philofop bers. Pan-
revs with ſore belps; Adzy netit'is "Ri, £1 in qua
[1161 ſeeentaa divinague Are In demands of Treaſons
ad 'Robbcries i915 good, becgdſe it for eth loyalty,
1 whar houſe ſoever, it: be, ye ſhall always find. it to.
ſ: :nifie forge accompanied with loyalty, lixeiviſe 4 it fi-,,
ge:berh Fairand richivttire. ' © |
"When. you. find'this fienre* in the feeond |
houſe j ic Hgni- cs 8-perfoh of good bumanity,
7 loving pence 8nd trenquthiry, juſtice-and mercy,
and's one of all well beloved, and loverhFct.,
and Jay ; ; and fonething given | to tlic p! Ale.
0

4

+ +

=

Rite o

CCUM A AGATE

Pookzi Te Temple of yſHome. _____I3

Por

© Of the fleſh. Ir, ſignizes 2 quantity: of tris pci
for. Traveland Machandite) and to get fbſtance 7" ir
zaifierh aj(o phyre chings 380d ro! ſpent ell good
OMPAnys £999. for. voyages 'and (ignifiech” fwiſtoeſs,
and likewile, for wrar,for icisaTtoken of a great enulth-
tide of people, aſſembled ready to'figbr, it-is good
for marriages, but cold in matter of Love, it is alſo
good to-gaun.and profit;by che warer. -
*** _ ,, If thisr gure. be in this hogyſe the party ſhall
* | be given to venerious/aRts, and chieffy with vile
X* x orlewd women,-and ſhall ſuffer much by their
* x means. he will be ofan evil compteRion, ſub-
+ je& ro many ſicknefſes; one of no faithor good
© ., confcience;>ir nates (gain by . things bidden in
the Earth with,coverouſnels, |2nd things black; che
perſon ſhall happen with melancholy and” fad compa-

*

ny, and of ſoall;purpoſe incaſe of voyspe; and in all
os ehines the figoifiecth (lownels, Vee bold hon-
ſes and fortreſſes. the is good, bur the work ſhall be
homely ; it is. good io bleek chings,” bur it is fil in all
other things., Jo Wer
 * *,,__ If this figure you find: in this houſe, che pars
X* X ty who asks the queſtion, which in this Art we
& call the Querent, ſhall approach unts or joyn
X X, bimſelf with. rich women, and ſhall marry with
*X them, and thereby grow rich 2 and if rhe que-
 .. fijon beby night, cheman or woman ſhall often
frequent men of the Church, and ſhall 'be of g:10d re-
puce, and for that cauſe be. much a gainer, and increaſe
in riches ; and jn allche demznds this figure is good,
noting great gainand profit, .and that the pecfon ſhall
thrive in quantity of Cattle, in proſpericy, in trafficks
and Merchandiſe, agd have gnod tuccels in all chings in
the world that be taketh in hand, This figure in this

houſe

14 he Temple of Wiſdows:

beuk 1 vectcr then alt the ather, except Fortune Mi. -

jor, which: in this bebalt doth norhing Emperiſh, and:
ſignifying more then the other gain; profic, and ho
nor with Kings, Princes, and ater Lords, andſipni-

ficth as much in matter beneficial, and eſtates of Preti-:

dcnts and Counfcliours.

X* judge the: Querent co be ſortunare among
i'*X' | women; to be knurioac; @ Fornicacor, a So-
'* x dome; and wickedly given coatiabominabie
Xx and filthy ations, adeloder of women, and
ſhall be cejuded and deccoved: by thim, he

ſhailterromth forme wn &:7 an evitprevenc?, and by be-
irg fo ad:ittcd fl bing into Inemafelf preac damage

and devriment; it alto agnificeh profit in Merchandifs
by occaſion of women, and ſignificth likewiſe thag
the gaw ſhall be good inthe war, and that therein
ſhall be gotten honour and ri For company in
the way, they ſhall be men of war, valiznt, and ſtove.
In ceſe of meſſages, ir fignificth ſpecdineſs with ſmall
profir, vnlefs it be touc!1ing war. In chings concerning
honour it 15 rery good. Jouching a thing ftolen , ir
ſhaV be bad apaio, but oot without "_ crouble and

angecr.

When ye find this figure in this :hovfe ,
* --. ye (hall jadgethe party to affcd riches, and
* X therein co abound by reaſon: of womens
=, . means, or Ecclefieſtica} preferments, he will
%; , @waysbe larniſhed with money , Fer will

: he ſpend mach apon Concubines, and infol-

Jowing Other voluptuous courſes 5 he will: alſo gain
xe by the dearth of his wives. In cafe of womenir
hgmteth loya'ty, and virginity, profperity, 2p6 god
luck, good and fure company by the way , gain in
things

If ye find ebb Gowe | in thishouſe, yeſhall.

— -—— ” cen 21-25 A -

Book-2: The Temple of Wiſclome: Sd.

. thivgs of pleaſure and mirth; 2s Mulick; \and ſuch like;
its good nail things, and eſpecially in whito things,
and; matcers: of women, it is good for the way; but
there wiil-be owe hindrance 3 this figure rather ſigni-
ficth good inallthings _—
This figure fignifieth much Bain by. Arcs
* » andSchemes, Philoſophy, Geomancy, Aſtro=,
* *- logy, and Aſtconompy;. it fortnnates a man
* In Merchandiſiog,in the Law, inall. kinds of
* | * writings, Empallies, .Courrfhips, and by his
| joduſtry and. ingenuity he ſhall attain great
honours and favours from greit perſons, and men in
Authority with great gaio, {pirit, and diligence, eſpe-
cially in white things: it is good in all things, and
ſhews- a good will, good company and-truſty, and
men of honour ; it isaiſo good in caſe ofa Voyape, yer'
will there be ſome ſtay by che way : this hows WHoon
Lg
Finding chis 7 pure in this houſe i it Goni-
X | | fer che honour pat, great riches, and great
2%. - ſubſtance. It is:go2d for Merchandiſe, ho-
X .X-. + hours, wary, and fabſtatice; It ſigni eth fwife=
$128 neſs in al things. ' Ja this place this i gure is
indifferent good.
. This figure in this part of the Earch ſigni»
-o -fteth ſwall gain and poverty, the thing lott
- 2 {hall never- be found again, the company is
Th- -

poar, and the profir is not great. In caſe of
xs ' Marriage ic isnot-very good unleſs the firft,
ſeventh, eighth, andninch'do conſent therennro, it is
indifferent i in-all things, .for j Jouray ing Jr 1s gone bur
ſome _ in. the way. '

T his

COIIINSIEY

+ * conqueſt and 'petrifp' of pods and riches
'&+ * *withourſin or breach-of conſtience ; it doth
- x © Hgnifie good company ,- merry; tecreative,
"2 * and of good will, promiſing * many things
'+. -»-- Which will, not de (performed | for a jour-
vey it fignifieth quickneſs : of all che Oriental fgures,
edis y'the beſt in all things, and in caſe of robbery the
thing istaken away in jeſt and will be had apain.

"* '* - 'm& profit}, knd*fignifiech that” the perſon
©-- + (hill berobbed-rhat rakes 's journey, Letthe
*X + "figurebe projeRted- for whatſoever you will,
"> "t194, ond fignifieth much debite and con-
- ++1*+ "> tetition about the thing loſt 'and ftollen ; and
as touching all the demands in this houſe" this Hgure
is il, |
This f;gure is a token of loſs and ſmall pain
* - orprofitin all things that you can demand
Xx * inthis houſe, bur co obtin the friendſhip of
* 3 Lady. Andas touching the way, ie doth
"Xx * fipnifie that the meſſenger ſhall be robbed
dy a number of Theevesand Hedp. watkers, fo
| _ that

|

f

+2 Thid figure in this 'place ſignifies ſmall g2in

Zoc 4dr; -
—_ ah; huge —_ oy or 45:3 , be ic for \ War or
Neace, and-is good: fornotbing buttogive. fokens (Y

Ladics.
= i} | 1 this figare be in.chis houle, ye : (hall
þ _jodgegaiai in things of good induſtry, as the

w_ . Law; Merchandiſe , Writings; the...
116 - oſt, ſhell. be recovered again in; time,; wit
& 3 "Y great. labour and diligence. Sometimes ic
,- | .: Jignivieth: Baſtards, and, the obtaining,
Kooks and Schemes writ by hand, i it £

arrival ofthe Meſſenger ; it notes gain by people late-
Iygdead. This figure is commonly good.
23i{a1 'This figure ſigaifieth great ſubſtance and
*.:.* richer, , great goodneſs, good-company of
avis: men, of boneſty, the thing loft ſhall be ford,

1. . proſperity: and good luck in + : Merchandiſe
| ..*% _ | with grea eek oe ic Ggaifieth alſo chat the
;. profic, wh perſon . ſhall haye , ſhall be

wich peace. wdtranquility, . without was or. debate :
alſo it is. a good. figure. |. '

ov {ant 2JMG figure Ggnifierh alt. retchednel and

oo. ,, Payerty, 4 *a perſon eſtroy-

- ; edand brought to poverty, and to ſpend all

. raigly;; rhe. chiogs loſt. Gat never be had

7 X--. 3gain, the man woe aw hall be robbed

Crafts-men wotkiog by Iran or regs:

Thoers, Lo uth, &c, |

ne a rr Re Ee OOO

the Fee of Wiſdome

> 2” Vs "Tr Le *Y "_y —_— _ - &, we th 0 Ret
* * os #4 FS 3

= «3 OY . a l
if of CHAP: IIs. aha! bis cenab.

if or { A

of the thivd 4 Houſe, (ho of the Dewendiobic mi y be

"made therein.
Ere follow the demands which I be at-
tribured unto cthethird hone, called the Cadent
from the Aſcendant of the Angle of the Ocri-
ent, beof Brethren, Sifters,' Kindred, with the Number
of thewy, and the place of the Narivity of the Querent

of ſhort jorneys.,

2 This Houſe containeth-alſo.the Queſtions which

may be propoynded of x Stholer Rudying i in che Uni-

verlity, or jr auyother place.
$ \fche Querent' and his Frogher, neighbour, or fi-.
S ſÞall agree: .
14; Of a Brother that is abſence! *
'Of reports, intelligence, or fears, if true or catſe
'or ignific good or evil.
1 , 6 -Ifrumon 3 decryc or fake.
* 7. Of Countel or Ailvice, whether good or evil,
' $ Whether the Querent have brethren or ſiſters.
= Of a juuroey ;3tpood ro go, which way,
xo Ofthe amity 2nd wkil-tare of a nerphbour.
-11 Oftn-baſſages, Letters, and Meſlages, which
may beſent witkin 2b": miles by Land.
12 If thae the ill fortune Gal cucnto any good iſ-
ſue ar any time;
13 Whether there be any ill company in the way
that a man world po.
14 How the man of the Church doth from whom
ye wovld hear news
15 As touching the members of tgans body, the ce-
mands

0C

Count 0.

BOOK 2. be. Temple of Fiſdeme. "19
_— which may be made couching the arms, ſhoul-

Vers, and legs , beappropriated unto the third houſe.

Taptbthartharath and his /de2's cule this houſe, where«

fJorewhen ye, find avy of the,16 figures there, ye ſhall

judge accordirg to the Ruler, {dea, and Figarei ia this
Houſe. |

brig —m_ If ye God chis figure ia abi danke; $""BLY

25 it [7 th a poble parentage, mighty and vercuous
Wa Os AR Ie: and goog, journeys: co the

* Querats gives him adminiſtrations, and of-
fices, and gifts from Princes, and greatperſonsz yethe
many y Hoes will undergo impriſonment. the ac-

Religign.y it; (igoificth that the perſon for
whom the queſtion is mage is angry with his Kinsfolks,
and that be (hall bave harm-for loye of them; ſome-
times it ſignificth profic and amity with Kinsfolk, ſo
that the tenth and fourch do. agrec 3, for ECON
this figure is good, ,.

Populus demonſtrates many breth

* >. ſiſters, and many friendly, ny beackoo ood
&* a; ſperous j bor wich chem, the Co re-
K F F ceives good, from his religious Kindred, he
Xx. x Will oþcain an. otfice of cruſt from Princes or
great perſogs, by which, be will receive

4 honour. 80g anincreaſe of riches. This fizure
is indifferent in all demands, and always f gaifies fwakte,

nelc.

When Carcer 1s caſt into this houſe, ic

% portends danger uuto. the brethren of the
X * Querent, and that chere: ſha}! be much hace
+ * berween him and chem it is dangerous in
X Journfes, and is very ill jinall demands, ſigni-
tying dece:ts in matcers of faith or honetty,

ard

T
#f

4
:

things a very ſycophane.

Be
aa

cligida, and in moſt,

-

and difſembling bypocriecs in 1

Acquifirio' fortunates the Querents bre@

thren' and kindred, and makes rhem and the

* Nativemutual friends; it is good in all des»
Xx . mands, and (ignifieth fortunate ſmall _
* aneys, 3z. Inland journies, and- he ſhall un»

| dertake them with pleaſure, quiet, and gain;

ic addiAs him to Religion and honeſty, makes him

credulous, devout, and of good confcieme.

Prey (ignifies much danger and prejudice
*X tothe Querent in ſmall jouryeys, that he ſhall
*. fall into the hands of Theeves and Robbers,
+ + heſtirs op much hate berwizt the Querent
' * and his. brethren, Infortunacy many times
the death of them'; the Querent is raſh, in-
credulous, ungodly, a blaſphemer, abſ/qne ſacroruns
remere. |
"Finding this figurein the third houſe, it
Sy ſipnifiech quarrel] and debate with kinsfolk ;
* % in ſhorr journies it noresſpeedineſs wich ſmall
' % gain; it isill for the Scholer, and fignifiech
X* ' x | anill neighbour, an4 iIf company t in all che
Ro demands which may be'made in this bouſe,
this figure always fignefics an ilf end.

, Albus gives a propenſity to the Mathema-
ticks, and fortunates the Querent in jour-
neys. And in all the demands this figure ts
very good.

% RX

The

a #2

py

= j "TT hae « of, the: De =yrny abide
*X X - makes the Querent: igious, and; |
* bimby fuch means; fottunates him in Jour-
«53 + 0885” gives: hi: fortuaare.. brethren, and
9:34 ſhewotheir birth to be'noble; inalldecaands
_ liz OIEY this figure ingood... :
wy % 1 Sinific contaftion of amity with
chant y'that:tbe 4mity. of: friends is
roy, Wh rs ithoue diſſſanalatioo, bur-yer they
* * be ſomewhat cholerick z.it is. nat good fot
* * the Scholer, for he hath no mind to ſtudy, it
1.4, - is. indifferent -pood all chioge, bat chat ic
_ alice cholcrickneſs.. w” 3 vl

| Signiberh little pood far the Kinsfoll ; it
b <a ho thar the perſon ſhall have his deſires
.;* cÞiy Kindred ſhall pur hint io fear byche the ways
x.3- - the Letters: bring good news, it is Food
* Journey, bur the there will bs ſome ſtay. is.
| +4 , «+ betterby Land chen by OY fignifieth
the. accompliſhment of all deſires.

; "This figure Ggnifiech loſs _d hindrance

Ih 'T,
USIT

&\

Hine, where. in is hoped, never to attain un-
> 1it0 ſybſtzoce bur. by extream labour, envie,
*X * and anger,, accompanied with, yl luck and.

* misfortune to looſe goods, to be ſpoiled, rob-

bed, overthrown, andtogo ia Theeves com-

pany, ſlow for journeys, and ſmall profit. This figure

1s 11] 1n all things, bot ro fortifie Towns ; the man of

the Church is il, ill neighbours falſe and difſembling
kindred and brethren.

Ce This

22

pe

The Temple of Wiſdom.

BOOK 2.

&* *.
*. *,

* +

This figure in ch houſe fignifierh peace
and concord amongſt kinsfolks and friends **

in caſe of voyage,it ſignifieth ſpeedineſs with-
our gain or profit, it is ill for a Scholer, for
it (hewerh. chat he hath nomind to fiudy ,

the neighbour is boneſt, This figure is good

in all other demands in this hovſe.

* *
&

* +.

 Rabeus in; this houſe fignificth choler, an-
ger, debate, ill will amongſt neighbours and
kinsfolks, to let a man bloud it is-good ; ir

. ſigai'ies burnings by reaſon of queſtions and

words of injury happened amongt kinsfolke,

'K is ill for the way; becauſe the perſon is in

Ganger to be ſpoiled; in all demands this figure

is j11-

X |
*

— Significth-good and perfet friendſhip a-

mongſt kinsfolks, and profit with them, and
fhewetb alſo that they be of good diſpoſition
and health. The ſuit which a perſon maketh
to come to the lcve'ofa Lady, he cannot ob-
tain. It is good for a ſhort journey, it i5 good

for a Scholer, bur it ſheweth he loves a woman in the
place where he is refideat ; in all demands elſe this fi-

gure is good.

X*
Ny
XX Xx

Signifieth conjuntion and amity amongſt
kinsfulks, it is good for all things that may
be demanded touching a Scholer ; it ſipni-

\fieth allo that the kinstolks be learned, the
neighbours good, the thing loſt ſhall be

found again, the Letters ſpeak of nothing

bur fables and rales ; it is good for to take a journey,

the meſſenger is good. T his figure is good in all che
demands.

TL.1;

Le]

Book 2. The T| emple of Wiſaome. 23

'U + This figure infortunates the Querents -
| Journey, threatens deſtruction to his bre-
thren and fifters ,*and kindred, and ſhews
mach quarrelling and diſagreement betwixc

| them, they ſeldome agree, but are always
jarring, yea ſometimes plotting the deſtruRion of each
other with much yiolence. In all the demands this fi-
gure is very 1ll.

EEEELGLEEESICLEESSLESE
CHAPI1V.

of the| fourth Houſe , and the Demands therein
contained.

X &

*& *

"Ow the fourth houſe which is the Angle Septen=
| $r50nal or of the North part of the Earth, cone
taineth naturally the queſtions and demands
which; may be made of Parents, Lands, Cities,
Towns, &c.
2 Alſo upon Houſes, Vinc-gardens, Meddows, Trees,
and their appurtenances.
3 Alſoupon a Citie, Town, and of the people that
dwell cherein, to know what they be, and of what dif
poſition, and what is done ia the City, or Town. .
4 lc containeth alſo the queltions which may be
moved upon a Caſtle, Palace, Fort, or Tower.
5 The place where things are hidden, or other
thing: kept, _ -
6 Alfothequeſtion which may be moved upon the
endof all the Figures, to kaow if the ifſac tha!l be
200d cr bad.
Cc > + 42 1m

W

24 The Temple of Wiſdonre. Book 2.

T_T

7 1his boute being the ſecond to the third muſt?”
therefore ſignific the ſubſtance of the brother or fiſtec
ct the Querent. , .

S$.Whereto find athinp hid or miſlaid, what part of
the hou'e or pround.

' 9 Ot buvirg and ſelling Lands, Houſes, Farms, &c.
'. 10 Ofthe pocdneſs of the Land or Houſe.

11 Quality of the pround.
12 Ifrthe Tenants be good or ill.

; 13 Ifthere be Wood on the ground, or if fertile or
barren.

14|fgood to hireor take theFarm orHouſe defired.
15 1f the Querent ſhall cojoy the eſtate of his
fathcr. | |
16 If good toremove from one houle to ancther,
17 Of turning the courſe of Rivers.
18 Of treaſutes hidin tbe ground, if the Querent
ſhall obtatnit. kh
19: Whether the father be dead, or ſhall die
quickly.
20 If the child be right fathered, cr a baſtard.
21 Whether the father or fon ſhall die firſt,
22 If ir be good to buy Lands of Herjtages.

23 Whether a Town ſhall be taken er not. A Fi-
gure caſt in /raly by my ſelf, to know whether tho
King or Oliver Cromwel had the beſt ar Worcefter,and
1;udged there,thac the King had then the worſt, but the
wind would change, and King (h.les the 2. in 1660,
would recurn in peace to his own again, And anorher I
caſt and gave my judgment upon a lictle after inTwr&y,
which was to know what next ſhould happen, and by -
my Figure I found we ſhould have war with the Dutch.
Many Merchants can teftifie how crue. I ſpake of evey
particular , and how things will proſper within 309
: y cat's

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome: ON 25

gears [ cold chem privately, which (! may not, | wii ſ
not) write here, Finally, all the Queſtions and Judges
ments in this Book, I have expzrienced, ar.d am wi-
ling toteach and inſtruc others our of that affcctioa [
bear to my own Gountty England.

24 Whether the Ship on che Sea ſhall come to a
good Port, and who is in her, and wherewi:h ſhe is
charged: |

25 Ifa man dyelling in a houſe ſhall dwell there
long time or not,

26 Whether he that is on the way ſhall be long in
coming or nor. Theſe be the queſtions which be con-
tained in this houſe, the ſignitication whereof, be it
g0o0d or bad, ſhall be judged according to the fignifi-
cation of rhe Rulers Idea's and Figures.

Wherefore when ye find this Figure cal-

*% + led Fortuna Major in this fourth houſe, ir

* * ſhews honour and dignity in old age, and a

* laudable fortune, and ftedfalt for a conſtancy

* - hidden treaſnre and much gain, Princely

| fame afcer death, a greateftate tocome by the

death of the father, unleſs Rybews or Triſtitis affliit

him ; butthis gor but by the fathers death. In all the
demands that may be made this Figure 15 good.

This Figure in the fourch houſe declares

* the Querent to take deliphe in Buildings, A-

*X griculcure, or Husbandry , Mills, and Fiſh-

* ponds, and Fiſhing, andhe ſhall gain wealth

* thereby , bis Parents and hewill differ, ard

together with his happineſs be will meer with
ſome vexation aad creuble, 1f the queſtion be by day,
che evil will happen in the beginning of tbe Natives
life, if by night in the latter part thereof. This Figure
is indifferent in all the queſtions.” |

| Cc 3 Carcer

X X * X

a _ PURI TEAS > pa re _
———__r@_*QYs 5 - EA. —_ EE AU Ft 1” HE 4 RS PE x AAS ITY IA De nn I INOES N—_— —
0 A

26 " The Temple of Wiſdome. - - . Book 2,

X «© Carcer in this houte gdettroys che babliays
* * rionanddwelling of the Native or Quereat
* > the father ſhall die before che ſon, the mo-

* ther is of ſhort life, this figure being in the

fourth, in arevolurion of the Earth brought
Carcer or Trifti:ta in & to Fortuna Ma'or, which kil-
Jed both Father and Mother the ſame year : Deftru-
&ivn of Lands left by the Querents Father, Fulturaw
p-1ri0ntiy he will deſtroy or make ſhipwrack of his
patrimony, this Figure is ill in all the demands of this

houſe. -
Aſfures the Qrerent of riches from Lands,
X% *X* and Houſes, jometimes treaſure, or riches
X* hicden in the earth, he ſhall rcceive fortune
* + f:omPrinces and great perſons, many times
* riches without labour an increaſe of his
patrimony, his Father or Parents will be ho»
poureble all cheir time, and after death ſhall be eternij-
{ed in Fames Treaſury ; ; The Native will attain unto a
oreat degree of rule and dignity, honoured of all, live
in great pomp and plory all his days,in all the demands
10 this houſe this figure1s good.

This makesthe Querent or he that is born
” to be a murderer,or a ſhedder of blood ; and
* Afubjes him to mich calamity and trouble,
* + dettroys his reputation and dwelling, haſtens
> the death of his Father, he will alſo have con-
centions with him, it threatens alſo damage
by fire, and wounds and hurts in the body, moleſta-
tion, loſs, or damage from his wife or wives: he will
be excited to all kind of violnce and villany , the
ground is {tony and barien ; this figure 1 1s1l] in all the

demands, |

Signt-

|

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 27
*Y Signifies a ſtable and firm inheriance, but
* very mean,the Parents be pretty eminent, but
* + poor; it ſignifieth loſs io affairs; In all the
* demands this figure is ill, and ſignifteth quar-
* * relsand contentions with folks of ill nature,
life, and complexion, the Father ſhalldie be-
fore the Son, it is not good to buy Lands, there isno
treaſure hid inthem,che crown beſicged ſhalbe caken,rhe
(hip cometh with agood wind, but it is no great profic
co the Merchant, the ſhip isfull of young wencbes for-
ſaken, and is in danger to fail into the hands of the ene-
. nemie, or elſe Pirots, the party ſhall dwell long ia the
Town or Houſe.

In this bouſe, ſhews an excellent memory

* *x and goodunderſtanding, a brain apt for Arts,

* > - and Sciences: acute and moſt apt in all buſi-

*x nefſles, andthe Querent by his induſtry and

* * ingenuity, ſhall accumulate a ſtable fortune

in Land and Edifices: but nevertheleſs he

threatens contention, ſtrife, and moleſtation with thoſe

nearly related unto him,. or bave any affinity with
him : in all demands this figure is good.

In this houſe argues much gain to acrew
* *X untothe Native : from Lands, Houſes, Ia-
* - hericances, &c. oftentimes much gain un-
* thought of, or unexpeRed, as by things bid
> and obſcure, &c. It alſo ſhews the fa-
mily from whence he ſprings to be noble,
ug and durable; in all the demands this figure
ts good,

C4 -- - Sige

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.

in all chings, the Father is come of an indiffe-
rent noble race, but they be all cbolerick per-
* * ſons; the houſe and appurtenances thereof
* * befair and good, and the Lands , but: they

_ ſhall be ſubjeR to ore, and they ſhall be da-
maged by men of war ſometimes, viz. by Souldietrs
both Harſe and Foot, there is no treaſure hidden, the
City or Town is well populated wich Souldiers, the
end of the war ſhall be good, for peace it is ill ; the Fa-
ther ſhall die before the ſon, the child is not legitimate,
che money which was hidden is found and taken away,
the place beſieged ſhall be taken through their own
folly, in quarrelling amongſt themſelves, the Ship ſhall
come home ſafe, the perſon ſhall live long in the
place: this figure ſignifies haſt and is not evil but for

PEaces

* k

This figure ſignifieth loſs of Heritage, in
all things that ye can demand this figure is ill,
but to ſow the earth: yertit is good by water,
the treaſure ſhall not be found, the City 1s
weak, and ſhall eaſily be taken, the Caſtle or
Tower is not fair. and they ſtand by the water
de; the brother and fiter have not much money,
the father is of long life, and the ſon legitimate; it is
good to buy Marſhes ; the ſhip ſhall come heme ſafe,
the man ſhall nor dwell long in the houſe : this figure
1s good'for all things but for love.

It fignifiech to be diſinherited and driven
* * fromtheeſtate of the Father , the man came
Xx * of anevil off-ſprins, the houſe is ill and ready
Xx Xx tofall, wer and ſmcaky, the Town ſhall be
* raken if che other conſent, the people be old

Souldiers, ſubtile and deceitful, the Palace,
Caltle,

XFXX

Signifieth great ſuddenneſs and quickne's'®

MN —————— ——

Book 2. T7 be Temple of Wiſ, dome, | 29

_— — —

; 2 Caſtle ard houſe be old, and much treaſure hidden in

chem; the end of ali rhings wh:ch ye demand is ill,
but to buy acrable Lands, 2nd co tuild houſes; the fon
ſhall die before the father, che morher is ull, yet the
ſon is legitimare; it is gocd to buy heritages, for they
ſhall be long enjoyed. he that is in the houſe ſhall live
there long, the ſhip is heavy loaden, and will be long
a coming z in all demands this figure is ill in this houſe,
and fo it isin the firſt and fifth houſes.

Signifies good luck and proſperity in heri-

| rages, and that the treaſure hid in them ſhall
*X X . befbund and diſcovered, the family is good,
= * and came of a noble extraction, the huule is
*# * pleaſant, and the placcs thereunto belonging
recreative, and of much pleaſure, ow. of

the groves, high Woods where. the Birds warble
forth their notes, and of the Gardens, Walks and green
places where the Fairie Queen and ber Ladies dance,
by the Moon which ſhines throvgh the tops of the
high crees, and fortunates the place with pleaſure ; the
Palace and Caſtle be very pleaſant, with the fine
works and green things that be there, there is much
trealure hidden near the fiiver ſtream which cules
alonp its waves by the Palace walls, the river is full of
fiſh, the end of all dema: ds ſhall be good. This houſe
ſignifies the ſubſtance or riches of the brother or ſiſter,
the ſon js legitimate if the 5b. conſent, the father is
nor dead, bur doth make goud chear, the thing enjoy-

_ ed ſhall be ſlighred, the man in the houfe ſhall dwell

but aſhorr time there - in all the demands tkis figure
1s good.

This

_ The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.
This figure ſignifies the father to be poor BF
* * &needy,ihe brother and fiſter have no riches,
* the father ſhall die ſhortly, the ſon is a ba-
* > 4tard,the ſhip (hal be caſt away in a ſtorm, the
* * waves have broke down the deck. & the puns
have broke their tackles, and ſtaved out the

fides of the ſhip; there is notreaſure hid, the Town
ſhall be taken, and the Dams opened, and all the place
deſtroyed by the abundance of water - in all demands
this figure is ill and fignificth death and bloodſhed.

»

Pella figni es a good honeſt family, the

= h«ule 1s pleaſant and fine, rhe City is fair,

* * Uncaf it be beſieged, it ſhali be taken, becauſe

>& there be more beauties, viz» Ladies and Gen-

* tlewomen, the men of war; there is no trea-

| ſure hidden bur near the water fide, the bro-

ther and fiſter have good ſtore of money, the father

ſhall live Jong : this figure is good in all the de-
mands.

Ie is good to viſit the father, for he is ſick

* + ordead, and if be be not dead, he will eauſe

+ ſomething to be written, the houſe is good,

* the Town ſhall be taken, or yeild bycompo-

* * fition the Souldiers be wiſe, the Palace, Ca-

ſtle, or Tower is not very fair but it was buil- -

ded by Artiſts in Geometrie, the treaſure bid ſhall be

finely found, the father ſhall die before tbe ſon , the

Stip ſhall come ſafe home, the brother and ſiſter have
but Jirtte moncy, the party that lives in the houſe or
Town , ſhall nor live there leng-: in all the demands

ft:i5 boure is good, |

Shews

ms .

Book 7. The T emple of Wiſdome.

> 4 -
Shews much labuur and lorrow O00 che
Querent, 8 confuſion and waſte of his patri-
mony ». loſs in Lands, Buildings, and all kind
of Edifices, troubic and anxiety in the life or

* + livesofhis Anceſtor or Anceſtors, lol of eitt-
mation and credit. |

X % *

QLLELLLLLLELALIEILESED
CHAP. V.
Of the fifth Houſe, and of the Demands therein

contained. |

F

Ere in order cometh the 5th, houſe, which is cal-
led the Succedant of the Angle of the Sep-
| rentrional, otherwiſe called the (ood Fortuve,
doth contain properly the fignifications of the demands
which may be made touching a child, to know whether
it ſhall be ſmall or great of ſtature, and touching bis
birth whether he be l-gitimate or a baſtard, of good
natureor il
2 The ſubſtance of the father whether he be rich or
oor.
F 3 Whether it be good to eat and drink.
4 If it he good to put on new cloathes, if they be
good and ſhalllaft long. |
5 If che promiſe made to a perſon ſhall be perfor-
| med or not, and whether it be true or falſe.
| 6 Whether the Meſſenger ſhall come quickly and
what news he ſhall bring, and alſo what is contained
jn the Letters,

7 If

«
Wt EAU Nv ts. AMAR eng
4 - wu -
4

|

"2 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book. 2.

7 1fthe earth ſhall bring forth plenty of fruits, and ,»
whether they ſhall be good or bad.
_ 8 Likewiſe the ſigni: cations of all pleaſures, as to
kiſs, fing, dance, banquet, and play on all inſtruments
of Mufick.

9 If one ſhall have children,

10 If a woman may conceive.

11 If the Querent ſhall have children be he man or
woman that asketh.

12 Ifa manſhall haye children by his wife, yea or
no, or of any other woman whom he nominates.

13 Whether ſheis wich child or nor.

14 It with child of Boy or Wench.
- 15 Ita woman do conceive with child of more then
one.

16 How long the woman hath been conceived.

17 Ofthe time when the birth ſhall be.

- 38 Whether the birth $hall be by day or night.

19 Whether pnity is like to be between the infant
and Parent. |

20 Whether the Town beſieged be taken or nor.

21 Whether the party which is on the way hall be
in danger to be robbed, and whether the ways be nor
dangerous by reaſon of Theeves.

22. If the Son be ſick, dead, or taken priſoner.

23 Whether the Book which one would read con-
tains things good or bad. Theſe be the Queſtions con-

YI

|

- ezinedunder this houſe, the which ye hall judpe ac-

cording unto the fignification of the Rulers das and
their figures, and you have jn the firſt Book their na-
tureand power, and here they follow in order : you
mult :emember firſt the Rwelers and /dea's and then
324ge the figures in the houſes,
; When

en

Book 2. - _ The Temple of Wiſdome. 32

-Y When you find Fortung Major in the fifth

* > houſe, it denotes few children, but thoſe of
Xx + much honour and Renown, Beſides he de-_
* clares the reſpe& and reverence the child ſhall
x receive from vulgar people, and the honour
and dignity he will receive from Eminent Per-
ſons : bur if it be with pure Rubews, Carcer, or Trifti-
ri4, the children dye if he be with «Acqws/itio or Letin
:14, the children may live and will attain a ſplendid
eſtate and credit in the world, and the party ſhall be
accompanied with the choyſeſt delights, in a word,
this Figure is good in all the demands, and better then
all the other, becauſe Sorath, and Yerchiel rule this
houſe in Fort ana Major,

Popxlgs m this houſe declares the Native or
* > qQuerentto journey often, and to go on divers
* > Meſlages, and Embaſſages, gives him honour
*X * from the vulgar people and ſignifies, that he
* > ſhall have many children : he willbe much gi-

ven to company keeping, and all kind of vo-- &5;

lhuptuons courſes, principally revelling, and haunting
Tavens and Alc-houſes.

In this houſe portends eicher no Iflue to -

+ thequerent, or the death and deſtruRion of

* thoſe he (hall have, and while they live, they
* > dAſhall prove croſs and diſobedient, bringing
* much ſorrow and tronble of mind anto him:
he deſtroys the querents pleaſure, and ſtirs

up contentions between him and Meſſengers or Em-
baſſadors, and preſages or averſe or croſs fortune in
a'l his Negotiations, "7

Declarcs

24 The Temple «f Wiſdome. Book 2+

as a ——. ——_—

Declaces many Children, and thoſe duti=gu
* . *# ful and obedient. to the Native or querent,
* ard he ſhall be bleſſed in them: they ſhall
* > prove honour eble and ingemous, and receive
* Applauſe and commendations from all per-
ſons, be Augiments the querents delights and
pleaſures, be alſo ſhews many trieadſhips and Do-
nations of Conſequence unto the Native or querent,
chiefly by ſome arduous Meſſages or Embaſlages ,
he (hall pcrform, and probably thereby atcain unto an
eminent degree of Honour : in aildemands this figure
is good.
, Portends unto the querent but few chil-
* dren, rather a ſpuriops and#legitemate Iſſue,
> by which he ſhall receive much ſorrow, grief,
$. X -venation and trouble, Ir alſo ſhewes much
* . loſſe and evil to enſue unto him by reaſon
. of Libjdincus and prodigal' courles, playing
and.gaming and following ill company this figure 1s
illin all the demands. |
Signifieth chat the child ſhall be of ill Na-
+ tureandlofſe of Heritage by Art, the fick
* + pctiſon ſhall amend, the woman with child
* {ſhall havea Son, but he ſhaltbe in danger
* > cf dcath it is nor good in caſe of eating.
and drinking, the promiſe ſhall not be per-
formed, the Meſſenger ſhall come quickiy, but he ſhall
bring ili news ther Letters ſpeak of cballenges and
quarrels abour a Woman, for pleaſure 'this Fi-
gure is fl, uvleſs it be for Wantons, and Bawdy-
houſe-Keepers at the Hand in Placker over againſt
Strand» Bridge without 7 emple-bar, for their iis good,
the houſe is 1il and dangerous: Vagabonds and Scor-
pi: ns Iye in the way, the Son is neither dead nor taken
| pri-

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſcone, =

riſoner, bur he is very fick; the Child is a battard, co
ay and ſellnew Garments it is ill, the year is good
and great, aboundance of Corn, it is ill for Trees and
Plants, the Books are ill and full of idle Complements.
and Love royes -.this Figure is ill in all the demands,
and fignifieth many Children, but chey hall be
all bad.

In the fifth houſe, ſignifies the querents
* +* Childrento be Ingeniousand apt for ſtudy t
x * makes the Native honoured of Eminent per-
+ fſons for his Clerks-ſhio Ingenuity, or skill in
Xx > the Mathematicks, he may prove Secretary
to ſome honourable perſon, by which he hall
F4in mach moneys and credic; he will delighe himfelf
in curious Arts, and neat and admirable iaveacions, in
which he will excell. |
| This is not ſo good as Fortune Major, but
Xx iris indifferent good in Antamn, & fignifieth
+ thatthe child ſhall be a man of honour, vio»
Xx > riousover his enemies, and liberal, and he
* > ſhall have many children : Ic is indifferent
good in cating and drinking, the promiſe
ſhall be performed, the Meſſenger ſhall return quickly,
and the news tbat he ſhall briog ſhall be of War,orof
ger; for pleaſure there ſhall be (mall joy,or hearts caſe,
it is 1[|to remain in the houſe becauſe of ſmall gain, the
women with child ſhall have « Daughter, and eſcape
death very narrowly, the Commons of the Town be
ill, if the Caſtle be beſieged ir ſhall be taken, there be
many Theeves by the way, and therefore it is nor good
co go into the Countrey : the ſon is ſick, bur he ſhall
eſcape the diſeaſe, and come home ſafely, if the tenth
agree, the child is a baſtard. ir is good to buy iand pue
on new cloathes, for they ſhallendure bug a while ; the
year

35 I

CON

"The Temple of Wi Viſdeme. ,

books ſpeak of wars, and anger z this Figure is indit-
Os inall the demand, and fignificth few children.
This Figure Ggni fiech to have few children,
but they' ſhall be of good nature and complexie -
on, and not long of life; it is better to drink
then to ear, the promiſe ſhall not be kept, the
woman i3'nor with child, bat hath fome Lump
jo her. Inall demands that may be propoung-

SITES

ſever you make a Figure for any demand, and find this
Figure in this bovley ic. (goifjerh cher Lerters ſhall
come from ſome- place, the which (hall ſpeak of things
| af waters or of a voyage; it figaiticch many children,
15 bhur.they (hallalldye. |

This Figure : neniieth ſorrow, heavineſle,
% nnquiemnets, poverty, and ill fortune hereafter
X . to come tothe child;.the Letters which come
X* ſpeak of heavy chings, as of a Town beſieged,
Xx orofother miſhaps and inconveniences; the
woman with child ſhall have a ſon, ſo thatthe |
wth be Maſculine, and ſhe ſhall have a great and long
_ travel with danger of deach, this Figure is ill in all de-
wands, and ſignifiech manychildren.

"FASL

Signifieth perverſe children, and degene-

* rate from vertue, it is ill touching, eating,

x and drinking, and eſpecially of red things,

* x. the promiſe ſhallnoc be kept,the Meſſengers

> fhall bring. Lecrers which make mention of

War, Duels, or challenges; this Figure is ill

in all things bur to fow the ground; the woman with
&tuld thall have a daughter, but it ſhall ſurely dycs

She

year ſhall be good aud p'entiſul, bur ill for _ the ”

, <drhis figure 3s ill, unleſs tr be for voyages, and when _..

W "Shefi ignifieth proſpe Et it is alſo.
* pgoodtocat,and codrink, and for all Mirth,
* X* and pleaſure; the promiſe all be kept, the
*X 'M oger ſhall come home tak, and at laſt
* * _ ſhall RR RR
be ite goodo woo, ily and Play
on Inſtruments of Muſick; the FT
. is no Theefe inthe way the Woman with child al

have a Wench if the four Angles conſent, to buy and

8 pur on new cloathes it is Soon La h that
they (hall be. rich, neat, foe t the ſhall be
+ good, andabomnd wich great ſtore of all orts of fruits,
the Bookstench how ro Wao, Court, Sing, 5; Ply, and and
Dance with Ladies; in alt demands fre, ogy on. rw
and fignifieth few children, burthey ſhall be very fair
: and lovely.

Signifieth that the woman with child hall E

* _ have a ſon, and whenſoever you do pou? a
* Figure for a Marriage, and find this
* this houſe, be ſure the Marriage ſhall cake
X* effe&. This Fignre is mean in all the D&-
mands, and ſignifies few children.

Signifies proſperity, good luck, and the ad»
* vancement of honour ro the child by his good

* nature, the woman with child (hall have a ſon
* X which ſhail have great honour and repatati-
* X- On in his life ; for all queſtions chis Figure

is good at to buy and pur on new cloathes, and

for the fruitfulneſs of the year , and conſequently "this |

Figure isgood in all the demands, and notech to have
few children. | |

Dd

Ja

37

ure in

ON ERS $4% 2 HS ee IS oe ia "Ire

ns ee ei ns

"The Temple of Wiſdeme. * Booka.'

e:t/2 In this houſe trecs che Native from many

* +: troubles, calamities, and dangers, and =
* '*,; unto bim many childyen, and thoſe long lived,

 b -- and. very. fortunate, the Native: receives

. *;: - ſome publick ewplo ment or Office, gains much

-»' theceby;, he is dehghted with muck civill
recreations and; pleaſures.'. ,
Io this. fifth houſe. dgth either. deny 1fue,

”'S £ "
$4985 ho

v1 or £iſe,portends the, deſtruRion: of the Que-
* / rents chiſdren by viglent deaths ; much cruel-
x - ty, and adverſity while chey live, makes them |
p x crols, vexatious, and diſobedicnt unto their | ;
Parents: Ie deſtroyes the Quereats pleaſures MF.

5 deliphes: : -Jogicaces. much evil unto him to pro- |

ceed from vain, irregular, and. yoluptuous ccurſes. \
ot "x M of | of Z
SSC USPEARE T SRL GS þ |

CHAP. V.

of the f:xth Houſe, and its £ neſtions, VIZ. of ſick-
neſs, Servants, ſmall Cattel.

7 Verv thing is known to receive vertue from the
2d, Jae 's and Rulers of the world, and they receive
heir power frem God, and incorporate. it-irto the
twelre parts of the Earth, and the ſixecea Figures in
the Annua', mionethly. and daily motions:.ot therp;
This being called the Cagent from the Angle Seprentri-
oral , which properly ' imports 'A +«v-2@+s Or
Revolution of Fipures good or evil in hcufes ; but
evis is called ill f rtune, and containeth theſe Queſti-

«ns, which may te made upon ſick perſons and diſea-
; jes,

Book'2, Ws The Temple of Wiſdome. 7 39

— ——— OO CCC meme

2M ies, whether it ſhall be long or ſhort : and of _ whiclt
of the four Humours it cometh : and if the _ Pa-
tiene ſhall be guickly whole, or loſe any of his [Limbs
by.chat Diſeaſe. ts Wn
{ -,2. -1f he (ball dye, in what eſtate he ſhall dye , in
good or bad, and in what day, and in what houc.
'- 3- Whatpact of che body isafflifted
. - 4- From what cauſe the ficknels is, what part of the
<, -body.the Houſes ſigaifie, and their diſeaſes; Diſeaſes
TY Ggnfieth by tbe. 1ges's, by,tbe Rulers in the firkt Book,

f

* .and by the Figures in. this and che third Book,
- $+.!]f che Diſcaſe be long or ſhort.

2 6. If the party be fick ot- whom the queſtion is
> ,demandad.;; 45:54 nt ts nth ee ER

$ ..7. Cauſe of the Diſeaſe, invard or outward, |
-+ .. 8. Ofthe quallity and nature of the Diſeaſe. .
.; - 9.i Wherher the Diſeaſe be ia the right or lefe fide.

| & . 10. Whether the Dilſcaſc bein the, body, or mind,
br both, —_— 9 A 4 & "By i
71, How long erethe ſick (hall recover.

12. Whether che Phyſician be a Learntd min you
, would goto, and if good tatake Phylick.

$3. If it be good co vilic a (lick perſon.

. 14. Whether it be good tq remove the fick perſon
from the Hoſpital or Chamber where hes to another
: Aire which is jn acother place.

: 15. This houte containeth che demands which may
1 W. be made upon ſmall beaſts, as Shecp, Lambs, Goacs,
r

4 for WACY6

Hogs, Conyes, and ſu« blike ſaaall beaſts, and whether
it be good to buy or (cll them. ;
16, Wherher the beaſt loſt, ſhall be found and who
jo 15 the Theef. | |
17. It containeth alſo the demands whicl may be
mace upcn men of low conditiqn or eflate, as Lavuii rs,
| Dd 2 Fa Mu

pn ————_—_

. The Temple of Fiſcome. Bod 2

Maſobs, . Carpencers, Butchers, and Porters of Lendang”
or ne .other City. {4
Alfo over of things ſtrayed nag broken, falſe
wich awds, Mel5;ees rib ng Enchanters.. -
39.” Allo over feat, an@fright [hume, erty, and
lack fmoke and datknels,/ ws wh 7
. ..20, As touching the members off try, it containeth
the decdrds which may'be made npor; all the: Noble
parts of che body, the hrart excepted Theſe betheprin-
cipal dettipnds which you tult judge according to the -
Gonification of the ſeven Lords of the Earth, the /
tivelve /dea's, and; the fixteen Frgores, according ro
former Rules putin order.

C Fortune /Aajor in the auch, (hews loſs in
 X ſmall beaſts, any pertn rbarions and troubles
*» 3K, "from ſervants; bong in 'foine things they

* ſhill be frietidly and ferviceableto him, Sar
= rmohſtrates many long,and Chronical Diſcaſes; |;

chiefly rhoſe of the mind, if Per or Rubens be

in the Aſcendant, the Father of the Querent ſhall /-

ihortly dye.”
Declares many fickneſſes to invade the Que-

* X%" cum Mnlieribus, damma ab hz, rixas cum con- |
*X * ſanguin, yet if ſhe ſhall be fortunate there,
 * itſhews health of body, much good from ſers

umes Impriſonments co the Yuercnt, and divers

'fes of the body, --x7vxs from the infe-

£ celve in this houſe from ſmall beaſts, many

rent, which ſhall afMi@ the brain, [nimicitias

vants and kindred, ard gain by imall Cartel,
Threatens many ſickrellcs, and many diſea-

licity, or unhappineſs, and prejudice men re-

croſſes jn fervants, and in obedient families,
He threatens Dolors, Griefs, and- fome- |

Ie

— — u -

Book 2. TheT, emple of Wiſ: Home. BE...

* Semarkable miſcheifs ſhall de;/ns ic were inſeperable

unto the body: ae
Aequ:ftio1n the (ixth houſe notes the que-

' x * rent to be g-nerally healchful; ' And inti-

x mates him ſubje& to: very few diſeaſes : he

* X gives him great fortune in dealing: in ſmall

* - cattle; his ſervants will 'be faichfull and ho-

| neſt tohim, he ſhall be honoured 'of his fa-

wo and þe bettered muck by his fathers Kine
dred. CEE nt |

In the fixth houſe preſages unto the que-

*X renthotand dry diſeaſes, if evilly aſpected

" '* there, he vitiates-\the. body either wich
X/ *X- crookedneſs or lainenefle: be infortunes him
i! * both in his Servants, and in ſmall beafts, if
' hebein & = 4 of. Paella oAlbus or Con-
juuftio: the querent proves art excellent Phyſician.

Shews much lofſe and damage from Ser-

' * vant, chiefly thoſe of the female ſex : his

Xx > Diſeaſes will be but few : but choſe that are,

*& will be cavſed be venerous- courſes': he will

* >*X be impotent in (yet-extream earneſt after)

the Art of Generation ; If he marry, his

wife wil be ignoble, inobedient, ſhameleſſe - And if

eAmiſſobe in 7 or & of Pacer or Rubens, ſhe will

prove Meritorious, but well diſpoſed; and in good

Aﬀpett of Arqui/itio, Leritia, then ſhe demonſtrates

one of excellent conditions ; and alſo denotes much

gain unto the querent from Servants and all kind of
ſmall beaſts, end will be honoured of his father.

Ddys In

"I OG _— ——

WF CITY

' The Temple of Wiſdhme. Book-2

-In the ſixth: gcnores the querent to libidio”
X nous courles, and to be deceived wuch- by
* women, If he be in AſpeRt of Carcer T rifts-
* ' tins Pmer and Rubeas, be portends unhappy
* * diſeaſes unto the querent, and many times a ©
yiolent death, general Impriſoaments and dam-
2ge from: ſervants,
- !: Tathefixth houſe, declareagood.,and faith-
X "ful, and boneſt feryants; pprtends health of
LE body, and a aro Conftitution, or that 've-
ry few diſeaſes ſhall aſſault the querent ; He
will be fortunate, in his fathers Kindred and
- 1n:beafts of the ſmaller ſort. - :.
_ 'When inthe ſixth houle ye find gbis figure
* _- called -Fortung; it{ignifieth that the ſervants
*X _ and ſubjeRs becrue unto their Maſter, but the
* > Servants hall be fick in their ſervice; it.is ill
,* X - to buy beaſts, the witneſſes be falſe, for the
: Phiſitian yy to take what he preſcribeth i it
is good , eſpecialy to talce Aurum potabile, and ſuch
£00d Medicines, ſo thee 'the 7th-and 1oth. do con-
ſeat ; the beaſt. loſt ſhall never be found: it is good
for whores and Bawss, but they ſhall be in danger to
betaken becauſe of their fear, and (hal not hayethe mo-
ney promiſed. -.
: Sig nifierh that the ſervants will willing-
2 ty pur forth themſelves in their Mafters buſi-
* - geſt, ard doit with great diligence ; ir is ill
X
Ic

* * X

- to buy and lell'cartle; the ſick perſon ſoall
be in danger of death if che .8th- conſent
thereunco, it is 41} for the Phyſirian, or co

take Medicines, The witneſſes have fallly depoſed,

the Bard doth mock ang will not: do ber endeavour, Þ|
whcre :he is worthy to o have tzn thouſand kicks for her
:Eadour. | Signt-

| D—

i. a. — ——

«
* * ſervants and ſubjets, andthatthey (hall be
*X * Afloarthful and fickly in cheir'ſervice, the fick
* * perſon ſhall die ſo thattheeighth conſent,
* the witneſſes. have ſworn:falſly ; it is ill co
buy beaſts, for che Phyſittan, or to:take Me-
dicine ;: and in. all things which ye -may demand in
this houſe this Figure is 111, buc for:Bawds , tor their
matters will go well. - _.. ns 2085]
Sigrifieth the ſervants to be. good at work,
* ſure and faithful; it is good to buy bealts,
* > - the Patient ſhall have none other diſe3ſes, bur
* X ſhallquickly amend : ſometime the ſicknets
* * cometh by over much reſt or penſively for
ſome thing ; in all other things which belongs: unto.
this houſe this Figure is good, except for Bawds, (hew-
ing they (ſhall be talſe, | 4/19
Significth na good luck touching ſervants,
* >* for they ſhall be in danger to be robbed or
Xx devoured by Wolves; the diſeaſe cometh of
* * too much abandance and corruption of blood
*X *X mixed with red choler, the ſick perſon ſhall
die or be long fick , if chat the firlt houſe apd
cighth do conſent: in all the demands which ye may
make in this houſe chis figure is ill, unleſs it be to let a
perſon blood.
It is very good in all the demands which
* may be made, touching ſervants it 18 11], for
* '* the ſick perſon and his diſesfe, came onely
* by phlegm and thoughe raking for Women:
* forall other things which ye may demand in
this houſe this Figure is good , eſpecially for
] Whores and Bawds, for their affairs ſhall proſper, tis
alſo profitable co buy Beaſts.
Dd 4 Signi

a
4

" TheT, emple of Wiſdom. >:

Signifieth diſobedience and: navghtineſs in

Cn 3
TO
&.

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.

Signinerh chat the ſervants be meetly goodp”
* the ſick perſon ſhall die, it is ill to cake Phy-

x (fick, and likewiſe ill for the Phyſitian, ir is ex-
X*
*

X* . other demands this figure is ill, but to buy
{mall cactle, for which icis good.

Shews that the Querent ſhall be afflited
Xx with many miſchievous diſeaſes, and croſſed,
* plagued, and exed with evil condition«.
*x ed fervants, the Beaſts ſhall be ſtolen or eaten
* * by Wolves, or Foxes, Badgers, or ſuch like

Beaſts, the Party (hall have a Feaver and ma-
ny other diſeaſes, and be in danger of death if the
eighth and fourth conſent: it is ill for the Phyſician,
and to take Medicine, and. for all other things , for
> and Bawds it is ill, for they. are deceit-

cellent good for Whores and Bawds; in all

i —_——.t... > —_

Book 2. T he Temple of Wi f; dome. 45

CHAP. V,LL

Significations of the ſeventh Houſe, viz. of Mar-
riaces, Enemies, Wars, Law-ſuits, and Con-
traFs,experimented by Sir.Chr. Heydon: gwe-
ſtions of Fugitives and Thefts, and according
to Cardans experience are dryſeuted here ,
which are true in Aſirologie ,and as certain in

. this Art of Geomancy and Teleſmes.

Ou muſt obſerve the ſeventh houſe, which is cal-
ted Kore Sv7r7, becauſe the Sun paſſeth into the
oppoſite Region to us, and leaves us, and falls into the
- Occidental Angle which Kedeme! rules, and her 1des
Zmriel, which in Paella govern the ſeventh part of
the Earth, which containeth properly and naturally
the fignifications of the Queſtions and Demands which
may be moyed on the contrary of the demand of any
rſon. |
Fs Of Marriage , whether it ſhall take effet or
not.
3 What ſhall be che occaſion or hindring the
Marriage. | 5
4 Which love or defire it moſt.
5 Whether a man ſhall marry.
6 The time of Marriage
7 How many hasbands a woman ſhall haves
8 From whar parr one ſhall marry.
9 What manner of perſon he or ſhe is.
10 Whether the man or woman be more noble;
11 Who ſhallbe Maſter of the two. |
| 12 Whee

46 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.

12 Whether ſhe berichor not. * :
- T3 Whetherthe Marriage be ligitimate.

14 How they ſhallagree oe Marriage.

15 Whether? a man or his wife ſhall die firſt,

16 Whether a Damoſel be a Maid or not.

17 Whether a woman be honeſt to her husband
or nor.

18 Ofa woman whether ſhe trades with any bue
her husband. |

19 Whether a woman is honeſt. -

20 If. ones Sweetheart have a Lover beſides
himſelf.

21 If a Marriage ſhall be oxfeded tothe conteat of
all parties or not, and-who willbe grieved.

'22 Whether the cbild conceived is the ſon of the
reputed facher.

23 VVhecher a woman liviog from her husband
ſhall be received into favour, er live with him
again.

24 VVhich of the two that play at any game, or
lays any wager, ſhall winor loſe, either at Cards,
Dice, &c. Cock fi ghting , Horſe racing, Cafting of
Lots, Cheſs, Tables, Bowls.

25 Oftwo Battels ready to fight, of Ordnance on
both (ides playing, and their Horſe and Foot in hor
ſervice ; on both parties, and in equal ſtrength and
number who ſhall get the viRory:

26 If the Companion appointed to you be a good
man or a bad.

27 It;here ſhall be war upon the laſt Proclamation
R wbeus aſcending, Fortana Ming in the tenth, with
CaudaD racons inthe eleventh, &c.
po 28 If the man be wiſe and of a good underfian-

ing.

zo It

—

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdowse: 47.
"* % 29 lt che triendsbip deeween Two. perions Shall
continue.
30 If the agreement made between two perſons
Shall continue.
31 The place where the ſervant fled, B-aſts ſtrayed
and things loſt ace.
32 How theſe things were loſt,
23 VVhether che: Cattle or other things be ſtolen
or _ |
34 VVhether the thing miſſing fled of ic ſelf.
35 Of Beaſts ſtrayed, or fugitives.
36 Ifthe Beaſts are loſt.
37 Ifdead or alive.
38 1f in Pound or nor.
39 If the Cattle or things loſt shall be found or not..
49 How far off the thing loft is from the owner. .
41 In whar place, which Way aro the Beafts ſtolea
or ſtrayed, in whatiground. -
42 VVhether the fugitive shall be taken.
43 How far the fupitiveis. -
44 V Vhether a thing ſtolen shall be had again.
45 If a thing be ſtolen or nor. |
46 If jt be loſt or ſtolen.
47 VVhether the Thicfbe young or old.
48 V Vhether the Thicf be man or woman.
49 If more then one Thief.
50 Ofthe cloarhes of the Thief,
51 Names of Theeves, or men according to Art.
52 VVhether the Thief be of che houie or not.
53 Strangeror Familian.
54 Whether the Thiet be in the Town or not.
55 Where the Thief is, gone cowards what part,
56 Ofthe houſe and mark of the Thief.
$7 Dore of the houſe, rokens of the Thiefs houſe. -
53 Whe-

Oe "OO

48 The Temple of Wiſdeme. Book 2.
58 Whether the goods be inthe cuſtody of the thief © D
$9 If he carried all witch him.

60 Place where the goods ſtolen are.

G61 If loſt or olen, in what part of the honfe.

G62 The form or likeneſs of the entering of the
houſe.

63 What is ſtolen by the ſecond or tenth houſe.

64 The quality of the goods ftolen.

6F If recovered, in what time recovered.

66 Whether the Thiefshall be known or not.

67 Whether the Thief be ſuſpeRted of the owner
or not.

68 If it be the firſt fat the Thief did.

69 Experienced Rules of -Battel , War, or other
contentions.

70 If one shall ceturn ſafe from war, or a dangerous

ape.

What will enſue of the war between Spain and

France, © |
72 If the agreement made between Erglend and

France $hall continue.

73 If the agreement made |between parties +hall
continue.
74 If neighbours $hall agree. |

Dh If good to remove of ftay in any Town or

ity. |

76 ,If Hunters $hall find or take their game that day

-Or nor.

77 Of a Law-ſuit or controverſie betwixt two who
should do beſt.

78 Of buyingand ſelling commodities.

79 Ot Partner-ship.

80 Whether a City, Town, or Caſtle befieged, shall
betaken or not.

81 Of

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſe ome. 49
' © $81 Of Commanders in Armies , their abilities and

 fidelicy, &c.
82 If ewo Armies thall fight.

83 If the Querent have open Enemies. =

Theſe betthe principal demands andqueſtions which
be propounded in this houſe, you mult remember the
Rulers and Ideas, and then judge as ye ſhall find by
your figures. £

When you find this figure called Fortane
* AMA ajor in this houſe, he declares many con-
* troverſics between the Querent and the Ma-

*X Pgiltrateor perſonin authority, and much evil

* Afſhallcome unto him thereby ; in his old age,

_ or declining years he will be honoured and

Fenowned, and may have anoble and yertuous wife, al-

though in his younger days he will be in peril and dan-

ger both of the loſs of his reputation and;ctace by the

means of Harlots and lewd women. . ”

Porrends ſorrow (or death ſometimes) to

* + theNativein his younger years , or unplea- . ©
* > fanttravels in another Country , and if ſhe
Xx X beintheillaſpeRs of the Iofortunes,he may
* > beindangerofa violent death, þut if ſhe be
in pood aſpeRt of Acquifitio,Letitia,or P nel-
la, and Miffic, the Querent will receive many advan»
tagious profits from women, he will marry more then
one, and his wife or wives shall be both fair and rich,
and he will be much honourable in his old age; but if
$she be unfortunate of Carcer, Tr:i/tst1i«, Pner, or Rubens,
the Querent rarely marries but follows corrupt and
jewd courſes, ſuch as he will receive diſeaſes, ſcandals,

and diſgraces from, and may repent too lates |

X
*

Being

0 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 5.

3% <1 Being in © to the Afcendantthe ſhews ,, > 'F

X* much danger unto th- life of thouerent,and
+ X | many noxious; .or hurtful diftempers co in-
Xx X* vadehim; it-alfo expoſes him 'to many vio-
' Xx {enranddangerous falls, much ſorrow, many
d:-MFculties, vexartions, and troubles 'in Marri-
pe; oftentimes it: imports 'a ſeparation berween the
ove and Wife; alwaycs z moſt miſerable ' Marriage
and fit to be pitied ; he portends many Diſcaſes in the
ſecret parts, 8nd Fiſtula's, and the Hemorrhoids. in the
Fundament, ftrifes; quarrels, and contentions with pub-
- . Declares the querent to: be victorious over
+ *+ his publick enemies, ſhewsan honourable mar-
- + *riape, and murh joy. and pleaſure with his
i++ x Wife ; many times the querent-pains a great
"+ ' eſtate , hwwevera vercuous, honeſt; wiſe,dif-

- © _ -creet woman, whoſe price 1s above Rubies:
She declarer-much bappinets and pleaſure uhto the que-
rent ia bis latter dayes. '* Ut: t
C31 Declares many ' perturbations, quarrels,

- x - Qftrifes, contentions, controverfies unto the

* _querent, he will often be engaged in broyles,
'*'* and thereby be indanger of ſtabbing, or be-
_ ing: wardered, Probarnm eſt; - he will per-

| ceive many of thoſe which he doth eſteem,

'or hath eſteemed as friends, to rarn the moſt Malignant

enemies unto him, he will be propenſe to fooliſh, and

prodigal courſes, and to follow the humours of idle

-women, and: ſpend his eſtace and ſtrength on them,

perhaps il rewarded for his labour; ir alſo imports

many bickerings, and quarrels betwixt him and his

Wife, many'impriſonments, and torments, he will be
allo of a thort life, unicls 4cquiſftro, Letiria, Amiſſio,
| or

BOOK 2.

The Temple of Wiſdome. 51

S , or Pucla proveadjuvanc unto him, and may prebably
* end it in his Peregrination. _
_ 'Significth that the open enemy is ill, but he
' x. 1s of no great power. and. each thing that he
& ; + _ , by _ it gay anger _ ha-
X, + - ſtineſs, but his r 1s ſoon paſt, the party
* X* ſhall loſe aa gs party ſuſpeRed "2-4
 _ .... Theef,and hath ſtollen the thing; the fugicive
will not be taken , the woman married will be a
W hore, the man is of an il] will, he ſhall loſe ac Dice,
and Cards, and other ſports: The Hounds will loſe
the Game,and ſpead upon a cold ſcent, & it falſe ; the
Marriage will quickly take force, but to no great: pro-
fit tothe one part, or unto the other ; for War it will,
the Wife lovetch not her Husband well, but hath com-
pany of others then he, the Maiden is no Virgin: the
Woman loſt will noe be found , the-man ſhall go to
war;,.but/not profic much thereby ; there ſhall -be no
great feats of Arms.done, 'but only aſſaults and skir*
miſhess, the Accord ſhall not long laſt betwixc Kings,
Princes, or Lords, becauſe they are not faithful, the
party bach no wit but to do harm, the Theef is not of _
the :houſe, but.isrug away, the thing loſt ſhall not be #2
had-agiin: There. will be no accord in all the de- Wi
mands which you may make in this houſe, this Figure ©
is ill, but for Bawdery. Et
Stirs up many quarrells, and controverſies
* :* betwixt the querent and great and eminent
* '% women, if he be therein ds 0 or s' of Car-
 *_ . . cer, Triſtitia, Puer, or Rubens, then many
* X_- publick enemies will ariſe againſt him , by
--_ - whoſe means, and accuſations, and croſſe.-
grain'd informations he may incurthe ſentence or cen-
luce of a Judge or chick Magiſtrate, and to tuffter im-

pri-

ep:

52 The Temple gf Wyſdoms: Book. 9.

priſoument, or exile bis —_ = iy AY dice
and danger, and he will follow very ill courſes. - ., 2

Denotes very few cnemics, but portends
* * much [from women, and that he (hall
* - ule their companies, and delight thercin ; ic
X . -glſo denotes great Riches with a Wife, or
*. _ Wives, andſhews her to be of an honeſt, pru-
| :Cent, and excellent carriage, and behaviour. x

_—

Fignifiech that the mance, ad of

* .,.#n, all, heart and; affection; ſtrong andenigh-
'*. .y, and intepdeth cuch-barm ; the Plainti®
* * Gall wis, his ſair, buc not wichout great pain, +
X , .; travel, and. diligent ſoligiting:; the Theed is |
ſahrils GOT, hs Fugiciye wilh no be -

found, neith cr, retUrn aolcrick, |

the warriag e will _—___ (opa)l \ 251+ nay "COR: '

eth Eb. the man"js.jll art ,->»the:Gamedter :
ſhall loſe , we (hall bhave:Wars ; 3! the; roman hath. to

do with morethenher hubrnd 4 4..the-Maid is go” Vir-
gin- the woman or thing loſtawill got raturs, again,

the woman is not very. rich, the. man ſhall go; co: war

and have the viRory, he hat \ good jodg gment/in war,

and how to fight, the Theef will aot be found, neither

the thing loſt : the peace made berween two parties

will not long continue : In all things chis. Figure i is. ill

but for wars and women,

Signifieth the encmy is feeble, andof ſemall

* power, the Plaintiff ſhall win the ſuir,chethief |

* Us crafey, the Fugitive will come ao more,

* for marrageic isill, zhe mag will put away bis

* wite, and be ſeparated from her, the Game- -

ſter ſhall not win much , the Maid is no Vir-

gin : In all the demands this Figure isill, but for-voy+

aces by water. : Sig-

»

|

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdamre. 53
| Signifies the eaemy is Rrong and mighty»
*X* * andisill minded, and will be avenged over
* * all his Enemies, the ſuir is in hazard to beloſt,
* *- the. Thief or Fugitive will not be found, the
* Wile and Lemon be good; and uſe thea-
ſelves Loyally, the Marriage begun (hall de
ended, the party hath a yery ill afe&ion, the Game-
ſer {hall win, but it ſhall be by deceit : the Maid is no
Virgio, the wife loyeth her husband, and the Lemon
her friend ; the man ſhall go ro war and have the vi=
Rory, and whin he hath taken bis enemy , will lee
him go again : the perſon bath good underſtandings
acd is of great ente; prize, the Co-partner ſhall do his
work well, the Thict is in rhe boule, and the thing is
there hidden t The love is feigned, and deccit is 1a ic g
the friendſhip or agreement made ſhall lat long, ſo
that the tenth conſent in all things, this Figure is il}, bug
to keep a thing ſecrer, it is good. .
Signifieth bur ſmall farce in the enemy,and
* bcfides he is noble; the Plaintiff thall obtain
*X * his ſuit, che man is not robbed - The Fugi=
* * tivewillnot come homeagain : lr is goqd for
* X. &@ wife, marriage, and for a friend : If yon
make a! igure to know how your Miſtriſs,
Wife, over, or Lemon doth, this Figure in this place
ſignifheth thar ſhe weepeth for'the great affeRion, he
or (he beareth ro the friend abſcot; the Gameſtcr
ſhall nor win much, che Marriage is indifferent good,
{v that the eighth and ecnth conſcar, there wiil be no
War, dit peace: the Maid is a Virgin, the Wife or
} arcamour loveth none bur her Husband, or friend, and
them they love heartily: the woman is pretty rich,
the Companion will aſe himſelf weil and faithfully :
the thing ſtvika will be recovered, and he that ap
| k e ſt

ES 5 no” Wore OE 0" "cy Ty RT 4% 0b Ee "= og Pi 7" "ER ;
£ y * . ; *
£4 T be * mp of. ©l A 0 | .

| echir; dotb ir ber jeſt and paſtime 2 the opreement, >
'ne«ly made will nottaſt long, this Figure is indifferent
gbod inal} things. © grEE En:
© ++ Signifiesrhe 'enemy'to be very angry, bat
'*-*X* -heis offmall power, be mindeth to kill his
"x *+ enemy; ior elſe to deſtroy him by poyſon or
% '*&' water , if he. have #'handſome opportunity
'% ** the Plaintiff ſhall loſe his ſuit; there were
++ * many Thieves at that Robbery, the Fugitive
will 'never retvrn 3 4t'is il [for Marriage , for -the
Husband wh run away from bis Wife and forſake ber,
'by otcafion whereof the woman'will-dezb with. other
'men;"chere. will be much dcbate ard: firife»in- the
g:ming ;'it is ill for Wor, fortherewillbe.los and nd
profit; che Mai4tsmo Vargin,-and hath bur {mall ſub-
Nance; the friend loveth nor his friend,, the Compa-
nion is not good, theman ſhall go yo War, buc ir ſhall
Þe to his laſs , the party 1s dull ſpiriced, and bath buc
 ſmallnnderſtanding or exp-rience, but in; the. Water
and Weils; this *1gure is il] in-all chings, but to fink
Wells, azd Pumps, and draw waters from place to
ace, *
4 Signifieth in this houſe bat the enemy hath
* _ nowind:o work diſpleaſure anto the other,
* * theſuit ſhall have good ſucceſs, the perſon is
*X not _.rcbbed, the Fugitive will come- home
* . again, it is goad for a woman, a.Lemon, Mar-
rage, and plays there wil be no Wars, but
firm peace,the married woman and Lemon fanſie others
then becometh them: this figure notes true love, the
woman or Lemon loſt will come again ; - the- peaſon
can play well upon Muſick, the thing loſt will be found
again, the agreement ſhall be made and laſtlong; the
woman is with child by another; and not by her
; husband

' Book2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 55

*, husband; this figure is good for all things, but wars.
x Demonſtrates the enemy to be teeble in his
* XK reins, and ſecketh daily to come to an agree-
- x © ment, thequerent ſhall obtain his ſuit to his
* profic, ſo that the tenth conſent : Ic is for
* Xx marriage good, and betrer then all che other,
| for it alwayes ſignifies the perfeRion. of it ;
the Thief that is ſuſpeRed hath imberzeled the thing
Joſt, and he ſhall be taken, and indanger to be hanged,
rhe fagicive will not return, the woman is honeſt 2 'If
the figure be made ro know whecher he ſhalt marry
the party, it ſignifierh he (hall enjoy his requeſt; the
Gamefter ſhall win, the Wife ſerteth little by her
Husband, or the Lemon by his friend, the Maid is no
Virgin , the man is wiſe, the Companion is good and
faithful - the Thief'is one of the houſe, and the thing
loft will not be found, becauſe ir is our of the houſe :
in all chings this Ggure is indiffereat, but for War , for

which it 1s ill,

| " Portends-many publick enemics unto the
- * querent, and 'many Predigious Calumnies ,
* Scandals, and diſgraces from them, and that
*X conſtaacly; bur it portends their deſtruction
* * alto that ſ\candalize; it declares a craſs and
unhappy marriage, alwayes brawling and
contentions between the querent ahd his wife, never
quiet, continual difconrentss, and murmurings, jealous,
fies &c. many times ſeparations ; it dein tes allo: the

| death , or diſſolution of che wife, or wives: Let no
min marry without the Artiſts advice in the choice
of a VV.fe, leaft he unhappily do repent the bar-
gain

b

The Tables ' of Letters, of N2m:s, of Numbers,
you ſhall fizd in che third Book ;j) where we teach you
| . Ee 2 Se ailo

Fo Re 0 Jud oe. al Il manner of
ſent, and P come, as you find their Nati
tions in the twelye Houſes, |

&;
TED ea-

» "Tjz4 c

| SEL EESELA AARSE2250.,
weaanabe 9 © # 3 b.'6 1 | aaa Fae ny

pe” a ye © Of tho ohh Hon =

Da: L AGLOR I AND 40s fays this houſe
4 Wnfoftunate, he-calls it 'ET:za 4 goers becauſe
It is th6'ficetdent of the Angie of the, Occident, and
Nerifitth blackneſs; coking and all evil z1t —_
ceh naturiffy the Daeftions'and Demands, which .

betmde #HVpropoimdedupon the ſickneſs; jarde
any man, if he ſhall live lon-,or dye quickly. .' * Ft
242 AWG&kriow wherherhic ſhitldye withio 4 day,
moneth, or year. TEITT

3: bu na rt Niall tes eenaddent. cools _

. * 4a +

WET IS, TE 432 ot bopromy
6 "ng. 7 itn when he halt return. TY? 3
7. Of the ceath of the querent, of ſpace of his own
fits! OF” "POM * 4
S.VV HEere,or iow whyte time che quereat way die-
*O ' Whither the mar} or wite ſhall dye firtt.
'10 ' What marner of death the querent hall dye.
7.1: #Phether the portionof the wife will be great,or
eafiiy oqt1ined, or if che woman will be rich; _.
12,'If ohe be affraid of a thing, whecher he ſhall be
In nl lb crecf, Or nor,
Fa . Ifa womans hisband at Sca be alive or.dead..

; 5. -Ffthe querent (hall _ rhe portion-promiles-
15. Whe-

| Book 3. The Touple of Wifdome. ___ 57
» 2 6 whether Nail dye firlt, the F Fatherzdr Fer er of

the querent. EE
x6. If a man be lin, who $169 bid.” ks Fe den
"17. */#h > hail mherit, - 1g
- 18, 1s the [efet Cotthfellerfof your enemy, or
of your wife, or whether ſhe doth keep Faithful com pu
ny ar not. 2D; MG

19. Alſo the (nia ich mhay- be mide upon
hd or fear of harw'to come, ns we _ burning, or
#'ofblood. AVE NN VT
" " oy0xine #tinor; profit kebackbotchcharwes athette.
DG af Hhowiane ſhbllthrive ina Rrange Conn yy. +
":v$! Whether the perfon-unto whom ye mays Biven |
ary rhitic! t6-Keepyvili ireſtore It again of nor...
'- 4p WPhettes hethor back given his many: to vfu-
i all ridimeherobys
24, "Wer what fhelbthe good or-hieg- .e6me-
that youſh ei} have. © >
Al vetwonred wich evi ſpiric of any qua.
lity, or "ordedBweodrive them aways! ©/
4252" THo $uft» of mans body, the Rulers, 1a, Fi-
gurevand Houfes frenifie, are largely wreated. of inthe
firſt Book, in a Table demonſtrating that this bouſe
contiins the-qatftions which may be made concerning
the principal parts of men or woman, Rubens ratural-
ly rules thithooſe,”” TELTT
''Deehirtlof of eſtate ind ricker;by the means
X * of peetone it Authority ; many dangers unto
X* *X-| 'the WE of the Native, but he ſhall elcape if be
* bewith Udegui/tionnd Pwrllsif he be erifly be-
 *& © 'hddiof ns Rubens Carceror Triftuia in oY
tery places of the Earth, che querent will be
drowned; or it danger of warer in theVefpart, loſs and
GeftraAiſon «end him I Fhieyes and Robbers ; Ho
c 3 E the

Py -

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.
the 50#1þ part, danger both'to body and eſtate by tire :
inthe Eeſt part of the figure and houſe, it threatens
hangings, cruel rormeats in priſons; and many: times
death anexpeted. + = S441

-_ --1.-- Demonſtrates many evills and affiitionsto
* > _ bappento the Querent from perſons of emi-
*X > nercy and renown; and he ſhall ſuffer impri-
X*--* 'ſonment, if not a violent:deach, by reaſon of
*. * falſe teſtimonies, Counterfeit Knaviſh tricks

and devices:, and it the Malcvolents -atfli&
him-there, ho will he drowned; or4jo great peril of wa-
ter: Siverobene fauor#t conſtituta, bereditaies rwmdonat
mortow-{acilem,, Yviamgue longam ac [anam,. (i:e.) but
if ſhe ſhall be well conſticured andafhſted by the be-
nevolent aſpect of :&fcquiftioor Puella, the Querent
ſhall then ger poſſeſſions , and inheritances, bis' deach
ſhail beeabe, bis life loog and healthful, a ;
; If Carcer be in the eighth houſe in-compa-.

*- - hy, or aſpe&, of- Acqui4o10r Paciia;y; he: de-

Xx * clares unto che Native-Lands and-Feredita-
> >. "ments fromthe death of ſome friendFpr rela-:

--,, Lions, chjefly if ſhe be-by day, bur if he:thall-

be thereja aſpeRt of Per or- Rypenty cin il
compary, it thews: unto the: Querevt, or he that is
Forn, -much forrow and affliction, and many-times-
threatens a violent death, NR pg:

. In this tioate is an arpument of long life un-
*- . \fothe. Querent, and denotes that when he

o expires, 1t ſhall be by « 'naturab death; it
X Xx gives himalſo mm his life much gain'by the

*X Wil ard Teſtaments of- perſons deceaſed ;

» in « Ncturns] Gen:ture, it generates many
ftrifesand evils, by which che Native wili ſuffer, it por-
re-ds much loſs of goods, if with ill company ard
aipedt, | Es Top

Book 2. | wy The Temple of Wiſdome. =

+418. , wv", WM o this houſe, 2nd For:una May "pun
X* '' Minor, Populns, or Via," tniany of the four-
'*: Angles, hawsdaoger of eviolent death, de-
feRs in the eyes, woundy-in the hands and
X - Feet, it chreatens loſs of goods, and poverty
'to enfue-unto him, m majty 'croffcs, troubles,
and vexitions, and'this when he is irill company and
aſpe&t; if in good company and dlpett, many of choſe
evils will be abatedyat leaſt the violence of chem:;-yer-
will the Querent 'Have quarrels/and controverſies wich
ſome perſonsabout'or conan tices as Legacies
giftyof dead men, &e: p_eL ry 1 5 4, et ids
+», _Inthishoule yery ſalom giverh marriage, -
+-bue generally denies ; (yet'if the Querent mat» i
Beg * *iYs as ſometimes it may-fo fall out, ſhe wilt be-
1:4 4 Widow'he marries and rich, and one thati:
Xi | will brieg Him'-greac 68% of wealchy-boauiul?
gain other ways by dead folks, hislife will aot:
be ſhort,*nor will his death be violent; if|Pacds be af-
fliged by 4ll company br aſpe&,-it ſhews the troubles.
and adverficies of the Natives niorher', and that ſhe-
ſhill die before him, it-ſhews aHoeue on = peril
_ ofhis wife and children.
Denotes ani augmentation of the Natives

& * fortune by his proper induſtry, about the Te-
*X * ſtaments, and Wills, and Legacies of men de-

X -* ceaſed., and that his own deach (hall not be
* = violent z yer unleſs Albus be aſſiſted by the:

he ſhall have many contentions and controverſies with
his friends and neighbours, and if Carcer, Triſtitis,

Peer, or Rubeus afflict. him there, he will 'bealying,
boaſting, quarre!ling, troubleſome perſon, he will be
allo infortunate in the forementioned things, ard come
to an untimely end.

good company of good figures and aſpets,

Ee 4 Pre-.

Fades — TERS »

p (Ri

[ ple of Wa boats, , Book, 2.
"Frenotes | &. a Tong — ET lite, and
X: ; giveathe,Nattve ipherncanets, and honours, *
6 +; and gifts,a0 a by aþc means, of pF:
3% « Jong de

£« Ho ba4S4i&:} +3!

_—_ Sc find this figure in this TH
:3k. - ſomcximes it ſignifiech -the death of. fome

» : F) J+? - I 23 3 x; wo

GAY 44 « freat Lady, an , 'accord-
+ Sm 4b the fic}, vi -houtes..do,
Mrs | 8 Wych Ad@ aboutiþis ihe
ritance, the | ed for the, deathoighe man.
Fo ER kpgdredau che mamapiamecyly; rich, it
is @gJl] 240 that CC ads LEMYP 486583 Kiko,"
the man needegh nat to, ONS: any (Hog at all, itis ill ro
fn 66g Pakokey tbe Artilt

LC. pilyrin al{be que-

ot} oft 973, 2a) *
LY _—_— 2 1 By ialkdis "i "i
> | rags man.

IA cs; algbx cacmic
end; the mas jnaratfique;
air ay eh mama yite and the Le:
PR Ns "ng be 4@y;PQOFr $he man, bath lain no þo-
FX ang. al FE. ig pilgn

Tt 1-7 +: he place... --- :
zfiech the Pacicnt, Chall be. __— plike:t to
"I digs a live, the Prafoner (hall die. in priſen,
* >, .it is for fycceſſion of heritages, good-, the-
*X x mani till in a great fright, ig is good a.
*X @rive away ſpirits, the man ſhall die apill
veath: wallthiogs this figure is ill,

In

iſpn he fhipll. comg-out -rb. his.
pyaile.- ,40-all tbe. queitions which ye way. propound:
in;chis þgure pill but to find watery Spins, and wo:

[i

© YNRRy woot EO IOORs Iu Re » as

Bob! a.

6? Invths hou: Lie Yatient \har > iP Uic o

o this Hieaſe, the man (hall be ſome trans heir,
& ? _ - 1 chewoman is mectiysich, nadto be briet this
* > - figure is good in all chings ani co flic inthe
Lee air by the m_—_ ol, an — it is very

2.

voy. "din? ics he man is or. Gall be ſlain with a

ES)

The Templs af 1wyflomd: _ MBs p

"

ph * F word or ttaff, the ſick perſon is tn danger to

* « Sicifithebrher houfes confenr, ' the enemy
> ns and the wife have I! counfe}; the ſickneſs will

1k beſhorr, the man is in'great fear, che woman *

3\ £2 34odrich2* in'all things thisfigure is ill, and |

Ggnifievemore haſte thro govd ſpecd. OY

C3 34 "oY | id RN F-: -p1v* s

IRS Signifierh the death of thefickp erſon-if*

Pg {thi renth conſent; the fickneſs "hall not be

* F, very long, the man $hall lofe the ſucceſſion -

!HX i! - arid Have no #ftxends for the treſpaſs, the man
Þ- * is in Yanger to'Gic on the wheel, hinged, 'or
2.” ſotie evil dearth Af tl Fpiires be with it or
afpeRi i, the father $ball dit before the brother, if the
fourth and renth conſent, the woman or Lemcn i 15nat
very rich, the party that is fuſpeRed hath fin a man
about a womans canfe, the woman hath ill company -
le which comnfelleth thy enemie and chy wilt is an}.

manand giveth no good countel, rhe fear is' nothing;

for loveir is indif:rear g004, bat thoſe that are pro-
cored againft their wills do nor love heartily, and it
will nor continue z the man 1n the ſtrange Couhtry
Shall loſe all and bring nothing home; in a word, this
fizure is 11 inall che demands.

S1Ont-

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book2.
Signifieth che ſick perſon ſhall die of this
JN XX diſeaſe, the man in priſon ſhall die by the
' ++- Law) the man ſhall nor inheric, but loſe his
- fuir, the man is in great fear, the Counſeller
Xx * of the Enemie and of the wife is ill, the father
ſhall die quickly, the man abroad ſhall nor
bring home much filver:: in all the demands of this
houſe this Figure is ill, (STE Om

Denotes a loſs of goods, and threatens
the Querent with a- yiojent death : this is.
certain 1f Fortuna: Aaajor , Forewna Me
*X ,. nor, Populus ,:Viay and .the Figure in the
* *+ firſt houſe are afflicted by il}:company

and ill aſpects of the Figures at Zazel and
Ser. 75 ied $09 957 HS 5

$XX

63

——

i —

' Book. 1he Temple of Wifdome.
 piud | is | TURES PT

CHAP. IR. Te "$4 4
peg Of: the. ninth: Honje. +1

\ Ver- this honſe ruleth Hiſma:! and the Tdes
eAdvachiel in the Figure "Acqnifirio, it is the
Cadant from the Angle of the Occident, 0-

therwiſe .called ©i2s (i,e.) ic containeth the queſtions
and deinands which may be propounded upon the ap-
purtenances of any Temple, Church, Ghappel, Mona-
fery, or HErmicage, and is therefore called Damns
Des. |

_ 2 Alſo ofthe doings of Prieſts, Religious perſons,
their Surplices, upon Divine Service, as the Common-
Prayer, and other Canonical Service, and of the Clerks
place, and the Parſons preaching.

'3 Alfo upon the: Garments and Veſtgres of the
Prieſt, Preacher, Scholer, and his Studie, the School
and che'Companions and Books. *

4 Whether he which goeth co be made Prieſt ſhall
have Orders or not. - |

5 If the man ſhall be rich in Benefices, thatis to
ſay, if he ſhall have the Biſhep ick, Abbey, Parſonage,
Vicaraoc, or be Curate in any Charch.

6 Whateſtate ſhall che Scholer be of when he res
turneth, whether he (hail be DoRor inany Faculty,or
tudge in any Eccleſiaſtical Courr, or a Prefident, or a
Countellour in any high Courc.

7 Ofa Voyageby Sea, and the ſucceſs thereof,

S What wind we (hall have.

9. Of him that raketh a } ourney , whether good
or had. :

10 Of

| Chery,

of Wiſdome. | Book 2.

3;TO, "Of the ſhort or row return of bim = taketh.

$ journey -.
2£:c{0 I When, he hall return chat is gone a long

Journey. 114,
þ.:83 Thecauſe of a journey, and ſucceſs thereof, and
the length abereof,
13 Jfone (hall pre: "tin his knoledge, fic, in Chy:

miſtcy, andChigurgery,... -.,
»+24 Ofones Science or Wildom, whether it be crue
QF DOte.

Yo 5. Of many. .Friſons cravelling, fn what condition
v1 EY arc. ics} ©;
24 16, To char. Bart. "of. Heaven the Tae _ as
fire& His Journey... -..
a2 #8's Parkag,Malþ ohraiga 890d) Be enelien;, ©
238. MURGy,, het fe She wo 405 This

RN - ie 435!

qu'B0 8 ingeps 0 rad
6o22 of i Ang re projger or not... 1
ME" be ace ſhall riſe 2gain,that iearhebotl

Protein Ke is
£ the Bonn thaſl phcain. the. Philoſophers
wg

4:24 Whether the year FT be good And fifa and
has things ſhall be plenciful.

" Tha be the queſtions and demands which may be

'propounded i in this houſe, for which,ye may make fi-
-£ures,, and Judge them. according to their apcn-

Flon. -.

= 4

Fortin; a

eovpre E C
Th. —_ ng ninch bouſe hews
* ' the 'Quereat to dERelipious!' dP a fertene
* faith, a true and zealous lover of Gol'md
"X..,., hy Religion, and Ho of Retigions wen+ his
; * , - Journeys will be many and pr -cfrable, He will
._ atcainto'great Ectitefialtical prefermint and
honours, chjefly if he ſhall be there with Acquifſtis i
gbod aſpets of pood Figites. £12 nat: 1
Nenotes many Jong journeys by Land, or
+ + Sea Voyaper, andthe Quererit-ſliell have
* , * Plealure and dclight in his peregrinationshe
* >= * wiltbe ſubje& ro many dreatiis anid/cogita-
* >, tjons, and according to the Company {he'ts
in, fo will the Quercacy iticlhation' be, as
if ſhe be in the houſes of Amvricl and Hamaliet be Will
be propetiſe to Altrologiz and the Mathematicks,if in
company bf Pucdn, ucts Mafick, 'Sculptiire, ind Poe-
ery ; in company of gia yr or Rnbewr, unto Milirity de
Warlikeaffairs; in comp ogy arcer or Triſtiria, he
ſtudies Chymiſtry or the P Y por Stone, a thing
that hath entiched many wich bh ' of this world; and
if ſhe be is good alpeR of the” ipurces, tlie Querents
without, dopbe, knows the rLue 0 matter of riches, vis.
the red and white Hiixar. '*'
© _Portends much damage and lofi in long jour-
Ny neys, Sea Voyages, and Travels unto the Que-
= rent, makes him hated of Princes: Fſhewshim
+ X be an abſolute hypocrite or diſſcmblery
© makes him heretical, and guilty of great er-
rours'in matters of + Faith and Religion, and
he will alſo be accuitomed to terrible dreams if he'te
wich good company the Querent w.ll be propesſe"to
the Mathemaricks, and to Vhil: lophy, he may prove
an admirable Diziacr cr Intecprecer of Dicams,

a a at mos

Giyes

Th# Temple of Wiſtlome. | Book. 2.

Gives many Ecclefiaflical honours, digni-_ »
* ties anqpeeferments unro the Querent, makes
*

b'm fincere in hisfaith and profeilion, zealors
and true hearted, his dreams will generally
+ prove true, and he will be mighty forcunate
and ſucceſsful tn 'Sea voyages and long jour
2 neys.
Neckes the querent purely ſuperſtitious and
&% Ffothy inhis profeſſion, unſtable, vaingiori-
*'% _ ous, and'oft changing his Religion, never
+ X ſtable or fixed therein, his dream will be fri-
* . Yolousand falſe, and he much puffed up and
conceited thereby; his Journeys* many and
erofs, he will prove 2 fcllow Fall of infidelity, a meer
Arhcift; butin'good'company he foreſhews many for-
etinare and horiourable Johrneys, chiefly if ke B61 about
miticary or Chorch matters.” *
Pirrends the querent to be- Relipions; and
* *one thar lives in' rhe fear of God}, he may
% +* prove a Prieſt ' or one-that 'is xonverſint' in
+ Eccleſiaſtical or Church matters, he will reap
* much honour and profit by many excellent
inventions as he will be good 'ﬆt5 bis dreams
will be filthy and polluted and foch as may'wiake him
2 perfect abhorrer of vices, he will be apt to lead a ſin-
[> life.
2 | Deckares rhe querent to be'experienced in
* * occuſt and obſcure things,'and' the choicett
*X * Arts, as Aſtrologic and the Mathematicks, he
*. willprore very fortunate and bappy in Eccle- |
*X >* Aflaſticalthings, gives him'many journeys,and

choſe profirable unro him * Þut if he be iniil company
ef;en che querent_ is a ſrenctick fellow, a bragoec and
boaſter of many chings more chen he can or ever will be

510 © periormy D.-

_—"

ve Temple of Wiſe 67
" Dectares the Native or a tobe Re-

v 0K 2.

' * * ligtous, and confers on him Riches, and Ho-

* 'nour by ſuch means, his Dreams, Revelati-

* ons, and Viſions to ſpeak like an Enchuſaſ )

* willforche moſt part prove true and certain,

nis Sea voyape will prove. propitious unto

him; unlcſs he be- afflicted by the ill company and
alpe of the JRER 199 figures. |

 Signifierh rhat the gran isof greet Wiſdome,

*X - Dodrine,and Knowledge z the man ſhall have
Xx the Benificc be pretends, but ir is of no great
* *. vallue, the Prieft isan honeſt man: the voy-
*x * age is long, but the mah. ſhall return home
with great profit; the Meſſenger ſhall quick-

ly return, the Books and Letters make mention ofthe
Acsof Kings, Princes, and great Lords: the Scholer
applyeth kis Learning; and ſhall come unto honour -

. the dream: is of Kings-and Emperours, in all things

this 4s" pdt 4s: RGA and. ſhower a little Chole-

rick

/ Signifieth that the man ſhall not obtain the
Benifieczit i is good for a Scholer,the man hath
dreamed. of Drink or Water, or of Letters

which ſhould be brought unto bim : it is ill
for gain, and in all other things, except for
long journies, for in them it ſignifieth that the

man ſhall go (ately wichout any danger or inconvent-

(XXXX

ence, but he ſhall be long by the way, beſides this,

whenſoever you meke a Figure for any Demand, and
find this Figure in this houſe, there ſhall a Meſſ -nger
come quickly « with Sema making mention of a
Voyage.

<gnIhe;

- 68 The Temple cf Wiſdowe. Book 2.

. Signifieth 4ll for che Churcb, the man
X- 3: CBhalloor attain co the. Benifice he. hoped to'
 54:2k have, unkls the fourth and tenth conſent; in
& x Cactelthere will be profit, for a voyage ic
 ' - FGenifiethdelay and ſtaying, to fear a Science
it is good, and likewite for a Schoker , for by
his knowledgein the ſecrecs of Nature, he ſhall be «
gicat DcRtor, the man ſhall be well eftecmed, and of
good reputation ; the Meſſenger ſhall be detained by
the way, the hip ts indanger co-be loſt or taken: jn_
ali chings this Figure is il, |

Tr is indifferent good for things concerning

*X _ the Church, the man ſhall not bave the Be-
5 x mtfice he yapes for, it is good for a Scholer ,
* * and likewiſe for « dream, ſignifiing that ir is
>= x ofthings merry, pleaſant, and recrcative, as
of ſome green Abours, Gardens, or Meadows,

for religious perfans jt is good, and ſignifieth that they
ſerve God; it is good for a journey and the company
tacrein, furprefic and gain It is meerly, the man from
heme fhall return quickly, and ſo iha!l the Ship on the
Sea; ro ling, dance, and to icarn theſe, and to play it
is cood, and in ail other Demands this Figure is
very good.

Is very ill in all the Demande, but ſuch as
* * concern Water- w-rks, Robbing, Rifling,
* Afpoylog, and ſuch other like, ro the which «

4 x 1s good, on ſuch wile, thar if you make a
* # fiqure ro know what ſhall happen co him
which doth take a long journey , it ſignifieth
- cms all doubt te ſhall be reþbed or ſlaia by
tic Way.

Siznifieth

}
p
Þ
|
I
1
|

ZSck;9:

4

+44. 2 2 2 Signifieth the inan ſhall not have the Be-
* - - nitice be gapethfor ; the books ſpeak of no-
* X. - thing but rounds, ballads, and of Love' Com-
, X. plements, ovef Loffes, and the Letters dothe
.* * like: the common-bruit amongſt the people is

1 + true,itcheman bea Prieſt he ſhall be much gi-
yea to Lechery, it is ill for the Scholer. 'for he will
not ſtydy,gbut love Whores,+the Merchandiſe ſhall nec

he very gaodin this yoyage, the nee ſhall loſe off,
the Shigl Ds grxatipeed, but in'danger to

be taken by the way ; this figure-is Wl in all .the De-

mand: of this houſe. ;

ro 3 bes 3 ET 43-3405 oe nn? Bo EY

*:*," ..}, 1, Sgaifieth good for the obtaining of
X ..,-4, Renehice,, it:is, but meetly for x Scholer,

. *, .v,f880& B:for a;:Dreaamy- the Merchant ſhall be
* X, , zobb{d,by the way ; in alt other rings this

- 4p trlph gw e is. jndifferent.good; tf

4 i

454 36: 15 Oe gt add. He 40 | "7 Oy
X, +, 1: Signifies.the Querent' to be unÞ4ble

- + , ApgWwavcring in matters of Religion, he- will
- 2... beſuſpiriqus, and efcvil faith, he dfren proves
+, .;, apeſtyent Heretick; and if Carcery Triſtstia,
_ . Puergor Rubens,by company, or Aſpe&do bes
hold this figure, the Querent though he be a Prieſ},
thall be of no faith, conſcience, or Religion, but an
ab{oluge Achciſt-or Sceptique, and. (-whbich is noto-
rious.tQ, be wondced at) it he fortune'to preach unto
others, his Conſcience willnever permit him to believe
what himſeif ſaith, his dreams will be. idle and deccit-

ful,. and lopg journeysor voyages to Sca will be molt

wretched and unforcunare to him.

F# CHAP

yo _ TheTemple of Wiſdome.

$3

Book 2.

_.CHAP. X.
_ Of thetemth Houſe.

Ow this tenth houſe ends the ten Letters of my
"=. narae, being the Anple of the South, called
"Me0-pin10- Metdiam (ah, the middle of Heaven,
where my name is written in the Book of Life : Some
call chis houſe (or Cel, by a Figure that Rhetoritians
rerm a Metaphor, which indeed is only proper to a bo-
. © ' Animate, or the heart of the world, we often give
Heavenly names to Earthly things, as Xicheel, Ga-
briel, Daniel, Fobn , &c. =

2 This houſe containeth properly all the queſtions
and demands which may be propounded touching the
honour or praiſe of a perſon.

3 Alſo which may be demanded touching a Phyfi-
tan and his Ordinance.

4 If the quereat thall obtain the Office deſired, or
not.

5 If one thall continue in the Command or Office
he is in.

6 If the King, forced to forſake his Kingdom, or an
Officer removed from bis Office, ſhall return 'to his
Kingdom, or Office, or not. | |

7 Ofrhe Profeſſion any one is capable of.

8 Ifthe King of Swedex ithall worſt the King of
D "merk. -

' 9 If the King of Po/d ſhall worſt the King of
Sweadt:;:a, |
19 If

Book 2 The Temple of Wife dome. 0
'Ytolf King Charles, che late King Charles his Son of
England (hall proſper inthe wars.

11 If the King of Spaiz thall worſt the King of

France, - |

I; If a man attain the preferment defired
14 Ofathing loſt or ſtolen. For.
15 If the Phyſick you take be good for the diſcaſe,
and if it will cure you or not. | +
16 Uponthe Mother, Grandmother,of the Wife or
Lemon. ;
17 Of the vertue and efficacy of a Medicine, and of
all things touching the Appothecary. |
\ 18 Of the Queen, Pope, Prince, Lord, open Offi-
cers, and Magiſtrates, and their ſecret Laws, Decrees,
and Ordinances, be they Eccleſiaſtical or Temporal,
abd upon the ſecret thoughts of the Mother, Grand-
mother, woman or fiend, -
19 If he which defireth to be Pope ſhall be choſen
Or not.
20 If the King ſhall enjoy his own, or a Lord
abidelong in his Country.
21 ]f you ſhall enter iato the fayour of the King,
Prince, or great Lord. ;
22 Whether ye ſhall abide in the favour of the Em-
peror, Pope, King, Prince, or great Lord.
23 If it be good for the King to remove out of one
Country to go into another.

f 24 Whether the King or other Lord will do juſtice.
25 If it be good for the Emperor, Pope, King, oc
of great Lord to make a voyage, if they that take it in

hand hall ſhortly recurn, and how will the affairs
IF ſtand, :

Ff 2' 26 An.

-
WOO OE

" = The Temple of Wiſdome. Pook 2.
- 20 Astouching the air and che time to know 1t it
will rain or be fair weather, wind or calm, and ifit be a
rainy ſeaſon, whether it ſhall rain much. |
27 If it be good for a Captain, Antient-bearer,Cor-
ner, or an} other Officer to go to War , if they ſhall
proſper or not. ;

When in this houſe, he gives great plory,
* X honour,autho:ity & dignity from Emperours,
* Xx Kinps, Princes,and greac Perſons, & thoſe far
*& beyond the condition or birth of the Native
XK orQuerent; and by reaſon of the admirable
inventions he may or ſhall atrain unto , he
ſhall obtain thelove and friendſhip of ſome eminent
pe: ſon or perſons, that thall exalt hum from a low even
unco a hiph degree.
Sipnifies Honours and Offices unto the
X > querent or he that is born, but becauſe it is
* +X the decriment of Populus bis fortune flozts
* 3 ſoonthis way and ſoon that, ſo that th:s Fi-
*X 2" gure promileth much 1a this houſe, yet per-
formerh nothing.
If |aicer be evil poſited in this houſe, he
* portends much I»is and damage unto the
*' + querent or nstive from great perſons, and
X > thar he ſhall ſuffer reſtraint, captivity, and
* impriſonmenr, and {hall be :n danger cf falls
from on high ; he generally makes ſhipwrack
'of the Natives Impriſcaments and bunds , by the fen-
rence of a;judge :if he be with Acqre/120 or Letitia, he
Chal be jn danger of tuff:rings although he be no ways
culpable ; if he be with yer or Rabews, rhe querent
ſhall be pac to death for ſome eminent fault he ſhall
Ccunmit ; if Alba; or Conjunttio be there, he ſuffers by
fa!ſe

FY 05 "y__ wr.

w_ 4 T9 u

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. Hide +

falſe evidence ; 1f Pucl[: or Amiſſio be in company he
will ſuffer many torments and be condemncd to die.
If Carcer or Tr:f#:t:4 ſhall be well poſited in good al-
peet and company with thoſe figures, are thejr friends,
they denote much riches unto the Native or querent
by the means of building of houſes, but not before the
querent is 30 years of age, or in his latter days.

Pofited in this houſe, gives unto the querent

* * iIfhe be in good company great riches, honor,

* dignity, preferment, and this chiefly by nego-
* > rating and following popular buſineſs, or
x Church affairs, by offices of ]udicature, Ad-

miniftrations, Wills, and Legacics, and of

all things of that nature,

Porcends great danger unto the querent

'* © of perſecutions and impriſonment from Magi-
' x Rftrares arid preat perions,. and theſe often
* % rimes'riofent ; many quarrels and controver-

+ (fies wich his friends, in good company and

aſe he then intimatcs good unto the que-

rent from his hindling divers buſineſs , as allo in

War. .
Gives unto the Native, honours and pre-
> ferments by womens favours; honour from
x >* Princes, his fortune ſhall be enlarged by the
*X mothers ſubſtance, and in general he ſhall
X* be forcunate and ſucceſsful in che ſecond part
of his 3pc then he was in the firſt.
Dcnotes'the querentto bean excellent pro-
* * ficient in the Mathematicks , and lignitics
* * much ayplauſe unto him for his admirable in-
* ventioas and rare skill therein, many times |
* *X 1t makes him a Secretary or Counſellour to a

Prince, bur if he (kill be there 12 il com-
FE 13 pany

Book. 2.

pany ic prelages m_ danger, lots, exile, and much in-
fclicity- |

74 The Temple of Wiſdome.

In good Company and good AſpeR de-
* + Notes honour and preferment unto the Que»
| * rent, Jethis condition be what it will, and
that he ſhall grow rich - it alſo ſhews bim
to be of good and honeſt life.
Denotes great amity and friendſhip with
Princes and great Lords, and eſpecially in caſe
of V Var, the King or great Lotd is ſick, but
* * he ſhallnordie jifhetake Aru potabile and
5 * ſuch like Medicines, the Phyſitian is good,
and the Medicine which be preſcribeth is
good and profitable : the Mother and Grand-mother
15 £000, ſo is the King or Lord, but they be ſomeching
angry, the King or Lord loveth him well for whom the
queſtion is made, the King ſhall dwell long in bis
Realm , and the Lord in his Country, but they ſhall
have ſome war, the man ſhall be *leRted Emperour ,
the Cardinal ſhall be made Pope, the-Gentleman ſhall
be Koighted, the ſervant ſhail be accepted ar Court;
Jt is good forthe King to take V Var in hand, for he
ſhaſl overcome his enemies and enjoy his own again ;
it is good to take poſſeſſion of ground, or of a Lord-
ſhip, the King or Lord $ball do sharp juſtice, the time
Shall te fair, and rhe air clear, ſweet, and wholeſome,
andir will notrain: in all thingy this figure is good,
bur always shews ſome 'aoper. OD
Is good to go to a King, for he shall do.
* him honour , ir is good to take Medicine, the
* thing loſt ſhall not be found, it is good for the
> Mother, the Oath is true, the King or Lord
*X love rhe perſon well, the King ſhall be baniſh-
ec,the Lordsball be killed by h:s ſervants mY
| i Ni ers al

X% XXX

Book 2, The Temple of Wiſome.

ſubjects, the King is noe ſick, the perfor shall neithet
be Pope, Emperouror King, the man $hall nor be'out
ofthe Court, it is good tor the King togo into! hid
Country , bur ill for war, this Lord isa Traitourand
will do no jultice, the air.is good , but it shall many
times rain: In all _ oro PAY is good, _ c>

ſpecially co travek--

. Signifierh' an it time and ablacky x to at-
* + tain unto the honour” pretended; the King
«x *& mm danger to loſe his Realm and Domi-
* X - nion, it is ill for the Phyfitian', or to take
X Phyſick; the thing loſt will never be foand,
ifthe King or Lord be ſick he hall die, the
perſon shall nor be choſen: Emperour, Pope, or King,
unleſs it be by Treaſon, the man: 8hall live ac the
Court, the King sball be betrayed 'by his own Sub-
zecs, the Voyage shaltbeitong and flow, -the air shall
be tenebrous and dark :/ this Figure isfl or all things;
bur to till the Earth, fortifie and keep Towns, and for
treaſure hidden. |

| Signifieth that the King or Lord is not

* \1ick, itis good for honour, the Phyſician is
*X * a good man, andit is cood ro take and uſe
* * his advice, tis good for the Mother, Uncte,
* * and Aunt; the King or Lord loverh wellthe
ſervant, whereby he $ball have profit: The

Lord shall have Dominion and Governance over the
Land, the perſon $hall continue in Court, the King
hall not $0 to war, but hall recover his Land peace-
ably , and shall do good juſtice with loyalty ; the
King shall be received again with great joy and
bliſs into his own Country , the air is ſweet, clean,
Ft 4 clear,

96 _The.Templeof Wifdome. Book 2

hes. eh. dn i AS

Clear, ang pleaſant; withoue rain or boiſterovinets 3 in
all things £his' Figure is $000 m_ RAS, rather VVar
LCN, FEACE-, i £431 i,
| Lym Signifiesb blood, choler, hates dwtoig,
- trife,:quareell, debare, treaſon, ſadneſs, and
Fs Mwill; In warit fignifieth:ViQory: at frſt,
*X * and loſs at laſt; it is good for difſojute love
to ts and.to pndermive 4 ſpring cofpag in all o-
, i: thprthlngs it is Mr ts nn yt

| Signiberh ill eo get honour-or . authori-

f As: ty z for thei party doth give himfelf to Le-
Ba , hory x js not good to rake Medicine, the
i thing loſt is ſtoleny and wilt not be had 2
RX "y gain uoleſs the ſeventh conſent ;' the Mo-
ther is cholerick', -and if she fall ſick $she

shall die., » [if theſeighth conſent; it isillto go tothe
King; Prince, or Lord, there will be no-raio; but the
air, will be-Fair and bright 'with a little wind : the
Figure is ill in all the demands which may be made

in this houſe , except to have the favour of a
Princeſs.

For, Honour and Dignity boldeth a //e-
* * adirxrity, it is gocd- to dwell with a great
* Lord, for he ſhall be his Secretary and Go-

X vernour, it is indifferent to take Medicine,
* * the Lord ſhall die of this diſeaſe he 1s ſick
cf, the perſon ſhall be baniſhed the Courr,

the oath 1s:good, the }udge will doright, it is-ill
to go tO VVar, for he ſhalt Le in danger to be
Nain, iris good to enter into a Town and to take
4

Book 2: The Temple of Wiſcome. : 77

3 \ Voyage , for they ſmall quickly return ; The arr
ſhall nor be wholeſome by rcafon of the rain? in
things ye can demand in "a houſe this Figure is
good , butfor VVaritis ill, for Loyei it is very good
and ſigni: etch Mirth.

.- "Decfares loſs of Honour , Reputation ,
© Credit, and Eftectt! unro- the Native; A
deprivation of all worldly 'Honour and Pre-
ferment ; it throws 'or' precipitates him
* *& from the chief Pinacle of Dignity , into
'the very Jaws of a Dungeon ; ſometimes
he is condemned to perpetual impriſonment or ex-
jle; it alſo portends ſhort life to the Mother 'of the
werent , and the time ſhe gorh _— much ine
fidelity. -* _

X &X ©

The Temple ofWiſdome. Book 2.

7 =

CHAP. XI.
of the eleventh Hoſe.

T% eleventh houſe , which is the ſuccedant of

the Angle of the South , otherwiſe called *'A;z-

2 olyper y (b Cx) Bonum Genius, the good Angel,
natarally doth contain all the demands which may
be made upon a friend , he or ſhe, that is to ſay, upon
the thing ye love, and whereof ye hope to bave con-
tolation, aid.and profir as well of the friend -haxd by
yoly 45 by. him which ty far off.

.2 Ot good ar iilinqueſtzons concerning this houſe.
3 If a man ſhall have the thing hoped for.

4 Of the agreeing of friends.

5- Of Love betwixt two, _

6 What money the King and the Mother have.

2 If the Emperour, Pope, King, or Prince will give

you 320y riches.

8 1f the friend be faithful or a traitour to you,

9 If the Pope or great Locd have much riches.

10 Tf the promiſe betrue.

1: It the year ſhall be good and plentiful.

32 If the year ſhall be dry or rainie.

#3 Tfche querent ſhall ——— all the year.

14 And in what Moneth or ſeaſon of the year ſhal

b< the plenty or fcarcity of things.

25 What Comodities ſhall be cheap, and what

Merchandiſ: ſhall be dcar.

16 And touchins the memvers of man, it contain-

eth the demands which may be mzde ppon the But-
| tocks or legs 05 man, and highs. mY,

Theſe

" Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 79

Theſe be tbe queſtions which may be made, to
know the truth whercof you muſt ſearch by all the
Rulers, Idea's, and Figures that move in this part of
the Earth. | |

Fortuna Major in this eleventh houſe de-
* * notes many helps and affiſtances from friends
Xx >* both old and young, unto the Native or
* querent, his hopes will prove no vain hopes,
* bur proſperous unto him: great perſons or
men in power, ſhall confer apon bim ho»
nours, dignities, offices, and preferments, and will
prove friends in carneſt unto bim.
Imports the hopes of the Native to be
Xx > proſperous, gives the querent many friends,
* > and thoſeno mean ones, hischildren (if he
* > "have any) ſhall be friendly and beneficial
Xx 2X. untohim, and he ſhallreceive honours and
profirs from perſons of eminencie., ©

With ill company and aſpet, shews the
X* ſtruction of the querents hopes, cauſes much
* * ſorrow and difcord among the fi iends of the
* Xx erent, and he inforcunates him alſo in his
Xx children, (it beins che fifth hoaſe from che
ſeventh)when Zeze/ is potent, and ſtrong in

the eleventh houſe : this figure 1s ill in all things...
Shews increaſe of Fortune and Dipuirty,
* > and honour unto the querent, by the means
= of friends, h- hail be ſupplied in his juſt
* * hopes; he willhave many fairhful, honeſt,
* © and ſufficient friends, ſuch as in a time of ne-
cellity will nor refuſe co ſtick unto him; be
shall receive favours from Mapiftrates, &c, in all
things this Fjgure is very 800d. | l

De-

"The Templeof Wiſdome. Book 5

Denotes falſe friends, & perſons oc" 9
friendſhip that ſhall prove enemies unto the
, Querent, vain and deceitful hopes, diminuti=
on of honour and ſubſtance,and much 6difhcul-
ty in obtaining the things he hopes for, he
may if in good company proſper in all Martial

things : this Fignre is indifferent in all chings.

Fignifies friendſhip unto the Querent in
| bis younger years ;. gives bim many faithtul
' friends and aſſociates, and thoſe that (hail be
true, unto kim. in his Counſels and Atticns ;

' his children will be many, and forcunate, and
. finally luch ſhall be- $15 go.d luck, that he

ſhall attain the end of hishopes-

Declares many.; ingenious and prudent
friends unto the Querent - viz. ſuch as delight
in Sciences and Arts, men of rare and-curious
inventions and ſuch ascan write well ; , he (hall
receive much profit and advantage by them,
and they ſhall add unto. bim the fumm of his

haves; in all the houſesthjs Figure ts very good.

Givesthe Querent much familtaricy and
friendſhip with Princes and great perſons, and
denotes much honour and riches unto them :
in all the queſtions which ye may demand in
this houſe, this Figure is very good.

Signifieth the friend is truſty and willing to
do pleaſure, but he wantcth power, he ſhall
not have the fruit of his hope, the friend is
honeſt and faithful, the Mother and King be
pretty well tore of money, and be in danzer
to be robbed z the entrance of the Kings ſhall

be good ; the year will abound in goodthings, the for-

wac

Book 2.' The Temple of Wiſdome. 3r

rune of Air is good ; in all chings which you may
demand this figure is good , eſpecially in things of
Love. | |

Stpnifieth joy among friends, and that the

* fortune of the querent (hall be good; the thing

* . deſired ſhall take effcR, the promile ſhall be

* good and kepr, the friend and companion be

faithful and good - there be. Letters coming,

the entrance of the King ſhall be joyful; this Pe

Sure is good in all things which you can demand in this
houſe ; chis figure is good.

Denotes ill fortune to the querent ; the friend
+ X* is ill, a quarreller, and a man of an ill mind to-
* wards his friend, the promiſe ſhall take no-
X x <cfﬀ&, the hope ſhall be in vain: che compa-
Xx nionisno wiſe man, the year will be barren,
and victaals dear, the fortune of the year il] -

this figure is ill ia all things.

Declares increaſe of friends, and that
* menof noſmall reputation, the fortune ofthe
& *X querent is good ; the fricnd is a good friend
x * andrruſty, the friend is a man that will both
+ pleaſureand help; the party ſhall not be de-
ceived of his hope, the companion is good,
honeſt, and ſecret, the Mother and King have not
much money, and molt part thereof js ſilver ; che
promiſe is good and true, the entrance of the
King ſhall be like the forcune of the year; the year
will be plentiful of all fruits and good things, and yet
there will be nuthing very cheap; in ail demands this
figure is good. |
Pore

7 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book. 3.

Porrends ill fortuns, the companion' and
X X -thefriend be ill, and by them will come ſtrife, ſo
Xx thatblood will be ſpilt 6n the one ſide or onſthe
* * other, the hope ſhall be nothing, the entrance
Xx * ofthe Kinpis ill; the Mcther and King have
fitcle money, arid if they have any, it isin dan-
ger fo be ſtolen ; in all chings this fizure 1s ill, but to
ter blood.

Sjpnifiefh the friend is falſe, and worſe

&% thenthe enemy; he that you put in truſt will

* * do thelike; the fortune of the querent ſhall be

*X I!l, and ſo hall his hope be alſo': the Mother

* x and the King have bur liccle inoney ; the year

' ſhall be ſcarce, and the fortune of che year ill,

2nd this Figure is ill in all chings, but for hope and love
of Courciers.

Denotes mean fortune to the querent; it

* * Is very good in thirgs witty : the fricnd is
* true, the hope is good, the thing loſt ſhall be
* found in the end, rhe companion is faithful
* * and true, the entrance of the King ſhall be
pood, the Kingand Mather are meetly mo-

neyed ; gain will come by labour, the fortune of the
year ſhall be good and no ſcarcity ; you ſhall have

Letters from your friend ; good to fend Children ro

ſchool, good to hire ſervants; in all the demands this
Figureis good.

5OOk 2. The Temple of W1jaome. 53
* _- Canda Drecwnisſeparates the Querent and
* _ his friends, and portends many ftrifes and
* contentions betwixt them , he. cannot obtain
* the thing he hoped for, without much difficul-

ty 2 his friends will prove his enemies, and if
not careful will procure his ruine, and in all things
chis Figure Is

WESSLOCLELKSF ERRE-G-f

CHAP. XI.

Of the twelfth Houſe, viz. Impriſonment, great
Cattel, Witchery, private Enemies , Labor,
Baniſhed men.

Ojie Crucien teachers of this Art, are the beſt
that ever writ ofthis Art: Now this Houſe is
called by all Writers, Ka:o0;-iu-y it is Cadent from the
Semth Angle; and of members in the body it bath re-
lation to the feet, it comprehendeth Naturally the fig-

nifications of the Queſtions and Demands which may * +

be propounded upon a priſon,and of the darkneſs there-
of, and alſo of the priſoner therein detained.

2 Alſo upon the deſolativa ofa perſon, and of his
Lamentation and Mourning.

3 Alſoupon an incurable ſickneſs, or ſuch as none
but Roſe (racians Medicines can cure, theſe the Le-
profie, Gout, Dropfie, and Falling-ſickneſs , and all priets
of the Eyes, &c.

4 Upon the 2ueſtions and Demands which maybe
made upon a Traytor, ill Servants, an1 Thief «tf 1

. | h »ule

© i by 's PH z " 5 TY .L #1, I J CIþ
# 4 7 G ; % a 4 :

| heuks, s ety yes Gogand the piece where ir was com-
miticd and done. - |

5 .Qt fecret encmics not ..

6 To'knew who a ſecret enemy 1s;

7 Whether anymean eommitcted £0. priſon ſhall foon
be deliv:red.

8 Of the impriſoned.

9 If a queſtion be asked for a Captive, Slave, or
Pritc ner,
10 If one be bewitched or nor.
| Þ1 Ifit be good to buy great beaſts, as Oxen,Camel:,
Dromodar ies, Ele; bans, Lyons, Bears, wolves, "Bas
as, Flarts, Dragons, Seferts, Horſes, Males, Aﬀſer,
and a1 other bealts that b: ir, and be .ridden vpon, or
to (ell chem.

12 Whether the priſoner” fhall ccme out of priſon,
_ ang when, |

t3 If he ſhoil (uffer it he ſpeak St Ugg

14. }f ove ſhail befick in priion,
.35 If the Horſe, Ox, or other beaſt, be od
of not.

26 If the perſon þe able to pay his debts.

17 If he shail be por hecrcatcer.

* 1 What manner of perſcns be the Traytors in the
oufe.

19 Whether a perſon $hal! be baniched fron his
Country or not.

20 Whether a man may bo!dly go before his ene-
my to unhorſe him without any danger, ard whether
' a man $ball be affraid of his cncmies , and of choſe

Whick do aid chem.

F, rt1194

Book 2, The Temple of WiſAome.
. .. - . Fortuna Major in the twelfth houſe, por-
* Xx tends preat and powerful adverſaries unto
* X the querent who will cauſe him to waſte and
* conſume much of his eſtate and treaſure, ſuch

* as willdetraR from him, and render him infa
| mous , he will be afflicted by captivity md
FAM ig will receive loſs from ſervants; it
denores an infirm and fickly body, tormented with long

and - tedious diſcaſes.

Z Portends many caſumnies and reproacher,

* * poverty and bondage, damage by great
| * beaſts, impriſonment, and he will have po-
| Xx * trentenemies to riſeup againſt him; but ifhe
. * | bein good company,in good aſpeR, he gives
che Qaerent victory and conqueſt over all

his enemies char are private, and ſuch as would nn-
por oe his repucation, and mitigates all the former
evils,

In the twelfth, intimates many enemies

* +* unto the Querent, and impriſonment, caprti-
* * vity, and impediments from them - if ſhe be
* + afflitcd by ill figures, the Querents life will
*X * be but ſhort, and he will be in danger of a vio-

lent death , he will be in danger of loſing

much by ſervants, and by dealing in the greater ſort of
of Catcel.

D: notes impriſonment and trouble unto

* the Querent, by reaſon of crimes and errours
x which thall wilfully be commirted , preac
* * lofs and prejudice from ſervants and privat:
* enemies, be willa{fobe unfortunace by deal-

ing in Beaſts of the greater ſorr, many ioſe-

2rable diſeaſes of che body will attend him, accord: n
to the nature of the Ru'e, [dea, 2nd Houſe; if Per

Ge te

86

The Temple of Wiſdome.. © Book 2.

* >
> X
&
* X

*
| >
+

be ſtrongy enemies will be potent, if weak, be needs .
r.ot fear his enemies. |

Portends fear, ſorrow,” trouble, captivity,
and exile unto the Querent, much damage by

.. great Beaſts and many evils and prejudice

fiom private enemies : if Carcer be well dig-
nified, that is, with good figure and aſpet
the Querent ſhall be fortunate in great Beaſts.

Shews the Qucrent to'be 8 great trafficker
or dcaler in great Beaſts ; and that he will be
afflied and receive loſs therebyz the ſecret
enemies are women, from whom he ſhall re-
ccive loſs and damage, and that he ſhall be
proſecuted, impriſoned, and in danger of

exile or baniſhment by their means, /» nativicare mu-
lierts decernet meretricem, in nativitate viri uxor ſepe
merctrix ancilla, vilts, cum infamia, & viri detrimento;
it oftentimes denotes men to be vile, and even paſt all
manner of ſhame,

Denotes a Graſjer or Drover of great beaſts,
and that he ſhall loſe by chem, if A/bus he
weak he willlofe by chem , and will buſic
himſelf about difficuls and unprofitable
things , his enemics will prove Clerks and
Solicitors , or ſuch like fellows, by whoſe

means and procurement be may ſometimes ſuffer im-
p: ulonmment. >

Imports many enemies unto the querent,
ſub jets him to penurie and ſervitude, it for-
tunates him in great beaſts,

De-

The Temple of Wiſdome. 87

Denotes the priſoner to eſcape out of pri-

*X _ ſon, theperſon ſhall have much loſs ia meer-
* - ing with his enemiec, the perſon ſhall nor be
*% *. made priſoner; itis good to buy beaſts, for
*X * there ſhall beprofic in ſelling them again; the

horſe ſhall be good, ſwifr, and nimble; the
horſe, amongſt orher things loft, ſhall return by him-
{elf ; che man ſhall be rich and not troubled, the man
ſhall pay his debts, the man ſhall not be baniſhed our
of his Country, the enemie ſhall have no ſuccour or
aid of any perſon: this Figure w good inall the de-
mands of this houſe, but to obtain Maſterſhip, or to
attend upon any other itisnort good. .

Signifieth deliverance out of priſon with-
out harm, it is good to go againſt the enemie,
it is good to buy Cattel and heritages, yea and
in all other things which ye may demand in
this houſe, this fgure is good.

In this houſe ſignifieth a preat number of
* > enemies, mighty, and irong ; there ſhall be
* > « great hcavinels for loſs of a ſervant, and of

XXKF

| *X * beaſts, and for long keeping in priſon and

X tormentthereof: this figure is ill inall chings.
Signiftes the Priſoner ſhall not be long in
prion, ir is not good to aſſault the enzmie,f. c

* *

he ſhall loſe by ir; che perſon ſhall not be
Xx +* priſoner, it is very good co buy beaſts, for
*X * you ſhall gain by ir; to hire aſervanc and

air the groundirt is very good: the horſe is

ſwift of foot and good, the man ſhall pay his debts ,

the perſon ſhall be rich, the enemie ſhall have ro aid z

there is nothing for which ye may make demand in tl.18
houſe, but'this figure is good.

Ge 2 Sic.

The T, emple of Wiſdome. Book 2,

_ Signifierh poverty and deſolation in ltrange

Countries , with few eneqies , the perſon
ſhall have much gain and ſmall profit in all
his doings: this t:gure ſignifiech ul in all the
demands.

Signifieth the Priſoner ſhall not come out
of priſon, but ſhall be ſick and confeſs a truch
being examined ; the man ſhall be made pri-
ſoner, ir is not good to buy horſes, bur if
any be bought, they ſhall be ſwift, che borſe
loſt shall not be found again; the perſon

«hall pay bisdebts and be poor , there be Traitours in
the bouſe, the man $hall be condemned, whipped, and
eormented, he $hall be banished' out of his Country,
the enemy Shall have ir, and thereforeir is not good to
meddle with him : in all chings this figure is ill.

Portends the Companies to beill,the thing
loſt will be found again, to buy beaſts it is
mean, and ſo it is to buy Lands and heritapes,
and to labour the Earth : che figure is mean
in all the demands. :

Denotes many oppreſlions unto the ene-
mies of the querent,, yet the querent rarely
eſcapes prejudice thereby, he is prejudiced by
dealing in great Cattel.

CHAP.

'] Book2. The Temple of Wiſdome.

89

—

——————— ————_— CT ena atirn

CHAP KU.

A brief deduTion of the accord and ſignification
which the ſixteen Figures have by the twelve
Houſes.

* * F this Figure named Acquiſitie, do in
X* KH mounting grow from che firſt into, the
* ſecond, that is to ſay, that be be in the
* , ſecond, or belikeuntothe firſt where Agqui-
fic5o is, it ſignifieth ro gain Gowns , and Clo»
thing apparel, to get honour, and to make'gain and
profitin aſl ats ofhonour and vertue, and with the ike
people. - 1 |
If that from the ficſt she go into the third, it fignt-
fieth to have honour, joy, and profit of the kinsfolks
and friends. a

If that che po from the firſt tothe fourth, it ſignifi-
eth profit by che father, and a good and joyful end of
his affairs. ] |

If that 8he go from the firſt co the fifth, 'ir fignifierh
joy of children, that is to ſay, they shall be good, and
of honour, and to have joy and pleaſure, to cat and
drink, and to be well clothed.

If that she go from the firſt to the ſixth, it ſignifieth
Pg and good .luck for ſervants , and to buy ſaall

reel.

Ifshe go into the ſeventh , it fignifieth to make a
contrad of enemies, to make marriages, and to pet ho-
nour and the love of pecſans , and for all demands it
13g00d, E
GEL : If

Book. 2:

If ſhe go from the firſt into the eighth, it fipnifieth
. death for the thing demanded , or for the demander,
and great profit in. fucceſſion and'heritages : it is alſo
g00d for things of Magick.

If ſhe go from the firlt co the,nioth, it fignifieth to
have profit and gain by Voyages, and in things of
the Church, as in Benefices or Offices : it is alſo good
for the profit of the children that ye would put: to
School , for they ſhall have promotions Eccleſiaſtical,
and they ſhall be men of knowledge. TE
If ſhe paſs from'the firſt ro the tenth honſe, it ſige

nifierh amity, familiarity, acquaintance and profit with
King:, Princes, and preat:Lords; likewiſe to receive
honvar, and dignity by the mother - .and alſo profic
mm ſucceſſion and heritages. And tobe briet it is pood
In all things. |

If ſhe go from the firſt to the eleventh, it ſignifieth
to have honour and profit by his friends, and a good
hope of the queſtion'demanded.

If ſte paſs from the firſt ro the twelfth, it ſignifieth

impriſonm-nt, loſs of beaſts, 'and to be overcome by |
the en:2miet and ro be brief, it is ill in all things. |
If you find this Figure eAmrſſio in the firlt |,

* 2 ""thowle, and From thence be found in the ſe-
* cond, whictrwe call the poing from one houſe
Xx * unto another, it ſignifiech loſs of goods, and

* _ to fall into debates, quarrels, and contentt-

ons, and ſuit for goods. |

Tf ſhe paſs into the third houſe, it ſignificth anger
and contentions between Kinsfolks and Allies, it 1s al-
ſoill for ſmaſl and ſhort journey, |

If ſhe go into the fourth houſe, it ſignifieth anger
between ihe ch{dren and the fither, and between the -
father and tle childreo, and by that means loſs of he-

| | xitages,

go The Temple of Wiſdome.

<m_—.
|| I——_— _ —— —rw——_—_——

bh

A. R8Rﬀ um QA ann w 30) ww wy, w a Et. CO aqua

<< &* .

. ſtance, and to be robbed by the way : it is ill for ſub-

. *# * hounle, andthenceleap into the ſecond, it hg-

Book We” The Temple of Wiſdoms. 7" OR
ricages, and the beginning and ſuit in law the one a-
gaintt che other : and this copulation and aſſembly
of the Figure is very ill but for lecbery.

If ſhe paſs into the fifth houſe, the woman with
child (ball have unſeaſonable deliverance : ir is alſo ill
co eac and drink, and ſignitierh anger about victuals.

If ſhe paſs into the fixth, it fGignifierh anger againſt
ſervants, and loſs of them and of ſmall cattel.

If ſhe paſs thence into the ſeventh, it ſignifieth
ſtrifes, quarrels, and debates with friends - it is alſo ill
for marriages, and ſignifieth to have diſpleaſure with
his wife, and to loſe the ſuit. :

If ſhe go into the eighth, it ſignifieth mortality by
hot fevers, and alteration of the underſtanding, loſs
of goods of the women, and of the cnemie : and in all
the demands it is ill.

If ſhe paſs into che ninth ie ſignifieth loſs of ſub-

ſtance. of the Church, and for men learned.

If ſhego into the ceath, it ſignitierh anger and miſ-
contentment of Kings, Princes, and Lords, and of the
Sea, and it is ill in all the demands of the tenth
houle. | |

If ſhe paſs into the eleventh, it ſignifieth anger a-
gainſt his friend, and to have an ill iflue of the thing
pretended or hoped to have.

If ſhe go into the twelfth, it ſignifieth Joſs of cat-
tel, and imp ifonment. And to be ſhort, ir is ill in
ali things.
If this Figure Fortuna Ma'er be in the firſt

X *. nifieth agreat gain in goods, moveables, as
Xx . gold, filver, and rich utenſils.

X It ſhe paſs into the third houſe, it gnifi-

| Gg 4 eth

92 The Temple of Wiſdome. Pook 2+
eth ro have wuch ſabftance by the means of the kin-
dred : it is alſo good for ſmall and ſhore Voyapes.

If ic paſs into tbe fourch,jt ſignifieth the father co be
of good and godly diſpoſition ; it is alſo good to buy
hericages and poſſeſſions, and a good iflue in all things.

. If ſhe pointothe fifth, ir ſipnifieth, joy, pleaſure,
to be in good order, well appointed and clothed, to
eat and drink well, and to have few children, and they
ſhall be of red colour. Fu ; "fs

If ir paſs into the fixth, it ſignifieth fidelity: in ſer-
vant*, and tharthe ſick perſon thall gmend : it is good
for tmall bcaſts. * | ;

Ii ſhe paſs into the ſeventh, it is good for marriage,
and Goriificth that the enemie will make peace 2 for the
acquaintance of a Lady, it is not good, becauſe their
ſecrers ſhallbe diſcloſed. | |

If it go into the eiphth, it ſignifieth death : it-is ill
in all chings but co hare the goods of a woman.

It ſhe paſs into the ninth, it fipnifieth to contrat an _
amity with Church-men, and men learned, to make a
Voyape it is goo,

If ir go into the tenth, it hgnifieth to have dipnity
with Kings 'and Princes, and with the mother, and to
have victory over his enemies. |

Ifſhe paſs into the eleventh, it fgnifieth a good iſ-
ſue upon a good bope, good friends and ſuccourable.

If it go into the rwelfth, ic fignifieth impriſonment
of the Prince, and that his enemies ſhall overpaſs bim
io might and power,

If this Fignre Fortuna Minor, be in the firſt

* houſe, and thence go into the ſecond,which we
* call going from one houſe to another, it ſion
*x hetha menn in can, and he which wedleth

* with rcd things ha!l quickly lote thereby.

| ]

WT Ob ew

' KLinsfolks, it isalſo good for a ſhort voya;e, and figni-

_ 18 angry or fick, ic alſo fignifieth the loſs of the ſuit. L.

The Tex 97 3

. The Temple of Wiſdome.
If ſhepaſs intothe' third, ir fipnificth joy of the

fieth that it ſhall be quickly ended, it is alſo good for
friends.
If it paſs into the fourth, it ſignifieth that the father

If ſhe come into the fifth, ir figniteth eo have many
children which ſhall be red of colour, alſo great joy
and pleaſure, to eat and drink, and to be coſtly and
well apparelled. . -. |

And ifſhe go into the fixth, it fignifieth good tobuy
ſmall Catrel, it is indifferent, for ſervants, and ſignifi-
eth that they ſhall be witty and wiſe. _

If it paſs into the ſeventh, ic ſignifieth marriage, and
that it ſhall be with ftrife and contention, che enemie
is ſtrong and mighty, the woman is wile, it is ill in
caſe of Love, for it hall be diſcovered. 0

If she go into the eighth, ir fignifieth death, and al-
fo is ill in all chings of eſprite, as Magick and inyo-
cations. LL

If it paſs into the ninth, ir ſignifieth long Voyages
with all proſperity and good luck, and the amiry of
men of the Church. ; |

Ifshe go into the tenth, it is good and proſperous
going to the ſervice ofa King, Prince, or great L
the Ship onthe Sea ſhall come ſafe and ſound, and the
owner thereof ſhall ſhortly have news. bo

Ifir paſs into the eleventh , it ſignifteth good and
truſtie friends, and a good end of the thing wherein
hope is put.

If ſhego into thetwelfth, it is ill in 8ll things but to
buy horſes.

; If

94 ' The Temple of Wiſdome Book. 2.

LS If you find Rwubeas in the trſt houſe, I will

Xx X* ſay noother thing bur chat which before I
if + - havetold you, that is to ſay, that following

| 1 * *X* the opinion of all the Doors in this ſcience, -

1 X * be they Caldeans, Indians, Hebrews, Arabics,

Egyptians, or Perſians, when this Figure is found in |

this place, it ought not to be judged, che whichghirg

1 have always tound true by long | experience, where-

i fore atthis rime1 will ſay no other thing, bur chat ſhe

IF is ill ig all the houſes bur in the ſixth. ;

1 - .*-+ . Tf you find this Figure eA/bus in the firſt

* + houſe, and be found again m the ſecond houſe,

X > i1r figniftiech gain and profit in white things,
Xx Writings, or Letters, or Books.

* *X Ifſh- paſs into the chird,, it ſignifieth

 - - :* Soodtime for friends and kinsfolks, and that

Letters ſhail come from near at hand.

If it go into the fourth, it ſignifieth to win his ſuir,
it 158)10 good in the demands which may be made up-
on the fatter, ſignifying as well in them as in all o-
thers, a good ifſuc and cnd. |

If ſhe paſs into the fifch, it figaifieth to have many
children, and to delight in white clothes, to. eat and
drink, and co company oftenizaes with learned
Men. : ;

If it pafs into the (ſixth , the ſervants be good and
trutt ys ;
if ſhe go into the (ſeventh, the martiage' lately be-
gun. ſhall cake effect , to the great contentment and
protitc of the parties, and the enemics ſhall. demand
POacc. |

And ifit piſs into the cighth, it ſignifieth death by
a hot difcalc of t\numes, and Cathers, it isSallo good
ſoc Mag'ck. | .

|

bas hos .

Bobo

The Tempie of W iſaeme. 95
If ſhe go into the ninth, tit ſignifiech that che Jon
joarny ſhall be good and proficable, and that the Lec
rers which come from afar oft bring good news, it1s
alſo good for Doors and Church-men, and to make
ammitic and acquaintance with them, =

If it paſs into the tenth, it is good to go to Kings,
Princes, and Lords, and to go to viſit his mother.

If he go into the eleventh, ir bringeth good luck,
and alſo for Letters which ſhall come on their
re. . | '.
FF it paſs into the twelfth, it is good to buy frames,
alſo in thisplace it isa token to be held priſoner.
If this Figure 7 apst draconze bein the firſt
* * houſe, and thence aſcend into the ſecond, ir

* Aſignifiethgain and profit in all things. .

X If it paſs into the third, it ſignifieth the

* Kkinsfolks to be of good amity, ic isalſo good

for ſhort Voyages, but there ſhall be ſome
ſlowneſs therein.

If ſhe go into the fourth , it ſignifieth good for the
father,and to ſucceed in his heritage.

Tf it paſs incothe fifth , it Ggnifieth many children
which ſball be wiſe and witty, it ſheweth alſo a hear»
tinels tocat and drink.

If ſhegointothe fixth, it gnifeth gain and profic
1n buying of Catcel, and that the ſervants be good and
loyal. |
If it paſs into the ſeventh, it is a good time for mar-
riage and for reconciliation of enemics, and chat the
perſon is of great amity.

If ſhe go into the eighth, it Genificth death with-
out remedy, and fometime in this place it ſignifieth co
win inheritances,

If ic paſs into the ninth, it ſignifieth gain and
profit

Book ; a

—_—

g6 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book. 2.

{| profit by along Voyage by men of the Church.
if If Che go into the tenth, itis good to go to Kings,
: Princes, and'to the mother. © - |
Wl 1fit paſs intotbe eleventh, it ſignifieth ro have good
Wil fricnds, and that the hope ſhall nocbein vain: ardalſo
' I g thing that is demanded fhall come. to. a good
If effec. |
If she go into the twelfth , it Ggnifieth to be made
1; priſoner, and therein ro have much vexation and tor-
1; ment, andin all the demands he is ill, but for to buy
[i horſes.

Tf this Figure Cande dracenss be found in
the firft houſe then the figure should not be
judged, but tr muſt be broken and an otber
* _. made one hour after that : but if. from the
Wi =X % ſecond houſeche gointo any ofthe Fe
| ll may there judge it, ſaving in the fourth,
|} where there is nocercain judgment to be given, for
the malice of the ſaid Figure, and therefore ar this
time 1 will ſay no more. | |

| Finding this Figure Lerires in the firſt
« * houſe, and thence go into the ſecond, it ſig-
+ * nifietha mediacricy of gain by white things,
*x * andinthings of che Church.
X x Ifir pals into thethird , it fignifieth the

x kinsfolks to be merry,and in good diſpoſition
and in health of body, it is alſo good for ſmall and shorr
Voyages, x64 [205

Ir shego into the fourth, the end of all things ſhall
be 355 ful, but the promiſe falſe. |
. It it paſs into the fifth, it is good for children, and
ro eat and drink, and to ſing muſick, and ſignifieth a
great light m cs of heart. |
If he go wiro the ſixth, it is good far ſervants,
ſign

X *

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 0

ſignifying that they ſhall be profitable to their maſters-
io all che other houſes this Figure is good; butin the
eghth and cwelfth , for in che eighth ſhe ſignifiech
death, and in che ewelfch loſs of Cattel. And for be-
cauſe that according to the ſignification of each houſe
I have herebefore ſufficiently written, you may by the
fame eaſily judge each queſtion that'is demanded, I ©
will not hold you long in the other Figures which fol-
Jow, in touching their mutations and concordances,
but onely paſs over them generally.

This Figure Trst::54 found in the firſt, and

x »« thencego into the ſecond, it fignitieth ſmall

*X profit but in things of the earth, as Vines,

*Xx * Medows, Woods, and Lands acrable, in all

* the other houſes this Figure is ill, but in the

fourth and eighth , where bath in che one

and the other, ir is good to buy heritages, and becauſe

I have largely declared herebefore, I will ſay nothing
more ar this time.

If this Figure Pa«{ago from the firſt houſe

* tothe ſecond, it ſignifieth gain by women ,
* X* andby white things; in all the other houſes
Xx where this figure paſſeth ſhe is good, clpe-

* cially inthe houſe where he ſignifieth joy- #®
fulne(6; bur in che eighth ſhe fgnificth death, es

and in the ewelfth impriſonmear.

If chys figure Pacer, paſſeth from the ficlt co

* the ſecond, it ignificch ſmall gain , burin

* things of War, in all ocher houſes this fi-

* * gure is mean, yt iathe eighth and twelith
= he is ill.

This

- The Temple ofWiſdame, Book 2.

This Figure Con jwn&69 going from the firſt
XK. x tothe ſecond, ir ſignifieth gain by books and
*X writings, in all other houſes this Figure is
o indifleceat, but in the ſeventh wherce it is
{| + X* good for mairiage, and in the ninth to pur
Scholers to ſtudy, and in the eighth ic is 11],
for it always ſgnifieth death , and in the rwelſth it is

ncither g00d nor bad. ©
This Figure (arcer paſſing from the firſt
* into the lecond, it is gainful to buy lands ae-
* + rable, in all other houſes where ye find ter,
* > yelhall judge her as ye do the others, thar
*X 1s tofay, according to the figrification of the
houſe where the 15, and therefore at this time

I will ſpeak no more thereof.

This Figure Popmlns paſſing from the firſt
houſe to the ſecond, it fagnificeth gain and
profit in white things, and in Jands which
lye by the water, and it ſhe paſs into the
third, it is good to make. Voyage by water,
it ſignitieth death 1n.che eighth and in the
ninth, and in the twelfib co be taken priſoner. In all
the other houſes judge according co their fignifica-
0190s,

g8

XX XX
X & %

This Figure /:4 going frem'the firſt to
the ſecond, it fignitieth imall gain , if it paſs
1::t0 the third it is good far ſhort Voyapes :
in all che ocher houſes this figures ll, but in
the ninth and tenth, where ſhe 1s very good,
1 the eighth ſhe ſignifieth death, and impri-
ſonment in che tweltch. ;
 Whiealoever ye finde the firſt houſrs to paſs one
170 another, you ſhall judge according to the figni-
fication of the houſe where they pals, as I have in the
| | begins

EEE

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome.

beginning told you at large, and now in the end more
briefly ; the which things, to the end,. you may the
better underſtand them, I will ſet you an example of a
Figure- which my Lord of Tays commanded me to
make, to know whether the French King Fraxcs the
firſt of that name , and the Emperour Charles of Am
ſtriche, the fifch of that name, ſhould ſpeak togetber.z
which Figure being made, and by fortune, Acquiſirso
beiog 'in the firſt houſe, went ſtrait toto the ſeventh,
which 1s the houſe of Kings and Emperours , which
was the cauſe char I traighe way judged that the Em-
perour ſhould ſpeak with the King; and ſo likewiſe
ſhall ye judge of the'ſecond if it paſs into the third, to
know (as by way of example) it the demand be made
for ſubſtance it ſignifieth that the ſubſtance (hall come
into the hands of che kinsfolks of him which made the
queſtion according to the content of the demand, and
the ſignification of the houſe where the ſaid Figure is 2
if the ſecond paſs into the third, fifeh, or ſixth, or into
any of the others following, you ſhall alſo judge accor-
ding to the ſignification of the houſe where it is - the
like ſhall ye do by the. third if it paſs into the fourth,
or into any of the other unto the ewelfch, ſo ſhall ye
do by the fourth if ſhe paſs intothe fifth, or into any
of the other houſes following : and fo all the others
judging as is aforeſaid, according tothe ſignification
of the houſes where they go, and according to the
good or ill of the ſaid Figures. And ye mult note chat
they never paſs bur one time to (tay the judgment, al-
though that a Figure formed have many of one ſqrr,
and all alike, whereof I will ſpeak more arlarge heceai-
ter, in declaring the example that I will (et.

\CHA?,

FT <a REDS . ae yen
 & 4 > 4 - :

Il The TempleoftWiſa

eve eo athar Acts £ L

v

jj
| | CH A P, XIV. Xe
Ea oo wk Aubin yr
li! ' ' mherethe Figures be in their place”? |

(}

:

% ; Pi good houſes, to be brief, are the firſt; fifch,
& $>» > rench, and eleventh ; the mean houſes be the {c-
| *. "cond, third, fourth, and ninth: the eyil houſes be the.

ſixth, ſeventh, eighth, and twelfth houſes.

Mt
|
Si; |

;

by

The Houſes wherein the Figures be fond 16 be good,

eAquiſitso is good fo: profit, and amongſt all other
Figures it is good in the firſt, ſecond, and tench
houſes... 4 <>;
eAmiſſio is good for loſs of ſubſtance, and therefore
is good in the cighth houſe, and very ul in the ſe-
cond. |
Fortuna MM ijor is good for gain in things where a
perion hath hope co win, and therefore it is very good
in the fifth, ſixth, ninth and cleyench houſes.

Fortuna /finor 1; good in any attair, wherein a per-
ſon would go quickly, and is therefore very good.in
Fir any a and ill in che eighth houſe;

Lerti48 is good for jay, as well preſeat as tocome,
and for that cauſe is found good almott in all the hou-
ſes, and cſpecially in the fifth, and ill in the ſixth, eight,
and twelfrh houſes | :

Triſtitiaisa very i!l Figure in all the bouſes, batin
the.cighth and twelfth houles, where (he is good': and
mean in the firſt and ſecond hoſes. |
Alvus is good for a man which hopery to have g

ain' ©

Ld

1

500K 2. The Temple of Wiſdome.
or profit in any thing, and alfo to have entrie into any
place, and in this reſpe& is found good in the firſt and
fourth houſes. | .

Rubews is ill in all good things, and good in all ill
things, and many times fignifieth death, ſhe is never
found in the firſt houſe to make a judgment as is told
you before, ſhe isill in the ſecond, fourth, ſeventh and
renth houſes, and almoſt in allthe other, ſaving incer-
tain demands.

Paella is very good inall things that ye may demand,
and eſpecially in things of women, and the is very
good in the ninth and fifth houſes.

Per is very ill in all the queſtions and demands
which-may be made in all the houſes, ſaving in the ſe-
cond and ſixth, where he is mean.

Carcer is a Figure likewiſe ill in all the houſes, and
eſpecially in the ſixth, eighth, ſeventh, and» twelfth
houſes, and fignificth always to be ſtaid.

Conjanttio is good with good, and ill with ill, and
ſignifieth always a recoverment and refticution of
things ſcattered or loſt, and ſhe is found goodin the
ſeventh, ninch, and tench houſes, and ill in the eighth,
and ſignifieth death, and in the twelfth fignifieth to
be kept in priſon. LY

Caput dracens is good with good, and ill with ill and
's good in the ſeventh and fecond houſes, and ſhewerh
to havea good iſſue inthe things where a-man boperh
to havepain,

( auda drxeonts is very good with the il), and very
ilt with the good, in matter of loſs ſhe is good , and
to paſs out of an affair: ſhe is found good in the fourth,
ſixth, ninth, and twelfth houſes, and ill in che ſecond :
ye muſi note that in the ninth ſhe is pood to learn
Hh ; Science,

101 -

| 7 TOME. | 500 2.

.1LO2 The Temipbe'd

Science, and ill to jouriiecy, fignifying ſpoiling and
robbing,, ſhe is alſo ill in this place for all other
things.

Populus is ſometime good and ſometime bad, with
g00d ſhe 15 good, and with ill ſhe is il], he is good in
the tenth, and-ill inthe eighth houſe.

Vis is a Figure which breaketh and fpoileth all the
goodneſs of the others, ſaving in demands of journeys
and voyages,and to go from place to place to the which
| ſhe is very good ; ſhe is pood in the third, fifth, and
ſeventh houſes, becauſe ſhe fipnifieth that Letters
ſhall come which ſhall bring good news : in the twelfth
houſe ſhe is common. | |

Jn all che Teleſmes it muſt be obſerved that the fi-
ures of Aſtromancie and Geomancie muſt unite, and
then Superiours will communicate their vertues to In-
feriours upon the proper Metals at the very moment
of time, be careful therefore 'to obſerve the hoar and
minute you make a Teleſmatical Gamahe, and follow
theſe Rules and you cannot err. |

P,

2 The Temple of Wiſdome.

CHAP. XV.

* KX Ortaxe Major being found in the firſt
* | houſe, giveth long life, and freeth from
X the moleſtation of diſeaſes : it demonſtrateth

* 2 man to be noble, mapnanimous, of good
| manners, mean of ſtature, complexion rud.
dy, hair curling, and his ſuperiour members greater
then his inferiour.

In the ſecond houſe, he ſignifies manifeſt riches and
manifeſt gain, good fortune, and the gaining any thing
loſt or miſ-laid ; the taking of a thief, and recovery of
chings ſtolen. SIE,

In the third houſe, be ſignifies brethren and kinſmen,
Nobles, and perſons of good converſation ; journeys
co be proſperous and painful with honour : it demon-
ſtrateth men co be faithful, and their friendſhip to be
unfeigned.

In the fourth houſe, he repreſents a father to be no-
ble, and of goed reputation, and known by many peo-
ple : he cnlargeth poſſeſſions in Cities, increateth Pa»
erimonics, and diſcovereth hidden treaſures. In this
place he likewiſe ſ1gnifies theft, and recovers every
thing loſt,

In the fifth houſe, he giveth juy by children , and
cavſerh them to attain ro great honours ; Embaſlages
he rendereth proſperous , bur they are purchaſed with
p_ and prayers ; he noteth rumours to be true, he

ſtowerh publick honours, and cauſeth a man to be
very famous afcer death | foreſheweth a woman with
child ro bring forth a marichild.

In the fixth houte, he frecth from Cifcaſes, ſhewerh

| Hh 2 theole

TS ca a Le

104 The Templd of Wiſdome. Book 2-

thoſe that have infirmities ſhall in a ſhort tume recover ;
ſignifieth a Phyſitian to be faithful and honeſt to ad-
miniſter good Phy ſick, of which there ought to be had
no ſuſpition ; houſhold ſervants and Miniſters to be
faithful; andof animals he ſignifies horſes,

In the ſeventh houſe , he giveth a wife rich, honeſt,
_ andof good manners loving and pleaſant, he overcom-
eth ſtrifes , and contentions. But if the Queſtion be
conceining them , he ſignifieth the adverlaries to be
very potent, and great favourites. ;

In the eighth houſe; if a 2ueltion be propoſed of
the death of any one, ir ſignifies he ſhalllive : the
kind of death he ſheweth tobe good and natural; an
hone(t burial, and honourable Funerals : he foreſhew-
ctha witc to have a rich dowry, legacies, and inhert-
tance.

In the ninth houſe, he Ggnifics journeys to be pro-
ſperousz and by land on horie back, rather then on _
foor, to be lung, and not ſoon accompliſhed ; he ſhew-
eth the return of thoſe that are abſent, ſign'fies men to
be of good faith, and conitant in their intentions, and
religious, and that never change or alter their faith -
dreams he preſageth co be true, ſignifieth true and
perfect Sciences. :

In the tenth houſe, he foreſheweth great honours,
beltoweth publike Offices, Magiſtracic, and Judge-
ments, and honcurs 10 che Courts of Princes : {igni-
fieth Judges to be jult, and nut corrupted with gifts,
bringeth a Caule to be caſily and ſoun expedited ;
ſheweth Kings to be potent, fortunate, and victorious,
denoteth Victory to be certain, ſignifies a mother to
be noble, and of long life.

In che eleventh hovte, he ſignifies true friends and
profitable, a P:iuce rich and liberal; maketh a man for-
funitc, and biloved of lits Prince. In

-

| mory.

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 105 *
In the twelfch houſe, if a Queſtion be propoſed of
the quality of enemies, it demonſtrateth them to be
po:ent and noble, and hardly tobe reſiſted ; butif a
Queſtion ſhall be concerning any other condition or
reſpe& to the enemies, he will deliver from their trea-
cheries; ir ſignifieth faithful ſervants, reduceth fupi-
tives, hatch ſignification of animals, as Horſes, Lions,
and Bulls ; freeth from impriſonments,. and eminent

dangers he either mitigaceth or taketh away.
Fortuna Minor in the firſt houſe, giveth

* longlife, but incumbred with divers moleſta-.

* * tions and fickneſles z it (ignifieth a perſon of
* * fhort ſtature, a lean body, having a mold or
mark in his forehead or right eye.

In the ſecond houſe, he fignifies ſubſtance, and that
to be conſumed wich roo much prodigality, hidech a
Thief, and a thing ſtolen is ſcarcely co be recovered
but with preat labour. |

Inthe third houſe, he cauſeth diſcord amongſt bre-
thren and kinsfolks, threatneth danger co.be in a jour-
ney, but eſcapeth ic z rendreth men to be of good faith,
but of cloſe and hidden minds.

In the fourth houſe, he prejudiceth Patrimonies and
inheritances, concealeth treaſuries ; and things loſt can-
not be regained, but with great difficulcy ; he ſignifi-
eth a father to be honeſt, bur a ſpender of his eftate
— prodigality, leaving ſmall portions to his chil-

ren: |

In the fifch houſe, giveth few children; a woman
with child he ſignifies ſhall have a woman chbild, ſig-
nifies Embaſlages to be honourable, but little protita-
ble, raiſeth to mean honours, piveth a good fame after
death , but nct much dirulged, nor of laſting me-

Hh 3 In

1106 The Temple of Wiſdome.

—_—

Book 2

In the fixth houſe;he ſignifies diſeaſes,both ſanguine
and cholerick, ſheweth the ſick perſon to be in preat
danger , but ſhall recover, ſignifies faithful ſervants,
but flothful and unprofitable : and the ſame of other
animals.

In the ſeventh houſe, be giveth a wife of a good pro-
genie deſcended, bur you ſhall be incumbred with ma-
ny troubles with her; cauſeth love to be anxious and
unconſtant, prolongeth contentions, and maketh ones
adverſary to circumvent him with many cavillations,
but in proceſs of time he giveth vicory.

In the eizhth houſe, he (hewcth the kind of death
to be good and honeſt ,- but obſcure, orin a ſtrange
place or pilgrimage ; | diſcovereth Legacies and Poſle(-
(1,15, bt to be obr2ined with ſuit and difficulty : de-
poreth funcrais and buryings to be obſcure, the por-
tion of a wife to he hardly gotten, buteaſily ſpent.

Intheninth houſe, he maketh journeys to be dan-_
gerous, and a parity abſent ſlowly to return , cauſeth
men to be occupied tn offices of Religion , ſheweth
Scrences to be unaccompliſhed , but keepeth conſtancie
to Faith and Religion.

In the tenth houſe, he ſipnifieth Kings and Princes
to be porent, but to gain their power with war and
violence ; baniſhed men he ſheweth ſhall ſoon return,
if likewiſe diſcovererh honours, great offices and be-
nefirs, but for which you ſhall continually labour and
ſtrive, and wherein you ſhall haveno ſtable continu-
ance, a Judge ſhall riot favour you, ſuits and conten-
tions he prolongeth, a father and mother he ſheweth
Mall foon cie, and always to be affeted with many
difcaſrs.

In th: eleventh houſe, he maketh many friends, but
ſuch as arc poor ard unprofitavic, and not able to re-
lie ve

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdoms. ,

—_— — — — — Cert —— WP anne

; 107

lieve thy neceilicies; ic ingratiates you with Princes,
and giveth great hopes, but ſmall gains ; neither long
to continue in any Benefice or Offices beſtowed by a
Prince.

In the twelfth houſe, he ſheweth enemies to be craf-
ty, ſubtle, and fraudulent, and (indying to circumvent
you with many fecrec factions : ſignifies one in priſon
to be long detained, but at length co be delivered ; ani»
mals he ſheweth to be unfruitful, and ſervants unpro-
fitable.; and che changes of fortune to be frequent
from good to evil, and from bad to good. |

YVi4 in the firſt houſe, beſtoweth a long and

* - proſperous life ; giveth ſignification of a ſtran-

* ger , lean of body, and tall of ſtature, fair of

* compleQion, having a {mall beard, a perſon li-

. x beraland pleaſant, but flow, and little addit-
ed to labour.
 Inthe ſecond, he increaſeth ſubſtance and riches ,
recovereth any thing that is ſtolen or loſt, but ſignifies
the Thicf to be departed withour the City,

In the third, he multiplies brethren and kinsfolks,
ſignifies continual journ:ys, and proſperous, men thar
are publikely known, honeſt , and of good conver-
ſation, .

In the fourth houſe, ſignifies the father to be honeſt,
increaſeth the Patrimony and Inheritance, produceth
wealthy fields, ſheweth treaſure to be in the place en-
quired after, recovereth any thing loſt.

In the fifch, he increaſeth the company of male chil-
dren, ſheweth a woman with <hild ro bring forth a
male-child, ſendeth Embaflages to ſtrange and remote
parts, increaſeth publike honours ; ſignifieth an ho-

neſt kind of death, and to be known through many

Provinces. |
HIS In

7"EOV -

The Temple of Wiſdome. 2.

In the fixch houte, he preleryech from 1ickneis, ſig-
nifies the diſcaſed ſpeedily to recover, giveth profita-
ble ſervants, and animals fruitful and profitable,

In the ſeventh houſe, he beſtoweth a wife fair and
pleaſant, with whom you ſball en'oy perpetual felicity,
cauſeth ſtrifes and controverſies moſt ſpeedily to be
determined, adverſarics to be cafily overcome, and
that ſhall willingly ſubmit their controverſies to the
arbitration of good men.

In the ejghth houſe, he ſheweth the kind of death
to pfoceed from Phlegmatick diſeaſes y to be honeſt ,
and of good report; diſcovercth great Legacies, and
rich inheritances to be obtained by the dead; and if
any one hath been reported to be dead, it ſheweth him
to be alive.

In the ninth houſe, he cauſeth long journeys by wa-
ter, cipecially by Sea, and portendeth very great gains
to be acquired thereby ; he denoteth Prieſthoods, and
profits from Eccleſiaſtical employments, maketh men
of good Religion, upright, and conſtant of faith;
ſheweth dreams to be true, whoſe ſignification ſhall
ſuddenly appear, increaſeth Philoſophical and Gram-
matical Sciences, and thoſe things which appertain to
the inſtruction and bringing up of children.

' In thetenth houſe, he maketh Kings ard Princes
happy and fortunate, and ſuch as ſhall maintain con-
ticual peace with their Allies, and that they ſhall re-
quire amity and friendſhip amongſt many Princes by
their ſeveral Embaſlages; promoteth publike honours,
offices, and Mapiftracie amongſt the Vulgar and com-
mon people, or about things pertaining to the water,
journeys, or abcut gathering Taxes and Aſſeſ;ments;
{hewerh Judges to be juſt and merciful, and that (hall

Quickly d:\patch Cauſes depending before them : and

denotes

.

Book 2. The T, emple of Wiſdome. 109
denotes a mother to be of good repuce, healthy, and of

long life. -
In the eleventh houſe, he raiſeth many wealthy

friends, and acquireth faithful fFiends in torcign Pro-
vincesand Countries , and that ſhall willingly relieve -
hm that requires them with all help and diligence ; ic
ingratiates perſons with profit and cruſt amongſt Prin-
ces, employing him in ſuch Offices,as he ſhall be incum-
bred with continual travels. P
In the tweltth houſe, cauſeth many Enemies, but ſuch
' as of whom lictle hurt or danger is to be feared ; ſigni-
fies ſervants and animals tobe profitable, whoſoever
is in priſon to be eſcaped, or ſpeedily to be delivered
from thence, and preſerveth a man from the evil acct-.
dents of Fortune.
| Populus being found in the firſt houſe, if
* > a queſtion be propounded concerning that
* > houſe, ſheweth a m:anlite, of a middle ape,
x >= butinconſtant, with divers ſickneſles, and
* + various ſucceſſes of fortune , ſigni-es a man
of a midele ſtature, a grols body, well ſet
in his members, perhaps ſome mold or mark about his
lefteye. But if a queſtion ſhall be propounded cone
cerning the Figure of a man, and to this Figure if there
be joyned any thing of the fi; ures of Zaze/or Rubens,
it ſheweth the man to be monltrouſly deformed, and
that deformity he ſignifies ro proceed from his birch ;
but if in the fifch houſe, it he be encompaſled with ma-
 levoleht AſpeRs, then that monſtrouſneſs i; to

- come.

In the ſecond houſe, ſhe ſheweth a mean ſubſtance,
and that to be gotten with great difficulty 3 maketh a
man alſo always fenftble of laborious toyl, things ſto-
len arenever regained,what is lo{t ſhall never be wholly
recovered,

Ilo Tpe Temple of Wiſdome. - Book. 5.
recovered , that which is hidden ſhall not be found.
But if che Queſtion be of a Thief, it declarcth bimnot
yet to be fled away, but to lyec lurking within the
City.

In the third houſe, ſhe raiſeth few friends, either of
brethren or kindred, fereſheweth journeys, but with
labour and trouble, notwithſtanding ſome profit may
acrue by them ; denotes a man unſtable in bis faith ,
and cauſeth a man often to be deceived by his com-
panions. h

In the fourth houſe, it ſignifies a father to be fickly,
and of a laborious life, and his earthly poſſeſſions and
inheritances to be taken away, ſheweth profit robe
pained by Water, ſheweth treaſure not to be hid, or
if chere be any hidden, that it ſhall not be found ; a pa-
trimony to be preſerved with great labour.

In the fifth houſe he ſheweth no honeſt meſſages,
but either maketh the meſſengers to be Porters or
publike Carriers, he divulgeth falſe rumours, which
notwithſtanding have thelikeneſs of ſome truth , and
ſeem to have their original from truth, which is not
reported as itis done; it (ign-fiesa woman to be bar-
ren,and cauſeth ſuch as are great with child to be abor-
tives, appointeth an inglorious funeral}, and ill report
* after death. :

In the ſixth houſe, ic ſheweth cold ſickneſſes, and
chiefly afliteth the lower parts of the body. A Phy-
fitian 1s declared to be careleſs and negligent in admini-
ring Phyſick to tbe ſick, and lignifies thoſe that are
aff.tcd with ſickneſs to be in danger of death, and
ſcarcely recover atall; it notes the deceitfulneſs of ſer-
yants, and detriment of Cattel.

In the ſeventh houſe, ir ſheweth a wife to be fair
and pleaſa'nit, but one that fhall be ſolicited with the

loye

er-

fair
rhe
ove

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdeme. 24.5
love of many Woers , ſignifies her love to be feigned
and diſſembling, maketh weak and impotent adyerla-
ries ſoon to deſert proſecuting. wt

In the eighth houſe, it denotes ſudden death wirh=
out any long ſickneſs or anguiſh. and oftentimes Ihew-
eth death by the Water, giveth no inheritance, poflſe\-
ſion or legacie from the dead ; and if any be, they ſhall
be loſt by ſome intervening contention , of other diſ-
cord, ke fignities the dowry of a wife to be little or
none.

Inthe ninth houſe, heweth falſe dreams, perſonates
a man of rude wit, without any learning or ſcience; in
Religion he ſignifies inferiour Offices, ſuch as ſerve ei-
ther to cleanſe the Church, or ring the Bells, and he

_ fignifies a man lirtle curious or ſtudious in Religion ,

neither one that is troubled wich muck conſcience.

In the tenth houſe, he Fgnifies ſuch Kings and Prin-
ces, as for the moſt -part are expulſed our of their Rule
and Dominions, or either (vffer continual trouble and
detriment about them ; he ſignifies Offices and Magi-
[tracie,which appertain ro matters concerning the Wa=»
ters, aS about the Navy, Bridges, Fiſhings, Shores,
Medows, 2nd things of che like ſort ; maketh Judges
ro be variable and ſlow in expediting of Cauſes before
them, declareth the mother to be ſickly , and of a
ſhorr life.

In theeleventh houſe, he giveth few friends , and
many flatterers ; and with Princes giveth neither fa-
vour nor fortune.

In the ewelfth houſe, he ſheweth weak and ignoble
enemies, declareth one in priſon not to be delivered ,
diſcovereth dangers in Waters, and waterie places,

Acqui-

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2+
eAcquiſitso found in the ficlt houſe, giverh
* * alonglife and proſperous old age ; ſipnifies

* amanof a middle ſtature, and a great head,
* * acountenance very well to be diſtinguiſhed or

* known, along noſe much beard, hair curling,

and fair eys, free of his meat and drink, butin
all things elſe ſparing and not liberal.

In the ſecond houſe, he ſignifies great riches, appre-
hendeth all theeves, and cauſeth whatſoever is loſt to
be recovered.

In the third houſe, many brethren, and they to be
wealthy , many: gainful journeys, ſignifies a man of
good faith.

In the fourth is ſignified a patrimony of much riches,
many poſſeſſions of copious f;uits 5 be fignitieth that
ereaſure hid in any place ſha.l be found, and ſheweth a
Father to be rich, bur covetous.

In the fifth houſe, it ſignifies many children of both
Sexes, bat more Males then Females, ſheweth a woman
ro be with child, and that ſhe ſhall be delivered with-
out danger : and if a queſtion be propounded concern-
wg any Sex, he ſignifies it to be maſculine ; increaſeth
painful, profitable Embaflages, and Meſſages, but ex-
rendeth fame not far after death, yet cauſeth a man to
be inherited of his own, and ſignifieth rumours to be
rrue.

In the fixth houſe he ſignifies many and grievous
ſickneſles, and long to continue, maketh the ſick to be
In danger of death, and often to dic, yet he declareth
a Phyſitian to belcarned and honeſt, giveth many ſer-
_ and chatrel, and gains to be acquired from
them
Inthe ſeventh houſe, he fipnifiesa wife tobe rich,
but ether a woman, or a woman of a well grown age ;
ſ1gat-

Book 2.'. The Temple of Wiſdome. I13

ſignifies ſuits and contentions $0 be great and durable,
and that love and wedlock ſhall be effeRed by lot.

In the eighth houſe, if a man be enquired after , ic
ſheweth him to be dead, fignifieth the kinde of death
to be ſhort, and ſickneſs to laſt bur a few days, diſco-
vereth very profitable legacies and inheritances, and
fignificth a wife to have a rich dowry. ©

In the ninth houſe, he ſignifies long and profitable
journeys, (heweth if any one be abſenc he ſhall ſoon re-
rurn, cauſeth gain co be obtained from Religious and
Eccleſiaſtical perſons or Scholers, and ſignifies a man
of a true and perfect Science.

In the tenth houſe, he maketh Princes to enlarge
their Dominions, a ] udpe favourable, but one that
muſt be continually preſented with gifts, cauſeth Offi-
ces and Mapiftracie to be very gainful, ſignifieth a Mo-
ther rich and happy. _

In theeleventh houſe, multiplieth friends,and bring-
eth profit from them, and encreaſeth favour with
Princes. .

In the twelfch houſe he ſignifieth a man ſhall bave
many powerful or potent enemies, reduceth or bring-
ech home ſervants fled away, and Cattel ſtrayed ;
and ſignifies he thar is in priſon ſhall not be deli-
vered. |

| _ Lerina in the firſt hoale , fionifies lon
* lifewith proſperity , and much joy and glad-
* + neſs, and cauſeth a-man to out-live and be
* * more victorious then all his brethren, ſigni-
*X > fie« a man of a tall ſtacure, fair members, a
broad fore-head , having. great and broad
teeth, and that hath a face comely and well cc-
loured. |
in the ſecond houte it 31ifies riches, and many

Qiatits

T14 The Temple ofWiſdome. Book 2.

gains, but great expences and various mutations of
ones Rare and condition, theft and any thing loſt is re-
' Covered and returned ; bat if che Queſtion be of a
Thief, it declareth him to be fled away.

in the third houſe ir ſheweth brethren to be of a
good convertation, bur of ſhort life, journeys pleaſane
and comfortable, men of great credit and faith.

In the fourch he ſignifies happy parrimonies and poſ-
ſeſſions, a father co be Noble, and hononred with the
dignity of ſome Princely Office, ſheweth treaſure'to
be in the place enquired after, but of leſs worth and ya-
lue then is ſuppoſed, and cauſeth it to be found.

inthe fifth houte, he giveth obedient children, en-
dued with gcod. manners, and in whom ſhall be had
the greatelt joy and comfort of old ape, fignifies > wo- '
man with chi!d co bring forth a-daughrer, ſheweth ho-
nou: able Embaſſage-, and declares rumours and news
eo be altog« ther rroe, and leaveth a good and ample
fame after death

In the ſixth houſe it ſheweth the ſick ſhall recover,
genoteth good ict vants, goodand profitable cartel and
animals. |

In the ſeventh houſe , he piverh a wife fair, beauti-
ful and young, overcometh ſtrifes and contentions, and
rendereth the ſucceſs thereof to be love.

In the eighth houſe it giveth Legacies and Poſlefſj-
ons, and a commendable portion with a wife; if'a
Queltion be propoſed concerning the condition of any
man, itſignifies him to be alive, and declares an honeſt,
quiet, and meek kind ofdeath,

In the ninth houſe it ſignifies very few journeys,and
thoſe that do apply themſclves to travel, their journeys
either are about the Meſſages and Embaſſaze: of Prin-
ces, or Pitgrimagesto fulfil holy vou $: ſheweth a man

ro

BOOK 2. The Temple of Wiſe dome. 115 |

tobeof a good Religion ,of indifferent knowledge,and
who eafily apprehendeth all things wich natural in-
genuiky. |
In the tenth houſe, it raiſeth Kings and Princes to

honour and great renown, maketh chem famous by
maintaining peace during their times, ſignifies Judges
to be cruel and ſevere ; honeft Offices and Magiltracie,
ſignifies thoſe things which are exerciſed either abour
Ecclefiaſtical affairs, Schools, or the adminiſtration of
juſtice, ſheweth a mother if ſhe be a widow, that ſhe
ſhall be married again.
| In the eleventh houſe,it increaſeth favour with Prin-
ces, and mulciplies friendse
| And in the twelfth houſe, it giveth the victory over

. Enemies, cauſeth good ſervants and families, deli-
vereth from impriſonment, and preſerveth from future

evils.
. | Pacla in the firſt houſe ſignifies a perſon
Xx of a ſhort life, weak conſtitution of body,
* + middleſtatare, little fat, but fair, effeminate,
1 Xx andluxurious, and one who will incur many
*X troubles and dangers in his life time, for the
b love of women.
3 In the ſecond houlc, it neither encreaſeth riches,nor
diminiſheth poverty, ſignifies a Thief not to be depar-
. red from the City, and a thing (tolen to be alienated
F and made away - it a 2uettion be ot treaſure ina place,
itisreſolved there is none. |
4 In the third houſe it ſignifies more ſiflers then bre-
be thren, and encreaſeth and continueth good fiiend(hip
4 and amicy amongſt them , denortech journeys to be
'S pleaſant and joyous, and men of good conver-
_ ſations. _
In the fourth houſe it ſignities a very {mall patri-

mony,

—

TIC | : mee
mony, and a father not to live long, but maketh the
fields fertile with good fruits,

In the fifth houſe a woman with child js Gignified to
bring forth a woman-child, denotes'no Embaſſapes ,
cauterh much commerce with women, ahd ſome Office
to be obtained from them. oo

In the ſixth honſe ſignifies much weakneſs of the
fick, bur cauſeth the fick ſhortly to recover, and ſhew-
eth a Phyſician to be unlearned and anskilful , but one
who is mnch elteemed of in the opinion of the vulgar
people, giveth good ſervants, band- maids, cartel and
animals. | |

In the ſeventh houſe it giveth a wife fair, beautiful -
and pleafant, leading a peaceable and quiet converſa-
tion with her husband, notwithſtanding one that ſhall
born much with luſt, and be covered and luſted after
of many men, denoteth no ſuits or controverſies;which
ſhall depend before a Judge, but ſome jarrs and wran-
flings with the common people one amongſt another,
which ſhall be eaſily diffolred and ended.

In theeighth houſe, if a Queſtion be of one -repu-
ted to be dead, ic dzelareth bio ro be alive, giverh a
ſmall portion with a wife, but that which contenteth
her husband. | :

In che niath houſe it ſignifies very few journeys,
ſheweth a manot god Religion, indifferent skill or
knowledge in Sciences, unleſs happily Muſick, as well
yocal as inſtrumenral.

In the tench houſe ic ſignifies Princes not to be very
potent, bur notwithſtanding they $hall poycrg peacc-
ably within their Dominions, and sha1l be beloved of
their Ne1ghbours and Subjects, it cauſeth them to be
affable, m:1de, and courteous ard that they shall always
exciciſe theaitelyes with continual muth, plays, and
1 : [UNC

_ _Y RY nm. 5p” + bt : ; — Y- "2
4 '& C#7 eo (/ AaAONne. 5oOk >. ES.

- S [| FL V4 [ *"* 4 3L A007E, _ 7
s 8 b S

huncings, maketh Judges to be good, godly, and mer-

ciful, giveth Offices about Women, or eſpecially from
Noble womer, |

In the eleveath bouſe he giveth many friends, and
encreaſeth fayour with women. -

In the twelfth houſe he ſignifies few enemies; bne
contention with women, and delivereth prifone*' out
of priſon through the interceſſion of friends. x

Amiſſio in tbe firſt houſe fignifies the ſick

Xx not tolive.long, and ſheweth a ſhort life ;
*x > Aſigoifies a man of diſproportioned members
o of his body, and one of a wicked life and
Xx + converſation, and who is marked with'ſome
notorious and remarkable defect in ſome part

of his body, as either lame , or- maimed, or che

like. |

In the ſecond houſe confumeth all ſabſtance, and

| maketh one to undergo the burden of miſerable

verty ; neither. Thief nor the thing ſtolen ſhall be
found, _ treaſure nor+to be in the place ſougtit
after, and tobe ſought for with loſs anddamnge.

In the third houſe it ſignifics death of brethren, or
the want of them, and of kindred and friends, fignifiech
no , journeys, and cauſeth one co be deceived of
many.

In che fourth houſe it Agnifies the utter deſtruRion
of ones patrimony, ſheweth the father co be poor, and
the ſon 11 die.

Tatbe ,ifch boufe ſheweth death of children, and
Aids a man with divgrs ſorrows, ſignifies a woman
aot to be withchilde, or elſe to have miſcarried , raiſ-
cth no fame or honours , and: diſperſeth falſe ru-
mours.

Jn the ſixth houſe it ſignifies the fick to be recovered
Ii | or -

CO EEE

OI - HO Are rey

© ated

5 -
Apps mers F = WE as.» ME. eee ee ee ee IIOEY
Pat »Þ - PO » $28" dw vos — — — —_— , ho, + -
* = þs Fa q - . 70 $
a

. or that he ſhail icon recover, but cauſeth loſs and da-
- mage by ſervants and Cattel.

o —_—_ —_—_ — ———__——— ”
£ 'K | ns - Mt a re RE EEE Ee
O ones ih ng .
i Cys Pon

— 7 RAI DA”
os”. i
n

—— _—

6 ects N C

| 3 -

oF” 'BE* Se ON IF ITICOPE. So

In the ſeventh houſe, givrerh an adulcerons wife, and
contrarying her husband with continual contention ,
neverthelcſs ſhe (hall not live long, and it cauſeth con-

 tentionst0 be ended.

Ja the eighth houſe, ſignifies a man to be dead, con-
ſumerh the dowry of a wife, beſtoweth or ſendeth ao
tnhericances or legacies.

In the ninth houſe ic 'caufeth no journeys, but ſuch
as ſhall be compaſſed with very great loſs, ſignifies
men2o be inconftant in Religion, and often changing
their opinion from one Se& to anather, and altogether
ignorant of fearning. q

Tn the tenth houſe. rendreth Princes to be moſt un-
fortunate, and ſheweth that they ſhall be compelled to
end their lives in exile and baniſhment ; Judges to be
wicked , and ſignifies Offices and Magiſtracie to be
damageible, and ſheweth the death of a mother.

In the eleventh houſe, ir ſignifies few friends, and
cauſeth them to be eaſily loſt, and turned to become
enemies, and cauſeth a man to have no favour with his
Frince, unleis it be hurcful ro him.

In the twelfth houſe, deſtroyeth all enemies, detain-
eth long in priſon, bur preſerveth from dangers.

Conjunitio in the firſt houſe maketh a pro-
ſperous life, and ſignifies a man of a middle

* ſtature. not lean nor fat, long face, plain hair,

R a little beard, long fingers and thighs, liberal,
*X * amiable, and a friend ro many people

: . In the ſecond houſe it doth not fignifie any
riches to be gotten, but preſervech a man ſecure and
free from the calamities of poverty, dete&eth both the
Thief and the thing ſtolen, and acquireth hidden trea-

ſure, In

11S
n-
'0-

air,
ral,

10)
and
the
rea-

Book 2. The Temple Wiſdome. I 19

In the third houſe he giveth various journeys with
yarious ſucceſs, and fignifieth good faith and con-
Rancie.

In the fourth houſe it ſheweth a mean patrimony,
cauſeth a father to be honeſt, of good report, and. of
good underſtanding.

In the fifch houſe he giveth children of ſubtle inge- -
nuity and wit, ſheweth a woman pregnant to have &
male-child, and raiſeth men to honours by their own
meer proper wit and ingenuity, and diſperſech their
fame and credit far abroad, and alſo ſignifies news and
rumours t@ be true.

In the ſixth houſe it Ggnifies fickneſſes to be tedious
and of long continuance , but foreſheweth the Phyſi-
tian to be learned and well-experienced, and ſheweth
ſervants to be faithful and blameleſs , and animals pro-
fitable. |

In the ſeventh houſe hegiveth a wife very obedient,
conformable, and dutifulto her husband, andoneof a
good wit and ingenuity ; cauſeth difficult ſuirs and
controverſies, and crafty, ſubtle, and malicious ad-
verſaries. |

In the eighth houſe, him of whom 4 Queſtion is
propounded, he ſignifies him co be dead, and pretend-
eth ſome gain to be acquired by his death, ſheweth a
wife ſhall not be very rich.

In the ninth houſe he giveth a few journeys,but long
and tedious, and ſheweth one that is abſent ſhall after
a long ſeaſon return. In this houſe increaſeth divers
Arts, Sciences, and Myſteries of Religion, and giveth
a quick, perſpicuous, and efficacious wit.

In the tenth. houſe it makech Princes liberal, affable,
and benevolent, and who are much deligttted and affe-
Qed with divers Sciences, and ſecret Arts , and with
It 2 men

120 The Temple of Wiſdome. | Book - bs

mea learned therein ; cauſeth Judges co be juſt , and
ſuch who with a piercing and ſubtle ſpeculation, do ca-
fily diſcern cauſes in controverſie before them, enlar-
gech Offices which are concerned about Letters, Lear-
ring, ſound Dodtrines afd Sciences; and fignifies a
mother to be honeſt, of good ingenuity and'wirt, and

| alſo one of a proſperous life.

In the eleventh houſe ic ſignifies great increaſe of
friends, and very much procureth the grace and fa-
your of Princes, powerful and Noble men.

In the twelfth houſe it ſignifies wary and quick-
witted enemies, cauſeth ſuch as are 1a priſon to remain
andcontinue fo very long.and cauſeth a man to eſchew
very many dangers in his life.

Albus 1n the firſt houſe ſignifies a life vexed

* * with continual ſickneſs and grievous diſcales,

- * Ffgnifiesa man of a ſhort ature, broad breſt,

Xx and groſs arms, having curled;or criſped hair,

x * oneof a broad full mouth, a great talker and

babler, piven much to uſe vain and unprofita-

ble diſcourſe, but one that is merry, joyous, and jo-
cond, and much pleaſing to men.

In the ſecond houſe it enlargeth and augmenteth
ſubſtance gained by ſports, plays, vile and baſe arts and
exciſes, but ſuch as are pleaſing and delightful, as by

plays, paſtimes, dancings and laughters: he diſcover-

eth both the thicf, and the theft or thing Rolen , and
hideth and conccaleth treaſure.

In the chird houſe it ſignifies very few brethren, gt-
veth not many, but tedious and weariſome journeys,
and ſignifies all deccivers,

In the fourth houſe he ſheweth very ſmall or no px
trimony, and the father to be a man much known , but
declareth him to be a man of ſome baſe 3nd inferious
othce and 1mployment. In

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome.

In the fifth houſe, giveth no children, or if any, thaCl
they ſhall ſoon die, declareth a woman to be fervile,
and cauſerh ſuch as are with young to mifcarry, or clſe
ro bring forth Monſters, denoteth all rumonrs to be
falſe, and raifeth ro no honour.

* In the fixth houſe, it cauferh very tedious fickneffes
and diſeaſes, diſcovereth the fraud, deceit,and wicked-
nefs of Servants, and fignifies difeafes and infirmities of
Cattel to be mortal, and maketh the Phy fician to be
ſuſpeRed of the fick Patient.

In the ſeventh houfe giveth a barren wite,. hut one
that is fair and beautiful, few ſaits or comroverfies,buar
fuch as ſhall be of very fong continnance.

In the eighth houſe, if a queſtion be proponnded of
any one, it ſhews the party to bedead, giveth letle
portion or dowry with a wife, and caufcth that tobe
much ſtrivedand contended for,

In the ninth hoafe it denoteth ſome jonrneys to be
accompliſhed bur with mean profic, hindererh him
rhat is abfent, and fignifies he ſhalt nor return, and de-
clareth a man to de ſuperſtitious in Retigion,and given
ro falſe and deceitfnt Sciences.

In the tenth houfe ic cauſerch Princes and ]adpes to
be malevotenr, ſhewetrh vile and bafe Officesand Ma-
giltractes, figniftes a Mother to be a Whore , or one
mnch fuſpected for adultery.

In the eleventh houfe tc maketh diffembling and
falſe friends, caafeth tove and favonr ro be ineon tant.

In the twelfth hoafe, denoteth vile, mmpotent, and
roſtical enemics, ſhewech fuch as are mprifon ſhalt noe
eſcape, and fignifics a great many. and xariows troubles
and difcommodtics of qaes lifes

I2E

LEI: Pary

The Temple of Wiſdeme. Book 2.

Pwer in the firſt houte giveth an indiffercne

* long life, but laborious: raiſeth men to

* great fame through military dignity, figni-

+ * fiesaperſon of a ftrong body, ruddy comple-
= Qion, a fair countenance and black hair.

Io the ſecond houſe it encreaſcth ſubſtance
obtained by other mens goods, by plunderings, rapines,
confiſcations, military Laws, and ſuch like ; he con-
cealeth both the thief and the thing ſtolen, but diſco-
vereth no treaſure.

In the third houſe it raiſeth a man to honour above
his brethren, and to be feared of them, fignifies jour-
# to be dangerous, and denoteth perions of good
credit,

Tn the fourth houſe it fgnifies dubious inheritances
an: pofleſſions, and ſignifies a. father to attain to his
ſub(t:nce and eſtate through violence.

In the fifth houſe itſheweth good children, and ſuch
as ſhall attain to honours and dignities, he ſignifies a
woman to have a male-child, and ſheweth honours to
> acquired by Military diſcipline, and great and fall

ame.

-In the ſixth houſe it cauſeth violent diſeales and in-
firmitics, as wounds, falls, contuſions, bruiſes, but ca-
ſily delivereth the ſick, and ſheweth the Phyfitian and

| Chirurgeon to be good ; denoteth ſervants and ani-
mals to be good, ftrong and profitable.

In the ſeventh houſe it cauſeth a wife to be a Virago,
of a ſtout ſpirit, of good fidelity and one that loveth to
bear the Rule and Government of a houſe ; maketh
cruel ſtrifes and contentions, and ſuch adverſaries as
ſhall ſcarcely be reſtrained by juſtice.

In the eighth houſe, ſheweth him that is ſuppoſed to
be dead, to live, ſignifieth che kind of death not to be.

'_ pain-

Book 2. The Temple of 1 wife dome.

painful, or laborious, but co proceed from ſome hot
humour, or by iron, or the ſword, or from ſome other
cauſe of the like kind, ſbeweth a man to bave no lega-
cies or other inheritance.

In the ninth houſe ic (heweth journeys not to be
undergone without peril and danger of life, yet never.
theleſs declareth them to be accompliſhed proſperouſly
and ſafely ; ſheweth perſons of liccle Religion, and
ufing lictle' conſcience, notwithſtanding piveth the
knowledge of Natural Philoſophy and Phyſick and
many other liberal and excellent Arts.

In the tenth houſe ſignifies Princes to be powerful,
plorious, and famous in Warlike atchievements, bur
they ſhall be unconſtant and unchangeable, by reaſon
of the mutable and various ſucceſſes of victory. In
this houſe he cauſeth Judges to be cruel and unmerci-
ful, increaſeth offices ig Warlike affairs, ſignifies Ma-
giſtracy to be exerciſed by fire and ſword, hurteth a
mother, and endangereth her life.

In the eleventh houſe jt ſheweth noble friends, and
noble men, and ſuch as ſhall much frequent the Courts
of Princes, and follow after Warfare, and cauſeth mg-
ny to adhere to cruel men; nevertheleſs he cauſeth
much eſteem with Prince; , but their favour is to be
ſuſpeRed. |

In the twelfth houſe he cauſeth Enemies to be cruel
and pernicious, thoſe that are in priſon ſhall eſcape,
and maketh them to eſchew many dangers.

Raveus in the firſt houſe, ſignifies a ſhort

* > life, and anevil end, ſignifies a man to be fil-
* thy, unprofitable, and of an evil, cruel, and
* malicious countenance, having ſome remar-
x kable and notable ſign or ſcar in ſome part
of his body.

123

Eg
*

Ii, In

124 The Temple of Wif, dome. Book 2.

In the ſecond hon'e it ſignifies poverty, and maketh
thieves and robbers, and ſuch perſons as ſhall acquire
and ſcek after their maintenance and livelyhoods by
ufing faiſe, wicked, and evil, and unlawful Arts, pre-
ſerveth theeves, and concealeth thett, and ſignifies no
treaſure tobe hid nor found, ”

In the third houſe it renders brethren and kinſmen
to be full of hatred, and odious one to another , and
ſheweth chem to be of evil manners and ill diſpoſition,
cauferh journeys to be very dangerous, and foreſhew-
cth falſe faith and treachery. |
+ In the fourth houſe he deſtroyeth and conſumeth
patrimonies, and diſperſeth and waſteth inheritances,
cauſeth chem to come to nothing, {deſtroyeth the fruits
of the field by tempeſtuous ſeaſons, and malignancie of
the earth, and bringeth the father to a quick and ſud-
den death, 7 8

In the fifth houſe, giveth many children , but either
they (hall be wicked and diſobedient, or elſe ſhall af-
fli& their parents with grief diſprace and infamy.

In the ſixth houſe it cauſeth mortal wounds, fickneſ(-

| , ſes and diſcaſes, him that is ſick ſhall diey the Pbyſi-

tian ſhall err, ſervants prove falſe and treacherous,
cattel and beaſts ſhall produce hurt and danger.

In the ſeventh houſe it ſignifies a wife to be infa-
mous, publikely adulterate, and contentious; deceit-
ful and treacherous adverſarics, who ſhall endeavour
to overcome yon by crafty and ſubtle wilds and cir-
cumventions of the Law-

In the eighth houſe it ſignifies a violent death to be
1nflied by the execution of publike ]uſtice, and fignt-
fies if any one be enquired after, that he is certainly
dead , and a wife to have no portion or dowry.

In the ninth heuſe ſheweth journeys to be ound
anh=

-

- -- — ”

Book 2. The Tempie of Wiſdome. 125
dangerous, and that a man ſhall be in danger either to
be ſpoiled by theeves and robbers, or to be taken b
phunderers and robbers ; declarech men to be of m
wicked opinions in Relizion, and of evil faith, and ſuch
as will often eaſily be induced to deny and go from
their faith for every ſmall occgſion ; denoteth ſciences
to be falſe and deceitful, and the profeffors thereof to
be ignorant.

In the tenth houſe it ſignifies Princes to be cruel
and tyrannical, and that their power ſhall come to an
evilend, as that eitherthey ſhall be cruelly murthered
and deſtroyed by their own SubjeRs, or that they ſhall
be taken captive by their Conquerours, and put to an
Ignominious and cruel death , or ſhall miſerably end
their lives in hard impriſonment ; Sgnifies Judges and
Officers to be falſe, theeviſh,and ſuch as ſhall be addi-
ed to uſury, ſheweth thar a mother ſhall ſoon die, and
denoteth her to be blemiſht with an evil fame and re--
port. |
In the eleventh houſe, ir giveth no true, nor any
faithful friends ; ſheweth men co be of wicked lives an
converſations, and canfeth a man tobe rejetedand caſt
out from all ſociety and converſation with good and
noble perſons. :

In the ewelfth houſe, it maketh enemies to be cruel
and traiterous, of whom we ought circumſpeRly to be-
ware ; ſignifies ſuch as are in priſon ſhall come to an
evil end, and ſheweth a great many inconveniencies
and miſchiefs to happen in a mans life.

Carcer in the firſt houſe being poſited, g-

* veth aſhort life, ſignifies men to be moſt wic-
* + Kked,ofa filthy,cruel unclean figure and ſhape,
* X and ſuch as are bated and deſpiſed of all men.

X In the ſecond houſe, it cauſeth moſt _
an

126 The Temple Wiſdome. Book 2:

and miſerable poverty , liznities both the thief and
thing ſtolen to be taken and regained, and ſheweth no
treaſure to be hid. |

In the third houſe it ſignifieth hatred and difſention
amongſt brethren, evil journeys, moſt wicked faith and
converſation.

In the fourth houſe it ſignificth a man to have no
ff offleſſions or inheritances, a father to be molt wicked,
| þ | and to die a ſuddenand evil death.

In the fifth houſe it giveth many children, ſheweth
| a woman not to be with child, and provoketh thoſe
HL thar are with child to miſcarry of their own confenc,

f or ſlayeth che child, fignifiech-no honours, and diſper-

i ſeth moſt falſe rumours.

In the ſixth houſe it cauſeth the diſeaſed to undergo
Jong ſickneſs, ſignifieth ſervants to be wicked, rather
unprofitable, Phy fitians ignorant.

In the ſeventh houſe it ſheweth the wife ſhall be
bated of her husband, and ſignifies ſuits and contenti-
ons to be ill ended and determined.

In the eighth houſe ir declarech the kind of death
to be by ſome fall, miſchance, or falſe accuſation, or
that men ſhall be condemned in priſon, or in publike
judgment,and fheweth them to be put to death, or that
they ſhall often lay violent and deadly hands upon
themſelves, denieth a wife to have any portion and lc-
gacies.

. Jn the ninth houſe, ic ſheweth he that is abſent ſhall
not return , and ſignifieth ſome evil ſhall happen to
him in his journey, it denotes perſons of no Religion, 2
wicked conſcience and ignorant of learning.

In the tenth houſe it cauſeth Princes to be very wic-
ked, and wretchedly to periſh, becauſe when they are
eſtabliſhed in their power, they will wholly addi

theme-

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. © 127
themſelves to every voluptuous luit, pleaſure, and ty-
ranny, cauſeth Judges to be unjuſt and falſe, declarech
the mother to be cruel, and infamous, and noted with
the badge of adultery, giveth no offices nor Magiſtra-
cies, but ſuch as are gotten and obtained either by ly-
ing, or through thefc, and baſe and cruel robbery.

In the eleventh houſe, it caufeth no friends, nor love,
nor farour amonglt men.

In the twelfth houſe it raiſeth enemies, detaineth in
priſon, and infliteth many evils.

Triſtusa in the firſt houſe doth not abbre-

X* viatelife, buc afliteth ir with many moleſts-
*% * tions, fignifiecha perſon of good manners and
* > Carriage, bur one that is ſolitary, and ſlow in
*X > -ailhis buſineſs and occaſions, one thar ts ſo-

litary, melancholy , ſeldome laughing, but
moſt covetous after all things.

In the ſecond houſe, it giveth much ſubſtance and
riches, but they that have chem ſhall not enjoy them,
but shall rather hide them , and s$hall fcarce afford to
themlelves food or ſuſtenance therefrom ; treaſureshall
not be found, neither shall che thief nor the thefg.

In the third houle ſignifieth a man to have few bre-
thcen, but sheweth that he hall out-live them all, cau-
ſeth unhappy journeys, but giveth good faith.

In the fourth houſe it confumeth and deſtroyeth
fields, pofſeiiions and inhericances, cauſeth a father to
be o'd and of long life, and a very covetous hoorder
up of money. |

In the fifth houſe, it fignifiesno children , or that
they shall foon die, sheweth a woman with child co
bring forth a woman-child,givech no fame nor honors.
In the ſixth houſe it |&heweth that the ſick shall die,

ſervants shall be good, bur ſNothful, aud fignifics cattel

Shall bc ofa {mail price or value, Ja

128 Fl The Temple of 'Wiſdome. | Book.

inthe ſeventh bvuſe it ſheweth that the wife ſhall
foon die, and declareth ſuits and contentions to be ve-
hurtful, and determining againſt you.

In the eighth houſe it ſignifies the kind ofdeath to
be with long and grievous ſickneſs, and much dolor
and pain, giveth legacies and an inheritance, and in-
doweth a wife with a portion. .

In the ninth houſe, it ſheweth thathe that is abſent
hall periſh in bis journey , or ſiznifies that ſome evil
miſchance ſhall happen unto him , cauferh iourneys to
be very unfortunate, but declareth men to be of good
Religioy, devour, and profound Scholers. |

In the renth houſe it ſipnifies Princes to be ſevere,
but very good lovers of juſtice, it cauſeth juſt Judges,
bur ſuch as are redious and flow in determining of cau-
fes, bringerh a Mother to a good old ape, with intepri-

ty and honeſty of life, but mixt with divers difcommo.
dities and misfortunes ; it raiſeth ro great Offices, but
they ſhall not be long enjoyed nor perſevered in, it fig-
'ifies fuch offices as do appertain to the water or tillage,
3nd manurinp of the Earth, or fuch as are to beim-
ployed, about matters of Religion and Wiſdome.

ts the cleventh houſe it ſignifies ſcarcity of friends,
andthe death of fricnds, and alſo ſignifies little love or
favour. |

In rhe twelfth houſe it fheweth no enemies, wret-
chedly condemneth the impriſoned, and cauferh many
diſcommodxics and diſprofits to happen in ones tife.

Caprt Draconsy in the firſt houſe augment»
+5 Xx <Cthlife and fortune.

* In the ſecond houſe he increaferh riches

Xx andilubſtance, faveth and conceakth a thict,

*X and ſignifies treafure to behid.

| in che third houſe it giveth many bre-
| ehren,

A

_ —_
- 4 XY a RY Y V9 =
"_— l - = .
I os OI IP es. "
—— t——_
_ —_— ——_——
RTE 47. 74
G4 CR er rea. f __— 4 0s _
: a A " PETR a a ,
* T__ vi _ a hk, < 6 < —S p
% * . ” R os

” hs —_ -
=! I as
OI OH as ner — —
o I _ cg
Inns 4.0 eyes =_
a w- - !. by way 44th I _ _
%
, : wu . - _
: i.
Geo 47 a
a + ONS 065--. be 0e—o
_-

=. '« 4 a
—_ : - « "
— oy” Re aggey
—_ = d.

ok 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 29

thren ; cauſeth journeys, Finſmen, and good faith and
credit.

In the fourth houſe he giveth wealthy inheritances,
cauſeth the father to attain to old ape. 7

In the fifth houle it givech many cbildren; ſignifies
women With child to bring forth women-children,and
often times. to have twins, it ſheweth great honours
and fame, and ſignifies news and rumours co be true.

In the ſixeh houſe it increaſeth ſicknefles and difea-
ſes, ſignifies the Phyſician to be learned, and giveth
very many ſervants and chatcel. |

In the ſeventh houſe he fignifieth a man hall have
many wives, multiplies and ſtirrcth up many adverſa-
ries and ſuits.

In the eighth houſe he ſheweth the dearth co be cer-
tain, increaſcth legacies and inheritances, and giverh
good portion with a wife, |

In the niath houſe ic ſignifies many journeys, many
Sciences, and good Religion, and ſheweth that thoſe
that are abſent ſhall ſoon recurn.

In the tenth houſe he fagnities glorious Princes, great
and magnihcent Judges, great Offices, and painful Ma-
giltracie. .

In the eleventh houſe he cauſeth many friends, and
to be beloved of all men, |

In the twelfth houſe ir (ignifieth men to have many
enemies, and many women, detaigeth the impriſoned,
and evilly puniſherh them. |

Canda Dracony 1n all and ſingular the re-

*X AfſpeRive houſes aforeſaid, giveth the contra-
*x ry judgment ro Capxt. And theſe are the
* natures of the figures of Geomancie, and
* * their judgments, in all and (ingular their houn-
ſes, upon all manner of queſtions to be pro-

| pounded,

130 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.

pounded, of or concernu:g ary matcer or thing what-
loever.

But now in the manner of proceeding to judgment,
this you are eſpecially -o obſerve, That whenſoever
any Queſtion ſhall be propoſed to you, which is con-
rained in any of the houſes, that you ſhall not onely
anſwer thereunto by the figure contained in ſuch a
houſe ; but beholding and diiigently 'reſp<ing all
the figures, and the Index it ſelf- in two honſes, you
ſhall ground the face of judgment. You ſhall there-
fore conſider the tigure of the thing queſited or en-
quired after , if be ſhall multip!y bimſelt by the other
places of the figure, that you may cauſe them alſoto
be partakers in your judgement : as for example, if a
queſtion ſhall be propounded of the ſecond houſe con-
cerning a Thief, and che figure of the ſecond houſe
ſhall be found in the ſixth, it declareth the Thief to be
ſome of ones own hovthold or ſervants : and after this
manner ſhall you judge and conſider of the reſt , for
this whole Arc confilteth in che Comminxtures of the
figurcs, and the natures thereof; which whoſoever
doth rightly praQice, he ſhall always declare moſt true
ard certain judgments upon every particular thing
whatſoeyer.

|
|

CHAP. XVI.
of the two Witneſſes.

A Fer that we bave ſufficiently treated of thetwelye
houſes and of the Figures, and of their tranſlation
and concord, and which be good, and which be bad.
Now reſteth it to ſpeak of the ewo Witneſſes and of
the Judge,now muſt you know that the two Witneſſes
be two figures drawn of the cwelve figures of the Zo-
diack, whereof the one muſt be placed in the Figure
formed on the right ſide, which is the thirteenth Fi-
gure, and is called the right Witneſs ; the other muſt
be placed on the lefc ſide of the Figure, and is the four.
ceenth Figure , named the lefe Witneſs: the right
Wieneſs is pat for the Querent, and Gpnifiethall that
which by the firſt Figure, and all the others which be
on the right ſide (that is to ſay, the ſecond, third ,
fourth, niath, and centh) is diſcerned, which is the
motive of the queſtion before propounded. The lefe
Witneſs containeth all chat which the figures do ſig
nifie which be on his fide, that isco ſay, the fifth,
fixth, ſeventh, eighth, eleventh, and twelfth, on fuch
wiſe that the right Wiecneſs ſignifieth the Querent ,
andthe left Witneſs the thing demanded, propounded,
and enquired, Beſides chis, the right Witneſs fignifierh
joy and happineſs of the thing lately paſſed to the
perſon which propounded the queſtion, and. the lefc
Witneſs ſigaifieth heavineſs, unquietneſs, and miſhap
of the thing to come, and put in queſtion ; you muſt
further note, that theſe two Witneſſes be no houles,
neither natural figures, but be only accidentals, taken
from the other to give a judgment certain on the que-
ſtion propounded. - CHAP.

_—.

CHAP. XVII.

of the Judge.

| T He Judpe, or the fifteenth figure is procreated of

the two Witneſſes to judge the end ofall the fig-
-nification of the demand, to know if it be good or bad.
The which Judge ought always of neceſfity to be c-
ven; forjficbe not, the figure ſhovld be falſe : and
ſo if the-Judge be good; the ſignification of the de-
mand ſhall cowe to a good end, andif he be ill, it ſhall
come to an ill end. If che Judge doagree with the firſt
and with che other fgur which be on the right ſide,
it Ggoifteth.good ro the Qnerenc, and ifthething de»
manded. And if he agree with thoſe on rhe left hand,
' which becealled the daughters, it ignifieth to the Que-
rent an ill iſſue of the thing demanded. And ſ@ muſt
yeſay and eſteem of the accord which he hath with
the right or left Witneſs, as ye ſhall ſee by the examplc
following, according to the doors in this Art, as well
Hebrews as Chaldcans, atid/'otbers which have treated
thereof. |

This Table following ſhall ſerve you to know
the Witneſſes and the Judge as well evenas
uneven, and the ſignification which they have,

and alſo for the better playing : the jucg-
- ment of each figure and deinagd propounded. '

BG go

Popwins

Even Wi itnefles -
|
[Judge
| *
«+ |. *
lite mean good
gold ds —_— . good - oO
Rh — —_—
bes DTT» TT ei
| —_ "> 7 {pod | gaed ET TE »
da tha woman wiepebindl SoirantddS i oo S067 mg
ſickneſs, fckneſs, 0 = x of aites, they 47 | health _ , Be
'P110n_ : , | <&-mE, Que. camn< out
Journey” Re good hy w warer flow EA
thing loſt found = ER 2, tornd_ ES |
Populus { x X * X > |
> - X + * & |
k * * *\| $1 . *
Even Witneſles «© « © * * X*
TRE Þ * | x
Judge | _ =
| * 2X | X
pO Es = ==
Iife x wed mean | |
= MSILEioGoGooo
wor h'p good mcan |
poſielſion NP ho prod 6 i! HEY |
+ wiſe oo ill , pg and oo]
woman with child © | +: ughrer ſon |
37 cnn" 1 on h:alth hcaleb 1
= SF ſoon E- me our is cur tor n: thing. |
« 11 ney PE mesn Ef : good by warer |
"2 | as 'G1nd Hor found

hiog ww:

Even Witneſſes

Ll Lo
Judge * X*
: . IM; En >
life a m-an | By _—_—
fubſtance — —
worſhip. ©: Wo. TN
polleflion mw =
2a witc wa © ye
woman with child © + daughter | daughter | |
feknefs ; periflous | health |
Hay [long © COmeGut
. nol -* - | moe -
"ing loft | found © oſt
Populus FX XK .X | & X* Ss
K = X * Xx X X
| * KF Km X X
Even Witneſſes *K X* | Xx * Mm &|
*K X X*
* * *

WE PRE «. Wok
life good OH Mmcan ph
ſubſtance —_— good
worſh'p_ — | == —} i
poſſeſſion ___ | mean good

\ wife good "TM I
woman with child © atrer the | daughter. |
ſickneſs © [| health afcer the r

priſon die therein die therein
journey” ” | mean | at. "—_
h'ng (ot _fourd part found

130.
% —S.

 Letuia

Uneven Witneſſes

_r

—

| XK
|] udge * ES
*
Iife | : TI% and lng | mean q
ſubRance © et me v3 Jo Fw =
worſhip. DO, go>d dig: ity | Mean EE |
pulkſhion | good 68 >" ARC ARTAK
2 wite ® good _ | San _ _ ; n
[W: Mai) with cha | lon daughter f
ficknefs ——_—_ | heair'1 after fer ihe 11 pe
Pr on 5; OT fare Gut 'cone out og
Eyes, | [aotirend..... {mr |
rhing 2 WM Op found © tound 5 in
Letna 2d | th -IT% 4 RX > =.
+ «SL * .$:
# «+ | * *. +
'Uneven Witneſſes | & *# + X* * XxX * K;
| He | Xx |
zudge XX X & + |
- SE s Bd | LEE...
Jife - (Me: nN ”_ | 11
(fu>Rance. Rn, | Mean E OE
| orthip mean | pord Tr ooonefr: |
FoRciTian | a. OO |
'4 wite PR &7 4.1
women with child | ve beer ; | according tO 5 |
Ic | ens { ateer ( h-- E: | dangerous |
Tin. =, [Ewveme 1 omen |
108 ill |

Penn
\ & Lornphoner hb . [-

Jets” np ate

part toung.

part four: d

Hook 2. be Templeof Finſdome.

Leritia

Jud ge

Lnzven Witneſſes

| fe

bit on. 4

+ wie

worw \, NN; DEI

aitcr the's - *

fick-e'\

prion
journev-

ching fot - -
Letitia

Tre; Witneſl.s

Judge

Ow | part ycitd-d

life __

[ nbſtance

worth: p

: 1calrh
"I

run 2way

Ml

__

J

poiletio

2 ryvi'c

woman with child

fickneſs

prif orifon on
journcy

Zbing lc wy - RY

 e—_ ——————

atrer the 4-

atte the ns

come ont

good by watcr Ss

Fs pare found

| <>——— —_——_

138

” OO —

"7 Temple of wiſ noe.

udge

- - EK; * X&
> *k «
Even Witoeſſes > * KX + 4
+ «5»
| X Xx
Judge * * 23;
| TEE | ms -
Munitance = EyY —T EE EO On PR Ly —
orſhip « 1. ea. "T HH =
ollelſion 7 © | oe _— EE —
wifc pF g nd —— | a]
ſeman wihabdd TT: [Tg ITED | gel =
nd TD | er — ||
pr: (0: ang N Gomes ts RE | dangerous AY;
” Si wr = O Tt ior nothing, Lt HE _ —
WOSITT 7 — goed by water | C : | p £0: d by water agg |
Via - | Dor toubd "1s } DO. found ! of obs 1
. 7 hon * | XR
- + : X > + <-
; : h ak ; i __
Even Witneſl : | eq * X|
| " ” Ry ; — 1 4
a * *

pair yieldeg

rOrrern

| {u,Und

T, "The Temple af Wiſande "Nt

_ —<—S —-»- —————————————

vs Net found

Via f % "+ | wo
| T X | *- FX)
« "x | =
Even Witneſſes * % * | Fn
| me X
Judge "I 3. X* ">
&. ———m
life mean . [7 Ez " :
.uDItance _ 1 McAN . - | BEN” ” =]
worth Dp T7 4100 gs ne, 1}. _ -=1
lpolictiio., || ana = - _ | gvod SG
2 wite RE 1 I AST
woman with ch: ad. 1 Afre the « = - 4 attcr the $—— = a
lickn<1> SL aaa: $9 in . |Ucarn_ ws
pron DS is | HOEVUL. - _ \ * Ge | nrroum == ==p=y
[journey __ es > gs fm = ="
thing loſt 1 tound _ part won”... 2 _
Vi, ” IE ICED :
>. * i} M$ %
Kincg «os F i = fe!
Even Witnefſ.'s ' % X j | $5: dhe:
| |
= * | Po. |
Judge |
| "Wa. "x
[life__ mean | men
ubſtance mean © meg p ,£
worſhip | mean —_ -
potietito:, ren "men Vw Bi
4 wi'c __ TIEN EM
woman w:thchild a ſon | atter ihe a So
ncknets hcaith Tbs | heal 4
Ir Jon come our {O51 QUT =H
journey larc | good k als
!:hing loſt litcle ſound 1 rome

"TheT, epic of IWiſdome.

ol rs 1 er ren”

10 pe ne

Book Lp

NOX XK: el
'S ng! rea * |

a __—

'* | # # *
+ —* |. v7
** || + *
* X >
| *« * X 11
* Xx M0
gond- NE ISS = : EE
TS, þ, vn PEDIEIION
EEE - god © FETAL
pood by watero— | prod FLEET,
Ed
Fe cy” 119 Wo 0n \'
Tas | | Xiu. RAE TD,
Tx" oF. __ , cOmE ov Pk
pO UP _— ''Jifficul pe
round” = jound {<4
— ———
Byen Witneſſes X* + X* WH... KK
| * X* A
Judge * ** F-
— "Ie
< ili | wean _
RR {mn
__ _ all | yoo. TE
pale L ul __ | mean -
I7! EB _—_—_ncnI£e ._:.
an wir: child lan * | aitcr the »
cknef+ health | after the 1
Pr ES rn —_— | die therein ___
ourney _ ( es a ean |
15 LL GE Gt wes found © | tcund

Book. 2 The Temple of Wiſdome. Ify
Fortuna Wajor Tx Xx” ' * K % {|
= {1+ £* * |* #
: { *. * * lo
Even Wietneſles | X* X X. i: a X& ©,
| * * 1
Re * oe |}
Judge | > K5451
ED es -—* 1}
life dS: } A) * +14 Tr: 7
luhRance -+- | men. EE wear, "DET
woithi,! | gd - fm #1 FMT.
[poticſſion | mcan | jn<an ns
aw witc | Ot OSes, | evil © Rn
WoMNan WICH) child” (Ok IN trogie TP ITTETi2-1
f cxnels Wh 2 oy aſrh. SR ) | Ter iifons y 1
boo ſon TR67Þ + CN etlT L wir harm” by 4
Journ_y FOA-Þ L- ſan reg ge. | iare: —_ |
th: gle? 53.9; 7 part rang” | a-r joan 3:
heme: w.1jor + * '% * | x | =X
| * *- + + | * _
| Xx X *!], #3].
'Even Witneſſes # oe Me 1- ge” 7 14 dE;
* Xx >X |
| | *X 4 |
Judge 1 F * >: |
| * \ ---#* 3
4. | god 1 ER
moe On Be | Kai 5 mca's FEE:
\worthi.) w_ ' £oud T0 good '
poi n gn FE, evil +1}
2 Wiic ! £O0's {= << o
w man with cd oe a'rerthe5'- © | ace ew 7 3h
ckne#s 7Þ> | healrh © | hevtrh |
prif n © |] comenue- - | | on our c; 4
{ltd | | good - __ | yerypood
'rnrg loft. cn | found -- nt found i

442 =_ Temple of wiſl dome. Book 5.
\ Albns "I + $6 | F<B M |
| k* ti [* K-* *|.
; X* *K «|| * —
{Uneven Witneſſes | + my XK hong " *
= * K
Judge |S
o— : _ | good
Gbſlance . Ls ED we ... — £229
ſhip ” uns 11] _—, | good L4Y
"7 "TH +4 + | good |
; offefton FARE EP ; ho — —
| 2 wife 11] Eh [2d
TD wich chilc -| davghrer dic | !afrer the 5. 14-0
Fr , |] ecarh | health To
- = ME dy en” _
; _—_—_ peritlous lare -
 {pri{on Err, <= BIO RR
TS |= ae. | BS _
| [not touud = BEET: Cung. ;
(OT RET Eh
NET. en nn
' * X EE * * *
Inneven Witneſſes XxX x #X| $$ *- *
| * *
[| X *_*
"(Tod X* - w *;
ife $ Tt _ iu thcienc
{1ubStance f Ro
, warp —- ill 7... SE
[potefion | Il - | _
| bo wife ' mean Ee good 3
aoman with _—_ — davghrcr atct he « |
Jock xknets death "| heath a
orfon- "Not our . | come out |
(journey. -- good if
thing bit. norfound rk part found :

=

Uneven Witneſles

life of 122 _ ITY Rs
ſubNance ___ {| me-n _ { good aſſaoys
[worſhip » Li Wo EP pond Es al
poleſſion -_ Jmann-- pod — Mm,
a ite A © a Bom. good - TEIOY
\woiran with "FF = daughter — |wterthe 5 TY
3clene(s _— death CC” thealh--oet
Dre OOO dienn priim | | runaway .. - |;
1;410-V +3 by differ» | tow "INT _
Ti41,K 1Ott part 4vund | round hs,
the * jr * [9 Wy
| RK * | * X* *
* + la.

| | *

Uneven Witnefles
|
Judge ,

+ 2

l "" ll. 1.
Navitance - en I EE
worſhip _ | Jl

oo ffim __ | ill ts a6
a witc EE IE one
woman with child | daughrer .*
Feknefs -; Th
priſ n +. | comcour.
journcy 97. m-an

'chirg loſt _

ear Fa
an——_— tt
mean 0
m22n 4 £
ai.” , 1
mean By +
ro ant ROSIE
davghrer |
aftcer he 1 J
Come our

-

bf Ligeven W ieneſſes

S&:
ax* v4 <A
$6223 F

”s
rw
—_——_

—— $15

260441

—

+
z

£0 a.
»

#
*

T' dan

Tiffcule

rer

th__

{2014 144
S MIT GO?

{+ ; - pſa, 46 >
$1531 414007

heed ant acs

©. +) bs

Y :
4 ke + -

"» C'S

; » 2 $£3%@ % .*-
__ Ss 4+ hes WR re ++ »
k : 23

—
==
1, = =mms

43
”T _—— — ——

. w"I'C+ 4
—<. @©__—__— m_ . Dev +7 og 2% +2 4 * , ,
--
= I u_ cs
— a # x
. F * © ONS En AY
®
{ . ae % OS
| { , ner
=
RE... —_— » & 2 _ _———t—_—_ —_— OI
wWx——_ At 4 - mw —_ Cy —_ a Log
-—

nd

a

| WY T5

”
8 4

>

4

-
FF au
4 £208 _ 7 "IR

woman with clnkd(!1 |

{> HEN?
4? 7

rion_

icknels ſ BY | )

m_- (

F 12ND |

Jadge ©

—

Na "TEEN

mean 8 9:2 I0ieg
& *? £3 TY

after Tie piiviii tre;

* *
* *)
*
*

# «FE F3
+ #TL SI

*k *k 5

woman with ch.

£ 3%
Ificknefs | 05 |
{prion £75 | £ |}

jj X ds w— : -
| hirg loft. Eq ! 7

oor ot fou wn”

.Nc not fovnd” Kt oe

\ . .; CRT ION

% 'S;
L443? ws

ta, - ea

4 X k #1 4 K
? 7 |

X |

« *
+

XXX XK;

 *
I;
F

X * X||

""

X*

| ;
ſufficicnr —_—

7 S077 bb Coke
"Ws "Yon 4

if »ficienc

000"

S 4

er

ae *% > + *
natfomng---

Uneven Witneſſes

Jadge

OL n—————_— * ;
es <4 « * « J
om
-<
a FT F III

d[tanda” _ : - 1 W
== #""f* iT) .
—_— ak ++:

__—

== atter the « 20s

jo

Woman ="

ME o with ctyi4 |
pm pmabt

vo =
»t

B 3

_—_——_. WY

porn) 214 |goodbywarer
melt On tparrfound

ME ts ain
- =

ma wn

k
>»

4

4

Oper tn T4
' -

—_

WB Is on F920 IS IS Dt AERIE ce 1 IT AT.

comeaoue
CET
7 EE oo 6 a

2

Bf "HH MN

- _— "W.- - a
mer SS ..

wm <_
RCs +S =. es
- -

-; x B

FX

Oro alt. Sa) 2

,”

A

"0. —_— ——— + 4 ——-

IS -* ;

£0412 4401} 5 »

gm ooo xv O24 ce +
 —_ Ow

<= ts OF Oe; rpg

»*
P

- _—

7 _— OY”:
- 1 3 f %. x!
det 5
* rt pt At rot Oy _
ac - p on CR
* 4 -

: F
E-

W,

hte
fubAance ©
vurlhyp Aa 75 Eagn

pull. Mon

<——

pp wite as
= ma" wich eh big

= o_

(«put draconts X*
Uneven Witneſſes | # | K* * Þ [
{Judge | * X *

: T X

| = I. 8 MM M1
life SY very good FT 22 Rs
ſubſtance © {v-iygo'd | ſuſficic |
jworth'p . | very goed | iN ——_
poſſeſſion | veryg:.od | mean — © 1
[awiſe prod , 3ll EET
(woman with child —@ | #ttcr1be _ + daughter q
$7m"%"<x7 ahi ba
 {eencom. "——herd- wy
| þ- 07 © v warer 11 1
| to "found LE 2 L

——_—

% St I WAP BY IR 4

| Book. 2. | ""7he Temple ef Wiſdpmec

a Fo «

Pry dracons — [* * *- of F)
X* T

Uneven Witneſſes |

Judge
tfe.
EE

*X X.
&*

roler able

good

| Aſter rhe 5

*4

der

Todd

BY a x

<

+ -v*

'X

bd. AH HT CAE EE wh

Book'z

2

Aquifi tio

Even Witneſſes -

J

wornan ich ai

10-nrerurn

-_ —

, _
WV” VSIA.

*
*
"EE
* -
* '*
_
X*

life : __ | mean good _—_—
ubſtance - _ ___+_ ] mean _ | good =

orſhio. | mean gond - - wy
— + : good | ——
@ 0an with 0 RR atrer the 5 - alon_
icknels __ | afre: the 1 in danger yp
(28 n T3. lars our NOE-OUT--—- -— =
Lak WY = Low . EF,
;hing tound tug ———

* X
*

*

X ..

*
X*

'*X
« 1760

- gone ho
=

' ——_——— II IE <4 Mi; 1.0
BS, "I Rh _

| ater ne ©

s * *% 6 s : 4.
} | 1 A Ws.
—_— =

KX X + X*| * *

1
a

= $
+ * * *

*

A
—_— -

18
It
E

- 4
4 ." ; |
of a> 24 :
Freq Witneſſes |

4
CI 7 .
} , A 4
| Mike — is
i } 3%
| dear

our inthe ed '_ - þ

+3 L.7

= :
o ut £4
' [Jongviring _

I __ 4 S . # :
EN - found - *

[XX + *|
=

rw

[400 n ri
— —__ WT i OS SR.
o

3
E
= |
:

|

gr

Wit
[-

7
:

|

X|

'x3
x
:

u————_—_ i wed
. -
[woman with child
ak. Mt A | FY

.
$ .
Ss x7 le ——...
. a "Y
yy
—_— oþ

chin loft ©

$ . &W »Þ E _—
8 5 2 'S
l ” .
4 OI WE
: is
; 8 ”
Pry " Yr :

nfl _ —_ ET
X A v 8 :
.

| CHAP. XVIII

| he how the Stars, Angels, and Geniicom-

-.municate theit vertuesin Nreams. Aad this |
# hath been deſcribed unto you by this Table
— here before, by -« diſcourſe, the fignification of the
- - Judge, and of the Witneſſes even and uneven, to the
| end you may the eaſilicr give a certain judgment of the
 Figurevas they ſhall fall, having ſometimes like ſigni»
. fication and impcrtance for ſandry demands, and ſome-
time unlike, :8 to know-if that a perſon ſhall be of long
life or ſhort, if | e ſhall have® the goods and ſucceſſion
- - Of his father, if it be good to tuy Lands and Lordſhip,
- ifit be good to take a wife, and whether ſhe ſhall be
'. good or bad, and whether a womanwith. child ſhall.
ave a{onor a daughrer,or if a ſick perſon ſhall amend
of that difeaſe, or that he which is in priſon $hall quick-
ly'come forth , or if it be good to take a Voyage in
hand, whether a thing loft shall þe found again. And
ſo of all other queſtions and demands which may bena-
med, according to the example here. before ſet out,
whereby you may by your own ſelf without any'fur-
ther declaration know the tgures which be good for
ogedemand, and thoſe which hold nomore on the one

—_—— wg y"" I wo

%

4 pe '
«—_— ”--

Ly
d43 £1

rn

EY ea a "s ; " p
"ET "0. IL T ?

7 may be as well and certainly judged, as by the Judge

F ſand, nay ten thouſand dreams which

y : TINY +5 35h 5 * Pos eyes . 087 ;
' 4 '

ww

himſelf. | | ;7 > OA
Now you muſt note that the Angelsand Genii come
down with their _—_ y the beathsof the
Planets to the carth;as you find by the fignrenof Aﬀro»

mancie and Geomancie, to the bodicsof men in their
Dreams: Many of the ancient learned Hebrewvs j
Greeks, and Latines, have handled the Subjet of
Dreams, and in theſe laſt ages divers have written of
them, but with iollictle aſſurance and probability; chat
amongſt a thouſand fignifications, there are. hardly
two true, having no more experience for what they
advance then ConjeQures and Imaginatiotis,. whereof
they have made large Volumes, which have rendred
them that ſtudied them more anxious and p.
deceind] though lexrar, ave knowing char row
deceiv ned, not knowing that & thou»
2s which poſſeſs the ſir
of man every night are nothing but « reminiſcence of
their former ations ; the which thing is common to
him with the beaſts, and that the 1 which
the perſon thought moſt concerned his life and lively-
hood, is that which repreſents it ſelf every night; Wir-

- neſs the Fiſherman of Theocrirus,, in the 22, ZEdyll.

lege xvor 4:75 ue!cym, Ixfvardyo, 8c which Clewm-.
d;an hath repreſented in theſe Verſes -

Omnia que ſenſu volunntur vota diarne,
Peftore ſopito reddit awica quies. ©,
Vonator ſus feſſa toro cums membra-reponit ,
| Mens tamen ad ſylvai & ſus luſtre redits
Jadicibuc lite, aurige ſora currus, ©
COnaqne nolturn metacavetar equis;

Mm 2 - -- Whiek

6 * om,
_ _ > n . S's
- -Xt> * &, fy : - 3 » 0

J % _y

. -
"©
#4.
c«.

Which in effect is no more but this :
© T0I 1: MH Faye .
11 12+The Hunter, Lawyer, Carter, all reſent .
- i/! +. t The ſenſe of what hath paſt the day fore-ſpent.

" 3773 4 Me: #444 - bg ,

. All-theſe elegant expreſſions of the Poets give us

plaidlyto:ſce tharwhich Antiquity thought divine in

dreams," wasindeednothing bur folly , and that in rhis

caſe rbere- is no-chfference between a man and a beaſt t

ſeeing alſo Fo/vmerthe wileſt that ever was of men,

hach ſaid, Thar-the end of the fons of men and the

'end-ofbeaſts is the fame.thingasrothem ; as the one

dici, fo. doch the other, and they bave all the ſame ſpi-

ric, :andg man nacurally is no more chen « beaf?, for all
i+yaoity:;\all goes ro the ſame place, all is dpft, and

all hall retura inro'duſt ; who ts it thit knows that
the ſpirixof the (cbildren of men aſcends up on high, J

andibe-[piritof:che beaſt deſcends under the earth? þ

for whaxan bringic back to ſce what was become of

&? Wherefore 1 have found nothing better then that þ

a-man ould rejodyce'in the works of of his hands. If
thatefcre this be-doubrful, who will attribure divini-
ty © ſomany-ſortiſh viſions dreamed by groſs people,
{eing all that is voder heaven is notbing but folly ,

- and humane wiidome, both which are but one thing ?

If a thouſand figures are ſeen by a Ruſtick in bis ſIcep,
even ſoit js with alabovring beaſt ; if the one chaſes,

' the other gill ſhew-iris angry ; all their paſſigns are .
alike, and-theywreborh of cheſamething ; the' bope
of oneis.the.-hope»of the other, but death reduceth all
things : the. onrout of n conſideration proſly embra- .
ced by him,.and:che orher deprived of all conſolation, 'J

having nor a reaſonKrong enough for diſcourſe, which
FA v

@

x8 +3: "Wy

 dreamsexceed 73 and that there be ſomething more

"' Book2. © The Temple of Wiſdom:

is the Soveraigaty of mens acquiſition. | But, houyasart /
- that a dream is natural co a man, and by the means. of
dreams the more ſubtle have 'perſwaded choſe that
were leſs, to many things; nd finding ſome things fall
out according to their defire, have given their. Dreams
the names of Prophecies, to the end they mighr hethe
derter received, ſaying, tbart things ro come werg'con-
tained in- theſe riddles ? ſo honeſt and ſimple ace we
thar for alittle peace', we wiſhour any trowbles rake

dreams for things corporally ſeen ; nay, that which

hath but the appearance of an hiſtorical rrath.j: for: 4.
- thing decreed certain and true; and are (I know not
what force ir is to the Sovervign) much moremiſera-
ble then the Canadiens , making 'our ſelves vnr own

Naves, rhroygh our own means and inventions, loadr

ing our ſejves with thoſe burdens ' wherewith 'our -
ſhoulders are cruſhed when we rhink of them ; depri-
ving our ſelves by that means of the pleaſure:of-this
life and the enjoyment of our labours: which ite be
a felicity.is ſuch a one as the moſt miſerable beaſt with- *
out it, is happier then we; for as 1 have ſaid, dreams
are equal to them with us, rhoogh- 1: preſame to; lay
that a man hath ſomewhac more then is ordinary eo
beaſts, ſomedreams being to him the fore-runners of
ſome fortunes or. misfortunes, which follow bim: the .
day after. they have been ſeen and dreamt. Of theſe
by ſearching into the anciene Cabaliſts , Mecubalilt,

and Maſſorets, 1 find to the numberof 73 whictraze
eaſily underſtood by thoſe who know rhetemperamenr
of thoſe that have dreamed them, and ngtotherwiſe ;
they ſhould alſo know the day of the Moon: andthe

hour of the nighe they were dreamed in- ©1f theſe

then ordinary that happens by ſome means more then
Mm 3 coln-

LS

E ITT &od E £4 . L "\B3 - TEE " xt
+ « d
169:
*
%*
Oo

_ ewo-
$ndico, 5.2. to judge of dreams. But becauſe I have given
' It place here, I have made follow-this ſecond nomina-

ſomnium & , neivo,

tion ofthe - Aparition®f dreams, which is fully re-
Pons without diſguiſe , that every one whatever

de ray receive'the comfort ofhis dreams, being cer-

rain forerunners of the affairs of the day following.
'Tis.notonly the ſimple man that is concerned herein,
bur the Monarch, King, Prince,and any one whatever
ſhall hence receive ſatisfaRian, and may prevent much

- evil and misfortunes that might dayly bappen to hith,
and alſp anticipate mach good. But all muſt be known |

thro
re
nights and days of the moon, not with any conformity
to:what they are 'in our Geomancy, but | according
\to the Meditativesgf the ſaid Maſſorets which are re-

ferred to the nights ofthe Moon, -and to cach of the

h theſecrets of the Hebrew Maſſorets which

\dreams, andto thoſe other three ſo notto omit the 72.
Jomethere ace, che formularity of whoſe poſition is as

*

tseo be ſeen hereafter, and is to be obſerved by the
curious; for theſe nights and days bere repreſented are

notto be neglected, but known t for before that 1 de-

'clared and ſhewed them in chis place, they were known
_ . cnlyof God. Befides this, there is nothing true in mat-

ter ofdreams:- for all that Artemidorns, Cardaw Ni-

.pbiss, GF2. have written thereof are nothing but miſ-
- cakes and brutaiities not differing from the dreams of
the moſt Savage creatures, wherein as they bave de-

celyc

ent them to-.n, and according to them the 28.

Bebold then how opr days are according ro thee 'Me-
cubabſts, pnd the pights for the dreams ſceing| tha by
them they: acknowledge one true God, and expeft the

ſ famc hopein the Meſhas, Which dreams the Greeks
who learned ſomewhat out of the ]ewiſh School, have
called Hyperphyſical, or.+J7*4. 7; and they diſpole,,

the 28 days or nights in this manner. -.

.4- Thefirftday of the Moon, or the firſt night wher-,

| init wascreated by the Eternal for to give it hght, was:
oh Fea ſpoicionof chis All,

7

he fourth of che creation and diſp |
and the firſt of irs newneſs, which by the Hebrews is
called «Alnath, that is to ſay Cornma eArizts, which
is the. beginning of the Moon ; all theſe nominations

are before, asalſo in Corn. Agripps in the 2. book

of his Oceu/c. Philgf. . All the dreams that any one (hall

dream, ſhall be very true, and ſhall bappen tothe ſatis-

fation and. jþy of the partics, and the child rhat
be born that firſt day, ſhall be longlived.

(4) 4 y 2. The ſecond night or ſecond d

tha

* * were created; The Hebrews give, this day.

* Enediel for Genizs, and for hoylethe belly of

Aries, Pagr (») called Albothas ; this day is

very forthinate to take ſome not ordinary learches,the

' dreams of the night are unprofitable, the child. bora
ſhall grow very ſenſibly and faſt. |

3- The third night and third day which is the fixth |

of the Creation, which is in the extremity of Aries .4-

thorage , was dam created; the dreams are verygood

and the child born that day ſhall be very fortunate
throngh Kings and Princes. "=Y

_

Fi Bock 2. The mnple of Hiſtone. 173,»
F- ceived others, ſo they, bave been deceived themſelves-

* ., *, was the fifth of the Creation, the Bs,
* .., reptiles , fiſhes and creatures of: the- earth '

Ge

| Book'9 % |
(+) © 4. Thefourth day GED was che fourth
'\ of rhe Moon, ſhe going ing* out ries, which
| F Lute been three days in etiering into Aldebran
'*X © Intheeyeof Fibre, Haſwedet (6 )iarco- this
X* *% nights unbappy; be char falls fick that night
> .: "$$ in danger of death; che dream of thar night
will be of no effe& ; thit day- was rhe Sabbark.”
5. The fifch day, i it is a day that is fit t& begin a”
good work, or build upon the warer 3 ifthe dreatn be.
good 1 it will haveits perfeR effeR ; if it be uoldeky74t"
willnor; the child born hardayisn Traitor. 2
BLM © 6. The ſixth day the Moon enters ene"
* xy firſt houſe ein fr and Tapht wrath
k3 : Ambrietin (c) this houſe called poet in-*
'% *rimates that the perſon | thac is ron _ a
+ +" wiy, orthe beaſt that is gone aftray* ſhall bs
fond and raken; the dreams of 'this night
fue ſuſpended, and the child born willtor be long-
Vedas
© of. Flue french day. or. oight, which © was,
as ſome gfirtn, the day wherein were all the ceremo-
ries of tlaw inſtituted, the ficknefles rhat' ſhall be
my that day ſhall be foon heafed ; the dreams muſt
he ſecret and frot revealed, and: he chat 3 is born
frat | ſex'fong and' pamfullife.
Ref oo Thee th day, the Moon enters into
wal rw heres aſmod:i rans into AMariclin(d)
which makes the firſt quarter; rbis p ace iy .
| cal d Alnazs; the dreanies of that day ct
night, are mr ft cerrain and erue : the child
born ſhalt be long: lived.
© 9. On theninth day of the Moon ſhes in the ſe-
cond pert of Camttr : all dreams are good ud ppy
the next day. |
; 20. The

XX ER
XXKX

EE OR" ER
FAY: "3 FT & B

- The YompRe of Wiſin” wy

© T0. Thetehifh; the! Mooti"thrers =
.' houſe of L:0,4h& Sorath Perthielin (e

*

*. the onl houte of the Sun ;, the dream of thit
*x night Prat "ome £0 paſs ſoon after z\ ide
| ous for yin

Kate is Cai « be
 chifd born fhiall The long; the Sub being the
giver of years. + 2qNE4tD.

11, The eleventh, "which is the fecond day of Les:
Alcharph, wherein governs' the ſpifit "Fabith! Fr
mie of dreams, for which Mm x they are of lee
che child born ſhaſf kive'inach affliction by reaſon
travels. t 3 31! £1 337 .t 211m 15+

12. Thetwelfh day, has the Moon is i db .
of the Lion, the* dieath. is good and turns rather\to a
good thenill effe&; the child botn'wilf be of g66d fts-

qd þ derſtanding,expert ant arcifical in al | efiinngs, ad for:

lived .

to

Þ
X
'*

« *

* 13, The thirteenth day, that the WAFIPON

ters Virgs calle@ Albayret andTephrhartherath ff

'"Hamaliel ini (f} the dreams are true: the

' chitd born ſhall be a fool, and T Zelor.” -
14. The fourteenth day is ftill Virgo; the

{dteais/ are in'ſaſpenſe,” but' rhe child born

in his part' of 'the-fighwill 'be © accompliſhed in ull'
things, and his Genizs will be of the hierarchie of V-/

riel under the Prince : Caſfieh = . 19409

(s) n

*
, "IM 9
*

ficknefs thirdgy '$ mort

19. The fificenth day night is indifferent,
thariero ſay, 'feither 'nor' evil: as to -
orral. this dey.the Moon
' enters Zib# x: oy Kedewh Zevriel wnd (2)
the dreams are rnoft true, and-the child bora

fall be of the nature: and completioavt

Fenn * ©

%

16 The

as gy |
29h 17... The, EVE op the Mono enters
ck and the ſpirit #4rzabel Governs (b)
Saturday the ;day is ſo much che more

| unfortanate ; the dreams ſhall not have any
_ effeRttillthree days after, and the child born
_.... . ſhallbe unhe Jo all things.

143, Tl e eighteenth. the Moon, which is the ſecond
day..c , the dream is certain the cbild ſhall ſuf-
fer much hare, yet ſhall come to 'the higheſt honours

- -niohe the Moon enters
fibre Hile : this

19 20. The R—_ <a Moon, the moon
X& . x. enters {the houſe of J#piter and, Haſmacl
—_ . . andeAvachid arcin (5, thedreams are

73 X - true; the child born ſhall be: [a deceiver and
| * .%... miſcbieyous.

14 : 31. The twenty firſt nighe. or day of the
Moon, this day {hall be good.coogh, but the. dreams
ſhall be CE IR <hild bora ſhall be
corpulenc and ſtrong, buta cheat. .,

(k) 22 The twenty ſecond day the Moon eu-

X*, .* 'tring into the firſt, houſe Ar Saturn go-
verned by. the ſpirit Gelie/ and Zaze/ and the
Wy re who will be in( 4) the dreams
are true and the child born ſhall be good and

+.docile,'bye not live long.
Ds The ewenty third day "lhaif be goverged by vw
atarn: the day willbe more fortunate then =

[

X*
Ky

X*
WM -

mp—_ _ * w % TIE
OA ALBA oa G *F

Book ooh 2. j The Temple of of Wiſdowe: 15

firſt, but che dreams of the fight. are- falſe 2 2 the: chil-,
dren born ſhall be.illhaped and deformed, yer. will.
have good underſtandings Bret!
- 24. The twenty forecd, the laſt day ot v being.ter-
nary,in this day or night, for the Intelligent though

ir be'of Mars is 7199) which will aſfiſt 0 him the;
dream will be without any effe& ; the:child born will,

be mild and gentle, and_ſhall love ſeaſting.. / 34

(1) + 25. The twenty fifch day or night entred,

* * death among the Egyptians for their incres
* + dulity : the Moon enters into Aquerins\the-
X X* | 2 houſe of Satwry and Cewbie/: ('t) the
X dreams are unfortunate, and the child born
ſhall bz much ſubjz<& to ag”; misfor-

tunes, and adverſities.

26. The twenty fixth day, Moſes, as they cell yy" Y :
vided the Er5threan Sea, to make a paſſage for'them
whom he-brought from captivity and bondage, be-.
cauſe of their, ſickneſs that was odious toall, they were
calightned by the. ſpirit 921119 their ProteRoar. 3
which is the reaſon thatthe dreams are certainz and
| thechild born being come ro perfcRion ſhall be rich
and much eſteemed.

27 The twenty ſeventh day Zad4s Adaccaben: got
his grear Victory, which came.from the hand of biaz
whom he adored, by his faith, and the Genias which
goverged was 712) This night is ſtrong for dreams
and for the birth of children.

28 The twenty eighth, he that falls fick dies;
dreams are not good to any,8& mens ſpirits are troubled
with fooliſh opinions in Relipionz children bora wildie
or if they exceed five monceths they become Idiots and
Zelots, that is to ſay, as natural Fools. |

Let us fee aur 73 Divine Dreams, The Reader

i muſt

SEE A LE A abt, 350 Own og ar
add WT + ; Ms "4 -

:
”
= WO

%Y 0-68. -x :

RN

night be ſhall dreah, by the Capital Letters of each
Iumour ; 2s the Sanguine dyS the Melancholick by
M: the -Cholevick by C.”'and/the Flegmarick by F.

The dreams do aifo ve the great myſteries of the
Cabaliſts, withrhe Mecubaliſts, and Mafforets. Where-
in cheAncientraffirm chey have found much certainty.
But you muſt obſerve your figures of Aſtromancie and

 Geomancie, we will teach. you che fignifications of
Aftromancie, and youwill learn without ceaching by

the'Kules before. |
[ 7 The » in the firſt Face of V.

1 To dream that one ſees bair, is infallibly to a

e to fee fome men whom he was not wont to
ſee; if rhey are white,they are friends ; ib red, envious
perſons 5 if black; Enemies, - Bur with mbtancholick
perſons tis quite otherwiſe; to cholerick men, the red
—_ on enemies. Read the Harmony of the world.

The ſecond Face of V.

:34\To-.dredm:that one bath much money and to

\count it," to the Sanguine, it is to be deceived, good for

yore? indifferenc to che C. and F.

The third Face of V.

E- os

"The Temple of Wiſdowe.. Book T2
_ miſt conſider ns ic <a and the

j" To worſhip God. cobeina Church'and do ſome.
whac that is religious, co the'S. it is joy, lotothe (.
peSoFuc and M. |

» In

ak I

4 _ I 1; wv = > . fs + ett
, *S A " F ; 8, g! ; S E F# #®
5.4 of ; OD — — —

» 1nthe firſt Face of ©. :
4 To dream that ones beard is. ſhaved, tothe. it is

melancholy and affition ; to the Af. good, to theC.
mere the F. indifferent. OY 890d, eek

The ſecond face of S.

- To have a long or little beard, by the great, is the
friendſhip of ſome great perſon, or his enmity by the
little one, the firft is co the ſanguine, the laſt for the.
F. and 4. | fy

En ner 7 OM GE Met
x p » *s Y W -
| - -
-.

a
*%

The third Face of S.

6 Who dreams tbat he hath teeth drawn , toaS;
it is loſs of friends, to the F. a fign of tooth-ach, to the
A. and (. indifferent. |

_ 7 Tobeinadiſpnte of Religion, or ſeeche myſte-
ries of out Religion in contempt, is an ill dream to the
S. Thar happened to a friend of tnipe which was in
priſon ; for he ſaw char night which was the fifth;
che man thar cauſed him to be taken did repreſent one
diſputing with an ill feature and” cruel counte-
nance ;. to the 4. it is honour, to che. choleriek con-
tempt and prejudice. Wat

Wes > | OPS Fe

$ To = with Serpents or Toads aid to deſtroy eſtroy

them, ſignifies to the 'S. victory over his enemies, bur

to the to fall under the burden ; to the F. _ af-
SE 1 7 mn_—_

* F.

; F#F,v_R 7 fa
>», v4.3, . Wh
. .

. P NY: E
4 ef F . S9 »

yo

\ *Aiction, tothe cholerick co kill, or do miſchief.
' The ſecond Face of mr.

' g To dream .thathe kiſſes, or lives with a Maid or
Woman with'ſome pleaſure, ſi gn ſome conteſtation
to the S. that day will not paſs without ſome quarre;
but to the Aegmatick ir is nothing, to the cholerick
death or wounds, to the 24. little or nothing.

- ES The third Face of E.

10 To drink when one is very dry, is aſſutedly fick-
neſs , if the dream be at the break of day, after dige-
ſtion ; if the party lie upon the left ſide, this is ill co
the ſanguine, but co the 2. health.

Þ i The firſt Face of S.

\ It To fie high is a ſign of praiſe, and the party is
praiſed according to the beighth , if it be above the
water, and that he ſeems to himſelf to beof a fair phy-

' fGiopnomije, .ic is all che honour and repatation that can

Fe J WE<, A; 5 ys by .

4

be for the 5. but conterapt to the //.
. __ Thefecond face of $.

t2 To hear thebells ring, isto the S. good; but ro
draw the rope of a bel}, and to ſec a ſpirit hindring it
to ſound, if ir be a Pricſt that hath dreamt it, he will *
have ſome trouble in bis fanQion, if be be ſanguine;
as for the 4, they are their ordinary dreams, + - C

4 "
at 4

Ul

ID "IO 5 Gl I» Y "a ” 3 q <3 eh p BY nay "oa, pg od
© 2 on y F wal FX P : SF # Sl
. ; 4 : 5 ” > R ;
. A FO ——_—— aa
ye ena "_— —_— > - 7” PM _— _— —_

13. To ſeethe R—_ or other FU eas,
that being in an ill night, ic is all iff and rueful
S. beware the priſon, the 24. the death, the ws
and troubles, &c- \ -

Hs:

14 He that dreams this folgvennch vight that he
lies with his mother, or any of his kindred, and knows
any of them, doubtleſly there will happen to him ſome
great misfortune, and ſome anger croſs to all hu-
mours. .

The firſt Face of &.

15 To ſpeak to the King in this fiſtexnch a
a very gooddream ; forto theS. ic Shank aig -
fir, co the IL. that are in hand with ſome baſinedis.ic
| = fGgn that all _ undertare: Malt have a good
ue, 4

16 To it fruit whereof che erees are abun-
mar ly 26 loaden, is _— and profit to the F, and honour '
to the $, 411

17 To give a ring, or ſome precious thing, is.to the
S. lofs, buttothe C, profir, indifferent to F. and Af...

The ſecond face of

13 Toclimb up ſome high place, and ſee ecipices,
the light whereof is fearful, it is the fear of Jaſtice, or.
of ſome great perſon that chreatens our fortune; it ic
be a C. this dream ig nor good, 19. To

_

. : 4
pom EGS 6 AP. ot » = i Me _o_ tk

19. Todream of ficp, anded: receive hure by ſeck-
to Ter hit, and not be able to do 1 coaC. it is

«in nd ate; ©O' the's. iis ind ; bur.

JA

£ © ? ; e Y ® f

20 To fre bre fall from "ear , HeniRieges ex-
dinary thing; if it be a King or Prince that dreams
"it, iris 6 War KFmen Country: - ER

v4 ENG 07 Therhirdfaceof a. ie 0ko ves

/

-

21 To marry a woman or be at a wedding, itis da-
mage by the death of ſome friend or other.

22 Tobe ark naked in a Church i is an a _— to
a5. but to the meliacholickvery good. |

-*23- To ſing confuledly inthe Choreb; "fo atom
underſtands not{the- peri -r/dendtes ſome diſpute
about matters in Religion, and bad for the 27. and F.

© 106d |, The Bot face of "ae. 40!

24 To i co have a new warriage, andeo'think
that be hath a fair woman, and to do the part-of a
| bugband,- it Fenores ſome grear/peril or eccident the
nextday;orfomedangor of dearh; andchar'for.:the 5.
and C. py
if A AE.

dts To Bono : od and, a f Ign of

{4 BOOK

is 77 $3 7 SY - y #
# 325} e {1 3L53 by *S ITT z

«4
d__ » * ” F SG
4 ors " x $47 + Fu © Fn 44 C59 s & 4 © 94 = IF" "a be © & p
by hy # ” Z - x :
i454 GE »# £ * s © tf $ 4 ' ; % F £
« $— + s » # on #85
” - Wit {1 4 , ' .
L A $ % 7 7 / * £ z C 6 % . : * , :
bs t Y + F * s 4 bu # _— 2 P

"yy 7 4 n 6 0 ; 4 P # p
fx _ , *

& ho P
ns. £0

' The ſecond face of ne.

16 To draw teeth; is thelols of friends, whe]
dy on filling vat, or diftruſts that is certain to |
C.

Sz % 9.

The third Face of m.

27 ToſeeSouldietie, the thing ſit ſelf will certainly
happen to the $. which 1 have my ſelf obſerved chore |
100 times; but it fs difquict co the F.

The firſt Face of 5.

28 To ſcem to have an ugly beard and great, or to
dream that ſome body placks if, it is NY peril,
and anger to the M. F F. and C. |

The ſorond F ace of

29 To have much vermine about one, and to be
troubled in killing of them, it is a fign'of money and

riches. -

The third Face of oa.

30 To ſee the Sun and Moon | mans then ordinary,
is a good dream.

31 Tobe at aftaſt and to ear roſt meat "OD

is fickneſs to the 5. and F.

s - i P- 5
- .
» 5 # S *#
N : :
Q rk V :
os, S.. - % bg , > | &. + o
Ft : F -

F

"i 4 # = a my F R
" ff C ” < = by
: K pb f Fo k.

ER

—_— _

he ft Face >

23 To gather ſome fair fruit, as Cherries, Plus,
Peaches” Apricocks, is a good ſign of encreaſe of riches
tothe $; and M- bur if one ear of thoſe fruits which ſer
the teeth on edpe, itis an ill omen to the C. and F,

a
of

33- Togoupa high Mountain, and that with pains
' and. fear becauſe of the precipices, it denotes through
much pains one ſhall come to the honours and digni-
cies which he purſues : this dream is ill to the M. if
they dream it not juſt when they go to bed.

34 To hear dops barkat [Fay and topurſue them,
or that they purſye him, is cither zo be overcome by his
renſes, or to overcome them in purſuit.

7 be ſecond Faoe of a

-

. ..35 To hear Crows croak, or to fee Monks, areill
W_Cw <, they ſignific gothivg bur. ſadneſs.

"36 To nds much ofa handſome woman, and yet.
be afraid ro come near her, is a good dream and repre-

ſcnts vertuous actions.
3 PE A Who dreams of uncleanneſs,as __ and oe,
: tovited to bafiquers.

£HDINA *; he third fuoe of 1

38 Toloſe ones clothes, and eſpecially ones ſhoes,'
r >the S, loſs, and calymoies, ifſo be this dream hap-
ports the firſt days of the Moon, = . The

———__——_ —— ww. -

LO —

4" a B86-4net) >. i g he 97 by 4 Ro
" NY "TIE RY 0 7 Fo? cd , EN VEWE$2.2+ 48M
. Y ET EIN” 1 od RES 7 oy Cops IP 5 n wages
__ y ai 3. fi : EY q " " : . 5 'F.. Wc #1 4 1
Fl ; s | o | - _ $--4+ »
- p, x < uf # Y
1 : 4 7 / F
EI Li 2 \ 2, e I , » 4 .
7 4
© —_ _
—_———— — _
Fg

39 To ſee a great and wide tiver', and tofeemto
ſwim over it , denotes praiſe for ſome knowledge, or -
elſe ſome honour which he ſhall receive from the com-
mon people ; but if he' ſeem ſometimes to fall into the
 , river, there will be prejudice. |

; ' 40 To ſpeak withan Angelthatreveals ſome ſecrets :
to you which you do not yet underſtand , deyptes thar
you ſhall come to know ſome great King or Prince. -

The firſt face of 2.

41. Who dreams that he ſpeaks to God , dreams
ſomerhing great and extraordinary , as who ſhould
ſpeak ro him being ſeated in a Throne, as Ezecbie!, or

'1n abreath or voice as Jeremiah, it is a beginning of
prophecie, to a $, it is very fortunate. WS

42 Tobein Paradiſe and ſee the greatnels of the
glory of God, yet nor dare to approach bis bumani--
— ty, isa beginning of wiſdome and of true learning.

, 43 TOfpeak with Spirits, is ill to the'S. and C. bur
good for the M, Dn ares 17s

—_—

_ The ſecond face of 7. f

44- To loſe blood, ifir be by the noſe, is very ill; tis
loſs of goods to the Af. and F. but to the S. and C.
Us gogd. | |
on Nn 2 * :” 45. To

iv

0 Se Bas 17
_ Dae wh. 4 —

-

» 08-1 To dream aro comes in and ſpeaks to us
in fome fimilliar way and without cerroar, denotes a

| fortane to the: dreamer, and that from the
Ber 7 TCO ug or Prince.

The _ of 2.

"46. Tofnsdat
| oryratice, figure

over a river, ditch,
home puns taking, and _ Ia-

EE fareof
To dream” of great thunder and other terrible

ahi

ignifics to the C. great wor and conteſta-
.- Hang, 3:

48. To FR Ifu'v very high place, yer without fal-
to the ground, and without receiving. any blow,
ſignifies a buſineſs which will nor come to perfectioo,
yet ſhalf there be no lofs. |

...: 49+ Toſce knives or UP” is a note of quarrels and
Slputes, but all wilide well again.

| RS} | . The Soul face of wy.

Jo. To bave many eggs, is align of great differences,
and. Many idle word $.

51 Toſce the topofa houſe burning, and defiring
__. reqedy i ie5but weſſoTuniy,! it igt © the _—

Sa "6 T. wt... ASP Þ Ad: I-00 ts
-$ 7M Tem We. OK 2.

Y
—_

e. 0+ + W's ARE £3 Lav 3: *xae Wee» 1-Sad OE = WE IRPM
<:

Book : 2. : The Temple of Wy PLL. dn ""_ 5 £ 385

of ſome grear man that is nie beware his
li

he is 2 Chriftao and |
good dream, nds the begjnaing of a good frnig,” |

The third face of

53 To ſee fair Kine, white br red, ic þ 10thp wo-
men fair and. white, thar he wasnoc accuſtomed ro
ſee, which ſhall be inclined to vertue.

54 To ſee lean or far Oxen, denotes geveraily the |
fertility or ſterility ofthe year ;z 'bur'ro take In wy
ſtrictly, it fignificss preſent gainor mk forranc. |

55 To feemto kifs ones father, or fome fieod,
or ſome one a Suiae , Ggnificss free
without deceit, yet there will be fome j g - thete
vikoos are I to the welanchollick..

The firſt face of —X

| 56 Who dreams that be hach had the compeny
his mother or fiſter, it is an ill dream and aa
op anieg Fonto lee ION he

7 T GED deing Church, i
ee ode eng = po

Na 3 2 me

Patio nds. KS Y
Pats 4 F , BOS TD £3 =? hi ; "FE $5 - "0 0
1 , .
—_—_———
. f bk

—_——— "IR

_ The ſecond face of x2.

> þ HOW 1 ee ERTIES;
_ Y

_—

. _ $8. To ſeeanevilSpirithinder a good work, baply-
the communion denotes thar ſome man ſeemingly de>
your ſhall hinder you in -your funion and bufineſs;
probably a Prieſt, a wicked hypocrite, will ſeck all
the that can be to hurt you ; chat hath hap-

A , «#
pF "RO Be | |
v * 2 >. @ ©

Pk

The third face of PY

% | ls 3. 6
, — Es

=. 59 MWhoever- dreams that be-ſces a Mule carrying

»

Books, and (ees-athers mocking at thoſe that demand

them, the'next morning he is affured to ſee an enemy

1 | _ ſhall /hinder all gevorion,, arid through his fool- _
Mhne&there will-be ſcmewhat wanting, that he may
appear\ beyond others, FER | 34151

The firſt face of &-

60. To ſeen grea: Lyon and well preprared to fight, |

.

eis tothe s. to ſeea nan ready to diſpute.

- 6t "Toſee men inthe places of execution ready to
| lofe ther lives, denotes that on the morrow you ſhall
[| © beimportunedby onethar ſhall be in Tome great ne-

s.

nee

- .,62 He that dreams he catsheatbs in a ſallet, will re-
ceire ſome novelty, in his opiniuns of learning and,
that wich controverſie, if there were divers hcarbs in

_ tharſfallet.. |
Sa | The

4 Yr | % _ "» :
» HS > $ TE Lo
= %

ht.

Book» 2. " The be Temple of W

—_—.

HEAR: ” > 1732p NY » Were ew
Zo CR ITE py TIER: "Rn
As 58

p

Piſtons, "4

—

7 be ſecond face of X,

63 To be in a fair place furniſhed with devout ima
and be meditatiog, and that 'many Angels are' with
you, is a very good dream; but if in that place. you ſee
deformed figares as in the places of the Fatherstis trea-
ſon apainſt'tbe oa |

64 To ſec the Sun and Moon and Stars fall at
feet, is the ſame dream as Joſephs ; but+ beware of by:
pocrilie, for thisage is full of deceit. © - SD

65 To ſee an old woman woing of you, and to FNe-« FS
ber is an affair purſued to good effe@, but ſo, wg hg A
. world ſhall mock at it.”

The third face of Fe.

66 To be in preat darkneſs and i in the middle of
that darkneſs to fer alight, and therein Jeſys ac A
ſeated in a rhrone ſpeaking to you, rien needs but |
''of theſe yo or dreams co do miracles. |

67 To ſee a great Serpent come out ofthe earth, and _
approaching to hurt you, but cannor, tis to the $,a wo-
man deſirous to do, him ſome imaryybT to theF. praiſe.

68 To be ina Hall richly banged with rapiftry of
divers colours, and there ſee' the King, isan excellent, - -
5: good dream. by ©

ER ©

= 2 Sib x PO? a IRC A ABD EAA Eee * meant

GIRL a

wy The "Temple of Wiſae Jome.

ne... nt + = are "5 "
an. " 2 z q $
Þ: 4 34 5 EW lj
i
Book |
2 'Y
-
wand .

The fr Face of

69 To have a great bunch of Keys. and give them,
to tho that ask or them tisa ſign of giving rn ra
 CapriVes.

**70 Toreceive great giftsfrom a King or Prince, is
matter of joy.

71 To dream, of hideous and ill favoured people
' $sto ſee things ti $0 cams. by ſome pox vulgar ſecrets.
73 Diverſity of ſubjets in dreams, as Horſes,

bo cha Bike Garmengs, to be talking with ſome

ugb fear, all ch e denotes

"bevy alba he 1 ef ei ſuch dreams and Nifions of of- -
ten, If they take bim at break of day, he may aflure
himſelfbe hath | part of Theyrgie, that ir is the boly
ſpirit that appears ro him to' reveal unto him ſome-
Aim more then ordinary - he

th low thivgs; = the {| ſpirit of the moſt Higb
jgh things. As at large you may read in the

ol ly $1 high
' Of fifteen dreams or p- jons dependeth all cuth,
2nd thoſe arg they that diſtinguiſh us from Beaſts,
hich, h yeequal with us what is common in dreams;
| ms was all chat che ancient Hebrews. be-
to be holy and. propherick, 'and it was all their

+ LTUSION 8 809 cpa pegs which were. underprop's by
Fe Joneing ecion. of it the true ones bo
= contained ood reatiſe under the 723, ng |

by the Eternal ; bur being particularized, there are fikceen
| more divinerthen the, reſt, which you may - - tar
fe! fifteen Principal verſes which are contained '*%
c

y \

.not.confteot hum. F

— ont

———— \ The Temple of Wiſdowe.”

the 37, which make « up Jacobs Ladder, there, being
one placed of every round by che which che Angets
aſcended: and deſcended. So. that this .Patriarchy only
ſaw them in a dream, which made'bim afraid, and
he paid his vows, ſaying, That God was in ans
lace, |
; Upon the top of his ladder there. was this- great
name of 72, Letters Sembs 4s » which by its
vertue and praiſe divided the 72Thillick verſes, includ-
ing what was to come of the propherical promiſes of

David, and myftically contained under the 72:Lettors
of the " foreſaid name. "which ſignifies nothing elſe bae
praiſes to the great Jehavah.

Lec us proceed is Order, - fot baving Cifparche whe
conceroed-terrettrial and ſublunary Matters, the cele-
ſial.folows. The celeſtial fatter, which bath: fot
its objet, Dreams, is either ſpiricual, or corporeal. '

. The m_—_— either infinite, as God; or finite, as
rae A MF Gn,

_— Reader is to obſerve thac the ref rrith +-of
God to.celeſtial chings is not here meang to the leaſt
prejudice of godlineſs ; as if he were: fuppoſed+to- be
includegin ſome certain pare ofthe |hegven, bur after
a famijiarmanner of ſpeaking ; for- fince it may'noe
be expeRed hat thele precepts | (whatever they we)
can poſſibly .be included:in certain and-infallible me-.
Jer becauſe of che contingence. and varietie
of the. matrer , the:Cotrteous Reader is entreated-to;
bring with. him an officious inclinacion and zeal ts
the adyancemenc of theſe ſtudies.” - + /

' To dream thenythatone prays and calls on God, ”
good; buritis ill, not only co ſee bim, but even to
ſpeak with him. But eo dreanr to ſee God ſpeaking be»
TOON 1s of: a more favourable ſignification. If a

= X earth. <tlrec-2cad? Ki 25 04 0M
Fx =
I 39 ? '
a de

jy man f
; '*
n : xi ME Bw

” Y Fe A 4 £78 4

——
s a lf dad -
-

mandre

. "fre him ſpeaking, gladneſs. -
- Tofee Angels, good;-to be-an Angel, better ; to
ſpeak with Angels, evil. DE: |
; The: celeſtial matrer that is withall corporeal , is
taken. 'cicher forthe ſubſtance of the Heaven , or its
parts 'or places, which are called houſes - or Signs.
_ - \The ſeeing of a ſerene clear sky fignifies profie and
glifinefs; = troubledand cloudy' ky, ſadneſs ;a bur-
ning $ky diſcaſes; /red, wars ;'the- sky-falling, guilt
of crimes; the'sky aſcending, honour and -ewinent

eo ns of EE:
_ To feethe'* planers pure and'clear falling'out' of
their- Orbs, or make towards the- earth, denotes
health. 7-0 | F267 BOTS
. The Fun fignifiesa King, father, Houſe or dignity,
 Arnald Will, cc. :: YL 4
(Tbe. Sun ſhining, a mind well pleaſed z the Sun
ng out of heaven, the death of ſome- prince or
Emperour ; the-Sun troubled, the dangers of prince;
the ſun'in Cohjun&ion with the: 2foon, ill: news;
- many: Suns: ſhining together, denotes a popular and
univerfal: joy. .To fee the: Sun, 'Moon*and planets,
gdlcar, pure, (and; cafily moving according to their
ordinary motion, are all of very good fipnification ,
eſpecially as to the health of che body. |
- 1,The, Moon denotes a Queen 'or- mother; being
darkened, ic ſpeaks the — of ſome great and

| noble women, as alſo threatnings, and Hatred; Many
T8 | Moons

- :

” OTOL RLALY —

Book 2. The Ti mple of Wiſe Home. I9T
Moons ſhining together, fignifies fome extraordinary
news, the Moow bloudy, loſs: the Moon ſhining
clear and bright, advantage; falling our of "Heaven,
the death of ſome princeſs, Datcheſs, Queen or emi-
nent Lady : to ſee the Moon of a purpie colour, de-
notes. profit and increaſe. +63” "Oe

The Stars of Heaven deaote Brothers, partners, «

*

Maſter or people to ſee them in their order anditio- .

rion, and in their luſtre, figures, and brigheneſs, fig-
nifies joy and gladneſs? ro ſee them confuſed and
' Without order, and wandring up and down, denotes
Seditions, Schiſms, perturbations, FaRtiens, Tumblts,
and Aﬀemblies, brawling,” diſcord, contention , &Cc.
Of theſe things our ſelf hath written largely in our
Jdea of the Law and in our Fundamental Elements of
Moral Philoſophy, Policy, Government and Laws.

This figure and his Idea and Ruler go-
* vern this houſe. ' Afcer the parts of Heaven -
* follow the ſpaces which ate the Celeſtial hou-
* * (ſes or ſigns, (which are twelve) and from
* which the fignifications of humane life are
deduced. © <<. |
- The firſt houſe js the horoſcope or iſcendent,
whence the condition and manner of life is reſolved.
- The ſecond is the houſe of riches, ſervants, fub-
ſtances as alſo che expiration of youth.
The third is of Brothers Siſters , and friendly
Relations, ET Os 4 "l | ;
The fourth of the inheritance of Fathers , and
treaſure. . ED FTE: eee
. T8 fifth Fol childret and ſabfiſtence, pleaſures and
delig kf. | F
' * Thefixth ofhealthand'ſickneſs.

The

cover hidden things.

by a proportioned analogie : for it is white, clean, li-
| ywgmthe depth of waters, long: lived, nearthe expi-.

SE SSRN IS IE nt I RE ET SC

192 The Temple of Wiſdome. | Book 2.

The feventh of wedlock, v women , marriage, and
ics diffolution.

The cighth of the kind of death, and the aft years
of a mans life.

The ninth is the houſe of piety, wifdome, learning,
philoſophie, and travels, {
The tenth is the houſe of government,advancement,

. *_ _eminencie, lordſhip, laws, and of the middle years of
_ be. -

 Fhecleventh of friends, benefaRors,fervants in their
old a
The ewelfth of Enenrics fighting, _— envie,

treachery in the end of life. :

Of theſe houſes fome are Cardinal, as the 1,4, 7,10.
ome are ſuccceding, as the 2, 5,8, 21. ſome cadent,
AS the 33 6 »9, 18. =

The afcendent is the fignification of life and its con-
dition-n every one , whereto alſo certain dreams are

Sgncd- « x

Secrates it is thus written , That Socrates the
|

night preceding the day he ſaw Plate, did forefee thar
a Swan being preſerired to him, reſted i in his lap, and
thence fying pitcht upon that gate of Athews, which
wascalled Academics , where it fo ſtretched out its
neck thar it reachedand pierced the heavent the next
day while Socrates related his dream to his Scholers,
Plare*s father preſents his fon to Soc>ates to be infiru- |

ted; whereupon Secreteg cries outs behold this is the
Swan that ſhall foar upto rhe celeſtial ſecrets, ard dif-

In this dream the Swan is the image of Philoſophy

xatioa

»

—

Ww | = » #5 #8 &# p Y'”"p
IC $\* Py * f F ; FI , .

ration of life ſweetly ſingiog : fo a Philoſopher king
ia integritie, and honeſty, is withoue ſpot, white, anc
clean, inquiring into the eruth of chings, ſearchingiats
che various depths of ſciences and opinions, to diſcern
between truth and falſhood, and according to the for-
mer, chuſes and direQs bis life, providing what is
neceſſary, negleRting what is ſuperfluous ; the loap-
lived experience of chings, brings him to a babir of
vertue and learning, and in the approaches of his
death, heleaves to poſterity ſentences and actions ſpe-
culative and praQick, as the Swarv like farewelk. And
this is the reaſon why a Swan foreſignifies a Philolo-
pher and long life.

There is ſuch another ſtory of the cluſter 'of Bees
pitching on che lips of P/z:o(bcing a little one ſleeping
in the cradle ) gathering of honey, avd a while after
diſperſing themſelves up into the air. This dream is
equally good as the other : for as the Bees gather co»
gether the matter of ſweetneſs for nouriſhment , the
matter of ſweet ſmelling , for the recreation of the

\ ſenſe : ſo Philoſophers diſpoſe all the time of their

lives, that they may in theic age recreate themſelves
with a true knowledge of things, and as with fragrant
incenſe inſtru& others in moſt ſweet precepts, which
they do two manner of ways, cicher by way of precepe,
or by expreſs examples of vertue, out-ſhining others,
there being in Bees a perfe& Idea of pxdagopical fun-
Rions. The wax denoterh the Idea of manners, and
che practical repreſentations of vertnes ; and the fweer-

neſs of the honey, thee ſweetneſs of docrine.

In like manner by a certain propriety the Vulture in

a dream ſignifies a Phyſitian, as we ſballmore ar large
ſhew hereafter. - :

There are alſo dreams that preſage an evil and vi-

t10ug

ious condition of life :- It is ſaid that Nero's mother
being with child dreamed tbat ſhe-broughr forth a
crael great Dragon, whict rifiing up againſt the mo- |
ther, drew out her bowels; who frightened, related
the dream to the Oneiromantift, who anſwers , Thou
ſhale bring forth a wicked man, and one that ſhall be
the cauſe of thy own death which happennd accord-
ingly. Ser. Nero, Cc. | ES

The figure is Puver Barzabel is the Ruler and 21./.

| Chigael isthe Genize that anſwers the Comunication

_ _of& in V in the trſt houſe. |

K edemel and the Genius Hiſmode! Rule this

X* houſe. Having ſpoken of the Angular houſes,

* * there remain tbe intermedial, that js to ſay,

* thoſerhar ſhelrer berween the four Angles,

* +* and they are either ſucceeding or cadent :

the ſucceeding are, Hel-gate; © ood fortune, Heaven
gar, Eudemon, viz. the 2,5, 8,11. houſes,

The firſt ſucceeding houſe is the ſecond, called Hel!
gcc, whence is judged of riches and fubſtance ; ſub-
Kance is underſtood two ways, for it 1s obtained cither
tewfally and honeſtly , or unlawfully and Chamefully;
fo many and thoſe very various dreams may be re-
ferred co this houſe. Beſides of what is directly and
lawfully gotten, ſome is @btained by Art, ſome by in-
duſtry, ſome by chance, fome by inheritance; and
what is indireQtly \ gotten, ſome is obtained by ſtealth
clandeſtinely, and with any manifeſt infamy ; ſome
wieh the note of open infamy, difgrace, baſcneſs, and
diſhoneſtly. - : |

So a certain man dreamed that he often went to di-
vers waters with nets, and caught ſmall fiſhes, but that
at

»w % 1 ;

ISO on

at laſt that he came toagreat river, and there took
a many great fiſh of ſeveral ſorts; This expreſly de-
noted he ſhould attain riches by his own induſtry and
pains? for the waters fignifie the pains, and the fiſh
'the advantage. In like manner, thoſe that receive fiſh
being given, or have catnicome into their windows ,
may expeQ the ſame.

A certain man dreamed that he took out his own

\ © bloud, which done he. went into ſome remore Coun-

try and. there delivered it to another; the party a
while after diesin a ſtrange houſe in a far Country, and
his riches by ceftament he bequeathed to another
ſtranger. Acertain thief related how he foreſaw that
as he entered into a certain houſe he found rhe Maſter
or owner of the houſe ſleeping, ſwollen up, and ſtink-
ing, whom outof indignation of the ftink he diſen-
rraild , which were full of the ſuperflaicy of nature ,
and burdened with his load of excrements be returned;
This very thief a while after, ſecretly in the night en-
tered the houſe of a certain Uſurer, and carried away
with him a great ſum of money while the other ſl
Ifcheſe had been ſeen without ſtink,, che ſignification
ſhould have been that the ſtealth might have been
committed withont any publike infamy and manifeft
diſgrace. By what hath been ſaid, the wiſe Interpre-
preter may eaſily judge of the loſs of ſubſtance, as if a
Fiſherman ſhould dream he loſt his fiſh out of a near
fiſh pond ; and fo conſequently of other things. And
now obſerve the Rulers and Ideas we ſpake of before,
and they will guide you in cheir figures.

T aph-

| T aphthar tharath and Ambreel have Domini”

* onover this corner of the' Earth : having

*X diſpatched the ſuccedent Houſes, we come

* now to the Cadent Houſes, we come now

* to the Cadent houſes which decline from the

| Angels, and are included in both the for-

mer, and arc, the Goddeſs of good things, Evil for-
tune, the Divine houſe, Cacodemon. +

The firſt then of the Cadent houſes is the third,

| called by the Aſtrologers Dea bonorum, by which are

judged dreams that relate to Brotbers, Siſters, kin, and
alliance, as alſo the change of place.

To this chapter rhe divers dreams of divers things
are to be refered.

So. the Brothers of Joſeph are denoted by their
ſheaves to bow the ſheat of Z>ſeph : the ſame may be
ſaid of the ſtars bowing to Foſeph, Ger. 37. &c.

So another dreamed that he ſaw one cotting off his
arms witha ſword, and was afterward killed by his
own brothers. |

Whatever is here ſpoken of brothers, the ſame
may be alſo underſtood of Companions aud perſons
of the ſame bloud, whereof the falling of the teeth
15a frequent (ignitication. |

As for the change of place or voyxpes, it is ſig-
rufied by flying. So a certain man (we have the ſto-
ry from Ys Novans:) ſaid that he dreamt that be
fled, and that with much pleaſute , and that at he
end of his flight he ſtood in a pleaſurable green Med-

dow, high ſeated: and that walking up and down
the meddow, he found divers rivers and rivulets, &c-
ind them repleat with ſerpents rails. And while he
-riouſly confdercd theſe ſights, he ſaw himſelf, =

c

«xp of o” "A >
BOOK 2
I # -& 0
® OC — oc 9G—$S—_

he thought, changed into a Vulcur, beating off with
his feet' the Serpents Ricking ro him. About ſeven.
days after he - was entertained by a great Baron, to
praQiſe phyſick there, and being entertained phyſi
tian in that hbuſe, he caſt down many that enyied
him. | |

' Tris hereto be noted that a Vultur, by ſome pe-
culiar property ſignifies a phyſitian ; for as a Vultur
ever attends other creatures and their carkafles, fo
the kin of a Vulcur newly killed draws other crea-
rures 'to it (for ſo they are taken in Spa») ſo the
phyfitian attends the diſeaſed for to cure them, ot
endeavours it as far as the bleſſing of God and tus

V

| own $kill can contribute. |

(a) Haſmodai and Hwriel in (4) the ſecond Car-
* > dinal houſe is the fourth, called the low
* * heaven, ſr»m whence is drawn the judge-
*x * ments of parents, patrimony , immoveable

and ſuch like.

In dreams then to ſee friends, eſpecialy ones mother,
ſignifies ſecurity ; for motherly dreams are of moſt
circumference and aRivity, Yet ſometimes the parents
appear like the Sun or Moon, ai Foſe ph ſaw the Sun
and Moon and 12. Stars bow to him , which was
afcerwards verified in his parents in Egypr. Gen.
46. 1. and 29. |

But it is in this place to be obſerved that the pa-
rents of divers perions, who bad ſeen total or par-
tial eclipſes have within a while after died or ficken-
ed; and proportionally to this is whatever may be
ſaid of the ſight of parents. So there was a certain
man that in his ſleep ſaw his father falling into a
deep pit, whoſe father accordingly alittle while after
dyed, Oo | Here

a

The Temple of Wiſdome. 197

X * goods, ediices, treaſures, lands, agriculture, &$®

oe 1 4 = / | _ e of +1 dome. SC y |
F [et F "ap

Here may alſo be ranked among preſages , ſome
matter which is # proporcionable ſubje& to the pa-
rents, thet is, ſuch a thing as is of dayly uſe and rcla-
tion to them, and may be the portender of life or
death ; as if the horſe of a noble man. or great man
(whereon he dayly rides) wt bout any ſufficient pre-
yious cauſe chance to die eirher at home or abroad

ſaddenly, it ſignifies ſome misfortune or danger to the

Nobleman.

| Sorath and V:rchiel Rules this place. The
* X , ſecond ſucceeding bouſe is the fifth , called

* X* ood Fortwne , whence we judge of ſons
* © dau; hters children, ſubliſtence, &Cc. |
* To ſee in adream a multitude of chil-

| dren, ſons or daughters, ſignifies many ad-
vantagiovs bulineſſes, and that deſervedly, becauſe tis
for our children that we undertake ſo many affairs:

A certain man dreamt that his own ſon was taken
by his play-fellows intoa hall and dad ina garment
of Laurel leaves, and crowned with a Laurel Gar-
land; He ſaw him afterward for his high integrity and
honeſty crowned King. -

Others dreaming they ſaw Crows on their chil-
grens heads, forewarned them of hanging.

A certain Quecn drcamed that there appearcd to
hec ouc of the Wet part of her Kingdom divers beaſts
under the forms of Lions, making towards her in the
King ber ſons Palace, and chat ſhe ſaw the Kings
Chappel burning, and that ſhe gathered together the
Szynts reliques. The Queen awoke, related che dream
eo an Oneiromancer, who anſwered, That the King-
dom ſhould {uff:r preat loſs, and that her ſon ſhould
dicin a War raiſed by the means of thoſe beaſts _

| | \ rne

COOK -2. © The Temple of Wiſdome. I 99

che Welt part of her Kingdom, and chat many
Inhabiranes and much Nobility ſhould be deſtroy-

Beſides the foregoing dreams, there are other pre-
ſages which more certainly prefigurate the deſtruRi-
on of Kingdomes, Children, and Regions, then any
dream can. ;

So a Gallowes or Gibbet newly built with the
| help of all bands, by ſome high wind quite overthrown
( before there is any motion of War) and by the vio-
Jence: of the wind cruſhing to pieces the dead bo-
dies of thoſe that have been hanged, denotes death
co ſome King, and the deftrution of the Kingdome,
witneſs Arneldas Will, Oc.

* * Taphthartharath and Hamaliel are com-
* mandedtoproted chis part of theEarth*The
= ſecond of the Cadent Houſes is the fixth,cal-

* * led bytheAftcologers 11] Fortane ; whence

the judgement is direRted concerning health
or ſickneſs, diſcaſe & indiſpoſitions, as alſo of ſervants
and Beaſts. That thetcfore .omewhat may here
be faid of health and fickneſs; ( though every where
before in the general objects of dreams relating to

Payſical matters, we have ſpoken ſufficiently \t is to be

noted. that thoſe dreams which are dreamed art nighe

refl:Qing on the ations of the day in an honeſt mar-
ter, and repreſenting ſomewhae like the ations of the

. day, arcevergoodtoaman ; for they ſignify health,

and are a fign that a mans mind is conſtant to the aQi-

ons, and what he did inthe day , and that his reaſon
and will are good friends, and that he is not detained
by a falneſs or emptineſs, or any other outward thiny, -

whereby the operations of his mind ſhould receive a-

oy hinderance. Oo 2 But

20 "The Temple of Wiſdame. BOOK 2.

But when the dreams are contrary to the aRions of
- the day, and fight with them , it denotes a perturba-
tion of the body , and conſequently fickneſs. In like
manner all things (that are pure) rhat feem to hang
out of heaven, fignifie good health, Things appear-
ing troubled, black, dark, +and not perſpicuous, ſigni-
fies ſicknefs, Hipp. 1b. de Inſomn.

Servants are commonly foreſeen & forefignified by
the hands ; for a ſervant is, aS it were, the hand of his
Maſter, as being a moving Organ, though a ſeperated
member. Hence Ariſ/orle was inthe right, 1. Pol:r. 4.
5 Sus x[npe 7,00, a lervant is an animate poſleſ-
fion; and every one that ſerves, is an organ to be pre-
ferred before all. The hands moreover are the ſer-
vants of the members ; for which reaſon the wiſe In-
terpreter ſhall apply them to ſervants, ſlaves, maids,
and Miniſters, |

If living creatures appear in dreamstheir ſignificati-
on is according to their propriety, compared to
man z or according to the ordinary uſe that man makes
of them. |

So an Oxe ſignifics huzhandry ; a Horſe, carriage ;
a hound, hunting ; a houſhould dog, fidelity, as to Do-
meſiick affaires ; Sheep, Swine, Geeſe , Ducks, and
ſuch liketame creatures, ſignific ſubſtance and cloath-
ing; and ſoin other caſcs the judgment of the dream
is according to Its ſeveral circumſtances, yer with this
difference ever, that the relation tro man be obſer-
ved ; in which reſpet, an Eagle doth commonly de-
Ggn a King ; a Favicon a Duke; a Lyon, an Empe-
rour, Prince, or King; and ſo of thereſt , as you
may read in T:nainys Geom.uncy.

And

a oy ———————————————
The Temple of Wiſdoms. 201
And Gcomancers attribute this figure to
* * this houſe, Ked:me/ and Zvriel are the Ruler

Xx and Idea of tiiis ſeventh Angle of the Earth.

*# Thethird Angular houſe 1s the ſeventh, cal-
led by the Attrologers the Weſt Angle; us

the denotator of all contentions and controveriies,and
conlequently to women in relation to their husbands ,
for the man as an agent, the woman as patient, as in
all'other controverſies, is taken for afſcendent, and in
the indication of celeſtial matters falls into the ſeventh

Houſe,

It 1s then to be noted, that when any creature of
what kind ſoever, makes any aſſault, or docs any vio-
lence, the contention is denoted both according to the
condition and quality of the aſſault, andaccordiog to
the defence which both tmake.

So Arnaldus de Villa :0va,leaves it of himfelf,that in

a dream heſaw four Wolves aſſtulting him with open

mouth , bur that he thruſt chroush the biggelt of

them ; four dayes after he overcame in ſuit four ad»
veriarics. Hither may be referred what is before
largely handled in The Harmony of the VYorld.

But as to women, it is to be noted in general;
Thac tolie with a woman proſtitute, ſignifies in ſome
way proſperity ; but a Virgin , much labour wich lit-
tle advantagz; the latter being properly barren, and |
the other fo ar fruicfol, as thar ſhe is alwaics ready .
for the at; This alſo hath obtained the credit of a '
perſage; That ingoing our of any place of tratfique ,
after having made their markets,the meeting of ſtrum-
pets ſignifie gain ; the meeting of ſterile perſons; loſs.
Bur ſuch things as theſe, are currant rather by the
ſtamp of experience , then by any natural reaſon ta- |
ken trom cauſes concurring to the eſſential conſtitution
of the things, Oo 3 Barzabel

202 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.
* Barzabel and Barthic] own this Quarter
* ofthe Earth, Thethird fucceding Houſe is
* * theeighth, called by rhe Aſtrologers Domns
* * mortis, whence the {ignification of death and
the end of a mans life is ſignified : Hither ape
pertain thoſe dreams that are the prefaces and forc-run-
ners of death,

Szetonius relates of Calpaurina, Jul. Ceſarrwile ,

that the nightbefore the aſſaſſination, ſhe dreamr that
 theroof of the Houſe fell, that her husband was thruſt
into the belly, and that preſently the Chamber door of
ic ſelf flew open. And whilethe next day ſhe related
the dream to ?ulizus, behold there came in a bird with
a branch of Laurel from Powpeps Court, which en-
tring in was purſued by many other Birds of divers
Kinds, from a Grove hard by, and having killed it, tare |
tin pieces. And Julius himſelf thought in his ſleep,
that he flew above the clouds : another rime, that he
ſhaked hand with Zwpiter : another time, that he was
caft down headlong. 7/:«s therefore forewarned not
ſo much by his own dream, as by the augury of the
Sooth-ſayer Spuri.a, to look to himſelf from the
Calends till the Ides of March were paſt, kept himſelf
ina while, but afterwards going abroad and meeting
with this Sooth- ſayer , the Calends are come ſayes be
to him; Spurina anſwered, but they are nor paſt Sir ;
ſo going forward to the Capitol , he was killed by the
Conſpiracors.

So the Crows cating out of the basket on Pharaohs
Bakers head , piefaged his hanging. Sotoa certain
Lady a black Cloak , wherewith ſhe dreamt her ſflf
cloathed for to go to a Funera] , foretold her own
death. : |

H iſmacl

s 0 Dy Oo "RH YT

—

The Temple of Wiſdome. 203

* Hiſmacl and Aavackiel rule here. The

*X third Cadent houte isthe ninth, called by the
* X* Altrologers, the Divine houſe , whence we

X judge of juurneys, travel, piety, wiſdome ,

learning , Philoſophy , and other - Sciences :
But (ſince we have ſpoken ſufficiently as to journeys
before, we ſhall in this place lay down ſomewhat briefly
of Religion, -

A certain man being to enter an Order of Monks,
did often dream he was dead, and that not withour
wondring , he thought he went about begging from
door to door z by which dream, bischange of life and

_ entrance into the Order was confirmed.

So likewiſe a certain Nun before ſhe entered che
Cloiſter ro make her vow of chaſtity, dreamed ſhe was
led by her parents intothe Church, received from the
Prieſt the image of Chriſt crucified, and that ſhe mar-
ried that image ; which dream ſignified the change of
her former life, and her beginaing of a Religious
life. . | |

As concerning Wifdome, Learning ,and philoſophy,
the Reader is referred to che Holy Guides +

X* Z1z:land the Genius Haxael govern this
* part of the Earth. The fourth and laſt of
* the Angular houſes is the tenth , called the
* Culm, or Mid-heaven by the Aſtrologers ;

whence is judged of Empire, Exaltation, Snb-
lIimation, Maſterſhip, Laws, Memory, Honours, Dig-
nities, and the like. |
There was a certain man ſaw in his dream, that in
an afrernoon , and after a ſickneſs, in a neutral condi-
tion between health and fickneſs, he had ſeen his own

face like a Sun, and in his left hand a bright Starz a

| Oo 4 great

XX

| 20k "he emple of Wiſdome. Book' 2.

OOO ETD 7 Eh ER
y

great while after this happened, be took the Degree
of Maſter of Arts.
eArnalduVilla Novanus relates of a certain King,
who dreamed that be crowned his wife, placing her in
- aroyal chair, and giving her a Scepter, did a while after
recover the Kingdom which the Queens father had
loſt, and did in effe&t make her heir thereof.
 . eArnaldawfays of another who dreamt that he fud-
denly fell oue of his chair and royal ſeat, and could nor
88ain recover his ſtat, though he much ſtrived to do
it; anda while after by the unanimous ccnfent of ail
his Nobility was depoſed, and died deſtitute of all Go-
vernment.

- Hither may alſo be referred the dream of Adri-vwm
before mentioned , who the day before he was pro-
nounced Emperour at eA*tioch, faw a fire fallen from
heaven on the left ſide of his neck ( which at the fal-
ling he preſently felt ) ſpreading into the right, but was
not hurt nor frighted by ir, |

So the dream of Artowizs the Philoſopher , con-
cm the hands of ivory , mentioned in the Holy

Wide,

Azalio the Omen of eAlexander the Great at his
nativity, of an Eagle being on the palace of his father

Philip, which with his voice and wings ſeemed to ap- |

plaud and:congratulate.
Such is the Omen of Aſcarixs of fire ſliding down,
ſuch-the Omen of Tali, of the head burning in the

_ cradle, whereof more in our thicd Book of The Tem-
ple of Wiſdome. |

Za

waz

Book 2- The Ti emple of Wiſdome. 205

* * Zaz:land Cambricl naturally belong co this
Xx *_ part of the Earth, Thelaſt of the ſuccedent
x * houſes is the eleventh, whence are judged
*X Friends, Counlellers, great men, BenefaQtors,
Patrons, 'Doers of pious works, Mecenates,
Favourers, and Servants. But becauſe a friend is ano- .
ther (cIf, there are many ſights referring to friends,
and maiy to enemies. It is a preſage of friendſhip to
ſee ones ſelf tmultiplied 3 as alſo to-have the arms and
grinding teeth ready and fit to do ſome ation 2 bur
the loſs of teeth, arms, or proviſion ſignifies propore
tionable cnmities and defigns of enemies. |
As for what concerns the Counſellers or Miniſters

. of great perſons , it may be gathered from what hath

been delivered in the Harmony of the VYorld. as if any
one dream that he adminitters or enjoys the honours
or dignities of ſome Duke, Prince, Emperour, or King,
or that he is ſubje&t to him; that is reckoned of
good preſage, other circumſtances of the Dicamer
being conſidered.

So Pharaohs Cup-bearer dreamed that he took Pha-
rachs cup, and having filled ir, preſented it to Praraob
rodrink; which dream 7oſeph interpreted to his.re-

Fi

ſtauration to his place. |

X Hiſmael and Annixiel are aſſigned hither.

* >* Thelaſt cadznt houſe is the twelfch, called by
* * the Aſtronomers , Caccdemon ; whence the
X * Jjudgmentis framed concerning Enemies, Ad-

verſaries, Treachery, Impriſonment, and the

like. In which procedure it is to be obſerved, that ene-

mies are deſigned under the forms of certain living

creatures ; ſometimes under the form. of a Dragon,
{omerimes of a Lion, ſometimes of a Wolf, Fox, Ser-

| pent, |

-

206 The Temple of Wiſdome. PBook 5.
pear, &c. according to the qualities of the Dreamer,
and according to the various circumſtances of the
dreams, as is ſufficiently ſpoken of before.

Togo into a priſon denotes treachery, bands, nets,
circumventions, iron chains, and the like, repreſenc
priſons, and impriſonment.

But if any one ack what it is that thus determines
the phantaſms of Viſions, Ar»«/4as anſwers out of
Prolemie, ſaying that the images of compoſition in this
World, are ſubjec to the celeſtial images proportio-
nably, eitherin reſpe& of the Dreamer, or in regard of
the Mover; the things enquired are to be un-
derſtood , as is doſcribed more at large in the Ho/y

wide,

Having ſpoken of the houſes of Heaven (read 7 h-
Harnwny of the Wo:{4)we are now to treat of the Signs
of the Zodiack, which areia number 1 2.through which

the Sun and Moon (eſpecially the Moon) paſling, do

diverſly diſpoſe the humours of our body , and conſe-

quently. imprint -ſo many various phantaſms in thoſe

that dream, and the Farth is alſo divided into twelve

parts.

Now all or at [caſt the principal matter of all our

ations, whereof we dream in the night, may be di-

| Nribured into theſc 24 heads. The 1 ſhall be of Weep-

ing, 2 Joy, 3 Cloatbing, 4 Water, 5 The living crea-
tures of the Water, 6 Chance of man, 7 Buildings ,
8 Theabuſe of Members, 9 Singing, 10 The arrival of

a friend, 11 Local motion, 12 The ſeeing of fire,
13 Riding, 14 Murther, 1 5 Dead people, 16 Waſhing
inthe water, 17 Money, 18 The fear of ſome ſight,
19 Fighting, 20 The ſpoiling of a man, 21 Sickneſs,
22 Kiſſes and embraces, 23 Banquets, 24 Aſſem-

| of

EE A a a ad ies at HS

"Book. The Temple of Wiſdome.

\ Of all theſe according to the order of the Celcſtial
b Signs, and Ideas of, |

. 207

* If Populus be in any of the 12 houſcs of
* theearth, you cannot err. The Moon being
* in contention, in © the fear of a friend ,
in 1x the hope of firm joy, ih S infirmity ,

* In g}, honour, in Tp gladneſs, in = mirth , in
m meeting ſome body, or agreement, in £ fear, in
the death of a friend, in = the death of ſome great
man, in 3 it ſignifics the hearing of ſome news - and
you may be ſure this is true if Pop#/us bein that part of
the Earth the ſign ſignifies.

Y 2 Joy.

The Moon being in Y ſignifies trouble, in S the ar-
rival of a friend, in 37 money, in $S the coming of a
friend, in © the ſeparation of a friend , in ne gladneſs,
in :& prief, in m the ſadneſs of a brother, in 2 joy, in
4? ſeparation of a friend, in 2 augmentation , in X a
vain dream. 2

X X % %

3 Cloathing.

The Moon being in Y ſignifies nothing, in = glad-
neſs, in It nothing, in B good, ia 4 hatred,in "Z great
contention, in ſadneſs, 1n m honour, in 2 ſicknels,
in Vf a gueſt or ſtranger, ig = vexation of heart, in X
nothing.

[

4 Waters.

BRAISED

208 The Temple of Wiſdome.” Book. <<

|| | 4 Waters.

The Moon in Y there is ſignified ſome trouble, in
Ss perplexicy,in T infirmity, in 5 extremity,s), power,
1p nioney, SZ nothing, m gladneſs, 2 death , v» con-
tention, = a vain dream) in * ſickneſs.

5 The living creatures of the Water.

The Moon being in ' fear, © comfort, xr money z

S a troubled mind, dl fear, 7 loſs of money, = death.
fil. of a friend, 1. amendment of life, ** good news,
| | trouble, = ſickneſs, * the like. |

6 The chanites of man.

The Moon being in ) detraRion, © lying, n bo-
nour , S adiſeaſe, Lnothing, famine, = death of
enemies, "diſſention, *'a new friend, '” griefof mind,
= g good dream, x ſome neceſſity. |

7 Buildings.

The Moon being in Y joy, = death from ſome pow- |
erful band, i plague of the fleſh, ® money, *. ſhall
travel, 't good news, = proſperity, \Ljoy, 2a new |
_— Vy grief of mind, = a good dream, X ſome ne-
celtic. |

pro

| | 8 The abuſe of members.

| The Moon being in Y a good thing, S neceſſity ,
f 7 erouble, S detraſtion Sa friend, 'k joy, © detra-
| Rion,

"Book 22 The Temple of Wiſdome. 209
Rjon, ' a diſeaſe, ** wearineſs, Y money , = mony.” >

9 Singing.

The Moon being in news, 5a journey, I change
into better condition, © nothing, > fancie, ar great
love, = trouble, "il grief of mind, *' fame; ? comfort,
= 4 vain dream, * diſcord.

' IO Arrival of a friend.

The Moon being in Y a gift, © i noting, Sincreaſe
of money, * loſs of ſome honour, "* poverty, = lamen-
tation; Vl riches, honour, '” great news, = trouble,
x wearineſs. |

11 Change of place.

The Moon being in Y ſtrife, © good to thy ſelf,
LK news, S the death of a Prince, >. the joy of 'a gueſt,
IX an enemy, = fomewhat ftolen from thee, ni, honour,
2 nothing, ve anger , = comfort , *< ſome great and
ſtrange news,

12 The ſeeing of fire.

The Moon being in Y tronble, > a gueſt, I increaſe
of money, S a diſeaſe, & loſs,.z crouble, =: news, m a
diſeaſe, * news, ” news, = grief of mind, x: grief of
heart.

13 Riding.

The Moon being in Y' death, & honour, IL a friend,
= noe

Tz ED
 a1IO'

” IT

oxy 74 Te T7 of Wildome. Book 2.

= nothing., 5 long life, mr « battle, = bumiliarion,
'Mtrouble, 2 detraction, Y thefe, = a gueſt, + detra-
Qion.'

14 Maurther.

\- The Moon beingin Y ſadneſs, in & death cf a friend,

IT confeition, S riches, $5. ſickneſs, % grief, = poverty,
Mins, 7 death» v gladneſs for a reward, = nothing ,
 X goodQhings.

15 One dead.

The Moon being in ! riches, © novght, 1! bad news,
S contention and anger, < money, ij, a gueſt, : glad-

Neſs, "ia vain dream, «* good news, Y joy, = good
© things to come, * a vain dream,

16 Waſhing in the water.

The Moon being in ' loſs, © trouble, I derradtion,
\ E great anger, < joy, * gitet of mind,=1iches,*+ fear,
x riches, 1y joys = loſs, - labour.

I7 Money.

The Moon being in + fickn:fs, ta heavy dream,
7 fois of a friend, = z gueſt, © money , '* wearinele,
= death of an enemie, m theft, *' a vain dicam, ': a
- Queſt, = joy, <a gueſt.

13 Fear of ſome ſight.

The Mocn being in ”” trouble, © a battle, 75: an evil
confcience, © good fortune, i fickneſe, 4 money, :-a
vain

= g——_— T ”
Toe. 7 E
p»,v.v .

vain dream, "the ſame, * good news, 1 ſtrife wich
thy ſelf, ® wearigeſs of heart, X tears.

19 A fight.

The Moon being in Y infirmity, & victory over an
adverſary, 1: good declaration, > advancement ,s} en-
vie, :1 g00q news, = an enemie, I buſineſs, * news of
women , vy a meſſenger, ® the flighe of an enemic,
X JOY»

20 The deſpoiling of a man.

The Moon being in Y deccit, >; riches, I a good
man, S a friend ro come, > a reward, '* Poverty ,
"1 death of an enemie, fame, '? a gueſt» = labour,
X departure. |

21 ADiſeaſe.
The Moon being in ! nething, S joy, deceit,S mo-.
ney to beloſt, < a friend, iz gladneſs, =comfort, m ®

fight, ,- a diſeaſe, vy joy, zz Joy of a friend, * good
employment.

22 Kiſſes and embraces.

The Moon being in } trouble, 5 detraQion, 5; the

coming of a friend, «, the arrival of an enemie, * ad-

 vancement, nz ſadneſs, = a gueſt, m joy, x lictle labour,
V news, =: grief and ſtrife, X gladneſs.

23 Banquets.

The Moon being in Y* joy, & the arrival of ©

friead,

hee

'YS

212 107992. DOOk 5

friend,;: gladne:s, © nothing,” long life, ny good news,
= poverty, "money, 2 comfort, '? ſeparation, ® a
vain dream, x joy.

Tl "Temple of W

24 An Aſſembly.

-- The Moon being in 7 news, & ſtrife, 1; fear, « Joy,
< ill news, 'X the fame, = a diſeaſe, ill news, * little
gladneſs, nothing, _ and X a Vain dream.

We have hitherto treated of the manner of divin-
ing according. to the ſubje& matter ; now follows the
manner of preſaging out of dreams. But fince dreams
are either divine, or humane, we arc to conſider
what truth ,, and out of what dreams this truth is
ws be had; and how. far divination by dreams may
be lawful or nct.

Divine dreams as they are without controverſie
the moſt certain, ſodo they require a certain faith : But
here we muſt be very cautious, and conſider what
dreams are properly divine, and what ate not ſo;
for (ometimes Sar changes tiplicliinrg an Angel
cf Liohe. |

Divine dreains are tryed by examining them by
the Kunle of the known Word: for if they agree with
what hath been delivered before, if they bear no-

"ehing new and diſcrepant from thoſe things which
2:ethe immiitable Law -of God and the Goſpel, they
are of God -- but if they be a falſe gloſs and ſhew of
\.-/1g10n and Piety, require ſomewhat contrary to the
d::}:red word of God, letthem be condemned they

are nut of God.
fn!

BOOK 2. e Temple of Wiſaome. 213

And fince the Devil, as in all bis other works, hack
endeavoured to imitate him in the buſineſs of dreams,
by which occaſion he crept into the minds of-fooliſh
and improvident people: we may not henceforth ex-
'pe& ſuch enchufiaſms from haaven, and God hath
rycd us to theexpreſs Letter of his doctrine, where-
in he requires us to ſeehim and know him, as alſo
what his pleaſure is, and what he wilt have us to do, .
and what not. Let us not therefore faſten on, but ab-
hor the doatings of fanatick perſons, thorgh they
pretend never ſo much to derive them from heaven,

Next to divine dreams are the Angpelical, which
if they agree with the Divine, and be ſuch asT have
deſcribed them, they may be believed. But the Dia-
bolical dreams are to be deteſted, by which the
Heathens of old, and of late che Manichzans, Pe=
lagians, Aonks, and fanatick perſons, being deceived
and carried away, were the authors and d:fenders
of what horrible things followed thereupon. +For it
is 2 point of the preateſt impicty and Atheiſm for
to have'any thing ro do with the dettroyer and ene-
my of God and man, or-to give any credit to his
lyes. Andit being granted that ſometimes the Devils
may know caſual events, (which opinion rhe Contmbr.
Philoſaphers charge e Auguſtine, Danaſcenus, and
'Tho, eAquinas with) yer the ſignificat.on of things
ro come (which the Devil never inſpires into men
dreaming) it cannot be called ; becauſe if he be the
ſworn enemy of truth, and the archire& and artifi-
cer of all lie, there cinnot any thing proceed from
him that is ſolid and crue; but whatever he doth, we
muſt look onitno otherwiſe then a painted falſhood,
ro deceive thoſe who ſhall credic it.

Humane dreams which have no. other but natural
Fp ; cauſes

a a er PR EOS ee nn
: = ”Ww - Y "7 4 |
| ; T17% DP,v,%
£ 2 L 4 We , J- ay 7

cauſes, and happen co men ordinarily as they. ſleep,

are either phyſical, o: common. The phyſical dreams.

arethoſe which by the agitation of the humours, and
the diſpoſition of the temperament, do by certain
ſigns, ray ſometimes even material and efficient cauſes,
diſcoyer unto the Phyſitian the more certain conſti-
rution of the patient. Theſe may be obſerved with-
out any riot or ſuſpicion of impiety- or atheiſm, to
the end that more fortunate medicines may be provi-
ded for the fick, See the Holy Guide. .

So a certain Wreſtler dreamed that he was plunged
ina Ciſtern of blood, and that he ſhould ſcarce deli-
ver himſelf thence 3 Accordingly to this dream, the
Phyſicians knowing it proceeded from an exuberance
of blood, having taken away what abounded, diver-
ted the danger he was in. Gales mentions another,
who dreaming that one of his legs became dead as
a ſtone, a while after became paralytick in that leg.

The common dreams are thoſe that proceed from
compound cauſes; and they are true, or falſe or e-
quivocal :. All which chough chey might happily be
_ the images of certain events; yet to reduce from them
any poſitive and ab{ojute interpretation or conjeure
Is forbidden in holy Writ. VVheretore we may not
give credic toa ſimple previſion any further then it
proceeds from natural cauſes.

' Nor is it ſufficient, in caſe the event ſignified, an-

ſwers this dream, or that if there be not the ſame
ſucceſs in a hundred or chouſand others, to charge the
Art with vanity, or the Intrepreters thereof with
tgnorance, ſince there are many things, which though
they are rightly interpreted, yer many times happen
not accordingly. Hence it was ſo many Kings and

Princes have miſerably periſhed by this kind of dreams,
as

wm 3© oa

ad cn s a Bf — BE eo? 5

—_

Book 2: The Temple of Wiſdome.

as Pompey, who aboiit the latter end of the war be+
tween him and Ceſar, dreamed thathe fate in the
Theatre, and was applauded by che people, which
applauſe ſhould give bim the victory : bur the event |
of that applauſe denoted not the viRory, butthe ſtir-

ring up againſt him of Lementulus, Domitine, Libienus,

and ' others. See our Idea of the Laws. &c.

So. Darius before the laſt battle with Alexander,
dreamed he faw a burning army marching through
Aſia, came even to Bebylos,where he ſaw Alaxander,
clad in a Perfian robe, entring the Temple andpreſent-
ly vaniſhing, By which'dream Darixs was perſweded
that by the flames deſtruction was meant to the Ma-
| cedonian Army; and that Alexander being clad in
Perſian habit, ſignified he ſhould be brought under
the power of them; But the evenc made it appear;
that by the flames was portended the ſwift and yito-
rious progreſs of Alexander, and that of fire devour-
ing all chings; by the habic, the Perſian Empire was
forefignified ro Alexander.

So Cambyſes dreaming that his Crown touched the
heaven., and that he fate in his brother S2i7d:s's
Royal feat, was to him the ſignification of death.

So Julins (eſars dreaming he was above the
Clond, had irs effeR in his death.

So Xerxes upon the bringing of his army into
Greece dreamed thathe was crowned with an Olive,
whoſe branches ſhadowed all the earth, that preſently
vaniſhing with-che dream. | f
There are many dreams which are rather th&
conjeRures of events, then the true fignifications, ſuch
a: was that of Alexenders dream to Cyrus; for he
dreaming that he ſaw Satyrs dancing asked the Con-
jeRor, whence he forerold him the viRory; the con-
P p 2 jeRure

Me a A ps

216

'" The Temple : of Wiſdome. Booko,

jeRture was taken from the word Satyr, ſeeing from
{-vs:4 may come thele words,7waeſft Tyrus.

' Miny dreams are ambiguous, double ſenſed, in cer>
tain, and doubtful, and may be referred to either part
of the contradition ; whoſe events are fo tickſiſh,

that the very Interpreters of dreams in ſuch caſes are

ſometimes aſleep, whereof we have theſe examples,
- -Onethat was tro run in the Olympick games, dream-
edihe was carryed in a chariot witch four horſes; He
cells the Conjector his dream, who anſwered, Thou
thalt overcome ; for thatis, ſhewn by the celerity and
ſtrength of the. horfes; the party relating the fime
dream'to eAntiphon was anſwered, Thou muſt be
o'ercome ; ſceſt thou not there are four that run
before thee ? |
Another rold a"ConjeRor that he had dreamed he

- Wis turned into an Eagle ; he anſwered thou ſhalt

overcome, for their is nothing ſwifter or more vio-
lent thenthat bird : But ſays Atiphon to him, doeſt
thou not ſee thy feif overcome, for that Bird pur-
ſuing and chacinp others, is ever the laſt it (elf.

Ofa many dreams, there are bur a few have their
true events, (though it muſt be granted they ſome-
times though ſcldome have) eſpecially in melancholy
perſons who as they are naturally thoughtful, ſo do.
they the oftnelt dream, and ſuffer moſt repreſentati-
ons of things. Whence as he that ſhoots allday may
at laſt bir the mack, ſo they in their dreams may ſome
rim or other apprehend tru: things, and that the of-
raer becauſe they dream often, Arift. 15b.d e dewin. Cc.

Thefe the Greeks'call 89/4 >dx45, bvEuriiecs. buoy,
x, a«gs »=« For they receive by particular influ-
ences of heaven ſuch a faculty, as when it perceives
the approach of any ihing, if it be in the day, ir _

| vately

Book 2, The Temple of Wiſdoms. 217
vately (the brain being imployed and taken up with
other thoughts) affects the perſons wherein it is;«with
an unexpected joy or ſadneſs , according to theicon-
diction of what is imminent - if itbe in the night, the
brain being exempred of its dayly imployment,the ſaid
faculty moves preſaging Phantaſms, ( Pexc. lb. de ds-
vin, per. ſomn.p ag. 256 ) whereof we have theſe ex-
amples in our Book called Regio Laces, - © ©
A certain man told aConjecor that he had dreamed
he ſaw an egg hanging by a ſtring of his bed ; the
Conjecor anſwers, that there was a treaſure hid-under
his bed ;- he ſearches and findes a parcel of-.gold', com-
paſſed with Silver. He ſent the Interpreter what ſilver
he choughe tit ; but ſayes che other, will you-give me
none of theyolk?, for that doth as well ſignifie the
gold, as the white did the filver. ©
So when Prolomie, Alexander: favourite, was hurt
with a poyſoned dart ina fight , and lay in grevious
pain ſick of ir; Alexanaey ſitting by bim fell: aſleep ,
and. ſaw a Dragon which his mother Olympias kept ,
carrying a little root in his mouth , 'and ſhewing the
place where it grew, ſaying it was of ſuch vertuechar |
it would cure Prolomie: Alexander being awake,told
his dream, and ſent to ſeek that root, (for theoplace
was not far off) which having found, it cured--not only
P:olomie , bur many other Souldiers that were burc
with thoſe kind of darts. þ- 2.57 3501811
Many holy p:rſons have the Society of-their Guar-
dian Genius by which they have che apprehenſpn-and
knowledge of the death of their friends andkindred
either before or after they are dead,-by certain monito-
. ry Dreams,or by a ſtrange and unuſual reſtleſsneſs with-
in themſ:lves, though they be a thouſand. Leagues di-
ſtant. My mother , Mary Heydon, now living , bath
| Pp 3 ſome

"218 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2:

fome ſuch gn always given her , tor there pever died

* any of our kindred, but a little before ſhe dreamt either
of Hair, or of Eggs, or of Teeth, all mingled together
witlearth; and this ſign was an infallible one , and I
my ſelf, wben I beard her ſay ſhe bad any ſuch dream,
obſerved the event. always to follow, 'And my ſiſter
Anne Heydon the 10, day of eApril 1662, Dream:
ſhe had an «Angel. cane toher aud ſaid ſhe muſt not ac-
| cept-of any of thoſe Gentlemen that deſrred to marry her ,
but goialong with him, and he gave her a white horſe 16a-
ay furniſhed, and bid her follow him 10: heaven, She (cnt
meberdream, but before my anſwer came to her, ſhe
was dead; and asit proved, this Yirgin (upon the next
 Mayjiday inthe morning abowt 4 of the Clock) took, her
Journey, 1 Write: this - nb powerfully eo enforce
the induRion upon the ſpirits'of the obſtinate men,
wiz. thoſe confident Coblers, and talking troubleſome
T aylors that have lately appeared in Almanacks and
other parrs of Aſtrology, oppoſing' Cornelius Agripp.s
Knight, and .other learned men, whom they do, not
underſtand , and, it is a doubt whether they can read
theſe Authors, who they ſo impudentely ignorantly, yer
confideutly abuſe. Let theſe inconſiderable men. paſs
unregarded ; I hope thoſe ingenious, Gentlemen that
are lcarniog theſe Arts, will be induced to believe the
truth of the Examples of theſe Books, and the cxperi-

”

ments we will inſert in our Third. |

By all theſe examples , it is cyidene that tbere are

few dreams are followed by their events; that many
fail, many are vain, and bur che ſports and images of a
buſte'. Nature. For which reaſon ( excepting thoſe
Phyſical dreams) we deny them any end ; for if we
believe nota Lyer though he ſpeak truth, how ſhall
we credit our dreams, which are only Ideas vrocoes
Zh | El rom

| Book 2. | The Temple of Wiſdome. [

from monftrous conceptions and pbantafies. Eipeci-
ally fince the moſt part, as thoſe in The Harmony of
the World,propt up with the probability of ſome Ana-
logie,and can challenge nothing certain and imutable,

Laſtly, fince ſleep is for the moſt part the end and
remedy of all care, labour, trouble,and anxiety,it were
impious from it to expect the matter of new cares and
vexations , as rightly Leftaxr. lib. de opif. cap. 18.
Cicer, & alit.

But thou wilt ſay , ſince dreams are nothing bat
toyes of a nature that is not quiet when at reſt,to what
purpoſe is it to deliver any precepts of ſuch things ?
and if the event be uncertain, what need we ſpend our
labour in vain therein ? | Fl

*Tis anſwered ; not that thou mayeſt firmly belieye
the event, butthat thou mayeſt cry and ſtudy how far
mans reaſon and the vigour of his wie may reach in bid-
den things, as alſo that from thisnature the contempla-
tion of the divine Majeſty and its goodneſs, may pro=
ceed ; To whom for what hath been bitherto granted
in this kind of (tndy,we give eternal thanks and praiſe,
beſeechin : him co grant all learning its halcyon dayes,
and preſerve and diſpoſe it to the glory of his name, the
advancement of Churches and Schools, the advantage
of Republicks, and the parcicular profic of every one;
and that chrough Jeſus Chriſt, Amer.

Now theſe manifeſtly demonſtrate the power of the
Angels of Aſtromancy and Geomancy whea they are
united, and how Superiours and Inferiours commani-
cate to mans In the third Book we: ſhallſhew you -
ſome more examples, but to compleat theſe Books,
read carefully The Harmony of the World. And
then The holy G wid: For in The Harmony of the
World, is all the ſecrets of Aſtromancy, in The Temple

Pp 4 of

219

wa

AIRY

—=_——— _
220 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 2.

of Wiſdome 18 all the ſecret Mitieries of Geomancy,
| and ſuch Spells
That allure the Geniti up that in our Center dwells.
Theleſmes and Gamahes, The Ho/y © wide leads to
all the ſecrets in Phyſick, and Matbaphyſick, with
the Rofie Cruſian Rules to raiſe the Iead, |
Now ic is not any Itch of writing poſſeſſes me, Cour-
tcous Reader, that I preſent thee with the Temple of
Wiſdeme ; thoſe that know me, have found me very
freg from this-foolifh paſlion, But a perſcn of quality,
(vir Ralph Freeman) v hom to deny any thing, were
agreat Crime in me, hath forced them ont of my Clo-
ter, wheace otherwiſe they never ſhould have come }
ſince I had reſolv'd, aiter ſo many Caluminies indured,
never to adventure more into the Publick View, hav-
ing ſo oftentimes ſighed forth thoſe words of a Roman
Prince ; Htinam neſciſſem literas | Bur in fine, the In-
treaties, and Commands of my friends have prevailed
againſt my own Reſolution ; and [ am forced, I con-
fefs, to this Publication ; ſince I could not but foreſee
well enough, that my Enemics would not relliſh at all
this other Eſſay of my pen : notwithſtanding after 31
this, 1 have where with cocomfort my lelf; ſince one
of the greatc({t Prelates cf our Ape hath condemned *

* . their Inlolence, Keceive therefore fzvourably this

Diſcourſe , Courteous Reader, and remember what
weall are: I willnot ſay, then ſhalt finde all things
perfect here, for I amno Angel: and if there de any
. defects, we mult accuſe our Mortality , which renders
all Mankindeſubjet co Error. Bur above all, know,
that I am no whit obſtinace, or ſelf-conceired, nor ne-
ver was; [take in very good part what Advertiiments
foev-r are given me - neither do Faccount my ſelf fo
knowing , bur that I ſhall be very tcady to learn of

any

i.

Book 2. The Temple of Wiſdome. 221

any man : they are fools only, and vain-glorious, that
_ refuſe co be taught; and thelgnorant only fay, They
know all. As for my part, Courteous Reader, uſe
me bur friendly, I ſhall require nothing elſe.

[f chouthink ir ſtrange , that a Gentleman as ] am,

ſhould adveuture cn ſo bold & daring a SubjeR, as this
fee ms co be ; conſider, I pray thee , that many Prieſts
have put forth things mach more bold then theſe ; and
even ſuch as have been eſtcemed dangerous roo, Thus
T rithemins the Abbot put forth his Po/ygraphy, and his
Stegawography , where rhe calling forth of. Spirits is

plainly del.vered; notwithſtanding he makes other uſe / |

of ir,then our Scocerers do. G/:e/mas Biſhop of Paris
hath-not only written of Natural Magick , but healſo
borh'perfeRly und:rſtood &praftis'dir,as the Learned
Pic1s Mirandyla reports oft him. Another learned Bi-

ſhop a!ſo, Albertus M1gnrs by name, hath taught the

grounds of it with admiration. Roger Bacon,and fohane
nes ds Rupeſciſſa both Franciſcan Friers,bave done the
ſame; Petrms Cirvellas, a Spaniard of the ſame Order,
hath publiſhed to the Chriſtian World a Book in Folzo,
of the Four Principal kinds cf Divination, and all the
Maximes of |udiciary Aſtrolopy.P. de Alliaco, Cardi-
nall,& Biſhop of Cambra, hathwritren of che ſame Sub-
jet : as8lſohath Junitinx;, aPrieſt of Florence, and a
Dr. of Divinity. And fincewe are fallen upon the /cali-
ans,have not eAwurelins Angurellan and Panthers, both
Preilts, the one aYex:tian, the other a Travian, de-
| livered the trath of the Phyloſophers Stone, the
one in his Chryſopex,: and rhe other in his Voar-
chad emia ? Marſilins Ficinus allo, a Prieſt, how full
of Admirable ſecrets are his writings ? yca what learn-
ing is there in the World, that he bath not publiſhed to
open View® Antonius Bernarans Mirandulanns , Bi-

ſhop --

222 The7 emple of Wiſdome. '* Book2.

ſhop of Caſerre, hath after his example , maintained a
world of things clean contrary to our Religion, in his
Book De ſingalari certamine. The Cardinal Cajetan
de Vio hath done the very ſame : and Giovanni Ingeg-
er1, Biſhop of Cabs d 1ſtria, bath newly buſted him- -
ſelf in maintaining the Grounds of Phyſiognomy.
And before all theſe, S1ne/iws, a Chriſtian Biſhopy
wrote a Book of -the Interpretation of Dreams, com-
mented on afterwards by Nicephorus Gregoras, a Bi-
ſhop alſo, or Patriarch , of Conſtantinople. I omit the
works of Joachimus Abbas; and of Savanarola, a Do-
minican Frier ; wich Cardnal Bembas his Gls Aſo-
lam; e/Eneas Sylvius (who was afterward Pope P:us
T 1.) his Lzcrece; the Book fo full of all Lewdneſs of
Poggius the Florentine , who was Secretary to the
Pope. Neither will I mention the 2acaronick Hiftory,
put forth under the name of Merlin { occa;, but write
ten by Tbeoph. Folengixs a Benedictine Frier ; nor an in-
finit. number of other Books , written by Churchmen,
with which, Kind Reader,if thou eompare this of mine
thou wilt find, if any blame me, they do it wrongfully.
And that thou mayeſt be fully acquainted with my
. purpoſe in this diſcourſe, know , that | enter into this
Temple no further then the Catbolique & Apoſtolique
Church permits , and that I have nor publiſhed them,
at leaſtYſome of the moſt nice and tickliſh, but after
many Chriſtians of my Profeſſion ; as thou mayſt per-
ceive by the Sequel. As for the Tetiſmaxicall.Figures ,
they were fo ſtrange in our Age, that their very name
was not ſo much as known. Now that thou mayeſt
have a more perfe& underſtanding cf what is deliver-
. ed in the enſuing Diſcourſe, be pleaſed ro add this
which followeth. |
In the ficſt part, I ſay , that I had not been ble to
| Ciſcoyer

"Book 2. The T, emeple of wy dome. 2 23

diſcover rhe reaſon, why Plurarch, Strabo, Trog us, T*
citus, and Diodoras had accaſed the Jews of worſhip-
ping 2 Vine- I have ſince found , chat it was , be-
cauſe they had heard ſay, and even themſelves (een, at
leatt ſome of them , that in the Temple ar Fer»/alem ,
there was a Golden Vine, with it'sleaves, and clu-
ſters of grapes, made apainft the walf; as it is defcrib-
edby Joſephus. [zterioy porta, ſaies he, tots inaurare_
erd;, wt dixi, Of circum eam anratns paries deſuper 4u-
tem habebat aggeos pampinos, und: racer, ſhatar a homi-
nis, dependebant. I knw very well, chat many ſo un-
deritand the words of Foſephus, as if this Vine were
not of ſolid Maffy gold, but only gilded, after the man-'
ner of Phbrygian work. But the other Foſephus, the Son
of Gorio:, contradiats this Interprecation of the
words: for, ſpeaking iS the ſame Hiſtory ( of the De-
ſtrution of Fer«ſalem) both more clearly , and more
at large , of this Golden Vine, and. it's bunches of
Grapes, he lajes: Fecit inſuper Herodes vitens de auro
mundo, & poſuit inſummitatem colwmnarum, cnjnus pon-
ans erat mille talentorum aurcornm. Erat autens vitis
ipſa fatta opere ingenieſs , habens ramas perplexos z rujus
folia, & germina faita erant ex rniilanti auro ; botri
autem ex aurofulvo,® grana cjus, acini, atqws follicu-
li fails erant ex laptdibug precioſis: toxwmgue ous erat
fabrefatnm opere vario, nt e(et mirandum ſpetaculun ,
& pon cordis omnibus intu:ntibus ipſam. And
preſently after he adds: Xults quogue ſcriptores Ro-
mani teſtantur, ſe cam vidiffe;cum deſolarerur Templum.
Now the forenamed Authors P/s:a75h, Strabs, and the
reſt ſeeing the Jewes had in their Temple a Golden
Vine, ſo rich, ſo precious, and of ſo admirable Work-
manſhip , they were eafily perſwaded' that they wor-
ſhipped ir, in honour of Bacchns, who was the —_

| | cage

—

i

224. T he TMbple of Wiſdome. Book. 2.

chart ſubdued che Eaſt: and this is che Opinion of Core
welius Tacitus, who Jived at the (ame time, when this
Beaucifull Temple was deſtroyed. S24 qa, aith he,
Sacerdotes Fudegrum tibia, tympaniſque concinebant, bes
dera vincieb agua vitiſque anrea in Templo reperta :
Liberum Patregayp!i, domuorem Orientis, quidam arbi-
rrati ſunt; nequaqiram congraentibus inſtirutis; Quippe li- +
ber feſtos,letoſq;ritys poſuit;Judxorum mos ab/urdas.ſor=
didaſq;. But we pals by this Impious Author,who makes -\;
a mock at the Religion of the | ewes on ay} occaſions.
In the Second Fart, where 1 render the Greek words
F;ae5 $51092215 ag they ought ro be underſtood ,
which ſignifies properly, Little, Delicate, and ſmall: as
we call one of rhe Greek letters Tp/i/on, rhar is to ſy,
the Little Y, Now the ſecond thoughts are ſmall, fine,
and Delicate, becauſe they confider things abſtracted,
and ſeperated from Macter ; whichthe firſt. do not.
- .In.che follow:nay part -you may add theſe admi-
table Gamahes, Art Piſa, .in the Church of St. Jobn,
you have, on a_ certain (tone, an Old Hermite, per-
fealy drawn by Nature only 4 but with ſo much ex-
aQneſſe, that there teemes not to be wanting any
ching that belongs to one of that ſort of men. For he
is repreſepted in a Deſert, ſuitable co his -profeſii-
on, and ſitting, pear a Brooks fide, with a Clock in
his band. Thi, Natural .piece of picture , almoſt
fully anſwers thats they delivec. St, eAntboxy in. In
che Temple .of $,, Sophia, at Conſtantinople, there isg-
ſo (cen upon a plain white Marble, the Image of St.
John Baptiſt, athed witha Camels skin; being onl
defeRive in this,that Nature hath drawn him but wit
one foot. Ravenna, in the Church of St. Vitalir,
there is to ,he.ſeen a Franci/cax Frier , naturally
drawn upon a.ftonc of an Aſh-colour. At Snciberg in
| - German

2OOK 2. The Temple « "Wil OMe. 225

——

Germany, there was found in the Earth, a certain lit-
tle Statue of a kind of unrefined Metall, naturally
made; which repreſented in a round Figure, a man
having a litele Child at his back: and whoever bath a-
ny where ſeen the picture of St. Chr:Hopher , may
| eaſily conceive the ſhape of this. Tt is not long fince
there was found in the Hercinian Foreſt, a ſtone that
naturally repreſented the figure of an old man with
a long beard, and crowned with a Triple Crown, as
the Pope of Rome is. Obſerve likewiſe that many of
theſe ſtones, or Gamahes, are called all by the ſame
name, becauſe they have always che ſame figure. So
that which repreſents the Eyes of a man, is called
Lencophthalmos y that which bears the figure of a
Heart, Excardia: that which hath the ſhape of a
Tongue repreſented on it, Gloſſoperra : that which is
figured like the Genitals, Ezorchs : and if jt repre-
jent as well the ſecret parts of a man, as ofa woman,
it is then called Diphys, &c.

To the figures that are found in Plants, and Flow-
ers, you may likewiſe adde thoſe which repreſent
ſome kind of Letters, or words: as the Hyacinth, on
which the Poet ſayes, is written: the Complaint of the
fair Phebas, for having killed Hyacinchus; whom he |
afcerward transformed into a flower of the ſame name:
and this Complaint of his is expreſt in theſe two
Letters, -, , Which make up the word, As, which we
frequently uſe.in all kinds of ſorrow.

Non ſat « hoc Phebo eſt, (hic enim fait autor honors.)
Ipſe ſuos gemitns folits inſcribit, & Hya
Fles habert inſcriptum, funeſtaque litera dufta eft. ©

The flower alſo that ſprung, (according to the fiQti-
on.gf the ſame Poet,) trom the blood of the valiant
A ax, bears the two firſt letters of his name As. :

T1116

"SPOUT BIR EAN VAR «

220 The Temple of Wiſdome.

Titera communis medijs puereque, viroque,
Tr{cripta eff foltis, hec nominis, illa querele.
As for the divers kinds of Figures that we meet
withal in beaſts, (which we have likewiſe examined in
the Holy Gzs4e,)) 1 have found nothing more worthy
our admiration, then what I have been lately inform-
ed of by Eye witneſſes : namely, that it is not long
ſince, that in divers parcs of Poztow it rained a cerrain
kind of little creatures, abour an inch in bigneſs; ſome
whereof were in the (hape of Biſhops, with a Rocher
and hood, cloſed up in a ſhell, or skin, ſo admirably
that one would have thought ir to. have been of bur-
niſhed gold : others were in a ſhape like Friers, with
a Frock and Cowl:ſome were of a certgin hurrid ſhape,
and others Jike I know not what. It 15a great won-
der, ifthis Relation come awong the Frenchmen, if
we have not very ſpeedily ſome ſtrange Intcrpretation
of the Rewelation, ſuch a one as Anaxias Jerancarim,
and R:yphact Eglinas bave given, (as we ſhall ſhew
hereafter) of the dark Viſions of Daxiel, by the help of
certain CharaRcrs found upon two Herrings caken vp
upon the Coalt of Norw.ty. Bur to paſs by theſe
foolerics.
In the firft Book , where T ſpake of divers forts of
T aliſmans, and prove theit vertue, according to the +
opinion of the Eaitern parts; vou mult take heed, that
you mix not all ſorts cf Characters ard figures indiffe-
rently , with theſe '/ali/n:zans. For though many of
them bear the figures of the living creatures deſcribed
in the Heavens, whiclr we oſually call Conſtellations,
they are not therefore preſently to paſs for true 7:li/-
”mazxs ; bur either ſome kind of money, as that of the
Duke of Braunſwicky whereon were engraven all the
Ceieſtial Signs; and that of Awgu/tus Ceſar,on Rn
| c

—_—
———————

ubeacra ar ial |

he cauſed the Sign of Copricors to be figured, for no
other reaſon, but only in memory that he was -born
under that Sign. Orelſe theſe Figures are onely ſoma
Myſtical Emblems under which the Ancients couched
ſome certain Philoſophical Secret, Such was Neftors
filver goblet in Homer whereon the Plciades were in-
Sraven. |

Whoever therefore knows not the myſtical meaning
of this Goblet, would, without doubt, ſeeing the Pleia-
des engraven on it, be apt to concelve, that it was made
under ſome certain Conſtellation as T ali/maxs are,
whereas there is nothing elſe in ic but a philoſophical
ſenſe thus darkly delivered by Homer.

The Poet Anacreon whoconſulted with Bacchns as
ofcen as with his Muſe, makes himſelf merry with this
Goblet of Neſtor, and entreats Yulcex to make him one
without ſuch a deal of philoſophy, enough to make one
crack his brains: For what have Lto do, quoth he,
with the Pleiades, or bright ſhining Bootes * Make me
therefore, good Yalcen, neither arms nor weapons ,
but make me a Bowl, as deep a one as thou canſt, and
engrave thereon no Stars, neither Charles his YVain,
nor the ſad Ori97, but carve me outa Vine, with its
ſwelling Grapes, and, {#pid, Bacchus, and Bathillus,
preſſing them together. | Þ;

I doubt whether or no many of thoſe precious
ſtones that we ſce in ancient Rings, which are com-
monly taken for Tal:/maxs, ( ſuch as was that of
our Countryman Bagarrs, whereof I make men-
tion :) on which we find Cupid, Bacchns , Vines,
bunches of Grapes , and Vine branches engrayen ,
were not rather the effes of ſome pallant humor
of ſome Philoſophers who defired to weat on their fin-
gers the Emblemes of Wine, rather then any other
figures. | In

| 22 o | ; i | h #T'S wh | o / r /7 £ "OY | * o L JOU 7
*

In the ſame Hook where 1 ſpeak of the power of Re.
| ſemblance, I know not how,the word France hath ſlipe
in io ſtead of Italy. For it is in /taly chiefly where the
Leprofie is ſo frequent, by reaſon of the great quantity
of Hogs fleſh that is eaten there more then in any 0.
ther Kingdome: and the reaſon that in Fravce we ſee
ſome infeted with this diſeaſe, is, becauſe that here,
next to the /relians, they eat more hops fleſh then any
where elſe. Neither do I fay this, but according tothe
opinion of Phy fitians, without the leaſt purpoſe of of-
fending any; either Strangers, or thoſe of my own
Nation. Ina word, Courtcous Reader, I ſhall deſire
thee to interpret in good part, whatſoever thou ſhalt
find in this Book , ſeeing that my purpoſe is to deal
clearly, as one exempt from paſſion. |
In this Book my intent is not to rank oſephs gift of
Tnterpreting Dreams with the Art of Conjecturing at
the meaning of Dreams: Nor yet to reje& the order
_ of the Commmandements eſtabhſhed by the Church,
and to introduce that which is fet down, for I there
follow the Jews manner of counting them. |
Laſtly, I muſt intreat thee co corre the faults cf the
Prefs, and uſe me as thou wouldtt be uſed chy ſelf, : e.
ſpeak well if thou doeſt not underſtand ir, and I will
do ſo of thine: for as the Poec faith to his Readers, (o
I conclude this Book.
Readers be civ'l and do not abuſe the Poct
S 'y notits 614d, ſtole, or [ know it,
\ '» If any ſuch thing thow ſee,
Se nothing, hec*l do 4s much for thee,

FINIK

TEMPLE
. WISDOME,

CerlrsrIAL, and

ErEtMENTA

In'whichyou may finde the Reſo-

lution of all manner of Queſtions.

Being Fitted (and Communicated) to
the W O R LD

EE ..—_—_

—_—_— —

Nba Hs x x0 4. Ga 6

—_ a

A Servant of God, and Secretary ro Nature.

M—

Nee omnia , nec mbil. .

-

Pſalm xxv. 14.

—_—

The ſeerves of the Lord are with them that fear bim.

L O N D 0 'N:
Printed by F.-C. for R. Broom , a the iow! of th
| ROT

1663,

_— 8 , . a TI ?
ACS oe an ore Vp ae m4 Tees eg x40) red. oe Ae 6; }
$X -—_ wa f - "- "_E I =ZY va 7 rage Vx G EO en 9. :

« ag _ »

Charles NE Eſq

Gentleman-Uſher |
To- the Queen-Moiker ; G6.

— ———

= *%
- IF
-

LE; wo own. Angel, 1 ogy; |

Y bend oo 60 he ak is ;
Be \24p072 the opira Wilanes, &E
ERS Players, andthe was Fo wtf %

\ 3 Cqarectes ena 7 ragedees,togetber w
the « Zerzerolis aud intragable Nature other rude
' Pegple, (viz, ee Rr Af rological T ajlors), cary:,
3 Gaſes jou: £19 Z dah zorme, ws F
do wo; ſay 1 am a ftrauger to God, Angels or
"F* Gen, arudtbepr | porrers in Art aud Nature when wat-
ied, &c. And therefore that you would ſend by the
: band of bimwhom. you ſDeuld ſend, when 1 am indeed
Y able for theſe things: 1 doubt nat to bgve on mi

Aaa 2

= Wych
EE; Hurlore SES that” py 4

(8 agine, are upon e few, and Aſo as
$ys8 Lawyiand hep AT cus Das I wo
Eeught to forbid the madnrſi of the |
;viJ'ow do wet deny the power of God; tugelror Spirits
1670p, ryan what'Spirtt:yow are :
bor the Body change s the Nature of -the Spirit. That ||
! he Genii' lodge in fanary Airy" Bodits , thoſe
| meter ere rears of apparitions ao ciearly
'þ eulea;. and it 5x 5 ay th & Air ſhould beſo
| change, axnto ſhapes, ard yet held tog Ce
ther-ev'an suated Vehicle of q Life, sf there were a
ſamerhing befides the Ar # ſelf that did thas poſſeſs
| Ro rate it, and ___ ailate, controf, and
Ts wire rom wr phe bot
ber ror ma e f Fl

ing fume of of ag or the re of Chim:

"Ph RS
C There irqne

ſpecial ſacs 4S Wo which Ho
penetration 3 doth either Moo ein exbitrariesfly . .
exert ; which is this, to f1] the Recepteuityer C: Pg
| Ar 4 Body. or' Matter, fo far forth avit#8C,

of a Soul. or Spirit : and thirafo8tonof 4
Spirit 1 will make bold to call * (for more compendi-
nll) oo Greek term Symetom, which that there
may bono ſuſpition of any fraud or affeRed foolery in
| tory Twas \ Platdy gre define thus'y @ power
YL A FO

feds on,ta TIL: $4 v3

| Srara di I if matter

der pot fic as Cloſe, nay cloſer to a Sperit thew anyons

' part of Matter can do to/anather : For bere nigh

pervades through all, but there Conjunfion un onclyin

s common ſugerficies, 65 5s uſually -fantiel and ace

knowledged; and this Hytopathia ; #hich i thas

ma giog mmf n- 1 further adae, may well ate

in Analogy to that: power creating Matter,

which ts neceſſarily £ included in Ny Idea caters
mberial being, She y Hl

| ſpeah- one aadef Inmateris ſabes
| his dlnavect next ar » or to have

i bis great bundle Peper, #0 be Pen 1.

{of in an Ale-bouſe, whenbe takes bis |
batco.. Bud to the ſemsn alferms or plants of Animal

the Arches, 8s The Roſie: Concern

But this Form'or Archeus 1s s thing mere imple aud
plain, and requires 4 more ſimple ind plain f*obfpce-
hou pc

e&'it works aponts viz. EY

Home-

ſubftencial peoer' of -bife that veflass in 5
mn * New is this Cpt vf the Archet or > Servant
_ Gans erea" aaa any fuck fe. but may be

oy = mw thoſe many pretended intx; ACIES in the
inſtance bers rages Vogt of Carcaſe
of « Mor Ther Arches that framed then are
cofvhe Ee. Saal that is dead , but ſeveral
Ar chergbet do as naturally joys with the mat-
= his Baay ſo putrified 81d prepared, os the Crazy
come te carhes fleſh, ©

14. one Why: derand where the e Arche! were before
&uufrry Cax there want room for ſo. [mol foes

frrrauad ity inn. fo wat a-campaſy as the carmprebenſion
the Joncyr . { ſhall watber nepin Where were

Yate fond fired Son bare enteral
3 di] L 85 eanhiſu
rd theres - theſe Magnetich Joe icies are hf
BO IEG: ela gey £48, LT
20677 oxg or Trou au e, but yon well
 twriproſerce by the (| ſonpble ad by an
wgral/ar.compurſog, they are os cyto.
wie

Kb magni Any ediy _

"* Theſe Arches be ſo. mavy {rigs 6 File. .commans
Sewlief he #gri., on Rpt = whliftencies of
058 <Xa-Theve) 65 40. Greater, pay I:

thay at may Se 6 3. Joy at
| vr Rd nt omg rbes-or dt-
Ds

fins

ftin&raxes of the great Soul of the world, that there-
fore t ate tthet wery Soul itſelf; andef theybe _
mot , they may beve their pleaſures andpains apart
erft;y8 from ane another > And wet 15 pleaſere- of
parn10 them , may bappily be netther gother ge
= 77 ' ber no mere then the tho)
! Cricket doth Six John Hanmer, John Flo 5 ſes
Te yg ſelf, when you are ——_ to yu {oud Mus
Now, learned and moe "I" \ pre rhe to fob.
mit all toyour better judgement. Then ſuppoſe I ſays |
they are ſo many ſubſtantes,zs indeperdent on the Sol
of the world, as the Matter it ſelf 1s (thdughy all dtpend *
#2 God) there is no difficulty at all, nor tconvemence |
11 that peſitton z, nor need 1 trouble my ſelf where they
are, or what- becomes of them z cither before they
wRnate this .or-that part of the mutter , or after they :
have done aBuating 6; fame ,nomore the of the parts |
of the Matter aftnated bythe, For as every pars ff .
Aatter 8 ſafely kept withmn the compa[s of of the adage:
real warld, ar uy it be ated upor «2 Souter C:
Archeas, or. not : ſo every Soul or Arehens ss pron AY
en the world of Life, dang from being exter>
mnated out of the comprehenfion of 1 mmtered Be:
877 gs whether: aff apon'any partuf the M1a2 val ouge .
or 10: For ſubſtance, be jt of what nature it will, it
cannot ' periſh without « Mirack: And —
ſhould arayhilate that; which tn ſi ucceſſe _ Fime
may 4g4in bave opportunity to af its part, and prove
ſeruiceable to the (ry 3 = man 1 thizk can exco-
grate any Reaſon. But

,
IRIIR I + oo ER?
q
em ORE Her KRG: RAD
/

_
hone ire
/

your 15 more eaſe to me then the committing

| you regard - mot orve tt to thoſe
preſent boldneſs, ons thank your ſelf, you 6d?

May 25.

— ——— —
z & Lad _
| Þ 1C to I

—_—.

——

_— + the Bodies of . the Spirits nothing bat
wetellated or. do of Air, IT put them

1 ure to appear y as toc e therr Ve.
che EEE, ar then 8ttates the a
hon Wn

mere piereangly and fi ing

inglyeold, Yroeſon of the ſabt

kh _
. . And when they not onely ft
Vehicle in the \ bat alſo f fi any

Pike, an

_ Face ng the _ keep choſe togerber, ca
y one is ſmartly moved mt ſelf.

I am ſure Iheve ſaid , but what I helieve z
of more ſometimes then 1 we underfivod » 4 bave
company enough ;, aud the pon ge an er-

36 was.
Thes ts my deed of gift, the Temple is yours and if
e that will: and for my

ted me this fam
- Bat the great Ginn of this Temple(:f you do not Ac-
a_ bem ? ſhall burn a while like thoſe Subterranass
Lamps under the Earth. Many ſhall ſee it,
but not now ; may ſhall bebldit bus not nigh.

Your humble Servant, . R
2663,

" 4

'Joun Huro on

© "THEO-

5
ds | Sow a - , ©# . a IS112

«

*
, ,
= :

px a. $3. = EO” 7 AS Sed 6 g ” "7 PEER f SE;
» : ens pee Coke tant nnonen, >
L 14? +391 6 LONE B51 IE) \
'Þ hi od B k. 30 i: fy.
19 e T ird Boo IV
<5>" 30 i
d3+3
——_— a — - — —— Ju _ hmm cues emma;
, A Eo

Frer we WED, cufficjently created of the
divifion of the Earth, and how to make
. the: Figures , and:aceriburethern tothe .
8 Rulers, ds ei parts of the Earth, and
; largely | written” thete. ſeveral gh
-ons\in-thein Places 3: wedball

3 Hi Fn

the next place ſpeakoFrhe J

udgement of Hotary:queſth

005, andalſo.of of Nagvizies.i -And be you) nat doubte
of. che truch of thid/Art « for: upon my Word and ©:
 __ all that is written in Dn Book | have ex»
Terinegdy and what cheRulersi 2nd Jdea's fionifie in
= Figures, W when, -they- are, iy Houſtsyou may

4 $ L ww A

hee 7 Te CHAP,

_ }
:

: ' he Temple of Wiſeon.

gon. aud to.

wh —

may be as well reſolvec 1s Lever _ 4 0
.come to (s, as if 1 you Sow 3.43 "your
- Birth. TheſE hos ries e'for the con} wr to Acs
quainted with, for the better judging of any. Queſtion
Ms, Thea he Figude, and fineſ of che
4..T icalrieſ of t eFi els of; t
| _ =o; : & the |
= 2. The poſlibiliry or impoſlibility matter pros,
81! pounded to be judged. ..
3- Of the Perſon or FORO: impeding or furthering?
thebufine6s. -
B., Of whe time in which it [tbly: be perfory-,

-
_ end? N , 4 4 AS | #

*;

=

"CHAP. jr."
4% "Of; hs - ſniff the

I F: Ei. Us. 1b 6 hm 35) hve) WY” ut, *
© He Querenck: chat Pare i.
M:: :thar' p ago ec on
Artiſt>* rol wot ine firſd Houle

< FS -

FI Wd

4

Hons) ay Fi FB

| fiqnilits che Querentt the is

| Youre; was. —ropars Condition and kityy ot "mixed? | $
UE LB; 3% TW 21 161 is :t ",

> A Ghats 1606p chin; Je | B

hr pou: che en. ally;
Mg the Idea, EC IIIERE 7 ty We

dd

FH Portien of the Wife, * or ge of: '® Hucbaud 3/508
 -Death; Gc. the errant "7 z.

bile whe

ryoay as Sppikie.| in char place the Rrporanms ofthe |
Body. | 12 PAY, $5
And let every Artift well nidybind the mifice-
tipns-'iof the Rulers 'and Idea's;; for Jin "Hi
nification.co the Houſes and Figs you fiadein the
ſecond Book. (5.2% t Paul

And teiug well verſed 3 in cheſez,pbſerve. the Naw” |

tireof your Queſtion propounded ,” and give the firſt
Hoaſe, and ihe Figure ,. Ruler and" Idea: therein, to
the Querent ; then cenſider unte what Houſe the .
perſÞn or thing enquired afteribefongs, d- give his |
Ruler”, Idea aud Figure to ſignifie the thing enquired |

after.

"Asfbr Hanple s Suppoſe a" Perſotr ſhould: enquire | «
concerning Riches ; the firſt! Houſe! ſignifies his Er...

ſon; and from . the ſecond Houle',/:and: the poſition *
of: the Figure, you ſhall know the condiciag: of hives
ſtate.

If one enquire concerning, Benthren ; 0. IE - 2
: Your. eake'the-chird Holife' tand his Run"
' fer ad fea; becauſe cents _—_ fi prieaton there _”
z a $2049 0 :

»
9}: 64197

But if a queſtion be made of Or! concerning.a Fs

ther, or Land, or Houſes, &c# ithe'fourth Houſe harh ©

ation thereof; If. of Children, &cr the fiiths
] of Servants or- ſrall Cattel, &c. the fixch ; If of
+Husband , x Wiſes Smeer-hearr:, or -of Partyerſlip,
Theft; Law-, or:Controvechiesy che: fevench91IF10f:4 -

| Kindred, we oRGN of re mi:

" thereof. The a There q:-"'E

+ 327
d -vgrY

FRE". The + Temple of Wiſabrn. = Book Tt. ©

ah 2 :3f of private Enemies, or ns and In-
- priſbamene; or of Priſoners, or: of great Catthe, &c.
the enelich Houſe: I hus according to the true pro-
-poillnding of any queſtion , Tay the ingenious Artiſt
gone a ſoberanda certain Reſolve : And this ſhall be
ufficient to diſcover the {gnificators, both of the (es
realy and the Perſon or thing Quetited.

—_—_———————_. ot

CHAP. Ik
ary a Figure is Radical , ond Fe to be Tu :

He: Artiſt before he adventureth to judge «Queſt
-*: on;, ought firſt to conlider, whether 3t be pro»
perand fit tobe judged : For many times, Perſons pro»
| umpertinent Queſtions, with an intent to diſ-
grace and delude Art; and inſodoing, they create nos.
thing but ſhame to chemſelves. -
en'the Artiſt ' ſhall: fometimes meet wich
ſons that know not how to propound, their detire
aright. It is an Argument when ſuch queries are
wade, that (although 'they may be asked with 2
good: ancent, yer) they are not ripe-for Judgement 3
and the Artiſt ought co defer his counſel until another
ime, ;:
$4 | Nowfor the diſcovery of the knavhry ofthe one, and
the unheneſs or. unpreparedneſs of the other: obſerve .
theſe Rales fiillowing. -
, If che Ruler "Idea, which eneds the Figure
in the firſt Houſe, &c- ſhall -deſcribe the Perſon ot the -
| may conchade the -Figure -
| queſlion propounded fic ro be judgel W
 when-Kebews,, Canida Drocons, or dnuſio's yau!

| 7 il a9? C FE

Book Lit. 1 the 7 Temple of oy -ſaom. $

havea care what you ſay , for:the Querent hath been
tampering with others aboug che buſineſs propounded;
ſe the ueſtion is forged ; mn chereſore not tc ta
dey a9 |
If Popw/us or any Figure go out of the firſt co a 0 or
P of the Figureof hel ſeventh, the Queen is a. nave;
and (o let him go. =
. When Triftitia or Carcey bein dia Alcendenr, py
Houſe,in ll company'and Aſpe&; either the matter pro-
pounded is falſe ,, or paſt all hope, : +
" Ifthe F oures be equal, and the Wicnelles and Judge
promiſe as much to. the one as :the: ;other, you ruſt
defer your judgement uatil another time. vets on

—_— ——c_—
Rs. —_—_—_—_ ——_— —
*
F

CHAP: rl eyti206
Of the Poſſibility or Impoſſi biling # + the Mane. 5 D

WW Haitfoever 1 is propounded; carrieth- in the fhee

' _ of it , both aNegarive and an Affirmative ; that
is to (ay,it ray be either concluded, 6r not. For
things under the ,Sun are contingent; and: it-is 'ax .
bonourable for an ;Argiſt-to. pive a Judgement-in the
Nezative , if che Fig igne deny the wiſhed defirey/as; in
the Affirmative, waea, the. Figare,promiferh it,, - ah
though not'ſo pleaſanc as the propanent.. Bur; the
pollivilicy or impoſlibility of bringing to paſs the Mat-
ne” propounded , you way know by chele Rules fol-
owing

Buſineſſes are brought topals divers ways, viz. when
the firſt Fi igure in chefirſt Houſe fignifying the perſon
propouriding, andthe perſon or thing propounded, are
in good places of the Figure , or when the firſt Figure
goes.into Houle of the thing demanded or queiited, 2nd
Bbb 3 aun

re Ran
|

4 g.- 9 : WT 7
ons
” 6
”
#

, L Poe
6 EONS oy nm Ber

"The Templeof Wi Piſum.. Book ITT,

again / benolds che firſt: Figure or Houſe by a * or r LH,
from places they delighe' 10a 8 Thechivg ſought afrer wil
be bronghe to palſs.': ELEKE,

If the Significator afthoching roaſted, bevel FR
nifgd, and i doth behold: the-tirſt Houſe 3 + the Mat-
ter _ be broughc- co: pecſeAtion before ic be'ex-

Like firſt Figars 5 admit' it were Albus, aid] In a»
moyneing grow fromthe firſt Hotiſe'to the ſecond ; thar
is eo ſay, that he be jir-the ſecond," br belike tothe
firſt; where Alburis? It ſignifies by vertue and power of
#heRulecr andfdea:chat: is ateeiButed'to it , mtich gain
by:Arts and Sciences, fortunates the Querent or Native
in Merchandize, i in all kinds of writings, and by his in-
genuity he (ball attgin great honour Mn men of au-
thority.

When the Significators of che Quer entand Queh ted,
ec. are now behalding, it is'an Hl ſign of ever bringing
the thing enquired after to perfeRion. .

When the Signifieators ſhall behold each' othe1 ty
(3'or, & from-haveful: places of the Figure ,''br ſeal
be in I) or '@f Carcer, Triſtitia, Pher, or "Rubs ;
is [eldome known aay thingis brought to paſs,” |
'When ill Figures [ſhall bem che Houle 4 onify-

$6
ng che thing enquiredafter, or 'afiting the Siznifica-

gors .by naps pombe wok wo dw nels ro ounded
ag caks 10 — b; F;

x
, "

 ofG1 —

Ps

Book Jl.

| pp roms by the Houſe" the Figure, IdeaandRu-

ſtarve the bulinels, &c. TR

nndecſtpod.: ; ot TiSY 17 28d 34 5! S- 11 '
ry Us Hs 9 (5 ig,” __ 15k aka A 1
[ - $/ | i Eau | H, 4115573 OC 17
y 7ecg lf "CHAP; vk $2, lA
6 3O : AY |
of the time wherein a Buſ neſs ” be tho fem)
' + 267 6

+ 4

The Tem le of Wi] Jom. bw %. y

_
v3
—_— c___ n——_— — — —— _— eat
TY 2

L] ; i
* t . x 3 4 . f « -
, S #$ :

BEER | F 4 5-4 We
Tie & HRS ea». pt 3, SF .

Of ths Pirſen, of Matter, fibrri's or men the Bu-
neſs.

Wis Jon ED projeted als mfg

an, ob ſtcu&iqn.ig or a, furt. he YOUr DL

neſs, obſerve the Figure impedia rogagr GEE zand.fay,
efrom

the let or furtherance ſha Ju cha perſon or

ler do govern.

If Puell: be at ting or ;npeting , and be in the
third, you may 2Siſter Kinkiyg man -Qr
will be the hh of cood or ol portended. by the
buline(s. |

that Money ub, be bit peel \aorn ig the ching
Crs ds ge KA! dp be

Bing defirous to khow, when or in whar time 2
thing may come to paſs , after you ſee a Forenney

B

thereof ; - you 'muſt conlider whether the Figuri

ſignifie Years, Maiths, Weeks, D aies and Hours. ©
If che Houſe be moveable, and the Idea char governs
the- mh ia ir be moveable, it will be a meek and
 Bbb 4 odde

C

PS 34 ” Br
7 #7 , -
| 's
a

0242. = aches: woes car its - anger —_—— 6s —__ cw <ub ey = tis tettggs aaa area"

The 'Tempie of Wiſcom. . Book It, |

odde days before the buſineſs be perfedted ; and.
= the\hour the Fignre governs that _ It will be

' done.

-If -che Honſe be common, and, the Fioure and Idez
"common; ir will be a Month ar five Weeks before the
thingbe done.

_. If the Houſe, Figure and Jdea in ie be fixed ; SOR ie
"Mill be 2 Year and three Monchsbefore che ching come
froeffeſt; according orothe Years, Months, Weeks, Don
'and Honrs che Figures f OY |

"$4 '*' - nl * a. ac GE Fay pes eat ag ve

.
& 4

CHAP. \ V1.

. ”
4+” 78

97 Ms ery AY gid Sea cars raf the Recent and; hg |
| ” deny

Ti knowledge of the Marks, "Moles, &c. wi Ta"
—- Querent by Ate 44s God way to veritte. your
Figures, , and prove. 4 Radic cal , Ke? we ſheyetl *be-

re” |

If che Figure that rules the: mo be | In any of 1 the
faur Angles; z andthe Moles,&c.ofthe Perſon enquiring
correſpond exaly with the Schea n erected : The
Artiſt . may ſafely pirgceed' to judgement. Now the
Rules obſervable, are theſe following.

jeted,your Figure, confider_ the Figure -

In the firſt Houſe,,and the Idea and Riller that governs it,
aud what 'PArT ON, memver 13 mans body-hey_ g by or
fax the Querent hath a Mcle,. Mark or Scar1 Net |
of his bc y. Exampje; If Pacr.bein the firſt Fe,
| JeFacur in the head or face, or burn, or red Mole :
£ Fo ara It is on the belly, 2iz. 23 Mole, Mark or Scat:
If Pmells þe in fe firſt, it son rhe Reins, 1 Viz. 4 Mark)

Coal
*
EP «FP

5 If Rabewey ch e Secrets

| Book m

6) bem # g ©

Mole : If Pxer or Rabews, it ls C

The Temple of w TIER wy A0t 7%

——_—

—Confiderif 'the firſt Figu yore galls Jay rhe? Hens -
our of the firſt,” the Querene hath a Mole in. 5
alſo: Conſider Populus, and whereſvever ſhe jsp"
Houſe nd Figure cells you m wha pirt the
hath another. | * FE ITYRUA
- Whar Fignre is in the fixch Houle, ' notes ufi
Mark, Mole, or Scar' the Member i {4 =
you may read in the 26 Chapeet' of 'the: firſt
If Carcer or Triftitia- fignifie the Mark; &c. it: is |
nerally an' *excreſcence of a' SLES
Jour. - Oden,

If Acqurfitio or Latirimgivia uſually apr e or
y 'fOome
Slaſh or Cut,chieflyins Houſe adreitdeſSys =
and ſometimes a reddifh Mole or ſpots of Gu 2
Tf Fortuna Major ,'of Forruna Minor, n
olive orichefnue colgur: If Amiſſts' or Prdlegfa
colour.” 2254) 3: XLS Off

” Altus or Code; whitiſh or lexd-colonesif |
Popalus or Via, white, and of the coloirthe Figi!
nie chat behold them: Capt Draconis, white 3 Co
Draconis,black or red :"Tf the Figure be Maſculine that
repreſents the Mole; Mark, &c. it'is on the) righe fade
of the Body; if Feminine, judge the contrary. |

If che Significator of che Mole, &c. be in thefirlt,
ſeventh, eighth, ninth,tenth,eleventh and cwelfth ofany
queſtion; ir is then viſible to che eye, and other forepart;
of the Body : but rthe- ocher+ Houſes fi the.
Mole is not tobe van bur is on the back-part of rhe
Bo dy. | 2 » 2

If if Figures bein theficit,, the Qterenc is is nſhally
blemiſtted ; for the Faceis fignified by the fiſt, > ler whar
Figure (bever bein it. *

 Thyſe Rules will hold erue upon the Body f the "© 4
Fn es Mutatis Mut mis. As f firppoſe one ſhould

_ enquire

M3 ©7Y A ee nn nn COA OOOOOOOG
 m——_ —_—_—
.XO

L "The Temple of Wiſaom.... VEN: Book TI.

| enquire of a Miſtrisgor (reet-heart, or wite, Oe, and
11, the: Members thoſe Figures Aignific , ſhe: ſhall have
tes, Moles,or Scars. |
. tha Hebrew, Galdean, Greek, Arabian, Latine and
ian Doors of chis Art , teach you, as we did in
he firk Book. caframe. the; Wirneſſes and the, Judge.
Witneds, chey put for-cheQuerent,: And it jr
weregood, antagreed. with cheſe qu the right fide.; ,and
iethe: were even. and ;good.: and agreed .wich the
ied , fourch ;, ninth, - 90g they ſaid the
© nie of the demand ſhould come to a good
+;Bue che Jef; Witne(s; was: contrary 3. 33d if the
7 conſented-49. i it , andthe. Figure onthat. fide +
-y queſtion ve $810g ſoughe aherlauld Come £0 21 il

yt becauſe we. Gonld never _ truth i in the VVie-
we never regarded their Judge, becauſe,we finde
no reaſon for what they ſaid: and-ſo ler chem pals,
YVVemill give judgement upon the twelve Houſes., as
BEGS haut to be tCUEs. P |

k. _—

=>”

th DT, -CHAP! YT. | 1 Z |
Bins FE to the FF Houſe T LC Ja Qef2ur-
a ficſt Houſe Ggnifs the life of each perſon, his

rature.and Corporature ; and jo the quelti-
ons, Keleb Fouts) to it.
4. Of the lengeh. of the Quereats life, . 2; Of the
Kin ar evil att life... 3+ When or it what time - |
ra Querent undergo a change, 4. What part of
| erenes life Is like to be belt. 5. To Bo part
een norld may he dire#t his affairs to proſper om, - wd

'D

p

=

Book HL 2" "OP Temyle of wiſdom.

6. A'perfon havin®'s ifinde eo ſpeak: with an
ſhall he! firide nie home? 7, Of an abſtrit'pays
ty, if dead'or live. $. Of a Ship ax Sek, her ſaſsry' 6k |
prejudice,'&e. © : S720
,Theſe particulars being explained,' will gr
ent light unto'the 'Artiſt, whereby he may 7 es i
any.otherdemand' proper "unto this Houſe. '-

| pleat I LIN, read kan raps 's hor; 4,5, 5978 Ts
atb on" ' 13,16 ÞM

cue: fs SLOT TY eerngf ys yy 148
, + «< "*k $s & 4 . TY | - f > a . "97 ] __e f . 12 Þ!:8
% 4

311! $00

we
=y 5 ih, 161 28
g ; 1351 SB '&
"Y z p _ | » b ® 4+»
»-4 LE _— 411 4 KL LLC TIT et Rats hh, e, OR

310 11 . 40

of; length PR Querents Life, ., 33UT $3017 'T

I'N ebe EE of this on muſt « e

the Figure inthe Eo ſr
2x 1 you Fade em fo free. as wi Aprr |
crs .

#

PP” ,y ot my, Od Ed

bn ©
4

Ms TheTmlrefwiſhm, Booklll,
| Pepe ern ent en Trey |
| ty $tegey on may y fafely judge the Quierenes life
ul long. Ifche firſt Figure go incorhe fourth, eighth
or twelfth Houſes wich ill companys you.may, judge the

encſhall»pt live long. -
or en the igficators, &<.. {ball beevilly Alpetted

vis; "FE "A

pon of:the Figure,;:or cthe-benevolent

Fare | fri greet, the Malevolencie threagned will
be abated : MM itbe from evil Houſes in che Figure,
and the benevolent afford! no _ ; much danger of a

fort, lifeis wy feared. JG

_—
CS
%
_
.

ten As each pcs) 1s known

qm ti rinfortunace'proje&tion of the =
pure. | Readebe: Harmon) of the World.” VVhenbe-
yolene Figures. efs”. the firit houſe, or the prin-
= ov | Figure) they dechre much good
the Quireng, in che whole courſe' o his

F the Grft tidal a befriended by the company of
| Figures," uFFigaresbeholdir, yer it bY
terent inthe courſe of his life ;
as much as an accidencatevil canriot rebate or wichſtand
an efſencia). I

*'Buewhen che Il 3 os ſhall poſleſ the places afore-
e Significators orchid; the

i] be ſubje& to a oubleſome
Ry Far any Atrologet 4d how the Riſers and Ides's bes 4
hold Nair rhetrFigtres,-mthe rwelve

hoqſe of che STI 1tisnot onely

they

_ the places where the Figures are,” and how they

_ unhappy.

% NA x Wt my Cy 6. v po ”— "y TE " «ph 4 ” 6 , Ego *# i AE oy « ONE ; be: "I kt haz a i
M. | ; f # I - q 4 y Re Mc
« FF f { - o "#0 } F i % ©
, _— 4s W
#k4

TID EF LOPete agent Fs. 6 CY Ie <
they are governed by the Sears, as ſome fondly ive,
but becauſe H' g/orc x5 av 26 Tipryas, H' ayots Thy gutm vine H* gure
Tv eve xeari7's. And fo agt ees with the ſoul of matl,
which is ruled by. God; whoſe Efttgiegit is;:1Andifo the:
Idea's are overcome, and made natural co,us. inghe
Figures, which are like the body, which is natural ; but
yet receives heat 'and .motion from'a diyine principle; -
as the other received their influence -we ſpeak of in che
firſt Book. | | 4 300). 23.47 inf 1 me'y Si Hevep

. If Carcer or Triſtitia be in the Eaſt-Angle, the Que»
rent will -be melancholy and- penlve , and: ſubje&-to.
perplexities from aged men, &e. - If. Puer or Rubens,
he will be cholerick., and lie liable eo opprefitba by
Knaves and Theeves; and ſometimes by the Villany
and Treachery of Kindred , he may ſiiffter. If Cande
Drconis, be 1s never free from ſcandalsand-diſgraces :
when the aſſiſting Figures are in good Houſes, the
good will be more permanent. Have great regard to

ont of one Houſe into another 3 for from thence is
known by what means che Querent ſhall be fortunate oe

- You muſt obſerve, that as the Malignant Company
or Aſpe& of Parts or Houſes evil, prevenc the
that is ſignified : So the friendly and benevolene
Houſes and Afpe& of Figures, mitigates muchof the
miſchigf portended : by conſidering of which, accore
ding to the ſtrength of the Figures alliſting or affli&ing,
the Artiſt may finde the Magnitude, ſinalneſs or Me-
COOAY of the good or evil that attends each Querents
ife,

|

?
|
A
i
$

> I "2008 Os 5
2 + "43% ":
"0

> ” F

» 4

4
Po
.
” x
.

-, _ TheS? mple of W:ſ2

Cen mm rnnnnnmn—

\ Ft I vo OE? | m. ; WE

I what rime' the Native or ern may expe i
+; ehanye. ' | ? ;
41iQ .

om GeFigures 6 dis; and If fixed Figures
governed' by fixed Kdea's of a: violent” Nerure,

the prin cipal parts of the Fignre , chiefly the
Honlſe' K Ho Houſe; thac number theſe Figures

| we-zttribared-co,' 29 ſudden and anexpeRted mif-

chiefs. VVhen good F the before-menti-

floned places , they demonſtrate ſudden goodr unto che

Ep

* Ve will. nov 'make'a | Table; liitebly you

34k ay know. the number of the Figures, , and
| A DRiNes they bgnabe. Sy

C

"4

JOU >

| py mm—_ _ y

The firſt Rule.

& ——
*®

x*

on,

F Þ:
qm_y /
"6
-—Y
—» wy
wh
tad |
.
* wn db

wu 5

1170 Pa EY

Km __

" The Temple of Wiſdame.

bo —_—_—

The fourth Rule:

Book IT. ' The Tomple of iſkane.

—-e Re P—"X——— . ta. DA. tt. mt

T'o know the Nameof aviy Perſons, _ to ſays. _
what. Letter or $ plable to knew as om
name of all things.. {1 x 5 :

_ '

If; ye would know the name of any - Perſan; of ab; -
Thief which hath Rolen any thing g.-or of Es Fe
in which a perſon ſhall be fortunate, an of —_—
doth write Letters, or of a Guardian+Genus, ar of
Angels, or of (uperiour: pawers, and of theR
Idea's- of the Earth," in. ſeveral places3' or how longs
Perſon (hall live ; when a thing wilb happen. how
long a:Town, Caſtle or Houſe ſhall eomwue, of Fa:
when the happine. of the Perſon ſhall mw wht.n
fortunate, Oc. i oth Sol
Of chat Figure which is in the: hrſt Houſe, Yaſholl |
take the firſt ſyllable ; likewiſe of thay of che centh: take
alſo the! Geond and ehirid ſyllable of che lexrers of-the
Figure, which ye ſhall finde in the Fourth Houſe 1: and
ſhall ye finde the name which ye defire.: -»/rr1 7/7 Sita Ro
Or thus: take the Leeters of-ebefirkk. yd fevapeh

WE > "2 {BIB
$$ _
"IR
> J

Figures 4/and as often as ye take chefaidLetrersy (ook f :

ten move:|your Figures and then. if: you nds Jeng
take the Letters of che tenth. 7 110.0 Ig
- You muſt nndercſtandthat the fiſt Eigurt dorbclge
nike the firlt letter of bis name, whom: ye defise't
know, » the feventh. and tenth ignite the
the middle of theme OR |
ofthe end. o1-z At _—_
Amd:ict. no man avvader; thay: Gp”
names many things ares fond our: For rhe mg
God oreated al} rhings by number, hams wewght
meaſure ; from —— the mb —
which: wete not iofficutedcafiully; bueby:s

Original,
Nos Hence Stx Joby in this Rewelevion bulky
| | Ccc 2 £<

%

0 =_

_ og. — OORT
”#
+
_-
Rd

> lr rr LE

' TheTempleof wifdome. Book 111.

ama d 2

+ bim which bath underſtanding

which were-inſpired into everyone at his Birth, by the
very Heavens, withthe conjun&ton of the Stars, and
ughe os wer into the body, as ye may readat
Ran ” Brorwny of ''the "World. God himſelf,
clionph he be onely one in Eſſence, yet hath divers names
| expound hot his divers Effences or Deities,- but,
ertainpropertics/ flowing from him ; by which Names

ke'do ue down, as it were by certain Conduits on
as and all his Creatures many benefits and divers gifts
by Idea's. © 'Ten of theſe Names weſpake of in che firſt
Book, which give vertne to ſeven and twelve, which are
feated in ſeyenty: two Places), - ewelve Veſtments in-
cloſe them in their places in. every Species ; and in theſe
vefigde levertytwoNamerFotliof An els and of God:
Ahd if you'-proceed- furtlier out: of- all places of Scri-
peure according to the fourth Rule, you will finde ſo
many names of Idea's Divine and Natural, as the number
of thoſe Names js& if ©

+ From theſe therefore, beſides thoſe 'which we have
reckoned up before, is the Name of che divine Eflence,
Bdbeiai ona, which is cranſlated 8; from hence they
call GodTs 3r, cthers'% 3 that is,the being. Ha, xn,
is Name, fignifying the Abyſs of the God-head:
Which the Greeks tranflate Twwriv, the fame. Eſech, whe,
Iy her Nainey foandech Fier and the Name of God

,
S E

(22K; mitiaatesperturbations and troubles; there is
alſothe Name Fob, 11, and the Name Elion, qv\yp and
the Name Macow, DPD; the-Na me Copbx, DD; che
Name Fimen, 210) 3 the Name Emerb, NOx, which is
meerpreted Fruch, and El the Seal of God: and: there
bes other Names Zr, w\y, and Aben,qart; both

*vwem {gnifie- a olid work, and one of them exprefi
the Father with the Son, And many more Names you

27 may

4

we
—_—_

Le ER re
| te name of the Beaft, which is the Jer ay of a Man. Theſe

mms © as. wo co _T

mm >. a>

"" Book HI. _ Toe Temple of Wiſaome., 24 *\
may finde in Rules extracted our of che Holy: Scriptures
nas many words retrafted by certain of their Letees +
make up one Name, or one Name diſperſed by cack'df
its Letcers, ifiech'or. rendereel]* more. | Sometimes ..
they take the four Anglesz the firſt Figure of them fig-
nifieth the firſt Letter or Vowel, tlie: teneh | che, ſecond
Vowel,; the ſeventh the fourth Vowel ; the faurth; Fi
oure the laſt Vowel. 1 ifthcÞ 100-7 ned
Sometimes Names are gathered from che heads: of
words, as the Name g/s, x78, that is, the Mighty
God for ever , taken fron this verſe of the. Holy. Scat
ture 1218 25 99 129 nM ; Jalike manner-che
Name Faia, 2, from this verſe, 1pny marnit
INAmmn ; that is, God, oxr God is. one God ;. | Ini dike
manner the Name Jevs, Niq?, from this: ver@
TIX 27111 AIR Tn 5 chat is, Let there be light, anditbere
was light: In like manner the Name Ararite, ret hs
from'this verſe INV INDOn TYM BR ROY ,
4Tm147 ;- that is , one principle of his Unicy , one: be»
ginning of his individualiey , his >vicifitude cis: one
thing : and this Name Hacobe,narmnis excratted from
- this verſe, RN -712W: 719113: The boly and bleſſed Ont:
Inthis like manner, this Name 9? is found inthe heads
of theſe two verſes, wiz. 111 O03) 3 that is, Vn-
til the Meſtab ſpall come, and the other verſe 'J\3v
M1292; thatis, His Name ebides till abe end : Thils
alſo is the Name Amenyfrom this verſe DWO1n: $
that is, The wickgd not ſo, but the Letters are txafflpo- ©.
ſed : So by the final Letters of this verſe DOOw mA!
thap is, To me, what, - or what is bir. Name? Sometimes
theſe Names are extrafted from all the Figures, one by
| one; evenas thoſe Names of God are extrated- from

thoſe three verſes of Exodar, begining from theſe three
words, DNR21 p01; the firit and

wruten from the righe to cheleſt 3 but the middle-cone |

Ccc 3 trarimiſe

[

z

" Þ* The Tempjeof Wiſcome, Booklll.
arviwiſe from the left to' <e righe: And fomerimes

8 acl: is excratted fron, a Word, ora Name. from a

Nante, by ehecranſpofition of Letrers, as Meſa, on,

;« -— "pag and Michael, YRIVD, from 2R9D,

n I f Argit -*{;1 SS £4 [24S

Lu-Sotnetimes alfo:by reaſon of che equality of Num-

$1; \Natfies are changed, ab Merartrox, {Y1©DD, for
Sadai, IV : for both of them in- Albxs make. three

'Iithdred and fourteen : So Flair, wan, and £1 )R are

"#Qual ir) amber} for both of then! with Pweſ/a and Leti-

432zmake thirty one. This is the Art which Afoſer and the

weth;and ir is not to beraſhly diſcoveredto any,

Thetefbre of theſe we will ay no more, bur pray to

<Gedithat he' vf his goodneſs would reveal , what we

20LY not teach you; for they are the myſteries and con-
veyances of Gods Omnipotencic: Not from men, nor

F&Afrom Angels, bur mftitured and firmly eftabliſhed by

| oft high God, afrer a certain manner, with an im-

 abweable nawber 4nd Figure, and breathe forth the
Harmony of the -God-head, being conſecrated by the
Diviae affiſtance : Therefore the Creatures above fear
htm 4 thoſe below tremble at chem; Angels, Rulers
aud Idea's reverence them ; every Creature doth ho-

wor, and evety Religion adorerhem.

_ **.* {Therefore the Rehigious obſervation of the Rulers,
Ides's and Fiftures inthe ewelve parts of the Earth, doth
ymAld16 frees Wikdom and Virtue, and even Deifies che

. Ution; and gives e power to work wonderful things in
Native : efore we may not for any Reaſon what-
'hanze the charadttersof the Ru Idea's.and

Figares ; for they bear the Image of the Heavenly

powers, andvdifirſbure heir vercue ro every Species in
:Thereforciletiogchty pararrangy ven from God, *-

729d mn Exoghye 3 J2 every plage in yrhich monjian *

V2;

— Fo IT p way — To | |

1s made of my Name: 1will be with thee, and -bleſt
thee z And in the book of. Nxmbers, 'the Lord ſaith, I
will put my \Name nper the Sens of Iſrael; Eroilbbleſi

them. | pg } |

\. Therefore theſe Rulers , Idea's and Figures have +
not their power in Operations from themſelves, as they
are Characters, or Teleſms, or Figuresz but from the
occult Divine Powers, working by them in the Mindes of
thoſe who proje& chem : By which Divine Powers, or
Names , the ſecret Power of God, as.it were through
Conduit-pipes is tranſmitted into the Rulers, Idea's and
Figures; and by moſt pure converſation of the Divine
Namesare made the habitation of God, and capable of
che divine Influences : Whoſoever therefore aſtth
rightly cheſe Rules and Figures , with that purity of
minde, in that manner and order as they were de»
livered , ſhall both obtain and do many wonderful

things.

1v.
What part of the Querents life is like to be beft,

BY the reſolution of this queſtion, yau are firſt to ob» Ws
ſerve in what part ofthe Figure the fortunate Ruler *
and Idea's are incorporated into good Figuresz: and ac«
cording to their potition Judge. |
If propitious Figures be in che firſt Houfe , the
twelfth or eleventh Houſes z the Querene will be moſt
happy in his infancie ; If in the tenth, ninth, cghth,
in the ſecond part of his age : If in the ſeventh, fxth,
or fifth, of his middle age: If in che fourth, third, ſe-

cond, his latter days will be moſt happy. «-
- When the Significatorg of lifeare , and fignifie
longlife, you —_ houſe allow ewelve years ,
Cc 4

_— — ES

if the Figures be' fortunate by :company, Houſe and
AſpeR;'for then'it is: poflible the -Querent (ifhe fol-
low the Rules in my Book, which is publiſhed, and
wears the name of The boy Gwide) may live more then
- one hundred and fifty years; if Godbleſs him to un-
| derftand our ſecret happines. ;

th 4g

V.

Toward what part of the World may the Duerent direfl bis
* courſe to proſper # | Ef
WE know it to be an evil Epidenical for perſonsto
7: undertake Voyages, and other weighty matters,
ec. much-to their- prejudice and difadvantage. And
although all places are alike to him chat made the Earch,
yet they are not ſo to men that polleſs it : Therefore ic
will be requiſite for thoſe that judge queſtions of this
kind to obſerve theſe following Rules, orat leaſt as ma- _
ny of them as he ſhall uſe. |
The Earth is divided into four quarters, Eaſt, Weſt,

North, South ; and theſe four quarters are again ſub- -
divided,' vie. The firſt Houſe is full Eaſt, and the
ewelfth -Houſe being nexe unto it turns Eaſt and by
South; che eleventh! next unto that is South-eaſt, and
the Mid-heaven is South, &c. According to the quar-
ters of Heaven, chit divided and ſubdivided, you are
to Took in which of thoſe places you finde the pro-
miling Figure,” &c. Viz. Acqaifitio, Letitia, Amiſiv,
Prells, Popmlur, Via. oi 15s

+ . Now the part of Fortune is very obſervable, andic is
found thus: Adde all the points of the Figure together,
and divide them by xwelve 3>and' what remains es
the place where' you muſt *pur-the part of Fortune
%» : SD»

i;

%

25 - The Temple of Wiſdome. Book Hl :
, % n ©
. \ I Gs EL ERLS

If one, in the firſt. Houſe ; if two remains, it inthe |
ſecond; if three, in the third Houſe, &-c. And this is
the charaer of ic, Þ» - | Er
If icbe inthe firſt Houſe, it —_— much” gain ts |
happen to the Querent by his own- labour and induſtry, _
eſpecially if with good Figures in good company 3
but if ic be 'wich'ill; it much abates its good fig
To the place where theſe good Figuresare, the part
of Fortune direfts the Querent. 7
If good Figyres be in che tenth , and Pers Fortune
dire& the Querent South; if rhey be in cheninth,cell
che Querent it is. his beſt way to 5 South-welt';"'f
_— Weſt, it is good to go Welt: 'and' fo of the
Fee" | ma
Confider ſeriouſly the Nature of the Querenes de-
fire, whether ic be for Health, Riches, long Life, Honour,
Friends, &c. that he hopeth to enjoy by his un-
dertakingz and by rightly underſtanding the queſtion,
you ſhall anſwer che Querents defire more -rea-
"EE IR A he
_ If irbefor Health he would remove his habicarion ,
where or in what quarter the Figure in the firſt Hooſe
removes, and is fortunate by company and Aſpe, di
ref him that way : If for Riches, takenotice of the ſ&+
cond and Þ: If for honour, conſider Fortxana Major, Wt
and what Figure is in the tenth: If Friends, obſerve the
| mg of the tenth; and fo may you anſwer any queſtion |

vi.

ent be Temple of Wiſdome, II,

Book ]
op

of ptrſen baving s minde to ſpeak, with another, if be ſhall
_. finde bim at hom ? Bs |
X7 Hen you would ſpeak with a Perſon that you have
_V'Y familiar and conſtant dealing with , and: he no
ways related unto you; take the ſeventh Houſe and his
Figure to ſignifie him, the ſeventh from the Eaſt: for the
Eab-Angle always ignifies the Querent.

If Pelle be in the: Tevench, and from thence go
£o-the centh, or if ſhe be in che ficſt or fourth.

Houſes; - the perſon you would ſpeak withal his at
home. * -
y Figure wn the ſeventh remove into any of the

'Wf an

the party is not at home, but he
is neer howe , and may be eaſily found ; the Ruler, 1-
os Figureand Houſe dire& you where to {peak with
Note that if the Perſon you would ſpeak with be a
relation, then you are not to takethe F; as you
did before, but the Figure which fignifies ſuch re-
" Iation : As if he be a Brother, then the third you
znult . look unto ; If a Farber, you muſt read the
fourth, war war Figure 1s "at into mou An-
Ie it goeth;., If a Son or Da , the fifth, &c..
- 1 phat” to.their poſitions, judge as you were

taught before. ; n ”

VII,

——_— ———

IVFL
Tf an abſent patty be dead or alive.

Erein you are toconfider what relation theQue-

JK rent hath to the party Quelited, andto take your
fignification actordingly, as is formerly ſhewed ; bur f
chere beno relation between them, take the firſt Hoale
and che Figure that is proje&ted init : And if Poprlns ot
Via be in che Figure, let theſe fionifie the party abſents
_— thus : | f

If any Figure in the firſt ( or Popwins or Vis ) bein
the eighth wich ill company and aſpe& , the abſent party
is dead. If Popxlus, Via and a Figure in the firſt, orany of
them ſhall be inthe (econdand eighth, or inthe fixchand
twelfth Hpuſes ; che abſent party isdead. ra ET

If a Figure in thefirſt go incothe fourth, or P
or Via inthe ſeventh in 7 Ape to the fourth,- it ſhews
great danger, ifnor s SL» 2 $2

If a Figurein the firft Houſe, which is Lord of that
Houſe, or Popxlxs be in the fourth or eighth inill com»

yay , Orin their falls; you may ſay, the party abſence is
If none of theſe happen, bue on the contrary, you
finde Populus and the firſt Figure ftrong and Red

by good company and aſpe&t from good Honſesz you |
a judge the party Quefited 1s alive and very ©
well. | : 2h

If the Lord of the firſt, chat is, theFipure ojeed
inthe firſt Home; gointo Hoods, vis. the tint the

party is fick; if intotheeighth, he is dead: bue after«
war Is if you fook intd che tenth, and finde them 'remo-
ved intoir, or into the hinth of eleventh Houſes ingood
£oMpany and aſpeft, he hath beon Frok ——

— The [empleef Wiſdom: : © Book UL.

* bat now is well and danger ; - and var
e his condition will be found. + Ying

VICE"
nl C o « Ship at Sea, ber ſafety or prejudice.

; Ts Quekion by the Hebrew, Caldean . Greek, hos
bin, Latine and Egyptian Doftors, is attributed co ©
' the ninth Houſe : But che Learned men of our Nation,
a oe pn oy 4 ) Eſq. and Captain Blackman, know the
_ ongeth co the firſt Houſe ; asthey have

by experience.
pre nov ofthe Ship are thus divided, and attributed

to the houſes.
| The fiſt Houle fignifies the Breaſt; the ſecond Houſe
nnder che Breaſt towards the Water ; the third Houſe
theRudder or Stern; the fourth Houſe, the Floor of the
Ship or Botrom ; the fifth Honſe,-che Top above Wa-
ters the fixth Houſe, the Belly of the Ship ; the (e-
vench, that pat' ahove the Breaſt in the Water; che
, Where Mariners abide , the Cook-room and
' Powder-room; the ninth, the Mariners , the hold
where the Merchants goods areſtowed ; the tenth, the -
Ends ofthe Ship ; the eleventh, the Governour or Cap-
tain; cheewelfch, the Oars. - |
_ | Aﬀter obſervation made of this diviſion, you are to
coplider what Figurezare fortunate, and what unfortu-
nate at the time of your Queſtion propounded; for
the perſons or parts of the, Ship thereby lignitied, are
either well or in danger, according to ther fortunacy

or unha
The Figure in the firſt Houſe and Popwlus if ſhe be
jn che Figure, 'are generally fignificators of the Ship and

the bunden ſhe bear > - If the rſt Figure or 4-0 or

"I

-—

3C $)j. %g SY +5 [- $\ EMt @-L 41 Jt T's

/7e peG into other. Houſes , thas ney =
that ſail-in her ; otherwiſe the firſt and on rope
Ship — Mariners: And if in a Lunn, a we

you i finde all theſe fortunate, you may ju
ils well, itis well viualled. If Capt Dr gov |
cunate,. the meg are in.a good condition , and they will
make a proſperous voyage.

Bue if on che contrary,” you finde them all afflied,
you may judge-he Ship is caſt away,andall that ig in her
loſt; If Rabews be in the firſt Houſe, and Canuda Drace-
ns in the eighth wich. Pxels ; and the Figures of the ©
ewelfth, ſixth, or fourth move to evil Afper of Conds
Draconis or Rubets,. who is proper Lord of the ei
All cheſe are dangerous preſages, (one the Ship is caſt ; _=
way or loſt.

If any- ſhall enquire of the ſucceſs Sip ſhall baye in
her voyage upon her ſetting forth, ths you muſt cheg be-
hold x" ngles of che Figure; and if,you fiade all.
or the, major part fortunate, and. che unfortungte Fi»
ures cadent, or in anabje&t condition 3 you may, jog
the Ship and her Lading to have a fair Winde unto
intended Haven. :

But if che infortunes be .in Angles or ſuccedene
Houſes, ſhe will meet with Men of War, Pyrats, or
ſuffer ſhipwrack, or ſome prejudice in her voyage z,.and
the misfortune will fall upon-.that..part ofthe ſhipor
perſon or thing in the ſame fignited by the Figs
and Houſe which ill Rulers and ilt Aden s govern-., It the We
ill fortunes threatnjng danger ſhall be Zazel, che! ellel "Wh
will be ſplic or ſunk, and che menin danger « of drowning:
Burif the infortuoe Barzobel, and be in his Figure;
Idea inthe eighth, ich Houſe, frowning wich ill Alpe&
the -fignificator , i pic fme mi
Zazel Paid.

But if fortunate Figures ſnile n cicher of che
—a I

4

»

forefald Dlaces, and the Ar ates; i with ood company,
checuly gre Eaſt removes into a good Hoſt ; and if
opnhus and Via be free from misfortune, itdenotes, al-

| Atarr 'the Ship ſhould be caſt away, yerby affiſtance
ofthe long-Boat foo Skiff, and other fortunate heſpes,
the major part of the men'and g6ods will i pres

ſerv ed,

"Bur if Barzabel do aft the Figures | In Angles Ind
the di{pofitor of Populns, the Say ſors or Mariners will
lowertheir Top-fails, Main-ſail, add Fore-ſail, Falf-Maſt
hizh; often eacking about ſhip, and ſtanding of: to Sex
for fear of their enemies. Es ff: boe Malum ; babwerit a-
lin dammen in figura accident inter eos imerfettiones, hy
caſfone/, vnluera, furta, E predationes mn Jubſlamiie, &
rebus quas ferunt, $C. |
Wt] to adde-to this evil, there _y any ©

Inthe Figures, there will be quarrelling , contro-
verfies,* words attd'thefts among the ſhips company
; they ne Fore coren and cheat one another ; and this will

ppen to be Jocated m thoſe Fignres, 'which
Tp of the parts in the upper divifion 'of the

oF if Zaze] do afflit after the ſame manner, he.
E'we ſaid of Bprgabel, there will be many thefts com-
in the ſhip; and moſt of the forementioned miſs .
; bnt no blood ſhed.

If the infortunate Figures Ggnifie the boteom or
pert ofthe ſhip, viz. the Hold, ir preſages ſtaving

owerhing, drowning, or aleuk.
©" the 1deq unforrmate-be in the Mid-heaven, and
Porzabel afMi&, the ſhip will bebnrny either byfire with-
In, or by thunder and \ightning withour her, Ar by Hel
ens Star , orby ſome unhappy Mereor falling out of the
Air, Of this you may. read inmy Book, called, The

Daly Guide, If Bargabele Fighres and Idea's __

 % " BB 7
FOUR :; S

RL - —— —_— — __—_ w—————_ _
be in thoſe places are governed by Idea's we call hu-
mane from their nature, the burning of che ſhip ſhall be
occaſioned by a fight ;- who ſhall by grapling with her,
cear and deſpoile her: and the danger ſhall begin in
that pare of. the ſhip gnified by che Idea which governs
che houſe the infortunate was placed in the Figure. But
if Zazel {hall by his tdea's in Figures be'the Aflitor
ſtead of Berzabeland his Idea's and Figures, and he po-
fired in the Sourh Angle, the Veſſel ſhall ſuffer by violens
croſs winds: lt ont Yu nt Bog: Thebes bel

- Etiam fi domus Aſcendentis in boc furrit fortuna, erit
reditts cum ſalutem ac bono ſacreſſu ; at ſi infortunatus,
cms Milo er Damng. Ib the Lord of the Aſtendent in
your Figure ſhall move his __ of his Idea into ano
ther fartunate place, the ſbip thall come home (aſe: but
if infortunate, ſhe will ſuffer loſs and damage.

If the Ruler of the (ſecond ſhall remove his Idea and
Figure from his own [cond ;- and 'the Ruler of the
Figure of the Part of Faxuune, ſhall remoyerthe Figure
cadent from them, or in [Jor P co them; ic then-pres
ſages want of viduals and things neceſlary. And if they
ſhall be foundin Aquatical places, there will be a pauci-
ty of freſh water. If in choſe Houſes are attribuced
to Earthy or Airy Idea's, they will be put co it for wane
of victuals and fire, by reaſon of which chey will be
much diſcouraged.

And theſe I hope will be ſufficient dire&ions for your
better” condu& through all manner of Queſtions of
-_ Nature, belonging to the firſt Houſe and to 8

IP.

” " D039 92 #4 WT] at BY TS ;
© 4-SIRDSC Of FF If ADVPE,
4 v J . i :

_—_—_

- ed OR AR: IX.
-, Queſom belonging to the ſecond Hoe tops
wm $3 143
Fl Bcoed: Houſe, s.the Hoinſe of ubRiaiice ; ; and
; theſe - queſtions following are —a—Cd to it,

vive.
I- Shall the Querene be rich or no?-/
.*-.- -2-: By what means ſhall he artain riches?
— he time :when. +
{'- 4 Stall be obtain ;che goods or Money
e? |
qu 3; wo ſhall obtain the wages - .Or: flpend
ye 2. be

"And cheſs bring wk lead che Art
oft the- ren ma ro SE " Queſtion of this Na-

II 33
"17 2 # SERTEE S> LIENS

' Fhollths bi Goremh rieb ar how Fo on i

N reſolving this ton, ou cavft {hai wy
I gure that is in the ſec Ho uſe,” 2nd bis 1dea ef
Ruler and ®, and their ſee of Alpes.
When youtinde all hr po capots free, and affited |
by the co pany of 260A of good Figures, y6u may concludethe
Qyerent will attain unto a very Ain fon degree of
fortune, and ſbatl eſcape. poverty, Albus being 2 [orc
Figure inthe firſt Hoſe, 2nd his conpunon Porjens
Major a good Fieurein 'the Reond, , prowiſe n good

34 The Temple of Wiſchme. -
competene eſtate ; and becauſe the ſecond goeth into
the eleventh Houſe, the Querent will be very much e-
ſteemed of his friends, and obtain what he hopeth
for.

When (on the contrary) you finde all the Significa-
tors afflied, and the fortunate Rulers and Idea's afford
- themnoaſliflance; you may judge the perſon interroge»
ting will þe poor, and that continually. #1

When the Fig of Zazel and Barzabel or Cauds
Draconis ſhall be in the ſecond Houſe, or afflit.by Aﬀpe&
or Company it's an argument the Querentſhall hot
attain Riches 3 of if ever he were mn good capati-
JT, he will be reduced cobeggery, or to a yery.imean

ec, TC NO 7

Sane ITY
DOOI

. - | l. 4 f 4
'By what means ſhall the Querent attain Riches ? F

Hs well viewed the Significators of ſubſtance,
obſerve what Houſes they paſs into, and what
Rulers and Idea's govern the Figures and” Houſes ;
for from thence is known by what means Riches
Come. : os |

If the ſecond or other Significators of ſubſtance te
tunately in beneyolent Aſpe& of good Figures, or if
e firſt go idco the ſecond, the Querent ſhall atrain to
great Riche without much labour , in a manner unex-

y. |

© in the ſecond, fignifies a proſperous and happy e-

ſtate, and ſhews es Gom bs ani an

_ naviygon ks at love En,
SUN | them, L Oc, 1 a ent {and keep 0

much prejudice and danger | wal? and ſuffer nothing

of evil to infelt or trouble him, | _

« 4 4 2 IR
EJ C g
* .
'P _—_ - Þ% :

7 LH 3; £F
The timewhen a man may at 4 thing. No

Onfider ſerioufly. your mica and eye

| e of Numbers : oor on

C Excorporeal Figures ſhew an un indfrey,or the
time to be neicher months nor years: movenble Figures
haſten the matter. You may meaſure ove your fime by
the Idea's and Figuresinto y or days,

as we direfted os before. Here fellows an xemple, |

A Figure of the year 1663. ;Ferihe Daly :
of SOM

_— 4 ' Lo Þ 4 3 ”
. SUAIDz | .

X. S s - F 4 4 f "I
7 5 j 0
4 _ by «+ 4
yr nm nt, B_
_ oo

Eing at dinner - the dla of February, at Fobn
_ Eſq. his houſe, with the Duke of "<> on
_ my png and dtherTL,ords und! Genre
mens ayongſt other diſcourſes the Duke propounded
ST bk and (being willi to'do hid
efted this Figure yeſbe, and” gave
ei nexttime 1 did eee! him's' which
- bor houſe at the
ni wh ry [ have
or met \ehd > inde
Che 1 ERS, Yr Rl Sap} ) On of your
ervants will he's aan to kill yor,, and you ſhall be hn in
ju mag which chg truly.: happened eg him in-
ced, as we all know., ”* -
 Nowyou may ſee what ap admirable Art this is, and
IS 90 5060 a0 ſhall finde ir infattible , and ſhall gain
and ae by it.. * And now we proceed tq ano>
2m ——_— . | oo

Shot a es he goods or money lent. _ |

|
| Y Ormu obſerve i inthis cnefiion, chat he firſt Hook:
-* is for the Querent, the Tecond denotes his fub-
wn eng but che ſeventh Houſe repreſentsthe perſon of
and whe Figure in che eighth Houſe
knitcs - ple wry > w9ms-r imme removes intd

uſes, & faluteeach other foving-
Ay denotes a ape: buſineſs enquired |

|| The firſt in che french, and the eighth in the
ſecond the matter" or inde will be-vcocap
ſhed, 7 And -&

Go Sw < Fi

%
ann Tia co. ca 3!

| tion ied by th
os be ae eg <1<3!8
Hec autem omnia ſupraditls ok de «Mp ques
ratlenter, vel finttmter Minores & ettans tmter Gommenn
nes perſonas, ficut ſunt bohitatoresfivitatum, caftrorum,
villarsm, & fimilium, que non ſunt inter perſonas quarum
quarum wna excedat aliam, Male &e+ daith 9

Cartes, *Al theſe thi en have ___
is

prove true , when the matter » (ueftion
TE

amongſt ordinary perſqns,. or with ſuch

whon! there ls a community or

ent 'Exery)
men, and fuck who, pay debes |
Law eakevlietle notice of. -

vn.

if the © werent ſhall obtain bis wages enfyred tot is due
, from tbe King or grent Lord. | '

Ehold the firſt Houſe and his Figure, _ ke

renthand his Fi re, which is _ roper fignificator of
the King or Nobleman, &c. che * demak Boats
and his Figure (ball fignific the fie of him oe
them. If the firſt be in the tenth, and che ſe-
| cou iy che cent Houſe, or removes into ſuch
Places” where they behold each other with a

ſmiling Aﬀfpe&, the Querent ſhall obtain his de-

Co

- cond, and what Fi igure is there, and behold the :

Ddd 3 5

3b wp oof wiſe. : Book ITT.
If none of the things be in the Figure the Que-
___ rarely obtain a ry ger

py

ati hs, Se

CHAP. X.

Tudgements pertayning to the third
| ce Qi

"THis Houſe judgeth of CIs Sifters , Kindred
'® andNei &e. 3nd of lalaud-jo urneys, and
Baumors; and theſe queſtions are yroper to this Houſe,
nn Shall che Querent and his Brethren, &c. and

P's lth Qu accord?

choppers Tnland-journeys be profpe-
3s 5 Oftic condition and eftate of an abſenc Bro-
. If Reporrs and Rumours nois'd about , be

7 true or falſe.
$, oof the advice of a friend, &c. if good ar

o

ce...

L

Sball the Querent and bis Brethren, &c, and Neighbours "I

gccord ?

YOu are to give the firſt Houſe ynto him chaten-. b
and what FI IR —_ ——
"des ages Face, end gaids
STE cams
pDddg (curd

ISLET Sth
EE Tre” M *_- 5 |
ay mole of WI ome.
E c e
FR

thicd Figure ofe the hos © Element, eriplicity and _— :
+ it} an argument of a good (diſpoſition in the Querent,

'/ fo es ENelohbor, him willing to ms. co with his Brethren,
eighbours ; and they will aflured! ly agree
and live TG y together.

When the Figures of Zaza!, Barzabel and their Idea's,
| or Canda:Draconis ſhalt be in firch a queſtion in the
firſt Houſe; it-denates the. Querent to be an ob-
oe perſon, evil conditioned, averſe to friendly agree-

7'bay if either of therh be projedted into the third,

Brethren, Neighbours and Kindred are of a poyſo-
ws and SH |

JI. >
UL the condition and eſtate of an abſent Brother.

reſolution of this queſtion, you muſt conſider the
Figure ih the third Houſe , his Idea, Ruler, and
the nacures of them; for they i in that place

Brethren: and if it move into any other Houſe,
chat Houſe cells ou the eſtate and condicion of che

hay the third be a good Figure, and 90 into che fourth
in no ill Afpe&t of the Malevolence;. the Brother ,
Fe, which is abſent, hath an intention co enrich

Forge in lace where he is: for che op
$i eee om che third,

g Favs EIT ill enmpany
| ran 9c wil de hore:
wi bs Et; Re RT HY "ut

A T
«s -

4, + EY $
" T

"4

—_— ear ape eonne þ

: 'Y 214: if
am. Kg

Shall the Qerrems Fntand-journe be nk
F the ſecond and third Houſe be. IX
che firſt beof thefime Nature nn
the firſt, it denbees the Journey enquired » after t:
leafane, [NG
, IN Figures in the eird Houſe ſhews bat a

JIE One ot OY FIRE

i 'Y > . $.:\
' "
7
4 : TS) «
I V. : F S

FF Reports or Rumours noiſed be trut or or fall x _

"TEE.

1uay

JF the Lord of the third and firſt de good
and Rulers, A orporated in good Figures
in good company Afpedts', and all the Angles
are fixed Figures,' the Report or Rumour is
rrue. |
: Ill ann ve and third Honſes afflited by
ill com z if the Fi resbe ſtrong:
theRwhonr infulſes | . wh
 Whenthe 5of che tench and fourth Hoalt
A wt ————

will prove true.

i hy
BEES cnn nad
WEN : 4 | 7 209

Of thenbvice of «Friend, dec. whether rd rel

Mee arti qcfit no

2 > 55 DEEP

The [emple of Wiſdome. Book IIl-
and perſwade with him, what he had beſt co do in ſuch
or fuch a Caſe, &c. Now. if you would know, whe-
ther he or they intend faichfully or perfidiouſly, pro-
je& your Figure as you were taught in the firſt Book ;
may frame the two Witnefſes and the Judgeif you

will, but it-needs nor. YES. x
* Behold the tenth Houſe, (that being the Houſe fig-
nifying advice) and ſee ifany fortunate Rulers, Idea and
| Figure accidenally be poſited there : That place being
- naturally the Houſe of Zaze!, and his Idea Hanael, bur

nr

by another good Figure,” that is, the friend of

Carcer, you may judge che counſel or advice
ſerious and good, and it will not be amis for you to
follow. - | |

But if Rxbew or Cauda Dracomis, or other ill Figures
ſhall be found in the tenth Houſe ; the friends rhat pre-
eend counſel intend knaviſhly, and are lyars and vain de-
ceitful ſellowes. A

LO OS —— ___ GEIESIs ——
err at. 6 —— — ea. en —

CHAP. XI.
Fudgements of the fourth Houſe, .

'F His Houſe is called Az7,«we, the North-Angle of the
:* Earth, and giveth judgement of Poſleſlions, Inheri-

tances, Lands or Houſes, and of things hid or miſlaid of -
the Father, &c. And theſe queſtions areproper unto it»
| Sc. 1. Shall the Querent purchaſe the Houſe or
Land? &c. 2. Shall the Querentdo well to take it? Of
the quality of it. 3. If it be good to remove, ora
abide where oneis. - 4. Of Treaſure bid, if attainable,
and who keeps it. 5. Is there treaſure in the place
ſuppoſed? - 6. Shall che Quyerent enjoy the eſtate of
his Father? 7- Of athing miſlay'd, how or w_—_—

#3

———

 fndeic. Theſe Examples will re INES

Ce maheter ata Spoormpan
ture. of RE

| Ab SW wiz; NTT IH AD
$hall the ®xerent purchaſe the Houſe or Land #

[orb Fig re et fourth Hou, ir rec
the accompliſhmenc thing, w impedi-

ment, let or hinderance.
"The firft Honſe fignifieth the Querent or Purchaſer 3
a nan oY give the fourth Houſe and

ah nog

PR

Satay, <—

ER

6: he
| tenth Houſe to

be good, Joudmllune

berw
; ” Y Fm. .-*.
S UL 2x * kc + 'S N wr OE F . 3 IN” 4 k $ % 3M . , Re ,
. as * ve 2

of $523 TE IEESs to

the
3 Aﬀpe&t and removi of theFigur

_— [be nds and

111

the bv do well to taky. Irs 5 of be quality of

JN ob

the Sareh) k if yon lives an ill Figute there
<7 Pecan is# Conjundtion, and i.

after will be ſpoyled and

you what it is, and its quality.

Ir 47 the'fourth of mwah » ſhews it tobe

Es |

Garth t Dee way then judge the Ground

y 5g eibyL.
Major, Minor, or Acquiſetio ſhall

co be purchaſed)is Monceinove, billy,hard

:*IF Amiſſie, Ro apa or Carcer, the Ground
nh and very grod {If Albus,Puells,Coput Dreco-

anda Draconis, the Ground is-mixt

5 a omges pare high, no act] in qua»

; good nor ? If Populus, Via,
nbe; EE Ground morſt,and over-burde-
AIG Water.

© 7
:

bought-ar purchaſed,” and the
price thereof. =

%

: b che ba. and at the wth” £ itisin no |
arg wt he Ruler pid Lie thr governs the
ret

L
1 «
a - —ﬀ _ a cc... LC uwaacwaf . co —_——

ILK
If good for 0n one 0 revorog or Bide whey bee.

Ts Houſe Mk fo the
racons 5 FAA

unt9 tack he wogl

Figure, the [andor or

= mT}
av.170 , $I E

"ef reair, if NY _ :

] Always obſerve in Queſſions ofthilNaye, | TE

tunars Figures be in the fourth, that there is
ſure hid : Fe firſt Figure be good ens
any, and fo go into the Sands the rene hid will
= found by theQuerent: and if chere be any ſpirit,
keep it ifyou arreſt bjm under the mmand of a for»
cunate ' conſtellaciorn, Yon _ ve | him where
- you pleaſe; as you er ags
Gaifs He, and >: LET;

Ops

9 7 A

” « «®
.3F,

6©.'S {&
+42 *&

V..: ;
' Is there Treaſure in the place ſuppoſed?

this queſtion lee the Aſcendent fignifie the Queren,
when Acquifitlo, Letitia, Puella, or Caput Draconis
is in'the fourth, any of them. declares treaſure tobe
in the place ſuppoſed. |
If Fortuna Major, or Fortuna Minor fignifie the Trea-
fare, ir is Gold or Jewels, &-c. If Popzlzs or Via, it is
Silver: If Carcer or Triftitia,it is Lead,or Coals,or a quar-
yo Stone, ſuch as is in Warwick:ſhire, at a place called
arebick inthe Shawes , neer the Church; 'thereis
Ttoutid the belt in England : there is alſo much Treaſure
in that Quarry-pit. And: thus'you may judge accor-
ding co the place ſuppoſed : If Rabexs, Prer, or Capm
Draconis, there is Braſs'or Inn or ſuch like: If 4c-
prey or Letitia, Tin, ſuch as is found jn Cormwal and
zre ;' There is a good Vein beewixt Sidmouth
and Newton, Bowoodand Bulverton Hill-end : If Pxells,
' Wamens Ornaments: If Albws or Conjuntiio, Piltures,

LY

Cs

Medals, Books, ec .

:
> # Ln a

w

: _ - Shall the Querent enjoy the Eftarc of bis Father ?

Af Any eyere Fathers, having been wantonand fullof

" merry frolicks in youth, curb and bridle cheir
ſons too cloſe, fearing the ſon ſhould verifie the Pro-
verb of So likg the Fatber, that be is the worſe again:
. Hur I like the old ſaying, An wnhbappy Boy makes « good
Man, Many there are in my days, that have occafion ws

%
»

ww ww Y%&> wry 57

f
r
z-
d
0
k

= _ 2 &”
FOUL ® l .*

ask chis Queſtion : the Artiſt may refolve them accor-
ding to the Rules following. FEED oi

If the ſecond go into the firft, 'and thefirſtgoinro
the fourth ; the Querent will enjoy the Eftate of oO
cher ; if chey ſtay intheir places , and move no fur»
ther. Po |

If one Ruler govern the firſt and fourth Figure, and
another Ruler bel his Friend, goErnthe ſecondand
fifth Figures, and they be all of an Elementzthe Querene
will ſuddenly receive-GTe of his Fathers Eftate. An
ill Figure in the fourth Houſg dechires the Father to'be
COIs and that he carey not to'pare with any
c Yo , |

VIL”
Of a thing miſlaid, bow or where to finde 8 F _

Aving projefted your Figure, and righely conft-
H deredof rows firſt Houſe, Oc. nar eh
to judgement after this manner, viz. ' If the ſecond Fi-
gure be in an Angle, the ching miſſing is withia the
Houſe of the Querent : bur if the ſecond Fignre be
in the firſt, che ching miſling is in that part of
the Houſe , which the Querene himſelf moſt fre«
' quents.
, If the ſecond go into the eleventh Houle, ic declares
the thing hid or miſlaid to be in the Hall, Parlour, Ban*
quetting-Houſe or Dining-Rome, if a Gentleman askthe
queſtion. GE cM
| wp Tradeſinan ask it, it isin the Shop or Copneiag*

Houſe. | —T
If the ſecond go into the tenth, che thing is ia

that part of the Houſe, where the Querents Wife *

or Maid-Servants ufe moſt to be ;:if athe fixeb, where
"his ſervants have moſt to do, &c. To

—

obſerve the nature and quality of the Figure and
Es .which if ;they. be Aiery,, the thing wanting is in

{rhe Houſe: If fie ny Aphrr 5 var Chime
DO pp or Fline-ſtones If Eaxrthy, it is

! Matry, it is neer ſome Sink or, V Vaſh-Houſe, or in ome
TT Ts 5 ' boy ple, &<- You muſt alfo obſervethe
$sand Figures govern, for that di-
An e or part ofthe Houſg where
hid: The Figures are thus to be

ErTument..
| , Major and Fortuna "Minor Eaſt
and by North; Acquif#io,Faſt and by Southz Popu/ns and
Via North, Rubeus and Caudg Dracoms North and by
Eaſt; Letitia and Capt Dracoms, North and by Wet;
Pxele and Capmt Dracanis. Weſt ; Triftitia, Weſt and by
North ; Albxs Weſt and by South: wo and Cauds
Fr Ac F s hr TN by 3 Conpundlin,
aut eſt., For beter inſtru&ion, turn back
Chaprer of-che fixit Book ; for theſe
tu hea : and Engenius Theodidatius will
on this ſacred Art .@ every Mechanical de-

e714 3+

- S =» £ >
——— F

A >a ah "I

alt f 1 1GHAP., XI
12.0: Of Judgement belonging to uhe fifib Houſe.

ks Houſe called 'preth rv. of the Greek Artilts, be-

T cuſicg it giveth Judgement of Children, Mellenger b
Rh, Debghts, and hath;cheſe queſtionsto, be re-
 Gldedfrom ie, +15; Whether 'F —_ ſhall bave chil

doen? 2. rom 3. fa
wor

Ck

j TEES TI eo al of - me

ſome Pavement or | gs or ſome low place: If

- y . E " - th. <a 4.44
p 47] - F 'l {1}, . '#h Ne,

nated\ of 'a Boy 'or. Girl? 5. Shall the have Twinst
6. When ' will the birch be?: 7; Of 'a' Meſlenger
ſent of a meflage. / 8. Shallthe Querent gainorJoule
T1207 1:1 BE: BK 5

* 7 {
+4 A

Whether a Wiman ſhall bave Children @ ©

Ne” he that knows how to reſolve theſe queſtions,
cannot be to ſeek to reſolveany. that belongs unto
this Houſe. Behold now the firſt Houſe , which in
this Figure is Acquiſitio: If it had baenin the fifth,or in
the fourth or fixth Houſes, theQuerent ſhotiid hate
Ty Eee Children

| Children; and if none of theſe happen, behold what

Fi ſmiles upon the firſt, fifth and ſeventh Houſes ;
if that be a good Figure, it's an argument that

the Querent may have Children. Another teftimony of

Children is ifthe ſecond goeth into the fifth Houſe; thar

being a good Figure : and the firſt and ſeventh promiſe

hopeful Children.

auda Draconis , Carcer or Triftitia in the fifth,
or beholding the fifth, generally denies Iflue : If Bor-
Zabels Idea's and Figures bein or F, it portendsthe
fame. | _

In what time may the Woman conceive ?

Ome hold that if the firſt go into the fifth, the Que-
rent may conceive in the firſt year : If in the ſecond,
the ſecond year: If in the tenth, the third year: If in
the ſeventh, che fourth year: If in the fourth Houſe,
the fifth year. Confider whether the Figures that ace
Significators of days, weeks,months and years are ſtrong
or weak ; andſo you may judge of the time.

i

In. -
If a Woman enquiring be with cbilde.

JF the Figures , Genii or Ideas of Geomancy concurs |. ,

you judge as followeth. |
 Andif Hiſmaels Idea's and Figures , the natural Sig-
nificators of children, be cither of them in the firſt
Houſe, or fifth, ſeventh or eleventh Houſes, no waysaf-
flied by ill Aſpe&s, it denotes the Querenc to be with

childe. 11! Figares in the fifth Houſe, as Zezaland |

Barzabels Figures, or Cauds Drocomis z the woman ei
quring 1s not. with childes |

IV.

ws an gd oa a _..-:

_ Houſes.

14

LT.
Is the Woman impregneted of Boy of Girl Þ

| FO reſolve this queſtion, you muſt obſerve the firſt

Houſe, the Ruler that gives vertue to that Idea and
Figure,and the fifth Houſe ; and that Ruler, Intelligence
or Angel of God , that is ſent amongſt other to govern
the Earth: See what is ehere : If thefirft and fitth Fi-
eures, Idea's and Rulers be Maſculine, che Querent is
with childe of a Boy : If Feminine, ſhe then goeth with a
Girl: And this is certain, if Feminine Figures in Fe-

minine Houſes, behold the firſt and fifth with good A-

(pe& : The like may be judged, if Maſculine Figures
in Maſculine Houſes, if they behold the fick and fifth

Amongſt the powerful Meſſengers of God, ſeven rule
theStars,ch= twelve Signes,and che twelve Houſes in the
Heavens;and ſeven are commanded to govern the Earth,._
& all things therein contained, according to the ſaying of
one Abeneſi: OYPANO ANQ, OY *ANO KATQ, AzTPA ANG»
AETPA KATQ, IANO ANQ, IIANTOTTO KATQ, AAYFTA AABE,
KAI EYTYXE. Thatis: Heaven above, Heaven beneath ;
Stars above, Stars beneath; all that is above, is alſo
beaneth : underſtand this, and be bappy, yn

And God commanded them to er his Idea upon all
things in Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath,and in
the Warter under the Earth ; andchey obeyed, and it
was even ſo. And God commanded theſe Meſlengers,
Intelligences or Rulers, Idea's to every Species, and to
every thing, both in Heaven and in Tas and every
Species hath it's Idea, Natural and Divine. Now the

atural Idea's and Figures receive the influences of the
Divine, and of the Melengers : And theſe Mellengers
have ewelve particular Idea's which they delight in, ond
| | c

Eee 2

theſe twelve are ſet over the twelve parts of the Earth
' which they govern : and of theſe ſome are called Maſ-

the in their number and nature, moveable, common

.ac the Mellenger ; che ſeventh Houſe and that Figure

: * _ WY 5 fs; Co

culine,and other-Feminine; the Maſculine are Z azel, Hiſ-
mael, Barzabel and Sorath ; the Feminine are Kedemel
andHaſmodai: Taphtbartharath is convertible in nature ;

and is either Maſculine or Feminine according to the |

Figures company and aſpect that are with him , and be.
hold him.

We told you before in the farſt Book what Idea's
were Maſculine, and' which were Feminine. Now we
will tell you the Nacural diſpolition of the Figures ;
Puer, Albus, Fortuna Major and Minor, Caput Draconir,
Amiſſio, Acquiſitio and Triſtitza are Maſculine: Pella,
Populus Via, Conjunttio,Rubeus, Cauda Draconis, (. arcer,
Letitia, are Feminine: Theſe being heeded, the ſex is
eaſily diſcovered. = |

Shall ſhe bave Twins, or more then owe?

FROnſider what Figures in the firſt Houſe, and what
AJ isin'the fifth Houfe, &c. For if the Idea's be in
Bi-corporeal or double-bodied Figures, the Querenc
may have two Children.

ruicful Figures in the firſt and fifth, in good Aﬀpe&

of good Figures and fruitful, it is then poſlible the Que-”

rent may have three Children.

9

I

. . . . | 8 {0K " N
Thecime when the Birth will be , che Figures figni-"< C:

fixed.
| VI. ;
Of a Meſſenger ſent of an Errand, &c.

| SS FF any one enquire of you concerning a Meſſenger,

©c, Give the firſt Houſe and his Figure tohim that

or,

, |
Fr

all

vans FRA -

*
o
_
i
j

het

= ls 09 He

} þ he 1 emiple of 4 iſ ome. |

Bookllt.
in it, to fignifie him ;to whom the Meſſenger is fents and

the fifth Figure,the Meſſenger and his management or or»

dering ofhis biifineſs,” . Cp

When the fifth Figure any ways beholds a good Fie
gurein the firſt or ſeventh*Houſes, you may then judge
the Meſlenger hath etfefted hisbulinels, and is returning

again. F ky

If he niove into the .queſited cond, which is the

eighth, and then be in the (econd, dic quod defert ſubſftane

tim, five ſu ſigmificagor Fortuna, ſive infortunium : he
then brings money with him, !et the Figure be good or
evil: If che fifth Figure ſhall goto the OD) or F of ei»
ther of the Infortunes, after he is ſeparated fromthe
Lord of the' ſeventh ;, the Meſſenger will receive
ſome prejudice or impediment in his returning home
again. . oh

If there be found an infortune in the ninth Houſe ; -

dic quod iter eft minus tutum' propter Latrones, you'may
then judge chat the Meſſenger will not travel ſae, bat
will be in danger. of prejudice by Theeves. © Ar f conn
trarinm bujus nveni@, cntrarinm judica; but.ifon the
contrary you finde a fortune in the niath, judge the cons

Far

"
>

Shall the Querent gin or looſe by play ?

T He firſt Figure, Idea and Ruler ſhall fignifie the
| Quereat: the fifth, the Play or Gate: the ſe |

von Houſe, the Perſon you are to Play or Game with»
all. |
Tf the firſt go into the fifth Houſe, and the ſeventh
BY into the ſecond Houle, the Qiierent wiil gain by
Play.

If the Part of Fortune be in the ſecond, and the Fi»
gures of Hiſmael or Tapbthartbarazb in the tifghzand caſt

Eee 3. © good

—— wean Sa,
s % y —
) Z ;
þ
—
4
»

Winds 4%
I >

Dl eat

-— aa. —_ + tit... th... tas, od

ren

— — ""—_

" 3s TheTempleof wiſtdome BookITI

vood Aſpedt to the firſt, ſecond and Part of Fortune, it
' ſhews gain by play.
If be ſecond be afflicted by either the company or
aſpe& of ill Figures, or the [J or F of Kedemrel, or the
Figure of the fifth; the Querent will then looſe by
play : If Canda Draconis be in theſecond Houle, and al-
a Figure of Tapbtbortbaratb be in the ſeventh,
and remove into * or © to the firſt Houſe, yet the
Querent will be cheated and abuſed in his play : And
ehis is ſufficient to inftru& how to judge any queſtion
belonging cothis Houle. |

————_.

—_w_— —_
”

CHAP. XII1,.
Fudgements belonging to tbe ſixth Houſe.

T He fixth Honſe giveth judgement of ſickneſs, Ser-
(® vants and ſmall Cattle; and by eheſe Examples
.yon may judge of any other queſtion. rt. What part
of the Body is afflifted? 2. Is the diſeaſe in body,
or minde, or both? 3. Shall the diſtemper be
Chronique or Acute? 4. What is the cauſe of the .
—_— 5- Shall the fick party recover, or die of
che diſeaſe > 6. Of ſervants, ſhall they prove juſt or
knaviſh ? 7. Of (mall Cattle, ſhall the Querent thrive

by them Or not ? O's

Book LIT.

The Temple of Wiſaome. .

| 1,
IV hat part of the body is afflified ?

wa K's 0 os
fs % [** "!
E: +5 a
Ss [A [9% |S
AMR EA EE. =
OI
» [** 6
*» | ++ 1 4uT
= 7
| ** | o. |
» oe * *

Heſe Rules are experienced by Do&or «Anthony

IT himſelfe : And I believe he "had his
' Herbs out of this Pratzm or Medow of che Idea's, a
place we well know 3 it isa Garden, and the Monntain
of the ſeven Mettals. Here Do&or Antbcny found how
to make his Auram potabile, that hath fince his death
cured ſo many tho of all ſorts of people. And _
ſomething Moſes hath ſpoken to this purpoſe ; and thus
it is written And Moſes tock the Calf, which they bod *
+ Do oe. '. - made

—

aLCLLIIIITERDS > Res EY

; Wh ES Ws SEE; .; , Fg” + ;
” = . F 2 a ” SF - *
; WW | ; |
8 $ " HR. The emple Wſdome k H To
_ _Y omar 7” wr oof: Or a9 ©9c—ea wy
by _ "2x - v ——- __— OS I
OT E_—_Y | Wa Arno

made, burnt it in the Fire, and grinded it to Powder, and
ftrowed it upon the Water, and made the Children of Iſrael
drink.of it, Certainly here was a ſtrangekind of Spice,
and an Art as ftrange as the Spice it ſelf: This Calf was
pare Gold, the-Ifraclites having contributed their

Fu

Ear-rings to'the Fabrick. | % |
Let any manin England nowliving, tell me by what
meang'fq ſolid and” heavy a” body as Gold \may be
he xo ſuch a light powder, that-3t may, be ſyrink-
Fon the face of the Water, and afterwards drunk up,
any man-think he can bring ſuch a thing ito paſsby
fre, lechim try, and cure one man whenhe ath done,
$f af Age with it.: Verily theſe Myſteries, ih ome

er, which we willnot for all.the world put to paper,
ave.made us almoſt diſpleaſe our deareſt friends, to
whom' notwittiftanding we owe a better ſitisfactian.
Had it been our fortune barely. roknow but theſe things,
as\Mmoſt men 'do;we had perhaps beetiles careful; but we
have been inſtructed in thenatureof Angels and. Spirits,
(as they ſay) which are viſible, and will fpeak withws,
and which are invifible ;zandhow.to body thetw/into Fi-
ures, and other ſecretcircurgſtences, which few upon
th underfiagd. We ſpeak not for any oftentation,
t ſpeak a truth which. aur..conſcience knows very
well. We had not ſpoken this in our defence, but that
prewereaſauſtedand cold'to our face, we were bound
ro diſcover all chac we knew, - | Therefore we leave this
_ Sliftavery to God: 'Lert it be your ſtudy now to under
fand this Book: and my Regjoilucis , and go enter in-
| 4 Engr thereof ; fogi then you way know
ipies:,: 2nd! : underſtand”; the; nature of: inviſible

* #

I ww OI MD 22804 +2 ob (! $2: 0
".ibo:haviog rojeRed your Figure, you muſt obſerve
bbs or andy 2 Houles, for.they arenatural Significy-
— owof dhe deſeaſes and then the firſt Houſe allied

by

Book Ul, The Temple of Wiſtlanher

rr Me
by an ill Figure, the the diſtemper lies in the heady mndals :
in that member or ares of Ne yo epreſeaced by che
Figure and Idea. * da USL
If Populus be in your Figure, or Via, and afflited by
che infortunes, [ay! the 'party iogrievod idrlhepirk

che body the Pigur ing governs ;ofrom
of his own Idea 4 che"fime antertand of cho finchy
LIY 2 . 20) VINY

at nag 's iT YL TO $411 m5uÞ

&2 & _ | ESTES: EE D ri :>}e91C1?
87 the ek in a thebocy, wy ky doch fiir Ciel 3
FEA 01:30 2448 wt 712 ni Quin,
wHekel Houſezhis Rulers Idevindtcare, Penny:
6 ara IF ch ignifieagonnF cho @iite -
or inde; RL YE 130 192 zi 230 © IG R

- Noww'if yow'firide che Gel Hon(®: kfibed;"
Mo jor affliged, und: che fifth: Jocks rhe bn
the fourchy may \conclade che idiftemper
ſeized the whole and minde alſo; obthefickarty
Ser Piſs; - 2122 209 20 5430/7 9631 04% avitiuritions m4 -
1f- +1 affidt otic oſt Houſe) aig] Forts: Aapr or
Mi nor at the fametimeinGor of him; ren >
is troubled #i-minde chiefly abou he”
world, and about lofies and: es cate; > See
Piſa;>* VER I0T QI: pro J'112 TAS
"Eineet beingTuller 'of 'good Bightes;: Mev
Houſes *of patts:of the: Earth 3 ahdethenhe afflifes chis
Sigmficators (for you maſt kriow,; Kb/maet as: hecyay:be
diſpoſed may be an infortune and do miſchief ,1even'ﬆ
Zazel and Bargabel) eritits tcoubled jatnlgle,
about Religious Tenends. ' { Kedenehyie isaboud Love: ©
toys : If Barzabel cor Tapbrharohivevi, 45 2rit
L ro one burt'the* fick- party: i80Frenetaquie 2 by
t Ks _ you _ underſiagd hides thei diffaſc

"Ss wVOOT

x þ 58 «

-, For inſtruion.

Book 11.

.—

The Femple of Wiſdome.

© n—

er} od
| Shall the diſeaſe beChronique or Acute ?

IN the Refolucion of this, you are to confider the
an” 2490 of the perſon, hisage,and the time of the

; the knowledge of theſe conduce much to the
diſcovery of the certainty of the matrer propounded :
Diſeaſes in Autumn and Winter, are uſually reputed
Chronical or Long, but more Long in Winter then in
Axtromn: : In Spring and Summer, Acuteor Short, but
more Acate' in Lorie then in Summer. - So infirmities
alliveg young perſons, or thoſe in the firſt half of their
age 3 likewiſe Melancholy and Phlegmatique 'perſons
are: ſubje& to Chronical. diſeaſes 3. but Sanguine and
For ang rr to Acute. But becauſe Sir Cbri-
fopber in his Book of Aſtrology, hath given you
che Reaſons -of: theſe things , we refer you' to them
For the Nature of the diſeaſe in this
Artis taken from'the Ruler and Idea chat poſleſſes the
Figure-in- the firſt Houſe and ſixth:Houſe : And the
Lengeh or ſhortneſs of the diſeaſe, isknown by the Fi-

 gures moveable, common or fixed,

An.ill Figure fixed in the fixth, preſgeth a laſting
fickoe(s; a moveble Figure in the fixth,gone after into
che ceneh Houſe; andif the Figure be good, as Fortuna

" Major, Auram Potabile will cure the party of his diſeaſe;
\Phroates: |

_ If aFigureia the firſt Houſe or the fixth remove in
X'or & coa good Figure, in therenth, it denotes che
diſeaſe <0 be ſpeedily cured by good Medicine , and
ſhews \ it to be of no long continnance.

Bar if the firſt or fixth Figure, or either of them, re-
move and bein [7], Por company of ill Figures, the
diſeaſe will be both long and tedious : and ifchis happen

| in

59 The Temple of Wiſaome. ' | Book Il, ©

gyge—_— — ——— ge te ER = Cz
in fixed Figures, the diſeaſe will be the longer. Phi-
loftratitse | |

What is the cauſe of tbe diftemper ?

| x
He cauſe of the diſtemper is known from the poſi-
| tion ofthe fignificators of fickneſs id, 1n ej
ther of the four Triplicitiesz for therein they ſhew
the predominant humour that is peccant.. Farchgs..'2
If in your Figure, they or the moſt of themaremo»
ved into Houſes governed by fiery Idea's , they de
clare chediſtemper to have its .Original from Choler z
whence Fevours and all ſuch diſeaſes proceed. Cor
nelius Agrippa's Teliſmes. *
Bur if the Significators be altered into Airy .
blood is then predominant in the body , and the di
is thence cauſed ; as Gouts,Leprofies,&c. If in Earthly,
they declare the cauſe of the diſeaſe to have its: —_
F'
£qver

from Melancholy ; and thoſe diſeaſes are uſuall
and tedious, as Conſfumptions, Agues, &c. |
Kimcim. | ; | od 8 oY
If the Significators be governed by Watery Idea's #
and Figures inWatery Houſes it denoces the amps xo"
- proceed from cold and moiſt cauſes, as Flegm; andthe ©
diſeaſes | 099g are Coughs, Prifique, and all
noxious diſeaſes of the ſtomack. Agripps's Teliſmes.
; Whea the projeftions of the $ cannot
throaghly inform you of the Nature of che diftemper:
Conſider the nature of the Rulers as well as the Idea's,
Figures and Houſes; for they much aflift inthe diſcovery
of the caule of a diſeaſe, Phroates, ' 3291

IR |
_ (i V.

"Ml 4o.iThe Temple bf
c an ® N, c of

-=Y ; . 4, 7 * e#A< er:
IV «19.1 CEA waits ++ $4

— - $4

"a 4 Vw...
- ” ”
© 585.» s

"vs /» 1s RAS
-
: Bo
= ” * ” -
x

$3 your Figure, if the firſt go from good, the party
ed by.ithe-.or &' of ill Figures in the fourth and

» .
F ” 8 3 "

-P
e ot 44 x

___ 1 :lfaFigureinthe firſt Hoſe removeinto the-eighth,
- it declares the irrecovery of the fick. - |

x cf the eighth thill be incherenth; and chefirſtin the

pett 3 the party ſhall farely die.
BS coupon) C155 34
; T2 3*I - SITY hs... V L;- :
1ic0 Of Serammts, all they prove juſt or kinaviſh?

- ; 4 *
© SIE{EL3 1:{: FS) Vf OTH]

v5 AG > 19 'Bue when-chis queſtion is by a Ma-
_Rer propounded unto yon, - gweany Figure that is pro-
zeced in the firſt Houſe of «
in the fixth to Fgnifie the Servant: and if amity and
Ipve be betwixt thoſe two Figures, their 1dea's and Ru-
lers, and theRulers and Idea's that naturally payers me
_ Roules

ok INI,

a ., na m7,

fixthardeventh Houſes, afftied by ill company .

tenth Honſess generally the Houſe of 'the Maſter |

onifie him, and the Figure.

C— bb

Houſes ; ſay the Servant ſhall prove juſt and beaneft. "-
Judge the contrary, if you finde Figures of a contrary |
quality in thoſeplaces, and accidentally are proje&ed.

there. oe 7
IT.
If the Querent Shall thrive by ſmall Cattle ?

be in the ſecond Houſe, the Querene+
guresbe

upon a Figure made fof any other queitio
coithis Houſe. Fd - | "p % \

; #
, f Tos p 7p N
— - £2 % . % "= Ef ES; L P JN as. &
C H A P./ XIV. ; : # / :
| # WF, Mc 4 P
Of the. ſevemb Hoeſſe, ;

Rom this Honſe or'part of the diviſion of the Earth,
and other things, Arcifts enquire of Marriages,Part-=
nerſhip, Law=ſuics, publick Enenzes,&c. of Thefts, Fus. .
oitives and Strays: And theſe _you ſhall have briefly
treated of by way of Example, that you may know
how the better to judge of the reſt. 1. Shall the
Querent marry ? 2. If marry, how long firſt? 14.
the Querent marry more thenonce ? | 4+' Whar
ner of Perſon ſhall the Querent marry ? 5.-Shall'&
accord. after Marriage ? 6. -Shall che Marriage be
feed ornot ? To reſolve theſe queſtions or any other
-of what nature ſoever, you muſt} proje& as you wene
tauglit in the ficſt Book, and make your Figure ag for
Example, and jadge asfolloweth+ ; -iofinrd

* CY #4 #%
£* kw £#*44
.

* Pu 7 A

$57
: I.
p w .

» » TR; a *
2 » . aha 5D. 5 CIR 5
x # 6h : ” 5; = 6. 4 3 Y f > 7 F 4 __ ads, pee : Le 3; 4 TE.
5 d = = > % LL RI 4 .

4/7 ” ”9 'F; a F”

F ” 2 , *
- —_ . ————_— v ;
- py F 1 _ teens. ia Br” REF v - ——_ —
— ww _ | — — —
—I
"wn : .
- $4
by .

I.
Sball the Querent marry ?

. Louth, |

og North.

FUOnfider herein the firſt Houſe, for thae always (ig-
A nifies the party enquiring, and the Ruler, Ideaand
'Figure in it : Malcbidael and Pxer with the Ruler Bar-
-zebcl naturally Rule this Houſe ; but accidentally P+-
-pulaes is here projefted : her Idea and Ruler fignifie the |}
party enquiring ſhall marry. Who is fignified by Pops-
-fxc5,18 of a low or little ſtature, the upper parts of more
bigneſs then the lower ; a round rage fickly, pale,
© whutely complexion, the hair a dark _ 2

: TIF

ton; ab OE

+
=
x potter ting ioroad!” 4 _

cheſnur and variable , and. the ſhall have many chil-

dren. ph,

The ſeventh Houſe, and the Ideaand Ruler that go-
vyerns the Figure that is accidently projected into it.
Bac __ and Pella are naturally commanded to go-
VErt ITo ABS If bes HO ES

Now hcre we finde Triftitia and his Idea and Ruler,
which exa&ly deſcribes the Querents husband. And the
two fignificators being in & Aſpe&eoeach other ; we
Judge the Marriage will be effe&ed, &-c. If the firſt or
ſeventh be in # to each other in their Motion, the Que-
rent no queſtion will marry. | | ct
' TIfallthe fignificators be ill Figures, and of ill govers
nors in {J or F to eachother, you may conclude the
party enquiring is 'averſe to Marriage, and in plain
terms he or ſhe will not marry.

Ih, |
If the Querent Marry , bow long firft ?

Inding the fignificators applying by a friendly Aſpe
F hogs pi confiderly ade Ociental or yk
\ dional partgof the Earth »' you may judge the Querene
will be married ſaddenly : if their motion be Occidental
or Septentrional ; it will be much prolonged,and a great
while before accompliſhed.

If the Figures and their Idea'sand Rulers be in moye+
able places,and bealſo moveable : They do very muck
accelerate or haſten the matter. In this j
moveable Figures that are governed by moveable Idea's

we weeks and days z common give months or weeks:
ed Figures give years or months. Et fic de ceteris.::;

I.

3c. 1 Bi
WT: 's

ata x ye + " 4 % 1 lp a : ,
oben end Tied 20) 0% SILLY LDL &

113 y 5 Ty
br 42:11 SboRebe Qytremmhrr mare * EW ?

23i- O24 45 21.49 4 1251 Vis

Ff anions of, Macriage \badouble-bodied, they

declareche Querent (bei ic either manor woman) to

ananry moredhtnidrice. 1 WETTL

»:/Erthe. rs- be 39: _ H. mich good Fi-

IT | - porteads marriage to verent more they

| ney. chiefly. from the) fafth', - ſeventh or eighth

C13G M9442:1 1

IC if you finde the gnificators of marriage in ixed

and fixed, aud.in Aﬀpett with not above one Fi-
gures:joumeytellche Querent {let it beeither he oc

dbedrhacic PRESrnge Nomore then Once.

7 .
What manner of perſon al oh Ruerent marry ? And
bow quolifies # -- (ol

|! i D's what Figure is projefted-in the firſt Houſe, and
| w

ſpe@&ic is, and' obſerve what Houſe it is, and accor-
y deſcribe the perſon: either man | or woman,
Far it * will be fach: a one- the Querent; ſhall -mar-

Ty
-- Af the fiſt be in. compaty ge Afpe& with Paella, lay
ghe. perſonas pleaſant, If with Sorath, the per-
foy'is noble;. of a greatſpirity aud imperious, , If with
Batzabe/, he: perſon is many times raſh and furious
:ndubjeftto choler and paſhon. If with Zaxg!, the
perſon 35 inclinable. «.:maglencholy,. Yer prpdene- Anj
gravely wiſe. If with Hiſmael, you may ſay the
aſt, honeſt and religious. If with Tephthartharath,

'th8 perſon is _—_ and RR &c, Mix your ene
men

"2 6. 2” fb , OY =" nI—_—S
— — _
\ %.

hat Idea and Ruler ,governs it, and in what A-.

—.. roo” —_ CO

Buys nh, any gaz Wk ab tat A wo wc

: : - — 2528
" I ST 3s Le Eee

”

Bi ox [I1.

p The [emple of Wiſdome: ; 7
mix- your judgement with the qualicy of your
fignificators, and their Nature is known the bet-
ter; =; ; FE |
Conſider the dignities and debilicies of the. Ruler

Idea's and Figures aforeſaid ; the ſhape,qualifications ind
eemperature of- the perſon whom the Querehe' fhall
matry ,will be the better known and difcovered. ' "|

| : V. | BB 5
Shall they accord after Marriage A

THe firſt Figure, his Ida and Ruler in company * of
"HO of the Figure that is in the ſeventh, or Ke-
demel , argues much pleafure and delight after Mar-
riage, and ſhews they ſhall agree well, and not quarrel at
all. - | | Ph 00-28 IT
But-if they ſhall be in I or P each untotheother, it
ſhews much, quarrelling and contention to ha afs
cer marriage : And if they ſhall bein [7] or P of the in-
fortunes, chiefly in all places of -the Figure, the -
ſame. | i |
The Figures of Zaze/, Barzabel or Cauda Dracons
in the -Aſcendent. or firſt Houſe, ſhews the Querent to
be imperious 'after marriage, and by his' or her obſtina»
cy will occafion much diſcontent and trouble : Bye
if they, or eicher of them be in the ſevench Houſe,
the perſon whom the Querent marries will be the occa-
ſion - of the, trouble and diſcontent. Any'of the
Figures of benevolent Rulers poffeſling the ſevench
Houſe; the perſon, and a friendly reception of the
ſeventtr and firſt, notey a good agreement after mare

Y *

riage.

Me re eee a ee Ee

55 © * TheTempleof wiſame. BookIll

—— .

* "Shall the Marriage be effetiedor broken off ?

IF the ficſt or Aſcendent have a good Fignrein it, and
" by. motion in *-,or O.. of the ficſt Figure, or in
any of the Efſeatial dignities of the Figure, the marriage
intended ſhall be brought to perfe&ion ; chiefly if it
ſhall befrom goodplaces of the Earth. We might have
added divgss qughore more relating to marriage: but
he that wh, ands theſe , cannot be to ſeek In judging
any-other-of thisnature. ©
_ Now letus-teach by: theſe Examples eo judge of
Partnerſhip, publick Ezemies, Law-ſuits, of War, &c,
I. Shall. two Partnexs agree in their partnerſhip ?. 2.
Shall the Querent or his adverſary overcome in a Law-

_ Caic2.. :3,49hall-;a perſon ;return ſafe from the Wars?

. 4+ Shallzbe Gity, Town, Tower or ſtrong Fort hold
out that is beſieged, or ſhallic be taken? 5. Shallthe
Quereat have publick Enemies ?

|
: Shall two Partners apree in their partnerſhip ?

Tc firſt and ſeventh Houſes being friends according
*. to Nature; and if-good Figures accidentally by
motion be projected in the firſt and ſeventh 5 which a-
gree as well with the Houſes and their Rulers, Idea's and
Figures, as accidentally by proje&ion, declare that the
Partners {ball agree in their Partnerſbip, and gain well

by their undertaking the ſame. _ a,
If they hall be enemies by accident, they are friends
naturally. And in this caſe, if the firſt bea berter Fi-

gurethen the ſeventh, and better dignified by motion,

=

company and aſpeCt ; it fignifieth the Querent wo

| Book Ul. i he 1 emple of W:ſgome. 67
beſt mthePertnerſhip : Bur if che ſeventh be a : good Fin
gure, and better then the Aſcendent or trſt rhe =
led gains moſt.
Barzabel or Tapbtbartbarath, Lord of he ſecondynfs
fitting by aſpe& or company a Figure in che..cighehy
the Querent will cheat and cozen his Parcner ; bur if
' eicher of them ſhall be Lord of the Figurs ofthe eighth,
and ſhall affli& the (econd; the Partner ſhall cheat and
cozen the Q.er Einc, - 21) © {&
He whoſe fienificators are eſtrongeſt and beſt Fi of
and by motion in the beſt places ofche Earth, ſhall thrive
beſt in the Partnerſhip : .But he whoſe fonificators: are
weak, and in evil places of che Figure, ſhall do yo

he Partner ſhip. Lf £
$ ball the @verent or bis adverſary overcome in 4 an
ſunt £ 16190

? 6
F the Sep or! firſt Houſe be of berter Fignred
| then the ſeventh; or: in! better-company of ajpett 1
there is great hopes-che Querent wilt overcome the
luit of Law, and worſt hisadverſary. : -!! 1-1

> 843

If a Figure in the ſeventh be more powerful i in digni-

ties then the Aſcendent or firſt Figure, che TUE
will overcome:

If the firſt and ſeventh Houſes nd cheks F gures! ſhall
be aftiited by theinfortunes;, | hEither party thall
come; but chey thall be both rumed, if they proceed to
tryal of-che ſuir; bur'if chey be borh. atbtted by the
fortunate.Rulersand Idea's in their/Figures and Houſes, ;
ſome friends will take up che buſineſs , and wr. li cudehs :
matter or ſuit amongſt them. _ *

Both fagnificators in their Efſencial Saillies.a Boys
2zabel in the firſt,and Kedemel in the (e\e uh : Theſepers -
 fons (o ſignified by the _— are too bigh to —_—

f 2 -/

_— The Tamploof miſdme. "* Book I1t-

of ab agreement, ifthey havea Law-ſuit : Bat if intheir
mopes — to each other ,-the matter will be ta-
emdlves: he whoſe fignificator dota

j emi tall ſeek peace, and wy himſelf the berrer

V 1; 4 TEL.
"- Shall a pays return ſafe from the Wars ?

jo firſt be a good Figure ſirong and potent, free

'from the Nhe company and aſpe&s of 'the infor-
rames, .it is an argument of great ſecarity to the
ok , and that he hand return fafe from the

or be afflifted by ill Figures ; adviſe the Querent to ſtay
ns and give his Commiſſion up to fits Ge-.
ne

Zazel arid his Idea and Figure in the firſt Houſe, pre-
f@geth much loſs and damage to the Querent, if he go
tothe Wars, becauſe there he hath his fall. © If Borza-
bel; be:in -company, or in [)' or P and weak, ec.
= = worn ys be wounded.

| IV.
Shall the Coftle or fot befieged| be taken or not

FIG Aſorndene or firſt Houſe, and the Ruter, Idea and
Figure accidentally projefted in ic, are for the be-
ers: [The fourth for the City, Town, Caftlc
pr Ruler, Idea and Figure that is init,
Ir: The fifch Hotife, and the Gover-

nor8ofthe Fig

re,Oc. for the Ammunicion,Souldiery
and the 2 they cither have_ oc may ex-

 Echefit being adi mg

If the firſt Figure in motion Fall cadenei in the Earth, . .

" Book IE.
eench in che ſecond; ic is then. an argument'the walls
ſhall be ſcaledand the place taken. i 1 NW oo
If che fourth remove into aplace not beholding it,
or be afflited of the infortunes ; it is an argument
the Caftle will be caken, and che Governours thereof
ſubje& to danger. ; 4 Err
if ill Figures be in the fourth Houſe, the place be-
Geged will be. taken by creachery and baſeneſs, ' and
that in a ſhort cime. wt oh
If a Figure in the fourth be ia the ſecond, firſt or
tenth, the Governour no doubt hath receiveda good
ſum of money for che delivery of the place, andin ſhore
time will ſurrender it. =: B95
But if none of theſe AſpeAts happen , but on the con-
grary the fourth Houſe and his Lord ſhall be fortunage,
and free from all manner of impediments , and thac
the fourth be in no manner of amicy with the firſt ;
the City, &c. then belieged ſhall not be caken by
the Army begirting it. $

= y 10 V.
Shall the Querent bave pub

Lthongh there be but few perſons in the world
but have publick Enemies yer I preſume there
may be ſome (alchough they are rare to be found) char
havenone 3 confidering that he's curſed that all 'mert
ſpeak well of. And we look upon 2 perſon evil ſpo-
ken of and envied, to have ſome notable parts beyond
_ other men : but co finde whether a perſon have
enemies or not, theſe Rules following will ſhew -
you. |
- If the firſt benocremoved, or if it be in motian fel-
len into [] or F. of the ſeventh; Houſe; the. wue-

rent hath publick enemies, or-there are (ſuch perſons li
- $1513 F

ff 3 , - wig

lick Enemies ?

Tre Temple of wiſeome, = 66

FD The Templedf wiſhws, Book Hl:

vingin.che world chat would do him a miſchief, if op-
portunity were offered. |
. Thoſe Figures are enemies that are [or F to the
firſt, and the Rulers and Ideg's fignifiethe quality of
them ; the, Houſes they are in, help your judgenenc
much in this point. | 7

The' Figure in the ſeventh Houſe teaches you
to know what manner of perſon he is or ſhe
Is. .

To know whether the C uerent or his pnblick ene-
mies ſhall vvercome ; obſerve thoſe Rules of the Plain-
tiff and Defendanc in Law-ſuits; Antaris c Mutandis we
have experienced them. —

Ler-us teach you by theſe Examples how ta

judge a queſtion of ris Nacure, as we be-

*fore rayght all manner of queitions , and
reſolved ſome for your dircChion.

1. Of Fugitives or Strays,ſhall they be found or not?
2. Which way are they gone? VVhar diſtance? 3.
Things loſt, if recoverable or not? 4. VVhat is the
Thief? Ofthe age and ſex of the Thief. 5. A ethere
more Theeves then one ? 6. Be they ſtrangers or fa-
miliars? 7. In what time ſhall. the thing ſtollen bere-
covered ? VVehope by thele judged, you will be able
fo judgeany other queſtion. |

Wages
Of Fugitives or Strayes, ſhall they he foxnd or not ?

FF Iphibartharath and: Hoſmoday ave naturally the fig-
* .nificacors of Fugitives and Strays (and why? ) for

no other reafog,; but becauſe theſe wa are ſwift in mo»
TT, c10n

|

FT, BookIll. TheTenple of wiſtome. ___73 *

4. \- "IFGEN ah

tion , and give a&ivity and ſpeed in all things, Now
' the ſeventh Houſe, andthe Ruler and Idea thag governs
che Fignre that is accidentally proje&ed, particularly
are fignificators thereof, unle(s the thing ſtrayed bea
Beaft, &c. | * NW _ -
If the firſt and ſeventh be in company or good a»
(pets, it declares the Fugitive, &-c. to be coming home
again.

, But if the aforeſaid ſignificators behold each other by
[D or P, or ſhall move into thoſe places, where chey
haveno aſpe& at all ; ir denotes the Fugitive to be.un-
willing to return again, and an unlikelyhood'of the Que-
rents having him again. If the ſeventh VVheel abow
the third or ninghb Houſes , you may Judge the Fugiuve
is gore 2 jourſtey, and will not ſaddenfly be found again.
If a Horſe, Ox or Cow, &c. be ſtrayed, obſerve” what
is in the ewelfth Houſe; and obſerve the ſame Rule as

TS © hu

caliogy,,
If the fixch or ewelſth' move/ into the ninth or,
tenth; it argues the Beaſt ſtrayed co be eicher;
b the pound, or under the conimand of forne Ofs
cer. SEE A. " _. | Rs Fa
The ſeventh, twelfth or ſixth, fortirated by the good
Figures of Hiſmael and Kedemel, and their Idea's Fi-
gwes fortunate inthe ſecond, fifth or eleventh Houſes,
or Fortuna Major in untothem there, they are very |

likely to be found again,

by ; "
A

and driven and fold. |

T HT,

DT I.

' © * What way are they gone ? What diſtance ?

T Heoſmoday or any other fignificator of the Fugitive
. or Stray, &c. in theteach Houſe, they are South ; in

the ſeventh, V Veſt ; in the fourth, North; inthe Aſcen-

dent, Eaft. | e _

. If che fignificators be in watry Houſes, and Idea's wa-
ery incorporated intotheir Figures ; che Strays,&c. are
Northward,; and. in ſome moiſt moriſh place : If the
Idea's 4hd Figures be Airy, they are Y Veſtward, andin
Mountainous- and _bigh. pJaces : If Earthy, they are
Southward, and in melancholy deſert places of Woods,
Se. if Fiery, they are Eaſtward, and im open places,
where'ground hath been lately digged up, &c.

CY by
| . Of things loſt, if recoverable or not ?

| Ottuamate Figures In Fay or X to the ficſt Figure

-

-

"or ſecond, or of the Part of Fortune, and paſitedin
Phe firſt or ſecond Houſe, declarea recovery of the thing
yolt 3 either of the fortune Figures in the ficſt and ſecond,

Ee very TY arguments of a recovery of the thing

if che ſeventh ſhall remove into the eighth; or if
the fir ind cond cannot agree,. or if Sorath beinyour
e, and 0aay, not b ding each other,or © ;
| e Earth, chere canlie go reſti»

Iv.

BookIIT. . |

'T Kroktll.

__—_—_—R_REII_ OED.

"IV;
Who is the Thief 7. and of his age and ſex.

He Figure in theſeventh hath none ignificarion
T of Theftand Thueves..

Now they uſuall obſerve the nature of the ſecond,
and what Figure: "him of a contrary Ruler: -_
Idea , and that fignifiesthe Thief. | |
| If the Figure be ma aflicting We woot ie
denotes the Thief to be amanz._ If the Figure be Femi-
nine, and move into aF © quarter, you ny judge
the Thief ts a woman.

Z azel fignificator of che Thief, hews the Thief ro be
old, except in the firſt, ewelfth or eleventh Houſes ;
Hiſmael , Barzabel and-Sorath, abour thirty, or fome-
what. morez Kedemel and Taphthattharath, You. out
Haſmoday according eo her age in the Fi 1gure
young 3 Occidental, more.aged. And thus much = |

intru& oo how to finde —__ and ſex,

* A BT's 2
Are there ei then one + ?-

M Any Figures affliing the fignificators of ſubllance

(it matters not whether they be peregrine or
not) ſhew many Thieves, or more

If che fignificator of the Thief | fa gen * orO, with
double-bodied-Figures, there are: mere Thieves then
one.

The Angles fixed, and che fighificator ofthe Thief
fixed , in. no aſpe&. with any gopd Eigure, fave with
the fgnibcators of ſubſtance or Þ 3: theſe T2
ar any 4 If $- 3551

VI.

* BookIII. . « The Temploofvviſabme. ...- - 7
——— — CN ea — _ _— w

V1. |
Be they Strangers or Familiars ?. _

= Aſcendent moveinto the third or fourth Hoy ſe,
accuſe your own houſhold-ſervant 3 5 andehis i Is pro-
experience. +, *
arts the Gignificator of the Thief be in the third or
ninth Houſe, it ſhews the Thief to be ſtranger : Sorath
figmies a Father or Maſter : Haſmday the Mother or
Miſtriſs : Kedemel, the Wife ora Woman 2: Zagel, a Ser-
vant or 2 Seranger lying there by chance : Barzabel, a
Son». Brother or Kinſiran: Taphthartbarath, a Youth, -
] STA or friend: And chus mult you judge.

x MI +
(o what time ſhall tbe thing —_ be monmed; ?

Qecingrefimony of recovery in your Figure,you may
diſcover the time thus.

If the fignificators be moveable, you findea Tablet
the latter end of this Book, that will tell you which
Figures R_ yon, which monehs, which weeks, and
_— days, &

—

—__

— —_————— ——_—_—
—" Nk
_ W—_ qo RT

- CHAP. XV.
+: Fadgommes proper to the ciobth Heaſe.

— of death, and hence we enquire of the
-deach of gach - and the manner thereof,
St; " Je alſo fignifies the dowry of the wife, becaule it is
a ſecond from the ſeventh. By theſe queſtions, we
Gall teach you howto judge others, 1. Ofthe _ *y

"Book IL The Trmple of wiſcome, 75
Jearh of the Querent ? 2. What manner of death may
be die?-, 3- Shall che Guerent obtain the wives ports
on? 4-: Shall ctke Querent or his wife che firſt d Gr. 1

And now wehopez after we havebriefly given Jadge«
ment of ſo:ne queſtions through all cheſe ewelve pares of
che Earth,any capacity by varying theſe Rules, may ulſo
reſolve any- demand, And this we do really our of af
fection to our country. - And here followetha Scheam

of theEarth, andRules given how ts jefolve” any de-*
mand. |: And' here we note'tmto Fj becarife this Hb
takes notice of the death! of fleflr; for a-'thie"

| on There is « 15 8
hrahabaidaxres Experience teach-
| chad that whatſoever bath a birth, preſently paſleth a-
way & haſteth towards death. And every thing that bath
2 dothi necetfarily and 'unavoidably ro] to-
w s end: And thisagreeewith the Do&rine of the
hay 4 Saint Paul, Heb. 9-27- Illud ftatetum eft
bins wt ſemel wornaner'; : It is appointed unto all
men once t0 die: And they that livethe longeſt, die at
laſt. And choſe whoſe lives are envied, do'no more but
diealictle before che reſt, . ----....._

Some live] _ other by reaſon i of i
and __ ?*s and Rulecs fortified by God at the
time of their Er + which makes them by natare more
—_ and fhble, and of longer duration then thoſe

incorporite ſo unate ones; /

them at Unawares.

| Shall nat he be accounteil a flly Souldier, that will
- 6: wary he & to encounter bis Enemie ?
cowardife, 'then'a badge of bold-
ker for atman to wink when he fights.
and fall of vanity,...- \

gime ofour yerth, (orany other materi-

It is

; lt wasthe ſayingof the late King Charls (who was
« Prieft and Prophet,.in his KIKDNBAT ta1TKH, in
be laft Ch þ 1 know any life is the chjef of the De-

iched meny mlice 31 bied-yet under Gods ſole en
floay

- > «a 4 . p <H he , 6th 1” o
' Book HL. |

" Jon ho be cheportion of every man and

chat liae {life 7 yet fomgperſons are (o peevilh,

' raſhand fea a dare a be acquainced with

the time; but? ar paſs on in acoittented (la-

ks fear , as Ty Neſiear or Non-vifibility could
procett them ; alas, poor 'wr etches ! death ſteals |

givenby God; and ſhall man be |

ya Book INT.

The Temple of Wiſtdome.. "Ra

 Godpanah at, Kc." He wasenvyet, war = 3
py Ts Loa, And it was alſo/long defore; the!
' pray aycrand requeſt ofrltie King 'Prieit and Propt
vid, unto the King of Kings, to be
very thing : Fac _—_— Febova , yes ra
ſura dierum meorum quid ſu,experiar quam darabilic ſum:
(i. e.) Lord, faith hei, ler me my end, andthe nuin-
ber of my days , that 1 may be certified bow lanyThove to
lzve.

Surely had not this enquiry been lawful and attain-
able, yea had it not been of great worth and excellency,
and admirable uſe thereof to be made , che hply Pro-
phers would never have ſpoken of it, nor pra edfdric
But to paſs by this Angelick uſe hefcof; as, chats man
may meet his God and Saviour with Joy. , and |
exclaim in che very ears of death , 117 auvS<vrs, alrijes
"3 ov, 23m, ro vime; O-Death , where is thy fling # 'O'Hell,
(the Hebrew word is Sheol, a Pit) where is thy vidory?

'We will: come coinftance 1 nn ſomething c that gol be
more taking wich mankind, and'then we will gi vejudge=
ment upon fone Queſtions belonging to this Honſe,orz.
the earthly uſes and advantages « Tinay be madebetes' .
of: (for ſuch is thEcorruptionef mankind, chatic will
rejeft every thing that carries*not preſent profic with
it.

Firſt in purchaſing of Lands or Houſes for Life, the
length of his life may-be Ee? ts! to ond

a5 Common experience teltifies. \

Secondly, by knowing the. ke ' of his life,
may fo order and dif j of his- Eacthly ori Fred | Are
- he may prevent much. ee depfors and contention abort the'
ſame nay am which uſually: (the more is F the pies |
WET in ſuch caſes. :
LW ara chis kind will eternize his mes
cath; which ocherwiſe may be buriedin

. oblivioa

| :
$ #1
$+{2

|
\N

d

.

is |
| |
'
'

.

:

.

o

*3
©
x

£

% oa Ds _ Pe "
-

1
Fl

The 1 emple of #1] dome.
oblivion (after a ſhoretime)in a coffin made of the curſes
of his neereſt Relationsz and by ſitch means he coverons
Adminiſtrator or Adminiſtratrix will ' be prevented of
courzening the Children , and the anconſcionable Exe-
cutor the Orphan ;. Brother cannot intrench- upon the

* liberty or eſtate of Brother. Every man will know his
owns. and Families may remain in quiet, peace and con-
cord, - Let us now return and reſolve our queſtions,

St 7h *# F: 6 SEW 2
y- i, Qf the tine. of the death of the Querem 7

F
$ -
Fad
x

_ Virs Fa bee, © + >deBſion, © SY ow of E + £63.54
Poe reſolve of this queſtion, you are eo conſider the
Þ; Hooks and what Figure is accidentally there;
let. the Rules ani{-Idea char governs it ſignifie the
erent. : the eighth Houſe and- the Ruler, Idea and
Figure that governs ic, to fignifie the death of the Que-

rent, may live an indiffegent long life. ; If the aforetaid
figntficators, or either of them, ſhall ſhall be in compa-
ny or good aſpeRt of the, Fortunes, anda fortunate Fi-
19 the firſt; all che preſage. the. Querent .accor»
ing to nature may live.to a conſiderable age. ' ;

inding all che fignificators free, as in the forementt-
oned Aphoyiſms , you may concludethe Querent will
FA > gpany, years, 4s the Figures, Idea's and Rulers

ine eo | Cos Tat 3

” Bucifyoh fiodethe oforeſzid fignificators afflifed, ci-
ther, by che-infortunes,or by the fourth, Gxth, eighth: or
ewe}fth Houſes z you may then conclude thepar
£0. beok no. very. longcantinuance. And according 40
your foregoing Rules, meaſure Time, moveable Figures
and Idea's, V Vecks, common Months, fixed years, &*:

And

CY

* Book 111,

rene... 2 KIA, rn an
- If the ficſt be free from the f of ill Figures, the Que-

ries life. ,

M————. Atro » bs ka ai

—_——c ORE 106 PRSRES WIR ————————_—— ” 64 <0 hi Lge.
NE anda

Book III. The Temple of w:ſdome.

And ſo may: you. : diſcover-the length. ne
OI of the Cos life. 3026's

# \ LY -
FY- #» .
u 'Y ;

W, bet manner f death mg PE « Rem die 7 oy
THe Ruler and Tdea that is i edi / into *o Eb

sure-of the eighch; ſhall ſhew the manner of :dexch
che Querent. ſhall be ſubje& unto, together wack: the
Figure beholding him or them. -

Tf the aforeſard fignificators ſhall be Hſe! orflads
mel, and they ſtrong, OA rn pu an: dearh. ubco
the Querenr. IB_f

Zazel being o fignificator, , prenotes death by ſome
olent Tertzan,: or ſome Ague, Dropfie or-Conſt
Bargabel, by Fevers or VVounds : Sozatb,by Phemien
or by ſore obftruQion: of 'the-Viralst Tapbtbarthars
by che Priſi que, Frenzie, Madneſs Lethargie, &e, A
. moday,by AMIE cy by diſcaſes proce Ten ;
moiſtures.” ul FE (3 2%

A 1 T. ; - , 23A
Shall the Quirenr obtain bis Wives Portion pi: in

Eg Querent is ſignified by he Aſcendent or firſt
Houſe, and the ſecond -Houſe doth fignifie his
| ſubſtance; the Queſited. is :fignified by the ſeventh
Houſe; and the eighch Houſe hath figmfication of the
Queliteds ſubſtance in this queſtion.

A good Figure in the eighth, in *#0r co che firſt,
and no ways: afflited by the f of any unfortunate Fi-
gure , declares the Querent ſhall have a: eſtacs

with his wife, andſhall have it without crouble. Hiſ-

macl or Kedemel, any of theiv Bigures, or the s
head projeſted in the cighth. Houſe, und no aye

"OY

7”

on 1G WP ers Ss pe 9g ——_—
# » 1
k "I _— = .

g ” 1;
06 armani eh eh >» nn age Fi
ern prortunyy "yore nfo notre a—
am—_ = ,
Y 004-2 7 $4
: ) wm. OG

DOG er i TSS AUST SEAS AGENCE £4

| $ (]
x

Houſe'ir falls; «ard -if ei

_—_
£3 A EL, roi. mw 4 n on _- " , :
— > hk 6 29% re” eds. wg
At -

£” Adb$ meta By;

1 he Ten. ple of Wiſdome, : "Book 111,

&ed, argues the' Querenrt: {halt have his wives
without any manner of trouble. portion

The Pare of Fortune is the uber of all the points
divided by twelve ; and whic remains, tells you in what
ishe remains , you. miſt place
® in the eighth Houſe; and there if good Figures
behold ic by *:or © Aſpedts, the 'Querent ſha have
the dowry of his Wite; andit is very conſiderable alſo.

If che frac -and cightlr Figawes being in P move to
any 8 good Aſpett , this che Querent: eo obtain
his wives. dowry. withotit

+ Buriftherebe {1 or P between che

Au

tn the

| Dowrene will not obrain the portion: of his wiſe without

diffcul

:i.JF ator or Rwakads Fi joures be in theeighth Houſe
in ill aſpe& of che firſt or ſecond, NE Dro
diſcontent about the wives s portion; the DragousT

h Ns che ſame. | .
A womTanenquiring concerning the eſtate ofamanſhe

1s to marry ;-theſe Rules will ſerve ſufficiently: For the

' Aſcendent is all one for the woman as it is for the man :

Ifa woman enquire, and the ſevench 'Houſe nut be for
the man, and the EE for his eſtate,

EE, |
Shall the man or "wife die fiſt? F:

TN this queſtion behold ths Aſcendene. or 5a Houſe
, andehe:ſevench, and ſee which of them igoeth to 5

or P of the eighth, or to the all Aſpects of the unfor-

eunate Figures, and fo ju

If ithethe firſt Figure wh ſuffereth this afflitiongfay

rhe mar (ifa man be Querent): ſhall. die firft. Tf the (c-

SI fit co theſe affliftions, the woman
Which

: rea ? Y
mm RI ePme—ym—ys—_—_—_—__ F _ _—_ ww F
IE NSA: —_— OY _— = —_ _—

Book [1 "The Temple of wiſdom | ""Vr

tia pitt. ce om rw—__ RW -— -

bm ce ron

Which of the fignificators is firongeſt and: moſt

powerful in the Figure? the party. ſignified chereby

{hall live 'the lonpeſt. . And this much may ſerve to

_ you how to judge —__ belonging co this
e.

,
—_—_ Cc
—

;

A" —_—
£

nan xYY
* Reef hinging t0 ihe ln oe

oF ER ET Wy 4p. 49 AGO 64 a tp

bo The Tem | e of | wiſe me. Book nr.

*
tid Prout . - - — "a

* Shall the Voyage be proſperoms or not ?

.

#

vw Hen the ninth Figure ſhall be nnfortunate, it de-

_* notes many hazards and dangers to attend the
ot” ts : If Zazal be aftlifting, the perſon enquiring
P F 4 ſubje& eo fickne&.and loſs of goods: Andif

arZ4Þel or the Dragons. 1 ail afflift the ninth Houſe,
they declare danger by Thieves or Pyrats ; ſometimes
it porcends cozeningand deceit in the Ship, one among
another, on

If the ninth Houſe be fortunate and ſirong, much
good and great ſucceſs is promiſed to the \ amy

MY

OS ws Yu Lat i Tekin: bd bed

we 62
Foy Leh
p
(4
[2

1 ——_ - ["—__—_—

tx HS EM REC r9s. 4h

Book Itt. __ Trople of Wiſdome:

che Vonage 9 wand that be ſhall; ſhalt ;nake *happy rerutn..

The ffit-and the ninth in ord with [each A
gues an admirable vo ag. 7

But if chey-ſhall bein{J or void of allrec ion 1
you way judge the 'Quevertr' will have an inauſpicious,
voyageof ic,a1d before he return thence again will wiſh
he had-let irt-alone.

If the firſt go into the eench, char being the ſecond
from the ninth; you may tel| the Querent that he ſhall |
gain great tore of wealth in the voyage.

If the Aſcendent: ov firſt Figure hall remove into
abje& places of the Figure, orin [or P toabjeR Fi-
Juress the perſon will falt fick in the journey, and che
Yoyage will be moſt unfortpnate.

IL.
Wall the vojage be long or ſhort ?

Tis Rule is experiented by Captain Blackman ; forl

made a Figure, and gave him a certain pound;
up ont. /

The (i onificatars of the- voyag oeand Querene move-
able , denotes the voyage ©0 be ſhort and quiick-: if |
they ia motion fall occidencal, there: will be ſome:ob<
ftcuftion: when cheAſcendent or firſtHouſe regards the
ninth with good Aſpe& , :;theie arcarguments of 3 good
$OJage, conſidering the length, the Quereac will make a

ſhorc "and prof

The Gielkand nin ninth etl Figures | prenote a.very No

rojaae. unto the Quegent ; 3. —_— Ls EY
moveable F Fiours,

_ Ordecly following,

rant of nothing which concerneth che pee know
ledge hereof: (othatif you do underſtand theſe Tables,
Gg8g 2 you.

EE ——————————

The. Treaple 0 Wiſdone,

dos 2, ——— —_—
FS-=+ % ;

"=

:

7

you ras ren r alſo x

In and good,

Book 1IL

except Letitia ; and thoſe which bave as many above as

-

—_—____—_

—_—K

Good for a Voyage, and quick.
DE [AS, 9. TTE.
* * = OI OR. *
| * * . * * & |: Ru
| © 1-VS. vx.
ELSE. "_
-* | þ * "FL ns *
 .Þ % CI, - > £5 "I
MK es A oh tan ned Wi

« by a *
p s F -
4 % ” '; : (il; F
. 6 -_ _—— cs "BE ze 19933 *
-
*

119

\O) -34; 1

' Þþ!
, EA its
£Uof t; 9

)

A emer
MCT SIMFLLE - ;
. r 2
1 ov ?: *£7!3

4
—

aderftand the. firſt -and ſecond and ſecond and third
ork. . And-note that. all the F
which have __ points on high then below, be encri

except Triftieie 5, and thoſe which have
more points below then on high, be going our and evil;

beneath, be mean, except Carcer. And theſe betheir
natural (grifcaton |

=

__——

Book III,

The T, emple of Wiſaome,
Slow for-.a.'Voyagey bu proficable.

CEE

—

—_—
' + & #
Wh

_—_— _—

\ X
- ; 4
. -F

M for the Ways! >;

 S
*X .
* KS.
|- wa +

* # +

Robbingby the Way... !!:

mo 5 *
* *
L FTIEEE TEES

——

I} for Fear. -

31165 if)

þ

* +
*
"4

* *

EX;
' |}
'* x |-
X * |

E:

Good x Honor md Di.

* ll *

& *
1
_

x”) |

bo

k Y 6.

The Temple of Wiſtome., = Book ITT

q "I TED yo? Il for y * p q
4 * wo - #— & + * ;
: 3M Honour, i

C45

—

X LEE: * FE "8
. - ){ + X
X -'* * X* X * X
OY [ * X * X&

. .— arent -

© — T — —

Good to havelLiberry, and come out of Priſon.

TITS w qu—__— ——_
þs. ,—_ , _—_— —
Ps W-. - 4X
s * fC'%
|

ki

-
FF 0

*
X
* &
*

Illto'fome our of Priſon.

SET SMHI” TT ”
* * x - XK * | X
TN - a * *
® * *K, {| «

— —|

Mean tocomeoutpf Priſon.

EX. © on ———.

+ + + *

.;: ood for the Body.

h en eas

| ﬀ SH + — | *

e Temple of Wiſcome,

«
ma ——_—
-- ” + oe -- _ ag ain

| |
| ; *» Better then before.
Wy EY Wn -——_—
_ SK * K "I.
FL. E 7 3 - $4" |
| = c— A _

- Evil for che Body. ' »

; W K : X X- | . *. Se * F.
| =$2 =«{ | |. jj nw |

> ; | i * * | % i WJ x s

vat IM 7 X Xx

Mean'for the Body. ar

"0 *F* j + 1 06 |

* * * '* * * MW
+ X * * **
= 70 + jj

———
Good for 3 Woman with Child. Child die]

RR 26 + Ol T:; K >
X > >X | X j
| X* XX |
X * X
Mean for Child Birth.
-”; X "'X ,

* —_—

«% ACK. -

*

| o
| .
13 Þ

Il for Womens Love.

”

n are aber A A x
s «+ wo” | *
+ ; . . o
% | h i. * »
a + EEE s
| Il:or Marriage.
: 0 ——_—_

ww
>

ST OE —PY

ur —_—

|

Good Figures for dreadand fear.

hm > —_—_—

».:1+,0 ©

——

=

-

F Book 1. A

| Goodtorecover tinge.

_ (+ 0 ung %, %
” i -
——_—_—
na LR y

Z _

Ill for & thing 2amg6]

: oy
ls. 5 «

mn
S &Ci

2 6.

{@ K
* 6

|
i

A

+ He Oe —F LY '# ®.-

#
'

.
-
" 4 %
= o 3
: :
.

CUES +

SO np uence#s” woo {4 we

Meat: tb remove.

— ———_—————_—

; ——J G EF | * X | | , = X
7 © 3 #*# $8 *

Wero remove,

= EI IS, "F oY
CAE) + | [*:|" + |:
' £4 | X 4 * * ul.
TReascel |

W1 for Gckoefs, apd al Gr ogdyFlax: Flax-

»;
X
*

kr &.

XK +
IH
* 4

a

a ERS YEE FORE A

The reraple of ſome.
———— nes...

Figures bien "_—

eats ———- 2 _

MT " | X X. '|* *
al Nag X" | # *
*X | K* | x% |# *

XX | L£X] #X*

- GndPintptigopi i

[* +

EF,
* *|*x*
Xx] *
ELKE] #.

—— cc 0 0

Figures of Cuties _ Virginie
—Tx=| FETs FX * *|. *_
1 Sins ge acti Y 4* *|*.*
> x | = k4-Jbew! } «EFF
Figures of Incontinencie + and Loki
[EEE EEE EE XX
#| * * *, * [|*. *] X |. 2:
*k KEE #| x * | * *_ ES
Figures of true Love.
—E TE”. —_ "4
of | X | * % + «x
+ # « K TI

»h

*
*
F wo *5
- -

»
i

Ms »

2

» '

=
OO OT Ons
. *
, \
-
>»

IS SY EG 4 ama
MY

Lg

PO

. Figures of Life. aut

. _ 568 Et —_—__ TR x: _—
4 »*® » 8 * * * ® * __ ® *
ZIELS * =:
; * #
we fo. +2: ." 1:69
_ s _— — - prongs mo + e———_

|

Fig ces of Deathyi _ cghth agree.

—_

His Bb 2s 2 2d A RS
»% KK » + a] =}, i ”* ex] *
| . Es o * | x » | = | z « | » n® | «> *
| ne) Lo oa — — = -
| SE Ennp ba | RN
| Figurezaf Liberaliey. |
— 6 AE =
wr — wer". + *
* &@ *© * * X ol
FF * 3» * X * *X q BEES
; — : Os
—— TFigares of Covetonfaeſs and Avarice. |
Th»: KX* | XX.
* * EX] * * X* |
* Xx * * > —
_ ; |

a1 Wau I TED E DATES B£oSs

" VETIOe bas if th
«
LEY

;

OR
I

” "4 =”

| s : | F-: by ; it ;

4 ; * ! 9 4 &» | Ent] |

A * \ ba |
. * | | | :

;
*
tc er gay 6.406

ca
———_—_—.

-
th.
'

» SD Irs. o-—_—

wr F" 0t6- agar <I8 3. bd <4

Redd by DIR ai

4a Ie ro *

———

for ad emo; 4 1 ANEH not Dlos 4536902 *
pt i29) ; rifle? MEL oF 0xFDINE Mee
| *;; bt mw te | ok 1 Sid, d Þ! {3 21.5; PA ig So Oe ;
; -'_re! MM 3 jew hol Houfoirs'
'-rericy ef! ninthHoye add che Figate us
jefted-inteo if; to fiþnifie: the- ET one
and wourding eorkeir pi Wand doo
;ofahis'q on,” 3 1 2d noms he ume
a7 % of adrhilaleh, dba 7

© Gbmdagle or O ubeedent Houſe; free great hopes *
eo che; rent, thar he'thall- gain” Fro "_
Art or Science” he enquices'' atrer's: wntl Be
fortunate! Toney, ou _ be! fire of your:
ment... d 45342 ai 9:12 VO vali 3.2470
hajper ie jour:Fignrs) |
2 F3-qri if *berwees
n: conchude 'the'1 =
Art or: Sclexce- If
Ty" WIE : $30*583551 -} 70.
nw vifortimare Fig ve -oriCands Doan |
ſhall .be n-the firſt or : as Powe, onſe, : or clin he
complany.n ill places of ebe Figure 3 you may- =
TFT Moms DE Ra
-*5] LuSLH-& ' | - SEOES 2
£ nts 3; at &Nk {$54 ! x Fe $4 ” _ ds 1h 35 A
111.1 (Bholl 4 Poſer duh Bee Kees 2 jo T75g WE

133755 ct | LY FoS'y c 12345 3368

8.

"+

* 22113 2 = (359 Gitz Vi - _ Tod
- -

The? VEN mg + HI

p a which.he. bad
Fomktcrait by the ides, _ alſo created manafrer ||
IS, or 85: the world peroinn ctew r

hor way rear

hi Bog, nd the Se

-” Lat PFRIE LET TA. MCAS Akoes i on #2. at eas am:

wet I Int.

ol

—

\
=

c
f
;
8
,
f
i
'y
4
f
ce
c

I NYRUDNDYY TiC Wa

-

px in p _
mee cs

y- wag, 45 ak ph
oporten —_ O

Ts

| the Elemerits in a fourfold body,

-
Mower rn CENT as X -&J 5 TIN

——_—

x0. CTY Tobi of Farime.”

a OCR AS. ne os 1

_

Book ITT,

” —_—__——__-—— _ _ _

ſinfe pe relifierh in many. plcer?” : Thiere-

fort ah isthe moſt expreſs Lars fees ſeein Sg hat
cotnaineth! In bim{elfa! 7 things whith\arein God'z bar
Godby#certain etninemcy contairjerh ail things chrough
his power, and finiply'; as the cauſe and beginning
of all chings 3. bur he hath given this power to
maths thit he ſhovtd in Vke -matner contain all
{but by a certain Art 'and'* compoſition , a
the ding £1 Tie nd Bond of all things * Therefore man
onely refoycerh in this honout,thac'he hath a Simiktuge
with all Operation with all,or Converfation withiall: He
ſymbolizech with the rhatrer in a; proper ſubjeR, with
with Plants in a
eative' Vireue , With Animals in a fenfitive faculty, |
With the Heavens in Etherial Spirit, and influx of the
faperionr parts on the inferiour :- With the Angels in
Underftanding and Wiſdom ; with "God in containing
all things; wat is preſerved with God, and the intelli-
*gences by Faith and Wiſdom: With: the Heavens and
heavenly things, 'by Reaſon and Diſcourſe: With all
Infertour. things. by Senſe.and Dominion, and afteth
with all, and hath power onall;even on God himſelf, by
enemy, and loving him : And 'as God knoweth
tings, fo alſo man dofemion all things intelligible, Re
ing be hath for an Adequate obje& Exc in general,or (as
ers ſay) Trath irfelf; neither is there anything
found in.cman, nor any dilpofition, i in which ſomechingof
Divitn "may not ſhine forth; -nenther's is therecany thing
in' Ob,” which may Aw alſo be*repreſented"I"-triak:
bi mins all: know: hamſelf Ral bor know al
things ta himſelf; cially be'ſball know God
cordmgro whoſe FI he was thade'she all khowthe
World, the reſemblance of which he bearech; lic {tall
knian-al} Creatures, with which/he 'fymbolizeth; 'und
Rm he cate have and big fro Jock

Pl ants,

JAY
as
ng
of
»
all
C
he
ill
d
bs
y)

I) FA» .
4s 5, 7 6 than

| Ptanes; Anim |

Tits, Angels, and&yer thing; ; th oww yew thingsmaa
fitteFfor all things; i} therr cithe} =
wo. qportion and harmo ony, and, cap draw andy b7inge

thſelfeven'as > Poa ie lr 13= > FLIREY
"21"'Ahd Ficinus it His Pookexeat ih 3 this do mmancan
Hips co-theperfeRtion of this Art; Ahothall tot know
pilpley + of tin himſelF:©Baf by dw midch the
#ribre every one ſhalt 'know himfeft 'by mich hk heob.
winefhthe greate er porer of arcraQitiz e,and by ſonjach
operateths or eater aht'more wonderfiil ehiings, ahd wil
cond fo ans =PpecfeRtion,c fit he is madethe Soh
kd 4 is Ine iHeo «thy! Iifage* which! fs
dis urfie ich! him jOwhith is Re Steabved to

Angels, the World, or any Creature, bur to man'onely

Bed o:Nave Power. to be majle'heSon of God; and
he united to*hjm3' bur mean Rig | United r5 Gbd;' ull
ba which tre" in' 'Matj; -are 'Miſted; yy efpecally' his
Me; then his Ipirits and Antinil'Powers, aid | vegeta-

TS.

tive fatulty : * And! the Elements are x0! he 'merter,
drayijng'w : HR 'Eventheboly/' m1 it ach
Beetr, feading it forth unt'a batter THikfidions and! if

Hezv Toy Nature even aneil it beglorified inw Tmwnors
And! this' which ve haye ſpoken, is thee peciflies

F Proper; d common tono' cher creature? PT is 1h IS
"Bat there are {brze Parfotis* who bye r=

nike Hioſe poi &Fofrins Meto

Wilt;the Image ofthe Divine 1 Jak —_

erjan Clergy going fixrchor;do ehis Hr |

It Me hr faculties} which they hn

$8 bur vi theTecond A&dvj''And' as: _

Foo te en Ghote So xemontyrece
Holy Gho

fot E Unerfonding _ _ wn fv our

Mi nl 7? mz 3; Hhk3*- "4 Wills

&1&

& botany $0 trythe dignity'6Fthie Divine indey of

JOR — The-Temple of iſadame. __ __Book Il]

Willzand RT HOT HEE HS It {elf having 2 2 prelenc Þ:
{3p producing! It, «uy, (ex farth i the an, Puri lag

And the more e Zealous Proteſtant Epicon) Mi
ſers geach, that moreoyer, all our members, ? rope res
ſent ſomething i in,Gogd, whoſe wh they. bear ; And
_— our ons we parts os To but by 9;
ertain piſcopacie 1s (hg. Igion,' a
= which ok the 1dea of the Law. But to our
yaateer : we read ofghe.Wrath Fury, ae
cencie,Love, Hatred, Pleaſure, Delefation Detighe
nation of God, &e. : And we baye above =
ken- of che Members of God, which my. be; cons
rUEne, | Sviang it
$i] Alfo Divine .Ploto in, Philebus ponſeling rhe Diving
v7 Trinip.defriberh it Underftanding,Lafe 2nd Brightneſs,

ſewhere he callech the- W rd, inde and ily
Spies ary faith, chat man is = de: -aſter ch F 4a
him gorh h repro Sg be fare Tragy ; for PER
andin g Mind 2 ver] ifym W hex, andy
pic, - © were prep Divine Firghgoeh dh "Oi ng Kaos
fide, repleniſhing all things, moving and

them ro her z But 2hie. "gs [27Y a
the nacural Spirit, which is vi the. 3 ah]
Soul is un3 ed; the fleſh gnd the 7 0:4 Ay Ys. by by which thi
dy .liverh and; ater g.; and one member heh ck on
er; Of che which Siri ve boys ſpoke before.:

ic Fe. bece ſpeak of rhe; narural 5p pars uch yet;
fome-ſorg s-4l(p carporrals 1 os
#grols ho emgibleand »
A dy, aogt e: beunized 1 wich + £
' | Superiovr - oo Dieingone which. 1 |
mop any. wonder,. Hove oy, TENT 2s $8
Fit, azd acorpores! wing, ior. Hi Hiker ,OF:{
yorrech OIgE of: FER] rwant |

oO: TOO w we Su ev" 5 no Eve WW 0D.a mv a_ - IP

telle&, the Minde, Light and Supreme Partion n:

Book III. The Temple of Wiſaome, _. __103
————————g—n———_s DR ——
and aſcth it as aninftrumenc: Iffobe, that you ſhall ne
derftand, what , amongft ,the Platoniſts chac Echerial
Body of the Soul, and Charior' of the ſame may: be.
Therefore in like manner they placethree things in Man,
which chey call the Supreme, Loweſt and Middle. . And
as we fay the Rulers, Idea'sand Figyres, © the Sypreme
is that Divine thing which they call the Mznd.,. ar.ſupe
riour Portion ,. or illuminaged Intelleq, _-Myſez in.
nefis call-ch it tbe breath of life, FE reath from.)
or his Spiric inſpired. into us. eLowelt js the (&x
tive Soul, which they. alſo call an Image? St. Pap;
Apoftlenameth it, the Animal Man 4. The Middlg1s
reaſonable Spirit, knitring and tying.cogether both axc-
creams, viz, The Animal Soul with che. Minde ſavoy
ring'of the Nature of both extreang,.yet "it: diffeceah
from char-Supreme, which 1s called the Hlaminared:

\

- ”
v4

cy

.

differech aiſo from the Animal <pyl, from the wh
the Apoſtle teachethus, that we ought. to ſe rates
ao hey of the Word' of God; faying, The ord of
God is powerful and lively, more penetrating then 8 99
edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing of the Soul ang
Spirit : For as that Supreme never ſinneth, never coax *
ſenteth'eoevil, and always refiſterh errour, and exhor» #
teth to' the beſt things: fo that Inferiour Portianand
Animal Soul is always overwhelmed in gvil, in fin
concupiſteace, and drawerh go the worſt things 3 of the
which ' St. PM! faith , [ſee another Law in my members,

—_— Captive to the Law of fin, The Minde there”

fore che Supreme.Portign js. never damaed ; bur when
ies companivasart ro be pyniſhed,, goeth. away unburp
eo irs Original { But the Spirit, which by Philo Fx

dps is called che reaſonable Soul, ſeeing iis by its Nay
enefree, andcan according to his plealure hs ©

The?

ar Pe,

th

. JED 6 of. | vp ch

i

+17 # &g6'F<- ia7s

$'* XT, 1s. that petals Larkkel
NM 5 bedoge 3, for it j Peng Klip

anc dehe thingy agen he {pea-
TAE mY ker, "re chat, Hem '
IEG he "Concer we the Hg ”
jeft © oh ive 5 the word nd-rh, g. writig

ori eg antbthar which Rn! Is ths word; ; 2nd
Wo kool ofthe Former, we; hae which formerh., is
HEAT "Creation of the Creator: 9. ang that
wv Ke Jt F wprd;. Dd che doing of > ys Doer,
erty; NWA one, z1S the, ares and he en avlede

tn'chat Koweth , and he Eching om, 15 e| e ford;
wy every thingrharc Can bell en 1s DUE A wor Landit's i

E a

2 that it hore one thing more then another, equally
Heftowing on-alf , that chey m: 5 that which-chey Yo

er more nor leſs ; and'its {elf being fenfib ble,

ele ff atid Mthings ſenſi! © ,, 4s lg hes naket Fea 2
nd* my FR vithte ; therefore the i wor, is ph led by
> th& bright Sun of he Mind * for the Con;
7 *hich the e Mind ce Everh ii iclelt, 1s. the 1 in
al wort ge Prat wa, from ighe & mind, v7 27 t c knows

0 of icſel

NB th Fatt ind Sebi woid"7 ie the off-lprn

wid manlfeftieidn of chit ward, , ada (pi | 4 As
RT, OE

ol of. tlie'mon brith fo wid ard y voycel |

, biit every reins our: Ie ech al
by Gere rye of God, boned Wo ſ

.* 3
& 21 $ <—_ © Sh» 3+ & 4

_-

—T <5 5.

_— NW 9

Cw wp © =

—

; Bug

- ©

ee ===> apap ESCASAIIN

Air, z—_ IT 2 but.the I Word of God
remaineth, life and ſenſe accompanyingiar. .. -.49v\\

Therefqr&ald oucTpeech , words\, fp iritcand Foyce,
have no poweginthis-Book,. qnlaf\chey be foetned by
the Divine Ward&., My L Lord' Bgeon in kns« Advaſitement
of Learning , _—_ \ The there Anat” any Vertme\,) eitber
Natural or Mortal, \uwgteſs; through God... Kef i-ugocther
place he affirmerhy., Tha 4w Underſtanding belalg good
and ſound , can do very much on the ſecrets of Nature; if
þ,begharvhe influetRevf the Divine pnwer be prefentibbber«
Tiſe nothing # alt,c,.Sp'#lfp-0ur:words can dojyery nia> =
nyimiragles, if cheybs formedby chejord in
which.ala gue. nnivedak Geaeration-iepertotbad, tis Ee
JarineheBy þ Wenanenyons O-hond,wehbave epriceive

; Ne patent ngfs 19s ga brongt rh pics ents
cl pw
ſowe {+ pan ke Hs rr veredbyxtieiRoy

ſie-Crucipns, entre oof flpcgs exec ob. this Qpts
mon, brough t forthas :Myrgin-outiof ade.io wn24iy) 6}
"ria amongh, theMahometandthare 5Sa
vianthatmany hom.ac-Muzgeiter and 5 appbre in yheio

tongues they-call Ne Sobli are born by a ſecret many Fat

Ber "ofDixine NiGao@don wakagutainal _
whos life: ha wondenfal.andimpaſſib
it were, Angehcal!;.and-altogethew A Baie
og ere um Ck realy

of. the Fat

cet, and. Fillfarches mania _ F1 rk =ren

HE 3 heron mienry cum 15niuV gry

9713 O18 3; FA Vain 31 yidiſog ©: $1009 [:1w Yor A
1 Cn ee wh afFhe Gdergy uanVMiruLinawe jb;

Fagſe Vevicy « can3l[52. 5 bis Saiodo foam nifl £50
of $807 19 Jo ne wed! o,7 ,n443 09697 01 deft: Wot
od gave Man Reaſon, that like Deities, mL;

17 : $4 night. HI1#g991h Gods avirh Eoaputityy':: Ve SY

T aan wple of Wiſdames Jook ITT,

Fo. kms ) be, that knows bs worth, and how

He equal is xntoohe Gods above. ker: 1
ic They repreſs an make Diſtaſes fly ; ©

i - They give Preſages, and from Miſery ©
: Deliver men: reward the good, andill'

::- Chaſtiſe, and ſo the will of God fill.

,. Theſs are Diſciples, and the. Sons of -6nth

> Me bigh that teach bij Wor abtoad,'

".Whoare ha of che will of Fleſh, .orer: Min, or
als Menſtraous Woman, bur of 'God-' Ke i tian "Uh
niver GI Generation;' in which ee Sotis like the Farber
$9 al .nanner-of iSvimltirude; / 9d #1 the which; _
erfrich:is begor ische (irve in Speciewith' che
Anmd:thiv's the power: of the Word forttied -

T7 Minde; and received ine ere mats rightly diſpoſed; as
{PR omavary the Mztrix for the x ' buſt ay,
WW. (ed. and rightly received, beewuſe that'all Ire not

partakers of. the ord'sfeer the fans manner; butCo-

ther ntherwiſe; Ant theſe / are the- mot hidden ſe

oferh of this Art, which ought nt to be” hire

Utd ltienticarl ealnne havedevizead too far, we
mui aca into- our. roud again; andtezch you how $2
ve jutlgement npor «Figure, 'and! veflve ary Que
Hor pil preſet, or to come; we hive onely

urged byrins OF dipsi4uds, /Qr preface 'uiito this molt
conkdrdble Fs. Ciera the condes toriſciencesof

. the Vulgar pecfons,-inty 'wholſe Hands: we'know this
Book will come ; pgnny ie may prevent alſo _
vf<<rdecter Learned, dgnin} the
Art, nioft choice and excelleng, "by very”:
|; == eo weead weſhen in Alan
I''; i INE

=” + 2g

=

hn dh RS. Un uw = '.Þu

rein ale, .,to "RE x" Parſon qr-Cler I von _
FD —_ and let the ninth Houſe fignifie the Par»
ſonage or ather Eccleſiaſtical PR ſoughe afs

ger. -
If the. FF: ind vivth be it ConjunRion'or good

Aſpea, gives 8 reac hopes that ehe- verool or Que»
rene may obtain the Parſonage of Benefice ſought af
eer.

If the priatipil 6 ificators be in X or Aſpeft,
mutual receptian 3 1 ; nv the Querene ſhal ws
Benefice with lietle trouble.

When" the firſt hall be joynel eo Figateral 2B:
#4e] os 'Sorath ,' 6 In: or O: to either
the Querens fratt- obgits che Benefjod wnghe
Os.

: But if none of the Tetimonies happen: ie villhe will he
2 _ difficule -matter £0 'obtain the

fire
: Ti-Froures is che alth 1" fcſt,- omg :
ninth or firſt 4 ſhevis much trouble —
to Vicar ar- urate,. or the Parſon that ena!
the Firs, in rv ic _— nev been Forums
Figures, in fartunate Hou! tending args F-.3
reunice [0 | — TE? Eb.
= hands :

the fignificators of the; | no FAMeroang,
thing. GISITON |

of Dredme.
[em _ bath dreamed a Dream, and

= Et LES hog a ==

CONT... 2 Pao 1m the feccy —
Thq

gt at wow”

2b . F4 þ4

Wor

4 not

ern) 22t2naf 20 S230

| e924) Noo # etl 1q3L 217 OY q i

p33 Takeo MF 35:27 I 123 Sl 292002!) » $6 " Xl 237 (6.18 313501

fieks'
£ PUDFa-thi ſo»
bi_le 2 Fa

daſs Y

Th. yu
| | .
TINL - ita : M's lr git) * "So ti 3:
Mb 2 I 23 cis»)! 03 1%" ;: aBISKib 1: v

: IQHWhenes ad _ «ff: adediching/tor of
Nani; 21dnuo13 5146 blomll. -510 17 fin wo:
SURE TE DONUT 3 10 53515. M10 'iG iT 6

ms
B3&{:::1.0} | apRnlendo: 2( 19781! ew 31 Linſedafter:s 14 © 6

J

ws wF

"Nin 238 puibnitted auch $3roummes os v5 tg)
4.1516 2 JP vi alfred 542 {2 algal. 20 <2

F OE War

$060k things
#3 1 27025292Mht;! 5

IJ | Book, Tie Tony of miſdunt 20 ZI
x — |
Lok j 3 1
= ak Vs
3 * *
& *% þ

| Of Marrhige, or of kn| Or then Howdy

Pembly [nd of the Way: 4 4)
8” 1 - —_—
| K* . 4 "0

o . o* [12 3

| > #&* | *% #:

Of pancreas which >:Of:4thingboughr,, hf
þ Weadane og tr Rollen>-ofivickneS: 2 |

nvocation of Spirits.
* | - KR
=: Xo -
+ * | =
| * | *%o*
| 8 Of "ene OOTY ped, "Of foe &ſpnion 10
neſs, ora thing hidden»: [1 tHe SLIUGT |
" - 1.410 7 "©. 03 WJ |
a es ———— —_ jb
-K * | *FAK-\ .
0 * *
- The Thought was of| Of ſomething loft, ſtrife
Women 3 oy, , of e off on ——_ or of the Way
Beaſts... - Rr F< <0 MPSHIPTTL ro
ded a ohebta
Ho

*: K6
86-6

| « chi apy 3k np
nipiny: z- MT
2 2107! Jo OOO NY

OO I II THIIEES

_ The Temple of wiſdbme. —BookII1,

«1 —*
*; *
* |

*
Of Far, Fortune , ory. |

o6- |
:-Of: fomething he is In
be of, of 4 Oyage, or |
ings | loft, of Money.

>
X.
| X-

»- 2 Xx
Of Gain to be had by, Of ſome Journey to be
grafftick , or moving frommade, or © ſome lols. © |
rey to place, or of Child-

& 2-

Bookill. The Femple of Wiſdome. =

[*: 1; $648 Ss Kg >*. 7 © x '7F - 12 5 1I0
> K KF. 2 2:25;
3* o [ = « SETS
|
|

Of Women, or of Mo-| Of fome body' that ke
ney, or of Cattle. loveth, or of the Way, orf
of melancholy by reaſon off:
Seckneſs: ft 7 EE

* - . 4

——— 2- VN > © FF i I Lhe 1.

/ Frudgements pertaining to the textb Hoſe. FE
T He Honour, Office or Dignity, Profelion ar ie

—_— of each Querent, is known from the tench
Houſe: And theſe interrogations are commonly pros
pounded, viz. 1. Shall the Querent obtain the Office
| or Dignity defired? 2. Shallheremainin the Em ops
. ment he poſſeſſes? 3. ' What Magiftery or Profe

will bebeſt for.any one to follow?

| I.
Shall the Querent obtain be Office or Dignity defired Þ _ ) b.,

Y muſt always remember to pive the firſt Hoaſe
* .and what Figureyou finde there, to fignifie, che -
Querent ;-let him be of high or low: : and che
| _ m_ and _ Figure you finde there, ſhallre«
reſent the Office, Honour or Dignity ſought after. |
fIf therefore the 6: Figure fall be co þ!
tenth, or ſhall friendly regard the tench by a * or
the Querent ſhall obtain the Dignicy ſought afcer by his
wdaſtry,-and the means he wi uſe. 4 NOM _ Si, Ra,
ch&
ee

| Ieks firk Figure finl move with cheexrth', ad

" 2s: The Temgladwiſdomie:'' Bbok III,
erent ſhall oÞtain the Honour and Offies, &c. which:
ſeeks after: %; _ oo. x
{ Fortunate Figures in the tenth having power in the
Afcendent, declare the Querent ſhall obegan the Office
or. Digahty.defireds 5 1D) 7 oo 7 NO
»ByTif; hone of tbe aforeſaid Configurations bappen
2movegthe. Significators aforeſaid » you may conclude
che honour and prefermene ſought after by the Que-
rent; wiltiot be obtained : No , althongh he have the
ireft promiſes and moſt probable: hopes that is po
le a perſon can have of any thing,

F< EE
© Shall 4 perſon-rtmgm 1n the Employment be poſſeſſes 'S ;

OL 30: 15 ap) 1 O79 4 SH -,
Hen a perfor in an Employment; Office, &c.'and
> DAM - jeaious of being curned out, . ſee - che firſt and
4 SP teath Figuresare in-company with igures,, and
ES ingood Aſpect together 5 you may Fad , finding a
good projeftion of Figures , thatthe Querent ſhall en
Joy the place he at preſent polleſles,
If che firſt Figure go into the centh , 1t prenotes the
Quereneto keep and remain in the place he at preſenc

. Bur if the firſdſhall bein' Dor & by place andnature
with che centh; Figure, it portends che Querent-in-dan-
Sateacſate Oflice or Employment he holds or poſs

+: RR.

ll Magiftery or Prefermynt al bebeſt for any ane #6-fall

}
*\t@ Si g- on 59d 7

=3-Flis qu=fio is onely fic to be. ropounded. by fucks

.
v on

- ci Perious.chat are capabie, of Profeſſions: tF8e md
a*% DA tliye 2nd moveins higher ſpheres, and

”
S$ 444

— > — -

w 16 4
.

"ITY"

BOOK Lilo be 1 emple of Wi] dome.

when a perſon convenient and proper propoundsthe

| Queſtion, either for himſelf or Friends, &c. .you may

anſwer him according to theſe following Aphoriſms ;
you are to conſider the Aſcendent or Figurethat is in
the firſt Houſe : for the perſon enquirihg, and the Fi-
ure in the tenth : and Barzabel and Kedemel, for the
Frade arid Profeflion of the Qnerent, &c. Andcon-
ſider the Aſpe&s between their Figures and che
firſt. 2
F the Figures governed by fiery Idea's, happen tobe
fienificator 3 you may judge the Querent will do well
in any Profeſſion that relates thereunto, according eo
his capacity of Birth : as if he be of quality ſuitable,
leet him turn Chymiſt , Phyfitian, Jeweller,” Chyrur-
oeon, Gold-(anth, Silver-ſmith or Apothecary. If
of a mean condition, he may make a good Ar-
morour, Cutler, Smith, Baker, Claſs-maker, and
the like. .
The fignificators in Aireal Figures; if the Birtho

. the Querent be nvt mean, he may make a Lawyer,

Arichmetician, Accomptane, Geometrician or Sur-
veyor, Scrivener, Clerk, Aſtronomer, &c. But if he
be of a mean Parentage, he may make a good, Ha-
berdaſhec of ſmall Wares, a Millener , a Painter,

\ a Draper, or one that may deal in all rerail Commo-

dities.

But if the ldea's ſhall be in Earthy Figures, the Que-

\ rent may make a good Farmer or Husbandman, Gard-

ner, Groom, Grazier, Farrier or Coach-maker, But-
cher or Brick-maker, Joyner or Carpenter, Turner or
Sheo-maker, Collier, Carter, Shepherd, Neatheard,
Day-labourer and indeed any kinde of ſervile Work -

_ or Employment.

If the Idea's of the Profeffion ſhall be in Watery
Figures and fignificators,. it may denote the Querent
Iii . £5

* BookIIl.

to do well in Brewing, Malting, in ſelling Wines, in
Vifualling, in turning a Fiſh-monger or Saylor ; he
may make a good Water-man, or do well in any thiig
that, belongeth co the watery Element.

| If the firſt and tenth Figures ſhall bein X or A A-
ſpe&, chat mult be the Profeſſion he ſhall follow ; If the
adore Jews, Figures and Elements agree in nature and
quality with the Genius of the Querent (7. e.) if they
move to gqod Houſes and there ſtand. —

But fs the ſignificators of Trade ſhall be afflifted in
cadent places of the Figure, and in DJ ors to each 0.
ther ; you may then ſay that the Querent will not thrive ,
by his Trade or Profellion.

And thus much may ſerve for the judgement of the
tenth Houſe.

—_—

CHAP. XVIII.

How 30 judge a Fignre of the Day.

Ne" we are among Friends, let us ſee whether
- the day will be pleaſant and youthful for
Porte |

o__

Book Ill. The Femple of Wiſdume.

The firſt Figure is Fortuna Major; and becault it is
aſſociated with Acquiſitis, winch is a good Figure,(igit- .
fieth a pleaſant Morning, and that about ſeven aclock
he ſball receive Money. The third, which is Alb, 4s
good to make a ſhort voyage, and fignifies char Leters
ſhall bring good newes; iris alſo:good for all the de-
mends which may be made upon Friends and Kinsfolk.
The fourth, which is Capt Draconic, fignifiech to Sup
with the fame Friends that he Dined wichal, and that he
received Money of, The fifth, which is Populus, fignt
fiech a great Woman will not be pleaſant, but froward
in the company. The fixth, which is Acquijitio, fi =
Iii 2 EE -:

IE The Trop of mane. yonrt

fieth thelove of the Drawers, and that they bring good

Win es. The ſeventh ” whic h 1s Pe la, lignifieth tO Cn»

Joy the company of a merry and vertuons Lady at ſup-

Bu The eighth is good in all demands. The ninth
onifi

eth that Counſellers and Lawyers,Clegy-men and
Learned Scho!ars will be in the company, .andin their
mirth nay talk of the King and noble things; for which
they will be in danger of impriſonment. Thetenth
" fignifieth to dine with men of Honour. And the ele-
venth makes chem true Friends, and fuch which will
hate and abhor Sycophants, whoſe friendſhip remaing
onely while the Sun fhiges ;: we love that friendthac
Istrue hearted. £

ExSegr yap mot Kiir@- cyuas *AiFar mviney -
'Oc x «rtpoy FM KiuIs: tx gperty ans 2 Tater

Jam gravis illi mibi nigri quam limini ditis,

Ore alind qui fert aliud ſub pefora celat.

As vale of deaty, ſo do I bate that kinde,
IWhboſe tongue from heart, whoſe month diſſcnts from mindt,

The-twelfth, which is ConjunGio, fignifieth that the
fon thall receive no damage from his enemies: And
. becauſe the tenth is a good Figure, it ſignifiech mirth
Tx abouit noon : And becauſe the ſeventh alſo is a good
1-0. Figurein to the eleventh, he ſhall ſup with the ſame
 i# - he dined with, and they: will drink . together until
midnight, And this 1s the manaer to judge a Figure
for thefoxeune of the day.

4

- ters that naturally govern the Houſes and the ldea's : In

cs e Temple of Wi aome, -

——
hed

A Figure of the week judged.

Ven now as the Figure before is for an Exampleto
E make a Figure to know che fortune of the day in
any queſtion propounded ; -ſo ſhall this be for Example
of choſe _— propoundedyto know what ſhalt ha
penthat Week. And here followeth a Scheam of

Figure: Wichinthe fir Line is all the Idea'sthat natu-
rally govern the Houſes: In the ſecond Line is all che

Idea's that govern the Figures that are accidentally pro-
pu inthe third Line : In the fourth Lineare the Ru»

Iiiz che

"TL a The Temple of wil. dome, _ Book Ilt.

= —C_ — —— FE IO RR TR
the fifth Line axe thoſe that govern the Fi igures: Inthe
; fixthplacearectheCofignificators: And becauſe Prella
Is1n the firſt, and ber Idea andRuler be friendsto the
Obdifesl Fignificttors, it fignifeth, that the Week fhall
From very good 4. Ir hifigg, The fecond, whichHs
0ft8eirs Prot, th th "that: there will be but ſmall
'The WR Wh 8 is (' auda Draconis,. ſhewerh
0 the Klnefotks of che Querent is diſcon-
tented. The fourth, which is Carcer, which goeth in-
to the eighth and thy fignifiethth(content or death
of Ar, _ The fifth is7/7a, ang fignifieth that Lerters
will be eomgtt ſhortly wichy, mo The fxth,

ww be wy and'a Fi of ires.\ſhewerh
om lagd y The: venth-is = and a
Fiarites,” UK ver ſe dfth

ad ner JÞ | nl

ay che FUES! of = Frie [.-or elle -of tor ethingof
' Tit "ory man hls Caper Draconie, Snifiet]

e_ Mony, and yet tie eve Ic.

's Capxt Dracmir, doch Hipnifie to
read Lodd this week, The eleventh, which if Earcer,
ifterh \s before. The twelfth fign if ood
time to. buy Horſes'and orfiec. great Heal Þ add that
En&mitsſhall become friends. Bucyou muſt > kerſand
by this Figure, that the ficlt fomtiech che'fixth hour
after Sunzrifing,andfo6falt the others unto the twelfth:

The firſt and ſecond together, do-fignifie the firlt day
of the week : The third and fourth, the ſecond ;

and fo of- the ofpes-fu Prowreng Hog two -wito

. WO.

"Book III.

A Figure of the Month, for # Gentleman as White
' Hall. [3

The Temp } Wi aome. _ to ; M

by
D
np —_ I
— |
- - —_— GG OT. — - [2

hn -— —_

He firſt Figure is a Figure of joy, called Acquiſitio,
hgnifiech the beginning of the Month to be good :

and becaule ſhe is accompanied with Popxlus, which is
che Figure of the Element of the Water, it fignifieth
that the ways ſhall be very foul. L etitia, whichis the
third, ſignifieth peaceand concord amongſt Friends
and Kinsfolks. The fourth is Per , and fignifieth
a mediocrity in all affairs and bulines. The fifth is
Fortuna Major, and fignifieth to take pleaſure in fine
Cloathes, trimmed with God-lace and ſuch Ribbon 3
Iii 4 and

+ hs, ag ny = y hd, :

., = == OED ones <tongy
and to.cat and drink,and feaſt, and to have acquaintance
* of women. - The fixth, which is Carcer, and 'goeth ico
the eighth and twelfch Houſes, fignifieth thedeath of
ſome of his ſervants, or to be held priſoner, or elſe ſome
of his Horſes to.die : And becaufe-the ſeventh, which is
Populws, is in the ſecond, andis accompanied with Car.
cer; it fignifieth that he ſhall Marry a Lady.fair bodied,
beautiful inſome obſcure place. The eigheh, which is
Carcer, fignifieth he ſha} do his buſineſs with great Wir
andPolicic : And becauſe the ninth is 1n the firſt, ic fig.
nifieth that be ſhall have Money this Month ; and that
the Wages and enterprizes which he ſhall make, ſhall
urn to his great honour and profit: And becauſe ir
 goeth into che tench, ir fignifieth thereby co have the
.tavonr of the King. Theeleventh, which is Amiſfo,
{fignifieth chat he is not beloved of thoſe whom he
aketh tobe his friends. The twelfth, which is Carcer,
zonifeth as we cold you before. Moreover, you muſt
notein this Figure, thatin this Figure the three firſt ſig-
nifie y firft week ; the next three, the ſecond week;
the ſeventh, eighth, ninch, the chird week ; the three
laſt, the fourth week. You may place the Idea's and
Rnlers in the Scheam, if you will ; but it needs nor, if
you remember their natural and accidental fignifica- |
pions.

_ Alt. rr
_—

——————_ : | ee one : RS” --
ae 393 . 5 eY Pb "Hee: "ISM
' The 1 e of Wiſdome.. "IST
=_ A £Þ
S - 3 * : C30
_ a + Une: TIS 35 _—_—_— —_— bs by
w _ — SENTED \ ——_—_ "ILY ID * Þ
.

—

| A Figure for the Tear 165], fir the King.

Ef preſent Figure ſhewech chat the King ſhall be
fortunate this year by reaſon of Acquiſitiohis Idea
and Ruler in Phra : and bene = —
re is ; into the eleventh; it
rib —_ King ſhall come to a point with his Ene-
mies, and obtain many Friends. The ſecond, becauſeic
is a good Figure, fignifieth that he ſhall have more mo-
ney then he had other years before , and then he ſhall
z2in mhch. The third fignifieth durty travelling, +,
ind weariſome. The fourth being an ill Figure, fignt-
fieth that he ſhall be angry about ſome Lands, Woods

90 ar ens NO ED Wn ar i Fr III mes 5 Arr
_ :

+44: Temple of Wiſdome. ' Book Itl.

and Houſes that will be deſtroyedin the War : And be.
cauſe the fourth goeth to the centh, it ſignifieth that
another would keep his Lands from him by force, when
Oliver Cromwel is dead. The fifth, fignifieth that he
will be angry with one of his kinsfolks. The ſeventh is
an ill Figure, and fagnifieth that his enemies will endea-
vour to War with him. The eighth fignifiech that he
ſhall not be inany danger ofdeath this year. The ninth
fignifieth that the Clergy will this year ſtand affe&ed co
_ The tenth figaifieth chat his Servants ſhal] be
true to him. As touching the eleventh, becauſe the firſt.
and thatare both governed by one Ruler , it fignifieth
ooo! friends and faithful. And becauſe the firſt isa
good Figure, 1 faid when fob Bocker and I diſputed
about government; that the King in May 1660, would
come againto his own, as Mr. Fobn Empſon at the Fiery
Beacon in Dukes-place, Mr. Errington, Mr. Fl2od, and
Mr. Edward Edwards at the Fountain, over againſt the
Roſe-tavern in King-fireet, Weſtminſter, and many 0-
thers .can witneſs. And fince that, the 29 day of June
1660, the King being at ſupper with the Duke of Back-
ingham, and our (elf being there; che Duke again veri-
fied this Art, and hath found it infallible,being as it were
Roſie Crucian Axiomata. Now it is not Jawful for me
\to'tell you what ſhall, happen.in Exgland - be; wibi ! 1
darenat2 1.would, all che Kings friends were as-faithful
as the Juke .of Buckingbamy the Lord of Oxford, Sir
. Fobe: . Hanmer, Sir, Ralph Freeupan, aud noble Colonel
wr wel Sandys late Goyernaur af Horcefter ,in the
'Wars..

Book NT. The Tonpleo ſem, 199

Te rom Era

CHAP. XIX,

The eAtphabet of Angel; and Genii Fe heal / |
Lauguage of Fives, ting and

:
_ eAgiel. | Beloh. | Chemor, |

— ——

|

. The Temple of Wiſdome.
m—————_—_—_— - ——

| »
= on.
39 % *
354 ® 43

| Jab. | Kne... | Labed I Mebod,
+3
Ob
2 #* 8 \n20% 64] '* *
X* | * * *
LR TOS
b Pamael, Quedb arſche

moth,

—t—_ @ —_—
-

'[
| Schethalim.

|

Vabam.

II.

The Temple of. W:ſYome.

Book III.

| Waders | Sth Lebiel, | Zelab, |
| 3 '
þ
2 Þ,
© 1 ® x # | #
6 6 }- 2B | [#3 «
« - | * * #
i *% * « *% * "BE -
= Mo

| Lehongh our ſelf is not ofthe Theomagical Order

A of the Holy Rofie Croſs; yet we have been very
ſtudious and curious in ſearching out their ſecret My-
ſterious Learning near twenty years : - befides, we have
ſerved as a Clerk five years in Cliffords-Izne, andnow
in Terme-time we follow the prafice of an Attnrney in
the Kings-bench at Weftminſter, But this is our Vacati-
. on-Recreation, andit is profitable to our Praftice inthe
Law ; and by theſe Arts we gain credit : for we will un-
dertake no cauſe that ſha}l go againſt us ; let the Plaintiff
or Defendane pretend what they will, we know before-

we (contrary to others) endeavour peace, fave money
 andtrouble; yet wedo not profeſs our ſelf a Scholar,
bur a Gentleman, and that very few Artiſts can do,

Oc.
' And theſe Studies and Aions are natural to us, as
you may fee by this Nativity following.

Londeng

hand what good or evil will end the bufineſs; and fo Ws

Londons
John Heydon, Nat.
Anno1629.SCP-IO.
U. 9 h. 45 min.
P., Me

Sub Lat. CTIs 2 2o

Figur

vole name is Malbi«.
tiriel, as you may read in The
Hermony of the Wrld. It is not
our happineſs to know any man
that underſtands theſe Divine
Rofie Crucian Arts, viz. Aﬀtro-
mancy and Geomancy, Teleſma»
fical Images, and our Theomo-
gia in cheir Nature,

-

ute > 9 ON RIO

_ ,

4 ,

-

Oo Coo a

ger de Lan Fo ee aa 2] ; «'s * =

Next, for an-Example, in all your works you muſt be
cartful char the Figures of Aſtromancy and Geomancy
agree Harmoniouſly, otherwiſe yon will never make a

_Teld{ME, flor can you finde what charaters the Angels
and Rulers of che Heaven and Earth delight in. You
muſk alfo obſervethat the Metal muſt be ſpermarick
and Calloe, before the Aſtral Agent will reſt upon

*-|
Te 3
% | >
ÞXF % [ak 3+

Ye

«

TxXEL
Sk
Jy

mNnie of Wilcome.

I
C
i —
A Eroes « —
: . - _ E
.

- NG” I a RED

. Albas is in the firſt Houſe, and his Ruler and Idea
areof the Nature of Gemini and Mercury yp Virgo 7: and
this is bis Charager daawn TE
from the Figures.

as oo
Sz NY

ws "OY 4
Th r

Now although we know God and Spirits can ſpeak
any Language, yet this before, they ſay he 1s molt de-
lighted in. But many doubt whether Angels or Genii,
ſince they be pureSpirits,uſe-any vocal ſpeech or tongue
amongſt themſelves. Bur St. Pax! is our Authority,
». When he faith in ſome place, if I ſpeak with tbe tongue
"> 3 of men and Angels : Now this 1s the Idiome before, and

= by this and the Figures do we finde out the Angel
Guardianof every man, Celeftial and Terreſtrial. And
ſeeing all- Tongues have and do undergo various muta-
tions and corruptions 3 this and the Hebrew do always
continue inviolated. - Moreover, an evident ſign of this
opinion is, that though each Genius and Intelligence do
uſe the ſpeech of thoſe Nations with whom they do in-
habie ; yet tochem that donot underſtand it,they never
ſpeak in any Idome, bur in this. But now how Angels
peak is hid from ns, 'as they theml(elves are; and what
man doth with a ſenfible voyce, they do by impreſling
the conception” of the ſpeech in thoſe to whom they
ſpeak, after a better manner then if chey ſhould expreſs
it by an audible vayce : £o the Platoniſts fay, That So
crates perceived his Genius by ſenſe indeed ; but not of
this body, but by the ſenſe of the Etherial body concea-
Ied this ; after which manner Averroes believes the
| | Angels,

aſlumed bo-

dies, as. you may read in The Harmony of the World,
X _ In The Holy Guide. Let us proceed to other Que-
l 10NS. |
» 1651. efugult 4.
's \'S * OT
e | Oo
d
]
d
=
s
s

®:

|
|
|
|
|

> "Thug s

3 2

w

E ſer ſail from London to Sally along the Coaſt of
Barbary, the 13 day of April, 1645, and had
K k k good

—="# « : FT, P , £
= ; EL / (1, ju d.9.68). pa

" Vn

———————

good weather, outward bound. From: Barbary we

ttood off to Sex with a freſh Winde for Chriſley in Ara-
bia, and feared no body but Prince Rxpert, becatiſe we
were of great force: viz. forty Guns all Demi-Can-

non and Demi-Culvering, and <achers; and one hun-

dred luſtFable Mariners , beſides Gentlemen and Mer-

_ chants, that were Pafſengers. Now no Turks Man of
 Wardwftcomenear us: fo ina Months time we came

to Anchor; and being oneday in privy council with
the Gentlemen, Captain and Merchants, and other Of-
ficersof the Ship , che Captain defired to know whe-
cher the King of England were well or not: fol fa-
voured him with this Figure, and gave my judgement
thus: The King is very well,he will come into England,
and in September his Army will be worſted at Vorcefter,

and he will be forced to ſhift for his life; which thing

grieves me, Now all our Friends in Exgland arevery

'well, and we ſhall make a good Voyage with theloſs of
' one-man 3 we ſhall have ſtormy weather homemard.
; Next morning as ſoon as the Sun had ſaluted the Sea,
: we looſed our Fore-top-ſail, weighed, and made all full

|

'
;
j

Gil until we came down the River Expbrates to lower
Babylon ; and from thence eame home, and found eve-
ry thing true, as they had written from the Figure:
And thusto the honour of Artlet this be ſpoken.

2 ab, Ts ? + OM
13 x
AJ
x

1 he 1 emple of Wiſdome.

a —-
April the 20. 1658.
i
mm oy - a4 = * I * x | - Thins Xt * —
x wv as | * & * "y £3 *® [+ & 5 * A * E
A.
| . d pa d a w F X _ 1 as mw» |
rs mT —
« K * 3
- * & | | * Fo » - &
* * * | | * -
"Mc - ” IE _ =
»* * A
»* *
» | » XK
— — — —
*
| *
: *

ſr IE
7 —— ——_— _

aa ———

| Þ Js the Tyranny of thelate Times, I was conti-
nually in trouble, ſometimes in Lambeth-Houſe,
ſometimes in the Tower, ſometimes in Foſhua Leads
beater the Meflengers houſe ; and yet the enemies of
God and the King conſpire againſt ne: burl ſhall ſee
their deſtru&ion : Now they help each other to ruine
the- Kings beſt Friends, and rout out his moſt faithful, as
you ſhall finde hereafter.

In theſe misfortunes was I many years, beſides it coſt
me above 1000 }, and my Father 2000 {, Burat laſt be-

Kkk 3 wo

ne 1 empie of Wijaome. DOOI

r *
——_—
I. ——

ing in company of diſcontented Lords and Gentlemen,
one asked me this queſtion, Sir,ſhall I be bebeaded ? ano-
ther ſays, Sball i be hang'd ? and thus every man feared
death, but my ſelf: And yet Oliver ſwore to my face he
would be the death of me ; but I feared not to tell him,
that it did not lie in his power, although I was chen be-
fore himz ſohe committed me, ſaying, //ſoall ſee this
tricks keep bim cloſe priſoner,

| Andlanſfwered their queſtion thus : Gentlemen, lee
yone of you be melancholy or aftraid, For oxr publick FE
gene, Oliver Cromwel, will die the third day of Septem-
her ; and of our company, peor Docior Hewit, thatis gone
om us to tbe Tower, be will ſuffer. Glad was Captain
iliam Hill, Major Claudius Malbrank,, Major Tho«
as Revel, and Edward Edwards ; and although the
{t was not a Prifoner, yet he can witneſs chis to bea
truth; and he lives at the Fountainin King-ftreet,Weſi-
minſter,near the Roſe-tavern, and the reſt live near him :
if che Artiſt defire Atteſtation , he may have it. Let
this be alſo the tohonour of Art 3 and ſo we proceed
to another queſtion,

— kw.

mm

The Temple of Wiſaome, : I 33

——

Book 111.

A Figure inthe year 16 59,

” ww VF ond & WW 5 @S

For my very loving Friend, Major Berkenbesd a
CIR at the Anchor in Holborn,near Fetter=
Laneend.

".

+ | * * *\K *| * * \*XX1@X*.|
*- [ſk x x | x | | kX x | k k | *K *
K X|* LS *k |* *| * &
* * * * * + | 92
| F * * * * *
| X* * * * * * |
| i +* i X .X |
| * * 2 CE * F
p | n
| * * | X
o | *
-
X *
| *
+ X*

His Gentlenan deſires to know whether Mr, Mb,
now Lord General ; or Mr. Lambert, then called
Lord Lamberz, ſhould have beſt ; and by my Figure I
found that Monke muſt be fortunate ; and I faid, Thar be
world come into England, and that King Charles ſpoxld
again come into England , and be Crowned. Anotlier
Figure 1 made, an. found Acquiſitio in the firſt and
tenth, 1658, and gave my judgement; that in May
1660, He would come into England z as Mr. Empſcn,at
the Fiery Beacon in Creecbzrcb-Lanes Mrs Erringion,

l _ ee ee ee Y livin BE IO rs HEY"
— 234 7 e Ter of Wiſdome
8&4 I y oy

* Mo 4 mn . 9
3 (pen MN ; gb Wh
%

5

NE OS OE eh a ates te

Book TII,

— — —
Mr. Flood, and many more can witneſs, to the advance.
ment of Art. Above a hundred thouſand times have [
experienced this'Art,and never failed, if I took care to
examine what my. Figure.fignitied :. And ifat any tine

+F ſhould miſtake, we are allbnt men ; and therefore may

err poflibly ſometimes. There are now many Dukes,
Marquefles , Earls, Lords and Knights, favour this
Art; as to name the moſt Honourable George Vil;ars
Dake of Buckingham, Covarles Stuart Duke of Richmong,
the ans pore Worceſter, the Earl of Oxford, theLord

Buckburſt, the noble and Valiant Sir Fobz Hanmer, and

is Friend Charles Potter Eſq; the Learned Knightand ||

Colonel Sir Ralpb Freeman, and the chief Champion of
Valenr,the Pillar and proclaimer to the Honour of Arts,
Fobn Digby Eſq; and Colonel Sammnel Sanajs, the Kings

ithfal Subje& and Friend; and many more of the

' Peers of the Realm: bur I ſhall name no more at this

time; let the Readers like or leave,as they finde by their
OWn Experience.

—_—_——
[ —_—. ——_—_— ——
—_ W rn rrnenn” —— o 4

CHAP. XIX.
Fudgements of the eleventh Houſe.

THis Houſe giveth judgement of theF riends of each

Querent; their faithfulneſs or fidelity, and of his

hopes &c. The Queſtions that be moſt common unto
It,

theſe, viz. 1. Shall the Friends of the Querent
prove faithful to him? 2. Shall the Querent obtain
what he bopeth for ? Os

L Shal

* BookIT.

CG Fe fret RI. WW 2. OY I CO "I —”T= 3 = wv» Cp of h= &4 1

—_— 54
9 "

">

—

The Temple Wiſdome.

og L
Shall the Friend! of the Querent prove faithful ?

Aving projefted your Figure as you were anght
H in che firſt Pare, obſerve the Aſcendenr or ft
houſe , and his Figure ; . and the Ruler and Ideaarefor
the Querent , and the eleventh for the friend of the
Querent. Now if both theſe Figures be of one Ele-.
ment , and governed by ſuch Rulers and Idea's that na-
eurally love one another, and they be in # or H Aſpe@,

| the friend will prove juſt and faithful ; eſpecially if they

move into good places of the Figure. |

If the firſt move inta the eleventh , it ſhews affe&ion
between the Querent and his friend: and if good Fi-
oures behold them, the ſame.

On the contrary , if you finde the firſt moving into
an ill houfe, in DD or P ofthe Infortunesin the eleventh,
you may judge the Querents friend is nor faithful ro

_ bim.

The Dragons Tay! in the eleventh houſe, ſhews the
friends of the Querent to be very deceitful, let them
pretend never ſo fair.

I 1.
Shall be Querent obtain what be hopeth for ?

VA Hen a perſon hath hopes of a thing , and is'unwil-
ling co declare what it is , yet would be reſolved
what the effe& thereof may be , and accordingly pro=
pounds the queſtion aforeſaid ; you are to give the firſt
and his Figure, Ruler and Idea, to fignifie him ;/ and the
eleventh, and the Ruler and [dea that is attributed co
chat Figure, to fignifiethe matter or thing hoped for.
If the firſt and eleventh be good Figures , and natu-
| Kk% 4 rally

— _— ——
apree in amity , —andry regard each ot! from good

£ ZE * or O, you may conclude earth: wp
>a wala c fixed.

If che Figures be RT he ſhal{ eicher 6
thing of wine he hapes for, or elſe ſo lure, chat, be: had
es as good have been withaur i ic : If Bi-c :

a, be ful theo have onely a part of what he ho»

7 Ns fon cators be in [7] &r &, you may then
pena hoped for will hardly be brought to
«\ wagh z Ol viebe, the Querent will have ſo many
brances and perplexicies with. ic, that he willbe

willy a Ie b a22in , for theevils ſake that at» |

m_ it] in the propoundinge - jon, the Qu Querene
rllech ou the parcicular ioporhs you =
ake your tion + td om its. pr

ce, and fa vary your aforeſaid Aphoriſins i i _
| = wt thus. much for the eleventh
I\Ce

—_—_— rp — _— md by |

OO OI On ee E—_ win. *

CHAP. XX.
Zudgernents belonging to the twelfib Houſe.

FE judge by this Houſe of private Enemies, Capth,
Vis and lapriſ onmeatsz. and the Queſtions
bs eunto belongingaxe theſe.
1. Hath the Ryeeens Mira Evemies ? 2. Whae
are are they 2 ar bow way be knw them? 3. Of a

| | he be free Oc
Re Re whed ved,, we wa to fit
omnand reſt frqmehis our labour, ana puraperied

V = we 0

"Book LH.

I wet
: Hy Carts
JE 9
+ © an?
En” . CGR. >
x SE
> 7 .
PRE. k
7. «
* 60

gre

Sy, @ fe]

| beRulersof the Figurein the ewelſth, the Enemies are

| befides the ewelfeh be in 0) or @ co the firſt obſcure Y BY.

| by theewelfch, and che chird affſt, cell che Querene

eo this more ro Sifconrle of Tana
written.

pets 629
W. > AY
I oy

< *S© PI.

L
' Hath tbe Querent private Enemies >

His Coueſtion being propoſed indifferendy ekilivn
how the Figures move, and ſee mbar Aﬀpeft muy

be berween the firſt and twelfth, and from what
ie 15 rand and {> judge of the Querents private Ene>

"x If che Aſpe& be[J or &, and out of malignant Hoaſes
of the Figure, you may conclude the Querent hath
private Enemies: And ie Zazel, Hiſmael or Barzabel

the more Co be feared. Butif Sorath, Kedemel, Topb-
thartharath or Haſmoday Rule the Figure, they are not
ſodangerous : the more powerful they are,the morede-.
criment will che Querent fuſtain by themz w leſs
__ the leſs evil and miſchief will they be able to

Generally in our we have found,if any Figure

places of the Figure, the Querent hath private Enes»
ies, 7. e. by Motion.

IH.
Who are bis private Enemies ? bow may be hnom
ibem ?

Or to :obive this Quebiourracy, obſerve ebb
and twelfth Houſes; and if the firſt be afflited

f

hrs private Enemies are thoſe har live neec Army
ar ace neefly; relaced to him, viz. either a Brother

Kinſman,

Treg _

, > a —— C—_— — D— — —
 Kinſman,Neighbour,e&c. deſcribe the prſonty the Ru-
ter, Idea and Figure affliting. We willin thisplace, be.

cauſe we have not done it before,teach you to know what

manner of perſons the ſixteen Figures fignifie by them-
ſelves in O ETs : |

* * Acquifitio {ignifies a man of a middle ſtature,

X. fair, narrow ſhouldred, full faced, of a fan-
X X# guine complexion, full eyed, comely bearded,
| X of good behaviour, fhame-faced , welſ-willing,
| iven to Merchandize. The woman of like ftature,
| living .chafte and womanly , having two broad teeth
before, well ſpoken and Religious
* * Fortuna Major, a man of middle ſtature, his bo-
& * dy compleat, of fair behaviour., full faced, full

* eyed, of (anguine complexion, honeſt, ſhame«fa-
* ced, black eyed, broad breaſted, not very groſsof
body. The woman Maidenly. or chaſte, well-willing,
endued wich all yertyes and good fortunes,

F Letitia, a man of comely body and reaſonable
* X tall ſtature, with a fair comely or round face, full
* X eyed, of a ſanzuine complexion, honeſt, ſhame-
X # faced, black eyed, broad breafted, not groſs of
body. The women maidenly or chaſte, well-willing,
endued with all virtues and good fortunes.

X * _Albus, a man of a middle ſtature, tending

X X ſomewhatco talneſs, whitely complexioned,great

* headed andeyes, handſome, a lover of Law, and
X X, honeſt,and Religious. The woman chaſte, well-
willing , joyful and' light of underſtanding, ingeni-
ous, {ſwift of moving, and delighte:h in hearing and
ſceing any thing which pertaineth co Learning.

Amiſſio, a_man of indifferent ſtature, fat,

* R'yellowiſh, having ſome mark in a neck, great

* . head, and. broad ſhoulders, little eyes, fair
* ® mouth, a broad forehead. The woman wan= |

| ton,

%

"Oo
a. 2 1

The Temple of Wiſdome.

bo r=

-Book III. 139 *
con, corrupted and Juftful , of like making and" eop«
porature as the man, but very cholerick of N
t cure.
R * Fortuna Minor, a man of middle ſtature, full
#* faced, big handed, proud and ſtately, the eyes
* * between black and grey , which willingly doch
* * ſerveto ſome noble man: a good Houſe-holder in
time, but not happy for the time preſent,in things which
he defireth or hopeth for : Of the women, give the
like judgement. | OT
* * Triſtitia, a man careleſs, barbarous, without
X * [aw, ſecret or hidden, tall and dry, long viſfaged
® *X and evil complexioned, long il! favoured teeth
X and ſtinking breath. The woman Laxurious, wil-
ling to conſent to fin againſt nature, a lover of ſer-
vants and ſtrangers, given to all kind of ill and ſecrer
envie. 7
* * Rubeus, a man ofmiddle ſtature, fat, high Co-
* lonred, having ſharp and fierce looks, big veins
X X% the hair red or brown, fierce and cholerick o
X X nature, yeta very coward in the field: a ſcotier or
mocker, oneill to meet withal, and an ill congue, given _
to all kind of vices. The woman corrupted, bloody, &:*
unhealthfyl, and of ill behaviour. | KS
X * Populus,a man ofhierce ſtature and complexion,
X * fall faced, big bodied, broad breaſted , having a
X * mark or hurt in the head, face or breaſt ; a great
* * pratler,a'lyer, and often penſive, unſteadfaſt, of a
moving minde, loving things that pertain to water.
The woman likewiſe corrupted , but a good houſe-
keeper, much wavering of body and minde.
X A man of no tall ſtature, ſhort necked, and
* long head, lictle beard, full faced, cholerick of
*X * nature, ſomewhat thick of body, delighting in
| F quarreling and martial affaires, having ſome mark
_

—
=
o

=

(

OE" "Is. 1 IF —_ ES - Sc ERS ——ad

| 8 4 "The The Lemple of Inſdame.

= . n 294; ®.. _ So :

—- > Book 11I.
Fane free; "Temp or fierce looks , and high co-

3 ' The woman like unto the man, 1n car-
tb hes and qualities.

ne ing 2 man of whitiſh or | yevow COm-
abt a

e, wich along me noſe,
reeth, mag i og, or few bat Þ his facy,
% #* lender of body, finall legs, == politck and
crafry: , and one that will learn many things withour
reaching : he is loving, and ſwift of ſpeech, andof good
company. The woman like untothe man, both in core
Fam? and quality.
R- Caput nr a man of middle ſtature, r«
*® thee ror to talneſs then otherwiſe, full faced,
.®* his noſe ſomewhat long or great, a wide mouth;
* hisceeth ill favoured, thick hair on the head, well
made of body, going upright, of indifferent grolneſs,
of good countenance a behaviour. The wo-
man of like complexion, ar in chaſtity and vir-
nm
a) Ml Puella, 2 man of a middle ſtature, tending to.
# ® talneſs, long necked, full faced, big Modes, a lit-
| ® ele mouth, broad ſhouldred, A favoured and
'® comely, ful e yed, of a age conplexion, the
road r beard of a Cath colour, of behaviour,
pleaſant, given to uſt after women. The woman cor-
Lo: or made defirous to be corrupted, given to all
ee wan of a talloenrs, long nocked, fl
a man of a tallature, long necke
X FIck big headed and long , rag vnrs fair and
p clean, his N ocy' ſlender, being of Fwy ory com-
plexion, thin bearded, or having few hairs on bis
go » very unſteadfait and moveable, and one that
loveth j The woman in like nanner as

LR

an vs” yr ro—prr—_— LT ON 0009 rag ry Arnge 02% eo. es _

>*

* "0 * - >
TO OM
2 8;

—

—

os Ew man fa ae rake
* * thick and ſhort then otherwiſe, his face of in
* # rent \fulneſs, of whiciſh complexion, Habs > 6 i
* and — , growing m—_— — ſhous*” + Iv
arms 3 ofe of nature, keep things IF
ſecret. The nn 2 Virgin, or at the lea = "0
of body, of like corporature and complexion of the |
mts --
* Cauda Dracanis, om mean Lature, Gull
* faced.little head, and neon, bikes with
'*X an ul} here look, asxrogantand roud, luxurious,
* * vagabond and envious, a -perſon,givea,
to all kinde of wickedneſs. The woman of like complexzis
qualities and conditions, corruptedand lecherous,
= given to all kind of wickedneſs.
fps by the Figures and ldea's and: Rulers; yout
may deſcribe any. perſon:
Nowifthe tre affl;& rhe Aſcendent or firſt Houſe,
' and moveiinto the fourth, or thenatural Ruler and 1»
dex ofthe fourth into. the ewelfth,, and by or -
i&,e&c. the Father of the Querent is his Enemie. |
oth bi Children (if he have = or ſone Medline

gs or Tower rs

"x 2r'
ne 8. SY
G

prove Ly

you ſhall _ 7

[he emp e of Wiſug ne,

Reed Ce

+ Inn.
* "Of a Priſoner or Captive, when may be be freed ?

A Moveable Figure in the firſt, denotes freedoni
FA from impriſonment in a ſhort cime; if ic move in-
co the third or ninth; it argues areleaſe from impriſon-
ment ina ſhore time, ES :

If the firſt ſhall be a better Figure then the ewelfch,
and be in # or & eo the Figtires of Hiſmacl or Kedeme],
you may then judge the Priſoner or Captive cinnot
remain long in the Priſon where he is , but will bere-
[raſed, on a6
The Aſcendentor Figure inthe fourth, ſixth, eighth
or twelfth Houſe, afflited by the Dor FP of the infor-
eumes, Zazel or Barzabel, the perſon in priſon. will

| not be diſcharged in a long time; and if the ill Fi:

gure be in theeighth, and affli& the firſt, he will die in
priſon: |

A fixedFigure in the firſt, portends along and tedious
impriſonment: A common, the affliftion will not be long;
if moveable, *cwill be very ſhort : If the firſt Figurebe
cadence from his Houſe or exaltation, it preſigesong
mmpriſonment ; If the Idea be incorporated into an 1]
Figure of the honr, in which the Priſoner was taken,
and chat Figure be unfortunate in an ill Houſe, and go-
verned by either of the infortunate Rulers ; it declares

-a eedious impriſonment, and very long captivity : But

F it ſhall be a Fortune, the impriſonment cannot be
ONge : 4 |

'Theonely way for the diſcovery of the time in which
a Priſoner or Captive ſhall be releaſed, isby obſerving

_ theFigures of numbers, the Figures of hours, days,

weeks, months 'or years; the moveable Ideas, the

common and fixed, as' we haye taught before in _
| places

' Book LIL. The Temple of Wifdome, Ty ©
_ we Im rr : m—_ nn rt
places 4, you may meaſare the time as you finde the Fiw - |
gures according to the inſtruion, how long the party
_— continue in priſon , and when he ſhall be re-
| When you have learned this Art, thank God, and
| uſe it, as no doubt'you will, to do good to other good
men: If any revile us, they are ſafe enough, becauſe
theſe things are hid and unknown to the World ; and
ſome delight to rail at all they do not underſtand:
Therefore we took in hand this hard dangerouslabour,
 whichall other of our Anceſtors have refuſed, becauſe
they might be aſhamed of cheir wrongful ſlandring of
Sir Chriſtopher Heydon and others : And che wiſe and
"_ _ ſee and take profit by the Truth of ſo great
2 bletling, - |
Now if we have flipt in words or truth of matter,
lee them chink how common it is among men, and
weigh the good and bad together ; or elſe Zoroafter
himſelf, wherhe ſlips now and then, could never eſcape
it: (and yet he was in an eafie matter, Man may
fain for ever) And had Exygenins Philaletbes, and Facob
Bebmen , wethink before hin : but you ſee the Spiri-
cual, Celeſtial and Elemental quality of the Matter. ,u*
Although my Pattern you do not ſee, becauſeit isnos (+
co my knowledge in the -world tobe ſeen: Bur whas WY
care we ? the Peers of England, and thoſe Noble men
whom wedelire to ſerve and benefit, will take all things
in good part, and then the reft we paſſed by long fince
unregarded. |

$9

And now to compleat our whole work, ob-
ſerve (theſe Deviations as underwits may ſup-
poſe them) this diſcourſe is as it were a _—_

dome, Þ ook ITT. .

- Y "WM :
; 8 4 1 4 q "S.. nat © "IE : pr DEF - |
WER I. Y 4 po”
+ 5 Wc % + "IM
a hemplie'
> <0 Lg to be pl vo — both
os yeh Works, apap Hapyrrg :

- ak ar
> gI—_ - - - ——— nie "RN 7” 4

| How men receive Qualifications from the Stars,
Plenets aud Angels : 41d how we may bete the $0.
clety of 4 Genius: And how ts par is 1906 ſome. '
thing, that inſtantly will receive theſe —

$f isfoy as. <a

[* the firt phace, ereft a Fighre, when the Lord of
the Aſcendent is powerful in. his Houſe,, Exaltationy
Triptcity, Term or * ink Oriemal in the Scheme ,, and
run the Lord of the Aſeendent be fortynately confi
tured in che face of the Sign that Aſcends DireQ, free
fom combuſtion -and . Sar-Beams : The Planers
zeal powerful in. the Souzb Angle, and in theWeft
it ed as in the Aſcendent or Eaft;but we mult rake
that chey be not in Nagy Harepats” 2 Oppoſition
ofthe ewo Malevolene Planets, Saturn and Ma 159 and
fi none_of thoſe degrees are OASILE ,, Lame, Pit-
ted; and che Figures of Geoman beſo fortu-
nate. * Yon muff obſervein yery gk of Aſtrologee,
that che Exf, Stmrb and Wot AngJes be very fortunate
Hrevery work : You muſt alſo make fortunace the {ſp
cendent and his Lord, the Sun, Moon and Part of Firtzne, |
and the Lord thereof, the Lord q the-foregoing Cor-
and prevention.
goats Planets fall inforetned,mmlet they be hap»

3 advantagiaus: fipnificators.- of. \the: work;- or
2 Notivity or —— , they had the pre-
dominancy

ES WI, IT Ws Y

a re. ae 3. at am as a

—-

 Buok It. | The Femple of Wiſs dome. .
Jominancie 3 3 for then they are Not at = to be on .
refled, ** - GOES
F You 7 above all have the Moon ſtrong: in |
Houſe'or Exaltatjon, free from combuſtion or Sxm
Beams, or evil Aſpe8s of Sathert or Mars : lethert be
Anznlar , in a degree conyenient for your deſired
work ; and fo let all the reſt of the Planets be. polired,
as you have here inſtriiions, and then fa 5 your
work as pou: are taught by the Angels of God in Aﬀro-
mancy and Geoma

In the firſt part of Capricorn and Sattern in i un the
Aſcendent ,- ariſes an Angel or Genius called wt
and they wake the Image of ax oI4 man fitting
Cbair, andin his hand a book, and nnder bis free 4 4
ef Grapes this Image is made upon a Satxrday, in the
Hour of Saturn, in Lead, "inſtantly that ie may receive
thefe Heavenly vifte of Got for us: They cever this Im
with black or Lark coloured Clothes, itconduceth to
prolengytes of life with happineſs. ' Read The Hol
Guide. -

lecnreth all diſeaſes of the right Ear, Spleen, Bladder,
Teeth,” Bones, and infirmities of the @xartan Agnes, all
diſcaſes, Celd and Dry, Leproſie, Morpbew, Cankgr, Tel-
low Choler, Rhewmes,. C ouſum tion of Lights , thaca
Paſſid, bIack, Famndife iſe, vain defire of going to ſtodl, has
bling, black (boler, Palfier, Laoſneſs of tbe art;
Sicko, Dropfie,C ongh? and the like diſeaſes, whic
ceed of cold hnmowrs, the diſtaſts of the Knees, a fg th |
Face'or red rllotmA the oy loſs of ſpeech, Sevens

dT

he - i.
- "a
4 8 |

of 'Bixth- arid Nature, having their . difference defaced,

> _— 4 3 # = OR ” '
4x" * # / i e 4! 7 "#, / f e #
p BY . p " Sag Tu% y o uy C @

ith gothing is wanting, but will be diligene to bring
men unco it, except thoſe that be lewd and fond b

TvYy y £
2 I -

and being fo far from their kinde eſtranged unto the
Kinde of Beaftc : That although they lack not their
helps .and furnitures, nor good will and endeavoursto
ſer then forward ; yet all will not, ſerve to mend them,

and bring them to Wit and Goodneſs , and happi-

nels. Dy

'Inthe ſecond part, Aſcendeth two Men and aWoman
Jooking cowards a Birdflying in the Air; and the Geni-
'& Or Angel that ariſeth here , doth forbid to ſearch af-

'ter things that, Fleſs and Blood cannot underſtand. +

ThisGemzs,they ſay,gives us a Salve for theſe two Sores,
that we may enjoy at laſt a whole and perfed bappineſs :
He will ſhew us the means how all fox! and vitiows per-
ſons may be cured and brought to bealth of minde, which
is Vt and Goodneſr: Heſaith alſo nocure can beskill-
. fally performed, without the cauſe be firſt known and
Temoved : the caufe of Happineſs, of ' long Life, of
Health, of Touth, of Riches, of Wiſdome and good
Manners, and fo of the contraries, which this Angel
eells us at large, that one of theſe doth betray the other,
Oc. Read The Holy Guide. w
"Inthe third Part, when it Aſcends, and the whole

Heavens and Egrth ſortunate 3 They. make an 1mage of |
'a Beantiful Toxng man in Lead,whi h the Angel or Gent»

x; reſteth on, and cauſeth Temperateneſs of body, and
clearneſs alſo, ſuch as we were jn the Etberial Regzonat
the Creatien, or of the Natyre of he Angels that mult
afſume a Body of Fleſh in the time* appointed by God.
This Angel that never yet inhabited a Hamane Nature,
Gith, (they fay) I ſhall be clogged with fleſhand blood
as youare : Bur becauſe wein the Etberial Regzos have

no ſuch bounds and beginnings from che Womb, 3s

LYt k - +" 6 i. is © {IGM ; p yet,

+- 4 >

: j

ed aA oo Cn —_——c "Ae"

yet;-as the meaſure of.cime baye given and grants
And as.it behgoyes-us, if we mean to buijc
our ſelves, to lay all the foundation , we in due

b; , 9 Tr _ < 4 o »
4 q ” ST oo EW”
:
em ly "1 _ a x

| % r \ : 5 i 2 4

, *

. , L ("9

- - ho

ror

«*

+ "LY
monglt us, .if you work after this manner, ;willcake ehe -
mattex;;in. hand again, .and ſhew you how-the(ermoare
che. yery cauſers of Health of Minde ,, 1 Makers alles
thatis, Wiſe and Vertuous: We have, ber 'to.teach.
o way,-..to apply..the remedy, and give happineſs,

"Pos, ot; EW, IE! 19013 % 29 ont
They Gy, you myſt caiſe anocher,. Angel or Genizs in
the hour. of. Satwre a; Aquarime Alcending,, and $ararn
forcunately. conſticuged, whoſe, Figure was a Af bio
V Fomgnmade.inſtantly ag:the day and hour {che &
in Jet. The, Ange}e. naye Sp acbiel, and hasa bx-
mane vice 5. he begins co texch V43/Gmn, (for chaghnww.
ledge had to go before doing ) and'bids us let gp all che
ll ſubtleties between Sapzence and Prudence; and ſays,
the firſt of theſe is tobe (cenin general and everlaſting,
the other in particalar changeable things: And becauſe
Teſus the Son of Sirach couples them together, he lets
the Holy Rofie Crucian alone,and ſays nothing againſt this
judgement in this point, but prefers our Tongue be-
| fore either Greek or Latine. He cures all diſeaſes of
the Legzs, or the infirmities, or the [nciſions of the
Veins and pains of the Eyes, as you finde in the firlt
| Book
- In; the ſecond Face, they ſay, Aſcendeth an « Fnget
| | firong andpowerful ; And this Figure is an old man with
| a long Beard, and hisname is Sadai : he cauſeth Under-
ftanding, Meekneſ7, Modefty, Liberty, and good manners z
be ſpeaks, they lay, with a voice bumane : Sometimes
he ſpeaks of Religion, Rational, and will teach the com-
mon and true Bounds of VViſdome; that is, Wit and
Knowledge of Divine and bumane things, and how theſe
contain all Minds and Roles,
3 oO

W3> TY Scunip vv

IS

bs, Pamilierand Commonweuttbs z and that
try fart ro me Pay yahes anderftand.

a Back m—_

AngHottied! bote of che Mol wrroer-wnrag]
eransferred into his Figare 5 be Afwvith + gret thi vie
and diſcourſes o the Minde and Soxl, and bids us calls in

and m GT BET of
yh me Nerv prg ted by the Raes v |

cart it is fithe co reſt, we boogie ark}
= ys Journey: meditate pon uh wiſde

h' and prayer, and - know moremd

a B*2 ($1

o OT EE hen: me. Fe

4 . G 7 8 4 > $2 Sn
: F - . " eh ts
. . —_— R b-4 Sette.
OF * by
& « Vigo
4 A > 007
S s ” | ka < ; Pg
" bo ;
» _
: % .
ite. _
- a ds

tel ttt tt. _—_ —— L-

"CHAP. X X11.
'what Divine gifts man receives from God by Sephti-
roth, the which traxsfers them through the feverdl
orders of the Angels to the Planets. And bom man
recefues Aduachicl, the Angel Amuryel. or Ky-
Tiel, and conuerſes with them of Diſcaſes,of Eartbly
Juges, of the Servants of Souls #wd Sperits : And
how they wander out of the Sody, and bring tadsngs
of ſtrange things : and of the powers of Spirits, tn
receiuing ſhapes ; the motions of Spirits and thetr
Meſſengers to our Members, ' And how man ve>
- CebUes themy as you read in The Harmony Of
the World, and#z The Holy Guide. .

N a Thurſday Zadizel ,, one of the ſeven Angels
/ that always ſtands before the Face of God, has
Influence on Zachariel : For firſt and immmedately they
have Influence on the nine. Orders of Angels, and
Quire of bleſſed ſawls; and by Sephiroth every, ching

receiveth power. Next, in the Gehjtia! Spheres,Phanets, Wl

and then infuſed, or afterwards transferred coman: IL
ſhould have aid through Haſmotim, and © through
che Sphere of Jupiter, falbioning the compqigions of
bodies, beſtowing #3/dome and Virtue on all mankind,
in whoſe Nativity he is ſtrong in þis-own Houſe, in the
IE ED
ge 5X el. nd eth 160] HuIif, 5D.
we id in the firſt Book, + 120 | } 90 195151

-. And for to receiverhis yet anbodied. Gendyr.ne Soul,
they raiſe the firſt Face 1x va ——
cat T 3

: The Temple of Wiſdowe. Book [[1.
-placein Cancer, and then they caſt inſtancly the Figure
of a Mancrowned, inpure Tin, and riding upon an Eagle

© or Dragon, baving in; his right hand @Dart, as he were
abour to ſtrike it into the head of the E 2gle or Dragon.
| They Clothe this with Garments of Saffron-colowr.: this
cauſeth long Life. and Wiſdome : he cureth all diſeaſes
of the Lungs, Ribs, Liver, griftles, pulſes, $ eed= Arteries,
Left Ear, Inflammations, Apoplexies, Pleurifies, diſeaſes of
Blood, Windineſ;, Squincies,pains at the Heart, Spaſmos,
Amazedneſs , an inflam'd Liver, Head-ach, paſſions of |
the bath=Bone, and all PutrefaGions. I

And cureth Fevers af blood, and the diſeaſes of the
Thighs and Hanches. |

He maketh a Fool to be Wiſe, and of an wnſhaken Pru-
dence, Temperance, Benignity, Piety, Modeſty, Tuftice,

F aith, Grace, Equity Clemeney.

This Image or Familiar Spirit, call it which you will,
ſpeaks, they ſay, with a Humane voice of- the Mind, Soul
and Body of Man,of the Servants of Soulsand Spirits,and
bids us let paſs theſe carthly Judges Ariftoxennsg Di-
darchus, Pliny and Gallenifts, who rating the Mind\asan
Eartblything, do judge'it to die+, and to be clean raſed c
outwith the body : and other wild Opinions,which the c
ſatne old Phi1oſopby where it is beſt adviſed, holderh and | - \
oe poof thisisreproved in The Harmony of the F

e332 2-603 45 | |
\ ,\ That as the Soul and Life of:all things, is all one :
with" 56 f&df, and all the odds ſprings. from the divers P
-tempers ofthe Body-:) (fo- ſaith the Spirir:) The divine } |.
and mitiorea) Mind: :proper unto Man 3 and another of ||
FFid#re+\to bewifedhd #like wiſe;and one and the fame _
in alf pomes, inaltinen;:as the ſeveral Orders of the An-
ls receive one from another” from 'the Supreme f|
wntain'God, fromiwhorm it came;/ and this is che dit-
ferences whe ag x7 and ſent into. hay
08:0 & 114 . places

A" REG YG

- — OTC” 7 LIED" Un a 8

BookIIT. The Temple of Wiſdhme. ©

the Soul, but the Planets diſpoſe the Body,onely ivy * ©
a tractable, complexion proportioned, and cempered _
for every good thing; and- they as: it were che Inſtras.
ments of che Angels:: But God as the primary cauſe
doth yeild both che influence and increaſe to alt: They
therefore, ſay, theſe. Souls zrenot joyned witty the bo-
dies themſelves nnleſs they be proportioned -by theſe
Stars; in 2a body brought coa Temperantand loup
' Life by Fuſtice, they think chat che Sou) infuſed is cem-
 perated by the power and Totellizence of Fupiter + Soin a
ws kept one bunared' years young, the Soul infuſed is
temperated by Mrs : So:when a Body isalways Health
ful, the Soxl infuſed 1s from the: Sun And when'a Bo»
dy is VViſe and Vertuoxs, Honeſt and Religious, the'Soul
infaſed is temperated by the powerand intelligence of
Mercury. And what I fay of one Planer all along in this
Book, you may do in the like Example of the reſt.
What I here ſpeak of Jupiter ,- the ſame may you
do with Satzrn, and the reſt as | you have occaftonto

work, both by Aſtromancy and Geo nancy. :. -
Furthermore, the Angel ſaith, from the:!A4ngelical
Orders man is ſtrengthned with wonderful Vereze, vis.
from Zadkiel, that he may be a Meſſenger of the Divine
' Will, and an interpreter of the Mind of God from\che
Arcbangel, that he may Rule over all Beaſts ofthe field,
Fiſh of the Sea, and Foxlrof the Ar, over which com-
mand is given him: And Sephiroth makes paſſage to us
from. Principalities,, that all things may be ſubdued to
hin; he comprehendeth the powers of all, and drawethr
all powers to himſelf by.a certain force, ſecret and fuper=
celeſtial ; from the Virtzes it receiveth power, by the
which. it conſtantly fighting is ſtrengthened againſt the
the Enemies of the Truth 5 for;the. reward of. which
we run a race in this life, from the Powers againſt the E=
LIl4 - nemies

"W_; wy mens — "Mn
places, to have paffage to us from Gd , who dilpoſls © ©

.Book Hl.

Bt The [empleof wiſdome...

EE -Þ ehis Earchly Tabermacles from the. Domine-
=. k bach help, by-the which we can ſubje&- any Do-
+ * Spaſſick Enimy weccarry along with us, and can obtain
_ "anyſgehired end: From the Thrones we are knit toge.
_ and being: colle&ed neo or ſelves, we fix our
. mengoryon thoſeeternal Viſions: 'From the Cherwbin,
is light of Mind, Youth, Power, Wiſdome and Virtne,
very;high Phantaftes and Figures, by the which we are
able xocontemplate even the Divine things :' from the
Serophins, thac by the. perfe& flame of love wemay at
length inhere in them: From F=pitey all is transferred
go the Horn, from herto the Etherial Region, and then
to the Fiery Regicz and throug| _ Air it is diflaſed
Into: the Body; cven'as many eu vark. through -
many Grounds of ſundry er Fu do likely every 1
rake a ſundry Smack diane” from” the Ground,
though ac firſt they ſprung and flowed. all. from one
ountam or Head or like as there are innumerable
of Lights inthe World, differing to the Seatsand
Houſts chat receive them, when the light of the Sun,
from whence they all receive Lighe,is of it (elfall'oneand
the ſame irrall places ; So the Sox! receives ſomerbing
of the nature and quality of all cheſe into the body:
anded receive theſe heivenly gifts in the day and hour
"Joepiter , T hey raiſe the Figure of a naked man wiv
> having both bis bands joyned rogetber, and lified vp
«r it were | praying for theſe Divine Gifts. Jupiter
being ig the ſecond Face of Sapittary aſcending or in
the' Sonrb- Angle, free from any evil Aſpe& of Soters
or Mars, inftantly deſcends the Angel = Genius upon
hum, and encreaſeth Felcity, Richer, Honoxr, and cot
ferceth Benevolence and Oe ot and freeth from Oni-
Fes RAP. or pe Hnged Girh i dh c Mind' moms u

" FookIHE.
| ther thing fit eo repreſent che Figare:

-imbracement ; even- (>. the Mind alone
ll inco the Cloud of the body » Is

| beam fitting inche Brain, takes the ſame tidingsand re-

Th The Temple of wiſe ©"
Self and the Fan, un, and theſe ſhe cannoe lee? bu = 4

Bagyt:, & = a SF:
of himſelf, ever ſhinerh and ſeerh a thinds; WS
fay,. e 9 if ff b . FOR
ian fox wh «Chu oro Sey"3 3: RE

: inllewlnowin :
the Sox! ce ſendit into Fi. rus wr y run quickly
chrou is puniſhmene for tence: Its

——_ it be pnrified : it lieth below che res
noch all chings, except when the unbodied Soul
ns bodied ; and this is neceſſary for the Divine
M

In the laſt Face of Sagittery ariſab » Manllike hio-
Jour to Gold; and upon him deſcends a Spirit that ſpeaks
well: it Gaith, The Mind is ſo and darknedin
= Body, that oy is cimes no idle, and my ſeckerh
all chings ; yea,it ſometimes snought at withoue
the wi fk help of the Body. :

This courſe cherefore ſhe now taketh : ſeeing ſhe may
not her ſelf Rep forth and range abroad to ſee things
ſhecraves leave and takes the %. of the Soul, which on
ter the viſitation of places far remote, returns again
inco che. Body more Learned, by the helpof his Servants, _
to the throne of our underſtanding called the Brain , "5
which receives the tidings of thi very far Ws

off. Firſt, ſheuſech the ourward Spirit that fits:in-the *
edge and border of the body, for Angel: to receive (by
_— of their inſtrumencs the parts where

=

returned, decſare many ſtrange thmgs
far off, and ſhewalfo their Shapes, oor hen ren, che
preſents them, as it were in a Glaſs before her _
they call the receiving Mind upon thein) and

fo wp over ' the knoyn' five yard \ Yies, hich we :
- nave

Ro 2G *Z " 5 2 - 2 £4 ; ny ry I de
F >>. Yr £ 4 ,
bes D - % 4 e , ” we .
wo * £ "4 * ad s " . CY
4.5 . <A * * p |
« , yp ts i F TY -

© "hae xpcunhely compared to a'Glafe, are divided into
- finder and feveral (ears and offices, . (as the Spirit Gith)
led Thaught,. FONARg the fore-parc of the
Spin gakes hold. and;repreſents;the ſhapes ler in at che
* . Windowes of che fixe. outward Serſes, Then another
| Crew, which we call Remembrance, keep the hinder
| part of the Head, and receiveth: ſtill theſe ſhapes in
reat plenty, and; layeth them up ag it were in a ſtore-
ouſe, until,firſt, the chird company of Souls and fpirics
deſcend upon the: Image of a black Man made in Iron,
when the firſt Face.of Aries is riſen #pon the , Aſcendent,
as you ſhall hear in the next Chapter, and they are called
Common-Senſe,which fitting in the middle of the Brain
as Fxdges, called for them to examine them, and to
determine of them, and then this lower Judge heareth
preſent matters.4n thought alſo; and then at-.laſt, the
greatand chief Juſtice, called Underſtanding, by laying
ie things together, and gathering one of another,judg-
nal. -;: |

Furthermore, 1a the firſt Face of Piſces, Aſcends a
Afan baving the bead of a Lyon, and his Figure is made
in Tzz,and cloathed in Seagreen; and upon him deſcends
an Angel or Guardian Genius, called Barchiet or
Amnixiel ; he cureth the Pallie and Gout, he ſpeaks
face: and bids us ask which is the ſeat of the chief

CAA Fe:

IE Rn

EN LIND 494 ;- 2
Es: £5 : E
X «.

£57 FX » ;

TO - . = = *

udge, for that is a queſtion (fajth he) among the
earned, when I take it co be no queſtion, if they all
grant that che Soul by the Pattern-of her fire the Sunn
the great World, dwelleth in the heart, the middle of
the body ,” that by caſting of. her Beams all .about, and
equally coall parts, ſhe mighe give lightand life equally
to all, as equal diſtant from-all, and in the middefſt of
che heir, as the. .anely moveable ; And : therefore
to. move others, the, onely fic part of che bo-
dy; for then ſure the minde being in the inward

{ 01a»

Book IM. The Temple of Wiſdome. ay 3
Tonanerioner Pintkernel, (38 Cardany Leakeicy alfa |
the other;ewo, the Sowl;aud the Spirit mult needs,
and be rooted there alſo: ' {5 i594 ot
| Secing the Mind ſeeth and knoweth nothing buithy
means of the Soxl and his inward F734 and Spirizs, riot
theſe alone neither, bue by cle helps of the outward
ones, called the Angels or Meſſengers of Wits; nor nej-
their of both, without the ' parts where: they lodge
and reſt: Then even as the parts of the Body ſtand'af-
feed and diſpoſed, ſo doth the Mind underitand; | Let
us go down more particularly to the matter, and raiſe#+
nother Image in the ſecond Face of: Piſces, and upon it
will deſcend a S»1:rit of a pleaſant humane voice, that
will tell us what condition or diſpoſition of the Body.
helps or hinders the work of Underſtanding : Aﬀer that
2 man hath abſtraged himſelf from his Body, how ta do
it, I ſhall cell; you in its due place; and thac the Soul
ehus tbſtrafted bath given the maccers to the five Wins
and Meſſengers z and after they have received them, and
delivered up the tidings to the threefold Glaſs within
the Brain; and this by ſtirring and running up and
down, preſent and muſters them before the Mznd, and
ſhe by caſting her light and view, judgeth and deter-
mineth that we may eaſily and quickly gather ewo
things needful to Viſdome and good underſtanding :
Firſt, ſuch a Glaſ or ſuch inward Spirits, as are able co
receive and hold many ſhapes imprinted; that is, very
cleanand clear Spirits by x In example of an Eye, char
kindly Glaſs, or of an artificial one, or of a Garment,
all which will eafily take and ſhew in that caſe every
little ſpot, ſhape and faſhion ſet upon them , whereas
when they are dark, foul and uneven, they can take
nothing, nor yet repreſent them, if chey had them.

fn thelaſt Face of Piſces, Aſcends a young Man naked,
With a Pofie of Flowers, and upon this Figure deſcends
4d

TE EE FEET WIC CCR

ko Gtxixr, thacſaich, theſe Spirits "quick.
'. © "ivenk i fin nbleby cher-ſiſe non
A o T : preſent and ſhew all pace, yin 3 for the
i heis the cauſeof jel, and |
Sis, as appears in fickneſs, ageand
-tband Sleep ; ha as in "agennd fickneſt more clear-
' y-eben'needs anyfight oftexching. Bue how in ſleep?
. "when! the hear of the Spirics ſerving Wir, is either
toiden wich che clopging fumes and breaches of the
-Sromack, whilſt the Sox! wanders, the Body is f
with labour ; or wich ſiveer and ſtill ſleep beho
for'reſt abates wok my as Tever ſaid, or elſe lene "3
eime unto his fellow Servants the Spirits of | lift,
for the di digeſtion ſake. Thus we have clogged our
elf aſter Thurſdays Journey : make good uſe of what
hach been Gid, and faſt and Pray © God for a 'blefling,
und. upon Fridey you ſhall know more and greater
7 ame : Read our Holy Gwide, |

"The Temple of Wiſdom. ” "Book... -

. ; "ER 5 ES" *
% © ";.-3 a Wee,
i a £FIt; $ b,

CHAP, XXI11-\ Þþ ©1140

yy Fee” bt
2 = IF
= 3. od 2
, k.
wy
>
:

+ Connmil , nt bes Power axe Fertue: P ſured | \. 48 |:

"d18ion" of War, Blood, and the' death of Oliver" :

'Cromwel - What diſeaſes. "Malchidael the” IF

. Spirit curts, bong, arrefted Far his Pigure of 4: 3

. ſiromavc'y aud. Geomay Re hew- 0 recerve. b

and of what be teachet ” Barthicl, nd. of:
raiſing the' Drady and what Ke the Soul doi:
' into the Body, ape after what manner i5 MAW
perfed 1 ; 822 of the Nature of Mgt bd Til i +
. Col ind of C ountyles, ad Medicipes for pobight 6s
" tinz of fs Cs Py {1 | "2

Ca eo BD ELME I % & &

: "'s \ L) i

Ere they. work the ahis matiner, in, FED
hour of Mars :; they raiſe.the fixſt Face of Aries
at which time they made: che Figure. of y Man Arm
in Iron, riding upon Lyen iz, ithen inflantly Cameely one
of the even,Spirits of: Gedy ſhines down: his influence
on the nive Qrders of idngelr and quite of Hlefſed: Segls
and by thew into the GCole/tiat Spheres nnd Plenats.t
_ AO ;Upon;the, jg we in;4
of '4 apt Mae on i

_—_ 19994 100 e/UOLY 1111 2: 4+ S001
- He cures the Reine oary;. Bevarg, 1
Quatithen Fivers Bletres Apt fy ;
red Cholerg pÞ bnrning Difeder, ny aw
&ſcaſer. ins he: [F yeh. Kace and $9 4:1;
_ af. Bloyd.y. Sivalr Fore kreby and) 1

FS a 2 ES Tony 13 =; g yaa

"tle Romy man Jar i in Armes,

b;
- a
”

£/ pu # ' J
, a

© -a6yon ſhall perceive;. he is generous, of great power
> "and furioas : be deftroys the Conguerors,as you ſhall ſee by

lon to Zuriel ; when Saturn and Mars were

(EP x rrp , Camael and i er were in Oppoſition al+
fa Read The Harmony of the World. \.. .. *;.-;-. ,
. _. He takes man from the Plow to a Throne, a dehen

boldne(s of

\ o
F; N
os EY
G

again frqma Throne to a Halter: He gives
Heart, and Gravity, Fortitnde, | {ena puniſhing the
fins of the Wicked, by the power of the name Elobim
Gihe? ; thatis, the mighty God of Cameel : andhisnu-
rheration is called Geburach ; that is to ſay, powerful
and.mighty, puniſhing by flaughter. and war, as you
may; (ee. in 1658, 1659 and.1660 z andis applped to
the tribunal pf God, the Girdle, the Sword and Left-
zad of God: it is called Pathgd, which is fear, and
harh influence 'thorow che order of op co the

F

Spbere of Mars, to whom belongs Fortitzae..' Read our
Book called The Harmony of the World.

He ſhewes: tlie” Natural cauſe of VV: and Madneſ7,

and the nature of Ape and Tomtb ;- and of the Spirits of

the Brein in Sletpatid Dreams: For faith he;jin Sleep the
Spirits of che Brains be' ſtil|'and quier, 'bur- the Soul
wanders with me, whilſt: the partsof the Body all ceaſe

at' once; and'nothing bur” 4jrivig left} eo-exerciſethe |
pant, iFrhe Meat (xo omic nyo heat) which «

kepti hereby Mats for F |
netther much, aor of an heavy. and clogging kind 2:50
neither breathing out foul yapours, nor needing: our
kelp codigelt it} before wereturrwith the newridi

ef ſecrer-marrert we heard abroad to benefir+ the body,
Mdthewour perceiving Spirits Begin to takb their places
S31icle before the Mind; and beholds thoſe things we
bring bome' coithe*Body in" particular ſhapes, which
they preſently convey to the outlide of the body, called

A EISWQ } 15:57 6291610 5ighe

<4

| —_o__——_

5 © VIV #*3 Y

= _ l DC Sm _ n p _ p
. 4 Fl x A l #/ 4
E, F 5 « 4 ; od ” :, \%
OO! » » ; * * % j

the Brains ;Arid chisis one. |
called:The Holy Gwide. , ; *

at laſt, as we ſee; to wit, aclear and: ſtitring Glaſsy%

as in Fools, Children, or Dramkards; bur if it be bi
here and there beſmeered, and drawn as it were with
dark ſtrokes, and lines of foul humours: The ſhapes
appears to the Minde, even as the. forms appearsin.the
broken Glaſs to the Eye by halves and confuſedly, which
in like manner maketh madneſs. 1,139
In the ſecond face of - Aries they make the imageof «
man, and ſometimes.of a woman ; upon which(they
deſcends a Genius that ſpeaks nobly, and asketh

ons,and reſolveth them bimſelf; and he giveth and cau-

ſeth beglth. But how(fith he)cometh Spirits of this in»
ward Glaſt, ſo foul axd-flow., whenthey are of them

ſe]ves (as becomes the beams of a beavenly ſoul ) transfer»

red into bumane fleſh, .and looſely placed both very
clean, clear , quick and lively. -Bit we need fayno
more, clear or foul ;.:when theſe two.qualities make or
mar the whole work of perceiving : | for if the Spirizz be
clear , it is a ligne they are in their own-natzre, andfo

whole and quick withal ; but if they-be fos!,. itis to» . |
ken their whole conditionand property is loſt and gone, Ft

and that ſtilineſs is come upon themalla. 262 1ST
_ Neigher is that, Etheris/ temper, which'is called bythe
name of the Spirit Gberzb, that receives the Sowl oupof
the rays of Starsand Planets, of theniture of ſeed, as
the Bil); baſe Impoſtures thinks , but itis by ſome callec
a (boriot,, becau(e. it carries the ſex! and all his keame
down ingo the body, .intathe middle point of thebiurs,
which is the centre of mans body 3. and from thence ir is
diffuſed chrough all the parts and members of his hody,
where it joyneth his chariot to the riatursl —_— 4
prris

4+ 4 "Ts FY "Ly En A Py” n 2
aſe of: Vit: nt» rs Va 22S
* %. 8 M0 RT
RT
. 7 SPE 30... » 3s Iu
He aich fur ther I that the cauſe of Wiſdc ne 23! Oe DE
AS Pg. os
- . . & - B: _ Bb Be
when the Glaſs is foul ir cauſeth natural or willing follgg

t

_——C— — ey NY

Tar agg by hear by e ehivie; plun=
—eewhyh humours , by che which it tnkereh
© meinbers. And toall- cheſe is made equally
uglieſt, alrbough it be diffuſed through one to ano-
Joven as the hear of fireadherech moſt -niph to the
art although ir be transferred by the Air to
$4 Water. © Thus it is manifeft,howthe immortal fox!,
by an/mmortal body', 'viz.'an Brberiel Vebicle, is inchu-

Sh _ op” *PS at *

he ny
t% > "& Fg
-

eaſes that ſpring always from the body,and from that part
—_ lly Sew the wits inbebit z by which diſeaſes,

theſe middlechingsare diflolved and fail, then the
foal ie ſelf by theſe middle things recollefteth' - ſelf, and
flowerk back inco-the heart, which was the firſt recepta-
ks the ſox! : 'þut the (pirir of the heart failing , and

ai rk extin& ;- irleaverth him, and man dierh, and
cx foul iyerh amuy , the on $0 Heaven, the wicked to

__-__— In the third and laſt face of Aries , they fay, eriſceh a
AY can which maſtinftantly be arrefted and ems ina Dias
weond 5; cok a definath a Genius which renders 2 man
pamerfid in good and evil: fo. rhat he ſhall be feared of
all>::He is of a terrible look 5 and ſpeaks fiercely : he
+ if the Reaſons vyouched by his Brethren will not
the curious Inquifitors''afrer theſe matters', fet
chem praQice and ice wich of eye-fight al expe.
'ehebelt > Plaineft , and moſ ing reaſon in
thoworld, and chen:ler him ſay rhe rruch.
| - Ifenariztonedoth paſs alt ork Creatures in wit, for
his ſeveral tem -abovechem ,' as we heard bei
fores\ cher if one marrgoerh. beforeunceber vi wie, \it
muſt needs followfroot che-fane tauſe, Now as Spirits
are clear and wand Fircalfo art clear and:
'whea:Karth and #oter are fart ind-flow': ſoure- the

VVit

ded:inagroſsand mortal body, which is the cauſe of diſe

OSS: 6 es ea © » [av aan ww tw Gaww bout

quick,
Yo corwaag where they bear: the-Fuy- alleged both in |

—

has © 7

'F book HI.

| 55a coken chatche

Jbe 1 emi pl e 0) wif KEE Y.
- be: þ ee Fr ne A [1 1
f x - 5-8 - - ls wo Fo - Sx EF
” IERNSEY ” - eto ——

2 hae" no Vane

Wit and Body , as appears with differente"beeteninhe®.
Hart and the Inde',/ahd all other wholeſoſhe-andlloye*
ſome Creatures.. To go further, why are 'thembrty®
orols and rude under the two Poles of the world, "tn ch; ©
frogen Countries, and ſo civil and wile in the bor 5, 'ag8 Dis

Tarndints well noteth 2 | but for that the outward hedt* ©
cleanſeth ,' as it is a cleanſer and diyer; and focleareth*
' their bodies ; whereas cold on theother fide binds and =
thickeys: and fo likewiſe by ſtopping rhe flying our of
the groſs, foul , and wateriſh humours and leavings, -
makes all not onely dark and cloudy , but bot and moiſt
| alſo, as if it were Drunken, by boyling together, as
Pythagoras tearmeth it. T2. 04s ER.

* They raiſe the firſt face of Scorpio, and then they
thake another Figure of a SoulfHier armed and crowned
with a Sword in his hand : and upon this (chey ſay) de-

ſcends a Spirit or Angel that ſpeaks with a'laxucious
 voyce : It ſheweth the cauſe of VVIiſdomet' ard foly,'
it alfo teacherh what Srars make Propbets, and how thae
Beaſts may put on mazlike Narare, &c. He' favours:
his brother preceding, and fays he might have'com-
par'd people to old mer, and the Aged in frozen (oun-'"
tries to the Tonth-in bot Countries. Becauſe (Qith he)'
che odds of Viſdome berween Age and Toxth, flows from
the ſamt cauſe of drought and moifture 3 that is, asehe'
Spirit ſaith, cleerneſs' and fulneſs of the Bodies. And
cherefore' Des Cartes was not ill adviſed, when he ſaid,
thar ac ſuch a time as the Eye of the: Body failed,” che
Eyes of the Underftanding begin eo ſee ſharply, becauſs
when his wateriſh inftrament dryech up with the reft
of the body, _ ie par ouc the fight of Senſe, y& ic
ight of Wit increaſeth; for drought, .
as we (aid, breeds tlearneſfs, if it be not mixt with cold-
xeſ7, for then ir'brings in Eartblineſs, the beavieſt Ele- |
ment of all : And chetefore choſe that ace oldaad colds
2, Mm m are

—

Book ILL. *

—

PII a _ Y p — _
EF @& The lempleot Wiſdyme.

 angyeey Bong and cbildih again; but if that drought.
-* bed WDNEc with heat Che more the better } they
_ > make the man very wiſe and full of underſtanding. It
eg hath beep alvays obſerved Falies Ceſar is deſcribed (o,
- *bue more ſtrongly: betore him Alexander, whoſe body
-- by: thſ4, great heat and droyght ,' was not onely moſt
'(weet-b1 life ; bit able, lyin; deal above Ground in a
:hoe (oy1and feaſon, without any Balming, alone to keep
it (elf treſb and ſweet with6ur all taint and corruption,
for many days together. - =
In-the-ſecond face they make the Inmate of a man ng-
bed, which we will apply to good prirp;ſe in good 1ar-
ters, alchough the Arabians raiſe this Figure, upon
whick reftech Barebzel , a deceitful Spirit z yet- expe-
rience hath caught us thac good may be done by this
Spzrit-z for it faith , men may 'elevate themſelves a-
bove the powers: of their body, and above their
ſcaſlitive. Powers ; and thoſe being ſurmounted , re-
ceive ;intq. themſelves the pcrfectien of the Heavens
and Intelligences a Divine Vigour, Seeing therefore the
Soxls of allmen, both wiſe and fooliſh, are perpetual;
and. ala all the Spirizs obey the perfe& Soxls; Roſe
Grutians thuak, that fools may be made wiſe : And this
Genixs ſaith, that perfet man may by the powers'of
their. Sow! repair their dying Bodies, withother inferi-
qur.Souls newly ſeparated, and inſpire them again, as
a Weezel char is killed is made alive again by the breath
and cyy of. his Nam ; and Lyons make alive again their
dead Whelps by breathing upon them. ;
: And :begaule, as they lay , all like things heing ap»
plyed to their like, are made of the ſame natures z and
every patient and thing that receives into it felf che At
of an Apent, is endued withthe nature of that Agent,
and made.Con-natural : Hence they thiak, thacto raile

the deyd $0 /ife , fome Herbs I Tpake of in my. Book
3018 * i | v

S

_— _
DOSES: = 2

of the. Rofie Cruciau Infalible Axtomats; libs gi bl
are Vervein, Dil}, (wncfeil, and Ravens anuki "2
blood putinto the Skin of a Sugke, do much cantudts; © ©
Fox we read of ſome that have. been .dromned/W ©
IV zter, others caft go the fire, and put upon thekee
others {lain in wars, others otherwiſe died ;...ac
_ a few days were alive again, as Pliny tefli-'
NES. oo :
We read of Aribur King of Exgland, being dead ,
was raifed to life again, and now liveth among the
Fiiry's : And there is ſuch another tale of Hon of Burs
derx, and of Afpollonius the Tyanean ; and of another
man that was dead, whom they ſay , beyond all ex-
perience, the Phyſitians coming to ſee 1t, the Herb
Dragon-wort reſtored to lite; ſomeſay , he revaved by
putting Aurzum potabile and hony into his body. .
In the laſt face of the deceitfulleſt Sign in the World,
when Mars is in Tawrus, Scorpio aſcends the form of
a-Man kneeling, and he muſt be engraven in Iron, in the
diy and hour of Mars, to do good, make Mary fortunate.
Then inſtantly (they ſay) will deſcend a Spirit that
ſpeaketh of Mirth, Luſt, Love, and cauſeth the Love of
IV omen : if it be well made, it keepech the Body Towthfxl
and Crafty in good Health.
They make Fignres in eleGed boxers and days for their
ſeveral operations, as to have long life for happineſs, for
bealth, for yomtb, for love, batred, for bleſſedneſs, for
Wiſdome, for content of mind : times obſerved, yout
may work Miracles, if you pradtice what's here exye-
rienced, and all Wifemen have found it Truch, that the
fiſt moment moves nor things below onely,bux in Hea-
——_— che difpoficions of Scars, and Planets,and Angels
alfo. ET Sow)
Buc more of theſe in our Rego Lxcis youthall have,
where 1 intend to make all plain, andeafie'to be expe-
Mmm 2 _ rienced,

« © @ -

. » + x . - , . f *
La L k : \ - . Ly —
* - ” £ OS. % -

A. —

0 Thee ans:
SA AP. XXIV.

. Of the fixth Name of God Eloka : And of the ſixth
Sephiroth, and their power and gifts, which are
receiled tn order tina Figure: Andbow of Ver-
chiel the Sperzt, and of his power, and bow be cu-
reth diſeaſes ; art of what natural Rulers heteach-

eth : The cauſe of Wiſdowe and Folly: And how

b Beaſts "may put 07 manlike Nature : How to make

a Fool a Wiſeman : Of. the degrees of Nature, that
an may be amended and maae per\ef in ten Of-
; ſprings: The cauſe of the Leprofie, and other zatu-
-+ . ral diſeaſes : That the world 1s governed Ly Angels,
. . and of what Augels got.ery the world, thetr
wames,and how long they Rule in the Figures of Get-
maiicy,

:
.

i TOw one of the ten names of God, which bleſkes
| & Your work, and which Rules the ten Sepbiraths, is
| called Elba, and is the fixth from the Aſcendent,: joyn-
_ ed with. audabat ;, his Sepbirath is Tepheratb, which is
the ſixth in order, that fignifieth the Tree of Life, and

_ Apparel, Beauty, Glory, Pleaſure:; and hath influence
_ through the ordex of Virtues, | They: call rs
| Rb, at

- + 4 Us

JOOR 41 | i 47% ,EMPLE ( #7 ads
chat is Angels, into The Sphere of i the Sun, pri
neſs. and. li light, 00. to. its and. proc zcerh) thy |
chiefly - Gold; bis | Incl igencer Is, Lophoel,, -
Har mm of the world. Fo OY
Naw for to Feceive this from che Tg : Operal
Sun, they made an In agein the h [2
_ then Aſcending, , An the Sun. pÞ FE
King crowned, ſitting in 4 Chazr, Fg
hand, and Randing upon 2. Gf e */ wh
ſame riT.E in molten Gold n Rt.
virtue Is brought, Gap by. FVebief he. on 4
ſtantly. will reſt DG be hg
This Spirit is ſix = fair Mo Nike" 4 os

and well 5's ortione: Man,” ” Tk 6 having a v

ak C.

owner, to, ye, Fo again ; he'f ewet ie
Wiſdomeand Folly : he reacheth admirablet hings.:.,
ſheweth the cauſe "Beaſts and Ma 1, Prophets, NA Star;
he diſcovers the ſecret. working of Wes Mole, an _ |
wonderful things. | wy
Firſt, he ſhewech che cauſe of Folly. and 3ſdome
Jef pe Prop. are ſaid to 'bewiler then aan pur
their $pjrits wiſer, then they, and the Stars m _
of all; for the odds in d ;rees, in the heat; Uri
and clearnels of their bodies; but the Spiris «
cxry is far more excellent at this, then he $
fore let him glone,” and notqueſtion fart r c of this mag
Pfr ou i. i 20 5; 4

M mm'3 © "> Onely

er-

4.46 © 5,004"; OINY £.t =; "
PX Ds RY TG [A CEEES Xe
5y7 : F, Pups: - Lg bY” "8 |

A LM 2 *%

n Fe) ple leof wiſddme._ Book 1.

7 EE
"i 4 LIES Tekpt of, the knovfedye of the tans
& ot we may tlie bee ter rnderſtgha How

oy "TY , etbapthe Ideots Botty $1 many kinds of
"7p as 11 bildbood, Lok Keg 2 ſep and doting
ol Melt he het Ne er ble to Nperſ:
_ Hher Letts (Gn; and wil (hare out the foul
| Beley FR why which overwhelm the Spiths,
_ 80U IT OA ge, <hoig quiet;oratleiſt 1 in the doting
if: %h ealfy; &r Enabled by litde
$kill't Yokag this TH ay Et, 4 3} great and ſtrong
and* iiphicy- Aims of Art chanced dhe to joyn with
atare che rank of all, and depe r6ote (that is)
Rhea cabal Fob tolly it ſet 2 be rgor a one and diſpar-
6 |
© =. & ns Get y.as fare do, That che reſt "hich
ns
<& ls When | this Ro A's rodted ed by natire; and

Wie 6 firlt enixryee of befbre a anyone of us de-
orates th * is 4. mixriict 45 11] as

rl iy. Lo oke, nior cah' TY be. atnended” by. the
| A (etf, ut by us, unle(s' man will cake up-
ts. put. I Beaſt ro oo, (4 Nature, and run

L Rl cen, kidd aflo rs and bounded one
A 5; whereby. yoli fy 6:0 yori ren well,
thit iy Randing 4, a lower 6 kind of his ears,
J6d I in ©6 cal be” betteted ire - made m
.Chat his. c r be, ſpoyledfirſt , andthen ta eatew ; ;
Ut * biel belig (royet, td bis is twended,
ou -74 Fehieg foretiiiate 5 " and. arteſt 2 yood

| Eorlil wt ſnag 1 up0h kim. Red Horan if the

king a toof ue. "there 38/6 ſich difficulty t'for
lt "ra thongh tbe ecll pfed giththe ſhadow. of an
tart RN ah} and wile, End i reſpe&t of his rein-
perg F m_ aboye z Beaſt, becauſe of his ivine _
within

-

PR. W 2

Book? Itt. The F Femple ot W "ſabe... __

within the ſta:e Sd condition of Manki

bounding in him as. 4s (hape declar cs, _ N

ther then, though 'nc © lo much, and in the (ary

and meaſiire. da
Aid what was the canſe? not. be ceaſe” 7 «i #0
1eaat It (o, but Reaſon or Nature' was Ie |

bindred 3 ſome e:2l Aſpefts of Sartny ; 9h, 6

0

both ; or fome'croſs and weak poſition "Mercury

_ the Author of Wiſdome, whereby nature Was ves to
ſtray, and, miſ6, aud cqme ſhore of her; þ urpoſe
che Mole, as Ariſtole Garh, for all he Dd, Hy in the
ſame kinde with all. ocher hotand perfett Creature,
which ſhould have all. their Wies ang Rooks. Read! oF
Hhly Guide,

Bzcaiiſe having all the parts of a1 c) 'E ' whole anll Fer OY
ſet, i bs. df Fon that Nacure*meant to have
forwards, but was let with the bar ofa groſand Aikice
Skin. , _- ;

Now yort ſee the faules and efrous of kinde by Dy Are
daily carre&ted ; why not a Fool made wiſe, 458 welt
Madneſs cured ?.' which is more eaſie then forme f
then : . Fooliſhnefs.is fome odd of fare example, Is;
werea Monſter in Kinde,or more fitly,diſcafes teftby. hq-
ture, asaninher! tance ſprung out fron ſowe ill tetnper.
'of the Parents...

'And whoſoever catfech the ſecond face "of Lis >*
whithtitne the Sxn ſhould be fortnnatein his exaſe
' 08,” ahd akerh the Fignre of Man with a fewer
ſhall have 3 Spirit, delcind upon it, which will teach
hint alſkheſe chings 21d. many more, and will give Him
victory over all his' enemies. Bur for e ma Py how
theſe Nats may beciiced; i Spagybot ti aftings
in. kindehave both cheir higheſt and deepe deepeſt pirch
£end', as Li Were their South Ind North rarks "fo

eds; © ao wherice

, 4 44 y 5 Wi! 7 _—_
—» TheTemple of dome. Book 11.

: IT p—_ and go back gain to, avojl

+ vote natural ad loft deaf «7 ; FBS cheie race,

7run and ſpend by little and little. When it is
od the ſtock of corruption ſpent (which is
h aloe or ten of-ſprings) then they mend, and re-
©: to healch yh V Gb | is, rhe ge meansto

- ER je hs #5 e
a =J wrt

At

A pate of Leo, a ed Os that x from
Shi ps gre che i : f of Hs mY yit, SIE
Lang k Pafions 'andfoolithneſs, which proce om
the raine 9 : gina art nth, 15 has hs 2ay Bran;
tm ay be he £6,come from one part alone, that 1s

Bic liv be , beca uſe} It che taker, of all blood; Fs ox
Bod: be-

es, and fo *
reacheth

is a moftdangerous part, i itbe ul;
ie by need of Nature, itiends to all'pl;

= LA 4 Aſs

ru 3 s: ; Ha __ , a : ple Wijdo Part "FA I bes: T 7
" , C1 $ % "I % < s - ” 4

Sherk vmemgir tt —_ firikerh at yo m Sy:
whereas the. Brains evermo ore keep. chemſc lves with”...
their, bounds, and ficetch/no, further: . Te"cnrs Fay. og C |
diſcaſes*which prozeed;from 'the combuſtion; of ia
Moon, Engebis Theddid#lur ſpeaking of chis Ang ki -
OT Thi ndpdich A a
| 2M f es, whos fold muſt quake at when «3.7
Hei is Sol your wh 6 $67 doth deſcend gh S
" jog @ Figure, when fortunate Sol aſcends . ©.
Ia[eb, be flies downto us from » Tos tb) Sh.
6. _ then exalts ui to Heavens ſecrets, big. .'._ >;
' He zeacheth Miracles, that'td bis beight are even, £
;F or I their If, ue are 4 hin to Heaven.
of worertu Kings, yer ſtoopes be then
N Near 4 man, wben be doth gevern men, . _ +
With Wiſdome, Virtue and otber things are = "E:
As ealth, long life, for tþ* body of fleſh or bong...
Ti} be that fazer | the time ry turning old, _ ..
And keeps the age up i. a bead, of Gold, . ICELE
"That inbis onn tyue.ciradleit doth run, 1 + \ a
- Ant bolds bis "YE a5 certain as the Sr. _
| - Hen makes it. epery fa phys Lain. A bang!
erp e doth ſhine,. and Ke ms ever. Jv
"Ihe a new. Nature 5'ſo that 4 rac

. Him by bis Hil ie 9/9 be is 6h

This Angel (they Gy abt lb
Perſx Sieley, Ana boy IrtUOUS-: ; "He was pro rg |
Tece, ind teacherh thatmen bould uſe good dier 1.5
fine. temper chrous oh }1l ' dier and palſi 10ns of the.
hath fallen boars 3 good Wit to a TEA of
ſcarce to be defcried Ao the ſtate.of an [deor. SO
order your ſelves according toour hrs ye
| made Wiſe Towng and Vertuons-c I. hen ſhall y

'£3

i'& c,050y
-<\r

- wpgge oe 1 2 WY i —_——
WY, _ Pp? be y ; TT F [ w ; 5 - - S-»
To - emple of Wiſdome
REES 4,5 7 F- 4 % Pp —— _— AD Wa .
7 p ' ys % - HE yu >
Wwe en th.

F <z "V+ , 2 ?
3&5, 8

A FE RE w
. IÞ; 3 oy

ISO Gus

by L, OR A Ng, "0 RD GE
4, WER? _—S 47 + »8* * £47
w- wp US

nn to. Ma. __

| mhotalag,and ſcatter and put to flight all miſts and dark-
” WdfDifafes;and clear and ſcomre the body migh ily,

”

Sy Ms matchleſ hear, ftrength and Spiritual
ſwiftly in every part- |
— Now what. was that which made and- mingled 2
fooliſh \body at. firſt? but.a_ Beam of begavenly Fire
carryed 'on a Couch, of Etber,. cown from. the ſeveral
Spheres and Regions through the f6ggy, foul and miſty
Aire eo the ceiriter. of the. Heart ; .which, as the Sun
diſperſes the Clouds, ſo this our ,4urum potabile, by
a Heavenly ' virtze, clears and.cleanſes the. body
from all fon! and groſs humours 'which | breed dif-

eaſes. - 6 -

You miay pleaſe to remember what the Spirit faith
of Happineſs, Ix Life Health, Yeuth, Bleſſedneſs, Wil
dome and Fally, Virtue and Vite ;. ahd how this Medi-
cine and Figure cauſech long Life, Health, and Lufti
neſs : and this Medicine did hot onely keep our bodie
in Health, *and deftroy all difeaſes that might hurts us,

Bar glſo doth cheriſh, nougith arid feed our bodies,
and bring it towards a heavenly of. ſpiritural> ature,
and by that theans we may'be refined from, E2rth
to Water, front Water to Air, from. Mir” co Fire,
from Fire, throygh the. fiquid waves' of the Fiery
ki Gant (thiey hy) fiyes, that Zoze! Rules the

' This Genins (they ſay) ayes, that Zaze! Rules t
Eatth 354 years ah 2 ALA * | Hiſmtael ſucceeds,
and' he governs the Earth 354 years and folir months:
Nexe Barzabel, ahd 'tie Rules as I6ng : And Zorath, he
Rules 354 years and four months: Then Kedeme! Rules
as rflany years aid four moaths : T apbthartharath, he
Fs 354 yenvand' 3 rhmy thonths: Then Haſmods?
regins, and fhe' Ries the Earth 354 eats and four

month;

"Book 11],
Tele nels of durum potabile, as I teach to make in
*Holy Guide, ariſe in the body like the Szp in the

a 8 | Cd ſo, ſ Pans

Book III. The eryle of wifaine. - Tp

months: And then begins Zazel again, and 6 they tilh
cheir races whilft Mfrs Is finiſhing cheprogreſs of hid ©.
Apheliuan, through Yirgo, Libra, Scorpio, $ pits
Capricormu, Aquarius and Piſces 3 andthen a new Ss
will ariſe. and give lighr to the bodied and unbudiet
Souls, and the bleſſed ſhall go che way our Holy Glide

ceachetl;* and ſhall enjoy 1t with everſaft happineſs.
Read our Harmony of tbe World. Now as theſe very

the Earth, there are '{even Angels or Planets it FHP :
vern thele, viz. Zaphiel, Anacl, "_— Michael, ny
mael,, Gabricl and Rapbiel : and w ten- you make 2
Teleſme of any of the ſeven Metals, the Angel, Planet,

Sign, Ruler, 1dea and Figure moſt harmoniouſly unite
upon the ſpermatick Metal. - whe 901

Of - the Genſi: Amnixicl. or Aſmodel, their power
in Hetven ; Atitl how they deſcend aown to man +
Antt how they ualifre them who they are fami-
liar w th: Andhiw they tauſe Bliſſedntfs : Ah!
what Diſeaſes they chiefly care: And bow they

ſpeak nbea tucerporated ito 4 proper Metal of
ater, 1 20935 1 ef1368 115 1d.

ret with a grave countenance, ſerious thoug
a ſP . words do- tell you, the ſev _
name of God, which we ſpeak of in our work, Is

Tetragrammaton 'Sabvdth, or Adonai Saboath ; that is

the Grd of Hoſts; and his Sephiroth s culled Nezad ; -

and thiv gift 18 Trixmph and Vidovy, and trandfers his =
influence throngh the- Order of Privcipalitier, called
in

V Tag —R pu ne __
7+ gg >" = IN

SAL |
= Read our Harmony of the World.
this gifc, they made an Image in Copper ;

*.

and Foly, Vertze and Vice, &c. |

©" Fhave opened the firſt part of Secrets,notasſone have
pretended, but even to God-himfelf.- + The Gennes, they
fay, further ſaith, He that keeps his body clean and tem-
perate, ſhall be Vertzous, Wiſe, and do Miracles. How
| te Þrave;temperatencſsgs.cakie by. that heavenly tempe-
- . #edMedicine. before namedz, Arm Potabile, See our
Holy:Guides) i 0 14) £11 71-5

; body” of.-nat, and: whence all ;Mannors proceed, the
:fate. and chpdigion. of the body ; among ;chem chat
thave, ſearchedithe, Reaſogs 429d Nature of things : Ang
- EE che

_—_

. 4 £9] SY 0-211 FLO WW gt -*
.:; Hebids us examine wheahee all Diſeaſes flow from the

| 5 | , WY ge a 9m "Ni 4 4 - Shy
Book MI. The Temple of wiſdomes, = "Bf

the cauſe. of Mamners..is laid either upon the Sears, >
Planets, or of mans body, or of their willsthas or thus _. >
framed, either by rhe bent of Nature, or by the uſe _
Cuftome ; let us ſcan the matter. :* 56M "Fl
They cannot flow from the #/ill of the Minde of man, > _
* | leſtall 4fen ſhould perforce be good, againſt our daily :
proof and experience z becauſe the Afinde of it ſelfy as
coming from goodneſs ,' is good and alike good in all
men, as I ſaid before in the Holy Grade - andſureno
cuſtome can alter and turn ſo divine a if to leudneſs,
bue by great force of neceſlicy 3 which force cannor be
ſeat down upon it by che Planers and theig Spirits, ſeeing
every power and virtue is from above, from God, from
the Intelligences and Stars, who 'can neither err nor
do evil. It is neceſffary that all evil Mannors, and what-
ſoever is found diſagreeing in theſe earthy bodies . do
proceed not from the malice of the 1nflzerce, but fron
the evil diſpoſition of the receiver. ; PORN
The Stars and Planets do feed on Etber, and are
living Creatures, of a good nature and quality : when
therefore the perverfity of the ſubje& receiveth-the
Influences of the perverſe, or .its debility cannot en
dure the efficacy of the ſuperiour; then by the Influy WW
ence of the Heavens thus received into a matter **
full of diſcords, doth reſule diflonant , deformed
and evil; yer the Celeſtial powexgs alwayes remain
g00d, which while they exiſt in chemſelves, and from
the giver of light, have their Influence by che holy In-
relligences : and the Heavenseven cill they ſhallcome
eo the Sphere of the Mooz,, their Influence is good, ay
it were 1n the firſt degree 3 but when it is receivedin a
viler ſubjeR, it alfo is vilified, yet cannoe touch che
Minde immediately, untill ic have paſſed into the
loops of the body, and fo change and diſpoſe the body
ficit, and by means of this affe& the Mind e: for if the

Mindg

_ ts i
- va 66

: 4-4
Ly

Ai "* — 3 G
5446608
TH f "gf
4; + ;

ah

wed

*
4 =

x74 "The Temple of Wiſdome.
Miange. ic ſelf, a finer thing then the Stars, cannoe

Perce out of the. body, as we heard before ; then
Buch eG ſhallthey make way to ger in by themſelves,

without the helps to our Mindes alotred. 'Andas theſe

gre all bodily, 1 mean che firſt helps, ſo theneareſt

cauſe of evil muſt needs flow fron the body : And
if the inward Spirits and Wits likewiſe do noucht
withont the Inſtruments of the body, and follow the

afſe&ion and diſpoſition of the fame; then the ap.

perice of the unreaſonable Sow! , common between
us and Beaſtsz upon which Pytbagoras and Ficinns
do lay the cauſe of Manners, as Ariſtotle witneſieth :
And: this is diſpatched and reſolved alfo, and the

' whole ſtream muſt needs clearly run from the body to

thus help.

They raiſe the firſt face of Z:bra, and Vemnr in it,
or in 7 azrus or Piſces : and upon this deſcends a Spirit
named Atalie! : In the ſecond face deſcends A4zerwel;
In the third, Z:urie!: And to receive theſe, they make
an Image in pure Virgin-Wax; they with ic cauſe love
and marriage : The Genii themſelves(they ſay) will tel!
you what you ſhall do. 1 refer you co the experience
fac this time.

—_—_—

7 | Boo "e Temple of Wiſaome.

ated

CHAP, :XXVLI. +<; a
3

of the uſe of the Nativity : Of him that deſires;

t
1
e
the ſoctety of his Guardian Genius , ard the nan
ture and pawer of this Genius , and how to' be at=
quarnted with it by aame 5, and how you may knew
the name of it, and corerſe with it: Of what
it cures: Haw it Cauſeth Faith, Religion, Roy-
al:y, Honeſly ard Grewuty of ſpeech, Of Mi-
chacl the Intel:;gence', aud Ambricl, and of
—_ gifts they give us; and bow we recerue
them, |

TY degree of any ones Nativity being known,
& v3z, che degree of the Sign aſcending, andthe
Sonth, Weſt and North Angles being Co-equated, then
let that which had the mcre dignicies of Planets in
thoſe four Angles, which the Arabians call Almmez,
be firſt obſerved amongſt the relt ; and according to 48
chat in the ſecond place, that_which ſhall benextto it WY
in the number of dignities: Ando by order the reft of
them which obtain any dignitie in the aforeſaid Angles
or ſuccedent places; this Order being obſerved, you
way know the true place and degree of them in the
Heaven, beginning from the degree of the Aſcendens
through each degree, according to the order; of the
Signs, to caſt twenty two of the Hebrew Letters ; then
what Letcers ſhall fall into the places of the aforeſaid
Planets or Stars being marked and diſpoſed according
tothe order found our above in the Stars, by the Gem,
and rightly joyned together according to the —_

.etters

oyned ſome divine name, viz. Elor Fab. Bur here we
= Gnde out the Gerizs of this Native, by the places of
3s he five Flegians ; and making projetion always from

- che *ibeginning of Aries ; Gemini ' being the - Sign
aſcending, and Mercary in the Nortb- Angle fortunate,

| being reduced alſo inco the known. Order from the
eighth name of God Elvhim Sabanth , which fignifieth
the God of Hoaſts, not of War and Juſtice, .but of
Piety and agreement : The Sephiroth of this is called
Hod, which'is interpreted Praiſe, Henowr and famoy|-
neſs , and hath Influence through the Order of the
Archangels, which they call Ben Elobim , that is, the
Son of God, intothe Sphere of Mercury, in Virgo or Gee
mini. The Intelligenceis Michael: he giveth Clemency,
or Goodneſs, Grace, Mercy, Picty, Magnificence, Elepancy,
W:iſdome,Vertue,Mcdefty,F aith, Religion, Royalty, Gravi-
{ of ſpeech, Honeſty,and acuteneſs of Wit.” To the Genizy
that, governs this Native, whoſe name is found tobe
Dirachzel, and he transfers all cheſe gifts into the Native,
after. this manner. . Firſt, chey bind @wichsilver ina
due place by the ſroak of Brimſtoze; and indeedby
that way in a months ſpace,it will be turned into perfe&t
Lxens : then they make the Figure of a handſome zoung

manbearded on it. The Scheam being as you ſee.

|

_ ; > © ot ITT oIOAEY _ ”
: 7 OM APE. 2 £3 LIES Fo
, EF "EL "Ie | Py i Hog / 4
4 *
. . @ +: ; & "
. 5
e . * — > . - . - > = —_— __TOE — x
nc CIC - SS *S» a. + = p

Ft tat wal

F; y=_ fr Philli p Gramone , Dake ond Þ Peer 4

- France,

ASTROMANCY.

 Book1ll,

h——_—_

© : : al -

FM '
PE, TW |
@ be
£ , 4 - _
of PR FI - ? | :
; 6.0 X's : .
- #2 * S > .
8%. by #: - 4 "
Ss '% " pe
MR

| ve

} :

WA

*

iT

;

|

Nd every thing came to paſs, for which the Fi-

oures and Teleſm was made. So both from
"Spaniſh and Prench Courts alſo, have we received .

great favour and credit : For theft Arts are now as much

. eſteerhed there, as at White-Hall amongſt the Peers of

| this Kingdom | WO.

oy —_— _ X F
= TE __— P av. ——- cos * —
. ;

: _* (3 . nr

Book LIL.

: OS hy 24 oe: i
And the Planets placed as in the Figure: , pare

ſay) Diracbiel will deſcend in order. upon. it; - he

Image muſt be made hollow ; and then the Genins (they,
ſay) ſpeaketh with a barren voce, yet very audiþle. If,
more degrees of Gemini ariſe , then Ambiel deſcend
upon the. Figure : if fewer degrees;then Gabzel, and the
are not much different in Nature, but in voice: Theſe
they rake from the places of Almxtez upon the five
Mm 5 Making / projeftion from Gemini afcen»

Theſe Genit are ſtrong,fair coloured,a humane voyce;
Theſe were the Ralers of Solomon, thele are exceeding |
loving, and will often ſtir you to ſerve the God
that made all the world, and to pray to hin and
his Son Jeſas Chrift chat died on the Croſs for our Re-
demption. Ef arent;

- Theſe; Geniz help the Memory, Tongue, - Fantaſieg
Brain ,, Spirits, Imagination, Gall, Benes, Thigbes, Sin-
news of the_ Brain; and cure Sickneſs, Medneſ}, and
the diſtempers of the Brain, deprivation of the common.
Senſe, Letbargie, Doting, Stammering, /mpediments.of
the Tongue , Hoarſeneſs , the Falling-ſickn eſs , 1bs; &. Pl
ſtoppings of ehe Stomack,, Gall, Vomnting , Pghoe th be
of abundance of bhamours in the Head, and the diſeaſes
of Blood; and all diſeaſes of the Sbowlders, Arms, Hands,
Sboulder=bone, belly, Bowels, and the diſcaſes of Melan-
cboly, fi WIFE'S

They teach the cauſe of Diſtempers of heat. and
cold, of wa Sun, Moon, Seer OR wage Fowls, and
creeping things 3 and finally, they teach all things you
ja or think on, as _ ſhall hear in ts dueplace-
"hes dings ehey have expericaceds uid di and

| eſe things they have experienced: uſe the , atk
then judge what ſhattered foundations the old Phie-
fopbers laid fo long 'ago 5 hat che building would Jar)

nnF

ple of wiſtome: Book 2M,

— _ — _— —— _

yn w _ his 1 "hem; of is org 7e Crate didhor not.
lore it yy inc 4 che Native by elearn to de-
7 thing Re, 5 fill and pleaſe che ſenſe
| clix which —_ nothing *elſebar Senſe.' 'Now 1
0: > to ſpeak bf Wiſdome 18s a) Dilſcaſes, tf all
Heme ſprung either from- the natural andinherited
pe on qualtties, or: from the purchaſed temper of
boty; keep the firſt eillafoh;1 This we haveei-
ther-from che gu Sojl where me livezi or. from our
corrapt Diet that we cake. The Air followeth either
the place 6fthe $7, or the iature of the Growne. Bur
His in The Harmony of the World, and ſomewhat too
hard to' learry as yet. "Lee us enlargeour ſelves, and
unfold 'and prove- how the Air- atid' Diet alters and
changeth,-and- makes the bodies to differ, firft, and
the Manners rude and fierce.

All 'the Dirarned 4ſtrologers in England, ſuchas are a-
ble to-define what « Mftrologieis, and what Geomany
Fignifiesz t be ny othe excrements of the Stars; as too
$il' ad h- as that Leech, Lozenge-mnan, and
"Nair lobill-wen; VC.

"wpbiliatros and gAftrophilus , 1 mean fuch as are
aybly fo indeed, and not a Botcher or Cobler f thoſe
they donot underſtand, but ſuch as are able to
c#ive zReaſoh for all things in the Heaven above, and in
"the Earth beneath, and in the Waters under the Eorth:
- Such menas theſe Tipeak to, and ſome of theſe hold 0-
[pihioh wich me," that where the Sr is either too near
le, or right over them, or too far off, as under
"the tivo Poles of the Porld, there mens bodies are big
eons, and their Qzolizierrudeand fierce; where-
as within the ewo temperate Girdles of the Ezrth, they
why rent e midſt (as they fay) both inbo-
ufbettorn we to come down'to the ground.
t; Wee thitafagey'Tand makes tbl

and pr STA: = I] Fo un I a1 c | Ex E
4G che paen fond in Witgnd Foc NES
rronell and Hl in th at ltr 1 WA ng af 1
ng irot. if che 5 xo heh
e (NGF 6 Rope jan Ah makes
wb thc, AP | yely. lybele deceighll _
men, .yaliznt aud. BIG alt My {
like MEET xl propys Lches in t 5, |
lowing both the ſyadvy - tempers: 9 oy ij
"ls 6 ſoul in chew and the: minde 1 M 3 56

Thenazrhe.mix Fa gale pn abit F

are alcered up. an legs

and ſuch Ms 1 Bk ome;ſt bel
the de pts to den "one Ka beat Wi
e Br Jord of fl = 5 ul ZE: r
> CRT FRE 1 is i «>
>; CCI 10ns: And | EE
rh Merexry'is the cault 5s
Then they raiſed the firſt £ face of and _
made the Image of a beautiful young man, which would
.Figar# was made on the day of Aercxry, on thechird
hour of Setxrn: The Sign Virgo ſcending,and the Figure
of Geomaney agreeing, being the che Houſe and Exaltation
of Mercury, fignifying Prophets, Saturn and Mercury be-

ſuſtenance, as * amr th Hint Ei
qoQ&j, Wagre en 'Q

Eat iy thay col {4 Till 26 Bn

o dnelgals Joe

Feel Ry (48. 46 £9 Js

of paper of

foretel things to come ; and this was made as before in

Luna : and then deſcended Fazeriel the Genizs. This

ing in Conjuntition in Generni in the ninth Houſe of Hes
Nnn 3 vey

wy F- 45” FE Fa 4s FO. AY : 4 n \ p
att & : = bf C- p aq
; « 4 h - ET OT ens — 4 w_—— NS wn

8. h, whic ich s "alſo c called Gott 7 Moreover, ler =
== - ye) [Hae Aſpett on the Aſcendent, and the Moor in
+ mk 04 [anner , andthe Sun havean Aﬀp be onthe p lace of
* EljatfionVtuns obtaining ſome 4 x wet Ser:
{and occidentg[ : Leg Mars be'combult by rhe Sun, (
tet icnot bave an 4 & on' Saturn or Mercy ; for
y aid, that theſplendor of che powers of theſe Stars
as diffuſed upon this e, and Fazerie! reſted on
ERS tk audi Yy with' a a humane voice:
Hee hes thac diſtempered meats do breed
empers, asin thoſe biiour that make com-
,and t their conditions. Why are the T0046
gel > ba ly and _babarows # bile bectiife (bifides
heir f by che ext and drink 'the fleſh and blood of
| ors e (te the Wanders of Corfica prove'as bold;
EHueland falſe as Pogr,whole fleth they eat. 1 therefore
1ve you in. all to'ra 8; heed-in the choice of Nurſes;
kn der, wp : the nameof the Angel that Ruls
the frond, ed Hamlie!, and that rules the pond
Frge, apology Purdy .not pen ar Fare
ow we have feen n
W--: ; Yourh, Blefſedneſs Wie anfVire ar
-Jlear ine our Holy Gmide, Fe next Genizs will teac
fyy rhe caufe of monſtrons Children : The call

J
7 The cauſe of Jn fear, Oe,
* »4IALz "Ip
th f ,
F243 ? : on of ;
[| -
; $330) $: [ 4
No f
f G& 4 T q Ri " ; - : ? 3 : . . ;
ea \ jf * Y F Ty : F x
of T8 LRN 37H & FORT £4 17 {12:33 6 4»
EY F > ® EE, 1 , . - ,
$iti734'+ rhe EDS 2 44,3. +, CHAR,
42 bl FS F ha. ;
S22 ang "63 4.4 44 bn» d als 4 LESLIE. £3 : :
, 54 | E214 ; ;
03:3 RE *q [ *4 +) da 2 4's %
4 »
T 34

<& rr rn nog J mm Dawg nG©G =o oo, we anon .,.m,

85 #3. =: 5arg OT
CHAP: XX IL, ; Per

+44 FO

Of Seheliel the Genins, and Murid he Geri:
and Ambediel the Genius ; of what th oj 13th |
aud bay to. converſe with them, And bow [ al
ter, charge and amend the flate of mans "body

| and get long axis ww —_— Gs. owes?
Holy Guide. qunoly

; - .
Fas e "2 7 P - . . +, , . *} p it}

Henineh me cf God falls ada th wiecch Planet 4
1t'8 Glled Sada: 5" that Ota Avelſg a
And £1bai, which" i che living God"; his'Sephirorh is
fed: thac is, Foutidtiin, and fioniHieth 4 pod whtets
ding, a Covenint, Redertpt 53; and'efd; ind harts
influence tlirongh the Qrder'of AngeFF, whom they call
};irico the SphEtt of the bin : this carlfettvalt-

* things' take Farch to increaſe and: decreaſe; and

care Sek Genii atid aps of Lye No
them: woke #briel. Tnttie hour of the Moow -
on. « Mindy, tþ chit firſt fate of Cancer, as
Moon 'in the Aernat or in her exalration' 7irarkis 3
the Fighre they | clien . melepd ii '$3lver, was 2
leaning ix Wt, taving Gn 6h tech a
fl curing Tree before him; z upon which, deſcen

&"FBebehiet, Fen he "crferh increaſes
wry ret, WE & The heron nal
made clic eng aſcii in that part of Cancer ',, Was
: wortiktoormred, an 2 Bull: Ant jnchethir
. patt*rhey matle « riding*upsn' a Drage -wirly
even Heath or a Ciab; and in her tight hand a Ar ;

her left'Y'Looking-Gle z clochs vered- with
Nt Sirhenti
with

white or yteer, andhaving vache?'h

Nan 4

4 75 together, and to each j Arm a Ser.
' Þent twined about, and to each foot alſo: and then
they wiſhed for the Angel Mearid, which is the chiefeſ
| of the Deities, the firtt of the G oddeſſes,the Queen of

fer, when the 2fc0r with ber ſeaſons return ; Ele-
ents ſerve her, at whoſe nod the lightni $ breath

fruit.
x Shes the Satilitea of the Moon, reſtraining the va-
rious paſſions of the Stars, d *penfi ng various lights by
the circuits of aces the ger of m Beaury, the
of. Tana 4 W ater,: a of Juſtice; the
of mankind ez the ada Pipn of all $ uy eates'; Kinds
merciful, prote&ing by Seaand. 3. mitigning
all.cempeſts of "25. Laps d diſpenſing with fate, nou-
xifking,: all. — ings growing..on Earth 3 wandering and
&zqing.ioch ve tops of H:zb o2dr gnd Groves ;, prnoliing

the [$425 aries ds rage:of
dog the 0 : openings of Earth, and G pong
of, n, the wholſozeRivers of the-Seg,aud the
veplored Ro of the infernal 04s. Gy I 7

e:Mogugn ry
She World, and Birds haſ Hell ungler her feer pen,
Majeſty. the ing 1g ihe Aer, arg 3fraid ;
"mild Beaſts rs yogi. Mountains >. SETPenn
ng dud 2 in' the , grpund, Filkes Haga ging

Blas
4Q Sexe io 4 the Lwer, le,
EYs di ere Cterrl orb Roms, Hef

By = F, _— tick feof, Women do nels | from*
Simmer, Ve chaeſs, Lak
; 7-age p 3, # bi Bs. ner gg med © Þ

want

T4

wW1Ne ., JOO þ "$

Avgsls, the Miſtreſs of the Elements whom the Stars an» +

forth, Seeds bud, Plants increaſe, the i initial parent of |

/

 cureth the Brat Ry 8 4 ny 5ghs, of 4 |
to Stack... Belpgleft nz tones, : z 'Ths-

BOO - e Temple of Wiſaome,

want of "digeſtion. "Haſnader and her ; govern =

niohe.
"And ay that Childrep, jf they ſack a Bitches ——_
3s bad conditioned as Dogs,and « they ſuck cheir opty
ward ſhapes and inward manners with the Milk thay 765
ceive, a$[ have (cen, Fools in Africa, which by ſuch
Camelsare made more painful then their kinde, ſwift:
healchfyl for. es ets ſuch like Examples mg tbe
brought if eime would ſuffer. To come toour
lefc us by our Parents, f- we femanners ingrafeed and
inbred in ſtock, Kigdred and Children, and: we
fill dawn, to take one after another (a long tm
kinde and Nature, as-that-cur(ed father bes ;
kindreg,ſer down un-Ariſtotle and other arr, Fo
which though hey, have no need, mult needs (toal:g90jles;
pal Lechery, and ogher evil. qualitids3- and V/alown, 4nd
other at qualities, Which we ſec idaily deſhend an
kindred ; whence [are - theſe? not from the Parewts
mide; and off-pring, whichcangor be lefe.nor ingrafleds
þut aguit return Sraight: and. whole, and all at oenrey
when they flic our. of .chislife to; that; Heapenhy:
fron. wheace-they. camez neicher. are all cheir - Wits
alike jcam'd-by.uſe and A— bus brought up ſome:
cies, COMLATY WK bo of 334-4
|. Thereforeco cur the giddy, ceclng,chunken onins
on, 3ud the whimfies.of .T bomss Syed; audtha ws
rant bold. umpudent Naciviey-moagars Leech),
ropmuch ducordingithold manners rung out ff Gage the
Parents ſeeds, which is a partof cheir bodies, purchaſed
by. meat .and nouriſlimears which buds if chey /uſe
andgemperate Digs; are everhke the firſt, othery
 . wile they follow the naguye of ongg and their difteme+
PFs» #5-Cordan ing few of che worlt-Dierr, bath moff
notably. marked., that, dryakea, or aver-{tydious ; of
TD ar»

0

| Par is
kige Oniareating _—

e Temple of Wiſaome.:

{ begetandbring forth for the moſt part Mad and Fran-

| rick Children. | ,

- To cloſe up all this third part, with this one lietle

| proof: If we inde our ſelves to do many things againſt
our will, as when a fearful ching is offered, our hearts
pant and fail with fear : when as fair Iſt and his parts
will ariſe, whecher we will or noz andall incontinency

| ſprings from that root, then ſure che body muſt lay
this force upon us.

But how is this ? you may ask (faith the Gerirs ) and
which way doth the body fo violently over-rule and
carry away the Will and Minde after her ? when any
ſhape appears in the thought of max , the doing Minde
takes it ſtraight (we muſt wear theſe words wich uſe,
and make them ſofter) and laying it with good and bad,

and matching, and comparing all things by degrees,
determines; and then her Will and Reaſon , which
Plato*placeth in the Head, follows -defires ; bur at the
fame time ſteps in ahother doubt , Will and Apperite,
ſent from that unreaſonable and perceiving Soul, which
is common between us and Beaſts ; and fitting one part
inthe heart, defiring outward goods of the body : and
took which ofttheſe is ſtrong ; thatis, which harh che
ſtronger Houſe, either by deſcent or purchaſe, -or elſe
baſ&” Mould be ſtill che weaker and obey the better,
that prevails and moves the Angels unto it, and thoſe
the fines, and thoft again by other middle means, the
whiole' body or: pare' chereof,: as i3 the pleaſure of that
Commander. - --: os ann NT |
' Wherefore to come to thepoint more namely, we
ſhall never be good, and enjoy Heppineſs, long Life,
Health; Towth, with Bleſſedneſs, und Wiſdome, unleſs we
follow the adviceof- theſe verrnvics Angels, that is mean
and reafon in our defires, and-a doing before theſe two
pares, che Hegrrand the Liver, befirſt by kinde and _
ST y

. Booklll,

pants F3* g& pd

_
—_—

Book III.
_ —

by Diet in order ſquareand temper, apt to obey the
Laws and:Rnles of Reaſon : for to begin with the Root,
ifthe Heart be very bot and moiſt, the man is couragious
andliberal, defiring Honour and great outward things :
If hot and dry, cruel, angry, deceitful ; bue if it keep
2 mean, and be temperate in qualityz keeping a mean
and obeying Reaſon in that kinde of manners forthe
Liver, if it be hot and moiſt , likewiſe it followeth ve-
nery and. gluttony : if hot and dry it doth the ſame, bye
crookedly and out of courſe 3 but.if cold and dry, 'the
man is very chaſte and abſtinent z'and if cold and
moiſt, ſomewhat chaſte and abſtinent ; but ouewardly,
whereas a temperate Liver, holds a mean in both, and
following the race of kinde delires to live ſoberly in
company, and honeſtly in Marriage; a life as far
from Jeſuits, Monks and Hermites , as Gluttons and
Letchers. nd

\We ſee therefore that. the Genius faith all Ozalitids
proceedeth from the Temper of thoſetwo parts ( nay
the underſtanding alſo). if it varieth ſtill accordingeo
the divers Heats aud Moiftures of : the Brain; and'if
theſe two parts . be :che ſprings of all the hear and
moiſture in the bagy z ſothat all good Qualities andall
vertae bud forth from the good, equaland middle'tems»
per 81d mixture of the fame parts, and 3ll- our {;bone
and travel (if we ſeek yertue) it muſt be to bring by the
Angels and Teleſmes of. the ſoon, and Haſmodel,; thoſe
ewain into ſquare and Temper ; that is, equality as near
as may be of the four Dualuies; .not onely by Auium
potabile, uſeand cuſtome, though Plato hits it righe in
histime, when he will have all long Lived, Healthfad,
Blefſed and Wiſe, and none lewd by his Will: There-
fore I bave ſhewn you the cruth of cheſe'things dearly,
that Mozks and Fryars did cover in dark picchy Clond
and how to cure anill diſpoſed Nature, by the x
cage

The Temple of Wil dome.

Bdbk I1T,
laddgeof theſe Teleſms ; and cheir names being found ac
carding to the Stars azcount,you may call them by rheſy
panes aforeſaid, although rinknown to, you in: ſound
. and ſignification;;yer I confe6 you may do more by
them chen with 'fignificative names , whillt che inde
being aſtoniſhed at the obſcurity of them, .and deeply
tatent, ficmly believing, chat ſanething Divine. is un«
der them, dath reverently.callithen by their names,
although not underſtond, tote: Glory of God, captivar

ting lyoaſelf with a-ſpiritual.affe&tion of Picty, in tho
pbedience of him. + fl nn | ns

Lot £1 - LR 5 fe Ps To

F fore = defigr $0 walk oriintoThe Temple of Wiſ-

gore, and to diſcover what 1 finde there of the

Sowl, of- God, and his Greation.. have no guide or con-
duftor;z onely 1: may fay thus much, that I follow no
mans Path to weary tay felf with*fruideſs labour; bat
that I might the mage 2 and write the cafie
Emanations of Mirig own Minde) 'and not run thibngh
Waldgrneſſes by 'direfions , '6r be' drawn off from
Thar. ſhould 'natarally fall from my ſelf, by prepot-
ſelling tny thoughes-by the fanciesand inventions of os
—_— 3, !} 50 hs P07 |

: Behold in chis Temple of VVIſdowse, there is ſich mat-
ezrwhucliis of 2 different ſort, and/has irs peculiar ſere
viceableneG: 1 followed no 'mans example , yer quots
-Awthors 3 what write is from the Temple of VV3ſdomt
 aridthe ecernal CharaGerr of the mind of man , and the

chown Phenmens of Natare, &c, * Tis

» ,
4 4
* ——_

wa -

Book III. The Temple of Wiſdome.
Noe eee BE Ta

The firſt ObjeR you ſhall ſee, is called Heaven and
Light ; and by them you are to underſtand che whole
comprehenſion of IntelleGual Angels, ſculs of menas they
were inthe Pre-exiſtency, and Beaſts , and the ſeminel
Forms of all i hings.

In this Temple z by the Earth you are to underſtand
the potentiality and capability of the exiſtence of the firſt
Creation ;, this poſlibility being exhibiced co our minds,
as the reſult of the Omnipotence of God, without whom
nothing would be, as is indeed the utmoſt ſhadow, and
darkeſt proje&ion thereof. And that you further may

Ce es

| underſtand how the power of God'is exalted above the

courſe of Natural Canſes , God taking of the duſt of his
dry ground , wrought it with his hands into ſuch a tem-
' per, with the detherial firſt moiſture , that it was matter
fic to make the Body of a man : Which when he firſt had
framed, was as yet bur like a piece of dough, till God
coming near unto it, With bis mouth be breathed into the
' Noſtrils thereof the breath of Life, which Life was lately
the Souls of Lapſed Angels, and with his word com-
manded the Geniws to attend him. This is to be obſer»
ved, That men breath through their Noſtrils, though their
mouths be ſhut,

When God had formed every Beaſt of the Field, and
every Fowl of the Air , the man named them as the
Angels Soul guided him ; and by the fame Genues was
pre-advertiſcd of his Wife, and able to pronounce, This
is bone of my bone , and fleſh of my fleſh , and gave her a
name ſuitable to her Nature ; and this was commended
of God, Read our Harmony of the Word. And of the
bodies of rebellious Angels, becare this Earth , which
was nothing bur ſolicude and emptineſs , and a$1t Was
deep boctromleſs capacicy of being , whatever God
choughe good to make out of ir , chat implyed no con-

tradition to be made: and there being a pollibility of
Creating

18g.

190 The Temple of Wiſdome. Book ITT.
creating things after ſundry and manifold manners , no-
thing was determined, but this vaſt capabiſity of things
 waSunſerled, fluid, and of it ſelf undeterminable as wa-
ter, But the Spirit of God , who was the Vehicle of the
Eternal VViſdom, and of the (uper-eſſential goodneſs,
by a ſwift forecaſt of counſel and diſcourſe of Reafon
eruly Divine, ſuch as at once ſtrikes through all things,
and diſcerns what is belt to be done , having hovered a
while over all the capacities of this fluid poſſibility ,
forthwith ſerled upon what was the moſt perfeft and ex-
a&. Wherefore the entire Dezty, by an inwatd word,
which is nothing bur VViſdome and Vertze, asT told you
in my book of The Harmony of theVVorld, when fpake
of the power of God edged with AGzal will, and with
more eaſe done then we can preſent any notion or /aes
to our own minds, exhibited really to their own view
the whole creation of ſpiritual ſubſtances, ſuch as An
- gelsarein their inward Natures; the ſoul; of men, and
other Animals; and the ſeminal forms of all things : fo

that all theſe, as many as ever were to be of chem, did
really and aftually exiſt , without any dependency or
corporeal matter : of this I have ſpoken larg*ly in The

Harmony of tbe world.

God approved and pleaſed himſelf in theſe things :
but yet though jm deftgne there was a ſettlement of the
fluid darkneſs, or obſcure poſlibility of the outward
creation 3 yetit remained as yer buta dark poſlibility.
And a notorious diftin&ion indeed there was betwixc
chis afiual ſpiritual Creation, and the dim poflibility of
the material body , and outward world. -

Inſomuch that this matter was a&uated and agitated
by ſome «»iverſal Angel , yet part of the world of life :
whence it became very ſubtle and Etherial, fo that this
_ was rightly by God called Light and Darkneſs; and 4

Aonad

®” — # * 0 20

known Phenomena of Nature - I hall alſo declare unto

Book I1]. 92

Monad of the Paſſive and Atiive Principle in the Creation
of this Microcoſm.
There are many worlds, as] ſhall demonſtrate by the

Tre Temple of Wiſaome,

you how God orders a real material Earth , when once ;
It is made, to make it pleaſant and delightfn] for »
both man and beaſt : for the Stars and Planets belong to
number ; and asa primary Planet in reſpeC of its refle-
Con of Light is rightly called a Planet , fo in reſpe& of
its habitableneſs it is rightly termed an Earth. Theſe
Earths therefore God orders in ſuch ſort , thatthey nei-
ther want water tolie upon them , nor be covered over
with water, though they be environed round about with |

the fluid Air. |

That vaſt and 1nmenſe Echerial Matter , which is call» 'þ
ed the Fluid Heaven or Etherial moiſture , with infinite
numbers of ſundry ſorts of Lights, which Gods Wiſdome
and Power,by union of fit and ative Principles drawn of
the World of Life, made of this Echerial Matcer, whoſe
uſefulneſs is plain in Nature , that they are far Progno»
ſtick ſignes and ſeaſons, and days and years.

God made the Planets partly Land, and partly Sea,
Rivers and Springs, whoſe convenience is obvious for e-
very man to Conceive.

And God placed all theſe forts of Lights in the thin
and liquid Heaven or Etherial Region, that they might
refle& their rays one upon another, and ſhine upon the
Inhabitants of the zzvelve Earths.

And that their bounty and reſplendency might be
conſpicuous to the beholders of them, whether by day
or by night,which is mainly to be underſtood of the Suns
chat ſupply alſo the place of Stars at a far diſtance, bue
waoſe chief office is to make viciflicude of day and night,
and the Univerſal darkEther.

God Created man, as you have heard, of a _—

ant "+

o
" TI92

g_

The Temple of Wiſdome. Book 1}I
Red Clay; purified by a ſupernatural Agent; tin&ured
alſo with the Ftheral firſt moiſture, and in Gods own -
Ithage; he confifting ofan Intelle&ual Soul, and a Ter.
reſtrial Body aftuared thereby : Wherefore mankind
became Male and Female, as other Terreſtrial Animals

gre. | |
Now Plants and Animals were. the Generations
effefts and produftions of Earth 3 the ſeminal forms
and fouls of Animals inſinuating themſelves into c he
prepared mitter thereof: And Szns, Planets or Earths,
. were the Gererations or Produftions of the Heavens,
es you may (ee in this Temple: There 1s a God that
Reigns and Rules the VVorld, and Created all the Inh a-
bitants of the Earth; that he is moſt Potent, Wiſe and
Provident; that he is a Rewarder, Revenger : That
| his Son ſuffered upon the Croſs for tis, and that he fufe
fered not in the fleſh for them as he did for us: How he
ſuffered for the Revolted Angels in their Region, you
may finde in the Temple; That he 1s to be adored in
three Perſons, and in one Power, and thata God.

And there went up a moiſt vapour from the Earths,

which being matur*dand concofted by the Angel of the
VVorld, which is very ative in the Heavens or Air, be-
came a pretious Balmy Liquor, and fit Vehicle of life
which deſcending down in ſome-ſort like dewy ſhowres
upon the Earth, moiſtned their habications 3 ſo that the
warmth of the S#ns gently playing and cooling accors
ding to Nature, upon the ſurfaces thereof, prepared
matter variouſly for ſundry forts of Inhabicants, not
onely In the Etberial Region, but inthe ſeveral Earths:
andlaſtly in this, not onely of ſeminal forms of Planets,
bur ſouls of 4nimals, alſo.

And man himſelf roſe out of the Earth after this
manner ; the Red Earthwith Etberial meiſturc , being

rightly prepared and attempered by theſe un&uous
| ſhowres

— — — ———

The Temple of Wiſdome.

Book II. __ =

ſhowers and valmy droppings of tbe fluid Heaven ; For
God had ſo contrived by his infinite Wifdome , thar
watter thus or thus prepared, ſhould by a vital cons
oruity attraft proportional forms from the World of
Lifez which is every where nigh at hand, and does ves
ry throughly Iincquitace the moiſt and unuous Air.
Wherefore after this manner was the Azreal or Etherial
Man called Adam, conveyed into an Earthly body,
having his moſt conſpicuous relidence in the head of
brains And thus the man Adam became the ſdzl of a
Terreſtrial living Creature, as you may read in the
Preface. |
For Adam was firſt wholly Etberial, and placed in
Paradiſe, that is, in an happy place and joyful condition
of the Spirit : For he was p!aced under the invigorating
beams ofthe Ditize InteLecf, and the Syn of righreouſs
neſs then hone fairly upon him. Read The Harmony of
the World. =
And his ſ-31 was now again the ground which God
bath blelt , and fo broughe forth every pleaſant Tree,
and every pleafant Plant of her heavenly Fathers own
Planting : tor the holy ,Ancel of Life had enriched the
/ozl, that it broughe forth all n.anner of pleaſantand
profitable Fruits. And the Tree of Life was in the
m:idit of this Garden of mans ſoul, viz. the Effential
Will of Ged, which is che true Root of Regeneration;
but to ſo higha Pitch Adam as yet had not reach un=-
©: and the Fruit of this Tree in this Erherial ftate of
the Soul, had been immortality , or Life everlaſting.
And the Tree of the Knowledge of good and cvil was
there alſo, viz. bis own will. And thus were the wicks
ed Angels. |
Some men will admire me, others will prattle and
condemn me: bur neither I nor my Genius, or any
inſpired Chriſtian, will anſwer their perhaps fruitleſs
Qoo queſtioas,

Book 111,

4

194 The Temple of Wifdome, O
queſtions. If they ask where this Temple is, and which
way I made it,or how | aſcended toit; | have told them
in the Preface to my Holy Guide ; and the Lord Veru-
lam is my authority. And herel fay the ſoul of max is
never idle, neither 1n the world nor any ſtate elſe. Bur
how ſball I aſcend and ſhake off this muddy temper of
fleſh ? ſay they ; when by the verdiGi of all the Deſt in
theſe cafes, there 1s no ſuch thing foxnd in Nature,
fave in the Heaven extant, neither heard you me fay
that it floated aloft, but was ſunk to the b9ttome of all Na«
zure, Notwithſtanding I have ſounded and weighed up
that muddy Bowel, the Melt,and deſtroyed the fiery and

ſcummy Gall in my body, and made my body of a better

temper then common. For heaven was once a groſs
and diſter.pered Lump , kefore God refined it, and
ſundred away round to the Place and Nature where it
now ſtandeth ; even ſo one of our groſs bodies. here
below, being a piece of the fame Lump chat was tem-
pered, asI told you above, and all one with that Hea-
ven once was, by theſe ways 1 dire&, may be retined
and parted from all his diſtempered drofles and
foul grealineſs in the fleſh , and brought unto a fine
Nature , as I ſhall ſpeak hereafter in The Hol
Guide, | |

| Theſow! of a ran is always aQtive, and hath ſome pro-
miſe to make good, and is to promote his intereſt
whoſe ſheis: For what greater gratification can there
be of a good ſoul, then to be a diſpenſer of ſome portion
of that Univerſal Good that God lets out uponthe
World ? And there can be no external converſation nor
ſociety of perſons, be they Terreſtrial, 4ireal or Etheri-
al , but forthwith it implies an nſe of Prudence;
wherefore Prudence 1s an inſeparable accompliſhment

of the Soul: walk but in my parhes toour 7 cmple of |

FW :ſdome, and you keep your body in health ; To follow
our

;
Z
I

- @a © 5A =o we. 6a a

wat PD SR FETIOO —

195
otr Examples 1s as much as you can naturally do ; yout
ſhall do no n:ore then do my ſelf, and itis as much as
can be looked for at the hands of weak mortality;for the
Souls of all mankind ſhall again become Angels, as they
were before the Rebellion : and the Souls of the wick
edand ungodly ſhall be again incorporated into fleſh,
and (uffer mortality, until they are clear from fin. Now
itis a Hell or puniſhment ſufhicient to be a Prince upon

Earth: for all mankind are miſerable, as you may ſee in
our Harmony of the World,

Book INT, The Temple of wWiſdome.

q—

LE ee EE een p—— a Mm ——_—_—_ _—_—

CHAP. XXIX

That knunlendge inclives the Minde to Hereſie azd
Atberſm : The Solut-074 of original Guilt , not 18
quantity but i the quality of K.owledge : Of the
correAtve temper z againſt I:ftutty, Anxiety and

ſeducements of Impoſiures ad Reſeryattues : That
we forget yot our Mortality : In The Temple of
VWiſciome z5 taught that Phileſ ophy leads the
Aid» Ly the ſteps of ſecond cauſes to the ſtayrs of

the firſt, -

Owcan the prodigious Aſtrologer makethe con«
tenplation of ſecond cauſes to derogate from the
authority of the firſt ? To diſcover then the errour and
zonorance of this O pinion, and the miſunderſtanding in
che grounds thereof, any man may (ee that theſe men
do not obſerve and conſider, that it was not that pure
and primitive knowledge of Nature, or that pre-
exiſtant Genius , by the light whereof man did give
names to other Creatures in Paracliſe , as they were
Woo 3 brought

196.
—
broughe before him; according to their properties,
which gave the cccaſton to fall ; but it was that proud
knowledge of good andevil, with an intent to ſhake off

God, and to givelaw unto himſelf.
God hath made all things beautiful and decent in
the true return of their Staſons; ailo he hath laced
the world 11 mans biart, yet cannot man finde ot the
works which God workerh, from che beginning unto the
end: by which words he declared nut obtcurely,that G:d
hath framed the 17:inde of Man, as a blirronr or Glaſs ca-
pable ofthe /mage of the Univerſal World; and as ;Oyju
to receive the impreſſions thereot , as the pure Patt of
man to paſs to the Sandum Santforum 1m the Terpie,or
8 the eye joyeth to receive light ; and not onely deijyh-
ted in the beholding the variery of the things, aud the
vicitſitudes of times, but raiſed a'!fo to find out and to Gdi-
(cera the inviolable laws,and the infaſlible decrees of Na-
ture. And although ] ſeem to Injinuate thar the f11pieme
or ſuTmary law of Nature , which 1s called the work
which God worketh from the beginning tothe end,is net
poſſible ro be found out by max; yet that doth n t de-
rogate from the capacity ot the nine, but may be re-
ferred to wans Nortality, the 1 Corrmdion of ia-
bours depraved, and unfaithful cradition of knowledge
over from hand tohand, and wany other inconveii-
ences wherewith the condition of man clogged with
theſe needleſs members is enſnared and involved. The
Spirit of man is as the ITairp of Gid4 , wherewith he
ſearcheth the very inwards of all ſecrets : Now this is
com1.0n toallmen, but not the capacity but if che
body be mended, the E:berial Sfirit is exalted within
the capacity and receipt of the t.inde of man, and inthe
mquiry and invention there is nodanges at all from the
roportion or quant ty of Knowledge how large foever,
Ritſhould make it (well or out-compaſs'it felf; on
-- : meer!y

lhe lemple of Wiſiloz.e.

Book ood

Ea am——— 8

Book Iti. The Temple of Wi 197
meerly i the quality, which being in quantity more or
leſs, if ic be taken without the correftive thereof, hath
init ſome nature of Malignity or venome full of flatuous
Symptoms; the mixture whereof tempers Knowledge,
and makes ir ſo Soveraig1 as Charity which buiids up
the Mind,and enemy to Pride and Conceiceanels: if you
could ſpeak wich the Tongue of en and , Angels, and
had nos Charity, you cculd never attain to that per-
fetion inour Temple, and temper of inſpired Chriſti-
215: neither could your Angel-Gnardian ever ſpeak to
you, but inſtead of direfing you would deſtroy you. Is
it not an excellent thing to fpeak with the Tongue of
M-n and Angels, aad converſe with Anacls or Celeſtial
Intelirences ? withoue Charity you cannot ; and it
muſt be referred to che publick good of mankinde; o-
therwiſe it rather exhibites a vain and empty glory,then
any ſubſtantial and (ol1d fruit. :

As for the conceit of thoſe who are of opinion that
coo much knowledge ſhould incline the minde to A-
theiſn, and that the ignorance of the ſecond cauſes
ſhould be as it were Midwile to our Piery toward the
hrſt : To my knowledge the prodigious Nativity- Mer»
chant, that undoes his cuſtomers, 1s not gmlry of any of
the k1owledae I ſpake of in The '[ cmple of WWi'dme.

The authority of this Tempie forbids us to have fo»
ciety with theſe impoſtyres. 1 will charge them in the

Language of Fob, 1'Fill you lic fir God, as 028 man doth'
for another to gratifie him? For certain ic is faid in The
Temple of Wiſdome, that God works nothing 11 Nature
according to the ordinary courſe, but by ſecond cauſes :
and if they would have it ocherwife believed, we pro-
nounce it meer impolture under colour of piety to
God, and nothing elſe but to offer unto the-Author of
Truth: the unclean facrifice of alie. But further.ic is an

aſl.ced ccuth, and a conclution of expecieacs, that alice

Qoo 3 Che

i —_——————

"i ws

The Temple of Wiſcdome, Book Ill

gtleor ſuperficial taſte of Philoſophy, may perchance in«
cline the minde to Atheiſm ; but a full dranghe there-.
of brought the minde back to Religion : for in the en«
trance of Ph:loſophy, when the ſecond cauſes, which are
next unto the ſenſes, do offer themſelves to the minde
of man, and the minde it ſelf cleaves unto them and
dwells there; an oblivion of the higheſt cauſe may creep
in : but when a man paſſeth on further, and beholds
the dependency,continuation and confederacy of canfes,
and the work of providence, then. he will eaſily believe
the higheſt Rep of Nature aſcends to the ſtair of a Su-
pernatural God, And thus by Aſtromancy and Geo»
mancy do Superiours and Inferiours communicate,
To cloſe in a word, letno man upon as weak a con»
eeit as prodigious Mr. Scorpion in his time, of ſobriety
or ill applyed moderation, think or maintain that a man
can ſearch too far, or be too well ſtudied in the book of
Gods Word, or in the book of Gods works, Diwinity or
Philoſophy ; but rather let men awake themſelves, and
cheerfully endeavour, and purſue an endleſs progreſs

i193

PF”. . .Þ or proficience in both: let them beware leſt they ap-
=. A” ply knowledge to Pride,not to Charity ; to oftentation,
pottoule; and again, that they do not unwiſely with-
out any conſent , mingle and confound theſe diſtin
knowledges of God and Nature, in Theology and Phileſo-
by, and their ſeveral waters together. Read our Har-
won) of tbe World.

.

CHAP.

De" « e-/-ſle Th W.t donnie.

tA. 4

Book 111;

eo

CHAP. X X33

Of the Soul, ſ-yeral Opinions are raiſed, Lut the
truth I have taught in this Temple : The inſpered
Eiſence of the knowledge of the ſenſible or produced
Soul ; of the ſubſtance and faculties of the Soul :
What cauſeth men to be of different qualities : The
knowledge of the faculties of the Soul : Of the uſe
and objefls of the faculttes, as they ave xritten in
The Icmple of Wifdome,

Erel intended to tell you what that Sol is: What
makes man diftra&ted about himſelf, and capable

of his diltraftion. 'Some would have it of the Nature of
Fire; a hot ſubtle body diſperling itſelf into rayes and
Fiery Atomes ; ſome think it Air, ſome make ita Spirit
mixt of Fire and Air,as Sir Fobn Heydon ina Manuſcript
atirmeth ; ſome would have everyElement a parent of

a Soul ſeparately : ſo every man ſhould have many

diſtin& Sowls, according to the principles of his compo»
tition : ſome have called it an unnde-mined Vertue: ſome
a ſelf-moving Nunber: ſome a guint Eſſence : others

have defined it to be nothing but a Harmony conflated

by the moſt even compoſure of the four Elements in
man. And for this, one might thus argue: The Body is
before the Soxl3 and till the Body be made perfect, as L
told you before, the Sox! appears not 3 as if the perfe&ti»
on of the Body, by the power of the Etherial Spirit, in his
even contemperation, were the Generation of the Soul
within tt ; The Sox] alſo changerh with the Body,
becauſe it was Angelical before it cane into mat=
FEre ;

IJ

— I mt

' Oo 0:4: Now

maT ” -
— "_— _ us RRP: y _
—_— Xx @ 0 - a. 3 4 35 J

[00 empie of Wiſaome,

200 " Book III.

E +; let us proceed to the Nature of the Minde and
* Soul of Man, outof the treaſure whereof all myſteries
are extracted. I ſpeak of the reaſonable Soul, which is
Pivine ; the ether of the unreaſonable Sou}, which is
common to Beaſts, in The Harmony of the World, |
have noted (where | ſpeak of forms) thoſe two Emanati-
ons of the Soxls, which in the firſt Creation of the 3
both, offer themſelves unto our view ; : thac is, that
one hath its original from the breath of God ; the other
from the Motrices of the Elements : for of tle Primi.
tive Emanation of the Rational Soul, as it was in
= Divine Temple, it was formed, as Itold you be-
re.

But the Generation of the nnr-aſonable $9z! or of
Beaſts, was accompliſhed by theſe words, Pruducat a=
ua, Prudxcat Terra : And this Irrational Soul, as it is
in man,isthe Inſtrument onely to the reaſonable Soul,and
hath the fame Original in us, that it hath in Beafts ;
namely, from the {lime of the Earth, as it is in one
Place; for it is not ſaid, God framed the body of Man
Of the {lime ofthe Earth, but God formed man, that is,the
whole man, that Spiraculum excepted : wherefore I
file that part of the general knowledge » £oncernins
IJMans Soul , the inſpired ſubfance, ] will tell you what
It is in the Holy Gaide, the other is the ſenſible or pro-

duct Sox. |
Fhere are many and great precellencies of the Soul
of man, above the Sox! »f” Beaſts, evident to thoſe who
Phitoſophize even according to ſenſe: And whereſoe-
ver the concurrent charafter of ſuch great excellencies
Xre fonnd, there ſhould ever upon good reaſon be made
« ſpecifique difference; wheretore' I do not altogether
fo well allow the Philoſophers Promiſcuous and confuſe
diſcourſes touching the funftions of the Sox!, -as if the
Sox] of Man was differenced gradually , 9”
Tos pect-

Book —_ 1 Temple of Wiſdome. ' 20!
ſpecifiquely from the Sou! of Beaſts, no ether-
wiſe then the Sx among the Stars, or Gold among Mes
tals. * 276

There remains, ſays ſome body to me, a queſtion
co be anſwered, whether all Sazzls are equal at their firſt
infaſion. Ianſwer, Nothing comes im:nediately from
God, bur is pure, perfe& and uncorrupe : Andif ic-be
of that Sowl purely, which at the {ame inſtant 15 both
revived and infuſed; then no quettion but they are
alike : but becauſe the ſenſitive part in man bears a
oreat ſway, it many times falls ot, that by the deficien-
cy of the Original parts, the Souls 1s eclipſed and im-
priſoned ſo, as it cannot appear in the vigour it would
thew, if the bodies compolition were fo perfe&t, make
it ſo fine, pure and open. Now a perfect Soul in at
imperfet body 1s lize a bright Taper ina dark, Lane
thorne, the fault is not in the lighe, but jn che caſe ;
which currains it with ſo dull an eutfide, as it will noc
let the (thine be cranſparent. I havz had men come ra
me againſt my deſires, for I affe& not acquaintance
yet they were both able and ingenious, who after a lir-
tle hurt received 1n a vital part, did grow almoſt infen-

fible, when the vital paſſages of the ſenſitive and vege-

tiveare imperfect, though they extinguiſh not the inte
leua], becauſe a thing mortal cannot deltcoy a thing
immortal; yet their defe& keeps it ſounder, as1t aps
pearethnot to the outward ayprehenfion. Not that
man hath three diſtin& Souls; for the intelle&ual 1
man containeth the other two : and what are different
in Plants,Beaſts and man, are in man one and Co-monad
together, otherwiſe he were a plant and (everally a brute
and rational; but as the ſolid Chriſta/ine Heavenand firlt
mover contains the Etherial Regionand Fluid Heaven ;
and the Etherial Region and fine Flnid Heaven, contains
* the Region of the Fire and Air, and the Region of the
Fire

+ SIE HARI © Loa EN - IL

— _———_
_ _—..,

to >

ASﬀSZ

Gd tiatS: .
e <-> p #.-
_ —— wow © 8..s ARG ON ==)

O2 e Temple of Wiſdome. Bok III,

Fire and Air Globes of the Earths and Waters, yet all
makes but one World: So the Intelleual contains the
ſenſitive, and the ſenſitive the vegetative; yer all in
man make but one Soxl; but the ditferences of men
may all be referred to ewo cauſes ; either inward or
outward : inward are defe&s in nature and generati« |
on either when the Ative part the ſeed is not perfe&,

their ſufficiency, are too abundant or corrupted : And
when man is of himſelf from the Womb, the maligni-
ty of lome humour may interpoſe the true operation of
the Internal Etherial firſt mozſture, Let us now come
to the Species or inſpired Eſſence. The ſuſtance of the
reaſonable Soul comprehends theſe inquiries , touching
the Naturethereof, as whether ic be Native or Advene
t3ve, Separable or Inſeparable, Mortal or Immortal : how
ic is tyed to the Laws of matter ; how far not, &c. This
I have in The Harmony of the World bound over at laſt
unto Religion, there to be determined and defined a-
monegſt other myſteries; for otherwiſe they ſtill lie open
to many errours and illuſions of ſenſe : For ſeeing that
the ſubſtance ofthe Soul was not deduced and extraed
in her Creation from the Maſs of Heaven and Earth, but
preſerved by God, when the Angels fell to be a Chaos,
and immediately revived and inſpired from God; and ſee-
ing the Laws of Heaven and Earth are the proper ſub-
jets of Philoſopby : How can the knowledge of the (ub-
ſtance of the reaſonable Soxl be divined or fetcht from
Philoſapby ? but it muſt be drawn from the ſame inſpi-

ration fron whence the ſubſtance thereof firſt lowed, as

you may read in The Harmony of tbe World,

or when the nutrinental and paſſive powers fail of #

20J

_—_—

Book III. The Temple of Wiſdome.

as n= ——

CHAP.XAXXI

That you are with confidence to attend and obey your
Genius his commands, natural and unprejudiced
aiates ; the ſame notions and truths are at leaſt
naturally and unauoydably aſſented unto by the
Soul, whether ſhe have of her ſelf a3ual knowledge
tn her or not : and that the definition of an Imma-
terial Being, abſulutely perfeR is ſuch; and this
abſolutely perfe# Immaterial Being, is God: Of
Maſcultize aud Feminine faculties given to man by
God, |

Qw in T be Temple of #iſdome you will finde your

Genizs , whoſe name you know by the an»
ſwering, is not unfurniſhed for the diQating of truth
unto you : | demand of any man, why under a pre»
rence that ſhe having nothing of her own, bue may be
molded unto an afſcas co any thing , or that ſhe do ar-
bitrariouſly and fortuitouſly compole the ſeveral im»
preſſes ſhe receives from without; he will be ſtill o
ſ{queamiſh or timerous as to be afraid to cloſe with his

own faculties, and receive the natural Emanations of &

his own minde as faithful Guides. But if this ſeem,
though nor too ſubtle, which 1 contend for, viz. that
the Soul hath a&ual knowledge in her ſelf in that (enle
which I have in the book of The Harmony of the World
at large explained ; yet ſurely this at leaſt will be confeft
to be true, that the ratre of the Soul 3s ſach, that
ſhe will certainly and fully afſent to ſome concluftions,
however ſhe came by the knowledge of them, unleſs
ihe manifeſt viojence to her own faculties ; which cruths

mult

204 Tbe Temple of Wiſdome.
TI Cm ny Cy” ——— _— pr mee
muſt therefore be concluded not fortzitors nr arbitra«
rious, but natural to the Soul, to aſlume the Idea of a be-
ng abſolutely perfe& above propoſed ; it bing in ſuch
Core ſec forth, that a man cannot rid his mine of it, bur
he muſt needs acknowledge it to be indeed the Idea
of ſuch a being; it will follow that it is no arbitrarious
nor fortuitons conceipt, but neceflary ; a1 therefore
natural to the Soxl at leaſt, 1f not ever attually
there,

Wherefore it is manifeſt that we conſulting with our
own natural light, c>1cermag the nation of being ab(o-
lutely perfe&, that this Temple of IV /1i/4ome teils ts, that
it is a ſpirizaal! jubſtance, eternal, infinite in Eſſence and
goodneſs, Omnip"tent, Omniſcient,and of it ſelf neceſſarily
exiſtent 3 for this anſwer 13 ſuch, that 1f' we underſtaod
the (eaſe thereof, we cannot tell how to deny it: and
cherefore it i3 true according to the light of Nature ;
but it is manifeſt that that which 1s (elf-ſabfaſtent, int»
nitely- Good, Omniſcient and Omnipotent, 1s the Ronr and
Original of all ehings; and Omnipotency (ignities a Power
ghat can effe& any thing that 1mphes no contradifion
co be effefred, and Crea:ion implies n9 contradiftion ;
Therefore this perfeX Being can create all chings. But
if 1e found the matter or other ſubſtances exiſting afore-

i

Creation will be 1n vain, which che free and unpreju-
diced faculties of the minde of man do not admit of :
Therefore the natural notion of a Being abſolutely per-
fet,inplies that thz (ame Being is Lord and Maker of all
things. To prove there isa God,is not my intent, I have
doae it already 11 our Hermony of the TYorld ; or to de-
moalt-are that the S1ow is white,or the Srem 7ives [igbt ;

rhe eyes 9four weak underſtanding, is to be adored and
whrſtipoeld ofall that has the knowie lge of it, with all.
__ hamir-

Book IIL,

hand of chemſeives , this Omnpotency and Power of

and according tonatural lizht, that which we ſee with

A, wes | Way \

Book Ill. TreT, emple of Wiſnome,

M——

Wd NERD
IX 5" I
Sa _ +4

2 Oo $3 | ; |
4 x <
. 7
* 4

F $6.4 -y

hurm*'ity and thankfulneis: and what 1s this but to
ac}. wiedged it to be Gou ? |

F-». i dewand of you that believe nothing but ſenſe,
how c ulil ſenſe ever heip you to theſe truths above no=
ted? that which exiſts without the help of another
is neceflary and eternal ; for necellity and eternity are
nolen; bj. qualities 3 and therefore arenot the obje&s
of any ſevſe : but there is other knowledge and percep-
tion in the S:#/, be{ildes that of ſenſe. I deny their
participle of 1 mes, a buiſneſs that will not fall under
ſenſe. The $ «! <5 nan hath other cognolcitive fa-
cuities, bei.des that of ſenſe.

C o:.ceining the fſenlible or produced Sou!lz what
makes tt.eie tearms of As wiiimns & forma corports,
and fuch-like wild Jogical univerſalities, to the know-
ledge of tie Srz's ſarl;j: ance ? for theſenfible Scal,or the
Sou; of Beaſts muſt needs be granted to bea corporeal
ſubſtance. atteir.ated by heat, and made inviſible; I
fay, a thin, gentle 2a'e of Winde, {well'd andblown up
from (ume flamy and Any Natme, indeed with ſoft-
neſs of Air to receive impreſhon , and with the vigor
of fire to embrace Action, nouriſhed partly by an Oyly,

artly by a watery rikſtance ſpread over the body, re-
bing (in perfet creatures) chiefly in the head, running
throtgh che Nerves, refieſht and repaired by ſpirituons
blood of the Arterics. 1 hear of no man that hath wric-
ten any thi;g, that imderſtands this point , but hath
brought forth Prodigies, Lies, Superſtitions, and very
cortagious Opinions ; and mcſt vilely abafing the dignity
of the /-xl of man,and the fame of glorious Hgrippa,
Knightr,of tranſmigration of Souls out of one Body into
another , and Ji ſt; ations of Souls by pericds of years.
And now of the tco near affinity in every point of the
Soul of Man, with the Souls of Beaſts: This Soul in
Beaſts is a principle Soul; whereof the Body of Beaſts
| 15

Book III.

——_-
Oe a Sp mace

206

isthe Organ ; but in man this Sozl it ſelf is the Organ of
the Soul Rational, and may rather be called by appella-
tion of a Spirzt then of a Sox).

Now I will inform you of another faculty of he
Sowul of Man ; which though it ſeem interiour, yet it is
far from being contemptible, it being both good for
himſelf,and convenient for the terreſtrial world;for this
makes him capable of being rhe head of the living Crea-
tures inthe Earth, as that faculty indeed 1s the mother
of all mankind. |

Thoſe higher and more intelle&ual accompliſhtents,
I miſt confeſs made the man very wiſe, and of quick

erception, for he knew very well the natures of the
beaſts of the Field, and Fowls of the Air : I mean, nor
onely of the viſible and terreſtrial Creatures, but alſo of
the fallen and unfallen Angels, or good andbad Genii,
and his former Angelica] condition, and was able to
judge aright of them, accordingto the principles they
conſifted of, and the properties they had 3 whereas man
was yet lofty in the higher parts of the Air, and could
from the Ertherial Region, amongſt the innocent and
zenfallen Souls. of Men, to the Criſtaline Heaven, and
ctheretake pleaſurea little while, that God might ſhew
hiserrour among the good Angels; now is caſt to Earth
with his new wedded joy, there to dwell, and his
ſeveral generations, until the day of redemption. By
theſe diſcourſes you muſt obſerve how the Angels of A-
ftromancy, and Genii of Geomancy in their Figuees
and proper Metals, or other matter,communicate.

e Temp e Of Wil aome,

e emp 0 1 aome.,

b——— ————_—_— —
[—

CHAP: AXXIL

Of the zature of the Soul of Man : what the Celeſtt-
al Angels ſay of it zaturally 10 our apprehenſion,
that Cannot ſpeak with the Tongue of Men and
Angels : whether ſhe Le a meer modification of the

botly, as you finde at large tn our Harmony of
the \Vorld.

Ere are the faculties of the Sox, that are well
known to beUnderltanding, Reaſin, Imagination,
Memory, Appetite, IWil!, Jn the knowledge concerning
the Soul, the Original of theſe facx!tics ought to be
handled, and that Pbyſ.cally, as they are Connatural with
the Soul, and adhereto it; onely their uſes and obje&s
are deſigned to other As, but the falculties of the Soul
have ewo appendences, which as they have been by Plato
and Paracelſus , and others handled , have rather pres
ſented us with firoak, then any Lucid flames of truth ;
one of thele 1s the knowledge.of natural Divination,
the other of Faſcination : Bur firſt, I ſhall tell you che
nature of the Scx! of mav, and then finiſh thoſe more
obvious faculties, that 1 ſpeak of iz: the Soul of Man,
thatnaturally tend to the diſcovery of the exiſtence of 8
God. I muſt conſider the eflence of the Soxl her (elf,
what it is, whether a meer Modification of the body, or
an Immaterial being diſtin therefrom : and then
whether Corporeal, or incorporeal, as we faid in The
Harmony of the World.

If youſay thatthe ſoul is a meer modification of the
body, the ſoul then is but one Univerſal faculty of the
body, or many faculties put together; and thoſe ope-

| rations

-”

OC
a,

2 Book IIT,

rations which are uſually actribured unto the body.
I derand therefore to what in the body will you at-
tribute Spoxtaneors Motion ? ] underitand thereby a

The Temple of Wiſdome.

the parts of our body.as our hand (ſuppoſe) or little fin-
ger. If you will ſay chat 1t is nothing but the 7":iſion

- of the Spirits into ſuch and ſuch Muſcles; I would
gladly know what dothimmut theſe Spirits, and dire&
chem ſo curioutly : is it themſelves or the Brain, or
chat particular piece of the Braia they call the Conarian
or Pine-kernel ? whatever ic be , that which does im-
mir then, and dire them, muit have Anitadverſion ;
and the fate that hath Animadverfton, bath Memory
and Reaſon alſo. Now l ch:ink it is a queltion whether
the Spirits themſelres be capable of Animadwerfion, Mes
mory and Reaſon. IFf1 ſhould fay it is impollible,thereis
none dare contradift me, no not the Nativity-man him-
ſelf with all his Stars : for theſe Animal Angels areno-
thing elſe but matter very thin and liquid 5 whoſe na-
ture conlifts in this, that :11 particulars of 1t be in Motor,
and beuig looſe from one another, frigee and play up
and down according tothe meaſure and manner of agi-
tation ta them.

I may now demand which of the particles in theſe,
ſomany loofly moving one from another, hath Animad-
verſion init ? If you lay that all put together have, | ap-

eal to him thac thus anſwers, how unlikely ic 1s,that that
ould have Animadverſion, that is ſo utrerly uncapable
of Memory, and conſequently of Reajon; for it is im-
poſlible to conceive Memory compatible to ſuch a ſub-
je&, as it is how to write charaters in the water or in
the winde. |
If you ay the Brain immits and dire&s theſe Spirits,
how can that fo freely and | a. move it ſelf or 4*

zother that hath no Muſc a aaa 1a.
what

power in ourſelves of wagging or holding ſtill m:cſ of

a cm wh mas wow ,Þc6 © tc o wm .T or, oz za oo ::.c ...

Book IIT. The Temple of Wiſdome,

whac does i:mmit theſe Spirits, andoire&t chem fo curt»
ouſly ? isit themſelves or che Brain, or that particular
piece of the brain wecall Conarionor Pine-kernel/7Whas-
ever it be, that which does jmmic them 'and dire&
che n, muſt have Animadverfion, and the fame hath Mee
mory and Reaſon : For Anatomiſts ſay , That though
the Brain be the inſtrument of Senſe, yee of it (elfic
1 inſenftible : How then ſhould chat that hath no Senſe
dire& thus Spontaneouſly and Arbitrartouſly , the Animal
Spirits into any part of the body, an AR that re-
quires deterrinate ſenfe and perception ? Bue ler
Doors, Chyrnurgions and Anatomilts conclude what
they will ; I ſhall demonſtrate chat the Brains have no
Senſe ; for the fame thing in us that hath Senſe, hath al-
ſo Animadverfion ; and that which hath Animadver=
fron 1n us, hath alſo a fucxlty of free and Arbitrarioxs
Fancieand Reaſon, Read our Book called The Holy
Gmide. |
Let us now conſider the Nature of the Pratn, andſee
how compatible thoſe alcerations are to ſuch a ſubjeaz
verily, if we take a right view of this Lax-pith, or
Marrow in mans Head; neither our Senſe nor Under-
ſtanding can diſcover any thing more in this ſubſtance
chat can pretend to ſuch noble operations, as Sagactous
Colle&ions of Reaſon, then we can diſcern in a fine
chimical Ladies Sack-Pollet. For this looſe pulp, that is
thus wrapr up within our Cranizm, is buta ſpungy and
porous body, and pervious, not onely to the Animal Spi-
rits, but alſo tomore Faye and Liquor, elle it could
not well be nouriſhed. at leaſt it cou'd not be ſo (of and
moiſined by drankneſs and exceſs, as to make the Linder=
ſtanding inept, and ſottiſh in its operations Where-
fore I now demand, in this ſoft ſubſtance, which we call
che Brain, whoſe ſoftneſs implies that it is in ſome
mealure Liquid, and Liquidity 3mplics & ſeveral _
Ppp gl

a * - |
i th

210. - .Bvok [1].

De — Ns

of looſned parts: . In what part or parcel thereofdoes

'Fancy,:Reaſon ard Animadverſton lie ? In this Lax

' -conliſtence that lies like a Net all on heaps in the wa-
cer ;-Can you tel] in what knor, loop or interval there-
of does this facal:y of free Fancy, and attive Reaſon re-
fide? I believe you cannot aſlign me any. 'f you ſhould
ſay, In all cogether, you mult ſay that tae whole Brain is
figured 1ato. this or that repreſentation, which would
cancel e Memory, and take away alkcapacity of there be-
Ing any diftin& notes and places for the ſeveral Species
of things there preſented. But if you will fay there is in
every part of the Brain this power of Animadrerſion
and Fancy, you are to remenber that the . Brain is in
{ſome meaiure a liquid body; and we muſt enquire
how theſe looſe parts underſtand one anothers ſeveral
Animadverſions and Notions: and if they.could (which
35 yet unconceiveable) yet if they could from hence do
:any thing towards the /mmiſſio, and direfion of the
Animal Spirits to this or chat part of the body, they
muſt do it by knowing one anothers mindes , andby a
joynt contention of ſtrength ; as when many Mariners at
the ( apftore, at once the word being given, pull toge-
ther the bars about, for the weighing of their Bejt Bower
or Sbeath- Anchor, that the tingle ftrengch of one could
not move, being ſo maſlie a Body ; but this 1s to make
the ſeveral particles of che Brain, ſo many individual
perſons: A thing I do not believe, as you may ſee 1n
the firſt Book.

+ Belides, how come theſe many Animadverſicns to
ſeem but one tous, our minde being theſe, as it is ſup-
poſed? Or why if the figuration of one part of the
Brain, be communicated to all the reſt , does not the
ſame obje& ſeem ſituated both behind us and before
us, and every way, as the impreſs of the objed is refledea,
22aink all the parts ofthe Brains * But there appearing

co

d

1 bel emple vt HW(Aume..

pop - " g F ; 4 FP (# *

to us but one Animadverffon, and one fite of things : is
is a ſufficient argument that there is but one; or if there
he many, that they are not mutually communicated
from the parts one to another; and therefore there
can be no ſuch joynt endeavour towards one defigns
whence it 15 that the brain cannot immur or dire theſe
Animal Spirits into what part of the body they pleaſes
Read onr Harmony of the World. a
The Brain hath no ſenſe, and therefore cant impreſs
Spontaneouſly. any Motion on the Animal Spirits 3 It is
noſlight argument, in that ſome diſſe&ed were found
without Brains, ſome with water in ſtead of Brains,
Read the Hily Guide. Now I appealto any free judge,
how likely theſe 11quid particles are co approve them=
ſelves of that nature and power, as to be able by e«
refting and knitting themſelves together for a moment
of time, to bear themſelves ſo as with one joynt con»
tention of ſtrength co cauſe an arbitratious obligation
of the Spirits int5 this or that determinate part of the
body. But of this and the faculties of the Soul, tho
Angels have not given more liberty. |

ve 1 emple of Wiſaome,

CHAP. XXAXAII,

F Angels, Gent and Idea's, conterning the ſub.

] ffance of the Soul, whether really diſtinR, aud thex

' whether corporeal or t1corporeal :; And of what the
Angels are : tonuceri-1ag the knowledge of the facyl-
Tres of the Soul. Natural Ajlromancy aud Geoman-
ry: And how to fortifie the +1agination © the nature
of R. C. Phyſick : The Eowledge of Aſtromancy,
and the knowledge of Geomaicy a: atn demorſtra-
ted.

He Angels that governthe World, publiſh , that
T the Nerves, 1 mean the Marrow of them, which
is of the ſel-Gawe ſubſtance with the Braiz, have no
ſenſe, as is demonſtrable from a Catalepfis or Catochus ;
but 1 will not accumulate arguments in a matter ſo pal-
pable : As for that little piece of the Brain, which we
call the Conarion, that was mentioned in the laft
Chapter in our Harmony of the World, that this I fay
ſhould be the very ſubſtance, whoſe natural faculty is
to move it ſelf, and by its motion and nods, to determi-
nate the courſe of the Sp:rts into this or that part of
the body, ſeems to me for more fooliſh and fabulous,then
the ſtory of him that would prove, that men cannot
change the winde as they pleaſed, in the corner of a
tundkerchief, or direct the proſperity of a Ship at Sea,
which I have ſeen. |

My Genizs bids me conclude that the impreſs of
Spantaneous motion , 1sneither from the Animal Spirits

nor from the Brain; and therefore that thoſe operati-
- ons that are uſually attributed unto the Soul, are really

compatible to any part of the body ; And aa
that

—

ee ee

Bos 11H, { be 1 emple of Wiſdome.

that the Soul is not a meer Modification of the Body,
2s 7 cold you in The Harmony of the World, but a ſub»
ſtance dijtind therefrom. ;
Now let us enquire whether this ſubſtance diſtin&
from what ordinarily we call the Body, be alſout ſelfa
corpereal ſubſtance, or whether it be incorporeatl. If you
ſay that it 15 a corporeal ſub(tance, you can underftand
no other then matter more ſabtle and tenacious, then
the Animal Spirits themſelves mingled with chem,
and diiperſed through the veilels and poroficies of the
Body ; for there can be no penetration of dimentions:
but I mexn not always to confute conceipts; for what I
Gaid of the Anima! Spirits before, is applicable with all
eaſe and fitne(s to this preſent caſe. I love not, if Ican
= it, toſpeak one thing twice.
may conclude againſt any oppoſition, that that
which 1nprelles ([pont aneous m1tion upon the body , or
more immediately upon the Animal Spirits, that which
imagines, Rem:mbers and Reaſons, is an immaterial
ſubſtance diſtin& from the body ; which uſes che Arte
mal Spirits, and the Brainsfor inſtruments, in ſuch and
ſach operations: and thus you finde an Angel in a pro»
per notion and fignification, that hath apparently theft
faculties in it, it can both underſtand and move corporeat
matter. Now with eaſe I can conſider the ſubſtance af
' the vaſt Heavens : for my Soul, as my good Angel tells
me, is as it were a compendious Statue of the Derry :
So I may with facility contemplate the Natnre of the
Almighty in this little Medal of God, the Soxl, enlarging
eco infinity , what I obſerve in my (elf, when I tran
fer it unto God ; as I do imagine thoſe circles, which [
view on the Globe, to be vaſter and bigger, while L
fancy them as deſcribed in the Heavens : and thus
much of the ſibftance ofthe Soul. This part touching

the faculties of the Sou} hath two appendices, oneof
— -Ppwk'32 theſe

lt

FEPFEREE —_—— %

OR Ir "PIE

e Temple of Wiſdome. Book IIT,
_ theſeisthe knowleape of Divination, the other of Faſci-
- nation: The Divination natural is that I intend to ſpeak
- of, and ie fpringethfrom the internal power ofthe Sox :
\ This is of two ſorts, the one Native, the other by
Inflaxiom : Native is the ground upon this ſuppolition,
that the Minde when ic is withdrawn and colle&ed into
ze ſelf, and not diffuſed into the Organs of the Body,
hath from the natural power of its own Effence, ſome
prenotion of things future 3 and this appears moſt in
lids, as you read in the ſatter Chapter of the ſecond
Book, of extaſies, propingquity of death, more rare in
waking , or when the body 1s healthful and ſtrong,
and chis ſtate of the Minde is commonly procured by
abſtinencies, and thoſe obſervances which do molt of all
retire the Minde unto it ſelf, from the praftique fundi-
on of the Body, that thus reclaim'd from the incum-
brances of exteriour engagements, it may polle(s and.
Enjoy its own Natzre. But Divination by Influxicn 1s
grounded upon another ſuppoſition, that the Mine as
a Mirour or Glaſs ſhould take a ſecondary kind of [I/u-
mination from the foreknowledge of God and Angels,
_ unto which the ſame ſtate and regiment of the Bozy,
which was to the firſt, doth likewiſe conduce : for the
ſame ſequeſtration of the Mirde, cauſeth ic more ſeverc-
Ir coemwpl y ies own Eſſepce,and makes it more ſuſceptive
of Divine Inflaxions, fave that the Sou! m Aftromancy
.and Geomancy by Influxion is rapt with a kind of fer-
Vency and impatiency, as it were of the Deity, wherewith
1c Is polleſt (which Sir Chriſty ber Heydon and other in-
ipired Chriſtians noted by thename of ſacred fwry : Jbut
in native Arts, the Minde is eafranchis'd, and neerer
. fOa repaſe rather, and an immunity from labour.
Aſtromancy and Geomancy are the power and in-
' Fenſive Alt of the Imagination upon the Body. of the
| Imaginant. Now when I had more intentively _ |
ere

e Fernpte 0 VII AOMe.

£

———_————— e——_—__— ww—__—___—

Be>->k 1th. :
| — "TCA — —
dered the ſecret emerges and imprellions of things, the
Irradiations of the Senſes, the tranſT.illions of Cogitati=
ons from Body to Body; the conveyances of magnetique
Vertzes ;" 1 came to be of opinion, that mach*more
might ſuch Impreſſions, Informations and ( ommunications,
| be made' from Spirit to Spirit, being that a Spirie'of
all other things is more powerful and ſtrong to work,
and more ſoft and penetrable to ſuffer: Whence the
c2i1ceits have grown,made almoſt popular,ofthe maſte-
r11g Spirits, of men Omiqzous and nnlycky ,* of the
firoke of Love and Envy, and of others of like Natzre :
Incident to this is the enquiry, how the Imazipation
may be intended and fortified; for if the Imagtnacion
fortified be of ſuch power , then it is mate;ial to know
by what wayes it may be exaſted, and made greater
then it ſelf: for it may bea da:gerous ſpecious pre-
tence,that Ceremonies, elc@ion of Hours, fortifying Aſcen=
_ dents or Navinitics, Charatters, Teleſms, Geſtictlations,
Amulets, & c. do work not by any tacite or Sacramen-
tal contra with Angels, as ſo ne fondly conceive, 'but
ferve onely to ftrengthenand exa't the /[maginstion of
hin that uſech them; even as the uſe of Imges 1n
Religion hath prevailed for the fixing of mens Mindes in
conte nplation of things, and the railinz of che devotion
of them that pray. Read on; Holy Guide.
To cone to my habitable Earthly Body on this ſide
the Erberial Region, and to deſcend below the Holy
Company. To my own judgement, ific be admitted,
that the force of Imagination is fo potent, and thac
( eremomez exalt with the Charatters of intelligent Angels
and Planets; intelligences of Anzels do fortifie that
Porrer :- and be jr granted, as it is, that cheſe thingsare
uſed fincerely to that intention, and as Mr Goodridze
nſes that Phyfical remedy the Pantarya, withour the
leaſt thought of inviting the aſliſtance of any revolted

Ppp 4 Spirit,

Spirit , but onely his natucal-Genzs, which is his 475.3
gel-Gnardian. ow. if ol, hold them _ :
#5 who knows my thoughts? it muſt be ifthey impygn
and contradict that Divine. edi&t paG'd upon man for
In ſudore vultus comedes Panem tuum : For this
kinde of Wiſdome inſpired Chriſtians ctaughe me before
they were acquainted with my Genizs,or had any knows
ledge of the Angels, which of them. were 71f ble, and
which inviſible :, And this propounds thoſe noble fruits
which God hath ſet forth, to be bought at the price of
labour, and to be purchaſed by that way and means we
direC& you in that part of The Roſie Crucian Medicines
which we annexed ; and in The Harmony of the World
and Holy Guide.

A Figure for James Boteler, Duke of Ormond,
ASTROMANCY.

/ id p } 4 ,
.* % # & %

—

V > by
*+> I / 0+
£1 |
CEC | |
hs |

M. .
& oF

2
@ wh a wit exc
ES V1349., Os: :
his $1 #5” £ 299%
_ Receiving

Ce TR ee oe

wy _ wha WI” hn...

d Ecciving ng my Patrons Letter, I ſent my ;udgemeaty to, ?

him ; and here Superiour and Inferiour powers'
communicate: by this Example you may know when'
there 3Sexa& Harmony in Heavenand Earthyas we gk,
Book enticuled The Harmony of the W, orld,

Next follows the fignification of the Gu Figures
in the twelve pars of the Earth, for your better undere

ſtanding the queſtions and Harmony of things.

Acquaſitie

yl NS ; pref

6 Good if thefifth.

12 Pain and loſs.

<2 P IEEE. Fa thn, WY A

_—

© Amiſſio. 1 IN in all fave Pri

peace.

5 Good in all.
6 Mean in all.

ſoners. 8 Wholly ill.
* 2 Good for loveonly.| 9 lll in all.
%* * {31 endbut inquar- {zo I!! but favow
, % # Ion all (rels. with Ladies.
117% * "It but in corn. 11 lil favein love.
| 6 11] butin venerie..- [12 UW inall.
Fortuna Maj. x good,fave in ſecrecy | 7 Good in all.
| 2 Good, but in ſad] 8 Good.
\ *%* *% {|3 Goodinall. (things. | 9 Good.
X * Goodin all,but me- {10 Exceeding good
* lancholy. | to goto Princes
* 5 Goodin all. 11 Good.
6 Good, for bawdes 12 Good in all.
| onely excepted. :
[Fors, Minor. jf jr Speed in via. and © 7 Ill fave in war
2 Good. (love. | and venerie.
7 * 8 Good , but ſome | 8 Indifferent good
Mins tee: ' choler. 1+ | 9 Godd, choler.
| * *, |, Haſt, evil but forj10 Good fave for
* ® peace. (ly in love.

11 Good bur ſpecya-
12 Good fave in al-

2 As the laſt houſe.

; I " T be Temple of Wiſdome. Book 11]
| Acquafirie: '1 Happy ſucceſs. 7 Reaſonable good.
” 2 Very proſperous. | .8 Good , re the
*% K*% | tick ſhalt die.

-, % [3 FavourandRiches. 9 Good in all.
I- + *%. |4 God hap. Io Good in (tnts.
5s Good ſucces. 11 Gondin all,

|

teration, |

Letitia

Book IIT.

The Temple of Wiſadome.

Letitia. ' jt Good buc in war. | 7 Indifferent.
2 $ickly. ' | $ Good.
* 3 III. 9 Very good. *
X * {14 Meanly good. 10 Good rarher |
X* * Excelleat good. war then peace.
X * [6 Good, bur for\r1 Good inall.
- bawds, 12 Very goodin all.
: | Triftitia, [1 II but for hid crea-| 7 Bl but in n ſecrecys
ſure & fortifications| 8 Evil. |
%* * {12 li|butco fortihe. | 9 Ill ave in Magick.
% X* '3 Hl inall. (10 l]I fave forgo for=
Ye * 4 Ill in all. rife,
* $5 Veryill. [1 linall.
& 1 ive for bawds. | 12 Very ill. =
Puella. 1 Good bur in war. | 7 Good fave i
2 Very guod. $ Good. (war.
| * 3 Good. 9 Good for Mus:
* X* ſick, elſemean.'
X 4 Bur indifferent. 110 Good and PEeace..
* "gs Regardingafpets;11 Good and love
6 Good, but ſpecial with Ladyes. |
| tor lechery. ___ {I2 Goodinall.
Puer. | Inditterenc, belt in| 7 lilfave for war.
BE $ Ill ave forlove.
X . *[2 Good, but with] 9 Ill favefor war. |
| K erouble. bs il in love good,
' X * 13 Goodhap. | elſe mean. [
| * 4 Ill avein war and |11 Mean, good fa-
# love. Voilr.
| 5 Meanly good. |12 Very goodinall.
6 Mean,

ll—
ms. cout

Rubens,

—_—

S 2 ©

Th-Temple e of Wiſdome, ; Back Ul,

FRI

i bows, - 'x Break the. figure | '7 Ill bue .for war
| when itis here. |. 8 'll. (and fire.
33. 2 11 for all. 9 Very ill.
'KF /3 1llbuttolethlood. [ Difſlture ove and]
KR * 4ll{buti In fice-works fire-works. f
K ''* 5 [Il aveto ſowe. 11 Saveto let blood.
6 Il averoletbload 12 11inall.
Htbws. [1Good formarriage J' 7 Good fave © for
Mercurial $8 Good. (war.
*F * | Goodin - "oh | 9g A Meſſenger
K - #\ |3Very good. '} : brings letters.
* |4Goodbutinwar. [10 Excellzne good
13% # {x ; 11 Verygood. (in all,
; L 6 Good in all. 12 Marveilous good.
Conjuntiio; x Good with good, | 7. Mean.
and 11! with ill.
% #*# {2 Commonly good.. | 8 lll.
* 3 Good hap. 9 Meanly good.
| * 4 Good fave for 10 For love, good;
IV 7 health con. the | for fick> ill. |
| eighth. |
's Meanly. (onely. j11 Good in all.
'6 Good for whores 12 Meanly good.
Cap. Drac.z Good inall, .\7 Ill fave for
Urſa Maj. | peace. |
| #* * {2 Good. | 8 Good.
8B: [23 Verygood 9 Very good.
Bo pe”) Gog fave in war. [10 Good in all» '
R [5 Very good. 11 Good for the
6 Good tor whores | Church.
| onely. ' © © ]ra Very good:

———_—__———

Cauds

—_ om. 4 Re —— ——

|

»
Y þ »

REECE omn——_—

AU * .

 ———
-

{auda Dra-'1 Break the figure. 2 I, 1 war and fire. |
conis, |2 Very ilk. | 8 No good.
* 3 Ill in all. 9 Il] 1n all.
X {411 fave in fire-[101ll ve for fir
| * | works. works.
| #®# * {[s Veryill. 11 11! fave for fayon
; I! fave for whores. we Very ill. |
Carcere I ]}1 but co forafie. | 7 Evil. rs
2 Goodan black, elſe. 8 Very ill,
* 3 III. GIL. 9 Ill inall.
* * {4 Goodonlyfor me- 1o1ll, fave for hid
* * lancholy. creaſure, |
* 5 Receive a letter 1x Muchtravail, |
within 3 days, ill. 12 Mean.
6 111. | -
|
Via | 111 bur co priſon, | 7 111 but for voy+|
2 Indi fferent. ages.
* ; Very goodin all. ' 8 Evil.
* 4 Good in all, fave 9 Indifferent.
* love. 10 Good.
X& 5 Voyages good, — 11 Very Good.
| — 2611 12 Excellent good,
ons
| Popwius, |1 Good for marn- 7 In war good, elſe
ſ a | mean. |
1 * * |, Meanly good. ' 8 lndifferent. E
| #* * |z Rather good then, 9 Look for tet-
" mM bad. | wn |
" % * 4 Good i in all, bore 10 Meaily good. 4
love. - |
15 Good in ER 11 Goodin all.
b- '6 Good. __(things. 12 Very ll.

——— kan Mt. 4

" The

XK a

Ul ”* LY /
NO CO #40 '
Na HRS ERS infec ram

_ _
_—_— C 4 I —

The Sun ſhines, and here arifes the Honourable,
Noble, Learned, Valianc and Loyal Sir Fobn Hanmer's
Figure of Geomancy judged, |

Xp X[+ ++ +*[#x[+& + *,* |
*& *| *# [x *#[* +] $| X* | X*
x [x *x|* | * |*#[*# #| © | *
x [x |* |* ſknſ*x * * | *
"Fo + re ey pe nel " 98” Hrs
* = * *
- = * * * Xx
* mw] K * k *
| © | WE »* &
Op *+ .
. * *
#- | * &
+ 366 CE ”» * RT”
| 1.

Aﬀer ſome diſcontents and vexations, pretended
Friends and private Enemies, this cruly Loyal, Learned
and Valiant Knighe will be happy, and enjoy twice as
"muchas he doth; for all men love and honour him.
And yet I knoy he ſpends abave 4000 L per an.to oblige
men to affet the King; beſides the expence upon his
own Troop. I would willingly looſe my fortune, upon
conditionall men were ſo faithful,

F iguerel

Book I1I.

Figures for Sir Richard Temple.

<—

Ome time fince Sir Richard Temple defired me to

I give him my judgement of hislife , and | favoured

him with this Figure, and gave my advice according-

 Iy; andiecameto paſs exaftly. By this Example we

teach you to obſerve the Harmony of primary and ſe>
condary Cauſes, —

GEO-

= he emple 0 WW me, Book II.

———_— —_
A——
a —_ ” ER —_

GEOMANCY.

w of]
® | * & .
” vs «
. % «
$M * ”
* 7
* ®
*
Ee ld —_ K Ee
| oP * &
| » * *
-» WM

LD — p

T was the defire of Fob» Dighy Eq. that. I ſhould
£ diſpute with the famons Fe/nt,called Father Fames,
;a good man and wotker of wonders; and as they ſay, (by
Prayers) he can cure all Diſcaſes in both Claud: and
Ceci, viz. Blind agd Lame: After we had been with
the Mar, neſs of Wincheſter, being nor there, we found
him with the- Lord Aubenry; and after forte ſerious
diſcourſe, I found him melancholy , :and of a ſtrong
| zmagination. whicbb two faculties fortifie Faith, and may
8 b- Miracles, if God permit. Indeed he knows
_ notliing of Aſtromancy or Geomancy , nor doth
he condemn them ; nor what misfortunes will hap»

pen to the world very ſuddenly ; ſuch things he
| ſydies

—_
_ % |
_ £ hag =

- ee ar rn IHR

Py wd wil [£5 AA mu. ©

-
_—

e

————————— _
Bo >< 111, : .'t 4 C1P4e Gy 1 {OM s
$I Os,

fttxdies not; And ! may not predidt Tmtare things"
particu/arly, but in geieral : Many great Lords will
ſititer death , and war will work -put deitruction to
others; let time make all known.” I pray God pre-
ſerve our king, Lords Te rporal and Spiritual , and
the lyingdon out of che power of niline peaphe, Amen.

The falling out of the ewo Lords bezar upon che
oppolition of Saturn and Aars; | Carges was in the
firlt, and Racbews in the (ſeventh Hotiſe: belides; 1

obſerved 2 ujdberſchemoth _ was in the
South, and by Eaſt part of Heaveu;and
now 11 a clear evening, yet tHe ſeit,
The fignification I leave ' 20 <time-
France 1s concerned; the Spapih and

. Popes party may be at [aſt vitorious over it ; We may
not predift to you what, it ſignities to England, Note,
the day of Jud;ement is not nigh, but many troubles.

C
SO = pt.

Cardinal Antonio, Duke arF Peer of Spain,
Lord Spiritualand Civil. -_

- —

-

His Figares of Aftromancy and Geomancy.”
TF" He Letter came from I'erice, direfted to Livorno,

vulyarly cal'ed Lygorn : Bat we were uiiler (ail at
Sea: So (ome ſmall Veſſels being in the Mould ready
ro weigh Anchor, ojie of them received the Letter,
which anonglt others was to me. I returned an anſwer
to the Lord Due Leopoldus 11 Pizllo, the firſt oppor-
| tunity, which was when we came to London ; and by
this Example, you ay alſo obſerve the Harmony of
Superiour and Infei tour powers, united by Art and Na-
tare, 11 the proper Spermatick Metal : for 1 ſent him
the Teleſn, Qqq \ ASTROQ-

Ti Tenge wine Bock
| a A NE

' ASTROMANCY.

Book ; 1 The T engl of Wiſdome.

We HOPS (IE

Rm

——— — -
-

m—_— E ns

.

A Figure of GeaNaddy for the Marqueſs De Fuentes,
2 Peer of Italy.

; * :
z p_y — - - —— us
EO
Y Fe 7 "
, .

- —_ ————______

Wi

——— - —_ ————————__———

—
— ——— —— ad

'A*f dat his requeſt I found this Figure, and a happy

time 1t was to his deſires, for he obtained his ſluts
 Amonglt theſe experiments, the Dutcheſs Dowa-
g# kath a Divine Genin; Flat in Monitory Dreams
doth predit firange ehings unto her as ſhe told
Te, &c. And without doubt the glorious Angels
- vurc their likes, and delight in beauty, not after the
22naer of 9%, but in a ſpiritual way of delight, cx
cl1e0s

os TITS. iD PRE gra Ig—y ————____—_—__—_—_— — ;
Book IIL. The-Temple of Wiſd1we, 226
ane ounce WAN BALD yo that One nem
dies bebo ER features and perieQions/in, Glaſs,
The Puke of Norfolks (ies hath a Diving Genims/ chit
Lady . Marchianels , of I/Forcoter curiaus in- Divine;
Dreams; and/ know of whaz-pixics they w5ez- the Lady:
Windſor, Maleverry, and Arlſon, are alſo Divine in pare;
eicular Dreams. To try the *pirits, 1 have taught.yom
in our Harmony of the World, Book 2. |

4

_ Sir Kerſkexius Dree , Kojght ark] Baronet, now living,
our Friend; and Avermesih his-Arabick 'Comnmentanies
upon, Ariftetles Morals tranfaged into Latang;, gives &
Reputation/to;theſe DivigeGemi:? for ſuper wim Powers
dp harmonipully. delight to communicate good 4j1and
give certain Precautions and Advertiſements of chidgs. +

This Geomancy is an Art, whereby the Judlgeiewe
may be rendred by Deſtiny to every Queltion of every
thing whatſoever: byt che: Art thereof: confeltteh of]
cially in certain points, whereof certain. Fguet$are de-
dufed according to the Reafon or Rule of Equality oe
Inequality, likeneſs or unlikene(s:; which Figures are als
ſo reduced to, and harmoniouſly agree with the Cale
ſtial Figures, aſſuming their Natures aud P
cording to the courſe of the Planets. Notwithſtand=
ing this, we are to conſider, that this kinde of Art can
declare or ſhew forth verity , when it is Radical 11 ſome
ſublime Vertae. Andchisisewofold ; the one whereof
conliſts in Religion , and Obſervations of times; and
therefore they projet upon the Earth ; wherefore it is
appropriated to the Earth , evenas Genii to the Ethe-
rial and Ajereal Region; Aſtromancy to che Hea»
VENS.

We judge the hand of the Proje&tor or Worker to be
moſt powerfully moved and dire&ed by the Geniz ,, and
cherefore the Artiſt ſhould uſe certain holy Incaneations,
Prayers, wich other Rites, &c. provoking and alluring
Angels of this nature hereunto,

I Cos. of noo

_ —— — n
—_— _- — - -_
"_

F W_ - 4. Allies. th te.

: —_ wy Ti —* Iniſome. 7 Book It.

Another Power theres, that doth dire and rule
| chis Art » which is in the very harmonions Soul it ſelf of |

, when it is carried to this work with ſome

it Epteſs of his own Soul. For this Art hatha Na-
ral ence to the ſoul it elf, and of neceſlicy hatly
Racy” and is movedeo tle which che Soul i it ſelf dew

And this way isby far more crue and pare ; SY
matters it whether in the Field, High-way, Woods, or
whereor how theſe pe - are proje&ted; therefore this
Art hath the Game Radix withthe Art of Aftrological'
Quettions 3- which alſo can no other ways be veritied,

_ unle&witha conſtant and exceſſive Aﬀe&ion of the Que«

rent himſelf. -

Anachee way v0 make « Figure of this
| CharaQter.

Book II.

The Temple of wiſaome. "+

. - A Fignreof England.

—_—

| H- that walketh b front revealeth ſecrets : but

be that is faithful ſpirit concealetb the matter.

Pray to God re you make a Figure ; and med- 4

dle not wich Kinghs bur in all things ask counſel of the # |

Lord; anddo not think, ſpeak, or doany thing, wheres =

in God'is not your counſeller: And y your Figure
finde the eruth.

n1oDIN rIINR NOD ILY.

- Go 6 Leen een but be tbat is boly :

or he that ands it is happy. Read our Harmony

of the World , Lib. 2.
Another way to make a Figure.

4

1 he {euple of Wiſe.

Ly

AOGCI RET oe; AW

% , s
"x £ y
- .
,

0
—_— —— CRE SIFERe nY | c—— id
* - S lo ttt S ®s" be
=
-

ok HI,

ww,
a =

A Figure for br. Jokn Sandford.

bh. 2
«

— —_

ON EL
T O be very brief after great labour; chis Gent. may
 Expe&crolles rwo years, buenot many ; however.
che malt pare of his life willbg:profperous: - en
FI oa 23 Tn Shia edt Tere. fb. ics |
Now let us teach you how to know the Angels and.
Genu in onr Book following.

Aww os Pr
- .
» # 2 is w ! oF

» af * 44+ -v»
- i ihe

»
_—
; 4

Book III. The Temple of Wiſdome.

= wy Wa. KY et; "+8
_ 4 -
2 2 $g s
ks

CAHP. XXXIV,

That thoſe IntelleFual or Cognoſcitive operations
we find in onr ſelves, are not performed by the
Evoeliacon, that the Arguments whereby we
prove the Incorporiety of the Soul of man, do not
Jo certainly prove the Incorporiety of any prin«
ciple in Beaſts, as we have taught in our Har-
mony of the World, and Holy Guide : For
by theſe Examples, you ſee how Superiours and
Inferiours Communicates,

Ou cannot ſay that either the Animal ſpirits or
the Brain, are che firſt principles of Spoxtaneous
motion in us; but though the Evoeliacon or Conarion
may be the Orgas of ſundry perceptions from Cor-
poreal obje&s, and the Palace wherein che Soul is
chiefly ſcated; yer ſaies the Genius, it is not that with-
our an immaterial inhabitant; this Arbicrarious
motion, which we are conſcious to our ſelves of, can
ar all beperformed in usor by us: for if we attend
to the condition of our own Natures, we cannot bur
acknowledge that that which moves our body thus
arbitrariouſly, does not only perceive ſenſible objedis,
bur alſo remembers and hath a power of free Imaginati-
0 and of Reaſon,

That perception of external objects ſeems in-
competible co the Conarion, for it being of like Ne-
ture with the reſt of the Brarn,it is not only diviſible,
but in a ſort divided one particle from another, elte
it could not be (ofoft as it is, though it be Comrning
harder then the reſt of the Brain; Now I ſay the

()qq [:nages

The Temple of Wiſdome.

Images of the ſenſible objeds, they (preading to ſome
ſpace in the ſurſace of the Cenarion againſt which they
hir, one part of the Conarion has the perception ſup-
pole of che head of a man,the other of a /eg, the third
of an Arie, the fourth of his Breaſt : and therefore
chough we ſhould admit, that every particle of ſuch
a ſpace of the Coxarion may perceive ſuch a part of
a man, yet there is nothing toperceiveto the whole
man,unlefs you'l ſay, they communicate their per-
ceptions one to another ; bur then all will be confy-
ſez Lut this communication ſcems alſo impoſſible,
fr if perception be by impreſſion from the external
objects, no particle of the Conarzon ſhall perceive
any parc of the obje&, bur what it receivesan im-
pre(s from; but if you-will yet (ſay that every part of
the ob;ect, - 1mprefſed upon'every of the Evoeliacon
or Conarion, wherein the Image is, it will be utterly
impoſſible indeed, but that the whole Image will be
a confuſed Lumpe, no diſtin& ſpecies of any thing;
for if perception be by impreſlion, then if every part
impreſs upon every particle, the Conarzon mult of
neceſſity receive every part in every part, and we
ſhall diſcerne the trae forme of nothing,

Now for the faculty of remembring of things, that
it Carinot be in the Conarion,we prove thus : for that
memory which is the ſtanding ſeal or impreſhion of ex-
ternal objetts, 1s not there plaine : for if it were, it
v ould fpoile the repreſentation of things preſent,
orra her after obje&s would be ſure to deface all
former impreiſions whatfoever. But if you'l ſay
that memory 15 1n the Brain, but Kemimiſcency m the
t vocizacon, lmildly anfwer youzas School-maſters do
their Boyes, that the'e impreſles is ſignatures mads by
outward objeGs 1n theBrain,and muſt alſo of neceſſity
be oblicerated by ſuperadvenient imprefſions; For

whether

225 Book [IT.

p

Book Ill. The Temple of Wildome.

whether theſe Images or Imprefles conſiſt in a cer= |

raine poſture of motion of the ?Plicatile Fibres, os
ſubtile Threds, of which the Brarme conſiſts, it isevi»
dent that they cannot but be cancelled and oblites
rated by occaſion of thouſands of Objefs chat invade
our ſenſes dayly, which muſt needs difplace chem,
or give them a new motion from what they had
before,and this conceit looks like Poet Hudrbras; bue
IT hope all now made plaine.
Bur it ſeems' de-Spagnet, doth fay, and fo
did Paracelſus, that great maſter in his time, and

obje&s againſt Sir. Charles Heydon's Spirit of Bliſs,

which we have evidently PRI doubred (viz)
the impoſſibility of there being either ſenſe, under-
ſtanding or Spontaneous motion in matter, yer ſay's
the two Philoſophers the greater and lefſer Tun
dinus, we are never the neerer : for the like
difficulties they urge, which Ariftotle urged againſt
there being any ſenſe or underſtanding in a fpirir,
and this Ariſtotle would have to be all can be ſaid
upon this matter, fith che ſpirit cannot but be ex-
tended, nor extended but diviſible, nor divifible
bur incapable of ſenſe. or underſtanding, as I have
largely argued in the Harmony of the IVorld, and in
my Holy Guide.

To this Sir. Fob Heydon anſwers, if by extenſion
be meanc a Fuxta pofition of parts,or placing of them
one by any another, as it isin matter, and I utter-
ly deny that a ſpirit is at all inchis ſenſe extended,
butif they mean only a certain Amplitude of pre-
ſence, that it be at every part of fo much marter at
once, I fay it is extended, but that this kind of ex-
tenſion does not imply any diviſibilicy in the ſnb-
ſtarice chus extended; for Juxta poſition of parts

ImpeneEtrrability and Divilibility go together, and
Q qq 3 therefore

CATE EY EE FTI
wy . ” q bn 4

ne Bond Y

- > ho BY

$4 >

SS

” * *$.

« os 44x

pr nv _— Fj yo + 4 > LESS phos. ps: ” 7 js ” £
"50 Do 7 eo) gilk
oo - 6.0 .
ER f Rx $

 Theforewhere the ewo formes are wanting, exten-
yes nora third. 11 | |
tEwben I fpake of indivilibility, that Imagine-
> $jon Creme nor new croubles to her (elfe, I mean not
tuck #nindivifibility; as 1s fancied in a Mathema-
gical point in Thowss Streets bumours z bur as we con-
_ _ ceivein ſphere of light made from one Jucid point
or Radiant Centre : Fnr that the Sphere or Orbe of
lighr, though it be in ſome ſenſc extended, yet it is
cruly indivifibleſupoſingthe'Centrefuch ; Forthere
is no means imaginable: co diſcert or ſeparate any
one ray of this Orbe, and keep: ic 6 part by it ſelfe
disjoyned from the Centre. ' . Om
Now a little ro invert the property of this Lumi-
#0us Orbe, when we would apply to a ſoul or ſpirit;
As there can be no ajteration, in the Radzant Cen-
ter, bur therewith it is neceſſarily in every part of
the Orbe; orſuppole it were redder, all would be
redder, if dimmer all dimmer, &c. So there is alſo
that wnity and undiviſibility of che exteriour parts, if
] may ſo callchem, of a Spirit or Sow! with their in.
moſt Center, that if any of chem be affeted, the
. Center of life is alſo thereby neceflarily affe-
Qed; and theſe exteriour parts of che Soul being
affetedby the parts of the Objed, with ſuch Cir-
cumftances as they are innated, that ic hath neceſ-
ſarily chen encire and uncoufuſed Images of things
without, though they be contrived into ſo (mal 8
Compaſs asare in the very Center of this ſpiricual
ſubſtance, | |
This Symbolical repreſentation I uſed before, not
only in-this book but in Vrania's Humane vertnes, and '
n thoſe Books of Phyfith and Afrologie I gave Dr.Cul-
peper and his man 7 bowas Harringtox to entitle theme
ſelves the Authors, becauſe I cared not to have my
' name

: A
G 08 W438 * |
& aw. If Wee FALL
* —— ”» q, : ,
12: + £
4 .& L
” A % PIMS or PS
bw * 5 ,
BIG. © as
FS <<5%, "RE _ :

name publick;let what good I can d
to another and not to me. | | "noe

I incend co ſpeak ſomething at large inthe.
quent Chaprers of Etheral Spirits, this prefentarion
ſooften uſed before I cannot excogitate "ny" Thing -
that will better ſer of the Natnre of a Spirit wheres. ©
in is implyed a power of receiving Multitudes of
particular figurations into one imdivifible of ſenſe,
whereall are exaQly united into one fubjeR,and yet
diſtinaly repreſented, which cannot be performed
by the Conarion it ſelfe, as | have demonſtrared, and
therefore ic remaines, that it muſt refer to a Sol,
whoſe cheif ſeat may happily be there, as the Att of
perception.

Bur if any ſhall abnſe our Courtefie of endeavouring
tohelp his [magznation or at leaſt to pratihic it, in
this Symbolical repreſentation we have made, by
conceiving of chis Center of the Soul, but as ſome
dull and divifible point in Matter, and of nogreat
efficacy ; and of the vital or Arbitrarious extenſion of
it, asgrollyas if it would neceſlarily argue as real a
diviſibility and gr 2g of the parts as in a bo-'
dy : toprevent all ſuch cavils we ſhall omit thoſe
Spinofuics of the extenſions or indiviſibility of a Soul or
Sperit,, and conclude thus. |

That the Manifold contradigions and repug-
nances we find in the Nature of Matter to beable to
either think or Spowtexcoufly tomove it (elfe, do well
affure us that theſe operations not to ut, but taſome
other ſubſtance ; wherefore we finding theſe opera-
cion$ in us, K is manifeſt thac we have in us an Ims
macerl being, really diftinQ from the Body, which
we ordinarily call a Sou/; The Speculation of whoſe
bare eſſence though it may well puzzel us, yet thoſe
properties that we find incompetible to a body, do

Qqq 3 ſufficiently

= Wcienelyinform us of the differencNature there-
= - "of, Ox itis plain ſhe is a ſubſtance, as I ſhall cell you
When ſbeik of. the Guardian Genius and Etberial

$

* *Becrating ond Spontancouſl moving ofa body, which
-- -- Properties areas immediate to her as impenetrabi-
', HIty-and feparabilicy of parts to the matter; and
weare not to demand the cauſe of one no more
then of the other, wo 7

CHAP. XXMXY.

The diſtribution of the faculties of the ſenſible
Soul into Motion and into fenſe.

Ifribution of the faculties of the ſenſible Soul
into motion and into ſenſe, and of the office
and apt Fabrick of the Nerves and Muſcles, and
other parts requiſite to this Motion, and which part
of the Body reſts, whileſt another is moved, and
that the Governour and Chariot driver, as it were
of this Motion, is the Imagination, ſo as diſmiſing the
Image co which the Motion, was carried, the motion
it ſe}fe is preſently intercepted and urrefted (as when
we walk,ifany other ſerious and fixed thought come
into our mind,” we preſently ſtand till ) and many
other ſuch ſubtilties not to be {leighted, have now
Jong agoe been noted in the Holy Guide, and how
.compreſlions and dilations, and Apitations of the
Spirit, which without queſtion is the ſpring of Moti-
FE SEL 6 j-: on,

*oX

00K Ill. The Temple of Wildome.:

\ —_— " " $ Fg ,
: + 4 £ $f b> ca M <* : lt” -
NETS ory AP Th "IO "

SER. 5 ER LN $9. 2 C
I 4 b ONS 3 *- th
v Kay, 5S-- >: "= :
- ws '
IX

on, ſhould excite and enforce the Copporealian®

EE. = <2 JED acne,
ponderous Maſs ofthe parts, hath no& yer :
man been ſpoken of, and no Marva

OS q
—_— 4.2 % YY b: by
8 JOOGON Ye
on. £09 Ts p A T2 4 b
-, Fawn ats:
» £90. FS + j * 5
'V = -

ſenſible Soul it ſelfe hath been hicherto*rakanfor ==
an Extelechy, or ſelfe moving facultys anda Ne:
fun&ion rather then a ſubſtance; but now it wal
-covered to be Corporal and a Material ſubſtance. - 375
As for the difference between perception and ſcuſe,”*
we (ce that thereis a manifeſt power of perceptromw,
even in all bodies Natural, and a kind of K/eciion to
Embrace that which is any way allied in Nature,
_ and favourable tothem; and toflly what is adverſe
and foraigne ; neither do we mean,of more ſubtile
perceptions only, as when the Load-ſtone drawes
unco it Iron, Flame leaps to Bituminous Mould; one bu=
ble of waternear unto another buble cloſeth and
in corporates with it, raiſe glance from a white
obje& ; the body of a living Creature, afſimilates
that which is good for it, excerneth what is unpro-
fitable; a peece of Spunge even when it 1s raiſed
above the (ſurface of che water, ſucks in Fater, ex-
pels Aire, and the like, for to what end ſhould we
enumerate (ſuch in{tances, ſeeing no body placed
near to another, changech the other, oris changed ll
of it, unleſs a reciprocal .perception precede the WM,
operation; ſome have attributed ſenſe ro all bodies, Wi
chat it is a moſt piacular crimeto pul of a bow from 4
tree, leaft it ſhould groare and complaine; now they
ſhould explore with diligence the differenceof per-
ception and ſen(e, noronly in comparing, of ſenlt-
bles with infenfibles, according to the entire body(as
of Plants. and lving Creatures, bur alſo to obſerve in
the ſenfible body, what ſhould be the cauſe that ſo
many aCtions ſhould be diſcharged, and that with-
out any ſenſe atall, why Aliments are digeſted, es
ae fieds

Q4q44 4

4" <HeY Fine - # Fe * *
Y 2” 4 .
7 T $ ;
b - 1 | "
5 Ie Conlthigs Is; PRE ;
IIS IS > OS
_ ka > .. 2 a

OT RT on ne k . :
—_——_—— nds wcculont worſt m_ carried u Wares
LEGO; The bart and Pulſe bear - the Guts

e hk "" 9 "0 " "61
' AD CERT Rs = 0 } - ' DH
NS F b ET os þ 74 =
5 k » &
4 I A ao, fo

*
WEE 5

eps; : where in every one ſhould do his
=o yer all theſe and many (uch tike are
ered” Withour ſenſe, not any 1 ever heard of,
atk aiicovered of whac Nature the aCtion of ſenſe
Land what kind of Body ; what delay, what Com-
auplication of impreſſion are required tothis, that pain
" and pleaſure ſhould follow. |
| The Ignorance of Ariſtotle and Pythagoras the Sa-
mian, touching this maxter; ſo far obſcured, the
lighe of Reaſon, as that they thought, there was
without any difference a Soul infuſed into all bodies,
nor did they conceive how motion, with a diſcer-
ning inſtin&, could be made wichour ſenſe, or ſenſe
exiſt without a Soul. |
And for the form of light, the handling of /:ybt
and che cauſes thereof in Phyſick,is commonly ſuper-
ſtitious, as of a thing of a middle Nature betwixc
things natural, and divine, inſomuch as ſome of
Platoes Scholers, have introduced light or a thing
more antient then matter it felf ; For whenche
E mpty ſpace was ſpread abroad, they affirmed, in a
vain Imaginetion,that it was firft filled with light, and
afterwards with a body, whereas Holy write, fers
down plainly the Maſs of Heaven and Earth co be
a dark Chaos, before the Creation of, light, but
what are handled Phyfically, and according to (enfs
of this ſubje&, preſently deſcended to Radiation:
Come to me, and I will cel vou, what is common to
all Lucid badies, as of the forme of Jjghe ; for whae
an immenſe difference of body is rkere(ifchey may
beconfidered accordingcotheir dignity )bewixr the
Sun and rotten Weed, or the pirtrid ſcales of Fiſh; no
men) as yet kiath told me a Reaſon whac fhould be
CF», . «> "4 EPS "0 L » « : i & » 4 PIES: the

Bs 7. rn, 3 aa
% Flt #4 IEA 8
hy WITS A 4

# 5
3

— OSHA nan 6 nar | 2 Y 9-7 * © a 3 _—_
4 4 % % The remp

the canſe why ſomethings weſee key v; and} vale
thronghly beared,caft forth « light ; on RR
Menals, Stones, Glaſs, Wood, Oyle, Tat oy FER,

ther caſt 'forth a flame, or at beaff grow weld

Water and Fire heated with the fury-oF al
games to the higheſt degree they are capability
acquire no ſuch /ight, nor caſt forth any (plenamp +”
if any man think ic thus comes co paſs, becauſe tw
the property of fire to give light; but Wacer and
Aire are utter enemies to Fire, ſure he neyertravet- ©
led by Sea,or was rowed wich Oares in a dark night
upon Sale water, andin a hot feaſon, efpecially in
hot Countries, where he mrght haye ſeen ſmal drops
of water rebounding from the clothing of the Oares,
eo ſparkle and caft forth a light, which I have b
the Ship fide, when all Sailes have been full of a fre
Gale of wind, Fome, and fhine with great fervency,
which they call the Sex longs.

What affinity with flame and fired matter have.
the Cicirdule, the Luciolz the Helene, and the Indi-
as fly,which caſt a light overa whole arched Rome ; or
the Eyes of certaine living Creatures in the dark,
and the Glow-worme: Sugar as it is grated or broken,
or the ſwear of a Horfe bard ridden, in a Souttry night, mn”
and many more; nay many underftand fo liccle of;
cheſe matrers, that they have thought the ſparks
from a flint to be attrited Aire, : |

Bue when the Airejs not firred wich heat, and ap-
| Parently concerves Light; how comes it to paſte,
that Owls and Cats and many other creatures ſee in
the night : So that it muſt needs be (ſeeing Viſion
cannot be conceived withonr light) that chere is a
Native and inbred lighe in Aze, although very
feeble and weak; yet ſuch as may be proportioned
to the Optick Beans of ſuch Creatures, aud may _

, 0 c&

Em Fe 0 Wi] I0Mme, BoOK|1 |
eels: Bur the cauſe of this evill, is
wmenSretireleſrand ignorant, and now not
rahdgwoutthe common forms of things,natu-

qSacticular inſtances: And chus much con-

ernngtcke Soul Rational, and (enfible with their
"cults, buc tay I will give you a Leſſon io Learn

ppg "4 £ % : |
| aſt y Ju come again; & I hadan intent to handle

but Thave exceeded my bounds, I would have you

38 ell me, why ſomethings are and way be ſo nume-
| | yousand large,others ſo few and little ? As why may
not there be asgreat ſtore 'of Gold, as Iron, as greac

plenty of Roſes as of grafle, as great variety of de-

termined and ſpecifique naturcs, as of imperfe&s

.and non ſpecificates; no man hath as yet diſcover-
edthe cauſe, why berwixt divers ſpecies there
ſhould, as it were perpetually be interpoſed, Parti-
ciples of nature, which are of a daubtfulljkind and
reference; as Moſe betwixt putrefaGion and a plant,

Fiſhes which adhear and move not, betwixt a Planc

and a living Creature, Rats and Mice and other ver-

mine between living creatures, generated of putri-

faſtion and of fced : Bats hetween Bards and Beaſts;

Flying Fiſhes, between Foule and Fiſh :- Sea Calfs be-

eween Fiſhes and four footed Beaſts; If you know not,

I'will cell you, as my time ſhall admit, do you not
know the reaſon, how it ſhould come to paſſe, be-
ing like delights tounitetolike, that Ira draws not
Jron as the Load-ftone doth, nor Gold allures, and
attraAs unto it Gold,as it doth. @uick-filver, Con-
cerning theſe and che like adjun&s of chings, there
15in the common diſceptation about Tranſcendents
a deep filence, for men have purſued nidceties of
termes. as DoQor Culpeper and his man called
Harington, but very impertinently and noc ſubrel-
 Fiesofchings inſpired Chriſtians abhor 3 I ans
ave

my
£

3o0Kk IN. The Temple of M1

have you ftudya ſolid and ſubltantin'e
of theſerranſcendents,or adventitiongzael
Encicies according to the Laws of N eur...
were diſcovered in che Harmony of th&Werdhu

Þ = #e 2 =

according tothe Laws of words of man,gw

I
5 Ret a E <4 b we to

che Tabernacle of the Soul. "7.

4 2 : " V4 *
4 A”;

——__—

1 þ £ 3 :

Care. XXXVI.

A very trueNarration of a Gentleman R. C. who

' bath the continual ſociety of a GuardianGenius;
What theſe Guardian Genii may be ? What the
reaſon Spirits ſo ſeldome appear; And mhther
they have any fetled ſhape or nos, That they aſ-
fiſt men in their Devotion or Prophecy; And
whether it be lawfull to pray to God for a good
Angel or Genizs or no,

Blation of it (elf was ſuch a ſacrifice to God, $43
that a good and holy man could offer no grea--

ter,as appears by the acceptance ofa Gentleman by
deſcent from che Lynes of the Plantaginets, who was
in Egypt, Italy and Arabia, and there frequented the
ſociery of the inſpired Chriftians with whom, he.
was acquainted after this manner: in Erglaxd being
at &« Tavern in Cheap-fide, more to hear and better
his judgment in the Company of the reputed wiſeſt
in London, there to drink Wine, their Tifcourſe be-
ing of the Neture and. Dignity of. Angels, which was
interrupted

""F

Bape of Vifdome. Boo Ir.

of RECLIT, - T4
ag Sr 2

bes Gentleman, for ſo he appeared,

to: Gr tleman in the Company, (Sir you
Tar fram. at this
re lene, yer ſeveral choughts aroſed, ſome

this Frange Gencleman to ſtay, but he refu-
©" Fed, avid veing preſſed, he gave the Gentleman a
paper of whice and ycllow powder, and bid him

Þarn ict at midnight, and read that Chapter lay o-

SR

the Kingdome of Go

L

Es «2
& 42 4

.Y a 3t

Z X35 4 Fe

mm MC I - £2" 7
T5 ELIE >. th

 penin the Bible in his Chamber, and fing ſuch Pſalms,
and then the window flew open, and the Gentleman
vaniſhed.

He burnt the Pouder as he was bid, and there ap-
peared a ſhining flye upon the Bible, which he had
m his hands, this vaniſhed whileft he flepr, which
was then about cight in the morning, Gemimz being
the Aſcendanr,and Mercury in Vergo,the Gentleman
conceived that this ſpirit had been with him all his
life cime, as he gathered from certain Monitory
Dreams and Viſions, whereby he was forwarned as
well of ſeveral dangers as vices: Mr. Waters and two
Gentlemen more were at his houſe and defired him
togoalong with them co the Exchange and dine with
them and ſome other Merchants, which he did,and go-
ing along,upon his breaſt one of them eſpied a ball of
Geld, which did ſhine ſo gloriouſly that ir dazled the
eyes of them all and this continued all the riffugof
Mercury who was then in Pergo; this Spiritdifcovered

himfelf to him after he had fora w year toge-
| ther earneſtly prayed to God, to ſend a good Ange! to
him, to be a guide of his life 8 a&ion, alſo he prayed
fora token that this was the will and hs of
God, which was granced, for in 2 bright ſhining
day, noClond appearing, there fell a drop of water
upon his hac, which ro this day is not dry, and Ithink
- <g will be alchough ic be worne in chis hog wea-
ther, He

Fd

, "-” . a, Þ. S
- a if * .
£ 7 S #4 nd. ot $*
p WS - a AF]
ARES,

He prayes God to defend him and guinea ns
crue Religion, reading two or thutg ran SR
Bible; after chis amongſt many other, Gor
and Viſions, he once in his {leep ſeemed ren NJ
voice of God, ſaying to him,l will-ſave thy Soulnm
he chat before appeared unco thees hace ann hg.”
Spirit every day knock at his Doore about thmear”
foura Clock in the morning : he rifing there apgage >
red a Child of faire ſtature, very comely and gave”
him a book which he keepeth very well, yet lecteth
many (ce it that can prevaile with him, this book's
full of Divine things, ſuch Inever red or heardof,
another time his Candle did fall down gpon the
ground and went our, and there appeared before
him ſomthing abour the bigneſſe of a Nut, round
and ſhining and made a noyle, he ſtrived to rake ic
up, bur it curned like Quick-filver, ſo that he could
not handle. |

Many Gentlemen have been in his Company
when he hath been pulled by the coat as they have
ſeen, bat could not ſee who did it, ſometimes his
Gloves lying at one end of the Table have been
brought and given him, but they ſee che Gloves as
chey thought come themſelves. &-::

Anothertime being with ſome Merchants at Din=
ner, that were ſtrangers to this Spirit, and were
abaſhed when chey heard the noiſe, and ſaw no»
thing, preſencly a Paper was given the Gentleman,
he _— it, and ſodid others, it was that he ſhould
ſerve God and fearnothing, for the enemies of his
F ather which haced him, ſhould all ſurely die, and
fo ſhould all that ſought to do him hurt, and tobe
aſſured he named ſuch a man, and ſaid he ſhall die
ſuch a day, as he did; another ſhould dic ſuch a day,
and he diedalſo; che Merchants were ſtrucken _

ar
7

- <a 1: a .
+ az ;
Femple of Wiſdome. Book 111
Ls -- b GI. | d
"S334 A 5, a Rar

oo x4 EL 4 —Y "*0 : —

. ho wurtiowards chem, and the better coafſure
' _—_ fag pet >>; - WP | '9
r- of it,” cold the cruthi of ll the whole mar-

4 4. ES Bk .
= vo 9” 5,
” "= E E

TIT ; w _
NE RE Gd:
vo $5-24 fs ” »*
Aſa >
wee 37 TSS

Ft
Ry,

we

© Bree fince;chi _ hath been alwaies with him,
und fomeſentible figne did ever advertiſe him of
'- "x n by, "as frriking his right Eare, if he did not
well; ifotherwiſe his left ; if any danger, he was
" =MWheti he begati co praiſe God in Pſalms, and to
declare his Mervelous Ads, that he was preſently
raiſed and ftreiigthened with a ſpiritual and ſuper-
naturat power.

That he daily begg'd of Godzthat he would teach
him his #/i, his Lew, and his Truth, and thar he ſec
one day ofthe week a part, for reading the Scripture
and Meditation, with finging of Pſalnis, all the day
in his Houſe; but chat in his ordinary Converſati-
on he is ſufficiently merry, if he like his Company,
and of a cheerful minde ; if he talked of any vain
thing or indifcreetly, would offer to diſcover any
ſecret, is forbidden; or if he at any time would
diſcover any imſpired ſecret, he was forthwith ad-
monuhed thereof in his Eare ; And every morning
called to prayer. Since he ofren goes to meer the
holy company at certain times, and they make re-

- ſolution of all cheir A&ions.

He gives Almes ſecretly, and the more Almes he
beftowes, the more proſperous he is, he dares not
commit any known faule, this Gentleman hath by
the providence of God been direfed through man
Wt dangers, even thoſe that ſought his Life
died. ;
At another time when he was in very great dan-

der, upon theaſcendent comming to the body -
| the

| | j T T l 4 1 ; '
ook lll. The C07 CI
EBERT. © ol IH - -
> EE ob pt LF

the Sun, and the Conjun@ion: of: $a

-
or Be. EF re en Ye. 34
— > Ve Sr
Q a; »
P

Fupiter oppoling his- Aſcendenry: and was news:
y gone-ro' bed, he ſaid char the” ſpiriz, manllh
nor let him alone: til] he had raiſed Simas?
gain, and told him he was falſly accuſed; wherdtons”;
be watched and Prayed all chat nighe, chedurat”
cer he eſcaped the hands of his perſecurors: ms
wonderful manner : one died,and theotherarenery ©
fick ; then came a voiceto him ſaying, bngs ; ſedes.
in Latibulo Altifhmi, many other paſſages happem & ©
this parey daily, as a hundred will reftifie, Mic ies
anendleſs labour torecicethem all, the man being
now alive, and in good health and well known a=
mong all men to be a friend toall, and defires to
do good. See the Holy Guide.

Now it is the condition of ſpitits themſelves, who
cannot appear viſible without ſome violence done
cotheir own Nature,it being as troubleſome to them
to keep in oxe ſfieady vifible confiftency, in the Arre, as
tis for men that dive, co hold their breath in the
Water, |

The Guardion Genii ſeem to me tobe as the Benigne
Eye of God, running too and fro in the world, wich
love and pitty, beholding the innocent endeavours W428
of harmleſs and fingle hearted menzever ready to do *
them good, and to help them, and theſe muſt beno
Euchites that Prophecy by familiarity of evil ſpirits,
for they deny goodneſs and honeſty, and their prin-
ciples, and are ofa different nature fromgoodnels.

It is lawful co pray to God for ſuch a good Genius
or Angel, and co purge the mind from Pride and
Hipocrifie, which is one reaſon that all men are not
capable of Conſociation with theſe good Genu, for
faith and defire, ought co be full ſaile, to make ſuch

Vozages proſperovs, and our end and purpoſepure and
fincere, -

Book IT.

ITT RRs EI or affe&ion of
rpeiviledge above other mortals, ſpy;
fe þ old an Enterpriſe, his devotions
Are; « orgs oy or the-good Gewiz :
nl g rojce e counterfeit will flir
cheaſfeSion diſcreecly charitable; Nay, this
- poeſurnpe! = invite he real Fiend to deceive
: hu, and Ibe cher defiruQion.
_ *,Yucthe fafct Wikdome is che fincere conſecrating
{ tro God, and the afpiring tonathing,; buc
Caprefound = itch of humility, asnot to beCon-
EXIST ves, of being at all touched with the
| 97S Ar > wy, and to ſuch « free and
of Charity, 8s cobedelightcd with the
well fare of another, as much as his own, they that
ſolely have their Eye upon theſe, will find comming
in what ever their bearc render they char pur
forth their hand vo catch ac high things, as they =
and negle& theſe, prove ac laſt bur a plagueco
Þ Son" anda 64g ſtock to the world ; Let
' none doubt I am well ce of the exiſtence of 2
Spirit.

as po

a FyMA AA e@@o-© +2 co. oc .o oT- __z

]

—_—_— _ .<

x < K T f
0,6] = - em E 0 %
SE
- RD ve 0”
; FERs 3
pr
s

.*
RN x
”

of

of God, of Angelr, andof Spirits,

dome, Angels of Illuminations of Light, of =
Earth and Man, and his inventive faculties, +.

—_ OR
- % x 3:
$$. REES
[0 = 5
. *
N LE
d OY

4 Journey to the Farth through Heaven,

firſt Mover the Region of Angels, the fluia F "1

 beaven, through the Etherial Region, the Re-
gion of Pire, through the Region of the Aire
and Blew Sea, the nature of the Regions, and
of the Spirits of Adam, of Cain, and Abel,
of Ages before the flood, of Ages ſince, of Mo-
ſes, of Job, of Salomon the King, of our
Saviour Chrift , of. St. Paul, of the Romare
Empire, of Charles Stuart, our Gracions and
Glorious King.

T Ow I amcome to the knowledge concerning
God, ſuch as I had by the'Light cf Nature,
and the contemplation of the Creature, which may
be called Divine in the reſpeQtof the Objed; and
naturall in reſpe& of the light; this Etherial Voyage
was aſcended to Adams firſt being in his firſt Moifture,
cleerly diſcovered and fet forth, to the contuta-
cion and convigion of Atheiſme, and the informa-
tion of the Law of Nature; bur ray not be drawn
to the confirmation of Religion. Therefore there
was never Miracle wrought by God to convert an
Atheiſt, becauſe che light of Nature might haveled
him toconfeſs a God, but Miracles are defiigned to
convert [dolaters, and the ſuperſtitious, who have
acknowledged a Diety,bur erred in his Adoration ;
becauſe nolight of Nature extends ro declare che
willand true Worſhip of God, For as wary" do
| rg {hew

bn

Eo ac = SOT >: + Mode
; F £5 ,
© the PL wh

[he Templc of VWiſdome. Book HI:
forth che power and 5kill of the workman, bur
is Image, fothe works of God do ſhew the

ency and Wiſdome of the Maker, but no

1d” have che worldto be the Image of God,

—wmhy hearc, to afford the world thac honour, as
" once to thinke it the lmage of God, bur only the
work of his hands : [| apprehend ſubſticute Man, the
immediate Image of God, wherefore that there is
a God, that he raines and rules the world, that
he is moſt Potent, Wiſe, and Provident : That he
is a rewarder, aRevenger, that he is to be adored,
( now ſaith ) the Genius or Angell, you cannot com»
prehend furcher then | have rold you, and when
you are to ſpeak of God, you are to beleeve an
vbiquity : but then how are you able co conceive
char chis vbiquity is, 1 ſpeak to Reafon not Faith,for
i know this beleeverch what ic ſees not, your veltel|
«not able co comprehend the waies of the moſt
High God,

Ler us ( ſaith ) che Ftherial Genius, proceed from
God to Angel!s whoſe Nature in Order of Digmty is
mexc Gods. The firſt place or degree 1s given to the.
Serapbim, that is Angells of Love. The fecond to
che Cherubim, that is, Anzells of Illumination. ' The

chird and ſo following, places to Thrones, Principalrties,
andcheReſt, which are. Angells of Power ana'Min-
itry as your Guardian Genizs knowes of 'us in the
Etberzal Region, fo you ſee as from this order and
diſtribution, it appears thatrhe Angell of kyowledge
and Illumination are placed before the Anjells of
Offce and Domination. | ;

Let us deſcend from Angels at the Throne of
.God, and inthe Solid Chriftalline Heaven, and Pitch
in the Eherial Region, Among thoſe Angells or bleſſes

CEE Spirits,

"Book II
os 6105: -
oy

S By $22
"We. OT _
es ads FUEL og ah,
3 % oy Ve DIE . Fs FI $
. * Oe ON ies OT I « C PE, Y
Po ES SEW, 4. = Sou M48 Lick, Y
© gg "FOLIO FRI, 3
238 IJ &% » wht *X- "tp oO
- a *<*; 7 Z
” th!"

Spiritsz, and as concerning their D

mand; let no man deceive you, with Sublime gi.
courſe touching the worſhip of Angels, prefling mts”
that he knows.not : the Etheriel Genis, bave attinicy
wich mans Soxl, yet notwithſtanding, if you obſer
chis precept, we forbid you Adoratiomof Anpels or”
ſuch as is due to God, and Phantaftical opinions -
_ them, Intelligences aud Guardian Genii, eithetby Wt";
tolling them, above the degree of a Creature ar *
co extoll a mans knowledg of them farcher than he ©
hath warrancable ground. "3
By the Sober and Illuminated knowledge of R.C,
and by the Gradations of things Corporeal, you may
aſcend tothe Nature of them, but you laborin vain;
if you attempt to have the acquaintance of a Guar-
dian Genizs, orthink to draw down Heavens miſte=
ries to your Reaſon, and thereby to get admictance
into the Miſteries of the inſpired Chriſtiane, ic ra-
ther becomes youto raiſe and adyanceyour Reaſon,
to the adored Throne of Divine Truth ; The know-
ledgeof K.C. is in your Soul, &, To ſpeak of
Revolted Spirits of the ſecond Revoliition, we pro-
hibit che converfing with them, nuich more any
Veneration towards them; bur the contemplationz
of their Nature, their power, their Tllufions : not on-
ly from places of holy Scripture, but from Reaſon or
F xperience, is a principal part of ſpiritual Wiſdome:
And it is not more unlawful in Natural Theologie, rs _,
enquire the Nature of Evil Spirits, then to enquire
the nature of Poyſon in Phyſicks : To deſcend from
the Angels. And the Hireal ſpirits, and evil; and
revolted Spiritz,and incelle&ual forms, to ſenfible and
Materal Forms : not to ſpeak one thing ewice; | The
firſt of Created Forms was Light ; which harhi a Rela-
tion and Correſpondence in Nature and Corporal
: Ric 2 things

"
>
Fn
”
*%.

F* yg! 919 mf UI F
Pa ff . » FP ; # .
. 26 mo ” hy * k. <ieb

- $2 _ "SS + bp”
pe Os Ry =
ha Fevet—Bo Boro i FEES Sm _——_—_—_ rs ;
LOT Rne'® CEE EE IRS Þ@ ©
4 "WS » Y of ( + - Y k
wii $.coknowedpe in Geri and Incorparal thin
Bononnncts - of apy, ens. To ou
MN _ rr, Yar... |
$2.45 5 To. 2 5
- Toinchedifiriburion of dayes,we ſee the day where-
$54Y > 9 & <> 70 " * wy 4 I 1 II a ty Pi \ F ”. £
X Hs 0 Oey Sa, Fs Y -70. ns G 3
* wg z &-:* *”: 7
Fug,” ox x
: T a contemp ate niS OWN WOrkS, Was
YL * 4

*

= bleſt above all the dayes wherein the Fabrick of the
© -univerſewas Creeted and diſpoſed. |
>= Afer theCreation was finiſhe, nian was placed in
” *chis Erherzal firſt Moiſture, and ſent io view the Gar-
” "dep which he liked very wcll, and there he Concem-
- placed, withouttrouble. And for delight and ex-
© erciſe Now the knowledg which introduced thefal,
it was not the Etherial knowledg concerning the
Creatures or Natural Imporanes of Names, bur the
Morrall knowledg of Gocd and Evil, where the ſup-
poſition was that Gods Commandements or Prohi-
bitions were not the Originals of Good and Evil,
but that they had other beginnings, which man
aſpired to knew, to the end to make a total defe&i-
on from God, and to depend wholly upon him-
ſelfe, and his free will, for. his Sou] perceived his
light. *

" would adviſe all in general, as I was adviſed,
that they would take into ſerious confideration,the
true and Genuin ends of inſpired Chriftiansor Rofie
C rucians, that they ſtrive not co be one of them, and
to have the knowledg of the Guardian Genius os to
converſe with Intelligences, either for pleaſure, or
Contention, or C ontempt of others, or for profit or fame
or for honour, and promotion or ſuch like, Adulterate
or inferiour ends : but for the Merit and Emolument of
life, and that they regulate and perfe& the ſame in

Charjty,for the delire of Power was the fall of Angels,
the defire of knowledg the Fall of Man, but in Cha-
rity thereisno exceſs; neither mexn nor Angels ever
incurreddanger by it, The requeſts ae:

| I * theſe

ONO, tr

: OE IE TY
bs th. » E: bs - - - et BE: fs
, 5 ww oo” Sg | Sy 2 LY
A, . 4 ; ; 45 2 Fe ed, 4
c : - V © I) wn, OE Sa bFe - GENS
* Far &. Wy. 1? 4 . # 4 8
| 23 + o® OEE = EN
>< Ch, SM OST rs E-
. - Mo +4 CE of 29-4 -
— —— _——_—___— - » OT
p ' by TOI? Ie +
bd OE OT RS 3. ED #7 54
theſe (co ſay nothing of our (elfecouchimge
" : : 7 #- BD "WE? Y i
"SE p55 Ea ON x

cer in hand, we requeſt chus mich, that men would->

not think of ic as an Opanon,' but as « work, and
cake ic for Truth, chac our Aime and end is nor cas ©
lay the Foyndation of a Sed or placed,'bur of bumane:
profit and knowledge of the Holy Guide, +

To deſcend tothe firft occurrance afterthe fal of *
Man, we ſee an Image of the two ſtates, the contem=,
plative and the Adive figared in the perſons of Abell.
and Caix, The one had the free view of Heaven a
lively Image ofa Contemplartive life, the other of the
Earth, and you may ſee the favour and Flefion of
God to the Sheep-heard and not to the tiller of
Ground.

To proceed from the Age before the #/o0d, where
Arts, and new Inventions were greatly honoured as
Muſique and Mettals, To the Age atter the Flood,
where the great Fudgements of God, upon the Ambi-
tion of Max was the Confufion of Tongues. Ler
us deſcend to Miſes the Law giver, and Gods firſt No-
tary, it was he that was ſeen in all the Learning of
che Egyptians, Moſes ſeems co have been aforehand
and prevented the ſabtillet inventions of Socrates,

_ Plato and Pythagors,'ir is generally acknowledged
_ by ſome Gentlemen, that they had their Philoſodby
from Moſues, and he from God.

Fob, A wiſe man, full and pregnant with the ſe-
crets of Natural Philoſophy, & Rofie Crucien (ecrets,
Aftromancy'and Geomancy, &c. And for Pythogoras it is
a thing incredible that he ſhould make ſuch a deal.
of do, with the Miftery of Numbers, had he not been
favoured with Moſes, diſcourſe of the Worlds Create-
on in fix dayes, and Job's Caſmography and Rounding
. of the Earth, the Pole of the North and the fimileneſſ
of convexity of Heaven. To proceel to Solymm; we

ares (4-

obo

gs #. 7. == hy :
wy * 6-8” 0
5 0 ?
$2:

"4 4
x —- £ 47
Kune =Y

be 2 Wh py « & Co 2 * *
&D POOR on Wy _ =
y : - Ru OI w " _
mM ro als A al og Ap AT ES, 8 MM
2. S \ **4 3 [- -— Hot 4 £ __— IDS. Z =
bY x7 $5.4% vs ES -2 $, PE: * ©» #* * .
= +... 7 & © Lay 2 3 S .
ag RE - ec T 423340 '0 OME., 00K .
"ue x5, BH P 3 _ k © th pw A,
- 2 Wo >
Lago 2 a. £*£, It FE ”— "_ - 2 3 WES: = o > -
C33 # * $ERD 3 PAL

 Seuthe endawments of #iſdaxee both in his Petition
and Gedrafſerc ebeceunto, preferred before all Ter-
= rexe and Temporal feticity, by vertue of which Done-
© tive-and Grant, Ss/omor being fingularly furniſhed
- andenabled; not only write thoſe Parables or Apho.
ſmtes concerning D:vine and Moreall Philoſophy : Bug
C compiled a Natural Hiftory of all Verdrve or Vi-
tables from the Cedar upon the Moxntaine® to. the
Meſs upon the Wall, whichis bur. the rudement of a
Planc, between Putrefadion and an Hearb, and alſo
of all things that breath ormove, |
| Toproceed on : The diſpenſation of God did
not vary in the cimes after,our Saviour came into
the world, for our Seviour himſelf did firſt few bis
power to ſubdue Ignorance, by his-conference with the
Dodors of the | aw and the Prieſts in the Temple, be-
fore he ſhewed his power to ſubdue Nature by his
great and ſo many Mzrracles,and the comming. of the
Holy G bojt was chiefly figured and expreſt mi the Sym:-
litude and guifts of Tongues, which are the vebicnla ſci-
entie. | PEA
_ Sointhe Ele&ion of thoſe Inſtruments, which it
pleaſed God ro uſe in the .Plamation .of the Faith,
ſome unlearned, only #nſpired-from thr, Hbly Ghoſt,
whereby more evidently he might declare his Im-
mediate and Divine working, and mighec abaſe all
humane Fiſdome and 'Miſteries, yet: nevertheleſs
that Counſel of his in this reſpeft was no-fooner per-
formed, but in the nexc/rcifitude andſvcceſfſion of
27me he ſent his Divine truth into:the Warld waited
one with other learning as with: Servants and Herd-:
9127as, Therefore we (ee Se:Paul pen ( whomwas only
tearned ammongft the Apotlee ) yas che fly employed
by Goa m the \criprare of the:New T eftanent. Z;
The Rowan Enmporoys were exceliemly qualified
+: 1 1 1m

- ©; 7. LENO

6, Ba

pr - .

A

Sy z 4

Bo A, [5 4

&'E .

228, We l

0 IRS 1 wt:
41

Y: £ d

-
belt woe mu roy i Hog acy

( J I e M | ; | o 'y Y a #
" 4
” - -

# - : 7 4z 3 l :. by I? | WEE >. wa ing 4 F

, , ET : OY

, - x 7 F g Fe” 127 ” _ TE "> REY :
| 2
93: 3 bb Y s "ES... p

* ou of

in all the A&ions of Moſes Atticus bis p - as: 5
Fmperour Fulian's Edigs were ad micted ine«

E 2 4 £8 R i! 2 |
4 : = S : boy =. $4 gs : - pt
although vulgarlp eſteemed a more pernigzious -<
| | 41 Sy au 4 "2 5

Engine and Marchination againſt the Proteflewt
The late King Charies hath excellently
the'Faith againſt tbe Foe, Puritans, pm
kers, and all che Religzous, Crept into: the Chugch
by Corruption of eeachiers. . . j 3 woot
And of late Kzxy Charles in our Age,was troubled
with Jeſnits as his Predeceſiours were; who par by
in thmſelves and partly by Emulation and Proveca-
tion of that Kingh Philoſopher, and. ſecond Solomon
have much. quickned the Proteſtant Dofrine- on
our fide, (we ſee (ay) what Notable ſervices they
have done.on their f;de, and what helps they have
brought into the Repairing and Eſtabliſhing of the
Roman Sea. ls dr |
Lafily, You may read in the ſame Book, that
Glorjqus example of the lace .King, viz, In his
EIKQON BASIAIKE, of Plalms, Proverbs,:2nd holy Me-
ditations: I love. Vertue in whom (oever I find 1t:
And1 am willingand as fincerely wiſh, that others
may go beyond himin this laſt Age, as he went be-
yond athers in his time, treading the ſteps of David
and his Son Solomon. |
Thus have we given you a ſhort view of ou

thoughts, and of Mans Soul, and God; as Chriſtians
are inſpured by their Guardian Genit, and Etherial
bleſſed Angels ; nor 1 am not at all inconfiſtent with
my ſelfe, for | am ſtill of epinion, that the lecrer of
the Holy Scripture teaches not- any precept-of Phi-
_ loſopby, concerning which there.can be any Contro- |
| verſie amongſt men ar difference from this boly Tems- -

pe of 7 a0 : And when you veniufe beyond: che

ictera] (ſenſe, you are not taught by the Scripture,

p +: "HET 4 bur

* pre 4 >
ms ' "ir
PTE + ,
{ 5-5 4a <a F* \Y
Pu : - " "Rc. " [.,. a
4 xs <bPs ip ws ws
: A 3
. , 2 RY
. P ; V5
£ "PL A 4
. F 2
s + :
Y Y ©
5 -
p Ls:
% \
\ $24
2

dome. . Book If.

"IA = pd, m4 A
Tas _— "—_
Lab » 2,
91 x; ("ad FE i /.—a © be m——_— 'H
8] , Sapp ron geo 97 £ Ro ou
| Y'” 3

: ..4..0UT vl we earned 10 e other OU

#

a 5 » ” ,
2 - ot _e_ 7 6 RET : " <OE: 's

> EIT ee? 0-095 7's d th t to be r,
» 14 ay T1 Aa Cont = i no Traſh,
F-» + & " F 3 5. WES
” a7 p 4
SY ; , _ | betas. - ©
w 7 SF %, %, A *
; "nh g * A -

by Reaſe ſon, Or more
boring wok man ſhould dare
zfacred a Text,burſuch a one, is well
x fl bea: Fabia ſtriteft examination, and that
© Jead to the more fill knowledg of God,and do'more
-* cleerly fe the Phenomena of Nature, and External
" Provialexee, to his moſt Preciows Attribates, and tend
_ torhe furchering of the boly Life, which I do again
profeſs is the ſole end of the Scripture, and of what
15 here diſcovered for your help and Condu?, and
hethac ventures beyond the lecter, without that
guid, will ſoon be loſt in his own fancies, where-
fore ifrhis Temple, which I have built amongſt thoſe
many other infpired Chriftians 'Advantagious (e-
 crets, have recited, had not this alſo ad ed unto
ic, the aime of Advancing the' Divine life, in the
world, 1 ſhould Took upon I, as boch: falſe and un=
profitable; and ſhould have reſted ſatisfied with The
Harmony of the World, for the Divine life of inſpired
Chriſtians; 4s above all Neturall' Meta ifital
knowledg whatſoever: And that Man is\a perfe& man
char is rruly Righteous and Pradent, whom 1 know
I cannot bur gratifie, with the Holy Guide, that | is
coming ublick in Print,' '*
But 1 any more zealous prerenderto Prudence
and Righreouſneſs, wanting eithier Leaſure or Abi-
licy rodeface this Temple I have ere&ed, 'and this
progreſsI have made to ſearch rheBody, 'Soul, and
Criſtallirre Heaven, rothe bottome backwards, ſhall
notwithſtanding Condemneitor Admire it, he has
mw and indiſcreetly ventered our of his
own Sphere, nd I cannot *cquit him of injuſtics

or _
Nor

Il. The emple of VV ildome

e233 A RE $f
—_— "> ET - 7 -
— RE
: EY 4 - LY

| "New did I ſtudy theſe Mifteries © Gue © ore aff a
Fion roeſteem then of grue bolineſk, wy pe. 1 4 have ab} 5
ked my diſcoveries thus accordit p.c0,x thi ” Pl rderof

che inſpired Chriftians: The
of a good man deſcribed in the Holy G
loſtin man, if it be not produced, Is ſerved ©
by a Radical acknowledgment of thoſe g and truths - ©
in the Hermony of the World. viz. thee To no
eternal God, aud a certain expeQation of more _ :
conſumate ha ppineſs upon the diſſo/ution of this mor
tel Body : For to pretend to vercue and holineſs,
withoiit reverence to God, and alife ro come, is but
tofall into a more dull and flac kind of Stoiciſme,
or to be content to feed our Carte] _ this fide of
ordan, in a more diſcreet and Religious way of
picuriſme, or at leaſt of degenerate Familiſme.
Theſe experienced Divine Truths, we have ſown”
unto Poſterity and the Immortal God, whoſe Dis
vine Majeſty we bumbly implore chrough his Son
and our Saviour, that he would vouchſafeGrati-
ouſly to accept theſe and ſuch like Sacrifices of Ha-
mane undetftanding ſeaſoned with Religion and
ya Illumination, as with Salt and Incenſed
tO his Gl OrY, ; |

_———_ —

' After this you muſt follow the method of our Books
Intel, The Holy Gaide,

-

»

pd
—_-. . Wu aa ib. oi —_ o « CP
” p - , * + <# er

CATafre of the Chapters of each
” + . Book, Intbe Temple of Wiſdome,

tis
DE ——

—— ——

BOOK. I.

CHAPTER 1.

Ow to projet! a figure the Roſie Crucian way, and
| bow wiſemen colle& vertues from the” threefold
world, is declared in theſe three Books... page 1.

, Chap. II. D
The Manner how to frame this Art,and give to each place
bis name. | | + :1Þ. 6
| es Chap, III. |
Of the ſignification of theſe eight fignres, and how from
them you muſt make four more. un 7
| | Chap. IV- LT
How to frame the Witneſſes and the judge. - pg
| Chap. V. #5,

Of the vertues of figures Natural , depending inrmedia-
rely upon the Elements, and of the names of the Rulers
of the Earth and other Elements, The names of their
22 Genijor Idea's, and of their 16 figures, p. 11

Chap. VI. _ .

How Geomantick things are ſubjeGed to ſuperiour bodies,

 .* end bow the bodies, the ations, and diſpoſitions of men

are aſcribed to Planets, Rulers, fjgnes, Genij and
Ideas. Of Zaz:l and his general and particular fig-
mfications, - | P. 16

| Ghap. VII.
Of H.imac} and bis ſignification whence the vertnes

of

| ;

HL 7
o

of things proceed, bow the operations f fromnll per.
tus, poſs from one thing into enther, and are commny.. >
ER A60 0108 FF ANNOREY- ea 4 p {th 4

Chap. VIE SY 3g 6

Cf Partabel and bis fignification, how Inferieur things
are ſubjefed to ſuperior bodies, and bow the bodies,
the ations, and diſpoſitions of men are aſcribed to

WAYS _- er LOA | eo 5 ie Ss ors on — —
l $ . S&- ERS in Wn Wiper, £54qart _—_ — "0
=. % ore I PW; "I Ib FM So TO oo Pe DM
Wat ER nnd y x et Fg Wool TOTS og IE.
£ wh £"F > IE er. oy: CO Sr A <0, $0", 2 IO

: : ; - ONE Tens ET WE de. /

73 EM VS ou The F

- ;
_ [1 L oy 6 e
FY ps WARS # IS Mag ©

© ts GR

Starrs, ſignes, ruler's, Idea's and figures, "'p,' 22

Chap. IX.

Of Sorath, and his fignification, of Emanations, Nu-
merations or attributes, of Sepheroths and ſacred
names of God which rule them; the Rulers, Jdea's
and fi ures, of the influence of divine names , and

»

therr power and vertue through all the middle Catiſes
into theſe figures of Geomancy. Pp. 26
| Chap. X.

Of Kedeme) and bir ſignification, which is under her
power, how by theſe natural and arteficial preparati.
ons, wee may attract certain celeſtial and vital gifts,and
how upon Geomantick figures, upon mettall, we may
draw not only celeftial and vitall, but alſo certain m.

. telleGnal and divine gifts from above P. 35-

Chap. XI.

Of Taphthartharath and brs fignification, nature, and

property, how by ſome certain, natural, and arteſicial
reparations, they attraf Celeſtial vitall gifts in Te-
eſmes, and by ſome matters of the world, ftir the Gods
of the world and their miniftring Angels. Pp- 38
OR, Chap. XII. |

Of Hafmodat and ber nature and ſignification, that the
earth is governed by theſe Rulers, Ideas and figures.

Þ- 42

Chap. XII!. |

Tow the ſeaven Rulers of the world be_ attributed to the :

' Panres and the figures to them both gocd and evil.
P40 BE > _

on 0 Yee; RD wh Chap p: XIV..
_ the Neture , Place, Countries general 4, riptions
7 and diſeaſe: fignificd by the twelve [dea's of the ver-
. kue of places, and what places are ſutable to every
dea of Genilis. 47
;- Chap. XV.
E How the RE Genij ere infuſed into the 16 figures
" * the Rules, throuzb the belpe of the foul of the world ,
. and bow the Angels and Genij incorporate their nature
and properties into the figures, and have likg ſignifica-
tion, as the Angels and Genij in their places p, 55
Chap. XVI. Of the munxer bow. to attribure the Genij
. or [dea's fo the figures, and the figures to the [dea's or
Genij. P. 60
Chap. XVII. Of the four Elements, their Nature, 94
perties, Qualities, and mutual mixions. p. 6
Chap. XVIll. Of « Threefold conſideration of the bl
ments. P- 6
Chap. XIX. Of the wonderful nature of fire and rarth,
'#1d their figures, - Pp. 66
'Chapy XX. Of the wonderful nature of water ,. and of
F. : her figures. P.70
53S \ | Chap. XXl1, Of the wonderful nature of aire, _
and of bis figures. P.7
Chah, XXIll. How Empires and Kiugdomes are rades
by Angels and Genij, and how the tarth is devided
. iuto twelve equall parts by them, of Light, Coulours,
Lemp's, Cities, Towns , parts of the body, they
fegnifie, and of the winds they bey fnifi » and to what,
5 and elements theſe are aſcr Pp.
Chip XXII. of the fexteen 7 Hr and their —_
degiſions : P. 87
Chap. XXIV. How the Angels aud Genij in their fir
DG an houſes of the Eerth behold each other, and
, of their various hos, nk a Table and its +.

p- 88.

-
__- > Aw;
ORs a. _—_

S ww - + # o

Chap. 2.5. 0” the Angels Eſſeatial Dignitie 8 the 12. parts af the *
Earth, and bow the Idea's are incorporated into 16 Figty: are yo-=
verned is the bowres. | | "b * 0

2 | Lets EST > ._- - I
Chap. 34. 4 very neceſſary Table ſhewing upd ark te OP Z

frenified by the ſexteen Fagures ; Of the
Houſes ; Of the, Earth governed Ly the twelve.

of mixt things, and the introduction of a more Noble

ſenſes of liſe. "os 0
Ibid.

Chap. 37. Of the 5 ualities of the Figures, aud the paſſions of
n__ bow thy change the uppcr body Ly chainging place,
moving the Geniy. P» 104

. Chap. 28. Of the Colours of the figures. id.

Chap. 29. A modeſt defence ſor Geemancy, and Teleſmes ix the
hnown Phxnomena of Nature ; with an Appeal to the Natural fa-
culties of men ; whether there be not a God, Anecls, Spirits and Ge=
nij, that at certain times appear in bumain ſhapez &c. Of the Far

| ming of man, of the extrnal ſenſes, and alſo the inware!, and the
; mind : Of the threefold appetite f the ſoule, and paſſion of the will,

þ of Teleſmes, and of the Charatters of the Stars and their vertues
| and uſe.

P. 105
Chap. 3o. Of the Sun, and Moon, and their Teleſmatical confederati=
035 : Beſure to let the figures of Aſtromancy and Geamancy to be ſor-
twnate, that the mind may change, and bind inferiowr things to that
which it deferes. | pP- 169
Chap. 31. Of the twenty ezght Manſions of the Moon, and their ver=
tues ; in Teleſmaticall wertues, and bow they partake 'of Dime <
Power: | £408 4
Chap. 3 2. Of the iruc motion of the heavenly bodies to be obſefoearR .
the eight Sphere, and of the ground of Platenary bowrs gat agree with * ..
the Rulers, Idea*s and Genii of Geomance, and what Dyume gifts
\ Man receiveth from abowe, [rom the ſeveral Orders of the Angels
and the Heavens. _ P- 177
Chap. 33. How ſome artificial things, as Teleſmes, 'Images, Seals,
and ſuch like, may obtain ſome vertue from the Celeſtial and Terreſ=

trial bodtes. | p. 19$

| Chap. 34. Of the Teleſmcs made upon Mettalls, ' what vertues they

being ingraven, Teceive from the Stars. .-180

Chap. 3s . Of the Teleſmatical Images of the Faces, aud of thoj Ima-

ves which are without the Zodjach. » p.18z

Chap. 36. Of Teleſmes and how to make them, | Þ- 138

Chap. 37. Of the Telrſmes of Saturn and Zazel. p.210

Chap. 38. Of the Teleſmes of Jupiter and Kedemel, Pp. 213

| Chao. 39g. Of the Teleſmes of Mars and Barzabel. P. 213.
1 Chap, qo. Of the Taliſmans of the Sun, and S0ralls p- 21.4"

- » hs 4 Chap. 41,

- Chap. 41: *Of we Tali/inars, . of Venus and Kedemel. © p, zxg
ar "OF pe Images of the Head and Fayle of the Dragaz of the

© +=" hal: bi | P:217
, Of the Tdeſmatical Imazes of the Manſions of the

Of tbe Images of the fixed Behenian Stars, przaz |
7. Of Images, the figare whereof is not after the likeneſs df

© an) Celeſtial Feure, | but after the likeneſs of that which the minde
T2 4 the worker deſires, as you ſhall finde in the ſicond aad third
yi |

. ES P. 221
ene, 43. Of certain Celeſtial obſervations and the prattiſe of ſome
© Teleſmatical Images. P- 226
Chap. 49. Of the Geomantick and Teleſmatical Charadters which

are made after the rule and imitation of Celeſtial, and how with th:
table thereof they are deduced out of Geomantical Figures. p. 232
Chap. 50. Of Teleſmat ical Charatters which are drawn from things

themſelves by a certain likeneſs. P. 239
Chap. > bh That no djivingtios without Aſtromancy and Gromancy is
perſedt. | Pegg

CCC CO. 1

—.

The Contents of the Second B ook.

(Cy. I Oueſtions coerning the firſt houſe and the ſpxnifi cation of
the Rulers, Idea*s and Figures in the ſame.

S = Pe 6
Chap. 2. Of the ſecond Houſe, and of the ſignification of all the Dc-

maids which may be qudged in it. p. Io
Chap. 3. Of the third Houſt, and of the Demands which may be made
FDCT.CIR. on p-18 ++

Chap, 4. Of the foarth Ho'vſe and the Demands therein contained. p.t3
Chap. 5. f the fifth Houſe, an1 of the Demands th:rein contained. 31
Chap. 6. Of the fexth Houſe, and its Oweftions, viz. of ſickneſs, Ser-
vants, ſmal Cattel. : p.38
Chap. 7. Significations of the ſeventh Houſe, vite of Marriages, Eu-
mes, Wais, Lawſuits, azd Contratts, experimented by Sir. Chr.
_ Heydon « Oueſtions of Furjtives and Thefts, and accordiag to Car-
dans experience are preſented here, which are true in Aſtrologie, and
_ 8s certazn wn this Art of .Geomancy aud Teleſmes. P-45
Chap. 8. Of th: ciebth Houſe, p.56-
Chap..g. 9f tbe ain(h Hoſe. p- 63
Chap. 10. Of the tenth Houſe. p-70 .
Chap. 11. of the eleveath Houſe. Fe pers ,
Chap. 12, Of tbe twelfy Houſe, viz. Impriſonmnts great __
£ witcher)

——

-
—— :
. ©

witchery, private Enemies, labour,

.* H et © J F E ; Ct: £4 yu £ ” Pg Y 5 PFs . Ts 'S Fy
. LY < E327 + & 1.4 : mg +
wp. Is au 0 Rh CE ye 32” * *
> **g ; _ - \&-T" wy.” = x Pats,
. . Sk. 8 WM LAY #7 ; 7
Ch ap. 13, Ab; the "s ES
P. I3s i [4 0 0f Be
x ; - 3 6 X17,
6 =# EE 4. s L ts,
; OB

xteen Figures have by the twelve a vs "1
Chap. 14. Of the good or ill Houſes, and - which they de, 'w "
figares be ia tinir places. | ” £7I® poyon, 5

Chap. 15. Of the power of Aſtromancy and Geoma
 _ and Houſes of the Earth. > -. Y
Chap. 16. Of the two Witneſſes. me Pe 331
Chap. 17. 9f the Fudge. _—
Chap. 18. of Aftromancy, Geomancy in the interpret Dreams. p. 166

© = > —— —— — |S > Bon

+ I——_— —— _ -

The Concents of the Third Book.

( JFp-r- Of ſeveral confederations to be obſerved for the better jude-

ing of a Dueſtion. Pp.
Chap. 2. Of the ſcenification of the © uerent and Dueſpted. 2

Chap. 3. When a figure is Radical, and fit to be Judged, P.4
Chap. 4: Of the Poſſibility or Impoſſubulity of the Matter. 5
Chap. 5. Of the Perſon,or Maticr, futhering or impeding the Buſcſs.5
Chap. 6. Of the time whereia a Buſineſs may be performed. P.
Chap. 7. Of Moles, Marks and Scars of the © uereut and Duefeted. g

C hap. 8. Fudgements pr oper to the firſt Hovſe (i, ce.) p-10
Chap. 9g. Oueſtioas belonging to tbe ſecond Houſe. P.32
| Chap. 10. Fudgements prrtayaing to the third Houſe. p- 38
Chap, x1. Fudgements of the fourth Houſe. P-43
Chapt 12. Of Fudgement belonging to the fifth Houſe. p.48
Chap. 13. Judgement; belonging to the ſixth Houſe. P. 54
Chap. 14. Of the ſcueath Houſe. p-61
Chap. 15. Judgement: proper te the eighth Houſe. P- 74
Chap. 16. Oueſtions belonging to the niath Houſe pP.85
Chap. 17. Judge wents pertainiag to the tenth Houſe. P- II

Chap. 18. How to jurige a Figure of the Day. . P-114
Chap. 19. Judgements of the eleventh Houſe, The Alphabet of Au-

gels and Gent, or the writing and Languageof Heaves, p.123
Chap. 20. Judgments beloaging to the twelfth Houſe. p-1356
Chap. 21. How men receive & ualifications from the Stars, Planets
 Aagels : And bow we may have the Socicty of a Genius : And bow
te put it into (omcbiae, that inſtantly will recerve theſe heavenly gifts

for us. 144
Chap. 22. what Divine gifts man receives from God Ly dophinnky the
which transſtr's them through the ſeueral orders of the Angels to the
Plaats. And bow mai receives Advachiel, the Augel Amutuel or
Kyricl, and conver ſes with them of Diſeaſes, of Eartbiy Fadges, of
the {uruants of ſouls and ſpirits * And bow this wander out of whe
body, and bring tidings of ſtrange thints ; and of the powers of ſpitits,
| "=

=
: .
& bet,
© PE, oy.
5 * ; :
# #4
EN Y
PR 0”
*, bs or”

oh CERES
re «a Io
I Gui

 « fre «edi |
je Jeet 3 Hor lar if |

at diſeaſes
being arrefled into his F w A
Ez eres tin ab Kurie be ire
pag the Dead, and what , tr
er bar mnaxener-55 Mtn perſel@ ; of
: Taub is told ad bot Contries, hues --

y

fy
E:
ih:
ke

- Ron RF vec « Sr pomp ps
_- - bow be cureth diſeaſes ; and of what natural Kwulers bs teacheth + The -
: of ,#iſdove and Folly And how Braſts may put erg
- , , ©Natwe: How to make a Foll a Wiſeman, ec.
= a Eo huge of che . Natdvity : Of bim that defores the jockey
"_ Guardaes Genius, &c. \ -P. 19s
Chap 273 Of Schelicl the Genius, and Marid the Genius, and Am-
- * mediel the Genius : of what they ep ans bow 70 Oy with
- them. &c. | . P+ 183
IH Of the Temple of wiſdame. . p.188.
« 29. That hnowleag inclines the Minde to reed Atheiſm:
e Solution of original guilt, not in quantity. but in the quality of
ledge : Of the corcefive temper ; againſt Infiaity, - Au riety
2 —— of Impoſi:1es and Reſervatives : That we ſoryet
F'* -- + not our Mortality. | p. 195
* © Chap3>. 9f the ſoul;ſeverdl Opinions are raiſed, but the trath 1 beve |
. Zaught an this Temple + &C. ;. P-199
Chap.3 1. That you are withconfsdeace to attend and ob:y your: Genius
-. bys command, natural and unorequdicial diftates, &c. . p.203
Chap: 32. Of the adture of the Soul of Maa : what the Celeſtial » An=
A gs ay of it naturally to our apprebenſion, &c. | . 207
3- Of Angels, Gem and Idea's, concerning the ſubſtance of
-* the Ja, whether really diſtal, and then whether corporeal or in

_ - Corporeal, &co * p. 21%
2x8 chap. 34. That thoſe IntelleTual or Copnoſcitive operations we find is
| . -- our ſtlves,, &c. P-225
pag ole rai of the faculties of the ſenſible Soul in Motion
we * . P.230
Tp 36.- 4 wery true Narration of 4 Gentleman R. C. who bath tbe
2 F > tr of a Guardian Genius, &c. "p235
| le \ NN God, of angels, «3d of Spirits, of Gods Wiſcloſwe, Aug is

| wed. ra &C. p. 246 ..:

£ To
* - >,
- LS
Q p Py 3 ew ih x > "Y
+8 9”. an Ih :
Ke AS -'® La. -
4 7 Y 3
WP *y gy " Wa? I $6. wer Y PS Y
