Leading the Way to the Won-
der of the VYorld :
(Acompleat Phifitian)teaching the
Knowledge of all thing^Paft, Pre lent,
and toCome^m, Of Pleafure,!ong lifc^
Health, Youth, Blefiedncfs, VVifdome
and Virtucj and to Cui'e, Change and Remedy

ell Dicif.s in Young and Old.

With Rope Crucian MtdWnil M which ate
verified by a Practical Examination of

Principles in the great Worlds and fitted for

the eafie under \landingrflain pradife0up
ani benefit of man Captihii

By Jo\m Hcydtm Gent. ®/Aoj/otue?, A Servant or
Go J, and a Secretary of Nature,

And he too\the golden Calf which they had wade,
and burned it in the Fire, and ground it to pow-
der, and brewed it upon the Water , and made.
the Children oflfrael drinl^of it 7 Exo. 3 2 ,v. 20.

L 0 N D ON,
Printed by T.jVf. 2nd are to be

fold by Thomas H hittlefey at the Globe
in Cannon-Street near London- Snne^wd
at all other Bco(.'fellcrs Shops , 1661.

4<

To the truly Noble

(by all Titles)

Sr. Richard Temple,

Baronet, &>c.

Externaljlnternai and Eternal happinefs
be wifhed,

Honoured Sir3

JJj obferve every
man naturally deftres
a Superiority z to
S^iSiS* have freafures of
Gold and Silver y and to feem
great in the eyes of the world ; God
indeed Created all things for the
ufe of man f bat he might rule over
themy and acknowledge therein the
ftngular goodmfl and Omnipotent
cyofGod,& give him thanh^ for
his benefits'* honour him andpraife
him : But there is no man losses
4 3 after

The Epiftle

after tbefe things ^otherwife then by
fpending his dayes idly, they would
enjoy them without any previous
labour and danger ; neither doe
they look then/ out of that place,
where God hath treafured them up,
whoexpeBe alfo that winfbould
fee\ for them there , and to thofe
thdtfe\i w^ he give them:
but there is not any that labors for
a poffijjio/t i# that place, and there*
fore thrfe Riches are not found*
For the way to this place , and the
place it f If hath bem mknownfor
a long | and it is hidden from the
gr:ateft pari of the world. Bitf
noffyithfianding it be difRcult^and
laborious to finde out this way and
place y yst the place JJjould be
(might after ; But it is not the will
?fGod to conceale avy thing from

thofe

Dedicatory.

tbofelbaTarebis 5 and therefore in
tbk lafl age, before the final judge-
ment comes, aUthefe things Jhalbe
manifejied to tbofe that are un-
worthy : As he himfelf ( though
obfcnrelyjefi itjhouldbe maniffi-
ed to the unworthy) bathfpoken in
a certain place } there h no-
thing covered that flail not be re-
sealed, and hidden that fbaUnat
be known; and therefore being z
Servant of God , and Secretary
of Nature , we do declare the will
of God to the World, which we
have atfo already performed and
pnbltjbed in Italy and England^
but ntoft men, either revile or con-
temn that our Harmony of the
World, and Temple of Wifdom
&c. or elfe waving the fpirit of
Cod, they expeB the frofofals

there"

TheEpiftle

thereof from us y JnPP°flng WQ
Will jlraight way teach them how
toma\e Gold by Art , orfurnijh
them with ample treafures, where-
by they may live pompoufly in the
face of the world , faagger , and
make wars^ turn ZJfurers , Glut^
tons and Drunkards Jive unchaji-
Ijl) and defile their whole life with
fevsral other fins j all which things
are contrary- to the bleffedwill of
G&d'ithefe menfhonld have learnt
fromthofe ten Virgins ( whereof
•five that were footiflj demanded
Oylefor their Lamps , from thofe
five that were wife ) how that the
eafe is much otherwife ; It is expe-
dient that every man fbould labour
for the treafitre by the ajpftance of
Qod.and his own particular fear^ch
and indnflfy. Bat the perverfe in -

tent ions

Dedicatory.

Untions ofthefe Fellows we under*
ft and cut of their writings 5 by the
fwgular Grace and Revelation if
God 5 "toe do flop our ears , and
wrap oar felves , as n were in
clouds, to avoid the bellowing and
howling ofthofe pieny who in faain
cry out for Gold* Andhence in*
deed it comes to paffe \ that thy
brand us with infinite Calumnies
andS landers jvhich notypkhftandr
ing we d-e not rcfent , but God in
his good time will judge them for
it- But after that we had well
hjtown C though unhiownto you)
and perceived all by your writings
how diligently you are to perufe
the holy Scripture, & feehjhe true
knowledge of God : We Honour
yqp Sir Richar d above thoufands,
andfignifie ihm much to yen 5 not,

but

The Epiftle

but that you know as much as our
felf : But as a tohgn of our good
will, that may make you mindefull
ofns0 There is a Mountain fttua*
ted in the mideji of the Earth , or
Centre of the World, which is both
fmall and great. It is foftyandaU
fo above meafure hard andflony.
It is far off] and near at hand, hit
by the providence of God invi-
fible. In it are hidden mof ample
treafures , which the world is not
able to value. Ihis mountain by
envy of the Devill , who alwayes
oppofeth the glory of God, and the
happineffe of man, is compaffed a-
b.o%t with very cruel Beafis and 0-
ther ravenous Birds, which mahg
the way thither both difficult and
danqerous. And therefore hither-
toy becmfe the time is not yt comcy

the

Dedicatory.

he way thither could ? ot be
rought after 7 nor found out5 but
ww the way is to be found by
hofe that are worthy , but not-
ftithjlanding by every P<ans felf
labour and endeavours. To this
mountain, y on Jhall go in a certain
Ni^ht (when it comes ) moji long
and moji dark^, and fee that y ott
prepare your felf e by Prayer.lnfifl
ppon the way that leads to the
Mountain y but as\ not of any man
where the way lies : Onely follow
your Holy Guide , who will offer
himfdfto you^andwill meet you in
the way , but you fb all not kpow
him. This Guide will brin* you
to the Mountain at Midnight \when
all things are filent and dark - It
is necefjary that yon arm your felf
with heroickjcouragejeaft you fear

thofc

TheEpiftle

ihofe things that will happen, and
fo fall backj Tou need no Sword,
Horfe andPiftols, Sec. nor any
other bodily weapon*, onely call
upon God fincerdy and heartily }
When you have difco<vered the
Mountain, the firji Miracle that
will appear, is this, a m<)fi<vekement
and very great winde that will
Jbakg the Mountain, and Jhatter
the Rockj in pieces', you fbal be en-*
counter d alfo by Lyons &* Drag*
gons, and other terrible Beafts,bnt
fear not any ofthefs things, be re-
folnte and take heed that y on re-
turn not, for your Holy Guide
that brought you thither, will not
ftiffer any eviU to befall you. As
for the treafure, it is not yet difco *
vered, hut it is very near , after
this wind will come an Earthquake

that

Dedicatory^

that will overthrow tbofe things,
which the winde hath left 5 and
wake all flat ; Butbefure that yen
fall not off: the Earthquake being
paji, there Jhall follow afire y that
will con fume the Earthly Rnbbijh,
• and ciifcover the treafure ; but as
yet yon cannot fee itt After all theft
\ things ) and mar the day breakg ,
\ there /ball be a great C almond yon
\ pall fee the Day Star arife i and
\ the dawning will appear , and yon
t jlj all perceive a great t reafure ; the
chief eft things and mo ft perftSl
that are there are written of at
large in this Bool^ Thefe medi-
cines being uftd^ as your Holy
Guide fball teach you, will make
yon young when yon are old health^
full, long lived 3 wife and virtu-
ous ; and you ' Jhall perceive no

diftafe

The Epiftie

difeafe in any part of your bod^

by means of the things taught in

this Boo^ youfJjail finde Pearls

of that Excellency , which cannot

be imagined : But do not y oh ar+

re gate any thing to your felf ^ be*

caufe tf your prefent power ^ but be

cmtentcdwith that which the Ho*

ly Guide ftal corttmwricMte toyouy

praife God perpetually for this his

gift^and have a jpecially care that

you ufe it not for worldly Pride j

but in/ploy it infuch worl^s^which

are contrary to the world ; ufe it

rightly, and enjoy it fo , as if you

had it not\ live a temperate life,

and beware of all fin^ otherwife the

Holy Guide will forfakfi yon, and

you (hall he deprived of this hap*

pineffc l Forfyow this of a truth,

tvbofoever abnfetb what he learns

pom his Guide, and lives not ex-

emplarily

Dedicatory.

mplarly -purely \ and devoutly be*
?Qre men^ hejhall loofe this benefit -y
mdfcarce any hope mil there be
efty ever to nenew it afterwards.
Thus cravtngTardonfor my bold*
leffe, but yon may partly thanh^e
wurfelfi Ton taught me this fa •
niliarity \ And now I humbly
yrefent my felfy

Sir i

your affe&ionatc

March 15.
2 h. 45'.

P. M.

1 6 6 4,

Servant,

John H e yd on.

|Mp *$mi WWW •$*•"*#*

The Preface.

E xravelVd from Sydmouth
(where we had continued by the
[pace of one whole year} for
London and Spain by the
South Sea, taking with us Vi-
duals for twelve moneths\And
ad «ood Winds front the Eajh though foft and
>eakf , for five monethsfpaze, and more. But
yen the winde came about, and fetled in the
Veft for many dayes, fo as we could ma\e little
r no way, and were fumetimes in purpofe to turn
ack< But then again there arofe pong
nd great Windes from the South, with a point
iaft, which carried us ups(for all that we could
\oe J towards the North : F.y which time our
hauals failed us , though we had made good
tare of them. S o that finding our f elves in the
udfi ef the great eft wilderneffe of Waters m
he World, without Victuals , we gave our felves
or loft men,andpreparedfort)eath.Tetwe did
ift up our hearts and voices to God above, wh$
heweth his wonders in the Deeps Befeeching him
f hk Mercy, that as in the Beginning he difco*
b vtrei

The Preface.

vcred the Face of the Veep , and brought forth
"Dry-land '■> So he would now discover Land to
usjbat we might not per ifh. And it came to pafs,
that the next day about evenings we faw with-
in a \enning before us, towards the North, as it
were tbic\Clouds, which did put us infome hope
of Land}, Knowing how that part of the South
fea was utterly unknown , and might have
Jflands or Continents , that hitherto were not
come to light , Wherefore we bent our courfe
thither j where we faw the appearance of Land,
all that Evening ; And in the Dawning of the
next Day, we might plainly difcem that it was
a land ; flat to our fight and full of Bofcage ,
which made it (hew the more Darl^ And after
an houre and a halfs fay ling , we entred into a
good Haven,hemg the Port of a faire City ; n ot
great indeed, but well built , and that gave a
pleafant view from the Sea : A>id we thinkjng
every minuit long , till we were on Land, came
clofe to the fhore , and offered to land-. But
iiraightwayes we faw divers of the people, with
Baflonsin their hands, ( as it were j forbidding
Us to land ; Tet without any cryes or fiercenejfey
but onely as warning us off, by fignes that they
made. Whereupon being not a little difcontfor-
ied, we were advifing with our f elves, what we
fhould do. During which time, there made forth
to us a fmall Boat, with about eight perfons in it%
whereof one of them had in his hand a Tiffiajf
of a yellow Cane Jtif fed at both ends withgreen9

who

The Preface.

who came aboard our (hip , without any ftjew of
diitruli at all. And when he faw one of our num-
ber prefent himfelf fomewhat afore the reft , he
drew forth a little Scrouleof Parchment (Jome-
fph.n yellower than our parchment, and fining
tikgtbe Leaves of Writing Tables, but other-
wife [off and flexible ) and delivered it to our
foremoji Man . In which fcroule were written in
antient Hebrew , and in ancient Greekg} and in
good Latine of the School \ and in Spanifhjbefe
words ; Land ye not , none of yon ; And
provide to be gone from this Coaft, with-
in Hxteen dayes, except you have further
time given you. Mean while, if you wane
frefti Water , or Vi&ual, or help for your
Sick, or that your (hip needeth repaire,
write down your wants, and you (hall
have that which belongeth to Mercy.
This fcroule wasfigned with a Stamp o/Cheru-
bins Wings , not fpread , but hanging clown-*
wards -, And by them a Crojfe. Ibis being de-
livered , the Officer returned 5 and left onely a
fervant with us to receive our Anfwer. Conful-
tin% hereupon among ft our felves, we were much
-perplexed. The denial of Landing , and haftf
warning us away, troubled us much ; On the o*
ther fide, tefindethat the People hadlanguageSj
and werefo full of humanity, did comfort us not
a little. And above all , the figne of the Crofft
to that Inftrument, wm to us a great re'joyting,
find m it were a certain prefage &f Good. Our

b 2 4tf*gL

The Preface,

Anfwer was in theSpanifh tongue, That for
our Ship, it was well -, For we had rather met
with Calms, and contrary windes than any tem-
pers. For our fick^tbey were many, and in very
ill Cafe 5 So that if they were not permitted to
Land, they ran in danger of their Lives. Our
other wants we fet down in particular,ad-
ding , 7 hat we had fome little ftore of Mer-
chandize^ which if it pleafedthm to de ale for,
it might fupply our Wants, without being charge
able unto them. We offered fome reward in Pi-
fiolet unto thefervant, and a piece of Crimfon
Velvet to be prefented to the Officer : But the
Servant took^ them not, nor wuuldfcarce loo\up-
en them \ And Co left us, and went backjn ano-
ther Boat, which wasfent for him.

About three houres after we had difpatched
eur Anfwer 5 there came towards us, a Perfon
(as it Ceemed) of place. He had on him a Gown
with wide f!eeves,of a kinde of Water Chamolot^
of an excellent green Colour , farre more glojfie
than ours : His under apparel was green A-
zure ; And fo was hti Hat, being in the form of
a lurban, daintily made, and not fo huge as the
Turkifh Turbans ; And the Lockj of his Haire
came down below the Brims of it. A reverend
Mm was he to behold. He came in a Boat, gilt
in fome part of ity with foure Perfons more one-
ly in that Boat ; And was followed by another
Boat) wherein were fome twenty. When he was
cemi within a Flight- foot of our Ship y Signer

were

The Preface.

were made to us, that wefbould fend forth fome
to meet him upon the Water -> which weprefent-
ly did in our Ship- boat , cr Skjjfe, fending the
principal! Mw among\\ us fave one, and foure
of our Number with him. When we were come
within fix yards of their Boat, they called to us
to ft ay , and not to approach further ; which
we did. And thereupon the Man, whom 1 be-
fore defcribed, flood upland with a loud voice ,in
Spanifh , askgd-, Are ye Chriflians? We an-
faered ; We were ; fearing th? lejfe, becaufe of
the Crolfe we had feen in the Subfcription. At
which Anfwer the fa id Perfon lift up his Right
hand towards Heaven, and drew-it foftly to his
mouth, (which is the Gefture they ufe , when
they thank^ God;*) And i hen fard: If ye will
fwear, (all of you) by the Merit efthe Saviour,
that ye are no Firates ; Nor have jhed blood,
I 'awfully >,nor unlaw fully, within forty dayespaft,
you may have licenfe to come on Land, We f aid,
We were all ready to take that Oath.
Whereupon one ofthofe that were with him , be-
ing Qas itfeemed) a Notarie , made an Entrie
sfthit Aft. Which done , another of the fame
Boat, after his Lord hadfpokgn a- little to him,
[aid aloud ; My Lord would haveyou know
that it is not of Pride, orgreatnefle, that
he commeth not aboard your Ship ; But
for that, in your Anfwer, you declare,
that you have many fick amongft you, lie
was warned by the Confervatour of Health,
b 3 of

-a

The Preface.

of the City , that he (hould keep a dijlance.
We were his humble few ants ; /:nd accounted
for great Honour-, and fingular Humanity to-
wards us , that which was already done ; But
hoped well, that the Nature of the fxknefl, of
our Mn, was not infectious. So he returned ;
And a while after came the Notary to us a-
hoard our Ship ; holding in his hand a fruit of
that Countrey, like an Orenge , but of colour
between Orenge-tawney and Scarlet , which
caji a Moll excellent Odour, He ufed it ( as it
feemnh ) for a prefervative againft InfcCion.
He gave us our Oath, i)y the Name of [efus
and his Merits : And after told us } that the
next day , by fix of the Clocke in the Morning,
we jhould befent to, and brought to the j\r angers
houfe , Qfohe called it) where we jhould be ac-
commodated of things both for our whole and
for our ficl^. So he left us *, And when we of-
fered him fome Tijtolets, he fmilingj 'aid $ He
muft not be twice paid for one Labour :
Meaning (ail take it) that he had Salary fuf-
ficient of the State for his fervice. For (as I
after learned ) they call an Officer that taketh
Rewards, twice paid.

Ihe next Morning early , there came to us
the fame Officer , that came to us atfirfl with
fyis Cane, and told us-, He came to conduct.
us the grangers houfe; And that he had pre-
vented the Hon re, becaufe we might have
fche whole day before us3for our bufinefTe.

For

The Preface.

For (faid he) if you will follow mine ad-
vice, there (hall tirft go with me fome rew
of you, and fee the place, and how it may
be made convenient for you ■> And then
you may fend for your Sick , and the reft
of your Number , which ye will bring on
Land. We tbkznkgd him , and faid , That this
care which he took of defolate ftrangers,
God would reward. And fo fix of us went a-
Jhore with him : A d when we were landed, he
went before us, and turned to us, and faid •, he
was our fervant, and our guide. He led its
thorow three faire flreets ; And aU the way we
went , there were gathered fome People on both
fides, ftanding in a Row -, but info civ ill afa-
Jhion, as if it had been, not to wonder at us , but
to welcome us : And divers of them,as we pafjed
by them, put their Arms a little abroad-, which
is their Gefiure , when they bid any welcome.
The fir angers houfe is a faire andfpacious houfe9
built of Bric^of fomewhat a blewer colour than
our Brick^', And with handfome windows, fome
ofGlaffe, fome of a kjnde of Cambric\oyVd.
He brought us firfi into a faire Parlour above
Jiaires, and then ask^ed us ; What number of
Perfons we were > And how many lick >
We anfweredy We were in all ffickand
whole) 2$o. Perfons, whereof our lick
were feventeen. Re de fired us to have pati-
ence a little, and to ft ay till he came hackjo us°,
Which was about art houre after 3 And then he
b A led

,_ _ &w

The Preface.

led us to fee the ( bambers , which were provim
dedfor us , being in number 250. Ibey having
caftit ( as itfeemeth } thatfoure ofthofe (b am-
bers, which were better than the reft, might re-
ceive foure of the principal Men qf our company,
and lodge them alone by themf elves ; and the
reft were to lodge us. The Chambers were band*
fome and cheer full C h ambers, and furnifhed ci-
villy. 7km he led us to a long Gallery, li^e a
Torture, where bejhewed us all along the one
fide ( for the other fide was but If all and Win-
dow ) fiventeen Cels , very neat ones, having
partitions of Cedar wood. Which Gallery and
Cells, beingin all 900. ( many more than we
needed ) were infiitnted as an Infirmary for
fick perfons. And he told us with all, that as
any our fic\ waxed well, he might be removed
from his Cell to a Chamber ; For which purpofe,
there were fet forth ten fpare Chambers , be fides
the number we fpa\e of before, 1 his done , he
brought usbacJ^ to the Parlour , and lifting up
his Cane a little , ( as they doe when thy give
any Charge or Command ) faid to us ; Ye are
to know,that the cuftome of the Land re.
quireth,that after this day, and to mor-
row, ( which we give you for removing of
your people from your fliip, ) you are to
keep within doores for three dayes But
let it not trouble you , nor do not think
your felves reftrained , but rather left to
your Reft and Eafe. You (hall want no-

thing3

fhe Preface.

thjng, and there are fix of our People ap-
pointed to attend you 3 for any burin eflfe
you may have abroad. We gave him thanks ,
with all affection and Refpecls, and [aid j God
iurely is m;mi felted in chisLand. We of-
fered kirn alf$ twenty Tijhlets , But he fmiled,
and onely [aid? What > twice paid / And ft
he left us. Seen after our Dinner wasferved in;
which was right good Viands , both for Bread ,
Meat) Wine , Sic. Better than any Collegiate
Viet that I have h^town in Europe. We had
mfo drin\ of three forts, Ale, Beer, Sy»
dermal1 whole fome and good *, Wine of the Grapey
and another drin\of Grain , fuch as is with us
our Mum, but more clear : And a kjnde of Ter-
ry like the Ye are juice , made of a fruit of that
Countrey ; A wonder fullf leafing and Refrejb-
ing VrinK Be fides, there were brought in to us,
great fiore ofthofe Scarlet Orenges,for our Stckj>
which (they fa id ) were an affured Remedy for
fictyfife taken at Sea, 7 here was given us alfo
a Box offmallgray, or whitijh Tills, which they
wijhed our fic\ frould take, one of the Tills, eve-
ry night before fleep -, which (they faid ) would
haften their recovery. 7 he next day , after that
our trouble of Carriage and Removing of our
men and goods, out ofeurjhip>was fomewhatfet-
led and quiet , I thought good to call our Com*
fany together, and when they were affembled,faid
unto them-, My dear friends , Let us know
ourfelves, and how it ftandeth with us.

We

The Preface.

Wcare Men caft on land as Jo>w was, out
of the Whales beliy, when we were as buried
in the Deep : And now we are on Land,
we are but between Death and Life ; For
we are beyond, both the old World , and
the New; And whether ever wefhail fee
Ear0pf,Godonelykuoweth. It is akindeof
Miracle hath brought us hither : And it
muftbe little lelTe, that (hall bring us
hence. Therefore in regard of our Deli-
verance pair, and our danger prefent,and
to come, let us look up to God,and every
man reform his own wayes. Beiides,we
are come here amongft a ChrijHm Peo-
j>leJ full of Piety and Humanity : Let us
not bring that Confufion of face upon
our felves, as to (hew our vices, or unwor-
thinefTe before them. Yet there is more.
For the/ have by Commandement,
( though in form of CourteQe) Cloiftered
us within thefe wals, for three daies; who
knoweth, whether it be not, to take fome
tafte of our manners and conditions 1 And
if they find thembad,to banifh usftraight
wayes 5 If good, to give us further time.
For thefe men,that they have given us for
attendance, may wichal have an eye upon
us. Therefore for Gods love, and as we
love the weale of our Souls and Bodies, let
us fo behave our felves , as we may be at
peace with God, and may finde grace in

the

The Preface.

the eyes of this People. Our Company with
one vjce thtinked me for my good Admonition^
and promt fed me to live foberly and civilly, and
without giving any theleaft tecaf&n of Offence*
So we fyem our three day es joyfully, and without
care^ in expe&ation what would be done with us ,
•when they were expired. During which timey
we had every hov.re joy of the amendment of our
fic^ who thought themflves calf into Come Di-
vine Poo I e o f H e a 1 1 n g *, They mended fo kjnd-
ly andfo fati 3 ai you may read in our Temple
of Wifdome.

Ihe morrow after our three dayei were pa (iy
there came to us a new Man , that we had not
feen before ^loathed in Azure ^as the former was,
five that his Turban was white ^with a (mall red
Crofie on the Top. He had alfo a Tippet of fine
Linnen. At his camming in^he did bend to ns a
little*, and put his arms broad. We of our parts
fainted him in a very lowly and fubmiffve man-
ner , As looking that from him , we (hould re-
ceive Sentence of Lih*. or Death He defired to
fpeal^with fome few of us : Whereupon fix of us
onely ftayed* and the re\i avoided the room. He
[aid ; I am by Office Governour of this
Houfe of Strangers, and by Vocation
lam zChriftian Friefls , and of the or-
der of the Kofie Croffe ; and therefore
am come to you to offer you my fer-
vice, both as ftrangers, and chiefly as Chri-
ftans. Some tilings I may tell you3 which I

think

The Preface

think you will not be unwilling to heare.
The State hath given you Licence to flay-
on Land, for the (pace of fix weeks : And
let it not trouble you , if your occafions
ask further time, for the Law in this point
is not precife -■> And I do not doubt , but
my fdf (hall be able to obtain for you,
fuch fur, her time, as may be convenient.
Ye (hall alfo uuderftand, that the Stran-
gers Houfe, is at this time Rich, and much
aforehand \ For it hath laid up Revenue
thefe 36000. years : For fo long it is fiuce
any Stranger airived in this part. And
therefore take ye nocare; theStatewill
defray you all the time you flay ; Neither
mall you ftay one day the lefle for that. As
for any Merchandize ye have brought, ye
(hall be well ufed , and have your return,
either in Merchandize,or in Gold and Sil-
ver: For to us it is all one. And if you
have any other Requefts to make , hide it
not. Forye mall flnde, we will not make
your Countenance to fall, by the Anfwer
ye (hall receive. Onely this I muft tell you
that none of j ou muft go above a Julo, or
Karan (that is with them^a Mile and an half)
from the walls of the City , without efpe-
ciall leave. JVeanfweredy after we bad looked
a while one upon another , admiring this graci-
ous and parent- 1 il{e ufage ^ That we could net
tell what to fay : For we wanted words to ex-

preffe

The Preface.

prejfe our thanh y And his Noble free Offers
left us nothing to as\ Itfeemed to us, that we
had before us a picture efourSa] vation in Hea-
ven: For we that were a while fince in the jaws
of Death, were now brought into a place cohere
we found nothing but Confolations.Forthe Com-
vnandement laid upon us, we would not faile to
obey it, though it was impotftble but our Hearts
ftiould be en flamed to tred further upon this hap-
py and holy Ground We added, That our
Tongues jhould fir ft cleave to the Roofs of our
Mouths,ere we Jhould forget,either his Reverend
Ferfon , or this whole Nation , in our Prayers.
We alfo mo ft humbly be fought him , to accept of
us as his trnefervants , by ajufl Right as ever
men on earth were bounden ; laying and pre fen-
ting , both our Tafons , and all we had , at his
feet. He f aid, He was a Vrieft,and looks d for a.
Priefts reward , which was our Brotherly love^
and the good of our fouls and bodies. So he went
from us, not without tears of tendernefie in
bis eyes ; And left us alfo confufed with joy and
kindnep, faying amongft our f elves , That we
were come into a Land of Angels, which did ap-
pear to us daily, and prevent us with Comforts^
which we thought not of \ much leffe expecled.

The next day about i ©. of the Clocks, the Go*
•vernour came to us again^and after <alutationy
faid familiarly 5 That he was come to vifit us ;
And called for a Chair, and fat him down\ And
&e heing fome ten cfus/jhe reft were of the me a*

ner

The Preface.

tier fort, or elfe gone abrfid} fat down with him.
And when we vxre ft ,he ktganihus. We of this
I/land of Apanua or Chrifle in Arabia ([for
fotkey> call it in their language} havethx, that
by means of our folitary Situation, and of the
Laws of Secrecy, which we have for our Travel-
lers , and our rare admiffion of Strangers, we
know well moft p art of the Habitable World,
and are our fives unknown. Therefore becaufe
he that hnoweth leafc, U fit t eft to a sty '< eft ions, it
is more reafon,for theEntertainment of the time,
that ye as\rne qut '[lions, than that I askjou. We
anfwered ; That we humbly thanked him , that
he would give us leave fo to do : And that we
conceived by the tafte we had already , that there
was no worldly thin<ion Earth,, more worthy to
be known than the State of that happy Land.
But above all (we faid*) fince that we were met.
from the fever al Ends of the I for Id , and hoped
ajfuredly 5 that we ftmdd meet one day in the
Kingdome of Heaven ( for that we were both
parts ChrijUans) we deftred to know (in refpeel
that Land was fo rem.ote, andfo divided by va\l
and unknown Seas , from the Land, where our
Saviour walked on Earth ) who was the Apo-
file of that Nation, and how it was converted to
the Faith ? It appeared in hU face, that he too\
great contentment in this (jueftion in the firs!
place-, For it fheweth that you firftfeekthe
Kingdome of Heaven ; And IftaJl gladlyy
and briefly, fa t is fie your demand.

About

The Preface.

About Twenty years after the Afcenfion of our
Saviour, it came topaffe, that there was feen by
the People ofDanirar ( a City upon the Ealiem
Coaftofour Ifland} within Night, (the Night
was cloudy and calm ) as it might befome wile
into thefea, a great Pillar of Light *, Not fiarp
but in form of a Columne,or Cylinder , rifing
from the Sea, a great way up towards Peaven -,
and on the Hop of it was feen a large Crcffe of
Lighty more bright and rejpendent than the Bo-
dy of the Pillar. Upon which fo flrange a Spe-
ctacle, the people of the City gathered apace to-
gether upon the Sands to wonder ; And fo after
put themfelves into a number offmall Boats, to
go neerer to thU marvellous fight. But when the
Boats were come within (about J 60. year ds of
the Tillzr, they found themfelves all bound, and
eouldgo no further j yet p as they might move to
go about, but might not approach neerer. So as
the Boats flood all as in a theater, beholding this
Light as an Heavenly Signe. It fo fell out, that
there was in one of the Boats , one of the wife
Men of the Society of the Rofie Crucians, wh fe
Houfe or Colledge ( my good Brethren) is the
very Eye of this Kingdome , who having a while
attentively and devoutly viewed , and contem-
plated this Pillar and Croffe, fell down upon his
face ; and then he raifed himf elf upon his kpee$9
and lifting up his hands to Heaven y made his
payers in this manner.

Lord

The Preface.

Lord God of Heaven and Earth ; thou*
haft vouch fa fed of thy Grace3 to thofe of
our Order5to know thy works of Creation
and the Secrets of them •, And to difcem
(ds far as appertained! to the Generation
of Men J Between divine Miracles3Works
of Nature, works of Art 3 and Impoftures,
and Illuiions of all forts. I do here ac-
knowledge and teftifie before this people,
that the Thing which we now fee before
our eyes, is thy Finger^and a true Miracle*
And for as much as we learn in our Books
that thou never worked Miracles but to a
Divine and excellent End , Qfor the Laws
of Nature are thine own Laws , and thoii
exceeded: them not biit upon great caufe)
We moft humbly befeech thee, toprofper
this great Signe ; And to give us the In-
terpretation and ufe of it in Mercy ;
Which thou doeft ift fome part fecretly
promife, by fending it unto us.

When he had made hti Prayer , he prefently
found the Boat he wm in , moveable , and un-
bound ; whereas all the reft remained (lilt {aft ;
And taking that for an ajjurance of Leave to
approach , he caufed the Boat to be foftl)', and
with filence } rowed towards the Pillar. But
ere he came neer ity the Pillar and CrofTe of
Li^ht brake up 3 and caft it J "elf abroad , as it
were^nto a firmament of many Stan ; which

a I fo

The Preface

alfo vanifljed foon after 5 and there was nothing
left to be feen but a fmall Ark orCheft
of Cedar, ^/rj/, and not wet at all with water ^
though it [warn. And in the Fore- end of it
which was towards himy grew a fmall green
Branch of Palme j And when the Rclk Cruci-
an had taken it with all reverence into his
Bo.aty it opened of it f elf ^ and there werefcund
in it a Book and a Letter 3 Koth written
in fine parchment ^ and wrapped in Sindons of
Linnen. 7 he Book containing all the Carta*
nicall Books of tkeQld and New Teita-jp
nient, according as you have them-, (For we
tytow well what the Churches with you recdve%)
And the Apocalypfeit/f/f •, And feme otbei»
Books of the New Te ft anient , which were nmk
at that time written, were neverthelefte in tW
Book. And for the Letter^ it was in ibefe
words.

I| o H N5 a Servant of the Highefr,
and ApoftteofjES usCHRisf,
was warned by an Angell, (hat ap-
peared to me id a vifion of Glory >
that I fliould commit this Arke re the
floods of the Sea. Therefore • .-
teftificand declare unto that people
where G o D (hall ordain this Arke to
come to Lnjid, that in the fame

The Preface.

is come unto them Salvation and
Peace, and good Will, from the Fa-
ther, and from the Lord Je-
sus.

Ihere was alfo in boththefe writings, as well

the Book,,, as, the Letter* wrought, a great Mi*

rack, Conforme to that of the Apo files in the

Original! gift of Tongues. For there being at

that time, in this Land, Hebrews, Perfians,

mand Indians, be fides the Natives, every one

™ read upon the book^ and the Letter , as if

they had been written in bis own Language.'

And thus w 06 this Land faved from Infidelity,

Mas the Remain of the Old World was from Wa-

^er) by an Arke, through the ApofiolicaU and

Miraculous Evangelifme of Saint John.hnd

here he paufed,and a MefTenger came,and

called him from us. So this was all that

palled in that Conference.

The next day the fame Governor! r
came again to us, immediately after din-
ner, and excufed himfelf, faying? That the-
day before, he was called from usfomewhat ab-
ruptly^ but flow he will make us amends, and
fpend time with us, if we held his Company and
Conference agreeable. We anfwered , That
we held it fo agreeable and pleafing to us, as we
forgot both dangers pa\\, and fears to come, for
the time we heard him fpeakj And that we

thought

The Preface.

thought an hour font with him, was worth
years of our former life. He bowed himfelf
a little to us, and after we were fet again
he faid ; Well, *he §ue[ti6ns are on your fart.
One of our number faid after a little
Paufe; That there was a Matter we were no
It fide fir ous to know> then fearfull to as\e, leaft-
we might prefume too farr. But encouraged
by his rare Humanity towards us, (that could
fcarce thin\pur ftlves Strangers, being his vow^
ed and profejfed Servants ,) we would take the
Hardinefsto propound it: Humbly be fetching,
him, if he thought it not fit to be anfwered,tbat
he would pardon it , though he rejected it. We
faid , We well ohfeYved thofehis words , which
he formerly fpal^e,that this hap pay lfland,wher
we now (hod, was ktiown to few, and yet knew
wo ft of the Natious of the World ; which we
found to be true, considering they had the Lan-
guages of Europe, and knew much of our ftate
and bufineffe ; And yet we in Europe, (mt-
withftanding all the remote Difcoveries, & Na-
vigations of ibis lajl Age) never heard any of
the leaft Inkjing or Glimfe of this Ifland. Ibis
we found wonder full fir ange ; For that all Na-
tions have Enter-kpowledg one of another , either
by Voyage into Forraign fptrtSe, cr by Strangers
that come to them ; And though the Travailer
into a Forraigne Country, d&th commonly know
more by the eye, then he that ft ay eth at home can
bj reUt'wi of the Travailer -, let both wayes

ct fuffi*i

The Preface.

fuffice to makg a mutual knowledge in fome de'
gf&) on both parts. But for this lfland,we m-
ver heard tell of any Ship of theirs, that had
been feen to arrive upon anyjhore ofEmop^No
nor of either the Eaft or Weft Indies, nor yet of
any Ship of any other fart of the World that had
made return from them.

Aadyet.tlye Marvel I re fled not in this\For the
Schuatioii of it (as his Lordfhip [aid,) in the
ftcret Conclave of fitch a vaii Sea mougbt caufe
it, hut then that they jhould have knowledge
of the Languages, Vook^ Affabres ofthofe that
lyefuch a diftance from them, it was a thing we
could not tell what to makg of -■> For that it fee-
to its a condition and Propriety ■ of Divine
Towers and i>eings, to be hidden and unfeen to
others yand yet to have others open., and as in a
to them. At this fpeech the GoVernour
aerations fmile and faid} Ihatwre did
w.liHraske far don for this ghieftion we now
• ir J- or that it imported^ as if we thought
■j f Magicians, that fent forth
■Spirits of the Aire into all parts ft to bring them
\t intelligence of other Countries. It was
ei ed by us all, in all pofllble humble-
li yec with a Countenance cakc-
.now.Iedce, that .we knew he fpake it
x^rvlly^M hat wewere aft enough to think^
waS'fjyniwhxtfupernaturall m thtslflmd,
. i her as Adgtlicall, than Ma^icall.
bis L'trdibiplyiow truly y what itw.i?
tljatwade us Und.r and djultfullto asl^ tbh

gutfioh,

The Preface.

6htefiion> it was not any luck conceit, but be-
cause we remembred, be bad given a Touch in
his former Speech, that this Land bad Laws of
Secrecy touching Strangers. Totb's be faid
ycu remember it aright ; And therefore in that
Ifbai! fay to you, Imu{i referve \ome perticulars
which it is not Lawful! for me to reveale^ but
there will be enough left to give yGufatisfofti-
m.

Tm (ball underftand (that which perhaps
you will fcarce thinly credible^ that about three
thousand years agoe, or fomewhat more, the Na-
vigation of the world {fperially for remote voya-
ges) was greater than at this day, Vo ntit
tbinkjpith your felves,that 1 know not fow much
it is incre&fed with you within thefe fix f core
Tears: 1 kpow it wellt, and yet I fay, greater
then , than now : Whether it was, that the ex-
ample of the Arke, that faved the remnant of
men from the univerfajl Deluge., gave men
confidence to adventure upon the Waters-fir what
it was\ iutfuchisthe 'Truth. The Pbrenici-
an* , and fpecially the TyriansJW great Fleets.
So had tbe Carthaginians their Cohny, which
is further fFeft. Toward the Eaft tbe Shipping
effigy pr, wd of PaJcftina was lihgwife greaf,
China alfo,and the great eXmeric^which have
now but Junks , and Caw? s, abounded then in
tan Ships. This Iflmd, Qas appear eth by faith-
full Regifters of thofe times} had thm fifteen
hundred fir ong Ships, of great content. Of all
c \

The Preface.

tbis,there is with you (paring Memory, or mm ,-
But we have lar^e knowledge thjreof.

At that time, this land was k,r,own and fre-
quented by the (bips and Ve (fells of all the nations
before amend; (And as it cometb to piffe*) they
bad many tirws men of other Countries, that
were no Tylers, that came with fbew, as Per-
fians, Chaldeans /Egyptians and Grecian?,
So as almofy at/Nations cf Mipht and Fame re-
(orted hither; Ofwhome we hav? (otne Stirps,
and little Tribes with us, at this day. And for
cnr own Ships, they went fundry Voyages y as
wet) to your ft) eight j y whicbyoucall the Pilhrs
ef Hercu'fcv* t0 ot^er p^tiin the Pcrfian and
jVlcditcrr ane Si'as ; As to Paguin, (which is
the fame with Gambaline) and Qinszy, upon
the Oriental! 5eas>ai fan as to the Borders o- the
EdJfTartary.

At the fame time , and an arye after, or wore,
the Inhabit ants of the Holy Land dia flowifb.
For though tb? Narration and dif crip t ion, which
is made by a great Man with you , that the Ve-
fcendents oj Neptune plantedthere ; and of the
Magnificent 'temple, Palace, City and Hill ; fee
my Rofie Crucian Infallible Axiom at a , and f£e
manifold fir earns of goodly Navigable rivers ,
(which as fo many Chains environed the fame
Site, and 'Temple ; ) And the fever al Degrees of
Afcent, whereby men did climb up to the fame, at
vf it bad been a Scala Caeli, be all Poe-
tical} and fabulous : let fo much is true ,

that

The Preface.

that the faid Country of Judca , as well that
of Peru then called Coya, as that of Mexico
thin named Tyrambel , wre mighty and proud
Kingdom's, in Arms, Shifting-, and Riches ; Si
mighty) as at one time ( or at lea[i within the
jpacetf ten) ears,*) the\ h\h made two great ex-
peditions ; They qf.Tfttmbcl tbrqttgb Judca
to the Mediterrane pa •, and they of Coya
through theSowh fea upon this our Ifiand : And
for the former of thefe^wbicb iras into Europe,
the fane Author amcn^fl you 3 (as it ftemetb^)
had jome relation from his B?ara3 whom be re-
citeth : S^c the Harmony of the World, lib,
i. The Preface which indeed !« an inrro-
du&ion to the worke. For affuredly fuch a
thing there was. But whether it were the ancient
Athenians that had the glory of the Repulfe^and
Refiftance of thofe Forces v lean fay ttotbin^ :
But certain it U^ there never cante back^y either
Ship) or Man , from that Voyage. Neither bad
the other Voyage of thofe of Coya upon us, had
better fortune , if they had not met with Enemies
of great clemency. For the Kingof this lftand*
{by name Pbroates who was rat fed three timet
from death to life ; ) a wife Man, and a great
Warrier-j Knowing well both bis ownftrength,
and that of bis Enemies; bandied the waiter fo9
is be cut off their Land-forces from their fhifs;
and entoyled both their Navy, and their Cam?
with a greater power than theirs, both by fea and
hnd : And compiled Ibem to rendzr \bm\elve*
c 4 wit ty&y

The Preface.

without ftrik*ingftroke: And after they were at
bis MeVSy contenting bimfelf only with their
Qjtb) thai tb?y fhonldho more beare Amies a-
gainji him, dtfmifjed tbw all infafeiy. But the
Divine Revenge overtook^not long after tkoje
fond enterprises. For within leffe than the
(p we of one Hundred years, tbelftxnA was «f-
terly loft and desTro;. ed : Not by a great Farth-
quake, as your man ]ailb\ (For that whole TraEl
h little fubjeft to Eartb-quakgs;') But by a par-
ticular Delude or Inundation ; thofe Countries
having at this day , far greater Rivers, and
far higher Mouni*ine$, to poure down lVaters9
than any part of tbe Old world. But it is true,
xhxt the fame Inundation was not di ep\ Notpaft
forty foot y i&moft places, from the ground', So
that) although it deflroyed man and Beaft gene-
rally , fit form few wilde Inhabitants of the
d efcafed. Birds dfo were favsd by flying
to the high Trees and Woods. For as for Men,
although they had^uildings in min$ placei>high-
er than the Depth of the Water, 'let tl?at Inun-
dation, though it were (hallow, had a long con-
tinuance ; whereby they of the Vail?, that were
not drowned perifbedforwunt of fcodt and o-
tber things n:ceffary. So as marvaik)Ou not at
the thin Population of AmcricijWor at the rude-
u^ffe and ignorance of the people \ for you wuft
account ycur inhabitants of America as a young
f$eple\ lounger a tboufand years , at the leafl
then the reft of the world* Ftr that there was fa

muck

The Preface.

ywch r ftwe, fo f weewf fee tlaive rial i Kkood-and
their Particular Inundation. For the poor
Remnant cf Humane feed , which remained in
their Mount ainej, Feopled the Country again
fi&wly, by little and little ; Andbeingfimple and
lavage Feople, (Net li\e Noah and his Sons
which was the chief family of the Earth) they
were not able to leave Letters, Arts, and Civi-
lity, to their P oft erity ; And having lifywife in
their Mountancas Habitations been iifed , {in
refped of thee xtr earn coid of thofe Regions,') to
cloath them f elves with the Skjmis of lygersi
Bears, andgreai Hairy Goates, that they have in
\hofeparU\ When after the) came dewmnto the
Valley, and found the intolerable heats which are
there9 wdhjiew no means of lighter apparcll,
they were forced to he^in the Cuftome of going
naked, which contiuueth at this day. Onely they
iak£ great pride and delight in the Feathers of
Bir ds, that came wp to the. high Grounds, while
the Waters ftocd below. So you fee, by this
vi aw Accident of time , we left our traffique with
the Americans, with whom, of all otbers9 in
regard they lay near eft to us, we had mo ft com-
merce. As for the other parts of the World, it is
moft manifeft, that in the ages following, (whe-
ther.it were in rcfpell ofWarrs, or by a natural
revolution of time,") Navigation did every where
greatly decay, andfpeciatiy, farr voyages, (the
rather by the ufe of Gallies, and fuch vejfels as
cculd hardly brooks tks Ocean?) were altogether

left

The Preface.

left and omrtted. So then, that part of enter'
courfe, which could be from oth*r Nations, to
Sayle to us, you fee how it hatb long fnce c a-
fed-, Except it were by fome rare Accident, as
this of yours.

But now of the Ceffation of that tther part of
emercourje, which mought be by our juyling too*
ther Nations, I mud yield you fome othr caufe.
For I cannot fay, Qf I (ball fay truly, ) but our
Shipping, for Number* Strength, Marriners, Py.
lots, aniaU things that appertain? to Navigati-
on, Is as great as eve"-m And therefore why we
foonldfrt at home, / foall now give you an account
by it felfl And to will draw nearer, to give yon
fatisfatlion , to your principall ghteflion.

There raigned in this Iflsnd, about nineteen
hundred years ape, a K'vtg, whofe memory of aU
others we moll adores Not (up er •flit iou fly , but as
a divine instrument, though a mortall man : bis
name was Eugenius Theodida&us, you may
readthis at large in owrldca of ihzLw.and we
efleemhim as the Law-giver of our Nation, This
King had a large heart, infer ut able for good', and
was wholy bent to make his Kingdome and Peo-
ple happy. H>: therefore taking into conjidera-
tion^ how f(tffi:ient andfubjlantive this Land
was to maintain it f elf without any aid (at aU)
ofthetorrainer ; being 5600. Miles in circuit
and of rare Fertility of Syyle, in the greatefl
part thereof $ And finding alfothe (hipping of
this country might be plentifully Jet oji workf*

both

The Preface,

both by ffbingt and by tranjportations from Port to
Port, andh\ewife by fay ling unto jome fmall /•
flands that d*-e not farr from m> and are under
the Crown aud Laws, of this State; And recal-
linginto his memory, the happy and flourijlnng
etfjtty wherein ibis Land then was , \o as it
rtQHght be a thoujandwayes altered te the worfe>
hut [cane any one wa) to the better ; though w;-
thing wanttd to bis Noble and Her ok all ini&iti-
onSybut oneiy as far us humane forefight mought
reach to give perpetuity to tb*ty wbicb was in
his tiwe fo happily eftabl/fcd. therefore amuncfi
his other fundament all Laws if this Kingdom?*
he did orda'me the Interdi&s end Prohibitions^
•which we have touching Entrance of slrangtrs^
which at that time (thougp it was after the ca-
lamity of Amtrica ) was frequent; Doubting
novelties, and commixture of Manners. It is
truejhe lik,e Law, again ft the admifivn offiran-
jiers without Licenfe, is an ancient law, in the
Kingdome of China 5 andyet continued inufe.
put there it is a poor thing, Read our B.*kc<tUea*
The Fundamental Element of Morrali Phi-
losophy, Policy Government and Laws And
hath made them a curious ignorant, jearfutty ]oo-
lifh nation, But our Law- giver wade his Law
of another temptr. Read our Boot\ called The
Idea of the Law3&c. Forfirfl, he hath prefer-
ved all points of humanity, in takjng Order , and
makjnz provijionfor the relief of flrang$rsdi-
(treffed f, whereof you havctafted* At which

fpeech

J l,«f

The Preface.

Speech (as reafon was) we all rofe up, and
bowed our felves. He went on. That King
aijo (till dt firing to )oyn humanity and policy
together, andthinkjngit againfi humanity^ to
delaine grangers here againji their wills; And
againfi folicy, that they (bouldreturne, cud dis-
cover their knowledge of this ftate, betook^ this
courfe : He did ordain, that of the Strangers,
that ffjould be permitted to Land^ as many at all
times mought depart as would? but as many as
would lldy, (hould have very good conditions , and
Means to live ) from the ftate. Wherein he far?
Jo 'far r, that now in fo many agesfince the Prohi-
bition, we have memory not of one (hip that ever
returned, and but of thirteen per jons only^at fe*
verall times, that chofetoreturn in our Bottoms.
JVbattbofe few that returned maf have reported
abroad,! \mw not. But you mufi think* What-
foever they have [aid, could be ta\en where they
came, but for aVr?am. Now for our Travel-
ling from hence into parts abroad , our Law gi-
ver thought fit altogether to retrain it , read our
Idea of Govern ment^c.So is it not ittGfcrns.
Tor the Chinefes jayle where they will* or can;
which (beweth, that their Law of keeping out
grangers* is a Law ofPu/iOanimiti^ and fear.
But this reftramt of ours, bath only one Excep-
tion y which is admirable; preferving the good
•which ccmni'tb b) communicating with grangers,
and avoiding the hurt; And I will now open it
. , And here 1 fball jeem a little to digrejje

hut

f he Preface.

hut you will by and by and by finde it pertinent.
left all under ft and, (my dear friends,} ib.it a-
mottgtt the excellent alls of that King, one above
all bath the preheminence, It was the Erectioft
and infiitution of an Order, or Society, which we
call TheTcu;pIc of the Roffc CrorTe 5 The
nobkft Foundation, (as we think, ) that ever
was upon the earth ; And the Lanthorne of this
Kinftdome. It is dedicated to the (iud) o\ the
rtorkh and Creatures of God. Some itoJ^if
bearetb the Founders name a litt\e corrupted, as
if itfbmldbe F. H. R. C. bis Houfe. Buttte
Records write it, as it is jpoken. So as I take
it to ie denominate of the King of the Ucbrt&s
which is famous with yea, and no i}r anger tv usi
For we have fame parts of his works, which with '
yojt have loft -, namely t hit Rode Crucian J&»
|| which he wrot of all things paft , prtfent or to
\come; And of all things that hiv* life and
on. This make th me thi nk^tba t our MjLKg

-nfelfto Symbolize, in many tl
thai i^ing of the Hebrews {wbifb I'rota
le) ore him) honoured kim with the Ti-
lt le of this Foundation. And I am the rather
:ed to be of this opinion , for that I f,iute in*
nt Records, this. Order or SocUty cfibe
Rofie Crcfft is feme times called lb? Holy foufe9
Ajtdfotne times the' College tf £he fix days
i^s ? whejeby I am fatjsfitd, Thai cur Ex-
.1 Sing had learned from the RzbicWSjbat
had cnaied the Worlds and all that therein

The Preface.

is, within fix days ; And th refore he infiitiu
tfingthJi b ufe , for the finding mi of the true
Katun* of things, (whereby Godmhkt hzve the
wore C'ory in the w rkpumfbip of them, and wen
the wore fruit m the uje of thar,^) didgive it al-
jo that fecondndfrfr* But mw to come to our
prefpnt purpoje; When the Khtg bad forbidden,
to a// his people^ Navigation iwo any part, that
was not under bis Crown, be bad ntverthtleffc
ifys Ordinance-, That every twelve years there
pmouldbe fd forth fM of this Kingdom?. two (hip*
appointed to feveroh voyages \ Thai in either of
t >/e S:ips} threfbould beamiffion of three of
the FeiljWi) or Brethren of the holy houfe;wkofe.
errand was only to givs us Knowledge of the Af-
faires and Stale ofsbofe Camtiiesjo which they
M?e) e defigned; And ejpecitHy of the Sciences^
Ar:s,Manufattures, and Inventions of all the
world; Andwvhallto bring unto us, Bookj, In-
ftrnwents and Patterns, in every kjnde: That
the (fjips ajter they had landed the Brethren of
tins H ofie Croffe fh'ould returne; And that the
Brethren K. C. flmld [lay abroad till the new
Mifjion. Ihefe (bips are not otherwise fraught,
thin withflore of Viclualls^ and wed quantity of
1rea\ure to remaine with the Brethren, for the
buying offuch thingst and rewarding offuch per-
fons as they foould think fit. Now for me to teU
you how the Vulgar fort of Marriners are con-
tained from being difcovered at land-, And bow
they that mufl be put onflme for any iime^olour

them-

The Preface.

themfelves under the name of other Nations, and
to what places tbefe voyages have been defined:
dnd what vlices oj Rendezvous are appointed for
the new mifjior.s; and the lik^e cir cum fiances of
the prafiique , I may not do it; Neither is it
thucbtoytur defire. But thus you fee, we wain"
tain a Trade, not for Gold, Silver, or Jewels\
not for filkji, norfor fpices «, Net any other com-
wcdity oj matter ; But only for Gods fir]l Crea-
ture, which was Light : 1q have Light (I fay)
of the Growth of all Parts of the World. And
when he had faid thif,be was filentj and fo
were we all. For Indeed we were all a#o-
cifliedj to hear foftrange things (o proba-
bly told. Aad be perceiving, that we were
willing to fay foinev*nac ? but had it pec
rcady,in great cotuttfictock us off, and de-
fended to askc us qucftions of our voyage
and fortunes, and in the end concluded,
that we mouglr do well, to think with our
feWef, what time of ftay we w#uld demand
oftheftatfj And bade ui not to fcant our
Cclvesj for he would procure fuch time as
we defied. Whereupon we all rofc up,
and prefented our felvjs to kiflfc the skirt of
hisTippu, but he would not fuffcr us, and
fo tooK his leave. But when it came one*
amongft our People, that the State ufcdto
offer conditions to ftrangera thai would
ftay, we had wor ke enough to get any of
our Men to look to our Ship; and to keep

them

The Preface.

them from going prefently to theGovern-
our, to crave conditions. But with much
aioe we rtfraincd them, till we moughca-
gree what courfe to lake.
We took our feivcs now for freemen, fee-
ing there was no danger of oar uttrr Pef-
cikionj And lived moll joyfully, goings-
broad , and (eerng what was to be teen, m
the City and places adjacent, within our
JedJer; ftnd obtaining acquaintance with
many of the City, not of the meaneft Qua-
lity; at whofe hands we found fuch huma-
nity , and fuch a freedome and defire, to
rake grangers,** it wtre,mto their bofotfie,
as w*s «Aough to make as forget all that
was dear to us, in out own Countries, and
continually wt met with many things,righc
worthy of Obfervation and relation; As
indeed , if there be a Minour In the World
woitay to h#M mens eyes, it is thatCoun-
tiy. On* <^ay there wtre two of our Corn-
piny bidden to afeaftof the fraternity, & as
th«y call JrjamoftNaturalljPibus. and Re1
vcrtiui cuitomc it is, (hewing that nation
to be con>pouf dtd of all Goodneffc. This '
is the manner of Ir. It is granud to any
Man, that ftiaJl live to fee t'rii ty per (on 5,
<jct'beiulcdof his body, aliva together, and
all above three years o]d*to make thhFeaftj
which is done at the coll of the Scatc. The
Father of the fratcrnity,wfibm they cal the

The Preface,

ti.C. two days b*tv>r« the Fcaft, taketh 10
him three of fuch friendf as he Jikcthto
chufc; Andisaffifted alfoby the Gove r-
our of the City5o place where the feaft is ce-
lebrated; and all the Per fons of the family
of both Sexes,are fummoncd to attend him.
Thefc two dayes the Rofie Crucian fitteih in
confutation, concerning the good eftate of
the Fraternity. There if there be any dif-
cord or fuits between any of the Fraterni-
ty , they are compounded and appeafed.
There, if any ort c family be Diftrcffed of
Decay ed, order is taken for their r\ilicf,and
competent means to live. There, if any
bcfubje&tovicc, or ukeillCourfes, they
ere i eproved and Ccnfured. So lik wile di-
rection is given touching Marriages, and
theCourfcsofiiffjwhichanyof them(Jiould
take 5 with divers other the like Orders
and Advice?. The Governcur afliitcth, to
the end to put in Execution, by his Pub-
like Authority, the Decrees and Orders of
the Tir/<M,if they (hou'd be di(obeyd;though
that feldomeneedethifcch reverence and c-
bedience they give, to the order of Nature.
TheTir/dB doth alto then ever chufe one
man from amongfr his Tons, to live in
houfc with him $ Who is called , ever after
the Sonne o] the Vine. T hereifon will here-
after appcare. On the Feaft day,the Father
or Tirjan commeth forth afcer Divine Sa-
Vice, into a Urge Room, where the Fraft is
d c^Kbratsd|

4-

The Preface.

celebrated * Which room "bach an half pace
atthe upper end. Againfl the wail, in the
middle of the Half-pace, is a Chaire placed
lor him, with a Table and Carpet before it.
O/cr the Chaire is a State, made Roundor
Ovill, and it is of Ivie; an Ivic fomewhat
whiter than ourf, like the leaf of a Silver
Afpe, But more mining-, For it is green all
Winter. And the date is curioufly wrought
wiihfilv.r and (ilk of divers Colour s,broy-
ding or binding in the Ivie; And is ever of
the work of fome of the Daughters of the
family, and vailed over at the top, with a
fine net of filk andfilver. But the Jubilance
of it, is tri$ Ivie; whereof, after it is taken
down, the Friends of the Family, arc dvfi-
rous to have fome Leaf or fprigg to keep.
ThcTirfan common forth with all his Ge-
neration or Linage, the Males before him,
and the females following him; and if there
be a mother , from whofc body the whole
linage jsdefcended, there is a Traverfe pla-
ced in a loft above, on the right hand of the
Chaire, with a privie Doore, and a' carved
window of GlafTe, leaded with Gold «nd
b'ew, where (he fitteih , but is not Ucv.
When the 1v\an is come forth, he fitteth
dowii in the Chiire; and all the Linage
place themfdves againfl the wall, both at
his back, and upon the return of the Half •
pace, in order of the- y<;arcs, without dif-
ference of Sex, and fiand upon their feet.

When

The Preface.

When he is fet, the Roome being a'.wayes
full of co npany, but well kept and with-
out Diforder> a for fomc paufc , there com.
meth in from the lower end of the Room, a
T'aratan f which is as much as an Herald y)
A nd on either & de of him two young Lads ;
Whereof one carri; th a fa owle of their mi-
ning yellow Parchment; And the other a
Clufter of Grapes of Gold, with a long
Foot or Stalke. The Herald, and Chil-
dren, arecloathed wiih mantles of Sea- wa-
ter green Sattin; But the H. raids MmtJe is
ftreamed wi hGold, and hath a Trail c.
Then the Herald with three curtefics, or ra-
ther inclinationSjCommerh up as fa rr as the
Half pace; And there fi fttakcth into his
Hand theScrcwc. This fcrowle is the
Kings Charur,cantaining Gifts of Revenue
and many Priviledges, Exemptions, and
poin's of honou-, granted to theFather of
the Fraternity; And ic is ever (Hied and di-
reftt d , To fdeb an one, Our well beloved friend
and Creditour : Which is a Title proper on-
ly to this Cafe. For they fay, the King is
Debtor to no man, but for Propagation of
his fubje&s. The Seal fet to the Kings Char-
ter, is R. C. and the Kings image imboffed
or mouled in Gold^ And though fuch Char-
ters be expedited ofCourfc,and as of Right;
yet they are varied by difcrtt!On5according
to theNurnbtr and Dignity of the Fratei-
d 2 nicy

*nl

The Preface.

Fraternity. This Charter the Herald rca-
dcth aloud, And while it is read, the fa-
ther or Kofie Crucian ftandeth up, fup-
portcd by two of his fons,fuch as he choof-
cth . Then the Herald mountcth the hdf-
pacc, and delivcrcth the Charter into his
Hands; and with that there is an Acclama-
tion , by all that are prefent, in their Lan-
guage, which is thus much , Happy are the
people of Apamia. Then the Herald taksth
into his hand from the other childe, the
clutter of Grapes, which is of Gold; both
the (hike and the grape. But the Grapes
are daintily Enamelled; And if the males of
the Holy Ifland be the greater number, the
Grapes arc enamelled Purple, with aliftle
Sun ft on the topp; If the feroaltf, then
rhey are enamelled into a grecnifh yellow,
with a Creflant on the top. The Grapes
arc in number as many as there are Depen-
dents of the Fraternity, This Golden
clofter, the Herald dclivereth alfo to the
Kofie Crucian , who prefently dclivereth ic
over to that Sonne that he had formerly
chofen to be in Houfcwith him; whobca-
rcth it before his Father as an enfigne of
Honour, when he goeth in publick ever af-
ter ; and is thereupon called Ibe Son of the
Fine. After this Ceremony ended, the Fa-
ther or Kofie Crucia retirerh ; a»d after
Komc time comcth forth again to Dinner,

,wherc

The Preface.

where he fitttth alone under the State, as
before; and none of his defendants fit with
him, of what degree or dignity focver, ex-
cept he happ to be of the Holy houfe. He
is ferved only by his own children, fuch as
are Male ; who performe unto him all fen>
vice of the table upon the Rnee;and the Wc-
men only ftand about him, leaning againft
the wall. The room below the half pacey
hath Tables on the fides for the Gfufts that
arc bidden; Who are ferved with great and
comely order; and towards the end of Din-
ner (wh'ch in the grcattft icifts with them,
lafteih never above an hour and an halfj
there is anHymnc fuug, varied according
to the Invention of him thatcompofcthit 5
(for they nave excellent Pot fie; J but the
Subje&ofitis, (alwayes) the praifesof^*
</aw,and Noah, 8t Abrabam% whereof the for-
mer two peopled the world>and thelaft was
the father of the faithfull. Concluding ever
with a thank fgiving for the Nativity of our
Saviour Jefus Chrift, in whofe Birth the
Bii ths of all are only bieffed. Dinner being
done,the R.Crucian return*th again; And ha-
ving withdrawne himfelf alone into a place
-where he maketh fome private Prayers, he
comfth forth the third time, to give the
Bleffing with allhisdefcend^nts, who ftand
about him as at. the firft. Then he called
them forth by one and by one, by came, as
d 3 ha

The Preface.

he pleafeth, though feldome the Order rif
Age be inverted. The per Ton that!* cal-
led,(The tabic being; before removed,)knet-
leth down before rhechaire, and the Father
laycth his hand., upon his head or her head,
and givct1! thctMlings in thefe words; Son
eft he Holy Jflund, (or Vaug'ter of the Holy If-
lan(T) tby Father faith it ; The numb} whm
thou baft B eath and life, jpeatytb the word; The
Bleffmg of the Everlaiiing Father, the Prince of
Peace, and the Holy Dove, be upon thee, and
wake the day es of thy P ilgrimtge good and many*
This hefaithto every of them; And that
done, if there he any cf h's Sons of emi-
nent Mer*t1and Vert tie, (fo they be not a-
bovetwo,) hecallethfor them again; and
faith, Jayin^his arme over their moulders,
thcyfhndirg; Sms, it is we B ye are borne,
give God the praift} findperjfvtreto the en^
And withalldelivercth to cither of them a
Jewel, made in the figure of an care of
wheat, which they ever a tcr do wcare in
the front of their Turban, or Hat. This
done, they fall to Muiick and dancer, and
other Recreations, after their manner, for
the reft of the day . This is the full order
of that Feaft of the Re fie Crotfe.
By that time, fix or ftven day es were fpent,
I was faMen into ftraight Acquaintance with
p Merchant of that City, whofe Name was
Nichcli f TFaljord) and \v jmu:$ede]ohn Boo-

The Preface*

/^r; He was a Jew and Circumcifed : Far
they have Come few Stirps of Jem yet re-
maining amongft them, whom they leave
to their own religion : Which they may
the bitter doe, becaufe they are ot a farr
difFerlngDifpoficion from the Jews in oihrr
parts, for whereas they hue the Name of
Chrift% And have afceret inbred Rancour
a^ainft the people amongft whom they live;
Thefefrcontrariwire)givc unto our Saviour
ma Tyhitih Attributes, and love the Nadon
of Cbaffalonia extreamly. Surely this mm,of
whom I (peak, wovld ever acknowledge
that Chriit wai borne a Virgin ; And that
he was more than a man ; And he would
tell how God made him Ruler of the Sera*
pbims which puard his Throne; read the
Harmoiy of tbc World. And they call him al-
fo th: mil ken way Emepbt and the Eliab of
the Metliah, and many other high Names;
\vhi:h though they be inferiour to his Di-
vine Majefty, yet they are farr from the lan-
guage of other Jews. And for the Country
ofApantia, the holy Ifland or CbaffalomaJoT
ic is all one place this man would make no
end o^&ommcnding.ifjiHrig deiirous bytra-
dititon amongft the Jewes thereto have ic
bc!icved, tu.at the People thereof were of
the generations of^rafcdw;byano her fon,
whom they call Nacborati; And that Mofes
by a fccrei CMa, re id Ibe Temple o) wifdom
a 4 hh. 4.

The Preface.

lib 4 ordained the Laws of Benfalem which
they now ufe; and that when the Mcifiah
fhould come, and fit in his Throne at Hie-
maltm, the King of Chciffalonia, (hould fc
at hi* feet, whereas o.her Kings fhould keep
a great difhnce. But y.t fetting afide the
Jemn> dreames, the man was a wife man,
and learned, and of great Policy, and ex-
cellently (ten in the Laws and cuftomesof
that Nation. Amongft other difconrfes,
onedav, Itoldhim, 1 was much affected
with the Relation I had, from fore of the
Company, of their cuftomc in holding the
Feaft of the Fraternity ; For that (me
thought)' 1 had never heard of a Solemnity,
wherein Nature did fo much prefide. And
becaufe Propagation of families proceed-
ed froauhe Nuptial copulation, I defired
to know of him, what Laws and cuftomes
they had concerning Mirriag?; And whe-
ther they kept Marriage well; And whe-
trer they were tyed to one wife-, Fdr thit
where Population is fo much affeScd, and
fuch as with them it Teemed to be, there is
commonly Permifllon ofPlurality of Wives.
To this he faid; Ton have Reafon for to com-
mend that excellent Institution of the Feali of
the Family. And indeed we have Experience^
that thofe Families that are partakers of the
tlefing oftbatFeaji, do flour ijh and proffer e*
•ver after , in an extraordinary manner. But
hcare me now ^ and 1 will tell you what Ikjiow.

Jour

The Preface.

Yon fijaH under fiand, that there is not under
the Heavens, fo chaji a Nation, as this of A pa-
in ia ; Nor fo free from all Pollution, orfoid-
Mjft. It is the Virgin of the world. I re-
member 1 have read in one of your European
Books, of unholy Hermit amongfl you, that de-
fired to fee the Spirit ofFornication, and there
appeared to him a little foule ugly ]£ t h iop c.
But if he had de fired to fee the cpirit of C ha-
ft it ie eftheiHoly IJland,it would have appeared
to him in the likeneffe of a faire beautifull C he-
ruuin. Fof there is nothing, amongfl Mortall
wen more faire and admirable than the chafie
Mindes of this people. Know therefore, that
with them there are no Stewes,no diffolute Hou-
fes,nocurtifans, nor any thing ofxh&kinde.
Nay they wonder (with detection) at you in
Europe, which permit fuch things. Ihey
fay ye have put marriage out of office : For mar*
riage is ordained a remedy for unlaw full concu-
pifcence; And naturall concupifcence feemeth Of
dfpurr to marriage. But when men have at
hand a remedy more agreeable to their corrupt
will, marriage is alms ft expulfed. And there-
fore there arewith you feen infinite men that
marrie mt,butchufe rather a libertine and im-
pure fwgle life, than tobeyoa\edin marriage \
bnd many that do marry, marry late* when the
Yrime and firength of their years is paCx. hnd
when they do marry, what is marriage to them,
fat a very bargain, wherein is fought alliance,

ar

The Preface.

or Portion, or Rtputation,withfomedefire (al-
molt indifferent) oflffue; and not the faith full
Nuptial! union of man and wife, that was fir (i
injiituted* Neither is it poffible, that thofe
that have ca\t away fo bafely, fo much of their
Strength , (bould greatly ejleeme children, (be-
ing of the fame Matter) aschafte Men doe. So
Iifywife during Marriage is the cafe much a-
mended, as it ought to be if thofe things were to .-
krated only for necefftty ? No, but they remain
Mill a very affront to marriage. The haunting
o thofe diffblute places, or re fort to*Curtizans^
arenomorepunifhedin married Men, than in
Batchelors . And the depraved cuftome of change
and the delight in Meretricious Ernbracements^
(where fin h turned into Art,) maketh Mar-
riage a dull things and a kjnde ofimpofition, or
lax. Ihey hear you defend thefe things^ as
done to avoid greater Evills ; As advoutries,
Deflouring of Virr'ins^ unnaturall tuft, and the
lik^e: But they fay, this is a pr£pofterous Wifdome%
and thy call it Lots'* offer ^ who to favehis
guefts from abtifing, offered his daughters: Nay
they fay further, that there is little gained in
this 5 for that the fame vices and appetites do
Hill remain ani ahound\ unlawful! lu\\s being
like a furnace, that if you flopp the Flames alto-
gether, it will quench s, But if you give it any
vent, itwillra^e As for mafculine Love,
they have no touch of it; and yet there are notfo
faithful! and inviolate frietidfoips in the world

again>

The Preface.

again as are there .-and tofpakjzcner&Uyy (as I
faid before ', ) I have not read of any fuch Cha-
ftity in any people, as theirs: and their ufual
faying is, That whofoever is unchafte,can-
noc reverence himfelf : hndthey fay, That
t-he Reverence of a mans felf, is, nexc
religion, the chiefeft Bridie of all vice.
And when he had faid this, the good
Jen paufed a little j Whereupon, I fan
more willing to hear him fpcak on ,
than to fpeak my felfj yet thinking it
decent, that upon his paufe of fpeech, I
flaould not be altogether filent, faid only
this ; That I would fay to font , «s the Widow
t/Serepta/tf/'^r<?Elias , that he was come to
bring to Memory ourfinns ^ and that Iconfffe
the Righteou fnefle cf Aquamia was g eater
than the RighteoufnefTe of Europe. At
which fpeech he bowed his head,and went
on in this manner. They have alfo many
wife and excellent laws touchinz Marriage.
They allow no Polygamic They have ordai-
ned that none doe intermarrie or contrail, until
a month be pafi from their firfi Inter- view.
Marriage without confent of Parents they do
not ma\e void , but they mulct it in the inberi-
Unrs : For the children of fuch Marriages are
not admitted to inherit, above a third part of
their farents Inheritance, I have read in a
hookofoneofyour Men, of a Fained corri-
mon*wealth3 where the Married couple are

permit ted i

The Preface.

permitted, before they contrucl, to fee one ano-
ther Naked. 7 his they dijlike: For they thin\it
aScorne to give u re fu fall after fo Familiar
knowledge: But becaufe of many hidden de~
feds in men and Womens bodies, they have a.
more civillway: For thy have neare every
T'^wne^ a couple of Poole?, (which they call A-
dam andEves Pooles,J where it is permit-
ted to 'one of the friends of the Man, and ano-
ther of the Friends of the Woman, to fee them
fever ally bathe Naked m

And as we were thus in conference, there
came one that Teemed to be a meflcnger,
inarichHuke, thatfpake with the Jew:
Whereupon he turned to me, and faid lou
will pardon me, for J am commanded away in
hufoe. The next morning he came to me a-
gain, joy full as it feemed,and faid; There
is word come to the Governour of the City that
one of the Fathers of the Temple of the Rolie
Crofle or Holy honfe, will be here this day Se^
ven-night ; We havefeen none of them . this do-
zen Tears. His comming is in State ; But the
cuufe of his comming is fecret. I will provide
you, and your fellows, of a good 'founding, to fee
hisEntry. I thanked him. and" told him
Jwasmoii gladof the news. The day being
come he made his entry. He was a man i
of middle Mature and age, comely of per- j
fon, and had an Afpeft as if hepittied \
Men. He was cloathed in a Robe of fine t

black 1

K s

The Pretace.

black Cloth, with wide fleeves, and a
Cape. His under garment was of excel-
lent white linncn, down to the foot, girt
with a girdle of the fame; and a Sindou
or Tippet of the fame about his neck. He
had gloves that were curious,and fee with
Stones; and Shoes of Peach-coloured Vel-
vet. His neck was bare to the moulders.
His Hattwas like a Bz\met,or Spanijh M&*-
teraytnd his Locks curled below ic Lecent-
ly: They wereof colour brown. His Beard
was cut round, and of the fame colour
with his haire, fomewhat lighter. He was
carried in a rich Chariot, without wheels,
I Litter- wife; With two horfes at either end,
richly trapped in blew Velvet Embroy de-
red, and two Footmen on each fideinthe
like attire. The Chariot was all of Cedar
gilt and adorned with Chryftali; favc that
the Fore-end had Pannells of Sapphire,
fet in borders of Gold; And the binder-
end the like of Emerauds of the Peru co-
lour. There was alfoa Son of Gold, Ri-
diant upon the Topp5 in the Vlidih *nd
on the Top before, a (mail Cherub of Gold
with wings Difplayed. The Chariot was
covered with cloth of Gold tifiiied upou
Blew. He had before him fifty attendants
young men, all in white Sattex loofe coats
to the Mid Legg ; and Stookins ofwhke
Silk j andfhoesof blew Velvets and Hats

of

The Preface.

ef blew Velvet ; with fine Plumes of di-
vers colours, fet round like Hat-bands.
Next before the Chariot, went two Men
bare-headed, in Unnen Garments down
to the foot, girt, and ihoes of Hew Velvet;,
Who carried the one a Crofier, the other a
PaftoraHfiafflikea Sheep-hooke: Neither
of them of Mettall, but the croiier of
Palme-wood, thePaftoral Staffof Cedar.
Horfe-Mcn he had none, neither before,
nor bchinde his Chariot : as it feemed to
avoid all tumult and trouble Eehinde
his Chariot, went all the Officers and
Principals of the Companies of the City.
He fat alone upon cufhion?, of a kinde of
excellent Plufti, blew; And under his foot
curious Carpets of Silk of divers colour?,
like the Perfian, but farr finer. He held up
his bare hand, as he went, as bleflingthe
the people, but in filence. The ftreet was
wonderfully well kept; So that there was
never any Army had their men ftand in
better battel- Array,than the people flood.
The windows likewife were not crouded,
b;*it every one Mood in them,asifthey had
been placed. When the iriew was pait,
the Jew (aid to me; I fljallnot be able to at-
tended you as 1 would, in regard of fome charge
the city hatq layedupon me 9 for the entertain-
in^ofthisFvoiie Crucian Three days af-
ter che Jew came to me again, and faid ;

Iff

The Preface.

Te are happy mentor the Father of The Tern •
pleoftheRofie CrofTe tafytb notice of your
being here, and commanded me to telly, uy that
he will admit all your company to bis prefencey
and have private conference with one of youy
that yefiall choofe : And for th s bath appoin-
ted the next day after to morrow^ Andbecaufe
"he meaneth to give you his Me fling , be hath ap-
pointed it in the Forenoon. We came at our
day, and home, and I was chofen by my
fellows for the private A ccefle. We found
him in a faire Chamber, richly hanged,
j and carpetted under foot, without any
degrees to the State. He «was fet upon a
low Throne richly adorned, and a rich
cloth of State over his head, of blew Sat-
tin Embroydered. , }ac was alone, fave
that he had two Pages of honour, on ei-
ther Hand one, finely attired in White.
His Under Garments were thelike that we
faw him wea'rein the Chariot^but in ftead
ofhisGown,hehadon him a Mantle with
a Cape, of the fame fine black, fa;neda-
bout him. When we came in, as wc were
taught,we bowed low at our rlrft enrrancej
And when we were come neare his Chair,
he flood up, holding forth his hand unglo-
ved, and .hi pofhi eofbieiung; 3iid w^ e-
very one of us {looped down and killed the
Hemm of his Tippet. That done, the reft
1 departed, and 1 remained. Then he war-
! ned

The Preface.

ncdche Pages forth of the Roome, and
caufed meiofit down befide him, and
fpake to me thus in the Spanijh Tongue.

GOdbleffethee9ntySon-y twill gibe thee
the greateji Jewell I have : For I mil
impart unto thee, for the love of God and
Men , a Relation of the true State of the Rode
Croife; Son, to make you kjiow the true ftate of
the Holy Houfe, I will keep this order. Firjl I '
willfet forth unto you the end of our foundati-
on. Secondly, the preparations and injlru-
mentswehave for our Worlds. Thirdly, the
fever all employments and.funUions whereto our
fellows are ajftgned. And Fourthly y the Ordi-
nances and rights which we obferve.

The end of our Foundation is the Knowledg
of Caufes, and Secret Motions of Things; And
the enlarging of the bounds of J^ingdomes to the li
EffeSing of all Things poffible.

The Frepprations and Jnflruments are thefe.
We hhve Urge and deep Caves of fever al depths*y
The deepeil are funke, % f ooo. Foot: And fome
of them are digged and made under great Hills
and Mount aines : So that if yon reckon toge-
ther the depth of the Hill-, and the Depth of the
Cave, they are (fome of them) above feven miles
d>ep For we fi ride, that the depth of a Hill,
and the depth of a Cave from the flatus the fame

Thing -i

The Preface,

r

things Both remote alikf,frum the Sun and
Heavens Beams, and from the open A/re- Thefe
Caves we call the Lower Region-, and we ufe
them for all Coagulations, Indurations, Refri-
gerations, and Confervathns of Bodies We ufe
them likewife for the imitation of natural!
Mines; and the producing alfo of new artificial
Mettallsfy compoftions and materials which we
itfey and lay then fore many years. We ufe them
#1 jo f onetimes, (which may feem ftrange ,) for
cureingoffome Vifeafes^ and for prolongation
vflife, infome Hermits that choofe to live there
well accommodated of all things necefi<iry,and
indeed live very long \ By whom alfo we learn
many things-, Read our Temple of VVif*
dome.

We have Bur tails in fever all e& ths, where
we put diver fe Cements, as the Chine fes do their
Borcellane, But we have them tn greater Varie-
tyj a'd fome of them more fine. We have alfn
great varieties of compojh, aud foyhs, forthi
making of the earth fruit full.

We have High Towers; the hi^he/i a lout half
a mile in Height; and fome of them likewife
fet upon high Yountaines : So that the vantage
of the Hill with the Tower, is in the highefi of
them three milts at leajl. And thefe places we
call the upper Region; accounting the Aire be-
tween the higheji places, and the lower, as a
middle Region* We ufe thefe lowers^ according
e n

The Preface,

to their fever all Heights^ and Situations, for In •
folation, Re fr iteration, Con fervation ; And for
the View of divers Meteors, as Winds, Rainy
Snow, Haile, and [owe of the fiery Meteors alfo.
And upon them, in fome -places, are Vwelings
0/ Hermits, whom we vifite fometimes, and
inftru&whattoobferve, Read our Harmony
ofthe World.

We have great Lakes, both fab and frefc
whereof we have ufe for the fijh andjowle. We
life them alfoforburiais of fome natural! bodies ;
\orwefinde ct difference in things buried in
earth, or in Aire below the Earthy and thinas bu-
ryedin the Water. We have alfj 'ooles, of which
fome doflrainefrefh water out offalt\ And other 1
by Art do turne frefh Water into fait. We have
alfo fome Rocks in the mid\\ of thefeaj and fome
Bayes upon thefherefor fome works^ wherein is
required the Aire and Vapour of the Sea, We .
have likfwife violent ftreames and cataraUs *
which ferve us for many Motions: And likewife
Engines for multiplying and Enforcing of winds
tofetalfo on going divers Motions.

We have alfo a number of Artificial Wells,
and fount aines made in imitation ofthe natural '
Sourfes and Baths, as tin tied upon Vitriol! Sul-
fher, Steell, Braffe, Lead, Nitre, and other
Minerals. And. again we have little Wells for
infufion of many things, where the waters take
the vertue quicker and better ^ than in Veffels, or

the

The Preface.

the B a fines. and amount them we have kWater\
which we call water of Pa radife, beings by that
we do to it, made very fever aign for healthy and
prolongation of Life, As you fhall read in this
BooJ^.

We have alfo great and fpaciow houfes, where
we imitate and demon ftrate Meteors,As Snow,
Hail, Raine, fome artificial I raines &f bodies,
and not of water, thunders, lightnings, Alfo ge-
nerations of bodies in aire 0 asfroggsy Y lie sand
divers others.

We have alfo certain chambers, which we
call chambers of Health, where we qualify the
aire as we thinly gcod and proper for the
cure of divers difeafes , and preservation, of
Health.

We have alfo f aire and large Baths, of ftve~
rail mixtures, for the cure of difeafes, and the
refioring of mans body from are faction : and o-
thersfor the confirming of it in Strength of Si"
news, vitall parts, and the very juyce and fub-
ftance of the body.

We have alfo large and various Orchards-0 fee:
the Epijile to the #armony of the Wor\d,and
Gardens,wherein we do notfo much refpea beau-
ty, as va riety of ground and foyle, proper for dim
verfe Trees, and Herbs: And fome veryfpaci-
cms 3 where Trees and Berries are fet, whereof
we makg divers hjndes of drinks, be fides the
Vineyards, In thefe ws pratlife likgwife all con*
i§ 2 clufierii

•The Preface.

clufons of Grafting, and inoculating, as well
of wild trees, as fruit trees, which produ-
cethmany effeUs. And we make ^by Art) in
the fume Orchards, and Gardens, Trees and
F lowers to come earlier,or later than their fea-
fons\ and to come up and be are more fpeedily
than by th, ir ntturall coiirfe they do . We mak§
them alfo by Art greater much than their na-
ture; a>id their fruit greater , andfwtcter,and
of differing tai}e,fmel!, colour, and figure, from
their nature. And many of them we fo order ai
they become of medicinall ufe.

iVe have alfo means to make divers plants
rife by mixtures of Earths without feeds ; And
hhgwife to make divers new Plants, differing
from the Vulgar\ and to mak^ one Tree or Plant
turne into another.

We have alfo par\s, <*w^ enclosures of aU
fjrts of beajls, and birds\ which we ufe not only
for view or rareneffe , but HJ^ewife for diffetli-
ens, and try alls, that thereby we may take light
what may be wrought upon the body of man.
It herein we finde many jlrang;e effetts; as conti-
nuinglife in them, though divers parts, which
you account v it all, be pert fhed, and taken forth;
Refufcitatin? of fome that fern dead in appea-
rance \ and the like. We try alfo all Poyfons^
and other medicines upon them, as well of Chy-
rnrgery ,h Phyficf^, By art likewife we make
them greaur or taller than their kind eis\ and

contrary-

Ths Preface,

contrary- wife dwarfs them &jlay their growth.
We make them more fruitful! and bearing than
their kinde is ; and contrary-wife barren and
not Generative. Alfo we make them differ it
colour , fcape, atlivity, many wayes . We finde
means to make commixtures and copulations e f
divers kjndes , which have produced manyntw
kinds , and thim not barren, as the general! o-
finion is. M 'e make a number ofkjndes offer-
pents, worms, flies, fifhes, of putrefaction, where-
of fome are advanced (in effecls) to be per feci
creatures, like beafis, or birds, and have Sexes,
and do propagate. Neither do we this by chance,
butwekjuw beforehand, of what matter and
commixture, what kjnde of thofe creatures will
rdrife.

We have alfo particular Fooles, where we
make trialls upon fi[hes, as we have faid before
rf tea jis, and birds.

We have alfo places for breed and generation
of thofe kjnds of Worms and Flies which are
offpeciall ufe\ fuch*as are with you your StII^
worms, and Bees.

I will not hold you long with recounting of
mr brew-houfes, bakf-houfes, and kjtchin sphere
are wade divers drinks, breads and meats, rare
and offpeciall effecls. Wines we have of Grapes
and drink^ of other juyces,of frurts, of Graines
and of roots, and of mixtures with honey, fugar9
mama, and fruit s dryed, and decocted ; Alfo of
'3 the

The Preface.

the teares or woutding of trees., And of the
Vulp of Canes. And thcfe drinks are of fever al-
ages , fame to the age or lajl of forty yeares. We
havedrinl'es a! fo brewed with fever all Herbs,
and roots, and Spices, Tea with fever all flefhes,
trndv^hite-meats^whereof fome of the Drink,} are
ftch , as they are ineffeci meat anddrin\ both :
So that divers, efpeciallj in are, do d'freto
. live with them, with little or no meat, or Bread m
%dncl above alwefirive to have drink} of extnam
thin parts > to infinuate into the body, and yet
w hh j ut all biting (Ijarpnrffe, or fretting ; info-
much as fo>n? of them, put'v.pyi the ha.
Hand, will, with a little itay , paffe through to
thep.ilr-t and yetta}e milde to ch^M^-ah. We
have alfo waters, which we rip hi in I > '~..;on,
as thy becorte nourifaing 5 So tk it they tokt in-
deed excellent Drink^: srndmany will ufe noo^
ther. Breads we have of 'fever all Grains. . faoii
and Kernels ; Tea and.fcm* of. flefh, and fijhy
drjed with divers krndes of Leavenhi^s, and
feafoni'ngs : So that fome doe extreamh move
appetite-, fome donnmfhfo as divers do live
of them , without any other meat , who live ve-
ry long. So for meats , we have fome of them fo
beaten , and made tender , and mortified, yet
without all corrupting , as a wea\e heat of the
Stomach v/dl turn them into good Chylus ■-,
wellasafrong heat would meat otherwife pre-
pared, We have fome meats alfo0 and breads^

and\

The Preface.

and drinks, which tak^n by men, enable them U
fajllong after ; and fome other, that ufedmake
the very fle(h of mens bodies fenfiblj more hard
and tough , and their Ifrength far more great
than otherwyfe it would be.

We hive Difpenfatories , or (hops of Medi-
cines: wherein you may ea fly thinkejfwe have
fuch variety of plants and living Creatures,
more than you have in Europe , (for wetyiow
vhat you have ) the Simples , Drugs, and In-
jredientsof Medicines, mud lik^wife he in fo
ttuch the greater Variety. We have them likf-
fife of diver fe ages, and Ion* Fermentations.
4nd for their preparations ± we have not onely
'H manner of Exquifite d Will at ions, and fepa-
i axiom , and efpeci ally by gentle heats and Per-
flations through diver fe Strainer s,yea andfub-
■ances , but alfo exact formes of compoftions,
thereby they incorporate almoft, as they were na-
urall pnples.

We have alfo divers Mechanic all Arts, which
m have not, and Stuffs made by them; as pa-
irs, linnen,fi!ks,Tijfues', dainty works of fea-
rers ofwmderfull luflure ; excellent Dies, and
tany others: And (hops Hk^wife^as well for fuch
I % are not brought into vulgar ufe amongfi us, as
fe >r thofe that are. For you muji know, that of
0 \re things ferecited many of them are grown in-
f. ufe throughout the Kingdoms', But yet, if they
d flow from our invention, we have of them al-
e 4 f*

Th? Preface

f t < ■

■

-
a r mere) C>'r<. fngreR
s *

i ■ i

Indt OH?}
I

rt of the Gperaiiott^
t^tre ml

. tmd radish

■

■ •

The Preface.

tions, colours : all demonjh axiom of fhadows^we
find? alfo diver fe means yet unknown to you, of
producing of liojht, originally from divers bo-
dies. We procure meats of feeing objecls afar
off as in the heaven , and remote Tl aces;
And refrefmt things near as a farr off\
and things a farr off as near , makjnz feig-
ned diCtances We hsve alfo helps for the fight ,
farr afove Spedacles and GUffes in ufe. We
have alfo gl 'a fles and means to fee f mall and mi-
nute bodies, perfectly and difti nelly, as the fhapes
I and Cohuts of fmall flies and wormes, Graines
andflawes in Gems which cannot othermfe be
feen,obfervatirAi in Vrine and Bloods, not other-
i wife to befeen. We maMj artificial Rain-lowes9
\ Halo's, and circles about light. We reprefent
; alfo all manner of Refletlions, Refradions, and'

multiplications of vifuall beams of objecls.

We have alfo pretious Hones of a]l hjndes, ma-
: #) of them of Great Beaut^and to you unlyown:
• Crytials likewife, and glares of divers kjnds-j &
■ amoves! them feme of Mettals Vitrificated, and

other materials, befides thofe of which you msbg
yGlaffe. Alfo a number of Foffiles, andiwper-

ffd minerals, which you have not. IJkf-
1 wife Loadjlones of prodigious vertue : And other
I rare (tones, both naturall and Artificial*. We
. | have alfo Sound- Houfe.t, where we pr a dice and
*' demon fir ate all founds, and their Generati.n
I We have Harmonies (rend the Harmony of the

worlds

The Preface.

World^which you have not^of quarter found 's^and
leffe'r kjndes of founds. Divers injiruments of
frtufick^likewife to you unknown, fome fweeter
than any you have-together with bells and rings
that are dainty andfw><>t> fee mybook^ of Geo-
mancy <ui i Teefrr->.s lib. 4. chap, the 9th.
IVe repr fent fmall founds as great and deep 5
lik^wif great founds, Extenuate andjharpe,we
wah^e diver fe Tremblings and Warblingsof
founds, which in their originall are entire. We
reprefent and imitate all anicul arte founds and
Letters-, read my Cabbala or Art by which
Mofes (hewed fo many fi^nes in ./Egypt, &
the voices and notes of bea\\s and birds We
have certain helps , which fet to the ear do fur-
ther the hearing vreatlv. We have alfo divers
• Strange and art fir.iall "EficW^ R °fletting the
voice many tiwes^and as it were tojJin% it: and
fame that give 'hackjhe voice lowder than it
came, fome fhriller , and fome deeper; yeafome
rendring the voice differing in the letters or ar-
ticular found, from that they receive We have
alfo means to convey founds in Trunks and -pipes
infirangr lines, and di\\ances.

We have alfo perfume houfes-, . wherewith we
)oyne alfo praUices oftafte. We multiply fmells
which may f^m ftrange. We Imitate fmellsy
making all f mails to breath out of other Mixtures
than thofe that give them We makedivers imita-
tions oftajie likgwife-i fo that they will deceive a*

ny

The Preface.

Iiy mans ta fie. And in this Temple of the Roiie
OrofTe we contain alfo a ConfitureHoufe where
we make all fweet-meats , dry and moift; and
d/verfe plea font Wines, Milly ^r oaths, and
Satlets,in farr greater variety than you have.

have alfo Engine-houfes, where are pre-
pared Enables and instruments for all forts of
motions. There we imitate andpratlife to makg
Swifter Motions than any you have, either out
of your Muskets, or any Engine that you
jaw , and to make? them, and multiply them
afily, and with fmall (on e , h wheels y
ind other Me ftns : \ nd to makg them Stronger
• h i m-.re violent. tha ■ irey exceeding your

1 BafMskj. We reprefent
tee and injlrunimts of Warr, and
til Kinds : And likewise new Mix-
fres and Compofifioyt of Gun-pouder, Wild-
ire h: water^ and unquenchable: Alfo
7ire-± -o\pf T^lefraes, How
i-lofts didfo many Miracles, Tofhua made
he miq and ftill, and Elijah called dewn
ire from Heaven j of all variety, bth for plea-
ure and vfe. We imitate alfo flights of birds%

I ve have fame degrees of flying in the Aire: Head

j The Familiar Spirit, We have faips and
>oats for going under water, and brooking offeas;

, 41 fo fwimming - Girdles and fupporters. We
i*ve divers curious Clockj, and other likg mo-

, ions ofretume : Andfomeperpetuall Motions.

We

The Preface.

V/e imitate alfo motions of living Creatures, b
Images of men,beafts, birds, fifoes and Serpents
fVe have alfo a great number of other variow
motions, fir ange for Equality, fineneffe andfub
titty.

We have alfo a Mathematicall pallace,wher.
are reprefented allinftruments, as well of Geo-
metry> as Agronomy, Geomancy and Telefmes
viz. afironomancy and geomancy exquiftel
made

*VVe have alfo houfes of deceits of thefnfes^
where we reprefent all manner of feats of Jug
//>£ , Falfe Apparations, Impoflures, and ilia
fions and their fallacies. And furely you wl
eafily believe, that we that havefo many thingi
truly naturally which induce admiration,couh
in a world of particulars deceive thefenfes,ifw<
would difruife thofe things, and labour to ma\
them feem more miraculous;

But we do hate all impoftures and lyes : in
fomuch as we have fever aly forbidden it to all ou
brethren, under pain of ignominy and fines, thai
they do not faw any naturall worfy or Ihm
adorned or fwellingy but only pure as it k ,am{
without all affeCtation of jirangenejfe.

Thefe are (my fon) the Riches of the Rod
Crucians 3 read our Temple of W
dome.

The Preface,

'«r the fever all employments and Offices] of our
Hows, We have twelve that Sayle intoforrain
Cuntries, under the Names of other Nattensy
7 1 our feal is K. C. and we meet upon the day
together , (for our own we conceale ; ) Who
I ng us the bookj, and Abjtrafis, and Patterns
) :xferimen ts of all other parts. Ihefe we call
^rchants of light.

''Vhave three that Collefi the experiments
mch are in all Looks. Thefe we call depreda-
:crs.

i We have three that Collet! the experiments
tall Mechanic all Arts 5 And alfo of liber all
minces'y and alfo of Pradices which are not
yught into Arts. Ihefe we call Myftery
m.
: vVe have three that try new experiments,fttcb

' -hemfelves think^good. Ihefe we call Pioners
^Miners.

.. We have three that draw the Experiments

\,yhe former four e into Titles, and 'Tables, to

be better light for the drawing of obfer-

.,> :10ns and axioms out of them. Thefe we call

1/ pliers.

We have three that bend themfehes, Looking

■!o the experiments of their felcwes, and call
how ti draw out of them things ofufe and

"Sice for mans life, and Knowledge, as well

\ wcrkfy offer {Irangedtmonftrationofcaufes,

meam

The Preface.

weans of natural divinations, and the eafie am
cUare dij cover t,of<he verities and parts cf B dies
Ihefe we call Dowry men or knefa&ori.

lh?n after divetfe meetings and confultsc
our whole number , to confider of the former la-
bours and colkdm<,we have three t hat ta\e can
out ofth?m,to MreQ new Experiments of a high
er li^ht , mote penetrating into nature than th
former 'The fe we call Lamps.

We have three others that doe execute the B»
periments fo directed, and report them. Ihefe H
call lnoculators.

Lafily , we have three that raife the form
Difcoveries by experiments , into greater objt\\
vations, axiotnes andaphori[mes. Iheje we ct\
Interpreters of Nature.

We have alfo, as you mufl thinkf,Novzces at
Apprentices, that the fuccejjion of the forrrer ei
ployed men, of our fraternity of the Rofte Crb
do not fails ; Beftdes , great number of fervm
and attendants, men and wean en. And this \\
do alfo : We have Confutations, which of\\
Inventions and Experiences, which we have i\
covered, (ball be publifbed* and which not : j\
tak^e all an Oath of Secrecy, for the conceaiinA
thofe which we tbin\ fit to kgep (ecret : Tha\
fome of thofe we doe reveale fomet/mes to
State, and fome not. Read cur Temple of W
domc-

Fcr our Ordinances and Rites : We have t

*

The Preface.

jery long andjaire Galleries in the Temple of the
flofie Ci ofTc ; In one ofthefe we place patterns
mdjamples of all manner of the more rare and
excellent inventions : In the other we Place the
Statues oj all principal Inventours. There we
have the Statues of the f'/efi-Indics : Alfothe
Invention of Sbips: and the mon\ that was the In-
ventcur of Ordnance , and oj Gunpowder : Ihe
inventour of Muficb^The invent our of lettersjhe
inventour of P r inting'.Tbe inventour ofObfcrva-
tions of Aircncwy.Aflrorr.ancy &Geomcncy.The>
invzn our of Workjin mettah The inventour oj
Glaffe: the invmtofir oj filke of the Worme]:
\Ibe inventour of Wine: The inventour of Corn
ind bread : The inventour of Sugars : And all
hefe, by more certain tradition, than yen have.
Then have we diverfe inventours of our cwn, of
xceilent Worlds -0 which fince you have not jeen9
\t were too long to make Vifcriptions ofthem^
\4ndbefides* in the right Vnderflanding of tbofe
yijeriptions , you might eafily erre. For upon e-
yery invention of value, we ereft a Statue to the
Inventour, and give him a liberal and honourable
Reward. Thefe Statues are >fcme of bra ffe,fome
' /Marble and Touch flone 5 fome of Cedar and 0-
>r jpecialwocds guilt and adorned, fome of Iron,
[ we offtlver, fome of gold, tele fmatk ally made.
We have certain Hy mnes and Services, which
e [ay daily, of Laud and 1han\s to God , for hi$
f Ileus workj : And Forms of Trayers, im-
1 1 flaring

The Preface.

floring bis ayde and bit fling, for the illuminations
of our lab *r/j and the turning of them into good
undboly Vfes.

Laflly, we have Circuits or Viftts of divers
principal Citiet of the Kingdom? ; where, as it
cummeth to paffe1 we dopublifb fuch News, profi-
table inventions, as we xhink^ good. And we dot
alfo declare natural Vivinati ns of VifeafeS,
Plagues, Swarms (f hurtful! creatures, Scarcity
lempefts, Earthquakes , great Inundations, Co-
wett, Temperature of the Tear, and divers other
things *, And we give CGunfel thereupon , what
the people (ball doey for tbf Prevention and Re-
medy of th^m.

And whtn be had f aid this : He deft red me to
{he him an account of my life , and obfervations
of my youth , that he might report it to the bre*
then of the Rxfi.* Croffe. / was difcended front
a noble family of London in Engl as d hein%

*/\ London'

V »'-*■*'•*».*.•*

.0* P. M. *''

•N^J SubLar.n.51;

X\k.

The Preface.

horn ofacompleat tall /Idttire, jmal Umbs>but in
every part proportionable, of a dark, flaxen baire,
it curling as you fee in the Effigies 5 andihtfe
Figures of Aflrologie , at the time I was born:
this is alfo the Cbara&er oftfij Genius Malhi-
trlc\,and fpirit Taphza
Bnczelthar Thafera- 0>

phimarah ; / bad the
final Pox md Rickets
very young; Ascendent
to Conjunction , Mars,
and Soltotbe quartie
cf Saturn: I was at
Tardcbick inWarwickfoire-neer Ucwc\ where
my Mother was borne , and there I learned^ and
fo care full were they to k,eep me to the bock and
from danger fh at I bad one purpofely to attendme
at fchool and at borne* For indeed my Parents
were both of them honourably dejcended .- they
put me to learn the Latine tongue to cm Mr.
George Linacre the Minifler 0} the Gefpel at
Gohonpf him I learned the Latine and Gree%
perfeclly, and then was fitted for Oxford. Bui
the fVarrs b*gany and the jun came to the body of
Satume aud f ruff rated that defign; And where-
at you are pkafed to flile me a mble-nalurcd
\weet Gentleman , Tou fee my Nativity: Mer-
cury, Vems and Saturn arefirong, and by tbetti9
the Dragons bead and M*t*> ? judge my btbavi-
f onr

i ne rrerace.

our full of rigour , and acknowledge my Con-
versation auflere : In my devotion I love to ufe
the civility ofmykjtee, my haty andhand, with
all fkofk outward and fen fible motion^which may
expteffe or promote invifible devotion ; 1 follow-
ed the Army of the Kin* to Edge- hill : and
( ommandeda troop of Horfe ; but never viola-
ted any mm , &c. Nor defaced the memory of
Saint or Martyr ; I never kjltd any man wil-
fully , but too\ him prifoner and dif armed him;
I did never divide my felf from any man upon
th: difference of opinion -> or was angry with his
judgment for not agreeing with me in that from
which perhaps within a few dayes I jkould dif
fent my felf : I never regarded what Religion
any man was of ', that did not queflion mine m
And yet there is no Church in the world, whofe
every partfo fquares unto my Confcience , whofe
Articles 3 Confiitutiom^and Cuftoms feem fo con-
fonant unto reafon, and as it were framed to my
particular dtvotion , as this whereof I hold my
beliefs The Church of England, to whofe Faith
I am a fworn fubjett ; and therefore in a double
Obli'iation^fubfcribe unto hr Articles , and en-
deavour to olferve her Constitutions : Whatfo-
ever is beyond, as points indifferent , I obferve
according to th* rules of my private reafon^or the
humour and fafljion of my D, v >tion \ neither be-
lieving this, becanp Lather affirmed it , or dif-
friving that) becaufe Calvin hath dij avouched

it :

The Preface.

lt : Now as all that dye in the War , are not
termed fouldiers,fo neither can I properly term
all thofe that fuffer in matters of Religion Mar-
tyrs. And I fay, there are not many extant, thai
in a noble way fear the face of Death le fie than
My fclfe -' yet frm T^e moral duty 1 owe to the
Commandement ofGed^andthe natural re f pells
that I tender unto the confervation of my Rffoins
end being , 1 would not perijjj upon a Ceremony^
politique points or indifferency : nor is my belief
nfthat untradahle temper , as not to bow at their
obfiacles or connive at matters wherein there are
not manifeft impieties ; the leaves therefore and
ferment of all, not or, ly civil, but Religions a-
Vihns, is wifdome-, without which, to commit
our f elves to the flames ) i shomi tide ^ and I fear y
but topaffe through one fire into another: 1 be-
hold as a Champion with pride the fpoiles and
Jrophies of my vitlory over my enemies, and can
with patience embrace this life, yet in my besl
Meditations do often defie death: I honour any
wan that conUmns ?t, nor can Hove any that is
afraid of it\ this wafys yne naturally love a foul-
' dier that will follow histCaptain. In my figure
' yon may fee lam naturally hajhfull;yet you may
' read my Equalities on my countenance; About
* the time I travelled into Spain, Italy, Tur-
'* key, and Arabia , the Afcendent was then di-
f , reeled to the lri> e of the Moon, Sextile of Mer-
it cury^ndQuartileofVetus. 1 jtudied Fhito-
' h fofbj

The Preface.

fophy and writ this Treatife, and my Temple
of Wifdome3eK. Convention*, Age^ or Tra.
veil hath not been able to affront or enrage me ;
yet I have one fart of the vtodefty which I have
feldome difcovered in another \that is (tofpea\
truly J I am notfo much ajfraid of Death at
afhamed thereof: It is the very dtfgrace and ig*
nowiny of our natures, that in a moment Can ft
diffigure us that our beloved friends ^fand afraid
and \\art at us \ the birds and beafts of the field
that before in a nat ur all fear e obeyed us , /or-
gettin ' all allegiance begin to prey upon us.Thti
very thought in a ftorme at fea hath difpofed
&left me willing to be [wallowed up in the abyffe
of waters; wherein I had periled, unfeen, un»
pitied , without wojidering eyes, tears of pity,
ledttres of mortality 5 and none had f aid, Quan-
tum mutacus ab illo/ Net that I am afl:amed
of the anatomy of my parts , or can accufe nature
for playing the pupil in any part of me , or my
ow>i vitious life for contr ailing any Jhameful
difeafe upon me , whereby I might not call m\
pi fa compleat bodyed man free from al difeafes
found, and I thanks God in perfefi health: .
writ my Harmony of the Word , when they
were all atdifcord, and f aw many revolutions o
KingdomeSy Emperours, Grand Signiours, ant
Topes : 1 was twenty when this boo\ was fini
JJjed, but me thinks I have outlived my felf9 an
begin to be weary oftheSw, although the Su

The Preface.

now applies te a Trine of Mars-, I have jhakpt
bands with delight andkpow all if vanity, and
Ithin\no man can live well once, but he that
could live twice , yet for my own part I would
not live over my bowres pafi, or begin again the
minutes of my dayes, not leCaufe I have lived
them well, but forfear Ijhould live them worfe%
at my death I mean to take a totall adieu of
the world , not caring for the burthen of a
Tombjloue and Epitaph, norfo much as the bare
memory of my name to be found any where, but
in the univerfall Regifier of God, I thank^ God
that wi$bjoy I mentio n it, I was never afraid of
Hell, nor never grew paile at the defcription of
Sheo\or Tophet, Sec. becanfe I underftand
the policy of a Pulpit , and fix my Contemplati*
onson heavm 1 writ The Roiie Crucian In*
fallible Axionnta in fouire books, andfludy not
for my own fake only, but for theirs that fiudy
not for them f elves ; and in the Law I began to
1 be a perfeft Clerk^: I writ the Idea of the
Law &c. for the benefit of my friends and pra-
ctice in the Kings Bench ; I envy no man that
kpows more than wyfelf, but pitty them that
kpow lejfe. For Ignorance is rude, uncivil!, and
will abufe any man as we fee in ^ayliffs, whr> are
often kjlled for their impudent attempts; theft
forces. Warrant and fright a fellow to fling
away his mwey , that they may takg it up-, the
T>tvi!I that did but buffet St. Paul, playes me
f 3 thinks

The Preface.

thinly atftyarpe with me. To do no in) try nor tak*
none, was a principle, which to my former years
and impatient affeV.ion , feemed to contain e-
nouqh of morality , but my more fettled years
and chrifiian conjittution have f allot uponfeve-
rer refactions. 1 hold there is no fuck thing as
injury, and if there be , there isnofuch injury
as revenue , and no fuck revenge as the contempt
of an injury There be thofc that will venture to
write againfl my doclrine, when 1 am dead\
that nevey durft anfwtr me when alive : I fee
Cicero" abufedby Cardan, who is angry at
Tul I y fi<r praifwg his own daughter : and Q-
rigarfus isfoiikpu&ent) that he adventures to
forge a f option of the heavens, and calls it Cor-
nelius Agrippa's Nativity-, and they fay,
A^rippa was home to believe lyes, and broach,
them: is not this unworthineffe to write fuch lyes,
and (hew fuih reafons for them ! his Nativity I
could never finde ; 1 believe no man knows it :
but by a falfe figure thus they fcandalizehim.
Mercury they ma^combu ft and in ghiartile to
Jupiter, and the Moon in Oppofttion to him and
Sol ; the Dragons Xayle they place upon the a f«
eendent ; they will have Saturne and Mars dif-
pofiter of the Moon, to fignify hi* manners, being
in Sextile of the Mcou, and Trine of Mercuryy
and in Oppofttion from Angles, and the Afcen-
dent evily beheld by both of them, ef pec tally by Sa-
turne ; indeed thti have made him a Noble £er~
fin, Agrippa a bafe fellow by thh figure*

The Preface.

Andfo they may ufe me j But behold the Sch^im
of my Nativity in Geomancy^and the CharaVier
of my f fir it. 0

Tipli

The Preface.

*••

Taphzabne^kharthaferaphimarah,

projecled by a lear-
ned Lord for th%
honour of birth*
now let any Ajiro-
loger9 Ge6mancerf
Vhilofopher 5 &c.
judge my Geni-
ture 3 the Figures are right according to the Ex-
ad time of my Birth y retlified by Accidents^
and verified by the Effetls of Uirefiicns. Now
in the midfi of all my endeavour sphere is but one
thought that dejecls me% that my acquired parts
muft perijh with my felf, nor can be legacyed a-
mongjl my dearly beloved and honoured friends;
I doe not fall out , or contemn a man for an £r-
rour 5 or conceive why a difference in Opinion
Jhould divide an affetlion : For a modefi reproof
or diffmte , if it meet with difcreet and peace-
able Natures^duth not infringe the laws of Cha-
rity in all Arguments 5 fo much there is of Paf-
fion^fo much there is of Nothing to the purpofe ;
For then Reafon like my Hound Lilly fpends or
calls out a loud \ and makes the woods eccho upon
afalfe fcent : Expecting Pool ah to jnyn with
him, but Frofter, Joyce, ]o\\\boy^anda white
Bitch hunt in their Couples another way , and
follow their game firfi darted When the Mid*,
heaven yets dire tied to the trine of the Moon , J

writ

The Preface.

writ another bool^and entituled it , The fun-
damental Elements of Philofophy,PoIicr?
- Government and the Laws, &c. After this

■ time , I had many misfortunes , and yet I thinly
there is no man that apprehends bis own miferies

■ leffe then myfelf^ and no man tbatfe nearly ap-
. prebends another s, I could loft an Arm with «

out a tear , and with few groan^ me thin\sy be

; quartered into pieces : Jet can I weep feriouflv

with a true pafjion , to fee the mercilejfe Rebels

in England forge a debts againft the Kings rmfi

loyall Subjefis , purpcfely to put them in th:

! Marjhalfey, or other HoufesofHel^to be deftroy -

'. ed in prrifon^and \\arvcdyr killed by the Keepers^

I and then two or three poor* old women for as ma-

■ ny (hillings (Jjall perfwade the Cr owner and the
people to believe 5 the men dyed $f Consumptions .
It is a barbarous part of in humanity to add untr>
any afflided parties mifery^or endeavour to mul-
tiply in any man a pajfwt, whofe fngle nature is
already above his patience : Ihis wasthegrtau
rll affliction of lob , and tbofe oblique expoftn-
lations of his friends a deeper injury than the

, down-right blows of the Vevil^&.'IheAfcendant
to the Quartile.of Saturn >and part of fortune to
the Sextile of the Noon came next ; and it is
true, I had loved a Lady in Devonshire , but
when 1 ferioufly perufed my Nativity , Jfo vwi

' tbeftvtutb tioufs afflided 3 and therefore never

tefolv-:

The Preface.

refohe to marry 5 for behold lama man, and I
kriownot how : Iwasfo proportioned and have
fomething in me> that can be without me , and
will be after me ; and here is the mifery of a mam
life\He eatsydrinks and thenfleeps u day that he
may do fo again to morrow ^and this breeds Vif-
eafes^which br ingsDeath ,F or all flefh is grafs.
And all theft creatures we behold, are but the
Herbs of the field digefled into fie fh in themyor
wore remotely carnified in our felves : we are
devourersnot onely ofmen,but of 'our felves ,and
that not in an Allegory Jut a Pofitvie truth ; for :
all this map offlefh, which we behold, came
in at our mouths •> this frame we lookjipon, hath
been upon our trenchers : and we have devoured
our felves^and what are we ? I could be content
that we might raife each other from death to
life as Rofie Crucians doe, &c. without Con*
junftionyor that there were any way to perpetuate
the world without this trivial and vain way of
Coition,as Vr Brown cals it : It is the foolijh-
efi aft a wifeman commits all his life ; mr is
there any thing that will more dejed his cold
imagination, then to confider what an odd er-
rour he hath committed ; had my Stars favour-
ed me 9 I might have been happy in that fweet
Sex : Then I confider the love of parents, the
tjfettions of Wives and Children , and they are
ail dumb dreams, without reality, truth, or con*
fiancy $ for firft> there is aftrong bond ofaffefii-

on

The Preface.

m between us and our Parents ; yet how eafily
iiffolved \ the Son betakes himfelfto a wcman-y
forgetting his Mother in a Wife , and the womb
that bare him, in that that pall btar his Image:
J his woman I le fling him with Children, his affe-
tiion leaves the Level it held before , and finl^s
from hid bed to his Iffue and Pi dure of pojurity,
where ajfedions kid no fleady manfion ; they
qrowin^ up in years defre his end , or applying
themfilves to a woman , take a law full way to
love another be ter than thcmfelvesm Thus 1 per-
Ctive a man may be buried alive, and behold hid
grave in his Iffue. And many takg pie a fur e to
befuch fools. I remember alfi that this Quar-
tile of Saturn impri fined me at a Mejfengers
boufe , for contending with Cromwell , who
malicioufiy commanded I (hould be Jtfpt clofe in
Lambeth-houfe.,<tf indeed 1 was twoyears\my
Per fin he feared , and my tongue and pen offen-
ded him, becaufe among\\ many things, I [aid
toarticjdar!y,fuch a day he would die, and he dy-
td. It is very true Oliver oppofed me all his life,
and made my Father pay Seventeen hundred
bounds for his Liberty : Be fides, theyftole under
i Pretence of fequeftring him, two thoufand
I pounds in Jewels, Plate, &c. and yet the Kings.
> noblefi fervams fuffer upon fufpition of "Debt ; *
t A Plot that carries a fairer pretence to \erfwade
, the ruder wits all is well, when the King and his
. heft friends are abu fed i but why fhould I trouble

my

The Preface.

**y fetf ! I do not, Believe me , it is not hopes o,
aplace,or afumofntomy, or a Commiffion tha
Ilool{for', I (ball peaceably enjoy my friend,ferv
God) honour my King and love the Bifiops, an,
jew men know who lam.

J look^ upon France as I do upon the Bear
gardenytbe Dogs are alwayes quarrelfome ; a x.
what is thr difference betwixt a man and
beajl ? the one is v.ertuout , learned and wife
the other is rich, proud and foolifh , yet indee
the fir/} is mo ft rich ,. for be (Indies long lift
happinefs, health, youth and riches, &c. an
enjoyes it: Yet] kjtow font? will be fpeUaXoi
of this rude Rabble, Sec. fuddenly dyes an ene
my to Reafon,Vertue and Religion \ and titer
are a multitude of thefe, a numerous piece c
wonder ; and this I obferve when they are ta
\en af under, feem men, and the reafonabl
Creatures of God ; but Confufed together, ma\
a Monfter more prodigious then any Beaft is i
the Tower (asVottorBvovme faith. ) It .
no breach of charity to call thefe Fools, as objetl
of contempt and laughter $ and it is th* ftn
the Rofie Crudans have a forded them , ft
down by Solomon in holy Scripture , and
point of our faith to believe fo. Neither in tl
name of multitude do I only include the baj
and minor fort of people, there is a rabble eve
amongft the Gentry , a fort of Plebeian head<
whofe fancy mv.es with the fame wheel as theft

me;

The Preface.

men in the fame level with Mecbanicks, though
their fortunes do fomewbat guild their infirmi-
ties 0 and their pur fe ^compound for their follies.
•But as in cajiing account three or four men to-
gether come jhortin account of one man placed
by bimfelf below them : So neither are a troop
cf thefe ignorant Doradoesof that true ejleem
and value as many a forlorn V erf on, whofe con-
dition doth place them below their feet ; and
\there is a Nobility without Heraldry, a natural
dignity 9 whereby one man is ranked with ano-
ther, another filed before him , according to the
.quality of hisdefert, and preheminence of bis
tgood parts : though the c irruption of thefe
jlrMf, and the Byafs of prefent prafiife wheel
^another way, thus it was in the firfl andfri-
| mitive Commonwealths^ and is yet in the inte-
grity and cradle of well ordered policies , tiU
J eorruption getteth ground under defires, labcwr-
ling after tb at which wifer confederations con-
\ temn^ every Foot having a liberty to amajfe and
l' heap up riches, and they a licenfe or I acuity to
a d$ or pur chafe any thins; . When the Moon was
j directed to the guartile of Sol, and the M. C.
to the Oppofithn of Sol, I was by the Pbanatk\
* Committee of Safety committed toprifon , and
r my Booty burnt ; yet I would net entertain a
^ bafe defign , or an atiion that fyould call me
; Villain, for all the Riches in England 5 and
J for this only do I love and honour my own fotdy

And

The Preface-

and have methinkj two armes, too few to en
brace my (elf , my converfation is likf the Su\
with all men , and with a. friendly Afpeft
good and bad.

Mctbinkf there is no man bad, and the wot
be\\, that is, while they are kfpt within the ci\
cle ofthofe quali ies, wherein there is good : Ti
method IJhould ufe in dijhibutive Juftice , J o}
ten obferve in Commutation, and keep a Geonii
trical proportion in both , whereby becommih
equrfl to others, 1 become. unjufi to ntyfelf, an
f uber ogate in that common Principle , Doe in-
to others as thou wouldeft be done unt
thy felf ; yet I give no Alms to fatisfie the hun
per of my Brother, hut to fulfil and accompli j
the will and command of God ; Ibis general an
indifferent temper of mine , doth nearly difpOj
me to this noble virtue amongfi thofe millions t
vices I do inherit and hold from Adam. Ihav
efcaped one, and that a mortal enemy to Charitj
the firji and father fin, Hot onely of man, but c
the Devil, Pride 5 a vice whofename is compre
bended in a Monofyllable , but in its nature nc
circumfcribed with a world ; J have efcaped 1
in a condition that can hardly avoid it : Ihe)
petty acquifitioMs and reputed perfections tha
advance and elevate the conceits of other men
add no feather unto mine ; And this is theobfer
vaiionofmylife, I can love and forgive, eve)
my enemies. And when 1 had f aid thisy btfiooi

"1

The Preface.

J pand I kpeeled down 9 and be laid hit right
3 and upon my head, and faidfiod blejje thee my
i m, and God bleffe thefe Relations, which we

avemade : I give thee leave to publijb them
J >r the good of uther Nations ; for we are here
f a t Gods bofome, a land unknown. And fo he left

?e, having ajftgned a value of about 2000I. in

old for a bounty to me and my fellows : For they
jj tve great largejfes where they come upon aU

:cafws.

\

m

4 J

ur.

fohn Heydon.

*R ondon, from my Hbufe in
typittlefields near Bijhopfgate,
Wextdoor to the Red Lion
April the 3d. 1662. '

vv v v vvv vv

TO THE

READER.

Gentlemen,

IT is thought good to let you knoi
Mr. John Heydon hath written man
Books,**/* Jhe Harmony of the Work
Jhe Temple of Wifdome , Jhe W
Guide, and 7 he Wife mans Crown ; being <
affinity,they are to be read together 3 bi
in his Preface and other places, fpeakir
of the Perfon of Nature, and her occu
myfterious Truths, he is not underftooi
as appears by the Knight of the Lobite
bein^ one of a Rabble, whooppofe an
opprefs this Noble Philofopher with
molt clamorous infipid Ribaldry h bi
behold with what an admirable patiem
our Author heard this report, andai
(Wered thus, Heautontimoreunmon, an

whe

'to the Puddtr. <jr

when one col J him (_ of Wii'tam Lilly be -
Inga Labourer or Ditchers Son* born at
; jDifeyporth in Leisejierjhire , and afterwards
brought up by one fatyrib Taylor in the
Strand) how he had abated him wicli
icandulous vvordi? reply e*!5 I wi// not treai
upon a Worm, tbt King of Swedens focofhafi-
tick^ Aftjrttbg#ffefajfe. .

lc teems in Rome and oilier parts of Ita-
ly his books are highly eileemedby very
many Perfons of honour and worth 3 and
eminent for their skill hi" thefe fhidies;
thefe with Cardinal Vrfinus, the Marquefs
"Defftttntesfhz Duke of Lorrain, the Prince
ol iCottdie 3 and a Colonel of Spanifh Ca-
va lie roes^T&^w Reveli, and one Cardinal
\i\ Antonio by name 3 have been forward of
W their own accord to put more honour
b iupon our Author then he in modefty will
115 own : the former , with fome other Car-
lo dihals and Jefuites, have endeavoured to
invert him to the Roman Catholick
id) Faith* but all in vain.

he Extra&of Colonel Tbovw Kevdl'c
Letter to Mr. John Heydon.

il SIR, fee.

itk T Befeech you receive, Sec. now from a Per-

nil JL fonwho much honours your eminent Leam-

and Humanity, and would eagerk embrace

To the Reader,

an occasion to give you tnofl ample teftimony of
the efteem I have for you , &c. I had your
Idea of the Law and Government, &c.
The Harmony of the World , but a friend
in Romzhath borrowed them of me, andfince
dyed ; fo I fear my Books are loft : I have
once feen your Fundamental Elements of
Moral Philofophy, Policy, Government
and Laws ^ which alone , although your other
Labours were not takgn in to makg up the value^
may equal you with the be ft defervers in Philo-
fophy : I was here advertized of many other"
Pieces as you writ, &c. Sir, I wijh allprofpe-
rity to your defervings , and humbly thanl^you.
for the fair admittance you have given me to
the acquaintance and friendfhip of Mr. John
Gadbury ; be pleafed to fend his Bookjwith
yours foe. Ihefe as memorial s\of your Loves-
and Friendjhips I Jhall prefer ve, as a tendernefs.
due to things fo eftimable ; and believe, Sir9
you have power at your pleafure to command
yours, Sec,

Tho. Revell,

The laft Letter that came to him, was
fent from Collonel Revell, &c. humbly
in treating him to have returned him.
j . Ihe Harmony of the World. 2. Iht lent'
pie of Ififdome. 3, Ihe Wife mans Crown

4. Vn

To the Reader,

4. The Fundamental Elements of Moral ?hi-
iofophy policy ^Government and Laws. 5. Th?
Idea of the Law , Government and Tyranny.
And thofe excellent Pieces of the Learn-
ed Mathematician Mr.JohnGadbury, viz.
I. His Agronomical Tables. 2. Ctlejiis 2>-
gatus. ^.Therofirine of Nativities. 4. Na-
tura Vrodigiorum^Nuncius Aftrologicus .%.The
Kingof Swedens Nativity. 6. The Nativity
of King Charles. 7. And the Examples of
Nativities.

Yhe firft Letter was dated from Madrid
the ninth of April, 166?) the fecond was
dated the fourth of March from Pczzolo,
the third from Fiorenza, the fourth from
Venetia, the fifth from Ancona , the fixth
from Eifgnano^'ith great lefpetts and ho-
nourable falutations from the Learned of
thofe parts of Italy and Spain.

The Learned beyond Sea like thefe
Books never the worfe, but much thebet-*
ter ('becaufe though every Englifh Rea-
der of Lilly and Mother >hipton under-
(land them not, they do.}

And now let us fpeak a word ortwc
concerning our Author and his Books,
which in many places you may perceive
to differ in ftile 3 &c. Our Author writ
feme of thofe admirable experienced
Truths when he was very young, even
before the Wars began in England; and
g 2 after*

To the Reader,

afterwards followed the Army of the
King, in which he obtained great ho-
nour. Laitly, he revifed his firft Work,
and added many things for the inter-
preting of Nature, and the producing
of great and marvellous works for the
benefit of Men : And as the Sun tips the
Clouds by day, and the Moon the tops of
the high Woods by night, with light; fo
our Author enlightens the Minds of
Clowneswith knowledge , and they caft
dirt at him for his labour : to this heufes
no fpleen , but mines upon them ! And
is not this a goodly Age of People the
while > A true Servant and Secretary of
God and the Myfteries of Nature, is not
apprehended by our dull Sermon-fay-
ers , or Jews in the Jugling-box : Thefe
with fome other fond Fools, and
feme pittiful fine things called Cour-
tiers, curfe our Author becaufe they
cannot underftand him. He fmiles at
the impudent affaults of vain-glorious
humours, and beholds their Anticks and
Rants , as if they had been trained a-
mongft Apes. But toclofe all , he loves
his Countrymen, even the rudeft, and
prefcribes fafe and effectual Medicines
for the cure of their Bodies , and gives
^aws fit to be obferved 5 he corrects the

errors

To the Reader,

errors of our Laws, and teacheth the heft
Formes of Government in Church and
State3as you may read in his Eook3 and fo
liefer you to them.

S. F.

g 3 To

i

fo his Eftecmed Friend Mr. John
Hey dont on bk Holy Guide,

and other hk Learned Indujiri-

ous Labours i already

Publtped.

R En owned Eugenia ! Famous above all !
A. Prince, in Pbyfiques I Moft Seraphicall !
TIk Art's Great Archer ! Never (hooting wide;
Yet Hici'ft the White beft, in thy Holy Guide .(took,
Good God .' What Pains have learn'd Fbiyfttiam
For Clenfing Phyfiqimfftrange perturbed] Brooke
Bat as ihfcir Crooked Labours did Deftroy
Our hopes, Iby Guide diretls the Ready way.
Hi ff aerates y Great Galen, and Scnertus,
Rbenodewy Paracelfus, and Albertus,
Grave Gerrardf and Ingenious Parkinjw,
Deid Cutyerer, and Living Tbomlinfon,
H*ve all Done well : Butab / they mifi the Road,
Thou' it Chalke i out, 7bou Dear Servant oj God 5
And therefore 'tis no wonder, if they Vary
From ehe« ; Great Natures ( High born ) Secretary !

9 TU thou alone, haft taught the way to blifs ;
Tis tboH don:, that Knowcft what it is ;

'Tis1

Tis thou, haft Rak cd fruitful Egypt ore
For Medicines j And Italy for more ;
And in Arabia thy Colle&ingBraincs,
To doc us good, hath taken wondiousPaines.
This having done, if Critiques will^not bow
To thy Great Learning, Utr^t, n*vf***
It (hall unto them furely prove ; And this
Eflay of thy Sublimer Mifterycs,
Shall make them Cure unto the Wife M'merua,
Yet Mil be ignorant of thy Pantarva.
But hold! whfreaml > furcrh'naft fcta fpell

On Me, caufe 1 can't praifc, thy doings vrell ;

Releaferwe, Good Eugviius ! and theCrowne,

Shall ftand on no browes, but thy Learned Owne.

Poets, no more, layClaimeuDtotheBavej !

*Tis H ey don f!>mes alone with Splendid Kayes :

Follow his G uide, hs teaches you mod fure ;

Let any make the Wound-, ''lis he,muji Cure.
For he dire&s the Welgrowne; Old, and Youngs

To live Ri:h> Happy, Healthy, Noble, Strong.

John Gadbury, ^^M^rmQ-, *

g 4 To

To the Reader on the behalf of

my much honoured Friend

the Author Mr.

John Hey don.

A Labyrinth doth need a clew to find
The pjfage out, end a Daedalian mind
May doe ftrauge worfy, beyond the Vicars reach,
Andtn their understandings mak^e a breach.
lis often fane, when men of pregnant parts
Study, Invent, and promulgate rare Arts,
Or unknown fecretf, how they puzzle thofe
That Z>nder(la?idthem nottfheir Tea's their No's,
Jre pu:tot\orsplus', Tutor*, then they lack
To drive them forwarder to bring them back.
H'jwmany Learned men (in former ages*)
In all the Sciences vara counted Sages >
A-:d)et are fcarcely underftoodby men.
Who dayly read them o're> and ore again!
gome can recount things panVm/prefent fome,
Andjome would know of things that are to come
Some Study pleafure, fome would faine live long;
Some that are old, would faine againe be yaung $

. —

(his Man doth toyle, andmoile^ofurcbafe wealthy
i That man getffickiiefs ftudymg for bis health %

This man would happy bee, thit Wifdomc hive :
j All are at lojs^ and every man dotb crave;

\oneis content^ But each man waniiz. Guide,

Them to diretl when the) do (lep afide.

Since , this is thiis^ Our Author hath took pajne

to had us ilk and bring us out again;

\w who is$\easd% in him for to confide,

'a th°Je Vifcoviries , Here's bis Eloly Guide.

Fray what can more improve the CommoQWcalchj

Then the dtfeovtry of the way to Hcilth?

Tlv Paradox is made a ortaid truth*

An Ancienc man way dye it'h prime oi's youth,

Wh& wonder is it if he gos afidc

The Path, which will not ta\e Tht Holy Guide!

Elaprim Scfipt.
9'Junij 1662.

John Booker,

llfopijfmk

&& €K> C^5 %?& €K> €fc> «

wxwfxwy

IttuJlriflimiSy &* were Renatk Fra*

i tribu$, I. HMl. C. *pefloTU»ra ■

Ecclefa in tumultuofo hoc

feculo dpofiolis Pacificif9

Salutem a Centro

Salutis.

QUx magna Call maenia, & tra&ae Aftfrzx,
Terrtque fines,fiquid auc ulira eft, capic 5
Mens ipfa tandem Capitur: Omnia ha&enug
Quae node potuit, notajam primum eft fibi ;
Accede, LeftoTy difee quis denaum fas ;
Tranquilinam Jccoris agnofcas tin
Qitipropius hseret nil cibf, & nil tam procul.
Non hie Scholarum frivob, aut cadi Loga,
Quales per annos forte plus feptcm Legit,
lie folic pleno prodcar, RtX£ Artifex ;
Vanafq; merccs futrii lingua crcpet3
S«d fan&a Rerum pondcra, & fenfus graves;
Qjiale, pararidecuit, ipfa cum fuic
Fingenda Ratio, &,vindicifuo adftitlt ;
Panduntur omnes Machinae gyri tuae ;
Animaeq; vertes, Trochleas, cwiei KoU-y
Qua concitetur Arte, quo {ufflaminc
Siftaturillarurfus&conftetfibi .
Nee, fi Fcneftram Peftori humano fuam

Aptafir

ptaffitipfe Montusy infpiccrct Magis.
\c ccrno Levia Affe&uHm\M%U,

i ^rajcilcfq^ fcnfusLineas; video quibus
lebantur alls blanduli Cupidines5

, ;hnbufq; ftimulis urgtant h* graves.
Tic Dolores, & voluptates fuos
♦rodunc recefTus ; ipfc ncc timor Iatct ;
lai Noric artes quifquis in foro vclit
^nimorum habenas fl;cYere,& populos Cu^it
Iptis Ligatos nexibus )ung\ fibi.
lie Archimedes publicus figac pedem,
iqaando rcgna michinis Politicis
urgcre fatagit, & feras gentes cict,
■nifq, motum fedibua Mundnm quatit;
dc\U domabit cunfta^qui menti imperat 5
lonfulcor audax, & Tromethti potens
,icinoris Animc ! qnis tibi dedit Deus
xc intacri faeculis longe abdita 5
K-ulofq; luce tinxit ambrofia Tuos
^u mentis omnis., at Tuac Nulla eft capax ;
[aclaude(olusfruerc : Divinum eft opus*
inimamcrearc ; Proximum huic, ©Hendcre.

T. H. h.to.Coll.lx.Oxon.

to*1

t*Sw «©» tWfsr tflfir ttff» tflft? t&p } ^If7 ' xKif9 n&a tfJte
<rj/s c^3 r,ip e^p cjp cv/3 cjjp f c&s • cio cuo c7/5

To his Ingenuous Friend Mr.

John Heyclon^ on his Book

Inutuled The Holy

GVIDE,

THe Antient Magi, Devilfj Cabbdlifls,
the Brachmans, Sybil's, *nd Gyranofophi/
With all that Occuk Arts haberdtfa
And make font iany mancies, doe but trafb.
By re taile vend, and may for Fedlers goe:
Tour Richer Merchandise doth fftal^ them Joe.
7he Stagarice muft with his Murtiival
Of Elements, Galen of humours call
In all their fuit, or your New A<t,
Without them, nta\es their good old caufe tofmavi
Vulgar Phyfitians cannot look, for more
Patients , then fucb which doe need hellibore :
When Rofie Crucian Tower can revive
The dead, and kfep old men in youth alive,
Hadyott not calf d yam work^ The Holy Guide 5
It tpouldbave puzzled all the world be fide
To have Baptized it with a Name fofit
And Adaequatc to what's contained in it 5
Should it be jlyled the Eocyclopaedy 5

Of Curious Art*) or termd a Myftery

JiOj or kenam^d the Vatican
tfd unto an Enchiridion,
VaU the Hern x in a Senary,
fi tli im and Thummlm of Plrilofopliy,
|j/t Art of Hiccglophicks/o reveal d>
*4dli\e the Apocalypa they are conceal d.
• )*b* Orthodox all Parodox, or all
3 cover' d, which men ft ill a wonder Callj
to Migna Cryrta of allSciences,
; d be that names it cannot call it lefs,
' Backhand Title inqht have well ogre ed'y
men have qiteftknd if into their Creed
'y ff/iidd have put your Article^ but How
? name of holy mm dare difallow.
hen fo much learning doth in one exlft
I/don, not Herme?,/^// be Trifmegifr.
Id if the Right Reverend of Levies Tribe
Hallow it> I cannot but fubferibe

My (elf your Friend and Servant
Tho. Fyge.

To r£e wo/£ Excellent Thi
lofopher and Lawyer Mr.

John Heydon, upen the Holy ' j
Guide.

HAyl you (admired Heydori) whofe great pat
Shine above envy , and the common ^W,
You kin to Angels^ and Superiour Lights,
( A Iparkv) the firtt fire ) whofc Edg/e flights
Trade not with Earthy and grofinefs, but do pal
To chc pure Heavns^U make your God your gla ;!
In whom you fee all forms, and fo do give
Thefe rare difcovcries, how things move and liiji
Proceed to make your great defign eomplcat,
And let not this rude world our h pes defes t.
Oh let me but by this the dawning light
Which ftreams upon me through your three pi I
P.ifs to the Ea/r of truth, *cill 1 may fee ( nigt
Mans fir ft {aire ftale, when (age Simplicity

he Dove and Serpent, Innocent and wife

)weRin bis fcre/f, and he in Paradife ;
I 'here from the Tree of knowledge his beft boughs,

'le pluck a Garland for this Authors brows,

Vhich to fucccccding times Fame (hall bequeath,
\ Vith this moft juft Applaufe, Great He)dom

(wreath;

f- IF.

n

:ii

?& -& && rtrz ttifr etifi* tRTfsr ttffr s\!/s tWf? tst

A

Chymical Dictionary

OR,

An Explanation of the hard
words and termes of Arc
which areufed in lbs
Holy Gmck.

ACquifttlo, Antiffio, Aibm, are figures <
Geomancy, Y or Arks, a figure J
jiftrm<mcyy and they areuani:s that fig nil
the Nature of the Medicine?, and you (ha
find tb cm in Order, there being ufe,:
19. Figures of Aiirowancy, viz. T? Sdfh'm
% Jupiter, <5 Mars, 0 Sol, S Feww, 5 Me
cwryj 3) the Moon, or Luna, & Taurus, n. G'
wirti, S Cancer, <5t Leo, t# JT/rgo, ~ Li&r
m Scorpio, ? Sagittary tYp Capricorn, zz Aqu,
riusy X Fifes. And 1 6. (Carcer,Triftiiia, Fo
tuna W]or, Fortuna Miner, Puer, FutUa, Cot
junftioy Rubeus, Laiitiay Caput Vraconi
Cauda VraconiSyPopiiluss via) of Geomancy.
Amalgamation is a Calcining or Co
rodjng Mentals whhC^ickfilvcr, and it

doi

A Chymtcal Dictionary. n

done thus 3 take any Mettall except Iron,
peat en into leafes, or very (mill Powder,
mixt with abom eight parts of Quick-
liver (which may the better be doLe, if
• 30th be healed firft) that they may become
)ne uniform Mafr, evaporate the Qiiick-
Ilver over the fire, and the Mettall will be
eft in the bottom as a thin Calx.
A^ua is the water.

Aries and Aquarius figne« in Atfromawji
Acqttifith, Ami/JjOj and Albws figures of
leomancy,

Aftrornancy is Heavenly knowledge, and

komancy is Earthly knowledge.

C.

Calcination la reducing any thing into

alx, and making ic fryable; and it may

t done two wayes, by firing, by reducing

1; ito a(he«3by reverberating, by Corrofi on,

y Amalgamation, Precipitation, Fumiga-

lon or vapotction, Cementation or ftrati-

Jj-ation. Caput Vraconisy Cauda T>r acorns ,

-unftio. and Career figures oiGccmancy.
i Circulation, is when any liquor is 10
jjjlpcfd in digeftion, that it fhail rife up
M d fall down, and rife up and fall down,
|JLc d fo do continually, and thereby become
: i/uedigtfted and mature, for which ufe
gjTT the ffloft part we ufe a Pelican.
, q Clarification , is the feparating of the
jigJIcicces from any decoction or juice ;
h * and

r

AChymical Dictionary.

and it is done three wayes, by the white c
an Egge, by digeftion, by filtration.
Cure all, is Aurum Totalile.
Coagulation, is the reducing of any liqui
thing to a thicker fubftance by cvaporatin
the humidity.

Cohobation, Is the frequent abftr a&ion <
any liquor poured oft-times on the fco
from whence it was diftilled, by diftillat
on. Cancer and Capricorn, figncs in Aftr
wancy.

Congelation, is when any liquor being d
co&ed to the height, is afterward by fc
ling into any cold place turned into
cranfparent fubftance like unto Ice.

Corrojlonjs theCaleining of bodies by co
rolive things.
Cure the great is the Pantarva.

D.
Vecantation, is tt c pouring off any I
Cjuor which hath a fctling, by inclinatio
Deliquium, the dlffoluing of a hard bo
into a liquor, as fait, or the powder
any calcined matter, &c. in a moift, co
place.

Vejcenfion, is when the eff utial jui.
djflblvcd from the matter to be diftilli
doth ccfccnd, or fall downward.
Dejpumation, is the taking off the frci

th.

A Chyvtical Di&ionary.

that Boats on the top with a fpoon or fca-
:hcr, or by percolation.

Distillation, is the extracting of the hu»
pid partlof things by vertucof hcac, being
i nft rcfolved into a vaponr, and then con-
fenfed again by cold. Thus it is generally
aken; but how more particularly, I (hall
iftcrward (hew.

Vigejlion, is a conco&ing, or maturation
f crude thiogt by an eahcand gentle heat.

Vijfolntion. is the turning of bodies into
liquor by ihc addition of forhc humidity.

Decoration, or V deification , is either
lie waftiing off the falc from any matter
lat was calcined therewith, with warm
Mter, in which the fait is ditfolvtd, and
ie matter dulcified : or it is fweetning of
u'ngs with fugar, or honey* or fyrup.

E
Elevation, is the riling of any matter in
a[; unncr of fume, or vapour, by vertuc af

(jt( Evaporation , or Exhalation, is the ?a-
|)Cpuringawayof any moifture.

Exaltation, U when any matter doth by
[ •jCgcfrion attain to a greater purity.
lifi Expreffton, is the extracting of any li~

cior oy thehahd, or by a prcfle.
, Extraction, is the drawing forth of am
iVcncc from a corporeal matter by fome
ha v fit

A Chymical Diffionaey,

fie liquor, asfpirk of wine 5 the feces re?
main in thebottome.

F.

fcermentation,!* when any thing is refoN
ved intoitfclf, and is rarifud, and ripe-
ned; whether it be done by any ferment
added to it, or by digeftion only.
Fox\un(LMd)QX a figure of Geomancy,

Filtration^ is the reparation of any liquid
matter from its feces by making it run
through a brown paper made like a tunnel,
or a little bag of woollen cloth,or through
ffcreds.

Fixation, U the making of any volatile*
fpiritual body endure the fire, and not flye
away, whether it be done by often reitera-
ted diftillations, or fublimations, or by
theadding of fome fixing thing to it.
Foriuna Minor a Figure ofGeontancy.

Fuwigatioftyis the calcining of bodies bj
the fume of (harp fpirits, whether vegeta-
ble or mineral, the bodies being hid ovei
the mouth of the vcflel wherein the fiiarj
f pirns are.

Gemini , a Figurt otGeomancy.
H.

HuweQathn, or Irrigation's a fprinklinj
of moifturc upon any thing.
•*•

Imbibition^ is when any dry body drink

A Chymicd Dictionary.

in any moifturc that is put upon n.
Jupiter 5 a planet of Aftromawy
Impregnation, is when any dry body hath
drank in fo much moifture that it will ad*
J mic of no more.

Incorpr a\ion, is a mixtion of a dry and

moiftbody together, fo as to make an unb

form mafle of them.

j Injufton, is the putting of any hard matter

l[ fcnjto liquor, for thevcrtue thereof to bz

1/11 (Extracted.

Inflation, is the digefting of things in
the Sun.

L.
Levigation,'l$ the reducing of any hard
matter into a meft fine powder.
Lxtitia, otGeomancy.
Leo and Libra figures of Aftromancy.

Liquation, is a melting or making any
thing fluid.

Luxation* is either the flopping of ths
orifices of veficls, that no vapourjpaffe our3
or the coating of any veflfcll to prefcrve ic
from breaking in the fire.
M.

H Mars, Mtrcury, and the Moon, Planets oi
Aftromancy.

Maceration, is the fame as Digeftion.
Maturation, is the exalting of a fubfhnc©
b 3 tfe*t

A Chymical DiSionary.

that is immature and crude, to be ripened
and conco&ed.

Mevftrum, is any liquor that ferves for
the extracting the tffmce of any thing.
P.
Frecipitathn, is when bodies corroded
by corrofive fpirhs, either by the evaporat*
ing of thefpirits remain in ihc bottome,
or by pouring fomething upon the fpiritf,
a* oil of Tartar , or a good quantity of
water, do fatl to the bottom.
Puer>Puella & Pofulus, figures ofGeoniancy.
Fifces a figure in Afttomancy.
Purification, is a reparation of any Li-
quor from its feces, whether it be done by
clarification, filtration, or digeftton.

Putrefaftion, is the resolution of a mixt
body into it fclf , by a natural gentle
heat.

a,

<jj>vinte(fence3 is an abfolute, pure anc
well digtfted medicine, drawn from an]
(ubftance> either animal, vegetable or ml
neral.

R.

Rubefy a figure of Geomancy.

Rettification\ is either the drawing of th
ftegmfrom the fpirits,or of the Cpirirs fror
the flegm, or the exaltation of any Liquo
by a reiterated diftillationr ;

Rtvir

A Cbjmical DiHionary.

Reverberation, is the reducing of bodies
:nto a Calx, by a reflecting flame.

Saturne, Sol, Scorfio, and Sagittary, Planets
and fignes in Apomancy*
oc: ; Solution, is a diffblving or attenuating
« of bodies.

Stratification, is a ftrewing of corroding
if! powdir on platesofraetaJlby courfe.
tji i Sublimation, U an elevating, or railing of
the matter to the upper pare of the vcflcll
q by way of a fubtle powder.

Subtiliatioi, is the turning of a body into
fl a Liquor, or into a fine powder.
xl T. .

i, Taurus, a figures ot Aflromancy .
m Tranfimutatron, is the changing oft thing
(Q iin fubftancc, colour, and quality.
V.
Venus, Virgo, figures of Afkromahcy.
I Volatile, is that which fly eth the fire.

a

Rw/fi to be confidered in Rofic Crucian
Medicines.

i.

1 jLfT Ake choice of a fit place in your houfe

■■ for the furnace, fo that ic may neither

I ' hinder any thing, nor be in danger of the

faling of any thing into it thatfhal lye over

U;

A Ckymical Di&ionary.

ic: for a forcing Furnace, it will be beft to
fetitin achimny, becauie aftrongheat is
ufedtoit, and many timw there arc ufed
brands which wili imoik, and the fie b:-
ing great the danger thereof may be pre-
vented, and of things of a maligocandve*
ncnate quality being diftillcd in fuch a Fur-
nace, the fume or vapour, if the glafs
fhould break nuy be carryed up \wo the
chimney which othervufe will flye about
the room eo thy prejudice.

2-

In all kinds of Diftillation the veffels *are
not to be filled too full; for if you diltill
Liquors,they will run ever; if other folider
things, the enc part: will be burnt before
the other pare be at all worked upon; but
fill the fourrh part of copper vcflels ; and
in rectifying of fpirics fill the veflll half
iuil.

Let thofe things which are flatulent, as
\vax,rofin, and fuch like, as alfo thofc
things which do eanly boil up, as honey,
be put in a ltffer quantity, and be diftilled
ia greater vefftls, with the addition of Glt3
(and, or fuch like.

4-

There be fome things which rcqnire *

ftrong

A Chymicd DiBioniry<

ic

ilrong fire, ycc you muft have a care that
the fire be not too vebernert for fear their
nature fhould be dtftroyed.

5-
You muft have a care that the lute with
which veffris are cloftd, do not give vent
aud alter the nature of the Liquor, cfpeci-
ally when a ftro g fir« is to be ufed.

6.

Acid Liquors have this peculiar proper-
ty, that the waktr part goes forth fi»ft;
aruj theftronger laft, but in fermented and
Liquors the fpiric goeth ruA, then the
sgme.

7.
If the Liquor retain a certain Empyreu-
;na, or (match of the fire, thou (halt help ic
L-y putting it into a glafs clofe ftopt, and (o
cxpofing it to the heat[of the Sun, and now
and then opening the glafs that the fiery
imprtflion may exhale, or clfe let the glafa

rand in a cold moift place.
8.
When you put water into a Teething Bal-
!* neum, wherein there are glaffes, let it be
L hot, or elie thou wilt endanger the break-
ing of the glafie*.

9.
When thou takeft an earthen or glafs

vcfM

A Chymical DiBionary.

vefTelfrora the fire, expofc it not to the
cold air too fuddmly for fear it (hould
break.

IO.

If thou wouldft have a Balneum as hot as
aCheSj put fand or fawduft into it, that the
heat of the water may be therewith kept in,
and made more intenfe.
II.

|f you would make a heat with horfe-
dung, the manner is this; viz. make a hole
in the ground,thcn lay one coarfc of horfe-
dung a foot thick, then a coarfe of un-
fiiked lime half a foot thick, then another
of dung, as before then fct in your veffcl,
and lay round it lime and horfe-dung mixt
together; prefs it down very hard 5 you
muftfprinklc it every other day with w*-
tcr, and then it csaftth to be hot, then
take it out and put in more.
12.

Note that alwaycsfandorafhes muft bi
well fifced ; for otherwise a coal or ftont
therein may break your glafs.
13.
The time for putrefaction of things i
various; for if the thing to be putrefied b
vegetables aud green, lefstimeis required
|f dry, a longer * if Minerals, the iongeft 0

all

A Chymical Dictionary.

1. Thus much note , that things ate
>oncr putrincd in clouJy weather thca
i fair.

14.

If thou wouldft keep vegetables frefh
od green all ihe year, gather them in a
ry day, and put them into an earthen
tfftl, which you mud ftopclofe, and fttin

cold place: and they will, as faith Glau-

I 1 rus, keep frefh a whole year.

Do not f xpeft to extraft the cflence of
j ny vegetable unlefs by making ufc of ihe
!:: tecs left afcer diftillation : for if you take

II We feccfj ai for example of a netele, and
" nake a deco&ion thereof, and ftrain it and
5 ct it in the froft, it will be congealed and
1 n it will appcara thoufand leaves of net-
^l 'les with their prickles, which when the de.

:o&ion is again refolved by heat, vanlili
iway, which (hews that the effence of the
&> Vegetable* lies in the fait thereof.
1 6.
Tn all your operations, diligently ofc~
fcrve the procefles which you read, and va-
;! rynota tittle from them* for fomcumes
iflfl a fmall miftake or ne^Jeft fpoilsthe whole
lift operation , and fruf^rates your expecta-
tion.

*£. Try

A Chymical Y>i8ionary.

l7\

Try no tat f\:ft experiments of great coft,

or greai difficulty; for it will be a grea-
difcouragement to thce3 and thou wilt bi
very apt to miftakc.

18.
If any would enter upon the prafriceo
Chymiftrie, let him apply himfclf to fora<
expert Artift for to be inftrufted in tbc ma
mial operation of things*, for by this mean*
he will learn more in two moneths, thei
he can by his practice and ftudy in fcvei
years, as alfo avoid much pains and cofl
and redeem mu.h time which elfe of neaffi
tyhewilllofe,

'9*
Enter not upon any operation, unlefs it b

confident with the pcflibility of natun
which therefore thou muft endeavour a
much as poflibly may be:to under ftan J wcli
20.
Do not interpret all things thou reade
according to the litteral fenfe-, for Pnilofc
phcrs when they wrote any thing too ex
cellcnt for the vulgar to know, expreiTed i
enigmatically* that the ions of Art onl
might underftand it.

Inall thy operations propofc a goo;

en

A Chymical ViBionary.

nd to thy felf, as not to u(e any excellent
xperiment that thou (halt difcover, to any
11 end, but for the publick good.
22.
llndcrftand well whether you (hall prof-
>ID or not ; before you begin any thing
3ray to God, and you will find all you

i icfircin the Second book made plain unto

fo you-

n

tli
to

■'-

lit

|J Gentlemen

rfid!

t?!r? ttffd ttifr ««f? «&? tato tSJto ttfr*

tHWr ttfr.

m vT*T**> IrT^m-: **T^*\ ffc^^ir* /iTTr, fc/

Gentlemen;, I {half defire you to favour the Erro;
of the preis. I have prefixed as many as I efpied to th
Book- bat it fortunates that an Author is apter ratta
to read it as it mould be , then really as it comes fror
the Compoficor and Corrector. And if you are fomc e
thbfe that would uhderftand me, be pleafed to doe m
the j.iftice, and your felves the few ice to Correct thera
1 could wiih the Copies were perfect; but the Nativir
of Books, is like that of Children, they Lifp both 3
firft, though their Parents fpeak never fo well;
Andthefe be the faults that follow.

INtfc firfi Epiflle Dedicatory, Lib. i.page i.limi^.fn
a long, r. a long time : p. $ ./. $ f. unworthy, r. worthy
p-53./,x3-/". Turfon in the Arabick,?-. Rofie Crucian
p.i6.!si6.f. Turfon, &c. r. Rofie Crucian: p.34. /.18./
Turfon, r. Rofie Crucian: p.^o.l.i.f. Jerufalem, r. c
the Rofie Crofle.^.43./. 17. f. Acjuamia, c. Apamia
Lib 1 .Page 3 .lim 16. for fratenity, t. fraternity : p.6.l.z
f. or which, r. or that which: p. 1 z.l. 1 4. f. we can, r. m
canto helpe to fupply them, p.xz.l. r 8,/*. compare, I
compares; p. 14 .l.z 3 .[. which it, r. which chey : p. 1 4./
2, }./. keepeth, v. keept: *p.i 6.J.8. f. Medicine, r. Medi-
cines promift: JMtf./.zo./'. atificially, r. artificially: p
iD.f.xo.f.Cityes, v. nicit.es,p.io./.iz./. Tohn Heydon
/.fob Heydon : p. 10 ./. z$ /. lyars, r. lying mUiS
Lilly that was born at Difetvovtb m Leiccficr-fture z
labourer, or ditchers fon, and brought up by one Palyn
aTaylot in the Strand, that gamed hiseftate, &c.p.xi(
/. f.f, have great j r. have made gieat: p. ii .1. \ 7 /.what
it i«, r. what they are: p.r\ J.iy.f. Nature of it, r. Na-
ture of them: p.3 1 ./. zo.f. Rofie Crucian, r. Rofie Cru-
ciansi Lib. z.p.i.l.H.f. 0/A.eir/xo*, '/'. <pi\hop@- : />.8.
/.iNote thefc clafles ofNumbcrs arc alio to be uled with

the

he Copper, p.\6 1 . p.9. /. z6. f. Gemines, r. Gemini :

p\ •.i3./.i4./:fift, r.firit:/>.i4./.i6/.Art, r. Air:;. ij./.i.

f. this is this, r. this is the: p.i-j.l. 31/. wondering, r.

'/vonder: p. 18.L zz. /.letter 1: r: Jod the Hebrew

cttcTj p.iy.l.i.f. Rebelloon, r. Rebellious, p. zo./. xx.

. diiivifiblity j r. devifibility. />. i%.l.i.f. conltiring, r,

.miiving: pi$.l.$.f. plants, r. Planets. /. z.^z./.j.

\ every, r. in the very: p. 34./.1 /. Chap . IV. r. Chap.

... VI. p. 34./. 13./". exin&ion, r. extinction: p. 3 5./. 8 •£ Ro-

ieCrunan phyfick, r. Roiie Crucian Phyfick: Lib,

-.4-./.12./. the whole, r. the whole Art. p.^d.z%.

tor, r, fear: />.46./.i8/.found, r. fount or River: £.49.

lo.f. on her, r. on her beae1: jp.ji./.f./'.Pythagorianss

K Pythagoreans called £.j 3. /. 11/. four; r. five:/. 6.2.

'. zo,/". repairing, r. preparing: p.66. 1. i$.f- doth cn-

... Jure, r. doth not endure: p.)%.l. 1 i . /. hird, ?\ third: p.

74. /-7. f. or, r. of: p.8i./.i <.f. be fo, r. bee they lea

87: /. 13. f. carried with? r. carried it with:/?- 107,

ji !•• <• /. followed, r. following: p. izy. I. 2.5. /*. re-

J* Covering them r. recovering when: p. 138. L zo,

J64. f.3 /. beink, r. being: ii6. 3. p. 1. L %.f.

nake a live, r. make one alive: p.$$.l.i.f. Chap, 2.*,,

Chap. 3. p.lf.Li/.Chap^. r.Chap. 4. p.6j.l.j.f. di-

< ft us, fpontaneouHy, r. direct thus frontaneouhy, r,

tied thus fpon:anlonfly: p.ji.l.ii.f. conation, r.coaa-

nip.y^.i^.'f. Speriatu madmifli, r. fpectatem a«J-

:!!":/>. 87. J.i|;/. The Holy Guide, Long Life,r. vvfc*

achcrh happinefsj Long life, knowledge^ all things

:t, prefeiitand to come, &c.p-9?. /. iz./. manksid,

mankind: p.ui.Li 6.f. tv, o round of,<\ two pound of:

1 Z4-/.i2./.wc have, f. wee have at pleafurt: fc 13'fX

■ A-f. "fudge me he did not underftand, r. Judge me 10

• that he did not underftand: p,i^i.l.\.f. fingles, r. fea-

es; f^o./^/.Loaltone, r. Loadfton.:/M6i./. iz/.

'•* ciueable, r. incurcabk : p. 163./. Z7./. wone, r. *im3

1 6 9 /. 1 3 /. your, r. youth: p. 1 7 z ./. a 3 . /! cooler, r.

lilcr: p. 173,/, 1 z/. fufters to, r. fuftcrs it to: t.i 74, j.

'ai

2 1. /.as unknown, r. is unknown, £.14.9./. 14./. bound?
r, board:/?. 17^./. z 8./. backing, r. bakeing: t>. 183.^.3.
/. next in point hand, r. next point in hand: p. 187.1
/. 'c./.tic only tor Telefmes where it is, r: unfit for Te-
lefmes ask is, p. 189.?.^. f. phnt of wight, r. plant fa
Wjghttp.ioiXi4.f and are difpatched,r.are difpatched'
p.%o$.Li.f. breaketh, v. hreatheth: p.no.i.i6f. whole
foile, r. hot foyle: Lib.+.p.iz.l.x 1 f. quick of conceit*
'/■'. quick of conception: p. n.l.n.f. Seamen,/. Seven
men, p.ij.l^.f. ftone,r. pantaiva: p.17 I. 29/. ftomej
r. Medicines: p.i 9X1 9./. itone, r. Medicines: p. 23 /, >
a^./.Heydon, r. Jacob Hcydon: p. 24,/: / :/:but live:?':
live : p: 1 8 :.': :/: waxed, ? : growech greater: p:^-; : ': u ;/j I
things neare, »: things arreneare:p.4?:/:4.f: furnifliS
burnifh: f: 48 :/•: 1 5 r/ifix, r: furus: />: 5 : ;: 1 9 :/s rhar,-/ .-.hen,'
that:'?: 5 --J: i.;r: and Copperas, r: a Copperas: />: y8:/I|
2 : meed any o'' any, n need of an\ : f ifi :l: 19/. own
r: one: f:7 1:^17:/: ftone, r: flout: Vh: ip:\\h\i fi
to ihew whence,V: to (hew more plainly whence:?: 2:/:8:
f. any, i : manyi/sSifrj :r: Gregorius, i : Georgiu
/: : i if: Dr. Anthony, r: Dr. Culpepper: p:zji:f: aqui'i
>h:: Scorno, n aqua^Maitis m Scorpio, and foJyott'
may read the reft of the waters of the Figures of Afho-i
mancy, and Geomancy: p:\i:':if'/'. and of, r: wifl
^: j 2 : ': i 8 if: wonder: ? : wonderful :&: 7 3 :/. 2 ifBock:p: 3 2 J <
3 : : r: The Harmony of the World, book 2: /■: $*:'; 1 fl
/: : ^:/:The Temple of wifdome;/>:3 j:f : 1 : '.-7: » : dm
jtopher Rud.i, of the Rod, Efq; one of his Maj.ftjes!
Attumeys in the Court of Kings Bench: p:^:l: 1 3:f:proH -
cure, r: prove: L.;/>:*:In the Advertifement, p:$yJ;io:
/: John, 4:4 : rrjohjij 8:;:Sc::44i

LlB.l. I

Chap. I.

)f(jod^Art and Stature.

OfGodyof Man, of Creatures : 2. A divine
pattern: z. Frailty : 4. HappineJJe wkat >
5. J [fir it that workelh all things: 6. Di-
vine lights: 7. Plato's Crown : S.lbe grounds
ef Knowledge : 9. Opinio Jts : 10. Images
of Heaven : 1 1 . Si#g/<? mindes, Mejjcngers
and Angels : 12. Degrees of hap pine fie :
Of three delights.

\*0d is our holy Guide , there-
fore in all orderly ^ft?-
cfos , and matters of
Learning^ firft of all be-
hoveth a wife man toa-
grce upon the thing in.
, what it is j And whatsis the bounds
(r Definitions^) of the fame; it feemeth
iy need full in this difcourfe of the Kofie
i'ueian Medicines 3 to mew firft, their mat-
tr , in Nature and Art y their manner of
nrking^ all which we will here canoni-
tljy and orderly make manifeft 0 be-
A ' eaufe

hnd,

9

The Holy Guide.

caufe ic is a thing much in doubt and ii
quettion among the Learned.

Eyes that ufe to behold and view th
reafon and nature of things, mayeafih
perceive by the outward (hape and inwan
gifts of man, unlike and paffingall othe
wights ( or living Creatures ) that he wa
made for fome notable end and purpof
above the reft, and fo not for pleafure3hc
nour, or enough of needfull outwar
things j which they call Riehes ; nor y(
for any other mattfers,which other wight
void of wit and reafon feek and follow
therefore a man ought not to make an
thing of that nature his end and happinef
unlerTe he think it reafon for the Majl
(and better workman) to learn of the Servai
and worfer, for what other pattern and en
have we to follow? none at all; becaufe v
are the beft Creatures in the world; than
is wirhout the world, fayyou, andamor
the blejjed mindes^ox the JEthereal Inhabit an
above and without all ; neither yet ha1
we found it,forthry beourfellow-fervan
and ftibjetts under one Almighty Kins;.

2. Wherefore Eugeniitf 7beodidad
fayes there remains nothing but God , at
hid happines to be fought and fet befo
our eyes; not with hope to overtake ar
reach it, that were madnefs; but with d
lire to attain fo much thereof, as the pr

porti<

1

The Holy Guide.

portion between him and us will Tuff^r ;

2. Or if theunmeafurable,and bound*
lefle, or infinite bieffednefsof God admit,
no comparifon, it were beft , yea awd by
the example of Mr. 7ho. Heydon^ to make
:he bounds of our happinefs in long life,
heal\b and youth i fo much of theferviceof
3W, as our whole power and nature will

, [wldand carry, now if we knew that di-
vine Pattern 3 and ontly gift of God, ail

' vere well : And this as almoft all other
ruth, efpecially in cafe of life and man-

t \ers, for the which this Book was chiefly
mtten, bythewitnefi and record of holy mit3

f \nd received to be known and proved : if that

I ere not fo ft range and far off from this
, urpofe, which is appointed as you fee to
. in through the midft of Art^Nature^Rea-

K3 Vhilofophy and Fhyfic^
u 3. Wherefore (ithence both in this and

1 other matters, Galen builds overmuch
"i pon his own devices, not considering as

me may object, that a man (efpecially a
• ')iingman)may fwerve, but we have aflr*
l' :mceofthe Rofie- Crucian Seraphicd illu-
;;i linated fratenity , and have be fides a fingle
t jdgement and manual experience in the Phy-
:: ffophers Pantarva, a double portion, of

II t'etfpiritscounfell, which faid ha %ti £*-
w ; **f* div^dLi vre'/l* hMt&s , All o-
ty ter beiides did not content us, becaufe

A 2 they

The Holy Guide. LlB.i

they were no more but men endued with
ripe wits, and perhaps found judgement
in the com feof kind(or Nature and Phy-
rjck;,) Now I muft look as near as I can
to my own judgement, that it be ftil!
lquared by the rule of truth and reafonj
And fo let us return to our purpofe, long
Life, Health, Youth, Riches, Wifdoni and
Vertue,arenot to be found among thofc
men that iivelike Hogs, alwayes greed)
afterfuch things asbeafts defire, Sc know
no better then things aufpicious to fwine
•4. Then to finde this happinefs and plea
fure of heaven among menjTo whom wen
it beft to travel?unto Poets think you?No
becaufe they take their aim full at a vaiw
mark, the peoples liking, as you may fe<
by Mr. John Cleavelands Poems*, fori wil
not draw of the dregs (when he faith'
If a man be rich, and have his health, with <
contented minde^ and honour , let him nc
care to be a God , nor for popular applauft
This vain and worldly content is farr
from a Divine nature; Nor yet need we g-
to the lower or lefTer houfes of Fhyfic\
where as they be tainted and imfound r
other points of learning; fo in matter c
manners they doe not do well to plac
their content in honour, pleafure, ori
fuch like outward things, no nor to feci
in good life alone, and veitue.

5.*

LlE.l. The Holy Guide* 5

5. Befides the opinion of Hermes, 7ar-
tbaSyApollonius^Tbroates, and others: it is
my thoughts, that that which is inferiour
or below, is as that which is fuperiouror
above, there being one univerfal mat-
ter and form of all things, differenced
onely by accidents, and particularly by
that great myftery of rarefa&ion and
condenfation,the inferiour and fupcriour,
; to work and accomplifh the miracles of
•one thing, and to (hew the great variety
1 'and diverfity of operations wrought by
I chat fpirit that worketh all things, in -all
I :hings; and as all things were from One,
\ oy the mediation of one God, having
it treated all things in the begiuning,which
i is the beginning of all things, and the
« ivifdomofhisFatherjfo all things fprung
it md took their Original from this one
it hing, by adoption, or fitting it felf accor-
1 lingly, in number, weight and meafure 5
!a lorwifdomebuildeth her ownhoufe.
tf 6. Fiato and Fythagoras, for their matcb-
K efs underftanding in naturall things,and
I i)ivine light in good order of life and
, manners, have been thefe many ages bell
Q ccepted with the beft, and followed in
.j: 11 things-, therefore in this high point of
nr lanners, which we have touched, we
I ; ill tell you the father of this one thing,
that which he ufeth infteadofan A-
: i A3 gent

7 be Holy Gmde. LiB.i.

gent, and all the operations thereof, is the
Sun-,M\d the mother thereof, or which
appiyes the place of a female and patient,
is the Moon ; the nurfe thereof and her
paps, all the influence of heat and moi-
fture, of the Sulphur e and Mercury of Na-
ture, for the fpirit of God moveth not
but upon die face of the waters-, the earth,
the wind, or aire, is carried in its belly, as
the failes in the chain, that tye the fupe-
riour things to them that are below. This
is the Father original, and Fountaine of
all perfection, and of all the fecret and
miraculous things done in the world ,
tvhofe foke is then peifeft and compleat.
Now let us fee what opinions others hold,
and how neer they come to Iheodidaclus
his right line of truth.

7. To begin with Plato^the fpringof this
Philofophy, his Medicine and Happinefs;
he difputes in ThiUbm, as neere as I could
gather, out ot fo large and fcattered a
fpeech,is nothing but Pleafure and Health
in a Medicine. And yet this Divine man
meaneth not (left you (hould marvellj
with that heard of fwine ("though they
were not the brothers of that foul opini-
on, but watered their gardens, as lully
faith, with other mens fprings) tofeto-
jen all the gates of the fences, and to let
in all that comes \ buc ouely ac a few

nar*

L 1 B. I .. The Holy Guide.

narrow loops, to receive cleanc delight
without all grief interlaced, and by name
delight in colours, confent and fome
fmells in Health, Wifdome and Vertue.

And again he faith in Thtutus, that
Jujtice and Holinejfe, together with JVifdomey
vt.tksus hfyunto God$ to letthofetwo pla.
cts ferve for him, and to come to Vythago-
ras : as there are two forts of men , one
difpofed todeale with others, which are
called worldly men; and another quite
contrarily bent to live alone, and tofeek
knowledge, which are called Philofo-
phcrs 5 fo he in his.book appoints two fe-
verall ends ; for the firft vertue \(l mean
adoring, and no idle vertuej garniftied
with outward helps, and gifts of body
and fortune: for the next knowledge ojf
the beft things ; and this he fetteth before
that other, for many reafons vouched to-
ward the end of his book ; but efpecially,
becaufe God, whom we ought to follow,
leadeth the fame life.

8. Thefebe the beft grounds of Happi*
neffeand Plcafure that ever any.Philofo-
pher orPhyfitian hath faid at any time ;
f for never a one hath quite built it up ; )
let us fee how they be fquared : If the
foul- fed Epicure may again be juftly re-
proved, and reckoned as an impious per-
•fon, whom never any heavenly thoughts
A^ touch-

y The Holy Guide. Lib. i .

touched for bringing in an idle God3n ei-
ther ruling the world, nor regarding it :
Bow cduAnjlotle ft em wrongfully accufed
of impiety, &c for the fame banifhed out of
the Academy j if there were not other proof
againfl him(when he faith J in that place,
God leadeth no other then this beholding
& gazing life of his? Is it not an idle,and,
as it were, a covetous life turned back up-
on it felf, and eftranged from all outward
action applied and directed to others ? .
yea, and that ill his own, and all other
mens underftanding; then to encounter
him with his worthy Matter Plato^ if that
were the beft life, or the life of God, why
did God make the World? he lived fo be-
fore, if that had been the beft life; but
becaufe he was good, he would have o-
thers enjoy his goodneffe, and before he
was bufie in making, and is yet in ruling
the world , and yet indeed it is no bufi-
nefs, as we reckon it, that is no care and
trouble, but an outward deed and action,
cleane contrary to the inward deed of a
niufing minde onely (hooting at his ownc
good cftate with hiswifdora &: knowledge
9. But if he deny all this, as it's like he
will, to increafe the heap of fin, he grants |
Xto beginning, then what can be greater
evidence then his own writings,one quite
thwarting another, ascrofs as may be; for
in another place he comes again 3 and

faith

;

Lib. i . Tie Holy Guide. 9 «

faith, that every man hath fomuch hap-
pinefleashehath Wifdome and Vertue,
even by the witneffe of God himfelf, who
is therefore happy3 and not for outward
goods; what can be more divinely fpo-
ken, and more crofs to the former, foule
and godlefs opinion > nay, fee the force
of truth; he yieldeth again according to
the heavenly Rafter, that tofore-ftall the
place from the worfer fort, good men
ought to take office upon them, and to
manage affaires of 5tate : yea further, if
they refufe (which if they be wife, they witty
queth Zeno) that thsy may rightly he compel-
led-, then, if this wile man hath vertuein
pofleffion, as no doubt he hath, he muft
as we fee by his own confeflion, ufe it ; and
the famereafon is of God himfelf in this
great City of the World ; but Tlato by
name, thinks thofe two fo nearly allied
and knit together,as he dare openly deny
happinefs to that Common- wealth where
they be diflinked and ftand afunder.

1 o. Then we fee, that in the judgement
ofthefetwo great Thilefophers and Fhyfiti-
am, where they be beftadvifed, and in
deed and truth, the divine pattern of happi-
nefs, which we ought toftrive unto, is no
more, nor no lefsthen that worthy cou-
ple of wifdome and venue knit together in
that bond of fellowfhip, which may ne-
ver be parted afunder.

That

■ IO The Holy Guide. LlB.u

ThatSalomon defired, when God gave
him his choice, and bad him ask what he
would have, and he would give it him, as
you may read i Kings c.i. Hefaid, Ion/
give thy fervant an understanding hearty that
he may judge between good and bad; and the
fpeech pleafed the Lord, that Salomon had
asked this thing? and God f aid unto him9 Be-
canfe thou baft asked this thing, and haft mt
asked long life, neither haft askgd riches for thy
felf, nor the life of thine enemies, but haft ask-
ed for thy felf under ft anding to difcerne judge-
ment ; behold, 1 have done according unto thy
word, ho I have given thee a wife under {land-
ing heart, fo that there was none like thee be-
fore thee, neither after thee (};all any arifo
like unto thee. And alfo 1 have given thee that
which thou hzft not asked, riches and honour ;
andfo will God doe to all thofe that mindwif-
dome and vertue. In the firft place, with an
intent to do good to others. On the con-
trary, fad experience hath witnefledeven
in our daye?, that many, whofe whole
aim was to be rich in this world, have
been deprivedof all, and forced to feeke
their bread in a ftrange land ; fo may o-
thersdo yet for ought I know, if they be
not all the wifen they that fwallow down
riches; and not by right, (hall vomit them
up again; the Lord (hall caft them out of
theirbdlies,y^20.i$.
ii. But you may fay, we have reared

our

Li B.I. The Holy Guide. II

our Happinefs,long Life and Health aloft,
and made it a fair and goodly work ; but
more lit for the dwelling of thofe clean
and tingle minds (or fpirits) above, which
they call Meffengers (or Angels) therefore
is man fo buried here below in thefe
earthly bodies , as we are fcarce able to
look up unco it:and therefore Pythagoras m
his book, with good advice, often recei-
veth in enough of bodily and outward
goods, to help the matter, (thought it not
to beany other caufe of joy, than thein-
ftrument is of Mufick : ) and fo Plat$, we
fee, nameth his fervants and helpers.

12. Indeed I grant, that this full and
high pitch of happinefs, &c. (I mean that
meafure above fet ) is free and eafte to free
and lively fpirits j bufr to us impoffible,
without outward meanes and helps,
which , neverthelefs , fhall not be
counted as any part of the frame of
Health, needfull to make up the whole,
bur, as it were, loofc and hang-by fteps
and ftaires leading up to it.

13, Then, if thefe be fo needfull a9
they be, it were of much need to lay
them down, and keep juft account, which
thofe Tbyfitiam do not, left if there be two
for one^HappineJfe^c mould halt:if again,
too many, the idle parts might, in fine,
infeft and marrethe reft > as we may fear

of

1 2 the Holy Guide. LiB.i.

of Flato his firfi three Delights , although
they be not hurtfull of themfelves .•
Without more words, the juft ftimmeis
thus : To obtaine fo much HappinefTe,
&c. as our Nature is able to take and
hold, the body had need befirft willing
and obedient, and then ftore of out-
ward needfull things to be at hand and
ready* thefe every man knowethj but for
the body, that is obedient, when it is
long lived, health full , young , clear e, and
temperate $ when all thefe helps flock to-
gether, we may be happy, if we will* if
any want, we (hall doc what we can, as
you (hall hear hereafter.

Then let us marfhall thefe things at
laft in order , by the Holy Guide> who
compare Happinefstoa Family^ & makes
that loving couple Wtfdome and Vertuey
as Maw and Wife , and Heads of the
HouQiold, the five proper eyes of the
body like Children, and Riches as Ser-
vants. Thefe againe, if the chief of the
houfe will fuffer them to marry, will be-
get other two bond-children, to beautitie
the fame houfe. Honour and flea pure ; but J
the wife and good Houfholder will in no
wife fuffer it,ieft his houfe mould be trou-
bled with more then may be ruled; andv
although true and right Honour and
Pleafure will perforce follow, yec he fliall

not

Lib.!, the Holy Guide. 1 3

not regard them 3 nor be minded towards
them 5 as thofe grave men were towards
Helen 3 and often ufe their faying , al-
though theybefuch kindeones, yet let
them go: and us follow our way to health
and happinefle, &c. See The Harmony of the
World, &c.

'•

All Objections caft againft the Rofie
Crucian Medicines Anfwered9 and
the truth made manifeft.

CHAP. II.

1 . The way to Wifdome ', 2. Hermes medicine*-,
5 . Rules, 4. pofftbilities and effeUs - 5 fault-
lejfe (ludies-, 6. approved reafons; j.Opinionsi
8. Tbeftop-/kip', 9. Secret truths. 10. Won*
drous mrks $ 11. Wifemens 12. Alchi-
myb 13. Ofthefccret bl ail and motion of
Cod-, 14. Of Natures faulty 15. Divine
truths-, iC. Mansminde; ij. Of the life of
God 3 18. Raging Counfell ; 19. S tingle fie
X rones; 20 . Vifiention-, the Emper ours folly.

Oh that we knew that health and hap*
pinefle5wemay when we will, go in-
to the way where and how all men may
be blefled : wherein I am quite bereaved
of all helps from the Grecians > as men e-

ver

14. The Holy Guide.

ver apt to fpeak & think well, rather then
to do &. perform any thing (though con-
ftancy & agreement,in their fay ings would
have left blefiednejfe as well as other good
things in the power and reach of all men
and I mud fly for aide into Mgy^t , a peo-
ple fo far palling all other Nations, as it is
better and nearer to God, to work and to
do great wonderous things than to behold
and look upon them.

2. For it is delivered toAncient and true
Record that one Hermes aKing and Lawgi-
ver of that Country , a man of a rare and
divine gift in knowledg above all that ever
were, found out Medicines able to bring
all men to health & long life^c.and left
them behinde him in writing tohis people;
& that they were after him,a long time by
thewjfer fort, clofely wrought and ufed,
umill atlaft, they crept abroad and ftole
into Arabia, when (lie flourifhed in Armes
and Learning, and there got the name
which it now commonly keepeth of
Filius Solis deleftis, Amicus Vitt, Pantarva,
Ignis ViU> Stella Vita, Radix Vita, Aqua So-
Iisy Aqua Luna, Vehcia vita, Panacea, Succus
Vita, Medulla vita, Adjutrix Vita, Salus vita,
Sanguis vita, Aurum Potabile ; and indeed all
thefe medicines are made of prepared
gold,*H.Now from thence in the fame fe-
cret and difguifed manner (Tor that is the
wont of them, as becomes fo deep fecretsj

they

LiB.T. The Holy Guide 1 5

they have traveled and fpread themfelves
overall Nations; now and then opening
and difcovering themfelves to a few of
the better and wiier company.

3. Then this is the meanes to obtaine
blcflednefs, which I mean to take , and
withall to prove it no pleafant dream
and happy tale, if it were true as the
common proverb goeth of it ; but as it is
a Natural, Heroical, and almoft a Divine
deed, fcarce to be reached or matched
with any words, fo I vow them a true and
certain ftory, things often done, and a-
gain to be done as often , I am unfits I
grant, and unable to bear fogreat a bur-
then, but that the defirel have both to
defend the Truth from Slander, and to
do good to them that love it, makes it
light and eafie : and again, the hope up-
holds me, that if I chance to {tumble or
faint at any time, thefe will as gently
and willingly lend their hand to ftay me,
or at leaft bear with the fall or misfor-
tune.

Then for the common or wilder fort,
which either for lack of good Nature, or
want of good Manners, ufe to wrangle a-
bout words, or twitch at things, I care
not j and becanfe I know them not, I pafs
them as unknown men ; for neither was
Henulcs able, as they fay, to match with

many-

1 6 ike Holy Guide. LiB.i,

many-headed Hydray nor yet with the
a#kg and crooked Crab,

4. Then to turn my fpeech, which
way were it beft to fet forwards > not
rightjandftraight to the matter ! No ; be-
caufe there is fuch crying out againft the
poflibility of the good work which our
Medicine promifes; and that Awke for
judgement of the matter hath been the
chief caufe which hath hitherto buried
this Divine Art from the fight of good
and learned men; I take it the beft way
of delivery, before I come to the point it
felf,to fetch about a little, & then to (hew
the poflibility ofthofe effe£b,and the way
to work them by other or weaker meanes,
as well as by Hermes Medicines. For al-
though it be notfo natural, in marching
forward to move the Iejft and weak part*
yet I keep it right atificially, and then it
mall agree with that goood order of Art :
Firft of all to put by a few of the light
things laid againft this bleffed Science y
becaufe, albeit, they be gathered but by
guefs,be(idesall grounds of certaintyjyet
they have fo wholly poflefled the common
people, yea, and fome of the better and
wifer fort likewife, that without any
further fearch or hearing of the matter*
they have ftraight-way caft it off for
falle, and condemned its for when as

one's

Lib. i . The Holy Guide. I 7

cnce deep hath taken the fort of the bo*
dy, the fenfes yield, and can do nothing j
fo if wrong belief get once pofTeffion of the
foul, reafon is laid to reft, and cannot
move again, before that mift be loofened,
put to flight and fcattered.

5. Firft, fay they, fith there befeen in
all places and times, fo many hundreds
with great paines, heed and cunning, to
ftudy this Art, and put the Receipts
in practice : now if they were true and
faultlefs, as others are, fome mould ap-
peare to hit the mark, and to gather the
fruits of their iravel, and to live as they
do, of all men moft miferabie: orat leaff,
becaufe it is fo ancient an Art, it would
have been recorded in fome publick cr
private writing, befides their own, which
be it bound with never fo deep oaths (as
it is) yet it is unfufficient proof and wit-
nefs in their own cafe.

6.Thefebe the moft capable reafdns,
and beft approved among the people.,
wherewith they ufeto batter this exchan-
ging fequence : but mark how light and
weak they be, and eafie to be wiped away;
for how could the a&s and deeds of thefe
R.C. Philosophers & Phyfitians come into
the writings and Records of men (to be-
gin there with them) whofe fame, nay,
whofe company they have everihunned >

£ and

/*

18 The Holy Guide. Ll B. i .

and when their own Records, if they
chance to light of any thing that was not
town abroad, and publiftied to the world,
as is the ufe of worldlings; but left like
moft precious Jewels unto fome freindof
fccret truft,which was counted as a Son a-
dopced , upon condition to keep itftill
within the houfe and ftock of Hermesfiom
the eyes and hands of the world and
(hangers, running evermore, like the wife
Starres, a contrary race unto the world,
that no mervaile, though they be both,iu
like fort croffed by the world, and mif-
called wanderers for Planets, J when in-
deed and truth they goe better. Now
when they deem credit to be denied to
the mens report & witnefs, it is a fign that
either their own report&witnefs is of light
and little weight, whereby they judge of
others ; or elfe, that their thoughts are
vain and phantaftical, puffed up, I mean
with that new kind of felf-love and over-
weening wifdome, to (et upthemfelves,
and pull down Authorities > of which
fort ic falls out moft commonly inpeo«
pie, that while they ftrive to avoid the
lake of fuperfHtion, they run headlong
unawares down the river of impiety, for
if fuch a wide breach and entry may be
differed to be made into the credit and
authority of the Writers, which are the
life of Antiquity and light of Memory,

great

LlB.l. the Holy Guide. 19

great darkneffe and confufion will foone
come in and over-caft the world \ yea,and
fo far forth at length,as nought fhall be be-
lieved & judged true that is not feen; that
even they which dwellin the main land,
(hall not grant a fea 5 a thing not onely
fond and childifh among men, but alfo
(ill be to me, if I fpeak not as i think)
wicked and godlefs amongft us Chrifti-
ans, whofe whole Religion, asS. Auguftine
faith, ftands upon that ground.

7.Wherefore,if we muft needs believeRe-
cords, yea, though they be fpmetimes
lewd men, foolifh and unlearned, as if
they were as whole and harmlefs asXe«o-
crates; but efpecially, although they had
great cau fe to lie, and to fpeak more or
lefs then the truth ; who can in common
reafon refufc the folemn oaths of fo goodj
wife and learned men > for he is good for
the love of Vertue it felf ; he that is wife,
to avoid the fhame of lying, will fpeak
the truth:What (hall I fay of EugemusiheG-
didaftus^that duril in times part $wnno other
iwwtf,wnofe whole care and practice, drift
& ftudies, now is nothing eife but to finde
and fet down the truth? but all is well $c
clear of all fufpition, if it may, bethought
thofe oaths and proteftations to have
fprung from himfelf, and others experi-
enced in thefe undeniable truths, of more
good will and defire to perfwadc the lo-
B* vert

2 O The Holy Guide. Li B . ! .

vers of Wifdome and Vertue , than
wrought out byfeare or flattery, which
may ealily be judged in fuch men,as Were
all either then falfe Vrotefton that cared
not, or Ki»g$ that needed not, as it is clear
in all their eyes that are converfant in thefe
kindes of (Indies Wherefore fuch men as
are fo bold with our ground of reafon to
deny, atui deny ftill all that comes, are,
in my opinion, greatly to be looked un-
to} far although they, like Xerxes, pull
not down Religion with hands openly,yet
they are of another fort as dangerous,
that undermine itclofely with wrong o-
p in tons. If our men avoid fuch plain un-
truths, as might be reproved by commwi
fenfe and daily experience, as when A-
nexagoras faid Snow was black, andXftfo-
phanes the Moon is inhabited, and full of
hills atid cities ; and in cities of old, with
tome of late among the Stars [Sir Chr:
JHeydon Baron & N&r. Job.Heydon^znd Mr.
John Gadburyy\ but I fpeak not againft A-
rtrologers, but againft fuch flattering ly-
arsthat have gained their eftates amongft
[illy foolifh women, &c ignorant people, H
that hold, that the earth, the onely movable
thing in the world, (lands ftill, and fuch
like ugly mimapeu lies, wherewith Greece
over-ifwarmed ; then you had reafon to
ufe them with ill words and thoughts as

you

L 1 B. I . The Holy Guide.

you doc : Now, although I was partly
perfwaded to be of the fame opinion with
thofe that hold the earths immobility :
but being convinced jl relinquifti my for-
mer opinions for they maintain,that by a
Heavenly Medicine they have great and
woiiderfull changes, turned all metals
into Gold, Folly into Wifdome, Vice in-
to Vertue, WeaknefTe into lcng Life, all
Difeafes into found Health, and Age into
LuftinelTe and Youth againe \ How can
you difprove them ? when did you fee
the contrary ? you finely know the nature
of the deeds and effects j for they require
great knowledge ; but the doing caufe
workman,that you diflike ls^their Medicines
you never faw,nor can imagine what it is,
much lefs conceive the reafon,jiwigth & na-
ture of it ; nay you fee nothing,but grope
and blunder in the dark,like blind-fold-
ed men at all things ; elfe how could
thefe exchanges have efcaped,8c been hid
from you, in a world fofull of all kindes
of changes > I mean, you fee great and ad-
mirable things f albeit you do not fo take
them, becaufe you fee them often ) but
you doe not truly fee them, that is, you
perceive not the nature, caufe and reafon
of them, and that makes you fo childifh
to believe nought unfeen, and count all
things wondrous which are not common
B 3 among

22 The Holy Guide. LlB.i.

among you $ much like that harmlefle
and fiDy kind of people, of late difcover-
ed, which made miracles and wonders of
many matters, that in other countreys
are ordinary and common, in fo much as
(to take one for all) they could not con-
ceive how two men afunder could by let-
ter certifie one another, unlefs a fpirit
were wrapt up in the paper to make re-
port, and tell the news 5 but if you and
they could once,;by this Guide & Art, cut
into the depth and nature of the great
and marvellous works of kind and skill,
which are common and daily among you;
then, and not till then, you would be
ready and eafie by comparifon to receive
almoft any thing unfeen, and brought by
report unto you. Let me awake your
wits a little; you fee daily, but not tho-
rowly, how the Moon by her Sympathy
with the fpirit of the water drawes the O-
eean after her, makes the ebbs and flow-
ings thereof: it is likewife commonly
knowne, that the Load-jione in the roof e
ef Mahomet his Church ydr aw s up his iron Tomb
from the ground^ and holds it hanging in the
middle way ; like as the miners in Germa-
ny > fonnd their tooles which they had left
in fuch a Vault, hanging in the morning ,•
which was accounted fora miracle,before
fuch time as the caufe, by the ski!full,was

LiB-l. The Holy Guide. 2 }

feen and declared unto them. What
(hould I fay more of this Scene > it is not
unknewne that there are whole rocks
thereof m1ndia9 attheCaftleof the Ada^
WtfKf,erefted by J uLCtf. drawing (hips chat
pafs by loaden with iron unto them:& yet
we fee that this mighty Stone, in prefence
of the Diamond, the King of Stones, is
put out of office, and can do nothing.

8. To come abroad, it hath been often
feen at Sea, that the little Stay-fifh clea-
ving to the fore-fhip, hath ftopt her full
courfe.

9. 1 mould now paffe over to that other
fide of skill and craft, and call to minde
many great and wondrous workes there
done and performed 5 the curious work
of that Italian King , which held a Clocks
be fides a DiaU within *>$ thefe three com-
mon feats found out of late, patting all in-
ventions of Antiquity, the Gun, Card, and
Vrintings and many other dainty Devices
of mans wit and cunning ; if this fliort
and narrow fpeech appointed would fuf-
fer any fuch out- ridings, let thefe few
ferve to awake you,and call your wits to-
gether: you fee thefe things 1 fay, and
are never moved 5 but if you had never
feene them, but heard the {lories only re-
ported,what would yon have thought and
laid ? and becaufe no man judgeth fo
B 4. well

3 ^ the Holy Gride. L 1 B. t .

well of himfelf as of another > fuppofe a
plain and hai mlefle people, fuch as thofe
Indians were, had from the beginning
dwelt in aCave under ground,let it be the
Center if you will, and at the laft onemau.
more wife then the reft , had by Health
crept out into the light : And by long
travel & traffick with our people,had feen
and learned the courfe of nature of
things which I have rchearfed unto you,
and then returning home, had fuddeniy
ftai t up and begun to account the won-
ders which he had Ceen and learned : firfr,
that he had found the earth hanging in
middle of the aire, and in like fort a
bright and goodly cover compaflmg afar
offthe fame ; this cover, befet and fprink-
led with infinite lights and candles, and
among the reft, one (to be (hort ) of a foot
in bignefs to his light, without all touch-
ing, or other means or inftrumentsto be
perceived, to hold and pull huge heaps of
water after her,as fhepafled up and down
continually, would they notftiout and
lift up their hands, and begin to fufpeft
the man of infection with ftrange and
gravelling manners?

jo. But admit, when the noife were
done, and all hufht, he went forward
$l toid them of fuch a Church andVault
with other things , as well, and more

firange.

LiB. I. The Hotly Guide. 15

nrange [then the earth (Tor that can-
not be othcrwife^ unlefs heavy things
flew up againil Nature) hanged in the
aire alone, and of fuch hills, that as the
Sunne waters drawes fhips out of their
coui»fes, without any ftrength or meanes
viiible ; furthermore, if he laid abroad
the wonderfull might of a little fi(h, like
halfa foot long, able to (lay the maine
courfe of a (hip under faile : doe you not
think w^ith what four contenances and re-
viling words, and reproaches, they would
bait and drive him out of their company?
but if the good and painfull man burning
with dcfire to leform the eft-ate of this
rude and deformed countrey, would not
be flayed fo, but fpying a calmer time,
durft come in prefeuce, and ftep forth
before them again, and fay, that by his
travel he had made fuch a ring as I fpeak
cf ; fuch warlike Engines as ftiould tail as
fearfull as thunder, and ashurtfull as a
canon fired at a fort , a niile offplanted;
with a kind off writing,whereby four men
might record as much in the fame time as
four thoufand of the common Clerks 5
fuch a Card, wherewith aCou.ntrey-man
that never faw the Sea, mall fit in the
bottom of a Ship, and direft the courfe
thereof throughout the world without
miffing 5 Is it not like chey would appre-
hend

2 6 1 he Holy Guide* LiB.i,

hcnd him for a coufener , and adjudge
him to pimiflititeut? then put the cafe
you ftood by and Caw the matter, I ap-
pealeto yoiar own experience, would you
not think the Traveller worth pity and
praife , and the People of reforma-
tion ?

ii. Well then, let" us returne to our
purpofe y there is a Nation of wife men
dwelling in a foyle as much more bleiTed
(then yoursji as yours is then theirs of
the Defarts, that is, as they bide under
ground, and you upon the face of the
roof: fo thefe men inhabite the edge and
the skirt of Heaven •, they daily fee and
work many wondrous things, which you
never faw nor made, becaufe you never
mounted fo high to come among them 5
if any one chance toflieaway from you
to thofe heavenly places,&:after like expe-
rience, to return & make the like reports,
you give him the like rewards you give :
if compare the reft J I fay no more ; but if
God would give you leave and power to
afcend to thofe high places, I meane to
thefe heavenly thoughts and ftudies, you
might quickly,by view of deep caufe?,and
divine fee rets and comparifon of one to
another, not onely believe the bleiTed Art,
but alfo learn and perform the fame, and
cure all the difeafed.

1 2. But

LlB.l. 7 he Holy Guide. 27

i2. But they will net be rid fo, but
follow as faft again another way : that
whereas fo many have been, and are dai-
ly Cecil to wear away their lives mAlcbimyy
& to find nothing that good is,but contra-
ry for the moft part, to wit, untimely and
unordinary death, iicknefs and age for
long life, health and youth, and alwayes
fmoak for golden Medicines, and folly
for wifdome, and very near as often, bad
and fad conditions for good and honeft
natures; ((or by boyling themfelves
long in fuch deceitful 1 fluff, as though
they were burnt to the pots bottom, they
carry moft commonly, forever after, an
nnfavoury fmack thereof ; ) it is a plaine
fign the trade is vain, falfe and deceitful;
this is the third charge they give unto us;
let us fee how tobeare and withftand it.
The moft wife and great Thilofophers ,
and Rofie Crucian Thyfitians, albeit they
know God made mankinde, for the hap-
py life abovefaid, and that it was at firft
enjoyed, or clfe it had been made in vain,
and that by corruption of ill cuftome (by
his fecret appointment^ our kinde is
grown out of kind, and therefore maybe
reftored, becaufe it is a mifleading, and
no intent of Nature ; (which forecafting
gave them occafion to feek the remedy J
yet they thought it unlawfull to teach

thefe

28 The Holy Guide. L ib.i.

thefe Medicines , fet ftraight againft
the will of God, that all mould be refto^F
red ; for that he feemed on purpofe to
have fown good and bad, and great ftore
of both together, in fuch fort as we fee
them,left if all were alike, and in one ftate
of happinefs, the great variety of bull- "
nefs and ftirring, and fo' the Society and g
Common- wealth among men fhould be
clean taken away : like as the firft foure
ftriving feedes (whereof all things are
made and fprung) were all alike, and one
friend to another, allfhould beftill and
quiet, without fucceflion, change and va-
riety in the world, and fo there mould be
no world} for God, when he caft his
mind upon the building of the world, he
went to make a beautiful and goodly
work, meet for the Power, Wifdome and
Pleafureoffuch a Builder, and therefore
a ftirring and changeable work, becaufe
there might be no cunning mown, no de-
light taken in one ever like or ftill thing,
but light fighting for fpeed , is ever beft in
fuch a ground : let us away, and follow.
13. Wherefore, by the example, and as
it were by the fecret blafc and motion of
God, after our men had found thefe refto-
ratives5&: ufed them for the time,&: meant
to leave them as becomes good men,to po-
sterity, they took this way of counfel to

lay

LiB.I. The Holy Gnide 29

lay them up fafe ill aftrongCaftle,as ic were
in die whicb all the broad gates and com-
mon eafie entries mould be fail mut up
and barred, leaving one onely little back
doore open, fore- fenced with a winding-
mark, that the beft fort, by wit,paines,
and providence, might come into the ap-
pointed blefTednefle, the reft ftand back
forfaken ; their Maze and plot is this:
firft, they hid themfelves in low and un-
trodden places, to the end they might be
free from the power of Prote ^ors^Scc.Sc the
eyes of the wicked world -, and that they
writ their bookes with fuch a wary
and well fenced skill, I mean, to overcaft
•with dark and fulJen fliadowes, and flye
pretences of likes & fecret riddles drawn
out of the midftof deep knowledge and.
fecret learning, that it's impoflible for a-
ny but the wife and well given, to ap-
proach or come near the matter.

14. And therefore it is, that when the
godlefs and unlearned men, hovering o-
ver gaine and honour, prefume againft
Minervas will to handle tbtfe vvords,wheii
the things mould rather IPnandled (Tor
nothing is fofc and gentle as fpeech, efpe-
cially fo throughly tempered) and yet all
befides the fecret meaning, thruft up in
deep knowledge : then if thefe wayesand
phantafics they pra£tife&: fet on work as

faft

go The Holy Guide. L1B.1.

faft fas their fingers itch) and mifle as faft
fas they muft needes doe) they fay they
followed our rules and precepts, and puc
our work in practice, and found them
falfe5 that were as if a cunning Archer
and Huntfman had delivered as darke
rules of {hooting and hunting unto his
Countrey-men, and thefe by chance had
fallen into the hands of another wild and
untaught Nation, which {imply milled by
miftaking his drift and meaning, had
made them ploughs to {hoot in, and go-
red their Oxen to their game, and then
milling of their purpofe, cryed out and
blamed the Arts of mooting and hunting,
& fought to blow away 8c abufe the man
that taught them : would not a wife
Judge hold and deem both thefe and
them, and all other bufie-bodies, that doe
ufe to mine and dig in other mens deal-
ings, to be fent unto their own trade and
bufincffi, wherefore they were made and
fashioned > and to let the reft alone for
the right owners? and for thofe of Her-
mes houfe, do noc think they make claim,
file, and recoveTOheir own in open court/
as others ufe (thatwere away in fuch a
wicked world* to fofe land, life and all to-
gether quickly J but in the fecret fort ,
which falleth out within the compaffe of
your reproof Neither would I have you

fol-

LlB. I. The Holy Guide.

follow too hard, and be fo earneft upon
the next reafon, that albeit our men had
caufe to hide their works and prac"tice,yet
they would have (hewn the fruit and er-
fe& thereof, advancing themfelves, aso-
thers doe, to Honour and Pleafure, and
not have lived like the refufe of the
orid,in fuch mean plight and wretched-
nefte; for that is the lighted of all other,
though it feem greateft : if I lift to rifle
in the rolls of ancient Records, 1 could
tafilyfindeand fhew you, that although
:he moft part of people live in this harm-
.efle and fafeeftate, which I told you, yet
fome again were Kings, and men of great
place and dignity fand yet I think by re-
minder, and not by purchafe,fo$) but I
ove not this kind of reafoning ; let them
:hatthirft, go to the fountaine, and as I
emember,that in the houfhold ofR.Gru-
an Riches are made but Servants,&: not
afters & Rulers, becaufe they be, for the
oft part, unruly and ambitious; and for
hatjeaufe they have no liberty granted
hem,but arc enjoynd to ferve lowly their
tetters, and to look no further; fo that if
)iir men were happy, or at ieaft lovers of
he fame,their riches ought to be imploy-
d in their own fervice, that is, to win
/Vifdomeand Vertue, and not fent out to
vait upon I know not whatftrangers, Ho-
nour

3?. The Holy Guide. LlE.T.

nour and Pleafure 5 which, as they be
Grangers, yea, and dangerous ftrangers,
lying open fas all high things doj to the
blaft of Envy, fo moft commonly they I;
will not be ruled, no more then they |
which got them, and then rebelling a- I
gainft them which are their Lords and [
Rulers , doe overthrow an happy e- t
irate.

15. Wherefore, what marvel is it if our jji
men did this, when they did no more J
then wifdom requires,norany more then J
all wife men have ever taught and fol- f
lowed ? thinking and calling it an hea- ¥
venly life, becaufeit flinders the heaven- f
lymind from the earthly body * not fas I'
Vliny writes of Hermeticm) by lending the W
fame out of the body to gather and bring
home newes, but by an high contempt of
earthly matters, and flying up to divine
thoughts,not with the golden feathers of
Euripides,but with the heavenly wings of |m
flato.

16. And therefore this fame divine man !
makes that minde alone the whole man
the body of a thing that is his, and be-!
longing unto him, but unto his, that is
the body s and, as I may terme thenb his
mans men. And this thing alfo Bias before
him, did as well performe, when at the
fpoyle of the City, having leave5 he took

not

LiB.l. The Holy Guide. 33

not his carriage with him, and anfwered
to the check of his friends, that he carri-
ed all his own things with him, which
was nothing but a naked body.

Ariftotle is of the fame minde with Thto,

asappeares notably in his laft Book of

Manners, where he hath laid down many

found reafons why this life is beft, and fo

by wife men, is and ought to be taken ;

becaufeitis, faith he, the mod quiet life ,

and fulleftof true delight* and with all

things needfull beft ftored *, for indeed ic

ivanteth nothing; for what> as a minde is

divine in rcfpe&of a body, fo is the life of

t, which is that we fpeak of, in regard of

i civil and worldly life. And againe, if

3ur mindes are our felves, it were meet to

;ead our own life before ftrangers : but

aft of all, becaufe God, our oncly pat-

ern5 leadeth no other life but this.* I

night be very large, if 1 lift to feek about

;nd traverfe this matter: but here ise-

}Ough to fnew the purpofe and reafon our

.lien of Egypt had; it was in their choice

o chufe this kinde of life which the world

■b defpifeth : but how if I could bring

,:hem in bereaved of all choice and free-

vill, and driven by force of neceffity to

lo the fame? would not that flop the

videft mouths, think you, in all this la-

-ifti company ? let us know firuy that the

G ' minde

34 The Holy Guide. Lib.!.

minde of man being come from that high.
City of Heaven,defireth of her felf to live
(till that heavenly life, that is the bleffed
life above defcribed ; and if there be any
let, as there is likely it is, in the weight
and grofsnefle of our body, over weigh*
ingourmindesdownto the ground, and
to all their own muddy matters then that
our men, after they have got this golden
Stone, fo famous in the world, do not, as
they think, and would doe, ftraightwayes
run to their Coffers > but firftand chiefly
gild their bodies with it: wherefore af-
ter that, by that mighty, fine and tempe-
rate Medicine,they have fcoured out ofall
grofsnefle and diftemper of the body, the
onely lets to understanding and good
manners, as we (hall heare hereafter, and
thereby leave the mindes at large, and'
alnfoftat her firft freedome > (he, and fo
they together laying aiide,and,asit were,
casing down all earthly matters, muft
return to their own former life again ; Co
far, I mean, as the condition and (late of
man will fuffer ; and fo put cafe you find
your own dark and dusky eye-fighr, fo
(bone taken with every foule, vaineand
worldly fancy, yet you muft not judge
thefe heavenly men thereby, but think
the moft (harp and clear fight of their un-
derftanding eafily able to fee the blemifh

and

Li B.l. The Holy Guide. * $

and to avoide the Call of common
love.

1 8. Wherefore, to clofe up this poini
at la ft, fith this happy craft of Hermes, for
ought that they know, may bev true and
lonourable j let the common and un-
earned fort ftay their judgement, and
eave thetriall fifting of any further mat-
ter unto the wife and learned, and there
in all directions, if they have none of
themfeives, might learn better advife,
before for the fault of fome, they turn to
any raging counfei, and bend tbeedgeof
Authority againft all.

19.I grant, that as in all good Arts, {o

in this,becaufe it is thefecreeeft; there be

bme drones crept in among the friends :

vhat then, as they are of another kinde,-

r never begotten by Hermes, or any of his

?ns , fo no reafon they mould uander

he Name and Houfe of Hermes, but bear

he burden of their own faults 5 then

lay be forted out and knownfromthe

oly ftinged and profitable Bee : firft, by

heir bignefle in words and braggs, and

hen fas followeth lightly by the courfe

f kinde^) by their ftingleffe and unar-

ied weakneffe in all defence of learning %

nd thirdly, by their floth and idlenefle \

f>r although they never leave Sirring,

G % ye*

36 The Holy Guide. • LlB.i.

yet, as Seneca, faith, operofe nihil (tgunt, they
painfully do nothing, becaufe all they
do is to no purpofe, all is fruitlefle and)
unprofitable. But Dioclefwn lacked this
difcerning vvifdome, and rafhly ranne
upon all, and burnt the Bocke, much!
like that part of Lycurgus, who for the?
drunkenneife of the people, cut downe
the Vines ; had it not been better to
have brought the fprings of water nearerJ
and to have bridled, as Flato faith, thaty
made good with theiober?

Even fo the Emperour might withl
better advice have tempered the heat:
of Akhimy with the cooling Card olf
Discretion, and made it an Art lawfull!
for a fmall number onely , and with
like charge to be practiced, which hadj.*
been a Counfel worthy wife Princes A
neither to let the hope of fo great ac
Treafure goe for a fmall lofle, nor yet
upon unceitaine hopes, be it never fc
great, to lofe a certaine great thing,
to wit, the life and goods of his Sub-i
jefts well and orderly bellowed. Now
let us Joyne Art and Nature together,
to know all things paft, prefent, and tc
come; that Long Life, Sec. may be with
the more pleafure enjoyed ; for aftei
this methodically Holy Guide, Know-
ledge,,

Lie .i. The Holy Guide- 1 9

ledge 5 the reft will be imperfeft : then
Knowledge compleats Happinefle, Long
Life perfects Knowledge ; Health com-
forts Long Life : Youth pleafes Health ;
Riches rejoyce Youth 5 Youth embraces
VVifdome and Vertuc, &:c. which you
(hall finde all in order.

C3 TO

THE

HolyGuide,

Leading the way to

Vnite Art and Nature :

In which is made plain

All things paft0 prefent,
and to corner.

By JOHN HEYDON Gent **«*««>

A Servant of God and Secretary
of Nature.

Thus have I declared unto you the defcent ofthefe*
cret power of .Nature from GOD9 even to this
Earth,

The Harmony of the World, Book^i. C&*/M.
Page 9.

LONDO N,
Printed by T. M. for the Author* 1662.

%• * $ ♦ * *

TO THE

Truly Noble by all

Titles,

Sir \alph Freeman,
Baronet, &c.

External, internal, and eternal bapfi~
nejji btrvijhed.

Jie Rofie Crucians
have a yery Excel,
lent opinion (Moft hono-
red Sir) that We ought to
labour in nothing more in

this

TheEpiftle

this life, then that We de-
generate not from the Ex-
cellency of the minde, by
Which We come nearejt to
Cjod, and to put on the
dhine 3\(ature : left at
any time our mind waxing
dull by yaine idlenejfts,
fhould decline to the frail-
ty of our earthly body, and
Vices of the flefh. So We
fhould lofe it, as it Wert->
cafi down by the dar\pre-
apices ofpenerfe Lujls.
Wherefore We ought fo
to order our mind, that it
by itfelfe, being mindfuU

4

Dedicatory,

of its own dignity and ex-
cellency floould alwayes
both think-, doe, and ope-
rate fomething Worthy of
itjelf: 'But thetyioWledg
of divine Science doth on-
ly and very powerfully
perform this for us, when
We by the remembrance of
its Afajejly, being always
bufied in divine Studies,
do every moment contem-
plate divine things, by a
fage and^dtligent inquifi-
tion,and by au the degrees
of the Creatures afcending
even to the Arch*type^

mm-

The Epiftle

bint/elf, to draw JromA
him the fecret TraBick^ I
Theory of Art and 3\(a-\
ture0 according to the do-\
Brine of the HolyGuide,!
Which thofe that negleffA
tmfltng onely to natural^
and Worldly things, are\
Wont often to be confound^
ed by divers errours and\
fallacies, and very oft to be\
deceived by evilfpirits.

IButthe underftandingj,
of the Holy Guide pur-j
geth the mind from errors , I
andrendreth it divine? gi.\
veth infallible power to our\

Ro-

Dedicatory

Roiie Crucian Ciuidejdr

drivethfar the deceits &
objiacles of all ei^/Spirits,
& together fubjefts them
to our commands ; yea, it
compellsgood Angds9and
all the powers of the World
unto our fervice0v\z. The
vertue of our Art being
drawne from the Arch-
Type himfelfi To Whom
when we afcend, all Crea-
tures neceffarily obey us,
and all the Quire of Hea-
ven do follow us.
Seeing therefore {Lear-
ned Sir) you have a
^Divine and Immortal

TheEpiftle

foule given you , Which

9

feeing the goodnefs of the
Divine Providences Wei/
difpofed fate , and the~>
bounty of Stature have
in fuch manner giftedfhat
by the acutenefs of your
underfianding& perfect-
neffe offenfes^you are able
to view, fearch, contem-
plate, difcern and fierce
thorough the pleafant
Theatre of ^jturaH
things, thefublime houfe
of the Heavens, and mofb
difficult pajfages of <Du
vine things.

Dedicatory.

I being bound to you by

the band of thefe your

great vertues am fo far a

debtor '3 as to communicate

Without Envy the true^>

account of all opinions,

theje ^ules, Which We~>

haroe read & learned \ e-

ifpecia/Jy their precious

\fSAdedicines &theirgrea-

» tejlfecrets of thePmtar-

t va, &c. frith their gift of

I healings according to our

* complexion and capacity*

I W'eprefent therefore^

;, now to you 0 a compleate

Work-in the\io\y Guide,

I Which

TheEpiftle

which We have perfected
With diligent care, and ye-
ry great labour and pains
both of mind and body :
and though it be rude and
unpolifhed in refpetl of
Words, yet it is truly ela
borate in refpeB of mat-
ter : wherefore I defire
this one favour, that To u
Would not expeft the~>
grace of an Oration,or the
Elegancy of Speech in this\
2?0o^, Which We Wrote
long fmceand revifed im
our dayes of mourningjor
the death of our felloW-

Trifo]

Dedicatory. '2,

\ Trifonev Iohn Hewit ,
; Vottor of 'Divinity, and
i others, TPho toere fpite-
| fully thrufi into Qaole^
| 'With us, and many cru-
elly murdered by the Ty-
rant Cromwell, becaufe
they loved our Soveraign
Lord the KING.

And TPe expeBed to
Juffer fop our Loyalty
t to His Sacred Majefiy
s the K^l 3\£ g ; but our
e Efiates ranfomed our
r Lives, &c.

r Jgaine, We hare^

i. chops the leffe Elegancy

<D of

TheEpiftle

of Speech, abundance of
matter fucceeding in the
place thereof ; hut fee-
ing Without doubt, ma-
ty JcoffingSophijlers Will
confpire-> againjl mee , I
efpecial/y of thofe^ Who I
boa ft themfehes to heel
allyed to C/0 *D , andi
fully replenifljed With\
<DIVIJ\£JTr; And
the feB of felf affe8ors,t
that Wtt (unlefe fome
fudiciow ^Patron bed
fixed to the Frontice-
piece0 as the beames of
the Sunne to correft their

fatPcy

Dedicatory.

faWcy peering With blind-
nejfe ) not onely di [gorge
their envy in Coords , but
judge and condemne to
the Fire the things ±
even before they have~>
read or rightly under-
! flood any thing of them,
i\ becaufethefe ME^Dl-
CI «2V££ £ agree not
I With their ^Bodies 0 nor
u fuch fweet Flowers with
t their nofe. And alfo by
e reafon of that fparke of
■hatred, long fince coth
I cefted againfi me for my
ir loving and ferviceable
y Z)z en-

TheEpiftle

endeavours to help tht->
\pyall Tarty to rejiore
the KJ3\C(jo and yet
fcarce containing itfelfo
under the djhes. There-
fore^ ear Sir, W ~e fur-
ther fubmit the ^ules a-
Jcribedbymeto the merits
of your Venue, and now
made yours, to your cen* \
jure, and commend it to k
your TroteBion, that if \
the bafe and perfidious \
Sophifiers would defame
it by the groffe madneffe
of their envy and malice,
7 bu would by theperfpu

cacy

Dedicatory.

cacy of your difcretion &
candour of fudgement,
happily prote ft and defend
it and me.

Your moft humble Servant
and true Honourer,

fohn Heydon.

D3 BOOK

L i B. 2. The Holy Guide.

BOOK. II.

Chap. I.

l.Oftke wonder full Secrets ^/Numbers,
q xf their Signification. %.How Moles
flnwed fo many figns by them, \tfow
JofhuaaWe ffoSun ftand (till by
Numbers. 5. H<?8> Z^y Numbers Elijah
r«*//ed down fire front heaven upon his
enemies. 6. How by theft following
Numbers the Rofie Crucians fore*
know all future things^ 7, command
whole Nature^ have power ovtr De-
vils, and Angels, and do Miracles^
&c. 8 .How by this Number <* River
fpak$ to Pythagoras.

Have obferved, that the
Numbers which are now
vulgarly ufed amongft A-
rithnjeticiam and Calcula-
J« fsn,have been in old time
much more efteemed then
they are now^ the order of them is
D 4 made

The Holy Guide. LiB.n

made after this manner, 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
to which is added a note of privation
figned wirh the mark c, which although
it fignifie no Number, yet it makes others
to fignifie, either tens, or hundreds, or
thousands, as is well known to Arithmeti-
cians. The vertues and fignification of
thefe Numbers, the Hebrews are of opini-
on were delivered to Mofes by God h\m-
felfupon Mount Sinaiy and then by de-
grees of fucceffion without the Monu-
ments of Figures or Letters was until I the
time ofEfdras delivered to others by word
of mouth onely, as the Pythagorean opini-
ons were formerly delivered by Archipfus
and Lyfinus, who had Schooles at Ihebes]
in Greece, in which the Scholars keeping 1
the precepts of their Matters in their me- !
mory,^id life their wits and memory in-
ftead of Books.

2 Mofes delivers a double Science of this i
Art-, The one of Brefith, which they call
Cofmologie^ viz. explaining the power of;
things created, Natural and CelefKal,and !
expounding the Secrets of the Law and
Bible by Philofophicai reafons.

3.Which truly upon this account differs
nothing at all from Natural Magick, in
which we believe King Solomon excelled;
for it is written he was skilled in all
things^ even from the Cedar of Lebanon to

the i

Ll B . 2 . The Holy Guide-

the Hyfop that growes upon the wall.
4.Alfoin Cattle, Birds, Creeping things and
Fijhes : All which (hew he knew the Ma-
gicall vertues of Nature and Numbers:
The Rofie Crucians follow after this,as you
may read in my Book of Geomancy and
T^elefnts, entitled, The Temple of Wifdome ;
and in my Way to Blijfe, and Rofie Crucian
Fhyficks

5. They call the other Science thereof
Mercara, which is concerning the more
fublime contemplation of Divine and
Angelick vertues,and of Sacred Numbers,
being a certain Symbolicall Divinity, in
which Numbers and Letters are Ideas
of mod profound things, and great Se-
crets. This is the Rofie Crucian Infallible
Axiomata, which teacbeth of Angelical!
Vertues, Numbers, and Names in the He-
brew 3 alfo of the Conditions of Spirits and
Souls in the Greeks Numbers and Names,
which fearcheth into the Myfteries of Di-
vine Majefty as the Emanations thereof;
and Sacred Names in Latine Numbers
and Letters, which he that knoweth, may
excell withwonderfull Vertues, as that
when he pleafeth, he may know all things
{afti prefent and to come\ and command
whole Nature,have power over Devils and
Angels, and do Miracles. By this thev fup-
pofe thac Mofes did (hew fo many iignes,

and

The Holy Guide. LlB.2

and turned the Rod into a Serpent , and
the Waters into Blood, and that hefent
Frogs> Flyes, Lice, Locnfts, Caterpillers, Fire,
with Raile, Botches and Boyles on the £-
gyptians, and flew every firit-born of man,
andbeafti and that he opened the Seas*
and carried his thorow 3 and brought
Fountains out of the Rocks, and Quaiies
from Heaven, that he fent before his
clouds and lightning by day, a pillar of
fire by night, and called down from Hea-
ven the voice of the Living God. to the
people, and did ftrike the haughty with
Finland thofe that murmured with the
Leprofie : and on the ill defer ving brought
fudden deftru&ion* the earth gaping and
f wallowing them up.

6. Further, he fed the people with Hea»
venly Food., pacified Serpents, cured the
envenomed , preferved the numerous
multitude from infirmity, and their Gar-
ments from wearing out, and made them
Vi&ors over their enemies. To conclude,
by this A rt of Numbers and Letters, Jo-
Jhua commanded the Sun to {landflill^ Elijah
cat ed down fire from heaven upon his eHemits>
reftored a dead child to life , Daniel ft opt the
mouths of the Lions ; the three children
fangSon^sin the fiery Oven: Moreover,
by this Idea of Letters and Numbers, the
incredulous Jewes affirm, that even Chriji

did

Lib. 2. The Holy Guide.

did fo many Miracles. The Rofie Crucians
Very well know the Angels and spirits that
govern thefe Numbers^ and therefore de-
liver Charmes againft De vih , and their
bonds, and the manner of Conjurations;
for againft Difeafes, they heard a Brother
make, a Spirit cry out,

"O* fJLU T&V T$IVQ<Pg>V -

j.Pytbagwas was not onely initiated into
the Mofakal Art of numbers, but arrived
alfo to the power of working miracles&s his
going over a River with his Companions
teftjfies that he fpeaking 80. & II in aTa-
ble to the River, the River anfwering him
again with an audible &: clear voice, Xet/pe
TlvSaylpa, Salve Pytbagora 5 that he (hewed
his thigh to Abarh the Prieft, and that he
affirmed that it glittered like Gold, and
thence pronounced that he was Apollo \
that he was known to converfe with his
friends at Metapontium and Taurontenium?
(the one a Town in Italy y the other in Si-
cily, and many dayes journey diftance )
in one and the fame day. This makes
good my Apologue at the beginning of A
ntw Method ofRofie Crucian Pbyfic^nd the
way U Blip.

8. Perpbyrius and Jantblicus report very
ftrange things of him, which 1 willingly

omit :

6 The Holy Guide. LiB.2*

omit : I (hall oncly adde his Predi&ions
of Earthquakes , or rather, becaufe that
mayfeem more naturall, his prefent ma-
king of Places in Cities, his filencing of
violent Winds and Tempers ; his calm-
ing the rage of the Seas and Rivers, Sec.
whicii skill EmpedvcleSy Epiwenides, Cathar-
tesy and Abatis having got from him, they
grew fo famous, that Empfdocles was fur-
named Alexanemm\ Epimenides , Cathartes,
and Abatis^ JEthrobates from the power
they had in fuppreffing of ftormes and
winds, in freeing of Cities from the
Plague, and in walking aloft in the Aire :
which skill enabled Pythagoras to vifite his'
friends after that manner at Metaponth
wmand lauromenium^ in one and the fame
day.

CHAP. II.

i .Of the Vowtr2.$.andVertues^. of Hebrew,
6.7. Greek and 8.Latine Letters, when the
Numbers are attributed to them.

1. *T" He Pythagoreans fay that the very E&-
-*- tnentsof Letters have certaine divine
Numbers, by which coined from proper
names of things, you may draw conjectu-
res concerning Secret things to come.

And

LiB.2. The Holy Guide.

2. And there is an uneven Number of
Vowels of impofed names, which did be-
token Lameneffe, or want of Eyes, and
fuch like misfortunes, if they be adigned
to the right fide parts : but an even num-
ber to them of the left ; And by the
Number of Letters you may findeoutthe
ruling Planets of any one that is borne,
and whether the Husband or Wife (hall
dye firft, and know the profperous or un-
happy events of the reft of our works.

3.The Latinefireek^ and Hebrew Letters

deputed to each Number,I (hall (hew ycu,

j; being divided into three Clafles, whereof

f the firft is of Vnites^ the fecond of Ttftf,the

i third oiHundredis and feeing in the K*-

man Alphabet there are wanting foureto

make up the Number of twenty feveii

Characters, their places are fupplyed with

I, and II. fimple Confonants, although

ithe Germans for bu the Afperate ufe a

(doubles, the true Italians and French in

their Vulgar fpeech put G joyned witht/.

inftead thereof writing thus, Vullbelmusy

and Guilkelmus.

s

the Holy Guide. LiE.2.

ilil* I4 ls<^>7>3<9 Uo|20hcl4OHcl6cl7clSo
A16X1PIE1PI^1H[1[K1UMJ^|Q IP 1Q1 R
90 I iocl20ol30cUool>ool5ocl70c|Socl900

T|"TTU|"X I Y | Z'lTl V l~Hi [Hu
Greek,

l^i?0hl[2?|23|24

Capitalis.

UlL^il 111 Jzlg k*! 0hohoi4ohoi^ol70lSo[^
A|B|r|A|E|i:riH|©ri |K|A|M|NJ*|0|n I*?
i^ooj 200(300! 400|s oo|£OOJ70o| 8 oo| 900

■1p~rs~rT~l"r"iT~l x l ¥TnT5~

iVour tfo C/*jJ« 0/ tfo Hebrew Num-
bers are thefe.

9 L8 l_Z

5
ni

I 4 1 3 1 2|I

1? 1 SO j 7O 1 lO 1 50 !~4° I SC I 2*0 f|»

y I a f y \ o 1 j I o 1 V I a !

900! 800 I700 I 600 ! 500 J+oo'^ooUooWi
Vl VI I l=3! T ! ftV*>l"V"|

Noi

LlB. 2, The Holy Guide

' Now if you defire t(5 know the Ruling
Tlattetofawy that is borne, compute his
name, and of both his Parents, through
each Letter according to the Countrey he
was born in, and the Number above writ-
ten, and divide the fumme of the whole
being gathered together by 9. fubftracV
ing it as often as you can *, and if there re-
main a unity, or 4. both fignifie the Sun ;
if 2. or 7. both fignifie the Moon^ but three
Jupiter; five Mercury ; fix Venus; eight Sa-
turn; nine Mars. And the reafons thereof
I have (hewed you in my Book of Geoman:y
w&IelefineS) entituled. The Temple ofWtf-
dome.

. In like manner, if you defire to know
the Afcendant of any one that is borne,
compute his name,and of his Mother and
Father, and divide the whole collected
together by 12. if there remain 1. it fig-
nifies the Lion $ if Juno 2. Aquarius; if 3.
Capricorn; if 4. Sagittarius; 5. Cancer; if
Venus 6. Taurus ; if palladium 7. Aries; if
Vulcans %. Libra; ifVJtfrihis o. Scorpio; if
- 10. Virgo 5 if 11. Fifces; ifP&g&w 12. they

tcprefent Geminot.
iof 6. And now let no maji wonder that by
the Numbers and Letters all things
may be knowne , feeing the Pjrfo*-
gorean Fbilofophers and Rofie Crucians

tefti-

lo The Holy Guide. LlB.a.

teftifie the fame: in thofe numbers lie
certain hidden myfteries, found out by
few h for the moft High created all things
by Number, Meafure and Weight, from i
whence the truth of Letters and Names
had its original,which were not inftituted
cafually, but by a certain Rule,although
unknown to us.
7. Hence Saint John in the Revelation faith.
Let hini which hath understanding com-j
pute the Number of the name of thel
Beaft, which is the Number of a man;|
yet thefe are not to be underftood off
thofe names, which a difagreeing diffe-j
renceqf Nations^ and divers Rites of Na-j
tions^ according to the caufes ofplaces,orj
education have put upon men , but thofej
which were infpired into everyone at hisl
birth, by the very Heavens, with thecon-l
junction of the Stars.

8. Moreover, Taftt, Rabanus, and K.l
Lully have dedicated to the Elements andjfl
Deities of Heaven, faered Numbers j fob;
to the Aire they have defigned the num-l
ber eight, and to Fire five, to Earth fixjf!
to Water twelve. Befides unity is afcri-;
bed to the Sun, in which God put his Ta-j1:
bernacle; and that this alfo is of Jupiter^.
doth the Caufative power of his Ideal ancty
intellectual Species teftifie, who is thej:
Head and the Father of the Gods^ as U-|

nitjl

LiB.2 . The Holy Guide. 1 1

unity is the beginning andParcnTof Num-
bers, i. engraven in Brafie,thcy fay brin-
geth a Spirit, inthefhapc of a black man
Sanding, and cloathed in a white Gar-
ment, girdled about, of a great body,with
Ireddifh eyes, and great fhength, and he
appeares like a man angry, and he givech
Boldnefs>Fortitude,8c makes a man lofty „
j - — . . — -

CHAP. III.

5 The Number of Ha ppinefs.

M,;i. 2. Ihe Pythagorick Names or Nature if a
Monad or Unite. 3,4. applyed to thefirji

■• dayeswork^: 5.6. What are the upper wa-
ters: 7.8. And that fouls that depend hi
yiyiw, are the Naiades or Water

*' Nymphs, in Porphyrins : 9. That mat*

* ter of it felf is immovable : 10. R. Bechai
his Notation very happily explained in my

I', 11. Temple of wifdome : 12. of the

i Number One, and the fignification\ and

if what Angel rules it.

x, |. T Admire the goodnefs of God .towards
0- i his Creatures, how fit the Number
v is to the jNature of every dayes wor.k :
«fj And Co I conclude, that God ordered it fo
mi on purpofe, and that in ail probability
the Fythagorasvivs acquainted with his Axio*
\t fH*te3 and>that was the jreafoa tta P^%g*-
m 1 E riant

1 2 the Holy Guide. L 1 B • i

reans made fuch a deal of do with Num-
bers, as you (hall find in Order , putting
other conceits upon them then any other
Arithmeticians doj and that therefore if
fuch Theorems as the Tytbagoreans held,
be found fuitablc and complyable with;
Mofes his Text,it is a fhrewd preemption
that the(e are the right Rofie Crucian AxioA
tnata thereof.

2. Fbilo makes this firft day fpent in thd
Creation of immaterial and fpiritual be]
ings,of the intelle&ual world, taking it ill
alarge fenfe for the Mundm vit^xht world
of life and forms : And the Fythagorear^
call an fif& Form, and Z«» Life. Theij
call it Zh?^ *t/p>®-, or the lower of Ju
2>iter,giving alfo the fame name to a Poin)
or Center h by which they underftanjj
the vital Formality or Center of things!
the Rdtiones Seminales ; and they call tl
unite alfo hky& c**svat'itk, which is S>
minalForm; But a very fhortandfufficj*
cnt account of Thilo's pronouncing th:
Spiritual fubftances are the firft dayes worte;
is, That as an Unite is indivifible,you ca-
not make two of one of them,as you msM
make of one piece of corporeal Mattf.d
two by a&ual divifion or levering theH
one piece from another 5 wherefore whli
was truly and properly created the fi fc
day5was immaterial,indivifible, and Ind-

pcndct ;

Lib. i . The Hoi) Guide. 1 $

pendent of the matter, from the highcft
I Angel to themeaneft Seminal Form.

3. And for the potentiality of theout-
I ward Creation,(ith it is not fo properly a-
I ny real being, it can breed no difficultyjbut
I what ever it is, it is referrible fitly enough
I to incorporeal things, it being no object of
1 fenfe,but of intellect and being alfo im-
I partible and undiminiftiable, and fo in a
I fort indivifible ; the power cf God be-
ing undiminiftiable, and it being an ade-
quate confequence of his powers where-
< : fore this potentiality being ever one, it is
f rightly referred to the fift day. And in
r refpeft of this the Pythagoreans call an
1 Unite uam, as well as the Binary y as alfo
Aihay.'jrtA & ffKoJoMtt, which names plainly
^ glance at the dark potentiality of things,
Jitec out by Mofes in the firft dayes Crea*
lotion.

D2i voy]o. Plato.

4 B#t of the Night, both day & skie were bornB

%' 4. God Created now Corporeal
^matter ( as before the world of Life)
Woat of nothing, which universal matter
Wmay well be called jpvpi for extenfion is
very proper to corporeal matter^ CafteWe
tranflates it Uquidum , and this univerfai
r E 2 Matter

1 4. The Holy Guide. Ll B. *

Matter is moftwhat fluid ftill , all over
the World , but at firft it was fluid uni-
verfally.

5. fcuthereit may be,youwiil enquire,
how this corporeal Matter (hall be concei-.
ved to be betwixt the waters above, and
thefe underneath; for what can be the
water? above > Maimonides requires conti-
nued Analogy in the hidden fenfe of
Scripture 5 as you may fee in his Preface
to his Moreb Nevochim : But I need not flie
to that general refuge 5 for me think9J
that the feminal forms that defcendj
through the matter, and fo reach the pof-
(ibility of the parts of the outward Crea-
tion, and make them fpring up into Art3
are not unlike the drops of rain that de«
fcend through the heavens or ayr , audi
make the earth fruitful *, Befides, the/W»i-
na! forms of things be round , and con«
tracked at firft,but fpread when they brinj
any part of thepoilibility of theoutwardi
Creation into Art,as drops of rainfprea<
when they are fallen to the ground, fc
that the Analogy is palpable enough
though it may feem too elaborate, an<
curious. We may add to all this* concert
ing the Naiades, or ^ater-Nymfbs^h^t thu
Ancients underftood by them, T** \i<yi
yiiny KATiiira,! ^,v%&s kow&s A's-ti.crtts-) ( t. e.
al! manner of Souls that cieicend into tl

matte

LlB. 2. The Holy Guide. I 5

matter and generation, and this is this num-
ber', by which it is faidy tbeyraife the dead to
life ; wherefore the watery powers may
be here indigitatcd by the name of the
upper waters.

6. The frequent complaints that the no-
ble Spirit in Pjthagoreas and Plato make
againft the incumbrances and difadvan-
tages of the body , make the Holy Guide
very true and probable 5 and it is fome-
thing like our Divines fancying Jheol to be
Created this day.

7. This is confonant to Plato's School,
who make the matter immoveable of it
felf, which is mod reafonable ; for if it
were of its own Nature moveable 5 no-
thing for a moment would hold together,
but difiblve it felf into infinitely little
particles 5 whence it is manifeft , that
there muft be fomething befides the mat-
ter 5 either to binde it or to move it 5 fo
that the Creation of immaterial Beings
was by 1. and is in that refpe&alfo ne-
ceflary.

8. For this Agitation of the matter
brought it to my fancy in the fecond
principle of the Rofie Crucian Phyficl^y
which is the true Mthe+px rather CD V&®
for it is as liquid as water , and yet has in
it the fiery principle of fire, which is the
firft Element , and made by the number;

E 3 as

1 6 The Holy Guide. L l B . ? .

as the heavens were , and called C3^]Q\E7
becaufe they are t£jt* and c^Q fire and
water ; for the round particles , like wa-
ter ( though they be not of the fame fi-
gure J. flake the fiercenefs of the firft prin-
ciple3which is the pureft fire ; and yet this
lire infome meafure alwayes lies within
the Triangular intervals of the round
particle3as my Book abovenamed declares
at large.

9. And this Number 1. is called a
number of Concord, of Fiety, ofFriendjhifc
which is fo knit that it cannot be cut into
parts 5 for Unity doth moft fimply go
through every number, and is the com-
mon meafure, Fountain, and original of
all numbers,contains every number joyn<
cd together in it felf intirely , the begin-
ning of every multitude, alwayes the
fame, and unchangeable; whence alfo
being multiplied into it felf, produceth
nothing but it felf; it is as I told you
above indivifible, void of all parts; but if
it feem at any time to be divided, it is not
cut , but indeed multiplied into Vnities :
yet none of thefe Vnities is greater or lef-
fer then the whole Vnitfc as a part is lefleJ
then the whole, it is not therefore multi-
plied into parts , but into it felf. There- 1
Tore it is named Cupid, becaufe it is made
alone; and will alwayes bewail it felf, and

beyond

L i B. 2. The Holy Guide. 1 7

beyond it felf it hath nothing, but being
void of all haughtinefs,orcoupling,turns
its proper heat into it felf; It is there-
fore the 1. beginning and end of ail
things; and all things which are, delire
that one , becaufe all things proceeded
from one j and that all things may be the
fame t it is neceflary that they partake of
that one : And as all things proceed of 1 .
in many things , fo all things endeavour
to return to that one 1. from which they
proceeded; it is neceflary that they mould
put off multitude.

10. One therefore is referred to the
high God, who feeing he is one, and in-
numerable, yet creaces innumerable
things of himfelf, arid contains them
within himfelf 3 there is therefore oneGod^
me world of the one God , one Sun of the one
world; alfo one?henix in the world,, one
King amongft Bees9 one Leader amongft
Flocks of cattel : 1. Ruler amongft herds
of beafts, and Cranes follow 1. and many
other Animals honour Unity ; amongft
the members of the body , there is one
principal, by which all the reft are guided,
whether it be the beads or as fome will,trfe
Heart; there is one element overcoming
and penetrating all things : viz. Fire.
There is one thing created of God th$
fubjeft of all wondering which is on
E 4 earth)

1 8 the Holy Guide. Lib. 2

earth, or in heaven; it is aftually animal,
veritable, and mineral, every where
found, known by few, called by none by
its proper name,but covered with Figures
and Riddles , without which neither Al-
chintie, nor Natural Magic\ can attain to
their compleat end or perfection 5 from 1 .
man Adam. a\\ men proceed, from that
one all become Mortal*, from that one Je-
fus Chrift, they are regenerated.

ii. And as St. Vaul faith ,one Lord, me
faith, one baptifnt, one God-,a\\d father of all,
one Mediator betwixt God and man, one moji
high Creator , who is over all, by all and in
us all 5 for there is one Father, God^ from
whence all, and we in him, one Lord Jefus
Chrift by whom all,and we by him, one God
holy Ghoft, into whom all and we into him;
and in the exemplary world, 1 Divine ef-
face, the fountain of all vermes & power,
whofe name is expreffed with one moft
fimple Letter 1. Gods And in the intel-
lectual world there is 1. Supream Intelli-
gence, the firft Creature, the Fountain of
JLives , rhe fuul of the world : And in the
Cf leltial woiid,theie is one King of Stars,
Fountain of Life , the Sun : And in the
Elemental world , there is 1 . Subjeft and
inftriiment of all vertires, natural , and
fupernatural, and that is, Ihe Thilofophers
Etone •„ And in the leffer world, there is u

firft

Ll B . i . The Holy Guide. 1 9

firft living, and laft dying, and that is the
hearty And in the infernal world, there is
one Prince of Rebellion of Angels , and
darknefs , and that is Lucifer. By this
number and Letters of the Hebrews , it is
faid that Mofes (hewed fo many figns in
Egypt This number fignifies England y
and the King thereof.

12. They fay if at 1. of the clock un-
der a fortunate Horofcope you caft One,
and Agiel in a piece of Gold , Agiel the
angel that rules that number will imme-
diately come, and personally attend you
and, fulfill your defires ; by this number
i flato was born, and the number ^. edu-
cated him, this Number Telefmatically
engraven in Gold wilMafily make you
underftand the firft book > viz, happinefs
and its effefts.

CHAP.

ao The Holy Guide. Ll B.2.

CHAP. IV.

This Slumber unites
5 Arts and Stature.

t) 2, 5 5 4. IhatVniverfa! Matter is the fe-
conddayes Creation, 5*6,7,8. faUymadc
good by the Names and Propertie of the
Number two s 9, 10, 11. its vertues.

x. T Tow fitly again doth the Number
X"l 2. agree with the nature of the
work of this day , which is the Creation
of Corporeal Matter,and thcPythagoreans
call the number 2. «** matter, and Sim-
flicius fpeaking of the Pythagoreans, EWoras
IviAhTlufQ'zteyWf »* o$ify? fore? clvkata-

*J.fa $ TifCtTOJ/, Mo /4 T^ UAW <»; AOft^Ofy $

o>Ktf ^cT/at/p^w? et/Tietj/. fhey might well
( fayes he ) call 1 . Form, as defining and
terminating to certain fhape and proper-
ty what ever it takes hold of, and 2. they
might wcl 1 call Matter , it being undeter-
minate, and the caufe of bignefs and di-
fivibility, and they have very copioufly
heaped upon the number 2. fuch appel-
lations as are moft proper to Corporeal

matter.

Lib. 2. The Holy Guide. 11

matter. As y Avxw*-7"®'* ^w&fb™* ©">
unfigured, undeterminated , unlimited,
for inch is matter it felf till form take
hold of it. It is called alfo Ken from the
fluidity of the matter, 'Asei* , '^ree/a,
becaufe it affords fubftance to the Hea-
vens and Stars ; NsT^©-, 'Hif <&, QcLv&to<,
(i e J contention , rate, and death , for
thefe are the conlequences of the foules
being joyned with Corporeal matter.
Kivi<rts3yive<Tis, A/a?$er/;, Motion, Genera-
tion, and Diviiion, which are properties
plainly appertaining to bodies j they call
the number 2. alfo <ss^^ovh becaufe it is
the \mK»ifj€vov} the fubjecl: that endures
and undergoes all the charges and altera-
tions the A&ive formes put upon it ;
wherefore itisplain the Vytbagoream un-
derftood Corporeal matter by the num-
ber 2. which no man can denybut that
it is a \ery fit Symbol e of divifion that
eminent property of matter.

2. But I might caft in a further reafon
of thecD'jQTi? being Created thefeebnd
day : for the Celeftial matter does con-
fift of two plainly diftinguifhable parts,
viz. The firft Element and the fecond,or
the Materia fubtiliffima^nd the round par-
ticles, as I faid before.

3. And 2 is called number of Science
and Memory, and of Light, and the num-

• ber

32 The Holy Guide- LiB.2«

ber of Man, who is called another world*
and the lefler world; it is alfo called the
number of Charity and mutual Love, of
Marriage StSociety: The firft number is of 2
becaufe it is the firft multitude, it can be
meafured by no number befides unices a-
lone, the common meafure of all numbers.
H is compounded, but more properly not
compounded, the number 3 is called the
number uncompounded.

4. But the number 2 is the firft branch
of VniteSy and the firft procreation:
Hence it is called Generation^and Juno and
an imaginable corporation, the proofe of
the firft motion, the firft form of parity,
the number of the firft equality, extremi
ty, anddiftance betwixt, and therefore
the peculiar equity , and the proper Art
thereof, becaufe it conftfts of 2 equally
poyfed; it is a number of Conjun&ion
and profit of encreafe, as it is faid by the
Lord, Two (ball be One flejh, and Solomon
faith, It is better that two be together then one;
for they have a benefit by their mutual
fociety; if one (hall fall he (hall be fuppor
ted by the other h Woe to him that is alone ,
becaufe when he falls he hath not another
to help him. hnd if two fleep together
they (hall warme one the other ; how
(hall one be hot alone? and if any pre
vaile againft him, two refift him.

5. And

\i

LiB-2 . The Holy Guide. a 3

S.And it is called a number of Wed*
locK, and Sex-, for there are two Sexes, M*-
fcnline and feminine^ and two Doves bring
forth two Eggs 5 out of the firft of which
is hatched the Male, out of the fecondthe
Female^ is called middle,that is capable,
that is good and bad partaking* and be-
ginnings of Divifion of multitude and de-
ftru&ion, and fignifies Matter *, 2 isalfo
fometimes the number of difcord and
confufion, of misfortune and unclean-
neffe, whence VJerom and Jovianut faith,
that therefore it was not fpokcn in the p-
condday of the Creation, and Gddfaid,
that it was good0 becaufe the number 2 is e-
vil.

6.Hence alfo it was3that God command-
ed all unclean Animals (hould go into the
Ark by Couples, becaufe, aslfaid, the
number 2 is a number of uncleannefs3and
is moft unhappy in theirCo«jar^tio«and in-
vocations of Spirits and Souls of the dead, e-
fpecially any of thofe that are under the
Angels deputed to Saturn or Mars9 for
thefe 2 are accounted by Geomancers and
Afirologers unfortunate. It is alfo reported
that the number 2 doth caufe apparitions
e) : fiery Ghofts and fearful! Goblins^ and bring
mifchiefsof evil Spirits to them that tra-
vel by night s Pythagoras faith the unity is
God and a good intellect and that Dua-
lity

3 4. The Holy Guide. LlB . l „

lity isa Devil, and an evil intellect, in
which is a Material multitude; wherefore
the Pythagoreans fay, that ^ is not a num-
ber, but a certaine confufion of Unites ;
and Eufebius fayes, that the Pythagoreans
called Unity Apollo, and 2 ftrife and bold-
nefTe.

7. And 3 Juftice, which 13 the higheft
perfection, and is not without many My-
fteries. Hence there were two Tables of
the Law in Sinai, two Cherubim looking
to the Propitiatory, in Mofes, two Olives
dropping Oy le, in Zachariah, two natures
in Ghrift, Divine and Humane: Hence
Mofes faw two appearances of God, viz,
his face and back parts.

8. By the number 2 alfo they fay, if it be
engraven in Copper, it will bring to you
a Genius that is good for to procure the love
tf women, fometimes print it in Lapis La-
z>ulufy and fometimes in Virgin Wax, and
write the names of the man &: woman in
Virgin Parchment ; to which appears a na-
fydmaid having a lookjng-glafle in her hand,
and a chain tied about her nec\, and nigh her a
band font young man, holding her with his left
band by the chain, and with his right hand he
wil be playing with her hair,andfmilingon her9
and thefe are fent by one of thofe Angels
of the number.

p.Aifo 2 Teftamcnts, 2 Commands of

love

LiB.2. The Holy Guide 2%

Jove, 2 firft dignities, 2 firft people^ kinds
of Spirits, good and bad, 2 intelleftuall
Creatures^w^/gf/ and Soul,% great Lights,
aSolftitia, 2 Equino&ials, 2 Poles, 2 Ele-
ments, producing a living Soul,v/z. Earth
and Water. Ey this number 2 it is faid
Elijah called down fire from Heaven upon his
enemies. And the name of God in the Ex-
emplary world isexprefs'd with two Let-
ters, n1 Jah Vm Ell. And there are two in-
telligible fubftanees in the intellectual
world,i/ij&.anAngel,and the Soul;and two
Lights in the Ceieftial world,the Sun,and
the Moon ; and two principal feats of the
Soul in the lefler world. *>i£.theHeart,and
the Brain; and there are two chief of the
Devils in the infernall world, viz. Beemotb
zndLeviathoHyMo two things Chhft threa-
tens to the damned, viz. Weeding and gnu*
(hing of teeth.

10. The number 2 is faid to fignifiea
: thing loft, and here they enquire whether

a man mall be rich or poor.

11. This number is commonly made
upon Brafs, that which is red or Copper*
at the houre of 2, and Jejajelis the Angci
that rules it,and 325. by that number was
this book made.

Chap,

26

The Holy Guide. LlB. 1 (

CHAP. V.

The Slumber of Long
Life.

The Nature of theThird daye's worl^ i.fet
by the Number 3. That the ntofi learned dot
agree that the Creation was perfected at
vnce y The Notation of WD jlrangefy a-
gnedwith the Notorious conclufiom of thi
Temple of Wifdom of the fignificatim oj
the Number 3 :

1. IN this third day was the waters com-
I manded into one place , the Eartf
adorned with all manner of pIants,Para-
dife and all the pleafure and plerity of itj
created) wherein the Serpent beguih
Eve* &c. What can therefore be mor<
likely then that the Pythagoreans ufethei]
Numbers as certain remembrancers o\
the particular paflages of this Hiftory of
the Creation > when as they call theii
Number 3. tvltuv & $&\a<&tiK0{ f i. e,
Triton and Lord of the Sea, which is in refe-
rence to Gods commanding the water in-
to!

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. 37 /j*

»to one place, and making thereof a Sea,
Ithey call alio the Ternary, Kifaf apctA.£t*?
Eg-iffo?, the former intimates the plenty
ofParadife, the latter relates to the Ser-
pent there > but now betides thi$,we (hall
Ifindethe Ternary very fignificant of the
|natureof this dayes work 5 for firft, the
jjearth confiits of the 3 Elements in my
iBook, entituled. The Temple of Vifdome :
i^for the truth of that Book will force it
Jfelfiii here whether 1 will or no: ) And
f ndeed I had no thoughts of this, when I
: vrit that} and then again, there are three
' jrand parts of this third Element necef-
Tiry to make an Earth habitable, the dry
]t and, the Sea, (whence are Springs and Ri-
lw) and the Aire: And Iaftly, there are
avegitables, which is the main work of
ihis day, three eminent Properties,accor-
^flingto my Goufin JrLeydons Philofophy,
™\i'z . Nutrition, Accretion, Generation; and
^Ifo if you confider their duration, there
J « three Cardinal points of \t,Ortus,Arme,
%mt«fj you may call in alfo that Mine*
[tkls, as the Arabians call them, which be-
long to this day as well as Plants, that
0 oth Plants and they, and in general all
®\'$rreftial bodies have the three Ghymical
ei[ Rnciples in thcm^ Sal, Sulphur and Mer«
•■) iry.

;lc': 2. As the matter of the UniVerfe came
F out

^8 The Holy Guide. Lib. 2.

but in the fecond day, fo the conttirinj
of this Matter into Suns and Flanets i
contained in this fourth day : The JEartl
her felf not excepted, though it is faid (h
was made in the firft day, and as (he is th
nurfe of Plants, faid to be uncovered i>
the third, yet as (he is a receptacle c
Light, and fliines with borrowed rayc
like the Moon and other Plants, (he ma
well be referred to the fourth days Cres
tion.

3. Nor will this at all feem bold
har(h,if we confider that the learned ha\
already agreed, that all the whole Cre;
tion was made at once As for exampl
the moft rationallof all the Jewijh D<
ftors, R. MofesEgyptius, Philo Jndeus, Abn
ham Judeus, frocopimy Gareus^ Cardinal C<
jetane, Saint Auguflin* and the Schooles 1
RilUl and Santa? ; fo that leifurely ord
of dayes is thus quite taken away,& all t
fcruple that may arife from that Hyfot

a*.

4. Wherefore t fay the number 3 isan ii
compounded number, a holy number
number of perfection, a moft powerfi
number; for there are three perfons
God, there are three Theological vertu,
in Religion : hence it is that this numb
conduceth to the ceremonies of God at
Religion, that by the fblemnity of whi<

praye

Ll B. 2. The Holy Guide. 29

prayers and facrirlces are thrice repeated^
and the Pythagoreans ufe it in their fan&i-
fications and purifications , and it is mod
fie in bindings or ligations.

5 . And in Johanna de Spagnet it was the
cuftome in every Medicine to fpit with
three deprecations, and hence to be cu-
n red. The number of 3 i? perfected with 3
argumentations, long, broad and deep>
:if beyond which there is no progreflion of
demenfion whence the firfi number is
(Called fquare. Hence it is faid, that to be
a body that hath 3 meafures, and to a
Tquare number nothing can be added;
wherefore Cardanus in the beginning of his
^'fpeech concerning Heaven, calls it as it
ri were a Law, according to which all things
are difpofed ; For Corporall and Spiritual
things coniift of three things, viz. begin-
ning, middle and end, by three the world
lis perfe&ed Hemarmene, neceility and
* ■ order, (i.e. ) concurrence of caufes, which
many call fate,and the execution of them
ifi to the fruit or encreafe, arid a due diitri-
) bution of the increafe; the whole meafure
'L of time is concluded in 3, viz, paft, pre-
fent and to come : All magnitude is con-
tinued in 5. Line, Superficies and body :
every dayconfifts of 3 intervalls, lengthy
'bredth, thicknefs : Harmoniou* Muiick
contains 3 confentsiii timea Viapafon9He-
F a " motion?

3o 'The Holy Guide. LlB. t

wiolion, Viatejfaron : there are alfo 3 kinds
of Souls, vegetative^fenfitive^ and intelleUu-
all. And God orders the world by num-
ber, weight,and meafure-, as the number 3
is deputed to the Ideal forms thereof, as
the number 2 is to the creating matter,
and unity to God the maker of it : Rofie
Crucians doe conftitute 3 Princes of the
\\'oi\c\,Oxomafis^[ilris^Axamcis, (i.e.JGod,
the Mind, and the Spirit ; by the 3 fquare
or folid tlie 3 number of 9 of things
produced are diihibuted, viz. of the
fuperceleftial in nine , orders of Intel-
ligences j ofCeleftial into 9 Orbs; ofinfe
riour into 9 kindes of generable and cor-
ruptible things : Laftly, in this- ternalf,
Orbe, viz. 27. all mufical proportions are
included, as Pinto and Vroclus doe at large
difcourfe.

6. And the number of 3 hath in it a
Harmony of 5, the grace of the firft voice,
alfo intelligencie; there are 3 Hierarchies
of Angelical Sprits ; there are 3 powers o!
intellectual Creatures, memory, mind*
and will: there are three orders of th
blefled, viz. ofNiartyrs^Confefiors and Inno-
cents: thereare three quaternians of Ce
leftial figneSiViz.fixt) movable and common.
and alfoofHoufes,*'^. Angels, Succedents,
Cadents. Thereare alfo 3 faces and head!
in every figne, and 3 Lords of each tripli-

city*

L I B . 2 . The Holy Guide.

city, there are 3 fortunes amongft the
Planets, 3 graces amongft the GoddefTes,
3 Ladies of deftiny amongft the infernal
crew,3 Judges, 3 Furies, 3 headed Cerbe-
ra,you read alfo of three double Hecats.

7. Three monethsof the Virgin Diana^
three perfons in the fuperfubftantiall
Divinity, three times, of Nature, Law
and Grace ; three Theological Vertues,
faitby Hope and Charity ; Jonas was three
dayes in the Whales belly, and 3 dayes
was Cbrift in the grave.

8. In the Original world there are three
Perfons in the Trinity, viz. The Father,
the Son, the Son, the Holy Ghoft; and
there are three Hierarchies of Angels in
the Intelleftual world , viz Supreme,
Middle, and Loweft ; and three degrees
of the bleffed. Innocents, Martyrs, Gon-
feQors. And there are three degrees of
Elements, viz. Simple, Compound, thrice

■Compounded ; in the leffer world there
are three parts anfwering the threefold

\[ world, viz. the head, in which the intel-
lect growes anfwering to the intellectual
world, the breaft where is the heart fhe
feat of life, anfwering to the Celeftial
world; the belly, where the generation is,

" and the genital members anfwering the

Elemental world; and in the infernal

world there are three Furies^iz, AleBo^

F 3 M*-

33 ihc Holy Guide. Lib. 2.

JMtagtra, lefchone^ three infernal Jud-
ges, Minos , Aarm Jxhadamantus ; three de-
grees of the DanmedjTFickecl, Apoftates^In^
pdels.

9. The Chaos it felf in every firft Analjfis
is alfo three- fold, the Saphireof the Chaos.
is likewife three fold. And here is fix parts,
which is the Pythagoreal Senarius^ or Hu-
merus Conjugii : In thefe fix the influx
of the Metaphyficks, called unity, is fole
?Vlonarch,and makes up the feventh num-
ber, or Sabbath, in which atlaftby the
aiiiftance of God the 'body (hall reft ; a°
game, every one of thefe parts is two-
fold, and thefe Duplicities are contra-
rieties. Here you have twelve, fixand fix in
a defperate diviiion, and the unity of
-peace amongft them : thefe Duplicities
confift of contrary Natures 5 one part is
good, one bad, one corrupt, one incor-
rupt ; one rational, one irrational; thefe
bad, corrupt, irrational feeds, are the
Tares and Sequels of the Curfe. This is
s. he Ho[y. Guide.

10. Septem partibus9 faith Zoroatfes, infunt
duo "Tern aria-^ & in Medio flat unum Vuode~
cimjinnt in Bello, Tres Amiciy "Ires Inimici ;
Jres viri vivificant. Ires etiam occidunt, &
Deus Rex fidelii ex fua. Santlitatu Atrio dd'
mnatur omnibus^ uftas fufer Jres^ & Jresffa

Lib. 2. The Holy Guide. 33

ferfeptent, &feptem fuper T>uodecimy & funt
wines Stipatiy Alius cum Alio.

1 1 . By this number 3 in a Telefme o£Tin
fophicly carried Vhity to Azotus.

1 2. The number 3 engraven in Quick-
filver fixed according to Art, will bring
to you an Angel in the form of a hand-
fome young man bearded, having in his
left hand a rod &a Serpent about it, and
in his right fometimes he holds a Dart;
and he they fay conferreth knowledge, e-
loquence , diligence in merchandizing
and gain by Sea ■> this maketh a man for-
tunate in gaming,and to win. This num-
ber thus engraven,makes menunderftand
the way to Long Life.

CHAP.

34 The Holy Guide. LiB.l,

CHAP. VI.

The 3\{jtrnher of Sta-
ture and Health.

i. Of the figmficathn of the Number 4.
? * 3 3 45 5- how the Corporeal world was
univerfally eretted into form and Motion on
the fourth day, 6. is wo (I notably confirmed
ly the Title $ and froferty of the Num-
ber 4. 758. The Infallible Roiie Cru-
cian or Pythagorick Oath , 9, wherein
tbeyfaore, ic5n. by him that taught them
the Myjlery of the Tetradn. 1 2. that the
Tztrafiuwas a Symbole of the whole Art,
that lay coached in Numbers and Letters:
135 14. I he myfteryof the Number 4.

1. *TpHe Earth, as oneof the Primary
X Planets, was cr£ated the fourth
day , and I tranflate D D^nn primary
Planets , primary becaufe of n Emphati-
cally, and Planets becaufe the very Nota-
tion of their name implies their Nature,
foODO is plainly from *»D Vfiio9 or burn-
ing> and 33 extinction, Nouns made from
n^D8d nnn as in and Dtf from PPH and
DD^, according to unexceptionable Ana-
logy. AndtheEarth, as alfo the reft of

the

Lie. 2 . the Holy Guide* 3 $

the Planets,their Nature is fuch,as if they
had been once burning and mining Suns;
but their light and heat being extinguifh-
ed, they afterwards became Opacedpla-
netsjthis conclusion feems here plainly to
be contained in the Rofie Crucians and Mo-
ps , but is at large demon ftrated in my
New method of Rofie Crucian Phyfick^,

2. Nor is this Notation cf 33 vj ener-
vated by Alledging that the word is or-
dinarily ufed to fignifie the fixed Stars, as
well as the Planets;for I do not deny, but
that iu a Vulgar Notion it may be compe-
tible to them alfo. For the fixed Stars
according to the imagination of the rude
people, may be faid to be lighted up, and
extinguifhed, fo often as they appear and
difappearifor they meaiure all by obvious
fenfe and fancy, and may well look up n
them as fo many Candles, fetup by Di-
vine Providence in the night, but by day
frugally put out for wafting : and I re-
jnember iheodidadus in his ni{i vfovoicts ,
has fo glibly lwallowed down the Notion,
that he ufes it as a fpecial Argument of
Providence,that they can burn thus with
their heads downwards, and not prefent-
ly fwcll out and be extinguifhed , as our
ordinary Candles are ; wherefore the
word 33^3 may very weltfce attributed to.
all the Stars, as well fixed as Planets, but

to

§6 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

to the fixed only upon vulgar feeming
grounds 5 to the Planets upon true and
Natural ; and we may be fure that is that
which Engenius TheodidaUm , The Kofie
Crucian would aim at , and lay ftrefle up-
on, in the Book M. Wherefore in brief n
Emphatical in i — mmm contains a
double Emphafis, intimating thofe true
DU3D or Planets,and then the moil emi-
nent amongft thofe truly fo learned. Nor
is it at all ftrange, that fo abftrufe conclu-
sions of Philofophy mould be lodged in
this Numeral and Literal Texts for as 1
havcelfewhere intimated , Mofes has been
aforehand with Kofie Crucians , the ancient
Tatriarbj having had will , and by reafon
of their long lives, leifure enough to in-
vent as curious and fubtle Theorems in Phi-»
lofophy 3 as ever any of their pofterity
could hit upon, befides what they might
have had by tradition from Adam : And
if we find the Earth a Vianet , it muft be ac-
knowledged forthwith that it runs about
the Sun,which is pure Kofie Crucian^ and a
£hrewd prefumption that they were
taught that myftery by Mofes: but that
the Earth is a Planet3beiides the Notation
we have already iniifted upon, the neceffi-
ty of being created in this fourth day
ambngft the other Planets, is a further
Argumentj for there is no mention of its

Ceeation

LlB. 2. The Holy Guide. 73

Creation in any day alfe , according to.
this Holy Guide.

The Hebrew is jnan *7}7, And I have
made bold to interpret it, not of this one
individual Earth , but of the whole Spe-
cies : and therefore I render it the world
at large, as tTliSn, is not an individual
man, but mankind in general.

3. This fourth dayes Creation is the
contrivance of Matter into Suns and Pla-
net s, or into £uns, Moons aud Earths; for
the iEtherial Vortices were then fet a go-
ing, and the Corporeal world had got in-
to a ufeful Odder and (hape. And the or-
dering and framing of the Corporeal
world, may very well be faid to be tranf-
a&ed into the Number 4. four being the
firftbody in Numbers, and therefore pre-
ferred before all the vertues, and the
foundation and root of all Numbers is
four h whence alfo all foundations^ well
in Artificial things as Natural and Di-
vine, are four fquare, as I (hall (hew you;
and it fignifies folidity , which alfo is de-
monftrated by a four fquare figure, and in
a Equilateral pyramid, which figure alfo
is a right Symbole of Light , the rayes
entring the eye in a pyramidal form, and
Lights now are fet up in all the vaft Regi-
on of the iEtherial Matter which is hea-
ven. The Pythagoreans alfo call this

Number

58 The Holy Guide. L1B.2,

Number cap* & KaV/xo? , body and the
world , intimating the Creation of the
Corporeal world therein, and further fig-
nifying in what excellent proportion and
harmony the world was made. See Cor-
nelius Agripptt.

4.They call this Number ^Armonia and
Vivien, & BitH%cto-/x3{f iviy&iejLov- Harmony^
Vrmid) and theftirrerup of Divine fury
and extane,infinuating that all things are
fo fweetly and fittingly ordered in the
world , that the feveral Motions thereof
are as a comely Dame,or rav idling Mudck,
are able to carry away a concemplative
Soul into Rapture and extalie upon a
clearer view 5 and attentive animadverii-
on of the order and Oeconomy of the
Uaiverfe 5 and the Rofie Crucians in the
head of a Catalogue of the mod famous
Law-givers, do much Pythagorize,in the
expreflion of Mofes \ they fay that this
Number 4. concerns the molt perfect pro-
portions in Mufical Symphonies •, viz.
Viatejptron, Dictpent^ Diapafon, and T>if-
diapafon, rnt /u$f) y£p <Pta,TiTa§cw 0 Alyo$ hm'
Tftrosi &c. For the proportion of Via-
teJJ'aron is as four to three, ofViapente as
three to two3of Diapafon as two to one, or
four to two, of Difdiapafon as four to one.
]. might caft in alfo the confideration of
Chat Divine Ncmefis which God hath

placed

LiB-2. The Holy Guide. 39

placed in the frame and Nature of the
univerfal Creation3asheisa drftributer to
every one according to his works , from
whence himfelf is alfo called Nemefu by
Plato, £n>V/nk ixctra fi&vzwaw • Eecaufehe
everywhere diftributes what is due to
everyone ; this is in ordinary Language,
Jufticc j and both Pbilo and Plotimts out of
the Pythagoreans , affirm that the Number
four is a Symbole of juftice, all which
makes towards what I drive at, that the
whole Creation is concerned in this
Number four , which is called the fourth
day. And for further Eviction we may
yetadd, thatasall Numbers are contain-
ed in four vertually, (Eyall Numbers is
meant ten,for when we come to ten,we go
back again ) fo the root and foundation
of all the Corporeal Creation is laid in
this fourth days work3wherein Suns,Eartb9
and Moons, and the ever whirling Vorti-
ces ; for as Pbilo obfasz^Pythagorean like,
ten (which they call alfo Ko^c*, v&ros>
.& cwrfcM/flt, the World, Heaven, and all
perfettnefs) is made by the fcattering of
the parts of four thus, one, two, three,
four; put tY efe together now and they are
ten. Tldj?7itei&, to tav, the Univerfejthis
was fuch a fecret amongft Pythagoras his
Difcipies, that it was a folemn Oath with
them , to fwear by him, that delivered to

them

4<D The holy Guide. LiB.lt

them the myftery of the Tetra&iscTetrad
or Number four.

J with pure mind by ttf Number four do fmar
That's holy > and the fountain of nature
Eternal, parent of the minde, &c,

5. Thus they fwore by Pythagoras, as is
conceived, who taught them this Myfteri-
ous Tradition , had it not (think you )
been a right worffripful rriyftery,and wor-
thy of the folemnity of Religion and of
an Oath , to underitand that one, two,
three, four, make ten, and that ten is all
which rude mankind told firft upon their
lingers, and Arithmeticians difcoveritby
calling them Digits at this very day.

There is no likelihood that fo wife a
man as Pythagoras was, fhould lay any
ftrerTe upon tech trifles, or that his Scho-
lars mould be fuch fools as to be taken
with them 5 but it is well known, that the
Pythagoreans held the motion of the Earth
about the Sun, which is plainly implyed,
according to the Holy Guide of this fourth
dayes work. So much of hisfecrets get
out tocommon knowledge andfameasl
conceived, that the choiceft and moftpre-
tious treasure of knowledge being laid
open in the K. C. Infallible Guide of the
fourth day; from thence it was that fd
much folemnity and Religion was put

upoi!

upon that Number , which he called his
letraUti, which feems to have been of two
kinds , the one the (ingle number of four,
the other thirty fix made of the four firft
Mafculine numbers. And the four firft
feminine, viz. i, 3,5, 7. and 2,4,6,8.
wherein you fee that \ the former and
more fimple letraftU is ftill included and
made ufe of 5 for four here takes place
again in the alignment of the Mafculine
and feminine numbers 5 whence I further
conceive, that under the number of this
more complex Tetra9,which conteins al-
io the other in it , he taught his Difciples
the Myftery of the Creation, opening to
them the nature of all things, as well Spi-
rituals Corporeal, *Oyd§ d'pTtos & c&ew^d*
to t\ai rix.lv %%$ % Tctd-iiTiKw, 0 cTe weetTJos to
arfxiitov *} dnctQls j£ fidLTiwv A;o 0 (Afi <f»-
ao? 'ovopeL^i tcu 0 dfeLu j as Tlato writes, for
even number carries along with it divifi-
bility , but an odd number indivifibility,
impa(fibility,and -activity, wherefore that
is called Fxminine, this Mafculine.

6. Wherefore the putting together of
the four fiift Mafculine numbers to the
four firft feminine , is the joyning of the
Atiive and Fa$ve principles together.*
matching the parts of tht matter, with
congruous forms from the woi Id of Life,
fo that I conceive the %etraftis was a Sym-

bole

42 The Holy Guide. LlB.2*

bole of the whole Syfteme of Pythagora
Philoiophy: which is the very t&mzmth
the Mofakal or Rofie Crucian Infallible Axio*
tnata ;. and the root of this TetrattU is fix,
which fignifies the fix dayes work.

7. And Fowle and Fifti were made by
the number four 3 for there is affinity be*
twixt them 3 becaufe Fowle frequent the
water in their kind , and the Elements
themfelves of Air and water are very like
one another 3 befides, the fins of fifties
and wings of Birds, the Feathers of the
one^aud Scales of the other are very A-
ndogical 5 they are both alfo deftitute of
Vreters, Dugs and Milk., and are Oviparous^
further their Motions are mainly alike.
The Fifties as it were flying in the water,
and the Fowls fwimming in the Air, ac*
cording to that of the Poet concerning
Vddalus , when he had made himfelf

Infultum pr iter gelidai enavit ad ArUos*

Caft in this alfo, that as fome Fowls
dive and fwim under water,fo fome Fifties
flie above the water in the air for a consi-
derable fpace, till their Fins begin to be
fomething ftiffe and dry.

8. The number four is the firft four
fquare plain, which confifts of two pro-

portionr,

Lib. 2. The Holy Guide. 49

portions ,w hereof the fir ft is of one to two,
and of two to one , the later of two to
four, and it proceeds by a double procef-
fion and proportion, viz, of one to one5
and of two to two , beginning at one and
ending at four, which proportions differ
in this,that according to Arithmetic^ they
are unequal to one the other, but accord-
ing to Geometry are equal; therefore a
four fquare is afcnbed to God the Father,
and alfo contains the myftery of the
whole Trinity . for by its fingle propor-
tion, viz by the firft of one to one, the
unity of the paternal fubftance is fignifi-
ed, from which proceeds one Son equal to
him 5 by the next expreffion alfo fimple^
viz. of two to two, is fignified by the fe-
cond expreffion the Holj/Ghoft from both?
that the Son be equal to the Father by
the firft expreffion : and the Holy Ghoft
be equal to both , by the fecond expreffi-
on.

Hence the fuper-excellent , and great
name of the Divine Trinity of God is
written with four letters, viz. Jod^He^nd
VauyHei where it is the afp nation, Ffofig-
niftes the proceeding of the Spirit from
both': for He being duplicated termi-
nates both Syllables and the whole name3
but is pronounced Jeova&s fome will have
it , whence that Jovti of the Heathen 4
Q whicfe

44 The Hoi/ Guide. L l B-2

which the Ancients did picture U with
four ears , whence the number four is the
Fountain and Head of the whole Divini-
ty , and the Pythagoreans call it the perpe-
tual Fountain nature ; for there are four
degrees in nature, viz. to be, to live, to be
ienlible,to understand, there are four mo-
tions in nature, viz. Afcendant, Defen-
dant, gcing Forward, Circular.

9. There are four Angles in the Hea-
ven, v/'z. Rifing, Middle, Falling of the
Heaven, and the Borom of it 5 there are
four Elements under Heaven, viz. Fire,
Air, VVate r Earth;according to thefe there
are four triplicities in Heaven. There are
four lirft qualities under the Heaven, viz.
cold, heat,drinefs, and moifture;for thefe
are the four humours,blood, flegme,chol-
Ier, melancholy ; trere are four parts of
a year, Spring, Summer , Autumne^xnd Win*
ter i aifo the wind is divided into Eattern,
Weilem, Northsrn^ and Southerns there are
alfo four Pavers of Paradife, viz Vyfon^
Gihon, UMekel^ and Perath] and fo many
infernal s, viz. Vhlegeton^ Cocitw> Stjx9
Acheron.

ic. And d e number four makes up all
knowledge-, firft it fills up every hmple
progrefs of numbers with four terms, viz.
with one,two,trme, and four,conftiruting
the number ten-, it fils up every difference

of

LiB.3. ihe Hoi) Guide. 45

of numbers,the one even,and containing
thefirft odd ink, it hath the grace of the
fourth voyce, Alfo it contains the in-
ftrument of four firings, and a Pythagore-
an Diagram , whereby are found out firft
of all Mufical tunes 5 and all Harmony of
Mufick for double, treble, four times dou-
ble,one and a half, one and a third part,a
concord of all , a double concord of all,
of five of four , and all ccnfonancy is li-
mited within the bounds of the number
four 5 It doth alfo contain the whole of
Mathentaticksm four terms,i//«. point,line, .
fuperficies , and profundity : it compre-
hends all nature in four terms , viz. fub-
ftance,quality, quantity, and motions alfo
all natural Philofophy, in which are the
feminary vertuesof nature, the Natural
fpringing 3 the growing Form , and the
Compofitum : Alfo Met aphy fields is compre-
hended in four bounds, z/i&. being,eiTence,
vertue^ and a ft ion 5 Moral Philofophy
is comprehended with four vertues, viz.
Prudence, ] uftice^Fortitude, Temperance.
It hath alfo the power of Juflice for
Times or Termes in the year at fFefttnin-
/fcr-Hall j all manner of Cafes are Tried
and Suits in Law , to the content of the
people. Hence a fourfold Law of Pro-
vidence from God 5 fatal from the foul of
the world, of Nature from Heaven , of
G 2 Prudence

46 the Holy Guide. LjB.2

Prudence from man -, Of this you may be
better fatisfied in my Book entituled,Tfo?
Idea of the Law, &c.

1 1 . There are alfo four Judiciary pow-
ers in all things being, viz. the Intellect,
Difcipline, Opinion and Senfe : It hath
alfo great power in calling of Names, of
Spirits and Angels,and in PredicYiGns,and
in all Myfteries 5 hence the Rofie Crucians
do fatifie the Number 4 with an Oath, as
if it were the number that God had fixed
on them, to coufirme their Faith^ as ap-
1 peares in thefe Verfes -,

©J y.£ Toy yiAiifiA 4VX* *£§ et^ovjet 7lT$a.K\av
Tla<rav dzvvav j>t£etv 'O^ity vetw.
i e.
By him that did to us difclofe

The Tetrads Myflerie :
Where Natures found that overflows.
And hidden root doth lie.

Now there are four Gofpels received
from 4. Evavge lifts throughout the wholei
Church, the Hebrews received the chief
name of God written with four Letters:
Alfo the Egyptians, Arabians, Perfians, fAa-
gitians, PAahumetans, Grecians, Tufcans, La-
tines, write the name of God with onely
foure Letters, viz. thus, Thet , Alia, Sire.
Orfi, Abdi, eio^ Efar, Veus. In the Origi-
ns

Ll B. 2. The Holy Guide. 57

nal world, from whence the Law was re-
ceived. The Name of God is written with
four Letters. fnrP In the intellectual world
whence the fatal Law was received, there
are four Triplicities, or intelligible Hie-
rarchies, Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones-, Do*
minations , Towers, Venues; Principalities,
Archangels, Angels-, Innocents, Martyrs,Con-
fejfirs : And there are four Angels, ruling
over the four Corners of the world, viz.
Micahel, Raphael, Gabriel, Vrieljour Rulers
of the Elements, Seraph, Cherub, Tharfis,
Ariel-, four cohfecrated Animal?, the Li
on, the Eagle, Man, a Calf ; four Tripli-
cities of the Tribes of lfrael; ~D an, After,
Nephtalint'y Judah, Iflachar, Zabulun \ \Ma-
naffeh, Benjamine, Ephraim; Reuben, Simeon,
Gad-, four Triplicities of Apoftles, Mat-
thias, Veter, Jacob the elder; Simon, Bar-
tholomew, Matthew, John, Philip, James the
younger ; Thaddeus, Andrew , Thomas ; four
Evangelifts, Matthew, Mark^, Luke and
John.

t2. The Celeftial Worldiscoaftituiedby
the Law of Nature: four Triplicities of
Signas, Aries, Leo, Sagittarius-, Gemini, Li-
bra, Aquarius', Cancer, S cor pius,Pi fees-, Tau-
rus, Virgo, Capricornus ; four Elementary
-Scars and Planets, Mars and the Sun, Ju-
piter and Venus, Saturn and Mercury, the
fixed Stars and the Moon.

G 3 Four

48 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

Four qualities of theCelcftial Elements,
Light, DiaphanoufueflTe, Agility, Solidity,
where Generation and Corruption is ac-
cording to the Elemental Law \ there is
Fire, Aire, Water and Earth ; and foure
qualities, Heat, Moyfture, Cold,Drynefs 5
and four kinds of mix'd bodies. Animals,
Plants, Metal?, Stone?-, four kinds of A-
nimals, Walking, Flying, Swimming,
Creeping j and four things anfwer the E-
lemeuts in Plants, viz Seeds, Flowers,
Leaves, Roots ; fo in Cecals, Gold, Iron,
Copper and Tin, Quick filver, Lead and
Silver; and in Scones there are four an-
fwer the Elements, bright and burning,
light and tranfpareant,clear and congea-
led, heavy and dark.

1 3 . In the Law of Prudence, Man,there
are four Elements, the Mind, the Spirit,
the Soul, the Body; four powers of the
Soul, the Intel left, Reafon, Phantafie ,
Senfe ; four Judiciary powers, Faith, Sci-
ence, Opinion, Experience j four Moral
Vertues, Juftice, Temperance, Prudence,
Fortitude *, four Senfes relating to the E-
lements, Sight, Hearing, Taft and Smell,
Touch -j four Elements in the body. Spi-
rit, Flefh, Humours, Bones s a four- fold
Spirit, Animal, Vital, Generative, Natu-
ral ; fourHumours,Choler,Blood,Flegm,
Melancholy ; four manners of comple-
xions,

L i B. 2. The Holy Guide. 49

xions, Violence, Nimbleneffe, Dulnefle,
Slownefs.

By the Law of Punifhment in the Infer-
nal World, there are four Princes of £pi«
ritsthat rule the four evil Angels of the
world, Oriem^aymon^Egin^ Amainon. This
number caft in a Telefme of filver by Art,
brings to you t he form of a Virgin, ador -
ned with fine cloathes, with a Crown on
her: This number giveth acutenefle of
wit, and the love of men.

14. The number 4 they fay, Telefma-
tically engraven in filver with the name
of the Angel of the day and hour, and
the parties name, and the name of his
Genius^ according to the Letters in the Fi-
gure of the world, all gathered together,
will produce thefociety of an Angel, who
appears like a man fitting in a chaire, hol-
ding a balance in his hand; and they bur-
ned Nutmegs and Frankinfence before
him; and he made the number fortu-
nate and happy to the bearer by Merchan-
dizing : this number according to Art en-
graven, makes a man healthful in, a!)
Contreys.

CHAP.

50 The Holy Guide. Lib. a

CHAP. VII.

T^e-j Slumber of
Tomh,

i. Of the Signification of the Number 5» 2. And
what Angels may be c ailed by it 5 3. And
how they may affear.

1. 'TpHe Number 5 is of nofmall force ;
JL for it confifts of the iftrft even, and
the firft odde, as of a female and male;
for an odde number is the male , and
the even the female; Rofie Crucians call
that the Father, and this the Mother :
Therefore the number 5 is of no fmall
perfection , or vertue , which proceeds
from the Mixtion of thefe numbers; it is
alfo the jure middle of the univerfal num-
ber, viz, 10. for if you divide the number
10. there will be 9 and one, or 8 and ?, or
7 and 3, or 6 and 4. and every collection
makes the number 10. and the exact mid-
dle isalvvayes the number <^. and its equi-
diftant ; and therefore it is a number of
Mirth and good fellowfhip; it is called by
the Pythagoreans the number of Wedlock,
as alfo of Juftice, becaufe it divides the

number

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. 51

number 10 even* there is alfo in it
an emblem of Generation *, as an Eagle
ingendringwith an Eagle brings forth an
Eagle; and a Dolphin engendring with
a Dolphin, &c. wherefore the Pythagoreans
this number Cytherea, that is Venus ^ and
r*V°,*5 Marriages and in Birds it is evi-
dent that they chufe their Mates : That
the Image of God confifts in this, rather
then in the dominion over the Creature, i
take to be the right fenfe, and more Phi-
lofophical, the other move Political.

It is a wonder, fayes Grotius3 to fee how
the explication of the Pvabbins upon this
Fra: and thofe paflages in Flato\ Sym.po-
Hon agree one with another j whith, not-
withftanding whatfoever proceeded, I
make no queltion, fayes he, but they are
falfe and vain; and I mult confeffel am
fully of the fame opinion: but this itrange
agreement Ariftof banes his Narration, in
the forenamed >ympoftony and the Com-
ments of the Rabbins, upon the Rofie. Cru-
cian M. is no fmall argument that Plato
had fome knowledge of Mofes^ which may
well adde the greater authority and cre-
dit to this our Holy Guide 5 but it was the
wifdome of Plato to owne the Holy
Guide himfelfe ; by fuch unwarranta-
ble Fancies as might rife from the Num-
bers and the Text, to caft upon fuch a

5 2 The Holy Guide. L | B.2 .

ridiculous fhallow Companion as Arifto-
fkanesy it was good enough for him to ut-
ter in that club of wits, that Philofophick
Sympofion otPUto.

2. and there be five fenfes in Man,Sight
Hearing, Smelling, FeelingiTafting, five
powers in the Soul, vegetative, fenfitive,
concupifcible,irafcible,rational: 5 fingers
on the hand, ^e wandring Planets in the
Heavens, according to which there are
five- fold terms in every fign ; in Elements
there are five kinds of mixt bodies, viz.
Stones, Metals, Plants, Plant-animals,and
fomany kinds of Animals, as men, four-
footed beads, creeping, fwinniin~,flying.
And there are five kindes, by which all
things are made of God, viz. Effence, the
fame, another, fenfe, motion ; the Swal-
low brings forth but five young, which
(he feeds with equity, beginning with the
cldei^ andfo the reft according to their
age : alfo this number hath great power
in Expiations j for in holy Geomancy and'TV-
lefmatical Figures, it drives away Devils, in
natural things it expels poyfon; it is cal-
led the number of fortunateneffe and fa-
vour s and it is the feal of the Holy Gboft,
and a bond that binds all things, and the
number God loves; it is the number of
the Croft) yea eminent with the principal
wounds of Chrift, whereof he vouchfafed

to

LiB. 2. ihe Holy Guide. 53

to keep the Scars in his glorified body.

The Philofophers did dedicate it as fa-
cred to Mercury^ ft eeming the vertue of it
to be much more excellent then the
number four,by how much a living thing
is more excellent then a thing without
life ; for this five in a Figure of Geommcyy
ftfoah found favour with God , and was
preferved in the Flood of waters that
overflowed Palajlma , Jfamia, and the
Country of the Eaft.

3. In the vertue of this Number, Abra-
ham being an hundred years old , begat a
Son of Sarah, being ninety years old,and
a barren woman , and paft child-bearing,
and grew up to be a great people. Hence
in time of grace,the name of DivineOm-
nipotency is called upon with five Letters ;
for in time of Nature the Name of God
was called upon with th ee Letters : In
the time of the Law the ineffable Name
of God was exprefTed with four Letters.
And in the exemplary world. The Name
of God isexpreft with five Letters, Eloim-,
and the name of Chriji with five Letters,
lhefu : In the intellectual world there are
five intelligible fubftances, viz Spirits of
the firft Hierarchy called Gods , or the
Sons of God: Spirits of thefecond Hie-
rarchy3called Intelligences; Spirits of the
third Hierarchy, called Angels , or MefTen-

54 Tfo holy Guide. L ■< B. 2,

gers, which arefent, fouls of Celeftial bo
dies, Heroes or bleffed Souls : In the Cele
ftial world, there are five wandring Stars
Lords of the Terms, Saturn, J upiter,Mars\
VenuS) Mercury, There are in the Elemen
tary world five kinds of corruptible
things, Water, Air, Fire, Earth, a mixed
body, and five kinds of mixt bbdies. Ani-
mal, Plant, Metal, Stone, Plane Animal
And in the Infernal world there are five
Corporeal Torments, deadly bitternefs.
horrible howling, terrible darknefs, un-
quenchable heat, and piercing (rink. The
Number five engraven Telefmatically in
Gold, with the Numbers of Letters o
names,of Angels, Planets, and dayes, the)
fay will bring to you a woman Crownec
with the gefture of one dancing in a
Chariot, drawn with four horfes ; and i
flame of Lightning attends her : Thi
number makes a man fortunate in Phy
fick,Chymiftry,^ftrology,Geomancy,anc
happy in fporting with women ; they fa)
it maketh Ladies beautiful,and beloved o
whom they pleafe,^.

CHAP

Lib. 2. The Holy Guide. 55

CHAP. VIII.

The~> [h[umber of
Riches.

i. Of the Signification of the Number fix>
2. And why the whole Creation was com-
prehended within it. 3. And how a Spirit
carried away a Quaker. 4,5,6. Of the
vertue of the Number .

1. -yHe Senarius or number fix. has a
JL double reference, the one to this
particular dayes work j the other to the
whole Creation. For the particular dayes
work,it is the Creation of fundry forts of
Land Anima Is, divided into male and fe-
male 5 and the number fix is made up of
male and female ^ for two into three
is fix; hence the Pythagoreans call this
number r*V°f Matrimony, adding more.,
that they did it in reference to the Crea-
tion of the world , fet down by Mofes :
This number alfo in the fame fort that
the number five, is a fit Emblem of Pro-
creation ; for fix into fix makes thirty fix.
Here is fomething alfo that refpetts man,
particularly the choiceft refill t of 'this fix

dayes

56 The Holy Guide. LlB.2,

dayes labour . The number of the Bru-
tifh Nature was five. But here is an unite
fuperadded in man 5 reafon reaclieth out
to the knowledge o f a God, and one ad-
ded to five makes fix.

But now for the reference that fix bears
to the whole Creation, that the Tytbagore-
ansznd Rofie Crucians, did conceive it was
fignificanttherecf, appears by the Titles
they have given it,forthey call ic A/*?$?a>-
cts vwtUi *£k[sq>v Ki<r[j.& , The articulate
and compleat effonnation of the Uni-
ve rfe, the Anvil, an d the World. I fuppofe
they call it the Anvil from that indefati-
gable fhaping out of new forms and fi-
gures upon the matter of the Univerfe,by
the vertue of the active Principle that
ever bufies it felf every where; but how
thefenary fhouldEmblematixe the world,
you (hall underftand thus; the world is it
felf compleat , filled and perfected by its
own paits',fbis the Senarius,which has no
denominated part of a fix , three and
two, viz one , two three, which put to-
gether make fix;,a perfect number, is that
which is equal to its parts -■> wherefore this
number fets out the perfection of the
world y and you knoiv that God in the
clofcof all faw., that all that he made was
very good h then again the world is ' Ahpvy
a) eJfA®-AM^/".&.i?4rw/»/r:)thatis,it confifts of

an

LiB.2. iheHoly Cmde 57

an Aftivc and Paffive principle , the one
brought down in o the other, from the
world of Life} and the Senary is made by
drawing of the firft Mafculine Number
into the fir ft Feminine, for three into two
is fix.

2. Thus youfee continuedly that the
property of the number fets off the na-
ture of the work of every day, according
to thofe myfteries that the Pythagoreans
haveobferved in them ; and befidesthis,
that the numbers have ordinarily got
names anfwerable to each dayes work,
which as I have often intimated, is a very
high probability, that the Rofie Crucians
had an Infallible Guids , referring to Mofes
his text \ fix is a number of perfeftion,be-
caufe it is the moll perfect in nature , in
the whole cotirfe of numbers, from one to
ten, and it alone isfoperfeft, that in the
Co) lccYionof its parts itrefults the fame,
nothing wanting nor abounding 5 for if
the parts thereof, viz the middle, the
third and ninth part * which are three,
two3one, be gathered together, they per-
fectly fill up the whole body of fix.

Now this perfe&ion all the other num-
bers wantihence by the Rofie Crucians it is
faid to be altogether applyed to generati-
on and marriage, and is called the bal-
lance oftheworldjforthe world is made of

the

5 8 The Holy Guide. LlB. 2-

the number fix; neither doth it abound Or
is defective; hence that i?, becaufe the
world was finifhed by God the fixth day;
for the fixth day God f aw all the things which
he had made , and behold they were exceeding
good , and the evening and morning were the
fxt natural day%

Therefore the Heaven, and the Earth,
and ail the Hoafts thereof were finifhed;it
is alfo called the number of man, becaufe
the fixt d?y man was Created; and it is
alfo the number of our redemption;
whence there is a great aftinitybetwixtthe
number fix and the CrolTe, Labour and
fervitude : hence it is in the Law com
manded , that in fix dayes the work is tc
be done,fix dayes Manna is to be gather-
ed, fix years the ground was to be fowen
arid that the Hebrew fervant mould fcrvi
his matter lix years; fix dayes the Glor
of the Lord appeared upon Mount Sinai
covering it with a cloud;the Cherubim ha
fix wings.

9. And there are fix Circles in the Fir
nvament, Aitick,Antartick,two Tropicks
Equinoctial and Eccliptick; fix Wanderin
Planets, "h , 'U, cT, ? > S > r. runnin
through the Latitude of the Zodiack
on boih fides the Ecliptick; there are in
fubftantial qualities in the Elements, viz
iharpnefs, thinnefs, motion, and the con

trar

LiB.^ The Holy Guide. * 59

trary to the e,dulnefs,thick*efs,reftj there
are lix differences of poliuon, upwards,
downwards, before, behind, on the right
fide, on the left fide . There are iix natu-
ral offices, without which nothing can be,
viz. Magnitude, Colour, Figure, interval,
Standing,Viotion. Alfo a folid figure of
a four fquare thing hath fix Superficies ^
there are fix Tones of all Harmony, viz.
five Tones and two half Tones , which
make one Tone,which is the fixt : and the
Name of God in the exemplary world are
written with fix Letters oni^ and
ITDJ^i and fix orders of Angels or Me(-
fengers in the intelligible world will not
obey the call of Inferioiirs , becaufethey
are notfent : and there are fix degrees of
men in the leffer, the Intellect, Memory,
Senfe, Motion,Life, EfTence. And fix De-
vils in the infernal world, which are the
! Authors of all Calamity, Arteus^ Magriefi-
j ( wflrmenus,LicW)Nicon, Mini$n. The ligns
to diftinguifh, whether the spirit be good
or evil, are the fame by which we diftm-
guifh whether a man or a tree be good or
evil:namely Actions and Fruitjand wick-
ed men cannot converfe with Angels : As
For Example, a Quaker or a Presbyterian
contrived a number in >ilver , and could
often converfe with an Angel, as they cal-
led it, at Fill Fens Furnace in Lancajhir^ for
H there

60 lhe Holy Grids. Lie. 2

there chey lived, although not<levout be-
fore God; thus they diflembled, as their
wanner U', with God and the World, and
freely and frequently courted this fami-
liar Spirit. But there are lying Spirits; fa
it hapnedthe 15. day of June, 1660. be-
ingat dinner with his wife and four chil-
dren t> there knocked one at the door, he
thought not of his familiar Devil Ifup-
pofe, but opened the door, at which en-
tred a man in blac\ clothes, and after fa liga-
tion, faid, hemuftgo with him ; at this the
Quaker was afraid ; undone of his fons
run out to call neighbbiirs 5 the reftcryed,
and the woman alio; fo one of the chil*
drenfaid, OJefus, mother this man has
feet like a Cow ; and the woman calling
her eyes upon him, bleffed her , and faid,
fweet Husband forfake thefe fool ifh fan-
cies of Quaking ; Immediately at the word
Went out of her mouth, for all his firiving, thii
Monfter carried him away, and top of the houfe
alfoy to the aslonijhment of all their neighbours^
who by this time were come to fave the
man, but he was gone before, and never
heard of after.

4. This may forewarn ungodly Saints
the medling with the Sacred things writ-
ten in this Book; for the Devil may appear
to you like an Angel of Light 5 wherefore
you are commanded in Scripture to judge

©f

j

liB. 2. The tiol) Guide. 6 1

cf the Spirits by their Do&rine, and not
of the Do&rine by the Spirits $ for mira^
cles, our Saviour hath forbidden us to
rule our faith by them, Mat. 24. 24. and
Saint Fdul faith, Gidat.%. Though an Angel
from Heaven preach to you otherwise, &c. let
him be accurfed > wherefore it is plain, that
we are not to judge whether theDottrine
be true or no by the Spirit , but whether
the Spirit be good or no by the Do&rine:
Co likewife i Job .4. 1 . Believe Hot every Spirit:
for falfeFrophets are gone out into the worldly. 2.
Hereby jhall yekpow the Spirit of God, v. 3.
Every Spirit that confeffeth not that Jefus
Chriji U come in the flejh-y is not of God\ And
Xhkii the Spirit of Antkhrift^ v. 1%. IVhofo-
tver confeffeth that Jefus Chrift U the Son of
God} in him dwelleth God, and he in
God.

5. The knowledge therefore wc have
?f good and evil Spirits, cometh not by
rifionof an Ahgel that may teach it, nor
Dy a miracle that may feem to confirm it :
Dut by conformity of do&rine with this
foticleand Fundamental point of Chri-
ftian Faith , which alfo Saint Paul faith is
:he fole Foundation , that Jefus Chriji k
iinteiktbe flsfb, i Cor. 3. 11.
6. For wifdome and knowledge iri
j Philofojphy, the Law and Divinity, they
engraved the nams of the Angd of t hs

62 The Holy Guide. L1B.2

day Planec and hour, with the mans
name at length, and the numbers attribu*
ted unto each Letter , and he it is faid re-
ceivech vertue from an Angel that ap-
pears like a man riding on a Peacock, ha-
ving Eagles feet, and on his head a Crefty
in his right hand he holds fire , and in his
left a cock.

And now you know how to try a Spi-
rit ; but fome deny the appearing of Spi-
rits , and that there are any good or bad ;
but we (hall prove that there are, and the
difference of Spirits in the third Book 5
to which we will add fome Rules to cure
thofe that are poflefled and difeafed. Ont
main defign to make men happy by
Knowledge, long Life, Health, Youth.
Riches, Wifdom, and Vertue, and how t<
alter, change, cureand amend all difeafei
in young or old, with the art of repairing
Kofie Crucian Medicines, and times to ad
minifter them , and their vertues anc
ufes.

CHAR

LiB.a, The Holy Guide. 63

CHAP. IX.

The fHutnber of Venue.

1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.^.16.17.

18.19.20.21. Ihefignificatlon of the Nmt -
her 7. 22. 23. 24.25.26. And that 7. is a
fit SymMe of the Sabbath or Reft of
God.

1. T~He Hebdomad or Septenary is a fit
1 Symbole of God, as he is confide-
nce! having finifhed thefe fix dayes Crea-
tion ; for then, as this Holy Guide inti-
mates, he creates nothing further, and
therefore his condition is then very fitly
fet out by the number 7. All numbers
within the Decadent caft into the Ranks,
is Plato obferves, oi (Av yw£<riv I yivvd-
•jiivor 01 <ffc yivvavjcti[j(.lv, *yivv£<n /£• of <Tfc
ifjL$iTt§&) 3^ ytvyuo't ^ yivvavjeu- (i.e.) fome

Deget, but are not begotten, others are
Degotten,but doe not beget;the laft both
oeget and are begotten; the number 7 is
Miely excepted* that is neither begotten,
lor begets any number, which is a perfect
imbleme of God, celebrating this Sab-
)ath; for he now creates noth;ng of a
iew3 as himfelf is nncreatable, fo that the
H 3 crea-

$4 The Holy Guide. LlB.2?

creating and infilling of fou^s, as occafion
{hall offer, is quite contrary to this Holy
Guide. And 7. is of various and manifeft
power ; for it conlifts of a and 6, or of a
an4 5, or of 3 and 4, and it hath a unity
as it were the coupling together of two
three's, hence it is called a number of
Marriage, and the Aftrologers and Geo-
niahcers are refolved by the feventh
Ho life, whether the Querent $a II marry
the party delired. 7 is called the Vehicu- j
lum of mans life, which it doth not re«
ceive from its part fo, as it perfects by its
proper right,of its whole-, for it container
body and fot^h for the body confifts of !
four Elements, and is endowed with foure
qualities.

2.Alfo the Nu: 3 refpe&s thefoul,by rea-
fon of the 3-fold power, viz. Imaginative,
irafcibfeand concupifcible.The number 7
relates to the generation of men, and it
caufeth man to be received, formed^
brought forth, nouri(hed,live, and indeed
altogether to fubiift; for when the genital
feed is received in the womb of the wo-
man, if it remain there 7 hours after the
effufion of it, it is certain that it will abide
there for good : then the firftfeven dayes
it is coagulated, and is fit to receive th€
flwpe of a man 5 then it produceth
Infants called mature perfecTion1, whicf^

L t B . 2 . 1 he Holy Guide. 6 5

are; called Infants of the feventh mo-
neth, becaufe they are the feventh mo-
neth.

3. After the birth, the feventh houre.
tries whether it will live cr not : for that
which will bear the breath of the air after
that hour, is conceived will live; after fe-
ven dayes it cafts the reliquesof theNar
vilj after twice feven dayes its fight begins
to move after the light; after 21 dayes if
turnes its eyes and whole face freely ; af-
ter feven moneths it breeds teeth ; after
fourteen moneths it fits without fea re of
falling; after 21 moneths it begins to
(peak; after 28 moneths it (lands ftrong-
ty and walks; after 35 moneths it begins
tp refrain fucking its nurfe; after (even
years its firft teeth fall, and new are bred,
fitter for harder meat, and its fpeech is
perfected ; after fourteen years boyes waif
ripe, and then is a beginning of Genera-
lion 5 at 2 1 years they grow to be men in
ftature, and begin to be hairy,and become
able and ftrong for Generation ; at 28
:hey begin to burnifh and ceafe to grow
:aller; ill the 35 year they attain to th,e
perfe&ionof their ftrength ; at 42. they
*eep their ftrength, at 49 yeares of age
hey attain to their utmoft difcretion
ind wifdoraej and the perfeft age of
nan.

66 The Holy Guide. LtB.*

But when they come to the tenth feven
year, where the number feven is taken for
acompleat nwmber,then they corns to the
common term of life-, the Prophet faying
our ageisfeventy years^the utmpft height
of mans body is feven foot.

4, There are alfo feven degrees in the
body, which compleat the dimenfion of
its altitude from the bottom to the top,
viz,. Marrow, Bone, Nerve, Vein, Artery,
Flefh, Skin There are feven which by the
Qreeks are called black members , the
TTongue, the Heart, the Lungs, the Liver,
the Spleen and tw-> Kidneys : there alfo
feven principal parts of the body, the
Head, the Bread, the Hands, theFeet,and
the privy Members: it is manifeft con-
cerning breath, and meat, that without
drawing of the breath, the life doth en-
dureabove feven hours, and they that are
ftarved ill prifon by blood-thirrty Credi-
tors, orotherwife with famine, live not
above feven dayes. The veines and arte-
ries are moved by feven.
! 5. All judgements in difeafes are rriadt
with greater manifeftation upon the fe-
venth day, being called critical or judici-
al 1 ; alfo of {c\tn portions, God create!
the foul, the foul receives the body by fe-
ven degrees j all differences of voyce«
proceed to the feventh degree ; aftei

which

•LiB.i. The Holy Guide. 67

which there is the fame refolution : A-
gain, there are feven modulations of voy-
ces, Ditonus,femi-Ditonus , DiatefTaron,
Diapente, with a Tone Diapente, with a
half Tone, and Diapafon.

6. Thereisalfoin Celeftials a moft po-
tent power of the number 7. for feeing
there arc four corners of Heaven diame-
trically looking jone towards the other;
which indeed is accounted a moft full and
powerful Afpeft, and coniifts of the num-
ber feven,forit is made from thefeventh
fign, and makes a croffe the moft power-
full figure of all j but this you muft not;
be ignorant of, that the number feven
hath a great communion with the CrofTej
by the fame Radiation and number the
Solfticeis diftant from Winter, and the
Equinoftium from the Summer j all which
are done by feven figns ; there are alfoy
circles in the Heavens according to the
Axel-tree •, there arc feven Stars about
the Artick pole, greater and lefTer, called
Charles Waine : alfo feven Scars called the
Pleiades,and Cewtn Planets,and the Moon
difpenfeth the influence Spiritual and
Natural, gives the light of feven to us ;
for in 28 (he runs her appointed courfe-,
which number of dayes the number fe-
ven, with its feven termes, viz,, from one
to feven, doth make and fill up as much as

the

^8 The Holy Guid*. LlE.2?

the feveral numbers, by adding to the
Antecedents, and makes Four times fovea
dayes, in which the Moon runs through,
and about the Longitude and Latitude of
the Zodiack by meafuring, and meafu-
ring, and meafuring again ; with the like
feven of dayes it difpeufech its light, by
changing it.

.7. r;or the firft feven dayes unto the
middle as it were of the divided world,
it increafeth; the fecond feven dayes ic
fills it whole Orb with light; the hird
by decretion,ic again is contracted into a
divided Orb ; but after 28 dayes it is re-
newed with the laft diminution Qf its
light; and by the fame feven of dayes it
difpofeth flux and influx of Waters j for in
the firft feven of theincreafe of the Moort
it is by little leffened ; in the fecond |by
degrees encreafed; but the third is like to
the firft, and the fourth doth the fame as
the fecond.

8. And alfo feven is applyed, to which
afcending from the lower in the feventh
Planet, which betokens reft, to which the
feventh day is afcribed,which fignifies the
feven thoufand, wherein (as Saint John
witnefTcth) the Dragon, which is the De-
vil, being bound, men fhalibe quiet, and
lead a peacable life: Moreover, the Rofie
Crucians call feyen the number of Virginia

LiB.2. *t>e Holy uuiae 09

ty, becaufe the firft is that which is nei-
ther generated , or generates , neither
can it be divided into two equal parts,
fo as to be generated of anqther number
repeated, or being doubled, to bring
forth another number of it felf, which is
c'ontained within the bounds of the num-
ber, ten, which is manifeftly the firft
bound of the numbers j and therefore
they dedicated the number feven to ?al-

9, It hath alfo in Religion mod potent
fignes of itsefteem, and it is called the
number of an Oath* hence amongft the
H^mmofwear, is called Septenary, to
yroteft by feven. Abrabamyvfhei\ he made
a Covenant with Abtmdechy appointed fe-
ven Ewe-lambs for a Teitimony ; it is
called the number of bleflednefs, or of
Reft, viz. in fouj and body. The feventh
day the Creator refted from his work, as I
fliewed you above ; wherefore this day
was by Mefes called the Sabbath, or the
day of Reft : hence it was that Chrift re-
fted the feventh day in the Grave.

10 Befides, it is mod convenient in Pu-
rification , whence Afukius faith, And I
put my felf forthwith into the Bath ofthe
Sea to be purified, and put my head fe-
ven times under the Waves, and the le-
prous perfbn is eleanfed, being fprinkled

feven

;o The Holy Guide, LiB.a.

feven times with the blood of a Sparrow ;
and Elnab faid to a-feprous perfon,(j0, and
ypajb thy felf feven times in Jordan, and thy
flejh (ball be made whole : And he wajhed
feveri times and was eleanfed 5 feven is a
number of Repentance and Remiffion,
and feven years Repentance was ordain-
ed for fin, according to the opinion of the
Wife-man, faying. And upon every finner
feven- fold.

11. And alfo the feventh yeare there
were granted Remilfions of all debts and
trefpafies, in full teftimony of Love and
fulfilling of the Law. And Chrift with fe-
ven Petitions finifhed hisfpeechof ourfa-
tisfa&ion; and at the end of feven yeares
every Apprentice doth challenge liberty
to himfeifj feven is fuitable to Divine
praifes, and David faid, feven times a
day do I praife thee, becaule of thy righ-
teous judgements; it is moreover called
the number of ftevenge,as Cain (hall be re-
venged feven-fold.

1?. The number 7. engraven by Art in
Silver, will produce to your light a man
leaning on a ftaffe, having a bird on his
head, and a flcu riming tree before him;
and this is made for travellers againft wea-
rineflc *, the number feven in Chriftal by
Art engraven, brings to you a woman cor-
nuted, riding on a Bull5with feven heads,

hold-

L i B. 3. The Holy Guide. J I

holding in her right hand a Dart, and hi
her left a Looking- glafle$ they will come
to you in white and green, and grant you
the love of any woman you (hall nomi-
nate.

13. And feven is defcribed to the Ho-
ly Ghoft,who is feven- fold, according to
his gifts, viz. the Spirit of Wifdomeand
Underftanding,the Spirit of Council and
Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and
Holinefs,andthe Spirit of the Fear of the
Lord, which is the 7 eysofGod; there are
feven Mefiengers or Angels that wait the
will of God, and feven Lamps burn be-
fore the Throne of God, 8c feven Golden
Candlefticks, and in the middle was one
like the Son of God j and he had in his
right hand feven Stars; there are feven
Angels in the prefence of God, that ftand
before him, and feven Spirits before the
Throne 5 and there are {even Trumpets,
I mean feven Angels, that flood before the
Throne of God. A Lamb had feven horns
and feven eyes, and a book was opened
wit h feven feals.

And when the feven feals was opened,
there was made lilence in Heaven 5 byfe-
^ven Julius Ctfar did bind and repell evil
fpirits, as you read in Lucan.

7 2 The Holy Guide. L VB-a

J will now call you up by a true name,
*Jbe Stygian dogs\ 1 in the light fupreme
Will leave and follow yow-, alfo through grave.
From all the urnes in death I will you fave.
Ihe number [even unto the Gods willjhew,
To whom taddrejje Xhyfelf in other hew
Ihou wafi woiit with wan form and without

grace,
Andtheeforbidto change Erebus his face.

14. And alfo of all clean beafts, feven
were brought into the Ark, and of Fowls
feven; and after feven dayes the Lord
rained upoii the earth, and upon the fe-
venth day the Fountains of the deep were
broken up, and the waters covered the
earth; and Abraham gave Abimelech feveri
Ewe-lambs; and licoh ferved feven years
for Leah, and feven more for Rachel ; and
feven dayes the people bewailed the death
of Iacob.

15. And you read of feven Kine, and
feveuEaresof Corn, fevenyears of plen-
ty, and feven yeares of fcarcuy; and in
numbers feven Calves were offered on
thefeventh day 5 and Balaam ereftld fe-
veri Altars; feven dayes Mary the fitter of
Aaron went forth leprous out of the
Camp; and in lojhua feven Priefts carried
the Ark of the Covenant before theHofk

ft-

Li B . 2 . The Holy Guide. 7 3

fevcn dayes they went round the Cities;
and feven Trumpets werecarried by the
feven Priefls \ and the feventh day, the
fcven Priefls founded their Trumpets.

j 6. And Abejfa reigned in Ifrael feven
years 5 Savrjtn kept his Nuptial fcven
dayes, and the feventh day he put forth a
riddle to his Wife 5 he was bound with fe-
ven new Cords, and feven Withs* and
feven Locks of his head were (haven off;
feven years the Children of Ifrael were
bppreffed by the King of Maden.

17. And E//#prayed feven times $ and
at the feventh time,behold a little cloud :
feven dayes the Children of J/r^/pitched
over againft the A$yrian$y and the feventh
day they joyned Battel; and feven times
the Chilcteneefed that was raifed by Eti-

Jka : feven Gifts of the Holy Ghoft; fe-
ven Petitions in the Lords Prayes : feven
Words of Cbrifl upon the Crcjfe: feven
words of the Virgin Mary.

18. Moreover this Number hath much
power, as in natural, fo in facred,fpirituai,
ceremonial, and myfterious : feven hours
were Adam and Eve in Taradife ; and there
were feven men foretold by an Angel, be-
fore they were born, viz. lfmael> Ifaac,
Sattopfcn, Jeremiah, John Baftift, James the
Brother of our Lord, & our Saviour Jefm
Chrifi: And in the Original world, they

writ*

74 T^ Hdfy Guide. LiB.a.

writs the Name of God with fevea let-
ters, Ararita. And in the Intelligible
world there are feven Angels that ftand in
theprefenceof God, Zafhiel^Zadkjl^ Ca-
mad, Raphael, Hanael, Michael^ Gabriel. In
the Elementary World, there are feven
Birds, that are ufed in calling or Angels,
viz the Lapwing, the Eagle, the Vulture,
the Swan, the Dove, the Stork, theOwl:
and feven Fifhes, viz. the Sea-Cat, the
Mullet, Thimallus, the Sea-Calf, the Pike,
the Dolphin, the Thurle- fifli 5 and feven
Animals, the Goat, the Cat, the Ape, the
Mole,the Heart,the Woolf,the Lyon : and
feven Metals, Lead, Tin, Iron, Gold Gop-
per,Quick-(ilver,Silver : and feven Stones,
the Onyx, theSaphir, the Diamond, the
Carbuncle, theEmrald, the Achates, the
Chryftal.

19. This number feven engraven in
Silver Will bring Gabriel to you, and
he will bring you a Genius fuitable to
your felf in nature, number and name,
and he will appear like a man cloathed
in comely apparel , or like a man and
woman fitting at a Table playing, and
this giveth mirth , riches, and the love
of women.

20. Again, the Number feven is of two
kinds,theoneis, * hl°< JW«T©- IJVV*?'
The other, n UCjh. The Septenary with-
in

L: B. 3 . 1 he Holy Guide. '? 7 $

in the Decade is meerly (even unites s the
other is a feventh number, beginning at
an unite ^ and holding on in a continual
Geometrical proportion till you have
gone through feven proportional Terms ;
for the feventh Term , there is this Septe-
nary of the fecond kind , whofe Nature
Tlato fully exprefles in thefe words 3
'Atti y*s o$ri novels®- evvTt&faiv©- 'c* JV-
whtLGiQis w ttiKditrxoii n cvylheo$ dva,Kby*<nv >

\i&TiM$*cidt4. Twj (M a.<7ay.cLT\i Kctltt Trivial*

i. e.

ii. For alwayes beginning from an
unite, and holding on in double or triple,
or what proportion you will , the feventh
number of this rank is both fquare and
cube, comprehending both kinds, as well
the Corporeal as Incorporeal fubftance^
the incorporeal according to the Superfi-
cies which the fquares exhibite, but the
corporeal according to the folic! DinVentt-
ons which are fetout by the Cubes.

22. As for example, 64. or 7, 2. 9. thefe
are numbers that a rife after this manner :
each of them area feventh from an unite,
the one arifing from double proportion,
the other from Triples arid if the pro-
1 portion

7 6 The Holy Guide. Lib. 2

portion were quadruple, quintuple,or any
elfe,there isthefame reafon. Some other
fevench number would arife, which would
prove of the fame Nature with thefe,they
would prove both Cubes andfquares,that
is,Corporeal and Incorporeal ; for fuch is
64. either made by multiplying eight in-
to eight , and fo itisafquare, orelfeby
multiplying four cubically, for four times
four times four is again fixty four, but
then io is a Cube. And 6)7. 9. is made
either by fquaring of 27. or Cubically
multiplying of nine, for either way will
729. be made: and fo is both Cube and
fquare corporeal and incorporeal : where-
by is intimated, that the world (hall be re*
duced in the feventh day^toa meer fpiri-
tual con(iftency,toan incorporeal condi-
tion ; but there (hall be a cohabitation of
the fpirit with flefli, in a Myftical or Moral
fenfe, and that God will pitch his Tent
amongftus. Then (hall be fettled ever-
lafting righteoufnefs, and rooted in the
Earth, fo long as mankind (hall inhabit
upon the face thereof.

23. And this truth of the Reign of
Righteoufnefs in this feven thoufand
years isftill more clearly fet out to us in
the Septenary within ten, tw wtZs tear J®-
S£</V*cfi, as Plato calls it, the naked num-
ber feven. For the parts it coniifts of are

three

Lie. 2 . The Holy Guide- 7 7

three and four, which put together make
feven. And thefe parts be the fides of
the firft Orthogonian Numbers ; the very
fides that include the right angle thereof.
And the Orthogonian what a foundation it
is of Iregonometry , and of meafuring the
Altitudes, Latitudes, and Longitudes of
things, every body knows that knows any
thing at all of the Mathematicks : and
this prefigures the uprightnefTe of the
holy Generation , who will ftand and
walk, actj3 q$Us, inclining neither this
way, nor that way3 but they will approve
themfelves of an upright and lincere
heart ; and by the Spirit of righteoufnefs
will thefe Saints be enabled to find out
the depth, and breadth , and height of
the wifdome and goodnefs of God, as
fomewhere the Apcftle himfelf phrafcth it.
24. But then again, laftly, this three
and four comprehend alfo the Conjuncti-
on of 1 he corporeal and incorporeal Na-
ture ; three being the firft fuperficies. And
four the firft body} and in the Ce\ea
thoufand years there will befo great uni-
on betwixt God and man , that man (hall
not die, but partake of his Spirit. And
the Inhabitants of the iEtherial Region
will openly converfe with thefe of the
Terreftrial, and fuch frequent converfati-
bn , and ordinary virus of our cordial
I 2 Friends

yS The Holy Guide. Lib. 3.

Friends of that other world b will take a-
way all thetoyl of life, and fear of death
amongft men , they being very chearful
and pleafant here in the body, and being
well allured, no pain (hall afflift them,
when they pleafe to go out of it 5 for
Heaven and Earth by this number (hall
ihake hands together , or become as one
houfe j and to die mall be accounted but
to afcend into a higher Room.

25. And though this difpenfation for
thcprefent be but very fparingly fet a-
foot, becaufe of my youth h yet 1 fuppofe
the more ancient and Learned may have
a glimpfe at it j concerning whom accom-
pliflied pofterity may happily utter fome-
thing anfwerable to that of our Saviours
concerning Abraham^ who tafted of Chri-
ftianity before Chrift himfelf was come in
the flefh : Abraham faw my day andrejoyced
at it. And without allqueftion, that ple-
nitude of happinefs that hath been re-
ferved for future times, the prefage, pre-
diction and reprefentation of it has in all
Ages been a very great Joy and Triumph
to all holy men, KofieCrucians and Pro-
iphetS'iAdam^Setb, Enos^Cainan^ Mahalaleel,
Jared^ they died, not enjoying the Riches
of Gods Goodnefs in their bodies ; but
Enoch, who was thefeventh from Adam,
was byfeven taken up alive into Heaven

by

Lib. 2. The Boly Guide. 79

by Gabriel : and feems to enjoy thac great
Blifle'm the body, I have (hewed you,in my
Book called The Way to Blifie : The World
then in the feventh Chiliad will be affumed
up into GOD, fnatcht up by his Spirit,
inafted by his power : The Jerusalem that
comes down from Heaven , will then in a
moft glorious and eminent manner flou-
rifh upon earth j God will, as 1 laid, by
feven, pitch his Tabernacle amongft us :
and for God to be in us and with us, is as
much as for us to be lifted up into God.

26. By Ccwen Cornelius Agrifpa being at
Tar is writ- to a Friend of his at the Court,
the fignification of a faying in Jeremiah :
viz. Our Crown is fallen *, Woe unto usfecaufe
we have finned *, which ( fayes he ) I wi(h
might not be fo truly applied to you j for
truly that verfe, the Numeral Letters be-
ing gathered together, MCVL expref-
feth the year MDXXlV. wherein, ac-
cording to the account, your King was ta-
ken ztPapi*.

27 The number feven engraven in a
Jafperftone, with the parties Name, and
the Numbers attributed to it^the Angel or
the Planet, and day of the week j and this
they fay is good to obtain the favour of a
Lady in Marriage , and the Love of Vir-
gins *, it maketh the bearer fortunate alio
in Gaming , as Tables, Gards,Dice,Horfe-
I 3 racing,

8o The Holy Guide. LlB.*

racing, Bowling, Shooting, Cock-fight-
ing, &c And by this Number they fay
trill appear a little Maid, cloathed in long
white Garments, with her hairfpreada-
broad, holding flowers in her right hand,
and (he gives vertue to this number, that
the bearer of it (hall go at his pleafure in-
vifible : if it be engraved with his name
and Genius, &c. in a Diamond.

By this Number they give phyftck to
renew Youth,^. but fome do not be-
lieve there is any fuch thing as Spirits h
but we (hall prove their Exiftence and Ap-
parition in the third Book,e^c.

C HA P,

LiB.2. ?he Holy Guide. 8 1

C H A P. X.

The Slumber of VFif-
dome.

Ofthefignificationof the Number 8, and what
Angels may be called by it> and how they ap-
pear.

i. T Am not angry at theFanatick dif-
Jl poikionsof men, that raile againft
my Writings, viz. Francis O$born> Author
of Advice to a Sony and Elias Ajhmole, Efq;
that made publick my imperfeft Copy ;
and fome others I pky3 being the worm-
eaten memorials of defaced Hiftories
&c.

2. Thefe ignorantly wonder what thofe
Officious Spirits fhould be I fo much talk of
in my book,called the Familiar Spirit. that
fo willingly appeare, and after my dire-
ctions^ offer themfelves to confociate with
a man.

3. O my enemies/ whom I pity, more
thendifpife, I (hall tell you lovingly, as I
fpeak to the capacities of people j They
are Angels uncapable of incorporation
into humane bodies and fouls of thede-

1 4 ccafed

8r The Holy G*?de. L1B.2

ceafed, that have affinity with mortality
and humane frailty* and thefe will not
appear to you at all times, but every firft,
third, fifth, feventh, ornineth yeare,
they will come, and for ever accompany
you in a fortunate Jelefme,

4, And eight will bring to you a G eni-
us you (hall know in its proper place :
And Orpheus was ufed to befeech Divine
Jufhce by eight, and he ufually fwareby
eight Deities, viz. Fire, Water, Earth, the
Heaven, Moon, Sun, Planets, the Night :
and ^irg*/ fpeaking of Ma gick^ faith,

1 many times with eight have Maeris fpy'd
Chang'd to a PVolfe, and in the Woods to

bide :
From Sepulchres would foules departed

charm,
And come beare ftanding from anothers

Farm.

5 . The Jiofie Crucians call eight the num-
ber of Juftice and Fulneffe : firft, becaufe
itisfirft of all divided into numbers e-
qualiy even,2>/£. into four, and that divi-
iion is by the fame reafon made into two
times two, viz. two times t\vo twice ; and
by reafon of this equality of Divifion, ic
tooktoitfelfthe nameof Jufticcj butthe
other received the name, viz, of Fulnefs*

by

EiB.2. The Holy Guide. 83

by reafon of the Contexture of the corpo-
real folidity, fince the firft makes a foiid
body. There are eight only viftble Spheres
cf the Heavens*, alfo by it the propercy of
corporeal matter is fignified, which lyrius
comprehended in eight of the Sea -fangs :
this is alfo called the Covenant, or Cir-
cumcifion, which was commanded to be
aone by the Jew? the 8tb day.

6. By eight it is faid, a Gentleman in
the Kings Army at Edge- hill battel (hewed
tr.e effe&s of Spirits, viz. the appearance
of armed men righting and encountring
one againft another in the skie, and hun-
dreds faw thefe things befides him-
felf.

7. And through eight Tfagarith (hewed
the Citizens of krufalent for forty dayes,
or five times eight together3horfmen run-
ning in the aire in cloth of Gold, and ar-
med with Lances, like a band of fouldiers,
and troops of horfmen in array, encoun-
tring and running one againit another,
vith making of fhields, and multitudes of
pkes, and drawing of fwords, and cafting
oidarts, and glittering of golden orna-
ments, and harnefs of all forts : and thus
he->redi&ed the great (laughter of nolefs
thd 80000 made by Antiochus : this is al-
fo recorded in the fecond of Macchabees^
^h.5

8. And

84 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

8. And in eight was feen a Sea-fight o-
ver Sydmoutb in Devonjhirey by Caleb Perkin-
fott) a Captain of a Ship and his company ;
and he predicted a Sea-fight, which hap-
pened betwixt us and the Hollanders.

g. Eight is an evil number, and alwaies
fignifies difeafes, or death ; and in the
old Law there were eight Ornament of
the Prieft, viz. a Breaft-plate, a Coat, a
Girdle, a Mytre, a Robe, an Ephod, a
Girdle of an Ephod, a Golden Plate : hi-
ther belongs the number to Eternity, aid
the end of the World., becaufe it follo^es
the number feven, which is the myneryof
time.

10. By eight Hammel caufed a Spirit,
called JLckerkeH) to appear alwaies in the
fliape of a hand, and haunt thofe that
troubled him, pulling down travellers off
their horfes , and overturning carri-
ages.

1 1 . They fay this number was dedicatee
to Dionyfiu*, becaufe he was born the 8th.
monethj in everlafting memory whereof
Naxos the lfland was dedicated to hin,
which obtained this prerogative, tiat
onelythc women of Naxos mould faely
bring forth in the- eighth moneth,and
their children mould live; where?* the
children of the eighth moneth mother
Nations die, and their mother then

fringe

LiB.s. The Hoi) Guide. 8 5

bringing forth are in manifeft dan-

§er-

12. By^ight artificially chara&redina

proper i\xb)tdi9 Apollonius Tyaneus told the
Epbefians of an old man that was a Spe-
ctre, and how the walking Plague was by
his means in the ^ity here and there ;
whereupon they ftoned the fhape5 and af-
ter a while they uncovered the heap ;
whereupon appeared the fhape of a great
black dog, as big as any Lion ; Yet I know
feme able Araftsm England, that will not
believe but this is Melancholy and fraud
of a Prieft : But the learned Grotius, a man
far from all levity znd vain credulity, is
fo fecure ofche truth of Jyanem his Mira-
cles, and Telefmaticall Numbers, that
he does not ftick to terme rum impudent
that has the face to deny them.

13. In the Infernall world there are 8
rewards of the damned, Prifon, Death,
Judgement, the wrath of God, Drunken-
nefs, Indignation, Tribulation, Anguiih 5
and eight kinds of bleffed men in the Jef-
fer world, the Poor in fpirit, the Merciful,
the Meek, the Viourners, they that hunger
and thirft after Righteoufw efs, the Peace-
makers, they which are perfecuted for
Righteoufnefle fake : eight particular
qualities in the Elementary world, the
heat of the Fire, the moiftnefle of the Air,-

the

86 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

the coldnefs of the Water, the drineffe of
the Ear^h, the drinefs of the Fire,the heat
of the Aire, the coldnefs of the Earth, t he
moiftnefs of the Water; and eight rewards
of theBleffed; Inheritance, Incorrupision,
Power, Victory, the Viiion of God,Gracc,
a Kingdome, Joy; and the Name of God
in the Original word is written fometimes
with eight letters, Eloha Vadaatb nV?**
rtjm Iehovab Vedaatb r^Tt*1 Fl^m and
thefe Qneftions are refolved by eight.

14. The number eight Jelefmntically en.
graved, as others were in an Onyx ftone,
they fay rendreth a man powerful in good
and evil,fothat he (hall be feared of all ;
andwhofoever carrieth it, they give him
the power of charming difeafes, and he
(hall terrine men by his looks when he is
angry: this makes alfo a man bold and
fortunate in Wars: by this number ap-
pears a Spirit like a man riding upon a Li-
on, having in his right hand a naked
fword : and by. this number they preferve
goods from ftealing, and caufe Thieves to
bring again what they have taken away;
thishelpethalldifeafesin the fecrets and
bowels : by this number rhcy know when
she party will die that is lick.

CHAP.

,

LiB.s. The Holy Guide. 87

CHAP. XI.

'The u^Qimber of chan-
ging ^Bodies.

Of the fignification of the number nines how
tha 1 by nine Julius C asfa r called up Spirits,
and did what he fie a fed: how Ga Heron by
nine went invifible, and bad the focietyofa
familiar Genius.

11. A Nd nine is a powerful number iri
A all things : Julius Cafar made this
number in Gold lelefmatically in the hour
by Artj and carried with him in his
march to the River Rubicon, which divides
Gallia Citerior from Italy, and upon the
Banks fide his Army faw appear at his com-
mand., a Genius, like a proper man, play-
ing on a Reed 5 the ftrangenefs of his
a&ions,as well as the pleafantnefs of his
mufick, had drawu feveral of theShep-^
herds unto hini3 as alfo many of the Soul-
diers j amongft whom were fome Trum-
peters, which this Triton (if I may fo call
him ) or Sea- god, well obferving, nimbly
fnatches away one of the Trumpets out of
i^heir hands, leaps forthwith into the Ri^

ver.

88 The Holy Guide. L1B.2,

ver, and founding to horfe , with that
ftrength and violence> that he Teemed to
rend the heavens, and made the aire ring
again with the mighty forciblenefs of the
blaft : in this manner he pafled over to the
other fide of the River : whereupon Ctfar
taking the Omen, leaves off all further di-
fputewith himfelf, carries over his army,
enters Italy y fecureof fuccefs, from the fo
manifeft tokens of the favour of the gods.
The number nine is dedicated to the Mu*
fes,by the help of the order of the celefti*
al fpheres,and divine Spirits.

2. And there are nine Spheres; andac.
cording to thefe there are nine Mufes^/z.
Galiope, Vratiia, Volymnia, Terpfichore, Clio,
Melpomene, Erato, Euterpe and Thalia',\vhich
nine Mufes indeed are appropriated to the
nineSpheres,fothat the rirft refembles the
fupreme fphere, which they call Frimum
Mobile ', and fo defcending by degrees, ac
cording to the written order, unto the
laft, which refembles the Sphere of the
Moon.

3 So the Name of GOD in the Origi-
nal Word, is fometimes written with nine
letters, mssaymn'' Jehovah Saboatb9

FaOIM riBOP • and there are in the intel-
ligible World nine Quire of Angels, SeraM
ph\m,Cherubin^ Thrones, Tcminations, Tow-\ i

erij

i

Li B.2. The Holy Guide. 89

ers, Vertues, principalities i Arch-angels, An-
gels ; and nine Angel? ruling the Heavens,
Metattron* Ophaniel, Zaph\iel, Zadkjel, Ca-
tnael, Raphael, Haniel, Michael, Gabriel. In
the Celeftial World Calliope is appropriate
to the Frivnum Mobiles Vrania to the Starry
Heaven, Folymnia to Saturne; Terpfcchore to
Jupiter s\Clio to Mars-, Melpomene to the Sun,
Erato to Venus, Euterpe to Mercury, Thalia
to the Moon : and they engrave nine upon
a Saphir , Emrald , Carbuncle^ Beril , #»/'*,
Chrifolite, Jajper, or 7tf/w$ : but properly
and moft effectually to be refoived of their
Queftions, or to obtain their defires, they
Tcfmatically in an hour engrave it in Sar-
dis or Silver 3 and this will make a man
(they fay) go invifible, as Caleron, Alexan-
ders brother '-in-law fometime did, when
he lay with his brothers Concubine as of-
ten as himfelf ; This number obtaineth
the love of women.

4. And the nineth houre our Saviour
breathed out his Spirit \ and in nine dayes
the Ancients buried their dead; and nine
years Minos received Lawes from Iupiter, as
you may read in my Book, called The Idea
of the Law. and nine was moft efpecially
taken notice of by Homer, when Lawes
were to be given, or anfwers were to be
given, or the fvvord was like to rage ; the
Ajirologers and Geomancers alfo obferve the

num-

go The Holy Guide. Lf B.3«

number nine in the ages of men,no other-
wife then they do of feven,which they call
a Climafterical year; which are eminent for
fome remarkable change: yet fomctimes
it fignifies imperfettnefs and uncompleat-
nefs,becaufe it doth not attain to the per-
fection of the number ten, but is lefs by
one 3 without which it is deficient, as Au-
ftin interprets it of the ten Lepers -, nei-
ther is the longitude of nine Cubits of 0gy
King othafan, who is a type of the Devil,
without a Myfterie ; and there are nine
fenfes inward and outward together in
man, viz. Memory, Cogitative, Imaginative)
Common fenfe; Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Ta-
tting, Touching : and nine orders of Devils
in Sheol, viz. Falfe Spirits of Lying,Vefels of
Iniquity, Avengers of Wickgdnefs, Iuglers, or
Lylians, Airy Towers, Furies, [owing Mifcbiefy
Sifters, or Tryers, Tempters, or Infnarers.

I aime at the Celeftial Glory ;
Below the Moon alTs Tranfitory.

15. The number nine, the number of the
Planet, day of the week. Angel of the day,
and hour engraven in Gold, will (they
fay)bring down to you an Angel like a King
crowned, fitting in a Chair, having a Ra-
ven in hisbofome, and under his fret a
Globe ; he wears Saffron-colour'd clothes3

and

I

LiB.2. ibe Holy Guide. 91 /$

& he, they report,gives vertue to the num-
ber 8c makes the bearer of it invincible &
honorable, &. helps to bring their bufinefs
to a good end, and to drive away vaine
Dreams. This number prevails againft
Feavers and the Plague, and they made
it in a Balanitis-ftom, or a Jtubie : This
number caufeth long life and health : by
this Number Vlato fo ordered himfelf,that
he could by it caufe Nature to end his
dayesat his pleafure, and by departing
upon the fame 81 years after his Birth, to
fulfill of purpofe nine times nine, the
moft perfect Number.

CHAP,

9 1 the Holy Guide. Lib.*

CHAP. XII.

The 3\(jtmberof Me-
dicines.

Of the figmfication of the number ten , how by
this Number ten , Socrates in a Monitory
Vifwnhada Swan in his tap>and of Plato's
birth and education.

j
i . *T* He Number ten is a Number of ho-
JL nour and preferment, and Pythago-
ras had honour by it. And Plato by this
Number had the knowledge of the more
facred Viyfteriesof God, and the ftateof
the foul of man in this world , and that
other defervedly got to himfelf the title
of Divine, o ©el©- TiKuTav.

2. But as for Miracles , I know none he
did, though fomething highly miraculous
happened,if that Fame at Athens was true,
that SfeufippUsClearchuS) and Anaxilides re-
port to have been , concerning his Birth,
which is, that Ariftoy his reputed Father,
when he would forcibly have had to do
with Peritione^ (he being indeed exceeding
fair and beautiful , fell fhort of his pur-i
pofe,and furceafing from his attempr,thac

he

LlB.2» The Holy Guide- 93

hefaw ApaUo in a Vihon , and fo abftain'd
from medling with his Wife, till (he
brought forth herfon Ariftocles, who after
wascalledP/*t0.

3. But that is far more credible, which
is reported concerning the commending
of him to his Tutor Socrates, who the day
before he came, dreamed that he had a
young Swan in his Lap , which putting
forth apace of afudden , flew up into the
Air, and fung (very fweetly * wherefore
the next day, when Tlato wasbroughtto
him by his Father, t«7^, \muv\iv tqv^uv^
he prefently faid , this is the Bird, and fo
willingly received him for his Pupil.

4. Eut his acquaintance with the Holy
Guide , as it is more credible in it felf, fo I
havealfo better proof: As Ariflobulus the
Jew in Clemens Alexandrians- Saint Am-
brose, Hermipfns in Jofephus againft Appions :
And \z&\y,NutncnnM the Flatonift, who in-
genioufly confeffes , T/ y&s <%t TXharav n
Ma>w 'hTJMi£av ; That is Tlato, but Mofes
in Greek,, as 1 haveelfewhere in my Book
called, The Idea of the Law, alledged a-
mongft Law-givers; the Number ten is
called, every Number,Gompleat,ngnify-
ing the full courfc of life ; for beyond
that we cannot number within it felf, or
explain them by it felf, and its own by-
multiplying them,

K 2 Where-

q, 4 The Holy Guide. L 1 B.2 .

Wherefore it is accounted to be of a
manifold Religion and Power, and is ap-
plied to the purging of fouls : Hence the
Ancients called Ceremonies Denary, be-
caufe they that were to be expected , and
to offer Sacrifices were to abftain from
iome certain things for ten dayes,whence
amongft the Egyptians, it wasthecuftome
for him that would (acritke to J ao (i.e.)
Jabyto faft ten dayes before; which Apt"
tarteftifiesof himfelf,faying, it was com-
manded that I mould for thefpace often
dayes refrain all meat, and be fading.

5. There are ten Sanguine parts of
Man,che lYlenftrue, theSperm,the Plafma-
tick fpirit5the Mafle, the Humours, the Or-
ganical body, the Vegetative part , the
Sensitive part , Reafon, a*ad the Minde ;
There are alfo ten fimple Integral parts
constituting a man, the Bone, the Carti-
lage,Nfrve,Fibre,Ligament,^rteryjVein,
Membrane, Flelh, Skin. There are alfo
ten parts of which a Man coniifts intrin-
fecally, the Spirit, the Brain, the Lungs,
the Heari , the Liver, the Gall, the
Spleen,the JCidnies, the Tefticle?,the Ma-
trix.

6. There are ten Curtains in the Tem-
ple,teu firings in the Pfaltery, ten mufical
inftruments which with Pfalms werefung,
the names whereof weseNeza^ on which

their

L l B .2 . The Holy Guide. 9 $

their Odes were fung : labium the fame as
Organs, ' Mizmor on which thePfalms,SzVs
on which the Canticles , Tebila on which
Orations , Berach on which Benedictions,
#W^ on which Praifes, Hodaiacn which
thanks,^/r? on which the felicity orbliffe
and happinefs of any one , Hallelujah on
which the thepraifes of God only, and
Contemplations: there were alfo ten fi-
gures of Pfalms, a. a. &c.

7. And there were ten Singers, viz.
Adam^Abrabam^Melchifedec^ Mofes, Afaph,
Vavid^Sclomon^nd the three fohs ofCborah
And the name of God in the original
world is written with ten Letter, Crfrj*
n^3Y EAo/K*'£*°9: There are ten Com-
mandements, and the tenth day after the
Afcentionof Chrift, the Holy Ghoftcame
down: There arc ten Names of God,

8. And the Number ten eaft in Gold
was it, in which Jacob wreftling with the
Angel all night overcame , and at the ri-
ling of the Sun was bleffed, and called by
the name of Ifrael. By,and in this Num-
ber Jofbua overcame thirty one Kings,and
by ten in a Carbuncle Vavid overcame

K 3 Goliah.

96 The Holy Guide. LlB. 1

Goliah , and the Phiiiftin.es ; and in ten
Vaniel efcaped the danger of the Lions.

9. There are ten lYJcflengers that carry
the fouls down from God through the
Heavens, Spheres, Stars, and Planets to
the bodies of men , and thefe be their
names, Ketber^ Heckmach , Binah, He fed, ,
Geburah) lipberetb> Nezah9 Jod, Hefod, Mai-
chutb > this Number is as circular as unity,
becaufe being heaped together,ret urns in-
to an unity, from whence it had its begin-
ning j and it is the end and perfe&ion of
all Numbers,and the beginning of tens as
the Number ten flows into unity back
again,from whence it proceeded *, fo every
thing that is flowing, is returned back to
that from which it had the beginning of
its Flux, fo water returns to the Sea from
whence it had its beginning ; the body
returns to the earth from whence it was
taken; time returns to eternity from
whence it flowed ; the fpirit fhall return
to God that gave it ; and laftly , every
creature returns to nothing, from whence
it was created, neither is it {imported, but
by the Word of God, in whom all things
are hid. .

10. By the Number ren Volomides an
Abbot of Malego m Spain could tell al-
moit at any diftance how the affairs of the
world went, what confutations or trans-
actions

LiB.2. ihe Holy Guide. 97

a&ions there were in all the Nations of
Chriftendome , from whence he got to
himfelf the reputation of a very holy
man , and a Rofie Crucian ; but other
things came to pafle , no lelfe ftrange and
miraculous, as that at the celebrating of
the holy Eucharift s the Prieft fhould al-
wayes want one of his round Wafers ,
which was fecretiy conveyed to this
Prieft or Abbot, by the administration of
Angels, he receiving into his mouth, eat
it in the view of the people,to their great
aftoniftiment , and high reverence of the
Saint.

11. At the elevation of the Hoft , Pfl/o-
mides 6eing near at hand , but yet a wall
betwixt, that the wall was conceived to
open, and to exhibitc Tolomides to the
view of them intheChappel. And thus
when hepleafed he would partake of the
confecrated bread j when this Abbot came
into the Chappel himfelf, upon fome fpe-
cial day, that he would fet off the folem-
nity of the day by fome notable arid con-
fpicuous Miracle; for he would fome-
times be lifted up above the ground three
or four Cubits high , other ibmeumes
bearing the Image of Chrift in his Armes,
weeping favourly, he would make his hair
to increafe to the length and largenefs,
that it would con*e to his heels and cover
K 4 rum

98 the Holy Guide. Lib. i

him all over) and the Image of Chrift in
his armes , which anon notwithftanding
would fiirink up again to its ufual iize :
And after this he called an Angel by ten
in Gold Telefmatical engraven , fofhew
the true Religion to him 5 and the Angei
bid him turn Proteftant , in the beft fenfe
of the Church of England-, and after-
wards all his life he preached , and was
created Bifhop in England , and preached
to the Proteftants in France , and known
well by the name of the Biftiop of Sfa-
latta.

12. And all things with the Number
ten, and by the Number ten make a
round, taking their beginning from God,,
and ending in him : God therefore the
firft unity ,or one thing,before he commu-
nicated himfelf to inferiours, diffufed
himfelf into the firft of Numbers , viz,-
the Number three, then into the Number
ten , as into ten Idea's and meafures of
making all Numbers3and all things,which
the Hebrews call ten Attributes and blef-
fed Souls, viz. Haloehy Hakades, Ofhanim,
Aralim, Hafmallim , Seraphim, Mdachim,
Elohim , Ben Elobim , Cherubim lfiim\ and
ten Angels ruling, Meiratton, Jopbiel, Zafh-
kjel,Zadkjel, Camael, Raphael, Haviel, Mi-
chael, Gabriel, the foul of Mefliah : Ten
Spirits-of theWorldthat rule the Spheres

Jtefchiib.

LiB.3. The Holy Guide. 99

Refcbithbagallalim, Maflotb, SMatbi,Zedf^y
Madim, Schemes , Nogay Ckocab^Levanab^Ho-
lorn, Jefodoth : ten confccrated Animals,
viz. a Dove, a Libard, a Dj agon^m Eagle,
a Horfc , Lion, Man, Genital*, Bull, a
Lamb: They account ten Divine names,
for which there cannot b?. a further Num-
ber.

13. Hence all tens have fome divine
things in them,and in the Law are requi-
red of God as his own , together with the
firft fruits as the original of things, and
beginning of Numbers , and every tench
is the end given to him, who is the begin-
ning and end of all things : and ten Or-
ders of the Damned in Hell , viz. falfc
gods,lying fpirits, {Villi am Lilly the King of
Swedem Jnglery &c. VefTels of Iniquity,
Tempters or Enfnarers, Sifters or Triers,
Revengers of wickednefs, Furies the Se-
minaries of Evil, Aery Powers, wicked
fouls bearing Rule.

All fpirits were created pure at fir ■/?,
But by xb eir felf- will after were accurfl.

14. The Number ten, and the Letters
and Numbers of Angels, &c. engraven in
a Carbuncle, rendreth a man free .'from
difeafes, and nuketh him in e long, rrefti,
and beautiful, this heipeth ail difeafes in

the

IOO the Holy Guide. LlB.2.

the Kidnies,it caufeth the party that bear-
eth it to live fecure from Theeves, for no
Thief can enter his houfe in the night,
nor have power tocarry away a Sheep or
Horfe,&c. if once ftept in the ground, he
fhall not come out again until the party
that owns the ground pleafes : and this
Number you muft character or caft in
Copper , and lay it under the gate in the
earth , and in the ground on the Eaft fide
of the place you wou'd have guarded, be
it Houfe,Garden,or an Orchard,^. And
its faid the Angel that gives vertue to this,
appears like an old man leaning on a
ftaffe, having in his hand a Sword, and he
feems in black Cloaths. By this Number
they know when to begin any work in
this book.

CHAP.

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. 101

CHAP. X1H.

The Slumber of prepa-
rations of gold.

Ofthefignification of the number i r. how by it
wefyow the bodies of Devils, and their na-
tural confHtutions : *pt»vtvs in Pherecydes
Syrus; D^«, n^y, C=3W , r-vy^,
?— — PPM* tftfW« of Spirits haunting fields
fid defolate places : of Theophilus Ful-
wood, who had the continuall fociety of a
Guardian Genius ; Of Plociiius apd O-
lympius. *

I. T5 Y ii Theophilus Fulwood, the Rofie
I) Crucian >knew the Vetnones Metallic^
and Guardian Genh , who told him. That
the bodies of Spirits were cold 5 &: indeed
it (lands to very good reafon,that the bo-
dies of Spirits being nothing but coagu-
lated aire, fhould be cold, as well ascogu-
lated watery which is fnow and Ice, and
that it fhould be a more keen and pier-
cing cold; it confifting of more; fubtill
particles then thofe of water, and there-
fore more fit toinlinuate, and more ac-
curately and ftingingly to affect and

touch

102 The Holy Guide. L\B-i

touch thenerves. Hence we may alfodif-
cover the folly of the opinion that makes
the very ejjence of fpirits to be fire; for how
unfit that would be to coagulate the aire,
jsplaine at firft ; for it would rather melt
anddiflblvethofe confiftencies, thencon-
irringe them, and freeze them in a man-
ner j but it is rather manifeft, that the ef-
fence of Spirits is a fubfta'nce fpeciiically
diftintt from all corporeal matter whatso-
ever 5 but my intents is not to philofo-
phize concerning the nature of Spirits.

2. Pherecydes Syr us the RofieCruci attend
Maftcr of Pythagoras , by, eleven knew
the Fauni and Sylvan'^ and Onocentauri ,

A kirn^of fpirits thac frequent the woods,
and are of a dark colour; they caufea
noifeand ftirinthofe defoiate places^and
therefore he forewarns his fcholars to be-
ware of their acquaintance.

Hdic loca capripedes Satyros , Nymphafqus

tetters
fimtimi fingunt, & Faunos ejje loquuntur 5
ghtorurn NocJvago ttrepitu Lud^quejocanti
Affirmant vulgo taciturna filentia rumpu
1. e.
Thefe are the places where the Nymphs

do won
The Fauns and Satyrs with their cloven
feetD YVhofe

LiB.2. The Holy Guide 1 03

Whofe noife, and fhouts,and laughters

loud do run,
Through the frill aire, and wake the fi-

lent night.

3. But the Jewes underftand by 11, and
n^^a Shec-devil, an enemy to women
in child-bed 3 whence it is, that they
write on the walls of the room where the
woman lyes in, nV7^ jpin mn cm**
Adam^ Eve^ out of doors Lilith.

And our Saviour Chrift in the 12th. of
Mtft.4.3. ver. plainly allowes of this Do-
c"trine,that evil fpirits have their haunts in.
the fields and defarts, which Grotius ob-
ferves to be the opinion of the Jewes, and
that v^TV Vtmones have their names for
that reafon, from HITE? Ager, the field; for
if it were from TTO, it would be rather
WW then Cl^ Shiddim then Shedhit*y as
Grammatical Analogic requires.

4. The number u, as it exceeds the
number ten, which is the number of the
Commandements ; fo it falls fhort of the
number twelve, which is of Grace and
Perfection, therefore it is called the num-
ber of lins,and the penitent. Hence in the
Tabernacle there were commanded to be
made 1 1 coats of hair,which is the habit of
thofethat are penitent, and lament for
their (ins j whence this number hath no

com •

1 04 the Holy Guide. LiB.2,

communion with Divine or Ccleftiall
things, nor any attra&ion attending to
rhings above* neither hath it any reward*
but yet fometimes it receives a gracious
favour from God, as he which was called
the eleventh hour to the Vineyard of the
Lord, received the fame reward as thofe
who had born the burthen and heat of
the day; and I never knew but one fpirit
that ever appeared by this number that
wa« a good fpirit ; and that IbeophilMFul-
jpood had, as he gathered from certaine
Monitory dreams and vifions, although
other fpirits would fpeak to him , this
would not, but yet he was forewarned as
well of feveral dangers as vices ; that this
fpirit difcove red himfelf to him after he
had for a whole year together earneftly
prayed to God to fend a good Angel to
him; and he engraved n in filver for it^
to be the guide and governour of his life
and a&ions,that he might not be deluded
by evil fpirits

5. Adding alfo, that before and after
prayer he ufed to fpend two or three
hours in meditation and reading the Scri-
ptures, diligently enquiring with himfelfj
what Religion amongft thofc fo many
controverted in the world, might be beft ;
befeeching God that he would be plea-
fed to direft him to it; and that he did

not

L* B,a. The Holy Guide. 105

not allow of their way, that at all adven-
tures pray to God to confirm them ifi that
opinion they have already pre- conceived,
be it right or wrong.

6. That while he was thus bufie with
himfelf, he light upon the Eook of
Common-Prayer , and in it he found
a paper, in which was written, Efifc&pacj
Meliorated, is the be ft Religion j and that a
good and holy man can offer up no grea-
ter,nor more acceptable tacriiice to God,
then the obligation of himfelf,hisfoul;and
under it w us D.G.Bijkop of C. and therefore
following the Bifhops Counfel , that he
offered his foul to G©d.

7. And that after that, amongft many
other Divine Dreams and Virions, he once
in his fleep feemed to hear the voice of
God faying to him, Iwillfave thy foul $ I am
he that before appeared unto thee ; After-
wards, that the Spirit every day would
knock at the door about three or four a
clock in the morning, though he rifing
and opening the door could fee nobody,
but that the Spirit periiited in this courfe,
andunlefshc did rife, would thus rouze
him up.

8. This trouble and boifteroufncfs made '
him begin to conceit that it was fome evil
f^irit that thus haunted him 5 and there-
fore he daily prayed earneftly to God ,

that

\o6 the Holy Guide. LlB.2,

that he would be pleafed to fend a good
Angel to him, and often alfo fimg Pfalm?,
having moft of them by heart.

9. YVherefore the Spirit afterward knoc-
ked more gently at the door, and one day
discovered himfelf to him waking, which
was the rirft time that he was allured by
his fenfes that it was he 5 for he often
touched and ftirreda drinking-glafsthat
flood in his chamber, which did not alit-
le amaze him.

10. Two dayes after5 when he entertain-
ed a Gentleman of the Kings, a friend of
his, at fupper with him, that this friend
of his was much abafhed while he heard
the Spirit thumping on the bench hard
by him, and was ftrucken with fear •-, but
he bid him be of good courage, there was
no hurt toward ; and the better to affure
him of it, told him the whole truth of the
matter.

1 1 . Wherefore from that rime,faith Eu-
genm Iheodaftus, he did affirm, that this
Spirit was alwayes with him , and by
fomefenfiblcfign did everadvertife him
with things, as by ftriking his right ear, if
he did any wayes amifs; if oiherwife, his
left* if any body came to circumvent him,
that his right ear was ftruckj but his left
ear if a good man Sc to good endsaccoft-
ed him*, if he was about coeator drink

any

Life.2. 1 he Holy Gtiicie. \oj /?

anything that would hurt him, or in eli-
ded or purpofed to himfelf to do any
thing that would prove ill^ that he was
prohibited by a fign; or if he delayed to
follow his buiinefs, that he was quickened
by a figw followed him.

12. When he began to praife Godih
Pfalms, and to declare his marvelous
a£b, that he was prefently raifed and
ftrengthened with a fpiritual and fuper-
natural power.

13. That he daily begg'd of God, that
he would teach him his Will, his Law,and
Ins truths and that he fet one day apart
in the week for reading the Scripture and
Meditation, with ringing of Pfalms, and
that he did not ftir out of his houfe all
that day; but that in his ordinary conver-
fation he Was fufficiently merry, and of a
cheerfull mind, and he cited that faying
for it, Vidi fades fanficrum fat as $ but in
his converting with ethers, if he had talk-
ed vainly or indifcreetly, or had fome
dayes together neglected his Devoti-
ons, that he was forthwith admonifhed
thereof by a dream, that he was alfo ad-
inonidied to rife betimes in the mornings
land that about four of the clock, a voice

ould come to him while he was afleep,
ying$ Who gets up firft to pray >
14.. He told Eugenia* alfo, how kt was
L eftm

ico The holy Guide. LIB. 7

often admonifhed to give almes,&: that the
more charity he bellowed, the more pro-
fperous he was $ and that on a time when
his enemies fought afcer his life,and knew
that he was to go by water, that his Fa-
ther in a Dream brought two horfes to
him, the one a white, the other a bay 5 and
that therefore he bid his fervant hire him
two horfes, and though he told him no-
thing of the colours, that yet be brought
him a white one and a bay one.

15. At another time, when he was in
very great danger, and was newly gone to
bed, he faid, that the Spirit would not let
him alone till he had raifed him again m
wherefore he watched and prayed all
that night ; the next day after he efcaped
the hands of his perfecutors in a wonder-
full manner ; which being done, in his
next fleep he heard a voice faying, now
fing, §ui fedet in Lmihulo Altifpmi.

\6.Eugemns asked him why he&ould
notfpeak to the Spirit for the gaining of
the more plain and familiar converfe
with it *, he anfwered, that he once at-
tempted it, but the Spirit took away the
Number and Plate, and (truck it againft
the door with that vehemency, as if he
had intended to have beat it down 5
whereby he gathered his diflike of the
matter.

17. But

Ll B. 2. The Holy Guide. 109

17. But though the Spirit would not
talk with him, as thofe that appear byo-
ther Numbers, yet he could makeufeof
his judgement in the reading of his books,
and moderating his ft udies $ for if he took
an ill book into his hands, and fell a rea-
ding, the Spirit would ftrikeit, that he
might lay it down, and would alfofundry
times, be the books what they would,hin-
der him from reading and writing over*
much,that his mind might reft,and filent-
ly meditate with it felf : he added alfo5
that very often, while he was awake, a
fmall, fubiil, inarticulate found would
come into his ears.

1 8. E ugenius further enquiring, whether
he ever did fee the (hape and form of the
Spirit 3 he told him, that while he was a-
wake,he never did fee any thing but a cer-
tain Hght,very bright and clear,andof a
rouj|fl compafle and figure; but that once
beingin great jeopardy of his life,and ha-
ving heartily prayed toGod that he would
bepleafed to provide for hisfafety; about:
break of day, amidft his {lumberings and
wakings, he efpied on his bed where ke
lay, a young boy clad in a white garment*
tinttured fomewhat with a touch of pur*
pie, and ofavifage admirable lovely and
beautiful to behold.

19. And this was the firft RefoGrucUti

t* shag

i to Iht Holy Gride. L f B. \

that ever 1 Taw, being about (even yeares
fince; but being now one of the frater-
nity,! asked him of fouls and fpirits ; and
what numbers were fitteft to be engraven
for a good Genius, and how to goinvili-
ble3 and in feveral (hapes.

20. Now,fayes he, by u a good Angel
will come and make you invifible, and
transform you into any of thefe fhapes, a
Boy, a Lamb, a Dove, a beam or 1 ight; and
the Spirit gets into the body, and by his
fubtif fubftance more operative and fear-
ching then any jEtfor, or lightning, melts
the yielding compages ofr the body to
fuch a confiftency, and fo much of it as is
fitforhispurpofe, and makes it pliable to
your imagination 5 and then it is as eafie
for him to work it into what fhape heplea-
fcth,as it is to work the aire into fuch
forms and figures as he ordinarily doth v
nor is it anymore difficulty for an Angel
to mollifie what's hard, then it is to harden
what is Toft and fluid as the ai e.

2i. And he that hath this power, you
can allow him that which is lefler, viz. to
inftru&men how they (hall for atimefor-
fake their bodies, and come in again : for
can it be a hard thing for him that can
thus melt and take in pieces the particles
of thebedy, to have the skill and power
coloofen the foul^a fubftance really di-

ftinft

Lib. i. the Holy Guide. II i

ftinft from the bddy, and feparablefrom
it, which at laft is done by the eafie courfe
of nature at final dirlblution of foul and
body, which we call death ; but no courfe
of nature ever transforms the body of
of man into the fhupe of a Lamb, or a
Dove; fo that this is more hard and diffe-
rent from the courfe of nature then the
other 5 I, you'i fay the greatnefs and in-
credulity of the Miracle is this, that there
mould be an a&ual feparation of foul and
body, and yet no death: But this is not
at all ft range, it we confider that death is
properly a disjunction of the fcul from
the body, by reafon of the bodies unfk-
nefs any longer to entertain the foul, be-
caufeof difeafes or age.

22. But this is not fuch a miracle, nor is
the body properly dead,thoug the foul be
out of it *, for the life of the body is no-
thing elfe but that fitnefs to be actuated
by the foul, the conservation whereof is
helped by Aurum Fotabile, and numbers
engraven inGold,Silvcr, precious Stones,
and in Metals, which keeps out the cold,
keeps in the heat and fpirits, : that the
frame and temper of the body may con-
tinue in fit cafe to entertain the foul again
at her return; fo the vital ftem of the car-
cafe being not fpent, the priftine operati-
ons of life are prefently again kindled,as a
L 3 Torch

112 The Holy Guide. Lib. 2

Torch new blown out, and yet reeking,
fuddenly catches fire from the flame of a-
nother,t hough at fome diftancc, the light
gliding down along the fmoak.

23. Wherefore the flying in the aire,
walking in Ladies chambers invifibly, and
bringing of meiTages from one lover to a-
nother, and difcovering fecrets, &c. it is
ealie j for they be then really out of the
bodies : And Socrates lying in the field for
quietnefs fiike, being far from the noife of
his brawling wife Zantippe^ fell afleep,and
being afleep, Euripides efpied a thing come
out of his mouth very lovely to behold, of
a whitifli colour, little, but made like a
Cony running in thegrafs, and at laft co-
ming to a Brook fide, very buyfily attem-
pting to get over, but not being able, one
of the ftanders by made a bridge for it of
hisfword, which it paffed over by, and
came back again with the ufe of the fame
pafTage, and then entred into Socrates his
mouth, and they faw it no more after-
wards j when he waked, he told how he
dream'd he had gone over an iron bridge,
and other particulars anfwerable to what
JLurifides and his fellowes had feen before- *
handball thofe that transform themfelves
into Lambs, Doves,Bryes, or little Birds,
or Conies, have their undeftandings un-
ehangedjthey h*ave the mind and jpemory
of a man as before. * 2^.Mi-

LiB. 2. the Boly Guide. 113

24. Miftake me not; all that can do
thefe miracles, are not Rofie Crucians; for
many of the Witches and Sorcerers in E-
gyft. could do miracles as well as Mofes 3
who was taught of God as thefe Refie Cru-
cians are.

25. To perfwade you to the truth of
numbers, when confecrared to God with
Divine names, and engraven upon con-
fecrated fubje&s, and what wonderful!
vermes they have in natural and fuper-
natural things, Khali amplifle and prove
by Plothw, for chat which Porphyrins re-
cords of him3falls little fhort of a miracle,
by the number 1 1. as being able by it en-
grave!*, as his enemy Olympus confeifed,
to retort that Magick upon him, which he
pra&ifedagainft Plotinus^ and that fedate-
\y fitting- amongft his friends, he would
tell them 5 Now Olympus his bo-
dy was gathered like apurfe, and his
limbs beat one againft another. But
your Witches, Sorcerers, Conjurers and
Inchanters are not able to ftand before
Rofie Crucians, no more then lannes and
Iambres could ftand before Mofes, who did
really thofe things, and abundance more
then the other could imitate by delufi-
ons, fleight and Legerdemain $ and this
proves the truth of Angels,fallacies of De-
vils : the one makes a happy man, the o-

L 4 the?

U4 The Holy Guide. LfB?2

ther makes him mifcrable. The Devil
promifed our Saviour more then he could
perform; but God performed more to
Abraham then he promifed : And to come
again to flofin.s , although he was not in-
ftrufted by the Jewifh Priefts and Pro-
pacts, yet he was a familiar friend of that
hearty and devout v^hriitian, and learn-
ed Father of the Church, Origen^ whofe
authority I would alfo caft in together
with the whole confent of the learned
amongftthe Jewes; for there is nothing
ftrange in the Metaphyseal part of this
Holy Guide , but what they had conftancly
affirmed to be true; but the unmannerly
fuperftition of many is fuch, that they
will give more heed to an accuftomed o-
pinion, which they have either taken up
ofthemfelves, or hath been conveyed un-
to them by the confidence of fome pri-
vate Theologer, then to the authority of
either Fathers, Churches, workers of Mi-
racles, or what is beit of all, the mod fo-
Jid reafons that can be propounded;
which if they were capable of, they could
not take any offence at the adqiittance of
the Kofie Crucian Philosophy into this pre-
fent Holy Guides but the principles and
moft notorious conclusions thereof, offer*
iiigthemfelvesfo freely,and unaffectedly,
and fp aptly and fittingly -{aking their

place

L i B. 2. the Holy Guide. 1 15

place in the Text, that I know not how,
with judgement and conscience, to keep
them out.

26. In an elefted hour they engrave 1 1
in call metal 1, and the numbers, Angels
and Letters belonging to it 5 and this ma-
ked) the bearer to gain in his rrade,cureth
all difeafesin the legs, viz the Gout, Sec.
And to thi$ appears an Angel like a beau-
tiful man, that makes a man profperous
by Sea.

By this number they know times when
to give Medicines, and how Devils offer
themfelves •■> by this number you (hall
know an Angel from a Devil, as you (hall
fee in the third book all in order.

CHAP.

Ii6 The Holy Guide. Lib.

CHAP. XIV.

The ZNjimber of kyoty-

ledge, of diffofoing

(jold 0 &c.

Of the fignification of the Number twelve 5 of
its natural vertue : twelve Magical Apho-
rifmesof Jan bofher: Of Angels, and their
nature and dignity : What thefe Guardian
Genii may be 5 whether one or more of them
he allotted to every man , or to fome none •,
what may be the reafon of Sprits fo feldome
appearing \ And whether they have any
fettled pap e or no : What their manner is of
affifling men ineither Devotion^ or Trophefu3}
or Love : Whether every mans complexion ii
capable of the fociety of a good Genius :
And lafily , whether it be lawful to pray to
God to fend fuch a Genius or Angel to one or
no, that in the Number and Name we defm :
at the engraving.

I.*T*He Number twelve is Divine, and

X that whereby the Celeftials are

meafured: It is alfo the Number of the

figns in the Zodiacf^, over which there are

twelve

L * B. 7 , T he Holy Guide. 1 1 7

twelve Angels as chief, fupportedby the
Irrigation of the great Name of God : In
twelve years Jupiter perfects His courfe,
and the Moon runs through twelve ^igns
in twenty eight dayes or thereabouts.
There are twelve chief joynts in nlans
body, in hands, elbows, (boulders, thigh?,
kneA, and vertebra of the feet : there is
a4fo'a great power of the Number twelve
in divine Myfteries: God chofe twelve
Families, andfet over them twelve Prin-
ces : fo many (tones were placed in the
niidft of Jordan , and God commanded
that fo many mould be fet on the breaft of
the Prieft : twelve Lions did bear the bra-
zen Sea that Solomon made : there are fo
many Fountains in Helim ; and fo many
Spies fent to the Land of Promife ; and lo
many ^poftles of Chnft Cct over twelve
Tribes; and twelve thoufand people
chofen; the Queen of Heaven crowned
with twelve Stars 5 and twelve Angels are
fet over the twelve Gates of the Citjr ;
and twelve (tones of the Heavenly Jeru-
faletn. In inferiour things, many breeding
things proceed from this Number : fo the
Cony being moft fruitful brings forth
twelve times in the year; and the Camel
is fomany months inbreeding , and the
Peacock brings forth twelve Eggs3& there
are 12 months in the year>as Virgil (ings,

How

1 18 The Holy Guide* L1B.2

How the Snn du k rule with twelve Zodiac)^

Signes,
Ihe Orb that's meafufd round about with

Linei)
Jt doth the Heavens flarry way make ]t$Qwny
And lirange Eclipfesof the Sun and Moon;
Artt'irus alfo> and the Stars of rain^,
Ihe j "even Stars lifywife , and Charrofci*

Warn i
Why Winters Sun m,t\es toward the Weft, f)

What maizes the Nights fo long ere they be
paft.

2. And there arc twelve Magical Apho-
rifmes.

1. Ante omnia puntlum] extitit : non to
efc-r/xop, aut Mathematicum , fed diffufivum.
Mono* erat explicite : implicite Myrias , Lux
erat&noxy principium^ & finis principa^m-
nid, & nihil \ eft, & mn%

2. Commovit fe monas in Diade: & per
triadem egreffe funt fades Luminis fecundi,

3 . Exivit ignis fimplex, increatus : & fub
Aquis induit fe tegumento ignis multiplied ,
creati.

4. Refpexit ad font em fuperiorem : & in*
feriorem dedutlo typo y triplici v.tltu figilla-
pit.

5. Cretmt

LiB.*. iht Hoi) GH.dc. 119

c. Creavit unum unit as : & in tria di-
fimxit\trini:aseft & guatenarius, nexus &
medium redu&.ionis.

6. Ex vif.bihbus primunt effulfit Aqua.'.
Fcemina inzumbentU ignis & figurabilium
gravida mater.

7. Forofa erat interius, & corticilus varia,
cujm venta babuit Calos convolutos , & Ajlra
tndifcreta.

S. Separatus /frtifex divifit banc in Am-
plas regiones , & a parente, fttu, difparuit
Mater,

9 . Peperit tamen Mater film Lucidos , in*
fiuentes in terram Chai.
'to. Hi generant Matrent in novijftmis :
cuj us fons cant at in Luco Miraculofo.

f ! . Sapienti* condus eft hie : ejio quipotes-
promts.

12. Pater eft totius Creati : & ex Filio
Creatoper vivamfilii Analyfin,Pater genera*
tur y habes fummwn GenerantU Circuli Myfte-
rium : filii Filius eft, qui Filti Pater
fiat.

3. The Name of God among Angels is
fpokc with twelve letters ^npn fttTp 3^
Father, Son, Holy Ghoft.

4. There are twelve Meflengers that
bear the Commands of God 5 and have
influence on the nine Orders of Angels,
and Quire of blefled Souls3and ten Sepbe-

T6tk

i:o The holy Guide. Li B. fl

rotb into the Angels of the Coeleftial
Spheres, and Angels of the Planet?, and
Planets themfcivesj and into the Angels
of the Signs, whofe names are thefe, Mai-
chidiel, Afmodicl, Ambriel, Muriel, Verchiel,
J-ianalieU Zuriel, Barbiel, Adnarciel, Hanae!^
Gabrlcl^Barchiel', amithefe have influence
upon the twelve Signs of the Zodiac^
Aries ; laurm, Gemini ', Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpius, Sagittarius, Qapricornus , A-
quariut-, Pices : and from thefe Angels after
this Order doth man receive a good Ge-
nius, according to the Number of his
Name, engraven in the Metal, or in one
of thefe twelve Stones, a Sardonius,3. Car-
tie of,* Topaze, a Cakedony, Jtfper, Emrald,
the Beril,zx\ Amethifl, the Hyacinth, a Chri-
foprafus, a Chrifial, a Saphir.

5. And there are twelve Tribes, twelve
Prophets, twelve Apoftles, twelve Months;
twelve Plants, Sang-uprigbt, Vervain, Bend-
ing-vervain , Comfry, Lady- feat , Calamyn ,
Scorpion grafs , Mugwort , Pimpernel-doe^,
Dragonwort, ArificJochy : and twelve prin- j
cipal Members, the Head, the Nec^, the
Arms, the Breafi, the Heart, the Eelly, the!
Kidneys, the Genitals, the Hams, the Knees3*
tht Legs,tht Feet : By the Number twelve
Spirits appear thatrefolve all manner of
Quefttons3as JanboJhar^Adams Tutor faith*

and

L.B.i. The Holy Guide. 1U

and you may find it recorded in the Indi-
an Eooks , written by Ifagarith a hundred
years before Adam. Now they fay in old
time the-Months were called and reckon-
ed for years ; but this I leave to more
curious pens , and pafTe on to my defign :
And if thefe things prattifed be found
true , and anfwer the expectation of the
Reader , let him then fay faithfully his
thoughts of Art,neitherfcandalizing, nos
fmutting it with difgraccful words.

6. Now it cannot but amufe a mans
mind to think what thefe Officious fpirits
mould be, that fo willingly by Numbers
fo me times offer themfelvcsto confociatc
with a man 5 whether they may be Angels
uncapableof incorporation into humane
bodies, which vulgarly is conceived : or
whether the fouls of the deceafed , they
having more affinity with mortality and
humane frailty then the other, and fo
more fenfibleof our ncceffities and infir-
mities, having once felt themfelves, and
feparate fouls are in a condition not un-
like the Angels themfelves.

7. But there are Angels in Heaven,that
are fet over man as Guardians, and their
names you find by thefe Axiom at a in the
Numbers and Letters , as *h«fewillingty

come

122 The Holy O/i/^t. L1B.2.

come to us. Now wc are to inquire, whe-
ther every man hath his Guardian Genius
or no: that Witches have nuny , fiich as
they are , their own confeifions tell fie :
The Pythagoreans were of opinion that
every man hath two Genii, a good one1,
and bad one , which Mahomet hath taken
into his Religion, adding alfo that they
fit on mens (boulders with table-books in
their hands,and that the one writes down
all the good, and the other all the evil a
man doth : But fuch exprellions as thefe
I look upon as Symbolical rather then
Natural.

8. And I think it more reafontfble, that
a man changing the frame of his mind,
changes his Genius withal , or rather unlefs
a man be very fincere and (ingle-hearted,
that he is is left to common providence;
as well as if he be not defperately wicked j
or deplorably miferable, fcarce any par*
ticular evil fpirit inter pofes,or offers him-
felf a perpetual affiftant in his affairs and
fortunes.

9. But extream poverty, irkfome old
age,wamof friends,the contempt, injury,
and hajd-heartednefs of evil neighbours
woiking upon a foul low funk into the
body A and wholly devoid of divine life*

doth

Ll B. 7 . The Holy Guide. 1 2 3 ■ ^_0

doth fometimes kindle fo (harp , fo eager,
and fo piercing a defire of fatisfa&ion and
revenge, that the fhrieks of nien while
they are a murthering , the howling of a
Woolf in the fields in the night, or the
fqueakiilg and roaring of tortured beafts,
do not fo certainly call to themthofeof
their own kind,as this powerful tylagick of
penfive and complaining foul inthcbit-
ternefs of its affliction , attracts the aid of
thefe our officious fpirits 5 fo that it is
moft probable, that they that are the for-
warded to hang Witches, arethefirft thac
made them , and have no more goodnefs
nor true piety, then thefe they fo willing-
ly profecute, but are as wicked as they,
though with better luck or more difcreti-
on , offending no further then the Law ■
will permit them $ and therefore they fe-
verely ft'arve the poor helplefs man,
though with a great deal of clamour of
Juftice, they will revenge the death of
their Hog orGow.

10. And now ic were worth our dif-
quifition, why fpirits fo feldpm now a-
dayes appear , efpecially thofe that are
good; whether it be not the wickednefs
of the prefent Age, as I have already hint-
ed , or the general prejudice men have
againftallfpirics that appear, that they
muft be ftreight-ways Devils* or the frailty
M H

124 T^ H°h Guide. Ll B.2 •

of humane nature 0 that is notufually able to
bear the appearance of fpirits , no more
then other Animals are^ for into what
Agonies Horfes and Dogs are caft upon
their approach 3 is in every ones mouth,
and is a good circumftance to diftinguifh
a real Apparition from our own imagina-
tions.

it. Or laftly,whetheritbenot the con-
dition of fpirits themfelves, who, it may
be, without fome violence done to their
own nature, cannot become vifible, it be-
ing happily, as troublefome a thing to
them to keep themfelves in one fteady vi-
fible confiftency in the Air,as it is for men
that dive to hold their breath in the wa-
ter.

* 12. Now although Spirits appear upon
Numbers and Names engraven upon Me-
tals, Minerals, or previous Stones, ic may
deferve ourfearch, whether fpirits have
any fetled form or (hape : Angels are com-
monly pictured, like good plump boyes,
which is no wonder the boldnefs of the
fame Artift , not (licking to picture God
Almighty in thefliape of an old man : In
both as it pleafes the Painter.

13. But this ftory feems rather to fa-
vour their opinion, that fay, that Angels
and feparate fouls have no fettled form,
but what they pleafe to give themfelves

upon

.Lib. 2. The Holy Guide. ta5

upon occasion by the power of their own
fancy. Ficinus> as I remember, fomewhere
calls them Aereal Stars. And the good
Genii feem to me to be as the benign eyes
of God running to and fro in the world,
with love and pity beholdirigthe inno-
cent endeavours of harmlefs and fingle-
hearted men,ever ready to do them good,
and to help them.

1 4. What I fpeak here of the condition
of the foul out of the body, I think is
eafily applicable to other Genii or Spirits;
and this I conceive of feparate fouls and
fpirits.

&Ke t(> a ti$t faft locked in Lanthorn dar\
Whereby by night our wary sleps we guide 1
In flabby Jlreets, and dirty channels mar}^
Some weaker rayes from the blacky top doe

And flufljer flreams perhaps through th* hor~

ny fide;
But we've paft the peril of the way.
Arrived at home^ and laid that cafe afide3
The nakgd light how clearly doth it ray.
And fpread its joyful beams bright as Sum*

mersday !
Even fo the foul in thUcontraUed ftaie
Confined to thefc ftrait Inftruments of

fenfe
f/lorc dull and nmwly $s opftat* $

M 2 4i

1 2 6 the Holy Guide. L l B. 2 .

At this hole bears, the fight ntuftray from

thence,
Heretafles, there ftnells, but when Jhe's gone

front hence,
And round about has perfett cognofcence ;
What ere in her Horizon doth appear,
She is one Orb of fenfe, all eye, all Aieryear.

15. Now you know by the vertue of
Names and Numbers how fpirits appear 5
let us inquire how thefe good Genii be-
come ferviceable to men,for either heighte-
ning their Devotions, or inabling them to
Prophefie, &c. whether it can be by any
other way then by defcending into their
bodies,and poflefling the heart and brain ;
For the Euchites , who affe&ed the gift of
Prophefie by familiarity with evil fpirits,
did utterly obliterate in their fouls *he
vtLTeM* coy.^K^ the principles of j;ood-
nefs and honefty (as you may fee in To .
fellw, *t£\visy*ta.s fcuphav) that the evil
fpirits might come into their bodies,whom
thefe fparks of vertue, as theyfaid would
drive away, but thofe being extinguifht,
chey could come in and poffefs them, and
inable them to prophefie.

16. And that the Imps of Witches do
fometimes enter their own bodies, as well
as theirs to whom they fend them, is plain
in the ftory of Witches in Trifntegift.

17. It

Lib, 2. The Boly Guide. 127

17. Ic is alfo the opinion of R. Lully>
that thefe fpirits get into the vains and
Arteries both of men and beafts.

iS. Wherefore concerning the holy
Kofie Crucians , it may be conceived reafo-
nable,that the good Genii infinuate them-
felves into their very bodies, as well as the
bad into the bodies of the wicked 5 and
that redding in the brain , and figuring of
it by this or that objett , as weourfelves
figure it,when we think the external fenfes
being laid afleep, thofe figurations would
eafily be reprefented to the common
fenfe; and that memory in the Rofie Cru-
cian E. T. recovering them when he awa-
ked, they could not butfeem co him as
other dreams did , faving that they were
better , they ever fignifyingibmething of
importance unto him.

19. But thefe Raptures of Devotion by
day, might by the fpirits kindling a purer
kind of love flame in his heart, as well as
by fortifying and railing his imagination,
and how far a man (hall be carried beyond
himfelf by this redoubled foul in him^
none I think,can well conceive unlefs they
had the experience of it.

20. And if this be their manner of
communion 3 it may be enquired by this
Number, whether all men be capable of
confociation with thefe good Genii. Qar-

M 3 dfvt

iag ihe Holy Guide. Lib. 2

dan fomewherc intimates thac their ap-
proiches arc depreheniible by certain
fweet fmells, where the rnind doth not
funk with pride and hypocrilie,hqve Come
natural advantage for the gaining their
fociety. But if there be any peculiar
complexion or natural condition requi-
red 5 it will prove lefs hopeful for every
One to obtain their acquaintance } yet
Regeneration comes to its due pitch :
though it cannot be without much pain
andangui(h,may well recYifie all unclean-
nefs of nature ; fothat no Angular good
and fincere man can reafonably defpair
of their familiarity. For he that is fo
highly in favour with the King, it is no
wonder he is taken notice of by his Cour-
tiers.

1 1. Some queftion thefe Numbers, and
the vertuesl attribute to them when en-
graven5 whether God afiifts us or not, and
whether it be lawful to pray to God for
fuch a good Genius or Angel : But the
examples of Enoch, Mofts, Jofkua, Elijah,
Jeremiah, Ezehjel, Daniel, St. John Baptifi,
and St. John the Divinc,with many others,
as Heftor of Troy, Alexander, Julius Ctfar9
Judas Maccabeus , King Arthur of England,
tharlemain, or Charles the Great, Huon of
Bur deux. Godfrey of Bulloyn, and thoufands
more I could name, feems a fujficient war-
ranto 32. But

L l B .2 . The Hoi) Guide 129

22. Buc I conceive faith and defire
ought to be full fail to make fuch voyages
profperouf , and our end and purpofe pure
and liucere ; but if pride, conceitednefs,
or affe&ation of fome peculiar priviledge
above other mortals , fpur a man up to fo
bold an enterprize, his devotions will no
more moveeither God, or the good Genii,
then the whining voice of a counterfeit
will ftir the afTe&ion cf the difcreetly
charitable. Nay this high prefumption
may invite fome real friends to put a
worfe jeft upon him, then was put upon
that tattered Rogue Guzman, by thofe
Mock-fpirits , for his fo impudently pre-
tending kindred,land fo boldly intruding
himfelf into the knowledge and acquain-
tance or the Gentry and Nobility of
Genoa,

But the fafeft Magick is the fincere con-
fecrating a mans foul to God , and the
afpiring to nothing but fo profound a
pitch of humility , as not to be confciouS
to our felves of being at all touched with
the praife and applaufe of men, and to
fuch a free and univerfal fenfeof charity,
as to be delighted with the welfare of
another as much as our own ; they that
folely have their eyes upon thefe, by
Numbers and Names, will find coming in
what ever tUeir heart can defire 5 but
M 4 thc/

13° 7^e Holy Guide. Li b. 2

they that put forth their hand to catch
at high things, as they fancy, and neglect
thefe, prove at laft but aplaguetothem-
felves,and a laughing (lock to the world.

In a convenient fcafon they engraved
the Number twelve in a white and clear
ft one, with the Letters of the name of the
party, andtheGeniu?, Angel, and Pla-
net,eH. And this encreafeth felicity,
honour, and conferreth benevolence and
profperityDand i reeth from enemies ; and
this Number cureth all difeafes in the
feet: to this they fay appears a Genius,
whofe figure is a man, having the head of
a Lion, or a Ram, and Eagles feet, and he
feemstobeinBlew, and a flame of light
attends him.

By this Number they know whether the
Medicine will profper or not.

CHAP.

Li B. 7 . The Holy Guide. 1 3 1

A» «ft» •$- -Si* «ft* *$* *&

A «b 40> <*P <*P <t2j> qCP

CHAP. XV.

Of what Angels appear by the vertue and power
of Numbers above twelve,

^.JN thirteen for the Agreement of
JL Married Couples, and for the diflbl-
ving of the Charmes againft Copulation,
they added the Numbers of their Names
together, and divided them by nine, and
the remainder was engraven with thir-*
teen upon a plate of Beril and Zedecl^
and then a Genii would appear like a man
and woman in white unbracing.

2. Now the Numbers that are above
twelve, you fee are endowed with many
and various effe&s and vcrtues, whereof
you muft underftand by their originals
and parts , as they are made of a various
gathering together of fimple Numbers,
or manner of multiplication 5 fometimes
as their fignifications arife from the lcflen-
sng, or exceeding of another going afore,,
efpecially more perfect, fothey contain of
themfelves the figns of certain Divine

Myfterfes 5

132 Tfo Holy Guide. L \ BSi

Myfteries, fo you fee the third Number
above tea (hews the YJyftery of Ghrifts
appearing to the Gentiles , for the thir-
teenth day afcer his Birth a Star was a
guide to the Magicians.

3. The fourteenth day doth typifie
Chrift, who the fourteenth day of the firft
Month was facrificedibr us: upon which
day the Children of Ifrael were comman-
ded by the Lord to celebrate the Pafsover,
14. Matthew, doth fo carefully obferve,
that he pafTed over fame Generations,
that he might every where obferve this
Number in the Generations of Chrift. To
cure the (Ick, they made this Number in
gold, and then an Angel would appear
like the head of a Lion , and they would
tnakea perfume of Amber.

4. The fifteenth Number is a token of
fpiritual Afcentions, therefore the Song
of Degrees is apply ed to that in fifteen
Pfalms. And fifteen years were added to
the life of Hezekjah ; and the fifteenth
day of thefeventh month was obferved
and kept holy: This Number they en-
graved with the mans name in Virgin
Wax andMaftick, and then would appear
a King crowned, before whom they would
burn Lignum Aloes , and he would recon-
cile him with his King whom he offend-
ed.,

5. The

LiB-2. The Holy Guide. 13 *

5. The Number fixteen the Tytbagori-
ans^Pcrphirians and Platonifts call the Num-
ber of Felicity. Italfo comprehends all
the Prophets of the Old Teftament, and
the Apoftles and Evangelifts of the New.
* They engraved this in a filver Ring,whofe
table was fquare, and then the Genius
would appear in the fhape of a woman
well cioathed, fitting in a chair* to whom
they would burn Mus^ Camphire 5 and
Calamus Aromaticut. They affirmed, that
Hie giveth happy fortune, and every good
thing

6. The Number feventeen is called of
R' Luliy, a Number of Victory ; by it en-
graven with the Letters and Numbers of
his Name, added together in red Wax,
appeared a Genius like a Souldier fitting
on an Horfe, holding a Piftol cockt in his
right hand ready to fire; and they burnt
red Earth and Storax before him : And
this enabled Julim C£far to come into this
Kingdom e of England,

7. By the number eighteen, Ifraelfer-
ved Eglon King of Niaab : your name and
number engraven in Iron, they fay will
preferve you againft The eves and Rob-
bers, for a Genius in the form of an Ape
willjittend.

8* By the Number nineteen engraven
in Copper, appeared a woman holding

her

134 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

her hands upon her face, and they burnt
liquid Storax before it, that might facili-
tate birth, and provoke the Menftrues.

9. By the Number twenty 9Jacob fcrved,
and Jfrael was fold 5 and amongft crea-
tures that havemany feet, there is non^.
that have above twenty feet, and they fay
that this number engraven in Tyn , with
the Number of the Hunters name , will
bring you a Genius like Sagittary, half a
man , and half a horfe, and before this
they burnt a Woolfs head, and it made
them profperous in hunting.

10. By twenty one, with the Number of
the Kings name, for the deft ruction of his
enemies, and to overcome iCingdomes,
they engraved it in gold , and finely
wrought it, and then appeared a Genius^
in the image of a man , with a double
countenance before and behinde , and
before this they burnt brimftone and

Jet-

1 1. Twenty twongnifies the fulnefs of

wifdome,and fo many are the Characters
of the Hebrew Letters, and fo many books
doth the Old Teftament contain : by this
Number engraven in filver, a little Virgin
appears, and is reported to increafe the
light of the eyes, to aflemble Spirits,
to raife Winds ,to reveal fecret and hkkien
things.

12. Twenty

jLiB.2. I he tioiy umae. 135

12. Twenty three. Engraven with the
mans name, and the Numbers of it, in a
Saphyr 3 maketh appear the Genius of a
man willing to make himfelf rnerry with
Mufical Instruments , and he maketh a
man honoured before Kings and Princes,
andhelpeth the pain of the teeth, hebe-
ftovveth the favour of men and Aireal fpi-
rits.

13. Now I fhall fay nothing of twenty
four,becaufe it is evil,and giveth a Genius
of a wicked man , whofe name was Cain,
and the name of any Spirit you may find
by the number and name of the man, for
what remains of Addition, and Divifion,
tells you the number and the name of the
fpirits 5 1 have told you of all mens names,
what Angels rule them asyou heard be-
fore ; thefe numbers arefaid to be good
andprofperousjws. 1,2, 3,457,9,11313.
14. vei7 g°°cU 16, 173 19? 20,223 23,10,
26, 27. indifferent good, 5, 6,8, 12, 15,
185 21. very ill, 24325,28,29,30. worft
of all,

CHAP.

ig6 The Holy Guide. LiE.2.

7 &£ Si 1$$ to JtJ«t& «9s &$&$ 2?? $5

CHAP. XVI.

Of Kings, Lords, or other people that fight, or go
to Law one again]} another y which fhafl have
the Vifiory,

i. ^JOw we have ftiewedyouthe pow-
JL ll er, vertue, and fignification of
numbers 5 we (hall next teach you the ufc
of them: And rirft, you muft know the
proper names of them which would fight
or go to Law one againft the other: and
according to the letters and numbers in
the fecond Chapter of this book : Joyn
unto each letter of the faid names the
number that is attributed to it, and
fumme the faid numbers together each
man by himfelf, and divide the fumme of
each mans name by nine, and judge by
thefe Rules following 5 and if it fortune,
that in dividing the whofe by nine, there
remain nothing; then the laft number of i
nine muft be it, you muft adde to his i
name.

2o And if the names be both one, the

Nctra* i

LiB.2. The Holy Guide 157

Numbers will be the fame, as John againft
John; and you rnuft remember to write
the names in the Nominative cafe lingu-
lar.

3. And if one to one remaine, then in
combate, he that is of the letter ftature
(hall overcome the other, becaufe the lef-
fer loves Clamours, Seditions,R.ebellions,
Deceits, Strife, Debate, and is Captain of
an ill company, that ftrive to over-run
and kill men,and by that means is feared;
fome men fay the younger mall overcome
the elders but I obferve not that rule:
the greater isa-mighty man, ftrong and
cruel, proud, and given to fight ; but yec
he (hall be hurt in the head ; and the lef-
fer (hall have the choice of weapon, and
overcome the other ; in Law the leder
(hall obtain the fuit.

4. Two to two, the greater (hall have
the choice of weapon, and (hall have the
victory with long weapon, becaafeheis
noble and handfome, and of good repu-
tation, and loves good company: The
leffer is a man of good nature and well
beloved ; but yet he loves to kifs in a cor •
ner, and therefore he (hall be hurt in the
face, and on the arm ; In Law thegrea*
terfhall obtain this fuit , and this trouble
is or will be about women.

5. Three againft three * here the lefler

(hall

lg 8 The holy Guide. Ltb.2,

fliall chufc and overcome with fliort wea«
poiijbecaufe he is Princely, and full of
fpirit ; but the greater is a poor fouldier,
that hath nothing but hisfword ; he hath
been hurt in the arm, and is fervant to
them that have likewife been hurt, and
have loft fome of their limbs, and (hall
now be hurt in the ftomack : In Law the
the lefler being witty fhall obtaine his
fuit.

6. Four to four; now the greater (hall
have the choice of weapons,and (hall have
the victory with long weapon ; he is lofty
in his deeds, and takes pleafure in Arms ,
being very handfom and amiable in com-
plexion, full of words, contentious: In
Law-fuit the greater (hall obtain the in-
heritance of his father or mother, or the
goods of the other that is in controverfie
with him-, is one of wifdome, beauty and
policy, and well beloved, yet by deceit
and treafon would he beguile his friends,
but he fails.

7. Five to five; then the lefler flature
fhall chufe the weapon, and overcome
withfhort weapon; yet the party is luft^
lefs ; and weak in generation, however
honeft, and therefore the greater (hall
be hurt on the fide, and on the head, and
fhall finely dye, becaufe he loves unjuft
quarrelling inihe Law, the lefler fhall in
two Terms obtain his fuit. 86

2/

LiB.2. ihe Holy Guide. 139

8. Six to fix 5 again the taller (hall o-
vercome, but the lower (hall chufe his
weapon, the other is an ingenious man,
full and active of body, a lover of good
cloaths , Guns, Crofs-bows, Horfes and
Harnefs.

9. Seven to feven 5 and again thelefler
fhall vanquifh with the choice of weapon,
which is fhort ; (heisagreat Lady, angry,
and a fighter, and feeketh nothing but
ftrife and quarrels, a favourer of He&ors,
and men of War for her defence, and to
be maintained by them in her controvert
lies j and the greater fhall be (hot in the
arm, and hurt in the head and ito-
mack.

10. Eight to eights the greater (hall
overcome with long weapon, 8c thelefler
fhall have the choice of weapon, thf grea-
ter is a very fawning deceitful Knave, full
faced and bodied, of a brown hair, much
givdh to Witchcraft,charmsand Inchanr?*
ments 5 a great embracer of women, and
therefore (hall hurt theleffer in the belly-,
fide and knee: In Law the greater ftiali
obtain his fuitj and there is like to be
murther, for the letter is a good manor
countenance and condition, and loves
good cloaths, but high fpirited; and to
there is like to be blowsgiven, with more
lofs to him that (hall win thefuit then it i
worth. N ii. Nine

1 40 the Holy Guide. L I B.2 .

1 1. Nine to nines here the leffer (hall
have the choice of weapon, and beat the
other with (hort weapon *, he is a man ve-
ry noble in his a&ions, aims and high
things, with a little pride*, the other is
one hath great power to do evil, apply-
ing himfelf unto nothing but revenge, to
murther and (laughter, and to rob and
deceive: A Phanatick Anabaptift in the
fear of God will cut your throat, he (hall
be for all his cunning hurt on the knee,
and on the fide : In fuit the leffer (hall
obtain without trouble, and they go to
Law for Heritages, or Womens apparrel
found ; the leffer (hall be content to take
part rather than trouble.

1 2. i to 2, the 2 (hall have the choice of
weapon, and overcome one with (hort
wcapcyi,and h? (hall be hurt in the head
for all his gallantry, and dye thereof. In
Law one fhall win, and have more favour
in his fuit then he looks for *, and thi fuit
is brought for Gownes, Garments, and
womens money.

13. One to three $ one is a man will
chufe the long weapon and beat the o-
ther ; three (hall be hurt on the arm, and
oniheftomack: In Law one (hall obtain
the fuit, the declaration is upon bond or
debts

14. One to four, here four (hall chnfe

the

L l B. 2 . Tkc Holy Guide. i 4. 1

the field and day of battel, and overcome
his enemy with long weapon; and one
(hall be hurt at the heart: In Law four
fhall by deceit obtain his fuit, which is a-
bout Succeflion or Inheritance.

i«v One againft five; The firft fhall
chufe the field and day of battel, and o-
vercome five with fhort weapon: In Law
one fhall obtain his fuit, which is fome
gift of a Lord or Knight.

1 6. One to fix ; here fix fhall beat one,
and hurt him in the belly and head with
a long weapon, and imprifon him. And in
Law fix fhall obtain their fuit, wfyich is
brought about with money or merchan-
dizable wares; and at laftthey fhall be
friends.

17. One to Cewtn ; in this bufinefs one
fhall beat feven with a fhort weapon, and
hurt him on the fide, although he had the
choice: In Law one fhall obtain his fuic
abqut women, or marriage-goods ; and
the fuic fhall be long.

18. One againft eight; here one fhall
be hurt on the fide, and in the genitorie«,
with long weapon, becaufe he ispoorani
malicious : he will be long angry, he is
hurt or blemifhed in his face, one of his
eyes is out, one of his members is cut a-
way, and he is an old man : and eight al-
foispoor,perplexed, proud and (brrow-

n 2 foil

1 4 2 The Holy Guide. LlB. *

ful, having one of her members cut away:
in Law eight (hall obtain his fuit, which is
about goods and houfh old-fluff, andfuch
things as are immovable, as houfes and
the appurtenances, 8cc

19. One to nine 5 one (hall have the
choice of weapon, and beat nine, and hurt
him on the fide : In Law one (hall win,
and the fuit is about honour, preferment,
or fome preheminence.

20. Two to three j here three (hall be
beat with (hort weapon, and two (hall be
hurt on the arm:In Law 3 (hall obtain his
fuit by the help of the Parfon of the Pa-
rim, becaufeitis amongft kindred about
heritages

3 1. Two to four ; now two (hall have
the better in fighting, and hurt four on
the ftomack,and on the arm : In Law two
{hall win by the fubtilty of his Attor.
ney.

22. Twoagainft five; here five (haU in
fighting beat two, and hurt him in the
flank and bread : in law five (hall obtain
the fuit, which, is about women and wo-
mcns cloaths.

23. Two to fix ; here two (hall over-
come and beat iix with long weapon, and
hurt him in the body^ and on his (houl-
ders : In Law two (hall obtain his fuit
without any great trouble -, two is a man

de-

Lie. 2. ihe Holy Guide- 145

delighting inftrifeand contention, and
imjuftly he pra&ifeth, to take away the
goods of others j fix is a fine fellow, well
made, and of good countenance, proud,
and therefore they will agree, and thefuit
is about Merchandize, or money lent ; for
it is bettertopleafea knave then an ho-
neft man.

24. Two to Ctven ; now feven will beat
and hurt two on the fide, although two
fhall have the choice of weapon, yet he
fhall be overcome : In Law feven dial! ob-
tain his fuit by delay es; two keep* com-
pany with martiall men, or with little
men, that have their eyes funk in their
heads, anda fmall beard, ready to doa
mifchief -> wherefore Ctstn will eaiily be
content to be quiet.

25. Two to eight; here two (hall have
the choice of weapon, and beat eight,and
hurt him on the ftones and bottom of his
belly: In Law two (hall obtain his fuir,
and he is a man very fad and penlive, pu-
nifhing his body by an extreme melan-
cholinefs,awd he loves to dig in the earth,
fortofinde treafure : and therefore two
fhall be alTifted by men of fmall fTaturc,
counterfeit, and as it were menftrous :
eight is a man very happy,3iid taketh no-
thing in hand,butit fhal turn co his praifc;
but here it happeneth eight fliall have

N 3 good

1 44 'iht Holy Guide. LlB.2

go^d right, but that [the fubtilty of two
is of fuch force, that eight (hall lofe ; and
this fuit is for movable goods.

26. Two to nine; now nine (hall beat
and hurt two at the heart with (hort wea-
po:i : In Law nine (hall obtain his fuit ,
which is about gift s or goods of the dead.

27. Three to four > by (hort weapon,
four (hall beat three, and hurt him in the
head and arms; In Law four (hall obtain
his fuit, which is about his Fathers goods,
and his kinsfolk would beguile him.

28 Three to five; by (hort weapon three
(hall hurt five on the fide or moulder, at
laft friends : In Law three (hall obtain his
fuit, and after they (hall be friends.

29. Three to fix 5 with long weapon fix
fhall hurt three in the belly : In Law fix
(hall obtain hisfuit,which is for merchan-
dize.

30. Three to feven 5 here three (hall
beat feven, and hurt him in the leg and
arm : In Law the fuit (hall be long, yet at
lad obtained by three.

31. Three againir eight* by long wea-
pon three (hall be hurt on the body and
entrails by eighth In Law eight (hall ob-
tain his fuit, which is about the apparel,
dowry, or things of women.

3 2. Three to nine; now with (hort wea-
pons three (hail hurt nine in the head,

whereof

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. J45

whereof he fhall die : In Law three fhall
obtain hisfuit by the help of fome Lords
of the Kings Court.

33. Four to five; Here H\e fhall beat
four and kill him : In Law five fhall ob-
tain his fuir, becaufe he is an honefi man
in heart, and the fuit is about goods gi-
ven by the Prince.

34. Four to fix ; with long weapon, fix
fhall hurt four in the body : In Law four
fhall obtain hisfuit, wheh is for money or
merchandize.

35. Four to feven ; now feven will beat
four with (hort weapon, and hurt him on
the knee and face : In Law fewen fhall ob^
tain hisfuit.

36. Four to eight: with ftiort weapon
four fhall hurt eight in the breaft and
arms : In Law four fhall obtain his fuit.

37. Four to nine 5 here nine fhall beat
four, and hurt him in the fide: And in
Law nine fhall obtain his fuit.

38. Five to fix; by long weapon fix
fhall hurt five on the head and face : In
Law fix fhall obtain his fuit, which is for
money lent.

39. Five to feven; here five fhall kill
feven: In Law five fhall win his Fathers
inheritance.

40. Five to eight; with long weapon

fivefhallbe hurt in the fide, and in the

N4 hands:

T4 6 The Holy Guide. Lib.2

hands: In Law eight (hall obtain hisfuit.

41. Five to nine; now five (hall hurt
nine on the moulder : In Law five (hall ob-
tain hisfuit.

42. Six againft feven; here feven fhall
have the choice of weapon, and hurt fix
on the head : In Law Cevew (hall win, and
the fuit is for Merchandize.

43. Six to eight ; here fix (hall be hurt
on the head by eight : In Law fix (hall ob-
tain his fuit ; they be both good men,and
will at laft be friends .

44. Six to nine; now nine (hall beat fix
and hurt him on the arm, and on the leg:
InLaw nine (hall obtain his fuit.

45. Seven to eight; here ei^ht fhall beat
and hurt feven on the breaft and heart :
In Law eight (hall obtain hisfuit, which is
for garments,, or movable goods left by
kindred.

46. Seven againft nine; by (hort wea-
pon nine (hall be hurt in the face : InLaw
nine (hall obtain his fuit.

47. Eight againft nine; with nine eight
(hall be overcome, and hurt in the body :
In Law nine (hail obtain his fuit.

Li B.3. The Holy Guide. \ 47

ARule abridged^ to know which of the

two that fights or go to Law ;

(hall have the Vi&ory.

3 in Aries i, againft 0 in Aries 1, the lefler

conquers.
? in Taurus 2, againft ) in Taurus 2, the

bigger conquers.
g'm Gemini 3, againft 5 in Gemini 3, the

lefler conq.
% in Cancer 4. againft )in Cancer 4.I the

greater conq.
5 iii Leo 5. againft 0 in Leo 5. the lefler

conq.
5 in Fzrgo 6. againft 2 in F/'rgo 6. the high-
er conq.
$ in Li£r* 7. againft ft in Li£rvz 7. the lefler

conq.
^ in Scorpio 8. againft 5 in Scorpio 8. the

greater conq.
tyin Sagittarius 9. againft ) in Sagittarj 9.

the lefler conq.
? in Taurus 1. againft) in Tiwrw 2. two

(hall conq.
J in Gewwi 1 . againft 5 in Gwff/Tr* 3. 1 (hall

conq.
9 in Leo 1, againft 0 in Leo 4. 4 (hall con,

quer.

0

] 48 The Holy Guide. L i B* 2

Q\\\ Aries g. againft $ in ytfr/^5. j (hall

conq.
$ in Virgo a againft 5 in Firgo 6. 6 fliall

conq.
^'m Libra 1. againft fain Libra 7. 1 (hall

ccnq.
c?in Virgo 1. againft $ in Virgo 8.8 fliall

conq.
% in Sagittarius 1. againft 0 in Sagittarius

9> conq.
cT in Gemini 7 .againft 5 in Gemini 3 . 3 {hall

conq,
ty in Cancer 2. againft } in Cancer 4. 2 (hall

conq.
ft in L^r<z 2. againft % in L#ra 5. 5 (hall

conq.
$ in Scorpio 2. againft $ in Scorpio 6. 2 (hall

conq.
$ til Gemini 2. againft g in Gemini j. 7 (hall

conq.
I2 in Capricorn 2. againft cf in Capricorn 8. 2

(hall conq.
$inLfo 2. againft 0 in Leo 9. 9 (hall con-
quer.
Oin^ra*^. againft 6" in Aries 4. 4 (hall

conq .
5 in Gemini 3. againft 6* in Gemini 5.3 (hall

conq.
$ in Firga 3, againft in $ in Virgo 6. 6 (hall
conq.

%

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. 149

\ in Aquarius 3. againft 2 in Aqumm 7. 3
(hall conq.

2 in Firga 3. againft £ in Virgoft. 8 fliali
conq.

£ in Aries $. againft 0 in Aries 9. 3 fhall
conq.

2inLe0 4. againft 0 inl?0 5. 5 (hall con-
quer.

5 in Virgo 4. againft ? in Virgo 6. 4. con-
quers.

"fein Copricom 4, againft cT in Capricorn 7.
7 conq.

K, in Sagitarius 4. againft 0 in Sagittarius
8. 4 conq.

2 in Gtmini 4. againft c? in Gemini 9, 9
conq.

0 in Leo 5. againft c? in lea (5, 6 con-
quers.

S in -4ri« 5. againft © in Aries 7. 5 con-
quers.

Ij, in Sagittarius 5. againft 0 in £rfgiff.8. S
conq.

5 in Gemini 5#againft 8 in Gemni f: 9 con-
quers.

cTin Aries 6* againft Gin Aries 7. 7 con-
quers.

5 in Virgo 6. againft? in Virgo 8. 6 (hall
conq.

S in GfMf/'ni 6. againft <? in Gfw/»i ^.9
conq.

0

1 SO The Holy Guide. L1B.2

©in Leoy. againft $ in Leo 8. 8. con-
quers.

0in Aries 7. againft^ in Aries 9. 7 con-
quers.

5 in Virgo 8. againft $ in Virgo 9. 9 con-
quers.

And thefe be the reafons of the Rules
going before, which you muft obferve in
every Medicine you make.

Ano-

LiB.2 . The Hoi) Guide. % 5 1

Another Rule more brief, according

to the Numbers and Names

going before.

24

35

4
5

4

4
3

9

s

Are Con-
%buews of

9
S

c

7

TOY IS of

5P

25

!3

24

'3

2;4

24

68

79

6*

7\9
5*

57

6fc

Unity is afcribed to the Suny 2 is afcribed to
the MooHj 3 afcribed to the Jupiter , Sol and V*-
nttS) 4 is of the Sun, 5 is afcribed to Mercury>6
is attributed to Venus and Juno, 7 belongs to
Saturn,^ is attributed to Jupiter and Vulcan,
Cybele and Bacchus 5 fotne attribute it to the
three Ladies ofVefiiny, 9 belongs to the Moon,
and the nine Mufes ; 1 o belongs to the Sun and
Janus; 11 is attributed to the Moon, \2 is at-
tributed to the World. 4

CHAP

\%2 The Holy Guide. LlE.2,

CHAP. XVII.

The Refolution of all manner of
gHejlions , and how by thefe Num-
bers you may be happy, &c.

i.X 7X7 Hether a perfon fhall livelong or

2. If aperfon fhall be healthful or fichjy .

3 . if one fhall find the party at home one would
fpea\ with.

4. Whether one abfent be dead or alive.

5. Whether a Ship fhall come home fafe.

6. If a man (hall be rich.

7. If Reports be true or falfe.
$ . If find again the thing loft .

9 , If a man fhall enjoy the Eftate of hit fa-
ther.

jo. If it be good to hire or takf the Farm or
Houfede fired.

ir. If good to remove from one houfe to ano-
ther.

12. If one fhall have Children
• 13. Whether the Father be dead or not.

14. If the Child be right Fathered 3 oraEa-
jlard.

15. Whether a Iwnbefiegcd fhall be takgn

16. If there beany ill company in the way a
^an would ee.

i7. //

LlB.2. The Holy Guide 1 5 3

! 7. If it be good to pit on new Clothes.
18. If * promife made fljall be performed,
ly. If the Earth jhall bring forth plenty if

fruits, or not.
20. If a ftk Party Jhall live or dye.
gf . If a fervant (hall get free from his Ma*

Jier.

2 2 . If it be good to take PhyficJ^.

iy If it he good to vifit the fick^ perfon, or
not.

24. If a man jhall marry.

25. If he Jhall marry well or ill,

26. If a man be wife, or afooL

27. If a woman be rich or not you would
marry.

28. If agree after Marriage, or not.

29. Whether a Vamofelbe a Maid, or no*.

30. Whether a Woman be hone ft to herHtw
band, or not.

31. If beajis loft, be dead or alive.

3 2 . Whether a Ihief (hall be taken, or not.
3 3 . Whether the thing loft be ftoln, or not.
34. If a City, Town, or Caftle Jhall be takgn,

or not.
3 <$ . If a party abfent be dead or alive.
3 6 . Whether the man (hall die a good death. •

37. If the Wifes Portion jhall be obtained.

38. if it be good to call Angels in matters of
Love, or not.

39. If the Spirit he good or evil, that
appears, and whether it be an Angel

°f

1 54 The Holy Guide. L1B.2

of Heaven^ or a Devil of Hell.

40. If the wind JhaU blow fair.

41. If gctthe?hilofophenStone,&c.

42. If Dreams be for good or evil.

42. If the FarfonJhaU obtain the Benefice or

not.
44. If one JhaU obtain the preferment de»

fired.
a<. if i* he good to go to Battel , or not.

46. If the Kin&9 FoPe) Prince, n Lord fic^
JhaU amend, or not,

47. If love betwixt two JhaU continue : If it
he good to go to the Court or not.

48. If thy Friend be faithful^ orafraytor.

49. If one JhaU be imprifoned or not.

50. \f a party be bewitched, or not.

e 1 . Whether one JhaU enter into the favour of

the King.
52. If the Prince JhaU have the Vitloty in

War.

55. If there JhaU be peace betwixt England
and France. •

5 a If the Captain be valiant, or not.
55/I/ the Horfe Jhall win tbe Race

56. \f a Frifoner Jhall come ou t of prifon.
.57. If * fickpefs (hall belong crjhort.

58. If you Jhallenjoy the woman de fired.

59. If it be good to take * journey.

60. If the child (hall be fortunate or not .

61. If it frail be a plentiful year .

ii. ]fit be good to trade in Merchandize.

63. If

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. ~^sT ^%

4~ t Jf it be good to takg a Wife.
6% if friendjhip jhallttkf goodeffetf, or not.
6*5 . if a mafl fiatt be fortunate in his hbvfe.
£6# jf a wan have fecret Enemies, or not.
$n. The way to Happinefs 3 and how U oh*
tainitfiLC.

68. The prolongation of Life.

69. TheKeslitutionof Touth in fonte Degree,

70. The Retardat ion of Age.

7i. The Curing of Difeafes counted Incura-
ble.

72. The Mitigation of Pain.

73. More Eafie and lefie Loatbfome Vurgings.

74. The increafing of Strength and Ad.ivity.

75. The increafing of Ability to fufferTtrture
or Tain.

76. The Altering of Complexions : And Fat-
nefs , and Leannefs.

77. The Altering of Statures.

78. The Altering of Features,

79. The Increafing and Exalting of the ito*
telleclual Farts.

80. Verfionsof Bodies into other Fodies.

81. Making of New Species.

82. Transplanting of Species into another.

83. Inftiuwents of Vefiru&ion, as of War^and
Foyfen

84. Exhilaration of the Spirits 5 and Tutting
them ingoodVifpofition,

85. Force of the Imagination , either upon

I another Body , or upon the tody it felf.

IS 6 The Holy Guide. L1B.2

86. Acceleration of Time in Maturations.
$n. Acceleration of Time in Clarifications.

88. Acceleration of Futrefattion.

89. Acceleration of Decoction,
go. Acceleration of Germination.

9 1 . Making Rich Ccmpojis for the Earth.

92. Imprefions of the Air , and raifing of
Tempers.

g -> Great Alteration ; as in Induration JLmol-

lition^ &c.
p. Turning crude and watry Sub}} ances into

Oyly and Vntrious Subjiances-
r-. Drawing of jtfew Foods outof Sub (t ances

not now in ufe.

96. Making new Tbreds for Apparel ; and
new Stttffes 5 fucb as are Paper, Glafie, Sec.

97. Natural Divinations.

9 8 « Deceptions of the Senfes .

99. Greater Vleafures of the Senfes.

100.. Artificial Minerals and Cements.

All which you (hall find in the Books,in
order-, tuft chufe a Number, and Telefma-
tically engine it ac a convenient time
foryo'ur work; eleft a proper hour> and
you cannot after erre, but perform in-
credible, extraordinary things 3 under-
hand well this book, for the more ealie
opening the reft 3 and God profper the
work.

And

Ll B. 2 . The Holy Guide. 1 57

And thus you may do of all other
Q.ieftionSj whereof you would be
refolved.

And now that you may better under-
ftand this Figure3and all things, and the
Refolution of the demands you would
propound 3 you muft firft of all chufe a
Number, what you will at yourdifcreti-
on, as five, fe\en, or nine, or any other
rnorcorleffes this done , take the Num-
ber of the day', as you (hall find in order,
and then take the Number which you
find in thefecond Chapter , or that you
iind in the Globe upon the firft Letter of
your Name,asyo 1 wereChnftened,

For example, if your Name be Francv,
you muft takeF. and the number which
is over it,and you (hall find all in order in
the Scheam > and gather all thofe Num-
bers into one fum , and divide them by
thirty, referving the reft as remains ? and
fearch in the Figure ; and if you find it
above in the upper half, your matter mail
fpeed well ; and if it be in the neither
half 3 it (hall beevil: And thus you may
know all that you defire, and be it love
which alters the Rumor, as Vlyjfes was al-
tered by the Mufick of hisMiftnfs.

O 2

i 58 iht Holy Guide. LiB.a

«. , - — -' — — — — « it

When to her Lute Penelope fings.
Her voice inlivens the leaden firings
But when of forrows floe doth ffeal^
Even with her fighs the firings do breafc
And as her Lute do th live or dye,
Led by her paflions , So do L

For to know whether you (hall enjoy
your Love, or not ; take the number of
the firft letter of your Name, the number
of the Planet,and of the day of the week,
and all thefe Numbers ye (hall put toge-
ther, and then divide them by thirty , as
you did before, and take your remainder,
and fee in the upper part, if it be there,
y ou (hall have your requeft ; if it be in the
nether half, it is contrary : And thus may
you be refolved of all things you would
know; you muftobferve the Numbers in
the Figure exceed not thirty, as you (hall
find them beginning with one, two,three,
and four, and fo confequent ly to thirty.

7 he Numbers of the Vlanets , and their
Characters.

7. 3. 9. 10. 6. 5. 2.

Saturn^Juf iter ^Murs^ol^Venus^Mercur. Luna

T> % S 0 * ' 8 D

Numbers

LiB. 2. The Holy Guide. 159

Numbers of tbe dayes of the Week,:

Sunday , blunday, Tuefday , Wednefday^
106. 52. 52. 102.

Jburfday^ Friday^ Saturday,

31. ' 9S 45-

Jhus have we (hewed you the Num-
bers of thePlanecsj and the dayes of the
Week , and their Numbers. Now that
nothing may be wanting to this Art, here
follows the names of the Idea's, Rulers,
g d Angels thereof, according to the Me-
thod of God.

Eheia, Jod, Jehova0Jebova Elohim^ElJLlo-
himGibortWpriTY), V]23X,Eloba, Jeho-
vay Sabaothy Eloim Sabaotb, Saidai, Adonoy
meley.

Ketber, Hocbmab, Benah, Hefed, Geburah,
ZepherethyNezak, Hod, Jefod,Malcurh.

Ambriel, Afmodel, Maltbidiei mett, Bar-
cbiely Cambiel, HanaeL

# # # ni * # # # S # # # Y. fobki,
X * #. *» # * #. * # a? * # #.

6. *. 4. 3. 2 1. h Zaphkiet, 900 gQo
700. 600 5<ro. 400.

i- n. T D.^3 j*. %. Zad&L r% T, rt
1 n. ?.

O3 400,

i^o the Holy Guide. Lib. 2

400. 50c 600. 700. 800 900. d-
Cantaely 1 2.3. 4. 5. 6.

T $ X *¥' & ® -4/wflM fflfttttf, A B T A E
I. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. S- Haviel) 7. 8. 9.

10. IT. 12.

et j8 > «A s £ $ Michael, « 8 iU|^.
400. 500. 600. 700. 800. 900. X>. Gabriely
1. 2. 2.. 4.5. 6.

T Z I V W Hu Jjfimy A B CD

Aierto

Th^iffOTBs of jyiroTtiattcy anl Geom ancy goal epuL wilL^

l4* The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

Ale do, Magera, Aracus, ABeus, Magate*
zius> Lucifer , Rhad&mantus, Nicony Lieut,
MiMonrCtefiphoKe.

T>apfa0 Beemothy Ogia> Leviathan, Corritia,
Ophdix , Egin , Thefmephma , Amaimon,
Hornta.

Advacbiel 5 Enediel , Zuriel , Hanaliel 3
Vercbiel^MnrieL

* / ****tn***^ *; # * #:

#*. ■

300 200 ICO 90 $0 70 60 50 40 30
20 IO 9 87.

78 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
200 200 2,00.
Z H 0 I K A M N S Q n P S T.
13 14 15 16 i7 lb 19 20 21 22 23

24-

? % o * $ v r v $ "£ & Uo

7 H jo 20 30 4.0 50 60 70 80 90
100 200 300.

G H I K L M N 0 F ®R ST
V X.

h\\$ this wilt wonderfully advance
your preparations and knowledge of dif-

Here

LlB.2. The Holy Guide 1 63

Herelies a wonderful virtue, worth,and
efficacy in Numbers, as well to good, as to
bad ; and they fay, Angels may be as fre-
quently converft with as Devils, by the
direction and help of the Figure before ;
and the eminent Philosophers do unani-
moufly teach, and learned Doftors, both
in Divinity, in the Law, and Do&ors of
Phyftck , and inoccult myfteries in Chi-
miftry , and in Rofie Crucian fecrets pra-
aife.

As St. Hieronty Auftin^ Origen, Ambrofiy
Gregery Nazianzen, AtbanafiusyB£filiuf,Hil-
latins, RubanHSy Bede, and many more, as
#. Lully, Diodorus Sicnlw , &c. confirm.
Hence Hillarm.in his Commentaries up-
on the Pfalmes teftifies , that the feventy
Elders, according to the efficacy of Num-
bers, brought the Pfalmes into order: Ra-
hanus alfoa famous Doftor, compofed an
excellent book of the vermes of Num-
bers. But now how great vertues Num-
bers have in nature,is manifeft in the herb
which is called Cinquefoil^ i e. five ieaved-
graffe, for this refills poyfon by vertue of
the dumber five; it drives away Devils,
conduceth to expiation , and one leaf of
it taken two times in a day in Wine, cures
the Feaver of one day ; three the Tertian
Feaver,four the Quartan; in like manner
four grains of the feed of Jurnfole being

drunk*

J 64 The Holy Guide. LlB.2.

drunk, cures the Quartan 3 but three the
Tertian : In like manner Vervain cures
Feavers,beink drunk in Wine W\t\\Aurum
fotahile, and the third joynt cures the
Tertian, the fourth the Quartan -, a Ser-
pent if he be once (truck with a fpear dy-
eth; if twice, recovers (trength.

Thefe and many others we read of in
feveral Authors ; we mult know now
whence thefe are done , which certainly
have a caufe, which is a various proporti-
on of various Numbers amongft them-
felves : there is alfo a wonderful experi-
ment cf the Number of feven, that every
feventh Male born without a Female
coming betwixt, hath power to cure the
Kings Evil by his touch alone, or word:
Alio every feventh Daughter that is born,
Rofie Crucians fay, wonderfully helpeth
forward the birth of Children , and fo
doth the Sun give the like vertue to Au-
rum potable, as Dr. Culpepper often experi-
enced 5 neither is the natural Number
here confidered, but the formal conside-
ration that is in the Number: And thefe
Numbers are not in vocal , or Numbers
of Merchants,, buying and felling, but in
rational, formal and natural : Thefe are
diftinft Myfteries of God and Nature j
but he that knows how to Joyn together
the vocal Numbers and natural with di-
vine.,

LiB. 2. The Holy Guide. I6<;

vine, and order them Telefmaticaily into
the fame harmony , (hall be able to work,
and know wonderful things , as the Kajfe
Crucians have faid this Book teaeheth .
The Rofie Crucians prognofticate many
things by the numbers ot names,and you
mu ft know , that fimple Numbers (ignitie
Divine things : Number of ten Celefiial,
number, of an hundred Terreitnal3num-
ber of a thoufand, thofe things that mall
be in future age ; befides feeing the parts
of the mind are according to an Arithme-
tical mediocrity, by reafon of the iden-
tity, orequalityof excefs, coupled toge-
ther '■> but the body, whofe parts differiii
their greatnefs, is according to a Geome-
trical mediocrity compounded : but an
Animal confifts of both , viz, foul and
body, according to the mediocrity which
is fuitable to Harmony : Hence it is that
Numbers do work very much upon the
Soul, Figures upon the Body, and Harmo-
ny upon the whole Animal : And one
fayes Numbers

Have in their natures a ntoft fiery force,
And alfo faring from a celeftial ' fource,

God gave to man mind and fpeech,
which are thought to be a gift f the fame
vertue and immortality : The Omnipo-
tent

\ 6 6 The Holy Gride. L I B- 2

tent God hath by his Providence divided
the fpeech of men into divers languages,
which languages have, according to their
diveriky, received divers and proper cna«
rafters of writing, coniifting in their cer-
tain order,number,and figure, not fo dif-
pofed by chance, nor by trie weak judge-
ment of man , but fromabove, wheieby
they agree with the celeftial and divine
bodie?, and vermes-, but before all notes
of languages the Hebrew is moft f acred in
thefiguresof characters, points, of vow-
els, and tops of accents, as confiding in
matter, form, and fpirit.

The poiition of the Sekrs being fiift
made in the feat of God , which is Hea-
ven,after the figures of them are moft fully
formed the letters of the celeftial myfte-
ries, as by their figure, form and (ignilica-
tion,fo by the numbers (ignified by them,
as alfo by the various harmony of their
conjunction * he therefore that will find
them ouc,muft by each joyning together
of the Letters fo long examine them until
the Voice of God is manifeft , and the
framing of the moft fecred Letters and
their Numbers be opened and difcover-
ed ; for hence voices and words have
efficacy in Magical works, becaufe that in
which Nature firft exercifed efficacy, is the
Voice of God : But of thefe you may read-
largely

Lib. 2. lhe Holy Guide. 167

largely in my Temple of jyifdome, a Book of
lelefmet and Geomancy.

The Letters ii% the Figure of the World
gomg before , have double Numbers of
their Order, viz, extended, which (imply
exprefs of what number the Letters are,
according to their Order , and colle&ed,
which recollect with themfelves , the
Numbers of all the preceding Letters 5
alio they have integral numbers, which
refukfrom thename,sof Letters, accord-
ing to their various manner of num-
bnng, the vertues of which numbers he
that fhall know,after our AxiomatafliM be
able in every tongue to draw forth won-
derful myfteries by their Letters engra-
ven, call down Angels, Spirits, and Souls
of men. And Eugenias brings in a Rofie-
Crucian . that brought him acquainted
with Etherialmen , and him doth Theo-
didad.usx.hws bring in fpeakingof himfeif,

force me be fits, with this thick cloud ldrivey
Tops the blew Billowy knotty Oaks up rive ;
Congeal fo ft [now , and beat theearthwiih

hail,
When I my brethren in the air aftail,
For that's our field 5 we meet with fuch a

Jhock,
That thundering skies with our encounter*

rock*

And

168 The Holy Guide. L1B.2.

And cloud-Jlruckzlightning flajhes fronton

high,
When through the top of all the world Iflie,
J force death in her hollow caves, I make
1h: Ghojts to tremble ,& the ground to quakf.

Solomon knew by the Axiom at a how the
world was made, and the operation of the
Elements,the beginning, ending, and the
nitdift of times, the alterations of the
turning of the Sun , and the change of
ieafons, the circuit of year*, and the por-
tion of Stars, the natures of living Crea-
tures, and the furies of wild Beafts, the
violence of winds, and the reafoning of
iherr,the diversities of plants,and the ver-
t ues of roots; what things have been
paft,and what things are to come. There
are alfo other myfterious Truths j Hap-
pincfr, Knowledge, long Life, Health,
Youth, Riches, VVifdom and Vertue; how
to alter, change, cure and amend all Dif-
cafes in young or old, and the Art of pre-
paring Rofie Crucian Medicines , and their
Rifles toraife the dead; all which they
have experienced and fitted to the feveral
Complexions of men. but I'hall teach
vyou thefe in the following Book. Where-
fore according to the Do&rine of our
Lord and Saviour JefusChrijl, Firjlfeek^you

the

LiB.2. The Holy Guide. 169,

the Kingdom of God, and all theft things JhaJI be
given you,

Siju Jehovah, ~Deu$ memjlluminaverii Me,
Lux font lembra tne&.

THE

THE

<2?

HolyGuide:

Leading the Way to

Long Life, Health, Youth,

Blefiednefi, Wifdome and Ver-

tHC) and to Change^ Cure, Alter and
Amend the Hate of the Body.

All being made plain and eafie to
mean Capacities.

By fohn Heydon, Gent. |

pttovotw* A Servant of God and Se- |
cretary of Nature.

Audeignh vocem.

LONDON. Printed by f. M. 1662,

f ?i^¥0»¥¥¥f Wf f If IB

TO THE

TRVLY NOBLE

BY ALL TITLES,

Sir John Hanmcr,
Barronet.

Sir, .

YOur Worthinefs and gratefuli ac*
ceptance of this kjnd of Learning^
which Ipromifed your honour able f elf % 1
would put fortb9 is now flown to your
Temple of Safety 9 Knowledge^ erfeSion^
or acquired parts for refuge and prote-
Sionrfrom the wickednejfe of itinerant^
P * fern*

The Epiftle Dedicatory.

Jcandalous Pulpit Sycophants^ School-
SophiJlers9 andfome of my own profejfi-
on^Lawyers : 1 mean the Phanatick, lia-
ble of Gown-men 2 that rage again ft the
King and Eifhops9 whom God preferve
out of their power : thefe contend againji
me continually^ and contemn that which
they do not know. But take heed ye un-
wife among the people \ Oyefooles^ when
will ye underfiand ? they judge they
know not wha^ and condemn without
evidence, this Holy Guide, which a-
bout tenyeares pajt§ withfome others of
affinity thereto^ for my private exercife
andfatisfa&ion I had at ieifure^ compo-
fed$ which being communicated unto
oney it became common unto many^ and
was by tranfcription fuccejfively corru-
pted9untill it arrived in a mott depraved
copie to DoSor Nicholas Culpepper,
and from him many had Copies^ which
fome highly eUeemed9 and others abu-
fed : it came to pafs about feven y tares
paft, jfl)ewedmy true Virgin invention
in manufcript to the learned Mathema-
tician Mr. John Gadbury, who was

then

TheEpiftle Dedicatory.

then in company with Captain George
Wharton and other Gent lemen,of which
one had a Copy, but imperfeft $ and
therefore knowing me to be the Author^
intreated me to pubbp) mine : / fufpe-
Sed my ability \ becaufe it wasfet downe
many year es pafi, when I was very youngs
and was the fenje of my Conceptions at
that time, not an immutable law unto my
advancing judgement at all times 5 and
therefore there might be many things
therein plaufible unto my pajjed appre-
henJion%which arenot agreeable to my pre-
fentfelfyt here fore unwilling any work of
mine fiould be printed.But at laji 1 was
perfwaded^ Now the enemies of Kmg
Charls & the Bifiops^ery proudly ,with
full mouthy bitter hatred, envy, malice
and calumnies, kindred me from putting
of it forth. Hence I began to be at a
Stand, whether ifiouldput forth the reji
of the hookworm ^ whilefi I did doubt
that 1 Jhould by this means expofe my
felf to public^ cenfure, and as it were
casimyfelfoutofthefmokpinto the fire,
* certain rude fear feifed upon we% leji

? 3 */

The Epiftle Dedicatory.

by putting them forth Iflwuldjeem more
effenjive then officious to you^and expofe
your Worfhip to the envy of malicious
carpers and tongues of detra&er /3 whileji
thefe things trouble me with a various
defparation9 the qulckpefs of your under -
fianding) exaff discretion ^ upright neffe
of judgement^ Religion without Super-
Jiition^ and other moji known Vertues
inyou^your authority and integrity be-
yond exception^ which can eaftly chf \
and bridle the tongues of (landerers9 re*
moved my doubting^ and informed me to
fet upon that again more boldly ', which I
had almoji left off9 by reafon of defpaire :
therefore (mott honoured Sir) take in
good part) this bool^9 in which we
fhew the myfierm of Ajironomy and
GeomancyiArt and Nature9CeleJiial and
Terreffiall, all things being openedand
ptanifejied 5 which experienced Anti-
quity makes relation of% and which came
to my knowledge^ hat thefe fecrets of R.
Crucians (hitherto negleUed% and not
fully apprehended by men of later times)
pay with y our proteff ion be by me%afttt

the

——I I I ■ ■ I I ——————

The Epiftle Dedicatory.

t he fiewing of Natural Vertues propofed
to them that are ftudiont and curious of
thefe fecrets:by which let him thatfhal he
profit ed9 andrecieve benefit, give you the
thanks, who have been the occafion of
this publication, and fetting of it at li-
berty to be feen abroad, wearing the Ho-
nourable Title of

May i. SIR,

I66u

Your humble Servant,

fohn Heydon.

P4 THE

Lib. 3. The Boly Guide.

tfp n£f9 trtp «!f? t&v $Sp t&r? tai/a ^Ir? ttfp

. tXT9 tKf9 tMf^ «w tazp «w <azr? taw tm

Wi ^p FT! TO ^^ ^^ ^* ^W #W Wl ^W

Book IIL

CHAP. I.

The Way to Long
Lifc->+

1 . Ifow to mdkf one live to two hundred years :
2. John Macklains onr Countrey man and
ojhtrs : 3. Tolicy to prevent cccafions :
4. Hf//tf from Egypt ^Arabia : 5. ISft-
thing can beget and mr\v]>in h [fife:
6. Ike heads of doing caufes: j.lhemf-
dome of God : £. A team of Fire : y.Moift-
nejfe : 10. Of wale and female jlvffe '*
it. Mixtures: 12. Of the jiuffe cloaihed
with wind : j 3 , C/f /j^ 0/Ye #?/i ^/zt 0/

The Holy Guide. L1E.3

Heaven : 1 4. The fecret heat 115. The
ftarry fire and fat of Aether :.f6. Earth
and iVater: 17. Aire and Fire: \%.T>if«
ferences of beads -.19. Of Hair e and Hoof :
20. Example : 21. Of tnafyng and peri-
ling : 22. The means to Long Life : 23. The
food of Life: 24. The c aufe of Long JJfe\
25. The truths of Nature'. 26. The Ju-
slice of God and End of Man : 27. Natu-
ral! My sleries ; 28. Of the clear ne fle of
mans body: 29. The Jufiice of Nature:
30. The wayes of Nature: 31. Methu-
falem: 33, A long Race: 34. Helps to
Long Life : 3 <5 . The life of Gyants :
36. King Argathon'.? 6jfc : 37. Plato'*
Common wealth , 38. enafled by the Lsw
of Nature^ what, &c. 39. The food of
Mars : 40. Hungry fpirits : 41. Mixt Bo-
dies, and their four enemies : 42 b Tfo
chwgable world and courfe of Creatures :
43. Natural means to Long Lift : ^,Soul9
Life and Heat of natural things : 45. Of
the Element of Fire : 46. Of the nature of
Aether : 47. Of the food of Aether :
48. Of the unfeen firfl Moifiure and Being
of Life: 49. Of the firfl fluffe of the fine
Oyleof the food of life: 50. Of a plaine
-pattern of adjournment of life : $ i* Na-
tures pattern not counterfeit^ or the blood
and flejb of feed; 53. Caufe of Life:

44-. In*

LiB.3- The Holy Guide.

54. lnftru&ion and noutifhing; ^. An
example of Cardanas: 5 6. Our finale Oyles
57^ Natures Works equal in weight and
truth.

1. T TEre we have met with the com-
JCjL mon argument , wherewith the
unlearned ufe to deface this goodly fe-
quence ; we muft go forward and encoun-
ter with the learned, who becaufe the
great deeds and effe&s that are promifed,
that is,to make all men long liv'd,health-
full, young, wife,blefled and vertuous.are
above their skill, or of their Anceftors^
the Grecians rate both the works impof-
fible, and the workmans way falfe and
guileful ; I muft, I fay, prove,according to
my task appointed, that thofe great acts
and deeds may be done & performed by
other and weaker means then Hermes Me-
dicines : And this I muft do with more
pains and diligence, becaufe this way
an entry once made in their hearts, the
great marvellous truth of thisfecret, may
the more eaiily come in and take pofleili-
on.

3 . But of fuch variety of hard and flip-
pery matter, where were it beft to fet
out > which way firft to take ? were it not
meet the means and helps unto pleafure
fliould be firft cleared and read before we

come

4 7 he Holy Guide. LlE.j

come to pleafurc it felf > and among
them to give long Life the foremoft place,
if not for his worthinefle, yet for his be-
hoof and neceflity, being needful iti all
Common-wealths and private perfons ;
firfttofeek to live, before to live well,
though that unto this end: then let us«
fee what is long Life , and how all men
may reach unto lohn Mackjain.

3. But why do we make fuch great haft>
we had need be flow and advifed in fo
great a matter, and to look before we
venter on folong away, and of fo many
dayes journey, that we be well provided
and furnifhed of all things : wherein I
hope, if I have not of mine own ; or if af-
ter the thrifty manner, when lam well
ftored my felf; yet I borrow to prevent
lending, although I took upon truftfo
much as would ferve this turn, it fhall be
noftainuntomy credit; but be rather
deemed a fafeand wary way,to cut offoc-*
cafion of robbery, both at home and a-
broad, efpecially if I take it up of fuch
men as are rnoft famous and well be*
loved.

4. Thefe (hoAd be my friends of
J&gypt and Arabia (though we have their
fecret help now and then ) the beft able
indeed, and the neareft unto me, if they
were fo well known and beloved in the

world )

LlB. 3. The Holy Guide

world ; but becaufe they be not, I will fly
to that other tide of Greece 9 and to the
moft renowned there , and beft liked :
Hypocrates9 Flato, and Arijlotk , whom I
doubt not to find very free and willing
in this matter : Let us then awake our old
ftudies out of deep, and lye to them, what
need many words.? After greeting, and
the matter broken, they make me this an-
fwer joyntly together : God, becaufe he
was Good , did not grieve to have others
enjoy his Goodnefs, that is, to be, and to
be well,meaning to make a worldf though
Ariffotle withdrew his hand herein) full
of all kind and everlafting changeable
things, firft made all,and blended them in
one whole confufed lump together, born
up by his own weight bending round up-
on it felf.

5. Then feeing it lay ftill , and that
nought could beget and work upon it
felf, he forted out and fundrcd away
roundabout, a fine lively piece (which
they call Heaven) for the Male-Mover
and Workman, leaving ftill the reft fas
grofle and deadly ) fit for the Female, to
contain the working andfafhioning,which
we term the four beginnings for Ele-
ments) Earthy Water r Air, and Fire*, and
thereof fprung the love which we fee yet
between them , andthcgreac defiretobe

joy»ed

The Holy Guide. L1B.3.

joyned againe and coupled together* !

6. Then that there might be no num-
ber and confufion of workmen and do*
ing caufes , but all to flow from one
head, as he is one head, drew all force of
working , and vertue of begetting , into
a narrow round compafs , which we call
the Sun,from thence to be lent outspread
and beftowed all about the world , both
above and below , which again meeting
together , made one general heat, light,
nature , life and foul of the world the
caufeot all things.

7. And becaufe it becomes the might,
wifdome and pleafureof fuch a Builder,
to make and rule the infinite variety of
things here below , and not evermore one
felf-fame thing ■> he commanded that one
light in many to run his eternal and ftint-
lefs race, too and fro, this way and that
way, that by their variable prefence, ab-
fence and meeting , they might fitly work
the continual change of flitting Crea-
tures.

8. This Soul, which Plato calls the ever
moving mover, quite contrary to AriJiotle9
tftytemdh which he himfelf conftrueth , a
movable mover, ( that we may mervail
how TuUy could tranflate it, as to make it
all one with Plato, nnlefs Luciam Gallons
milled him y which is found in fome cop-
pies*

Li B. 3. Tbe Holy Guide. 7

pies that he might be an eternal mover,
is,in Nature)and being a moil fubtile and
fmall beam,lpark of heavenly fire,in pro-
perty and quality, by his cleannefs, light,
and finenefs, hot ■> and for his moiftnefs,
withall temperate, as appearethto him
that bendeth his mind upon it.

9. 1 f you doubt of this moiftnefs, think
nothing is made without mingl ing, which
is by drawing in, and breaking fmali toge-
ther the whole ftuffe, when a dry heat
draweth out and fcattereth the fine from
the great , and thereby wafteth and nar-
roweth all things, making nothing: As
for example, Dung hatchstb an egg 3 and
quichpeth anything apto receive life, when
warm aftes will never do it 5 what need
we more > Imagine an heavenly flameby a
good burning water, which flaming upon
the hand on a dry cloath , heateth them
both gently,without heatorpunifhments
and yet this Sunny beam is not moift of it
felf , before it is tempered with the rnoift-
nefs of his wife, the Moon* to make it apt
for generation. Then Hermes calls the Svn
and the Moon the Father and the Mother
of all things.

10. Now the ftufFeand female, to be fit
to fufitr working, muftbefirft open, that
is,foft an d moift,and then not one,nor yet
many lfcc things , leaft in both t hefe cafes

chey

8 TheHoly Guide. Llfc^.

theyfhould ftand ftillthefame, and not
when they be flirted by the workman,
rife and ft rive , bruife and break one ano-
ther, fitly by continual change, until at
laft they come unto a conftant reft and
ftay; and that upon fmall occalion the
fame confent might jaragain , and come
and change the wifhed end and purpofelof
the work , And therefore God caft in at
firft , the known four fighting enemies ;
yet in the foftand openftufFe, there are
but two of them. Earth and Water in one
mixture, feen and extant at the begin-
ning , before the painful foul draws out
and works the reft, Fire out of Earth, and
out of Water that breath-like and windie
thing called Air.

1 1. Sothar if there be much Earth, lit-
tle Water,and great heat to mingle them,
fire will (hew it felf and bear the fway 5 if
but fmall heat upon the fame meafure of
Earth and Water3Earth will rule the roft ;
if on that other fide , upon fmall ftoreof
Earth, and much Water, but a fmall heat
of working; the thing will fall out to be
raw and waterifh ; if upon the fame quan-
titie, and ftronger heat, there arifeth ari
Airie , which is termed a fat and oy ly bo-
dy.

12. Wherefore when the Soul comes
down by theAfpe&s of Stars ( Read the

Har-

iiB.3. the Holy Guide. ~~9 ^

ffaFmoHy of the World ) upon the ftuffe,
cloathed with a fine windy coat of the
cleaneft Air next unto Heaven, called
JEtker (without the breaking' of which
means3the twoextreams and unacquaint-
ed ftrangers would never bargain and
agree together) by his m oft mild heat it
moves it,and alters it very diverfly , ma-
king many! forts and kinds of things
differing according to the ftrength of
the one, and the obedience of the 6-
thcr.

15. And foby reafon in that fepa ration
of that fine and male part , at firft, the
ftuffe was throughly toft and mingled,
and the heat of Heaven thereby ( like a
hot Summer after a wet Spring ) very
fitly \ all which , man and all were made
alike , without any feed fown , otherwife
then by the great Seeds-man cf Heaven,
upon the common ftufFe h^rchandWa-
ter3and isftill feen in the coiimion tillage,
yet ufed in thofe lame and imtilled
Wights, which fome call Start-ups, and
fprung out from themfelves, As we may
be calily led to thinks if we confider how,
ttot.onlyall kinds of plants, without all
fettingorfowing, grow up by themfelves
in fome places 5 and fome kind of Fifti in
Q^ the

jo The Holy Guide. LlB 3;

the Sea are only Females 5 but alfo what
plenty of fifti there abounds in that fro-
zen Country 5 for the great heat and fat-
nefs of the waters 5 and chiefly that
upon the (limy and hot lands of
JEgyp , there are yet fome bloody
and perfeft Land-wights ( as Hares
and Goats, &c) all made and fafliio-
ned.

14. But becaufe afterward the well
mingled and fat fine fhiffe, and ftrong
working heat failed fas it muft needs in
time) and yet the great Lord would have
the continual flitting,change,and fuccefli-
011 hold the fame, and fit caufes were
daily kept by continual fucceflion within
thebodyof the perfect Wights , theftuffe
in the (he, and the heat in both, yea, and
as far as need required in feeded Plants
alfo.

Now we muft underftand as well ,
that this heavenly Soule, when it is fo
cloathed with that windy body, is cal-
led fpirit fnot only moveth and wor-
keth with his heat) but alfo for food
wafteth the ftuffe -, for nothing that is
made, is able to bear up his ftate and
being without his proper and like food
and fuftenance. See my Harmony of the
mrld.

15; Then

L1B.5. The Holy Guide. tl

15. Then asourgroG fire here l^ow
feedeth on weather and wind, called Air,
as upon his lighted meat ; and as it in his
due place , is too thin and fcattered,
fp reading the figure fo far as it followeth
his food, until atlaftit vanifheth co no-
thing, unlefs it be plentifully heaped and
crowded up together, and fo kept in a
narrow (hell of water, which is called oyle
or fatnefs; evea fo it is between the
fineftarry fire and his like food, the fine
fat of iEther, for that caufe befides the
divine purpofe abovefaid, it cometh
down inpoft intothefe quarters, to find
and dreffe himfelf {tore of meat, as ap-
pears by his tarrying; for asfoon as his
food is fpent he flyeth away as faft , and
leaves his Hoftatiix andfevens uncared
for. I was about to tell you the courfeof
the divers forts and fuits of thefe lower
Creatures, but thllthere was a great puffe
of matter came between and fwept me
away. This now being paflfed over, I will
go forwards.

1 6. Then if the fuffering ftuife be grofs,
foul andtough,and the making heat very
fmall and ealie , as it is within and under
the ground, things are made, which they
call Metals,or rather by the Arabick word,
Minerals, little, broken, altered, or chan-
ged 3 but the grofs beginnings , Earth
Qjs and

1 2 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

andBfater ( Earth efpecially ) rule ftill *,
anclthe life and foul, as it were, in a dark
dungeon, faft (hut up, and chained, as not
able to ftir and mew it felf at all. When
the ftufle is finer and fofter, with greater
heat upon it, then will arife a rooted and
growing thing, called a Plant, better min-
gied,and fmaller,and further broken from
the low and foul beginnings 5 and the life
of Heaven (hall have morefcope , becaufe
Wind, or Air, or Water (and yet Water
chiefly ) fwayeth the matter.

17. But if the Soul be yet more migh-
ty, and the ftuffe yet finer, he is able (Air
and Fire) but that above this exalted, to
Chew himfelf a quicker workman , and to
make yet a finer piece of work, moving
forward,and by mighty force perceiving 5
but by reafon thefe twocaufes, paffingby
thofe degrees, to mount and rife at laft,
there is an excellent altdfierie kind con*
trived, over our kind, I mean, moft
throughly, and fair, and finely wrought,
even fofat indeed, that he may not eatily
feem made at all of thefe all- making
feeds, the four beginnings : Whence it is,
that when a Corps is confumed with fire,
there are found fcarcefix ounces of clear
earth remaining ; which finenefsof body
gives occafion to the greateft quicknefs
and freedome of the Soul, and ability to

per-

Lib. J. The Holy Guide. 13

perform fas his duties of life ) moving
and perceiving ; yea, and (hall I puc in
underftanding alfo > For albeit God hath
imbreathed us with another more fine
and clean mover,called Mind,for a fpecial
and divine purpofej yet that mind, as
well as the foul above, is all one of it fel f
in all places, and working diverfly, ac-
cording to thofe divers places, as we (hall
lee more at large hereafter.

1 8, Then you fee all the differences of
the four great heads and kinds , which
contain all things; yea and of many
lefler degrees and fteps lying within every
one of thefe , which I named not before -y
as alfo of fundry forts (not worth the
naming ) cf doubtful and needlefs
things, touching and partaking on each
fide of the four great ones ( or between
the firft two , ftones budding like herbs in
the Scottifh Sea ; between Plants and
Beafts,that fprung Ap^ or rather hairy wild
fnen^ between beads and us) to proceed
from the divers mixtures of their bodies
If you cannot quickly perceive the mat-
ter,behold at once the outward fhapesand
fa(hions,as they here go down a (hort pair
of ftairs before you.

19* Do you not fee man alone, through

his exceeding fine and light body, carried

up and mounted with a mighty heat of

Q^3 Heavens

14 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

Heaven , of an upright ftature and carri-
age of himfelf that his divine wit might
be freed from the clog of the fle(h > when
other Wights , from the contrary caufe,
(which thegrofs or earthly leavings, or
excrements, of hair, horn,hoof, and fuch
like declare ) are quite otherwife difpo-
fed,as we fee, towards the ground, their
like companion; and fo the lefshotand
fine they be, that is, the like the earth, the
nearer they bend unto her ,, being lefle of
fiafureitill 3 and after that n\any-footed
to fupport them; but at length (ootlefs
and groveling , until they come to their
heads downward, and there they ftay
not, but pane quite over , and degene-
rate from Wights to Plants, and from
thence, if I might tarry about them , I
would fend them down ftill through all
the fteps of them and Minerals, until
they come to their main reft and ftay,
from whence they all fprung clean Earth
and Water.

But I think it be now high time to take
my leave of thefe Tbilofophersand Phyfitians,
and to fet forwards as foon as I have
packt up my fhiffe round together, efpeci-
ally the beft and moft pretious things, my
Medicines.

2c. Then we gather by that inlarged
Speech, one chief and notable rule of

learning.

Li B. 3 . ?he Holy Guide. 1 5

learning, that the fhape, nature, being,
perfe&ion , and all the difference in all
things here below , fpringeth from the
mixture and temper of the ftuffe and be-
ginnings y the doing , making and work-
ing caufe, that makes, mingles, broacheth
andfetsall a running, to be apiece of the
finer part of the whole, parted and packt
up together in the Sun : of which finer
part, fome remaineth ftill in the raw and
rude ftufFe fecretly hid and placed : other-
fome more freely,in the half-made ftuffe,
called feed j and in finer feed yet more
lively, and in man moft at liberty^except-
ing where 1 faid it was free indeed from all
Jrind of body ; and yet all thefe but one
and the felf-fame thing , called foul, life,
heavenly and natural heat.

2 1 . Thus means divine Hippocrates when
he faith, nought is made, and nothing
perifheth, but all are altered,and changed
up and down by mingling : And again,
that no Wight can die,unlefs all fall;w here
he is moft agreeable, and jumpeth with
thefe grounds and rules, and with the
whole web of our Rofie Crucian Phyfick.
If any man doubt of the other two, Flats
and Ariftotlejet him read their books with
heed, and he (hall find them, where they
fpeak naturally , and by the light of hu-
mane reafon, to draw dill towards this
Q 4 head

1 6 the Holy Guide. L1B.3

bead and point of truth, though they
come toftay fometime, milled, I think,
by the over weening wifdome of Aftro-
nomy, to the Infinite variety of divers
naturedand conditioned Stars above, and
fiich like Influences caufingthe like end-
lefs odds and differences of all things.

22. Let us now,i fay, tet forward in our
firft dayes journey to long life, unfolding
iirft what it is, and the canfe thereof, and
laftly, the common and high way to
it.

It feems hard foe : man to appoint
jffhat bounds of Hie are large and long
enough for Man,unlefs God ( who know-
eth beft both the meafure of pleafure and"
happinefs fit for him 9 and the race of
time meet for him) firft fet and marked
tlem-, to that the greateft age and far-
theft time that the luftieft men and beft
difpofed bodies , both by kind and diet,
have at any time reached and lived , may
well , by the great and goodwill of our
great Land-lord, be fet the bounds, ftint
and end of life, large enough to hold all
the pleafures meet for mankind , and the
mark which we may all aim and level our
indeavours at , yea and with fure hope to
hit and reach it, and no further, isabout
fn hundred and fifty years, as you (hall hear
aiion.

Now

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. 1 7

Now if there do three caufes meet to
(he making up of things, and thereon
leaneth all their being jthe ftuffe, the mo-
ver, and the meat of the mover, which is
the fatnefs of the fluffe , then fure the
caufe of their long being and continu-
ance in their eftate can be nothing elfe
but the favour and goodnefs of thofe
three caufes.

23. The foul and heat of heaven is
good and favourable to Wights ( to let
the reftgofar more dark and further off
my purpose ) when (he poures her felf
plentifully upon them ; for there can be
no other odds in one and the felf-fame
thing in all place?;, but the fat food of life
which they call the firft moifture, and is
the fineft piece of all that is lying hid
and unfeen iu the found feccnd part of
Wights, and yet by skill to be fetched out
andfet before us„muft not only be plen-
tiful and great in (lore, to match the feed-
ing foul, but alfo faft and fine, that by his
finenefs he may be both friendly and like
to live, and Aiery,or rather ^therial (we
muft leave thefe words without handling)
to keep himfelf both in cold and heat
flowing, and that through his fatnefs
and clofenefs, (which they call in La-
tine , Denfum or Solidum ) that is through
his much ftuffe in a narrow room he may

be

1 8 The Holy Gride. L1B.3

be more lading and fie to continue. Now
the ftuffe and body is beft when it isfaft,
and fine alfo, to hold and hang all to-
gether , and that other to give free fcope
without flopping or let , unto the conti-
nual and wife race of life.

24. Then to make a fum of all, the
caufe of long life is a raft fine body,
fprinkled and feafoned with much like
finemoifture, andftoreof heavenly heat.
If this matter needed any further proof,
1 could eafily by cutting up the nature of
things, fo lay it open before you, as your
own eyes mould witnefs and fee the fame ;
but if it need to fome,they (hall fee fome-
thing , and that fufficient to content
them.

For the firft, Arijlotle faith, and we find
it true by experience, that they livelong-
eft in hot Countries for their dry , found,
foft,and fine bodies ; but chiefly for their
finenefs,yielding free recourfe and paflfage
unto life \ tor age and kindly death come
of rottennefs , which flows from the ftil-
nefs of hear, andflacknefstofalve andre-
freflivhe part?:

Touching the reft, to wit, that much
heat aiivi much good fatnefs are a caufe of
long life: mark the fhort life of all thofe
Wights,that either want them by kind, as
the maimed and imperfect ones, orwafte

them

Lib. 3. The Boly Guide. 19

them by motion, as the male Greyhound
of Lacedenton was , againft the courfe of
kind, (horter-lived then the Bitch, for his
pains in running 5 and the gelt male
Hound , and fpayed female , hunt better,
and live longer then others. And the
Cock-Sparrow lives but half fo long as
the Hen , and yet this but three years for
tlieir xenfty $ the world is full of fuch
examples : ;and behold again , the Ele-
phant on the other tide, for the great help
and favour of all the caufes above the reft,
as may appear by iheir great fruit and
effects in him,that is^ftrength,bignefs, and
ftomack, being able to bear the ground
work of a Cattle of fifteen armed men, to
eat 9. bufhels at a time, and to drink 14.
firkins ("to indure and hold out much
longer then any of the rea , and to live
( Ariftotle is mine Author in the ftoryj
three hundred years in all

Now we know what long life is,and the
caufe thereof, let us fee whether all men
may reach it or uo, and then which way
they may reach it.

2q. At thefirft all mankind by the will
and appointment of kind, was found3and
lufty, and lived long, and all the failing
and corruption now adayes (which falfly
feemethaweak condition of our nature)
crept in through diforder in our felves,

by

20 The Holy Guide. LlB.j

by little and little, 8c fo by (owing ftill the
like children, itfpread it felf atlaft deeply
rooted over all, and made it, as it were, a
certain ftate, nature and kind of men ;
wherefore by good order in our fel ves , it
may be reformed and brought back again
unto the ancient Eftate ; but how may we
prove this? If God and Nature have or-
dained man unco a divine end above the
reft; and yet fome beafts ( as Theophrafius
for a wonder complains ) live longer
then our common rate , yea and longer
then any bounds above fet ; certainly we
ought to do as much and more, by the
rate of nature , and of all right and rea-
fon,and fome did at firft, before we fell by
our default, which may be mended.

26. But leaft I may happen to deal with
fome,who will neither grant the Juftice of
God, nor yet yield to the end of man;
with fomej fay,that have fo far put off all
humanity, I will bring them to natural
caufes ; 1 will open and lay before them,
both the forts and fruits of Wights,! mean,
of men and Beafts; that they being ' a
monftrous doubtful kind between both,
that is, Beafts within,cloathed only with
outward fhape of Men , may the better
Judge of both fas in like cafe they
formed of the like mifhapen Monftersthe
Poet* know my meaning, it is not worth

the

Lib. 3 . The Half Guide. 2 1

the flouri(h of a chad and modeft Pen )
which hath in kind the more caufe to live
long; that feeing at laft the worfer
Wights to overgo us in life, and to run to
the very goaleitfelf, and yet to have re-
ceived leffe caufe from nature, they may
be driven by force of reafon to yield, that
we have a better kind and worfer cuftome,
and that we did and might livelong, but
for our own fault, which maybe reform-
ed.

27. To begin with the foul and natural
heat for his worthinefs,let us fee which of
them is indcwed with more (tore of him,
that is, of the chief caufe of long life $
manwalketh upright, when the reft are
thrown to the ground , becaufe they lack
the force of this light and afcending
heat,to bear up the weight of their bodies,
which we have abundantly h but if we
leave the outward (hape and look into
them , we (hall by the great forefight of
natural Wights, which are hot and full of
blood 3 have againft the root and fpring
thereof, to root and temper the fame, a
contrary in place and property fet, the
brain, I mean fomemore andfomelefs,
ftill according to the behoof and requefl
of the heart j in fomnch that they that
have leffe blood and faiall heat within
them, as not needing any cooler, have no
brain at all, 28.

32 fheHoly Guide. LiB'3»

28. Then by certain race and courfecf
kind, if that be true which all Phyfitians
& Philofophers hold,thata man hath the
greateft brain of all Wights-, it muft needs
follow, that he hath the greateft (tore of
heat alfo : but enter further into them,
and you (hall fee man by how much more
hegoeth beyond a beaft in wit, fomuch
to burn in heat above him: for wit fpring-
eth out of the clearnefs of the bodie. And
this out of heat, as I will prove in his place
hereafter.

29. Now if this firft point be done and
granted, the next is quickly made, even
as one match is made by another. It
ftandeth with the juftice of nature that
makes not in vain, to match this greedy
heat with ftore of good meat, that is, of
faft and fine Etherial firft moifturefuita-
bly, or elfefure, faith Heraclitus, the offi-
cers of Juftice, the Fairies would foon ap-
prehend her. To be ftiort, both this and
that, and the third likewife, a clofefine
bodie and all is cleared, if it be fo that
man in making is moft clear and finely
mixt, and broken of all the lower crea-
ture;?, as we heard even now decreed in
the Councel of the beft Philofophers and
Rofie Crucian Doftors •■> for if nought makes
but heat, then nought maketh well but
much heat 5 if there were no other odds

irt

LiB.g- 7 he Holy Guide 23

in fouls, as was above-faid : and if the
beginnings be well and finely mingled,
andtheconco&ion hold, they mnft needs
gather themfjves in clofe together alfo
to make another cauie, yea, and the laft ;
for what is hue oyle and fitnefs, but wa-
ter wherewith we flovv, as our brain de-
clareth, throughly mingled and raifed in-
to an airy, or rather into an Etherial
clofe fubftance 5 but if you will not ftand
to this degree, then once for all confider
and weigh but this one example, that al-
beit man be more given to luft, then any
other Wight, and thereby drying up the
body, it plainly appearech more then in
any other, and weakeneth all the helps of
long Life together, both the moifture,
that knits and holds the fiame, and chat
which feeds our heat, and this all 5 andfo
the fummeofiife, which is yet due by
nature, he payeth before his day to his
own wantonnefs, yet he livethand hold-
eth out longer then almoft any other;
that we may plainly fee, that if he lived as
chaftly,andin other points as orderly as
the reft, he might far pafs and over-run
themall, in this race of life and continu-
ance.

Butmethinksl hear them whifper, that
I forgot my felf, and the bounds of my
long Life, when I make men able to live

as

24 The Holy Guide. L1B.3

as long, and longer then any beaft ; for
to let pafs that Hart, Badger and Raven,
which overtake the longed: life of
our old men ; fince the Elephant, as we
have heard, goeth far beyond the very
bounds of agej efpecially the Raven,
whom Euripides will have to live nine of
our ages.

30. There may feem fome matters,but
chiefly the laft uncurable, and yet they
'are indeed light and eafie, and the laft
moftofalUl mean the Rawn; for if there
was never yet man of found judgement
and knowledge in the waies of [nature ,
thatalowed the ftory (and Ariftotleby
name condemns it, when he gives the
Elephant the longeft life of all Wights,
and man next to him) what? mould we
fearch after Poets Records? belides,doth
not one among them confefs himfelf,
they are not to be believed, and held as
witneiTes> doth not Flato, once a Poet,
and then a wife Philofopher, chafe them
up and down in all places ? and in one
place fayeth, they are befldes themfelves,
when they fit on their Mufes (tools, and
run Llike a fpring pouring out all that
comes > Are they not all, in wife mens ac*
count, the greateft enemies to God, good
manners, and all right and true know-
ledge, that ever the world or the Devil
bred.? 31*

IS~

L1B.3 . the Holy Guide. 2 5

j I. But I Hide too far unawares; and
if we muftof force receive this aged Ra-
ven, yet perhaps there mall be no great
hurt received : and I cannot fee why we
may not match him with Mtthuja/emy
and fome other aged Fathers in holy IVrit^
reported to have lived as many yeares
as nine of our ages comes to, with ad-
vantages is not enough to fay that which
fome fay, thofe yeares are to be meant
for moneths, and not as we account them;
for albeit I know the Egyptians reckon (fo
wcmay fee in P/i#y, where fome of them
arefaidto live a thoufand years apiece3
that is, fo mahy moneths) yet is agreed
among the Divines, men beft skilled in
thefe matters, that the Jewes account was
otherwife, even as we and all other Na-
tions make it. But if this ancient ftory of
our holy men be a thing in doubt, or cer-
tainly untrue, or to be meant of moneths,
yet your aged Raven may go with it, and
the Father of the tale together 5 and we
may, when we will, pafs to the Elephant.
Arijiotle indeed is the Author of this ixo-
rie , that the Elephant liveth three hun-
dred years ; how then (hall we miilike in
like manner of this man, and refufe his
witncfs> I cannot tell what to fay; it is
a very hard matter that he faith : and a-
gain I know, that when the power and
R, purfe

^6^ l he Holy Guide. Lib. 3

purfc of his King and Scholer, Alexander^
who gave him eight talents of Silver, a
huge f limine, to that rife, he heaped up
a rableofall kinds of reports and heare-
fayes into fome of thofe books (by fome
ca\led wokvicLkclvicl) and fome falfe and
untrue tales might creep in among them-,
yet I owe much to the mans worchinefs;
and again the books have ever held the
place of a true Record \ and befidesthis
matter of the Elephant, both for the fore-
couched caufes, and for his wit and man-
ners, fomewhat near our nature, may rea-
fcnably well agree with the found 01 rea-
fon. How then? I fay again, methinksl
feel my mind to ebb and flew within me :
And yet fuppofe it true, that this Bead
fliouldliveio many yeares; the Iflanders
ofTeil near Colecut, and the inhabitants
of the hill Athoy both of them commonly
and ufually reach our appointed time of
an hundred and fifty yeares,by the favour
of the aire onely and foile where they
dwell, taking fbefides ,for ought 1 can
know) the common rate and courfe of
the world 5 that we may lawfully deem, if
they lived as chaftely as the Elephant , who
comes but once in two yeares to Venery,
and followed his other good orders of life
as well, that they might eafily draw forth
their age longer, and come to the daies I
©f the Elephant. 32,For j

Ll B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 2 7

32.Foras wein our lefs happie foiles,
by our own ill diet and crooked cuftomc*
have cut offand loll the better half of our
time , fo it may feem of them ; for we
muft hot think in this diforder of the
world, that any man fulfilleth the time of
nature, but all are fwept away with the
blaft of untimely death.

33. But it may chance that long race of
life, which the Author makes the beaft to
run, was no common and ordinary courfe
in that kind, but of fome odde and rare
Example y and then, no doubt, as there
be fome amongft us which by their di-
ligence, and I know not by what good
hap, double the common term , fo there
be not wanting in thofe places, which
fometimes prove aged men , and which.
live twice as long as the common fort,thac
is, as long as the Elephant.

34. Wherefore, for all this, or ought
elfe that can be caft againft us , let us
conclude, that man, if he kept the good
and kindlie diet and order of life, which
other wights, void of reafon by the true
and certain guide of Nature keep, having
more helps and means unto it j might
live longer then any of them ; yea, and
with eafe reach the bounds of long life ap-
pointed, and perhaps further alio; but
we have ftayed in the midftand mean, as

R2 it

2 8 The Holy Guide. Ll B. 3

it were, becaufe it feems to obey the fccret
Will of God the better , and yet withall
to fill the whole deiire of Nature.

Then fay you, it were good to learn the
order of life which Beafts doufe to keep
and follow5if it were meet and feemly for
men to lead a beaftlylife; do not fo take
the meaning of a good thing , with the
fuareof afoul and filthy word ; a man is
not one and Tingle as they be, but double
and two things, and partly a Wight, nay
a Beaft ( be it fpoken with reverence )
and partly a more divine thing* and
therefore albeit , according to his divine
part and reafon, he ought to follow the
divine pattern and form of life above fet;
yet as he is a Wight, and an earthly Crea-
ture alfo, it is not uncomely, nay it is we*-
cerTary to do as they do, after a fort ; and
if it were altogether fo,it were better, and
more agreeable with the will of Nature,
who knoweth beft what belongs unto life,
that is, unto her felf '•> for kindleadeth
them ft ill after one due and orderly man-
ner, when great variety of wit and device
guideth usagainft Minervaes will , as they
fay, and quite befides the way of Nature,
unto a thoufand by and forraign Cu-
ftomes, which is the only caufeof our de-
feneration from our ancient and finl
whole and fecond eltate, Wherefore if a

company

I

Lib. 3' The Holy Guide.

company of piety and lufy Men and Women
would agree to live together in fome wild, open,
clear and fweet air , fcatteredly like a Country
village^ and not like a clofe and fathered City
(which one thing prevents a thoufanct
difeafesand deaths alone J and to live to-
gether to thrright end of Nature , that u, for
children , and not for pleafures fakj? ( for this
was made to the right purpofe ) and in as
feldome and due courfe 5 as the better
fort of Beafts, the ready way to preferve
life and foreftall difeafes, but efpecially to get
good Ghildren^ and to bring up their children in.
labour and hardjhip 5 mingled with much mirth
and Jleep together , no frnall helps to long
life and health5asthe dire&ers themfelves
confefs and know.

But for their meat and diet ( wherein
thofe Beafts offend and fail greatly ) if
they would confeut to take no phyfick,
but in great danger caft in by misfortune
(in which cafe the Beafts do not wane
their remedies ) never to drink wine, the
(hortner of life 5 and to be fhort 3 not to
take any meat and drink that the fire hath
touched ( for it funders the fine from the
grofs 3 that is, the beft from the worft,
which we now choofe ) but as Nature
hath left them D and other Wights ufe
them ; if thefe things , I fay , were duly
kept and performed^ ani fully perCwaded
R. 3 that

■■ . I* i : ~ <| 1

go The Holy Guide. LiB,^.

that within three or four generations and
orT-fprings,it would come to pane, that we
{hauld fee this people prove a Nation of
Giants, not only pafTing the age of Beafts,
and the bounds of long life afore fet,
but wholly* recovering and reftorinf; all
the bleflings of the firft eftate of the
body.

35. And this I gather, not by our own
contrary cuftomc-s only , taking effe&s as
crofle and contrary, but chiefly by the life
and ufe of Giants and lufty people in
times paft, and fome other yet at this day,
which was and is the very felf-fame race,
and courfe which I defcribed : And fure
for the Inhabitants of Teill and ^t^,which
I brought in even now, filling the term of
our long life,al though I am not certain of
their ufe and cuftome , and where I find
the ftory5I know the caufe is laid open, the
goodl fuels of the foyi in the firft place (for
it is thought to be the blefled Paradife)
and upon the goodnefs of the Air in the
next, for the height of the hill, without
all wind and rain , two great troubles of
mens bodies ; yet lam led to think that
they do keep the fame orderly and kindly
form and rule of life, or atleaft to draw
near unto it, becaufe albeit clean Air, by
cleaning and quickening the fpirits, and
Searching the body, be not; little helps

and

LiB.g. the Holy Guide. 31

and comforts in this journey ( as we (hall
eaiijy fee,if we mark how among all Crea-
tures, that lead their livesinthe cleaner
Element 3 do live the longer ; Fifh then
Worms,and land Wights then thefe; and
winged ones yec longer, becaufe the high*
er , the better air ftili ; infomuch as Car^
<//*» dare's think,that if any dwell in JEther,
as Tlatfs Heir affirm, they live for ever ) ->
yet if ill diet went withall, it would marr
as much as the other made, and greatly
cloy and hinder, yea and cut fhort the
race of their long life.

36. I am of the fame mind for all other
odd and private perfons of great a^e and
long life recorded, (as for fome Italians
in Plinies time, regiftred of one hundred
twenty four years ) and fuch other aged
men in Authors, a man might let in here
a fea of examples -, but I muft be fliort;
neither would I name King Argantbon,
that lived an hundred and twenty years , and
reigned eighty thereof ; nor yet the old
Knightof our Country, Sir Alington^ and
Tarre, &c. yet twenty years older-, but that
is fo ftrange in Nobility , that they come,
as it were, unto that kindly courfe of
life , as unto the goale and end of long
life.

Then we fee at length that it is not un-

pofilble, as they fay, but an ordinary and

R, 4 eafic;

3 2 the Holy Guide. Lib.?

eafie matter to ftrengthen the weak na«*
ture of mankind) to enlarge the ftreights
of his life , and fo lead him on ttill to
thei ancient age and long life appoint-
ed-

37. Bat I fee them ftart up and fay the
like as Cato in affairs of ftate, ufed to give
counfel ( un wifely, though never fo well )
as if he had been in Plato's Common-
wealth, and not in the dregs of Romulus :
So in matter of dyec and order of body,
fpeakasif we lived in the former golden
Age, which,as Foets fain, was under Saturn,
and not in the corruption of Jupiters
kingdome ; and thac with the world,asit
now goeth, cannot be brought ( without
a kind of divine power,to raze out the old,
and make a new world , and that in long
time ) unto the tuft' and kindly cuftome
of life 5 I muft,if I mean to do wife!y,take
the men as 1 find them, and prove that all
fuch weaknefs as now is among them,may
by mans indeavour and skill of healing
be upholden and led forth unto thofe
bounds, and the end of long life afore-
fet.

Albeit I have done as much as reafona-
bly may be required at my hands in this
place, which was alottedout tofhow the
pofiibility of the matter , yet becaufe I
v*oimt it better byplainnefs of fpeech to

do

LlB.?« The Holj Guide. 35

do good, which is the end of my writing,
fhen by fubtlenefs of Argument to ob-
tain my purpofe, I will come unto you,
and venture upon that point alfo,be it ne-
ver fo hard and defperate , hoping not
that fortune will favour bold men, but
God good men.

Then as there are three caufes of life
and being, the life and foul it felf, and his
food the firft moifture , and the frame
and temper of the body that holds them
both ; fo let us take them all in order,and
fee how they may be preserved , and kept
together, beginning firft with the laft, be-
caufe it is leaft and lighted.

38. It is enatted by the law of Nature,
that no body,mixt orfimple, (hall or may-
live and preferve his eftate , and being
without two helps or ftayes, that is, meac
and exercife,each like his kind, and of his
nature ; as in lone and fimple and fub-
tile bodies ( for it is plain in the firft row,
efpecially if they be living, as they term
them, though all things indeed have life
and fouls, as we heard above ) the hot
ones crave fiery meat and moving exer-
cife •, moift ones, wind and water, flowing
food and exercife ; cold and dry things
like an earthly , fuftenance and reft for
exercife, which is alfolike, and preferves
their ftate and being.

m% But

g 4 *fhe Holy Guide. L I B- 3 .

39. But if all alone and fimpie things
be within the compafs of this Law , then
Heaven may not be free, nor exempted 5
and they (peak* not altogether fondly,
that fay, the Stars feed uponthe Sea $ and
for thatcaufe, by good advice of Nature ,
the Ocean fo rightly placed tinder the
courfe and walk of the Sun ; for although
the water be yet fo far off, and unlike
them, yet their power and ftrength is
fuch,as they are able by their labour eafi-
ly to refine it , and turn it firft into Air,
and then into iEther, a weaker like thing,
and their proper food.

40. That this is fo, the hungry Souls
f which are but taps dipt off the heavenly
body) makes it plain here below unto us,
when we fee them ftill unwilling to tarry,
and unable to live among us without
meat, as they bewray tfoemfelves by the
plain expence and wade of the firft moi-
fture : Nay take this one way , if you
would mark well, and all lyeth on the
ground : then there is old coil and fight-
ing here below for meat and exercife,that
is, for life and being (which makes the
caufe of all aftion and doing, reft and
change, and of all things J and every
one runneth eafily and gladly to his like;
and if hisftrength be never fo lit tie grea*
ter, he fubdues, digefts, and turns him in-
to

Lib.?, The Holy Guide. 35

to his own nature, and is ftrengthened by
him j but if he mifle of his like food at
hand, and be much ftronger, he dares en-
counter, and is able to equal unlike things
alfoj as I find of the Scars, mightieft
things, giving might to all things in the
world : But in cafe the unlikes and con-
traries be of equal power and matches,
then neither devoureth nor confumeth
each other , but both are mazed, dulled,
and weakened , which they call confent,
and temper, and mixture ; for example,
fireextream hotandfomewhafi dry wit h-
all, and water very cold and fomewhat
wet,meeting together in even powers and
proportions of ftrength, are both impair-
ed, but neither loft and deftroyed 5 but if
this nature chance by the heat of Heaven
tsbe taken in hand, and turned into an
airy and fat fubftance , though there be
now two monfters fet againft the drought
of fire, yet becaufe of the heat of weather
and Heaven abounding, it is now become
partly like to fire, his weaker foe and ene-
my yielding himfelf for food unto it,and
encreaflng his ftrength and nature. But
if on the other fide air add unto his ex-
ceeding moifture, matching the drought
of fire, yet fome ftrength and watry cold-
nefs fas appeareth in thick and foggy
weather) it is able eafily to overcome the
firs, and eat him up, 41,

36 The Holy Guide. LlB.$

41. Now for a mixtbody (which is a
confenc and dulling of the fourfirft fa-
mous enemies, made and kept in tune and
awe, by the force and skill of an heavenly
and natural heat upon them ) it hath the
fame reafon ; for when either for lack of
meat, or driven by violence, this heat de-
parteth, the friends begin to ftir and
fight for food and freedome, until fome
oneftandsout above the reft, and reco-
vers fome part of his former power,which
puts thofe that can feel to the worft , and
breeds difeafes, and at laft gets the whole
Lordfhip, and rules over all, and turns
them all into his own nature; then the
old confent,knot,and body is broken, loft
and fpoiled, and a new made and gotten,
ftill going downward, untillthey return
to earth, from whence they all came ; for
example,and that near home ; In the fiery
frame of mans body , when the foul for
want of food fails and flits away, they
itreight retire and run back in order:
Firft, fire waxeth moift and lukewarm,
fupt up with air, and thisfoon after thick
and cold, that is,wateri(h, and water mud-
dy,ftill more and more thick and dry, till
at length it be molt dry and heavyaand all
be devoured and brought to earth , from
whence they all fet forth before. And
this is the natural diflblution and

deatk

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. 37

death of our body ; forcible death and
deftruttion is by difeafe ( to bear out
other force, which no man can warrant )
when either breath or meat, diftempered
in fome quality, do feed and nourifhfome
one their like beginnings above the reft,
and make him ftrong and able to vanquifti
them, and bring in the jar of the mufkal
confent aforefaid ; as when by waterifh
meat and air all the beginnings are chan-
ged into water, through hot and dryin-
toa fiery temper, and fo forth; or eife
when the body wants the exercife which
is owing and due unto him, which is quick
motion, to preferve the air and fire in the
fine frame of man, from the floth and
idlenefs of the flow and rufty begin-
nings.

For in a Difeafe called the yellow Jtun-
dice, when all the blood is converted into
choler , if there be not a way to convert
that choler back into bloud,how can the
man live f for if all the blood converted
into choler be let out, he muft needs die 5
fbhe muft alfo if there be not a way left
in nature to tranfmute this choler back
again into blood : I might inftance the
like of the Dropfie 5 but I mould make too
I< ng a marginal note ; ftudy Nature, and
(he will make thee a better Phy fitian then
Galen himfelf was, fo fnall you learn to

fort i fie

38 The Holy Guide. Lib.}

fortifie that quality of the body that is
weak, andalmoft eaten up by its adverfe
quality, as a Mufitian winds up that ftring
that is flacked, till it makes a harmony in
the reft,but he winds it not too high, lead
its found overtop them. By which
grounds laid, we fee the way to uphold
the temper of our body made plain and
eafie ; no more but to feed and cherifli it
with clean and temperate Air and meat
continually > that all the beginnings
ferved and fed alike , one may not be
more proud, ftrong, and able then ano-
ther,to fubdue the reft, and overthrow the
State 5 and therefore poyfon killeth
us , becaufe it is extream cold and dry,
(Tor we niay fhut out all rotten, as alfo
fiery and watery tempers from the name
of poyfon) feeding and ftrengthning the
dregs, but devouring the fine liquor of
the body , as venomous Juices the like
Plants, and thefcnoifomeBeafts, and one
of thefe another j nay which is very
ftrange, I have read of fuch nacured men
of India , that ufed to eat Toads and Vi-
pers : And Albert™ faith , he fawaGirlof
three \ear\ old >t hat fed greedily upon Spiders,
and was never hurt,but liked greatly with

it.

42. Do not think it anydifcord, when
Ifaid above , fatnefs and raw temperate-

nefs

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 39

nefs upholds the body • all is ones it can-
not be fac , unlefs the earth and water be
well and evenly mixt ; nor fine, except
fire and air bear as good a ftroke, as rule
among them ', but you will fay, that Na-
ture hath given her creatures a walk of
courfe , not to (land ftill in one ftay and
place for ever 3 but to move and walk up
and down, to and fro, from one fide to
another: that is, as wasfaid before, God
hath made a changeable world,and there-
fore that' frame and building of mans
body, cannot ever hold and hang toge-
ther , but mull needs one day be loofned
and fall afunder. I grant, it mull needs be
fo by the courfe of nature, becaufe to ful-
fil the will of her Lord^ (he hath appointed
ftronger means and caufes to work, either
the want and abfence of the inward
friendftiip and keeping of the foul , in
thofe which the common fore callliving
things,or in the reft, theprefenceof fome
ravenous and fpoiling enemy : but if
cunning Art and Skill ( which by the
help of nature is above thecourfeof na-
ture J by knowing of the due food for
life, and defence againft the enemy, may
be ajole to defend the one, and keep off
the other, then, no doubt, the frame and
temper of both dead and quick may laft
for ever.

43. The

40 The Holy Guide. L1B.3

43. The way is found already , and
known by certain people for the one j I
mean, that Art hath often, by keeping off
the failing enemy with a ftrong contrary,
preferved and upheld a dead thing , of
ilippery date and foon decay for ever >
as a Corps by Balm or water of Salt,Tim-
berby theoyl of Brimftone,and fuch like:
Why then mould the next prove impolfi-
ble > to wit,by giving ftore of fit food frill
to life and natural heat ( for the other
helps of meat and exercife are* eafie ) to
underfhore or keep upright our weak and
falling frame forever.

The Greeks hold, that our natural heat
and life ( becaufe it feeds upon,and waft-
eth the moft fine and unfeen oyl ( called
firft moifture ) daily, which no food of
Air and Meat is fit and fine enough tore-
pair, muft need faint and fail wichall, and
cannot be reftored : Let us fee what may
be faid to this, yea and bend all our force
unto it ; for this is all.

44. The foul, life and natural heat of
things is often and fitly compared and
likened unto the other grofs and fierce,
hot and dry body, called fire 5 to feed
and maintain this, his weak-like, that is,
air cannot be wanting ; and becaufe it in
his due place is too thin and fcattered,di-
viding the fire to nought in purfuit of his

food

Li B. 2 . 7 he Holy Guide. 4 1

iood and fuiienance , vc muft needs by
heaps be crowded up in a fhell of watery
called oyl 5 if much heat and oyl nieec
together* the work is great and buiie, and
thereout rifeth a fmoak as a leaving of the
meat , and the fire follows as far as the
fmoak hath any fatnefs , which makes a
flame.

45. Albeit the nature of fire continueth as
long as it hath food enough, & cravech no
great exercife, and will laft well in a c!ofe
place as under afhes,yet aflame being more
thenfire,a hot breath orfmoak-befides,de«
fires open and clear air,both to receive the
thick,the refwfe , which elfe would choalc
him, as alfo for his like weaker food, thac
he be not ftarved , which two are enough^
befides a little motion for his exercifejthac
we may not marvailat thofe men, which
be in cooling for another needful thing
in this bufinefs, wherees the kind of fire
and air abhors cooling as his contrary, as
it is engraven in the nature of things, ftill
to fly from that which hurtsit.

Now in like manner to come to the pur-
pofe, if the fire of life and natural heac
be not great,a little fine oyl, and firft moi-
fture, will ferve to feed it, and out of the
flack working fmallftore of refufe breath
and fmoak arifeth to make need of frefh
and open air to clearWe and feed it, as
S appeared*

A*x the Holy Guide, Lib. 3

appeareth by thafe Wights,which are able
to live in their places without help of
wind.> breath, and air: thelittle parted
Vermine ( called in Latine Ifefia ) liveth
any where 3 and Fifh in the water, nay in
the found earth fometimes \ Toads \\t
clofe Rocks,as Agrkola faith ; and Flies in
themoft fecret Miners fire , as Aritfotlere-
ports ; but when the heat , on the other
iide,is great and lively, like a flame, as in
the hotter fifh, and other, no Wight can
want frefhairand fine breath, both by his
clearnefs to purge , and his weaker like-
siefs tonourifh the iEtherial fmoak, and
(pirit that carrieth it.

ftowthis, no more then flame, needeth
cooling to preferve his being *, but to
temperate the kind of his proportion , fit
for wit and weighty perceiving, which, I
fay,before I brought, and not the air per-
formed.

46. That ^Ether is ftronger then air,and
able toconfume it, it is plain in reafon by
his warmth and moiftne?,pafIing air in his
own naturejand yetgrofsand thick air, as
bent towards enmity and contrariety
with it, will ftand in combat againft it,
and overcome it, and thence it is, that in
deep Mine-pits,and Caves underground,
where the air is thick$co'rrupt,and unkind
for want of flowing, no Wight nor light

can

Ll E. 3. ihe Holy Guide, 43

can draw breath and live* unlels by ily
deiire the way be found to move and
nouriih the fame air , and make it kind-

47. Then to draw near the matter, if
the Stars do feed on ./Ether,and this upon
ciean andfpotleG>air , as on their weaker
lights , and our foul and life is of a ftai ry
kind 5 even a (lip and fpark thereof ( as
you may read at large in my Harmony of
the JVerld) as is aforefa'd, then it fo flow-
ech forth to feed our ^ther, the Carrier
of ourfoul, with good a;r, which is round
about us j that will fcrve the turn, but to
nourifh life and heat it felf. Either it lelf
mult be the food, or this body which is Co
high and pail our reach, except this- fpark
of heavenly fire were able, like the whole
body and fpring above, by his power over
our meats , to turn the water firft into
breath , and this into /Ether , which it is
norland can go no further then toair,and
to make a common oyl and fatnefs fit to
nourifh an elemental, as they term it, but
not a heavenly fire.

48. Where then mall our life find food
and fuftenance, fay you , tic to bear it up,
and maintain his being ? In that fine oyl,
and unfeen firft jnoifture and fat, and call
you that iEtherial > How can that which
wxonceftedj and before that bleed, and fin} of

S 2 all

A 4 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

all a fipnt, become a body fo fine , clear and
JEtbereal ? Efpecially when one weak
^>car, and foft fire of heaven, is not able to
make fo fineawork,fo fair and highly fun*
dered -0 1 fay, this is the fecret and depth
of all 5 which becaufe the Greek} never
founded, I do not marvel if the means to
preferve life did efcape them ; but let us
ihut up every word, and help them in this
helplefs matter , yea although we be dri-
ven to open the things that have long
lain hid and covered over with great
darknefs.

When our life in the lufting parts is by
Che bellows of thought ftirred up, and
moved unto work, itfendeth forth out of
every part , the hot natural fpirits and
breath of begetting cloathed with the
(hell of feed , cut out from the dewy part
of our meat, ready to be turned into our
body ( or at leaft already, and now turn-
ed into earth)and not from the refufe and
leavings of it, asfomefay, when I could!
(hew it,if time would fuffcr,the bed juice
in all our body.

49. This is the furtheft and fineft work
manfhip of our meat and food of body,
the very beginning and firft (ruffe of th
fine oyl,the food of life,after the remain
ing forty dayes in heat , before it come t
perfcftion3 being wrought, as we know,

with

Lib.j. 7 he Holy Guide* 4 5

with the double natural heat of the be-
getting breatb,and the womb, forty dayes
before it be fully framed and faihioned
into the form and (hape of a man , ready
to draw food or nourimment ( be it milk
or menftrue, received by mouth or navel,
I cannot ftand to reafon ) from the mo-
ther , to the increafe of the tough and
founder parts : but the firft moifture is
now at his full growth and perfeftion,and
from thence feedeth life , being unfed it
felf,and wafteth daily againft the grounds
and rules of Phyfick , for the child hath
now received all that the workman can
give, & is put over for the reft5 which is his
nourimment, unto his mothers payment 5
but what hath (he to give for food unto
the food of life > NougBt, as I (hewed be-
fore5 elfe we might live for ever.

Then we fee what the firft moifture is>
and how it excels the food of the body, 8c
why it cannot be maintained by it, be-
caufe it is the moft airy peice f for the reft
go every one his way , and make his owri
part from whence he came)of all the feed
mingled, wrought,purged,raifed,and re-
fined,and then clofely thickened and dri-
ven up clofe together, forty times more 8c
above our meat, which in one day is end-
ed and ready to be turned into earth3and
therefore unfit in any wile to increafe and
S 3 cleave

46 7A« Holy Guide. LiB.2.

cleave co our tirft moifture, the food of
life , even as unmeet for all the worlds as
water is to iEther,oyl cr fitnefs.

50. J\nd by this to come to the point,
we have a plain pattern ( if we be wife
and careful ) and way to work the great
myitery cf Adjourment of life-, for if it be
fo,as I proved above, that all the moifture
of the matter lyeth in the maintenance
of our natural heat, and it, as our men,
and all reafon teacheth , followeth the
iteps of common fire,waxethand waneth,
is quick and faint .> according to the ftore
of his food, andfirft moiftuie; then fure
we can make an oyi as fine and clofe as
this, nay in ail points all one with this ; it
will ealily mingle and joyn with our firft
moifture, and fo fee J, nouriOi, and in-
crcafe, and like withal! ; even in as good
and plain reafon , as the fame oyl dropt
ftill into the fire augments both food and
flame; yea put cafe the fame natural fire
of ours , mould not only impaij? his
ftrength, for lack of meat, and flack his
force, but abate hisbignefsalfo, as feme
Phyiitians hold : yet there were no gTeat
hurt done; for this fecond fpark and Hip
of the great and common fire of Nature^
being a piece of the finer part of the
whole ( which is all one in all things) and
fellow to his like in us, when it is mack

free

L1B.3. Ifa Holy Guide. 47

free and clofe in thefe fine iEtherial Me-
dicines,would reitore the heap, and mend
the matter.

But how (hall we get the like fine oyl
and fat tiiftmoifture>

51. The matter is drawn fo far, that
there is all the hardnefs *, I mewed the
pattern , even as Nature got the fame be-?
fore you, by the like ftuffe and food, and
by the like heat and moving workman :
this by certain proof of all our men is
eafily to be found, even a gentle, con-
tinual, equal, andmoift, that is, rotting
heat. But the feed feemcth hard and
unable to be matched , becaufe a kind of
ftrange and hid proportion and temper of
our body ( which no man by counfel and
knowledge, much lefle by hand and work-
manfhipjcan reach andcounterfeit,nonoe
if he boyld all the mixtures in all the
heats that all the wits in the world could
devife, made it thus after his own faftu*
on.

52. Then how if we take the fame
frame and temper not by us , but by kind
proportioned > I mean the fame blood, or
nefh,or feed.if we will f which the men of
Germany choofe , and commend it ,
above all , and call it Muwia ) would it
not be very natural ? for if the Doctors
hold it good , if any part about us fail ip,

S 4 hi^

4S The Holy Guide. LiB.^ j

his duty,tocorre& and help him with the
like pare of fome beaft, pairing in the pro-
perty j as to mend fainting I lift with the j
yard of a lufry Beaft; the womb th^t
cannot hold, with the womb of a quick I
Conceiver ; narrow breathing with the I
lungs of a long-winded Wight. See the
Itiarmonyof the [Vorld^ &c.

Then confider with how much more
kindly confent we might with cur own
parts finely drefTed help ourfelvesin our
difeafes.

But for my part I cannot unwind the
bottomeof this great Secret of Germany,
for we mean not to make a Man, which is
to be feared in thecourfe , if his rules be
true, but a faft mcifture only ; and then
fithall things are made of the fame ftuffe,
by the fame workman , and differ but by
mingling only , it boots not where we be-
gin the fame mingling , and form it the
laft, which Art is able in time to do at
once, (he may do often, and fo reach the
end of Nature.

53, Whatneedl fay more? Is notthe
matter clear enough,that another faft fine
oyl and firft moifturemay be made, in all
iike to our own, and able to maintain, or
repair it and the natural together > And
then that by the fame ( though other
cage means would ferve) becaufeit isfo
J ~ tern-

Li B.3. The Holy Guide. '49

temperate , the body may be brought and
held in fquare and temper, and fo by
reafon all the caufes meet and flock to-
gether, the life may bepreferved, I dare
not fay for ever , for fear of the ftroke of
Beftiny which God hath made, and will
have kept, but unto the term , and thofe
bounds above fet, and beyond them
alfo, if ever any men have gone beyond
them. 5 ee the Temple of JVifdome.

^4. But if it fhould chance any of our
chofen children ( toufe thephrafeof our
Family) be unable yet, for all this
teaching , to take and digeft this food of
learning, what is to be done.? Shall we
caft them off for untoward Changelings,
as the foolifh women think > Or elfe for
Beares and Apes, as Galen did the Ger-
mans? No, that were inhumanity; let lis
rather nourifh them ftill eafily and gently,
hoping that they will one day prove men ;
and give it unto them , that all the
moft wife and cunning men in the world,
I mean all the hofts of Hermetifts , have
from age to age ever held ( but under
vails and fhadows ) fomewhat covertly,
and taught for certain, that fucha firft
fine oyl, whereof I fpake, and which they
call a fifth nature , Heaven, or by a more
fit name, JEther^ is able alone to hold to-
gether the brittle ftateof man, very long

above

50 tke Holy Guide. L \ B- 3 .

above the wonted race both in life, health.,
and lufiinefs : nay, for fear there be yet
fo'me fufpiticn left in their Authority , \
will go further; As many in the other
lideof Greece 3 as had travelled in thefe
matters^andfeenfcmeching ( though not
with eyes, but with minds i think ) con-
fefs the fame; as (befides them which
perhaps I know not ) Fernel in part, and
altogether Fecinus and Car damn (who were
as wife and learned men as any time hath
brought forth) do openly declare in their
writings : But if this foft and eafie kind of
delivery will not yet ferve theturn, and
they mufrfeed their eye as well as their
belly, as the proverb goes, then let them
cell me by what diligence did Plato (o or-
der himfelf and fchool his own body (to
life his words )<tf he could be able to caufc Na-
ture to end his dayes at hi* plea fur e .<? and by de»
parting or dying on the fame day eighty one years
after his birth , to fulfil of purpofe ( but I
know not of what purpofe) nine times
nine, the moft perfect number : Might he
not have had fomefuch Medicines > Nay,
is it not like he had them when he wa9 in
/Egypt among the Pxiefts and Wife men,
and brought home great learning from
among them I and when he fpeaks Co
much and often in difgrace of his own
Countries Phyfick, though Hippocrates

him-

LlB.?. The Holy Guide. 5 1

-

himfelf then reigned > But it is for certain
written in divers of our Records, that
many of Egypt , the fp ring of this water of
liie , have before and fince Tlato, by the
feif fam: water, kept themfelves alive
twice as long as Plato 5 if I might bring in
their witnefs , or if this whole kind of
proof ( which I like full ill) were not
counted by the Arc of People unskil-
ful!.

$<;. Then let this one example to'd by
Cardan, a man allowed among them,ferve
for all j That Galenus of late Charles the
fifths Phylitian, by this Heaven of ouns,
b:fet with Starrs (as fome do term it)
encreafed the fpirits of herbs, by an eafie
feat put into them, and fo preferved him-
felf in luftv fort until one hundred and
twelve years.

56. Neither think tht mixture better
then our fingle oyl, ( though Lully, Ra*
perfis, Varacelfus , aud fome others allow
icfo) but rather worfe in reafon fortoo
much heat in a weak and loofe body;
I mean for long life; by his over greedi-
nefs in eating up too faft his own and our
firft moifture 5 it maybe better becaufeit
is ftronger againft difeafes ; even as the
Leaches judge between the durrghil and
a garden hearb for the fame caufe.

51, But

5 1 The Holy Guide. Lib. 5

21. But i think the device not good
in either, nor agreeable to the Juftice
of Nature , which more evenly weigheth.
her works 5 nor yec to the kindly skill
of Hermes 9 who, to the great advantage
of his Medicines, hath a moftfaft, tough,
and lading ftufle, according as we (hall
(how in that which followeth. Now is it
time to reft, we have made the Third a
longdayes journey.

CHAR

L1B.3. The Holy Guide. 53

CHAP. H.

1.2. Of the accurate ftrufiure of mans body:
5. Of joy and grief e^ and difference of
wits,

I Admire the goodnefs of God towards
us in the frame and ftru&ure of our bo-
dies; the admirable Artifice whercofy Ga-
len, though a Naturalift, was fo taken
with, that he could not but adjudge the
honour of a hymn to the wife Creator of
it. The continuance of the whole, and
every particular is fo evident an argu-
ment of exquifite skill in the Maker, that
if I mould purfueall that fuits to roypur-
pofe, it would amount to too large ("yet
an entire^ Volume. I fhall therefore write
all that is needfull to be known by all
men, leaving the reft to be fupplyed by
Anatomifts : And I think there is no man
that hath any skill in that Art, but will
confefs, the more diligently and accu-
rately the frame of our body is exami-
ned, it is found the more exqmfitely con-
formable to our Reafon, Jndgement and
Delire-, fothat fuppofing the fame mat-
ter that our bodies are made of^ if it had
been in our own power to have made our

(elves.,

54 the Holy Guide. L1B.3

felves, we mould have framed our felves
nootherwife then we are : Toinftancein
fame particulars, As in our Eyes, the
Number, the Scituation, the Fabrick of
them is fuch, that we can excogitate no-
thing to be added thereto, ortobe alter-
red, either for their Beauty, Safety, or
lifefulnefs; But as for their Beauty, I
have treated largely of it in my youthful
merry Poems, and now am uot minded to
transcribe my tender nice fubjeft , and
couple it with my feverer ft>le; 1 will
onely note how fafely they are guarded,
and fitly framed out for the ufethey are
intended : the Erow and the Nofe faves
them from harder ftrokess but fuch a cu-
rious part as the Eye, being neceflary lia-
ble to mifchief from Imallcli matters, the
lweat of the Forehead is fenced off by
thofe two wreaths of haire, which we call
the Eyc-browes* and the Eye-lids are
fortified with little ftiff briftles, as with
Palljfadoes, againft the aflault of Fives
and Gnats, and fuch like bold Animalcu-
l&\ beiides, the upper lid prefently claps
down , and is as good a Fence as a Port-
cullis againft the importunity of the Ene-
my ; which is done alfo every night,whe-
ther there be any prefent aflault or no, as
if nature kept Garrifon in this Acropolis
of mans body, the Head, and look 'd that

fuch

LjB. 3. ihz Holy Gtiide. 55*

fuch Lawsfhould be duly obferved,as were
moft for hisfafety.

2* And now for the life of the Eye,
which is fight, it is evident, that this Or-
gan is fo exquifitely framed for thatpur-
pofe , that not the leait curiofity can be
added : For iirfr, the Humour aiidTuniclei
are purely tranfparent to let in light, and
colours unfolded, and unfophifticated by
any. inward tincture. And then again ,
the parts of the Eye are made convex0
that there might be a direction of many
rayes coming from one point of the ob-
ject , unto one point anfwerable in the
boctome of the eye, to which purpofe the
ChryfiaUine humour is of great moment, and
without which, the fight would be very
obfeureand weak. Thirdly, the Tunica
uvea hath a Mufculous Yomr^nd can dilate
and contract that round hole in it, which
is called the Pupil of the Eye, for the bet-
ter moderating the tranfmiition of light.
Fourthly, the infide of the^ietfis black
like the wall of a Tennis-Court, the
raies falling upon the Retina again 5 for
fuch a repercuffion would make the fight
more confufed. Fifthly, the Tunica Aracb-
vcides , which invellops the ChryfiaUine hu-
mour, by vertue of its Procejfus Ciliares^ can
thruft forward , or draw back that preti-
9us ufeful part of the Eye, as the nearnefs

or

• 5 6 The Holy Guide. Ll B. 7,

or diftance of the obje&s (hall require.
Sixthly and laftly, the Tunic* Retina is
white, for the better and more true re-
ception of the fpecies of things ( as they
ordinarily call them ) as white paper is
fitteit to receive thole Images of Ink*
and the eye is already fo perfeft,
that 1 believe it is not needful to fpeak
any more thereof *, we being able to move
our head upwards and downwards , and
on every fide, might have unawares
thought our felvcs fufUciently well pro-
vided for h but Nature hath added Muf-
cles alfo to the Eyes , that no perfection
might be wanting; for we have oftocca-
fion to move our Eyes, our Heads being
unmoved,as in reading,and viewing more
particularly any object fet before us; and
that this may be done with more eafe and
accuracy, (he hath furnifhed that Organ
with no lefie then fix feveral Mufcles ;
and indeed this framing of Mufcles , not
only in the Eye , but in the whole body^
is admirable; for is it not a wonder, that
even all our flefh mould be fo handfomly
formed and contrived into diftinft pieces,
whofe rife and infertionslhouldbe with
fuch advantage, that they do ferve to
move fome part of the body or other i
and that the parts of our body are not
moved only fo conveniently, as will ferye

us

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 57 2*

us to walk and fubfift by, but that they are
able to move everyway imaginable that
will advantage us ? for we can fling our
Legs and Arms upwards and downwards,
backwards, forwards, and roiind5 as they
that fpin,or would fpread a Mole hill with
their feet. To fay nothing of Reffiratz-
oh , the conftriftion of the Diaphragm* for
the keeping down the Guts, and fo enlar-
ging the Thorax, that the Lungs may have
pfay, and the afliftance of the inward in -
ter'coftal Mufcles in deep fufpirat ions, wheii
we take more large gulps of Air to cool
our heart, overcharged with love or for-
row; nor of the curious Fabrick of the
Lainix, fo well fitted with Mufcles for the
modulation of the voice, tunable fpeech,
and delicious finging : You may add to
thefe the notable contrivance of the
Heart, its two ventricles, and its many val-
vule ,fo fram'd and fcitiiated, as is mod lit
for the reception and tranfmifflori of the
blood , and its fent thence away warm to
comfort and cherifh the reft of the body ;
for which purpofe alfo the valvule in the
veins are made.

3. But we fee by experience, that joy
ami grief proceed not in all men from the
fame caufes , and that men differ very
much in the conftitution of the body3
whereby that which helpeth arid further-
T ech

5 8 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

cth vital conftitutiou in one, and is there-
fore delightful , hindereth and croffeth it
in another, and therefore caufeth grief.
The difference therefore of Wits hath its
original from the different paffions , and
from the ends to which the appetite lead-
eth them. As for that difference which
arifeth from ficknefs, and fuch accidental
diftempers, I have appointed them for
thefeco'nd Part of this Book, and there-
fore I omit the fame as impertinent to this
place,and confider it only in fuch as have
their health, perfe&ion of body, and Or-
gans well difpofed.

— -?■

CHAP,

Ll B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 59

CHAP. II.

I. Of the -perfection of the Body, 2. And
then of the Nature of the Senfes. 3. Of
Delight^ 4. Pain, 5. Love, 6. Hatred,
7. Senfkal Delight, 8. and Pains of the
B°fy> 9- J°Jy 10. and Grief.

i./^Ther things I have to fay, but I
\^ will rather infift upon fuch th ings
asareeafie and intelligible even to Idiots,
or fuch Phyficians that are no wifer, who if
they can but tell the joints of their
hands,or know the ufe of their teeth,they
may eafily difcover it was Counfel , noc
Chance, that created them 5 and if they
but underftand thefe natural Medicines
I have prepared in this Book for their ex-
ample, they willknowthat theyfhallbe
cured of alli?ifeafes, without pain or any
great coil; and Love, not Money, was it
that made me undertake this Task. Now
of the well-fram'd parts of our body, I
would know why we have three joints iri
our Legs and Arms,as alfo in our fingers,
but that it was much better then having
but two or four > And why are our fore-
teeth fharp like Chizfeels, to cut, but our
inward teeth broad, to grind 1 but this is

T 2 more

6o 1 he Holy Guide. LiB 3-

more exquiiice then having cherii ail
fharpjorali broad,or the fore-teeth broad,
and the other (harp; but tfe might have
made a hard fhift to have lived , though
tn that worfer condition. Again, why
are the teeth Co luckily placed .<? Or ra-
ther , why are there not Teeth in other
bones as well as in the Jaw-bones , for
they might have been as capable as thefe.
But the reafon is,nothing is done fooli/h-
ly, nor in vain, I have (hewed you how
to prolong life , and to return from" Age
to Youth i and how to change, alter and
amend the ftate of the body : To keep
the body in perfect health is my prefent
defign, and to cure all Difeafes without
reward , for there is a divine Providence
that orders all things. Again ( to fay
nothing of the inward curiofity of the
Ear) why is that outward frame of it,
but that it is certainly known that it is for
the bettering of our hearing >

2. I might add, that Nature hath made
the hindmoft parts of our Body ( which
we fit upon ) moft flefhy , as providing
foroureafe, making us a natural Cufhi-
on , as well as for Inftruments of Motion
for our Thighs and Legs ; (he hath made
the hinder part of the Head more ftrong,
as being otherwife unfenced againft falls
arid other cafuaities. She hath made

the

L B • 3. The Holy Guide 6 C

th: Back- bone of feveral Vertebra , as bc«?
ing more fie to bend, more tough, and lefs
in danger of breaking then if they were
all one intire bone , without thofe gnftly
un&ures. She hath ftren<ichened our

t

ingers and Toes with Nails, whereas (he
might have Cent out chacfubftance at the
end of the firft andfecond Joints, which.
hid not been fo handfome and ufeful,
nay , rather fomewhat troublefome and
hurtful. Andlaftly, She hath made all
bones devoid of fenCe, becaufe they were
to bear the weight of themfelves , and of
the whole body ; and therefore if they
had had fenfe, our life had been painful
continually and dolorous.

3. And now I haveconfidered the $t-
nefs of the parts of mans body for the
good of the whole , let me but coniider
briefly his fenfes and his nature, and then
I intend more folidly to demonftrate the
caufeof all Difeafes, and with that the
Cure , becaufe I intended a Holy Guide
in my Harmony of the World , and other
Books . By our feveral Organs we have
feveral Conceptions of feveral qua-
lities in the objects -y for by light we have
a conception or image compofed of co-
lour and figure, which is all the nptice
and knowledge the objefl: imparceth to
tjsof its nature, by the excellency of the

■ T 3 «/«•

6a the Holy Guide. LiB.2.

eye. By Hearing we have a conception
called Sound, which is all the knowledge
we have of the quality of the object from
the Ear: And fo the i eft of theSenfesare
alfo conceptions of feveral qualities or
natures of theirobje&s.

4. Becaufe the Image in vifion con lift-
ing of colour and fhape,is the knowledge
we have of thequalities of the objett of
that Senfe, it is no hard matter for a man
to fall into this opinion, That the fame
colour and fhape are the very qualities
themfelvesj and for the fame caufethat
found and noife are the qualities of a
piece of Canon or Culvering charged
with fuiphurous Powder, fired, orof the
Air: And this opinion hath been folong
received 5 that the contrary muft needs
appear a great Paradox. The fame qua-
lities are eafierin a bell ; and yet the in-
troduction of fpecies vifible and intelli-
gible^ ( which is neceflary for the main-
tenance of that opinion ) pailing to and
fro from the objeft, is worfe then any Pa-
radox, as being a plain im portability. I
(hall therefore endeavour to make plain
thefe points.

5. That the fubjeft wherein colour
and image are inherent, is not the objeft
or thing feen.

6. That

L1B.5. The Holy Guide. 63

6. That there is nothing ( really )
which we call an Image or Colour.

7. That thefaid Image, or Colour, is
but an apparition unto us of the motion,
agitation, or alteration, which the objeft
worketh in the brain, orfpirits, or fome
internal fubftance of the Head.

8. Thatasinvifion, fo alfo in concep-
tions that arife from the other Senfes, the
fubjeft of their inherence is uotthe ob-
ject, but the continent.

9. That Conceptions and Apparitions
are nothing really, but motion infomc
internal fubftance of the Head, which
motion not flopping there , of neceflity
muft there either help or hinder the moti-
on,which is called Vital 5 when it helpeth
it is called Delight, Contentment, or
Pleafure , which is nothing really but mo-
tion about the Heart, as Conception is no»
thing but motion in the Head , and the
obje&s that caufe it are called, Pleafant,
or Delightful, and the fame Delight, with
reference to the object , is called Love ;
but when fuch motion weakneth or hin*
dreth the vital motion , then it is called
Pain,and in relation to that which caufetn
it, Hatred.

10. There are two forts of pleafures,
whereof one feemethto affeft the corpo-
real Organ of the fenfe, and that I call

T 4 fenfualj,

64 1 he Holy Guide. Lib.?, j

fenfual , the greaceft part whereof is that i
by which we are invited to give continu-
ance to our Species * and the next by |
tvhicti a man is invited to meat 3 For pre-
servation of his individual perfon. The
qcher fort of Delight is not particularly
any part of the body, and is called, The
pelight of the Mind, and is that which we
call Joy. Likewife of Pains, fome affett
£heBody, and are therefore called, The
Pains of the Body 5 and feme not 3 and
ehofe are called Grief.

CHAR

L ) B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 6 3

CHAP. HI.

j. Of the nature of the fold of Man: 2 Whe-
ther(he be a meer Modification of the body :
3 . or a fubftance really dijiinli •. 4 . and
then whether corporeally or incoy pore all:
5 . and of the temper of the bod),

1. T TEre lam forced to fpeak what T
A A have in my book called Fawilar
Spirit, and it is not impertinent to my
purpofe 1 therefore if we fay that the foul
is a meer modification of the body, the
foul then is but one univerfal faculty of
the body, or a many faculties put toge-
ther; andthofe operations which are u*
fually attributed unto the foul, muft of
neceflky be attributed unto the body :
I demand therefore, Towhatinthe body
will you attrillfcte, fpo'ntaneous motion <? I
underftand thereby a power in our felves
of wagging, or holding ftill moftof the
parts of our body, as our hand, fuppofe,
or little finger: If you will fay that it is
nothing but the immiflion of the fpirits
into fuch and fuchMufcles,! would gladly
know what does immit thefe fpirits, and
direft them fo curioufly ; Is it themfelves?
qt the brains S or that particular piece of
* i the

66 The Holy Guide. L I B- 3 ,

the brain they call the Vine-k&rnel? What-
ever it be, chat which doth thus immit
them and dirett them, muft have Anim-
adverfion ; and the fame that hach A-
nimadverfion hath Memory and Reafon
alfo: Now I would know whether the
fpirits themfelves be capable of Animad-
verfion, Memory and Reafon; for it in-
deed feemes altogether impoffible ; for
thefe animal fpirits are nothing elfe buc
matter very thin and liquid, whofe na-
ture confifts in this, that all the particles
of it be in motion, and being loofe from
one another, frig and play up and down
according to the meafure and manner of
agitation in them.

2. 1 therefore demand, which of thefe
particles in thefe fo many loofly moving
one from another, hath Animadverfion
in it > if you fay that they all put toge-
ther have 5 I appeal to him that thus an-
fwers, how unlikely it is Aat that mould
have Animadverfion that is fo utterly un-
capable of Memory, and confequently, of
Reafon; for it |is impoffible to conceive
memory competible to fuch a fubjecl:, as
it is how to write Characters in the Wa*
ter, or in the Wind.

3. If you fay the brain immits and di-
rects thefe fpirits ; how can that fo freely
and fpontaneoufly move it felf, or ano-
ther,

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 67

ther, that hath no Mufcles > Befides, Do-
&ov Culpepper tells you, that though the
Brain be the inftrument of Sence, yet it
hathnofenfe atall of it felf; how then
can that that hath no fenfe direct us fpon-
taneoufly and arbitrarioufly, the animal
fpirits into any part of the body? an
Aft that plainly requires determinate
fenfe and preception : But let the Phyfi-
tians and Anatomifts conclude what
they will, I (hall, I think, little IcfTe then
demonftrate that the braines have no
fenfe; for the fame in us that hath
fenfe, hath likewife Animadverfion; and
that which hath animadverfion in us3hath
alfo a facultie of free and arbitrarious
Fancy and Reafon.

4. Let us now confider the nature of
the brain, and fee how competible thofe
alterations are to fuch a fubjeft ; verily
if we take a right view of this Laxe, pith,
or marrow in mans head , neither our
fenfe nor underftanding can difcover any
thing more in this fubftance that can pre-
tend to fuch noble operations, as free
imagination and fagacious collections of
Reafon, then we can difcern in a lump
of fat, or a pot of honey ; for this floofe
pulp that is thus wrapped up within bur
Cranium, is but a fpongie and porous bo-
dy, and previous, not onely to the ani-
mal

68 The Holy Guide. LlB.3-

mal fpirks, but alfo to more juice and
liquor •, elfe it could not well be nouri-
fhed/at leaft it could not befo foft and
xnoiftued by drmkennefTe and excefle,
as to make the underiranding inept and
fottifh in its operations. Wherefore I
now demand 5 in this foft fubftance
which we call the Brain, whofe foftneffe
implies that it is in fome meafure liquid,
and liquidity implies a feverai motion of
ldofened partsYin what part or parcel
thereof doe? Fancy, Reafon and Ani-
madverrlonlie> In this laxe confidence
that lies like a Net, all on heaps in the
water ; I demand, In what Knot, Loop ,
or Interval thereof, does this faculty of
free Fancy and active Reafon relide ? I
believe not a D :>&dr in England, nay, not
Doctor Culpepper himfelf, were he alive ,
nor his men, Do&or Fr;eman> and the
reft, can aflign me any ; and if any will
fay, in all together ; they muft fay that
the whole Brain is figured into this or
that reprefentation, which would cancel
Memory, and take away all capacity of
there being any diftinft notes and places
for thefevcral fjpec'iesof the things there
prefeuted. but if they will fay there is in
every part of the brain this power of A-
nimadverlion and Fancy, they are to re-
member, that the brain is infome mea-
fure

L.B.3. The Holy Guide. 69

fare a liquid body 3 and we mint enquire
Nhow thefe loofe parts underftand onea-
nothers feveral Animadverfions and no-
tions *, and if they could (^whichisyet
very unconceivable) yet if they could
from hence tioe any thing toward *the
immiffion and direction of the animal fpi-
rits into this or that part of the body,
they muft do: it by knowing one ano-
thers minds, and by a joynt contention
of ftrength., as when many men at once,
the word being given when they weigh
Anchor , put their ftrength together for
the moving of that maffie body, that the
(ingle ftrength of one could not deale
with j but this is to make the feveral par-
ticles of the brain fo many individual per-
fons ; a fitter objeft for laughter, then the
leaft meafure of belief.

5. Betides, how come thefe many A<-
nunadverfions to feem but one to us, our
minde being thefe, as is fuppofed? Or
why if the figuration of one part of the
braine be communicated to all the reft:
does not the fameobjettfeeme fcituated
both behinde us, and before us, above
and 6eneath , on the right hand and
on the left 5 and every way, as the im-
prefleofthe objett is reflected againft all
the parts of the braines 1 but there ap-
pear

70 The Holy Gride. LlB.3

pearing to us but one Animadverfion,
and one fight of things , it is a fuftici-
ent Argument that there is but one j
or if there be many, that they are not
mutually communicated from the parts
one £0 another.) and therefore there can
be no fuch joynt endeavour towards one
defigne; whence it is manifeft , that
the braines cannot immit or direct thcfe
animal fpirits into what part of the body
they pleafe.

CHAP,

Lib. 3. The Boly Guide. 71

CHAP. IV.

lUow a. Captain was killed: 2. Of fpont a--
neous motion : 3. Of the external Pheno-
mena : 4.0/ the nature of the EJfence: 5 .Of
the Soul her felfe : 6. What it is : 7. And.
whether it be corporeally 8. or incorpo-
real,

1 . jVJOw I muft tell you j that the brain
x\ hath no fenfe3 and therefore can-
not imprefle fpontaneoufly any motion
on the animal fpirits; it is no flight ar-
gument, that fome being differed, have
been found without braines: and this I
faw, a Captain in Cbrifley, in Arabia^ that
was accidentally kill'd by an Alcade and
an Arabian ; the ftone is pleafant, but not
pertinent to our purpofe ; but this man
had nothing but a limpid water in his
head^ inftead of brains $ and the braines
generally are eafily diflblvable into a wa-
tery confiftence, which agrees with what
1 intimated before. Now I appeal to any
free Judge, how likely thefe liquid parti-
cles are to approve themfelves of that na-
ture and power, as to be able by erecting
and knitting themfelves together for a
moment of time, to bear themfelves . fo,

M

71 The Holy Guide. Lie.?.

■ -• •

as with one joint contention of ftrength,
locaufeanarbitrarious obligation of the
fpirits into this or that determinate part
of the body j but the abfurditie of this 1
havefufficientlyinfinuated already.

2. The Nerves, I mean the Marrow of
them, which is the fame fubftance with
the brain, have no fenfej as is demonftra-
ted from aCM/Ji^ or Catochus j butl
will not accumulate Arguments in a mat-
ter fo palpable. As for that little fprunt
piece ofthe brain, which they call the Co-
nacioH) that this mould be the very fub-
ftance, whofe natural faculty it is to move
itfelf, and by its motion and nods to de-
termine the coarfe of the fpirits into this
or that part ofthe body, feemstomeno
lefle foolifh and fabulous then the Storie
oSlkomai Harrington^ Culpepper s man, who
tells a Tale of his Matters Ghoft,&;c. If
you heard but the magnificent ftory that
is told ofthe little lurking Mufhrome,bow
it does not onely hear and fee, but ima-
gines, reafens, commands the whole fa-
brick of the body more dexteroufly then
an Indian Boy does an Elephant: what
an acute Logician, fubtil Geometrician,
prudent Statefman, skilful Phyfitian, and
profound Philofopher he is / and then
afterwards by difie&ion you difcover this
worker cf miracles to be nothing but a

poor

Li B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 7 3

poor filly contemptible Knob, or Prctu-
bernacy, confiding of a thin Membrane,
containing a little pulpons mattery much
of the fame nature of the red of the brain \

Spedatum admiffi rifum teneatis amlcil

3. Would you not fooner laugh at it,
then go about to confute it > and truly I
may the better laugh at it now, having
already confuted it in what I have afore
merrily argued concerning the red of the
brain.

4.T fhal therfore make bold to conclude,
That the imprefle of fpontaneous motion
is neither from the animal fpirits, nor
from the brain, &c. therefore that thofc
operations that are ufually attributed nn-
to the foul, are really incompetible W
any part of the body; and therefore, as
in the laft chapter 1 hinted, I fay, That
the foul is not ameer modification of the
body , but a fubftance diftinft there-
from.

5. Now we are to enquire, Whether this
fubftance diftinft from what we ordinari-
ly call the body, bealfo it felf a corpore-
al fubftance, or whether it be incorpore-
al? If you fay that it is a corporeal fub-
ftance, you can underftand no other then
matter more fubtil and tenuous then the
U animal

a.<£

74 The Holy Guide. L1B.3

animal fpirits themfelves, mingled with
them, and difperfed through the veflels
and poroiitiesof the body ; for there can
be no penetration of dimenfions : But I
need no new arguments to confute this
fond conceitjforwhatl faidof the animal
fpirits before, is applicable with all eafe
and fitnefle to this prefent cafe -, and let ic
befufficientthat 1 advertife you fomuch-
and fobeexcufed from the repeating of
the fame things over again.

6. Icremaines therefore that we con-
clude, That that which impreffes fponta-
neous motion upon the body\or more im-
mediately upon the animal fpirits: That
which imagines, remembers, and reafons3
is an immaterial fubftance, diftinft from
the body, which ufes the animal fpirits
and the brain for inftruments in fuch and
fuch operations. And thus we have found
afpiritina proper no ion and fignifica-
tion, that hath apparently thefe faculties
in it, it can both underftand and move
corporeaj matter.

7. And now this prize that we have won
will prove for ourdeligne in this new me-
thod of Phyfick and Philofophy of very
great confequence ; for it is obvious here i
to cbferve that the foul of man is asit|
were^>ctA/xfit©€«, a compendious ftatueof
the Deity 5 her fubftance is a folid Effigies 1

on

Lib.?. * he Holy Guide. 7 5

of God ; and therefore, as with eafe,we
confider the fubftance and motion of the
vaft Heavens on a little fphere, or Globe,
fowemay with like facility contemplate
the Nature of the Almighty in this little
Model of God, the foul of man, enlarging
to infinity what we obferve in our felves
When we {transfer it unto God, as we doe
imagine thefe Circles which we view on
the Globe, tobevaftly bigger while we
fancy them as defcribed in the Heaven.

8. Wherefore we being allured of this,
That there is a fpiritual fubftance in our
felves, in which both thefe properties doe
relide, viz,, of the underftanding, and of
moving the corporeal matter 5 let-usbut
eularge our minds fo as to conceive as well
as we can of a fpiritual fubftance that is
able to move and a&uate all matter what-
foever, never fo far extended, and after
what way and manner foever it pleafe,and
that it hath not onely the knowledge of
this or that particular thing,but a diftinct
and plenary cognizance of all things; and
we have indeed a very competent appre-
henfion of the nature of the eternal and
invisible God., who, like the foul ofmani
does not indeed fall under fenfe^but does
every where operate fo, that hisperfonis
eafily to be gathered from what is difco-
vered by our cutwardfenfes.

U % CHAP;

76 1 he Holy Guide. Lib. 3

CHAP. VI.

Of Hants, that the meer motion of the matter
may do fomething , yet it will not amount
to the production of Plants. That it U no
botch in Nature, that fome Phenomena be

■ the refults of Motion , others of fubjlantial
forms. That beauty is not ^a meer fancy,
and that the beauty and vertue of Vlants vs
an Argument that they are made for the
ufe of our bodies from an intellectual prin-
ciple. ,

1. TTOw weak is Man , if youcQnfider
fl his nature , what faculties he
hath, and in what order he is in refpeft of
the reft of the Creatures? And indeed,
though his body be but weak and dif-
armd^yet his inward abilities of Reafon,
and artificial contrivance ^ is admirable,
both for finding out thole fecret Medi
cines , which God prepared for the ui'e of
Man,in ihe Bowels of the Earth^of Plants
and Minerals

'i. And firft of Vegetables^ where I (hall
touch only thefe four Heads , their Form
and Beauty, their Seed, their Signatures,
and their great ufe, as well for Medicines
as fuftenauce 5 and that we may the bet-
ter underftand the advantage we have in

this

L I B. 5 . The Holy Guide. 7 7

this clofer contemplation of the works of
Nature, we are in thefirft place to take
notice of the condition of the fubftance,
which we call matter, how fluid and flip-
pery, and undeterminate it is of it felf *
or if it be hard, how unfit it is to be chan-
ged into any thing elie ; and therefore all
things rot into a moifture before any-
thing can be generated of them, as we
foften the wax before we fet on the
feal.

3. Now therefore, unlefs we will be
fooliih , as becaufe the uniform motion of
the Air , orfome more fubtil corporeal
Element, may fo equally comprefs or bear
againft the parts of a little vaporous moi-
fture, as to form it into round drops ( as
we fee in the dew,and other experiments)
and therefore becaufe this more rude and
general motion can dofomething9 to con-
clude that it does all things : We muft in
all reafon confefs , that there is an eternal
Mind and Vertue, whereof the matter is
thus ufefully formed and changed.

4. But meer rude and undirected mo-
tion, becaufe naturally it will have fome
kind of refults,that therefore it will reach
to fuch as plainly imply a wife contrivance
of counfel, isfo ridiculous a Sophifme, as
I have already intimated , that it is more
fit toimpofe upon the inconliderate fouls

tl 1 of

J 8 the Holy Guide. Lib.j

— m nx. ■

of fools and children, then upon men of
mature Reafon,and well exercifed in Phi-
lofophy, or the grave and well pra&ifed,
feraf hie ally illuminated Ro fie Crucians. Admit
that Rain,and Snow, and Wind,and Hail,
and Iceland Thunder,and Lightning, and
a Star 1 mention for examp!e,that may be
let in amongft Meteors , by fome called
tlellens Star , and is well known at Sea , I
have fecn it melt Copper Veffels aboard a
(hip y it cometh of an heap of fuch va-
pours as are carried by violent crofs
Winds up from the Earth 5 and fuch like
Meteors may be the produces of heat and
cold, or of the motion and reft of certain
fmall particles of the matter 5 yet that
the ufeful and beautiful contrivance of
the Branches, Flowers, and Fruits of
Plants mould be fo too, ( to fay nothing
yet of Minerals,and the bodies of men )
is as ridiculous andfupine a collection, as
to infer, That becaufc meer heat and cold
does foftenand harden Wax , and puts it
into fome fliape or other, that therefore
this meer heat and cold, or motion and
reft,without any art and direftion , made
(the Silver Seal too , and graved upon it fo
curioufly fome Coat of Arms, or the (hape
of fome Bird or Beaft, as an Eagle,a Lyon,
&c% nay indeed this inference is more
tolerable far then the other $ thefeeffe&s

l"r— c " ;: - • of

LlE.?. The Holy Guide- 79

Art being more eafie, and lefle noble then
thofe other of Nature.

5. Nor is it any deficiency at all in the
works of Nature, that fome particular
Vhtnornena be but the eafie refults of that
general motion communicated unto the
matter from God ; others the effects of
more curious contrivance , cr of the Di-
vine Art , or Reafon ( for fuch are the
Koyw OT-«?|UfltTi;co*, the Rationet Seminales^)
incorporated in the Matter,efpecially the
Matter it felf being in fome fort vital, elfe
it would not continue the motion that it
is put upon, when it is occafionally this or
the other way moved; and befides the
Nature of God being the mod perfect
fulnefsof life that is pofllbly conceivable,
it i? very congruous,that this outmoft and
remoteft fhadow of himfelf, be fome way,
though but obfcurely vital: Wherefore
things falling off by. degrees from the
higheft perfection, it will be no uneven or
unproportionable ftep,if descending from
the top of this utmoft Creation, Man^ in
whom there is a more fine conception , or
reflexive Reafon,wfiich hangs on, as every
man hath fo much experience as to have
feen the Sun, and other vifible Objects, by
reflexion in the Water and Glafles , and
this as yet (hall be all I will fay for this
xeafonj 1 will give you more then I pro-
U 4 mifed,

8o the Holy Guide. Lib. 3.

mifedin the Contents, by four Prop oflti-
ons concerning the nature of Concepti-
ons , and they (hall be proved ; andalfo
of the main deception of Senfe, that Co-
lour and Image may be there where the
thing feen is not ; But becaufe it may be
faid, That notwithftanding the Image in
the Water be not in theobje&,but a thing
mcerly phantaftical, yet there may be co-
lours really in the thing it felf; I will
urge further this experience. That divers
timers men (ee direttly the fame objc&
doublets two Candles for one,which may
happen from diftemper^oroth erwife with-
out diftemper if a man will 5 the Organs
being either in their right temper, or
equally diftempered , the Colours and
Images in two fuch Characters of the
fame thing, cannot be inherent therein,
becaufe the thing feen cannot be in twp
places.

6. One of thefe Images therefore is
not inherent in the Obje&jbut the Teeing,
the Organs of the light arc then in equal
temper or diftemper , the one of them is
no more inherent then the other, and
c;onfequently,neither of them both are in
the Objedts , which is the firft proposition
mentioned in the precedent number.

7. Secondly, that the Image of any
thing by reflexion in a Glafs 3 orVVater,

or

LlB.3- rhe Holy Guide. 8 1

or the like, is not any thing in, or behind
the Glafs, or in,or under the Water, every
man may grant to himfelf; which is the
fecond Propoiition of Des Cartes,

For thirdly, we are to eonijder, firft,
That every great agitation or concufiion
of the brain ( as it happeneth from a
ftroke,efpecially if the ftroke be upon the
eye) whereby the Optick Nerve fufferech
any great violence,thereappeareth before
the Eyes a certain light, which light is no-
thing without , but an apparition only;
all that is real being the concufiion or mo-
tion of the parts of the Nerve; from
which experience we may conclude, That
apparition of light is really nothing but
mQtion within If therefore from Lucid
bodies there can be derived motion , fo as
toafFett the Optick Nerve in fitch manner
as is proper thereunto,there -will follow an
Image of light fomewhere in that line, by
which the motion was at laft derived to
the eye, that is to fay, in the Object, if we
look dire&lyonit , and in the Glafsor
Water, when we look upon it in the line of
reflexion, which in effect is the third Pro-
position, namely. That image and colour
is but an apparition to us of that motion,
agitation, or alteration, which the objeft:
worketh in the brain, orfpirits, orfome
internal fubftance in the head.

4, But

8 2 The Holy Guide* LiB. $

4. But that from all lucid, mining, and
illuminate bodies, there is a motion pro-
duced to the eye, and through the eye, to
the Optick Nerve , and fo into the Brain,
by which the apparition of light or colour
is effe&ed , is not hard to prove. And
firft, it is evident that the Fire , the only
lucid body here upon Earth , worketh by
motion equally every way, infomuch as
the motion thereof flopped or inclofed,
it is prefently extinguished , and no more
lire. And further, that that motion
whereby the fire worketh is dilation and
contraction of it felf alternately, com-
monly called Scintillation, or glowing, is
manifeft alfo by experience; from fuch
motion in the fire muft needs a rife a reje-
ction, orcaftingfromitfelf off that part
of the medium which is contiguous to it>
whereby that part alfo reje&eth the next,
and fo fuccelively one part beatethback
another to the very eye , and in the fame
manner the exteriour part of the eye
prefleth the interiour f the Laws of re-
fraction ftillobferved.) Now the interi-
our coat of the eye is nothing elfebut a
piece of the Optick Nerve, and therefore
the motion isftill continued thereby into
the Brain3and by refinance or re-action of
the Brain, is alfo a rebound into ihe Op-
tick Nerve again,which we not conceiving

as

L i B,3- The Holy Guide. 8 3

as motion or rebound from within , do
think it is without, and call it Light, as
hath been already fhewed by the experi-
ence of a ftroke : We have no reafon to
doubt that the Fountain of Light, the
Sun, worketh by any other wayes then,
the Fire,at leaft in this matter : And thus
all vifion hath its original from fuch mo-
tion as is here defcribed 3 for where there
is no light, there is no fight ; and there-
fore colour muft be the fame thing with
light , as being the effeft of the lucid bo-
dies,their difference being only this, That
when the light cometh dire&Iyfrotn the
Fountain to the eye , or indirectly by re-
flexion from clean and polite bodies, and
fuch as have not any polite bodies , and
fuch as have not any particular motion
internal to alter it , we call it light ; but
when it cometh to the eye by reflexion,
from uneven, rough, and courfe bodies,
or fuch as are affected with internal mo-
tion of their own that may alter k , then
we call it Colour^ colour and light differ-
ing only in this, that the one is pure, and
the other perturbed light } by that which
hath been faid-, not only the truth of the
third Propofition , but alfo the whole
manner of producing liglu: and colour is
apparent

5. As colour is not inherent in theob-

jea,

84 the Holy Guide. L I B*3*

jeft,but an effeft thereof upon us, caufed
by fuch motion in the obje&,as hath been
described *, fo neither is found in the
thing we hear, but in our felyes -, one ma-
nifeft iign thereof, is, that as man may fee,
foalfohe may hear doubleand treble by
multiplication of Ecchoes,which Ecchoes
are founds as well as the Original 5 and
not being in one and the fame place, can-
not be inherent in the body that maketh
them j nothing can make any thing which
is not in it felf; the Clapper of a Bell
hath no found in it, but motion, and ma-
keth motion in the internal parts of the
Bell ; fo the Bell hath motion and not
found, that imparteth motion to the air ;
and the air hath motion, but not found ;
the Air imparteth motion by the Ear and
Nerve unto the Brain *, and theBrain hath
motion, but not found > from the Brain
it reboundeth back into the Nerves out-*
ward, and thence it becometh an Appari-
tion without, which we call found. And
to proceed to the reft of theSenfes, it is
apparent enough, that the fmell and tafte
of the fame thing are not the fame to eve-
ry man,and therefore are not in the thing
(melt or tafted, but in the men ; fo like-
wife the heat we feel from the tire is ma-
nifeftlyinus, ahd is quite different from
the heat which is in the fire 3 for our heat

is

Lib. 3. ?bt Boly Guide. 35

is pleafurcorpain, according as it is great
or moderate ; but in the cool therels no
fuch thing : By this the iaft is proved,™*,
that as invifiori, fo alfo in conceptions
that arife from other Senfes,thefubject of
their inherence is not in theObjett,butin
the Sentinent : And from hence alfo it
followeth, that whatfoever accidents or
qualities our Senfes make us think there
be in the world, they be not there, but are
feeming and Apparitions only 5 the things
that really are in the world without us^are
thofe motions by which thefefeemingsare
caufed 5 and this is the great deception o f
fenfe, which alfo is to be by fenfe correct-
ed ; for as fenfe telleth me, when I fee di-
rectly,thattbecolourfeemeth to be in the
object ■-, fo alfo fenfe telleth me,when 1 fee
by reflection that colour is in the object,
But now I am out of the way from the
outward Creation of Man, in whom there
is a principle of more fine and reflexive
reafon, which hangs on, though not in
that manner, in the more perfect kind *f
Brutes, as fenfe alfo ( loth to be curbed
with too narrow compafsj layes hold up-
on fome kind of Plants,as in thofe fundry
forts of Zoophyta , but in the reft there are
no further footfteps difcovered of an a-
nimadveriive form abiding in them ; yet
there be the effects of an inadvertent form

( khy&

86 The Holy Guide. L1B.3

( \oyQ- '4w\@-) of materiated or'%incor-
porated Art or feminal Reafon 5 I fay, it is
no uneven jot to pafs from the more faint
and obfcure example of Spermatical life,
to the more confiderable effects of gene-
ral Motion in Minerals, Metals, nor yet to
fay any thing 6f the Medicines extracted,
mortified, fixe, diflblv'd^and incorporated
with their proper Veagles, becaufe we
have intended it our laft bufinefs, tore-
turn to Minerals , Metals, and fundry Me-
teors, whofe eaiie and rude ftiapes have no
need of any particular principle of life,
or Spermatical form diftinct from the reft,
or motion of the particles of the matter.

1 o. But there is that curiofity of form
and beauty in the more noble kind of
Ptants,bearing fuch a futablenefs and har-
mony with the more refined fenfc and fa-
gacityof the foul of Man, that he cannot
choofc C his intellectual touch being fo
f weedy gratified by what it deprehends in
fuch like objects) but acknowledge that
fome hidden caufe, much a kin to his own
nature that is intellectual, is the contriver
and perfetter of thefe fo plealant fpe&a-
clesin the world.

Nor is it at all to thepurpofe to object,
that this bufinefs of Beauty and comelinefs
of proportion is but a conceit , becaufe
fome men acknowledge no fuch thing,and

all

Lib.?. ihe Holy Guide. 87

aTl things are alike handfome to them ,
who yet notwithstanding have the ufe of
their eyes as well as other folks ; for I fay,
this rather makes for what we aim at, that
Pulchritude is conveyed indeed by the out-
ward fences unto the foul, but a more in-
tellectual faculty is that which relifhes ic 5
asanAfirological, or better, a Geometrical
Scheam \t lee in by the eyes,but the Demon-
stration is difcern'd by Keafon : And there-
fore it is more rational to affirm , that
fome intellectual principle was the Author
of this Pulchritude of things, then that
they mould be thus fafhioned without the
help of that principle : And to fay there
isnofuch thing as Pulchritude , and fome
fay, xhext'is noway to felicity: The firft, 1
anfwer, is, becaufe fome mens fouls are fo
dull and ftupid. The firft cannot reliifh
all objetts alike in that refpeft : The fe-
cond knows not Hrfpinefs , nor the way to
long Life, nor the means to Health, nor how
to return] from Age to Touth,8cc. which is as
abfurd and groundlefs, as to conclude
there is no fuch thing as Reafon and Zte-
monjiration , becaufe a natural fool cannot
reach unto it. But that there is fuch a
thing as The Holy Guide, Long life, and a
certain way to Health, not as yet known in
'England, \ will demonftrate : The way to
Health \ (hall (hew you anon in this Book,

the

88 The Holy Guide. L1B.5

the reft in another Part, as I promifed
you.

i2t Now that there is fiich a thing as
Beauty ,and that it is acknowledged by the
whole generations of men, to be in Trees,
Flowers, and Fruits, and the adorning of
buildings in all Ages, is an example, and
undeniable teftimony ; for what is more
ordinary with them , then taking in
flowers and fruitage for the garnifhingof
their work? Betides, I appeal to any man
that is not funk into fo forlorne a pitch
of Degeneracy,that he is as ftupid to thefe
things as the bafcft of Beafts, whether for
example,a rightly cut Tefraedrunt, Cube or
Icofaedrum , have no more VulcWitude in
them,thenany rude broken bone lying in
the field or high-wayes : Or to name other
folid Figures , which though they be not
regular properly fo called, yet have a fet-
led Idea,aud Nature, as zCone, Sphere, or
Cylinder, whether the light of thefe do not
gratifie the minds of men more , and pre-
tend to more elegancy of fhape , then
thofe rude cuttings or clippings of Free-
ftone that fall from the Mafons hands,and
(erve for nothing but to fill up the mid-
dle of the wall, and fo to be hid from the
eye* of Man for their uglinefs: And it is
obfrrvable,that if Nature (hape any thing
near this Geometrical accuracy, that we take

notice

LiB.3- 7he Holy Guide. 89^

notice of it with much content and plea-
fure, as if it be but exa&ly round, as there
be abundance of fuch {tones upon Mefque9
a hill in Arabia j 1 havefeen them there,
ordinarily Quinquangular, and have the
fides parallels , though the Angels be
Unequal , as is feen in feme little '(tones*
and in a kind of Alabafter found here in
England , and other pretty (tones found
w^onBulvmon-hiU near Sidmouth in Devon-
floire, and near Stratford upon Av on\ and iri
Tyms Grove at Colton, and at lardebick^
Stony-hilly the Shawes and Quarry Pit, Ha-
zle-hill, and Ajh-hill in Warwickshire , are
found fuch ftones that grow naturally
carved with various works, fome with Ro-
fes,others with Lions3Eagles.andall man-
ner of delightful works 5 thefe ftones, I
fay, gratifie our fight, as having a nearer
cognation with the foul of man that is
rational and intellectual, and therefore is
well pleafed when it meets with any out-
Ward objeft that fits and agrees with thofe
congenite Ideas her own nature is fur-
nifhedwith : For Symmetry 3 Equality , and
Correfpondency of parts,is the difcernment
of Reafon, not the* object of Senfe, as I
In our Harmony <j the World have in ano-
ther place proved*

13. Now therefore it being evident,

that there is fuch a thing as Beauty, Syrn-

X * mtry±

90 The Holy Guide. L1B.3.

tnetry9vmd Cmlinefs of proportion ( to fay
nothing of the delightful mixture of co-
lours, and that this is the proper object of
the Underftanding and Reafon ; for thefe
things be not taken notice of by the
BeaftsJ I think I may fa fely infer, that
vvhatfoever isthefirft and principal caufe
of changing the fluid and undetermina-
ted Matter into fhapes fo comely and
fym metrical , as we fee in flowers and
trees, is an underftanding Principle, and
knows both the nature of man , and of
thofe objefts he offers to his light in this
outward and vifible world, and would
have man fearch and find out thofe fecrets
by the which he might keep his body in
health many hundreds of years, and at
laft find the way our Holy Guide leadeth ;
for thefe things cannot come by cliance,
or by a Multifarious attempt of the parts
of the matter uponthemielvesj for then
it were likely that the fpecies of things,
though fome might hit right, yet moft
would be maimed and ridiculous; but
now there is not any ineptitude in any
thing, which is a fign that the fluidnefs of
the matter is guided and determined by
the overpowring counfel of an eternal
mind.

14. If it were not needlefs, I might in-
ftance mfundry kinds iof flowers, herbs,

and

Lib.?, The Holy Guide. 9 \

and trees 5 but thefe objetts being Co ob-
vious , and every mans fancy being bran-
ched with the remembrance of Rofes ,
Marigolds, GiUiflowers, ?ionies,Tulifsfianfiesy
Vrimrofes, f erne flowers and feed, Orange
flowers , the leaves and clutters of the
Vine, &c. OF all which you mud confefs,
that there is in them beauty, and fymme-
try,and ufe in Phyfick , and grateful pro-
portion 5 I hold it fupcrfluity to weary
you with any longer induction , but (hall
pafs on to thofe coniiderations behind, of
their feed, fignatureand ufefulnefs, and
fhall pafs through them very briefly , and
then I fha!l come to mineral Medicines;
thefe obfervables being very neceflary firft
to be known by way of an Introduction^
and as ordinary and eafily Intelligible 9
but for your better inftruftion in theun-
derftanding of this Book, read the Har-
mony of the World, and the Temple of lyif-
dome. You muft remember our defign is
to prove both the Theory and Prattick
Parts of thefe My fterious Truths,

X* CHAP.

9 2 The Holy Guide. LlB. 3

CHAP. VII.

j.2.3.4.<$. Of the Seeds : 6. 7.8. /7»i Signa*
natures of Plants: 9.10.1 1. .^«i #>fore-
/wf Gtf^ wi/fcfc them.

I. in Very plant bath its feed 5 Rofie
JC Crucians therefore fay there are fe-
cret Myfteries lie hidden in them, which
mould be our delight to find out ; for
Divine Providence madeall goodforthe
life of man : And this being no neceiTary
refult of the motion of the matter, as the
whole contrivance of the plant indeed is
not j and it being of great confequence
that they have feed for the continuance
of propagation of their whole fpecies; aad
for the gratifying of mans Art alfo, indu-
ftry andneceifity (for much of Husban-
dry and Gardening lies in this) it cannot
but be the aft of Counfel to rurnifh the
feveral kinds of Plants with their feed, e-
fpecially the earth being of fuch a na-
ture that though at firft for- a while it
might bring forth all manner of Plants,
(as fome will haveit.alfo to have brought
forth all kinds of Animals) yetatlaftit
would grow fo fluggifh, that without the
advantage of thofe fmall compendious

princi-

L1B.3. The Holy Guide. 93

principles of generation , the Grain of
feed would yield nofuch births, no more
then a Pump grown dry will yield any
water, unlcfle you poura little water in-
to it hrft, and then for fo many Eafons
full, you may fetch upfo many Tankards
full.

2. Nor is it material to obje&, that (lin-
king weeds and poifonous plants bear feed
too, as well as the moft pleafant and ufe-
ful; for even thofe (linking Weeds and
poifonous Plants have their ufe in Rofit
Crucian Medicines, as you (hall know here-
afters befides our common Phy tick-
mongers often ufe them as their fan-
cy guides them, grounded upon no o-
ther reafon then woful and deadly expe-
rience; fometimes the induftry ot man is
exerciied by them, to weed them out
where they are hurt fab, which reafons, if
theyfeemflight, let us but confider, that
if humane induftry had nothing to con-
flict and ftruggle with, the fire of mans
fpirit would be half extinguifhed in. the
fle(h,and then we (hall acknowledge that
that which I havealledged, is not fo con-
temptible nor invalid.

3. Eut fecondiy. Who kndwes but it is
fo with poyfonous Plant?, as vulgarly is
fancied concerning Toads,- and ocher
poifonous Serpents that lick the Vrenome

X 3 from

94 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

from off the jearth> So poifonou's Plants
may well draw to them all the maligne
Juice and nourifhment, that the other
may be more pure and defecate, as there
are Receptacles in the body of man-, and
Emunftoriesjto draine off fuperflitous
Choler and Melancholy, &c.

4. Laftly, It is very well known by them
that know any thing in Nature and Phy-
fick, That thofe Herbs that the rude and
ignorant world call Weeds, are the mate-
rials of very foveraign Medicines; that Acor
nitum Hyemahy or Winter Woolfs bain^ that
otherwife is rank poifon, is reported to
prevail mightily againft the biting of Vi-
pers, Scorpions, and mad Dogs, which Sir
Chritfopber Heydon affenteth unto, and
that that Plant that beares death in the
very name of it, Solanum Lethiferm7t,prc-
vents death by procuring fleep,if it be
applied in a Fever 5 nor are thofe things
to be deemed unprofitable, fay the Rofie
Crucians, whofe ufe our heavy ignorance
vvillnct let us underftand > but they will
teach us as followeth.

5. We come now to the Signatures of
Plant?, which indeed refpetts us more pro
perlyand adequately then theother,and
is a key ( as the Rofie Crucians fay J co en-
ter man into the knowledge and ufe of
the Treafures of Natures I demand,

thereforej

L \ B* g. Tk: Holy Guide 9 5

therefore, Whether it be not a very eafie
and genuine inference from the obferving
thatfeveral herbs are marked with fome
mark or fign that intimates their vertue ,
what they are good for; and there being
fuch a creature as Msn in the World, that
can read and underftand thefe fignes and
characters} hence to collect chat the Au-
thor both of man and them, knew the
nature of them both ; and belides Di-
vine providence would onely initiate and
enter mankid in the ufeful knowledge of
her Treafures, by the Seraphical illumi-
nated Kofie Crucians, leaving the reftco
imploy the vulgar chat chey might noc be
idle ; for che Theacreof che world is an
exercife of mans wit, and cherefore all
things are in fome meafure obfeure and
intricate : that thefedulity ofthat divine
fpark, the foul of man, may have matter
ofconqueft and triumph, when he hath
done bravely by a fuperadvenienraHft-
anceofGod.

6. But that there be fome plants that
bear a very eminent fignature of their na-
ture and ufe, for examjAejCapilliti venerti>
Folytrichon, or Maidenhaire ; the Lye in
which it is fodden or infufed, is good to
warn the head, and make the hair grow in
thofe places that are bare; the decoction
of Quinces, which area downy and hairy
X4.. Frui V

9 6 The Holy Guide. f L1B.5

Fruit, is acconnted good for the fetching
again hair that hath been fallen by the
French Pox; the leaf of Balm, or Allelujab9
or Wood-finely as alfo the roots of Author -a ,
reprefent the heart in figure, aud are
CardiacaL

j . Walnuts bear the whole fignature of
the head i the outward green Corte x an-
fwers to the Pericranium, and a Salt made
of it is Angular good for Wounds in that
part, as the Kernel is good for the Brains,
which it refembles.

Vmbelkus Venerisis powerful to provoke
Luft, as Do&or Culpepper affirmesj as alfo
your feveral forts of Satyr ions , which have
the evident refemblance of the general
parts upon them ; Aran efpecially, and all
your OrchiJJes, that they have given names
unto, from fome beaft or other, as Cyno-
forchis, Orchis, Modes , Tragorchis, &c. the
laft whereof notorious for itsGoatifh fmel,
and Tufts not unlike the beard of that
lecherous Animal, is of all the reft the
molt powerful incentive to luft.

8. The leaves of Hypericon are very thick
pricked, or pointed with little holes, and
it is a lingular good Wound-herb, as ufe-
(ul alfo for de-obftru&ing the pores of
the body.

9. Scorpioidhes, Echiumy or Scorpions grafsy
i£ like the crooked taile of a Scorpion ; and

Qphioglofiuni

LiB.g. The Holy Guide. 97

Ophiogloffum, or Adders Tongue, hath a very
plain and perfect refeinblance of the
Tongue of a Serpent; as alfo Opbiofcoro-
dm of the entire head and upper parts of
the body;and thefe are all held very good
againft poifon,and the biting of Serpents;
& generally all fuch plants as are (peck-
led with fpots like the skins of Vipers, or
other venomous creatures, are known to
be good againft the flings or bitings of
them, and are powerful obje&s againft
poyfon.

10. Thus did Divine Providence by
natural Hieroglyphicks3readftortLettures
totherude wit of vulgar man; others of
the Serapbically illuminated Fraternity be
entred, and lumciently experienced of
thefe,found out the reft, it being very rea-
sonable that other hearbs that had not
fuch fignatures , might be very good for
Medicinal ufes,as well as they that had.

11. Rofie Crucians have quickned and
actuated their Phlegmatick natures to
more frequent and effe&ual tuner}; for
their hng lives^bealtb^nd youth fulne[sy (hews
they were not very nery5 to fey nothing of
their happinef^kpowled^ejricbes wifdeme and
vertue, becaufe I have in this Treatife fpo-*
ken of it largely.

CHAP.

98 The Holy Guide. L I B.3.

CHAP. VIII.

j, 2. Of tfo ufefnlnefs of plants : 3^4. ^fcJ
of the Works of God,

2. \70u (hall now briefly take notice of
X the ufefulnefs and profitableneft qf
Plants > both for Phyfick and Food , and !
then pafs on to the confideration of the
infpired K0//e Crucians, what their Medi-
cines are: As for the common ufes of
Plants Herbals teach you fomething; but
I refer you to the fmgular Medicines of R0-
fieCrucians in my Book of The Harm, of the
World',\,2Sor thefalvation of your health j
Animals know as much by inftinft and
nature; and that which is moftobferva-
ble here is this, That brute Beads know as
much as many Phyficians do that are
taught by Herbals only; and thefedeny
the Power of God in the works of Nature,
and the power of Nature in the skill of
IVIan , that it mould be impoflible to make
Trees bear fruit in December, and Apple-trees
to grow, to bkfiom, and bear Apples, contrary to
fyid, in March.

2. Beafts have knowledge in the vertue
of Plants as well as Men 5 for the Toad
being overcharged with thepoyfon of the

Spider^

L) B. 3. The Holy Guide. $9

Spider, (as is well known) hath recourfe
to the Plantane-leaf. The Weafei,when
(he is to encounter the Serpent , arms her
fe\f with eating of Rue. TheDog,when
he is fick at the ftomack , knows his cure,
falls to his grafs,vomits, and is well. The
, Swallows make life of Celandine^ the Len-
net of Euphragiafor the repairing of their
fight. And the AfTe,when he is opprefied
with melancholy , eats of the herb Afple-
nium^ov Miltwaft 5 and fo eafes himfelf of
the fwelhng of the Spleen. The Raven
makes ufe of Cinquefoyle for the prolonga-
tion of his life , to fometimes fix or fev'en
hundred years ; and therefore I think it
is, that the Kofie Crucians prefcribe the oyl
of Ravens, Swallows, and Harts, for the
ufe of man to annoint himfelf, to conti-
nue hisfreih and wel-complexioned body
from wrinkles and lamenefs : and Didam-
Hum Cretenfe is much ufed , as Wold you
in my Wife mam Crown, and Temple of Wif-
dome: Cretian Dittany cures Wounds of
what nature foever.

Which thing I conceive no obfcurein-
dagation of Providence; for they doing
that by inftinft and Nature , which Men,
who have free Reafon, cannot but ac-
krfcwledge to be very pertinent and fit-
ting,nay fuch,that the skilmileft Phyfitian
will approve and allow j and theft Crear*
v tures

I oo The Holy Guide* Li B . %

tures having no fuch reafon and skill!
themfelves as to turn Phyfitians, it mufti
needs be concluded by vertue ef that!
principle that contrived them, and made!
them of that nature they are, enabled}
themalfo to do thefc tilings.

3. Let us now confiderthe Fruits of
the Trees,, where I think it will appear we^
ry manifeftly , that there was one worker of
Miracles , and inffirer of Rofie Crucians 5 I
might now reach out to Exotick Plants,
fuch as the Cinnamon-tree, the Balfome-
tree, and the Tree that bears the Nutmeg, j
invelopped the Mace , as alfo the famous I
Indian Nut-tree , which at once (as the I
Rofie Crucians fay J affords almoft all the |
neceffaries of life 5 for if they cut but the I
Twigs at Even'mg,there is a plentiful and
pleafant juice comes out , which they re- j
ceive into Bottles, and drink inftead of
Wine, a*d out of which they extract fuch
an Aqua vit* », as is veryfoveraign againft
all manner of fickneffes'jthe branches and
boughs they make their Houfes of, and the
body of the tree being very fpungy with-
in, though hard without, they eaiify con-
trive into the frame and ufe of their Ca-
noes^or Boats, the kernel of the Nut ferves
them for bread and meat , and the fhe#ls
for cups to drink in , and indeed they are
not nicer empty cups, for there is found a

delicious

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. id

delicious cooling milk in them 5 befides3
there is a kind of hemp that inclofes the
•Nut 5 of which they make Ropes and Ca-
bles , and of the fineft of it Sails for their
ihips j and the Leaves are fo hard and
jharp pointed, that? they eafily make Nee-
dles or Eodkinsof them for ftitching their
Hails , and for other neceflary purpofes;
and that Providence may fhew her felf
benign as well as wife, this fonotablea
Plant is not reftrain'd to 9ne Coaft of the
World, as thtEaft Indies, but is found in
Africa, Arabia^nd in all the 1 (lands of the
Weft Indies, as Hifpaniola, Cuba, where our
men are viftorers,and feveral other places
of the new-found World.

4. But I thought fit to infill upon there
things by way of Proof and Inftru&ion,
but to contain my felf within the compafs
of fuch objetts as are neceflary for our
knowledge, and familiarly and ordinarily
before our eyes, that we may the better
(thefe things underftood) take occafion
from thence to demonftrate the Rofie Cru-
cian way to health , and their ordinary
Medicines which to us are not yet known,
&c.

CHAP,

102

The Holy Guide. L1B.3. !

CHAP. IX.

1 . The Rode Crucian way how to get health
2. the caufeswhy we eat food. 3. Of the
fir ft nature of the World. 4. A meafure
of raw and temperate meat: «$. And the
caufe of the fiery , and fcummy GaV, 6 . and
needle fs muddy bowels the Milt 5 7. Nature \
carelefs of making the reins of Vrine draw-
ers -, 8. drink^efs Animals have none at all. ]
9. Bow tr cleanfe your felf from thefe idle \
Bowels, 10. and avoid all Vifeafes.

i. T">0 you not confider the weaknef*!:
y_J of man , what faculties he hath,)
and in what order he is in refpe&of thei
reft of the Creatures, Rofie Crucians ob-i
fer.ve, though his body be weak anddif-f
armed, yet his inward abilities of reafon, 1
and artificial contrivance is admirable ;
he is much given tofearch outtheM^i-j
anal vertues of plants, Wights, and Minerals^
and hath found out thofe that were of fo
prefent and great confequence, as to be
Antidotes againft poyfon , that would fo I
quickly have dilpatched mankind; it
were good for us to demonftrate the Rofie
Crucian Medicines, now our Landij afflitled
with a fickjtefi called the new Vifeafe^ of which

all

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 103

all forts die^ withoift remedy, for none as
yec have prefcribed a Medicine-, for young
men that deftre to live, and for old men
that wifh for health, without which no
life is fweet and favory 3 then let us bend
our felves to cure our brethren firft , and
endeavour to (hew the means ( befides
the common Collegian Doctors drenches,
or Culpepers way , how every man may gee
aud keep his health, that is fomething
ftrange , but a vowed truth ; the confenc
and equal ( I mean agreeable to kind )
temper and dulling our four firft begin-
nings, theftaffe of our bodies; for if this
knot be broken, and they loofe towards
their former liberty , they wax proud and
ftrong, and fight; for their nature is toge-
ther by the ears, and put usto pain, and
lets the rule of nature, and this they call
the difeafe.

2. Then to handle one at once , as oar
manner is, and will keep our cuftome frill,
to keep our health and body in temper,
feems no fuch matter to me as the world
would make it , even plainly impcffible,
when I know allthewayes and entries to
let in difeafes and diftempers of the body,
may by fmall heed be flopped and fen-
ced.

3 . We muft needs draw breath and eat
meat ; for the caufe I mail fpeak of it in

its

J04 The Holy Guide. L1B.3-

its place*, and as this is not all clear and
agreeable , fo Nature hath her leavings 5
and again, labour and reft are needful, and
perhaps we cannot chufe but be moved in
mind with joy, grief, fear, hope, and fuch
like paffions , though the Stoickj deny ne-
cefTity, faith Des Cartes.

4. By fo many wayes and gates difeafes
may enter , if they be not well watched
and looked unto , which may be done in
reafon,and hath been done often, as they
affure us that have lived long without all
difeafes and ficknefTes, as John Harding re-
lates of a Minifter, called John Macl^aine9
to have continued for thefe fivefcore
years laftpaft together in health,and after
his hair,teeth,eyes and flefli renewed, and
became young again- and fuch like fto-
ries are to be found enough , if we might
ftay to feek them j fome are contented for
all but air and meat, but thefe fay they
have often feeds of difeafes lye hid iii
them, unable to be forefeen or prevented,
as we find thofe meats that make the fineft
fhew fas Wine, and Sugar, and fuch enti-
cing baits)to have hid in them molt hate-
ful difeafes and dregs in the bottom 5 fo
the air, when it feems the beft and higher},
yet is fometimes infe&ed and poyfoned
with venomous breath,fent out and thruft
into it , either from below, or from the

Stars

L1B.3. TkeHol) Guide. 10$ 5*

Scars of Heaven, "and asthe caufe is hid-
den and unknown to u§, fo the hurt im-
poflible to be avoyded and prevented.

5. If I lift to let rny fpeech run ac
large, efpeciallyin other mens grounds,
1 could find that that Divifion is falfe;
firft, ( to come to meat anon ) and then
if it were true, yet the caufe of that in-
fection not unable to be forefeen and
warded $ but I am fo forry for the fault
above , that I can the better take heed
hereafter \ yet methinks it is a grief to
hear the harmlefs and glorious divine
things above, fo defaced with (lander,
and no man makes anfwer for them.

6. Gentle Reader, bepleafedto ftay a
little^If the Stars have no light, and fo no
power but from the Suny thatmoft whol-
fome and profperous creature, then they
hurt him molt wrongfully, and reprove
themfelves very rightly. And again, if
they be buc a piece of the finer part, and
firft nature, as it were, of the World, as
I have inevved in my Book of lbs Temple of
tVifedome, then they be the wholfomeft
things in the World, fo farbe they from
poyfoned (lander: And fo let their Lights
be never fogrofly mingled in their meet-
ings, and thereby that State of the Wea-
ther changed fuddenly, and from thence
our bodies troubled and turned iiuo Di«

Y fcaft.

io6 7 he Holy Guide. Lib. 3.

feafes, becaufe they were not prepared
and made ready for it, yet the things
are good and profperous; and by know-
Jedg of Aftrology, or influences of the 1
Planets, and races of the Stars, we may j
prepare our felves, and prevent all, if
we cannot have that happinefs to con-
verfe with our Guardian Genius. Now
for lower reflection, it is not worth the
anfwcring twhen there is fo much wafte
ground in the World 5 then let uspafs
over to that other Breach \ may we not i
fhun the leaving baits in our Dyet, and :
takefuch meat as is mod temperate and
near our Nature, and then drefs the fame
after the mod kindly and wholfome man-
ner, feafoning it well with labour, mirth i
and fleep >

7. And to be plain, I have (hewed in
another part of this Treatife of mine^
fouiuch noted by our Writers, what a
jewel of health it were to ufe all raw and I
temperate meat, or becaufe we be wife I
and vertuous, and this Dyet would per- I
haps change our Nature of fire, but like
Ibiiofopbers a quite contrary way , taking I
the beft, whenas none is loft, and leaving I
word, whick is that we now take, a Way j
1 fay, to ftrip of all groffhefs and foul- j
nefs of bodies, the only hurt of them- j
felves,and is the Food of all Difeafes.

8. I

L i B . J . 1 he Holy Guide. \ 07

8. I will tcli you another way which
you will think Grange, but you fhali find
it true , if the meat be temperate, as I
bid you chufe it, there is no hurt can.
come thereby* ( if you keep rueafure in
your felves ) fave from your leavings;
thefein fo clear a Dyet firft will be very
few 5 but if you would be ruled by my
Counsel chichi Nature taught mc> chofe few
ihould never hurt you.

9. Of all the Leavings in the body,
there are three which the liver maketh
moft troublefome unto usf for the reft are
eafily difpatched ) a light and eafie,or ra-
ther a fiery ("as fome call itj Choler ; a cold
and heavy mud., called MeUncholly\ and
the third is Vrine^ which I will treat of in
the next Chapter , but thofe two the
worfer *, and this fault is not in them-
felves, but all by reafon of the needlefs
and hurtful bowels in our bodies, ( as
the Seeds-man ufeth to fow good and
bad together ) which being of the fame
kind and quality with thofe humors, do
draw and pull them ftill unto them ( as
all other parts and things do ) for their
Food and nourifhmetat $ and fo by the
narrow paftages too and fro, their greedi*
nefs in pulling and holding, and a hun-
dred fuch meanes, fubjeft to great mif-

Y 3 chances^

Io8 rbe Holy Guide. L1B.3.

chances, have brought in as many mif-
chiefs, whereas Nature the great expeller
of her unlike, and Enemies, if me had
free choiceand liberty, would other wife I
witheafe, and without hurt, expel thofe :
Leavings, efpecially fo fmall a number i
of the better fort info clean a Dyet, nay, i
fetthe malice of thofe parts, ( thofe parts |
are Milt, Gall, and Reins ) if there be not j
fufficient (tore of other foul meat at
hand, likeapoyfoned or a purging Me- :
dicine, they ufe to draw good juices, »
and to make food of them j what is notq
maniftftedin this chapter, ftiall metho-.
dically be demonstrated in the enfuing,:
for Imtend to be ferious in this part of
my Book, and will mew yon what Na-i
cure taught me.

CHAP.

L»B.g. The holy Guide io9

CHAP. XI.

'i. Rofie Crucian Medicines made plain by ex-
amples, and tbofe are above controlement.

2. That the wet Sun- beams declare fome
fine and forrain fatnefs to nourijb mankind.

3 . How to live twenty yeers without food%
as many creatures do. 4. Vfe and Cufiom a
fecond Nature. <; . The Bird called Manuda.
Viae a, and the finging Dog. 6. That the
Camelion never eats food. 7. An experien-
ced Medicine, and how to apply it with Pa-
racelfus, and the Rofie Crucian new Art of
Healing.

1. /^\F Ariftotle it is reported , Thai
V^/he is the witty Spye of Nature,
and as if he had been made in this mat-
ter , he i"hevvs the need and ufe of the
greater Entrails and Bowels of Wights ,
and faith very truly and wifely. The
Heart and Liver as thefpring of Life and
Food, be needful for all Wights, ad-
ding to the hotter one the Brain to cool,
and the Light s to c\enfe the Heaty ftaytng
there as if he thought the other three un-
profitable* nay for one of them in the
fame Book, ( I fay ) telling the ftoriesof
of the Hare and Camel, and giving the
Y 3 reafoa

1 1 o the Holy Guide. LlB. g^

«*p-! " ■

reafon why they be both fo fwift, health*
ful, long-liv'd and other good proper-
ties above the reft enfeoffed, vouched in
plain terms , the want of the fiery and
fcummy Gall, as a great Enemy to them,
for the Milt that muddy Bowel, that it
may be left out as needlefs in the bodies
of the better creatures. The Meadows
near Cortina, and Maggadtre declare when
by a ftrange and hidden vertue they be-
reave the Beads thereof that graze upon
them, of it; the Herb is called Affkninmy
as I told you in the preceding Chapters,
nay, than the Milt is not only idle, but
hurtful, which all experience,even in our
felves, hath taught it.

2. TheZwfe light Footmen, ( I fay,
which I know not by what example un-
lefs it were the want of the fame in the
Camef, making the Beaft able to travel
an hundred miles a day, and fo without
drink fifteen dayes together ) being in
their childhood purged of their Milt,
prove thereby the moft light, fwifc, found
and lafting Footmen in the World.

3. As for the veirts of Urine-drawers,
as drinklefs creatures have aone at all, fo
fome men have but one of them , as if
nature pafled not to make any at all ;
if we could forbear our drink f as thefe
Beafts do by kind , and (bme men by

cuftom)

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. m

cuftom ) we might the better fpare them,
and avoid many mifchiefs in our bo-,
dies.

4. Therefore the odd man, faraceifus^
I know not by what light, if not of the
f.ofie Grofsy ( caft in I think from Seraphi-
cal illumination ) not only fees thefe
faults, but alfo finds ways to amend them,
and to cut the mifchiefs off all thefe three
noyfome parts, not with any yeilding
Craft, but with Kofie Crucian divine kind
of Healing, with Aurum ptabile^ &c, fo
that to avoid all difeafes that fpring of
theLeavings, take of Aurum ptabile one
ounce; one pound of the Oyle of Ra-
vens ; two round ofMiltwaji, or Aj$hnium>
a handful of Cinkffoyh, otViftamnnm Cre-
tenfe, Ophioglojfum and Scor fades , Eckiunt,
of each a like quantity , and obferve
the Afcendent and his Lord ; and the
Moon, and Lord of the fixt, at your dis-
cretion, and take the quantity of a Wal-
nut every night and morning, and a-
noynt the face and hands, and ( if you
will ) the reft of the body : Kofie Crucian;
have other healing and yeilding Medi-
cines; you (hall know them in their
places; this is fuch an experienced Me-
dicine, that you know where to find it ;
1 need not (hew you to put out the fway
and power of thefe idle bowels, or per-
Y 4 hapj

112 7 he Holy Guide. L1B.3.

hjps it mould not nee^ and in a ftock
that eafech our clean Dyet Nature her
felf as (he doth inthofe Meadows, by o-
t her creatures, would alfo quite raze and
difpatch them within a few genera-
tions.

5. But I will go further. Hear a Rofie
Crucian new and unheard of opinion, and
yet let not your judgement run before
you fee good reafon ; What if we could fafi
for every and live without all food ? might
not all hurt and dange r of meat be then
foreftalled X if other Creatures , whofe
life hangeth upon the fame hold, by the
fufferancc , nay by the commandement
efGod and Nature, do laft for ever , there
is no Reafon but the fame common Nature
will at laft fuffer it in us 5 Let us fee. And
,to ftep over the Camelion, becaufe it is a
Cold and Hoodie fs Creature ; what fay we
to a Bird which is an hot and perfect one >
a bird in the Molucco Iflands, Manuda Viae*
by name, that hath no feet at all, no
more then an ordinary fifh, as Mr. Moer.e
faith, and I have feen her ; the bignefs
of her body and bill, as likewife the form
of them , is much what of a Swallows,
but the fpreading out of her wings and
tail has no lefs compafs then an Eagles:,
fhe lives and breeds iuthe Aire, born up
\y tl;e force of rpind with more eafe then

Archjtai

Ll B. 3. The Holy Guide. 11 3

Archytas his Dove, and comes not near
the earth but for her Burial; for the large-
nefsand lightncfs of her wings and tail
fuftain her without Latitude, and the
laying of her Egges and brooding of her
young is upon the back of the M*/tf3 which
is made hollow, as alfo the breaft of ihe
Female, for the more eafie incubation,
taking no other food ( as alas how
(hould (he ?) then there is found : but
whether (he lives meerly of the dew of
Heaven, or cf flies and fuch like infe£h",
1 leave to others to difpnte

6. Nay 5 have you not heard of the
LfttleVog in the. Weft Indies, which fing-
eth fo fweetly all the night long ,
neither night nor day eating any thing >
But there be examples in our kind as
well ; then it is certain above control-
ment : Sir Chriftopber Eeydon faith thers
is a Moutblefs andfo a weatlefs people or kind
of men about the head of Ganges , which
liveth by the breath of their NoflrHs ,
except when they take a far journey, they
mend their Viet with the fmell of flowers:
and left you may think I lean upon bare
Authorities without the fby of reafon,
all the matter refts upon this reafon I
told you before, that our life lay in the
. hand ( belide a little exercife ) of two
ijke meats, one for the Soul and Natural

heat

114 7he Hoh GHide- L1B.3.

heat which is within us, and the fincft
andfirftmoifturein our body; the other
is without any meat, of the fame Tem-
per with our body as near as may be, to
ivphold the frame and building of the
fame which I faid to be a fine Aiery and
Fiery Flame,

7. And we are now grown fo out oi
order, and fd much eftranged from our
JLtherial fail Moifture and the life of Gody
t?hat we creep downward towards the
Earth through difeafes, before we can
reach the Life of the Vehicle ; within fix-
(core years we dyc9 and are hidden from
the fenfible approach of renewing life.

CHAP. XII.

1. Of Nature and her medicines experienced
by Kofie Crucians . 2. Of the occult vertue
ofMyfteries. 3. Of the healing and confu-
ting medicines. 4. Of their ufe. 5. Of
the Gout, Leprofie, IDropfie and Falling Sic^
uefs , &c.

1. ^J0w the Aire it felf, efpccially

iN when it is evermore as the wet

Sunbeams declare, fofprinkled with fome

Fine f arraign fatnefo may feem (ufficient

food

LlB.g. The Holy Guide. u%

food to nourifh the finer pare of our
Frame, wherein the temper of w/r*^W,
and his life ( tonching that point ) ftand-
eth, which is as much as any meat can do
to life , ( for it is not fed by common
food, as i faid above ) though not e-
nough for ftrength, becaufe the groffer,
founder, and tougher parts wherein the
ftrength lyeth, ma 1 want food in this
~D)ety and fail no doubt greatly; yet life
Jkalllaftftill, as long as Aire and fir -ft tnci*
fture holds, in my opinion : or if we think
that too fpare a Dyet, we may mend it
(as the mouthlefs people do ) with fmell of
flowers: or rather, as we know Nature is
able to draw Aire and other food which
(he deiireth through j^he skin into all pla-
ces of the body ; fo if (he had meat ap-
plyed to the ftomach, (he would no doubt
fatisfie her felf that way moft finely, with-
out theheap of hurts let in at the broa4
and common gates, as we fee by exam-
pie for Vrin)^ that all the while we lit in
Water , we (hall never third: And for meat,
I have heard Rofie Crucians fay, by ap-
plying Q&mne in this fort they failed with-
out all hunger for two years together.

2. And in like manner I have experi-
enced this, and faded two dayes when I
firft ftudied the nature of the Guardian
Qmii i But if that would not ferve the

turn.

l 6 The Holy Guide, Li B.3.

turn, and we mull needs receive in meat
ac the common gate, yet we may let it
pafs no further then the gate, and make
theftomach in the mouth, which is the
life of ComeRofie Crucians when they are
Seraphic ally illuminated 5 and to provide
enough for life and ftrength, and a great
deal better for our health, then we do,
becaufe the clearer part alone mould be
received. And moreover I fay , for the
cleardifpatchofthatour ordinary trou-
ble and anoyance which your reverence
will not fuffer me to name, although I
might among Fhyfitians, but they knou*
my meaning : But it (hall not need to fteal
(hifts and holds if you will believe the
%o fie Crucians y that we may eafily -fa ft all
our life ( though it be three hundred years
together) without all kind of meat, and
to cu*t off all doubts and dangers of di-
feafes thereof fpringing 5 and for my own
part, I know fome that have fafted and
lived in the holy orders of the Fraternity with-
out all food tenyears fpace together. What
need we fay more > if you be both fo hard
of belief, and dull of fight 5 and reports
of good Authors, nor my own experience
will fink intoyou, nor yet can you fee the
light of reafon mining before you; take
here a few of ordinary matters in the life
and ufe of men, and weigh one with a-

aother v

LiB.?,^ The Holy Guide. \\j

nother; is ic not as common in life, and
indeed needful, tofpir, and avoid ano-
ther namelefs leaving? and to firing buc
to fleepefpecially > If fome of thefe, nay
all may be fpared , why not our meat
alfo> let us fee a little, and by example,
becaufe Reafonis both too long and too
open to cavil.

3. To leave drink, which many have
all their lives left ; Elizabeth Vrewe a Pts
vonjhire Gentlewoman, is reported never to have
[pat, nor the Indian Nation. Sir John Heydon
faith, fo? knew one that kept the namelefs mat-
ter forty daics together. And although this
anfwereth not the queftion, yet it meweth
the truth of the former Holy Story-, for if
in fo foul and grofs a thing as dyet is, he
could folong want its why not thefe men
forever, foclear and line a diet, almoft
empty and void of allleavings > For the
grofler fort, which make up this foul and
ihameful one we left before,asyou heard,
and the finer in thepaffage from the Sto-
mach through the former Gates were
drawn all away to the Liver, as the like
isever in us and voided otherwaie^. To
clofe up all, 1 was at ^ea with one that
flept not one wink for thefe three years
la ft pair, and Mr hhn Knotsford is a Wit-
nefs to this truth, and Captain Jfindfor.

4. And thus we fee thefe ftrange things

fall

Ii8 The Holy Guide. Lib.?.

fall out in proof \ but how, I cannot ftand
tofhew. Firft, nature differs them, then
ufe and cuftome, another Nature, brings
them ins yet we may well believe the
like in this matter of meat we have in
band ; For as the Bear ( according to the
guife of many Beads that lurk in Winter )
fafteth fourty daies, fo Eugenius Iheodi-
daaus, the reported Rofie Crucian tells of
a Scottijb young man , David Zeamons, that
waited on him, that by ufe brought him-
felf to fair three daies together, which
by ufe might have been three hundred as
well, if he had ordered himfelf thereafter
by flow and creeping cuilome, as Captain
Copland calls it, and by fuch means as I
fet down before.

5. So we fee, I fay, great wonders prove
plain and eafie troths in the fight of
Wifdome : you have read of the won-
derful works of Godm the accurate Stru»
dure of mans Body, of his Sou!, of his Senfes9
of Plants, of Minerals, and Rofie Crucian
-medicines fhal be that which I will infift up-
on , and that by the means aforefaid
(where are more then one, if this like
them not , they may take another ) it is
poflible for all men by kind and cuftome
to keep their health for ever : Let us come
to the next point, that is,as well to be re-
covered if it were loft, and that all difea-

Lib. 5. The Holy Guide, 1 19

fes may be cured. This is a point much
harder then the firft , even fo befet and
ftopt with all kind of lets and incumbran-
ces, that a man can fcarce tell which way
to fet his foot forwards. Fift appears
JEfculapw, Hippocrates, and Flato, the chief
among the Grecians, bearing in hand fun-
dry difeafes of both kinds ( both come
by defcent^and gotten by purchafe)hope-
lefs and paft recovery , and giving over
the men that owe them , for troublefome
to themfelves and to the Commonwealth:
Then you may fee Galen, his foft and
fine Company with him , that follow
thefe as Gerard and Riverius , and Gulpep*
per, and thefe with a long train of hedge*
Doclors-, and among thefe ftandthe Bill-
men, that dawbe their Medicines upon
every poll, with Caterers and Coo\s, laden
after them with all kind of dainty Drugs.,
ftand forth and cry, they have thefe many
Ages devoured heaps of Books , and took
cndlefs pains in fearching out the Nature
of {ingle Medicines,and making mixtures
of the fame , and yet could hardly cure
fome Agues, and other lefTe difeafes : But
for the four great difeafes, viz. theGout,
Leprofie, Dropfie, Falling Sicknefs, they
could never heal them,and have therefore
for Oracles fet them down incurable.

CHAR

no The Holy Guide. ~LiB^T

CHAP. XIII.

i , 7bat the knowledge and vertue of Medicines
arefecretly hid from vulgar underjianding:
2 . How they may be gotten : 3 . And of
. what lies couched in the Oil of Bodies :
4. Of the ufe, and how to feech it out by
SkjH} the Haven of Medicine.

I. T 7\ 7 Hat is left to be done in this
V V Matter > what (hall we fet a-
gainft the weight of fo many great mens
Authorities > Equally put them in the Bat-
lance 5 as we have done hitherto, and
weigh thfcni with truth and reafon ; But
where (hall we find it > fay they j As it is
cveiywhere, as Mr. Hobbs faid, drowned
in the deep, fo in this matter it is (Matter-
ed all about , and largely fpread withal ;
for there be three things, and every one
full o( undev-Eranches ) belonging to the
Rofie Crucian Art and way of Healing \ 1 he
firji is kptw ledge of the Vifeafes, the feccndthe
remedies againjl them, and the third of the Ap~
pliance of the remedies, ail which (hall be
traverfed in this Methodical myiterious
Tieatife : butitfhallnotneed I hopemay
we mull: take heed how we enter into fo
Jon"' and large a race, in fo fliort and nar-
row

Lib. 5. The Holy Guide. 121

row a compafs of time appointed , efpe-
cially being never run before by any man
but oirfelf, not one of the wife Egyptians,
nor ouxAncejtorsjhe holy Company of Mo fe sand
Etnu , whofe fteps we itrive to follow, and
;their fucceflbrs j for when they have once
hit the mark they have mot at, and got-
. ten the great and general Medicine Caput
mortuum A. P. curing with eafe all difeafes,
they think it ftrait enough, and an empty
and needled labor, as it is indeed, to
trouble tbemftlves and their Children with
large Rules about innumerabie^«;and
Caufes of infinite difeafes, and about o-
therfmall particulars in appliance. Nei-
ther would I have you fee Sendivogiia, ?&-
racelfus, and their heirs upon me, and fay
they have taken great and gocdly pains in
this field 5 you will then force me to fpeak
my thoughts.

2. Though thefe men ( to !et theBill
men go, as too young and childim yet )
by great light of Wit wherewith they
flowed , and by long proling both with
eyes, ears, and hands, in themyfteries
of Egypt, faw and performed many of the
Kofie Crucian deep fecrets, yea and there
got moft of their worldly praife,although
I think a number feigned^ yet Paracelfa
his new Art and Rules of Healing are not
good in my opinion 5 For firft, againft the
Z es«

122 ? he Holy Guide . LiB.^,

example df the Kofie Crucians, from whom
he had received all things , and then in
defpight and difgrace of Galen, fcrmif-
calliiig his Countrymen 9 asyou have
heard 5 but chiefly carried away with a
mad and raging defire of Fame and Ho*
nor, which Culpefer always defpifed,yec
the Stars favoured him, when 1 aflifted to
fet up that new, famous and ftrange work
oiVhyfick^, now well known and prafti-
fed , which faracelfus took in hand , a
man unfit to do it , topull down and raze
the old Work, and to fet up our new ex-
perienced fecret , which he could never
do all his life.

3. Then we fee how it is performed ; he
fets down fome falfe rules,"fome waft,idle,
and fome wanting, and all unconitant,
difordered , and unlearned 5 when he
doth well fas he doth fometimej he doth
no more then was done before him , and
brings in the fame thing difguifed with
new,odd,crofs, and unheard of names,
fuch as may move wonder at thfflrft , but
when they be fcanned, Laughter, as Mr.
Moor faith of Fbilalethes his likedevices of I
his Welch Philofophy. And that I do j
not flander them where there is no
caufe , I could prove , if this place would
admit a Volume. Wherefore let us fol-
low the true and right Kofie Crucians, as

eafily

Li£.$. ihzHrty Guide. 133

ejfily you liny know them by their Acti-
ons, if ever )Oii fortune to fee them and
be acquainted wkh them; and leave P*-
racelfut, and the reft in this ill mattered
Light and Apifh, as he makes it 5 and why
fhouid we (pend all our care and thought
about a fmall matter? you have a good
Medicine and remedy againft difeafes,
when old Wives in the Countrey , and
fome good IVtmen^ amongft other Dr. C»/-
prfpers late wife^ and Simple men^ on our
fide (I mean Simple in refpeft of theOf-
cian fubtilties about nothing ) when thefe
people have healed moft, nay , even
all difeafes, and with wo'manifh Medi-
cines indeedj the German Doctor (let us
give him his due praife) hath quite flain
the Grecian Thyfic^ and here done much
for mankind, by defcribing and difpatch-
ing our clofe and fecret enemy 5 which
under colour of friendship and fighting
againft our enemies hath this long time
betrayed us and done us much rmfchief;
which th+Rg one of their beft Captainsof
their State, FerHelitfrby name, after he
had been a while in Egypt , began to fmel
at laft , and began to repent himfelfof all
his former pains ( which we know were
great ) beftowed in that kind of Healing
faying it to be but words, and the whole
force and weight of this Art to lean up-

2 3 m

124- The Holy Guide. LiB-}.

on the knowledge and vertues of Medi-
cines , fecretly hid and couched in the midfi
and oyl of bodies , to be fetched out and
gotten by the skilful means of Alchymip $
even fo of that Art , which is fo much
condemned of his fellows before and
fince him, have fled and do daily flie from
the daily toil and troub'e of their fruit-
lefsand barren dead Sea: Now let usihift
our Sailes, and flie further too, I hope
of wind and tide and all , which we
have.

4. But let us mount up to the Main-waft
tof of our Knowledge, and fee if we can
defcribe the Haven of Rofie Crucian Medi-
cines, and fee what marks it hath, and
how it differs from other Creeks adjoyn-
ing, left at our journeys end we mifs with
more fhame and grief, and fuffer fhip-
wrack. A medicine is that which kills the
face of that which hurts us; and this it
cjothmanywayes, and yetalfoto one end
(which is the end of doing and working as
1 fa id before^ for his food and fuftenancc.

CHAP.

LiB. g. The holy Guide 135 3'

CHAP. XIV.

I Of Medicines. 2. Of Witchcraft. %.How
to cure thofe that are afflilled thereby, 4. al-
though their bodies be pojfejfed with evil-
fpirits, 5. that caufe them to vomit up
Needles, Thimbles, 6. Vots, 7. Glafles,
8. Hair, 9. and jhredsof cloth, 10. which
by the Devil were conveyed into the Body.
11. Jh it Hinds and Tempefts areraiftd by
Witches upon meer ceremonies of Medicines*
17. Of Foyfons-y with the examples alfo of
other fupernatural effetts of unclean Spirits.,
13. Of imagination. 14. How to cure a,
Witch, 15, and to takg away her power.

1. A Servant of God and Secretary of
j[\ Nature, muft be well advifed of
what he writes, efpecially in this age, and
of this matter(viz.) of theRofie Crucian
FbyficJ^, left he fhould,as I faid before, fail
in this deilgn , and fo it may be a fhame
that he mould be reproved , by the pre-
tenders to thofe wife truths he alone hath
opened to publick view 5 then let us come
l|j again and fort our fpeeches.

A Medicine heals us andkjlls our enemy , ei-

I ther bydullingorconfumingit5for when
it meets with a contrary pf even ftrengtu
Z3 0*s

n6 The Holy Guide „ Lib. 3.

fas when oyl and poyfon,eH. joyn)*then
in ftrength they neither eat up nor de-
flroy oneanothenbut both are dulled and
vveakned , and make one heavy thing,
which Nature cafteth out for an unlike
and unkindly dead thing, which they call
an eitcrementjor leaving -, but in cafe it be
of more ftrength and power then our
enemy, then it quite deftroyes, devours,
and turns him into his own nature. And
this confumer is either like the thing that
hurts us, in which fort even as every herb
of fundry qualities draws and feeds upon
his own juice in a Garden, fo one poy foil
doth cure another, and all purging and
drawing things do heal us, and all Rojie
Crucians bid and Divine properties 60 work
by plain reafon ; Or elfe it i$ unlike and
contrary to their cuftom \ after which
manner, as dry flicks, and tow, and vine-
gar,quench wild fire,or other fat fires, be-
fore water, whofe fatnefs feeds it,i for the
ftrong contrary quality quelling and eat-
ing up the weaker * fo doth any cold and
dry thing 5 as Bolearminic^ Terra Lemma,
&c. cure a rotten Poyfon -, and fo are a
great number of cures done ; which only
courfe,in a word, the Refie Crucians ufe for
Phyfick,and not indeed without good fuc-
cefs; we heard even now of two hinde-
frances of healing , which our common

Phyficians

LlB.%. The Holy Guide. 1 27

Phyficians did take unawares, and Fara-

celfuf pretends to have found out before

pie, gave any hint to the World of our

f A' experienced inventions , of Gold diffohed
and made Rotable , being incorporated with its
proper Veile , which we now ufe by the
name of Aurum ptabile 5 but Paracelfus
ftrayeth much in the making of it, and
knows it not no more then Thomas Har-
rington Dottor Culpeppers Man , whether
in their poyfons, on the other fide,, when
they think all Cures thereby perform-
ed.

2. Now when the confuming Medicines
have done their duties, Nature expels
them for poyfon and unlike ftrange
things, according to the Holy Guide, as
well as the Grecian. Rules , becaufe all their
Medicines were not approved by the Fra-
ternity, and were by their confeflion fuch :
But if they had either thought of the dul-
ling Nouriflier, which as I told you, takes
the nature of the leaving or excrement,
or had known the Rofie Crucian whol-
fome Medicine , they would have made;
another reckoning : But let them go, and
let us fee out in time towards the Haven of
Health. If the Art of Healing be nothing
■ but deftroying hurtful things, And their
ftronger enemies (but equality will fotne-
times ferve the turn ) or likes together;
Z ± and

Ja8 The Holy Guide. LiB.^.

and the world beTfull of botli thefe kinds
of Creatures, following the nature of
their Paientsof four beginnings , which
are, as we fee3fome like, and fomc contra-
ry one to another.

3. Then fure the Rofie Crucian Art of
Healing \s not fas fome may fay) impofll-
b!e j truly it wanteth nothing but a man
well skilled in the Nature of things , A
Servant of God 3 and Secretary of Nature by
name-, for(lthinkJ I need not put in a Thy-
fician^o know what other part the Caufes
of the difeafes, which muft be known
and matched, becaufe as Sir (hrijlopher
Hey don the Seraphic ally illuminated Rofie
Crucians^ and learned 4ftrologex well faith,
He that knoweth the changes' and chances
of things in the great World , may foon
find them in the Little.

But our nought- healing Bill-men, that
daube Medicines upon every wall andr
poft, and fome Leaches will ftep in audit
fay , Difeafes are in fome fo great, and in
all Co many , and mans wit is fo weak andr
(hallow, and the Medicines fo hid andj;
drowned in the deep of Nature, that it is]
not poflibleto find them all V or if the
were found, to apply them with fuch di
cretion, as Nature might abide thofe poy-
foned Fraies and Battels within her. And
again, admit all this untrue, yet therebe

fome

I

L> B. ?. The Holy Guide. l\9

fome difeafes fent from Witchcraft and
Sorcery^ and other means which have their
caufe, and To their cure. I have read of
feme that have vomited lip pieces of
cloath with Pins {luck in them , Nails,
Needles, and fuch like ftuffe * and this is
iugefied into the Stomach by the prefti-
gious Heights of Witches : Others I have
feen vomit up Hair3Glafs3Tron,and pieces
of Wood with Pins fhick in it ; anuthers
Corps wasdirTec"ted3and ripping up the Ven-
tricle , there they found the caufe of the
difeafe , which was around piece of JFood,
four Knives^ fome even and Jharp, ethers were
indented likg a Saw, Others do Miracles
by carting Flint ftones behind their Backj to-
\yards the IVejl , or itriking a River with
Broom , or flinging of Sand inthe Airy the
ftirring of Vrine in a hole in the ground , or
boyling of Hogs Briflles in a. pot 5 fome by
rrhifpering fome words inthe Ear of anHorfe,
or wild Stag^could direli him a jQurney^accord-
ing to their own defire. But what are thefe
things available > To gather Clouds, and
to cover the Air with darknefs , and then
to make the ground fmoak withpjealsof
Hail and Rain , and make the Air terrible
with frequent Lightning and ratling
claps of Thunder: But this is from trie
power of the Devilfasfome fancy) which
lie hath in his Kingdom of the Air.

4. For

1 30 The Holj Guide. L I B. 3*

4.. For the remedy of thefe mifchiefs, I
navefeena man wasprefent, whenfome
have vomited up tfeedles, IhimbUs^ Shredi
of Chxh^ pieces of Pots, Glafs,Hair ; another
would f uffer himfelf for money to be run
through with a Sword, when 1 was not
there 5 but it appeared to mea Fable. I
have feena Rofie Crucian Vhjfitian cure
thefe affli&ed People. But if you will
fay, there is a touchftone whereby we may
difcern the truth of Metals, but that there
is nothing whereby we may difcover ch e
truth of Miracles recorded every where
in Hiftory. But I anfwer there is, and that
is this :

«$.Firft,if what is recorded, was avouched
by fuch perfons who had no end nor inte-
reftin avouching fuch things.

6v Secondly, If there were many eye-
witneffes of the fame matter.

7:' Thirdly and Jaftly , If thefe things
which are fo ftrange and miraculous, leave
any fenfible effects behind theni; though I
will not acknowledge that all thofe Sto-
ries are falfe that want thefe conditions,
yet I dare affirm, that it is meer humour
and fullennefs in a man to rejeft the
Truth of thofe that hear them; for it is
to believe nothing but what he feeth him-
felf, from whence it will follow, that he is
eo read nothing of Hiftbryj for there is

neither

Lib. 3. 7be Holy Guide. 121

neither Plea Cure nor any ufefulnefs, if ic
deferfeno belief.

S. Another Remedy for thefe Superna-
tural dii'eafes is , Let one watch the party
fvfpefiedywhcTi they go home to their houle
and prefently afcer, before any body go
into the hcufe after him cr her, let one
pull a handful of the Thatch , or a Tile
that is over the Door, and if it be a Tile,
make a good Fire , and heat it red hoc
therein 3 fetting a Trivet over it; then
take the parties water, if it be a Man, Wo-
man, or Child, and pour it upon the red
hot Tile, upon one iide firft, and then on
the other , and again put the Tile into
the Fire,and make" k extremely hot, turn-
ing it ever and anon , and let no body
come into the houfe in the mean time

9. If they beCattel that are bewitched,
rake fome of the hair of every one of
them, and mix the hair in fair water, or
wetit well,and then lay it under the Tile,
the Trevet ftanding over the Tile,make a
lufty fire, turn your Tile oft upon the
hair , and ftir up the hair ever and anon ;
after you have done this by the fpace of a
quarter of an hour^ let the fire alone, and
when the aflies are cold, bury them in the
ground towards that quarter of Heaven
where the fufpefted Wicch lives.

10. If

532 The Holy Guide. Li B.^.

io. If the Witch live where there is no
Tile,but Thatch, then take a great hand-
ful thereof,and wet it in the parties water,
or elfe in common water mixed with fome
fait, then lay it in the fire, Co that it may
moulterandfmotherby degrees,;and in a
long time,fetting a Trivet over it. Or elfe
take two new Horie-fhooes, heat them red
hot,and nail one of them on the Threfhold
of theDoor, but quench the other in the
Urine of the party fo bewitched, then let
the Urine over the fire,and put the Horfe-
ihooe in it , fetting a Trivet over the Pip-
kin or Pan wherein the Urine is; make
che Urine boyl with a little Salt upon it,
and the Horfe nails,until it isalmoft con-
ifumed,x>i£. the Urine ; what is not boyled
fully away pour into the fire : Keep your
Horfe-lhooe and Nails in a clean cloth or
paper,and dolikewife three feveral times $
the operation will be far more efFe&ual if
you do thefe things at the very change or
full Moon , or at the very hojrir of the firft
or fecond Quarter.

If they be Cattel , you muft mix the
hair of their Tails with the Thatch 5 and
moiften them being well bound together,
and fo let them be a long time in the fire
£pn fuming.

ji.YguIiave heard theCaufeoffome
of thefe difeafes^and have heard the Cure;

but

LiB-3- The Holy Guide. 133

but thefe are without the compafs of Na»
ture, and To let them pafs with our fickle
Handing, which is daily and hourly fo be-
fet withdeftinies, that a man can warrant
nothing.

12. Truly deftinies are fo deep and
bottomlefs (to return ftraight Homer»\\kc
upon them , and therefore it were beft in-
deed to let them go , and the applying of
the Medicines with themj the rather be-
caufe the other CI mean the formerj is fo
flight a matter to a difcreet Phyiician,
fuch a one as is pointed out by their old
and famous Leader Hippocrates , who both
in thiSj and all other duties of his Art,
made fuch fpeed, and fo farpafled all his
fellows ( as none fince, which is a good
time,could ever overtake himjno noryec
come (o neer as to keep the fight of him
whom they had in chafe and followed.

13. Then for thofe fupernatural caufest
which 1 (hall not (land here to fearch (for
fo they are called) if they flow from un-
clean and wicked Spirits (as fome think)
they are not the ftuffe of the things that
hurt us, though fometimes they dwell in
and poflefs the body, but windy matters,
much like unto thofe fierce and fudden
changes of the Weather* proceeding from
the Influences of the Planets and fixed
Stars, and working the like effe&s in mens

bodies.

*3|, Jhe Holy Guide. L1E.3.

bodies, fothat iich the neareft caufe is na-
tural, let the reft be whatthey will > and
the Cure be done by natural mean^as we ■
fee by experience amongft us : And there-
fore E. A. that pretends this,and puts the
fault in the faith of thewicked,which is a
thing as far above Nature, yet holds its
Cure with a natural Medicine, which we
call a Quinteffence.

14. Although T am not willing, that
fometimes this (icknefs isfuch, as he bids
us fometimes withftand it with another as
ftronga belief fct againftit, but form/
part , I cannot reach it with my conceit
fiet deeper heads then mine, or the Vke-
Chancellor of Oxford, Doctor Owen, think
UponitJ how thefe beliefs and imagina-
tions , and other parts and powers of the
foul or mind of man , can fo flye out of
their own kingdome, and reign over a for-
reign body, when we know the foul and mind
is fo faft bound in the body in durance, and
fo like to be, until it be the great pleafure
of the Omnipotent and the Omniscient God,the
chief good, who hath committed them, to
let them loofe at once,and fet them ftill ac
liberty ; and this may be difputed with
grace and knowledge on my part 5 let this
man therefore buzze againft my knowledge,
which he would have to be more then
Grace 9 I appeal to the natural facuttietof

any

LiB.^. The Holy Guide. 135

any free Judge , whether there be not as much
Grace in me as there ii honefty in him^ that was
Oliver Cromwels Creature , and appointed
to examine and judge me he did notun-
derftand > All men cenfure as they like of
Stones; fo let them pafle amongft old
wives tales for me ; we will feverely follow
our task. That if the effect do not ceafe
which the object hath wrought upon the
Brain , fo foon as ever by turning afidebf
the Organs the object ceafeth to works's,
though the fence be pad 5 as the ftrokeof
a ftone, a blaft of wind, puts (landing wa •
terinto motion, and it doth not prefently
give over moving as foon as the wind cear
feth,or the Stone fctleth : fo the Image or
Conception remaineth,but more obfeure,
while we are awake , becaufe fome object
or other continually plyeth and follici-
tethoureys and ears,keepeth the mind in
a ftronger motion , whereby the,weaker
doth not eafily appear. And this obfeure
conception is that we call Tbantafie^ or
Imagination being (to define \t) conception
remaining , and by little and little decaying
from and after the all ef fenfe, &c. If fome
of thefe difeafes fpring, as Doctor Culpeper
and fome others hold, and with good rea-
fon, from neither of both thefe two roots
namad, but from a foul and venomous

breath/

\%6 The Holy Guide. Life*;*,

breath,f£nt forth from a poyfoned temper
of the Witches body , through the windi-
nefs of hateful eyes: For Thought fafhi-
oneth the Blood and Spirits aim oft a this
pleafure*, then all the caufes being ordi-
nary , and agreeing to the courfeof Na-
ture, they may be cured and put to flight
by the fame courfe and means : which
opinion, if you pleafe to bear with my
tarrying, it is worth the handling, taketh
hold upon this reafon , becaufe (as Rofie
Crucians do wit nefs ) fome beafts of ranker
venome, do witch and hurt after the fame
manner ; as an old Toad by ftedfaft view,
not only prevails, but benums a Weafell,
but kills a young Child. And by the fame
means the Eever hunts the little Fifh,and
takes his prey ; But moft fiercely and mif-
chievoufly of all Creatures in the world,
the two Monfters in kind , the Cockatrice
and Jlpoblefas : again,for that the eye of a
menftruous woman (as all report) doth
fpot the glafs which it beholdeth : And
moreover Eugeniuf Jkeodidadtu, in the
Wife mam Crown, telleth of many folk that
through a poyfoned prerogative , which
a monftrous Mark of a double-fighted
eye gave unto them , were able to be-
witch to death all thofe upon whom that
Eye was angerly and fui ely fee and faft-

nedj

L1B.3. TheHoly Guide. 137

ned 5 but chiefly becaufe we fee them
that ufe this wicked Trade, to be by kind
of a muddy and earth-like complexion
*md nature , brought by age , as they be
'moft commonly, long life* and groflfe
diet, to the pitch of Melancholy, that
is, to a cold and moil dry nature in the
World.

1$. For certain proof whereof, bring
one of them out of that beaft-like life*
brought unto merry company , and fed
full with dainty Diet , and within twen-
ty dayes, as hath by a Rofie Crucian been
tried a truth , the whole ftate and nature
of her body will be fo changed , as it (hall
not fuffer her to bewitch and hurt again $
as you may read in my Familiar Spirit or
Guardian Genius^ and in my Book calif d
The Imjle of Wifdont.

3&

A a CHAP,

1^8 the Holy Guide. Lib. 3

CHAP. XV.

1/3. The Natural effefis of Medicine: ^.The\
force and power of minerals in difeafesj
4. With examples alfo that every difeafel
breeder hath the cure or remedy in it. 5.EX-I
amplesthat poyfon prepared cures poyfonedi
people : 6- Kofie Crucian Medicines, j.Thel
venue and power of the Planets and heavcnX
ly Stars poured through the influence on
the moon upon the Lower Creatures. 8. On
Hot Stomachs ; 9. (9/ the Etherial firjil
moiiiure of man : 10. Examples alfo o]\

[, Rofie Crucian Natural and fupernaturaa
cures. 11.. Of the under jianding of thefil
experienced truths by the wit of man,

j. T Et us conic to the next and chiefefl|

.point j And there we mull not fay]
for fhame, that thefe helps and reme
dies lye hid in nature, too far for the wit
of man to find, uniefs we will accufe out
own floth and dulnefs : For nature hath
brought them forth and laid them open
afwefasthe Poy fops and hurtful things,
or elfeme were verycrofs and ill willing
to him for whofe fake it feems /lie doth all

% , Nay further her good will is fuclv
as (he bath not on'y laid them open, bin

given

Li B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 1 3 9

given us wayes to come by them , and
meanes of fpeech, hands and wit alfo,
far above all other living creatures. And
yet me hath not left us fo$ but left by
chance we might go wide and mifs them,
to (hew her motherly love aud affection
towards us, fhe hath guided many witlefs
BeaftS) even by common fenfe, unto their
Fpeedy helps and remedies in their di-
feafes : That we by the plainnefs and
fliame of the example might be taught
and moved to feek out the myfterious
truths of nature in Celeftial bodies, as well
as beafts that feek and find us Medicines
helpful in the like difeafes* for our Ter-
teftial Tabernacfe. As to name a few not
unworthy meaning 5 fhe maketh the bcaft
Hippotamus in time of his fulnefs and fat-
nefs to go to a reed, and by rubbing a
vein to lethimfelf blood, and to ftop it
I again by laying mud upon it 5 A Tick dog
' to feek an- Herb and purge himfelf * and
the bear to do the fame after his long faft
in Winter > fhe leads the Panther, when
heispoyfoned, to her foul and namelcfs
leaving 5 and the Tortcyfe, after he hath
[eat a Viper, to Summer Savery : And
[theHedg-hog is fo good a natural Aftro-
nomer, that he fortifies his hole againft
foul weather; the Hog will gather Mofs
i and ftraw to cover himfelf a. little before
A a 2 it

140 The Holy Guide. LiB-3 .

it rains j The dog knoMS the influence of
Mars when he doth fleep by the fire, and!
will not go out adores when he is in any
evil pofition : and many fuch like exam,
pies hath nature laid before us for our
inftru&ion h by which at laft wife Plato^
Philo, ApoUonius, Pythagoras, and painful
men of Greece, as they themfelves reportj
be they Elias or Elijha from whom the
orderof the Rofie Crofs came, ( as form
fay)orelfeas others will have it, from
Mofes,or Ezekjel, or whofoever, and byi;
laying reafon and further proof together,
firft made the Art and rules of Healing*
to know whence difeafes came, and how
to recover them. And then feeking all i
about for remedies to ferve each turntij
by little and little they matched the mo{W
part of the letter rank with fingle Medijl
cines, and the greater ones they doubled!
and coupled many together, infomuch ail;
at laft,which was in Hippocrates time, thejll
were able to heal all ( laving four, ) {of thj j
greateft & deepeft difeafes, the Gout, thM
"Drop fie, xh& Leprofy the F ailing fickjtefs^vihlcM
are now healed by the Rofie Crucians onelyT
But this race is below theSeraphically illumi\
nated fraternity: now not a Pbyfician that ii
lined with Plufh in England, Spain, Get
many, or France , but hoi ds that Long-lij
Health, Youth , not attainable , th<

there

LiB. 3. TheHoly Guide 141

therefore with one confent, amongft the
other four, call them impoilible.

3. But to come to the point ; what
wrong this was both to skill and nature,
they do eafily fee and laugh at, which
know that in this labour, they did not
only overfee and skip the Minerals, the
ftouteft helps in the whole ftore-houfe of
Nature ( although they could dig them
out well enough to other and worfer
ufes ) but alfo, which is in all, did let
the Rofie Crucian skill of preparing Medi-
cines, whereby weak thiags are made al-
mighty, quite efcape them.

4. Wherefore to make up the Rofie Cru-
cian Art of healings and to make it able
( as they fay ) to help and cure all difea-
fes came in, or rather went before, into
mans body 5 The Egyptians in great fa-
vour too with nature both for their foil
and bringing up, fo notably commen-
ded above all nation^ ( having for ex-
ample, to move and teach them even the
great wight of the world as Sir Ma Hey*
don faith ) for wits to devife, and bodies

i to put in praftice.

5; Whereby in fhort time they unfol-
ded the knot why the Minerals were of
jgreateft force and power againft difeafes;
!and foon after, which was a divine light*
'and in«fight, theyperceived the huge la-
Aa 3 bour

14* ike Holy Guide. LlB,?.

■«■»'' — -^— — — ««

boiir of feeking fuch a huge fort of Angles I
and mixtures to be vain and empty, and
pitiful among vyifemen.

6. Becaufe firft, there is nothing hurt* i
ful and a breeder of difeafe, but it hath I
the heal and remedy for the fame about !
him : For the wings and feet of Cantharidesy I
the Fruit of the Root Bezar, the Afhes of
Scorpions, Toads , and Vipers , andh
divers other ftronger poyfons, both by .
nature and skill dreft and prepared, doi
cure and heal their own and all other ^
Poyfons j nay as all ftronger likes dojfc-
cuie thejr likes throughout the wholel ,
world of difeafes, even fo when a many
hath found out a thing that hurts him,j i
he may by eafie skill mingle and break the i
temper of the fame further-, that is, makejJ
it able to eat up and confume it felf as j
eallly, without any further doubt, toil j
and labour; But especially becaufe there! j
is no one thing in the world, take what \
you will, that hath not the vertucsof the! J
Ttanets arefted and fattened upon it, audi I
alfo of the qualities thereof within it ftlfjl
that is not as good as all, and may fervejli
inftead of all, and that is not able to cure I
all difeafes ; which thing weighed, and!
with difcourfe of wit and reafon fully 1
reached, they went to practice, and byfji
she like (harpnefs of wit, they found our J:

the I

L i B.5. The Holy Guide. 1 4 2

the kindly and ready way to drefs and
make fie thefe three kinds of Medicines a-
forefaid, which contain all the Art of
healing 5 all the reft are but waft words
and grievous toyl, to tire a world of wits
about a bootlefs matter , as faith Dei
Cartes. But efpecially they refled in the
laft, which is enough alone, and yet not
without great forecaft, to chufe one of the
beft, and that the very beft of all, for
their eafe in dreflmg. Though Qr.Cufye-
per of late was not content with this, but
ran through the reft, afwell to fpight his
enemies, the Colledge of PbyfiGians, as to
make himfelf famous in laverm and Ale-
heufes, as Faracelfus in his time did : whofe
ftepsheftrove to follow againft the rule
ofRofie Crucian wifdom and vert ae , and the
example of his anceftors.

7. But hath every thing all the vertues
and influences taken from the Flanets and
Stars, by the Mocn, to the earth > Thatis,
all the curing and healing power of all
the things in the world .<? \ery well you
mult remember that I proved above all
the vertues and powers of heaven, pou-
red dc^m through the Influence of the
Moon upon thefe lower creatures, to'
be nothing elfe (as Cap George Wharton
truly faith ) but one felf fame life and
Soul ? and heavenly heat in all things,
A a 4 an.4

144 The Holy Guide. LiB-3*

lind again, that all difeafes flow from di- j
flemper, and as it were difcord of the Na-
tural confent of the body s then that 1
thing which is endued with ftore of life, j
and with exafr and temperatenefr, feated I
upon both a fubtile and ftrong body,
( which the thing in the bottom is ) able \
alone by fubduing his weaker enemies , j
thofe diftempered difeafes, by ftrengthe- j;
ning his fellow life, Aurum Potabile, in ji
in our bodies. And laftly , by orderly J
binding together the frame that was dipt
out of order , to do as much as all the i
powers and forces of all the Plants, \
Wights, and minerals in the world, that t
is, to put to flight all troubles of difeafes,
and reftore the body to perfett health and j
cjuietnefs.

8. But how is all this done > we talk
of high things, and huddle up too many
great matters together. It were good for
us to work them o ut diftin&ly h when this
Aurum Potabile we fpeak of, and ftrong j
tempered medicines, flip into th6 fto-i
mach, it ftaies no long digeftion, being
already digefted, nor looks for any ordi-
nary paflages to be opened unto it, but
asfoon asitisraifed out of fleep*by his
fellow*, the natural heat, by and by he
flyesout, and skours about, as fa ft as
she VQlfhine after his prey* or as nature

her

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. u5

her felf, whom Mr.lko.Heydon, as I cake it,
faith to pierce bounds , and all to the
purpofe, that is te feek his like food, and
fuftenance, whereby to preferve his ftate
and being, which is the purpofe of all
things in the world, as was faid above.

9. Now there is nothing fo like and
neeraperfeft temperature in the world,
as the Etherial firjt woifture in man ; but
what this is, you may read in my book
entituled Ventus Magnus*

10. Thisis beftand mod in the hearty
the root of life, then thither it hyeth and
preyeth upon that part fir ft, and that is
the caufe why it prefently reftoreth a man
half dead, and as it were, pulls him out
of the throat of death ; then it runs to
the reft all about , increafmg by that
meanes the natural heat, and firft moi-
fture of every part of the body 5 when
this is done, he turns upon the parts
themfelves, & by encountring with them
in the fame fort, according to his might,
upon them,and brings them a certain way
towards his own nature, even fo far as
we will byourufagefuffer > for if we cake
it with meafure and difcretion 9 it will
bring our body to a middle mean and
ftate, between his own exatt tempera-
ture, and the diftemper of difeafes, even
a better ftate then ever it had before 5 if

we

*46 the Holy Guide. L I B- 3

we ufe it out of meafure, it takes us up
too high, and too near his own nature,
and makes us unmeet for the deeds of
the duties of an earthly life. But in the
mean while in the midft of this work, we
muft know that by his exceeding heat
and fubtlenefs which is gotten by Rofie
Crucian skill, and which makes up the
ftrength above all things, it divides and
Scatters, likefmqke before the wind, all
diftempered and hurtful things, and if
they cannot be reconciled and turned to
goodnefs , nature throwes them out as
dead and unfruitful leavings.

1 1 . But how do we talk Jo much of ex-
it ft and perf eft temper, when by the verdift
ofaIlthe^«e/r in thefe cafes there is no
fuch thing round in nature, but in heaven
only.? neither heard you me fay that it
floated aloft, to was fun\to thebottom of all
nature ; notwithstanding by a true and
Holy Rofie Crucian to be founded and
tveighed up. For as heaven was once a
grofsand diftempered lump ( as I told
you in my book of the nature and dignity of
Angels ) by the divine art of God that or-
dered all things ( as you have read in the
Introductory part of this book, ) refined
and fund red away round to the place and
nature where it now frandeth ; even fo
one of our grofs bodies here below, being

LlB.3- ThetHoly Guide. 147

apiece of the fame lump alfo, and all one
with that which Heaven once was, may
by the like art and cunning be refined
and parted from all his diftempered
drofs and foul droffinefs, and brought
into a Heavenly nature of the beft and
goodlieft thing in Heaven: And yet you
rnuft not take me as though I would have
themindand wit of man, which is but
a fpark of the divine gr^t mind, flfpake
in my book called Ventm Ingens ) to
be able to reach the excellency of his
work, and to make fo great perfection ;
i*fhe do but ftiadow it, and make a Coun-
terfeit, that is, if he reach not 10 far as
to make all things, but to mend a few by
this his Heaven, all is well, it is as much
as I can look for at the hand of any man
that is not a JLofie Crucian. Now is the
time to reft a little, and pray for the good
ufe and practice of thofe that (hall read
our Harmony of the World,

CHAP.

I48 The Holy Guide. L 1 B. 3.

CHAP. XVI.

1 . Of the Rofie Crucian Sun, 2 . or spiritual
Oyl. 3 . Of the Divine Works of God not
yet obferved. 4. How to makg Mther .
5 . Examples of Medicines Rofie Crucian
and Grecian. 6- OfPoyfon. j.Ofthefu-
pernatural Miracfes of the Rofie Crucians,
8. with obedience toReafon. p# Another
Medicine of fupernatural efefi. 10 .Of the
power and fecret skill of Nature, 11, How
to difiolve Minerals. 12. And how to pre-
pare them for Mens Bodies.

1. TTYUgenw IheodidaUus hath (hewed
: JE, you this Heaven , nay this Sun of
ours3which is nought elfe, as I told you in
one of my books of Aftrology, Hhelewi-
pie of W'ifdome> but an 0)1 fuU of heavenly
SpiritSyznd yet in quality of his body ;uft,
even and natural, fine and piercing, clofe
and lading , able as weil to rule this little
World , as Mr. Thomas Heydon faith , the
great Sun is able to govern the great
World.

2. But what is he that can fee this Di-
vine Art and Way3whereby God made his

great

LiB-3. The Holy Guide. 149

great and mighty work , viz. y&n3 as I
ftiewed in my Book, intituled, Mofes fpeech
to Go^upon the fecond chapter of Genefut
or if he (aw it, learn and match it by imi-
tation > 1 anfwer. None but Rofie Crucians
towhomIamafriend,and they God hath
enligh tned and unfealed their eyes , they
have found the way lying open in all pla-
ces , and in all Natural! changes , they fee
them pafleand travt),Ifay ftill,the courfe
that Mr. Thomas Heydon calls foft and wit-
ty, that is, kindly reparation : and if he
be not fwift and rain as many, fuch as Iho-
mas Street^ but will have fober patience,his
own skill and labour will be but little if he
pleafe 5 for Nature her felf very kindly
will in her due time perform all,and even
all that heavenly workmanmip be eafily
performed j and yet I mean not fo, but
that Art muft accompany and attend up-
on Nature (though with no great pains
and skill ) both forward and backward in
this Journey (Dc&or French knows my
meaning, fo^Joth Do&or Oweny if his an-
gry Cenfure will fuffer his Natural judge-
ment)until he come to his wiftied reft,and
to the top of all perfection.

3 . If you perceive not5confider the way
whereby we made our Mther in our Book
abovenaraed 9 and matched our own fir ft

rnoi-

j 50 1 he Holy Guide. LlB. 3.

moifture,a thing JEtherialJ. fay,and almoft
Temperate-, mark what I fay, there is a
further end in the matter ', hold on the
lame means , whereby you came fo far
through The Wife mans Crown > and are
gone fo far in the Harmony of the World,
which is that I fpake of, and you may
reach it.

4. Then you fee the Way to ciire all
difeafes by the third way of Egyptian
healing, which they do, arid we may well
call it the Egyptians Heaven, and yet it is a
way far beneath the Rofie Crucian Art of
Healing, as we (hall (hew hereafter.

5. But if they will not yield to reafon,
but mutter ftiil Thomas SfwMike, that
thefe Heavenly Medicines of curs are ve-
ry high for the reach of mens filly wits,
here (bowed below upon the ground for
other leffer and bafer ufes , and that no'
man iince the firft man, or if I will fay
Mofes was the firft that firft found otit thefe
inventions3as they call them,after Adam ;
and that none but the Succ#fcrs of Mofs
have beeivever yet known to have found
and wrought the fame $ 1 will notftand to
beat Reafon into fn ch giddy-braind menj
but go to the other two wayes of healing,
which the Eg pt? arts found out and ufed,
and called thVfirtt Minen.lMedicines3and

thefe

L i B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 1 5 1

thefe Mofes taught the Children of Ifrael
in the valley of Mount Sinai , when hetoo\ the
Golden Calf which he had made, and calcined
it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and in-
corporated it with a Solar V eagle , and made
the children of Ifrael drink^ Aurum Pota-
bile.

6. And the next myfteries andfecrets,
as may appear by Riverius his fpeaking of
JLofie Crucian Secrets ,we may fitly call this
fecondkind, becaufe that is too large a
Name ^if it be lawful for us as well as for
all other Learned men, where a fit word
wants to make a newj wemaydowell, I
fay, to call it a Cure it felf, becaufe it is by
that way of healing, whereby every felf-
fame thing further broken may cujjAJjg:
felf y and this inward and hidden thmg,
as they fay, the outward and apparent by
the courfe cf kind, whereby the ftronger
like cats up in trial and confumes the
weaker.

7. If this leave be once granted,wewiil
borrow a Ijdjfcmore for the other two
likewife, became their names are not per-
tinent to our purpofe , and call that Hea-
ven 3. Cure all, for foit doth, and the next a
Cure the 6r^r,becaufe the Order of the Ro-
fie Crucians is alwayes to match the greater
wind more fiubborn fort of difeafes with

the

i$a The Holy Guide. L1B.3,

the ftoutand mighty Minerals, and the
reft with thofe hidden cure-thenifefoes,or at
lead in the lower rank of lighter difeafes,
with their likes , only raw, as theCrtCians
ufe them, without any curious dreiling.

8. Let us draw nearer a concluhon of the
matter 5 becaufe Grecians themfelves are
able , and our Englijb Phyficians that learn
of them, to cure the lighter fort of difea-
fes, and to heal all but the four aforefaid,
we will leave the reft for them , and fo lee
this fecond kind of healing go, called our
bidden cure themfelves^nd bend all our bat-
teries againft thefe four, which they call
incurable , and fee how by force of our
Mineral Medicines they may be cured :
Wft^ce the poyfoned fpirits and breaths of
vCTfomous things, with what force they
work upon our bodies, things in Nature
fet againft them , and how they confume
them 5 If you do not fee by imagination,
reafon with your felves; if not, remember
thofe above named, that killed with their
right ; Hear one or two flttfre that work
the fame by touch as violently. The Hare*
fijk3& moft cold and dry Creaturef to omit
that (he maketh a mans head ake by fight)
if you touch her aloof only with a ftafle,
that her venomous breath may go ftreight
and round unto you , you die prefently.

The

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 153

The root Baazam'm Palejlme, zzVythagorai
prices, kills the man thac handleth ity and
therefore they ufed to make a Dog pull it
up, who thereby died immediately. To
come into the body 5 that cojUy poyfon thac
is in Nubia , and one grain kills a man out
of hand,yec flay but a quarter of an hours
working, and that one grain divided will
overcome ten men 5 1 hope you doubt not
but thefe mighty poyfons, if they were
like in Nature to the four great Difeafes,
and by little and little to be born byNa-
cure, and fet upon chem, would be able
ealily, by their great ftrengch, to devour
& confume them ; orelfe Cure fuch heaps
of poyfonas the Phyficians give us would
not dwell fo long within us , but would
put ouc life in a moment. Now what arc
thefe poyfdned Vapours, but moft cold
and dry bodies , wrougbc and broken up
by natural mingling , unio greac finenefs
and fubtilenefs , by this peircing (wifely
all about, andby thefe contrary qualities
overcoming > Then let us take the ftouteft
Minerals, fuch as are called Middle Minerals
by Rofie Crucians, or hard Juices (to leave
:he Metals for a becrer purpofe ) be they
poyfons,as G. Agricola (zith^but whacthey
3e I care not ■> and after we have by meer
working cleanfed chem,and ftripped them
B b of

15^ The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

of their clogs and hinderances , broken
and raifed them to a fine fubftance , then
match them with their hkes, the hurtful
things in our bodies, (hall they not let all
the reft alone, and ftraightway cleave to
their fellows, as well as a purging Medi-
cine,and fo devour and draw them out by
little and little? If there be no likes, I
grant they will as well as that, fall upon
their enemies,or good juices, and feed up-
on them.

9; 1 hen what do you doubt , is not a
Mineral body far better? And therefore
if it be raifed to as great a finenefs,much
ftronger in working then the gentleand
loofe temper of a Wight or Plant : where-
fore thefe our Mineral Medicines, and
fome other forementioned Medicines, and
Cure the greats as we call them,fhall in any
reafon work more violently upon their
likes, then the natural poyfonsof Wights
and Plants do upon their contraries3both
becaufe the like doth more eaiily yield
then the contrary,and forJthat the lighter
here is theftronger.

10. .But if you cannot fee thefe things
by the light of the mind, open your eyes,
and caft them a little into the School of
Akhimy^ into the lefTer and lower School, I
I mean of Germans , and you (hall fee the

Schol-

— « — 9

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 155 ^

Schollars, efpecially the Matters, by Grip-
ping the Minerals , and lifting up their
properties, but a few degrees , to work
wonders j as to name three; or four , by
quenching the Loadftone in the oyl of
Iron, his proper food, they make him ten
times ftronger,able to pull a nail out of a
poft , &c. And by this natural pattern
they make Artificial drawers , not for
Iron only, but for all other things, yea,
and fome fo mighty3as they will lift up an
Oxe from the ground, and rent the Arm
of a Tree from the Body , as Mr. Comer
doth witnefs , who reporteth again, that
hefaw a Fiefh-drawer that pulled up one
hundred weight of Fle(h?and a Mans Eye
out of his Head,and his Lights up into his
Throat, and choafyd him. They make
Binders alfo to glew two pieces of Iron toge-
ther, as faft as the Smith can joyn them.
To be fhort , they make Eaters alfo , that
will confume Ir on, ftones, or any hard thing,
to nought in a moment : They diflblve
Gold into an Oyle 5 they fix Mercury with
the fmoak^ of Brimftone, and make many
rare devifes of it : And all thefe wonders,
and many more, they do by certain rea-
fonj 1 could tell you if I couldftand fi-
fe ut it. In the mean time coniider, if
ithefe or any ether fitch like Minerals were
B b 2 raifed

1^6 1 he Holy Guide. LiB-3

raifed higher , and led to the top of their
finenefs and fubtlenefs, and matched with
their like Cbmpanions^or with their Con-
traries,if you will, thofe great Difeafes in i
our Bodies , what ftirrs they would make
among them, how eafily they would hew j
them, pierce, divide, wafte, and confume j
them? But youmuft alwayeshave afpe-i
cial regard, that the Medicines be not liker
our natures, then the nature of the thing!
that hurts us, for then they would firftj
fall upon us, and let the Difeafes alone 1
which heed is eafily taken in Minerals,
things very far off our nature , faith Des\
Cartes.

And with thefe Experiences of thej
wonderful vertue of the oyl and water
of Tobacco, Wife men I have known doj
Miracles with it, but the fmoak of it is the!
abhorredft thing in the world.

ii. What is to be faid more in thefe
matters > I think nothing, unlefs through;
the countenance of an idle opinion that
reigns among them , they dare flye to the!
laft, and of all other the moft (lender fhel«
ter, and deny our ability to break, tame
and handle as we lift, fuch ftout and ftub-;
born bodies : (what) becaufe you know
not how to do it, will you faftiion all men
by your mould 1 Wife men would firft

look

L i B *i - The holy Guide 1 5 7

look into the power and ftrength of skill
a nd nature3and fee what they can do, and
aieafure it thereby, and not by their own.
weaknefs ; there fhall you underftand,
that there is nothing in nature fo ftrong
and ftubborn, but it hath its match at
Ieaft, if not his over-match in Nature,
fuch is the nature of Mans body, of his
Souls , of fignatures of Plants, of Met-
tals, and Minerals, and other things al-
fo.

12. But admit fomewhat weaker, as
Herbs and Plants, &c. yet this , if he gee
the help of a Wife mans Art unto him,
(hall quickly wax great, and mend in
ftrength, and beableeafily to overcome
that other : Mark how the dregs of Vine-
gar, a thing fprung out from a weak be-
ginning, and it felf as weak as water, is
able, if it be but once diftilled, to make
ftouter things then Minerals , even Metals
themfelves, all but Silver and Gold, to
yield and melt down to4iis own waterifh
nature,nay which is more,then Mill-dew of
Heaven, wrought firft by the £tt, thatcun-
i ning Beaft,and then twice or thrice by the
i Diftillers diftilled will do the fame , you,
■ may judge with your felf, whatnot only
i thefe,but other fiercer and (harper things,
as Salts, &c. more like to do upon Mine*
B b 3 rals;

158 'the Holy Guide. L1B.3.

ralsj and by the way confider, if fuch
mild things as Wine and Honey, fo mean-
ly prepared, are able to fubdue in that
fort the moil ftiffe and tough things in the
World, fo Minerals cheaper then Aurum
fotabile, in their higheft degree of dignity
would cure the ftouteft Difeafe (being
prepared fitly-) that can grow in our bo-
dies. Now let us fit and take our reft a
little , and then we will lead you the way
to the golden treafuresof Nature, and
fafe, eafie and effectual Medicines.

CHAP,

L i B . 5 . The Holy Guide. 1 s 9

CHAP. XVII.

How the Rode Crucians mak$ aChirur-
geons Inftrument, 2. that it Jhall pierce
through any part of the whole body, without
fenfe or feeling , and found the depth of a
Wound, 3. The difference of Common
Tbyfitians,raw, blunt, and herb) Medicines,
and Roiie Crucians : 4. What a Pby~
fician ought to be. 5. what they ought to
learn, 6. and what they ought to Pra*
ft*.

1. TyUt I wear away time in vain, to
IJ fpeakfo much about this matter;
and yet fith all are not of like Capacity,
I will add one yet familiar examples when
a Chirurgeon goeth about to fearch a
Wound that is deep, if he thruft at it
with a Butchers prick he would move
Laughter, let him take a Thorn , and it
will pierce fomewhat prettily ; but to do
itthroughly , and at hispleafure he will
ufe (though to the great grief of his Pa-
tient ) a fine and long Inftrument of
metal. But a right Chhurgion (the
B b ^ common

1 6o The Holy Guide. L I B. 3 • I

common ones are but Butchers ) fuch a
one as is aVbyficiaKy and Aftrologer , nay a;
liofie Crucian Mo, would touch his Inftru-1
merit with a Loaftone, that is commonly]
found , to make it pierce throughout thel
body without all tenCe or feeling : Even!
€0 good FhyficiaWy fuch as thefe, are hardpi
to be found in this Government , wherei
none of thefecan live without great en-r
vie. If one of thefe~Ko/i> Crucians be to,
encounter with our greateft enemies a
thefe four we fpeak of 5 he would 'not, 1
hope, if he were a true Rofie Crucian, be foil
mad as to thruft attheniwith the raw and 1
blunt Herby Medicines , fuch as Dottor
Scarborough prefcribes, no nor although
they be fharpened by Mr. Jacob Hejdon, by!
plain diftillations: neither would he, I
think,for pitty fting the poor Patient with 1
Martyrdome of rude and rank Minerals,
and unlefs they were made into a fine,
clean, natural, and temperate quality,!
which would work mightily, anddeftroy
either of thefe four great Difeafes , Lepro-
fie, Gout^Vropfie, and F 'ailing- feckpefs: buc
fecdy comfort, or at leaft not offend and
hurt his Patient ; they labour in vain that
pra&ife otherwise. Thefe are the Medi-
cines which 1 only ufe, and which a good
and wife Phyfician ought only to feek and

follow^

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 16*

follow,and if lie cannoc find it,let him life
the Cure themselves. Bur fucha thing as
this,lfay , brought to this equality and
finenefs of frame and temper, (were it at
the firft, Wizht-> Plant, or Mineral) was it
which our father and founder Mofes (the
chief of the Rofie Crofs) faid, is like to
Heaven, and the ftrength of all ftrengths,
piercing and fubdiiing all things.

2. This was it that warranted his Sons
the Rofie Crucians to avow fo {lonely, that
Art was long,and Life fhort,Jand all Difea-
fes curable 5 when Hippocrates, the father of
common Yhjficians , was driven by the infir-
mity and endlefs matter of his weak bo-
dy and envious mind, tm&ured with Co-
vetoufnefs and fickle Medicines, to cry to
Rofie Crucians , but they woiild not hear
fuch hard-hearted fellows, nor give him
long life ; he faid therefore , that Art was
long, and life was fhort. And whereas he
and his off- fp ring were fain to leave ma-
ny difeafed helplefs, to the great fhame of
Art,and plague of Mankind,is it any mar-
vel when as they prick at them (as 1 faid J
with a Butchers-prick? Nay, fee what
they do by their practice, they be fo far
from all help and comfort to the Patient
in greateft danger, that they increafe his
mifery many wayes, except the great Ea-

.

l52 'the Holy Guide. Lib- 3.

fer of all pain , and their common Medi-
cine Death, be quickly adminiftred : Firft,
they make the Patient fuffer the puniftr
ment due to their own flothfnl idlenefs,
burdening his ftomack with that labour
of loofening and hindering the Fine from
theGrofs, which they mould before have
taken into their GlaJJes : and then by do-
ing thefe often , they clean tire his feeble
Nature ( as it would tire a Horte ) when
as by ftripping the foul and grofs ftuffe,
that dulls the working, and retaining the
Vertue in a narrow ftrong body, they
might do as much at onetime as they do
now in twenty ; and becaufe their Medi-
cines applied are of fmaller power and
weaker then the things that hurt us, they
feed, nourifhand ftrengthen the Difeafe
and ficknefs } but for all this , if fome of
this company and fide of Leaches have
been and are yet fometimes able to heal
all Difeafes in our body ( though with
much ado, as you have heard J fave the
four named remedilefs, yea and thofeas
well in their fpring as before their ripe-
nefs, as they themfelves report. Is there
any Proportion in Geometry ? Let the Colledge
of Fhyficians lay meafures why the Rojie
Crucian mighty Medicines , which I call Cure
the Gnr/rt^pailing thefe in power, as much at

the

L1B.3. The'Holy Guide. 1 63

the ripenefs of a difeafe U above the Spring,
(hall not overmatch the ripe as well as the
green Difeafes : Wherefore there be no
doubts left, but this plainly true, that al-
beit the Grecians are weak and halting in
this kind of healing, yet is the Egyptian^
(as now they term it ) the Paracelfian and
Mineral skill fufficient to cure all difeafes :
Then I have paid the whole fum of my
promife, touching the fecond means and
helps tc Happinefs , [Knowledge of all
things paft, prefent^ and to come, long
Life, Health, Youth,Riches, Wifdomeand
Vertue, how to change and amend all
Difeafes in young or old by Rofie Crucian
Medicines, which is Life and Health.

3 . Before I clofe , I think it very meet,
while the time and place very fitly fer-
veth,to do a good deed , and this (hall be
my intent , to admonifh and exhort the
Grecian Leaches, and their Schollars, the
Englifh, Spanilb, and French Phyficians,
whom if they follow Hippocrates , Plato J
Vythagoraty and his felfows, 1 love for their
Learning , and pitty for their mifleading
others, (although it be grievousj Tknow
too old Scholars,woneinakind of Learn-
ing, to unlearn all, as it were, and begin
again,for their own credit and virtue,yea,

and

164 The Holy Guide. L1B.3.

and profit fakealfo, if they eiteern that
be ft 5 to eave thofe 'gilded Pills and fugred
Baits^nd all other crafty Snares, wherewith
the World hath been To long caught, and
fo long tormented, and to feek this only
heavenly Society 5 'as (to you that are
learned j eafily may temper" your felve?*
and be acquainted with the ready, true,
plain and certain way of healing Difeafes.
I think in former time they were not great-
ly to be blamed and accufed but of dul-
nefs and weaknefs of underflanding , in
not applying and feeing this perfection,
and Supplying of all their wants 5 but
fince they have been fo often warned, not
with words only, but with examples of
Learned meriyMatbeolus Femelm^ Severinus
Uanw, PhiloJud£US, Uiodorus Siculus, and
other fuch like, which have and do revolt,
and flie away from them daily,yea and by
the certain deeds of Paracelfa , it were
impiety to fit ftill : Well, few words will
ferve to wife and vertuous Phy ficians,fuch
as are of themfeivcs forward.

4. But there is another , and I am a-
fraid, the greater fort, lefshonefl", more
idle and covetous,full of windy pride and
words , but empty of all good learning,
and they are no friends to Rofie Crucians,

nor

L1B.5. The Holy Guide. 165

nor they to them , and thefeno gentle
warning of any, no though a Kofie Crucian
himfelf (hould come and bring Iruxh her
felf along with him in perfon, would pre-
vail ; who care not5 it feemsj if half man-
kind fhould perifh for want of help and
fuccour , rather then loofe their gains •,
and which not only fpeak foully,but write
foolifhly 3 againft this overflourifhing ver-
tue, but alfo like the giddy people of my
time, where they oatch the State, banifh
the men that hold and poflefs it j where-
as if it were a good Commonwealth
(quoth Arifiotle) the matter would be fo
far from Bani foment or Jnifrifomnent^s they
would efteem fuch a Wan as well as the
Laws (Tor he is himfelf a LawJ exempt
from all obedience and judge him wor-
thy to be followed and obeyed as a jfwjf-
tualKing.

5. This untowardnefs andcrookednef*
in men,caufed all our AH healing Anceftcrs
the Kofie Crucians, from time to time, ne
ver to abide their Sentence, but to th s
great hurt and lofs of mankind, go into
willing Banijbment, you have eftablifhed a
kind of Government among you (to pur-

fue the fame, like a little ) wherein

you rule alone over the weak andforry

fub-

166 The Holy Guide. LlB.g*

fubjetts of mens Bodies,then their health
and fafety you ought to feek only, befldes
enough to maintain a contented eftate
alfo, which VUto allows his Governours,
and not profit only fthat were Tyranny J
both for humanity and Religion fake 5 for
to omit Religion , which they do lightly
omit, if a Phyfitian begin once to make a
prey of men, he is not only no man, but a
moit fierce and cruel Beaft , not fit to be
compared and matched any whereof you
feek all over the world, as with themifha-
pen Monfter of India- , which Arifiotle de-
scribes, and calls Martichora^ which being
by nature or cuftom, 1 know not whether,
xevy greedy upon mans flelh, is with ma-
nifold and wonderful helps furnifiied and
armed unto it.

6. Firft with a face like a Man , a voice
like a Trumpet , two fit things to allure
and call him in, and then if heflye,with
the fwiftnefs of an Hart to overtake him 5
he darts like a Porcupine, to wound him
afar off, and withthetail of a Scorpion,
as it were, a poyfoned fhaft near-hand to
ftinghim : Furthermore,leftall this might
not ferve,by occaiion of Armour, he hath
feet like a Lion , fiercely and cruelly to
tear him, and three rows of teeth on each

chap

LjB. 3- **' Holy Guide. \bj ^

chap for the in devouring. Apply you
and the Apothecaries the reft your (elves,
in fecret, for my part, as I am not a Rofie
Crucianfolam as well as they forry to fee
evil done. And I am loath to (peak evil
or it j and fure were not the great, grief
and envy 1 do bear, and alwayes did , to
fee deferc trodden down by fuch unwor-
thinefs , and fome little hopes I have to
hear of the amendment, andfo of the
return of the Truth, and good Men out
of banimment and imprifonment , you
fhould have found me in lFe]lmin[ier-Hatiy
as I have been an Attourney in Term
time, and mean to continue my pra&ife
there fo long as I live, except in the Vaca-
tion , which I intend to fpendin Chimical
and Re fie Crucian Medicines, for the good
of honeft plain meaning men : As you
(hall find in the fift Book, after we have
proved, the way toHappinefs, the way to
know all things pafr,prefent5and to come,
the way to long Life 3 the way to Health,
the way to wax Young, and to conti-
nue fo, the way to Bledednefs , the way
to Wifdome and Vercue , the way co
cure, alter and amend the (rate of the
Body; the way to find out the Golden
Treafures of Nature and Art, and the
way to prepare Rofie Crucian Medicines ,

then

168 The Holy Guide. LlB.*.

their ufe and vertue* they being fafe3
eafie, experienced, and effectual Rules
and Receits, andfuch, as whofoeverpius
inpraftifc (hall find true, to the Glory of
God, delight of his Soul 5 and cure of
his Body.

CHAP.

tl B. 3 . The Holy Guide. 1 69

l. . — — ■ - ■ ■ '■ m

CHAP. XVII.

T^he way to waxyong.

1. Old Age, gray Heirs, dim Eyes, deaf Ear ft
rottm Teeth , and lame bones renewed to
flrengtb and youth-,] ohn AKcklcini example
and others : 2. The Reafm : 3. What makes
its young and puriflnn'g: 4. Of cherifbing
life : 5. Why children and old foll^ are
lefs Atlive : 6. The decay 0} the food of life;
7. Example, of renewed youth : 8. Why
Princes are not long lived: 9, To freferve
you: 10. Of Br achmans and Indian fecrets :
ii.TheftayoftheLawofkjnd: 12. The
frfi moiflure in Nature: 13. Motion :
14. Heat: 15. How to move the ffirits :
i 6. Fruitfulnefs and Activity ; 17. Of
Frosl : 18- Of youth: 19. Kinds of wax*
ingyong: 20. Various opinious : 2 1- Strange
1 changes: 22. To ff ring to youth from Age :
\ 23. Medea and fafon : 24. 0/ the Deeds
\ of Nature : 25. Ma« reftored . 26. Tore"
new the $kin, nailes and hair : 27. (?f orvfcr
in youth : 28. T^tft <m o/</ man may he fa-
fc* as it were from ihe brink, of the grave %
withered, feeble and crooked, and ledbacj^
i d bis former youth and lufiinefs: 29. Acls of
Kinde: 30, An old woman turned into a man
C c and

170 1 he Holy Guide. L1B.3I

and af other things : '3 1. How to accomflim
tbeje things.

1. T TQwbeit we live long and in health, I
XjLoi-e bodice be weak and unwcildy J
it is in age, it muft needs let & clog us mucl
in this happy racc;whereforc the third ftel
andhelptoHe^/f/;, that in >outh was ncj
idle;, nay out of order isyouJh; what thel
is youth? they know beft that have loft it|
It it the moji Afiive, Fruit full, andbeautifull \
ffate of the body, thefc be the marks and dil
ferences, whereby we may know it from a
things elfc- I mean a&ivity, not in deeds
moving only,but of life and fence a!fo3 th
is it which makes up the Nature of youth
the other two marks are taken in, not
. need full helps, cither to youth or health an
fuch as may not be (pared (efpecially beat
ty)but becaufe they be very notable mark)
to know youth by ; and that as we hear
of true honour and pleafurc abovc,fothe
will alfo perforce hang on and follov
though they be unlooked for and unrega;
dcd.

2. Then this is the matter under hand i
this place; this we muft prove pofllble to h
kept and prcferved to our lives endjyca an
though it were loft before, that it may 1
gotnen again and rcftored; and yet, fir ft, s
our naturall heat is the caufc of our ircinj

{

L i B . 3 . %he Holy Guide. 1 7 1

Co thecaufe of our bed cftate; and youth 11
the flower of it, that, h his chief ftrcngdi
and quickneflc. Then keep and recover
this, and all is done.

3. But we had need be Cure of this, that
the novv^er of heat makes us young and flou-
rishing and fure by proof and cxpcricnce,the
belt niTu ranee in the World : let 11s look
all over and we (hall fiV* -ie ic fo; for to begin
wit- Pi ants; although their life is dark, and'
they be but la 1 e and unpcrfeci wights, See
wy Harmony of the lVcrld(ioi Plato give s them
fence) So clearly jellow the qukkpejfc anddul-
n?ffe of their imbred beat^ caufed by she two fea*
font affummer ajid winter , as appears in In-
dia 9 where for the continual heat and
moyfturc and fummer of the Country >
no plant feels age y or fail o\ the k.af\ that
word \% Idle in ihofc parts, becaufe by a
flrange ptopeny btiides the reft, it hath
it range cooling above the reft , (lauding in
water -firftjand then iome what dceply/from

1 the Summer fun. Nay an.ongit m we fee
thofc Plants which are hot and -dry, found
and hardy* able to witMand the force of
cold3to keep their leaves in winter, as Hcllh
Ivy>Brjxy&c.

4. Moreover keep off the ftarving cold,
andchcrrifli the life wkhin, and you may
help and amend Nature, and mafee any
Plant flouriin aud bear fruit in winter; bow

C c 2 #

tyi 7 he Holy Guide. Lib. 5

jithatt but an cafy matter : Plant ic ift a
flove, and cover the root with Horfe dung,
and the reft with chaff, and you fha 1 fe? the
proof, if not the profit worth the coft and
travail. The fame is feen in beafts, but
Jet us leave the middle that we come not to
the end too late.

5. Then why arc Children and old folk
lcfle atVvejfruitfull and beautifull, then the
middle fort, but for want cf heat? for let
the/wmmerfirft dry usj Galen faith and that
beforcthe birth as 1 fhewed,be great there in
ftore, bulk & cjuant!ty,becaufe it waxcth &
wancth fiill with his food, our flrft rnoifture
and this from thence decayeth dailyj yet
his quality , ftrcngth and activity, which
jnaketh him worthy of the name of hf at, is
then little, as overmuch drowned with o-
vermuch forraign and ftrange wctnefTe.
(Like as we fee in a green fagoO unable to
work his will, and fhew himfelf, either to
knot the finruws for ftrength, or conco& the
blood for food, and coolor before the for-
raign moifhire be fpent and gone, which is
not in longtime : The caufc I have proved
in my Temfle of Wifdovje.

Now (or o}d folk what is fo clear as this,
that by re*afon of the daily decay of the food
of life, the fainting heat lets the Knot of
ftrength andluftincflc flack and loofc again,
and the conqpAion and colour of blood,

which

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. ij %

which before made feed and beauty, to de*
dine and grow to waterifknefler in fick
rocn and women for the fame caufe 5 and'
albeit women hive their feed, yvt isitnet
hot and quickningfe-d, but as dad fluff
only fit co rea ivc life and frm'ton; and ad-
roit they be more faire and fmootb then
mm, which are hotter, it comes by chmce
becaufe the foul leaving', the fremifh of
bejuty, by the force of manly hcac are dri-
ven outwards, when the flacknefle of the
heat of woffisn furTersto remain within,
and turn into menftrucS, a ihing more grie-
vous and noyfome in truth then beauty is
ddighefome. And therefore Anftotk very
well calls her a weak man ; snd he makes
the male in all kindes to be that which is
able to concoft the blood; and that which
is not, the female. Then if it be cleared of
all doubt, that the chief ftrcngth of heat is
the caufe of the flow«r of age and youth,
and nothing elfe in the world; let us
take and flick to the mater , and fee
how it may be maintained firft;and then re-
ftored.

7, 1 will not urge the way of upholding
heat in Plants above faid , nor yet this wit-
Dcffcof the German who hath found out
means for the fame, both in Plants and
wights, as he teachcth in his high opinions^
aor yet make account of thofc examples ,
Cc 3 which

174 The HAy Guide. LlB.^

which by courfe of nature and good order
oflife have done wcl1, and dr.twn n arto
this matter : a? of Lucius the player, who.
pronounced upon the ftageat Rome en hun-
dred years tog^thtr, nor of Cxntliw who
bare Silurn'vie the Conful after fixty two
years-, nor yet of King Mafimjfa , who a-
bout ninty get a child, a^id ever travailed
both in fro ft and (now barerraied, and
fiich other like, marked with figncs of long
continue! life and lufnmlTK 1 will come
to the point at once. F liny' (Tuch an Au-
thor) repor:e:hthat the whole nation of
indux livelb long free from all dijeajes, well
nigh two hundred years without any grief
of Body, not once touched with ake of
head, teeth, or eyes, nor trouSlcd with fpic-
ting, all the great companions (as w; fee J
of age 3 that we may gath<r by likely
£ueffes when they know not the com-
panions , the thing it felf as unknown
unto them; but what needs any gutding
when the fame man for certain and in plain
rermes atfureth us, that in that part of India
where the Sun being their Zenith, that is
right over their heads, cafting no fhaddow, |
the men are five Cubits and two bandjulls high,
and live one hundred and thirty years,never
waxing old, and being when they dye, as in
their middle age and chief ftrength & lufti-
heffi? what need more wprds? If this re-
port

LiB.3. The Holy Guide. 17$

pore be true, as we may not eafily do ubc of
fuch an Authoiy hen fure thia matter is not
impofllble, as th-y would have it ; but all
men if they livzd in fuchan aire, and took
fo good a care of life as I difcribed (I mull
'fiill fly to that fuccour) might preferve their
youth, and never wax old untill that term and
ftint of life appointed;or if this kinde of teach-
ing be now fome what fhle, yet bt arc with
my meaning, and yet perhaps fome other
means may be found for the matter, in the
ftorehoufe of skill and cunning; let us fee,
much more briefly then we have done before,
becaufe this part is already well nigh dif-
patchedj fo ftraightis the link of all thole
helps, that one can fcarce be loofened
without the reft, and all muft go together^
8. Then what means may we findc?whafi
preferveth this natural & heavenly heat of
ours? that common people take hot meats
& drinks, & think that thefe preferve heat &
nature, as (imply as if a man (houldput lime
totherootofatree which he loved % for as this
baftneth the fruit withheat,but kjls tbeftockmtb
drought y&foa^etb up the lively juyce &my(lure:
Co in them their hot meats out of kinde,laid
to the root of life, quicken and ftir up the
fpirits, thefruic of life, forafcafon; but
withall underftand, drink it up & wafte the
firftmoiftive, that is, the whole ftock of na-
ture \ and fo by fofening thus the hardnefs
C c 4 of

\-6 the Holy Guide. L1B.3J

of agejas ic Wire Iron in the fire, they make
Ic feem for a time youthfull, and livrly, yec
is h but a vain and emp:y ftuw and fhaddo w;
and as iron when it comes out of the fire, is
theharder; fo they make their agemore
unweildy, and draw ic on the fafltr by chat
means, and that is the very caufe, together
wiihcare and pleafure, why princes and «;-
tles, bydryingup their bodies in that fort, live
mtfo long for the wo{l part, nor in fo'good health
as other folk$,and depart efpecially atfuch lintel
(iftbzrepsrt be irwe) as tbofe bufbtd Starrs caU
led Commits , appear; B caufe whether ic
be a ftedfaft Starr, or an Elem*ntall flame, (I
am not to difpute fuch queftions here J it is
not to be feen in a very fine and dry wea-
ther which confames dry bodies, and (ends
them packing; and betides, (though it be
beftdes my purpofe,*)turns good humors in-
to (cum called Cboler, caufe of Broyles and
fedition; and fo making,as we fee, the bum
Starr3 a plain figne of both thofe matters,
buc caufe of neither : As you may read in
our Harmony of the World, lib. 2,

9. What then prefervceh heat ? learned
men have brought in certain fine fat and ai-
ry meats,as Batter, 0;/?, andHony^nd com-
mended them for very great helps & mean*
toprtferwe/i/e and ywtb,{ior both are done
by one Way, and under one} but efpecially
one of them, that is bonyfavt thfy lifted up
i above

L1B.3. The Holy Guide, 177

above the rtft, for cat the B*f, that lictlo
cold & blooditffcbeaft, by r^afon it is boih
made of 5 and fed with the fame, Hveth (o
Jong above ihe kindeof parted wighes, even
eight year? as they report; and b caufe
Manna the famous nourifher unto man, 13
nothing elfe but a dew conco&ed in hoc
Countries, by the heat of Heaven in ftead of
ciie Bee, and for fuch like caufts too long to
bs told in to (horc a race of fpeech as I have
throughout appointed. But thefe men are
wide as well, though not as the former; for
if you remember well, when we fpakeof
things that preferved life, (which is no-
thing, elfe as Thomas Hey don haih faid, but
Heat, there were found oncly two be-
longing to the ufe;i/i2. meat and exercife,
and that to ht paflc exercife, although the
finer brenh of the outward Aire of our
meat may fcrve the Mtberial Spirits, which
carritih life as ivel upward as downwards;
fee my Tew fie of VVifdome; yet our Heaven-
ly muft have finer food, an JEtberialbody
which is ready and at hand3 nowhere in
nature fave in our firft moifture ; then this
fat & airy meat of theirs, may help to leng-
then life, and youth indeed; but not di-
re&ly by feeding life and maintaining the
firft moifture, but by another by-way pro-
curing health and foundncfle, (for ficknefr

and

I78 rheHoly Guide. Lib. 3.

and difcafes bring age and death a pace)
and this is, becaufe lor their great ciean-
neflf, whereunto they be wrought by na^
tureandArt together, they neither breed
( a* other meats do ) many drofly di-
feafes , nor flop the lives and heats free paf-
fage.

30. Sith then there is nothing in the
worldjWithin the compaiTe of our reach,able
to maintain and nouriih heat, but it mud
needs faint and wane daily with ourfirll
rnoifture; how falls it out, fay you, that
thofe Indians fo kept their youth , without
vvaxing old, as we heard out of Pliny > I
cannot tell, unlcfle the Sun, for that great
and familiar acquaintance fake, hath favou-
red and blefled them above all people, and
brought down /Ether, and given it them
to nourifh them; for their foyle and feate,
becaufe it lyeth right under the Sunns
walk and travail , is not through extream
heat unhabitable, ( as Thomas Street
fondly fuppofcth ) but of other the beft
and moft temperate, by rcafon that extream
heat of heaven is moft equally anfwered,
andjuftly tempered with cokl and moy-
ftureofthe ground propoitionable, which
thing they knew not, becaufe their eyes
were let to high to fee the lower caufe and
courfe of nature,moft plain & certain. For
God when he meant to make our change-
able

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 179

able worid here below, by a wonderful!
fortfigmed wifdome , flirted the Sun with-
in thofe known bounds, the North and South
turns (which tlvy call Trapicfy) leaftwhen
he had run round about, he (hould have
worneand w^flcdit everywhere alike, and
rn^deit fmooth and even in all places; and
fo al either 3 dry ground or a (landing poole,
both unfit for the variety of change which
he mear t to fee play before him-, but now ha
is fo curbed and retrained within thofe
bounds atorefaid, he can wearethe ground
no further then his force can reach, nor any
otherwHc then as his force fervtth-, fo that
the earth muft needs be moftworne and wa-
fted, where it Iyeth within the compafle of
h;s walke; and fo rile by little and littleDon
both fides without the Turns,untill it come
to the top and higheft pitch, where it is fur-
theft off, that is under th? two pins (which
they call Poles) of the world. Then heare
for the coldnefle, the earth is fit to thicken
the aire and breed water, and for the bene
and falling to fend it down to the midft and
lowed: part; wherebv the great ftrengthof
heat is drawn upon heaps and in great
plenty; and for this caufe and the length of
thepigh'.s, it cannot fcattcr abroad, and
vanim away to nought, but thickens a pace,
and falls again abundantly^ raining three
or fourc times a day. Whereby we may

l8o the Holy Gride, Lib- 3.

Judge, that this middle girdle wherein we
inhabite, canro: be fo broyhd and unfuf-
ferable as our Starr- mm avow, but in all
reafonverymilde and temperate; 8c chink
that as the Sun meant to favour al! parte as
much as might be, fo chiefly and above all
thatfasreafon, yea and necifluy bound
him) wiih which he is beft acquaictedjand
as this is certain (by report of all Authors)
in all other things, ya and in men touch-
ing all other gifts and blefllngs, fo we ma/
gutffe this one which we have in band,
Wis not flipt and left out in (o large a char-
ter.

11. But for all this, and in good fadneft
(w«havebuc argued hhherto,it isnocgood
to feck to difpence againft the lofs of na-
ture, and it were better to dtferedit Vliny
the reporter, (though be he never fo good
an Author J then Nature her fclf the Au-
thor of all things ; for this ftory is fet a-
gainft the whole courfc and drift of nature
whofe works as they be not woven and
made up at once , fo they decay and weare
away by little and little: and therefore ad-
mit thefe men of India by fpeciall licence
from above, dobearcage frefh and young
a long time, in refpeft of other Nations;
Yet we muft in no wife think this is fore-
ver and not for death; asP/iw; faith,for then
they fhould not dy and depart as other men

do.

Lib. 5. The Holy Guide. 181

do3 natural Jy, which is when age creeping
on and changing by little and little, is at
Juftmsde ripe znd falling; but rather by
iome fuddain force be taken, and at ic were
delivered by and by to I knovv not what
hang-man among the delinks, to be cut off
and put to death by violenc^but Vfhac force
can that be > nay I affaire you further that
if the ftroak of fickneffe and difeafes were a-
way (a? faith he, it is almoft ) they might
live for ever; another breach of the never
broken laws of kinde.

1 2; Wherefore let this ftory go. and letm
hold this rule for cercain, that by reafon
there is no other food for naturall heat c-
pen in kirtdc, but our firft moyfture,which
becaufe for want of fupply, it likewife wa-
ficth daily, yout h rauft needs by nature fall
away and cannot lafl for ever. And yet we
muft alfo(to come to the purpofej remem-
ber how it was full often above proved,tbat
fuch a free fupply of due food for life were
to be made byski!,and fctchtoutofthebot-
tome of nature and all things by the Divine
Art of Homes. Wherefore to avoid the jar
and ill found of our often beating upon one
thing, our Pantarva. and heaven above de-
clared, is it that feeds our heat, that hol-
deth and prefcrveth 1m\h\ that is ic I fay
that doth the deed, for manycaufes fet down
before 5 1 will fend them that come "not hi-
ther

182 The Holy Guide. L1E.3.

therthc right w*y back again totakca;!
before them.

13. But there is another thing; motion I
fiiean, and that helps to bear up the ftate of
life and hear, whieh I (cant touched in my
difcourfc of Phyfick there, and yet it (houlJ
be handled ; becaufe although ic be not (o
needfuli as the formerly et it cannot in any
cafe be wanting; for as Mar -tiallfeofle like
unto A/aa fas we term it) and valour it Clf
lofeth his glory and brightneffr in peace
and quia nttfe, asyou may read at large
in our Idea of the Laiv ^Governments and Ty-
ranny, the fecond Edition; fo this heat that
rules our body,though it be never (o fb: on£
andlufty, y*t it cannot fofoonrtft, as it
decays and as it were rufts wiih Idlentdc ,
nay the bedy it felf being as I {hewed abovejan
Airy and Fiery temperature^ muft needs have
quick motion, as one of the two pillars of
his ftate; and therefore Tlato by the example
of the greafi world , very well advifeth us
ftill to move both body and minde,and that
together^ v*c mean to have them long con-
tinue. And we finde his Counfell good by
daily proof , when we fee thofe that move
the memory mod, as wife and learned men,
do hold itlongeft,but becaufe thfy do not
forthemoft part ex^rcife their bodies, to
lofe that quality: Whereas quite contra-
ry the common fort, by rcafon they move

dius

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. j8?

this much , and that other litle, arc a great
while in body lufty, when their memory is
gone as quickly.

14. How moving increafcth heat, it appea-
red* in all p!aecS}firft in the Spring of al hcae
the Sun above , which could in no wife
fervc to ftretch fo far as to heat half the
world at once , if thofe huge heaps of hea-
venly beams and fpirits did not help him.
Sec my Harmony of the World* Then they
wouM be (hut up faft as they be in ftones ,
and metalls and fuch like alfo, and hard
lower lodgings, and not (as we fee them)
mod free, quick, lively, and fwiftly Airing*
no more doth any fire below burn fo fierce-
ly as that which by a coldblaftis driven
up clofe and round together,and we fee by
thofe that move and ftirr moft lively;t9 pafs
by the lightning,(as the weakeft to the flron
geft in *hc world> and a number more fuch
proofs; for what mould I ftand fo long u-
ponfo plain a matter.?) motion doth*%ion
only increafe heat where it is, but begets
and pjrehafeth it of nothing. And not on-
ly that way which every man fecth, by rub-
bing two hard things together, butaHb by
grating a hard thing againft the foft and
ycilding aire, which is fomewhat rare, and
yet known to the Babylonians in times pa/?,
when tbey ufed to roft egges by whirling them a-
bout in a fling in the fame manner; andfo
thefc Archers that have jeen thz leaden beads

of

the Holy Guide. LlE.^

cftbtir ArroKPSyto melt in. flying (o great a fa-*
thcr o'heitw motion thit we' mav judge
how able he is to keep it when ir. is
once gottei : Read our Temple of VVtfe-
dome.

15. Now if this be fufficiently (howne
and proved, wenced beftow the letter la-
bour to teach men, how to move their beat;
and fpirits, becaufe every child that
can go, can do it; and it is enough to
exhort them that love th*mfeJves to do
it.

16. Then bythefe two means of like meat
and motion, we have our youth ftill (that
is) our chief colcHrJruitjullneffe and a$ivity, it
there any thing elfe } thsfe make //j> all the be-
ing find nature of youth; except you fear the
lofTeof his hang-byes, andappurtenanceSj
which are teeth, the fweetneffe of breathy the
fmoothneffe ofskjn^ and of have the colour Ho-
rn al.

tj. But it is no danger if you will let me
run them over ; for if our heat and moifture
remain without decay, firft the Jaw bones
tvherein the teeth be mortized, will be fuH
and moift,able to gripe and glew and fo to
hold the fame from falling, then all ill frnel
comes of rawneflc and want of heat to con-
co& it; wrinkles of cold whichmake the face
to flirink,& gathers that together, which heat
fprcads a broad fmoothly, and gray haires
r from

LiB. 2. the Holy Guide. 149 ^

from the fame caufe^ for when our 113: Ural
heat faints &fail!sit withdraws it feiffrom
the outmeft coldeft parts foonefr, and leaves
the moyfturd raw , which for lack of in«»
, vard heat to file and keep it, JyeSopcnto
the force of outward co!d;whcncc comes all
rottenncfie, and from this a white coat and
hoirintfle. Therefore we fee why ficknefs
and forrow bring gray haires fo fdft, yea
fometimes preftntly: as to paffc by the plain-
er, you fiiall hear by one ftrange example
of aforrovpfullycung gentleman 0 f Italy jhat be-
ing fallen into the hands of Pirats,and laid wrapt
in a faife ready to be ca[i over boun ?, and with*
in twenty foure hours f$acc, released and fet at /i-
bcrty yvtho by great grief and fears forcing
it8 he it to retire to the heart her Caftle,
made his head white and aged in that fpace,
8c cculd never ga it turne again all his life,
which was a long time after. And fowc
avc this poin: briefly and eafily difpatcheef
ftcapfe it was a loofe and eafy matter; but
:he mxt,ihat is to recover youn^y ears [pent and
)Iown away, feems no fuch thing, nor to be
ifed in chrt order ; for as a new and ftrong
uilding by due and daily reparation, is
cpt found a long time; whereas if for lack;
)f care, it be once falne to decay , it cannot
without great coft and time be recovered;
:vcn fo it is with our body; as it is eafy if ic
)c taken in time with heed to preftrv c it; fo

150 the Holy G Hide* Lib. 3S

if by negligence the weathf r have once beat I
in an J made it rottcn,ic fcems a marvailousjl
ynrk torcpairek.

Although indeed it be much harder3r,otl]
onely then his fellow , but then all the rcfti
that were before; yet we will not give ir
over now , and like our idle Toet, fail tht
hfta&of life; wherefore lcti*s go forward,
and with all our endeavor ftrivc to (hew,
thai \ouib loqg before loft (though not fo
cafilyj yet as well may be recovered as it
was prelerved,

19. There be fo many kinds of waxing
young aga:n named in Pbilofopby, and givca
to the nature of wights, that it were goodi
fi, ft to fort them out, to fee which we mean;
in the place, Icaft our labor fall into their
han^s that can quickly miftake ; one ofj
thefe ways is by name ontyjand not in deed,l
As vrbn the fo'ft and bare shinned beaftsjife by\
courfe of kjnde , twice a yeary the Spring and\
fall of the leaf , to cafi iff their upper coat and
skjn , shey fay they put off old age , andwa:
young ageing when it is in truth the puttim
on of age rather and decay of Nature , ai
appe tFcth to them that know the caufc, thai
even for ve y cold and drought, the trix
plain ear marks of age , their skin doth
loufcn and wither awa1'.

20. There is another kinde, as far in ex-
tremity as that other, and all together in-
deed,

Ll B. 3 . The Holy Guide. \ 5 1

deed, which Alconeon cifis joyning of ones
end to his beginning , and Which he faith
roan cannot do, and therefore dyes ; and
this is and ever was, not the opinion of
Poets onely, but of Pbilofophers , and not of
Greeks onely , but of all Nations except
our old Egyptians , and Rofie-Cruftam , n:en
always in all rare wifdom efteemed.

21. Thcfe men, as Lfaid above, do not
afeto mark the ftcps of kind, and hermoft
Grange and unwonted changes, but alfo
ct and venter upon the like by skill -, yea
ind to pafs further, if any reafon will car-

y them; and fo at length they came, and I
mow not how , or whether by guefs or
nowledgc to this ruled certain ground , of
aifing the dead , and whether it was pof-
ible tor any man, put out by forcible and
'iolcflt death by natural means to rife and
juicken again,and fo to be renewed, and as
t were by a new birth reftored.

22. But what be their new and marvel-
ous means > which way is this incredible
ourfe performed? after they fawnot onely
ome parts of other wights (as the tailes of
izards, the eyes of Snakes and Swallows)
ut alfo the whole bodies of cold and blood -
rfsoncs, clean razed and deftroyed , Net*
iraUy to faring a frefb) end to be reftored , as

gnahe cut in peices and rotten in dmg^ to

nickM) mdevtry piece to frsve a Snaks dgaln^

kDd 2 tb*i

152 The Holy Guide. Lib. 5

they began to reach by Divine knowledge and pra-
ctice at fome further matters; and to fay fomc
whole and bloody wights, that spring not
out of nothing, but arc breed by force of
Seed and conjunction of Male and Female,
and the like kindly corruption , to raifc
them up again and renew them ( as a bird
burnt alive in a clofe glafs, and fo rotted^ and
then inclojed in a (belt to hatch it under a ften,
and fo refiore thejame*) and other ftrange
proofs thc)> ceafed not to make, un:ill at
laft they durft be bold to think, that any
wight, even a man and all might by the
fame courfe wax young and be born again i
Hill, and live for ever.

23. This is the fecond way of waxing
young again, and as great an extrcam as
the other, and as far from any meaning,
though there be divers reports and {lories
Sown abroad, of men that took the fame
race in themfelvcs and others , and found
both good and bad fuccefs ( according as a
man that favors it will thirk ) a« the work
was intended by them which were put in
tnaft; Medea fped well fjy they y in proof, upon
Jafons Body, and made him young again , a$
Tully/tfiffc, recoqxendo; but Hsrmes,ffo Poet
Virgil, and the Spanifh Earl failed upon them-
f elves > as fome bold, but as others bold, they had
good tucl^and came to their purpofe. To know
tfre whole Art, read the fecond Book of the

LiB.g- ihe Holy Guide- 1 5 3

Harmony of the Worlds and the Temple of
Wifdcm. What mould a man fay to this
matter? albeit I do not choofc this kinde of
renewing, ye: I will not condemn it with-
out canfc, and judge it for a thing Impof-
fiblc ; for 1 fee no reafon Luc that the ftory
of t he Sn?ke may be full cafily true, be*
caufo it is bred by it feif , and of more un-
fit ftuffe in the fame manner ; and for the
reft all is one to nature , if the ftuffe and
place te meet and convenient , having her
general feed of begetting f which I faid was
all one in all things ) in her bofome ever
ready, and thereby making (yet as we heard
before ) all feeded Plants without feci
fomewhere, yea and perfect wights both
water and Land ones ; and at firft when the
ftuffe, and wombe, and her own heat, and
all ferved very fitly, having wrought man
and all fo.

24. But now why is feed given up to
things^ becaufe nature for want of the
former helps ( as they could not laft for
eveO fo not able in all places to work the
raw ftuffe of the beginnings f o far, to fuch
pcrfe&ion, unlefs (he finde both the ftuffe
well drcft and half made to her hand ; and
a whole womb like an artificial fornace, to
help and fct her forward ; well then for
this one matter and manner , of reftoring
man, let us call it to the account of reafon*
D d 3 and

154 *** Holy Guide. L1B.3,

and confidcr what is that feed that makcth
man, and the place where he is made 5
wh t is all the work ? Is it any thin?, elfe but
a part oj man (except bis minde) rotted in a con «
tinual, even, gentle, moiji, and mighty heatX
is it not li\e that the -whole body rotted in JiJ»a
tnanner, and in a womb-agreeable, (baO fwim
ont at laft, quicken and rife the fam> thing*. I
cannot tcll,l will neither avow nor difavow
the matter; Nature is deep and wonderful in
her deeds , if they be fearctud and unwound
to the bottom. I cannot tell, I fay; nature
may fuffer this, but not Religion; and yet
it is a dangerous trial as our men, and the,
Poet found by Come mens fay ings.

2 5 . they might more fafely have wade a proof
upon a piece of themselves, which we caO Seed,
ordered by that $\il\u\ kjnde of recoclion (which
bath been found true , as fome report , and I
think it certain) or perhaps more kindly and
throughly * but fure more civilly and reli-
gioufly in the due place appointed ; for this
alfo a kind of renewing of himfelf and wax-
ing young again, when his child is (as Ari-
fiotle faith well ) another himfelf , oncly
Cundcred and fet apart from himfeife; but
neither is this third kind enough for us-, we
mujr have th? whole and imparted man refiored.
26. Then the fourth is it I mean , which
Js indeed a mean between all the reft,
especially between that empty and

dan-

LlB. 5- The Holy Guide. 15$

dangerous deed aforefiid , performing
more then the one in the out- fide, and lef*
within then theoher : for this w*y doth
not onely by a better race of rcfrefhing
it with heat and moifture , renew the
ikin, nails 5 teeth alfo , though thefc by
the fame way of putting off the o'd ones;
J)ut for the inward chief and needful pai ts,
how out of the fecdatfirftby the natural
workman, it (hall neither make nor mar
any , onely change and a'tcr , purge and
place them all in their former ft te and
foundnefr, youth and ltiftinefs.

27. Then let us fee how we may be re-
newed and wax young in that order; be-
ginning flrft with thofe idle and necdlef*
things (I cannot call them parts) of the
body, which after were made up, fini-
fhed, grew , aud fprung out from the leav-
ing of our meat and nourishment; thefeeffr,
nailes, and hair •, as for the skin it is a pare
of the feed , or the cruft that over caft the
thing , when it was fully baked; then as
thefe had no certain courfc and order of
kind in coming 5 for ( to omit hair thac
goes and comes upon every light occafion)
fomc are born without nailes, and fome
with teeth; when ethers again have none
before they be old, and fuch like diforders^
f o no doubt by skill they may come and go
again without any hurt or great change to
D d 4 the

156 The Holy Guide. L1B.3 1

the body. V liny tells of one whofd teetb came
arain after he wu anhundredyears old,and up'
wird: and Jebn Mici>Jain an Engli(h Mini->
iter renewed his age and waxed young be-
ing very old as they fay ; and I know not
well Whathsr the Souldiers in Germany
by drinking of a faring by the Kiver Renin e, had
their teetb jbal^en out, and loofi and had them,
come again a new. Bin this is certain thac
trnre be waters in the world, which by a
fpechli quality make thofe beads thac
drink thereof, call their haire, homes and
hoofs, and fo renew them, as the Poet
faith.

28. What need many words? tfcus part
is eafy and of fmall weight, and wc
may paffc it over ; but that an old feeble,
withered,crookcd, and barren man, fhould
be taken from the brink of his grave, as it
were and led back to his former youth, and
luftineffe,isa thing fay they, both in truth
falfe , and in reafon incredible; nay if two
fuch men were fct before us, it would feem
in fence ridiculous : indeed it will feem fo
to fuch men as are either all fence and no
reafon , or elfc whofe wits are all beftowed
upon the fearch of fuch troubles as iff not
worth the fearching.

29. Hhhadbeen fpent about thedeep
and hidden works of nature, there would
Come have appeared as great as this if, and

flayed

L i B . 3* the Holy Guide, 157

flayed all childifh words; for my part I am
Willing to fupply ihs want, to unfould
thegreateft a&s of kinde, and fcc them be-
fore you ,bu: th-s work grows too fift and
proves bigger then either I wift, or would*
it is plam.cd upon Co good and fruitful! a
ground 5 ytt have one or two of theficteft
examples, and nearcft and match them, and
this tog*th<r that you may iee it, at lift,
fd! out- to jeft, and worth/ laughter5(I am
loth to fall into the mouths of jrfters) z-
bout a folid and earncft matter, wri:en by a
young hand.

30. Is it not as hjrd and wonderful! a
change think you, to fee a woman fuddenly
prove a man , as to behold an old man by
lit tip and little wax young again? compare
this if you but doubt of the ftory. Pliny is
my Author ftill , who reports of three fuch
fundry chances, which hehimfcif faw,
(he named the place and party) and how
performed upon her mariagc day. Cardan
doubted no wbit of the truth , but ventures at a
reafonforit ^which becaufe it is both likely
to be true,and unfecmely to be told, I will
let it go;)and he voucheth the fame change
again, but in another kinde, and yet more
ftrangely then the firft, and whereof no
man ever dtvft or could hold a rcafon. The
fame man again faith, that the cruel Beaft
Hyena, every yeatsbangtlb btr / e# , being by

courfe

58 the Holy Guide. Lib-?,

courjeonyear mate, and another year female,
never cea/ing nor miffing that grange and mar-
velous turning; is not this a much more harder &
greater fynde of change and alteration then that
•we ff>ea\\ of> then we grant nature is able to
do this if (he be willing; but it («emeth not
becaufe (he never doth it; (lie runneth ftill
If (he be not letted, her appointed race ; but
if there be many dead chances able to hin«
der and let this courfe of nature,bow much
more can the wit of man, (which is a fpark
of the winde which gave by kinde her
Commiflion)dothit> as (he doth often, if
I m'tghtftand to (how it, both ftoup and
lengthen , and yet (he is never willing and
confenting. let us fee then for this matter
In hand, how skill is able to overrule kind
by her own confenr, and make her willing
to returne and wax young again; firft let us
know that all Philofophers, Bofte Crucians
and Pbyfitians hold, the life and foule and
naturall heat to be aliwayes of ic fell
young and lufty, and never old,but to ap-
pcarefoby reafon of her failing part her
inftrutnents;and that 1 have often (hew*d in
a kinde of fire waxing and waning accor-
ding to her heat and motion; then her e one
good help to the great work of renewingjn
like fort the parts of the body are not mar-
red and loft, as they fay of a rich man that
he is decayed, when his moi^ey the life of

the

LiB.3- Ti&e Holy Guide. 159

the World, hath deft and for faken him;
even to when our natural heat the life of
this little world, is faint and gone, the bo*
dy (hrinks up and is defaced;buc bring again
hsatinto the parts, and likewife money in-
to the bankrouts Cofcn , and they (hall be
both lufty and flourifh again, as much as e-
\cr they did.

31. But how miy this heat be brought
again? to make few words, even ?s fheis
kept and held by due meat and* motion;
for if (he faint andfaile foe want of them
only, then give her them, and fhsfhalirs-
cove r her fclf again ; meat is the bait that
draws her down ; Motion comes forward
like a gad-bee to prick her forward; but
that work is performed in this ordert fiift
this meat Which is that fine and J&titrial
oyle, often difcribed by Eugenius Ikeodi-
daftus in his book entituled the Koto. Mundi9
and in myRofie Crucian Axfamata lih.2.chap,
7. exceeding piercing fwifwiTc, divides,
fcatters and fcourcs away the grofsand
foul degrees and leavings, which for wane
of the tillage of heat, had overgrownein
our bodies and which wascaft like a block-
i(h ftay-ffth in our wyjoflay the free courfe of
thefripoflife, if me lifted to ftir and run her
wonted race, (which fome think it enough
In this matter j but alfo fcattereth all about
her dew and defired meat, and ffrft moy fture

to

1 60 ihe Holy Guide- Lib. $

to draw her forwards. By which means
our life havinggotten both her full ftrength
and live lyneffe, and returned like the Sun
infummer into all our quarter i , begins to work^
as fnjb as (be did atfir(l\ (for being the fame
upon the fame (he muft needs do the fame)
knitiog and binding, the weak and loofe
joyms and (Incws, watering and concoft-
ing all by good digeftion, and then the idle
parts lik: leaves (hall in the hot Summer
Ipring and grow fourth afre(h, out of this
new and young temper of body, and all the
whole face and (hew (hall be young and
fljur idling.

This is quickly fpoken,fay you,ifit were
as foon done. It were happy Medicines, nay
thit w:re a miracle; but 1 work no mira-
cles; I only help, as I faid, the willing race
of kiride, wherefore as a man is long decay,
ing and wearing away, or rather in make*
ing and waxing to his perfection 5 fo in
mending no doubt, he cannot return all at
once, but muft creep back by little and little,
and fo be re ftored ; or elfe I would bav& told
you atfir;} dafb oftbft fpriug in the Ifle Bonica
which Matter Edwards doth witneffe,
will in fewdaysreftoresaman quitc(faving
gray haires and wrinkles) and make him
youngagain. Nay if! had taken acourfe
to delight wom:n and children,and to win
credit among the common fort, I would

have

LiB.3. The Ho If Guide. 1 6 1

have fought the Legend, and rifled all the
goodly wonders in the world, and fitted
many to my purpofc. But ?f I ferve Madam
Bcata my Love, and wat upon a wi(>r mi-
rlrcls, yea and in i he raoft inward and fecrec
place among them, Co I would 6y my will,
(peak nothing that mould not be pleafing
in hr light, and well founding in the ears
of wifdome; Wherefore lee theie few fuffice
for this matter bdng th^ tmth, as I lear-
ned of Nature.

CHAP

162 The Holy Guide. Lib

■*c

CHAP. XVIII.

The Way to Tleafure, or
. the Worlds efleemed
Happinefs.

i. Of poverty and riches: 2. Of worldly wetltb':
V Of Arabian Hna\er- ground bodies : 4. Of
Socrates under- ground I ecrets: 5%, Ibattbs
heal of the earth boyles fvoekj into Minerals :
6. Of§{uickcfi}ver: 7 . Ibe futyburous and
Mineral quality of the breath of man : %.lhe
Frozen Aire 1 9. Of Purging Quick^ fiiver 2
j o. Viffolving of feeds and breaths of mettals:
ii. Earthly Brmfkone to makf a perfetl
weight : 12. Sun and Moon ma\ejman : 13,"
Of making Mettals : 14 Inflrufiion. 15.
Earth in Power, wafer in Quick, ftlver e~
quail 1 16. Nouri(bment in Minerals and
Plants : 1 7. Ofgroffe arid fine bodies : 18.
Mineral heat : 19. Heat perfells Minerals,
.old covers the rrorkj: 20. Iron and Copper
of be Nature of Quick- filver: 21. lb at

Nature

Lib. 3. Tbe ^oly Guide. 163

Nature intended white and ythw Copperas
GoldandSilver: 22. Silver and Gold in ail
Metals: 23. Degrees ofMetalls ckanfedz
24 . Nature changeable 125. 0/ mending Na+
tare by Art : 26. Tta imagination of Birds.
27. Guides: 28. Antimony: 39. T6e co-
/<3«r 0/G0W faflned: 30. To </ie Aff/a/i :
31. Joftay flying fpirits: 32. To wa(b the
hands in Molten lead unhurt • 33. To /fciro/
the force of a Bullet unhurt: 34. lokeepa
Cloth from burning: 35. To uje unripe gold
andmakpitasgood as the be ft; 36. How to
rn^eAurum Potabile* 37. That ghticlf
ftlvermaybe bounds coloured and madeGoldj
andoffirange things.

EVen this is the point at laft which thegol*
den worjd looked for at firftj fta way to
Flea fur ^becaufe ic is indeed the lift & low-
eft parr, f bring fervants, and fo to be ufed)
and yet very needtull and no: to be fpared
in this bleffed houjbold; for al though wc h avc
all helps to hng life, health, and youth that
may bt ,yet if we wane the fervice of riche?,
poverty will beficge u?, and keep us under
and cut offand hinder many goodly deeds
and woiks of wifdome and venue; but what
are Riches ? for the world by Rofte Crucians
and Pbilofopkers agree not in this account;
nor this within it felf; the world reckons
(lore of Go/dand ftlvet to be riches; Arifiotle

Enough

164 The Holy Guide. L1B.3.

V.nougb oJntedjhU things : the Stoick, enough of
Earth and Aire. To begin here, thtft. might
beftretched and made large enough, but th^t
we know their ftraitnefle; would they have
us live by breath slontymd never est, accor-
ding to the guife which I fee out in healing?
be it poflibl^- as it feemeth;yet it is fomwhac
feeble, as 1 (hewed there, 2nd (o fomewhat
halting and unp.rfe&f by lack of youth and
JuftinenV) for our full and perh<5fc life ap-
pointed, befides themcans and hurts of po-
verty, which I right now touched. An-
/fot/e is {omwhat ftraic alfo for beads, th;t
I reckon are rkhes as well; if he had put in
enough of things needfull forgoodlife,
wherefore we were made, he had faid much
better; yet not all,for (o mould all the bo-
dily mtans and helps aforefaid be counted
riches, a great deale tooconfnfedly; now
much lefTe can wc rate the golden wealth
right and true riches, becaufe a man may
dye with hunger for all this ; So he that
fold a Mo fife for two hundred pence, d)ed hivnfdf
forlac\ of foody when the buyer lived, and this
was done (to let go fained Midas) when
Hannibal befcidged Caftline-, then true riches
are enough of outward things needfull for
good life, that is, for our P&y/jcJ» above
tit-

But becaufe that golden and worldly

wealth

Lib. 3. TheHoly Guide. l6<

w alth h a ready and Ccrcain way & means
to this ( out bearing violence which no man
can warr3r t) we will ufe the caufe for the
effeft in this place & to ftrive to (how how
all men may get enough of Gold and (ilvcr
and that by weaker means then Hermes Me*
decines as the place requireth, although by
the fame way concerning the fluff we work
on; that is, by turning bafe mcttals into
filver and gold,by the Art of preparing 2vo-
fia Crucian Medicines named in my Harmony
of the World ^ Jib. i . chap. 1 2. this is the hard
matter which turns the edg of worldly wits,
the bright-nifT; 1 fay, of thefc healthful!
thing3 dazles the eye of the Common and
bleared pcople,becaufe it is in their account
the beft and higheft, and moft happy in the
world ; when indeed and truth as it is the
Icaftandloweft, and worft of all the helps
unco Vh)fic\ belonging, fo it is in proof and
tryall the lefTc hard & troublefomt, both to
Art and »^f«re,themoft ready andeafy to be
got en and performed.

3. And to (how this (we will make no
Ion £ tarrying) it were firft good to enter
into the way and or Jer which nature below;
keepeth,in making the Mettali underground;
if I thought I might not run into Socrates
his accufation, for fea-rching over deeply
the under ground matters:but I tyzpt I (hall
not now by the mighty paines of the miners
E e fp adc*#

166 the Holy Guide. L1B.3

fpadcs, and mattocks, thi way is made fo
plain before mc, or elfe (lire as they be, jm-
deed I would account them over deep and
hard for my pen to digg in.

4. Theo all underground bodies, vfhich
the Arabians calls Minerals, are cither ftones
or hard Juices, (which we name middle mi-
ncralls) oreHe they bcMcttals; thefe as all
other perfect things have all one ItufF,earth
and warer, and one workman the heat of
Haven, as I faid above, for their womb?,
becaufc chey be but dead things as they call
them, the earth will ferve. But for thac
nature meant to make moit perfect things in
that ki«de,which require long time to finifh !
them:fhc chofe a moit fure and certain place i
even the dead and hard rock ic (tU, not to |
the end the Earth might hide them as hurt-
full things, and leane upon them with all
her weight, a* Seneca faith very feverely, ,
w rather very fintly, (for we know how,
he hunts after fineneffe) like an Orator, to
whom it is granted to iyt a little in Hijhries, |
that he may bring it in more prcitily ,
as the Orator hicnlelf confefleth.

5. Then the manner of the v\ork of Mine-
rals is this, rlrrt the water pcircing down-
wards, fofrens and breaks the rock, taking
her courfeftill that w«y where itisfofteft,
to make the crofs and crooked race, which
we fee of wombs , called vains or pipes of

the

LlB.3* The Holy Githle. 167

the Minerals ; but as the water runneth
fto take the ftuffe as the next thing in or-
der^) it wafhtth andfhaveth cfffmall pieces
of the rock 3 and when it ftands and ga-
thers together in one place by continual
draining, cleanfeth and rcfineth the fame,
untill the mild heat of the earth, which is
the heat of heaven , come and by long
boyling, makes it thicken and grow toge-
ther into one body of many kindes , ac-
cording to the difference of the fluff and
heat, which they call hard Juices, as I fay,
or midle Minerals.

6. This workman continuing and hold-
ing on his labor (this Agricola faith, the
cold and drought of the rock nowlayes
upon the ftuffe, and by little and little, and
atlaftbindes it into that hard form of a
mcttal • nay though Arifiotle from the be-
ginning gives the work to the fame caufe)
out of the heart as it were, and beft part
of them, wringeth out'ac laft a clean, clofe,
and heavy, raw, waterifh , and running
body called Quick? filver\ here it fiandeth
in perfection of this Mineral work, except
there chance (which chance happens often)
by the means of the boiling, any contra-
ry, whole and dry breath of the fame kind,
;to be made with all in the fame places, then
the meeting with the raw, waterifh, and
■unhappy lumpe , lik e rennet with milk, or
Ec 2 feed

168 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3

feed with menftrue, curdles, thicken?, and
fafhions into the {landing body o( met-
tai.

7. This mineral breath of man, for his
likenefs in quality (though their fuhfhnce
do greatly differ ) do ufe to call Frimftone •,
now (hen thisfecond and earthly heat is
come into the woik, the middle hea: of
heaven fcts the ftuffe which flayed before to
work again, and drives it forward, and
thefe two together by continual boiling
and mingling, alter and change, cleanfe
and refine it from degree to degree , until!
athft, after many years labor, ic comes
to the top of perfection, in clean nefs, fine*
nefs , clofenefs and colour , which they
call gold; thefe degrees if the heat be gen-
tle and 1 on g-fu fieri ng (as they fayj be fir If
Lead , ihen linn , thirdly Silver , and fe to
G>ld> but if it beflronge and fuddain , it
turns the weak woi k out of the way quick-
ly and burns \t up quickly, and makes
nought but Iron , or at the leaft if the heat
be fomewhat better, Coffer ; yea and forne-
times the fullncfsof the earthly Brimfione
alters the courfc of nature in this work,
as alfo there is odds of Quick- ftlver ; but
indeed the caufe of all the difference, is in
the working-heat that maketh anddifpo£
cth the beginning, midtft and crfd of all,
thus and thus, according to her ftrength

and

LiB.$. IheHolj Guide. ' 169

and continuance , and which is the main
ground co this purpofe, Q«ic^/F^eristhc
mother of all themcctals.

3. Now when the work is done, it ly-
et.h yet as it did all the while in a thick
flowing form, lik? ths form of a molten
mtttal, and then ic is fit tomakeTelefmes
tor love marriage, health, long life, youth,
gaming * for fortune in Merchandize and
Trade-, for war and all other things. But
when the owner comes to enjoy it, bring-
ing in the cold breath ot the air upon it,
like unto Corral,and other foft and grow
ing Sea-plants, it freezeth and hardencth of
a (uddain fie for the turn and ufeof man in
other things, wherefore ic was made and
ordained- Thefe be the grounds of the
moft and beft of our men Rofte CrufianSy
that is of men beft feen and furtheft tra-
velled in fuch matters, where unto Canton
a man indifferent, and none of us, yet
▼ery learned, agreeth jumpe as may be;
but lcaft thefe dime and little lights may
feern to be darkned , with the briahtnefs
and fame of Ariftotle D and his Scholar
Tbeopbrat) and the lace renowned Agricola^
! holding hard the contrary, and the fame

Ifomctime ftifTely maintained 9 1 will as
much as in me lyech > and ny narrow
bounds will fuffcr , endeavor to lay the
icafons all down in order 9 which mo^ed
Ec 3 ehcaa

1 70 The Holy Guide. LlB. 3

them to think thus, and ftaid them in the
fame opinion \ that wife men at Icaftmay
lay one rcafon with another , and judge
which is the weighted and worthy to bare
the beft price, with the vain regard of out-
ward mews and authorities.

9. Firft,Tnac the Mineral fluff fprung
out from the rock Savings aforefaid, all
cunning Miners can tell you, whoilillby
the nature and grille of theftone, though
there be twenty fcveral forts (as there be
fometimes in the rock)arc able certainly to
fay this or that vein followcth. But to pafs
over lightly the lighter matters, and fuch
as they grant as well as we ; that Quick* '
ftlver is the neareft ftuffe or menftrue , or
mother of mettals , that is the thing in
great ftrife and queftion , when it needed
not in my opinion, if we mark the con-
fent of all thofe men, in all Nations , that
put the name upon thinps, which were not?
of the unwifeft fort, flatly to allow this
faying, when they by calling it in Gree^
Latine, and all other tongues quick or li- '
quid SiWer, in fecret meaning plainly fay,
that if by the force of thofe two whole
workmen aforefaid it were flayed and bet-
ter purged, ic were nothing elfe but Sil-
ver for indeed Avicen and fome other of
the Learned fide , leaving out the middle
degrees, hold the very fame opinion, which

LlB.?. JheHoly Guide. 171

I alio think true , if the fturJe and heats (as
they arc in hoc Countries) be good and
fauhlefsjbut the difquiet Will account this
kind of argument unskilful, and fo caft it
off, then remove the cold that at laS came
upon the mcttal and hardened it, andic
appears ro the eye nothing elfe but (jach an
altered Quick- filver.

10. Or if thewitnefs of fence be fome-
times falfeand deceitful, enter ourSchoJe
and behold ihem by a more kindly and gen-
tic way lead back to a txueQuickcftlver ,
both in cold and heat abiding , being a
true rule in RoficCrutian Phifick and Phi-
lofophy , every thing to be made of that
whereuntoit is lofened and difolved. But
if all this will notferve, pafs alittle fur-
ther into the border and edge of fecreta 3
and you (hall fee them by following the
fteps of kinde underneath (which I mark-
ed out before ) that is by fowing thedif*
folving feeds and breaths of mettals upon
Ghickcfiher, to curdle and trine her in 1 hat
form of metal which they will and wiftv
for.

11; Now for that earthly Brira/rotff, na-
ture doth make a perfect wight , and is fain
to break her firft order, and to take vhe
help of a whole womb5& of another work-
man^ tvenfo to frame' a perfect dead crea-
ture befides the help oi Eugenlus 7beodi-
E c 4. daUnty

172 1 he Holy Guide . LtB. 3.

daUut'-, boch to taQiion and 10 boilc it to
petft&ion.

j 2. Then as Arijlotle faichjf^ 5«n d?/<i Mcwi
rca^ d man\ and the reft have two working
and moving caufet, the heat of beaven3and
the breath of the male iced ; te in ;his
work of metcals, there is not onely the
great and general begert'ng breath of hea-
ven* b"t alfo the piivate and particular
feed of the earth their father, that there
lacks -a little cinh to (lay ^uickcfilvtr,
Ariftotie himself (hewcth, by a pretty like
example (h: faith) that hearts blood flomtb
full when it is cold, vfcn as others [lands , be-
caufe it wan«s thofe earthly dreams which
others have, to make it grow together , as
we may fee by tryal finding no blood
which hath them with a drainer taken a-
way 3 to ftand and ciufter, but run con-
tinually. Even fo take away the Earth and
Brimfloneot a mcttal ("which pur Art can
do) and the water will not ftand again but
how for ever 5 and this is general if we
mark well, that nothing ftands and leaves
his running before earth, ruling binds and
ftayeshim.

13. Whofoever allows not this way of
making meetals, befides other fails and er-
rors, he (hall never unfold the nature of
§>ukk*fther 9 as we by Aritlot k$ and Api-
GQlafs ftrugling and firiving againft the

ftrcara

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. 175

tfream about it, giving the caufe of his
flawing and flying from the fi;e unto abun-
dance of aire in him, for then his Jight-
jiefs and feeding of the fire, two things
far from his nature would a? weil *s in ail
airy bodies , (nine forth and appear unto
us.

14. But he that ftands upon TLugenius
Ihcodidaftui grounds and rules Jaiddown
before nn~y cafily perceive his own raw,
cole, and watery condition , to make him
fl/e the fire his enemy $ and this even pro-
portion in power and equal rule of earth
and water in him, tobcthe caufeof his
runing.

15. The firft is plain, but that there is
as much earth in power, as water in §>ukkc
filver ( albeit it feems all water ) and no
more of this then of that , furely mingled
and put together, appears becaufe it is the
onely dry water in the world; her earth
haling one way makes her dry, and her wa-
ter another caufeth her to flow ; but this
is a certain fign thereof, that when we find
by reafon all other things , if cither earth
or water rulcth over them , either to (land
with cold and harden, or clfe to melt with
fire and water ; , ycc we fee plainely
this one dry water called ghiickffilvtr to
ftoop, and ycild to neither 5 but to our pur*
ppfc.

The

174 T^e Hob Gftide* L1B.3.

The reafons why the heat of heaven is
the workman in the Mine, are many 5 but
hear a few and briefly delivered , if he
vvorkcthand minglcth (as I proved above)
all perfeft mingled bodies, then that mail
lec and bar him from this labor alfo, the
depth and hardnefsof the rock? No, for
if thofe fubtilc bodies which we call fpi-
rits, are able in the opinion of all men, to
pierce through (tone walls without brcich
or fign of paffige, how much more fubtile
and able to do it j is this heavenly foul >
But all men grant the workmanfhip of li-
vings to flow, from thatondy caufe and
fountain > then tell us how it comes to pafs
that Fifb (by the wknefs of good Au-
thors) are fame times found in the dee fes and
found earth , where no water runneth 3 nay
which way do very loads get into certain
flones in Germany , and Mill-done roc\s in
France , even fo clofe that they cannot be
fpifd, before they be felt in grinding and
break themfclvcsasGeorge^grico/d reporteth

16. But if Minerals as well as Plants
take their food and nourishment, wax
and grow in bignefs , aU is clear 1 hope and
void of doubt ; this will I prove hereafter.

17. In the mean time let us win it again
by proof and tryal, the ftrongeft battery
th'Atmavbe; cold bindes and gathers in
the ftuffc both like and unlike 3 grofs and

fine

L1B.3. rte Hoi) Guide. 175

fine together , without any clcanfing or
fundcring ; but mettals cfpccially arc very
finely and cleanly purged bodies. Again if
cold frozen and packt up gold together, the
force of heat (as we fee the proof in all
things') (hould cut the bands and unmake
the work again , which is not. To this,
what colour fp-rings from cold, but his
own watcrifti and earthly colour? that if
a thing be dyed with other colours, we
know ftraightway where it had them-, be-
fides cold leaves no fmell behind it ; but
heat is thecaufc of allfmells , then too-
mitt the firy fmells of fomc ftones, and
fweet favor of others, and the variety of
fent in juices happened it that Silver found
at Mar)+berg fmelt likp violets , as Agricoh re-
ports-, that all men feel the unpleifant fenc
of Ccpptr and other bafe mettals. But
mat k the practice of the plain men, when
they ocvifc and judge of a Mine below,they
take their aim at no better mai k, then if by
grating two ftones of the hill together, they
feel a fmell of Brimftonc, becaufe they take
I tbus the leavings of the mettals in their
concoction.- To befhortdobut caft with
your felvcs, why there be no mettals but
in rocks and mounyines , unlefs they unload
an 3 (hut them down into the p/*zitf, and
then wherefore foul mcttal in cold Coun-
ties, and fine (tlver and gold, befides pre-
cious

176 The Holy Guide. > LlB^.

cious (tones in hot Countries, and you fhall
find thceaufc of thi* to tc'thediffrerc of
the refining and purging heat , and the
clofenefs of the place to keep in the heaven *
ly h at, a"d iWicnneis with «11, and emp-
tineis of Plants to draw it forth and fpend
ic-

18. Some cannot conceive how heat
mould caufc this matter, when they feel no
heat in the Mine ; I will not fay to fuch
that this heat is mod milde and gentle every
where, and there efpecially ; buc bid them
bring apiece of Mineral earth, andLyit
in the open air , and they (hall feel if they
will lay their hand upon it , no fmall but a
burning heat, by the cold blaft ftirred up
and caufed, even as the lurking heat of Lime
is ftirred up with water.

19. Wherefore we may fo fafely fit down
and build upon it that all Minerals are
made with heat , and get thereby their be-
ing and perfection , albeit the outward
fhapeand laft cover asic were of the work,
is put on by cold.

20. Now for the ftcps and degrees of
rr)ctcaTs, that they all except Iron and Cop*
per , though fome do not except then?,
arife from the fteps and degrees of backing
the fclf fame thing and ftuffe of §>uick-
filver, it appears in Lead Mines, where is
always for the moft part fome Gold and

Silver

LlB. 3- The Holy Guide. i?7

Silver found hy report of good Authors 5
and therefore albeit faith,that cunning Mi-
ner?, ufe in fuch cz(c to (hut up the Mine
aga'ne, for thirty or fourty years, to b^ke
ihe Lead better, and kke it ontoputii-
fa&ion.and thzt thing to have been found
true in his time in Seeavoyia,

2i. But what do White and Yellow
Copper U found in the ground fignifie nnto
us, but that Nature was travelling by Way
of conco&ion unto the end of Silver and
Gold. Again how comes U topafs ths*
plain Ariificcrs can fetch out of every met-
tal forne Gold and Silver ? and out of
thefefome bafs raettals , unlcfs Gold and
Silver were the heart and belt part of tke
whole body , and of one ftlf fame thing
with the mtttal*.

122. Nay Farafelfus avowcth that not on-
ly in trwfe, but in Mines of minerals, things
further offas you knowaatv never without
filver ind gold ; and thtrtfore h: giveth
Counccll to water them, as. if they were
plants wiih their own mine, & kindly wa-
ter 3 affuring us that they will grow up to
rirenefle, and in few years prove as rich as
any gold and (liver mine,
23. Then we fee atlaft theftrengthof this

IMettallinground unfhaken, and (landing
fureforall the battery of the ftoutfft Gre-
cians f that all m<ttal!s have but ore quk\fil-
ver

178 The Holy Guide. Lib. $

ver^ kinde and nature, being all one felf
fame thing, differing in degrees of cleanneft
and finencfle, clofleoeffe and coulourj that is
from Accidents (pringing out from the de-
grees of boyling and decocYion : it is no w
time to go to build up this matter, and to
(how how thefc low and unclean mettals
may be mended and change into Silver and
Gold, to make the way to attain Riches, if
all mettals are fonear & like one another,
efpecialyfome of them(/w lich 1 fct down be-
fore) wanting nothing, but continuance of
cleaning and purging by conco&ion, then
fure this change may fa ni no fuch hard im-
poffibie matter,nor to iwed perhaps to hdp
the divine Art of .HVrwfj Medicines , biu a
letter and bifer skill may ferve the turne. '

24. And as nature is not pooreand needy,
but full of (lore and change, (o may skill if
fhe will follow the fteps of nature, finde
more waves then one to one matter then
whkh is the lawer way and lefler skill fol-
lowing naiure? we will fetch from that way
you fay nature take even now below the
ground what is that; 1 will tell you (bortly.
25. As nature in her work below ufed
hot workmen, fo will I, example in this
place: and mention the fl/e letter and im-
purer Msctals, viz. $ U T? 3 and 5 may be
mended and changed into the greater and
moil: perfect rncttals, viz. into©an<*i) bus

thir

L i B.3- The Holy Guide. 1 7 9

this cannot be done without the Philo-
sophers Pantarva; and now let us returne
to our work in hand in the Courfe of Na-
ture. And becaufe we cannot tarry hrlei-
furc and long rime, (he taktth to that pur-
pofe, we will match and countervail her
little heats with proportion anfwerable
and for our time, that we may do that in
forty day<$, that nature doth in fo many
years, and this proportion is not hard to
be found, when we confider the odds and
fpace, that lyeth between the founders fire,
and the gentle heat of heavenjand again the
difference of fuch a fcouring purgor,as that
Eater above confuming Stones and Iron fo
quickly and the milde heat and lafy breath
of a thickened ^uickcfilvtr. And therefore
as the minners do well in trying and pur-
ging the rude mcttall from the outward
I filth and leavings, befides a great outward
firej to put to the limpc many hollc and
piercing things to further the work of boy-
fing, and fo afcer they have done and made
the mettall clear and handfbme, if we mean
to clenfe them further from the inward
filth and dioufineffe, we muft take the
fame courfe, but with greater force
and skill, even fo much more, as 16
is more hard to part away the inwards,
and imbrcd uncleanneffe, then the outward
and ftrange (curfe and foulneffe.

Although

l8o 7 he Holy Guide. Li B. $

Although I didfet btfore divers dirf.ren-
ces and markes upon the mettalls, y i in-
deed t here are but two to be counted of;and
there is no odds between them3and Gold:kut
in clofentfTc and coulour^the reft iscleanef?,
finenefle, and ftedfaflneffein the fire, follow
all under clofenefs, for a thing is clofe, when
much thing is packt uptogahtr in a nar-
row room which cannot be except the fluff
be clean and fincbeforr.and when this is To
pa& up, itmuft needs be weighty and flee1
faftalib, heavy for the much fluff, but ftcd-
fafl for twocaufcS; both for that there is
neither Entrance left for the fyre to pierce
and divide the fluff, (and by divifion all
things are fpoyled) nor yet any groffe and
g'cafy fluff the food of firr,rerneaningQ//:c^-
ftlver as I faid was clcane at firft,& if it with
a fine brimftone you flay & faftcn it, which
is often in hot countryes) it flraight way
( I mean without any middle ftcps) prove
Silver and then Gold: but if that curdling
breath be foule and greafy (as it is tnoft
commonly) k turns Quick^filver into foule,
metals firfljanctthe work mud tarry a Ion*
gcr leifurcto be made clean and pcrfc&,that
is until I fuch time, as that foule brimftone^
be clean purged out as it is oncly in
Gold. .

26. That Nature doth in due time, and
Art by imitation may pare and drive away

all

Lib.?. The Holy Guide. 181 Sy

all the fi thy Rennet, this is afigne becaufe
it is no pare of the <hing;how is that proved
all the filthy rennet, this is a fign becaufe it
is no part of the thing; how is that pro-
ved? for thjt it the male feed that beget s,
makes, and fafhions all , and nought begets
it ftlf , but is made by a ftrange and out-
ward mover, which is like the Carpenter,
)r other workman towards the work he
naketh, that this is fo, ic is, plain by the
nale feed of wights, which is not the raa-
erial ftufTfecn with eyes ( that is but a (hell,
;ivcn for the fafe keeping ) but an unfeen
ioc breath of their bodies , whereby alone
jvhhout the help of the (hell, many wights
cget their Mates with young, as we may
sad in Atifioik and other good Authors ;
/hat makes it fo plain, As the barren eggs
fhicb many Birds Ifajbim fully in tbentfelves by
mceite ofluft, wanting onzlj an outward qnick^
ing canfe from the male >

27. Then how (hall we purge out this
nil and greafic workmanjto make the work
f anymetalclofe and well coloured > Na-
urc would have done this in time by con-
?&ion, wkhouc any other help 5 but we
iuft haft to (hortcn the time fit for ufe,two
evifesjonc to breed c!ofencf?,and the other

1) bring on good colour; thefirftis a bin-
ing (hell, the next is a dying cunniiig> for
Vf ths

1 8 2 the Holy Guide. Lib.?

the firft, let Nature AM be our guide and)
leader.

28. As (h: in all her eafie changes, ufcth]
to confume and raze out the weaker with
the ftrongcr •, like fo we , if we mean to
devour and confume all thegrea(ie8c grofe:
fluffs of themtttal, that when all is clean
and fine, the mectal may draw it up clofc
*ogeiher$we muft encounter it with a ftrong
like; what was the Brintflone or any other
filth in Qjickfilver , and of what flock
think you? Did I not tell you itfprung
out of a confufed heap of middle minerals,
and was a Mineral breath and V2por ? then
Ictus take the foul and (harp minerals, and
in a ftrong fire fa them upon the mentals,
and thty (hall furc by fearching and lifting
roundabout, quickly draw to them, cat
and drink up all the water like drofs of the!
mettal , and leave the reft which is unlikel
clean and unrouched ; 1 need not (land any
moreahoutit ; do we not fee how SoapaJ
fil hy ftrong tring in battail, and working!
with a foul and filthy cloth, makes ic clean
and fpotlefa > Nay, to come nearer, howl
doth Antimony that fierce and foul mineral^
where he is fer. on work with Gold to;
chanfe him, fearch and run over all the
meit 1, take and confume his like meat,
and the ftrange and unclean parts , leaving
the reft as unlike and unmeet for him 5 to

be

LlB.J. The Holy Guide. 183

be ftiort, if you mark well , you ftiall find it
the plain ready and kindly way , not onely
in all purging* , but in every natural
thing.

29. Then let this part go by, and fith
now the roettal is as clean , fine, weighty a-
gain as gukl^ftlver ,or clofe & fledfaft as Sil-
ver, or rather more; let us take the next
in point hand, and bring on the colour of
GoId,this ftandeth upon two ponits,it muft
have the fairnefft: and laflingncfie of
Gold.

30. But hear is all the cunning, to dvc
the mcttal all over , with an ev.rlafting
colour •, to this purpofc,it had need be able
to peirce the mcttal, and to abide at fire ;
thatfirft is not hard again, But how (hall
this be done > perhaps We need not ftrivc
before we lay the colour, to make it ftead-
faft and binding ; but like as Gold will, Co
faft embrace>and hold his flying,makc quick-
filvcr, if (he be a little cleanfed and made
fit to receive him , that no fire (hall depart
them ; fo the clofenefs of this one fledfaft
mcttal (hall deft nd and favc the colour; but
fuppofe it will not , yet if Iron and Cop-
per, nay, the midle minerals may be bound
and made abiding in the fire (as our men
hold arcdteaeh) then their colours may be
flaid and made ftedfaft alfo,

Ffi . 3i,Wha*

184 The Holy Gride. LlB. 3

3 1. Whar is remaining, if you be not yet
content goto School and learn to faft«*n and
flay Hying spirit?, as t'-ey call them, Cjr-
dan who denyesit poflibie to make an open
nitttal, dofc and ftedfift, yet alows this
matter eafie, and fith we arc here, and he
fo ready, Jet ustalk with him a little. I
nizrvil much at him, a man fo well learn-
ed (bii: indeed not skilled in theArtvthe
thief of all Learning ) tr-at aLhough he
hadfpofcen well .1 great while, and allow-
ed all mtttals to be made of oneftuflc, and
to travel by one way of concoction unto
one cnd.Gvld: and to differ by one accident
one! y and chance or t^ofe degncs ofboyl-
ing, and thereby ycildcd that all the foul
rncttals may be turned one into another,
and Silver- i ike wife into Gold; becaufeit
i* nothing clle but imptrfeft GolJ, and the
worftr part thereof , warning nought but
colour which eafie and a little clofenefs ,
which t y pSTging out the greafie food of
fie may -..be; given him ; yet fcr all this, he
ricnys if. pciffible to change any of the low-
tr metrals into c thcrSJ or Luna, becaufe
of our fuddain heat (/« lfaid) of Mars and
Vtws bang burnt they cannot be brought
totbe:ro!d Mercurhl tlcarncfs, nor yet be
m*de abfdirg nor ftedfafi in the fl e.

32. ThUhe would never have faid if he
had teen brought up in this our trade of

Learn-

Lib.?. the Holy Gride. \ 8 5

Learning, h« mould have feen us cafic]"
lead thcmcttals back from whence th;y all
came, and then, by means aforr(aid Hay
them; for, he grants himftlf thai all ihc
caufc of unclofenefs , unftedfaftn-fs and
wafting in the fire , is thac our faty Brim-
ftone, and that it maybe c!e?.nfedoiK of
Silver; why not out of the reft al Co ? will
they not abide the violence/ net at fin'*,
but by little 2nd little they will, as gentle
and wife men know how to ufe then ,
there are others a'fo as well as he , Eranits
andfuchLke, that deny this artoF chang-
ing ; if I thought thofemen needed any la-
bour of reproof , who through ignorance
of the points they handle, blundtr and
ru(hin thcdaik, crofs, and reprove tbem-
felvci , all about in fuel, fo:t as they Kem
rather to move pitty to the ftandei s ty, ctxcfi
to make a challenge, and to call forth an
adverfary. Then fu:h men I will exhort
to be better advilcd, by the view of ccrtaia
plain examples which i will lay down be-
fore them, and thereby with them , to (Ly
their over C\»Ut and fore running judge-
ments, until they com; to the tryai and
battel it felf, in thit which fhalt fojio<v.
Lead, as that workman know is ore of the
greatcftfpoilcra of his fellows, the foul met-
tal in 1 he wor!d3fave them from the rag- of
him upon a (hell of A(hes, which they cilia
F13 ' Teft3

1 86 the Holy Guide. LlB. 3

Tcft, and he is counted faff, fare, and ftcd-
faft enough agairft all cflays. A few years
agoc when I was in Egypt , about April one
thoufand fix hundred and fifty , Tranfilanu*
a Learned man of Alexandria told me of a
man at Cbaffa!ovia> which I know not how
foannointed and armed himfelf, I mean his
face and hands , as he could fuffer to wafh
them in molten Lea;*.

33. Another time I was in Arabia, and
from thence failed to the Rock^called Alexan-
der, and further to Anjalerne and Cbrifte
upon Euphrates 3 in the year one thoufand fix
hundred fifty and two; about May I met
Hentet Obdeloh and the Akades amongft ma-
ny wonderful things , this I faw , one who
durft. oppofe his naked body to the violence
of a Bullet (hot from a Musket ; and this na-
turally hisflemwas hardened by a charm.
Why may not then byiheGme example a
tougher and harder Mettai be more eafily
armed and fenced againft all force and vio-
lence.

34. In my Orient at Travels, you may read
of the events ia nature experienced, and
again to be experienced by my felf ; nay j
you fhali ft c more wonders by thcjkill of j
nature eafily performed , clear Cbryftal Javts.
the cloth that is wrapt about it from the rage of
the fire , jo doth oyl defend fa}er 3 in fo much
that yon may boil Eifb therein , v ithout either

burning

LlB.?. the Holy Guide. 187

burning the paper , or the oil foaking through*
and all this is becaufe the txcream and dead-
ly fewds do fave the middle thing by their
working. Is it then a wonder, if Iron or
Copper be by forae pretty Height , or kindly
skill defended from all fire , and made lure
and fledfaft.

35. To draw nearer unto you ^ ic is ve-
ry well known that bafc and unripe Goldy
fit oncly for Tolefmes when it is, fee my
Kofte Crucian infallible Axiomatay lib. 1. in
the Preface ; as it were a mean between Sil-
ver and Gold, wanting colour and clofe-
nefs , wafting much away in time of proof
and tryal, may by fomeof the lefTer and
and lower degrees of binding, be refined
and made as good as the beft gold in the
world ; then is there any let in reafon, why
the reft, cfpecially Silver, by ftr. ng and
more forcible means may not be bound and
coloured and reach perfection.

36. Now before I travel further, it is
firft necciTary to prevent the delufionsof
theMountebankcs of London, and in other
plates; and lee you know thetrmfi chat
you be not deceived by thoO: that pretend
to have Auxuwpotabile , and thofeexperhn-
fed Medicines Madam Beata taught me , as
you may fee in the Preface and Chap, 12.
of my firft book of the Harmony of the world.
None hath thefe true Philofophkal Med>-
Fi 4 cincsj

188 The Holy Guide. Lib. 5

ciiv.c8,(but Eugenius IbeodidaGuj^nd Doctor
Cuheppers widdovv) imagined to be attain-
ed Dy the ftudics of one Dr. tfkb: Culpepper
who learned of me 5 'tis truth Nicholas Cvl-
pepper was a friend, but not a Mafter to the
Golden experienced Medi-ines. But to
undeceive you , the Poft-Uoftors and pre-
tenders err, andinfteadof Potable Gold,
the Fanarea Pantaiva which is the cjuintc-
fencc/.f.and tin&ure of GoId>e^c. have gi-
ven to run an impure Calx of Gold, not
confidering the difference and evil that fol-
lows upon ic; Gold Calcined or powdered,
if it be given to men, is githcrcd intD one
lurnpe in the ftomaek, and does no good
to the patient, it guilds the bowels and
ftomaek , and binders the conco&ion,
whence many and various fickneffes follow,
and at length death it felt; i were going ?t
the finishing hereof into Italy which I left
for healch (ake^c. Take no Mettallack Ar-
canum or Medicine into your body , unlefc
it be firfi made volatile, and it be reduced
into no mettal. The beginning to pre-
pare potable Gold is this; (o may fuch a
volatile be afterwards diffolvcd in (pirit of
Wine, that both may a(cend together aid
be made volatile inseparable, and as you
prepare Gold , fo may you alfo prepare
potable Lunay Mercury, Partus, Mars, Jufiier,
&;ic5 Satyr ne j it is hard to learn without

rjra&ke

LiB.$. T xhe Holy Guide. 189

pr2&ice and a teacher. But to return to
our purpofe, and to conclude if we may
bytradng and diligently perfuing the foot •
fteps of nature, which (he tread th daily,
turn and plant of wight into a ftone, and
minerals into a mettal, and Lead into Tin,
nay Lead in o Copper ( as I will prove
hereafter) withfogrcit exchange £and tn-
crcafe of center and cloffenefg; then tell
me why by means fitted in proportion ,
Lead, or rather Copper may not be turned
into Silver, or cither, of thefe efpecial.y
Silver into Gold.

37. Therefore 10 make up all far acelle
reoorts for certain , that in Corintbia they
ijj c mmonly turn Copper into Silver, and
this into Gold in Hungary , though he
names not the means whereby they made
thofc exchanges , yet we may c^liiy judge
thole way*, ot binding and colouring fee
down before, that is , JefTtrr ways then
Hermes Medicine) and yet fuffident to ferv?
ourturn, and to rjife that wealth app^ini
ted, as we may fee by gutfs of their com-
mon practice, which fife were empty, vain,
and foolim , as aLoby the light change cf
middle minerals in reipeft of the riturn
and giin of gold, And if the praife of an
enemy be lightly true and uncorrupt, 1 t
us here what Poetus a denyer of the Arr of
ficrmes confeflethupon his ownexperience;

that

3 oo The Holy Guide. L1B.3-

thai Qjkkfilver may be diicrs ways bound
and coloured and made perfect Gold and
Silver 5 and on may when ic is with Brim-
ftone burnt and made Cinaber very gainful-
ly ( which thing Joannes Cbrifipus found
true) and further that in his due time and
place Mercury by the fmoak of Brimslone .
within one moneth will be turned into per-
fect Luna. I might prefs you with more as
^ood proofs and tryal of men of credit,
but here is enough , I fay to flay your
judgement for a while , let us go for-
ward.

CHAP. XIX.

1

The two guards if fafety9 Wifdom ^ and
Vertue^ to the Soul and body , with
other wonderful truths expe-
rienced andpubl/JIied by
good Authority.

i. Will and diligence : 2. Of the difference of
Sapience and prudence : 3. Of the mind and
foul: 4. Earthly Judges : 5. Of the fer°.
vants of [cuts and fpirits . 6. Mtjfengers of
fpirits : 7. The pown of fpirits in receiving
fbapes: 8- Motion of the fpirits and mem-
bers: o, That the Mibtr carrietb the foul

and

J.1B.3. 7 be Hoi) Guide. qoi

and all bis beams down into the body : i o The
excellency of man: n. T6? nature of Age,
and)outb in cold and hot Countries : i 2. Of
Stars and Prophets: 13. 7bat abeafimay
put on manly nature : 14. Of a Mole : i^.Of
the decrees vf Nature : 16. Of the caufe and
cure of Kind : ij.To mend man in nine or
ten off- fating*. 18. The nature of Parents :
19. Of difeajts and Leaprofie : 20. Wit
and madnefs : 21. 7 he caufe of foolifh bo-
dies and the Mixture . 22. The caufe of Ver-
tue : 23. 7he caufe of manners : 24. Of
the Will and mind of man and Stars ; 2 5 .Of
the pi ice of the Sun, Air^ and food : 16. Of
the Poles of the world: 27. Pepper turned
into Ivy ; 28. 7be caufe of diftempers ;
29. the cauje of monfirous children : 30 7he
caufe of Madnefs: 31. 7he caufe of joy or
fear : 32: How to temper the heart and liver:
33. Of that proceedeth fnm the heart and
liver.^&c.

YOu have fan now happincfs, know-
ledge, long life, health, \outh, plea-
fure, and are difpatched, and we have got
fuch a goodly quire of helps, inftrument*,
andmeons, to wifdom and venue, that is to
perfeft health and haopinefs ; whit is wan-
ling, but will and diligence, to bring all
wen unto it, unlefs there be fome as there
be many, fo lude and fond by birth and na-
ture.

200 The Holy Guide. LlE.g.

ture, haying their difference deuced, and
being fo far from their kind cftranged unto
the kind of beafts, that although they lack
not thefe helps ard furnitures, no nor
good will and indeavourto fet them for-
ward , yet all will not fcrw to m*nd tnern
and bring them to wit and goodnef*.

Then let ui feek the falves for thefe two
forest likcwife that we may make it at laft a
whole and perfect pleafureand happiness;
let us, 1 fay, bend our fclvcj to (hew the
means, How all foul and vitioas \>erfons may be
cured and brought to health of minde ( which is
wit and goodnefs } no cure can be skilfully
performed , without the caufe to be firft
known and removed; th- caufe of wifdem
and vertue^ and fo of their contraries (for
one of thefe do bewray another) 1 opened
htntofore when I brought into the bound
and honmold of wife men or Rofie Cru-
cians, that two oth<r properties that i»
clearnefs and temperatnefs of body, but
becaufe we hive no fuch bounds and begin-
ings, as the meafures have given and gran-
ted, and it behoves if we mean to build
ahy thing our felvcs, to lay all thefe unda-
tion ; let us take the matter ;in hand again,
that thofc two are the very caufcrs and
makers of this health of minde, ihatisoi
wifdomzn&vertus, and then teach the way
Ig^ apply the remedy.

2. Tq

LiB-3. The Holy Guide. 201

2. To begin with wifdom (for that kjiow-
Wgfhad a being btfprc ffomgj and therein
to let pafsail the idle fubtilties about the
difference between faience and frudence (if
I may fo term it for once and ufe it notj
as one of them to be fcen in general and
ev.rlafting, the other in particular and
changeable thing*, and becaufe they ought
ever more (as I (hewed at firft) to go toge-
ther ( evca as our Englidi tongue better
then cither Greek or Latin , hath linked
and (hut them up both in one word toge-
ther) I will taty the common and true bounds of
wifdom'y that is, wit and knowledge of divine
and humane things-, thefe containing in all
mindes and bodies, and affairs of private
men , families and Commonwealths, it
will be very hard indeed to bring the French
Fools to undeiftand all thefe matters; but
let us march , we have paflcd great dan >
gers,e^c.

3. And ifin this difcourfc of theminde
(as well as in the former of the foul , and
fome other ) I call in again the beji Fkilofo-
piberj, and make them abide the brunt , I
hop- you will not blame me in a courfe ever
blamclefsand allowed in matters of fuch
weight, both that the truth might be the
better bolted out , and the man warded
with a charm againft the (hoi: of envy.

4. There-

104 The Holy Guide* LiB.$

4. Th-refore leting pafs thefc earthly
Judges as Areftoxenus Vidarchus , Pliny and
Gdlenejlsjwho rating the mind c as an earth-
ly thing, do judge it to dye and to be clean
razed out with the body, and all other
wrong; opinions with the fame mind; old
Pfylofopbyand RofieCxuciansQuhztt it is beft
advifed) hold and teach , that as the foul
and life of all things is all one with it felfj
and all the odds fprings from the divers
tempers of the bodies,fo the divine and inn
mortal mind proper unto man , and Author
of mfdom and venue, to be wife and a like-
wife, and one and the fame in all points, in
all men, as God from whom it came, is ene and
wife J and to differ when it is divided, and
fentintofundry places, Evenas many rivers
pajfing through many grounds, of fundry qncthties
do lightly every one takg a fundry taint, fmaks
and nature fom the ground, though at firft
they all fprung and ftawed from one foun-
tain or head, or more fitly like as there are
innumerable kindes of lights in the world,
differing to the feat* and houfcs that receive
them, when the light of the Sun from
whence they all revive light , is of it fclf
all one tnd the fame in all places. Then as
the Su » (think not much if I be (Till driven
to likes, becaufe it is the lightfomeft way of
delivering divine things, wherein you fee"
me plunged; for as the eye can behold all

things

iTi B.5. The Holy Guide. 305

things buc her fell and the Sun , andchofe
it cannot fee but in another thing fie to re-
prefent the figure , even fo the minde can-
not underftand her fclf, nor yet other di-
vine matters, fo well as in a like and com-
parifon) as the Sun, I fay , of himfelf ever
Ihineth, and feeth all things if his beams be
nor ftopt with a cloud or fome other thick
imbarcment, even fo, the minde alone,and
before me fall into the cloud of the body, is
ever bufie and likewife knowcth all thing?,
as unto fo divine a thing bdongeth, but
now (he is fo intangted and darkened in this
manner, (he isfometimes idle 3 and never
feeketh all things yea nought at all , with-
out the leave and help of the body.

5. This courfe therefore (he now taketh,
fith (he may not her feif ftep forth and range
abroad, to fee things, (he craves and takes
the help of the foul and his fervants, which
they call beams^cr (pints; fitft (he tifeth
the outward fpirits that fie in ths edge and
border of the body for mefTengers to re-
ceive (by means of [heir inftrumeiits , the
parts where they lodge ) and bring in tid-
ings, that is (hews and (hapes of things,and
then the inward beam fitting in the brain,
takes the lame tidings andreprefent them,
as it were in a glafs ; before her, that (he
may caft her light (which they call the dif-
fering or receiving minde) upon thtm and

fee

204 The Hob Guide. L 1 B . 5

ice them to skip over the known fine 5 in-
ward wits which we have fnot unfitly J
compared to a glafs, are divided into Tun-
dry and (tvcral feats and officts. Firft one
fort called , thought inhabiting thefore-
pai t of the br )in,tak( s,holds, and reprcfer ts
the fhapes, Lt in at the windows of the fine
outward {enas; then another crew which
me CdllrvPncrobrance, keep the hinder part
of thchead, receive h ftill thofe fhapes in
great plenty, and laycth them up as It were
in a ftorthoufe , untill . firft the third com-
pany of the fouls and fpirits called com-
mon knee, and fitting in the midle of the
brain (as becomes a judge) calleth for
them to <xamine them and determine of
ffccm (though this lower judge heamh
prefnt mattirsin thought alfo ) and then
at bftthe great and chief juftice called un-
derftandrng, by laying the things together
and gathering one of another, judgtth all.
But which is the fe^t of the chi*f judge,
that is, the qucftion among the learned ;
when I take it to be no queftion, if they all
prant that ihe foul 3 by the pattern of her
fie the Sun in t he great world , dvvdleth in
the heart, the middle of the body ; that by
caiUng hrr beams al about,andtqualy to all
parts, fhc might give life and light equally
ro all, as tqualdiftant from all; and in
themidtit of ihe heat, as the oiuly move-
able

Lib. J. The Holy Guide. 205

able and therefore to move others the only
fit part of the body; for tb en Jure the minde
being in the inward kerncll, as Tlato faid
of the other two, the foul and tbe fpiric,
muft needs reft and be rooted there al-
fo.

6m Seeing the minde feeth and knoweth
nothiog but ty means of the foul & his in-
ward wits and fpirits, not thefe but by the
help of the outward ones, called the five
wits ormefTengers, nor neither of both*
without the parts wher they lodge and reft;
then even as the parts of the body ftand af-
fected and difpofed^fo doth the minde un-
derftand.

Let us go down more part iculaily to the
matter, and lee what condition or difpoii-
tion of the body helps, 01 hinders the work
of undemanding.

7-After that the fat wi'« and mclTcngers
have thus received and delivered up the ty-
dings to the threefould glanVwiihin the
brain, this by ftirring and running up and
downspnfentsand mufttrsthrm before the
minde,and (he by rafting her lig'n and view
judgetb and c^etcrminethjihatwemayeaiily
and quickly gather two things needful! to
wifdoaie and good underftancing-, firft (uch
aglafle, or fuch inward (pirit«, as arc able
to receive and hold many fhapes imprinted
that ifjvery dean and clear* Ipiriu by the
G g example

3tf

ao6 The Holy Guide. Lib.?

example of an eye that kindly ghfIe,or of an
artificial one,or of a garment,all which will
eafily tak<? and (hew, in that cafe, every lit-
tle fpotfhape and fafhion fee upon them;
whereas when thev are darkc,foul and une-
ven, they can take nothing, nor yet repre-
sent them, if ihey had them,
Second! y,Tbefe fpirirs had need be quick
and livcly,that is whole9to be able by their
fwift running to and fro, to rcprcfent and
(how them all apace, and eafily j for the
minde doth all by matching and laying
things together.

8. That heat is the caufe of quickneffe
and ftirringofthcfpirits,appcarcs in fiik-
nefle, age^nd found deep, especially in age
and ficknefle, more clearly then needs any
light of teaching. Bat frow in deep > when
the heat of the fpirits ferving wit, is either
loaden with the clogging fumes and breaths
oftheftomack, cr fpent with labour, or
with fwcat,and ftiil beholding, (Tor reft a<
bates heat, as 1 ever faidj or elfc lent for
time, unto his fellow-fervants.the fpirits
life, for the digeftion fakc;thcn the fpirits of!
the brainc be (till and quiet, and outward
and inward fences, wit and underftanding
all ceafe at once : But if the meat (to omit
the expencc of heat) was neither much,nor
of an heavy and ckgingkinde, and fo nei-
ther breathing out leading fiufl^ nor need-

ipf

Lib. 3. The Holy Chide. 207

ing foraisn help to digeft it, then our pc -
c ivinp fpirics begin to take thnr own and
rtarur II agiin unto them, and to move a
little before the minde, whereby (he be hol-
df th foni? old fhipes and l"ruws of things in
their palling, which is called dreaming. But
in ca(e 1 hey recover all that heat, they be-
ftirr themfelves apace, running to the out-
fide of the body, and bringing back
new tydings to theminie, which when
(he perceiveth, is calhd waking.

Then the caufe cf wifdomc is dear at laft
a 8 we fee, to wit a clear and ilirringglafle,
and of folly when the fame is foul and'ftill.
If the gbffe be fouled dl over,it cauteth na-
tural! or willing folly, as in fools, chil-
dren, or drunkards $ but if ic be but here
and there befmeared, and drawn as it were
with darkc ftrokes and lines of foule hu-
mouis, the (hapes appearcto the minde, e-
ven as the formes appcares in a broken glafs
to the eye by halfet and confufedly, and ic
maketh madneffe.

9-But how come the fpirits of this inward
glafs fo foul & flow, when they are of them
felves(as becometh the beams of a heavenly
fouljboth veryclean,clear,quiek and lively?
But we need fay no more, but cleare and
foule abovc,when thefe two qualities make
or marc the whole work of perceiving; for
if the fpirits be cleare, it is a figoe they are
Gg 2 in

3 08 the Holy Guide. Lib.:;

in the'r own nature, and fo whole & quick
withal', but if ihcy be foulc, it is a token
their whole condition and property is lofl
ami gone, and To that ftillnefs is come up«
on tnern alfo , neither is that /Ethefeall
thin^wnich is called by the name of a fpirit;
thncarrieth the foul and all his bcarrcs
down in the body and breakcth ( as ! faid
above ) between them , foul or flill of
it ftlFs (f°r rpWits are not as fomc leaches
think;!, mads of but feed with the breaths of
our meat J but very fine, cleanc, and lively*
as aft men grant of iE'.hsr; how then ? muft
it n6t needs follow that all the caufc of
faile and want in tits cafe, fpiingcth from
the body, and from that part cfpecially,
where the wits in ha bite?

10. If the waked rcafon brought in byi
Tbeodidadus above will not ferve to content
this matter, let us Lad him forth clad withi
proof ofrcye'jfighc ?nd experience, the p!ai-
ntft/greateft, moilfi ling and rr oft fatiMy-
ing rcafon in the world. If man alone doth
pafTea'l other wigh 8 in wict, for his Aery
an j Firev temper above thei»3 as we heard
before, then if one man goeth bek re ano-
ther in w'tt, it muft needs follow, from the
fame iaufe; Now as Ayre and Fire are
chare and quick,when Eai th and Water <rc
I oufc *nd llow/oaie the wights where they
beir the fw< v, affected both in wit 8 body,

as

Lib.?. the Holy Guide. 209

as appears wiih difference between the
Hare and the Toad; and all other whol-
fome and noyforre wights; to go father,
why^are the men fo grofe & rude under the
two pins of the world-, in the frozen Cour -
tries? and fo civili and wife in the whole
as Ariftotle well noteth^but for that the out-
ward heat elenfeth as it is a clcnfer3and dry-
cth, and fo clcireth their bodies? whereas
cold on the other fide binds and thickens.
And fo likewifehy doping the flyingoutof
the groffc, foule and waterifh humours and
leavings, makes ajl not only dark and clou»
dy, but whole and moyft al fa, as it were
dtunkenby boyling together, as Arifiotle
tcrmcth it.

1 1. But me thinks (I muft favour them a
little becaufc they arc our rjeighbours) he
might have done w 11 to have refembk d
thofe broyled peo pic to old men other-
where, and theaacdmen in frozen coun-
tryes to the youth in hot foylcs , becaufe
1 the odds of wifdosne between age & youth
1 flows from the fame caufe of d rough and
t moyfture, that is cteannefle and foulwrTe of
i ttubodyes ; and therefore PU'.o wis noc ill
; advifed, when he faid, that at (uch time 39
: the eye of tre body fayled, rhe eye of the
: understanding begins to feeftarp y; becaufe
j when his waterifh inftrument dryeth up
I with the reft of the body, though it put ou
• Gg 3 the

2io The Holy Guide. LiB. 3.

the fight ot fence 3 Vet it i« a token that th*
light of witincreafeth-, for drou*h a? I fliicf,
brtedsclearnciTc3if it be not mixt wiihcold-
ntdc; for (hen it bring* in canhiineile the
ivo'd foul" and flu ;gi(h Element of all; and
therefore thofe that are very old and cold ,
are very doating and childifh again ; but if
that drought be feafoned with heat (the
TFiOre the better) truy* make the roan very
wife, and full of unde: (binding, as it batH
been alwayes obferved i Ctjar h defer ibed
io; but more ftronply before him ? Alex*
ander whofe bedy by his gfeat heat and
drought was not only mod iwect in his life
time but able lying dead above ground in a
whole foyle and feafon without any balm-
in*, alone to kep it fclf frefh and fweet
without all taint and corruption for many
dayatogitrur.

12. But /am too long; wherefore Pro«
phets arc fald to be wifcr then men: and
their fpirits wifer then they, and the fiars
moft wife ofalJ; for the odds and degrees
in the heat droughand clcarneneof iheijf
bodies.

Now then we know the caufc of this hurt
and difeafe,le t us apply the Medicine; let us
clearc the Idcors body, in many kinds of
foolimncfTe, as in childhood, drunkcnncfle\>
fbcp and doating difeafes ; Nature her fclf
is the fame to difperfc in her due time and

feafon,

Lib. 5. 1 he Holy Guide. 211

icafon.and fcoureoutal the fouleand clog-
gy cold and ,grofle hum ours which over-
whelme the fpirk^and nuke them Unclean
and qu cr ; or at leaft in the ranker fort of
them, as in doating difcafes fhe may be hol-
pcneafily, and enabled by little skill to do
it ; that we may judge , if great and ftrong
and mighty means of Arc chanced once to
jovn with nature,the rank-ft of al, and dee-
peft rooted, That is , Naturall fclly it fcif
n>ay be rooted out and difpatched.

13. But you may reply as fome dc^that
the reft, which fprung out from outward
light, and hang by caufes, may be cured,
when this being fo rooted in nature,and firft
mixture of the feed (a mixture as ill as a
beaftly mixture) can never be mended, un-
lcfTe we grant that a beaft may be holpen
alfo and put on manly nature. I had need
fend you back to the degrees of kindc , al-
lotcd and bounded out above5 by theCoun-
fell of Philofophers, whereby you may fee
ifyou confider well, that a bcaft ftanding
in a lower fteep and kindeof mixture, can
in no cafe be bettered and made man , un-
lefie that his temper be marred nrft&made
a new, and fo his life being put out and ra-
zed, when as a foolifh man hath no fuch
caufe and reafon, being both for his divine
minde (though it beeclipfed, with thcflia-
dow of an earthly body) and in refpeft of
Gg4 , his

a 1 4 The Holy Guide. LlB. 3

his temper a degree above a beaft; and in the
ftateand condition of nnnkindc, fire a-
boundingin him as his fhape declares, as
well as in other men though not To much,
and in the fame point and meafurc.

14. And what is the caufc> not becaufe,
Nature meant it fo, but reafon or nature
was let and hindred by fome crofs thing lay
in her w*y,within the fluff, wh«reby(hc was
driven to %ay and mifle and come fhort of
hcrpurpofc: like as the Mole, as Ariflotle
faith for all her blindneffc, is in the fame
kinde with all other whole and perfect
wights , which mould have all their wits
and fences.

15. Becaufe having all the parts of an eye
whole and perfefr, it is a iignc that Nature
went to hav- gone forward, and waslejr
with the barr of a groflTe and thick skin.

Now then we fee the faile and errors of
k:nde by ikiJ daily corrected; yea and fo»e
hold ©pinion that the blemifh in the Mole
may be wafhed out and amended alfo: That
we may hold it pofllble to do the like in
this fault of fol!y,nay we may think it more
eafy then ibme of them, becaufe there is na
feverall purpofe, which feemeth fo in the
work of the Mule ; But fome odd and rare
examples, as k were monfters in kinde, or
more &Ij di (cafes left by nature , defcent,

and

Lib. 3. The Hal) Guide. 2 1 3

andinhericance, fpring out from fomcill
temper of the Pa ref ts.

16. But how may this difeafe be cured?
all things in kinde bv the courfc of kinde,
have both their hightft and deepeftpitch and
end, and as it were their South and North
turns, fromwhence thryftill rcturnc and
go back again, to avoid Infinity.

17. So thefe ruturall and laft difeafe?,
have their race which they rua and fpend
bylijjle and Utile; when it is all run , and
the flock of Corruption fpen, C which is
within nine or ten off-fpringa) then they
mend andreturne to health again; fuch is
theraceof wifdomcalfo, and of health cf
body; for the health of the roinde, i* inclo-
fed within that other, as we fee by the chik
dren, which wife men beget, and fo fonh;
the caufe is plain and eafy.

18. Then we fee in this matter, how na-
ture inclines, and is ready to hold her felf •
and if Art would ltnd her hand, we may
think the cure would be much more fpcedy,
and many parts of the time cutofFanda-
batcd ; and as we find in fores and othci
lighter inward hurts, this done by fligru
meant of (lender ekil, fo we may deem that:
by more mighty means , more great and
migrty deeds may be performed ; but whae
do 1 fetch about the mat tcr, when it is above
^8 1 think fufficicntly proved , that all Icfc

Lcaproii*8

3f4 The Holy Guide. LiB.g,

Leprofies, and oth'r natural diicaksof the
body, by thofe heavenly and Mineral Me-
dicines (which I call the Cure-alls and
Curc*the-great)may re quite cleanfed and
driven away $ and this among i he number
of leaft and natural difezfes, all fprung
out from an ill temper of the feeds of pa-
rents >

19. And to omit the red 3 if theLepro-
fie flowing ijam the foulnefs of the blood
of all the body, may be cured; murh
more this which proceeds from the frame of
one part oncly , that is , from a muddy
brain ; or if that difcafc may be faid to
come from one pare alone,? hat is the Livcrf
becaufi it is the maker of all blood, yec
that one Is a moil dangerous part if it be
ill-afTe&ed , becaufe by need of nature, it
fends to all places,and (o reacheth through
all y. and ftriketh all by contagion , whereas
the brain as other more keep themfelveg
wuhin their bounds , and ftretch no far-
ther.

20. But let us go further , if good fine
temper through all diet and paflions of the
foul, hath often failed from a good wir,
to a kind of madnefs, fcarce to be defcried
from the ftate of an Ideot;then fure through
frhc contrary caufe, a foul frame may be
cleared and rafe wiidom, by as good rea-
fon as the Art of rcafonhath any? efpeci-

ally

Lib. 3. The Holy Guide. ai 5

ally if tho ft contrary plTior 8 and dyct be
hojprn and (a forwards by meetMcdicines,
which tic Grctiim know and teach , and
wherewith they m^ke great changes in mc? s
bodies; but without all doubt and qus~
ftion, if that our mod fine, cear, and
whole Egyptian Cure-all come in place to
help the matter ; for if the, mi^hiyer enemy
ihill in fight overcome the weaker fas vou
all grant, and thereon ftandsjpur Phyfick)
then dull failing finenefs and clearnefs,
when itarifcthin the body like the Sun in,
the morning > fcattcr and put to fl ght all
mifls and darknefs, clearing and (couring
mighrily by his matchlefs heat , ftrengtk
and fwiftnef?, every part of the body,

2 1 . Neither (hall you fay, life will fuffer
no fuch violent and forcible dealing, when
as life it felf (hall do it; for what is that
•which made and mingled at firft the foolifti
body, buca beam of heavenly fire carried
on a Couch of JEiberl and what is this
our heavenly Medicine but the fame as is a-
bove fhewn at large 5 then let us put fame
to lame, flrcngth toftrength; and if one
before was too weak to break as it would
and mingle the fond body finely § now
both together, one helping another, and
ftill with f rtfh fupply renewing thebattail,
ftiali be I think able to overcome the work,
and at laft to bring it to the wifticdend,

pafs

ai6 The Holy Guide. L1B.3.

pafs and per'e&ion. If you flye to the laft
hole and (hifc , and fay that time is now
paft, and occafion of place and ftuffc now
loft, and flips away, being too hard for na-
ture upon fo hird a fluff and place to work
iuch exchanges ; if you look to her ordina-
ry race in ail things, you (hall feet-hat (he
is able , and doth daily frame, rule and
fquarc very grofs and unmctt fluff in rnoft
unfit places u> our thinking, yea much
more then thetc in this work ; and not on-
ly the thick and fturdy ftuffe of Miners ,
cleaning the works (yet in unfecn plac s)
down to the bowels of the ground; and the
grofs and rude g ar in the bottom of the
fea to make (hell-fifo, but alfo living, mov-
ing , and perceiving land wights 5 in the
clofe rocks (as you heard before ) and in
the cold Snow and burning fire, as thofe
worms and flyes in Ariflotk. To clofe up
and end th's matter at once ; if you remem-
ber h_>w this our heavenly Cure-all, when
he was fent into the body to work long
life, health, and luftinefs , did not onely
(hike and kill, and put out of being all
foul and grofs diftempers, his own and
our enemies, but alfocherifh, nourim and
feed our bodies, and bring it towards our
own nature ( even as far as we would by
difpofiag of the qiulity ) you may eafily
conceive the plain and certain way of this

great

Li B.3. The Holy Guide. 2 1 7

great exchange when you know his mod
clean, fine, clear, and lightfomc Na-
ture.

22. Now I have difpatched the firft part
of Phyfick , not as fome have pretended,
but even to God himfelf, Ictus goto the
fecond} and becaufe we have not done it
before, though we talked much thereof,
we will now begin to bound the matter ,
and make venue (as Arhtotle and truth
tcachethus)a mean in outward deeds and
dealings with other men ; or a reafoa in
manners and conditions , as Plato termctb
it, all is one; the caufe of vertue is like-
wife fct forth in the beginning , to wir,a
temperate body^ but I left the proof unto
this place, which is all the hardnefs in this
cure of lewdenefs ; for if it be once known
that temperatenefs is the caufe of vertue,
we (hall eafilyby that temperate medicine,
fo notable in the fpee^h going before^ pur-
chafe and procure the fame ; and why that
is fo, it hath fo oft<n won before, that
we may quite eaft it of! and leave it, bctag
nought in this place to prove that a tem-
perate ftate of the body is the caufe and
way to vertue.

23. Butfirftletus fee whether all man*
nera fbw from the body or not , and then
from what ftate or condiiion of the body,
among them that have fearched the rea-

fjns

2 1 8 The Holy Guide. L l B . $

fons and nature of things , the caufe of
manners is laid upon the difpofhion, either
of Stars, or of. mens bodies, or of- their
wills, thus or thus framed, either by the
bent of nature, or by ufe of cuftome, let
us lean the matter and that briefly.

24. They cannot flow from the will of
theminde of man, leaft all men (hould per-
force be good againft ourdaily pio^f and
experience 5 l)ccaufe the minde of it felr is
coming from goodnefs , is good and alike
good in all men, as I (aid before j and fure
no cuftome can alter and turn io divine and
right a wVll to lewdness, but by great force
of neceflity, which force cannot be fent
and laid upon it by the Stars, as I know
not how,the weather fpiers,by long watch-
ing and heficging the Skie , the high
and ftrong City , with empty and bootlefs
labor , have obferved 5 for whether the
Stars be wights or no, thev are all £as I
(hewed before) of one good ftrain and qua-
lity , or if they were not ; or whatfoever .
they be in either fubftancc or quality, they
cannot touch the minde immediately , but
muft needs be let in by the loops of the bo-
dy, and fo change and difpofe the body
firft ; and by means of this arTe&the minde;
for if theminde It fclf 5 a finer thing then
the Stars 5 cannot pierce oat of the body,
as we heard before, then much lefs mail

they

Lib. 3. the Holy Guide. 219

they nake way to gee in by the .n (elves, with
out the helps to our mindc allotted; and as
thefe are alj bodily ( I mean the firft helps j
fothc ncareft caufe of manners muftnecd*
fl >w from the body; and if the inw ard fpi-
rirs and wits I'kewife do nought without
the inftruments of the body, and follow
the affc&ion and difpofition of the fame,
the appetite of the unreafonable foul, com-
mon between u« andbeafts ( upon which
Ariftoile and his heirs do lay the caufe of
manners ) is difpatched alfo, and all the
whole ftream muft needs clearly run from
the body.

25. But let fome old danger come & fhake
thefe old Grounds, which you faw the Phi-
lofophers lay fo long agoe,and fo this buil-
ding might fall and tumble, I will fhore it
up with experience a thing moftfittofill
and pleafc the fence of them which have no
thing el fe but fence.

As all difeafcs,fo all manners fpring, ei-
ther from the naturall and inherited, or
from the purchafed temper of the body; to
keep the firft till anon; this we have either
from the ayrc and foyle where we live, or
from the meat which we take; the Ayre fol-
lowcth cither the place of theSun or the na-
ture of the ground; but this is fome what
too hard and thorny a kind of tcaching;lec
us enlarge our felvcs, and unfold and prove

how

a 3 o The Holy Guide. Lib. $

how (though I Shewed the manner at large
before) the ayre and meat alters and chan-
gcth and makes to differjthe bodies firft,and
fo the manners rude and fierce.

26. All ftarmen and Philofophcrs (no
otherwife then we fee by proof j hold opr-
nion, that where the fun is either too ncarc
the people, or right over ths , or too farr
off, as under the two pitches of the world,
there the bodies arc bigg and flrong and the
manners rude and fierce ; whereas withia
the two temperate girdle! of the earth, they
keep a mean and hitt the midft, as they
Cay, both in body and manners.

To comedown to the ground(for Imuft
be fhort) we fee that a fat and foggy land
makes the blood and f pi) its thick and grofs
and thereby dull and flow, and fo the men
fond in wit and rude and fimple, faithfull,
chaft, homftand ftill in that ftraine of man-
ners-, whertas a barren and dry ground, if
jthe fun be temperate therewithal I (a* at
Rome and Athens} makcih the fame thin
andcl^are and. lively, fubtill and dcccitfull
mcn,valiant,unchaft , and fo forth of alio*
iher proper eyes appertaining. For meat,
manners in men are like the vertues and
proper tides in plants, following both the
fundry tempers of the body es,whcn the foul
in th-'m, and the minde in us is one in all.
27. Then as the mixtures, qualityes and

vcrcues

LlB.J. The Holy Guide. 23 1 ^

vcrtues in plants, are alterd up and down
according to their food and (utterance, as
(to omit the outward nourifhment of the
ground;) whereby Peper brought out of
Calicut into Italy, will after a few fettings
ttirneintolvy andfuch like ; the caufe is
plain; a cunning Gardner either by ftecping
the feed or flip, or better by inclofiog in the
rootorftock, can give to any p'ant any
colour, tafte, fmcll or power of healing : e-
ven fo the tempers of mens bodyes^and con-
dition of their Manner?, change to and fro
upon the fame occafion.
28. To let go that hold in phyfhk,that di-
ftemperd meats do bread the likediftcrnpes
in thofc famous humours which make com*
plexions , and their conditions; why are
the Tartarian Co beaftly and barbarous in
manners, but becaufe Cbefides their (oyle )
they eat and drink the fltfh & blood ofHot-
fes? We fee the Iflandersof Corfica prove as
bold, cruel & falft: as doggs,v\hofcfle{h they
cat:a man may range farr in this field ;but Igc
us draw near home; it is not without caufe
that Plutarch, Plato, and other frrave znd
wifePhilofophers, give fo ftraight charge
of the care ana heed in the choyce of Nur-
fes.

29. hit not like,nay in their opinion terrain,

that the child fucks in with their milk their

outward fhape and inward manners? why

Hh not?

212 The Holy Guide. Lib. 3'

not? as well as beafts that fuck of ftran-
gers out of kinde, do plainly draw unto
thfm moth of their unkindly qualities; as
appears by the foals in Africa, which by
fucking Camels, are made more painfull
then their kinde, fwift and healthful! for it;.j
and enough fuch like examples might be
brought, if time would fuffcr; to come to
our bodies left us by our pjrentf, if we fee
manners ingrafted and imbred in flocks,
kindred , and children and nephews fUil!
dowfl^to take one after another a Jong timei
by kindc and nature, as that curfedfatherj
bearing kindred, fet down in Ari^otie, and
other pilfering flocks, which though they
have no need, muft needs fleal; to let pafle
lechery, valour, and other good &bad qua*
litks, which we fee daily defcend and raincj
on kindreds, whence are thefc > not from
the parents mindesandoff-fpring, nor can
be left and ingraffed , but muft returnej
ftraight and whole, & all at once when they
flit out of this life to that heavenly place
from whence they came: Neither are all
their wits alike framed by ufeand cuflomc,
but brought up fomecimes contrary,

30. Therefore to cut off the giddy reel-
ling drunken opinion as a firing too much
difcording, thofe manners fpringout from
(the parents (ccds9 which is a part of their
bodys;purchafcd by meat and nouriftimcnt,

which

Lib.?. 1 he Holy Guide. 22$

which bodycs if they u(c good and tempe-
rate dyet, arc ever like the firft; otherwise
they follow the Nature of the meat* , and
of their diftcmpers,at Cardan in a few of the
worft dyetSjhath aioft notably markcd,that
drunken,or over ftudious or too great fad-
ings large onyon-cacing parents do beget
and bring forth, for the moft part, mad and
frantick children.

3 1* To clofc up all this firft part, with
this one little proof at once; if wefinde our
fclvcsto do many things againft our will, as
when a fairc thing is offered , our hearts
pant and faile with fean when a faire luft
and his part will arife , whether we will or
no, andallincontinency fprings from that
root, then furc the body muft lay this force
upon us.

But how is this > and which way doth

the body fo violently over-rule and carry

away the will and miadc after her } when

any (hape appears in the thought of man,

> the doing and minde takes it ft rength (we

muft wears thefe words with ufe, and make

them foftcrj laying it with good or bad^

and matching and comparing all things,

degree! and determines ; and then her will

1 and rcafon which Flato piaceth in the headj

; follows and dcfi.es : but at the fame time

fteps in another double will and appetite

! fen t from that unrcafonablc and perceiving

Hh 2 feul,

2*4 the Holy Guide. L1B.3

fou7,whtch is common between us & beafts,
and*fitting one part in the heart, and denre-
ing outward goods of the Body, and look
wnichofttak is ftronger, that is, which
hath the ftronger houfe,cithei by defcent or
purchafe, (or c}fe bafer mould, be ftill the
weokr, and obey thebetterj that prevails
and mows the ipirits unto it, and thofc
the finenefT j and thofe again by other miJ-
die mean?, the whole body or part thereof,
asisthepleafure of that Commander.

3 2. Wherefore tofcome to the point more
fully, we (hall never be good and follow
vcr tuc, that is mean and reafon in our de-<
fires and doings, before thefe two pan s, the
heart and the liver, be firft by kinde, and
thenbydyetin order, fquareand temper,
apt to obey the laws and rules of reafonjfor
to begin with the root , if the heart be vejy
hotandmoyft, the man is ccuragious and
liberal , defireing honour and great cut^
ward things; if hortanddry, cruel, a nv
gry, deceitfull; but if it keep a mean, o*s §
btyeth reafon in that kinde of manner; for
tihe liver if it be hot and moid, like wife it
followeth vsnery and gluttony ; if hot and
dry, it doth thefame, but crookedly & out
of courfi^ but if it be cold and dry,the man
is very chad and abftinent ;- and if cold and
rooyftfcimewhar chaft & abftincnr, but out-
wardly : whereas a temperate liver holds a

ifcB.g . iht Holy Guide. 225

mean in both, and following the race of
kindedefircs to live fobcily in company
and honcftly in mai riage,a life as tarr from
Monkes and Hermits as gluttons and letch-
crs.

33. Wherefore we fee thitall manners
proceed from the temper of thofe two
parts fnay perhaps undemanding alfo, if
it varyeth ftill according to the divers heats
and moyfturc iD the bodysjfo tint all gcoi
manners and all vcrtue budd forth frcm
the goodjcquall & middle temper and mi -
tare of the farce parts ; and all our labour
and travell fir we feek vertuc) muft be to
bring thofe twaine into fquare and temper,
thai is equality a* near as may be of the
foure qualities * not only by the Phllofc-
phicall falve of ufc and cuftome, f though
TlaU hits it right in his time, as when he
will have no man ludc by his will, and
therefore not tobebhmed but through his
by-ufe or nature ill difpofed) but raiherby
good dyeeaaj)d by right Phyft k efpecially.

And thus we have n laft finimed thefe
parts, wherein we mean to prepare the
mindebothof the common and learned p^o*
plr, and to make the way to the truth of
Herme$ Medicines.

Thus have we proved our way to happi-

nefle, knowledg, long life, health, youth,

kleiTcdneffc , wife and vertue, plain and

Hh 3 cafyj

22 6 7he Holy Guide. Lib. 3.

eafy* let us next paflcth unto th* Golden
creafurcs of nature > and the method cf the
Holy Guide.

ths end of the third Eooh^

^■11 1 1~ ■ 11

HOLYGVIDE

Leading the Way to
The Golden Treafures of Nature.

How all may be happy in this world* Enoch
and LlUis knowledge of the Mindc and Soul. Eugcmtts.
Tbcodidaftiis his diicovery of the manner and matter of
the Philofopheis Vmtcirva-> or Anontagius, and the man-
ner of working CanonicaUy and orderly made maniteft
in the feCrets of Nature and^'/t, by which Pbilofopty
is refloied.

That Anontagius will tranfmute Tin, Iron, or

Copper into Silver and Gold, with what

advantage ycuwill.

ThetRofie Crucian Seraphical Speculations

and Gamatbes^nd how to extract the Soul IJ

of Gold, and put it to another Body.

That Gold may be wrought into a fine Oyl ,

and tranfmutcd into Gold again. How to make the

Bmbmans Medicine that cures all difeafes,

A manuel experiment, difcovered and

communicated to the World

By Join Hey don Gent. $>/* hy opos, ^ Servant of
God, and a Secretary of Nature.

^nE^tf tup ajnt^na nuann miWi wttfon

Si no* ego mlbi 3 ({ins mlbl ? ' & cum ego mibimet iffh #*'<* £l9?
LONDON. Printed by X.M. 1662.

To my honoured friend

Mr. Robert Richardfon Citizen and
Merchant Adventurer of
London i .

All Cosleftial and Terreftial happincfs
be wifhed.

SIR,

Following the Vath of the Rofie
Crucians , // is my ambition to let
the world know why it is that 1 do ef*
f e daily honor men 5 it is not Sir as they
are high born heirs of the great Poten-
tates^ for which moti honor them ( and
upon which account 1 alfoJ/:all not deny
them their due ) but as they excel in bo-
ne fly > and are friends to the Fraternity
of R. C. That poor Philofophers
fhould take no delight in Riches, and
. Rich men fhould take great delight in
Philofophy , is to me an Argument
that there is more delight, honor, and

fatis-

fatisfa&ion in the one then in the other.
Have you not heard of a Nobleman s
Porter that let in all that were rich
apparelled, but excluded a poor Phi-
lofo pher f But Jfiould if I had been in
his. place % have rather let inthePhiJo-
fopher without the gay cloaths> then
the gay cloaths without the Philofopher,
As long as I 'have fen ft andreafonjfoall
improve them to the honor of Arts, in
the perfeUion thereof there are long lifei
health, youth> riches, honor, pleafure,
wifdom and vertue 5 By Art Aretefius
lived a thouf and year s^ Des Cares knew
all things paft, prefent or to come .• By
Art Elias raifed the dead, Jofhua
made the Sun ftand (till, and Mofes
with Aurum Potabile healed the peo-
ple. %y thefe Arts yon may command
Lead into Gold, dying plants into fruit-
fulnefsjhejick into healthy old Age into
youth , darkpefs into lights a month
would fail me to give you an account of
their power $ but you may read them in
The Rofie Crucian Infallible Axi-
omes, and in our boohjcalled The Har-
mony

mony of the world, and in our Tem-
ple of Wifdom. 'Now for the effecting
of this -9 letmeadvife you to read well
all my books , there ym will find my
Mifirefs9 fie is a Virgin^ and a mother of
children 5 court the mot her 0 and you will
win 'the daughter 5 prevail with nature9
and the fair Beata is at your fervice } it
is pity there is fuch great encouragement
for many empty and unprofitable Arts%
and none for thefe and fuch like ingenui*
ties9 which if promoted would render
an Vniverfity far more* flounfhing them
any in the world % but I never expeBto
fee fuch dayes in this Kingdom^ titlflja-
dows vanifo9 and fub fiances flour i/b7
truth prevail, and The fraternity of the
Rolie Crofs dif cover themfelves to us9
which time 1 hope is at hand> and de fired
by all true Artifis, and to my knowledge
especially by yourfelf9 upon which ac-
count I truly honor you. 'Now to your
felf therefore I crave leave to Adumbrate
this part of the Art which 1 know you
will be willing to promote for the pub life
good. I Dedicate this Treatife toyou9 not

that

that it is worthy your acceptance 9 but
that it may receive worth by your accepK
ingof it. I prefent it to you (as men
bring Lead to the Philofophers to be
tinged into Gold) to receive the
ftampe of your favor and approbati-
on9 that it may pafs currant with an ac-
ceptance amongfi the Rofie Crucians!
Aftrologers, Geomancers, Aftrono^ <|
mersi Philofophers and Phyficiansj
whereby you wiUoblige%

Sir,

London

March 1 5. Your moft affe&ionate

1662.

friend and fervanc

fohnHeydon*

LiB4* The Holy Guide.

*&? HW ttftf ttff* & «fc> <titf> j»t)U^f^t«^
2& 2& 285 2&S #5 g& $»& TC C$t <3&

Book IV.

CHAP. I.

How to Change, alter. Cure and

amend thefiate of Mans Bo*

dy y when nature makes

it deformed.

j . Of the Compofttions of man : 2. The dore of
Light: 3. Order of (feech: 4. Of Hermes
Medicines and other things* 5. That an ounce
of Gold in a year mil makg a Medicine as
the Philofof hers (lone: 6. Of the fonof Gold.
7. Of the heavenly vertue of Wights: 8.0/
Creating Mice and other things: 9. Of the
learns of Heaven : 1 o . OJ Cdeftiall faints
in Minerals : 1 1 . the force of Heavenly fpi»
rits: 12 Envious Leeches: 13. Of Stones y
Zrockifcs, Pills, Elefiuaries, Nile Water and
Qtber things ; 14. Of the vertue of calcined

{details

The Holy Guide. LlB.4 ■

Mtttalls in Fbyfick, andChirurgery : 15. Of
tbejecretVertue of minerals: j6. Of diffol-
ved Gold and raw G&ldy and other things:
17. Of our fijt Nature: 18. Oftheperfetl-
ing of the minde and body: 1 9. Paracelfus
Opinion, and of Voyjon*

*• ""^^QyOufeehow we have mown*

1 heretofore in the JxioMataJib.%.

£~S divers wayes to our Guide to bap-

pineffe, &c. and fhndry roe ins whereby the

wholckinde of men may come to the know-

lcdpof the Compofition of man, and of the

infilling <f the foul, and bow the fuperna-

tural things being the fecrets of God alone,

are artificially made helpfull to mankir>dc,

and of the power of the foule being (tpara-

ted from the body, at the command of the

fpirit, and how it becomes like the heavens,

and of the vertucs of the minde and foul and

how God wonderfully work* efTcfts in the

imagination, and what is the firft matter

of all thingSt Yet in truth they arc all by

long and comber fome ways, fit rather to

put them in minde of a better way (which

was the drift of .that purpofe) then to be

gone and travelled by lovers of wifdome

and v rtue: wherefore 1 would notwim them

towrrive their councells in many'of thofc

places, but to feck to the haven of Hemes

or

LiB4» The Holy Guide. 5

, . — i .»-- i >■

or jRo// Crucians, and of their fons the wife
Philosophers as to the only one, ready and
eafy way to our Gnid to kap?ine(fe , then we
arc come at laft to thaG which Wis the firft
intent and meaning of all this labour, that
Hermes and the Philofophers medicines arc
the true and ready way to eternal happinefs
in Phyfick.

2. But how (hall we prove this unlefs we
unlock the doorc of fecrcts, and let in light
to thofe matters which hive been ever moft
clofelykept and hid in darknefle? we mull
I fay firft open what is Hermes medicine, ex-
cept we would put on a vizard, and make a
long buzz and empty found of words, about
that which no man understands. We are
like now to be driven into a marvailous
ftraight either to fly the field, or to venture
upon the curfe and difpleafure of many
wife and Godly men, yci and of God him-
fclf as we heard at the beginning. If Vhto
thought he had caife when he took in hand
that mighty piece of work, the world, firft
to make his prayer; how much more may
we in fuch a world of doubts and dangers t
and tedefire of God that we may prove our
qucftion, not only with fufficienc evidence,
but with fuch difcretion alfo , that thofe
men which can ufe it, and arc worthy of
it, may fee the t^uth, and the reft may be
blinded.

3 » Then

The Holy Guide- L1B.4

3. Then both to direfr my fpecch,
which muft have fomc ground to ftand
upon, and their ftcps which crave a little
light to guide them, 1 think it beft to come
to the entrance of this way , and to point
afar off unto the end , leaving the righs
unto their own wit and labor , for I
may not be their guide* lcaft the reft (hould
cfpy us and follow us as faft.

4. Hermes Medicines and the Rofie Cru-
cian* Medicines lye among them, even in
Gold; and the end of this Journey where
happinefs begins, is the fon of him; albeit
thatlamnot ignorant'thac father Hermes
and the reft of his wife fofor children,hold
and teach that out of any plant, wight or
mineral, may be fetched a medicine for all
difeafes of men and mectals , as good as
this which we have defcribed ; neither
dowc, as though we had drunk thcw.uec
of Lethe , forgot the reafon of it above
declared, becaufe all things are in all
things, and the fame and one thing, at
having all one fluffand foul ; if their ftuffo
had the like and not divers minglings, and
for that all things if th?y were wrought to
the top and higheft of perfc&ion fas they
may be) (how a like with all the venues
of heaven and earth, foul, body, lire and<
qualities; but thofe wayes arc long, cum •
berfqmc and coftly, as well as the reft, and

L1B4. The Holy Guide. 5 *°

\ know you feck the moft^ready^^rl^d
eaiie, vvhicn is gold far above all other
things in the world.

5. The reafon is tccaufc nature hath
powered her felt wholly upon him, and in-
fcotfed h;m cffar more and greater gifts
>oth of foul and body then all the reft
laving given him not orely greater ftore
B the heat of heaven , but alfo the meff
jne, temperate and lafting body, whereby
>ut efpecialiy by reafon of his exceeding
ioughand lafting body, wherein he won-
derfully pattern all things , we have him
ialf ready dreft to our hands, and brought
ery near the jourmys end, quickly to be
cd forward and finiflied wuhlirtlc labor;
then as the reft are left in a very hard way
ery many mile* b:hind him •, it U ftrargc
am perfwaded that a thoufand ounces of a
lant, or wight (as for Minerals, they fcc
nuch better) cannot with gi eat labor, coft,
kill, and time, be brought to that good*
cfsand nearnefs to ptrfe&ioa, as an ounce
f Gold hath already given him by nature;
nd I durft warrant you , thai out of an
unee of Gold in lefs then one years fpaee5
»ith a few pounds charge may be gotten a
Iedicine as good as the Philofophers Pan-
|irva, of flant or wi?ht, that takcth a
lioufand ounces of fluff, many hundred
sounds oi charge, three years rime;, and

6 the Holy Guide. LiB. 4,

the wearing ouc of many mens bodies, that
we may think , although the wife Philofo-'
pherB in Egypt faw and (hewed the depth of
Nature, and thffe works, yet they were
net fo mad and fond as to put them in
pracYice 5 and therefore Uain Geberin faith,
it is poffi'ole out of Plants to make the Me-
dicine!, and y t ailmoft impoffible alfo,
becaufc thy life would firft fail thee; where-
fore we may be content alfo to know the
fecret, but let us ufe no other way but this,
and fo difpatch not only plants and ivights
a* foul earthly things , but alfo middle Mi-
nerals, which arc like the ftanding lights of
heaven in this comparifon. Nay, neither
hold we his fellow plants to be his equals,
no though th y be Quick-filvcr or Silver
themfeives, the beftand neareft of all thcl
reft, cfpecially Silver the wife of Gold, but!
even let her pack away w'uh the reft ; for as
her fire above glitters and makes a fair (hew
until! (he come in prefence of her husband
(as the want of had women is) fo this our
earthly Moon be (he never fo bright and ex-
cellent in another* company, y«tinfight&
regard of Gold her husband, (he appcareth
as nothing ; if y ou marvail why > it is
becauft (he wantetb much of the heat of
heaven , temperatenefs and toughnefs of
body, but in finenefs an hundred fold;
ihcfe things arc high and lofty, and foar

above

Lib. 4« TAe Holy Guide.

above the common fight , |wc will (etch
•them down anone and make them plain and
catie.

6. Then let us fall to the matter, that
the ion of Gold may be found , the ready
way to Gold, the perfeft Medicine both of
man and mettals •, and tirft as it is meet, let
us regard our felves and cure our own bo-
dies before we help a Granger. There is
is no gift properly or vertue but it fpring-
eth either from the foul or the body 5 the

I beft gift of the foul is moft ftore thereof ,
as we the wed before 5 and of the body fit ft

! temperatenefs thereof in the firft qualities*
and then finenefs and clofcncfs, which cau-

1 feth laftingne'Sj in the fecond^ let us fee
how Gold exccllcth in all thofe vertucs and

■ ovcrgoech all other things, firfl by the gift

I of nature , and then by a divine Science*

• but it were not good in fuch an heap of
1 matters to be difpofed and difpatched at
: once, co regard thofe that be clear and re-

• ecivtd; fo then let the finenefs of Gold
go his ways, as clear in all mens eyes, and
his tem peratcoefs, which all Leaches grant,
and take th? reft as things both more in
doubt and of greater worth.

7. Thofe thit arelongefta ripening and
growing to perfection , are both the moft
tough and lafting, and fullcft of heavenly
vcrtues 5 whereas on the other fide, foon

1 i 2 ripe,

8 1 he Holy Guide. LlB.

ripe, foon rotten, as they fay, and an ill
weed grows a pace and (o forth ; the ciufe
or this in bodies 5 is beciufe the firft moi-
ftut e , it it be faft and clofe , that is full,
proceedeth and fpreadcth (lowly and is
hardly confumed and eaten up with the fire
of life, when thinne and watcrifh moifturc
fpreads apace, and fpends as faft ; and for
that heavenly venue'", when the ftuffe hath
long Iain open under the hands of the fpi-
ritsof heaven, it muft needs receive grea-
ter ftore of them , and hold them furely
with his ftrength & toughnefsj what rcafon
can (hew this more plainly, except you will
call me to examples? then bend your ears a
wfrle and mark the Elephant, swo years in
making in his mothers womb, and a long
time in growing to his beft cltatc and lufti-
nefs, tonachthe hightft and beft pitch in
mortality (for man is mortal) and nos one-
lybyhis ftrength and long life which you
heard before , but through a kind of wk
and good conditions alfo, drawing neer
to the nature of mankind.

8. Conflder again of Mice, thofc little
verroine, how foon they be bred, as forne-
times the earth creates them, fometimes
the mother without the male by licking
fait, and other whiles ( for a wonder in
nature ) they conceive and arc big with
young in their mothers btlly. Confider I

fey*

LlB.4* The Boly Guide.

fay, howfoon again chcy be fucpt away,
even with a mower of rain , as Aritfotk re-
porteth, who tells of a one-day flye bred
in a leaf in the forenoon,at midday fledged,
and ever dying at night vfith the fetting of
the Sun.

9. Again Pliny write th of a child that
wkhin three y*ari fpace grevf three cu-
bits,- and was now grown to mans ftatc
(which they calif ubeYtateuni)h\xi hafte made
waft as thsy fay, and within three years
after his limbs mrunk upa^ain, an « he dy-
ed- Nay he faith , thu the whole kinde
of women among the Caiingians> conceive
at five years of age, and live but eight.

To cut off living wights, and come to
plants, are not trees the longer -lived the
bettcc in ufe,for the long growth and ripen-
ing ? and among trees, doth not the Oak,
after his long growth to perfection , fland
to our great profit even for ever slrnoft ? It
is orange that I fay, and yet Jofefbus writes
of one that flood from Abrahams time 9 to
the razing of Jerufalem , ivfo thoufand
years at leaft; and God knows how long
after that time it lafted; to befhort, rhe beft
tree of all the earth that brings forth the
Coccus of/wfidjin one mans age, fear ce begins
to bear any fruit,and Iafteth after that almoft
Raft all ages.

Ii 3 Where-

io 1 he Holy Guide. Lib. 4,

Wherefore the minerals by the courfe of
rcafonand cuflome , bting by thegrantof
all men, longcft in making and perftcYmg,
muft needs of all other bothbebeftin ver-
tue, and laft thclongeft, and among them
GoldaboveaU, becaufe it is the end of all,
and fo far in that point paffcih themoft
part of them , that as fome men think, a
thoufand years arc fpent before it come to
perfection; for his long lafting we fee
plainly he is evcrlafting •, and if we doubt
or h's heavenly vertue, Jet us weigh the
place and womb where he is fafhioned, and
we (hall fee it a common gulf of all the
beams of heaven , as the Sea is the receipt
of all the rivers that run.

10. How is this? albeit the beams of
heaven (it forth from a round and wide
compaffe, and likewife leave a circle after
they have traveled a great wide way one
from another,domeet at laft together,;* amp
in thcNavill of the Earth, yea and with
great force and ftrcngth, above all other fpi-
rits in their places, not only by thercafon
and the length of their jonrney (for all na%
turall things the further they go, the more
they mend their pace,) but chiefly becaufe
meeting in fuch a flrait, with fuch abun«
dance, they violently thruft,and throw one
another on heaps together, as we fee the
force of win.de and wat^r meeting in that

order.

J

II The Holy Guide. L1B.4

order,or rather as the Sun - beams, falling
upon the ftone Hephcfiites^ or the Steeple fa-
(hioncd burning -glafle, thereby (hews
fuch flrange and unwonted force to
burn drythings,mcltmettals and fuch- like,
bceaufe the beams that light upon it, do
meet all in heaps and apace, in one narrow
point of the Middle.

11. Wherefore the Minerals, becaufe
they be bred and brought up about that
place, firft receive great plenty ofthof hea-
venly fpirits, and then thofe very furely fct
on by the fwiftnefieof the ftroak, and a? faft
held and kept, for the found end ckfc
bodyes that take the Printings when as
plants and wights, dwelling in one place.,
and outfide of the ground aloft, where
thofe b?ams and breaths of heaven^are more
fcarfe, flack and weak, rouft needs have net
onely leflc ftore, faintly put upon tbem,but
alio thofe which th y have, for their loofe
and foft fturFj quickly loft and forgon 2-
gain.

12. But if the edg of fome mens mts, be
too blunt and dull to cut ip deeply into the
earrh,to finde this marter,Iet them caft their
eyes and behold the daily experience, how
thefc heavenly fpirits in Minerals, for all
they (hut up and bound Co Faft in the prifon
ofthe hard and fturdy ftu-ffj yet are able to
(how their forcc> as much and woik as

I i 4 mightily*

I a The Holy Guide. L1E.4

mightily, as the free breaths of other things
enlarged in their fofc and gentle bo- ;
dies.

13. It would not be amiffe to bring in a
few and fct before us, becaufefor the (loth
of the tim-s paft, and fpite of th* latter lea-
ches, thefe things have laine for the mod
part, bur'edas theyb?, and hid from the
light and common knowledg.

14. Ttien to paffe by r he-Pearl, that hcl-
psth iwouning and withftands the Plague
of poyfon-, the Smarage and Jacinth like-
wire , which keep off the plague, and heal
the Wounds, Venemous Stings, and many
more fuch rare and worthy vcrtucs, which!
tfafy themfclves grant and give to pretious
{tones in their wi icings, nay iniheirTro-
chifes, Pills, and Electuaries, let us come
to hard Joyces and middle minerals, the
Water of Niel, which makes the women of
Mgyft fo quick of conceit, and (o fruit full,
as to bear fea-men at a birth, as Vbroates
writes, is known to be a Salt-peter- water;
it is foun \ by common proof that the fame
Sale- peter, or common Salt, or Coppere*
Matter, made a water, kills the poyfon of
theToad-ftoole, and Joyce of Poppy: that
a Plaifter of Salt and brimftone heals the
hurt of vrnom infringed; That Amber which
is no ftone but a hard C'lany Juyce, calfed
Bitumen, eafeth the labour of women and

the

L > B.4* The Holy Guide. 1 3

the falling fukneflc ofChildren^it is known
likewise that all wholfo me bathes, both wee
and dry, of wucr or its vapours, which ai\'
wirhouc number in the world, butefpeci-
ally that famou* Hott - houf* in Z-
tally, called Salviati, for the (pace ofthrre
miles compaffe wrought and hewn out of
the ground very daintily, deferveth to be
named and delivered to the memory of men
to come J flow from a brimftony ground,
and draw from thence,all their nature, qus-
Ji:y, force, and vercue;except a few of Cop-
peres water, as appears by ihcir dying pro-
perty, whereby thsy give any white rnettal
thdr own yclow and Copper colour; Now
for Mettals,if ic be true that precious ftoncs
in that hard and ungentle faQilon , (hew
fuch vertuc and power of healing , why
mould we mark the German for a lyar, when
he awards great praife to the mixture of all
theMettals,madein theconvertion of their
own Planets which he calls Elc&rum, fay-
ing it will cure the Cramp, benuming Pal-
fy, falling fickneffe, if it be worne on the
hearty finger: and give fignes befidesifthe
body ayleth any thing, by fpots and fweat-
nitig; and bewray poyfon, if it be made in
Plate by the fame tokens? for all that Pliny
will have poyfons fo difcribed by the natu-
rall Ele&rum and Maffe of Gold and filvcr,
and not by the artificial mixture to be made

of

The Holy Guide. IjB.4,

of filverand Gold and Copper, Adulter an-
da. adulteria nature^ as he more finely then
conftantlyfaith, when he allotcd fo chaft
vertue before unto her.

15. But fuppofe this vertue in the hard
form of mcttalls nor fo apparent; yet no
man fhall den^ the daily proofs of them o
penly by rude skill, and fct a little at liber-
ty^ the great ufe of burnt brafIc,lron-faf-
ron,Metta!-fmoak(and this by Gallens own
witrjeft) and marvailous help in Chirurge-
ry ; nay the mighty power, both within
and without of Antimony, which is unripe
Lead^nd of Qiiick-(ilver,very raw and run-
ning fiber, fo after tryed before their eye*,
hath amafed and daunted the better Lee-
chcSjthough Gallen himfelf in times paft hath
termed this rank poyfon , fer ftraighc
sgainft our nature, and the lcaft part there-
of taken inward, to hurt and annoy us, to
the great laughter of the Country witts,
which even Children , a dangerous time
to take Piylick in3 take , without any
hurt at all,nay which they ufe to drink it a-
gainftwormes in great quantity ; but Gal-
hn did but rove by g u eft at the matter,
when as in another place (forgetting him-*
felf as he doth often) -he faithhe never
had tryed its force neither within nor
without the Body.

16. Rue

JL1B.4. the Hoi) Guide. I %

1 6. But if thofe ftonesjuyces and mutals
Were by great skill more finely dreft, and
freely fct at liberty (as they be by the Ger-
mane') what wonder were they like to work
in the Ait of healing ? neither let us think
(as Gallen and his herd think of all things^
thofe great and rare mineral vermes, could
iffue out, and come from the grofle and foul
body, but from an heavenly gift erf a migh-
ty foule, which cannot be kept in awe, and
held fo ftraight, with thofe earthly bound?,
as it (hall not be able in fome fore to fiirr
and break through and fticw its force and
power.

1 7. Wherefore to rcturne to my purpofe,
if nature hath beftowed upon thefe three
forts and fuits of minerals, fo large gifts
and vcrtuesjwhen (he hath given to gold the
end and perfection of them all, fo receiving
and holdin g the vcrtues ofthem all at oncej
What fays the Leachc5 to this matter > They
are loth to fay any thing, albeit i heir deeds
fpeak enough, when they lay raw Gold to
the right fide of the head to h e « 1 his ach;
right againft the heart to comfort his fad-
nelle and trembling: arid when in fuch fore
ihey apply it to fuch purpofes ; again why
dotheyboyle it in their cullifTe, mix it
in their pills and their ele&uaryes, bid the
Lepers (wallow h> do they not feem to
fmcll its great and matchless power againft

difeafes

1 6 The Holy Guide* L1B.4

difcafcs and marvcylous Comfort and
wholfomncffe to our nature? But lik* rude
and unskiilfull Cooks they know not how
to drefie it? but if t icy know the skill,thcy
{hpuid Tee it rife in power and vertue, ac-
cording to his degrees in freedom?, & when
H comes ( o the top* which I call the fon of
Gold, to prove almighty > I mean within
our compaffc; for confider Gold is now
good and friendly above all unco us, for his
exceeding ftore of com for table heat of hea-
ven, (liming through the mift of a moft fine
and temperate body. Then what would ie
be if the properties of the body were by
great, mingling and breaking of the fluff,
refined and rai fed in their ktnde,an hundred
degress at leaft? (which our Art profeffeth)
and thofe lively and piercing helps of
comfortable fpirits, freed and fet at full li-
berty, and all rhefe feated, upon a mighty
bocty fubduing all things? is there any thing
In the world to be compared,to the mighty
and nnrvailous work which he would
make in our bodies > could any of thefe ve-
ry violent and mortall poyfons, which I
brought in above,fo eafily and roundly de-
ftroy us, as this would help and fave us? but
to come to the point.

18. Ifthat our old clofe fine and Mi he-
real oyls which they call a fift nature, was
able alone/or thercafons fee down in their

places,

L 1 B 4. The Holy Guide. 1 7

places, to breed and beget all thofe blefied
bodily gifts and properties, that is , health
and youth, and the two fpringsof wifdom
andvertue, clearneflc and temperate nsfTc ;
how much more (hall this Ton of Gold the
rocdecine and ftone of Hermes, and bh ofl-
fpring be fufficknt and fumifhed for
it?

19. For fir ft, when his foul and heat of
heaven is much more great and mighty, and
his body a more fine and faft Oylc, that is a
more like and lafting focd of life, it both
upholdcth andftrengtheneth life, and natu-
rall hca* the better, and 10 proves the better
caufe of long life and youth; then being
temperate9 and that quality carried upon,
and that quality and finer and tougher thas
is a ftronger body, it is able v»ith more cafe
and fpced to fubdue his and our eccmies>the
diftempcred difeafes.arad to elenfe and cleare
fafhion and bring into good order and tem-
per the whole frame of our body 8c to pro-
cure health, wifdome and vertuc, in better
fort, and in more full and heaped meafure;
for you muft not think thata fit natureof
wine or fuch like that I brought in above,
and which many men do make for their
bodies, is fo good by twenty degrees as the
Philofophers ftone ; I mean the fame raea-
fureofboihs when befides that ic is noc
temperate and neare unio Heaven, (though

the

1 8 7 he Holy Guide. Ll B.4

the name be never foncarc) for it wantcth
twenty parts of the foul, and as much of
trut fine fluff, clofely and finely tyed up to*
gehcr ; and therefore one part thereof will
iaft longer, and fpread further with all his.
veitues,and fo do more good in our bodies,
then twenty time as much as the formcr;de-
liver to minde what I fay; it is worth mark-
ing; I (hall not need to ftand to fhew you
the reafons why,and manner how this great
Medicine of Her wes, (hall be able to get and
purchafe thofc pleafurcs of mind and body,
becaufc it is already done at large elfc-
where, and it may fufTer in this place co win
by force of reafon (which hath been done
as much as needs)thzt this medicine is much
bctter^and more able then an /Fther,Heaven
ot fift nature.

20. Then thofc men may fee ( Imeane
Varacelfa and fuchas .know whereof th«y
ipeak, let the reft go) how ram and unad-
vised they prove themfelves when they arc
content to let in the name of Poyfon into
this happy medicine, and to avowthniE
workethall thofc wond.°rsin our body^s,
by that v^y of curing which 1 (hewed, by
ftronge -like poyfons : for then it would
be at moft but a gcmrall mcdicine,and cure-
all again ft difeafe*, and fit for health alone,
but no Phyfkall or joyfull way to long life,
yemhj wifdomc, andvertuej which grant

Ia B.4. The Holy Guide. 1 9

r e well as the other, both he and all the reft
r?o give unto him 5 for it might not be ta-
ken and ufed in a fecond body, no more
then a purging medicine f except it were of
the Viperous kindc aforefaid; for he then
would battail with our nature, fpoyle and
overthrow the fi. ft moyfturc, and the whole
frame of the body; fo farr it would be from
nourifhing the naturall heat and rooy-
fture, from clearing and tempering the
body to caufe long life,youth wifdome and
vertue;

And the rtafon of this reproof is, becaufe
every poyfon is very barren and empty of
the heat of heaven, and very diftemperedly
cold and dry in body , fet ftraight againft
cur hot and moift nature (as appears by fly*
ing the fire, and oyle his enemies} the Phi*
lofophers ftone was temperate in refpe&,at
firft, and is nowexaftly fo and a very fine
c yle, and full of heavenly fpirits; and fo for
thofc three caufes, not only moft friendly
and like to naturc3but alfo a very deadly *-
ncmy and moft craffe contrary to all poy-
fon.

CHAP.

io The Holy Gride. L1B.4,

CHAP. II.

I

Hermes and Paracelfus
tSMedicines.

i . Of the foure Complexions of the body, 2 Of
Malice and Ignorance ; 3 . Of Difeafes ,
Age and Death ; 4. How to makf minerals
&ow; 5. How to mak^. Lead grow, 6. That
Goldha-ih lire; 7. Tbe unwinding of fecrets-,
2. Authors Opinions ; 9, How to order the
feed of Gold 5 10. Experienced truths 5 11.
Campari fons; 12. Of turning wood into Iron
and slone; 1$. Of turning Iron into Copper,
1 4. Abraham Judseus experiment; 15. lr-
i(h fritter j and other things 5 16. Of Gcbcr
cwdAgricoia; ij. Of fait Gemm; 18- Iron
m^ &e w^e to car Ste*/ 0* j<*//* as /tee/ cuts
wood-, 19. Of Silvery and G olden C operas;
20. T6e iwfKe of Copperas Water; 2 1. , 0/
Art and Katurall changes ; 22. Natures
Medicines j 23. Oft be food of Gold and other
things.

OVer this we have lightly run,bcing the
former part of long life, health, youth

flefrntijj^

— *—— — — a <¥/

L1B4. the Holy Guide. a 1

clearneile, and temper a tentffc, which make
up all good gifts of body needfulJ ; let us
now come to the outward help of riches,
and borrow fo much leave again, as to ufe
thecaufefor the effeft, and take gold for
riches, and ftrive to (how that the fon of
Gold is able to turne any mettal into gold;
and net fo fparinglyand hardly as wc did
before, by thofc baftred kinds of binding
and colourin&frf though a little of it were

I without mif-pene •? of time & travail would
fervc our turn) but as fully and plentifully
as any of our men allow to that amazemene

I of the world ; they fct not down nor flint,
which I will do, becaufe I have to do with
thirft ing ears, and becaufe again I love noc
tornn.t randum* but to make a certain
mark whereat to aime and levell all my
fpeeches.

Then let us fay> by this great skill of Met"
mej,& a little labour and coft we may fpend
with the greateft Monarch in the world, &
reach the Turks revenew, yea though it be
fifteen millionsStarling,as 1 find it credibly
reported; yea let us be bold, and not as So-
crates did when he fpake of love,hid his face
from the matter, the truth is vouchablc be-
fore God and man, and will beare is Mi
outatlaft, though it be my luck ft ill to be
Croft by men of our own coat, Hermes fofter
Children: But why do 1 call chem fo .? al»
Kk fecif

12 the Holy Guide. L1B.4.

btit Patactlfus of whom we deal of late, was
plainly fo; Yec his Schollers Phyfick, which
iijw comes in place, is out of this account
as clearly; thismaa<I fay toexcufehisown
Ignorance, hath learned a new trick^in un-
folding Hermes Riddle, that neith?r Hermes
nor anyof his follower*,in fayingthcy turn
the foure foule Murals, Lead, Iron, Tinn,
Copper, into Silver and Gold,mcan plainly
according unto common^eech, but (till
riddle and double the matr^underftanding
the foure Mcttalis in fo good forme and
temper changed ; and thefc to be filver and
gold which they make at any time;and that
by this tok^n,becaufe they fetch their mcdi«
cine asyou heard even now out of all t hings;,
then heflyethotuandliftcthup his matter*;
with high piaife*, for finding firi), and up-
turning the knot and riddle; whereas there
is nothing fo plain both In Par ace If us and
all uther ofhis hidden fcience, as their opi-
nion as touching this matter : nay fceth<
worthy memory of the rnan himfelf, in con-
ftiuing the words of his Matter concerning^
the famw matter, makes it as well as he andji
the rtft, a plain division of this msttcr, and ;
yildrth in open termer, that our Medicine :
Ictvech both for tmn and mettals.
1 2. This noble Dr. Elias Avery when 1 was a
novice and fi filing in this ftudy, zi he mif-
li ad me in otiur things which he took upon

hirv

Lib. 4. % the Holy Guide. 23

him co unfo'd, (o he amazed me in this, be-
fore he himfelf knew the leaft of them : but
after I went forward and be£ an to confiier
earntftly3and weigh die things by their own
weight (^and not by the wught of words
and amhorkies)the only way to knowledge
i qu;ckly faw the wifehood of the new op -
n*on, and more plain rcafbn and caufe of
belief, for this point then for all the reft,
which he at!ows>and which S flawed befo e :
then let us not ftay3 for him nor for any
thing elfr, but lee us march forward wit'i
all fprcd and courage, and if ic be never
good in difcourfc of fpcech to heap and
huddle up all together, but for light fakd
to joyn the matter and cue it in divers pic*
ces,le» us do fo too3 and j rove that the Son
of Gold is able to turn metcalh that are
bafe into Gold, then that he can change (b
much, astomake up th: fummel Jcfe aS
neediull. Hey don is to turn mettata two
ways •, firft.as a feed if a man lift to few hint
upon them; and then after his birth, by
fiourimment,and turning them into his owri
Nature, and this is either into his father?,
vnichis his own afrerafort, or into his
new being, and felf fame nature; of thefe f
will treat fcverally ; and rkftof feed which
cann jtbedenyed unto gold, if all things
have life, and life have three powers and a-
1 bilitvcsj to h* nourifhed and so wax^and to
K k 2 bfget

34 ?he Holy Guide. L ! B. 4 .

get his like alfo; the fecond part is clear and
granted among all Philofophers ; and that
all things have life, it hath been often (hew-
ed before by their feeding and divers other
arguments.

But becaufe it is a thing whereon al-
moft all the frame of my fpeech lcancth,and
yet much in doubt and hardly believed a-
mong the learned \ let us take it again, and
prove it by name in Mineral! s, becaufe
they be both fartheft from belief, and nea-
reft our drift and purpofe.

3. Thofe things that hjfve difeafes, age,
and dcathjCannot but live,and we fee plain-
ly the difeafes, age and death of pretious
ftone*;but mod: clearly in the pretiousLcad-
ftonc (though he be foul in fight) which is
tept,fedd and nourifhed in the fillings of I-
ron, his proper and like food, when quick-
filver, or Garlike quite deftroys him, and
puts out all his life, ftreogth, and ver-
tuc.

4. But how if the Mineralls by feeding
wax and grow as well as plants or wight* >|
as miners have good experience of that,i
when they fee them, by thofe due and con-:
Irani fits, fo dangeroufly void their leaning.
Agricola faith, that Salt-peter , after that
by draining it hath loft his taift & vcrtae,
if it be layed open in the weathcr,wil with-
in five or fix years (pace, grow and ripen,

and

LiB.4* The Holy Guide- 1 5

and recover his power and ftrength again;
the fame man tellcth of one lead Mine, and
iwo other of Iron, which after ttuy be dig-
ged and Emptied, within few years fpacr,
ripen and grow to be full again, and one
of thefe every tenth year.

5. Btic admit th (e by the flight and can-
yafie of a crafty witt maybefhifcedofFjyet
they (ball never read the next that follows
of Lead, after he hath been taken out of his
proper womb, where he was bred and nou-
riflicd, and fafhioned into his forme for our
ufe requifite; yet if he be layd in a moid
place under ground, it will wax and grow
both in weight and bignefTe by many good
Authors,yea and by Gallenhh own witnefs,
which although it be light otherwifc,yet is
of weight in this matter, becaufc it maketh
fo much againft his own caufe; nay marke
what AgricoU reporteth that the fame hath
been found true on the top of houfcs, and
(howes where and how the proof was taken;
but to come to the very point, Taracelfus
faith, that Gold buried in good foyle that
lyeth Eaft,and cherifhed well with Pigeons
Dung and Urine,wi)Ido the fame; and fure
I dare not condemn his witnefs in this mat-*
tcr, becaufe the reft that went before, fee me
to fay as much in effect, and to vow the
truth of thig ftory.
6. Then if it be fo certain, that Gold
Kk 3 hath

2 6 'I he Holy Guide . L i B. 4 .

hath life, there 13 no help, but it (hall be-
get his like alio; if Philofophy and Com-
mon proof be received, but they vrill fay
that nothing doth foD that win.tetb feed,!? I
many wights and plants do, and all Minei*
rals; no man faith fo > that knoWeth what
feed i$;fecd is no grofle thing, that may be
feen with ey'l.f»but a fine and hot heavenly
breath, which we call life and foule, where*
w'.th not only the common rule of ths
world, but alfo wiahts, yei and perfect
Wlglus Tome times beget without the com-
pany and fmce of that frothy ftuffand (he!,
aslfaid above; but yec more commonly
nature tskes the h Ipt& guard of that body
called feed, tint was prov d,not only to be
a branch and parrfiipt from the whole bo-
dy , but the whole it felf (on, times, as, b;
kinds in the foure be ginnlngs,and in Mine*
itflr, and in fcedlefs plants and wights, and
by skill in all.

Therefore minerals andal! have theif
Hcd , and 1 heir whole body in their
feed.

7. Then as by nature they are wholy,'
fowne, anddy, and forelfc under- Moon
things would prove Mcttals) rife again the
fame I< .created according to the wont ofl
( nature, even fo they will above ground if'
We can *.y skill ufe them kindly, which w<i
ipay as \»c)l as qatrjf ^ if we could efpy her .

footing

Li B. 4 The Holy Guide. 2 7

footing, not unpoffiblc to be fe^n as I could
fhow you quickly 9 if I Slight a lhtl« un«
winde the bottome of fecret?, and lay them
open; but I muft take heed.

Then as the feeds of p'am* and wights
rife again, much increaftd in ftore and
bignefle,b?caufe it draw? muoir, and turns
into it in his own nature,much of he kind-
ly fluff and ground that lycth about it to
corrupt itjeven lb if you make the mettals
and groun d fit to receive and corrupt the
feed of Gold, it will after his due t J me rife
again, turning them, or much of 1 hem h*-
to his own nature.

8.„ Now Dofror Freeman or Moore ma/
fee if they be not blinded , that rhis h no
iridled mattcr,but a plain and certain truth,
grounded upon the open and daily race of
nature, which not I efpied out mil (as they
fpyed outthefubtill falfe - hood) bur the
fame tell the troop or the wife ^Egyptians
faw, and taught before me, yea and iome
of them thatfee in dajknefle asthofc wor-
thy Leaches, whofe ayd we took before*
F«i#e, Fernet, and Card \tn , especially ihe
two fir ft, becaufe th y bearc ^ood Will to the
truth of this (cience : Bu Cardan as a mate
that neither knew nor* loved ir, halts a lit-
tle; for when he had all about held for cer-
tain, tfrat Minerals and all had life and
Kk 4 y$&t

2 8 the Holy Guide. L1B.4

wcf£ nourifhsd, and greWfani wax?d,yet
he buryed the third point with fi-
lence,

9; But let us not urge this fo much in
this place, becjufcit is not the right Son
of Gold, and ftoneof Herntes> but a letter
skill and lower way to rich ■*, fit to have
been followed in the frcondBook. Then
how doth the Philosophers done, and the
naturall Son of Gold, turncbafe Mcttals
into Gold > For that was the fecond ning
8:0 be handled in this place; when this chili
is borne, keep him in his heat, which is his
lifc,and given him his due and natural food
of Mcttals; and he muft needs, if he be quick
and ablcd to be nourifhed, digeft, change
and turn them into his own Nature, much
more cafy then lead; and he in a cold place ,
and rudr,and hard fafhion, Was able before
toturne ftrange meats and digeft ir, as I
fewed above the change of natural thinga
when they meet in Combate, to be either
throughout or half way* that is cither by
conf uming to raze one another quite our,
and turn him into his own naturc,or when
by mixture, both their forces arc broken
and dulled equally; Even fo in this great
skillfull change, we may fo order the mat-
ter, and match the two Combatants, that
is the meat and feeder, fluff or doer, with
fuch proportion that one (hall either gee

the

L i B.4. The Holy Guide. 7 9

the vifrory, and eat up the other quite, or
both maimed alike and weakened-

10. To be plain, if wc give this mighty
child and fon of Gold, but a little food
(the quantity 1 leave to difcretion) be will
be able to turn it throughly into his own,
felf-fame nature, and thereby to mend hirri-
fclf and increafehis own heap and quan-
tity ; but it you will make Gold which
isyourlaft ind andpurpefc, match your
Medicine with a greit deal and hundred
times as Ynuch, or Co (your eyes (ball teach
you) and bo:h (hall work alike upon each
other , and neither fhali be changed
throughly, but make one mean thing be-
tween both , which may be Gold if you
will,or what you will, according to your
proportion.

ii. And if you perceive not, mark
how (the comparison is fomewhat bafe,but
fit and often ufed by our men) thqjf make a
fliarpeand flrong Medicine, called leaven
of the beft wrought flower which is dough;
and fuch another of milk well mingled in
the calves bag, called Rennet ; and how by
matching them with juft proportion of
flower and milk , they turn them into the
middle natures of dough and curdes, no-
thing fo fit; mark it well; nayfith you
begin to call meto examples, I will play
and load you with them , and yet I will lay

no

30 The Holy Guide. L1B4.

no ftrangc burthens upon you, nonet the
quick nature of the ScotcifhS«:a , turning
Wood into Gccfe; nor yctthc Eagles fea-
ther* that lying among Goofc quiils, eat
them up, twj more marve^us changes,
then all thefe that are profeffed in the Art of
changing; yet I leave them, I fay for
things too ftrangc, and far off my pur-
pofe.

12. There are many witcrs and ear.h?*
which lam credibly informed by ,G. AgrU
Cc/i, and others as good Au hors , are in-
dued with the properties to 1 urn any plant,
wight, or liiettal into ftone. Cardan tells
of a lake in Ireland , wherein a flake ftuck
down, will turn in one years fpacc, fo
much as flicks in t^c mudde into ftone, and
(o much asftands in the water into Iron,
th* reft remaining Wood ftill.

13. There is an old mine pic in the hill
Car^axt in Hungary , wherein the people
daily ftcep their Iron and wake it Copptr 5
thereafons of thefc things is plainly, that
which I brought for our great and golden
change, and likened to R ennet atfd haven
here be for:.

1 4. The waters and earth which afionifh
things in that order, are ever more infeft-
ed and mixed with fume very irange ftony ,
Juice, as A&rkda faith? and reafon agrceth

Wnly in the matters, when they no foon-

W

Lib. 4. The Holy Guide. 31

er reft from running then they go into
ftone •, nay Pliny faith the ftony (ticks in,
Arcadia goes into (lone running. J. Ho-
tham meanc thereby to try fuch a thing
upon his Lord the great Grecian M narch,
when he gave it him to d rink , it killed
him.

15. The Iiifh wat*r is without doubt
mineral, and as I gather by the difcription
tempered and dyed- with the Iron juice
which is calted Ferrugo; but every man
knowvth for ccrrain that that the matter of
Car fat is Copperas water; now Car fat is
as near the nature as the name of Copper,
which the Greeks fee out moft clearly, cal-
ling Copper ChalcuW) and that other Cbdl-
canihus, aad the done Pyrites or Marcafite
(as it is terr.-d in Arabia} that breeds them
both, it is like leaven to dough made of
Coppepjand raifed to a (harp quality which
when it. is loofened into water, and by
draining and by difti. ling up and down in
that hiJI , refmcd,it becomes yet more (harp
andftrong, able eafi'y to overcome Iron, a
like and near weaker thing ( for -what is
near to Iron as Copper?) and turn him
into his own foilemcan and middle na-
ture.

But how {hall we (hew that Copcrag
comes of Copper in that order? Firft the
proof of our men makech clcar3when they

turn

g* The Holy Guide. L1B.4

turn that into this, and this into that fo
commo'ly.

16. Then the authorities of Geber and
Agrkoli (the beft skilled in mineral mat-
ters of all that ever wrote) the one after
th it h tad obierved it long in Mines, fee-
ling it down for a rule* and Geber calling it
the Gum, as it were dropingsof Copper;
but chiefly the workmen^ da ly practice
who by following the (repp* of nature,
ibftening and diflMving t\u brazen ftone
Pyrites , do commonly make Copper; let
u? now fee what arc hath done by counter-
feiting thsfc patterns by Nature fet (o
plainly before her ; if (he hath not dons
as much and more, furcly (he was but a
rude and untoward child ; let us fee what
is done,

17. She hath likewife, and as well as Na-
ture ; by a ftiarp ftony water , calied Salt
G^mrne water, turned wood into ftone,
yea and niettals alfo into precious ftones,
not by aoy counterfeit way which Glafs-
makers ufe, but Philofophicaliy and natu-
rally , by a marvdlous clear and ftrong
Water of Qjick-filver , leading them back
to the middle nature of Rnc ftones.

18. To lit pafs middle minerals which
by the fame cou rfe we eafily change one in-
to another, (he rurncti Antimony into
Lead, and this into Tin eafily, becaufcas

that

Lib, 4- The Holy Guide. 33

that is unripe Lead > fo this is unripe Tin
alfo. Thefe things AgrkoU reported* and
tells the way of the firft by conco&ion on-
ly, but not of the fecond , which Paraccl-
jm fupplicth, by purging him our way of
binding with Sal Armoniack. I coullfet
down a way to turn Iron into fuch Steel as
will cut Iron as faft as this will cut wood,
and bare out all fmall (hot, but that they
arc both but on kinde, one better purged
then the other , as indeed fo arc all the
mettals, though net io neareiy ; II led.

19. Even fc Ieftccmcf the Silvery and
Golden Copperas, which nature fome-
times yeilds under ground, and Art coun*
tcrfeits by our binding, and colouring rules
above fet, as Jgrkcla tells andteacheth;
neither think thefe baftard wits cut quite
out of rule, but fo follow the fame rea-
fons of nature 5 and as the reft take the fin-
er like part, and leave the profs unlike, fo
do thefe feed upon their like, the fowler
parts, and leave the better as unlike their
Nature.

20. But to proceed to turn Iron into
Copper by Copperas -water , is fomewhat
more ordinary then the reft 5 Agriceh faith
an old parting water which is made there-
of (as we know) will do it, but the work-
men in the hill Kuttenberg in Gemany, do
more nearly follow nature in that hill of

Carf&t2

34 The Holy Guide. Li B.4,

Carpaty for they drain a ftrong Lee from
the brazen ftone, that is, they make Cop-
pras^water ftrongly and kindly , and by
flecping their Iron in it make very good
Copper -9 nay i\mhtr>?aracelfus faith again,
lhac in Caften they turn Lead alfo into
Copper, and though he nanieth not the
means in that place,yet otherwhere he do:h,
and teacheth how by Copperas fundry
ways (harptnedj to turn both Lead and
Iron into Copper , in which place he de-
livereth another pretty feat tounloofeboth
Iron and Copper into Lead again, and this
into Quick»iiiver, by the force of a (harp
melting duft which Miner* ufe, and this
our common rule (fill of (hanger likes;
for this duft being of the fame nature ftill,
which exalted Lead and Qnick-filvt r , two
great foftners and loofencrs of hard bodies,
is able to make tic ftubborn mettals, retire
and ycild into the middle place of Leadj
and this is Quitk filver.

21. Now then wc fee that Art hath
reached and overtaken all the Natural
changes of Minerals ; why may not (he by
the pattern divife more of her ff If, as the
grief of good workmen is, and go beyond
nature, and turn ihe foul mttta?s into fine
Silver and Gold ? She hath a gre:t advan-
tage of nature 5 fift for patrerns, andthui
her helps ia woiking; and hilly the help

and

LiB4- The Holy Guide.

and inftru&ioa of a divine wic and under-
(landing , whereby no marvail if all wife-
men have faid^ (he paffeth nature.

22. Albeit it is uncertain whether nature
have fuch a Golden Medicine in her bofom
hid, or no, as well as thofe of Copper y
Stoncs,and (uch, yet this is fure, that by the
baftard way of binding (as we have heard
before) {he turneth Lead and Tin , and
perhaps Copper too , but futely by Quick-
fiver and Silver into Gold.

Then I fay it is a fign of a weak and
(hallow wit, if Art cannot by thefe pat-
terns aforefaid, devife further to turn other
masals into Silver and Gold; is It any
rrore then to raifc and exalt Silver into
Gold? but this will ferve for both inro
very fharpc, ftrange qualities, able Ike
the reft, to devour and turn their own like
meat into their own middle nature from
whence they fprung. Certainly thereafon
is (o plain and ready5that 1 mufi needs deem
him left f hen a child that cannot conceit its
nay bend your ears and minds.

23. By rcafon, if tbe workmanbe very
ftrong over the ftuffe, he will turn in try*
al , things unlike and contrary a* well,
though not fo e iiely as like and friend-

ry;

And for the proof of (tony juices, turn-
ing all (ores of things, even metulsthem-

felves

3 6 The Holy Guide. LiB.4#

fclves into ftone, as hath been found by the
ftampe remaining ; of Antimony and
Copperas turned into Lead and Copper,
of the ripening of the Mineral Mines of
Lead and Gold eating dung and urine, and
l'uchlikc exchanges fee down before, I am
led to think that a tery lufty andftrong
Medicine would be able to change other
things as well as mettals , cfpecially Mine-
rals into Gold ; fome of our men fay no,
becaufc their wants in the reft the ground
of Qii'ick-fiiver , the knot of friendfliip
and unity, I grant it were hard in re~
fpeft of the right way, and yet 1 holdic
poffible.

And thus you have feen the ability of
Hermes medicine, to turn bafc mettals into
Gold by three fundry ways; firft as he is
fown and rifeth again to be made medicine,
which I call begetting; and then by chang-
ing the little food that is given him into
his own nature; to make him wax and
grow in heap and bignefs , which I term
nourifhment ; and laftly by changing the
great ftorc of ftuffc 5 wherewith we march
half way into the middle nature of Gold*
yrhich is the beft change and drift of our
purpofe. And this I may do well to call
mixtion, though Sir Cbrijlopher Heydon and
Fernei name it begetting alio , as it is a
kind indeed ? bun beeaufe it gocth not the

kind

-^ *t

L1B.4. The Holy Guide. 37

kind way, let it go and us keep our order
with our brethren.

CHAP. III.

The Rofie Crucian
Medicines.

Of feed. 2. Of increaftng Gold. 3. 7be
quality of Gold. 4. Of nature in concoft'wn.
5. Changeable fluff e. 6 How nature made
Quich^filver and turned it into Gold 7. Of
purging. 8. Of Lightnings 9. Of fire-flyes.
10. Of the Star-fi(b9 and other things. 1 1 Of
the nature of fires. 12. Of Hellen slar and
cauje of lightning and thunder. 13, The
power and venue of Kofte Crucian Medicines.
14 The firfi matter of Gold. 15. Of hot fti*
rits. 16 Of the fiery quality of Gold and it i
power. iJ*Of the fernitious quality of cold
frozen countries. 18. Of the under [landing
(fir its of the airy and the lively jfiri ts of hea-
ven. 19. Ofthefpiritofrnettals. 20* Of a
natural flone that confumetb all the fltfh and
hones of a dead man in fourty dayes3 and of
other things. 21. Why Copper-water parts
fiver frfffygbli. 22; Hotflomackf. 23. Di-
h 1 teftim

3^ the Holy Guide. Lib. 4.

re&ions to Pbilofopbers* , 245. Examples.
25. How gold got its hi^b red colour.

NO v, how (hill our fon of Gold be!
able to lubdue and turn fo much ol|
bafe mettds with Co little change andtra
vail, and fo great return again as we hive
promifed? it is for three caufes; rlrft, fo
thebitctrnefs and readinefs of th? ftuffc tc
be changd; and then for the great ftorc
and ftrength of the changing workman
to (cnda.wuy the lightdt ftill firft end fore
moft; and laftiy for his increafe in ftor
and quantity, which may be made by fow
ing and nourifhing the fon of Gold with
out number; for fowing firft, There b
lundry forts of fowing and making th
our medicine; one is an excellent way, bq
abareand naked and lorfe way; becaufe i
Gold can be made fie and open to b<
wrought, as beh ves a feed, he hath al
b th fluff? and wot krran, male and frmali
feed within himl'tlf; and the lefs contaguj
there is of unclean (tuff • , the more excel
lent and mighty will he rife again-, this waj
by deep and painful wit , hath been ibvn
times tdksn, but very feldom, becauftiti
viry hard, long, andirkfome, and iherc
fore we will leave italfo; but chLrlybe
caufe it crofTeih my purpcte above (did;
for if it befown alone, he cannot rife in

creafedl

L I B . 4. The Holy Guide* 3 9

created; whereas we ddircto augment hi*
quantity, thtn thc^e are two kinds of
grounds, and y<;t both one kindc, which
we m^y put unto him to corrupt him cafily
and raife him again with great increafe, md
quantity; one nearer his nature then ano-
ther. To much is enough for that.

Now for the ftore of ground fitt to be
laid about hitr, thirds a chcycebttteror
WorfeaKb; but that is no great muter, fo
you ksepthemeafure and diflretion which
a common feds -man can keep, neither to
ioverl y and drownchim, nor to leave him
dry and barren; then to our purpofeicaftin
your felf what iricfeafe in ftore one grain of
corne will yieM , within few times fowing;
when I had a little leafu're I did once carl
what one grain?, by the incnafe cf fifty
(which happens often) would arife to in
f.vcn times fowlng, and I wearied my (elf
with an endleffe matter.

A gi eater fumme then any msn would

think. I have forgotten it5caft you that have

leifure : Now a graine, I mean an ounce,

of our feed, though it rifrth not with fuch

advantage(for if it were fofowne, it would

be quite drowned, or at icaft not worth the

tarrying) y^t it rewards it another way,

I with fpced in working: For albeit, the firft

time be much a like, about forty weeks or

rfiich a matter; yet the fecond is run much

LI 2 fboner^

-

i-" ■ -■ i-r .

40 'Ike Holy Guide. LiB»-4.

(ooner, both becaufenow he is fofter then
the firft feed, and eafierrobe loofned, and
aifo mightier, and more able to turn the
work over, fo that we keep our fclvcs with-
in the number of ten, as fomc do f«t the
boundsjyet 1 think the midft bctvic^duplum
and dtcuflmn a notable mean, although thaC
be as it happcneih, yet by this great h-fte &:
fpeed, we may quickly overtake lnhni-

cv A

1, But if you think this too flow a courfe
let us runn to the next; increafc by nourifh*
menr^whofe great fpecd and rcadinefls will
eafi'yfupplyall and fill tbebtsgeftdefirc in
the world* after the Son or Gold hath been JC
once fowne , and raifed again, he is now a« n\
blc to wo) k mighti!y,and not before,and [d m
turne one hundred parts of his due meat, \m
into a third middle thing, Gold his fathers *l
nature 5 this no w will (how hereafter; then ^
if h. be able to turne an hundred times as
much half way, he can furtly a> eaiiiy an
quickly one part.thacis no more then him
klf, quite through into his own fe'f-Gm
nature, efpecially if that food befiiver o
Gold, which is beilof^al! to the purpofe
then he is now twice as oig and as llrong a
h« was before, able to devoure as much
gain;and (o for ever, for chisftrer.gth (h
mver bt aba ed, w.ien after his feeding
u left the fame ftilJ, or even as one Ca

at

Ll B. 4 rhc Holy Guide. 4 1

die lights another $iil or more ftrangely,
though nor To largely, like unto th*e Load-
ftone, which as Plato reporitth, afte it
hath drawn one ri? g oflron,it giveth pow-
er to draw another, and thus mito 1 he ne^t
until! yon nuk: a Jong row dni jink of
rings , dote and faf}3 one hanging upon a-
nother.

3. Then fith we may To foon heap up To
great a quantity of this Golden medicine,
jt nuy chance we (hail no? need any great
belpofthereadincfs cf the ftuf] and fireng<h
Df the woikman; and if but ten parts of the
Cjold mighc bs made at ones , between a
weak woikman and a fluff, vet perhaps it
would ftrve the turne to raife the fumm ap-
pointed : But fuppcfc it comtneth fhort
|:cn pares of the way, yet, if through the
neans of the nearneffe of the (tuff, and force
^f the doer, one part may came to turne a
lundred, then we (hall fupply and ovci-
akcal! the want and hinderance : Let u«
fee.

4. And firft apain of the ffuf£ becaufe ic
is the fhoncr and eafier matter ; a thing fit
,ind eafy to be changed w^en it is Jik. the
.uture of the workman, & nearer the ways
:nd.

The (traight affinity and nearnefle of the
fottals one to another we have opened < -.
>ove, when we found them all to re one
L I 3 (faing,

42 I he Holy Guide. L1B.4.

thing, differing only by certain hang-byes'
of clearrieis.clofericfr^and colour fpringing
out from the odds ofconco&ion,and that
if the fame concoction hold,they wil come
at length to their journeys < nd, which they
ftrive unto, the perfection of gold, except
pc: hap? Iron and Coppc* 5 by over (udditn
beat orfome other foule means , have ben
led out of the way , yet they may be led
back again snd deanfed as we beard before,
and yet they were all midc at fir ft ofquick-
iilver, afoul and greafy thing in refpeft,
and ih:n wer grimed and bcfporred great-
ly again 5 with the fouie earthly B.imftone
which afterwards Came upon the m, where*
by they were all groff; and ill coloured, o-
pen and fubjeft to fire, and other fpoyling
enemie?, before by long,gcntlc and kindly
cmcocVioo, all the foule and grofe ftuff was
cleanfed and rcfi"<cd,and fo made apt to take
good colour, (as we fee in plants and all
things) andto'gatbcf it (elf up clofe toge
th^andl ktncfle to be weighty, for the
much fine fluff in a narrow room, when
Lada'qd Qj-ick-filver , heavineffe follow
from the r^wneffc; and laftly, to be fledfa
and Cic from the hre^ and all other enemli
tuft there wa„s never any way of •en
ncc info great clofeneffe, left, to majc
•ion and diifolu.ion, thtis dcftruM

9nJ

L1B4. ihe Holy Guide. 43

on,nor yctanygrcafy ftuiTthe food of fyre
itmaining.

5. Wherefore we fre the neir neighbour-
hood ci mcttals, and caiinefle to be changed
one into another, (cfpeciaUy if we work
upon Silver, which is half Gold already )
when they want nothing of Geld, but ei-
ther long or gentle concoction, crinflcjd
there* f (becaufe we cannot tar.yJasnYong
ard tierce one ani'werable unto it, flrft to
cltnfe out all the grofle and grcafy ftuff,
and then to bring colour upon it.

£0 that I cannot but wonder at thofe men
if th ybe learned, who, in reproof of this
Art unknown, vouch, unfitn efl« of the ftuff
to be changed, faying that Men als being of
fundry kindes and natures , cannot be tur-
ned before they be brought into that fluff,
whereof they were flrft made and falhioncd,
which we do not when we melt them only,
and which is not edily to be done. It is a
fign that either they never knew, or at that
time reitefnbred not that nature of a Mct-
tal, or ot the firftftufli for if they mean the
Grecian fuppofed firft empty and n?.k*d fturT
without fhapf, but apt to recieveali, e-en
that which is the middle (late of a thing
lading but a moment, when by the way ci
making and marring (which our men with
Hi$Q:raies call changing) it is paffing from
One to another, then if yielded and quickly
L 1 4 gran^d (

44 * he Holy Guide . LiB,^

granted with Ge&er, Arnald^Lully and many-
more learned men, pn our fide, that in that
very violent work of changing the Mettall
being fo farr altccd and broken, even in-
to duft of another fdfhion, I think I muft
drive them to blow tni f^d,as they fay, and
thcykaow not whu to anfwer.

6. But ifthey mcanc as they fcemed to
do, we fhould not melt our tYIcttal, but
bring him back unto his neareft beginning
and fluff Quick iilver, and then put on our
fh^pe and forme upon him, according to
the kindly fenving of Gold, upon his bafe
ground abov; faid, they arc deceived not
knowing the nature of Matals; for they be
not of fundry kinds and beings (as they
fayj but all one thing differing by degree of J
bakeing,like divers loaves of one pafte, that
it were madneiTe if any of them lacked bake*
ingtolead him back, or irair or fpoyh
him of his fafhion, but in the fame forme
and being to bake him better, and fo did
nature in the Ground, in bikeingquick-fil-
v<r , or lead into Gold, (he went forward
and not backward with the matter; Nay
why go I fo farr with them? they never
maiked the nature of their own words,
which they ufe in their own Rhilofophy,
where changing is fitting only, and fhift of
thofe hang • byes called accidents, the

forme,

:

JLiB.4« The Half Guide. 4^

form?,kirde and being of the thing remain-
ing.

Then "if the fluff be Co fit, let us fee what
the work is, not in (tore which is done al-
ready, but in force and power; his ftreng?h
and power is (ten in two things purging
and colouring; Firft hemufl mightily Chew
himfcif in purging and driving out ail the
gfciTcgrcafineffeof thefiuffe,and then when
all is fine, clezre, and clofe, be ought to
ftretchhimfelf at large, and to fprcad farr
forth in colour upon it; for albeit long &
gentle heat purging by concoction, of ic
feJf breeds and brings good colour, yet this
over-fhort, and violent hen proportioned
doth not fo (as I (hewed above in th? dif-
courfc of binding and colouring)but needs
bring colour wi'h him already coyned.

7. So that v*h< n he purge* h the ftuffun-
derftand; hedraweth not cut the foulear.d
grofs ftuffjand depart* away from the work
frit hall, as the foul purging binder did;
but being a clean and fine thing like the na-
ture of a wight, he purgcth by digeflion and
cxpuliion, driving out the foul and unlike
parts as leavings, taking and embodying
with him fejf the iUnc and dearc for food
and nourimment.

Then let us fee how this work of purging
is performed, for that is all,?.nd the colour
hangeth upon the fame-, and is done all un-
der

46 The Holy Guide. L1B.4.

derone, as we ihali hear in going out of
this treat ife, if nothing purg<th but heac
through conco&ion, and this ever to be
meafured according to the ne^i and behoof
of the work underhand$and we muli fcour e
an hundred time* as much fluff in one or
two or three hours fpace at mod (Tor that
is their tas-k)thcn we had need of a marva-
lous fiery Medicine, befides the great out-
ward hear, to prick him forward5fcarce to
be found within the compaflc of the world
and niturc; ic muft (hew it ielf an hundred
times fiercer then a binder, which was fcant
able in longer time and firungcr heat to
fcoure and purge one parr, and as much of
the fame fluff.

8. This is a marvailous hard point: 1
had need whet my thoughts and memory,
and all the weapons of wit unto this mat-
ter; ifwe frarch all about and rifle the
corners of kinde, we (hall fi.ideno fire i\
the world fo hot and fierce, 2nd the light-
ning able to kill plants and wights & melt
mtttalls, and to perfcrme other fuch like
marvailous things in a niomeir.

As (to Ie: pafleplanrs noc fo ftrong) I
have read of eightLep*rsin the Id; oiLermos
wh'ch as thty fat at me t under an Oak?,
wcie all fuddainly ft: ucken ftarke dead
therewith, feiting fiill in the fame guife of
living and eating creatures; agtin that ic

harh

Lib. 4- The Holy Guide. 47

hath fometimes paflcd through apurfe at a
mans fide , ard meted the Coyne withou*
hurting the leather, becaufe fitch a fuUa"
ble and fpeedv fire found that rcfti~Pg flay to
work on, in the Mcttal which it wanted in
the ope nind yielding leather, and many
more fuch ftrangc deeds we may finde done
by that molt violent fire,thcn our firy work;
man if he be tasked as he is to work as greet
winders as thefe be, had need to he fierce
and vehement, as the fire of lightning',
as ids fometimes termed in our Philofo-

-. Let us match inefe two together, and fee
how they can agree, that all things n a e
Lyed, and as it were ftrucken together, the
light of truth may at laft appear, and (hine
foith of the comparison-, lec us as ful-
ly faith , ar. the fi.ft fetting out , lanch
and row a little eafy bciore we hoyfeup
fayle.

Gold of it felt in Philofophy is a
fire that if it he raifed and increafed cne
hundred degrees in quality it may Well
item to prove the grtauft fie in the
world.

9. But our men as they fpeak all things
darkly3 fo thispethapsin reeard of oher
mettals, or rather becaufe like the SaLi-
tnandtYy not like the fire fli-s (for though
the Salamander can as well as Serptnts egs,

4# The Holy Guide. L1B.4.

byhis extrcam coldncfle3qucnch a little fire,
yet a ftrong fire confumes him and puts him
out of being ) becaufe I fay^ike the fire fiy
he doth live and fumifh in the fi c, when at
indeed Gold3as all ether mctta!s,is cold and
vraterifh farr from the fire.

10. And yet it is not the owtward (low
of the body*'One that m.kes a fiery n.-turr,
but femetime? the inward qualify doth the
deed of fire 5 (if we fpeak at Janrc as the
common cuftome is) and fo the Srarr Fifh
in the Sea burrs all (he touched, and a
cold fpring in Sdavonia. fcts on fire any
cloarh fpread over upon it* and to come
ncare by fuch fid v force dr th the water fix.
in Tbeffaiy pierce through in any vr (fell fave
an horfe hoofe-

11. But now we are come unto the deep,
let us hoyfe up fail* and fpczk more proper-
ly and Philojyhically, and more neare the
J urpofe; let us I fay h?arc the ni! ure of fire
and how it commcth fire, as they bound it,
and wc (hall find* it if we mark this off--
fprlng, as a very hor and dry (u.bftance; the
flrft caufe of fire is motion, a gathering and
driveing much dry fluff into a rairow.
(traJghr, which by (tirring and ftrivingfor
his life and being, is ftill made more clofc,
fi fie, and hot , that its nature will bearc
and fufTer ; and fo it breaketh out at laff,
and is turned into another larger, and

thinner,

LlB4- rf>e Holy Guide. 4-9

thinner,riryer and hotter naturc,called fire:
hence the great underground fires, in JEtna
Hecli and many other places, grow and
fpring at fir ft, when the cold drweth a heap
ot hot earthly breaths and vapours, either
round up and clofe together , or along
thtough the narrow and rough place?, rub-
ing and wringing out fire, which the natu-
ral fatnefle of the ground feeds for c-
ver.

12. So the Starr called Helleri-flarr, that
lights a fign (o dangerous upon the table of
the (hip, and falling melts Copper veflall?,
and commtth of an heap of fuch yapours ,
carried up by violent erode windes, (o that
by rubbing Milftones, Flints and fuch like,
we fee fire arifc after the fame manner; and
this is the manner of the fpring of all fire,
others flow from rhif, one ftill Towing as ic
were one anothcr^but if the ftufFof this fire
be tough and hard, and then when it is
wrought into fire, if it be moved again a»
pace, it provtth for thefc two caufesa mar-
vailous hor and violent fire, whence fprin-
gesh all tre torcc of Lightning; for it is no-
thing tile out a heap of thick andbrimftony
Vapoursfas fome hold withfeafonjby the
cclneHiof the cloud; beaten up clofe in
that order, and now being turned of a fud-
dain into a larger and thinner Element then
it was before, when ic was earth and Water,

his

50 'ihe Holy Guide. L1B.4

his own phcc will not hoi 1 him, and fo by
the force of nature, ftriving for room and
liberty, he ic^ts the clouds in that manner
which we heare in thunder,and burflcth out
out at laft\a great and fwift pace, as we Tea
in lightning* much fwifrnefTe together with
the to ugh neffc of the fluff, finely wrought,
mak^s up his violence above all fires la the*
world

13. Now for the Son of GoM and Her*
tnes his /Vledicinc, what kinie of n\e is he,
when he can be no fuch Element, extrcatn
hot and dry fire} for he is temper ue, and
frarhall the qualities equal!, & none work-
ing above an>ther,and yet indeed by reafon
of itafine and sough (an 1 therefore migh-
ty body)wh reon they be feared, they work
in equality together, much more torcibly,
thac thi extreamly diftempered cold and
drypoyfon* can worke alone and as fan*
and teftr then they dtvoureand deftroydi-
(lemp-red bodies; thefc do overthrow the
contrary ; Then what fire he is I (hewed be-
fore, how full fluffed with heavenly fpirks
above all things, and fo he is an heavenly
fire, which is much mor^ eflfe&uali in pow-
er, and mightier in Action then t^ato-
ther ; by reafon of his exceeding fubcilj
a Ss , able to pierce through ro;k?, all
thing?, where that other fmall quickly
days,

14. Admifi

L t B.4. The Holy Guide. 5 1

14. Admit it fay you, if that heavenly
fire were quick3frtc and at full liberty : but
it is faft bound up in a hird body ; th<n I
will give you all the r<afon,rend your wits
unto it; Gold at firft was fully. fraugbted
with the rnoft piercing fi e«n the world,
and then came and wrought it into a moft
fine flowing oyle, and fo unbound it and
fet it at full liberty : not fo freely indeed
as in heaven , but as it can be in a earthly
body, clofely crouded up together, (which
help) heats as in a burning - glsfle, upon a
nioft ftrong and mighty body farr above all
things in the world; and Iaft ly with a vio-
lent outward fire, me feat all thefe apart
away to work together.

1 5. Judge then ycuthat have Judgement,
whetfcerit were not like tobeftir it ft If as
lightning; Coppar* the heat of the hot.
fpirits, is as great; and if it were not, yet
th irpaflingfubrilnelTc would requite thac
matter esfit'y, and make him even; yea and
perhaps when they be diawn and carried
up clofe togeiher, make fome odds and dif-
ferences between them ; but furely the ex-
creding tcughrefle of the body (as we fee
in Iron and ths reft) augments heat great-
ly , and carrieth him farr beyond it.

16. Now for the pace, it is much fwif-
rer , and drivin by a much (tronger mover,
even fo much as a founders fire pafieth in

ftrcngth

5 2 The Holy Guide. Ll B.4

ftrcngtb, the top of a thick cloud; for this

ishettut fends that lightning which tlfe

would tnve flowne upward?; thti eforc bc-

eauic ihc fire is ftronger, and hath the helps

of body ?"nd motion farr more favourable,

the fire of the Son of Gold muft needs palTe

the lightnings in power, and woixkifull

working. Then bethink y^ur ftlf, wTth

what calc and fpeed, (uch a fiery rreciant

were like to pierce and breakthrough, fift

ani fearch all about, and fo fc urc and

clenfe a great made of foule installs? how

many times more then a weak and grofle

miner all binder ? fatten and bfnd your

mindes upon it : we fee how a weak waref-

ifh or earth y breath in a narrow place,

within a cloud* the groundj or a GtinnJ

fall is but thunder) becaufe he is fo fud-

dainly turned into a Jarge Element, and

lackuh roonic, beftirrs himfelf, and wor*

kcth marvailous deeds; what may we think

then of the heaps of thofe falfe reports pf

heaven , and of that moft flrong Golden

body>c!ofcly couched up together in a little

rcom,whtn they be in a narrow veflel drc-

ven out, and (pred abroad at large by a

mighty fire, and thereby (rill pricked and

egged forward, (for as long as the fire

holderh, jhey cannot be ftill, nor draw in

themfelves again) what thing in the fturdi-j

eft Mcctal can be able to withfiand? how tM

fily

LlB4. Ihe Holy Guide. 53 W

hiiV.y (hall they aft down all that comes

[in their way, brake and bruize all topow-

H?r. May not we all fay plainly tint

l.vhkh the Poet bybonowed fpecch avouch*

I:th, that Gold lovcth to pafs through the

•nid left of the Goards , yea and to pafs

hroutih the rocks , being more mighty

:hcn the ftroak of lightning, it is fo fic5as

f it had been made for- the matter.

17. I have heard t. at* the extream cold
weather in Layii and Finland ('which are
mder ne poles girdle of the wotldj peir-
:e:h and freezeth, and cracketh the rock?,
/caandM ttalline vefTls \ again that the
Doyfomd Cockatrice by his violent, cold,
mcl dry breath , doth the fame on the rock
where fbe treadeth 5 then what may we
udge of the force of our fiery medicine up-
on the mettals, by thefe comparifons? How
lercely and quickly were ic like to divide
ind break them . having an extream fire,
the greateft fpoiler of all things, to over
match the cold and dry quality? and a much
ftrongcrbody then thefe vapors which car-
ried the former qualities, and both thefe

Jfent with far greater fpced and ftaifc-
nefs , as appears in the difference of the
1 movers >

18. Lift up your ears U mark what I fay?a
deaf Judge had nomeed hear thefe matters;

Mm «wh©

5* the Holy Guide. L1B.4

who bath not feen how Quick- fiiver enters,

cuts and rents the me tals, though many

doubt and differ about the caufe thereof ?

Cardan thinks thst ^ like a- we find of the

eo!d weather in thofc frozen count »ic?a

fo this marvailous cold m-ttaiine water ,

entering the metuls freezrth their moifture

within thcm,*nd make then crackc zvA fall

afunder, and therefore Gold iooneft of all

other, became his moifture is ftnzftt even as

foddm water foi* his finenefs fretzeth foon-

tr then cold. Surely very wittily Vatacel-

fus deems this dons by th? fpirkua] fubtil-

ty of the body, even as ths under (landing

fpiritsof the air, and the lively Spirits of

heaven ufc to peirce through ftone walls

and rocks , by the fame frrength5 without

the force of qualities \ but t think his ra«

for his hxonger-like qualities, feeking

to devour them ; elfc he would peirce your

your hand and leather, and fuch Iikeeafie

things which he leaved 1 untouched as un«

likes and ftrangers •, as for thr qualities of

Q2i;k-fi'ver, it is a qucftion what they are,

and which excelleth ; forejudge her vc:y

cold, feme again marvailous lios (as Vara*

(elfui for one ) fom^moift, other dry, but

as (he bah' them all apparently, foldecra

her temperate, like Ttu 1 hat fprung from

Ur, and aliayft like unto her. Gold J

mean

LlB.4> the Holy Guide* % 5

mean, though perhaps the quAidc* be not
all in her, as in him, (o equally bal-
anced.

} 1 9. But let the cafe be what it will (I
love cot to fettle upon uncertain matters)
the great fpiritof rrjettal* after (he is firir
wrought into Gold , and then into his fon
our medicine , (hall be in any rea.oabotli
•for body and foul an hundred times ftrong-
•r and more able to do it j nay Antimony
and Lead are much groier thro Qokk- til-
?cr , and yet you fee how they rend, t«ar,
andconfumebafc met tals even to nothing;
but wha? fay we to plants ? there is a great
difference in fharpenc fs aDd ibiiity to
peircc and enter between a thor nc and a
needle, and yet you heard abev^ the gen-
tle plants of the vine , aod the middle dt\v
of heaven yeild ftuile to an eating wj ter,
able within three or four dift.l lings to de-
vour and diflblvc mettals ; then what (hall
not onely (harpc mineral racers, but this-
our almighty Gold medicine (tew upon
them , which bciiclca that wcndcri'ulpaf-
fing, (harp, tnd peirting body hath the
great help (which i hey want) of that hea-
venly fire, and of her fwiftnefs, ftirrcdup
by a mighiy mover? Thefe things are e-
nough tofum:cany rcafonable man(if they
will not ftop their ens agair.ft the found
M m 2 of

5*

The Holy Guide. Lib. 4,

of rcafonj touching the power, might,and I
ftrength of our Medicines.

20. What is then bchinde, the holyi
Guide hath taught us all things ; yet I hearl
them wif per, that albeit thefe medicines of 1
ours have fuch thundering power, yci|
they may not force (o our purpofc of con-
fuming all the mettals ( as the guife and]
forcible ufe of fuch fiery things as ) with-
out: regard or choice of any part or porti-
on; but it is not always 1 hope the guifc
of violent things; I need not go far
there is a natural ftonc in Hazo, which b]
a mighty and ftrangc property ufeth, b
feurty da)esfpaceto con fume and makf away ai
theflepand bones of a dead mans body> \av\n\.
the teetby which he leaveth everfafe and whok'y\
and therefore they called it in times pal
. fltfh cater, and made tombes thereof foi
dead , and boots for Goutty men ; I couh
clog a world ©f readers with like exam*
pies, if I might be fuffered, but weigl
this one and our artificial Pantarva togcj
ther. Why m ay not it as well have
choice and fame, a part of this great waft<
and fpciling/* they know not why, anc
how then? there are many deep > hidden]
and caufclcfs properties in the bofom
kind and nature , which no mans wit
able to reach and fie into, the world is

L1B.4 TheHoly Gnide. 57

of them , when Art is open, and all his
Ways known. Indeed the world is full, of
late of fuch fcncelefs and blind Philofo*
piers (which like as the Poers when the
Stoick a little calls on Jove by many names,
to help to (hors upthefallof averfe, or
flop the gap in the number) fothty when
their eyes are dazled upon the view of a
deep matter, flye to nature as faft , and to
hide her unfearchablc iccrets , to cover the
fhame of ignorance , as though God mo-
ved all with his finger (as they fay) with-
out any middle means and inftruments.
. There is nothing done without a middle
"; caufe fore-running, if it were known , as
J I think it is to Tome, though never fo dark
jj and hid from others 5 and therefore to
come to the purpofc , as the reafon of the
1 natural eating ftonc , was clear to Agxkola
though unknown to P/ircy, and many more
j" the reporters ) and found to be for the
loofc and light temperatures, and Cop-
peras water, fie to eat the flefh and fofter
, bones, and yet unable to do a thing above
his ftrength, thatis, to overcome thehar-
der ; even fo you may think the reafon in
this like property of the FL C. Phyfick,

IPantarva,^. is feen to fome: for certainj&
howfoerer it was my luck to fee it , I can.
not tell, it hath been fure unfolded twenty
Mm 3 times

58 7 he Holy Guide.

Lib.

times at leaftj in the fpeech going before, if
you renumber well, itfollawcth the high
and common way of all nature, I mean
that eating nature; for all things eat, and
that is the caufe of things done below; then!
there is nothing eats and devours all the
ftuflfe wUch ic overcometh, but fomuch as
is like and turnablc, the reft hcleaveth as|
ftrang* and untouchable* fodid all the foul
bidders purge above; nay (o aad nooihr]
ways, doth the lightning and all firceai
andconfume the ftuff fubducd, turning th<
aire and water into fire, and leaving th<
earth and aftes ; even fo doth our rocdi«
cine > after ic hath driven out and (batterer
all uaclcanncfs, is t*ke« and (tokesuntx
the fine part, like unto it {elf, and makes it|
like himfelf , as far as his ftrength will
carry.

What need 1 pray> is there need any of an'
more examples ? is it not clear enough thai
all things fctk their like and (hun theii
concraries ? yet becaufe thefc Mineral Mil-
ters have been evermore very ftrmgeam
nn acquainted with the Grecians, I will fet
down one or two of the clearer cxam«
pies.

21. Why doth dfperas- water part ant
draw away filver from Gold> but Copper as i
i to Copper ; and this to filver $ for

Lcac

L1B.4. the Holy Guide. 59

Lead is to Gold) )ois this to Silver \ caft in
pla es of L ad and Copper, and that will
cle veto the Gold, and thi* to the Silver.
But Si ver is liker to Lead then Copper,
therefore to partfiiv*r from Copper , the
Miners ufe to f^fon a lump of Lead with
a little Silver that fofteneth the work and
maketh it ready, then one Silver draweth
the other part unto her , nay raw Q<nck-
,fi!vcr as (hi is ftrong in all things, fo in
this veiy wonderful, Quick-filvtr I fay the
gr-nd mother of cur medicine, and the
fpring of all her goodnefs , will quickely
receive and fwallcw, either in heat or cold,
her near friend, or very like clean, tempe-
rare,and very finebody of Gold {m& there-
fore as the one is termed unripe Gold, fo
At ocher ripe Quick-fiiver ) when the reft
Hie refufethj and bearsth aloft as foul,
grofr, and unlike her nature ; and this fe-
crct the miners alfo by thiir practice have
opened unto us when they to part Gold
from the reft, mafhed altogether inaduft
heap ; wherefore when this fine and clean
body QMck-filver a is made*by nature^and
h\ t ytt much finer and cleaner , and again
asmucn more pcircdng and fplritual, and
able to perform it , how much more deadly
will (he run to her like and devour h> the
clean 3 fine, and fplritual, that is the Quick-
IVIm 4 filvcry

60 the Holy Guide. Lib, 4.

filvcry pare of the mtttal, and if me devour
it, then ic cannot be loft, but muftweds
go into a better nature 3 even to the nature
which wedefire.

What is then to be faid more > I have not
yet bounded the matter, as I promifed, and
fhewed how ihs golden ftonc mould turn an
hundred times as much irto Gold , I have
ftiot a large cornpafs? but all at randome ;
now it is time enough every thing hath its
due time and place.

22. You have heard lam fure of the hot
flomach of the Elephant, Lizard, and Sea-
calfe, able to digeft and con fume ftonr, yea
and to come to the point, the Srruchio
(EftridgeJ thatmarvailous beaft, Iron alfo;
if the ftomach of a wight be able in a fhoi t
fpace to divide j expel, and turn the fine
part of a mctcal into his own ftlf famcli
nature. How much5and how foon may theji
ftomach of our medicine turn into Gold >
notonely an hundred times mere then the
beaft, becaufe it is an hundred times more
fitter and able to do it ; firft for the likenefs
and ncarnefs pf the fturfe, and then for the
two great heats I (peak of 5 and thirdly for
the wonderful, (ubtlc, ftrong, peircingand
cutting workman , but efpecially becaufe
he goeth not quite through with the work,
as the beafls did, but half way to the middle

Na«

1.1

Lib.*. the Holy Guide. 6i

Nitureof his fuhsr : confider and weigh

tne matter, but if he be fomewbat faroflF

the mirk, fee how woade & other things of

'< like ftrong gifts and qualities are eafily a-

blcto overcome aiu change, with whom

j they racer, even without (his preat ming-

f ling and boylihg: why (hall ic then be hard

Irforour Me iicine, with great concoSion,

J-to do the like upon his own fubjefts, for

proportion of ftrength , for ftrength will

foil jw him , as able to overcome the

ftubborne Mettais, as thefc two thcwca«

ker wafer.

23. Toclofeup all, remember what I,
f.id, and what is tnoft true and certain,
that gold is clofcft and moft full of fine larg
fpreading fluff, of any thing elfc in the
world,pafling the wonderful! gift of Silver,
in this point an hundred fold, in Co much
that one ounce of Gold, by the blunt skill
of the hammer,may be drawn out and made
to ftretch ovcr3 above twoAchcrs of ground;
Confidtr well this one point, allfhall be
plain and eafy-,1 mean to them that are lear-
ned, for theft be, no matters for dull and
mazed wits to think jn 5 then after this
fpreading Mcttal , is made a fine flowing
oylq and drawn out at length; and layed
out a broad moft thinly, by a vehement heat
of fire upon, how much will ic fpreadj may

yo«

6% The Holy Guide. L1B.4.!

you think in reafon? but inch a vUw may
qiickly dazle the eye of the undcrflandingjj
let us pifture out the matter as Plat*
ufeth.

24. Think the difference in fineneffe, in
colourbecweentheSon of Gold a >d Sil-
ver (if you will t^ake him to tu me as I bade
you) to be like the odds between very fine
Scarlet, and course white fack- clothe lee
rim be clofely (hut up together in a Walnut
(hell, this packed up as hard in a very round
pot of a quart, or of that bigneffe, whicb
willcak: the meafureof an hundred Wal
nuts; you fee the bulk of both ; and fo, if
you weigh them , one will prove an hun
dred times as much in weight as the other :
but draw them out , and fpread them one
upon another, & one (hall overtake, match
and fit another on all fides ; Now owne is
very courfe and bigg, and she Other is very
dn^ and fmall, as appears by their threeds ,:
yet the fmall may be full as flrong as the
bigg, as we fee in a lirtle gall, poyfons, &c.
it is common.

Then thefe two encountring (as we muft
fdppofe)fhall of force,hurt and chaDgeeach
other equally,and fo the exceeding fine and
grofle mingled, mike a middle thread, and
the extream read and white colour? carried
with their bodies, take a yellow mc*ne al*

fo;

JLiB,4* T A* Holy Guide. 6 3

fo : even fo you mufl think when an hun-
dred ounce* of filver, and one ounce of our
Medicine, arc both by the fire beaten, and
driven out at length and to the furtheft
thinnefle , every part overtakes , fits, and
reaches other, and the fmali part being as
ftrong as the bigger, in ftriving one over-
comes, confumea, and turncs theother,thst
neither fhail be quite raifed,but both equal-
ly changed and mingled unto a third mean
thing,both in finenefs and colour,and all o*
ther proporties whatfocvov

25. And fo you fee the colour alfo dif-
patched vfhica 1 kept in their place, and
which femeth a wonder in fomemens lights,
fol hope you will not a?k me how GoM
got this high red and unkindly colour un-
ltflc you be ignorant how all fuch hang-
byes flirt and change up and down, without
hurt to the thing that carricth them; and
except you know not, that by a kindly
courfcf whereby all foft & alterable things,
gently and foft boyled, Wax firft black, then
whitc,next ycllow,and laftly red, where they
ftopp in the top of Colour) we fee changed
and drawn up our feceds of Gold unto this
new unwonted colour; of this 1 havefpo-
ken largely in she nature and dignity of
Angel?,

• And

H

The Holy Guide. Lib 4.

And thus you have ai laft, all the reafonli
which 1 (how , or at leaft thought good tore
deliver in writing; for the truth of Her-p
me/orthcPhylofophers (lone and Medicine,*;
why is it the ready way ro bring all men ton
all Kefte Cr«//dtf-happinefle in the world I
ihuis tolongLife, Health, Youth, Riches J
Wifdome, and Vertue : it is no*w tirreto
fit down and take our reft.

Chap.

LlB.4« The Holy Guide. 65

CHAP. IV.

What the Pantarva is : The true natter

in Nature and Art : The manner

. of working: C anonic ally and or<*

derlj made manifeU in

this Book:

The place for wor\ing; 2. Heaven uncban-
gable^ all beginnings even and of other things-,
3. Of end and everlaftingnefje; 4 Heaven
and Earth\ 5 . Of God and Man; 6. Of blood;
7. Of Making and peri [hmgi, 8. Of the foure
jeedsof firife in the world; 9. The difolver
and de sir oyer of Gold; 1 o. The way of make-
ing and wording the thing [ought after;ii.Of
the body> fire and bloedof our matter; 12. The
due of Starry blood and womb for feed; ^.In-
fluences of Heaven ; 14 . Of lnflrufiions.;
15* The Quality of Countries; \6. The
Pantarva*, 17. Dr. More andVr. Freeman
Convin:td , and all the Art nta.e mani-
fest.

1. Eugenius

66 the Holy Guide* L1B.4

1. I? Vgenius Tbeodidadus he ire* them
l^mutter among themfclves, that
there Is never a reafon given asyet,
no not one, beciufc all ftandeth upon a hi-
ncd and fuppofeJ ground, which being
nothingfall that is built upon it muft needt |
come 10 nothing ; For even as Paraceljut in
his fuppofed Paradife , in the end of high o-
pinions, concludes, that if it were poflibl*
to be made, by any labour or wifdome, ic
would prove no doubt, a notable place for
long Life and Health ; even (o may be
thought of this ftone of Gold, if any A» t or
skill were able to contrive tr, that it would
without doubt work thefc wonders afore-
Uid ; but as his Paradice (if he m?an plain-
ly as hsfayes,aud of the Philosophers ftone
whereto it may be wrcflcd) is unpoffiblc to
be made, unlelfe he would include himfelf
in a place free, firft from a the contagion
and force of outward Earth, Water and
Weather, y«a and therefore of ihc fire of
Heaven , and light alfo ; and fecondly
where all their beginings were in their
pure and naked Nature, which they call
the fift nature , which it nowhere iavein
ruaven, and which were a miracle to be
onccived ; snd laftly except he would live
without meat and his leavings which both

lcar-

LiB.4* The Holy Guide. 67

learr edand unlearned hold ridiculous to
think.

Even fo it 18 ai hard in opinion and un-
like 3 tht Gold may be fpoyhd and
brought to nothing, as hemuftbc firft, and
then reftoredandraifed to fuch dignity:
becaufe as heaven is cv^r one and unchaa-
gable : for that in it all the beginnings are
Weighed fo even, and furcly tyed together,
In a full content, unable even to iarr and he
loofnedj in the like manner Gold is fo
clofeandfaft, for his fare and eq»jull mix-
ture of his fine earth and water, ihat no
force of nature , neither of Earth, Aire,
Or Water, no nor fire, although he bs hol-
pen with Lead, Antimony, or any fuch like
fierce or hoc ftomack, eafily confuming all
other things, will ever touch him: nay
which is ftrange, thegreateft fpoylera iu the
wo»:ld, fire and r is helps, are (o farr from
touching him; that they mend him and
make him Rill better, and better; what is
to be faid to this ? albeit I con kuv chat ro
be :.hrt main ground and ftateofallthe
Work and building, yet I fuppofe it not
nor rook i t as grantrd, as if 1 ',ad been f n
Geometry, but left it to be proved in the fit-
ter place; as for that fuppo fed paractife it
U ha> d to judge , becaufe hs did but
glance at it, and fo leavss h unlawful

to

66

The Holy Guide. Lib.

V .

10 be told; albck a man may divife inj
thought as well as be, (for 1 think he had|
nottiy?d it) whit may be done and whai
nature will fuffer.

Then what if a man inclofed himfclf if
a little Chamber, free from outward in-
fluence which is eafy; overcaft for light
fke, if.ncccTbe with fuch Marble ssTert
made hi* Temple5fhining in darkmffowhl
all floured thick wt: h Terra Lemnia^ or tht
earth of a fifh nature (which is better, bui
much harder to be gotten) and had fuel
water within the lodging, as that not lonj
fince found under ground in Italy between1
twofilverCupps; then if he could evef Fivt
quire without meat, (which I (hewed not
Impoffible) or prderved himfclf with a flfi|
Nature? which breeds no leavings; what
think you of the matrer leaving?; but thin]
what you will: if it jarr and found nol
well in the cares of any man , let it be a«
mong other his Incredible and impoffibh
Hionfters ; yet our caufe (h?.ii not be thi
worfe for it, but eafily poflible, as I will o«
pen unto you, as farr as my leave will fufj
fer me, which hath bf en large indeed, an<
mufi be , becaufe I made a large promife ai
firft perhaps too rafhly; but lor the got
meaning) which muft be payed and rcrfor-
med to my brethren of the R. Croffe*

3, Arlhllt

LiB.4' Ike Holy Guide- 6$ *^

3. Ariflotle faith like a wife Philofopher,
that nature makes her creatures and Tub-
. jc&a apt to move and reft, that is, change*
able ; and again that a body that is bound-
ed cannot be without end and everlafling ;
\ and therefore that when heaven ever mo-
, veth, and earth ever reffeth , it is beyond
the compafs of nature , and fprings from
. a roorc divine caufe; if this rule be true, as
litis moft certain, then Gold a thing not:
'. unbounded, nor yet an extraordinary and
l divine work , but made by the ordinary
hand of kind , as we heard above, mu§
needs decay and perllh again , and cannot
iaft for ever 5 and if nature can diflolve
him, much more (hall (he with the help of
Art perform it ; and that which was faid of
.fire and his helpers, is nothing; for why
doth fire better Gold , but by removing his
enemies, which nature hadfecretly laid a-
bove him to deftroy him? and fb every
flick as I faid above, may be faved from de-
ay; but let nature have her fwing under
ground, or skill above, they (hallcaufc
his enemies in time to fpcil andconfume
him.

We cannot tell (fay they country-likej
it may be a divine and no natural work,
for wc fee it evcrlaftingi

Nft 4.G9

;o The Holy Gride. Lib. 4

4. Go toojbcit (o, 1 will over-take then
that w*y too ; for as we know that whicl
Ariftofle knew not , that borh heaven an<i
earth by the Tame divine caufe that mad'
them both, may be, and once muft be mar
red and changed ; fo we may think tha
Gold, although it were a divine work, ye
by the Ike skill folio wcth the divine pa
tern, might fall to decay and pciifh.

5 But what is" that divine pattern > an
how (hall men be like unto God > even b;
the goodneft of God, who hath , as I fai«
above, !cf< his pattern open in all place*
and cafic to be feen to them that fetk to b
like the main pattern wh refore wcarea
made ; and this as hiermes faith, gentle an
wity feparadon, wherewith he avowed
both the great, and our little work ma
and woven 5 and fo to be marred and un
woven again , to figure unto us privirj
that there is no great and cunning wor
performed by fuh rude and Smith*lik
violence as you fpeak of .( vis confilri exfei
mole ruit jua) but by this geiulc skill anc
Counfel , as vte may ftc very plainly a
fitly, by a thing in vertue and price,
Itiean in the worldly eftimation moft nea
unto Gold, the noble and untamed Di
mond , which when he comes into thi
Smiths hands, will neither yeildto Ft

001

JL1B.4. The Holy Guide. jl

nor Hammer, but will break this rather
Ijjun he will break, and not fo much a* be
h t (as Pliny faifh) but not b* hurt fas
Ijfchey all grant) by that other , and yet
iby gentle meanes ot Lyon or Goates
Jjblood.

116. Though they be hot bloods (that by
kinde, and this by a difeafe of a continual
:ijAgue) you may fo (often and bring Under
fythis flout and noble ftone , as he will ycild
ijfeo be handled at your pleafurc, nay by
ttjthc flawing tears of Molten Lead (a thing
Moot fo hot as may he) he will quite relent
iljan.i melt withalL Even fo we may judge
rlbf Gold ; that albeit the more roughly he
itipe handled, the lefs heftoops , astheNa-
!(yture of ftone things is, yet there is a gen-
tle and heavenly skill and way to (often
Vim, and make him willingly yeild and go
j:o corruption, though this as well as that
be not common and known abroad, as no
rcafon it mould.

7. But what need we flye with Ariftotle

:o any divine (belter > as Gold was made

Dy a common courfe of kihdc, and muft

. dye and perifh the fame way 5 To th7s skill

f ours needs not be fetched from any hid

Sand divine fecret (whatfoeverour men fay,

Jtokeep off the unworthy) buc fr< m a plain

'^"Arc following the daily and ordinary ftcp§

N n 2 ei

72 The Holy Guide. Lib.]

of nature in all her kindly works ani
changes; then mark and chew my word)
well, and I will open the whole Art uatl
you.

8. Godbecaufc he would have nonce]
thefe lower creator** eternal ( as is aforcj
faid) firft fowed the four feeds of ftrife i
the world, one to fight and deflroy the c|
ther; and if it would net ftrveasit will
not here, he made thofe that fprung frot
them of that fame nature; and there is nc
thing in the world that hath not h
match , cither like or contrary, able t
combatc with him and deftroy him.

9. But ths like eats up and confume
the like, with more cafe and more kind
then the contrary, for their nearnefs and <
greement ; then if nature mean to fpo
Gold and mata him perifh, becaufc it
fo ftrong a thing, {he takes the nearcft
mod kindly way, (he fcts a ftronge like ur.
on him to eat him up and confume hin
What mould I fay more or more plainly
you know the thing moft like and nearc
unto this, is in all mens fight corrupt,an
iubjeft to decay , and then when it is loo;
ned, very ftrong and fierce; it is ever moi
wrapt about him, and fo by contagion
firikes and enters, and fo pulls him aft
and all in their own nature, heat and

L:b.4. The Holy Guide. 75

nace rot together, and in due time rife a-
] gain and the fame ; for being all one in
effect, as the feeds of male and female, it
booteth nothing whether overcome in the
end, and a new thing like the old muft
needs arifc, if fome occasion in the place
(as I faid of heat and Brimftone) come not
^efwecn and turn the courfe.

10. You have heard of nature, let us

come to Art; if (he cannot follow thefteps

of nature, fhe is but a rude skill; nay fhe

muft pafs them far, if fhe mean to take

profit by the work ; for albeit I deny not

that all things may fall out fo luckily, that

our fon of Gold may flare up underground

("though never found,for who would know

it? J yet nature may fo eafily fail in the

choice of corrupting ground 0 but cheifiy

in tempering the degrees of her kindly

heat (without which the work will never

"fee end) and again the lets are Co many

?f and fo cafual, that perhaps we would be

'" ;worn before the work be finifh«d.

Then how mould Art her counterfcic
; J pafs this kindly pattern > very eafily , by
1 the undemanding skill of a divine minde,
which I faid doth pafs nature in her own
: works; firft in chufing the beft ground,
I and beft proportioned for generation,
* which nature in this refpeft cannoe , as
Nn 3 aiming

ir

I

74 The Holy Guide

L'B,

aiming at dcftrucYion onely , then in re-
moving all lets to come between.

But efpecially in well ordering thai
gentle and witty fire of Herwej, wherewitl
ail the workisfundred, that is turned, al-
tered and mingled.

But what is this wirtyfire? for here it
all the hardnefs, h?re all the world* ii
blinded, all the reft is eafie ; bend y m
mindes5 1 fay, I will tell you all the Art;En«
rlofe the feed of Gold in a Concra, yet
kindly place ; Lo here is all the Art , all th<
reft is written to blind and fhaddow this?
fo far as 1 may do good and avoid hurt,
will unfoh! this.fhort^hid and dark matter3
and yet Hermetically and PhiJofophically.
A» the Sun is the father of all things , an<'
the Moon his wife the mother ( foi
he fends not down thofe begetting beams!
immediately but through the belly of the
Moon) and this double ieed is carried in a
winde and fpiric into the earth, to be made
up and nourimed ; fo our Sun hath hisl
wife and Moon, though not in fundry Cir-
cles, but Adawlikc, and both thefc are,
carried in a fpiric alfo 3 and put into a
kindly furnace.

ii. To be more plains this feed of Gold
is his whole body loofned and foftned with
his own water ( I care not how, but beft

for

^ Lib. 4 TJ>e Holy Guide. 7 5

'' for his beloved for eafe in working ) there
[is all the ftuffcand preparation, a very con-
temned (trite; here is the fire , this belly is
full of blood of a ftrange nature ; it is
jcjrthly and yet watery, airy and very firy;
, [Jfis a bath, it is, a dung-bill, and itisafhes
,,[alfo, and yet thefe are not common ones,
8|mt heavenly and Philofophical, zs it bc-
•"[fcnics Philofophers to deal with norbing
njput heavenly matters or things; fearch then
,*:his rare kindeof heat, for here is all the
"* winning ; this is the key of all ; this makei
he feeds, and brings them forh ; fearch
irifely and where it is, in themiddeft of
icaven and earth ; for it is in the middeft of
•oth thefe places, and yet but one indeed;
ou may think I crofs my felf and know
ot what I (ay , but compare and look a-
.out, and you (hall finde nothing profper
jut in his own place.

1 12. Let the dew of his (tarry blood beat
jbout the womb, and the feed (hall joy and
rofper, yet fo much the better and fo neai?
Ifo, if that blood be whole and found,
ad (landing of all his parts; wherefore
o marvaii though the world miflcth this
appy ftone, when they think to make it a-
ove the ground; 1 fay they rauft either
imbe up to heaven , or go down deep
ithin the earth; for there and no where-
fe is this kindly heat.

Nn 4 13* Wights

» ' ' ■ -

76 1 'he Holy Guide. LlB.^,

13. Wights are h:at with blood, anc
plants with earth , but Minerals with ai
heavenly breath ; to be fhort, becaufc men
are too heavy to mount up to heaven, yoi
muftgodownto therniddeft of the car. hi
and put the feed in the mine again,that h
may take that influence of heaven equallj
rotmd about htm again.

14. Mufe and conjecture well upon ml
words, you that arc fit and skilled in Naf
turc, for this is a very nitural heat, am
ytt here all the world is blinded. Naj
indeed if a roan could read little and thin!
much upon the wayes of nature , fc|
might eafily hit this Art , and before th;
never.

Whit doth now remain? we have a
the way to mar and fpoil the Gold , ai
that was all the doubt; I anfwcr,for if he I
once down fo kindly, he will rifcagaij
Cure, or elfe all nature will fail and 1<
her cuftome j and if he rife, he (hall
ever in vertuc tenfold increased 5 I mean
Jt be not embafed as the feeds of wights ai
plants are , and as the feeds of Gold
by th&t bafe way abovefaid , with tl
ground that corrupteth it. So if a poifoi
t& plamt or wight be rotted in a glafs, f
will rife again a molt venemous beaft , an
perhaps a Cockatrice, for that is the of

fprinj

Lib.*. The Holy Guide. 77

fpring; corrupt in like fort a good plant*
and it will prove a worm or fuch like, with
much increafed virtue; what is the rcafon*
becaufe the fame temper and meafure of
qualities, ftill rifcth in power at the body
is refined, and the grofs fluff that hindrcth
the workingjftript off and removed.

15. Wherefore Gold is now temperate;
loofen and refine him often over by cor-
ruption, that is, ftripe ofTthelets of the
body, and all the qualities (hall beraifecj
equally, and (hall work mightily, devour,
and draw things to their own nature,morc
then any thing elfc-, becaufe they be not
onelyfrec, and in their clean and naked na-
ture, but alfo feated upon a moft fubtle
and tough body, able to peirce, divide, and
fubdue all things. Again both mettals
andftone?, the more heat they have (as in
hot countries) the finer and better; and
therefore the oftner they be brought back
to their firft matter , and baked withtcm-
pcrate heat, the more they increafe in
goodnefs.

\6. And if he be brought to fuch a tempe-
rate finene(8,that is,to fuch a heavenly na-
ture, then he keeps no longer the nature of
mettal in refpeft of any quality fave the
laftingnefs of the body, nor of any other
grofs meal nor medicine, and therefore he

can-

78 The Holy Guide. L1B4.

cannot be an enemy to our Attare, nor yet
any ordinary digeftion in our body, but
(freight way fiyes out , as I fa id before,
and by extraordinary means and paflage*
as we'l as nature her felt, and fo joyn th
with ourrlrft moifturc, and doth all other
good deed? belonging to this fiofie Crucian
infallible Axiomata of long life, health,
youth, richrf, tvifdom and vertue in fuch
fort and better then I have (hewed thee of a
fife rmu*re *<i that book above faid ; and fo
AppolloniusiFkilofiratus and Eraftus, and all
other fUnderousmouthes may now begin
again; for there is not a word fpoken to
any purpofe, becaufe all runneth upon a
falfe and unknown ground; a wife man
wouM firft have known the nature of the
thing he fpeaketh of, if he mean not to
move laughter to them that hear him and
knowth martcr.

17. But indeed Van Bdmomt G^bory
and Bthemon the Coblcr, and other railers,
are fare enough, becaufe thefc things are fo
hid and unknown to the world, that no
jnan, but one of this our houfhold can efpy
them orcontrole them 5 therefore I took
in hand this hard and dangerous labor,
which ">U other of our anccftors to this day
have refufed, both that they might be a-
fliamcd of their wrongful (landers , and the *

wife

LiB.$. The Holy Guide. 79

wife and well difpofed fee and take profit
by the truth of fo great a bh (Ting freely be*
flowed upon them. If they find it5lcc them
thank God, and ufe it; no doubt they will
do good unto good men. If I have flipt in
tyords, or abounded in truth of matter, or
failed hi herto, mark well the fubfequent
difcourfe; although you think I fjpeak
flrangely, yet aflu redly youfh?.ll find fomc-
thing hat was never revealed to any, but
of our laudable order ; if in this or thac
Chapter you find any thing amifs, think
how common it is among men , efpecially
of my ^gej I may be excused •, and weigh
the good and bad together, or elfc Homer
himfelf an old man in his time, when he
skips now and then could never efcape it,
and yet he was in an eafie matter ( a man
may find I think howfoever ) and he had
Orpheus and Mig^aj, I think,beforc him;but
you fee the hardnels of this fhift, although
my pattern you do not fee, becaufcit is
not to my knowledge in the world to be
feen, buc what care 1 5 thefe men whom 1
regard, will take all things in good part,
and then the reft I patted by long fince un*
regarded ; now let us fit down and reft a
while, having perufed the way to happi-

Inefs, knowledge of all things, paft,prefcnc
and to come, long life, health 3 yonth,
blcflcd-

80 The Holy Guide. L1B.4.

blcflednefs, wifdom and vertue; how to
alter, cure, change , and mend the ftate of
the body In young or old ; and (h: wed you
the golden trcafures of Nature, and the
Fountain of Phvfick and Medicines ; and
this being all poffible to be obtained? we
fhJl next lead you the way to prepare the
Medicines which are experienced to be fafe
and cffrftual for all bodies, and you (hall
find tbeir wonderful, incredible, extraor-
dinary vcrtues, if you pra&ife and ufe them
a* you are taught in the fifth Book*, but you
muft remember to know the name of your
patient, and the number of his name, Ge-
nius and PJantt , and chufc a fie time aa
you are taught by the numbers in the fc-
cond Book; then prepare the Medicines as
followeth in the fifth Book ; and now ha-
ving guided all men to happinefs, know-
ledge of all things paft , prefent , and to
come, long life , health , youth , blefled-
rufs, wifdom, and vertue ; and to aktr^
cure, change, and mend all difeafes in
young or old , I have proved thefe myfteri-
ous truths practical, and therefore next wc
will teach you the receipts, their vertuel
and ufe in the fifth Book. The Theory be-
ing i ufficien^y cleared from all obje&ionf,
and the myfterics of nature made plain and
safic » both in the ftru&urc of mans body3

mind

L i B.4. The Holy Guide. 8 1

mind, foul, and fpirir, of the nature of
Stones, Herbes, and Plants, Minerals and
MettalS; then 1 having proved the power
of nature , and the temper and order of
happinefs what it is, and how all may ob-
tain h>viz. knowledge of the time when
to give Phyfick, when the party will re-
cover.

And thus having pafled the Theory and
Pra&ique part of Art and Nature, I fhall
proceed to the pra&ique part of Phy-
fick.

And firftyoumuft obferve the nature of
your patients, their Ages, what number
Governs each name , and what Genius at-
tends that name ; what Phyfick is proper
for that perfon , when it is good to give
it; this you will find in the fecond Book
tage 61. if the number be in the Law-
reljtis good, if the number be in theScr-
penr ,k is evil. Again the number of your
qucftion , name , Planet 3 and the day of
the wetk muft be added together 3 and di-
vided by thirty, and what remains you (hall
find in that Figure; and if it be in the Law-
rel, your qutftion or what you defire (hall
be obtained, and your patient (hall be
cured ; if it be long life, it *4 good , for
you (hall live long; and if the number be
in the Serpent, it is evil, and the patient

will

8 2 The Holy Guide. L l B . 4

\s\\ dye. And thus may you do of any
other queftion whereof you would be re-
ceived; you mull note the numbers in
the Figure exceed noc thirty 5 as you
are taught in the fecund Book in the
fluids of the hold Guide. The young
Vitm that fir* upon the Mountain of Dia
monds , is the fervent and childc of the
hcly Guide 5 he receives his knowledge
from Mercury in Virgo , and his compleat
nefs of body from Caput Draconis in Ge-
mini; Saturne and Venus in Libra direct
him to the light of Nature ; Fortuna Ma-
jor & populas Figucrs of Geomancy give
him heahh , and they receive it from ths
Sun anci Moon ; the Angel defends him
from the Dragon, and the fpiteful Dra-
gon bites his tail in Sagittarius in anger3
fcecaufe he cannot deftroy the yourh; Ju-
piter in Capricorne with two Ideas o{
Geomancy con fpire againft him; but he
receive Medicines and treafures from the
"Sunnc, and Jewels from the Moon, and
gives them to Mars in Cancer, and Ju-
piter in Capricorne 5 who regard him evil
for his good will ; the numbers in the
Lawrel are heavenly and defended by an
Angel ; they grant you your rtquefls;
and the numbers in the fold of the Ser-
pent deftroy all your hopes ^ being earthly

and

LlB»4- The Holy Guide. 83

and evil. And now the Medicines follow;
pra&he them to the Glory of God, and
help your difcafed neighbour. And To we
end our fourth Book.

7he end of the Fourth Book*

THE

Holy Guide:

Leading the Way to the

Golden Treafures of Nature.

Where is found the Foun-

tain of Phyfickor Medicines,

fitted to the ufe and profit

ok mean Capacities.

By John Hey don Gent. $a^©-3A Sen
vant of God3 and Secretary of Nature.

Penes Nos unda Tagi.

LONDON,

Printed by T* M. 1 66^

)

CTO f CTK) C/TO _ C&3 C7K> tffo CJ» C7K>C7Tv3 C/T>
cij£ cfl£ C£P " c#» c*W ctf# ttft? c*fl& ^; & c^*

To the Learned

?8\ EMI AH

Mount, Efq;

Caeleftial and Terreftrial Bliflc
and happinefs be wiftied.

SIR,

YOur own worlff and their attendants have
in ways of Civility, to whom I bold my
felf obliged for your Favour to meey
orced this publicly Action, which perhaps you
tay think^ slrange, that a F erf on fo wholly a
ranger as I, flxjuldtenderyoufucha peece as
bis: let w ill i I doubt not, acquit meof rude-
efs and incivility in fo doing, when you con*
derthe prefent difcourfe, as there is no hu-
lour at all in it , fo 1 hope there is Uf hazard
* Qenfure ; For here's no lav+jh mirth, no
ztyrical (haypenefs, no writing cr dijlorting
*e Genuine Frame and Compofure of wine
Oo 2 iwn

The Epiftle,

own mind) to ft out the deformity of Another s
no Kapture, m Poetry, no Enthufafme , n
no more then there is in Euclids Elements, o
Hippocrates his Aphorifmesybut though 1 hav\
beenfo bold as to recite what there is not in th\
Book: yet 1 had rather leave it to your wifdom]
to judge what there is, then be put upon jj
much modefiy my felf as to fpeak any thin
that may feem to give it any precedency abon
what is already extant in the world about Phili
fophy andPhyfak: Only I may fay thus much
that I did onpurpofe abfiain from reading ai
Ireatifes concerning this Subjecl, that I mig
the more undiflurbedly write the eafy Eman
tions of mine own Mind, and experienced
dicines'j and not be carried off from what
knew to be true 9 which fiould naturally fMk
from my felf by prepoffeffing my thoughts
the inventions of others : I have writ therefo
after no Copy but the Eternal Characters oft
mind, and thefafe^ eafie and effeilual Med
cinesfor all difeafesin the known Vh^nomentt
Nature, And all men Confulting with thi
that indeavcur to write fen fe in thefe Mattel
though it may be not done alike by all men,
could not happen but I Jhould touch upon ;
fame heads that others have, that have
before me, who though they merit very hi
commendations for their learned atchievemen
yet I hope my indevours have been fuch0 tb
though they may not be Corrivah or Partnt

m

TheEpiftie.

in their praife and credit , yet I doe mi di\\ru\l
but they may doe their flour e towards that pub~
"lick.good, under yoxir protection and patronage
j I aim at.

>>For that which did embolden metopuhUJh this
foprefent Jreatife -, and dedicate it to youjvas not
if si faid before, b ec an f 1 flatter d my fd fin
:j* Conceittthat it was better or more plaufible9
tfben what is already in the hands of men :
Sut that it was of a different fort, and has its
peculiar fervkeablenefs and advantages apart
knd diilinct from others, whofe proper prebe-
r^tinencies it may aloof off admire, but dare not
yt« any wife compare with. So that there is no
t tautology committed in recommending what
f]r have written to the public]^ view , nor any
j 'Jftning the Labours of other by thus offering
4 be fruit of mine own, for confidering there
0 ye fuch fever al complexions and tempers of
if! ten in the world, I doe notdiftruji but that as
i >hat Dr. Gulpeper and others have doney
tj as been very acceptable and profitable to many,
,i, » thh of mine may be ufefultofome or other, and
S( • feem not to have been writ in vain. Such as
„ fis,IJhall leave it here under your Patronage :
,r nd fubmit it to your judgement , if you jhall
j hiiikjt worth the while U takg cognizance ofit9
whether to perufe and confider the truth of it>
'which by Keafon of your good accomplifhmenV
t thefe, afwel as in ether parts of Learning,you
re well able to doc ) or to lay it by for thofe that
Oo 3 will:

The Epiftle.

will : as being unwilling by any importun
Solicitation to trefpafs upon your Lea fur ey o
divert your thoughts from matters of more Con
cernment , to confider of fuch things as theft
defiring mean while your Favour fo far as t
give me leave to honour youy and ( though
have not hitherto had the honour to be well kjicw
%o you ) tofubfcribe myfelfy

June, ii. 1662.

Sir,

lour woft humble
*-> ' '■ Servant^

John Heydon.

THE

HOLTg U1V E.

BOOK V,

CHAP. I.

Of Vrojeffion and preparing Rojic Cru~
cian Mtdicines.

s i.Of the Original of Gold 2. Of Sperm?.
1 .Of the firfl matter of Met alls. ^Of the dif-
ference of Gold. 5 .Of the difference of Cliwes.

6. What Salty Sulphur, and Mercury > are

7. Of the vertue of Sulphur of details S.Of
the Nature of Mercury. 9. Of Salt. 10. Of
Gold, ir. Of Silver. 12. Of the Prepara-
tion of Gold.. 13. Of Aurv.m potabile, and
Oyle of Gold. 14. How to make them. 1 «; . Ike
fecond procefs. 1 6. & 1 7. 1 he third procefs.
if.The true oyle of Gold. i9, Jhe\Child cf
Gold 70.7heSunefGo!d. ix IheMoonof
Gold. 22. The Star of Geld. 72. Jhe Rain-
bow. 2^.Howto mafy Aurumpluminans.

1. 1"* Shall now endeavour to fhew
I whenceGold had its original, and
J. what: the matter thereof is. As Na-
ture ( faith Sandivogius ) is in the will of
Oo 4 God.

R

0 TAe H0/7 Gw/de. L i B. 5 ;

God, and God created her : fo nature

made for her felf a feed, ( i. ) her will iii

the elements Now (he indeed is one, \et

(he brings forth divers things : but fhe

operates nothing without a Sperme :

whatfoever the Sperme will, nature o-

perates; for fhe is as it were the inftru-

ment of any artificers. The Sperme there

fore of every thing is better, and more

profitable then nature her felf : for thou

fbalt from nature without a Sperme, doe

as much as a goldfmith without fire, or a

husbandman without grain or feed Now

the Sperme of any thing is the Elixir.

the balfameof fiilphur, and the fame a

Humidum Radka/e is in metalls : but tc

proceed towhat concernes our purpofe

Four elements generate a Sperme, by th<

will of God, and imagination of nature

For as thegpermcof a man hath its cen

ter, or the veflell of its feed in the kid

neys : fo the four elements by their inde

Scient motion ( every one according u

its quality ) caft forth a Sperme into tht

center of the earth, where it is digefted

and by motion is fent abroad. Now th

center of the earth is a certain empr

place, where nothing can reft : and ih

four elements fend forth their qualitie

into the circumference of the cente

I ;•„; A:

hi B. 5 . T he Hoi) Guide.

As a male fends forth his feed into the
womb of the female, which after it hath
received a due portion caftsout the reft *,
fo it happens in the center of the earth,
thac the magnetick powder of a parr of
any place attracts fomething convenient
toitfelffor the bringing forth of fome-
thing , and the reft is caft forth into
{tones and other excrements. For every
thing hath its original from this fountain,
and there is nothing in the world produ-
ced but by this fountain ; as for example,
Tec upon an even table a veifd of water ,
which may be placed in the middle there-
of, and roundabout it fet divers things,
and divers colours, alfo fait, &c. every
thing by it felf : then poure the water in-
to the middle, and you (hall fee the wa-
ter to run every way, and when any
ftreame toucheth the red colour, it will
be made red by itjifthe fait, it will con-
tract the taft of fait from it, and fo of the
reft : Now the water dcth not change
the places, but the diveriity of places
changeth the water. In like manner the
feed or Sperme being caft forth by the
foure elements from the center of the
earth unto the fuperficies thereof, pafleth
through various places, and according to
the nature of the place is any thing pro-
duced;

the Holy Guide, L l B« 5

ducediifit come to a pure place of earth
and water, a pure thing is made

2. The Seed and Sperme of all things;
is but one, and yet it generates diver?&
things, as it appears by the former ex-ffl
ample. The ^perme whileft it is inl
the center, is indifferent to all forms;!
but when it is come into any deter-Il
minace place, it changeth no more its!
forme. The Sperme whileil it is in the!
Ncenter,can as eafily produce a tree, as alt
metal, and an hearb as a ftone, and one
more precious then another according to
the purity of the place. Now this Sperme
is produced of elements thus. Thefe
foure elements are never quiet, but by
jeafon of their contrariety mutually a&
one upon another, and e\ery one of its
felfe fends forth its own fubtilty, and
they agree in the center Now in this cen-
ter is the Arch&us, the fervant of nature,
which mixing thofe Spermes together
fends chem abroad , and by diftillation
fublimes them by the heat of a continual
motion unto the fuperficies of the earth :
For the earth is porous, and this vaponr
for wind, as the Philofophen call it)is by
diiYilling through the pores of the earth
refolved into water, of which all things
are produced. Let therefore as I faid be-
fore,

Lib. 5. the'Holy Guide.

foresail Tons of Art know that theSpcrme
of metals is not different from the fperme
of all things being, viz. a humid vapour.
Therefore in vain do Artifts endeavour
the reduction of metals into their firft
matter, which is, only a vapour. Now
faith Bernard Trevi fan, when Philofophers
fpeakofa firft matter, they did not mean
this vapour, butthefecond matter which
is an un&uous water, which to us is the
firft, becaufe we never find the former.
Now the fpecification of this vapour in-
to diftinft metals is thus. This vapour
pafTeth in its diftillation through the
earth, through places either cold, or hot;
if through hot, and pure, where the fat-
nefs of fulphur flicks to the fides thereof,
then that vapour ( which Philofophers
call theMercury of Philofophers ) mix-
eth and joyneth it felf unto that fatnefs,
which afterward it fublimes with it felf,
and then it becomes, leaving the name of
a vapour, un&uofity, which afterwards
coming by fublimation into other places,
which the antecedent vapour did purge,
where the earth is fubtle, pure, and hu-
mid, ills the pores thereof, and is joyned
to it, and fo it becomes gold : and where
it is hot, and fomething impure, filvcr.
But if that fatnefs come to impure places,
which are cold, it is made lead : and if

that

The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

I

that place be pure and mixed with ful-
phur, it becomes copper : for by hew
much the more pure and warm the place
is, fo much the more excellent doth it
make the metalls.

3. Now this matter of metalls is a hu-
mid, vifcous, incombuftible, fubtle fub-
ftance, incorporated with an earthly fub-
tilty, being equally and ftrongly mixed
fer minima in the caverns of the earth But
as in many things there is a twofold
un&uofity C whereof one is as it were in-
ternal, retained in the center of the
thing, left it fhould bedeilroyed by ike,
which cannot be without the deftru&ion
of the fubftance it felf wherein it is : the
other as it were external, feculent and
combuftible ) fo in all metalls except
golda there is a twofold un&uoiity: the
one which is external, fulphurous, and
inflammable, which is joyned to it by ac-
cident, and doth not belong to the totall
union with the tcaeftial parts of the
thing : the other is internal, and very
fubtle, incombuftible , becaufe it is of
the fubftantial composition of Argent vive^
and therefore cannot be deftroyed by
fire, unlefs with the deftruction of the
whole fubftance, whence it appeares what
thecaufe is that metalls are more or lefs
durable in the fire : For thofe which a-

bound

LiB.S. The Holy Guide. 7

bound with that internal unctuofky, are
lefsconfumed, as it appears in filver, and!
efpecially in gold. Hence Rofarius faith,
the Philofophers could never by any
rneanes find out any thing that could en-
dure the fire, but thatunctuous humidi-
ty only which is perfect, and incombufti-
ble. Geler alfonflerts the fame, when he
faith that imperfect bodies have fuperflu-
ous humidities, and fulphureity genera-
ting a combufhble blacknefs in them2and
"corrupting them 5 they have alfo an im-
pure, teculent & combuftible terreftriety,
fo grofs as that it hinders ingreffion, and
fufion : but a perfect metall , as gold,
hath neither this fulphurous or terreftrial
impurity;. I mean when it is fully matu-
rated and meltedj for whileft it is in con-
coction, it hath both joyned to it, as you
rcny fee in the golden Ore; but when they
doe not adhere to it fo, but that it may
be purified from them, which other met-
talls cannot, but are both deftroyed to-
gether if you attempt to feparate the one
from another : Befides gold hath fo little
of thefe corruptible principles mixed with
it, that the inward fulphur or metalline
fpiritdothfometimesandin fome places
overcome them of it felf,as we may fee in
the goldtwhichis found very pure fome-
times inthefuperficiesof the earth, and

in

The Holy Guide. Lib. 5.

in the fea fands5andismany times aspure
as any refined gold.

Now this gold which is found in fands,
snd river?, is not generated there> as
idith Gregorius Agricola in his third book
dc Re Metallic a, but is wafted down from
the mountains with fountains that run
from thence. There is alfo a flaming gold
found ( as Paracelfus faith ) in the tops of
mountaines, which is indeed feparated of
itfelffrom all impurities and is as pure as
any refined gold whatfoever. So that you
fee, that gold although it had an extrin-
fecallfulprurr and earth mixed with it,
yet it is (bmerimes feparated from it of it-
i'elfyViz, by that fiery fpirit that is in it.
Now this pure gold ( as faith Sandivogi-
iw) nature would have perfected into an
elixir*, but was hindredby the crude air,
which crudeair is indeed nothing elfe but
that extViniick luiphur which it meets
with and is joy ned to in the earth, and
which fills with its violence the pores
thereof, and hinders the activity of the
Spirit thereof } and this is that prifon
which the Sulphur ( as faith the aforefaid
author ) is locked up in, fo that it cannot
aft upon its body, viz. Mercury, and con-
coct it into the feed of gold, as otherwife
it would doe: and this is that da^ke body
fas i'Aid\Pc?iQtui) that is interpofed be-
twixt

Lib. 5. The Boly Guide. 9

twixt the philosophical Sunneahd Moone,
and keeps off the influences of the one
from the other. Now if any skilful Philo-
fopher could wittily feparate this adven-
titious impurity from gold whileft it is
yet living, he would fetfulphur at liber-
ty, and for this his fervice he would be
gratified with three kingdomes, viz. Ve-
getable, Animal , and Mineral ; I mean
he could remove that great obftru&ion
■which hinders gold from being digefted
\ nto the Elixir. For, as faith Sandivogim,
he Elixir or Tin&ure of Philofcphcr?,
s nothing elfe but gold digefted into the
ligheft degree : for the gold of the vulgar
s as an hearb without feed; but when
;old Q i. ) living gold ( for common gold
lever can by reafon that the Spirits are
>ound up , and indeed as good as dead
nd not poUibly to be reduced to that
ftivity which is required for the produ-
ing of the fperme of gold ) is ripened, it
ives a f&cd^ which multiplies even ad
rifinitum, Now the reafon of this bar*
ennefs of gold that it produceth not a
eed, is the afoiefaid crude aire., fviz. im-
*urities : You may fee this illuftrated by
his example.

5. We fee that Orenge-trees in TolonU
loe grow like other trees^ alfo m Italy +

and

IO T&e Holy Cmae* LiB»v

and elfevv here, where their native to) ie
is, and yeeld fruit* becaufe they have
ftifficient heat; but in thefe colder court*
treys they are barren and never yeeld any
fruit, becaufe they are opprefied with
cold ; but if at any time nature be wittily
and fweetly helped, then Art can perfect
what nature could not* After the famei
manner it is inmetalls h for gold would
yeeld fruit, and feed in which it might
multiply it felf, if it were helped by the
induftry ofthe skilfull artift, who knew
how to promote nature, ( i. ) to feparat
thefe fulphurous and earthly impurities
from gold. For there is a furicient hea
in living gold , if it were rrirred u
by extrinfecall heat, to divert it into
feed* By extfinfecal heat 1 doe not mea
the heat of the celeftial Sun, but tha
heat which is in the earth and ftirres u
feed, (i, ) the living fpirit that is in al
fubterraneal fperms to multiply, and in-
deed makes gold become gold. Now thi
is a heat ofputrefa&iori occasioned byaci
fpirits fermenting in the earth, as yo
may fee by this example related by Alber>
tut Magnus ) but to which the reafon wa
given by Sandivogius. There was fait
the former author, certain graines of gol
found betwixt the teeth of a dead man i
the grave ; wherefore he conceived the

wa

, —

Ll B. 5 . The Holy Guide. 1 1

was a power in the body of man to make
and fix gold : but the reafon is far other-
wife , as faith the latter author : for
faith he, Argent vive was by fome phyfiti-
an conveyed into the body of this man
when he was alive,either by un&ion or by
turbith, or fome fuch way, as thecuftom
was; and it is the nature of Mercury to
afcendtothe mouth of the patient, and
through the excoriation of the mouth to
be avoided with theflegme. Now then if
in fuch a cure the iick man dyed, that
Mercury not having pafTage our,remain;d
betwixt the teethjin the mouth, and that
carcafie became the natural veflel of Mer-
cury, and fo for a long time being (hut
\ up was congealed by its proper fulphur
1 into gold by the natural heat of putre-
faction, being purified by the corrofive
flegme of thecarkafle; but if the mineral
Mercury had not been brought in thither,
gold had never been produced there: And
this is a moft true example that as Mercu-
ry is by the proper fulphur that is in it
felf, being ftirred up atad helped by an
cxtrinfecall heat, coagulated into gold,
unlefs it be hindred by any accident, or
have not a requifiteextrmfecall heat , or
a convenient place, fo aifo that nature
doth in the bowels of the earth produce
of Mercury only gold and diver, anio-
P p ther

12 I he Holy Guide. LiB.S -

other metcalls according to the difpofi-
tion of the place, and matrix \ which
afiertion is further cleared by the rule of
redudion; for if it be true that all things
confiitof that which they may be redu-
ced into, then gold coniifts of Mercury,
becaufe (asmoft grant, &: ^w^affirms.
and many at this day profefs they can
doe)and may be reduced into it. There id
a way by which the tincture of gold which
is the foule thereof, and fixing it, may be
To fully ex traded that the remaining lub-
ilance will befublimed like Arfenick, anq
may be as eafily reduced into Mercury
Sublimate. Iffo, and if all Mercury ma)
be reduced into a tranfparent water, a
it may ( according to the procefle fe
down before , and 1 know another bet
ter and eafier way to turn a pound o
Mercury of it felf into a clear water if
halfe an fcoure, which is one of the grea
teft fecrets \ know, or care to know, to-
gether with what may be produced thena
and mall crave leave to be fllent in ) wh)
may not that water in fome fenfe, if it b
well rectified, be called a kind of livinj
gold out of which you may perhaps mak
a medicine*, and a menftrum unfit for ch<
vulgar to know > It appears now fron
what is pi emifed,that the immediate mat
lerofgoldis probably Mercury, and no

certai

L I B . 5 . The Hot) Guide. 1 3

certain fairs, and I know not what as
mari/ dream of, and that the extrinfecal
heat is from within the earth, and not
the heat of the fun, as fojne imagine ( be-
caufe in the hotteft countryes there is all,
oralmoftall gold generated ) who if they
considered that in cold countreys alfo
are,and as in Scotland were, gold mines in
King James his time,wouldbeof another
rriind then to think that the celeftial fun
could penetrate fo as to heat the earth
fo deep as moft gold lies,

6. Now having in fome meafure difcb-
veied what theintrinfecal , and extrinfe-
cal heat, and the matter of gold is, I (hall
next endeavour to explain what thofe
three principles are, z>/£.Salt,Sulphur,and
Mercury, of which Argent vive> and Gold
confift ; Know therefore that after Nature
had received from the moft High God the
priviledge of all things upon the Monar-
chy of this world , (he began to diftribute
places and provinces to every thing , ac-
cording to its dignity ; and in the firft
place did conftitute the four Elements to
be the Princes of the World, and that the
will of the moft High finwhofe will Na-
ture is placedj might be fulfilred,ordain-
ed that they mould aft upon one another
inceffantly. The fire therefore began to
aft upon the Airland produced Sulphur I
Pp 2 The

14 1 he Holy Gride. Lib. 5

The Air alfo began to ad upon the Water,
end produced Mercury : The Water alfo
began to aft upon the Earth , and produ-
ced Salt. Now the Earth not having
whereon to ac\produceclnothing,but be-
came the lubjeft of what was produced.
Fo then there were produced threeprin-
ciples > but our ancient Philofophers not
foftri&ly confidering the matter, defcri-
bed only two acts of the Elements, and fo
named but two Principles , viz. Sulphur
and Mercury ; or elfe they were willing to
be iilent in the other, fpeaking only to the
fonsof Art.

7. The Sulphur therefore of Philofo-
phers ( which indeed is the Sulphur of
Meta-ls, and of all things) is not, as many
think, that common combuftible Sulphur
which is fold in (hops,but is another thing
far differing from that,and is incombufti-
ble, not burning, nor heating, but prefer-
ving , and reftoring all things which it
is in, and it is the Calidum Innatum of
every thing, the fire of Nature, the
created Light , and of the nature of the
Sun, and is called the Sun 5 fo that what-,
foever in any thing is fiery and airy, is
Sulphury not that anything is wholly ful-
phureeus, but what in it is mcrtt thin and
fubtle, having theeffence of the natural
Fire, arid the nature of the created Light,

which

Lib. 5. + The Holy Guide. IS

which indeed is that Sulphur which wife
Philofophers have in all ages with great
diligence endeavoured to extract, and
with its proper Mercury to fix , and fo to
perfect the great Magiftery of Nature.
Now of all things in the world there is
nothing hath more of this Sulphur in it
then Gold and Silver,but efpecially Gold,
infomuch that oftentimes it is called ill-
phur, (i. e.) becaufe Sulphur is the mo ft
predominant and excellent principle in
it, and being in it more then in all things
befides.

8. Mercury is not here taken for com-
mon Argent vive\ but it is the Humidum
Jiadicaleot everything, that pureaque-
ous,unctuous, and vifcous humidity of the
matter , and it is of the nature of the
Moon, and it is called the Moon, and that
for this reafon,i>i2S becaufe it is humid, as
alfo becaufe it is capable of receiving
the influence and light of the Sun, viz.
Sulphur.

9. Salt is that fixt permanent Earth
which is in the center of every thing, that
i's incorruptible, and inalterable, and it is
thefuppcrcer and nurfe of the Humidum
Hadkale , with which it isftrongly mixt,
Now this Salt hath in it a feed, viz. its Ca-
lldum Innatum , which is Sulphur, audits
Humidum Radio ale ,which is Mercury 5 and

P P 3 yet

1 6 The Holy Guide. L \ B . 5'.

vet thefe three are not diftinft, or to be le-
parated , but are one homogeneal thing,
having upon a different account divers
names ; for in refpefr of its heat and fiery*
fubftance it is called Sulphur, in refpett of
its humidity, it is called Mercury, and in
refpectof ils terreftrial ficcityit is called
Salt , all which are in Gold perfectly uni-
ted, depurated and fixed. ,

10. Gold therefore is mofl noble and
folid of all Metals, of a yellow colour5
compared of principles digefted to th
titmoft height,and therefore fixed.

1 1. Silver is in the next place of dig-
nity to Gold, and differs from it in dige-
ftion chiefly; I faid chiefly, becaufe there
is fome fmall impurity befides adhering
to Silver.

12. Now having given fome fmall ac-
count of the original matter, firit, anc
fecond, and manner of the growth oil
gold, I (hall in the next place fet dowAe
fome curiofities therein , and preparatiotlfcii
thereof. The preparations are chieflfc
three, viz. Aurum potabile , which is tbfliry
mixtion thereof with other Liquors ; Oililj
of gold, which is gold liquid by it felM
without the mixture of any other Liquoila ]
and the tintture , which is the extra&iojjl ;
of the colour thereof.

L i B • 5* The Holy Guide 1 7

Dr. Culpepers famous Aurum potabile,
and 0) I of Gold,

1 3. Diflblve pure fine gold in Aqua regis
according to Arc (the Aqua regis being
made of a pound of Aqua, fortis^ and four
ounces of Sale Armnniack difhlled toge-
ther by Retort in fand ) which clear folu-
tionput into a large glafTe of a wide neck,
and upon it pour drop by drop Oyl of
Tartar made per deliquiutn, until the Aqua
regis , which before was yellow , become
clear and white ■-, for that is a fign that all
calx of gold is fettled to the bottome*
then let it ftand all night , and in the
morning pour off the clear Liquor, and

(wafh the calx four or five times with com-
mon fpring water,being warmed, and dry
11 : it with a mod gentle heat.
( 14. Note, and that well, that if the
heat be too great , the calx takes fire pre-
sently like Gun-powder and flies away to
f chy danger and loffe ; therefore it isbeftto
- dry it in the fun, or on a ftone , ftirring it
i diligently with a wooden fpattle. To this
l! calx add half a part of the powder of
ju fulphur 5 mix them together, and in an
open crucible let the fulphurburn away
in the fire,putting a gentle fire to it at the
firft, and in the end a moft ftrong fire for
P p 4 the

*8 The Holy Guide. LiB*5.

the fpae'e of an hour, that the calx may in
fome manner be reverberated, and be- 1
come nioftfubtle, which keep in a violll
clofe ftopt for your ufe.

15. Then make a Spirit of Urine after
this manner , viz Take the Urine of a
healthy man drinking Wine moderately,
put it into a gourd , which you mud flop
clofe , and fet in horfe-dung for the fpace
of forty dayes,then diftill it by a Limbeck
in fand into a large Receiver, until all the
humidity be diftilled off. Re&ifie this
Spirit by cohabitation three times, that
the Spirit only may rife. Then diftiil it in
fand by a glaffe with a long neck,having a
large Receiver annexed, and clofed very
well to it , and the Spirit wi\l be elevated
into the top of the veflel like chriftal
without any aqueous humidity accompa-
nying of it. Let this diftillation becon-
tinued,unril all the Spirits be rifeii.Thefe
chriftals muft te diflblved in diftilled
rain-water, and be diftilled as before 5 this
muft be done fix times , and every time
you muft take frefh rain-water diftilled.
Then put thefe chriftals into a glafsbolt-
head,whichciofe Hermetically, and fet in
the moderate heat of a Balneum for the
fpace cf fifteen dayes, that they maybe
1 educed into a molt clear Liquor. To this
JLiciuor add an equal weight of Spirit of

Wme,

Lib. 5- The Holy Guide. 1 9

Wine, very well rectified, and let them be
digefted in Balneo the fpace of twelve
dayes, in which time they will be uni-
ted.

16. Then take the calx of gold above-
fa id , and pour upon it of the (e united
Spirits as much as will cover them three
fingers breadth, and digeft them in a gen-
tle heat, until the Liquor be tinged as red
as blood ; decant off the tin&ure, and
put on more of the aforefaid Spirits, and
do as before till all the tincture be extract-
ed j then put'all the tin&ed Spirits toge-
ther, and digeft them ten or twelve dayes,
after which time abftract the Spirit with a
gentle heat, and cohobate it once; and
then the calx will remain in the bottome
like an Oyl as red as blood,and of a plea-
fant odour,and which will be diflblved in
any Liquor. Whereof this Oyl may be
the Succedanenmoi true Gold. If you di-
ftil the fame folution by Retort in fand,
there will come ever, after the firft part of
the menftruum , the tintture with the
other part thereof , as red as blood, the
earth which is left in the bottom of the
veffel being black, dry, fpongious and
light. Themenftiuwm muft be vapoured
away, and the Oyl of Gold will remain
by it felf, which muft be kept as a great
treafure : and this is Dr. Anthonys durum
fotabUt, four

ao The Holy Guide. Li B.5.

Four or eight grains of this Oyl taken
in what manner focver, wonderfully re-
frefheth the Spirits, and works feveral
wayes, efpecrally by fweat, and cures all
Diieafes in young or old.

The true Ojlof Gold.

18. Take an ounce of Leaf-gold, dif-
folve it in four ounces of the rectified wa-
ter of Mercury , exprefledpage75. digeft
them in horfe-dung the fpace of two
moneths , then evaporate the Mercurial
water, and at the bottome you (hall have
the true Oyl of Gold , which is radically
diilblved.

Another procefs hereof you may fee
page 71.

?he Child of Gold.

19. Diffolve pure Gold in Aqua regia,
precipitate it with the oyl of fand into a
yellow powder, which you muft dulcifie
with warm tvater, and then dry it; (this
will not be tired as Aurum fulminam ) this
powder is twice as heavy as the Gold that
wasputin, thecaufe of which is thefalt
of the flints precipitating it felf with the
gold. Putthis yellow powder into a cru-
cible, and make it glow a little^and it will

be

L» B. 5. The Holy Guide. 2 f

be turned into the higheft and faireft pur-
ple that ever you fa w, but if it Hand lon-
ger;, it will be brown. Then pour upon ic
the ftron^eftfpiritof fait (Tor it will dif-
i'olve it better then any Aqua, regis) on
which diflTc/lurion pour on the bell rectifi-
ed Spirit of Wine 3 and digeft them toge-
ther 3 and by alougdigeition, fome part of
the Gold will fall to the bottome like a
white fuow, and may with Borax, Tartar
and (alt Nitie be melted into a white me-
tal as heavy as gold, and afterwards with
Antimony may recover its yellow colour
agam. ; then evaporate the fpirit of Salt,
and of Wine, andthegold Tincture re-
finainethat thebottome, and is of great
vertue.

The Sun of Gold,

20. Take of the aforefaid yellow Calx
or Gold, precipitated with Oylof fand,
one part, and three or four parts of the
Liquor of fand, or of cryftal j mix them
well together, and put them into a cruci-
ble in a gentle heat at firft , that the moi-
fture of the Oil may vapour away ( which
it will not do eafily, becaufe the drinefs of
the fand retains the moifture thereof, fo
that it flyeth away like molten Allum , or
Borax) when no more will vapour away,

encreafe

2 j The Holy Gmde. L ! B • 5

encreafe your fire , till the crucible be rec
hot, and the mixture ceafebubling; ther
put it into a wind furnace , and cover i»
that no a(hes fall into it,and make a ftrom
fire about it for the fpace of an hour,anc
the mixture will be turned into a tranfpa^
rent Rubie. Then take it out , and beai
it, andextraft the tintture with fpirito
Wine, which will become like thin blood
and that which remains undiilblved, maj
be melted into a white metal as the for
mer.

7he Moon of Gold.

21. Hang plates of Gold over the fume
of Argent vive, and they will become
white,inable, and fluxil as Wax. This is
called the Magneiia of Gold, as faith ?a-
racelfuS)\n finding out of which (faith he)
Philo top hers, as Ik onus Aquinas, and Ru*
pefcijfa, with their followers, took a great
deal of pains, but in vain ; and it is a me-
morable fecret, and indeed very fingular
for the melting of metals, that are not ea-
sily fluxil. Now then Gold being thus
prepared, and melted together with the
Mercury, is become a brittle fubftance,
which mult be powdered , and -out of it a
tin&ure may be drawn for the tranfmu-
cimiof metals.

Lib. 5- "ibe tioly Guide. a$

Ihe Star of Gold.

12. Take half an ounce of pure Gold,
diflol ve it in Aqua regit, precipitate it witli
Oyl of flints, dulcifie the Calx with warm
water,and dry it, and fo it is prepared for
your work. Then take Kegulus M&rtis
jtpowdered, and mix it with three parts of
3 fait Nitre , both which put into a Cruci-
J ble 3 and make them glow gently atfirft,
:hen give a ftrong melting fire ., and then
:his mixture will become to be of a pur-
ple colour, which then take out, and beat
:o powder, and add to three parts of this
Dne part of the calx of Gold prepared as
before; put them into a wine furnace in a
[trong crucible , and make them melt as a
netai , fo will the Nitrum antimoniatumm
he melting take the calx of gold to it fclf,
ind dhTolve it , and the mixture will be-
ome to^be of an Amethyft colour. Let
his ftand flowing in the fire till the whole
naflebeas tranfparentasaKubine.which
foil may try by taking a little out and
ooling of it. If the mixture do not
[low well, caft in fome more fait Nitre.
,:When it is compleatly done, caft it forth,
'being flowing, in:o a brazen (VIorter, and
it will be like to an oriental Rubine; then

I powder it before it be cold, then put it in-
9

24 the Holy Guide. LiB.5.

to a Viol, and with the fpirit of Wine ex.
ti aft the tincture.

This is one of thebeft preparations ol
Geld, and of moft excellent ufe in Medi«:
cine,

Ihe Rainbow.

23. Firftmake a furnace fit for the pur-
pofe, which muft be clofe at the top, and
have a pipe, to which a recipient with a
flat bottome muft be fitted : When thi
furnace is thus* fitted, put in three or foui
grams* not above at owzt^oiAurum fulmi-
nant , which as Toon as the furnace is ho
flyeth away into the recipient througl
the pipe like a purple coloured fume, and
is turned into a purple coloured powder
then put in three or four grains more,and
do as before, till you have enough fioweri
of Gold ("that which flyeth not away,bui
remaineth at the bottome , may with Bo-
rax be melted into good Gold ) then take
them out, and pour upon them re&ifie(
fpirit of Wine tartarizated , and digel
them in afhes till the fpirit be coloured
blood-red, which you muft then evapo-i
rate , and at the bottome will be a blood-
red tincture of no fmall vertue.

Auruni

;i

1,!B.$. The Holy Guide. 75

Aiirv.m fulminans.

Take the pureft gold you can get , pour
on it four times as much Aquaregia , flop
your glafle with a paper, and fet it ill
wamiafhes, fo will the Aqua regiam an
hour or two take up the gold,and become
a yellow water, it" it be ftrong enough :
(be Cure that your Gold hath no Copper
El it,for then your labour will be loft) be-
caufe the Copper will be precipitated with
the gold, and hinder the firing thereof )
then pour on this yellow water drop by
drop , pure Oyl of Tartar made^r deti-
quiunty fo will the Gold be precipitated in-
to a dark yellow powder,and the water be
clear. Note that you pour not on more
Oyl of Tartar then is fufficient for the
precipitation j otherwife it will diflolve
part of the precipitated Gold to thy pre-
judice. Pour off the clear Liquorby in-
clination, and dulcifie che calx with diftil-
k4 rain-water warmed Then fet this
calx in the Sun, or fome warm place, to
dry,but take great heed,and efpecial care,
that you fet it not in a place too hot^for it
will prefently take fire and fly away like
thunder, not without great danger to the
ftanders by,if the quantity be great. This
is the common way to make Auxum fulmi-

turns-

2 6 The Holy Guide. Lib. 5.

nam 9 and it hath confiderable difficulties
in the preparation. But the bell way is
to precipitate Gold diffblved in Aqua re~
gis by the fpiricof Salt Armoniack or of j
Urine ; for by this [way the Gold is madc|
purer then by the other , and giveth a fai;
greater crack and found. Note that thefc
fait of the fpirits which is precipitated!
with the Gold, muftbe warned a way 9 and!
the Gold dulcified as before.

A few grains of this being fired give a
crack and found as great as a Musket when
it is difcharged, and will blow up any
thing more forcibly far then Gunpowder3
and it is a powder that will quickly and
eafily be fired.

This is of ufe for Phyfick as it is in
powder, but efpecially it is ufed in ma
king the foregoing tin&ure.

CHAP,

LIB. 5. The Holy Guide. 27 ^

CHAP. II.

I. Of Acetum Thilofophicum. ?. Of Aqua
Mars Scorpio. 3 1 Of aqua Mars Subtilitatis.
4. How Filius SoIis Celejiis is nude, s How
Stella vita is made 6. How F ilia Luna is
made. 7. How Ignis vita is made 8. Of
. Adjutrix vita, y. Of Salusvita. 10. Of
Sanguis vita. 11. Of Amicus vita. 1 2. Of
' Snccus vita. 13. Of aqua Venus, Virgo.
14. OF aqua Mars Aries. i<>. Of aqua
Sol, Cancer. \6. Of aqua Saturn, Libra.
*7- 0/ Medulla vita. 18- Of aqua Mars
Luna, 19. ^K<r Mars, Cancer. 20. ^7#£
Ktftf&r, L^rtf. »i. ^«^ Fftf/tf, Scorpio.
■22. Aqua Sol,' Virgo. 23. ^^ Jupiter
Taurus. 2 \ Aqua Mars Cancer. 2 > . ^?tf£

Mercury, Virgo. 2{* Aqua Jupiter Luna.

27. Pz/d'tf cc/ ?%. Acquifitio Luna,

q 9, A qua Luna,., Scorpio. 3 o. Fortuna \ia<*
jorSol. 31. Rubens Sol. 32. P^r &?/.

33. Aqua Jupiter. 34. Sol Mars, Aries.

7,^. Of mahjntr Spirits. 36. To make a

Vegit able yield his fpirit : and of the mri*

derful veriues of thefe waters.

T

Acetum Thilofophicum.

Akc Honey, Sale melted, of each a
pound 9 of the ftrongeft fpirit of
Q^9 Vinegar

•jgP Ihe Holy Guide. Lib. $[

Vinegar two pound 5 digeft them for the)
fpace of a fortnight, ormore, then diftil
them in afhes', cohobate the Liquor upont
the feces three or four times , then rettitic
the fpirit.

Note that they muft be done in a lar^ej
glafs-Gourd.

Aqua. Mart is Scorpi*.

J

2. Take of the beft rectified fpirit o
Wine, with which imbibe the ftrongeft un
flaked Lime, until they be made into ;
pafte, then put them into a glafs-Gourd
and diftil off the fpirit in afhes : Thi
fpirit pour on more frem Lime , and do a
before 3 do this three or four times , anc
thou (halt have a very fubtle fpirit, able t(
diffolve moft things , and to extraft the
vertue out of them.

2

Aqua, Mart is Suhtiliatis.

3 . Take oil Olive, Honey, rectified (pi-
nt of Wine,of each a pint, diftil them al
together in afhes, then feparate all the
flegm from the oyls, which will bediftin-
piifhed by many colours, put all theft
colours into a Pelican, and add tc
them the third part of the EfTencc o
Bakn j and Sallendine, digeft them fo

th

0

1

i

Ll B. 5. The Holy Guide. 29

the fpace of a month. Then keep it for
life.

This Liquor is fofubtle that it penetra*
: teth every thing.

.

lilius Soli Ceteris is made thus.

4. Take of Cinnamon, Cloves 5 Nut-
J megs. Ginger, Zedoary, Galingal, Long-
[tpepper, Citron-pill, Spikenard, Lignum-
Aloes,Cububs,Cardamums,Calamus aro-
;maticus,Germander, Ground-pine,Mace,
white Frankincenfe,Tormentil,Hermoda-
§{ky\syAur potabile0the pith of Dwarf- el der^
"tan ounce ofeach: Juniper Berries,BayBer-
a*ries,the feeds and flowers of Motherwort ,
7 the feeds of Smallage,Fennel,Anmfe, the
leaves of Sorrel, Sage, Felwort,Rofemary,
: Marjoram,Mints, Penny- royal, Stechados,
the flowers of Elder, Roles red, white,
of the leaves of Scabious, Rue, the letter
Moonwort,Egrimony,Centory,Fumitarys
Pimpernel,Sowthinle,Eyebright, Maiden-
hair, Endive, red Saunders, Aloes,of each
two ounces, pure Amber, the Beft Rhu-
fbarb,of each two drams, dryed Figs, Ran
iins of the Sun, Dates (toned, fweet Al-
'monds, Grains of the Pine, of each an
'ounce,of the beft Aqua viU to the quantity
of them all, of the beft hard Sugar a
pound,of white Honey half apound,then
Q q 2 add

go 1 be Holy Guide. LlB. s .

add the root of Gentian, flowers of Ro fe-
mary, Pepperwort, the root of Briony,
Sowbread, Wormwood, of each half art
ounce. Now before thefe are diftilled,
quench Gold , being made red hot often-
times in <he forefaid water 5 put therein
oriental Pearls beaten fmall an ounce,
and thendiftd it after twenty four hours
infufion.

This is a very Cordial water 3 good a
gainft faintings and infection.

Stella vit£, is made thus,

5. Take of the rind of Citrons dryed.
Oranges, Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon, ol
4gach two ounces; the roots of Flower- de
iuce,Cyprus,Calamus Arematicus,ZecJoa-
ry,Galingal,Ginger,of each half a pound
of the tops of Lavender, Rofemary, o
each two handful j the leaves of the Bay-
tree, Marjoram, Balm,Mints,Sage,Thime,
flower of Rofes white , Damask, of each
half a handful , Aurum ptabile a dram;
Rofe-water four pints , the beft Whit*
wine a gallon : Bruife what mult be brui-
fed , then infufe them all twenty fom
hour«, after which diftil them.

This is of the fame vertuc as the fo
mer.

Bin

1

L * B. 5- The Holy Guide 3 1

_ _.

filia Lung Celefiisy is made thus,

6 Take of Clove*, Galingal, Cubebs,
Mace,Cardamums, Nutmegs, Ginger, of
each a dram,theurice of Celendinehalf a
pine, fpirit of Wine a pint, White wine
three pints : lufufe all thefe twenty four
hours , and then diftil off two pints by a
Limbeck.

This water is very good again ft wind in
the ftcrnackand head.

Ignis vit£y U made thus,

- 7. Take a gallon of Gafcoign wine,

i|3inger, Galingal, Cinnamon, Nutmegs,

3rains, Annifeeds, Fennel feeds, Carro-

vay feeds of each a dram , Aurum potabile,

111 ounce, Sage, red Mints , red Rofes>

fhime, Pellitory,Rofemary, wild Thime,

Camomile, Lavender, of each a handful :

ikat the Spices fmall, and bruife the

iearbs letting them macerate twelve

-lours, ftirring them now and then, diftil

hem by a Limbeck or copper Still, with

ts refrigeratory , keep the firft pint by it

felf,and the fecond by it felf.

Note that the firft pint will be the hot-
er, but the fecond the ftrongcr of the
ngredients.

CLq 3 This

3* the Holy Guide. Lib 5.

Th is water is wel 1 known to comfort all
the principal parts.

Adjutr'w vit£%

8. Take of red Poppy- cakes ( after thj
water hath been diftilled from them in J
cold Still ) not over dryed two pound
pour upon them of the water of red Pop
py a gallon and half, Canary wine thre
pints 5 add to them of Coriander feed
bruife d four ounces, of Dill feed bruife
two ounces , of Cloves bruifed half a
ounce , of Nutmegs fliced an ounce , c
Rofemary a handful, three Oranges ci
in the middle, diftil them in a hot Still
tothe water put the juice of fix Orange;
and hang in it half an ounce of Nutmet
fliced, and as much Cinnamon bruife
two drams of Cloves, a handful of RofiL
maiy cut fmall , fweet Fennel feeds bru
fed an ounce, ofRaifinsof theSunftonem
half a pound, being all put into a b
which maybe hanged in the water (t
velTel being clofe ftopt ) the fpace of
month , and- then betaken out and c
away, the Liquor thereof being Brit pre!
fed out into the forefaid water, and <fl
Aunimptabile a dram.

This water is of wonder vertue in Sifli
fets and Plurifies 5 compofeth the fpir

caufe

LlB. 5. The Holy Guide. 33

I caufeth reft, hclpeth digjeftion if two, or

I three, or four ounces thereof be drunk,

^nd the Patient compofehimfelf to reft.

Salus vita,

9. Diftil green Hyfop in a cold ctil till
I you have a gallon and half of the Water ,
A to this put tour handful of dryed Hyfop, a
Pi handful of Rue 3 as much of Rofemary,
* Uorehound , Elecampane-root bruifed,
T land of Hoife-radim- root bruifed, of each
e four ounces, of Tobacco in the leaf three
a ounces, Annifeed bruifed two ounces, two
( quarts of Canary wine, let them all ftand
:i in digeftion two dayes, then diftil them,
" and in the water that is diftilledput halt a
Impound of Pvaifins of the Sun ftoned, of
f iLicorifh two ounces , fweet Fennel feeds
fi bruifed two ounces and a half, Ginger
diced an ounce and a half , and let them
be infufed in Frigido the fpace of ten days,
then take them out.

This water fweetned with Sugar-candy,
and drunk to the quantity of three or
four ounces twice in a day, isjverygood
ffor thofe that are Ptifical,it ftrengtheneth
'the Lung?, attenuates thick fle^m, opens
obftructions , and is very good to com-
fort the ftomack.

0.4 4 San.

54 The Holy Guide. LiB5;

Sanguis vit£„

10. Take of Wormfeed bruifed eight
ounces, the (havings of Harts-horn two
ounces, of Peach- flowers dry'ed an ounce.
Aurum ptabilevi dram , of Aloes bruifed
half an ounce, pour on tltefe the water oi
Tanfie,Rue,Peach flowers, and of Worm
wood, of each a pine and half, let then
being put into a glafs-veffel.be digefted th«
fpace of three dayes,i then diftil them
cohobate this water three times.

This water is very excellent againft th(
Worms 5 it may be given from half ai
ounce to three ounces, according to tin
age of thePjtient.

Amicus vit<e.

ii. Take of Kos vitridi ("which is tha
Water that is diihlled from Vitriol in th
calcining thereof) two quarts,in this pu
of Rue a handful, of Juniper berries brtii
fed an ounce , of Bay berries bruifed hall
an ounce, Piony berries bruifed fix drams
Camphire two drams , Rhubarb fliced ai
ounce, Aurum fotabile two drams, digef
thefe four days in a temperate Balneoythen
diftil them in a glafs veffel in afhes , an
there will come over a water of no fmal
venue* I

r

Li B. 5. The Holy Guide.

Ic cures Convuliions m Children efpe-
daily, ic helps alfo the Vertigo, the Hyite-
rical pai!ion,and Epilep(ie,it is very excel-
lent againft all ofTeniivc vapours and wind
xhat annoys the head andftotnack.

Ic may be taken from two drams to
two ounces.

Succm vit<e,

12. Take of Wormwood, Broom blof-
Xbms,of each a like quantity, bruife them,
and mix with them lome Leaven, am lee
them (land in fermentacion in a cold
place the fpace of a week, then difhll
hf them ivi a cold Still till they be very dry :
take a gallon of this water, and half a
gallon of the fpiric of Urine, pour them
upon two pound of dryed Broom blof-
foms, half a pound of HorfeRadilh roots
dryed, three ounces of the belt Rhubarb
fliced , two ounces of fweec Fennel feed
bruifed, and an ounce and a half of Nut-
megs; lee them digeft a week being put
1 into a glafs veflel in a temperate talneo -7
then prefs theLiquor hard from the feces,
put this Liqupr in the faid vefTelagain,and
: to it put three ounces of fweec Fennel
feeds bruifed , Licorifh diced two ounces,
digeft them in a gentle heat the fpace of a
week,then pour it off from the feces, and

add

!

56 The Holy Guide. Lib- 5.

of Aurum ptabile^ two drams, and keep
it clofe ftopt.

This water being drank from the quan-
tity of an ounce to four ounces every
morning , and at four of the clock ia
the afternoon, doth feldome fail in cu-
ring thedropfie 5 it ftrengtheneth alfo the
Liver, is very good againft gravel in the
back, (tone, cures the Scurvy, Gout, and
fuch difeafes as proceed from the weak-
nefs and obftru&ions of the Liver.

Aqua Venus Virgo.

13. Take of Anifeed three ounces,Cum-
minfeed three drams. Cinnamon half an
ounce, Mace, Cloves, Nutmeg, of each
a dram, Galingal, three drams, Calamus
Aromaticus dryed, half an ounce, The
dryed rind of Oranges two ounces, Bay
berries half an ounce, Aurum potabile an
ounce.

Letall thefe being bruifed, be macera-
ted in fix pints ofMallago wine 48 hours,
then bedifhlled in 'Balnea till all be dry.

This water being drank to the quanti- '
ty of an ounce or two at a gme do eafe
the gripings of the belly and ftomach,
very much.

AquA

Lib. 5- The Holy GnUe. 37

Aqua Mars Aries.

14. Take of black cherries bruifed
with their kernels, a gallon, of the flow-
ers of Lavander three handful, half an
ounce of white Milliard feed bruifed, mix
thefe together, then put feme ferment to
them and let them (land clofe covered the
fpaceof a week, then diftill them in Bal-
neo t'i\\ all be dry.

This water being dranketo thequanti-*
tityof an ounce or two or three, doth
much relieve the weaknefs of the head,
and helps the Vertigo thereof, as alfo
(trengthen the linews and expell windi-
nefs out of the head and (tomach.

Aqua Sol0 Cancer*

i<$. Take the root of the great Burre,

frefh, Swallow wort, frefn, Aurum pota-

bilean ounce, The middle rind of the

root of the Afhtree, of each two pound ;

cut them fmall3andinfufe them 24 hours,

in the beft White wine and Rue vinegar,

of each five pints, then diftill them in

BalneouWM bedry, puc to the water as

much of the Spirit of Sulphur fer Cawpa-

tiam^ as will give it a pleafant acidity, and

to every pint of the water put a fcruplc

and

38 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

and a half of Camphire cut fmall, and
tyedup in a bag, which may continually
hang in the water.

This was a famous water in Germany a-
gainft the plague, peftilence and Epide-
mical difeafes : it caufeth fweat wonder-
fully if two or three ounces thereof be
drank and the patient compofehimfelf to
fweat.

Aqua Saturn, Libra.

16. Take of the beft fpirit of Wine a
gallon, Andromachus treacle, fix ounces,
Myrrhe two ounces, The roots of Colts-
fort, three ounces, Sperma Ceti, Aurum
Potabile, Terra Sigillata, of each half an
ounce , the root of fwallow wort , an
ounce, Dittany , Pimpernel , Valerian
root, of each two drams, Camphire, a
dram. Mix all thefe together in a glafs
veffel, and let them ftand clofe, ftopt the
fpacc of eight dayes in the Sun.

Let the Patient drink of this a fpoonfui
ortwo,andcompofe himfelf to fweat.

Medulla vit<e.

17, Take three pints of Wufcadine,and
boil in it Sage, and Rue of each a handful
till a pint be wafted, then ftrain it and fee
it over the fire again, put thereto a dram

of

l;

B.$. The Holy Guide. 39

of long Pepper, Ginger and Nutmeg of
each half an ounce being all briufed toge-
ther : then boil them a little, and put
thereto half an ounce of Andromachus
treacle, and three drams of Mithridate,
and a quarter of a pint of the beft Ange-
lica water, an ounce of Aurum Potabile.

This water ( which , as faith the Au-
thor, muft be kept as your life, and above
all earthly treafure ) muft be taken to the
quantity of afpoonful or two,morning 8c
evening; if you be already infe&ed, and
fweac thereupon, if you be noc infe&ed,
afpoonful is fufficient, half in the mor-
ning and half at night ? all the plague
time under God ( faith the Author) truft
to this, for there was never man, woman,
or child that failed of their expectation
in taking of it . This is alfo of the fame
efficacy nut only againft the plague, but
pox, meafles, furfcits, &c.

Aqua Mars, Luna.

18. Take of Andromachus his Treacle,
five ounces, the beft Myrrhe, two ounces,
and half, the beft Saffron half an ounce,
Camphire two drams, ^urum Potabile an
ounce. M'X them- together, then pour
upon them ten ounces of t lie beft fpirit of
wine, and let them ftiind 24.-, hours in a

warm

40 *he Holy Guide . Li B . 5 j

warm place, then diftill them in Balneal
with a gradual fire, cohobate the fpiritj
three times.

This fpiric caufeth fweat wonderfully,
and relifts all manner of infc&ion.

It may be taken from a dram to an]
ounce in fome appropriate Liquor.

Aqua Mars, Cancer.

19. Take of the roots of Biftort, Gen-
tian, Angelica, Tormentil, of each ten
drams. Pimpernel ten drams, Bay berriesj
Juniper berries, of each an ounce, Nut-
meg, five drams. The (having of SajfTafras
two ourices,Zedoary half a dram, Aurum
Pbtabile a dram, White Sanders three
drams, the leaves of Rue, Wormwood
Scordium, of each half a handful, the
flowers of Wall flower, Buglofle, of each
a handful and halfjAndromachusTreaclej
Mithridateofeach fix drams Infufe them
aiLin three pints of the beft White wine
vinegar the fpace of eight day es in Frigido
in glafs veffeis j then diftil them in Bal-
neo.

This Spirit is very good to prevent
them that are free horn infection, and!
thofe that are already infe&ed, from the
danger thereof, if two or three fpoonful
thereof be taken once in a day , with

tweating

Lib. 5- The Boh Guide.

fweating after, for thofe thac are infe&ed,
but without fweatingfor others.

Aqua Veneris, Libra.

20. Take of the middle rind of the root
.of Ambruifed, two pound. Juniper ber-
ries bruifed, three pound, Aurumpota-
bile a dram, Venice turpentine thac is
very pure, two pound and a half. Put
, thefe into twelve pints of fpring water in
a glafs veflel well ciofed, and there let
them putrifie in horfe dung for the fpace
of three months, then diftil them in afhes,
and there will come forth an oil and a
water, feparate the one from the other.

Ten or twelve drops of this oil being
taken every morning in four or fix fpoon-
fuls of the faid water, diffolves the gravel
and ftone in the kidneys, moft wonder-
fully.

Aqua Veneris, Scorpio.

21. Take the juice of Radifh, Lem-
mons, ofeach a pound and half : Waters
ofEetony, Ton fey, Saxifrage, and Ver-
min, of each a pine. Hydromel, and Malm-
fey, ofeach two pound. In thefe Liquors
mixed together, infufe for the fpace of
tfourorfivedayesinagentle Balneo, ju-
niper

I

42 The Holy Guide. L1B.5J.

niper berries ripe and newly garnered be-;
ing bruifed, three ounces : ciie feed ofi
Gromel, Bur-dock , Pvadifti, Saxifrage,*
Netties, Onions, Anife, and Fennel, of)
each an ounce and half, the four coldj
ieedsjthe feed of great Mallows,ofeach iid
drams, the Calx of .Eg-mel*, Cinnamon,!
of each three drams, of Camphire twoj
drams, let all be well (trained and diftifl
led in afhes, and afterwards an ounce ol
Aurumpotabile.

Two ounces of this water taken every
morning, doth wonderfully cleanfe tin
Kidneys, qrovoke Urine, and expell the
Stone, efpecially if you calcine the, feed
and extraft the Salt thereof with the faid
Water.

Aqua 5o/, Virgo.

<i2. Take Plantain, Ribwort, Bone
wort, wild Angelica, R.ed-mints,Betony,
Egrimony, Sanacle, Blew-bottles, White
bottles, Scabius , Dandelion, Avens,
Honey-fuckle leaves 5 Bramble-buds.
Hawthorn buds and leaves ; Mugwort,
Dafie roots, leaves and flowers ■> Worm
wood, Southernwood, of each one hand
•full: Boil all thefe in a pottle of White
wine, and as much Spring water, till one
half be wafted; and when it is thus boiled
flrainit frogi the hearbs, and put to

hali

balf a pound of hony, and lee ic boil a
liictle at ter : then put it into bottles, and
<eep ic for your ufe.

Note that thefe hearbs muft be gathered
in May only, but you may keep them dry,

I md make your water at any time.

This water is very famous in many
Counties, and it hath done fuch cures
Ifl curing outward and inward Wounds,
jimpofth umes , and Ulcers , that you
rould fcarce beleeve it, if I mould re*
jitethem to vou : alfo it is very good to

II eal a fore mouth.

]( The Patient muft take three or four
cnooufuls thereof morning and evening,
'i ad in a fhort time he (hall find eafe, and
ideed a cure, unlefs he be fo far decli-
ed as nothing almoft can recover him.
If the wound be outward, it muft be
i afhed therewith, and linnen cloths wee
i t the fame be applyed thereto.
in ■ y-

m i Aqua Jupiter, lauru:. -

ii

lit ! 93. Take of Lavender flowers a gallons

ro tar upon them of the belt (pint of wine

irte gallons : the veffel being clofeftop-

djlec them be macerated together in

e Sun for the fpace of fix daye?, then

MA'\\ them inanAlembick with its refri-

r:ratoiy, then take of Aurum potabile a

l\ r dram-,

^ the Holy Guide. Lib,

dram, the flowers of Sage, Rofemar)!'!
Betony; ofeach a handful, Borage, Bujfl
lofs, Lillie of the valley, Cowflips, ofeau.
twohandfuls ; Let all the flowers be fre»
and feafonably gathered, and maceratl]
in a gallon ofthe belt fpirits of Wine, ail
mixed with theaforefaidfpirit of Lave,
der, adding then the leaves of Balm, Mi
therwort, Orange tree newly gathere
the flowers of Stechados, Oranges, B;
berries, ofeach an ounce. After a con\
nientdigeftionlet them be diftilled agai
then adde the outward rinds ofCitrons i
drams,thefeed of Piony husked,fix dran
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Mace,Cardamu n
Cubebs, of yellow Sanders, of each h;
an ounce, Lignum Aloes one dram, t!
beftjujubs, the kernels taken out, hal;
pound. Let them be digefted for
fpace of fix weeks, then Aram &filtre t
Liquor, to which adde of Aurum potabi
an ounce,prepared Pearl, two drams, pr
pared Emrald a fcruple, Ambergryfe
Musk , Saffron , Red Rofes , Sanders
of each an ounce. Yellow Sanders, Rin<
ofCitrons dryed,of each a dram. Let
thefefpicesbe tyed in a filken bag
hanged in the forefaid fpirit.

Jfi

Li B. 5 + tie Holy Guide. 4 5

Aqua. Mars, Cancer.
1

24. Take the leaves of both forts of
it Scurvie-grafs, being made very clean, of
a teach fix pound : let thefe be bruifed, and

ihe juice preifed forth : to which adds

(the juice of Brook-lime, Water creiTeSj
in pf each half a pound, of the belt White

wine, eight pints, twelve whole Lemons
in cut, of the frefh roots of Eriony four
jii pound, Horfe Radifh two pound, of the
si bark of Winteran, half a pound, of Nut-
11 megs four ounces. Let them be macerated
in three days and difhlled.
L Three or four fpoon fills of this water

taken twice in a day,cures the Scurvy pre-

fently.

Aqua Mercury Virgo]

25 . Take of frefh Caftoreum two oun-
ces, flowers of Lavender frefh, half an
ounce , Sage , Roiemary, of each two
idrams, Cinnamon three drams, Mace,
Cloves of each a dram, the beft rettiiied
(Spirit of Wine, threepints. Let them be
digefted in a Glafs ( two parts of three
being empty )ftocc clofe with a bladder
and Cork two dayes. in warm aflies 5 then
diftil the fpirit in Balneo, aud keep it in a
R r 2 glafs

i

I

46 The Holy Guide. LlB.^I

glafsclote ftopt. If you would make i]
Wronger, take a pint of this fpirit, and a:;
ounce of the powder of Caftoreum ; pu
them into a glafs and digeft them in
cold place for the fpacc of ten dayes, an.
then (train out the Spirit.

This fpirit is very good againft fits c
the Mother, paffions of the heart whicl
a rife from vapours , &c.

Aqua Jufiter^ Luna?

26. Take of the leaves of the greate
Salladinc together with the roots there
of, three handfuls and a half, Rue, tvv«
handftls, Scordium,four handfull, Dit
tany of Crete, Carduus, of each a hand
fill and half, root ofZedoary, Angelica
of each three drams, the outward rind o
Citrons, Lerwmons, of each fix drams
the flower of Wail-giHy-flower, an ounce
and half, Red Rofes, thelefTer Ceutoiy,
of each two drams, Cinnamon, Cloves
of each three drams, Andromachus hi
Treacle, three ounces, Mithridate, a]
ounce and half, Camp hire, two Temples
Trochifccs of Vipers, two ounces, Mace,
two drams, Aurum Potabile, one ounce;
Lignum aloes , half an ounce, Yellow
landers, a dram and half, the feeds o:
Cardans., an ounce, Citron^ iix drams.

C

I B • 5 • The holy Gride 47

putthofe things that are to be cut, and
[ ee them be macerated three dayes in the
, >eft Spirit of Wine, and Mufcadine, of
^ ach three pints and half, vinegar of Wall
L'illy-flowers, and the juice of Lemrrfons,
nfeachapint, let them be diftill^ in a
rlazed veflel in Balneo.
I After half the Liquor is diftilled off, let
[hat which remains in the veffel be ftrain-
Id through a linnen cloth, and vapoured

way to the thicknefs of honey, which

nay be called
This water is a great Cordial, and good

gainft any Infection.

Puella Softs.

27- Take of Ginger a pound,long Pep-
er, and black Pepper, of each half an
>unce, of Cardamums three drams, of
jrainsan ounce, powder them and put
hem intoaglafs with half an ounce of
he belt Camphire, diftilled vinegar two
[>ound, digeftthem a month, then fepa-
ate the vinegar by expreilion , which
,'nuft putrific a month, and then be cir*
;:ulatedfor the (pace of a week, then niter
and thou haft as powerful a Sudoritick
is ever was or can be made.

The dofe is from a dram to half an
Rr 3 ounc?5

48 The Holy Guide. L1B.5,;

, __ — v

ounce, and to be drank in a draught oil
poflet- drink.

Acquifitio Luna.

28 Take of the juice of the green (hale
of Walnuts four pouud,the juice of Pvu<
three pints, Carduus , Marygold, Bain
of each two pints, the root of Butter
burrefrefh a pound and half, Burre, An
gelica, Mafter-wbrt fre(h, of each half
pound, the leaves of Scordium3four hand
fuls,old Andromachus treacle,Mithridat<
of each eight ounces, Aurumpotabile
dram, the beft Canary, twelve pints, th
(harpeft Vinegar, fix pints, the juice
Lemmons, two pints. Digeft them tw
days in horfe hung, the veifel being cloi
flopped -j then dilttl them in fand.

Aqua Luna0 Scorpio.

29. Take of Sugar candid, onepounc
Canarie Wine, fix ounces , Rofewater
four onnces. Make of thefe a Syrup, an
boil it well, to which adde Aurum po
tabile a dram, of Aqua Celeltis, two pints
Ambergryfe , Musk, of each eighteei
grains, Saffron , fifteen grains , yellov
Sanders infufed in Aqua Celeftis, twc
drams.

Fortunt

Lib. 5. The Holy Guide. 49

Fortuna. Major Sol.

30. Take of the root of Briony, four.
>ound, the leaves of Rue, Mugwort, of
:ach two pound,Savin dryed,three hand-
ills, Mother-wort, Nippe, Penny-royal,
(>f each two handfuis, Garden Baiil, Gre-
renfian Dittany, of each a handful and
lalf , the rind of yellow Oranges frefh,
bur ounces, My rrhe, two ounces, Aurum
x)tabile, an ounce, Caftoreum, an ounce,
he beft Canary wine, twelve pints. Let
it( hem be digefted four dayes in a fit veflel,
hen diftil them in Balneo.

Kubeus So!.

31. Take of the beft Tobacco in leaves,
rut fmall, four ounces, Squils two ouuces,
Nutmegs diced half an ounce ; put thefe
nto three pints offpring water, a pint of
vVhitewine vinegar, diftil them in a hot
StilorAlembick. .

If thou wouldft have itftronger, thou
'mayeft put this water on frefti ingredi-
ents, and diftil it again.

A little quantity of this water is a moft
fafe and effectual vomit, and may be ta-
ken from the eldcft to the youngeft, if (b
R r 4 be

50 The Holy Guide. Lib.<

— — — — — — ■ - — -"• ■■ ■

be you proportion ithe quantity to t\
ftrength of the Patient.

You may dulcifie it with fugar or fyri
ifyoupleafe.

Tuer Sol,

$2. Take green Walnuts gathered
bout Midfumrner, Radifh roots, of eat
bruifed two parts, of diftilled Wine
negarfour parts, digeft them five dayc
then diftill them in Balneo.

This being taken to the quantity of tv
fpoonfuls or three, caufeth eane vomitin

Aqua Jupiter. 1 1

33. Take of Scammony an ounce,He
modacVyls two ounces , the feeds <
Broom, of the leffer Spurge, of Dwai
Elder, of each half an ounce, the juic
of Dwarf Elder, of wild AfTes cucumbe;
of black Hellebore, the frtfh flower
Elder, of each an ounce and half, Poljj
podium fix ounces, of Sene three ounce;
Red fugar eight; ounces, common diftil
led Water fix pints.

Let all thefe be. bruifed, and infufed
the water twenty four hours, then be di
/li lied in 'Balnea.

This water may be given from tw<:

Lib. 5. T he Holy Guide. 5 1

/drams to three ounces, andii purgeth all
manner of humours, opens all obftrutti-
ons and is pleafant to be taken, and
they vvhofe ftomachs loath all other phy-
fick,may take this without any offence.

After i t is diftilled there may be hanged
a little bag of Spices in it, as alfo it may
befweetned with fugar, or any opening
fyrup.

Sol) Mars, Aries.

34. Take of oil of Cloves well rectified
half an ounce, in it diflblve half a dram of
Camphire, adde to them of the Spirit of
Turpentine four times re&ified,in which
half a dram of Opium hath been infufed,
half an ounce.

A drop or two of this Liquor put into a
hollow tooth with fome lint, eafeth the
tooth-ack prefently,

fbe Spirit of any vegetable may fuddenlyj at
any time of the year be made thus.

5$. Take of what Hearb,Flower,Seeds3
or Roots you pleafe, fill the head of the
Stil therewith , then cover the mouth
thereof with a courfc Canvas, and fet it
on the Stil, having firft put into it fack, or
low Wines. Then give it fire,

If

52 the Holy Guide. LlB*5«

If at any time thou wouldft have the
fpirit be of the colour of its vegetable*
then put of the flowers thereof dryed a
good quantity in the nofe of the Stil.

To makgany vegetable yeeld its fpirit quickjy.

36. Take of what vegetables you pleafe,
whether it be the feed, flower, root, fruit,
or leaves thereof, cut or bruife them
(mail* then put them into warm water,
put yeft or balm to them, and cover them
warm, and let them work three days as
doth Beer, then diftil them,and they will
yeeld their fpirit eafily.

CHAP,

LiB.5. The Holy Guide. 53

CHAP. III.

I . Of the EJfence of a Hearb ■ ?, Of the ap-
pearing of the Idea of a Herb in a Glaffe.
3. Of a wonderful famous Medicine expe-
rienced by the Rofie Crucians. 4. Of its
vertue. ^. How to turn guickcfilver into
water without mixing any thing with it, and
to make thereof a good purgative and dia-
phoretic}^ Medicine, 6. Of the Fragrant
Oylof Mercury. 7. its vertue s : 8. itsuje.
9. to make a Spirit of Honey. 10. Of the
Quintcflence of Honey, 1 1 . Of the Oj I of
Honey. 12. Of the EJfence of Honey:
13. Of itsvertues: i^.ufe. i«^. Fortuna
Vener island of thevertues^andufe. 16. Aqua
M^gnanimitatU. 17. The famous Refto-
rative of Plato and Pythagoras. 1 8. Of
Paracelfus Homunculus. 19. Tbeprocefs.
7 o . The fecond Rule. 21. The third Rule.
22. Of thevertues andufe of it. 23. How
to mak^e artificial flejh^nd of itsvertues.

To reduce the whole Hearb into a liquor, which
may well be called the Eflence thereof.

V mmTm

Akc the whole Hearb with flowers
and roots;make it very clean, then

knufis

54 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

bruife it ill a ftone Morter , put it into a
large glafs veffel , fo that two parts of
three may be empty : then cover it ex-
ceeding clofe , and let it ftand in putrefa-
ction in a moderate heat the fpace of half
a year, and it will be all turned into a
water.

To makf an EJfenceof any Hearby which being
put into a gUffe, and held over a gentle fire,
the lively form and Idea of the Hearb will
appear in the Glaffe.

2. Take the foregoing water, anddiftil
it in a gourd glafs (the joynts being well
clofed) in afhes5and there will come forth
a Water and an Oil,and in the upper part
of the veflel will hang a volatile Salt. The
oil feparate from the water 9 and keep by it
felfj with the water punfie the volatile
fait by dhTol ving5filtring,and coagulating.
The Salt being thus purified imbibe with
thefaidOyljUiiti! it will imbibe no more;
dig eft them well together for a month in
a veflel hermetically fealed. And by this
means you (hall have a moft fubtil EfTence,
which being held over a gentle heat will
fly up into the glafle, and reprefentthe
perfect Idea of that Vegetable whereof it
istheEflence.

Lib, 5. The Holy Guide. 55

Of a wonderful famous Medicine experienced
by the Rofie Crucians.

3. Take Calx of Saturn^ or elfe Minium,
pour upon it fo much fpirit of Vinegar as
may cover it four fingers breadth ; digeft
them in a warm place the fpace of twen-
ty four hours,often Itirring them, that the
matter l'ettle not too thick in the bot-
tome •, then decant the Menfiruum , and
pour on more; digeft it as before, and this
do fo often until all the faltnefs be ex-
tracted : Filter and clarifie all the Mf»-
firuum being put together, then evaporate
it half away, and fet the other part in a
cold place till it cryftallize. Thefe Cry-
ftals duTolve again in frefh fpirit of Vine-
gar , filter and coagulate the Liquoragain
intoCryftals, and this do fo often, until
they be fufficiently impregnated with the.
fait Armoniack of the Vinegar as with
their proper ferment. Digeft them in a
temperate Balneo 5 that they may be re(ol-
ved into a Liquor likeOyl. Then dithl
this Liquor in (and in a Retort, with a
large Receiver annexed to it, and well
clofed, that nofpirits evaporate, together
with the observation of the degrees of the
fire ; then there will diftil forth a fpirit of
fuch a fragrant fmeil, that the fragrancy

of

i

56 iht Holy Guide. Lib. 5.

of all flowcrs3and compounded perfumes,
are not to be compared to it. After Di-
fhllation when all things are cold ., take
out,and can* away the black feces which is
of no ufe. Then feparate the yellow oil]
which fvvims on the top of thefpirit, anctj
the blood red oil which finks to the bot-
tom of it: Separate the flegm from the
fpirk in Balneo. Thou (halt by this mean
have a moll fragrant fpirit that even ra
vifheththcfenfesj andfo balfamical^thac
it cures all old and new fores inward and]
outward/and fo cordial3that the dying ar
with admiration revived with it.

4. They that have this Medicine need
fcarce ufe any other either for inward of
outward griefs.

How to turn Gtuich^filver into a water without
mixing any thing withit^and to ma^e thereof
a good purgative and Diaphoretic^ medi
cine.

5. Take an ounce of Quick-filver not
purified^ put it into a bolt head of glafle,
which you rnuft nip up,fet it over a ftrong
fire in (and for the fpac e of two month?,
and the Quick-filver will be turned into
a red fparkling Precipitate. Take this
powder5 and lay it thin on a Marble in a
Cellarforthe fpace of two months 3 and

it

Lib. 5. rhe n°b ^nide. 57

it will be turned into a water which may
be fafely taken inwardly 3 it will work a
little upward and downward , but chiefly
by fweat.

Note that you may fet divers glafles
with the fame matter in the Tame Furnace,
that fo you may make the greater quantity
at a time,

I fuppofe it is the Sulphur which is in
theQuick-filver , and makes it To black,
that being ftirred up by the heat of the
lire fixcth the Mercury.

A fragrant Oyl of Mercury.

6. Take of Mercury feven times fub-
limed, and as often revived with unilaked
Lime0as much as you pleafe, diflolve it in
fpirit of Nitre in a moderate heat , then
abftraft the fpirit of Salt, and edulcorate
it very well by boyling it in fpirit of Vi-
negar ; then abftraft thefpirit of Vine-
gar, and warn it again with diftilled rain
water; then dry it, and digeft it two
months in a like quantity of the beft re-
ctified fpirit of Wine you can get. Diftii
them by Retort, making your fire mode-
rate at the beginning, afterwards increa-
fin^ it ; then evaporate the fpirit of Wine
mBatneo, and there will remain inthebot-
tome a moll fragrant oil of Mercury.

7. This

58 The Holy Guide. L1B.5,

7. This oil fo purifies the blood by
fweat and urine , jhat it cures all diftem*
pers that arife from the impurity there-
of^ as the venereal Difeafe, & c

8. The truth is , they that have this
Medicine well made, need but few other
Medicines : the dofe is four or five drops.

To tHdks a fpirit of Honey,

g. Take good ftrong ftale Mead, other*
wife called Metheglin , as much as thou
pleafeft , diftil it in a Copper Still or Lim-
beck, with its refrigeratory., and it will
yield a fpirit like Aqua vit£.

Ibe Quinteffence of Honey is made tb us,

10. Take of the pureft Honey two
pound , of Fountain water one pound 5
boyl thefe together till the water be
boyled away, taking off all thefcum that
rifeth; then take the Honey and put it
into aglaiTe, four parts of five being emp-
ty 5 clofe it well , and fetin digeftion a
whole year ^ and thou (halt have the Ef-
fence of Honey fwirnming on the top in
form of an oyl, being of as fragrant fmell
as any thing in the world; the flegm will
be in the middle, and the feculent matter
in the bottom 3 of a dark colour ? and
(finking fmell. Some

LIB. $. The Holy Guide. 59 ^

Some make the Gyuintefience of Honey aft.r
this manner.

li, Take as much Honey as thou plea-
feft of the beft, put it into a Gourd of
glaffe, tirft diftiloff the flegm in Balneoy
then extract the tin&ure out from what
remains, with the faid water, then calcine
the remaining feces, and extract from
thence the fait with the forefaid water,
being diftilled off fom the tintture 5 cal-
cine the fait and melt it in a Crucible,
then let it diffolvein a Cellar h then again
evaporate it away , and thou (halt have a
molt white fait, which let imbibe as much
of the tincture as it will ^ digeftthem for
three moneths, and thou malt have an
EfTenceof Honey.

An Eflence of Homy may be made thus.

12. Take of Honey well defpumated
as much as you plenfe, pour upon it as
much of the beft re&tfied fpirit' of Wkve
as will cover it five or fix fingers breaddfj
digeft them in a glade. velTel well clofed
(the fourth part only being full ) in a
temperate Balneo the fpace of a fortnight,,
'[for till the fpirit be very well tinged , then
decant off thefpirit^ and put on more til!

I S f ali

BCI

i'o The Holy Guide. Lib, 5;

all the tintturebe extracted , then put al
thefe tin&ures together , and evapora
the fpirit till what remains begin to be!
thickifli at the bottome, and of a golden
colour.

13. This is a very excellent Eflence oir
Honey,and is of Co pleafancau odour,that'
fcarce any thing is like to it.

14. It is fo cordial, that iteven revives
the dying , if two or three drops thereof
be taken in fome cordial water.

Fortune Veneris.

15. Take of Pifmiresor Ants (the big?
geft,that have a fowrifh fme\l,are the belt)
two handful §3 fpirit of Wine a gallon, di-
geft them in aglalfe velTelclofe fliut the
fpace of a month, in which time they will
be diflblved into a Liquor, then diftd
them in Balneo till all be dry. Then put
the fame quantity of Ants as before , di-
geft and diftil them in the faid Liquor as
before: do this three times, then aroma-
tize the fpirit with fome Cinnamon .

Note that upon the fpirit will float an
oyl, which niuft befeparated.

This fpirit is of excellent ufe to ftir up
the Animal fpirit $ in fomuch that John
Cafmiire Pal fg rave of the Rhene , and Sey-
/r/Vof Gotten, General againft the Turks,

did

Lf B. 5 . 1 he Holy Guide. 6 f

did a lw ayes drink of ic when they went
to fight 5 to encreafe magnanimity and
courage j which it did, even to admira-
tion.

This fpirit doth alfo wonderfully irri-
flte them that are ilo> Hful to Venery.

U alfo provoketh Urine even to admi-
aticn.

It doth alfo wonderfully irritate the
juries that are dulled, and deaded with!
hy cold d idem per.

This oyl doth the f*me effects , and in*
eed more powerful ly.

This oyl doth 5 belides what is fpoken
f the fpirit, help deafiiefs exceedingly.;
wo or three drops being dropped into
hq ear after it is well fy ringed , once in a
ay3 for a week together.

It helpeth alfo the Eyes that have any
Im growing on them,being now and then
ropped into them.

Aq a Magnanimitath is made thus.

|S. Take of Ants or Pifmires a hand*
J,of their Eggs two hundred, of Milie-
:des3 Le. Wdod-lic6 one hundred, of
:ts one hundred and fifty^ digeft all
efe in two pints of fpirit of Wine, being
ry well impregnated with the brighteit
k>c. Digeft them together the fpace?
Sfa «*

6 ? 'ihe Holy Gv ide , LiB.

of a month, then pour off the clear fpirirj
ajul keep it fare.

This water or fpirk is of the fame ver-|
tue as the former.

"Ihe famous lieftorative of Plato and Py tha«
gora; ufM by Paracelfus.

17. Firftwe rmifttunderftand that there
are three, acceptions of the word Homutf
cuius in Favacelfus, which are thefe.

1. Homunculus is an image made in th
place or name of 'any one j that it ma)
contain an Aftral and invisible man]
wherefore it was made by Numbers.

a homunculus is taken for an artificia
nian^madeof Spetma humanuw b'lafculinum\
clir;erled into the fhape of a mankind then
nourimed andencreafed with the e(Tenc<
of mans blood 5 and this is not repug
ninttothe p.iTibility of Nature and Art
but is one of the created wonders 0
God, which he ever did tuffer mortal mat
to know. I mail not here fet down th
lull procefs , becaufel think it unlit tot)
done , at leart to be divulged ; beiide?
neither this nor the former is for my pre
fent purpole.

3. Homunculus is taken for a molt excel
lent Arcanum, or Medicament, extra&et
by thefpagyrical Art, from ihcchiefef

ftaffi

L:B5- The holy Guide 63

of the natural fife in man, and according
to this acception I (hall here fpeak of it :
But before lihfvv ycu the procefs , 1 fhall
give you an account why this Medica-
ment is railed Homunculu^ and it is this.

iS. No wife man will deny that the
ftafFe of life is the nutriment thereof, and
that thechiefeft nutriment is Bread and
Wine, being ordained by God and Na-
ture above all other things for the fuiten-
tation thereof. Beiides Paracelfus prefer-
red this nutriment for the generation of
the blood and fpirits , and the forming
thence the Sperm of this Komnnculus.
Now by a futable alluftonthe nutriment
is taken for the life of man,and efpecially
becaufe it is tranfmiued into life: and
in , the life is taken for the man ; for
unlefsaman be alive he is not a man, but
thecarcaisonlyof a man , and the bafeft
pare thereof, which cannot perfectly be
taken for the whole man, a^ the nobleft
part may. Inasmuch therefore as chenu
triment, or aliment of life, may be called
the lifeor* man ; this nutriment extract d
out of Bread 8c Wine,& being by dige ion
exalted into the hig'heit purity of a nu-
tritive fubilance, and confeqiienrly be-
coming the life of man , being fo poten-
tially, may Metaphorically be called Ho*
unculuL

S f 3 io. The

it!

64 the Holy Guide. LlB 5.

1 9. The procefs, which in part fnall be
fee down allegorically is thus; Take the1
beft Wheat, and the beft Wiiie, of each a
likequantity3put them into a gbfs^whtcl
you muft hermetically cLofe : then let
them putrine in horfe-dung three dayes,
or until the Wheat begin togerminate, or
to fp rout forth, which then muft be taken
forth and bruifed in a Morter , and be
prefled through a linnen cloth , and
there will come forth a white juice like
milk; you muftcaft away the feces : Lee
this juice be put into a giafs , which multi
not be above half full y flop itclofe, and]
fet it in horfe-dung as before,for the fpace1
of fifty dayes. If the heat be temperate,
and not exceeding the natural heat of a
man, the matter will be turned into a1
fpagyrical blood,and flefh,likean Embryo.
This is the principal,and next matter, out;
of which is generated a twofold fperm,i
viz. of the father and mother, generating1 «t
the Homuncitlus , without which there caa| to
be made no generation, whether humane^
or animal.

20. From the blood and flefh of this
Embryo lee the water be feparated in
'Balneo , and fhe air in afhes, and both be
jkeptby themfelvcs, Then to theieces
of the latter diliillation iec the water
the former? diftilhtion be added, both

which

Li B^ 5 • The Holy Guide.

<?5

[which* muft fthe glafs being clofeftoptj
mtriiie in Balneo the fpaceof ten dayes^,
tfterthis diftil the water the fecond time,
If which is then the vehiculum of the firftj
(together with the fire, in afhes. then diftil
pff this water in a gentle Balnea , and in
;:he bottome remains the fire , which muft
be diftilled in allies. Keep both thefe a-
>art. And thus yon have the four Ele-
ments fe pa rated from the Chaos of the
"mbryo.

2 1 . The feculent earth is to be reverbe-
rated in a clofe veffel for the fpace of four
Hayes : In the interim diftil off the fourth,
l>art of the firft diftillation in Balnea , and
[:aft it away ; the other three parts diftil
afhes, and pour it upon the reverbera-
ted earth,and diftil it in a ftrong fire ; co-
liobateitfour times, and foyou (hall have
very clear water, which yon muft keep
»y it felf : Then pour the air on the fame
Mirth* and diftil it in a ftrong fire ; and
[here will come over a clear,fplendid,odo-
fiferous water, which muft be kept apart :
Softer this pour the fire upon the firft wa-
:r, and putrifie them together in Balneo
le fpaceof three dayes, then put them
:ito a Retort,and diftil them in fand,and
lere will come over a water tailing of
he fire *. let this water be diftilled in BaU
eo9 and what diftils off keep by it felf, as
S f 4 alfo

6 6 The Holy Guide. L » B. 5 .

alfowhat remains in the bottome 3 which
is the rire3keep by it felf. This laft diftilled
water pour again upon its earth , and let
them be macerated together in Balneo for
the fpaceof three dayes5 and then let all
the water be diftilled in fand , and let
what will arife befeparated in Balneo^ and
the rdluence remaining in the bottome
be referved with the former refidence.
Let the water be again poured upon the
e^arth, be a bft rafted 3 and feparatedas be-
fore, until nothing remain in the bot-
tome 3 which is not feparated in Balneo.
This being done3 let the water which was
laft feparated be mixed with thereiidue of
its fire, and be macerated in Balneo three
or fouf dayes,and all be diftilled in Balneo^
that can z^cend with that heat 3 and let
what remains he diftilled in afhes from the
fire 3 and what mall be elevated is aerial i
and what remains in the bottcme is fiery.
Thefetwo laft Liquors aire afcribed to the
two firft principles3the (ormer to Mercury, jtii{
and the latter to SuJphur, and are ac-|iiu
counted by it Crvcians>not aselenients^buev
their vital parts,being asit were the naturjtt
ral fpirits 2nd foul , which are in them bypa;
nature. Now both aretobe recYihedgandJI^
reflected into their centerwith a circular
inotionj that this Mercury may baprepa*
icd with its water, being kept clear , and

odoriferous,

Iftl

nrl
k\
k\
lei

L > B. 5 . The Hot) Guide. 67

odoriferous , in the upper place, but the
Sulphur by it felf. Now it remains that
we look into the third principle ; let the
reverberated earth, being ground upon a
marble, imbibe its own water, which did
above remain after thelafl: feparation of
the Liquors made in Balneoy fo that this be
the fourth part of the weight of its earth*
and be congealed by the heat of afhes
into its earth, and let this be done fo oft,
the proportion bring obferved , until the
earth hath drunk up all its water. And
laftly , let this earth be fublimedinto a
white powder as white as fnow , the feces
being caft away. This earth being Cubit*
med and freed from its obfeurity , is the
true Chaos of the Elements; for it con-
tains thofethmgs occult, feeing it is the
fait of nature, in which they lye hid, be-
ing, as it were, reflected in their center.
bcA This is the third principle of ?aracelfmy
:0{B and the fait, which is the matrix, in which
[ciiim the two former fperms , viz. of the man
e m and woman, the parents of the Homuncu-
iMfohviz- of Mercury and Sulphur, are to
rM be put , and to be clofed up together in a
silI glazen womb, fealed with Herm?s (eals,
I for the true generation of the Hcmuucu-
lusy produced from the fpagyrical Em-
bryo ; and this is the tiomvnculus or great

Arcanum^

m
w
it
hi
k
id
it
irii

68 The Holy Guide. Lib* 5.

Arcanum , otherwife called the nutritive
Medicament of Faracelfus.

22. This ttomunculus or nutritvive Me-
dicament, is of fuch vertue, that pre-
fendy after it is taken into the body, it
is turnetiinto blood and fpirits. If then
Difeafes prove mortal becaufe they de-
ftroy the fpirits , what mortal Difeafe
can withftand fuch a Medicine, that
doth fo foon repair , and fo ftrongly
fortifie the fpirits, as this Womunculus, be-
ing as the ovl to the flame, into which
it is immediately turned, thereby re-
newing the fame> By this Medicament
therefore, as Difeafes are overcome, and;
expelled , fo alfo youth is renewed, and
gray hairs prevented.

An artificial way to mafy Flejh.

23. Take of the crums of the beft
wheaten Bread as foon as it comes
forth out of the Oven , being very hot,
as much as you pleafc, put it into a
glaffe veflel, which you muft prefentljr
hermetically clofe. Then fet it in di-
geftion in a temperate Balneo , the fpace
of two months, and it wdl be turned into
a fibrous fiefh.

If any Artift pleafe to exalt it to a
(iigherperfe&ion, according to the Rules

of

11

Hi

LiB.5- The Holy Guide. 69

of Art , he may find out , how great
a nourifher and reftorative Wheat is 5
and what an excellent Medicine it may
make.

Note that there mud be no other moi-
ftu re put into the glafTe befides what is in
the bread it feif.

CHAP.

7.6 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

CHAP. IV.

I . The way to raife a dead Bird to life. ' 2. Of
generating many Serpents of one^ Sec. 2 . To
fur? fie and refine Sugar. 4. To maty a
Vegetable grow and become more glorious
then any of its [pedes. 5 . To make a. Sal-
let grow in two or three hours . 6. To make
the Idea' of any plant appear in a glafs 3 as
if the very plant it felf were there. 7. Ta
make Fine- trees appeare in Turpentine.
S. To maty Harts-home appeare in a Glafs.
9. To make Golden Mountains to appear in
a glafs. 10. To make the world appeare in
a Glafs , 1 t . To maty four Elements ap-
peare in a Glafs 12. To make a perpetual
Motion in a Glafs. \^.To make a Luminous
water that fhdll dive light by night . 14. Of-
a room that (hall feem on fire^ if you enter
with a Candle. \^. To maty a powder that
by fp'ntin* upon it (hall be inflamed. 1 6 . To
maty a Loadjione draw a. Naile out of a-
foft.

The way to raife a dead bird to life^ arid for,
the generating many Serpents of one', loth
which are performed ly putrefaction.

-A

Bird is reftored to life thus, viz.
Take a Bird, put it alive into a

gcurd

IjL'B.S- The Holy Guide. 7 1

■gourd glafs, and feal it up hermetically,
Iburn ic to afhes in the third degree of
(fire, thenputnfie it in horfe dung into a
mucilaginous flegm, and fo by a continu-
ed digeftion that flegm muft be broughc •
to a further maturity ( being taken out,
and put into an oval vcffel of a juft big-
inefs to held \t) by an exaft digeftion,and
itfill fo become a renewed bird : which
faith Paracelfus is one of thegreateft won-
ders in Nature, and fhews the great ver-
tue of putrefaction.

2. Cut a Serpent into fmall piece?,
•which put into a gourd glafs which you
muft Hermetically feal up, then putrifie
them in horfe dung, and the whole Ser-
pent will become living again in the glafs,
in the form either of worms or fpawneof
fifties ; Now if thefe worms be in a fitting
manner brought out of pucrefa&.on ,.
and nouriftied ; many hundred serpents
will be bred out of one Serpent, whereof
every one will beas bigas the firft. And
as it isfaidofthe Serpernts fo alfo many
other living creatures may be raifed, and
reftored again.

To fur; fie and refine Sugar.

4. Make a ftrong Lixivium of Calx vive,
wherein diftblve as muchcourfe Sugar as

the

7 2 iht Holy Guide. Ll B. 5

the Lixivium will beare, then put in the

white of Eggs ( or 2. to every part of the

Liquor ) being beaten into an oil * ftir

them well together, and let them boy! a

little, and there will arife a feu mi which

muft be taken offas long as any will arife,

then poure all the Liquor through a great

Woilen cloth bag, and fo the feces will

remain behind in the bag, then boyl the

Liquor again fo long till fome drops of ic

being put upon a cold plate, Witt, when .

they be cold, be congealed as hard as fait., I

Then pour out the Liquor into pots, or

moulds made for that purpofe, having I

hole in the narrower end thereof, which

muft be flopped for one night after, and

after that night be opened, and there will

a moift fubftance drop forth which is

called Molofles, or Treakle ; then with

potters clay cover the ends of the pot,and

as that clay iinketh down by reafon of the

finking of the Sugar, fill them up with

more clay, repeating the doing thereof t if

the Sugar fhnnk no more. Then tajie in

out till it be hard, anddryed, then bind

it up in papers.

"Xo wakf a. vegetable grow and become more g!o*
mus then any ofitsfpecies.

ffi

it

11

:

4« To reduce any vegetable into its

three

Lib. 5. ibe Holy Guide. 73

tthrce firft principles, and then ioyn them
[together again being well purified, fsc put
the fame into a rich earth, and you (hall
lhave it produce a vegetable far more glo-
brious then any of its fpecies.

Note how to make fuch an efTencejlook
linto the firft book, and there you fhali
■fee the procefs thereof.

To make a flant grow in two or three boures.

5. Take the afhes of MoiTe,nK)iften them
Uith the juice ef an old dungil being firft
preiTed forth, and llreined,then dry them
[t little, and moiften them as before, do
his four or five times, put this mixture
being neither very dry, nor very moi(r3
jntofome earthen, or metalline veffell >
indin it fet the feeds of Lettice, Purflain
>r Parfly ( becaufe they will grow fooner
hen other Plants ) being firft impregna-
|ed with the eiTenceofa vegetable of its
mix fpecies, ( the procefs whereof you
jiall find Book 1 .page 52,33.^111 they be-
in to fprout forth, then 1 fay, put them
n the laid earth with that end upwards
1 hich fprouts forth ; Then put the veffel
tuoa gentle heat, and when it begins to
liy, moiften it with fome of thefaid juyce
fdung.

Thou

74 The Holy Guide. L1B.5,

Thou maieft by this meanes have a Sal-i
let grow whilcft flipper is making ready.

Ho make the Idea, of any ?Lnt appear in a
glafc as if the very flantitfeifwere there, j

6. Theprocefsof this thou maift fee3j
pag, 32. and therefore I need not here z\
gain repeat it, only remember that if you
put the flame of a candle to the bottom of
the glafs wheie the effencc is, by whicli
it may be made hot; you will fee that
thin fubftance which is like impalpable
allies or fait fend forth from the bottom
of the glafs the manifeft forme of a vege-
table, vegetating and growing by littW
and little, and putting on fo fully the
forme of ftalkes, leaves and flowers in fuchj
perfect and natural wife in apparent
(liew, that any one would believe verily
thefametobe naturally corporal, when
as in truth it is thefpiritual Idea, endued
with a fpiritual efTence : which ferveth!
for no other purpofe, but to be matched
with its fitting earth, that fo it may take
unto it felf a more folid body. This ma-!
dowed figure aflbon as the veffel is takeni
from the fire, returnes to its aflies againi
and vanifheth away, becoming a Chaos,
and confufed matter.

1o

L l B . 5 . The Holy Guide. 7% &

To make Firre-trees appear in Turpentine.

. 7. Take as much Turpentine as you
>leafe, put it into a Retort, dift.il it by
legrees ; when all is diflilled eff* keep the
letort frill in a reafonable heat,that what
lumidity is ftil remaining msy be evapo-
ated^and it become dry : Then take this
)fffrom the lire and hold your hand to
he bottom of the Ptetort, and the Tur-
Dentine that is dried ( which is called Co-
pphonia^) will crack afunder in feverai
laces, and in thnfecrackesof chaps you
ball fee the perfect effigies or Fine-trees
,/hich will there continue many months.

0 make Hat ts- born Jeemingly to grow in a
glafs.

8. Take Harts-horn broken into (mail
ieces, and put them into a glafs RetorC
o bediftilled,ahd you (hall fee the glafs
obefeemingly full of horns, which will
Dntinue there fo long till the volatile fait
ome over. •

0 make golden mountains as it were appear e in
a gla%

<?. Take of Adders eggs half a pound3

?6 ihe Holy Guide. Lib. 5,

put then into a glafs Retort, dillil them
rgreesj when ali is dry, you (hall fee
she feces at the bottom turgid and pufFedlj
up, and (eem to be as it were golden
mountains, being very glorious to be-
hold. .

-
Tfl make the r.prefentation of the whole Worh
in a Glrfs.

10. Take of the pureft fait Nitre
much asyou pleafe, of Tin half fo muc
mix them together 9 and calcine th
hermetically, then put them into a Rl
tort, to which annex a glafs rcceiver,aij
lure them well together; let there I
leaves of gold put into the bottom there
of, then put fire to the Retort, until va
pours ari!e that will cleave to the gold
augment the. lire till no more fumes i
fcend, then take away the Receiver, aii(j
clofe it rjermetically, and make a lamj
lire under it, and you will fee prefeutei
in it the Sun , Moon, Stars , Fountains
Flowers, Trees, fruits, and indeed even
ail things, which is a glorious light to be
hold.

T0 makgfour "EtyntenU appear in a glafs

. I . Cubtle powder of Jet %r

ouric

0

Ll B. 5. Ike Holy Guide, 77

ounce and half, ofthe oil of Tartar made
per Veliqi turn ( in which there is not one
drop of water befides what the Tartar ic
felf contracted )two ounces, which you
muft colour with a light green with Var-
degreafe, of the pureft Spirit of Wine
tinged with a light blew with Indico, two
mcesof the bett rectified Spirit of Tur-
mtine coloured with a light red, -with
adder two ounces. Put all thefe into a
lafs, and (hake them together*, and you
fhall fee the Jet which is heavy and black
Till to the bottomland repefeut the earth;
lext 3 the Oil of Tartar made green,
representing the element of water, falls :
pon thatfwims the blew fpirit of Wine
hich will not mix with the oil of Tartar;
nd represents the element of air : upper-
mod wil fwim the fubtle red oil of Turpen-
tine which reprefents the element of fire.

It is ftrange to fee how after fhaking all
rhefe together they will be diitmftiy .fc-
parated the one from the other. If it be
well done, as it is eafie enough to do, it is
1 moft glorious fight.

To rnnke x perpetual motion in aglafs.

12. Take feven ounces of QnickfHver5

as much Tin, grinde them well together

with fourteen ounces of Sublimate diflcU

T t 2 ved

jS 'i he Holy Guide. LiB.S.

ved in a cellar upon a Marble thefpace of
four days , and it will become like oil
Olive 5 which diftil in fand, and there
will lublimea dry fubftance*, then put the
water which diftills off back upon the
earth, in thebottome of the Still and dif-
folve what you can; filter it, and diftil
it again, and this do foure or five times,
and then that earth will be fofubtle, that
being put into a vial, the fubtle atonies
thereof will move up and down for e?
vet.

Note that the vial orglafsmuft be clofe
ft opt, and kept in a dry place

1o make a Luminous Water, that (ball give
light by night.

z

13. Takethe tailesofGlo-wormes,p
them into a gla-fs ftil, and diftil them in
BalneOy pour the faid water upon more
frefh tailes of Glo-wormes, do this four
or five times, and thou (halt have a mod
Luminous Water, by which thou maift
fee to read in the dark night.

Some fay this Water may be made of
the skins of Herrings •, and for ought I
know it may be probable enough : for I
have heard that a fliole of Herrings coni-
ming by a (hip in the night have given a
great light to all the fliip.

L i B . 5 . Tie holy Guide y 9

Ir were worth the while to know the
true reafoa why Glo-wormes, and Her-
rings and fome other fuch like things
fhould be luminous in the night. '

To ma\e a vapour in a chamber , that he that en*
ters into it with a candle jhall thinkg the
room to be on fire.

14. DifTolve Camphirein rectified A-
iqua vit£3 and evaporate them in a very
elofe chamber where no air can get inland
lie that firft enters the chamber with a
Iighted^andle,will be much aftoniftiedifor
the chamber will feem to be full of fire,
very fubtle, but it will be of little qpntr
nuance.

You muft note that it is the combufti-
ble vapour, with which the chamber is
filled, that takes flame from the candle.

Divers fuch like experiments as this
jmaybedon*, by putting fuch a combufti-
ble vapour into a box, or cubboard or
fuch like, which will aflbon as any one
ihallopen them having a candle in his
hand3 take fire, and burnc.

To make a powder tba t by fritting upon frail be
inflamed.

15. Take a Load-ftone, powder it, and
T t 3 put

go Tke Holy Guide % LlB,5.

put it into a ilrong calcining pot, cover
it all over with a powder made of Calx
vive , and Colophonia , of each a like
quantity, put alfo fomc o£ this powder
der under it ', when the pot is ful, cover
it, and lute the clofures with potter*
earth, put them into a furnace , and
there letthemboyl, then take them out
and put them into another pot, and- fet
the m in the furnace again, and this doe
till they become a very white and dry
Calx. Take of this Calx one part, of falc
Nitre being very well purified four parts,
and as much Camphirr, Sulphur vrVundJ
the oil of Turpentine, and Tartar, grind'
all thefe to a tubtle powder and fearfei
them, and put them into a glafs veflelji
then put as much Spirit of wine well re&i-l,
fied as will cover them two fingers
breadth, thenclofethetu up and let the P
veflel in horledung three months, and ia 1
that. time they will alt tecome an uni-1
forme palte : evaporate all the humidity, I
imtill the whole malTe become a very dry I
(tone : then take it out and powder it,and I
keep it very dry.

Ifyou take a little of this powder and

'{pit upon jt, or pour fome water upon it,

ic will take fire prefently, fo that thou

maiit lie; tit a match, or aay fuch thing by

L'iB.5- The Holy GmJl>. 8 1

To fortifie a Load-ftone that it (hall be able to
draw a naile out of a piece of wood.

1 6. yakea Load-ftone,and heat ic very
hotincoales, but (o that it be not fired,
:hen pi efently quench it in the Oil of Cro-
ws Martis made of the beft Iteel, that it
nay inbibeasmuch as it can.

Thou (bait by this means make the
Load-ftone Co very ftrong and powerful,
that thou maiftpuli out nailes out of a
)iecc of wood with it, and dofuch won-
derful things with it that the common
oadflone can never do.

Now the reafon of this (as Tar-acelfm.
kith ) isbecaufe the Spirit of iron is the
ife ot the Load- ftone, and tins may be
xtra.&ed from, or increafed in the Load-
one.

Tt4 CHAR

82 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

CHAP. V.

J. To ma\e Quickflver Malleable jn [even
houres. ?. To reduce gl 'a fs into its fir jl prin-
ciples, vfz / "and and jail. 2. To write ot
engrave upon an egge, or pebble > with wax
4. To waly Pearle. $.Mak? Arabian per-
fume.. 6. To make Ctrange Gyles and Liquors,
7. To makj Steel grow like a Tree. 8. Ti
welt any Mettelin the hand without burni
' cfit, 9. Secret observations. 10. To e
trait a white MUkje fuh fiance from the ra,
of the Moon.

To maf^e §)uic\ fiver Malleable in fe\
houres.

i« T^Akeof thebeft lead, and melt I
X and poureit into a hoIe,and wheni
it is almoft concealed make a hole in icJ
and prefently fill up the hole with quick-j
filver, and it will prefently be congela*!
ted into a friable fubftance-, tfaien beat it J
into a powder,and put it again into a hole
of frefh melted lead as "before 5 do this, I
£hree or four times, then boyl it being all J
in a piece in Linfeed oil the fpace of fix,
houres ? then take ic out and it will be-
come malleable.

Note

L ) B. 5 . The Holy Guide. 8 3

Note that after this, it may by being
melted over the (ire be reduced into
quick-filver again.

A thin plate of the faid Mercury laid
iipon an inveterate Ulcer takes away the
malignity of it in a great meafure, and
renders ic more cureable then before.

A plate of the faid Ylercury laid upon
tumours would be a great deal better re-
percufllve then plates of lead, which Chi-
i'urgaons ufe in fuch cafes.

The powder of the friable fubftance of
Mercury before it be boyledun the oil is
very good tobeftrewei upon old ulcers,
for it doth much correct the virulency of
them.

T0 reduce glafs into itsfirft frinciplesy\\z.fand
and fait.

2. Take bits or powder of Glafs as much
as you pleafe, as much of the fait which
Glafs men ufe in the making of Glafs :
melt thefe together in a ftrong fire : Then
diilblve all the melted mafs in warm wa-
ter, then pour off the water and you (hall
fee no Glafs,but only fandin the bottom,
which fand was that which was in thegiafs
before,

This

8 4 the Holy Guide, L l B * 5 .

This ceniures the vulgar opinion, viz
that the fufion ofGlafs is the laft fufion*
and beyond all reduction*

'Io write or engrave tipman eggeyor pebble^
with wax or greafe,

3. Make what letters or figures yoif
pleafewitu wax, or greafe, upon an eggs
orpebble,put them inco the ftrongeft Spin
lit of Vinegar, and there let theml^e tvvaJ
or three dayes, and you (hall fee every!
place abouj; the lettets or figures eaten oq
confumed away with the laid Spirit, bud
the place where the wax or greafe was,n ;tj
at all touched : the reafon whereof id
becanfc that the Spirit would not operate
upon the faid oleaginous matter.

To make artificial Pearles, as glorious as anj-
oriental.

4. Diffolve mother of Pearle in. Spirit
of vinegar, then precipitate it with Oil o£
Sufphur per Campanam ( and not with
Oil of Tartar, for that takes away the
fplendour of it ) which nddes a luftre ta
it : when it is thus precipitated, dry it,
and mix it with whites of eggs, and of
this mafs you may make Pcarles of what
beliefs or fafliionyou pleafe : before they

be

ilB^T The Holy Guide. 85

>e dryed you may make holes through
fhem, and when chey be dryed they will
AOt at all or very hardly be diCcerned
from true, and natural Pearles.

To makj a Mineral perfume.

«;. DifToIve Antimony, or Sulphur in the
Liquor or Oil of flints or pcbbles,orChry-
ftals,offand,coagulate thefolution into a
red mafs , pour thereon the fpirit of urine
smddigeft them till the fpirit be tingedy
then poure it off, and pour more on, till
all rhetin&urebe extracted, put all the
tinctures together , and evaporate the
Spirit of urine in Balneo,and there will re-
main a blood-red Liquor at the bottom,
upon which pour Spirit of wine, a^nd yoS
(hall extract a purer tinfrwre , which
fmellethlike garlick^digeu it three or four
weeks, and it will fmeli like balme; digeft
it longer, and it will fmel like Musk or
Ambergryfe.

Befides the fmell that it hath, it is an
excellent Sudorifick, and cures all difeafes
that require fweat3 as the plague, putrid
feaversj Lues venerea^ and fuchiike.

Ihe

86 The Holy Guide. Ll B.5.

The OH or Liquor of [and, flints, pebbles y or
Chry flails, for the aforefaid preparation, is
thus made.

6. Take of the beft fait of Tartat being
very well, by two or three diflblutioiis
and coagulations purified;, and powdered
in a hot mortar,one part,of flints, pebbles
or cryftals being powdered, or fmal fand
well wafhed,the fourth part, mingle them
well together^ put as much of this co'm-
pofition as will fill an eggefhel into a Cru-
cible fee in the earthen Furnace, ( ex-
piefTedpage 83. ( and made red hot, and
prefently there will come over a thick3and
white fpirit, this doe till you have e-
nough, tthen take out of the Crucible
vvhileft it is gtowing hot, and that which.
is in it is like traufpareut glafs, which
keep from the aire.

The Spirit may be rectified by fand in a
glafs Retort.

The Spirit is of excellent ufe in the
gout, ftone,ptifick, and indeed in all ob-
ftru&lons, provoketh fweat, and urine,
and cleanfeth theftomack, andbyconfe-
quence effectual in moft difeafes.

It being apply ed externally cleareth
the skin, and makes it look very faire.

Take that which remaines at the bot-

tome

,iB.$. The Holy Guide. 8/

omc in the crucible, and beat it to pow-
ler, and lay it in a moift place, and (bit
liflblveth into a thick fat Oil: and this is
hat which is called the Oil of fan d, of
lints, pebles or chryftals.
This oil is of wonderful ufe in medicine,
.salfoin the preparation of all forts of
flineralls.

This oil beinctaken inwardly in fome
■ppropriated Liquor, diflblves tartarous
:oagufationsin the body, and fo opens
ill obftru&ions.

It precipitates metals and makes the
:alx thereof more weighty then oil of
Tartar doth.

It is of a golden nature : it extracts co-
lours from all metals, is fixed in all fires,
naketh fine Cryftals, and Borax, and ma-
cunrieth imperfect metals into gold.

If you put it into water, there will pre-
ipitate a moft fine white earth, of which
you may make as clear veflels as are
China-difhes.

Note that allfand, flints, and pebbles,
ven the whiteft, have in them a golden
iilphur, or tin&ure, and if a prepared
ead be for a time digefted in this oil,it wil
eem as it were gilded, becaufe of tiie geld
that will hang upon it, which may be
vvafhed away in water. Goldalfo is found
in fand and flints. &c. and if ) ou put gold
into this oil, it will become more ponde-
rous thereby. ?o

88 the Holy Guide. Lib. J

Towakf Steele grow in aglajdike a tree,

7. Diffolve Steele in a rettiried Spirit
of bait, lb dial I you have a green and
fvveec folution , which fmels like brim-
ftone \ filter it, and abftraft all the moi-
frure m fund with a gentle heat, and there
will diftil over a Liquor as Tweet as rain-
water; for Steel by reafon of its Jdryneft
detaines the corofivenefs of the Spirit
of Salt, which remaineth in the bot-
tome like a biood red maffe, which is
as hot on the tongue as fire 5 difIolv<$
this red maffc , in oil of flints, or 01
fand, and you (hall fee it grow up in two
or three homes like a tree with a ftem
and branches ; prove this tree at the tefi-,
and it yeeldeth good gold, which this
tree hath drawn from the aforefaid oil of
fand, or flinty which hath a golden. ful-
phurin it.

To melt any nutaU in ones hand without burning I
of the hand,

8. Take a little calcining pot in your 1
hand, make in it a lane or comfe of the
powder ofany metal, then upon it lay a
lane of Sulphur, Siilt-pefer and Saw-duft, .

of

jLibT^ V/jtf Boly Guide. «9

of each a like quantity, mixed together,
put a coal ot fire ro it, and forthwith the
metal will be melted into a mais

Ijin objervation upon the beams of the Sun and
beat of the fire , h^v they adde weight to Mi-
nerals and Metalline bodies.

i . Take any Mineral Liquor and fet it
Sn an open veffel in the fun for a fpace,and
it will be augmented in quantity, and
weight. Bu.t fome will fay that this pro-
ceedeth from the air : to the which 1 an-
fweranddemand,whethertheair had not
this impregnation from the fiui , and
what the air hath in it felf that proceed-
ed not from the fun and liars.

2. put this liquor in a cold eel 1-ar, or
in a moift air, and youfhall find that it
increafeth nor in weight, as it doth in the
fun^ or in the fire ( which hath in this re-
fpt&fome anatogie with the Riti ) ! do
not fay but h;ip!y it might attract fome
little moifture vvnich is foon exhaled by
anv frail heat.

3% D;lTo!ve any fulplmrous and im-
pel feft metal 1 as Iron, Copper, or Zinke,
in AquafoYtis^ov any other acid fpirit, then
abftraft the Spirit from it, make it glow-
ing hot, yet not too hoc, tjiat the Spirit
nifly on*y vapour away, then weigh this

metalline

90 The Holy Guide, L1E.9, :

metalline Calx, and fee it in a crucible]!
over the fire, but melt it not, only let itjl
darkly glow; letitftandfo three or four!
weeks, then ta*ke it off, and weigh it a-l
gain, and you (hall find it heavier then!
before.

4. Set any fulphurous metal, as Iron,!
or Copper, with ilxteei^or eighten part^l
of Lead on a teft made with afhes cf wood!
or bones in a probatory furnace : firftl
weigh the teft,copper and lead before you |
putthem intd the furnaces let the frond
copper fly away with the'lead, yet not
with too ftrong a hear, then take the teft
out, and weigh it, and<you (hall find it
( though the metals are gone ) when it
js cold to be heavier then it was when it
was put in o the furnace with the metals.;
The queftionis now whence this heavi-
nefs of all the aforefaid Minerals and me-
tals proceed , if that the heat of the'
fun and fire through the help of the ' Mi-
nerals and metals be not fixed into a pal-
pableMineral , and Metalline body .

5. Seta teft with lead, or copper in the
fun, and with a concave glafs unite the
bcames of trie fun, and let them fall on
the center of the metall,hold the concave
glafs in your hand , and Jet your teft
never be cold, and this will be as well
done in the fun, as in the fire. But this

concave

: Lib. 5k the Holy Guide. 9 1 ^

■concave mutt be two foot in Diameter,
land not too hollow or deep, but about
■the eighteenth or twentieth part of the
Icircie,thatic may the better caft its beams
forth, and it muft be very well polifhed.

6. Calcine Antimony with a burning
jlafs j and you mall fee it fmoak, and
"ume, and be made dryer then before, yec
*eigh it and it will be heavier then be-
ore.

Khali take in, for the confirmation of *
11 this, a relation of Sir Kenelme Vtgbjl
oncerning the precipitating of the fun
tarns. I remember ( faith he) a rare ex-
el iment that a Nobleman or muchffin-
eri.y, and a lingular friend of mine,
Did me hehadfeen, which was, that by
leans ofglafTes made in a very particular
lannor, and -artificially placed one by
nother, he had feen theiun beame? ga-
iercd together, and precipitated down
tto a brownifh, or purplifh red powder,
here ( faith he ) could be no fallacy in
lis operation. For nothing whatsoever,
asin theglaf«D when they were placed,
vddifpofed foa this intent j and it muft
2. in the hot time of the yearjelfe the
& would not follow. And of this ma-
ttery he could gather fome dayes nee£
10 ounces in a day,and it was of a ftrong
latile vertue , and would imprefs its
U u Ipiritual

"^7~ The Holy Guide. Lib. % i I

fpiritual quality into gold it felf ( the hea- ;i
vieft and moft fixed body \vc convert I
withal ) in a very fhort time.

I leave it now to the reader to judge!
whether the beams of the fun, and hea i
of the fire adde weight to Minerals, anal
Metals.

1o extrdft a white Milkje fubftance from th I
rates of the Moon.

Take a concave glafs and hold it ajl
gainft the Moon when (lie is at the full i%
a cleare evening, and let theraies there
of being united fall upon a fponge, am
the fponge wil be ful of a cold Milkie fub
fiance* which you may prefs out wit!
your hand, and gather more. De-La
Broffeis of opinion that thisfubftance is c
the fubftance of the Moon: but I cannc
affentto him in that, only this I fay, i
this experiment were well profecuted, t
might be the key to no fmall fecrcts.

CHAP

LiB. 5. The Holy Guide. 93

CHAP. VI.

To condenfe aite in fummer. 1. How to
fix two volatile [alts. 3. Of a Rofie Cruci-
an Medicine, and itsufe and vertues. 4. A-
notber. 5. Of a Cordial TinUure, and its
vertues. 6' Another of excellent, vertue,
and its ufe. 7. To reduce dijiilled Tur-
pentine into its body agaiti, and of itsufe,
and vertues. 8. To mak$ the difiilled oyle
out of any her be or flower, or feed in an in*
ft ant without a Furnace. 9. To kpow what
Metal there is in any Ore. \ o. A petty obfer-
vati on upon the Melting of Copper and Tin
together, n. A r, mar able obfervation upon
the melting fait Armoniack^, and Calx vive
together. 12. A cheap powder likf unto au-
rum fulminans. 1 3 . Totnake an Antimo-
hial cup, and to caft divers figures of Anti-
mony.

'

condenfe the aire in the hent of fummer and
in the beat of the day, into water.

FILL an earthen yeffel unglazed*
made pointed downward, and fill
t with (how-water f which muft be kept
11 the year)in which is diffol ved as much
litre as the water would duToWe : Lee
Uu2 the

94 The Holy Guide. Lib.?

the veftel be clofe ftopt. Hold this vefle!
againft the fun, and the air will be fo cow
denfed by the coldnefs of the veifel thafj
it will drop down by thefides thereof.

Km two forts of volatile S 'alts will be fixed V
joyning them together,

7. Take a ftrong Lixivium made o
unflaked Lime, and evaporate it, anq
* whereas you would expeft to find a fait ajj
the bottome, there is none $for all the falji
in the Lixivium is vapoured away,and thid
more the Liquor is evaporated,the weakel
the Lixivium becomes , which is contrary
to ,other Lixiviums : Alfo if you tak« I
fpirit of Vinegar , and evaporate it, yoij
(kail find no falc at the bottome. Nov >j
if you take the clear Lixivium of Lime
and fpirit of Vinegar,of each a like quan J
tity,and mix them together, andevapo i
rate the humidity thereof, you (hall find]
good quantity of fait at the bottom]
which taftes partly hot, and partly acid. :

This fait being fet in a cold cellar on ;i j
marble ftone, and diflblved into an oil, i ?
as good as any Lac virginU , to clear anc
fmooth the face, and dry up any hot pu i
ftles in the skin , as alfo againft the Itch
and old Ulcers te dry them up*

.

LiB.S. Tie Holy Guide. 9 5

Zonttikg an Vnguentfhat a few gr ami thereof
being applied outwardly, will can ft vomiting
orloofenefS) as you flea fe,

3. Take Lafii inf emails^' mix therewith
ofdiftilled oyl of Tobacco as much as
will make an Ointment : Keep it in a dry
place.

If you would provoke vomiting, anoint
the pit of the ftomach with ^yc or fix
graines thereof, and the party will pre**
fently vomit, and as much,as with taking
of a vomit.

If you would provoke to loofenefs a-
noint *bout the navel therewith, and the
patient will presently fall into a loofe-
nefs.

Note that you muft give the patient
fome warm fuppings all the time this me-
dicine is working.

Note alfoa and that efpecially, that
you let not the ointment lye fo long as to
cauterize the part to which it is applyed.

1oma\eamedicinethdt half a graine thereof
being takgn every morning will kgep the body
foluble.

4. Takeofthediftilled oil of Tobacco,
of which let the effential fait of Tobacco

U113 imbibe

y6 1 he Boly Guide. Lib. y I

'imbibe as much as it can Then with this J
compofition make fome Lozenges by acj-i a
ding fuch things as are fitting for fuch ail
forme of medicine : Note that you putjl
but fuch a quantity of this oily fait ashalfll
3 grain only may be in one Lozenge.

Oneofthefe Lozenges being taken e-j
very morning, or every other morning, J
keepeth the body folubie, and is good fof [J
them as are apt to be very coftivein thefrjj
bodies. ,

Note that you may put fome aromati-jj
cal ingredient into the Lozenges thafl
may qualitie the offenfive odour of thejj
oil, if there fhall beany.

%o maty a Cardial, fiomachicaly and purga?
five tinfture.

5. Make a tincture of Hiera picra with
Spirit of wine well rectified, and aromat i-
•zed with Cinnamon or Cloves.

Two or three fpoonfuls of thistinftnre
being taken in a morning twice in a week,
wonderfully helps thofe that have weak
and foul nomacks; it openeth obftru&i-
pns , and purgeth vifcolities of the fto-
mach and bowells, cureth all inveterate
headachy killed wormes, and indeed lea-
yeth no impurities in the body, and is
yery cordialjfor it exceedingly helps them

that

Ub^T The Holy Guide. 9?

>that arc troubled with foldings. There
is nothing offensive in this medicine but
the bitternefs thereof, which the other

(extraordinary vercues will more then
ballance.

Another.

6. Diffolve Scammony in Spirit of
Wine, evaporate the one nioity, then pre-
cipitate it by putting Rofe-water to it:
and it will become moft white; tor the
black and fetid matter will lye on the top
of the precipitated matter which you

imuft warn away with Rofe-water. Then
take that white gum being very well
waftied, and dry it ; if/ you pleafe you
may powder it, and fo ufe it; tor indeed
it hath neither fmell nor tad, and pur-
'geth without any offence, and may ^be
given to children or to any that diitait
phyfick, in their milk or broth , without
^anvdifcerningof'it; and indeed it dotn
spurge without any manner of gripings.
f was wont to make it up into pills with oU
of Cinamon or Cloves which gave^t a
gallant fmel, and of which I gave a fc?u-
pie which wrought moderately and with-
out any manner of gripings ; then diUolve
it again in Spirit of wine being aromati-
zed wich what fpices you pleafe, and tbis
keep. U*4 ?hl*

98 the Holy Guide. Li B. 5.

This tin&ureis fopleafant, fo gentle,
fo noble a purgative that there is fcarcj
the like in the world; for it purgeth with-
out any offence, is taken without any nan-:
feating, and purgeth all manner of hu-
mours, efpecially choler, and melancho-
ly, and is verv Cordial.

It may be given to thofe that abhor any
medicine, as to children,or thofe that arc
of a naufeous ftomach.

The dofe is from half a fpoonful to two
or three.

Noteitmuftbe taken of it felf; for if
it be put into any other Liquor, the Scam
mony will precipitate and fall to the bot-
tome.

After this manner you may. prepare
Jollap by extracting the gum thereforej
and then diffolving it in Spirit of wine.

By this meanes Jollap would not be fo
offenfive to the ftomach, as ufually it is;
for it is the gum that is purgative, and
the earthlieft that is fo naufeous.

Jollap being thus prepared is a moft ex-
cellent medicine againft all hydropick
difeafes; for it purgeth water away with-
out any naufeoufnefs or griping at all.

T*

L1B.5. The Holy Guide. f 99

Jc reduce dijtilled Turpentine into its body a-
gaine.

7. Take the oil of Turpentine, and the
Colophoni;* thereof ( which is that Tub-
Jtence which remaines in the boctome af-
ter diftillation ) which you muft beat to
powder. Mix thefe together and digeit
them, and you (hall have a Turpentine
of the fame confiftency as before, but of
a very fujptle nature.

Pills made of this Turpentine^ are of
excellent ufe inobftru&ionsof the breaftV,
kidneys and the like.

Jo makg tf3e dijlilled Oil out of any hearh, feed
f or flower in an inftant without any furnace.

8. You muft have a long pipe made of
tin, which muft have a bowle in the mid-
dle with a hole in it as big as you can put
your finger into it ; by which you mufl:
put your matter that you would have the
Oil of. Set this matter on fire with a can-
dle or coal of fire, then put one end of
the pipe into a bafon of fair water, and
blow at the other end,and the fmoak will
come into the water; and there will an oil
fwim upon the water, which you may fe-
parate with a tunnel .

I CO I The Holy Guide. LlB.$i

"to prove whatkjnd of met all there is in any
Ore> althoughyou have but a very few grains
thereof fo that as you cannot makg proof
thereof the ordinary way with lead.

9. Take twoorfoure graines f if you
have no greater quantity ) of any Ore
that you have, put to it half an ounce of
Veniceglafs, and melt them together in
a crucible, ( the crucible being covered )
and according to the tincture* that the
glafs rtceiveth from the Ore, fo may you
judge what kinde of metal there is in the
Ore; for if it be a copper Ore, then the
glafs will be tinged with a fea-green co-
lour. If copper and iron, a glafs-green; if
iron, a dark yellow; if tin^a pale yellow*
if (iiver, a whitifh yellow; ifgold, a fine
skie colour; if gold andUlver together^a
Smaragdine colour;if gold, (liver, copper*
and iron together^ an amethyft colour,

d pretty obfervation upon the melting of Copper
and Tin together.

10. Firft make two bullets of red cop-
per of the fame magnitu^ie,make alfo two
bullets of the pureft tin in the fame
mould, as the others were made : weigh
all fQiu bullets, and obferve the weight

well :

•0!

LiB.5. The Half Guide. 101

well: then melt the copper bullets firfr,
upon them being melted put the two tin
bullets, aud melt them together , but
have a care that the tin fume not away.
Then cad this molten mixture in the
fame moulds as before, and it will fcarce
make threee bullets, bur yet they weigh
as heavy as they did before they were
melted together.

I fuppoie the copper condenfeth the
body of the tin, which before was very
porous, which condenfation rather addes
then dinainifheth the weight thereof.

A remar\abU obftrvathn upon the melting of
Salt Armoniack^ and Calx vive together.

ii. Take Salt armoniack , and Calx
yive, of each a like quantity, mix, and
melt them together. Note that Calx of it
felf will not melt in lefs then eight houres
-with the ftrongeft fire that can be made;
but being mixed with this fait melts in
( half an houre, and lefs, like a metal, with
an io different fire.

This mixture being thus melted be-
comes a hardftone, out of which you may
ftrike fire as out of a flint, which if you
diffblve again in water, you (hall have the
Salt armoniack in the fame quantity as
before, but fixed.

Note

i o a T be Holy Guide. Li B. f .

Note that hard things have their con-
gelation from Salt armoniack, as homes,
bones and fuch like ; for little fixed fait
can be extta&ed from them, only volatile
and armoniack.

An ounce of any of theft volatile Salts^
(as of homes, bones, amber and fuch
iike ) reduced into an acid Liquor by di-
filiation, condenfeth, and induratcth a
pound of Oily matter.

Aneafie and cheap powder like unto aurum
fulminans.

1 2. Take of fait Tartar one part, Salt-
peter three parts. Sulphur a third part,
grind thefe well together, and dry them.
A few graines of this powder being fired
will cive as great a clap as a musket when
itisdifcharged.

1o ntakg an Antimonial cnp) andtocaji divers,
figures of Antimony.

13. Take the beft crude antimony very
well powdered, Nitre, of each a pound,
of crude Tartar finely powdered two
pound, mix them well together, and put
them into a crucible, cover the crucible,
and melt them, andthe reguluswill fall
to the bottome, and be like a melted m

ta

L»B.5. The Holy Guide* 10?

tal, then pour it forth into a brafs mor-
tar, being firft fmeared over with Oil.
Or,
Take two parts of powdered Antimony,
alt and four parts of powder of crudeTartar*
: melt thefe as aforefaid.

This regulus you may ( when you have
made enough of it) melt again and caft
it into what moulds you pleafe ; you may
either make cups, or what pictures you
pleafe, and of what figures you pleafe.
You may carl it into formes of (hillings or
half-crownes, eitherof which ifyoupuc
it into two or three ounces of wine in an
earthen glazedveffel, or glafs, and infufe
in a moderate heat all night, you may
have a Liquor in the morning which will
caufe vomit: of which the dofe is from
two drams to two ounces and half.

Note that in the Wine you may put a
little Cinamon to correct and give a
more grateful relifhtoit.

It is the cuftometofill the Antimonial
cup with Wine,andto put as much Wine
round about betwixt that and the little
earthen cup where it ftands, and fo infufe
it all night, and then drink up all that
Wine : but I fear, that fo much Wine will
be toe much as being three or four oun-
ces when aswefeldom exceed the quan-
tity of two ounces of the infufiono* An-
timony. Thefe

1 C4 The Holy Guide. Li B.5;

Thefe clips or pi&ures will laft for
ever, arid be as effeftual after a thou-
fand times infufion as at firft : and if
they be broken at any time, ( as eafify
they may , being as brittle as glafs) the/
may be call: again into what formes yoit
pleafe.

Note that he that cafis them muft be
skilful in making hisfpawde, aFalfoin
fcouring of them , and making them"
bright afterwards: for if they be care-
fully handled, they will look even as
bright as ill ver.

The R.ofie Crucians give this Kule for tbi
Gout : To be taken in this order,

the Pult/tfie.

1. •-■■^Ake of Manchet about three otifn
J[ ces,thecrum only, thin cut , let it
be boyled in Milk till it grow to a Pulp.
Add in the end a drachm and an half of
the powder of red Rofes, of Saffron teii
grains, of oyl of Rofes an ounce 5 let it
be fpread upon a Hnnen cloth, and ap-
ply ed Iuke-warm3and continued for three
hours fpace.

pi

LiB.5» 1 be Holy Guide. IO<>

*7he Bath or Fomentation,

2. Take of Sage- leaves halfahandfuI,of
the root of Hemlock diced fix drachms,
of Briony roots half an ounce , of the
leaves of red Rofes twopugils j let thern
be boyledin a pottle of water, wherein
Steel hath been quenced , till the Liquor
come to a quart j after the (training put
in half an handful of Bay fait: Let it be
ufedwith fcarlet Cloth or fcarlet Wool
dipped in the Liquor hot, andfo renewed
fevenximes3all in the fpace of a quarter of
an hour, or little more.

The Plaifier.

3. Take Emflaiftrum Viacalcitm as muth
as is fufficient for the part you mean to
covtr ; let it be diflblved with Oyle of
Rofes in fuch a confidence as will ftick,
and fpread upon a piece of Holland, and
applied.

CHAP,

tc6 The Holy Guide* L1E.5.

CHAP. VII.

I. Of a water to caufe hair fallen to grow
again ?. A water to caufe hair taken off
nt vtr to grow again. 3 . How to ntakg ano-
ther. 4. How to rake away fpots in the face^
<;. A water agaiwi fcabs. 6. Topreferve
the fight. ~. Another wattr, . 8. How:
to rejiore the fiibt of an old man. a. How,
to cure the Gout. *- j o. To cure the Web and
(pots in the eyes 9 1 . How to cure Tetters,
Fiftulaes, Canltfrs, &c. 12. Howfo cure
the rednefs of the face , and beaut i fie the
skjn. t$. Another. 14. Another of the
fame vertue.

A water to caufe Hair fain to growagajn.

1. "T^Ake Mountain-Hyfop , Mouncam-
X Calamint, leaves of Southern-
wood, of each two handfuls, Canary
Wine, Urine, Honey, Milk, of each two
pound, Muftard feed half a pound, brnife
what is to be bruifed,macerate them three
dayes, then diftil them in halneo.

LiB.S* The Holy Guide* \cy S*

A water to caufe hair taken of never to grow
again.

Take feeds of Henbane brnifed two
poundjlay it awhile in foms moift place,
then add great Stonecrop half a pound.
Mil it according to Art.

Anotkr.

Take blood of Frogs , Tern ^iguat£3
ilimach, Rofes, Sorrel, Houfleek, whac

fufficient^ macerate them together
wenty fourheurs, then diftil them in
3alneo.

A water totakg away [pots in the Face,

4. Take AfTes milk four pound3White-
/ine one pound, the iniide of two new
,oaves, twelve Eggs with the lhels,Su£ar-
andy three drachms ; mix them well to-
eckeraud diftil them,

A water again}} Scabs,

%. Take Sorrel water two pound, juice
F Plantain 3 Ptofe-water , of each four
unces, juice of Lemons two ounces, Ly-
narge i]x ounces , Cerufe Sublimate, of
X x *ach

ic8 The Holy Guide. LiB. 5,

each half an ounce, Sulphure vive thret
dracbams; bruife them that are to be
bruited 3 then irifufe them 24 houres.
and after diftil them according to £rt.

A water to preferve the fight.

6. Take Fennel, Vervain, Eye-bright.
Endive, Betonie, Red Rofes, Venus Hair
of each three handfuls. Bruife the hearb:
and macerate them 24 hours in white
wine, ( as much as is fufficient ) then di«
ftil them in a limbeck in Balneo.

Another.

7. Take Fennel,Celandine, Sage,RofC'
maiy, Vervain, Rue, of each equal parts
Prepare as it before.

A water to reftore the fight decayed.

8. Take Fennel, Gelandine3 Vervaine
Rue, Leaves of Enula, Fullers Teefel, Mil?
foile, of each one handful* Camphire halj.
a drachm, Bruife them and diftil them
in an Alembick.

A water againft the Gout.

o, Take Licorice h alf a pound, Anifeeds

1. pound;!

LlB.$. Jhe Holy Guide. 1O9

1. pound, Cinamon, 3 ounces,Galingale>
dinger. Roots of Iroes, Enula Campana,
peeds of Fennel , Caraway, Amomum,
i\mmi, Piony, Bafil, Savory* Marjoram,
>f each oneounce,Juniper Eerries 2. oun-
ces, Ground Ivy half a handful. Long
j)ePPer5Calamt5,Spikenard:)Mace,ofeach
[;. drachms. Valerian 1 drachm,Roots of
^ngelica half an ounce, Cyprus 4. oun-
:es. Lignum Aloes half an ounce, Sugar
,. oances, Maliga Wine, or ftrong Ale
U pound,Prepare and diftil them accord-
ng to Art.

This water taken inwardly ftrengthens
old and weak ftonaachs, and breaks th£
>tone.

Outwardly applyedkeafeth the Gout,
hnlargeth rinews that are fhrunk,&: is good
gainft all aches and paflions proceeding
rom melanchollyand cold.

A water {or the Weh andfpots in the Eyes.

10. Take Rue, Plantaine, Red rofes*,
led Poppies, Vervaine, Celandine leaves,
•>f each 1. ounce. Red rofe water 1. pound
md half, Tutia prepared 1. drachm,
Moes Hepatick an ounce and a half,
gloves 1. ounce. Powder, prepare and
liftii them according to Art. Drop the
:wer into the Eyes morning and evening*

>: k % A

no The Holy Guide. L] b. 5

A water for letters, Fifiulasy Cankers, &c.\

it. Take ftrong white Wine Vinega
8 pound, Wood Allies 1. pound, infuC
them 3 da-yes natural , and ftir thea
'twice a day, then put thereto unflakec
lime 1. pound, let it ftand bther thre
dayes, and fttr it as before* when it is wet
fetled, Fikre off the clear Lee, and pu
thereto SalGemme, Salt A\ka\iySa!isVit4
Salt Armoniac, Salt of Tartar, of eacl
oncdram. CalxofEggefrYels, and Cah
vive9 of each 1 drachm 3 grind all thefe ti
^ether, and temper them with the fai<
Lee; put them into a glafs lembick an<^
diiftil them in Balnea h give it the firf
24.houresno more heat then will mak
it, and keep it warm : after that diftil i
off according to Art.

A water againjl rednefs of the Face9 and t
heautifie thefkjn.

12. Take Wild Ptuflaine, Mallows
Nighcfhade, Plantain with the fceds,|>
each three handfuls. The White9 0
x 2 Egges, Limons number 12. Roch AJ-
1 urn, 4. ounces ^prepare and diilil them;!
aco/diugto Art.

•

Amth

-

[.1E.S. The Holy Guide. in

i>___- ■> ■ " ■ — — — ■« ■

Another.

13; Take Calx of Eggemels,Wbite Co-
al pulverized, cf each j. ounces, Sale cat-
enated, and Borax., 'of each 6. ounces,
}um Tragagant 5. ounces,Rootsof white
allies, number 6. White fope 8. pou
tyrax, Calamita , Belzom , of each

ounces. Mix and diftil them by Alem-
ick.

Another of the fame venue.

14. Take Wine Vinegar half a pound,
ytharge of gold one ounce and a half,
ierufeone ounce, Sal Geo^ iix drachms,
uoch Alum, half an ounce, Eofax, Sul*
hure vive, Salt Nitre, .of each three
rachms, Camphhe half a drachm, pre-
are and diftil them according co Art,

Xx 3 CHAP.

Ii2 1 he Holy Guide. Lib. 5

CHAP. VIII.

1 . Wow to cure inordinate Flux of J e ares . 2 Q
thus. 3. How to cure red eyes, 4. How 4.
clenfe and dry a Jharp ulcer, 5 . How
make white teeth. 6 To take away the mark,
of the [mall fox. 7, To Cicatrize Vlcen
8. Another thus. 9. To cure Vlcers. 1 c. 0
hollow V leers and their cure, w. Of aCt
catrizing water. 12. Of curing wound*
til Another water. i4. To tnak^e teeti
white. i^.Of the Collie^ how to cure it
1 6. To cure a cold jiomach. ij. Of Sa§
water. 18. Of Lavender water conrpoun
ded, and its tertues and ufe. \y. A Vector a
water. 20. Another. 21. Aqua J>plene;
tica &its vertuer. 22. Aqua Febrifuga
audits vertues. 23. Aqua Damafcena,0
dorifera, and its vertues. 24. Aqua Hy
fterica, and its vertues. 25. Aqua Nc
phiitica. 26, Aqua Apertiva, andtheh
vertues hew to ufe them.

A water againfi the inordinate Flux of Team

1. Take ripe Strawberries as many a<
you pleafe? fee them to digeil in Horfr
dung, fifteen dajes^ $hen difhl them in

$ahxo.

Ox

.1 B. % • the Holy Guide. 1 1 3

Or thus.
2. Take Flowers of the white Thorn,
leaves or tops of the Willow, Eye- bright,
|>f each what fufficeth, diftil them as be-
>re.

A water agamji rednefs of the Eyes.

3. Take juice of Celandine, Rue, Ver-
t/aine. Fennel, of each three ounces, tops
|nd leaves of Rofes,of each what fufficeth,

ugar candy three ounces, of the beft Tu-
^ia, Sanguis Daconis, of each four ounces,
pruife them that are to be bruifed, and di-
[lilthem according to Art.

A water to clenfe and dry ajharp Vlcer.

4. Take Crude Allum two ounces ,
|*hite of Egges, number fifteen, Juice of
f?urflaine,Plantaine, Nightftiade, Nicoti-
an, Houfeleek, Water of Meadfweet, Tri-
nity grafs, Rofes, of ea,ch four ounces.
fLabour them wel together and draw off
che Water by an Alembick cf glafs ia
~$alneo.

A water to wakg 7eeth white.
5. Take Allum fix ounces. Common

114 7 he Hoi)1 Guide. L1B.5.

fait three ounees, Myrrhe^Maftkk^Cloves,
of each three drachms. Mix bruife and di-
it'll them according to Art.

A water to take away the warkj of the Small

rex.

6. TakeMaftick, Myrrhe, Aloes Hepa-
tick, Nard, Sanguis Draconis, Olibanum,
Onopana^x , Bdelium , Carpobalfamum,
Saffron, Gum Arabick, Liquid Storax, of
each two drachms and a handful. Beat
what is to be beaten, then adde there-
to of clear Turpentine equal weight . di^
fli'l them according to Art.

A water to Cicatrize Vlcers.

j. Take red Wine two pound, Plan-
tainewater halfa pound, Rofewater four
ounces. Juice of Plantaine , Vervain©,
Shepheards Purfe , Knotgrcfs ,) Cen-
taury the lefle , Com fry the greater
and Jefier, of each two ounces. Crude
Ailumone pouncT, Cyprefs Isfuts thres
ounces,Pomgranate flowers ha) fan ounce,
Pomgranatepils three ounces. Gals half
an ounce, Bark of the Oak , Sumach, of
each live drachms, Turpentine , three
ounces , Crude Honey half a pound,
Maftkk, OHbanum, of each ten drachms,

Sa.F

Sarcocol two onnces, Burnt Vitriol, Burnt
lead, of each one drachm} Bole Armoniack
three ounces, Caffia lignea, half an ounca,
Round Birtwon three ounces. Powder
what istobepowdred, then mix and dh
ftil them.

Amther.

8. Take Maffick, Myrrhe, Olibanum ,
Sarxoco), Mummie, of each three drams.

IFrankinccnfe one ounce, Nutmeg, Gin*-
mon. Cloves, Cubeb?, of each two drams.

i Cyprus Nuts half an ousce. Flowers ,
Barkcs cfPorogranatcs,of each one drachm.
Bole Armoniack one ounce; Sanguis Dra-
conis half an ounces, Red Rofes three
drachms , Roch Allum one pound,VitrioI
7. drachms , Clarified Honey ooc oetKe,
Aqua viu a pound end half, White Wine
one pound, juice of Plantaine,Nightfhadf,
Comfry of the greater and Jeffer, of each
four ounces, Water wherein Iron hath been
quenched four pound* Powder what is to

i bepowdrech andinfufctbem all night in
Aquavit^ inthe moruing draw forth the
water by Alembic k.

A water for Vlars*

9. Take White Wine four pound. Plan-

tain

9i6 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

tain water two pound, Allum half a p^und,
White Copperas five ounces, Crude Honey
one pound, Licorice Rafpcd one pound,
Bole Armoniack five ounces, Camphirc an
ounce and half, Mercuryj {ublimatcd two
drachm^, Bruife what is to be bruifed* and
diftil them by Alembick.

A water for hallow V leers.

10. Take Fountaine water, Red Wine,
of each two pound and a half, Red Rofes, '
four ounces, Flowers, Rindes, of Pompra-
nates, of each two ounces and a half, Su-
mach two ounces; Sage a handful, Comfcry,
the greater and lefler of each half a handful,
Sarcocoll three ounces, Maftick two oun-
ce$,01ibanum one ouncc>Honey one pound*
water of Turpentine a pound and a half,
brnife what is to be bruifed, and diftil them
through a lembick of ghfs with a gentle
fire.

A Cicatrizing Water.

11. Take water wherein Iron hath been
quenched four pound. Aqua Balfami veri
four pound. Turpentine a pound and half,
Crude Honey one pound , Allum ten
ounces, white Copperas five ounces, Bole
Armoniack feven ounces, Mercury fubli-

tnated

L1B.5. TheHoly Guide. U7

mated half a drachm, leaves of Plantain,
Cornferv the greater, middle and IciTer,
Teafil,Knotgrafs,Sc. Johns Wort, of each
a handful and a half, Frankinccnfe two
ounces, Olibanum, White Sanders, of each
half an ounce, Red R ofes, a handful and a
half, Ca(fiaLign(»,Cin anion, of each three
drachms for the fir ft diftillation s tn€n
take Turpentine one pound, Maftick three
drachms, pure Rozea fix ounces,Cinamon,
Cloves; of each two drachms;Pomgranate
rinds half an" ounce, Cyprus Nut* one
ounce and a half, White Copperafs two
ounces, Allum three ounces, Olibanum
f3ur ounces, Sanguis dr acorns an ounce and
a half, Aqua Balfam. veri one pound, for
the fecond diftillation : Afterwards,

Take Flowers of St. Johns Wort, Sage,
Rofemary, Carduus Bvnedi&us* Centaury,
of each one ounce, Maftick, Red Sanders,
of each three drachms 3 Wood of Aloes,
two feruplci, Cuhcbs one drachm, Aqua
vit£ hair a pound. Burnt Allum, white Tar-
tar, of each an ounce and a half, Myrrhe
half an ounce, Earthwormes in powder
one drachm, the middle Bark of the Oak
fix ounces, CafJJa hgnea three drachm?,
White Copperas one ounce , Rindes of
Pomgranatcs one drachm, Ouajacum four
ounces, Carpobalfamum, Xylobalfamum,
of each i dramaMynles5MumR]ie, cf each

t#o

1 1 8 The Holy Quids. LlB.

two drachms. Borax half an ounce, CioveS
two drachms, Torraencil, Gentian, Round!
Birt- wort, of each two drachms and a half Jj
This is for the laft diftillation, afterwards]
adde Burds Allurn half an ounce, White!
Copperas two drachms, Maftick one ounce!
in finepowder, and then keep it for ufc.

A water for hollow Wounds,

1 2- Take fountain water, R.ed Wine, o
eacli two ounce* and an half, Red Rofes,
four ounces* Pomgranar* flowers, Pom
granite rindes, of each two ounces and a
half, Sumach two ounces, Sage one hand-
ful, both the Comfries, of each a handful.
Allumhaif a pound, Sarcocol three ounces, j
Maftick two ounces, OJibanurn one ounce,
Honey one pound, water of Turpentine a
pound and a half*. Prepare the ingredients
according to Art, aud then diftii them all
rogcth?rs in a glafs lembick with a gentle
fire.

A water for Wounds and VIcers.

13. Take Calx tf/ve extinct in fountain,
water eight pound, Plantain water four
ouncet, P^ofcwitcc two pound. Heat all
thefe together ; afterward let them Hand
and clear, pour torch all ihc clear to the

lembick

Lib. $. The Holy Guide. . 119

hmbkkj and put 50 Ic Honey two pound*
Alium an ounce, Borax, Maftick, of each
three ounce?, Olibanum four ounce*, the
middle Bark of the CX»k drytd,thrrc ounces*
powder what is to be powdred, and diftil
them according to Art.

A water to mak$ the teeth white,

14. Take thcfirftdiftilled water of Honey
t which is white, one pound, Allam half a
rpound. Salt Nitre, white Salt* of each one
I ounce, Water of Lcnthk leaves one pound,
sMiftick two ounces, White Vinegar, Whfce
IWine, of each two ounces. Mix and diftil
fohem according to Arc^ and refer yc the

wattr.

A water againft the Ctolickf

15. Take Mufcadcl , or Milmfey four
pound , Nutmegs , GaIJs; of each on*

' drachm, Cinamcn, Clowes, Grains, of each
two drachms. Powder the ingredients
grohely, and infufe thera in th« wine 24,
houres, then with a fofi fire draw off the
water according to Art,

A water for a cold Stomach,

16. Take Citron and Orange pils dry «d,

of

l io The Holy Guide. Li B.5 \

of each two ounces, Rofcmary, Mints, o|
each one handful. Cinamon, Cloves, Cu|
bebs, Cardamum?, Nutmegs, Ginger , o|
<ach a drachm and a half, Sage, PennyroyJ
al. Thyme, ot each one handln1, Carawaj
feeds, ■ Anifecds, of each four drachma
Bruifc what is to be bruifed, and infufj
thcmallthcfpaceof 24. houres in Canarl
wine four pints, then diftil them in Balml
according to Art.

Water of Sage Compound.

17. Take Sage, Marjorum, Thyme, La
vender, Epithymnm, Betony, of each onj
ounce, Cinamon half an ounce , Ireoj
Roots of Cyprus., Calamus Aromaticus, o
each one ounce, Storax, Benjamin, of each
a drachm and a half, infufe them four daye;
in four pound of fpirit of Wine •, then di^
ilii 1 hem in Balneo.

Lavenkr water Compound.

- 18. Take flowers of Lavender, Lilly o:
the valley, of each 24.'. handful?, Piony.
Tillia, Flowers of Rofcma?y Sigr, of cad
haf a handful, Cinamon, Ginger, Cloves.
Cubcbs, Gatingale, Calamus Aromaticus,
Mace, Mtffclto of the Oak, of each a drachm
and a half, Piony roots one ounce and

half

LiB.J. The Holy Guide. 12 1

01 Mf, otthcbeft Wine what fufficcth, in*
ki ia(c them in the Wine two dayes , then
o diftil them in Balneo MarU.

This water is good againfl the Falling
:'4 fickneft. Convulsion fits, and the infirmi-
ties of the brain.

A Pe fiord water.

19. Take the Liver of a Calf, the Lungs
cfa Fox, of each number 1. Liverwort,
Longworr, Sage, Rue, Hyflbp,of each one
handful, Roots of Enula-, Gladiol, of each
half an ounce, Seeds of Anifr:. Caraway,
nctFcnn*!, of each half an ounce, Flowcn of
otBorage and BuglofT*, of each two drachms,
otlinfufe them the fpace of 24. houres, in rich
ich old Wine what fuffi;cth, water of Scabius,
vtfCarduus Bcnedi&us of each, four ounces*
& Hyfop two ounces 5 then diftillit in Balneo
Mm*.

Another.

y 0 20. Take leaves of Scabius, Veronica,
iny„ofcawh two handfuls, Venus Hair, Sage,
:aciiHyfop, Horthound, Liverwort, Licorice,
ivd of e?ch one handful, Flowers 'of Borage,
icoi Bngloffe, Violets, of each half a handful,
(bi Roors of Enuh Campana, L<corice,F!owers
pj of Ircos, of each hail announce, Anifceds,
ha Fennel-

127 the Holy Guide. LiR.f

Fennelfeeda , of each one drachm, choyf*
Ciftamon, oriental Saffron, of each half t
dram, lee thembebruifed and cut, bs di-
alled in water of Scabius, Veronica, o
each one pound, water of Hyfop half i
pound, white Wine three pound, let theni
digefted two days, |be difUlled in Bjlne<
M^ri.e | adde Suggarcandy what fofficcth.

This water openeth fc'ne obftru&ions o
the Liver and Lung*; and. flrtngthmetr
them.

Aqua Sflemttkct. •

2 1. Take roots of Fern two ounces,
roots of P«r[}ey , Polypody, of each an
once and a half, roots of Round Bir tworfc
Lovjgc, Calamus Aromaticus, Acoru* oi
th« water, of each one ounce, chofen f\u-
barb$ barks of Tamarisk, Copperas, Afhj
of each half an ounce, Lovage, Seeds oi
Caraway , Cummin , Anrfe, of each two
drachtm, Scolopendria > tops of Worm-
wood, Funmerre, Dodder, leave* of Agri«
mony, Ceterach, of each a handful and z
half: Rich Wine eight pound ; let them
be digefted two dayes, and then diftil them
in Balneo Masia>

This water ftrengthcnsth the ipleen
openeth and provokcth lliiae.

Aqua

LiB.J. TheHoly Guide. 123 ^3

)1

Aqua Febrifuga.

oi 22. Take roots of Vipers grafs. Cinque-
foil) Tormentil, Di&amum, of each fix
icnjdrachms, Seeds of Citron excorticated,
Carduus Benedi&us, Carduus MarU ,
Sorrel, of each half an ounce, of all the
Sanders,of each onedrachm,ofcheCordi-
rlowers,ofeach one handful, Goats Rue
one handful. Hartshorn rafped half an
ounce, pour upon them bruifed water of
Tormentil, Cichorie, Carduus Benediftus^
Carduus MarU^ Wild Poppy, of each what
etiifutiiceth j lee them be macerated three
andayes in a glafs, clofe (hue, afterward
rtadde Citrons bruifed number fix, Juice
to of Endive, Carduus Benedifi us , Plantain,
h of each one pound, Borage, Scordium, of
Vli each half a pound 5 lee them be diftilled in
so Balneo MarU.

1% This water is convenient in Feavers,
in efpecially malignant Feavers: becaufc k
pi drivediaway the rxialiguity, and reiifteth
putrefaction.

AqHaVtrtiafcena Odorifera,

23, Take Ireos Flowers, Cloves j Cu-
bebs , Cinamon, Graines of Paradife,,
Calamus Aromacicus,of each one ounce,
Y y (Ylar'jo*

1 24 the Holy Guide. L1B.5I

Marjoram , 1 hyme, Bayleaves,Rofemar;
Flowers, Red Rofes, of each a handful
Lavender flowers three drachms, of th
beft vVine three meafures ; let them b
macerated and diftilled : to the diftille«
liquor add Musk half a fcruple, Civet fir
grains.

This water heateth, dryeth, cutteth
difcuffeth, and chiefly ftrengtheneth tht
Heart and head.

Aqua Hyjierica,

24. Take roots of Di&amnum, feeds o
Daucus, of each one ounce-, Cinamon
Caffia lignea. Balm, of each two fcruples
Oriental Saffron one fcruple, New Cafto
reum one fcruple and a half ; of all theft
mixt make a powder, to which let be pou*
red water of Rue two pound and a half
let them ftand in infufion four dayeSjand
then diftil them in Balneo Maria.

Aqua Nephritic a.

25. Take roots of Enula Campana*
Cammock, Pimpernel, Radifh of each
one ounce , Parfley , Lovage, of each
feven drachms; leaves of Lovage. Pariley,
of each one handful, Saxifrage cum toto
two ounces, Flowers of Broom , Balm,
Rofemary, of each halfa handful ; Elder
one handful, Berries of Juniper, Myrtle,

Alcakengic.

\l jLi B. 5 • 'i he Holy Guide. \ 2 $

Alcakengie, Anifeeds,of each two ounce?,
dft cue them and infufe them, the fpace of
eight dayes in twelve pound of the beft
white Wine, then let diem be difhlled.
This water opener h and proveketh
:td|LIriiie : the dofe is one fpoonfui.

eth . • Jqua Jpertiva,

tlif A

%6. Take roots of Eringo , Vipers
;rafie, Fern, the greater Centaury, of
ach half an ounce; roots of Fennel, Barks
>f Copparis, Tamarisk, A(h, of each three
irachms, Barks of Citrons two drachms
nd a half \ Seeds of Garduus Bendifiiw,
^ichorie, of each half an ounce, feeds

ijjj f Endive, CrefTes, Citrons, S.cariol, of

ach two drachms, Polytricon, Adian-

hum, Ceterach, Dodder, Scolopendria5

>eony, Endive, of each a handful and a

alf. Tops of Thym<, Epithymum,

lops, Flowers of St. Johns wort, Broome3

orage, Balm, of each one handful, fmajl

>aifins , one ounce : Cinamon out

rachm and a half. Stec. Vialac. balf a

rachm. Carduus Benedi£is9 Water of Hops,

colopendria, Pauls Betony, ofea&h one

und, Rhenifh Wine two pound and d

lft let them ftand two daies in a warm

ace in a veflelclofe flopped : afterward

nilth'cminB«/»w.

Y y 2 kThi?

3 6 The Holy Guide. Lib. S

j

li

This water openech the obftru&ions o
the whole body, but efpecially of thj
liverj fpleen^and Mefentery.

CHAP. IX.

i. H6W to maks the Golden treeofPhilofopben

2 . To make the Tree of the Sun. 3 . To mak

Gold grow in the Earth. 4. Of the Gold*

Marc a fite , 5. Of preparing of it, 6. [C

the vertues of prepared Gold, 7, C

prepared Silver. S. Of Beata's Mt

diciney 9. Beata's green Oil of filva

jo. To makg oil officer. 11. To makg

liquor of fiver, that it jhall make the gla

wherein it isfo exceeding cold, that no nta

is able for the coldnefs thereof to hold it in h

hand any long time, A 2. How to maksfilvi

as white as (now. 1$. Of Silver Trfa

14.. Of preparing Fhilofophers gold an

fiver. i<). The frocefs of the Terrefttt

ftaly Celt. 1 6. The Procefs of the Fantam

17. TbJ Procefs of the Rofie Crucian Med

c hies, and of the ir diffolving gold \ % , Tl

frocefs of the Fan area, and Hermes Med

cines,

Jc makf gold grow in a glafs like a Tree whit\
h called the golden Tree of thePbilofopher

T

Ake of Oil of Sand as much aryo
pleafe 3 pour upon it the Uw

quantit

MB. $• the Holy Gmde. 1 2 7

uantity of Oil of Tartar per ddiquium,
ft lake them well together that they be in-
orporated and become as one Liquor of
thin confiftence3then is yourMenft ruum
r Liquor prepared. Then diflTo vie gold
1 Aquaregiii) and evaporate the Men-
ruumanddry theCalxin the fire, but
lake it not too hot, for it will thereby
fe its growing quality 5 then take it out
id break it into little bits, not into pow-
( ir, put thofe bits into the aforefaid Li-
\ lor ( that they may lye a fingers breadth
J e one from the other) in a very clear
i afs. Keep the Liquor from the air3 and
*u flialj fee that thofe bits of the calx will
^efentiy begin to grow 5 firft rhey will
rel, then they will put forth one or two
;ms, then divers branches and twigs fo
ca&ly,as that you cannot chufe but ex-
edingly wonder. This growing is real \y
id not imaginary only. Note that the
afs muft ftand ftill , and not be mo-
d.

The Tree of the Su#.

2. Calcine fine gold in Aqu&regisy that
become a calx3which put into a agourd
afs, and pour upon it good and frcfti
jua regia, and the water of gradation, fc*<
.at they cover the calx four fingers
Yy 5 breadths.

128 "the Holy Guide. LlB.^

breadth ^ this Menftruum abftratt in the
third degree of fire until no more will af-
cend.This diftilled water pour on it again
and abftraft it as before, and this do fo
often till you fee the gold rife in the glafs,
and grow in the forme of a Tree having

nianybowes and leaves.

•

%o make Gold grow and be increased in tht
earth. ]

3. Take leaves of gold, and bury them
in the earth which look? towards the Eaft,
and let it be often foiled with mans urine,
and doves dung, and you (hall fee that I
a ftort time they will be increafed.

The reafon of this growth I conceive
may be the golds attracting that univer-
sal vapour and fperrne that comes froir
the center through the earth ( as hat!
been fpoken intheanotomy of gold ) atic
by the heat of ' putrefaction of the dun]
purifying and aflim dating it to it felf.

A remarkable obfervatipn upon a golden Mar
cafre.

4. There is found a certain ftone ii
Jlononiay which feme call a golden Mar'
cafite,fome a (blade Magnes,that receive
light from the fun in the day time, anc '

give,

- I

LiB.S. The Holy Guide. 1 2 9

gives it forth in the dark. About this there
hath been much reafoning amcmgft Philo-
fophers, as whether light be really a
x>dy, or any kindeof fubftance, or any
iccidenc only, and whether this (i one had
my gold in it or no, a«nd what it did con-
ift of. He that firft difcovered it,thought
hat he had found a thing that would
ranfmute metals into gold,f by which it
•ppears that there feemed to be fome-
hingof gold in it or fomething moreglo-
iousthengold ) bnthig.hopes were frus-
trated by a fruitlefs labour, notwith-
standing which I conceive there might
>efome immature or crude gold in it 5
orcrudegold is a fubjeft ( being there
jfome life in it ) that it moft fit to receive
he influences of the fun according to the
unanimous confent of all Philolophers,
nd therefore is by them not only called
olary, but Sol (i. ) the fun it felf.

5. It is prepared for the receiving of
ght thus, it is calcined two wayes, firft
: is brought into a moft fubtle powder
rith a very ftrong fire in a crucible^ fecon-
f, being thus brought into a powder, is
lade up into cakes as big as a doller, or a
) iece of eight, either with a common wa-
er alone, or with the white of an egge;
ut thofe cakes being dry ed by themfel ve3
ato a Winde Furnace SSS, with coales,
Y y 4 and

l$o The Holy Guide. LiB^ji^

k

i

and calcine them in a nioft ftrong fire for
the (pace of foure or five houres. Wher
the furnace is cold, tyke them our, and
they be not fufficiently calcined the firf
time, (which is known by their giving bu
little light, ) then reiterate the calcinati
on after the fame manner as before, whicl
isfomecimes to be done thrice. That
the bed which is made with the choifd
{tones that arc clean, pure, and diapha
nous, and gives the belt light. With thi
being powderedyou may make the forme
of divers animals of what fhapes yot
pleafe, which you muft keep in boxes, am
they will receive light from the fun in th p
daytime, give light in the night, or in
darke place, which light will vanilh by deftvei
grees. • lole

t«

7 he venues of the aforefaid preparations i \^\
gofd3 and their vertues and vfe.

6. With the aforefaid preparations thpei
Ancients did not only preferve the healt
and ftrength of their bodies, but alfo pro ri;
long their lives to a very old age, and n<jjrin
that only, but cured thorowly the E]
lepfie, Apoplexie, Elephantiasis, Leprol
Melancholy, Madnefs,the Quartan , t1
Gour, Dropfie, Plurify , all manner c
FeaveiSj the Jaundife, Lues venerea, th

Wold

LlB. 5- The Ho If Guide. 131

Wolfe, Cancer, Noli we tangere> Afthma,
Confumption, the Stone , flopping of
Urine, inward Impoftumes, and fuch like
difeafes, which moft men account incu-
rable. For there is fuch a potent fire lying
in prepared gold, which doth not only
rcafume deadly humours, but alfo renews
the very marrow of the bones, and raiferh
up the whole body of man being halfe
dead.
They that ufe any of thefe preparations
:; for any of the foregoing difeafes, muft-be-
\ fake themfelves to their bed for the fpace
oft wo or three houres,and expect fweat-
iingto enfue j for indeed it will fend forth
fweat plentifully, and with eafe , and
ieave no impurity or fuperfluity in the
whole body. Note that they mult take ic
for ten dayes together in appropriated
Liquors.

Let young men that expect long life,
take any of the aforefaid preparations
once in a month, and in the morning;
but they muft abftain from meat and
drink, till the evening of the fame day ;
for in that time that matter will be di-
gged into the radical humour; whereby
the ftrengthof the body is wonderfully
increafed, beauty doth flourifh moft won-
derfully, and continues till extream old
Iage.
Lee

132 The Holy Guide. LlB. 5 .

Lee old men take it twice in a nioneth,
for by this meanes will their old age be
freQi till the appointed time of death.

Let young women and maids take it
once in a moneth after their menftrtia,
for by this meanes they will look frefn and
beautiful.

Let women that are in travel take it,
and it will help and ftrengthen them to
bring forth without much pain3 notwith-
ftanding many difficulties.

Let it be given to women that have paft
the years of their menftrua once or twice
in a month,and it will prefervethem very
fre(h, and many times caufe their men-
ftrua to returne, and make them capable,
again of bearing children.

It cures the plague, and expells the
matter of a carbuncle by fweat moft po-
tently.

When I fay that this, or it will doe
thus or thus, I mean any one of the for e-
named preparations; viz. Aurum ptabiley
Oiles3 or Tin&ure of gold.

7he preparations offilver in general.

7. All the feveral preparations of gold
may, except that of Aurum fulminant, be
applyed to fil ver,of which being thus pre-
pared the vertucs are inferiourto thofe o£

gold,

Lib. 5. TheHoly Guide. 133

gold,yet comes neererto them then thofe
ofany other matter whatfoever, or how-
foever prepared.

Note that lilver hath fome peculiar pre-
parations which neither gold nor any o-
t,hermctalls are capable or.

Eeata'j Gift.

8 Take fine Silver , and difTolve it in
twice fo much rectified fpirit of Nitre,
then abftract half of the faid fpirit 111
iand •■) let it ftand a day or two in a cold
place, and much of the Silver will
thoot intoCryirals, and in oft doing moft
cf it.

Thefe Cryftals are very bitter,yet may
be made into pills , and taken inwardly
from three grains to twelve ; they purge
very fecurely and gently, and colour the
lips, tongue, and mouth black. If in this
diilolution of Silver, before it be brought
to Cryftals, half fo much Mercury be dif-
(b!ved,and both moot together intoCry-
ftal?, you mail have a ftone not much un-
like to Allum. This purgeth fooner, and
better, and is not fo bitter ; itcoloureth
the nails, hair, skin, if it be diffblved in
rain-water, with a lovely brown, red, or
black, according as you put more orlefle
thereo£

Take

134 The Holy Guide. L1B.5.

Take of theaforefaidGryftals of filver*
mix with them a like quantity of pure
Saltpeter well powdered , then put this
mixture into the diftilling veflel , at the
bottome of which muft be powred coals
to the thicknefs of two fingers breadth^
then make a ftrong fire, that the veflel and
coals be red hot ; put in a drachm of the
aforefaid mixture, and it will prefently
fublime in a lilver fume into the recipient,
which being feded,put in more,and fo do
till you have enough. Takeout the flow-
ers, anddigeft theminthebeft alcholiza-
ted fpiritof Wine, that thereby the tin-
fture may be extracted, which will be
green.

Be at a'* gretn Qjh of Silver.

9. Take of the abovefaid Cryflals 0$
filveronepart,cf fpiritof Salt armoniack
two or three parts 5 digeftthem together
in a piaffe with a long neck, well ftopt^
twelve or fourteen dayes,(o will the fpirit
of Salt armoniack be coloured with a ve-
ry fpecious blew colours pour it off, and
filter it, then put it into a fmall Retort,
and draw off moft of thefpirit of Armo*
niack , and there will remain in the bot-
tome a grafs-green Liquor. Then draw
ofFall thefpirit, and there will remain ill

the

LiB.5« The Holy Guide. 1?5

thebottomea Salt, which maybepurm-
ed withfpirit of Wine, or be put into a
Retort,and then there will ditto" offa fub-
tle Spirit, and a ftiarp O'l.

This green Liquor is of great ufe for
the gilding of all things prefently.

If you take common rain-water diftil-
<Ied , and diffolve and digeft theaforefaid
Cryftals of lilver for a few daye?,yoii mall
after the'appearance of divers colours
find an effenceatthebottome, notfo bit-
ter as the former, but fweet, and in this
Liquor may all metals in a gentle heat by
long digeftion be maturated, and made fit
for medicine; but note that they muft
firft be reduced into falts , for tben chey
are no more dead bodies, but by this pre-
paration have obtained a new life, and
are the metals of Philofophers.

1o makf Oyle of Silver per del iquium .

io. Take of the aforefaid Salts, ok
Cryftals of iilver, and reverberate them
in a very gentle fire , then put theminto
a Cellar on a Marble ftone, and they will
in two moueths time be tamed into a
Liquor.

T*

1^6 The. Holy Guide. LlB.^

To maty a Liquor of Silver^that Jhall maty the
glafjt wherein it is fo exceeding cold, that no
man is able for- the coldnefs thereof to hold it
in his hand any long time,

11. Take the aforefaid fait of Silver,,
pour upon it the fpirit of fait Armoniackj
and diflblve it throughly , and it will do
asabovefaid. . . ,

With a glade, being full of this Liquor,
you may condeufe the air into water in
the heat of the fumnier * as alfo freeze
water.

To maty Silver as white as [now.

■
12. Take of the calx of Silver made
by the dillolution of it m Aqua fortis £
dulcifie it3and boyl it in a Lixivium made
of Sope-afhes, and it will be as white as
any fhow.

To maty the Silver ■• tree of the Ihilofophers.

13. Take four ounces of aquafortis^ m
which diflolve an ounce of fine Jfilvel?
then take two ounces of aqua, fortis, ift
which is diflblved half an ounce of ar-
gent vive ; mix thefe two Liquors together
irt a clear glafie with a pint of pure wa-
tery

L » B. 5 . 'the Holy Guide. 1 3 7

ter,ftop the glaiTe very clofe3and you (hall
fee, day after day, a tree to sjrow by little
and little, which is wonderful pleafantco
behold.

To (referve Tbilofofhers Gold and Silver,

14.' I have fet down feveral vulgar pre-
parations of Gold and Silver, and of al-
moft all things eife,l (hall now crave leave
to give an account of fome Philofophicai
preparations of the Philofophers Gold
and Silver. For indeed the Art of pre-
paring of them is the true Alchymie , in
:omparifon of which all the Chymical
iifcoveries are but Abortives, and found
3ut by accident, viz. by endeavouring af-
i{ :erthis. 1 would not have the world be-
ieve3that I pretend to the underftanding
acJ)fthem, yet I would have them know,
ei|:hat I am not incredulous as touching the
)offibility of that great philofophicai
vork,which many have fo much laboured
ifter, and many have found. To me
here is nothing in the world leems more
loflible, and whofoever mall without pre-
udice read over my Harmony oftheWorld,
■hall almoft,whether he will or no f unlefc
»ie refolves net to believe any thing
though never fo credible ) be convinced
f the portability of it. What unworthi-

nefe

138 TheHolj Guide. L1B.5 i

nefsGod fawin Gold more then in othcij

things, that heffioulddeny the feed of

multiplication (which is the perfe&ioil

of the creatures) to it, and give it to al

things befides, feems to me to be a quefti

en as hard to be refolved, yea,and harde

then the finding out theElixarit felf, i

the difcovering of which thegreateft dii

ficulty is, not to be convinced of the eai

nefs thereof. If the preparations wei

difficult, many more would find it of

then do (faith Sandivogius ) for they ca

themfelves upon molt difficult operation

and arc very fubtle in difficult difcov*

ries,*which the Philofophers never drean

ed of. Nay, faith the aforefaid Autho

it Hermes himfelfwere now living, tog«

ther with the fubtle-witced Geber , ar

moft profound Raitnund Lul 'lie, they won!

be accounted by our Chymifts not f

Philofophers , but rather for learnei

They were ignorant of tbofe fo m

ny diftiliations , fo many circulation

fo many calcinations , and fo mar

other innumerable operations

Artifts now adayes ufed , which inde<

men of this age did find out and inven

ed out of their book ; Yet there is 01

thing wanting to us which they did, vi

to know how to make the Philofophc

ftone.or phylicaltin&ure3,the proceiTes

whic

LiB.5.. The Holy Guide. 13^ $*+

which , according to fome Philosophers*
arethefe.

Kit

7be Procefs of the terrefliria! Hali Cvtli.

15. Take the mineral Eteflrutn , being
immature and made very fubtle,put it in-
to its own fphere, that the impurities and
uperfluities maybe warned away , then
purge it as much as poffibly you can with
Stibium, after the Alchymiftical way, left
*y its impurity thou fuffer prejudice^ then
-efolve it in the ftomack of an Eftridge*
vhich is brought forth in theearth , and
hrough the (harpnefs of the Eagle is con-
brtated in its vertue.

Now when the Elettrum is confumed*
nd haxh after its refolution received the
olour of the Marigold , do not forget to
educe it into a fpiritual tranfparent ef-
enc?, which is like to true Ambers then
idd half fo much as the EleUrum did
reigh before its preparation of the ex-
pended Eagle, and oftentimes abftraft
rom it the ftomach of the Eftridge , and
;>y this means the Elefirunt will be made
inore fpiritual. Now when the ftomack
►f the Eftridge is wearied with labour, it
vill be neceffary to refrelh it, and alw«5fes
o abftra5tit.Laftly,when it hath again loft
ts (harpnefsjaddche tartarisned quint-
Z z cfitace,

1 1

** 140 7 he Holy Guide. L1B.5.JJ

cffence, yet fo, that it be fpoiled of its]
rednefsthe height of four fingers, and!
that pafTe over with it. This do fo oftenil
till it be of it felf white, and when it is>
enough, and thou feeft that fign, fublime
it ; fo will the Ele&rum be converted into
the whiteuefsof an exalted Eagle, am
with a little more labour be tranfmutcd
into deep rednefs , and then it is fit foi
medicine.

Ihe procefs of the Tantayvx •, and Vrojefiw
according to the Rofie Crucians,

16. Take of our Earth through elever
degrees eleven grains j of our Gold, anc
not of the vulgar, one grain; of our Lune
not of the vulgar , two grains ; but b<
thou admonifhed that thou take not thi
Gold and Silver of the vulgar5for they an
dead,but take ours which are living, thei
put them into our fire, and there wil
thence be made a dry Liquor: Firft thi
Earth will berefolved into water, whict
is called the Mercury of Philofophers
and in that water it will refolve the bo!
dies of the Sun and Moon, andconfunn
vjiem, that there remain but the tentl1
part with one part, and this will be th<
HumidmnRadkale Metatlkum. Then taki
the water of the falc Nitre of our earth

ii

I JB.S. the Holy Guide. 1 4 1

§!i which there is a living (treamif thou
iggeftthe pit knee deep, take therefore
he water of it, but take it clear, ahdfet
>veritthat Humidum Radkale, and put it
ver the fire of putrefaction and genera-
ton, but not fuch as was that in the firft
peration. Govern all things with agreat
eal of difcretion, until there appear co-
jurs like to the tail of a Peacock; govern
by digefting of it, and be not weary,riU
lefe colours ceale , and there appear
jroughout the whole a green colour,and
>of the reft; and when thou (halt fee in
e bottome afhes of a fiery colour , and
je water almoft red, open the vefTel, dip
La feather, and fmear over fome iron
ith it;if lttinge, have in rcadinefs thac
ater which is*J the Menftruum of the
forld, f out of the fphere of the Moon
often rectified, until it can calcine
old) put in fo much of that water us
as the cold air which went in , boyl ic
(;ain with the former fire until it tin^e
{fin.
j

kRofie Crucian universal Medicine, and
a way how to difiolve Metals.

17. Take the matter 3 and grinde it
ith amphyfical. contrition , as diligently
may be d then Tea it upon the lire, and

. let

2 z 2

1 4.2 The Holy Guide. Lib. $,|

let the proportion of fire be known , viz J
that itonly ftir up the matter, and in ]
lhort time, that fire, without any othel
laying on of hands, will accomplifh thl
whole work, becaufe it will putrifie, coi
rupt, generate, and pcrfeft, and make t
appear the three principal colours, blacl
white,and red : And by the means of on
fire, the medicine will be multiplied, if:
be joyned with the crude matter, not or
ly in quantity,but alfo in vertue. Witr
ai! they might therefore fearchout th
fire ( which is mineral, equal, continua
vapours not away , except it be too muc
ihrred up, partakes of Sulphur , is take
from el few here then from the mattei
pulleth down all things, difTolveth, cor
gealeth, and calcine?, and is artificial c
find out, and that by a compendious an
near way, without any coft, at leaft ver
(mail, is not tranfmuted with the matte
becaufe it is not of the matter) and the
(halt attain thy wifh , becaufe it dothtf
whole work, and is the key of the Philoijc
phers,which they never revealed.

Ihej rocefs of the Panarea and Hermes Med
ernes , and the Art of projection of ti

LI xer.

-

iS. Tiue without all falfity, certai

an

ILlB. 5. the Holy Gmde. 143

land mo# true j that which is inferiour is
is that which is fuperiour, and that which
s fuperiour is as that which is inferiour ;
ead my Harmony of the Worldy for the ac-
ompltfhing of the miracles of one thing.
\nd as all things were from one, by the
aediationof one, (ball things have pre-
ceded from this one thing by adaptati-
on1 The Father therefore is the Sun, and
ic Mother thereof the Moon , the Wind
irried it in its beliy,theNurfe thereof is
tie Earth.

The F'ather of all the perfe&ion of the
hole World is this : the vertue thereof
entire,if it be turned into earth : Thbu
ale feparate the earth from the fire, the
ibtle from the thick, fweedy, with a
eat deal of judgement. It afcends from
e earth up to heaven , and again de-
ends down to the earth, and receives the
>wers of fuperiolirs and inferiour s. So
ou haft the glory of the whole world;
erefore let all obfcurityfly from thee:
his is the ftrong fortitude of the whole
irtitude, becaufe it (hall overcome every
ing that isfubtle , and penetrate every
-lid thing,as the world is created: Hence
ill wonderful adaptations be, whereof
is is the manner, wherefore I am called
trmes Irifmegiftus, having three parts of
ephilofophy of the whole world. It is
Z z 3 com-

i44 The Holy Guide. Lib.S

compleat , what I have fpoken of tfcj
operation of the Sun.

Thefe Medicines are good againft a
Difeafes.

Now if you do know the firfr Matte
yon have difcovered the Sanctuary
Nature,there is nothing between you an
thefe Treafures , the Mountain of Di;
monds,the Youth and his Medicines, an
all the powers of Ajlromancy and Geomai
ey are at your command h but you mu
open the door,I if your defire lead you c
to the practice. Confide.v well with yot
felf what manner of man you are, aj]
what it is you would do ; for it is no fma
matter you have refolved, to be a Co-of
rator with the Spirit of the living God, an
to minifter to him in his worl^ of General
en: Have a care therefore that you c
not hinder his work j for if your heat ej
ceeds the natural proportion , you have fti
red the wrath of the moifi Natures ,and the
will ftand up againft the Central fire, an
the Central fire againft them, and there wi
be a terrible divifton in the Chaos : buttr
fweet Spirit* of Peace, the true etern;
QuintefTence , will depart from the Eh
xnents,leaving both them and you to cor
fufion* neither will he apply himfelftf
the matter, as long as it is in your violer
deftroying hands: take heed therefor

lea

L1B.5. The Holy Guide. 145

leaft you turn partner with the Serpent^
for it is the Devils defign from the begin-
ning of the world a to fct Nature at vari-
ance with her felf, that he may totally
corrupt and deftroy her; Ne tu augeas Fa-
f«w,do not further his defignsj many men
will laugh at thisjbut onmy*vord,l fpeak
nothing but what lrmve known by very
good experience, therefore believe me, for
my own part,it was ever my defire to bu-
ry thefc fecrets in filence,or to print them
out in fhadows, but I have Ipoken thus
clearly and openly out of the affection'
I bear to foine , who have deferved much
more at my hands : True it is,l intended
fometimes to expofe a grearer work to the
world , which I promiTed in my Temple of
Wifdome -, but 1 have been fince acquaint-
ed with that world, and I found it bafe
and unworthy. I fear not Man, and his
noife is nothing to me ; Heeknot hisap-
plaufe, and fo I end the fift Book.

Zz4 THE

THE

|Rofie Crofs

UNCOVERED,

AND

The Places , Temples >

holy Houfes, Caftles5and invifi-

ble Mountains of the Brethren difco-

vered and communicated to the World,

for the full fatisfa&ion of Philofo-

phers, Alchymifts, Aftromancers 5

Gcomancers,Phyfitians and

Aftronomers.

Whereunto is added,

A Bar to flop Thomas street from his im-

pudentAttempts, and mad clambering

"PtoAftronomys to which is demon-

itrated, that his Tabula Corolina is all

talfc, and that he belyes his Authors,

notwithftanding he was nine years

ftuding his own admired

Experience.

:By f+BQim Ge*.^ ^, A 5erva« *f

Ood^anda Secretary of Nature,

I 0 K V 0 N,

;& ttip ncp rtto tfp t$P tfp nm ttip tsto ;3fe

To my much honoured

Friends, Thowas Temple oiBour-

ton upon the Water in the County

of Glocejier Efquire,Page to Prince

Rupert 9 and Gentleman of the

Kings Privie Chamber.

AND

Cbrijiopber Rodd of Hereford

Efqsand in Cliffords- Intone of the
Attourneys of the Kings Bench.

All Celeftial and terreftrial Hap-
pinefs be wifhed.

Gentlemen^

AS toyifli Ay res pleafe tri*
vial Ears,fo they kifle the
fancy and betray it } but behold
without flattery or expectation
of gain j I give you an unheard

of

of piece of Kofie Crucian Philo*
fophy and Fhyficl^, I do not cry
Hail firft, and after crucifie 5 I
prcfent it to you \ becaufe you
are two guards of f&fcty ; and if
you except it not 3 I (hall not
therefore be angry, but quefti-
on my felf for this preempti-
on , to come (o plain betore
Wifdome and Vcrtue ; you gave
me the firft encouragement,
and my Pbilofophy returnes to
you for Patronage ; I know
your Abilities to difcern, and
Knowledge to defend } you
have Art and Candour r let the
one judge ', let the ether excufe.

June 9. Tour moji humble Servant

1662.

JOHN HEYDON.

An

An Apologue for an
Epilogue.

I Shall here tell you what R.ofie Crucians
are,and that Mofes was their Father, and
he was €>e« irus i fome fay they were cf
the order of Elias, fome fay the Vjfciples
of Ezekiel; others define them to be 'Toup^s
<£t fB&v))ykiMv&> u<mi§ pny cite gar thia$ l$a.K-
ft»f ^ c*7ct, deopcoffcy toIvta >£ dHvxffcts', i. e<

The Officers of the Genera hlTimo of the
world .that are as the eyes and ears of the great
King, feeing and hearing all things ; they are
Seraphic ally illuminated , as Mofes wa?3 ac-
cording to this order of the Elements , Earth
refind to Water, Water to Air, Air to Fire ;
fo of a man to be one of the Heroes, of a He-
j roes a Dxmon,orgoodGen\us,af a Genius
a -partaker of Divine things, and a companion
of the holy company of unbodied Soules and
immortal Angels, and according to their vehi-
cles,^ ver futile life, turning themfelvesy Pro-
teus- like, into any jhape.

But there is yet Arguments to procure
Mr. Walfoord, and T. Williams, Rofie
Crucians by election ^ and that is the mirae'es

that

that were done by them , in my fight 5 for it
fhouldfeem Rofie Crucians were not only in-
itiated into the Mofaical Theory, but have ar-
rived alfo to the power of working miracles, as
Mofes, Elias, Ezekiel, and the fucceeding
Prophets did , as being tranf ported where they
fleafe, as Habakkuk^^ from Jewry taBa-
by\on,oras Philip 3 after he had baptized the
Eunuch, to Azotus , and one of thefe went
from me to a friend 0 f mine in Devon fhi re,
and came and brought me an anfwer to Lon-
don the fame day, which it four dayes journey,
they taught me excellent prediUions of Ajirolo-
gy^and Earthquakes 5 they flacky the T I ague in
Cities ; they filence the violent Winds and tern-
pefts j they calm the rage of the Sea and Ri-
vers-, they walk^in the Air, they frujlratethe
malicious afpetls of Witches ; they cure all Dif-
eafes -, I de fired one of thefe to tell me whether
my Complexion were capable of the fociety of
my^ood Genius ? When I fee you a^ainjaid
he J. will tell you , which it, (when hepleafes
to come to me, for I kpow not where to go to
him ) When If aw him^ then he faid, Te fbonld
pray to God 5 for a good and holy man can offer
no greater nor more acceptable facrifice to God,
then the oblation of him f elf , hit foul.

He faid alfo , that the good Geni i are as the
benizne eyes of God, running to and fro in the
world , with love and pitty beholding the inno-
cent endeavours of harmlefs and fingle- hearted

men; ever ready to do them good , and to help
them '■> and at his going away he bid me beware
cf my feeming friends, who would do me all the
hurt they could , and caufe the Governours of
the Nations to be angry with me, and fet bounds
to my liberty : which truly happened tome , as
they did indeed : Many things more he told
me before we parted, but 1 Jhall not name them
here.

For this Rode Crucian PhyficJ^ er Medi-
cines, I happily and unexpectedly light upon in
Arabia , which will prove a reftauration of
health to all that are aptied with that fick~
fiefs, which we ordinarily call natural, and all
other Difeafes, as the Gouty Vropfie, Leprofie
find F ailing- fickpefs ; and thefe men may be
"aid to have no fundi infight in the body , and
that Walfoord, Williams, and others of the
fraternity now living, may bear up in the fame
likely Equipage, with thofe-noble Divine fpirits
their Tredeceffors ; though the unskjlfulnefs in
men commonly acknowledge more of fuper-
natural pffiftance in hot un fettled fancies, and
-perplexed melancholy, then in the calm and di-
ftinci ufe of reafon \ yet for mine own part,
but not without fubmiffon to better judgements,
Hook, upon thefe Roue Crucians above all
men truly infpired, and more then any that pro-
fejfedor pretended themfelves fo , this fixteen
hundred years, and I am raviflxd with adyni-
ration of their miracles and tranfcendent me-
chanical

ch anient inventions , for the fatving the Phe-
nomena ?"# the worlds I may without offence
therefore compare them with Bezaliel and
Ahol iab5 thofe skjlful and cunning Workers of
the Tabemacle^who^as Mofes tefifies, were fit*
ted with the Spirit of God, and therefore wer&
of an excellent undemanding to find out alt
manner of curious worl^.

Nor is it any more argument , that thefe Ro-
•fie Crucians are not inffiredy becaufe they do
not fay they are ; then that others are infpired9
becaufe they fay they are ; which to me is m
argument at all ; but the fuppreffion of what
fo happened 5 would argue much mote fobrietf
and mo defy •, when as the profeffion of it with
fober men , would be fufpecled offome piece of
melancholy and dijlrattion , efpecially in theft-
things \ where the gr and pie a fur e is the evidence
and exercife of reafon, not a bare, beliefs or an
ineffable fenfe of life, in refpeel whereof there
is no true Chrifiian but he is infpired ; but if
any more zealous pretender to prudence and
righteoufnefs , wanting either leifure or ability
to examine thefe Ro fie Crucian Medicines to
thebottome, (halt notwithflanding either con-
demn them or admire them, he hath v.nbe
tontingly and indifcreetly ventured out of b
own fphere , and I cannot acquit him of inju*
fiice or folly : Nor am 1 a Rofie Crucian,
mr do I [peak of fpite, or hope of gain, or for
any fuch matter 3 there is no eaufe^ God kpows,

rr

ml envie no man, be he what he will be, I am m
Mfbjfitian, never wm, nor never mean to bs :
what I am it makes no matter as to my pro-
feffion.

Lajlly 5 thefe holy and good men weuld have
mekjtow, that thegreatefi fw et and perfection
of a vertuous foul, is the kindly accompli jhment
of her own nature , in true wifdome and divine
love ; and thefe miraculous things that are done
by them, are , that that worth and knowledge
(hat is in them may be ta\en notice of, and that
od thereby may be glorified , whofe witnejfes
they are; but no other happinefs accrues to them
from this, but that hereby they may be in a better
capacity ofmakjng others happy.

Spittle- fields this
10th of May>i662.

John Hey don,

A a a THE

!

^v . v v ., v v v.vv Vj

THE *

ROSIE CROSSE

UNCOVERED,

The Sixt Book,

O D 5 becaufe he was
good 3 did not grieve to
have others enjoy his
Goodnefs, ( that is,to be
and to be well ) meaning
to make a World, full*6f
ill kmdsof everlafting and changeable
hings ; Firft made all, and blended them
n one whole confufed mafle and lump
ogether, born up by his own Weight,
)ending round upon it felf.

Then feeing itlayftill5and that nought

ould beget and work upon it felf; he

Aaa 2 forced

TheRoJieCrofs. LiB.6.

foiled out , and fund red a way round .
about,a fine lively Piece (which they call
Heaven) for the Male Mover and Work?
tug s leaving fhll the reft as grofTe and
deadly 3 which moves in oppofition to,
Light>and jjpalled I) arkjtefs, the reward of
the wickedT and below this lies the Fe»
male, to receive the working and fafhion-^
ing , which we term the four beginnings}
(or Elements) Earth, Water, Air and Fire $
And thereof fofin&s the Love which w^'
fee get between them , and the great de*
lire to be joyned again and coupled tew,
gether.

Then, that thefe might be no Numbe
of Confufion in doing caufes, but all
flow from one head , as he is One ,
drew all force of working and vertue
begetting into one narrow and rour
compafs,which we call 5c/;frorn thence
fent out, fpread and beftowed all abo
the world, both above and below, win
again meeting t« gether , made one gene
ral Light ,He at Mature, Life and Soul of thi
World, the caufe of all things.

And becaufe it becometh the might
wifdome and pleafure of God tc make anc
rule the infinite variety of changes her*
below, and not evermore one felf-ftm
thing ; He commanded that (one Light i
many) to run his eternal and reftiefs Rac

.

Lib. 6. The Rojie Crofs $

to and fro, this way and that way, that by
their variable prefence,abfence and meet-
ing they might fitly work the continual
change of flitting; Creatures. So Virgil
fings:Thus4tranilated by JLugenius Tbeo*
didacius.

And firfi the Heavens, Earth, and liquid

Plain,
The Msons bright Globe, and Stars Tita-

nian,
A Spirit fed within , ffread through the

whole,
And with the huge heap mixt infusd a

Soul :
Hence Man, and Beafis , and Birds derive

their firain,
And Monjlers floating in the marbled

Main.
Ihefe feeds have fiery vigor, and a birth
Of Heavenly race, but clog'd with heavie

Earth.

Now there are a kind of men , as they
:hemfelves report, named Ro fie Crucians,
!i divine Fraternity that inhabite the
Suburbs of Heaven , and thefe are the
Officers of the Generaliffimo of the World,
hat are as the eyes and eais ofthegreac
(ing,feein^ and hearing all things : they
ay thefe Kofie Crucians are feraphically
Aaa3 illume

The Rofie Crofs. Li B.6.

illuminated, as Mofes was, according to
this order of the Elements j Earth refin'd
to Water, Water to Air, Air to Fire. So
of a man to be one of the Heroes, of a He-
roes a 'Damon, or good Genius, of a Genius a
partaker of Divine things, and a Compa-
nion of th£ holy Company of unbodied
Souls and immortal Angels, and accord-
ing to their Vehicles,a verfatile life, turn- 1
jng themfelves, Frote us -like, into any
(hape.

But the richeft happinefs they efteem
is the gift of healing and medicine > It/
was a long time, great labour and travel
before they could arrive to thisBlifTe a-
bovefet; they were atfirftpoor Gentle-
men that ftudied God and Nature, as
they themfelves confefs; (faying) feeing
the only wife and merciful God in thefc
latter dayes hath poured out fo richly his
mercy and goodnefs to mankind , where-
by we do attain more and more to the
perfeft knowledge of his Son JefusChrift
and Nature ; that juftly we may boaft of
the happy time, wherein there is not only
difcovered unto us the half part of the
World, which was heretofore unknown
and hidden; but he hath alfomadema-
rufeft unto us many wonderful and never
heretofore fcen works and Creatures of
Nature, and moreover hath raifed men,

in-

LiB,6. The Rofie Crofs. 5

indued with great wifdome, which might
partly renew and reduce all Arts ( in this
our Age3 fpotted and irnperfeft ) to per*
fe&ion.

So Finally man might thereby undef-
(land his own Noblenefs and worth, and
why he is called Microcofmus, and hew far
knowledge extendeth in nature*

Although the rude World herewith will
be but little pleafed, but rather fmile and
fcoffe thereat ; alfo the pride and cove-
teoufuefs of the Learned is fo great, it will
Hot fufFer them to agree together > but
were they united, they might out of all
thofe things, which in this our age God
doth fo richly beftow upon us, collect the
Book,, of Nature, or a perfect method of
all other Arts3 whereof this is the chief-,
and therefore called the K. C. Axiomaia%
Butfuch is their oppoiition that theyitill
keep, and are loath to leave the old courfe
efteeming Forphory, Arijtotle and Galen, yea
and that which hath but a meer fhew of
learning, more then the clearand mani-
feft light and tiuth: who if they were now
living, with much joy would kave their
erroneous doctrines. But here is too great
weaknefs for fuch a great work.

And although in Iheotogie, Thyfick^ and
theMathematickj, the truth doth oppofe it
it felfj neverthelefs the Old enemy by his
A a a 4 fubtilty

6 TheRofieCrofs. Lib. 6.

fubtilty and craft doth (hew himfelf in
hindering every good purpofe by his in>
ftttiments and contentions ( wavering
people. ) Tofuch an intent of a : e.'ieral
reformation, the moft godly and feraphi
cally illuminated Father, our Brother,
C. K a German, the chief and Original
of our Fraternity, hath much and long
time laboured, who by reafon of his po-
verty (although a Gentleman born, and
defcendedof Noble Parents J in the fifth
year of his Age was placed in a Cloifter,
where he had learned indifferently the
Greek and Latine tongues, ( who upon
hisearneftdeflre and requeft ) being yet
ill his growing years, was aflociated to a
Brother. P. A. L. who had determined to
go to Apam'/a.

Although his brother dyed in Cyprm,
and fo never came to Apamia^y tt our bro-
ther C. R. did not return but fhipped
himfelf over, and went toDantafco, mind-
ing from thence to go to Apamia but by
reafon of the feeblenefs or his body^ he
remained frill there, and by his skd in
fhyfick^ he obtained much favour with the
Jjhmalits. In the mean time he became
by chance acquainted with the wife men
of Dante ar in Arabia, and beheld what
great wonders they wrought, and how
Nature was difcovered unto them, hereby

was

LiB.6. TheRofteCrojs,

was that high and noble fpirit of brother
C. R. fo ftirred up that Apantia was not fo
much now in his mind as Damcar ; alfo
he could not bridle his defires any longer,
but made a bargain with the Arabians that
they ftaould carry hjm for a certain fum
of mony to Vamcari this was in the 16th.
year of his Age, when the wife received
him C as he himfelf witneffeth ) not as a
Stranger, but as one whom they had
long expected }they called him by his
name, and (hewed him other fecrecs out
of his Cloyfter, whereat he could not but
mightily wonder.

He learned there .[better the Arabian

i tongue : fo that the year following he
Tranflated the Book M.into good Latine,
and 1 have put it into Englijk^ wearing
the Title of The wifem am Crown ; where-
unto is added, A new Method ofRofie Cruci-
an Fhyfick^ This is the plaee where he did

I learn hisPhyfick and Philofophie how to
raife the dead ; for example, as a Snake
cut in peeces and rotted in dung, will
every piece prove a whole Snake again5&c.
and then they began to pra&ife further
matters, and to kill birds that are bred
byforceof feed and conjunction of Male
and Female , and to burn them before
they are cold in a glafs, and fo rotted, and
then inclofedin a mel, to hatch it under

8 IhtRofteCrofs. LlB.6.

a Hen*, and rcftore the fame ; and other
ftrange proofs they made of Dogs, Hogs,
orHorfes, and by the like kindly cor-j
ruption to raife them up again, and re- 5
new them : And at laft they could reftore, j
by the fame courfe, every Brother that!
died to life again, and fo continue many J
Ages; the rules you find in the fourth:
book.

Let me fpeak a word ( although I anv
no Rofie Crucian) of this matter and man-
ner of reftoring of a man ; Let us call it be-
fore Reafon> and confider what is that Seed
that makes man, and the place where he
is made : what is ail the work, is it any
thing elfe but a part of man f except his
mind ) rooted in a continual, even, gentle*
moiji) and natural heat ? Is it not like that
the whole body, rotted in like manner,
and in a womb agreeable, fhall fwim out,
at Jail quicken, and arifethe fame thing I
as Medea found true upon Jafons father,,
nnd made h'imyoung again, as lully faith,
llecoquendo. And Hermes was after this.
manner ratted from death to Life ; fa-
was lirgil the Poet : but the Spanijh Earl'
failed, through the ignorance ofhis Friend
the artift that miltook the heat, moifture,
and tamper of the work, as you heard in
the third Book.

But

iLiB.6. The Rojie Croft.

But I cannot teti3 1 will neither avow nor dif-
avow the Matter'? nature is deep, and won-
derful in her deeds, if they be fearched
to the bottom, and may fuffer this, but
not Religion. But to our R. C% who lear-
ned his Matbematickj here, whereof the
world hath juftcaufe to rejoyce, if%there
were more love, and lefs envy.' After
three years he returned again with good
confent, (hipped himftlf over Sinus Ara-
bicut into Egypt 5 where he remained not
long, but only took better notice there,
of the Plants and Creatures, of Mineral
Medicines, the famous Aurum Petabile,
that cures all difeafes in body and rninde,
andoftheOyl of gold.

Then he failed over the whole Mediter-
ranean Sea, for to come unto Fezo where
the Arabian, had directed him. And it is
a great (hame unto us that wife men, fo
far remote the one from the other, would
not only be of one opinion,hating all con-
tentious writings; but alio be fo willing
and ready, under the Seal of Secrecy to
impart their fecrets to others.

Every year the Arabians and Africans
do fend one to another, inquiring one
of another out of their Arts, if happ lythey
have found out fome better things ior if experi-
ence had weakened tbeir Ilea fons,y early there
came fomething to h^ht , whereby the

hlathe-

lo 1 he Rofte Crofs. L i b. 6, ji

Mathematics Cbifir •and Magtr ( for irk; |J
thofe are they of Fra molt skilful ) werqj ^
amended •, as there is # now adayes iqi
Germany no want of learned men, Caba.,) in
/i/fr, Phyfitians, Aftrologers, Geomancers, and', fr*
Philosophers, were there but love and more? ^
kindftefs among them, or that the moflr'i oigl
pare of them would not beep their fecrets: i tovi
as we Germans likewife might gather to*i iif
gether many things, if there were the k
like unity: and defire of fearching out oil
fecrets amongft us.

After two vears, Brother C, R. depar-
ted the City Fez, and failed with many
coftly things into Spain , hoping well $
he fo well and fo profitably fpent his time
in Travel , that the learned in Europe
would highly rejoyce with him, and be-
gan toflule, and order all their Studies,^
according to thofe found and fure foun-
dations : He" therefore conferred with
thelearnedin Madrid, (hewing them the,
Errors of Sodom and Gomorrah, and how
the faults of the Church by Epifcopacy,
and the whole Philofopbia Moralis was to
be amended.

But becaufe their acceptance happened
to him contrary to his expectation, be-
ing then ready bountifully to impart all
his Arts and Secrets to the Learned^ if

...^ — .-- -- — — _,

they would have but undertaken to write

the

J.1B.6. The Rofie Crofs. 1 1

he trye and infallible Axiomata> which he
tnew would direft them, like a Globe or
Zircle, to the only middle point and
:entrum, and( as it is^ufual among the
Arabians ) it mould only ferve to the wife
ind Learned for a Rule, that alfo there
might be a fociety in Canaan which fhould
have Gold, Silver, andprecions Stones,
fufficient for to beftow them on Kings
for their neceflary ufes, and lawful pur-
poses : with which fuch as be Governours
might be brought np to learn all that
which God hathfuffered man to know.

Brother C. ft. after many Travels, and
his fruitlefs true inftru&ions, returned
again into Germany , and there buildeda
neat and fitting habitation, upon a little
BUI or Mount, and on the Hill there refted
alwayes a cloud ; and he did there render
himfelf vifible or invifible, at his own
will and difcretion. In this houfe he
fpent a great time in the MathematicJ^s^nd
made many fine Inftruments, Ex Gtnnibus
hujus Artispartibus.

After five years came into his mind the
wilhed return of the children oilfrael o\\t
of Egypt, how God would bring them out
of bondage with the Inftrument Mofes.
Then he went to his Cloyfter, to which
he bare affe&ion, and defiied three of
his brethren to goe with him to Mofet9

Ihe

1 2 The Bofte Crofs. LiB-6.

The chojen fervant of God. Brother G. lrm
Brother!. A. and Brother 1.0. who be-
iides, chat they had more knowledge in
the Arts, then at that time many other&j
had> he did binde thofe three unto him*'
felf, to be faithful, diligent, and fecret;*
as alfo to commit carefully to writing!
whzt Mojes did -, and alfo all that which he]
mould direft and inftruft them in, tothej
end chat thofe which were to come, andl
through efpecial Revelation mould be re-'
ceived into this Fraternity, might not be
deceived of the leaft fyllable and word.

After this manner began the Fraterni-j
ty of the Rofie Croft, rirft by four perfonsj
who dyed and rofe again until Chrift, and]
then they came to worfhip as the Star gui-J
d^d them to Bethlem of Judea, where iayj
our Saviour in his mothsrs Arms ; and then?
they opened their Treafure and prefeuted'
unto him Gifts, Goldy Frankjnfenfe, and'
Mjrrhe , and by the Commandment of
God went home to their habitation.

Thefe four waxing young again fuc-
ceffively many hundreds of years, made
a Magical Language and Writing, with a
large \'Diii ion ary> which we yet daily ufe ta
Godspraife and glory, and do find greac
tffifdom therein ; they made alfo the rirft
part of the book At. which I will fhortly
publish by die Title of 7be mfemans
Crown. Now

LlB.6- TheRoJfeCrofs. J$

Now whileft Brother C. K. was in a
proper womb quickning, they concluded
to draw and receive'yet others more into
tf«sir Fraternity: To this end was chofen
Brother K. G. his deceafed Fathers Brothers
fon-y Brother B. a skilful Painter, G. their
Secretary, and P. D. another Brother
elected by confent} and E.F. all Germans^
excepe I A. Co in all they were nine in
number, all Batchelors and oivowed Virgi-
nity ; by thofe was collected a volumn of
all that which man can defire, wifh or
hope for.

After fuch a moft laudable fort they
didfpend their lives j and although they
were free from all difcafes and pain, yet
notwithstanding they could not live and
pafs their time appointed of God: So they
all died, at the death of our Lord and
Saviour Jefus Chrift, and their Spirits
attended him into glory. Now the fecond
row of thefe men by many were called
the Wife men of the Eaft ; and eighty one
years the Secrets of this Fraternity were
concealed.

New the true and fundamental Rela ti-
on of finding the memory of the Frater-
nity of the Rofie Crofs is this. A learned
man in Gemany^ went to find out the
wife men of the Eaft into many Countries^
tut could never hear of any of them : So

being

14 The Rojte Crofs. LlB-6#

being provided of Gold and Silver , Me-
dicines5Tin£hires and Telefmes, he chofe
a Matter of Numbers A. to be his Com-
panion : and finding an old ftrange ha-
bitation D then they fet themfelves to alter
thisbuildingjin which renewing,he light-
ed upon the memorial Table, which was
caft in BrafTe^and contained all the names
of the Brethren , with fomc few other
things? this he transferred to another
more fitting Vault with great joy ; for he
had never heard of this Fraternity,being
all dead eighty one years before his time.
fn this Table ftuck a great nail, fomewhat
ftrong, fo that when it was with force
drawn out, it took with it a ftoneand a
piece of thin wall, or plaiftering of the
hidden door, and fo, unlooked for, unco-
vered the door; wherefore we did with m
joy and longing throw down the reft of.
the wall, and cleared the door , upon
which was written in great Letters , Fofi
8 1 . Annos Patebo^vf ith th e year of our Lord
under it.

Wherefore we gave God thanks , and
let it reft that fame night ; in the morn*
ing following we opened the door, and
there appeared to our fight a Vault of
feven fides and corners , every fide,fiv£
foot broad , and the height of nine foot. ilt'
Although the Sun never Aimed in this |J({

Vatri%

T

Lib. 6. The Rojie Crofs 15

Vault, neverthelefs it was enlightened
with another Sun which had learned tins
of che Sun, and was iituated in the upper
part in the center of the ceiling; in the
midrr, inftead of a Tomb-ftonc , was a
round Altar, covered over with a Plate of
BrafTe, and thereon was this engraven.

A, C. K. C- Hoc univerfi Compendium
uniws mihi Sepulchrum Feri,

Round about the firft circle or brim
lood.

Jefiis Mihi Omnia.

sr

In the middle were four Figures, in-
lofed in four Circles, whofe circumfcrip-
•on was

1. Nequaquam Vacuum,

2. Legis Jugum.

3. Libert M EvangeliL

4. Dei gloria intaUa.
This all clear and bright, asalfothe

>venth fide, and the 2,'Heptagom : fo we
neeled all down together, and gave
ianks to the fole Wife, fole Mighty, and
le Eternal God, who hath taught us
tore then all mens wit could have found
at, and praifed be his holy Name : This
auh we parctd into three parts , the up -
B b b f*r

16 ihcRojie Grofs. LlB6i

per part or celing, the wall or fide; the
ground or floor.

Of the upper part you {hall underftand
no more of it at this time, but that it waj
divided according to the festn fides ir
the Triangle , which was in the brigbi ml
Center ; but what therein is contained
you mall, God willing, (that are defirouj
of our Society) behold the fame witBur:
your own eyes 5 but every fide or waii i leu;
parted into ten fquares , every one witlJoi
their feveral Figures and Sentences, a ept
they are truly mewed , and fet forth Con tk
centratum here in this Book. re

Thebottome again is parted in the tri ous
angle,but becaufe therein is defcribed th hi
power and rule of the inferiourGover dat
Hours, we leave to manifeft the fame, fo 16
fear of the abufe by the evil and ungodl k
world. But thofe that are provided am ndj
ftored with the heavenly Antidote , the mn;
do without fear or hurt tread on the hei ^
of Otpiovtvg the eld and evil Serpent ion!
which this our Age is well fitted for. Ev$ ley
ry fide or wall had a door for aChefl
wherein there lay divers things, efpecial
ly all the Works of C. K. how he and hi!
Brethren railed each other to Life again
in thofeBocks were written of their goklj i
to Bethlehem to worship our Saviour JeCu
Ghrilt, and of the ltineramw} mdvitar,

Lib. 6. the Rofie Crop. if

of C. R. [n another Cheft were Looking*
piaffes of divers vertues > as alfo in other
places were little Bels, and Rings, which
f any man put upon his finger,he Teemed
low in green,then in white and blew,red
md bloom, and all manner of colours ,
hus will his Garments change into a
Hire colour every moment : f here wers
ri >urning Lamps, and wonderful artificial
11 Jongs, which they had kept eve,r lince
H jod fpaketo Mofes in the Mount : They
, iept the old Tertament carefully,and ex-
e£ted Chrifi to be born; and chafe forty
ve more to bear witnefs to theincredu-
t! dus World and fuperftitious Se&s, that
1 thrift is the Son of God, and was crucifi-
d at Jerufalem ; and left thefe Brethreii
11 the wonderful Works of God, and the
fts of Mofes and the Prophets , to the
id,that if it mould happen, after many
undreds of years,the Order orF^terni-
r (bould come to nothingrand if Tyrants
rould burn the old Teftament, which
ley bear witnefs to be the Word of God,
lifiat then they might by this only Vaulc
i reftored again.

And there is another Vault or Habita-
on of the Brethren in the Weft of Eng-
nd % and there is recorded all the New
eftament, and every Chapter explain*

B b b 2 JHo*

1 8 The Rojie Crofs. L » B . 6, 1

Now as yet we had not feen the deadt
body of our careful and wife Father inl
the German- bill h wc therefore remcveclL
the Altar afide, there we lifted up a ftronrt
Plate of Brafle, and found a fair and worlf l
tliy body whole and trnconfumed , as thjr
fameishere, lively counterfeited withalP
the Ornaments and Attires j in his hancp
he held a Parchment book divided intcL
twoparts,the firft was the old Teftamentlf,
and every Chapter interpreted , and thJ
other is the Book I, which next untothtf
Bible is our greater) treafure3which oughif "
to be delivered to the cenfure of th<F
world. At the end of this Book (landetlp^
this following Elogium. fa,

C.Rof. C. ExNobili atque fplen^m
dida Germans R. G* Familta orium
dus% vir fui fecnli Divinis revelationh 0
hm^ Subtilijjimk Imaginationibus^ 2*1 ton
defejfis Laboribus ad C&leftia at que hu*
man a Mjtfteria t arcanave admijjus\ l
pojiqyam fuam (quam Arabico & ^
Africano, Itincribus collegerat)p'»/ T
quam regiam at que imperatoriam G* y\
%am [no feculo nondutn Convmttnitn. ,
potferitate ermndam cufiodiviJJet9 &
jam fuarnm Artinm^ nt & nominh

fdos

.IB. 6. TkefkoJieCrofs. 19

•dot ac conjun&iffimos Heredes infii-
biffet 5 mundum Minutum omnibus
Motibus Magno illi refpondentem Fa-
ricajfet > hocque tandem Pr£teritartim9
'r£(eniiutto & futurarum rerum
\ompendio extra£to9 C ntenario Major9
ion m or bo {qitemipfe nunquamCorpo*
expert us erat9 nnrnqnam alios in-
ejlare finebat ) ullo pellcnte9 fed Spi-
itu Dei evocante9 tUnminatam ani-
ent (inter Fratuum antplexus & ul-
imx Ofcnla ) FideliJfiMQ Creatori Deo
\eddidt/fet9 Pater diUSijfimus , Fra.
mujjfim us , Preceptor Fideltjfimus^
micus integer rim us 9 a fuis ad 14OO.
innos hie abfconditm ejl*

Underneath they had fUbfcribed
emfelves.

■

j. Fra. I. A. Fra.C. H.Fra.l.H. %*i

tiione Fraternitatis Caput.
1. Fra.G.V. M.P. C.S.

3. Fra. R. C. Junior haeres S. Spiri*
tus.

4. Fra. B.M. P. A. Piftor & Arehi-
teftus.

Bbb? 5-^'

a o T6 e Rofie Crofs. LtB.6.

5. Fnt. G. G. F. H. MP J. «. A. M
Cabbalifta F. JF. N. g. A. Z. B. X
0. N. F.E.V.L: F.K. M.Z. A.S
OK.

Sccundi Circuli.

1. Fra.T.H. Succeffor, Fra.P.A. Ma«
thematicus.

2. Fra. LO. S\\cctfto\\Fra.A.~D.

5. Fra. P. ft. Succetfbr Patris C R.C,
cumChrifto Triumphant.

At the end was written.
Ex Peo nafcimuri in Jefu Morimur, ]>e%
Sfix'itum Sanftum revivifcimus.

Hi

fe

o\c

At this day the Rofie Crucians that haW
been iince Chrift3fay, their Fraternity in-
habits the Weft of England j and the)31
havelikewife power to renew themfelvei
and wax young again,as thofe did befomtC£
the birth of Jefus ChrifT,asyou may reac :
in many Books. :2l

And Dr. F. faith, fomewhere there is : ''
Caftle in the Weft of England , in COTe
earth^and not on the earth3and there thci 31f
Rofie Crucians dwell , guarded withour '•'■■
walls, and pofleffing nothing, they enjo] -
all things ; in this Caftle is great Riches *■
the H^lls fair and rich to behold, andthi Ja
Chambers are made and compofed oF
White Marbleja? theendof the Hall ther j-

^1E.6. TbeRoficCrofs. 31

s a Chimney,whereof the two Pillars that
uftain the Mantle-tree,are of fine Jafper,
Lnd the Mamie is of rich CaIcedony,£iid
he Lintel is made of fiic Emeralds trail-
d with a wing of fine Gold , and the
;rapes of fine Si! ver, and all the Pillars in
he Hall are of redCalcedonie, and the
)avementisof fine Amber.

The Chambers are hanged with rick
lothes , and the benches and bed- {leads
re all of white Ivory , richly garnifhed
rith precious {tones j the Beds were richly
overed •, there are Ivory PreiTes,whereon
re all manner of Birds cunningly
v rough t, and in thefe Prefies are Gowns
nd Robes of mod fine Gold , and moft
ich Mantles, Furred with Sables, and all
wanner of rich Garments.

And there is a Vault , but it is bigger
hen* that in Germany, which is as clear, as
hough the Sun in the midft of the day
lad entred in at ten windows , yet it is
evenfeore fteps under ground:And there
re ten Servants, of the Rofie Crucians^
air young men: 'And C. B. reports this;
yhen I firft came to the Society (faith he)

faw a greatt Oven with two mouths,
*hich did cart out great clearnefs , by
vhich four young men made Pafte for
Sread , and two delivered the Loaves to
nhertwo, and they fit them down upon
B b b 4 a

2 2 The Rofie Crofs. Li B.6.

a rich cloath of (ilk; then the othertwo
men took the Loaves,and delivered them
unto one man by two Lonves at once,and
lie did fet them into the Oven to bake,
and at the other mouth of the Oven,
there was a man that drew out the white
Loaves and Pads, and before !>;m was
anotheryoung man, that received them,
-and put them into baskets, which were
richly painted.

C B. went into another Chamber
eighty one Cubits from this, and the Ro
fie Crucians welcomed him 5 for he found
a Table ready fet,and the cloth laid, and
there flood Pots of Silver, and VerTels of
Gold, bordered with precious Stones and
Pearle, and Bafons and Ewers of Gold to
wafh their hands; then we went to din
ner; of all manner of Flefh, Fowl, an
Fifh, of all manner of Meat in the world5jl<
there they had plenty, and Pots of Gold
garnifhed with precious Stones full oft
Wine : This Chamber was made of Chry-
ftal, and painted richly with Gold and
Azure, and upon the walls were written
and engraven all things paft, prefent,and
to come, and all manner of golden Me- v
dicines for the difeafed , as you read in
the Preface : upon the Pavement was
fpread abroad Rofes,Flowers, and Hearbs
fweet-fmelling above all favours in the

world ,

tO ((

in.
nd

Id, .,

Lib. 6. The Rojie Crofs. 2 3

world ; and in this Chamber were divers
Birds flying about jandfinging marvellous
tweedy.

In this place have I adefireto live, if it
were for no ether reafon, but what the
Soph ft fometimes applied to the Moun-
tains,, Hosprimum Solfalutat^ultimopjue defe-
rit. &vij Locum non timet ^ Dns Loagiercs
habentem. Rut of this place I will not (peak
any more leaft the Readers fhould miflake
roe, fo as to entertain a fufpitionthat I
am of this Order.

Tobm fFiHiamSyNoab V/alfurd, Fra.H IP.
V. C. B. I. anri thefe in ail are thirty iix,
that bear witnefs of Chrift.

And Fra.N chefe C.B. forhiscuc-
ceflbr, faying, I have long expetted your
coming 5 in this place you ftiall live, and
we will teach you all thing?,and you (hall
learn our Axkmata.

Firft,you mu r, as we do, profefs Medi-
cine, and cure the iick5 and that gratis,

2. You (hall not be conftrained to wear
one certain kind of Habit,but may there-
in follow the cuftome of the Countrey.

3. Every year upon the day C. you
ftiall meet us in thisHoufe, S. Spiritus, or
write the caufe of your abfencejand when
1 am dead lay me in a glafle, and renew
me according to Nature to live again3 as
ycu are taught by us,

4. And

24 "IheRojieCrofs. LlB.6.

4. And you mull look about for a wor-
thy perfon, who after your dcceafe muft
fuceeed you.

5. The word K.C. muft be your Mark,
Seal, and Ghara&er.

6. Our Fraternity (hall be concealed
feven years, and no more. And thirty of
the Brethren departeds only four and the
Brethren T. W. and N. W* remained with
the Father Fra. K. C. I. A. and their fer-
vauts a whole year, and T. W^ died, and
Father I. A. put him in a glafs, and bu-
ried him for renewing his life.

After few years there will be a general
Reformatioaboth of Divine and Humane
thing?, according to our deiire, and the
expe&ation of others : For its fitting,
that before the Hiring of the Sun, there
fhould appear and break forth Aurora^ or
Divine Light in the sky, and fo in the
mean time fome few , which fliall give
their names, may joyn together, there-
by to encreafe the number and refpc&of
our Fraternity, and /make a happy and
wifhed for beginning of our Philosophical
Canons prefcribed to us by our brother
R. C. and be partakers with us of our
treafures, ( which never can fail or be
wafted ) in all humility and love to be
eafed of this worlds labour, and not walk
fo blindly in the knowledge of the won-
derful works of God, But

LiB.6. 'ibeRojie Croft. 2$

iJut that aifo every Christian may
know of what Religion and belief we are,
We confefs to have the knowledg of Jefus
Chrijl, among his Difciples, and he is the
SonofGod0 and wascruciiaed for Mankind
at Jerusalem -hint did our eyes fee and vvor-
fhip, being guided by a Star. And Epif-
copjey is the belt form of Church Govern-
ment, being moft clear and purely pro-
felTed, and cleanfed from f aft ions Vresby-
terians0 fromwellian Anabapti\h> Jefuitical
Quaker S} andfalfe prophets.

Alfowe ufe two Sacraments as they
are initituted with all Forms and Ceremonies
of the firft renewed Church in England,
we acknowledge Carolus Magnus Secundum
for our Chrifiian Head : and in Po!itiay we
acknowledge the Proteftant Empire and
g)uartam Monarchiam for our Government ;
albeit we know what Alterations be at
hand, 1663, 1664. 1665. 1666. 1667.
1668.16693 and would fain impart the
fame with all our hearts to other Godly
Learned men.

Notwithstanding our writings which is
in our hands no man (except God alone)
can make it Common, nor any unwor-
thy Perfon is able to bereave us of it ; but
we (hall help withfecret aid, this fogood
a caufe, as God (hall permit, or hinder
us : for our God is not blinde as the Hea-
thens

26 The Rofie Crofs. LlB-6.

thens Fortune but is the Churches Or-
mmenc , and the honour of the Tern*
pie : Our Pbil.fopbj of numbers alfo is noc
a New invention, but as Adam after his
Fall hath received it, and as Mofes and
Solomm onr Men ufed it ; alfo ftie ought
not much to be doubted of, or con-
tradicted by other opinions, or meanings;
but feeing the Truth is peaceable, brief
and always like herfelfin all things, and
cfpecially accordingly with Jefus in omni
farte and all members : And as he is the
Image of the Father, fo is (he his Image ;
It (hall not befaid this is true according
to Philofophy , but true according to
Theologies and wherein Plato 5 Arijlotle ,
Pythagoras, and others did hit the mark,
and wherein Enoch, Abraham, Mofes, our
Men, and SofamondidexccU ; but efpeci-
ally wherewith that wonderful Booli the
Bible agreeth, all that fame concurreth
together, and maketh a Sphere or Globe,
whofe total parts are equidiftant from the
Center, as hereof more at large,and more
jplain (hall be fpoken in Chriftianly Con-
ference.

But now concerning ( and chiefly in
this our Age) the ungodly, and accurfed
Gold making, which hath gotten fo much
the upper hand, whereby under colour of
it 9 many Runnagates and Roguifh

people

LlB.6. 7 he KojieCrojs* 27

People do ufe great Villanies, and cozen,
andabufethe credic which is given them,
yea now adaies men of diferetion do hold
the tranfmutation of Petals to be the
higheft Point and Faftigium in Fbilofopbie^
this is all their intent and dehre.j and
that God would be molt efteemed by
them, and honoured,which could make
great ftore of Gold, and in abundance,
the which with unpremeditated Prayers,
they hope to obtain of the Alknowing
God, and fearcher of ail hearts } we there-
fore do by thefe prefents publikely teftifie,
That the true fh'ilofofbers are far of ano-
ther mind, efteeming little the making
ofGold, which is but a Parergon, for be-
sides that they have a thouland better
things. And we fay with our loving
Forefathers , Fby. Awum^ Nifi quantum
aurum \ for unto them the whole Nature
is detected ; he doth not rejoyce, that he
can make gold, and that as faith Chrift,
the Angels and Devils are obedient unto
him,biu is glad that he feeth the Heavens
open, and the Angels of God afcending
and defcending, and his name written in
the Book of Life.

Alfo we do teftifie thatunder the name
of Chjtnin many Eooksand Pictures are fet
forth uxContumeliamgloritVei, as we will
name in their due feafon, and will give to

thtf

28 The Eojie Croft. LiB.6,

thePureheartcdaGatologue or Regifter
of them ; and we pray all learned men to
take heed o£Tbe nurum Chymicum Eritanl
cy», publifhed by Elias Afimole Efquire,.
andfuchkindof Books as thefe '■> for the
Enemy never reitcth,but foweth his weeds
till a itronger one doth root it out.

To conclude, the Rofie Crucians fay,
Tear! helpeth fwounding«,and withitands
the Plague of Poyfons, and that Smarage
and Jacinth helps the Plague, and heales
the wounds of venemous ftirtgs,

The water of Nile makes the women of
Jigyft quick of conceite and fruitful, and
fometimes they bear £even children at a
Birth, and this is Salt-peter- water : There
is a wonderful vertue in the Oyl of To-
bacco : in the tintture of Saffron, in th<
flower of Brimfton, in Quickfilver , in
Common Salt, and Copprefs, molten and jj
made a water, kills the poyfon of the
Toad-flooh and juyce of Poppey, Amber $
which is no ftone, but a hard clammy
Juyce, called Bitumen, eafeth the Labour
of women , and the falling ficknefs in
children.

Now for Metals, Ifitbetrue, which all
man grant, that precious frones in that
hard and ungentle fafhion, (hew fuch ver-
tue and power of Healing, what mail the
mixtures of all thefe Mcttals under a for-
tunate

L i B.6- The Kufit Crofs. 2 9

tunate Conftellation made in the Con-
verfion of their own planets do,which they
call JL/earum, Sigil0 or Telefme, faying, ic
will cure the Cramp, Benumming Paliie,
Falling- ficknefs, Gout, Leproiie, Drop-
fie5 if it be worn on the heart-finger *, o-
thers they make to caufe beauty in La-
die?, &:c.

The third perfume of R. C. is Com-
pounded of the Saphirkk earth, and the
JEther, if it be brought to its full exalta-
tion, it will mine like the Day-ftar in her
frefh Eaftern glories*, it hath a fafcinating
attractive faculty 3 for if you expofe it to
the open Air, it will draw to it Birds and
Beafb9 and drive away evil Spirits, yf/mr/tt
Sohsy or the R. C. Mineral Sun is com-
pounded of the JEther , and a bloody,
fiery-fpirited earth ; it appears in a Gum-
my Coniiilency, but with a fiery, hot,
glowing Complexion, It is fubftantially
a certain purple, animated, Divine Salt,
and cureth all manner of Venereal di-
ftempers, Conlumptions, anddifeafes of
the Mind.

We give another Medicine, which is an
Azure , or Skiecoloured water , the
Tinfture of it is light and bright, it re-
flects a moft beautiful Rainbow *, and
two drops of this water keeps a man heal-
thys in this water lies a blood red en th
of gizzx. venue. The

5 o "i he Rofie Crofs . L * b. 6.

The other Medicine is the Heavenly,
Luna and Moon of the Mine, a very ftrangl
ftiipifyinijfubfVartctf: ic isnotiimple but
mixt : The JEtber9 and a fubtie whirl
Earth are us Components : and this
makes.it groiTer, then the Mtfar it felfl
it appears in the form of an exceeding,
white oil, but in say truth a certain* ve-
getans Bowing, finootH, fofc fair, and
this rcneweth youth, and caufeth wiO-
dom and vertue.

Thepantarva of Re fie Crucians is a wa*
ter, and no (tone; itafcemight difcovers
a hre as bright as da) 5 and if you look ori
ic in the day time , it dazles the eye with
certain gleames or Corrufcationsj for in
it is a Spirit of admirable power to lond
J/iTe, Wifdom, and Vertue : Now 1 will
iliew who taught thefe Secrets, and (hewed j
me thefe things.

Walking upon the plain ofBulverton H/fl
to ftudy Numbers and the nature of
things, one evening, I could fee between,
me and the light, a molt exquifite Divine!
beauty; her frame neither long nor fhort^
but a man decent ftature^attir'd (he was iiu
thin loofe Silks, but fogreenthat ! never*
few the like,for the color was notearthlyJ
in fome places it was fancied,with gold $c
filler Ribbands, which lookd like the
Sun and Lyllies in the field ofgrafs; her,

head

K

kfa
nc

F,

ehii
iidi
h
m
idl
irfcri

ton
n

s

LiB.6. The Rojtc Crofs. 31 Sy

head w«t overeat with a thin floating
Tiffany ; which (he htld up* with one of
icr hands, and looked as it were from un-
der it; her eyes were quick, frtfh, *nd O-
eftfal, bu; had fomcthmgof a Start, as if
he had been puzzled with a fuddain occur-
ence

From her vaile did her Joiks bre*k our,
ika Sun beams from a Mift, truy ran difhe-
■eld to her B eft, and then recurred to her
treks in curies and riags of go'd; her hair
ehind her was rowled to a curiousGlobe,
jith a (mall more fpirc flowered w ih pur-
le and ikie colour knots \ her Rings were
art intirtEmcradIs,for fhe valued noM< tal,
nd her pendants of burning Carbuncles.
1 brief her whole habit was youthful and
owery, it fmelt like the Eaft and was
roughly ayrd with rich Arabi&nDiafafmsi
\\% and no other was her appearance at
at time.

But wbtlft I admired her perfections ,
id prepared to make my addreiTes, fhe
events me with a voluntary approach;
re indeed I expected fomc difcourfe from
r, but (he looking very ferioufly and fl-
uty in my face, takes me by the hand and
ftly whifpers, My love 1 frctly give you,
d with it thefe tokens, my Key and Sig-
t, the one o pens, the other muts,bc fare
u(e both with difcretion 5 as lor the
Ccc royfttrie

5 2 ihc Rofie Crofs. LlB.6

myit#rie* of the Kojie Crofs, you have my
Library to pcrufe them all ; there it not an)
thing here, but I will gladly reveal it t(*
you, I will teach you the vcrtue of Numl
bers of Names, of Aogels and Genii of men t
1 hive one prcceps to commend to you i
and this it is, you rauftbt fiicnt $ you fhaj [c
noc in your writings exceed my allowance ^
remember that 1 am your love, a.^d youu
will noc mak« me a Proftiiute. Bat be jL
cau'e 1 wifh you frrviccable to thofe of you L
own difpofuion, I here give y6u an Em
blematical Type of mySan&uary,i>?3. Th
sixiomata of the K. C. The frcrcts of Num
b-rs, with a full priviledge to publifh il
Thiaisal', and now I am going to the in
vifihle Region, amongft the^therial God
defies let not that Proverb take place wit
yoUjOut of fight^out of mind;remcmber m
and be bappy.

Now I asked her if ftie would favour m
with her name; to this fhe rcplycd ver
familiarly,as if (hehad known me long be
fore, My dear friend H. I have man
Name*, but my beft beloved is Euterp?,

Obferve io your R. C. Axiomata that th
Genuine tim* of impg|fion of Character
N4mes, Angels, Numoers, and Genii 0 J
men, is, when the principles arc Sperm ad
and Callalo; but being once coagulated tc
aperfeftbody; the tiraeofffcllification i

paft

rai
nil

E

fit
r,

B. 6. The Rojie Crofs. 33

>aft. Now the R. C. in old time ufed
[range Afirological Lamps, Images,Ring«,
nd Plates, with the numbers and names
ngraven, which at certain hours would
roduce incredible extraordinary cffe&s.
"he common Aftrologer he takes a piece of
fetalis, another whining Affociate he helps
im with a Chryftal Stone, and thefe they
gure with ridiculous Chara&ciS, and then
xpofcthem to the Planet?, not in an At*
mufty but as they Dream tiny know not
>hat, when this is done, all is to no pur.
ofcrbut though they faile in their practice,
et they believe they under ftand the
xiomata of Numbers well enough. Now
|°Jiy bt loved J. H. that you may know
' hat to do, I will teach you by Example*
^ ake a ripe grain of Corn thatishard and
'ye, cxpofcit to the Sun beams in a glafs
rany other veflcll, and it will be a dry
am forever; but if you do bury it in the
'Jinn, that the Nitrous Saltimmoyfturc of
!e Element may diffoFvc it, then the Sun
ill work upon it, and make it fpring
idfprout to a new body; it is juft thus
ith the Common Aftrologcr i he expo-
th to the PJancts'a perfeft Compared
)dy, and by this meanes thinks to per-
rme the Rcfte Crucian Gdma^a^ and mar-
thc Infcriour and Sup.riour worlds.
■ It mu ft be a body reduced into S^rmey
Ccc a ttuc

54 TheRofieCrofs. Lib. 6,

that the HeavenlyFemininc moifture,whicri
receives and retains the Imprefs of the A
ftrall Agent, maybe at liberty, and immej
diatly cxpofed to the Mafculine fire of Nrj
rure. This is the ground of the Beril ; bui
you muft remember, that nothing can bj
ftellified without the joynt Magnetifm ci
th ee Heavens ; what they are you know all
ready. When (he had thus faid.fhe tookoul
of her bofora two miraculous Medalls wiilf
Numbers and Names on them, they waf
not Mettaine,but fnch as I had never feci!
neither did I conceive there was in Naturf
(uch pure aud glorious fubftances ; In my
judgement, they were two Magical Telefax
butfheca&d them Saphiricks of the Su|
and Moon. Thefc miracles Euterpe com.
mended to my perufai, and fiopt in a mnljif
Ceremony ; for I was to be left alone ; fli ' ;
lookt upon me in filcnt fmilcs, mixt wit'
a pretty kind of fadnefs, for we were ur.i ,,
willing to part; blither hour of Tranfla, -[
tion was co re, and taking as I though;!1
ourlaft leave, (he pad before my eyes intj
the JEther of Nature; excufing her felf a Jfl
bing flecpy, otberwife fhe had expounds y
th m toa:e ; I lockt, admired , and wea f
pied my felf in that Contempt ior ; ihei ';
complexion was fo heavenly, their conti.
nuance fo myfterous, 1 did rtot wdl knoifl"1
what to make of thnti , I turn'd afide t

fi

h

JLiB.6. 7heRoJieCrofs. 35

cc> if flic was fUll a flfcp j but (he was gone-,
fnd this did not a little trouble me. I ex-
[>c&ed her return, till the day was quire
pent, but (he did not appear : at laft, fix-
tig my ryes on that place, where (he forr.e-
imesrtftcd, I discovered certaii pieces of
rold, full of Numbers and Names, which
he hid left behindc her, and hard by a
>apcr folded like a Letter. Thefe I took
ip, and now the night approaching, the
veiling Star tinn'd in the Weft -, when tak-
ng my laftfurvtyof her flowry pillow I
parted from it in thefe verfes.

>retty Green Ban\furewel, & mayfi thou wear
lun-beams, and Rofe, and Lillies all the year ;
Isefleft on thee, but needed not to (bed
ler Gold, 'twas pay enough to be her bed:
Thy Flowers are Favourites; for this lov'd dcy
hey were my Rivals, and with her didplay\
'hey found their heaven at band} and in ber eyes
Enjoy' d a Copy of their abfent s\ies*
Their weaker paint did with true Glories Trade,
And mingled with her cheeks, one Vofie made \
And did not her f oft skin confine their Pride,
And with a screen of Silkjber flowers divide ;
they had fucked life from theme ^ andfr™ her

beat
Borrowed afoul to makp them f elves compleat.

0 happy Pillow ! though thou art laid even
With duhi [he made thee up almofl a heaven ',

G c c 3 Her

3 6 The Rofie Croft. L r B . 6<

Her breath rairid Spice*, and each Amber King
Of her bright lockf, flntfd Bracelets ore thy

Spring-,
'that Earths not poor, didfuch a 7rea[ure hold%
JBnt thrice inrich'd mh Amber^Spice and Gold,

Thusmuchat this time, and no more
am I allowed by my Miftrifs Euterpe to pub
lifh : B? therefore, gentle Reader admo-
nifbed that with me you do earncftly pray
to God , that it pleafe him to open the
hearts and earcs of all ill-hearin2 people,
and to grant unto them his bltfling, thai
thty may be able to know him in his Om
nipotency, with admiring eontemphtiori
of Nature, tohishononr and Praife, and
to the Love0 Help, Comfort and ftrcngth
cuing of our neighbours-, and to the rtfto- a
ringofalhhc difeafed, by the Medicinc»(
above taught. '

I had given you a more large account (fflf
the Myfterhsof Naturc;and the Kofie Crejd
but whiUft 1 fluc?yed Medicines to cureoJL'
thcrs, my deare Sifter Am*. Heydon dyv'djj}a
and I never heard fhc was fkkf for fhc waij-
ico miles from roec ) which puts an end! t
to my wrrtings,and thus I take my leave of ^
the worldjl (hall write no more, youknowj p.
my Books by Name, and this 1 write (that Ji
none may abufe me ) by printing books in 1
my Name, as Cole does Cufyepers. But return
to my fir ft happy Solitudes.,
FINIS.

«

37

The Rofie Crucian Prayer
to God.

Jefm Mihi Omnia*
A,

H Thou everywhere
and good of AW^what*
foever I do^ remember^
1 befeech 1 heef that I
am but Duft, but as a Vapour
fprung from Earth , which even
thy fwallefk Breath can fcatter ;
Thou haft given me a Soul, and
JLaws to govern it ; let that Eter*
nal Rule, which thou didfi firjl
ppointto fway Man, order me*,
make me careful to point at thy
|Gk>ry //; all my wayes\ and where
I cannot rightly know Thee., that
not only my tinderjlanding , but
Ccc 4. my

8 The Rofie Crucians Prayer,

my ignorance may honour thee^
'Thou art All that can be perfeSl;
Thy Revelation bath made p;e
happy j be not angry , 0 Divine
Qnefi God the mofl high Creator^ I
if it plea fe theey fuffei'thefe re-
vealed Secrets^ Thy Gifts alone^
notfiirmypraife^bntto thy Glory ,
to manifeji themselves. I befeech
thee moji gracious Gocl^ they' may hn
not fall into the hands of ignorant\h
envious perfons, that clond thejetm
truths to thy dif grace, faying, themh
are not lawful to be publifh'd, be-\ft
canfe what God reveals ^ is to be f
kept fecret. Bat Rofie Crucian u
Phil'fophers lay up this Secret in • it
to the bofome of God , which I .
have pre fumed to manifeji clearly \t
and plainly . / befeech the Trinity, a
it may be printed as I have writ* \{

ten j

The Rofie Grucians Prayer. 39

ten it, that the ^truth may no more
be darkened with ambiguous Ian-
guage. Good Godybefides thee no-
thing is. Oh ftream thy Self into
my Sonl , and flow it with thy
Grace, thy Illumination, and thy
Revelation. Ma\e me to depend on
Thee : Ihon delightejl that Man
jhould aeconntThee as his King,
and not hide what Honey of
Knowledge be hath revealed. I
caft my felf as an honotirer of
thee at thy feet .0 ejlablijh my con-
fidence in Thee , for thou art the
fountain of all bounty , and can ft
not but be merciful, nor canft thou
deceive the humbled Soul that
trujisThee: Andbecaufel cannot
be defended by thee , unlefs I live
after thy Laws, keep mey Omy
^cmls Sovereign, in the obedience

of

40 The Rofie Crucians Prayer,

of thy Will , and that I wound not
my Confcience with vice^ and hi-
ding thy Gifts and Graces be~
flowed upon me ; for this I know
will dejiroy me within , and mahg
thy Illuminating Spirit leave me :
I am afraid I have already infi-
nitely fwzrved from the Revela-
tions of that Divine Guide^ which
thou haft commanded to direSl m:
to the Truth ; and for this lama
fadProJirate and Penitent at the
foot of thy Throne \ I appeal only
to the abundance of thy Remiffions*
0 my God? my God, I know it is a
myfierie beyond the vaji Souls apm
prehenfwn , and therefore deep ei
nough for Man to reft in fajety in.
0 thou Being of all Beings, caufe
me to worh^ my felf to thee , and
into the rweiving armes of thy

paternal

The Rofie Crucians Prayer. 4*

paternal Mercies thro*to my felf.
for outward things Ithankjbte,
and fuch as I have I give unto ci-
thers , in the name of the Trinity
freely and faithfully , without hi-*
dwg any thing of what was re.
wealed to me i and experienced to
he no Diabolical Delufun or
Dream, but the AdjeQamenta of
thy richer Graces % the Mines and
deprivation a*e both in thy hands.
In what th on baft given me I am
content. Good God ray thy felf
into my Soul^give me but a heart to
fleafe thee, I beg no more then thou
haft given ? and that to continue
me,uncontemnedly and unpittiedljf
hone ft. Save me from the Devil,
Lufts, and Men, and fat thofe
fond dotages of Mortality, which
would weigh down my Soul to

Low*

^2 The Rofie Crucians Prayer.

Low&efs and Debanchmentj let it
be my glory (planting my felf in
a Noble height above them ) to
contemn them, lake me from my
felfcand fill me but with thee.Sum
up thy blejpngs in thofe tw&y that
I may be rightly good and wife *
And thefe for thy eternal Trnths
faks grant and ma\e grateful.

finis.

43

Advertifement

TO

THOMAS STREET.

I Perceive ( by the fag end of your
Afironomia Carolina in Englilh, for you
underftand no Latine) that you have
a mind to be taken for an incomparable
Artift in the Mathematicks,and fo you ap-
plaud your felf in an Ephemeris Geocen-
tricaland Helioccntrical, faying, The likf
is not hitherto performed, &c. and therefore
have a defire we fhould hear you ; truth is,
it is fcarce worth the while either for you
or us,yet wc could be contentedjfor once,
to hear you fif we thought you would
fay any thing worth hearing J but to
make a conftant practice of it3or to enter-
tain you as one of our Schollers5I have no
mindat all,becaufe l fear you are too old
to learn 5 though you have not fo much
wit, and more need 3 then thofe that be
younger y and yet will think much to be

whipc

4+ __^

whipt when you do commit thefe Faults I
find inyourv£xercife,:>i£.alI falfe.

Again 1 homos , why do you praife fo
much your felf > and difparage all other
Mronomers,Aftromancers,PhilcfopherSj
and Geomancers in the world > tell me in
good earned ( for I cannot think you fo
iimple as you would feem to be ) whether
you do indeed believe (though you
thought to fet a good face upon it , and
talk big ) that all you have faid is worth
a ftraw,eitherasto the defending of your
Reputation, or the impairing of ours. >

But Gentlemen , behold in an Epiftle
Dedicatory to one of his Books he cries
Hrfi/,and then Hofanna to Cromwell, kifling
and embracing the enemies of the King 5
and now he flatters the King in afcurvy
flat Epiftle to his Book, which is all falfe,
both Tables and Observations, add I
prove them fo as followeth : Obferve
Readers (for I fubmit to the learned
judgement of Dr. John WaMU ) Tho. Street
hath lately publifhed fome Attronornical
Tables, entituled ( the better to get cre-
dit to his work ) Ajironomla Carolina : and
pretends therein to be more exa& then
any other Altrouomical Authors extant ;
we (hall make a brief enquiry into the
truth of his Tables , by comparing them
with fome of the moft eminent Observa-
tions,

4$

tions , by which Aftronomy ought to be
( and is by 'other Aftronomers ) correct-
ed j and afterwards examine how true
Mr. Street himfelf is to his own Tables,
by comparing them with fome of the Ob-
fervations himfelf hath pretended to
frame his Tables by.

Se&* i . Mr. Streets Tables com-
pared with Obfervations made bjtbc
Learned Mr. Edward Wright at
London^/ the Suns place at Noon.

ByObfervationOtf. 2. 1595,
O in£* 180 26' 22".

An.M.T

1581

oaob.

2.

An.Mre
0* i*Y
Pras. Eq.

6. 14. 8. 15.
11.29.25.33.
8. 29.4. 18.
1.58.16.

14.36.22.
21.0 9
27,32*28.

0,27.20.0,
11.52.
36.

0.27.32.82,

Loc.folisj6. 18.32.37.
Differs from Obfervation od 6' 15".
viz. above 2h and \ in time.

By

46

By Obfervation M/zrd> it.

0 in y od 57' 48".

^97

27.20.O.
12.48,

i^Bi 16. 14.8. .15.

\6 (11.29.54.25

Martii. ji. 28.9. 4.

11. f 10 50.30

An. M T. 8. 23.2. 14.50727.32.5
0 *} ^T)ii.3. 18.33J
Prascef.Eq )o. 27.32.56./

Loc. &oiii.;o- o. 51. 29JYod5if29 j
Differs from Obfervation 6' 1 9".
viz. above 2h and' in time.

By Obfervation Novemb. 18. 1595.

O in t 6° 2 30".

1

1581.
14.

Novemb.

6. 14. 8. 15.
(11:29.25.33.

• 29.37.32-
17.44.28.

o. 27.20. o,
11.52.

40,

An. M. T.

0 *i * V
Prsecef Eq

o. 55. 48.
8. 17. 2.

27. 32.32.

o. 27.32.32-

1 5; 0'j 4

Loc. Sohs. |8# 5. 49. 34
Differs from Obfervation 12' 56"."
viz. above 5h in time.

47 **

By ObferVation Septemb, 22,
Q in g 90 3' 26"-

8,

1597

1581.

16.

Septemb.

22.

6. 14. 5. 15
11:29.54.25.

7. 29,30.12.
21.41. o.

27.20. o,

12.48.

An. M. T-

0 *i* Y
PrascefEq

3. 5. 13. 52. jo. 27.32.48.
5. n. 35.12* J

O. 27 32,4-S.l

Loc. Solis. 16, 9. 8. o.l- 90 £/. o"
differs frcmObfervation 4' 34".
viz. near 2h in time.

When Mr. Street comes to view thefe his
Iftrange Deviations from Agronomical
Irruth , he will perhaps for refuge fly to a
(difcourfe of Parallaxes , or Equations *
which if hedo3let him remember that by
his own Tables the greateft Equation is
Diit 9' 55" in time.*, which in thefe Ex-
amples cannot be brought in to fervc
lim ; but if they could*3 I would fain
mow what that can ftead him , when in
notion I prove him guilty of ncer as ma-

(~ ly minutes error, and in one Example
)' more. And all Aftronomers know that
■ he minutes of time and motion are of a
D d d far

1

4_8

far different tendency ancl fignifi cation
Then if Mr. Street (hall think to find San
ftuary in Parallaxes,he will be moll mon
ftrouily miftaken j for by his own Con
ceiTion(in page 12. of his Bookjthe j;rea
teft Parallax of the Sun is but i^';an»
is" is but the fourth part of a minute
and how the fourth part of a Minute cai
falve the error of many minutes , viz
4/ o' ori^' 1 confcfsmy felf purely ig
norant 5 perhapsMr. Street's deep under
(landing may difcover the Riddle.

Refractions, 1 know Mr. Street canned
pretend an excufe from ; becaufe the:
are only made ufe of in Altitudes, no
Longitudes. But leaft Mr. Street fhoul
have any peculiar exception againft chef
Examples of Observation 3 andfo deeE
themerroneouSjbecaufe his Book will no!
countenance them: I will give him fuel)
another fcale of Calculations by the Ob
fervations himfelf hath made ufe of in hi|
own Book, tovenfie the exattnefscf hii
Tables.

By

'fi A T T O N T IMOPTMEN 0_N.
Seft. 2. Mr. Street atOJcU with

hjnafelf.

Pag. 97. of Mr. Streets Book he laaih
the O by Obfervation, March,
i4tb 1583.10 T 3° 13' 4*"

1551

2.
M r ii.

14..

6. 14. S. 15.
1 1.29.29.44.
1. 28. 9. 4.

1 3. 4-7^ S.

0.27.20. o«

1.36.

8.

An.M.T.|8. 25.34.58lo.27.21.44i

Vrx Eq*'Q 77. 21 44-J

|Loc.ioii*jO. 3. 15. 5 6-i
iDiffcrsfromObfeivatioD. /55"
[Differs from himfclf 2' 24''
'or fo he faith by his TaMts MsT 30 1 3 Y/:!
when you fee it is 2 24" diftam
fromic.

0s place bv ObfervadotijAirfr. 13* 1585.

T; 20 4/ 1 i" by Mr. Streets Galcu-

huon V 2°44/2£>ff.

I iS»S

6. 14. 8. 15.

0. 27.20. 0.

1 4.

11.29.58 36.

3. 12*

j Mirui.

1. 28. 9. 4

8.

13.

1248. 47

(An, MT

8.25. 4. 42.;o.27,23.'2o.

oil. My

frx. Eq

u. 5. 23.33. j

0-27,23. 20I

jLoc.fuli.'|o. 2. 40.53.lY2 ° d6'50,/
Differs trom Qbfcrvadoo % 4-"

Differs from him f el f . 2' 25"*

5o

05 Place by Obfcivadon, Miircb 12,

1581. isY*° 17' 37'' by Mr. Streets

GAlcithrio". Y 1. »6. 28".

158.
6
Martii.
12.

6. 14.8. 15
it .29.28.20.
1. 28.9. 4.
11-49.38

o. 27. 20.0.

4.48.

8. 23.3 5. 17. Jo. 27.24.56

An. m; T

0 a 1 #Y|| 1.3! 53.53.
Pr&cef.Eg.l?. ?7. 24,^6. J

Loc. bolis.o. *. ib. 29.IY i°iS'49"|
Differs from Obfervation I4 1 2". ^
Differs from himfel f. 2.21.

Sept. 13. 1585. 0 by Obfervation n* 290
39' 51" by Mr Strafe Calculation t#-
l5Kl^ 4y\

6

An.M.T

1581
2.
t

*3

An M. O
0 4 i#y
Prse. Eq.

14. 8.15.

11 29.29.44-
7- 29.3r.12.

o. 27

20.C
1.36
32

25.3e.58.jo. 27. 22.8

2. 18 19.

27. 22v8 '

Loc fol is J s. 2 9-40. 2 7 it? 2904C/271
Differs from Obfervation 0' 26''
Dinars from himfelf ,' \%»

I 5*

Now I appeal to the Reafon of any
IMan skilled in Aftronomy , whether
{•Mr. Street's Tables be either more exact,
lorfoexaft, as other Mens > or if I fhould
fallow them foj whether Mr. Street under-
Iftands his own Tables? mice bytheni I
■ have proved his own Calculations from
Ithem, to be much wide of them* as in
levery of thefe four laft Examples , in the
■belt of which he differs from himfelf no
Ileffethen l'^S'^and in the greateft 2*25'*
land makes his own Tables the Judge.

But beudcs thefe errors3 not only lit
■'Mr. St reets Tables, but in his own Calcu-
Ilationsfrom them, Mr. Srmthath falfty
•reduced all lichos Obfervaticns of the
JSun, to make them guadrare with his
f Tables, as the Obfervations themfelves
f piove,andfome of Mr. Wrights alfo ; See
j Mr. V. Wings AUrmomia Inftaurata^ fol.94.
{(licbo's* oiks being not eafie to be got ten)
land there you will find a Catalogue of all
lithe Suns observations Mr. Street hath
(made ufe of j and may alfo fee how pre-
$ ftigioufly he hath dealt in the reduction
Vof each of them for his purpoft. As for
* example, Anno 1583. March 14. at noon,
licho obferved the Sun in Aries 3.17' ^C\
iin the Meridian of Vraniburg: Mr. Street
I tells us , he obferved him in Aries?,, i^'.
I 41*'. whichyou fee wants but one fecond
D d d 3 of

5^

of four minutes from what Ticbo ( and
Mr. Wing from him) hath fct it down \
an J thus it is in all the reft of the Cata-
logue. So that you fee Mr. Street can
bring the Mountain to Mahomet; (i.e. J
if his Tables will not agree with Obfer-r
vacionSjObfervationsmuitjand (hall with'
his Tables. But Mr. Street hath miffed
in that alfo •, for notwithstanding all his
care, cunning, Heights, and jugling, an4
playing fa ft and loofe , he will be able as
loon to tranfmute all the figures in hi|
book to Stars or Diamonds, as to recon-
cile hisTablesto Obfervations,or indeed
the Obfervations to his Tables*, yea,
though he (hould ftareand pore anothetf
ei^ht or nine years about it / He who
hull Mercury \n Tifces in oppofk ion to his
Afcendent at birth, and Luna, in cP \. 3f
decima dor,to , cannot but make a mad
Aftrohomer s although he be confident
and conceited, (nsjjtn&'m theexaltatf*
on of M^r^in Sextile of Mercury may make
him) yet he never attains to a capacity
of doing any thing excellently , but will
be alwayes unfortunate in his attempt?,
if Aftrologers fay footh. And if Mr. Street
had aqy fuch Portions in his Nativity, he
could not but make mad work ; however
iince naturally he is deftincd foto doy let
hi^be.^xcufecj.

If

S3

If Mr. Street be thus ftrangely mlftaken
'in the Suns p!ace3how much nwfthe vary
p the reft of the Planets > fmce his place
ruly found, is the $*<ns of all the reft.
The building of that houfe cannot long
laft3ordo the Owner any durable fervice,
?hofe foundation is corrupted and rot-
en. That perfon is rather to be plttied
hen embraced5that in eight or nine years
ftudyjbrings forth the birth of the Moun-
tains!

And truly we hope by thefe Examples
le may examine the reft of his Tables,
for they are all falfe. Now being fully
convinced what wrak ftufFehc writes, his
utmoft hopes are, ( as I underftand from
lis friends^) that though he be miftaken
n Aftionomy, &c. yet he hopes to prove
limfelf an honeft man, and had the con-
ideiice to dedicate his Book to the King :
And though things were not fo fully de-
monftrated as to fat is fie every Reader,
yet he thought hisMajefty would never
take cognizance of it,being not worth his
perufe , but give him fomething for his
Book,and let him go. And now bychefe
means lie goes about to prove himfclf an
honeft man : Juft like the honeft man 9
who when he had cut a purfe , put it (lily
into another mans pocket ( after he had
taken out the money) that fo this other
D d d ^ might;

5+ ___

might be (hamed for it. And ! hope you
are now. Gentlemen, able to judge, whe-
ther Mr. Street be not as well a good Aftro-
nomer >& an honeli man : Much alike,mitch
alike: 1 am no enemy to any man, but a
friend to truth and loyalty, doing good
fir evil to all. To conclude, I know no
exception remaining, unlefs like hie, who
putting a Bond in fuit, when the Defen-
dant made proof of pay ment,replied,Th©
Condition of the Obligation was dictij
that he (hould content, fatisfie and pay 1
and therefore though the money were alt
paid , yet forafmuch as the Plaintiff was
not contented,the Bond was forfeit. Now-
I hope the Reader can bearwitnefs, that
you are by this time diffidently pa'idy and,.
I hope, fatiified: Ent if we mult never
jiave done till you be contented , I am
afraid vvefhall die in your debt. And fo
I leave Mr. Street to Repentance, hoping
to hear of his content and amendment of
manners : I have charity to think Ihem^
a man of a tender Forehead ( after fo
much infolence , grounded upon arro-
gance and ignorance ) that he will
leave Aftronomy to better Wits, and
learn his Prayers,leaft his Soul be infected
as his Body is troubled with the Scab, cr
Jiis Book, wiqh the Scurvy.

And; >

55

And is not Mr. 1 horn as Street now a. fine
Gentleman , much like his Brother Wil-
liam Lil'y* ( who with an upright foul
cryes Hofanna to Cromwell , and fo he de-
fires to be remembred ) crucifying the
King in contrived Characters of a fcan-
dalous Genealogy. Note ({ayes Wil-
liam ) All Kings fince Will ram the Con-
queroiir ( who was a Ballard ) have de-
fended from his lffue 5 and have been bafely
begotten-. \J\\\ .'s rtng. p. 17. 1 65*5- Then
again he calls theKing,* Pyratical Trince,
and young Cccl^cril. Are not thefe brave
Fox hounds! thev hunt in theircouples,
to catch gain, and fpend Loud5crying out
flat teringly3Cforr/« the merciful. Some fay
thefe are Gentlemen of noble Families,
but Clarenceux the King knows not thcii*
Coats of Armes5eH.only an antieut Pedi-
gree you (hall find in John 4.4.4.. in thefe
words^pCe are of your father theVevil^and the
lufis of your father ye will do\he was a murtherer
from the beginnings and abode not in the truth,
becaufe there is no truth in him-, when he fpeak?
eth a lie^he fpeaketh of his own, for he is a lyar
and the father of it : Fill ye up then the mea-
fure of your fathers *, ye ferpents, ye generation
of vipers , how can ye efcape the damnation of
hell! Mat. 23. v 3 2, and 33.

An

AN INDEX

Of the Particulars contained in the

HO LT gUIDE,

Whereby the Reader may find
any Chapter or Paragraph.

LIB. L CHAP. I.

Of God, Art and Nature.
I. f\F Godyof Nian^of Creatures. 2. Adi:
\*J vine pattern. 3 . Frailty. 4. Happinefs
yrhaft^ .Afpirit that workgth all things. 6. Di-
vine lights, 7 .Plato's Crewn. 8. e£he grounds of
Knowledge. 9. Opinions. 1 o. Images of Hea~
ven. 1 1 . Single minds JAeffmgers and Angels,
12. Degrees of happinefs, 13. Of three dt»
lights.

Chap,

The Index,

Chip. n.

All Ob!e&ions Qaft againir theRofie Crucian
Medicines anfwered D and the truth
made manifeft.

i. 7 he way to Ulfdotn i. Hermes Medi-
cines \ 3. Rules, 4. poffibilities and effe&s;
5 .faultlefs ftudies '■> 6 . approved reafons. 7 . Opt -
I niom. 8. The Stop-fkip. 9. Secret truths,
10. Wondrous works. \\,U ife pi en . 12. Al-
chyniie. 13. Of the fecret blaji and mtion of
God, \.\. Of Natures faults. 1-. Divine
truths. 16. Mans minde. ly.Of the life of
God. 18. Raging Coimj 'el. 19. St ingle ft
Drones. 20. Dilution : the Emperours
folly.

BOOK. II. CHAP. L

1 . Of the wonderful Secrets of Numbers.
2. Of their fan i fie at ion. 3. How Mofes
Jhewed fo many figns by them 4. How Jofhtia
made the Sun [land jtill by Numbers. 5 . How
by Numbers Elijah called down fire from
heaven upon his enemies. 6. Hcwbytbefe fol-
lowing Numbers the Roiie Crucians fore-
hpow all future things j 7. covtmand whole
Nature, have power over DtsWs^and Angels,
and do Miracles, &:c. 8. How by this Num-
ber a River fpakf to Phythagoras, And

for

The Index.

for further fatufatiim of thefe myfterious
truths, read our Temple of Wifdome.

Chap. II.
i. Of the Tower, 8cc. 2,3- andVertues,
4,5.0/ Hebrew, 6,7 Greek and 8. La-
tine LettcrSyWhen the Numbers are attributed

Uthent. 1

Chap. III.
The Number of Happinefs.
1 5 2. Ibe Pythagorick Names or Nature
of a Monade or Unite, 3, 4. applyed to the
firfl dayes work^ % , 6. What are the upper wa •
ten : 7, 8. And that fouls that defcend \is yt-
vartv 3 are the Naiades or Water Nymphs,ztf
Porphyrius: y.lhat matter ofitfelf isun~
movable'. 10. Pv. Eechai his Notation very
happily explained in my n. Temple of
Wifdome : 12. Of the Number One, and the
Signification, and what Angel rules it.

Chap. IV.

This Number unites Arts and Natare.

1,2, 3,4. that Vniverfal Matter is tht

fecond dayes Creation, 5, 6, 7, 8. fully made

good by the Names and property of the Number

two, 9, 1 c5 1 1 . its vertues.

Chap,

The Index.

Chap. V.
Th« Number of long L;fe.
The Nature of the third dajcs work^, 2.fet
off by the Number 3. That the moji learned do
agree that the Creation wjs perfected at once,
7 he Notation of SD^D flrangely agreed with
the Notorious cenclufions of the Tempte of
Wtfdomjfthe Signification of the Number 3.

Chap. VI.

The Number of Nature and Health.

1 . Of the Signification of the Number four.
?9 3, 4, 5. How the Corporeal world wus uni-
verfally eretled into form and motion on the
fourth day, 0. is mojl notably confirmed by the
Titles and Property of the Number four.
7^8. Ihe Infallible Rofie Crucian or Py-
thagorick Oath, 9. wherein they [were,
10, n. by him that taught them the Myjiery of
the Tetradis. 12. That the Tetra&is wm a
Symbole of the whole Art, that lay couched in
Numbers and Letters. 13314. The myjhrie
ef the Number four^

Chap. VII.
The Numberof Youth.
1 . Of the fignification of the Number five.
1 . And what Angels may be called by it: 3 tAnd
how they may.appear.

Chap.

The Index,

Chap. VIII.
The Number of Riches.
i. Of the fignification of the Number fix. <
2. And why the whole Creation wjslompre-
hended within it. 3 . And how a Spirit carried
away a Quaker . 4,536. Of the vertue of the
Number.

Chap. IX.
The Number of Vertue.
U *$-3f4*5* 6,7,8, 9, 10, 11, f?, 12,

14, is? '6, 17, 1 8, 1 c, 20, 21. The fignifi-
cation of the Number [even. 25,23, 2 4,2s,? 6.
y&/^ f to /<?:/£# *'; /* /; r Symbole of the Sabbath
or reft of God.

Chap. X.
The Number of Wifdome.

t . Of the fignification of the Number eighty
and what Angels may be called by it 9 and how
tbcy appear .

Chap. XJ.
The Number of changing Bodies.
Of the fignification of the Number nine ;
how that by nine Julius Cccfar called up Spi- '
rits^and did what hepleafed : How Galieron
hy nine went invifible^ and had the fociety of a.
familiar Genius.

Chap.

The Index,

Chap. XII.
The Number of Medicines.
Of the fignification of ibe Number ten-,
how by this Number ten, Socrates in a Monitor
ry Vifion had a. Swan in his Upland of Plato^s
birth aud education.

Chap. XIII.

The Number for the Preparations

of Gold.

Of the fignification of the Number eleven :
How by it we fyiow the bodies of Spirits, and
their natural conflitutions ; opt avid in phere-
cydes Syrus b W I^D^^CD^U J—vV1?*
r~— nrw , names of Spirits haunting fields
and de folate places*. Of Theophilus Fill-
wood , who had the continual fociety of a
Guardian Genius. Of Plotinus^Olym-
pius.

Chap. XIV.
The Number of the Knowledge how to
diflblve Gold.

Of the fignification of the Number twelve ;
of its natural vertue. Of the twelve wife
Aphorifmes of JanL oilier Adam's Tu-
tor. Of Angels 9 and their nature and
dignity : What ihefe Guardian Genii may
be : Whether one or more be alotted to every
man0 or to fonts none. What may be the rea-
son of Spirits fo f el dome appearing; and

whether

The Index,

whether they have any fettled Jhap>e or no ;
}Vhat their manner u of affijUng men in either
I>evHion,or Propbefie, or Love : It bether every
mam complexion Is capable of the fociety of £W
good Genius : And Laflly ^whether it be I aw full
to pray to God to fend pah a Genius or Angel foBV
one or no, that in the Number and Name we de-m
fire at the engraving,

C hap. XV.
Of what Angels appear by the vertue and W
pwn of Numbers above twelve.

Chap XVI.
Of Emperours, Popes, Kings, Lords, &c. orW
other people that fight, or go to Law one againfhW
another, which pall have the victory.

Chap. XVII.

The Refolution of all manner of t^e\iion$M>
and how by thefe Numbers you may be bap-$-\
Ph &c.

BOOK. 1U. CHAP. !.

The Way to long Life.
i. How to makja man live to two hundred
years. ?.. John Macklain our Countreyman
and others 3. Policy to prevent occafjons.
4. Help from Mgypt and Arabia. 5. N*f '

thing

The Index.

thing can beget and work^ upon it fetf. 6. 7 he
beads of doing caufes. y.7he wifdome of God.
8. Abeam of Fire. y.Moiftnefs. xo^Ofmale
ind female ftujfe. 5 1 . Mixtures. 12. Of the
iuffe cloathed with wind, 1 3. ( lean air and
jeatof Heaven. 14. 7 he fcret heat. 1$. The-
iarry fire and fat of JEzher. 16. Earth and
Water, 17. Air and lire. 18. Differences of
leads. 1 9. Of Hair and Hoof. 20. Examples.
it Of making and peri (king. 2 2 . 7he means
0 long Life, 2 3 . Toe food of Life. 2 4 -. Tbs
'aufe of long Life. 2 <; . 7 he iruths of Nature.
'.6. The ju&ice of God and End of Man.
17 . Natural My Series . 2 8 . Of the clearnefs of
nans body 2 9. 7 he j ujike of Nature .30. 7he
vayes of Nature. 3 1. Mechufalem. 53. A
ongRace 34. Helps to long Life. 3^ Tfo?
ife of Gyants. 36. King Argathcn's life.
\j. Plato"* Commonwealth^ zfi.ena Tied by the
iaw of Nature, what. Sec. 39. 7he food of
pars. 40. Hungry Spirits. 41. Mixt "Bodies ,
fid their four enemies. 42. 7 he changeable
mid and courfe of Creatures. 43. Natural
neans to long Life. 44 Sojd, Life and Heat of
•atural things. 45 . Of the Element of Fire.
.6 Of the nature of TEcher. 47. Of the food
f TEcher. 48. Of the unfeen firfi moijlure
ni being of Life. 49 . Of the firfi fiuffe of the
'ne Oyl of the food of life. 50. Of a plain pa t -
?rn of adjourtfient of life. % i . Matures pa*-
E c * fcf/J

The Index,

tern not counterfeit , or the blood and flefh of
feed. <,%. Caufe of Life. 54. Injiruclion and
ftourijhing, 5^. An example of Cardanus.
S 6\. Our fingle Oyles . 57. Natures works equal
in weight and truth.

Chap. I!.

t,2. Of the accurate fruchre of wans \
body. 3. Of joy, and grief, and difference of
wits.

Chap. IIT.
1. Of the perfection of the Body. 1. Ani
then of the Nature of the Senfes.$ .Of Delight
4.. Fain, ^.Love. 6. Hatred, n.SenfualDh
light. 8. And Pains of the Body. p. Joy)
10. and Grief,

Chap. IV.
1 . Of the nature of the foul of Man 7. Whe-
ther jhe be a meer Modification of the bodys
5 or a fubftance really didinU : 4. And then
whether corporeal ', or incorporeal, 5 ,And of the
temper of the body.

Chap. V.

1 . How a Captain was killed. 2. Of fponta-
neons motion. q.Oftbe external phenomena.
4. Of the nature of the EJfence. 5. Of the Soul
herfclf, 6. What it is. 7. And whether it be
corporeal j 8.or incorporeal.

Chap,

The Index. W

Chap. VI.

Of Plants ^that the meer motion of the matter
muy dofomethin^ yet it will not amount to the
produtlion of Plants. Jhat it U no botch in Na-
ture y that fome Phaenamena be the refults of
motion ^others of fubftantial forms, That beauty
U ml a meer fancy 3 and that the beauty and
vertueof Plants is an Argument that they are
made for theufeof our bodies from an intelle-
ctualprinciple .

Chap VI!.

1,255,45$. Of the Seed -y 63j,$. and
Signatures of plants ; 9, 1 o, 1 1 . And where-
fore God made them.

Chap. VIII.
t , 2 . Of the uftfulnefs of Plants : 3,4. And
of the Works of God,

Chap. IX.
i. Ihe Rofie Crucian way how to get
health. 2. the caufes why we eat food. %, Of
the firfl nature of the World, 4. A meafure of
raw and temperate meat: «j. And the caufe
of the fiery and fcummy Gall^ 6. and needle f<
uddy bowelsythe Milt. 7. Nature carelefs of
of making the reins of Vrine drawer <:8 Drink?
lefs Animals have none at all, o. How to cleanfe
yourfelf from tbefeidle Bowels 5 10. And avoid
all IHfeafes.

E e r. 2 Chap,

I he Index.

Chap. X.
i . Rofie Crucian Medicines made plain by
examples 5 and thofe are above controlement.
2. lhatthe wet Sun-beams declare fome fine
and forrain fatnefs tonourifh manhjnd.q.How
to live twenty years without food^as many Crea-
xur s do. 4. Vfe and Cuftome afeCond Nature.
«;. 7he Bird called Manuda Diaca , and the
fngingDog. 6.1 hat the Camelion never eats
food, j. An experienced Medicine ^ and how to
apply it with Paracelfus, and the Rofie Cru-
cian new Art of Healing.

Chap. XL

t . Of Nature and her Medicines experien-\
ced by Roiie Crucians. 2. Of the occult vert ue\
9f Myjicries. $.Oftbe healing and confumingl
■Medicines. 4. Of their uft* 5. Of the Gout^
Leprofe, Drop fie and f ailing- fckttefs} &c.

Chap. XII.
t . 1 hat the knowledge and vertue of Medi-
cines are fecretly hid from vulgar underftand-
ing\ ?. How they may he gotten : g. And of
what lies couched in the Oil of Fodies : 4. Of the
upland how to fetch it out by Skjl'jbe Haven of
Medicine.

Chap

The Index.

Chap. XIII.

i. Of Medicines. 2. Of Witchcraft. $.How
to cure thofe that are afflitled thereby, 4, al-
though their bodies be pofiefied with evil fpiritsy
5. that caufe them to vomit up Needles, 1 tum-
bles, 6. Pots y 7. Glafie^ 8. Rairy 9. andjhreds
ofcloathy 1 o. which by the Devil were conveyed
into the Body, 1 1 . That Winds and Tempejh
are raifed by Witches upon meer ceremonies
of Medicines. 1 2 . Of Poyfons •, with the exam-
ples alfo of other fupernatural effetls of unclean
Spirits, ig. Of imagination, \±. ftowtocuw
a Witchy 15. and to take away her power.

Chap. XIV.
i, 2. The Natural effeUs of Medicine. ^.The
force and power of Minerals in Vifeafs.^ With
examples alfo that every difeafe-breedyr hath the
cure or remedy in it. $, Examples that poyfon
prepared cures poyfoned people. 6. Pvofie Cru-
cian Medicines, 7. The vertue and power of
the Planets and heavenly Stars poured through
the influence of the Moon upon the lower Crea-
tures. S.Of hotStomacks. c.OftheJEtberial
fir (I moifiure of man. ic. Examples alfo of
Rofic Crucian natural and fupernatural
cures. 1 1 , Of the undemanding of theft expe-
rienced truth i by the wit of man.

Eeeg Chap.

The Index.

Chap. XV.
i. Of tfo Rofie Crucian Sun 3 2. or fpi-
yHualOyl. 3. Of the Divine Works of God not
yetobferved. 4- How to makf JEther. <; Ex-
amples of Medicines Rolie Crucian and Gre-
cian. 6. Of Foyfon. j. Of the fuper natural
Miracles of the Rofie Crucian*, 8 . with obe-
dience to Reafon, 9. Another Medicine of fu-
■pematural effed. 10. Of the power and fecret
skjll of Nature. 1 1 . How to diffolve Minerals.
1 2 . And how to prepare them for mens bodies.

Chap. XVI.
1. How the Rofie Crucians ma^ea Cki-
rurgeous Infirument, 2. that it Jhall pierce
through any part of the whole body ^without fenfe
$r feeling , and found the depth of a Wound.
3. the difference of common lhyfitians> rawy
blunt ^nd hearby Medicines, and Rofie Cruci-
ans. 4. What a Phyfician ought to be j 5. what
they ought to learn > 6. and what they ought to
paUife.

Chap. XV1L

The way to wax young.

\ . Old Age^gray Hairs>dim Eyes^deaf Ears,

rotten Teeth ^and lame Bones renewed to ftrength ,

and youth ; John MackleirT* example and

sthers : 2, 7 he Reafon. 3. What makes us

young

The Index

y sung and flour ifljing. 4. Of chert flung life,

5 . Why children and old folk, are lejfe atlive.

6. The decay of the food of life, 7. Example
of renewed youth. 8 . Why Princes are not long
lived. 9 To preferve youth, 10. Of Brach-
mans and Indian fecrets 1 j . The ftay of the
Law ef fytd. 12. The firftmoifture in Nature.
i%. Motion. 14. Heat. 15. How to move the
fpirits. 16. Fruit fulnefs and AUivity. 17. Of
Froft. 18. Of Touth. 19. Kinds of waxing
young. 20. Various opinions. 2js Strange
changes. 22. To faring to Touth from Age.
23. Medea and la Ton 24. Of the Deeds of
Nature 25. Manrejlored. 26. To renew the
skjtt) nails 3 and hair. 27. Of order in youth*
28. that an old man may be Xaken^ as it were,
from the brinks of the grave^ withered^ feeble
and creokgd^ and led bac\ to his former youth
and lujUnefs. 29. Ails of kind, 30. An old
woman turned into a man, and of ether things^
3 i. How to accomplijh thefe things.

Chap. XVIII.
The way to Pleafure, or the Worlds

efteemed Happinefs.
Of poverty and riches. 2. Of worldly wealth.
3. Of : Arabian W&7 '-ground bodies. 4. Of
Socrates under- ground fecrets. 5. That the
heat of the earth boyles Rocks into Minerals.
6. Of giiickcfilver. 7. The fidphurous and
E e e 4 mineral

The Index.

mineral quality of the breath of man, §.7 he
frozen Air. 9. Of purgrng ghtick: fiver.
ic. Viffolving of feeds and breaths of metals.

1 1 . Earthly hrintjltme to makg a perfeCt wight.

1 2 . Sun and Moon make man. 13 Of makjng
Metals. ji.Inflrufiicn. 1^. Earth in lower ^
water in Quick^filyer equal. 1 6 . Nourijk ment
in Minerals and Hants. ly.Of grcffe and fine
bodies. iS. Mineral heat. 19. Heat perfects
Minerals, cold cov ers the work, 20. Iron and
Copper of thtMature of guicl^ fiver. 2 1 .7 hat
Nature intended white and ye How Copper of
Gold and Silver. 52- Silver and Gold in all
Metals, 2 3 . Degrees of Metals clean fed .24. Afa-
ture changeable. 2$. Of mending Nature by
Art 20. 7 he imagination ef Birds 27. Guides,
2 8 . Antimony. 2 9 . 7he colour of Gold fafined.
30. To die Metal. 3 1 . T 0 ftay flying Jpirits.

32. To wajh the hands iri molten head unhurt,

33. To ft and the force of a Bullet unhurt

3 4. To k,eep a cloath from burning. ^.To ufe
unripe Gold, and nsakg it as good as the bejl,
26. How to make Aurum potabile. 37. That
Quic^- fiver may be bound, coloured and made
Gold, and of ftrditge things.

C hap.

The Index-

Chap. X!X.

The two guards of fafecy, Wifdome and

Vcrtue,to the Soul and Body3with other

wonderful truths, experienced and

pnblifbed by good Authority.
1 . Will and diligence. 2 - Of the difference of
Salience and prudence, y.Of the wind and foul.
4. Earthly Judges. 5. Of the few ants of fouls
and fpirits 6. Mejjengers of fpirits. 7. Ihe
power of fpirits in receiving (I: apes. 8. Motion
cf the fpirits and memlers. c. 7 hat the JE ther
carrieth the foul and all his beams down into the
body 1 o. 7 he excellency of man. 1 1 . Ihe na-
ture of Age and Touth in cold and hot Countries,
1 2. Of Stars and prophets. i^.That a be aft may
put on manly nature., 14. Of a Mole. 15. Of the
degrees of Nature . 1 6 . 0 f the caufe and cure of
Kind, j j. To mend man in nine or ten off-fprings.
j 8 . The nature of parents, \g.of Vifeafes and
Leprofie. 10. Wit and madnefs. 2 \ .The caufe of
foolifh bodies and the mixture. 22. The caufe &f
Verttte. 23. The caufe of manners. 24. Of the
will and mind of Man And Stars. 7^. Of the
place of the Sun ^Air^and food. 16. Of the Poles
of the world. 2 7. Pepper turned into Ivy . 2 8 .The
caufe of diftempers. 2 9 . The caufe of monftrom
children. 30. The caufe of madnefs. 3 1 . 7 he
caufe of joy er fear. 32. How to temper the
heart and liver. ^z.Cf tfat proceedeth front
tfye hear: and liver 3&c.

EOOK.

The Index,

BOOK. IV. CHAP. I.

How to change, alteiyrure and amend thcf
ftate of Mans body, when Nature
makes ic deformed.
i. Of the Compoftkn of man. 2. The door
of Light. 3. Order of fpeech. 4 Of Hermes
Medicines and other things, 5 .That an ounce of
Gold in a year will make a Medicine as good as
the Philofophers flone. 6 . Of the fon of Gold.y . Of
the heavenly veriue of Wights. 8. Of Creating \
Mice and other things- 9. Of the beams ofHea- '
•ven. 10. Of Celeftial fpirits in Minerals.
1 1 . The force of heavenly fpirits 1 2 . Envious
Loaches. i^.Of Stones, Trochifces, Pills, Ele-
Uuaries, Nile Water and other things. \ 4. Of
the vertue of calcined Mettals in Fbyfick^ and
Chirurgery. j^. Of the fecret Vertue of Mine-
rals, 16. Of diffolved Gold and raw Gold,and
other things ; » 7 . Of our fift Nature. 1 8 . Of
the perfecting of the mind and body. ip. Para-',
celfus Opinion, and of Poyfon,

Chap. II.

Hermes and Faracelfus Medicines.

1 . Of the four Complexions of the body, 7 .Of

police and Ignorance. 3 . Of Difeafes , Age,

and Death. 4. How to make Minerals grow .

5. How to m.jhe Lead grow. 6. That Gold

hath'

The Index-

hath life: 7 .Ike unwinding of fecrets: 8. Au-
thors Opinions: 9. How to order the feed of
Gold: 10. Experienced truths: n. Compart •
ous: 12.O/ turning wood into iron and if one:
13. Of turning Iron into Copper: 14. A bra*
ham Judasus experiment. 15. Irijh Waters
\tnd other things: id. Of Gcberand Agrico-
la: 17. OffaltGcmm: '8. Iron may be made
to cut fieel as fajl as jieel cuts wood: 19. Of
filvery and golden Copperas: 2-c. The vertue of
Copperas water: 21. Of Art and Natural!
changes: ?2. Natures Medicines: 23, Of the
"ood of Gold and other things.

Chap. Ilf.

The Rofie Crucian Medicines.

1. Of feed: 2. Of increafing Gold, 3. Hhe

quality of Gold : 4. Of nature in concodim :

Changeable (luffe: 6. How Nature made

uick? fiver and turned it into Gold: 7. Of

purging: 8 Of Lightnings: $.0f fire fiyes :

jo. of the Star-fijh, and other things : U.Of

\the nature of fires: 12. Of Hellen-ftar and

\caufe of lightning and thunder: 1 3 . 1 he power

iand vertue of Rofie Crucian Medicines :

\J4.1he firfi matter of Geld: 1 $ Of hot fpi-

'rits: 16. Of the fiery quality of Gold and its

1 power: 17. Of the pemitious quality of cold

ifrozen Countries. 18. Of the under (landing

mfpirits of the airland the lively fpirits of heaven.

J?.

The Index*

1 9. Of thefpirit of metals : 20. Of a natural
ftone that confumeth all the flefh and bones of a
dead man in fourtydayes^and of other things :

2 1 . Why Copper- water parts fiver from gold I

22. Hot ftomackj: 2$. Directions to Philofa
phers: 2a. Examples 1 25. How Gold got ffni
high red colour.

Chap- IV.
What the Pantarva is ; The true matter.

in Nature and Art : The manner of J
working Canonical \y and or-
derly made manifeft in
this Book.

1. The place for working: 2. Heaven un*
changeable 3 all beginnings even and of othef
things : %.Of end and everlaflingnefs: 4. Hea*
ven and Earth: 5. Of God and mam 6. Of
blood: j . Of makjng and pcrijhing : S-OftMf
four feeds offtrife in the world : 9. The difolvit
and de fir oyer of Gold : ie. The way of maty-
ing and working the thing fought after : 1 1 . Of
the body, fire and bloud of our matter : 12. Thl
dew of Starry blood and womb for feed: 1 3 . 1»-
flue-aces of Heaven : 1 4. Of Inftrudioni :
15. The quality of Countries ; 16. The Pan-
tarva: 17. Dr: More and Dr: Freeman
convinced, and all the Art made vwii*

BOOrv

The Index.

BOOK. V. CHAP. I.

Of projection and preparing Rofie Cru-
cian Medicines,
i Of the Original of Gold : 2 Of Sperme :
'3 Of the fir {I matter of Metals ; 4 Of the
difference of Gold : 5 Of the difference of
CUme i i 6 What Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury
are : 7 Of the vertue of Sulphur of Metals :
8 Of the nature of Mercury : 9 of Salt : 10 of
Gold : 1 1 of Silver : 12 of the preparation of
Gold; 13 of Aurum TpotabWe^and oyl of Gold:
1 4. How to make them ? 1 5 The fecondprocefs :
16^17 ^e third procefs : 1 8 Ihe true 6yl of
Gold : 1 9 Ihe Child of Gold : 20 Ihe Sun of
Gold : 2 1 7 he Moon of Gold ; 22 Ihe Star of
Gold: 23 The Rainbow : 24 How to make
Aurum Fulminans.

Chap. II.
1 Of Acetum Philofophicum : 2 Of
Aqua Martis : Note this Water cures or reme-
dies thefe difeafes and infirmities ; viz. the
Canker, Consumption, Convulfions , Cholick.,
Deafnefs, Inflamations of the Eye,Excorations,
helps Digejtion, purgeth C holer, cures a quar-
iain Ague, Apcplexie, Afthma, objlrutiionsof
the Bladder, prefer ves from Abortion : 3 Of

Aqua

The Index:.

Aqua Marrs Subtilicatis : Note it is good a*
gainji gri pings of the Belly, attenuates thicl^
Flegmfures the F ailing- ficknefs^and Faintingsl
and helps Obfirudions , eafeth hot pains, and
cures theFa/fje : 4 of Filius Solis Coeleftisl
Note it helps to ftreftgthen the head and brains!
purifies the blood, cures the Gout, Pox, Puftlesl
and preserves again $ futrified Air, helps thk
head, and takes away the fcurfe thereof and tha
ach or pain, helps the pafjions of the he art A
(irengthens hearing , cures hydro pical difeafesi
0 bfirudions of the Reins, Ring-worms^and HyA
iierical paffions 5 5 How Stella vitas is made ;|
6 How FHia Lunae Coeleftis is made ; Note\
ix cures the Scurvy inward and outward , In- \
flammationsy di{\emper of Kidneys^ ftrengthenA
the fight and finews,purifiesthe skin, andmak^A
it h*k, fair : 7 How \ gnis vitas is made ;j
S Adiutrix vitas ; 9 Salus vitas ; ioSan-1
gtiis vitas : 1 1 How to make Amicus vitas : ]
1 2 And Succus vitas; 1 3 Of the water of Ve-1
nus in Virgo : Note it caufes Women in travel*
to be delivered without pain, cures the WormesX
in the belly, and helps the griping of the Guts :-•
14 Of the water of Mars in Aries: Note it
preferves from grey hairs, helps the head and
the pams thereof : 1 <; Of the water of the*
Sun : Note it helps againfl madnefs, quickens^
dead members, and cures all difeafes in the head'.-
or heart : 16 Of the water of Saturn in Li-
bra :

The Index.

bra : Note this cools hot Reins and cures the
Fox : j j How to make Medulla vitae: 1 8 Of
the water of Mars and the Moon ; Note tbi$
curn the Cancer in the breaft, and all obftrufii-
ens in the breaft 5 it cureth the head pains and
•Gonorhea's j &c. 19 Of the water of
Mars in Cancer : 20 Of the water of Venus
in Libra : Note this provokes venery and urine y
nnd cures all difeafes in the Reins; 21 Of the
water of Venus in Scorpio .- Note this is a.
fecret water for women and fonot to be fpokgn
of by a young mm^fo much a fir anger to them ;
22 of the water of the Sun in Virgo: Note it
cures the twiftings of the guts, and all pains in
the belly : 21 Of the water of Jupiter in Ca- *&
pricorn 5 Note it helps fwellings in thek?ieesy
thighs and feet : 24 Of the water of Mai si*
Cancer : Note it cools Inflammations of the
breaft : 25 Of the water of Mercury in Vir-
go : Note this water helps all pains in the belly ;
26. Of the water of Jupiter and the Moon:
Note it is excellent good for the wind in the
Jiomackjs, griping* ofthejhmacl^inflammations
of the ftomac'^ and deanfei the fhmack^:
27 Of the vertue of the Geomantict^ figure
and the Sun . 2$ Of the Geomantick^ Figure
and the Moon : 2 9 Of the water of the Moon
in Scorpio: 50 Of the Figure of Geomancy
and the Light of Aftromancy : 3 1 Another
Figure of Geomancy , and a. planet of Ajiro-

mancys

The Index.

vikancy: 32 Another of wonderful vertue :
3 3 of the water of Jupiter; n Of the wa-
ter of the Sun and 'Wars in Aries : Note it is
very good againfl alldifeafes in the heady heart y
and privy members ; 3^ Of making fpiritsy
Sec. ^e.lo make a Vegetable yield his fpirits,
&c.

Chap. III.

1 Of the Eflence of a Hearb ; 2 Of the
appearing of the Idea of a Hearb in a Glaffe :
3 Of a wonderful famous Medicine experienced,
by the Roiie Crucians; 4 Of its vertue: % How
to turn Quick? fiver into water without mixing
any thing with it , and to make thereof a good
purgative and diaphoretic!^ Medicine ; 6 Of
the Fragrant Oyl of Mercury t 7 its virtues :
8 its ufe: 9 to make a Spirit of Honey: 10 Of
the®uintejfenceof Honey : 1 1 Of the Oyl of
honey: 1 2 Of the Ejfence of Honey : 1 3 Of
its vertues: 14 ufe I is Fortuna Veneris,
and of the vertues and ufe: 1 6 Aqua Magna-
11 i m i t a c i s : 17 The famous Rejlorative of
Plato and Pythagoras. 18 Of Paracelfus
Homunculus : 19 The procefs ; 20 The
feCondKule: m\ The third Kule : 22 Of
the vertues and ufe of it : 23 How to make
artificial fleflj) and of its vertues.

Chap.

The Index. So

Chap. IV.

i The way to raife a dead Bird to life, i
generating many Serpents of one, &c. 3 T<)
furific and refine Sugar. 4. To maty a Vegeta-
ble grow and become more glorious then Any of
its fpecies. 5 Jo make a Salletgrow in two or
three hours. 6 To maty the Idea of any Plant
appear in a glafs , as if the very Plant it felf
were there. 7 To maty Firre- trees appear in
Turpentine. 8. To maty Harts horn appear in
a Glafsm 9 To maty golden Mountains to appear
in a glajfe. 10 To maty the World appear in a
Glajfe. 1 1 To maty four Elements appear in a.
GlaJIe, 1 2 To maty a perpetual motion in a.
Glajfe. 13 To make a Luminous water thai
\fbaU give light by night 14 Of a rcom that
(hall feem on fire if you enter with a Candle.
I15 To maty a powder , that by fpitting upon it
\fhaUbe inflamed. 16 To maty a Loadftone
'4raw a Nail out of a pofl.

Chap. V.

1 To maty Quicty fiver malleable in ftv en
hours 2 To reduce glafs into its fir Jl principhsi
\\z.fand and fait. 3 To write or engrave up"
en an egg, or pebble , with wax. 4 To maty
FearL 5 To maty Arabian perfume, 6 To
maty ftrange Gyles and Liquors. 7 To maty
Steel grow lity a tree. 8 To melt any metal in

The Index

the hand without burning of it, 9 Secret obfer-t
nations . 1 o to extra U a white milkje fub {lance I
from the raies of the Moon.

Chap. VI.
1 To condenfe air in fummer. 2 How to fim
two volatile Salts, 3 Of a Rolie C<uciatd
Medicine ^ and its ufe and vertues 4 Another A

5 Of a Cordial Tintlure , and its vertuesA

6 Another of excel entvertue^and its ufe, 7 Tai
reduce di/tiHed Turpentine into its body againd
and of its ufe and vertues. 8 To ntakg a difiilX
led Oyl out of any Hearb, or Flower ^ or Seed ink
an inftint without a Furnace. 9 To fytow whatk
Metal there is in any Ore. 10 A pretty obferA
vathn upon the melting of Copper and Tin toA
get far . 1 1 A remarkable tbfervation upon the',
welting fait Armoniac^ and Calxvive togeA
ther. 12 A cheap powder likgunto Auruinl
Fnlminans. 1 3 To makg an Antimonial cupA
and to caft divers figures of Antimony.

Chap. VII.

1 Of a Water to caufe hair fallen to grow
again 2 A Water to caufe hair taken off never
to grow again. 3 How to maty another. 4 How'
to take away [pots in the face.^A Water againft
fcabs. 6 To preferve the fight. 7 Another Wa-
tt*. 8 How to refiore the fight -of an old man.
9 How to cure the Gout. 1 o To cure the Web

and

The Index.

^

cudfpQts in the Eyes. 1 1 How to cure Tetters-)
Fiftulaes, Cank$rs± &c. 1 2 How to cure thQ
rednefs of the face , and beaut i fie the skjn.
1 3 Another, j 4 Another of the fame vertue.

Chap. VIII.
, 1 How to cure inordinate Flux of Team,
2 Or thus. 2, H$wto cure red Eyes. 4 How to
cleanfe and dry ajharp Vlcer. ^ How to make
white Teeth. 6 To tak^e away the marks of the
fmall Pox . 7 . To cicatrize V leers. 8 Another
thus. 9 To cure Vlcer s 10 Of hollow Vlcer s
and their cure.u Qf a cicatrizing Water. 12 Cf
curing Wounds. 13 Another Water. 14 To
wakg teeth white, 15 of the Collie^ how to
cure it. 16 To cure acold jtomack. 17 Of
Sage water. 1% Of Lavender water compound-
ed^and itsvertues and ufe. 19 A peroral wa-
ter. 20 Anetber. 21 Aqua Splenetica and
itsvertues, 22 Aqua Febriftiga audits vir-
tues. 23 Aqua Damafcena^Odoriftra, and'
itsvertues. 24 Aqua Hyfterica, and itsver-
tues, 25 AquaNiphriti a. 26 Aqua Aper*
tiva3 and their vertues and ufe.

Chap. IX'

1 How tomakg the golden tree of Phil of -
phers, 2 To make the tree of the Sun. q To
viakg Geld grow in the Earth, a. Of the r
JSIarcafte, 5 Of preparing of it, 6 (f the
fff2 'ver.

The Index.

vertucs of prepared Gold 7 Of prepared Sil-
ver. 8 Of Beata's Medicine. 9 Beata's gra>*
pyl of Silver. 10 To mal\e Oylof Silver.* \ T«
make a. liquor of Silver , that it (hall make the]
gl fs wherein it is fo £x:eedingcold 3 t hit no
man is able for the coldnefs thereof to hold it in:
his hand any long time. 1 2 How to make Silver^
M white as [now. 1 3 . Of Silver "trees. 1 4. 0/i
preparing Fhilofophers Gold and Silver. 1 5 .The
procefs of the 'lerrefiial Ha i Ce'i \6*lhe
Procefs of the Pantirva. 17 ibe Proce's of
the Pvoiie Crucian Medicines , and of their
dijfofving Cold, \%lhe Procefi of the Pan a: ea,
and Hermes Medicines.

BOOK VI,

THis Book wa> defined to (hew the life
o- the Figures of Aftromancy and
Geo liajncy in a 1 the other 5 both for the
day and hour of the working •-, but b«l
caufe it doth not, you a re to read, 1 .7 he
Boly Guide : 2. 7 he Harmony 0 r the World ;
3 . 1 he Cab alia \fir Art, by which they faySlofes
didfo many Miracles in i^sjypt, fofhua made
the Sun and Moon {land in I , and Elijah rai-
fed the dead'.. And $.. 7 he Jemtle of. Uifdome

together.

The Index.

together 5 thefe ray their Light to each
other,and by one you may fee and under-
ftand the re it : 1. ibe Idea of the Law:
2 . ?he Idea of Government ; 3 . The Idea, of
Tyranny. 4. The fundamental Elements of
Morralpbilofophy ^Policy ^Government and Laws,
are to be read alter the method they ftand,
and in thefe books you may find the
names of all his booksrand this is thought
good to advertife the Reader of, leaft
hereafter the Bookfellers (hould cozen
thereby printing other bocks in his name
he never writ, and <fo abufe him, as Peter
Cole doth Dr. Nich. Odpeper.

To conclude 3 In all your works you
mult obferve well the Afcendent, his Lord
and che Moon, and fortifie them, let them
be in their Exaltation the day and hour
you begin any thing in this Book, and be-
holding the Fortunes with Sextile or
Trine r\fpec"t,fr cm Angles; thisyou may
read at large in Ihe Harmony of the World,
and in our Cabhalla. Next after you have
erected your Figure of Aftromancy , you
mil ft project a Figure of Geomancy, and
obferve how they agree, and whatsoever
Medicine you arc to make , or Metal you
aretoprepare, the Figure of Geomancy
will direft you to its vertue, and how to
life, it ; the time when to ufe it, note you
nuift obferve,

The

The Index.

The Figure of Aftromancy , which be^
ing fo fortified, you rauft prepare and give]
your Medicine to your Patient at that
moment or minute of time, and God
profperyour work.

In all the fecond Book you mufl ob-
ferve the Afcendant,and his Lord,and the
Moon, which being fortified in Angles in
their own houfes with good Afpe&s , then
you muft have ready a Figure of Geo-
mancy 5 and your Figures agreeing thus
with the numbers and names , the year,
month, day and hour, and then the Aftral
Meflenger will fall down upon the Mat-
ter, and perform, they fay, incredible, ex-
traordinary effefts, anddire&you (they
fay) to the way to happinefs, knowledge
of all things pair, preCent and to come j
and lead you the way to long life, health,
youth, bleffednefs, wifdome and vertuey
and how to alter,change,cure and amend
the (late of the body in young or old -,
and how to ^repireand open the bodies
of Gold, Silver and other Metals and
Minerals, and fit them for your purpofe.
Now 1 he temple of IV if dome teacheth you
thefe things j and fo we refer you to it.
