Roſie Crucian +

Infallible Axiomata >
OR,

Generall Rules to know al
things paſt, — and |

Uſefull, pleaſant and — |

ble to al and fitted to the un-
derſtanding of mean capacities.

By John Heydon Gent. oe 4 Servant
of GOD, and Secretary of Natare,


Pexes nos unda Tagi.

LONDON,
Printed in the Near, 1660.

r _w 2 "_ RO _— —_ Vw I — WW. ww e

Tothe mol diner 2
ant and Succeſefull, bi High» =
neſs, e veces

Exicrnall, Eternall, and Internal bappineſs be wiſhed,

IMS He Roſie Craciant have a Ex-
A callent opinion ( molt 8
Fice) that we to
Js in nothing more in chis life,
® then that we degenerate nos
llency of the mind, by which we
| cw God, ctto put on the divine Na-
ture: leaſt at any time our mind hs wy ir
by vaia idleneſſe, ſhould decline to the frailey
of our earthly body, and vices of the fleſh.
So we ſhould loſe id, ay it were caſt down by
the dar k precipices of perverſe luſtu.
Wherefore wee ought ſo to order our mind,
that it by it (elf, bang mindfall of it's own
dignity and excellency, ſhould alwayes both
think, do,and 2 ſomethlug worthy =
2

The Epiſtle Dedicatory.

= ooly and very powerfully perform this
| us, When we by the remembrance of it's
| Majeſty, being alwayes buſted in divine Stu-
dics every moment, contemplate divine
| Stage nid Migent Hquitchoy, and
by a
even
him 1 Lille vere ofeall rhings,accarding
to the Doctrine ofthe Roſie Crucian A xiomata,
which thoſe that negleR, truſting only to Na-
turall and Worldly things, are wont often to
be confounded by divers errers and ſallaciet,
and very ofi to be deteived by evill ſpirits.
But the undei ſtanuing, of the Roſie C in-
faliklt Axon putgeth the mind from errors, &
mudererii it divine, giveth infallible power to
our NM, & ddverh far the deceits and ob-
ſtaclær of All evill Spirits , and together ſubjects

Angellr, and all the powers of the World unty

being draun from the Arch. type himſelf : To

whom when we aſcend all Creatures neceſſa-

rily obey us, and all the Quire of Heaven do

fullow ne.

Seciug therefore ( moſt Excellent Duke) you

have a divine and immortall foul given you,
i which

it ſelf; Burche knowledge of divine ſcience

ing, 91
A. . of tbo Creatures aſcending
(he Arch- type biwfelf, do draw from

dem id our commands; yea it compels good, |

our ſe vice, viz, The vertueof our Numbers

The Epiſtte-Dedicatory. *

which ſeeing the goodneffe of : ther divine

rovidence , a well Alipoſed fate a,, the
(00 of Nature: Rite in | ſuch,” manner
gifted ; that by the àcuteneſſe of your ur-
derftanding and perf &nefſe' of ſenſes you are
able to view, ſearch, contemplate, deſctan, and
pierce thorow the pleaſant Theatersiat natu-
rall things, the ſublime houſe of. the Hea +
vent, and moſt difficult patlages of divine
things: U
* — bound to you by the baud of theſe
your great vertues am ſo far a debior, as to
Communicate without envy by the true Ac-
count of all opinions,theſe Koſie Grugianlnſal-
lible Aziomata, which we lia ve teact and lear-
hed, eſpecially their precious Medicines and,
their greateſt fecret the Pantarva, wichtheir gifc
of healing, according to our complexion and
capacity. ;

We preſent therefore now to you, a com-
pleat work, in the Rofie Crucian Axiomata ,
which we have perfected with diligent care,
and very great labour and pains both of mind
and body: and though it be rude and unpol-
liſhed in reſpe& of words, yet it is truly elabo-
rate in reſpect of mai ter whereſore I deſire
this one favour, that You would not expect
the grace of an Oratio n, or the Elegancy of

| A 3 ſpeech


| The Epift le Dodicatery.

Speech in this „which we wrote in our
dayes 12 the death of our ſellow
Priſoner Jabn Hewit, Doctor of divinĩty, and
others, who were ſpiteſully thruſt into Jaile
wich us, and cruelly murdered by the Tyrant
Cromwell, becauſe they loved our Soveraign
Lord the K ING.

And we expected to ſaffer for our Loyalty

to your Brother, his ſacred Majeſty the King,
but our Eſlates ranſomed our lives, c.
Again, We have chuſed the leſſe Elegancy
of Speech, abundance of matter ſucceeding in
che place thereof; but ſacing without doubt,
many ſcoffing Sophiſters will —— againſt
me, eſpecially of choſe who boaſt themſelves
to be allyed to God, and fully repleniſhed
wich Divinity; And the fe& of (elf affoctors,
that will ( unleſſe ſome judicipus Patron bee
fixed to the F tontice · piece, at the beams of the
Sun to cortect their ſawcy peering with blind -
neſſe) not only diſgorge their enyy in wordg,
but judge and condemn to the fire, theſe K. C.

A xiomatageven be fore they have read or right- |

ly undcritood any thing of chem, becauſe theſe
Medicines agree not wich their bodies, nor
ſuch ſweet flowers with their neſe. And alſo
by reaſon of that ſpark of hatred, long fince
conceived againſt me, my loving & ſerviceable

endeayours

wa mpPpyaAWwwwWyYr an = 2

The Epi Je 1 on).

endeavours to _— Royall Party toreflore
your Brother and Youand yet ſcarce contain-
ing ic ſelf under the Aſhes, Therefore ,
( moſt Iiluftrious, Prince, and Valiant Duke)

' We further ſubmit the Axiomata, aſcribed by
me to the Merits of your vertue, & now made

yours, to your ſonlure, and commend it to

tetion , thay if the baſ; rfi-
a4 Jandl pe

5 our Pro
| 5 . eme jc by the rofl
7} m 0 ou would
by 3
dour

r envy and malice,
Judgems21,happily Protect and defend

of your diſcretion and can-
it and me.

Avuguſt 4th, Your Highneſs maſt bumble
1660! Seve aud true Honer oy,
JOHN HETDON,

SN WW Www WW VV WW ¶ WW} OT "0

Jop, betauſe he was good did not grieve
Os to have others enjoy bis googneſſe, ( that
uf to be and to be well) meaning to make
a M old, full of all Kinds of everlaſting
and changeable thijgs ; Firſt made all,
and blendedthem \n one whole confuſed
wadſſe an lump togethe?, bern up by his own wag bt, heu-
die tuen s ſel}.

Then ſeeing it lay ſtill, and that zaught could beg et and
wo k upon ut ſelf ; be ſorted aut, nd ſundred a way round
about, a fine lively Piece ( which they call Heaven) ſo/ the
Male, Myuve: and Working; leaving [tal the reſt ( as
groſſe and deadly, which moves in oppoſition to Light,and
3s caled Du kneſſe, the Keward of the wicked; aud be-
low fir der the Female potrecerve the workmy and ſaſhion-
ing, which we term the {our beginnings C Elemens )
Euth, Water, Air and Fire : And thereof ſprings the
Love which we ſcc get bet ween them, aud the great deſire
to be yoyned again, an4 coupled togethe

Then, that theſe mis Ft be no Number of Confuſion, in do-

ages but all to flow: om ae hei „ As hetyQne, be
Voce of work! and y%9t ce of bent ting into ode
%, e

. «a ,,,,

— ä as mt WS _ @©@S&«<

The Preface. | *

narrow and round compaſſt, which we call Sol, from thence

' beſent out, ſpread and beſtowed all about the world both

above and below, which again meeting together. made one
generall Light, Hear, Natwe, Life and Soul of the world,
the Cauſe of All things. |
And becauſe it becomcth the might, wiſdome and plea-
ſure of God to make and rule the infinite yariety of changes
here below, and not evermore one ſelf-ſame thing : Hee
commanded that (one Light in many) to run his Eternall
and Re leſſe Race to and fro, this way and that way, that
their variable preſence, abſence and meeting they ght
tly work the continuall change of flitting Creatures , 8
VirgillVngs. Thus tranſlated, Eugenius Theo.

And firſt the Heavens, Earth, and Liquid plain,
The Moons Light Globe, and Stats Tianian.

A Spirit fed withio, ſpread chrough the whole,
And with the huge heap mixt infus'd a ſoul :
Hence man and beaſts and birds derive their ſtraine,
And moaſters floating in the maibled main.

Theſe ſceds have fiery Vigor, and a birth

Of Heavenly lace, but clog'd with heavy Earth.

Now there are a Kind of nen, as they themſelves Re-
port, Named R ſie Crucians ; a Divine Fraternity that
mhabie the Subburbs of Heaven, and theſe are the Officers
of the Genet aliſſimo of the World, that are as the eyes and
cares of the great King, ſeeing and hearing all things: they

. ſay theſe R. C. are ſeraphically illuminated, as Moſes was

accoiding to this Order of the Elements ; Earth refon'd to
nater, later to Air, Air to Fiie. Soof a man to be one of
the Heroes, of 4 Heros 4 Damon, or good Genius, of 4
Genius a per/takey of Divine things, and a Companion of the
Loly Company of un hodied Souls and immortall Angetts, and
argording to the Velucles, à vr [ane ue, turning then

ſel vet

The Preface
felves Protews-tike into 4% Shape.

But the richeſt baafineſs they eſteem, is the gift of bealia
and Medicine, It was a Long time great Labour and wow.
eo ie they could aritue to this Bliſſe above ſet, they were
at firſt poor Gentlemen, that Studied God and Nature, as
they themſelves conſeſſe: ( ſaying ) Secing the anly wiſe
and Merciſull God in theſe Latter dayes bath powred out
ſo richly bus mercy and goodneſſe to mankind, whereby wee
do attiin more & more to the perſefl knowledge of bus Son
Ear Chriſt asd Nature t hat jufily we may boaſ of the

* bappy time wherein there it not onely diſcaverch unto us the
1 part of the nord, which was beretoſore unknown and
 bidden; but he hath alſo made manifeſt unto us many won-
derfull and never heretofore ſeen works and Creatures of
Nature, and mexeover hath raiſed meu, iadued with great
wiſdome, whi:b might partly renew aud reduce all Arts ( in
this our Age, ſpotted aud imperſed ) to perfebiion,

So Finally man might thereby underſtand bzs own No-
bleneſſr aud worth, and why be is caled Microcoſmus ,

and how ſay knowledge ext eudeth in nature.

Although the rude world hertwith wil be but little plea-
ſed, but rather ſmile and ſcoffe thereat : alſo the pi dt and
Goveteouſneſſe of the Learned is ſo great , it will not ſuffer
them to agree together 3 but were they united, they might

ent of all thoſe things, which in this our age God doth ſo
nichl beſtow upon us , collect the Book of Nature, or a
peſel method of all other Arts, whereof bit is the chief 3
and tbrie/ore called the R. C. Axiomata. But ſuch it their
oppeſi ion that they ſti | keep, aud are loat h to leave the old
caſe, eſicenicg Porphiry, Ariſtotle and Gallen, yea and
that which bat» hrt a meer ſhew of learning, more then the
cha; aid ha est gt ana tiuth ,; who 1/ u were now
living, with much joy wild leave their erroncous do-
Triac. But hee i 1% great weakneſſe ſor ſuch 4

gre.t worſe.
And

>> 2388

*
2

rr

J ²˙ ͤi , hk £.c.ea

, \ The Preface.

Ard althodgh in Theologie, Phy fick, and the Mathe ·
matick, the tyuth doth oppoſe it ſelf, nevertbeleſſe the Old
enemy by bis ſubtilty and cigft doth ſhew bimſelf in lande-
ring every good purpoſe by bus inſtruments and contentious
( wavering people, ) to ſuch an intent of 4 generall Refor-
mation, the moſt Godly and Seraphycally illuminated Fa-
ther, our Brother, C R. « German, the chief and Origtaall

of our Frateraity, bath much and long time laboured, who

reaſon of his poverty ( although a Gentleman born, and
eſcepded of Noble Parents) in the 3th. year of bu Age was
placed in a Cloiſter, where be had learned indifferently the
Greek and Latine tongue, ( who upon his earzeſt delsre and
requeſt ( being yet in his growing years, was aſſociated to
« Brother, P. A. I. woo had determined to go to Apa

mis · <
Although bis brother dyed in Cyprag an {ſo never cam tg
Apamia, yet our brother C. R. did not return but ſhipped
himſel over, and went to Damaſco, minding ſrom thence
to go to Apamia, but by reaſon of the feebleneſſe hit bo-
40 be re flil there c by bis ail in Phyfick,be obtained
b favour with tbe Iſhmalits Ia the mean time be became
1 acquainted with the wiſe men of Daracar in Ats -
bia, & beheld what great wonders they wrought,& bowN a-
ture was diſcovered u to them; hereby was that bigh &
tee Spit brother. R. ft ſtirred wp that Apamia was not
ſo nacb now in bis mind «as Damcac ; alſs be could not hri-
dle his deſires any longer, but made a bargain with the Ara-
bians that they ſhould carry him for a certain ſuume of 1
my to Damcar, this was in the x6th- year of bis Age, men
be iriſe received him ( as be bimſelf witneſſeth ) not @ «
Stange., but as one whom they had long expected, they ca-
led hum by bis name, and ſhrwed him other ſecrets put of
" Cloyſter , whe/eat hee could not but mightily wen-

er.

He learned the, e better tꝰe Arabian tongue © ſo that the
year

5 The preſace.
Year ſelln wing he Tranſtated the Book M. into good Lite

fine, and I have put it into Engliſn, weit the Title of,"
The Wiſemans Crown ; wheveurto is Added, A new M
thod of Roſie C-ucian Phyfck, This is the place where
he did learn bis Phyſich ani Philoſophie how to raiſe the

dead ; for example, as a Snake cut in picces and roteed in
dung, un every piece prove a whol: Snake ag ain, Nc. and
then they begs to practiſe ſut her mittere, and to hill
Birds thiet are brid by ſorce of ſeed ard ctonjunttion of Male
and Female, and to burn them brforethiy are cold in a
Glaſs, and fo rotted, and then incleſedhin a (hell, to hatch
it under a Hen, and reſtore the ſame ; and other ſtrange
proofs they made of Dogs, Hogs, or Horſes, and by the like
traaly corruption to raiſe them up again, and renew them:
And at laſt they could reſtore , by the ſame courſe, every:
Brother that died to life again, and ſo continue many
Ages.

Let me ſpeak a word (although 1 am no Roſie Crucian)
of this matter and manner of reſtoring of a man, Let us call

it before Reaſon, and confeder what i that Seed that mater

man, and the place where he is made, what is all the work ?
Is it any thing elſe, but a part of man (except bis mind)
rotted iu a cont inual, even, gentle, moiſt , aud natural
heat? I it not like, tha the whole body, votted in lite
munner, ard in a womb agveeable ſhall ſwim ont, at laſt
gutcken, and avi/e the ſame thing? as Medea found true
upon Jaſons ſather, and made hun young again, 4: Tully
Jaith, Recoquerdo , And Hermes was after thu manner
raiſed from death to Life ; ſo was Vigil the Poet: but the
Spaniſh Ex | /nled, through the ignorance of his Friend
the A lui that miftook the heat, mos{ture, and temper of ohe
work.

But I canner tell , I witl neither avow nor diſavow
the Matte!, naruie is deep, vd wondcrt nll in bei deeds,
if they be 114 to the bott h, and may Juffer tin but

nt

_— cc _ WWW WK

;
The Preface.
{ Lite not Religion. But to our R. C. who learned his Mathems-
lr of, tick bert, whereof the world bath juſt cauſe to rejoyce, if
Me there were more love, and leſs envy. Aſter three years he
here returned again with good conſent , ſhipped kymſclf over
* the Sinus Arabius into Egypt; where he remained not long,
4 in but only took better notice there, of the Plants and Crea-
and tures, of »'mneral Medicines , the ſamtus Autum Potabile,
ki that cures all diſcaſes in body and minde, and of the Oyl
Hale of Gold.
in 4 Then be ſailed over the whole Mediterranean Sea ſor to
itch come unto Fern where the Arabians bad direffed him. And
oe it is a great ſhame unto us that wiſe men, ſo ſar remote the
lite ore from the other, ſhould not only be of one opinion, ha-
em: | ting all contentions wings; but alſo be ſo nilling, and
bey veady, under the Seal of Secrecy to impart their Scryers to
any others.

Every year the Arabians, and Africans do ſend one
in to another, inquiring one of another out of their Arts, if
alt © happily they had found out ſome better things, or if ex-
hes | perience had wakened their Reafons, yrarly there came
þ > fſomet Hing to light, wheteby the Mathemarica , Chiſir and
4) | Magir (fo in thoſe are they of Fez. moſt rhilful) were a=
ral | mended ; as there is hw adnys in Germany no want of

e |, Learntd men Cabalifts, Phyficians, Aſtrofogers, Geoman-
aff | cers, a Philoſophers 5 were there but love and more
ue © (indneſs among them, pr that the moſt part of them would
ly vor keep thei / ſecrets': As we Germans likewiſe night ga-
er ther togither many things, if there were tbe like unity, and
de dieſire of ſcarching out of ferrets among ſt us.

After two years, Brother C. R. departed the City Fez,
be and ſailed with many coſtly tings into Spain, horins well;

he ſo will and ſo p.ofitably ent is tine in Travel, th at

the Learned in Euiope weuld | wghly reoyce with hum, and
began to Rule, aud order all thu Studies, according to
| Bhofe ſound and ſure fonndations : He therefore conferred
t with

The Preface.

wb the Learned in Madrid, hewing them the Errors of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and how the faults of the Church

by Eviſcopacy ,\and the whole Philoſophia Moralia was to

be amended.

But becauſe their acerptance happened to him contrary to
bis expect. uion (being then ready bountiſully to impart all
bus A'ts and Secrets to the Learned, if they would have
but undertaken to write the true an1 infallible Axiomata,
which he knew would direũ them, like a Globe or Circle,
to the only middle point and centrum, and ( i is uſual
among the Alabians) it ſhould only ſerve ts the wiſe and
learned for a Rule, that alſo there might be a ſocitty in
Canaan which ſhould have Gold, Silver, and 2
Stonis, ſufficient for to beſlow them on Kings, for their ne-
ceſſary uſer, and lawſull purpoſes : with which ſuch as be
Governours mag ht be brought up to learn all that which
God hath ſuffered man to hnow. ö
Brother CR. after many Travels, and bis fruitleſs trace
wnſtruttons , returned again into Germany , and there

bulded a nrat and fitting babit ation, upon a little Hill or

Mount, and en the Hill there reſted always a cloud ; and he
did there render bimſelf vi ble or inviſible, at his own will
and diſcretion, In this houſe be ſp:nt a great time ba the
Mathematicks, and made many fone Inflrumeuts, Ex umni-
bus hujus Artis partibus.

After five years came into hit minde the wiſhed return of
the children of I ſcael out of Egypt, bew God would
bring them out of bondage with the Inſlrumens Moſes.
Then be went to bis Cloyſter , to which be bare affection,
und died three of bis brcthrea to go with him to Moſes,
The choſen ſervant of God. Brother G. V. Brother I. A.

and B ot he, I. O. who befides, that they bad more u.

mM A4\ts, then at that time many others had, be
«id binde thoſe three unto humſelf , to be ſaithſul, diligent,
axd ſecict; a; alſoto commit caraſully to writng what

Moſes

The Preface. |
Moſes did ; and alſo all that which be ſhould diet and in-
Rruft them in, to the end that thoſe which were to come,
and througl eſpecial Revelation ſhould be rceti ved into this
Fraternity, might not be deceived of the leaſt able and
word,

After this manner began the Fraternity of the Roſie
Croſs, firſt by four perſons, who died and roſe again un-
till Chrift, and then they came to wo ſhi as the Stat gut-
ded them to Bethlem of Judea, where lay our Saviour in
his mothers Arms 3 and then they opencd their Treaſure and
preſented unto him Gifts, Gold, Frankinſenſe, and Myrrhe,
and by the Comman4meat of God went home to their
habitation.

Theſe {our waxing young again ſucc ſively many hun-
dreds of years, made a Magicial Language and Writing,
ws vogue agate y which we yet diy uſe to Gods
praiſe and glory, and do finde great wiſdom thercin; th
made alſo the firſt part of the Book M. which I will bent
publiſh by the Title of, The Wiſemam Crown. :

Now whileſt Brother C. R. was in a proper womb quicks
ning, they concluded todraw and receive yet others more
into t hei / Fraterniiy: To this end was choſen Brother
R. C. hs deceaſed Fathers B others ſon ; Brother B. 4
Hu Painter, G. their Secretary, and P. D. another Bo-
ther elected by Conſent; and E. F. all Ge mins, except

I. A, ſo in all they were ninc in aumber, all Bitchelots and

of vowed Virginity, /by thoſe was collected a volumn of
all that which man can deſir:, wiſh or hopc fo.

Aſter ſuchi a moſt laudable ſoit they did pend theirlivet;
and although they were ſree [rom all diſeaſes and pain, yet
not wit yſtan ing they could not live aud paſs thar time ap-
point ed of God So they all died, at the death of or Lord
and $autour Feſis Chiyt, and their Spirits attended him
into glory. Now t';e ſecond owe of theſe men by may
weie c.illed the iſe nen of the faſt; and caghty one

you's

e Preface.

Jeares the SLES of this Fratermly was contealed.

Now the true and fundamental Relation of finding
the memory of the Fraternity of the Roſie Croſs is this,
A learned min in Germany, went to find out the wiſe men
of the Exft into many Count ret, bw could never bear of
any of them: So bring provided o Gold and Silver, Me-
dicines, TinAures and Teleſmes , be choſe a Maſter of
Numbers A. to be bis Companion: And finding an old
ſtrange babitati-n, then they ſet themſelves te alter this
huilding, in which Renewing be lighted upon the memorial
Table, which was cuſt in Braſs, — contained all the names
of the Brethren, with ſome ſew other things; this be
transſerred to another more fitting Vau'r, with great joy ;
{ar he had never heard of tins Fraternity, betng all dead81.
yea's before his time. In this Table [tuck a great nayl, ſome-
what ſtrong, ſo that when it was with force drawn out,
1: took with it 2 fone and a piece of thin wall, or plaiſter-
z g of the hidden door, and ſo uxlooked ſor, untovered the
dos whercſee we did with joy and longing throw down
the rſt of the wall, and cleaved the door, upon which
wirt written in great Lriters , Poſt 81. Annos Patebo,
with the year of our Lord under it.

trhereſore we gave God thanks , and let it reſt that
ſame might ; In the morning following we opened the
Jnoy, and there appeared to our fight a Vault of ſeven
ſides and corners, every ſide five foot broed,and the height
of nine foor. Althourh the Sun never ſhined * this
Van'r, nevertheleſs it was enlightened with another Sun
which hal learned this of the Sun; and was ſituated in the
ape part ia the cente/ of the Scaag : in the maſt, inſtead
of 4 Tomb ſtone, was around Altar, covered over with a
Ae of Braſs, and thereon was this engravens

A. C. R. C. Hocuniverſi Compendium unius mihi

Scpuſchrum Feri.
Rouua

Sen mowroMs

The Preface
Riaved about the firs Circle of trim feet.

Klas Mihi Quiz
Is the MAdle were four Figures, inclaſed is four Cir-

det, whoſe cixcnmnſcription was,

1. Nequaquam Vachum.
2, Legi lugum.

3. Libertas Kvangelil.
4. Dei gloria incata,

This all clear aud bright, as iſe the ſeventh (ide , and.
the 2.Hepragoni,ſo we kueeled all down togetherand gave
thanks to the Sole Wiſe, Sole Mighty, and Sole eternal Gods
who bath taught us mere then all mens wit cond have
fownd aut, prafyd be big bely Name : This Vault we. t-
rapid. r, —＋ part or ſeiltng, the wall or
Ne, the ground ov floor. .

Of the upper part you ſhall underſtand na mert- of: it at
this time, but thatit was divided according to the ſeven
let inthe Tangle, which was in the brig bt nter: bus
what therein is contained, you [hail God wilting, (thet axe
deſirous of our Society.) behold the ſame with. you own
der; but every ſide or wall is parted into tan Syugres,
even one with they ſeveral Figures and Sextencts, os they
a — ſhewed, and ſet ſa-th Concentruum bert in

Rook *

The bottom ag eis is parted in the Triangle , but becauſe
there is deſcribed the Power and Kule of the Ia ſeriau Go-
ve/nours, we leave to wanifeſt the ſame, for fear of the
abuſe by the cul and ungodly world, But thoſe that are
Movided and flexed with the Heavenly Antidote, they de
without fear or bat, tread as the bead of Oganeus
dhe old and evil Serpent, which this our Age is well fitted
for, Lven fide ar wall, bad a doore for a Che , wheres
tber lay t things, eſpecially all the works FRE

4 ow

The Preface.

Þ,w he and his brethren rasſed e ich other t6 Liſe ais? in
thoſe Books were witten of their going to Bethlehem to
worſhip our Saviour Feſus chi, and of the leinerarium,
and vitam ef C. R. In another Cheſt were Looking glaſ-
ſes of divers vertues , as atfo in other places were little
Bells, and Rings, which of any man put upon his finger, he
ſeemed now ia Green, then in white and Blew, ved and
bloom, and all manner of colours ; thus nll his Gar-
ments change into pure colours eve y moment: there were
him ning Lamps, and wonderfull Artificial 'Songs , which
they bad hept ever frace God ſpake to Moſes in the Mount,
they toe the oſd Teſtament carefully and expr(t:4 Chrit
to be born : And choſe fowrly five more to bear witneſs to
the incredulous world and ſuperſtitiout Sefts, that Chrift
is the Son of God, and was cruciſied at J-ruſalem ; and
left theſe Brethren all the wonderfull works of God, and
the Ads of Moſes aud the Prophets to the end that if ii
ſhould happen aſter many hundred of yea #he Order of
Frarerniry ſhould come to nothing, end if Ty rents ſhould
burn the Old Teftament, which they bear witneſs to be the
word of God, t bat then they might by this only Vault be
reflored again. |

Anid theve is another Vault or Habitation of the Bre-
thren in the reſt of England, and there it recorded all the
New Teftiment, and every Chapter explained.

Now as jet we had not ſeen the dead body of our care.
full and wiſe Father in the German Hill ; we therefore re-
moved the Altar afide, there we liſted up a ftrenz Plate
of Braſs, and found a fair and worthy body whole and
unt onſumed, as the ſame is here lively caumterſeited with
el{the Ornaments and Attpes; in bis hand he held a P h-
ment Book, divided into two pa ts, the firſt was the Old
Teſtamert, aad every Chapter Interprated, and the other
i the Baoke I, which next unto the Bible it ou grea*
tft treaſure, which ought te be dH, e te the Conſure of

tbe

th

MM 4 — 2 +4 +

—

I - way aw uin ww - F Ms

The Prefice.

the world, At the end of this Book ſtandeth this follow»

ing Elogium.

C. Rof. C. Ex Nobili atque ſplendida Germa-
nix R. C. Familia oriundus, vit ſui ſeculi Divi-
nis revelationibus,Subrtiliſſimis Imaginationibus,
Indeteſſis Laborihus ad , Cœleſtia atque humana
Myſteria: arcanave admiſſus poſtquam ſuam
(quam Arabico & Africano, I. ineribis College-
rat) pluſquam regiam atque imperatoriam Ga-
zam ſuo ſeculo nondum Convenientem poſtert-
tate cruendam cuſto diviſet & qm ſuarum Arti-
um, ut & nominis fades ac conjunctiſſunos Here-
des inſtituiſſet, mundum Minutum omnibus
Motibus Magiio illi reſpond:nrem Fabricaſſet,
hocque tandem Prerericarum, Præſentium & fu-
rufarum, rerum Compendio extracto Centena-
rio Major non morbo (quem ipſe nunquam Cor-
pore experrus erat, numquam alios infeſtare ſi-
nebat) ullo pellente ſed Spiritu Det evocante,
illumina tam animam (inter Fratuum amplexus
& ultima Oſcula) Fideliſſimo Creatori Deo red-
didiſſet, Pater dilectiſſimus, Fra: ſuaviſſmus,
Preceptor Fideliſſunus, amicus integertimus, &
ſuis ad 1400. Annos hic abſconditus eſt.

uaderneath they had ſubſcribed themſelvet,
1. Fra. I. A. Fra, CM. Fra. I. H. Liectione Frater.

nu Cape.
> 1. Fre

The Prefice.

2, Fra. G:v. M.P.C.S. |
3. Fra R C. Junior beres S. Spiritus.
4. Fra. B. M. p. A. Pictor & A ebitectu⸗

3. Fri. GG. FH. M.. 1 C. AN, CabA¹jL F. w.

N.Q. AZ. BX. O. N. P. k. 0. L. F. x. M. Z. AS.
WS: 05:57

C
Secundi Cirtuli.
r. Fta. T. H. Succeſſor,” Fra. F. A. Mathematicus,
2, Fra. I. O. Succeſſor, Fra. A. D.
J. Fra. P. K. Succeſſor Fa, is CR. C. cum Chile,
1 tamphant.

At the end was written.
Ex Deo naſchmer , in Jeſu Morimur per Spicicum
Sanctum ceviviſfimus.

At this day the Rofie Crucians that beve been ſince
Chit, jay their Fraternity inhabits the Welt of Eng-
land ; and they have likewiſe power to rem themſelves,
and wax * ayain, as theſt did before the Brtb of Je-
ſur Chill, as you may read in many et. :

And Dr. F. ſauhb ſomewhere there is a Caſile ia the urſt
of England, on the en th. and not on the Earth, and theye
the Rolte Cruc' ins dell, 4 4 without walli , and
preſſing nothing , they ene «ll things ; in this Cattle is
tat Riches, the Halls fa and. ich to behold, and the
chambers are nude «nd compoſed of white Mar'4e , at the
eng of the Hail chere is a chino, whereof the two Fil.
lars that ſuſtain the Manile Tree ave of fine ßer, and the
Mantle 4s of ich Calcetony ; and the Lintel i4-made of
nine Eme: alds gail d with a wing of fine Gold, and the
ge of fine Silver , and all the Pillars in the Hall anc of
Rid C:lcedonle, and the haut is of hne Amber.

The Chambtis e han e with ich clorthes, aud the
#5hir ani bed-fleads are nll of white Ivory , ie gar

. HHhe

ſ

The Preface:
{hed with \ptevious ſtones, tbr Beds were richly cover;
ed; there ave Ivory — rey 1 1 0
RN ; and bn tbye are Gowns
and Robes of me ne gold, 01d yoſdrichManules, Fur-

red with Sobles, and all er z Go
1 -
ep 37 of

if 15 fev

enſcore
ſteps undet pround : And there are ten Scrum of the
Boſc Crugians,: Ci young wen: Aud C.., reports this
when I ft came to the Socict ( ſaith be) 1 ſaw 4 greet
Oven with two mouths, which did caſt out great cl e,
by nad pre, young men made Paſte for Bread, and two
delivered the Loaves io other m, and they (4 them den
upon a rich cloath of filk ; then the other tuo men
the Loaues & delivered them unto our man by two Loeves
at once, and be did ſet them jato-the Oven ta Bake, aud at
the other mouth of the Oven, there was « man that drew
out the white Loavues and Paſte, and Re no-
.

ther young an, that received them, and put
kets, which were 1ichly painted.

CB. weat iato another Chamber eighty one Cubits fñum
thie, and the Rote Crucians welcomed hi; for befourd
a Table ready ſet, and the cloth laid , and there o Pore
of Silver, and veflels of Gold, bordered with precions
ſtones and pear}, 424 Bafons and Ewers of Gold to wiſh
their hands ; then we went to dinner of all wrunner of
Fleſh, Fowl, and Fiſh , of al maxzer of Meat in the
World, thevethey bad plenty , and pots of Gold garni-
ſhed with precious A of Wine : This chamber
2.15 made of Chryſtul, and painted 156hly with Gold and
Azure; and upon the walls were w, itt en and engraven all
thiegs paft, preſent, and to come ; »p0n the Penn
* rad abroad Roſes, Flower, and Herbs ſweet»
{mclling above all [rvours is the world; and in this

& 2 Cham-

The Preface.
Chamber were divers Birds flying about, and Singing mar-
vellous ſweetly. g |

In this place have I A deſire to live, if it were for no 6:
ther reaſon, but what the Sovhift ſometimes applied to the
unt aint, Hos prĩmum Sol (alorar, ul imoſqee deſerit.
Quis Locum non amet, Die: Longiores habentem. But
of this place, I will not pat any more leaft the Readers

ould nuſtate me. So at ti entertain 4 ſuffition that 1 am
of the Order.

Tobis Williams, Neah Walford : Fre. H. w. v C.
8 theſe in all are 9 fin, that bear witneſs of
(ik.

And Fra. N. chofe C. B. for his Succeſſor, ſaying, I haue
lene * e you” com, in t his place you ſhall live, and
we will teach you all things, and you ſhall lrern our Axio»

mat

Fir. you muſt ar we do, profeſs Medicine and cure the
pci, and that gratis.

2. Ton ſhall not be conſtraiaed to wear one cert ain hin
of Habite, but may therein follow the cuſtom of the
C ountyey. ,

3. Every yar upon the day C. you ſhall mert us in thi;

. Houſe, & Spiritus, dr wiite the cauſe of four abſence, and
when I am dead lay mt in a Glaſs, and ven me accord- ''
ing to Nature to live again, as you ave taught by us.

4. And you muſt look About for a worthy perſon, who af -
ter your deceoſe muſt ſuccerd you. |

3. The word R. c. muſt be your Mark, Seal, and
Chara@er,

6. Our Frater: ity ſhall be concealed ſeven years and no
mare. And thi tyof the Brethren departed, only four and
the Brethrey I. W. «and N.W. remainy'd with the Father
Fiz, R. C., I. A. and their ſervants a wholt year, & T. W.
died, and Father l. A. put him ina glaſs, and buried bun
form. wi Ly c,

A; icy

rener

The Preface: 1
After few yeart there will be a general Reformation Goth
of Divine and Humane things, according to our deſire, and
the expeftation of others : For iti fitting , that before the
Riſoug of the gun, there ſhould appear and break ſorth Au-
rora, or ſomeetearneſs, of Divine Light in the Sky, and
fo in the wein time ſome few , which ſhall give their
Names, may joyn together, thereby to eucreaſe the number

«nd refþc of our Fratermtie, and make a happy and wi
ed far beginving of our Philoſophical Canons preſcribed to
ws by our Brother R. C and be paytakhers with us of our
treaſures (which never can fail or be wiſted) in all humi-
kity and love tobe eaſed of this worlds Labtur, and nt
— blindly in the knowledge of the wonderſull works

Bu that alſo every Chriſtian may know of what Religion
and belief we are, We Confeſs to have the hnowledge of
J- ſas Chrift , among his Diſciples, and he is the Son of

od, and was crucigged for Mankinde at Jerelalem him
did our eyes ſte and wo ſbip, being guided by a Star. And
Epiſcopacy u the beſt Form of Church Government, being
moff clear and purely profeſſed , and cleanſed from ſactious
presbyteriam, Cromwelſtan Anabaptiſts, Jeſuicical Qua-
kers and ſa ſe prophets.

- Alſo we uſe two Sacraments, as they are inſtituted with
all Forms and Ceremonies of the firſt renewed Church in
England, we acknowledge Carolus Magnus Sc cundus, for
our Chriſtian Head ; and in Politia, we acknowledge the
Proteſtant En pite and Quartam Monarchiam for our Go-
vernment; beit we know what Allcrations be at hand,
1563. 1664. 1665. 1666, 16:97. 1668, 1669.
nd wauld fan impart the ſame wit hall our hearts to 0-
thy, Godly | earncd men.

Not n ih ſlaadiag our Wikings which isin our bands no
man (ertept God alone) ran make it common, nor any
1» th Pe ſon is able to le eng ws of 4; but we ſhall

34 help

=
.

The
he/pwoich ſteret Aid, thic ſo good = « God ſhall
permit oy binder as; ſor our Cad is not blinde as the Meas
thens Fortuna, but 45 the Churches Ornament , and the
honour of the Temple : dur Philoſophy of Numbers alſo
is not a New but as Adam after bis Fall hath
recaved ity aud
2 ſhe ought

D er contr adified
3

and wherein
mon did excel ;

But wow ing (and chneflpix tha aur Age) the u-
god, and accuſed 84 making, , which hath goucen ſo
mut hu t he up per hand, whereby ander colour of it, many
Ru, ytgates and Rogrifh People do uſe great Villanies, and
n and abuſe the credit which us groen them 4 5 now
sdays min of dſtretion do boll the tranſmutation of Met-
tals to be the highefl Point and Fan is Fhiloſophie,

this zs all the nt and deſi re; aun that Gad would be
rot ec: med them, aud honoured, wich could make
grett ſto e, Gol, and id ahuxrdance, the which with
wnpromeditite Prayers they hope te aitain of the Al-hnowing
God, 144 ſearcher of all beaits ;, we there/ore do by theſe
eſcpts ub teſtifies Ft the true Philoſophers ave
. of an'the, „ide, eecmiag little the making of
Gild, wiigh is but 4 Varigon; For befides that
160

Moſes aur Auen and Solomon uſed ie;

—c_. SAS UT. Tas LS

The Preface:
they have « thouſand better things, And we ſay
with um loving Foreſathert, Phy. Aurum, Nia
rum; for unte them the whole Nature 44 d : be
doth not rejoyee, that he can mate Gald, and that as ſai
Chriſt, the Angels and Devils are obedient amo him, but

' is glad that be ſteth the Heavens open, aud the Angels of

Goll aſcending and deſcending , and bu name written in
the Book of Life.

Alſo we do teflifie that under the name of Chymia many
Books and Pictures are ſet ſorth in Conrumeliam gloriz
Dei, , we will name in their due ſeaſon, and will give
to the Pure-bearted a Catalog ue or Regiſter of them ʒ and
we pray all Learned men to take heed of The aurum Chi»
itanicum, prblifbed by Elias Aſhmole, Eſjure.
ind of Books as theſe; ſor the Enemy never

b bis weeds till 4 fronger one doth

r
w Sy ends 4 P t
Smarage & Jacinth helps the Plague, aud beals the wounds
of VEnemous ftangs,

The water of Nile makes the women of Egypt quick of
conceit, and ſruitful, and ſometimes they bear ſeven chil-
dex at a birth, and this is Salt - peter. water: There 3s 4
wonderfull vertur in the Olof Tobacco: in the tincture of
dalf ron, in the flower of Brumflonjn Nuichſlver, in Common
Sal, aud Coppreſs, molten and made a rater, & At the 125
{on of the Toad-flool, ani juyce Poppey, Amber, which
4s 140 ſtonc, but a hard clammy Jayce, called Bitumen, ea-
ſel» the Labour of women , and the falting fchneſs in
6b1!aven,

Now for Metals, If it betiue, which all men grant,
ht prertous tans in that hard and ungentle ſaſbion, ſhew
(4:5 O1ue and power of Healing, what ſhall the ur-
$4+.4% E: Malt under a fortunate Conltellation

made

A
:

The Preface,
made in the Converſion of their own Planers do, which
they cal Fe um, Sigill, er Teleſme, ſaying. it will ture
the Cramp, Benumming, Palſee, Falling-fichneſs, Gout, Le-
prolie,Dropfie, if it be morn on the beart «finger, others they
ohe to cauſe beauty in Ladies, Sc, |

The third perſume of R. C. is compounded of the Saphi-
ric carth, and the ther, if it be brought to its fall ex-
altation, it will ſhine like the Day ſtar in her freſh Baſtern
giorirs ;, it bath a faſcinating altrałlive faculty; ſor if you
expoſe it to the open Air, it wi I draw to it Birds and Beaſts,
vnd drive away. il Spirits, Aſtrum Solis, or the R. C.
Mineral fun is compounded of the - ther, and a bloody,
fiery ſprnted carth ; it appeays in a Gummy Conſiſtency, but
with a fiery, bot, glowing comple non. It it ſubſtantially
a certain puiple, animated, Divine Salt ; and cureth aff
manner of venenal diftempers, Conſumptions, and diſeaſes
of the Mind.

we gi ve enether Medicine, which is an Azure, or Shic-
erloured water, the Tincture of it is light and bright, it
reflects a moſt hrautiſull Ratybow ; and two drops of this
water keeps a max bealthy, in this water (is a blood red
eth of great vert ue.

Tic other Medicine is the Heawenly Luna ad Moon of
the Aire a very ftranze ſtapiſying ſubſtance ; it is not (imple
but muxt : The Ather, and a ſubtle white Eaith ave its
Components: and this H it grofſer, then the ether it
felt, it aa in the form of an exccectig white e, but

in ti tiuth a certarn wvegetant, flowinz, (mooth, ſo t ſalt,

and this rexewtth youth, and cauſith wiſdom and verlue,
Ihe Pantarua of Roe Crucians is a water, aud 110 [trut,

it ate, zi ht diſ cov et a fire as bauht as diy, 4nl if

V look on it in the di tine; it dard s the eye with ce.
tan elrames , Co, ucααν,jũ it; for tutte SpItt o& .-
„ale purer to lins I, u Hen, and len: N
1 will ſhtw who arzt E e Stents, + rd flowed t ie

* * . * -
8 +4 * ri wth
« ? a

__n_ wo %

The Preface:

whz
/ —— We'king upon the plain of Bulverton Hill te fludy Num
t, Le- bert and the nature of things, one evenings I could ſee be-
# they tween me and the light, a mofi exquiſite Dine beauty, her
FIFTY frame neither long nor ſhort, but a mean decent ſtature, atti-
tphi. d ſhe was in thin looſe Silks, but ſo green that I never ſaw
| the like, ſor the colour was not earthly, in ſome places it was
dern fancied with white and ſilver Ribbands, which look'd ike
you Lylkes in the ficld of graſs, her head was overcaſt with 4
or, thin floating 5 which ſhe held up with one of her
C bands, and look d & it were from under it, her eyes were
. quick, freſh, and Celeſtiall, hut had ſomthing of a Start, as
but if ſhe had been puxxled with a ſudd ain occurrence.

1 From her vail/ did ber locks break out, like Sun beams
from a Miſt hey ran diſhev:l'd to ber Breſt,and then return-
ed to her cheeks in cnrles and rings of gold, her hay» behind

7

a her was rowl'd ts a curious Globe, with a ſmall ſhort ſpixe

* fowred with purple and tie colour knots, ber Kings were

oi pure indie Emeratds ſor ſhe valurd nd. Metall, aud er pen ·

. dants of burning Carbuncles. In brief ber whole habit was

/ youthbſull and flowery, is ſmelt like the Eaſt and was
thraughly ayr'd with rich Arabian Diapaſme, this and no

f other was her ap"earante at that time.

But whilft I adwnved her perſeflions, and prepared to

d make my addreſſes, ſhe prevents me with a voluntary ap +
proach .here indeed | expetted ſome diſcourſeſrom berg but
(hr looking very ſenouſly and filentl, in my ſ ace, takes me by
the hand and ſoftly whiſpers, my love | freely give you, and
with it theſe tokens, my Key aud Signet, the one opens, the
other ſauts, beſure to uſe both with diſcretion, as for the
wy[ter1es of the Rofie Croſs, you have my Libra y to peruſe
them all, there is not any t bing here, but I will gladly re-
weal it to you, I will teach you the wiitue of Numbers of
Names of Angelly aud Genii of men, | have one precept
com mend to you, and this it is you mu he filent, you (hal
rot in yer ing exceed my allowance, ememier that 1
AM

The Preface.
am your dove, and yo will nat mate me 4 Profſitute, But
becauſe I wiſh you ſerviceable to thoſe of your o diſboſ -
tien I here give you an Smblepyaticall Te of my Sandtua-
9, viz. The Axiomata of the R. C. The ſecrets of Num-

bers, wit h a full priziledge to publiſh iti. This bs all, and |

now | am going to the inv iſible Kegron, amongſt the · Athe-
wal! Goddeſſes, let not that Proverb take place with you,
Ont of fight out of ind, remember me and be happy.

Now I ashed ber if ſhe world favour me with her name;
to this ſhe veplyed very famliarly. as if ſhe had known me
(oxy before, My dearſriend H. I bade many Names, hut
wy be. beloved i: Euterpe. |

Obſervetnyour R. C. Axiomara that the Genuine
time of impreſſion of Charatters, Names, Angells, Numbers,
and Gerii of men is, when the principles ave Sperma c and
Callaln, but hing once coagwated to a, perfcft bed the
time of ſſellißcat on is paſt, Now the R. C. in old time
uſed range Aſtrologicall Lamps, Images, Rags, and
Plates, wub the numbers and names engraven, which at
eetgn hours, would product incredible extraordinary
effeits. The common Aſtroſoger be takes 4 piece of
Metals an»ther whining Afloctate be helps lim with «
Ch. i tall Stone, and theſt they figure with idiculout cha-
vacters, and then erbeſe then tothe Planet s, not in an Al-
kemuſt but as they Dream they know not what, when this
ts done, all ts to no purpoſe, but though they falle in their
procliſt, yet they believe they anderſtand the Axiomara of
Numbers well enough. Now my beloved J. H. that you
may tnow what to do,1 will trat h you by Example, Tale 4
te gran of Corn, that js bard and drye, expoſy it tothe
Su, Beams ina gl, or any ther veſſell, and it wil bee 4
diy grain for ecer, but if you do bwy it in the E Y, that
the Mt, o, Salih moyſture of the Element may diſſul ee
it, thent'e d% mill work uo it, and wake it
and wout e e body, it ij thus with the Coin

—

The Pref:cc.

Aftratoger , he expoſeth to the Planets a perfelt Cam-
falle body, and by this meanes thinkes te performe
the Roſie C ucian Gama a, and Mary the Tiferiour and
Supertour worlds.
It muſt be a body reduced into Spermegthat the Heaven
Femizine Moyſture, which recei vet an yetilas the In-
preſs of the Aſtrall Agent, may be at Liberty, and immediate

| ty expoſed to the Maſculine five of Nature. This us the
| ground of the Beil; but you muſt remember, that nathiag

cas be ftell;/yed without the ſ nt Mac netiſia of bree Hea-
dent, what they are you know already, j ben ſhe had thus
ſaid, ſhe took out of her boſom two mi/aculous Medalls
with Numbers and Nat on them, they were not Metis»
line, but ſuch an I had never ſeen; neither dil I concebue
there ws in Nature ſuch pure 61d glorious ſubſtances ; In

my Judgement, they we'e two Magical Celclas, but ſhe
called t Saphir of the Sun and Moon. Theſe ma»
yacles Euterpe commended ts my peruſal , and ſtopt ig a
mute Ceremony; for I was 10 be left alone, ſhe lookt upou me
in filent nder. mixt with a pretty kind of ſadacſs, for
we were unwilling te part; but ber hour of Tranthution

was come, and tatig as I thought oxy laſt leave ſhe palt

before my eyes into the · Ethet of Nature 3 excufag ber ſelf
« being ſ1:evy, otherwiſe ſhe had expounded them far me ;
[look't, «dmived, and wearied my |clf in ther Coatemols»
tien, t hei/ comulexion e heautnly , thetr contiau ance
ſomſte tous, Idid not well know what to make of them, I

turn'd aſideto ſec, if ſhe was ſtill aſleep ; but ſhe wu gan-
and this did not a little trouble me. I expefled her retain,
till the day was quite ſpert, but ſhe did vat appear; At laßt,
firing my eyes 04 hat place, where ſhe ſomctumes reſted, I
diſcovered certain feces of Gold , full of Numbers an4
Names, which ſh: hade t it bebinde her, and hard by & Pa-
per folded like a Letter, Theſe I too wp, and now the ug.
«preaching, the evering N trin'd in the Welt; - rt
t. K.

The Preface
taking my laſt ſaruey of ber flowry pikow 1 paried from it
in theſe 8 cr/es,

Pretty Green Bank, farewel, and may ſt thou wear
Sun beams, and Roſe, and Lillies all the year ;

She ſlept on thee, but needed not to ſhed

Her Cold, is pay enough to be het bed:

Thy Flowers a! c Favourites 3 fer this lov'd day
They were my Rivals, and with her did play,

They found iheir heavꝰn at hand, and in her eyes
Enjoy'd a Copy of their abſent skies.

Their we ke: paint did with true Gloiies Trade,
And ming!'d with her cheeks, one Poſie made,

And did not her ſoft skin confine their Prid e,

And with a skreen of Silk her flowers divide 5
They had fack' ld life from thence. and from her heat
Borrow'd a ſon! to mike themſelves compleat.

O hippy Pillow ! though thou art laid even

Wich duft,ſhe made thee up almoſt a heaven
Her breath rain'd Syices, and each Amber Ring
Of her bright Locks, ſtrew'd Bracelets ore thy Spring ;
That Earths nat poor, did ſuch a Trealure hold,
But thrice inrich'd with Amber Spice and Gold.

Thus much at this time, and no more am | al-
lowed by my Aliſtriſs Euterpe to publiſh : Be
therefore, gentle Reader admoniſhed, that with
me you do earneſtly pray to God, that it pleaſe
him to open the hearts and ears of all ill hearing
people, and to grant urto them hs bleſſing,
that they may be able to know him in lu Omni po-
reiic's with aAm'r ons contemplation of Natwre,to

hu

. The Preface.
fremit | big honour and Praiſe, and to the Love, Help,
Comfort and ftrengthening of our neighbours,
and to the reftoring of all the diſeaſed.

John Heydon.

F.em my houſe next dnor to the Red-
Lyon, on the K. ſt fide Spittle fields
near B ſhops-Gaic, London, Augult
4h. 1660.

nf ;

al. Illuſtrit-

ng g —
. .
:
0”
to

$SÞSÞEÞÞÞÞFÞ $$©$0ÞÞÞ$

1 lluſtriſcimis, & vere Renatis
Fratribus, 1.H. R. C. ,
Ecclefie in inmultuoſo hoc ſeculo
Apoſtolis Paciſicis, Salutem à
Centro Salutis.

P

Uz magna Cxli mania, & tractæ, Maris
Terreque fines ſiquid aut ultra eſt, capit;

Mens ipſa tandem Capiur : Omnia hactenus

Qux noſſe potuic, nota jam primum eſt ſibi;

Accede, Ledlor diice quis demum ſies;

Tranquilinam yecorts agnoicas tui

Qu; propius hæret nil tibi, & nil tam procul.

Non Inc Schol rum frivola, aut cath Log,

, Qualcs per annos Forte plus ſeptem Legit,
Ur t- N P * 1 en, Atixe Artiſex;
Vanalg; merces tutih lingua crepet,

Sed ſancta Nm pondera, & tenſus graves;
Qrales parari decuit, ipſa cum fur

Pingenda Ratio, & vindici (10 adſtitit;
Pandunitur omnes Machinx gyri tuæ;

Animæq; verces, Trechlex, canei, Rote ;

—

— —

Qui concitetur Arte, quo ſufflamine
Siſtatur illa rurſus & conſtet ſibi: F
Nec, ſi Feneſtram Pectori humano ſuam '
Aptaſſet ipſe Momus, inſpiceret Magis.

Hi £7 Levia Affectuum veſtigia

Gracileſy; ſenſusLiheas ; video quibus
Vehantur alis blanduli Cupidines

uubuſq; ſtimulis urgeant Iræ gra ves.

= & te voluptates ſuos

| Produnt receſſus; ipſe hec timor later
Nas Norit artes quiſquis in foto velu

| | e habenas flectere, & populos Cupit

1

>

Aptis Ligatos nexibi s jungi ſibi

Hic Archimedes publicus figat pedem
Siquando regna machinis Politicis

Urgere ſatagit, & feras gentes ciet

Imiſq; motum ſedibus Mundum quatit;

F Facile domabit cuncta, qui ment imperat
Conſultor audax & Promethei potens
Facinaris Anime ! quis tibi dedit Deus
Hzc intueri ſæculis Longè abdita;
Oculoſqʒ luce tit ambroſia Tuos,

Tu mentis omnis, at Tux Nulli eſt capax
Hac laude ſolus fruere* Divinum eſt opus
Animam creare : Proximum huic, oſtendere.

Ambr. Waters, A.M. Coll. te. Oxon»,

To his moſt 3 aceom-
iſtrd friend, Mr. Johns Heydow, on
is Loſſe cruciam Inſallible Axameata,

the excellent and ſeeret uſe , Num.
bers.

Ow let the Pope no mare pretend to ber,

t The Father of IN FALLIBILITY;'
Unleſs be can great Heydon's Numbers teach,
And nimbly to bis Axiomata reach.

One Learned He ydon, with bis Art-lilę - Pen,
Hath exerciſed ſo, the brains of Ain;
That how to anſwer bum, thus very Age,
Keows not | I'm ſure with all its Wit, and Rage,
Our Author here, as Heir wnto his Kill,
Hath kept his name up, ( with a pregnam Quill) *
So happily | That Ages yet to come,
Shall ſing his Fame in this Elog iam
While Numbers ſingthe worlds glad Harmony,
This worthy work ſhall teach Philoſophy,

O von, Jo. Gadbury

$120449 xlinF,
C 2 To

S$EIFHES$ÞD 2 $20.1

To the READE & in bebalf
of the ingenuity of my friond |
Ather Anthor', Maſter
John Hey don.

Ur ſtudions Author by his working brain

To tmd forth ſectets; Nambers doth diidain
Which common are; And that to putpoſe he:
His fancy bends, to {earch rhe Myſtery
Of Numbets out; (Theſe Numbers it we pleaſe,
Though nine we count bit, yer we may increaſe,
Arithmetick tels thus, (tis fancy mine).

LSE ST GC .

Add equall Ciphers, after this vaſt Sum,
Rather then number them, men might be dumb,
Great virtue 1s in Numbers; I confeſs,
I like one ſort of it, which makes things leſs,
Though I 10000co of firs have done,
It Gul the 1. blot our, there will be none.
Let me enjoy the Myſtery of tlus Number,
(le not my ſelf withorher ſecrets cumber,

N OW

Nom ſince” -my friend, counts me amoneſ> his

friends,
I dd cheſe ſmes, oma łęchim foraggmends

] Bad J. | rake £ e what qu doth write,
a f L eaſt friends tim foes, and ſharply him backbite.

Sic Scrip it - Jo. Booker,
"AFpogran'gi pubs

1234567890c000c0co
Thus figures joynd with Ciphers may ſurmount
Sands of the Sea ; how Sandy's our account ?

.

To his much bonoured friend the
Al thor Mr. John Heydon upon the Roſie Cru.
cian Inſallible Axiomata. |

PV redivivus, ge thy ways

Imto the world : and number out thy praiſe ;

Laconian Lads eſteem your ſelves ne more,

Who Numbers rich is, who eftcems is poor

For they eſteem themſelvs, becauſe no more.

Moſes in Mrracles did exceed tit true

By Number done only found out by you

Therefore the greateſt Miracle's your dus.

Tria ſunt omnia ſhall no more ſurpaſs,

Who's but ſor fimple Numbers is an Aſſe,

Thy compound Numbers ſbew as clear as Glaſs,

That the wiſe world this piece ſhall ſo extoll

-
”

At (wear naſfoul , if not Harmonic all

For never was piece 1th world ſo exatlly done
In the time paſt, or preſent, what's to come,
Then teeming Soul give thy Pex intermiſſion,
And breath a while beſore the next Edition.

John Fyge Miniſter of
the Goſpell.

LA

Li ki

<4 $$$$4$$59- $$$$;

Erudito Johanni Heydon
emicitie gra tid) bæc de-
icat.

A diviecs; Tis & irn Ede,

Ke? ravpi fn ti u d dNager,
ra, Thxrors i gurus Iavuared ifdoxus,
dye; xan' Ay,, v er xpve]e Tipayxee
&bypar Ag x; ria) ney © g4019 v
Tay wbSedor ae, ICY wie, o i
a Wars Ann Cb dM Tiore Teva,

Es pu datpbedysr gd Stfe ᷣ ν,u e d, :
H o/aupov pedipes E] d harp tu ets
*

© er nſive * Anh praiſe attends

hy worthy work, to that each number tends,
Sith to the Holy Greſs thou art the Crown ;

And that, which Nature did at firſt ſer down *

In Hiereghphecks, that ſhe might conceal
From Sons of earth, her Darkng doth Reveal
Unto the Sen of Art, and doth unfold

Thoſe Tomes of Crypicks, that before were rold;
3 infallible, — _— us ſhew,

Would Fl make bis doubting Trade forego.
We e by thy Method be e
Crurced, and woniby men of low degree,
When Fancy tells me this cannot be done,
My Reaſon prompts me to believe a Son,
Inſpired by the Roſie Crucian Spirit,

Is Heir to more, to whom I do refer it.

Tho. Fyge.

To

$6745. 030204 434S

To the moſt Excellent Phi-

lolopher and Lawyer Mr.
John Heydon, upon the

FEoſie e an: Infallible
x mata.
H you ( admired Heydon ) whoſe great

parts

Sbine above envy; and the common Arts,
You kin to Angels, and Superionr Lights,
(A ſpark of the firſt fire ) whoſe Eagle flights
Trae not with Earth, and greſſneſ1, but do paſs
To the pure Heav'ns, and make your God your
In whom you ſee all f- rms, and ſo do give (Glaſs
Theſe rare diſcov ries, how things move and live,
Proceed to make your great deſign compleat,

A» d let not this rude world our hopes defeat.

(h let me, but by this the dawning lig hi

Which ſtream upon me thronghyour three pii d
Paſs to the Eoſt of truth, till I may ſee ( night
Mans firſt fair (tare : when ſage Simplicity
The Dove ard Serpent, Innocent and wile
Dell in his breit, ard he in Paradiſe,

There

There from the Tree of knowledge his beſt bought,

Te pluck a Garland from this Authors brows, |
Which to ſucceeding times Fame fhall bequeath, |
With this moſt juft Applauſe, Great Heydons |

wreath | ©
Fred, Talbet
Eſquire ,
Srxay, | «

$$+2000020+622+

CHAP, 1.

Of the wonderfull Secrets of Numbers, of thei
Signification, how Moſes (hewed ſo many figns
by them, How Joſhua made the Sun ſtand ſtill
by Numbers, How by Numbers Elijah called

owt fire from Heaven upos his enenues, How
by theſe following Numbers the Roſie Crucians
forchnow all ſuturs things command whole Na-
ture, have power over Devills, and Angells,
and do miracles, &c. How by this Number
4 River ſpalę to Pychagoras.

ue obſerved that the Numbers which
? 1 7 are now vulgarly uſed amongſt Arith-
ident and Calculators have been in
7. N. old time much more eſteemed then
18 . they are now, the order of them ate
EZ Wo 2d t after this manner, . 2. 3. 4. 5.
6. 7. V. 9. to which is added a note of privation frgned
with the mark O, which alchough ic fignifie no Number,
yet it makes others to fignifie, either tens, or hundreds,
or thouſands, as is well known to Anthmeliciaus, the ver-
wes and fignification of theſe Numbers, the Hebrews are
of opinion ve e delivered to Moſes by God himſelſe up-
on Mount Syz4, and then by deg; ees of ſueceſſion wit
cut the Monuments of Fig et or Letters was untill the
time of E/dras delivered to others by ward of mouth
only, as the Py:1.9 0/444 opinions were fcrmerly deliver-
ed by Ah, and Hin, who had Schools at Thebes
in

** A

2. The Roſie Crucian Inſallible Axiomata.

in Creece, in which the Scholars keeping the precept |
of cheic M affers in their memory, did uſe their wit and;
memory inftead of Books |

Moſes delivers a double ſcience cf this Art, The
one of B cſith which they call Coſwologie, vix. explaig-|
ing the power of things created Naturall and Celeftiall |
and expeunding the Sec: ers of the Law and Bible by
Philoſaphical! reaſens, - |

Which truly upon this acconnt diftcrs nothing at &ll |

:

from Natucall Magick, in which we believe King Sele mon |
excelled, ſot it is writren he was killed ip all V ing even

from the Cedar of Lebanon to the Hyſop that grows upon
the Wall.

Alſo in Cattle, Bi. d, Creeping things and Fiſhes : All
which ſhew he knew the Mgica!l ver ues of Natwe and

Nambers: The Roſie Crutians follow afrer this as ycu

may read in my Book of Gromancy and Teleſms entiruled

The Temple of iſcdom: aid in my ir'ay to Eis, and Ro-

ſi e Crucian Phyſich .

They call the other Science%thereof of Mercarogwhich |

is concerning the more ſublime contemplation of Divine
and Angelick vettues and of Sacred Numbers, being a

—

certain Symbolica Divinity in which Nemhers and Let |

ters ate Ideas of moſt proſound things, and great Se-

crets , This is the Roſie Cut, Inf llible Axiomata + |

which treateth of Angelicall vertues, Numbers, and
Names in theHebrew, alſo of the Conditions of Spirits
and Souls in the Greek Numbers ard Numes, which

ſearcheth into the Myſteries of Divire Majeſty as the |

Emanarion tf eren, and Sected Names in Latine Num-
bers and Let:ers, which he that knowerh may excel with
wonderfuil vertu.s ; as that when he pleaſerh, hee may

knows all hies fl, nt, and te come, and comaand

who'e Nature, h.ve pose over Deuills and 474 i(ls, and
go Niaciert. By this they ſoppoſe that , di ſhe fo

many

The Roſie Crucian Infallible Axiomata., 3
many figns, and turned the Red into a Sergerut,,and the

| waters into b'ocd,and that he ſent Frogs, Flyes, Lice, Lo-

cuts, Caterpillar, Pere, with Hail, botches and boyls on
the E-yptians ; and flew every firſt born of wan, and
beaſt 3 and that he opened the Seas, and carried his tho-
row, and brought Fountains out of the Rocks, and
Quails frem Heaven, that he ſent before his clouds and
lighening by dy, a pillar of fire by night, afld called

don from Heat en the voite of the Livirg God to the

—

—

prople and did frike the haughry with Fre, and thoſe
that marmured with the Leprofi* : and on the ill deſer-
ving brought ſudden de ſt: ction, rhe carth gaping and
ſwallowing them np. | |

Further he Fed the people with heavenly Food; pa-
ciſed Serpents, cui ed the envenomed, p eſtryed the
numetous u tituſc From infe mite, and their Gu ments
from wearing oh, and made them Viftors over theit ene-
mes. To conclode by rii's Art of Numbets ard Let-

ters, Joſhuz rommunded the Sun ta fland, fall Elijah

called down Fire hem Heaven udn Hy enemies, weſtorcd
a dead chill to , + Daniel ſtopt he mouths of the H-
ors ; the three che fing Songs in the fety Oven:
Mot enver by thi [er cf Lefters and Numbers the in-
credulous T πν n , that even Chriſt did fo many Mi-
rtacles. The Roſie Crith.tns very well xnow the angels and
Set that Gove ntheſe Numbers, and therefore deliver
Cha: ms againſt Der, and their bends, and the manner
of C mjurations, and apaiuſt diſeaſes, I heard 4 Bother
make a Spiric cry ours

O, vor , Teri

P)that 0s is not on'y mitiiied mo the Mo ical Art
of Nun hers , bur a:iived allo + the power of working
Miracles; as hu going ove: 4 River with his Compani»
ons

lope Crucien Infallible Ariomata. |
ons, that he ſpeaking 80. and N ia a Table to the Ri-
ver, the River anſwering him again with an audible and
cleat voice, Xa NS, Salve Pythargora ; chat
he ſhewed his thigh to Abaris the P. ieſt, and that he
affirmed that ir gliſtered like Gold, and thence pronoun- |
ecd chat he was Apollo; that he was knowa to converle |
with his friends at Metapontium and Tauromenium (the
one a Town in 1taly, the other in Sicily, and many days
journey diſtance) in one and the ſame day. This make.
good my Apologue as the beginning of, A New Method
Roſe crucian c, and The way to Bliſs, |
Porphyncus and amblicus report very ftrange rhings « |
bim, which 1 willingly omit : 1 ſhall only add his Pre-
ditions of Eatt es, ot rather, becauſe that may
ſeem more Natural , his preſent ſhaking of P in
Cities, his filencing of violent winds and Tem z ha
calming the rage of Seas and Rivers, &c. which skill Em-
pedocles, Epimenides, Cathartes, and Abaris having ga |
from him, they grew ſo famous, chat Empedocles ww
ſurnamed Alexanemus, Epimenidet, Cat hartes, and Aba it,
Athrobates from the power they had in ſuppre ſſing ol
ſtorms and winds, in freeing of Cities from the Plague,
and in wa'kingaloft in the Air : which kill enabled Py |
thagoras to viſit his friends after that mannet᷑ at Mctapon |
tium and Tauromenium, in one and the lame day. þ

:

GHAP.|

© Aa a%

& * 4 O02 ae =>

a «a + VXct =

days

|
% of |
Pre-
may
3 in
j ha
Em |

loble Anon

aud Latine Letters, when the Numbers are

Attribmed to them. =

Me Pyt hageriant ſay that the very Elements of Lets
ters have certain divine Numbers, by Which Colle-
Red from proper names of things, yeu may draw con-
jeAures concerning Secret things to come.

And there is an uneven Nu of Vowells of impo-
ſed names, which did beroken Lameneſs, or want of

eyes, and ſuch like misforranes, it they be ro
| the right fide parts: but an even Number to t of

the left: And by the Number of Letters you may finde

ont the ruling Planers of any one that is born, and
; whether the Husband or Wife all dy firſt, and know
; the proſperous er unhappy events of the reft of ous

wor ks.

The Latine, Greeh, and Hebrew Letters deputed to
each Number 1 ſhall ſhew you being divided into three
Claſſes, v hereof the firſt is of Unities, the ſecond of Texs,

; the third of Hundreds and ſecing in the Romin A phabet

AP.

there are wanting four t make up the Number of rwen-
ty ſeven Characters, their places are ſupplyed with I. and
v. fimple Conſonants, although the Germans for hu they
Aſperate uſe a double w. the true Italians and French in
their Volgar ſpeech put G. joined with U. inſtead there-
of writing thus /uilbelmsy and Guilhel mus.

1

6 The Koſie Crucian Inſallible A xianata.

Greek,
123456 78910111213 14 15 16 17
efyAsTnlst nA pu r & „ 7 7

1$ 19 20 21-22 23 24
1 vo x; Þ ©

Capi. Ui.
12 345678 9 102030 4 50 60 70 80
AB TAESZ HO IK AMNE O mw
90 100 2c 300 400 500 6c 700 800 9
„ T9O0 41s

Now the Claſſes of the Hebrew Numbers are
theſe.

2
co 800 700 6 5 490 300 200 100
1

0
1

rng

* wan we

The Roße Crucian Infallible Axiomata, 7

Now if you deſire ro know the Ruling Planet of any
that is born. compre his name, and of both his Parents,
throogh each lettet according to the Country he was born
in, and the Number above written, and divide the ſum
of rhe whole being gathered together by g. ſubſtracting
it as often as you can; and if there remain 2 unity, or 4.
both ſigniſie the Sun ; if 2. or . hoch fignific the Moon,
but three iter; five Mercury 3 fix Ven ; eight Sa-
turn; nine Mars. And the Reaſons thereof 1 have ſhewed
you in my Book of Geomancj and Teleſmes, entituled, The
Temple of wiſdom.

In like manner if you defire ro know the Aſcendant
of any one that is born, compute his name, and of his
Mother end Futher, and divide the whole collected to-
gether by 11. if there remain 1 it fgnifies the Lion ; if
Junos 3. Au,]; if 3. Capricorn ; if 4. Sagittarius: if
5. Cascirʒ Thur 6. Taurus; if Palladium 7. Aries;
if Vulcan g. Lia: if Mars his 3. Scorpio : if ro. Vi-
go ; if ri. Piſtes ; if Phebus 12. rhey repreſent Cem -
nos.

And now let no man wonder that by the Numbers
ard Letters all things may be known, ſeeing the Pytha-
gonan Philoſophers and Roſie. Cruci ant teſtifie the ſame :
in thoſe numbers lie certain hidden myſteries, found out
by few; for the moſt High Created all things by Num-
ber, meaſure and weight, from whence the truth of Let-
rers and names had its original. vhich were not inſtituted
caſually , bur by a certain Rule, although unknown
to W.

Hence Sr. oh in the Revelation Gith, let him which
hath underſtanding compute the Number of the name
of the Beaſt, which is the Number of a man ; yct theſe
are not to be underſtood of thoſe names, which a diſ-
agreeing d ference of Nations, and divers Rites of Na-

D tions,
D

1 The Roſie Cruciau of aMhble A nie mata.
tions, according to the cauſes of places, or education

have put upon men; but thoſe which were inſpired

into every one at his birth, by the very Heavens, with
the Conjunction of the Stars-

Moreover, Teucer, Rabanus, and R. Lully have dedi-
cated to the Elements and Deities of Heaven , ſa
cred Numbers ; for to the Ayr they have affigned the
number eight, and to Fire five 3 to Earth fix; to We
ter 12. Befides unity is aſcribed to the Sun, in which
God put his Tabernacle z and that this alſo is of Ja-

:

* = — —

Om OO —— — —

piter doth che Cauſative power of his Ideal and in-
tellectual Species teſtifie , who is the Head and the |
Father of the Gods, as unity is the beginning and |

Parent of Numbers, 1. engraven in Braſſe, they Gy

„ and closthed in a white Garment , gitd-

bringeth a Spirit, in the ſhape of « black ma
Randig
out, of e great Body, with reddiſh eyes,

ent ſttength, and be appears like a man angry,

led
and
and he giveth Boldneſs, Fojtitude , and makes 2
man lofty,

, CHAP,

-

|

Arras err

2 8

The Roſe Crutian Infallible Aziomata,

CHAP, III.

The Pythagorick Names or Nature of 4 Monad
or Unite, applied to the firſt dajes work,,
what are the upper waters And that ſouls tha
deſcend its tyims'y, are the Naiades or Water
Nymphs, in Porphyrius , That matter of it
ſelf is wnmoveable R. Bechai his Notation of
VOL very happy explained in my new Me-
thod of Roſie Crucian Ph; of the num-
ber One, and the ſignification.

Joi the goodneſs of God rowards his Creatures,
how fir the Number is to the Nature of every days
work; And ſo I conclude , that God ordered it ſo on

rpoſe, and that ia all probabili as was
quinte with his Alba — 4 =" na

9 Ks. wr made ſuch a deal of do wich Numbers,

as you ſhall find in Order, putting ocher eonceits upon
them, then any other A/ithmeticians do ; and that there-
fore if ſuch — yin 2 — 2 held, be ſound

ſuitable and complyable with Moſes his Text, it is &

taking it in a large ſenſe, or the Mandy vita, the wor
| AS 7 of

ſhrewd prefumption that theſe are the right Roſie Cruciar

| Anomeathereof.

Philo makes this firſt day ſpent in the Creation of im-
material and ſpiritual beings, of the intellectual wor

10 The Roſie Crucian Infallible Axiowats.
of life and forms : And the Pithagorians call an NA F,

:

Form, and Zen. Life. They call it Larbe ue, |

or the Tower of Jupiter, giving alſo the ſame name to a
Point or Cenrec ; by which they underſtand the viral
Formalicyne Center of things: th

aud they call an unite alſo a:y& onveu ati, which
is Seminal Form; But a very ſhort and ſufficient account |
of Philo + pronouncivg that Spiritual ſubſtances are the |
iet days work is, That as an Unite is indivifible, you |

cannot make two of one of them, as you may make of |

one piece of corporeal Matter two by actual divifion.oc
ſever ing them one piece from another ; wherefore what
was truly and properly creired the firſt day, was immate-
rial ipdiviſible,” and Independent of the mutet, from
the higheſt Angel to the meaneſt Semmal Form.

And for the potentiality of the outward Creation ſich
it is not ſo properly any real being, it can breed no dif-
ficulty, but what ever it is referrible ficly enough to in-
corperealihings, it being vo objeA of ſenſe, but ef is
tellect, 8000 dei alſo impſible and undiminiſhable,
and ſo in oft indie: Able, 70 the power of God being |
undi mini le.

wet; wherefore'this potenti ility being eye one, it b

ighrly refegred co, the fiſt day. And in teſpect of th
the Jihege 1 tall an Unite CA, as well as the Binay, |

as alſo SAU N ondlubia, which names plainly |

glance ar the da k potentialicy of things, ſet out by Me |
ſet in the ſuſt deys Creation.

Neis ay]' Anf T6 Y nplpa 75%.

rene. Plato.

1%. But cf the Night; both day and Hie were *
0

e Katrones Seminales:

|

e, u being! an adaquarg conſequence 'of tis |

£6 _ « ms = as 6&4, / & a ws ©4 am, «© -«= = a << _ & a -

Mn tt fw «2%

« hs

The Roſie Cruciaus Fifallible mam. 11.

God Cremtd n Corporeat mitrti ( beſore the world
of Lie) dur bi nothing, which univerſal matter muy
well be called N for extenſton i veth proper to cor-
poreal matter Caſtallis tranſlates it Liqudum, and this
univerſal Mattet is moſt ut fluid Al; alb ever the
World, but at firſt, it was fluid vrverfally>'! (i! /
But hete ir may be, yoti wilt enquire, How this corpo-
real Mattet᷑ ſhall be conceived ro be betwixt the waters
above, and theſe underueath ; fer what ean be the waters
above, Maimonides requires continued Analogy in the
hidden ſeaſe of Sci ipture; 43 you may ſee in ns Preface
to his eh Newochim : But I need not ſſie to that gene-
ral refuge; for me thinks that the ſeminal ſo/ms that de-
ſcend through the marter , and ſo reach the poſſibility of
the parts of the ourward Creation, and make chem ſpring
up into Art, are not unlike the drops of rain, that de-
ſcendit hrough the heavens or zyr, and make the earth
fruirfull ; Befides the ſeminal form of things be round,
ind conti acted at firſt, but ſpread when they bring any
part of the poffibiliry of the ourward Creation into Art,
as drops of rain ſpread when they are fallen to the
ground, ſo that the Analogy is palpable enough, though
it may ſeem too elaborate, and curious, We may add to
all chis,concerning the Naiadet, or water: Nympbs that the
Anciedts un de: ſtood by them „ Teas in 7 12

TINT a5 dures , d ( 1e.) all manner of

Souls that deſcend into the matter and generation, and
this is this number, by which it i ſaid, they raiſe the dead
to life; wherefore the watery powers, may be here indi-
gitaced by the name of the upper waters.

The fr: quen* complaints that the noble Spirit in Py-
thrgoreans and Platonifls makes againſt the incumbrances
and diſadvantages of the body, makerh this Roſe Cruci an
Ar very probihle; ani it is ſomething like

ouc

1 me Rofie Crucies Inf allible Aziomate,

s moment would hold
infinicely little particles ; whence it is manifeſt , that
there muſt be ſomething beſides the matter, either to |
binde it or to move it; fo that the Creation of ime |
material Beings was by 1. and is in chat reſpeR alſo ne |

. |
For this Agitation of the matter brought it co my |
fancy in the ſecond principle of the Rope Crucian Phy |
ch, which is the true ther, or rather M for ita
as liquid as water, and yet has in it the fiery principle of |
fire, which is che firſt Element, and made by the number;
as the heavens were, and called CAI\CU becauſe they are |
UN and e fire and water ; for the round particle, |
like water (though they be not of the ſame
flake the fieiceneſs of the firſt principle, which is 1
reſt fire; and yer this fire in ſome meaſure always Ii
within the Tri intervals of the round purti-
cles, as my Book abovenamed declares at 2

And this Number 1. is called a number of Concord, o
Pity, of Fnendſiap, which is f@ knit that it cannot be
Cur into parts ; for unity doth moſt fimply go throogh & |
very number, and is the common meaſure, Fountain,and |
original of all numbers , contains every number joyned |
together in itſelf inti eh, the beginning of every mul-
tirude, always the ſame, and unchangeable 3 whence l-
fo being mulriplied into ir ſelf , produceth nothing but |
it ſelf; it isas | told you above indi viſible , void of all |
ports, but if it ſeem at any time to be divided, it is not
cut, but indeed multiplied into #nties 2 yer none of theſe |
© 14125 is greater or leſſer then the whole unity, as a part |
ts leſſe then the whole , it is not therefore multiplied in-
to

J + < + = a =« Ms

TEDES

55's

— = —

.

37 *

—

—— —

——

XXLT TA 7.1

— —

Al-

be Roſie Crucian Infallible Axio mati. 13
to parts, but into it ſelf, Therefore ir is named Ci,
becauſe it is made alone, and will always bewail it felf
and beyond it ſelf it hath nothing, but being void of all
hatghrineſs, or coupling, tos its proper hear into it
ſelf: It is therefore the 1. beginning, and end of all
things, and all chings which arc, deſire thar one, becauſe
all things proceeded from one, and that all things may
be the ſame it is neceflary that they partake of that
eve : And av all things proceed of r. in many things, ſo
all chings endeawour to retum to that one 1. from which
+) e z it i» neceſſary that they ſhould put of
—

K ,

One therefore is referred to the high God, who ſee-
ing hc is one, and innumerable, yer creates innumerable
things of himſelf, and contalm them within himſelf,
there is therefore one God, ont world of the one God, one
802 of the one worid , alſo 0:8 Phenix in the world, one
Ng amongſt Bees, one Leader among Flocks of cattel:
t. Ruler amongft herds of beafts, and Cranes follow 1,
and many other animals honour Uniry;amongſt the mem-
bers of the body, there is one principle by which all the
reſt are guided, whether ic be the bead, or as ſome will
the Meart ʒ there is one element overcoming and pene-
trating all things : wiz, Fire. There is one thing created
of God the ſubject of all wor di ing which is on earth,
or io heaven it is actually animal vegitable, and mineral,
every where found, known by few , called by none by its
proper name, bur covered with Figures and Riddles,
without which neither Alchymit, not Natural Magick can
attain ro their compleat end ot perſection , from i. man
Adam all men proceed, from that one all beccme Mot -
tal, from that one 7eſirs ch. iſt, they are tegenerated.

And as St. Paul ſaith one Lord, one ſaith, one baptiſm,
one God, and Father of all, one M:diator betwixt God
and m, one moſt high Creator, who is over all by all and

in

14 | The Roſie Crucians Infallible Aziomata,

in us all ; ſor there is one Father, God from whence all, |

and we in him, one Lord Feſus Chriſt by whom all, and we
by him, ne God boly Gbeſt , into whom all and we inco
hum; and in the exemplary world, 1. Divine eſſence, the
fountain of all vertues and power, whoſe name is expreſ-
ſed with one moſt imple Lettet 1. God; Aud in the in-
tellectual world there is 1. cam Intelli „ the
fiſt Creature, the Fountain of Lives, the foul of the
world: And in the Celeſtial world, there is one King of
Stars, Feuntain of Life, the San: And in the Elemental
world, there is 1. Subject and inſtrument of all vertues,
natura', and ſapernatural, and that u, The Philoſophers
Stone: And in the leſſer world, there is 1. firſt living,
and laft dying, and that is the heart , And in the infer-
nal world, there is one Prince of Rebellion of Angels,
and darkneſs, and that is Lucifer. By this number and
Letters of the Hebrews, it is ſaid chat Moſes ſhewed fo
many ſigns in E7ypt: This number fignifies England, and
the King chereot.

09 a

t
:
.

They fay if at 1. of che clock under a fortunate Ho- |

roſcope you caſt One, and Agic! ina piece of Gold,

Agie! the angel that rules that number will immediately |

come, and perſonally attend you and ſul fill y eur defires 3
by this number Plato was born, and the number 45.
educated him. „

/

CHAP.

*

+
4

|

7

|

7

|

|

|

1

=

'
|

"ANA? ACRE

1
wA

|
|
|
|

rb Roſie Crucians Infallible io mata. 19

CHAP. 4.

That Univer ſall Matter is the ſecond days Crea-
tron, fully made good by the Names and Pro-
perty of the Number two.

Ow fitly again doth the Number 2: agtee with the
nature of the work of this day, which is the Creation
of Corporeal Matter and the Pythag 01447 call the Num-
ber 2. n matter and Simplicins ſpeaking of the Py-

thageries, Eix57 ws © ply T3 07 & aer, ws riger

Tr ar rA x TipoTiy, J Is Tay CAny 6g

ares, x 751 d\c rele; alrlay. They
might well ( ſays he) call 1 Form, as defining and ter-
minating to certain ſhape and properly what evet it
fakes hold of, and 2. they might wel call Matterir being
unde terminate, and the cauſc of bigneſs and dwiſibility,
ard they have very coy icuſl; heaped upon the number
2. luch appellations as are moſt preper to Corporeall
matter. A AN, Ae , Ar unfigu-
red, underermivated, unlimited, for ſuch is mat ter itſelf
till form take hold of it. It is called alſo Rca trem the
fluidity of the matter, Ata, Aregla, becauſe it af-
fords ſubſtance to the Heavens and Stars Nx Me-
O21ra2G@ (4c ) contention, fate, and death, for
the'e Ire the conſequences cf the ſouls being joined
with Co: potexl! matter Kire#'s, y4'rt01s Ale
Motion

16 The Roſie Crucians Infallible Axiomata
Motion, Generation, and Divifion which are be
plainly appertaining to bodies they call the At
alſo Eni becauſe it is the yr g6iyuarer, the
that endures and undergoes all the charges and al
ons the Artive ſo mes put upon it, wherefore ir is
the Pythago cant underſtood Corpo eall matter by
number 2 which no man can deny but that it is a
fi: Symbole of diviſion that eminent property of
ter.

But I might caſt in a farther reaſon of the H
being Created the 11 : for the Celeſtiall

does confift of two plainly diſtinguiſhable parts,
The firſt Element and the ſecond, or the Materia
bſſima, and the round perticles as I ſaid before,

And 2 is called a number of Science and memory,
of light, and the number of man, who is called 2
world, and the leffer world, it is alſo called the numb
L of Charity and Mutual Love, of Marriage and

| The firſt number is of a becauſe it is rhe firſt multi

Feser 38

©

|

2.

it can be meaſured by no number beſides unities alone
the common meaſure of all numbers. It is not compom
died. bur more properly not compounded, the nume
313 8culled the number nded. |

But the number 2 is the firft branch of #nitres, and
the firſt pr / creation : Hence it is called Generation ai
Juno and an imaginable Corporation, the proof of d
firſt motion, the firft form of pariry, che number o
the faſt equality, exttemity, and diftance betwixt, and]
therefore che peculiar equity, and the proper Art there
of, becauſe it cofinfts of 2 equilly peyfed, it is 4]
number of Conjunction and profic of increaſe as it #)
faid by the Lo d two ſhalibr one fiſh, and Solomon faith
2 is better that two be together then ine, for they have
2 hene fi by their mu ua | ſociery, if one ſhall fall hee!
ſhall be ſopph ted hy the / ther, wo to him that it alone,
becauſe |

OLA EET ESS-S;

The Roſie Cruciens Infallible Axiomate 17
a bccanſe when he falls he hath not another 10 help him,
ber And if co ſleep together, they one ſhall warm one the

other : how ſhall one be hot alone, and if any prevail
| apiaſt him two celiſt him.

And it is called a number of wedlock and Sex, for
there are twe Sex, Maſculine and Feminine, and two
Deves bring forth two Eggs, out of the firſt of which is
hacched the Male, out of the ſecond the Female, 2 is
called the middle that is capable that is good. and bad
partaking and beginning of Divifion of multitude and
deſtruction, and Hgnifies Marter, 2 is alſo ſometimes
the number of diſcord and confufion, of misfortune
and uncleanneſs, whence Mierom againſt Jovaniss ſuich,
that therefore it was not ſpoken in the ſecond day of the
Creation, and God ſaid, that it was good, becauſe the
yamber 2 is evil.

Hence alfſe it was that God commanded that all un-
clean Animals, ſhould . the Arke by

becauſe as I ſaid the number 2 is a number of b
neſs, md it moſt unhappy in their Conmuration and
invocations of Spirits and ſoules of the dead, eſpeciatly
m of thoſe that are vnder the Angells deputed to $4-
turn or Mars, fortheſe 2 are accounted by Gromancers
ani and Afrologers unfortunate, It is alſo reported that the
1 number 2 doth cauſe apparitions of fiery Ghoſts 9
n Goblins, and bring miſchiefs of evill Spirits to them
„ tell by night, P;thagoras ſaith the unity is God and
ad] 200d incelle#, and that Duliry is a Devill, and an
ere evil imellect, in which is a Materiall multicude, where-
s 1 fore the Pythag orians ſay, that 2 is not a number, but &
tk} certain conſuſion of #nities, and Euſebius ſays that the
nt Pythagorians called Unitic Apollo, and 2 ſtrife and
ave! boldnefs,

And 3 Juſtice, which is the higheſt n

1Þ The Rofie Crucians Inf allible Io mal.
and is not without many Myſteriet.” Hence there
were twWo Tables of the Law in Syna, two cheubm Ch
tooking to the Propiis:tory, in Moſes, wo Olives drop»! ing
anc
po

ping Oyle, in Z icheriah, two natures in Chriſt Divine
and Humane: Hence Moſes ſaw two appearances ef
God, viz, his face and back parts.

By the number 2 alſo they ſay if it bee engraven} 1
in Copper, it will briog to you a Genius , that is good! is
for ro procure the Love of wome», lometimes they} Al
Print it in Lapis Lx ulut, and ſome times in Vg
Fax and write the names of the man and woman in
Virgin Parchment, to which appears a nahed maid! —
having a looking Glaſſe in her hand, and « chain tyed
about ber neck, ard nigh her a bandſom young man,
holding her with his leſt hand by the chain, and with
his fee band be will be playing with ber bar, and im -
ung on ber, and theſe are * by one of choſe Angell: |
of the number.

2 Is the number of Pe ſia, Cypras, Lorraine, Ireland, |
Nants,

Alſo 2 Teſtaments, 2 C ommands of love, 2 firſt dig-

_ niries, 2 fiſt peop'e, 2 kinds of Spirits good and bad,

2 intellectual Creatures, an Angel! and Soul, à grent
Lights, 2 Solſtiria, EquinoQialls, 2 Poles, 2 Elements |
producing a liyimg Soul, viz, Earth and Water. By this |
number a it is ſaid Elijah called down fire ſrom Heaves |
upon his enemies. And the name of God in rhe Exenr |
plary wor'd is expreſt with to Letters T Jah JR EITE
And the1e are two intelligible ſubſtances in the Intelle- | f
Quall worlr,, wiz. an Angel, the Sc ul, and two lights in} Þ
the Celeſtiaii world the Sun, the Moon, and two pri-
cipall ſeats of the Sou! in the leſſer vod, vi. the beart, | &
the brain, ud there are vo ch ef of the Devils in the ir-

ſe: nal!

a he Roſe cruciant Infallble Axio mata. 19
t ferrigll world, ri. Beemoth and Leviathan,alſo two thi
= — threateiis to the damned, vi, Hteing and [mw 4
drops ing teeth. : |

vi The number .» is ſaid to fignifie a thing oft,
& of! and here they enquire whether a man ſhall be rich or

r.
raven | "This number is commonly made upon Braſſe that which
good! is Red or Copper at the hour of 2 and Graphieltis che
they Ange ll chat rules it and 325.
© ;

m4 n N

wy, CHAP, 5.

The Nature of the Thru days work. ſet off by the

' Number 3. That the moſt learned do agree that

nd, | the Creation was peiſictei at once, The Not a-
| tin of ) ſtrangely agreed with the Noto=

lig rious conc luſioct of, the Temple of Wiſedom

Md, of the ſignification of the Number 3.

ett v

nes :
this { JN thisthirdday was the waters commanded into one
vs place, the Exrth adorned with all manner of planes,
m- | Paradiſe and all the pleaſure and plenty of it created,
Ell | wherein the Serpent beguiled Eve, &c. What can thete
le- | fore be more likely then that the Pythagorians uſe their
in | Numbers ax:cerrain remembrancers of the particular paſ-
10- | ſages of this Hiſtory of the Creation: when as they call
. | their Number 3 Tgr7ep & fenanix® (i. e.) Tri-
- ton

(Tis; 777 f Ins

ton and Lord of the Sea, which is in reference to Ge Cres
ing the water info one place, and making them ratia

of a Sea, they call alſo the Ternary, Kipes & | Phalo
& briwy the farmer igtimazes the plenty of P .

the later relates to the Serpent there, but now be
this we ſhall find the Ternary very fignificant of the
ture of this days work, for fir, the earch conſiſts of
8 Elements ia my Book Entituled The Temple of
dom: ( for the truth of that Book will force it ſelſe pow
1 And _ I had
$ of this, when 1 writ that. and again then .
we three grand paits of this thicd Element neceſſaty —
make an Earth habitable, the dry land the Seca, (bene *
are Springs and Riꝑe t, and the Ayre :) And laſtiy then 4.
are invegitables, which is the mazig work of this dy} ;
three eminent Properties, according to my Couſi
Heydons Philoſophy, viz, Nutrition, Accretion, Generath
en, and alſo if you conſider their duration, there be thre
Cardinall poincs of it, Ortus, Arme, Interitas, doo
call in alſo chat Atincralls as the Arabian: call them whi
belong to this day as well as Plants, tha both Plan
and they, and in general! all Terreſtriall bodies have the
— Chy micall principles in them Sal, Sulphur, and
£/Cury
As the Matter of the Univerſe came out in the ſecond
day, fo the conteining of this Matter into Suns and Pls
at is cpatcined in this ſontth day: The Earth be
ſelf not expected though it is aid ſhe was made in che
firſt day, and as ſhe is the nmrſe of Plants, ſaid to be ur
covered in the third, yet as ſhe is a receptacle of Li
and ſhines with borrowed rayes like e Moon and
plants, ſhe may well be referred to the fourth days
Creaion.
Nor will this at all ſeem bold or harſh if wee conſide
"that the Learned have already agreeed that all = whole
reation

take
Hypo
p

Nun

„rasse 1-3-2 LL

be Nai Crucian If alnbie Axiomate
Gestion was made at once» As for example, the meſt
then racianall of all the Jewiſh Dofors, R. Moſes Agyptins,
Philo. Tudeus, Abraham Fades, Procopius, Gareus, Cardi-
ul Caeta ne, Saint Auguſtine and the Schools of Hillel and
$4maij So that that leaſarely order of days is thus quite
taken away, and all the ſcruple that may arife from that

pot beß .

8 1 ſay the Number 3 is an incompounded
Number, a holy Number, a number of perſection, a moſt

number, for there ace three perſons in God,
there ate three Theologicall vertues in Religion, hence
it is that this number conduceth to the ceremonies of
Gad, and Religion, that by the ſolemnity of which pray-
t $ and Gerifices are thrice repeated, and the Pytbagors»
a uſe it in their ſanRifications and purifications, and ir
is wot fic in bindings or ligations,

And in Jobaxzes De [pagnet it was the cuſtome in eve-
ry Medicine to fpit with three deprecations, and hence
tbe cured. The number of 3 is perfeGed with 3 Aug
mentations: long, broad, and deep, beyond which there
is no pregreſhion of demenfion whence che fiſt number
is called Hence it is ſaid that to bee a body tha
hach 3 meaſuce. , and to a ſuqare number nothing can be
added, wherefore Cardanus in the beginning of his

concerning Heaven, cals it as it were a Law, ac-

ing to which all things ace di ed, for Corporeall
ms pn canſ 47 U r
middle, and end, — hel b He>
concutrence

marmene , neceſſuy, and order, (i. e.

of cauſes whic h many call fate, and the execurion of
them to the fruit or inc eiſe, and a due diſtribution of
the increaſe, the whole meaſure of time is conc|nded in
three, wit, preſent, and ro come : All magnirude
h dont ined in 3 Line, Superficies, and body, every day
confi. of 3 intervalls, length, breadth, thickneſs :

Eee Inst if fac >;

tion

—

27 be Roſie Cructan Infalkble Aiomata.
Har monioos Mufick contains 3 conſents intime,Diap2ſon,
Hemiolion, Diateſſaron, there ate 'alſo 3 kinds of Sonls,
Vegetative, ſenſitive, and intelleftuall. And God orders
the world by number weight and meaſure, and the num ·
ber 3 is deputed to the Ideall fe ms thereof, as the num-
ber of 2 is to the Crearing matter and unity to God the
maker of it: Roſe Cracians do conſtitute 3 P inert of
the world, Oxom , Milris, Aramis, (i. e.) God, the
mind, and the Spirit, by the 3 Iquare or ſolid the;
number of g of things producedare diſt-ibuted, v of
the ſuperceleſliall in 9 orders of intelligences : of -Ce-
leftiailiato 9 orbs t of inferiours into 9 kinds of
ble and corrup'1ble things: Liftly in this ternal! orbe,
ix. 29. all Muſſcall prog oftions are included, as Plath
and P oclus,.do at large diſcou ſea. |
And the Number of 3 hath:in it a Ha mony, of ;
the grace of the-firſt voyce,alſo inintełigencie t here ate
3 Hterarcbies off Angelica Spitits, there ate 3 powefs
of imclieuall--Cenures memory, mind, and will.
There ae g orders' of the bleſſed, vi of Aarty'y,
Con{efſo/s, and innocents , There are three quatermans
of Celeſtiall guet, 147. fixt, moveable, and rommon und
alſo of houſes, vix. Angles, Succedents, Cadienty. There
ae aſſo z faces and heads in every fign and 3 Lords of
each triplicuy;rhece me 3 forrunes amongſt the Planets,
tbece graces amvuigh the 'Godoefſes, 3 Ldyes of 'deftioy
among? the ipfer null crew, 3 J'\idges 3 furics, 8 Naded
Cerberus you read allo of 3 dvuble Heceats, © ©
Three months of the Virgin Diana, 3 perſom in the
ſuperfubſtantiall Divinity, 3 timeyof Nature, Law and
Grace $ theological! ver tues Faith, Hupe / and Charity,
Jun was three days in the # bales belly, and thret days
was Ch iſt in the grave. | 1 „
in the Or igĩual i Mod there are 3 per ſons m the Trl-
nity, 444, Ihe Father, che Son, the Holy ae
| there

ww «<< © ww o = XxX"

we A404 © ©&

The Roſie Crucian Infallible Aziomata, 23
there are 3 Hierwchies of Angells in the intellectual
world, Ti. Supream, * iddle, and Loweſt, and 3 de-
grees of the biefſed, Innocents, Martyrs, Conteflors.
And there are 3 degrees of Elements, vix. Simple,
Compound, thrice Compound ed, in the leſſer world
there are 3 parts anſwering the 3 fold world viz, The
head, in which the intellect growes anſwering c the
intelleuall wor id, the breaſt where i, the heart, the
ſeal of life, anſwering to the Celeſtiall vod, the belly
where the faculty of generation is, nd the get. tal mem-
bers anſwering the E\-mentall world, ar in the infer-
nall world there are 3 turies, IN Alrito, Mo fra, Cre-
phone, 3 infernall Judges Mines, Arur Foodomantuss
ok of the Dimiicd, 1444 4, Aboſlaces, Ix fi-

ls.

The Chaos it ſelf in every ſuſt Anatyſis is alfo 2 fold,
the Saphire cf the CH is !kewiie 2 fo'd. And here
is x parts which is the Pyt hago ical Sena tics or nume -
rus Conjugii 3 In theſe s the influx of the Meraphiſicks
cald unity is (cle Monarch and moke! vp the feverth
Number. or Sabbath, in which at laſt by the a ſſiſtance
of God the body ſhall ret, again every one of theſe
pats is 2 fuld, ad theſe Dupl citics arc contrarieties.

Here you have 12, 6 apainit 6 in 2 deſperate Diviſion,

and the unity of peace amongſt them, theſe Duplicities
conſiſt of contrary Natures : one pair is good, one bad,
one cor: upt, one inco tupt, one ra!lorall, one itratio-
na, theſe d d, corrupt, inationsll feeds, ae the
Twes and Sequells of the Cuiſc, T ts is the Ke Crucian

Iaſallible Art
Septem pa this, ſa th Z ner, 1iſunt do Terxa ia,
& in Medio ſtt unum Duodectin (tant in B l, Tres
Ani, Tres Iii: Tres wane wiuiticant, Tres ettam oc-
(1dunt , & Deus Rex fi deli ex ſua Sanfittatis Atito doms-
Nat, omar, % Hit) ſapen Tics, &T eſupe / 0 ! ter,
; eben

24 The Roſie Cruti ans Inſallible «Axiomata
ſeptem ſuper Duodecim, & ſunt omnes Stipati, Alius cum
Alto

By this Number 3 in a Teleſme of Tin Jopbiell carried
Philip to : otus.

The Number 3 engraven in Qickfilver fixed accor-
ding to A- t, will bring ro you an Angell in che form cf
a handſome young man bearded, having in his left hand
a rod and a Serpent about it, and in his right ſometimes
he holds a Dart, And he they ſay conferreth knowledge,
eloquence, diligence, in Merchandiziug and gain by
Sea, this maketh a man forrunate in gaming and to
winne.

. Ja

CHAP. Iv. %

—

Of the ſigniſication of the Number 4, how the
Corporeall world was wniverſally erected tuto
forme and Motion on the fourth day, is mo#t
notably confirmed by the Titles and Property of
the Number 4 The Infallible Roſie Crucian
er Pythagorick Oath, wherein they [wire by him
that taught them the Myſtery of the Tetracłlis,
that the Tetraftis was a Symbole of the whole
Roſie Crucian Infallible Axiomata, that lay
conched in Numbers ana Letters.

» Earth as c ne of the P imary Planers was created
the 4 day, and | cranfl , primary Pia-
ners, primary beczufe of 1 Empharically, and Planets

be-

The Roſie Crucians Infallible Axiomate 25

beeauſe rhe very Notation of their name implies thei
Nature, for 9919 is plainly from . tio, or burnine
and I) exindhion, Nouns made from T9 & MA as *f
and IN from Fm and MIN, according tounexpe-
ſtionable Analogy, And the Earth, as alſo the reft of
the Planets, their Nature is fuch as if they had been
once berning and ſhining Sans, but their light and heat
being extinguilhed, they afcerwards became O paced
Planets, this ceacluſion ſeems here plainiy to bee con-
teined in the Roe Cructans and Moſes , but is at large
demonſtrated in my New met had of Roſie Crucian Phyſich.
Nor is this Noratiou of III enciyated by Alledgu

that the world is ordinarily uſed ro fignihe the —
Starts, as well as the Planets, for I do not deny but chat
in a Vulgar Norion it may bee competible to them alſo,
For the fixed Stars according to the i magination of the
rude people may ſ e ſaid to be lighred up, and extingui-
ſhed, ſo often as they appear and dif-appear, for they
meaſure all by obvious ſenſe and fancy, and nay well
look npon them as ſo many Candles, fer up by Divine
providence in the night, but by diy frugally put out
for waſting, and 1 remember Toreadidafbus in his
% mpovores, has ſo glibly ſwallowed do vn the Nori-
on / that he uſes it as a ſp<ciali Argument of Providence,
that they can barn thus wich their heads downwa: ds,
and nor preſently (well o and be extingaihe d, as our
d dinary Candles ate, wlieieiore the word . may
very well be attributed t all he Stars as we't nxed as
Paret, but ro the fixed onely upon vu gat feeming
grour.ds, to the Plaucts upon trve and Naturall,
and we may be ſucc that ir chat which Eegenias Theods-
dad , The k ie C uc un wou'd aim at, and lay ſtieſſe
uf ou, n the B ok M. Wheretore in brief F Eniphatis
call in icon eras a donble Emphaſis, inti-
mating thoſe ttue 02) o lanets, and then the moſt

2 eminent

FN

26 The Roſie Crucian Inf allible Axiowata.

eminent aniongt thoſe truly ſo learned. Nor is it at all
ſtrauge, thar fo abſttuſe concluſions of Philoſophy ſhould
be lodged n Nume a l and Litera Text, for as 1
have ci where intimated Moſes has been aſorchand
wich Rope C/uctars, the ancicur Pat iarcis having had
will, and by te. on of heir long lives Leakue enuugh to
invent as curious and ſubtle Theorems in Philoſophy, u
evei any of their poſterity could hit po, befides what
they might have had by tradition [rom Adam, And if we
fad ib: Eaith a Planet it muſt be acknowledged forth
with char ir runs about che Sun, which is pure Roſie Cru-
tian, and a ſhrewd preſumprion that they were taught
that miſtery by Moſes, bur that the earth is a Planer,
beſ des the Notation we have already inſiſted upon, the
nec eſſity of being cieated in this fourth day amongſt the
other Planet, is a further Argumenr, for there is no
mention of it's Creation in any day elle according to this
Roſie Crutian Axiomata.

The Hebie wis KN 5y And I have made bold to
interpret it not of this ore ind. v iduall Earth, but of the
whole Species: ard cherefore 1 render it che world a
Ia ge, as QOINT in the 25 of this Book, is not an indi-
vidual n. n, hut man kind in gene all.

This 4d ys Creation is the contrivance of Matter, in-
to Suns nd Planets, or into Suns, Moons o Eaiths, for
the A her iall vorues were then ſet a going, and the
Corporeall woild had got into 4 vſctull order and ſhape.
And the ordering and framing of the Corporeal! world,
muy very wel' he {aid to be rranſated into the Number
4. 4, being ch. i ſt body in Numbers and therefore
pic fert d before all the vertues and the foundation and
toot of all Numbers is 4. whence allo all foundat ions as
well im Artificial rhings as Natura!! and Divine ate 4
e T ſhall ſhow vou, ard it fi, nities ſolidity, which
allo is 6: mont}iaied by a 4 ſquare figure, and in a m_

alcta

F of

os

=
3

The Roſie Crutians I ſallible Aviomata. 27

lacerall pyramid, which figure alſo is a right Symbole of
Light,the rayes entring the eye in a pytamidaſ fo:m,and
Lights now are ſet up in all the vaſt Region of the Æthe-
riall Matter which is heaven. The Pyrhagorians aif> call
this Number Cop neue, body and the werld
imimating che Crea lon of the Corporeall world therein,
and further ſignifying in war excellent proportion and
harmony the world was made, See Cornelius Ag ip-

pa.

They call this Number 4, A4rmonia and Fi, &f
Bax 4%. Harmony V/ama, and the
icrer op of Divine fury and extaſie, infiguating hat
all things are ſo ſweetly and firtingly ordered in the world
har the ſeverall Notions thereot are as 4 comely Dame,
or raviſhing Muſick, ate able to carry away a cortempla-
tive ſonl into Ripture aud extaſie upon a clearer view,
ind attentive animadveiſion , of the order and Oecono-
my ofthe univerſe, end the Roſie Critcians in the head of
Catalogue of the moſi famous Lawgive! s, do nuch Py-
thagorize, in the expreſſion M ſes, they ſay that this
Number 4 conteins the moſt p er ſect proportions in Mu-
kcal! Syn phonies, (TIC Diateſſayov, Ds tre, Dia pa-
ſon, and Diſatapaſ nThs wut yap $1oxreve. oy 6 Ab Ye
en Tpνꝑ CC. For the propo:tion of Diateſſuron is
1 4 to 3, of v2apente as 3 to 2, of Diap-ſon a8 2 to I, ot
40 2, of Hiſdia paſon as 4 to 1. I mighc caſt in alſo the
confideration cf that Divine Ne mefis which God hath
placed in the frame and Nature of the univerſal] Creati-
on, a* fe is a d ſtiibutet to (ve y one cco g to his
wor k*f, om whence hiuiſelſ is alſo called vendhe by Pla-
to ins 745 (45a ν,iνι Be cauſe he everywhere
ditributes what is due to every one, this is in ordinary
Languare, Juſtice, and both Vhils and Plolinius out
of the Py:1420/4145, 2h ms that the Number 4 is 2
; Ez Symbole

Gan Int allible Artomata. ©

Symbole of Juſtice, all which makes towards what I
drive at, that che whole Creation is concerned in this
Number 4 which is called the 4 day. And for fu her E.
viction we may yet add, that as all Numbers are contein-
ed in 4 vertoally.(By all Nunibers is meant 10, for when
we come to 10, we go back again ) ſo the root and
foundation of all the Corporeall Creation is laid in this
4 days work wherein Suns, Earth, and Moon, and the
ever whirling vortices, for as Philo obſerves Fyt hagori -·
an · like 10 ( which they call alſo Klowns, wee „ &

Fc#\inmugx. the World, Heaven, and all perſectneſs ) i,

made by the ſcatrering of the pa ts of 4 thus, 1, 2,3, 4.
put rheſe together now and they are 10. -p7iang, 7d
Ter, the univerſe, this was ſuch a ſecict amongſt Pytha-
go Diſciples, that it was a folemn Oath with them
to ſwear by him, that delivered to them the myſtery of

the Tettactis, Tetrad or number 4.
I with pure mind by th* Number 4 do [wear that's
holy, and the fountais of nature Eternall, parent of

the mind, &.

Thus they ſwore by Pyr gage as is conceived who
taught them this Myſterious Tradition, had it not (think
you ) beena tight worſhipfull mi ſtery and worthy of
the ſolemnity of Religion and of an Oath, ro underttard
that 1,2, 3» 4. make 10, and that 10 is all which rude
mankind .oid firſt upon their fi gets, and Arithmeticanns
diſcove it by calling them Digits at this very day,

Tce is no Ikel:hood that ſy wiſe a man as Ft hago
ras wa: fhygnd lay mny Hteſſe rpon ſuch triſſes, or that
N co\2: ng. Ud be ſuch fools as to be taken with them,
bur i: en that the Pthagorians held the mo-
tion cf the Each abe ut the Sun, which is plainly imply-
ed cco. ing; te the R. C. If allihle Axio mata of this: 4 days
w. SO MUCi © his ſec iets got out to common know-

ledge

.,, , ĩͤ . toc ,,

"he Roſoe yu Thi AY

ledge and fame as I conceived, that the choyeeft and
moſt precious tteaſure of knowledge beirg layd open in
the R. C. Infallible Axio mata of the 4 day from thence it
was tha: ſo mnch ſolemniry and religion was put upon
chat number, which he called his Tetradlis, whick ſermes
to have been of 2 kinds, the one the fingle nu nber of 4
the other 36 made of the 4 fin Muſeu ine numbers. And
the 4 firſt Feminine, v. I, 3, $, 7. and of 2,4. 6, 8.
wherein you fee that che former and more fimple Tetra-
flis is ftill included and made uſe of; for 4 here takes
place again in the aſſigament of the Maſculine ad Femi-
niae numbers, whence | further conceive that under the
number cf this more complex Tetrad, which conreins
alſo the other in ir, he raughr his Diſciples the Myſtery
of the Creation, opening, to them the natu e of al! things
as well Spi-icual as Corporeall, O yup agr. & dpt-
nabe To Tue Tixdy ix Y nx31718)y, 0 $8 ede
764 TWeTiy ii x) Ade H2y Bud d uy Abbe;
orouels Ta 's pp, As Flito wires, for even num-
ber carries along with it divihbility, but an odd number
indivifibility, impaſhibility, and Ativity, wherefore that
is called Fempine this Maſculi sc.

Wherefore the putting together of the 4 firſt Maſcu-
(re numbers to the 4 firſt Femioanc is the joivirg of the
Active and Paſſive principles together, matching the
parts cf the matte, with congreons forms from the
world of Life, ſo that I conceive the Tetrattis was a Sym-
bole of the whole Syſteme of Pythagoras Philoſophy :
which is the very ſime with the Moſatcall or Roſie Cruci-
a Inlaillivle ixiomata , and the root of this T:trattis is
6 «hich Ggnities the fix dis work,

And Fowle and Fiſh we:e mide by the number 4 for
the :e is aſtinity herw'xr t em, becruſe Fowle frequent
the water in their x nd, and the-E'ements themſelves of

Air

\
ans Intallble 10 M411.

Air and water ate very like one another, beſidet, the
Finns of fiſhes and wings of Birds, the Feathers of the
one, and Scales of the other are very Analogicall, they
arc bi th alſo deſtitute of &reters Dngs and Milk, and are
Oi 045, furt her their Motions are mainly alike, The
Fiſh-s as it were flying in the warer,and the Fowls (wim-
ing in the Air according to (hat of the Poet conceining
De1alus, when he had made himſelf wings.

hiſultuns per iter gelidas enevit ad Atos.

Caſt iu this alſo, tha: as ſome Fouls dive and ſwim un-
der watet ro ſome Fiſhes flye above the water in the air
ſo: a confiderable ſpace, till their Finns begin to bee
ſomeihing ſtfte aud dry.

The numbe 4 is the firſt 4 ſquare plain which confiſts
of z proportions,whereot the ſi ſt is of ove to 2, and of 2
to i, the latter of 2 to 4, and it proceeds by a double po-
ceſſion aud proportion, viz of 1 to 1, and oſ 2 to 2, be-
ginning at 1 and ending at 4, which proportions differ in
this, that according to it hmeticꝶ they ate unequall to
one the other, but according to Geometyy are e qualli there:
foic a 4 que is aſcribed to God the Father, aid alſo
conteins the myſtery of the whole Trinity : for ty its
lingle proportion, viz, by the fi ſt of one o one the u-
nity of the pate rnail ſubſtance is ſignified, from which
pwcreds one Sun cquall to him; by the next expreſ-
fion »iſo ſimple, 21% of 2 ro 2 is fign-fied by the ſecond
exprefiion the /70'y Ghoſt from both, that the Son be e-
quali to the Farhes by the firſt e xpiefhon: and he Ho-
y Ghoſt be «qu i] ro bath, by the ſecond expreſſion.

Hence the 1p cr-excellent, and great name of the Di-
vine II ini: of God s written with 4 letre s, wit. od,
H, and Vau, He, where ic i the aſpiration, He, ſign he;
the proceeed ig cf the Spuit from both: for He berg
duplicated e miates tort Syllables and the whole name,
bur is pronounced Jouula) ſome will have ——

vs

—

The Roſie Crucians Inſallible Axiomatze, 3

* o' the Heathen, which the Ancients did picture
with 4 eais,wHence the number 4 is the Fountain and
Head of the whole Divinity, ald the Pythagorians call it
the perpetual Fountain nature, for there are 4 degrees in
nature, vi to be, to live, to be ſenfible, to underſtand,
there are 4 mot ins in nature, vix · Aſcendant, Deſcen-
dant, going Forward, Circular.

There are 4 Angles in the Heaven, v R ſing, Middle,
Filling of the Heaven, and the Bottome ol it, thete arc 4
Elements under Heaven, vi, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, ac-
cording to theſe thee are 4 criplicities in Heaven, There
ne q fiſt qualities under the Heaven, . cold, heat,
dryneſs, and moyſture,for theſe are the 4 humours, blood,
flegme, cheller, melancholly, there are 4 parts of a year,
ine, Summer, Aulumne, and winter; alſo the wind is
divided into Eaſtcrngreftiern, North in, and Sout he /n, thete
tre alſo 4 Rivers of Varadiſe, viz. Pyſon, Gibbon, Hiddekel,
and Peet, and fo many infernall, vi. Phlegeton,Cocuus,
Styx, Acberon,

And the number 4 makes vp all knowledg, firſt it fil's
up every ſimple progreſs of numbers wich 4 tem, 017,
with 1, 2 3,and 4, conſtituting che number 10, it fills up
every difterence of numbers, the 1,even, and conteining
the firſt «dd in it, it ha h the grace of the 4 vO ce · Alſo ic
conteins the iuſt ument of 4 ſtrings, and a Pythag o12an,
Diagram, whe eby are fourd out & Nof all Muſical runes,
and all Hatmony of Maſick for double, treble, four times
de uble, one an ta half», one and a third part, a concord
of all, a d'uble concord of all, of 4s of 4, and all
cor ſonancy is limited within the bounds of che rum-
ber 4, It doth alſo contein the whole of Mubematicks
in 4 tern s, M poinr, inc, ſuperficies, and profundity :
it compichends all nature in g re: ms, . ſuhſtance, qua-
Ney, quantity, and motion, alſo all naturall Philoſo
phy, in which ae the ſeminary verracs of natu 8

l

*

® - 4 y) 4811 Jo Nom.

the Natural fpringing, the growing Form, and the Comk;
poſitum : Allo Metaphyſicks u comprehended in 4.bound
wiz, being, eſſence, ver tue, and action; Moral Philos

y, is comprebe ed with four verrues, wiz, Prudeuc
Fo ce, Forti nde, Temperance. It hath alſo the po]“ꝛ
of Juſtice ; fo: Times or Terms in the year at Weſtminſtel*'?"
Hall; all manner of Cafes ate Tried and Suit in Lay, —
to the content of the people. Hence a fourfold Law d ta
Providence ſiom God faral from the foul of the won
of Nature from Heaven; of Prudence from man; Of
this jou may be bettet facified in my Book enriculed, Con
The Idea of the Law,

There are aiſo ſou Jui;ciary powers in all things, be
ing viz. the Intelle&; D'(cipline, Opinion, and ſenſe. k
hath alſogreat power in calling of Names, of Spirits aud
Angels, and in P:ediQons, and in ail Myſteries ; hence
the Roſie Crucians do ratifie the number 4. with a1 Oath
as if it were the Number that God had fixed on them, to
confirm their Faith, as appears in th eſe verſes.

Op wa vie nuilt;e {14,4 pak'11e 747 po] dy
naar awd: quoi; pg apa), ix.

.
By him that did to us diſcloſe
The Tetrads Myſteite :
Where Natures found that overflows,
And hidden root doth lie.

Now there are ſo Goſpe): received from four Evaige-
Ae threnohonr the whole Church; the Hebrews receir
ved the chic ſeſt name of God w:rren with du Letreys:
Alſo the Eg vptians, Arabiens, Verh ans, MagitiÞfns, Mahu-
metans, Grecians, Tuſcan, Latines , write the name
of God with only four Letters : VZ. thus, 146, 44,
Se,

The Roſie crucian Tiſnllible A, 3
ire, O G, Abdi, GN Eſar, Deus. In the Original world

am whence the LH was received, The Name of God,
«wricten with four Leters ., In the Intellectual
wid, whence the fatal Law was received, there are four
he plicicies, or Intellig ble Hiera: chies, Seraphim. Chera-
| Law, tim, Thrones, Dominatuons, Powers, Vert ues, Princapaluzes,

Acbangelr, Angels, Innocents, Martyrs, Cenfeſſo1s: And
aw of there are four Angels, cullng over the four Corners of the
world, viz. Michael, Rhaphael, Gabriel, Diel; four Ru-
| n of the Elements, Scyaph, Cherub, Tharſis, A iel, four
uled, Conſectated Animals, the Lyon, the Eagle, Man, a Calf,
four T7iplicities of the Tribes of Iſrael, Dan, Aſſer,
be. Nehtalim, Judah, Iſſachar, Z ubul un, anaſſ eh, Benjamin,
e. & Ephraim; Reuben, Simcor, Gad, 4. Triplicities of Apo-
: and files, Matchias, Peter, Jacob, the elder, Simeon, Bartholg-
coop new, Matthew. Joh, Philip, James ahe younger, Thaddeus
Dat) Andi ow, Thomas four Ev ngdits Matthew, Mark, Luke
M0 | and John.

The Celeſtial world is conſtituted by the Law of Ni-
nre: four Triplicities of Signs, Arcs, Lea, Sagitta ius,
4 Gemm, LIVA, Aquarius, Canin, Scorpiits, Piſces, Taurus,
Virgo, Cap torn , 4. Elementiry Stars and Planets,
Mirs, and the Sun, Jupite/, and Venus, Saturn, and Me-
«ay; the txt Stars and the Moor.

4- Qualicies of the Celeſtial Elements, Light, Dia-
phanouſneſs, Agility, Solidiry , here Generation and
corruption is according to the Elementaty Law ; there
is Fire, A, ue, and earth; „d tour qualities, hear,
mov ſtu c colds dry neſs, and (ou ki ads of mx; bodies,
ge. Animals, Places, Metals, Sosce, fon. kinds of Animals,
er | walking, tying, [wimming, ccc, and four things an-
ber the Elements in Plants, ++. Secs, t lowers, Leaves,
Roots: So in merrals, Go |, en. Copper, and Tin,
me | Quickllver, Lead, and Silke; a: d initones there are
*4, | four anſwe; the Elements, bi gut ond lun , light and
"9 4 tu anſparant

34 The Reſte Cruciant Infallible Axſo mata.

tranſparant, clear and congealed, heavy and dark.
In che Law cf Prudence, Man, there are four Tle-
menis, the minde, the ſpirit, the foul, the body, 4.
powers, of the ſoul : the intelle&, Reaſon , Phantaſie,
Senſe 4. Judiciary powers, Faith, Science, opinion, ex-
perience, 4. Moral vertues , Juftice , Temperance, Pru-
dence, Fortitude: 4 ſenſes relating to the Elements, Sight,
Hearing, Taſt, and Smell, Touch: 4. Elements in the
body, Spirit, Fleſh, Humou s, Bones : a fourfold Spirit,
Animal, Viral, Generative, Natural: 4. bumours, chol-
ler, blood, flegme, melancholy : 4. manners of comple-
xiona, violence, nimbleneſſe, dulneſſe, ſlowneſs.
By the Law of puniſhment, in the Infernal Wold, there
are four Princes of Spirits, chat Rule the 4. evil Angels
of the world, Oi en, Paynion, Egin, Amnnon. This num-
ber caſt in a Teleſme of ſilver by Art, brings to you the
form of a Virgin, adorned with fine cloathes, with a
Crown on her; this number giveth acuteneſs of wir, aud
the love of men. 4
>} The number 4. they ſay, Teleſmatically engraven in
fil-er with the name of the Angel of the day, and hour,
and the pat ties name, and the name of his Guus accord-
ing to the Letters in the Figure of the world, all gathered
together, will preduce the ſociety bf an Angel, who ap-
pears like a man firting in a chair,holdinga balance in his
hand ; and they burned Nutmegs and Frankinſence be-
foie him; and he made the number forrunate ard happy
to the beater by Merchand Zing.

The Roſie Cucians Jrf allible Axĩomata. 35

CHAP, VAL

of the ſanificatic» of 1h» Number 5. And what
Angels may be called by it, and how they
may appear.

HE Number 5. is of no ſmall form ; for it con-

fiſts of ihe nf deen, and he fiift odd, as of a

Fem ile an Mile; for ain odd Number is the Male,
and the ever thc Femia'e, whom RH , Cuttzos call that
the Feth -r, and his the mother Theref re the number
3. is of nomal g ect on, or veituc, ah ch proceeds
from the M -f choſe Numbers, it is a the juſt.
middle of ec un.verſil rumber , Ii. 16. for if you
divide the Numbei 1, there will be g. and one, or 8. and
2, 07 7. and 3. or 6. and 4. and every collection makes
the number 10- ard the ex.tt wiacle ns always the num-
ber 5. and its equid'ſtave 3 and therefore it js a number
of Muth, nd good fellowſhip it is Called by the Pycha-
geians the mber of Wed!ock, as allo of Juſtice, be-
Cuſe it div d- the nue feen; There is alſo in it
an Embleme «f ge can is an Enpie ingendring with
an Eagle brings to thas Eagle + 1n 2 Doiphin eogendring
with a Dolphin, &c, were e Prrhagorians call this
number Cytherea, that is Vents, and T. Marriazes and
in Birds it is eviden- Hat tie chooſe det Mares : That
the Image of Grd conſiſts in this, rather then in the Do-
minion over the Ccitu e , | rake to be the righe
lenſe, and more Philoſuphica!', rhe o her more Po-
lit ical. | Ic

g6 The Rofge Crucian Inf llible Axiomat a

Plato's Symvofien agice one with another; which not-
withſtanding whctſnever proceeded, I make no queſtion,
ſays he, hut they are falſe and vain, and 1 muſt confeſs l
am fully ot the fame opinion; but this ſtrange agree
ment Antiyhones his Nartation, in the forenamed Sym

ofton, aid che Comments of the Rabines, upon the Ks
be Crucizs . is no (mall Argument that PI. had ſome
knowledge of et, which may well add the greate!
Authority and Credit to this our Axiomita; But it wa
the wiſdom f Pl:to, roown the Reſie Crucan Inf allbil:
Ariomata hiimſe'f, but ſu h unwarrantable Farcies 2
might riſe fam Nom ers and the Text, To caſt upon
ſuch a ridicuion ſhall» Companion as A+ iſtophanes , it
was good onongh for him outet in chat Club of win,
that Philoſophick Sympoiton cf Plate.

And the «© he tive ſenſes in Man, Sigh”, Hearing, Smel-
ling, Taftiog : five powers in the ſoul, vet e ative, ſePſp
tive, concupi(cible, [iafcible, Rational: fie Fingers on
the hand: five wandering Planets in the Heavers,acco'ds
ing ro which there ate fiveſo!d rerms in eve. v figo: in Ele-
ments there ate five kinds of mixt bodies,
Mettals, Plants, Plan Aniaals, and fo many kinds of A-
ni mals; as men, four fonred Beaſts, creeping, ſwinming,
flying. And there are hve kinds, by which all things are
made of God, xi Eſſence, the ſame, another, ſeuſe, mo-
tion: the Swallow brinps forth hut 5. young, which Fae
feeds with equity, beginning with the elde, ard ſo the
reft aceo ding to their age: Alſo this number ha h great
power in Expiations ; for in Holy Geomancy, and Teleſ-
matical Figiues it drives 22 / devils, in natu al things it
expeis po) ſon; it is called the number of For unatenefs
and fave i; and it is the ſcal of the Holy Ghoſt , and a
bond that binds all things, and the number God loves z it
is

It is a wonder, ſays G. otivs, to ſee how the explicati|*
on of the Rabins upon this Fra: and thoſe paſſages is q

& Stones,

licati-
ges is
not-
ion,

ess [

Igrees
Sym-

The Roſie Cruci an Infallible Axio mara. 37

is the number of the Croſs, yea eminent with the prin-
cipal wounds of Ch: iſt, whereof he vouchſafed to keep
the Scars in his glorified body.

The Philoſophers did dedicate it as ſacred to Mercury
eſteeming the vettre of ic to be much more excellent
then the number four by how much a livin g thing is more
excellent then a thing without life 3 for this 3 in a Fi-
gure of Geomancy, Noah found tarour with God, and was
preſerved in the Flcod of waters that overflowed Pala-
firs, Apamia and the Country of the Eft.

In the vt rue of this Number, 4br4bam being an hun-
dred years old, beat a Son of Sarah, being ninety years
old and a harten Woman, and paſt A and
— up ta be a great people; Hence in time of graee,
the name of Divine Oainipotency is called upon with
$, Lerrers ; for in time of Natute the nan e of God was
al ed upon with three Letters : In che time of the Law
the ineff abe name cf Ged was exprefſed with four Let-
ters And in the exemy !a y world, The name of God is
expreſt with 5 Lette s, Eloim, And the name of Chriſt
with 5. Letters [ſit In the intellectual world there
ne $. inte lięible ſuhſtances, i Spirits of the fiſt Hie -
nichy called Gods, or the Sons of God ; Spirits of the
ſecond Hierarchy , called Intelligences 4 Spirits of the
third Hierarchy, called Angels or Meſſenger s, which are
ſent, Cools of Celeftial bodies, Hr ors or bleſſed Souls :
Ia the Celeſtial world, there are 5 wandering Scars,
Lords of the Terms, Saturn, 7ipitcr, Mars, Virus, M-
wry. Theie are in the Elementary world g. kinds of
corruptible things, Warer, Air, Fire, Exch, a mixed
bedy, and g. kind« of mixt bodies, Animal, Plant, Me-
tal, Stone, Plant Animal: And in the Infercal world
there are 8. Corporeal Torments, Deadly hitrerreſs, Hor-
ble howling, terrible darkneſs , u quonchable Hear,
md piercing tink: The Number 5. engrayen Teleſma.
tically

38 The Roſie Crucien Infallible Axiomata.

gically in Gold, wich the Numbers of Letters of name,
of Angels, Flaners and dayes, they ſay will bring to you,
a woman Crowned with the geſture of one dancing in 4
Chariot, drawn with ſou horſes ; and a flame of Light
ning attends her: This number makes a man for tunate in
[+ —— Aſt:ology, Geomancy , and happy
in ſporting with women, they ſay ic make h Ladies beau
tiſull, and beloved of whom they pleaſe.

CHAP. VIII.

Of the ſignification of the Number ſix , and
why the whole Creation was comprehended with.
in it.

He Senarius or number 6. has a double reference, the
one to this particular days work, the other to the
whale Creation For the particular days work, it is
the Creation of ſundry forts of Lind Animals, divided
into male end female; and the number 6 is made un of
male and female ; fer two into three is fix ; henee the
Fyt hago tant call this number Tau Matrimony , ad
ding more, that they did it in referenc® to the Creation
of che wor'd, let d vn by Moſer : This number atfo in
the lame fort that the nunibet 5. is a fir Embleme of
Procreation ; fors. iro 6. mukes 36. Hee is ſomething
alſo that reſpe&s man, pareicniQcly the choiceſt reſult of
this 6. days Labvur : The uber bf the Binriſh Na-
ture was g. But here is aa unn ſuperaddel in man; —
on

/

'

3 of ws -

ee OP

The Rofie Crucian fal ible Axiond'a; 39
fon We to the knowledge of a God, and I added
105 n
But now far the reference that 6 bears to the whole
creation chat the F) thagorians and Roſie Cruci ans, did
conceive ir was fignificant theienf, appeits by the Tir'es
they have given it, for they call it A. dees: 1
rarru Axuar len The articu'ate and cempleat
eſſor mation of the univerſe, the Anvil, and the Werld, 1
ſuppoſe they call it the Auvill from that indeſat gable

ping out ef new forms aad figures upon the mat ter of
the unive: ſe, by the vettue of the ARive principle that
ever kuſies ic ſelf every whe: ce, bat how the ſenary ſhould
Emblemacize the world you ſtfall underftand thus, the
world is felie compleat, filled and perſected by its own
parts ; ſo is the Sena ius, ,which has no denominated
part of a 6, F and 2, vx. 1,243- which put together mike
6, A perſect Number is thac which is equall to its part,
wherefore, this number ſers out the perfetion of the
vor ld, and you know that Gad in the cloſe ot all faw that
Achat te made was very god, then again the. world is

Appin £ On 245 Mas Be F ening, that is, it confiſts of
an Active and Paſſive principle, the one biought down
into the ot her, from the world of Life, and the Sedary
is made by drawing ef the firſt u ſculine Number into
the firſt Fine, for 3 into 2 is 6.

Thus you 7 continuedly that the property of the
number ſets off che na ute of the wor k of every day, ac ·
cording to thoſe myſteries that the t hagerias have ob-
ſerved in them; and be ſides this, that the numbers have
ordinarily got names anſwerable to ench dan work, which
ul have oſten intimated, is 2 very high probability, that
the Rofie Cru / iant had an Infallible Axiomama referring to
Moſes his text, 6 is « number of perfeRtion, becauſe it ig
the moſt per!feR in * the whole courſe of *

er-

40 The Roſie Crucians Infallible AExiomata
bers; {ram one to 10 and it alone is ſo perfe that in the
Collection of irs parts it reſulrs the ſame nothing wincing
not abounding, for if the party thereof, vi; the middle
the 2, and g.pair, which ate 3,2, l. be gathered together
they pe: ſactly fill up t he whole body of 6.

Now this ei fection all che o het numbers want, hence
by the Raſit Cyan it is ſa d to be altogether applyed to
gene ation and marriage, and is called the ballance sf
world, for che world is mode of the number 6, neither
doth it bound br is defe&ive, hence that is, becauſe the
world was 9 Goc rhe © day, for the 6 day God
ſaw all the things hi h̊ he had made aud behold they were
22 good, and the ee. and mormang were the
6 nitarall. en .

Thejefo'e the Heaven ind the Earth and all the hoaſt
theteof were fiaiſned, it is alſo called the number of mar,
becaiiſe the s day man was Created, and it is alſo the
ramber of our redemprionwhence there is a great affini-
ry berwixe ine number 6 and the Croſs, Labour and ſer-
vitude ; hene if is in the Law commanded, chat in 6
days the work is to be done, 6 days Manna is to be g
ther ech t year rhe ground was to be ſowen, aud chat t
Hebrew ſervanc ſhould ſei ve his maſter 6 years, 6 days
rhe Glory of Lord appeared upon Mount Sina, cover ug
it with a cloud, the Chenabins had 6 wings,

And there are 6 Circles inthe Fitmament, Artick, An-
tartick, 2 Tropicks, Equinoctioil. and Eclipricky 6 win-
dering Planets; N Saturn N. . N. D. ruining dough
the La itude and of the Zoduck, on both fides the Teli
prick, there ate 5 ſubſtantiall quilities in the Element,
wir, ſharpneſic, thinneſſe, motion, and the camtary to
theſe dnineffethickneffe, reſt, there are 6 differences oſ
pofirion upwards, downwards, before, behind, on the
rich / ſidey on tbe left fide. There are 6 naturall officer,
without which nothing can be, N, Nagnirude, —

| iguie,

323% AFN

vi and top of the houſe alſo, to the aftoniſhmens of all

The Roſie Crucians Infallible x510mate 41

Figure: intet val, Standing otion. Alſo a ſoſid figure of a
4 (quare thing hath 6 Soperficies,there are 6 Tones of all
Harmony, viz, $ Tones, and 2 half Tones, which make
one Tone, which is the & and the name of God IF
exemplary world are viitten wich 6 Letter: U
and NI) JR And 6 ordert of Angel's or Meſſengers in
the intelligible world will got obey the call of inferiours
becauſe they are net ſent, d there ate 6 degrees of men
in the lefſec world, the intellect, Memory, Senſe, Motion,
Life, Eſſence · And 6 Devils in the inſernal world which
ae the Authors of all Calamity Arteus, Mageleſius,Orme-
nut, Licus, Nicon, Mien. The ſignes to diſtinguiſh, whe-
ther the Spit it be good or evill, are the ſame by which
we diſtinguiſh whether a man oc a tree be good or evill
namely Actions and Fruit, and wicked men cannot con-
verſe with Angells, as for Example a Quaker or a Pres-
byterian contrived a number in Silver, and could often
converſe with an Angell as they called ic, at Fell, Feut,
Furai in Laxcaſhire for there they lived, although not
devout before God, thus they difſembled,as their manner
is with God and the World, and freely and frequently
courted this famihar Spi: ir. But there are lying Spirits, ſo
it hapned the 15 day of June, 1660. being at dinner with
his wite and 4 children, there knocked one at the deor,
he he not of his familiar Devill 1 loppoſe, bur o-
pened the door, at which entred a 43: x black cloatbs,
and afrer faluration, ſaid he muſt go with bim, at this
the Quaker was afraid, and one of his ſens ruu out to call
neighbouts, the reſt ctyed and the woman alſo, ſo oue
of the children ſaid, O Jeſus mother this man has feer
like a Cow, and the woman caſting her 'eyes upon him
blefled her, and (aid, ſweet Husband forſake theſe fooliſh
fancies of Quaking, Immediately as the word went out of
ber mouth, for all his fhiviag this Monſter carried him 4.

(fz) their

42 The Rete Crucian Inf allible Axiowata. =
their neighbours, who by this time were come to ſave the
man, bur he waz gone before, and never heard of after.

This may forewarn ungodly Saints the medling with
the Sacred things written in this Books for the Devil may
appear to you like an Angell of Light, wherefare you are
commanded in Ser iptute to judge of the Spirits by their
Doctrine, and net of the DoArine by the Spirits for m-
racles our Saviour hath forbidden us to rule our faith
chem, Mat. 24. 24. and Saint Paul ſaith, Gal. v. . thoug
«x Angell from Heaven preach te you otherwaſr, c. Let
him be accarſed, — it is plain that we ate not to
judge whether the DeRrine be true t no, by the Do-
rine: ſo likewiſe 1 John 4. 1, Bilieve not every Sim:
for falſe Prohter are gone out Into the worli, ve. 1. Hereby
ſball ye haow the Spirit of God, ver. 2. Every »pirit that
conſeſſeth nt that Jeſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh, is not
of God. And this is the Spirit of Atichriſt, ver. v5. u bo-
ferver tonſeſſeth tha Feſus Chit u the Son of God, in
him dwellech God, and he in God.

The knowledge thereſote we have cf good and evill
Spiricy comerh not by vifion of an Angell that may reach
if, nor by a miracle that may ſeem to cer fim it: bat
by confoi micy of dectrine with this Article and Fund
mentall point of Chriſtian Faith which alſo Sr. Paal faith
is the Sole Foundation, That Feſwus Choiſt is come is the
fleſh, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

For wiſedome and knowledge in Philoſophy, he Law
and Divinity, they engtaved, the nam e of the Angell of the
day Planet. and hour with the mans name at leng:h,and
the numbers acer ibuted unro-cach Letter, ard he it 15
laid receiveth venue from an Anpell tat appears like #
man riding on a Peacock, having Eagles feet, and on hu
head a Creſt, in his right hand he hulds fi c, and in hi
left a cock.

CHAP,

a «= aaom ova Uma" ec ac a cc ac a.

2228 &© = 4 Xt

The Roſie Crucians I: ſallible Axiomats. 30

1 £ —

CH AP. IX.

The ſignification of the Number 74 Ard that
7 i a fit Symbole of the Sabbath or reſt of
God,

The Hebdomad or $eprenary is a fit Symbole of God,
as he 'is confide:ed, having finiſhed theſe 6. dayes
Creation,for then as this Lofallible Ax iomata intimv es,
he creates nothing further, and therefore his cenaition
is then very fitly ſet out by rhe Number 7. All Num-
bers withia the Decad, are cal into three Ranks, as
ius obſerves, Oi wir yirrecty # girth, of
MN , ultr, try oro! MN ih dpupbriga, oj
y0160: oy Y. ( i. e.) ſome beger, but ae
not begs: ren, others are begotten, bur do not beger,
the |. beth beget and are begotten, the Number 5.
is only exceped, that is neither begetten, nor be-
gets any Number, which is a pei ſect Embleme of God,
celebrating this Sabbath; for he now creates not- jeg
of 4 new, as himſelf is uncreaecable, ſo that the creating
and infufing of ſ uls, as occaſion ſhall offer, is quite
contrary to this Rofie Crufien Axiomara. And 7. is of
various and maniſeſt power, for it confifts of 1 and 6,or
of a and 3, or of 3 and 4. ald it hath s uyity as it were
the coupling rogether of two th een, hence it is Cal.ed
a number of mariage, and the +\nrologers and Geoman-
cer, are teſ lved ly the 316 H uſe, whether the Qye+
reat ſha'l marry the party defired. 7, is called the Ve-
bicolum of mans ife, which it deth not receive from
F 3 1's

42 The Rofie Crutian Inſallible Ariomat a.
ir's parts ſo, as it perfe&s by it's proper right, of it's
whole, for it comeins body and ſoul, fer the bod

ries.

Alſo the Number 3. reſpefts the foul by reaſon of the
threefold power, viz.iroaſcible; and concupicible. The
Number 7relazes to the generation of men, ard it eauſeih

man to be received, formed, brought forth , nouriſhed

live, and indeed altogether to ſubſiſt, for when the ge-
nitall ſeed 5s received in the womb of the woman, if it
remain there 7. hours after the effuſion of ir, it is certain
that it will abide there for good : Then the fuNt y days
it is coagulated, and is fit to receive the (hape of a man,
chen it produceth mature Infaats, which are called In-
Gants of the r. month, becauſe they are the 71. month.

After the birth, the 7th. hower ttyes whether ic will
live or not: for that which will bear the breath of the
air, — — RE will toe, after 7 days
it caſts the Reliqves of the Navill, afrer twice 7 dayes
it's ſaght begins to move after the Light, her Nt dayes
ir turm is's eyes, and whole face freely, afrery months
it breeds teeth, after 14 months it fits withour fear of
falling, aſter 21 months it begins ro ſpeak, aher 28
months it ſtands ſtrongly and walkes, after 35 months it
begins to refrain ſucking its nurſe, ater years it's firſt
teeth fall, and new are bred, fitter for harder meat, and
it's ſpeech is perfefed, after 14 year Boycs wax ripe,
and then is a beginning of Genet „ att year they
grow to be men in ſtature, and hegin to be haity, aud be-
come able and ſtrong for Generation, at 28 they begin to
harniſh and ceaſe to taller, in the 3 $th. year they attain
to the perfeFion of their ſtrengrh, ar 42. they keep
their 7 be at 49 yes of age they attain to their
umoft i erion and wiſdome and the perte& age of
man.

But

confiſts of 4 Elements, and is endowed with 4 quali

=I3-3-T:3- 1-3-3 386-5

wwe sener 2: 5M

The Roſie Crucian Inſ@lible Axjomata, 43

got when they come to the 10th. 7 year, where the
Math 7 is taken for a compleat Number, hen they
com to the common tearm of lifezthe Prophet ſaying our
wge is 70. Jeans, the utmoſt height of mans body is foot.
There ate alſo 7. degiees in the body, which com-
plear che dimenſion of it's Altitude hom he bottome to
the Top. K. Marrow, Bone, Nerve, Vein, Atiery,

Fleſh, Skin. There are 7 which by the Greeks are cal-

led black- members, The Tongue, the Heart, the Lungs,
the Liver , the Spleen and 2 Kidneys ; there are alſo 7.
Frincipall parts of the body; the Head, the Breaft, the
hands, the feer, and the privy members, it is man iſe ſt

ing breath, and meat, that without drawiog of
the beeath, the life, doth not endure above 7 hours, and
they that are ftarved in priſon by blood thirſty Credl -
tours ot otherwiſe with Famine, live, not above 7 dayes.
The Veins and Atteties are moved by 7.

Al Judgmcors in diſeaſes are made with greater mas
diffusion upon the 71h. day, being called critical or

i

b al of 7 portions, God cteatet the ſoul, the
Hul receives the body by 7 degrees, all differences of
yoyces proceed to the tb. degree, after which there is
the ſame Revolution: Again there are 5 Modu ions of
voyces, Dironvs, ſemi- Di onu, Dicateſſaton, Diapente
with a Tone Diapente, with a half Tone and Diapaſon
There is a'ſo ia Celeſtialls a moſt potent power of the
Number 7, for ſeeing, there ate 4 corners of heaven

\Diametrical'y looking one towards the other 3 which in.

deed is accounted a moſt full and powerfull Aſpect, and,
confiſts of che Number 7, ſor it is ma ie from the 71. ſign
and makes a croſi the moſt powerfull figure of all, but his
you muſt not be ignorant of, that the number 7 hath a
great conmunion with the Croſſe, by the ſame Radiation
and number the Solftice is diſtant from Winter, and
the Egulno dium from the Summer, all which arc _
F 4 y

44 The Roſie Cruclamt Infallible Axiom.

by 7 figns, there alſo 7 Circles in the Heavens according feſt
to the axel. Ttee there are 7 fta;3 about the Artick- pole gic:
greater and leſſet called Charles Wain, Ad 7 fatn
called the Pleides and 9 Planets. and the Moon diſpem] fie
ſeth che influence Spiritual and Natural, gives the light] po
of 5 rous ; for in 28 ſhe tuns her appointed cours, pre
wh ch Nun ber of daycs, t he number 7, with it's ſeve] 45
termes, vic. From 1 to 7, doth make and fillup, af cal
much as the ſeverall Numbers, by adding to che Aut an,
eedens, aud makes 4. times 7 days in which the Moes] 50
runs through, and about all the Longitude and Latitude by
of the Zodiack by meaſuring, and meaſu iq, and mer 1,
furing gain, with the like 7 of days ic (difptnſerh in
light, by changing it |

For ihe fuſt 9 dayes unto the middle, as it were cl
the devided world, it increaſeth ; the ſecond 7 dayesit
fills irs whole Orb with light: the third by, decretion
it agaia cengracted into a divided Cabybut afrer 28 day
u is renewed with the laſt diminution of irs light and
by the ſame 7 of dayes ir dipoſeth flux ar inflpx of
waters, for in the fuſt 7 of rhe increaſe of the Mcon ith
by little leſſened : in the ſcond by degrees imcerealed,
bur the 3 is like go be ſi ſt, and the forth doth the ſame
. the l cord.

And alſo 7 ĩ applied to which aſcending ſrem ibe
lower, in tie 9th, Plarer which te okens reſt, to which
tc 7ih d- y i aſcfiber, which fignifies the 7 chouſand,
» herein, ( as S1int Jun wicthefſerh ) the Dragon which
is it £ Devi I, He ing b und, men ſhall be quier, and lead
p Aale life; Moreover the Reſe Crufiens call 7 the
N in ber of Virginity, becalſe the firſt is that whichis
neichet gene sed, of ecnetates neither can it be di-
vided ntp wo cquill parts ſ a8 to be generated of 2
roth rx Number tepeated, or teing doubled to bring
futhan ther Nich t of ir ſe f, which is conte ined
witmu the row d. of te Nmber 10, which it —

N

20 =

P as ts Jt. St. £2

The Roſie Crucians Infallible Axiomata, 47

ding! f the firſt bound of Numbers,and therefore they de-
2 ted the Number 5 to Pallas.

iſpew
20
ſeven

p, U

It hath alſo ia Religion moſt potent ſigns of it's e-
eem, and it is called the Number of an O-th, hence &
moneſt the Hebrews to (wear is called Scytenaty, to
proteſt by 7. Abraham when he made a Covenant with
Abimelech appointed y ewe lambs for a Teſtimony, it is
called the Number of bleſſedneſſe or of reſt, viz in foul

and body The 7:6. day the Creator reſted from his
work, 23 1 ſhewed you above, whereſore this day was

by Moſes called the Sabbath, or the day of Reſt, hence
ig was thai Chriſt reſted the 9 day inthe grave.

Beſides it is moſt convenient in puritications whence
Aule iu / Gittrvund I; ut my (elf forthwith, into the Bach

oi the Sca, to be purified, and put my head 7 times un-

der the Waves, and the Leap oiſſe perſon is cle anſed, be-
ing ſpr rkled 7 times vi h the blocd of a Spart ow, and
Hijab faid to a Jeaprous perſun, Go, and waſh thy ſelfe

times in Jordain, and 1 fl:ſb ſhell be made whole, And
A waſhed 7 times and was cleanted, 7 is a number cf
Re pentancg and Rem. lion, and 7 ears Repentance was
ordeined for Sin, acaording to the opinion of the Wiſe ·
man, ſaying, and upon every finner ſevenfold.

And alfo the 91h, year there were granted Remiſſions
of all debts and treſpaſſes in full teſtimony of Leve and
fulfiling of the Law. And Chriſt with 7 Petitions fini-
ſhed his ſpeech of our farisfa dion, and at the end of ſeven
years every Apprentice doth chillenge liberty to him-
ſelf; 7 is (uteable to divine Praiſes, and David a'd y
umes a day do 1 praile tbee, becauſe of thy Righteous
Judgemenrs, it is morecvcr called the Number of Re-

verge, a5 Cain ſhull be revenge | ſevenfold.

be Nie Cructen Inf allible Axioma ta.
The Number 7 engraven by Art in Silver, will prodace| and
to your light a man leaning upon a Scaffe, having a biti u, «
on his head, and a floriſhing tree before im, and th hon t
u made for eravellers againſt wearineſs, the Number N the
4nChriſtall by art engraves brings to you a woman Cor bath
vuted riding on a Ball, with q heads holdidg in her tighthy 7:
hand a Dart, and in her left a looking glaſs,they will eqme
to you in white and green, and grant you the love of v
ny woman you ſhall nomĩ nate. "INE An
And 7 is aſcribed to the Holy Ghoft, who ig 7 fold, ar I ple
eotding to his gifts, vix. the Spitit of Wiſedom and us · {ylve:
derſtanding, the Spirit of Counſell, and ſtrength, the ed
Spirit of knowledge and holinefle, and the Spirit of the
fear of the Lord, which is the 7 eyes of God, thete are 7 lai
meſſengers or Angells that wait the will of God, ind 7% d
Lamps burn before the Throne of God, and 7 Golden one
Candleſticks and in the middle was one like che Son of ly, pr
God and he hid in his right hand ) ſtars, chen are 5 A 4
gells in the preſence of God that ſtand before him, and 7 N
Spirits before the Throne, and there are given to them 0h.
7 Trumpet I mean y Angels that ſtood before the throne Wit
of God, A Lamb had 7 horns and 7 eyes, and a book de
was opened with 7 Seals. | of |
And when the 7 Seal was opened there was male &| A
lence in heaven, by 7 Julius Ce/ar did bind and repell |bcb

evill ſpirits as you read in Lucan. he:
joy!

1 will now'call you up by a true name, ul

The Stygian dogs Ii the light ſupream ne
— knd follow you alſo through grave 7.
From all the urnes in death I will you ſave. |

The Number y unto the Gods will g tal

To whom t' addreſs thyſel in other bew; 74

Thou waſt wont, wit h wan form and without grace, lex
41d th:e forbid to change Krebus bis ſace. * bo

The Reſie Crucjan Tafnllible Axio mat a. 47

Odace | And alſo of all clean beaſts 7, were brought into the
| Didi, and of Fowls 7. and after 7. days the Lord rained
the earth, and upon the ſeventh day the Fountains
der che deep were broken up, and the waters covered the
n Cx. uh; and Abraham gave Abimelech 7. Ewe Lambs;
tie Jacob ſerved ſeven years for Leab, and ſeven more for
_— bel; and ſeven days the people bewailed the death of
Of Uo)

And you read of 7. Kine, and 7. Ears of corn, 7. years
plenty, and 9. years of ſcarcity; and in Nambers 7.
z were offered on the ſeventh day; and Baalum ere-
d ſeven Alrars ; 7. days Mary the filter of Aa10s went
um Leprous out of the Campz and in Foſhuab 7. Prieſts
Ae7jatied the Ark of the Covenant before the Hoſt 3 and
md 1 days they went round the Cities ; and 95+ Trumpets
ne carried by the 7. Prieſts 3 and the ſeventh day, the

Mn of fy. Prieſts ſounded their Trumpets.
Ar | And Abeſſa reigned in 1ſrael 7, years; Sampſon kept his
indy [Noptial 7. days, and the ſeventh day he put forth a riddle
them o his wile ; he was bound with . new Cords, and 7.

Id, as
d aq-

Irons |Withs 3 and 7. Locks of his head were ſhaven off; 7.years
book | the children of 1/rael were oppreſſed by the King
of Maden,

* &| And Eharpraved 7. times, and at the ſeventh time,
pell bebold a little cloud : 7. days the children of 1/rae! pit
Qed over againſt che A iianc, and the ſeventh day they
joyned Battel 3 and 7. times the childe neeſed that was
aiſed by Eliſha : 7. gifts of the Holy Ghoſt: 7. Petitions
nthe Lords Prayer : 7. words of ch ifi upon the Croſs :
1, words of the Virgin Mayy.

Moreover this Number hath much power» as in Natu-
al, ſo in Sacred, Spiritual, Ceremonia), and myſteries :
hours were Adam and Eve in Paradice; and there were
„ ſſeven men ſotetold by an Angel, before they were
* | born, viz. 1{macl, Iſaac, Sampſon, Jeremiah, John Bavtifi,

48 The Kefie Crucians Inſaliible Axiomat a.

Fames the Brother of / u Lord and Savicur Chriſt Jeſ.
And in the Original worlo, they weite the name of
wich. Leticr, Marita. And iu tue In elligible wi 70
the e are 5, Angels tha Vd in the preſence of Gat
Z. pie, Zadſi i, Camacl, R ,t, Hanae!, Michiel, Ga Fo
briel, in the Elen entary World, there ate 9. Budi, he ado
are uſed in ca ling of Ang: Il, di, The Lapwing , thee"
Ege the Vulture, the Sw n, the Dove, the Sto k, deen,
Ow! : and 9. Frſhes, viz, The Sea Cat, the Muller, Ife
mai.us> ; the Sea Caf, che Pike , the Dolphin, Thuthe ape
Fiſh : and 7. Ammals, the Coar, Car and Ape, the Mole jth A0
the Heat, he Wolf; the I yon: and 7. Mcttals, Lea hy cl
Tin, Iron, God. Copper, Quick hvst, S If and . A
Scones, The Onix, the S. phir, the D amond, the Gar viſe
buncie, the EMA, the Achates, the Cu iſt i. 1 U
This Number 7. engraien in S ver will bring Gabi te.
to you, and he wiil bring you a Genius ſuitable to youry fy
ſelf in ny/vre, number and name, and he will appear like ah
a man <loarhed in cemely apparel , or Ike a man and
woman ic ing at a Table playing, and thi giverh Mirth | dv
Riches and the love of women. po

'4
1

nd

Aoain the Number 5, is of two kinds, the one is, bie
» W5 a JiailÞ ifdeuds., The other cla | al
The *eptena;y within the Decade is meerly 9. unites the *
Other i: a ſceenth rumbe:, beginning at an unite, and te
holding on in a continual Geomettical proportion, till
you have go eth ough 7. p oportional Terms; for the be
ſeventh em, there 18 his Septenary of the ſecond kind, | ©
who! « Nute 7 y x," [rs in theſe Word: ; e

As yp 3 im ν,ẽã evr11Shuer&® u rw goi- -
, Un er. (01; a rA dpraecyion. I ,

dub wb 3 T2 x; 74)þ1 yeores Foy & woolepa bad | i
Tip i400 1.54 a h & Cop etTihig gig. Tit
MITES

Ie Reſe C aciant Infalbily Axio mata. 49
' 400d Te tau Thy (alan tr an lands! -
9": 0! Tis I gwugrinns va Tn) dTIpar -
76! g, . e.
Fo alway: beginn ig from an unite, and holding on '
di, ta double ot tripley-or what proporucn y'u wil; the
18 , thellevench number of this rank is both ſquaie and cube,
„k, camp chending both kinds , aſwell the C poreal as In-
er, Thi/corporeal ſubſtance; t. & incorporeal according to the
nuch luper ficies which the ſquares x ite, but the corpores»
Mol according to the folid Dimenſions, which are (ct out þ
Lex, byche Cubes.
ind , As for example, 54, or 7 2.9. theſe are numbers thut
Cu wile after this manner : each of them are a ſeventh from
n unite, the one acifiag f om deuble proportion, the o- |
abe e from Triple; and if the proportion were quadruple |
your] quinruple, or any elſe, there is the ſame ea o. Some
r like | ether ſeventh Number would ariſe, which wou'd prove
1 and] of the Game Nature with theſe, they would prove
licchy | both Cubes and ſquares, that it, Corporcal and Incors
po cal; for fuch is 54. either made by multiply ing 8. in»
108. and ſo it u a ſquare, ot e fe by multiplying 4 Cu-
e i& | bically, for 4. times 4, times 4. is again 64. but then it is
c/o, Cube. And ſe 519. is mide eiche by ſquating of 27.
the | or Cubically mul-iplying of 9. for either way will 729.
and | te made: and ſo is both Cube and ſquare corporeal and
til inco-poreal : where by is in:imared, that the world ſhall
the | be ten uce d in the ſi venth day to a mee: ſpiricual co fiſt
nd,
d:
Fl-
9
44
75

ency to an inc rporeal condition; hut there ſhill be a
chabitation of the ſpuit with ficſh, in a Miſtical or
Moral ſenſe, and that God will pitch his Tent amongſt us.
Then ſhal' he ſetled everl:ſting rightecuſneſs, and roet-
ed in the Each, ſo long as mankinde ſhall inhabige upon
the face the eof.

And this truth of the Reign of Righteouſneſs in this
'» | 7060, years is ſtill more clearly ſet out ro ws in the Sep.
tens y

30 The Rofee Crucian Inf allible Axiomate

tenary within 10, 7y' ird fined & Wadouad),
Plato calls it, the naked number 7. For ite patts iic
ſits of ate 3. and 4. which put together make 9.
theſe parts be the ſides of the firſt 0:tho;0144n Nu
bers the very ſides that include the right anęle theree
And the Orthog onan what a foundation ir is of Tig
metry, and of meaſuring the Altitude, Latirudes, uuf dt
Longitudes of things, every body knows that knows r f
thing at all of the Mathemaricks : and this prefigures th nei
uprighenels of the holy Generation, who will ſtall gd
and walk, x 55027, inclining neither this way, u phe!
that way, bu: they will approve themſelves of an upright] they
and fincere heart; and by the Spirit of righteouſned] int}
will theſe Saints be enabled to find out the depth and} 4d
breadth and height of the wiſdome and goodneſk] hie
of God, as ſomewhere the Apoſtle himſelf phre| d)
ſeth it · ws)
But then again; laſth, this 3. and 3. comprehend ali 4
the ConjunRion of tlic corporeal and incorporeal N
ture: 3. beirg the fit ſaperficies. And 4. the firſt bo- ©
dy; and iu the 900; years there will be io great union la
betwixt God and man, that min ſhall not die, bor par be
take of his Spirit. And the Lnhabitanrs of the Hh. ;
tiall Reg on will openly conveiſe with theſe of the Ter | |
reſtrial, and ſuch frequent converſation , and ordinary x
viſits of our cordia Friends of that other world, will 5
take away all the to Jof life, and fear of death amongſt /n
men, they being very cheark: I! and pleaſant here in the =
body, and being well affa ed, no pain ſhall attl-R them,
when they pleaſe to ga our of it; for Heaven and Earth
by this number ſha!! ſh. kc hands together, or become
as on@houſle, and to die all be acccunted but to de )
(cend into a higher Room
And though this diſpenſation for the preſent be but '

very

The Roſie Crucien Inf alible An, :
xy ſoaringly ſet 2 foot, becauſe of my youth 3 yet 1
pple rhe — ancient and Learned, may fave a
gimpſe ar it; concerning whom accompliſhed poſteri-
may happily utter ſomething anſwerable to that of out
ours concerning Abrabam, who tuſted of Chriftianis
before Ch iſt himſelf was come in the fleſh : 4brabam
"my day and refoyced at it. And without all queſtion,
tut plennude of happineſſe that hath been reſerved
for future times the preſage , prediction and repre»
der tit! sion of ir, has in all Ades been a very grear Joy
| Rand] ad Triumph to all holy men Rope Crucians and Pros
y , ny phets, Adam, Seth , Enos, Cainan, Mabalaleel , Jared,
pig] they died, not enjoying the Riches of Gods goodneſſe
zuſndh] n their bodies; but Enoch who was the ſeventh frem
h and} 4dam, was by ſeven taken np alive into Heaven by Ga-
dneſe] brie! : and ſeems to enjoy that great Bliſſe in the bo-
phrr dy ; 1 have ſhewed you in my Boeke called, The
way to Bliſſe: The World then in the ſeventh Chili-
4% & will be aſſumed up into G OD, ſaateht up by
bis Spirit, inacted by his power : The Jeruſalem that
ft bg. mes down from Heaven will then in a moſt glorious
md eminent manner flow iſh upon earth, God will as I
lud by ſeven, pitch his Tabernacle amongſt us : and for
£the. Cod to be in us and with us, is as much as for us to be
Ter lifred up into God. f ;
ina By ſeven Corncliut Agrippa being at Paris writ to a
will | Friend of His at the Court the ſignification of a ſaying
ang in Jeremiah ; viz, Our Crown is fallen, Wo unto us becaaſe
we have fined, which (fays he) I wiſh might not be ſo
nem, du applied to you 3 for truly that verſe , the Numeral
| Letters being gathered together, M. c.“. L. e xpreſſeth
the year M. D x. x.. herein according to the accompt
de- | Jour King was taken at Papia.
The number 7. engraven in a Jaſper ſtone, with the
hue | Parties Namie, and the Numbers attributed to ic the —
ke

,

85
w$

oe Kofre cin Infallible Axionats.”

— the Planet and day of the week 3 and this they

15 goed to obtain the favour of a Lady in Marriage,
the Love of Virgins 3 it maketh che bearer fortunate |
ia Gawing z as Tables, Cards , Dice, Ho: ſe-ta
Bowling , Shooting , Cock- fighting, dec. And by hy
Number they ſay will appear a little maid , cloathed |
long white Gu ments, with her hair ſpread «broad, he

ing flowers in her right hand, and ſhe gives vettue
ths nember, chat the bearer of it ſhall go at his ples
ſuce viſible: if it be engraved with his name and Geniug

c. in a

AP.

CHAP. X.

Of the ſignification of the Number [8], and what An-
gel; may be called by it, and how they eppear.

Am not angry at the Fanatick diſpoſitions of men

that rail agaialt my Writings ; viz, Francs Oiberne,
Author of Advice to « Son, and Elias Aimee, Elq.
that made publick my imperfe& Copy, called, he way
10 Bliſs, and ſome others I pity, being the worm-caten
memorials of defaced Hiſtories, &c.

Theſe ignorantly wonder what thoſe Officiews Spirits
fhould be I fo much talk of in my Book, called, * fa-
miliar Spirit, that ſo willingly appear, and after my di-
regions, oflet themſelyes to — Es with a man.

O my enemies | whom I pity, more then deſpiſe, I
ſhall cell you lovingly, as I ſpeak to the capacities of
people; They arc Angels uacapable of incorporation
into humane bodies and ſouls of the deceaſed, that have
affinity with mortality and humane frailty ; and theſe
will not appear to you at all times, but every 1. 3. 5- 7s
or ih. year ? they will come, and for ever accompany
you in a fortunate Teleſme.

And 8 will bring to youa Genius you ſhall know in
its proper place: And Orbea was uſed to beſeech Di-
tine Juſtice by 8, and he uſually ſware by 8 Deities,
vix Fire, Water, Earth, the Heaven, Moon, Sun, Pla-
nets, the Night: and Virgil ſpeaking of Magick, faith 5

1 many times with 8 have M#cirfþi'd

Chang's 10 Wolf, and in the Woods to bide :

From jepulchres won(d ſouls deperied charm,

And corn bear landing from anothers Farm.
F

The

n m
Me. F 4

ö | nſanidie Axiomats.
The Roſte-Cruczans call 8 the number of Juftice, and
Fulneſs : firſt, becauſe it is firſt of all divided intonum-
bers equally even, vi into 4. and that diviſion is by
the ſame reaſon made inte 2 times 2, viz, 2 times:
twice 3 and by reaſon of this equality of Diviſion it took
to it (elf the name of Juſtice ; but the other received
the name, viz. of Fulne(s, by reaſon of the Contexture
of the corporeal ſolidity, ſince the firſt makes a ſolid
body. There are 8 onely viſible Spheres of the heaveni-
alſo by it the property of corporeal matter is lignified,
which 7 prin comprehended in $ of his ſea-fongs : this
13 alſo called the Covenant, or Circumcifion,which wat
commanded to be done by the Jews the 8h. day.

By 8 it is fad a Gentleman in the King's Army at
Edge-hill battle, ſhewed the effefts of S pirits, viz. the
appearance of Armed men, fighting and encountri
one ginſt another in the rkie, and hundreds ſaw cher
things beſides himſelf.

And through 8 Tſagerith ſhewed the Citizens of Je-
ruſalem for 40 dates, or 5 times 8 together, Horſmen
running in the airin cloth of Gold, and armed with Lan-
ces, like a hand of fouldiers, and troops of horſmen in
array, entountripg and tuning one againſt another,
with thaking of (ſhields, and multitudes of Pikes, 2nd
drawing of ſwords, and caſting of darts, and glitte ring
of golden ornaments and herne ſj of all forrs : and thus
he predicted the great ſla r of no lefs then 88000
made by xnviochur ; this i alſo recorded in the ſecond
of her, Chap. 5

And in 8 wa ſeen n Sea-fight over Sydmonth in De-
vnſbire, by Caleb Perkinſon, a Captain ofa (hip, and his
Company; and he predicted a fea-fight, which happe-
ned betwizt us and the Noander,

$ 1s an evil number and alyaics ſigmſies diſeaſes, or
death: ans in the old Law there were 8 O

— ”,, = = = =»

-- —

S — IMC]

The Refie- Crucien infallible Axiomats. 7z
the Pricft ; wit, a Breaſt-plate, a Coat, x Girdle, a My+
ter, a Robe, an Ephod, a Girdle ef an Epbod, a Golden
Plate: hither belongs the number to eternity, and the
end of the world, becauſe it follows the number 7,wbich
is the myſtery of time.

By 8 Hammel cauſed a ſpirit, called Eckerken, to ap-
dear alwaies ia the ſhape of a hand, and hauat thoſe that
troubled him, pulling down wavyellcrs off their horſes,
and overturning carriages.

They ſay this number was dedicated to Dyonifius,be-
cauſe he was bara the 8h. month, in everlaſting memo-
ry whereof Naxs, the Iſland was dedicated to him,
which obteined this prerogative, that ogely the women
of Naxos \hould ſafely bring forth in the 8h. month, &
their chiſdten thould live; whereas the children of the
ih. moath in other Nations dic, and their mothers then
bringing forch are in Wanifcfh danger.

By 8 artificially characted in a proper ſubject, Ami-
lanins Tyan: told the Ephelians of an old man that was
x Spectre, and how the walking Plague was by his
means in the City here and there jwwhereupon they ſio-
ned the thape, & after a while they uncoveted the heap,
whereupon appeared the thape of a preat black dog, as
big a+ any Lien: Yetl know ſome able Artiſts in Eng-

land, that will not believe but this is Melancholy, and
fraud of a Prieft : But the learned Grotius, 2 man far
from all levity, and vain credulity, is ſo ſecure of the
ruth of Ty ancur his miracles and Teleſmatical numbers,
that he does not ſtick to tetme him impudent that has
the face to deny them.

In the Iuſerual word there are 8 rewards of the dam-
Darned 3 Priſon, Death, Judgment, the Wrath of God,
kneſs, Indigustion, Tribulation, Anguiſh: & 8 kinds of
bletſed men in the le ſſer world ; the Poor in ſpirit, the

Mercifyl, the Meek, the Mourners,they that hunger ang
F 3 11

74 The Rofie-Crutian infallible Axiomate.
thirſt afterrighteouſneſs, the Peace-makers, they which
are perſecuted for righteouſneſs ſake : 8 particular qua-
lities in the Elementary world ; the Meat of the Fire,
the Moiſtneſs of the Air, the Coldneſs of the Water, the
Dryneſs of the Earth, the Dryneſs of the Fire, the heat
of the Air, the Coldneſs of the Earth, the Moiſture of
the Water: And 8 rewards of the Bleſſed; Inheritance,
Incorruption, Power, Victory, the Viſion ef God,
Grace ,a Kingdom, Joy : and the name of God in the
— — world is written ſometimes with $ letters, Ele-
ha V adaath, ng) NW Jehovah Y edeath nyn
Nima nd theſe Queſtions are refolyed by 8.

The number 8 Teleſmatically engraved as others were
in an Onyx ſtone, they (ay rendereth a man powerſulin
good and evil, ſo that he ſhall be feared of all: and
whoſoever carxieth it, they give him the power of char-
ming Diſeaſe+, and he ſhall terrifie men by his looks
when he is angry : this makes alſo a man bold and for-
tunate in Warrs: by this number appears a Spirit like a
man riding upon a Lion, having in his 1ight hand a n.
ked ſword ; and by this number they preſerve Goods
from ſealing, and cauſe Thieves to bring again what
they have taken away ; this belpeth all diſeaſes in the
ſecrets and bowels.

AP.

T he Refic-Crucian infallible A xiomare. 75

—

CHAP. XI.

Of the ſigniſication of the Number yg ; how tharby 9, Julius
Cx tar called up Spirits, and did what he pleaſed : how
Galleron by 9 went inviſible,and bad the ſociety fa Fa-
miliar Spirit.

AN 9 is a powerful number in all things : Juli:

Ceſar made this number in Gold Teleſmatically in
the hour by Art, and carried with him in his march to
th: River Rubicon, which divides Gaia citerior from [taly,

& upon the Banks {ide his Army ſau appear at his com-

mand a Genius like a proper man, playing on 2 Reed

the ſtrangeneſs of his ations, aſwell as the pleaſantneſs
of his Mulick, had drawn ſeveral of the Shepberds un-
to him, as alſo many of the Souldiers ; amongſt whom
were ſome Trumpeters, which this Triten it I may ſo
call him) or Sea-god well obſeiving, nimbly ſnatches
away one of the trumpets out of their hands, leaps
forthwith into the River Md ſounding to Horſe, with
that ſtrength and violeſſce, that he ſeem'd to tend the
heavens, and made the air ting again with the mighty
forciblenefs of the blaſt, in this manner he paſſed over
to the other (ide ofthe river : whereupon Ceſar takin
the Omen, leavs off all ſurthet diſpute with himſelf
carries over his Army, enters /taly ſecuie of ſucceſs
trum the fo manifeſt tukens of the favour of the gods :
the nubert 9 is dedicated to the Muſes , by the help of
tie order of the celeſtial ſpheres, and divine ſpirits,

And there ate. Spheres,and according to theſe there
are 9. Muſer, viz. Caliope, V rania, Polymsia, Ter fichc«
re, Clio, Melpomene, Eratn, Enterpe, and Thalia, which
9. Muſcrindeed ate appropriatedto the g. Spheres, fo
that the lu ſt te ſembles the ſupreme Sphere , which they

F 3 cail

1 76 The RH Cruclan infallible A xioms te. |
call Primum Mobile; and ſo deſcending by degrees, c-
cording to the written order, unto the laſt, which reſem-
bles the Sphere of the Moon.

So the Name of GOD in the Original World, is

ſometimes written with 9. Letters, MURAL NN
Jehovah Saboath, 19 ly M7 ö Zin

V213 EDTYN EAOIM TIBOP, And there arc
in the Intelligible World, Quite of Angels, Sera.
phim, Chernbin, Thrones, Dominations , Powers, Virtus,
Principalitier, Arch - Angels, Angel, and angels Ruhig
the Heavens, At eiattron, Ophaniel , Zephkiel, Z adkiel,Ca-
meel, Raphael, Haniel, Michael, Gabriel. In the Celeſti-
al World Calliope is appropriate to the Primam Mobile,
V ranieto the ftarry Heaven, Polymnia to Seturr, Ter-
fechore to Jui, Clis to Mars, Melpomene to the Sus,
Preto to Nm., Euterpe to Mercary, Thalia to the Mun!
And they engrave 9g. upon a Sephir, Zmre'd, Carbenche,
Beril, Onix, Cbriſolite, laber, or Tapas: But properly
and moſt effeQtually to be reſolved of their Queſtions,
or foobtain their deres, they Teleſmeticatly in an hour
engrave it in Sardis, or Silver, and this will make a man
(they (ay) go invilible , as Galermm, Alexander's Bro-
ther- in- Law, ſometime did when he lay with his Bro.
thers Concubine as often as himſelf : This Number
obtaineth the Love of women.

And the 9. hour our Saviour breathed out his ſpirit;
and in 9. dayes the Ancients buryed their dead; and 9.
years Minos received Zaws from Iwpiter , as you may
read in my Beoke called, The Ide of the Law, And 9.
was moſt eſpecially taken notice of by Her, when
Laws were te be given, or anſwers were to be given, or
the ſword was like to rapes the A ſtrologers and CG eoman-
cers alſo obſerve the Number g. in the Ages of men, no
otherwiſe thenthey do of 7. which they call a Cee

rica

The Refie Crucian injalibls Aximate. 77
rical yeare , which are eminent for ſome remarkable
change. Yet ſometimes it ſignifies Impetfectneſſe, and
uncompleatneſſe, hecauſe it doth not attgin to the peiſe-
Sion of the Number 10. but is leſs by one, without
which it is deficient, as Auſlin interprets it of the 10.
Leapert, neither the longitude of 9. Cubitt of Og King
of Baſen, who is a Type of the Devil without a Myſte-
ry: Andthete are 9. ſenſes inward and outward to-
gether in Man, viz. Memery, Cogaiive, Imaginative,
Common-ſenſe, FHeoring, Steing, Smelling, Taſſing, Tou-
ching. And 9. Orders of Devils in Sheol, viz. Falſe
Spirits, Spirit. of Lying, V eſſe! of Iniquizy, Avengers of
Wickedneſſe, Tuglers, or Lyliant, Airy Pomers, Furies,
ſewing Miſchief, Sifters or Tryers, Tempters, Or Inſnaxers.

I aim at the Celeſlial Glory;
Below the Moon al"; Trenſuory.

The Number yg. the Number of the Planer, day of
the VVeek, Angel of the Day, and hour engrayen in
Gold, will they ſay ) bring down to you an Angel
like a King crowned, ſuting in a Chair, havipg a Reven
in his Bolom , and under his Feet a Globe ; he wears
Saffcon-coluured Clothes, and he (they report gives
virtue to the number, and makes the Beater of it invin-
cible and honourable, and helps to bring their buſineſs
ta a good end, and to drive away vain Dreams This
Number prevails againſt Feavers and the Plague, and
they made it in a Falenitzs-ſtone, or a Ruby : this Num-
ber cauſeth long life and health : By this Number Pla-
to ſo ordered hinuf that he cou'd by it cauſe Nature
to end his dayes at his Pleaſure, and by departing upon
the ſune 81.years after his Hirth, tofulfil of purpoſe g.
times 9. the mt perſet Number.

F 4 CHAP

53 The Rofie-Crucieninfelible Axiemaia.

—————————— —— ———

CHAP. XII.

Of the ſignification of the Number 10, how by this Num-
ber 10, Socratesin a Moenicory V iſion bada Swell in
his lap and of Plato's birth and education.

He Number ten is a Number of honour and pre-
5 and Pythagoras had hondur by it. And
Plato by this Num ber had the knowledge of the more
ſacred Myſteries of God, and the tate of the ſoul of
man in this world, and that other defer yed!y got to

himſelſ the the title of Divine, 5 M Maar «wv.

But as for Miracles, I know none hee did, though
ſomething highly miraculous happer ed, if that Fame
at Athens was true, that Spenſippus, Clezrchus , and
A naxilides report to have been, concerning his Bit),
which is that rifle his reputed Father, wi en he would
forcibly tave had to do with Peritione, thee being in-
deeq exceeding fair and beautiſul , fell thort of his pur-
poſe, and ſurceaſing from his attempt, that hee ſaw
Apo ina Vilion, and fo abſtain'd from medling with
Vic wiſe till the brought forth ker fon Ariſiccler, who
aſter was called Plato.

But that 18 far more credible which is reportedconcer-
rit2 the commending of himto his Tutor Socratet, u ho
the day before he came 5 dreamed that he had a yourg
Swan in his Lap, which putting ſorth apace of a ſud-
den ficw up into the Air, and ſung very ſweetly; where-
fore the ne xt day when Pla was brought to him byſhis
Father , Tu Day, 1 ip Tey 5 5 he preſently ſaid
this is the Bird, and ſo willingly received hin for his
Pupil.

But his acquaintance with the Rte. Crucian inſal ib e

HH x49

The Reſie- Crucian infa lible Axiomats. 79
Aximate, as it is more credible in it ſelf, fol have alſo
better proof: As Ariftebulus the Jew in cen
Alexandrina: Saint Ambroſe, Hermippu, ip J-
ſephus againſt Appin : And laſtly, Numenius the Pla-

oni t, who ingeniouſly confeſſes Ti Jap Ser IIAA 70

1 Mor c AL; What is Plaio, but Aoſes in
Greek , as [ have elſe-where in my Book, called, The
Idea of the Law alledged amongſt Law-givers, the
Number 10 is called, every Number, Compleat, ſigni-
ſy ing the fu'l ccurfe of liſe; for beyond that we can»,
not number witl in it felf , or explains them by it ſelf,
and its own by mul: i lying them.

Whereſore it is accounted to be of a maniſold Re-
ligion and Power , and is applied to the purging of
ſouls: Hence the Antients called Ceremenies Denary,
becauſe they that were to be cxpetted, nd to offer Sa-
crifices were to abſt. in from ſome certain things for ten
dayes,whence amongſt the Fx yprians it was the cuſte me
for | im that would ſacriſice to Jas (7.e.) } b, to faft 10
dayes before, which Afguleius teſtiſies of himſelf, ſay-
ing, it was commanded that I ſheu!d for the ſpace of
10 «(ayes teſtain al meat, and be ting.

There are 10 Santuine parts of Man , the Menftrue,
the Sperme ; the Plaſmatick ſpirit. the Maſſe , the Hu-
mours, the O:ganical body, the Vegi tariie part, the
Senſitive part; Reaſon, and the Minde: Theie are alſo
10 *1mp'e Integral parts conſtituting a man, the Bone,
the Cartilage, Nerve, Fibre, Ligament, Artery, Vain,
Membrain Fleſh, Skin. There are alſo 10 parts f
which a man conſiſts intrinſically, the Spirit, the Brain,
the Lungs, the Heart.the Liver,the Gall, the Spleen, the
Kiduies, the Tefticles,the Matrix.

Theie are 10 Curtains in the Temple, ten firings in
the Pfaltery, ten muſical inftrumenrs which with

Pſalms were ſung , the names whereof were V, on
which

* 1
4 4

ble Arien.

which theic Odes were ſang, Nablum the ſame 21
Organs AMizmor, on which the Pſalms , Sirs on which
the Centicler , Tebils on which Orations , Berach on
which Benedictions, Hale on which praiſes, /odais
on which thanks, Are on which the ſelicity or bliſs and
happineſs of any onc Hallelujah, on which the praiſes
of God only, and contemplations : there were alſo ten

figures of Plalms, 47 0.

And there were ten Singers, viz. Adam, Abraham,
Melchiſedech, Moſer, Aſeph, David, Solomon, and {three
ſons of Chere : And the Name of God in the original

world is written with ten Letters ,, Nax ON 5

EA (4 erf : there are 10 Commandements, and
the 10th day after the Aſcention of Christ, the Holy
Ghoſt came down ; there are 10 Names of God,

um E AM n lie ‚ RINMN love
Be 5 6 1DpnyR (a vice why 654
Nax Truru love acre) m2zoamnyn EH
Faß 205 11 Ca fla JN Aera MEAEK 6

And the Number to caſtin Gold was it in which
Jacob wreſiling with the Angel all night overcame, and
at the riſing of the Sun was blefied , and called by the
name of 7ſraci. By, and in this Number 121hus over-
came 31 Kings, and by 10 in a Carbuncle David over-
came Goliah, and the Philiftines ; and in 10 Daniel
eſcaped the danger of the Lions,

There are 10 Meſſengets that carry the fouls down
from God throngh the Heavens , pheres, Stars, ard
Planets to the bodies of nien, and theſe be their names,
ether, Flechmach, Rinah, Neſed, Geburih , liphereth,
Nexh, Iod, Fiend, hut; this Number is as ciccular
28 unity, becauſe being heaped together, returns into
2 unity from whence it had its beginning, and it is
the

The Refe- Orncien infallible Axiomate. 81
the end, and petſection of all Numbers , and the be-
ginning of 10's ,av the Number 10 flows into unity
back apain, fram whence it proceeded, ſo eveiy thing
that is owing, is returned hack to that from which it
had the beginning of its Flux, fo water returns to the
Seafrom whence it had its beginning, the body returns
to the carth from whence it was taken, time return to
eternity from whence it flowed, the ſpirit ſhall return to
God that gave it: And laſtly, every creature returnjto
nothing, trom whence it was created, neither i» it ſup-
ported but by the Word of God, in whom all things
are hid, |

By the Number to Polomider an Abbot of Afalego in
Spain, could rell almoſt at any diſtance how the affairs
ofthe world went, what conſultations er tranſactions
there were in all the Nations of Chriſtendome, from
whence he got to himſelf, the reputation of a very holy
man, anda Refe- Crucian, but other things Game to
paſs, no leſs ſtrange and miraculous, as that at the
celebrating of the holy Euchariſt , the Prieſt ſhould al-
wayes want one of his round Wafers which was ſecretly
conveyed to this Pricſtor Abbor, by the adminiſtration
of Angels, he receiving into his mouth eat it in the
view of the people, ro their great aſtoniſhment , and
high reverence of the Saint.

At the elcvation of the Hoſt Polomides being near at
hand, but yet a wall betwixt , that the wall was con-
ceivedto open, and to exhibite Polomides to the view
of them in the Chappel : And thus when he pleaſed
he would partake of the conſecrated bread, when this
Abhot came into the Chappel himſelf, upon ſome ſpe-
cial day, that he would ſet off the ſolemnity of the day
by ſome notable and conſpicuous Miracle;fer he would
ſometimes be lifted up above the ground three or four
Cubits bigh, other ſometimes bearipg the Image of

Chrig

11 The Rofie- Crucian tufallibæ A xiemate.
Chriſtin bis Armes weeping ſavourly, he would make
his hair to increaſe to the length and largeneſs that it
would come to his heels and cover him all over, and
the Image of Chriſt in his arms, which anon notwith-
ſtanding would it inke up again to itsuſual ſize: And
after this he called an Angel by 10 in Go d Teleſoa-
tical engraven, to ſhew the true Religion to him: And
the Angel bid him turn Proteſtant, in rhe beſt ſenſe of
the Church of Znglend,, and afterwards all his life he
preached , and was created Biſhop in England , and
preached to the Proteſtants in France , and known well
by the name of the Biſhop of Spelatte.

And all things with the Number 10, and by the
Number 10 make a round, taking their beginning
from God, and ending in him, God therefore the filt
unity, ot one thing, before he communicated hiuiſelſ to
inferigurs , diffuſed himſelf into the firſt of Numbers,
viz. the Number 3, then into the Number 10, as into
10 Ida, and meaſures of making all Numbers , and
all things, which th Hebrews call 10 Attributes and
blefſed fouls, viz Haloch, Hakeder, Ophinim, Aralim,
Haſmalilim, Seraphim, Melachim, Elahim, Ben Elohim,
Cherubim Iſiim and 10 Angels ruling Afetratten, 10+
phiel, E aphkicl, Zadkjel, C amael, Kae, Haviel, Ali-
thael, Gabriel, the foul of Meſtiah 10 Spirits, of the
World that rule the S pete: Keſchith hagalalim, Maſloth,
$abbathi, Zedeck , Aladim, Schemes , Noga, ( hechab,
Levanal, Flelem, Jeſodeih, 19 confecrated Animals,
vi a Dove, aLibard, a Dragon, an Eagle, 3 Horſe,
Lien, Man, Genitals, Ruil, a Lamb : Tacy count 10
Divine names, for which there cannot be a further
Number.

Hence a'l 10's haveſome divinething in them, and
in the Law are required of God as his own , t. gether
with the füſt fiuits as the original of thingy , and te-
dinnin;

% U EFF oc wu

The Refe- Cyudien infallible Axtomate. 7
inning of Numbers, and every 1oth is the end given to
my. is the beginning and end of all things: and 10
Orders of the damned in Hell, vi falſe gods, lying
ſpirits , William Lilly the King of Swedens [ugler, &c.
Vegels of Iniquity , Tempters or Enſnarers, Sifters
or Triers,Revengers of wickedneſs, Furies the Semina-
ries of Evil, Fery Powers, wicked fouls bearing Rule.

Al ſpirits were created pure at firſt,
But by their ſelf- will after were accurft.

The Number to, and the Letters and Numbers of
Angelr,&c. engraven in a Carbuncle, rendreth a man
free from diſeaſes, and maketh him live long, freſh
and beautiful, this helpeth all diſcaſes in the Kidnyet, it
cauſeth the party that beareth it to live ſecure from
Theeves , forno Theef can enter his houſe in the night,
nor have power to carry away a Sheep or Horſe, &c.
if once ſept in the ground, he (hall not come ont again
untill che party that owns the ground pleaſes : and this
Number you muſt charaRer or caſt in Copper, and lay
it under the gate in the earth, and in the ground on the
Eaſt ſide of the place you would have guard d, be it
Hoſile, Garden, or an Orchard, &c. And its (aid the
Angel that gives vettue to this appears like an old man
leaning on a ſtaffe, having in bis hand a Sword, and he
ſcems in black Cloaths.

3s

The Rofre-Crucien infallible Axiomate.

CHAP. XIIL

Of the ſgnification of the Number 11, how by i: we know the
bodies of Divels,and their natural conſtitution: : ; ιjẽ t
in Pherecydes Syrus 3 ON , , ,
CNN, — 9 „ names of Spirits Vaunting
field and deſolate places tf Theophilus Fulwood, who
had the continual Seuuy of 4 Guardian Genius: Of Plo-
tinus and Olympus.

Vit Theephiln: Fullw1nd the Roſie Crucian knew the

Demone Metallici, and Guardian Genii wo told him
het the bodyer of ſpirits weie cold; and indeed it ftands to
very good reaſon, that the bodies of ſpirits being nothi
bur coagulated aire ſhould be cold,us well as —
Water, which i: no & ice, & that it (ſhould be à more
keen & piercing cold, it conſiſtiog of more ſubtle par-
ticles hen — 2 — therefore more fit to inſi-
nuate & more accurately & ſtngingly to affect & touch
the neryel. Hence we may alſo diſcover the folly of the
Opigion that makes very eſſence of ſpirits tobe tire: for
how unfit that would be to coapulate the aire is plainy
at firſt, it would rather melt & difiulverthofe confiftencies
then conſtringe them & ſtee them in a manner hut ic is
rather — that the eſſence of ſyitis is a ſubſtance
ſpecifically diſtinct from all corporeaH matter hat ſo-
ever, but my intentis not to philoſophize coacerning the
nature of ſpirits.

Pheyecydes Syrus the Rofie Crucian & maſter of Pytha-
gorar, by 11 knew the Fauni and Sylvani, and Onocen-
1anr , Hasbro a 7 xefv>oy % lud
area. A kind of ſpirits that frequent the Woods, and
arc of a dark colour ; they cauſe a noiſe, and tic in
theſe deſolate places, and therefore he forewarns bis

S$Tholars to beware of their acquaintance,
] Ha

The Refie-Crucian infaRible Axiomate.

Fac loca capripedes Satyres, Nympbaſque tenere

F iniuumi fingunt, & Faunei ef eloguuntur ;

Querm Nonivage firepits Luddque jocanti

Alf] irwent vulgo laciturna filentia rumpi.

j e.

Theſe ate the places 1 the Nymphs do won
The Faun and Satyres with their cloven feet,
Wioſe noiſe, and ſhouts, and laughters loud do run
Thiough the ſtiff Air, and wake the ſilent night.

But the Jew: underſtand by 11, and T1919) a we Devil,
an enemy to women in Child-bed ; whence it iu, that
they write en the walls of the room where the woman
lyes in, 0 YνƷmn m N= Adam, Eve, out
of doors Lilith.

And our Saviour Chriſt in the r2.0f Mertb. 4g. verſ.
plainly allows of this Doctrine, that evil ſpirits have
their haunts in the Fields and Defarts, which Grein
obſerycs to be the opinion of the Jews, and that N
Demonet have their names for that reaſon, from 7
Agr. the field, ſor if it werefrem , it would bee
rather VNV then ONW thiddim then : bedhim as Gram-
matical Analogy requires.

The Number 11 as it exceeds the Number to, which
is the Number of the Commandements, fo it falls hort
of the Number 1x , which is of Grace and PerfeRion,
therfore it is called the Number of fins, and the penitene.
Hence in the Tabernacle there were commaonded to be
made 11 Coats of hair, which is the habit of choſe that
are penitent,and lament for their {1m3; whence thu Num-
ber hath no communion with Divine or Cœleſtial
things, nor any attraction tendirg to things above, nei-

ther

# 73

"Mate.

ther hath it any reward ; but yet ſometimes it receives a
gtracious fayour from God, as he which was called the
1t hour to the Vineyard of the Lord, received the
ſaine reward as thoſe who had born the burthen and
heat of the day ; and I never knew but one Spirit that
ever appeared by this Number that was a good Spirit;
and that Theophil/n: Fulword had , as he gathered from
certain Monitory Dreams and Viiions, although other
ſpirits would ſpeak to him, this would not, but yet hee
was forewarned as well of ſciera! dangers as vices;
that this ſpitit diſcovered himſelſ to him atrer he had for
a whole year together earnellly prayed to God to fend a
good Angel to him: And he engraved 11 in ſilvet for it,
to be the guide and governor of his iſe and ations that

he might not be deluded by evil Spitits

Adding alfo that before , aud after prayer he uſed to
ſpend to or three hours in meditation and reading
the Scriptures, diligently enquiting with himſalf, what

Religion among thoſe ſo many controverted in the

world, might be beſt ; beſceching God that he would

be pleaſed to direct him to it ; and that he did not al-
low of their way, that at al adventures pray to God
confirm them in that opinion they have already pre-

conceived, be itright or wrong. 6

That while he was thus bulze with himſelf, he light
upon the Book of Common-prayet, and in it he found

a paper in which was written Epiſcopacy Mcliorated, is

the beſt Religion ; and that a good and holy man can

offerup no greater, nor moie acceptable ſacrifice to

God, then the oblation of himfelf ;_ and unde: it was
D. G. Bithop of C. and therefore following the Biſhops
counſel that he offered his ſoul to God.

And that after that, amongſt many other Divine

Dreams and Viſions , he once in his ſleep — to
ear

|

The R. e- Crucian infallible ff xz0mntd. 7
hear the voice of God ſay ing to him, 7 will ſave th

u; I am he that before appeared unto thee : Aſter-

yards: that the Spirit evety day would knoek at the
door about three or four a clotk iu the morning though
he tilung and apeniug the door could fee no body, but
that the Spirit petliſted in this coutſe, and uule ſs he did
iſe, would thus touſe him ap.
This trouble and boiſtrouſneſs made him begin to
conceit that it was ſome evil Spitit that thut haunted
him 3 and therefore he daily prayed carneſtly to God,
that he would be pleaſed to fend agoodAngel to bim, &
often al ſo ſung Pſalas having moſt of them by heart.
Wherefore the Spirit afterward knocked more pent-
ly at the door, and one day diſcovered himfelf to him
making ,-which was the fiſt time that he was aſſured by
his ſenies chat it was he ; tor he often touched and ftir-
ed a drinking glaſs that ſtood iu his chamber, which
dd not a little amaze him-
Two dayes after when he entertained a Gentleman
& the Kings, a ſcietid of his at Supper with him, that
this friend of his was much abaſhed while he heard the
eit thump ing on the bench hard by him, and was
uc ken with tear; but he bid him be of gocd courage,
there was no hurt toward ; and the better to aflure him
dit, told him the who'e truth of the matter.
Where fore from that time faith Engenivs Theodatins
de did afficm that this Spirit was alwayes wich him,
ad by tome fentible ſien did ever advertiſe him of
mir gs; as by ſhiking his tight ear, if he did any things
mio it otherwiſe his left; if any hody came tocitcum-
ent him, that his tight ear was ſtuck, but his left ear if a
good manz& to d uod ends ac coſted himʒiſ he was about
Þ eat or drink any thing that would hurt him, or inten-
« or putpoſed to himſelf to do any thing that would
tove ill, that he was prebibited by a lign ; or if he de-
(3 layed

2 The Roſie Crucien nfabible Axiows
layed to follow his buſineſs, that he was quickged bya
ſigu given him.

When he began to praiſe God in Pſalmes, and to
declare his marve)lous Acts, that he was preſently rai-
ſed and ſtrengthened with a ſpititual, and ſupernatural

wer.

That hee daily begy'd of God that he would teach
him his Will, his Law, and his truth: And that he fet
one Cay apart in the Week for reading the Scripture
and Meditation, with ſinging of Pſalmes , and that he
did not tic out of his houſe all that day; but chat in
his ordinary converſation he was ſuſſiciently merry, and
of a theerſul minde, and he cited that. ſaying for it,
V id; facies fanflorum Lc; but in his converting with
others. if he had talked vainly or indifcreerly , or had
me dayes together neglected hu Devotions, that he vas
ſorthwith admonithed thereof by a Dream, that he was
allo admoniſhed to riſe hetimes in the morning , and
that ahout fourof the clock; a voice would come te
him while he was aſleep ſaying, Who gets up. fiſt to

ray

He told Emngenin! allo how he he was ofren admo-
niſhed to give Almes, and that the more charity heb e.
& wed , tae more profperous he was; and that on:
time when his enemies ſought after his life and knew
that he waz to go by water , that his Father ina Dream
brought ew» Hortesto him, the one a Whito, the other
a By, and that therefore he bid his ſervant hire him
two Horſes, and though he told him aothing of the
Coulours,, that yet he brought him a White one, and
Bay one.

At another time when he was in very great danger,
and was new y gone to bed, he faid that the Sparit
would not let him alone till he had raiſed him again,

wherefore he watched and prayed all that night, the
next

The Rifit- Crlttien infallible Aramis. %
nent day after he eſcaped the hands of his Perſecutors
in a wonderful manner ; which being done, in his next
flcep he heard a voice ſaying,now ſiug, Qui ſedet in La-
tibulo A liiſtimi.

; Eugenius asked him why he would not ſpeak to the
Spirit ſor the gaining of the more plain and familiar
converſe wich it; he anſweredi hat he once attempted
it, but the Spirit took away the Number and Plate, and
uc k it againſt the deor with that vehemency, as if he
bad intended to have beat it down, whereby he ga-
thered his diſlike of the matrer.

But though the Spirit would not talk with him as
thoſe that appear by other Numbers , yet he could
make uſe of his judgement in the reading of bis books,
and moderating his ſtudies; for if he took an ill book
into his hands, and fell a reading , the Spivit would
firike it, that he might lay it down, and would alſo fun-
dry times, be the books what they would , hinder him
from reading and writing overntuch , that his minde
might reſt , and ſilently meditate with it (elf : He ad-
ted alſo, that very often while he was awake , a fmall
ſabtil, 1narticulate ſound would come into his

"| Cars.

Eugeniu ſurther enquiring whether he ever ſee the
ſhape and form of the Spirit: he told him that while he
was awake, he never ſee any thing but a certain light
very bright and clear, and of a round compaſs and
fgure ; but that once being in great jeopardy of his
life, and having heartily prayed to God that he would
bee pleaſed to provide for his ſaſety j about break of
day amidſt his Numbrings aud wakings, he efpied on
bis bed where he lay, a young boy clad in a white Gar-
ment, tinctured ſomewhat with a touch of Purple, and
of a viſage admirable lovely and beautiful to be-
hold .

G 2 And

yo The Refe- Crucianinfallible Arent a.

And this was the firſt Roſie-Crucien that ever I ſaw;
being about ſeven year: ſince ; but being naw one of
the fraternity , I askedhim , of fouls aud ſpirits ? and
what Numbers were fittteſt co be engraven for a good
Genius, and how to g 'invilible , and in ſeveral
ſhapes.

Now ſayes he by ita gaodAngel will come, & make
you inviſible , and transform you into any of theſe
ſhapes, a Boy, a Lamb, a Dove, a beamof ught ; and
the ſpirit gets into the body, and by his ſubtil ſubſtance
more operative and ſeatching then any Kier, ot
lightning, melts che yeelding compages oſ the body to
ſuch a conſiſtency, and ſomuch of it as is fir for his
Purpoſe, and makes it pliable to your imagination;
and then, it is as calie for him to work it into what
ſhape he pleaſeth , as it is to work the Aite into ſuch
Fornis and Figures as ke ordigaiily doth not is it any
more difficulty for an Angel to molliſie what is bard,
then it is to harden hs is ſoſt and- fluid as the
Air.

And hg that hath this power,you canallo him that
which is leſſer viz. to inſtiuct men how they thall for 4
time forfake their bodies, and come in again: For can
it be a hard ching for him that can thus melt and take a
pee cet the particles of the body, to have the skill ard
power to loo ſen the ſoul, a ſubſtance really diſlinct from
the body, and ſepatable from it, which at laſt is done by
the caſte courſe of nature at the final dillolution of
ſoul and body which we call death; but no couiſe of
natuic eyer transforms the body of man into the (hape
of a Lamb, or a Dove; fo that this is moie hard and dit
ferent fou the courſe of nature then the other; I, Ac
{ay the greatneſs and incredulity of the Miracleis this,
that there ſhou!d be an actual ſeparation of ſc ul and
body, and yet no death: But this is not at n

The Rofie-Crucian infallible. A xiomatea 91

fwe conlider that death is properly a diſ-junftion of
the foul from the body, by reaſon of the bodies un-
keneſs any longer to entertain the ſoul, becauſe of diſ-
caſes or Age.

Bur this is not ſuch a Miracle , nor is the body pro-
perly dead, though the ſoul be out of it ; for the life of
the body is nothing elſe but hat firneſs to be actuated
by the ſoul, the conſei vation whereof is helped by Au-
mm Potabili, & number engraven in Gold, Silver, pretious
tones, and ia Mettals which keeps out the cold, keeps in
the heat and ſpirits, that the frame & temper of the body
may continue iu fit caſe to entertain the foul again at
her return, ſo the vital ſtem af the Carcaſe being not
ſpent ; the Priſtine operations of life are preſently again
kindled, as Torch new blown out, and yet reeking,
ſuddenly catches fire from the flame of another, thou
at ſome diſtance, the light gliding downe along the
ſmoak.

Wherefore the flying in the Aire, walking in Ladies
Chambers inviſibly, and bringing of Mefſages from
one lover to another, and diſcovering ſecrets, &c. it is
eahe, for they be then really out of . bodies : And
Socrates lying in the field for quietneſs-ſake, being far
from the noiſe of his brawling wife Zantippe fell
aſleep , and being aſlecp Euripides eſpied a thing come
out of mouth vety lovely to behold, of a whitiſh co-
lour, little, but made like a Ceoy running in the graſs,
and at laſt coming to a Brook fide , very buſily at-
tempting to get over, but not being able , one of the
unden by, made a bridge for it of his ſword , which
it paſſed over by, and came back again with the uſe of
the ſame paſſage, and then centred into Socrates his
mouth, and they ſaw it no more afterwards 5 when he
waked , he told how he dreamed de had gone over an

if} \ron bridge, and other particulars anſweradle te

@ 3 What

92 T he Ro Crucien infallible A xiomata.

What Turipides, and his fellows had ſeen afore-hand all
thoſe that tranform themſelves into Lambs, Doves;
Boyes or little Birds or Conies have their underſtanding
unchanged,they have the minde and memory of a man
as before.

Miſtake me not, all that can do theſe Miracles are
not Roſer-Crucians, for many of the Witches and
Sorcetets in Egypr, could do Miracles as well as Moſe;;
who was taughe of Gud as theſe Keſie-Crucians
ate

Te perſwade you to truth of Numbers when con-
fecrated to God with Divine names, and engraven
upon conſecrated ſubjets, and what wonderful ver-
tuct they have in natural and ſupernatural things : l
{hall amplifie and prove by Pletinus, for that which
Perphyrius records of him falls little ſhort of a Miracle,
by the Nnmber it as being able by it engraven, as his
enemy O/ympius confelled, to retort that Magick upon
him which he practiſed againſt F lotinus , and that ſe-
dately fitting amonęſt his friends , he would tell them;
Now Olympin: his body is gathered like a purſe, and
his limbs beat one againſt another. Thus your Witches,
Sorcerers, Conjurers M Inchanters are not able to
ſtand before R , Crucians , no more then Janne, and
Tambre; could ſtand before Afoſes , who did really thoſe
+ things, and abundance more then the other could imi-
tate by deluſions, ſle ight, & Legerdemaine, and this proves
the truth of Angeli, ſallac ies of Devils. The one makes a
happy man, the other makes him muſecable. The Devil
promiſed our S aviour more then be could perform,
but God performed more to Abraham then he pro-
miſed, and to come again to Pletinus : Although he
was not inſtructed by the Jewiſh Prieſts and Prophets,
yet he was a familiar friend of that hearty and devout
Chriſtian, and learned Father of the Church Origen,

vhoſe

The ft : COSTITC N 7 *
ghoſe Authotity, I would alſo caſt in together, with
the whole conſent ot the learned amongſt the Jews,
for there is nothing ſt. ange in the Metapbilical part of
this Axiomata , but what they had conſtantly affirmed
to be true , but the unmaunerly ſuperſtition of many it
ſuch, that they will give more heed to an accuſtomed
opinion, which they have either taken up of themſelves,
or hath been conveyed unto them, by the confidence of

$ [ſome private | heologer, then to the Autority of either

Fathers, Churches, workers of Miracles, or what is beſt
of all the moſt ſolid 1caſons that can be propounded :
which if they were capable of , they could not take any
offence at the admittance of the Roſte-Crucian Philo-
phy into this preſent Fxiomare, but the principles and
moſt notorious cenclul ns thereof, offeriig them-
ſelves fo freely , and unaffectedly, and fo aptly and
fctingly taking their place in the Text, that I know not
how with judgement and conſcience to keep them

out.

In an elected hour they engraved 11 in caft Mettah
and the Numbers, Angels and Legters belonging to it,
and this maketh the beater to gain in his TiaZ., cureth
all diſeaſes in che Legs, wiz, the Gout, &c. And to this
appears anAngel like a beautiful man, that makes a mai
proſperous by Sea.

G 4 CHAP:

94 Tht Rojie-Crucian infallible Axiomate.

N $ 3 1 ; ge

CHAP. XIV.

Of the figniſication of the Number 12% itt natural de
I2 Aayical Aphoriſme: of Tenbother : of Angels, and
their nature and dignity : what theſe Guardian Genii
may be, whethey one or wore of them be allotted to ce
every man, er to ſome none; what may be the reaſon of
Spirits ſo ſeldome appearing Arnd whether they have
any ſetled hape or no: What their manner is of «ſifting
men in either Devotion or Propheſie , or Love : whether
every mans ceinplexion is capable of the ſocinry of a guid
Genius : And lofily whether ir be lawful to proy to
God to ſend ſach a Genin « v» Angel 160 ene, or ne, that
in iht Number and N amt we de fire at the engraving.

He Number 12 is Divine, and that whereby the

Celcſtalls ate mealured : It is alſo the Numberof
the ſigns in the' Zedlack, over which there rei:
Anger as chief, jupported bythe Irrigation of the
great Name of God: In 12 years Jupi er perſe Ry his
courſe, and tlie, Mon rant thrizugh * n 18
dayes of thereabquts. Fbere sre 12 thief joymr in
mant body, in hands, elbows, ſhoulderi, thigbs, knees,
and vertebre of the feet : there is alſo a great power of
the Number 12 indivine Myſteries : God choſe 12 Fa-
milies, and ſet overthem 12 Princes: So many ſtones
were placed in the midſt of Jorden, and God com-
manded that ſo many Huld be ſet cn the breaſt of the
Prief 31148 Lions did heat the brazen Ses that So/omon
made there ate ſo many Tountains in Melim, and fo
many Spies ſent to the Land of Promiſe, and ſo many
Apoiles of Chriſt ſet over 12 Tribes, and 12000

people choſen, the Queen of Heaven crowned with
12

The Rofie- Cruc1n infallible Ara. 57
12 Stats, and 12 Angeli ate ſet over the 12 Gates of
the City, and 12 Stones of the Heavenly Jernſalem.
Ia inferior things many breeding thing proceed from
thi Number: So the Cony being m- ſt ſraicful bringt
forth 12 times in the year, and the Camel is ſo many
months in breeding, and the Peacock brings forth
12 Eg2s, and there are 12 months in the year as V irgit
logs

Flow the Sun doth rule with 12 Zodiach fignt
The Orb that's meaſur'd round abeut with Lines,
11 doth the Feavens ſlarry way make known,
And ſtrange Eclipſe of the Sun and Moon,
Arilurus aiſe, and the ſlars of rain;
The Seyen ſtays likewiſe and Charles his wain,
Why Winters Sun male toward the Weſt ſo faſt
What makes the night fo lang ere they by paſs.

And there are 12 Magical .Fphoriſme: in Plana
23 many Pythegeras hath, but this is the ſenſe of them
both.

T. Ante omnia punflum exiitit: not 74 A 1.
Mathematicum, ſed Diffufivum, Monat erat caplicite: i-
plicite Myrlai, Lux erat & nox, prineipium, & finis prin-
cipii, onmia, & nihil, eſſ, & now.

1. Cemmopii ſemonat in Diade : & per taialam eareſſ ee.
ſunt faciti Luminis ſecunds. x | 1
3. Friuli ignis ſimplev , increatus : M Aqnis in-

duit ſe regiments ignis wulriplicis, creau.
y 6 Reſpext: ad 'fontem ſnperiorem : rie dee |
dufto typo, iplic vault Agillavit. dat.

5 Creauit wnum units, & in tri« diſlinxit trinites
eſl > Quatengrivr, nexus c medium reduttionis.

6. Fx wviſibilibus m effulfit Aqua: Femina in-
ö 1 en-

*
LE

1- The Rept Cr ole AMxromate. +
cumbanti; ignis, ec fignrabilium gravida mater.
7. Poroſa erat inieriui, & corticibu; via cu ju venter
babuit Clos convelutes, & Aſtra indiſcreta.
$8 Separetar Anifex diviſit hanc in Amplas regin-
9: & 4 parenit, fan, d. (parnis Mater
9. Peri amm Maier filiss Lucidos , influentes in
tarram Chai.
10. Hi generant Mairem in noviſumis : cujus fons
caniat in Luce Miracu'o(o.
11. Sapiemiæ conda; 6/4 hic: eſto que poies, promus.
12. Pater eft toit Creati : @ tx Filio Create per
vivan Filii Analyſin, Pater generatur , habes ſummum
@eneraniis Circuli My flerium: Fill Filius eſt, qui Fill
Pater fuit.

The Name ef God among Angeli is ſpoke with 12

Letters Vp MVR IR Father, Son, Holy
Gheſt.

There are 12 Meſſengets that bear the Commands
of God, and have influence vn the g Orders of An-
gels, and quite of bleſſed Souls, and io Sepheroth into
the Angels oſ the Cœleſtial Spheres and Angel: of the
planets , and planets themiſe)ves , and into 4 Angd:
of the ſigns , whoſe names arc theſe , Malchididl, Af
modie/, Ambriel, Muriti, V erchiel, Hanaliel, Zuriel,
Barbiel, Adnarciel, Hanse Gabriel, Barchiel : and
theſe have influence upon the i Signs of the Zodiac,
Arrius, Taurws, Gemini , Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpius, Sagiutarmi, Capricorn, AquariunPiſces : and
from theſe Angeli after this Order doth man receive a
good Genius according to the Number of his Name,
enpraven in the Metal, or in one of theſe 12 Stones, a
Sardonius, 2 Carneol, a Topaz, a Calcedony, Jasper, Em-
ral, the gi, an Ancehiſt, the Hyacynih, a Cbriſe-

fhrafas,a Chriſtal,a Sapbir.
a 5 and

*

The Rog. Crulan infalible ANxiomare. * 97
And there are 12 Tiibes,12 Prophets, 12 poſtles,
1: Months, 12 Plants, Sang-wpright, vervain, Bending»
vervain, Crmbry, Lailier-ſtal, Calamynt, Scorpion-greſiy
Mug wort, Pimpernel-dock, Dregon-wort , Atiſtolechy *
and 12 principal members, the Flead , the Veck, the
Arms, ile Breaſt, the Heart, the Belly, the Kidneytoy
Striiali the Flame, Knees, Legi Feet: By the Number
12 Spirits appear that reſolve all manner of Queſtions,
as [anboihax, Adams Tutor ſaith , and you may finde
it recorded in the Indian Beoks , written by ſag un
too years before Adam : Now they ſay in old time
the Month's were called and reckoned for years, but
this leave to more curious pens and paſs on to my de-
lign: And iſ theſe things practiſed be found true, and
anſwer the expeRation of the Reader, let him then ſay
faithfully his thoughts of Art, neither ſcandalizng,
nor (murtting with the ignorant title of a Conjurer, 40
one that hath learned Oxford Tricks, as the vulparly
word it; forl am a ſetvant of God, and Secretary of
Nature : And thus I. ſearch out the reaſon of
things.

Now it cannot but amuſe a mans minde to think
whar theſe Officions ſpirits ihould be, that fe willingly
by Numbers ſometimes offer themſelves , to conforje -
ate with a man, whether they may be Angels uncapable *
of incorporation into humane bodies, which vulgarly
is conceived : or whether the fouls of the deceaſed,
they having more affinity, with mortality and humane.
frailty then the other , and ſo more ſenſib e of our ne-
ceſſitie: and 19firmities , having once felt them eve,
and ſeperate ul are in a condition not unlike the
Angelis themſely*s

But there are Angels in Heaven that are ſet over man
as Guardians, a their names you finde by thele Ari.
mate jn the Numbers and Letters as thete willingly

come

"Ss

58 The Refit-Crucian infallible Aximmata.
come to us. Now we are to enquire, whether every man
hath his Guardian Genn or no: that Witches have
many, ſuch as they are, their owa confeſſions teſtiſie:
The Pythagorians were of opinion, that every man
has 2 Genii, 2 good one, and bad one, which Aahrmet
hath taken into his Religion, adding alſo , that they
fit on mens ſhoulders with table-books in their hands ,
and that the one writes down ali the govd, and the
other all the evil a man doth : Bur ſuch expreſſions as
theſe I took upon as Symbolical rather then Natural.
And I think it more realonable that a man changing
theframe of his minde , changes his Genizs withall, or
rather unleſs a man be very ſiucete and ſingle-hearted,
that he is left to common providence, as well as if he
be not deſperatly wicked, or deplorab'y milerable,
ſcarce any particular evil ſpirit iaterpoſcs or offers
himſelſ a - perpetual aſſiſtant in bis affaircs and for-
tunes. 1
But extream poverty, u kſome old age, want of
friends, the contempt, injury, and hard- heute dne is of
evil neighbours working upon a ſoul low ſunł into the
body, and wholly devoid of divine life , doth ſome-
times kindle ſo ſharp , ſo cager , and fo picicing a de-
{ite of ſatiifaction and revenge, thatthe,threeks of men
vehile they are a murthering, the howling of a Wolf in
the feld in the night, or the ſqueaking and roaring of
tortured beaſts , do not fo certainly call to them thoſe
of their own kinde , as this powerful Magick of pen-
five and complaining foul in the bitterneſs of its af-
flictiou, attract the aid of theſe our officious ſpirits,
ſo chat it ia moſt probable that they that ate the for-
wardeſt to hang Witches, ate the ſuſt that made them,
and have no more goodneſo, nor true piety, then theſe
they ſo willingly proſecute , but are as wicked as they,
though with better Juck or nie dilcretion , offending

NG
w

ft © wa

ming * ener

— wW - Yw

The Roſie. Crucian infallible Alea. 7
no ſurther then the Law will permit them, and there ·
fore they ſeverely ſtatve the poor helpleſs man, though
with a great deal of clamour of Juſtice, they will re-
venge th death of theic Hog or Cow. |

And now it were worth our diſquiſuion, why ſpiries
ſo ſeldome now a dayes appear, eſpecially thoſe that
are good; whether it be not the ic kedne ſi oſ the pre-
ſent Age, as I have already hinted, or the general pte -
judice men have, againk all ſpicits that appear, that
they mult be ſtte ght wayes Devills, or the frailty of
humane nature, that is not uſually able to beat the ap-
pearance of ſpitits, no more then other Animals are 3
for into what Agonics Horſes and Dogs are caſt upon
their approach, is in every ones nfouth , and is a good
circumſtance to diſtinguich a real Apparitionfrom our
ounimaginations.

Or ly, whether it be not the condition of ſpirits
themſelyes, who, it may he, withoapt {ome violence
done to their own nature cannot become viſible , it
being happily astroubleſome a thing to them to keep
themſe'ves in one ſteady viſible conſiſtency in the
Aice , as it is for men that dive to hold theic breath in
the water, |

Now although, $pirits appear upon Numbers and
Name engteven upph Mettalls, Minerals, or precious
Stones, it may deſerve our ſearch, whether ſpirits have
any letled form or ape : Angels arc commonly pictu-
red like good ph mp boys, uhich is no wonder the bold-
neſs of the ſame Artiit , not ticking to picture God Al-
mighty in the thape of an old man In both as it pleaſes
the Pawnter. :

But this Rory ſeem rather to favour their opinion,
that ſay that Angels, and ſeperate ſou'shave no ſettled |
ſotm, but what they pleaſe to give themſelves upon
oceaſion by the power of their own fancy. Ficinus as [

| re-

-
*

do The Roſie. Opentian infallible meets.

remember 5 ſomewhere calls them Aten Starr. And
yd yon Genii ſeem to me to be as the benigne eyes of
God tunning to and fro in the world, with love and
pity beholding the innocent endeavours of harmleſs
and ſingle-heatted men, ever ready to de them good,
and to help them.
What I ſpeak here of the condition of the foul out
ofthe body, I think jseafily-applicable to other Genii
or Spirits ; and this I conceive of ſeperate fouls and
ſpirits.

| ty &

Like to a light faf lock'd in Lanthern dark ,

Whereby by night ur wary ſtep: me guide

In ſlabby ſtreets, and dirty channels mark

Some weaker rayer from the black top do glide,

And fluiher fireems prrbaps throwgh ih horny fide;

« Yi But we're paſt the peril of the way,

Arriv'd at home, and laid that caſe aſide,
The naked light how clearly doth it roy,
And ſpreaditi jby ful bear: bright as Summer! day!
Even ſo the ſout in this contrafied tate
Conſin d to theſe firait Infttuments of ſenſe

More du and narrowly do operate 5
Alt this hole heart, the fight muſt ray frem thence,

\ , Here taſtes, ihert ſine li, hat when he's gon from hence
Andround about has perfef? cognoſcence;
What ere in her Horizon doth appear
She is one orb of ſenſe, all eye, all ATiery tar.

Now yeu know by the vertue of Names and Numbers

how ſpirits appear; let us inquire how theſe good Gen
become ſerviceable to men, for tithet heighrning their
Devotions, or inabling then to Propheſie, &c. wherher

je can be by any other way then by deſcending into
their bodies, and polleſſing the heart and brain : For

the

The Refie- Crucian ina

the Zichires, who aſſected the gift of Prophe ſie by ſa-
miliarity with evil ſpirits, did utterly obliterate in their
ſouls the cr α poars the principles of good-
neſs and honeſty ( you may ſee in Peſelur, 89
iy % ( / «160107 } that the evil tpirits might come
into their bodies, whom theſe ſparksot vertue, as they
ſaid would drive away but thoſe being extinguiſher,
they could come in and poſſeſi them, aud inable them
to Propheſie. |

And that the Imps 'of Witches do ſometimes enter
their owne bodies, as well as theirs to whom they
ſend them, is plain in the ſtory of Witches in Triſ-
mei. ; v

It: is alſo the opinion of R. Lully that theſe ſpirits
get into the yains and Arteries bock of men und
beaſts, | work

Wherefore concering the holy Ri · Cracians it may
be conceived reaſonible that the good Genii inſunuare
themſelves into their very bodies, as well as the bad ima
the bodies of the wicked ; and that reſiding in the
brain, and figuring of it by this or that object, as wee
our ſelve ſigure it when wee think the externall ſenſes
being laid aſleep , thoſe ſigutatiom would ealily be re.
preſented tothe g mon ſcuſe; and that memory in
the RA Cruciar E. T. recovering them when he wn ·

Jked, they ccul not but ſeem to bim as other
dreams did, (zving that they were better, they ever
ſignifying ſomething of importance unto him.

But the ie raptures of Devotion by day , might by the
ſpirits kindling a purer kinde of love flame in his heart
as well as by forttfying and raiſing his imagination, and
how far a man ſhall be carried beyond himſelf by this
redoubled foul in him none I think, can well con-
ceive unleſs they had the experience of it. 1

And

TY

| REC" HCI4N (nfallible A xumntetd. *

And if this be their manner of communion it may be
enqured by this Number , whether all men be capable
of conſociation with theſe good Genii. Carden ſome-
where intimates that their approaches are deprehen-
hle by certam ſweet ſmells, where the minde deth
not ſtink with pride and hyocritie , have ſonic natural
advantage for che gaining their ſociety. Bur if there
be any peculiaz.complexion or natural condition re-
required, it uill prove leſs hopeſul for every one to
obtain tbeir acquaintance;yet Regeneration come to its
due pitch? though it cannot be without much pain
and anguiſb, may well rectiſie all uncleannels oi nature;
ſo chat no ſingular good and ſincere man can reafon-
ably deſpair of their familiarity. For he that is ſo
highly in favolr with the King, it is no wonder he is
taken notice of by his Courtiers.

Some queſtion theſe Numbers , and the vertues I at-
tibureto them when engraver , whether God aſſiſts us
or.not, and whether it be lawful topray to God for
fuch a good Genius or Angel : But the examples of
Enoch, Moſes, Zorbun, Elijah, [eremiah, Exckiel, Daniel,
St. ohm Raptiſt, and St. ohn the Divine, with many
others , as Hettor of Troy, Alexander, Iulius Cſar,
Jude: Aa, ur, King Atthar of England, Charle-
maine Or Charles the Great, Hum of Burdeux , Geodfry
of Anion, and thouſands more I could name, ſeenis a
ſuſficient warrant.

Bur I conceive faith and delice ought to be full fail
to make ſuch voyages proſperous,and our end, and pur-
pole pure and {intere ; but if pride, :conceitednefs, or
alteQution of ſe me peculiar 'priviledge above other
mortalls, fpur a nan up to ſo bold an enterptize, his
de votions will no more move either God, or the good
Genii, then the whining voice of a counterfeit, will
flir the affection of the diſcreetly charitable. Nay

this

5 we By WO RW 2 v2» FHF wa” 6 TT ..ILTH4jH. ww. Oy

The Refit-Cruciah infallible Axiomats. 103

this high preſumption may invite ſome reall friends to
put a worſe je upon him then was put upen that
cattered Rogue Guzman by thoſe Mock. ſpirits, for his
ſo impudently pretending kindred , and fo boldly in-
truding himſelf into the knowledge and acquaintance
of the Gentry and Nobility of Genoe.

But the ſafeſt magick is the ſincere conſectating a
mans ſoul to God, and the aſpiring to nothing but fo
profound a pitch of humility, as not to be — to
our ſelves of being at all touched with the praiſe and
applauſe of men, and to ſuch a free and univerſal ſenſe
of charity, as to be delighted with the welfare of ano-
ther a» much as ourown, they that ſolely have their
eyes upon theſe, by numbers and Names will finde
coming in what ever their heart can deſire ; but they
that put forth their hand to catch at high things as they
fancy , and neglect theſe, prove at laſt but a plague to
themſelves, and a laughing ſtock to the world.

In a convenient ſeaſon they engraved the Number
11 ina white and clear tone , with the Letters of the
name of the party, and the Genius, Angel, and Pla-
net, &c. And this encreafeth ſelicity, honour, and con-
ferreth henevolence and proſperity, and freeth from
enemics ; and this Number cureth all diſeaſes in the
feet: to this they ſay appears a Genius,whoſe figure is a
man, having the head " a Lion, ora Ram, Eagles
ſeet , and he ſeems to be in Blew; and a flame of lighe
attends him.

104 The Ro dan infallible Ariomata

C HAP. XV.

Of what Angels appear by the vtrtue and power of
Number: above 12.

8 rg for the Agreement of Married Couples, and for
the diſſolving of the Charmes againſt Copulation,
they added the Numbers of their Names together, and
divided them by 9, and the remainder was engraven
with 14 upon a plate of i and Zedich , and . a
Genii would appear like a man and woman in white
imbracing.

Now the Numbers that are above 12, you fee are en-
dowed with many and various eſſecti, and vertues wher-
of you muſt underſtand by their originals and parts , az
they are made of a various gathering together of
{umple Numbers, or maner of multiplication ; ſome-
times as their ſignifications ariſe from the leſſening,
or exceeding of another going afore, eſpecially more
perfect, ſo they contain of themſelves the ſigns of
certain Divine Myſteries, fo you ſee the third Number
above 10 ſhews the myſterie of Chrifts appearing to
the Gentiles, for the 14 day after his, Birth a Star
was a guide tothe Magicians,

The 14 day doth typifie Chriſt, who the 14 day
of the firſt Month was ſacrificed for us: upon which
day the Children of 1ſrac/ were commanded by the
Lord to celebrate the Paſsover. 14 Matthew deth fo
carefully obſerve , that he paſſed over ſome Genera-
tions, that he might every where obſerve this Number
in the Generations of Chriſt. To cure the lack , they
made this Number in gold, and then an Angel would
appear like the head of a Lion, and they would
make a perfume of Amber. The

The Refie-Crucien infallibl mn. 10;

The 15 Number is token of ſpiritual Aſcentions ,
therefore the Song of Degrees is applyed to that in
ſiſteen Pſalms. And 15 years were added to the life of
Negelliah, and the x5 day ofthe 5 Month was obſeryed
and kept holy : This Number they engraved with the
mans name in Virgin Wax and Maſtick, and then
would appear a King crowned before whom they
would burn Zignwn Flo, and he would reconcile
him with his King whom he offended.

The Number 16 the Pythagerian:, Porphirians and
Plantiniſts call the Number of Felicity. It alſo com-
prehends all the Prophets of the Old Teſtament, and
the Apoſtles and Evangelifts of the New. They engra-
ved this in a filver Ring, whoſe table was ſquare, and
then the Genius would appear in the ſhape of a woman
well cloathed, ſitting in a chair, to whom they would
burn Muck, Camphire and Calamur Aromaticas. They
afficmed that ſhe giveth happy ſortune, and every good
thing.

The Number 17 is called of RL a Number of
victory: by it engraven with the Letters and Numbers
of his Name, added together in red Wax, appeared a
Genius ike a Souldier ſitting on an horſe , holding a
Piflol cock't in his right hand ready to fire, and they
burnt red Earth and 5 torax beforc him : And this en
abled Iulius Ceſar to come into this Kingdome of
England

By the Number 18 7ſrae! ſerved Eglen King of
Moab : your name and number engraven in Iron t
lay will preſerve you _— Theeves and Robbe ti, for
a Genius in the form of an Ape will attend.

By the Number 19 cngraven in — appeared a
woman holding her hands upon her face, and they

burne liquid Srorax betore ic, that might ſacilitate birth,
; and provoke tne Menſtrues.

H » By

108 ofte-C infellible Axiomate.

By the Number 20 Jacob ſerved and 1ſrael was fold;
and among creatures that have many feer,there is none
that have ahove 20 feet, and they ſay that this number
engraver in Tyn, with the Number of the Hunters name,
will bring you a Genins like Sagittary, half a man and
half a horſe, and beſore this they burat a Wolſes head;
and it made them proſperous in hunting.

By 21 wich the Number of the Kings name, for the
deſtruction of his enemies, and to overcome King-
domes, they engraved it in gold, and finely wrought it,
and then appeared a Genius in the image of a man,
with a double countenance before and behinde , and
before this they burnt briniſtone and Jet.

22 Signiſies the fulneſs of wiſdome , and fo many
are the Characters of the Hebrew Letters, and ſo many
books doth the Old Teſtament contain:by this Number
engraven in ſilver, a little Virgin appears, aud is report-
ed to increaſe the light of the eyes, ro afſemble Spirits,
to raiſe Winds, to reveal ſecret and hidden things.

23 Engraven with the mans name, and the Numbers
of it, ina Sephyr, maketh appear the Genius of a man
willing to make himſelf merry with Mufical inftru-
ments, and he maketh a man honoured” before Kings
and Princes, & helpeth the pain of the teeth, he beſtow-
eth the favour of men and Aireal ſplrits.

Now I ſhall ſay nothing of 24, becauſe it ii evil, and
giveth a Genius of a wicked man, whoſe name was
Cain, and the name of any Spirit you may ſinde by the
number & name of the man,for what remains of Addi-
tion& Diviſion tells you the number & the name of the
Spirits, Ihave told you of all mens names, what An-
gels rule them as you heard before ; theſe numbers are

aid to be good and proſpetous, vix. 14243445739 113138
14,very good 16,17,19,30,2223,10,26,27.indifferegt
good, 5,6,8,12,15,18,21, very evil, 24z25128,29,30-

—

wouſt of all, CHAT.

Fd

15

1

The Refe- Crucian infallible oma 107

— ———

CHAP. XVI.

of Kings, Lords, or other people that fight, er go toLam
one againſt another, which ball have the vittary.

Ne” we have ſhewed you the power, vertue, and
lignification of Numbers , we (hall next teack you
the uſe of them: And firſt you mult kaow the proper
names of them which would fight orgo to Law , one
againſt the other: and according to the Letters and
Numbers in the ſecond Chapter of this book : Joyn
unto each letter of the ſaid names the Number that is
attributed to it, and ſumme the (aid Numbers m__—
each man by himſelf, and divide the ſumme of each
mans name by 9, and jndge by thele Rules following ,
and ifit fortune that in dividing the whole by g there
remain nothing ; then the laſt Number of 3, muſt be it
you muſt add ro his name.

And if the names be both one, the Numbers will be
the ſame as ohn againſt John, and you muſt remember
to write the names in the Nominative caſe ſingu-
lar.

And if t to i remain then in Combate , he that is of
the leſſet Rature ſhall overcome the other, becauſe the
leſſet loves Clamours, Seditions, Rebellion, Deceits,
Strife Debate, and is Captain of an ill company , that
rive to over-run and kill men, and by that means is
ſeared , ſome ſay the younger ſhall overcome the elder,
by' I obſerve not that rule : the greater is a mighty
man, ſtrong and cruel, proud, ll iven to fight , but
yet he walk be hurt in the head, and the leſſet thall have

the choice of weapon, and overcome the other, in Law
the lefler (hall obtain the luit.

3 1 to

OS The N. Crucian infallible Axiomate.

2 to 2 , the greater ſhall have the choice of weapon,
and ſhall have the victory with 'ong weapon, becauſe
he is noble and handſome , and of good reputation,and
loves good company: The leſſer is a man of good na-
ture and well beloved, but yet he loves to kiſs ina
corner , and therefore he ſhall be hurt in the face; and
on the arm: In Law the greater ſhall obtain this ſuit, and
this trouble it, or will be about women.

3 againſt 3, here the lefſer ſhall chuſe and overcome
with ſhort weapon , becauſe he is Princely , and full of
ſpirit , but the gteater is a poor ſouldier, that hath no-
thing but his ſword, hee hath been hurt in the
arm , and is ſervant to them that have likewiſe been
hurt, and have loſt ſome of their limbs , and ſhall now
be hurt in the ſtomach; In Law the leſſer being witty
ſhall obtain his ſuit.

4 to 4, now the greater ſhall have the choice of wea-
pons, and (hall have the victory with long weapon; he
is lofty in his deeds, and takes pleaſure in Arms, being
very handſome and amiable of complexion , full
of words, contentious : In Law ſuit the greater ſhall
obtain the inheritance of his father or mother, or the
goods of the other that is in controyerhe with him, is
one of wiſdome, beauty and policy, and well-beloved,
yet by deceit and treaſon would he beguile his friends,
but he fajls.

q to 5, then the leſſet ſtature ſhall chuſe the weapon,
2nd overcome with ſhort weapon, yet the party is luſt-
leſs, and weak in Generation, however honeſt, and
therefore the greater ſhall be hurt on the fide , and on
the head, and ſhall ſurely dye, becauſe he loves ut juſt
quarrelling in the Law, the Jefſer ſhall in two Temes
obtain his ſuit.

6 to 6, again the taller ſhall overcome, but the lower
ſhall chuſe his weapon, the other is an ingenious me

1

„ — . 9 »

«Ss _ «a rr err

full and active of body, a lover of good cloaths,Guas,
Crol-bowi, Hotſes and Harneſs.

7 toy and again the leſſer hall yanquiſh with the
choice of weapon which is (hort, (he is a great Lady,
angry, anda fighter, and ſeeketh nothing bur ſtrife and

uarrels, a favourer of Hector and men of war for het
| x, and to be maintained by them in her con-
troverlies, and the greater ſllall be ſhot in the arm, and
hurt in the head and ftomach.

; to 8,the greater ſhall overcome with long weapon,
and the lefler (hall have the choice of weapon, the
greater is a very fauning deceirful Knave , full faced
and bodied, of a brown hair, much given to Witchcraft,
Charms, and Inchantments a great imbracer of wo-
men, and therefore ſhall hurt the lefler in the belly, ſide,
and knee: In Law the greater ſhall obtain his ſuit; and
there i+ like to be murther , for the leſſet is a good man
of countenance aud condition, and loves good cloaths,
but high ſpirited , and fo there is like to be blows given,
with moreloſs to him that ſhall win the ſuit then it is
worth,

9 to g, here the lefler ſhall have the choice of wea-
pun, and beat the other with ſhort weapon; he is a man
very noble in his aftions, aimes, and high things, with a
little pride, the other is one hath great power to do evill,
applying himſelſ unto nothing but revenge, to murther
and ſlaughter, and to rob and deceive : A phanatick
Anabaptiſt in the ſear of God will cut your throat , he
ſhall be for all his cunning hurt on the knee, and on
the (ide : In ſuit the le fer thall obtain without trouble,
and they go to Law for hetitages, or womens apparel
ſound , the lefler (hall be content to take part rather
then trouble.

to 2,the 2 (hal have the choice of weapon,and over-
come 1 with hort weapon, and he ſhall be hurt in the

H 4 head

head for all his gallantry , and dye thereof. In Law
1 ſhall win, and have more favour in his ſuit then he
looks for,and this ſuit is brought for Gowns, Garments,
or womens many.

to 3, 1 is a man will chuſe the long weapon and
beat the other, 3 ſhall be hurt on the arm, and on the

ſtomach: In Law 1 ſhall obtain his ſuit, the declaration

15 upon bond or debts.

I t04, here 4 ſhall chuſe the field and day of battel,
and overcome his Enemy with long Weapon;and 1 thal
be hurt at the heart : In Law 4 ſhall by deceit obtain his
Suit, which is about Succeſſion or Inheritance.

1 againſt5 : The firſt ſhall chaſe the field and day of
battel, and overcome 5 with ſhort weapon: In Law 1.
ſhall obtain his ſuit, which is ſome giſt of 2 Lord or
Knight.

1 to 6, here 6 ſhall beat 1, and hurt him in the belly
and head with a long Weapon, and impriſon: And in
law 6. ſhall obtain bis tuit, which is brought about with
money or merchandizable Wares ; and at laſt they ſhall
be friends.

1 to 7 in this buſineſs, 1 ſhall beat 7 with a ſhort Wea-
pon, and hurt him on the fide, although he had the
choice: In law t ſhall obtain his ſuir, about Women, or
Marriage Goods, and the ſuit ſhall be long.

1 againſt 8, here 1 thall be hurt on the (ade, and in
the Genitories with long weapon, Becauſe he is poore
and malicious: He will be long angry, he is hurt or ble-
miſhed in his face, one of his eyes is out, one of his
Members is cut away, and he is an old man: And 8 alſo
is poor, perplexed, proud and ſortowſul, having one of
her members cut away in law: 8 ſhall obtain his ſuit,
which is about Goods and Houſhold- ſtuſſe, and ſuch
things as are unmovablc, as Houſes and the Appurte-

nances, Cc.

1 f@

Xi 1 »”

.

*

Tl Se- ien nh i N.

1 tog: 1 ſhall have the choice of weapon, and beat
9, and hurt him on the fide : In law 1 ſhall winne, and
the ſuit is about honor, preferment , or ſome prehemi-
nence.

1 to 3, here ſhall be beat with ſhort weapon, and z
ſhall be hurt on the Arm: In law; ſhall obtain his ſuit
by the help of the Parſon of the Pariſh, becauſe ĩt is a-
mongſt Kindred about Heritages.

2 t04: Now 2 ſhall have the better in fighting, and
hurt 4 on the Stomack, and on the Arm: in law 2 ſhall
win by the ſubtilty of his Attorney.

1 againſt 5, here 5 ſhall in fighting beat s, and
hurt him in the flagk and breaſt; in law 5 (hal obtain the *
ſuic, which is about women, and womens clothes.

2 to 6: Here 2 ſhall overcome and beat 6 with l
weapon, and hurt him in the body, and on hit moul-
ders : In law 2 ſhall obtain his ſuit without any great
trouble: 2 isa man delighting in ſtrife and contention,
and unjuſtly he vraftiſeth , to take away the Goods of
others: 6 is a fine fellow, well made, andof good
countenance, proud, and therefore they will agree, and
the ſuit is about Merchandize, or money lent; for it is
better pleaſe a Knave, then an honeſt man.

1 to 7: Now 7 will beat and hurt 2 on the fide, al-
though 2 (hall have the choice of weapon, yet he ſhall be
overcome. In law 7 ſhall obtain his ſuit by delayes : 2
keeps company with MYttial men, ot with little men that
have their eyes ſunk in their heads, anda ſmall Beard

ready to do a miſchief, wherefore 7 wil be eaſily con-
tent to be quiet.

2 to 8: Here 2 (hall have the choice of weapon, and
beat $, and hurt him on the ſtones and bottom of his
belly In law » ſhall obtain his fait, and he is a man ve-
ry ſad and penſive, puniſhing his body by an extreme

melanchollineſs, and he loves to dig in the earth _—_

God Treafure. And therefore 2 ſhall be affited by men
of ſmall ſtature, counterſeir, and as it were monmtrous:
8 isa mag very happy, and taketh nothing in band, but
it ſhall turn to his praiſe; but here it happeneth 8 ſhall
have good right, but that the ſubtilty of 2 i» of ſuch
force, that 8 ſhallloſe; and this ſuit is for movable

2 to: Now 9 ſhall beat and hurt 2 at the heart
with hore weapon: In law g ſhall obtain bis ſuit, which
u about gifts or goods of the dead.

3 te 4: By ſhort weapon 4 ſhall beat 3, and hurt
him in the head and arms: In law 4 ſhall obtain his
ſuit, which is about his Fathers goods, and his Kinsſelk
would beguile him.

3 tog: By ſhort —＋ $ ſhall hurt 5 on the (ide
er ſhoulder, at laſt friends. In law z (hall obtain bis ſuit,
and after they (hall be friends.

3 to 6: With long weapon 6 ſhall hurt; in the bel.
Iy: Ia law 6 Gall obtain bis (uit, which is for Merchan-
dize.

g to 7: Here ſhall beat 7, and hurt him in the leg
and arm: Ia law the ſuit ſhall be long, yet at laſt obtai-
ned by 3.

3 againſt 1: By long Weapon; ſhall be hurt on the
body and entrals by $8 In law 8 (hall obtain his ſuit
; which is about the Apparel, Douty, or things of wo-

men. 8
3 to 9 : Now with ſhort weapons ſhall hurt g in the
| head, whereof he ſhall dye: In law z ſhall obtain bis
uit by the help of ſome Lords of the King's Court.

4 toy: Here ſhall beat 4 and kill him: In law 5
(hall obtain his ſuit, becauſe he is an honeſt man in heart,
and the ſuit is about goods given by the Prince,

4 tos: with long weapon 6 (hall hurt 4 in the hody:
In law 4 ſhall — ſuu, which is for Money or Mer-

handize. _ 4107»

The 2 147 , a
4to 7; Now 7 will beat 4 with ſhort weapon, and
hurt him onthe knee and face: In law 7. ſhall obtain
his ſuir.

4 to — with ſhort weapon 24 ſhall hurt $ in the break
and arms : In law 4Ghall obtain hi: ſuit.

4 to g:Here 9 ſhall beat 4,and hurt bim in the fide 2
Andinlaw 9 ſhall obtain his ſuit.

5 to 6: By long weapon 6 ſhall hurt 5 on the head)
and face: In law 6 ſhall obtain his ſuit, which is for mo-
ney lent.

5 to 7: Here 5 ſhall kill 7: In law 5 ſhall win hi
Fathers Inheritance.

5 to 8: with long weapon 5 ſhall be hurt in the fide]
and in the hands: Is law 8 ſhall obtain his ſuit. 4

to 9: Now 5 ſhall hurt 3 on the ſhoulder : Inlaw
5 ſhall obtain his tuit.

6 againſt 7 : Here 7 ſhall have the choice of
pon, and hurt 6 on the head: In lau 7 ſhall winne,
the ſuit is for Merchandize.

6 tog: Here 6 ſhall be hurt on the head by: In
law 6 ſhall obtain bis ſuit ; they be both good men, ande
will at laſt be friends. ' |

6to 9 Now 9g ſhall beat 6, and hurt him on the
Arni, and on the leg: In law y ſhall obtain his ſuir.

7 to 8: Here 8 (hall beat and hurt 7 in the breaſt and
heart: In law 8 (hall obtain his ſuit, which is for GA -
ments, or moyeable Goods left by kindred. |

7 againſt 9: By ſhort weapon 9 ſhall be hurt in the
(ice: Ia law 9 (hall obtain his ſuit.
| $ againſt9: with 9, 8 ſhall be overcome, and hurt
is the body: In law 9 ſhall obtain his ſuit.

Ste Crucian inla le Axiomete.
Af Rule abridged, to know which of the two
| 50 Law, hall have the Y iory.

| & io Arie: 1, againft O in Fries r, the leder conquers.
Lin Tawru 2, agunkt Y in T 2, the bigger con-
vers.

that fight, or e

Y in/ irgo 6, againk ꝗ in irge 6, the higher conq.
L in Libre 7, againſt H in Libre 7, the lefler conq .
in Scorpio 8, againſt 2 in Scorpie,8, the greater cono.
XI ia Sagittarius 9, aguuft Þ in Sagittary 9, the leſſer
Cc .
Lure, againſt q in Tauru⸗ 2, 2 (hall conq.
in Gemin; I; againſt Lin Gemini 37 1 ſhall congq.
in Teo x, againſt O in Zeo 4, 4 ſhal conq.
O in Fries x, againft ꝗ in Tries, x conq.
in irgo t, againt & in irg0 6, 6 thal conq.
in Libre 1, againſt Hin Zibre 7, and 1 ſhal conq.
Jin nge 1, agrialt g in Virge 6, & 8 ſhal conq.
in Sagitterjne x »againkt O in Sagittarius 9, I conq.
in Gemini 2, ap. Nin Geminiz, 3 conq.
in Cancer 2, apainſt D in Cnc. 4, 2 conq.
"Hig Libre 2, apainft L in Libra 5 conq.
in Scorpio 2, againſt in Scorpio 6, 2 conq.
ia Gemini 2,againt & in Gem 7, 7 conq.
FH in Capricorn 2, againſt d in Caric. 8, 2 conq.
E in Leo 2, againſt O in Les 9,9 cong.
O in Arie 3, againſt Fin Arier 4, 4 conq.
in Gemini 3,againſt Fin S. con.
PinY irgo z, againſt & in Virgo 6, 6 conq.
in Aquarius 3,againt N in Aquaer. 7, 3 cenq.
Lin Vin: 3, ag ainſt PinYirges, 8 conq.

in

— ———

The RA Cru
ꝗ in Aries 3, again O in Arie. , 3 con.
P in Leo 4, againſt O in Leo 5,5 conq.
N in Ving: 4,againt PinYirgos, 4 conq.
H in Capricorn , againſt ꝙ in Capric. y, 7 conq.
YN in Sagittarius 4, again O in Sagit. 8, 4 conq.
E in Gemini 4, againſt q in Gem. 9, 9 conq.
O in Leo5 , again & in Leo 6, 6 cong.
Lin Aries, againſt O in Friesp, 5 con.
in Sagittarius, againſt O in Sagi. 8, & cong.
L in Gemini 5, againit F in Gemini 9, 9 conq.
d in Arie: 6, againſt O in Fries 7, 7 cong.
L in Virge 6, agaiult ę in Virge 8, 6 conq.
E in Gemini 6, againſt q in Gem. 9, g conꝗ.
O in Leo 7, againſtYin Ces 8, , conq.
O in Frie: 7, againſt ꝙ in Frie: g, 7 conq.
Lin irge8,againtY in Virge 9, 9 conq.

And theſe be the reaſons of the Rules going before. +

Ana,ker 7 |

fs TEN. Crucien infelible Arlam.

—

6
6 — ——_ —

Another Rule more brief,according tothe Numbers and
Names going before.

—

1 75 4 I 3 [7/8
1644 1- o 11416 8
{4 3 | 117
12/7 [dre Con- | The Con- (3 | 31 $18

's BET Of 15 11117

% Huai) 570071
1 8 7 21416
1165 8 t|3|s

unity is aſcribed to the Sun, » is aſcribed to the Moon,
3 «ſcribed 60 lupiter, Sol and Venus; 4 of the Sun, 5 #
aſcribed to Mercury, 6 is attributed to Venus and June, 7
belongs to Saturn, I is attribated to Jupiter and Vulcan, Cy-
bele and Bacchus; ſome attribute it to the three Ladet of de-
fin; 5 belongs to the Moon, and the y Muſes; 10 belongs to
the Sun and lan, 11 3s attributed ts the Moon, 12. 35 at-
ed to the world.

CHAP.

The Roe. Creucien inf, [ible Amienate.

CHAP. XVII:
The Reſolution of all manner of QUESTIONS. X

117

I Hether « perſon hall live long, or not.
- wW 2 If « perſon thall be healthful or fickly;
3 1f ene Shall find the perty at home one would ſpeak with =
4 Whether one abſent be dead or alive.
5 Whether a Ship ball come home ſafe.
6 If a man that beyich,
7 If Reports be true or falſe.
8 1f find again the thing loft.
9g If « man thall enjoy * Eſtate of his Father.
10. If itbegood ts — take the Farm or Menſe deſi-

11 If geodse remove from onthauſe to another.
11 If one hal have Children.
13 Whether the Father be dead or not.
14 if the Obild be right Fathered, or « Beftard.
15 Whether a Town beſieged, thafl be taken.
161f there be any ill compeny in the wey « man weld go.
17 If itbe good ts pus on new Clothes,
18 If « promiſe made, hal 3
If the Earth hall bring forth plenty of fruits, op nar.
20 If a fc party thall live oy dyes.
21 If aſervant thall get free from bi Maſter,
22 If it be good to takes Phyſich,
23 If it be gead to wifht the fick perſon or nar.
24 1f «man that marry
25 If he shall marry well or il.
26 If amanbewiſe, or « foul.
| 27 If « woman be rich er not, you wenld harry.
'% 28 If agree after Marriage, or not.
29 Whether a Damoſe! be « Maid, or not.
30 Whuher « Woman be honefite her Fu band, or na
11 41

red

—

| N Wallible Axiomate.

31 If Beefti loft, be deador alive.

32 Whether « Thief thall be taken or net.

33 Whether the thing loft be flolne, or nor.

34 1f «a City, Town, or Caſile hall be raken, or not.

35 if « party abſent, be dead or alive.

36 Whether the man thell dye a good death.

97 If the Vive, Portion ball be obtained.

38 If itbe goodto call Angels in matters of Love , or

wor.

39 if the Spirit be good or evil, that appear: , and whe-
ther it be an Angel f Heaven, ora Devil of
Hell.

40 If the wind ball blew fair.

41 If ges the Phileſophers Stone.

- if Dream: be for good or evil.

43 if the Parſon thall obtain the Benefict or not.

44 If one ball obtain the preferment defired.

45 If iube goodto go to Bae, oy ner.

46 If the King, Pope, Prince, er Lord fich, chall 47
mend, or nos.

47, If eue betwixs 16 thall continue If is be good 10

ot the Ceu er nor.

43 If the Friend be faithful, or a Tray tor.

49 If one ball be impriſencd, or nar.

30 If a party be bewitched, or nos.

$1 Whether ene hall enter ipto the favehy of the King.

$2 If the Prince hall have theV iRory in Mar.

$3 If there hall be peace betwixt England and France.

54 If the Captain be valiant, or not,

55 If the Horſethall win the Race,

56 If « Priſoner thall come out of Priſon.

$7 1f a fickneff shall be long or there;

58 1f yowthall enjoy the woman deſired.

59 If i le good 1914ke 4 Journey.

60 If the child thall be fortuna ie, or net.

. 611

——ñ——

= —— — ͤ ́Ü2ü—ũ2ãñ Ü qĩ!I᷑ĩ—

Than. an infa A xiomata. 3 tg
61 If 'irqhalt be a plentifal year. hls
61 If tbe goods trade in Merchandite.

63 If ii he good to ta « Wife. |

64 If friendsbip thall sabe good effeFt, or not.

65 If a" man thell be fortiinaze in his houſe.

66 If a man have ſecrei nemies, or nes.

And thus you may do of all other Queſtions,
whereof you” would be reſolyed.

And aow that you may better underſtand this Figure
of the world, and all things and the Reſolution of the
demands you would propound, you mult firfiofal chuſe
aNumber,what you wil at your diſcretion,as .7.07 q. or
any other more or leſ1;this done, take the Number of the
day, as you ſhall find in order and then take the Numbet
which you find in the ſecond Chapter, er that you find
in the Globe upon the firſt Letter of your Name, as you
were Chriſtened.

For example, if your Name be Francs, you muſt take
F. and the number which is over it, and you ſhall find
all in Order in the Scheam, aud gather all thoſe Num-
bers inte one ſum , and divide them by 30, reſerving
the reſt as remains; and ſearch in the Center of the Fi-
gureʒ and if you find it above in the upper half, your

matter ſhall ſpeed well; and if it be in the acicher ha f,

it ſhall be evil: And thus you may knoy all that you
delire, and be it love which alters the Humor, as / (iſſes
was altered by the Muſick of his Miſtris.

When to hey Lute Penelope fingr,

Her voice inli ves the leaden firings

Nut when of ſorrows the duth ſp

Even with her ſig ha the firings do break;

And her Lute 14th live or dye,

Tia d her paſſions: * 1.

Fos

| 110 75 in 4 "TX

not, take the number of the fuſt letter of your Name,
the Number of the Plau and of the day uſ che week,
and all theſe Numbers e call put togechet, und then
divide them by 30. at you did before, and take your re-
maigder, and ſee in the dle af he Globe, and you
ſhall find it; and then if it be in the upper halfe , you
ſhall have your requeſt, if icke in the netherbalfe , it is
contrary : And thus may au be reſalved of all things
you would know, you muſt obſcrve the Numbers in the
Figure exceed mot 30. at u ſhall ind them beginnin
Sb T.x.3.6 4-and fo confequently to 30. |

The

For to know whether you ſhall enjoy your love, or

|

The Roſie. Crucian infallible Ax 1321
The Number: of the Planets, and their Chapadlers.
7 9 10 --6 1290
Sathrnus Jupiter Mari Sol en Mer cui,i Tung
5-6 S448
Numbers of the dey; of the M.

Sunday, Minday, Treſday, Widneſday, Thurſday,

108 51 11 102 3h

Friday, Saturday,
68 45

Thus have we ſhewed you the Numbers of the
Planets, and the dayes of the Week, and their Num-
bers. Now that nothing may be wanting to this Art,
here follows the Figure of the World, and names of
the I dea i Rulertand Angeli thereof, according to the
Method of God,

Here lyes a wonderful virtue , worth, and efficacy in
Numbers z as well to good ag to bad 5 and they ſay,
I z Apgels

1122 The Refi: Onitien infallible Ax m.
Angels may be at frequently cenyerſ with as Devils,
by the direction and help oſ the Figure before; and the
eminent Philoſophers do unanimonſly teach, and
learned Doctors both in Divinity, in the Law, and Do-
Rors of Phyſick, and inpccule myſteries in Chimiſtry,
and in Rei- C rucian ſechets practiſe.

As St. Hierom, Auſtin, Origen, Ambroſe, Gregory
IVatiangen, Athanaſius, Baſilins, Hillarius, Rubanw,
Bede, and many more, K. Lully, Diodorns, Sic tn, pc.
coufirm.” Hence AMillariu in his Commentatics upog
the Pſalmes, teſtifies that the 70 Elders , according to

the efficacy of Numbers brought the Pſalmes into ot-

der; Kebanwialio a famous Doctor, compoſed an excel-
lent book of the yertyes of Numbers, But now how
great vertues Numbers have in nature , 4s manifeſt in
the herb which is called Cingueſoile, i. e. live leaved-grals,
for this relifts poyſon by vertue of the Number 5 3 it
drives away Devils,conduceth to expiation, and one leaf
of it taken two times in a day in Wine, cures the Feaver
of one day, z the Tertian Feaver, 4 the Quartan in like

manner ; four Grains of the ſeed of Turniſele being

drunk cures the Quartan, but three the Tertian In
like manner Veryain cures Feavers being in Wine, with
Awrum Porabile; and the third joynt cures the Tertian,
the fourth the — a Serpent if he be once (truck
with a ſpear dyeth, if twice, recovers ſtrength.

Theile, and many others we read of in ſeveral Au-
thars, we muſt know now whence theſe are done,
which certainly have a cauſe , which is a various pro-

portion ef various Numbers amongſt themſelves, there \

18 alſo a wonderful experiment of the Number of 7,that
every yth Male born without a Female coming betwixt

hath power to cure the Kings evil by his touch alone, ot
word : alſo every 7th Daughter that is born, Roſia- Cru.
cians lay, wonder fully belpeth forward the birth of

chi J.

q

—m_——

ͤj— I ———s

— — —ä— ——— —

T he Roffe-Crucien infalkible Arien.
children, and ſo doth the Sun give the like vertus to
Awrum petebile ax Dr. Culpepper often experienced,
neither is the natural Number here conſidered, but the
ſoimal conſideration , that is in the Number: And
theſe Numbers are not in vocal, or Numbers of Mer-
chan'y, buying, and ſelling , but in ratienal, formal,
and natural: theſe are bin myſteries of God and
Nature, but he that knows how to joyn together, the
vocal Numbers, and natural with divine, and order
them Teleſmatically iotethe ſame harmony, ſhall bee
able to work, and know wonderful things , as the
Roſie-Cyncians have ſaid, this Book teacheth. The K. C.
pregnoſticate many things by the Numbers of names,
and you muſt know that {imple Numbers ſignifie Di-
vine things: Number of 10 Celeſtial, numbers of 100
Terreſtrial, numbers of looo, thoſe things that ſhal be in
future age, beſides ſeeing the parts of the minde are ac-
cording to an Arithmerical mediocrity , by reaſon of
the identity , or equality of exceſs, coupled togetherz
but the body, whoſe parts differ in thei greatneſs , is
according to a Geometrical mediocrity compounded :
but an Animal conſiſts of both, viz. foul and body,
according to the medioctity which is ſuitable to Har-
mony : Hence it is that numbers do work very much
upon the foul , Figures upon the body, and Harmony
upon the whole Animal: And one ſayes Numbers

|

Have in their natures a moſt fiery forte,
And alſs ſpring from a celeſtial ſource.

God gave to man minde and ſpeech , which are
thought to be a gift of the ſame yertue , and immorta-
lity: The Omnipetent God hath by his Providence,
divided the ſpeech of men into divers lapguages,which © |

language

* * allible ta.
lan have accotding to their diverſity, recejyed
divers and proper characters of writing , conſiſting in
their certain order, number, and figure, not ſo difpo-
70 by chance, nor by the weak judgement of man, but
rom above, whereby they agree with the celeftialls
and divine bodies, and yertues, but before all notet of

the Hebrew is molt ſacred in the figures of
characters, points of vowels, and tops of accents, as
comlaſting in matter, form, and ſpirit.

The poſition of the Star being firlt made in the feat
of God which is heaven, afterthe figure of them are
moſt fully formed the letters of the celeſtial myſteries,
as by their figure , form and ſigniſic ation, fo by the
numbers ſignified by them, as alſo by their yatious
, their comunction, he therefore that will
finde them out, mult by each joyning together of the
Letters ſo long examine them untill the voice of Ged
is manifeſt , and the framing of the molt ſacred Letter
and their numbers, be opened and diſcovered; for
hence voices and words have efficacy in Magicall
works, becauſe that in which nature firſt exerciſed
efficacy is the voice of God: But of theſe you may
read largely in my Temple of Wiſdom, a Book of Te-
leſmet and Geomancy.

The Letters in theFigure of the World going before,
have double numbers of their Order, viz. exrended
which ſimply expreſs of what number the Letters are,
according to their Order, aud collected, which recol-
lect with themſelves, the numbers of all the proceed-
ding lettters; alſo they have integral number, which
reſult from the names of Lerters, according to their
various manner of numbring , the vertues of which
numbers, he (hall know after our Ari mata, ſhall bee
able in every tongue to draw forth wonderful myſteties
by their Leiters engraven, call down Angels, Spirits,
and

"ane .: 0 *

The Roſee- Creucian infallible Axiemae. 116
and fouls of men: And Fugenius brings in a Refie-
Crucian , that brought him acquainted with Etherial
men, and him doth TheodidaFins thus bring in ſpeak«
ing of hiniſelf, |

Force me befits, with this thick cloud I drive,
Tofs the blew Bille, O, up rive 3
Congeal ſoft ſnow, and beat the earth with hail,
When 1 my bruhren in the aire aſſail

For thas: eur field we meet with ſuch a ſhack
That thundering iet with our encounters rock,
And dowd firuck lightning flaihe: from on high
When through the top of all the world 7 ye,
1 force leak in her hellow caves, I make
The Ghei to tremble, and the ground to quake:

Solomon knew by the Arima how the world was
made, and the operation of the Blements, the begin-
ning, ending, and the middeſt of times , the alterations
of the turning ofthe Sun, and the change of ſeaſons,
the circuit of years, and the poſition of | the na-
tures of living creatures, and the furies of wilde Beaſts,
the violence of winds, and the reaſoning of men, the
diverfaties of plants „and the vertues of roots; what
things have been paſt, and what things are to come.
There are alſs other myſterious joynings of Letten
with numbers : But I ſhall teach you theſe in the fol-
lowing Book, Wherefore according to the Doctrine of
our Lord and Saviewr Jeſus Chrift , Firft ſeek you the
Kingdome of God, and all theſe things. thall bes given

you. /

s T's ]thevab, Dow: mens iiluawineverss Moy L
fins Temebre m.
