On the Councils (De Synodis) (Hilary of Poitiers)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, 1892. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 Introduction to the Treatise De Synodis.

 ------------------------

 Hilary had taken no part in the Synod held at Ancyra in the spring of
 a.d. 358, but he had been made acquainted with its decisions and even
 with the anathemas which the legates of that Synod concealed at
 Sirmium. He saw that these decisions marked an approach. The horror
 which was felt at the Sirmian Blasphemia by those Eusebians whose only
 objection to the Nicene faith was that they did not understand it,
 augured well for the future. At the same time the majority of the
 Eastern bishops were deliberately heretical. It was natural that Hilary
 should be anxious about the episcopate of the West.

 He had been in exile about three years and had corresponded with the
 Western bishops. From several quarters letters had now ceased to
 arrive, and the fear came that the bishops did not care to write to one
 whose convictions were different to their own. Great was his joy when,
 at the end of the year 358, he received a letter which not only
 explained that the innocent cause of their silence was ignorance of his
 address, but also that they had persistently refused communion with
 Saturninus and condemned the Blasphemia.

 Early in 359 he dispatched to them the Liber de Synodis. It is a double
 letter, addressed to Western bishops, but containing passages intended
 for Orientals, into whose hands the letter would doubtless come in
 time. Hilary had recognized that the orthodox of the West had kept
 aloof from the orthodox of the East, firstly from ignorance of events,
 secondly from misunderstanding of the word homoousios, and thirdly from
 the feelings of distrust then prevalent. These facts determined the
 contents of his letter.

 He begins with an expression of the delight he experienced on receiving
 the news that the Gallican bishops had condemned the notorious Sirmian
 formula. He praises the constancy of their faith.

 He then mentions that he has received from certain of their number a
 request that he would furnish them with an account of the creeds which
 had been composed in the East. He modestly accedes to this request
 beseeching his readers not to criticise his letter until they have read
 the whole letter and mastered the complete argument. His aim throughout
 is to frustrate the heretic and assist the Catholic.

 In the first or historical division of the letter he promises a
 transcription, with explanations, of all the creeds drawn up since the
 Council of Nicha. He protests that he is not responsible for any
 statement contained in these creeds, and leaves his readers to judge of
 their orthodoxy.

 The Greek confessions had already been translated into Latin, but
 Hilary considered it necessary to give his own independent
 translations, the previous versions having been half-unintelligible on
 account of their slavish adherence to the original.

 The historical part of the book consists of fifty-four chapters (c.
 10-63). It begins with the second Sirmian formula, and the opposing
 formula promulgated at Ancyra in a.d. 358. The Sirmian creed being
 given in c. 10, Hilary, before proceeding to give the twelve anathemas
 directed against its teaching by the bishops who assembled at Ancyra,
 explains the meaning of essentia and substantia. Concerning the former
 he says, Essentia est res quæ est, vel ex quibus est, et quæ in eo quod
 maneat subsistit. This essentia is therefore identical with substantia,
 quia res quæ est necesse est subsistat in sese. The Ancyran anathemas
 are then appended, with notes and a summary.

 In the second division (c. 29-33) of the historical part, Hilary
 considers the Dedication creed drawn up at Antioch in a.d. 341. He
 interprets it somewhat favourably. After stating that the creed is
 perhaps not sufficiently explicit in declaring the exact likeness of
 the Father and the Son, he excuses this inadequacy by pointing out that
 the Synod was not held to contradict Anomoean teaching, but teaching of
 a Sabellian tendency. The complete similarity of the Son's essence to
 that of the Father appears to him to be guarded by the phrase Deum de
 Deo, totum ex toto.

 The third division (c. 34-37) contains the creed drawn up by the Synod,
 or Cabal Synod, which met at Philippopolis in a.d. 343. Hilary does not
 discuss the authority of the Synod; it was enough for his purpose that
 it was composed of Orientals, and that its language emphatically
 condemns genuine Arianism and asserts the Son is God of God. The
 anathema which the creed pronounces on those who declare the Son to
 have been begotten without the Father's will, is interpreted by Hilary
 as an assertion that the eternal Birth was not conditioned by those
 passions which affect human generation.

 The fourth division (c. 38-61) contains the long formula drawn up at
 Sirmium in a.d. 351 against Photinus. The twenty-seven anathemas are
 then separately considered and commended. The two remaining chapters of
 the historical part of the work include a reflection on the many-sided
 character of these creeds both in their positive and negative aspects.
 God is infinitus et immensus, and therefore short statements concerning
 His nature may often prove misleading. The bishops have used many
 definitions and phrases because clearness will remove a danger. These
 frequent definitions would have been quite unnecessary if it had not
 been for the prevalence of heresy. Asia as a whole is ignorant of God,
 presenting a piteous contrast to the fidelity of the Western bishops.

 The theological part of the work opens in c. 64 with Hilary's
 exposition of his own belief. He denies that there is in God only one
 personality, as he denies that there is any difference of substance.
 The Father is greater in that He is Father, the Son is not less because
 He is Son. He asks his readers to remember that if his words fall
 short, his meaning is sound. This done, he passes to discuss the
 meaning of the word omoousion. Three wrong meanings may be attributed
 to it. Firstly, it may be understood to deny the personal distinctions
 in the Trinity. Secondly, it may be thought to imply that the divine
 essence is capable of division. Thirdly, it may be represented as
 implying that the Father and the Son both equally partake of one prior
 substance. A short expression like homoousios must therefore receive an
 exact explanation. A risk is attached to its use, but there is no risk
 if we understand it to mean that the Father is unbegotten and the Son
 derives His being from the Father, and is like Him in power, and
 honour, and nature. The Son is subordinate to the Father as to the
 Author of His being, yet it was not by a robbery that He made Himself
 equal with God. He is not from nothing. He is wholly God. He is not the
 Author of the divine life, but the Image. He is no creature, but is
 God. Not a second God, but one God with the Father through similarity
 of essence. This is the ideal meaning of homoousios, and in this sense
 it is not an error to assert, but to deny, the consubstantiality.

 Hilary then makes a direct appeal to the Western bishops. They might
 forget the contents of the word while retaining the sound, but provided
 that the meaning was granted, what objection could be made to the word?
 Was the word homoiousion free from all possible objections? Hilary (c.
 72-75) shews that really like means really equal. Scripture is appealed
 to as proving the assertion that the Son is both like God and equal to
 God. This essential likeness can alone justify the statement that the
 Father and the Son are one. It is blasphemous to represent the
 similarity as a mere analogy. The similitude is a similitude of proper
 nature and equality. The conclusion of the argument is that the word
 homoiousios, if understood, leads us to the word homoousios which helps
 to guard it, and that it does not imply any separation between the
 Persons of the Trinity.

 The saint now turns to the Eastern bishops, a small number of whom
 still remained faithful. He bestows upon them titles of praise, and
 expresses his joy at the decisions they had made, and at the Emperor's
 repudiation of his former mistake. With Pauline fervour Hilary exclaims
 that he would remain in exile all his life, if only truth might be
 preached.

 Then, in a chapter which displays alike his knowledge of the Bible and
 his power of refined sarcasm, he unveils his suspicions concerning
 Valens and Ursacius. He doubts whether they could have been so
 inexperienced as to be ignorant of the meaning of the word homoousion
 when they signed the third Sirmian Creed. Furthermore he is obliged to
 point out a defect in the letter which the Oriental bishops wrote at
 the Synod of Ancyra. The word homoousion is there rejected. The three
 grounds for such rejection could only be that the word was thought to
 imply a prior substance, or the teaching of Paul of Samosata, or that
 the word was not in Scripture. The first two grounds were only
 illusions, the third was equally fatal to the word homoiousion. Those
 who intelligibly maintained homoousion or homoiousion , meant the same
 thing and condemned the same impiety (c. 82). Why should any one wish
 to decline the word which the Council of Nicæa had used for an end
 which was unquestionably good? The argument is enforced by the
 insertion of the Nicene Creed in full. True, the word homoousion is
 quite capable of misconstruction. But the application of this test to
 the difficult passages in the Bible would lead to the chaos of all
 belief. The possible abuse of the word does not abolish its use. The
 authority of the eighty bishops who condemned the Samosatene abuse of
 it does not affect the authority of the three hundred and eighteen who
 ratified its Nicene meaning. Hilary adds a statement of great
 importance. Before he was acquainted with the term he had personally
 believed what it implied. The term has merely invigorated his previous
 faith (c. 88, cf. c. 91). In other words, Hilary tells his
 contemporaries and tells posterity that the word homoousion, is
 Scripture because it is the sense of Scripture, and is truly
 conservative because it alone adequately preserves the faith of the
 fathers. The argument is interwoven with a spirited appeal to the
 Eastern bishops to return to that faith as expressed at Nicæa.

 The last chapter (c. 92) is addressed to the Western bishops. It
 modestly defends the action of Hilary in writing, and urges a
 corresponding energy on the part of his readers. The whole concludes
 with a devout prayer.

 The Liber de Synodis, like other works in which Catholicism has
 endeavoured to be conciliatory, did not pass unchallenged. It satisfied
 neither the genuine Arian nor the violently orthodox. The notes or
 fragments which we call Hilary's Apology throw light upon the latter
 fact. Hilary has to explain that he had not meant that the Eastern
 bishops had stated the true faith at Ancyra, and tells his Lord and
 brother Lucifer that it was against his will that he had mentioned the
 word homoiousion. We must ourselves confess that Hilary puts an
 interpretation on the meaning of the Eastern formulæ which would have
 been impossible if he had written after the Synod of Ariminum. Speaking
 when he did, his arguments were not only pardonable but right.

 On the Councils, or, The Faith of the Easterns.

 ------------------------

 To the most dearly loved and blessed brethren our fellow-bishops of the
 province of Germania Prima and Germania Secunda, Belgica Prima and
 Belgica Secunda, Lugdunensis Prima and Lugdunensis Secunda, and the
 province of Aquitania, and the province of Novempopulana, and to the
 laity and clergy of Tolosa in the Provincia Narbonensis, and to the
 bishops of the provinces of Britain, Hilary the servant of Christ,
 eternal salvation in God our Lord.

 I had determined, beloved brethren, to send no letter to you concerning
 the affairs of the Church in consequence of your prolonged silence. For
 when I had by writing from several cities of the Roman world frequently
 informed you of the faith and efforts of our religious brethren, the
 bishops of the East, and how the Evil One profiting by the discords of
 the times had with envenomed lips and tongue hissed out his deadly
 doctrine, I was afraid. I feared lest while so many bishops were
 involved in the serious danger of disastrous sin or disastrous mistake,
 you were holding your peace because a defiled and sin-stained
 conscience tempted you to despair. Ignorance I could not attribute to
 you; you had been too often warned. I judged therefore that I also
 ought to observe silence towards you, carefully remembering the Lord's
 saying, that those who after a first and second entreaty, and in spite
 of the witness of the Church, neglect to hear, are to be unto us as
 heathen men and publicans [453] .

 2. But when I received the letters that your blessed faith inspired,
 and understood that their slow arrival and their paucity were due to
 the remoteness and secrecy of my place of exile, I rejoiced in the Lord
 that you had continued pure and undefiled by the contagion of any
 execrable heresy, and that you were united with me in faith and spirit,
 and so were partakers of that exile into which Saturninus, fearing his
 own conscience, had thrust me after beguiling the Emperor, and after
 that you had denied him communion for the whole three years ago until
 now. I equally rejoiced that the impious and infidel creed which was
 sent straightway to you from Sirmium was not only not accepted by you,
 but condemned as soon as reported and notified. I felt that it was now
 binding on me as a religious duty to write sound and faithful words to
 you as my fellow-bishops, who communicate with me in Christ. I, who
 through fear of what might have been could at one time only rejoice
 with my own conscience that I was free from all these errors, was now
 bound to express delight at the purity of our common faith. Praise God
 for the unshaken stability of your noble hearts, for your firm house
 built on the foundation of the faithful rock, for the undefiled and
 unswerving constancy of a will that has proved immaculate! For since
 the good profession at the Council of Biterræ, where I denounced the
 ringleaders of this heresy with some of you for my witnesses, it has
 remained and still continues to remain, pure, unspotted and scrupulous.

 3. You awaited the noble triumph of a holy and steadfast perseverance
 without yielding to the threats, the powers and the assaults of
 Saturninus: and when all the waves of awakening blasphemy struggled
 against God, you who still remain with me faithful in Christ did not
 give way when threatened with the onset of heresy, and now by meeting
 that onset you have broken all its violence. Yes, brethren, you have
 conquered, to the abundant joy of those who share your faith: and your
 unimpaired constancy gained the double glory of keeping a pure
 conscience and giving an authoritative example. For the fame of your
 unswerving and unshaken faith has moved certain Eastern bishops, late
 though it be, to some shame for the heresy fostered and supported in
 those regions: and when they heard of the godless confession composed
 at Sirmium, they contradicted its audacious authors by passing certain
 decrees themselves. And though they withstood them not without in their
 turn raising some scruples, and inflicting some wounds upon a sensitive
 piety, yet they withstood them so vigorously as to compel those who at
 Sirmium yielded to the views of Potamius and Hosius as accepting and
 confirming those views, to declare their ignorance and error in so
 doing; in fact they had to condemn in writing their own action. And
 they subscribed with the express purpose of condemning something else
 in advance [454] .

 4. But your invincible faith keeps the honourable distinction of
 conscious worth, and content with repudiating crafty, vague, or
 hesitating action, safely abides in Christ, preserving the profession
 of its liberty. You abstain from communion with those who oppose their
 bishops with their blasphemies and keep them in exile, and do not by
 assenting to any crafty subterfuge bring yourselves under a charge of
 unrighteous judgment. For since we all suffered deep and grievous pain
 at the actions of the wicked against God, within our boundaries alone
 is communion in Christ to be found from the time that the Church began
 to be harried by disturbances such as the expatriation of bishops, the
 deposition of priests, the intimidation of the people, the threatening
 of the faith, and the determination of the meaning of Christ's doctrine
 by human will and power. Your resolute faith does not pretend to be
 ignorant of these facts or profess that it can tolerate them,
 perceiving that by the act of hypocritical assent it would bring itself
 before the bar of conscience.

 5. And although in all your actions, past and present, you bear witness
 to the uninterrupted independence and security of your faith; yet in
 particular you prove your warmth and fervour of spirit by the fact that
 some of you whose letters have succeeded in reaching me have expressed
 a wish that I, unfit as I am, should notify to you what the Easterns
 have since said in their confessions of faith. They affectionately laid
 the additional burden upon me of indicating my sentiments on all their
 decisions. I know that my skill and learning are inadequate, for I feel
 it most difficult to express in words my own belief as I understand it
 in my heart; far less easy must it be to expound the statements of
 others.

 6. Now I beseech you by the mercy of the Lord, that as I will in this
 letter according to your desire write to you of divine things and of
 the witness of a pure conscience to our faith, no one will think to
 judge me by the beginning of my letter before he has read the
 conclusion of my argument. For it is unfair before the complete
 argument has been grasped, to conceive a prejudice on account of
 initial statements, the reason of which is yet unknown, since it is not
 with imperfect statements before us that we must make a decision for
 the sake of investigation, but on the conclusion for the sake of
 knowledge. I have some fear, not about you, as God is witness of my
 heart, but about some who in their own esteem are very cautious and
 prudent but do not understand the blessed apostle's precept not to
 think of themselves more highly than they ought [455] : for I am afraid
 that they are unwilling to know all those facts, the complete account
 of which I will offer at the end, and at the same time they avoid
 drawing the true conclusion from the aforesaid facts. But whoever takes
 up these lines to read and examine them has only to be consistently
 patient with me and with himself and peruse the whole to its
 completion. Perchance all this assertion of my faith will result in
 those who conceal their heresy being unable to practise the deception
 they wish, and in true Catholics attaining the object which they
 desire.

 7. Therefore I comply with your affectionate and urgent wish, and I
 have set down all the creeds which have been promulgated at different
 times and places since the holy Council of Nicæa, with my appended
 explanations of all the phrases and even words employed. If they be
 thought to contain anything faulty, no one can impute the fault to me:
 for I am only a reporter, as you wished me to be, and not an author.
 But if anything is found to be laid down in right and apostolic
 fashion, no one can doubt that it is no credit to the interpreter but
 to the originator. In any case I have sent you a faithful account of
 these transactions: it is for you to determine by the decision your
 faith inspires whether their spirit is Catholic or heretical.

 8. For although it was necessary to reply to your letters, in which you
 offered me Christian communion with your faith, (and, moreover, certain
 of your number who were summoned to the Council which seemed pending in
 Bithynia did refuse with firm consistency of faith to hold communion
 with any but myself outside Gaul), it also seemed fit to use my
 episcopal office and authority, when heresy was so rife, in submitting
 to you by letter some godly and faithful counsel. For the word of God
 cannot be exiled as our bodies are, or so chained and bound that it
 cannot be imparted to you in any place. But when I had learnt that
 synods were to meet in Ancyra and Ariminum, and that one or two bishops
 from each province in Gaul would assemble there, I thought it
 especially needful that I, who am confined in the East, should explain
 and make known to you the grounds of those mutual suspicions which
 exist between us and the Eastern bishops, though some of you know those
 grounds; in order that whereas you had condemned and they had
 anathematized this heresy that spreads from Sirmium, you might
 nevertheless know with what confession of faith the Eastern bishops had
 come to the same result that you had come to, and that I might prevent
 you, whom I hope to see as shining lights in future Councils,
 differing, through a mistake about words, even a hair's-breadth from
 pure Catholic belief, when your interpretation of the apostolic faith
 is identically the same and you are Catholics at heart.

 9. Now it seems to me right and appropriate, before I begin my argument
 about suspicions and dissensions as to words, to give as complete an
 account as possible of the decisions of the Eastern bishops adverse to
 the heresy compiled at Sirmium. Others have published all these
 transactions very plainly, but much obscurity is caused by a
 translation from Greek into Latin, and to be absolutely literal is to
 be sometimes partly unintelligible.

 10. You remember that in the Blasphemia, lately written at Sirmium, the
 object of the authors was to proclaim the Father to be the one and only
 God of all things, and deny the Son to be God: and while they
 determined that men should hold their peace about homoousion and
 homoiousion, they determined that God the Son should be asserted to be
 born not of God the Father, but of nothing, as the first creatures
 were, or of another essence than God, as the later creatures. And
 further that in saying the Father was greater in honour, dignity,
 splendour and majesty, they implied that the Son lacked those things
 which constitute the Father's superiority. Lastly, that while it is
 affirmed that His birth is unknowable, we were commanded by this
 Compulsory Ignorance Act not to know that He is of God: just as if it
 could be commanded or decreed that a man should know what in future he
 is to be ignorant of, or be ignorant of what he already knows. I have
 subjoined in full this pestilent and godless blasphemy, though against
 my will, to facilitate a more complete knowledge of the worth and
 reason of the replies made on the opposite side by those Easterns who
 endeavoured to counteract all the wiles of the heretics according to
 their understanding and comprehension.

 A copy of the Blasphemiacomposed at Sirmium by Osius and Polamius.

 11. Since there appeared to be some misunderstanding respecting the
 faith, all points have been carefully investigated and discussed at
 Sirmium in the presence of our most reverend brothers and
 fellow-bishops, Valens, Ursacius and Germinius.

 It is evident that there is one God, the Father Almighty, according as
 it is believed throughout the whole world; and His only Son Jesus
 Christ our Saviour, begotten of Him before the ages. But we cannot and
 ought not to say that there are two Gods, for the Lord Himself said, I
 will go unto My Father and your Father, unto My God and your God [456]
 . So there is one God over all, as the Apostle hath taught us, Is He
 God of the Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the
 Gentiles also: seeing it is one God, which shall justify the
 circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith. And in all
 other things they agreed thereto, nor would they allow any difference.

 But since some or many persons were disturbed by questions concerning
 substance, called in Greek ousia, that is, to make it understood more
 exactly, as to homoousion, or what is called homoiousion , there ought
 to be no mention made of these at all. Nor ought any exposition to be
 made of them for the reason and consideration that they are not
 contained in the divine Scriptures, and that they are above man's
 understanding, nor can any man declare the birth of the Son, of whom it
 is written, Who shall declare His generation [457] ? For it is plain
 that only the Father knows how He begot the Son, and the Son how He was
 begotten of the Father. There is no question that the Father is
 greater. No one can doubt that the Father is greater than the Son in
 honour, dignity, splendour, majesty, and in the very name of Father,
 the Son Himself testifying, He that sent Me is greater than I [458] .
 And no one is ignorant that it is Catholic doctrine that there are two
 Persons of Father and Son; and that the Father is greater, and that the
 Son is subordinated to the Father, together with all things which the
 Father has subordinated to Him, and that the Father has no beginning
 and is invisible, immortal and impassible, but that the Son has been
 begotten of the Father, God of God, Light of Light, and that the
 generation of this Son, as is aforesaid, no one knows but His Father.
 And that the Son of God Himself, our Lord and God, as we read, took
 flesh, that is, a body, that is, man of the womb of the Virgin Mary, of
 the Angel announced. And as all the Scriptures teach, and especially
 the doctor of the Gentiles himself, He took of Mary the Virgin, man,
 through whom He suffered. And the whole faith is summed up and secured
 in this, that the Trinity must always be preserved, as we read in the
 Gospel, Go ye and baptize all nations in the Name of the Father, and of
 the Son, and of the Holy Ghost [459] . Complete and perfect is the
 number of the Trinity. How the Paraclete, the Spirit, is through the
 Son: Who was sent and came according to His promise in order to
 instruct, teach and sanctify the apostles and all believers.

 12. After these many and most impious statements had been made, the
 Eastern bishops on their side again met together and composed
 definitions of their confession. Since, however, we have frequently to
 mention the words essence and substance, we must determine the meaning
 of essence, lest in discussing facts we prove ignorant of the
 signification of our words. Essence is a reality which is, or the
 reality of those things from which it is, and which subsists inasmuch
 as it is permanent. Now we can speak of the essence, or nature, or
 genus, or substance of anything. And the strict reason why the word
 essence is employed is because it is always. But this is identical with
 substance, because a thing which is, necessarily subsists in itself,
 and whatever thus subsists possesses unquestionably a permanent genus,
 nature or substance. When, therefore, we say that essence signifies
 nature, or genus, or substance, we mean the essence of that thing which
 permanently exists in the nature, genus, or substance. Now, therefore,
 let us review the definitions of faith drawn up by the Easterns.

 I. "If any one hearing that the Son is the image of the invisible God,
 says that the image of God is the same as the invisible God, as though
 refusing to confess that He is truly Son: let him be anathema."

 13. Hereby is excluded the assertion of those who wish to represent the
 relationship of Father and Son as a matter of names, inasmuch as every
 image is similar in species to that of which it is an image. For no one
 is himself his own image, but it is necessary that the image should
 demonstrate him of whom it is an image. So an image is the figured and
 indistinguishable likeness of one thing equated with another. Therefore
 the Father is, and the Son is, because the Son is the image of the
 Father: and he who is an image, if he is to be truly an image, must
 have in himself his original's species, nature and essence in virtue of
 the fact that he is an image.

 II. "And if any one hearing the Son say, As the Father hath life in
 Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself [460]
 , shall say that He who has received life from the Father, and who also
 declares, I live by the Father [461] , is the same as He who gave life:
 let him be anathema."

 14. The person of the recipient and of the giver are distinguished so
 that the same should not be made one and sole. For since he is under
 anathema who has believed that, when recipient and giver are mentioned
 one solitary and unique person is implied, we may not suppose that the
 selfsame person who gave received from Himself. For He who lives and He
 through whom He lives are not identical, for one lives to Himself, the
 other declares that He lives through the Author of His life, and no one
 will declare that He who enjoys life and He through whom His life is
 caused are personally identical.

 III. "And if any one hearing that the Only-begotten Son is like the
 invisible God, denies that the Son who is the image of the invisible
 God (whose image is understood to include essence) is Son in essence,
 as though denying His true Sonship: let him be anathema."

 15. It is here insisted that the nature is indistinguishable and
 entirely similar. For since He is the Only-begotten Son of God and the
 image of the invisible God, it is necessary that He should be of an
 essence similar in species and nature. Or what distinction can be made
 between Father and Son affecting their nature with its similar genus,
 when the Son subsisting through the nature begotten in Him is invested
 with the properties of the Father, viz., glory, worth, power,
 invisibility, essence? And while these prerogatives of divinity are
 equal we neither understand the one to be less because He is Son, nor
 the other to be greater because He is Father; since the Son is the
 image of the Father in species, and not dissimilar in genus; since the
 similarity of a Son begotten of the substance of His Father does not
 admit of any diversity of substance, and the Son and image of the
 invisible God embraces in Himself the whole form of His Father's
 divinity both in kind and in amount: and this is to be truly Son, to
 reflect the truth of the Father's form by the perfect likeness of the
 nature imaged in Himself.

 IV. "And if any one hearing this text, For as the Father hath life in
 Himself so also He hath given to the Son to have life in Himself [462]
 ; denies that the Son is like the Father even in essence, though He
 testifies that it is even as He has said; let him be anathema. For it
 is plain that since the life which is understood to exist in the Father
 signifies substance, and the life of the Only-begotten which was
 begotten of the Father is also understood to mean substance or essence,
 He there signifies a likeness of essence to essence."

 16. With the Son's origin as thus stated is connected the perfect birth
 of the undivided nature. For what in each is life, that in each is
 signified by essence. And in the life which is begotten of life, i.e.
 in the essence which is born of essence, seeing that it is not born
 unlike (and that because life is of life), He keeps in Himself a nature
 wholly similar to His original, because there is no diversity in the
 likeness of the essence that is born and that begets, that is, of the
 life which is possessed and which has been given. For though God begat
 Him of Himself, in likeness to His own nature, He in whom is the
 unbegotten likeness did not relinquish the property of His natural
 substance. For He only has what He gave; and as possessing life He gave
 life to be possessed. And thus what is born of essence, as life of
 life, is essentially like itself, and the essence of Him who is
 begotten and of Him who begets admits no diversity or unlikeness.

 V. "If any one hearing the words formed or created it and begat me
 spoken by the same lips [463] , refuses to understand this begat me of
 likeness of essence, but says that begat me and formed me are the same:
 as if to deny that the perfect Son of God was here signified as Son
 under two different expressions, as Wisdom has given us to piously
 understand, and asserts that formed me and begat me only imply
 formation and not sonship: let him be anathema."

 17. Those who say that the Son of God is only a creature or formation
 are opposed on the fact that they say they have read The Lord formed or
 created me, which seems to imply formation or creation; but they omit
 the following sentence, which is the key to the first, and from the
 first wrest authority for their impious statement that the Son is a
 creature, because Wisdom has said that she was created. But if she were
 created, how could she be also born? For all birth, of whatever kind,
 attains its own nature from the nature that begets it: but creation
 takes its beginning from the power of the Creator, the Creator being
 able to form a creature from nothing. So Wisdom, who said that she was
 created, does in the next sentence say that she was also begotten,
 using the word creation of the act of the changeless nature of her
 Parent, which nature, unlike the manner and wont of human parturition,
 without any detriment or change of self created from itself what it
 begat. Similarly a Creator has no need of passion or intercourse or
 parturition. And that which is created out of nothing begins to exist
 at a definite moment. And He who creates makes His object through His
 mere power, and creation is the work of might, not the birth of a
 nature from a nature that besets it. But because the Son of God was not
 begotten after the manner of corporeal childbearing, but was born
 perfect God of perfect God; therefore Wisdom says that she was created,
 excluding in her manner of birth every kind of corporeal process.

 18. Moreover, to shew that she possesses a nature that was born and not
 created, Wisdom has added that she was begotten, that by declaring that
 she was created and also begotten, she might completely explain her
 birth. By speaking of creation she implies that the nature of the
 Father is changeless, and she also shews that the substance of her
 nature begotten of God the Father is genuine and real. And so her words
 about creation and generation have explained the perfection of her
 birth: the former that the Father is changeless, the latter the reality
 of her own nature. The two things combined become one, and that one is
 both in perfection: for the Son being born of God without any change in
 God, is so born of the Father as to be created; and the Father, who is
 changeless in Himself and the Son's Father by nature, so forms the Son
 as to beget Him. Therefore the heresy which has dared to aver that the
 Son of God is a creature is condemned because while the first statement
 shews the impossible perfection of the divinity, the second, which
 asserts His natural generation, crushes the impious opinion that He was
 created out of nothing.

 VI. "And if any one grant the Son only a likeness of activity, but rob
 Him of the likeness of essence which is the corner-stone of our faith,
 in spite of the fact that the Son Himself reveals His essential
 likeness with the Father in the words, For as the Father hath life in
 Himself, so also hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself [464]
 , as well as His likeness in activity by teaching us that What things
 soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise [465] , such
 a man robs himself of the knowledge of eternal life which is in the
 Father and the Son, and let him be anathema."

 19. The heretics when beset by authoritative passages in Scripture are
 wont only to grant that the Son is like the Father in might while they
 deprive Him of similarity of nature. This is foolish and impious, for
 they do not understand that similar might can only be the result of a
 similar nature. For a lower nature can never attain to the might of a
 higher and more powerful nature. What will the men who make these
 assertions say about the omnipotence of God the Father, if the might of
 a lower nature is made equal to His own? For they cannot deny that the
 Son's power is the same, seeing that He has said What things soever the
 Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise.

 No, a similarity of nature follows on a similarity of might when He
 says, As the Father hath life in Himself, so also hath He given to the
 Son to have life in Himself. In life is implied nature and essence;
 this, Christ teaches, has been given Him to have as the Father hath.
 Therefore similarity of life contains similarity of might: for there
 cannot be similarity of life where the nature is dissimilar. So it is
 necessary that similarity of essence follows on similarity of might:
 for as what the Father does, the Son does also, so the life that the
 Father has He has given to the Son to have likewise. Therefore we
 condemn the rash and impious statements of those who confess a
 similarity of might but have dared to preach a dissimilarity of nature,
 since it is the chief ground of our hope to confess that in the Father
 and the Son there is an identical divine substance.

 VII. "And if any one professing that he believes that there is a Father
 and a Son, says that the Father is Father of an essence unlike Himself
 but of similar activity; for speaking profane and novel words against
 the essence of the Son and nullifying His true divine Sonship, let him
 be anathema."

 20. By confused and involved expressions the heretics very frequently
 elude the truth and secure the ears of the unwary by the mere sound of
 common words, such as the titles Father and Son, which they do not
 truthfully utter to express a natural and genuine community of essence:
 for they are aware that God is called the Father of all creation, and
 remember that all the saints are named sons of God. In like manner they
 declare that the relationship between the Father and the Son resembles
 that between the Father and the universe, so that the names Father and
 Son are rather titular than real. For the names are titular if the
 Persons have a distinct nature of a different essence, since no reality
 can be attached to the name of father unless it be based on the nature
 of his offspring. So the Father cannot be called Father of an alien
 substance unlike His own, for a perfect birth manifests no diversity
 between itself and the original substance. Therefore we repudiate all
 the impious assertions that the Father is Father of a Son begotten of
 Himself and yet not of His own nature. We shall not call God Father for
 having a creature like Him in might and activity, but for begetting a
 nature of an essence not unlike or alien to Himself: for a natural
 birth does not admit of any dissimilarity with the Father's nature.
 Therefore those are anathema who assert that the Father is Father of a
 nature unlike Himself, so that something other than God is born of God,
 and who suppose that the essence of the Father degenerated in begetting
 the Son. For so far as in them lies they destroy the very birthless and
 changeless essence of the Father by daring to attribute to Him in the
 birth of His Only-begotten an alteration and degeneration of His
 natural essence.

 VIII. "And if any one understanding that the Son is like in essence to
 Him whose Son He is admitted to be, says that the Son is the same as
 the Father, or part of the Father, or that it is through an emanation
 or any such passion as is necessary for the procreation of corporeal
 children that the incorporeal Son draws His life from the incorporeal
 Father: let him be anathema."

 21. We have always to beware of the vices of particular perversions,
 and countenance no opportunity for delusion. For many heretics say that
 the Son is like the Father in divinity in order to support the theory
 that in virtue of this similarity the Son is the same Person as the
 Father: for this undivided similarity appears to countenance a belief
 in a single monad. For what does not differ in kind seems to retain
 identity of nature.

 22. But birth does not countenance this vain imagination; for such
 identity without differentiation excludes birth. For what is born has a
 father who caused its birth. Nor because the divinity of Him who is
 being born is inseparable from that of Him who begets, are the Begetter
 and the Begotten the same Person; while on the other hand He who is
 born and He who begets cannot be unlike. He is therefore anathema who
 shall proclaim a similarity of nature in the Father and the Son in
 order to abolish the personal meaning of the word Son: for while
 through mutual likeness one differs in no respect from the other, yet
 this very likeness, which does not admit of bare union, confesses both
 the Father and the Son because the Son is the changeless likeness of
 the Father. For the Son is not part of the Father so that He who is
 born and He who begets can be called one Person. Nor is He an emanation
 so that by a continual flow of a corporeal uninterrupted stream the
 flow is itself kept in its source, the source being identical with the
 flow in virtue of the successive and unbroken continuity. But the birth
 is perfect, and remains alike in nature; not taking its beginning
 materially from a corporeal conception and bearing, but as an
 incorporeal Son drawing His existence from an incorporeal Father
 according to the likeness which belongs to an identical nature.

 IX. "And if any one, because the Father is never admitted to be the Son
 and the Son is never admitted to be the Father, when he says that the
 Son is other than the Father (because the Father is one Person and the
 Son another, inasmuch as it is said, There is another that beareth
 witness of Me, even the father who sent Me [466] ), does in anxiety for
 the distinct personal qualities of the Father and the Son which in the
 Church must be piously understood to exist, fear that the Son and the
 Father may sometimes be admitted to be the same Person, and therefore
 denies that the Son is like in essence to the Father: let him be
 anathema."

 23. It was said unto the apostles of the Lord, Be ye wise as serpents,
 and harmless as doves [467] . Christ therefore wished there to be in us
 the nature of different creatures: but in such a sort that the
 harmlessness of the dove might temper the serpent's wisdom, and the
 wisdom of the serpent might instruct the harmlessness of the dove, and
 that so wisdom might be made harmless and harmlessness wise. This
 precept has been observed in the exposition of this creed. For the
 former sentence of which we have spoken guarded against the teaching of
 a unity of person under the cloak of an essential likeness, and against
 the denial of the Son's birth as the result of an identity of nature,
 lest we should understand God to be a single monad because one Person
 does not differ in kind from the other. In the next sentence, by
 harmless and apostolic wisdom we have again taken refuge in that wisdom
 of the serpent to which we are bidden to be conformed no less than to
 the harmlessness of the dove, lest perchance through a repudiation of
 the unity of persons on the ground that the Father is one Person and
 the Son another, a preaching of the dissimilarity of their natures
 should again take us unawares, and lest on the ground that He who sent
 and He who was sent are two Persons (for the Sent and the Sender cannot
 be one Person) they should be considered to have divided and dissimilar
 natures, though He who is born and He who begets Him cannot be of a
 different essence. So we preserve in Father and in Son the likeness of
 an identical nature through an essential birth: yet the similarity of
 nature does not injure personality by making the Sent and the Sender to
 be but one. Nor do we do away with the similarity of nature by
 admitting distinct personal qualities, for it is impossible that the
 one God should be called Son and Father to Himself. So then the truth
 as to the birth supports the similarity of essence and the similarity
 of essence does not undermine the personal reality of the birth. Nor
 again does a profession of belief in the Begetter and the Begotten
 exclude a similarity of essence; for while the Begetter and the
 Begotten cannot be one Person, He who is born and He who begets cannot
 be of a different nature.

 X. "And if any one admits that God became Father of the Only-begotten
 Son at any point in time and not that the Only-begotten Son came into
 existence without passion beyond all times and beyond all human
 calculation: for contravening the teaching of the Gospel which scorned
 any interval of times between the being of the Father and the Son and
 faithfully has instructed us that In the beginning was the Word, and
 the Word was with God, and the Word was God [468] , let him be
 anathema."

 24. It is a pious saying that the Father is not limited by times: for
 the true meaning of the name of Father which He bore before time began
 surpasses comprehension. Although religion teaches us to ascribe to Him
 this name of Father through which comes the impassible origin of the
 Son, yet He is not bound in time, for the eternal and infinite God
 cannot be understood as having become a Father in time, and according
 to the teaching of the Gospel the Only-begotten God the Word is
 recognized even in the beginning rather to be with God than to be born.

 XI. "And if any one says that the Father is older in time than His
 Only-begotten Son, and that the Son is younger than the Father: let him
 be anathema."

 25. The essential likeness conformed to the Father's essence in kind is
 also taught to be identical in time: lest He who is the image of God,
 who is the Word, who is God with God in the beginning, who is like the
 Father, by the insertion of times between Himself and the Father should
 not have in Himself in perfection that which is both image, and Word,
 and God. For if He be proclaimed to be younger in time, He has lost the
 truth of the image and likeness: for that is no longer likeness which
 is found to be dissimilar in time. For that very fact that God is
 Father prevents there being any time in which He was not Father:
 consequently there can be no time in the Son's existence in which He
 was not Son. Wherefore we must neither call the Father older than the
 Son nor the Son younger than the Father: for the true meaning of
 neither name can exist without the other.

 XII. "And if any one attributes the timeless substance (i.e. Person) of
 the Only-begotten Son derived from the Father to the unborn essence of
 God, as though calling the Father Son: let him be anathema [469] ."

 26. The above definition when it denied that the idea of time could be
 applied to the birth of the Son seemed to have given an occasion for
 heresy (we saw that it would be monstrous if the Father were limited by
 time, but that He would be so limited if the Son were subjected to
 time), so that by the help of this repudiation of time, the Father who
 is unborn might under the appellation of Son be proclaimed as both
 Father and Son in a single and unique Person. For in excluding times
 from the Son's birth it seemed to countenance the opinion that there
 was no birth, so that He whose birth is not in time might be considered
 not to have been born at all. Wherefore, lest at the suggestion of this
 denial of time the heresy of the unity of Persons should insinuate
 itself, that impiety is condemned which dares to refer the timeless
 birth to the unique and singular Person of the unborn essence. For it
 is one thing to be outside time and another to be unborn; the first
 admits of birth (though outside time), the other, so far as it is, is
 the one sole author from eternity of its being what it is.

 27. We have reviewed, beloved brethren, all the definitions of faith
 made by the Eastern bishops which they formulated in their assembly
 against the recently emerging heresy. And we, as far as we have been
 able, have adapted the wording of our exposition to express their
 meaning, following their diction rather than desiring to be thought the
 originators of new phrases. In these words they decree the principles
 of their conscience and a long maintained doctrine against a new and
 profane impiety. Those who compiled this heresy at Sirmium, or accepted
 it after its compilation, they have thereby compelled to confess their
 ignorance and to sign such decrees. There the Son is the perfect image
 of the Father: there under the qualities of an identical essence, the
 Person of the Son is not annihilated and confounded with the Father:
 there the Son is declared to be image of the Father in virtue of a real
 likeness, and does not differ in substance from the Father, whose image
 He is: there on account of the life which the Father has and the life
 which the Son has received, the Father can have nothing different in
 substance (this being implied in life) from that which the Son received
 to have: there the begotten Son is not a creature, but is a Person
 undistinguished from the Father's nature: there, just as an identical
 might belongs to the Father and the Son, so their essence admits of no
 difference: there the Father by begetting the Son in no wise
 degenerates from Himself in Him through any difference of nature:
 there, though the likeness of nature is the same in each, the proper
 qualities which mark this likeness are repugnant to a confusion of
 Persons, so that there is not one subsisting Person who is called both
 Father and Son: there, though it is piously affirmed that there is both
 a Father who sends and a Son who is sent, yet no distinction in essence
 is drawn between the Father and the Son, the Sent and the Sender: there
 the truth of God's Fatherhood is not bound by limits of time: there the
 Son is not later in time: there beyond all time is a perfect birth
 which refutes the error that the Son could not be born.

 28. Here, beloved brethren, is the entire creed which was published by
 some Easterns, few in proportion to the whole number of bishops, and
 which first saw light at the very times when you repelled the
 introduction of this heresy. The reason for its promulgation was the
 fact that they were bidden to say nothing of the homoousion. But even
 in former times, through the urgency of these numerous causes, it was
 necessary at different occasions to compose other creeds, the character
 of which will be understood from their wording. For when you are fully
 aware of the results, it will be easier for us to bring to a full
 consummation, such as religion and unity demand, the argument in which
 we are interested.

 An exposition of the faith of the Church made at the Council held on
 the occasion of the Dedication of the church at Antioch by ninety-seven
 bishops there present, because of suspicions felt as to the orthodoxy
 of a certain bishop [470]

 29. "We believe in accordance with evangelical and apostolic tradition
 in one God the Father Almighty, the Creator, Maker and Disposer of all
 things that are, and from whom are all things.

 "And in one Lord Jesus Christ, His Only-begotten Son, God through whom
 are all things, who was begotten of the Father, God of God, whole God
 of whole God, One of One, perfect God of perfect God, King of King,
 Lord of Lord, the Word, the Wisdom, the Life, true Light, true Way, the
 Resurrection, the Shepherd, the Gate, unable to change or alter, the
 unvarying image of the essence and might and glory of the Godhead, the
 first-born of all creation, who always was in the beginning with God,
 the Word of God, according to what is said in the Gospel, and the Word
 was God, through whom all things were made, and in whom all things
 subsist, who in the last days came down from above, and was born of a
 virgin according to the Scriptures, and was made the Lamb [471] , the
 Mediator between God and man, the Apostle of our faith, and leader of
 life. For He said, I came down from heaven, not to do Mine own will,
 but the will of Him that sent me [472] . Who suffered and rose again
 for us on the third day, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the
 right hand of the Father, and is to come again with glory to judge the
 quick and the dead.

 "And in the Holy Ghost, who was given to them that believe, to comfort,
 sanctify and perfect, even as our Lord Jesus Christ ordained His
 disciples, saying, Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
 name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost [473] ,
 manifestly, that is, of a Father who is truly Father, and clearly of a
 Son who is truly Son, and a Holy Ghost who is truly a Holy Ghost, these
 words not being set forth idly and without meaning, but carefully
 signifying the Person, and order, and glory of each of those who are
 named, to teach us that they are three Persons, but in agreement one.

 30. "Having therefore held this faith from the beginning, and being
 resolved to hold it to the end in the sight of God and Christ, we say
 anathema to every heretical and perverted sect, and if any man teaches
 contrary to the wholesome and right faith of the Scriptures, saying
 that there is or was time, or space, or age before the Son was
 begotten, let him be anathema. And if any one say that the Son is a
 formation like one of the things that are formed, or a birth resembling
 other births, or a creature like the creatures, and not as the divine
 Scriptures have affirmed in each passage aforesaid, or teaches or
 proclaims as the Gospel anything else than what we have received: let
 him be anathema. For all those things which were written in the divine
 Scriptures by Prophets and by Apostles we believe and follow truly and
 with fear."

 31. Perhaps this creed has not spoken expressly enough of the identical
 similarity of the Father and the Son, especially in concluding that the
 names Father, Son and Holy Ghost referred to the Person and order and
 glory of each of those who are named to teach us that they are three
 Persons, but in agreement one.

 32. But in the first place we must remember that the bishops did not
 assemble at Antioch to oppose the heresy which has dared to declare
 that the substance of the Son is unlike that of the Father, but to
 oppose that which, in spite of the Council of Nicæa, presumed to
 attribute the three names to the Father. Of this we will treat in its
 proper place. I recollect that at the beginning of my argument I
 besought the patience and forbearance of my readers and hearers until
 the completion of my letter, lest any one should rashly rise to judge
 me before he was acquainted with the entire argument. I ask it again.
 This assembly of the saints wished to strike a blow at that impiety
 which by a mere counting of names evades the truth as to the Father and
 the Son and the Holy Ghost; which represents that there is no personal
 cause for each name, and by a false use of these names makes the triple
 nomenclature imply only one Person, so that the Father alone could be
 also called both Holy Ghost and Son. Consequently they declared there
 were three substances, meaning three subsistent Persons, and not
 thereby introducing any dissimilarity of essence to separate the
 substance of Father and Son. For the words to teach us that they are
 three in substance, but in agreement one, are free from objection,
 because as the Spirit is also named, and He is the Paraclete, it is
 more fitting that a unity of agreement should be asserted than a unity
 of essence based on likeness of substance.

 33. Further the whole of the above statement has drawn no distinction
 whatever between the essence and nature of the Father and the Son. For
 when it is said, God of God, whole God of whole God, there is no room
 for doubting that whole God is born of whole God. For the nature of God
 who is of God admits of no difference, and as whole God of whole God He
 is in all in which the Father is. One of One excludes the passions of a
 human birth and conception, so that since He is One of One, He comes
 from no other source, nor is different nor alien, for He is One of One,
 perfect God of perfect God. Except in having a cause of its origin His
 birth does not differ from the birthless nature since the perfection of
 both Persons is the same. King of King. A power that is expressed by
 one and the same title allows no dissimilarity of power. Lord of Lord.
 In Lord' also the lordship is equal: there can be no difference where
 domination is confessed of both without diversity. But plainest of all
 is the statement appended after several others, unable to change or
 alter, the unvarying image of the Godhead and essence and might and
 glory. For as God of God, whole God of whole God, One of One, perfect
 God of perfect God, King of King and Lord of Lord, since in all that
 glory and nature of Godhead in which the Father ever abides, the Son
 born of Him also subsists; He derives this also from the Father's
 substance that He is unable to change. For in His birth that nature
 from which He is born is not changed; but the Son has maintained a
 changeless essence since His origin is in a changeless nature. For
 though He is an image, yet the image cannot alter, since in Him was
 born the image of the Father's essence, and there could not be in Him a
 change of nature caused by any unlikeness to the Father's essence from
 which He was begotten. Now when we are taught that He was brought into
 being as the first of all creation, and He is Himself said to have
 always been in the beginning with God as God the Word, the fact that He
 was brought into being shews that He was born, and the fact that He
 always was, shews that He is not separated from the Father by time.
 Therefore this Council by dividing the three substances, which it did
 to exclude a monad God with a threefold title, did not introduce any
 separation of substance between the Father and the Son. The whole
 exposition of faith makes no distinction between Father and Son, the
 Unborn and the Only-begotten, in time, or name, or essence, or dignity,
 or domination. But our common conscience demands that we should gain a
 knowledge of the other creeds of the same Eastern bishops, composed at
 different times and places, that by the study of many confessions we
 may understand the sincerity of their faith.

 The Creed according to the Council of the East.

 34. "We, the holy synod met in Sardica from different provinces of the
 East, namely, Thebais, Egypt, Palestine, Arabia, Phoenicia, Coele
 Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Galatia,
 Bithynia and Hellespont, from Asia, namely, the two provinces of
 Phrygia, Pisidia, the islands of the Cyclades, Pamphylia, Caria, Lydia,
 from Europe, namely, Thrace, Hæmimontus [474] , Moesia, and the two
 provinces of Pannonia, have set forth this creed.

 "We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Creator and Maker of all
 things, from whom all fatherhood in heaven and earth is named:

 "And we believe in His Only-begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who
 before all ages was begotten of the Father, God of God, Light of Light,
 through whom were made all things which are in heaven and earth,
 visible and invisible: who is the Word and Wisdom and Might and Life
 and true Light: and who in the last days for our sake was incarnate,
 and was born of the holy Virgin, who was crucified and dead and buried,
 And rose from the dead on the third day, And was received into heaven,
 And sitteth on the right hand of the Father, And shall come to judge
 the quick and the dead and to give to every man according to his works:
 Whose kingdom remaineth without end for ever and ever. For He sitteth
 on the right hand of the Father not only in this age, but also in the
 age to come.

 "We believe also in the Holy Ghost, that is, the Paraclete, whom
 according to His promise He sent to His apostles after His return into
 the heavens to teach them and to bring all things to their remembrance,
 through whom also the souls of them that believe sincerely in Him are
 sanctified.

 "But those who say that the Son of God is sprung from things
 non-existent or from another substance and not from God, and that there
 was a time or age when He was not, the holy Catholic Church holds them
 as aliens. Likewise also those who say that there are three Gods, or
 that Christ is not God and that before the ages He was neither Christ
 nor Son of God, or that He Himself is the Father and the Son and the
 Holy Ghost, or that the Son is incapable of birth; or that the Father
 begat the Son without purpose or will: the holy Catholic Church
 anathematizes."

 35. In the exposition of this creed, concise but complete definitions
 have been employed. For in condemning those who said that the Son
 sprang from things non-existent, it attributed to Him a source which
 had no beginning but continues perpetually. And lest this source from
 which He drew His permanent birth should be understood to be any other
 substance than that of God, it also declares to be blasphemers those
 who said that the Son was born of some other substance and not of God.
 And so since He does not draw His subsistence from nothing, or spring
 from any other source than God, it cannot be doubted that He was born
 with those qualities which are God's; since the Only-begotten essence
 of the Son is generated neither from things which are non-existent nor
 from any other substance than the birthless and eternal substance of
 the Father. But the creed also rejects intervals of times or ages: on
 the assumption that He who does not differ in nature cannot be
 separable by time.

 36. On every side, where anxiety might be felt, approach is barred to
 the arguments of heretics lest it should be declared that there is any
 difference in the Son. For those are anathematized who say that there
 are three Gods: because according to God's true nature His substance
 does not admit a number of applications of the title, except as it is
 given to individual men and angels in recognition of their merit,
 though the substance of their nature and that of God is different. In
 that sense there are consequently many gods. Furthermore in the nature
 of God, God is one, yet in such a way that the Son also is God, because
 in Him there is not a different nature: and since He is God of God,
 both must be God, and since there is no difference of kind between them
 there is no distinction in their essence. A number of titular Gods is
 rejected; because there is no diversity in the quality of the divine
 nature. Since therefore he is anathema who says there are many Gods and
 he is anathema who denies that the Son is God; it is fully shewn that
 the fact that each has one and the same name arises from the real
 character of the similar substance in each: since in confessing the
 Unborn God the Father, and the Only-begotten God the Son, with no
 dissimilarity of essence between them, each is called God, yet God must
 be believed and be declared to be one. So by the diligent and watchful
 care of the bishops the creed guards the similarity of the nature
 begotten and the nature begetting, confirming it by the application of
 one name.

 37. Yet to prevent the declaration of one God seeming to affirm that
 God is a solitary monad without offspring of His own, it immediately
 condemns the rash suggestion that because God is one, therefore God the
 Father is one and solitary, having in Himself the name of Father and of
 Son: since in the Father who begets and the Son who comes to birth one
 God must be declared to exist on account of the substance of their
 nature being similar in each. The faith of the saints knows nothing of
 the Son being incapable of birth: because the nature of the Son only
 draws its existence from birth. But the nature of the birth is in Him
 so perfect that He who was born of the substance of God is born also of
 His purpose and will. For from His will and purpose, not from the
 process of a corporeal nature, springs the absolute perfection of the
 essence of God born from the essence of God. It follows that we should
 now consider that creed which was compiled not long ago when Photinus
 was deposed from the episcopate.

 A copy of the creed composed at Sirmium by the Easterns to oppose
 Photinus.

 38. "We believe in one God the Father Almighty, the Creator and Maker,
 from whom every fatherhood in heaven and in earth is named.

 "And in His only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the Father
 before all ages, God of God, Light of Light, through whom all things
 were made in heaven and in earth, visible and invisible. Who is the
 Word and Wisdom and Might and Life and true Light: who in the last days
 for our sake took a body, And was born of the holy Virgin, And was
 crucified, And was dead and buried: who also rose from the dead on the
 third day, And ascended into heaven, And sitteth on the right hand of
 the Father, And shall come at the end of the world to judge the quick
 and the dead; whose kingdom continueth without end and remaineth for
 perpetual ages. For He shall be sitting at the right hand of the Father
 not only in this age, but also in the age to come.

 "And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the Paraclete, whom according to His
 promise He sent to the apostles after He ascended into heaven to teach
 them and to remind them of all things, through whom also are sanctified
 the souls of those who believe sincerely in Him.

 I. "But those who say that the Son is sprung from things non-existent,
 or from another substance and not from God, and that there was a time
 or age when He was not, the holy Catholic Church regards as aliens.

 II. "If any man says that the Father and the Son are two Gods: let him
 be anathema.

 III. "And if any man says that God is one, but does not confess that
 Christ, God the Son of God, ministered to the Father in the creation of
 all things: let him be anathema.

 IV. "And if any man dares to say that the Unborn God, or a part of Him,
 was born of Mary: let him be anathema.

 V. "And if any man say that the Son born of Mary was, before born of
 Mary, Son only according to foreknowledge or predestination, and denies
 that He was born of the Father before the ages and was with God, and
 that all things were made through Him: let him be anathema.

 VI. "If any man says that the substance of God is expanded and
 contracted: let him be anathema.

 VII. "If any man says that the expanded substance of God makes the Son;
 or names Son His supposed expanded substance: let him be anathema.

 VIII. "If any man says that the Son of God is the internal or uttered
 Word of God: let him be anathema.

 IX. "If any man says that the man alone born of Mary is the Son: let
 him be anathema.

 X. "If any man though saying that God and Man was born of Mary,
 understands thereby the Unborn God: let him be anathema.

 XI. "If any man hearing The Word was made Flesh [475] thinks that the
 Word was transformed into Flesh, or says that He suffered change in
 taking Flesh: let him be anathema.

 XII. "If any man hearing that the only Son of God was crucified, says
 that His divinity suffered corruption, or pain, or change, or
 diminution, or destruction: let him be anathema.

 XIII. "If any man says Let us make man [476] was not spoken by the
 Father to the Son, but by God to Himself: let him be anathema.

 XIV. "If any man says that the Son did not appear to Abraham, but the
 Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

 XV. "If any man says that the Son did not wrestle with Jacob as a man,
 but the Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

 XVI. "If any man does not understand The Lord rained from the Lord to
 be spoken of the Father and the Son, but that the Father rained from
 Himself: let him be anathema. For the Lord the Son rained from the Lord
 the Father.

 XVII. "If any man says that the Lord and the Lord, the Father and the
 Son are two Gods, because of the aforesaid words: let him be anathema.
 For we do not make the Son the equal or peer of the Father, but
 understand the Son to be subject. For He did not come down to Sodom
 without the Father's will, nor rain from Himself but from the Lord, to
 wit by the Father's authority; nor does He sit at the Father's right
 hand by His own authority, but He hears the Father saying. Sit thou on
 My right hand [477] .

 XVIII. "If any man says that the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost
 are one Person: let him be anathema.

 XIX. "If any man speaking of the Holy Ghost the Paraclete says that He
 is the Unborn God: let him be anathema.

 XX. "If any man denies that, as the Lord has taught us, the Paraclete
 is different from the Son; for He said, And the Father shall send you
 another Comforter, whom I shall ask [478] : let him be anathema.

 XXI. "If any man says that the Holy Spirit is a part of the Father or
 of the Son: let him be anathema.

 XXII. "If any man says that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
 are three Gods: let him be anathema.

 XXIII. "If any man after the example of the Jews understands as said
 for the destruction of the Eternal Only-begotten God the words, I am
 the first God, and I am the last God, and beside Me there is no God
 [479] , which were spoken for the destruction of idols and them that
 are no gods: let him be anathema.

 XXIV. "If any man says that the Son was made by the will of God, like
 any object in creation: let him be anathema.

 XXV. "If any man says that the Son was born against the will of the
 Father: let him be anathema. For the Father was not forced against His
 own will, or induced by any necessity of nature to beget the Son: but
 as soon as He willed, before time and without passion He begat Him of
 Himself and shewed Him forth.

 XXVI. "If any man says that the Son is incapable of birth and without
 beginning, saying as though there were two incapable of birth and
 unborn and without beginning, and makes two Gods: let him be anathema.
 For the Head, which is the beginning of all things, is the Son; but the
 Head or beginning of Christ is God: for so to One who is without
 beginning and is the beginning of all things, we refer the whole world
 through Christ.

 XXVII. "Once more we strengthen the understanding of Christianity by
 saying, If any man denies that Christ who is God and Son of God,
 personally existed before time began and aided the Father in the
 perfecting of all things; but says that only from the time that He was
 born of Mary did He gain the name of Christ and Son and a beginning of
 His deity: let him be anathema."

 39. The necessity of the moment urged the Council to set forth a wider
 and broader exposition of the creed including many intricate questions,
 because the heresy which Photinus was reviving was sapping our Catholic
 home by many secret mines. Their purpose was to oppose every form of
 stealthy subtle heresy by a corresponding form of pure and unsullied
 faith, and to have as many complete explanations of the faith as there
 were instances of peculiar faithlessness. Immediately after the
 universal and unquestioned statement of the Christian mysteries, the
 explanation of the faith against the heretics begins as follows.

 I. "But those who say that the Son is sprung from things non-existent,
 or from another substance and not from God, and that there was a time
 or age when He was not, the holy Catholic Church regards as aliens."

 40. What ambiguity is there here? What is omitted that the
 consciousness of a sincere faith could suggest? He does not spring from
 things non-existent: therefore His origin has existence. There is no
 other substance extant to be His origin, but that of God: therefore
 nothing else can be born in Him but all that is God; because His
 existence is not from nothing, and He draws subsistence from no other
 source. He does not differ in time: therefore the Son like the Father
 is eternal. And so the Unborn Father and the Only-begotten Son share
 all the same qualities. They are equal in years, and that very
 similarity between the sole-existing paternal essence and its offspring
 prevents distinction in any quality.

 II. "If any man says that the Father and the Son are two Gods: let him
 be anathema.

 III. "And if any man says that God is one, but does not confess that
 Christ who is God and eternal Son of God ministered to the Father in
 the creation of all things: let him be anathema."

 41. The very statement of the name as our religion states it gives us a
 clear insight into the fact. For since it is condemned to say that the
 Father and the Son are two Gods, and it is also accursed to deny that
 the Son is God, any opinion as to the substance of the one being
 different from that of the other in asserting two Gods is excluded. For
 there is no other essence, except that of God the Father, from which
 God the Son of God was born before time. For since we are compelled to
 confess God the Father, and roundly declare that Christ the Son of God
 is God, and between these two truths lies the impious confession of two
 Gods: They must on the ground of their identity of nature and name be
 one in the kind of their essence if the name of their essence is
 necessarily one.

 IV. "If any one dares to say that the Unborn God, or a part of Him, was
 born of Mary: let him be anathema."

 42. The fact of the essence declared to be one in the Father and the
 Son having one name on account of their similarity of nature seemed to
 offer an opportunity to heretics to declare that the Unborn God, or a
 part of Him, was born of Mary. The danger was met by the wholesome
 resolution that he who declared this should be anathema. For the unity
 of the name which religion employs and which is based on the exact
 similarity of their natural essence, has not repudiated the Person of
 the begotten essence so as to represent, under cover of the unity of
 name, that the substance of God is singular and undifferentiated
 because we predicate one name for the essence of each, that is,
 predicate one God, on account of the exactly similar substance of the
 undivided nature in each Person.

 V. "If any man say that the Son existed before Mary only according to
 foreknowledge or predestination, and denies that He was born of the
 Father before the ages and with God, and that all things were made
 through Him: let him be anathema."

 43. While denying that the God of us all, the Son of God, existed
 before He was born in bodily form, some assert that He existed
 according to foreknowledge and predestination, and not according to the
 essence of a personally subsistent nature: that is, because the Father
 predestined the Son to have existence some day by being born of the
 Virgin, He was announced to us by the Father's foreknowledge rather
 than born and existent before the ages in the substance of the divine
 nature, and that all things which He Himself spake in the prophets
 concerning the mysteries of His incarnation and passion were simply
 said concerning Him by the Father according to His foreknowledge.
 Consequently this perverse doctrine is condemned, so that we know that
 the Only-begotten Son of God was born of the Father before all worlds,
 and formed the worlds and all creation, and that He was not merely
 predestined to be born.

 VI. "If any man says that the substance of God is expanded and
 contracted: let him be anathema."

 44. To contract and expand are bodily affections: but God who is a
 Spirit and breathes where He listeth, does not expand or contract
 Himself through any change of substance. Remaining free and outside the
 bond of any bodily nature, He supplies out of Himself what He wills,
 when He wills, and where He wills. Therefore it is impious to ascribe
 any change of substance to such an unfettered Power.

 VII. "If any man says that the expanded substance of God makes the Son,
 or names Son His expanded substance: let him be anathema."

 45. The above opinion, although meant to teach the immutability of God,
 yet prepared the way for the following heresy. Some have ventured to
 say that the Unborn God by expansion of His substance extended Himself
 as far as the holy Virgin, in order that this extension produced by the
 increase of His nature and assuming manhood might be called Son. They
 denied that the Son who is perfect God born before time began was the
 same as He who was afterwards born as Man. Therefore the Catholic Faith
 condemns all denial of the immutability of the Father and of the birth
 of the Son.

 VIII. "If any man says that the Son is the internal or uttered Word of
 God: let him be anathema."

 46. Heretics, destroying as far as in them lies the Son of God, confess
 Him to be only the word, going forth as an utterance from the speaker's
 lips and the unembodied sound of an impersonal voice: so that God the
 Father has as Son a word resembling any word we utter in virtue of our
 inborn power of speaking. Therefore this dangerous deceit is condemned,
 which asserts that God the Word, who was in the beginning with God, is
 only the word of a voice sometimes internal and sometimes expressed.

 IX. "If any man says that the man alone born of Mary is the Son: let
 him be anathema."

 We cannot declare that the Son of God is born of Mary without declaring
 Him to be both Man and God. But lest the declaration that He is both
 God and Man should give occasion to deceit, the Council immediately
 adds,

 X. "If any man though saying that God and Man was born of Mary,
 understands thereby the Unborn God: let him be anathema."

 47. Thus is preserved both the name and power of the divine substance.
 For since he is anathema who says that the Son of God by Mary is man
 and not God; and he falls under the same condemnation who says that the
 Unborn God became man: God made Man is not denied to be God but denied
 to be the Unborn God, the Father being distinguished from the Son not
 under the head of nature or by diversity of substance, but only by such
 pre-eminence as His birthless nature gives.

 XI. "If any man hearing The Word was made Flesh thinks that the Word
 was transformed into Flesh, or says that He suffered change in taking
 Flesh: let him be anathema."

 48. This preserves the dignity of the Godhead: so that in the fact that
 the Word was made Flesh, the Word, in becoming Flesh, has not lost
 through being Flesh what constituted the Word, nor has become
 transformed into Flesh, so as to cease to be the Word; but the Word was
 made Flesh [480] in order that the Flesh might begin to be what the
 Word is. Else whence came to His Flesh miraculous power in working,
 glory on the Mount, knowledge of the thoughts of human hearts, calmness
 in His passion, life in His death? God knowing no change, when made
 Flesh lost nothing of the prerogatives of His substance.

 XII. "If any man hearing that the only Son of God was crucified, says
 that His divinity suffered corruption or pain or change or diminution
 or destruction: let him be anathema."

 49. It is clearly shewn why the Word, though He was made Flesh, was
 nevertheless not transformed into Flesh. Though these kinds of
 suffering affect the infirmity of the flesh, yet God the Word when made
 Flesh could not change under suffering. Suffering and change are not
 identical. Suffering of every kind causes all flesh to change through
 sensitiveness and endurance of pain. But the Word that was made Flesh,
 although He made Himself subject to suffering, was nevertheless
 unchanged by the liability to suffer. For He was able to suffer, and
 yet the Word was not possible. Possibility denotes a nature that is
 weak; but suffering in itself is the endurance of pains inflicted, and
 since the Godhead is immutable and yet the Word was made Flesh, such
 pains found in Him a material which they could affect though the Person
 of the Word had no infirmity or possibility. And so when He suffered
 His Nature remained immutable because like His Father, His Person is of
 an impassible essence, though it is born [481] .

 XIII. "If any man says Let us make man [482] was not spoken by the
 Father to the Son, but by God to Himself: let him be anathema.

 XIV. "If any man says that the Son did not appear to Abraham [483] ,
 but the Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

 XV. "If any man says that the Son did not wrestle with Jacob as a man
 [484] , but the Unborn God, or a part of Him: let him be anathema.

 XVI. "If any man does not understand The Lord rained from the Lord
 [485] to be spoken of the Father and the Son, but says that the Father
 rained from Himself: let him be anathema. For the Lord the Son rained
 from the Lord the Father."

 50. These points had to be inserted into the creed because Photinus,
 against whom the synod was held, denied them. They were inserted lest
 any one should dare to assert that the Son of God did not exist before
 the Son of the Virgin, and should attach to the Unborn God with the
 foolish perversity of an insane heresy all the above passages which
 refer to the Son of God, and while applying them to the Father, deny
 the Person of the Son. The clearness of these statements absolves us
 from the necessity of interpreting them.

 XVII. "If any man says that the Lord and the Lord, the Father and the
 Son, are two Gods because of the aforesaid words: let him be anathema.
 For we do not make the Son the equal or peer of the Father, but
 understand the Son to be subject. For He did not come down to Sodom
 without the Father's will, nor rain from Himself but from the Lord, to
 wit, by the Father's authority; nor does He sit at the Father's right
 hand by His own authority, but because He hears the Father saying, Sit
 Thou on My right hand [486] ."

 51. The foregoing and the following statements utterly remove any
 ground for suspecting that this definition asserts a diversity of
 different deities in the Lord and the Lord. No comparison is made
 because it was seen to be impious to say that there are two Gods: not
 that they refrain from making the Son equal and peer of the Father in
 order to deny that He is God. For, since he is anathema who denies that
 Christ is God, it is not on that score that it is profane to speak of
 two equal Gods. God is One on account of the true character of His
 natural essence and because from the Unborn God the Father, who is the
 one God, the Only-begotten God the Son is born, and draws His divine
 Being only from God; and since the essence of Him who is begotten is
 exactly similar to the essence of Him who begot Him, there must be one
 name for the exactly similar nature. That the Son is not on a level
 with the Father and is not equal to Him is chiefly shewn in the fact
 that He was subjected to Him to render obedience, in that the Lord
 rained from the Lord and that the Father did not, as Photinus and
 Sabellius say, rain from Himself, as the Lord from the Lord; in that He
 then sat down at the right hand of God when it was told Him to seat
 Himself; in that He is sent, in that He receives, in that He submits in
 all things to the will of Him who sent Him. But the subordination of
 filial love is not a diminution of essence, nor does pious duty cause a
 degeneration of nature, since in spite of the fact that both the Unborn
 Father is God and the Only-begotten Son of God is God, God is
 nevertheless One, and the subjection and dignity of the Son are both
 taught in that by being called Son He is made subject to that name
 which because it implies that God is His Father is yet a name which
 denotes His nature. Having a name which belongs to Him whose Son He is,
 He is subject to the Father both in service and name; yet in such a way
 that the subordination of His name bears witness to the true character
 of His natural and exactly similar essence.

 XVIII. "If any man says that the Father and the Son are one Person: let
 him be anathema."

 52. Sheer perversity calls for no contradiction: and yet the mad frenzy
 of certain men has been so violent as to dare to predicate one Person
 with two names.

 XIX. "If any man speaking of the Holy Ghost the Paraclete say that He
 is the Unborn God: let him be anathema."

 53. The further clause makes liable to anathema the predicating Unborn
 God of the Paraclete. For it is most impious to say that He who was
 sent by the Son for our consolation is the Unborn God.

 XX. "If any man deny that, as the Lord has taught us, the Paraclete is
 different from the Son; for He said, And the Further shall send you
 another Comforter, whom I shall ask: let him be anathema."

 54. We remember that the Paraclete was sent by the Son, and at the
 beginning the creed explained this. But since through the virtue of His
 nature, which is exactly similar, the Son has frequently called His own
 works the works of the Father, saying, I do the works of My Father
 [487] : so when He intended to send the Paraclete, as He often
 promised, He said sometimes that He was to be sent from the Father, in
 that He was piously wont to refer all that He did to the Father. And
 from this the heretics often seize an opportunity of saying that the
 Son Himself is the Paraclete: while by the fact that He promised to
 pray that another Comforter should be sent from the Father, He shews
 the difference between Him who is sent and Him who asked.

 XXI. "If any man says that the Holy Spirit is a part of the Father or
 of the Son: let him be anathema."

 55. The insane frenzy of the heretics, and not any genuine difficulty,
 rendered it necessary that this should be written. For since the name
 of Holy Spirit has its own signification, and the Holy Spirit the
 Paraclete has the office and rank peculiar to His Person, and since the
 Father and the Son are everywhere declared to be immutable: how could
 the Holy Spirit be asserted to be a part either of the Father or of the
 Son? But since this folly is often affirmed amid other follies by
 godless men, it was needful that the pious should condemn it.

 XXII. "If any man says that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
 are three Gods: let him be anathema."

 56. Since it is contrary to religion to say that there are two Gods,
 because we remember and declare that nowhere has it been affirmed that
 there is more than one God: how much more worthy of condemnation is it
 to name three Gods in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Nevertheless,
 since heretics say this, Catholics rightly condemn it.

 XXIII. "If any man, after the example of the Jews, understand as said
 for the destruction of the Eternal Only-begotten God, the words, I am
 the first God, and I am the last God, and beside Me there is no God
 [488] , which were spoken for the destruction of idols and them that
 are no gods: let him be anathema."

 57. Though we condemn a plurality of gods and declare that God is only
 one, we cannot deny that the Son of God is God. Nay, the true character
 of His nature causes the name that is denied to a plurality to be the
 privilege of His essence. The words, Beside Me there is no God, cannot
 rob the Son of His divinity: because beside Him who is of God there is
 no other God. And these words of God the Father cannot annul the
 divinity of Him who was born of Himself with an essence in no way
 different from His own nature. The Jews interpret this passage as
 proving the bare unity of God, because they are ignorant of the
 Only-begotten God. But we, while we deny that there are two Gods, abhor
 the idea of a diversity of natural essence in the Father and the Son.
 The words, Beside Me there is no God, take away an impious belief in
 false gods. In confessing that God is One, and also saying that the Son
 is God, our use of the same name affirms that there is no difference of
 substance between the two Persons.

 XXIV. "If any man says that the Son was made by the will of God, like
 any object in creation: let him be anathema."

 58. To all creatures the will of God has given substance: but a perfect
 birth gave to the Son a nature from a substance that is impossible and
 itself unborn. All created things are such as God willed them to be:
 but the Son who is born of God has such a personality as God has. God's
 nature did not produce a nature unlike itself: but the Son begotten of
 God's substance has derived the essence of His nature by virtue of His
 origin, not from an act of will after the manner of creatures.

 XXV. "If any man says that the Son was born against the will of the
 Father: let him be anathema. For the Father was not forced against His
 own will, or induced against His will by any necessity of nature, to
 beget His Son; but as soon as He willed, before time and without
 passion He begat Him of Himself and shewed Him forth."

 59. Since it was taught that the Son did not, like all other things,
 owe His existence to God's will, lest He should be thought to derive
 His essence only at His Father's will and not in virtue of His own
 nature, an opportunity seemed thereby to be given to heretics to
 attribute to God the Father a necessity of begetting the Son from
 Himself, as though He had brought forth the Son by a law of nature in
 spite of Himself. But such liability to be acted upon does not exist in
 God the Father: in the ineffable and perfect birth of the Son it was
 neither mere will that begat Him nor was the Father's essence changed
 or forced at the bidding of a natural law. Nor was any substance sought
 for to beget Him, nor is the nature of the Begetter changed in the
 Begotten, nor is the Father's unique name affected by time. Before all
 time the Father, out of the essence of His nature, with a desire that
 was subject to no passion, gave to the Son a birth that conveyed the
 essence of His nature.

 XXVI. "If any man says that the Son is incapable of birth and without
 beginning, speaking as though there were two incapable of birth and
 unborn and without beginning, and makes two Gods: let him be anathema.
 For the Head, which is the beginning of all things, is the Son; but the
 Head or beginning of Christ is God: for so to One who is without
 beginning and is the beginning of all things, we refer the whole world
 through Christ."

 60. To declare the Son to be incapable of birth is the height of
 impiety. God would no longer be One: for the nature of the one Unborn
 God demands that we should confess that God is one. Since therefore God
 is one, there cannot be two incapable of birth: because God is one
 (although both the Father is God and the Son of God is God) for the
 very reason that incapability of birth is the only quality that can
 belong to one Person only. The Son is God for the very reason that He
 derives His birth from that essence which cannot be born. Therefore our
 holy faith rejects the idea that the Son is incapable of birth in order
 to predicate one God incapable of birth and consequently one God, and
 in order to embrace the Only-begotten nature, begotten from the unborn
 essence, in the one name of the Unborn God. For the Head of all things
 is the Son: but the Head of the Son is God. And to one God through this
 stepping-stone and by this confession all things are referred, since
 the whole world takes its beginning from Him to whom God Himself is the
 beginning.

 XXVII. "Once more we strengthen the understanding of Christianity by
 saying, If any man denies that Christ, who is God and the Son of God,
 existed before time began and aided the Father in the perfecting of all
 things; but says that only from the time that He was born of Mary did
 He gain the name of Christ and Son and a beginning of His deity: let
 him be anathema."

 61. A condemnation of that heresy on account of which the Synod was
 held necessarily concluded with an explanation of the whole faith that
 was being opposed. This heresy falsely stated that the beginning of the
 Son of God dated from His birth of Mary. According to evangelical and
 apostolic doctrine the corner-stone of our faith is that our Lord Jesus
 Christ, who is God and Son of God, cannot be separated from the Father
 in title or power or difference of substance or interval of time.

 62. You perceive that the truth has been sought by many paths through
 the advice and opinions of different bishops, and the ground of their
 views has been set forth by the separate declarations inscribed in this
 creed. Every separate point of heretical assertion has been
 successfully refuted. The infinite and boundless God cannot be made
 comprehensible by a few words of human speech. Brevity often misleads
 both learner and teacher, and a concentrated discourse either causes a
 subject not to be understood, or spoils the meaning of an argument
 where a thing is hinted at, and is not proved by full demonstration.
 The bishops fully understood this, and therefore have used for the
 purpose of teaching many definitions and a profusion of words that the
 ordinary understanding might find no difficulty, but that their hearers
 might be saturated with the truth thus differently expressed, and that
 in treating of divine things these adequate and manifold definitions
 might leave no room for danger or obscurity.

 63. You must not be surprised, dear brethren, that so many creeds have
 recently been written. The frenzy of heretics makes it necessary. The
 danger of the Eastern Churches is so great that it is rare to find
 either priest or layman that belongs to this faith, of the orthodoxy of
 which you may judge. Certain individuals have acted so wrongly as to
 support the side of evil, and the strength of the wicked has been
 increased by the exile of some of the bishops, the cause of which you
 are acquainted with. I am not speaking about distant events or writing
 down incidents of which I know nothing: I have heard and seen the
 faults which we now have to combat. They are not laymen but bishops who
 are guilty. Except the bishop Eleusius [489] and his few comrades, the
 greater part of the ten provinces of Asia, in which I am now staying,
 really know not God. Would that they knew nothing about Him, for their
 ignorance would meet with a readier pardon than their detraction. These
 faithful bishops do not keep silence in their pain. They seek for the
 unity of that faith of which others have long since robbed them. The
 necessity of a united exposition of that faith was first felt when
 Hosius forgot his former deeds and words, and a fresh yet festering
 heresy broke out at Sirmium. Of Hosius I say nothing, I leave his
 conduct in the background lest man's judgment should forget what once
 he was. But everywhere there are scandals, schisms and treacheries.
 Hence some of those who had formerly written one creed were compelled
 to sign another. I make no complaint against these long-suffering
 Eastern bishops, it was enough that they gave at least a compulsory
 assent to the faith after they had once been willing to blaspheme. I
 think it a subject of congratulation that a single penitent should be
 found among such obstinate, blaspheming and heretical bishops. But,
 brethren, you enjoy happiness and glory in the Lord, who meanwhile
 retain and conscientiously confess the whole apostolic faith, and have
 hitherto been ignorant of written creeds. You have not needed the
 letter, for you abounded in the spirit. You required not the office of
 a hand to write what you believed in your hearts and professed unto
 salvation. It was unnecessary for you to read as bishops what you held
 when new-born converts. But necessity has introduced the custom of
 expounding creeds and signing expositions. Where the conscience is in
 danger we must use the letter. Nor is it wrong to write what it is
 wholesome to confess.

 64. Kept always from guile by the gift of the Holy Spirit, we confess
 and write of our own will that there are not two Gods but one God; nor
 do we therefore deny that the Son of God is also God; for He is God of
 God. We deny that there are two incapable of birth, because God is one
 through the prerogative of being incapable of birth; nor does it follow
 that the Unbegotten is not God, for His source is the Unborn substance.
 There is not one subsistent Person, but a similar substance in both
 Persons. There is not one name of God applied to dissimilar natures,
 but a wholly similar essence belonging to one name and nature. One is
 not superior to the other on account of the kind of His substance, but
 one is subject to the other because born of the other. The Father is
 greater because He is Father, the Son is not the less because He is
 Son. The difference is one of the meaning of a name and not of a
 nature. We confess that the Father is not affected by time, but do not
 deny that the Son is equally eternal. We assert that the Father is in
 the Son because the Son has nothing in Himself unlike the Father: we
 confess that the Son is in the Father because the existence of the Son
 is not from any other source. We recognize that their nature is mutual
 and similar because equal: we do not think them to be one Person
 because they are one: we declare that they are through the similarity
 of an identical nature one, in such a way that they nevertheless are
 not one Person.

 65. I have expounded, beloved brethren, my belief in our common faith
 so far as our wonted human speech permitted and the Lord, whom I have
 ever besought, as He is my witness, has given me power. If I have said
 too little, nay, if I have said almost nothing, I ask you to remember
 that it is not belief but words that are lacking. Perhaps I shall
 thereby prove that my human nature, though not my will, is weak: and I
 pardon my human nature if it cannot speak as it would of God, for it is
 enough for its salvation to have believed the things of God.

 66. Since your faith and mine, so far as I am conscious, is in no
 danger before God, and I have shewn you, as you wished, the creeds that
 have been set forth by the Eastern bishops (though I repeat that they
 were few in number, for, considering how numerous the Eastern Churches
 are, that faith is held by few), I have also declared my own
 convictions about divine things, according to the doctrine of the
 apostles. It remains for you to investigate without suspicion the
 points that mislead the unguarded temper of our simple minds, for there
 is now no opportunity left of hearing. And although I shall no longer
 fear that sentence will not be passed upon me in accordance with the
 whole exposition of the creed, I ask you to allow me to express a wish
 that I may not have the sentence passed until the exposition is
 actually completed.

 67. Many of us, beloved brethren, declare the substance of the Father
 and the Son to be one in such a spirit that I consider the statement to
 be quite as much wrong as right. The expression contains both a
 conscientious conviction and the opportunity for delusion. If we assert
 the one substance, understanding it to mean the likeness of natural
 qualities and such a likeness as includes not only the species but the
 genus, we assert it in a truly religious spirit, provided we believe
 that the one substance signifies such a similitude of qualities that
 the unity is not the unity of a monad but of equals. By equality I mean
 exact similarity so that the likeness may be called an equality,
 provided that the equality imply unity because it implies an equal
 pair, and that the unity which implies an equal pair be not wrested to
 mean a single Person. Therefore the one substance will be asserted
 piously if it does not abolish the subsistent personality or divide the
 one substance into two, for their substance by the true character of
 the Son's birth and by their natural likeness is so free from
 difference that it is called one.

 68. But if we attribute one substance to the Father and the Son to
 teach that there is a solitary personal existence although denoted by
 two titles: then though we confess the Son with our lips we do not keep
 Him in our hearts, since in confessing one substance we then really say
 that the Father and the Son constitute one undifferentiated Person.
 Nay, there immediately arises an opportunity for the erroneous belief
 that the Father is divided, and that He cut off a portion of Himself to
 be His Son. That is what the heretics mean when they say the substance
 is one: and the terminology of our good confession so gratifies them
 that it aids heresy when the word homoousios is left by itself,
 undefined and ambiguous. There is also a third error. When the Father
 and the Son are said to be of one substance this is thought to imply a
 prior substance, which the two equal Persons both possess. Consequently
 the word implies three things, one original substance and two Persons,
 who are as it were fellow-heirs of this one substance. For as two
 fellow-heirs are two, and the heritage of which they are fellow-heirs
 is anterior to them, so the two equal Persons might appear to be
 sharers in one anterior substance. The assertion of the one substance
 of the Father and the Son signifies either that there is one Person who
 has two titles, or one divided substance that has made two imperfect
 substances, or that there is a third prior substance which has been
 usurped and assumed by two and which is called one because it was one
 before it was severed into two. Where then is there room for the Son's
 birth? Where is the Father or the Son, if these names are explained not
 by the birth of the divine nature but a severing or sharing of one
 anterior substance?

 69. Therefore amid the numerous dangers which threaten the faith,
 brevity of words must be employed sparingly, lest what is piously meant
 be thought to be impiously expressed, and a word be judged guilty of
 occasioning heresy when it has been used in conscientious and
 unsuspecting innocence. A Catholic about to state that the substance of
 the Father and the Son is one, must not begin at that point: nor hold
 this word all important as though true faith did not exist where the
 word was not used. He will be safe in asserting the one substance if he
 has first said that the Father is unbegotten, that the Son is born,
 that He draws His personal subsistence from the Father, that He is like
 the Father in might, honour and nature, that He is subject to the
 Father as to the Author of His being, that He did not commit robbery by
 making Himself equal with God, in whose form He remained, that He was
 obedient unto death. He did not spring from nothing, but was born. He
 is not incapable of birth but equally eternal. He is not the Father,
 but the Son begotten of Him. He is not any portion of God, but is whole
 God. He is not Himself the source but the image; the image of God born
 of God to be God. He is not a creature but is God. Not another God in
 the kind of His substance, but the one God in virtue of the essence of
 His exactly similar substance. God is not one in Person but in nature,
 for the Born and the Begetter have nothing different or unlike. After
 saying all this, he does not err in declaring one substance of the
 Father and the Son. Nay, if he now denies the one substance he sins.

 70. Therefore let no one think that our words were meant to deny the
 one substance. We are giving the very reason why it should not be
 denied. Let no one think that the word ought to be used by itself and
 unexplained. Otherwise the word homoousios is not used in a religious
 spirit. I will not endure to hear that Christ was born of Mary unless I
 also hear, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God [490] .
 I will not hear Christ was hungry, unless I hear that after His fast of
 forty days He said, Man doth not live by bread alone [491] . I will not
 hear He thirsted unless I also hear Whosoever drinketh of the water
 that I shall give him shall never thirst [492] . I will not hear Christ
 suffered unless I hear, The hour is come that the Son of man should be
 glorified [493] . I will not hear He died unless I hear He rose again.
 Let us bring forward no isolated point of the divine mysteries to rouse
 the suspicions of our hearers and give an occasion to the blasphemers.
 We must first preach the birth and subordination of the Son and the
 likeness of His nature, and then we may preach in godly fashion that
 the Father and the Son are of one substance. I do not personally
 understand why we ought to preach before everything else, as the most
 valuable and important of doctrines and in itself sufficient, a truth
 which cannot be piously preached before other truths, although it is
 impious to deny it after them.

 71. Beloved brethren, we must not deny that there is one substance of
 the Father and the Son, but we must not declare it without giving our
 reasons. The one substance must be derived from the true character of
 the begotten nature, not from any division, any confusion of Persons,
 any sharing of an anterior substance. It may be right to assert the one
 substance, it may be right to keep silence about it. You believe in the
 birth and you believe in the likeness. Why should the word cause mutual
 suspicions, when we view the fact in the same way? Let us believe and
 say that there is one substance, but in virtue of the true character of
 the nature and not to imply a blasphemous unity of Persons. Let the
 oneness be due to the fact that there are similar Persons and not a
 solitary Person.

 72. But perhaps the word similarity may not seem fully appropriate. If
 so, I ask how I can express the equality of one Person with the other
 except by such a word? Or is to be like not the same thing as to be
 equal? If I say the divine nature is one I am suspected of meaning that
 it is undifferentiated: if I say the Persons are similar, I mean that I
 compare what is exactly like. I ask what position equal holds between
 like and one? I enquire whether it means similarity rather than
 singularity. Equality does not exist between things unlike, nor does
 similarity exist in one. What is the difference between those that are
 similar and those that are equal? Can one equal be distinguished from
 the other? So those who are equal are not unlike. If then those who are
 unlike are not equals, what can those who are like be but equals?

 73. Therefore, beloved brethren, in declaring that the Son is like in
 all things to the Father, we declare nothing else than that He is
 equal. Likeness means perfect equality, and this fact we may gather
 from the Holy Scriptures, And Adam lived two hundred and thirty years,
 and begat a son according to his own image and according to his own
 likeness; and called his name Seth [494] . I ask what was the nature of
 his likeness and image which Adam begot in Seth? Remove bodily
 infirmities, remove the first stage of conception, remove birth-pangs,
 and every kind of human need. I ask whether this likeness which exists
 in Seth differs in nature from the author of his being, or whether
 there was in each an essence of a different kind, so that Seth had not
 at his birth the natural essence of Adam? Nay, he had a likeness to
 Adam, even though we deny it, for his nature was not different. This
 likeness of nature in Seth was not due to a nature of a different kind,
 since Seth was begotten from only one father, so we see that a likeness
 of nature renders things equal because this likeness betokens an
 exactly similar essence. Therefore every son by virtue of his natural
 birth is the equal of his father, in that he has a natural likeness to
 him. And with regard to the nature of the Father and the Son the
 blessed John teaches the very likeness which Moses says existed between
 Seth and Adam, a likeness which is this equality of nature. He says,
 Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill Him, because He not only had
 broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was His father, making
 Himself equal with God [495] . Why do we allow minds that are dulled
 with the weight of sin to interfere with the doctrines and sayings of
 such holy men, and impiously match our rash though sluggish senses
 against their impregnable assertions? According to Moses, Seth is the
 likeness of Adam, according to John, the Son is equal to the Father,
 yet we seek to find a third impossible something between the Father and
 the Son. He is like the Father, He is the Son of the Father, He is born
 of Him: this fact alone justifies the assertion that they are one.

 74. I am aware, dear brethren, that there are some who confess the
 likeness, but deny the equality. Let them speak as they will, and
 insert the poison of their blasphemy into ignorant ears. If they say
 that there is a difference between likeness and equality, I ask whence
 equality can be obtained? If the Son is like the Father in essence,
 might, glory and eternity, I ask why they decline to say He is equal?
 In the above creed an anathema was pronounced on any man who should say
 that the Father was Father of an essence unlike Himself. Therefore if
 He gave to Him whom He begat without effect upon Himself a nature which
 was neither another nor a different nature, He cannot have given Him
 any other than His own. Likeness then is the sharing of what is one's
 own, the sharing of one's own is equality, and equality admits of no
 difference [496] . Those things which do not differ at all are one. So
 the Father and the Son are one, not by unity of Person but by equality
 of nature.

 75. Although general conviction and divine authority sanction no
 difference between likeness and equality, since both Moses and John
 would lead us to believe the Son is like the Father and also His equal,
 yet let us consider whether the Lord, when the Jews were angry with Him
 for calling God His Father and thus making Himself equal with God, did
 Himself teach that He was equal with God. He says, The Son can do
 nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do [497] . He shewed
 that the Father originates by saying Can do nothing of Himself, He
 calls attention to His own obedience by adding, but what He seeth the
 Father do. There is no difference of might, He says He can do nothing
 that He does not see because it is His nature and not His sight that
 gives Him power. But His obedience consists in His being able only when
 He sees. And so by the fact that He has power when He sees, He shews
 that He does not gain power by seeing but claims power on the authority
 of seeing. The natural might does not differ in Father and Son, the
 Son's equality of power with the Father not being due to any increase
 or advance of the Son's nature but to the Father's example. In short
 that honour which the Son's subjection retained for the Father belongs
 equally to the Son on the strength of His nature. He has Himself added,
 What things soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise [498] .
 Surely then the likeness implies equality. Certainly it does, even
 though we deny it: for these also doeth the Son likewise. Are not
 things done likewise the same? Or do not the same things admit
 equality? Is there any other difference between likeness and equality,
 when things that are done likewise are understood to be made the same?
 Unless perchance any one will deny that the same things are equal, or
 deny that similar things are equal, for things that are done in like
 manner are not only declared to be equal but to be the same things.

 76. Therefore, brethren, likeness of nature can be attacked by no
 cavil, and the Son cannot be said to lack the true qualities of the
 Father's nature because He is like Him. No real likeness exists where
 there is no equality of nature, and equality of nature cannot exist
 unless it imply unity, not unity of person but of kind. It is right to
 believe, religious to feel, and wholesome to confess, that we do not
 deny that the substance of the Father and the Son is one because it is
 similar, and that it is similar because they are one.

 77. Beloved, after explaining in a faithful and godly manner the
 meaning of the phrases one substance, in Greek homoousion, and similar
 substance or homoiousion, and shewing very completely the faults which
 may arise from a deceitful brevity or dangerous simplicity of language,
 it only remains for me to address myself to the holy bishops of the
 East. We have no longer any mutual suspicions about our faith, and
 those which before now have been due to mere misunderstanding are being
 cleared away. They will pardon me if I proceed to speak somewhat freely
 with them on the basis of our common faith.

 78. Ye who have begun to be eager for apostolic and evangelical
 doctrine, kindled by the fire of faith amid the thick darkness of a
 night of heresy, with how great a hope of recalling the true faith have
 you inspired us by consistently checking the bold attack of infidelity!
 In former days it was only in obscure corners that our Lord Jesus
 Christ was denied to be the Son of God according to His nature, and was
 asserted to have no share in the Father's essence, but like the
 creatures to have received His origin from things that were not. But
 the heresy now bursts forth backed by civil authority, and what it once
 muttered in secret it has of late boasted of in open triumph. Whereas
 in former times it has tried by secret mines to creep into the Catholic
 Church, it has now put forth every power of this world in the fawning
 manners of a false religion. For the perversity of these men has been
 so audacious that when they dared not preach this doctrine publicly
 themselves, they beguiled the Emperor to give them hearing. For they
 did beguile an ignorant sovereign so successfully that though he was
 busy with war he expounded their infidel creed, and before he was
 regenerate by baptism imposed a form of faith upon the churches.
 Opposing bishops they drove into exile. They drove me also to wish for
 exile, by trying to force me to commit blasphemy. May I always be an
 exile, if only the truth begins to be preached again! I thank God that
 the Emperor, through your warnings, acknowledged his ignorance, and
 through these your definitions of faith came to recognize an error
 which was not his own but that of his advisers. He freed himself from
 the reproach of impiety in the eyes of God and men, when he
 respectfully received your embassy, and after you had won from him a
 confession of his ignorance, shewed his knowledge of the hypocrisy of
 the men whose influence brought him under this reproach.

 79. These are deceivers, I both fear and believe they are deceivers,
 beloved brethren; for they have ever deceived. This very document is
 marked by hypocrisy. They excuse themselves for having desired silence
 as to homoousion and homoiousion on the ground that they taught that
 the meaning of the words was identical. Rustic bishops, I trow, and
 untutored in the significance of homooision: as though there had never
 been any Council about the matter, or any dispute. But suppose they did
 not know what homoousion was, or were really unaware that homoiousion
 meant of a like essence. Granted that they were ignorant of this, why
 did they wish to be ignorant of the generation of the Son? If it cannot
 be expressed in words, is it therefore unknowable? But if we cannot
 know how He was born, can we refuse to know even this, that God the Son
 being born not of another substance but of God, has not an essence
 differing from the Father's? Have they not read that the Son is to be
 honoured even as the Father, that they prefer the Father in honour?
 Were they ignorant that the Father is seen in the Son, that they make
 the Son differ in dignity, splendour and majesty? Is this due to
 ignorance that the Son, like all other things, is made subject to the
 Father, and while thus subjected is not distinguished from them? A
 distinction does exist, for the subjection of the Son is filial
 reverence, the subjection of all other things is the weakness of things
 created. They knew that He suffered, but when, may I ask, did they come
 to know that He jointly suffered? They avoid the words homoousion and
 homoiousion, because they are not in Scripture: I enquire whence they
 gathered that the Son jointly suffered? Can they mean that there were
 two Persons who suffered? This is what the word leads us to believe.
 What of those words, Jesus Christ the Son of God? Is Jesus Christ one,
 and the Son of God another? If the Son of God is not one and the same
 inwardly and outwardly, if ignorance on such a point is permissible,
 then believe that they were ignorant of the meaning of homoousion. But
 if on these points ignorance leads to blasphemy and yet cannot find
 even a false excuse, I fear that they lied in professing ignorance of
 the word homoiousion. I do not greatly complain of the pardon you
 extended them; it is reverent to reserve for God His own prerogatives,
 and mistakes of ignorance are but human. But the two bishops, Ursacius
 and Valens, must pardon me for not believing that at their age and with
 their experience they were really ignorant. It is very difficult not to
 think they are lying, seeing that it is only by a falsehood that they
 can clear themselves on another score. But God rather grant that I am
 mistaken than that they really knew. For I had rather be judged in the
 wrong than that your faith should be contaminated by communion with the
 guilt of heresy.

 80. Now I beseech you, holy brethren, to listen to my anxieties with
 indulgence. The Lord is my witness that in no matter do I wish to
 criticise the definitions of your faith, which you brought to Sirmium.
 But forgive me if I do not understand certain points; I will comfort
 myself with the recollection that the spirits of the prophets are
 subject to the prophets [499] . Perhaps I am not presumptuous in
 gathering from this that I too may understand something that another
 does not know. Not that I have dared to hint that you are ignorant of
 anything according to the measure of knowledge: but for the unity of
 the Catholic faith suffer me to be as anxious as yourselves.

 81. Your letter on the meaning of homoousion and homoiousion, which
 Valens, Ursacius and Germinius demanded should be read at Sirmium, I
 understand to have been on certain points no less cautious than
 outspoken. And with regard to homoousion and homoiousion your proof has
 left no difficulty untouched. As to the latter, which implies the
 similarity of essence, our opinions are the same. But in dealing with
 the homoousion, or the one essence, you declared that it ought to be
 rejected because the use of this word led to the idea that there was a
 prior substance which two Persons had divided between themselves. I see
 the flaw in that way of taking it. Any such sense is profane, and must
 be rejected by the Church's common decision. The second reason that you
 added was that our fathers, when Paul of Samosata was pronounced a
 heretic, also rejected the word homoousion, on the ground that by
 attributing this title to God he had taught that He was single and
 undifferentiated, and at once Father and to Himself. Wherefore the
 Church still regards it as most profane to exclude the different
 personal qualities, and, under the mask of the aforesaid expressions,
 to revive the error of confounding the Persons and denying the personal
 distinctions in the Godhead. Thirdly you mentioned this reason for
 disapproving of the homoousion that in the Council of Nicæa our fathers
 were compelled to adopt the word on account of those who said the Son
 was a creature: although it ought not to be accepted, because it is not
 to be found in Scripture. Your saying this causes me some astonishment.
 For if the word homoousion must be repudiated on account of its
 novelty, I am afraid that the word homoiousion which is equally absent
 in Scripture, is in some danger.

 82. But I am not needlessly critical on this point. For I had rather
 use an expression that is new than commit sin by rejecting it. So,
 then, we will pass by this question of innovation, and see whether the
 real question is not reduced to something which all our
 fellow-Christians unanimously condemn. What man in his senses will ever
 declare that there is a third substance, which is common to both the
 Father and the Son? And who that has been reborn in Christ and
 confessed both the Son and the Father will follow him of Samosata in
 confessing that Christ is Himself to Himself both Father and Son? So in
 condemning the blasphemies of the heretics we hold the same opinion,
 and such an interpretation of homoousion we not only reject but hate.
 The question of an erroneous interpretation is at an end, when we agree
 in condemning the error.

 83. But when I at last turn to speak on the third point, I pray you to
 let there be no conflict of suspicions where there is peace at heart.
 Do not think I would advance anything hurtful to the progress of unity.
 For it is absurd to fear cavil about a word when the fact expressed by
 the word presents no difficulty. Who objects to the fact that the
 Council of Nicæa adopted the word homoousion' He who does so, must
 necessarily like its rejection by the Arians. The Arians rejected the
 word, that God the Son might not be asserted to be born of the
 substance of God the Father, but formed out of nothing, like the
 creatures. This is no new thing that I speak of. The perfidy of the
 Arians is to be found in many of their letters and is its own witness.
 If the godlessness of the negation then gave a godly meaning to the
 assertion, I ask why we should now criticise a word which was then
 rightly adopted because it was wrongly denied? If it was rightly
 adopted, why after supporting the right should that which extinguished
 the wrong be called to account? Having been used as the instrument of
 evil it came to be the instrument of good [500] .

 84. Let us see, therefore, what the Council of Nicæa intended by saying
 homoousion, that is, of one substance: not certainly to hatch the
 heresy which arises from an erroneous interpretation of homoousion. I
 do not think the Council says that the Father and the Son divided and
 shared a previously existing substance to make it their own. It will
 not be adverse to religion to insert in our argument the creed which
 was then composed to preserve religion.

 "We believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible
 and invisible:

 "And in one our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, born of the Father,
 Only-begotten, that is, of the substance of the Father, God of God,
 Light of Light, Very God of very God, born not made, of one substance
 with the Father (which in Greek they call homooision); By whom all
 things were made which are in heaven and in earth, Who for our
 salvation came down, And was incarnate, And was made man, And suffered,
 And rose again the third day, And ascended into heaven, And shall come
 to judge the quick and the dead.

 "And in the Holy Ghost.

 "But those who say, There was when He was not, And before He was born
 He was not, And that He was made of things that existed not, or of
 another substance and essence, saying that God was able to change and
 alter, to these the Catholic Church says anathema."

 Here the Holy Council of religious men introduces no prior substance
 divided between two Persons, but the Son born of the substance of the
 Father. Do we, too, deny or confess anything else? And after other
 explanations of our common faith, it says, Born not made, of one
 substance with the Father (which in Greek they call homoousion). What
 occasion is there here for an erroneous interpretation? The Son is
 declared to be born of the substance of the Father, not made: lest
 while the word born implies His divinity, the word made should imply He
 is a creature. For the same reason we have of one substance, not to
 teach that there is one solitary divine Person, but that the Son is
 born of the substance of God and subsists from no other source, nor in
 any diversity caused by a difference of substance. Surely again this is
 our faith, that He subsists from no other source, and He is not unlike
 the Father. Is not the meaning here of the word homoousion that the Son
 is produced of the Father's nature, the essence of the Son having no
 other origin, and that both, therefore, have one unvarying essence? As
 the Son's essence has no other origin, we may rightly believe that both
 are of one essence, since the Son could be born with no substance but
 that derived from the Father's nature which was its source.

 85. But perhaps on the opposite side it will be said that it ought to
 meet with disapproval, because an erroneous interpretation is generally
 put upon it. If such is our fear, we ought to erase the words of the
 Apostle, There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
 Jesus [501] , because Photinus uses this to support his heresy, and
 refuse to read it because he interprets it mischievously. And the fire
 or the sponge should annihilate the Epistle to the Philippians, lest
 Marcion should read again in it, And was found in fashion as a man
 [502] , and say Christ's body was only a phantasm and not a body. Away
 with the Gospel of John, lest Sabellius learn from it, I and the Father
 are one [503] . Nor must those who now affirm the Son to be a creature
 find it written, The Father is greater than I [504] . Nor must those
 who wish to declare that the Son is unlike the Father read: But of that
 day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven,
 neither the Son, but the Father [505] . We must dispense, too, with the
 books of Moses, lest the darkness be thought coeval with God who dwells
 in the unborn light, since in Genesis the day began to be after the
 night; lest the years of Methuselah extend later than the date of the
 deluge, and consequently more than eight souls were saved [506] ; lest
 God hearing the cry of Sodom when the measure of its sins was full
 should come down as though ignorant of the cry to see if the measure of
 its sins was full according to the cry, and be found to be ignorant of
 what He knew; lest any one of those who buried Moses should have known
 his sepulchre when he was buried; lest these passages, as the heretics
 think, should prove that the contradictions of the law make it its own
 enemy. So as they do not understand them, we ought not to read them.
 And though I should not have said it myself unless forced by the
 argument, we must, if it seems fit, abolish all the divine and holy
 Gospels with their message of our salvation, lest their statements be
 found inconsistent; lest we should read that the Lord who was to send
 the Holy Spirit was Himself born of the Holy Spirit; lest He who was to
 threaten death by the sword to those who should take the sword, should
 before His passion command that a sword should be brought; lest He who
 was about to descend into hell should say that He would be in paradise
 with the thief; lest finally the Apostles should be found at fault, in
 that when commanded to baptize in the name of the Father, and the Son,
 and the Holy Ghost, they baptized in the name of Jesus only. I speak to
 you, brethren, to you, who are no longer nourished with milk, but with
 meat, and are strong [507] . Shall we, because the wise men of the
 world have not understood these things, and they are foolish unto them,
 be wise as the world is wise and believe these things foolish? Because
 they are hidden from the godless, shall we refuse to shine with the
 truth of a doctrine which we understand? We prejudice the cause of
 divine doctrines when we think that they ought not to exist, because
 some do not regard them as holy. If so, we must not glory in the cross
 of Christ, because it is a stumbling-block to the world; and we must
 not preach death in connection with the living God, lest the godless
 argue that God is dead.

 86. Some misunderstand homoousion; does that prevent me from
 understanding it? The Samosatene was wrong in using the word
 homoousion; does that make the Arians right in denying it? Eighty
 bishops once rejected it; but three hundred and eighteen recently
 accepted it. And for my own part I think the number sacred, for with
 such a number Abraham overcame the wicked kings, and was blessed by Him
 who is a type of the eternal priesthood. The former disapproved of it
 to oppose a heretic: the latter surely approved of it to oppose a
 heretic. The authority of the fathers is weighty, is the sanctity of
 their successors trivial? If their opinions were contradictory, we
 ought to decide which is the better: but if both their approval and
 disapproval established the same fact, why do we carp at such good
 decisions?

 87. But perhaps you will reply, Some of those who were then present at
 Nicæa have now decreed that we ought to keep silence about the word
 homoousion.' Against my will I must answer: Do not the very same men
 rule that we must keep silence about the word homoiousion? I beseech
 you that there may be found no one of them but Hosius, that old man who
 loves a peaceful grave too well, who shall be found to think that we
 ought to keep silence about both. Amid the fury of the heretics into
 what straits shall we fall at last, if while we do not accept both, we
 keep neither? For there seems to be no impiety in saying that since
 neither is found in Scripture, we ought to confess neither or both.

 88. Holy brethren, I understand by homoousion God of God, not of an
 essence that is unlike, not divided but born, and that the Son has a
 birth which is unique, of the substance of the unborn God, that He is
 begotten yet co-eternal and wholly like the Father. I believed this
 before I knew the word homoousion but it greatly helped my belief. Why
 do you condemn my faith when I express it by homoousion while you
 cannot disapprove it when expressed by homoiousion? For you condemn my
 faith, or rather your own, when you condemn its verbal equivalent. Do
 others misunderstand it? Let us join in condemning the
 misunderstanding, but not deprive our faith of its security. Do you
 think we must subscribe to the Samosatene Council to prevent any one
 from using homoousion in the sense of Paul of Samosata? Then let us
 also subscribe to the Council of Nicæa, so that the Arians may not
 impugn the word. Have we to fear that homoiousion does not imply the
 same belief as homoousion? Let us decree that there is no difference
 between being of one or of a similar substance. The word homoousion can
 be understood in a wrong sense. Let us prove that it can be understood
 in a very good sense. We hold one and the same sacred truth. I beseech
 you that we should agree that this truth, which is one and the same,
 should be regarded as sacred. Forgive me, brethren, as I have so often
 asked you to do. You are not Arians: why should you be thought to be
 Arians by denying the homoousion?

 89. But you say: The ambiguity of the word homoousion troubles and
 offends me.' I pray you hear me again and be not offended. I am
 troubled by the inadequacy of the word homoiousion. Many deceptions
 come from similarity. I distrust vessels plated with gold, for I may be
 deceived by the metal underneath: and yet that which is seen resembles
 gold. I distrust anything that looks like milk, lest that which is
 offered to me be milk but not sheep's milk: for cow's milk certainly
 looks like it. Sheep's milk cannot be really like sheep's milk unless
 drawn from a sheep. True likeness belongs to a true natural connection.
 But when the true natural connection exists, the homoousion is implied.
 It is a likeness according to essence when one piece of metal is like
 another and not plated, if milk which is of the same colour as other
 milk is not different in taste. Nothing can be like gold but gold, or
 like milk that did not belong to that species. I have often been
 deceived by the colour of wine: and yet by tasting the liquor have
 recognized that it was of another kind. I have seen meat look like
 other meat, but afterwards the flavour has revealed the difference to
 me. Yes, I fear those resemblances which are not due to a unity of
 nature.

 90. I am afraid, brethren, of the brood of heresies which are
 successively produced in the East: and I have already read what I tell
 you I fear. There was nothing whatever suspicious in the document which
 some of you, with the assent of certain Orientals, took on your embassy
 to Sirmium to be there subscribed. But some misunderstanding has arisen
 in reference to certain statements at the beginning which I believe
 you, my holy brethren, Basil, Eustathius, and Eleusius, omitted to
 mention lest they should give offence. If it was right to draw them up,
 it was wrong to bury them in silence. But if they are now unmentioned
 because they were wrong we must beware lest they should be repeated at
 some future time. Out of consideration for you I have hitherto said
 nothing about this: yet you know as well as I do that this creed was
 not identical with the creed of Ancyra. I am not talking gossip: I
 possess a copy of the creed, and I did not get it from laymen, it was
 given me by bishops.

 91. I pray you, brethren, remove all suspicion and leave no occasion
 for it. To approve of homoiousion, we need not disapprove of
 homoousion. Let us think of the many holy prelates now at rest: what
 judgment will the Lord pronounce upon us if we now say anathema to
 them? What will be our case if we push the matter so far as to deny
 that they were bishops and so deny that we are ourselves bishops? We
 were ordained by them and are their successors. Let us renounce our
 episcopate, if we took its office from men under anathema. Brethren,
 forgive my anguish: it is an impious act that you are attempting. I
 cannot endure to hear the man anathematized who says homoousion and
 says it in the right sense. No fault can be found with a word which
 does no harm to the meaning of religion. I do not know the word
 homoiousion, or understand it, unless it confesses a similarity of
 essence. I call the God of heaven and earth to witness, that when I had
 heard neither word, my belief was always such that I should have
 interpreted homoiousion by homoousion. That is, I believed that nothing
 could be similar according to nature unless it was of the same nature.
 Though long ago regenerate in baptism, and for some time a bishop, I
 never heard of the Nicene creed until I was going into exile, but the
 Gospels and Epistles suggested to me the meaning of homoousion and
 homoiousion. Our desire is sacred. Let us not condemn the fathers, let
 us not encourage heretics, lest while we drive one heresy away, we
 nurture another. After the Council of Nicæa our fathers interpreted the
 due meaning of homoousion with scrupulous care; the books are extant,
 the facts are fresh in men's minds: if anything has to be added to the
 interpretation, let us consult together. Between us we can thoroughly
 establish the faith, so that what has been well settled need not be
 disturbed, and what has been misunderstood may be removed.

 92. Beloved brethren, I have passed beyond the bounds of courtesy, and
 forgetting my modesty I have been compelled by my affection for you to
 write thus of many abstruse matters which until this our age were
 unattempted and left in silence. I have spoken what I myself believed,
 conscious that I owed it as my soldier's service to the Church to send
 to you in accordance with the teaching of the Gospel by these letters
 the voice of the office which I hold in Christ. It is yours to discuss,
 to provide and to act, that the inviolable fidelity in which you stand
 you may still keep with conscientious hearts, and that you may continue
 to hold what you hold now. Remember my exile in your holy prayers. I do
 not know, now that I have thus expounded the faith, whether it would be
 as sweet to return unto you again in the Lord Jesus Christ as it would
 be full of peace to die. That our God and Lord may keep you pure and
 undefiled unto the day of His appearing is my desire, dearest brethren.

 [453] Matt. xiii. 15 ff.

 [454] Hosius, bishop of Cordova in Spain, had been sent by Constantine
 to Alexandria at the outbreak of the Arian controversy. He had presided
 at the Council of Nicæa in 325, and had taken part in the Council of
 Sardica in 343, when the Nicene Creed was reaffirmed. In his extreme
 old age he was forced with blows to accept this extreme Arian Creed
 drawn up at the third Council of Sirmium in the summer of 357. This is
 what is stated by Socrates, and it is corroborated by Athanasius, Hist.
 Arian, c. 45, where it is added that he anathematized Arianism before
 dying. Hilary certainly does Hosius an injustice in declaring him to be
 joint-author of the blasphemous' creed.

 [455] Rom. xii. 3.

 [456] John xx. 17.

 [457] Is. liii. 8.

 [458] John xiv. 28.

 [459] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [460] John v. 26.

 [461] Ib. vi. 57.

 [462] John v. 26.

 [463] Prov. viii. 22.

 [464] John v. 26.

 [465] Ib. v. 19.

 [466] John v. 32.

 [467] Matt. x. 16.

 [468] John i. 1.

 [469] Substantia is in this passage used as the equivalent of Person.
 The word was used by Tertullian in the sense of ousia, and this early
 Latin use of the word is the use which eventually prevailed. The
 meaning of the word in Hilary is influenced by its philological
 equivalent in Greek. At the beginning of the fourth century hupostasis
 was used in the same sense as ousia. The latter word meant reality,'
 the former word the basis of existence.' Athanasius, however, began the
 practice of restricting hupostasis to the divine Persons. Hilary
 consequently here uses substantia in this new sense of the word
 hupostasis. The Alexandrine Council of 362 sanctioned as allowable the
 use of hupostasis in the sense of Person, and by the end of the century
 the old usage practically disappeared.

 [470] The Council at Antioch of 341, generally known as the Dedication
 Council, assembled for the dedication of the great cathedral church
 which had been commenced there by the emperor Constantine, who did not
 live to see its completion. Four creeds were then drawn up, if we
 reckon a document which was drawn up at Antioch by a continuation of
 the Council in the following year. The second, and most important, of
 these creeds became the creed of the Semi-Nicene party. Capable of a
 wholly orthodox interpretation, it was insufficient of itself to repel
 Arianism, but not insufficient to be used as an auxiliary means of
 opposing it. Hilary throughout assumes that it is not to be interpreted
 in an Arian sense, and uses it as an introduction to Nicene theology.

 [471] Lamb is Hilary's mistake for Man. He doubtless read the original
 in a Greek manuscript which had the word anthropon written in its
 abbreviated form anon. This would readily be mistaken for the word
 arnion, lamb. The Latin word used by Hilary as a substitute for Apostle
 is prædestinatus, for which word it seems impossible to account.

 [472] John vi. 28.

 [473] Matt. xxviii. 19.

 [474] Mount Haemus is the mountain range which at this period formed
 the boundary between the provinces of Thracia and Moesia Inferior.
 Hæmimontus was grouped with Moesia Inferior under the Vicarius of
 Thrace.

 [475] John i. 14.

 [476] Gen. i. 26.

 [477] Ps. cix 1.

 [478] John xiv. 16.

 [479] Isai. xliv. 6.

 [480] The Flesh, without ceasing to be truly flesh, is represented as
 becoming divine like the Word. That is, the humanity becomes so endowed
 with power, and knowledge, and holiness through the unction of the Holy
 Ghost that its natural properties are "deified." These and similar
 phrases are freely used by the Fathers of the fourth century, and may
 be compared with John i. 14, and 2 Pet. i. 4.

 [481] Passibility may not be affirmed of the divine nature of Christ
 which is incapable of any change or limitation within itself. At the
 same time the Word may be said to have suffered inasmuch as the
 suffering affected the flesh which He assumed. This subject was
 afterwards, carefully developed by St. John of Damascus peri orthodoxou
 pisteos, III. 4. In c. 79, Hilary criticises the Arian statement that
 the Son "jointly suffered," a word which meant that the divine nature
 of the Son shared in the sufferings which were endured by His humanity.
 This phrase, like the statement of Arius that the Logos was "capable of
 change" implied that the Son only possessed a secondary divinity.

 [482] Gen. i. 26.

 [483] Ib. xviii. 1.

 [484] Ib. xxxii. 26.

 [485] Ib. xix. 24.

 [486] Ps. cx. 1.

 [487] John x. 37.

 [488] Is. xliv. 6.

 [489] Eleusius is criticised by Socrates II. 40, for disliking any
 attempt at a repudiation of the "Dedication" creed of 341, although the
 "Dedication" creed was little better than a repudiation of the Nicene
 creed. He was, in fact, a semi-Arian. But his vigorous opposition to
 the extreme form of Arianism and the hopefulness with which Hilary
 always regarded the semi-Arians, here invest him with a reputation for
 the "true knowledge of God." In 381 he refused to accept the Nicene
 creed or take part in the Council of Constantinople.

 [490] John i. 1.

 [491] Matt. iv. 4.

 [492] John iv. 13.

 [493] Ib. xii. 23.

 [494] Gen. v. 3.

 [495] John v. 18.

 [496] Proprietas, or sharing one's own. The word proprietas is not here
 used in a technical sense. In its technical sense proprietas or idiotes
 signifies the special property of each Person of the Godhead, and the
 word is used to secure the distinctions of the three Persons and
 exclude any Sabellian misunderstanding.

 [497] John v. 19.

 [498] Ib.

 [499] 1 Cor. xiv. 32.

 [500] Impiare seis used by Plautus, Rud. 1, 3, 8, in the sense of
 asebein. The sentence probably refers to the misuse of the word by Paul
 of Samosata.

 [501] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

 [502] Phil. ii. 7.

 [503] John x. 30.

 [504] Ib. xiv. 28.

 [505] Mark xiii. 32.

 [506] Methuselah'sage was a favourite problem with the early Church.
 See Aug. de Civ. Dei, xv. 13, and de pecc. orig. ii. 23, where it is
 said to be one of those points on which a Christian can afford to be
 ignorant. According to the Septuagint, Methuselah lived for fourteen
 years after the deluge, so that more than eight souls' survived, and 1
 Pet. iii. 20, appeared to be incorrect. According to the Hebrew and
 Vulgate there is no difficulty, as Methuselah is represented as dying
 before the deluge.

 [507] Heb. v. 12.

 Introduction to the De Trinitate.

 ------------------------

 Since the circumstances in which the De Trinitate was written, and the
 character and object of the work, are discussed in the general
 Introduction, it will suffice to give here a brief summary of its
 contents, adapted, in the main, from the Benedictine edition.

 Book I. The treatise begins with St. Hilary's own spiritual history,
 the events of which are displayed, no doubt, more logically and
 symmetrically in the narrative than they had occurred in the writer's
 experience. He tells of the efforts of a pure and noble soul, impeded,
 so far as we hear, neither by unworthy desires nor by indifference, to
 find an adequate end and aim of life. He rises first to the conception
 of the old philosophers, and then by successive advances, as he learns
 more and more of the Divine revelation in Scripture, he attains the
 object of his search in the apprehension of God as revealed in the
 Catholic Faith. But this happiness is not the result of a mere
 intellectual knowledge, but of belief as well. In §§ 1-14 we have this
 advance from ignorance and fear to knowledge and peace. And here he
 might have rested, had he not been charged with the sacerdotal (i.e.,
 in the language of that time, the episcopal) office, which laid upon
 him the duty of caring for the salvation of others. And such care was
 needed, for (§§ 15, 16) heresies were abroad, and chiefly two; the
 Sabellian which said that Father and Son were mere names or aspects of
 one Divine Person, and therefore there had been no true birth of the
 Son; and the Arian (which, however, Hilary rarely calls by the name of
 its advocate, preferring to style it the new heresy') asserting more or
 less openly that the Son is created and not born, and therefore is
 different in kind from the Father, and not, in the true sense, God.
 Hilary declares (§ 17) that his purpose is to refute these heresies and
 to demonstrate the true faith by the evidence of Scripture. He demands
 from his hearers a loyal belief in the Scriptures which he will cite;
 without such faith his arguments will not profit them (§ 18); and in §
 19 he warns them of the limits of the argument from analogy, which he
 must employ, inadequate as it is in respect of the finite illustrations
 which he must use to express the infinite. Then in § 20 he speaks with
 a modest pride of his careful marshalling of the arguments which shall
 lead his readers to the right conclusion, and in §§ 21-36 he gives a
 summary of the contents of the work. He concludes the first Book (§§
 37, 38) with a prayer which expresses his certainty that what he holds
 is the truth, and entreats the Father and the Son that he may have the
 eloquence of language and the cogency of reasoning needed for the
 worthy presentation of the truth concerning Them.

 Book II. He begins with the command to baptize all nations (St. Matt.
 xxviii. 19) as a summary of the faith; this by itself would suffice
 were not explanations rendered necessary by heretical
 misrepresentations of its meaning. For (§§ 3, 4) heresy is the result
 of Scripture misunderstood; and here we must notice that Scripture is
 regarded as ground common to both sides. All accept it as literally
 true, and combine its texts as will best serve their own purposes.
 Hilary, regarding all heresies as one combined opposition to the truth,
 makes the two objections that their arguments are mutually destructive,
 and that they are modern. Then in § 5 he expresses the awe with which
 he approaches the subject. The language which he must use is utterly
 inadequate, and yet he is compelled to use it. In §§ 6, 7 he begins
 with the notion of God as Father; in §§ 8-11 he proceeds to that of God
 the Son. He states the faith as it must be believed; it is not enough
 (§§ 12, 13) to accept the truth of Christ's miracles. The mystery, as
 it is revealed in St. John i. 1-4, must be the object of faith. In §§
 14-21 he expounds this passage in the face of current objections, and
 then triumphantly asserts that all the efforts of heresy are vain (§
 22). He advances proof-texts in § 23 against each objector, and then
 points out in §§ 24, 25 our indebtedness to the infinite Divine
 condescension thus revealed. For, in all the humiliation to which
 Christ stooped the Divine Majesty was still inseparably His, and was
 manifested both in the circumstances of His birth and in His life on
 earth (§§ 26-28). The book concludes (§§ 29-35) with a statement of the
 doctrine of the Holy Ghost, as perfect as in the undeveloped state of
 that doctrine was possible.

 Book III. In §§ 1-4, the words, I in the Father and the Father in Me,
 are taken as typical. Man cannot comprehend, but only apprehend them.
 So far as they are explicable Hilary explains them. But God's self
 revelation is always mysterious. The miracles of Christ are
 inexplicable (§§ 5-8); this is God's way, and meant to check
 presumption. Human wisdom is limited, and when it passes its bounds,
 and invades the realm of faith, it becomes folly. Next, in §§ 9-17, the
 passage, St. John xvii. 1 ff., is explained as proving that in the One
 God there are the Persons of Father and of Son, and as revealing God in
 the aspect of the Father. Then, in §§ 18-21, the wonderful deeds of
 Christ are put forth as an evidence of His wonderful birth. We must not
 ask how He can be coeternal with the Father, for it is in vain that we
 should ask how He could pass through the closed door. Either question
 is mere presumption. The revelation which Christ makes (§§ 22, 23) is
 that of God as His Father; Unum sunt, non Unus. And finally, in §§ 25,
 26, he returns to the futility of reasoning. True wisdom is to believe
 where we cannot comprehend; we must trust to faith, not to proof.

 Book IV. This book is in a sense the beginning of the treatise, and is
 sometimes cited later on as the first. Its three predecessors, he says
 in § 1, had been written some time before. They had contained a
 statement of the truth concerning the Divinity of Christ, and a summary
 refutation of the various heresies. He now commences his main attack
 upon Arianism. First (§ 2) he repeats what his difficulty is; that
 human language and thought cannot cope with the Infinite. Then (§ 3) he
 tells how the Arians explain away the eternal Sonship of Christ. As a
 defence against this tampering with the truth, the Church has adopted
 the term Homoousion (§§ 4-7); Hilary explains and defends its use. In §
 8 he shews, by a collection of the passages of Scripture which they
 wrest to their own purposes, that such a definition is necessary, and
 in §§ 9, 10 that their use of these passages is dishonest. In § 11 he
 tells us exactly what the Arian teaching is, and sets it forth in one
 of their own formularies, the Epistola Arii ad Alexandrum (§§ 12, 13).
 In § 14 this doctrine is denounced; it does not explain, but explains
 away. The proclamation made through Moses, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy
 God is One, upon which the Arians take their stand, reveals only one
 aspect of the truth (§ 15). It does not exhaust the truth; for God is
 represented as not one solitary Person in the history of creation (§§
 16-22), in the life of Abraham (§§ 23-31), and in that of Moses (§§
 32-34). And this again is the teaching of the Prophets, as is shewn by
 passages selected from Isaiah, Hosea, and Jeremiah (§§ 35-42). All the
 evidence thus collected shews that in the Godhead there is both Father
 and Son, and that the Son is God.

 Book V. Hilary now points out (§ 1) the controversial strength of the
 Arian position. If he is silent in face of their assertion, they will
 claim that he agrees with them that the Son is God only in some
 inferior sense. On the other hand, if he opposes them, he will seem to
 be contradicting the Mosaic revelation of the Divine unity. In § 2 he
 recapitulates the argument of Book IV., that the witness of Scripture
 proves that God is not a solitary Person; that, as he says, there is
 God and God. But the Arians had a further loophole; their creed
 asserted (§ 3) one true God. They might argue that Christ is indeed
 God, but of a nature different from that of the Father. In refutation
 of this Hilary goes once more through the history of creation (§§
 4-10), proving that the narrative reveals not only the Son's share in
 that work, but also His equality and oneness of nature with the Father;
 in other words, that He is not only God but true God. The same truth is
 demonstrated from the life of Abraham (§§ 11-16). Moreover, these
 self-revelations of the Son (as the Angel, on various occasions) are
 anticipations of the Incarnation. He was first seen in flesh,
 afterwards born in flesh. The Arians concentrate their attention on the
 humble conditions of Christ's human life, and so, from want of a
 comprehensive view, fail to discern His true Godhead. But Hilary will
 not anticipate the evidence of the Gospels (§§ 17, 18). He returns to
 the Old Testament, and proves his point from Jacob's visions (§§ 19,
 20), and by the revelations made to Moses (§§ 21-23). After a summary
 and an enforcement of the preceding arguments (§§ 24, 25), he proceeds
 to prove from certain passages of Isaiah that the Prophet recognised
 the Son as true God (§§ 26-31), and that St. Paul understood him in
 that sense (§§ 32, 33). Then, in §§ 34, 35, the result which has been
 attained is dwelt upon. Hilary shews that it is the Arians who fail to
 recognise the one true God; for Christ is true God, yet not a second
 God. Finally, in §§ 36-39, Moses, Isaiah, and Jeremiah are adduced as
 testifying that Christ is God from God, and God in God.

 Book VI. Hilary begins by lamenting the wide extension of Arianism; his
 love for souls leads him to combat the heresy, whose insidiousness
 makes it the more dangerous (§§ 1-4). He repeats in §§ 5, 6 the same
 Arian creed which he had given in Book IV. The heretics here gain the
 appearance of orthodoxy by condemning errors inconsistent with their
 own; and this condemnation is designed to cast upon the Catholic faith
 the suspicion of complicity in such errors. Hence he must postpone his
 appeal to the New Testament till he has examined them (§§ 7, 8).
 Accordingly in §§ 9-12 he explains successively the doctrines of
 Valentinus, Manichæus, Sabellius and Hieracas, and shews that the
 Church rejects them all, as she does (§ 13) the doctrine which the
 Arians in their creed have falsely assigned to her. Their object is to
 deny that the Son is coeternal with the Father and of one substance
 with Him (§§ 14, 15); but this denial is clean contrary to Scripture,
 which it is blasphemy to oppose (§§ 16, 17). The Arians would make a
 creature of Christ (§ 18), to Whom, in §§ 19-21, Hilary turns with an
 impassioned declaration of certainty that He is very God. He then
 resumes the argument, and proves that Christ is Son by birth, not by
 adoption, from the words both of Father and of Son as recorded in the
 Gospel (§§ 22-25). This is confirmed (§§ 26, 27) by the Gospel account
 of His acts, which are otherwise inexplicable. The argument is clenched
 by a discussion of St. John vii. 28, 29, and viii. 42 (§§ 28-31). The
 true Sonship of Christ is further proved by the faith of the Apostles,
 whose certainty increased with their knowledge (§§ 31-35), and
 especially by that of St. Peter (§§ 36-38), of St. John (§§ 39-43), and
 of St. Paul (§§ 44, 45). To reject such a weight of testimony is to
 prefer Antichrist to Christ (§ 46). And, moreover, we have the witness
 of those for whom He wrought miracles, of devils, of the Jews, the
 Apostles in peril on the sea, of the centurion by the Cross, that
 Christ is truly the Son of God (§§ 47-52).

 Book VII. The Arians are adepts at concealing their meaning; at the use
 of Scripture terms in unscriptural senses (§ 1). They have already been
 refuted by the proof that Christ is the true and coeternal Son; and
 Hilary now advances to the proof of the true Divinity of Christ, which
 is logically inseparable from His true Sonship (§ 2). But the danger is
 great lest, in attacking one heresy, he should use language which would
 sanction others (§ 3). Yet the truth is one, while heresies are
 manifold. Each of them can be trusted to demolish the others, while
 none can establish its own case. He illustrates this by the mutually
 destructive arguments of Sabellius, Arius and Photinus (§§ 5-7). Christ
 is proved to be God by the name God which is given Him in Scripture:
 The Word was God (§§ 8, 9). The name is His in the strict sense, and
 not any derivative meaning (§§ 10, 11). Yet Father and Son are not two,
 but one God (§ 13). Being the Son of God, He has the nature of God, and
 therefore is God (§§ 14-17), and yet not one Person with the Father (§
 18). Again, His power, manifested in His works, proves His Godhead (§
 19), as does the fact that all judgment has been given Him by the
 Father (§ 20). Christ's own words display the truth (§ 21). The Arians
 are blind to the plain sense of Scripture, and are more blasphemous
 than the Jews; Christ's reply to the latter meets the objections of the
 former (§§ 22-24). He asserts His unity with the Father (§ 25), and
 makes His works the proof (§ 26). The Father is in the Son and the Son
 is in the Father (§ 27): this is illustrated by the transmission of
 physical properties from parent to child and from flame to flame (§§
 28-30). In fact, the Catholic is the only rational explanation of the
 words of Scripture (§§ 31, 32). Again (§§ 33-38), the way to the Father
 is through the Son, and knowledge of the Son is knowledge of the
 Father. This would be impossible, were not the Son God in the same
 sense in which the Father is God. Thus the contrary doctrines of
 Sabellius and of Arius are confuted; there is neither one Person, nor
 yet two Gods (§§ 39, 40). Christ calls upon us to believe the truth,
 and belief is not only possible but reasonable (§ 41).

 Book VIII. Piety is necessary in a Bishop, but he needs also knowledge
 and dialectical skill in the face of such heresies as were rampant in
 Hilary's day; for the heretics outdo the orthodox in zeal, and are
 masters in the art of devising pitfalls for the unwary reasoner (§§
 1-3). He maintains (§ 4) that hitherto he has established his case; and
 now turns, in § 5, to the Arian interpretation of I and the Father are
 One, as meaning that They are one in will, not in nature. The fallacy
 of this is shewn by a comparison of the unity of Christians in Christ
 (§§ 7-9); a unity which is confessedly one of nature, yet is not more
 natural than that of Father and Son, of which it is a type (§ 10). And
 indeed the words, I and the Father are One, are ill-adapted to express
 a mere harmony of will (§ 11). This gift of unity of nature could not
 be given, as it is, through the Incarnation and the Eucharist, to
 Christians, unless the Givers Themselves possessed it; i.e. unless
 Father and Son were One God (§§ 12-14). As a matter of fact, we have a
 perfect union, through the mediation of Christ, with the Father; and it
 is a unity of nature, a permanent abiding; an assurance to us of the
 indwelling of Father in Son and Son in Father, and of the fact that
 Christ is not a creature, one in will with the Father, but a Son, one
 in nature with Him (§§ 15-18). For, again (§§ 19-21), the Mission of
 the Holy Ghost is jointly from the Father and the Son; He is called
 sometimes the Spirit of the Father, sometimes the Spirit of the Son,
 and this is a further proof of the unity in nature of Father and Son.
 Hilary now enquires (§§ 22-25) into the senses in which Scripture
 speaks of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes this title is given to the Father,
 sometimes to the Son, in both cases to save us from corporeal
 conceptions of God. But it is also used, in the strict sense, of the
 Paraclete, as on the day of Pentecost. Now the Divine Spirit dwells in
 Christians; but this Spirit, whether styled the Spirit of God, or the
 Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of Truth, proceeding from the Father
 and sent by the Son, is only one Spirit. Hence the Godhead is One, and
 the nature of the Persons within that Godhead one also (§§ 26, 27). He
 next points out (§ 28) that the Arians are inconsistent in worshipping
 Christ, and yet styling Him a creature; for thus they fall under the
 curse of the Law, and forfeit the Holy Spirit. Again (§§ 29-34) the
 powers and graces bestowed by God are described indiscriminately as
 gifts of one or another Person in the Godhead. The Son, therefore, as a
 Giver, must be one with the Father, Who is also a Giver, and one with
 the Spirit. There is One God and One Lord (§ 35); if we deny that the
 Son is God, we must also deny that the Father is Lord; which is absurd.
 They are One God, with one Spirit, but not one Person (§ 36). St. Paul
 expressly says that Christ is God over all; an expression which must,
 like all the Apostle's teaching, bear the Catholic sense, and is
 incompatible with Arianism (§§ 37-39). The supporters of Arianism are
 thus alien from the faith (§ 40). After a restatement of the truth (§
 41), Hilary proceeds to deduce the Divine nature of the Son from the
 fact that He has been sealed by the Father (§§ 42-45). This sealing
 makes Him the Father's counterpart, Whose Image He thus becomes, though
 in the form of a servant. If He were thus the Image of God after His
 Incarnation, how much more before that condescension (§ 46). In § 47 he
 again denies that this teaching reduces the Father and the Son to one
 Person; and then (§§ 48-50) works out the sense in which Christ is the
 Image of God. It means that They are of one nature and of one power,
 and that the Son is the Firstborn, through Whom all things were
 created. But creation and also reconciliation is the joint work of
 Father and Son (§ 51). Christ could not have stated more explicitly
 than He has done His unity with the Father; the recognition of this
 truth is the test of the true Church (§ 52). Heresy is blind to the
 essential difference between the life-giving Christ and the created
 universe, which owes its life to Him (§ 53). In Him dwells the whole
 fulness of the Godhead bodily. The Indweller and the Indwelt are Both
 Persons, yet are One God; and the whole Godhead dwells in Each (§§
 54-56).

 Book IX. After a summary (§ 1) of the results already obtained, Hilary
 returns, in § 2, to certain of the Arian proof-texts, and warns his
 readers that their life depends on the recognition in Christ of true
 God and true man, for it is this twofold nature which makes Him the
 Mediator (§ 3). Universal analogy and our consciousness of the capacity
 to rise to the life in God convince us of these two natures in Him, Who
 makes this rise possible (§ 4). But heresy lays hold of words spoken by
 Christ Incarnate, appropriate to His humility as Man, and assigns them
 to Him in His previous state; thus they make Him deny His true Godhead.
 But His utterances before the Incarnation, during His life on earth,
 and after His return to glory, must be carefully distinguished (§§ 5,
 6). Hilary now examines the aims and achievements of Christ Incarnate,
 and shews that His work for men was a Divine work, accomplished by Him
 for us only because He was throughout both God and Man, the two natures
 in Him being inseparable (§§ 7-14). After reaching this conclusion from
 a general survey of Christ's life on earth, he examines in the light of
 it the Arian arguments from isolated words. They assert that Christ
 refused to be called Good or Master. He refused neither title, and yet
 declared that both belong to God only (§§ 15-18). And, indeed, He could
 not have associated Himself more closely than He did with the Father,
 while yet He kept His Person distinct (§ 19). The Father Himself bears
 witness to the Son; and the sin and loss of the Jews is this, that,
 seeing the Father's works done by Christ, they did not see in Him the
 Son (§§ 20, 21). The honour and glory of Christ is inseparable from
 that of God (§§ 22, 23). The Scribe did well to confess the Divine
 unity, but was still outside the Kingdom because He did not believe in
 Christ as God (§§ 24-27). Next, the Arian argument from the words, This
 is life eternal, that they may know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
 Christ Whom Thou hast sent, is refuted by comparison with cognate
 passages (§§ 28-35). For, indeed, if the Father be the only true God,
 the Son must also be the only true God (§ 36). That Divine nature which
 is common to Father and Son is subject to no limitations, and the
 eternal generation can be illustrated by no analogy of created things
 (§ 37). Christ took humanity, and, since the Father's nature did not
 share in this, the unity was so far impaired. But humanity has been
 raised in Christ to God; and this could only be because His unity in
 the Divine nature with the Father was perfect. Otherwise the flesh
 which Christ took could not have entered into the Divine glory (§ 38).
 There is but one glory of Father and of Son; the Son sought in the
 Incarnation not glory for the Word but for the flesh (§§ 39, 40). The
 glory of Father and Son is one; in that unity the Son bestows, as well
 as receives, glory (§§ 41, 42), and this glory, common to Both, is
 evidence that the Divine nature also is common to Both (§ 42). Again,
 the Arians allege the words, The Son can do nothing of Himself, which
 Hilary shews, by an examination of the context, to be a support of the
 Catholic cause (§§ 43-46). The Son does the Father's work, not under
 compulsion as an inferior, but because They are One. His will is free,
 yet in perfect harmony with that of the Father, because of their unity
 of nature (§§ 47-50). The Arians also appeal to the text, The Father is
 greater than I. The Father is, in fact, greater, first as being the
 Unbegotten, and secondly inasmuch as the Son has condescended to the
 state of man, yet without forfeiting His Godhead (§ 51). But He is not
 greater in nature than the Son, Who is His Image; or rather, the
 Begetter is the greater, while the Son, as the Begotten, is not less
 than He, for, although begotten, He had no beginning of existence (§§
 52-57). Next, the allegation of ignorance, based on St. Mark xiii. 32,
 and therefore of difference in nature from God Omniscient is refuted
 (§§ 58-62), both by express statements of Scripture and by a
 consideration of the Divine character. It is only in figurative senses
 that God is stated in the Old Testament sometimes to come to know,
 sometimes to be ignorant of, particular facts (§§ 63, 64). And so it is
 with Christ; His ignorance is but a wise and merciful concealment of
 knowledge (§§ 65-67). Yet the Arians, though they admit that Christ,
 being superior to man, knows all the secrets of humanity, assert that
 He cannot penetrate the mysteries of God (§ 68). But Christ expressly
 declares that He can and does, for Each is in the Other and is mirrored
 in the Other (§ 69). The ignorance can be nothing but concealment. Only
 the Father knows, i.e. He has told none but the Son; the Son does not
 know, i.e. He wills not to reveal His knowledge (§§ 70, 71). God is
 unlimited; unlimited therefore in knowledge. The nature of Father and
 Son being one, it is impossible that the Son should be ignorant of what
 the Father knows. As in will, so in knowledge, They are One (§§ 72-74).
 And the Apostles, by repeating their question after the Resurrection,
 shew that they were aware that His ignorance meant reserve. And Christ
 did not, this time, speak of ignorance, though He withheld the
 knowledge which they asked (§ 75).

 Book X. Theological differences are not the result of honest reasoning,
 but of reasoning distorted, as in the case of the Arians, by
 preconceived opinions, whose cause is sin and their result hypocrisy
 (§§ 1-3). Hilary has fallen on the evil times foretold by the Apostle;
 truth is banished and so is he, yet his sufferings do not affect his
 joy in the Lord (§ 4). In the preceding books he has stated the exact
 truth, of which he now gives a summary (§§ 5-8). But the further
 objection is raised that, while God is impassible, Christ in His
 Passion suffered fear and pain (§ 9). But He Who taught others not to
 fear death could not fear it Himself (§ 10). He died of His own free
 will, knowing that in three days His Body and Spirit would rise again
 (§§ 11, 12). Nor did He fear bodily tortures, for pain is an affection
 of the weak human soul, which inhabits our body, and is not felt by the
 body itself (§§ 13, 14). And, although the Virgin fulfilled entirely
 the part of a human mother, yet the Begetter was Divine. Christ, when
 He took the form of a servant, remained still in the form of God, and
 was born perfect even as the Begetter was perfect, for Mary was not the
 cause, but only the means, of His human life (§§ 15, 16). St. Paul
 draws a clear distinction between the First Man, who was earthy, and
 the Second Man, Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and in Whom what
 is Flesh, in one aspect, is Bread from heaven in another (§§ 17, 18).
 He is therefore perfect Man as well as perfect God, and did not inherit
 the flesh or the soul of Adam. His whole human nature is derived from
 the Holy Ghost, by Whom the Virgin conceived (§§ 19, 20). Again (§ 21)
 the Arians argue that the Word was in Jesus in the same sense in which
 the Spirit was in the Prophets, and reproach the Catholics with denying
 the true humanity of Christ. Hilary replies that just as Christ was the
 cause of the birth of His own human Body, so He was the Author of His
 own human Soul: for no soul is transmitted. Thus His human nature is
 complete; He has taken the form of a servant, but all the while He is
 in the form of God, i.e. He Who is God and also Man is one Christ, Who
 was born and died and rose (§ 22). In all this He endured passion but
 not pain, even as air or water, if pierced by a blow, is unaffected by
 it. The blow is real, and the Passion was real; but it was not
 inflicted on our limited humanity but on a human nature which could
 walk on water and pass through locked doors (§ 23). If it be argued
 that He wept, hungered, thirsted, Hilary answers that He could wipe
 away tears and supply needs, and therefore was not subject to them;
 that though He endured them, as true Man, He was not affected by them.
 Such sufferings are habitual with men, and He endured them to shew that
 He had a true Body (§ 24). For such a Body He had, although (since He
 was not conceived in sin) one free from the defects of our bodies; not
 sinful flesh, but only the likeness of sinful flesh. For He was the
 Word made Flesh, and continued to be true God as He had been before (§§
 25, 26). The Lord of glory suffered neither fear nor pain in His
 Passion, as is shewn by the powers which He exercised on the verge of
 death (§§ 27, 28). His utterances in the Garden and on the Cross are
 not evidences of pain or fear, for they may be matched by lofty
 expressions of calmness and hope (§§ 29-32). Thus no proof of fear or
 pain or weakness can be drawn from the circumstances of the Passion.
 Nor was the Cross a shame, for it was His road from humiliation to
 glory (§ 33), nor the descent to hell a degradation, for all the while
 He was in heaven. How different the faith of the Thief on the cross to
 that of the Arian! (§ 34). The argument is summed up in § 35. Next the
 Agony is considered. Christ does not say that He is sorrowful on
 account of death, but unto death. It is anxiety on the Apostles'
 account, lest their faith should fail; a fear which reached to His
 death, not beyond, for He knew that after His death His glory would
 revive their faith. This was the fear in which He was comforted by the
 Angel; for Himself He was fearless, being conscious of His Godhead (§§
 36-43). He was free from pain and fear, for it is the sinful body which
 transmits these affections to the soul. Yet even human bodies rise
 sometimes superior to them, e.g. Daniel and other heroes of faith: how
 much more Christ (§§ 44-46). In the same way we must understand His
 bearing our suffering and our sin (§ 47), for, as St. Paul says, His
 Passion was itself a triumph (§ 48). The complaint that He was forsaken
 by the Father is similarly explained (§ 49). The purpose of the Arian
 arguments is to displace the truth of Christ as very God and very man
 in favour of one or other heretical hypothesis, all of which the Church
 rejects (§§ 50-52). Our reason must recognise its limitations and be
 content to believe, without understanding, apparently contradictory
 truths (§§ 53, 54). Christ weeping over Jerusalem and at the grave of
 Lazarus is equally inexplicable, yet certain (§§ 55, 56). His laying
 down and taking again His life is accounted for by the two natures
 inseparably united in one Person (§§ 57-62). After a short summary (§
 63) he returns to the union of two natures, which is the
 stumbling-block of worldly wisdom (§ 64), and shews it to be the only
 reasonable explanation of the facts (§§ 65, 66). As St. Paul says, our
 belief must be according to the Scriptures; the necessity and the
 rewards of faith (§§ 67-70). The seeming infirmity of Christ was
 assumed for our instruction and for our salvation.

 Book XI. The Faith is one, even as God is One; but the faiths of
 heretics are many (§§ 1, 2). Hilary has now demonstrated the truth
 about Christ, so that it cannot be denied; it is attested also by
 miracles even in his own day (§ 3). The Arians preach another, a
 created Christ; and in making Christ a creature they proclaim another
 God, not a Father but a Creator (§ 4). The Son, as the Image, is of one
 nature with the Father; if He is inferior He is not the Image (§ 5).
 But the Arians explain the oneness away by arguments from His
 condescension to our estate (§ 6), and, even after His Resurrection,
 plead that He confesses His inequality. They argue thus from 1 Cor. xv.
 24-28, a passage to which the rest of this book is devoted (§§ 7, 8).
 But we must recognise the mysteriousness of the truth, accepting the
 two sides of it, both clearly revealed though we cannot reconcile them
 (§ 9). They regard only one aspect; Hilary in reply proves once more
 that Christ is both born from God, and Himself God (§§ 10-12). But at
 His Incarnation He began to have as Lord the God Who had been His
 Father eternally (§ 13), and when He said that He was ascending to His
 God, He spoke as when He calls us His brethren (§§ 14, 15). Thus there
 are two senses in which God is the Father of Christ; and He Who is
 Father to Christ the Son is Lord to Christ the Servant (§§ 16, 17). And
 it was to Him as Servant that the Psalmist said, Thy God hath anointed
 Thee, the words would have no meaning if addressed to Him as Son (§§
 18, 19). It is through this lower nature that He is our Brother and God
 our Father, and He the Mediator (§ 20). But it is argued that His
 subjection at the last and the delivery of the kingdom to the Father is
 a proof of inequality. The passage must be taken as a whole (§§ 21,
 22). There are some truths which it is difficult for man to grasp, and
 if we misunderstand them we must not be ashamed to confess our error
 (§§ 23, 24). In this passage the Arians aid their case by changing the
 order of the prophecy (§§ 25-27). The end means a final and enduring
 state, not the coming to an end (§ 28), and though He delivers up the
 kingdom He does not cease to reign (§ 29). His subjection to the Father
 and the subjection of all things to Him is next considered; in one
 sense it is figurative language, in another it proves the unity of
 Father and Son. The subjection of the Son means His partaking in the
 glory of the Father (§§ 30-36). The Transfiguration shews the glory of
 Christ's Body; a glory which the faithful shall share (§§ 37, 38). The
 righteous are His kingdom, which He, as Man, shall deliver to the
 Father, for By man came also the resurrection of the dead (§ 39). And
 at last God shall be all in all, humanity in Christ not being
 discarded, but glorified and received into the Godhead (§ 40). Christ,
 as well as St. Paul, has foretold this (§§ 41, 42). The Arian
 misrepresentation of this truth is mere folly (§ 43). Any rational
 explanation must assume that God's majesty cannot be augmented, even as
 it cannot be measured (§§ 44, 45), while our reason is limited, and so
 contrasted with the Divine infinity. God cannot become greater than He
 was in becoming All in all. Father and Son, after as before, must Each
 be as He was (§§ 46-48). All was done for us that we might be
 glorified, being conformed to the likeness of Him Who is the Image of
 the Father (§ 49).

 Book XII. Hilary gives a final explanation of the great Arian text, The
 Lord created me for a beginning of His ways; the words must not be
 taken literally. Christ is not created, but Creator (§§ 1-5). If He is
 a creature, the Father also is a creature, for They are One in nature
 and in honour (§§ 6, 7). The similar passage, I begat Thee from the
 womb, is figurative; elsewhere God's Hands and Eyes are spoken of. The
 sense is that the Son is God from God (§§ 8-10). Nor was Christ made;
 He is the Son, not the handiwork, of the Father (§§ 11, 12). And His
 Sonship is immediate, not derivative like ours, or like that of Israel
 His firstborn. This latter kind of sonship has a definite beginning of
 existence, and an origin out of nothing (§§ 13-16). The Arian arguments
 fail to prove that the Sonship of Christ has either of these characters
 (§§ 17, 18). Truth is to be attained not by self-confident arguing but
 by faith (§ 19), yet it is not enough for us to avoid their reasonings;
 we must overthrow them (§ 20). The Son was born from eternity, being
 the Son of the eternal Father (§ 21). The objection that sonship
 involves beginning does not hold in His case (§§ 22, 23). The Son has
 all that the Father has; He has therefore eternity and an unconditioned
 existence (§ 24). He is from the Eternal, and therefore eternal
 Himself; from the Eternal, and therefore not from nothing. Reason
 cannot grasp, and therefore cannot refute, this. We must not assert
 that there was a time before He was born, a time when He was not (§§
 25-27). We must not argue, from the analogy of our own birth, that the
 truth is impossible (§ 28), nor that, because of His eternal existence,
 the Son was not born (§§ 29-32). Again, the Arians deny the eternal
 Fatherhood of God; He always existed, they say, but was not always the
 Father. This contradicts Scripture (§§ 33, 34). They argue that Wisdom
 is said to be the first of God's creatures; but creation, in this
 sense, is a synonym for generation, and Wisdom was antecedent to
 creation (§§ 35-38). Wisdom is coeternal with God (§ 39), and shared
 His eternal purpose of creation (§§ 40, 41). Nor may we believe that
 Christ was begotten simply in order to perform the creative work, as
 God's Minister, for Wisdom took part in the design as well as in the
 execution (§§ 42, 43). And again, Wisdom is spoken of as created, as an
 indication of Her control over created things (§ 44). The creation to
 be a beginning of God's ways is a separate event from the eternal
 generation. It means that Christ, as the Way of Life, under the Old
 Covenant took the semblance, under the New Covenant the substance, of
 the creature man, to lead us into the way. The two senses must not be
 confused (§§ 45-49). Yet mere inaccuracy of speech, without heretical
 intent, is not unpardonable (§ 50). After a final assertion (§ 51) of
 faith in Christ as God from God, the eternal Son, Hilary appeals to the
 Almighty Father, declaring his creed, his consciousness of human
 infirmity and of the need of faith (§§ 52, 53). The Son is the
 Only-begotten of God, the Second because He is the Son (§ 54). The Holy
 Ghost proceeds from the Father and is sent by the Son. He also is no
 creature, but of one nature with the God Whose mysteries He knows, and
 ineffable like Him Whose Spirit He is (§ 55). Finally, Hilary prays
 that, as he was baptized, so he may remain in the faith of Three
 Persons in One God.
