New Evidences in Psychical Research (J. Arthur Hill, 1911)
==========================================================
J. Arthur Hill — Hill's record of investigations — the Edwardian SPR member's evidence survey. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (cu31924028951122) — 1911 first edition.

New Evidences^

PSYCHIC\L ReSE.

<3f»ARTHUR HILL '

QJarnell Uniuctaitg Slihratg

FROM THE

BENNO LOEWY LIBRARY

COLLECTED BY

BENNO LOEWY

1854-1919
BEQUEATHED TO CORNELL UNIVERSITY

Cornell University Library
BF1031 .H64

New evidences in psychicai research: a r

olin

3 1924 028 951 122

The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


NEW EVIDENCES IN
PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

New Evidences in
Psychical Research

A RECORD OF INVESTIGATIONS, WITH SELECTED
EXAMPLES OF RECENT S.P.R. RESULTS

BY

J. ARTHUR HILL

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

SIR OLIVER LODGE, D.Sc, F.R.S.

Principal of the University of Birmingham

LONDON
WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Ltd.

164 ALDERSGATE STREET, E.G.
191 1

RicBAAD Clay & Sonb, Lihitkd,

BBKAD STRKKT HILL, K.C., AND
BUNGAY, SDFFOLK,

TO MY FRIENDS
F.K., I.O., AND M.E.N.

"I, at least, will shun the weakness of
philosophising beyond my depth. . . . What
is the use of pretending to assurances we have
not, respecting the other life ? ... If there
is a wish for immortality, and no evidence,
why not say just that ? If there are con-
flicting evidences, why not state them ?
If there is not ground for a candid thinker
to make up his mind, yea or nay — why not
suspend the judgment ? I weary of these
dogmatisers, I tire of these hacks of routine,
who deny the dogmas. I neither affirm nor
deny. I stand here to try the case. I am
here to consider, a-Keirreiv, to consider how
it is."

(Emerson: Montaigne; or. The Sceptic.)

PREFACE

It is desirable, in the interests of psychical
research, that experiences of apparently super-
normal nature should be put on record, if
they reach a fairly high evidential level. The
incidents described in the following pages
seemed worth chronicling, though no claim
is made that any or all of them can be re-
garded as supplying proof of any particular
theory. I thank the friends who have so
kindly allowed me to make use of their
results.

It appeared, also, that a selection of cases
giving an idea of recent S.P.R. investigation
might be useful to readers who have no time
for the study of very lengthy reports. A
few chapters have accordingly been added,
dealing with such investigation. I have
to thank the Council of the Society for
Psychical Research for permission to quote
from the Proceedings. For all opinions in
the text, the responsibility is mine.

J. A. H.

Bradford,
December 1910.

INTRODUCTION

My friend Mr. J. Arthur Hill, having been
more or less concerned in various remarkable
experiences, thinks it desirable to publish
them, and at the same time to discuss briefly
the general subject from a reasonable point
of view and in the light of a considerable
knowledge of what has been done by others.

He has asked me to introduce his little
book to the Public; and accordingly I have
pleasure in testifying to the careful and
responsible truthfulness which characterises
his presentation, and to the unemotional
habit of mind with which he regards these
phenomena.

Without vouching for the details of
events many of which are outside my own
knowledge, I nevertheless commend the
narrative as well worthy of study, and the
discussion of possible explanations as sane
and likely to be helpful to many readers. So
far as a book dealing with a subject of
this obscurity can be trustworthy I consider
that this book is of that nature; and the
simplicity of its treatment should make it
widely read.

Oliver Lodge.

September 1910.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

I GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

II THE TELEPATHIC AND OTHER PHENOMENA OP
MRS. NAPIER

III TWO SITTINGS WITH MISS MCDONALD

IV SITTINGS WITH THE CLAIRVOYANT WATSON,

NOS. 1, 2

V SITTINGS WITH THE CLAIRVOYANT WATSON,

NOS. 3, 4

VI SITTINGS WITH THE CLAIRVOYANT WATSON,

NOS. 5, 6

VII SITTING WITH THE CLAIRVOYANT WATSON,
NO. 7

VIII SITTINGS WITH THE CLAIRVOYANT WATSON,

NOS. 8, 9

IX REMARKS ON THIS SERIES OF NINE SITTINGS

X SITTINGS WITH WATSON : SECOND SERIES,
NOS. 10, 11 .... .

XI SITTINGS WITH WATSON : SECOND SERIES,

NOS. 12, 13

XII ANOTHER SITTING WITH WATSON
Xjn HALLUCINATIONS

PAGE

ix

15
28

35

43

51

57

63

72

91

99
110
117

xii CONTENTS

OHAPTEK PAOE

XIV AUTOMATIC WEITING 139

XV THE TRANCE-PHENOMENA OP MBS. THOMPSON . 158

XVI CKOSS-COERESPONDENCES BETWEEN MBS. POBBES,

MBS. PIPBE, MRS. THOMPSON AND MBS. VERRALL 168

XVII CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS OP MRS. HOLLAND

AND MBS. VERBALL 175

XVIII CONCOEDANCES IN THE SCBIPTS OP MBS. HOLLAND,

MBS. PIPEB, MBS. VEBBALL AND MISS VERBALL 185

XIX THEOBY 196

APPENDIX 213

INDEX 215

NEW EVIDENCES
IN PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

A RECORD OF INVESTIGATIONS, WITHSLEGTED
EXAMPLES OF REGENT S.P.R. RESULTS

cha:^ter I

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

Any one who writes on psychical research
without having- clear-cut convictions as to the
explanation of the phenomena, is in a rather
unenviable position. If he fails to ascribe
them to fraud or " electricity," he will be
regarded by the outsider as a credulous crank,
or — to vary the epithet to that by which
the Beach-comber designated his friend Mr.
Andrew Lang — as a "superstitious muff";
while, on the other hand, if he declines to give
in to " spirits " he will be accused, in some
quarters, of constitutional unbelief, inability
to make logical inferences from the facts, or
unconquerable bias and unfairness. He may
thus fall between two stools.

But we may perhaps venture to hope that
a few righteous men may be found, who will

2 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

pick him up again. Public opinion is slowly
but surely becoming educated : is gradually
realizing that it is unwise to come to conclu-
sions in a hurry; that in this very complex
world there is no telling what may happen,
and that therefore it is unsafe to reject a state-
ment as being necessarily untrue just because,
to our prejudiced minds, it seems absurd. It
is a question of evidence ; let us defer decision
until sufficient evidence has been accumulated.
Like Plutarch, let us sit on the fence. For ' ' to
give entire credit to them [stories of speaking
statues, in this case] or altogether to disbelieve
them, is equally dangerous, on account
of human weakness. ... It is best to be
cautious, and to avoid extremes." It may
cheerfully be admitted, that — to quote a
contemporary of Plutarch's — " lovers of the
marvellous are too prone to heighten the
marvels they hear tell of, by adding touches
of their own; and thus they debase truth by
alloying it with fiction." In which remark of
Pausanias, the founder of modern scientific
method would have heartily concurred. But,
he would continue, " rarities and reports that
seem uncredible are not to be suppressed or
denied." Accumulate the evidence, and stick
close to objective experience; for " men have
withdrawn themselves too much from the
contemplation of nature, and the observations

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 8

of experience, and have tumbled up and down
in their own reason and conceits," showing a
regrettable " impatience of doubt, and haste
to assertion without due and mature suspen-
sion of judgment. For the two ways of
contemplation are not unlike the two ways of
action commonly spoken of by the ancients :
the one plain and smooth in the beginning,
and in the end impassable ; the other rough and
troublesome in the entrance, but after a while
fair and even : so it is in contemplation; if a
man will begin with certainties, he shall end
in doubts; but if he will be content to begin
with doubts, he shall end in certainties."
{Advancement of Learning, § 8.)

I am not so sure that he will end in certain-
ties. He may continue all his life in doubt.
But at least he will have the consolation that
he has not led any one astray by unjustified
assertion. In psychical matters, even more
than in others, there has been too much cock-
sureness on both sides. Mr. James Robert-
son, speaking of some controls,^ says, " I am
as certain as I am of anything that I have
held converse with ' Joseph Priestley,' the
discoverer of oxygen, whom religious bigotry
forced to flee from Birmingham to America
on account of his Unitarian opinions," and he

^ SpiritiMlism : The Open Door to the Unseen Universe,
p. 50.

B 2

4 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

also claims acquaintance with the spirits of
J. S. Mill and Harriet Martineau; while Mr.
John Lobb goes one better, and interviews
Dickens, Carlyle, and Shakespeare, who —
judging by the report — must have deteriorated
terribly since " passing over," for they twaddle
atrociously.^ On the other hand, Mr. Frederic
Harrison tells us that " to talk to us of mind,
feeling, and will continuing their functions in
the absence of physical organs and visible
organisms, is to use language which, to us at
least, is pure nonsense." ^ Professor Mtinster-
berg is even more downright, for he says,
referring to trancfe-mediumship, that " the
facts as they are claimed do not exist, and
never will exist, and no debate makes the
situation better." ^ And no doubt many
sensible folks, unacquainted with the subject,
will be prepared to class it, without study,
along with that witchcraft which, according
to Reginald Scot, was " incomprehensible to
the wise, learned or f aithf ull, a probable matter
to children, fooles, melancholike persons or

1 Talks with the Dead, pp. 41, 42, 44, 62.
Philosophy of Common Sense, p. 217.

^ Psychology and Life, p. 253. Professor Miinsterberg
is quite Canute-like in giving his orders to Nature as
to what shall happen and what shall not. Or, shall
we say, ostrich-Uke, in hiding his head and vowing
that there is nothing to see ? Certainly he has not yet
learnt the lesson which Canute (in the story) taught his
courtiers.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 5

papists"; 1 and they will cheerfully affix, in
their minds, the second of Scot's four labels to
all those misguided individuals who devote any
of their time to investigation of these matters.

Such pronouncements as these, on which-
ever side, seem to me premature, and harmful
to science. The attitude of Plutarch and
Bacon is preferable to such hasty dogmatism,
and is indeed, I think, the ideal attitude to
adopt. Some theorizing of course is inevit-
able, and hypotheses can only be tested by
adopting them, provisionally, and seeing how
they work — ^how far they fit the facts. But
it is necessary to keep a sharp eye on the
hypotheses, lest they stiffen into doctrines;
or, rather, to keep a sharp eye on ourselves,
lest we become so enamoured of a hypothesis
that we try to make new facts fit it, instead
of being guided by them to a perhaps truer
explanation. In the infancy of a science,
theory is of less importance than careful
observation. We must make sure of our
facts, before beginning to fit them into their
places in the mosaic.

So much on the general aspect; now to come
a little nearer the particular.

Psychical Research includes a large variety

1 Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584), Cambridge History
of English Literature, iii., p. 113.

6 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

of phenomena. Some are admitted as occur-
ring, but in need of study and explanation —
such as the curious symptoms of multiple
personality of the " Sally Beauchamp " kind ^
— while others are alleged but disputed, such
as the various supernormal phenomena of
Spiritualism. No one can yet decide any-
thing about the relative importance of these
different phenomena, for all of them — all that
the future will certify as actually occurring,
that is — will have some kind of bearing on our
conception of the nature and destiny of human
personality. For the present, however, the
position of greatest prominence is given to
those happenings which more or less directly
suggest that human beings survive the death
of their bodies, retaining the memories and
loves of earth, and communicating at times
with those who are left behind. It is natural
enough that anything which suggests this,
should immediately and principally engage
our attention; for we all have a vital interest
in the question of what really happens to us
when we die. A few words, however, concern-
ing other phases of the research, are perhaps
desirable.

There is a well-marked class of alleged facts,
usually known as " the physical phenomena of
Spiritualism." These alleged facts include

^ The Dissociation of a Personality, Dr. Morton Prince.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 7

raps, movement of objects without contact
or normal means of impulsion, touches by
apparently-material hands which are not the
hands of the sitters, materialization of spirit
forms, apports, and the like. Concerning all
these, I have to say that I have had little or
no experience in this particular direction, and
that I have — consequently — little or no belief.
Several of my friends have had the luck to
get good table-levitations apparently without
contact and in a good light, and I cannot
entirely ignore their testimony — particularly
as one of them, in whose house the sittings
were held, is a strong anti-spiritualist as well
as an exceptionally keen observer. And, in
common with many other readers, I have
been considerably impressed by the Report
on Eusapia Palladino in which Messrs, Bag-
gaily, Carrington, and Feilding — experienced
investigators and hitherto hardened un-
believers — have announced their conversion
to the belief that, whatever the cause, the
things happen. But it is no more than an
impression. The conviction of years, that
these things cannot happen — however un-
scientific, as I admit — is not shaken by mere
reading. Indeed, I doubt if I should believe
in some of these things, even if I saw them.
Seeing is not always believing.^ The possi-
1 Mr. Lang expresses simileir distrust of his own senses

8 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

bilities of conjuring are so great- that it is
dangerous for a non-expert to trust his senses
in these fields of investigation, particularly
if a paid medium is present. And, even if
not, there may be some motive for fraud,
other than the financial one. Some person
present may have a turn for practical joking,
or may have some mental abnormality which
predisposes him to the production of marvels,
just for the sake of mystery-mongering.i
This may even be done subconsciously, in a
state approaching trance; and the performer
may not be morally blameworthy, being
irresponsible for his actions. And it must be
remembered that in these sittings the medium
— paid or unpaid, conscious or entranced — has
a great advantage over the platform conjurer.
The latter has to produce his phenomena at a
given time; the former can wait for his oppor-
tunity. And, if the conditions are too strin-
gent — the observers too keen — he can always
say that the spirits won't come. It is heads I
win, tails you lose. If the sitters are deceiv-
able, they are deceived, and the medium wins ;

(Dock Lane and Common Sense, p. 22), but disclaims all
convictipns, "negative and affirmative." But if he
really had attained this admirable state of acrobatic
balance, would not actual experience, under test con-
ditions, pull him over on the affirmative side ?

1 Dr. Maxwell records cases in point : Metapsychical
Phenomena, pp. 78, 92, 128, 381,

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 9

if they are not, they lose — both the phenomena
and their money. And. indeed it is doubtful
if fraud-proof conditions can be devised, A
medium who makes a living at the trade, and
is therefore in constant practice, may be ex-
pected to be more than a match for any lay-
man. For myself, I confess that I have little
interest in this branch of the subject, for I see
no possibility of attaining safe conclusions.
If I could not trust my own observation — and,
like Professor Miinsterberg, I am quite sure
that a very moderately clever trickster would
outwit me — still less can I trust the observ-
ation of others. Therefore, in short, while
admitting the impressiveness of the Report
just mentioned, I am nevertheless uncon-
vinced. Even if there was no fraud, the ex-
planation may be " collective hallucination."
And, even if these phenomena were estab-
lished as occurring without normal causation,
they would not prove anything except the
existence of a force unrecognized by orthodox
science. It is absurd to say that they would
prove " spirit-origin." In a series of sensa-
tional " exposure-articles " which appeared
last year in a popular magazine, it is remarked
by a person who poses as an expert but who
gives himself away in almost every paragraph,
that these minor physical phenomena are
" all that I myself require to become a con-

10 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

vinced spiritualist." And this gentleman
apparently considers himself a hard-headed
unbeliever ! He seems to me, on the con-
trary, to be extraordinarily credulous, as well
as astonishingly illogical. Why should it
necessarily be " spirits," if a table does waltz
about without being touched ? There is no
logic in such a supposition. It is like the
reasoning of a savage who, ignorant of guns,
attributes superhuman power to the white
man, because this latter can kill at a distance,
without seeming to throw anything. In
each case, the argument is from ignorance,
not from knowledge. " I don't understand
how this can be; therefore it is the work of a
spirit, or a god, or a devil." Which, of course,
does not follow. On this point. Sir Oliver
Lodge remarks : "If asked : Do I associate
physical movements and other physical pheno-
mena with the continued existence of deceased
persons ? I must answer I do not." {Pro-
ceedings S.P.B., xvii., p. 49.)

Another curious phase, also deeply tinged
with fraud, is that of so-called spirit-photo-
graphy. Here, again, I have little or no
belief, though I have no a priori negative
judgment to make. There are^many actinic
rays which are invisible to us; and if we
imagine an object which reflects some such
rays while remaining transparent to ordinary
light-rays, there is not much difficulty in

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 11

conceiving that the camera may photograph
something which is really there, though in-
visible to us. If a spirit can build up a semi-
material form — say, out of some such stufiE as
the ether — the thing is credible enough. It
is a question of evidence as to whether the
phenomenon happens, or not. Personally, I
have come across only one case that impressed
me, and it was not convincing. But it was
curious. I will describe it shortly.^

On May 15, 1905, between 12 and 1 o'clock,

Mr. Binns, photographer, of S (a small

market town in Lincolnshire), took a photo-
graph of a labourer named Warren. The
plate used was the first of a new packet of
"IKords," purchased that very day. The
only persons present in the room were the
photographer and the sitter. Nothing ab-
normal was seen or expected. The people
concerned are none of them spiritualists.

The plate was developed on the 19th, and
showed, in addition to the sitter, the figure of
a man, dressed in ordinary clothing, super-
posed on the portrait of Warren. ^ The face
was quite distinct, also the turn-down collar,

^ An account of this case appeared in the Occult Review
for March 1910, with several reproductions of the
photographs concerned.

2 Its position and clear focus disprove any supposition
of the well-known dodge of a background painted with
sulphate of quinine. The form's face is in the sitter's
chest.

12 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

tie, cuffs, and watch-chain. It was very
unspiritual-looking, and of course suggested
ordinary double exposure. But the curious
thing is that the figure is a perfect likeness of
Warren's cousin (a Mr. Ground), who, so far as
we can make out, had never been photographed
by Binns, and who, at the time of the i^cident,
happened to be lying in a hospital fifteen miles
away, suffering from a gunshot wound from
the effects of which he died ten days later.
The photographer states in the most solemn
and emphatic manner that not only had he
never photographed Mr. Ground, but that he
was unaware of his existence. The form
appearing on the plate was therefore quite
strange to him.

No photograph of Mr. Ground is known to
exist except one in which he appears in militia
uniform, aged about eighteen. At the time
of his death he was thirty-four, and of course
very different in appearance. It seems, there-
fore, unlikely that any existing photograph
had served as a copy.

There is no apparent motive for fraud, for
Binns is (or was, for he is now out of the busi-
ness) an ordinary photographer, and he stood
to lose, not gain, by getting any sort of uncanny
reputation. He is well known to a friend of

mine (the vicar of M ) whose choirmaster is

Binns' s brother; and this friend vouches for
the integrity of all concerned. And it cer-

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 13

tainly seems difficult to account for the affair
by accident. Mr. Ground had not been photo-
graphed by Mr. Binns, and, moreover, the
packet of plates was a new one.^ I suppose
the spiritistic explanation would be that
Ground, finding himself partially free from
his body (he seems to have been probably
unconscious at the time), became aware of
his cousin being photographed, and was
able somehow to produce a photographable
thought-form of himself. But I do "not
entirely accept such an interpretation. The
incident is curious, and my friend the vicar
is quite convinced that some supernormal
agency was concerned; but so much depends
on the reliability of Binns (of whom I know
nothing discreditable, and to whom an apology
is due for the apparent suspicion) that it is
dangerous to come to any definite conclusion
in the matter. The most that can be said,
is, that such cases seem worth investigating.
Perhaps we may ultimately come across one
in which normal agencies can be satisfactorily
excluded. Until then, judgment must be
suspended.

Stories of such astral travelling — minus the
photography — are told in all ages and among

1 Accidental double exposure is disproved by the clear-
ness of the background, which coincides with that of
many other photographs taken by Mr. Binns and seen
by me.

14 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

all peoples; and it is possible that there may
be some truth in it. The following is a curious
modern case which supports the notion. Mr.
Wilmot was crossing from Liverpool to New
York. The passage was very stormy. On the
night following the eighth day he dreamed
that he saw his wife come to the door of his
state-room. Here she hesitated, seeming to
discover that the room had a second occupant.
Finally, she advanced, kissed him, and with-
draw. On waking, Mr. Wilmot found his
fellow-passenger, whose berth was above but
not directly over his own, leaning on his elbow
and regarding him fixedly. " You're a pretty
fellow," said the room-mate at length, " to
have a lady come and visit you in this way."
Asked for explanations, he described what he
had seen, while lying wide awake. It tallied
exactly with Mr. Wilmot' s dream. When
the latter reached home, his wife told him
that she had been anxious about him, and had
" visited " him one night, finding him in a
state-room with another occupant in an upper
berth, who was awake and who stared at her.
The time and the details corresponded with the
experience of Mr. Wilmot and his room-mate.^
In the following chapter will be found a
similar though less detailed experience, in
which the " traveller " is a friend of my own,

^Myers's Human Personality, i., p. 682; Proceedinas
S.P.B., Tii., p. 41.

CHAPTER II

THE TELEPATHIC AND OTHER PHENOMENA OE
MRS. NAPIER

The present chapter will describe a few
experiences of a friend of mine who possesses
what for want of a better name we call
" psychic faculties," but who is in no sense
of the word a " professional."

Mrs. Napier — as I will call her — is a lady
in early middle age, living a rather quiet
country life, though active in charitable works.
She belongs to a family of means and position,
as did also her husband, whose widely-
lamented death occurred not long ago. She
is domesticated but sociable, a good musician
and landscape painter (as a hobby), very
fond of animals, flowers, and outdoor life.
She is of exceptional physical strength, and,
until recently — when she was thrown from
a carriage and sustained slight injuries which
have compelled avoidance of violent exercise
— she enjoyed enviably perfect health. I
mention this because it is fashionable in some
quarters to regard " psychic " folks as invari-
ably weak and neurotic. Even Mr. Lang —

15

16 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

probably as a sop to the Philistines, for he
surely knows better — remarks that in British
Guiana, " as elsewhere, hysterical and epilep-
tic people make the best mediums." ^ How-
ever it may be in British Guiana, it certainly
is not so nearer home. Our hypnotic special-
ists come across much hysteria and epilepsy,
but they seem to find little or no mediumistic
power; so little, that Dr. Bramwell does not
believe even in telepathy. And, as to the
sensitives with whom the S.P.R. has had its
recent results, I am not aware that they show
any morbid symptoms. One of them, at the
time of Mr. Piddington's report, could spend
a day fox-hunting, which, as Mr. Piddington
suggests, does not point to much degeneracy,^

Mrs. Napier is not a spiritualist, has never
attended a spiritualistic seance or meeting, has
never even seen any trance-speaker, automatic
writer, or other medium, and, until after the
experiences which I shall describe, had read
nothing of the literature of the subject, except
a few odd copies of Light. In religion she is
a good Churchwoman, and her social surround-
ings are of very orthodox Anglican type.

The form which her experiences most
usually take, is that of vision in a kind of
trance, or, sometimes, what has been called

1 Cock Lane and Common Sense, p. 39.

2 Proceedings 8.P.B., vol. xviii., pp. 303-4.

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 17

" travelling clairvoyance." The condition
generally comes on when she is in bed, but
is very different from sleep. It is always
preceded by a tingling feeling, running
through the body from head to foot, and very
similar to that produced by a galvanic battery.
Cataleptic rigidity follows, and apparitions
begin to be seen, usually of unknown people;
or, as sometimes, there is a painful feeling of
" getting out of the body," and then a sensa-
tion of rushing through space — a sensation
" delightful beyond description " — to some
distant town, whence veridical information,
of a kind which guessing, inference, or previous
knowledge would not account for, is brought
back.^ In one of these journeys, for example,
she saw a friend getting into a train at a
certain station in a town a hundred miles
away. She had no normal knowledge of this
friend's whereabouts on that day; but it
turned out that the vision was true. This
might, however, be due to chance. The
following is a better example.

1 Jerome Cardan iiad, in addition to a Socratic
" elairaudience," a similar faculty " of passing out of his
senses as into ecstasy whenever he will, feeling when he
goes into this state a sort of separation near the heart as
if his soul were departing, this state beginning from his
brain and passing down his spine, and he then feeling
only that he is out of himself." — Tylor, Primitive
Culture, ^ef . is to Cardan's De Varietate Rerum, 1 556,
cap. xliii.
c

18 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

In a recent experience of this kind, Mrs.
Napier, after the usual feeling of " travelling,"
seemed to find herself in her old home, sixty
miles away from where she lives. She had
tried to " go," for she had a feehng that
her father, who is an invalid, was worse.
Arrived " in spirit " at the house, she went
up-stairs, and into her father's room. As
soon as she got within the door, she saw
her father sitting up in bed, and evidently
worse; he turned his head, saw her, and
cried out " Why, there's Mabel I " She was
at this point overcome by the faintness
and the "drawn-back" feeling which pre-
cede the end of each of these experiences,
and, after the rushing return through space,
woke up in her. body once more. She
immediately wrote home, describing the
incident. Next morning, however, there
came a letter from her step-mother {i. e.
the letters had crossed in the post) say-
ing that the invalid had been worse, and
during the period of attack had seemed to
see his daughter standing by the door. He
had then called out her name, saying " There's
Mabel .' " or some such phrase. The times
coincided closely, so far as can be ascertained.
It is noteworthy, however, as indicating the
mental nature of these experiences, that the
percipient described his daughter as wearing

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 19

a pink gown; while as a matter of fact she
was wearing at the moment a blue dress —
which, by the way, he had never seen. The
incident occurred at about 10 a.m., and Mrs.
Napier was lying down in her room.

I do not press this as a particularly good
example of an evidential case. Chance coinci-
dence cannot be quite excluded. And this
is the more to be considered, as on one or two
occasions a vision has presented details which
were not true. This incident, therefore, is
presented as an illustration rather than as
evidence. But I believe that of some at
least of these experiences, chance coincidence
is not the correct explanation. The following
case, though still not amounting to unques-
tionable proof, is strongly suggestive of some
supernormal exercise of faculty. I give it in
Mrs. Napier's own words, written out and sent
to me a few weeks after the event. (Such
incidents ought to be recorded, and the record
sent to some responsible person, at once, in
order that there shall be no time for lapse of
memory on points of detail. Mrs. Napier
has kindly promised to inform me of any
future experience of this kind, immediately
on its occurrence.)

" An old friend of ours came to spend the week-end
with us, a few weeks ago. He departed, as was his
custom, by the nine o'clock train on Monday morning,
c 2

20 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Soon after his departure, I went up-stairs, and, a feeling
of drowsiness coming over me, I lay down for a_ few
minutes. No sooner had my head touched the pillow
than I distinctly felt the vibration, and heard the
noise, of a train in swift motion; and then it seemed to
me that this friend I speak of was beside me, talking
to me, and teUing me to be careful of some valuable
papers which he had left in a drawer of the writing-table,
and which he had forgotten to take with him. Then
he was silent, but I could stiU see liim, and could hear
and feel the vibration of the train. Then, aU in a
moment, I felt jerked off the seat, and felt a sharp pain
in my back as though it were broken; then the next
second I was back in my room again, though I stiU
seemed to feel the pressure of his hands on my shoulders.
" As it afterwards turned out, the gentleman ^ad left
these papers — quite unknown to me, of course — and
at the time of my vision he was wishing I might find
and care for them, which I did. A curious additional
circumstance is that his train, on reaching his destina-
tion, stopped with a jerk which threw him on his back,
causing severe pain."

This looks like a mixture of telepathy and
clairvoyance. For a similar but more elabor-
ate case (Mrs. Storie's) cf. Phantasms of the
Living, i., p. 370, quoted in Human Personal-
ity, i., p. 144.

Mrs. Napier also finds that she is often
warned of visitors before they arrive; but in
these cases it is difficult to exclude chance.
A recent case, however, was rather good. Mrs.
Napier was at the piano one Sunday, after
lunch. Suddenly, half-way through a piece
of music, she stopped and said, "Major Hall
is coming; he has just started from home."
Her sister ridiculed the idea, for their friend

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 21

Major Hall, who lives four miles away, makes
it a rule to stay about home on Sunday after-
noons, and had never called on them on that
day. Mrs. Napier, however, stuck to her point,
adding that the Trents were coming also, and
Mr. Trowbridge. And they all duly turned
up, and stayed to tea and dinner !

I pass now to a striking case of another
kind; and, to make the narrative easier to
follow, I again give Mrs. Napier's own words,
as nearly as possible. She sent me an account
of the incident, in a letter, soon after its
occurrence in August 1906.

I had gone to bed very tired, after a dinner-party,
and — ^if truth must be told — not in the best of tempers.
Just as I was going off to sleep, I began to feel the
electrical tingling which always precedes visions. I
fought -against it for all I was worth, but had to give
in, though making up my mind that I would neither
see nor hear, if I could help it. However, as it soon
turned out, I could not prevent it: for beside me I heard
an agonized voice say : —

" Mabel, Mabel, for God's sake pray for me ! "

I am ashamed to record my reply, and can only plead
my tiredness in extenuation. I said : —

" Pray for yourself, as I do ! I ask nobody to pray
for me ! "

Then it seemed to me that somebody knelt down
beside my bed, and a head was bowed upon the clothes.
I looked, and saw a head which seemed rather familiar,
though the voice had awakened no memories. So I
said : —

" Lift up your face, so that I may see you. You
address me by my name — what is yours ? "

The form at once lifted its head up, and I recognized
him as a friend of my girlhood's days — ^Anthony Grace

22 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

by name. Softened by the pain in his face, I immedi-
ately changed my tone.

" Anthony, let me help you ! " I said. " I will, with
all my heart : only show me the way."

" Pray for me, pray for me ! " came the answer.
" I'm dead; can't you see I'm dead ? "

" No," I replied, " you do not look dead." Nor did he.

I promised to do what he wished, and his face lost
some of its pain as he thanked me. He remarked about
the trouble he had had to find me, and promised — ^in
response to my request — to try to reach me again.
But I have seen nothing of him since.

[Notes from later letters, referring to the above.]

At the time of this occurrence (August 1906) we knew
nothing of Anthony Grace's health or general circum-
stances. He belonged to a part of the country which
I had left long before. I had seen him for about ten
minutes at a railway station early in 1905, but with this
exception I had not seen him for ten years. He passed
out of my life before I was twenty-one, and at the time
of my vision we knew nothing about his condition, and
had no reason to expect his death or any illness.

But it turned out afterwards, when my sister — whom
I had immediately told of my experience — visited that
part of the country, and made inquiries, that he had died
in AugvM 1906. Unfortimately, I forgot to note the
exact date of my vision, so we cannot find out how nearly
it coincides with Grace's death. Probably some hours
elapsed between the two, for he died suddenly, while
dressing in the morning (unexpectedly and without
previous serious illness) and my vision would occur
about midnight. But my sister and I are sure that we
had no normal knowledge of his death. If we had heard
of it, we should certainly have remembered.

On another occasion, Mrs. Napier was
alarmed by the apparition of a man, who
carried a gun under his arm and a brace of
pigeons in one hand. He was quite natural
and lifelike, and she would have mistaken

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 23

him for a living man if she had not remembered
that she had carefully locked her door. He
advanced into the room, and threw down the
pigeons on the bed. Mrs. Napier immediately
experienced a peculiarly violent feeling of
repulsion which she could not understand;
she is quite accustomed to these curious
visitations, and they are generally not repellent
or objectionable. Then the man spoke —

" You don't know me ? "

{Mrs.N.) "No."

" Your father knew me well enough. I
died over twenty years ago. I'm Tom Wynd-
ham. I used to call your father ' Bob.' "

And he vanished. Mrs. Napier did not
remember hearing the name before, but on
her next visit home she asked her father if
the name was known to him. He asked why
she wanted to know, and she gave some kind
of evasive reply, for her people disapprove
of " this kind of thing." He went on to say,
however, that Tom Wyndham had been
a friend of his in youth, that he died over
twenty years ago, and that, though good-
hearted, he had been a wild sort.

" In what way ? " asked Mrs. Napier.

" Well," replied her father, " he cared for
nothing but sport of a low kind, chiefly
pigeon-shooting ; and at the end he died raving
mad through drink."

24 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Mrs. Napier now understood her feeling
of repulsion. But there was one other point.

" What did he call you, father ? " she asked.

" He called me ' Bob,' " he replied. " He
was the only one of my friends who did so.
As you know, I have always had a strong
objection to the abbreviation."

I do not propose to discuss the various
explanatory hypotheses which these experi-
ences suggest. In the first place, we can-
not guarantee the absolute accuracy of the
report ; for we have to depend, to some extent,
oto'lilrs. Napier's memory. This, however,
happens to be a very good one, and it is also
to be noted that the accounts were written
out, and in my possession, soon after the
events occurred : further, I have the corrobora-
tive testimony of Mrs. Napier's sister, with
regard to the incidents in which she was
concerned. I have not much doubt about the
essential accuracy of the report, and I feel that
some apology is almo&t due to Mrs. Napier
and her sister for considering it even debatable.
However, they understand the necessity of
considering all the points, and \yiU be indul-
gent accordingly.

As an illustration of psychic faculty in a
non-spiritistic setting, I will give as a close
to this chapter a curious case of apparent

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 25

premonition as distinguished from precogni-
tion. It is rather like a reported experience
of the late Mr. Melton Prior, the famous
war correspondent. He dreamed twice that
he saw himself shot and buried. His mother
wrote to him, describing a similar dream, and
imploring him not to go to the relief of
Eshowe. He accordingly sent a substitute.
In the engagement, the unfortunate substitute
was one of the first men to be shot.^ But
this may have been a case of chance coinci-
dence. Dreams are so numerous that some
of them are sure to "hit on" by chance;
and this was a very expectable kind of dream,
in the circumstances. It is quite different,
and much more evidential, when the premoni-
tion is conveyed in waking clairvoyance or
other unusual state.

Mrs. Napier was lying in bed, awake, on a
morning in July 1907. Suddenly the usual
" magnetic " tinglings began. In a minute
or two she seemed to find herself on a country
road, and saw a wagon with three horses
collide with a dog-cart : —

" Then from underneath the wagon I saw a man pull
out a girl and a bicycle. I felt that this girl was my
sister, though I could not see her very well. Then I
recovered normal consciousness.

" Soon afterwards my sister came up with my break-
fast, and I told her of my vision, asking her not to go

1 Daily Chronicle, Nov. 3, 1910.

26 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

out cycling that day. It happened, however, that she
particularly wanted a certain book from the neighbouring
town-library, so I ultimately agreed to let her go, on
her promising that if she saw a wagon with three horses,
she would dismount and keep close to the hedge.

" She went. When about half-a-mile from the town,
and riding up a hiU, she saw before her a wagon with
three horses. She immediately dismounted and walked
close beside the hedge. Within a few seconds there was
a sudden flash of lightning, and a scream from behind.
Then a horse and trap dashed past — the horse had bolted,
frightened by the lightning. But it was safely pulled
up, and no one was hurt."

Mrs. Napier wrote out and sent me an
account of this incident, three days after its
occurrence. I have quoted from her letter,
which lies before me. As she goes on to say,
things did not turn out as seen; " but who
knows what might have happened but for the
warning ? " ^

" Chance-coincidence," says the sceptic.
Well, perhaps so. But, knowing the fre-
quency of Mrs. Napier's veridical experiences,
and noting the amount of correct detail in
many of them, I confess to a certain incred-
ulity. , " There is a point," as Mr. Lang has
neatly said, " at which the explanations of
common sense arouse scepticism."

Whether, in the case just described, Mrs.
Napier's subliminal self somehow saw the

^ I have the sister's written corroboration of the details.
The case seems half-way between Mr. Prior's and Saul's
(Samriel i. 10), though we can't admit the latter as
" evidence " at this time of day.

TELEPATHIC PHENOMENA 27

danger ahead and communicated its know-
ledge to the upper levels by a vision of what
might happen, or whether the warning came
from external intelligences, no one can tell.
Many interesting questions suggest themselves
here, notably the question of the reality of
Time, Is the Future really, to some higher
Intelligences or to the hidden part of our own
minds. Present ? But that subject is too large,
and too metaphysical, to be entered on here.^
In the next chapter we proceed a step
further in the direction indicated by Mrs.
Napier's phenomena. These latter are always
spontaneous, and are not in the least under
her control. Indeed, she manifests a rather
unexpected inability to produce anything by
trying — except a little automatic writing —
for she cannot even get a rap or a tilt out of
a table, though she has tried most persever-
ingly; and this is the more surprising as she
has had occasional experiences (raps audible
to others and, on one or two occasions, move-
ment of objects without discoverable cause)
which suggest " physical mediumship." Some
people, however, seem able to induce, or at
least to encourage or facilitate, phenomena
of various kinds; particularly trance pheno-
mena, such as are now to be described.

* It is desirable to state that Mrs. Napiel' has read the
MS. of this chapter, and certifies the account as correct.

CHAPTEK III

REPORT OF TWO SITTINGS WITH MISS
MCDONALD 1

On August 8, 1906, my friend Mr. Frank
Knight called on Miss McDonald — a well-
known medium — at her house in the West
End of London, and asked for a sitting.
Miss McDonald was engaged, and suggested
another day; but Mr. Knight persisted, and
the afternoon of the same day (the day of the
call) was fixed on. Mr.Knight wandered about
the neighbourhood until the appointment-
time came, fearing to return to his temporary
dwelling-place (with a married sister some
miles away) lest the supposedly wily medium
should put detectives on his track and should
learn his identity. He gave no name or
address to the medium, either at his first
call or at the sitting; and, so far as he knew,
he was as complete a stranger to her as she
was to him. He had never sat with a medium
before, was quite unknown in spiritualistic

1 Not the true name. Mr. Knight, however, permits
me to give the true name and address to any serious
inquirer.

28

SITTINGS WITH MISS McDONALD 29

society — having only just before become in-
terested in such matters — and his home was
200 miles distant from London.

This first sitting was almost a blank.
The medium was not in good trim. But she
got the names Wilfrid and Frank, which
were correct. [F. K.'s name is Wilfrid Frank
Knight, though he rarely uses the first
Christian name.] A few " spirits " were
described as present, but were not recognized,
A great upheaval in F. K.'s life " ten years
ago " was alluded to, but this statement did
not correspond with fact. He was also in-
formed that he ought to have been in the
medical profession; this is an appropriate
and " veridical " remark, but may be due
to chance.

F. K. did not bespeak another sitting, but,
on the same evening, he wrote to Miss
McDonald suggesting it. The medium ar-
ranged for the day but one following — -i. e.
August .10.

I give below, with F. K.'s kind permission,
his own account of this sitting, almost
exactly as written out in a letter to me on
August 13, 1906. We discussed it together
on his return home, and he has also carefully-
read the MS. of this chapter. There seems
to be nothing to add thereto, and nothing
therein to alter. Notes in square brackets are

30 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

for the reader's information; round brackets
contain remarks made at the time.

The medium borrowed my watch as before, held it
to her forehead, and after some twisting of the features
said " I see Henry." [My father's name was Henry.
In reply to my inquiry she gave me the following further
details.] " He died very suddenly — ^perhaps accident.
Age about 30 to 32. Light brown hair, blue eyes,
moustache, short beard. Broad-minded and better
developed spiritually than most men passing over."

[My father died very suddenly through the bursting
of a blood-vessel. His age was 31. The other details
are probably correct.]

When Miss McDonald had reached this stage she slowly
put out her hand towards me, her eyes meanwhile being
closed. I said " Do you wish to shake hands with me ? "
To this she replied, in broken English, without any trace
of her usual Scotch accent : —

" Yes, I always like to shake hands with the sitters
of my medium. I was here when you called on Wednes-
day, but I could not see into your life so I did not attempt
to speak. Now I must look around, but first I must tell
you that spirit-Uf e is a great reality, and that the spirits
on both sides of the grave are alike- children of the same
great Father.

" Your life is at present all dark and tangled, but a
great light is about to come into it, which will be like the
rising of a beautiful evening star, and life wiU be all
changed for you."

(WiU this happen soon 1)

" Yes — even now it is coming, and I am saying all this
to prepare your mind for the great light that will soon
dawn upon you. But I will now look into your life.
When you were a little boy something happened which
darkened your life. You were about six years old when
some one very nearly related to you passed over, and
your life was changed from what it should have been.
There was a great financial change, and you could not
become a medical man, as you ought to have done. Then
when you went to school you were a very shy boy, and

SITTINGS WITH MISS McDONALD 31

had much trouble with your schoolfellows, who did not
understand you at all, but by mixing with the world
since you have to a great extent thrown this off.

" You will excuse me, please, but I must go forward
now to about six or eight months ago. Then a great
trouble came into your life, and it became all dark. You
were much troubled with business matters."

(Possibly, but there was no financial difficulty.)

" No, no, the trouble is connected with a person."

(Yes.)

" A lady."

(Yes, can you tell me anything about this lady ?
I should like to hear about her.)

" You would have married her."

(No, I should not.)

" I wiU look again. Lady, 55 to 57 years of age,
brown hair, I hear Frederica."

(No.)

" It is Fre . . . something."

(Freda possibly 1)

" Yes, yes, Freda, Freda [then in a faint voice] your
other name . . . Katherine, Katherine."

As these words were spoken. Miss McDonald's head
fell back a little, her eyes were closed, and she was very
pale. She looked very much as if she had fainted, and
appeared to be quite unconscious. In a few seconds her
lips began to move again, and I detected my own name,
Frank. Then louder and more distinctly until it ended
in a delighted cry : " Frank ! Frank ! ! Frank ! ! ! Oh,
my boy, my boy, my dear, dear boy." With a face
shining with delight the medium seized my hand and
pressed it in both hers : —

" Oh, my boy, my boy, I am not dead, I am not dead."

Then she began stroking my hands and face and hair,
just as my mother used to do when we were talking
together at night in her later invalid-days when I sat
and chatted by her bedside before going to bed myself.
The characteristic action was unmistakable.

" My dear boy, I never thought I could have got so
near to you. God bless you, my love."

(Are aU the others with you, mother ?)

32 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" Yes. All. All. Grandmother and Benjamin — and
Benjamin too."

(Do you love me still ?)

" Oh, yes, my dear, dear boy; I love you more than I
can tell. I wish I could take you into my arms."

(And you know I love you, don't you ?)

" I know, I know you do. I never knew until after
I died how much you love me."

(Oh, mother, I would give my life to be with you. I
am so very lonely.)

[Here I broke down. The hands continued their
soft stroking of my face and hair, and the voice went
on : — ]

" Don't grieve, my dear lad, it ii all for the best,
Frank. God is good, God is so good. I love you, my
dear, dear boy, and shall always be with you, and I Tvill
write you a little letter with your own hand, when you
get home." My dear love to Janet — Janet and Herbert
— and Herbert."

(Are you satisfied with us, and the lives we are living 1)

" Yes."

(Am I to continue to keep my house on, and live as I
am doing ? )

" Yes, at present."

(Have you any special message for me ?)

"Ood bless you, my dear, dear boy. God bless you.
I shall be often with you."

The last words were very faint, and then, as they
finished, the medium fell back in her chair, apparently
unconscious. Soon, she began to come round with a
series of twitchings, eventually opening her eyes and
rubbing them.

" Do you feel all right ?" I asked.

" Yes, right now, thank you. But I am sure I have
been controlled by some other spirit as well as ' Sun-
beam.' Did ' Sunbeam ' speak to you ? "

I gathered that she referred to the control with the
broken English. Miss McDonald confirmed this, and
said that it was a rare thing for " Sunbeam " to allow a
strange spirit to control. Miss McDonald assured me
that she had no consciousness of what had passed. I

SITTINGS WITH MISS McDONALD 33

told her something of what had happened, and expressed
myself satisfied with the sitting. We were leaving the
room together, when Miss McDonald said : —

" Just wait a moment, I beheve your grandmother
is in the room. She is a little lady. Stoops rather.
Was very active, while in the flesh. Wore a cap, and
had brown hair in front, but I can see a little white
behind. She had bright blue eyes, and her message to
you is : ' I'm not old any more, Frank ! ' "

This ended the sitting.

[Notes on the details, by F. K.

It is trae that I was " about six years old " when
some one nearly related to me (my father) passed over.
The remarks about my shyness as a boy, and the painful
time I had at school, are specially appUcable. I had
to be taken away from the school, to prevent breakdown
in health — the incipient illness being caused by the
roughness of boarding-school life acting on a too sensi-
tive organization.

The trouble " six or eight months ago " was, no doubt,
my mother's death, wMch had occurred on Dec. 13,
1905 — i. e. eight months previous to the sitting. She
had been an invalid for many years, and the relations
between us had been exceptionally intimate and tender.
Her death truly left my life a blank. My brother and
sister are married, and I live alone, so far as relatives
are concerned.

My mother's age at death was 57. Name, Freda
Katherine, as given by the control. Hair brown.

" Benjamin " was my uncle — mother's brother —
who lived with us until his death in 1903.

Janet and Herbert are the names of my sister and
brother.

I never told the medium where I came from, and at the
first sitting she did not know my name. Naturally,
I carefully refrained from mentioning any names of
relatives, and I hardly think there had been time,
between the two sittings, for any satisfactory detective
work, even if the medium had succeeded in discovering
what town I lived in, down in Yorkshire.

34 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

The description of my grandmother is peculiarly
accurate as to the hair. She wore a brown wig, which
did not always stay on quite straight, and sometimes
allowed the grey to show. The other details are also
correct. A frequent remark of hers was : " I'm an old,
old woman, Frank."]

[General comments, by F. K.

When I entered Miss McDonald's drawing-room, I
was an entire disbeliever, not only in " spirit-return "
but also in survival. The sitting had a profound effect
upon me; and during its progress, at all events, I had
not the slightest doubt that I was actually speaking to
my dead mother.

The sudden personation was very startling and dra-
matic, and, with the realistic cry, " Frank, Frank, my
boy, my boy," certainly carried me away a little; but
I did not lose control of my observing and reasoning
faculties, and I am prepared to maintain the accuracy
of this record in every essential detail.]

CHAPTER IV

SITTINGS WITH THE CLAIEVOYANT WATSON

The following five chapters describe some
interesting sittings which took place at the
house of a friend of mine. The medium is
a " normal clairvoyant " who sees " spirit
forms," describing them, giving names
and various identifying details, and some-
times obtaining a considerable amount of
impressional or automatic script. Notes
were taken at each sitting, and the full
account was written out as soon as possible
(always within a day or two, at most) and
was read and checked by one or more of the
other sitters. A full report of each sitting
was always given to me within a few days
of its occurrence, and was discussed by me
with one or more of those who had been
present. I quote from these records. My
MS. has been carefully read, and is approved
as accurate, by the two principal sitters.

The medium is known to me and to others
among my friends. None of these la|ter are
spiritualists. Yet they are of opinion that

D 3 35

36 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

the medium is honest, and has some kind of
supernormal faculty. I myself have sat with
him, with results to be mentioned later on.
I started out with the usual suspicions of an
" orthodox psychical researcher " (if such
a contradiction in terms be permissible), but
am now pretty thoroughly convinced of the
medium's honesty. We have entirely failed
to discover any indication of fraud, or in-
deed anything the least to his discredit. I
believe him to be a man of integri]by, and
the other sitters coincide in this opinion.

The chief sitter in the following series was
Mr. Frank Knight, whose sittings with Miss
McDonald have just been described. He is
a hard-headed business man of about thirty-
five years of age. The other principal sitter
was Mr. Isaac Oddy, a well-known composer.
I have altered the true names, for, though my
friends would have permitted their use, there
is so much ignorant prejudice against these
matters that it seems better to hide identities,
particularly as in this case the true names
would lead to the recognition of other people
mentioned in the sittings, who might reason-
ably object to publicity.

Mr. Knight and Mr. Oddy were, at the
beginning of their investigations, vigorous
Haeckelians; but their results have led them
to adopt conclusions approximately the same

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 87

as those expressed by Myers in his great work.
Human Personality. Both of them have
keen minds, of the legal type ; quick to detect
flaws in the evidence, drastic in their methods*
persistent in their demands for proof. Mr.
Knight is now a member of the S.P.R., and
Mr. Oddy also is in full sympathy with its
work and its methods.

The medium (Watson) is a man of about
thirty. His usual procedure is to sit with a
small table before him, on which are paper
and pencil. The sitters are grouped in semi-
circle to his right and left. He often de-
scribes the "influence" which he gets from
each sitter, correctly diagnosing the state of
each one's health, or hitting off their occupa-
tions or special interests. But the best
feature of his mediumship is the description
of " spirit forms," with names and messages
which he seems to get by a kind of inner
hearing; though the automatic script is in-
teresting, and often important, and has the
advantage of furnishing a first-hand record
of the messages.

So far as can be ascertained, all the sitters
were unknown to Watson at the beginning
of the sittings. He knew Mr. Knight's name,
the latter having written to him asking for
a sitting, but they had not met before. He
assured F. K. that he knew nothing about

38 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

him except that he (F. K.) was a bachelor.
The latter is not a prominent man in public
affairs, being very much of a reader and
student; and his name does not appear in
the title of his firm. It seems probable enough
that the medium's assertion was true. Mr.
Knight of course did not mention his sittings
with Miss McDonald, and was careful to give
no information about his family or his affairs
generally.

Sitting 1.
Oct. 5, 1906. Watson had called on F. K.
to arrange about sittings.

Whilst talking about these arrangements,
Watson said that he felt the strong influence
of the spirit of a lady, who was present in the
room. This lady was of middle age (the
exact age — 57 — was given in Sitting 3) and
her name was Mary Katherine. [Partly cor-
rect, for F. K.'s mother; the true name is
Freda Katherine Knight, as given in full as
signature to a letter in Sitting 4.j

F. K. asked for further information. Watson
rested his hand on F. K.'s knee — the only
time that physical contact occurred between
medium and sitter — and proceeded as below : —

" The spirit of your mother is present. I feel her
influence, but cannot see her. She is greatly devoted
to you. She impresses me very strongly. She wishes
to give you a test of her actual presence. Do you see

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 39

anything written on the table?" (No.)i "Z do; I
see a name. It is the name of some relative of yours
who died many years ago. The name is Oliver Upton.
This gentleman is not present now, but your mother
knows that you will recognize the name."

[Oliver Upton, bom 1784, died 1856, was F. K's.
maternal great-grandfather.]

■" Your mother is now taking me away from here —

I am at Queen Street Station, Z . I am following

her body to the grave, through the streets of Z

out into the suburbs, where her body lies with that of a
gentleman.

"She is very anxious you should know that though her
body is in the grave, her spirit is here with you now."

[F. K.'s mother was buried at St. James's Church,

in a suburb of Z , where his father and infant sister

also lie. She — Mrs. K. — was taken for burial, by train

from X (the town of the sitting), via Queen Street

Station, Z .] ^

The medium went on to say that he also
received an impression that the lady in
question, as she lay dying, had had two
thoughts specially in mind. One was sur-
prise that death was so near; the other was
conjecture as to where she would be buried.

[It is impossible to verify this. The notions
were not present in F. K.'s mind, but he says
that the statement is quite likely to be true.
His mother's death was unexpected, the
doctor's verdict having been more favourable;
and her mind would quite possibly be occupied
with the place of burial, as many of her

^ Round brackets contain remarks made at the time,
by the sitters. Square brackets contain elucidatory
comments for the reader. See Appendix for genealogi-
cal table of Mr. Knight's connections.

40 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

blood-relations are buried at X (where

she died, and where F. K. lives), while her

husband and one child lie at Z , forty

miles away.]

[General comments by P. K.
It might be possible for a fraudulent
medium to obtain many of these details by
inquiry. It is, however, very unlikely that
the name of my great-grandfather, Oliver
Upton, could have been so obtained. It is
fifty-one years since he died, and there is
no obvious link to connect me with him.]

Sitting 2.
Oct. 19, 1906. Present, F. K., I. 0., a
Mr. H. H., and medium.

After being in the room a few minutes, the
medium had the impression that a previous
tenant of the house had died there, after a
long illness, [All present denied this; but
it was afterwards found to be true of a Mk.
Charles Underwood. Mr. Oddy, however,
remembered afterwards that he must have
known of it, so telepathy from his mind is
not excluded, though it does not follow that
such a supposition would be the true one,
even if the more obvious one of fraud be
excluded.]

The sitters then sat round a small table.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 41

Turning to Mr. Oddy, the medium said that
he got from him a strong influence of music.
He also described spirit forms associated with
him, and obtained the maiden name of his
mother. I omit the details, as they were not
noted at the time, being supplied by Mr.
Oddy afterwards. The medium then turned
to Mr. Knight and said: —

" I see standing between you and the next gentleman "
— Mr. H. — " the figure of a lady. She has brown hair,
brushed up high, and straight back from her forehead —
brown eyes — about 36 years of age — her name is Kath-
leen." (Any other name ?) " Yes, Upton." (Any
other name ?) " Not at present."

Later, while talking to I. 0., the medium
suddenly remarked : —

" There's some one calling out Thornes, Thornes. It
is the lady — her name is Kathleen Upton Thornes.

" She has with her — ^holding her by the hand — a
man about 51 years of age — ^in a weakly, tottering condi-
tion, whose mind was afflicted while he lived. His
name is Benjamin Thornes, and he is the brother of
the lady called Kathleen." (Any other name ?) " No,
not at present."

Then, a little later : —

" I have got the other name you wanted. It is
c-A-R-T-E-B,— Carter. The correct names are Kathleen
Upton Thornes and Benjamin Carter Thornes, and they
are blood-relations of Mr. Knight."

The names and descriptions are correct.
The people in question were F. K.'s aunt
and uncle respectively, who lived and died

42 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

at his old home, not the house in which he
now lives. Kathleen Thornes died in 1889,
aged 39. Benjamin Thornes died in 1903,
aged 51.

[Comment by F. K.

The descriptive detail preceded the names,
and I recognized the personalities described,
before the names were mentioned.

The names Upton and Carter are family
names, but they were not used by the Thornes' s
either in correspondence or conversation.
I very much doubt whether any one outside
my immediate family had heard the name
Carter associated with me, as that branch
of the Carters has been extinct for about
100 years, and they did not at any time live
in this district.]

CHAPTER V
SITTINGS WITH WATSON (continued)

Sitting 3.

Nov. 16, 1906. Present, F. K., I. O., two or
three of their friends, and the medium.
The principal details, however, concern
the usual two sitters.

The medium began by saying that the
sitters had been wrong in asserting at the last
sitting that no one had died in the house. He
said that the spirit of the man who had died
there had appeared to him in the railway
carriage as he was returning home after the
sitting.

This spirit was now in the room. He ap-
peared as an elderly, bearded man, and gave
his name as Charles Underwood. He was
waiting in these regions in expectation of some
event which would take place soon.

[Kenelm Underwood, the previous tenant
of F. K.'s house, and son of Charles Under-
wood, died about three months after the date
of this sitting. His death had long been
expected. Apparently — on the primd facie
supposition — the father had come to meet his
dying son.]

43

44 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

The medium then took paper and pencil,
and wrote the iSgures " 1875." Turning to
F. K., he said : —

" The spirit of your sister is in the room. She died
in 1875. [Correct.] She was under three months old
when she died [correct], but now I see her looking like
a beautiful woman of thirty." [Cf. Sitting 4.] " Her
name is Nora. [Correct.] She is often with you.

" Her father is also in the room — a fine healthy -looking
man. His name is Henry, and he died in 1880, at Upper-
town, Z , I think. [All correct. Uppertown is a

suburb of the town Z , forty miles from X .]

" The lady whose portrait is' hanging on the wall
[P. K.'s mother] is also present, in fact hers is the
strongest influence in the room; and she has brought
the other people with her, so that you may recognize
them.

" There is a well-built, well-dressed man of about 52
years of age standing on the hearthrug now. He was a
shrewd business man, and you [to F. K.] have a good
deal to do with his widow in business, and see her very
often. He has brown hair, and his name is Kenneth
Frederic." [All correct, as applied to F. K.'s deceased
uncle, with whose widow F. K. is associated in business
affairs. Cf. Sittings 4 and 6.]

Later, the medium remarked that he saw
an old lady wearing a black silk shawl. A
relative of Mr. Knight, and was over 80 when
she died. Her name was Theresa, and there
was something in the room near to him (the
medium) which used to belong to her.

[These facts apply to F. K.'s grandmother,
whose name was Theresa Carter Thornes.
Cf. Sitting 4. She often wore a black silk
shawl; and her Bible, used regularly by her
for over twenty years, was on the shelf at the
medium's elbow, though he did not know this, j

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 45

The medium then stated that he was being
taken by F. K.'s mother to the house in which
she died, which was only a short distance
away. From there he was taken to the sta-
tion, and forward to Z . Coming out of

Queen Street Station he turned sharply to the
right, and straight up a long road, upon which
trams were moving backward and forward.
As the suburbs were reached he saw a succes-
sion of large houses surrounded by gardens and
trees. At last he turns to the left, going a
short distance up a road which has large
houses on one side, and open fields on the
other. A little way up this road, he comes to a
churchyard gate. Here he stops an instant,
and is then taken forward to a spot on the
right-hand side of the church, where he sees a
number of large white stones, such as are seen
on rockeries. Here he is left.

[Comment by F. K.

This is a remarkably accurate description
of the route from Queen Street Station to St.
James's Church, and the white rockery-stones
are actually on the grave.]

In connection with Mr. Oddy, a tall gentle-
man of about seventy years of age was
described. He was stated to be a relative, to
wear a beard and moustache, and to have a
prominent nose. Name, Joseph Oddy.

46 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

[Joseph Oddy is the name of I. O.'s de-
ceased grandfatlxer. Cf. Sitting 8.]

The medium then wrote the names " Bertha
Oddy— Joseph Oddy— Peace." The " Peace "
seemed to confuse him, and he could not tell
what was meant. As a matter of fact,
"Peace" was the name of Joseph Oddy's wife.

Later, the medium felt the very strong
influence of a relative of I. O.'s on his father's
side. He complained that this relative, who
was apparently a great-uncle and who had
passed away many years ago, was endeavour-
ing to hypnotize him. He also accurately
described several of I. O.'s relatives who live
in a distant town, but I omit these details, as
the persons' names were not obtained. De-
scriptions, unless very specific and containing
some marked characteristic, are not the best
of evidence, though they ate sometimes
striking enough to serve as useful corrobora-
tion.

[Comment by F. K.

I do not believe that any one in our town,
outside our small family circle, knew that I
had had a sister Nora, who died in infancy, in
1 875. This incident seems to me rather good. ]

Sitting 4.

Dec. 12, 1906. Present, F. K. and medium only,
until near the end, when F. K.'s brother

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 47

and sister-in-law {Mr. and Mrs. Herbert
Knight) came in.

After some general conversation, the

medium said : —

" Your mother is in the room — I can see her very
plainly. She tells me that it is Just a year to-day since
she passed away. [Correct.] Why, your family must
be nearly all dead ! I can see quite a lot of them. I see
two men and three women of your mother's family.
[Correct.] Besides a man of your own age or a little
younger, named Henry. [Applies correctly to F. K.'s
father at time of his death.]

At this point the medium took paper and
pencil, and wrote : —

" Dear Son, — I am delighted for this opportunity.
I have been endeavouring to make you aware of my
presence early this morning. At 7 minutes to 8 o'clock
to-day do you remember any particular sensation, be-
cause I was in close touch with, you then. [Note A.]

" Your father and I are happily re-united after so long
a separation. Twenty-five years seemed a long time,
but now one understands the experiences of life better. '
[Note B.]

" My sister Kathleen is indeed engaged in work that
would be pleasant to any good soul. Would you know
that Florence as well and I have all come together, and
what a greeting it was. You would perhaps know how
soon she followed your little sister Nora. Well, she has
been her guardian and teacher, and such a beautiful
woman she is now. [Note C]

" Oh ! the beauty of this fuller life. I cannot express
it to you, Frank, but I hope to give you personally some
evidence of my continued affection for you. I hope to
make myself tangible to you as soon as is possible.

" Your grandmother, my own dear mother, is now
quite consciously united to us all.

" Quite a charming circle we make.

" I cannot say more. My time is spent in this direc-

48 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

tion. Don't think of me as being in St. James's, but
as being near you often.

" Your dear mother,

" Freda Kathbeine Knight."

[Correct, F. K.'s mother.]

At this point, Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Knight
came into the room. The medium proceeded
to give his impressions, addressing H. K., to
whom they did not apply. To F. K., how-
ever, they did apply : —

" There is a gentleman now present in the room about
53 years of age, well dressed, and giving the impression
of a prosperous man with commercial interests, a deter-
mined character and of a somewhat critical mind.

" His name was Frederic or Ferdinand, and he has
a son still living." [Of. Sitting 6, p. 55']

" He is much interested in a certain business which is
at present carried on by a lady — ^his widow. The
business requires to be carefuUy watched in certain
details, and certain proposed extensive outlays must
be avoided, as they are unnecessary.

" Matters, however, will soon right themselves. With
Frederic is a man called Nathan, who passed away at
least 36 years ago, aged about 45. [See Note D.]

" There is also present the old lady over 80, previously
described, and she is still wearing the black silk shawl.
With her is another old lady, wearing a very antique
dress, and a crinoUne."

F. K. asked for their names, and the medium wrote : —

"Theresa Carter and Nora. her mother." [Correct
Christian names of F. K.'s grandmother, Theresa Carter
Thornes, nee Upton, and her mother, Nora Upton.]

It was then stated by the medium that
Frederic, Nathan, and Theresa Carter were
all interested in the business at Stanbury.
[This business, with which F. K. is now asso-
ciated, was the property of these three persona

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 49

successively, and they are the only deceased
members of the family who have had any
connection with it.] ^

Then came the following written communi-
cation : —

" I am Grandmother Thornes. I am so glad. Just
have patience. All things come to those who wait.
That difficulty is easily got over. It is Kenneth Ferdi-
nand. Just take the advice."

[Should be Kenneth Frederic, for F. K.'s uncle.]
" I am your Aunt Florence. Thirty years since I left
my earthly home. Dear Boy." [F. K. here asked if
the full name could be given.] " Yes. My name was
Florence Brown— Thornes." [Cf. Sitting 8, p. 66.]

Benjamin Thornes was again described as
groping forward, and as having suffered from
mental affliction. [Cf. Sitting 2, p. 41.] Also
as being about 50 years old, which was also
the age at which Kenneth Frederic died. The
medium felt that there was a tie of relation-
ship between them. [They were brothers, and
each died in his 52nd year.]

[Notes by F. K.
(A) At 7 minutes to 8 on the morning of the
sitting, I was standing in my bedroom,
saying aloud (just after glancing at my
watch) that if my mother could hear my voice,
I wanted her to know that the medium was
coming in the evening, and would she, if

1 Cf., for a spirit's continued interest in an earthly
business, Sir Oliver Lodge's Report in Proceedings S.P.B.,
Part 58, pp. 168, 193.

50 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

possible, write me a letter through his hand.
I was not, however, conscious of any particular
sensation.

(B) My father died in 1880, my mother in
1905. The " twenty-five years " is therefore
correct.

(C) "Kathleen" was my aunt — my
mother's sister. [Cf. Sitting 2, p. 41.]

Florence Brown {n^ Thornes) was another
maternal aunt, who died in 1876. My little
sister Nora died in 1875, so the statement that
Florence " followed " her soon, is correct.

(D) My uncle, Kenneth Frederic Thornes,
died in 1895, aged 51.

The business with which I am connected is
now carried on by his widow. Certain exten-
sive outlays were actually being contemplated
at the time, and I am convinced that no one
living, except the members of the firm and
myself, knew anything whatever concerning
the proposals which were under consideration.
The advice given has turned out, in the light of
recent events, to be very sound.

The phraseology of the letter purporting to
be from my mother, is not always what I
should have expected from her; but, on any
hypothesis, the medium's personality may be
assumed to colour the messages somewhat.]

CHAPTER VI

SITTINGS WITH WATSON (continued)

Sitting 5.

Feb. 22, 1907. Present, F. K., Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Knight, Mr. I. Oddy, a Mr. New-
man {friend of F. K. and I. 0.), Miss T.
(F. K.'s housekeeper) and medium.

The medium told Mrs. Herbert Knight that
he saw with her a gentleman, about 44 years
old. He had done a lot of writing when
living — was in fact a journalist. Asked for
the name, the medium got " Wilfrid Renton,"
Had passed away prematurely, and with
great reluctance, being at the time engaged
in important work, and being also loath to
leave his wife and children. This spirit was
waiting for something to happen towards
which he was looking with much interest.

[Note by F. K.

Wilfrid Renton was Mrs. H. K.'s father.
He was a journalist, and he died aged 44, At
the time of the sitting, his eldest son (William)
was very ill, dying about two months after-
wards, on April 9. Apparently the father

E 2 51

52 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

was waiting for his son, aa in the Charles
Underwood case described in Sitting 3, p. 43.J

Immediately afterwards, the medium said
that he felt himself to be taken a long railway
journey. Arrived at a small village^in North-
amptonshire. [About 100 miles from place of
sittings,] Some one lives there with whom
Mrs. Herbert Knight occasionally comes in
contact. The medium got the name of the
village as Oundle, and the name of the family
as Hanby. Later, he got the name Thomas
Hanby.

[Note by F. K.

Mrs. H. K.'s maternal grandfather was
Thomas Hanby, and he lived at Oundle,
Northamptonshire. Mrs. H. K. did not re-
member his Christian name, but on inquiry it
was found to have been Thomas.]

Mr. Newman, who had never seen the me-
dium before, and who so far as is ascertainable
was not known to him, was correctly given his
father's name (surname and three baptismal
names) and the age at which he died; also his
own profession (teacher). [Mr. Newman's
name was not mentioned by the sitters, and
he was not introduced to the medium.]

A deceased relative of I. O.'s was named and
described, and F. K.'s father and mother were
also said to be present.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 58

At this sitting, the new evidential^matter is
not large in quantity, but it is good in quality.
It is not likely that the medium possessed"
normally-acquired knowledge of the name and
place of residence of Mrs. Herbert Knight^s
grandfather. Further, good evidential matter
was given to Mr. Newman, who, so far as we
know, was a stranger to the medium.

Sitting 6.

April 18, 1907. Present, F. K., I. 0., Mr.
Newman, Mr. H., and Mr. B. {friends of
F. K. and I. 0.).

The medium described and named correctly
a relative of I. O.'s. He then went on to refer
to another deceased relative of I. O., describ-
ing but not naming her. The description
was recognized. There was said to be in this
lady's home circle a girl who was not at all
well, and who would require strict attention.
[Afterwards verified.] With the exception of
the head of the house, all the members of this
family were girls. [Correct.] The young
lady who appeared, and who had died after a
short illness, was said to be buried in a flat
churchyard where there are many other
graves; there was stated to be a very white
stone over her grave. [This about the grave
is quite wrong; I quote it in order that the
total evidentiality may not seem stronger than

54 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

it is. In the whole series, the number of
inaccurate statements is remarkably small, I
quote them all. Where I omit incidents, they
are evidential and tend to strengthen the ease;
being omitted here as being likely to confuse
the reader by introducing other names, or for
some similar reason. The total evidential
mass is therefore greater, and not less, than
that of the account here printed.]

A young man was described as connected
with Mr. Newman. Very energetic, well edu-
cated, studious, but business-like. Had died
prematurely, leaving a wife and some children.
[Correct, of Mr. N.'s father. Cf. Sitting 5.]
One of his children, who died in infancy, had
predeceased him. [Wrong.] The medium
then gave the name, correctly as far as given,
but omitting one Christian name. [The full
name had been correctly given in Sitting 6,
p. 52.] A correct description of the church-
yard and grave was also given.

A spirit was described for Mr. H., but was
not recognized. Correct statements were
made regarding Mr. H.'s health and business
position. Full notes were not taken.

A spirit was described for Mr. B., but was
not recognized.

Standing beside F. K., said the medium,
was a well-made man who had died 12 years

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 55

previously. Age perhaps 54. High brow,
full face, grey mixture suit — a well-groomed
man. Had been much engrossed in business,
and shortly before he died had had much
business worry which had no doubt hastened
his end.

After much difficulty, the medium got the
name Kenneth Frederic Thornes. Was much
interested in the business with which F. K. is
connected, and certain advice was given to
the latter concerning it, though it was stated
that there were others living who were more
nearly concerned than F. K. [True.] These
persons, however, could not be reached by the
communicator. [They are not interested in
psychical research, and are in fact hostile to
the subject.]

[Note by F. K.

My uncle, Kenneth Frederic Thornes, died
in March 1895. " Twelve years ago " is
therefore correct. He had much business
worry, shortly before he died, owing to the
destruction of a mill by fire. The worry inci-
dental to rebuilding, and loss of trade, affected
his health, and the illness from which he died
developed at this time.]

The medium then gave a description of an
old lady, apparently F. K.'s grandmother.
Name, Theresa.

66 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Later, he turned to F. K. and asked if his
brother (Mr, Herbert Knight) knew about the
sitting; for he (the medium) had caught a
sudden impression of Mr. and Mrs. H. K.
standing behind P. K. The lady's eyes
appeared to be inflamed.

[Note by P..K.

We noted the time of this last statement —
9.25 p.m. At the conclusion of the sitting,
my brother (H. K.) came into the room.
Until we saw him we were unaware that he
was in the house. He had entered quietly,
and had stood by the door of the room in
which the sitting was being held. He put his
ear to the closed door to catch, if possible,
what was being said. The first words he
heard were those of the medium when he
asked if my brother knew of the sitting. The
time was 9.25.

It appeared that Mrs. H. K. was suffering
that evening from headache and inflamed eyes
owing to a trying bicycle ride, against wind
and dust, in the afternoon. She therefore
stayed at home instead of coming to my house
with my brother. The sitters knew nothing
of this until informed by H. K., and there is
no reason to suppose that the medium had
any normally-acquired knowledge of it.]

CHAPTER VII

SITTINGS WITH WATSON (continued)
Sitting 7.

June 12, 1907. Present, F. K., I. 0., and
medium. Towards the end, there came in
Mr. Herbert Knight and his wife's sister —
Miss Benton, of Y , thirty miles away.

The medium told F. K. that there was some
difficulty and confusion in connection with
his (F. K.'s) domestic affairs, and that if
this matter was not faced at once it would
be more difficult to face later on.

[Correct, and peculiarly appropriate; but
the details are too private to quote here,
another person being involved to whom
injury or pain might be caused if the identities
were discovered. It seems to me, knowing
all the facts, that any normally-acquired
knowledge of the state of affairs, on the part
of the medium, is improbable to the point
of incredibility.^ Later in the sitting, an
automatically-written message was produced,

1 F. K, is very sure that no one except himself and
perhaps his brother can have known anything about the
situation — ^which was an altogether peculiar one, and
not a matter of finances.

67

58 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

in which this same matter was alluded to.
The message purported to come from F. K.'s
mother. The wording was exactly appro-
priate to the situation, yet had a curiously
purposeful-seeming indefiniteness, as if the
communicator were deliberately choosing
phrases which, though intelligible enough to
F. K., should nevertheless give no clear
impression to an outsider — e. g. the medium.

Some automatic script was next produced,
purporting to come from the Kenelm Under-
wood of Sitting 3, Chapter V. It was drama-
tic, unexpected in matter and style (therefore
inexplicable by telepathy from the sitters'
consciousnesses) and somewhat evidential;
but it involves family matter of a private
nature, and I suppress it lest it should cause
pain to certain living relatives.

Early in this sitting the medium got the
impression of a young lady who had been
associated with F. K. some time ago. Not
much over 30 when she died. Name, Stonor.
With her, and related to her, was an old
gentleman, somewhat feeble, over 70 when
he died. Name, George Stonor. Had been
neighbours of F. K.'s at a former address.
F. K.'s mother, Freda Knight, " had given
them financial assistance at; a time of great
trouble,"

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 59

[Note by F. K.
The above names, descriptions, ages, and
facts, are correct. The financial help was
given through the doctor in attendance on
the Stonors (father and daughter) in order
that they should not know its source. They
were our next-door neighbours at a fornier
address, and they died there, in 1901, within
a few weeks of each other. It seems ex-
tremely unlikely that the medium could have
learnt the fact of the money help, in any
ordinary way. So far as I am aware, no one
ever knew of the incident except the Stonors,
the doctor, my mother, and myself. I had not
thought of it for a long time, as it was a small
matter, and occurred so long ago. I do not
think I had ever heard Mr. Stonor's Christian
name, but I find on visiting the cemetery and
looking up the tombstone, that it was George,
as stated. His age at death was 73, his
daughter's 32.]

The medium then announced that F. K.'s

mother was again present, whereupon F. K.

asked that she would give him a test of her

identity by telling him something which was

not in his own knowledge, but which could

be verified by some relative or friend. The

following was written at once: —

" I am thinking of what you suggest, and I will in
the meantime think of something.

60 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" You would perhaps not remember something that
happened to Benjamin when he was twelve years old.

" How I can tell you I don't know, but I will try —
Poor boy — ^He is all right now [pause].

"Herbert is all right I think, but [pause]when you were
bom, let me see, I almost think it was at Uppertown,
but, oh dear ! how strange. It is like going into a
strange country, going back to those times. I visited
the grave where I am supposed to be buried. It is very
nice. The stones are stiU there. Dear me, I feel quite
a dual personaUty. More I cannot say now. I feel
used up, or rather to have absorbed all at my command
for the present.

" Don't feel the least afraid. Ood is not mocked.
I am your mother. Her care is still yours. Love."

[Note by F. K.

I believe my Uncle Benjamin was bitten
by a horse when he was a boy.

I was born at Uppertown, Z .

The " stones " are still on the grave.

The communicator apparently was wander-
ing from one idea to another in a dream-like
condition of mind.]

To Miss Renton, the medium made the
following statements : —

That her health was not good. That she
was passing through a period of great strain
and had done a lot of nursing recently. That
she was at present nursing a lady, her mother,
whose health was very precarious. They
must at once leave their present home, which
could never be the same to them again. Her

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 61

mother's life depended on this removal.
[Note by J. A. H., Nov. 17, 1910. They have
not removed. Mrs. Renton is still alive,
though in poor health.]

Miss Renton asked where they were to go,
and the medium at once wrote the following: —

" Tell your mother to go home to the old country in
Northamptonshire for a little while. It will do her a
heap of good. Time will bring much change, but all
has happened beet, for suffering cannot bring happiness.
Rest at last. W. R."

[Miss Renton's brother, William Renton,
had died at home, of consumption, on April
9 — i. e. two months before the sitting. Pro-
bably he is the ostensible communicator,
though the initial letters W. R. might also
stand for Wilfrid Renton, Miss Renton's
father, who died a few years before. See p. 51.]

The medium then stated that he saw,
connected with Miss Renton, a well-dressed
gentleman, middle-aged, a clear speaker,
related to her through her father. Had died
since the latter. Name, Thomas.

[This applies correctly to Miss Renton's
deceased uncle, Thomas Renton.]

A lady also was seen. Had lived in a
farming district a long way off. Had been
dead a long time, and inquiry concerning
her should be made among old relatives.
Name, Mary Hanby.

62 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

[Mary Hanby turns out to have been the
name of Miss Renton's great-grandmother,
who died long ago in a Northamptonshire
village. At the sitting, Miss Renton disputed
the name, but the medium stuck to his guns. J

[Note by F. K.

Miss Renton was not expected at the

sitting; had come from Y (30 miles

away) with her mother during the afternoon;
and had never seen the medium before. Yet
every statement made to her was correct.
At the time, she thought the name Mary
should be "Martha" to be applicable; but
inquiry proved the former to be correct.]

For Mr. Herbert Knight the medium
described a woman of thirty, name Edna.
[Unrecognized. A deceased aunt of H. K.'s,
however, had a name very like Edna. Per-
haps this was what was intended.]

CHAPTER VIII

SITTINGS WITH WATSON (continued)

Sitting 8.

July 5, 1907. Present, F. K., I. 0., and
medium.

The medium complained at the opening
of the sitting that he was not feeling well.
Perhaps this may account for the mixed
results. The influence apparently was con-
stantly changing, and many of the messages
and descriptions were disjointed and incom-
plete. In spite, however, of much confusion,
some interesting results were obtained.

The medium, got the name Fanny, con-
nected with I. O. The name belonged to
some one rather past middle age, who had
been dead a few years.

Later, he wrote : —

" Fanny Oddy. My ambitions have been
quite realized."

I. 0. inquired where she had died.

'* Grey Gables." [Incorrect. " Grey

Gables " is I. O.'s house, but Fanny Oddy —

I. O.'s aunt — did not die there.]

63

64 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Asked where she was buried, the answer
was " Storm Kidge," which is correct.

An old gentleman was then described —
bearded, stooping, holding out before him a
bundle of herbs. Was a connection of a
young lady — related to Mr. Oddy — whose
presence was felt, but whose name the
medium could not get. Asked for the old
man's name, Watson produced writing as
below.

" That is my grandfather — K. M. I am your cousin."
[Full name of K. M. was requested.] " Who passed away
at Holywell ? " [" Well, who did ? " asked Mr. Oddy.]
" Kenneth Mills." (Is this your grandfather ?) " Yes."

[Kenneth Mills was an herbalist who died
near Holywell. He was the grandfather
of I. O.'s cousin, who had purported to send
messages before, and who apparently is the
young lady whose presence the medium had
felt.]

The name " Sarah Ann " was then written.
[This was the name of the cousin's mother.]
I. O. then asked where his cousin had died.
"Southport" was written. [Wrong. She
lived several years at Southport, but died at
Blackpool.]

The influence then changed, and the
following was written, apparently to F. K.
from his mother : —

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 65

" My dear Boy, — Love to Herbert and yourself, not
forgetting Anme. How strange it seems. What a
concourse of us. I feel sorry about the vacant ..."
[" Annie " unrecognized : F. K.'s sister's name is Janet.]

Here the writing stopped abruptly, and
the medium's attempts to continue the com-
munication were unsuccessful. After waiting
a few moments he wrote as below : —

" My dear Friend, — I would have you know the com-
munications are mixed, by the reason of the young lady,
the dark man's friend, and the lady of the house, both
attempting at the same time to give a message. This
is common enough as you are aware, and they are excited
to no small degree. We will do our best to put them in
order. Perhaps it wiU be more direct and consecutive
afterwards. The fair man should really have a personal
message soon, as the anxiety displayea in his part tor a
time makes their friends equally anxious. 1 am your
old friend,

"Thomas Ward."

P. K. is fair; I. O. dark. The sitting was
being held as usual at the home of the former,
so the " lady of the house " is correctly used
if referring to F. K.'s mother. The " young
lady, the dark man's friend," apparently
purports to be I. O.'s cousin, already men-
tioned.

The medium remarked that " Thomas
Ward " was well known to him as a frequent
communicator. The name was not known
to the sitters. The "old piend's" well-
meant efforts, however, seemed to be in-
effectual, for nothing further was received at

66 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

this sitting, either from I. O.'s cousin or
P. K.'s mother.

A communication apparently intended for
I. 0. was : —

" ' Occupy till I come ' is a passage of scripture which
your grandfather gives you. J. 0."

Mr. Oddy asked for his grandfather's
name. " James." [Wrong.] " Joseph."
[Right.]

The medium then described a young lady
of about 30 years of age, wearing her hair
brushed back. Asked for the name, he wrote
" Florence B. Thornes." Asked for her mar-
ried name, " Brown " was given. How long
had she been dead ? " Over 30 years."
[All this is correct as to F. K.'s aunt. Cf.
Sitting 4, p. 49.]

The following was then written : —

" I am anxious to give you some idea of the real life.
I may be unknown personally to you, but your tastes
and pursuits generally draw me into your surroundings.
Music, the noblest science known to man, which angels
honoured long ere time began, was my dehght.

"Its sweet seraphic lays shall hand your memory
down to future days.

"K. I. Gaeeison."

This was evidently intended for I. O.,
who, as I have said, is a well-known musician.
While I. 0. and F. K. were discussing the
message, the medium began to write again : —

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 67

I took part along with, you at an organ recital at
some Meeting House some time ago, and I believe it
was at Stanbury." [" Whereabout at Stanbury 1 " asked
I. 0.] " Industry Street."

It happens to be a fact that I. 0., a few
months before the sitting, had given an organ
recital at a place of worship in Industry
Street, Stanbury (a few miles away), but he
was not conscious of any assistance from
" the other side " on that occasion !

"K. I. Garrison" is the name of a man

who was organist at X Parish Church

about 50 years ago. This fact was unknown
to F. K., but I. O. had probably heard it,
though he could not remember at the time
anything about a K. I. Garrison, and had to
ask his father, who was able to supply the
information.

The medium also described a tall, elderly
man, not very old, rather lean and grey, with
a high brow, aquiline nose, and shaggy
whiskers, dressed in a black cloth suit. Had
probably been a preacher. The words " 14th
chap. Cor." were written, and the medium
inclined to think that the same communicator
had written the message " Occupy till I
come," etc.

The description would apply correctly to
I. O.'s grandfather, Joseph Oddy.

The Kenneth Mills incident was perhaps

F 2

68 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

the best piece of evidence in this sitting, as
it would have been difficult for a fraudulent
medium to find out any connection between
this man and Mr. Oddy. He was I. O.'s
cousin's grandfather, but was not the grand-
father of I. O. himself. /. e., he was the
cousin's mother^s father, whUe I. O.'s relation-
ship to the cousin was through the latter's
father. Kenneth Mills was therefore not
a blood-relation of I. 0.

Sitting 9.

Aug. 23, 1907. Present, F. K. and medium.

The medium felt the influence of an old
lady whom he had previously seen several
times at these sittings. She was over 80
when she died, and had died at the same
house as F. K.'s mother, but had predeceased
her. She had not been dead long, however,
when his mother [her daughter] followed her.
She was of a very affectionate disposition, and
had been specially fond of F. K., liked to
have him about her, and would always be
wanting to know what he was doing and
where he was going.

[Note by F. K.
Correct, as to my grandmother, Theresa
Carter Thornes. Cf. Sittings 3, 4, and 6,
pp. 44, 48, 55.J

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 69

The medium then felt the strong influence
of F. K.'s mother. He was impelled to say
that the discipline to which F. K. had been
subjected in his earlier days, when he had
apparently had a rough time of it away
from home, had been for his good.

The following writing was then produced : —

" My dear Boy, — What a pleasure it is to be able to
write a line or two to you. It is very diificult to keep
in line my mind while I give you a message. Were
you yourself at all intuitive I have no doubt you would
soon feel my presence, but time may bring this result
yet. I can assure you I shall endeavour to my utmost
to give you what is essential for your welfare spiritually.

" My object is to make clear to you my interest is
stOl as~strong as ever. I am sure you are happier
already."

[Note by P. K.

I was standing over the medium while this writing
was being produced, and I here interjected a request
for something evidential — something, about herself or
my other relatives which I could verify by inquiry.
The writing resumed as follows.]

" My brother Kenneth Frederic was in touch with me,
and may possibly give you some idea of his presence
soon. My dear child, were you able to comprehend
the diilSculty we have in bringing to you the evidence
you so long for, you, I am sure, would not be so anxious."

[Here P. K. asked if she could complete the message
about his Uncle Benjamin. See Sitting 7, p. 60.]

" You know Benjamin was a great charge for so long,
but no longer does that obtain ..."

(" Please tell me more about Benjamin.")]

" I cannot grasp your desire, it seems 'as though
I get perplexed."

[P. K. again presses for evidence of identity. " Tell

70 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

me more about yourself. Whose daughter were you,
for example ? "]

" Nathan Thornes'." [Correct.]

The writing then proceeded : —

" How puzzled I am. Dear me ! Probably it will
come all right, but the means don't seem to come to my
hand "

[A pause. F. K. asked if she could remember any
of the incidents in connection with her last illness.]

" As regards my suffering bodily I cannot speak, for
I no longer retain the sensation." [A pause.] " Your
thought sometimes is very clear to me, but I caimot for
my life symbolize it to you, why, I caimot teU. I seem
so near and yet so far, for the subtlety of the atmosphere
prevents me perfecting it. I am sure you are anxious.
What for I cannot just realize, but if you cannot feel
me near I don't know what else to do. We are undoubt-
edly in close contact, but time and space is not brought
into account. On wings of aspiration we commune
and our manner of communication is kept up in this
way."

[Here F. K. interrupted to ask if there was no way by
which he could be made conscious of her presence, no
little sign by which he might know she was with him.]

" With ail your senses combined physically you are
unable to see that your comprehension is but meagre
relating to time and occupation and correspondence."!

[F. K. had also asked what she did with her time,
whether the others were with her, and how they com-
municated.]

" It is unity of mind here that brings us close, not so
much blood ties, though we are as we were before,
near together.

" Henry and I, though he seems quite ahead of me in
many ways, is very near to me, and is ever impinging
me with his knowledge. Your little sister — I say so
because you would know her better — ^is truly a wise
messenger, having been schooled in a superior plane of
thought." [Pause.]

" J should like our grave to be kept in order, though

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 71

it does not follow its neglect would affect me, but you
know my mind about it. It is far better to be in your
mind than in the grave. I shall have to give it up this
time. I shall not relax my efforts, though I don't
know just what is wanted. Perhaps it will occur to
me.

" My dear boy, you are stiQ my charge, don't mis-
understand me. I am so glad you are so happily
fixed. Your place is like home.

" I must leave you,

" YouE Mother."

No further writing was obtained, but the
medium went on to describe a young man of
medium height, rather fair, slight moustache,
sunken cheeks, about 26 years of age, who had
been dead about ten years, probably longer.
Was associated with F. K. through some lady
stUl living, but no name could be obtained,
except the letter A, and what sounded to the
medium like " Norton."

[Unrecognized.]

[At a later sitting, on January 8, 1908, a
"Mrs, Norton" was referred to as a friend of
P. K.'s maternal grandfather. This was given
in response to requests for a test answer.
F. K. knew nothing of a Mrs, Norton, but, on
questioning an old man who had known his
(F, K.'s) maternal grandfather and grand-
mother, he found that a Mrs. Norton, long
since dead, had been a friend of Mr, and Mrs.
Nathan Thornes,]

CHAPTER IX

GBlirERAL REMARKS ON THIS SERIES OF
NINE SITTINGS

The first explanation that occurs to the
investigator in these borderland regions is,
of course, that of ordinary fraud. The
medium is paid for his services — at least, he
is when he happens to be a professional, as
in this case — and it is to his interest to give
good results. Obviously, much detail of
genealogical kind may be gleaned by examina-
tion of tombstones, and by inquiry. In the
sittings under consideration, a large part of
the evidence is of this kind; and it is there-
fore necessary to decide, before going into
more perilous hypotheses, whether all the
knowledge displayed by the medium could
or could not be reasonably explained by
supposed detective-work, plus an allowance
for possible hints dropped, unnoticed, by
the sitters, during the proceedings.

If Mr. Watson is an honest man, it is
unfortunate for him that his phenomena are
so largely of the class (the " tombstone "
kind) which specially suggest normal ac-

72

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 73

quisition. In this research, it is necessary to
assume that a medium is " a fraud until we
have proved him honest " — as the business
maxim runs — and I confess that my own
attitude towards a new medium is one of
curiosity, and a setting of myself to the task
of finding out his particular modus operandi,
rather than one of expectation that anything
supernormal will occur. Here perhaps it
may be permissible to make a personal
remark concerning the sitters. It has often
been objected by sceptics — or rather dis-
believers, who generally are not " sceptics "
in its true meaning — ^that psychical researchers
are mostly professors, literary men, scientific
men, and so forth, and that they are easily
diddled by a medium, because of their
ignorance of mankind, and of the ways of this
wicked world generally, outside the walls
of libraries and laboratories. Well, in the
sittings described in this book, the sitters are
probably not open to the charge of any
academic innocence and guilelessness. One
of the drawbacks of a business life (spiritually
speaking) is that it makes a man suspicious
of everybody else. His financial existence
depends on his acuteness — on his being able
to see through the man who is trying to
" do " him. And certainly a commercial
training inculcates accuracy. I suggest, then.

74 [PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

that the sitters mentioned, having been reared
in the business atmosphere of large towns,
and being in more or less direct connection
with business matters (true even of Mr. Oddy),
are perhaps rather specially unlikely to be
gulled by elementary forms of cheating, and
also specially unlikely to accept any " super-
normal " hj^othesis without being driven to
it by sheer weight of otherwise inexplicable
facts.

All the sitters now affirm their beUef that
some such " supernormal " hypothesis is
necessary, though at the beginning of the
series all except Mr. Knight were disbelievers.
The medium never " fishes," never seems to
make shots in order to provoke remarks
which shall put him on the right track. It is
also evident to all who sit with him that he
is fond of talking; consequently, the sitters
need not say much, and can thus avoid risk
of slips. While he is reeling off his evidential
statements, he seems to be in a slightly
abstracted state — though never approaching
trance — and sometimes appears to be listen-
ing, or exercising some inner sense which
requires the outer ones to be unemployed.
I am inclined to think, therefore, that the
allowance for hints picked up normally from
the sitters — who, moreover, were very careful
— may safely be put at almost nil.

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 75

fNow as to tombstones and inquiry. It is
just possible that the genealogical details
concerning F. K. and I. 0. might be obtain-
able by research. But the research would
not be an easy one. The burial-places of
some of the deceased people concerned are
100 miles from the town of the sittings, and
another town where a cemetery would have
to be visited is 40 miles away in the opposite
direction, while yet another is 30 miles
away, again in a different direction. The
railway fares would be a rather serious matter.
Here it may be mentioned that the medium's
fees are not high. I think five shillings per
sitting was the amount usually paid by F. K.,
but I have known this medium refuse pay-
ment altogether, after a poor sitting. In
my case, for instance, he at first declined
payment, but finally accepted half-a-crown,
out of which he had to pay a railway fare of
eightpence. If he is a fraud, it is clear that
his great powers of deception are coupled
with a very unusual lack of acquisitiveness
on the financial side.

But, waiving this point, are there any
features in the sittings, which are absolutely
inexplicable by any supposition of detective-
work, and which therefore, if chance coin-
cidence also is unacceptable, supply proof of
" supernormalitjy' " ?

76 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

There are, I think, several that are fairly
evidential. For example, the Stonor in-
cident, concerning financial help given by
F. K.'s mother — a fact known to no more
than two or three living people, so far as can
be ascertained; the incident of Mrs. H. K.'s
eyes; the correct facts about Kenneth Mills,
and about the relatives of Miss Renton, who
appeared unexpectedly at a sitting, who
lives at a considerable distance (30 miles)
and whose ancestors lived at a much greater
distance. If we suppose that the medium
had been hunting up tombstones, we must
allow that he would not have much profit
left out of his fees. But, even granting that
he does not seek profit, how did he learn
about the Stonor affair,^ and the carefully
kept secret of the contemplated extension jof
business by Mr. Knight's firm,^ and the state of
his sister-in-law's eyes,^ and his own domestic
worries * ? And, finally, what about the
" seven minutes to eight " incident, which
seems to me perhaps the best in the whole
series ? Perhaps it may be suggested that
a servant heard F. K. make his request,
and repeated it to the medium. We cannot
disprove such an assumption, but we can point
out that there is no basis for it in actual
fact. F. K.'s servants were not spiritualists,

1 Sitting 7. 2 Sitting 4. « Sitting 6. * Sitting 7.

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 77

they were unknown to the medium except as
seeing him come to the house (so far as can
be ascertained), and, finally, F. K. has no
reason to suppose that any one did overhear
him. And it is hardly likely that he would
unconsciously give the case away by telling
the medium about it, retaining no recollection
of his slip. This incident, it seems to me,
is strongly evidential of some form of super-
normal faculty on the part of the medium.
And, adding to it the correct statements
given to new and unexpected sitters, and the
multitudinous facts which a normal memory
would find it very difficult to keep in proper
order (e. g., nearly thirty family names, with
many descriptions, dates, etc.), it will seem,
I think, even to an outsider, unlikely that
common fraud is an adequate explanation
of the phenomena.

If, then, fraud is dismissed as inade-
quate or improbable, the next explanation
to which we turn is that of telepathy or
thought-transference; though, in this kind
of phenomena, a better name would be
" mind-reading." For the active principle con-
cerned, if it is an incarnate mind, is certainly
the mind of the medium. The sitters were
not usually trying to " telepath " anything;
they were mainly occupied in observing and
noting. And, in several instances, veridical

78 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

details were given which were not consciously
known to any of the sitters — such as the
Christian name of Geoge Stonor. In this
case the explainer by mind-reading will have
to assume that F. K. had once known the
name, and that it was still accessible (though
slipped down below the " threshold ") to the
foraging mind of the medium. It may be
so. But it is no more than assumption.

It is of course quite clear — and F. K.,
I. 0., and myself wish to emphasize the
fact-ythat some of the details given are to
be explained on mind-reading or clairvoyant
lines, if supernormal agency is admitted at
all. For example, the vision of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Knight. It is possible that the
medium's keener hearing — we may grant
possible hypersesthesia — may have enabled
him to become aware, consciously or sub-
consciously, of H. K.'s entry, though it was
unperceived by the sitters. But no hyper-
aesthesia will account for the veridical detail
of Mrs. H. K.'s inflamed eyes. This seems
to demand some kind of clairvoyance, or at
least a reading of H. K.'s mind. Also, many
of the facts concerning the health of sitters
or their relatives, and other details, seem ,to
be attributable to a direct reading or " sens-
ing," by supernormal means, of the conditions
in question.

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 79

If, then, some of the phenomena may be
thus explained, the question arises as to
whether all are not exphcable on the same
hypothesis. Most of the veridical details
given were known consciously, or may be
assumed to have been known subconsciously,
to some one or other of the sitters. Does
the medium's " subliminal," then, forage in
the sitters' minds, somehow managing to
select the right facts appropriate to the
personahty who is supposed to be com-
municating ? This, I believe, would be the
hypothesis favoured by Mr. Podmore, if he
admitted any supernormal agency at all.^
To me, the idea is unsatisfactory. It is
indeed almost ludicrous. Certainly it makes
too much demand on my credulity. I con-
fess my utter inabihty to believe it. There
seems, moreover, to be httle or no evidence
in its support, outside the phenomena which
it is invoked to explain. I put aside, then,
the hypothesis of selective telepathy as being
scientifically unsatisfactory. Let us consider
another speculation, which rather attracts
me, though I do not fully accept it. A little
digression is necessary in order to introduce
it.

1 Mr. Podmore's death, by which psychical research
loses a valued worker, occurred after the writing of
this chapter.

80 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

The form of supernormal function of which
I am most strongly convinced, is that which
may be called medical diagnosis by a trance-
personality, I am forced to the belief, from
my own experience, that some trance-con-
trols, on being given a lock of hair or other
rapport-oh]ect, can accurately describe the
state of health of an absent person, even
though the sitter (the individual bringing
the hair) may be quite ignorant of what is
the matter with the patient. In other words,
the process, whatever it is, is not thought-
transference from the sitter. I will give an
example.

Mrs. Robinson, an old friend of ours, took
a lock of hair which had been cut from the
head of an ailing cousin, to a sensitive —
well known to me — whose control purports
to be a doctor. The cousin lives at a dis-
tance of 100 miles from here, and his mother
sent the hair by post. The important thing
to note is that Mrs. Robinson had not the
slightest idea of what was the matter. Her
aunt had given no indication whatever as
to the nature of the illness. Yet the control
diagnosed without hesitation, and Mrs, Robin-
son took such detailed notes that she covered
nine pages of note-paper in her report to the
aunt. The lad's illness was an unusual one
— an obstruction between nose and throat;

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 81

therefore less likely to be hit on by chance
coincidence than such common ailments as,
e. ^., indigestion. Every detail of the diagnosis
was correct, and one statement was specially
interesting. The control described a slight
redness, as of eruption or inflammation, on
one side of the patient's face; remarking,
however, that it was unconnected with the
illness, and was unimportant. Mrs. Robin-
son was as ignorant concerning this as she
was concerning the patient's general health;
but, on receiving her aunt's next letter, she
found that the description was correct. Her
cousin had been suffering from neuralgia,
and a mustard leaf had been applied, causing
temporary redness and incipient blistering.

Such cases are, naturally, unconvincing to
those who do not know the persons con-
cerned; but to me this case is impressive.
My knowledge of Mrs. Robinson — ^who is no
novice in these matters, and who is quite alive
to the evidential importance of being sure
that she knew nothing of the illness — is such
that this case of itself would strongly incline
me to doubt the universal applicability of
telepathy in explanation of such cases. And
I have known other eases of equal strength.

I am not, of course, arguing for " spirits ";
my point is simply that telepathy from the
sitter is an insufficient hypothesis. (It hap-

82 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

pens to be a fact that in these cases the con-
trol usually purports to be a deceased medical
man; but I am not concerned with that at
present.) Now it sometimes happens that
a rapport-oh]ect is unnecessary. A trance
medium well known to me can diagnose
without rapport-ohject when the person who
sits on the patient's behalf is closely connected
with the latter. The sitter seems to supply
the necessary link.

Suppose now, that a medium's super-
normal powers are directed to the ascertain-
ment of the names and descriptions of a
sitter's deceased relatives, instead of to the
diagnosis of his living relative's ailments;
somewhat as a dowser can " set himself " to
find hidden coins as weU as underground
water. May it not be that a sitter may act
as a rapport-ohject or Lnk, enabling some
subconscious part of the medium's mind to
reach the facts required ? And here let me
say that the word rapport may give a false
impression if it suggests a telepathic rapport.
I have grounds for believing that, in a
diagnosis of an absent person's illness by
means of hair or other object, the process
is not telepathic. For one thing, the diagnos-
ing intelligence does not seem able to tell
what the owner of the object is doing, at the
time of the sitting, as we might reasonably

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 83

expect if the object coupled up the two
minds. Further, the diagnosis, though turn-
ing out accurate, sometimes conflicts with the
behefs of the patient and those about him.
(Some " telepathists " may suggest that the
patient's " subliminal " knew, and that the
medium read that. We could of course ex-
plain almost anything by a supposed read-
ing of a subconsciousness which is supposed
to know. It is magnificent — but it is not
science.) However, I do not press these
points, for I have not sufficient data to feel
sure; but I do believe, as a result of much
investigation of a medium during many
years and with the help of several different
sitters, that the raffort-ohiQci does not
bring about a telepathic perception. It seems
more as if the object carried with it so much
of the owner's personality that his whole
condition becomes visible, somewhat as a
doctor may be able to describe fairly accur-
ately the external appearance (as to com-
plexion and weight) and internal condition
of an absent person, after testing and micro-
scopically examining a specimen of his blood,
or sputum, or other secretion. If, then, a
ra/pport-oh]ect can carry with it information
of my bodily state, may it not carry with it
other information also ? If a lock of my
hair — or a worn article of clothing, as with

G 2

84 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

another medium who does not go into trance,
and who has given me good results — can
reveal the state of my heart, may it not
reveal other things concerning me as well ?
And this would presumably come about
just the same, if the worn article were taken
to the medium after my death. I confess
that the result of my inquiries into this
phase of mediumship has been to lessen the
importance, in my eyes, of many of the
early Piper sittings at which objects formerly
belonging to a deceased person were pre-
sented — the importance, I mean, of the
results considered as evidence of communica-
tion from the dead.

" But," it will be said, " you have just
remarked that a rapport-ohjeot is not always
required. What about it then ? " True; a
ra/pport-ohiQct can occasionally be dispensed
with, hut only when the sitter is in close touch
with the patient. We can dimly see, I think,
how a sitter may serve as rapport-obiect.
We all of us influence those with whom we
are in close contact. They bear the effects
of our personality in their minds, and, con-
sequently, in their bodies, brains, etc. May
it not be that this impression may be " read
off," as the personahty-impression may be
read off from a lock of hair ? Or at least
may it not put the medium's subconscious-

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 85

ness " on the track " of other required
knowledge ? It may seem that this is a
far-fetched supposition, for, though it is
fairly easy to conceive of a lock of hair
yielding information concerning its owner, it
is difficult to see how the traces of our person-
ality in other people — even near relatives —
can be so distinct; for those traces must be
very much mixed up with the traces of other
people who also have influenced the sitter.
This may be admitted. But at least when
the " communicator " purports to be the
sitter's father or mother, there is undeniably
a close connection. If I had taken some of
my mother's hair, during her lifetime, to
the mediums I have mentioned, I should
probably have received a medical diagnosis
of her state of health; if I had taken it after
her death, I should probably have received
a description of my mother, with details of
her last illness, and also with the remark that
she was now dead.^ If I have none of her
hair, but if I go myself, I am in one sense
taking no rapport-ohieot, but in another
sense I am taking one, and a very intimate
one; for some of my body's cells once belonged
to my mother in quite as close a way as her

1 A friend of mine, a doctor, once took a lock of hair
from the head of a dead patient. The control at once
said, " This is dead," and rebuked the sitter for trying
such an experiment.

86 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

hair. Does it not seem easy to believe,
then, that my body may serve as a rapport-
object, from which the medium's sixth sense,
or whatever we may call it, can read off facts
about my mother ?

It was believed by Fechner — following
and elaborating an ancient notion, e. g., Plato
in the Philebus — that an Earth-Spirit exists,
bearing the same relation to the earth (in-
cluding all living matter thereon) as our
spirits do to our bodies. We are related to
this spirit somewhat as our sensations are
related to our total mental fabric; each of
us is, so to speak, one of the Earth-Spirit's
organs of sense-perception. In it, " dead "
people exist, as memories exist in our minds.
Presumably, then, dead people can be brought
into communication with us if we can touch
the right chord of association, much as we
" remember " things of which something
else " reminds " us. A rapport-dhject, or
closely-related sitter, may " remind " the
World-Soul of the deceased person from whom
communication is desired, and evidence of
that person's identity may be forthcoming
to any extent; for the World-Soul contains
all that person's knowledge.^

^ Professor James thought that " some kind of anima
mundi thinking in all of us " was a " more promising
hypothesis than that of a lot of absolutely individual
souls." {Princi'ples of Psychology, cha^. x.)

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 87

Pechner himself, though elaborating this
spiritual conception of the Universe (for the
Earth-Spirit is but a member of a great
Ultimate Spirit), nevertheless disliked spirit-
istic phenomena and notions, though his
system could make room for them, if neces-
sary. He did not believe, however, that dead
people lost their personalities when they
ceased to be the World-Soul's perceptions,
and became only its memories; though here
there seems to me to be some diificultj^^

But this system, though possibly true
and certainly ingenious in its analogical
reasoning, 's a metaphysic of the whole of
Nature. As workers at a science, it is
preferable for us to keep 'n close touch with
the facts of observation, and not to spread
ourselves too much into theories of the All,
however un-abstract and " thick " they may
be. Moreover, the Fechnerian notion, though
help'ng the imagination in visualizing the

' Fechner's Zend-Avesta, ii., p. 228, etc., German
edition of 1906. A digest is contained in his Buchlein
des Lebena nach dem Tode (English translation, On Life
after Death, Open Court Puhlishing Co.). See James,
Pluralistic Universe, p. 133 et seq. [Ci. Arnold's
famous lines —

" The spirit of the world.

Beholding the absurdity of men —
Their vaunts, their feats — let a sardonic smile
For one short moment wander o'er his lips ;
That smile was Heine."

88 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" how " of results obtained by sittings with
a medium, does not help us much with
spontaneous phenomena where there is no
material rapport-ohject, as in Mrs. Napier's
" Anthony Grace " incident, Miss Smith's
veridical rappings (to be described later),
and the host of spontaneous veridical hap-
penings which may be found described in
Proceedings 8.P.B., vol. x., and elsewhere.

Putting aside, then, the fascinating Pechner-
ian philosophy as too wide to be very useful
to us at present, and putting aside the " selec-
tive telepathy " idea as being a dubiously-
justified guess, unsupported by evidence,
there seems to be nothing left but the spirit-
istic hypothesis according to which, in evi-
dential cases, the communicators are held
to be actually what they claim to be, though
often communicating under difficulties which
limit their manifestation. It is a legitimate
hypothesis, and the facts seem to justify its
provisional adoption, though there are many
serious difficulties in the way. However,
difficulties are to be expected when science
explores new realms. The puzzling and
baffling details may fall into line later on.

At this point, it is perhaps desirable that
I should indicate my sentiment, as well as
my belief, regarding this question of personal
survival of death, in order that the reader

REMARKS ON THIS SERIES 89

may know how much — if anything — is to be
allowed for the " personal equation." When
there is a strong desire for survival, as in the
case of Myers, it is possible, though not
inevitable, that the desire may warp the
judgment. With me, however, I think this
source of possible error is absent. I have
little or no desire of that kind. Continued
existence — on the average level of happiness
of my earth life — has no attraction for me.
I should look forward to an " endless sleep "
with equanimity and even with satisfaction,
as did Socrates of old; for in deep sleep there
is at least no suffering.

It seems to me, therefore, that I am as
nearly as possible unprejudiced. My intel-
lectual convictions have not been influenced
by emotion. They are at variance, rather
than in agreement, with my desires. Mr.
G. B. Shaw, with his usual exhilarating
vigour of language, tells us that " the way to
get at the merits of a case is not to listen
to the fool who imagines himself impartial,
but to get it argued with reckless bias for
and against." [The Sanity of Art, p. 4.)
Apparently, then, the only sensible people
are those who argue, or could argue, with
reckless bias, for or against. Well, in psychical
research (of which, by the way, Mr. Shaw is
not speaking) we have had a good many of

90 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

these sensible people — at least, we have had
plenty of " reckless bias for and against " —
for and against the alleged phenomena and
the various interpretations. Mr. Shaw does
not say what is to be done after the case has
been argued out with sufficiently reckless
bias. Perhaps he would admit that at this
stage there may be uses for the fool who
imagines himself impartial. Anyhow, in
whatever category Mr. Shaw might place
the present humble writer, the latter main-
tains, not without some fear and trembling,
that so far as honest and thoughtful intro-
spection can tell him, he is almost or quite
impartial as to survival. Some fluctuations
there may be, according to the mood of the
moment; a little desire for life, or a little
desire for extinction. But the prevailing
condition is neutral.

CHAPTER X

SITTINGS WITH WATSON : SECOND
SERIES

In the foregoing chapters I have described
the early sittings as fully as possible — except
for the omission of a few (evidential) details
which might have introduced over-complexity
— in order that all incorrect statements
should be included, and the reader thus
placed in a position to see for himself that,
whatever the correct theory may be, chance
coincidence cannot account for the pheno-
mena. In sittings that present a large
amount of incorrect or dubious matter, it is
possible that the few successes may be due
to lucky shots. In Watson's case, however,
it is not so. The correct statements are so
numerous and definite, the incorrect ones
are so few, and there is such an absence of
" fishing," that an explanation by guess-
work and chance coincidence is quite out of
the question.

Having demonstrated this by full reports
91

92 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

of the first nine sittings, it seems unneces-
sary — as it certainly would be tedious — to
describe other and later sittings with equally
scrupulous inclusiveness. These later sittings
yielded further evidential matter, but this
matter was at times mixed with things that
had already been said. When once the full
names, ages, and dates of death, of Mr.
Knight's mother, uncles, aunts, etc., had been
given, any repetition of these was of course
devoid of evidential value. I propose, there-
fore, to select, from four later sittings, such
incidents as seem evidential of supernormal
faculty, or — in a few cases — as seem curious
and interesting enough to be included, though
not evidential. The selection, however, al-
most amounts to a full report. The omitted
matter is small in quantity; and, if it were
included, it would not weaken the evidential
weight of the sittings, for the proportion of
incorrect statements continued to be so
small as to be almost negligible, even if
we class as incorrect a few unverifi-
able descriptions which there is reason
to suppose may be true of long-dead rela-
tives.

I have omitted, in order to avoid over-
complexity, several evidential statements
referring to the relatives and occupations of
Mr. Oddy and Mr. Newman.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 9S

Sitting 10.

Dec. 11, 1907. Present, Mr. Frank Knight, Mr.
and Mrs. Herbert Knight, and the medium.

Watson felt that some anniversary was
near, but could get no particulars. [Mrs.
Knight died Dec. 13, 1905. The medium
had already got this, in Sitting No. 4.] He
then obtained the following message — pur-
porting to come from Mr. Knight's grand-
mother : —

" Your father, whom you will scarcely remember,
save by name, often is near you, but probably you
cannot realize it. Poor Henry ! He did not live long
to look after his children. Don't get anxious now,
boys, for we wiU do our best, but it is very strange
indeed. Your mother cannot do what she wants, but
will endeavour to give you more."

Soon after this, the medium saw, associated
with Mrs, H. K., a gentleman 44 years of
age, a tall, well-built man, a fluent writer,
who had died after a short illness several
years ago. (Cf. Sitting 5, Chap. VI., p. 51.) The
man .appeared to be very anxious to give
advice concerning a middle-aged lady still
living, a blood-relation of Mrs. Herbert's.
This lady was stated to be in a critical state
of health, and must remove at once from
her present home, to return to the old locality
of her own people. Then the following
came, in writing : —

94 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" I am your father — Wilfrid. You will know me by

that. Your mother must leave Y , or she wiU not

keep well. That, is f/nal. You have been good to
Mother and poor William — ^he is better now, but how
she silently grieves.

" Bert too was good to him, but all good deeds are
stored up and are imperishable."

[Mr. Wilfrid Renton is Mrs. H. K.'s father.
He died " several years ago." His widow's
health was bad, as stated. William (son)
had died April 9, 1907. It is true that
"Bert" (Mr. Herbert Knight) had "been
good " to him. Cf. Chap. VI.J

The medium again felt the influence of
F. K.'s grandmother, and was convinced
she had something to say about an anni-
versary. All the sitters knew that the day
was the anniversary (according to the day
of the week) of Mrs. Knight's death, and
some message to that effect was expected.
To their surprise, however, the following
writing came : —

" On December 29, you may remember that day.
It was always a pleasure to me. I shall never forget
when your father died. It must be 27 years since now,
if I remember rightly. My thoughts get entangled.
When at High Elms. What a long time since. Florence
and Kathleen and Kenneth Frederic and your mother
and all of us were together. What a change. I cannot
say more now. Love to you all. H. F. J."

[Note by F. K.
December 29 is my birthday. My grand-

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 95

mother never forgot it. The last words she
ever wrote were words of affectionate greeting
to me on my birthday, and are headed
" December 29th, 1902."

My father died very suddenly through the
breaking of a blood-vessel, and my grand-
mother had specially felt the shock. She
and my mother were the only people in the
house, besides my father, when it happened.

The persons mentioned as being " to-
gether " did live together " a long time since "
— viz., my grandmother, mother, uncle, and
two aunts — before marriages, etc., broke the
circle. They did not live at High Elms,
though that property did belong to the
family. They lived about two hundred yards
away, and no doubt were often there. I know
no one to whom the initials H. F. J. would
apply; perhaps they are intended to specify
my brother, myself, and my sister — Herbert,
Frank, and Janet. J

A little later, Watson got the following
writing : —

" Suffer little children to come unto me. Nora
Knight was a lamb for his kingdom, but not now as a
child do you behold her, but as a maiden fair.

" In Earth-life but briefly. In life immortal for 4 J
cycles of time. Pebruary to April 1875."

[Mr, Knight's sister Nora was born Feb.
18, 1875, and died April 29 of the same

96 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

year. F. K. could not recall the dates at the
time, and had to look them up. J ■

Watson also had an impression that Mr.
and Mrs. Herbert Knight would not stay
long in the house occupied by them at the
time. This predicted removal seemed un-
likely, but within two months of the sitting
they received notice to quit, the landlord
having sold the house. This is not par-
ticularly evidential, for the coincidence might
be accidental. Watson, like Mrs. Thompson's
Nelly, is generally wrong in his predictions;
he has not given us more than three or four,
mostly rather vague, and certainly not very
successful as events turned out.

Sitting 11.
Jan. 8, 1908. Present, F. K., I. 0., and
medium : later, Mr. and Mrs. H. K. and
Miss Benton.

Nathan Thornes was described as present,
and stated, by writing, that he was trying
to " stimulate the influence," so that results
should be better. F. K. asked for a test
message, say, about the business. The fol-
lowing was the reply : —

" Business has no interest with me at all now. I
cannot at all give any idea of business life, except that
Uriah Martin and I were always chums in that line.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 97

You must not think we will not convey the messages
you desire. It is difficult, inasmuch as it is only momen-
tarily we can grasp the position of affairs, that formerly
attached themselves to us."

F. K. asked for something about the
commiiiiicator's earth friends, and " Mrs.
Norton, of Stanbury," was given in answer
to the request.

[Uriah Martin was Mr. Nathan Thornes's
manager. He died many years ago, and
Mr. IVank Knight never knew him. F. K.
had no conscious knowledge of any Mrs.
Norton, but on asking a very old employe,
the latter said that he formerly knew a
Mr. and Mrs. Norton very well, and that they
were friends of Mr. and Mrs. Nathan Thornes.
See p. 71.J

Here Mr. and Mrs. H. K. and Miss Renton
came in, the two sisters sitting down beside
the medium. They were hardly seated before
Watson began to write again, producing
the following script : —

" These two young ladies are my nieces, the daughters
of my brother Wilfrid, so I am their aunt, though they
would never know me, but they would know their Aunt
Tamar Betty, better than me.

" How glad I am to make this known, for William's
sake. I cannot give more just now. Your affectionate
Aunt, Frances Jane."

In answer to inquiries the communicator
stated that she died twenty-eight or twenty-

98 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

nine years ago, aged 19. The medium
further wrote : —

" Abraham. Your Grandfather on father's side —
Mary. I am her mother, not her step-raotheir — died at
Ripley."

An aunt of Mrs. H. K. and Miss Renton,
died before they were born, aged 17 or 19.
Name, Frances Jane. An aunt named Tamar
Betty is still living, and is well known to
her nieces. " Abraham " was these latter's
paternal grandfather. " Mary " was his first
wife. " I am her [Frances Jane's] mother,
not her step-mother," is correct. The girls
knew their step-grandmother, but had never
known their grandmother Mary, the mother
of Frances Jane. This latter died at Ripley
as stated. Mrs. H. K. and Miss Renton
had a brother named William, who died, as
mentioned before, on April 9, 1907. (See
Sitting 10, p. 93; also Sitting 5, Chap. VI.,
p. 51.)

CHAPTER XI

SITTINGS WITH WATSON : SECOND SERIES

(continued)

Sitting 12.

Feb. 7, 1908. Present, Mr. Frank Knight and
medium ; later, Mr. Herbert Knight and
Mr. Isaac Oddy.

Watson had the impression of an old lady,
wearing a cap with long strings. He could
not see the face clearly, but knew that it was
not F. K.'s grandmother, whom he had pre-
viously seen several times. He then wrote
the following : —

" My dear Son, — I am indeed glad to be able to pen
you a line. Through, the help of my grandmother I
am able to do this, my own power not being sufEicient.
You would not know my mother's mother, but it is
her." 1

[Here Mr. Knight asked for the name.]

" Nora Upton."

[Correct.]

1 In this impressional or automatic writing, there
occur several grammatical lapses and constructional
peculiarities wmch are not characteristic of the ostens-
ible communicator. On any theory, the sensitive's
mind may be expected to colour the message.
H2 99

100 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" For 45 years she has been passed away from the
Earth." [Correct.]

" How pleasant are the dwelling-places, where love
exists, and mine is imperishable. Dear boy, I love
you still as much as ever, nay more, and whenever the
chance afEords I am near to you. Just as your aspira-
tion, just so is my presence."

(Have you been in contact with any of the others
lately ?)

" Yes, your Aunt Kathleen."
(Do you all live together still ?)

"No.

" Life truly is good to live for. It is not in the length
of days but in the fulness thereof."

(Is there no way by which I can be made to feel your
presence when you are near me ?)

" Only by my thought being forced upon you. Thought
with us is potent and all-powerful."

(Can you remember some incident in your early eartji-
life, as a test of identity ?)

" I understand partly what you want, but much
difficulty obtains in getting it, as it involves some
measure of contact with the persons to do so. Your
great-grandmother is helpiag me in this."

(Do you ever visit your other relatives still living
on the earth ? Do you visit my sister, for example ?)

" Yes, often."

(In that case, can you give me any description of her
home ?)

" No."

(Can you see my home now ?)

" No."

(Can you see me physically 1)

" No."

(Will you try to teU me something now which hap-
pened — say — during your early married life, which I
could not have heard of ?)

" My dear child, could I fix my thought into expres-
sion I readily would, but your father and I were so long
separated it makes it difficult for me."

(Are father and yourself still together ?)

" Oh, yes." [Pause.] " All our time is in use, for

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 101

there is no time limit, and could you at all comprehend
the nature of our life, you would soon understand how
well we are all occupied. Your aunt Florence Bessie
for instance is quite away from us, engaged in work of a
delightful nature, but we can, by our thought, closely
mingle together."

[Tests again asked for.]

" Could you remember Uncle Benjamin running away
from home ? "

(How old was he when he did this ?)

" About 22 I think."

(Was he away long ?)

" No."

(You are quite sure about this matter ?)

" He did run away from home. Was away all night.
Your Grandmother Thomes was in a terrible fix."

(Do you think any one now living will remember this ?)

" I think Kenneth Frederic's wife wiU. When I
left Z 1 was bad."

(HI?)

" Yes. You will not remember."

(Where did you live in Z ?)

" Uppertown."

(Correct, but tell me the name of the house.)

[Pause.]

(Cannot you remember it ?)

" Yes."

(WeU, tell it me, please.)

" Gone." [Pause.] "... I shall have to cease,
at least for a while. Give my tenderest love to all. . . .
There is no love like a mother's, so lasting, deep and
true. Your own mother."

[F. K. then asked for the name by which she was
known to her intimates. " Kathie " was written. F. K.
asked if she was sure : the word was then crossed out,
and " Kathie is -wrong " was written. The name re-
quired is not Kathie.]

After a few minutes, the writing recommenced : —

" Dear friend. The personality of this subject is
hardly suitable for your Mother's full influence to

102 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

control it in its entirety. It would be stronger mani-
fested through a female organism."

(Do you know my friends on the other side ?)

" I only feel their presence. I am not closely allied
to them. I always took a deep interest in the school."

(What school ?)

" Your school."

(Will you give me your name, please ?)

" No, not at present."

(WiU you give me your school number ?)

" I had no number."

(Were you a boy at the school ?)

" No."

(Were you a school official ?)

" No."

(Why are you here ?)

" By law of attraction from the school where you
was (sic) trained."

(When did you die ?)

" Not dead."

(Are you alive, then ?)

" Yes."

At this point the medium said he felt sure
something was wrong. He thought there was
some impersonation going on; felt sure the
writer was a man, but could get no name. He
therefore decided to discontinue.

After a short interval, he stated that he
heard the name " William Brown," and asked
F. K. if the name was known to him. As a
matter of fact, William Brown was the hus-
band of Florence Bessie Brown {nee Thornes).
After his wife's death, he emigrated — about
1877 — to New Zealand, where he lived until
his death in 1903. F. K. never knew him per-
sonally.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 103

The medium further stated, to Mr. Oddy,
that a near relative of his had died with painful
suddenness [true of Mr. Oddy's mother] and
that another relative, living in a neighbouring
town (name given), was in some business
connected with colours or drugs. [Correct,
of a Uving uncle. The business is dyeing.]
Watson then gave the correct initials of this
man, but could get no name. " He is no
longer a young man. Though externally
looking weU he is really in a very unsatis-
factory state of health, and wUl require to
take very great care of himself." [This also
is true. His health lately has not been
good.]

[Notes by F. K.

The three photographs which I ha,ve of my
great-grandmother Nora Upton, show her
wearing a cap with strings, as described. The
medium had not seen these photographs, of
course. (Mr. Knight does not lay stress on
this as evidence, but merely as being " note-
worthy." Probably most old ladies of that
date wore caps with strings. My grand-
mothers did. J. A. H.)

The name of my Aunt Florence Bessie is
given correctly, and for the first time in full.
Previously, it had been given as Florence B.
Thornes.

The incident relating to my Uncle Benjamin

104 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

is possible, perhaps probable, but is unverifi-
able. " Kenneth Frederic's wife " did not
come into the family until ten years later,
and does not remember hearing of such an
occurrence. I have written to my New
Zealand cousins, but no verification seems
now obtainable.

" When I left Z I was bad. You will

not .remember." I was away at boarding-
school at the time, but my sister informs me
that mother certainly was ill at the time.

The " impersonation incident " — if such it
was — is curious and inexplic able. I do happen
to take a deep interest in my old school, and
the medium is probably aware that I have
been closely associated with the Old Boys'
Association, etc. But if it was deliberate and
fraudulent, it is curious that he did not
supply a relevant name, of some person living
or dead, which he certainly could have done
without difficulty. The same difficulty arises,
on the " telepathic " hypothesis.]

Sitting 13.
March 19, 1908. Present, F.K. and medium;
later, Mr. Herbert Knight, Mr. I. Oddy,
and Mr. Newman.

After a little veridical but not strongly-
evidential matter relating to Mrs. Knight's
last illness, the medium wrote ; —

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 105

" My dear nephew. It is gratifying indeed to speak
to you, if it can only be done by this means.

" Your mother is truly happy in being able to realize
your presence.

" I have become master of the material now, and
can reach you by means your mother at present may
fail in. Our love is as strong as ever. Your Aunt
Kathleen."

At this point, F. K. asked the communicator
to mention some of her friends known to him,
as evidence of identity. ' ' Mary ' ' was written.
(" Mary " is a very common name.) " Polly."
(Is that right ?) " Polly— PoUitt. It is your
Aunt Kathleen who dictates this to you. She
passed from earth-life 32 years ago or there-
abouts. 1876." (Are you sure of this ?) ^

" That is what is imparted. She is trying
to catch your desire, and to meet it if possible."

(Then ask her, please, to give the name of
some friend — not a relative — as a test.)

" Mary."

(What was this lady's other name ?)

" PoUy."

(What was her surname, I mean ?)

" Tranter."

(Where did she die ?)

" High Queen's Park. Near to here."

(How old was she ?)

1 The name of Pollitt was unknown to Mr. Knight,
but on mentioning it some time afterwards to his sister,
the latter said that " when she was a girl she used to go
with Grandmother to see a Miss Pollitt, whose mother
was an old friend " [of Mrs. Nathan Thomes].

106 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" Twenty-seven."

(How long has she been dead ?)

" Over 30 years."

(Did I ever know her ?)

" No. Your mother knew her well. I
cannot help you more in this way now. Your
influence is at present unequal in giving us the
power."

(Try to think of some other test, please.)

" I am acting in the capacity of dictator,
and can only give you in fragments."

The writing began to tail off, and no further
evidential matter was produced. The medium
then took articles — watch, etc. — from several
of the sitters, for " psychometry." A good
deal of miscellaneous veridical matter was
obtained, which I omit as being confusing to
the reader, and not very important. It was
of the familiar type; e. g., Mr. Newman was
told that he had recently been engaged in
laborious mental work, and that he had lately
promised something that would entail rather
heavy responsibility. (Mr. Newman had been
working for an examination, and had recently
become engaged to be married.)

Mr. Knight made inquiries, and found that
a person named Mary Tranter did live and die
at High Elms, Queen's Park. She died twenty
years or more before the date of these sittings.

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 107

It is impossible to discover whether she was
a friend of F. K.'s aunt, or not; but their
respective homes were near, and separated
only by fields, so it is at least probable that
they were acquainted. In fact, it is likely
that they played together as children, about
forty years ago.

This is a good example of the difficulty of
getting conclusive evidence, in this depart-
ment. If the statements made concern recent
events or matter of wide-spread knowledge,
the medium may have acquired the facts
normally, and may reproduce them automatic-
ally, even if he is quite honest; and if the state-
ments concern events long past, they are apt
to be unverifiable. But the Mrs. Norton and
the Mary Tranter incidents are certainly
rather impressive, if fraud is excluded. And,
as already indicated, we are of opinion that
many of the phenomena exhibited by Watson
are not satisfactorily explicable without the
supposition of some form of supernormal
faculty.

It is perhaps desirable to state here, that
Watson himself regards the results obtained
for Mr, Knight and Mr. Oddy as quite excep-
tional in their range and detail. He told me
that he has often sat for hours with some sitters,
without getting a single " impression " of
any kind. Success or failure seems to depend

108 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

on conditions which are not yet in the least
understood, unless indeed we provisionally
adopt a spiritistic interpretation, for there
certainly seems to be more likelihood of a
sitter obtaining good evidence, if he has some
beloved relative or friend recently passed to
" the other side." Mr. Myers found this to
be the case with the sitters whom he intro-
duced to Mrs. Thompson.

Whether this be the reason or not, Mr.
Knight seems to make a particularly good
sitter. If the sceptic suggests that " good "
sitters are those who get excited and in
conversation give away the details of their
family affairs, I emphatically deny the applica-
bility of any such suggestion either to Mr.
Knight or Mr. Oddy. Further, Watson's
manner, both normally and when obtaining
evidence, is quiet and unemotional, and the
atmosphere of the sittings is very ordin-
ary and undisturbed. Finally, there being
generally several sitters present, there was
every opportunity for watching each other;
and it will hardly be maintained that details
about Mr. Knight's great-grandmother would
be likely to cause great excitement in the
minds, say, of Mr. Oddy and Mr. Newman.
However that may be, the fact remains that
no sitter, throughout the whole series, ever
detected any hints being dropped which could

CLAIRVOYANT WATSON 109

have assisted the medium. At some of the
sittings, the latter was talking or writing
practically the whole of the time, and the
sitters were merely listening and note-taking.

At the end of the series just dealt with —
there was one more sitting which produced
little new matter and which I have therefore
omitted — Watson said that he felt he was
losing touch with Mr. Knight's connections,
and would prefer to discontinue the sittings,
at least for a time. The suggestion was
adopted. Since then, only one or two further
sittings have been held, and not much new
matter was obtained, though some of it was
rather impressive in its evidential quality.
For example, the Mrs. Nathan Thornes com-
municator mentioned, in reply to a question,
certain articles manufactured by the firm of
which her husband (P. K.'s grandfather) was
head. These articles were manufact\jred by
the firm in those days, but the trade in them is
long since dead, and the business is now con-
cerned with quite different things.

I do not quote the details, as the narrative
is already full enough to give a good idea of the
evidence. Moreover, the notes taken at these
later sittings were less full than in the former
ones, chiefly because of repetitions which now
had no evidential importance, and which,
consequently, were more or less disregarded.

CHAPTER XII

ANOTHER SITTING WITH WATSON

The records of this sitting are hardly worth
quoting, if their intrinsic value only is con-
sidered; for the amount of evidential matter
was small, and none of it was impossible of
acquisition by " detective work." Conse-
quently, if it stood by itself, it would have no
evidential weight; but, having become con-
vinced of the medium's possession of genuine
psychic powers, I incline to think that my own
results with him were due to them rather than
to a fraudulent palming-o£E of normally-
acquired knowledge. What I wish to make
clear, is, that I do not put forward this sitting
as possessing any evidential value if taken by
itself; the more so, as I find it desirable to
suppress part of the evidence, lest it should
cause pain. In the case of my friends, the
concealment of their true names has rendered
it possible to quote more fully than would
have been feasible if their identities had been
disclosed.

Sitting of Aug. 8, 1907. Present, myself and
medium all the time ; my sister part of the time.

After preliminary conversation — in which

110

ANOTHER SITTING WITH WATSON 111

of course we were careful to say nothing about
OTir relatives, either Uving or dead — I asked
the medium if he could get anything in the
way of psychic evidence. He picked up a
book from the table, and began running the
leaves through his fingers, without speaking.
He did not seem to be reading — indeed, his
sight is too bad — but, rather, abstracting his
mind, ungearing himself, so to speak, from his
surroundings and from his thoughts on the
subject we had been talking about. Suddenly
he looked up, gazing apparently at a point a
little above my right shoulder, and fired ofiE
the following, almost more rapidly than I
could take it down in shorthand : —

" There is a spirit lady with you. Died at the age
of 54. Been dead 21 years. Medium sized. Placid.
Bright eyes. Slight colour in cheeks. Neat hair,
wavy. Name Mary. Interested in your welfare; been
with you since passing away. Was business-like and
shrewd — a good manager. Has helped you during
your illness."

I did not speak while this was being reeled
o£E, and I do not think anything could have
been gathered from my face, for I was bending
over my writing (sheet of paper on a book held
on my knee) and was more intent on getting
it all down verbatim than on noticing how far
it was correct. My sister was sitting partly
behind the medium, and he could not see her
face. She did not speak.

When he stopped, I told him that what he

112 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

had said applied correctly to my mother,
except that, as we remember her, she had no
colour — i. e., was always very pale.

After a reference to my health, in which his
impressions coincided with the doctor's views
regarding the condition — a rare one — of my
heart, the medium continued : —

" You have not lived here long. You were not here
when your mother died. She indicates unfamiliarity
with this house." [Correct.]

He then went on to give the correct name of
a living relative of mine, stating that the per-
son in question was still " in the body "; also
the correct name of another relative (deceased)
with age at death, date of that event, and
other evidential matter. This spirit he saw
in the room, as he had seen my mother. His
description was not quite accurate in one of
the details, and moreover was not very
specific. But the name, age and date of death
were correct.

The medium then turned to my sister : —

" You had trouble nine years ago. Change in your
life. [Father died Oct. 1898 — i.e., nine years before date
of sitting.] You have lived here some little time.
[Ten years.] House is saturated with your influence.
But you did not come to it new — some one lived here
before you. Name ' Corrie ' vibrates round me in my
mind." [True about the house. " Corrie " unrecog-
nized. A doctor of that name lived near, many years
ago, but before this house was built.]

Watson then asked for paper, and tried for

ANOTHER SITTING WITH WATSON 118

automatic writing. Presently he wrote a
word or two. I purposely did not get up to
see what it was — I was sitting at a little dis-
tance from him — lest my manner should help
him to make guesses. He looked at the writ-
ing, and made a remark which I omitted to
note down. I think he said, " That is the
name of a house, I suppose " or some-
thing like that. A few more words were
written, and then I looked at the production.
It was : —

" Round [scrawled in a shaky handl Roundfield Place

Yes...

Mary."

The " Yes " was apparently in answer to
the medium's remark : " That is the name of
a house, I suppose." It happens that our
address was " Roundfield Place " before we
came to the house in which we live now. It
was while living at Roundfield Place that my
mother died, in 1886.

[Comments.

On this sitting alone, I should have assumed
probable fraud. The accurately-given names
and dates strongly suggest a reading of the
tombstone-inscriptions over our vault in a
cemetery half a mile away. And the points
in which the medium was wrong are pre-
cisely those details which would be difficult
to get at by inquiry — thus suggesting that

114 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

he made guesses, or that he had been wrongly
informed by some one whose knowledge was
imperfect. For example, my mother was
pale, and — as we remarked afterwards, though
not to the medium — ^her hair was not wavy.
As it was twenty-one years since she died, an
accurate description would not be easy to
obtain by inquiry.

But, though the facts thus seem to point to
fraud, I am inclined to think that this was
accidental. The results of Mr. Knight's and
Mr. Oddy's sittings have led me to accept
the hypothesis of some form of supernormal
faculty on the part of Watson, as, on the
whole, the most reasonable explanation of the
phenomena. And, when once this is accepted,
it is as easy to swallow the whole as a part. I
mean that it seems rather absurd to assume a
mixture of fraud and genuineness, assuming,
e, g. — as some seem to do — that all the norm-
ally ascertainable facts were normally ascer-
tained, and only the " impossible " ones due
to supernormal faculty. There is much to be
said in favour of " erring on the safe side," I
am aware; but I think that the " mixture "
assumption, though certainly on the safe side,
is probably more erring than the " unsafer "
one would be.

It is worth noting that if Watson had read
the tombstone-inscriptions over our vault, he
would have got my father^s name, age, and

ANOTHER SITTING WITH WATSON 115

date of death. Also, a correct description of
my father would have been easily obtainable,
for his death was fairly recent, and he was
extremely well known, locally. Yet- not a
word concerning him was obtained at the
sitting. If, then, the medium obtained any
information concerning my father — either
from inscriptions or otherwise — he either for-
got part of his ammunition, or exercised
artistic restraint in order to puzzle me —
which is, of course, possible enough, though I
agree with Professor James in regarding this
supposition with extreme scepticism. It usu-
ally pays best for a fraudulent medium to
bring out aU his goods. I have not much
belief in the theory of deliberate artistic
restraint. And, if it was forgetfulness, it is
curious that it should extend to every detail
concerning my father. On the fraud hypo-
thesis, this medium must be granted a marvel-
lously good memory, and it seems unlikely
that he would forget everything concerning one
of the persons whom he had been looking up.
Some little detail, surely, might be expected
to have been retained.

It ought to be mentioned that, unless
Watson did make investigations with fraudu-
lent intent, he is almost certainly ignorant
concerning my family, living or dead. He
lives at some distance, in another town, and I
doubt if he has ever heard any one speak of me,

I 2

116 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

except Mr. Knight and Mr. Oddy. And these
two friends of mine were not acquainted with,
and know nothing about, any of my deceased
relatives. Consequently there could have
been no accidental dropping of information
on their part. Also, the cemetery mentioned
is not a public one, and it is unlikely that
Watson had any casually-Sicquired knowledge
of the gravestone-inscription.^

I intended this sitting to be the first of a
lengthy and carefully-planned series, with
verbatim notes, and new sitters introduced
as often as possible, unexpectedly. Unfor-
tunately, illness prevented me from carrying
out this scheme, but I still hope that it may
be possible, later on. This medium, however,
is not easy to catch, as he is away from home
most of his time, giving clairvoyant tests and
speaking at meetings in different parts of the
country. Also he is only with difficulty
persuaded to give private sittings, for he is
always afraid he will not be able to " get "
anything, and is much distressed and disap-
pointed when this happens.]

1 It is perhaps just worth saying, though I lay no
stress on it, that if my mother could really communicate
with us, the words " Roundfield Place " are the most
Ukely words we can think of her saying, as evidence of
identity. This had not occurred to us before, but after
the sitting we realized how intimately associated with
ourselves, in my mother's mind, the words " Roundfield
Place " must have been.

CHAPTER XIII

HALLTTCINATIONS

It is recorded of a witty Frenchwoman —
was it Mme. de Stael ? — that she did not
believe in ghosts, but she was nevertheless
afraid of them. Probably many people are
in a similarly illogical state of mind. It
seems likely, however, that the next genera-
tion wiU beUeve more and fear less. Fear
is largely due to ignorance of the feared
object. " Men fear death," said Bacon, " as
children fear to go in the dark." So with
Hamlet, in the famous Soliloquy. " For in
that sleep of death what dreams may come."
But if ghostly phenomena — supposing them
to occiir — could be understood, there would
be good hope that the fear would vanish.
The ticking of a watch, held close to the ear,
has struck terror into the heart of a savage
who could hardly be expected to have any
nerves at all. When he understood that it
was not some kind of hitherto-unknown and
possibly venomous animal, but a useful man-
made article, his fears were allayed.

So with ghosts. We are beginning, or

think we are beginning, to understand them.

The first step in the process was to rechristen

117

118 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

them, in order that they might seem more
scientifically respectable. Accordingly, they
became " visual hallucinations." If appar-
ently connected in some causal way with a
distant person, they are " externalizations of a
telepathic impact " originating in that persoij,
or this latter perhaps rejoices in a " phantas-
mogenetic diathesis." Whether these beauti-
ful polysyllables really get us much " for-
rarder," may be disputed. Naming is not
explaining; and some of the terminology is
strongly suggestive of the famous bachelierus
in Molifere's Malade Imaginaire, who explains
that opium produces sleep because it has
a " dormitive virtue." Still, psychical re-
search terminology is not quite as bad as
that, and, anyhow, if it helps to make the
subject respectable — helps to induce orthodox
science to regard it as worthy of study — the
polysyllables will not have been in vain.

Edmund Gurney neatly defined a hallucina-
tion as " a percept which lacks, but which
can only by distinct reflection be recognized
as lacking, the objective basis which it
suggests." ^ An illusion, on the other hand,
is a misinterpretation of sensations derived
from a real " objective basis," as when an
overcoat, hanging in a dim light, is mistaken
for a person. It has been objected, not

1 Cf. James's Principles of Psychology, ii., pp. 115,
123, 124.

HALLUCINATIONS 119

without grounds, that the term " hallucina-
tion " begs the question by assuming that
there is nothing really " there," that the
experience has no external cause, but is inner,
subjective, centrally-initiated, entirely on a
par with ordinary dreams, or the delusive
visions of a delirious or drugged person.
There is some point in the objection; more-
over, " hallucination " in ordinary use in-
evitably suggests mental infirmity, in spite
of the hallucinatory experiences of such very
sane folks as Socrates, Luther, Napoleon, and
Ben Jonson. StiU, there seems to be no satis-
factory substitute at present. It must there-
fore be borne in mind that the word as used
in psychical research, whatever its popular
connotations may be, carries with it no implied
suggestion of any morbid condition, and does
not prejudge the question as to whether the
experience is entirely subjective or not.^

Hallucinations may affect any of the senses,
but the most important are visual and
auditory. These latter are often difficult to
establish; for ordinary noises, even though
inexplicable, may be caused by rats, water-
pipes, or other very matter-of-fact things.
But occasionally it seems possible to exclude
these agencies. A friend of mine once heard

1 Mr. Piddington has shown, fairly conclusively, that
between psychical and " visceral " hallucinations due to
pathological conditions, there is a well-marked generic
difference. Proceedirigs 8,P,B-, vol. xix., p. 267.

120 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

footsteps outside his bedroom door, and went

out to investigate. No one was there, but

the footsteps were still audible, tramping

slowly down the stairs. My friend leaned

over the rail, and — so to speak — ^watched

them down. When they reached the bottom,

where the stair-carpet ended and linoleum

began, the sound changed as it would have

done under real feet. It was about four o' clock

on a Jime morning, and, consequently, broad

daylight. The footsteps were heard by my

friend's wife and by his brother. All are

very serious and honest people, but queer

things do happen in that house, apparently

in connection with the wife, who shows

marked psychic faculties, but declines to

attempt any development. My friend is a

phlegmatic man, of normal mind and great

physical strength. He is a determined

materiaKst. Such incidents, however, are not

" evidential." ^ The following is a better case.

A few years ago (exact date given me)

Miss Smith was staying with her sister in the

house of Mrs. Jones, in a tiny northern village.

One evening a messenger brought the inf orma-

^ Cf. Lang's Dreams and Ghosts, p. 189 : a " footstep
case " in which the seventeenth and eighteenth steps
always creaked, as those two steps— and those only —
did under real feet. Percipient was a lady well known
to Mr. Lang. She sat on the stair and " watched " the
footsteps down. But, in this case, there was apparently
no other percipient, and the experience might be
subjective only.

HALLUCINATIONS 121

tion that Miss Smith's brother Tom, whose
business was in a town a few miles away, had
been hurt; but in his occupation slight acci-
dents are common, and the girls were not
alarmed. They retired for the night soon
after nine o'clock. Just as the sister was
getting into bed, and before Miss Smith had
finished undressing, both of them heard a
succession of sounds as of heavy blows struck
on the wall. The part of the wall on which
they occurred was an out- wall — i, e., did not
adjoin any other room or building — and the
outside of that part could be seen by looking
out of the open window ; further, the month
being June, there was light enough not only
to see but also to recognize any human being,
or any living thing big enough to cause the
sounds. The sisters looked out, and Miss
Smith climbed out on a ledge in the roof,
in order to have a better view, but nothing
was discovered. Meanwhile the knocking
continued. Mrs. Jones was fetched, and
further investigation made, but without result.
Eventually the girls went to bed, though not
to sleep; for the knocking continued until
three o'clock in the morning, causing great
terror. (The fright, and the general tension,
brought on in Miss Smith's case an attack of
brain fever, though she is one of the calmest
and most unemotional women I have ever
known.) Early in the morning, a messienger

122 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

brought the news that Tom Smith had died
at 8.45 the previous night — about twenty
or twenty-five minutes before the noises
began. A curious feature of the sounds was
that they were not audible in the other rooms,
though in this one room they seemed loud
enough to be heard all over the house.

Miss Smith has been well known to me for
many years. I cross-examined her closely,
and also obtained an independent account
from her sister, with the result that it seemed
unlikely that the sounds were due to a normal
cause. If they were not, the experience was
an auditory hallucination; and it seems also
to have had a veridical (truth-teUing) ele-
ment, for it coincided with the death of Miss
Smith's favourite brother. However, I quote
the case chiefly as illustration, for its evidential
strength is not very great. Of course, even
if we attribute the sounds to the agency of the
man's surviving mind, we need not suppose
that they were consciously and deliberately
produced; for to terrify his favourite sister
into brain-fever would be far from his wish.
It is probable, as was thought by Myers, that
in such cases the agent is not present in any-
thing like the fulness of his personality — is
not aware of the effects which he is producing
in our world. It may be that these pheno-
mena are the dreams of the dead, or are
produced in a dream-like and unreasoning

HALLUCINATIONS 123

state, such as it is natural to expect would be
a spirit's condition after the wrench of death.
There is reason to suppose, from the Piper
and other phenomena, that some such condi-
tion usually does supervene before the spirit
comes to itself in the new environment.

Let us pass now to visual hallucinations.
First, what are the results which the S.P.R.'s
laborious investigations may be said to have
estabHshed?^ They seem to me to be as follows.

(1) That a person in good health, of
apparently perfect sanity, awake, and in a
normal and unexcited frame of mind, may
see an apparition of a person whose body is
elsewhere. The apparition may be that of a
living or a dead person, who may or may not
be known to the percipient.

(2) That though some of these appari-
tions are merely subjective hallucinations
similar to those which may be produced
hypnotically or which arise through bodily
abnormality due to disease or drugs, there is
nevertheless reason to believe that many of
them are something more. The chief reasons
— to be dealt with later — for so believing, are
(a) that an apparition is sometimes seen by
more than one person, (6) that in many
cases there seems to be a connection between

^ These investigations were carried out by means of
inquiry among nearly 20,000 people. It was a " Census
of Hallucinations." Proceedings, vol. x.

124 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

the fact of the apparition and some other fact
concerning the real individual whose " ghost "
appears — e. g., in many cases, that individual
is found to have been going through some
unusually stressful experience (as dying) or,
perhaps, as in some carefully-recorded cases,
trying to produce an apparition of himself to
the percipient, merely as an experiment.

The explanation of these phenomena, the
reality of which is admitted by aU investi-
gators, is a difficult matter; but there seems
little doubt that the safe starting-point must,
at least for the present, be the idea of thought-
transference or telepathy. The experiments
recorded in the Proceedings and Journal of
the Society for Psychical Research are suffi-
cient, I think, to convince a logical and
unprejudiced reader that thought-transference
between two minds is possible ; that by con-
centration and willing, the agent has some-
how caused the desired idea, as of a triangle
or other figure or object, to arise in the
percipient's mind, without any indication
being perceived through the ordinary sensory
channels.^ Close proximity is not a necessity,
for experiments have succeeded when agent
and percipient have been at a distance of
several miles from each other. ^ In most of

1 See also Sir Oliver Lodge's Survival of Man, p. 38
and foil.

2 Journal S.P.B., vol. xii., p. 223. Distance 20 miles.

HALLUCINATIONS 125

these cases the percipient does not see the
object externally, but rather perceives it by
an inner vision ; or the idea may merely
" arise," as many ordinary ideas do, without
apparent cause. But in many instances the
object presents itself to a good visualizer as
externalized in space — i. e., as a definite
hallucination. 1 Of this kind are those remark-
able cases 2 in which the agent has succeeded
in making the percipient see an apparition of
himself ; the percipient, be it noted, having
no knowledge of what was being attempted,
and therefore in no state of expectancy.

We thus arrive, by gradual approach from
simple cases of thought-transference, at a point
from which apparitions may be explained
on the same principle. A living person can
a£Eect another mind by means other than the
known methods of communication, even to
the extent of producing his own " ghost ";
if, then, the apparition of a dead person is
seen, is it not possible to suppose that the
personality of that individual is still somehow
existent, and trying to make itself manifest ?
On the face of it, it seems reasonable; but
several objections require to be considered.

One difficvilty is that whereas the living

1 Dr. Gibotteau's case. Proceedings S.P.B., vol. viii.,
p. 466.

2 Myers's Hunum Personality, vol. i., pp. 293, 688, 690,
692. In one case the distance between agent and percip-
ient (Mr. S. H. B. and Miss Verity) was three miles.

126 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

experimenter has a material brain, which may
do the trick by starting some sort of " waves,"
the supposed dead experimenter has not.
This difficulty of course depends on the
assumption that mental activity cannot take
place without a material brain, of which
thought is a " function." A discussion of
the materialistic position would be out of
place in this book ; for present purposes it
suffices to point out that the materialist's
assumption — that in all the Universe no
intelligence exists apart from what we call
nervous systems — is a tremendous assumption
to make. It is surely rather rash to make such
arbitrary decisions as to what is or is not
possible in a universe which, as we learn more
about it, is ever becoming more wonderful
and more complex. And if the materialist
disclaims dogmatism and says that he merely
" sees no reason " to suppose discarnate
Intelligence — no evidence for its existence —
the reply is that if he will read the publica-
tions of the S.P.R., he will probably never
again say that there is no evidence for the
existence of such intelligence, though it is
quite open to him to say that it is not suffi-
cient to convince him.^ Further, there is
some ground, in the nature of the evidence,
for the supposition that telepathy is not a

1 None are so blind as those who will not see. I know
a worthy cleric who " can see no evidence for evolution."

HALLUCINATIONS 127

physical process. In many cases, the agent
has been asleep, and the brain-activity there-
fore probably at its lowest ebb.^ Also, the
complexity of the apparition is often such as
to render it difficult to believe that it is an
affair of ether-waves or other physical means
of transmission. And if the process is super-
physical (as Mr. Gerald Balfour, among others,
believes), a physical brain is not a necessity.

So much for the argument of the materialist.
There are, however, other and perhaps more
weighty objections to the belief that an
apparition of a dead person is generated by
that person's surviving mind : —

(1) The apparition may be a merely
svbjective hallucination. This is no doubt
true in many cases, but the supposition is less
acceptable when several people see the ghost,^
or when the percipient had made a "compact "
with the person whose ghost appears, but
whose death had not become known to the
percipient at the time of the vision,^ It is
also unlikely that a vision is entirely subjective
when the percipient, while not recognizing
the apparition — it being that of an unknown
person — is able to describe it so that it is

1 This was so in some of the experimental cases already
alluded to — e.g., that of Mr. Godfrey, Human Personality,
vol. i., p. 688. Cf. also Mr. Newnham's case, i6id,p. 418.

2 Human Personality, vol. ii., p. 389.

2 Case of Countess Kapnist, ibid., ii., p. 49. Other
cases, p. 42.

128 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

recognized by people who knew the deceased,^
or picks the correct photograph out of a
number.2 As to those cases in which the
person dies about the time at which his
apparition is seen (by people unaware of his
death) it is obvious that this may some-
times be a chance coincidence ; the percipient
may happen to have a subjective halluci-
nation just at the right time. But it
was shown by the results of the Census of
Hallucinations that the actual coincidences
are much more numerous than chance would
require. Chance would bring about a coin-
cidence of the kind in one out of 19,000 cases
of apparition ; the actual proportion for this
number was found to be 440.^ This does not
prove anything absolutely, for there is great
difiSculty in estimating the proper allowance
for possible error — lapse of memory and other
sources of inaccuracy. But it is at least a
striking fact, and the committee dealing with
the Census seem to have been liberal in their
discounting for all possible sources of error.*

1 Case of Mrs. Bacchus. Human Personality, ii., p. 34.
In this case, as often, there was a special reason for this
spirit appearing in this particular house. The widow of
the man whose apparition was seen, had died in the house
the night before, and the body was lying in the room
below. I suppose Dr. R. had come " to meet his wife."

2 Sfirit Teachings (Stainton Moses), p. xix.

^ See Proceedings, vol. x., for fuU particulars, and for,
the mathematics of the subject, p. 247.
* The Committee comprised Prof, and Mrs. Sidgwick,

HALLUCINATIONS 129

(2) An apparition may be a telepathically
generated phantasm, the agent being some
living person. If a living agent can project
his own eidolon, perhaps he could produce
an eidolon of somebody else. This, though
a rather far-fetched idea, and at present
unsupported by much evidence, is neverthe-
less a legitimate hypothesis. It seems, how-
ever, an improbable one in " compact "
cases, when the compact to " appear " is
known to very few people, and the probability
therefore being that no person possessing the
apparently rare phantasmogenetic faculty will
happen to be among that number. And
the likelihood that a living person has " tele-
pathed " the apparition seems sometimes to
be negatived by specific features in the
phantasm which were known to one living
person only.^ It would, of course, be more

Miss Johnson, Mr. Myers, Dr. Myers, and Mr. Podmore.
Their conclusion was that " between deaths and ap-
paritions of the dying person a connection exists which
is not due to chance." Proc, vol. x., p. 394.

1 Case of Mr. F. G. Human Personality, ii., p. 27.
The deceased girl had a scratch on her face, accidentally
caused by the mother after death. No one but the mother
knew of this. But the scratch was visible in the appari-
tion, seen by a brother nine years after death. On the
telepathic hypothesis, the mother was the agent; but
we have no reason to suppose that she possessed such
powers. (This case cannot be explained by the theory
of an emergence of a latent telepathic message sent by the
"agent" before death; for the apparition conveyed
information which was not known to the sister while
living.)

130 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

satisfactory if we could get a well-authenti-
cated case in which the apparition revealed a
verifiable fact which was known to no one
left on earth ; but this would only happen by
a very fortunate concatenation of circum-
stances, for most facts of this kind would be
unverifiable — and, anyhow, clairvoyance and
latent telepathy would have to be reckoned
with, so the case would not be crucial. There
is, however, some evidence for messages of
this kind, though not hallucinatorily given ; ^
and this supports by analogy the primd facie
explanation of many apparitions, as against
an explanation by telepathy from the living.
On the whole, then, it seems reasonable
to suppose that the cause of an apparition
of a dead person may be the surviving mind
of the person who appears ; though, as already
remarked in connection with the auditory
experience of Miss Smith, it is not necessary to
believe that the full personality of the deceased
is concerned. In the experimental cases of
Mr. Kirk and Mr. S. H. B. (who happens to
be the brother of a friend of mine) the agent
did not know whether or not he had succeeded
in " appearing," until he heard the percip-
ient's story ; similarly, a disembodied person
trying to appear, may not know whether he
is succeeding or not. Further, the phantasm
of a living person sometimes appears, without
1 Human Personality, vol. ii., pp. 37, 183.

HALLUCINATIONS 181

that person's conscious will or effort, though
in veridical circumstances which suggest that
his mind must be concerned, evidently in its
subliminal levels. This further supports the
conjecture that an apparition of a dead person,
even though in some way proceeding from
that person's mind, is not necessarily the
manifestation of full consciousness. This
view is strengthened by the aimless and semi-
conscious behaviour of many veridical appari-
tions, and would seem to be necessitated by
some cases of haunting. Apparitions, then,
may be — in Myers's striking phrase — the
objectified dreams of the dead. But, if they
can dream, they are not very dead.^

So far of spontaneous apparitions among
ordinary folks. What now of the forms seen
by the medium Watson ? May not these have
an external cause, like the spontaneous ones ?

1 Mr. Lang has remarked that the theory, in origin,
is due to St. Augustine, and that Thomas Aquinas held
a similar opinion. (Goch Lane and Common Sense,
pp. 132-3, 156; also Booh of Dreams and Ghosts, p. 16,
giving quotation from De Cura pro Mortuis Habenda,
Library of the Fathers, XVII. Short Treatises, pp. 530-
531.) But it is probably almost as old as the earliest
theories on the subject. As to the Church Fathers, they
were apt to believe, like the good Sir Thomas Browne
of a later date, that " apparitions and ghosts of departed
persons are not the wandering souls of men, but the
unquiet walks of devils." (Beligio Medici, xxxvii.)
The departed, being in Hell, Purgatory, or Paradise,
could not " appear." This is still the Roman Catholic
attitude, as exemplified by Father Hugh Benson and
Mr. Raupert.

K 3

182 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

The dreams-of-the-dead notion, though a
plausible explanation of some cases of a
spontaneous kind, seems quite out of it here.
If the dead are the agents at all, they are very
wide awake ; for the evidence of identity is
presented with undeniable intelligence. It
is possible, however, to avoid invoking their
agency, if we assume that the medium obtains,
telepathically or clairvoyantly, some know-
ledge of the dead people concerned, and that
this knowledge objectifies itself ; much as if,
in the case of a dowser, a hallucination of
running water, veridical as to quantity and
direction, were experienced when over hidden
water-pipes. Some of the incidents are of this
character — e. g., Mrs. H. K.'s veridical appari-
tion in Sitting 6, Chap. VI., p. 56. Another
curious affair — a sensing without hallucination
— occurred at a sitting on Dec. 11, 1907,
when Watson complained of the " perturbed
conditions." He said he thought that a some-
what excited discussion had recently taken
place in the room, and that the psychical
vibrations thus set up were not yet dispersed.
Consequently he had difficulty in getting
impressions, as " the spirits could not break
through this disturbed area without much
trouble." As a matter of fact, there had been
a rather lively though good-humoured argu-
ment in that room, a few days before, between
Mr. Knight and a friend. There was no

HALLUCINATIONS 183

reason to suppose that Watson had any
normal knowledge of this. On changing to
another room, the conditions became better,
and the sitting proceeded satisfactorily.

But no such sensing of the immediate
surroundings could account for such incidents
as those of the Christian names of George
Stonor and Mary Hanby ; and another curious
episode, which I will describe in a few words,
tells rather strongly in favour of the deliberate,
fully-conscious agency of one of the soi-disant
communicators.

At a sitting on Feb. 7, 1908, Watson said
that Mrs. Knight (P. K.'s mother) was in the
room, wearing a handsome brown silk dress,
high in the neck, trimmed with white, and
having a " lined " or " watered " effect in
its texture. There was some history attached
to this dress, about which P. K. was to inquire
of his sister, who would probably know.

F. K. knew nothing about this, and there-
fore wrote to his sister, as instructed. The
reply was to the effect that Mrs. Knight had
ordered a dress such as the one described,
but that it was delivered only the day before
she died, and, consequently, was never
worn. Mr. Knight's sister was able, further,
to send a few inches of the brown watered
material, with some of the white lace trim-
ming. Both of these I have seen. Watson's
description, as far as it goes, certainly applies.

184 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

If fraud is dismissed, this incident suggests
neither telepathy nor a rummaging among
passive memories in a cosmic reservoir; but,
rather, the activity of a surviving mind, able
to marshal its earth memories and to select
from them for presentation to the medium,
such details as will constitute the strongest
possible evidence of identity.

Leaving now the question of " evidence,"
a word or two is perhaps required as to the
nature of visual hallucinations. When these
forms are seen, either by mediums like Watson
or by ordinary people who have an occasional
spontaneous experience of the kind, is there
really anything there, in a physical sense ?
The answer is that we don't know. In
Watson's case, I am inclined to think that he
does not really see anything with his eyes,
though I am not sure. The people are
externalized clearly enough to him, and he
will describe a " well-dressed man standing
on the hearth-rug," or an old lady sitting in
the rocking-chair, in the most prosaic manner
imaginable. A rather curious thing is that
he says he can form an idea as to how long
they have been dead, by observing the degree
of their apparent materiality. A recently-
deceased person looks solid and life-like; an
individual long dead (e. g., Mr. Knight's
great-grandmother, Nora Upton) is tenuous
and shadowy. Perhaps the spirit, as it

HALLUCINATIONS 135

progresses, travels farther and farther away
from material conditions, and becomes less
able to produce effects in our world, either on
the brain of the medium or on external
matter.

Watson himself is sure that he sees the
figures, and says he cannot see them with his
eyes shut. But this may be due to self-
suggestion. It seems more likely that the
perception is inner. In the first place, his
sight is extremely bad. He has undergone
several operations on both eyes, and he has to
wear enormously convex glasses. Even with
these, he is unable to read. For this purpose
he has to reinforce his spectacles with a large
lens. Yet in spite of this ocular deficiency he
describes these " spirit forms " with extreme
minuteness — not only their features and dress,
but, often, small articles of jewellery. It
seems doubtful if he could do this with living
people, in a normal way. Again, when
describing the figure of my mother, although
his eyes seemed to be fixed on a point above
my right shoulder, he gave the impression
of being occupied in listening rather than in
seeing — as one often stares fixedly, without
seeing anything, when thinking abstractedly.
Moreover, when he said of another figure
(to the other sitter) " she has gone behind
your chair," he indicated the alleged move-
ment by a turn of the head, but did not

136 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

seem to follow a moving object with his eyes.
Perhaps, then, in his case the forms are
interiorly perceived and are in no sense
physically present. But this is no more than
a provisional supposition. It is too early
to come to any conclusion in the matter. I
confess (though the confession is terribly
heretical, scientifically speaking) that I see
no reason to deny that there may be something
really " there." By means of our muscles,
we move things about. Perhaps we can
produce visible effects at a distance of a few
inches (in a dry enough climate) by rubbing
feet on floor, and presenting a fi.nger at the
gas issuing from a burner, thereby lighting
it. But, generally speaking, we produce
physical phenomena only by pushing or
pulling with our muscles. When we come to
think of it, however, there seems to be no
reason why this limitation should be absolute.
It is a matter of habit. We have got accus-
tomed to it, and are apt to accept it as a
necessary result of things being as they are.
But there is nothing essentially outrageous
or absurd in the supposition that a human
being may move matter without the use of
his muscles, as Eusapia Palladino is alleged
to do. " How could it be done ? " it may be
asked. We do not know; but then we do not
know how we move matter with oue muscles.
I make an effort of will, and my arm moves;

HALLUCINATIONS 137

but I do not in the least understand how my
efiEort of will — a mental fact — ^has produced
an effect in the material world. It is alto-
gether marvellous. Between the physics of
the brain and the corresponding facts of
consciousness, there is — as Tyndall said — a
gulf which has not been bridged. Between
the movement of my arm and the volitional
effort which " caused " it, I can detect no
necessary relation. It is familiar to me, and
causes no surprise, because it is habitual; but,
rationally speaking, it is no less astonishing
than it would be if, by a similar effort of wiU,
I upset a chair in the next room, while sitting
peacefully in my own. The phenomenon
ia each case is, at bottom, incomprehensible.
If, then, there seems no a priori reason why
we should not be able to act at a distance
as weU as at close quarters, there seems to
be no particular difficulty in supposing an
actual effect — ethereal or "metethereal," if not
material — produced by a distant or deceased
person on the portion of space in which an
apparition is seen. And of course the same
applies to auditory hallucinations such as
that experienced by Miss Smith, the collective
character of which strongly suggests some
actual external cause of a physical or quasi-
physical nature. If " spirit-photography "
turns out to be a genuine fact — if, say, the
case described in Chapter I. is correctly

188 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

described and includes no deliberate fraud —
a more or less physical theory of many
veridical haUucinatioris will take the place
of the externalized-telepathic-impact theory
which is fashionable at present. It wiU have
to be recognized that there is something
really " there." Moreover, there are cases
on record in which the apparition has caused
some effect in the material world — an effect
remaining after the phantasm's disappearance.
As, for instance, when it moves something;
or, as in the case of the Rev. Dr. Gwynne,
puts out the light ! {Phantasms of the Living,
ii., p. 202. Both Dr. and Mrs. Gwynne saw
the ghost, which was not recognized. It
seemed to be a case of " haunting.") But
these are not among the weU-estabUshed
phenomena, and, while leaving the door open
— so to speak — for future evidence, it must
be said that, at present, there is not much
good evidence in support of any considerable
material effects which are to be attributed,
even hypothetically, to a disembodied mind.
If messages ever do come from the " other
side " — and I beKeve they do — there must
of course be a connection somewhere; but
a very small change in the brain of a sensitive
would account for a good deal in the way of
communications or apparitions. And, observ-
ing the axiom of parsimony, we must not make
bigger suppositions than the facts necessitate.

CHAPTER XIV

AUTOMATIC WRITING

Let us turn now to the consideration of
the other principal feature displayed at most
sittings by Watson — viz., automatic writing.

It is probable that human beings have many
powers or faculties which we have not yet
discovered. We are continually finding out
new potencies, even in the chemically simple
and unorganized matter of the external world
(e. g., radio-activity), and, this being so, it
seems more than likely that such a complex
structure as the brain of man wiU be found to
possess many properties which are not yet
apparent. This is a reasonable supposition,
even looking at the matter from the standpoint
of the materialist.

The fact of automatism, or the working of
muscles without intervention of ordinary con-
sciousness, is common enough. We do not
consciously direct the action of our hearts
and lungs; they do it " of themselves," or
automatically. Similarly with digestion,
which, though we think nothing of it, involves
amazingly complex chemical processes, and
which, when we come to think of it, seems to

139

140 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

require intelligence. Yet it is not the intelli-
gence of the normal consciousness, for we are
not aware of the reactions which are taking
place within us. We call it, therefore, sub-
liminal consciousness, or subconsciousness.

A kind of mind, then, is manifested, or is
inferrible, where it is not at first apparent; a
mind which, though closely connected with our
weU-being, is not a part of our normal con-
sciousness. It is this part of our mentality
that controls the involuntary muscles (heart,
etc.) and the general organic processes of diges-
tion and the like. It can also take charge of
some of the muscles which are " voluntary "
— i.e.jWhich are usually moved by the conscious
wiU; for it is observable that many actions
which at first are the result of conscious
thought, gradually come to be performed
automatically; as walking, writing, sewing,
knitting, etc. Long practice has educated
the subconsciousness until it can now take
charge of the muscles concerned, leaving the
supraliminal consciousness free for more
original and higher work. Consequently, we
may continue to walk with a friend, even while
engaged in discussing Bimetallism or the
Hegelian philosophy.

But it is experimentally found that there
are forms of automatism in which muscles are
moved not only in a mechanical and servant-
like sort of way, but also in an unexpected and

AUTOMATIC WRITING 141

productive sort of way. In walking or knitting
the legs or fingers move " of themselves," but
they repeat the same movements continually,
and no initiative is required. But it is found
by many people that if they take a pencil in
the hand, allowing the latter to rest passively
on a sheet of paper, written characters or
drawn figures will be produced without con-
scious will or thought. Sir Francis Galton
describes his own case as follows : —

" I have myself had frequent experience of the
automatic construction of fantastic figures, through a
practice I have somewhat encouraged for the purpose,
of allowing my hand to scribble at its own wUl, while I
am giving my best attention to what is being said by
others, as at smaU committees. It is always a surprise
to me to see the result whenever I turn my thoughts on
what I have been subconsciously doing. I can rarely
recollect even a few of the steps by which the drawings
were made; they grew piecemeal, with some almost
forgotten notice, from time to time, of the sketch as a
whole. I can trace no likeness between what I draw and
the images that present themselves to me in dreams, and
I find that a very trifling accident, such as a chance dot
on the paper, may have great influence on the general
character of any one of these automatic sketches." ^

Some of the automatic drawings that I

have seen are beautifully executed, with a

kind of ornate bizarrerie which stamps them

as very different from consciously-produced

designs. From such drawings as these it is

but a small step to writing, for they both are

symbols of thought, and both must be the

1 Inquiries into Human Faculty, section on Visionaries,
p. 124 of Dent's " Everyman " edition.

142 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

product of intelligence, conscious or sub-
conscious. Not many people, however, can
write automatically with a free pencil, and
resort is consequently had to a little piece of
apparatus.

In these days of psychical novels, probably
most people know what is meant by " plan-
chette," which began more or less as a draw-
ing-room toy, and is now — also more or less —
an implement for serious psychological investi-
gation. If two people place their finger-tips
lightly on this little heart-shaped board, it
will usually be found that movements result,
though the experimenters are not consciously
pulling or pushing. The movements may
only be sufficient to cause the pencil to make
scrawls or zigzags on the paper; but, with good
operators, words will be written, words which
(often) were not in the conscious mind of the
operators. Thus there is a definite product —
a result, apparently, of subliminal thinking.
This product is often astonishing in its remote-
ness from the ordinary thoughts of the plan-
chettists, and is frequently — sad to relate —
comic or even downright siUy. It usually
purports to emanate from a spirit — probably
because the planchette-tradition is that spirits
are the agents, and because the planchettists
have that idea in their minds, even though
they may not always believe it.

This planchette-product is often interesting

AUTOMATIC WRITING 143

by its mere bizarrerie, which suggests a con-
nection with dreams. Indeed it seems likely
that if a sleeper could write while he is dream-
ing, he would produce something very like the
average planchette-script. In each case, it is
the subliminal consciousness that is at work —
or rather, perhaps, at play.

The proportional number of people who can
produce planchette-writing is not definitely
settled. Out of a dozen taken at random,
there will probably be at least two or three.
I myself have no automatic faculty, and can-
not make the planchette budge at all; but
I can play second fiddle — or, to vary the
metaphor, can act as carbon to the active
zinc — by associating myself with a friend who
has the power. E. g., with my friend Hartley
we find that the planchette will usually write
something, generally something very trivial.
We made a long series of trials some years ago,
from the contemporaneous records of which I
quote.

Our first " spirit," who wrote her name at
the second sitting, after abundant scrawls,
was " Minnie Murdoch." Both of us were
struck by the curious way in which the second
word was written. After M was written, the
planchette began again, and wrote MU; then
a fresh start, and MUR appeared; and so on
to the end. Each time, the letters already
traced were written with greater ease, as if

144 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

the consciousness at work were learning. We
did not expect this, and W. H., who is un-
doubtedly the moving power, was unboundedly
astonished.^

Neither Hartley nor I could claim the honour
of Minnie Murdoch's acquaintance, so we
asked for further information. In answer to
various questions, at this and subsequent
sittings, we were told that our fair visitor (we
politely assume the fairness) was a spirit,
that she died at Balloch in 1896 or 1897 (aged
fifty, as she remarked with commendable but
surprising frankness), that she was attached
in a guardian-angel sort of way to Hartley's
wife — who is Scottish, hence perhaps the
sympathy — and that she hoped we should
have "enough money and a merry Christmas."
This worldly-sounding and very unspiritual
wish caused us rather a shock; though, on
reflection, we agreed that it was rather nice
of Minnie, and not inconsistent with the pre-
sumable activities of a good-natured Scottish
spirit. Another good trait was Minnie's
evident fear of being behind time with her
good wishes; for, though she was giving us
Christmas greetings, we were at the time only
in October.

After this, we often had other " spirits,"

1 I rather fancy that the Miimie and the Mu were
only the usual zigzags which planchette often indulges
in; but H. read the letters into them. After Mur,
Murphy or Murdoch was almost inevitable.

AUTOMATIC WRITING _ 145

among them a John Murray, who said that he
died in 1796, but who vigorously denied that
King George the Third was reigning at the
time. A curious feature was that Minnie
Murdoch would not write if my friend Hartley
was smoking ; but she would go ahead at once
when he laid down his pipe or cigar. John
Murray, however, did not seem to have any
objections.^

Now I have not the slightest reason to
suppose that these good folks were in the least
degree genuine. They were probably dream-
creations of my co-planchettist's subliminal
consciousness. It is true that he himself,
though not a spiritualist, is nevertheless dis-
posed to be friendly to the hypothesis that
some external agency is concerned; for he
feels sure that he is not moving the planchette,
and that the things written do not emanate
from his consciousness. I quite believe this
is subjectively true. He is not consciously
moving the planchette, and the messages do
not come from his conscious mind. Never-
theless, I believe he is the agent, though sub-
consciously, in both the physical and the
psychical aspect of the phenomenon.

But let us go on to the next step.

It is sometimes found that the planchette

1 " John " said he had lived in our own town (Brad-
ford) but declined to commit himself to any address
or to any identifying details. Perhaps he realized that
I was going to " look him up."

146 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

"Writes correct matter which the automatists
say they did not know. For example, a friend
of mine (Dr, Thornton, a fellow-member of the
S.P.R.) planchetting with his daughter, made
the acquaintance of a Thomas Bamer, who said
he had been a pikeman and had been killed
at Flodden. Dr. Thornton immediately pro-
ceeded to make a mean use of the advantage
which his superior education gave him over
the poor unlettered soldier, by asking ques-
tions about historical matters, and thus
trying to trip up the unfortunate revenant : —

Dr. T. What was the date of the battle ?

T.B. 1640.

[Alas, poor spirit ! But the answer was
curious, for both the automatists knew well
enough that the correct date was 1513. An-
other proof that the conscious mind is not the
agent.]

Dr. T. Who commanded the English army ?

T.B. Sir Edward Stanley.

This astonished Dr. Thornton stiU more;
for he was expecting " Earl of Surrey " to be
written, the Earl being, as he knew, the
English general concerned. On looking up,
however, he found that Sir Edward Stanley
did command a part — the left wing — of the
English forces, and that this part is specially
mentioned as having been composed largely of
pikemen. Of these facts, neither Dr. Thornton
nor his daughter had any conscious knowledge.

AUTOMATIC WRITING 147

I suggested that one or both had known the
facts, but had forgotten them. Dr. Thornton
repeated that he felt sure he had never known
about Stanley commanding the left wing at
Flodden. But I pointed out that the Stanley
in question is mentioned in Scott's Marmion —
and at greater length in the notes to some
editions of Scott's Poems — and that therefore
the two planchettists in this case could hardly
be credited (or debited ?) with ignorance on
the point at issue, even assuming that they
were innocent of systematic historical know-
ledge. StiU, waiving this, it is at least interest-
ing to find that the planchette wrote something
which neither of the automatists consciously
knew. In other words, it appears that plan-
chette-writing will sometimes resurrect for-
gotten things — will reproduce submerged
recollections or memories. It has conse-
quently been suggested by some perhaps over-
hasty speculative philosophers, that we never
really forget anything; that all we have known
and forgotten, stiU exists in the subconscious
strata of our minds. This is not provable,
and is probably too extreme a view. But it is
certain that much *' forgotten " matter does
thus exist in our subliminal memories, and
that it can sometimes be reached and brought
forth by these automatic methods. In a
recent instructive case, a " Blanche Poyn-
ings " communicator gave much historical

L2

148 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

matter which apparently could not have been
gathered without a good deal of research.
But it was all found in a forgotten novel, of
which " Blanche Poynings " was a subsidiary
character (Journal S.P.R., xii., p. 287).

There is also often shown a sportive kind of
will. A young lady friend of mine and her
sister were operating planchette not long
ago, and — after the usual manner of such
damsels — were asking for information from
the spiritual realms, concerning their matri-
monial futures. With reference to the lady
best known to me, there was written the
name "Albert." This was not recognized as
applying to any one eligible or likely : —

Question. What is his trade ?

Answer. No trade.

Q. What then ?

A. Profession.

Q. What profession ?

A. Accountant.

Still no recognition. Further details were
asked for, and given, without shedding any
light on the matter. Finally, a surname was
written, and the whole thing was clear. All
the details were true, of this particular man,
but had not suggested him, partly because the
automatists knew him but slightly, and partly
because, being already married, he was not in
their thoughts among the " eligibles." Yet
the " subliminal " of one or botji of them was

AUTOMATIC WRITING 149

evidently thinking of this man, from the first.
And, also evidently, this was one of the sub-
liminal' s little jokes; for, in addition to the
trifling obstacle just mentioned (of a wife
already existent) there also appears to be,
between my young friend and the gentleman
in question, a cordial dislike which — says
the former — would prevent the planchette-
prophecy from " coming true," even if he were
the proverbial last man in the world.

Moral : do not ask planchette to prophesy !

In another curious case, the automatist —
a correspondent of mine — produced script
purporting to come from seven spirits belong-
ing to the planet Saturn. These announced
that they were here in a missionary capacity,
and had a great revelation to make. (This
is quite the usual thing.) For my own amuse-
ment and instruction, I inquired concerning
the nature of Saturn's ring, and the number
of its moons. The spirits showed a sad lack
of knowledge — and imagination — for they
seemed quite helpless about the ring, and they
gave their planet only four moons, instead
of ten or so as our astronomers teach. The
Revelation was the thing; they were not
interested in merely astronomical affairs. In
order to introduce this Revelation to the
benighted inhabitants of Earth, the medium
and myself had been chosen, and were appar-
ently expected to consider ourselves greatly

150 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

honoured. I was first asked, and then com-
manded, to arrange a sitting with the medium
at the S.P.R. rooms in London. It was
casually mentioned that I was to bear all
expenses, I suggested that they should give
me some ground to go upon, by producing
something evidential, in support of their
claims. This they disdained to attempt.
Instead, they renewed their peremptory com-
mands, breathing out threatenings and
slaughter. If I did not obey before a given
date, I was to be haled by spiritual messengers
before some dread Tribunal. By this time I
had got rather bored, the spirits seeming to be
a poor lot in the " supernormal " line. Ac-
cordingly I intimated, shortly but vigorously,
that I had no intention of carrying out their
orders. Whereupon they gave me up in
disgust. 1

But let us go a step further. It is proved
that planchette (or a pencil in the hand of an
automatist who does not need to use the
board) will perpetrate mystifications, and that
it will sometimes write true matter which is
not consciously known to the producers of
the script; but, as in Dr. Thornton's case,
the facts may be presumed to have been
known and forgotten, as they undoubtedly

1 This automatist told me very frankly, at the be-
ginning, that " they " were often wrong in their state-
ments, and that he had no particular belief as to what
they were. He was not a spiritualist.

AUTOMATIC WRITING 151

were in the " Blanche Poynings " case just
mentioned. The question naturally arises :
Does automatic script ever contain true
statements, of specific character, which are
inexplicable by chance coincidence or by the
normally-acquired knowledge, conscious or
subconscious, of the automatist ? In other
words, is anything evidential ever written
which the automatist provably never knew ?

It is difficult to prove that any given fact
is, and always has been, unknown. I can
easily prove that I have some acquaintance
with this or that language, but I cannot prove
that I am ignorant of others. Negatives are
hard to establish. Still, there is good reason
to believe that automatic script does some-
times contain evidence of this kind. In such
cases it is necessary to resort to the hypothesis
of thought-transference. For example, in a case
known to me, a man sitting at a distance from
two planchette- writers requested the board
to write the name of the person of whom he
was thinking. The name — an unknown one
to the automatists — was written. Evidently,
the subconsciousnesses of the planchette-
operators had received or obtained the name
by thought-reading or telepathy. Such cases
are not common, but they are not as rare as
might be supposed.

In this case, however, the " sender " of the
telepathic message was at least present in the

152 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

same room. Does it ever happen that the
automatists write something which they have
provably never known, and which no one
present can verify; yet which, on investiga-
tion by asking some other person, turns out
correct ? Yes : even this sometimes happens.
The " agent " sometimes seems to be a distant
person : and, more curious still, that person
is not necessarily trying to " telepath " the
facts. It often seems more like mind-reading
by the planchettist, than thought-transfer-
ence from the " agent." For instance, in the
following case.

In October 1885, there was a burglary at
Netherby Hall, Cumberland, some valuable
jewels being stolen. The thieves were caught
a few days later, but the jewels were not
recovered. Lady Mabel Howard, of Grey-
stoke Castle, Westmorland, who wrote auto-
matically, was asked by friends to try to
discover the lost property. She wrote : " In
the river, under the bridge at Tebay." It
seemed unlikely; but there the jewels were
found. If this was not a chance coincidence,
we must assume that the mind of one or other
of the burglars was somehow tapped.^ This
kind of thing makes it very difficult to exclude
a mind-reading hypothesis in cases of alleged
spirit messages even of an evidential character.

1 Full account in Human Personality, ii., p. 435, with
other cases vouched for by Sir Redvers Buller.

AUTOMATIC WRITING 158

So far, we have been concerned mostly with
planchette. But many people can write
automatically with a pencil held in the
ordinary way, as indeed did Lady Mabel
Howard, and as does our medium Watson.
No doubt the absoluteness of the automatism
varies in different people, and in the same
person at different times. There may be
complete unconsciousness of what is being
written, or there may be a dim awareness, or
a consciousness of each word as it comes,
with no knowledge of the total sense. It is
useless to differentiate at present.

Historically, this phenomenon of automatic
writing is no new thing. It is common enough
in the annals of religion. Swedenborg prac-
tised it, and tells us that his spirits " have
sometimes, indeed often, directed my hand
when writing, as if it was quite their own " —
showing, however, regrettable disregard of
truth, " for almost everything they say is
made up by them, and they lie." {Spiritual
Diary. White's Emanuel Swedenborg : His
Life and Writings, pp. 168, 171.) Further
back — taking a case at random — we find
another typical instance in Richard RoUe
of Hampole, who died in 1349. This mystical
worthy was a kind of lay preacher of the
Bunyan kind, who wrote prose and verse, in
English and Latin. He had studied at Oxford,
but gave himself up to the contemplative life

154 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

— a dangerous procedure for one of his temper-
ament. " RoUe has ecstasies, he sighs and
groans; people come to visit him in his soli-
tude; he is found writing much, ' scribentem
muitum velociter.' He is requested to stop
writing, and speak to his visitors; he talks to
them, but continues writing, ' and what he
wrote differed entirely from what he said,'
This duplication of the personality lasted two
hours." 1 Probably the Revelation of St.
John the divine was received in somewhat
similar way, and many of the instructions to
patriarchs, such as Moses (Exodus xix., etc.).
Certainly automatic productions are allied to
the product of genius, psychologically speak-
ing. The more easily and — as it were — uncon-
sciously a work is produced, the better it
usually is. It is said that Shakespeare's
MS. had no erasures or corrections. Ibsen
wrote Brand and Peer Oynt in an abnormal
state; " he would write and write verses day
and night — even when half asleep in bed." ^
Goethe said, " AUes ist als wie geschenkt,"
and many geniuses have had the same feeling,
from Caedmon and Langland to Sir Walter
Scott, Charlotte Bronte, Dickens, and George
Sand.

1 Jusserand's Literary History of the English People,
p. 217; Cambridge History of English Literature, ii.,
p. 44.

^ Haldane Macfall, Ibsen, the Man, his Art, and his
Significance, p. 108.

AUTOMATIC WRITING 155

But, though the product of this subconscious
or unconscious activity may be a work of
genius or a revelation (the two are almost the
same), it may, on the other hand, be nonsense,
or even deceitful, as Swedenborg and others
have found. The source, whatever it is, is
" part rubbish-heap and part king's treasury."
It is therefore necessary to distinguish, and
not to accept everything at its face value.
This attempt, with regard to automatic
writing, particularly on its " supernormal "
side, is now being made for the first time with
scientific care. The phenomenon is old, but
its scientific examination is new. Several
people of position, both in the educational
and social worlds, have recently developed
the power, and are investigating the results in
conjvmction with the officials of the Society
for Psychical Research. Through these
automatists, some interesting matter has
been obtained ; matter which, in my opinion,
is not satisfactorily accounted for by any
reasonable telepathic hypothesis, and which
seems to prove (or as nearly prove as the
problem permits), the agency of disembodied
intelligence. How such intelligence can act
on the material world, on the brain or hand
of an automatist, we cannot tell. But, as
already remarked, we cannot tell how our
ovm minds act on matter. I see my own
hand writing, or moving other objects; but

156 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

I do not understand how I do it. I make an
effort of will, and the thing happens — voila
tout. Perhaps Will is the most real thing we
can reach.

The next four chapters will give a few
examples of the kind of evidence mentioned.
Like all other scientific evidence, it is cumu-
lative, and mere selection does not give a
good idea of its strength. It is a faggot,
not a chain; and of course any separate stick
can easily be broken. Accordingly, no single
incident can ever be crucial. Even the correct
reading of a posthumous letter would not be
proof of its writer's continued existence, for
if — as it has been claimed — the mottoes inside
nuts have been clairvoyantly read, a sealed
letter may be similarly deciphered by a
medium's supernormal perceptive powers.
I say may he ; for the motto-reading evidence
was not absolutely convincing. I merely
wish to point out the impossibility of attain-
ing certainty. An alternative hypothesis is
always possible.

I lead up to the famous cross-correspond-
ences by a chapter on the trance-phenomena
of Mrs. Thompson, who, however, has now
ceased to give sittings. I have purposely
avoided quoting from the very latest parts of
our Proceedings, for these parts, though giving
further evidence of the same kind, are perhaps

AUTOMATIC WRITING 157

less striking. My aim is not so much to give
an up-to-date resume as to select the parts
which seem most relevant to the new evidence
given in the earlier part of this book, or to the
hypotheses which that evidence suggests. I
have to thank the Council of the Society for
Psychical Research for their kind permission
to quote from Proceedings and Journal; but
the accounts should be studied in extenso by
any one who wishes to form a clear and well-
grounded opinion. Miss H. A. Dallas's able
little book. Mors Janua Vitae ? gives a good
idea of the evidence which specially suggests
the agency of the late F. W. H. Myers, and
there are good articles by Mrs. Verrall in the
New Quarterly, January 1909, and by Mr.
G. W. Balfour and Principal Graham in the
Hibhert Journal of the same date.

CHAPTER XV

THE TEANCE-PHENOMENA OF MRS. THOMPSON

Mrs. Thompson is a lady who was kind
enough to give sittings to a few friends and to
others introduced by them, with a view to
purely scientific investigation. She was not,
and never had been, a professional medium.
She showed various forms of " psychic
faculty," but the most important form was
speaking, and sometimes writing, in a state
of trance. Among the investigators who have
had sittings with her are Sir William Crookes,
Dr. Van Eeden, Dr. Hodgson, Sir Oliver
Lodge, Mr. Myers, Professor Sidgwick, and
Mrs. Verrall. Dr. Hodgson's haK-dozen sit-
tings were almost complete failures; the best
sittings recorded are those of Mrs. VerraU,
described in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvii.

Mrs. Thompson's chief control purported
to be her daughter Nelly, who died when a
baby. A " Mrs. Cartwright," known to Mrs.
Thompson during life, played a secondary
part. Sometimes another " spirit " might
speak, but, as in the case of Miss McDonald
and her control " Sunbeam," it was unusual.
As a rule, any messages which the sitter might

158

TRANCE-PHENOMENA 159

receive from soi-disant relatives of his own,
were given by " Nelly," who usually claimed
to have received them from the spirits of the
relatives in question. The following quota-
tion from Mrs. Verrall's account of her sit-
tings,^ will give an idea of the kind of evidence
produced.

" In what was practically my first sitting with Mrs.
Thompson — ^for I had only been present once before
with several other, people while she was entranced —
Nelly gave me a series of descriptive touches of a dead
lady with whom I was intimately acquainted, all of
which were true, characteristic, and familiar; but they
were not the leading traits in this lady's personaUty,
the points on which I should have seized had I wished
to recall her to a third person. Nor was my attention
fixed on this particular friend at the beginning, for I
had given the sensitive a hair cross and was expecting
information about its owner. But the statements of
Nelly were definite and accurate, referring to small
details of dress — among other things saying that my
friend wore a black silk apron trimmed with lace,
fastened by an elastic and button round the waist,
that this apron had belonged to some one else before
her (the lady had often told me that it was her mother's),
and that she folded it in a particular way; NeUy also
described correctly the lady's objections to the low-
necked frocks which my child wore as a baby, and
imitated a habit she had of pulling up the child's under-
vest to cover her bare neck; she further successfully
reproduced a facial trait of this lady, a characteristic
movement of the lips, and finally described her as
puzzled at the situation, doubtful as to the truth of
Nelly's statements that I was really present — all this
very characteristic — but engaged in obtaining explana-
tions of the circumstances from Dr. Arthur Myers.
There was no sort of reason why Mrs. Thompson
should associate the lady in question, had she known

1 Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvii., p. 174.

160 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

her name, with Dr. Myers; as a fact they had not met
more than three or four times, but on those occasions
my friend had been in the habit of discussing the prob-
lems investigated by the S.P.R. with Dr. Myers, because,
as she used to say, his explanations made the things
easier for her to understand."

It is possible, of course, that all this was
due to " telepathy," That blessed word is
very useful, very hard-worked, and very
non-explanatory. Let us pass, however, to
another case.

The sitters in this instance ^ were Mr. and
Mrs. A,, Mrs. VerraU acting as note-taker.
" Nelly " made a rapid and confused state-
ment, which seemed almost unintelligible.
Afterwards, when alone, Mrs. Thompson had
a vision of " Mrs. Cartwright," who said that
Nelly had made a great confusion between Mr.
A.'s relatives, and that she (Mrs. Cartwright)
would have to set matters straight. At a
later sitting, Mrs. A. present, Mrs. Cartwright
replaced Nelly, and the notes of the former
sitting were corrected by her. Out of appar-
ently hopeless tangle, order arose; and a
series of definite statements was obtained,
some of them known by Mrs. A, to be true,
others entirely unknown to her. These latter
were six in number : one seems incorrect;
the other five were as follows : —

(1) It was stated that Mr. A. had a relative,
alive, a " rare old lady for knitting " ; that she

1 Proceedings, vol. xvii., p. 179.

TRANCE-PHENOMENA 161

used to carry about with her a round knitting-
basket which contained her " top-knot " — " a
cap you might call it, but it was a top-knot."

[Mrs. A. knew an old relative of Mr. A.'s
who was a great knitter, but knew nothing of
a round knitting-basket or any cap-basket,
or any " top-knot." Mr. A. could throw no
Light on the matter. But his sisters, on being
informed of the statement, said that the
relative in question, before adopting the old
lady's cap, had worn a little knot of black lace
which her young relatives called her top-knot,
and which she used to take about with her in a
round knitting-basket, j

(2) It was stated that Mr. A.'s mother, now
dead, " was famiUar with the wife of a retired
naval officer; you coxild get information about
this." [It was known to Mrs. A. as well as to
Mr. A. that his mother had few intimate
friends, and of these there was only one whose
husband's occupation was unknown to Mrs. A.,
the lady being a widow when Mrs. A. first
heard of her. Mr. A. supplied the information
that the husband was " Captain C," but
thought he had been in the army. Mr. A.'s
sisters, however, said that he had been in the
navy. This Mrs. C. was the only person out-
side their family group who had visited their
mother in her last illness.]

(3) It was stated that Mr. A.'s mother used
to wear a white Shetland shawl which was

M

162 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

still in existence in her husband's house; " not
in your house (to Mrs. A.), in the other house."
[Neither Mr. nor Mrs. A. had any recollection
of this, but, once more, the daughters con-
firmed the statement.]

(4) It was stated that the old lady fastened
the shawl with a brooch, which was described
in detail. [Mr. and Mrs. A. remembered no
such brooch. The daughters, on being ques-
tioned, said there was such a brooch, but that
the description was wrong in one detail. On
finding up the brooch, it turned out that it
was the daughters' recollection that was at
fault; the communicator's description was
correct.]

(5) It was stated that Mr. A.'s mother had
possessed a manuscript " receipt " book, stUl
in existence in her husband's house, and that
in this book were receipts other than cookery
receipts, and in particular a receipt for
pomade, or, as the lady herself used to call it,
" pomatum." [Mrs. A. knew of the book, but
knew nothing of its contents. Mr. A. did not
know of its existence. The daughters knew of
the book, and said that " pomatum " was the
word used by their mother, but they knew
nothing of any such receipt. On examining the
book, however, a recent entry was found — not
indexed, the lady having died soon after
making the entry — ^which gave a receipt for
making Dr. Somebody's pomade.]

TRANCE-PHENOMENA 163

These five statements are significant because
of the following features : —

In all the five cases, the information (a)
was unknown to one sitter, Mrs. A.; (6) was
not consciously possessed by the other sitter,
Mr. A., though, as to one or two of the details,
he may be assumed to have had subliminal
knowledge, having known and forgotten, e. g.
about the Shetland shawl. And, finally (c) all
the information given was known to the
deceased lady from whom the statements
purported to come. As to the possibility or
likelihood of telepathy from the daughters'
minds, it is important to note that these
ladies were unknown to Mrs. Thompson, and
that they were unaware that references had
been made to their family or friends; conse-
quently their thoughts were not directed to
reminiscences of deceased relatives. Further,
the whole of the facts were not known even to
these living though absent persons. The only
person who knew all was the dead lady herself.
" If such experiences as these were numerous,
it would be difficult to avoid inferring that the
source of information is to be found rather in
the one consciousness that knew all the events
than in the scattered consciousnesses which
can, after all, not supply the whole." ^

1 Proceedings, vol. xvii., p. 183. The account here
given is taken almost verbatim from Mrs. Verrall's
admirable Report, which may be recommended to the
reader's careful study.

M 2

164 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Unfortunately, such experiences are not
numerous, while other experiences are com-
mon, which warn us against a too great readi-
ness to accept spiritistic interpretations. It
is fairly common, in sittings of this kind, for
true information to be given regarding a living
person, information which must have been
supernormally acquired, but which there is no
reason to suppose is in the possession of any
deceased person (e. g., the incident relating to
Mrs. H. K.'s eyes, already described, p. 56).
Such cases, therefore, point to mind-reading
or clairvoyance; and it may be that occasion-
ally facts thus acquired are presented in such
a way as to suggest a spiritistic explana-
tion which may, nevertheless, be the wrong
one.

We now pass to the new kind of evidence to
which the name of " cross-correspondences "
has been given.

Before his death, Mr. Myers had given some
thought to the idea of trying to get a spirit to
send the same message through two different
mediums. This, it seemed to him, would
be an improvement on the kind of evidence
previously obtained. Consequently, it was
natural to expect, after the death of Dr. Sidg-
wick and Mr. Myers, that some development
of this kind might occur, if these investigators
found themselves able to communicate. Dr.

TRANCE-PHENOMENA 165

Sidgwick died on August 30, 1900 ; Mr.
Myers on January 17, 1901.

During December 1900, Mr. Piddington
(Hon. Sec. S.P.R.) had several sittings with
Mrs. Thompson, but there was no mention
of Professor Sidgwick, even when his sister
(Mrs. Benson) was introduced, with a view to
attracting communications. On January 11,
1901, however, the first reference to him was
made, quite unexpectedly. " Nelly " said
something about " Henry Sidgwick," and,
shortly afterwards, a Sidgwick control made
its appearance. Not much was said, but the
voice and manner, says Mr. Piddington, were
extraordinarily lifelike. Another control then
appeared, and, speaking on behalf of the soi-
disant Sidgwick, said : — ^

" Eleanor's writing his Life. He doesn't want her
to make him ' a glorious personage.' You're to give
her that message. He said : ' Eleanor has gone abroad
to prepare my Life.' "

We turn now to the trance speech of Miss
Rawson (pseudonym), a non-professional
sensitive who was, at the time, in the South
of France.

In this lady's trance, there appeared for
the first time a Sidgwick control, on January
11, 1901 — *'. e., on the same day as the first
Sidgwick control through Mrs. Thompson in

1 Proceedings, vol. xviii., p. 295.

166 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

London. The message through Miss Rawson

was this : — ^

" Tell my friend Myers to tell my wife not to put in
the whole of the last chapters of the book she is finishing.
She will know the passages she feels doubtful about.
Tell him it is really I who am here."

The comniunications, though not identical,
are similar, and correct facts are stated or
indicated; though these do not count for much,
as Mrs. Thompson may easily have known or
surmised that Mrs. Sidgwick was writing a
Life of her husband. More significant than
the matter, is the appearance synchronously of
a Sidgwick control for the first time through
these two sensitives at a great distance from
each other.

Further : on January 21, the same control,
speaking through Mrs. Thompson with charac-
teristic manner as before, said, "He's (^. e.,
F. W. H. Myers) not with me. He's not
within range at all."

During this sitting, Mrs. Thompson's hand

wrote : —

" I don't think Myers is here, or we should see him
before the 8th, as E. G. told me [Mr. D., another control]
was waiting for him."

On January 23, a Sidgwick control, speaking

through Miss Eawson, said : —

" I have not seen my dear friend Myers yet, but I
am more thankful than I can say that he has come
here. The circle above has been waiting for him, and
will with great joy welcome him."

1 Proceedings, vol. xviii., p. 295.

TRANCE-PHENOMENA 167

Again there is similarity between the
messages. Mr. Myers had in life been accus-
tomed to calling the personalities of whom
" Mr. D." was one, the " governing group,"
and this is perhaps what is meant by " the
circle above." If so, the messages agree in
saying that Mr. D. or his group had been
waiting for Myers.

Further confirmatorjT^ details might be
added, but space does not permit full quota-
tion. It is important to note, however, that
the script of Mrs. Thompson, purporting to
come from Professor Sidgwick, is a remarkably
close imitation of his handwriting, and is
quite different from Mrs. Thompson's normal
hand. Mr. Piddington showed the script to
several people, asking them whose handwrit-
ing it recalled to them, but giving no hint.
In each case it was unhesitatingly ascribed to
Professor Sidgwick.

Mrs. Thompson says that she had never seen
any of Professor Sidgwick' s handwriting; but
this is of course impossible to prove. None
of the investigators have any doubt as to Mrs.
Thompson's integrity, but it is just possible
that she may have seen some of the writing in
question, and may have forgotten it. The
likeness of the trance-script to the original
may thus be due to subliminal knowledge.
But this does not explain the cross-corre-
spondences.

CHAPTER XVI

CROSS-COBBESPONDENCES BETWEEN MBS.
EOBBES, MBS. PIPEB, MBS. THOMPSON,
AND MBS. VEBBALL

Afteb the death of Mr. Myers in January
190.1, Mrs. Verrall developed the faculty of
automatic writing. Her previous efforts had
been failures; but she now made more per-
sistent attempts, which resulted in success.
At first the script — mostly in Latin and
Greek — was incoherent and non-evidential,
but there followed a gradual improvement
and clearing in the matter written, along
with more tendency to the use of English.
Some of the writings were signed, purporting
to come from deceased persons; but the
majority were unsigned.

On May 8, 1901, between 10 and 10.30 p.m.,
Mrs. Verrall's pencil wrote a rather unin-
telligible message in Latin, concluding in
English with the words : " Falsehood is
never far away. . . . No 'power — doing some-
thing else to-night. Note hour." ^ This pur-
ported to come from Mr. Myers. On May
11, 1901, was written: "Before the Vlth wait.

1 Proceedings S.P.B., vol. xx., p. 207.
168

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 169

Rosa Thompson will speak — Lodge will tell
you. Wait. Do not hurry date this." From
these messages it appeared (1) that a soi-
disant Myers, writing through Mrs. Verr all's
hand about 10.25 p.m. on May 8, claimed
to be doing something else, presumably
communicating elsewhere, at or about the
same time; and, (2) that Sir Oliver Lodge
would inform Mrs. Verrall of something that
would be said by Mrs. Thompson before the
17th.

The facts turned out to be as follows.
Unknown to Mrs. Verrall, . Mrs. Thompson
was dining on May 8, 1901, with Sir Oliver
and Lady Lodge in Birmingham. About
9 p.m. she went suddenly and unexpectedly
into trance, and was controlled not only by
the usual Nelly, but also by a soi-disant
Myers. The latter control said something
about " falsehood creeping in," and that
some one was " calling him" elsewhere; and
at the end of the sitting, which concluded
at 10.30 p.m., Nelly remarked that some one
was calling Mr. Myers. Sir Oliver Lodge's
notes of the sitting were given to Mr. Pidding-
ton at the Council meeting on May 17, 1901.

The next striking case was a cross-cor-
respondence in which the other sensitive
was Mrs. Piper.i On January 28, 1902, Dr.

1 Proceedings, xx., p. 213.

170 PSYCHICAL KESEAKCH

Hodgson asked the trance-personality who
was communicating through Mrs. Piper, if
he could show himself in a vision to Miss
Helen Verrall, holding a spear in his hand.
The control agreed to try, but asked "Why a
sphere ? " The misunderstanding was put
right. Dr. Hodgson repeating "spear"; and
it was promised that the experiment should
be tried for a week. At the next sitting,
on Febuary 4, the control claimed to have
succeeded in showing himself to Miss Verrall,
with a " sphear " — so spelt in the trance-
writing. This confusion of " spear " and
" sphere " is important, in view of what
follows. Remembering that Mrs. and Miss
Verrall knew nothing of Dr. Hodgson's
experiment, it is interesting to find that
on January 31, 1902, Mrs. Verrall' s pencil
wrote the following : —

" Panopticon artJMipa^ aTiToWti, (rvvSey/JLa [ivarucbv ri ovk
tSiSm; volatile femim — ^pro telo impiaget."

The translation of this mixture is not very
clear; " panopticon," though not without
meaning, is not an extant word. But the
idea seems to be something like this : —
" Universal seeing of a sphere fosters the
mystic joint-reception. Why did you not give
it ? The frying iron will hit."

Now the phrase " volatile ferrum " is used
by Virgil for a spear; and, consequently,
however much of vagueness there may be

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 171

about the meaning of the whole, there is at
least an allusion to a spear, and a definite
use of a-^atpa (a sphere). It would there-
fore seem that the Piper control, whoever or
whatever he may be, had failed to make
himself visible to Miss Verrall as he was
requested to do and as he claimed to have
done, but that he had instead succeeded —
without knowing of the manner of his success
— in transmitting the idea of " spear " and
" sphere " through Mrs. Verrall' s hand. Her
script of this day — January 31, 1902 — con-
tained other matter, of non-evidential kind,
and was signed with two crosses, one of them
the Greek cross which is stated elsewhere
in the script to be the sign of " Rector," who
is the chief control of Mrs. Piper. In view
of the possibility of this incident being due
to chance, it is important to note that no
allusion to a spear had occurred in Mrs.
Verrall' s previous writings, and that only
once had there been any mention of a sphere,
in an early and unintelligible piece of script
dated March 14, 1901. No case of juxta-
position of the two ideas in the same script
had ever occurred before.

The cross-correspondences, however, were
not limited to Mrs. Piper as the second
automatist. Several good cases occurred,
in which a part was played by the script of

172 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Mrs. Forbes (pseudonym) — a lady living in
the North of England.

On August 28, 1901,i Mrs. Verrall's script
had some Latin of which the following is a
translation : —

" Sign with the seal. The fir-tree tliat has already been
planted in the garden gives its oivn portent."

This script was signed with a scrawl and
three drawings representing a sword, a sus-
pended bugle, and a pair of scissors.

On this same day, Mrs. Forbes' s script,
purporting to come from her son (who had
been killed in the South African War), said
that he was looking for a sensitive who wrote
automatically, in order that he might obtain
corroboration for her own writing. This
script was apparently produced earlier in
the day than Mrs. Verrall's script just men-
tioned.

The interest of the incident lies in the fact
that a suspended bugle surmounted by a
crown was the badge of Talbot Forbes' s
regiment. Further, Mrs. Forbes has in her
garden four or five small fir-trees grown
from seed sent her from abroad by her son :
these she calls Talbot's trees. These facts
were totally unknown to Mrs. Verrall. As
bearing on the questron of chance-coinci-
dence, it is to be remarked that on no other

^ Proceedings, vol. xx., p. 222.

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES 173

occasion has a bugle appeared in Mrs. Verr all's
script, nor has there been any other allusion
to a planted fir-tree. ^

Lest a wrong impression should be given,
however, it is necessary to point out that
these are perhaps the best cases, and that
in one case there was an absolute failure —
though introduced by a success — in an inci-
dent which claimed to be evidential.

For some time previous to the publication
of Mr. Myers's posthumous work Human
Personality, Mrs. Verrall's script had appar-
ently been trying to give a prediction ^ to the
effect that the book would contain an allusion
to Plato's Symposium, and to Diotima in
particular. Also, in Mrs. Forbes's script
there had been attempts at the words Sym-
posium and Diotima,^ with unmistakable
Greek letters, and the same prediction about
the book, Mrs. Forbes did not know the
Greek alphabet, had never consciously written
Greek letters, had read no translation of the
Platonic dialogues, and did not know the
name Diotima.

The prediction turned out correct, and thus
encouraged the experimenters in another
direction. In 1904, Mrs. Verrall's script per-
sistently indicated that a passage from the
Symposium was enclosed in a sealed envelope

1 Proceedings, vol. xx., p. 224.

2 Op. cit., pp. 311, 315-16. 3 u_^ pp. 246, 315.

174 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

which had been left with Sir Oliver Lodge
by Mr. Myers.^ At last it was considered
that statements sufficiently definite had been
made — considering the success of the previous
effort of the scribe — and it was decided to open
the envelope. This was done in December
1904 : the contents were found to be quite
different from what had been given in the
script.

This, then, was a complete failure ; and
those who are hostile to psychical research
have made the most of it. But it hardly
needs to be pointed out that this failure does
not in the least invalidate the many successes
in other directions which are now on record.
If communication with discarnate minds is
possible at all, it is reasonable enough to
suppose that such communication is attended
with great difficulty, and that we must expect
frequent failures and much confusion. We
must not overlook or suppress these failures
— they must be taken into account in any
summing up of the evidence — but, on the
other hand, we must not allow them to blind
us to the evidential successes of various
kinds, or to prejudice us against the possi-
bility of success in a kind of experiment
which happens once to have turned out a
failure.

1 Proceedings, p. 299.

CHAPTER XVII

CONCOEDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS OF MRS.
HOLLAND AND MRS. VERRALL

In 1903 there occurred a further develop-
ment of cross-correspondences. Mrs. Holland
(pseudonym), a lady living in India, had been
in the habit of writing automatically since
1893, and had occasionally obtained matter
which was suggestive of supernormal agency.
But she had not made any regular or system-
atic attempts, and, the society in which she
moved being mostly uninterested in these
things, she had no encouragement to cultivate
the gift. In June 1903, however, she read
Myers's Human Personality, which greatly
impressed her. Soon afterwards, a Myers
control purported to communicate in her
script, along with Edmund Gurney and Henry
Sidgwick — the two friends to whom Human
Personality is inscribed. Mrs. Holland com-
municated with Miss Johnson (at that time
Secretary of theS.P.R.), sending her portions
of her script, and saying how much she
herself was puzzled by it.

One of the first indications of supernormality
175

176 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

was the appearance of a description which
appUed rather closely to Dr. Verrall, with
instructions that the script was to be sent to
" Mrs. Verrall, 5, Selwyn Gardens, Cambridge."
This address is correct. Mrs. HoUand was
acquainted with Mrs. VerraU's name, through
its appearance in Human Personality ; but
that work does not contain her address,
which Mrs. Holland did not consciously
know. However, it is possible that she may
have seen it somewhere, and it is also possible,
though extremely improbable, that she had
seen a portrait of Dr. Verrall. Automatisms
frequently resurrect forgotten knowledge, and
this may be a case in point. Another de-
scription — of Mrs. VerraU's dining-room —
cannot reasonably be explained in this way,
but may perhaps be accounted for by chance-
coincidence.

A further step was taken, however, in
December 1903, and January 1904, when
what seems to have been an attempt at
similar matter appears in the scripts of
Mrs. HoUand and Mrs. VerraU — ^who, it
must be remembered, were not personaUy
acquainted at this time. In Mrs. VerraU's
script of January 17, 1904, there was a refer-
ence to a text, in connection, however, with
Dr. Sidgwick. On this same day (January 17,
1904) Mrs. Holland, writing in India, obtained

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 177

some script with similar allusions, and a
reference to " 1 Cor. xvi. 13" (" Watch ye,
stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be
strong"). The scribe also remarks that he
is unable to make the automatist's hand form
Greek characters, " and so I cannot give the
text as I wish." ^ The text in question is
inscribed — with the omission of the last two
words — in Greek, over the gateway of Selwyn
College, Cambridge, which would be passed
in going from Mr. Myers's house to Mrs.
Verrall's. The road in which Mrs. Verrall
lives is named after this College, and there is
a mistake in the inscription (the omission of
a mute letter) on which Mr. Myers had more
than once remarked to Mrs. Verrall. The
text, therefore, was likely to be doubly
associated with her in Mr. Myers's mind;
and it is noteworthy that it turns up in Mrs.
Holland's script about a year later, again in
connection with Mrs. Verrall, and before
Mrs. Holland learnt that there was any
significance in its former appearance. This
incident, though not very strongly evidential,
does at least suggest the personality of
Mr. Myers as the possible source of the
communication.

It may reasonably be urged, however, that
the automatist had supraliminal or subliminal
1 Proceedings, Part Iv., p. 234.

178 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

knowledge that the text alluded to was over
Selwyn College gateway. It is possible that
this may be so, but it seems unlikely. Mrs.
HoUand had never been in Cambridge, and
had few friends or acquaintances connected
with it. And, even if she knew of the text,
it seems improbable that she could know
of the special interest which it possessed for
Mr. Myers, and of its special suitability as
an indication of his identity to Mrs. Verrall.
The cross-correspondence part of the incident
is not strongly marked, the allusion in Mrs
Verrall's script (to a text) being vague, and
doubtfully applicable. But a further develop-
ment occurred, in this direction.

In Mrs. Verrall's script of February 9, 1906,^
there was a prediction that she would find
" two clues " in the forthcoming Life of
Dr. Sidgwick. This book was published in
March 1906, and Mrs. Verrall found in it
two " clues " which seemed to explain certain
hitherto incomprehensible allusions in her
earlier script — " Hope's vision," " Wanderer
on the Way," etc. One of these clues is a
letter (quoted in the Memoir) from Dr.
Sidgwick to his friend Roden Noel, in which
he refers to Browning's La Saisiaz, in which
he found " a kind of repose." The line of
thought — the letter continues — is " that on
1 Proceedings, Part Iv., p. 316.

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 179

moral grounds hope rather [than] certainty-
is fit for us [regarding immortality] in this
earthly existence." Mrs. Verrall now read
the poem, which to the best of her belief she
had not read before, and found in it certain
resemblances to the phrases in her script.
It is of course possible that -she possessed
subUminal knowledge of the poem, but it is
significant that her script suggesting it,
should purport to come from Dr. Sidgwick,
who — as shown in the letter just quoted — was
specially interested in La Saisiaz, and was
in special agreement with its line of thought.
The letter was written in 1878, and Mrs.
Verrall was not acquainted with Roden Noel.
The agency of Dr. Sidgwick as communicator
is therefore perhaps suggested.

Next, in Mrs. Verrall's script of March 7,
1906, there occurred the following lines : —

" Tintagel and the sea that moaned in pain
And Arthur's mount uplifted from the plain
And crowding towers of quaint fantastic shape
Ah ! never more to see
The ripples dance
Nor hear again the roar
On smitten shore
Where the huge wave rolls on
Amid the salt and savour of the sea."

A copy of this was sent to Mrs. Holland, but
the lines suggested nothing to her. It was
only when writing the Report that it occurred
to Miss Johnson that the lines were very

N 2

180 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

suggestive of Roden Noel's poem Tintadgel.
The resemblance will be seen by comparing
the script with the following quoted lines : —

" Tintadgel, from thy precipice of rock
Thou f rownest back the vast Atlantic shock !
Yet purple twilight in cathedral caves
Moulded to the similitude of waves
Tempestuous by awful hands of storm

* * * 4f- *

And therefore Arthur's ancient ramparts range
From human fellowship to nature, change
To semblance of the fretted weathered stone,
Upreared by mystic elements alone."

Mrs. Verrall does not believe that she had seen
or heard of this poem until Miss Johnson
drew her attention to it in January 1908.

To turn now to the other automatist.

On March 11, 1906, Mrs. Holland wrote
automatically : — ^

" This is for A. W. Ask him what the date May
26th 1894 meant to him— to me— and to F. W. H.

I do not think they will find it hard to recall but if
so — ^let them ask Nora."

In sending Miss Johnson this script Mrs.

Holland remarked that the scribe was not

Mr. Myers or Mr. Gurney, and that she hoped

the date would have evidential relation to

Dr. Hodgson. This showed that the date

had no conscious associations for her. As

a matter of fact, it was the date of Roden

Noel's death. Mr. Noel was not weU known

to Dr. Verrall (" A. W.") or to Mr. Myers

1 Proceedings, Part Iv., p. 319.

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 181

(" F. W. H."), but he was an intimate friend
of Dr. Sidgwick's. The instructions to " ask
Nora " (Mrs. Sidgwick) are therefore appro-
priate, if we suppose Mr. Noel or Dr. Sidgwick
to be the communicator. Further, in this
script of March 11, 1906, there are expressions
which recall the " clue " which Mrs. Verrall
found in the letter from Dr. Sidgwick to Mr.
Noel — viz., allusions to " seeking," the " solu-
tion of the Great Problem " (which he is
stUl unable to give) and general indications
of the idea that he is stiU hopeful rather than
certain, " though with a confirmed optimism
more perfect and beautiful than any we
imagined before."

Mrs. Holland's next script ^ begins as
follows : —

"(March 14th, 1906.) Eighteen fifteen four five
fourteen — ^Fourteen fifteen five twelve — Not to be
taken as they stand. See Rev. 13-18 — but only the
central 8 words not the whole passage — It does not
do to be clearer under existing circumstances.

H. S. [in monogram] R. N. [in monogram] June
1st 1881 (?) "

Revelation xiii. 18, is as follows : " Here is
wisdom. Let him that hath understanding
count the number of the beast; for it is the
number of a man; and his number is Six
hundred three score and ten." The central
eight word clause of this text is : " for it is
1 Op. cit., p. 320.

182 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

the number of a man," Acting on the hint
given in the script, Miss Johnson substituted
for the numbers " eighteen, fifteen," etc.,
the corresponding letters of the alphabet,
and found that they formed the name " Roden
Noel." Mrs. Holland had not looked up the
text, and had no idea what the numbers
meant. This incident is not due to any
personal interest, for Mrs. Holland had practi-
cally no knowledge of Roden Noel, and had
read only a few of his Sonnets in a book of
selections.^

There are a few other possibly relevant
details, such as a description, in Mrs. Verr all's
script, which correctly applies to Roden
Noel, and in Mrs. Holland's script a poetical
reference to " rooks," etc.,^ which may suggest
the Cambridge " Backs " and the under-
graduate days of Dr. Sidgwick and Mr. Noel;
but the main features are given above. As
the reader will perceive, the scripts contain
nothing that was provably unknown to the
automatists, though there is much suggestion
of matter which at least was not consciously
known to them. But, in any case, the cross-
correspondences seem significant, and are sug-
gestive of an intelligence apart from, and
working through, the automatists.

Another curious incident, analogous to one
1 Proceedings, Part Iv., p. 325. ^ /^^ p 321

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 183

just quoted in connection with Mr. Noel,
occurred in Mrs. Holland's script of Febru-
ary 9, 1906, The following is the part in
question : — ^

. . . Sjdibse Ipehtp o — only one letter
further on —

18

8

9

15

3

4

8

7

1

19

18

15

4

14

They are not haphazard figures read them as
letters—"

In spite of the hints, Mrs. Holland did not
solve the conundrum. Miss Johnson, how-
ever, saw that the letters are formed from the
name " Richard Hodgson " by substituting
for each letter of the name the letter which
follows it in the alphabet; while the numbers
represent the same name by substituting for
each letter the number of its alphabetical
place.

Dr. Hodgson died in December 1905. Mrs.
Holland was no doubt aware of the prominent
part which he took in the work of psychical
research, but she had no special knowledge
of him, or interest in him. The transposition
of letters, and the substitution of figures in
the second instance, may have been merely
a subliminal trick; but it is noteworthy that

1 Op. cit., p.;;304.

184 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Dr. Hodgson, in life, was fond of puzzles and
conundrums of all kinds, and that, conse-
quently, this kind of " message " is extremely
appropriate and characteristic. Further,
there are a few other details in Mrs. Holland's
script, which, though not affording evidence
of identity, do to some extent support the
idea of communication from a genuine Hodg-
son. There are, for instance, fairly accurate
descriptions of his appearance; apparent refer-
ences to Professor Hugo Miinsterberg (" Hugo
— H. M.— Minsterberg "), whose book. The
Eternal Life, had much incensed Dr. Hodgson,
who seems to have intended to write a reply
to Professor Miinsterberg' s attacks on pyschi-
cal research; and allusions to " Spring on a
Boston hill-side " and the redness of the
maples (" One clump of maples stands alone
— they are outlined against the sunset and
the sunset is no redder than they "^). Mrs.
Holland believes that she had never seen a
portrait of Dr. Hodgson, or heard of him
before her reading of Human Personality ;
and that she had never heard of Professor
Miinsterberg. Also, the association of red
tints with spring is unlikely for a European,
the fact that one of the American maples
bears a bright red flower in spring being
probably not very widely known on this side.
1 Of. cit., p. 306.

CHAPTER XVIII

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS OE MRS.
HOLLAND, MRS. PIPER, MRS. VERRALL,
AND MISS VERRALL

Mrs. Piper came to England at the invita-
tion of the Council of the S.P.R., and gave
seventy-four sittings between November 10,
1906, and June 2, 1907. The aim of the
investigators was to encourage the develop-
ment of the soi-disant Hodgson, Myers, and
Sidgwick controls, which had already ap-
peared in Mrs. Piper's trance ; and to make
experiments in " cross-correspondence." ^
About 120 attempts of this kind were made,
the word or idea being suggested by the
investigators in eighteen cases, and in the
other cases by the trance-personalities. Out
of the eighteen, only one was a certain suc-
cess ; of the 102 it is impossible to speak
statistically, as the degree of success shades
off so gradually. But, as Mr. Piddington
says in his Report, some of the cross-corre-
spondences are so specific that chance coinci-
dence can hardly be held to be a satisfactory
explanation by any one who will give careful
attention to all the facts.

1 Proceedings, vol. xxii., p. 19.
185

186 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

Details concerning manner of communica-
tion are not important for our present pur-
pose, which is the summarizing or quoting
of evidence; but it may be remarked that,
with one exception, Mrs. Piper's sittings were
" writing " sittings — i. e., she became en-
tranced, and her hand wrote the communica-
tions. With the other automatists concerned,
the writing was not accompanied by trance.

The first cross-correspondence described is
not strongly evidential, but, being to some
extent typical, and being comparatively
simple, it serves to lead up to the more com-
plex cases.

In a sitting with Mrs. Piper on November 16,
1906, Sir Oliver and Lady Lodge present, a
Hodgson control appeared, and, in reply to
Sir Oliver's remark about cross-correspond-
ences, said that he woiild give " St. Paul " to
Mrs. Holland.^

As it turned out, " St. Paul " did not appear
in Mrs. Holland's script; but in the script of
Miss Verrall there are two passages which are
possibly relevant. On January 12, 1907, she
wrote : —

" the name is not right robbing Peter to pay — ^Paul
sanctus nomine quod efficit nil continens petatur
subveniet. [Holy in name — i. e., saint — ^what she (or
he) is doing is of no use (i. e., by itself). Let the point
be looked for; it will help."

1 Op. cit., p. 31.

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 187

On February 26, 1907, Miss Verrall wrote as
follows : — 1

" You have not understood about Paul ask Lodge."
Some Latin followed, about calling in the
aid of learned men and referring it "to one
standard." The only reference to Sir Oliver
Lodge in Miss Verrall' s script during the
period under review, is the one just quoted.
The primd facie explanation would be that the
control had failed to get his message through
in one quarter, but had succeeded when he
tried another automatist in the group. It
is, however, noteworthy that though " St.
Paul " did not appear in Mrs. Holland's
script, there did appear (December 31, 1906) a
reference to St. Peter,^ a quotation from St.
James, and the words, " This is a faithful
saying," which appear at least three times
in St. Paul's Epistles. This may have been
accidental, but, in view of the scripts of Mrs.
Piper and Miss Verrall, it is at least suggestive
of a partial success. The next incident to be
quoted is much more impressive, and also
much more complex.

At his sitting of January 16, 1907, with Mrs.
Piper,^ Mr. Piddington suggested to the Myers
control that, when he gave a message through
two or more automatists, he should mark the
message in each case with a distinctive sign,
1 Op. cit., p. 32. 2 /c^.^ pp. 33^ 34.

* Id., p. 36 et aeq.

188 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

in order to indicate that they were connected,
and were to be compared. " You might put,
say, a triangle within a circle, or some simple
sign like that," to show that another message
similarly marked must be looked for elsewhere.
The trance-personality seemed to understand,
and promised to carry out the suggestion.

In Mrs. Verrall's script of January 28, 1907,
there appeared a clearly-drawn and unmis-
takable triangle within a circle, along with a
message embodying a successful cross-corre-
spondence. No such diagram appeared in
the scripts of the other automatists concerned,
though in Mrs. Holland's script of May 8,
1907,^ there were geometrical figures — a circle,
two or three arcs, and a rough approximation
to a triangle. The success, therefore, was
between Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Verrall only.
Now for the cross-correspondence itself.

In Mr. Piddington's sitting of February 11,
with Mrs. Piper, the following occurred : — ^

(Myers communicating.) Did she [i. e., Mrs. Verrall]
receive the word
Evangelical.

J. G. P. " Evangelical ? "

Yes.

J. G. P. I don't know, but I will inquire. I referred
also to Browning again. [I had chosen on December 18,
1906, some words from Browning's Flight of the Duchess

1 Op. cit., p. 37.

2 Id., p. 59. At a later sitting, " Evangelical " was
altered to " Evelyn Hope " — the title of a poem by
Browning.

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 189

for transmission to Mrs. Verrall by Myers,i and he had
claimed, though wrongly, to have succeeded in getting
them written. It is to this that I think " again " refers.
J. G. P.]

J. G. P. Do you remember what your exact reference
to Browning was ?

I referred to Hope and Browning.
Yes (assent to reading as above.)
I also said Star.

Later, Myers, repeated, "Look out for
Hope, Star and Browning."

We turn now to Mrs. Verrall' s script. ^

Jan. 23, 1907.
" Justice holds the scales [underlined]
That gives the words but an anagram would be better
Tell Mm. that — rats star tars and so on. Try this
It has been tried before RTATS rearrange these five
letters or again tears
stare
seam
same
and so on
Skeat takes Kate's Keats stake steak.
But the letters you. should give to-night are not so
many — only three
a s t."

Mrs. Verrall' s next script, as below, was

done on January 28, 1907.

" Aster [star]

Tcpas [wonder or sign]

The world's wonder

And all a wonder and a wild desire —

The very wings of her

1 Myersp is the soi-disant Myers in Mrs. Piper's trance.

Myersy „ „ „ Mrs. VerraU's script.

Myerss „ „ „ Mrs. Holland's „

Similarly with the Sidgwiok and Hodgson com-
municators. ^ Proceedings, xxii., p. 61.

190 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

A WINGED DESIRE

wroTTTepos epeos [winged love] I

Then there is Blake

and mocked my loss of liberty.

But it is all the same thing — the winged desire

cpojs irofleivos [passion] the hope that leaves the earth
for the sky — ^Abt Vogler for earth too hard that
found itself or lost itself — ^in the sky.

That is what I want

On the earth the broken sounds
M - threads

In the sky the perfect arc

The C major of this life

But your recollection is at fault."

Then followed two drawings^a triangle
within a segment of a circle, and a triangle
within a circle,

These scripts suggest Browning very
strongly, the later one being mostly quota-
tions from Abt Vogler and The Ring and the
Book. Star is indicated by " rats star tars "
in the first script, and by the " aster " in the
second. (Aster= " tears, stare " in first script.)
Hope is suggested by the " hope that leaves
the earth for the sky," in which " hope " is
misquoted for " passion " {see Abt Vogler), as
Mrs. Verrall noticed at the time, being familiar
enough with the poem. It may be here men-
tioned that, in Mrs.Verrall's script, an appar-
ently deliberate mis-quotation has occurred
more than once, with the aim — so it seems — of
emphasizing a special word, as " hope " in the
present case.^

In connection with the anagram on star,
1 Op. cit., p. 63.

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 191

it occurred to Mr. Piddington that he had seen
something of the kind when going through
Dr. Hodgson's papers in Boston, early in 1906.
He therefore asked Dr. Hodgson's executors
to search for a piece of paper with " rats arts
star " upon it. Such a paper was found; and,
in addition to these words, it had upon it —
with other odds and ends — the weirds stare,
tears, and aster, which appear in Mrs. Verrall's
scripts of January 23 and 28, 1907. This
seems to suggest the agency of Dr. Hodgson in
regard to these scripts. It was at least clear
that he had occupied himself with anagrams
on " star " and " tears."

But there was further confirmation as to
the intended cross-correspondence, from an-
other quarter. On February 3, Miss Verrall
(who had been told nothing of the inci-
dents just described) produced a piece of
script containing the word star, also a draw-
ing of a star, and the words " therapeutikos
ex exoticon " [a healer from aliens]. On
February 15, Mrs. Verrall told her daughter,
by way of encouragement, of the cross-corre-
spondence between her own script and Mrs.
Piper's, substituting, however, other words
for the actual ones — " Planet Mars " for Star,
" Virtue " for Hope, and " Keats " for Brown-
ing. On February 17 Miss Verrall produced
script containing a drawing of a five-pointed
star, and the following words : —

192 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" that was the sign she will understand

when she sees it

diapason Sui ttoo-wv pvOfio^ [rhythm through all]

no arts avail

the heavenly harmony ms e<^i; oTrAarmv [as Plato says]

the mystic three (?)

and a star above it all

rats everywhere in Hamelin town

now do you understand Henry (?) "

Each of these two scripts contains a drawing
of a star, and the word " star " ; a combination
not occurring in Miss Verrall's other scripts
of this period. The second script has " arts "
and " rats," as well as " star," thus recalling
Mrs. Verrall's anagram-script of January 23,
and the anagrams on Dr. Hodgson's slip of
paper; and the " rats everywhere in HameUn
town " evidently refers to Browning's Pied
Piper of Hamelin. " Therapeutikos ex exoti-
con " also perhaps suggests the Piper, who
cured Hamelin of its plague of rats, and
" there was no guessing his kith and kin."

A noticeable feature of the incident is that
Dr. Hodgson had apparently failed to hit on
one obvious rearrangement of the letters in
Star — viz., Tsar — and that this form of the
anagram is similarly missiag in the scripts.
Further, the feminine plural vatrtov (in Miss
Verrall's script of February 17) is very ap-
propriate if the " rhythm through all " is
an allusion to the concordances obtained
through Mrs. Piper, Mrs. Verrall, and Miss
Verrall. There are a few other possibly con-

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 193

firming details, but the summary already given
will indicate that some explanation beyond
chance — and possibly beyond telepathy from
the living — is required.

One more case may be quoted, but in briefly
summarized form.

At his Piper sitting of February 12, 1907,
Mr. Piddington was informed by Hodgsonp
that he (Hodgsonp) had given "Arrow" to
Mrs. VerraU.^ At a later sitting on February
19, HodgsoUp repeated that he had been try-
ing this, and said " She did get a r I think
and stopped there."

In Mrs. VerraU's script of February 11, 1907,
there was a drawing of three arrows, with the
words tria convergentia in unum [three things
converging to one (point)]. The arrows were
drawn as if thus converging. The word
" arrow " does not appear. But in Mrs.
Verr all's script of February 18 there was a
drawing of two bows, a drawing of an arch,
and the following words : —

" Blanche de Lys or some such name — but it is all
only symlobic [sic]

It seems to be carvings in stone

Church architecture or some such thing

Who wants those drawings ? this is quite fresh. I
keep trying to say a long word.

ARCHITECTONIC ARCHITRAVE

a pointed arch

I can't get rid of the idea ARCH it obsesses me

1 Ov- at., p. 77.

194 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

There has been great confusion here and I do not
think anything has been accurately said

Accurate dicta adcuranda sunt [things said accurately
are to be attended to.]

But the white arch should give a clue."

In this script, some word beginning with
AR is obviously aimed at. Hodgsonp was
right when he said (referring to Mrs. Verrall)
" she did get a r I think and stopped there."

On March 18, 1907, Mrs. Verrall's script,
though still failing to produce the word
" arrow," had nevertheless an approximation
to the idea, in a drawing of arrows, bows, and
a target. Further, in Miss Verrall's script of
February 17, there is a drawing of an arrow,
with the words " many together," which
suggest the three converging arrows in Mrs.
Verrall's script of February 11.

With regard to the possibility of telepathy,
it is noteworthy that Mr. Piddington did not
receive this last-mentioned script (Mrs. Ver-
rall's of February 11) until after his Piper
sitting of February 12. Therefore, telepathy
from Ms mind cannot be suggested as an
explanation of the " arrow " which Hodgson r
said he had given to Mrs. Verrall.

There are two points concerning this script
of February 11, which seem worth mentioning,
though Mr. Piddington does not draw atten-
tion to them, probably fearing over-complex-
ity. They relate to the words " Blanche de
Lys." The script, it must be remembered, is

CONCORDANCES IN THE SCRIPTS 195

trying to give a word beginning with AR, and
the scribe purports to be an intermediary of
Mr. Myers or his group. Now it happens that
" de Lys " was the name under which the
family of Jeanne d'Arc was ennobled; and we
know that Mr. Myers was greatly interested in
the story of the Maid. If his surviving mind
were occupied with the letters AR, the thought
of Jeanne d'Arc would be likely to arise; and
this in its turn would naturally lead to " de
Lys." The second point is that " Blanche de
Lys " recalls a poem of Frangois Villon's, in
which Jeanne is referred to, and which is
quoted by Mr. Myers in Human Personality,
vol. ii., p. 100.

To put the whole thing in a sentence, it
seems probable that the letters AR, if given
to the living Myers in an association-experi-
ment, would have been likely to suggest the
name of Jeanne d'Arc; which, again, would
call up " de Lys " and Villon's poem. The
script, therefore, is rather characteristic, so
far as these points go, of the mind which
claims to be communicating. On the other
hand, it must be remembered that Mrs.
Verrall knew well enough what associations
the letters AR would have for Mr. Myers, and
that consequently a " subliminal " explana-
tion may suffice. It would have been more
satisfactory if the " Blanche de Lys " had
appeared in the script of Mrs. Piper.

2

CHAPTER XIX

THEORY

As already remarked, much theorizing is
to be deprecated, the data being insufficient
to supply a firm enough foundation. Never-
' theless, some idea must be given, however
inadequate, of my own personal explana-
tional attitude, so to speak, towards the
phenomena which have been described.
Otherwise they may remain as an undigested
mass in the reader's mental epigastrium, un-
assimilable, causing discomfort. I will take
the facts in order of difficulty, the easiest
first.

The phenomenon most easily acceptable,
is the one in which Mrs. Napier was given
instructions about the papers forgotten by
the week-end visitor. This is a simple case
of telepathy. I do not say that telepathy
is in the least degree understood, nor even
that it is the best-established among super-
normal facts. For me, it is not. As already
stated, I am much more certain of super-
normal diagnoses with help of a rapport-
object, than I am of any other form of
supernormality; and I have strong ground

196

THEORY 197

for believing that the process is not one of
telepathy — certainly not always a reading
of the sitter's mind. But I recognize that
this clairvoyance by rapport-ohiect is so
bizarre, so utterly incomprehensible, that it is
not a desirable jumping-ofE place. Telepathy
is nearer to orthodox science. We can fit
it in to our mental fabric more easily. The
phenomenon of wireless telegraphy (though
the analogy must not be pressed, for the
mechanism of telepathy may turn out to
be entirely different) at least enables us to
believe that transmission of thought without
use of ordinary sensory channels may be
possible. Therefore we begin Avith telepathy,
and I say that the incident of the forgotten
documents is a simple case of telepathy.

In this case, however, the "agent" was
thinking about the documents — thinking hard
and anxiously, and connecting them in his
mind with Mrs. Napier. It is therefore
fairly easy to conceive that this mental
activity somehow started a disturbance in
the etheric or " metetheric " environment, a
disturbance which translated itself into con-
scious thought in Mrs. Napier's mind, as
electrical pulses translate themselves back
again into sound, in an ordinary telephone.
When we pass to the cases in which Mrs.
Napier feels the imminence of visitors before
they arrive, the matter becomes a little

198 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

different. The people are not consciously
and anxiously wishing to communicate im-
portant information. True, they are no
doubt to some extent thinking of the friends
they are going to see, and this may start the
supposititious " waves " ; but there is at least
a suggestion that in these cases the per-
cipient's mind is the active one — that it
becomes aware, by its own extended range
of perceptive power, of the coming events.
This is supported by the many cases of
precognition in Mrs. Napier's experience, of
which I have quoted only one, the others
being mostly of a private and family char-
acter. These experiences, at least, cannot
be explained by telepathy. In so far as
they are beyond explanation by inference
or by chance, they indicate a wider range of
perception, with regard to time. As to the
premonition of imminent visitors, it is per-
haps preferable to suppose extension of
perceptive power with regard to space; for
clairvoyance is better established than pre-
cognition.

Going a step farther, we seem driven to
the conclusion that either this extension
reaches to a considerable distance, or that
there is an actual spatial change in the
location of the perceptive centre, as when
Mrs. Napier becomes aware of the condition
or the doings of friends at great distances.

THEORY 199

An actual change — a real " travelling " of
the aware-spot of the ego — is suggested by
the incident in which an apparition of Mrs.
Napier was seen by her father, and by her
absolute unconsciousness during the trance.
(I mean the unconsciousness of her body ;
her sister, on one occasion, finding her
unconscious, and being unable to rouse her,
thought her dead, and was greatly alarmed.)
Further, if we are to accept the photograph-
case in Chapter I., this would support the
same idea of some travelling of the spirit,
clothed perhaps in a quasi-material body,
invisible to normal eyes, but capable of
being photographed, or of being seen by
an invalid whose body is wearing thin and
allowing the indwelling spirit to see more
clearly.

But what of the Anthony Grace and Tom
Wyndham incidents ? The latter may per-
haps have been due to a resurgence of for-
gotten knowledge, but the former is not
thus explicable. Some supernormal agency
seems almost established. And I confess
that I am unable to explain it satisfactorily
by any reasonable supposition of activity on
the percipient's part only. Another mind
is indicated. And, if one could get over the
materialistic prejudices of one's early scientific
training, that other mind might seem more
likely to be that of the dead Anthony Grace

200 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

than that of anybody else. We have no
reason to suppose that any living person was
thinking of the dead man with a view to
causing telepathic hallucinations representing
him. The 'primd facie explanation, there-
fore, seems feasible.

Coming now to the sittings of Mr, Knight
with Miss McDonald, we are faced with the
same difficulties. Given such supernormal
range of perceptive power and of openness
to supposed " telepathic impacts," may not
all the facts have been conveyed in some
supernormal way from Mr. Elnight's mind
to that of the medium ? Undoubtedly he
was thinking more or less about his mother,
though expecting no evidence; and perhaps
the facts given were reverberations of his
own thought, dramatized by the medium's
subliminal consciousness, which quite possibly
believes itself to be the person it is simulating,
as when a dreamer believes himself to be
somebody else. It may be so. We will
return to the point later on.

The next phenomena to be considered
are those of the medium Watson. These
have already been discussed, and a short
survey is all that is required here.

Eliminating fraud, as all the sitters now
do, we apply our usual reagents, beginning
with our old friend telepathy, or mind-

THEORY 201

reading as it must in this case be called, for
the sitters were usually not thinking the
things that were given, and telepathy from
subliminal levels is too remote from scientific
demonstration to be very seriously considered.
How far, then, does a mind-reading hypo-
thesis explain the phenomena ?

For many of them it is no doubt adequate,
and probably true, or as true as we may
expect to get at present. It suffices as an
explanation (if we like to call something an
" explanation " which is itself so much in
need of being explained) of incidents like
that of Mrs. Herbert Knight's eyes (p. 56),
the disturbed state of the "atmosphere"
(p. 132), the correct details about Mr. Frank
Knight's business and domestic affairs (pp.
48, 57), and of most of the " sensing "
incidents in which the medium gave correct
matter regarding a sitter's health, occupation,
or interests.

But it begins to be doubtfully applicable
when we reach the George Stonor kind of
incident, of which Mr. Knight had not thought
for a long time; though we certainly have to
bear in mind that even forgotten knowledge
may be resurrected by planchette-writing
and crystal vision. Still, there is a difference
between an incident like the Blanche Poynings
affair (and presumably the Sir Edward Stanley
affair of Pr. Thornton's), there is a difference

202 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

between these and the George Stonor episode.
In the former, there is no necessity to suppose
anything supernormal; there is nothing at all
puzzling to orthodox psychology. In the
latter, there is. And, even admitting the
possible selective rummaging among forgotten
knowledges — a wild assumption, truly, and
one which no sane man would accept save
as a pis aller — even so, it seems difficult to
account for such incidents as that of the
brown silk dress and the Mrs. Norton and
Mary Tranter aflEairs, there being no evidence
that the knowledge in question had ever been
possessed by the sitter. And it must be
remembered that there is, throughout, the
unmistakable and undeniable presence of an
intelligence which, whatever it is, is certainly
marshalling facts with the definite aim of
proving the identity of Mrs. Knight. If
that intelligence is Mrs. Knight's, as it stead-
fastly states itself to be, the whole thing falls
into shape; if it is not — if it is the medium's
" subliminal " — ^we are face to face with a
problem as difl&cult as the spirit hypothesis
itself — or more so. But there is no scientific
ground for believing that the intelligence is
the medium's "subliminal"; such a guess,
it must be admitted, is no more than a rather
desperate "bluff," an avoidance of "spirits"
by hiding behind a long word which sounds
more respectable.

THEORY 20a

Finally, we come to the automatists of
the S.P.R. group. In these phenomena,
fraud is excluded on several grounds, and
some form of supernormal agency must be
admitted, I think, by all unprejudiced
students of the full records. Moreover,
thought-transference from the sitter or sitters
is ruled out. If telepathy from the liv-
ing is to explain all, we shall have to
believe that it can occur in a very definite
and continuous way between people who do
not know each other, as in the earlier script
of Mrs. Holland and in some of the trance-
speech of Mrs. Thompson. We shall also
have to assume a very complicated system
of telepathic cross-firing among the auto-
matists concerned, the cross-firing, moreover,
occurring at subliminal depths, leaving the
normal personalities quite ignorant of all
this remarkable activity. I confess that I
am unable to accept this. To quote Mr.
Lang once more, " there is a point at which
the explanations of common sense arouse
scepticism." And I do not think that a
telepathic theory of this extended kind can
be called an explanation of common sense.
If it were presented on its own merits, and
not as a refuge from " spirits," it would be
described, by common-sense people, as a
piece of uncommon nonsense. And indeed
there is little or no evidence in its support.

204 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

outside of the phenomena which it is invoked
to " explain."

Arrived at this point, then, we seem com-
pelled to accept, at least provisionally, the
agency of a disembodied mind. For, as in
the Watson sittings, there is undeniably
some intelligence at work, and there is no
scientific ground for placing that intelligence
within the mind of any living person. More-
over, the intelligence is certainly of a high
order, as is shown by the planning of many
of these cross-correspondences. " I care not
to whom that intelligence be attributed;
but that intelligence and acute intelligence
lie behind the phenomena I stoutly maintain "
(Mr. Piddington, in Proceedings, xxii., p. 35).
And Sir Oliver Lodge has said, similarly,
that " intelligence and scholarship and ingen-
uity are being very clearly and unmistakably
displayed. Of that we have no doubt what-
ever. The scholarship, moreover, in some
cases singularly corresponds with that of
F. W. H. Myers when living, and surpasses
the unaided information of any of the re-
ceivers." Indeed, some of the communi-
cations are strikingly appropriate to and
characteristic of Mr. Myers, in many subtle
ways ; and this psychological kind of evidence,
made up of many strokes, some bold, some
faint, but all tending to bring out the linea-
ments of this one personality — this psycho-

THEORY 205

logical evidence, I say, even apart from any-
thing else, is as impressive as isolated correct
facts about the communicator's past life,
which is the kind of evidence mostly sought
for hitherto. And, adding to this evidence
the cross-correspondences, which are also
in some instances of characteristic kind — e. g.,
the anagrams characteristic of Dr. Hodgson,
and the Dante, Tennyson, and Browning
incidents suggestive of Mr. Myers, there
results a body of recent evidence stronger
perhaps than anything that has previously
been published by qualified investigators, in
favour of communication from disembodied
human beings.

And, if we admit that these recent S.P.R.
results are sufficiently evidential to justify
a tentative hypothesis of survival and com-
munication, this throws a retrospective in-
fluence on the described phenomena of Mrs.
Napier, of Miss McDonald, and of Mr.
Watson. If communication does take place,
it is possible and even likely that some of
the phenomena of these sensitives which we
have disposed of as due perhaps to telepathy,
may, after all, be genuine communications,
as they purport to be. We have discussed
them with a constant aim to admit as little
of the supernormal as possible, in order to be
on the safe side : but it is quite likely that
we have been over-cautious, and have labelled

206 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

" possibly telepathic " many messages which
have really come from " the other side." It
is very difficult — nay, impossible — to know
where to draw the line. The phenomena
are, no doubt, of different kinds, shading
into each other; and classification at present
can only be of the most tentative nature.

While, however, affirming that the evidence
for survival is strong, we must nevertheless
sedulously avoid dogmatism. The subject
is so beset with difficulties, we know so little
about the latent or hidden powers of our
own minds, that it is dangerous to come to
definite conclusions. On any theory, the
sensitive's mind may be expected to influence
messages; and the "Blanche Poynings "
episode proves the subliminal' s deceptiveness,
or its mistakenness as to its own identity.
We can place no reliance on unsupported
claims to spirit-agency. We must be exigent
for evidence.

And there may be undiscovered sources
of error in the conditions attending experi-
mentation; the evidence, being gathered and
presented by fallible mortals, may not give
us the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth. Consequently, we must not
allow ourselves to be so convinced as to think
further evidence unnecessary, or as to become
liable to accept evidence which is in itself
weak. We must keep up the standard. We

THEORY 207

may incline to the belief that communication
from the " dead " sometimes occurs, but
we must not forget that many communica-
tions which purport to come from such
sources — e. g., in ordinary planchette-script
and much trance and " inspirational " speak-
ing — are in all probability correctly explained
by subUminal activity. One of the tasks of
the psychical researcher or psychologist of
the future is to find the farther frontier
of the subliminal region, in order to be able
to prove that a communication does or does
not come from " beyond " — from another
order of existence. But, even if the task
prove too great, as indeed is most likely —
for, as Carlyle said, the attempt of the mind
to comprehend itself fully is like the attempt
of an athlete to fold his own body in his arms,
and, by lifting, to lift up himself — even so,
there is still evidence enough to justify even
a cautious and sceptical mind in believing
that this other order of existence is a fact;
that human personality survives the wrench
of bodily death, the cosmic scheme widening
as the spirit grows; that materialism, at
least, is a short-sighted philosophy and a
putting of the cart before the horse, spirit
being the reality and matter the illusion;
that the seen things are temporal, and the
unseen things the more enduring. Science
is extending our purview into another world,

208 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

and is confirming the tidings of the poet and
the seer : —

" Who knoweth if we quick be verily dead,
And our death life to them that once have passed
it?"

(EtTEiPiDES, Frag. 638.)

" Peace, peace ! he is not dead, he doth not sleep !
He hath awakened from the dream of Hf e.
'Tis we who, lost in stormy visions, keep
With phantoms an unprofitable strife."

(Shelley, Adanais.)

No, not unprofitable; we are here for
education, and the strife is purposed. We
need not grudge the throe. We must learn,
nor account the pang. Education and evolu-
tion — this is, as Emerson says, the only sane
solution of the enigma. Evolution on the
other side, as well as on this : —

" No sudden heaven, nor sudden hell, for man.
But thro' the Will of One who knows and rules —
And utter knowledge is but utter love —
iEonian Evolution, swift or slow.
Thro' all the Spheres — an ever opening height.
An ever lessening earth."

(Tennyson, The Ring.)

I say there is evidence enough to justify
even a cautious mind in believing this. I
do not say that there is evidence enough to
prove it. " Proof " is a word that is used
with much looseness. In a strict sense, there
is no such thing as proof, in inductive prob-
lems. To demand " mathematical proof "
is to show ignorance of the very nature of

THEORY 209

the inductive sciences. A theory is justified
— therefore proved in the only possible sense
of the word as applied to an inductive theory
— when it colligates all the facts in a more
satisfactory way than any other ; but it does
not necessarily exclude all other hypotheses.
The flat-earth crank is still with us, and
supports his belief with rather plausible
argument. The anti-evolutionist, also, still
abounds, and regards himself as no crank.
Yet we regard the spheroid shape of the earth,
and the doctrine of differentiation of species
by descent-with-variation and natural selec-
tion (plus other causes) as " proved." It
is only in this sense that the survival of man
can be said to be " proved." It is a hypo-
thesis which accounts for the facts better, as
some of us think, than any other.

And it does not rest entirely, or even
perhaps chiefly, on the facts directly suggest-
ing it, such as veridical apparitions or osten-
sible spirit-communications through this or
that medium. It is not this or that veridical
message, but the sum total of established
phenomena pointing to a conception of human
personality which involves personal survival.
In other words, we do not so much make
an induction of survival from the facts
directly suggesting it, as a deduction from the
personality-conception which the whole of our
knowledge necessitates. And it is to be noted

210 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

that, even if a spiritistic explanation (say^
of the phenomena described in this book)
is rejected, the alternative hypothesis of
telepathy or mind-reading or clairvoyance
still points to survival, or at least to a
transcendental theory of existence which
includes survival as a possibility or a
probability. For these phenomena, even
waiving " spirits," are not explicable on
naturalistic lines. The simplest case of
thought-transference seems to lift us out of
the category of physical things. The trans-
mission does not fit in with known physical
laws; does not seem to weaken according to
the law of inverse squares, does not take
place in all directions like a physical radi-
ation. These faculties of telepathy, clair-
voyance, precognition, do not seem to be
products of what Myers called terrene evolu-
tion. They are gleams of potencies greater
than we know. They suggest that incarnate
human beings are spirits manifesting under
difficulties — cribb'd, cabin'd and confined by
the clogging flesh, by this muddy vesture of
decay which doth so grossly close us in.

All this follows, at least as a working
hypothesis, if once the Bubicon is crossed, and
supernormal phenomena admitted. The only
consistent thing for the determined materialist
to do is to deny that the phenomena happen.
This heroic measure works very well — as it did

THEORY 211

in my own case — until one's experience is
enlarged by running up against some of the
facts. Then there is a tussle; for pre-
judices die hard. But if the investigator
will persevere, there is only one end to it. I
have never yet known, or heard of, any
inquirer who has followed up the research
with honest care and vigour, without becom-
ing convinced that things do happen which
" common sense " cannot explain. What
explanation the inquirer then adopts, depends
on his idiosyncrasies. If he has a " will to
believe " in personality as a lasting thing, he
will be likely to follow Mr. Myers. If not,
he may adopt a system of pan-psychism and
re- absorption of the individual into the anima
mundi or into God. " The Drop slips back
into the shining Sea." Or he may decline
to philosophize, remaining, say, at the position
occupied by the late Mr. Podmore.

As for me, I do not greatly care what he
does. Being no propagandist, I make no
attempt to convert any one to my own belief.
I state the facts, or what I believe to be the
facts, as carefully and accurately as I can,
with a little explanation as to why I incline
to this or that hypothesis. The reader may
then draw his own conclusions — if he feels
able to draw any at all, for it is generally
found that personal experience is required
before much change of belief is effected. I
p s

212 PSYCHICAL RESEARCH

shall be content, therefore, if this book merely
helps, on the one hand, to weaken the pre-
sumption that " such things can't happen,"
and, on the other hand, to emphasize the
necessity of carrying the most stringent
scientific method into these new fields, lest
we fall into superstition, which is belief
insufficiently evidenced. There has been too
much " tumbling up and down in their own
conceits " among men, and we now see the
ineffectiveness of those performances. Care-
ful observation and experiment, scrupulously
accurate recording, and cautious inferring —
these are what we now want. It is this
scientific method that has yielded such great
triumphs in the material world since the time
of Bacon; it is possible that the same method,
applied in hitherto unexplored regions, may
yield an equally important harvest, of an-
other kind.

a
i4

Q

bo

f3

03

U

ca

a

5

o

+a

u

cu

tt

O

>

ei

■p

19

^

^

T3

^

S3

»

CS

^

.--v

4^

to

O

'e

a

_r»

o

tH

IS

CO

a

i

e

b

«

Ih

_>

J

s

« IS

s

bo

a

32
MS-

a =

9 O

M.

.S O bDCO

S-. os-s eo

ai t- p

w 00 ^

— O •\ «

S ooc
oi-is

w

-S

o
3

cs

Pi « s

^

:3

a

«--N

■■gS

■Q

g

03

*-•

^

I

-a

1-

^ .3

li"

g tH

f^-«-

1^"

a CO

^

Md

INDEX

"A./' Mr. andMrs.j 160
ApparitionSj experimental, 125
Apparitions, spontaneous, 21,

22, 23, 123, 127, 131
Arnold, Matthew, 87
Automatic writing, 139, 168

Bacon, 2

Balfour, Mr. Gerald W., 127,

157
Bamer, niomas, planchette

" spirit," 146
Binns, spirit (?) photog^raph

case, 11
Bramwell, Dr., 16
Bronte, Charlotte, 15-1
Browning, Robert, 188-192,

205

Caedmon, 154

Cardan, Jerome, 17

Cock Lane and Common Sense,

16, 131
Communicators and other de-
ceased persons : —
Brown, Florence Bessie
(nee Thornes), 49,50, 66,
94
Brown, William, 102
Garrison, K. I., 66, 67
Hanby, Mary, 61, 62
Hanby, Thomas, 52
Hill, Mary, 111
Knight, Freda Katherine,
31, 33, 38, 47, 48, 69,
69

Communicators and other de-
ceased persons {con-
tinued) : —
Knight, Henry, 30, 44, 70,

93 .

Knight, Nora, 44, 46,

95
Martin, Uriah, 96
Mills, Kenneth, 64, 67,

68
Norton, Mrs., 71, 97
Oddy, Bertha, 46
Oddy, Fanny, 63
Oddy, Joseph, 45, 46, 66,

67
Oddy, Peace, 46
Pollitt, Miss, 105
Renton, Abraham, 98
Renton, Frances Jane, 97
Renton, Mary, 98
Renton, Tamar Betty, 97,

98
Renton, Thomas, 61
Renton, Wilfrid, 51, 61,

94 97

Renton, William, 61, 94
Stonor, George, 58, 59
Stonor, Miss, 68, 59
Thornes,Benjamin Carter,

32, 33, 41, 42, 49, 60,

69, 101, 103
Thornes, Florence Bessie,

49, 60, 66, 94
Thornes, Kathleen Upton,

41, 42, 47, 60, 94, 100,

105

215

216

INDEX

Communicators and other de-
ceased persons {con-
tirmed) : —

ThorneSj Kenneth Fred-
ericj 44, 48, 49, 50, 55,
69,94

Themes, Nathan, 48, 70,
96

Thornes, Theresa Carter,
44, 48, 65, 68, 94

Tranter, Mary, 105, 106,
107

Underwood, Charles, 40,
43

Underwood, Kenelm, 43,
68

Upton, Norai 48, 99, 103

Upton, Oliver, 39, 40

Ward, Thomas, 66
Cross-correspondences, 164

Dallas, H. A., 167
Dickens, Charles, 164

Euripides, 208

Eyes, incident regarding Mrs.
H. Knight's, 66, 78

Fechner, 86, 87, 88
Footsteps, hallucinatory, 120
Forbes, Mrs., 172, 173

Galton, Sir Francis, 141

Goethe, 164

Grace, Anthony, 21, 88

Hallucinations, 117
Hallucinations, census of, 123
Hallucinations, physical na-
ture of visual, 134
Harrison, Frederic, 4
Hodgson, Dr. Richard, 170,

183-4, 192-3, 205
Holland, Mrs., 175, 185
Howard, Lady Mabel, 152
H,, J. A., sitting with Wat-
son, 110

H., J. A., planchette experi-
ments, 143

H., J. A., sentiment regarding
survival, 88

Human Personality, Myers's,
14, 20, 125, 127, 128, 129,
130, 162

Ibsen, 164

Jusserand, 154

Knight, Frank, sittings with

Miss McDonald, 28
Knight, Frank, sittings with

Watson, Nos. 1, 2, 38,

40 ; Nos. 3, 4, 43, 46 ; Nos.

6, 6, 51, 63; No. 7, 67;

Nos. 8, 9, 63, 68
Knight, Frank, second series

of sittings with Watson,

Nos. 10, 11, 93, 96; Nos.

12, 13, 99, 104
Knight, Herbert, 32, 33, 47,

48, 51, 56, 67, 62, 78, 93,

96
Knight, Janet, nee, 32, 33
Knight, Mrs. Herbert, 47, 48,

61, 52, 66, 57, 78, 93, 94,

96

Lang, Andrew, 1, 7, 8, 16,

120, 131
Laugland, 164
LobB, John, 4
Lodge, Sir Oliver : —

On intelligence shown in
cross - correspondences,
204
On physical phenomena,

10
Report in Proceedings

S.P.R., Part 58, 49
Sitting with Mrs. Thomp-
son, 160
Telepathic experiments,
124

INDEX

217

Maxwell, Dr., 8

McDonald, Miss, sittings with,

28
Medical trance-medium, a, 80
Medical non-trance medium,

a, 84
Molifere, 118

Miinsterberg, Professor, 4
Murdoch, Minnie, planchette

"spirit," 143, 144
Murray, John, planchette

" spirit," 145
Myers, F. W. H., 164 et seq.,

175, 186, 188, 196, 204, 205
Myers, F. W. H., posthumous

letter incident, 173 .
Myers, see also Human

Personality

Napier, Mrs., telepathic and

other phenomena of, 16
Noel, Roden, 178-182
Norton, Mrs., 71, 97, 202

Occult Beviev), 11

Oddy, Mr. Isaac, sittings with

Watson, Nos. 2, 3, 40, 43 ;

Nos. 6, 6, 61, 63 ; Nos. 7,

8, 57, 63 ; Nos. 11, 12, 13,

96, 99, 104

Palladiuo, Eusapia, 7

Paus^nias, 2

Personal sentiment regarding
survival, 88, 89

Physical phenomena, 6, 7

Piddington, J. G., 16

Planchette, 142

Plutarch, 2

Poynings, Blanche, 147, 148,
206

Premonition, a case of appar-
ent, 26

Prince, Dr. Morton, 6

Rawson, Miss, 166
Jlenton, Abraham

Renton, Frances Jane
Renton, Mary
Renton, Thomas
Renton, Wilfrid
Renton, William

See " Communicators."
Renton, Miss, 60, 61, 62
Robertson, James, 3
Robinson, Mrs., sitting with

medical medium, 80
Rolle, Richard, 163

Sand, George, 154

Saturn, " spirits " from, 149

Scot, Reginald, 4, 5

Scott, Sir Walter, 164

Selwyn College text, 177

Shaw, G. B., 89

Shelley, 208

Sidgwick, Dr., 164, 165, 166,
167, 178

Smith, Miss (auditory halluci-
nation), 120, 137

Socrates, 119

Spirit-photography, 10, 11, 12,
13, 137

Stael, Mme. de, 117

Star, anagram on, in Mrs.
Verrall's script, 189

Stonor, George

Stonor, Miss

See Communicators.

Swedenborg, 163

Symposium, Plato's, references
in script to, 173

Telepathy, 16, 77, 126-7, 161,
196-7, 200, 202-3

Tennyson, 208

Theory, 196

Thompson, Mrs., trance-
phenomena of, 168

Thornton, Dr., planchette
experiments, 146

Tranter, Mary, 106, 106, 107

218

INDEX

Underwood incidents, the, 40,

43,68
Upton, Oliver, 39, 40

Verrall, Mrs., sittings with
Mrs. Thompson, 159

Verrall, Mrs., cross-corre-
spondences in script of, with
Mrs. Forbes, MraThompson,
and Mrs. Piper, 168

Verrall, Mrs., concordances in
script of, with Mrs. Holland,
175

Verrall, Mrs., concordances in
script of, with Mrs. Holland,
Mrs. Piper, and Miss
Verrall, 185

Wilmot, case of Mr., 14
Wyndham, Tom, 23

Hichard Clay ct Sont, limited^ London and Sunpay.

A

LIST OF WORKS

COMPRISING

New Thought Philosophy
Mysticism Spiritualism

Occultism Belles Lettres

Etc.

January, igii

Including Latest Publications and
Announcements.

PUBLISHED BY
WILLIAM RIDER & SON Ltd.
164, ALDERSGATE ST., LONDON E.G.

THE PHILIP WELLBY
PUBLICATIONS

The New Thought Library

Crown 8vo. Crimson cloth extra, gilt tops 3s. 6d. net
and 4s. 6d. net per volume.

The " New Thought Library " has been designed to
include only the best works in this class of literature. No
volume will find a place in this series unless it has already
an established position in the popular favour. The first
nine volumes are now ready.

HAVE YOU A STRONG WILL? How to Develop and
Strengthen Will Power, Memory, or any other Faculty,
or Attribute of the Mind by the Easy Process of Self-
Hypnotism. By Charles Godfrey Leland. Third
and enlarged edition, containing the Celebrated Cor-
respondence between Kant and Hufeland, and an
additional Chapter on Paracelsus and his Teaching.
Price 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — Preface. Introduction. How to Awaken Attention and
Create Interest as preparat'^ry to Developing the Will. Faculties
and Powers latent in rran. Mesmerism, Hypnotism and Self-Hypno-
tism. Pomponatius, Gassner, and Paracelsus. Medical Cures and
Benefits which may be realised by Auto-Hypnotism. Forethought
and its Value. Corrupt and Pure Will. Instinct and Suggestion.
The Process of Developing Memory. The Arte$ Memorandi cf Old
Time. The Action of Will and Hypnotism on the Constructive Facul-
ties. Fascination. The Voice. Telepathy and the Subliminal Self.
The Power of the Mind to Master Disordered Feelings as set forth by
Kant. Paracelsus, his Teaching with regard to Self-Hypnotism.
Last Words.

"Why can we not will ourselves to do our very best in all matters
controllable by the individual will ? Mr. Leland answers triumphantly
that we can." — The Literary World.

"An earnestly written work entirely free from charlatanism," —
Birmingham Post.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER <§■ SON, Liniitcd

THE QIFT OF THE SPIRIT. A Selection from the
Essays of Prentice Mulford. Reprinted from the
■' White Cross Library." With an Introduction by
Arthur Edward Waite. Third Edition. Price 3s. 6d.
net.

CoNTKNTS. — God ill the Trees ; or the Infinite Mind in Nature. The
God in Yourself. The Doctor within. Mental Medicine. Faith; or,
Being Led of the Spirit. The Material Mind v. The Spiritual Mind.
What arc Spiritual Gifts ? Healthy and Unhealthy Spirit Communion.
Spells; or, the Law of Change. Immortality in the Flesh. Regenera-
tion ; or. Being Born again. The Process of Re-Embodiment. Re-
Embodiment Universal in Nature. The Mystery of Sleep. Where
you Travel when you Sleep. Prayer in all ages. The Church of
Silent Demand.

■■ The Essays of Prentice .Mulford embody a peculiar philosophy,
and represent a peculiar phase of insight into the mystery which
surrounds man. The essays were the work, as the insight was the
gift, of a man who owed nothing to books, perhaps not much to what
is ordinarily meant by observation, and everything or nearly every-
thing to reflection nourished by contact with nature.'' — A, E. Waite,
in the Introduction.

Under the title " Your Forces and Ho\v to Use Them," the Essays
of Prentice .Mulford have obtained the greatest popularity in America.

THE GIFT OF UNDERSTANDING. A Farther Selec
tion from the Works of Prentice Mulford. Reprinted
from the "White Cross Library." With an Introduc-
tion by Arthur Edward Waite. Price 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — Introduction. Force, and How to Get rt. The source
of your Strength. About Economising our Forces. The Law of
.Marriage. Marriage and Resurrection. Your Two Memories. The
Drawing Power of Mind. Consider the Lilies. Cultivate Repose.
Look Forward. The Necessity of Riches. Love Thyself. What is
Justice? How Thoughts are born. Positive and Negative Thought.
The Art of Forgetting. The Attraction of Aspiration. God's Com-
mands are Mans Demands.

Appendix containing a summary of the Essays of the " White Cross
Library " not included in the above volumes.

This further selection has been prepared in consequence of the
great popularity attained by the first series of Prentice Mulford's
Essays, published under the title of " The Gift of the Spirit."

764 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

ESSAYS OF PRENTICE MULFORD. Third Series.
Price 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — The Law of Success. How to Keep Your- Strength.
The Art of Study. Profit and Loss in Associates. The Slavery of
Fear. Some Laws of Health and Beauty. IVlental Interference. Co-
operation of Thought. The Religion of Dress. Use your Riches. The
Healing and Renewing Force of Spring. The Practical Use of Reverie.
.Self-Teaching : or the Art of Learning How to Learn. How to Push
your Business. The Religion of the Drama. The Uses of Sickness.
Who are our Relations? The Use of a Room. Husband and Wife.

The third and fourth series of Prentice IMulford's Essays have been
prepared in response to a large demand for the complete works of
the " White Cross Library " at a more reasonable price than that of
the American edition in six volumes.

ESSAYS OF PRENTICE MULFORD. Fourth Series.
Completing the entire set of the Essays published in
America under the title of " Your Forces and How to
Use Them." Price 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — The Use of Sunday. A Cure for Alcoholic Intem-
perance through the Law of Demand. Grace Before Meat; or tjie
Science of Eating. What we need Strength for. One Waj- to Cul-
tivate Courage. Some Practical Mental Recipes. The Use and
Necessity of Recreation. Mental Tyranny : or, How We Mesmerise
Each Other. Thought Currents. Uses of Diversion. " Lies breed
Disease ; Truths bring Health." Woman's Real Power. Good and
. Ill Effects of Thought. Buried Talents. The Power of Honesty.
Confession. The Accession of New Thought.

These four volumes constitute the cheapest and best edition of
the Essays of Prentice Mulford published in the English language.
Special care has been taken to eliminate the errors and mistakes
with which the American edition abounds. Price 3s. 6d. net.

THE SCIENCE OF THE LARGER LIFE. A Selection
from the Essays of Ursula N.Gestefeld. Price 3s.6d.net.

Contents. — Preface. Part I. How we Master our fate. — The Inven-
tor and the Invention. The Ascension of Ideas. Living by Insight
or by Outsight. Destiny and Fate. The Origin of Evil. What is
within the " Heir " ? Words as Storage Batteries. How to Care for
the Body. The Way to Happiness. You Live in your Thought- World.
The Language of Suggestion. Constructive Imagination. The Power
of Impression. How to Remove Impressions. Your Individualism.
Making Things go Right. Utilising Energy. Master, or be Mastered.
The Voice that is heard in Loneliness. The Ingrafted Word. The Law
of Liberty. Part II. — The Evolution of an Invalid; The Invalid's

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

^ILLIAM RIDER c~ SON, LiiiiitcJ

Alter Ego. The Evolution of a Thief; The Honest Man. The Evolu-
tion of a Liar ; The Truthful Man. The Evolution of a Miser; The
Benefactor. The Evolution of an Egotist ; The Self-Forgetful .Man.
The Evolution of a Drunkard ; The Self-Possessed Man. The Evolu-
tion of a Libertine ; The Strong Man. The Evolution of a Flirt ; The
Divine XA'omanlv. Part III. — Stilling the TnHpest. Live in the Eter-
nal, not in Time. .Affirmation of Being. Affirmation for the Morning.
Affirmation for the Evening. Affirmation for Fear of Heredity.
Affirmation for fear of Death.

EVERY MAN A KING, or Might in Mind Mastery. By
Orison Swett Marden. Price 3s. 6d. net.

" Happily written, with knowledge and insight as well as gaiety and
charm." — Light.

"Admirable! It is a long time since we have read a book on the
fascinating subject of mind's influence over matter, especially in the
building of character, with as much pleasure as this has afforded.
Characterised throughout by a cheery optimism, the perusal of it is as
good as any tonic, and far better than most." — Pall Mall Gazette.

MENTAL MEDICINE : Some Practical Suggestions from
a Spiritual Standpoint. By Oliver Huckel, S.T.D.
With an Introduction by Lewellys F. Barker, M.D.
Price 3s. 6d. net.

SuM.MARY OF CoxTENTS — The New Outlook for Health. The Unique
Powers of .Mind. The Spiritual Mastery of the Body. Faith as a
Vital Force. The Healing Value of Prayer. Glimpses of the Sub-
conscious Self. The Training of the Hidden Energies. The Casting
Out of Fear. The Cause and Cure of the Worry Habit. The
Gospel of Relaxation. Work as a Factor in Health. Inspiration
of the .Mental Outlook. Best Books for Further Reading.

" Unusually bright and stimulating discourses." — The Scotsman.

" A book of common sense and reason, and its logic is unassailable
in almost every chapter." — Pall Mall Gazette.

NEW VOLUME.

SELF-CONTROL, AND HOW TO SECURE IT (L'Educa
tion de Soi-meme). By Dr. Paul Dubois, Professor of
Neuropathology in the University of Berne ; Author of
" The Psychic Treatment of Nervous Disorders," "The

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, LiwiUd

Influence of the Mind on the Body," etc. Authorized
Translation. By Harry Hutcheson Boyd. 337 pp.,
4s. 6d. net.

" ' Man is the only animal who does not know how to live,' I said o:ie
day, after listening to the grievances of my patients.'''' in these words the
learned Genevese doctor introduces a book, the object of which is to
correct this defect of the human race. Dr. Paul Dubois' extensive
experience of all sorts and conditions of men, and of their physical,
mental and moral ailments, renders him well qualified for the position
of confidential adviser to the world in general on so important a subject.
The aim of this book, which has already won a well-deserved popularity
on the Continent and in America, is to point out the road indicated by
a due regard for consideration of physical and moral well-being to those
who, without some such aid, are only too liable to take the wrong turn-
ing for lack of the necessary guidance and worldly wisdom. The book
covers such varied subjects as : The Conquest of Happiness, Con-
science, Education, Egoism and Altruism, Indulgence, Moderation,
Courage, Idealism, etc., etc.

" Eighteen wise and lively essays on subjects relating to common
life, all entirely deserving attention for their bright wisdom, and easy
to read because of their simple and happy style." — Light.

" A thoroughly wholesome and sound book." — T.P.S. Book N< tes.

" This is a manual of self-culture . a series of brilliant essays,
bold in conception, sympathetic in spirit, and eminently serviceable in
substance." — The Health Record.

THE QIFT OF THE SPIRIT. Pocket Edition (Sin x Sin).
Leather, gilt, 2s. 6d. net.

Mysticism

ON A QOLD BASIS. A Treatise on Mysticism. By
IsABELLE DE Steiger, Translator of " The Cloud upon
the Sanctuary " by Eckartshausen. Crown 8vo, cloth,
gilt, 3s. 6d. net.

" Unlike other Western writers, Isabelle de Steiger has been at
great pains to understand aright what the principles as applied in
Eastern philosophy are, and the result is that we have a book which
is reliable from every point of view — reliable as regards the informa-
tion it contains, reliable as regards the deductions made therefrom,
and reliable as an authoritative exposition of all that is best and true

164 Alders^ate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Liinihd

in the science of mysticism. Eastern scholais lis well as Western
scholars will benefit immenseh by a perusal of this excellent booU." —
Till' Indian Ri-vitw.

'■ One of the most fruitful and suggestive inquiries into modern pro-
blems of thought and life which has been made. . . As a treatise on
mysticism it touches the subject at all points, a new light appearing as
each facet is brought into view, a kaleidoscopic enchantment. At what-
ever page you may chouse to open up the book, there is something new
and suggestive." — " Scrutator" in The Occult Review.

THE CLOUD UPON THE SANCTUARY. A Text Book
cf Christian Mysticism. Third Edition. Revised and
Enlargfed. Crown 8vo, xxxix. + 144 pp., 3s. 6d. net.
By Councillor Karl von Eckartshausen. Translated
and Annotated by Isabelle de Steiger, and with an
Introduction by Arthur Edward Waite.

The fullest and clearest exhibition of the Doctrine of a Secret Holy
Assembly within the Christian Church.

" I can very cordially recommend to all who are interested in
religious mysticism ' The Cloud upon the Sanctuary.' . . . Not only
is Eckartshausen's text of the highest curiosity and interest, but the
' critical apparatus ' furnished hy the translator, by Mr. Brodie-
Innes, and by others, will prove most helpful to the student ; and
Mr. A. E. Waite's ' Introduction,' with its historical study of the
author, and its store of recondite learning, adds the finishing touch
to this valuable edition of a very valuable and singular work." —
T. P/s Weekly.

THE HIDDEN WAY ACROSS THE THRESHOLD;

or, The Mystery which hath been Hidden for Ages and
from Generations. An explanation of the concealed
forces.in every man to open the temple of the soul, and
to learn the guidance of the unseen hand. Illustrated
and made plain, with as few occult terms as possible,
by J. C. Street. Large 8vo. With Plates, 12s. net.

The writer of this book, it is admitted, has enjoyed access to sources
of information not commonly open to mankind in its present state of
development.

STEPS TO THE CROWN. By Arthur Edward Waitf,
Foolscap 8vo, buckram, 2s. 6d. net.

764 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

8 WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

" Mr. Waite has presented his philosophy of life in a series of
aphorisms. The author of this volume is well known as one of the best
living authorities on the history of mysticism, and the point of view
here maintained is that of an initiate. Nature is regarded as an
enemy — a sleeping serpent. Man's highest destiny lies — as St.
Augustine taught many centuries ago — in his ultimate union with the
Divine Nature. The great renunciation is to surrender that which
matters nothing in order that we may possess everything. There are
several hundreds of aphorisms in this slender volume, all of them
terse and pregnant." — The Tribune.

NOTES ON THE MARGINS. Being Suggestions of
Thought and Enquiry. Five Essays by Clifford
Harrison. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — An Enquiry into iWysticism, The Illusion of Realism.
The Lines of Coincidence. Arrest or Advance ? The Lost Riches of
the World.

" Perhaps the best and most readable introduction to the under-
standing of the true spirit and meaning of Occultism, or as the author
prefers to call it, Mysticism, which we could offer to any one desirous
of information on the subject." — Theosophical Review.

JUST PUBLISHED.

THE WAY OF THE SOUL. By William T. Horton,
Author of "The Book of Images." A Legend in Line
and Verse, depicting the Soul's Pilgrimage through
matter. With Forevi^ord by Ralph Shirley. 48 full-
page Symbolical Illustrations. In artistically designed
blue cloth binding, black and gold lettering, with sym-
bolical design. Crown 4to, gilt tops, 224 pp , 6s. net.

In a series of fine line drawings and simple descriptive verse Mr.
Horton has given a symbolical rendering of the ever-essential, jet ever-
changing, problem of the progress of the Soul-form under the rulings
of circumstance as it is planned and directed by the Spirit. Not only
is the book a mystically conceived poem, but, reading between the lines,
one may find a sane and useful guide to living the everyday life.

NOW READY.

ANCIENT MYSTERIES AND MODERN REVELA-
TIONS. By W. J. Colville, Author of " Fate Mas-
tered," " Life and Power from Within," etc., etc.
With Portrait of the Author. Crown Svo, 366 pp.,
cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER c~ SON, Limited

Selection of Contents. — Bibles under Modern Search-light — How
Ancient is Humanity on this Planet ? — Egypt and its Wonders — Apol-
lonius of Tyana — Five N'arietiesof Yoga — The Message of Buddhism-
Ancient Magic and Modern Therapeutics — Andrew Jackson Davis, a
Ninetee ith Century Seer — The Latest Views on EvoUition — Spiritual-
ism and the Deepening of Spiritual Life— The Divine Feminine —
Psychopathic Treatment ; or, Suggestive Therapy in Practical Appli-
cation.

AZOTH ; OR, THE STAR IN THE EAST (A New

Light of Mysticism). Embracing the First Matter of
the Magnum Opus, the Evolution of Aphrodite- Urania,
the Supernatural Generation of the Son of the Sun,
and the Alchemical Transfiguration of Humanity. By
Arthur Edw.ard Waite. Cloth gilt, 239 pp., imp. 8vo,
5s. net.

Contents; — Preface — The Gate of the Sanctuarj — Introduction —
The Outward Man — The Inward Man — Appendices.

This book deals with the life ol^ the mystic in a thorough and illumi-
nating manner. The various phases of mysticism, its philosophy, its
method, its discipline and its glory, are treated seriatim in a volume
v;Tiich must be regarded as of great value to all students of mysticism.

Psychic Phenomena and Spiritualism.

IN PREPARATION.

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNKNOWN. (La Psy-
chologie Inconnue). A Contribution to the Experi-
mental Study of the Psychic Sciences. Translated
from the French of Esiile Boirac, Correspondent of
the Institute, Rector of the Academy of Dijon. Demy
8vo., cloth gilt, 6s. net.

READY IN FEBRUARY.

NEW EVIDENCES IN PSYCHICAL RESEARCH. By

J. Arthur Hill. With Introductory Note by Sir
Oliver Lodge, F.R.S,. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 224 pp.,
3s. 6d. net.

16-1 Aldvrssatc Street, London, B.C.

10 WILLIAM RIDER &- SON, Limited

CHRISTIANITY AND SPIRITUALISM. [Christianisme
et Spiritualisme.) By Leon Denis. Translated by
Helen Draper Speakman. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — The History of the Gospels. The Secret Doctrine of
Christianity. Intercourse with the Dead. The New Revelation.

The writer contends that Spiritualism offers tangible proofs of
immortality, and thus carries us back to the pure Christian doctrines.

"A book possessing deep and obvious interest for many thoughtful
minds."— T. P.'s Weekly.

HERE AND HEREAFTER {Apris la Mart). Being a
Scientific and Rational Solution of the Problems of
Life and Death, and of the Nature and Destiny of
the Human Ego in its Successive Lives. Translated
by George G. Fleurot froim the French of Leon
Denis, author of " Christianity and Spiritualism."
Second edition, revised, cloth gilt, crown 8vo, 352 pp.,
3s. 6d. net. •

An able and luminous account of the phenomena and doctrines in-
cluded under the term " Spiritualism," their relation to modern
science and their influence on conduct. The present volume is a new
and enlarged edition of the original work, the popularity of which,
across the Channel, may be gauged by the fact that it has already
run into its twenty-second thousand.

'•A wonderful book, which should appeal to . every intelligent
and ci\ilized person, of whatever rank or nationality." — The Lady.

" It deals with profound subjects in a simple way, and while the
most experienced wiU find instruction in it the beginner will Hnd no
difficulty in the attempt to master it from the first page to the last."

— Light.

EVIDENCE FOR A FUTURE LIFE. .A Translation of
Gabriel Delanne's Important worl< " L'Ame est Im-
mortelle." By H. A, Dallas, Author of " Gospel Records
Interpreted by Human Experience." Demy Svu, 5s. net.^

164 Alders^ate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER &■ SON, Limited 11

This work has been accepted by all Spiritualists as an unequalled
summary of the most notable phenomena of modern times, chiefly with
reference to the " perisprit " or fluidic body, by which man is brought
into direct contact with the unseen universe.

" He makes out an extremely strong case.'' — Light.

" It covers the whole field of spiritualism in a perfectly serious,
rational and scientific manner." — Daily Express.

MORS JANUA VITAE? A discussion of certain com-
munications purporting to come, from Frederic
W. H. Myers. By H. A. Dallas, with Introduction
by Professor W. F. Barrett, F.R.S. Crown 8vo.,
cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. net.

No discussion within the sphere of Psychical Research during
recent years has attracted more public attention than that relating to
the alleged communications of the late Frederic W. H. Myers —
principally by the method described as cross correspondence — with
his erstwhile colleagues of the S.P.R. The object of this book is to
put before the reading public who are interested in the latest develop-
ments of psychic investigation the main facts of the evidence in this
remarkable case.

" Has dealt with her material in a lucid and interesting way."

— The Christian Commonwealth.
" We can cordially praise Miss Dallas's exposition." — The Guardian.
" A timely little book." — Light.

HIGHLAND SECOND SIGHT, with prophesies of Coin-
neach Odhar and the Seer of Petty. Introductory
Study by Rev. Wm. Morrison, M.A. Edited by
Norman Macrae. Crown 8\o, 202 pp., cloth bound,
leather back, 3s. 6d. net.

It is hoped that this book will prove as helpful to the serious
student as, it is believed, it will be welcome to the general reader, not
in the light of the superstitious or the merely curious, but as a subject
of particular interest in view of present day research in matters
psychological.

COLLOQUIES WITH AN UNSEEN FRIEND. Edited by
Walburga, Lady Paget. Crown 8vo, White Linen,
3s. 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

U WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

Contents. — Reincarnation. Atlantis. Conditions of Communication
with the Invisible. Historical Sketches. Humanitarianism and the
Advance of the world. The French Revolution and Secret Societies.
War and Politics. Scraps. St. Francis.

This volume consists of a remarkable series of communications, re-
corded by a highly developed medium.

" Always daring and often original." — The Planet.

THE PAST REVEALED : A Series of Revelations con-
cerning the Early Scriptures. Recorded by E. C.
Gaffield, Author of "A Series of Meditations," and
"A Celestial Message." Crown 8vo, blue cloth, gilt
tops, 309 pp., 2s. 6d. net.

" As we read this vivid, profound, and yet simple exposition of
human life in long-departed ages, we can indeed feel, that a veil has
been lifted, and some portion of truly gnostic information has been
unfolded to the world." — W. J. Colville.

THE WATSEKA WONDER: A narrative of startling
phenomena and an authenticated instance of spirit
manifestation, throwing a remarkable light on certain
of the phenomena of multiple personality. By E. W.
Stevens, M.D., with introduction by J. M. Peebles,
M.D. Paper covers Is. 6d. net.

READY IN FEBRUARY.

Demy 8vo. About 600 pp., los. 6d. net.

PSYCHICAL AND SUPERNORMAL PHENOMENA.

Being a translation by Dudley Wright of " Les
Phenomenes Psychiques," the new and very notable
work of Dr. Paul Joire, Professor at the Psycho-
Physiological Institute of Paris, President of La
Societe Universelle d'Etudes Psychiques.

Contents — Psychical Phenomena generally considered. E.xternali-
sation of Sensibility. Spontaneous Phenomena. .Vlultiple Per-
sonalities. Abnormal Faculties in Hypnotic Subjects. .Abnormal
Dreams. Phenomena of Lucidity and Externalisation observed in
Fakirs or Oriental Sorcerers. Haunted Houses. Telepathy.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited 13

Crystal Gazing. Clairaudifncc. Typtology. Automatic Writing
and Lucidity. Tliought Pliotograpliy. iMovemert of Objects without
*^ontact. Levitation. Eusapia Paladino. Materialisations. General
view of Psychical Phenomena.

READY IN FEBRUARY.

DEATH : ITS CAUSES AND PHENOMENA. By Here-
ward C.arrin'gton and John R. Meader. 8s. 6d. net.

CONTENTS.

Preface. Part 1. Physiological. — 1. The Scientific Aspect of Life
and Death. II. The Signs of Death. III. Tr.mce, Catalepsy, Sus-
pended Animation, etc. IV. Premature Burial. V. Burial, Crema-
tion, .Vlummification. VI. The Causes of Death. VII. Old Age : Its
Scientific Study. By Hereward Carrington. VIII. My Own Theory
of Death. By Hereward Carrington. IX. My Own Theory of Death.
By John R. Meader. X. On the Possible Unification of our Theories.
XI. The " Questionnaire " on Death. Answers. XII. General Con-
clusions.

Part II. Historic Speculations on Death. — I. Man's Theories about
Immortality. II. The Philosophical Aspect of Death and Immor-
tality. III. The Theological Aspect of Death and Immortality. IV.
The Common Arguments for Immortality.

Part III. ScientiHc Attempts to Solve the Problem. — li troductory.
I. The Moment of Death. II. Visions of the Dying. III. Death
Described from Bejond the Veil. IV. Experiments in Photographing
and in Weighing the Soul. V. Death Coincidences. VI. The Testi-
mony of Science — Psychical Research. \^II. On tlie Intra-Cosmic
Difficulties of Communication. VIII. Conclusions. •

Appendices. Bibliography. Index.

REINCARNATION AND CHRISTIANITY. A discussion
of the relation of orthodoxy to the reincarnation
hypothesis. By a Clergyman of the Church of
England. Crown 8vo, stiff boards, 96 pp., Is. net.

The unique characteristic of tl'.is book is that it is the first attempt
ever made in literary form to justify the theory of Reificarnation from
the standpoint of Christianity. The writer attempts to prove that even
to the stickler for orthodcxy, there is nothing inconsistent, or out of
harmony with the teachings of the church, in the avowal of a belief
in the evolution of the soul through the tenancy by it of a succession
of physical bodies. He quotes Jesus Christ Himself as pointedly re-
fraining from disavowing such a belief, and instances the declared

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

14 WILLIAM RIDER &- SON, Limited

adherence to the doctrine of a number of early Christian Fathers. He
shows that it is a mistalie to suppose that Reincarnation was ever
condemned at any authoritative Council of the Church, and proceeds
toarguethatmany of the Christian's greatest difficulties are solved by
its acceptance.'

" A brief but thoughtful defence of the doctrine that each soul is
reaping the consequences of a past." — The Times.

" A well-written volume." — The Scotsman.

" He grapples with the difficulties which an orthodox Christian
might raise. His very fair and temperate argument."

--The Quest.

" It will fulfil a most useful function." — T.P.S. Book Notes.

Philosophy.

JESUS: THE LAST GREAT INITIATE. Translated
• from " Les Grands Inities" of Edouard Schure, by F.
RoTHWELL, B.A. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s net.

"The Light was in the world, and the world was made by it, but
the world knew it not." — John i. 10.

"When a man listens to the Divine Call a new life is created in
him, now he no longer feels himself alone, but in communion with God
and all truth, ready to proceed eternally from one verity to another.
In this new life his thought becomes one with the Universal Will."

" Always suggestive and often eloquent." — The Scotsman.

KRISHNA AND ORPHEUS, the Great Initiates of the
East and West. By Edouard Schure. Translated by
F. RoTHWELL, B.A. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. net.

" The work is learned and interesting." — The Scotsman.
" Would get hold of the imagination of the dullest."

— St. 'jfames's Gazette.
I "An admirable translation." — Glasgow Herald.

PYTHAGORAS, and His System of Philo.sophy, (The
Delphic Mysteries.) By Edouard Schure. Translated
by F. RoTHWELL, B.A. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER (f- SON, Limited 15

" Know thyself, and thou wilt know the Universe and the Gods.'' —

" A thoughtful history and exposition of tlie great teacher."'

The Scotsman.
" In tliis cvcelient translation the reader is familiarised with the
life and philosophy of Pythagoras."— T//t' Daily Express.

HERMES AND PLATO. The Mysteries of Egypt and
the Mysteries of Eleusis, by'EoouARD Schure. Trans-
lated by F. RoTHvvELL, B.A. Crown 8vo., cloth, Is. 6d.
net.

" Happy is he who has passed through the Mysteries. He knows
the source and the end of life." — Pindar.

" -M. Schure has presented a picture of ancient religious indoctrin-
ation that will give an excellent general idea of the scope and signifi-
cance of the Greek and Egyptian mysteries." — Light.

" An interesting essay on the occultism of the ancient world."

— The Scotsman.

RAMA AND MOSES. The Aryan Cycle and the Mission
of Israel. Translated from '' Les Grands Initie's" of
Edouard Schure, by F. Rothwell, B.A. Crown 8vo.
cloth, 2s. net. N.B. — This volume completes the series.

" -\I. Schure brings to his work a wonderful picture-making
faculty."— r. P. S. Book Notes.

"The work will be of great value to the serious student of the
origin of religions." — Annals of Psychical Science.

WITH THE ADEPTS : An Adventure among the Rosi-
crucians. By Dr. Franz Hartmann. New and Revised
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 180 pp., 2s. 6d. net.

" This interesting narrative of a psychic experience."

— The Theosophist.

THE BOOK OF THE SIMPLE WAY. By Laotze
(" The Old Boy "). A New Translation of " The Tao-
Teh-King." With Introduction and Commentary by
Walter Gorn Old, M.R.A.S., Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

16 WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

" Laotze remains a prince among philosophers . . . and is still as
good reading as he was some five or six centuries B.C." — The Times.

" An excellent translation of the teachings of this ancient sage. .
As an editor and expositor Mr. Old is both well-informed and sympa-
thetic." — Glasgoiv Herald.

OBERMANN. By Etienne Pivet de Senancour. Trans-
lated from the French, with Biographical and Critical
Introduction by Arthur Edward Waite. Crown 8vo,
423 pp., 6s. net, ornamental cloth, gilt tops.

" A Spiritual Autobiography, rich in the invitation to thmk, alive
with the quest of truth, and yet full of speculative unrest. . . . The value
of this edition is greatly enhanced by the critical appreciation with
which Mr. Waite has enriched a book that deserves to be much more
widely known." — The Standard.

" An excellent translation." — The Times.

"Mr. Waite must be well known as a learfied and enchanting
Mystic ; even those who are not mystics or even thyrsus- bearers hold
him in respect. We are therefore not surprised that he treats
Obermann as ' A great book of the soul,' and De Senancour as a man
of vision ' belonging at his best to eternity.' " — The Daily Chronicle,

THE LIFE OF LOUIS CLAUDE DE SAINT=MART!N,

the Unknown Philosopher, and tin- Substance of hi?
Transcendental Doctrine. By .'\rthur Edward Waite.
Demy 8vo, 464 pp., 6s. net.

Contents. — Book 1. Louis Claude de Saint-.Martm. Book II.
Sources of Martinistic Doctrine. Book III. The Nature and State of
Man. Book IV. The Doctrine of the Repairer. Book V. The Way of
Reintegration. Book VI. Minor Doctrines of Saint- Vartin.

Appendices. — 1. Prayers of Saint-Martin. 2. Metrical Exercises of
Saint-Martin. 3. Bibliography of the Writings of Saint-Martin. Index.

" The feet of Saint-Martin are on earth, but his head is-in heaven."

— JOUBERT.

" A profoundly spiritual view of the world ; an interpretation of
Christianity which, though free, is also suggestive, and a handling of
the moral problems of life which is marked by insight and power." —
Scotsman.

" Men of distinction have spoken of Louis Claude de Saint-Martin
with respect and even admiration as a modern mystic who had more
to recommend him than obscurity and extravagance." — The Times.

164 Aldersgate Street, London E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited 17

PSYCHIC PHILOSOPHY, AS THE FOUNDATION
OF A RELIGION OF NATURAL CAUSES. By
V. C. Desertis. With Introductory Note by Professor
Alfred Russel Wallace, O.M., D.C.L., LL.D. F.R.S.
New edition, largely re-written, cloth gilt, gilt tops,
crown 8vo, 421 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

Contents. — Introductory Note and Preface. — Part I. The Bases of
Experimental Fact. Part II. Theory and Inferences. Part III.
Practical Mysticism.

"The book is replete with sound, scholarly, cogent and practical
reasoning, on the scientific and religious, as well as on the psychic
side, and may well be taken as a treasury of arguments proving that
the spiritual philosophy is a necessity for the future well-being of the
world." — Light.

" There is much in this volume which we have found both helpful
and stimulating, and with which we are in entire agreement."

— The Academy.

" Temperately and carefully written, and is in every way superior
to the average spiritualistic publication." — T.P.'s Weekly.

" In every way worthy of study." — Christian World.

THE WISDOM OF PLOTINLS. A Metaphysical Study,
by C. J. Whitby, M.D. 120 pp. crown 8vo, cloth gilt,
2s. net.

A Treatise on the metaphysical doctrines of the great Neoplatonic
Philosopher.

Contents. — Life of Plotinus. Ancient and Modern Methods. \eo-
platonisra. Matter. The Universe. Individuality. The Problem of
Evil. Providence and the Individual. Demons and the Demonic
Faculty. Concerning Love and Emotions. Substance or Corporal
Essence. Time and Eternity. Doctrine of the Soul. Individuality.
Incarnation or Descension. Intelligence, and the Intelligible World.
Primal Categories or Elements of the Notion. Ijniversal Number.
Number and Unity. Time and Space in Eternity. Ideal Functions
of Time and Space. Universal Differentiation. Intelligence and the
One. The One. Potential Import of the Doctrine of Unity.

" For the professed student of philosophy, Plotinus still remains
the most important of the Neoplatonists, and his theories cannot be
neglected. Mr. Whitby has presented them in an admirably concise
and lucid form, and for metaphysicians his little volume will be
indispensable. ' ' — Globe.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, EJO.

18 WILLIAM RIDER &- SON, Limited

" A short but useful exposition, carefully analysed, of the life and
teaching of the great third century Neoplatonist." — Times.

" We can confidently recommend Dr. Whitby's admirable study to
lovers of the greatest intellect of the first Platonic renascence. . . .
A very good book to serve as an introduction to a first-hand study of
the in'mortal Enneads." — G. R. S. Mead in the Theosophical Review.

RATIONAL MEMORY TRAINING. By B. F. Austin,
M.A., B.D., Ex-Principal of Alma Ladies' College, St.
Thomas, Ontario. Author of " Woman, Her Charac-
ter, Culture and Calling," " Glimpses of the Unseen,"
" Success and How to Attain It," and Editor of
" Reason." 147 pp. crown 8vo, Is. 6d. net, brown
paper covers.

A series of articles on Memory, its Practical Value, its Phenomenal
Powers,' its Physiological Basis, the Laws which govern it, the
Methods of Improving it, Attention, Association and Arrangement of
Ideas, Causes of Defective Memory, Mnemonics, their Use and
Abuse, etc., etc., with Hints and Hel, s in Memorizing Figures, Lists
of Words, Prose and Poetic Literature, New Languages, etc.

THE THREE GREAT TIES: The Humanities, the
Amenities, the Infinities. By J. E. A. Brown, author of
"The First Four Things," &c. Royal 18mo. Canvas,
Is. 6d. net.

" These essays have charm, insight, and suggestiveness, reminding
one of the late Mr. Hammerton in his ' Intellectual Life.' Grace and
Truth are here beautifully blended." — Western Mm-iung News.

" Abounds in practical wisdom." — Glasgow Herald.

THOUGHTS ON ULTIMATE PROBLEMS: A Study of
Two Thecdicies. By W. F. Frankland. Crown 8vo,
paper cover. Is. net.

" There is packed within this pamphlet of twenty pages sufficient
matter to fill almost as many volumes. . Thinkers all the world
over will hail the present work as a logical and stimulating contribution
to the literature of idealistic philosophy." — New Zealand Mail.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER c^- SOX, Limited 19

THE WORLD WE LIVE IN. By E. A. Brackett, with
Portrait of the Author. Crown 8vo, 8jin. x 5|in.,
)21 pp., cloth gilt, gilt tops, 2s. net.

This book gives a singularly clear exposition of the meaning of
life as seen through the spectacles of a believer in Spiritualism.

" In view of his long study of such questions, his remarUs on
spiritualism, mesmerism and kindred phenomena are deserving of
respect." — Sunday Ttnus.

"Thoughtful, picturesque and refreshing." — Tlie Scotsman.

YOQA OR TRANSFORMATION. A comparative state-
ment of the various religions and dogmas concerning
the Soul and its destiny, and of Akkadian, Hindu,
Taoist, Egyptian, Hebrew, Greek, Christian, iVIo-
hammedan, Japanese and other Magic. By William
J. Fl.agg. Royal 8vo, 376 pp., cloth gilt, cheaper
edition, 6s. net.

OCCULT SCIENCE IN INDIA AND AMONG THE

ANCIENTS. With an account of their mystic initia-
tions and the history of Spiritism. By Louis Jacolliot.
Translated from the French by Willard L. Felt.
Royal 8vo, 276 pp., cloth gilt, gilt tops, cheaper edition,
6s. net.

THE ZODIACUS VIT/E of Marcellus Palingenius
Stellatus. An Old School Book. Edited and Abridged
by Foster Watson, M.A., Professor of Education in the
University College of Wales, Aberystwyth. Crown 8vo.
2s. net.

■' The book is entitled ' The Zodiac of Life,' because a life led in ac-
cordance with its teachings is as glorious as the sun travelling through
the signs of the Zodiac."— Thomas Scaurinus (Old writer.)

•' Palingenius writes as an alchemist and astrologer. . . keenly
desirous to give-a spiritual application to all physical theories."

. — Times.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

20 WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

MATTER, SPIRIT AND THE COSMOS : Some Sugges-
tions towards a Better Understanding of the Whence
and Why of their Existence. By H. Stanley Red-
grove, B.Sc. (Lond.), F.C.S., Author of "On the
Calculation of Thermo-Chemical Constants." Crown
8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. net.

" Another evidence of the revolt that seems to be gradually rising
against the materialism of the late nineteenth century. As a student
of science, the author may be considered as at least an unprejudiced
advocate for the reality of spirit." — The Scotsman.

" The thoughtful reader who is not satisfied with what materialism
has to offer him will find food for reflection in this book . . . the
author's conclusions are well stated, and are based upon careful
reasoning and accurate interpretation."

— Chemical News, edited by Sir Wm. Crookes.

Higher Life Handbooks.

Crown 8vo. Uniformly bound in handson\e dark green
cloth. Gilt ornamental design and lettering.

LIFE AND POWER FROM WITHIN. By W. J.

CoLviLLE, Author of " The Law of Correspondences,"
" Elementary Text-Book of Mental Therapeutics," etc.,
etc. 189 pp., 2s. 6d. net.

"Written in the fluent, simple and direct style characteristic of the
author."— r. P. S. Book Notes.

" It can be strongly recommended to all who wish to go beneath
the surface of things, and get at the springs of life." — The Pioneer.

THE LAW OF THE RHYTHMIC BREATH, TEACH-
ING THE GENERATION, CONSERVATION AND
CONTROL OP VITAL FORCE. By Ella Adelia
Fletcher, Author of " The Woman Beautiful," " The
Philosophy of Rest." 372 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER &• SON, Limited 21

" I regard it as the most important and authoritative contribution
to ' Occult ' science that has been made since Madame Blavatsky's
publications ; and it will reach and benefit multitudes who could never
have profited by ' Isis Unveiled ' or ' The Secret Doctrine.' "

—Julian Hawthorn.

" Written in clear English, and with moderation, as the result of
both study and experiment the book is thoroughly ' up-to-

date.' "—T.P.S. Book Notes.

PATHS TO POWER. By Floyd B. Wilson, Author
of " Man Limitless," " Through Silence to Realization,"
" The Discovery of the Soul." 229 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

"Thoughtfully written, and the truths the author wishes to teach,
are presented in a very plain yet forcible manner." — Tlie Morning
Advertiser.

THROUGH SILENCE TO REALIZATION; OR, THE

HUMAN AWAKENING. By Floyd B. Wilson,
Author of " Paths to Pcwer," " Man Limitless," etc.
190pp., 3s. 6d. net.

" This is an important, helpful and inspiring book, teaching man
how to become all he is capable of being" — Times Union, Albany, N.Y.

" The chapter on ' The Silence ' is the clearest practical exposition
of the steps of human consciousness by which one reaches The Silence
that we ever remember reading." — Ideas, Boston, Mass.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE SOUL OUT OF MYSTI-
CISM, LIGHT AND PROGRESS. By Floyd B.
Wilson, Author of " Paths to Power," " Man Limit-
less," etc. 247 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

An attempt is made herein to reveal the plane progressive man
has attained on his ascent toward freedom, and to throw light on the
path leading through Mysticism to the discovery of those unused
powers within the soul which, duly appropriated, give expi'ession to
the divine in man.

The following publications of Messrs. Fenno, of New York,
are also supplied : —

MAN LIMITLESS. By Floyd B. Wilson, Author of
" Paths to Power." 224 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

" Have been reading your book, ' Man Limitless.' It is brimful of
energy, light, power and helpfulness from all sources."

— Ella Wheeler Wilcox.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

22 WILLIAM RIDER &- SON, Limited

THE TRIUMPH OF TRUTH; OR, THE DOOM OF

DOGMA. By Henry Frank, Author of " The King-
dom of Love," "The Shrine of Silence," etc., etc., 6s.net.

" In this able work Mr. Frank has given a bold and radical treatise,
which is at once broad and scholarly, and, what is still more rare in
such works, reverent and constructive in spirit and character."

— The Arena.

"The 'Triumph of Truth ' is an interesting work." — The Aihcnaum.

THE MASTERY OF MIND IN THE MAKING OF

MAN. By Henry Frank, Author of "A Vision of
the Invisible," " The Shrine of Silence," etc., etc.
234 pp., 4s. 6d. net.

" His arguments are based, not upon theory, but upon fact, and he
sticks close to the indispensable data of physical science, and he has
carefuUj' studied his authorities." — Annals of Psychical Science.

Alchemical Philosophy.

THE TAROT OF THE BOHEMIANS: The Most Ancient
Book in the World, for the Exclusive Use of Initiates.
By Papus. Translated from the French by A. P.
Morton. New edition, revised throughout, with intro-
duction by A. E. Waite. Crown 8vo, ornamental
cloth gilt, gilt tops, 384pp., profusely illustrated, 6s. net.

" Probably the most complete exposition of the whole subject that
;an be obtained in the English language." — Light.

" Well illustrated, and garbed beautifully." — '.''he Theosophist.
" M. Encausse's very considerable learning cannot be gainsaid."

— Manchester Courier.

A PACK OF 78 TAROT CARDS ; Exquisitely drawn and
coloured, from new and original designs by Pamela
Coleman Smith. Each card has a separate allegorical
meaning. This is without question the finest and most
artistic pack that has ever been produced. Price
6s. net, in neat blue box, post free.
" The most wonderful pack of cards that has ever been seen since
the days when Gringonneur illuminated three pacits for the amuse-
ment of King Charles VI. of France, in the year of our Lord 1392." —
Arthur Machen in T.P.'s Weekly.

164, Aldersgaie Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, LiiniUd

THE KEY TO THE TAROT: Giving the history of the
Tarot Cards, their allegorical meaning and the methods
of divination for which they are adapted. By Arthur
Edward Waite. Royal 32mo., cloth gilt, 2s. net.
Essential to the interpretation of the Tarot Cards.
The Cards and Key are supplied together in neat red
box for 8s. post free.

" An interesting account of the mysterious symbolism of the
cards." — The Scotsman.

JUST PUBLISHED.

THE PICTORIAL KEY TO THE TAROT : Being an
Enlarged and Revised Edition of the Key to the Tarot,
with Seventy-eight full-page reproductions of the Tarot
Cards facing their descriptive matter, and considerable
additional matter dealing specially with the subject of
Fortune-Telling by means of the Tarot. By Arthur
Edward Waite. Handsomely bound, gilt tops, 340pp.
Price 5s. net.

JUST PUBLISHED.

THE BOOK OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC, including the
Rites and Mysteries of Goetic Theurgy, Sorcery, and
Infernal Necromancy. In Two Parts. I. — Analytical
and Critical Account of the chief Magical Ritual extant.
II. — A Complete Grimoire of Black Magic. By Arthur
Edward Waite. The two chief sections are sub-divided
as follows : — (a) Studies on the Antiquity of Magical
Rituals ; (6) The Rituals of Transcendental Magic, so-
called ; (e) Composite Rituals; (rf) The Rituals of Black
Magic; (f) The descending Hierarchy of Spirits;
(/) The Lesser Key of Solomon the King ; (g) The
mystery of the Sanctmu Regiiuin; (h) The Rite of
Lttcifuge ; (i) The method of Honorius, etc., etc. The
main objects of the work are : (1) To determine the
connection, if any, between the literature of Ceremonial
Magic and The Secret Tradition in Christian Times ;
(2) To show the fantastic nature of the distinction
between White and Black Magic, so far, at least, as

164 Aldersgate Street, LoihIou, E.G.

24 WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

the texts are concerned. Crown 4to, gilt tops, 376pp.,
illustrated, with about 180 engravings, some of which
are full- page plates. Beautifully bound in Art Canvas,
with Design in gold. Price 15s. net.

JUST PUBLISHED.

A MANUAL OF OCCULTISM. A complete Exposition
of the Occult Arts and Sciences by Sepharial, Author
of " A Manual of Astrology," " Prognostic Astronomy,"
" Kabalistic Astrology," etc., etc. With numerous
diagrams and illustrations. 368pp., handsomely bound
in cloth gilt. Gilt tops. Crown 8vo., 6s. net.

CONTENTS.

Part I. — The Occult Sciences, comprising : Astrology — Palmistry
— Thaumaturgy — Kabalism — Numerology — Talismans — Hypnotism.

Part II. — The Occult Arts, comprising: Divination — The Tarot
Cartomancy — Crystal Gazing — Clairvoj'ance — Geomancy — Psycho-
metry — Dowsing — Dreams — Sortileges — Alchemy.

The need for a concise and practical exposition of the main tenets
of Occultism has long been felt. In this manual of Occultism the
author has dealt in a lucid manner with both the Occult Sciences and
the Occult Arts, and has added some supplementarj- matter on the
subjects of H}'pnotism and Alchemy.

The book is written from the point of view of a practical student,
and contains many experimental results, which form valuable keys to
the study and practice of the subjects dealt with.' The text is, more-
over, illustrated with numerous explanatory diagrams and sj'mbols,
and the whole work forms a more complete compendium of Occultism
than any hitherto offered to the public, while it is supplied at a price
well within the reach of the general reader.

JUST PUBLISHED.

ALCHEMY: ANCIENT AND MODERN. Being a brief
account of the Alchemistic Doctrines, and their re-
lations, to mysticism on the one hand, and to recent
discoveries in physical science on the other hand ;
together with some particulars regarding the lives and
teachings of the most noted alchemists. By H.
Stanley Redgrove, B.Sc. (Lond.), F.C.S., Author of
" On the Calculation of Thermo-Chemical Constants,"

764 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER c^- SON, Limited 25

" Matter, Spirit and tlie Cosmos," etc. With sixteen
full-page illustrations (including Portraits of the most
celebrated Alchemists). Demy 8vo., cloth gilt, 4s. 6d.
net.

Contents. — The .Meaning of Alchemy — The Theory of Physical
Alchemy — The Alchemists — The Outcome of Alchemy — The Age of
.Modern Chemistry — Modei-n Alchemy.

YOUR FORTUNE IN YOUR NAME OR KABALISTIC
ASTROLOGY. New edition, largely revised. Demy
8vo, cloth gilt, 96 pp., 2s. 6d. net. By " Sepharial."

The first edition of this popular worU on Kabalistic Astrology having
been entirely sold out, the publishers arranged with the author for
this corrected and revised edition to meet the continued public demand.

A MANUAL OF CARTOMANCY, Fortune Telling
and Occult Divination, including the Oracle of Human
Destiny,Cagliostro's Mystic Alphabet of the Magi,&c.,&c.
Fourth edition, greatly enlarged and revised, by Grand
Orient. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 252 pp., 2s. 6d. net.

"To the curious in such matters this book will afford much interesting
information. "^PaZi Mall Gazette.

NUMBERS, THEIR MAGIC AND MYSTERY. By

Dr. Isidore Kozminsky (Fra Ros. Crus.), F.R.N.S.,
A.B.A.A., Etc. Second Edition. Red paper covers,
6'd. net.

An attempt to show how numbers can be used with prophetic
accuracy in terrestrial affairs, with numerous examples.

THE HERMETIC AND ALCHEMICAL WRITINGS OF

AUREOLUS PHILIPPUS THEOPHRASTUS
BOMBAST OF HOHENHEIM, CALLED PARA-
CELSUS THE GREAT, now for the first time trans-
lated into English. Edited with a Biographical Preface,
Elucidatory Notes, and a copious Hermetic Vocabulary
and Index,by Arthur Edward Waite. In Two Volumes.
Dark Red Cloth, medium 4to, gilt tops. 25s. net.

Vol. I., 394 pp.; Vol. 11., 396 pp.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

26 WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited

THE TURBA PHILOSOPHORUM, or Assembly of the
Sages. An Ancient Alchemical Treatise, with the chief
Readings of the Shorter Codex, Parallels from Greek
Alchemists, and Explanations of obscure terms. Trans-
lated, with introduction and Notes, by A. E. Waite.
Crown 8vo., 4s. 6d. net.

A great symposium or debate of the Adepts assembled in convoca-
tion. The work ranks next to Gober as a fountain-head of alclicmy
in Western Europe, It reflects the earliest Byzantine, Syrian and
Arabian writers. This famous work is accorded the highest place
among the works of Alchemical Philosophy which are available for
the students in the English language.

THE NEW PEARL OF GREAT PRICE. The Treatise
of Bonus concerning the Treasure of the Philosopher's
Stone. Translated from the Latin. Edited by A. E.
Waite. Crown 8vo., 4s. 6s. net.

One of the classics of alchemy, with a very curious account, accom-
panied by emblematical figures, showing the generation and birth
of metals, the death of those that are base and their resurrection in
the perfect forms of gold and silver.

A QOLDEN AND BLESSED CASKET OF NATURE'S

MARVELS. By Benedictus Figulus. With a Life of
theAuthor. Edited by A.E. Waite. Crown 8vo.,4s.6d. net.

A collection of short treatises by various authors belonging to the
school of Paracelsus, dealing with the mystery of the Philosopher's
Stone, the revelation of Hermes, the great work of the Tincture, the
glorious antidote of Potable Gold. Benedictus Figulus connects by
imputation with the early Rosicrucians.

THE TRIUMPHAL CHARIOT OF ANTIMONY By

Basil Valentine. Translated from the Latin, includ-
ing the Commentary of Kerckringius, and Biographical
and Critical Introduction. Edited by A. E. Waite.
Crown Svo., 4s. 6d. net.

A valuable treatisft by one who is reputed a great master of alchemi-
cal art. It connects practical chemistrj- witn the occult theory of
transmutation. The antimonial Fire-Stone is said to cure diseases
in man and to remove the imperfection of metals.

164 Aldersgate Street. London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited 27

THE ALCHEMICAL WRITINGS OF EDWARD KELLY.

From the Latin Edition of 1676. Witti a Biographical
Introduction, an Account of Kelly's relations with
Dr. Dee, and a transcript of the "Book of St. Dunstan."
Edited by A. E. Waite. Crown 8vo., 4s. 6d. net.

A methodised summary of the best Hermetic philosophers, including
adiscourse on Terrestrial Astronomy, in which the planets are replaced
by metals, and instead of an account of stellar influences we have
the laws governing metallic conversion.

Mental Pathology and Therapeutics

THE MASTERY OF DEATH. By A. Osborne Eaves.
Author of " The Colour Cure." Crown 8vo. Cloth,
2s. net.

The object of this work is to show how disease may be eliminated
and human life almost indefinitely prolonged, and the writer gives
clear directions as to how these aims can be accomplished.

THE ART OF LUCK. By A. Osborne Eaves. Author
of "The Colour Cur'e," "The Mastery of Death,"
etc. Sin. x4f in., paper covers, ls.net.

" It is better to be born lucky than rich." — Old Proverb.

Si Synopsis. — Life's Failures. Human Fossils. The True Source of
Luck. Forces and Planes. The Dynamics of Thought. Socrates'

JDemon. How Magic can Aid. Lucky days and Astrology. The
Science of Numbers. Talismans and Charms as Auxiliaries. Mind
Control and Building. Recipe for Weak Wills, etc.

IMAGINATION THE MAGICIAN. By A. Osbor.ne
Eaves, author of "The Colour Cure," etc. Paper
covers, Is. net.

THE COLOUR CURE. A Popular Exposition of the Use
of Colour in the Treatment of Disease, by A. Osborne
Eaves, Author of " The Mastery of Death," etc., etc.
Crown 8vo., 64 pp., paper covers, Is. 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

28 WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

ELEMENTARY TEXT- BOOK OF MENTAL THERA-
PEUTICS. By W. J. Colville. Crown 8vo, paper
covers, 80 pp., Is. net.

This introductory text book is characterised by all Mr. W. J.
Colville's well known simplicity and perspicuity of style. For prac-
tical guidance in everyday life it is of far greater value than many
more expensive and more ambitious volumes.

PSYCHO-PATHOLOGICAL RESEARCHES. Studies in
Mental Dissociation. With Text Figures and 10 Plates.
By Boris Sidis, M.A., Ph.D., Director of the Psycho-
pathological Laboratory of New York. 329 pp.. Royal
8vo, 8s. 6d. net.

Seli-xtion from the Contents. — Psychosis and Introspection.
The Subjective Method and its Difficulties. Examination of the Sub-
conscious. The Psychopathic Paradox. Subconscious Habit Forma-
tion. Automatic Writing and Anaesthesia. Origin and Growth of
Dissociation. The Development of the Secondary State. The
Synthesis of the Dissociated States. The Phenomena of Affective
Triple Personality. Re-emeruence of Disintegrated Groups and their
Final Dissolution. Dissociation and Synthesis. First Attacks and
Aura. Lapsed Periods and Hypnoidal States. Synthesis.

READY MARCH 1st.

ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY. By Isador H. Coriat,
M.D., Second Assistant Physician for Diseases of the
Nervous System, Boston City Hospital, Neurologist to
the Mt. Sinai Hospital. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 322 pp.,
5s. net.

CONTENTS.

I. The Exploration of the Suecoxscious. — What is the Sub-
conscious ? — Automatic Writing — Testing the Emotions — Analysing
the Emotions — Sleep — Dreams — What is Hypnosis ? — Analysis of the
Mental Life.

II. DiSEASESOF the Subconscious. — Losses of Memory — Restora-
tion of Lost Memories — Illusions of Memory — The Splittin)> of a
Personality — Hysteria — Psychasthenia — Neurasthenia — Psycho-
Epileptic Attacks.

.Most of the investigations on Abnormal Psychology are widely
scattered throughout the pages of medical publications and psycho-
logical literature generally. Hence these researclies are difficult of
access to the general reader in any convenient and connected form.

164 Alderss'ate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER <f- SON, Limited 29

The present volume is an attempt to bring all this material together
within the compass of a single work, and some personal observations'
and experiments have been supplied by the Author in illustration of
the various theories propounded. The book is a valuable study of
psychological phenomena in the region of the abnormal, and especially
of subconscious mental states, from the medical standpoint.

Ars Vivendi Publications.

ARS VIVENDI or The Art of Living and acquiring IVIental
and Bodily Vigour. By Arthur Lovell. 2s. net.

" A sensible treatise of encouraging advice and instruction."

— Scotsman.

CONCENTRATION. By Arthur Lovell. 2s. net.

" Concentration is the supremest art, and we are grateful for the
author's insistence upon it." — Pall Mall Gazette.

VOLO or THE WILL. What it is, How to Strengthen
and How to use it. By Arthur Lovell. 2s. 6d. net.

" It is a clearly written book, designed to tell people how to streng-
then and how to use the will." — Scotsman.

IMAGINATION and its Wonders. By Arthur Lovell.
5s. net.

" Mr. Lovell first of all considers his great subject from the scien-
tific view point, and concludes a valuable book by two admirably
written chapters 'Verifying the Imagination' and 'Right Use of Imagi-
nation.' " — The Idler.

BEAUTY OF TONE IN SPEECH AND SONQ. By

Arthur Lovell. Is. net.

" Mr. Lovell has here a discovery which will raise the standard of
voice cultivation to a high level." — Times.

DEEP BREATHING. By Arthur Lovell. Is net.

" Discusses an important subject in all its bearings, and incisively
and luminously expounds some very sagacious counsels."

— Leicester Post.

HOW TO THINK. By Arthr Lovell. Is. net.
" A grammar of mental language." — Scotsman.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

30 WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

Rider's Mind at\d Body Handbooks.

These Handbooks deal with the subject of mental and
bodily health in the new light of psycho-therapeutics,
mental healing and auto-suggestion. The following volumes
are now ready or in preparation : —

NATURE'S HELP TO HAPPINESS. By John Warren
AcHORN, M.D. Small crown 8vo., 55 pp., cloth gilt,
1/- net, paper, 6d. net.

" A suggestive essay on the benefits of the open-air life." — The
Scotsman.

" This is the best booi< ever written on health." — Equinox.

HOW TO REST AND BE RESTED. By Grace
Dawson. 46 pp. red paper cover, 6d. net, cloth. Is. net.

It is the purpose of this little book to point out practically the

restful way of living Wrong to the body is wrong to the mind

and to the spirit. The whole man — body, soul and spirit — must live in
unity and harmony in order to realise a full and healthy life.

' ' This little book is especially to be recommended to those who
dread the possibility of a nerve breakdown." — Nursing Notes.

" Brief and to the point, it contains in 46 pages as much common
sense as many a bulky volume." — Health Record.

NERVOUSNESS : A Brief and Popular Review of the
Moral Treatment of Disordered Nerves. By Alfred
T. ScHOFiELD, M.D., M.R.C.S. Small crown 8vo.,
cloth gilt, 88pp., Is. net.

" A medical manifesto of real importance ... It is not too much
to say that if Dr. Schofield's principles were acted upon, they would
lead to something like a revolution in the treatment of nervous
sufferei-s , . . a singularly wise and able little book."

— Westminster Gazette.

", Wise counsels for the prevention of nervous disorders."

— Christian World.

" Dr. Schofield states his case well . . . the book is well worth
reading." — The Queen.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited 31

THE POWER OF SELF-SUGGESTION. By Rev.
Samuel McComb, D.D. Small crown 8vo., cloth gilt,
1- net.

" A readable and stimulating essa\ ." — Scotsman,

' A well-written essay, free from technicality on the one hand and

■ -T.P.S. Book Notes.

HOW TO KEEP FIT. An Unconventional Manual.
By Alfred Schofield, iVl.D., M.R.C.S. Author of
" Nervousness," etc., etc. Small crown 8vo., cloth gilt,
80 pp.. Is. net.

A wise little Book." — The Observer,

•' Full of really sound and sensible advice." — Newcastle Daily
Chronicle.

'■ It ought to prove extremely helpful to all those who desire to live
rationally." — Yorkshire Evening Post.

•• A useful little manual on personal hygiene." — Scotsman.

'■ Hints on health which are given in a rational, common-sense way,
which is refreshingly unusual in works of the kind." — Irish Times.

■' .A suggestive health manual, which has the rare virtue of not en-
couraging the faddist or the valetudinarian in their ways."

— Birmingham Daily Post.

"This book is well worth reading." — Christian World.

FROM PASSION TO PEACE; or, THE PATHWAY
OF THE PURE. By James Allen. Author of
" The Mastery of Destiny," " From Poverty to Power,"
"As a Man Thinketh," etc., etc. Small ci'own 8vo.,
cloth gilt, 72 pp.. Is. net.

The first three parts of this book — Passion, Aspiration and Tempta-
tion — represent the common human life, with its passion, pathos and
tragedy ; the last three parts — Transcendence, Beatitude and Peace —
present the Divine Life, calm, wise and beautiful, of the sage and
Saviour. The middle part — Transmutation — is the transitional stage
between the two ; it is the alchemic process linking the divine with

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

32 WILLIAM RIDER &- SON, Limited

the human life. Discipline, denial and renunciation do not constitute
the Divine State ; they are only the means bj- which it is attained.
The Divine Life is established in that Perfect Knovi'ledge which
bestows Perfect Peace.

"This thoughtful little booU." — Publishers' Circvlar.

" A delightful little book with a strong Buddhistic tendency."

— Annals af Psychical Science.

NOW READY.

STUDIES IN SELF-HEALING, or Cure by Meditation.

A practical application of the principles of the true

mystic healing of the ages. By Ernest E. Monday.

Small crown 8vo., 79 pp. Cloth gilt. Is. net.

" Full of interesting and useful materials . . offers many
practical suggestions." — Two Worlds.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE MIND ON THE BODY.

By Dr. Paul Dubois, Professor of Neuro-Pathology
in the University of Berne, Author of ," The Psychic
Treatment of Nervous Disorders," " Self-Control, and
How to Secure It," etc. Translated from the Fifth
French Edition by L. B. Gallatin. Small crown 8vo,
64 pp., cloth gilt, Is. net.

" A clearly-stated stitdy of an extremely interesting subject."

— Scotsman.

" Will afford the student much food for thought, whilst it is simple
enough to appeal even to those who are comparatively ignorant of this
subject." — Sunday Times.

" A very wise book." — Light,

"An excellent work containing most sound advice for those who
make their own li-fe and the lives of their families a misery through
the worry habit." — Manchester Courier.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER c^- SON, Limited 33

Theology.

THE UNESCAPEABLE CHRIST. And Other Sermons.
An expression of the New Theology. By Rev. Edward
W. Lewis, M.A., B.D., of Grafton Square Congre-
gational Church, Clapham. Author of " Some Views of
Modern Theology." Crown 8vo,^ cloth, 3s. 6d. net.

"The author franUly declares himself a disciple of the New The-
ology, and the sermons are all upon subjects which are involved in
that controversy. They are marked by great freshness and beauty, and
will do much to remove prejudice against the nevi' views." — Scotsman.

SOME BETTER THING FOR US. By A. S. L. Second
Impression. Demy 12mo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net.

Contents. — Introduction. Faith : A Practical Matter. Fear : Its
true Function. Truth in Relation to Life. Error in Thought, and its
Dangers. The Law of the Lord. The Law which Gendereth Bond-
age. The Two Points of View. The Threefold Cord of Prayer.
Object Lessons of Christ's Methods in Healing. Health, Holiness
and Power.

This volume is addressed specially to that large class of sufferers,
whose trials have not found adequate support in the presentment of
religion which has come their way.

" A lucid exposition of the efficacy of faith." — Light.
" The expression of a living faith, which has been tested by ex-
perience." — H. A. Dallas in The Seeker.

GOD THE BEAUTIFUL, An Artist's Creed; and The
Religion of Beauty Contrasted with Buddhism. By
E.P.B. Second Edition (translated into Japanese and
German). Fcap. 8vo., 2s. 6d. net.

" The writer's philosophy may be described as a kind of pantheistic
idealism. He finds a manifestation of ' God the Beautiful ' in Nature,
in the soul of man, in all acts of human love and courage. . . .

The book contains many suggestive, original and beautiful thoughts."
— Church Quarterly Review.

TRANSFORMED HINDUISM. By the Author of ■' God
the Beautiful." 2 Vols. Fcap. 8vo, 5s. net.

764 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

34 WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

Contents. — Vol. I. — Introduction. Panorama of Ancient India.
Development of India's Commerce. Tlie Rise of Brahraanism. The
Spiritual Empire of India. The Sacred Scriptures: Rig Veda, Soma
Veda, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda. The Brahmanas, Aranyaki and
Upanishads. The Fivefold Ministry. The Legal Works, Dharma
Sutras, &c.

Contents. — Vol. II.— Hindu Philosophical Systems: The Nyaya
and Vaiseshika, The Saiikhya, The Yoga, The Purva Miniansa, The
Vedanta School. Epics: The Mahabharata, The Bhagavat Gita, The
Ramayana, Modern Hinduism. Sin. Death and Immortality.

" It is well written, and gives a comprehensive view of Brahraanism,
of ' the sacred scriptures,' Hindu philosophical systems, and the Hindu
epics, modern Hinduism, etc." — The Times.

THE CHIEF SCRIPTURE OF INDIA. {The Bhagavad
Gita) and its relation to present events. By W. L.
WiLMSHURST, Author of " Christianity and Science :
The Latest Phase," &c. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 2s. net.

" An introduction to the study of the Bhagavad Gita, calling atten
tion to its relation to the Western religious thought of the present
day. A thoughtful and well- written paper by a widely read man, who
hopes that some day, in the inevitable course of the world's evolution,
all races of men will form ' onefold under one shepherd.' " — Academy.

" A brief and interesting general atcount of the Bhagavad Gita,
which may well serve as an introduction to the detailed study of that
Sacred Book of the East." — Scotsman.

CHILDREN OF THE RESURRECTION. By Thos.
Allen. Crown 8vo. Paper cover, Gd.net.

Contents. — Introduction. Eschatology. The Recession of the
Soul. Spiritual Corporeity. The Power of Christ's Resurrection.
The Nature of Christ's Resurrection. Eclectic Resurrection. Equality
in Heaven (a) Dead-levelism (b) Disciplinary Treatment (c) Formation
of Character. Eternal Life.

THE MESSAGE OF ARCHDEACON WILBERFORCE.

A Summary of the Teaching found in his Sermons and
Discourses. By a member of the Congregation of St.
John's, Westminster. Crown 8vo. Paper cover, 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER c~ SON, Limited 35

THE MESSAGE OF THE SUN, AND THE CULT
OF THE CROSS AND THE SERPENT. By Rev.
HoLDEN E. Sampson (" Light.") Crown 8vo., Is. 6d. net.

" The cult here advocated, under the fantastic title of the ' Cult of
the Cross and the Serpent,' was, accorditrg to Mr. Sampson, taught
in its purity by .Vloses and the Hebrew Prophets, by Krishna and
Christ, but was effaced from the world through the heresies of the
Niccnc Apostasy until now re-discovered by himself at the end of four
teen centuries. Judaism and Christianity are perversions of this true
and only religion." — Sheffield Daily Telegraph.

CHRISTIANITY AND SCIENCE — THE LATEST

PHASE. By W. L. Wilmshurst. Crown 8vo.,92pp.,
in neat brown paper cover 6d. net, cloth Is. net.

Contents. — Foreword. The Parting of the Ways. The Develop-
ment of the Conflict. New Factors tending to Reconciliation. The
Present and the Future.

" The treatment of the subject is thorough." — Light.

LIVING THE LIFE; or, CHRISTIANITY IN BEING.
By Grace Dawson. Author of " How to Rest and
be Rested. Crown 8vo., 78 pp., cloth gilt, gilt tops,
Is. 6d. net; paper, Is. net.

A short study of Christianity as Christ taught it.

" Devout and intelligent religious discourses." — Scotsman.

NOW READY.

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN GENERATION. Its Records
and Traditions. Second and cheaper Edition. By
James Thomas, Author of " Our Records of the Na-
tivity," " The Pantheon at Rome : Who Built It .? "
414 pp. Red cloth, gilt. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d. net.

Selection from Contents. — The Interment, Resurrection and

Ascension Narrative of Acts — Paul's Earlier Life — Paul's Later

Journeys — Authorship and Reliability of the Acts — Peter and Paul
at Rome — The Remaining Gospel Characters — The Church in Jeru-
salem — Exterior Churches.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

3(> WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

The author of this book aims at presenting a truthful account of the
earliest Christian times, in so far as this can be reconstructed from
such records and documents as survive. Among these, the latter part
of the composite document, Luke-Acts (the former part having been
dealt with in a previous work), has been carefully examined, and an
attempt is made to arrive at a final appreciation, from an independent
point of view, of tne position of the creed and organisation of the
primitive Christian churches, having regard to their relationship with
the political and social movements of the period. The writer's chief
object is to discriminate myth from fact in the incidents narrated, and
the debatable territory of doctrine has been avoided as far as possible.

The unbiassed reader will find the author's sane and scholarly criti-
cism and sound judgment in agreeable contrast to what is generally
submitted in the guise of an historical estimate of this much -discussed
epoch to an over-indulgent public.

READY FEBRUARY 1st.

THE NEW GOD AND OTHER ESSAYS. By Ralph
Shirley, Editor of " The Occult Review." Crown 8vo,
cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net.

Poetry.

STRANGE HOUSES OF SLEEP. By Akthur Edward
Waite. With Frontispiece Portrait of the Author.
P'cap. 4to. Parchment gilt. Printed at the Ballantyne
Press. 12s. net. Limited Edition of 250 copies, signed
and numbered.

Parti. Shadows of Sacraments. Part II. The Hidden Sacrament
of The Holy Graal. Part III. The Poor Brother's Mass Book: con-
taining a Method of Assisting at the Holy Sacrifice for children who
are not of this world. There is also implied a certain assistance to
Servers. Part IV. The Book of the King's Dole, and Chantry for
Plain Son? : A Greater Initiation.

" Sciendum est igitur, dona omnia, in quibus vita nostra consistit,
sacramentis et externisquibusdam sensibilibus signis tecta ac involuta
esse."

"Through all one comes in touch with a fine spirit, alive to the
glory of the world and all that charms the heart and sense of man,
yet seeing past these with something of the soul of Galahad. . . .
Rich in memorable verse and significant thought, so closely wedded
to emotion that each seems either." — Glasgow Herald.

164 Aldcrsgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Linntcd

A BOOK OF MYSTERY AND VISION. By Arthur
Edward Waite. Foolscap 4to, with Special Cover de-
signed by Mary Tourtel, and Frontispiece by Isabelle
DE Steiger. Price 7s. 6d. net,

"The most remarkable and on the whole the most successful
attempt to sing the mysteries of mysticism, siAce Blake wrote his
' Prophetic Books.' " — The Star.

"There is true gold of poetry in the book, and often more of real
thought and suggestiveness in a single page than would go to the
making of a whole volume of average minor verse." — The Bookman.

" Undoubtedly one of the most original and most remarkable books
of verse published for many years." — Birmingham Daily Gazette.

" .Vlr. Waite's volume may be regarded as a confession and an ex-
position of faith of themystic school." — Glasgow Herald.

JUST PUBLISHED.

THE BRAHMAN'S WISDOM. Translated from the
German of Friedrich Ruckert. By Eva M. Martin.
Small crown 8vo. Bound with artistic design in violet
and lemon cloth, gilt. Is. 6d. net.

Friedrich Ruckert was born at Schweinfurt in 1788. During a long
life he published many volumes of poetry, of which perhaps one of the
best known is the Weisheit des Brahmanen, published in 1836. It treats
of all imaginable subjects, from the deepest problems of existence,
and the beauties of Nature and Art, down to the smallest details of
hnman daily life. The book, as a whole, breathes a sane and lofty
philosophj' of life, and teems with thoughts and phrases of a rare and
original charm. Nearl}' all the stanzas in the collection have been
taken from th? first two sections of the book. Ruckert has well been
named in Germany a "Master of Form." His resources of both
rhyme and metre — and of the former in particular — are apparently
endless. He wields the rich and sonorous German words with some-
thing of the same consummate ease which Swinburne showed in
moulding our English language into new forms of melody and
rhythm.

THE NAZARENE: The Study of a Man. A Poem. By
Arthur H. Adams, Author of " Maoriland and other
Verses." Demy 8vo, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. net.

" His work is reverent aud sincere, and not without dranii'tic
force." — Times.

164 Aldcrsgate Street, Londoti, E.C.

38 WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited

Belles Lettres.

The Aldwrych Series

Edited by Alfred H. Hyatt

Printed in red and black on hand-made paper at the Cedar

Press, and bound in vellum. End-papers designed by

Dudley Heath. 3s. 6d. net per vol.

Not more than 300 copies printed of any single volume.

I. CUPID'S POSIES. Mottoes for Rings and other

Pleasant Things.

II. A LITTLE BOOK OF GRACES.

" This little anthology should havea wide appeal." — T.P.'s. Weekly.

"One of the prettiest compilations of the year . an alto-

gether char.ning little volume." — Glasgoi;' HcrnUI.

III. A GARDEN OF SPIRITUAL FLOWERS. An

Elizabethan Book of Devotions : containing prayers for
each day ot the week, and others for sundry occasions.

" . . . The true simplicity, joyous, strong and grand, is to be
found in these prayers." — T. H. L. in The Occult Review.

IV. ROSE LEAVES FROM SADI'S GARDEN. Being

the " Gulistan " rendered into Verse by "Alfred H.
Hyatt.

" From the ' Gulistan,' or Rose Garden of Sadi, these leaves have
been gathered. Sadi, whose name signifies felicity, was born at
Shiraz in Persia, a.d. 1194. It is said that he lived a hundred and
two years. The whole of his long life was devoted to the accumula-
tion of knowledge gained during his many travels. Some of Sadi's
wise thoughts are here set forth." — From the Foreword. — A.H.H.

" The reflective wisdom of Sadi has been gracefully interpreted by
.Mr. Alfred H. Hyatt." — Nottingham Daily Guardian.

(Only 3 few copies of the first three volumes of The Aldwvch
Booklets remain for sale.)

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited 39

THE PAGEANT OF SUMMER. By Richard Jefferies.
Edition dc Ln.xc of 100 copies. Printed at the Chiswick
Press on Van Gelder Paper. Decorated by Dudley
Heath. White vellum. F'cap. 4to. 7s. 6d. net.

This Edition is printed by arrangement with Messrs. Chatto &
Windus, the owners of the Copyright.

' A very charming miniature example of artistic book-production.
In its chaste velluni binding, with its decorative lettering and its per-
fection of paper and type, the little volume presents Jefferies' exquisite
prose poem in a form worth}' of its rare intrinsic beauty as a work of
literary art." — The World.

LORD CHESTERFIELD'S ADVICE TO HIS SON

AND THE POLITE PHILOSOPHER. Crown 8vo.,
cloth, gilt, Is. 6d. net.

'■ A plain, tastefully produced volume, in clear type on light paper,
well and attractively arranged. Lord Chesterfield can always be ' witty
without satire, and serious without being dull ' ; and in spite of its
age his wisdom is fresh to-day, and no unsafe guide in this form for
any )-oung man beginning his career." — The Bookman.

Fiction.

THE THRONE OF EDEN : A Psychical Romance. By
W.J. CoLviLLE, Author of " Old and New Psychology,"
"Studies in Theosophy," etc., etc. Crown 8vo., red
cloth, 468 pp., 3s. 6d. net.

" Much profound philosophy is intermingled with amusing incidents
of various kinds." — Fischer-Munck Leigh.

THE DAYS OF FIRE. The Story of a Forgotten Epoch.
By the Countess of Cromartie. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. net.
An id>ll of love and strife in the days of Heremon, King of Erin,
who reigned in Tara.

" The story of a forgotten epoch, told with skill and feeling."

— Times.

" Written witn a fine romantic fancy, and with many happy turns
of invention, it cannot fail to please anyone interested in the legendary
heroes of Erin." — Scotsman.

164 Aldnrsirate Street, London, B.C.

40 WILLIAM RIDER S' SON, Limited

HIS PRIVATE LIFE. By H. Smith. New Edition.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d. net.

"The story is developed with a strong and practised hand . .
many well-drawn personalities." — Morning Post.

" A novel that has much truth in it, treated with striking ability." —
The Evening Standard and St. yanics^s Gazette.

" The minor characters are exceedingly well drawn, and the novel
stands out from the great ruck of fiction, both by its maturity of
touch and power of construction." — T.P.'s Weekly.

" A novel of exceptional ability.'' — Review of Reviews.

THE PRIESTESS OF ISIS. , An Occult Romance of
the Days of Pompeii, by Edouard Schure. Trans-
lated by P. RoTHWELL, B.A. Crown 8vo, 318 pp.,
cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. net.

" It pictures with much graphic power the City of Pompeii on the
eve of lier destruction." — The Times.

' ' Powerfully written and well conceived, this novel is sure to interest
a great number of readers." — Uaily Telegraph.

" A classical drama full of colour and poetry." — Yorkshire Post.

THE SECRET OF THE SPHINX; or, The Ring of
Moses. By James Smith and John Wren Sutton.
Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. net.

"A romance, founded on the building of the Great Pyramid by
Pharaoh and the birth of Moses, is a distinctly notable addition to
modern fiction, and Mr. Smith and Mr. Sutton have done their work
conscientiously and well. The secret of the Sphinx is revealed by a
narrative of a curious combination of circumstances, in which the
magic ring of Moses is given a conspicuous place." — The Scotsman.

" A vividly drawn and fascinating picture of life in Egypt and the
desert, and interprets on broad and universal principles the ' wisdom
of the Egyptians ' in which Moses was learned." — Light.

GRAN; A Girl Worth Knowing. By H. D'Arcy Martin.
Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. net.

164 Aldersi^rate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SUN, Limited 41

" The upbringing of Gran amidst surroundings so unusual — a stern,
fanatical father, a reserved mother who nurses a secret and cares
nothing for her child, leaving her to the sole charge of an old
servant — and the development of her character, are portrayed with
considerable power, the result being a very charming picture." —
Literary World.

" Gran is remarkable, and also a remarkably attractive heroine.'' —
She field Telegraph.

"There is not a dull sentence in the hook." — Review of Reviews.

THE LIVING WHEEL. By T. I. Uniacke. A Drama
in Five Acts. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net.

This story of a spiritual marriage presents strange possibilities of
union between those who are of necessity separated in the physical body.

"This is one of the most remarkable books that I have read for
many a long day. A daring book, a puzzling book, one that suggests
more than it says, and raises questions innumerable to which it sup-
plies no answers." — W. T. Stead, in The Review of Reviews.

" A thoughtfully written novel, and one that dips a little deeper than
most into spiritual and intellectual matters." — T.P.'s Weekly.

THE TWICE-BORN. By an Ex-Associate of the Society
for Psychical Research. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. net.

A modern instance of Re-incarnation as exemplified in the case of
two children — brother and sister — who revisit the earth after a very
short interval, so that they are enabled to retain a vivid impression of
their previous state of existence.

"A fascinating tale. . . The author is evidently a person of great
originality of thought, and also well versed in psychic mysteries."

— Progressive Thought.

THE SOUND OF A VOICE THAT IS STILL. By

Archie Campbell. Cheaper Issue. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d.
net.

" Can certainly claim to be the most original work of the year. A
combination of romance and theology, or perhaps we should say
mythology, it provides, in the form of a story, a new theory of life,
death, and eternity, derived from Eastern teaching. Christian doctrine,
and romantic imagination, which is as fascinating as it is delightful.

164 Alder sgate Street, London, E.C.

12 WILLIAM RIDER &■ SON, Limited

. An interesting and a fascinating book which merits the attention
it has already aroused." — Birmingham Daily Gazette.

FLAXIUS : Leaves from the Life of an Immortal. By
Charles Godfrey Leland, Author of " The Breitmann
Ballads," &c. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. net.

" .Mr. Godfrey Leland, apart from the keen sense of humour which
inspired the ' Hans Breitmann Ballads, ' has a great deal of old-
world knowledge at his command. Both the humour and the know-
ledge jostle one another in ' Flaxius,' a book which is rather a rhapsody
than a romance. Flaxius is an Immortal, and into his lips Mr.
Leland puts his own philosophy of Life. There are passages in the
book which are an invitation to think, and they stand side by side with
much elaborate fooling." — Standard.

•' It is quite impossible to give any idea of this book. It is enough,
surely, to say that it is Mr. Leland's to send people of sense to it.
But we may thank him for many excellent things in it, and not the
least for the Breitmann ballad with which it is concluded." — Spectator.

THE LIFE AND CONFESSION OF ASENATH, the

Daughter of Pentephres of Heliopolis. Narrating how
the All-Beautiful Joseph took her to Wife. Prepared
by Mary Brodrick, from notes supplied by the late
Sir Peter Le Page Renouf. Crown 8vo. paper covers,
Is. net. Exquisitely printed on hand-made paper.

The Life and Confession of Asenath, the Daughter of Pentephres
of Heliopolis, is one of those many quaint little stories of a religious
character which appear to have had their rise somewhere about the
6th centuryA.D. It is undoubtedly written with a purpose — to reconcile
early Christian converts to the idea of Joseph (a type of Christ) taking
unto himself the daughter of the high priest oF false gods and herself
an idolater. The little story recounts the preparations made for the
reception of Joseph who was making a tour in Egypt to prepare for the
coming famine, Asenath's arrogance towards "the runaway" and
slave, her final conversion to his religion when she " flung her gods out
of the window," and her marriage to Joseph. The story has much
spirit and life in it ; it is a strange medley of Egyptian, Jewish and
Christian religious ideas, but it has a charm and poetrj' about it which
cannot fail to interest the lovers of ancient lore.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited 43

The Library of Occult Records.

Crown 8vo, in artistically designed blue cloth, gilt
lettering, 3s, 6d, net per volume.

This Library is designed to include a selection from the
best Occult and Psychic stories which lay claim to an
inspirational origin. No fiction of the ordinary stamp
will be given a place among these books. The' following
volumes are now ready : —

THROUGH THE MISTS. Leaves from the Autobiography
of a Soul in Paradise. Recorded for the Author by
Robert James Lees. 3s. 6d. net.

" An extremely fascinating story." — Yorkshire Post.

"Mr. Lees acts merely as recorder, and his work should have much
of the vogue that fell to ' Letters from Hell ' on the one hand, and
'Letters from Julia' on the other." — Academy.

" Mr Lees' story is supremely fascinating." — Birmingham Gazette.

'* It is reverent, poetical and quite ingenious in conception. It will
appeal especially to Spiritualists, many of whose religious beliefs it em-
bodies." — Manchester Courier.

THE LIFE ELYSIAN. Being More Leaves from the
Autobiography of a Soul in Paradise. Recorded
for the Author by R. J. Lees. 349 pp., 3s. 6d. net.

" Whoever takes up this book will be loth to lay it dovi'n till the last
page is reached." — Liverpool Courier.

" A very curious and interesting book." — The Lady.

" It is an impressive work, of a most unusual type; and even those
readers who take exception to the doctrines set forth will be repaid
for their trouble by much that is suggestive and inspiring." — Court
Circular.

THE' CAR OF PHCEBUS. By R. J. Lees. 388 pp.,
3s. 6d. net.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER <?- SON, Limited

" A well-told story of love, adventure and political intrigue in the
days when the great powers of Babylon and Egypt were yet rising
towards the zenith of their glory. . . Decidedly interesting." —
To-Day.

" Thoroughly readable." — Punch.

" A clever mj^stical romance.'' — Light.

" A passionate love story. . . It is verj- powerfully written, and

takes, what is so rare to find^ a new and uncommon line." — Queen.

THE HERETIC. By Robert James Lees. 566 pp.,
3s. 6d. net.

" Decidedly curious and interesting." — Morning Leader.

'• A very original story." — Lloyd's Weekly.

"The book is an able production, and is an honest attempt at
solving the problem of human existence." — Dundee Advertiser.

" In ' The Heretic ' Mr. Lees has produced a thoughtful work that
will certainly appeal to a very wide circle." — Catholic Herald.

AN ASTRAL BRIDEGROOM: A Reincarnation Study.
By Robert James Lees. 404 pp., 3s. 6d. net.

" Mr. Lees has . . succeeded in producing a most interesting
story, in which both tragedy and comedy are admirably blended,
while occult experiences occur on almost every page."

— Annals of Psychical Science.

" Not only a clever and original, but in some palrts a humorous
novel." — The Christmas Bookseller.

IDA LLYMOND and HER HOUR OF VISION. By

Hope Cranford. 3s. 6d. net.

" This story will please and edify many readers ; it is a novel and
reverent treatise on a thorny problem." — The English Review.

" Its machinery is elaborate yet simple. . . . Always a burning
faith in the all-wisdom of the Father of all. ... It expresses many
uplifting thoughts in graceful language, and is the sort of book
that makes a. deep impression on the responsive mind." — Aberdeen
Free Press.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.C.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Limited 45

"There is more than a tendency to mysticism in the contents of
this volume. Its tone is distinctly religious. . . . Ida Llymond is
brought low by illness, and her mind, bordering on the infinite, has an
open vision of the life beyond the veil. She thinks she obtains an insight
into the hidden meaning of many things, and a knowledge of the beatific
condition of those who have entered into rest." — Birmingham Post.

"The tone and moral teaching are of the highest. The book
should find a large circle oi readers." '^Sheffield Telegrixph.

Controversial.

INFERENCES FROM HAUNTED HOUSES AND

HAUNTED MEN. By Hon. John Harris. Crown
8vo, Is. net.

" There is a great deal in the volume which will interest those who
love to explore the 'occult' branches of science." — Westminster
Review.

" We recommend it to all interested in the subject." — Spectator.

" Curious readers of curious subjects may find it worth while to
look into what Mr. Harris says." — New York Times.

THE PS EU DO -OCCULT. Notes on Telepathic Vision
and Auditory Messages proceeding from Hypnotism.
By Hon. John Harris. Crown 8vo, Is. net.

" Students of psychical research will find much to interest them."

— Aberdeen Free Press,

THE ALTERNATE SEX, or The Female Intellect in Man
and the Masculine in Woman. By Charles Godfrey
Leland, F.R.L.S., A.M., Harvard. New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. net.

Contents. — Absolute Difference of Sex. The Origin of Life, or how
It is that " Things " grow. The Origin of Sex. The Female Mind in
Man; its Influence on the Inner Self — Occultism and Spiritualism.
The Male Intellect in Woman. Dreams. Memory. Hypnotism.
Sensitivity and Love. On Entering into Harmony and Sympathy
with the Inner Mind. Of Mutual Influence. The Immortality of the
Soul. The Existence of God.

T64 Alders^ate Street, London, E.C.

46 WILLIAM RIDER S^ SON, Limited

" A curious theory of the psychology of sex. . . The chief point
of the theory is that every man has so much woman in his nature,
every woman so much man in hers." — Scotsman.

"The booU is the fruit of wide eclectic reading, and is in line with
the best thought of the time." — Daily News.

TEKEL; or, The Wonderland of the Bible. By J. Horton.
A Sequel to " My Search for Truth and What I Found."
Demy 8vo, cloth gilt, 6s. net.

"In many respects a clever, fascinating, and wholesome piece of
writing, and in ali respects an honest and sincere work." —

Glasgow Evening Times.

The Shilling Library of Psychical
Literature and Inquiry.

Demy 8vo. Vols. I. II. III. IV. Is. net each, paper covers;
Is. 6d. net, neatly bound in green cloth.

By Edward T. Bennett

Assistant Secretary to the Society for Psychical Research,
1882-1902.

I. THE SOCIETV for PSYCHICAL RESEARCH:

Its Rise and Progress, and a Sketch of its Work.

Principal Contents. — The Society for Psychical Research : its
Rise and Progress. Thouglit-Transference or Telepathy. Sugges-
tion — Hypnotism — Psychic Healing. The Subliminal Self. Appari-
tions and Hauntings. Evidence of the Existence of Intelligences
other than " The Living," and of the Reality of Inter-communication.
Conclusions.

II. TWENTY YEARS OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH:

1882-1901

Principal Contents. — Twenty Years of Psychical Research :
1882-1901. The Work Accomplished: Its Character and Amount.
Evidence of the Phenomena, Arranged under Three Groups. Con-
clusions. A Descriptive Index of References to Main Issues.

'I. and II. are Illustrated with Facsimiles of Thought-
■ Transference Drawings.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

WILLIAM RIDER S- SON, Limited 47

III. AUTOMATIC SPEAKING AND WRITING : A

STUDY With many hitherto Unpublished Cases and
Examples.

Principal Contents. — i. Automatic Speaking and Writing. 11.
Communications which state definite Facts, or in which Information
is conveyed unknown by any normal means to Speaker or Writer.
Some Incidents in a Business Transaction. III. Communications in
which the Intelligence claims to give Evidence of its Identity with a
Deceased Person. Messages from Twenty-one alleged "Strangers,"
with more or less complete Verifications ; A Test arranged before
Death. Professor J. H. Hyslop's Investigation and Testimony.

IV. Communications the chief interest of which lies in their character.
Selections from the Records of a Private Circle. V. The Sources of
the Communications, and Conclusions. A Descriptive Catalogue of
(English) Automatic Literature.

IV. THE " DIRECT " PHENOMENA OF SPIRITUAL-
ISM: — "Direct"' Writing, Drawing, Painting, and
Music.

This book is a Study of " Direct " Phenomena, mostly in the pre-
sence of David Duguid and of Mrs. Everitt. Great care has been
taken as to the quality of the evidence selected. The volume is exten-
sively illustrated with a unique series of Facsimiles of " Direct "
Writings and Drawings. Also with reproductions of certain engrav-
ings alleged to have been plagiarised. As to these, a hitherto un-
recognised form of Telepathy is suggested as the solution of the
singular resemblances. Twenty-two plates in all.

"Spiritualists will read the book with interest, and the curious
inquirer xvill derive both enlightenment and entertainment from its
pages." — Scots-nJan.

GLOBES AND MIRRORS FOR CRYSTAL GAZING.

Small size globe, 2s. 3d. post free in United Kingdom (including

case), abroad 2s. 9d.
Z-rays globe (superior quality), 3s. 3d. post free in Unitcu

Kingdom (including case), abroad 3s. 9d.
Larger globe (2Jin. diameter), 4s. 9d. post free in United

Kingdom, abroad 5s. 3d.
Small Fakir Mirror, 3s. 6d. net.. Post Free, in United Kingdom ;

abroad, 4s., post free.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, B.C.

CDe Occult Rcoleu)

A Monthly Journal devoted to the Investigation of

the Problems of Life and Death and the Study of

the Truths underlying all Religious Beliefs

Edited by RALPH SHIRLEY

THE SUBJECTS DEALT WITH INCLUDE

Occultism, Hypnotism, Magic, Psychic Phenomena.Telepathy,

Reincarnation, World Memory, Planetary Influence,

Dreams, Multiple Personality, Thie Occult in

English Literature, Religious Mysticism,

&c., &c.

Among the contributors are the following well-known writers
and authorities on Psychical Science : —

Nora Alexander, W. F. Barrett, F.R.S., R. H. Benson, Lady
Archibald Campbell, Hereward Carrington, Mabel Collins,
W. J. CoLviLLE, Jean Delaire, Mrs. Stuart Erskine, Florence
Farr, a. Goodrich Freer (Mrs. Hans Spoer), C. G. Harrison,
Franz Hartmann, J. Arthur Hill, Reginald Hodder, Bernard
Hollander, M.D., Professor J. H. Hyslop, Isabelle de Steiger,
Andrew Lang, A. J. Pearce, Mrs. Campbell Praed, H. Stanley
Redgrove, C. W. Saleebv, M.D., F. C. S. Schiller, " Scrutator,"
Northcote W. Thomas, Charles Lloyd Tuckey, M.D., A. E.
WaIte, W. L. Wilmshurst, Dudley Wright, &c., &c.

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION:

British Isles, Seven Shillings, post free.

United States and Canada, $1-75 cents. Elsewhere, 8s. or its equivalent.

Vols. I. to XII. (Jan. 1905 to Dec. 1910), handsomely bound in
green cloth, gilt tops, 4s. net each, post free.
Vol. IV., very scarce, 10s. net.

WILLIAM RIDER & SON, Ltd.

164 Aldersgate Street, London, E.G.

A.MERICA : Macov Publishing Co., 49 John St., New York

INDIA: A. H. Wheeler & Co., Calcutta

fV.\
