Walter Hilton, The Scale of Perfection (1396)
==========================================================================
Hilton's systematic guide to the contemplative life — the great English mystical treatise of the 14th century, companion to the Cloud of Unknowing. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.

We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web


at |http : //books . google . com/


X'li


Mwfh


(J"V\-».


' f;W


•' ./-.


THE SCALE OF :<;
PERFECTIONj*


5 >» .


2>»


THE SCALE (OR LADDER)

OF PERFECTION^* Written by
WALTER HILTONa«a« With an
Essay on The Spiritual Life of Me^
diaeval England by the Rev. J. B.
DALGAIRNS, Priest of the Oratory-


««


Moses plus prafecit in monte adorando quam
multitude magna bellantium


at


A NEW EDITION


«l«


WESTMINSTER

ART AND BOOK COMPANY

28 ASHLEY PLACE

1908


i


. j


Nihil obstat:

Bbrtrandus Wilbbrforce, O.P.

Re'imprimatur:

« EDUARDUS,

Ep, Birtninghamiensis

Die 20 Martii, 1901


//J?9^'9-r?(^^


PUBLISHERS' NOTE

Of all the old English ascetical works which
were extant before the Reformation none have
maintained their reputation longer than Walter
Hilton's " Scale of Perfection." Hilton was a
canon of Thurgarton in Nottinghamshire, and
died in 1395. His "Scale of Perfection" is
found in no less than five MSS. in the British
Museum alone. Wynkyn de Worde printed it at
least three times — ^in the years 1494, 15 19 and
1525. Many other editions were printed at the
same period.

After the Reformation it was a favourite book
of Father Augustine Baker's, the well-known
author of " Sancta Sophia," and his comments
on it are among his MSS. at Downside. In
1659 Father Baker's biographer and editor, Dom
Serenus Cressy, O.S.B., published an edition of
the " Scale," the title-page of which claims that
" by the changing of some antiquated words [it is]
rendered more intelligible." Another edition
appeared in 1672, and yet another in 1679.

Within our own times two editions have been
published— one by the late Father Ephrem Guy,


vi Publishers' Note

O.S.B., in 1869, the other, a reprint of Cressy's,
in 1870, with an introduction by Father Dal-
gaims on the " Spiritual Life of Mediaeval
England." Cressy's text has again been used in
the present edition, and Father Dalgairns's
Essay is also reprinted in this volume.


CONTENTS

CMAPTBB fAQB

An Essav on the Spiritual Life of Mediaeval

Engfland ••« ... ••• ... ..« .m i

THE FIRST BOOK

PART I

I. That the inward State of the Soul should be like

the outward i

II. Of the Active Life, and the Exercises and the

Works thereof 2

III. Of the Contemplative Life, and the Exercises and

Works thereof 3

IV, Of three Sorts that be of Contemplation, and of

the First of them 4

V. Of the Second Sort of Contemplation 6

VI. Of the Lower Degree of the Second Sort of Con-
templation 8

VII. Of the Higher Degree of the Second Sort of Con-
templation 8

VIII, Of the Third Sort of Contemplation 9

IX. Of the Difference that is betwixt the Second and

Third Sort of Contemplation 10

X. How that Appearings or Shewings to the Coiporal
Senses or Feelings may be both gooa and
evil 13

XL How thou shalt know whether the Showine or
Apparition to the bodily Senses and Feehngs
be good or evil 13

XII. How and in what things a Contemplative Man

should be busied 17

XIIL ' How Virtue beginneth in Reason and Will and is

perfected in Love and Liking, or Affection ... 18

XIV, Of the Means that bring a Soul to Contemplation 19


viii Contents


CHAPTBR PAGE

XV. (i) What a Man should use and refuse by the

Virtue of Humility 20

(ii) How Hypocrites and Heretics, for want of
Humility, exalt themselves in their Hearts
above others 26

XVI. Of a firm Faith necessary thereto, and what

thing's we ought to believe thereby ... 29

XVn. Of a firm and resolute Intent and Purpose

necessary thereto 31

XVIII. A brief Rehearsal of what hath been said, and of
an Offering- made of them altogether to
Jesus 33

PART II

I. (i) Of Prayer, and the several Sorts thereof ... 34

(ii) How they should do that are troubled with

vain Thoughts in their Prayers 42

II. (i) Of Meditation 45

(ii) Of divers Temptations of the Enemy, and

the Remedies against them 49

III. That a Man should know the measure of his
Gift, that he may desire and take a better
when God giveth it 55

PART III

I. Of the Knowledge of a Man's Soul, and the

Powers thereof necessar}' to Contemplation 57

II. Of the Worthiness and Excellency of the Soul

and how it was lost 59

III. (i) That a Man should be industrious to recover

again his ancient Dignity, and reform
within him the Image of the Trinity, and
how it may be done 65

(ii) That this Dignity and Image is restored by
Jesus, and how He is to be desired, sought
and found 66

IV. (i) Of the Ground and Image of Sin in us, which

is first to be found out and laboured
against, and how it is to be done 74

(ii) What the said Image of Sin is, properly, and

what Cometh out of it. .^ .« 77


Contents ' ix


CHAPTBR

V. (i) Of the Seven Deadly Sins, and first of Pride,
what it is, and when it is a deadly Sin and
when but venial


79


(ii) How Pride in Heretics and in Hypocrites is

deadly Sin 87

(iii) A short Exhortation to Humility and
Charity, with a Conclusion how a Man
may know how much Pride he hath in him 90
VI. (i) Of Envy and Wrath and their Branches, and
how, instead of Sin, the Person is often
hated 9a

(ii) That it is a Mastery and noble Skill to love
Men's Persons, and yet wisely to hate their
Sins, and how 93

(iii) How a Man shall know how much Wrath
and Envy is hid in the g-round of his
Heart, and how he may know whether he
loves his Enemies, and the Examples we
have thereof in our Saviour 98

VII. Of Covetousness, and how a Man may know how

much of it is hid in his Heart 102

VIII. (i) Of Gluttony, and how a Man shall know when
he sinneth not in Eating and Drinking, and
when he sinneth venially, and when deadly 106

(ii) That a Man should be busy to put away and
hinder all Motions of Sin, but more busy
about those of Spiritual Sins than those of
Bodily no

(iii) What Remedy a Man should use against the

Faults in Eating and Drinking* 113

IX. Of the Five Windows of this dark Image, and
what Cometh in by them, and how they are
to be ordered 115

X. Of another Hole or Window that is to be stopped
as well as the Windows of the Senses, viz.,
the Imagination 121

XI. A Brief Rehearsal of what hath been said in the
former Chapters, with a Portraiture of this
dark Image of Sin 122

XII. A comparing of this Image with the Image of

Jesus, and how it is to be dealt with ... 124

XIII. How a Man shall be shapen to the Image of

Jesus, and Jesus shapen in him 130


X Contents

CHAFTBR PAOB

XIV* The Conclusion of this Book, and of the Cause
why it was made, and how she for whom it
was made was to make use of it 131

J'

THE SECOND BOOK

PART I

I. (i) That a Man is the Image of God after the
Soul and not after the Body ; and how he
is restored and reformed thereto that was

misshapen by Sin 133

(H) That Jews and Fag^ans and also false Chris-
tians are not reformed effectually throug-h
the virtue of the Passion through their own

Faults X37

II. Of two Manners of Reforming of this Image, one

in fulness, another in part 140

III. That Reforming in part is in two manners, one

in Faith, another in Feeling 143

IV. That through the Sacrament of Baptism (which

is grounded in the Passion ot Christ) this
Image is reformed from Original Sin ... 144
V. That through the Sacrament of Penance (that
consisteth in Contrition, Confession and
Satisfaction) this Image is reformed from
Actual Sin 145

VL That we are to believe stedfastly the reforming
of this Image, if our Conscience witness to
us a full forsaking of Sin, and a true turn-
ing of our V\ill to good living 150

VII. Ttat all the Souls that live humbly in the Faith
of Holy Church, and have their Faith en-
livened with Love and Charity, be reformed
by this Sacrament, though it be so that
they cannot feci the special gift of Devotion

or of spiritual feeling 152

VIII. That Souls reformed need ever to 6ght and strive
against the Motions of Sin while they live
here. And how a Soul may know when
she assenteth to these Motions, and when
not 155

IX. That this Image is both fair and foul whilst it is
in this Life here, though it be reformed ;
and of the Differences of the secret Feel-
ings of those that be reformed and those
that be not .. 160


Contents xi

CHAPTER PAOB

X. Of three sorts of Men, whereof some be not re-
formed, and some be reformed only in
Faith, and some both in Faith and Feeling* 164
XL How Men that abide and live in Sin, misshape
themselves into the likeness of divers
Beasts, and they be called the Lovers of

the World 165

XI L (i) How Lovers of this World in divers ways dis-
enable themselves from becoming reformed

in their Souls 169

(ii) A little Counsel how Lovers of this World
should do, if they will be reformed in their
Souls before their departure hence... .« 171

PART n
Of Reforming in Faith and Feeling also.
L That this Reforming cannot be suddenly gotten,
but in length of Time, by Grace, and much

Spiritual and Corporal Industry 174

XL (i) The Causes why so few Souls in comparison
of the Multitude of others, come to this
Reforming that is both in Faith and

Feeling 176

(ii) How that without great Corporal and Spiri-
tual Industry, and without much Grace and
Humility, Souls cannot come to reforming
in Feeling nor keep themselves therein
after they come thereto 181

III. An Entry or good Beginning of a Spiritual

Journey, showing how a Soul should be-
have herself in intending and working that
will come to this Relbrming, by example of
a Pilgrim going to Jerusalem 186

IV. Of certain Temptations and Lettings which

Souls feel from the;r Spiritual Enemies, in
their Spiritual knowing and going towards
Jerusalem, and the Remedies against them 193
V. Of an evil Day and a good Night, and what they
mean, and how the Love of the World is
likened to an evil Day, and the love of God

to a good Night 198

VI. How that the Desire of Jesus felt in this light-
some Darkness slayeth all Motions of Sin,
and enableth the Soul to perceive spiritual
Lightnings from the heavenly Jerusalem,
that is, Jesus 204


xU Contents


VII. How a Man shall know false Illuminations, that
are feigned by the Enemy, from the true
Light of knowing that cometh out of Jesus,
and by what tokens 207

VIII. How great profit it is to the Soul to be brougfht .

through Grace into lig'htsome Darkness,
and how a Man shall dispose himself if he
will come thereto 213

IX That the Working of our Lord Jesus in the Re-
forming' of a Soul, is divided into four
times, which are: Calling', Justifying',
Magnifying* and Glorifying' 219

X. How it falleth out sometimes that Souls that are
but beginning or profiting in Grace seem
to have more Love, as to outward tokens
thereof, than some have that be perfect,
and yet it is not really so in their Interior... 223

XI. After what manner a Man shall come to know
his own Soul, and how a Man should set
his Love in Jesus, God and Man in one 1

Penoa 227

PART III

L In what Sense this Manner of Speaking* of Re-
forming- of a Soul in Feeling' is to be under« .
stood ; and in what Manner it is reformed,
and bow it is found in St Paul's Writings 235

II. How God openeth the inward Eye of the Soul to
see Him, not all at once, but by divers
times, and of three Manners of reforming'
of a Soul explained by a familiar Example 238

III. How Jesus is Heaven to the Soul, and why He is

called Fire 241

IV. Of two manner of Loves, created and uncreated, (

and how we are bound to love Jesus much '

for our Creation ; but more for our Re- |

demption ; and most of all for our Salva-
tion, throug^h the gifls of His Love ... 245

V. How that some Souls love Jesus by bodily

Fervours, and by their own human Affec- ^

tions that are moved by Grace and by

Reason. And how some love Him more

quietly by spiritual Affections only moved

inwardly through spiritual Grace of the

Holy Ghost 251


G)ntents xili

CHAPTER PAOB

VI. That the Gift of Love, among-st atl other Gifts of
Jesus, is most worthy and most profitable.
And how Jesus doth all that is well done ia
His lovers, only for Love. And how Love
maketh the exercise of all Virtues and all
S:ood Deeds light and easy 354

VIL How Love through gracious Beholding of Jesus
slayeth all stirrings of Pride ; and maketh
the Soul to lose the savour and delight in
all earthly Honours 258

VHL How Love slayeth all stirrings of Wrath and
Envy easily ; and reformeth in the Soul
the Virtues of Peace and Patience, and of
perfect Charity to his Neighbour, as He
did specially in the Apostles 264

IX. How Love slayeth Covetousness, Lechery and
Gluttony, and the fleshly delight and
savour in all the five Bodily Senses, softly
and easily, through a gracious beholding
of Jesus 267

X. What Virtues and Graces a Soul receiveth
through opening of the inner eye into the
gracious beholding of Jesus, and how it
cannot be gotten only by man's labour, but
through special grace and his own labour

also 273

XI. How such special Grace for the Beholding of
our Lord Jesus is withdrawn sometimes
from a Soul ; and how a Soul is to Behave
herself in the Absence and in the Presence
of Jesus, and how a Soul shall always de-
sire (as much as is in her) the gracious
Presence of Jesus 281

XI r A Commendation of Prayer offered up to Jesus
by a Contemplative Soul, and how stable-
ness in Prayer is a secure work to stand
in ; and how every Feeling of Grace in a
chosen Soul may be called Jesus. But the
more clean the Soul is, the more worthy
the Grace is 288

XIII. How a Soul through the opening of the spiritual
Eye receiveth a gracious Love enabling to
understand the Holy Scriptures ; and how
Jesus, that is hid in the Holy Scriptures,
showeth Himself to His Lovers 294


xiv Contents

CHAPTBR rAGB

XIV. Of the secret Voice of Jesus sounding' in a Soul,
and how it may be known. And how all
the gracious Illuminations made in a Soul
be called the Speakings of Jesus 301

XV. (i) How through gracious Opening of the Spiri-
tual Eye a Soul is made Wise, humbly and
truly to see the Diversities of Degrees in
Holy Church, as Militant, and for to see
the nature of Angels; and first of the
Reprobate 304

(ii) How by the same light of Grace the Nature
of the blessed Angels is seen. And how
Jesus is God and Man above all Creatures,
according to that which the Soul may see
of Him here 307


TREATISE WRITTEN TO A DEVOUT MAN
I. That he who intends to become a Spiritual Man
must first use much Bodily Exercise in
Penance, and in Destroying" of Sin ... 315

II. To what kind of Men the Active Life pertaineth 320

III. To whom the Contemplative Life appertaineth... 321

IV. To whom appertaineth the Mixed Life 322

V. How holy Bishops held and used the said Mixed

Life 334

VI. What kind of Life was most fitting* for him for

whom this Treatise was made 327

VII. That a Man's Devotion sometimes will be the
greater by reason of the outward Work
which before out of Charity he hath been
in hand with 334

VIII. What the Desire of God for Himself is, and how
that in Cleanness of Conscience is found
true Comfort and Sweetness 337

IX. How thou shalt Dispose thee to Devotion ... 342

X. How a Man is to Think on the Humanity of

Christ ... ... 344

XI. How a Man shall think on Virtues and upon the

Saints 345

XII. How a Man shall think of the Holiness or our

Lord Jesus and of our Blessed Lady ... 346


Contents xv

■ ■■ I I n M il 11 iiiiiii^i y i I II i.i

CRArrBR PAOT

XIII. Of seeing^ and beholdingf the Power (by some
consideration or thinkingf), the Wisdom,
the Goodness and the Mercy of God in
His Creatures 347

XIV. How the Consideration and thinkings on the
Miseries and Perils of this Life is apt to
breed in a soul the Desire of Heaven ... 348

XV. How a Man shall do when he feeleth no taste

nor comfort in his Mental Exercises ... 350

XVL What a Man is to take heed of in bis Prayers

and Meditations 351


ERRATA
Page 133, heading-, read The Second Book, Part I.
Page 234, line 9, for far read for.

Pages 237-310, headlines, for The Third Book read The
Second Book.


THE SPIRITUAL LIFE
OF MEDIAEVAL ENG-
LAND * * *


AN ESSAY

on the

Spiritual Life of Mediaeval England

It is only very gradually that we are obtaining
a real knowledge af the Middle Ages. Hitherto
it has been one of those subjects which no one
could approach without getting into a passion.
Just as no one can talk soberly of Mary, Queen
of Scots, so it would appear as if few could keep
their tempers in spewing or writing of the
mediaeval time. The fact is that it is only by
little that we can understand a period so very
different from our own. A chaotic time is always
a time of great contrasts, when profound igno-
rance exists side by side with considerable learn-
ing in individual instances, when heresies are
wild and monstrous, while faith is touchingly
simple and devoted. The real difficulty is to
estimate the condition of the masses. It requires
a patient spirit of research into minute details
and dry statistics, united with a reverential ad-
miration, a sifting criticism as well as a devout
imagination, to avoid overweighting isolated
instances and attaching undue importance to
outstanding and striking features. I am not
going to enter upon this dangerous ground. My
only anxiety is to protest against what I cannot
but consider a great error, both historically and
ecclesiastically^ the assumpjdpn that the Middle
Ages are the model time^of Christianitji^ It


a The Spiritual Life

matters little what a man thinks about mediaeval
architecture, vestments and embroidery, but it
does matter a good deal what principles a man
holds as to what may be called the philosophy of
Church History. If he conceives the grand story
of God's Church as though it were a pyramid, the
apex of which is formed by the Middle Ages,
while modem Christendom is on the downward
side, then his whole view of Christianity is
wrong. The Church never grows old, and it has
advantages in the nineteenth century which it
had not in the thirteenth. What, however,
strikes a student of history most forcibly is that
tjie more minutely we know the ages which are
past, the more we learn the oneness of the spirit
amidst all outward differences of form. We are
every day obtaining more knowledge about the
Middle Ages. Much has come to light since,
thirty years ago, I wrote some " Lives of English
Mediaeval Saints " at Littlemore, and, little as I
have been able to follow the progress of history
since then, I have seen enough to acknowledge
that recent publications have brought with them
the conviction that there was far more interior
and mystical life amongst our ancestors than
appeared at first sight.

Very much has been done for us by such
learned bodies as the Early English Text
Society, and by such men as Pfeiffer in Germany
and Lecoy de la Marche in France. Now we not
only possess sermons like those of St Bernard
addressed to monks in the cloister, but we have
the identical vernacular sermon which roused to
passionate grief the mediaeval sinner, and drew
tears of sweet devotion from the eyes of the
citizens of Cologne, Paris and London, or the
peasants of country parishes in the Black Forest


of Mediaeval England iii

or the Weald of Kent. We have the English
prayers which were said before-Jhe Rosary was
myentedr and the devotions which touched the
hearts of men and women living in the midst of
that world which seems so strange and so far off
to us. I must confess that without any deprecia-
tion of our grand old Cathedrals, " The Wooing
of our Lord" and "The Ancren Riwle" have
more charms for me than a thousand painted
windows. I know the thoughts which flowed
from hearts which have long since ceased to beat,
and I can understand, as I never did before, the
grim old warriors and their wives who look so
unearthly side by side upon their tombs. One
touch of grace makes me feel akin to them.

The perusal of this literature has, however,
far more than a sentimental interest. It has now
become simply ludicrous to look upon the devo-
tional ideas of the Middle Ages as made up of
indulgences and gifts to monasteries. These, of
course, had their right place, as they have now;
but, if ever it was doubtful, no one now can
doubt that the mediaeval sinner knew quite as
well as the gentleman of the nineteenth century
that if he offended God and did not resolve never
to offend Him again, he would infallibly be lost,
though he left all his lands to the neighbouring
convent. Priests might sing Requiems, and
nuns might recite their Office, but nought could
avail the impenitent before the judgement seat of
Christ. If any man doubt it, let him read a ser-
mon preached by Berthold of Reg-ensburg, some-
where near Toggenburg or Sargans, not far from
where the railway now skirts the lovely lake of
Wallen. The barefooted Franciscan introduces,
in his dramatic way, a man who had kept posses-
sion of ill-gotten gains rising up in the midst of


iv The Spiritual Life

the congregation, and saying : " Ho ! Brother
Berthold, I have done good to the brotherhood,
and I make my confession every year; I have
often entertained you at my house ; I am in the
confraternity, and have besought your prayers,
that when 1 am dead you may watch over my
body with song and lections." " Thou hast done
well," is the Brother's answer, " and as soon as
thou art dead we will sing for thee, and read long
vigils, and chant beautiftil Masses for thy soul,
and loud Requiems, and bring thee in procession
from thy parish church into our minster, and lay
thee before the altar. But, I tell thee, if thou
hast not restored what thou hast robbed, then, if
all the tears and the raindrops which were ever
shed or rained since the world began were turned
into monks and brothers, grey monks and black,
Preachers and Minorites — yea, into patriarchs
and prophets, martyrs and confessors, widows
and virgins, and if they were to read and to sing
and weep tears of blood before God for thee to
the day of judgement, they would do thee no
more good than if they did all this for the foul
^ fiend." Such was mediaevaJ[4Q^tn?X6 iii the year
1256. Moreover, Tf results from many hitherto
unknown documents, that there was much more
of what we should now call spirituality every-
where in the Middle Ages than even Catholics
were disposed to think. It is even plain that
nations were not reduced to one uniform stan-
dard. There was, for instance, a type_ Qf-4evo-
tion_ which was peculiarly _En^lish> and the
object of the present essay is to point this out.
Of course, I can only treat the subject cursorily,
for want of space, and I will confine myself to
one portion of mediaeval life intimately connected


of Mediaeval England


with the book which is here presented to the
reader.

Very little is known of Walter Hilton, the
author of the " Scale or Ladder of Perfection."
It _r§ vftiy likely that more niight hfiinown.if
air^^_onejtook the trpuhle.. to search, the manu-
scripts of the British Museum . Something
perhaps also might be done towards amending
the text of this book if the edition of 1659, ^f
which this is a reprint, were compared with the
old black letter of Wynkyn de Worde. The
present edition^* however^ has solely a spiritua l.
no^a;_critic ^l objf^qt . and, therefore, I confine my-
self to^ the^ little which lies on the surface of
history about this mystical writer, without in-
quiring further. Fortunately, Father- CUiy has
lately, in his excellent edition of " The Scale of
Perfection," thrown light on the life of Walter
Hilton, by proving that he did not belong
to the Carthusian Order, but was a Canpji
pf Thurgarto n, in Nottinghamshire. Tanner
had already published an extract from a manu-»
script, which gave 1395 as the year of his death.
No one, however, had as yet perceived that this
fact disproves the ordinary account of his having
been a member of Henry VI's Carthusian
monastery at Sheen, since that house was not
founded till several years later. It might still
be argued that he belonged to some other house
of the Order. As, however, there is no authority
for his having been a Carthusian except the
erroneous account of his having belonged to

♦ It should be remembered that the book was written in the
fourteenth century, and the reader must expect inaccuracies
which would not be tolerated now. For instance, I would
mention the author's views about the sins of heathens, and
inadequate notions of the Sacrament of Penance.


vi The Spiritual Life

Sheen, and as the passage quoted by Tanner
distinctly affirms him to have died at Thurgar-
ton, Father Guy seems to me to have sufficiently
proved his point. It is not hard to see how the
mistake arose. Walter Hilton had evidently a
great devotion to the Carthusian Order, and
there is still extant in manuscript a panegyric
of it, addressed to Adam Horsley, an officer of
the King's Exchequer, who by his advice be-
came a disciple of St Bruno.* On the other
hand, we shall presently see abundant proof that
the devotion of the Carthusians to Walter Hilton
was no less great. There was something in the
" Scale of Perfection " which attracted the monks
whom the Christian instincts of Henry VI planted
in the neighbourhood of his palace of Richmond,
as well as their brethren of the Charterhouse,
who kept up a witness for God in the heart of
London.

There is, however, an especial reason why the
book should have found its way to Sheen. We
«know from Dugdale that a benefactor of the
monastery had assigned out of the manors of
Lewisham and Greenwich twenty marks a year
for the maintenance of an anchoret, whose cell
was in its precincts. Thus there dwelt in the
midst of the Carthusians one of those recluses
to whose instruction the book is dedicated, and
a description of whom will form a considerable
part of this essay.

Now it is not a little strange that a large
portion of English vernacular literature has
direct reference to this form of the solitary life.

* This treatise exists in manuscript in the library of Merton
College. Mr Bliss, one of the librarians of the Bodleian, has
kindly examined it, and assures me that it nowhere implies that
Hilton himself belonged to the Order.


of Mediaeval England vli

We possess, besides Hilton's ** Scale of Perfec-
tion," two other most remarkable books, ad-
dressed to or written by anchoresses. They
will serve as specimens of the spiritual life of
our ancestors at several very striking periods.
It is very rjemarkable that Ihamoat-Startling
form of the life of tha rl^^^^rf .sf^inf<^ «t>innir^ ixave
continued in Engl^^nd .up to the very momfint
37 the JS^fionnation. The Anchorets or An-
choresses (for there were solitaries of both
sexes) were more lonely than hermits in the
sense that they were far more of recluses. The
hermit lived, it is true, in an out of the way
place, in a forest, or in one of those many un-
cultivated spots of which an English common
or down are the sole relics, but which were
easily to be found in a country not yet entirely
cultivated ; while the anchorets were commonly
attached to a church, and were thus not far fix)m
their fellowmen. They wer ^, hnw^vftr^ imn^i^fftH

tTiehermit> was ,a ^ free d er^'^^" of the woods.
As we know from St Godric, he might have
his garden and his cow. The anchorets, on
the contrary, were strictly confined to their
cells. They were the descendants of solitaries
like Sj Thais and those other recluses of whom
we read in the annals of the Nile desert, who
were strictly shut up in their hut and only held
conversation with others through a window,
which also served as a passage for their food.
This sort of life, then, was by no means peculiar
to the Oriental contemplative who fled from the
old worn-out world of a decrepit civilization.
The same taste for solitude in its most extreme
form was a part of the young and vigorous life
of those Teutonic nations whom Christianity


vm The Spiritual Life

converted after the Roman and Hellenic cul-
ture had disappeared. While the blood of the
old Vikings was still fresh in their veins, men
and women left the brilliant and varied world
of the Middle Ages, which was still full of life
and movement, to shut themselves in a cell,
with no prospect but the black yews and crosses
of the church-yard. This was a solitude far
deeper than that of the great monasteries, each
of which was a little world. It is evident that
these recluses were by no means rare. There
is many a foundation on record for the per-
petual entertainment of a recluse.* Several
Pontificals contain a regular office for these en-
closures. Very often the anchoret was a chap-
lain attached to a church, who said Mass in
his cell. The anchoress was more commonly
near a church, into which she could look through
a window, and thus take part in its holy cere-
monies. Incidental mention is often made of
such recluses in the troubled history of the
times. Two anchorets were burned in the
church at Mantes, when William the Conqueror
set fire to the town. Richard II, before setting
out on his dangerous encounter with Wat Tyler,
went to confession to the anchoret in West-
minster Abbey. It is probable that these holy
men were often spiritual directors, while, as we
shall presently see, many souls in sorrow and
trouble, came to the window of the maiden an-
choress for advice and consolation. It is true
that fi-om their very position the recluses were
exposed to great temptations. Sometimes hypo-
crites were to be found among them, as is known

• Many of these particulars are taken from the very interest-
ing account of the Anchorets in Dr Rock's ** Church of our
Fathers."


of Mediaeval England


from t\^ life of St Stephen of Obazine, where
we hear of a pretended anchoret who decamped
with sums of money entrusted to him. The
life is more intelligible in the case of a priest
who had the adorable Sacrifice to oflFer up,
confessions to hear, and Office to recite ; but
what would be the occupation of the hearts and
brains of many an English maiden during the
long days and nights which she thus spent in
the narrow circle of the four walls which thus
encaged her ? What spells did she use to cool
the restless fever in her veins ? This is revealed
to us by those treatises which we are now to
consider.

The first is the **Ancren Riwle," a book
for anchoresses, first published by the Camden
Society. The authorship of this remarkable
book is very uncertain, or rather it is imknown.
There is not a vestige of evidence to connect
it with St Richard ^ Chichester, to whom it
has been ascribed. On the faith of a manu-
script, it has been assigned to Simon of Ghent,
Bishop of Salisbury, and supposed to have been
written by him for some sisters living at Tarant
in Dorsetshire. It has also been contended that
Richard Poore, Bishc^) of the same See, was its
author. The only thing that is certain is that
it was written by a Dominican, for the list of
prayers which the writer enumerates as having
been in use among the lay brothers of his Order,
are nearly identical with those ordered in the
Rule of St Dominic* As the Black Friars did
not come to England till 1221, the book could
not have been originally written for the sisters

♦ Compare " Ancren Riwlc," p. 24, with Brockie, torn. IV,
121. It is also plain, from p. 3^ of the Riwle, that the author
did not believe the Immaculate r


jc The Spiritual Life

^

at Tarant, who before that date are known to
have been Cistercians and not recluses ; nor can
one of the above-named prelates be its author,
for they never belonged to the Order. Who-
ever was its author, it is evident that it must
have been written before French had penetrated
to any great extent into the English tongue.
A few such expressions as Deulefet (Dieu le fait)
and " sot " (foolish), show the presence of the
Norman ; and " annul " proves how early an
importation from France was weariness of
spirit in England. But the newness of words
of French origin proves how little two cen-
turies of Norman rule had succeeded in Ro-
manizing the old language of the Saxon.
Though the recluses to whom the book is ad-
dressed evidently could read French, yet the
whole language and tone of thought is essen-
tially English. The anchoresses, then, were
English girls, in the thirteenth century. Their
very names are unknown, though at that time,
probably in the reign of our Henry III, their
renunciation of the world was much spoken of
among our ancestors. ** Much word is of you,
how gentle women ye be, for godliness and for
nobleness yearned after by many ; sisters of
one father and one mother, in the blossom of
your youth having forsaken all the world's
blisses, and become anchoresses." A rich
neighbour sent them all necessaries "from his
hall." They had maidens to wait upon them,
and to provide all that they wanted from with-
out. They themselves, however, never stepped
beyond the threshold of their hermitage. One
window looked into the church, and from thence
they assisted at the holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
At another window, answering to the grill ot


of Mediaeval England xi

an enclosed convent, they gave audience to
visitors ; but from the moment of their seclu-
sion they never left their house, till they were
carried out for burial.

What could be the meaning of this apparition
in the bustling times of the thirteenth century ?
Though society was gradually settling down, yet
it was a restless age. Men did not travel for
pleasure, nor were there yearly migrations to the
seaside ; yet there was still a good deal of wan-
dering. The great migrations of nations were
over long before, and the majority of the agri-
cultural population was still practically tied to
the soil ; yet crusades and pilgrimages often
drew men to the far East and across the Alps.
The scholar wandered from university to uni-
versity for knowledge; the merchant was not
tied to his desk, but travelled from fair to fair
with all his precious wares ; the minstrel dis-
seminated news, and sung his ballads. There
was a world then, with pomps and vanities, as
there is now ; a gay, parti-coloured, motley
world, at which the Church frowned and preach-
ed. The eternal war between God and the
world was going on. It is quite true there was
less of the chronic excitement which is now
wearing the strength of souls with its wasting
fever. Pleasures were intermittent, and life more
even.* Balls were few, and generally took place
in the daytime ; public tournaments were few
and far between. Yet society was still heaving
with conflicting elements. Archbishops were
often in exile; Emperors were under the ban
of the Church; the Pope himself oftener in
Viterbo than in Rome. English barons were
harassing their king with Oxford Provisions;

* Chaire Fran9aise au Moyen Ag-e, 414.


xii The Spiritual Life

— y

Simon de Montfort was devising a real English
Parliament where the middle classes were re-
presented. All the while these maidens of the
period were praying to God day and night.

This is the secret of their life. Wherever
men believe in prayer, you are sure to have
the monastic life in some shape or other. If they
have none, they will soon cease to believe in
prayer, as is fast becoming the case in all Pro-
testant countries. Wherever the Christian idea
is strong, men who are by their position neces-
sarily involved in the strife of the world will
be glad to know that men and women who
are separated from its turmoils and its sins
are offering prayers to God for them.

It is plain that such was the occupation, and
such the idea of the anchoress. It is also true
that they did a great deal more than pray.
The very dangers against which the author of
her rule warns her are a proof that all had
many visitors. He warns her against becoming
a "babbling" or " gossiping anchoress," a varie-
ty of the species evidently drawn from the life ;
a recluse whose cell was the depdsitory of all the
news of the neighbourhood at a time when
newspapers did not exist. Her habitation is
not to be the storehouse where the neighbours
placed objects of value, that they might be safe
from the robber's hand. All this proves that the
good anchoress had means of exercising charity
towards her fellow creatures. Many a sorrowing
soul came to the window, and received balm for
her wounded spirit from behind the black cur-
tain and the white cross which hung there.
Through her servants she might even practise
hospitality to those who wanted it, and they
might act as school-mistresses to little girls


of Mediaeval England ziH

who otherwise would frequent schools were boys
were taught. All this is quite true, yet it is
plain that the chief business of the anchoress
was prayer.

It is very difficult for men living' in the
modem world to understand a life of prayer;
yet they must accept it as a real feet. Thou-
sands of Christians have lived such a life with-
out becoming either praying machines like the
Buddhists or fakirs like the Brahmins. The
principle of Christian ascetism is as far apart
from Manicheism as possible. It is simply the
imngiple of expiatory suflEexing 'an^'^ayerm-
volved in tiie very idea of the sacrifice of .Christ.
The gulf which separates the anchoress from^e
fanatic, is the love oL Jesus. Of course this is
nothing new to Catholics. Yet I think that even
Catholics are not aware to what extent this is
true of mediaeval devotion, and above all of
England. Looking at the England of to^ay
it is very difficult to realize the fact that, whilst
such a feeling towards our Lord is the very
foundation of all Christian devotion, fihere j^
undoubt ftdl Y ^ ^ in d of tender, pathetic love
which is to be f oup ^ ^'" o ld Fn clnh _ wrjtrri,
and which is peculiarly their own. If I were
asked to select the grace which is prominent in
their writings I should say that it was piety in
the sense in which the word is applied to the gift
of the Holy Ghost. The literature which is now
before us is an excellent specimen of this spirit,
because of the gre at interior free dom which^ was
a llowed to ap^^^^^ ^- T^ ey were less ikuj^^
and had t^^^^ ^•**gl1llgj2£^_^. ^^^^ ^^ r§l]^us
Qld§t5» "In this wise," says the Rule, "an-
swer to him that asketh you of your Order,
and whether it is white or black; say that


xiv The Spiritual Life

ye are both, through the grace of God, of
St James's order, about which he wrote, Im-
maculatufn se cuslodtre ab hoc scBCulOy that is,
as I said before, *From the world to keep him-
self clean and unstained.' Herein is religion,
and not in the white hood nor in the black, nor
in the white nor in the grey cowl. Thus it is
in a convent ; but wherever woman liveth or
man liveth by himself alone, eremite or anchoret,
on outward things whereof no scandal cometh,
he need lay little stress."* The anchoress had
no peculiar habit, and her ofl&ce was, as has been
said, not that of the choir, hut that of the lay
brothers. She is encouraged to say English
prayers, t At midday she made a meditation on
the crucifix. Holy meditations are especially
recommended to her. J Though, according to
the practice of the Church at the time, she made
only fifteen Communions a year, yet there is a
marked devotion to the Blessed Sacrament
throughout the treatise. Its perpetual presence
in the church is held out as a reftige against
temptation, and it is plain that from the window
which looked into the church, the anchoress
often knelt in prayer, with her eyes fixed upon
the altar where Jesus lay in the Sacrament of
His love. Let me give a few specimens of these
meditations of the thirteenth ceutury. These
then were the veritable thoughts which went
through the hearts of English anchoresses as
they knelt before the crucifix five hundred
years ago :

" Jesus, true God ! God's Son ! Jesus, true
God, true Man ! Man, maiden-born ! Jesus, my
holy love, my own sweetness ! Jesus, mine
heart, my joy, my soul's health! Jesus, sweet!

• Ancren Riwle, p. 13. t P. 291. 4: P. 2^1.


of Mediaeval England xv

Jesus, my love, my light, my healing oil, my
honey-drop ! Thou all that I hope in ! Jesus,
my weal, my winsomeness, blithe bliss of my
breast! Jesus, teach me that Thou art so soft,
and so sweet, yet, too, so lovely and so love-
some that the Angels ever behold Thee, and yet
are never full of looking on Thee ! Jesus, all
fair, before whom the sun is but a shadow, for
she loseth her light and becometh ashamed of
her darkness before Thy bright face. Thou that
givest her light, and whose is all that bright-
ness, enlighten my dark heart. Give brightness
to Thy bower, even my soul that is sooty. Make
her worthy to be Thy sweet abode. Kindle me
with the blaze of Thy enlightening love. Let
me be Thy bride, and learn me to love Thee,
the loving Lord! Wo that I am so strange
with Thee; but as Thou hast bodily separated
me from the world, separate me eke in heart;
turn me altogether to Thee, with true love and
belief."*

In another place, after a beautiftil and minute
description of the crucifixion, and how the " hell-
bairns " betrayed and crucified Him, she breaks
out : " Ah ! Jesus, my life's love, what heart is
there that will not break when he thinketh here-
of; how Thou, that art the Saviour of mankind,
and the remedy for all bales, didst thole such
shame for the honour of mankind. Men speak
oft of wonders and of strange things divers and
manifold that have befallen, but this was the
greatest wonder that ever befell upon earth.
Yea, wonder above wonders that that re-
nowned Kaiser, crowned in Heaven, maker of
all that -is made, to honour His foes would

• This interpretation is rather different from that of the
learned translator pf th^ ** Jliwle,"


xvi The Spiritual Life

hang between two thieves. Ah, how can I
live for ruth that see my darling on the rood,
and His limbs so drawn that I may tell each
bone in His body ! Ah, how do they now drive
the iron nails through Thy fair hands into the
hard rood and through Thy noble feet ! Ah,
now from those hands and feet so lovely streams
the blood so ruefully ! Ah, now they offer to
my love, who says He thirsts, two evil drinks
in His blood-letting, vinegar, sourest of all
drinks, mingled with gall, that is the bitterest
of all things ! Ah, now, sweet Jesus, yet be-
sides all Thy woe, to eke it out with shame and
mockery, they laugh Thee to scorn when Thou
hangest on the rood ! Ah, that lovely body
that hangs so ruefully, so bloody, and so cold!
Ah, how shall I live, for now dies my love for
me on the dear rood, hangs down His head, and
sends forth His soul ? But it seems to them that
He is not yet fully tormented, nor will they let
the pitiful body rest in peace. They bring forth
Longtnus with the broad sharp spear. He pierces
His side, cleaves the heart, and there come flow-
ing out of that wide wound the Blood that bought
us, the water that washes the world of guilt and
sin. Ah, sweet Jesus, Thou openest for me Thy
heart, that I may know Thee truly, for there
I may openly see how much Thou lovedst me.
With wrong should I refuse Thee my heart,
since Thou hast bought heart for heart. Jesus,
sweet Jesus, thus Thou foughtest for me against
my soul's foes. Thou didst settle the contest
for me with Thy body, and hast made of me,
a wretch. Thy beloved and Thy spouse. Brought
Thou hast me from the world to Thy bower.
I may there so sweetly kiss Thee, and embrace
Thee, and of Thy love have ghostly liking*.


of Mediaeval England xvii

What may I sufifer for Thee for all that Thou
didst thole (endure) for me ? But it is well for
me that Thou be easy to satisfy. A wretched
body and a weak I bear upon earth, and that,
such as it is, I have given Thee and will give
Thee to Thy service. Let my body hang with
Thy body nailed on the rood, and enclosed with-
in four walls, and hang I will with Thee, and
never more leave my cross till that I die."

These extracts suffice to give us an insight
into the inner life of the anchoresses of the
thirteenth century. Th ey were supported in
th^ir long imprisonmentpy the love 6T our
IjQXiL. Their thoughts were fed by the image
of Jesus. This is expressed in characteristic
words: "After the death of an earnest knight
man hangeth high in church his shield to his
memory. All so is this shield, that is, the
crucifix, set in church in such place that it
may soonest be seen, for to think thereby on
the knightship of Jesus Christ which He did
on the rood." Here is evidently a passionate,
chivalrous love of our Lord. The Rule is very
full of child-like piety, and at the same time of
shrewd common sense. Its whole tone is as
different as possible from that of the hermit of
modem fancy. There are no images of Alexan-
drian orgies, no hobgoblins worse than the an-
choress's cat, which is especially exempt from
the ban which proscribes pet animals.* She
is nothing but a simple girl, who has given up
the free life of English country maidens for the
love of Christ.

Very differ ent is, .tha. Jioxt anchoress jyho
comes under. our. consider atiojo. One of the
most remaxkable. books of the Middle Ages, is

♦ P. 417.

B


xviii The Spiritual Life

the hitherto almost unknown work called " Six-
teen Revelations of Divine Love made to a de-
vout servant of our Lord, called Mother Juliana,
an Anchoress of Norwich." * It contains visions
and passages of such beauty as to rival the reve-
lations of the Blessed Angela of Foligno. We
shall find it well worth studying.

But little is known of Mother Juliana. Her
very name has been hitherto unnoticed. It ap-
pears, however, most probable that she is the
Juliana Lampit to whom a knight, Shakespeare's
" good Sir Thomas Erpingham," t who com-
manded the English archers at Agincourt, left
a legacy in his will in 1424. Her cell was at
the east end of the church-yard of St Julian's
Church at Norwich. J She was thirty years old
and a half in May, 1373, and, as she appears to
have died in 1443, she must have lived to be
a hundred. She thus lived through some of the
most stirring times of English history. She saw
Poitiers and Agincourt, and the death of Joan
of Arc.

Nothing can show more forcibly how pro-

* Blomfield, in his History of Norfolk, p. 546, mentions
a MS., apparently existing in his day, and belong-ing- to a
clerg-yman of the name of Peck, author of ** The Antiquities of
Stamford." The book wa« first published by Cressy in 1670,
and reprinted in 1843.

t Sir Thomas Erping-ham has the credit of having been
a partisan of Wycliffe. That for twenty-eight years before his
death he was a good Catholic is certain. From the year 1400
he was an intimate friend of the Bishop of Norwich, the great
enemy of the Lollards. He is said to have built a gate at the
west end of the Cathedral as an atonement for his errors. In
the same will there is a legacy for Masses for his soul, and
special bequests to each Monk. — Blomfield, 372, 526.

X It is true that Juliana Lampit is there said to be the re-
cluse of Carrow (v. Blomfield, p. 515). The church of St Julian,
however, belonged to the nunnery of Carrow, and therefore the
recluse might very well have been called by that name. — Pp.
S45» 54^1 862, where 1528 is evidently a misprint for 1428.


of Mediaeval Ens:Iand xix

foundly the minds of men in the fourteenth cen-
tury were stirred down to their lowest depths
than the appearance in an obscure anchoress of
those fundamental questions concerning good
and evil, which, however laid to rest in times
of peaceful faith, are sure to start up afresh
whenever the minds of men are strongly moved.
We know that the time was marked by an out-
burst of mystical life in Germany, and that
Eckhart, Tauler and the Blessed Henry Suso are
proofs of the existence of a deeply speculative
as well as religious spirit ; but we were not pre-
pared to find it in England. This is the more
remarkable because there is no trace of any con-
nexion between the German and English move-
ment. In one short passage alone, Juliana, in
the crude English expression, "unmade kind is
God," * might seem to give utterance to the doc-
trine so prominent in Eckhart that creatures,
considered as eternally present to God's mind,
are identical with God. It was such expressions
as these which drew upon the Dominican the
censure of the Church, which, after his sub-
mission, he modified, and which reappear in
writers of his school, such as the Blessed Henry
Suso, but with explanations which render them
harmless. Their occurrence in Mother Juliana
is very remarkable. We might be tempted to
suppose that they were an importation into
Norwich through the immigration of Flemish
weavers. We must, however, remember that
this school of mysticism, represented by Ruys-
brock, appeared later in Flanders than in the
Rhineland. These views, then, are only another
proof, among many, of the simultaneous appear-
ance of ideas in places unconnected with each

• P. 157.


XX The Spiritual Life

other. Like volcanoes, distant from each other,
bursting out into flame at one and the same
moment, they reveal the existence of some fiery
depths at work in the very heart of Christendom.
In Juliana's mind, however, this view of creation
is only subordinate to that which absorbs and
agonizes her whole being — the mystery of the
existence of sin. Like the faces of fiends which
grin in stone down upon us from the roof of
a Gothic cathedral, the thought haunted her cell
and mocked her at her prayers. In her mind it
does not take the shape of the modern difficulty
of the existence of suffering, eternal or temporal.
It is true that even in this shape the difficulty
was not entirely unknown to the Middle Ages.
In Dante's great poem, for instance, the question
of the eternal destiny of the heathen is treated
with a freedom which we should not have ex-
pected. Even in the preceding century Brother
Berthold is obliged to answer both popular and
learned objections to the doctrine of everlasting
punishment.* This, however, is never doubted
by Mother Juliana. With her the difficulty is
the possibility of the existence of such a horror
as sin in creatures, which, even in the natural
order, are so connected with God that in Him
they "move and have their being." Above
all, in the supernatural order, how could there
be sin in souls predestinated to heaven ? " How
may this be ? For I know by the common teach-
ing of holy Church, and by mine own feeling,
that the blame of our sins continually hangeth
upon us from the first man unto the time when
we come up into Heaven. And between these
two contraries my reason was greatly troubled
by my blindness, and could have no rest, for

♦ Pfeiflfer, p. 386,


of Mediaeval England xzi

dread that His blissful presence should pass
from my sight, and I to be left in unknowing
how He beheld us in our sin. My longing en-
dured, Him continually beholding; and yet I
could have no patience in great fear and per-
plexity." Her mind is torn because she must
hate sin, "as holy Church teacheth," yet that
hateful thing exists in the predestinate.* In vain
she takes refuge in the views of the schoolmen
that sin has " no manner of substance, ne no part
of being, ne it might not be known but by the
pain thereof." t It was but poor comfort that
sin, being a defect and therefore a negation, can
be no object of cognition. The fiend was too
powerful to be laid by metaphysical distinctions.
Conscience and "the doom of the Church"
alike cried out that it was a horrid fact, an
"ugly sight," and that many creatures "shall
be damned to Hell without aid, as holy Church
teacheth me to believe."^ The agony of soul
still continued: "I cried inwardly with all my
might, seeking unto Grod for help, moaning
thus : * Ah ! Lord Jesus, King of bliss, how shall
Ibeeasedr'"§

This is very different from the "Ancren
Riwle." There we saw none but the ordinary
temptations of the soul, "the world and the
flesh." Here is a soul racked by the agony of
perplexity, torn by the throes of doubt. It is not
the fruit of modem scepticism, " the spirit which
always contradicts." Shft ta^es for p rranted a ll
the gran d my steries of "fieaveiTiiuLearth^ --^J^^i^
{fiis. very certainty whict causes intolerable j^flin.
lliis soul has a tremendous grasp of the reality
of God, which she expresses with terse energy.
" The Trinitie is God," she exclaims, " God is

♦P. no. tP. 62. :tP. 71- §P. ixx-


xxU The Spiritual Life

the Trinitie, the Trinitie is our maker, the
Trinitie is our keeper, the Trinitie is our ever-
lasting lover, the Trinitie is our endless joy and
our blisse, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
our Lord Jesus Christ ; and this was showed
in the first sight (vision) and in all. For when
Jesus appeareth, the Blessed Trinity is under-
stood as unto my sight."* Yet with all this,
there was that ** ugly sight " of sin, obscuring
the very face of God, shaking " the holy Church
in sorrow and anguish and tribulation, as men
shaketh- a cloth in the wind,"t coming like a
dark cloud between her and the crucifix. Truly
here is an anchoress worth studying, if only
because it gives us a new and unexpected in-
sight into the mediaeval time.

The fact is hers was a dismal age. The
more we study history, the more preposterous
it seems to lump together into one the whole
of those ages commonly called the Ages of
Faith. There is as much difference between
the twelfth and fourteenth centuries as between
the fourteenth and the nineteenth. The power
of the Church throughout the Middle Ages has
certainly been much exaggerated. There were
continual fluctuations of victory and defeat. Even
in the thirteenth century she was by no means
omnipotent; certainly at the beginning of the
fourteenth her influence was sensibly growing
less. I wish, however, just now especially to
point out that, simultaneously with the fierce
attack of Europe on the Papacy, of which the
treatment of Boniface VIII by Philip the Fair
was the beginning, there came an undoubted
outburst of sin, a marked progress in vice. It
is absurd to look for the cause of this enmity

♦ P. 9. t P. 63.


of Mediaeval England xxiii

in the Papacy itself. Boniface laid claim to
nothing whatsoever which was not sucessfully
claimed by Innocent III. The causes were to
be found in society itself, in profound social
changes which were bringing on political revolu-
tions. The unchristian principles which from
the first were contained in chivalry, its courts
of love, and its impure literature, were now
getting entirely the upper hand over its high
and virtuous ideal. The germ of all this wick^-
ness had been at an early period brought over
to England by the Queen of Henry II, the
Eleanor of the South of France. Since John
England had been ruled by men who, with all
their faults, were good and religious — Henry,
Dante's "king of simple life,"* and the noble
Edward, his son ; but the brilliancy of Cressy
and Poitiers cannot blind us to the licentious-
ness of the court of Edward III, even though we
disbelieve the common story of his affection for
the Countess of Salisbury. Minute details on
the subject of dress and manners, from con-
temporaries of Mother Juliana, come to us from
too many sources to leave a doubt on the de-
generacy of the times. The dress and demeanour
of the ladies of the upper classes scandalized the
people, and were a distinct change for the worse.
" In these days," says Knighton, *' arose a mur-
mur and clamour among the people, that when-
ever there was a tournament, there came a great
concourse of ladies of the court, costly and
beautiful, but not of the best of the kingdom, in
divers and wonderful rich apparel, in divided
tunics, one part of one colour and one of another,
with short caps and bands in the manner of cords
wound round the head, and zones well bound

* Purg, vii.


xxiv The Spiritual Life

round with gold or silver, and in pouches across
their bodies knives called daggers, and thus they
proceeded on chosen coursers or well-governed
horses to the place of tournament ; and so ex-
pended and devastated their goods, and vexed
their bodies with scurrilous wantonness, that the
murmurs of the people sounded everywhere ; and
thus they neither feared God nor blushed at the
chaste voice of the people/'* Evidently these
ladies of the period were worse than their grand-
mothers. Let any one call to mind the Parson's
sermon in the " Canterbury Tales," and he will
see that this immodesty continued in the reign
of Richard II. This change of manners was,
however, by no means confined to England.
Loud complaints arose from every land in
Europe. Dante's sad and beautiful description
of the simplicity of the old Florentine life which
he had known in his early years, and his in-
dignant lines against the low dresses introduced
among the Florentine ladies of the fourteenth
century,! are too precise to allow us to suppose
them to be the product of a morbid mind. The
sober prose of the chronicle bears out the langu-
age of the poet. " People at this time," says the
Roman author of Rienzi's life, " began to change
much in their habits, both in dress and conduct."
Documents from Pavia, Piacenza and Milan
bear witness to the same change for the worse,
especially in the modesty of the young. J As for
France, the universal voice accuses it of being
the centre of corruption and vice. Already, at
the end of the preceding century, a preacher of
the south of France attacks customs which

* Quoted in Longman's Edward III, i, 295,

t Compare Pwr^. 23 and Par. 15, 16.

X Canta, Histoire des Italiens, tom. 7, c. 123.


o( Mediaeval England xxv

only appeared later elsewhere.* Villani traces
Florentine degeneracy to the visit of the French
in 1384.1 The same degeneracy appears in
Germany. Landino, a commentator on Dante,
mentions a circumstance of German life which
resembles St Chrysostom's invectives against the
public baths of the Eastern Empire. The whole
subject is thus summed up by a competent writer J :
" Since the end of the thirteenth century the
comfort and material prosperity of all classes in
Italy, the Netherlands, France and Germany
were much greater owing to the spread of com-
merce and intercourse. On all sides are seen a
tendency to luxury and a rapid change of fashion
which already, under Philip IV, called forth a
formal sumptuary ordinance for the nobility,
clergy and citizens." It was just one of those
periods in which the heart of Christians like
Mother Juliana are profoundly stirred by the
sight of the increasing wickedness of mankind.
Nor need we wonder that the knowledge of
the wickedness of the world should have reached
the cell of the recluse. It so happens that the
anchoress lived in the centre of these political
revolutions, which were the result of this very
degeneracy of chivalry. Norwich, with its 60^000
inh^cbitants, was the second C.ity iji the kingdom,
and represented more interests than even Lon-
don. No one can fail to have been struck with
the prominence of financial details in the annals
of the reign of Edward III. The great conqueror
is forced to leave his great crown and his little
crown and his Queen's crown in pledge, and his
nobles as hostages for his debts, before he can set
sail from the continent and return to his own

* Chaire Fran^aise au Moyen Age, P. 409. t CantCi, Ibid.
X Schwab, Johannes Gerson, p. 38.


xxvi The Spiritual Life

kingdom. A great part of his revenues came
from taxes on wool, and as Norwich was the
great seat of woollen manufactures, it acquired
an immense preponderance in an age when al-
most daily alternations between protectionist
and free-trade principles prove the attention
paid to its peculiar branch of commerce. The
city was therefore always profoundly stirred by
England's revolutions, and wild storms surged
up to the very doors of the cell of the Anchoress
of Carrow. Every party in the realm was re-
presented there. About seventy years before
Juliana's birth there had been fighting in the
streets between the partisans of the Abbey and
the citizens. The old-world privileges of the
Church, given in times when the monks were
almost the only agriculturists, became galling
to the rich wool-merchants of Norwich, and
a bloody fight had been the result. The agi-
tation had, however, worked deeper down ; and
a lower stratum of society was in process of
upheaval. In the great insurrection of 1381 the
French Revolution had been well-nigh antici-
pated. Two elements of strife were at work, and
each affected Norwich. First there was the re-
bellion of labour against property* The awful
visitation of the Black Death had carried oflF
a vast proportion of the ill-fed, comfortless
villains. The result was a great rise in wages,
which Parliament attempted to keep down by
legislation. This produced a long strike among
the labourers, who fled from the uncultivated fields
and flocked into the towns. From one single
manor, that of Cossey, no fewer than eighteen
villains in one year fled to Norwich; out of
these eight received their freedom on the plea
of their having had a domicile for a year and


of Mediaeval England xxvii

a day. This occurred earlier in the century,
but by Juliana's time hundreds must thus have
been turned into free manufacturers instead of
serfs. In that one city there were congregated
all the conflicting elements of society — the rich
Abbey, the wealthy merchant, the Flemish
manufacturer and the freed serf. This of it-
self, however, might have been insufficient to
raise the storm if it had not been for a cause
to which I have adverted. The increasing and
ruinous luxury of the nobles produced a grind-
ing oppression of the poor. This had always
been contained in the bosom of feudalism. In
that system those who were not possessors of
land, the villains and the serfs, had but little
to trust to but the conscience of their lord and
the customs which regulated their services. As
long as the lord had comparatively simple wants,
the serf was less oppressed. But when a licen-
tious court showed an example of prodigality,
the infection spread through the whole of the
feudal hierarchy. The knight still swore to de-
fend the poor and the oppressed, but when he
wanted money for his multiplied needs, the
temptation to wring it out of the vassal was
too strong to be resisted. Here again we have
a cloud of witnesses from all sides. The evil
had begun earlier in France. "The order of
knighthood," says James of Vitry in a sermon,
*' is now-a-days in many cases corrupt ; they use
their strength like furious madmen. Many harry
their vassals by corvies^ as they are called, and
give them no bread to eat." * " Let the serf be
too happy that I have left him his calf and
spared his life," said a nobleman, who had
carried off a poor man's cow. Matters had

• Chaire Fran^aise, 357,


xxviii The Spiritual Life

become ten times worse at the period of which
we are writing. The world had less conscience,
and there are fewer stories on record of the
signal punishment of the oppressor. " Jacques
Bonhomme will not pull out his purse unless
you beat him, but Jacques Bonhomme will pull
out his purse because he will be beaten," was the
common talk.* Jacques Bonhomme took a fearful
revenge. The horrible rebellion of the Jacquerie
was the result. In England it took a longer
time to stir up these elements of horror. There
was a better feeling amongst us, and the Com-
mons in the Good Parliament presented a peti-
tion for a law to forbid the lords of the demesnes
to exercise sovereign authority by taxing the
villain.t The king answered that he would act
as seemed good to him. The answer cost Eng-
land a civil war. Six years later London was
in the hands of Wat Tyler at the head of the
Kentish serfs, and the blood of the Archbishop
of Canterbury stained the streets of the city.
Men perpetrated horrible crimes, but they were
maddened by an unjust tax, levied by officials
who insulted the honour of those who were
nearest and dearest to them. Here again Nor-
wich was in the midst of the fight. A dyer of
Norwich was at the head of the peasants, and
its Bishop, of the noble house of Spencer, in
full armour, with a few lancers, rode and hewed
down the insurgents, and arrested their leader.
While all these horrors were enacted at the city
gates, Juliana was leading her life of miraculous
prayer. Amidst decaying chivalry and chaotic
revolt the saints of God were suffering. It is
remarkable that on the same blood-stained flats
of Norfolk, over which formerly, in quieter times,
• Longman's Life of Edward III, ii, 24. t Ibid., 259.


of Mediaeval England xxix

St Walstan, of the royal house of Cedric, had
driven the plough as a poor labourer, now in
this most troubled century, an English peasant
maiden, Jane the Meatless, was adoring and
loving the Blessed Sacrament, which for many
years was almost her only food.

Into this witch's cauldron was thrown another
ingredient. Up to this time Europe can hardly
be said to have given birth to an indigenous
heresy. Such errors as those of Berengarius
and Gilbert de la Por6e were chiefly confined
to the schools, and only afFected the laity in
a comparatively small degree. Heresies of the
Albigensian class were the descendants of
Gnostics and Manichees.* Public opinion was
against them, and the very jongleurs in their
songs satirized the Vaudois. We find^ however,
in the fourteenth p^ntury the be^Suung oJ a^is-
tinctxeyort of the cultivated class against Chris-
tianity. They are already numerous enough to
fill the sixth circle of Dante's Hell. In the case
of Fredrick II it was still possible to refer his
scepticism to what has been well called Ghi-
belline culture. But now out of the dismal
tombs arise at once spirits who belonged to
both the great parties of the time. Farinata
was a Ghibelline, Cavalcante was a Guelph.
Hitherto England had been singularly free from
intellectual revolts against the Church. The Do-
minican author of the " Ancren Riwle " thanks
Grod that England is free from heresy. In Mother
Juliana's time, however, the land was stained
with native error. It is to the disgrace of Wy-
cliflFe that while he taught doctrines which, not-

* It is true that Malespina mentions Epicureans (Muratori, 8,
933), even in the Countess Matilda's time, but there seem to
have been heretics of an older type to whom Malespina gives
a name more familiar to himself^


XXX The Spiritual Life

withstanding his disclaimers, struck at the root
of all property, he played into the hands of the
party of the rapacious nobles, headed by the
Duke of Lancaster. The citizens of London rose
in disgust against the priest who insulted their
bishop and was protected by the man who was
the defender of abuses, which the Black Prince
rose from his bed of death to oppose in his place
in Parliament. We have not, however, anything
to do with " ^ycliffe's social views. I must ad-
vert to the speculative part of his system in order
to contrast it with that of the recluse of Norwich,
for there is sometimes a coincidence of language
which might deceive the unwary. Little do they
know of WycliflFe who look upon him as a sort of
modem Evangelical because he translated the
bible and abused the mendicant Orders. That
he was a morning-star of the Reformation we
have no diflBlculty in allowing, a fitting Lucifer
for such a day. Some writers have connected
him with Ockham, because Merton College
had the honour of producing both. In point of
fact, the two doctors were at the very opposite
extremes of the poles of scholastic thought.
Wycliffe identifies nominalism with heresy and
held i^alism in its most intrepid form. "We
meet in him," says a Protestant writer, " with
elements which in their logical evolution would
have led to Pantheism." What they did lead to,
according to the same authority, was " a denial
of free-will " in God and man. So thoroughly
and absolutely did he identify in God the idea
and the fact, the order of thought and the order
of being, that he denies to God the conception
of any possible things beyond what is or will be
actual. Thus creation, present or future, is the
measure of God's omnipotence. The old me-


of Mediaeval England xxxi

taphysical bull-dog of the North country, the
<<quidam Borealis" of Walsingham, hung on
with all his teeth to his premisses, in spite of
the immorality of the conclusion. God, accord-
ing to_ him, was neither more norTess free "in
the .creation^oftKe 'World than in the generation
of ihe.Soiu I need not say that this is direct
Panth eism, since it makes the universe a ne-
cessary "jiiart o£.^od. WyclifFe saw and was
not scared by the fearful danger of throwing
the causality of evil upon God. He tries to
escape from it, indeed, by the scholastic view
that sin is but a negation, and therefore cannot
be the object of the Divine ideas. But he did
not fear to say that all things happen by abso-
lute necessity.* "Accordingly all sin appears
to him a necessary thing; all is required in
order to the beauty of the universe." This
might have appeared at first sight as unintelli-
gible nonsense, but it has borne a most bitter
fruit. Unfortunately a good deal of what some
are inclined to dismiss as metaphysical subtlety
leads to endless misery, and turns to very in-
telligible blasphemy. The slightest acquain-
tance with the schoolmen will enable us to see
that WycliflFe's views are an audacious perver-
sion of scholastic principles. His denial of
possible things in God is a shameless use of
St Thomas's "Actus Purus," and his theory of
evil a still more shameless abuse of the view
that sin is a defect not a substance.

"We are now in a condition to show how

* Neander, vol. ix, p. 241, Bohn's edition. He appends the
following" note, ''Among the forty-five articles attributed to
WyclifFe, the proposition, 'Omnia de necessitate absolute
eveniunt,* might justly be condemned as one actually belonging"
to him." Neander is my authority throughout, for I am not
^ acquainted with Wycliffe's writings.


xxxii The Spiritual Life

groundless is the notion that Mother Juliana's
expressions in the least imply a tendency to
the errors of WycliflFe. Both fact and doctrine
render such a notion preposterous. It so hap-
pens that we have Walsingham's testimony
that "Faith and religion remained inviolate in
the diocese of Norwich." The martial prelate
whom we met just now threatened to bum any
Lollard whom he caught, and would, without
doubt, have kept his word. The recluse was
under ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and was too
marked a person to escape if her works had had
a really WycliflBlte tendency. Furthermore, her
tender devotion to our Lady, her reverence for
the saints, her very mode of life rendered it im-
possible. Wycliffe denied the necessity of con-
fession, calls the canonization of saints blasphe-
mous, and enclosure within stone walls a result
of " the cursed spirit of falsehood." The only
passages which would lend a colour to such an
imputation on the recluse are those which we
have already quoted, and others * which imply
strong views about predestination, the impos-
sibility of the ultimate fall of the elect, and the
loving care of God for the souls of the elect if
they fall into sin. All these coincidences only
show how deeply the minds of men were stirred,
since we find views on these subjects in the very
cell of the recluse. It would be simple ignorance
to suppose that such thoughts were confined to
Wycliffe, and could only be derived from him.
Bradwardine had already made them familiar.
How far even the popular mind was tossed
about by questions of fi-ee-will and grace is plain
from the fact that in Chaucer the Nun's Priest
mentions Bradwardine's book ; and the existence

• For instance, p. 131.


of Mediaeval England xxxiii

of these disputes is thus referred to as well-
known to an assembly such as that which com-
posed the Canterbury Pilgrims, to mine host
of the Tabard, to the miller and the reeve.

What has already been proved contrary to
fact can still be shown to be impossible by a
comparison of doctrine. The few coincidences
between Mother Juliana and Wycliffe are among
the many proofs that the same speculative view
often means different things in different systems.
Both St Augustine, Calvin and Mahomet believe
in Predestination, yet an Augustinian is some-
thing utterly different from a Scotch Cameronian
or a Mahometan. The same words mean different
things in the mouths of different people. The idea
which runs through the whole of Mother Juliana
is the very contradictory of Wycliffe's Pantheis-
tic Necesitanarianism, The moment that a man
believes in any real sense in a loving Grod he
ceases to be a Pantheist. It is not enough to
believe in a beneficent spirit, for universal bene-
volence may be a blind impulse, but since love
is a free gift of self, a spirit who can love is free,
and a being who is free is at once personal.*
The very basis, however, and the essence of
Mother Juliana's views are her belief in the
lovingness of God. Few since the beginning
of Christianity have spoken of the love of God
like this English recluse. After the agony of
the black night of sin, her only consolation is

• ** We premise this, that when we attribute Personality to
God, we intend to asseverate of Him nothing- else than that He
is a Being (Wesen) separated from all other existence (Sein),
self-subsisting, self-conscious, and free." — Kleutgen, Theologie,
i, 229. In other words, though freedom does not constitute
Personality, yet every free intellectual being must be personal.
Thus, because the Sacred Humanity was free, it must ipso facto
have possessed a personality, f.#., since it had none of its own,
that of the Divine Word.

C


xxxiv The Spiritual Life

to plunge into the great abyss of Grod's love.
" Thus Jesus Christ, that does good again evil,
is our very Mother. We have our being of Him,
where the ground of Motherhood beginneth, with
all the sweet keeping of love that endlessly
foUoweth. As verily as God is our Father, as
verily is Grod our Mother; and that showeth
He in all; and namely in these sweet words
there He saith, *I it am,' that is to say, *I it
am, the might and the goodness of the Father-
head ; I it am, the wisdom and the kindness of
the Motherhead; I it am, the light and the
grace that is all blessed love; I it am, the
Trinity ; I it am, the Unity ; I it am, the high
sovereign goodness of all manner things; I it
am that maketh thee to long ; I it am, the end-
less fulfilling of all true desires/ Our high
Father, Almighty Grod, which is being, He
knoweth us and loved us from before any time.
Of which knowing in His fidl deep marvellous
charity, by the far-seeing endless counsel of all
the blessed Trinity, He would that the Second
Person should become our Mother, our Brother,
and our Saviour. Whereof it followeth that as
verily as Grod is our Father, verily Grod is our
Mother." In a perfect rapture of love, she
goes on, '* Our kind Mother, our gracious
Mother, for He would all whole become our
Mother in all things ; He took the ground of
His work full low and fiill mildly in the maiden's
womb. In this low place He arrayed Him, and
dight Him all ready in our poor flesh, Himself
to do the service and the office of Motherhead
in all things. We wit that all our mothers
bear us to pain and to dying. What is that
but our very Mother Jesus ? He alone beareth
us to joy and to endless living, blessed mote


of Mediaeval England xxxv

He be. Thus He sustained us with Him, in
pain and travail, unto the full time that He
would suffer the sharpest thorns and grievous
pains that ever were or shall be, and died at
the last. And when He had done and so borne
us to bliss, yet might not all this suffice to His
marvellous love. And that He showed in these
high ever-passing words of love, < If I might
suffer more, I would suffer more.' He might
no more die, but He would not stint working.
Wherefore Him behoveth to feed us, for the
dear-worthy love of motherhood hath made
Him debtor to us. The mother may give her
child to suck her milk ; but our precious Mother
Jesus, He may feed us with Himself and doth
full continuously and tenderly with the Blessed
Sacrament. This is precious food of very life, and
with all the sweet sacrament He sustaineth us
full mercifully and graciously. And so He meant
in these blessed words, when He said, * I it am
that Holy Church preacheth thee and teacheth
thee.' That is to say, all the health and life of
the sacraments, all the virtue and the grace of my
word, all the goodness that is ordained in Holy
Church to thee, I it am.' The mother may lay
her child tenderly to her breast ; but our tender
Mother Jesus He may homely lead us into His
blessed by His sweet open side, and show us
there in party of the Godhead. And that showeth
He in the ninth Revelation, giving the same
understanding in His sweet word when He saith,
* Lo how I love thee.' " * This is the key-note
of her whole book, the solution of all her doubts.
She attempts no reasoning, and has no logical
answer to her difficulties. She simply plunges
into the depths of God's love. ** There I was

•P. 149-


xxxvi The Spiritual Life

learned that I should only enjoy in our blessed
Savioiu: Jesus, and trust in Him for all things.
And thus our good Lord answered to all questions
and doubts that I might make, saying full com-
fortably : * I may make all things well, and I can
make all things well, and I shall make all things
well, and I will make all things well, and thou
shalt see thyself that all manner of things shall
be well." This, after all, is the sole refuge of
poor humanity. Yet it is not a mere sentiment.
It is based on a deep view of God's g^reat attri*
butes. Grod is not merely a benevolent being.
She distinguishes His pity from His love. Down
in the depths of His eternity there has been
a longing, which she calls " a ghostly thirst," a
" love-longing." ♦ ** For as truly as there is
a property (attribute) in God of ruth and pity, as
verily there is a property in God of thirst and
longing. And this property of longing and
thirst cometh of the endless goodness of Grod ;
right as the property of pity cometh of His end-
less goodness ; and though He kave longing and
pity, they are sundry properties (dijBFerent attri-
butes) as to my sight."

Put this side by side with Wycliffe's deep
growl at abuses rather than sin, his heaven of
brass, and his iron destiny ; it looks like and is a
different religion. Not only the feeling which
actuates, but the intellectual basis which ani-
mates it is the direct contradiction of his whole
system. She belongs to the genuine school of
English mystics which we have pointed out. Her
love for Jesus is of the same kind as that found in
the ** Ancren Riwle." The supernatural events
of her life remind us of what has been often
thought to be peculiar to Continental devotion.
• P. 6;.


of Mediaeval England zxzvH

Here is a poor English recluse, who has visions
not unworthy of being read by the side of those
of her g^reat contemporary, St Catherine of Siena.
This is a phase of English mediaeval life which
we little suspected. Juliana is a recluse very
different from the creatures of the imagination of
writers on comparative morals. So far frx>m
being cut off from sympathy with her kind, her
mind is tenderly and delicately alive to every
change in the spiritual atmosphere of England.
Every storm was felt with an electric shock
through her inmost being. The earthquake
council made the cell of the poor recluse rock to
and fro as violently as the stones of old St Paul's.
The four walls of her narrow home seem to be
rent and torn asunder, and not only England,
but Christendom appears before her view.* It
was not the crucifix which came before her in her
visions, but the very form of the crucified Jesus,
"with the plenteous bleeding of the head, the
great drops of blood falling down from under the
garland of thorns." And this was seen at
Norwich, the English Manchester of the four-
teenth century, when Cressy and Poitiers were
still fi^esh in men's minds, and the Black Prince
was lying sick at Berkhampstead. At that time
England had not separated itself from the great
stream of Christian life.

A fiirther proof the intimate connection be-
tween the spiritual and social life of England is
furnished us by the history of the remarkable
treatise to which this Essay serves as an intro-
duction. The precise time when it was actually
written is unknown ; all that is certain is that the

* How accessible were anchoresses to the influence of the
outer worid is proved by the curious fact that the last anchoress
of Carrow was actually perverted by Bilocy, and tamed Pro-


xxxvlii The Spiritual Life

" Scale of Perfection " must have been written
before 1395, when its author died. As Juliana's
book was written in 1370, it is plain that there
cannot have been any great difference in date
between the composition of the two works. It
tells much for the spiritual life of England that
in the fourteenth century such a treatise as the
" Scale of Perfection " should have been written.
It is, however, to the subsequent history of the
book that I wish to point rather than to its
origin ; it so happens that the period assigned
for the commencement of Walter Hilton's in-
fluence coincides with that of the close of Mother
Juliana's life.* Unlike Mother Juliana's book,
which remained comparatively unknown, Walter
Hilton's treatise evidently had a wide circulation.
The number of existing manuscripts scattered
through various cathedral and other libraries
bear witness to its popularity. It was translated
into Latin by a Carmelite early in the fifteenth
century. It was high in repute with the Carthu-
sians, and this in itself is a guarantee of its being
extensively read. No order was so respected in
England and other Teutonic countries as the
Carthusian. Those who speak most mournfully
of the bad state of Christendom just before the
Reformation, always make an honourable excep-
tion of the sons of St Bruno. They were spiri-
tual directors of Gerard Groot in the Low
Countries, and of Colet, More and Fisher in
England. One of their especial employments
was the translation and propagation of good
spiritual books, as we know from Surius, through
jvhom Tauler and Henry Suso were made known

* Blomiield, 546. All that is known is that she was alive in
1443, but was a hundred years old. She had two servants to
wait upon hen


of Mediaeval England xxxix

to the Church in a Latin dress. Walter Hilton
was the favourite author of Margaret, Countess
of Richmond, the spiritual child of Fisher. The
art of printing was as yet in its infancy when the
"Scale of Perfection" was at once printed in
black letter by Wynkyn de Worde, and other
editions rapidly appeared. This, then, is the re-
markable fate of this book. A treatise on the
spiritual life, originally written by an obscure
author in a small house of Aug^tinian Canons
in Nottinghamshire and addressed to the most
solitary of all the varieties of monastic life, is
chosen to be the guide of good Christians in
the courts of kings and in the world. Through-
out the dismal wars of the Roses, and the more
dismal reign of Henry VIII, many a heart was
streng^thened and consoled by Walter Hilton.
The very copy still exists which must have been
in the hands of the martyred Carthusians, the
glow from whose pallid faces lit up the cell of Sir
Thomas More as he gazed down at them as they
were dragged on the hurdle to execution. The
selfsame book was to be found in the palace of the
mother of Henry VII. How she loved it, the rude
lines in Wynkyn de Worde's edition will testify :

This heavenly book more precious than gold,
Was lately directed with g^eat humility,
For godly pleasure therein to behold
Unto the right, noble Margaret, as ye see,
The King's Mother of excellent bounty,
Harry the Seventh, that Jesus him preserve.
This mighty Princess hath commanded me
T' imprint this book her grace for to deserve.

Now, all this is very worthy of remark. Here
is a book written for a recluse, yet printed and
recommended as a book of devotion, not for the
cloister, but for good Christians in the world.


The Spiritual Life


This is quite a new feature, and points at once to
the fact that the interior life was spreading in
England. What is the significance of this fact?
Enough has been already said to show that the
religious life of the Middle Ages was not the
formal ritualism which many have supposed.
German scholars have done a vast deal to destroy
this illusion by the publication of old religious
books in the vernacular tongue. We have only
got to look at Mone's collection of mediaeval
hymns, and to observe the frequent notices of
translations, not only into German, but into
French and Italian, to be convinced that the
songs of the Church were accessible to the poor,
and even in common use amongst them in their
own language. Jacopone de Todi's beautiful
hymns are a proof of the popularity of spiritual
songs other than the liturgical hymns of the
Breviary. There are extant also hymns sung
and prayers said in various languages — French,
Proven9al, German and English — to be used at
the Elevation, the Holy Communion, and on
various feasts.* Didactic books of devotion in the
vernacular tongue, such as Tauler's "Nachfolge,"
"L'Intemelle Consolation," and in English the
"Ayenbite of Inwit" or Remorse of Conscience
prove that spiritual reading was practised. It is
plain then that our mediaeval ancestors were by
no means so chained to the letter, so unspiritual
as some have supposed. Nevertheless it is true
that the "Scale of Perfection" is a step forward,
indicating a greater spread of the spiritual life
among Christians in the world.

The fact is that there was arising, at the close
of the feudal period, a new clas3, which had to
be legislated for. We often use the terms me-
* V. Mone, i, 286, 293, 254, and Ancren Riwle.


of Mediaeval England xli

diSBval and modem without much reflection on
the real diflference between society as it was con-
stituted then and now. The feudal society wa s
a great hierarc hy qL dutifts. Of course, wherever
Christianity exists property must involve duties;
in the mediaeval time property and duty were
absolutely synonymous. Property was held on
conditions of certain sevices, and was forfeited
when these were withheld. In theory the feudal
sovereign was the owner of the soil, and the
nobles held their lands of him on a definite
tenure. Combined with this was the view that
each noble was despotic on his own land, and
administered justice to the serfs who lived upon
it. Horridly oppressive and tyrannical as the
system became in fact, it was founded on the
notion of reciprocal obligations. The noble de-
fended and fought for the serf, who in his turn
laboured for the lord. The consequence of this
state of things was that there did not exist a
single man who had nothing to do. Indepen-
dently of the absence of available wealth and of
means of being comfortable, the very fact of
possessing something implied that a man must
work. Every little lord who possessed as much
as a tower was fully occupied in the administra-
tion of justice, in the government of his vassals,
and in actual war or the keeping himself ready
for it. Robbery, injustice and crime were very
possible; idleness could not exist. The result of
this was that there was no such thing as a class
of persons in society who had a great deal of
time on their hands and were not compelled to
do anything. In times when money was scarce
life was a struggle. Ladies took a personal share
in the work of the kitchen, and overlooked their
servants from the gallery in the hall. Even


xIH The Spiritual Life

hunting was an occupation as well as an amuse-
ment; men hunted stags for the sake of the
venison, instead of foxes for the love of sport.
The fish of the stream and the birds which were
struck down by the hawk were an object to the
lord. Gardens and parks were few, and forests
many. The marks of the plough can still be
traced close up to the ruined castle wall. Life
was a more earnest, personal affair in the Middle
Ages than now.

Gradually this state of things passed away.
Warwick the King-maker has been rightly called
the last of the Barons. In Henry VI we may
consider that we have the last of mediaeval kings.
The Middle Ages find their euthanasia in this
pallid, saintly monarch, just as a former state of
things was closed by St Edward the Confessor.
Edward IV, the favourite of the citizens of Lon-
don, brave, but unchivalrous, faithless, irreligious
and unchaste, was a king of a far other type.
The wars of the Roses utterly destroyed the old
feudal baron. Men were hardly conscious of the
change, and the Duke of Norfolk might still boast
" that he was as good as a king when he was on
his own estate at Norwich." The dream cost
him his head. It was only gradually that men
became aware of the vast, silent change which
had been consummated. The feudal world had
passed away, and modern society had taken its
place. As far as concerns us, the result is the
total disruption of all necessary connection be-
tween property and occupation, the creation of
a very large class of men and women who can
live, if they please, without doing anything at
all. I do not mean to say that any man breath-
ing is bom without duties ; but I mean that there
is a very large class of beings who can eat, drink


of Mediaeval England xliii

and perform all the functions of life whether they
do their duties or not.

It is evident that this state of things requires
something peculiar to meet it. What is to be
done with all this superfluity of unemployed life r
What is a man thus set free from obligation to
do with his time ? In the Middle Ages life itself
imposed an unvarying rule of living. Is man
now to live without a rule ? A thousand moral
and religious questions start up and cry out for
an answer. Things have become possible now
which were not possible before. Men and women
can spend their lives in an unvarying round of
amusements and excitements, even without sup-
posing them to seek vicious pleasures. Theatres,
operas, balls, novels — ^things unknown to their
ancestors — may make up their life. Is this right?
Is it safe? A most momentous question this,
which requires an answer. Here is a new thing
upon earth, or at least a state of things which
has not existed since the Teutonic nations were
converted — the upper classes of society able to
live in a constant round of amusement, and
thinking themselves satisfactorily sure of salva-
tion, because of the hypothetical absence of great
sin. Are unlimited balls and unlimited sacra-
ments compatible? Or is a worldly life a peri-
lous one for those who live it ? Or rather ought
not Christians to spend more time in prayer, in
devotion, in voluntary almsgiving and works of
charity, in proportion as they are set free from
many duties? Is not life more dangerous and
salvation more insecure because of this terrible
invasion of the world, with audacious require-
ments and unblushing exigencies ? Considering
the cool impudence with which the world insists
on his own innocence, nay, has even the imperti-


xllv The Spiritual Life

nence to look upon its general mode of life as
a duty to society, it does seem as if this new
attitude of the world called for new rules and
a greater strictness to counteract its dangers.

Now, the "Scale of Perfection" is valuable
because it is an English book containing an
answer to this question. If not written for, it
was at least adopted by an English princess,
a king's mother, living at court in the reig^ of
Henry VII. In fact, it contains the old English
Catholic view before Protestantism. existed. The
answer to the above question is unequivocal, and
is contained in the following words : * " When
men and women who are free from worldly busi-
nesses if they will, and may have their needful
sustenance without much solicitude about it,
especially religious men and women — ^and other
men also in secular estate, that have good abili-
ties and understanding, an^ may, if they will
dispose themselves, come to much grace; these
men are more to blame than those who are so
busied with worldly things which are so needful
to be done. Verily it is perilous for a soul not to
seek to make any further progress." The only
safe thing is to " set his heart fully to come to
more grace and give himself heartily to prayer,
meditating and other good wishes."

Such was the old Catholic life, before we were
corrupted by the society of Protestants. The
moral of the book is that a supernatural life is
common to all Christians, and that there is no
such infinite distinction between Christians in
the world and religious. Both, in different de-
grees and modes, are not safe unless they aim
at "profiting in grace." Of course, much in
Walter Hilton's book is inapplicablef to us, yet
♦ P. 151.


of Mediaeval England xlv

all who are not repelled by the imusual English
will find it a very beautiful spiritual treatise. It
is not a regimental book, and contains few
rules. No one will find in it "a rule of life."
It is simply occupied in laying down principles.
A book written in the fourteenth century cannot
be expected to establish minute practical rules
for the nineteenth. It will, however, be very
valuable as a specimen of the old traditional
Catholic spiritual life in England. The basis of
all spiritual life in all ages must after all be the
same ; and this book, written so long ago in the
forgotten house of Canons at Thurgarton, may
help us now in fighting our battle of life in this
very different time. In this respect it will be
a lesson to us. Rather mystical than ascetical,
it contains an antidote to the prevailing tendency
to restless activity, even in devotion. Above all,
it is remarkable for containing the old English
tradition of a most tender, personal love for our
blessed Lord.

Now that we are threatened by a great in-
flux of Protestant morals, through the increasing
intercourse of Catholics with the world, it will be
well if this book reminds us of our past history.
The great apostasy of the Reformation could
never have been successful if a terrible outbreak
of worldliness had not sapped the first principles
of Christian life among the nobility and gentry
of England. Nothing will save us now in danger-
ous times but the supernatural principles of our
Faith carried out in our lives.


THE SCALE dP
PERFECTIONS


i


THE SCALE OR LADDER

OF PERFECTION

BOOK I

PART I-CHAPTER I

That the inward State of the Soul should be like
the outward

Ghostly Sister in Christ Jesus, I pray thee that
in the calling to which our Lord hath called thee
for His service, thou rest contented, and abide
constantly therein, travailing busily with all the
powers of thy soul to fulfil in truth of good life
(by the grace of Jesus Christ) the state which thou
hast taken in exterior likeness and seeming ; and
as thou hast forsaken the world, as it were a dead
man, and turned to our Lord bodily in sight of
men, so thou be in thy heart as it were dead
to all earthly loves and fears, and turned wholly
to our Lord Jesus Christ; for be thou well as-
sured that a bodily turning to God without the
heart following is but a figure and likeness of
virtues, and not the truth in itself. Wherefore
wretched men and women are they who, neglect-
ing the care of their interior, show only exteriorly
a form and likeness of holiness, in habit or cloth-
ing, in speech and outward carriage and works,

I


The Scale of Perfection


casting their eyes upon other men's deeds, and
judging their defects, esteeming themselves to be
something, when indeed they are just nothing,
and so deceive themselves. Do not thou so ; but
together with thy body turn principally thy heart
to God, and frame thy interior to His likeness,
by humility and charity and other spiritual
virtues, and then art thou truly turned to Him.
I say not that thou mayest early on the first day
be turned to Him in thy soul in perfection of
virtues as thou mayest with thy body be enclosed
in a house; but my meaning is, that thou
shouldst know that the end of thy bodily en-
closure is that thou mightest thereby the better
come to a spiritual enclosure ; and even as thy
body is enclosed from bodily converse with men,
even so thine heart might be enclosed from the
inordinate loves and fears of all earthly things.
And that thou mayest the better come thereto,
I shall in this little treatise yield thee the best
instructions and helps that I know or can.


CHAPTER n

Of the Active Liie, and the Ezei^ises and the Works
thei^of

Thou must understand that there are in the
holy Church two manner of lives (as saith S^
Gre^vfy) in which a Christian is to be saved.
The one is called Active y the other Contemplative;
without living one of these two lives no man may
be saved. The Active consisteth in love and
charity exercised exteriorly by good corporal
works, in ftilfiUing of God's commandments and
of the seven works of mercy, corporal and spiri-


The First Book


tual, towards our Christian brethren. This life
pertains to all worldly men that have riches and
plenty of worldly goods to dispose of, and to all
those (be they learned or unlearned, lay men or
spiritual persons) that are in office or state to
govern, or have care of others; and generally
all worldly men are bound to the practice of this
kind of life according to their best knowledge
and ability, and as reason and discretion shall
require. If he much good have, then much good
for to do ; if he little have, less may he do ; and
if he naught have, then must he have a good
will. Such works as these (be they corporal or
spiritual) are works of the Active life. Also a
great part of it consists in great bodily deeds
which a man exerciseth upon himself, as great
fasting, much watching, and other sharp penance,
to chastise the flesh with discretion for sins
formerly committed. As also to mortify there-
by the lusts and likings of the flesh, and to
make it pliable and obedient to the will of the
spirit. These works though they be but Active^
yet they help very much, and dispose a man
in the beginning to attain afterwards to con-
templation, if they be used with discretion.


CHAPTER m

Of the Contemplative Life» and the Ezetoses and

Works thereof

Contemplative life consisteth in perfect love
and charity, felt inwardly by spiritual virtues;
and in a true and certain sight and knowledge
of God and spiritual matters. This life belongs
to them especially who for the love of God for-


The Scale of Perfection


sake all worldly riches, honours, worships and
outward businesses, and wholly give themselves
soul and body (according to all the knowledge
and ability that is in them) to the service of
Grod, by exercises of the soul.

Now then, since it is so (dear sister) that the
quality of thy state requireth of thee to be con-
templative (for that is the intent of thy enclosing,
that thou mightest more freely and entirely apply
thyself to spiritual exercises), it behoveth thee to
be right busy both night and day in labour of
body and spirit, to attain as nigh as thou canst
to that life by such means as thou mayest find
to be best for the said end. But before I tell
thee of the means, I shall tell thee a little more
of this contemplative life, that thou mayest some-
what see what it is, and so set it as a mark in the
sight of thy soul, whereto thou shalt tend, and
direct all thy exercises and doings.


CHAPTER IV

Of thrtt Sorts that be of Contemplation^ and of the
First of them

Contemplative life hath three parts. The first
consisteth in knowing God, and of spiritual
things gotten by reason and discourse, by teach-
ing of men, and by study in holy Scripture, with-
out spiritual gust, or affection, or inward relish
felt by them ; for they have it not by the special
gift of the Holy Ghost, as persons truly spiritual
have their knowledge, which, therefore, is very
tasteful to them in their interior.

This part have especially in them learned men
and great scholars, who, through long study and


The First Book


travail in holy Writ, attain to this knowledge
more or less by the abilities of their natural wit,
which God giveth to every one, more or less, that
hath use of reason.

This knowledge is good, and may be called
a kind or part of Contemplation, inasmuch as
it is a sight of verity and a knowledge of
spiritual things. Nevertheless it is but a figure
and shadow of true Contemplation^ since it hath
no spiritual g^st or taste in Grod, nor inward
sweetness, which none feels but he that is in
great love of charity ; for it is the proper Well
or Spring of our Lord, to which no alien is
admitted. But the aforesaid manner of know-
ing is common both to good and bad, seeing it
may be had without charity, and therefore it is
not very contemplation. Of this kind of know-
ledge St Paul speaketh thus : If I knew all i C9r. xiiL
mysteries and all knowledge^ and have not charity^
I am nothing.

Nevertheless, if they that have it keep them-
selves in humility and charity, and according
to their might fly worldly and fleshly sins, it is to
them a good way, and a great disposing to
true Contemplation if they desire and pray de-
voutly after the grace of the Holy Ghost. Other
men have this knowledge, and turn it to pride
and vain-glory, or unto covetousness and desire
of worldly dignities, worships and riches, not
humbly using it to the glory of God, nor chari-
tably to the soul's good of their brethren. Some
of them fall either into heresies and errors, or
into other open sins, by which they discredit
themselves and the holy Chm-ch. Of this
knowledge St Paid speaks in these words:
Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifies. This i Cor. vii'u
knowledge alone lifteth up the heart to pride;


The Scale of Perfection


but mix it with charity, and then it turns to
edification.
How learned This knowledge alone is but water, un-
men may be- savoury and cold. And, therefore, if they that
comeptous. j^^^^ j^ would humbly offer it up to our Lord,
and pray for His grace. He would by His
blessing turn their water into wine, as He did
at the prayer of His Mother at the marriage
feast; that is to say, He would turn their un-
savoury knowledge into true wisdom, and their
cold naked reason into spiritual light and burn-
ing love, by the gift of the Holy Ghost.


CHAPTER V

Of the Second Sort of Contemplation

The second part of Contemplation lieth princi-
pally in affection, without spiritual light in the
understanding or sight of spiritual things ; and
this is commonly of simple and unlearned men
who give themselves wholly to devotion, and is
had and felt in this manner: When man or
woman being in meditation of God, through
the grace of the Holy Ghost, feeleth fervour of
love and spiritual sweetness, by occasion of
thinking of Christ's passion, or of some of the
works done by Him in His humanity; or he
feeleth cause of great trust in the goodness and
mercy of God for the forgiveness of his sins, or
admires the liberality of His gifts of grace, or
else feeleth in his affection a certain reverential
fear towards God, and His secret judgements and
justice, which yet he seeth not; or being in
prayer, he findeth all the powers of his soul
to be gathered together, and the thought and


The First Book


love of his heart to be drawn up from all tran-
sitory things, aspiring and tending upwards
towards Grod by a fervent desire, and spiritual
delight, and yet, nevertheless, during that time
he hath no plain sight in the understanding
of spiritual things, nor in particular of any of
the mysteries or senses of the holy Scriptures ;
but only that for that time nothing seemeth so
pleasing and delightful to him as to pray, or
think as he then doth for the savoury delight
and comfort that he findeth therein, and yet
cannot he tell what it is, but he feeleth it well,
for it is a gift of God, for out of it spring many
sweet tears, burning desires, and still mournings,
or contrition for sin, which scour and cleanse
the heart from all filth of sin, and causeth it to
melt into a wonderful sweetness in Jesus Christ,
and to become obedient and ready to fulfil all
God's will, insomuch that it seems to him he
makes no reckoning what becomes of himself,
so that God's will were fulfilled in him, and by
him, with many other such good inspirations
and desires which cannot be reckoned. Such
feelings as these cannot be had without great
grace, and whoso hath any of them or other
such like, he is at that time in charity and the
grace of God ; which charity, let him know to
his comfort, will not be lost or lessened in him
(though the fervour thereof may abate) but by
a deadly sin. And this may be called the
second part of Contemplation; nevertheless, this
part hath two degrees.


8 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER VI

Of the Lower Degree of the Second Sort of Con^
templation

The lower degree of this feeling, men which are
active may have by grace, when they are visited
by our Lord, as mightily and as fervently as they
that give themselves wholly to Contemplation and
have this gift. But this feeling in his fervour
cometh not al way when a man would, nor lasteth
it full long. It cometh and goeth as He will that
giveth it; and therefore whoso hath it, let him
be humble, and thank God and keep it secret,
unless it be to his confessor, and let him hold it
as long as he may with discretion ; and when it
is withdrawn, let him not be daunted or troubled,
but abide constant in the light of faith, an humble
hope, with patient expecting till it come again.
This is a little tasting of the sweetness of the
love of God, whereof David saith thus in the
Pstdm xxxiii. Psalms : Gustate et videte quoniam suavis est Do-
minus — Taste and see how sweet our Lord is.


CHAPTER Vn

Of the Higher Degree of the Second Sort of Con^
templation

The higher degree of this part may not be had
nor held but of them which be in great rest and
quiet both of body and mind, who by the grace
of Jesus, and long travail corporal and spiritual,
are arrived to a rest and quietness of heart and
clearness of conscience. So that nothing is so


The First Book


pleasing to them as to sit still in quiet of body
and to pray always to God, and to think on our
Lord, and sometimes on the blessed name of
Jesus, which is comfortable and delightful to
them, by the remembering whereof they feel
themselves moved and fed in their affection
towards God. And not only the said name,
but also all other kind of prayers (as the Pa^
ter Nostety the AvCy the Hymns and Psalms^
and other devout prayers and sayings of holy
Church) are turned, as it were, into a spiritual
mirth and sweet songs, by which they are com-
forted and strengthened against all sins, and
much relieved in their bodily pains or diseases.
Of this degree speaketh St Paul thus : Be not Ephes. ▼,
drunk with wtnCy out be filled with the Holy Ghost^
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and
spiritual songSy making melody in your hearts to
our Lord. Whoso hath this grace, let him keep
himself in humility and be ever desiring to come
to more knowledge and feeling of God, which
is to be had in the third sort of Contemplation.


CHAPTER Vm

Of the Third Sort of Contemplation

The third sort, which is as perfect Contempla^
tion as can be had in this life, consisteth both
in knowing and affecting; that is, in knowing
and perfect loving of God, which is when a
man's soul is first reformed by perfection of
virtues to the image of Jesus, and afterwards,
when it pleaseth God to visit him, he is taken
in from all earthly and fleshly affections, from
vain thoughts and imaginings of all bodily


10 The Scale of Perfection

creatures, and, as it were, much ravished and
taken up from his bodily senses, and then by
the grace of the Holy Ghost is enlightened, to
see by his understanding Truth itself fwhich is
God) and spiritual things, with a sort, sweet,
burning love in God, so perfectly that he be-
cometh ravished with His love, and so the soul
for the time is become one with God, and con-
formed to the image of the Trinity.

The beginning of this Contemplation may be
felt in this life, but the full perfection of it is re-
served unto the bliss in heaven. Of this union
and conforming to our Lord speaks St Paul
1 Cor. vi, 17 thus : Qui adhaeret Deo unus spiritus est cum eo ;
that is to say, he who by ravishing of love is
become united to God, God and that soul are
not now two, but both one. And surely in this
oneing consisteth the marriage which passeth
betwixt God and the soul, that shall never be
dissolved or broken.


CHAPTER IX

Of the Diffei^ence that it betwixt the Second and
Thiifd Sort of Gmtemplation

The foresaid second sort of Contemplation may
be termed a burning love in Devotiony and is
the lower; this third a burning love in Con-
templationy and is the higher. That is sweeter
to the bodily feeling, this to the spiritual feeling
inwardly, and is more worthy, more spiritual,
more wonderful. For, indeed, it is a foretaste
(so little as it is) and an earnest or handsell * of
the sight or Contemplation of heavenly joy, not
clearly, but half in darkness, which shall be per-

* Hansel, a first gift.


The First Book ii

fected and made a clear light and sight in the

bliss of heaven ; as Si Paul saith : Now we see i Cor, xiii

as through a glass darkly^ but then we shall see

face to face. This is the enlightening of the

understanding in delights of loving, whereof

David saith in the Psalter : Et nox tllumtna- Ps. cxxxv

tzo mea in deliciis meis — My night is my light

in my delight. The other is milk for children,

but this solid meat for perfect men, that have Heh. v, i^

their senses exercised (as St Paul saith) for the

discerning of good from evil.

To the perfection of this high Contemplation
may no man come till he be first reformed in
soul to the likeness of Jesus in the perfection of
virtues ; nor can any man living in mortal body
have it continually and habitually in the height
of it, but by times when he is visited. And as
I conceive by the writing of holy men, it is a full
short time, for soon after he retumeth to a so-
briety of bodily feeling ; and of all this work
charity is the cause. Thus, as I understand St
Paul speaks of himself: For whether we be be- 2Co/.v,i^
side ourselves^ it is to Gody or whether we be sober ^
it is for your cause ; it is the love of Christ that
constraineth us; that is, whether we overpass
our bodily senses in Contemplation^ or we are
more sober to you in our bodily feeling, the love
of Christ straineth us. Of this part of Contempla-
tion and of reforming to God speaketh St Paul
openly, thus : But we all with open face^ behold- 2 Cor. iii,
ing as in a glc^s the glory of our Lord, are changed
into the same image from glory to glory y even as
by the spirit of the Lord. Which is as much as
if in the person of himself and all perfect men
he had said thus : We, first being reformed
in virtues, and having the face of our soul un-
covered by opening of our spiritual eye, behold


12 The Scale of Perfection

as in a mirror the heavenly joy, being withal
fulshaped and oned to the image of our Lord,
from clearness of faith into clearness of under-
standing, or else from clearness of desire into
that of blessed love ; and all this is wrought in
a man's soul by the spirit of our Lord, as saith
St Paul.

This part of Contemplation God giveth where
He will, to learned and unlearned, to men and
to women, to them that are in government, and
to solitary also. But it is special, and not
common. And although a man who all his
lifetime is active happen to have the gift of it
through special grace or favour, yet the fulness
of it may no man have, but he that is solitary
and in life contemplative.


CHAPTER X

How that Ap^arings or Shewings to the Corforal
Senses or Feelings may foe both good and evil

By this that I have said may you somewhat
understand that visions, or revelations, or any
manner of spirit in bodily appearing, or in
imagining, sleeping or waking, or also any
other feeling in the bodily sense, made as it
were spiritually, either by sounding in the ear,
or savouring in the mouth, or smelling at the
nose, or else any sensible heat, as it were fire
glowing and warming the breast, or any other
part of the body, or any other thing that may
be felt by bodily sense, though it be never so
comfortable and liking, yet be they not very
Contemplation^ but simple and secondary (though
they be good) in respect of spiritual virtues, and
of this spiritual knowing and loving of God ac-


The First Book 13

companying true Contemplation. But all such
manner of feeling may be good, wrought by a
good angel, and they may be deceivable, wrought
by a wicked angel, when he transfigureth him-
self into an angel of light. Wherefore sith* they
may be both good and evil, it appeareth they are
not the best. For, mark ye well, that the devil
may, when he hath leave, counterfeit in bodily
feeling the likeness of the same things the which
a good angel may work ; for just as a good angel
cometh with light, so can the devil. And as he
can do this in matters of seeing, so can he do it
in matters of the other senses. Whoso hath felt
both, he can well tell which were good and which
were evil. But he that never felt either, or else
but one of them, may easily be deceived. .

These two be alike in the manner of feeling
outwardly, but they are full different within, and
therefore they are not to be desired greatly, nor
to be entertained lightly, unless a soul can by
the spirit of discretion know the good from the
evil, that he be not beguiled, as St John saith :
Trust not every spirit^ but essay first whether it
be of God or no. Wherefore by one trial that I iSt/ohn\\
shall tell thee, methinketh thou shalt know the
good from the evil.

CHAPTER XI

How thou shalt know whether the Showing or
Apparition to the bodily Senses and Feelings be
good or evil

If it be so that thou see any manner of light or
brightness with thy bodily eye or in imagination,
other than every man seeth ; or if thou hear any

♦ Since.


14 The Scale of Perfection

pleasant, wonderful sounding with thy ear, or in
thy mouth any sweet sudden savour, other than
what thou knowest to be natural, or any heat in
thy breast like fire, or any manner of delight in
any part of thy body, or if a spirit appear bodily
to thee, as it were an angel to comfort thee or
teach thee; or if any such feeling, which thou
knowest well that it cometh not of thyself, nor
from any bodily creature, beware in that time, or
soon after, and wisely consider the stirrings of
thy heart ; for if by occasion of the pleasure and
liking thou takest in the said feeling or vision,
thou feelest thy heart drawn from the minding
and beholding of Jesus Christ, and from spiritual
exercises, as from prayer, and thinking of thyself
and thy defects, or from the inward desire of vir-
tues, and of spiritual knowing and feeling of God,
for to set the sight of thy heart and thy affection,
thy delight and thy rest, principally on the said
feelings or visions, supposing that to be a part
of heavenly joy or angels* bliss, and thereupon
comest to think that thou shouldst neither pray
nor think of anything else, but wholly attend
thereto, for to keep it and delight thyself there-
in : then is this feeling very suspicious to come
from the enemy; and therefore, though it be
never so liking and wonderful, refuse it and
assent not thereto, for this is a sleight of the
enemy. When he seeth a soul that would en-
tirely give itself to spiritual exercises, he is
wonderfully wroth ; for he hateth nothing more
than to see a soul in this body of sin to feel verily
the savour of spiritual knowledge and the love of
God, which he himself, without the body of sin,
lost wilfully. And therefore, if he cannot hinder
him by open sinning, he will let and beguile him
by such vanity of bodily savours or sweetness in


Tliennt Bdck 15

tiiesenseSytofariiig'a soul icto spExitnal pride azxl
into a £ilse security ai hisis^^ -m^frrrz ^^ at
had iben^ a fepair.g cf beaT€::iI-T joj,1ukd ^at
he is half in paradise, br reasoa cc tbe dE^igbt
he feeleth abcKxt iiim, w^-e^i i=:deiad be is near to
hell gates; and so bv pride azjd prsssxspdoo be
might faOl into errors or berEsSes, or pfflaatasks,
or other bodily or speriuial miscnSefs.

But if it be so that this manna- of icadingkt
not thy heart from spsrimal ex-ercises, bot maketh
thee more devout, and xaoie ierveot to ptai, vyxyt
wise to think giKKtiy thficghts, and tbcxigh it be
so that it astcmish thee in the beginning, ner^r-
theless afterward it tnmeth arid qoykenedi thy
heart to more desEre of Tirtoes, and increased!
thy love more to God and to tar neigixboor, also
it fwalrp^li Aee more hnmbie in thy own eyes — by
these tc^cens may est thoa kn vw that it is of Go^
wrought by die presence and working of a go(>i
angel, and oometh firom the goodness of &!>d,
either for the co mfo i t of simple dercot sculs, for
to increase their trust and desire towards Gryi,
to sedc thereby the knowing and loving of God
more perfectly by means of sodi comforts. Or
else if they be perfect that feel soch delight, it
seemeth to them to be an earnest and as it were
a shadow of the giorifying ot the body, which it
shall have in die bliss of heaven ; but! wot* not
whedBa- there be any soch man living on earth.
This privilege had Sfary Magdaltn as it seemeth
to me^ in the time when she was alone in the
cave thirty years, and every day was borne up
with angels, and was fied both body and soul r^y
their presence, as we read in ner story.

CM" this way c€ discerning the working of
spirits speaketh Sf John in his Epistle, t'-js :


i6 The Scale of Perfection

■
iSt/ohniv,^, Omnis spiritus qui solvit jfesunty hie non est
ex Deo — Every spirit that looseth or unknitteth
JesuSy he is not of God, These words, I confess,
may be understood in many manners, never-
theless, one way I may understand them to
this purpose, as I have said. This knitting and
fastening of Jesus to a man's soul is wrought by
a good will and a great desire to Him, only to
have Him and see Him in His bliss spiritually.
The greater this desire is, the faster is Jesus knit
to the soul ; and the less this desire is, the looser
is He knit; whatsoever spirit, therefore, or feeling
it is which lesseneth this desire and would draw
it down from the stedfast minding of Jesus Christ
and from the kindly breathing or aspiring up to
Him, this spirit will unknit Jesus from the soul,
and therefore is not of God, but is the working
of the enemy. But if a spirit, or a feeling, or a
revelation make this desire more, knitting the
knots of love and devotion faster to Jesus, open-
ing the eye of the soul into spiritual knowing
more clearly, and maketh it more humble in
itself, this spirit is of God.

And hereby you may learn that you are not
to suffer your heart willingly to rest nor to delight
wholly in any such bodily feelings of such man-
ner of comforts or sweetness, though they were
good; but rather hold them in your sight naught,
or little in comparison of spiritual desire and
stedfast thinking on Jesus ; nor shall you fasten
the thought of your heart over much on them.


The First Book 17


CHAPTER Xn

How and in what things a Contemplative Man should
be busied

But thou shalt ever seek with great diligence in
prayer that thou mayest come to a spiritual feel-
ing or sight of God. And that is, that thou
mayest know the wisdom of God, the endless
might of Him, His great goodness in Himself
and in His creatures; for this is Contempla--
tiofiy and that other mentioned is none, thus
saith Si Paul : Being rooted and grounded in Ephes. iii,
charity y we may he able U comprehend with all
the saints what is the breadth and length and
height and depth. That ye may know, he saith
not, by sound of the ear nor sweet savour in the
mouth, nor by any such bodily thing, but that ye
may know and feel with all saints what is the
length of the endless being of God, the breadth
of the wonderful charity and the goodness of
God, the height of His almighty Majesty and the
bottomless depths of His wisdom. In knowing
and spiritual feeling of these should be the exer-
cise of a Contemplative man. For in these may
be understood the full knowing of all ghostly
things. This exercise is that one thing which
St Paul coveted after, saying thus : This one Phil, iii, 1
thing I covet, which is that, forgetting those
things that are behind^ and reaching forth to
those things that are before^ I press to the tnark
of the supernal vocation. Which is as much as
if he had said, One thing is best for me to
covet, and that is, that I might forget all things
that be behind or backward, and I shall stretch
out my heart ever forward for to feel and to grip

2


i8 The Scale of Perfection

the sovereign reward of endless bliss. Behind
are all bodily things, forward or before are all
spiritual things. And so St Paul would forget
all bodily things, and even his own body also,
that so he might see spiritual things.


CHAPTER Xm

How Virtue beginncth in Reason and Will and it
perfected in Love and Liking^ or Affection

Thus have I told thee a little of ConUmplatton
what it is, to the intent that thou mightest know
it and set it as a mark before the sight of thy
soul, and to desire all thy lifetime to come to any
part of it by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
This is the conforming of a soul to God, which
cannot be had unless it first be reformed by some
perfection of virtues turned into affection ; which
is when a man loveth virtues because they be
good in themselves. Many a man hath the
virtues of humility, patience and charity to his
neighbour, and such other only in his reason and
will, and hath no spiritual delight nor love in
them, for ofttimes he feeleth grudging heaviness
and bitterness for to do them, and yet neverthe-
less he doth them, but 'tis only by stirring of
reason for dread of God. This man hath these
virtues in reason and will, but not the love of
them in affection. But when by the grace of
Jesus and by ghostly and bodily exercise reason
is turned into light and will into love, then hath
he virtues in affection ; for he hath so well gnawn
on the bitter bark or shell of the nut that at
length he hath broken it and now feeds on the
kernel; that is to say, the virtues which were


The First Book 19

first heavy for to practise are now turned into
a very delight and savour, so that he takes as
much pleasure in humility, patience, cleanness,
sobriety and charity as in any other delights.
Verily till these virtues be turned thus into afiBec-
tion he may well have the second part of Contemn
f lotion, but the third, in sooth, shall he not have.


CHAPTER XIV

Of tlie Means that bring a Soul to C>ntempIation

Now seeing virtues dispose us to Contemplation,
it behoveth us to use the means that may bring
us to virtues. And they be three means which
men most commonly use that give themselves to
Contemplation : As reading of holy »Scripture and
good books ; secondly, spiritual meditation ;
thirdly, diligent prayer with devotion. By
meditation shalt thou come to see thy wretch-
edness, thy sins and thy wickedness ; as pride,
covetousness, gluttony, sloth and lechery, wicked
stirrings of envy, anger, hatred, melancholy,
wrath, bitterness and imprudent heaviness. Thou
shalt also see thy heart to be full of vain flames
and fears of the flesh and of the world. All these
stirrings will always boil out of thy heart, as
water runneth out of the spring of a stinking
well, and do hinder the sight of thy soul, that
thou mayest never see nor feel clearly the love of
Jesus Christ ; for know thou well that until the
heart be much cleansed from such sins, through
firm verity* and diligent meditating on Christ's
humanity, thou canst not have any perfect know-
ledge of God, Himself witnessing the same in

• Stable truth.


20 The Scale of Perfection

St Matt V. His Gospel thus: Blessed are the clean in
hearty for they shall see God. In meditation,
likewise, shalt thou see those virtues which be
needful for thee to have, as humility, mildness,
patience, righteousness, spiritual strength, tem-
perance, cleanness, peace and soberness, faith,
hope and charity. These virtues thou shalt see
in meditation, how good, how fair, how profi-
table they be ; and by prayer thou shalt there-
upon desire and get them. Without which third
means of prayer thou canst not be contemplative,
for Job saith thus: In abundantia tngredierts
sepulchrum — In plenty shalt thou enter thy grave;
that is in plenty of bodily works and spiritual
virtues shalt thou enter thy grave, that is thy
rect* in Contemplation.


CHAPTER XV

SECTION I

What a Man should uae and refuse by the Virtue of

Humility

Now if thou desirest to prosecute spiritual works
and exercises wisely, and to labour seriously in
them, it behoveth thee to begin right low ; three
things needest thou first to have, upon which as
on a firm ground thou shalt set all thy work,
namely, humility, a firm faith, and resolute will
and purpose to seek after God.

First, it behoveth thee to have humility on

Humility this manner: thou shalt in thy will and in thy

n^^u/^'^ feeling judge thyself unfitting to dwell among

^ ^ ' men and unworthy to serve God in conversation

* Rig^ht rule.


The First Book 21

with His servants, and as unprofitable to thy
Christian brethren, wanting both skill and power
to fulfil any good works of active life in help of
thy neighbour, as other men and women do.
And, therefore, as a wretch and an outcast and
refuse of all men art shut up in a house alone,
that thou shouldst not g^eve nor offend man or
woman by thy bad example, seeing thou canst
not profit them by any well-doing. Beyond this
it behoveth thee to look further, that since thou
art so unable to serve our Lord by outward bodily
works, how much more it behoveth thee to deem
thyself unable and unworthy to serve him spiritu*
ally by inward exercises ; for our Lord is a spirit,
as the prophet saith: Our Lord is a Spirit before
our/accy and the most kindly service to Him is
spiritual, as He saith Himself: Trtce worship- StfohnXy
pers shall worship the Father tfi spirit and in
truth. Thou then that art so gross, so lewd, so
fleshly, so blind in spiritual things and in the
understanding of thy own soul (which it behoveth
thee first to Imow before thou canst come to the
knowing of Grod), how shouldst thou feel or think
thyself to be able or worthy to enjoy the estate or
likeness of a contemplative life, which consisteth
principally, as I have said, in spiritual knowing.
This I speak to thee, not that thou shouldst re-
pent thee of thy clothing, enclosing and state of
life, but that thou shouldst feel this humility
really in thy heart (if thou canst), for this is the
very truth and no lie. And, thereupon, thou
shalt night and day desire and endeavour to
come in truth as near as thou canst to that state
which thou hast taken upon thee, firmly believ-
ing it to be the best kind of state for thee (by the
mercy of God) to exercise thyself in. And though
it be so that thou canst not in this life attain to


22 The Scale of Perfection

the perfection of that state, yet, at least, seek to
make an entry into it, and trust assuredly to have
the perfection thereof by the mercy of God in
heaven. And truly this is my own case, who
feel myself so wretched, frail and fleshly, and so
far from the true feeling of that which I speak of,
that in a manner I do nothing but cry, God
mercy, and desire after it (as well as I can) with
a hope that our Lord will bring me thereto in
heaven. Do thou likewise; and better also, if
God give thee grace.
^tL ^ ^'^ '^^^ feeling of this lowness and humility will
put out of thy heart all imprudent looking into
other men's actions, and drive thee wholly to
behold thyself, as if there were no other man
living but God and thyself. And thou shalt
deem and hold thyself more vile and more
wretched than any one creature that liveth ; in-
somuch that thou shalt hardly be able to brook
and endure thyself, for the greatness and number
of thy sins, and the filth which thou shalt feel in
thyself.
i Omiempia- Thus behoveth it thee sometimes to feel and
Mnaven^ judge of thyself, if thou mean to become truly
ihnU^msel/ humble. For I tell thee truly, if thou wilt be
*&re grievous very humble, thou must think a venial sin in
kan a mortal thyself more grievous and painftil to thee and
greater in thy sight sometimes than great deadly
sins in other men. And this is most true in thy
case who aimest at Contemplation^ seeing whatso-
ever hindereth and letteth thy soul most from the
feeling and knowing of God, oughteth to be
most grievous and painful to thee. But a venial
sin of thy own letteth thee mor^ from the feeling
and perfect love of Jesus Christ than any other
man's sins can do, be they never so great.

It follows, therefore, that thou shouldst rise


The First Book 23

more in thy heart against thyself to hate and
condemn in thyself all manner of sin which
letteth thee from the sight of God, more than
against the faults of other men ; for if thy heart
be clean from thy own sins, verily the sins ot
other men will not hurt thee. If, therefore, thou
wilt find rest here and in heaven, do thou (ac-
cording to the counsel of one of the holy Fathers)
every day ask of thyself: What am I? and
judge no man.

But thou wilt object, how may this be, seeing Who are
It is a deed of charity to tell men of their faults, ^ j^? f*'^
and a deed of mercy to admonish them that they ^/'^"^/**
may mend ?

To this I answer that in my mind, that to
thee or any other that hath taken on them the
state of a contemplative life, it belongeth not to
leave the watching over thyself to behold and
blame other men, unless there should be great
need, so that a man were in danger to perish
without it.

But those men that are active and have And what
authority and charge of others, are bound by
their office and by way of charity to look into,
inquire and rightly to judge and correct other
men's faults ; not out of a desire and delight to
punish them, but only for need, with the fear of
Grod and in His name, and for the love of the
salvation of their souls. Other men also who
are active and have no care or charge of other
men are bound to admonish other men of their
faults out of charity only, and that when the sin
is deadly and cannot well be corrected by an-
other, and there ^s hopes of amendment by being
admonished, else it is better to let it alone.

That this is good doctrine may be gathered
by the practices of St John, who was a Con-


24 The Scale of Perfection

templative^ and St Peter, who was an Active
man. For when our Lord at His last Supper
with His disciples, at the motion of St Peter to
St John, told St John how Judas should betray
Him, St John told it not to St Peter, though
he asked him, but turned him, and laid his
head upon Christ's breast, and became ravished
through love into the contemplation of the
Divinity and divine secrets; and that so plea-
singly and beneficially to himself that he forgot
both Judas and St Peter, teaching thereby other
Contemplatives how in the like occasion they
should behave themselves.
Not to enters By this that hath been said thou mayest learn
'?** **^*" neither to judge other men nor conceive willingly
7hat Uad an a-g^inst them any evil suspicions, but love them,
active life. nor see any faults in them, but worship in thy
heart such as lead Active lives in the world, and
suffer many tribulations and temptations ; which
thou sitting in thy house feelest naught of; and
they endure very much labour and care, and
take much pains for their own and other men's
sustenance, and many of them had rather (if they
might) serve God (as thou dost) in bodily rest
and quietness. Nevertheless, they in the midst
of their worldly business, avoid many sins, which
thou, if thou wert in their state, shouldst fall
into, and they do many good deeds, which thou
canst not do. There is no doubt but many do
thus, but which they be, thou knowest not ; and
therefore it's good for thee to worship * them all,
and set them all in thy heart above thyself as thy
betters, and cast thyself down at their feet, as
being the vilest and lowest in^thy own sight.
For there is neither dread nor danger in making
thyself never so low beneath others, though in

• Respect.


The First Book 25

the sight of God, at the same time, thou hast
more grace than others ; but danger there is in
being too high, and lifting up thyself in thy
thoughts willingly above any other man, though
he were the most wretched and the most sinfiil
caitiff that is in the earth ; for our Lord saith :
He that humbleth himself shall he exalted, and he St Luke xi'
that exalteth himself shall be brought law.

This part of humility doth it behove thee to
have in thy beginning; and by it, and for the
grace, shalt thou come to the perfection of it,
and so of all other virtues. For whoso hath one
virtue, hath all other virtues; as much as thou
hast of humility, so much hast thou of charity, of
patience, and of other virtues ; though they be
not shown or appear outwardly. Be, therefore,
busy to get humility, and hold it fast, for it is
the first and the last of all other virtues.

The first, as being the foundation, as saith St
Augustine : If thou think to build a high house of
virtuesy lay first a deep foundation of humility.
Also, it is the last ; for it is the maintainer and
conserver of all other virtues. St Gregory saith :
He that gathereth (or striveth to keep) virtues with-
out humility y is like him that maketh or carrieth
the powder of spices in the wind. Do thou never
so good deeds, fast, watch, or anything else,
if thou hast not humility, it is naught which
thou dost.

Nevertheless, if thou feelest not this humility How i^ ^t
in thy heart with affection, as thou wishest, do as ^«»»»^»0'.
thou mayest, humble thyself in will, by reasoning
and arguing with thyself, judging that by right
thou shouldst be so humble, and think of thyself
as I have said, albeit thou do not so feel it within
thee, and in that respect hold and esteem thyself
the verier wretch, that thou canst not feel thyself


26 The Scale of Perfection

to be that which in truth thou art. And if thou
do so, though thy flesh rise against it, and will not
assent to thy will, be not too much daunted, nor
troubled, but bear with and suffer such false feel-
ings of thy flesh, as a pain, and then despise and
reprove that feeling, and break down that rising
of thy heart, as if thou wouldst be well con-
tented to be spumed and trodden under other
men's feet. So bjr the grace of Jesus Christ,
through stedfast thinking on the humility of His
precious Manhood, shalt thou much abate the
stirrings of pride; and the virtue of humility,
that was first only in thy naked will, shall be
turned into feeling of affection. Without which
virtue, either in true will, or in feeling of affec-
tion, whoso disposeth himself to serve God in a
contemplative life, like to a blind man, he will
stumble, and never attain thereto. The higher
he climbeth by bodily penance, and other virtues,
and hath not this humility, the lower he falleth.
For as St Grspory saith : lie that cannot perfectly
despise himself ^ he hath never yet found the humble
wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.


SECTION n

How Hypocrites and Heretic^ for want of Humility^
exalt themselves in their Hearts above others

Hypocrites and heretics feel not this humility
neither in good-will nor in affection, but full
cold and dry are their hearts and reins fi-om the
soft feeling of this virtue, and by so much the
further are they from it, as they esteem they have
it. They gnaw on the dry bark without, but the
sweet kernel and the inward taste of it they
never come to. They make a show of outward
humility in habit and holy speech, in a low


The First Book 27

carriage, and (as they would make show) in
many corporal and spiritual virtues. But in the
will and aflfection of their heart, where humility
should be, it is but feigned. For they judge,
and despise, and set at naught other men that
will not do as they do and teach; they esteem
them either fools for want of knowledge, or to be
blinded by fleshly living. And, therefore, lift
they themselves up on high in their own sight
above all others, weening that they live better
than others, and that they only have the truth
and verity of right living and of spiritual feeling,
and of the singular grace of God both in know-
ledge and affection above all others. And out of
this sight of themselves riseth a delight in their
hearts, in which they worship and praise them-
selves, as if there were none but they. They
praise and thank God with their lips, but in their
hearts, like thieves, they steal His worship and
praise, and place it in themselves, and so have
neither humility in will nor affection.

A wretched caitiff or sinner which falleth all
day, and is sorry that he doth so, though he hath
not humility in affection, yet hath he it in good
will ; but an Heretic or an Hypocrite hath neither ;
for they have the condition of the PhariseCy who
came, as our Lord saith in the Gospel, with the
Publican into the Temple to pray. And when he
came, he prayed not, nor asked aught of God,
for he thought he had no need ; but he began to
thank God, and said thus : Lord^ I thank Thee
thai Thou givest fne mare grace than othersy that
I am not tike other meny robbersy luxuriouSy or
other such sinners. He looked beside him, and
saw the Publicany whom he knew for a wretch,
knocking on his breast, only crying for mercy ;
then he thanked God he was not such a one as


28 The Scale of Perfection

he, for Lord, said he, I fast twice a weeky and I
pay my tithes duly. When he had done, our Lord
said : He went home without g^ace as he came,
and got just nought.

But thou wilt say, wherein did this Pharisee
amiss, since he thanked God and spoke the
truth ? I answer he did amiss, inasmuch as he
judged and reproved the Publican in his heart,
who was just&ed of God. And he also did
amiss, for he thanked God only with his mouth,
but secretly in his heart he willingly delighted in
himself through pride and glorying in the gifts
of God, stealing to himself the honour of them,
and the praise and love due to God. This is the
condition verily of Heretics and Hypocrites^ they
will not willingly pray, and if they pray, do not
humble themselves, acknowledging their wretch-
edness, but feigningly thank and love God, and
speak of Him with their mouth, but their delight
is vain and false, and not in God, and yet they
do not think so, for they cannot love God. And

Ecclus XV. as the wise man saith : Praise is not contely in
the mouth of a sinner. Wherefore it is profitable
for me, and for thee, and for such other wretches,
to leave the condition of this Phariseey and
feigned loving of God, and follow the Publican in
lowliness, asking of mercy and forgiveness of
sins, and grace of spiritual virtues, that we may
afterward, with a clean heart, truly thank Him
and love Him, and yield wholly all honour with-
out feigning ; for our Lord asketh thus by His

Jsaias\yis\. Prophet: Upon whom shall My Spirit rest t He
answereth Himself, and saith: Upon none but
upon the humble^ poor and contrite in hearty and
him that trembleth at My words. If, therefore,
thou wilt have the Spirit of God ruling in thy
heart, have humility and dread Him.


The First Book 29


CHAPTER XVI

0{ a firm FaitK necessaiy thereto^and what things we
ought to believe thereby

The second thing which it behoveth thee to have Faitlu
is a firm faith in all the articles of thy belief,
and in the Sacraments of the holy Church,
believing them stedfastly with all thy will in
thy heart. If thou feel any stirring in thy heart
against any of them, by suggestion of the enemy
to put thee in doubt of them, be thou stedfast,
and dread not therefore, but forsake thine own
wit, without disputing or ransacking of them,
and set thy faith in general on the faith of the
holy Church, and make no reckoning of the
stirrings of thy heart which seem to be contrary
thereto ; for those stirrings are not thy faith, but
the faith of the holy Church is thy faith, though
thou never see it nor feel it. And bear those
suggestions patiently as a scourge of our Lord,
by which He will cleanse thy heart and make thy
faith stedfast. Also it behoveth thee to embrace
and honour in thy heart all the laws and ordi-
nances made by the prelates and rulers of the
Church, either in declaring of the Faith, or
concerning the Sacraments, or in general con-
cerning all Christian men, meekly and truly
assenting to them though thou understandest
not the cause of making such ordinances ;
and though thou shouldst think that some of
them were unreasonable,* yet shalt not thou
judge them or find fault with them, but reverence
and honour them although they little concern

♦ Unskilful.


30 The Scale of Perfection

thy particular. Neither entertain thou any opi-
nion or fancy or singular conceit under colour of
more holiness (as some unwise people do) either
out of thy own imagination, or by the teaching
of any other man, which thwarteth the least
ordinance or general teaching of the Church.
Hope. Moreover, together with such faith, thou shalt
firmly hope that thou art ordained by our Lord
to be saved as one of His chosen by His mercy,
and stir not from this hope whatsoever thou
hearest or seest, or what temptation befalls thee.
Though thou think thyself so great a wretch that
thou art worthy to sink into hell, for that thou
doest no good nor servest God as thou shouldst,
yet hold thee in this truth and in this hope, and
ask mercy, and all shall be well with thee. And
though all the devils in hell appeared in
bodily shapes, saying to thee, sleeping or wak-
ing, that thou shouldst not be saved ; or all men
living on earth or all the angels in heaven (if
possible) should say the same, yet believe them not,
nor be stirred much from thy hope of salvation.
This I speak to thee, because some are so weak
and simple that when they have given up them-
selves wholly to serve Grod to their power, and
feel any stirrings of this kind within them by
the suggestion of the enemy, or any of his
false prophets (which men call soothsayers) that
they shall not be saved, or that their state or
manner of living is not pleasing to God, they be
astonished and moved with such words, and so
through ignorance fall sometimes into great heavi-
ness, and as it were into despair of salvation.
Who may Wherefore it is (as it seems to mej necessary
^^^ /^^ ^^^ every one (that by the g^ace of Goa is in a full
a ton. ^^^ resolute will to forsake sin, and as clearly as
his conscience telleth him, suffereth no deadly sin


The First Book 31

to rest in him, but he goes soon to confession for
it, and humbly betakes himself to the sacraments
of the Church) to have a good trust and hope of
salvation. Much more then should they trust and
hope, who give themselves wholly to God, and
eschew venial sins the best they know and can.

But on the other hand, as perilous it is for Who not
him who lieth wittingly in deadly sin, to have
trust in salvation, and in hope of this trust will
not forsake his sin, nor humble himself truly to
God and the holy Church.


CHAPTER XVn

Of a firm and resolute Intent and Purpose necessary
hereto

The third thing needful for thee to have in thy
beginning was an entire and firm intention ; that
is to say an entire will and a desire only to please
God, for this is charity, without which all is
nought which thou doest, and thou shalt set
thine intent always to search and travail how
thou mayest please Him, resting no time will-
ingly from some good exercises, either bodily or
ghostly. Neither shalt thou set a time in thy
heart that thus long thou wilt serve Him, and
then suffer thy heart willingly to fall down to
vain thoughts and idle exercises, imagining it
needful to do so for preserving of thy health,
leaving the keeping of thy heart and good exer-
cises, and seeking rest and comfort for a time
outwardly from thy bodily senses or inwardly
from vain thoughts, as it were for recreation of
thy spirit, that thereby it may be more quick and
lively for spiritual employments. But I trow
thou wilt not find it so. I say not that thou wilt


32 The Scale of Perfection

be able fully and continually to perform this thy
intent and purpose, for ofttimes thy bodily neces-
sities, such as eating, drinking, sleeping and
speaking and the frailty of thy flesh shall let and
hinder thee, be thou never so careful. But my
meaning and desire is that thy will and intent be
always wholly to be exercised bodily and spiri-
tually, and to be no time idle, but always lifting
up thy heart by desire to God and to heaven,
whether thou be eating or drinking or doing any
corporal work as much as thou canst, intermit it
not willingly. For if thou have this intent it
will make thee quick and ready to thy exercises ;
and if thou fall through frailty or negligence
upon any idle occupation or vain speech, it will
smite thy heart as sharply as a prick, and make
thee account irksome, and be weary of all such
vanities, and turn again speedily to inward think-
ing of Jesus Christ or to some good excercise.

As to thy body, it is good to use discretion in
eating, drinking and sleeping, and in all manner
of bodily penance, and in long vocal prayer, and
in all bodily and sensible feelings and fervours,
or earnestness of devotions, and tears and the
like, and in discoursing with the imagination in
times of aridities and want of the feeling of grace.
In all these works it is good to use discretion,
for the mean is the best. But in destroying of
sin by keeping thy heart, and in the continual
desire of virtues and the joys of heaven, and to
have the spiritual knowledge and love of Jesus
Christ, hold there no mean, for the greater it
is the better it is; for thou must hate sin and
all fleshly loves and fears in thy heart with-
out ceasing, and love virtue and purity and
desire them without stinting if thou canst. I say
not that all this is needful to salvation, but I


The First Book 33

trow it is speedful and much helping. And if
thou keep this full intent, thou shalt profit more
in one year in virtues than thou shalt without it
in seven.

CHAPTER XVm

A brief Reheai^al of what hath been said^ and of an
Offering made of them altogether to Jesus

Now I have told thee of the end thou shouldst
set in thy desire, and draw towards it as nigh
as thou canst, as also what is needful for thee
to have in thy beginning, namely, humility, firm
faith and an entire and strong will and purpose,
upon which ground thou shalt build thy spiri-
tual house by prayer and meditation and other
spiritual virtues.

Furthermore, pray thou or meditate thou, or
any other good deed or exercises which thou
dost, be it either good by grace or defective
through thy own frailty, or whatsoever it be that
thou seest, feelest or hearest, smellest or tastest,
either outwardly or by thy bodily senses or in-
wardly by thy imagination, or knowest or per-
ceivest by thy natural reason, bring it all within
the truth and the rules of holy Church, and cast
all into the mortar of humility and break it
small with the pestle of the fear of God, and
throw the powder of all this into the fire of de-
sire, and so offer it up to God. And I tell thee
for truth that well pleasing shall this offering
be in the sight of our Lord Jesus, and sweet
shall the smoke of that fire smell before His face.

The sum is this : draw all that thou seest and
intendest within the truth of holy Church, and
break thyself by humility, and offer up the desire

3


34 The Scale of Perfection

of thy heart only to thy Lord Jesus, to have Him
and nought else but Him. If thou do thus, I
hope, by the grace of Christ, that thou shalt
never be overcome by thine enemy. This St
I Cor. X. Paul teacheth us when he saith : Whether ye
eat or drtnky or whatsoever else ye do^ do all in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christy forsaking
yourselves and offering all up to Him ; and the
means which thou shalt use to this purpose are
prayer and meditation.

PART n-CHAPTER I

SECTION I
Of Prayer, and the several Sorts thereof

What ^ayer PRAYER is profitable and speedful to be used
•j; for the getting of purity of heart by destroying

of sin and bringing in virtues; not that thou
shouldst thereby make our Lord know what
thou desirest, for He knowet'i well enough what
thou needest, but to dispose thee and make thee
ready and able thereby, as a clean vessel, to re-
ceive the grace which our Lord would freely give
thee, which grace cannot be felt till thou be
exercised * and purified by the fire of desire in
devout prayer. For though it be so that prayer
is not the cau^e for which our Lord giveth grace,
nevertheless it is a way or means by which grace
freely given cometh into a soul.
How we ^^^ ^ow thou wilt desire perhaps to know
shouupray. how thou shouldst pray and upon what thing
thou shouldst set the point of thy thoughts in
prayer, and also what prayer was best for thee to
use. As to the first, I answer that when thou

* Assayed.


The First Book 35

art wakened out of thy sleep, and art ready to
pray, thou shalt feel thyself fleshly and heavy,
tending ever downwards to vain thoughts, either
of dreams or fancies, or of unnecessary things of
the world or of the flesh, then behoveth it thee
to quicken thy heart by prayer, and stir it up as
much as thou canst to some devotion. In thy
prayer set not thy heart on any bodily thing,
but all thy care shall be to draw in thy thoughts
from beholding any bodily thing, that thy desire
may be as it were naked and bare from all
earthly things, ever aspiring upward to Jesus
Christ, whom yet thou canst never see bodily as
He is in His Godhead, nor frame any image or
likeness of Him in thy imagination; but thou
mayest, through devout and continual beholding
of the humility of His precious humanity, feel
the goodness and the grace of His Godhead.

When thy desire and mind is gotten up, and
as it were set free from all fleshly thoughts and
affections, and is much lifted up by spiritual
power unto spiritual favour and delight in Him
and of His spiritual presence ; hold thou therein
much of thy time of prayer, so that thou have no
great mind of earthly things, or if they come into
thy mind that they do but trouble or affect thee
little. If thou canst pray thus, thou prayest well,
for prayer is nothing else but an ascending or
getting up of the desire of the heart into God
by withdrawing of it from all earthly thoughts.
Therefore it is likened to a fire which, of its own
nature, leaveth the lowness of the earth and
always mounteth up into the air, even so desire
in prayer, when it is touched and kindled of the
spiritual fire, which is God, is ever aspiring up to
Him that it came from.

They that speak of this fire of love know not


36 The Scale of Perfection

^iLf^in"^^ well what it is ; save this I can tell that it is
prayer iu neither any bodily thing nor felt by any sense of
the body. A soul may feel it in prayer or in
devotion, which soul is in the body, but it feeleth
it not by any bodily sense ; for though it is true
that it works in and upon the soul, that the body
itself is turned thereby into a heat and be as it
were chafed through the labour and travail of the
spirit, nevertheless the fire of love is not bodily,
for it is only in the spiritual desire of the soul.
And this is no riddle to any man or woman that
have had the experience of devotion ; but be-
cause some are so simple as to imagine that
because it is called a fire that therefore it should
be hot as bodily fire is, therefore have I set
down thus much.

Now as to thy other question to know what

prayer is best to be used, I shall give thee my

opinion. Thou shalt understand that there be

three kinds of vocal prayer.

What prayer The first is that which was made immediately

is^he^st tobe ^^ QqJ Himself, as the Pafer mster ; the second

those that are made more generally by the

Three sorts of ordinance of holy Church, as Matins, Evensong

^ndoftt^'first ^"^ Hours ; the third sort such as are made by

sort^, pious men addressed to our Lord and to our

Lady and to His saints.

As to these kinds of prayers that are called
vocal, I judge that for thee that art religious and
art bound by custom and thy rule to say thy
Breviary it is most expedient to say it, and that
as devoutly as thou canst, for in saying of them
thou sayest also the Pater noster and other prayers
likewise. And to stir thee up more to devotion
there be ordained psalms and hymns, and such
other which were made by the Holy Ghost, like
as the Pater noster was. Therefore thou shalt


The First Book 37

not say them hastily nor carelessly, as if thou
wert troubled or discontented for being bound to
the recital of them ; but thou shalt recollect thy
thoughts to say them more seriously and more
devoutly than any other prayers of voluntary de-
votion, deeming for truth that, seeing it is the
prayer of holy Church, there is no vocal prayer
so profitably to be used by thee as it is. Thus
shalt thou put away all heaviness, and by God's
grace turn thy necessity into good will and thy
obligation into a great freedom, so that it shall
be no hindrance to thy other spiritual exercises.
After this thou mayest, if thou wilt, use others, as
the Pater nosier or any other, and stick to those
in which thou feelest most savour and spiritual
comfort.

This kind of vocal prayer is commonly most
profitable for every man in the beginning of his
conversion, as being then but rude and gross and
carnal (unless he have the more grace) nor can-
not think of spiritual thoughts in his meditations,
for his soul is not yet cleansed fi-om his old sins.
And therefore I hope it is most speedful to use
this manner of prayer, as to say his Pater noster
and his Ave, and to read upon his psalter and
such other. For he that cannot run easily and
lightly by spiritual prayer, his feet of knowledge
and love being feeble and sick by reason of sin,
hath need of a firm staff to hold by, which staff
is set forms of vocal prayer ordained by God and
holy Church for the help of men's souls. By
which the soul of a fleshly man that is alway
falling downward into worldly thoughts and sen-
sual affections shall be lifted up above them, and
holden up as by a staff, and fed with the sweet
words of those prayers as a child with milk, and
guided and held up by them that he fall not into


38 The Scale of Perfection

errors or fancies through his vain imaginations ;
for that in this manner of prayer is no deceit nor
error to him that will diligently and humbly
exercise himself therein.
The danger oj And hereby thou mayest learn that those men

*^be^Li% (^^ ^^y ^^^^ ^^®^® ^®) ^^^ ^^ ^^^ beginning of
leave thevocai their conversion, or soon after, having felt some
Prayers of the Spiritual comfort, either in devotion or know-
A^?/f? '^^* ledge, and are not yet stablished therein, leave

rait too soon to °' - j^i_ ^j*

others. such vocal prayer and other outward exercises

too soon, and give themselves wholly to medita-
tipn, are not wise ; for ofttimes in that time of
rest which they take to themselves for meditation,
imagining and thinking on spiritual things after
their own fancies, and following their bodily
feeling, having not yet received sufficient grace
thereto, by indiscretion overtravel their wits and
break their bodily strength, and so fall into
fancies and singular conceits, or into open errors,
and hinder that grace which God hath already
given them, by such vanities. The cause of all
this is secret pride and overweening of them-
selves ; for when they have felt a little grace and
some sensible devotion, they esteem it so much
to surpass the graces and favours He doth to
others that they fall into vain-glory. Whereas if
they knew but how little it were in comparison of
that which God giveth, or may give, they would
be ashamed to speak anything of it, unless it
were in a case of great necessity. Of this kind
of vocal prayer speaketh David in the Psalms^
Psalm cxli. thus : With my voice have I cried unto the
Lord^ with my voice have I prayed to our
Lord. Behold how the prophet, for to stir
other men to pray both with mouth and with
voice, saith : With my voice I cried to God^ and
with my speech I besought our Lord.


The First Book 39

There is another sort of vocal prayer which is ^^ sect
not by any set common form of prayer ; but is, %a%^
when a man or woman, by the gift of God, feel- ''^^*
ing the grace of devotion, speaketh to God as it
were bodily in His presence, with such words as
suit most to his inward stirrings for the time, or
as Cometh to his mind, answerable to the feelings
or motions of his heart, either by way of re-
hearsal of his sins and wretchedness, or of the
malice and sleights of his enemy, or of the
mercies and goodness of God. And hereby he
crieth with desire of heart and speech of mouth
to our Lord for succour and for help, as a man
that were in peril among his enemies ; or in
sickness, showing his sores to Gt)d as to a
physician, saying with David: Deliver me from p^^^^^ ^^
my enemieSy O Lard. Or else this : Heal my
soul, for I have sinned against Thee; or other
suchlike words as they come to hismind.

And at other times there appears to him to
be so much goodness and grace and mercy in
God that it delighteth him with great affection
of heart to love Him, and thank Him in such
words and psalms as do most suit to that oc-
casion, as David saith : Confess ye to the Lord Ps. cxxxv,
because He is goody because His mercy endureth
for ever.

This kind of prayer pleaseth God much, for
it proceedeth wholly from the affection of the
heart, and therefore never goeth away unsped*
or empty without some grace, and this prayer
belongeth to the second part of contemplation^
as I have said before. Whoso hath this gift of
God fervently ought for a time to eschew the
presence and company of all men, to be alone
that he be not letted ;t whoso hath it let him

* Unprosperous. t Interrupted.


40 The Scale of Perfection

hold it as long as he can, for it will not last long
in its fervour. If the grace of it come plenteous-
ly, it is wondrous painful to the spirit, though
it be much pleasant also to it ; for it is much
wasting to the body whoso useth it much, for it
maketh the body (if the grace of it come in abun-
dance) for to stir and move here and there as if
the man were mad or drunk and could have
no rest. This is a point of the passion of love,
the which by great violence and mastery breaketh
down and mortifieth all lusts and likings of any
earthly thing, and woundeth the soul with the
blessed sword of love, that it makes the body
sink, not able to bear it. The touch of love is
of so great power that the most vicious or fleshly
man living on earth, if he were once strongly
touched with this sharp sword, he would be right
sober and grave a great while after, and abhor
all the lusts and likings of the flesh and all
earthly things which before he took most de-
light in.

Of this manner of feeling speaketh the prophet
/pr.xx, 9. ^Jeremy thus: And there was made in my heart
as a fire boilings and shut up in my boneSy and
I faintedy not Me to bear it ; which words
may be understood thus: The love and feeling
of God was made in my heart, not fire, but as
boiling or burning fire ; for as material fire
burneth and wasteth all bodily things where it
Cometh, right so doth spiritual fire (as is the love
of God) burneth and wasteth all fleshly loves and
likings in a man's soul. And this fire is shut
up in my boneSy as the prophet saith of himself;
that is to say : This love filleth the powers of the
soul, as the mind, reason and will, with grace
and spiritual sweetness, as marrow filleth the
bones, and that inwardly, and not outwardly in the


The First Book 41

senses. Nevertheless it is so mighty within that
it worketh out into the body, and maketh it
quake and tremble. And yet it hath so little to
do with the bodily senses, and so unacquainted
is the body with it that it cannot skill of it and
cannot bear it, but faileth and falleth down as
the prophet saith. Therefore our Lord tem-
pereth it and withdraweth this fervour, and
suffereth the heart to fall into more solDriety
and softness. He that can pray thus often, he
speedeth soon in his travail, and shall get more
of virtues in a little time than another without
this, or exercised in any other way of prayer,
shall get in a long time for all the bodily pe-
nance he can do. Whoso hath this need not
afflict his body with more penance than this
brings along with it, which will be enough if
it come often.

The third sort of prayer is only in the heart
without speech, with great rest and quietness
both of soul and body. A pure heart it be-
hoveth him to have that shall pray after this
manner; for such only attain to it who by long The third sort
travail both of body and soul, or else by such ofPrayen
sharp touches or motions of love, as I have
before mentioned, have arrived to rest of spirit,
so that his affections are turned into spiritual
savour and relish, that he is able to pray con-
tinually in his heart, and love and praise God
without great letting of temptations or of vani-
ties, as is said before in the chapter of the second
sort of Contemplation, Of this kind of prayer
St Paul saith thus : If I pray with the tongue i Cor, xiv, 14,
my spirit prayethy hut my mind is without, fruit, 'S«
What then ? / will pray also in the spirit, I
zvill pray also in the mind ; I will sing in the
spirity 1 will sing also in the mind. That is


42 The Scale of Perfection

to say : If I pray with my tongue only, by the
consent of my spirit, and with painstaking and
diligence, it is meritorious, but my soul is not
fed by it, for it feeleth not the fruit of spiritual
sweetness by understanding. What then shall
I do, saith Si Paul? And he answers, I will
pray with the exercise and desire of the spirit,
and I will also pray more inwardly in my spirit
without labour, in spiritual savour and sweet-
ness of the love and the sight of Grod, by the
which sight and feeling of love my soul is fed*
Thus (as I understand him) could Si Paul pray.
Of this manner of prayer speaketh our Lord
Levit. vL in holy Writ in a figure thus : Fire shall always
burn upon ihe aliar^ which ihe priesi shall nourish^
pulling Tvood underneaih in ihe morning every day^
ihai so ihe fire may noi go oui. That is, the fire
of love shall ever be lighted in the soul of a de-
vout and clean man or woman, the which is Grod's
altar. And the priesi shall every morning lay to
it sticks and nourish the fire, that is this man
shall, by holy psalmSy clean thoughts and fervent
desires, nourish the fire of love in his heart, that
it go not out at any time. This prayer of rest or
quiet our Lord giveth to some of His servants,
as it were a reward of their travail, and an
earnest of that love and sweetness which they
shall have in the bliss of heaven.

SECTION II

How they should do that are troubled with vain
Thoughts in their Prayers

But thou wilt say that I speak too high in this
matter of prayer, which indeed is no mastery nor
difficulty for me to write it, but it were a great
piece of mastery for a man to practise it.


The First Book 43

Thou sayest that thou canst not pray thus
devoutly, nor so perfectly in heart as I speak
of; for when thou wouldst have thy mind up-
ward to God in thy prayer, thou feelest so many
vain thoughts, either concerning thy own business
or other men's, with many other lets and hin-
drances, that thou canst neither feel savour nor
rest nor devotion in thy prayers, and ofttimes
the more thou strivest to keep thy heart the
further it is from thee and the harder, and some-
times continues so from the beginning to the
end, that thou thinkest all lost that thou dost.

In answer to that which thou saidst, that I
spake too high of prayer, I grant well that
I spake more than I myself can or may do.
Nevertheless I spake it for this intent that thou
shouldst know how we ought to pray ; and when
we cannot do so, that we should acknowledge
our weakness with all humility and Grod's mercy.
Our Lord Himself hath commanded us thus :
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
hearty with all thy soul and with all thy m^'ght.
It is impossible for any man living to fulfil this
bidding so fully as it is said. Yet our Lord hath
bidden us so, to the intent, as St Bernard saith,
that thereby we should know our feebleness, and
then humbly cry for mercy, and we shall have it.
Nevertheless I shall instruct thee in this point
what to do as well as I can.

When thou goest about to pray, first make
and frame betwixt thee and God in thy mind a
fiill purpose and intention in the beginning to
serve Him, then with all the powers of thy soul
by thy present prayer, and then begin and do as
well as thou canst. Though thou be never so
much letted contrary to thy former purpose, be
not afraid, neither be angry at thyself, nor im-


44 The Scale of Perfection

patient against God, because He giveth thee not
the savour and spiritual sweetness in devotion as
thou thinkest He giveth to others. But see therein
thy own feebleness and bear it patiently, deem-
ing it to be (as it is) feeble and of no worth in thy
own sight, with humility of spirit ; trusting also
firmly in the mercy of our Lord, that he will
make it good and profitable to thee, more than
thou imaginest or feelest. For know thou well
that thou art excused of thy duty, and thou shalt
be rewarded for this (as well as for any other
good work done in charity), though thy mind and
intention may be not so fully set upon it as thou
wishest. Therefore do what belongs to thee, and
suffer our Lord to give what He will, and teach
Him not. Think thyself wretched and negligent,
and as it were in great fault for such things, yet
for this fault and all other venials which cannot
be eschewed in this wretched life lift up thy
heart to God, acknowledging thy wretchedness,
and cry God mercy, with a good trust of forgive-
ness, and strive no more therewith, nor stay any
longer upon it, as if thou wouldst by main strength
not feel such wretchedness, but leave off and go
to some other good exercise, either corporal or
spiritual, and resolve to do better the next time.
Though thou shouldst fall another time into the
same defect, yea, an hundred times, yea, a thou-
sand, yet still do as I have said, and all will be
well. Moreover a soul that never finds rest of
heart in prayer, but all her life is striving with
her thoughts, and is troubled and letted with
them, if she keep her in humility and charity in
other things, she shall have great reward in
heaven for her good will and endeavours.


The First Book 45

CHAPTER n

SECTION I

Of Meditation

Thou must understand that in meditation no cer-
tain rule can be set for every one to observe, for
they are in the free gift of our Lord, according to
divers dispositions of chosen souls, and according
as we thrive in that state and in virtues, so God
increaseth our meditations, both in spiritual
knowing and loving of Him. For whoso is
always alike, and at a stand in knowing of
God and spiritual things, it seemeth that he
profiteth and groweth but little in the love of
God, which may be proved by the example of
the apostles, who, when at Pentecost they were
filled with burning love of the Holy Ghost, be-
came thereby neither fools nor dolts, but became
wonderful wise, both in knowing and speaking
of God and spiritual things, as much as men
could in mortal bodies. For thus saith the
Scripture : They were all filled with the Holy Acts ii.
Ghost y and began to speak the wonders of God;
all which knowledge they got by ravishing
in love, through the working of the Holy
Ghost within them. Divers sorts of meditations
there be which our Lord putteth in a man's
heart. Some of them shall I tell thee of that
thou mayest exercise thyself in them. In the
beginning of the conversion of such a man as
hath been much defiled with worldly or fleshly
sins, commonly his thoughts are much upon his
sins with great compunction and sorrow of heart,
with great weeping and many tears humbly and
busily asking mercy and forgiveness of God for
them. And if he be deeply touched in conscience


46 The Scale of Perfection

for them (for then our Lord will soon cleanse
him from them), his sins will seem ever to be in
his sight, and that so foul and so horrible, that
hardly can he be able to brook or endure himself
for them ; and though he confess himself never
so clearly of them, yet will he find difficulty and
a fretting and biting in his conscience about
them, thinking that he hath not confessed right.
And scarce can he take any rest, or be quiet,
insomuch that his body were not able to undergo
such vexation and pain, were it not that our
Lord of His mercy sometimes comforteth him by
the consideration of His Passion, and devotion
wrought in him thereto ; or by some other means
as He seeth good. After this manner worketh
He in some men's hearts more or less, as He
will, and this is through His great mercy, that
not only will He forgive the sin or the trespass,
but will both forgive the trespass and the pain
due for it in Purgatory^ for such a little pain here
felt in the remorse and biting of conscience.
Also, to make a man rightly to receive any
special gift or degree of the love of God, it be-
hoveth that he first be scoured and cleansed by
such a fire of compunction for all his great sins
before done. Of this kind of exercise of com-
punction often David speaks in the Psalter^ but
PsaJmX. especially in the psalm, Miserere tneiy Deus —
Have mercy on nUy O God.
7*' rrk^'^'^' "^^^ *^^^ sometime after this travail and
HumaniiT^ excrcise, and sometimes together with it, such a
given freely man that hath been so defiled with sins, or else
JaLS^*"^^* another who, by the grace of God, hath been kept
^ajtehwrnn ^^ innocency, our Lord bestoweth on him the
io he given hy meditation di His humanity, or of His birth, or
^im^ of His Passion, and of the compassion of our

Lady, St Mary. When this meditation is made


The First Book 47

by the help of the Holy Ghost, then it is right
profitable and gracious, and thou shalt know it
by this token : when thou art stirred to a medi-
tatian in God, and thy thoughts are suddenly
drawn out from all worldly and fleshly things,
and thou thinkest that thou seest in thy soul the
Lord Jesus in a bodily likeness as He was on
earth, and how He was taken by the Jews and
bound as a thief, beaten and despised, scourged
and judged to death, how lowly He bore the cross
upon His back, and how cruelly He was nailed
thereon ; also of the crown of thorns upon His
head, and of the sharp spear that sticked Him to
the heart ; and thou in this spiritual sight feelest
thy heart stirred to so great compassion and pity
of thy Lord Jesus, that thou moumest and
weepest, and criest with all thy might of body
and soul, wondering at the goodness, the love,
the patience, the meekness of thy Lord Jesus,
that He would, for so sinful a caitiff as thou art,
suffer so much pain ; and, nevertheless, thou
seest so much goodness and mercy to be in Him
that thy heart riseth up into a love and a joy and
a gladness in Him, with many sweet tears,
having great trust of the forgiveness of thy sins
and the salvation of thy soul by the virtue of
this precious Passion ; so that when the medi-
tation of Christ's Passion, or any part of His
hiunanity is thus wrought in thy heart by such a
spiritual sight, with devout affection answerable
thereunto, know well that it is not of thy own
working, nor the feigning or working of any evil
spirit, but by the grace of the Holy Ghost. For
it is an opening of the spiritual eye into the
humanity of Christ, and may be called the fleshly
love of God, as St Bernard saith, inasmuch as
it is set upon the fleshly nature of Christ, and it


48


The Scale of Perfection


is right good, and a great help for the destroy-
ing of great sins, and a good way to come to
virtues, and so after to the Contemplation of the
Godhead. For a man shall not come to the
spiritual light in Contemplation of Christ's God-
head, unless first he be exercised in imagination
with bitterness and compassion, and in stedfast
thinking of His humanity. Thus St Paul did,
I Cor, ii. and therefore first he saith : / desired to knozv
nothing among you hut Jesus Christ and Him
crucified. As if he had said: My knowing
and my faith is only in the Passion of Christ ;
and therefore he saith thus also : God forbid
I should rejoice in anything^ save in the cross of
Christ. Nevertheless afterward he saith: We
preach unto you Christy the power of God and the
wisdom of God, As who should say: First I
preached of the humanity and Passion of Christ ;
now I preach to you of the Godhead, that Christ
is the power of God, and the endless wisdom
of God.
The Medita- But this manner of meditation a man hath
Hon of the Pas- ^ot always when he would, but only when our
^thd^awnr Lord will give it. Unto some He giveth it all
their lifetime by fits, when He visiteth them ;
some men being so tender in their affections that,
when they hear men speak or think themselves
of this precious Passion, their hearts melt into
devotion, and are fed and comforted thereby
against all manner of temptations of the enemy,
and this is a great gift of God. To some men
He giveth it plentifiiUy at the first, and after-
wards withdraws it for divers causes, either if
And why, ^ man grow proud of it in his own eyes, or for
some other sin by which he disableth himself
to receive the grace ; or else our Lord with-
draweth it, and all other devotions sometimes,


The First Book 49

because He will sufiFer him to be tried with
temptations of the enemy, and thereby will dis-
pose a man to understand and feel our Lord more
spiritually, for so He saith to His disciples : // St John xv
is expedient for you that I go away from you [in
My body'], for except I go the Holy Ghost will not
come. As long as He was with them they loved
Him much, but it was fleshly according to
His humanity, and therefore it was necessary
that He should withdraw His bodily presence,
that the Holy Ghost might come to lliem and
teach them how to love Him and know Him
more spiritually, as He did at Pentecost. Right
so, it is expedient for some that our Lord with-
draw a little the fleshly and bodily image from
the eye of their soul, that their heart may be set
and fixed more busily in spiritual desire and
seeking of His divinity.


SECTION n

Of divers Temptations of the Enemy« and the
Remedies against them

Nevertheless it behoveth a man to suffer many
temptations first, which shall befall some men xemi>tatio\
often after that their comfort is withdrawn, and from Satar
that sundry ways by the malice of the enemy.
As thus : when the devil perceiveth devotion
much withdrawn, that the soul is left, as it were,
naked for a time, then sendeth he to some temp-
tations of lust, of gluttony, and these so hot and
burning that they shall think they never felt so
grievous ones in all their life before, even when
they gave themselves most to such sins. Inso-
much as they think it impossible to stand out long
from falling without help. And, therefore, have

4


50 The Scale of Perfection

they then much sorrow for lack of comfort and
devotion which formerly they have had, and
much dread also of falling from Grod by such
open sins. All this the devil worketh (by Grod's
permission) to make them repent of their good
purposes, and turn back to their former courses
of sinning. But whoso will abide, and suffer a
little pain, and not turn again to sin for any-
thing, the hand of our Lord is full near, and will
help them right soon, for He hath much care of
that man that is in such a case, though he
Psalm xc ^^oweth it not ; for so saith David in the person
of our Lord : / am with him in trotibley I will
deliver him^ and he shall glorify Me, The
devil tempteth others maliciously to spiritual
sins, as to doubt of the articles of faith, or of
the Sacrament of our Lord's blessed Body. Also
to despair, or blaspheme of Grod or any of His
saints, or to a wearisomeness of their own life, or
to bitterness against others, or foolish melan-
choly and sadness, or too much fear of them-
selves, of doing hurt to their healths by giving
themselves so much to serving of God. Some
others, and namely solitary folks, he frighteth
with dreads and ugly shapes appearing to their
eyes or to their imaginations, causing often
thereby great shakings and quakings in their
bodies, either sleeping or waking, and so trou-
bleth them that they can hardly take any rest.
And also many other ways he tempteth, more
than I can or may say.
The remedies The remedies for such may be these. First :

SatanT *^ Christ, and often call to mind His Passion and
the pains that He suffered for us, and that they
then believe stedfastly that all sorrows and tra-
vail which they suffer in such temptations, which


The First Book 51

to unskilful men may seem a forsaking by God,
are indeed no such leavings or forsakings, but
trials for their good, either for cleansing of their
former sins or for the great increasing of their
reward and the disposing of them for more grace,
if they will but suffer awhile and stand fast, that
they turn not again willingly to sin.

Another remedy is that they fear not, nor
esteem these malicious stirrings for sins, nor lay
to heart that despair or blasphemy, or doubtings
of sacrament, or any such other, though never so
ugly to hear ; for the feeling of these temptations
defile the soul no more than if they heard a hound
bark or felt the biting of a flea. They vex the
soul indeed, but do not harm it, if so be a man
despise them and set them at nought, for it is
not good to strive with them, as if thou wouldst
cast them out by mastery and violence, for the
more they strive with them the more they cleave
to them. And therefore they shall do well to di-
vert their thoughts from them as much as they
can, and set them upon some business. And if
they will still hang upon them, then it is good
for them that they be not angry nor heavy
through feeling of them ; but with a good trust
in Grod bear them (like a bodily sickness and
scourge of our Lord for the cleansing of their
sins as long as He pleaseth) out of love to Him,
even as He was willing to be scourged and bear
His cross for the love of them. Moreover, it is
good for them to open their minds to some wise
man in the beginning, before these temptations
get rooting in their heart, and that they forsake
their own wit and judgement and follow the coun-
sel of another. But that they show them not un-
advisedly or lightly to any unskilful or worldlv
man, who nevqr felt such temptations, for such


52 The Scale of Perfection

may happily by their unskilfulness bring a simple
soul into despair.
The remedy of Of this manner of temptatiofiy by which a man
^^^ ^fnptiu seemeth forsaken of God, and is not, the help and
to^^come ^jxwt comfort is this : The Lord saith by His prophet^
God, For a little space have I left theCy hut in great

Isaias liv. mercy will I gather thee. For a moment of in-
dignation have I hid My face a little while from
theCy and in mercy everlasting will I have mercy
on thee. As if He had said, I suffered thee to
be troubled a little while, and in a point of My
wrath I smote thee ; that is to say, the penance
and the pain that thou suflFerest here is but a
point or little prick of My wrath, in regard of
the pain of hell or of purgatory. Yet in My
manifold mercies I shall gather thee ; when thou
thinkest thyself forsaken, then will I of My great
mercy gather thee again to Me ; for when thou
esteemest thyself, as it were, lost, then shall our
Job xi. Lord help thee, as Job saith : When thou shall
think thyself consumedy thou shall arise as the
day-stary and thou shall have confidence. That
is to say, when thou art brought so low by tra-
vail into temptation that thou despairest of help
or comfort, like a forlorn man, yet stand stiffly in
hope and pray to God, and verily thou shalt sud-
denly spring up as the day-stary in gladness of
heart, and have a sure trust in God.

Moreover, for the comfort of such men, that
they may not despair in temptation, the wise
Eccl, iv, i8. man saith thus of our Lord : In temptation
He walketh with himy and bringeth fear and dread
up&n hiniy and torments him with His discipliney
till He try him in his cogitations, and may trust
His soul : And He will establish himy arid make
a [direct way unto himy and make him glady and
will disclose His secrets to himy and will heap upon


The First Book 53

him as treasures knowledge of understanding and
justice. The wise man, because he would have
not despair in temptation, to comfort them saith
thus : In temptation our Lord forsaketh not a man,
but goeth with him from the beginning to the end.
For he saith first, He chooseth him, and that is,
when He draweth a man to Him by comfort of
devotion, and afterward bringeth upon him sorrow
and dread and trials, and that is when He with-
draweth devotion and suffereth him to be tempted.
And he saith that He tormenteth him in tribula-
tion until He hath well tried him in his thoughts,
and until a man will put all his trust in Him
fully, and then He bringeth him out into the
right way, and fasteneth him to Him, and glad-
deneth him, and sheweth him His secrets, and
giveth him His treasure of knowing and under-
standing of righteousness.

By these words may you see that these tempta-
tions or any other, be they never so ugly, are
expedient and profitable to a man that by grace
is in full will to forsake sin, if he will be willing
to suflFer and abide God's will, and not turn again
to sin which he hath forsaken, for any sorrow,
or pain, or dread of such temptations ; but ever
stand still in travail and in prayer with good
hope. Our Lord of His endless goodness hav-
ing pity and mercy of all His creatures, when
He seeth time, will put to His hand and smite
down the devil and all his power, and ease him
of his travail, and put away all dreads and
sorrows and darkness out of his heart, and
brings into his soul the light of grace, opening
the eye thereof to see, that all the travail that
he hath had was expedient for him, giving him
also fi-esh spiritual might to withstand all the
suggestions of the fiend and all deadly sins


54 The Scale of Perfection

without great difficulty, and leadeth him into a
stability and settledness of virtue and good liv-
ing ; in which, if he keepeth himself humble to
the end, then will He take him wholly to him-
self. Thus much have I said, that thou mightest
not be troubled or letted with any such tempta-
tion, or too much afraid ; but do as I have said,
and better if thou canst, and I hope through the
grace of Jesus Christ thou shalt never be over-
come by thine enemy.
Take heed of But after thou hast escaped these temptations,

sedihesetemp^ many by His mercy) that thou hast not been
tations. troubled much with any such, then it is good for

thee that thou beware of turning thy rest into
idleness; for there is many a man that taketh
rest upon him too soon, as if he were ripe for
rest in Contemplation. But if thou wilt do well,
begin a new game and a new travail, and that
is, by meditation^ to enter within into thy own
soul, for to know what it is, and by the know-
ing thereof to come to the spiritual knowledge
of Grod. For St Austin saith. By the knowing
of myself I shall get the knowledge of God.
I say not that such exercise is absolutely ne-
cessary, and thy bounden duty, unless thou feel
thyself stirred up by grace, and as it were
called thereto. For our Lord giveth divers gifts
where He pleaseth, not all to one man, nor one
to every man, save the gift of charity, which is
common to all.

Therefore, if a man have received a gift from
God, as devotion in prayer, or in the Passion of
Christ, or any other, be it never so little, let him
not leave it quickly for any other, unless he as-
suredly find and feel a better, but hold that which
he hath, and exercise himself therein seriously,


The First Book 55

ever desiring a better when Grod will give it.
Nevertheless, if that be withdrawn somewhat,
and he seeth a better, and feeleth his heart
stirred thereto, then seemeth it to be a calling
of our Lord to the better, and then is it time
that he follow after it, to get it, and fall to
practise it as speedily as he may.


CHAPTER m

That a Man should know the measure of his Gift»
that he may desire and take a better when God
giveth it

Our holy Fathers heretofore taught us that we
should know the measure of our gift, and there-
fore to work upon it, and according to it, and not
take upon us, out of our head or imagination, to
have more in our feeling or ability than indeed
we have. We may ever desire the best, but we
may not ever work the best or our utmost, be-
cause we have not yet received that grace and
ability. A hound that runneth after the hare
only because he seeth other hounds run, when he
is weary, he stayeth and resteth, or tumeth home
again ; but if he run because he seeth or is in
view of the hare, he will not spare for weariness
till he have caught her. Right so it is in the
spiritual course, whoso hath grace, be it never
so little, and wittingly leaveth it, and the work-
ing upon it, and putteth himself to the exercise
or practice of another kind, for which he hath not
as yet received a gift or grace, but doth it only
because he seeth, readeth, or heareth that some
others do so, he may perhaps run awhile till he
be weary and then will he turn home again, and
if he be not the more wary, may hurt his feet


56 The Scale of Perfection

with such fancies before he get home. But he
that continueth working upon such grace as he
hath, and humbly beggeth by prayer perseve-
rantly for more, and after feeleth his heart stirred
to follow after the grace which he desired, he
may securely run, if he keep himself humble.
Therefore, desire of Grod as much as thou wilt
or canst, without measure or moderation at all
concerning any thing that belongs to His love
or Heaven's bliss, for he that can desire most of
God shall feel and receive most ; but work as
thou mayest and cry Grod mercy, for that thou
canst not do. Thus St Paul seems to mean,

I Cor. vii. when he said : Every one hath a proper gift of
Gody one sOy and another so. Also, when he said :

I Cor, xii. There are varieties of gifts ^ to one is given the word
of wisdom^ to another the word of knowledge^ etc.

Ephes. iv. And also when he said : To every one of us is
given gracey according to the measure of the dona-
tion tf/" Christ. And further, where he said :
That we may know the things that are given us
by God. He saith that every one hath his gift
of Grod: For to every man that shall be saved is
given a grcu:e according to the measure of Christ's
gift. Therefore it is speedful that we know the
gifts that are given us by Grod, that we may work
in them, for by those we shall be saved, as some
by bodily works, and by deeds of mercy, some
by great bodily penance, some by sorrow and
weeping for their sins all their lifetime, some by
preaching and teaching, some by divers graces
and gifts of devotion shall be saved and come
to bliss.


The First Book 57


PART m-CHAPTER I

Of the Knowledge of a Man's Soul and the Powers
thereof necessary to Contemplation

There is one work more very needful and ex-
pedient to travail, in which I esteem also to be
the plain highway in our working (as much as
may be) to Contemplation : and that is, for a man to
enter into himself, to know his own soul* and the
powers thereof.

By this inward sight thou shalt come to see
the nobility and dignity that naturally it had in
its first creation ; and thou shalt also see the
wretchedness and the mischief which thou art
fallen into by sin. From this sight will arise
a desire with great longing in thine heart to
recover again that dignity and nobleness which
thou hast lost. Also thou shalt feel a loathing
and detestation of thyself, with a great will and
desire to destroy and beat down thyself and all
things that let thee from that dignity and that
joy. This is a spiritual work, hard and sharp in
the beginning, for those that will go speedily and
seriously about it. For it is an exercise in the
soul against the ground of all sins, little and
great, which ground is nought else but a false
mistrusted love of man to himself. Out of this
love, as St Austin saith, springeth all manner
of sin, deadly and venial.

Verily until this ground be well ransacked
and deep digged, and as it were dried up by
casting out of all fleshly and worldly loves and
fears, a soul can never spiritually feel the burn-
ing love of Jesus Christ nor have the homeliness

* The fairness and the fouhiess of it.


58 The Scale of Perfection

of His gracious presence, nor have a clear sight
of spiritual things by light in the understanding.
This then must be the travail and labour of a
man, to draw his heart and mind from the fleshly
love and liking of all earthly creatures, from vain
thoughts and from fleshly imaginations and from
the love and vicious feeling of himself, so that the
soul shall or may find or take no rest in any
fleshly thoughts or worldly affections. Then in-
asmuch as the soul cannot as yet find her spiri-
tual rest and satisfaction in the sight and love of
Jesus, therefore it must needs be that in the
meanwhile she must find and feel some pain and
wearisomeness.

This pain and travail is somewhat straight
and narrow, nevertheless I hope it is the way
which Christ teacheth to them that would be His

SiLuie%Mu perfect lovers in the Gospel, saying: Strive to
enter in at the strait gate^ for strait is the
gate^ and narrow is the way that leadeth to life^
and few men find it. How strait this way is.
He telleth us in another place: Whoso will

St Matt xvl come after m£y let him forsake himself and hate
St John xii. his own soul. That is to say, forsake all fleshly
love and hate his own carnal life and vain liking
of all his bodily senses for love of Me ; and take
the cross, that is suffer the pain of this awhile
and then follow Me ; that is to say, in Con-
temptation of My Humanity and of My Divinity.
This is a strait and narrow way that no bodily
thing can pass through it, for it is a slaying of all
Cblos, iii. sin, as St Paul saith : Mortify your members
that are upon earthy not the members of our body
but of our soul, as uncleannesSy lusty evil con-
cupiscencey avaricey fond love to ourselves and
earthly things. Therefore as thy endeavour has
been heretofore to resist bodily sins and open


The First Book 59

temptations of the enemy, and that in matters as
it were from without; right so it behoveth thee
now, in this spiritual work within thyself, to batter
down and destroy the ground of sin in thyself as
much as thou canst. Which that thou mayest be
better able to perform, I shall give thee the best
counsel I can.

CHAPTER n

Of the Worthiness and Excellency of the Soul and how
it was lost

The soul of a man is a life consisting of three How man
powers, Memory y Understanding and Willy after *^ image
the image and likeness of the Blessed Trinity ; ^Trinity!^
inasmuch as the Memory was made strong and
stedfast by the power of the Father to hold and
retain God in perpetual remembrance, without
forgetting, distracting or letting of any creature,
and so it hath the likeness of the Father. The
Understanding was made bright and clear, with-
out error or darkness, as perfectly as a soul in a
body unglorified could have, and so it hath the
likeness and image of the Son, who is infinite
wisdom. The Will and affections were made
pure and clean, burning in love towards God,
without sensual love of the flesh or of any crea-
ture by the sovereign goodness of God the Holy
Ghost, and so it hath the likeness of the Holy
Ghost, which is blessed love. Whereby you
may see that man's soul (which may be called
a created Trinity) was in its natural estate re-
plenished in its three powers with the remem-
brance, sight and love of the most blessed un-
created Trinity, which is God.

This was the dignity and worth of man's soul


6o The Scale of Perfection

by nature at his first creation, which thou hadst
Howhelostit in Adam before the first sin. But when Adam
sinned, choosing love and delight in himself and
in the creatures, he lost all his excellency and
dignity, and thou, also, in him, and fell fi-om that
Blessed Trinity into a foul, dark, wretched trinity;
that is to say, into forgetting of God and igno-
rance of himself, and into a beastly love and
liking of himself, and all this he did wittingly
and willingly. For, as David saith in the
Psalter: Man being in honour understood it noty
andy therefore, he lost ity and became like a beast,
MatCswretch- See then the wretchedness of thy soul, for as
edness by sin, ^j^g Memory was something established and fixed
upon God, so now it hath forgotten Him and
seeketh its rest in the creatures, now in one
creature and then in another, and never can find
full rest, having lost Him in whom is full rest.
So it is with the Understanding and the Will arid
affections, both which were pure in spiritual
favour and sweetness but now is turned into a
foul, beastly lust and liking in itself and in the
creatures and in fleshly favours, both in the
senses as in gluttony and lechery ; and in the
imagination, as in pride, vain-glory and covetous-
ness, insomuch that thou canst do no good deed
but it is defiled with vain-glory ; nor canst thou
easily make use of any of thy five senses cleanly
upon anything that is pleasant, but thy heart
will be taken and enflamed with a vain lust and
liking of it, which putteth out the love of God
from thy heart, so that no feeling of love or
spiritual favour may come into it.

Every man that liveth in spirit understandeth
well all this. This is the soul's wretchedness and
our mischief for the first man's sin besides all
other wretchedness and sins which thou hast


The First Book


61


wilfully added thereto. And know thou well
that hadst thou never committed any sin with
thy body, either mortal or venial, but only this
which is called original (for that is the first sin,
and is nothing else but the losing of our
righteousness which we were created in), thou
shouldst never have been saved, had not our
Lord Jesus Christ by His precious Passion de-
livered thee, and restored thee again.

And, therefore, if thou think I have herein
spoken too high, because thou canst neither under-
stand it well, nor practise it according as I have
delivered, I will now descend to thee, and fall as
low as thou canst desire, both for thy profit and
my own. Then say thus : though thou be never
so much a wretch, and hast committed never so
great sins, do but forsake thyself and all thy works
done, both[[good and bad, and cry God mercy, and
ask salvation only by virtue of this precious Pas-
sion, and that with a good trust, and without
doubt thou shalt have it. And a.s for original
sin, and all other thou shalt be safe, yea, as safe
as an anchoret that is enclosed. And not only
thou, but all Christian souls that trust upon His
Passion and humble themselves, acknowledging
their wretchedness, asking mercy and forgive-
ness, and the fruit of this precious Passion only,
and submitting themselves to the Sacraments of
holy Church, though it be so that they have
been encumbered with sin all their lifetime, and
never had feeling of spiritual favour or sweetness,
or ghostly knowledge of God, yet shall they in
this faith, and in their good will, by virtue of this
precious Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ be safe,
and come to the bliss of Heaven.

All this thou knowest well, but yet it delights
me to recite and speak of it, that thou may est see


HoTu not
standing
this, man
he saved
the Passi
of Christ
he nevet
wretched^


62 The Scale of Perfection

The endless the endless mercy of our Lord, how low He

mercy 0/ God faUeth to thee and to me and to all sinful caitiffs ;

io all stnners. ^^^ mercy therefore, and have it. Thus saith the

Joel ii. Prophet in the person of our Lord : Every one

that calleth upon the Name of our Lord shatl be

Romans x. saved; that is to say, asketh salvation by Jesus

and His Passion.
Whoshallbe This courtesy of our Lord some men under-
partdkers of stand aright, and are saved thereby ; and others
^noU^ wAo in trust of this mercy and this courtesy lie still in
their sins, and think to have the benefit of it when
they list, but they are mistaken, for they are taken
ere they are aware, and so damn themselves.
^^ But thou wilt object : If this be true that thou

apZiin^r sayest, I wonder greatly at that which I find in
love of Jesus some holy men's books, for some say (as I under-
he necessary stand them) that he that cannot love this blessed
and^h^^* Name Jesus nor find and feel in it spiritual joy
and delight with sweetness, shall be a stranger
to the bliss of Heaven, and never come there.
Verily when I read these words, they astonished
me, making me afraid. For I hope (as you have
said) that through the mercy of our Lord they
shall be safe, by keeping of the commandments
and by true repentance for their former evil life,
who never felt any such spiritual sweetness, in
the Name of Jesus, and therefore I marvel the
more, to find them say (as me thinketh) the con-
trary hereto.

To this I answer that (in my opinion) their
saying (if it be well understood) is true, and no
whit contrary to what I have said, for this Name
Jesus is nothing else in English but healer or
health. Now every man that liveth in this
wretched life is spiritually sick, for there is no
man that liveth without sin, which is a spiritual
sickness, as St John saith of himself, and of other


The First Book 63

perfect men thus : If we say we have no sitiy we ' ^^ ^^^^ *•
beguile ourselves^ and there is no truth in us.
Therefore he can never come to the joy of
Heaven, till he be first healed of this ghostly
sickness. But this spiritual healing may no
man_ have (that hath the use of reason) except
he desire it, and love it, and have delight thefe-
in, inasmudi as he hopeth to get it. Nowthe
Name of Jesus is nothing else but this spiritual
health; wherefore it is true that they say, that
no man can be safe, unless he love and like the
Name of Jesus ; for no man can be spiritually
healed, until he love and desire spiritual health ;
just as if a man were bodily sick, there could no
earthly thing be so dear, nor so needful to him,
nor so much would he desire it, as bodily health ;
for though thou shouldst give him all the digni-
ties and riches of this world, and not make him
whole (if thou couldst), thou pleaseth him not.
Right so it is to a man that is sick spiritually,
and feeleth the pain thereof; nothing is so dear,
nor so needful, nor so much coveted by him, as is
ghostly health, and that is Jesus, without whom
all the joys of Heaven cannot please him. And
this is the reason (as I take it) why our Lord
when He took man's nature upon Him for our
salvation, would not be called by a name be-
tokening His infinite essence, or His wisdom,
or His justice, but only by that which betokened
the cause of His coming, namely, the salvation of
man's soul, which salvation this name Jesus be-
tokened. Hereby, then, it appeareth that none
can be saved unless he love salvation, to have it
through the mercy of our Lord Jesus only, by the
merits of His passion ; which love he may have
that liveth and dieth in the very lowest degree of
charity.


64 The Scale of Perfection

Also I may affirm on the other side, that he
that cannot love this blessed name Jesus with a
spiritual joy, nor increase in it with heavenly
melody here, shall never have nor feel in Heaven
the fulness of sovereign joy, which he that could
so love it in this life by abundance of perfect
charity in Jesus shall then have and feel in
Heaven, and so may their saying be understood.

Nevertheless he shall be saved, and have
great reward in Heaven from God, whosoever in
this life is in the lowest degree of charity by
keeping God's commandments. For our Lord
St John xiv. saith : In My Father's house are sundry man-
sions. Some are perfect souls, who in this life
are filled with charity and graces of the Holy
Spirit, and sing most sweetly and lovingly to
God in Contemplation of Him, with wonderful
sweetness and heavenly savour. These because
they have most charity and grace of the Holy
Ghost shall have the highest reward in the bliss
of heaven, for these are called God's darlings.
Others there be, not disposed or enabled to Con-
tefnplationy nor having the perfection of charity
(as the apostles and martyrs had in the begin-
ning of the holy Church), these shall have a
lower reward in the bliss of Heaven, for these
are called Goa's friends ; for thus doth our
Cant'c. 5. Lord call them : Eaty O My friends^ and be
inebriatedy O My darlings. As if He had said :
Ye that are My friends, because ye have
kept My commandments, and preferred My love
before the love of the world, and loved me more
than any earthly thing, ye shall be fed with the
spiritual food of the Bread of life. But ye that
are more than My friends, that not only kept
My commandments, but also of your own free will
fulfilled My counsels, and loved Me entirely with


The First Book 65

all the powers of your souls, and burned in My
love with spiritual delight (as especially did the
apostles and martyrs and all other souls that
through grace came to the gift of perfection) ye
shall be made drunken with the noblest and
freshest wine in My cellar, which is the supreme
joy of love in heaven.

CHAPTER m

SECTION I

That a Man should be industrious to recover again
his ancient Dignity^ and reform within him the
Image of the Trinity^ and Low it may be done

Nevertheless, though this that I have said be This mercy
true, through the endless mercy of God to thee and ^^^^^ ^
to me and to all mankind we are not, therefore, u^T^
in confidence hereof to be more careless, or wil-
fully negligent in our living ; but the more busy
to please Him, and the rather, because now we
are restored again in hope by the passion of our
Lord, to the dignity and bliss which we had lost
by Adaffis sin. Though we should prove not to
be able to recover it fully here in this life, yet
should we desire and endeavour to recover the
image and likeness of the dignity we had, so
that our soul might be reformed, as it were in
a shadow, by grace to the image of the Trinity
which we had by nature, and hereafter shall
have fully in bliss. For that is the life which
is truly contemplative to begin here, in that feel-
ing of love and spiritual knowing of God, by
opening of the spiritual eye, which shall never
be lost nor taken away, but shall be perfected in
a far higher manner in heaven. Thus did our
Lord promise to St Mary Magdalen (that was

5


66 The Scale of Perfection

St Luke 'X. a true Contemplative) when He told her thai

she had chosen the better part (which was the

love of God in Contemplation) that should never

be taken from her,

'%isimag€U \ do not say that in this life thou canst re-

ISer^ir'in ^^^®^ ^^ whole and so perfect a cleanness and

thU ^i/e. innocency, knowing and loving of God, as thou
hadst at first, and shalt have hereafter, neither
mayest escape all the wretchedness and pains
of sin ; nor that thou living in mortal flesh
canst wholly destroy and kill within thee all
false vain loves, nor eschew all venial sins, but
that they will (unless they be stopped by great
fervoiu" of charity) spring out of thy heart, as
water doth out of a stinking well. But I wish
that if thou canst not fully quench it, yet thou
mayest somewhat slack it, and come as near as
thou canst to cleanness of soul. For our Lord
promised to the children of Israel, when He led
them into the land of Promise, and in them by

Deuf.xu a figure to all Christians, saying: All the land
which thy foot shall tread upon shall be thine.
That is to say, so much land as thou canst tread
upon with thy foot of true desire, so much shalt
thou have in the land of Promise, namely, in the
bliss of Heaven, when thou comest thither.


SECTION n

That this Dignity and Image is t^stored by Jesua^
and how He is to be desired^ sought and found

Kw Jtsut is Seek, then, that which thou hast lost, that thou

to bi sought mayest find it; for well I wot, whosoever once

hath an inward sight, but a little of that dignity

and that spiritual fairness which a soul hath by

creation, and shall have again by grace, he will


The First Book 67

loathe in his heart all the bliss, the liking and
the fairness of this world, as the stink of
carrion ; and he will never have any will or mind
to do other deed, night or day ^save what mere
need of nature requireth) but desire, mourn, seek,
and pray how he may come again thereto.

Nevertheless inasmuch as thou hast not as yet By desiring
seen what it is fully, for thy spiritual eye is not ^^f^*
yet opened, I shall tell thee one word for all, in
the which thou shalt seek, desire and find it ; for
in that one word is all that thou hast lost. This
word is Jesus : I mean not this word Jesus painted
upon the wall, as written in letters on the book,
or formed by lips in sound of the mouth, or
framed in thy mind by imagination, for in this
wise may a man that is void of charity find Him ;
but I mean Jesus' Christy that blessed Person,
God and Man, Son of the Virgin Mary^ whom
this name betokeneth ; that is all goodness, end-
less wisdom, love and sweetness, thy joy, thy
glory, and thy everlasting bliss, thy God, thy
Lord, and thy salvation.

If, then, thou feelest a great desire in thy
heart to Jesus, either by calling to mind this
name Jesus, or by minding, or thinking, or say-
ing of any other word ; or in Prayer, or Medita-
tion, or any other deed which thou dost ; which
desire is so much, that it putteth out, as it were, by
force all other thoughts and desires of the world,
and of the flesh, that they rest not in thy heart ;
then seekest thou well thy Lord Jesus. Aiid when
thou feelest this desire to God, or to Jesus (for
it is all one), holpen and comforted by a ghostly
might, insomuch that it is turned into love, affec-
tion, and spiritual savour and sweetness, into
light and knowing of truth, so that for the time,
the point of thy thought is set upon no other


68 The Scale of Perfection

created thing-, nor feeleth any stirring of vain-
glory, nor of self-love, nor any other evil affec-
tion (for they cannot appear at that time), but
this thy desire is only enclosed, rested, softened,
suppled, and anointed in Jesus, then hast thou
found somewhat of Jesus ; I mean not Him as
He is, but a shadow of Him ; for the better that
thou findest Him, the more shalt thou desire
Him. Then observe by what manner of prayer,
or meditation, or exercise of devotion thou find-
est greatest and purest desire stirred up in thee
to Him, and most feeling of Him, by that kind
of prayer, exercise or work seekest thou Him
best, and shalt best find Him. Therefore if it
come into thy mind, asking as it were of thy-
self: What hast thou losty and what seekest thou ?
lift up thy mind and the desire of thy heart
to Jesus Christ, though thou be blind, and canst
see nought of His Godhead, and say that : Him
hast thou lost, and Him wouldst thou have, and
nothing but Him^ to be with Him where He is.
No other joy^ no other bliss in Heaven or in
earthy but Him.

And though it be so, that thou feelest Him in
devotion, or in knowing, or by any other gift
or grace, rest not there, as though thou hadst ftiUy
found Jesus; but forget that which thou hast
found, and always be desiring after Jesus more
and more, to find Him better, as though thou
hadst right nought found in Him. For wot
thou well, that what thou feelest of Him, be it
never so much, yea, though thou wert ravished
with St Paul into the third heaven, yet hast thou
not found Jesus as He is in His joy; know
thou, or feel thou never so much of Him, He is
still above it. And therefore, if thou wilt fully
find Him, as He is in His joy, do thou never


The First Book 69

cease from spiritual desiring and loving of Him,
whilst thou livest.

Verily I had rather feel and have a true and Whatptofi
clean desire in my heart to my Lord Jesus Christ, *' isto ha\
though I see little of Him with my spiritual eye, j^^mf*^^
than to have without this desire all the bodily
penance of all men living, all visions, all revela-
tions of Angels appearing, all songs and sound-
ing to the ear, all tastes and smellings, fervours
or any delights, or bodily feelings, and (to be
brief) all the joys of heaven and earth which are
possible to be had, without this desire to my
Lord Jesus. David the Prophet felt (as I con-
ceive) this desire in himself, when he said thus :
What have I in Heaven hut Thee^ and what can Psalm Ixxi
/ desire on earth besides Thee ? As if he had said.
Lord Jesus, what heavenly joy is liking to me
without desire of Thee, whilst I am on earth, or
without love of Thee when I come to Heaven ?
As who should say, right none. If, then, thou
wilt feel anything of Him, bodily or spiritually,
covet nothing but only to feel in truth within
thee a desire of His grace and of His merciful
presence, so that thou mayest think that it is not
possible for thy heart to find any rest in anything
but in Him. Thus coveted Davidy when he said
thus : My soul hath coveted^ or longed after y the Psalm cxv
desire of thy righteousness at all times. Seek,
then, as David did, desire by desire. And if thou
feelest, by thy desire in prayers and in medita-
tions, the familiar presence of Jesus Christ in
thy soul, bind thy heart fast thereto, that it fall
not from it ; and if thou shouldst stumble, that
thou mayest soon find Him again.

Seek, then, Jesus, whom thou hast lost, for Jesus desir
He would be sought, and is desirous to be found, *^J^ ^^^
for He Himself saith: Every one that seeketh stMatLv


70 The Scale of Perfection

findeth. The seeking is painful, but the finding
is joyful ; do, therefore, after the counsel of the
Prov. ii. wise man, if thou wilt find Him : If thou shali
seek wisdom (that is Jesus] like silver^ and as
treasures shalt dig her up^ then shall Ihou under^
stand the fear of our Lordy and shalt find the know^
ledge of God. It behoveth thee to delve deep in
thy heart, for therein Jesus is hid, and cast out
perfectly all loves and likings, sorrows and fears
of all earthly things, and so shalt thou find
wisdom, that is Jesus.

Be thou, then, like the woman in the Gospel,

St Luke XV. of whom our Lord saith : What woman is there^

that hath lost her groat and doth not light a candU^

and turn her house upside down^ and seek till she

finds it f As who should say, there is none but

would do so. And when she hath found it, she

calleth to her Mends, and saith to them thus :

Make mirth with me and melody for I have found

my groat which I had lost. Tiiis groat is Jesus

Two Ian- which thou hast lost, and if thou wilt find Him,

thorns to find light up a lanthom, that is God's Word, as David

I. HUWo^d. saith : Thy Word is a lanthorn to my feet By

Aa/mcxviii. this lanthom shalt thou see where He is, and

how to find Him. And if thou wilt, thou mayest

together with this, light up another lanthom,

that is the reason of thy soul. For as our Lord

StMatt!^. s^^^^ • ^*^ lanthorn (or light) of thy body is thy

bodily eye. Right so may it be said, that the

lanthorn of thy soul is reason, by the which

thy soul may see all spiritual things. By this

lanthom mayest thou find Jesus, that is if thou

hold up this lanthorn from underneath the

bushel, as our Lord saith : No man lighteth a

St Luke viii. (^^ndle or) lanthorn to set it under a bushel^ but

upon a candlestick. That is to say, thy reason

must not be overlaid with earthly business, or


The First Book 71

vain thoughts, and earthly aflFections, but always
upwards, above all vain thoughts and earthly
things as much as thou canst. If thou do so,
thou shalt see all the dust, all the filth and small
motes * in thy house (for He is light itself), that
is to say, all fleshly loves and fears in thy soul.
I mean not perfectly all; for as David saith:
Who knaweth all his trespasses f As who should A«^»»
say, no man. And thou shalt cast out of thy heart
all such sins, and sweep thy soul clean with the
besom of the fear of God, and wash it with thy
tears, and so shalt thou find thy groat, Jesus;
He is thy groat, thy penny, thy heritage.

This groat will not be found so easily as 'tis ^^ f»t
thought, for this work is not of one hour nor ^^i
of one day, but many days and years, with much
sweat and labour of body t and travail of soul.
And if thou cease not, but seek busily, sigh and
sorrow deeply, mourn stilly,$ and stoop low, till
thine eyes water for anguish and for pain, for
that thou hast lost thy treasure Jesus, at the last
(when His will is) well shalt thou find thy groat
Jesus. When thou hast found Him, as I have
said, that is when in purity of conscience feelest
the familiar and peaceful presence of that blessed
man Jesus Christ, at least a shadow or glimmer-
ing of Him ; thou mayest, if thou wilt, call all
thy friends to thee to make mirth with thee and
melody, for that thou hast found thy groat Jesus.

See then the mercy and courtesy of Jesus, jnwhi
Thou hast lost Him, but where ? Soothly in thy /esus 1
house, that is to say, in thy soul, that if thou ^^^ g
hadst lost all thy reason of thy soul by its first f„ercy
sin, thou shouldst never have found Him again ; fested
but He left thee thy reason, and so He is still in

thy soul, and never is quite lost out of it.

♦ Molle. t Swink. t Silently.


72 The Scale of Perfection

Nevertheless thou art never the nearer Him
till thou hast found Him. He is in thee, though
He be lost from thee ; but thou art not in Him
till thou hast found Him. This is His mercy
also, that He would suffer Himself to be lost
only there, where He may be found, so that thou
needest not run to RontCy nor to Jerusalem to
seek Him there, but turn thy thoughts into thy
own soul where He is hid, as the Prophet saith :
Isaias xlv. '^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^ hidden God^ hid in thy soul,
and seek Him there. Thus saith He Himself in
St Matt, xiii. the Gospel : The Kingdom of Heaven is likened
to a treasure hid in thefieldy the which when a man
findethy for joy thereof^ he goeth and selleth all that
he hathy arid buyeth that field. Jesus is a treasure
hid in the soul. Then if thou couldst find Him
in thy soul, and thy soul in Him, I am sure for
joy thereof thou wouldst part with the liking of
all earthly things to have Him. Jesus sleepeth
in thy heart spiritually, as He did sometime
bodily when He was in the ship with His di-
sciples ; but they, for fear of perishing, wakened
Him, and soon after He saved them from a
tempest. Do thou so, stir Him up by prayer,
and waken Him with great crying of desire, and
He will soon rise and help thee.
W§ ourselves Nevertheless I believe thou sleepest oftener
^Zi^'^^^ to Him than He doth to thee; for He calleth
hanceTof ^^^ ^^ ^^ Vfith. His sweet, secret voice, and
Inding Him stirreth thy heart full stilly, that thou shouldst
leave all other jangling of other vanities in thy
soul, and hearken only to Him. Thus saith David
in the person of our Lord : Heary O daughter y and
Pf. xliv. consider; tncltne thine ear y and for get thy own people
and thy father* s house. That is, forget the people
of thy worldly thoughts, and the house of thy
fleshly and natural affections. Here thou seest how


The First Book 73

our Lord calleth thee, and all others that will
hearken to Him. And what hindereth thee that
thou canst neither see nor hear Him ? Soothly
there is so much din and noise in thy heart of
vain thoughts and fleshly desires, that thou canst
neither hear Him nor see Him ? Therefore put
away those unquiet noises, and destroy the love
of sin and vanity, and bring into thy heart the
love of virtues and full charity, and then shalt
thou hear thy Lord speak to thee.

As long as Jesus findeth not His image Humility
reformed in thee, He is strange, and the far- chanty at
ther from thee ; therefore frame and shape thy- ^^/^
self to be arrayed in His likeness, that is in jesus.
humility and charity, which are His liveries, and
then will He know thee, and familiarly come to
thee, and acquaint thee with His secrets. Thus ^^ j^j^^ ^
saith He to His disciples : Whoso loveth Me^ he
shall be loved of My Father ^ and I will manifest
Myself unto him. There is not any virtue nor
any good work that can make thee like to our
Lord without humility and charity, for these two
above all others are most acceptable to Him,
which appeareth plainly in the gospel, where
our Lord speaketh of humility thus : Learn of ^^ j/^^^ ^
Me^for I am meek and humble in heart. He saith
not. Learn of me to go barefoot, or to go into the
desert, and there to fast forty days, nor yet to
choose to yourselves disciples (as I did), but
learn of Me meekness, for I am meek and lowly
in heart. Also of charity He saith thus : This is stjohn xii
My commandment, that ye love oru another as 1
loved yoUy for by that men shall know you for
My disciples. Not that you work miracles, or
cast out devils, or preach, or teach, but that each
one of you love one another in charity. If there-
fore thou wilt be like Him, have humility and


74 The Scale of Perfection

charity. Now thou knowest what charity is,
namely, To love thy neighbour as thyself.


CHAPTER IV

SECTION I

Of the Ground and Image of Sin in us, which is
first to be found out and laboured against^ and
how it is to be done

Thou hast heard already what thy soul is, and
what dignity and beauty it had, and how it lost
it, and also how it may by grace and busy travail
be somewhat recovered again, in feeling, in part
in this life. Now I shall tell thee (according to
my feeble ability) how thou mayest enter into
thyself to see the ground of sin, and destroy it as
much as thou canst, and so recover a part of thy
soul's dignity.
How w To do this thou shalt cease for a time from

should behold ^u bodily works, and from all outward business
ts image. ^^ much as thou canst, then shalt thou draw thy
whole thought into thyself from all thy bodily
senses, which thou must hold in and restrain
from wandering forth, so that thou take no heed
of anything thou seest or hearest or feelest, and
after this draw in thy thoughts nearer from all
imaginations of any bodily deeds done before by
thee, or of any other men's deeds ; and this is not
difficult to be done at that time when thou hast
devotion, but thou must do it also when thou
hast no such devotion, and tljen it will be some-
what difficult. And set thy intent and full
purpose, as if thou wouldst not seek nor find any-
thing but only the grace and spiritual presence
of Jesus.


The First Book 75

This will be painful ; for vain thoughts will
press into thy heart very thick, to draw thy mind
down to them. And in doing thus thou shalt
find somewhat, but not Jesus whom thou seekest,
but only a naked remembrance of His name.
But what then shalt thou find. Surely this : a
dark and ill-favoured image of thy own soul, which
hath neither light of knowledge nor feeling of
love of God. This image, if thou behold it heed-
fiilly, is all inwrapped and clothed with black
stinking rags of sin, as pride, envy, anger,
covetousness, gluttony, sloth and luxury. This
is not the image of Jesus, but the image of sin,
which St Paul calleth a body 0/ sin and of death. ^*"^- ^^•
This image and this black shadow thou bearest
about with thee wheresoever thou goest ; out of
this spring many great streams of sin, and small
ones also. Just as out of the image of Jesus, if
it be reformed in the beams of spiritual light,
will spring and ascend up towards heaven burn-
ing desires, pure affections, wise thoughts and
all comeliness of virtues. Even so out of this
image spring stirrings of pride, of envy and
such other, which cast thee down from the. come-
liness of a man into a beast's likeness.

Peradventure now thou beginnest to think What this
with thyself what this image is like, and that *"^^* « ^''**
thou shouldst not study much upon it, I will tell
thee. It is like no bodily thing. What is it
then, sayest thou ? Verily it is nought^ or no real
thing, as thou shalt find, if thou try by doing as
I have spoken ; that is, draw in thy thoughts
into thyself from all bodily things, and then shalt
thou find right nought wherein thy soul may rest.

This nothing is nought else but darkness of
conscience, and a lacking of the love of God and
of light ; as sin is nought but a want of good, if


76 The Scale of Perfection

it were so that the ground of sin was much
abated and dried up in thee, and thy soul was
reformed right to the image of Jesus; then if
thou didst draw into thyself thy heart, thou
shouldst not find this naughty but thou shouldst
find Jesus ; not only the naked remembrance of
this name, but Jesus Christ in thy soul readily
teaching thee ; thou shouldst there find light of
understanding and no darkness of ignorance, a
love and liking of Him, and no pain of bitter-
ness, heaviness or tediousness of Him. But be-
cause thou art not reformed, therefore when thy
soul draweth into herself from all bodily things
and delights, thou findest nothing but emptiness,
darkness and heaviness ; so that thou thinkest it
an hundred years till thou be out again to some
bodily delight or vain thoughts, and it is no
wonder; for he that cometh hcMne to his house,
and findeth nothing but stink and smoke, and
a chiding wife, he will quickly run out of it.
Even so thy soul, finding no comfort in itself,
but black smoke of spiritual blindness, or great
chiding of guilty or fleshly thoughts, crying
upon thee that thou canst not be in peace, verily
it will quickly be weary of being alone and
recollected, until it be out again. And this is
the darkness of conscience.
He that will Nevertheless, in this dark conscience it be-

^^^ih^ hoves him to labour and sweat ; that is to say,
p^ns^t It behoveth thee to draw thy thoughts into thy-
this dark Self from all bodily things as much as thou canst,
image oj sin, and then when thou findest right nought but
sorrow and pain, and blindness in this darkness,
if thou wilt find Jesus, thou must suffer the pain
of this dark conscience, and abide awhile therein.
And here also thou must beware that thou take
Jesus Christ into thy thoughts against this dark-


The First Book 77

ness in thy mind, by busy prayer and fervent
desire to God, not setting the point of thy
thoughts on that aforesaid noughty but on Jesus
Christ whom thou desirest. Think stiffly on His
Passion and on His humility, and through His
might thou shalt arise. Do as if thou wouldst
beat down this dark image, and go through-
stitch with it. Thou shalt hate and loathe * this
darkness, and this nought^ just as the devil, and
thou shalt despise and all to break itt For with-
in this nought is Jesus hid in His joy, whom thou
shalt not find with all thy seeking, unless thou
pass this darkness of conscience.

This is the ghostly travail I spake of, and the
cause of all this writing is to stir thee thereto, if
thou have grace. This darkness of conscience
and this nought is the image of the first Adam,
St Paul 'knew it well, for he said thus of it: As i Cor, xv.
we have before borne the image of the earthly maUy
that is the first Adam, right so that we might now
bear the image of the heavenly man, which is Jesus,
the second Adam, St Paul bore this image oft
full heavily, for it was so cumbersome to him
that he cried out of it, saying thus : O who shall Rom. vii.
deliver me from this body and this image of death ?
And then he comforted himself and others also
thus : The grace of God through Jesus Christ.

SECTION n

What the said Image of Sin is^ properly^ and what
Cometh out of it

I HAVE already told thee of this image, that it is
nought. Nevertheless, if thou canst not under-
stand how this should be an image, seeing
nought can be nothing else but nought, and so

* Agrise. t Brest it.


jS The Scale of Perfection

for all my telling thou canst make nothing of it,
I shall therefore tell thee more plainly of this
image as methinketh.
Seven fivers This image is a false inordinate love of thy-

'/M^'T^ ^^ ^®^^' ^^* ^^ ^^^^ there come all manner of sins
0/ IS ma^e. ^^ seven rivers, which are these: pride, envy,
anger, sloth, covetousness, gluttony and lechery.
Lo, this is somewhat that thou mayest understand.
By some one of these rivers runneth out all
manner of sin, and putteth thee out of the state
of charity, if it be a deadly sin ; or letteth the
fervour of thy -charity, if it be venial. Now
mayest thou grope^ at l&^t that this image is
not altogether naught \ but it is much of bad,
for it is a great spring of love unto thyself, with
such rivers as I have said.

But now, sayest thou, how can this be true r
For I have forsaken the world, and am shut up
in a monastery ; I meddle with no man, I chide
not, I strive not, I neither buy nor sell, I have
no worldly business, but by the mercy of Grod
keep myself chaste, and withhold me from de-
lights. And, besides this, I pray, I watch, I
labour bodily and ghostly, as well as I can ;
how should this image then be so much in me
as thou speakest of?
The spring To this I answer, granting thee that I hope
of ^ these thou dost all these works and more; and yet
^wUhhi "^*y i^ l>® true as I say. Thou art busy to thy
power to stop these rivers without, but the
spring within perhaps thou leavest whole. Thou
art like to a man which had in his yard a stink-
ing well, with many runnings from it, who went
and stopped the runnings, and left the spring
whole, and thought all was well ; but the water

♦TofeeL


The First Book 79

sprang up at the ground of the well, and stood
still, insomuch that it corrupted all the fairness
of his garden, and yet did no water run out.
Right so may it be with thee, if it be so that
thou hast by grace stopped the rivers of this
image without, so far that all is done well, but
beware of the spring within; surely unless thou
stop and cleanse that as much as thou canst, it
will corrupt all the flowers of the garden of thy
soul, show they never so fair outwardly in sight
of men.

But now, sayest thou, whereby shall I know How a mm
that the ground is stopped, if I go about it ? As ^ayknow
to this I shall tell thee, how by trying and ex- 'tp^n^'be''
perience thou shalt know this image if it be in stopped.
thee, and how much it is in thee, and thereby
shalt thou know how much it is stopped in thee,
and how little also. And inasmuch as pride is
the principal river, I shall begin with it.


CHAPTER V

SECTION I

Of the Seven Deadly Sins, and first of Pride, what it
is, and when it is a deadly Sin and when but venial

Pridx is nothing else (as the learned say) but
love of thy own excellency, that is, of thy own
worship. The more thou lovest and likest thine
own honour, the more thou hast of this pride ;
the more thou hast of this image in thee. If
thou feel in thy heart a stirring of pride, that
thou art holier, wiser, better and more virtuous
than others, that God hath g^iven thee grace to
serve Him better than others do, and thinkest
all others beneath thee, and thyself above them,


8o The Scale of Perfection

or any other thought of thyself, which showeth
to the eye of thy soul an excellency and a sur-
passing of others, and thou feelest a love and
delight in this stirring, and a vain pleasing in
thyself, that indeed thou art so ; this is a token
that thou bearest this black image, which, though
it be privy from the eyes of men, yet it appeareth
openly in God's sight.

But thou sayest that thou canst not eschew
such stirrings of pride, for oft thou feelest them
against thy will, and therefore thou boldest them
no sin ; or, if they be sin, they be nought but
venial.

As to this, I answer that the feeling of these
stirrings of pride, or of any other sin, which spring
either out of the corruption of this foul ima^e or
by incasting or suggestion of the enemy, is no
sin so far as to the feeling of them. Neverthe-
less, when by negligence and thy own blindness
this feeling is received unwarily in thy thoughts,
and turned into love and liking, then is there sin
in it more or less according to the measure of this
love, sometime venial and sometime deadly.
The privilege This is a grace and privilege by virtue of
that Chris- Christ's passion granted to all Christians bap-
^^'^^ '"* *^2®^ *^ water and the Holy Ghost. For verily
conaipiscence to Jews and SoTocenSy who believe not in Jesus
and uie stir.' Christ, all such Stirrings are deadly sins. For
tings of sin. ^y p^^i gai^^ . Whatsoever is done without faith
in Christ is sin. But we Christians have this
privilege through His mercy, that such feelings
are no sins, but the pain of original sin.
When the But when it is venial and when it is deadly
^**PH^^^ I cannot fully tell thee; nevertheless, a little I
mor^ca. shall say, as methinketh. When the stirrings of
pride are received and turned into liking, so far
that the heart chooseth them for a full rest and


The First Book 81

a full delight, and seeketh no other end, but only
the liking therein, then is this pride deadly sin ;
for he maketh and chooseth this delight as his
god, without any opposing of his reason or will,
and therefore it is deadly sin.

But now, sayest thou, who is such a fool as to
choose pride for his God ? No man living, sure,
will do so. To this I answer that I cannot tell
thee in special who sinneth deadly in pride. But
in general I shall say that there be two sorts of
pride, one bodily and the other spiritual. Bodily
pride is of fleshly living men ; spiritual is of
hypocrites and heretics. These three sin deadly
in pride; I mean such fleshly living men as St
Paul speaks of: 1/ ye live after the fleshy ye shall ^^*^' vHi.
die. Then say I thus : That a worldly man who
loveth and seeketh principally the worship of
himself, and chooseth the liking of it as the rest
of his heart, and the end of his bliss, he sinneth
deadly.

But now thou wilt say : Who doth choose the And when
love of his worship, credit or honour, instead of ^^'«^
his God ? I answer, that he that loveth his wor-
ship, as for to seem better and greater of estate
than any other, and travaileth about it as much
as he can ; if he love it so much that for the
getting, or keeping, or the saving of it, he break-
eth the commandment of God, or breaketh love
and charity to his neighbour, or is ready, or in
full will to break it rather than he would forbear
his worship, or lose anything of it, either in his
name, or in his estate, or of fulfilling his will ;
soothly he sinneth deadly, for he loveth his wor-
ship, and chooseth it more than the love of God
and of his neighbour. And nevertheless, the man
that sinneth thus deadly will say with his mouth
that he will not choose pride for his god, but he

6


' 82


The Scale of Perfection


And in whom.


begiiileth himself, for he chooseth it for his god
in his deeds.

Nevertheless, another worldly man that loveth
his own worship and pursueth after it, if he love
it not so much, that he would not for the getting-
or the saving of it do a deadly sin, or break
charity to his neighbour, he sinneth not deadly
but venially, more or less according to the
measure of his love and of his liking, with other
circumstances.

But a man or woman that disposeth himself
or herself, to live contemplatively, if it be so that
he forsake himself as to his own will, and offer
up himself wholly to God with a ftiU general will,
that he will not sin in pride wittingly, nor have
any joy in himself wilfully, but only in God, as
far as he can, and may ; and notwithstanding
after this full will offered up to God, feeleth many
stirrings of vain-glory, and delighteth in them
for the time (because at the first he did not so
well perceive them), this liking is but venial sin,
and, namely, if it be so, that when he cometh to
himself he reproveth himself, and withstandeth
this stirring with displeasure of his will, and
asketh mercy and help of Gt)d ; then the liking
which before was some sin, our Lord of his mercy
soon forgiveth it; and moreover he shall have
reward* for his good travail in withstanding it.

And this is a courtesy of our Lord, granted

God* s special to all those who are specially His servants and

servants. domesticsf of His court, as are all those that for

His love forsake, with a good true will, all

worldly and all fleshly sin, and give themselves

wholly both body and soul unto His service, with

all their might and cunning, as do truly Anchor-

ties enclosed, and all truly religious persons, who

* Mede. t Homely.


Who are


The First Book 83

for the love of Grod and salvation of their own
souls enter into any religious order approved by
holy Church. Or else, if it be so, that they enter
first for worldly respects, or for their bodily sus-
tenance, or some other such ; if they repent them
and turn it into a spiritual respect, as for the ser-
vice of God ; these as long as they keep this will
and pursue it as well as their frailty will permit,
are true religious persons.

Also, what man or woman soever he be ; in
what degree soever he liveth in holy Church,
priest, clerk or layman, widow, maid or wife,
that will for the love of God and salvation of
his, or her, own soul forsake all the worships and
and likings of this world, in the world, in his or
her heart truly and fully betwixt Gt)d and them-
selves, and all unnecessary business and earthly
things, even to what they have bare need of, and
offer up their will entirely to be His servants, in
the constant exercise of devout prayers and holy
thoughts, with other good deeds that they may
do bodily and ghostly, and keep their will whole
to Gt)d stedfastW", all such are God's special ser-
vants in holy Church. And for this good will
and good purpose that they have by the gift
of Gt)d, they shall increase in grace and in charity
here all their life long ; and they shall have for
this special will a special reward in the bliss of
heaven above other chosen souls, who offered not
wholly their will and their body to God's service,
neither openly nor privately as they did. All
these, whom I call God's servants, and of His
court more specially, if they, through frailty and
ignorance, when they feel such stirrings of vain-
glory, for the time delight therein, and perceive
not that they do so, for that their reason and
senses are letted through that liking which they


84 The Scale of Perfection

feel, so that they cannot so well see those stir-
rings, they sin not deadly in this liking of vain-
glory. For that will that they have in general
set m their heart before, to please God, and to
forsake all manner of sin, if they knew it, keepeth
them here, that they sin not deadly in such stir-
rings, and in all other that come of frailty, and
•will keep them still as long as the ground of that
will is kept whole.
owdivirs I say moreover for thy comfort, and for the

UesinHoly comfort of all Others who live in the state of
lurchshall jlnchorets enclosed, and also by God's grace,
wardsTit for the comfort of all them that enter into any
tavfi. religious order approved in holy Church, that
all those who through the mercy of Gt)d among
them shall be saved, shall have a special reward,
and a singulau: worship in the bliss of heaven ;
for their state of living before other souls that
had not that state in holy Church, though they
were never so holy ; which worship is better than
all the worship of this world without comparison ;
for if thou couldst see what it is, thou wouldst not
for the worship of this world, if thou mightest
have it without sin, change thy state either of
Anchoret or of religious, neither lose that singu-
lar reward in heaven, which reward is called the
Accidental Reward.
nureUtwo Nevertheless, that other men may not mis-
specialRc^ take this that I say, therefore I shall say it more
TD^ds in plainly. Thou shalt understand that there be
eaven, ^^.^ rewards in the bliss of heaven, which our
Yh^^^ Lord giveth to chosen souls. The one is Sove^
reign or reign and Princtpaly and is called the Essential
Essential. Reward^ and that is the knowing and loving of
God according to the measure of charity given
by God to the soul while she lived here in mortal
body. This reward is best and Sovereign^ for it


The First Book 85

is God Himself, and is common to all the souls
that shall be saved, in what state or degree
soever they live in holy Church, more or less,
according to the quantity and the muchness of
their charity in this life, what degree soever they
live in. For he that loveth Grod by charity most
shall have most reward in the bliss of heaven ;
for he shall there love God and know Him most,
and that is the Sovereign^ or Essential reward, and
according to this reward it may and shall fall out,
that some manner of man or woman, as a lord,
or a lady, knight or esquire, merchant or plough-
man, or what degree he be, in man or woman,
may and shall have more reward than some
priest or friar, monk or canon, or Anchoret en-
closed. And why so ? Soothly, because he loved
God more in charity.

Another reward there is that is Secondary ^ or The
Accidental^ which our Lord giveth for special good secondary
deeds, which a man doth voluntarily, over that ^^ ^^^^^^
he is bound to do. Of these deeds three prin-
cipal ones the Doctors of holy Church do make
mention of, namely. Martyrdom, Preaching and
Virginity. * These works, inasmuch as they pass
all others in excellency, shall have a special re-
ward, which is called an Aureola, which is nought
else but a singular worship and a special token
ordained by God for reward of that special deed
they did above others, over and above that- Sove^
reign or Essential reward of the love of God,
which is common to him and to all others. Right
so it is of all other special good deeds, which, if
they be done sincerely, are specially acceptable
in the sight of God, and in the judgement of holy
Church are very excellent, as are the enclosing
of Anchorets, done by the authority of holy

* Manhood.


86 The Scale of Perfection

Church, also entering into religion approved,
and the stricter that the religion is, the more
excellent is the deed in the judgement of
holy Church.

Also after these, and beneath these, are the
taking of the order of Priest, either for cure of
men's souls, and to minister the Sacraments of
holy Church, or else for singular Devotion to
please God, and profit our neighbour, by the
sacrifice of the precious body of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Soothly these are special deeds, and
declared to be excellent by the judgement of
holy Church, and in the sight of our Lord.
When they are done truly for God, they are ex-
cellent, and shall have special reward, each man
in his degree, in the bliss of Heaven. The state
of Bishop and Prelate is above all these deeds,
as to the Accidental reward. That this is so,
appeareth out of holy Writ, where it saith thus
jy^^ ^.. in the Prophet Darnel : Bui go thou until the time
prefixed y and thou shall rest a7id stand in thy lot
until the end of the days ; which is to say thus
much : The Angel when he had showed Daniel
the secrets of God, he said to him thus : Go thou
to the rest of thy bodily deathy and thou shall stand
in thy lot as a prophet at the last day. And verily
as Daniel shall stand as a prophet at the last day
of doom, and have the worship and excellency of
a prophet above the Sovereign blessed reward of
the love and sight of God, right so shalt thou
stand as an Anchoret in that lot, and a Religious
in the lot of the Religious, and so shall it be with
other excellent deeds, and have a singular wor-
ship, passing other men at the day of doom.


The First Book 87


SECTION n

How Pride in Heretics and in Hypocrites is deadly Sin

An heretic sinneth deadly in pride, for he
chooseth his rest and delight in his own opinion,
and in his own sayings, for he imagineth them to
be true; which opinion or sayings are against
God and holy Church, and, therefore, he sinneth
mortally in pride, for he loveth himself and his
own will and wit so much, that though it be
plainly against the ordinance of holy Church, he
will not leave it, but resteth thereon, as upon the
truth, and so maketh he it his god; but he be-
gnileth himself, for God and holy Church are so
united and accorded together that whoso doth
against the one doth against both. And, there-
fore, he that saith he loveth God, and keepeth
His biddings, and despiseth holy Church, and
setteth at nought the laws and ordinances there-
of, made by the head and supreme thereof ap-
pointed to govern all Christians, he lieth ; for he
chooseth not God, but chooseth the love of him-
self, contrary to the love of God, and so sinneth
mortally. And wherein he imagineth most to
please God, he most displeaseth Him ; for he is
blind, and will not see.

Of this blindness and this false resting of
an heretic in his own feeling, speaketh the wise
man thus : There is a way that seemeth right to ^^^^' ^*^'
a viatiy and the last end of tt bringeth him to endless
death. This way specially is called heresy : for
other fleshly sinners that sin mortally and lie
therein, commonly condemn themselves, and feel
biting in conscience, because they go not the
right way ; but an heretic supposeth that he doth


88 The Scale of Perfection

well, and teacheth well, yea, and that no man

doth and teacheth so well as he, and so judgeth

his way to be right, and, therefore, feeleth he no

biting of conscience nor humility in heart. And,

soothly, if God of His great mercy sendeth him

not humility at the last end, he goeth to hell.

And, nevertheless, yet weeneth he to have done

well and that he shall get the bliss of Heaven for

his teaching.

The hypocrite The hypocrite also sinneth deadly in pride.

^nneth mor^ He is an hypocrite that chooseth vain joy in him-

taifytnprtde. ^^^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^y delight of his heart in

this manner.

When a man doth many good deeds bodily
and ghostly, and then is put into his mind by the
suggestion of the enemy, the beholding of himself
and those good deeds, how good, how holy he is,
how worthy in men's deem, and how high in
God's sight, above other men, he perceiveth this
stirring, and receiveth it willingly, for he judgeth
it to be good, and from God, forasmuch as it is
true (for he doth these good deeds better than
other men). And when it is received thus by
consent of his will, there ariseth from it in his
heart so great a love and delight in himself, that
he hath so much grace, that for the time it
ravisheth his mind out of all other thoughts,
both corporal and spiritual, and setteth it upon
vain joy in himself, as on a rest of his heart.
This ravishing in spiritual pride is delectable,
and, therefore, he keepeth it, holdeth it, and
nourisheth it as much as he can. For this love
and delight he prayeth, watcheth, weareth hair-
cloth, and doth other afflictions, and all these
trouble him but little. He pretends to love God,
and thanketh Him sometimes with his mouth ;
sometimes wringeth a tear out of his eye, and


The First Book 89

then he thinketh all safe enough. But soothly,
all this is for love of himself which he chooseth,
and mistaketh for love and joy in God, and
therein lies all his sin. Not that he willingly
chooseth sin, as it is sin, but chooseth this
delight and joy that he takes for good, as the
rest and repose of his soul. Which, because he
doth without any striving against it, or dis-
pleasure at it in his will, therefore is it sin ; for
he judgeth it to be a joy in God, and it is not so,
and, therefore, sinneth he mortally. Job saith
thus of an hypocrite : The joy of an hypocrite is as it job xx.
were for a moment. If his pride rise up even to the
heavenSy and his head touch the clouds^ at the last
end he shall he cast out cls a dung-heap. The joy
of an hypocrite is but a point, for if he worship
himself never so much, and joy in himself never
so much, all his lifetime, and bepaint himself
with all his good deeds, in the sight and prais-
ings of the world, at the last it will prove right
nought but sorrow and pain.

But thou wilt say : Sure there be few or none
such that are so blind as to hold and choose vain
joy in themselves for joy in God.

As to this I cannot answer, nor will, though
I could ; only I will tell thee this one thing, that
there be many hypocrites, and, nevertheless, they
think themselves to be none, and that there be
many that dread and fear themselves to be hypo-
crites, and soothly are none ; who is the one, and
who is the other, God knows, and none but He.
Whoso will humbly dread, shall not be beguiled,
and whoso thinketh himself secure, he may
lightly fall. For St Paul saith : Whoso esteemeth Gal vi.
himself to be somethings whereas indeed he is nothings
he beguileth himself


90 The Scale of Perfection


SECTION in

A short Exhortation to Humility and Charity^ with
a Conclusion how a Man may know how much
Pride he hath in him

Now by what hath been said, thou mayest (if
thou wilt understand them) conceive comfort for
thy degree of living, and also matter of humility.
For though it be true, that (in case thou come to
Heaven) thou shalt there receive so much reward
in special, for thy state of life; nevertheless it
may be that there is many a wife, and msmy
a woman, living at large in the world, that shall
he nearer God than thou, and shall love Grod
more, and know Him better than thou, for all thy
religious state, and that ought to be a shame to
thee. Yet if thou labour to get love and charity
as fully and as perfectly as those that live in the
world (for thou mayest have it by the gift of God,
as much as they that live in worldly business),
then shalt thou have as much of the Sovereign or
Essential reward as they ; and, moreover, shalt
also have another singular and accidental reward
and worship, for thy state of Religion which the
others shall not have. If then thou wilt do well,
be humble, and forget thy state, as if it were
right nought ; for in sooth it is so, that is, right
nought in itself. And let thy desire and business
be to destroy sin, '^ and to get charity, and hu-
mility, and other ghostly virtues, for therein
lieth all.
How a man I have well-nigh forgotten that image I spake
viay know of, but now I tum again thereto. If thou wilt
prid^isin ^^^w how much pride is therein, thou mayest
him. try it thus: Look to it wisely, and flatter not


The First Book 91

thyself; if loving, praising or worshipping, or
human favours of worldly men or others, be
pleasing to thy heart, and thou tumest them into
vain gladness, and well paying of thyself, think-
ing secretly in thy heart, that men ought to
praise thy life, and reward thy speeches more
than other men's ; and also on the contrary, if
it be so, that when men reprove thee, and set
thee at nought, hold thee for a fool, or an hypo-
crite, or slander thee, or speak evil of thee falsely,
and in any other way disease* thee unreasonably,
and for this thou feelest in thy heart a grievous
heaviness against them, and a great rising in thy
heart, with an unwillingness to suffer any shame
or disgrace in the sight of the world ; if, I say, it
be thus with thee, it is a token that there is
much pride in this dark image, seem thou never
so holy in the sight of men. For though these
stirrings be but little and venial, nevertheless
they show well that there is much pride hid in
the ground of thy heart, as the fox dareth in his
den. These stirrings, with many more, spring so
fast out of this image that thou scarcely canst do
any good deed but it will be mingled with some
pride or vain delight in thyself, and so with thy
pride thou defileth all thy good deeds, and
makest them loathesome in the sight of thy Lord.
I say not that they are lost because they are
mingled with this pride. But I say that those
good deeds are not so pleasant to thy Lord as
they would be if they were simple and truly
rooted in the virtue of humility. And, therefore,
if thou wilt have cleanness of heart, to come to the
love of God, it behoveth thee not only to fly the
rest and repose of thy heart in vain-glory, by
willingly consenting to pride, and also the wretch-

♦ Defame.


92 The Scale of Perfection

less liking therein out of frailty against thy will,
but also the very feeling itself of pride, as well as
thou canst, which will not be done unless thou be
full quick and diligent about the keeping of thy
heart, as I shall tell thee hereafter.


CHAPTER VI

SECTION I

Of Envy and Wrath and their Branches^ and how, in^
stead of Sin, the Person is often hated

Turn this image upside down, and look well
therein, and thou shalt find two members or
limbs of envy and anger fastened thereto, with
several branches springing out of them, which
hinder the love and charity which thou oughtest
The branches to have toward thy neighbour. The branches of
of envy and these two sins are these : Hatred, evil suspicion,
wtath. foXse and rash or unskilful judging, melancholy,

risings of heart against them, despising, un kind-
ness, and back-biting, or other ill-speaking of
them, misliking, unskilful or causeless blaming
of them, misconstruing their words or deeds,
anguish and heaviness against those that despise
us, or speak any evil of us, or speak against us,
a joy or gladness at their pain, a selfness or
bitterness against sinful men and others that will
not do as we think they should do, with great
desire and eagerness of heart (under colour of
charity and justice), that they were well pun-
ished and chastised for their sin.

Such motions and stirrings as these seem
good ; nevertheless, if thou ransack it well, thou
shalt find it more fleshly and sensual sometimes
against the person than spiritual against the sin;


The First Book 93

for thou shouldst love the man, be he never so
sinful, and hate the sin in every man whatever
he be. Many are beguiled in this, for they set
the bitter instead of the sweet and take darkness
instead of light, contrary to the prophet, saying :
IVo to you who call evil good, and good evil; pulling Isaias v.
darkness for light, and light for darkness; putting
bitter for sweet, and sweet for hitler. Thus do all they
who, when they should hate the sin of their neigh-
bour and love his person, hate the person instead
of the sin, and imagine that they hate the sin.
Wherefore it is a special craft and art by itself
whoso can do it well.


SECTION n

That it 18 a Master/ and noble Skill to love Men's
Persons^ and yet wisely to hate their Sins« and how

It is no mastery to watch and fast till thy head
ache ; nor to run to Rome or Jerusalem on pil-
grimage upon thy bare feet; nor for to stir about
and preach, as if thou wouldst turn all men by
thy preaching. Nor is it any mastery to build
churches or chapels, or to feed poor men and
build hospitals. But it is a mastery for a man
to love his neighbour in charity, and wisely hate
his sin, and love the man. For though it be true
that all those deeds before said be good in them-
selves, yet are they common to good men and to
bad, for every man may do them if that he would
and have wherewith. And for thee to do that
which every man may do, I hold it no mastery^
but to love thy neighbour in charity and hate his
sin can no man do, save only good men, who
have it by the gift of God and not by their own
travail, as St Paul saith : Love and charity is she a /^om. v.


94 'I^he Scale of Perfection

abroad in your hearts by the Holy Ghost^ which is
given to you. And, therefore, it is more precious
and more dainty to come by. All other good
deeds without this make not a man good nor
worthy of the bliss of heaven, but this alone, and
only this, maketh a man good and all his good
deeds to be medeful. All other g^ifts of God and
works of man are common to good and bad, to
the chosen and the reprobate; but this gift of
charity is proper only to good and chosen souls.
How a man And, therefore, for the learning of this hard
This hard *®^^^"» ^^^^ must Understand and consider that
Ussoti!^ ^ good man for the love of Grod fasteth, watcheth,
goeth on pilgrimage and forsaketh all the plea-
sures of the world sincerely in his heart, without
feigning, and he hath his reward in heaven ; and
an hypocrite doth the same deeds out of vain-glory
and for love of himself, and receiveth his reward
here. Also, a true preacher of God's Word,
filled with charity and humility, sent of God and
received and approved by the Church, if he preach
and teach God's Word, shall have a special re-
ward of God ; that is the aureola for his preach-
ing. And an hypocrite or an heretic that hath no
humility or charity, nor is sent of God nor yet of
holy Church, if they preach, they have their re-
ward here. Also a good man living in the world
for the love of God buildeth many churches,
chapels, abbeys, hospitals and doth other many
good deeds of mercy, and he shall have his re-
ward in the bliss of heaven, not for the deed in
itself, but for the good will and the charity that
he hath in him by the gift of God for to do these
good deeds. Another man out of vanity of him-
self and worship and pleasing of the world and
for his own name doth the same good deeds, and
hath his reward here. The cause in all these is


The First Book


95


that the one hath charity and the other none;
but which is the one and which is the other, our
Lord knoweth, and none but He.

From this, therefore, we are to learn these two
lessons. First, that we should love and worship
all men in our hearts, and approve and think well
of and receive all their deeds that have the like-
ness of goodness, though the doers be bad in the
sight of God, except they be the deeds of known
and open heretics, or of open cursed (or excom-
municated) men ; for of these two we are specially
to fly and eschew their company and coming
amongst them. And we are also to reprove and
refuse their deeds, seem they never so good,
as long as they are rebels to God and holy
Church. And if a worldly, cursed (or excom-
municated) man build a church, or feed poor
men, thou mayest safely hold and judge such
his doings to be nought, and deem them as they
are. Also if an open heretic, who is a rebel to
holy Church, preach and teach, though he con-
vert a hundred thousand souls, thou mayest hold
the deed, as to himself, right nought ; for these
men are openly out of charity, without which all
is nought that a man doth.

Secondly, that it is a great mastery for a man
to know how and to be able to love his neighbour
in charity ; all which may be plainly proved by
St Paul's words, thus : l/l speak with the tangtces
of men and angels^ if I have not charity y I am right
nought; and if I have so great faith that I can over-
turn htlls anct bear them away^ and have not charity ^
I am right nought. And also^ though I had all
manner of knowledge of all mysteries^ and if I give
all that I have to the poor y and my body to be burnt y
and have not charity y it profiteth me right naught.

Here it seemeth by St Paul's words that a


We are h
love and
think wel
of ail mei


None can
truly love
neighbour
he that ha
charity.

1 Cor, xiii.


96


The Scale of Perfection


A difficult
thing to know
whether we
have charity.


None hath
charity but
he that is
humble*


Rom» viii.


man may do all good deeds bodily without
charily, and that charity is nought else but to
love God and his neighbour as himself. How
should, then, any wretched caitiff upon earth,
whatever he be, have any delight or trust or
security in himself for anything he doth or is
able to do with all his bodily powers or natural
wit, sith all this is nought worth without love
and charity to his neighbour ? And this charity
cannot be gotten by his own working, for it is
the free gift of God, sent only into an humble
soul, as Si Paul saith. Who then dare be so
bold as to say : / have Christy or / am charity ?
Verily no man can say it securely,* or of a
certainty, but he that is perfectly and truly
humble ; other men may trow of themselves, and
hope that they be in charity by tokens ; but he
that is perfectly humble feeleth it, and therefore
may say it securely. Thus humble was St Paul^
and therefore said he thus of himself : Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ 1 Shall tribula-
tion^ or anguish^ or distress^ etc. ? And he answereth
himself, and saith : / am persuaded that no crea-
ture shall he able to separate me from the charity of
God in Christ Jesus, Many men do deeds of
charity, and have no charity, as I have said. To
reprove a sinner for his sin to his amendment, in
a convenient time, is a deed of charity ; but to
hatd the sinner instead of the sin, is against
charity. He that is verily humble can part the
one from the other, and none but he. For though
a man had all moral virtues of all the philoso-
phers, he could not do this ; he could be able to
hate sin in other men (for he hateth it in himself),
but he could not be able to love the man in
charity, with all his philosophy. Also, if a man

• Sickcrly.


The First Book 97

had the knowledge of all books and divinity, and
be not withal truly humble, he shall lightly stum-
ble and err in this point, and take the one for the Charity «
other. But humility is worthy to receive a gift ^*^***^h
from God, which cannot be gotten or learned by ^ ^^^ ''
cunning of man, and therefore he that is humble
can hate the sin and truly love the man.

But now peradventure thou beginnest to be
afraid for that which I have said, that charity
cannot be gotten by any work that thou canst
do ; how shalt thou then do ?

To this I answer, that there is nothing so hard
to get as charity ; this is truth, as to the getting
of it by our own travail and labour. And, on the
contrary, I say that there is no gift of God that
may so lightly or easily be had as charity, for
our Lord giveth no gift so freely, nor so gladly,
nor so commonly, as He doth it. How shalt
thou, then, have it, sayest thou ? Be meek and
lowly in spirit and thou shalt have it ; and what
is lighter to be done than to be humble ? Sooth-
ingly nothing. Then it foUoweth that there is
nothing so lightly to be had as charity, and,
therefore, thou need not be much afraid; be
humble, and have it. Thus saith St James : Our
Lord resisteth the proudy but giveth grace to the
humble. Which grace is properly charity; for
according to the measure of thy humility, so
shalt thou have charity. If thou have humility
imperfectly only in will, not in affection, then
hast thou imperfect charity, which indeed is good,
for it sufficeth for salvation, as David saith : Lordy Psalm
with the eyes of mercy thou seest my imperfection, cxxxviii. i
But if thou have humility perfectly, then shalt
thou have perfect charity, and this is best. The
other we must necessarily have if we will be who is trt
saved. This we should ever desire and labour humble.


98 The Scale of Perfection

for. If thou ask me now who is perfectly humble,
I shall tell thee no more concerning humility at
this time but this : He is humble that truly knaweth
himself as he is.

SECTION m

How a Man shall know how much Wrath and Envy
18 hid in the ground of his Hearty and how he
may know whether he loves his Enemies^ and the
Examples we have thereof in our Saviour

Now turn we again to this image. If thou wilt,
try how much anger and envy is hid in thy heart,
which thou feelest and perceivest not. Look well
and behold thyself wisely when such stirrings of
anger and envy against thy neighbour spring out
of thy heart. The more that thou art stirred by
melancholy or wicked will against him, the more
is this image in thee. For the more thou grudg-
est by impatience, either against God for any
tribulation or sickness, or other bodily disease
sent by Him, or against thy neighbour, for aught
that he doth against thee, the less is the image
of Jesus reformed in thee. I say not that such
grudgings or fleshly angriness are deadly sins ;
but I say that they hinder the cleanness of heart
and peace of conscience, that thou canst not have
perfect charity, by the which thou shouldst come
to life Contemplative, For that end is the purpose
of all my saying, that thou shouldst not only
cleanse thy heart from deadly sins, but also from
venial as much as thou canst; and that the
ground of sin might by grace of Jesus Christ be
somewhat shaked in thee.

For though it be so that thou feelest no evil
against thy neighbour for a time, yet art thou not


The First Book 99

secure that the ground of anger is quenched in
thee; neither yet art thou lord and master of
the virtue of charity. For let him but touch thee
a little angrily, or By a shrewd word, and thou
shalt see presently whether thy heart be yet made
whole by perfect charity. The more thou art
stirred and evil-willed against his person, the
further art thou from charity. And if thou be
nothing stirred against his person, neither by
any angry carriage or gesture outwardly, nor by
any privy hate in thy heart, either to despise or
judge him, or undervalue, or set him at nought ;
but the mc»-e shame or villainy he doth to thee by
word or deed, the more pity and compassion thou
hast of him, as thou wouldst have of a man that
were out of his wits, and thinkest that thou canst
not find in thy heart to hate him (because love is
so good in itself) but pray for him and help him
and desire his amendment, not only with thy
mouth, as hypocrites can do, but with affection of
love in thy heart ; then hast thou perfect charity
to thy neighbour.

This charity had S^ Stephen perfectly when he '^0 love our
prayed for them that stoned him to death. This ^^^'*^^-
charity counselled Christ to those that would be
Hb perfect followers when He said thus : Love s. Matt v.
yotir enemies^ do good to them that hateyoUy pray for
them thai persecute you. And, therefore, if thou
wilt be one of Christ's followers, be like Him
in this craft. Learn to love thine enemies and
sinful men, for all these are thy neighbours.
Look and bethink thee how Christ loved JudaSy After the ex-
who was both His deadly enemy and a sinful ^^j^^f^"*^
caitiff; how goodly Christ was to him, how "''"*
benign, how courteous, and how lowly to him
whom He knew to be damnable. And never-
theless He chose him to be His apostle, and sent


100 The Scale of Perfection

him to preach with His other apostles. He gave
him power to work miracles; He showed the
same good cheer to him in word and deed as He
did to other apostles. He washed his feet, and
fed him with His precious Blood, and preached
to him as He did to His other apostles. He
bewrayed him not openly (for He did it privily) ;
He miscalled him not, despised him not, never
spake evil of him; notwithstanding if He had
done all these things. He had said nothing but
truth. Moreover, when Judas took Him, He
kissed him, and called him His friend. All this
charity showed Christ unto Judas^ whom He knew
to be damnable ; and this He did in no way of
counterfeiting or flattering, but in reality and
truth of good love and clean charity. For though
it was true that JtuUis was not worthy to have
any gift from God, or any sign of love for his
wickedness ; nevertheless, it was worthy and
seemly that our Lord should show Himself to
be that which He is, and that is love and good-
ness to all His creatures, as He was to JtuUis.
I say not that He loved him for his sin, nor
that He loved him as one of His chosen, as He
did St Peter ; but He loved him inasmuch as
he was His creature, and showed him tokens of
love, if he would have been mended thereby.
Follow thou His example somewhat as much as
thou canst; for though thou art shut up in a
house as to thy body, nevertheless in thy heart
(where the seat of love is) thou mayest have part
in such love to thy neighbour, as I have spoken of.
Whoso thinkest himself to be in his life a
perfect lover and follower of Christ's teaching
(as some men perhaps esteem themselves to be,
because they preach and teach, and are poor in
worldly goods, as Christ was) and cannot follow


The First Book loi

Christ in this love and charity, to love their

neighbours, even every man, both good and bad,

friend and foe, without feigning or flattery, or

despising him in his heart, without angriness

or malicious reproving, soothly he beguileth

himself. The nearer he thinketh himself to be

to Christ's example, the further is he oflF; for

Christ said to them that would be His disciples,

thus : This is My biddings that you should love one st/ohn xi

another as I have loved you. For if ye love as

I have loved, then are ye My disciples.

But now thou wilt say : Ilow shall I love him ^ow a mc
that is bad as well and as truly as him that is good f ^IH^l^^^^

To this I say thus : That thou shalt love both -well ^as Vu
good and bad in charity, but not for the same e^
cause as I shall tell how. Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. Now, thou shalt love thy-
self only in Gody or else for God, In God thou
lovest thyself, when thou art righteous and
virtuous through grace, and lovest not thyself
but only for that righteousness and virtues that
Grod giveth thee, then lovest thou thyself in Gody
for thou lovest not thyself, but God, Also, thou
lovest thyself y&r Goa^ when being in deadly sin
thou desirest to be made righteous and virtuous,
for then thou lovest not thyself as thou art (for
thou art unrighteous), but as thou wouldst be.
Right so shalt thou love thy neighbour. If he
be good and righteous, thou shalt love him by
charity in God only ; in that he is good and
righteous ; for then lovest thou Grod (who is
goodness and righteousness) in him, and so
thou lovest him more than if he were bad or
in deadly sin. As, for example, thy enemies
who hate thee, or any other of whom thou hast
ftdl evidence they are not in grace ; yet notwith-
standing shalt thou love them, not as they are.


102 The Scale of Perfection

nor as good and righteous men (for they are bad
and unrighteous), but thou shalt love them for
Gody that they may be good and righteous. And
so shalt thou hate nothing in them, but that
thing which is contrary to righteousness, and
that is sin. This is as I understand the doc-
trine of St Augustine^ for to distinguish the love
of the man from the hatred of his sin, and the
love of thy neighbour. He that is humble, or
desires truly to be humble, can thus love his
neighbour, and none but he.


CHAPTER Vn

Of Covetousness^ and how a Man may know how
much of it is hid in his Heart

Heave up this image, and look well about it,
and into it, and then shalt thou see covetousness
and love of earthly things possess a great part
of this image, though it seem little of it- Thou
hast forsaken riches and the having much of this
world, and art shut up in a cell, but hast thou
cleanly forsaken the love of all this ? I fear not
yet, for it is less mastery to forsake worldly
goods than to forsake the love of them. Per-
adventure thou hast not forsaken thy covetous-
ness, but only hast changed it from great things
unto small ; from a pound unto a penny, and
from a silver dish unto a dish of a halq>enny.
This is but a simple change ; thou art no good
merchant. These examples are childish ; never-
theless they signify much more. If thou believe
not what I say, put thyself upon the trial. If
thou have love and delight in the having and
holding of anything that thou hast, how mean
soever it may be, with the which love thou


The First Book 103

feedest thy heart for a time, or if thou have
a desire and yearning for to have something
that thou hast not, with the which desire thy
heart is disquieted and stumbled through un-
reasonable thinking of the thing, that the pure
desire of virtue and of God cannot rest therein ;
this is a sign that there is covetousness in this
image. And if thou wilt put thyself further to
the trial, look if anything that thou hast be
taken away from thee by violence, or by borrow-
ing, or any other way, so that thou canst not
get it again, and for this thou art disquieted,
angered, and troubled in thine heart, both for
the loss of that thing which thou wouldst have
again, and canst not; and also art stirred
against him that hath it, to strive and chide
with him that may restore it, and will not, this
is a token that thou lovest worldly goods. For
thus do worldly men when their goods and riches
are taken from them ; they are heavy, sorry and
angry, chiding and striving with them that have
them, openly, both by word and deed. But thou
dost all this in thy heart privily, where God
seeth, and therein thou art in more default than
a worldly man; for thou hast forsaken in appear-
ance the love of worldly things, but a worldly
man hath not so, and therefore he is excused,
though he strive and pursue for his goods by
lawful means, for to have them again.

But now- sayest thou, that it behoveth thee
to have thy necessaries of such things as belong
unto thee, as well as a worldly man. I grant
well thereto; but thou shouldst not love it for
itself, nor have liking in the holding nor in the
keeping, nor feel sorrow and heaviness in the
losing, or in the withdrawing of it. For as St
Gregory saith : As much sorrow as thou hast in


104 The Scale of Perfection

losing of a things so much love hast thou in the
keeping of it. And therefore if so be thy heart
made whole, and thou hadst truly felt a desire
of spiritual things, and therewith hadst a true
sight of the least spiritual thing that is, thou
wouldst set at nought all the love and liking
of any earthly thing, it would not cleave to thee.

For to love and have more than thou reason-
ably needest, only for lust and liking, is a great
fault. Also, to fix thy love upon the thing
which thou needest, for the thing itself, is a fault
also, but not so great. But to have and use that
thing that thou needest without love of it, more
than nature and need requireth, without which
the thing cannot be used, is no fault.

Soothly in this point I fear that many who
have taken upon them the state and likeness of
poverty are much letted and hindered in their
pursuit of the love of God ; I accuse no man, nor
reprove any state, for in each state there be some
good, and some otherwise ; but one thing I say
to every man or woman that hath taken the state
of voluntary poverty, whether he be religious or
secular, or what degree he be in, as long as his
love and his affection is bounden and fastened,
and as it were glued with the love of any earthly
thing, which he hath, or would have, he cannot
have nor feel soothfastly the clean love, and the
clear sight of spiritual things. For St Austin
said to our Lord thus : Lordy he loveth Thee hut
little^ that loveth anything with Thee^ which he
loveth not for Thee. For the more love and
covetousness of any earthly thing is with thee,
the less is the love of God in thy heart. For
though it be so, that this love of earthly things
putteth them not out of charity ; but if it be so
much that it strangleth the love of God and of their


The First Book 105

neighbour, verily, it hindereth and letteth them
from the fervour of charity, and also from that
special reward which they should have in the
bliss of heaven for perfect poverty, and that is
a great loss if thou couldst see it. For who so
could understand the spiritual reward, how good,
how precious and how worthy it is (for it is ever-
lasting), he would not for the love of all earthly
joy, or having all earthly things (though he
might have them without sin) hinder, no, nor
lessen the least reward of the bliss of heaven,
which he might have if that he would ; but Grod
knows I speak more than I do myself. But I
pray thee do thus as I say, by the grace of God,
if thou canst, or any other man that will, for it
would be a comfort to my heart (though I have it
not in myself that which I say) that I might have
it in thee, or in any other creature, which hath
received more plenty of His grace than I.

But see, now then, since covetousness, in the
naked ground of it, letteth a man or woman so
much from the spiritual feeling of the love of
God, how much more, then, doth it let and
cumber worldly men and women, who by all
their wits and bodily business night and day,
study and travail how they may get riches and
plenty of worldly gpods? They can have no
other delight but in worldly things ; nay, they
will not, for they seek it not. I say no more
of them at this time ; for in this writing I spake
not to them. But this I say, that if they would
see, or could see what they do, they would not
do so.


io6 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER Vm

SECTION I

Of Gluttony, &nd how a Man shall know when he
sinneth not in Eating and Drinking, and when he
sinneth venially, and when deadly

Still mayest thou see more in this image,
though it be dark, namely, sensual love to thyself,
in gluttony, sloth and lechery. These fleshly
likings make a man full beastly, and far from
the inward savour of the love of God and from
the clear sight of spiritual things. But thou wilt
say that thou must needs eat and drink and
sleep, which thou canst not do without liking,
therefore thou thinkest this liking is no sin.

As unto this I say : That if in eating, drink-
ing and other takings of necessaries for thy
body, thou observe and keep measure ; which
is that thou do but what is needful for nature,
and thou receivest or admittest no further
pleasure or delight in the taking, than the
nature of the thing doth needs bring with it ;
and all this thou dost not of purpose to please
thy sensuality, but for ghostly delight which
thou feelest in thy soul, and the upholding of
thy body in the service of God, I grant that
for a truth thou then sin nest right nought
therein, but mayest well eat and sleep in that
manner as thou hast mentioned.

Soothly and without doubt I am full far
from knowing how to do better in this point,
and further from doing of it ; for to eat I have
by kind or nature, but to skill how to eat, I can-
not but by the grace of God. Si Paul had this
cunning by the grace of God, as he saith himself


The First Book 107

thus : / am cunning in all thinp^ through Him
thai strengtheneth me ; for I can hunger^ and I can
eat^ I can with plenty^ and I can with poverty y I can
do all things, St Austin saith thus to our Lord :
Lord^ thou hast taught me that I should take meat
as a medicine: hunger is a sickness of my nature ^
and meat is a medicine thereof. Therefore the
liking and delight that cometh therewith, and
accompanieth eating, inasmuch as it is natural,
and followeth of necessity, it is no sin ; but when
it passeth into lust, and into a voluntary and
sought or intended pleasure, then it is sin.

Therefore here lieth all the mastery and skill ^ ;j^^^ ^f^i^
to be able to distinguish wisely need from lust to distinguish,
and voluntary liking, being so knit together that *!^e pleasure
the one cometh with the other. So that it is fromni^S'
hard to take the one (which is the meat or drink) sity.
as need requireth, and to reject or not to admit
the other, namely, the voluntary and willingly ad-
mitted lust and liking, which often cometh imder
the colour of need.

Nevertheless, sith it is so, that need is the A man may
ground of this, and that need is no sin ; for be a ^^/^^p^
man never so holy, it behoveth him to eat, and sure felt in
drink and sleep; therefore the lust and liking thetakingof
that cometh under the colour of this need, and 'f^^j\tnl^
often exceedeth this need, is the less sin. For it forthepiea-
is true that he who chooseth lust and the liking cure's sake,
of his flesh, and delight in welfare of meat or Zl^^l^i^
drink, as the full rest of his heart that he would the end or
never have any other life nor other bliss, but live cause of the
ever in such lust of his flesh, if he might, it is no *^^l'!^^clssiiy'
doubt but he sinneth deadly ; for he loveth his to he the
flesh more than God. But he that lieth in deadly cause, and
sin of pride or envy, or such other, he is so ^^^^^i^
blinded by the devil, that for the time he hath no necessarily

accompanym
if^ it ; and perhaps too as a thing that makes the meat more grateful to
a weak stomach and so digestible.


lo8 The Scale of Perfection

power of his free will, and therefore he cannot
well withstand fleshly likings when they come,
but falleth down willingly to them, as a beast
doth to carrion ; and inasmuch as he hath no
general will before to God principally, because
that he is in deadly sin, therefore the lust of
gluttony into which he falleth easily, is to him
deadly sin, for he maketh no resistance either
general or special. But another man or woman,
who being in grace or charity, hath alway a good
general will to God in his soul, whether he sleep
or wake, eat or drink, or whatsoever good deed
he doth, so that it be not evil in itself; by the
which will and desire he chooseth God above all
things, and had rather forbear all things in the
world, than anger his God for love of Him. This
will, though it be but general, is of so great
virtue through the grace of our Lord Jesus, that
if he fall by frailty in lust and in liking of meat
A general and of drink, or of such other infirmity, either by
wiUandpur- exercise, in eating too much, or too often, or too
^ndstt^God g^^^^ily, or too lusty and delicately, or too often
keeps us from before the set times of eating, it saveth and
the gum of keepeth him from deadly sin. And this is truth,
lhesefailing7, *^ ^^^S ^^ ^^ ^^ in charity in his other works,
and keepeth his general will in all that he doth ;
and especially if anon after such his miscarriage
he acknowledge his own wretchedness and cry
for mercy, and be in purpose specially to with-
stand such fleshly lusts for the time to come.
For our Lord is good and merciftil, and forgiveth
right soon these venial sins and miscarriages, or
excesses about meat and drink (by reason that
the occasions of them are hardest to eschew, be-
cause of the necessity there is of seeking and
taking of them for the upholding of our corporal
lives and healths) unto an humble souL


The First Book


109


And these stirrings and likings of gluttony,
among all other sins, are most excusable and
least perilous. And therefore thou shalt not rise
against the ground of this sin as thou shalt
against the ground of all other sin, for the ground
of this sin is only natural need and necessity,
the which thou canst not eschew, unless thou
shouldst do worse, namely, slay this need (as many
unwise persons do, by destroying their bodies
or healths), whereas they should only slay the
thief and spare the true man. That is to say,
slay unreasonable lust and sensual voluntary
likmg, and spare and keep natural liking and
corporal ability, and they do not so. But against
all other sins thou shalt arise to destroy, not
only deadly sins and the greater venials, but also
against the ground of them by suppressing the
stirrings and motions of them, and also avoiding
the occasions and motives and incentives to them
as much as thou canst ; but this thou canst not
do here with all thy skill, for thou canst not live
without meat and drink, but thou mayest live
without lechery or carnal pleasure if thou wilt,
and never better than when without it. And
therefore thou shalt not fly only the deeds of it
(namely, the doing of any external thing against
chastity) but also thou shalt suppress and destroy
within thee all mere inward and mental desires
against the virtue of chastity (the which mental
desires or thoughts are sometimes only venial
sins, and sometimes mortal) ; but also thou shalt
labour against the ground of the said sin, and
seek to destroy the feeling and the rising of
fleshly stirrings.

But this travail and labour against the ground
of lechery must be spiritual, by prayers and
spiritual virtues, and not by bodily penance


The ground
of gluttony
cannot he
taken away.


The ground
of sins must
be destroyed
by spiritual
labour as well
as corporal.


no The Scale of Perfection

only; for wot thou well, that if thou fast and
watch and scourge thyself, and do all that thou
canst, thou shalt never have cleanness and
chastity without the gift of God, and without
the grace or virtue of humility. Thou shalt
sooner kill thyself, than kill fleshly stirrings and
feelings of lust and lechery, either in thy heart
or in thy flesh, by any bodily penances ; but by
the grace of Jesus, in an humble soul, the ground
may be much stopped and destroyed, and the
spring may be much dried, the which will cause
true chastity in body and in soul.

The same may be said of pride and of cove-
tousness, and of such other, for thou mayest live
though thou wert not proud at all, nor covetous,
nor luxurious, and therefore thou shalt labour
to destroy the very feeliitgs of them as much as
thou canst, and so seek to cleanse and take away
the very ground of those sins. But in gluttony
it is otherwise, because the ground thereof, which
is natural appetite and need, must remain as long
as thou livest, therefore must thou only arise and
fight against the unreasonable desires of thy natu-
ral appetite therein, the which do creep in under
pretence, and by occasion of the said just and
reasonable need ; smite these unreasonable stir-
rings, and keep the ground whole.


SECTION n

That a Man should be busy to put away and hinder
all Motions of Sin^ but more busy about those of
Spiritual Sins than those of Bodily

And therefore he that riseth against the feeling
of fleshly liking in meat and drink, more fully
and more sharply than against those of pride, or


The First Book iii

covetousness, or lechery, or envy (the which
because they be more spiritual and less perceiv-
able, seem perhaps less evil, and are less re-
prehended). I say that he is half-blind, for he
seeth not his spiritual uncleannesses (as of pride
and envy), how foul they are in God's sight, for,
I believe that if a man could see with his spiritual
eye how foul pride and covetousness are in God's
sight, and how contrary they are to Him, he would
more loathe a stirring of pride, and the vain liking
of it; and also he would more abhor and rise
against that evil will of envy, or an^er to his
neighbour than many a stirring or likmg either
of gluttony or of lechery. Nevertheless, all men
do not think so, for commonly men are more shy
or troubled to feel a stirring of fleshly sin, and
have for it more sorrow and heaviness than for
great likings in vain-glory or in other ghostly
sins. But they are not wise ; for if they would
understand the holy Scriptures and sayings of
doctors they should find it as I say, which I
neither may nor will rehearse now.

I will not excuse them that fall in the likings
and delights of gluttony and lechery, as if they
sinned not ; for I wot well that all the kinds of
them are sins more or less, according to the
measure of the lust and misbehaviour in the sin,
and other likings, with consideration of how far
voluntary it was with other circumstances. But
my desire is, that thou mightest know and es-
teem all sins according as they are, indeed, the
greater to be the greater, as are spiritual sins ;
and the less to be the less, as are fleshly or sen-
sual sins ; and yet nevertheless would I have
thee to hate and fly all, both bodily and
spiritual, with all thy might. For know thou
well, that fleshly desires and unreasonable


112 The Scale of Perfection


likings in meat and drink, or any likings that
belong to the body, exceeding reasonable needs,
though they be not always great sins to him
that is in charity. Nevertheless, to a soul that
desireth cleanness and purity of heart, and a
spiritual feeling of Grod, they are full heavy,
painful and bitter, and greatly to be eschewed ;
for the spirit cannot feel his kindly savour
within, till the flesh hath lost his beastly
savour without.

And, therefore, if thou wilt come to clean-
ness of heart, thou must strive against the un-
reasonable stirrings of fleshly desires ; but
against the ground of them thou shalt not
rise ; for the ground of it is Needy as natural
hunger, which thou must necessarily feel, and
must attend thereto, and satisfy it in fitting time
and manner, and help thyself against it by
medicine of meat, as Uiou wouldst help thyself
in a reasonable manner against a bodily sick-
ness, that thou mayest more freely serve God
both bodily and spiritually. F<m- know thou
well, that what man or woman that shall be
occupied spiritually in thoughts, gfreat pain or
hunger wilfully undertaken or bodily sickness
or pain in the stomach, or in the head, or in
other parts of the body for want of good ruling
of themselves in too much fasting, or in any
other way, will much let the spirit, and much
hinder him from the knowing and beholding of
spiritual things, unless he have much grace, and
be arrived to great abilities in the Contemplative
life. For though it be true, that bodily pain
either of penance, or of sickness, or of bodily
occupation, sometime letteth not the fervour of
love to Grod in devotion^ but oft increaseth it,
yet I believe that they let the fervour of love in


The First Book 113

Contemplation^ the which may not be had nor felt
fully, but in rest and freedom of body and soul
from all the aforesaid corporal pains, wants, em-
ployments and solicitudes.


SECTION in

What Remedy a Man should use against the Faults
in Eating and Drinking

Therefore, thou shalt behave thyself discreetly
about thy body, yielding it necessaries reason-
ably, and then let God send thee what He
pleaseth, either health or sickness; take it
gladly, and grudge not willingly against Him.
Do as I say, take thy meat as it cometh,
or provide it according to reason, and take it
gladly, as a thing that thou needest ; but be
well aware of lusts that cometh with need, es-
chew too much as well as too little. And having
done, if after it there arise in thee a remorse or
biting of conscience, that thou hast eaten too
much, and thereupon thou becomest sad and
heavy with overmuch bitterness against thyself,
lift up the desire of thy heart to thy good Lord
Jesus, and acknowledge thyself a wretch, and
a beast, and ask Him forgiveness, and say that
thou wilt amend it, and pray that he will forgive
thee. Leave off then, and think no ftirther of
it, nor strive so much with the vice, as if thou
wouldst destroy it utterly, for it is not worth
the doing so, neither shalt thou be ever able
to bring it about that way ; but set thyself about
some other business bodily or ghostly, according
as thou findest thyself best disposed, that there-
by thou mayest profit more in other virtues, as
in humility and charity. For wot thou well, that

8


114 The Scale of Perfection

he that hath in his desire and in his endeavours
no other respect to no other thing but Humility
and Charity, always crying after them, how he
may have them, he shall through such desire
and manner of working profit and increase, not
only in those two virtues, but also in all other
virtues together with them, as in chastity, absti-
nence and such other (though he have but a little
regard to them in comparison of the other, name-
ly, Humility and Charity) more in one year than
he should, without the said desire and manner of
working, profit in seven years, though he strive
against gluttony, lechery and such other con-
tinually, and beat himself with scourges each
day from morning to even-song time.
^ndcharit ^^^ thyself, therefore, about Humility and

/^ fygfo^^ai Charity y and using all thy diligence and industry
remedies. to come by them, yet shalt thou have enough
to do in getting of them. And if thou canst get
them, they will direct thee, and measure thee
privily and secretly, how thou shalt eat, and how
thou shalt drink, and succour all thy bodily
needs, that there shall no man know of it, unless
thou thyself do tell it him, and that thou shalt
not be in perplexity, scruples, vexation, anguish-
ment, or heaviness, nor with any lust or adhering
to the delights and likings of sensuality, but
shalt do all in peace of a glad conscience with
all quietness and satisfaction. I have spoken
more than I thought to have done in this matter,
but nevertheless do (as far as thou canst) as I say,
and I hope God shall make all well.

By this that I have said, thou mayest in some

measure see into this image of sin, and perceive

how much it hinders thee. The Gospel saith,

how that Abraham spake to the rich man that

StZuiexy'u was buried in hell, on this wise: There is &-


The First Book 115

twtxt us and you a great chaos; that is to say,
a thick darkness betwixt thee and us, that we
cannot come to thee, nor thou to us. This dark
image in thy soul and mine may be in like
manner called a chaos, that is, a great darkness,
for it letteth us that we cannot come to Abraham^
which is Jesus, and it letteth Him, that He will
not come to us.

CHAPTER IX

Of the FiTe Windows of this dark Image^ and what
Cometh in by them« and how they are to be ordered

Lift up thy lanthom, and thou shalt see in this T^rem, ix,
image five windows, by which sin cometh into
thy soul, as the Prophet saith : Death cometh in
by our windows. These are the five senses by
which thy soul goeth out of herself, and fetch-
eth her delight, and seeketh her feeding in
earthly things, contrary to the nobility of her own
nature. As by the eye to see curious and fair
things, and so of the other senses. By the unskil-
ful using of these senses willingly to vanities, thy
soul is much letted from the sweetness of the
spiritual senses within ; and therefore it be-
hoveth thee to stop these windows, and shut
them, but only when need requireth to open
them.

And this would be little mastery or difficulty The unde
for thee to do, if thou didst once see thy own soul ^j^i^^^^
by clear understanding what it is, and how fair it ours^vh
is in its own nature, and so is still, were it not so make us j
overlaid with a black mantle of this foul image, sakejiesk
But because thou knowest it not, therefore leavest ^^**^'
thou the inward sight of thyself, and seekest thy
food without, abroad, like a brute beast. Thus


ii6 The Scale of Perfection

saith our Lord in a threatening way to a chosen
Cantic. i. soul in holy Writ : Thou fairest among women^ if
thou knowest not thyself go out^ and walk after the
steps of the flock of thy fellows ^ and feed thy kids.
And it is as much as to say : Thou soul, fair by
nature, made after the likeness of God, frail in
thy body as a woman, by reason of the first
sin, that thou knowest not thyself, nor how that
angels' food should be thy delights within, there-
fore goest thou out by thy bodily senses, and
seekest thy meat and thy liking as a beast of
the flock, that is as* one outcast and rejected,
and therewith thou feedest thy thoughts and
thine affections, which are unclean as goats. It
is a shame for thee to do so.

And, therefore, turn home again into thyself,
and hold thee within, and beg no more without,
namely, swines' meat. For if thou wilt needs be
a beggar, ask and crave within of thy Lord Jesus,
for He is rich enough, and gladlier would give
thee than thou canst ask, and run no more out
as a beast of the flock, that is a worldly man or
woman, that hath no delight but in his bodily
senses. And if thou do thus, thy Lord Jesus
will give thee all that thou needest, for He will
lead thee into His wine cellar, and make thee to
taste and try His wines, which liketh thee best,
for he hath many tuns. Thus a chosen soul, jw-
Cantic. \u ing in our Lord, saith of Him in holy Writ : The
King brought tne into His wine cellar. That is to
say : Inasmuch as I forsook the drunkenness of
fleshly lusts and worldly likings, which are bitter
as wormwood, therefore the King of bliss, the
Lord Jesus, led me in ; that is, first into myself
for to behold and know myself, and after He led
me into His cellar ; that is to say, above myself,

* Reprieved.


The First Book 117

by ascending and passing into Him alone, and
gave me a taste of His wme ; that is for to taste
a certainty of spiritual sweetness and heavenly
joy. These are not the words of me, a wretched
caitiff, living in sin, but they are the words of
the spouse of our Lord in holy Writ ; and these
words I say to thee, to the end that thou might-
est draw in thy soul from without, and follow on
further as well as thou canst.

I will show thee furthermore (for thy desire When the
draweth more out of my heart than I thought to ^^rede^i^i^
have said in the beginning) when the use of thy sin,andwj
senses be deadly sin, and when venial. Thus, onij'venia
therefore, our Lord saith in the Gospel : A man
made a great supper y and called many thereto ^ and St Luke xi
sent his servant at supper-ttmey after them that
were hidden. The first excused himself y and said
on this wisCy that he could not comey for he had
bought a farm. The other also excused himself
that he could not comey for he had bought five yoke
of oxeriy and went to try them. The thirdyfor that
he had married a wife. I forbear to speak of
the first and of the last, and will tell ye of the
middlemost of them, that had bought the oxen,
for he is to our purpose. Five yoke of oxen be-
token the five senses, which are beastly as an ox.
Now this man that was called to the supper was
not rejected because he bought the oxen, but be-
cause he went to try them, and so he would not
come. Right so say I to thee ; for to have thy
senses, and to use them in need, it is no sin, but
if thou go voluntarily to try them by vain de-
lights in creatures, then it is sin. And if thou
choose that delight as a final rest of thy soul,
and as a full liking, that thou carest not to have
any other bliss but such worldly vanities, then is
it deadly, for thou choosest it as thy God, and so


ii8 The Scale of Perfection

shalt thou be put from thy supper ; for St Paul
forbids us to use our senses in that manner when
he said thus : Thou shalt not go after thy lustSy
nor voluntarily try thy likings. A man or a
woman that is encumbered with deadly sin shall
hardly escape deadly sin in this business, though
he perceiveth it not; but I hope this toucheth
not thee.

Nevertheless, if thou through frailty delight
thee in thy senses, and in such vanities, but yet
keepest thyself in charity and the grace of
Grod as to other things, and choosest not this de-
light for a full rest of thy soul, but always settest
up God above all things in thy desire, this sin in
thee is venial ; and that more or less according
to its circumstances; nor shalt thou for these
venial sins be put from the supper in the bliss
of heaven, but thou shalt want the tasting and
the assaying of that delicate supper, whilst thou
livest here on earth, unless thou be busy with all
thy might to withstand and conquer such venial
sins, for though it be so that venial sins break
not charity, yet soothly they let the fervour and
the ghostly feeling of charity.

But thou wilt say again, that thou canst not
keep from hearing of vanities, for divers, both
those that live in the world and others, come oft
to speak with thee, and tell thee some tales of
vanity.

As unto this I say thus, that thy communing
with thy neighbour is not much hurt to thee, but
helpeth thee sometimes, if thou order thy busi-
ness wisely; for that thou mayest try and find
out thereby the measure of thy charity to thy
neighbour, whether it be much or little. Thou
art bounden (as all other men and women are) to
love thy neighbour principally in thy heart, and


The First Book 119

also in deeds to show him tokens of charity, as How we
reason asketh, according to thy might and know- •^^<'«^ behave
ledge. And since it is so that thou oughtest not Th^^thtu
to go out of thy house to seek occasion how thou come to speak
mightest profit thy neighbour by deeds of charity, "^^^^ ^*
because thou art enclosed ; nevertheless thou art
bound to love all men in thy heart, and to show
some tokens of true love to them that come to
thee. And therefore, whoso will speak with
thee, whatsoever he be, or of what degree so-
ever, though thou knowest not what he is, nor
why he cometh, yet be thou soon ready with
a good will to ask what his will is, be not
dainty, nor suffer him long to wait for thee,
but look how ready and how glad thou wouldst
be if an angel of heaven should come and speak
with thee, so ready and so buxom be thou in will
for to speak with thy neighbour when he cometh
to thee, for thou knowest not what he is, nor why
he cometh, nor what need he hath of thee, or
thou of him, till thou hast tried. And though
thou be at prayer, or at thy devotions, that thou
thinkest loth to break off, for that thou thinkest
that thou oughtest not leave God for to speak
with any one, I think not so in this case, for if
thou be wise thou shalt not leave God, but thou
shalt find Him, and have Him, and see Him, in
thy neighbour, as well as in prayer, only in
another manner.

If thou canst love thy neighbour well, to speak
with thy neighbour with discretion shall be no
hindrance to thee. Discretion shalt thou have
on this manner as me thinketh ; Whoso cometh
to thee, ask him meekly what he would have ;
and if he come to tell thee his disease or trouble
and to be comforted by thy speech, hear him
gladly, and suffer him to say what he will, for


120 The Scale of Perfection

ease of his own heart ; and when he hath done,
comfort him if thou canst, gladly, getitly and
charitably, and soon break off. And then, after
that, if he will fall into idle tales, or vanities of
the world, or of other men's actions, answer him
but little, and feed not his speech, and he will
soon be weary, and quickly take his leave.

If it be another man that cometh to teach
thee, as some Churchman, etc., hear him hum-
bly, and with reverence to his order ; and if his
speeches comfort thee, ask of him more what
thou needest, and take not upon thee to teach
him, for it falleth not to thy share to teach a
priest, but in case of necessity. If his speech
comfort thee or profit thee not, answer little, and
he will soon take his leave.

If it be another man that cometh to give thee
his alms, or else for to heeir thee speak, or to
be taught by thee, speak gently and humbly to
them all, reprove no man for his faults, for that be-
longeth not to thee, unless he be the more homely
or mmiliar with thee, that thou knowest that he
will take it well from thee. And to be short in
this matter of thy telling of another of his faults,
I say, that when thou conceivest that it will do
him good (namely, in his soul) thou mayest tell
him thy mind, if thou hast opportunity, and if he
is likely to take it well. And above all other
things, in this matter of conversing with thy
neighbour, keep silence as much as thou canst,
and then shalt thou see that by so doing thou
shalt in short time be troubled with little press
or company that would come to hinder thy de-
votions. This is my opinion herein ; do thou
better if thou canst.


iht First Book 121


CHAPTER X

Of three Sorts of Men^ whereof some be not refor me4
and some be reformed only in Faith^ and some
both in Faith and Feeling

But thou wilt say that thou hast done all this,
namely, stopped the windows of thy five senses, so
that thou seest no worldly things, nor hearest
them, nor hast any use of thy senses, more than
need requireth ; and for that end thou art en-
closed. And to this I answer : If thou do thus,
as I hope thou dost, then hast thou stopped a
great window of this image, but yet art thou not
secure ; for that thou hast not stopped the privy
holes of the imaginations of thy heart. For
though thou seest me not with thy bodily eye,
yet mayest thou see me at the same time in thy
soul by imagination ; and so mayest thou do of
all bodily things. If, then, thou feedest thy soul
willingly and wittingly by imaginations of vani-
ties of the world, and desiring of worldly things ;
as a comfort or pleasure and ease ; verily though
thy soul be kept within as to thy bodily senses,
it is notwithstanding far without by such vain
imaginations.

But now thou wilt ask me whether it be any
great sin for a soul to busy itself in such vani-
ties, either by the outward senses or by the in-
ward imaginations and thoughts. As unto this
I say ; that I would never have thee ask any man
this question ; for he that will truly love God, he
asketh not commonly, whether this or that be the
greater sin? For he will think that whatsoever
letteth him from the love of God is a great sin,
and will think nothing sin but that thing which


122 The Scale of Perfection

is not good, and letteth him from the love of
God. What is sin but a wanting or a forbear-
ing of cfood ? I say not that it will or ought to
grieve nim so much as a mortal sin would, or
a venial sin should, neither say I but that he
knoweth and distinguisheth a mortal sin from
a venial, and fleeth it more than the other.


CHAPTER XI

A Brief Rehearsal of what hath been said in the
former Chapters^ with a Portraiture of this dark
Image of Sin

By this that I have said mayest thou see a little
the darkness of this image of sin, not that I have
described it fully to thee as it is, for I cannot ;
nevertheless by this little thou mayest see more
if thou look well.

But thou wilt say, how know you that I bear
about me such an image as you speak of? To
which I answer, that I may take to me a word

Joel xii. said by the prophet, which is this : Invent idolum
mthi — / have found an idol tn myself; that is, a
false image, which some call an idol, very foul,
disfigured and misshapen with wretchedness of
all those sins which I have spoken of, by the
which I am cast down into fleshly or sensual
pleasures and worldly vanities, from cleanness
of heart, and feeling of spiritual virtues, more
than I can or may say: and such fall of mine
much grieveth me, and I cry God mercy for it.
By this wretchedness which I feel in my own
self, more than I have said, may I the better tell
thee of thy image, for we all came oi Adam and
Eve^ clothed with clothes of beasts' skins, as the

Gen. Ill, Scripture saith : Our Lord made to Adam and his


The First Book 123

wife clothes of a beast* s hide. In token that by
sin they were come to be misshapen like to a
beast, in which beastly clothes we all are born,
and wrapped, and disfigured from our kingly
shape.

This then is an ugly image to look upon; The parts of
whose head is pride ; for pride is the first and ^w Image.
principal sin, as the wise man saith : The be- Ecclus. x,
ginning of all manner of sin is pride. The back
and hinder part of it is covetousnesSy as St Paul PhU. iii.
saith : / forget that which is behind (vizi, all
worldly things) and I stretch forward to that which
is before. The breast (in which is the heart) is
Envy; for it is no fleshly sin, but it is a devil's
sin, as the wise man saith : By envy of the devil wisd, ii.
death came into the worlds for all those that are of
his party follow him therein. The arms of it are
wrcUhy inasmuch as a man wreaketh or revengeth
himself by his arms, contrary to Christ's bidding
in the Gospel : If a man smite thee upon one cheeky st Matt, v.
thou shalt not smite him again, but offer him the
other. The belly of this image is gluttony ^ as St
Paul saith : Meat serveth for the belly y and the i cor. vi
belly for meaty but God shall destroy them both ;
namely, at the last day, when shall be the full re-
forming of his chosen, and damning of the repro-
bate. The members of it are lechery y of the which
St Paul saith thus : Yield not your members to be
instmments of iniquity unto sin; especially to
this sin of lechery. The feet of it are sloth; there-
fore the wise man said to the slow and lazy
person (to stir him up to do good deeds), Runy Prov, vi.
make hastey raise thy friefid, that is to say, run
quickly about to good works, and make haste, for
the time passeth, and raise up thy friend, which
is Jesus, by devout Prayer and Meditation. Here
hast thou heard the members of this image.


124 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER Xn

A comparing of this Image with the Image of Jesufl^
and how it is to be dealt with

This is not the image of Jesus, but it is liker an
image of the Devil, for the image of Jesus is
made of virtues, with humility and perfect love
and charity ; but this is made of false fleshly love
to thyself, with all those members, spoken of in
the former chapter, fastened thereto. This image
bearest thou, and every man whatsoever he be,
until by g^ace of Jesus it be somewhat destroyed
and broken down. Thus David seemeth to say
Psal. xxxviii. in the Psalter : Man passeih away as an image^
and is troubled in vain. Which is as if he had
said : Though it be so that man in the beginning
was made after the image of Grod, stable and
stedfast; nevertheless because of sin, he pro-
ceedeth far in this imapfe of sin, living in this
world, by the which he is unstable and troubled
in vain. Also St Paul speaketh of this Image
I C9r. XV. thus \Aswe have heretofore home the image of me
earthly many the first Adam, that is, the image of
sin, Right so now (if we will come to the love of
God) let us bear the image of the heavenly man
JesuSy which is the image of virtues.
This imofre is What shalt thou do with this image ? I an-
iohtctuctfied. g^gy tjj^g ^ a word that the Jews said to Pilate
of Christ — Crucify Him. Take thou this body of
sin, and do Him on the Cross ; that is to say,
break down this image, and slay the false love of
sin in thyself; as Christ's bodjr was slain for our
sins and trespasses ; right so it behoveth thee, if
thou wilt be like Christ, slay thy bodily liking
Gal. V. and fleshly lusts in thyself. Thus said St Paul:


The First Book 125

Those that are Christ* s followers have crucified and
slatn their fiesh (that is, the image of sin) wtth all
the lustSy and the unreasonable desires and appe-
tites of it. Slay then and break down Pride, and And to be
set up Humility ; also break down Anger and ^^'^^ ^<^
Envy, and raise up Love and Charity to thy
neighbour. Also instead of Covetousness, poverty
of Spirit ; instead of Sloth, fervour in devotion
with cheerful readiness to all good deeds ; and
instead of Gluttony and Lechery, Sobriety and
Charity in body and soul. This considered St
Pauly when he said thus : Putting off the old man Ephes. iv.
wtth all his meniberSy which is rotten according to
the desires of error y ye shall shape you and clothe
you in the new many which is the image of God by
holiness and righteousness and perfection of vir- And how?
tues. Who shall help thee to break down this ^/^^/^
image ? Verily thy Lord Jesus. In the virtue ^
and in the Name of Him shalt thou break down
this mawment (or idol) of sin, pray to Him
earnestly, and desire it, and He shall help thee.

Gather then thy heart together, and do after 2fkf« ^j'^
the counsel of the wise man, when he saith thus : *^^^
With all diligence keep thine hearty for out of tt
Cometh lifcy and that is when it is well kept, for Prov. iv.
then wise thoughts, clean affections and burning
desires of virtues and of charity, and of the bliss
of Heaven come out of it, making the soul to live
a blessed life. But on the contrary, if it be not
kept, then as our Lord saith in the Gospel, evil
thoughts and unclean affections come out of the
heart which defile the man. They either benumb
and kill the life of the soul by mortal sin, or else
they enfeeble the soul and make it sick, if they
be venial. For what is a man but his thoughts
and his loves ? These alone make a man good
or bad. So much as thou lovest God and thy


126


The Scale of Perfection


How we may
know our
heart and
affections.


This breaking
vfill be pain'
ful at first.


neighbour, and knowest Him, so much is thy
soul, and if thou love Him little, little is thy soul,
and if thou love Him not at all, nothing at all
is thy soul. It is nothing as to good, but it is
much as to sin. And if thou wilt know what
thou lovest, look and observe what thou thinkest
upon most, for where our love is, there is our
eye ; and where our liking is, upon that our
heart is thinking most. If thou love God much,
thou likest to think much upon Him, and if thou
love Him little, then little dost thou think upon
Him. Rule well thy thoughts and thine affec-
tions, and then art thou virtuous.

Undertake then the breaking down of this
image, when thou hast first well bethought thee
of thyself, and of thy wretchedness, inwardly, as
I have said, how proud, how vain, how envious,
how melancholy (or fi"oward), how covetous, how
fleshly, and how full of corruption. Also how
little knowing, feeling or savour thou hast of
God and of spiritual things, how wise, how quick
and how much savour thou hast in earthly things.
And (that I may say all in one word) how thou
art as full of sin as an hide or skin is full of flesh,
yet be not thou too much dejected, though thou
thinkest thus of thyself. And when thou hast
done thus, lift up then the desire of thy heart to
thy Lord Jesus, and pray for His help, cry to
Him with great desires and sighings that He
will help thee to bear this great burthen of this
image, or else that He will break it. Think also
what a shame it is for thee to be fed with swines'
meat of fleshly savours, that oughtest to feel
a spiritual savour of heavenly joy.

If thou dost thus, then beginnest thou to rise
against the whole ground of sin in thee, as I have
said. And it may be that thou shalt feel pain


The First Book 127

and sorrow, for thou must know that no soul can

live without pain, heaviness and sadness, unless

that she take delight or have her rest either in

her Creator or in some creature. And, therefore,

when thou risest against thyself by a fervent

desire for to attain to the feeling of thy Lord

Jesus within thee, and for to draw away thy love

from all bodily things, and from rest in all bodily

feelings, insomuch that thou art even a burthen

to thyself, and it seems to thee that all creatures

are risen up against thee, and all the things,

which heretofore thou tookest delight in, do now

turn thee to pain and heaviness. And when thou

hast thus forsaken thyself, and canst not likely,

for all that, as yet find comfort in God, needs

must thy soul feel and suffer pain in this case.

Nevertheless, I hope that he that will suffer this

pain awhile, stedfastly, cleaving to the desire

and naked mind after Jesus Christ, and to that

his desire, that he will have nothing but his

Lord, and will not lightly depart therefrom, nor

seek any other comfort from without for a time

(for it lasteth not long), our Lord is nigh to him,

and soon shall ease his heart, for He will help

him to bear his body or sensuality, which is full

of corruption ; and will, with His merciful power

of His gracious presence, break down this false g^^ aftet'

image of love in him ; not all at once, but by wards mor$

little and little, till he be in some measure re- ^^^

formed to His likeness.

After such a total rising and resolution made
by thee against thyself, when it is passed thou
shalt more soberly, more gently and more easily The means to
rule thyself, and more charily keep and guard facilitate it.
thy thoughts and thine affections, and shalt note
and discern them, whether they be good or bad.
And thereupon if afterwards thou feel (I put this


128 The Scale of Perfection

for an example) a stirring of pride in any manner
or spice of it, be then presently well aware, as
well and as soon as thou canst, and suffer it not
to escape away lightly, but take it in mind, and
there rent it, break it and despise it, and do all
the shame thou canst unto it ; look thou spare it
not, nor believe it, though it speak never so fair,
for it is false, though it seem to be truth ; as the
Isaias iii. Prophet saith : My peopky they who call thee
blessedy do deceive thee (by their so saying) and
would bring thee into error.

And if thou be diligent to do thus, thou shalt,
by the grace of Jesus, within short time, stop
much of the spring of Pride and much abate the
vain delight thereof, so that thou shalt very early
feel any such motion in thee. And when thou
feelest it, it shall be so weak and, as it were, half
dead, that it shall not much trouble thee. And
then shalt thou have a spiritual sight of the
virtue of Humility, and see how good and how
fair it is, and thou shalt desire it and love it for
its goodness, so that it shall please thee both to
behold and see thyself as thou art indeed, and
also to be esteemed and held by others to be
such a one, that is full of corruption, and (if need
be) to suffer gladly despite and reproof for love of
righteousness.

In like manner when thou feelest any stir-
rings of wrath, or anger, or of melancholic
risings of heart, or any other evil will against
thy neighbour, for any manner of cause, though
it seem reasonable, and not to be against charity,
beware of it, and be ready with thy thought to
restrain it, that it turn not into a mrther liking
or consent ; resist it as much as thou canst, and
follow it not neither by word nor deed ; but as it
riseth, smite it down again, and so shalt thou


The First Book 129

slay it with the sword of the fear of God, that it
shall not trouble thee, for know well in all these
stirrings of pride, vain-glory, envy, or any other,
that as soon as thou perceiveth it, and resistest
it with displeasure of thy will and of thy reason,
thou slayest it. Though it be so, that it cleave
still upon thy heart against, thy will, and will
not lightly pass aw^y, fear it not, for though
it letteth thy soul from peace, yet doth it not
defile her.

Right so in like manner shalt thou do against
all evil stirrings of Covetousness, Sloth, Gluttony
and Lechery ; that thou be always ready with
thy reason and thy will to reprove them and
despise them.

And this mayest thou do the better, and the
more readily, if thou be diligent and careful to
set thy heart most upon one thing, and that is -^« excellent
nought else but a spiritual desire after God, how ^ateult^to^
to please Him, love Him and know Him, to see setow desire
Him and to enjoy Him by grace here in a little «Awt God.
feeling, and in the bliss of Heaven in a full being.
This desire, if thou keep it, it will tell thee what
is sin, and what is not ; and what thing is good
and what better ; and if thou wilt but fasten thy
thoughts to the same desire, it shall teach thee
all that thou needest, and it shall procure thee
all that thou wantest. And, therefore, whenso-
ever thou risest against the ground of sin in
general, or against the ground of any particular
sin, hang fast upon this desire, and set the point
of thy thoughts more upon God whom thou
desirest than upon the sin which thou abhorrest.
And if thou do so, then God fighteth for thee,
and will destroy sin in thee. And thou shalt
much sooner come to thy purpose if thou doest
thus, than if thou shouldst leave thy humble

9


130 The Scale of Perfection

desire principally after God, and set thy heart
only against the stirrings of sin, as though thou
wouldst destroy it by thy own mastering of it,
but thou shalt never so bring it about.


CHAPTER Xm

How a Man shall be shapen to the Image c^ Jesus,
and Jesus shapen in him

Do as I have said, and better if thou canst, and
I hope by the grace of Jesus thou shalt make the
devil ashamed, and shalt break down all such
wicked stirrings, that they shall not much trouble
thee. And by this course may the image of sin
be broken down in thee and destroyed, by the
which thou art misshapen from the kindly shape
of Christ's image ; and thou shalt be reformed
and shapen again to the image of the Humanity
of Jesus, by humility and charity, and after-
wards shalt thou become ftiU shapen to the
image itself of the Godhead, whilst thou livest
here, as it were in a shadow of it in contempla-
tion, and hereafter in verity and ftill reality in
the bliss of Heaven.

Of this shaping to the likeness of Christ *SV
Gal iv. Pctui speaks thus : My liitle children whom I
travail with again (as a woman that were with
child with you) uritil Christ be shapen again in
you. Thou hast conceived Christ within thee by
faith, and He liveth in thy soul by grace, inasmuch
as thou hast a good will and a desire to serve Him
and please Him ; but He is not yet ftiUy shapen
in thee, nor thou in Him by perfection of charity.
And therefore St Paul bare thee and me and
others also with travail, as a woman beareth


The First Book 131

a child, until the time that Christ hath His full
shape in us, and we in Him. Of this treateth
the second book.

CHAPTER XIV

The Conclusion of this Book, and of the Cause why
it was made, and how she for whom it was made
was to make use of it

Whoso thinkest to attain to the working and The true way
to the full use of contemplation and not by this ^0 co^^ to
way, that is by perfection of virtues, and taking ^^^"*^^«-
fuU heed thereto, cometh not in by the door, and
therefore as a thief he shall be cast out. I say
not but that a man may have by the gift of God,
at by times, a tasting and a glimmering of the con-
templative life ; some I say at the beginning of
their conversion. But the solid feeling of it shall
he not have, until he have gotten in him some
perfection of virtues. For Christ is the door,
and is also the porter, and without His leave
and His liberty no man may come in ; as He
Himself saith : No man cometh to the Father but stjohn xiv.
by Me. That is to say, no man can come to the
contemplation of the Godhead but he that is first
reformed by perfection of humility and charity,
to the likeness of Jesus in His Humanity.

Lo, then, have I told thee a little, as methink-
eth, first of Contemplative life, what it is ; and
then of the ways which, by the grace of God,
lead thereunto. Not as if I had it myself in
feeling and in working, as I have it in talking.
Nevertheless, I would by this writing of mine
(such as it is) first stir up my own negligence to
do better than I have done ; and also my purpose
is, to stir thee, or any other man or woman that


132 The Scale of Perfection

hath taken the state of life Contemplative, to
travail more diligently and more humbly in that
manner of life, by such simple words as God
hath given me grace for to say. And therefore,
if there be any word therein that stirreth thee or
comforteth thee more to the love of God, thank
God, for it is His gift and not of the words
written. And if it comforteth thee not, and
thou understandest it not readily, study not too
long about it, but lay it aside till another time,
and go to thy prayers or some other business;
take it as it will come, and not all at once.

Also these words which I write, take them
not too strictly, but when thou thinkest, upon
good consideration, that I write too short, either
for lack of English or lack of reason, I pray
thee amend it only where need is. Also these
words which I write to thee, belong not all of
them to one that is of an active life, but to thee
or to any other which hath the state of life con-
templative.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
thee.


THE SECOND BOOK

CHAPTER I

SECTION I

Tbat a Man is the Image of God after the Soul and
not after the Body; and how he is restored and
reiormed thereto that was misshapen by Sin

Forasmuch as thou desirest greatly, and askest
it for charity, to hear more of that image of
which I have spoken in the former book in part ;
therefore I shall willingly, with fear, fall to thy
desire, and by the help of our Lord's grace, in
whom I fully trust, shall open to thee a little
more of this image.

I tell thee in truth, that I understand nought
else thereby, but thy soul. For thy soul and my
soul and every rational soul is an image, and
that a worthy one, for it is the image of God,
as the Scripture saith : Man is God's image and q^^ j^
made to the image and likeness of Him ; not in His
bodily shape without, but in his faculties within,
as holy Writ saith : Our Lord God shaped man
in His soul to His awn image and likeness. This
is the image that I have spoken of. This image,
made after the image of God in its first shaping,
was wonderful fair and bright, full of burning
love and ghostly light, but through the sin of the
first man Adam it was disfigured and misshapen
into another likeness, as I have said before, for it
fell from that ghostly light and that heavenly
feeding into painful darkness and lust of this


134 The Scale of Perfection

wretched life, exiled and driven out from the
inheritance of Heaven, that it should have had
if it had continued, into the wretchedness of this
^ earth, and afterward into the prison of hell, there
to have been without end ; from which prison it
should never return to the heavenly inheritance
until it were reformed to the first shape and like-
ness. But that reforming could not be made by
any earthly man, for every man was in the same
mischief, and none was sufficient to help himself,
and so much less another man. Therefore it
needed to be done by Him that was more than
man, that is God alone. And it was needful that
He should reform and restore man to bliss (if
ever he were to be saved) who of His infinite
goodness first created him thereto. Now, then,
I shall tell thee, how he might be reformed, and
how he is reformed to his first likeness by Him
that first made and framed him, for that is the
Man restored intent of this writing. The justice of God re-
by the Passion quireth that a sin committed be not forgiven j
ofChitst. unless that amends be made for it, if it may be
done. Now it is certain that mankind that
was perfect in Adam the first man (sinning so
grievously against God, when he broke His
special command, and assented to the false
counsel of the devil) deserved justly to be
separated from Him, and damned to hell with-
out end, so far forth, that according to God's
justice, he could not be forgiven, unless amends
were first made, and full satisfaction given. But
this amends could none make that was man only,
and proceeded out of Adam by generation ; be-
cause that the trespass and dishonour done to
God was endless great, and therefore it passed
man's power to make amends for it. And,
secondly y because he that had offended, and would


The Second Book 135

make amends for it, ought to give and pay unto
him whom he had offended, all that he owed him,
though he had not offended, and over and besides
that, to give and pay him something that he
owed not, in regard of the same offence and in-
jury done. But mankind had not wherewith to
pay God for his trespass, over and above that
which he owed him, for what good soever man
could do in body or soul was but his debt; for
every man ought, as the Gospel saith : For to love
God with all his hearty and all hts soul^ and all
his might; and better than this could he not do;
and nevertheless this deed was not sufficient to
the reforming of mankind, nor could he do this
until he was first reformed. Then needed it, that
if man's soul should be reformed, and the tres-
pass made good, that our Lord God Himself
should reform this image, and make amends for
the trespass, since no man could. But that
might He not do in His Godhead, for He might
not, nor ought not, to make amends by suflFering
pain in His own nature, therefore it was neces-
sary, that He should take the same nature that
had trespassed, and so become man. And that
could He not do by the common way of genera-
tion ; for it was impossible for God's Son to be
born of touched woman, therefore must He be-
come man through a gracious generation by the
working of the Holy Ghost of a pure gracious
Virgin our Lady St Mary ; and so it was done ;
for our Lord Jesus, God's Son, became man ; and
through His precious death which He suffered,
made amends to the Father of Heaven for man's
guilt. And that could He well do, for He was
God, and ought not anything for Himself, but
only as He was man, bom of the same kind that
Adam was that first trespassed, and so though


136 The Scale of Perfection

He ought it not for His own person, for that He
had not sinned. Nevertheless He ought it of His
free will, for the trespass of mankind, having
taken upon Him their nature for the salvation
of man, out of His endless mercy.

Forsooth it is, there was never any man that
could yield to God anything of his own which he
owed not, but only this blessed Jesus ; for He
could pay God something which He owed not,
for Himself, which was but one thing, namely, to
give His precious life by voluntary undertaking
death for love of justice, this He owed not. As
much good indeed as He was able to do in this
life, for the honour of God was all but due debt ;
but to undergo death for the love of justice. He
was not bound thereto. He was bound to justice,
but He was not bound to die : for death is only
a pain ordained to man for his own sin. But our
Lord Jesus Christ never sinned, neither could sin,
and therefore He ought not to die. Since then
He ought not to die, and yet died willingly, there-
fore paid He to God more than He ought. And
since that was the best man's deed, and most
worthy that ever was done, therefore, was it rea-
sonable that the sin of mankind should be for-
given. Inasmuch as mankind had found a man
of the same kind, without spot of sin, that is
Jesus ; that might make amends for the trespass
done, and might pay our Lord God all that He
ought ; and over and above, that which He ought
not. Since, then, that our Lord Jesus, God and
man, died thus for the salvation of man's soul,
it was just that sin should be forgiven, and man's
soul, that was His image, should or might be re-
formed and restored to the first likeness, and to
the bliss of Heaven.

This passion of our Lord, and this precious


The Second Book 137

death is the ground of all the reforming of man's
soul; without which man's soul could never be
reformed to the likeness of Him, nor come to the
bliss of Heaven ; but blessed be He for all these
His works. Now so it is, that through the virtue
of His precious passion, the flaming sword of the
Cherubim that drove Adam out of Paradise is
now put away ; and the endless gates of Heaven
are open to every man that will enter in thereto.
For the person of Jesus is both Grod and King of
Heaven in the bliss of the Father, and as man,
He is porter at the gate, ready to receive every
soul that will be reformed here in this life to His
likeness. For now may every soul, if he will, be
reformed to the likeness of God ; since that the
trespass is forgiven, and the amends through
Jesus is made for the first guilt. Nevertheless
though this be true, yet all souls have not the
profit nor the fi-uit of this precious passion, nor
are reformed to the likeness of Him.


SECTION II

That Jews and Pagans and also false Christians at«
not reformed effectually through the virtue of the
Passion through their own Faults

Two manner of men are not reformed by the
virtue of this passion. One is of them that know
it not ; another is of them that love it not. Jews
and Pagans have not the benefit, because they
know it not. Jews understand not that Jesus the
Son of the Virgin Mary is God's Son. Also the
Pagans know it not that the sovereign wisdom of
God would become the Son of man, and in His
manhood would suffer the pains of death. And
therefore the Jews held the preaching of the


138 The Scale of Perfection

Cross and of the Passion nought but slander
and blasphemy ; and the Pagans held it nought
but fancy and folly. But true Christians hold it
the sovereign wisdom of God and His mighty
iCof.u power. Thus saith St Paul: We preach unto
you Christ crucifiedy to the Jews a stumbling blocky
and to the Gentiles foolishness ; but to those that be
called^ both Jews and Greeks^ Christ the Power of
God and the Wisdom of God. And therefore these
men, through their unbelief, put themselves from
the reforming of their own souls, and continuing
in this unbelief, shall never be saved nor come to
the bliss of Heaven. Forsooth it is, from the be-
ginning of the world to the last ending was there
never any man saved, nor shall be, unless he be-
lieve generally or specially in Jesus Christ, to
come, or already come. For right as all chosen
souls, that were before the Incarnation under the
Old Testament, believed in Christ that He should
come, to reform men's souls; and that either with
an open and clear belief, as the Patriarchs and
Prophets and other holy men did ; or else with
a secret and general belief, as children and other
simple and imperfect souls had that had no
special or explicit clear knowledge of the My-
stery of the Incarnation ; right so, all chosen souls
under the New Testament have belief in Christ
already come ; either openly and feelingly, as
spiritual men and wise men have, or else gene^
rally, as children have that are christened, and
other simple and unlearned souls have, that are
nourished in the bosom of holy Church.

Since this is so, methinks that those men err
greatly and grievously who say that Jews and
Turks, by keeping of their own law, may be
saved, though they believe not in Jesus Christ,
as holy Church believeth ; inasmuch as they be-


The Second Book 139

lieve that their own faith is good, and secure,
and suflBcient for their salvation. And in that
belief they do as it seems many good deeds of
justice and righteousness, and peradventure if
they knew that the Christian faith were better
than their own, they would leave their own and
take it ; and therefore they shall be saved. But
I say this is not enough, for Christ, God and
man, is both the way and the end. And He is
the mediator betwixt God and man, and without
Him can no soul be reconciled, nor come to the
bliss of Heaven, and therefore they that believe
not in Him who is both God and man, can never
be saved nor come to bliss.

Other men also, that love not Christ, nor His
Passion, are not reformed in their souls to His
likeness, and these are false Christians, which
are out of grace and charity, and live and die
in deadly sin. These men know well, as it
seemeth, that Jesus is God's Son, and that His
passion suflBceth to the salvation of man's soul ;
and they believe also the other articles of faith.
But it is an unshapen and dead faith, for they
love Him not, nor choose the fruit of His passion,
bxit lie still in their sins, and in the false love of
this world, unto their last end ; and so they be
not reformed to the likeness of God, but go to
the pains of Hell endlessly, as Jews and Turks
do, and into much more and greater pains than
they, inasmuch as they had the truth and kept it
not ; for that makes their sin greater than if they
had never known it.

If then thou wilt know what souls are reformed
here in this life to the image of God through the
virtue of His Passion ; verily, only those that be-
lieve in Him and love Him ; in which souls, the
image of God that was misshapen through sin, as


140 The Scale of Perfection

it were, into a foul beast's likeness, is restored
and reformed to its first shape, and to the worthi-
ness and worship that it had in the beginning ;
without which restoring and reforming never
shall any soul be saved nor come to bliss.

CHAPTER n

Of two Manners of reforming of this Image^ one in
fulness^ another in part

Now thou wilt say : How can this be, that the
image of God, which is man's soul, should be
reformed here in this life to His likeness in any
creature ? Whereas the contrary seemeth true,
nay, it seems that it cannot possibly be so ? For
if it were reformed, then should it have a stable
memory, a clear sight or understanding, a clear
burning love to Gnod and spiritual things ever-
lastingly, as it had in the beginning. But these
hath no creature living here in this life, as thou
perceivest ; for as for thyself, thou canst truly
say, that thou art far from it. Thy memory, thy
reason, and thy love of thy soul, are so much set
upon the beholding and loving of earthly things,
that of spiritual things thou feelest right little.
Thou feelest no reforming in thyself, but art so
wrapped about with this black image of sin, for
all that thou canst do, that upon what side so-
ever thou turnest, thou feelest thyself defiled and
spotted with fleshly stirrings of this foul image ;
and other changings thou feelest none, fresh
fleshliness into spiritualness, neither in the in-
ward faculties of thy soul within, nor in bodily
feelings or thy senses without. Wherefore it
seems to thee that it cannot be that this image
should be so reformed.


The Second Book 141

Thou askest, therefore, how it can be reformed ?

To this I answer, and say thus : There be two
manners of reforming of the image of God which
is man's soul, whereof one is in fulness, another is
in part. Reforming in fulness cannot be had in
this life, but is deferred till after, to the bliss
of Heaven, where man's soul shall fully be re-
formed ; not to that state that it had at the first
by nature, or might have had through grace if
it had stood whole; but it shall be restored to
much more bliss, and much higher joy through
the great mercy and the endless goodness of
God, than it should have had if it had never
fallen. For then shall the soul receive the whole
and the full feeling of God in all its faculties,
without any other love or affection to anything
else interposing itself. And it shall see man-
kind in the person of Jesus exalted above the
kind or nature oi Angels y united to the Godhead,
for then shall Jesus, both God and man, be all in
all, and only He, and none other but He, as the
Prophet saith : Our Lord (Jesus) in that day shall /saias ii.
be exalted only. And also the body of man shall
then be glorified, for it shall receive fully the rich
dowry of immortality, with all that belongeth
thereto. This shall a soul have with the body,
and much more than I can say; but that shall
be the bliss of Heaven, but not in this life. For
though it be so that the Passion of our Lord be
the cause of all this full reforming of man's
soul ; nevertheless it was not His will to grant
it straightways after passion, to all chosen souls
that were living at the time of His Passion, but
He delayed it unto the last day, and that for this
reason : Manifest it is that our Lord Jesus Christ
of His mercy hath ordained a certain number of
souls to salvation, which number was not fulfilled


142 The Scale of Perfection

in the time of His Passion, and therefore it need-
ed that by length of time through natural genera-
tion of men that number should be made up; then
if it had so been, that so soon as after the death
of our Lord, every soul that would have believed
in Him should have been blessed and fully re-
formed by His life, without any further delay,
there would no creature that lived then have
been that would not have received the Faith for
to have been made blessed, and then should
generation have ceased. And so should we
that are now chosen souls living, and other
souls that come after us, not have been bom, and
so should our Lord have failed of His number.
But that might not be, and therefore our Lord
provided much better for us, in that He delayed
the full reforming of man's soul till the last end,
Heh. XI, as St Paul saith ; God providing better for uSy that
they should not be consummate without us. That is,
our Lord providing better for us in the delaying
of our reforming, than if He had granted it then,
for this reason, that the chosen souls should not
make a full end without us that come after.

Another reason is this : Since that man in his
first creation was set in his free will, and had free
choice whether he would have God fully or no, it
was therefore reasonable that since he would not
choose Grod then, but wretchedly fell from Him,
if he should afterwards be reformed, that he should
be set again in the same free choosing that he
was first in, as whether he would become re-
formed or no. And this may be also a cause why
man's soul was not fully reformed speedily upon
the Passion of Jesus Christ.


The Second Book 143


CHAPTER m

That Reforming in part is in two manners, one in
Faith, another in Feeling

Another reforming of this image is in part, and
this may be had in this life, and if it be not had
in this life, it will never be had, nor the soul ever
come to be saved.

But this reforming is on two manners ; one
is in Faith only, another is in Faith and in Feel^
ing. The first sufficeth to salvation, the second
is worthy to have passing great reward in the
bliss of Heaven. The first may be had easily
and in short time, the second not so, but through
length of time and much spiritual pains. The
first may be had, and yet the man may have to-
gether with it the stirrings and feelings of the
image of sin. For though a man feel nothing in
himself but all stirrings of sin and fleshly desires,
notwithstanding those feelings, if he do not volun-
tarily assent thereto, he may be and remain re-
formed in Faith to the likeness of Grod.

But the second putteth out the liking in, and
delight felt in sensual motions and worldly de-
sires, and suffereth no such spots to abide in this
image. The first is only of beginning and profit-
ing souls, and of active men. The second is of
perfect souls, and of contemplative men. For by
the first reforming the image of sin is not de-
stroyed, but it is left, as it were, all whole in feel-
ing. But the second destroyeth the old feelings
of this image of sin, and bringeth into the soul
new gracious feelings, through the workings of
the Holy Ghost, 'fiie first is good, the second
is better ; but the third, that is in the bliss of


144 The Scale of Perfection

Heaven, is best of all. First let us speak of that
one, and then of that other, and so we shall come
to the third.

CHAPTER IV

That through the Sacrament of Baptism (which is
grounded in the Passion of Christ) this Image is
reformed from Original Sin

Two manner of sins make the soul to lose the
image and likeness of God. The one is called
Original, that is the first sin ; the other is Actual,
that is committed by our own will. These two
sins put away a soul from the bliss of Heaven,
and damn it to the endless pains of hell ; unless,
through the grace of God, it be reformed to His
likeness, before it pass hence out of this life.
Nevertheless, two remedies are there against
these two sins, by the which a misshapen soul
may be restored again. One is the Sacrament
of Baptism against original sin, another is the
Sacrament of Penance against actual sin. A soul
of a child that is bom, as is not christened, by
reason of original sin, hath no likeness of God ;
he is nought but an image of the fiend, and a
brand of hell ; but as soon as it is christened, it
is reformed to the image of God, and through
the virtue of the faith of holy Church is suddenly
turned from the likeness of the fiend, and made
like an Angel of Heaven. Also the same falleth
to a yew or to a Turk, the which before they be
christened, are nought but bondslaves of hell ;
but when they forsake their error, and fall hum-
bly to the truth in Christ, and receive the baptism
of water in the Holy Ghost, surely without any
further tarrying they are reformed to the likeness


The Second Book 145

of God, so fully that the holy Church believeth
that if presently after baptism they should happen
to die, they should straight fly up to Heaven with-
out any more letting, though they had before in
the time of their unbelief committed never so many
or so great sins ; nor should they ever feel the
pains of hell nor of purgatory, and that privilege
should they have by the merit of Christ's Passion.


CHAPTER V

That through the Sacrament of Penance (that consist
teth in Contrition^ Confession and Satisfaction)
this Image is reformed from Actual Sin

Moreover, Christian men or women that have
lost the likeness of God through a deadly sin in
breaking God's commandments, if he through
the touching of grace in his heart doth truly
forsake his sin, with sorrow and contrition of
heart, and be in full purpose to amend and turn
to a good life ; and in this foresaid purpose and
will receiveth the Sacrament of Penance, if he
may come by it, or if he cannot have a will and
desire to come by it, surely, I say, that this man
or woman's soul, that was before misshapen to
the likeness of the devil through deadly sin, is
now by the Sacrament of Penance restored and
shapen again to the image of our Lord Gt)d.

This is a great courtesy of our Lord, and
an endless mercy, who so lightly forgiveth all
manner of sin, and so suddenly g^veth plenty of
grace to a sinful soul that asketh mercy of Him.
He requireth not great doing of Penance, nor
painful suffering in the flesh, before He forgiveth
it. But He requireth a loathing of sin, and a
full forsaking in the will for love of Him, and

xo


146 The Scak of Perfection

a turning of the heart to Him. This He asketh,
for this He griveth. And then when He seeth
this, without any further delay He for^veth the
sin, and reformeth the soul to His likeness. The
sin is forgiven, that the soul shall not be damn-
ed; nevertheless, the pain due to the sin is not
yet fully forgiven, imless that the contrition and
love be the greater. And therefore shall he go
and show himself, and make his confession to his
ghostly Father, and receive the penance which
he enjoineth him for his trespass, and perform it
gladly, so that both the sin and the punishment
may be done away before he pass hence.
Why Con- And this is the wise ordinance of holy Church,
fession is to the g^reat benefit of man's soul, that though
necessary. ^^ ^^^ y^ forgiven through the virtue of contri-
tion, nevertheless for the exercise of humility,
and for to make entire satisfaction, he shall (if
he have means for it) show to his priest a plen-*
ary confession ; for that is his token and warrant
against all his enemies, of the forgiveness of his
sins ; and such a token or warrant will it be need-
ful for him to have. Just as if a man had for-
feited his life against a king on earth, it were not
enough for him (as to his full security and dis-
charge) to have only forgiveness of the king,
unless he have a charter firom him, which may
be his token and warrant against all other men.
Right so may it be said spiritually, if a man
through deadly sin have forfeited his life against
the King of Heaven, it is not enough for him (as
to his full security) to have forgiveness of Gnod
only by contrition between Grod and him, unless
he have a charter also made by holy Church (if
he may come by it), and this is the Sacrament
of Penance, which is his charter and token of
forgiveness. For sith it was so, that he had


The Second Book 147

offended and forfeited both against God and His
Church, it is skilful that he have forgiveness
from that one, and a warrant from that other.
And this is one cause why Confession is needful.
Another reason is this : That since this re-
forming of a soul standeth in Faith only, and
not in Feeling (for the forgiveness is only be-
lieved and not felt) therefore a fleshly or sensual
man, that is at first gross and rude in under-
standing, and cannot easily judge and conceive,
but only outward bodily things, would not easily
have believed that his sins had been forgiven
him, if he had not received some outward or
bodily token of it, and that is Confession, through
the which token he is made secure of forgiveness
if he do his part and duty in the business. This
is the belief of holy Church, as I understand it.
Another reason is this: Though the ground of
forgiveness stand not principally in Confession,
but in contrition of the heart, and in detestation
or forethinking of sin ; nevertheless, I believe
that there is many a soul that would never have
felt true contrition, nor had arrived at forsaking
of sin, if Confession had not been ; for it falleth
out oftentimes, that in the time of Confession,
grace of compunction cometh to a soul that be-
fore never felt grace, but ever was cold and dry,
and farther off from feeling of grace. And there-
fore sith Confession was so profitable to the more
party of Christian men, holy Church ordained,
for the more security generally to all Christian
men, that every man and woman should once in
the year, at the least, confess all their sins to
their ghostly Father, that come to their mind,
though they had never so much contrition before
time. Nevertheless, I hope well, that if all men
had been as careful about the keeping of them-


148 The Scale of Perfection

selves and escbewing^ of all maxmer of sin ; and
bad arnved at as great knowledge and feeling of
God as some men have, holy Church would not
have ordained the said tc^en of Confession as an
obligation, for it had not been needful. But be-
cause all men are not so perfect, and peradventure
much or the greater part of Christians are imper-
fect, therefore holy Church ordained Confession
by way of general obligation, to all Christians
that will acknowledge holy Church as their Mo-
ther, and will be obedient to her laws.

If this be true, as I hope it is, then erreth he
greatly that generally saith that Confession of
sins to the priest is neither necessary nor pro-
fitable, and that no man is bound thereto ; for by
that which I have said, it is both necessary and
profitable to all those souls who in this wretched
life are defiled with sin, and namely to those who
through deadly sin are misshapen fi-om the like-
ness of God, who cannot be reformed to His like-
ness but by the Sacrament of Penance which
principally standeth in contrition and sorrow of
heart, and secondarily in confession of mouth
following after it if it may be had. And thus
through this Sacrament of Penance is a sinfiil
soul reformed to the image and likeness of God.

But this reforming standeth in Faith and not
in Feeling. For right as Faith's property is to
believe that which thou seest not, so also is it to
believe that which thou feelest not. For he that
is reformed in his soul by the Sacrament of Pe-
nance to the image of God, feeleth not any chang^e
in himself, neither in his external corporal nature,
nor within in the substance of his soul, other than
he did before. For as to his feeling, he is as he
was, and feeleth the same stirrings of sin, and the
same corruption of his flesh in his passions and


The Second Book 149

worldly risings in his heart, as he did before. Yet
he ought to believe that through grace he is re-
formed to the image of God, though he neither
feel it nor see it. He may easily feel in himself
a sorrow for his sins, and a turning of his will
from sin to cleanness of living, if he have grace
and take good heed of himself. But he can
neither see nor feel the reforming of his soul,
how it is wonderfully and unperceivably changed
from the foulness of the fiend unto the fairness
jf an Angel, through a secret gracious working
of the Holy Ghost This cannot he see but only
believe it ; and if he believe it, then is his soul
reformed in truth. For right as Holy Church
believeth, a Jew or Saracen^ or a child, by the
Sacrament of Baptism duly administered, to be
reformed in soul to the image of God, through
a secret unperceivable working of the Holy Ghost j
notwithstanding all the fleshly stirrings of his
body of sin, which he feeleth, after his Baptism
as well as before ; right so, by the Sacrament of
Penance humbly and truly received, a bad Chris-
tian who hath been encumbered with deadly sin
all his lifetime, is reformed within in his soul,
unperceivably, saving that he finds a turning of
his will to God through a secret power, and a
gracious working of the Holy Ghosty which sud-
denly worketh, and in a moment or the twink-
ling of an eye, setteth right a froward soul, and
turneth it from a spiritual foulness to an in-
visible fairness, and maketh her, of a servant
of the fiend, a son of joy ; and of a prisoner of
hell, an inheritor of Heaven, notwithstanding
all the fleshly feelings of this sinful image, that
is the corporal nature.

For thou must know, that the Sacrament of
Baptism or of Penance, is not of that virtue to


150 The Scale of Perfection

The Sacra- hinder and destroy utterly all the stirrings of
menUofBap^ fleshly lusts and of inordinate passions, that
^nemce do ^^^ ^oul should never feel any risings nor stir-
notutteriyde- rings of them at any time ; for if it were so,
sirov and take ^Yieti were a soul fully reformed here to the
^ZnL/kT'" dignity it had at its first creation. But that
fifsh. cannot be fully in this life. But it is of that

virtue, that it clean seth the soul from all sins
before done; and if she, being in that case,
chance to die, it saveth her from damnation ;
or if it continue in the body, it giveth her grace
to withstand the stirrings of sin, or of the
passions of the flesh, so that be they never so
grievous, they shall not hurt her, nor separate
her from God, as long as she doth not willingly
consent thereto. So meant S^ Paul when he
Rom. viii. said thus : — There is no condemnation to them that
walk not after the flesh. That is, those souls that
are reformed to the image of God by Faithy
through the Sacrament of Baptism or of Pe-
nance, shall not be damned for the feeling of
this image of sin, if so be that they go not after
the motions of sensuality by deed doing.


CHAPTER VI

That we arc to believe stedfastly the reforming of
this Image, if our Conscience witness to us a full
' forsaking of Sin, and a true turning of our Will
to good living

Of this reforming in Faith speaketh St Paul in
HeK X. these words : The just man liveth by Faith. That
is, he that is made righteous by Baptism or Pe-
nance, he liveth by Faithy which sufficeth to sal-
vation, and also to heavenly peace, as St Paul
saith : Being justified by Faithy we have peace


The Second Book 151

with God. That is, we that are made righteous
and reformed through Faith in Christ, have
peace and accord made betwixt God and us,
notwithstanding the vicious motions of our body
of sin. For though this reforming be secret,
and cannot well be felt here in this life, never-
theless whoso stedfastly believeth it, and is care-
ul to shape his life accordingly, and turns not
again to deadly sin, surely when the hour of
death cometh, and the soul is departed, then
shall he find that true which I say now. St John
in comfort of chosen souls that live here in Faith
under the feeling of this painful image, saith
thus : Little childreny now are we the sons of Gody i /ohn iii.
and it appear eth not what we shall be; but we know
that when Christ shall appear y we shall also appear
like Him in glory. That is, we are now, whilst
we live here, the sons of God, for we are reformed
by Faith in Christ to His likeness, but it appear-
eth not plainly what we are, but it is kept secret.
Nevertheless, we know well, that when our Lord
shall appear at the last day, then shall we appear
with Him, like to Him in glory.

If then, thou 'wouldst know if thy soul be re- H<m a mt
formed to the Image of God or no, thou mayest '"?''./'"l?
be resolved by that which I have said, ransack ^„/ ^^re-^
thy conscience and look what thy will is, for formed.
therein consisteth the whole business. If it be
turned from all manner of deadly sin, so that
thou wouldst not for all the world wittingly and
wilfully break the commandments of God ; and
for what thou hast done amiss heretofore con-
trary to His bidding, hast humbly made thy
confession, with full intent to leave it, and art
sorry that thou didst it ; I say then, surely that
thy soul is reformed in Faith to the likeness
of God.


152 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER Vn

That all the Souls that live humbly in the Faith of
Holy Church, and have their Faith enlivened with
Love and Charity, be reformed by this Sacrament,
though it be so that they cannot feel the special
gift oi Devotion or of spiritual feeling

In this reforming, which is only in Faithy the
most part of chosen souls lead their lives, setting
their wills stedfastly to flee all manner of deadly
sin, and keeping themselves in love and charity
to their neighbour, and keeping the command-
ments of God according to their knowledge.
And when it is so that wicked stirrings and evil
desires of pride, envy, wrath or luxury, or of any
other capital sin rise in their hearts, they resist
and strive against them, by being displeased at
them in their will, so that they follow not those
wicked motions in their deeds ; and if through
frailty they fall, as it were against their will, and
through ignorance, their conscience soon after
so grieveth and paineth them for it, that they
can take no rest till they have made their con-
fession, and had absolution for it.

Surely all these souls that thus live in this
state of reforming, and be found therein at the
hour of their death, shall be saved, and shall
come to a full reforming in the bliss of Heaven
though it were so, that they never had spiritual
feeling, nor inward taste of devotion, nor any
special gift of grace of sweetness or comfort in
all their lifetime. For if thou shouldst say,
that no soul shall be saved, unless she were here
reformed in spiritual feeling, so that she hath felt
devotion and spiritual sweetness in God, as some


Th e Second Book 153

souls through special grace have done ; then
should very few souls be saved, in comparison
of the multitude of the other.

Nay, it is not so to be supposed, that only for
the souls that have had such extraordinary de-
votion, or have through great grace come to a
spiritual feeling, and for no more^ our Lord Jesus
should have taken upon Him the nature of man,
and suffered the bitter passion of His death. It
had been such a small purchase for Him to have
come from so far to so near, and from so high to so
low, for so few souls ; no, His mercy is spread
larger than so. But on the contrary, if thou
imaginest the Passion of our Lord to be so
precious, and His mercy so great, that there
shall no soul be damned, and namely, no
Christian, do he never so wickedly, as some
fools do imagine, surely thou errest greatly.

Go, therefore, in the middle way, and hold
thee there, and believe as holy Church believ-
eth, and that is, that the most sinful man that
liveth on earth, if through grace he turn his
will from deadly sin by true repentance to the
service of God, he is reformed in his soul, and
if he die in this state, he shall be saved. Thus
hath our Lord promised by His Prophet^ saying :
At what time soever a sinner shall be converted^
and sorry for his sms, he shall live, and not die.

And on the other side, whoso liveth in deadly
sin, and will not leave it, nor amend him thereof,
nor receive the Sacrament of Penance, or else
if he receive it, taketh it not truly, for the love
of God (that is, for the love of virtue and clean-
ness, but only for dread or shame of the world,
or only for fear of the pains of hell), he is not
reformed to the image of God, and if he die
in that state, he shall not be saved, his Faith


154 The Scale of Perfection

shall not save him, for it is but a dead faith,
because it lacketh love, and therefore it will
not serve his turn. But they that have Faith
quickened with love and charity, though it be
but the least degree of charity, as are simple
souls who feel not the gift of special devotion,
nor have spiritual knowledge or feeling of God,
as some spiritual men have, but believe in
general as holy Church believeth, though they
know not fully what that is (for it is not neces-
sary that they should know so fully), but in that
belief keep themselves in love and charity to
their neighbour as well as they can, and eschew
all deadly sin according to their best skill, and
do deeds of mercy to their neighbours ; all these
belong to the bliss of Heaven. For thus is it
written in the Apocalypse : Ye that fear God, both
great and smally praise Him, By great ones are
understood souls that are profiting in grace, or
that are perfect in the love of God, which are
reformed in spiritual feeling. By smally imper-
fect souls of worldly men and women, and others
that have but a childish knowledge of God, and
full little feeling of Him, but are brought forth in
the bosom of holy Church, and nourished with
the Sacraments, as children are fed with milk.
All these ought to love God, and thank Him for
the salvation of their souls, which proceedeth
from His endless mercy and goodness. For
holy Church, which is mother of all these, and
beareth tender love to all her ghostly children,
prayeth and asketh for them all tenderly of her
Spouse, that is of Jesus, and getteth them health
of soul through virtue of His Passion ; and
namely for them that cannot speak for them-
selves by spiritual prayer for their need.

Thus I find in the Gospel that the woman


The Second Book 155

of Canaan asked of our Lord health for her
daughter that was troubled with the fiend ;
and our Lord at first made dainty of the
matter, because she was an alien. Neverthe-
less she ceased not to cry till our Lord had
granted her asking, and said to her thus: O
woman^ great is thy fatth^ be it unto thee as thou
wtlt. In the same hour was her daughter made
whole. This woman betokeneth holy Church,
that asketh help of our Lord for simple igno-
rant souls, that are encumbered with tempta-
tions of the world, and cannot speak perfectly
to God by fervour of devotion, nor by burning
love in Contemplation. And though our Lord
seemeth to make dainty at first, because they
are, as it were, aliened fi*om Him, nevertheless,
for the great faith and desert of holy Church,
He granted to her all that she will. And ior
these simple souls that believe stedfastly as
holy Church believeth, and put themselves
wholly upon the mercy of God, and submit
themselves under the Sacraments and Laws of
holy Church, are saved through the prayers
and faith of their holy Mother the Church.


CHAPTER Vm

That Souls reformed need ever to fight and strive
against the Motions of Sin while they live here«
And how a Soul may know when she assenteth
to these Motions^ and when not

This reforming in Faith is easily gotten, but it is
not so easily held. And, therefore, that man or
woman that is reformed to the likeness of God in
Faith, must use much labour and diligence, if
they will keep this image whole and clean, that


156 The Scale of Perfecti on

it fall not down again through weakness of will
to the image of sin. He may not be idle or care-
less; for the image of sin is so near fastened
unto him, and so continually presseth upon him
by divers stirrings of sin, that unless he be very
wary, he shall very easily through consent fall
again thereto. And, therefore, he needeth to be
ever striving and fighting against the wicked
stirring of this image of sin, and that he make no
accord with them, nor have friendship with them,
to be pliable to their unlawful biddings, for in so
doing he begnileth himself. But verily if he
strive with them, he need not be much afraid of
consenting; for striving breaketh peace and false
accord. It is good indeed that a man have peace
with all things, save with the fiend and this
image of sin, for against them ought he ever to
fight in his thoughts and in his deeds, till he hath
gotten the mastery, which will never be fiilly in
this life, as long as he beareth and feeleth this
image. I say not but that a soul may, through
grace, have the upper hand of this image, so far
that he will not follow nor assent to the inordinate
motions of it, but to be clean delivered from it, so
that he shall feel no suggestions nor jangling of
fleshly affections or of vain thoughts at anytime,
that can no man come to in this life.

I trow that a soul that is reformed in feeling,
by ravishing of love in contemplation of God,
may be far from the sensuality and from vain
imaginations, and so far drawn out and parted
from the fleshly motions for ^ time, that she shall
feel nothing but Grod ; but such a case lasteth not
always. And, therefore, I say, that every man
ought to strive against this image of sin, and
namely he that is reformed in faith only, who
may so easily be deceived by the same. In the


The Second Book 157

person of which men St Paul saith : The flesh Gal v.
Itisteth against the sptrity and the spirit against the
flesh. That is, a soul reformed to the likeness of
God fighteth against the sensual motions of the
image of sin, and also this image of sin fighteth
against the will of the spirit.

This kind of fighting between these two
several images St Paul knew and felt, when he
said thus : / find a law in my members flghting Rom. vil
against the law of my mindy and leading me captive
to the law of stn. By these two laws in a soul
I understand this double image : by the law of
the spirit I understand the reason of the soul,
when it is reformed to the image of God ; by the
law of the flesh I understand the sensuality,
which I call the image of sin. In these two laws
a soul reformed leads his life ; as St Paul saith in
these words : With my mind I serve the law of
Gody but wtth the flesh the law of sin.

Nevertheless, that a soul reformed should not
despair though she serve the law of sin by feeling
of the vicious sensuality against the will of the
spirit, because of the corruption of corporal
nature, St Paul excuseth it, saying thus of his
own person : For not that good that I wouldy do /,
but the evil that I hate that I do ; but if I do the
evil that I hate^ it is not I that worketh /'/, but sin
that dwelleth in me. That is, I would feel no
fleshly stirrings, but that do I not, but the sinful
stirrings of my flesh I hate, and yet I feel them.
Nevertheless, since it is so that I have the wicked
stirrings of my flesh, and yet I feel them and oft *
delight in them against my will, they shall not
be laid to my charge to my condemnation, as if
I had done them. And why ? For the corrup-
tion of this image of sin doth them, and not I.

Lo St Paul in his own person comforteth all


158 The Scale of Perfection

souls that through grace are reformed in Faith,

that they should not too much dread the burthen

^ese stir- of this image with the inordinate motions thereof,

ings of sin {f ft be SO that they do not willingly and deliber-

utchfoU ately yield thereto. Yet in this point, many

fared. souls that are reformed in truth, are ofttimes

much tormented and troubled in vain, as thus :

When they have felt fleshly motion of pride, or of

envy, of covetousness or luxury, or of any other

chief sin, they know not whether they consent

thereto or no, and it is no great wonder ; for in

time of temptation frail man's thoughts are so

troubled and so overlaid that he hath no clear

sight nor freedom of himself, but is overtaken

often with liking unwarily, and so that liking

passeth perhaps a good while within him ere he

will perceive it, and, therefore, falleth sometime

in doubt and dread whether they sinned in time

of temptation or no.

As to this point I say, as methinketh, that a
soul may discern by this means whether he con-
sent or no. If it be so that he is moved or
tempted to any kind of sin, and the liking of it is
so great in his fleshly feeling that it troubleth his
reason, and, as it were, with mastery possesseth
the affection of his soul, and yet he restraineth
himself, that he performeth not the sin in deed,
nay, nor would not if he might, but is rather
pained to feel the liking of that sin, and fain
would put it away if he could ; and when that
stirring is over, is glad and well repaid that he is
delivered from it; by this may he gather, that
were the liking never so great in his fleshly
feeling, yet he consented nor sinned, not especially
mortally in the business.

Nevertheless, a good and secure remedy it
w^ere for such simple souls being in such a case,


The Second Bcx>k 159

and cannot help it, that they be not too bold in
themselves, utterly weening that such fleshly And yet not
stirrings with liking are no sins at all, for so they ^ ?^/^^"
may fall into carelessness and a false security. ^' "
Neither on the other side that they be too fearful,
or foolish, as to deem them all as deadly sins, or
as great venials ; for neither is true, but that he
hold them all as sins and wretchedness, and that
he have sorrow for them, and be not too busy in
judging them either deadly or venial. But if his
conscience be greatly grieved, that he go speedily,
and show to his Confessor in general or in special
such stirrings, and, namely, every stirring that
beginneth to fasten any root in the heart, and
most possesseth it, for to draw it down to sin and
worldly vanity. And when he hath thus con-
fessed in general or in particular, let him assur-
edly believe that they be forgiven, and dispute
no more about them that are passed and for-
given, whether they were mortal or venial. But
let him be the more careful to carry himself
better against such as shall afterwards arise.
And if he do so, then may he come to have quiet
in his conscience. But some are so unwise and
so gross that they would feel or see, or hear the
forgiveness of their sins, as clearly and palpably
as they might see or feel a bodily thing; and
because they cannot, therefore they fall oft into
such fears and doubts of themselves, and never
come to rest ; and in that they are unwise, for
Faith goeth before feeling.

Our Lord, when He healed a man sick of the
palsy, said thus to him : Trusl (my son) thai thy
stns are forgiven thee; that is, believe stedfastly.
He said not to him, See, feel, how that thy sins
are forgiven (for the forgiveness of sins is done
spiritually and invisibly, through the grace of


i6o The Scale of Perfection

the Holy Ghost) but belteve it. On the same
manner, every one that desireth to have peace of
conscience, it behoveth him (having done what
lay in his power) to believe without spiritual
feeling and forgiveness of his sins. And if at
first he believe it, he shall afterward, through
grace, feel it and understand it that it is so.
Thus said the Apostle : Unless ye believe^ ye shall
not understand. Faith goeth before, and under-
standing cometh after, and this understanding
(which I call the light of gfrace that cometh from
God) a soul cannot have but through g^reat clean-
SiMatf,y. Tiess, as our Lord saith: Blessed are the pure in
hearty for they shall see God. Not with their
fleshly eye, but their inward eye, that is, their
understanding, cleaned and enlightened through
grace of the Holy Ghost, to see the truth ; the
which cleanness a soul cannot feel, unless she
have firm faith and belief going before, as the
Apostle saith: By faithy purifying the heart;
that is, our Lord through faith cleanseth the
hearts of His chosen. It is necessary, therefore,
that a soul first believe in the reforming of him-
self made through the Sacrament of Penance,
though she see it not ; and that he dispose him-
self fiilly to live righteously and virtuously, as
his Faith requireth ; so that afterward he may
come to stghty and to the reforming in feeling.

J»

CHAPTER IX

That this Image is both fair and foul whilst it is in
this Life here^ though it be reformed ; and of the
Differences ot the secret Feelings of those that be
reformed and those that be not

Fair is a man's soul, and foul is a man's soul.
Fair, inasmuch as it is reformed in faith to the


The Second Bcx>k i6i

likeness of God. But foul, inasmuch as it is
mingled with sensual feelings and inordinate
motions of this image of sin. Foul it is without,
like a beast ; fair within, like an Angel. Foul in
the feeling of sensuality, fair in truth of reason.
Foul for the fleshly appetites, fair for the good
will. Thus is a chosen soul both fair and foul,
according to the saying of Holy Writ: / am
blacky but beautifuly O daughters of Jerusalem^ as Cant i.
the tents of Kedar^ and as the curtains of Solomon.
That is, O ye Angels of Heaven, that are
daughters of the high Jerusalem^ wonder not at
me, nor despise me for my black shadow. For
though I be black without, because of my fleshly
nature, as the tents of Kedar^ yet am I full fair
within, as the curtains of SolomoUy in that I am
reformed to the image of God. By Kedar is
understood a reprobate soul, which is the tent of
the deviL By Solomon is understood our Lord
Jesus, for He is peace, or peaceable. By the
curtain of Solomon is understood a blessed Angel,
in whom our Lord dwelleth, and is hid in him.

Now may a chosen soul with humble trust in
God, and joy of heart, say thus : Though I be
black, because of my body of sin, like a reprobate
soul, that is one of the tabernacles of the fiend ;
yet within am I fair (through faith and good will)
like an Angel of Heaven. For so saith he in
another place : Look not upon me, because that I am Cant L
blacky for that the sun hath altered my colour. The
sun maketh a skin swarth only without and not
within ; and it betokeneth this fleshly life. There-
fore thus saith the chosen soul : Rebuke me not
because I am swarth, for the swartness I have
is all without, by the touching and carrying
about me this image of sin; but it is nothing
within. And, therefore, soothly though it be so

II


i62 The Scale of Perfection

that a chosen soul, reformed in faith, dwell in
this body of sin, and feel the same fleshly stir-
rings, and use the same bodily works, as doth
a tabernacle of Kedar so far forth that in man's
judgement there be no difference betwixt the one
and the other, yet within in their souls, and in
the sight of God there is a full great difference.*
But to know this, which is the one, and which is
the other, is only kept to God ; for it passeth
man's judgement and man's feeling. And, there-
fore, we ought not to judge any man evil, for that
thing that may be used both evil and well.
How to dis' A soul that is not reformed is so fully taken
hei^^^h^ up with the love of the world, and so much over-
fi^^msof l^id with the liking of his flesh in all his sensu-
lustinthe ality, that he chooseth it as a full rest of his
tformed and heart, and in the secret desires thereof nothing
unrtforme . ^j^^ would he have, but only that he might ever
be sure thereof; he feeleth within him no liquor
of grace, moving him to loathe his fleshly life,
nor to desire Heaven or bliss. And, therefore,
we may say that he beareth not this image of
sin, but is borne of it ; like a man that is sick
and so weak that he cannot bear himself, and,
therefore, is laid on a bed, and borne in a litter.
Right so, such a sinful soul is so weak and impo-
tent, for lack of grace, that he can neither move
hand nor foot to do any good deed, nor to resist
(by displeasing of will) the least motion of sin,
when it cometh, but falls down thereto, just like
a beast upon carrion. But a soul that is re-
formed, though he use his fleshly senses and feel
fleshly stirrings, yet he loatheth them in his
heart, for he would not for any good rest in them
fully, but fleeth any such rest in them, as the
biting of an adder, and had rather have his rest
and the love of his heart in God, if he could ; and

* Twining,


The Second Book ^ . 163

sometimes actually aspireth thereto, and often
gTudgeth at the fleeing of the pleasures of this
life, for love of the lifisj everlasting. This soul is
not borne by this image of sin, like a sick man,
though he feel it ; butne beareth it, for through
grace he is made mighty and strong to suffer
and bear his body, with all the evil stirrings of it,
without hurting or defiling himself, inasmuch as
he loveth them^ not> no|: foUoweth them, nor con-
senteth to deadly sins^'ag another doth.

-: This was bodily ful^lled i;n the Gospel by a
man sick of the p^lsy, who was so feeble that
he could not go, and therefore was laid and
borne in a litter, a^iia trpught to* our Lord; and
when he saw hl^ in that misery, 6f His goodness
He said to him : Artsel and take up thy bed^ and go St John v.
home to thy house; and so he did, and was whole.
And soothly, right as this man bare upon his
back, when he w^s made whole, the bed that
before bare him ; right %o it may be said in the
spiritual gense, that a soul, reformed in faith,
beareth this image of sin, which bare him before.
And therefore be not too much adread of thy
blackness that thou hast by bearing of this image
of sin ; but only for the shame of the discomfort
that thou hast from the beholding of it, and also
for the upbraiding that thou feelest in thy heart
of thy ghostly enem,ies, when they say to thee
thus: Where is thy Lord Jesus? What seekest
thou ? Where is the fairness that thou speakest of?

What feelest thou else but blindness of sin ? Where
is that image of Gody tliat thou say est is refornud in
thee ? Comfort thyself, and be faithful stiffly, as
I said before, and if thou do so, thou shalt, by
this faith, destroy all the temptations of thy
enemies. Thus saith St Paul: Take unto you the Ephes, vu
buckler of faith^ with which thou shalt be able to
quench all the burning darts of the enemy.


i64 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER X

Of three sorts of Men» whereof some be^ not refonnec^
and some be reformed only in Faitb^ and some
both in Faith and Feeling

By that which I have said, thou m'ayest perceive,
that according to the divers parts of the soul are
divers states of men. Some are reformed to the
likeness of God, and some are not ; and some are
reformed only in faith, and some both in faith
and feeling. For thou must understand that a
soul hath two parts. The one is called sensu-
ality, and that is fleshly feeling by the five out-
ward senses, which is common to man with
beasts ; of the which sensuality, when it is un-
skilfully and inordinately ruled, is made up the
image of sin. That is, when it is not ruled after
reason, for then is the sensuality sin. The other
part is called reason ; and that is parted also into
two, into the superior and inferior part. The
superior part is likened to a man, for it should be
master and sovereign, and that is properly the
image of Grod, for by that only the soul knoweth
God, and loveth Him. And the inferior is likened
to a woman, for it should be obedient to the other
part of reason, as woman is subject to man. And
this consisteth in the knowing and ruling of
earthly things, for to use them discreetly accord-
ing as we have need of them, and to renise them
when we have no need of them, and to have ever
with it an eye upwards towards the superior part
of reason with dread and reverence, to follow and
be guided by it.

Now may I say, that a soul that liveth after
the likings and lusts of his flesh, is, as it were^ a


The Second Book 165

brute beasts and neither hath knowledge of God
nor desire of virtues, nor of good living, but is all
blinded in pride, fretted with envy, overlaid with
covetousness, defiled with lechery, and other
great sins; is not reformed to the likeness of God;
for it lieth and resteth fully in the image of sin,
that is, in sensuality. Another soul, that feareth
God, and resisteth deadly stirrings of the sensual
part, and foUoweth them not but liveth according
to reason in ruling and ordering of worldly
things, and setteth his intent and his will for to
please God by his outward works, is reformed to
the likeness of God in faith ; and though he feel
the same stirrings of sin as the other doth, they
shall not disease him, for he resteth not in them
as the other doth. But another soul, that through
grace fleeth all deadly stirrings of sensuality, and
all venials also, so far forth that he feeleth them
not, keeping under the very first risings, is
reformed in feeling ; for he foUoweth and is led by
the superior part of reason, and this he doth
by the beholding of God and spiritual things, as
1 shall tell thee afterwards.


CHAPTER XI

How Men that abide and live in Sin^ misshape them^
selves into the likeness of divers Beasts^ and they|be
called the Lovers of the World

A WRETCHED man is he then that knoweth not
the worthiness of his soul, nor will know it, how
it is the most worthy creature that ever God
made, except an angel, to whom yet it is like ;
high above all others, the which nothing can
satisfy as its full rest, but only God. And there-
fore should he not love nor like anything, but


i66 The Scale of Perfection

Him only, nor covet nor seek anything, but how
he may be reformed to His image ; for he know-
eth not this, therefore seeketh he and coveteth
. his rest and his liking outwardly in bodily crea-
tures that are worse than himself. Unnaturally
doth he, and unreasonably, that leaveth the sove-
reign Good and everlasting Life (which is Grod)
unsought and unloved, unknown and unwor-
shipped, and chooseth his rest and his bliss in
the fading delight of an earthly thing. And yet
thus do all the lovers of this world, that have
their joy and their bliss in this wretched life.
Some have it in pride and vain glory of them-
selves, that when they have lost the fear of God
they travail and study night and day how they
may come to the worship and praise of the world,
and care not by what means they come thereto,
and surpass all other men, either in learning or
any other skill, in name or in fame, in riches or
in respect, in sovereignty and mastership. Some
men have their rest in riches, and in outrageous
getting of worldly goods, and set their hearts so
fully to get them, that they seek nothing else but
how they may come thereto. Some have their
liking in fleshly lusts of gluttony and lechery,
and other bodily uncleanness, and some in one
thing, and some in another.
Thi proud And thus wretchedly these that do thus, mis-
turmdinto shape themselves from the worthiness of a man,
and turn themselves into the likeness of divers
beasts. A proud man is turned into a lion, for
pride ; for he would be feared and worshipped by
all, and that none should withstand the mlfiUing
of his fleshly will, neither in word nor deed. And
if any one contradict his proud will, he becometh
angry and wroth, and would revenge himself* on
* Wroken of him.


The Second Book


167


him, as a lion wreaketh himself on a little beast.
He that doth this is not a man, for he doth un-
naturally and unreasonably against the kind ot
a man, and so is turned and transformed into
a lion.

Envious and angry men are turned into
hounds, through wrath and envy, that barketh
against his neighbour, and biteth him by wicked
and malicious words, and with wrongful deeds
grieveth them that have not trespassed against
him, harming them both in body and soul, con-
trary to God's bidding.

Some men are misshapen into asses, that are
slow to the service of God, and evil willed to do
any good deed to their neighbour. They are
ready enough to run for worldly profit, and for
earthly honour or for pleasing of earthly man.
But for procuring reward in heaven, for helping
of their own souls, or for the worship of God,
they are soon weary, they have no list thereto ;
and if they must go about any such thing, they
go but slowly and with an unwilling mind.

Some are turned into swine, for they are so
blind in their understandings and so brutish in
their manners that they have no fear of God,
but follow only the lusts and likings of the flesh,
and have no regard to the virtues and honesty
beseeming the noble nature of man, nor to order
themselves according to the- rules of right reason,
nor to refrain the unreasonable motions of sen-
sual nature, but as soon as a fleshly or sensual
motion of sin riseth within them, they are ready
to fall down thereto, and follow it as swine.

Some men are turned into wolves, that live
by ravening ; as bad covetous men do that,
through violence or might, rob or deceive their
neighbours of their worldly goods; and some


The enviot
and at^ry
into hound


TheidU
into asses*


Thelus^
into swine.


7%ecovetai
into wolvei


i68 The Scale of Perfection

are turned into foxes, as false and deceiving
people that live in treachery and guile.

AH these and many more, that live not in
the fear of God, but break His commandments,
transform themselves from the likeness of God,
and make themselves like beasts, yea and worse
than beasts, for they are like to the fiend of hell.
And therefore verily these men that live thus, if
they be not reformed when the hour of death
cometh and their souls part from their bodies,
then shall their eyes be opened, which are now
blinded with sin, and then shall they find and
feel the torment of their wretchedness that they
lived in here. And, forasmuch as the image of
God was not reformed through the Sacrament of
Penance in them neither in faith nor feeling here
in this life, they shall be cast out from the blessed
face of our Creator as cursed, and shall be con-
demned with the devil into the depth of hell, there
to remain for ever. Thus saith S^ John in the
Apoc. xxi. Apocalypse: The fear ful and unbelteverSy the cursed^
murdererSy forntcatorsy sarcererSy tdolaterSy and all
that love and make a Ite, their portion shall be in the
pit that bums with fire and brimstone. If the lovers
of this world would often think of this, how all
this world shall pass away, and draw to an end,
and how that all wicked love shall be most
severely punished, they would in a short time
loathe all w orldly lusts which they now take
most delight in, and would lift up their hearts
to love God, and would carefully seek and labour
how they might be reformed to His likeness ere
they pass hence.


The Second Book 169


CHAPTER Xn

SECTION I

How Lovers of this World in divers ways disenable
themselves from becoming reformed in their Souls

But some now will say thus : I would fain love
God, and be a good man, and forsake the love of
the world if I might ; but I have not grace for it.
If I had the same grace that a good man hath,
I should do as he doth ; but because I have it
not, I cannot, and so I need* seek to do no more,
but am excused.

Unto these men I answer thus : True it is as
they say, that they have no grace, and therefore
they lie still in their sin, and cannot rise out.
But that availeth them not before Grod, for it is
their own fault. They disenable themselves in
divers ways, so that the light of grace cannot
shine into them, nor rest in their hearts. For
some are so froward that they will not have
grace, nor be good men at all; for that they
know well, if they should turn good men, they
must part with the great liking and lust of this^
world, which they have in earthly things; but
that they will not do, for they think they are
so sweet that they will not part with them.
And they must also do works of penance, as
fasting, watching, praying and many other
good works, in chastising of their flesh and in
withdrawing of their fleshly will, and these may
they not do, for they seem so sharp and so
terrible to their thinking, that they shrink t and
loathe to think upon them, and so they cowardly
and wretchedly still dwell in their sins.

* It is to me to wjrte no more. t Ug-g^n.


170 The Scale of Perfection

Some would seem desirous of grace, and
begin to dispose themselves for it, but their will
is exceedingly weak, for as soon as any stirring
of sin Cometh, though it be contrary to the com-
mand of God, they fall presently thereto, for they
are (through former custom of often falling and
assenting to sin) so as it were bound and tied to
sin, that they think it impossible to withstand it;
and so their imagined difficulty of being able to
make such resistance maketh their will weak,
and smiteth it down again.

Some also feel the stirrings of grace, as when
they have bitings of conscience for their evil
living, and motions to leave it, but it seems so
painful and grievous to them that they will not
suffer it nor abide it, but fly from it and forget it
if they can, so that they run to seek comfort and
contentment outwardly, at such times, in fleshly
creatures, to the end that they may not feel such
pangs of conscience within their souls. And
moreover some men are so blind and so brutish
that they think there is no other life but this ; nay,
that there is no soul other than of a beast, and
that the soul of a man dieth with the body as the
soul of a beast ; and therefore they say : Let us
eat and drink and make merry here, for of this
life we are secure, we see no other heaven.

Verily such are some wretches that say thus
in their hearts though they say it not with their
mouths. Of which men the Prophet saith thus :
The fool hath said in his heart there is no God.
Such a fool is every one that loveth or liveth
in sin, and chooseth the love of the world as the
rest of his soul ; he saith there is no Grod, not
with his mouth, for he will speak of Him some-
times, when the world goes well with him, as it
were in reverence of Him, saying : Blessed be


The Second Book 171

God. And sometimes in despite, when he is

angry against God or his neighbour and swear-

eth by his blessed body or any of his members.

But he saith in his thoughts that there is no

God, and that is because he imagineth that God

seeth not his sin, or that He will not punish it so

severely as the Scripture saith ; or that He will

forgive him his sin though He see it ; or else that

there shall no Christian be damned, do he never

so ill. Or else, if he fasts the fasts of our Lady,

or say every day so many prayers, or hear every

day two or three Masses, or do some bodily

work, as it were for the honour of God, he

thinketh he shall never go to hell, do he never so

much sin, and continue in it. This man saith in

his heart that there is no God, but is unwise,

as the Prophet saith, for he shall one day find

and feel in torments that He is a God whom

he forgot and set at nought; but set by the

wealth of the world, as the Prophet saith : Pain Jer. xxvHL

only will give understanding. For he that know-

eth not this here, nor will know it, shall know it

well when he is in torments.

SECTION n

A littk Counsel how Lovers of this World should do»
if they will be reformed in their Souls before their
departure hence

These men, though they know well that they
are out of grace, and in deadly sin, they have
no care nor sorrow nor thought therefore, but give
themselves to sensual mirth and worldly solace
as much as they can. And the farther they
be from grace the more mirth they make, and
perchance some of them hold themselves well
apaid that they have no grace, that they may


172 The Scale of Perfection

as it were the more fiilly and fireely follow the
liking of fleshly lusts as though Crod were
asleep and did not see them. And this is one
of the greatest faults that can be. And thus,
by their own per\'erseness, they stop the light
of grace from their own soul, that it may not
rest therein. The which grace, for its part, is
most willing and ready to shine to all creatures,
and enter into the souls of men, that will but
be willing to receive it, even as the sun shineth
upon all creatures bodily, where it is not
hindered. Thus saith *?/ John in the Crospel:
Si/Qhnl The light shineth in darkness^ and the darkness
comprekendeth it not. That is, these blind hearts
receive not the gracious light, nor have the bene-
fit of it, but even as a blind man is becompassed
with the light of the sun when he standeth in
it, and yet seeth it not, nor receiveth any benefit
of it, as for going, or walking, or working by
it. Even so, spiritually, a soul blinded with
deadly sin is all encompassed with this spiritual
light, and yet he is never the better, for he is
blinded, and will not see nor know his blindness,
and this is one of the greatest impediments of
grace, that a man so wretched will not, by reason
of his pride, be aknown of his blindness ; or else,
if he know it, careth not for it, but maketh
merry, as if he were very secure and safe.

Therefore, unto all these men that are thus
blinded and bound with the love of this world,
and are fallen from the natural fairness of man,
and are become misshapen, I say and counsel
that they would think on their souls, and dis-
pose themselves for grace as much as they
can ; which they may do on this wise, if they
will, when they find themselves out of a state
of grace, and overlaid with deadly sin, let them


The Second Book 173

first think with themselves what a miserable
and dangerous thing it is to be out of the state
of grace and separated from God ; for there
is nothing that holdeth them from falling into
the pit of hell presently, save the bare single
thread of this bodily life, whereby they hang ;
and what may more easily be broken in two
than a single thread ? For, were the breath
stopped in their body (and that may easily hap-
pen) their soul would presently pass out, and
would instantly be in hell, there to remain ever-
lastingly. And if they would but thus think
with themselves for some time, they would shake
and. tremble at the righteous judgements of God
and at His severe punishing of sins, and they
would begin to grieve and sorrow for their sins,
and for their want of God's grace and favour,
and then would they cry and pray that they
might have grace, and if they did thus, then
would grace enter in and put out darkness and
hardness of heart and weakness of their will,
and give them might and strength to forsake
the false love of this world, so far at least
as it is deadly sin; for there is no soul so far
from God through wilfulness of deadly sin
(I except none that liveth in this body of sin)
that may not, through grace, become righteous,
and be restored to cleanness of living, if he will
but bow and submit his will to God with hu-
mility, for to amend his life, and heartily ask
grace and forgiveness of Him, and excuse our
Lord and wholly accuse himself. For holy
Writ saith : / will noty saith the Lordy the death
of a sinner y but rather that he be converted and live^ RMee, xrxliL
for our Lord's will is that the most froward man
that liveth, and who through sin is misshapen
in soul, if he will but change his will and ask
grace, may be reformed to Hi$ likeness.


174 The Scale of Perfection


PART I-CHAPTER I

Of Reforming in Faith and Feeling also—That this
Reforming cannot be suddenly gotten^ but in
length of Time» by Grace^ and much Spiritual
and Corporal Industry

The reformingf in Faith, which I have before
treated of, may easily be gotten. But after this
Cometh reforming* in Faith and Feeling, which
will not easily be gotten, but by much pains and
industry. For reforming in Faith is common to
all chosen souls, though they be in the lowest
degree of charity. But reforming in Feeling is
only in those souls that are coming to the state
of perfection, and that cannot be attained unto
suddenly, but after great plenty of grace, and
much and long spiritual exercising, and thereby
shall a man attain thereto, and that will be after
that he is first healed of his spiritual sickness,
and after that all bitter passions and fleshly lusts
and other old feelings are burnt out of the heart
by the fire of desire ; and new gracious feelings
are brought in with burning love and spiritual
light. Then doth the soul draw very near to
perfection, and to reforming in feeling.

And here it is no otherwise then, as when
a man through bodily sickness is brought near to
death, though he receive a medicine, by the
which he is restored, and is freed from the danger •
of death, yet cannot he, therefore, presently rise
up, and go to work as a sound man may; for the
feebleness of his body keeps him down, so that
he must rest, and follow the use of medicines,
and use a good diet, by measure, according to
the advice of a physician, till he hath ftiUy
recovered his health. Right so in this spiritual


The Second Book 175

business, he who through deadly sin is brought
to a spiritual death, though through the medi-
cine of the Sacrament of Penance he be restored
to life, so that he shall not be damned, neverthe-
less he is not presently whole, and cured of all
his passions and of all his fleshly desires, nor is apt
for contemplation; but he must abide a great
while, and take good heed to himself and order
himself so, that he may recover perfect health of
soul ; for he shall linger a great while, ere he be
fully whole. Yet if he take medicines, by the
coiinsel of a good spiritual Physician, and use
them in time with measure and discretion, he
shall much the sooner be restored to his spiritual
strength, and come to reforming in feeling. For
reforming in Faith is the lowest state of all
chosen souls, for beneath that they cannot well be.
But reforming in feeling is the highest state
in this life that the soul can come to. But from
the lowest to the highest a soul cannot suddenly
start, no more than a man that would climb upon
a ladder that is high, and setteth his foot on the
lowest stave, can at the next step get up to the
highest, but must go by degrees from one to an-
other till he come to the highest.

Even so it is spiritually, no man becometh sud-
denly supreme or high in grace, but through long
exercise and cunning* working of the soul may
he come thereto, namely when He (in whom all
grace lieth) helpeth and teacheth a wretched soul,
for without His special help and inward teaching
can no soul arrive thereto.

•Sly,


176 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER n

SECTION I

The Gtuses why so few Souls in compafison of the
Multitude of others^ come to thb RidEprmiflfif that
is both in Faith and Feeling

But now thou wilt say, Since our Lord is so
courteous of His goodness, and so free of His
gracious gifts, it is a wonder that so few souls (as
it seems) in comparison of the multitude of others
come to this reforming in feeling. It would seem
that either He is unwilling, but that is not so ; or
that He hath no regard of His creatures, who by-
receiving of Faith are become His servants.
Cause I. Unto this I answer that one occasion is this :
Many that are reformed in Faith, set not their
hearts to profit in grace, nor to seek a higher
estate of good living, through much industry
in praying and thinking, and other bodily and
spiritual exercises ; but think it enough for them
to keep themselves from deadly sins, and to stand
still in the plight they are in. For they say it is
enough for them to be saved, and have the least
degree in Heaven, they will covet no more.

Thus perchance, do some souls, who are in the
state of grace, and lead an active life in the world,
say or think ; and it is no wonder, for they are so
busied with worldly things that are needfiil to be
done that they cannot fully set their hearts to
profit in spiritual exercises. But nevertheless,
such proceeding is perilous to them, for they fall
daily, and are now up, and now down, and can-
not come to the stability of good living, yet are
they somewhat excusable, by reason of their con-
dition of life. But other men and women who


The Second Book 177

are free from worldly businesses if they will,
and may have their needful sustenance with-
out much solicitude about it, especially reli-
gious men and women, who have bound them-
selves by entering into religion to the state of
perfection, and other men also in secular estate
that have good abilities and understanding, and
may (if they will dispose themselves) come to
much grace; these men are more to blame.
These persons, I say, are more to blame, for they
stand still, as idle, and will not profit in grace,
nor in fruther seeking to come to the love and
knowledge of God.

For verily it is perilous for a soul to be reform- it is danger-
ed only in Faith, and will not seek to make any ousiobe con-
further progress, nor give himself diligently to *^^^gg
spiritual exercises, for so he may easily lose that of grace,
he hath,and fall again into deadly sin. For a soul
cannot stand still always in one state, for it is either*
profiting in grace, or decaying through sin. For
it fareth with him, as it doth with a man that were
drawn out of a pit, and when he is up, would go
no ftirther than the pit's brink, surely he were a
very fool, for a little puff of wind, or an imwary
moving of himself, might soon cast him down
again, and that worse than he was before. But if
he fly as far as he can from the brink and go for-
ward, on fiirther ground ; then, though there come
a great storm, he is the more secure from falling
into the pit. Right so is it in this spiritual busi-
ness ; he that is drawn out of the pit of sin through
reforming of Faith, and when he is out of deadly
sin thinketh himself secure enough, and there-
fore will not profit, but remaineth still at the
pit's brink, as near as he may, he is not wise;
for upon the least temptation of the enemy, or of
bis flesh, he falleth into sin again. But if he flee
' • 12


178 The Scale of Perfection

from the pit, that is, if he set his heart fully to
come to more grace, and to use his best indus-
try to come thereto, and give himself heartily to
prayer, meditating and other good works, though
great temptations rise against him, he falleth not
easily to deadly sin again.

And verily it is a wonder to me, that seeing
grace is so good and so profitable, why a man,
when he hath but a little thereof, yea so little that
he can scarce have less, should say : Ho, I will
have no more of this, for I have enough. When
yet I see a worldly man, though he have of
worldly goods much more than he needeth, yet
will he never say : Ho, I have enough, I will have
no more of this ; but will covet more and more,
and bestir all his wits and might, and will never
set a stint to his covetousness to get more.
Much more, then, should a chosen soul covet
spiritual good, which is everlasting, and which
maketh a soul blessed, and never should cease
from coveting, if he did well, to get what he
^wight get. For he that most coveteth, most
shall have ; and surely if he do thus, he shall pro-
fit and grow in grace greatly.
Cause 2. Another cause of such fewness of souls re-
formed in feeling is this: Some men that are
reformed in Faith, in the beginning of their turn-
ing to God, set themselves in a certain manner
of working, whether it be spiritual or corporal,
and think ever to hold on in that manner of
working, and not to change it for any other that
cometh through grace, though it were better,
imagining the first course to be best for them
to hold on in, and therefore they rest therein,
and through custom so bind themselves thereto
that when they have fulfilled it they find them-
selves wonderfully well satisfied, for they imagine


The Second Book


179


It is not good
to tie our'
selves to any


they have done a great good thing therein for
God. And if it chance that they be at any time
hindered from their said custom, though it be by
a just occasion, they are sad and troubled in con-
science, as if they had done a great deadly sin.

These men hinder themselves somewhat from
feeling of more grace, for they set their perfection
in a corporal work, and so they make an end in ^^toimiryde.
the midst of the way, where no end is. For those votions «»-
corporal or sensible customs, which men use in alterably .
their beginnings, are good, but they are but
means and ways to lead a soul forward to per-
fection.

And therefore he that setteth his perfection in
any bodily or spiritual exercise, which he feeleth
in the beginning of his turning to God, and will
seek no further, but ever rest therein, he hinder-
eth himself greatly. For it is but a silly way ot
trading, wherein an apprentice is ever in the
same degree of skill, and can do as much in it
on the first day as he can thirty years after. Or
else, if the trade be good and subtle, he is but
of a dull wit, or an evil will that profiteth not
therein.

Now it is certain, that of all crafts the service
of God is most sovereign and most subtle, and
the highest and hardest to come to perfection in
it, and also the most profitable and gainful to
them that faithfully prosecute it; and therefore
it seemeth that the apprentices to it that are ever
alike in learning are either dull witted or evil
willed.

I do not reprove those customs that men use

in their beginnings, whether they be corporal or

spiritual, but say that they be fiiU good and

profitable* for them to use. But I would that

*SpeedfiiL


i8o The Scale of Perfection

they should hold them only as a way and an
entry towards spiritual feeling, and that they use
them as convenient means till better come ; and
that while they use them they covet after better.
And then if better come that are more spiritual,
and more drawing in of the thoughts from flesh*
liness and sensuality, and vain imaginations, if
that same better thing should be hindered by
cleaving still to their former customs, that then
they leave such their custom (when it may be left
without scandal or harm* to others) and follow
that which they feel. But if neither hinder the
other, that then they use both if they may. I
mean not of leaving customs necessary through
bond of law, or of rule, or of penance, but
of others voluntarily undertaken. Thus saith
A. Ixxxiii. the Prophet in the Psalms : Surely the lawgiver
will give His blessings they shall go from strength
to strength^ and the God of Gods shall be seen in
Sion. That is, our Saviour will give His grace
to chosen souls, calling them from sin and mak-
ing them righteous through good works to His
likeness ; through which grace they shall profit
and grow from virtue to virtue till they come to
Siony that is, till they come to contemplation in
which they shall see the Grod of gods, that is,
they shall see well that there is but one Grod.

* Disease.


The Second Book i8i


SEcnoN n

How that without great Coti)oraI and Spiritual In^
dustry^ and without mucn Grace and Humility^
Souls cannot come to reforming in Feeling nor
keep themselves therein after they come thereto

But now thou wilt say, since it is so, that re-
forming in Faith only is so low, and so perilous
to rest in, for fear of falling again ; and reform-
ing in Feeling is so high, and so secure for them
that can arrive thereto, therefore covetest thou to
know what kind of exercises and industries were
most convenient to be used for it, by the which
thou mayest profit and come thereto ; or whether
there be any one certain exercise or special work
by which a man may come to that grace and
that reforming in feeling.

To this I answer thus: Thou knowest well Theymusi
that what man or woman that will dispose him- ^^^J^^
self to come to cleanness of heart and to feeling
of grace, it behoveth him to use much industry
and great striving both in will and in deeds con-
tinually against the wicked stirrings of all chief
sins. Not only against pride or envy, but against
all other, with all the kinds that come out of
them, as I have said before in the First Book.
For why ? Passions and fleshly desires hinder
the cleanness of heart and peace of conscience.
And it behoveth him also to labour to get all
virtues, not only chastity and temperance, but
also patience and mildness, charity and humility,
and all the other. And this cannot be done by
one manner of work, but by divers works, ac-
cording to the divers and sundry dispositions of
men, as now praying, now meditating, now work-


i82 The Scale of Perfection

ing some good works, now proving- and exercising
tlvMnselves in divers ways, in hunger, in thirst, in
cold, in suffering of shame and despite, if need
be, and bodily pains and labours, for the love of
virtue and justice. This thou knowest full well,
for this thou readest in every book that treateth
of good life ; thus saith every man that would
stir up men's souls to the love of Grod. And so
it appeareth that there is no one special exer-
cise, no certain work by which only a soul can
come to that grace, but principally through the
grace of our Lord Jesus, and by many and great
deeds, in all that he is able to do, and yet all is
little enough.

And one reason why there must be such pains-
takiiiir is this : That since our Lord Jesus Him-
self is the special master and teacher of this art,
and the special Physician of spiritual sicknesses ;
for without Him all is nought; it is therefore
reasonable, that as He teacheth and stirreth,
so a man should follow and work. But he is
a simple master that cannot teach his scholar
whilst he is learning but only one lesson, and
he is an unskilful physician, that by one medi-
cine would heal all sores. Therefore our Lord
Jesus, that is so wise and so good, to show His
wisdom and goodness teacheth divers lessons
to His scholars, after that they profit in their
learning, and giveth to divers souls divers and
several medicines according to the nature of
their sickness.

Another reason also is this : If there were
one certain work by which a soul might come
to the perfect love of God, then might a man
fancy that he might come thereto by his own
endeavours, and through his own travail only;
as a merchant cometh to his riches only by his


The Second Book 183

own industry and travail. But it is not so in
this spiritual business, concerning the love of ^
God; for he that will serve God wisely and
come to the pe-fect love of God, he will covet
to have none other reward but Him\only. But
then for to have him may no creature deserve
by his own travail or industry ; for though a man
could labour both corporally and spiritually as
much as could all the creatures that ever have
been, yet could he not, for all that, only by his
own working deserve to have God for his reward ;
for He is the sovereign bliss and endless good-
ness, and surpasseth without comparison all men's
deserts ; and therefore He cannot be gotten by
any man's special working, as a temporal re-
ward may, for He is free and giveth to whom
He will, and when He will, neither for this, nor
for that, nor in this time, nor after that time.
For though a soul work all that he can and may
all his lifetime, yet shall he never have the per-
fect love of Jesus till our Lord will freely give it.

Nevertheless, on the other side, I say that Neither gr^
God useth not to give such grace unless a man 'without wo
do work and travail all that he can and may; ^i^^if^^
yea, till it seem to him that he can work no grace.
more, or else be in full will and desire to do
more if he could. And so it seemeth, that
neither grace only, without the full working of
the soul so far as it can, nor the man's work-
ing alone, without grace, bringeth the soul to
the reforming in feeling (the which reforming con-
sisteth in perfect love and charity). But that
both joined together, that is grace joined to
working, bringeth into a soul the blessed feel-
ing of perfect love. The which grace cannot
rest fully, but only on humble souls that be full
of the fear of God.


i84 The Scale of Perfection

Therefore I may affirm that he that hath not
humility, nor doth use his industry and labour,
cannot come to this reforming in feeling*. And
he hath not full humility, that understandeth
and perceiveth not himself truly as he is. As
thus: He that doth all the good deeds that he
can, as fasting, watching, wearing hair-cloth,
and all other sufferings of bodily penance, or
doth all the outward works of mercy to his
neighbour, or else internal works, as praying,
weeping, sighing, meditating, if he always rest
in them, and lean so much on them, and so
greatly regardeth them in his own sight and
esteem that he presumeth on his own deserts,
and thinketh himself ever rich and good, holy
and virtuous, verily as long as he feeleth him-
self thus, he is not humble enough. No ; though
he say or think that all that he doth is of God's
gift, and not of himself, he is not yet humble
enough; for he doth not as yet make himself
naked of all his good deeds, nor truly poor in
spirit, nor feels himself to be nothing, as indeed
he is. And verily, till a soul through grace is
come sensibly to annihilate herself and strip her-
self of all the good deeds that she doth, through
the sight and beholding of the truth of Jesus, she
is not perfectly humble ; for what is humility but
truth ? Verily nothing else. And therefore he
that through grace can see Jesus, how that He
doth all, and himself doth just nothing, but
suffereth Jesus to work in him what He pleaseth,
he is humble. But this is very hard, and as it
were impossible, and unreasonable (to a man
that worketh all by human reason, and seeth
no further) for to do many good deeds, and then
to attribute all to Jesus and set himself at nought.
But whoso can have a spiritual sight of the truth.


The Second Book 185

he shall think it full true and full reasonable to
do so. And verily he that hath this sight shall
do never the less, but shall be stirred up to tra-
vail corporally and spiritually, much the more,
and with a better will. And this may be one
cause why some men peradventure labour and
travail,* and pine their wretched bodies with out-
rageous penance all their lifetime, and are ever
saying prayers and psalms and many beads, and
yet cannot come to the spiritual feeling of the
love of God, as it seems some do in short time,
with less pains, for they have not that humility
I spake of.

Also on the other side I say : He that useth
not his industry, but thinketh thus with himself,
to what end should I take pains ? Why should
I pray, or meditate, or watch, or fast, or do any
other bodily penance to attain to such grace, see-
ing it cannot be gotten or had but only by the
free gift of Jesus ? Therefore I will continue in
my sensuality as I am, and do even nothing of
any such corporal or spiritual works ; but expect
till He give it, for if He be pleased to give it. He
asketh no working of me, how much soever or
how little I do, I shall have it, and if He be
pleased not to give it, labour I never so hard,
I shall get it never the sooner. He that saith
thus shall never come to this reforming, for he
draweth himself wilfully to idleness of the flesh,
and disenableth himself for the receiving of the
gift of grace, inasmuch as he layeth aside and
putteth from him both inward working, which
consisteth in a lasting desire and longing after
Jesus, and outward working, by exercising his
body in outward deeds, so that he shall never
receive the said grace.

* Swink and sweat.


i86


The Scale of Perfection


Therefore I say that he that hath not true
humility, nor is very serious and diligent, either
only in internal exercises and continual desire
towards God by prayer, and devout affections
and thoughts of Him, or else both inward and
outward, he cannot come to this spiritual form-
ing of His image.


The shortest
and readiest


CHAPTER m

An Entry or good Beginning of a Spiritual Journey^
showing how a Soul should behave herself in
intending and working that will come to this
Reforming^ by example of a Pilgrim going to
Jerusalem
Nevertheless, for that thou covetest to know
. some manner of working by which thou mayest
hereto. ^ ^^^ ^^^ sooner attain to this reforming, I shall show
thee, as well as I can, the shortest and readiest
help that I know in this working. And how that
may be I shall tell thee by an example of a good
pilgrim in this wise. There was a man that
would go to Jerusalem, and because he knew not
the way he came to another man^ who he be-
lieved knew the way thither better, and asked
him whether he might come to that city, who
answered that he could not come thither with-
out great pains and travail, for the way is long
and perilous, and full of great thieves and robbers
and many other hindrances there be that befall
a man in his going, and also there be many
several ways as it seemeth leading thitherward.
And many men travelling thitherward are often-
times killed or robbed, and so may not come to
that place which they desire. Nevertheless, there
is one way, the which whosoever taketh and hold-
eth to it, I will imdertake (saith he) he shall come


The Second Book 187

to that city of Jerusaleniy and shall never lose his
life, nor be slain, nor die by default, though he
should oft be robbed and well beaten, and suffer
much pain in the going, yet his life shall be safe.
Then said the pilgrim, so I may have my life
saved, and come to the place that I covet, I care
not what mischief I suffer in going. And there-
fore, tell and advise me what you think neces-
sary, and I promise you on a certainty that I will
follow your counsel. That other man answered
and said thus : Lo, I set thee in the right way ;
this is the way, and see that thou bear in mind
that which I tell thee. Whatsoever thou seest,
hearest, or feelest, that would stay or hinder thee
in the way, stick not at it, willingly consent not
to it, abide not with it, behold it not, like it not,
fear it not, but still go forward holding on thy
way, and ever think and say with thyself that
thou fain wouldst be at Jerusalem^ for that thou
covetest and that thou desirest ; and nought else
but that, and if men rob thee and spoil thee, beat
thee, scorn thee, despise thee, do not thou strive
against such their doings, if thou mean to have
thy life safe, but be content with the harm thou
receivest, and hold on thy way, as if all that were
nothing, lest thou receive more harm. Also if
men would seek to stay thee by telling tales, and
feed thee with lies or conceits to draw thee to
merriment, or to forsake or prolong thy pilgrim-
age, give them a deaf ear and answer them not
again, and say naught else but that thou wouldst
fain be at Jerusalem, And if men proffer thee
gifts, and would make thee rich with worldly
goods, listen not to them, but think ever on
Jerusalem. And if thou wilt hold this course
and do that which I have said, I will under-
take for thy life, that thou shalt not be slain,


i88 The Scale of Perfcctfon

but that thou shalt come to that place that thou
desirest.

Now to apply this spiritually to our purpose :
Jerusalem is, as much as to say, a sight of peace;
and betokeneth contemplation in perfect love of
God ; for contemplation is nothing else but a sight
of God, which is very peace. Then if thou covet
to come to this blessed sight of very peace, and
be a true pilgrim towards yerusalem^ though it
be so that I was never there, nevertheless^ as far
forth as I can^ I shall set thee in the way to-
wards it.

The beginning of the high way, in which thou
shalt go, is reforming in Faith, groimded humbly
on the faith and on the laws of holy Church as
I have said before; for trust assuredly, though
you have sinned heretofore, if you be now re-
formed by the Sacrament of Penance, after the
law of holy Church, that thou art in the right
way. Now then, since thou art in the safe way,
if thou wilt speed in thy going and make a good
journey, it behoveth thee to hold these two things
often in thy mind : Humility and Love; and often
say to thyself, / am nothings I have nothings I covet
nothings but one. Thou shalt have the meaning
of these words in thine intent, and in the habit of
thy soul perpetually, though thou have them not
always expressly in thy thought (for that is not
necessary). Humility saith, I am nothings I have
nothing; Love saith, I covet nothings but onCy and
that is Jesus. These two stirrings well fastened,
with the minding of Jesus, make good music in
the harp of the soul, when they be cunningly
struck upon with the finger of reason; for the
lower thou smitest upon the one, the higher
soundeth the other. The less thou feelest that
thou art, or that thou hast of thyself, through


The Second Book 189

Humility, the more thou covetest for to have
of Jesus, through desire of love. I mean not
only that Humility which a soul feeleth by the
sight and sense of his own sin, for frailness and
wretchedness of this life, or of the wretchedness
of his neighbour; for though this kind of Hu-
mility be true and wholesome, nevertheless it
is boisterous and fleshly in comparison of that
other, not so clean, nor soft, nor lovely. I mean
that Hxmiility which a soul feeleth through grace,
in the sight and beholding of the endless being,
and the wonderful goodness of Jesus, and if thou
canst not see it with thy spiritual eye, yet that
thou believe it ; for through this sight of his
being, either in full faith or in feeling, thou
shalt esteem thyself not only the most wretched
creature that is, but also as nothing in the sub-
stance of thy soul, though thou hadst never done
any sin. And this is lovely Humility ; for in
respect of Jesus (who is truly all) thou art just
nothing, and so must thou think that thou hast
just nothing, but art as a vessel that standeth
ever empty, and as if nothing were therein, as
of itself ; for do thou never so many good deeds
outward or inward, until thou have and feel that
thou hast the love of Jesus, thou hast just no-
thing. For with that precious liquor only may
thy soul be filled, and with none other. And
forasmuch as that thing alone is so precious and
noble, therefore whatever else thou hast, or what
thou dost, hold and esteem it as nothing as to
rest in, without the sight and the love of Jesus.
Cast it all behind thee, and forget it, that thou
mayest have this, which is the best of all. Just
as a true pilgrim, going towards Jerusalem^
leaveth behind him house and land, wife and
children, and maketh himself poor and bare


iQO The Scale of Perfection

from all things that he hath, that he may go
lightly without letting. Right so, if thou wilt
be a spiritual pilgrim, thou shalt strip thyself
naked of all that thou hast, that are either good
deeds or bad, and cast them all behind thee, that
thou be so poor in thy own feeling that there be
nothing of thy own working that thou wilt jest-
ingly lean on ; but ever desiring more grace and
love, and ever seeking the spiritual presence of
Jesus. And if thou dost thus, then shalt thou
resolve in thy heart ftdly and wholly that thou
wilt be at Jerusalem^ and at no other place but
there; that is, thou shalt purpose in thy heart
wholly and fully that thou wilt nothing have but
the love of Jesus and the spiritual sight of Him
in such manner as He shall please to show Him-
self; for to that end only art thou made and re-
deemed, and He it is that is thy beginning and
thy end, thy joy and thy bliss. And therefore
whatsoever thou hast, be thou never so rich in
other deeds spiritual or corporal (unless thou
have this love that I speak of, and know and
feel that thou hast it) hold and esteem that thou
hast right nothing. Imprint this well in the de-
sire of thy soul, and cleave fast thereto, and it
shall save thee from all perils in thy going, that
thou shalt never perish, and it shall save thee
from the thieves and robbers which I call un-
clean spirits, that though they spoil thee and
beat thee by divers temptations, thy life shall
ever be safe; and in brief, if thou keep it, as
I have said, thou shalt escape all perils and
mischiefs, and come to the city of Jerusalem in
a short time.

Now then, since thou art in the way, and
knowest the name of the place, and whither
thou tendest, begin therefore to go thy journey.


The Second Book 191

Thy setting forth is naught else but spiritual
working, and bodily also, when there is need,
which thou shalt use according to discretion
in this wise. What work soever it is that thou
shalt do (according to thy degree, and the estate
thou art in), corporally or spiritually, if it help
and further this gracious desire that thou hast
to love Jesus, and make it more whole, more
easy, and more mighty to all virtues and to all
goodness, that work I hold the best, be it preach-
ing, be it meditating, reading, or working ; and as
long as that work strengtheneth most thy heart
and thy will to the love of Jesus, and draweth
thy affections and thy thoughts farthest off from
worldly vanities, it is good to use it ; and if so be
that through use the savour or good taste thereof
groweth less, and thou thinkest of some other
work that savoureth more, and thou feelest
more grace in that other, take the other, and
leave that. For though thy desire and the
yearning of thy heart to Jesus ought ever to
be unchangeable, nevertheless thy spiritual
works that thou art to use, in praying or
thinking, for the feeding and nourishing thy
desire, may be divers, and may well be changed,
after that thou feelest thyself disposed through
grace severally to apply thy heart to them; for
it fareth with works and this desire as it doth
with sticks and a fire, for the more sticks are
laid to the fire, the greater is the fire. Right so,
the more several spiritual works that a man hath
in his design, to keep entire this desire, the
mightier and more burning shall his desire be
to God.

And therefore consider wisely what work thou
canst best do, and which most helpeth to keep
whole this desire of Jesus (if so be thou be free.


192 The Scak of Perfection

and not bound by any obligation), and that do.
Bind not thyself to voluntary customs unchange-
ably, which may hinder the liberty of thy heart
to correspond or answer the motion or invitation
of Jesus, if His grace at any time should specially
visit thee. And I shall tell thee what customs
are ever good and necessary to be kept, that is,
such as consist in the getting of virtues, and in
hindering or resisting of sin, such customs
should never be left ; for thou shouldst ever be
humble, patient, sober and chaste, if thou do as
thou shouldst. But the customs of other things,
if they hinder a better good, are good to be laid
aside, giving place to that which would be better
for us. As thus, if a man have a custom to say
so many beads or prayers, or to meditate of such
or such a subject, for so long a time, or to watch,
or kneel thus long, or any other such bodily
deed, these customs are to be left sometimes
when reasonable cause requireth, or when more
grace cometh otherwise, or in some other exercise.


CHAPTER IV

Of certain Tem|>tatioas and Lettings wbich Souls feel
from their Spiritual Enemies, in their Ss>iritual
knowing and going towards Jerusalem^ and the
Remedies against them

Now that thou art in the way, and knowest how
thou shouldst go, beware of thy enemies, that
will be busy to let thee if they can. For their
intent is to put out of thy heart that ^desire,
and that longing that thou hast to the love of
Jesus, and to drive thee home again to the love
of worldly vanities ; for that nothing grieveth
them so much as this desire. These enemies


The Second Book


193


are principally fleshly desires, and vain fears,
which rise out of thy heart, through the corrup-
tion of thy fleshly nature, and would hinder thy
desire of the love of God, that they may fully
and peaceably possess thy heart ; these are thy
nearest enemies. Also other enemies there are,
as unclean spirits, which are busy with slights
and wiles to deceive thee. But one remedy hast
thou, which I mentioned before, and that is, that
whatsoever they say, believe them not ; but hold
on thy way, and only desire the love of Jesus.
Answer them ever on this wise : / am nothings
I have nothings I covet nothing only the love of our
Lord Jesus.

If thy enemies, by suggestions in thy soul, say The first
unto thee that thou hast not made thy Confession temptatior
aright, or that there is some old former sin hid in
thy heart that thou knowest not, nor never madest
thy Confession aright of it, and therefore thou
must turn home again, and leave oflF thy desire,
and go confess thyself better ; believe not this
saying, for it is false, for thou art rightly con-
fessed, and so do thou surely hope and trust;
and that thou art in the right way, and that
thou needest no further to ransack thy soul for
confession of that which is past ; hold on thy
way, and think only on Jerusalem.

Also, if they say that thou art not worthy to Theseamc
have the love of God, and therefore why shouldst i^^P^f^^ion
thou covet that which thou wilt not be able to
attain, nor art not worthy of ; believe them not
but go on, and say thus : Not because I am worthy ^
but because I am unworthy y therefore would I love
God; for if I had His love, that would make me
worthy ; and since I was created to that endy though
I should never have it, yet will I covet ity and there--
fare will I pray and think that I may get it. And

13


194 The Scale of Perfection

then if thy enemies see that thou beginnest to
wax bold, and well-willed to thy work, they will
begin to be afraid of thee, yet will they not
cease to seek to stay and hinder thee as much
as they can, as long as thou art going in the
way, what with affrighting and threatening thee
on one side, and what with flattering and vain
pleasing thee on the other side, to make thee
break thy purpose and turn home again. And
The third they will say thus: 1/ thou hold on thus thy
temptation, j^^^^ ^ JesuSy travailing SO fervently as thou now
beginnesty thou wilt fall tnto bodily sickness^ or thou
wilt craze thy head and fall into fancies or melan-
choly y as thou seest some do ; or thou wilt fall into
poverty y or bodily mischief y and none will be able to
help theey or thou wilt fall into secret temptations
and illusions of the devily that thou shall not be
able to help thyself; for it is very dangerous for any
man to give himself over to the love of Gody and
leave all the worlds and covet nothing but only the love
of Him, For that m^ny perils may fall out that a
man knows not of and therefore turn home agaifty
and leave off this desirCy for thou shall never bring
it to pasSy and do as other worldly men do.

Thus will thy enemies say, but believe them
not, but hold on thy desire, and say naught else ;
but that thou wouldst have Jesus, and be at
Jerusalem ; and if they perceive that thy will is
so strong, that thou wilt not give over, neither
for fear of sin, nor of sickness, for fancies nor for
frenzies, for doubts nor for dreads of spiritual
temptations, for mischiefs nor for poverty, for
life nor for death, but ever seekest and longest
after one thing, and nothing else but that one
thing, and turnest a deaf ear to them, as though
thou heardest them not, and boldest thee on stiffly
and constantly in tby course of prayer, and in thy


The Second Bcx>k


195


Other spiritual exercises without stinting, but yet
with discretion, after the counsel and directions
of thy Superior, or of thy ghostly Father, then
begin they to be wroth, and to come a little
nearer to thee. Then they begin to rob thee y,. . .,
and beat thee, and do thee all the shame that temptation.
they can, and that is, when they make that all
the deeds that thou doest, be they never so well
done, are judged by others to be evil, and turned
into the worse part. And whatsoever thou
wouldst do, or have done for the help or com-
fort of thy body or soul, it shall be letted or
hindered by other men, so that thou shalt be
put from thy will in everything which thou
reasonably desirest. And all this they do, that
thou mayest be stirred up to anger, or melan-
choly, or evil will against thy neighbour. But
against all these diseases, and all other that
thou mayest feel, use this remedy. Take Jesus
into thy mind, and trouble not thyself with them,
nor be angry ; tarry not with them, but think on
thy lesson : That thou art nothings that thou hast
nothings that thou canst nothing lose of earthly
goodsy that thou covetest nothing hut the love of
Jesus ; and hold on thy way, with thy exercises,
to Jerusalem. And though thou be sometimes
tarried and letted in thy way, through thy frailty,
with such inconveniences as befall thy bodily life,
through evil will of man, or malice of the enemy ;
as soon as thou canst, come again to thyself, leave
off the thinking of thy inconveniences, and go on
with thy exercise. Abide not long upon the
thinking of those thy defects for fear of thy
enemies.

And after this, when they see that thou art so The fifth
well willed, that thou art nol angry, nor heavy, ^''«/^«'«''»'
nor wroth, nor much moved against any creature


196 The Scale of PerfectioQ

for aught that they can do or say ag'ainst thee^
but settest thy heart fiilly to suffer all that may
fall, ease or unease, praise or dispraise, and
that thou dost esteem or regard notMng so that
thou mayest keep thy thought and thy desire
whole to the love of God, then are they much
abashed. But then will they set upon thee with
flattery and vain pleasing; and that is when
they set before thee all thy good deeds and
virtues, and tell thee that all men praise thee
and speak well of thy holiness, and how all
men love thee and worship thee for thy holy
living. Thus will thy enemies do, that thou
mayest believe them, and take delight in this
vain joy, and rest therein. But if thou do well
thou shailt esteem all such jangling^ and sug-
gestions to be false flatterings of thy enemy,
that proffereth thee to drink venom tempered
with honey, and therefore refuse it, and say
thou wilt have none of ity but thou wouldst he at
Jerusalem.

Such lettings shalt thou feel, or the like, what
from thy flesh, and what from the world, and
what of the fiend, more than I can rehearse.
Now for as long as a man suffiereth his thoughts
willingly to run about the world in beholding
of sundry things, he perceiveth few lettings.
But as soon as he draweth all his thoughts and
his yearnings to one thing only, to have it, to
know it, and to love it, which is Jesus; then
shall he feel many painful lettings ; for whatso-
ever thing he feeleth which is not that which
he coveteth, that same thing is a letting to
him. Therefore I have set down some of them
for examples in particular. And moreover in
general, I shall now tell thee that whatsoever
stirring thou feelest of the flesh, or of the fiend,


The Second Book X97

either pleasant or painful, bitter or sweet, lovely
or dreadful, gladsome or sorrowful, that would
draw down thy thoughts or thy desires from the
love of Jesus to worldly vanities, and would
hinder or cool thy spiritual covetousness that
thou hast to the love of Him, and would have
thy heart to be occupied with that stirring and
rest upon it, set it at naught, entertain it not
willingly, tarry not therewith too long. But
if it be any worldly thing that is necessary
to be done, for thyself or thy neighbour, dis-
patch it, and quit thee soon of it, and bring it
to an end that it hang not on thy heart. But
if it be another thing that may be spared and
is not very needful, or else concerns thee not,
heed it not, jangle or dally not therewith, nor
trouble or vex thyself about it, fear it not, like
it not, but cast it out of thy heart speedily, and
say thus : / am nothings 1 have nothings I seek
nor covet nothing hut the love of Jesus. Fasten
thy thoughts to this desire and strengthen it,
and maintain it by prayer and other spiritual
exercises that thou forget it not, and it shall
lead thee in the right way, and save thee from
all dangers; that though thou feel them thou
shalt not perish, and I hope that it shall bring
thee to the perfect love of our Lord Jesus.

Nevertheless on the other side, I say also,
what work or what stirring it is that may help
or strengthen or nourish thy desire, and draw
thy thoughts farthest from lust and the mind-
ing of the world, more entire and more burning
to the love of God, whether it be praying,
meditating, reading or hearing, solitariness or
being in company, silence or talking, going or
sitting, hold to it for the time, arid exercise
thyself therein as long a« any savour or relish


198 The Scale of Perfection

therein lasteth, if it be so that thou take there-
with meat, and drink, and sleep, as a pilgrim
doth, and use discretion in thy exercises, after
the advice and directions of thy superior. For
a pilgrim, though he be in never so great haste
in his journey, yet will he eat and drink and
sleep. Do thou likewise ; and though it hinder
and stay thee at one time, it shall fujther thee
at another time.

CHAPTER V

Of an evil Day and a good Nighty and what the/ mean^
and how the Love of the World is likened to an
evil Day, and the love of God to a good Night

If thou wouldst know then what this desire is,
verily it is Jesus, for He worketh this desire
in thee, and giveth it thee ; and He it is that
desireth in thee, and He it is that is desired ;
He is all, and He doth all, if thou couldst see
Him. Thou dost nothing, but sufFerest Him to
work in thy soul, and assentest to Him with
great gladness of heart, that He will vouchsafe
to do so in thee. Thou art nothing else but a
reasonable instrument by which and in which
He worketh ; and therefore when thou feelest
thy thoughts, through the touching of grace,
taken up with the desire of Jesus, with a mighty
devout will for to please Him and love Him,
then think that thou hast Jesus, for He it is
that thou desirest. Behold Him well, for He
goeth before thee, not in bodily shape, but in-
sensibly, by secret presence of His power.
Therefore see Him spiritually if thou canst, and
fasten all thy thoughts and affections to Him,
and follow Him wheresoever He goeth ; for He


The Second Book 199

will lead thee the right way to Jerusalem^ that is
to the sight of peace and contemplation. Thus
prayed the Prophet to the Father of Heaven,
saying: Send out Thy light and Thy truth (that Aa/jwxlii.
is Thy Son Jesus), and He shall lead me (by de-
sire in me) to Thy holy hill and to Thy tabernacles.
That is, to the feeling of perfect love and height
of Contemplation,

Of this desire the Prophet Isaias speaketh
thus : Memoriale tuum^ &c. Lord Jesus, the Isaias xxv
remembrance of Thee ts imprinted in the desire
of my souly for my soul hath desired Thee in the
nighty and my spirit hath coveted 2hee in all its
t/wughts. The Prophet saith he desired God all
in the night, being a space betwixt two days ; for
when one day is ended another day beginneth not
presently, but first cometh night which parteth
the days, being sometimes long and sometimes
short, and then after that cometh another day.
The Prophet meaneth not only of this manner
of night, but he meaneth a spiritual night. Thou
shalt understand that there be two days or two
lights. The first is a false light, the second
a true light. The false light is the love of this
world, which a man hath in himself through
the corruption of nature. The true light is the
perfect love of Jesus felt through grace in a
man's soul. The love of this world is a false
light, for it passeth away and lasteth not, and so
it performeth not that which it promiseth. This
light did the enemy promise to Adam when
he stirred him to sin, and said thus: Your eyes
shall be opened^ and ye shall be as gods. And
therein he said truth. For when Adam had
sinned, forthwith his inner eye was shut, and
spiritual light withdrawn, and his outward eye
was opened, and he felt and saw a new light


aoo The Scale of Perfection

of fleshly liking and worldly love which he
saw not before. And so saw he a new day,
but this was an evil day, for this was it that
Job ill. Job cursed, when he said thus : Let the day
perish wherein I was born. He cursed not the
day running on in the year which God made,
but he cursed this day which man made, that
is the concupiscence and the love of this world
in the which he was born, though he felt it
not. That day and that light he asked of
God that it might perish and last no longer.
But the everlasting love of Jesus is a true
day and a blessed light ; for God is both love
and light, and He is everlasting, as St John
I St John i. saith : He that loveth God dwelLeth in the light.
And now, what man perceiveth and seeth the
love of this world to be false and failing, and
therefore will forsake it and seek the love of
Jesus, yet may he not for all that presently
feel the love of Him, but he must abide awhile
in the night, for he cannot suddenly come
from that one light to that other, that is from the
love of the world to perfect love of God. This
night is nought else but a forbearing and a
withdrawing of the thought and of the soul
from earthly things by great desire and yearn-
ing for to love and see and feel Jesus and
spiritual things. This is the night; for even
as the night is dark, and doth hide all bodily
things, and a time of ceasing from all bodily
works ; even so a man that setteth himself fully
to think on Jesus, and to desire only the love
of Him, is careful to hide his thoughts from
vain beholding and perceiving, and his affec-
tions from fleshly liking and loving of all
bodily creatures, whereby his thoughts may.
become free and not be subject, nor his affec-


The Second Book 201

— »' ■■ ■■'■' ' ^ i ■ " I ...ii I.

tions bound or pinned to, or troubled with
anything lower or worse than himself. And
if he come to this pass then is it night with
him, for then he is in darkness. But this is
a good night and a light darkness, for it is a
stopping out of the false love of this world,
and it is an approaching of the true day. And
verily the darker that this night is the nearer
is the true day of the love of Jesus ; for the
more that a soul can, through longing after God,
be hid from the noise* and stirrings of fleshly
affections and unclean thoughts, the nearer is
she to feel the light of the love of Him, for
it is even at her. Thus seemeth the Prophet
to mean, when he saith : When I sit in dark-
ness our Lord is my light. That is, when my
soul is hid from all stirrings of sin as it were
in sleep, then is our Lord my light, for then
approacheth He by His grace to show me His
light, nevertheless this night is sometime pain-
fid. As first, when a man is very foul, and is
not used through grace to be often in this
darkness, but would fain haVe it, and be in it,
and therefore he setteth his thoughts and his
desires to Grodward as much as he can, he
would not feel nor think but only of Him, and
because he cannot easily have it, therefore it
is painful for the custom and familiarity t that
he hath formerly had with the sins of the
world, and of fleshly affections and earthly
things ; and his daily fleshly deeds press so
upon him, and continually strike in, and
through force draw down the soul to them,
that he cannot well be hid from them so soon
as he would. Therefore this darkness is pain-
ful to him, and especially when grace toucheth

• Pin. t Hgrnclincis.


202 The Scale of Perfection

him not abundantly, instilling* some extraor-
dinary devotion into him. Nevertheless if it
be so with thee, be not too sad or heavy for
it, nor strive much as though thou wouldst by
force drive them out of thy thoughts, for thou
canst not do so ; but do thou rather expect
grace, suffer quietly, and force not thyself too
much. But slyly (if thou canst) draw thy de-
sire and spiritual eye to Jesus, as if thou didst
not care for them. For be thou assured, when
thou wouldest desire Jesus, and think only of
Him, and thou art not able freely to do so,
for the pressing in of such worldly thoughts,
thou art certainly coming out of the false day
and art entering into this darkness. But thy
darkness is not restful, not quiet to thee by
reason of thy uncleanness and unacquainted-
ness with it, and therefore use it often, and in
process of time through feeling of grace it will
be more easy and more restful to thee, and
that is when thy soul through grace is made
so free, and so able and so good and so
gathered into itself that it listeth to think on
just nothing, then is it in a good darkness. This
nothing I" mean thus: that a soul may through
g^ace be gathered into itself freely and wholly,
and not be driven against its will, nor drawn
down by force for to think, or like, or love
with cleaving of affection to any sin, or any
earthly thing vainly, then thinketh the soul
just nought, for then it thinketh of no earthly
thing cleavingly. This is a rich nought, and
this nought and this night is a great ease to
the soul that desireth the love of Jesus, it is in
ease as to the thoughts of any earthly thing,
nevertheless it is fiill busy to think on Him.
What thing then maketh this darkness?


The Second Book 203

Verily nought else but a gracious desire to
have the love of Jesus, for that desire and that
longing that it hath at that time to the love of
God, for to see Him and have Him, driveth out of
the heart all worldly vanities and fleshly affections,
and gathereth the soul into itself, and busieth it
only in thinking how it may come to the love
of Him. And at that time she may freely and
devoutedly behold Jesus, whether she would pray
or meditate, and so it bringeth her to this right
nothing; and verily it is not altogether dark
nor nothing when it thinketh thus; for though
it be dark from false light, it is not altogether
dark from the true light. For Jesus, that is
both love and light, is in this darkness, whether
it be painful or restful. If it be painful, then
is Jesus in the soul, as travelling in the desire
and longing after light, but He is not yet as
resting in love, nor as showing His light. And
therefore it is called night and darkness, inas-
much as the soul is hid from the false light of
the world, and hath not yet a full feeling of
true light, but is in expecting of that blessed
love of God which it desireth.

Therefore if thou wouldst know when thou
art in tiiis secure darkness, and when not,
thou mayest try it thus, and seek no further.
When thou feelest thy intent and thy will fully
set for to desire God, and think only on Him,
thou mayest, as it were, at first ask thyself in
thy own thoughts whether thou covetest to have
anything of this life for love of the thing itself,
or for to have the using of any of thy bodily
senses in any creature. And then if the eye
answer then thus : / would see just nothing; and
thy mouth: / would savour just nothing; and
thine ear : / would hear just nothing; and thy


204 The Scale of Perfection

body : / would feel just nothing; and after that,
thy heart say : / would think just nothing of
earthly things, nor of bodily deeds, nor would have
my affections fastened fleshly to any creature but
only in God and to Godwards, if I could; and
when they all answer thus to thee, and do it full
readily, being touched by grace, then art thou
entered somewhat into this darkness. For though
withal thou feel and perceive within thee the
presentations and profferings of vain thoughts,
and pressing in of fleshly affections ; neverthe-
less thou art in this profitable darkness, if it be
so that thy thoughts be not fixed to them ; for
such vain imaginations that fall into the heart
unadvisedly, they trouble indeed this darkness,
and somewhat molest the soxil because it would
be hid firom them, but cannot ; but they do not
take away the profit of this darkness, for the soul
shall by this means in time come to restful dark-
ness. And then is this darkness restful when the
soul is hid for a time from the painful feeling of
all such vain thoughts, and is rested only in the
desire and longing after Jesus, with a spiritual
beholding of Him, as it shall be said hereafter ;
but this lasteth whole and entire but a short time,
yet though it be but for a short time, yet it is full
profitable. ^

CHAPTER VI ' '

How that the Desire of Jesus felt in this lightsome
Darkness slayeth all Motions of Sin^ and enableth
the Soul to perceive spiritual Lightnings from the
heavenly Jerusalem, that is, Jesus

Seeing then this darkness and this night con-
sisting only in the desire and longing after the
love of Jesus with a blind thinking on Him, is so
good and so restful, though it be but short, how


The Second Book 205

good then, and how blessed it is to feel His love,
and to be illuminated with His blessed invisible
light thereby to see the truth, the which light
a soul receiveth when the night passeth, and the
day springeth.

This I conceive was the night that the Prophet
meant when he said : My soul hath desired Thee
in the nighty as I have said before. It is much
better to be hid in this dark night from beholding
of the world,* though it were painful, than to be
out in false liking of this world, which seemeth
so shining, and so comfortable to them that are
blind in the knowledge of spiritual light ; for
when thou art in this darkness, thou art much
nearer Jerusalem than when thou art in the
midst of the false light. Therefore apply thy
heart fully to the stirrings of g^ace, and use thy-
self to dwell in this darkness, and by often essay-
ing to be acquainted therewith, and it shall soon
be made restful to thee, and the true light of
spiritual knowing shall spring up to thee, not all
at once, but secretly by little and little, as the
Prophet saith : To them that dwell in the country Isa. ix.
0/ the shadow of death light is sprung up. That
is, light of grace springeth, and shall spring to
all them that can dwell in the shadow of death ;
that is in this darkness which is like to death ;
for as death slayeth a living body and all its
fleshly senses, right so the desire of the love
of Jesus felt in this darkness slayeth all sins, all
fleshly affections, and all unclean thoughts for
the time, and then dost thou hasten to draw near
to Jerusalem. Thou art not there yet, but by
some small sudden lightnings that glide out of
small caves from that city, shalt thou be able to
see it afar off ere thou come to it, for know thou
well, though tha t thy sou l be in this restful dark-
* Claude fenestras ut luccat domus*


Em€C, Xl.


206 The Scale of Perfection

ness without the trouble of worldly vanities, it is
not yet clothed all in light, nor turned all into
the fire of love. But it perceiveth full well that
there is somewhat above itself that it knoweth
not, nor hath not yet, but would have it, and
buminja^ly yeameth after it, and that is nought
else but the sight of Jerusalem outwardly, which
is like to a city which the Prophet Ezechtel saw in
his visions. He saith that he saw a city upon
a hill towards the south, that to his sight when it
was measured was no more in length and breadth
than a reed, that is six cubits and a palm of
length. But as soon as he was brought into the
city, and looked about him, then he saw that it
was wondrous great, for he saw many halls, and
chambers both open and secret; he saw gates
and porches without and within, and many more
buildings than I now speak of, and it was in
length and breadth many hundred cubits, that it
seemed a wonder to him that this city was so
long and so large within, that seemed so little
to his sight when he was without.

This city betokeneth the perfect love of Grod
set upon the hill of Contemplation^ which to the
sight of a soul that without the feeling of
it travelleth in desire towards it seemeth
somewhat, but it seemeth but a little thing,
no more than a rood, that is, six cubits and a
palm of length. By six cubits are understood
the perfection of man's work ; and by the palm,
a little touch of Contemplation. He seeth well
that there is such a thing that passeth the de-
servings of all the workings of man, like as a
palm is surpassed by six cubits, but he seeth
not within what it is, yet if he can come within
the city of Contemplation^ then seeth he much
more than he saw at first.


The Second Book 207


CHAPTER Vn

How a Man shall know false Illuminations^ that ai*e
feigned by the Enemy^ from the true Light of
knowing that cometh out of Jesus^ and by what
tokens

But now beware of the midday fiend that
feigneth light as if it came out of Jertcsalemy
and is not so; for the fiend seeth that our
Lord Jesus showeth light to His lovers of
truth ; therefore for the deceiving of them that
are unwise, he showeth a light that is not true
under colour of a true light, and cozeneth them.
Nevertheless, how a soul may know the true light
when it shineth fi^om God, and when it is feigned
by the enemy, shall I declare (as methinketh) by
an example of the firmament.

Sometime the firmament showeth a light
from the sun, which seemeth to be the sim and
is not ; and sometimes showeth the true sun
truly. To know the one from the other is thus :
the feigned sun showeth himself only betwixt
two black rainy clouds ; and then because the
sun is near, there shineth out from the clouds
a light as if it were a sun, but is not. But the true
sun showeth itself when the firmament is clear,
or much cleared from black clouds. Now to our
purpose. Some men, as it seems, forsake the
love of the world and would come to the love of
God, and to the light of understanding Him, but
they would not come through that darkness
which I spake of before. They will not know
i» themselves truly and humbly what they have
" been heretofore, or what they are yet through
sin, nor how naught they are in their nature


208 The Scale of Perfection

against Grod. They are not busy to enter into
themselves, all other outward things being left
and flee all wicked stirrings that rise in their
hearts of Pride, Envy, Anger, or other sins
through a lasting desire to Jesus in praying
and meditating, in silence, and in weeping, and
in other corporal and spiritual exercises as de-
vout and holy men have done. But as soon as
they have forsaken the world, as it were out-
wardly in appearance, or else soon after, they
imagine that they are holy and able to have the
spiritual understanding of the Gospel and of holy
Writ, and, namely, if they can literally fulfil the
commandments of Grod and keep themselves from
corporal sins, then they imagine that they love
Grod perfectly. And therefore they will presently
preach and teach all other men, as if they had re-
ceived grace of understanding in perfection of
charity through special gift of the Holy Ghost.
And also they are much more stirred, forasmuch
as they feel sometimes much knowledge as it were
suddenly given to them without great study be-
fore had, and also much fervour of love as it
seemeth ifor to preach truth and righteousness to
their neighbour. Therefore they hold it as a
grace of God that visiteth them with His blessed
light above other souls. Nevertheless, if they
will look well about them, they shall find that
this light of knowledge and that fervour which
they feel cometh not from the true Sun, which
is our Lord Jesus, but cometh from the midday
fiend that feigneth light, and likeneth him to the
Sun, and therefore shall he be known by the
foresaid example.

Light of knowledge, that is feigned by the
fiend to a dark soul, is showed betwixt two black
rainy clouds. Whereof the upper cloud is pro-


The Second Book 209

sumption and exalting of himself, and the lower
cloud is the down-putting and disdaining of his
neighbour. Then whatsoever light of knowing
or feeling of fervour it be that shineth to a soul
with presumption and exalting of itself, and dis-
dain of his neighbour felt at the same time, it is
not the light of grace given of the Holy Ghost ;
although the knowledge in itself be true, but it
is either from the fiend, if it come suddenly, or
else from a man's own wit if it come by study,
and so it may easily be known that this feigned
light of knowing is not the light of the true Sun.
Therefore, they that have this knowing on this
manner are full of spiritual pride, and see it not ;
they are so blind with this feigned light that they
hold the exalting of their own heart and their
disobedience to the laws of holy Church as it
were perfect humility to the Gospel and to the
laws of God ; and imagine that the following
of their own will to be freedom of spirit. And
thereupon they begin to rain, like black clouds,
waters of errors and heresies ; for the words that
they utter in preaching tend all to backbiting,
and to strife and discord, reproving of States
and of Persons ; and yet they say that all this
is charity and zeal of the truth. But it is not
so ; for St James the Apostle saith thus : Ubi
zelus est et contention &c. — Where envy is and con- st James iii.
tention^ there is unstableness and every evil work.
And therefore that knowledge that bringeth
forth such sins cometh not from the Father of
lights^ that is God, but is earthly^ beastly and
devilish. And so by these tokens, namely, pride,
presumption, disobedience, indignation, back-
biting and other such sins (for these follow
after) may the feigned light be known from the
true. For the true Sun shineth not nor breaketh

14


210 The Scale of Perfection

forth by special visitation to give light of under-
standing or perfect charity to a soul, unless the
lirmament be first made bright and clear from
clouds ; that is, unless the conscience be made
clean through the fire of burning desire to Jesus
in this darkness which wasteth and bumeth up
all wicked stirrings of pride, vain-glory, wrath,
envy and all other sins in the soul. As the Pro-
Pi xcvi ^''^^ saith : Ignis ante ipsum procedef, &c. — Afire
shall go before him; that is, desire of love shall
go before Jesus in man's soul, and it shall hum
all His erumies ; that is, it shall waste all sins.
For except a soul be first smitten down from the
height of itself by fear and humility, and be well
tried and burnt in this fire of desire, and as it
were purified from all spiritual filth, through
long time in devout praj^ers and other spiritual
exercises, it is not able to bear the shinings of
spiritual light nor to receive the precious liquor
of perfect love of Jesus. But when it is purified
and made subtle through this fire, then may it
receive the gracious light of spiritual knowing
and the perfection of love, which is the true Sun.
Thus saith holy Writ : Vohis qui timetis
Deurn^ &e, — The true Sun of Righteousness^ that
is, our Lord Jesus, shall spring to you that fear
MaK iv. ffim ; that is, to humble souls that humble them-
selves to their neighbour, through knowing of
their own wretchedness, and cast themselves
down under God by annihilating themselves in
their own substance through reverent fear and
spiritual beholding of Him lastingly, for that
is perfect humility. Unto these souls the true
Sun shall spring, and enlighten their reason
to the knowing of Truth, and kindle their
affections in the fervour of love, and then shall
they both bum and shine, namely, bum in perfect


The Second Book 211

love through the virtue of this heavenly Sun,
and shine in the knowledge of God and spiritual
things, for then be they reformed in feeling.

Therefore, he that would not be deceived, I
think it is good for him to draw down himself
and hide himself in this darkness. First, from
intermeddling with other men, as I have said,
and forget all the world if he can ; and follow
Jesus with constant desire offered up in prayers
and meditating on Him. And then I believe
the light that cometh after this darkness is
secure and true, and that it shineth out of the
city of Jerusalem from the true Sun to a soul
that travelleth in darkness, and crieth after
light for to show her the right way and com-
fort her in travel. For I believe that after
true darkness going before feigned light never
cometh. That is, if a man truly and fiilly set
himself to forsake the love of the world, and
can through grace come to the feeling and
knowing of himself, and hold himself humbly
in that feeling, he shall not be deceived with
any errors nor heresies nor fancies; for all
these come in by the gate of pride. If then
pride can be stopped out, there shall no such
sin rest in a soul, and though they come and
proffer themselves, they shall not enter ; for
grace which the soul feeleth in this humble
darkness shall teach the soul truth, and show
it that all such proflferings are from the enemy.


212 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER Vm

How great profit it is to the Soul to be brought tbrougli
Grace into lightsome Darkness^ and how a Man
shall dbpose himself if he will come thereto

There be many devout souls that through grace
come into this darkness and feel the knowledge
of themselves, and yet know they not fully what
it is, and that ignorance is partly a hindrance to
them. They feel well often their thoughts and
their affections drawn out and separated from
the minding of earthly things, and brought into
great rest of a delectable softness, without pain-
ful troubling of vain thoughts or of their bodily
senses ; and they feel that time so great a free-
dom of spirit that they can think on Jesus peace-
ably and offer up their Psalms and Prayers
mightily, savourly and sweetly to Him, as long
as frailty of bodily nature will suffer them. They
understand well that this feeling is good, but
they know not what it is. Therefore unto all
such souls I say, as methinketh, that this
manner of feeling, though it be but short and
but seldom, it is really this darkness that I
speak of. For it is a feeling of themselves
first, and a rising above themselves through
burning desire to the sight of Jesus; or else,
if I shall say more truly, this gracious feeling
is a spiritual sight of Jesus. And if they can
keep themselves in that rest, or bring it through
grace into a custom, so that they can lightly and
freely have it when they list, and hold them-
selves in it, they shall never be overcome by
temptation of the fiend, nor of the flesh, nor by
errors or heresies; for they are set in the gate


The Second Book 213

of Contemplation, able and ready to receive the
perfect love of Jesus. Therefore he that hath
it, it is good that he know it humbly, keep it
tenderly, and pursue it fervently, that no creature
let* him utterly from it, but that he follow it
when he may. And that he forget and set at
nought all things that may put him from this,
if so be, he be at his own liberty, and may do
what he will without scandal or oflFence to his
neighbour. For I think that he cannot come
to this rest lightly, unless he hath great plenty
of grace and set himself to follow the motions
of grace, and that ought he to do; for grace
would ever be free, namely, from sin and worldly
business, and all other things that let the work-
ing of it, though they are not sins.

Nevertheless, another soul that hath not yet
received this plenty of grace, if he desire to come
to this spiritual knowing of Jesus, he must, as
much as in him lieth, enable himself to it, and
put away all lettings that obstruct grace as
much as he can. He must truly learn to die
to the world, and truly forsake the love of it.
First, pride, both spiritual and corporal, that
he desire no worship, worldly knowledge, nor
worldly craft, profits, nor riches, nor precious
clothing, nor worldly array, nor anything by
which he may be honoured above other men;
he shall covet none of all these. But if they
be put upon him, take them with fear, so that
he be poor both outwardly and inwardly, or at
least fully inwardly in his heart. And that he
covet to be forgotten of the world, and men re-
gard him no more, though he be never so rich or
so wise, than the poorest man living. Also that he
suffereth not his heart to r^st in the beholding of

* Hinder.


214 The Scale o f PerfccHon

his own deeds, or in his virtues, imagining that
he doth better than another, in that he forsaketh
the world, which others do not, and therefore he
setteth well by himself. Also he must leave all
risings of heart, and evil will of anger and envy
against his neighbour. And that he offend no
man, nor anger him indiscreetly by word or
deed; nor give any man occasion whereby he
may reasonably be angered, or moved, so that
he may be free from every man. And also that
he forsake covetousness, that he covet right
naught of earthly goods, but only crave his
bodily sustenance which he needeth, and hold
himself well apaid, when God stirreth up other
men to give it him. And that he put no manner
of trust in the possession of any worldly goods,
nor in the help or favour of any worldly friends,
but principally and fully in God ; for if he doth
otherwise, he bindeth himself to the world, so
that he cannot be free to think on Jesus. And
also gluttony, and lechery, and all other fleshly
uncleanness must he utterly leave, that his affec-
tions be bound to no woman by fleshly familiarity;
for it is no doubt but that such blind love as is
sometime betwixt a man and a woman, and
seemeth good and honest, forasmuch as they
would not sin in act, is in the sight of God full
unclean and very great sin. For it is a great
sin for a man to suffer his affections, which
should be fastened to Jesus and to all His vir-
tues, and to all spiritual cleanness, to be bound
by any fleshly love willingly to any creature,
especially if it be so much that it beareth down
his thoughts, and maketh them unrestful that he
cannot have favour in God. And this I hold to
be done willingly, when a man doth it, though he
confess it to be a sin, or else when he is so blinded


The Second Book 215

with it that he will not see it. And also that
a man covet not delights of meats and drinks
only for lust of his flesh, but be contented with
such as he can easily have without great trouble;
namely, if he be in health with what meat will
put away hunger, and keep his body in ordinary
strength for the service of God. And that he
grudge not, nor strive not, nor vex himself for
his meat, though sometime he be served not as
his flesh desires. All these sins and all other
must he forsake utterly in his will, and in deed
when he can ; and all other things that hinder
him, so that he may dispose himself to think
freely on Jesus. For as long as these lettings
and such other hang upon him, he cannot die to
the world, nor come into this darkness of knowing
of himself. And therefore that he may come
thereto, he must do all these things, as St Paul Gal vl.
did, saying thus : This world is slain and crucified
to mCy and I to the world. That is, he that hath
forsaken the love of the world in honours and
riches and in all other worldly things abovesaid,
for the love of God, and loveth it not, nor pur-
sueth it, but is well satisfied that he hath right
nought of it, nor verily would have though he
might, verily to him the world is dead, for he
hath no favour nor delight therein. And if the
world set him at nought, and hath no regard
to him, nor favour, nor worship, and set no price
by him, but forgetteth him as a dead man, then
is he dead to the world. And in this plight was
St Paul set perfectly, and so must every other
man in part that would come to the perfect love
of God ; for he cannot live to God fully, unless he
die first to the world. This dying to the world is
this darkness, and it is the gate to Contemplation,
and to reforming in feeling, and none other than


2i6 The Scale of Perfection

this. There may be many sundry ways, and
several works letting and leading sund^ souls
to Contemplation; for according to divers dis-
posings of men, and after divers states as are
religious and seculars, according as they are in,
are there divers exercises in working. Never-
theless there is but one gate; for whatsoever
exercise a soul useth, unless thereby he come
to this knowing, and to an humble feeling of
himself, and that is, that he be mortified and
dead to the world, as to his love of it, and
that he may feel himself sometime in this rest-
ful darkness, by the which he may be hid from
the vanities of the world, as to the love of them,
and that he may feel himself what he is indeed,
. he is not yet come to the reforming in feeling,
nor hath he Contemplation fully. He is full far
from it, and if he will come to it by any other
gate, he is but a thief and a breaker of the wall,
and therefore shall be cast out as unworthy.

But he that can bring himself first to nought
by the grace of humility, and die on this manner,
he IS in the gate ; for he is dead to the world, and
he liveth to God. Of the which Si Paul speak-
Colos, ill. eth thus t Ye are dead. That is, ye that for the
love of Grod forsake all the love of the world, are
dead to the world, and Your life ts hid with Christ
in God. That is, ye live spiritually in the love of
Jesus. But your life is hid from worldly men, as
Christ liveth, and is hid in His Godhead from the
love and the sight of fleshly lovers.

This gate our Lord Himself showed in the
St Matt XIX. Grospel, when He said thus : Every man that for^
saketh for My love Father or Mother^ Sister or
Brother y or aty eart'ily goody he shall have an
hundredfold in this lijey and afterward the bliss
of Heaven. This hundredfold which a soul shall


The Second Book 217

have, if he forsake the world, is nought but the
profit of this lightsome darkness, which I call
the gate of Co7iiemplatton, For he that is in this
darkness, and is hid through grace from worldly-
vanity, he coveteth nothing of worldly goods, he
seeketh it not, he is not hindered therewith, he
looketh not after it, he loveth it not, and therefore
hath he an hundredfold more than the King, or
than he that coveteth most of worldly goods, for
he that coveteth nought but Jesus hath an
hundredfold, for he hath more rest, more peace
in heart, more true love and delight in soul in
one day, than he that most coveteth of this world,
and hath all the wealth of it in his full possession,
hath all his life-time.

This is, then, a good darkness, and a rich
nought, that bringeth a soul to so much spiritual
ease, and so quiet softness. I suppose David
meant of this night, or this nought, when he
said thus : Ad niht'lum redactus sum^ et nescivi — p^^ ixxil.
/ was brought to noughty and I knew it not. That
is, the grace of our Lord Jesus sent into my
heart hath slain in me, and brought to nought
all the love of the world, and I knew not how, for
not through any working of my own, nor by my
own wit had I it, but by the grace of our Lord
Jesus. And therefore methinketh that he that
would have the light of grace, and sweetly feel
the love of Jesus in his soul, he must forsake all
the false light or worldly love, and abide in this
darkness. And, nevertheless, if he be fearful,
at first to continue therein, he must not turn
again to the love of the world, but suffer awhile,
and put all his hope and his trust in Jesus, and
he shall not be long without some spiritual light.
Thus the Prophet commandeth : Qui ambulcU in Isaias ix.
tenebrtSy &c. — I/e that walketh in darkness and


2i8 Th^ Scale erf PcrfedJon

hath fio lights Ut htm hope tn our Lardy and Ut him
rely upcn his God. That isy whoso would hide
hims^'lf from the love of the world, and cannot
readily feel the light of spiritual love, let him not
despair, nor turn again to the world, but hope in
(iur horJ, and rely upon Him ; tliat is, trust in
(iody and cleave to Him by desire, and abide
awhile, and he shall have light. For it fidledi
out therein as it doth when a man hath beeni
grrat while in the sun, and after that cometh
suddenly into a dark house where no son shinetb,
he will be as it were blind, and see just nought
]3ut if he will abide awhile, he shall be able
presently to see about him; first great things,
and then small things, and afterwards all that is
ever in the house. Just so is it spiritually: he
that forsaketh the love of the world, and cometh
to himself into his own conscience, at first it is
Bomewhat dark and blind to his sight ; but if he
stand still, and hold out by serious praying, and
often meditating in the same will to the love of
Jesus, he shall be able afterwards to see both
great and small things which he knew not before.
This it seemoth the Prophet promiseth when he
ha, Ivlll. saith thus : Orietur in tenebris lux tuay &c. — In
darkness shall thy light spring up^ and thy darkness
shall be as noon-day y and thy Lord God shall give
thee rest, and shall fill thy soul with lights. That
is, thou tliat truly forsaketh the light of all worldly
love, and hidest thy thought in this darkness,
light of blessed love and spiritual knowing of
God shall spring up to thee, and thy darkness
shall be as midday ; that is, thy darkness of
painful desire, and thy blind trust in Grod, that
thou hast at first, shall turn into clear knowledge,
and into security of love, and thy Lord God shall
give rest to thee ; that is, thy fleshly desires, and


The Second Book 219

thy painful fears and doubts, and wicked spirits

that have before time vexed thee, all these shall

grow weak, and lose much of their might, and

thou shalt be made so strong that they shall not

trouble thee, for thou shalt be hid in rest from

them. And then shall our Lord fulfil thy soul

with shinings ; that is, when thou art brought

into this spiritual rest, then shalt thou more

easily attend to God, and do nought else but

love Him, and then shall He fill all the powers

of thy soul with beams of spiritual light. Wonder

not that I call the forsaking of worldly love a

darkness, for the Prophet calleth it so, saying

thus to a soul : — Intra in tenebras tuas filia Chal- jsaias xlvi

dcBorum — Go into thy darknesSy thou daughter of

Chaldee. That is, thou soul that art as a

daughter of Chaldee through love of this world,

forsake it, and go into thy darkness.


CHAPTER IX

That the Working of our Lord Jesus in the Reforming
of a Soul^ is divided into four times^ which are :
Calling^ justifying^ Magnifying and Glorifying

Lo, I have told thee a little, how, if thou covet

to be reformed in feeling, thou shalt dispose

thyself towards thy forthgoing. Nevertheless I

do not say that thou canst do thus of thyself;

for I know well that it is our Lord Jesus that

bringeth all this to the end where He pleaseth.

For He only, through His grace, stirreth up a

soul, and bringeth it first into this darkness and

then into light, as the Prophet saith : Sicut^ te- Ps. cxxxvii

nebrcB ejus, ita et lumen ejus. That is, just

as the light of knowing and the feeling of

spiritual love is from Jesus, just so the dark-


220 The Scale of Perfectien

ness, that is, the forsaking of worldly love, is
from Him, for He doth all. He formeth and
reformeth. He formeth only by Himself, but
He reformeth us with us ; for grace given, and
the applying our will to grace doth work all
this. And in what manner this is done, *?/
Rom. viii. Paul rehearses thus : Quos Deus prcesctvtty &c. —
Those whom God foreknew should he made can-'
formalle to the Image of Hts Sotiy those He called;
and whom He called those He justified; and whom
He justified those He glorified. Though these
words may be understood of all chosen souls
in the lowest degree of charity, who are re-
formed only in faith ; nevertheless they may
be understood more especially of those souls
that are reformed in feeling, to whom our Lord
God showeth great plenty of grace, and is much
more busy about them ; for they are in a special
manner His own children, who bear the full
shape and the likeness ot His Son Jesus. In
these words St Paul divideth the working of
our Lord into four times.

The first is the time of calling of a soul from
worldly vanity, and that time is often easy and
comfortable; for in the beginning of turning
such a man that is disposed to much grace, is
so quickly and so feelingly inspired, and feeleth
often so great sweetness of devotion, and hath
so many tears in compunction that he thinketh
sometimes that he is half in Heaven ; but this
ease passeth away after for a time. And then
Cometh the second time, namely, the time of
justifying^ which is laborious. For when he
beginneth to go forth mightily in the way of
righteousness, and setteth his will fully against
all sin outward and inward, and stretcheth out
his desires to virtues and to the love of Jesus^


The Second Book 221

then feeleth he much letting both within him-
self from the frowardness and hardness of his
own will, and from without through the tempta-
tion of his enemy, that he is oft in full great
torment, and that is no wonder : for he hath
so long been crooked towards the false love
of the world, that he cannot be made straight,
as a crooked staff cannot be made even, unless
it be cast and wrought by the fire. Therefore
our Lord Jesus, knowing what is fit for a fro-
ward soul, suffereth it to be tormented and
letted by sundry temptations, and to be tried
soundly by spiritual tribulations that all the
rust of uncleanness may be burnt out of it. And
this shall be done both inwardly with fears and
doubts and perplexities that it shall almost fall
into despair, and shall seem as it were forsaken
of God, and wholly left in the hands of the fiend
(saving only a little secret trust that it shall
have in the goodness and mercy of God, for
that secret trust our Lord leaveth in such a
soul, though he go never so far from it, by
the which the soul is borne up from despair,
and saved from spiritual mischief), and out-
wardly also it shall be mortified and pained
in the sensuality, either by divers sicknesses,
or by feeble torm en tings of the enemy; or else
by a secret working of God the silly soul
through feeling and bearing of the wretched
body shall be so pained that it shall despair
almost of suffering or continuing in the body,
unless our Lord Himself keep it therein. And
yet, notwithstanding, the soul had rather be in
all this pain than to be blinded with the false
love of the world, for that would be hell to
such a soul; but the suffering of this man-
ner of pain is only Purgatory, and there-


222 The Scale of Perfection

fore he suffereth it gladly. And he would
not put it away though he might, because it
is so profitable. All this doth our Lord in
great profit to a soul to drive it out of its
sensuality, that it may receive spiritual light;
for after this, when a soul is thus mortified,
and brought from worldly love into this dark-
ness, that it hath no more savour nor delight
of worldly liking than of a straw, but thinketh
it bitter as wormwood, then cometh the third
time of Alagnifying : and that is, when a soul
is reformed in feeling in part, and receiveth
the gift of perfection, and the grace of Con-
templation, and that is a time of great rest;
for then is Jesus more familiar with a soul.

And after this cometh a fourth time of Glori-
fying; that is, when a soul shall be fully re-
formed in the bliss of heaven. For these souls
that are thus called from sin, and thus Justifiedy
or else on any other manner by divers trials
both through fire and water, and afterwards
are thus magnified, they shall be glorified. For
our Lord shall then give them fully what they
coveted here ; and more than they could covet ;
for He shall raise them above all other chosen
souls, to be equal with cherubim and seraphim,
seeing they passed all other in knowing and
loving of God here in this life.

Therefore, he that will come to this magni-
fying must not be afraid of this justifying, for
that is the way ; for our Lord saith by His
Prophet a word of great comfort to all such
souls that are tried with the fire of tribulation
Isa. xliii. thus : Piur mens noli timerCy &c. — My childy
if thou pass through fire fear noty for the flame
shall not hurt thee. It shall cleanse thee from
all fleshly filth, and make thee able to receive


The Second Book 223

spiritual fire of the love of God, and this must
first be done ; for as I said before it cannot
otherwise be reformed in feeling.


CHAPTER X

How it falleth out sometimes that Souls that are but
beginning or profiting in Grace seem to have
more Love^ as to outward tokens thereof^ than
some have that be perfect^ and yet it is not really
so in their Interior

But now thou wilt say, how can this be true ?
For there be many souls newly turned to God
that have many spiritual feelings ; some have
great compunction for their sins, and some have
great devotions and fervours in their prayers,
and often have sundry teachings of spiritual
light in understanding, and some men have
other kind of feelings of comfortable heat and
great sweetness ; and yet these souls never come
ftilly into this restful darkness, which I speak of,
with fervent desire and lasting love and thought
on God. And hereupon thou askest whether
these souls be reformed in feeling or no; And
it seemeth yes, inasmuch as they have such great
spiritual feelings, which other men who stand
only in faith feel not.

Unto this I answer, as methinketh, that these
spiritual feelings, whether they stand in com-
punction or devotion, or in spiritual imagination,
are not the feelings which a soul shall have and
feel in the grace of Co7itemplah'on, I say not but
that they are true and graciously given of God.
But these souls that feel such are not yet re-
formed in feeling, nor have as yet the gift of
perfection nor the spiritual burning love of Jesus


"ris Sczk of Pfrrerion


".vrr.i.v


e:. 25 it
:r.: ar.i


is old,
i^h and

r^iv to


The Second Book 225

cleave and burst until the wine hath boiled and
purged out all uncleanness; but as soon as the
wine is fined and cleared, then it standeth still
and the barrel whole ; just so a soul that is old
through sin, when it receiveth a little of the love
of God, which is so fresh and strong that the
body is in point to cleave and to break were it
not that God keepeth it whole. But yet it burst-
eth out at the eyes by weeping, and at the mouth
by speaking, which is more for weakness and
feebleness of the soul than through greatness
of love. For afterward, when love hath boiled
all uncleanness out of the soul by such great
fervours, then is the love clear and standeth still.
And then is both the body and the soul much
more in peace. And yet hath the soul much
more love than it had before, though it show
less outwardly; for it is now all whole in rest
within, and but little in outward showing of fer-
vour. And therefore I say that these souls that
feel such great bodily fervours, though they be
in much grace, are not yet reformed in feeling,
but they are greatly disposed towards it. For
I trow that such a man, namely, that hath been
greatly defiled in sin, shall not be reformed in
feeling, unless he be first burnt and purified with
such great compunctions going before.

Another soul that never was much defiled
with the love of the world, but hath ever been
kept from great sins in innocency, may lightlier
and more privily, without great fervour showed
outwardly, come to this reforming. Then is this
true, as I hope, that such comforts and fervours
that a soul feeleth in a state of its beginning,
or of its profiting, are, as it were, his spiritual
food sent from Heaven for to strengthen him in

15


226 The Scale of Perfection

his journey. Even as a Pilgrim travelleth all
day meatless and drinkless, and is near-at-hand
overcome with weariness, falleth at last to a good
inn, and there hath he meat and drink, and is
well refreshed for the time, right so is it
spiritually. A devout soul, that will forsake
the love of the world, and would fain love Gx)d
and setteth all her business thereto, prayeth and
exerciseth all day bodily and spiritually, and
sometimes feeleth no comfort nor savour in de-
votion ; then our Lord, having pity on all His
creatures, that they should not perish for want,
nor fall into heaviness or j^^rudging, sendeth to
it, among other things. His spiritual food, and
comforteth it in devotion as He pleaseth. And
when the soul feeleth any comfort, then doth
she hold herself well paid for all her travail
and all the suffering it had on the day, when
it fareth well at night by feeling of any grace.
Also in the same manner falleth it out with
other souls that are profiting and proceeding well
forward in grace. These feel oftentimes gracious
touchings of the Holy Ghost in their soul, both
in understanding and sight of spiritual things,
and in affection of love. But yet be they not
reformed in feeling, nor are they yet perfect ; for
why ? All such feelings come to them in that
state as it were unawares, for they come to them
ere they think of them, and go from them before
they think ; and they cannot come by such things
again, nor wot they where they may find them ;
for they have not as yet any familiarity with
them, of thought and lasting desire in Jesus.
Nor is the eye of their soul opened to the be-
holding of spiritual things, but they draw well
toward it; and therefore they are not yet re-
formed in feeling nor have yet the full gift of
Contemplation.


The Second Book 227


CHAPTER XI

Aftet* what manner a Man shall come to know his
own Soul^ and how a Man should set his Love
in jesus^ God and Man in one Person

A SOUL that would know spiritual things needs
first to have the knowledge of itself; for she can-
not have the knowledge of a thing that is above
herself, unless she have first the knowledge of
herself. And that is when the soul is so gathered
into herself, and separated from beholding of all
earthly things and from the use of her bodily-
senses, that she feeleth herself as she is in her
own kind, which is without a body. Then, if
thou covet for to know and see thy soul what it
is, thou shalt not turn thy thought with imagi-
nation into thy body, to seek it and feel it as it
were hid within thy heart, as thy heart is hid and
holden within thy body. If thou seek in that
manner, thou shalt never find it in itself. The
more thou seekest for to find and feel it as thou
wouldst feel a bodily thing, the farther thou art
from it. For thy soul is no bodily thing, but
a life invisible, not hid and holden within thy
body, as a less thing is hidden and holden with-
in a greater ; but it holdeth and quickeneth thy
body, and is much greater in might and virtue
than is thy body. It then thou wilt find it, with-
draw thy thoughts from all bodily things outward,
and from minding of ihy own body, also from all
thy five senses, as much as thou canst, and think
on the nature of a reasonable soul spiritually, as
thou wouldst think for to know any virtue, as
justice, humility or any other. Right so think
that a soul is a life immortal, invisible, and


228 The Scale of Perfection

hath in itself a power to know the sovereign
verity, and for to love the sovereig-n g-oodness,
which is God ; when thou seest this, then feelest
thou somewhat of thyself. Seek thyself in none
other place, but the more fully, the more clearly
that thou thinkest of the nature and the worthi-
ness of a reasonable soul, what it is and what is
the kindly working of it, the better seest thou
thyself.

It is full hard for a soul that is rude and
much in the flesh for to have sight and knowledge
of itself or of an angel or of God. It falleth
presently to the imagining of a bodily shape,
and it weeneth thereby to have the sight of it-
self, and in like manner of God, and of spiritual
things. And that may not be, for all spiritual
things are seen and known by the understand-
ing of the soul, not by the imagination. Right
as a soul seeth by her understanding, that the
virtue of righteousness is to give to everything
that which he ought to have; right so, and on
such a manner may the soul see itself by the
understanding.

Nevertheless, I say not that thy soul should
rest still in this knowing, but it shall by this
seek a higher knowledge above itself, and that
is the nature of God, for the soul is but a
glass,* in the which thou shouldst see God spiri-
tually. And therefore thou shalt first find thy
glass and keep it bright and clean from fleshly
filth and worldly vanity, and hold it well up
from the earth, that thou mayest see it and our
Lord therein also. For to this end do all chosen
souls travail in this life, in their meaning and
in th^ir intent, though they have not the special
feeling of this. And therefore it is said before

• Mirror.


The Second Book 229

that many souls beginning and profiting have
many great fervours, and much sweet devotion,
and as it seemeth are all burning in love, and
yet have they not love perfectly nor spiritual
knowledge of God. For be thou well assured
that though a soul feel never so much fervour,
even so much that he thinketh his body cannot
bear it ; or though he melt all into weeping,
as long as his thinking and his beholding of
God is for the most part or all in imagination
and not in the understanding, he is not yet
come to perfect love nor to Contemplation.

For thou shalt understand that the love of
God is in three manner of ways ; all of which
are good, but each one is better than the other.
The first cometh only through Faith, without
gracious imagination or spiritual knowing of
God. This love is in the least soul that is re-
formed in Faith, in the lowest degree of charity ;
and it is good, for it sufficeth to salvation. The
second is that which a soul feeleth through faith
and imagination of Jesus in His Manhood.
This love is better than the first, when the
imagination is stirred by grace, for then the
spiritual eye is opened in beholding of our
Lord's humanity. The third love that a soul
feeleth through spiritual sight of the Godhead
in the humanity, as it may be seen here, is the
best and most worthy, and that is perfect
love. This love a soul feeleth not, until it be
reformed in feeling. Souls beginning and profit-
ing have not this love, for they cannot think
on Jesus nor love Him spiritually, but, as it
were, all manly and fleshly after the conditions
and likeness of a man; and accordingly they
frame all their working in their thoughts and
in their affections. They fear Him as a man,


230 The Scale of Perfection

and worship Him and love Him principally by
the imagination of His humanity; and go no
fixrther.

As thus : If they have done amiss and tres-
passed against God, they think then that God
is angry with them, as a man would be if they
had trespassed against him ; and therefore they
fall down, as it were, at the feet of our Lord
with sorrow of heart, and cry Him mercy. And
when they have done thus, they have a good
trust that our Lord of His mercy will forgive
them their trespass. This manner of doing is
right good, but it is not spiritual as it mig^ht
be. Also when they would worship God, they
present themselves in their thoughts, as if they
were before our Lord's face in a bodily likeness,
and imagine a wonderful light there where our
Lord Jesus is, and then they reverence Him,
and worship Him, and fear Him, and fully put
them into His mercy for to do with them what
He will. Also when they would love God, they
behold Him, worship Him, and dread Him as
a man (not yet as God in the humanity), either
in His Passion, or in some other thing in His
humanity, and in that beholding they feel their
hearts much stirred to the love of God.

This manner of working is good and gra-
cious, but it is much less and lower than is
the working of the understanding ; that is, when
the soul graciously beholdeth God in man, for
in our Lord Jesus are two natures, the Humanity
and the Divinity. And as the Divinity is more
sovereign and more worthy than the Humanity,
right so the spiritual beholding of the Divinity
in Jesus Man is more worthy, and more spiri-
tual, and more meritorious than the beholding


The Second Book 231

of the Humanity alone, whether he behold the
Humanity as mortal or as glorified. And right
so by the same reason the love which a soul feel-
eth in thinking and beholding of the Divinity in
the Manhood, when it is graciously showed, is
more worthy, more spiritual, and more meri-
torious than the fervour of devotion, that the
soul feeleth by the imagination only of the
humanity, show it never so much outwardly;
for in regard of that of the Divinity, this of
the Humanity is but a human thing. For our
Lord showeth not Himself in the imagination
as He is, nor that He is, for the soul cannot
at that time for frailty of the flesh suffer it so.

Nevertheless unto such souls that cannot
meditate on the Divinity spiritually, that they
may not err in their devotion, but that they
should be comforted and strengthened by some
manner of inward beholding of Jesus to for-
sake sin and the love of the world, wherefore
our Lord Jesus tempereth this invisible light
of His Godhead, and clotheth it under bodily
likeness of His Manhood, and showeth it unto
the inner eye of the soul, and feedeth it with
the love of His precious flesh spiritually. The
which love is of so great might, that it slayeth
all wicked love in the soul, and strengthens it
fpr to suffer bodily penance and other bodily
difficulties in the time of need for the love of
Jesus. And this is the shadowing of our Lord
Jesus over a chosen soul, in which shadowing
the soul is kept from the burning of worldly
love ; for as a shadow is made of a light and
of a body, even so this spiritual shadow is
made of the blessed invisiole light of the God-
head, and of the Manhood united thereto showed
to a devout soul. Of the which shadow the


Lam. iv.


232 The Scale of Perfection

Prophet saith thus : Sptritus ante factem nosiram^
&c, — Our Lord Christ before our /ace as a Spirit,
under His shadow we shall live among folks. That
is, our Lord Jesus in His Godhead is a spirit,
that cannot be seen of us living- in the flesh
as He is in His blessed light, therefore we
shall live under the shadow of His Manhood
as long as we are here.

But though that this be true that this love
in imagination is good ; nevertheless a soul
should desire to have spiritual love in under-
standing of the Godhead; for that is the end
and the full bliss of the soul, and all bodily
beholdings are but means leading a soul to it.
I say not that we should refuse the Manhood
of Jesus, and separate God from man ; but thou
shalt in Jesus Man, behold, fear, admire and
love spiritually the (lodhead, and so shalt thou,
without separating them, love God in man, and
both God and man spiritually and fleshly. Thus
our Lord taught Mary Magdalen to do like a Con-
templative^ when He said thus : Noli me tangerey
&c. — Touch me not : I am not yet ascended to My
Father. The meaning is this : Mary Magdalen
loved our Lord Jesus well before the time of His
Passion, but her love was much bodily and little
spiritual. She understood well that He was
God, but she loved Him butiittle as God; for
she could not then, and therefore she suffered
all her affection and all her thoughts to fall
on Him as He was in form of man. And our
Lord blamed her not then, but praised it much.
But after when He was risen from death, and
appeared to her, she would have worshipped
Him with the same manner of love as she did
before, and then our Lord forbade her, and
said thus : Touch Me not. That is, set not thy


The Second Book 233

rest nor the love of thy heart on that form of
man which thou seest with thy fleshly eye, for
to rest therein only, for in that form I am not
ascended up to My Father; that is, I am not
equal to the Father, that is, the form of the
Godhead ; and love Me, know Me and worship
Me as God and Man, godly, not as a man,
manly, so shalt thou touch Me. For since I
am both God and Man, and all the reason why
I am to be beloved and worshipped is, for that
I am God, and for that I took the nature of
man ; and therefore make Me a God in thy
heart and in thy love, and worship Me in thine
understanding as Jesus, God and Man, the
sovereign verity and the sovereign goodness,
and blessed life; for I am so. And thus our
Lord taught her, as I understand, and also all
other souls that are disposed to Contemplaftotiy and
enabled thereto that they should do so. Neverthe-
less other souls are not so skilful,* nor are yet
made spiritual through grace, it is good for them
that they keep on their own working in imagina-
tion, with affections towards our Saviour's Hu-
manity, until more grace come freely to them.
It is not safe for a man to leave any good thing
utterly, until he see and feel a better.

In like manner may it be said of other kind
of feelings that are like to bodily, as hearing
of delectable songs, or feeling of comfortable
heat in the body, seeing of light, or sweetness
of bodily savour. These are not spiritual feel-
ings ; for spiritual feelings are felt in the powers
of the soul, principally in the understanding,
and in love, and little in the imagination. But
these feelings are felt in the powers of the body
in the imagination, and therefore are not spiritual

* Subtle in kind.


234 The Scale of Perfection

feelings. But when they are even at best, and
most true, yet are they but outward tokens of
the inward grace which is felt in the powers of
the soul. This may be plainly proved out of Holy
Acts ii. Writ, saying thus : Apparuerunl ApostohSy &c,—
The Holy Ghost appeared to the Apostles on the day
of Pentecost in the likeness of burning tongues^ and
inflamed their hearts, and sat upon each of them.
Now it is true that the Holy Ghost, which is
God in Himself invisible, was not that fire nor
those tongues that were seen, nor that burning
which was felt bodily, but He was invisibly felt
in the powers of their souls, for He enlight-
ened their reason and enkindled their aflfections
through His blessed presence so clearly and so
burningly, that they had suddenly the spiritual
knowledge of truth, and the perfection of love, as
our Lord promised them, saying thus : Spirttus
Sanctus docehtt vos^ &c. — The Holy Spirit shall
teach you all truth. That fire and that burning
then was nought else but a bodily token showed
outwardly in witnessing of that grace which was
felt inwardly. And as it was in them, so is it in
other souls that are visited and lightened within
of the Holy Ghost, and have withal such out-
ward feelings for comforting them and witness-
ing of their inward grace. But yet I do not
think that such grace is in all souls that are
perfect, but only where our Lord pleaseth.

Other imperfect souls that have such feelings
outwardly, and have not yet received inward
grace, it is not good for them to rest in such
outward feelings, but only inasmuch as they help
the soul to more love, and to more stableness of
thought in God ; for some may be true and some
may be feigned, as I have said before.


THE THIRD BOOK

CHAPTER I

In what Sense this Manner of Speaking of Reforming
of a Soul in Feeling is to be understood; and
in what Manner it is reformed^ and how it is
found in St Paul's Writings

I HAVE heretofore told thee somewhat of re-
forming in Faith, and also I have touched
concerning thy proceeding from that reforming
to a higher reforming which is in feeling. Not
that I would by* these discourses limit God's
working by the law of my speaking, as to say
that God worketh thus in a soul and no other-
wise. No, I mean not so, but I speak after my
simple feeling that our Lord worketh thus in
some creatures as I conceive. And I hope well,
also, that He worketh otherwise, which passeth
my wit and my feeling. Nevertheless, whether
He worketh thus or otherwise by several ways,
in longer time or shorter, with much travail or
little, if all come to one end, that is, the per-
fect love of Him, then is it good enough. For
if He will give one soul on one day the full
grace of Contemplaticmy and without any travail,
as He well may; as good is that to that soul
as if he had been tried, pained,* mortified and
purified twenty years. And therefore in this
manner take my sayings as I have said, and
namely as I meant to say them. For now by
the grace of our Lord Jesus shall I speak a
•Pyned.


236 The Scale of Perfection

little as methinketh more plainly of refonning
in feeling, what it is, and how it is made, and
what are spiritual feelings which a soul re-
ceive th. Yet in the first place, that I may not
be understood to make this manner of speaking
of reforming of a soul in feeling as a fiction or
fancy of my own, I shall ground it on S/ Pouts
words, where he saith thus : Noltte con/ormari
huic scBCulo^ &c. That is, ye that are through
grace reformed in Faith, conform not yourselves
henceforward to the manner of the world, in
pride, in covetousness and in other sins, but be
iiom, xii. y^ reformed in newness of feeling * Lo, here thou
mayest see that St Paul speaketh of reforming in
feeling ; and what that newness of feeling is he
expoundeth in another place thus: Ut trnplea-
mini tn agfiittone^ &c. That is : IVe pray God
that ye may be fulfilled in knowing of God's will
in all U7ider standing and in all manner of spiritual
Col\. wisdom. This is reforming in feeling; for thou
must understand that the soul hath two manners
of feelings, one without by the five bodily senses ;
another within of the spiritual senses, which are
properly the faculties of the soul — memory,
understanding and will. When these faculties
are through grace fulfilled in all understanding
of the will of God and spiritual wisdom, then
hath the soul new gracious feelings. That this
is so he showeth in another place, thus : Reno-
vamini spirttu mentis vestriy &c. — Be ye renewed in
Eph. iv. the spirit of your soul. That is, ye shall be re-
formed, not in bodily feeling nor in imagination,
but in the upper part of your reason. And be
clothed with the new many that is shapen after God
tn righteousness y holiness and truth. That is,
your reason, which is properly the image of

* In novitate sensus.


The Third Book 237

God, through grace of the Holy Ghost, shall be
clothed in a new light of truth, holiness and
righteousness, and then is it reformed in feeling.
For when the soul hath perfect knowledge ot
God, then is it reformed. Thus saith Si Paul : ^^^ ...^
Expoliantes veterem homtnemy &c, — Spoil yourself
of the old man with all his deeds. That is, cast
from you the love of the world with all worldly
manners, and clothe you with the new man. That
is, you shall be renewed in the knowing of God,
after the likeness of Him that made you.

By these words thou mayest understand that
St Paul would have men's souls reformed in
perfect knowledge of God, for that is the new
feeling which he speaketh of generally. And
therefore upon his words I shall speak more
plainly of this reforming as God shall give me
grace. For there be two manners of knowing
of God.

One is had principally in imagination, and
little in understanding. This knowing is in
chosen souls beginning and profiting in grace,
who know God, and love Him humanly (not
spiritually) with human affections, and with a
corporal imag^e of His Humanity, as I have
spoken before.

This knowing is good, and is likened to milk,
by which they are tenderly nourished as children
until they be able to come to the Father's table,
and take from His hand substantial bread.

Another knowing is principally felt in the
understanding, and little in imagination ; for the
understanding is the lady, and the imagination
is the maid, serving the understanding when
need is. This knowing is solid bread meet for
perfect souls, and is reforming in feeling.


238 The Scale of Perfection


CHAPTER n

How God openeth the inward Eye of the Soul to aee
Hixxi^ not all at once, but by divers times, and of
tliree Manners of reforming of a Soul ezplaiiied
by a familiar Example

A SOUL that is called from the love of the world,
and after that is righted, tried and mortified and
purified, as I have said before, our Lord Jesus
of His merciftil goodness reformeth it in feeling
when He pleaseth. He openeth the inner eye
of the soul, when He enliehteneth her reason
through the touching and shining of His blessed
light for to see Him and know Him, not all fully
at once, but by little and little, by divers times,
as the soul is able to bear it. He seeth Him not
what He is, for that can no creature do in Heaven
nor in earth. Nor seeth he Him as He is, for
that sight is only in the bliss of Heaven. But
he seeth Him that He is an unchangeable being,
a supreme power, a sovereign truth, supreme
goodness, a blessed life, an endless bliss. This
seeth a soul, and much more that cometh withal
not blindly and nakedly and unsavourly, as doth
a learned man, that knoweth and seeth Him only
by his learning, through might of his naked
reason ; but he seeth Him in understanding,
that is, comforted and lighted by the gift of the
Holy Ghost, with a wonderful reverence, and
a secret burning love, and with a spiritual sa-
vour and heavenly delight, more clearly and
more fully than can be written or spoken.

This sight, though it be but short and little,
is so worthy and so mighty that it draweth and
ravisheth all the affections of the soul from be-


The Third Book 239

holding and minding of all earthly things to it-
self, for to rest therein evermore if it could. And
upon this kind of sight and knowing the soul
groundeth all its working inward in all the affec-
tions ; for then she worshippeth God in the hu-
manity, as verity ; wondereth at Him, as power
and might ; loveth Him, as goodness. This
sight and this goodness, and this knowing of
Jesus, with the blessed love that cometh out of
it, may be called reforming of a soul in feeling
and in faith, which I have spoken of. It is in
faith, for it is dark yet in comparison of that full
knowing of Jesus, with the blessed love that
cometh out of it, that shall be in Heaven. For
then shall we see Him, not only that He is, but
as He is, as Si John saith : Tunc vtdehtmtis eum
sicut est — Then shall we see Him as He is. Never- i St/ohn
theless it is in feeling also, as in regard of that
blind knowing that a soul hath standing only in
faith, for this soul knoweth somewhat of the very
nature of Jesus as God through this gracious
sight, which that other in faith knoweth not, but
only believeth it to be truth.

Nevertheless, that thou mayest the better
conceive what I mean, I shall show these three
manners of reforming of a soul by example of
three men standing in the light of the sun. Of
the which one is blind, another can see, but hath
his eyes stopped, the third looketh forth with full
sight. The blind man hath no manner of know-
ledge that he is in the sun, but he believeth it if an
honest man tell him so ; and he betokeneth a soul
that is only reformed in Faith, that believeth in
God as holy Church teacheth, and understandeth
not what. This sufficeth as to salvation. That
other man seeth a light of the sun, but he seeth
it not clearly what it is, for his eyelid letteth him


240 The Scale of Perfection

that he cannot see ; but he seeth through the lids
of his eyes a glimmering of great light. And
this man betokeneth a soul that is reformed in
Faith and in feeling, and so he is Contemplative^
for he seeth somewhat of the Godhead of Jesus
through grace, not clearly nor fully ; for the lid,
that is, his bodily nature, is yet a wall betwixt
his nature and the nature of Jesus God, and let-
teth him from the clear sight. But he seeth
through this wall, after that grace toucheth him
more or less, that Jesus is God, and that Jesus is
sovereign goodness, and sovereign being, and
a blessed life, and that all other goodness cometh
from Him. Thus seeth the soul by grace, not-
withstanding its bodily nature, and the more
clean and subtle that the soul is made, and the
more it is separated from sensuality, the sharper
sight it hath and the greater love of the Divinity
of Jesus. This sight is so mighty that though
no other man living should believe in Jesus, nor
love Him, yet would he never believe the less,
nor love Him the less, for he seeth it so certainly
that he cannot but believe it.

The third man that hath full sight of the sun,
he believeth it not, for he seeth it fully. And he
betokeneth a full blessed soul, that without any
wall of his body or of sin, seeth openly the face
of Jesus in the bliss of Heaven. There is no
faith, and therefore he is fully reformed in feel-
ing. There is no state above the second reform-
ing that a soul can come to here in this life, for
this is the state of perfection and the way to
heavenward. Nevertheless, all the souls that
are in this state are not all alike in degrees ; for
some have it little, short and seldom ; and some
longer, clearer and oftener; and some have it
best of all, clearest and longest, according to the


The Third Book 241

abounding of grace, and yet all these have the
gift of Contemplation. For the soul hath not per-
fect sight of Jesus all at once, but at first a little
and a little, and after that it profiteth and cometh
to more feeling ; and as long as it is in this life
it groweth more in knowing, and in this love of
Jesus. And verily I know not what can be more
desirable to such a soul that hath felt a little of
it, than utterly to leave it and set at nought all
other things, for to hold only thereto, to have
a clearer sight and clearer love of Jesus, in whom
is all the Blessed Trinity.

This manner of knowing of Jesus, as I under-
stand, is the opening of Heaven to the eye of
a clean soul, of which holy men speak in their
writings. Not as some imagine, that the open-
ing of Heaven is as if a soul could see by imagi-
nation through the skies above the Firmament,
how our Lord Jesus sitteth in His Majesty, in
a bodily light, as much as an hundred suns. No,
it is not so ; no, though he see never so high on
this manner, verily he seeth not the spiritual
Heaven. The higher he soareth up above the
sun for to see Jesus God, thus by such imagi-
nation the lower he falleth beneath the sun.
Nevertheless, this kind of sight is tolerable in
simple souls that can seek no better for Him
that is invisible.


CHAPTER m

How Jesus is Heaven to the Soul, and why He is
called Fire

What then is Heaven to a reasonable soul r
Verily nought else but Jesus God. For if that
be Heaven only that is above all things, then

^ 16


242 The Scak of Perfection

is God only Heaven to man's soul, fi)r He
alone is above the nature of a souL Then if a
soul can through grace have knoixrledge of that
blessed natiire of Jesus, verily he seeth Heaven,
lor he seeth God. Therefore there be many men
that err in understanding of some words that are
spoken of God, for that they understand them
not spiritually.

Holy Writ saith, that a soul that will find
God must lift her inward eye upward, and seek
God above itself. Then some men tfiat would
do after this sa\4ng, understand this word above
themselves to signify the placing or setting of a
thing in place and worthiness above another, as
one element or planet is above another in situa-
tion and worthiness of a bodily place. But it is
not so taken spiritually ; for a soul is above each
bodily thing, not in place, or sight, but in purity
and worthiness of nature. Right so in the same
manner God is above all bodily and spiritual
creatures, not in place and sight, but in piuity
and worthiness of His unchangeable blessed
nature.

And therefore he that will wisely seek God,
and find Him, he must not run out with his
thoughts as if he would climb above the sun,
and part the firmament, and imagine the
Majesty like to a hundred suns. But he must
rather draw down the sun, and all the firma-
ment, and forget it, and cast it beneath him
where he is, and set all this and all bodily
things also at nought; and then, if he can,
think spiritually both of himself and of God
also. And if he do thus, then seeth the soul
above itself, then seeth it into Heaven.

Upon this same manner shall this word
wtihin be understood. It is commonly said


The Third Book 243

that a soul should see our Lord within all
things and withm itself. True it is, that our
Lord is withm all creatures, but not on that
manner that a kernel is hid within the shell of
a nut ; or as a little bodily thin^ is contained
within a greater. But He is within all crea-
tures, as holding and preserving them in their
being, through the subtlety and power of His
own blessed nature, and purity invisible. For
even as a thing that is most precious and most
clean is laid innermost, ri^'ht so by the same
likeness it is said that the nature of God, which
is most precious, most clean, most goodly, most
remote from bodily substance, is hid within all
things. And therefore he that will seek God
within, he must first forget all bodily things,
for all such things are without; and also his
own body; and he must forget thinking of Jiis
own soul, and think on the uncreated nature;
that is, Jesus, who made him, quickeneth him,
holdeth him, and giveth him reason, memory
and love, the which is within him through His
power and sovereign subtlety.

Upon this manner must the soul do, when
grace toucheth it, or else it will but little avail
to seek Jesus, and to find Him within itself, and
within all creatures as methinketh.

Also it is said in Holy Writ, that God is light, i St John
So sayeth St John : God is light. This light we
must not take for a bodily light ; but it must be
understood thus : God is light; that is, God is
truth and verity itself, for verity is spiritual light.
He then that most graciously knoweth verity,
best seeth God. And nevertheless it is likened
to corporal light, for this reason: Right as the
sun showeth to the bodily eye both itself and all
bodily things thereby; even so verity, that is,


244 The Scale of Perfection

God, showeth to the reason of the soul itself first,
and by itself all other spiritual things that are
needful to the knowing of a soul. Thus saith the
Psalm XXXV. Prophet : Domtne in lumme ttio videbimus lumen.
— Lordy we shall see Thy light by Thy light. That
is, we shall see Thee, who art verity, by Thyself.

Heh. xU. In like manner, it is said that God is fire.
Our God is wasting fire. That is to say, God is
not elementary fire, that heateth and burneth a
body, but God islove and charity. For as fire
wasteth all bodily things, that can be wasted,
even so the love of God burneth and wasteth all
sin out of the soul and maketh it clean, as fire
cleanseth all manner of metals. These words and
all other that are spoken of our Lord in Holy
Writ by bodily similitude, must needs be under-
stood spiritually, else there is no savour in them.
A^ljl the reason why such words are said of our
Lord in Holy Writ is this, for that we are so
carnal, that we cannot speak of God nor under-
stand anything of Him, unless we be first entered
by such words. But when the inner eye is open
through grace to have a little sight of Jesus, then
will the soul easily enough turn all such words of
bodily things into spiritual understanding. This
spiritual opening of the inner eye into knowing
of the Divinity, I call reforming in faith and feel-
ing. For then the soul feeleth somewhat in
understanding of that thing that it had before,
in naked believing, and that is the beginning
of Contemplation. Of the which St Paul saith

2 Cor, iv. thus : Non Coniemplantibus nobis qucB videntur^
&c. — Our Contemplatioft is not on things that are
seeny but on things unseen. For things that are
seen are passingy but things unseen are everlasting.'
To which sight every soul should desire to come,
both here in part, and in the bliss of Heaven


The Third Book 245

fiilly. For in that sight, and in that knowing

of Jesus fully, consisteth the bliss of a reasonable

soul and endless life. Thus saith our Lord : H(BC

est autem vita (Bternay &c, — This is eternal life, St/ohn-sy

that they know Thee the true God, and Thy Son

whom Thou hast sent.


CHAPTER IV

Of two manner of Loves, created and uncreated, and
how we are bound to love Jesus much for our
Creation ; but more for our Redemption ; and
most of all for our Salvation, through the gifts
of His Love

But now perhaps thou wonderest why, since this
knowing of God is the bliss and end of a Soul,
why I have said heretofore that a soul should
covet nought else but only the love of God, and
speak nothing of this sight that a soul should
covet it.

Unto this I may answer, that the sight of
Jesus is the full bliss of a soul ; but not only for
the sight, but also for the blessed love that
Cometh out of that sight. And because that
love Cometh out of knowing, and not knowing
out of love ; therefore it is said, that in knowing,
and in sight principally of God with love is the
bliss of a soul ; and the more He is known, the
better He is loved. But forasmuch as a soul
cannot arrive to this knowing, and the love that
Cometh out of it, without love, therefore I say
that thou must covet love; for love is a cause
why a soul cometh to this knowing, and to the
love that cometh out of it. And in what manner
that is, I shall tell thee more plainly.

Holy writers say, and true it is, that there


246 The Scale of Perfection

be two sorts of spiritual love : One is called
Created^ and the other Uncreated. Love uncreated
is God Himself, the Third Person in the Trinity,
that is the Holy Ghost. He is love uncreated,
I St John iv. and unmade ; as St John saith : God is love.
That is, the Holy Ghost Love created is the
affection of the soul produced by the Holy Ghost
out of the sight and the knowing of Verity ; that
is, God stirred up, and set upon him. This love
is called createdy for it is made by the Holy Ghost.
This love is not God in Himself, for it is made :
but it is the love of the soul felt by the sight of
Jesus, and stirred up towards Him only. Now
may you see that created love is not the cause
why a soul cometh to the spiritual sight of Jesus.
And some men think that they could love God so
fervently, as it were by their own strength, that
they might be worthy to have the spiritual know-
ing of Him. No, it is not so ; but love uncreated,
that is, God Himself, is cause of all this knowing.
For a blind wretched soul is so far from the clear
knowing, and the blessed feeling of His love,
through sin and frailty of its corporal nature,
that it could never come to it, if it were not for
the endless greatness of the love of God. But
because He loveth us so much, therefore giveth
He us His love, that is the Holy Ghost. He is
both the giver and the gift, and maketh us then
by that gift for to know and love Him.

Lo, this is the love that I spake of, that thou
shouldst only covet and desire this uncreated
love, that is, the Holy Ghost; for verily a less
thing or a less gift than He is cannot avail us,
to bring us to the blessed sight of Jesus. And
therefore ought we fully to desire and ask of
Jesus only this gift of love, that He would for
the greatness of His so blessed love touch our


\


The Third Book 247

hearts with His invisible light to the knowledge
of Himself, and make us partakers of His love ;
that as He loveth us, so we might love Him
again. Thus saith St John : Nos dihgamus > St John \
DeuTHy &c, — Let us love God noWy for He loved
us first. He loved us much when He made us
after His likeness ; but He loved us more when
He bought us with His precious Blood, by volun-
tary undertaking of death in His Humanity from
the power of the enemy and the pains of Hell ;
but He loveth us most when He giveth us the
gift of the Holy Ghost, that is, love, by the
which we know Him and love Him, and are
made secure that we are His sons chosen to
salvation. For this love are we more bound
to Him than for any other love that ever He
showed to us, either in our making or redeem-
ing. For though He had made us and bought
us, if He did not save us withal, what would
our making or redeeming profit us ? Verily
right nought.

Therefore the greatest token of love showed
to us, as methinketh, is this : That He giveth
Himself in His Godhead to our souls. He gave
Himself, first, in His manhood to us for our ran-
som, when He offered Himself to the Father of
Heaven upon the altar of the Cross.

This was a right fair gift, and a right great
token of love. But when He giveth Himself
in His Gt>dhead spiritually to our souls for our
salvation, and maketh us to know Him and to
love Him, then loveth He us fully; for then
giveth He Himself to us, and more cannot He
give us, nor could less suffice us. And for this
cause it is said that the justifying of a sinful
soul through forgiveness of sins is attributed*

• Arrected.


N


248 The Scale of Perfection

and appropriated principally to the working of
the Holy Ghost; for the Holy Ghost is love.
And in the justifying of a sinner, our Lord
Jesus showeth to a soul most of His love ; for
He putteth away all sin, and uniteth it to Him ;
and that is the best thing that He can do to
a soul ; and therefore it is attributed to the Holy
Ghost. The making of the soul is attributed to
the Father, as to the sovereign might and power
that He showeth in making of it. The redeeming
of it is attributed to the Son, as to the sovereign
skill and wisdom that He showed in His Man-
hood ; for He overcame the enemy principally
through wisdom, and not through strength. But
the justifying and full saving of a soul through
forgiveness of sins is appropriated to the Third
Person, that is, the Holy Ghost, for therein
showeth Jesus most love unto man's soul, and
for that thing should He be most loved of us
again. His making is common to us and all
unreasonable creatures ; for as He made us of
nought, so made He them, and therefore this
is a work of greatest might, but not of great-
est love. Also the Redemption is common to
us and all reasonable souls, as to Jews and
SaracenSy and to false Christian men ; for He
died for all souls alike, and bought them if
they would have the perfect love of it. And
also it is sufficient for the restoring of all,
though it be so that all have it not. And this
work had most of wisdom, not most of love.
But the justifying and sanctifying of our souls
through the gift of the Holy Ghost, that is
only the work of love, and is not common, but
a special gift only to chosen souls. And verily!
that is most the working of love to us that are
His chosen children.


The Third Book 249

This is the love of God that I spake of, which Love doth tOL
thou shouldst covet and desire ; for this love is
God Himself and the Holy Ghost. This love
uncreated, when it is given to us, it worketh in
our souls all that good is, and all that belongeth
to goodness. This love loveth us before we love
Him, for it cleanseth us first fi-om our sins, it
maketh us to love Him, and maketh our wills
strong to withstand all sins, and stirreth us up
to exercise ourselves through divers exercises
both bodily and ghostly in all virtues. It
stirreth us up also to forsake sin and carnal
aflFections and worldly fears. It keepeth us
from malicious temptations of the enemy, and
driveth us out from business and vanities of the
world, and fi-om the conversation of worldly
lovers. All this doth the uncreated love ot
Gt>d, when He giveth Himself to us; we do
right nought but suffer Him and assent to
Him ; for that is the most that we do to as-
sent willingly to His gracious working in us.
And yet is not that will fi-om and of ourselves
but of His making, so that methinketh He doth
in us all that is w^ done, and yet we see it not.

And He not only doth all thus, but after-
wards this love doth more; for He openeth the
eye of the soul, and showeth to the soul the sight
of Jesus wonderfully, and the knowledge of Him
as well as the soul can suffer it by little and
little ; and by that sight H« ravisheth all the
affections of the soul to Him, and then beginneth
the soul to know Him spiritually and to love
Him burningly. Then seeth the soul somewhat
of the nature of the blessed Divinity of Jesus,
how that He is all, and that He worketh all,
and that all good deeds that are done and good
thoughts are only of Him ; for He is all-sove-


250 The Scale of Perk

reign might and all-sovereigfn verity and
sovereign goodness. And therefore every
deed is done of Him and by Him. Anc
alone shall have the worship and the thani
I all good deeds, and nothing else but He

" though wretched men steal His worship

I for a while, yet at the last end shall verity j

r full well that Jesus did all, and man did ]

nought of himself. And then shall the thi
of God's goods that are not reconciled to
II here in this life be judged to death for their

And Jesus shall be fully worshipped and thai
of all blessed creatures for His working.
' love is nothing else but Jesus Himself, thai

love worketh all this in man's soul and refom
it in feeling to His likeness, as I have said bei
f and somewhat more shall say. This love br

eth into the soul the perfection of all virtues,
maketh it all clean and true, soft and easy,
tumeth it all into love and into liking. An
what manner He doth that I shall tell thee a 1
hereafter. This love draweth the soul from ^
beholding of worldly things into Contempla
of spiritual creatures and of the secrets of C
ftx)m sensuality into spirituality, from ear
feeling into heavenly savour.


.J .1


ii


, *


The Third Book 251


CHAPTER V

How that some Souls love Jesus by bodily Fervours,
and by their own human Affections that are
moved by Grace and by Reason* And how some
love Him more quietly * by spiritual Affections
only moved inwardly through spiritual Grace of
the Holy Ghost

Therefore I may truly say, that he that hath
most of this love here in this life, most pleaseth
God, and shall have most clear sight of Him, and
most fully love Him in the bliss of Heaven, for
that he hath the greatest gift of love here in
earth. This love cannot be had by a man's own
travail, as some imagine. It is freely had by the
gracious gift of Jesus after much bodily and
spiritual pains going before. For there are some
lovers of God that make themselves to love God
as it were by their own might; for they strain
themselves through great violence, and pant so
strongly, that they burst into bodily fervours, as
if they would draw God down from Heaven to
them. And they say in their hearts and with
their mouth : Ah, Lord ! I love Thee, and I will
love Thee, and I will suffer death for the love of
Thee. And in this manner of working they feel
great fervour and much grace. And true it is, I
think, this working good and meritorious, t if it be
well tempered with humility and discretion. But
yet these men love not, nor have the gift of love
on that manner that I speak of, neither do they
ask it so. For a soul that hath the gift of love
through gracious beholding of Jesus, as I mean,

•Rcstfully. t Mcdcful.


252 The Scak of Perfedioo

or that soul that hath it not jet, but would have
it, she is not busy to strain herself above her
strength, as it were by bodily might, fcr to have
it by bodily ferxours, and so fiar to feel the love
of Gody but thinketh herself to be rig-ht nought,
and that she can do right noug-ht of herself; box
as it were a dead thing, only depending and
borne up by the mercy of God. She seeth well
that Jesus is all, and doth all, and, therefore,
asketh she nought else but the gift of love ; for
since the soul seeth that her oim love is nought,
therefore she desireth His love, for that is enough.
Therefore she prayeth and desireth that the love
of God should touch her with His blessed light,
that she may see a little of Him by His gracious
presence, for then should she love Him ; and so
by this way cometh the gift of love, which is God,
into a soul. The more that a soul noughteth
itself through grace by sight of this verity, some-
time without any fervour showed outwardly, and
the less that it thinketh that it loveth or seeth
God, the nearer it approacheth* for to perceive the
gift of this blessed love ; for then is love master,
and worketh in the soul, and maketh it forget
itself, and for to see and look on only how love
worketh; and then is the soul more suffering
than doing, and that is pure love. Thus S/ Paul
Ram, viii. meant when he said thus : Quicumque spiritu Dei
aguntuTy &c. — T/i€y thai are ^rr ought by the spirit
of God are God's sons. That is, soids that are
made so hmnble, and so pliable t to God, that
they work not of themselves, but suffer the Holy
Ghost to stir and work in them the feelings of
love with a sweet chord to His stirrings. These
are in a special manner God's sons most like
unto Him.

* Ni£^beth. t Buxom.


The Third Book ^ 253

Other souls that cannot love thus, but travail
themselves by their own afflictions, and stir
themselves through their own thinking of Grod
and bodily exercise, for to draw out of them-
selves, by mastery, the feeling of love, by
fervours and other bodily signs, these love not
spiritually. They do well and meritoriously, it
so be they understand humbly that this their
working is not the kindly gracious feeling ot
love, but is a human acting of the soul at the
bidding of reason. And, nevertheless, through
the goodness of God, because the soul doth as
much as in it is, these human aflFections of the
soul stirred into God by man's working are
turned into spiritual aflFections, and are merito-
rious, as if they had been done spiritually in the
first beginning. And this is a great courtesy of
our Lord showed to humble souls, which turneth
all these human affections of natural love into
the affection and into the reward* of His own
love, as if He had wrought them all fully by
Himself. And so these human affections thus
turned may be called affections of spiritual love
through purchase, not through kindly bringing
forth of the Holy Ghost. I say not that a soul
can work such human affections only of itself
without grace; for I wot well that Si Paul saith
that we can do just nought, nor think anything
that is good of ourselves without grace. Noii 1 Cor. iii.
enim quod sumus sufficient eSy &c, — Not as tf we v
we were sufficient of ourselves to think anything as
of ourselves y but all our sufficiency is of God. For
God worketh in all both good work and good
will, as St Paul saith : // is God that worketh in Phil. ii.
us both to Will and to do^ according to His good
pleasure. But I say that such affections are
* Mede.


254 The Scale of Perfection

good, being made by the will and endeavours of
a soul according to the general grace that He
giveth to all chosen souls, not of special grace
made spiritually by the touching of His gracious
presence, as He worketh in His perfect love, as
I said before ; for in unperfect lovers love work-
eth at a distance by human aflfections ; but in
perfect lovers love worketh nearly by her own
spiritual affections, and killeth in a soul, for the
time, all other affections, both carnal, natural
and human ; and that is properly the working of
love by itself. Thus love may be had in some
measure,* in part, here in a pure soul through the
spiritual sight of Jesus; but in the bliss of
Heaven it is fulfilled by clear sight in His God-
head ; for there shall no affections be felt in a
soul but such as are divine and spiritual.


CHAPTER VI

That the Gift of Love, amongst all other Gifts of Jesus,
is most worthy and most profitable* And how
Jesus doth all that is well done in His lovers,
only for Love« And how Love maketh the
exercise of all .Virtues and all good Deeds light
and easy

Ask, then, of God nothing but this gift of love,
which is the Holy Ghost. For among all the
gifts that our Lord giveth there is none so good,
nor so profitable, so worthy, nor so excellent as
this is. For there is no gift of God that is both
the giver and the gift, but this gift of love ; and,
therefore, it is the best and the worthiest. The
gift of prophecy, the gift of working miracles, the
gift of great knowledge and counsel, and the

• In litUc.


0'


The Third Book 255

gift of great fasting, or of great penance doing,
or any other such, are great gifts of the Holy-
Ghost, but they are not the Holy Ghost, for
a reprobate and damnable soul may have all
these gifts as well as an elect soul. And, there-
fore, all these kinds of gifts are not greatly to be
desired or cared for much. But the gift of love
is the Holy Ghost, God Himself, and Him can no
soul have and withal be damned ; for that gift
alone saveth from damnation, and maketh it
God's son, and a receiver * of the heavenly heri-
tage. And that love, as I have said before, is
not the aflFection of love that is created in a
soul, but it is the Holy Ghost Himself, that is,
love uncreated, that saveth a soul. For He first
giveth Himself to that soul before the soul loveth
Him, and He formeth the affection in the soul,
and maketh the soul to love Him only for Him-
self. And not only so, but also by this gift the
soul loveth itself, and her neighbour as herself
only for God. And this is the gift of love that
maketh the distinction betwixt chosen and re-
probate souls. And this gift maketh perfect
peace betwixt God and a soul, and uniteth all
blessed creatures wholly in God ; for it maketh
Jesus for to love us, and us Him also, and each
of us to love one another in Him.

^ Covet this gift of love principally, as I have
said ; for if He please out of His grace to give it
thee on that manner, it shall open and enlighten
the reason of thy soul, to see verity, that is God,
and spiritual things. And it shall stir up thy
affections wholly and ftilly for to love Him. And
it shall work in thy soul only as He will, and
thou shalt behold Jesus reverently, with softness
of love, and see how He worketh. Thus com-

• Perceivcr.


9-

4


256 Tlie Scale of PerlectioQ

manded He by His Prophet that we should do,
Im zhr. saying thus : Vacate et vuiete quonutm ego sum
Deus, — Cease ye y and see that I am, God. That is,
ye that are reformed in feeling-, and have your
inner eye opened into sight of spiritual things,
cease ye sometime from outward working, and
see that I am (rod. That is, see only how I,
Jesus, God and Man, do ; behold ye Me, for I do
all, I am love, and for love I do all that I do, and
ye do nought. And that this is truth, I shall
show you, for there is no good deed done by you,
nor good thought felt in you, but what is done by
Me. That is, through power and wisdom and
love mightily, wisely and lovely, else it is no
good deed. But now it is true that I, Jesus, am
both power and wisdom and blessed love, and
ye are naught, for I am God. Therefore may
you easily see that I do all your good deeds, and
all your good thoughts, and all your good loves
in you, and ye do right nought. And yet, never-
theless, be all these good deeds called yours.
Not because ye work them principally, but for
that I give them unto you for love that I bear to
you. And, therefore, since I am Jesus, and for
love do all this, cease then ye from beholding of
yourselves, and set yourselves at nought, and
look on Me, and see that I am God, for I do all
this. This is somewhat of the meaning of that
verse of David before said.

See then and behold what love worketh in a
chosen soul, which he reformeth in feeling to his
likeness, when the reason is enlightened to the
spiritual knowing of Jesus, and to the feeling of
His love. Then bringeth love into the soul the
perfection of virtues, and tumeth them all into
quietness,* and into liking, as it were, without
* Softness.


The Third Book 257

working of the soul ; for the soul striveth not
much for the getting of them, as it did before ;
but it hath them easily, and feeleth them rest-
fully, only through the gift of love, that is, the
Holy Ghost. And that is a very great comfort,
and gladness unspeakable, when she feeleth
suddenly in herself (and scarce knows how) the
virtues of humility and patience, sobriety and
staidness,* chastity and purity and love to her
neighbour. And all other virtues which were
sometimes travaillous,t painftil and hard for to
keep, are now turned into easiness,} and liking,
and into wonderful lightness, insomuch that she
thinketh it no mastery nor difficulty to keep
every virtue, but it is most pleasing to him to
keep it, and all this is made by love.

Other men that stand in the way of common
charity, and are not yet got so far in grace, but
work under the command of reason, they strive
and fight all day against sins for the procuring
of virtues ; and sometimes they be above, and
sometimes beneath as wrestlers are.

These men do full well, they have virtues in
reason, and will, not in savour, nor in love. For
they fight with themselves as it were by their
own might for them ; therefore cannot they fully
have rest, nor perfectly the higher hand. Never-
theless they shall have great reward,§ but they
are not yet humble enough. They have not yet
put themselves altogether into God's hand, for
they see Him not yet. But a soul that hath
spiritual sight of Jesus taketh no great care of
striving for virtues for that time. He is not busy
about them particularly, but he maketh ic all his

* Sadness, t Laboursome. t Softness. § Full mede.

17


258 The Scale of Perfection

business to keep that sight, and that beholding
of Jesus which it hath for to hold the mind stably
thereto, and bind his love only to it, that it fall
not from it, but forget all other things as much
as it can. And when it doth thus, then is Jesus
verily Master against all sins, and overshadow-
eth it with His blessed presence, and getteth it
all virtues. And the soul is so comforted and so
borne up with the restful * feeling of love that it
hath of the sight of Jesus, that it feeleth no great
disease outwardly. And thus doth love generally
slay all sins in a soul, and refprmeth it in the new
feelings of virtues.

J*

CHAPTER Vn

How Love through gracious Beholding of Jestis dayeth
all stirrings of Pride t and maketh the Soul to lose
the savour and delignt in all earthly Honours t

Love fieeth NEVERTHELESS I shall tell thee more particularly
Pride, ^lovf love killeth sins in a soul, and reformeth vir-
tues. And first of Pride, and the virtue contrary
thereto, namely. Humility. Thou must under-
stand that there be two kinds of Humility ; one is
had by working of reason ; another is felt by the
special gift of love. Both are of love, but the
former love worketh by, and with the reason
of the soul, and the latter love worketh by her-
self. The first is imperfect, the other is perfect
The first a man feeleth from the beholding of his
own sins and wretchedness, through the which
beholding he thinketh himself unworthy to have
any gift of grace, or any reward of God, but
thinketh it enough that He would of His great
mercy, grant him forgiveness of his sins. And

* Soft. t Worship.


The Third Book 259

also he thinketh himself, because of his sins, to
be worse than the greatest sinner that liveth,
and that every man doth better than he. And
by such beholding thrusteth he himself down in
his thoughts under all men. And he is busy to
withstand the stirrings of pride as much as he
can, both bodily and spiritual pride, and des-
piseth himself so that he assenteth not to the
feelings of pride. And if his heart be taken
sometimes with it, that it be defiled with vain
joy of worship and praise from others; or from
the conceit of his wit, or of any other thing, as
soon as he perceiveth it he is displeased with
himself, and hath sorrow for it in heart, and
asketh forgiveness for it of God, and showeth
himself to his confessor, and accuseth himself
humbly, and receiveth his penance. This is good
humility, but it is not yet perfect humility ; for
it is of souls that are beginning and profiting in
grace caused by the beholding of their sins.
Love worketh this humility by reason.

Perfect humility a soul feeleth from the sight
and spiritual knowing of Jesus ; for when the
Holy Ghost lighteneth the reason into the sight
of verity, how Jesus is all, and that He doth all,
the soul hath so great love and so great joy in
that spiritual sight (for it is really so indeed) that
it forgetteth itself, fully leaneth to Jesus with all
the love that it hath to behold Him. It taketh
no heed * of any unworthinesss of itself, nor of
sins aforedone, but setteth at nought itself, with
all the sins, and all the good deeds that ever
it did, as if there were nothing but Jesus. Thus
was David humble when he said thus : Et sub- ^^* xxxviii.
stantia mea tanquam nthilurn ante Te, — And my

• Keep.


26o The Scale of Perfection

substance is as nothing before Thee. That is, Lord
Jesus, the sight of Thy blessed uncreated sub-
stance and of Thine endless Being- showeth well
unto me that my substance and being of my
soul is as nought in regard of Thee.

Also, such a soul in respect to his neighbour
hath no regard to him, nor judging of him,
whether he be better or worse than himself;
for he esteemeth himself and all other men to
be all alike, and to be just nought of themselves
in regard of God (and this Ls very so). For all
the goodness that is wrought in himself, or in
others, is only of God, whom he beholdeth as
all in all. And therefore setteth he all other
creatures at nought, as he doth himself. Thus
humble was the Prophet when he said thus:
Ua. xi Omnes gentes quasi non sint sic sunt coram «?, &c,
— All nations are before our Lord as if they were
7iot, and are reputed as nothing^ and as a vain
thing. That is, in comparison f of the endless
Being, and the imchangeable nature of Grod,
mankind is as nought; for of nought was it
made, and to nought shall it return, unless He
keep it in its being that made it of nought
This is truth, and this should make a soul
humble, if by grace it could see this truth.
Therefore when once love openeth the inner
eye of the soul, for to see this truth, with
other circumstances that attend it, then be-
ginneth the soul to be really humble; for then
through the sight of God it feeleth and seeth
itself as it is ; and then doth the soul forsake
the beholding and leaning upon itself; and
fully falleth to the beholding of Jesus. And
when it doth so, then setteth the soul nought

• Unnoteful. t Anentcs.


The Third Book 261

by all the joy and worship of the world, for the
joy of worldly worship is so little, and so nought,
in regard of that joy and of that love that it
feeleth in the spiritual sight of Jesus and know-
ledge of the truth that, though it might have it
without any sin, he would have nothing to do
with it. No, though men would worship him,
praise him, and favour him, or set him in great
state, it would nothing at all please him. No,
though he had great skill in all the seven liberal
sciences, and of all skill under the sun, or had
power to work all manner of miracles, yet would
he take no more delight* in all this, nor no more
savour than to gnaw on a dry stick. He had
rather forget all this, and to be alone out of the
sight of the world, than to think of them and be
worshipped of all men ; for the heart of a true lover
of Jesus is made so much, and so large through
a little sight of Him, and a little feeling of His
spiritual love, that all the liking and all the joy
of all the earth cannot suffice to fill a corner
of it. And then appeareth it well that these
wretched worldly lovers, that are, as it were,
ravished with the love of their own worship,
and pursue after it to have it with all the might
and all the wit they have, they have no taste of
this Humility, but are wondrous far from it. But
the lover of Jesus hath this humility lastingly,
and that not with heaviness and striving for it,
but with liking and gladness. The which glad-
ness he hath not therefore, because he forsaketh
the worship of the world, for that were a proud
humility belonging to an hypocrite ; but because
he hath a sight and a spiritual knowing of the
verity and worthiness of Jesus through the gift

* Dainty.


262 The Scale of Perfcctiofl

of the Holy Ghost. That reverend sight, and
that lovely beholding- of Jesus comforteth his love
so wonderfully, and beareth it up so mightily and
so easily,* that verily it cannot like, nor fiilly rest
in any earthly joy, nor would he if he could. He
maketh no matter whether men praise him or
dispraise t him, worship him or despise him ; as
to iiimself he sets it not to heart, neither to be
well pleased + for his greater humiliation^ when
men despise him, nor to be displeased when
men worship him or praise him. He had rather
forget both the one and the other, and only think
on Jesus, and get humility by that way. And
that is much the securer way whosoever can
attain to it. Thus did David when he said:

xxiv. OcnH met semper ad Dommuniy &c. — My eyes are
always to the Lord^ for He shall pluck my feet out
of the net. For when he doth so, then forsaketh
he utterly himself, and casteth himself wholly
under Jesus, and then is he in a secure guard ;
for the shield of Truth which he holdeth keepeth
him so well that he shall not be hurt through
any stirring of pride, as long as he holdeth him-
self within the shield. As the Prophet saith:

«c» 5« Scuto ctrcumdahit te Veritas ejus^ &c, — Verify shall
compass thee with a shield. And that is, if thou,
leaving all other things, only beholdest Him;
for then shall thou not dread far the night's dread]
that is, thou shalt not fear the spirit of pride,
whether he come by night or by day, as the next
verse saith thus : A sagitta volante in die — From
the arrow that flieth by day. Pride cometh by
night to assail a soul when it is despised and
contemned of other men, that thereby it should
fall into heaviness and into sorrow. It cometh


Softly. t Lack. % WeU paid.


The Third Book 263

also as an arrow flying on the day, when a man
is praised and worshipped of all men ; whether
it be for wordly doing or spiritual, that he should
have vain joy in himself, and to rest therein, and
false gladness in a thing that is passing. This
is a sharp arrow and a perilous, it fleeth swiftly,
and it striketh softly, but it woundeth deadly.
But the lover of Jesus, that stably beholdeth by
devout prayers, and busy thinking on him, is so
encompassed with the safe shield of Truth that
he dreadeth it not ; for this arrow cannot enter
into his soul. Nay, though it come it hurteth
him not, but glanceth * away and passeth forth.

And thus is the soul made humble, as I under-
stand, by the working of the Holy Ghost, that is,
the gift of love ; for He openeth the eye of the
soul to see and love Jesus, and He keepeth the
soul in that sight restfully and seciu*ely ; and He
slayeth all the stirrings of pride wonderftiUy and
privily and softly, and the soul knoweth t not how.
And also He bringeth in by that way verily and
lovely the virtue of humility. All this doth love,
but not in all lovers alike fully ; for some have
this grace but short and little, as it were in the
beginning of it, and a little assaying toward it ;
for the conscience is not yet cleansed ftilly through
grace. And some have it more fully, for they
have clearer sight of Jesus, and they feel more ot
this love. And some have it most ftilly, for they
have the full gift of Contemplation, Nevertheless,
he that hath the least on this manner that I have
said, I hope verily he hath the gift of perfect hu-
mility, for he hath the gift of perfect love.

♦ Glentcth. f Wotteth.


264 The Scale of Perfedioa


CHAPTER vm

How Lofwt skyetli all sdnings of Wraitli and EoTy
eaaily;* and refermeth in the Soul the VirCues cc
Peace and Patience, and of perfect CbMritf to Ids
Neighbour, as He did BptOAUf in the Apoetla

r/A LovEy where it worketh, worketh wisely and
' easily* in a soul ; for he slayeth nnghtily anger
and envy, and all passions of wrath and melan-
choly in ity and bringeth into the soul the vir-
tues of patience and mildness, peaceableness
and amity to his neighbour. It is full hard
and a great mastery for a man that standeth
only in working of his own reason to keep
patience, holy rest and softness in heart and
charity to his neighbour, when they use him
hardly and do him wrong, that he do not
through motion or rising of anger or bitter-
ness t within him something against them, either
by word or deed, or both. (And nevertheless
though a man be stirred and troubled in himself
and made unrestfiil, if so be it passeth not too
much the bounds of reason, and that he keep his
hands and his tongue, and be ready to forgive
the trespass when forgiveness is asked, yet this
man hath the virtue of patience, though it be but
weak and nakedly. Forasmuch as he desires to
have it, and laboureth busily in restraining his
unruly passions to the end that he may have
it, and also is sorry that he hath it not as he
should.) But to a true lover of Jesus it is no
great mastery for to suffer all this; for why?
Love fighteth for him, and slayeth wondrous

* Softly. t Melancholy,


i


The ThircJ Book» 265

easily such stirringfs of wrath and of melan-
choly ; and maketh his soul so easy and so
peaceable, so suffering and so goodly, through
the spiritual sight of Jesus, with the feeling of
His blessed love, that though he be despised
and contemned of other men, or suffer wrong or
harm, shame or villainy, he heedeth * it not, he is
not much stirred against them ; he will not be
angered nor stirred against them, for, if he were
much stirred, he should forego the comfort which
he feeleth within his soul, but that will he not.
He can lightlier forget all the wrong that is done
hira than another man can forgive it, though for-
giveness t was asked him ; and so he had rather J
forget it ; for he thinketh it most easy to him.
And love doth all this, for love openeth the eye
of the soul to the sight of Jesus, and establisheth
it with the pleasure § and content of love that it
feeleth by that sight, and comforteth it so mightily
that it taketh no heed II whatever men jangle or do
against him ; it resteth IT nothing upon him ; the
greatest harm that he can suffer is a forbearing
of the spiritual sight of Jesus ; and therefore it
is better** for him to suffer all harms than that
alone. All this can the soul do well and easily
without great disturbing of this spiritual sight,
when the grievances fall outwardly and touch
not the body, as do backbitings or scornings
or spoiling of his goods. All these grieve him
nought ; but it goeth somewhat nearer when his
flesh is touched, and he feeleth smart, then is it
harder.

Nevertheless, though it be hard and impos-
sible to the frail nature of man to suffer bodily

• Chargreth. f Mercy. t Well lever. § Likingf.
U Kepe, m Hangeth. ** Lever.


266 The Scale of Perfection

penance gladly and patiently, without bitter
stirrings of ire, anger and melancholy, and yet
it is not impossible to love, that is, the Holy
Ghost for to work this in a soul, when He
toucheth it with the blessed gift of love. But
He giveth a soul that is in that plight mightily
the feelings of love, and wonderfully fasteneth
it to Jesus, and separateth it very far from sen-
suality through His secret might, and comforteth
it so sweetly by His blessed presence that the
soul feeleth little pain or else none at all in the
sensual part ; and this is a special grace given to
the holy Martyrs.

This grace had the Apostles, as holy Writ
saith of them thus : Ibant Apostoli gaudentes, &c.
AcfsY — TAe Apostles went from the Council rejoicings
when they were beaten with scourges^ and they were
glad that they were accounted worthy to sujfer any
bodily pain for the love of Jesus. They were not
stirred to anger, nor to bitterness,* to be revenged
on the Jews that beat them, as a worldly man
would be when he suffered a little harm, were it
never so little, from his neighbour. Nay, they
were not stirred to any pride, nor highness of
mind, nor to disdain or judge the JewSy as hypo-
crites and heretics are who will suffer much
bodily pain, and are sometimes ready to suffer
death with great gladness and with mighty will,
as it were in the name of Jesus, for love of Him.
Verily, that love and that gladness that they have
in suffering of bodily mischief is not of the Holy
Ghost, it Cometh not from the fire that burneth
on the High Altar of Heaven, but it is feigned
by the enemy, inflamed of hell ; for it is fully

* Felness.


The Third Book 267

mingled with the height of pride, and of pre-
sumption of themselves, of despite and judging
and disdaining of those that thus punish them.
They imagine that all this is charity, and that
they suffer all that for the love of God, but they
are beguiled by the mid-day fiend.

A true lover of Jesus, when he suffereth harm
firom his neighbour, is so strengthened through
grace of the Holy Ghost, and is made so humble,
so patient, so peaceable, and that so really, that
what harm or wrong soever he suffereth from
his neighbour, he still preserveth his humility,
he despiseth him not, he judgeth him not, but he
prayeth for him in his heart, and hath pity and
compassion on him much more tenderly than
of another man that never did him harm ; and
verily loveth him better, and more fervently de-
sireth the salvation of his soul, because he seeth
that we shall have so much spiritual profit out of
that evil deed of that man though it be against
his will. But this love and this meekness is
wrought only by the Holy Ghost above the
nature of man in them whom He maketh true
lovers of Jesus.

CHAPTER IX

How Love slayeth Covetousness, Lechery and Glut*
tony, and the fleshly delight and savour in all the
five Bodily Senses, softly and easily, through a
gracious beholding of Jesus
COVETOUSNESS also is slain in a soul by the Love slave
working of love, for it maketh the soul so Covetousm
covetous of spiritual good and so inflamed to
heavenly riches that it setteth right nought by


268


The Scale of Perfection


Love slayeth

Nalutal

Affections.


all earthly things. It hath no more joy in the
having of a precious stone than a chalk-stone ;
no more love hath he in an hundred pounds than
in a pound of lead. It setteth all things that
must perish at one price; he heedeth no more
the one than the other, as to his love ; for he
knows well that all these earthly things which
worldly men set so great price by and love so
dearly must pass away and turn to nothings both
the thing itself and the love of it. And therefore
he woriceth his thoughts betimes'into that judge-
ment and esteem of them which they must come
to hereafter, and so accounteth them as nought.
And when worldly lovers strive and fight and
plead for earthly goods, who may first have
them ; the lover of Jesus striveth with no man,
but keepeth himself in peace, and is well con-
tented with that which he hath, and will strive
for no more; for he thinketh that he needs no
more of all the riches on earth than a scanty
bodily sustenance for to sustain his bodily life
withal, as long as it pleaseth God, and that he
can easily have. And therefore would he have
no more than he barely needeth for the time,
that he may fireely be discharged from the trouble
of keeping and spending of it, and fully give his
heart and his business about the seeking of Jesus
for to find Him in cleanness of spirit ; for that is
all his covetousness ; for why ? — only the clean in
heart shall see Him.

Also, the fleshly love of father and mother
and other worldly friends hangeth not upon him.
It is even cut from his heart with the sword of
spiritual love, so that he hath no more aflFection
to father or mother, or to any worldly friend than
he hath to another man, except he see or feel in
them more grace or more virtue than in other


The Third Book 269

men, or except that his father or mother hath
the selfsame grace that some other men have.
But if they be not so, then loveth he other men
better than them, and that is charity. And thus
doth God's love slay covetousness of the world,
and bringeth into the soul poverty of spirit. And
that doth love, not only in them that have right
nought of worldly goods, but also in some crea-
tures that are in great worldly state and have
earthly riches to spend. Love slayeth in some
of them covetousness so far forth that they have
no more liking nor savour in having of them
than of a straw. No, though it should so happen
that they should lose them through default of
those that should look after them, yet set they
nought thereby. For why ? — the heart of Grod's
lover is, through the gift of the Holy Ghost,
taken so ftiUy with the sight of the love of
another thing, which is Jesus, and that is so
precious and so worthy that it will receive no
other love to rest in it that is contrary thereto.

And not only doth love this, but also it slay- Lvot slayi
eth the liking of Lechery and all other bodily Lechery.
uncleanness, and bringeth into the soul true
chastity, and tumeth it into liking. For the
soul feeleth so great delight in the sight of
Jesus that it liketh for to be chaste, and it is
no great difficulty to it to keep chastity, for
therein is most ease and most rest.

And in the same manner the gift of love HowLov^
slayeth the lusts of Gluttony, and maketh the ^^^^^^^ ^
soul sober and temperate, and beareth it up so ^^^*
mightily that it cannot rest in the liking of meat
and drink. But it taketh such meat and drink,
whatever it be, as least hindereth or chargeth the
bodily complexion, if it can easily come by it ;
nor for the love of itself, but for the love of Grod.


r


i


i


270 The Scale of Perfectioi

On this wise the lover of Grod seeth well that h
needeth to sustain his bodily life with meat am
drink, as long as Grod will sufier them to con
tinue together. Here, then, will be the discre
tion of the lover of Jesus, as far as I understand
that hath feeling and working in love, that ii
what manner he may best keep his grace whole
and be least letted from working in it througl
taking of bodily sustenance, so shall he do
That kind of meat, which least letteth anc
least troubleth the heart, and may keep tin
body in strength, be it flesh, be it fish, be ii
bread and ale, that I suppose the soul choosett
for to have, if it can come thereby. For the
whole business of the soul is to think on Jesuf
with reverent love, constantly, without letting 01
anything, if that it might. And therefore since
it must needs be letted somewhat and hindered
the less it is letted and hindered by meat 01
drink or any other thing the better it is. It hac
rather use the best meat and most costly if it lesi
hinder the keeping of his heart, than to take
only bread and water, if that hinder him more
for he hath no regard for to get great merit bj
the pain of fasting, and be put thereby from soft-
ness and quietness of heart, but all his business
is for to keep his heart as stably as he can in tin
sight of Jesus and in the feeling of His love
And surely I am of the opinion that he may wit!
less lust and liking use the best meat, that L
good in its kind, than another man that worketl
all by reason without the special gift of love cai
use the worst. Ever excepting such meat as it
dressed with art and curiosity only for lust, foi
such manner of meat cannot at all accord wit!
him. And also on the other side, if little meat
as only bread and beer, most helpeth and quiet-


The Third Book 271

eth his heart, and keepeth it most in peace, that
is most acceptable to him for to use ; and, namely,
if he feel his bodily strength sustained thereby,
and have the gift of love withal.

And yet doth love more, for it slayeth sloth i^e slayt
and fleshly idleness, and maketh the soul to be Sloth and
occupied in goodness, and, namely, inwardly in ^^^^^s^*
beholding of him, by virtue whereof the soul
hath savour and spiritual delight in praying, in
meditating, and in all manner of doing that be-
longeth to him to do according to the state
he is in, without heaviness or painfiil bitter-
ness, whether, he be religious or secular.

Also, it slayeth the vain likings of the five Love slayt
bodily senses. As first of the sight of the eyes, J^ ^{^^^
so that the soul hath no liking in the sight of any Sensesi^
worldly thing, but feeleth rather pain and disease
in beholding of it, be it never so fair, never so
precious, never so wonderful. And, therefore, as
worldly lovers run out sometimes for to see new
things, for to wonder at them, and so for to feed
their hearts with the vain sight of them ; rigfht so
a lover of Jesus is busy for to run away, and
withdraw himself from the sight of such manner
of things, that the inner sight be not letted ; for
he spiritually seeth another manner of thing,
which is fairer and more wonderful, and that
would he not forbear.

Right on the self-same wise is it of speaking
and hearing. It is a pain to the soul of a lover
of Jesus for to speak or hear anything that might
let the freedom of his heart from thinking on
Jesus, whatever song, or melody, or music* out-
ward it be, if it hinder the thought that it can-
not freely and restfiilly pray, or think on him,

* Minstrelsy.


272 The Scale of Perfection

it liketh him right nought. And the more
delectable it is to other men, the more un-
savoury it is to him. And also to hear any
manner of speaking of other men, unless it be
somewhat touching the working of his soul into
the love of Jesus, it liketh him right nought, he
is right soon weary of it. He had rather be in
peace, and hear right nought, nay speak right
nought, than for to hear the speaking and the
teaching of the greatest Clerk on earth, with
all the reasons that he can say to him by human
wit, except he can speak feelingly and stirringly
of the love of Jesus; for there lies his skill* princi-
pally. And therefore would not he speak of any-
thing else, nor hear, nor see anything, but what
might help him, and further him into more know-
ledge, and to better feeling of Him.

Of worldly speech it is no doubt that he hath
no savour in speaking, nor in hearing of it, nor
in worldly tales, nor tidings, nor in any such
vain jangling that belongeth not to Him. And
the same is of smelling and tasting. The more
the thoughts are distracted and broken from
spiritual rest by the use either of smelling, or
tasting, or of any of the senses, the more he
avoideth it. The less that he feeleth of them,
the better t he is. And if he could live in the
body without the feeling of any of them he
would never feel them, for they trouble the
heart oft-times, and put it from rest; but they
cannot fiiUy be eschewed. Nevertheless the
love of Jesus is sometimes so mighty in a soul,
that it overcometh and slayeth all that is con-
trary thereto for a time.

• Craft, t Lever.


The Third Book ^73


CHAPTER X

What Virtues and Graces a Soul receiveth through
opening of the inner eye into the gracious Be^
holding of Jesus^ and how it cannot be gotten
only by Man^s Labour^ but through special Grace
and his own Labour also

Thus worketh love in a soul, opening the
ghostly eye into the beholding of Jesus by in-
spiration of special grace, and maketh it pure,
subtle and able to the work of Contemplation.
What this opening of the spiritual eye is the
greatest scholar on earth cannot imagine by his
wit nor show fully by his tongue ; for it cannot
be gotten by study, nor by man's industry alone,
but principally by grace of the Holy Ghost, and
with human industry. I am afraid to speak
anything of it, for methinketh that I cannot, it
passeth my attempt,* and my lips are unclean.
Nevertheless, because it seems to me that love
asketh, yea, love biddeth that I should, therefore
shall I say a little more of it as I hope love
teacheth. This opening of the spiritual eye is
that lightsome darkness and rich nought that
I spake of before, and it may be called purity
of spirit and spiritual resty tnward stillness and
peace of consciencey highness of thought and loneli-
tress of souly a Itvely feeling of grace and re-
tiredness^ of hearty the watchful sleep of the spouse
and tasting of heavenly savoury burning in love
and shining in lighty the gateX of Contemplation
and reforming in feeling. All these expressions
are found in holy writings of divers men, for

• Assay. t Privity. % Entre.

18


('


I


274 The Scale of Perfect!

every one of them speaketh according" to
feeling in grace. And thoug-h all these
divers in show of words, yet are they all c
in meaning and verity ; for that soul wh
through visiting of grace hath one of th(
hath all. For why r a soul sighing- to see 1
Face of Jesus when it is touched throu
special grace of the Holy Ghost, it is sudder
changed, and turned from the state that it ^
in into another manner of feeling. It is wond(
fully separated and drawn first into itself, fi"C
the love and the liking of all earthly things,
much that it hath lost the savour of the bodi
life, and of all things save only Jesus. Ai
then is it clean from all the filth of sin, so i
forth that the minding of itself, and all oth
inordinate affections to any creature is sudden
washed and wiped away, so that there remai
no middle thing or impediment betwixt Jesi
and the soul, but only the bodily life, and th<
it is in spiritual rest. For why? all painf
doubts and fears, and all other temptations
spiritual enemies are driven out of the heai
that they trouble not, nor sink not into it f
the time. It is in rest from the annoyance
worldly business, and painful hindrances
wicked stirrings ; but it is full busy in the fi-i
spiritual working of love. And the more
laboureth so, the more rest it feeleth.

This restful labouring is full far from flesh
idleness and fi-om blind security. It is full <
spiritual working, but it is called rest, for th,
grace loseth the heavy yoke of fleshly lo^
from the soul, and maketh it mighty and fr(
through the gift of spiritual love for to woi
gladly, softly and delectably in all things 1
which grace stirreth it to work in. And then


The Third Book 275

fore it is called an holy tdlenesss and a resi most
busy, and so it is in regard of stillness from the
great crying of the beastly noise of fleshly de-
sires and unclean thoughts. This stillness is
made by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost
through the beholding of Jesus. For why ? His
voice is so sweet and so mighty that it putteth
to silence in a soul all the jangling of all other
speakers ; for it is a voice of power,* softly
founded in a pure soul, of the which the Prophet
saith thus : Vox Domini in virtute, — The voice of Psalm xxi
our Lord Jesus is with power. This voice is a
lively word, and speedy, as the Apostle saith:
Vivus est sermo Dei, &c, — The word of the Lord ^^^* »▼•
ts lively and powerful, more piercing than any
sword is. Through speaking of this word is
fleshly love slain, and the soul kept in silence
from all wicked stirrings. Of this silence it is
said in the Apocalypse thus : Factum est silentium Apoc. vUi.
in cceloy &c. — Silence was mcuie in Heaven as it
were half an hour. By Heaven is meant a pure
soul lifted up through grace from earthly love
to heavenly conversation, and so it is in silence.
But forasmuch as that silence cannot last whole
continually by reason of the corruption of the
bodily nature; therefore it is compared to the
time of half an hour, a very short time the
soul thinketh it to be, though it be never so
long ; and therefore it is but half an hour.

And then hath it peace in conscience. For
why? Grace putteth out the gnawing, pricking,
striving and fighting of sins, and bringeth in
peace and concord, and maketh Jesus and a
soul both one in full agreement of will. There
is no upbraiding of sins, nor sharp reproving of

• Virtue.


276 The Scale of Perfection

faults made at that time in a soul, for they have
kissed and are made friends, and all is forgiven
that was done amiss.

Thus feeleth the soul, then, with great humble
security and great spiritual gladness, and con-
ceiveth a full ^eat * ^certainty of salvation by
this accordmakmg ; for it heareth a secret wit-
nessing of the Holy Ghost to the conscience,
that he is a chosen son to a heavenly heritage.
Rom. viii. Thus St Paul saith : Ipse Spiritus testttnontum
perhibet spirtiui nostra^ &c, — 7Ae Holy Spirit bear-
eth witness to our spirit that we are God's sons.

This witnessing of conscience verily felt
through grace is the very joy of the soul, as
the Apostle saith : Gloria mea est testimonium^
2 Cor, I fy'c. — My joy is the witness of my conscience :
and that is, when it witnesseth peace and
accord, true love and friendship betwixt Jesus
and a soul. And when it is in this peace,
then is it in highness of thought.

When the soul is bound with the love of the
world, then is it beneath all creatures ; for every-
thing goeth over it, and beareth it down by
mastery, that it cannot see Jesus nor love Him.
For even as the love of the world is vain and
fleshly, right so the beholding and thinking and
using of all creatures is fleshly; and that is a
thraldom of the soul. But then through open-
ing of the spiritual eye into Jesus the love is
turned, and the soul is raised up according to
its own nature above all bodily creatures. And
then the beholding and thinking, and the using
of them is spiritual, for the love is spiritual.
The soul hath then great disdain to be obedient t
to the love of worldly things, for it is high

* Boldness. + Buxom,


The Third Book 277

set above them through grace. It setteth
nought by all the world. For why ? It will all
pass away and perish. Unto this highness of
heart, as long as the soul is kept therein,
Cometh no error nor deceit of the enemy; for
Jesus is really in sight of the soul at that time,
and all other things are beneath it. Of this the
Prophet speaketh thus : Accedat homo ad cor altum Psalm Ixii
et exaltabitur Deus. — Lei a man come to a high
hearty and God shall he exalted. That is, a man
that through grace cometh to the highness of
thought shall see that Jesus is only exalted
above all creatures, and he in Him.

And then is the soul thus set aloft, estranged
from the fellowship of worldly lovers, though his
body be in the midst among them, full far is
he parted from carnal affections of creatures. He
careth not though he never see man, nor speak
with him, nor have comfort from him, that he
might for ever continue in that spiritual feeling.
He feeleth so great familiarity* of the blessed
presence of our Lord Jesus, and so much savour
of Him, that he can easily for love of Him forget
the fleshly affection and the fleshly mind of all
creatures. I say not that he shall not love nor
think of other creatures, that he shall think on
them in fitting time, and see them and love them
spiritually and freely, not fleshly and painfully
as he did before. Of this loneliness speaketh
the Prophet thus : Dticam earn in solitudinemy Osee il
&c, — I will lead her into solttudey^ and I will
speak to her heart. That is, the grace of Jesus
leadeth the soul from troublesome J company
of fleshly desires into loneliness of thought, and
maketh it forget the liking of the world, and

♦ Homeliness. t Oneliness. % Noyous.


278 The Scale of Perfccti


;ion


soundeth by sweetness of His inspiration words
of love in the ears of the heart. A soul is
thus lonely when it loveth Jesus, and attendeth
fully to Him, and he hath lost the savour and
the comfort of the world ; and that it may
better keep this loneliness^ it fleeth the company
of men as much as it can ; and seeketh loneliness
of body, which helpeth much to the loneliness
of the soul, and to the free working- of love, the
less hindrance that it hath from without of vain
jangling-s, or from within of vain thinking, the
more free it is in spiritual beholding-. And so
it is in retiredness* of heart.

A soul is all without, whilst it is overlaid and
blinded with worldly love, it is as common as the
highway, for every stirring which cometh from
the flesh or from the fiend sinketh in or goeth
through it. But then through grace it is drawn
into the privy-chamber, into the sight of our
Lord Jesus, and heareth His privy counsel, and
is wonderfully comforted in the hearing. Of this
Isa. XXIV. speaketh the Prophet thus : Secretum meum. mihi^
secretum meum mihi, — My privily to me^ my privity
to me. That is, the lover of Jesus, through inspi-
ration of grace, taken up from outward feeling of
worldly love, and ravished into the privity of
spiritual love, yieldeth thanks to Him, saying
thus : My privity to me. That is, my Lord Jesus,
Thy privity is showed to me, and privily hid from
all lovers of the world; for it is called hidden
Manna, which may easier be asked than told
what it is. And that our Lord Jesus promiseth
to His lover, saying thus : Dabo sibi Manna abscon-
Apoc, ii. dituvty &c, — / 7vill give her the hidden Manna
which no man knoweth but he that taketh it. This

♦ Privity,


The Third Book 279

Manna is heavenly meat, and angels' food, as
the Scripture saith; for angels are fully fed
and filled with clear sight in burning love ot
our Lord Jesus, and that is Manna; for we
may ask what it is, but cannot know what it is.
But the lover of Jesus is not yet filled here, but
is fed with a little taste of it, whilst he is bound
in this bodily life.

This tasting of this Manna is a lively feeling
of grace had through the opening of the spiritual
eye. And this grace is not another grace from
that which a chosen soul feeleth in the beginning
of his conversion ; but it is the self-same grace,
only it is otherwise felt and showed to a soul.
For why ? Grace groweth with a soul, and the
soul groweth with grace. And the clearer that a
soul is parted from the love of the world, the
more mighty is its grace, the more inward and
more spiritual is the showing of the presence of
our Lord Jesus come to be. So that the same
grace which at first turneth him from sin, and
maketh him beginning and profiting by gifts
of virtue and exercise of good works, maketh
him also perfect. And that grace is called a
/ively feeling of grace; for he that hath it
feeleth it well, and knoweth well by experience
that he is in grace. It is full lively to him ; for it
quickeneth the soul wonderfully, and maketh
it so whole that it feeleth no painful disease
of the body, though it be feeble and sickly. For
why ? Then is the body most mighty, most whole
and most restful, and the soul also. Without
this grace the soul cannot live but in pain ; for it
thinketh that it can keep it for ever, and nothing
can put it away ; but it is not so, for it passeth
away full easily. Nevertheless though the sove-
reign feeling passeth away, and is withdrawn,


280 The Scale of Perfection

the virtue* of it stayeth still, and keepeth the
soul in sobriety,! and maketh it to desire the
coming again thereof.

Canf. V. And this is the waking sleep of the Spouse, of
the which the Scripture thus : Ego dormto, el cor
meum vtgtlat, — I sleeps and my heart waketh.
That is, I sleep spiritually when through grace
the love of the world is slain in me, and wicked
stirrings of fleshly desires are dead, insomuch
that I scarce feel them. I am not held by them,
my heart is made free. And then it waketh, for
it is quick and ready to love Jesus, and see Him.
The more I sleep from outward things, the more
am I awake in knowing of Jesus and of inward
things. I cannot be awake to Jesus, except I
sleep to the world. And therefore the grace of
the Holy Ghost, shutting the fleshly eye, causeth
the soul to sleep from worldly vanities, and
opening the spiritual eye, keepeth it awake to
the sight of God's majesty covered % under the
cloud of His precious Humanity. As the Gospel
saith of the Apostles, when they were with our
Lord Jesus in His transfiguration, first they

Lulexyi, slept: Et evtgtlantes viderunt majestatem, — They
waking beheld His glory. By sleep of the Apostles
is understood the dying of worldly love through
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; by their
awaking is understood their Contemplation of
Jesus. Through this sleep the soul is brought
into rest from the noise of fleshly lust, and
through waking is raised up to the sight of
Jesus and spiritual things. The more that the
eyes are shut§ in this manner of sleep from
the appetite of earthly things, the sharper is
the inner sight in lovely beholding of heavenly


\


* Relief. f Sadness. % Helid. § Spered,


The Third Bcx>k 281

beauty.* This sleeping and this waking doth
love work through the light of grace in the
soul of the lover of our Lord Jesus,


CHAPTER XI

How such special Grace for the Beholding of our
Lord Jesus is withdrawn sometimes from a
Soul : and how a Soul is to behave herself in
the Absence and in the Presence of Jesus^ and
how a Soul shall ^ alway desire (as much as
is in her) the gracious Presence of Jesus

Show me then a soul that through inspiration
of grace hath this opening of the spiritual sight
into the beholding of Jesus that is separated
and drawn out from the love of the world, so
far forth that it hath purity and privity of spirit,
spiritual rest, inward silence and peace of con-
science, highness of thought, loneliness and
privity of heart, the waking sleep of the Spouse,
that hath lost the liking and joys of the world,
taken with delight of heavenly savour, ever
thirsting and softly hasting t after that blessed
presence of Jesus; and I dare boldly J pronounce
that this soul bumeth all in love, and shineth
in spiritual light, worthy to come to the name
and to the worship of the Spouse ; for it is
reformed in feeling, made able and ready to
Contemplation. These are the tokens of inspira-
tion in opening of the spiritual eye. For when
the eye is opened, the soul is in full feeling of
all the aforesaid virtues for that time.

Nevertheless it falleth out oftentimes that TkeStaU
grace withdraweth in part by reason of the <*t^^^iii^

* Fairhead. f Highing. % Hardly.


282 The Scale of Perfection

corruption of man's frailty, and suffereth then
the soul to fall into itself in sensuality,* as it was
before; and then is the soul in pain and in
sorrow, for it is blind and unsavoury and can do
no good. It is weak and impotent, encumbered
with the body and all the bodily senses. It
seeketh and desireth after the grace of Jesus
again, and it cannot find it ; for the Scripture
Job xxxiv. saith thus of our Lord : Postquam vultum suum
absconder ity &c, — When our Lord hath hid His
face^ there is none that can behold Him, When He
showeth His face, the soul cannot but see Him,
for He is light ; and when He hideth Himself, it
cannot see Him, for the soul is dark.

His hiding is but a subtle trying of the soul.
His showing is a wonderful merciful goodness in
comfort of the soul. Wonder not though the
feelings of grace be sometimes withdrawn from a
lover of Jesus ; for holy Writ saith the same of
the Spouse, that it fareth thus with her : Qucesivi
Cant ill. et non inveni tllum^ &c. — / sought HiiUy and
I found Him not; I calledy and He answered
not. That is, when I fall down to my frailty and
sin, then grace withdraweth ; for my falling is
the cause thereof, and not His flying, but then
feel I pain of my wretchedness in His absence.
And, therefore, I sought Him by great desire of
heart, and He gave to me not so much as a
feeble answer. And then I cried with all my
Cant vi. soul: ReverterCy dilecte mi — Turn again^ Thou my
beloved. And yet He seemed as if He heard me
not. The painful feeling of myself, and the
assailing of fleshly loves and fears in this time,
and the wanting of my spiritual strength is a
continual crying of my soul to Jesus. And


\


• Fleshly heed.


The Third Book 283

nevertheless our Lord maketh strange, and
Cometh not, cry I never so fast ; for He is sure
enough of His lover, that he will not turn again
to worldly loves quite ; he can have no savour in
them, and, therefore, stayeth He the longer.

But at the last when He pleaseth. He cometh
again full of grace and faithfulness,* and visiteth
the soul that languisheth through desire, by
sighings of love after His presence, and toucheth
it, and anointeth it full gently t with the oil of
gladness, and maketh it suddenly whole from all
pain. And then crieth the soul to Jesus in a
spiritual voice with a glad heart thus : OUum
effusum Nomen tuum, — Thy Name ts as oil poured ^^^^ '•
ouL Thy Name is Jesus, that is, health. Then
as long as I feel my soul sore and sick by reason
of sin, pained with the heavy burthen of my
body, sorrowful and fearful for perils and
wretchedness of this life, so long, Lord Jesus,
Thy Name is oil shul up^ not poured forth. But
when I feel my soul suddenly touched with the
light of Thy grace, healed and cured J from all the
filth of sin, and comforted in love and in light
with spiritual strength and gladness unspeakable,
then can I say with lusty, loving and spiritual
might to Thee : Thy Name^ O JesUy is to me oil
poured forth. For by the effect of Thy gracious
visitation I feel well the true exposition of Thy
Name, that Thou art Jesus, healthy for only Thy
gracious presence healeth me from sorrow and
from sin.

Happy is that soul that is ever fed with feel-
ing of love in His presence, or is borne up by
desire to Him in His absence. A wise lover is
he, and well taught, that soberly and reverently

• Sothfastness. t Softly. % Softed.


284 T'he Scale of Perfection

behaveth himself in His presence, and lovely
beholdeth Him without dissolute lightness, and
patiently and easily beareth His absence without
venomous despair and over painful bitterness.

This changeability of the absence and pre-
sence of Jesus, which a soul feeleth, is neither
the perfection of the soul nor is it contrary to the
grace of perfection or of Contemplation^ but only
a state of less perfection ; for the more letting
that a soul hath of itself from the constant feeling
of grace, the less is the grace ; and yet, neverthe-
less, is the grace in itself grace of Contemplation,
This changeability of absence and presence
falleth as well in the state of perfection as in the
state of beginning, but after another manner;
for even as there is diversity of feeling in the
presence of grace betwixt these two states, right
so is there in the absence of grace. And, there-
fore, he that knoweth not the absence of grace is
apt to be deceived. And he that maketh* not
much of the presence of grace is unthankful t to
the visiting thereof, whether he be in the state of
beginners or of the perfect. Nevertheless, the
more stableness that there is in grace unhurt and
unbroken, the lovelier is the soul, and more like
jas. i. unto Him in whom is no changeahlenessy as the
Apostle saith. And it is very meet that the
Spouse should be like her Bridegroom Jesus in
manners and in virtues, fully according to Him in
stableness of perfect love. But that falleth out
seldom here in Spouses of this life ; for he that
perceiveth no changeableness in the feeling of
his grace, but is all alike, whole, stable, unbroken
and unhurt, as he thinketh, he is either very per-
fect or very blind. He is perfect if he be se-

• Keeps not. f Unkind.


The Third Book 285

questered from all carnal affections and inclina-
tions * to creatures, and hath all hindrances t of
corruption and of sin betwixt Jesus and his soul
broken away, and is fully united? to Him with
softness of love. But this is only from grace
above man's nature. Or he is very blind if he
imagineth himself to be in grace without
spiritual feeling of God's inspiration, and setteth
himself in a way of stableness, as if he were ever
in feeling and in working of special grace,
imagining all to be grace which he doth and
feeleth, both inwardly and outwardly, thinking
that whatsoever he doth or speaketh is grace,
holding himself unchangeable in speciality of
grace. If there be any such, as I hope there is
none, he is full blind in feeling of graca

But thou may est object: That we ought to
live only by Faith, and not covet spiritual feel-
ings, nor regard them if they come; for the
Apostle saith : The just shall live hy faith, Heh. x.

Unto this I answer that bodily feelings, be
they never so comfortable, are not to be desired
nor regarded much if they come ; but spiritual
feelings, such as I have spoken of, if they come
in that manner as I have said, should ever be
desired. I mean the killing of all worldly love,
the opening of the spiritual eye, purity of spirit,
peace of conscience and all other spoken of
before. We should ever covet to feel the lively
inspiration of grace made by the spiritual pre-
sence of Jesus in our souls, if we could. And for
to have Him in our sight with reverence, and
ever feel the sweetness of His love by a wonder-
ful familiarity of His presence. This should
be our life and our feeling in grace after the

• Commoning. f Meanes. % Oonyd.


jTns ScMscK IVnKtioD


mesaor^ j£ Ss iri£ iic jw'jiiul 23 xratu? 5s^ id some
mxt^ xdL 33' idxxs 7K5Hf:: ioT ^is ^^i!%s«sace is felt
it ttJ^ra^ -niginHTY £5^ H* Tuffi^senL. An^n in this
»>? fniTufit jzvt £nf -wn:i: Tfhg: ' M ' ^ ' t r rtt ie3©c§«ii to
oa^ oi ific^ iir wjuiim: rtn^ ip^ s^snQr moi be aifale
ac Itp? fcuT-maZTr. Fnr £2^ lie- somH i$ lie life at
^K ri:»fj- rxrii: ^c 5^ _7*sEi ^2e I5fe of tiie soul by

ATif> jt?parTrit*fi??ffL :±5s fr.gn>*r of feding,
tflggga :r be ::ever scr Tmnr., is jssx, in £udi in

same J-sssxs Ex i±ie boss caf Hexi^vai. Ijq^ t^iis
fcrrH*;- ^x^Ljf «? <5s£ir^; fior erenr reasooaUe
soxl cis^^ ^' cn^rvt„ W3& sZIL its power, to
appTjOica. ti> JT^si:^ ssnl to be Mfniiiiitl to jffim
trsrccgr ^sefrr-g- cc His g]ncf<iQES inrisible pce-
scDce. H^nr ^lzi pcvsecnce is ^It majr better be
kiM/a J. br experSsnce t22a by any writing; Ibrit
is the life az>d tri«e lofre^ t£ae naEgbt and the light,
the JOT and ere rest of a <±osen sooL And,
tberefore, be tiur bath once tnily fi^ it cannot
forbear it wrtboot pain, neither can he choose but
desire it, it is so good in itself and so comfortable.
What is more comfortable here for a sool than to
be drawn out through grace fincmi the ncHsomeness
of worldly business and filth of desires, and firom
vain affection of all creatures, into rest and soft-
ness of spiritual love, secretly perce i v in g' the
gracious presence of Jesus, and fedingly fed
with the savour of His invisible blessed Face r
Verily, I think nothing can make the soul of
a lover full of mirth but the gracious presence of
Jesus, as He can show Himself to a pure soul ;
such an one is never heavy, never sorry but when
he is with himself in sensuality. He is never full
glad, nor merry, but when he is out of himself as
being with Jesus in spirit.


The Third Bcx)k 287

And yet is that no full mirth, for there ever
hangeth a heavy lump of bodily corruption on
his soul, and beareth it down, and hindereth
much the spiritual gladness, and this must ever
be whilst it is here in this life. But whereas
I have before spoken of the changeability of
grace, how it cometh and goeth, that thou mis-
take me not ; thou must understand that I mean
not of common g^ace, that is had and felt in faith
and in goodwill to God ; without having and
lusting of which, and continuing in it, none can
be saved ; for it is in the least chosen soul that
liveth. But I mean of special grace felt by
inspiration of the Holy Ghost in that manner as
I have said before. Common grace, which is
Charity, lasteth whole whatsoever a man doth, as
long as his will and his intent is true to God,
which will of his keepeth him from sinning
deadly, and the deed that he wittingly doth is
not forbidden under a mortal sin ; for this grace
is not lost but by mortal sins. And then is a sin
mortal when his conscience witnesseth with
deliberation that it is mortal sin, and yet never-
theless he doth it ; or else his conscience is so
blinded that he holdeth it no deadly sin, although
he doth the deed wilfully, which is forbidden by
God and holy Church as a deadly sin.

Special grace felt through the invisible pre-
sence of Jesus, which maketh a soul a perfect
lover, lasteth not ever alike whole in the height
of feeling, but changeably cometh and goeth, as
I have said before. Thus our Lord saith:
Spiritus uhi vult spiraty &fc, — The spirit bloweth St John'iSSu
where it listeth^ and thou hearest His voicey but thou
knoTvest not wheftce He comethy nor whither He
goeth. He cometh secretly sometimes when thou
art least aware of Him, but thou shalt know Him


288 The Scale of Pcrfectia

full well ere He go ; for He wonderfully stirreth
and mightily tumeth thy heart into the beholding
of His goodness, and then doth thy heart meh
delectably as wax against the fire into softness of
His love, and this is the voice that He soundeth.
But then He goeth ere thou perceivest, for He
withdraweth Himself somewhat, not wholly al-
together, but from excess into moderation.*
The height of feeling passeth, but the substance
and the effect of Grace dwelleth still. And that
is as long as the soul of a lover keepeth himself
pure, and falleth not wilfully into wretchedness
or carelessness t in sensuality, nor to outward
vanity, as sometimes it doth (though it have
no delight therein) out of frailty. This is the
changeability of grace which I meant and
spake of.

CHAPTER Xn

A Commendation of Prayer offered up to Jesus by
a Contemplative Soul» and how stableness in
Prayei* is a secure work to stand in; and how
every Feeling of Grace in a chosen Soul may be
called Jesus* But the more clean the Soul is* the
more worthy the Grace is

The soul of a man, whilst it is not touched with
special grace, is blunt and g^oss for spiritual
work, and can do nought therein. It skilleth not
thereof by reason of its weakness. It is both old
and dry, undevout and unsavoury in itself. But
then Cometh the light of grace, and through
touching maketh it sharp and subtle, ready and
able to spiritual work, and giveth it a great free-

* Sobriety. t Dissolution.


Y


The Third Book 289

dom and a perfect readiness in will to be pliable *
to all the stirrings of grace, ready to work after
that grace stirreth the soul. For by opening of
the spiritual eye it is wholly applied to grace,
ready to pray. And how the soul then prayeth I
shall tell thee.

The most special prayer that the soul useth
and hath most comfort in, I suppose, is the Pater
nosier or else Psalms of the Psalter. The Pater
noster for unlearned men ; and Psalms and
Hymns and other service of holy Church for the
learned. The soul prayeth, therefore, not in that
manner as it did before, after the common way of
men by highness of voice, or by reasonable
speaking out ; but in full great stillness of voice
and softness of heart. For why ? His mind is
not troubled nor hindered with outward things,
but wholly gathered together into itself. And
the soul is set, as it were, in the spiritual pre-
sence of Jesus, and, therefore, every word and
every syllable is sounded savourly, sweetly and
delectably, with fiill accord of mouth and of
heart. For why ? The soul is then turned all
into the fire of love. And, therefore, every word
that it secretly prayeth is like a spark rising out
of a burning fire, which heateth t all the powers of
the soul, and turneth them into love, and en-
lighteneth them so comfortably that the soul
listeth ever to pray and to do nothing else. The
more it prayeth the better it may, and the
mightier it is. For grace helpeth the soul well,
and maketh all things light and easy, that it
delighteth to chant and sing the praises { of God
with spiritual mirth in heavenly delight. This
spiritual work is the food of the soul, and this

* Buxom. t Cbaifeth. X Lovioi^t.

19


290 The Scale of Perfection

prayer is of great virtue, for it wasteth and
bringeth to nought all secret and open tempta-
tions of the enemy, and slayeth all the mind
and all the liking of the world and of fleshly sins.
It beareth up the body and the soul from painful
feeling of the wretchedness of this life. It keep-
eth the soul in the feeling of grace and working
of love, and nourisheth it ever alike hot, as sticks
nourisheth the fire. It putteth away all irksome-
ness and heaviness of heart, and holdeth it in
strength and spiritual gladness.
talm cxL Of this prayer speaketh David thus : Diriga-

tur oratio mea sicut tncensuviy &c, — Let my prayer
be dressed as incense in Thy sight For even as
incense that is cast into the fire maketh a sweet
smell by the smoke rising up to the air, right so
a Psalm savourly and softly sung or said in a
burning heart, giveth up a sweet smell to the
face ot our Lord Jesus, and to all the Court of
Heaven. There dare no flesh-fly rest upon the
pot's brink boiling on the fire. Even so can no
fleshly delight rest upon a clean soul, that is all
bilapped * and warmed in the fire of love, boiling
and blowing up Psalms and prayers to Jesus,
This prayer is always heard of Jesus. It yieldeth
grace to Jesus, and receiveth grace again. It
maketh a soul familiar,t and, as it were, hail-
fellow with Jesus, and with all the Angels in
Heaven, use it who so can. The work is good
and gracious in itself. And though it be not
alto^-ether perfect Contemplation in itself, nor the
working of love by itself, nevertheless it is in
part Contemplation. For why ? It cannot be
exercised in this manner but by plenty of grace
through opening of the spiritual eye. And,

* Happed. t Homely.


The Third Book 291

therefore, a soul that hath this freedom and this
gracious feeling in praying with spiritual savour
and heavenly delight hath the grace of Can-
templation in the manner as it is.

This prayer is a rich offering filled all with
fatness of devotion, received by Angels and pre-
sented to the face of Jesus. The prayer of other
men, who are busy in active works, is made of
two words ; for they oftentimes form in their
hearts one word through thinking of worldly
business, and speak with their mouth another
word of the Psalm sung or said. Yet, neverthe-
less, if his intent be true his prayer is good and
acceptable, though it lack savour and sweetness.
But this prayer of a Contemplative man is made
but of one word ; for as it is formed in the heart,
right so doth it wholly sound in the mouth, as it
were nothing but one and the same thing, both
which formeth it and which soundeth it. And
verily no more it is, for the soul, through grace,
is made whole in itself so far parted from sensu-
ality,* that it is master of the body, and then is
the body nothing else but as an instrument and
a trumpet of the soul in the which the soul
bloweth sweet notes of spiritual prayers to Jesus.
This is the trumpet that David spake of. thus :
Buccinate in neomemay &c. — B/^m ye the trumpet Isalm Ixz:
in the new moon. That is, ye souls that are
reformed in spiritual life through opening of the
inner eye, blow ye devoutly the sounding of
Psalms with the trumpet of your bodily tongue.
And, therefore, since this prayer is pleasant to
Jesus, and so profitable to the soul, it is good for
him who is new converted to God (and desires to
please Him, and coveteth to have some quaint

• Fleshly heed.


^


292 The Scale of Perfection,

feeling of grace) to covet this feeling, that he may
through grace come to this liberty of spirit and
oflFer his prayers and his Psalms to Jesus con-
tinually and stably and devoutly, with whole
mind and burning affection towards Him, so that
he may be ready for it through custom when
grace will stir him up thereto. This is a secure
feeling, and a true one. If thou canst attain unto
it and keep it, thou shalt not need to run about
here and there and ask questions of every spiri-
tual man what thou shouldst do, how thou
shouldst love God, and how thou shouldst serve
Grod, and speak of spiritual matters, that pass
thy understanding, as perhaps some do: Such
kind of doings are not profitable unless in case
of necessity. Keep thee to thy prayers, quietly
at first with thy own great industry, that thou
mayest afterwards come to this restful feeling of
spiritual prayer, and that shall teach thee wisdom
enough in verity without feigning or fancy ; and
hold thee on in such prayer if thou hast gotten
it and leave it not ; but if g^ace come otherwise,
and removeth it fi-om thee for a time, causing
thee to work on another manner, then mayest
thou leave it for a time, and after return again
thereto. And he that hath this grace in prayer
asketh not whereupon he should set the point of
his thought in his prayer, whether upon the
words that he speaketh, or else on God, or on
the Name of Jesus, as some ask, for this feeling
of grace will teach him well enough. For why r
The soul is turned into the eye, and sharply be-
holdeth the face of Jesus, and is ascertained that
it is Jesus that it feeleth and seeth. I do not
mean Jesus as He is in Himself, in fulness of
His blessed Godhead ; but I mean Jesus, as He
is pleased to show Himself to a clean soul, yet


The Third Book 293

in the body according to the cleanness that it
hath. For thou must know that every feelinflc of
grace is Jesus, and may be called Jesus. And
according as the grace is more or less, so feeleth
the soul more or less of Jesus. Yea, the first
feeling of special grace in a beginner, which is
called grace of compunction and contrition for
his sins, is verily Jesus. For why ? He causeth
that contrition in a soul by His presence. But
Jesus is then very grossly and rudely felt, very
far from this spiritual subtlety ; for the soul can
nor may do no better by reason of its unclean-
ness. Nevertheless, afterward, if the soul profit
and increase in virtues and in cleanness, the
same Jesus, and none other, is seen and felt by
the same soul when it is touched with grace;
but that is more spiritually, and nearer to His
Divinity. And verily that is the chiefest thing
that Jesus loveth in a soul, that it may be made
spiritual and divine in sight and in love, like to
Him in grace, as He is by nature ; for that shall
be the end of all lovers.

Then mayest thou be secure, that at what
time thou feelest thy soul stirred by grace,
specially in that manner as I have said be-
fore, by opening of thy spiritual eye that thou
seest and feelest Jesus, hold Him fast whilst
thou may, and keep thyself in grace, and let
Him not easily go from thee. Look after none
other Jesus but that same, by feeling of that
self-same grace more divinely that it may in-
crease in thee more and more. And be not
afraid, though Jesus whom thou feelest be not
Jesus as He is in His full Godhead, that thou
therefore mayest be deceived if thou trust to
that feeling. But trust thou well, if thou be
a lover of Jesus, that thy feeling is true, and


294 T^^ Scale of Perfection

that Jesus is truly felt and seen of thee through
His grace as thou canst see Him here. And
therefore trust fully to thy feeling when it is
gracious and spiritual, and keep it tenderly, and
have great dainty, not of thyself, but of it, that
thou mayest see and feel Jesus still better and
better. For grace shall ever teach thee by
itself, if thou wilt fall thereto, till thou come
to the end.

But perchance thou beginnest to wonder why
I say one time that grace worketh all this, and
another time that love worketh, or God worketh ?

Unto this I answer thus: That when I say
that grace worketh, I mean both love, and Jesus,
and &od; for all is one, and nought but one;
Jesus is love,* Jesus is grace, Jesus is God. And
because He worketh all in us by His grace for
love, as He is God, therefore may I use which
of these four words I list after my stirring in this
writing.

CHAPTER Xm

How a Soul through the opening of the spiritual Eye
receiveth a gracious Love enabling to understand
the Holy Scriptures ; and how Jesus, that is hid
in the Holy Scriptures^ showeth Himself to His
Lovers

When a soul thus feeleth Jesus in prayer, he
thinketh that he shall never feel otherwise.
Nevertheless it happeneth that sometimes grace
putteth vocal prayer to silence, and stirreth the
soul to see and to feel Jesus in another manner.
And that manner is first to see Jesus in the holy
Scriptures ; for Jesus, who is all truth, is hid and
covered therein, folded in a soft Syndon, under

* I John iv.


The Third Book *^ 295

fair words, that He cannot be known nor felt but
of a clean heart. For why ? Truth will not show
itself to enemies, but to friends, that love and
desire it with an humble heart. For Truth and
Humility are full true Sisters, fastened together
in love and charity, and there is no distance of
counsel betwixt them two. Humility presumeth
upon Truth, and not at all on itself ; and Truth
esteemeth well of Humility, so they accord well
together. Then forasmuch as the soul of a lover
is made humble through inspiration of grace by
opening of the spiritual eye, and seeth that it is
nought of itself, but only hangeth on the mercy
and the goodness of Jesus perpetually, being
borne up by the favour and help of Him only,
and truly desiring His presence, therefore seeth
it Jesus ; for it seeth the truth of holy Scriptures
wonderfully showed and opened above study and
industry and reason of man's natural wit. And
that may well be called the feeling and the per-
ceiving of Jesus. For Jesus is the fountain of
Wisdom ; and by pouring down of His Wisdom
into a clean soul, by little and little, He maketh
the soul wise enough for to understand all holy
Scripture ; not all at once in special beholding,
but through that grace the soul receiveth a new
ability and a gracious habit to understand it,
particularly when it cometh to mind. This open-
ing and this cleanness of understanding is made
by the spiritual presence of Jesus : for right as
the Gospel saith of the two Disciples going to
EmmauSy burning in desire and speaking of our
Lord Jesus, our Lord appeared to them pre-
sently as a pilgrim, and taught them the pro-
phecies of Himself. And as the Gospel saith:
Aperuit illis sensu?n, &c. — He opened their wits St Luke lal
that they might understand the Scriptures. Right


296 The Scale of PerbctioQ

so the spiritual presence of Jesus openeth tfie wit
of His lover, that it bumeth in desire to Him,
and bringreth to His mind by ministration of
Angels, ^e words and sentences of holy Writ
unsought and unconsidered one after another,
and expoundeth them readily, be they never so
hard nor so secret. The harder they be, and
farther from man's understanding by reason, the
more delectable is the true showing of them.
When Jesus is the teacher, it is expounded and
declared literally^ maraily^ mystically and heavenlyy
if the matter will bear it- By the literal (which
is the easiest and plainest) corporal nature is
comforted. By the morale the soid is informed
concerning vices and virtues, to be able wisely
to distinguish the one from the other. By the
mystical it is enlightened to see the works of
Jesus in holy Church, readily to apply the
words of holy Writ to Christ our head, and to
holy Church, which is His mystical body. The
fourth, which is heavenly^ belongeth only to the
working of love, and that is, when all truth in
holy Writ is applied to love. And because this
is most like to heavenly feeling, therefore I call
it heavenly.

The lover of Jesus is His friend, not for that
he deserveth it, but because Jesus of His merciful
goodness maketh him His friend by true accord.
And therefore to him He showeth His secrets, as
to a true friend that pleaseth Him by love, not
serveth Him through fear in slavery. Thus He
fohn XV. saith Himself to His Apostles : Jam vos dixi
amicos quia qtuBcumqiu audivi a Patre meo nota
feci vohis, — Now have I called you friends^ far I
have made known unto you all that I have heard
of the Father. To a clean soul whose palate is
purified from filth of fleshly love, holy Writ is


Thc^ Third Book 297

lively food and sustenance delectable. It savour-
eth wonderful sweetly when it is well chewed by
spiritual understanding. For why? The spirit
of life is hid therein, that quickeneth all the
powers of the soul, and filleth them full of
sweetness of heavenly savour and spiritual de-
light. But verily he must have white teeth,
and sharp, and well picked, that can bite of
this spiritual bread ; for fleshly lovers and
heretics may not touch the inward flour of it.
Their teeth are bloody, and full of filth, there-
fore must they be fasting from feeling of this
bread. By teeth I understand the inward
senses of the soul, which in fleshly lovers and
heretics are bloody, full of sin and worldly
vanities. They would, but they cannot come
through curiosity to the truth in knowing of
holy Writ; for their senses are corrupted by
original and actual sin, and are not yet healed
through grace. And therefore they do but gnaw
upon the outward bark, speak they never so
much thereof. The inner savour within they
taste not of. They be not humble, they be not
pure for to see it. They be not friends to Jesus,
and therefore He showeth them not His counsel.
The mystery of holy Writ is closed under a key,
and sealed with a signet of Jesus* finger, which
is the Holy Ghost, and therefore without His
love and His leave may none come in. He
alone hath the key of skill * in His keeping, as
holy Writ saith, and He Himself is the key : Isa. xxii.
and He letteth in whom He will by inspiration
of His grace, and breaketh not the seal.

And this doth Jesus to His lovers, but not to
all alike, but to them that are specially inspired

* CunninsT*


"^ - -^ Sc^ of Pg&ctioo

^ '^ T^ "^f^rl "^ ^^^ ^^^^ '^^^ ?^»^ ^

oci'jri -: TJ.v:".£, ii:tL ^rit oiucii ':jiLiiiess in

v*^'..-:::v: ^' :::u: :'^£or^. ^-lese niav aame to the

-::t^:u i :. viimji ^.^ ^^^ wiii "oe aiicased to

iiow :. >r- v.-v. :::eii. .iqw gT3ce opcneth

::tf -:::r-:'ijj. -»<:?, iiru -M~5ij?*di rne seises ot the

.-lu VL. -.rr"!../ ii:ove rue jaiitv of corrupt

— '-i^^- - ^-■•'^tri -n-r -sjui i at\r aauicv witether

, VI.. -*r.«.^ :».:•.- •> r!^^ jr .leajr :c; or medicare in

., jr - ^jcifr^ijji'^ :r^y ojiu savauriv die truth

.1 : :: :r.T :=jj-"Tr ii-. r-biud : mix also for to

vjrrt -rrdcilv _: r^sosjon^ xna -vcnxbi^ riac are lite-

*^i-'' ^V'j-virJi n 5>?Lr!Cuaa. MniMrscuidia^g:. And

rat > X ^-^Lu: in..iic«% :or rhe <ame :^irit that

ua^- ::'T >:r:v:ur^>. :*xpc?u::cet:i it and declareth

V '- -^r^^ui sjui iQT :LSr cuixxiurc — izaaxeLT» the

.^v- .:: > ^nio? ma.y *ae» inii :s^ as wetl in lay-
:at?ji j^ I ::.- r-ixried, is^ :u rrie sobscaiice and
:ruft? -r?^!::!-*: ji :he verrc^/ and scriri:iial saTOor
JX -c n ^•^ii-enu, :iioii5fh diey ^ee not so many
r»?ttsc::> :i >wctal; :or mac needeth not* And
'v:it??: :ne <*. oi .s- ::iu:!' -*n«taied* and eilijf htened
:::r-u*::i ^r>ic-> :iie!i he ciiouseca to be alone
50mec:::!'e>* ju: :£ :::e lemn^ ind meddling^ with
ail ,rr?:.::urT>v ::MC he aiay i-**Ly exercise his
intern::-'.::, v i.ch 1 ,rali his reason oc beholding
sjf ver::y w-:.c:i :> conciined :n holy Scriptures.
And ^:en 'viLl tiier? nill inco his mind wcMtis
and reasons and :s?n<es enough to busy him,
and riiar rull or-iery and rulx seriously. And
whac j*jinn:rt arid soirir-icil delight, what savour
and i'veecness a 5cul v.-»ji then reel in that
ST Lrirjjl ex:ir::se through divers illuminationSy
inward rer-ei. Lnv^s* seci7?t knowings and sud-
den rouchings cc the Koly Ghost, a soul can
onlv know bv eA^ii^erience, and not otherwise.


The Third Book 299

And I hope that he shall not err, if so be his
teeth, that is his inward senses, be kept white
and clean from spiritual pride, and from curiosity
of his natural wit. I believe David felt full great
delight in this manner of working, when he said
thus : Quam dulcia faucihus meis eloquia Tua^
&c, — How sweet are Thy words unto my taste ! Psalm cxviii.
sweeter than honey to my mouth. That is, Lord
Jesus, Thy holy words endited in holy Writ,
brought to my mind by grace, are sweeter to
my taste, that is the affections of my soul, than
honey is to my mouth. Verily this is a fair
work without painful travail for to see Jesus
thus. This is one manner of sight of Jesus, as
I said before ; not as He is, but clothed under the
likeness of works and of words, per specultim^ in
centgmate. — In a glass^ and by a likeness^ as the ' ^^' **'*•
Apostte saith. Jesus is endless might, wisdom
and goodness, righteousness, truth, holiness
and mercy. And what this Jesus is in Him-
self can no soul see nor hear ; but by the effects
of His working may be seen through the light
of grace. As thus, His might is seen by mak-
ing of all creatures of nothing; His wisdom
in orderly disposing of them ; His goodness
in saving of them ; His mercy in forgiveness
of sins ; His holiness in gifts of grace ; His
righteousness in severely punishing of sin ; His
gentleness in true rewarding of good works,
And all this is expressed in holy Writ, and
this a soul seeth there with all other attributes
that pertain thereto. And be thou well as-
sured, that such gracious knowings in holy
Writ, or in other writings, which are made by
the assistance of God's grace, are nought else
but sweet letters sent and made betwixt a
loving soul and Jesus the beloved. Or else.


300 The Scale of Perfection

that I may speak trulier, betwixt Jesus the true
lover and the souls beloved of Him. He hath
full great tenderness of love to all his chosen
children, that are here closed in clay of this
bodily life. And therefore, though He be absent
from them, high, hid above in the bosom of the
Father, filled with the delights of the Blessed
Grodhead, yet notwithstanding He thinketh upon
them, and visiteth them full oft through His
gracious spiritual presence, and comforteth them
by His letters of holy Writ, and driveth out of
their hearts heaviness and wearisomeness, doubts
and <bars, and maketh them truly glad and merry
in Him, believing in all His promises, and humbly
continuing fulfilling His will.
iPtffvf. XV. St Paul saith thus : Quoscumque scrtpta sunty
&c. — Whatsoever things are written^ are written
far our instruction^ that we might have hope through
the comfort of the Scriptures. And this is another
work of Contemplation^ to see Jesus in the Scrip-
tures after the opening of the spiritual eye. The
cleaner the sight is in beholding, the more com-
forted is the affection in tasting. A full little
savour felt in a clean soul of holy Writ in this
manner abovesaid, should make the soul set little
price by knowing of all the seven liberal arts, or
of all the world, or all worldly wisdom ; for the
end of this knowing is the salvation of a man's
soul in everlasting life ; and the end of that other
knowledge, as to himself, is but vanity and a
fading delight, unless by grace it be turned to
this end.


The Third Book 301


CHAPTER XIV

Of the secret Voice of Jesus sounding in a SouI» and
how it may be known* And how all the gracious
Illuminations made in a Soul be called the Speak'
ings of Jesus

Lo, these are fair new feelings in a clean soul ;
and if a soul were filled with such, it might be
said, and that truly, that it were reformed some-
what in feeling, but not yet fully ; for why ? Yet
Jesus showeth more, and leadeth the soul inward,
and beginneth to speak more familiarly, and
more lovely to a soul, and maketh it more ready
to follow the stirrings of grace. For the Prophet
saith : Quocumque that spirtttiSy tlluc gradiehantur Ezee, 1.
et toUb seauentes eum. — Whithersoever the spirit
wenty thither went the wheels following him. By
wheels are understood the true lovers of Jesus,
for they are round in virtue, without angle of
frowardness; and lightly whirling through readi-
ness of will after the stirrings of g^ace ; for
according as grace stirreth and teacheth, so
they follow and work, as the Prophet saith.

But first, they have a full secure experience,
and a true knowing of the voice of grace, ere
they do so ; that they be not deceived by their
own feigning, or by the mid-day fiend. Our
Lord Jesus saith thus of His lovers : Oves mece stjohn x
vocem meam audiunt^ &c. — My sheep hear My
voicey and I know them^ and they know Me. The
privy voice of Jesus is full true, and it maketh
a soul true; there is no feigning in it, nor on
fancy, nor pride, nor hyprocrisy; but gentle-
ness, humility, peace, love and charity. And


302 The Scale of Perfection

it is full of life, love and grace. And
therefore when it soundeth in a soul, it is
of so g^eat power sometimes, that the soul
suddenly layeth aside all that was in hand, as
praying, speaking, reading or thinking ; in
the manner abovesaid, and all manner of bodily
work, and listeneth thereto fully, hearing and
perceiving in rest and in love the sweet soimd
of this spiritual voice, as it were ravished
from the mind of all earthly things, and then
in this quiet, Jesus sometimes showeth Himself
as an awful* master, and sometimes as a reverend
Father, and sometimes as a lovely Spouse. And
it keepeth a soul in a wonderful reverence, and
in a lovely beholding of Him, that the soul
liketh well then, and never so well as then;
for it feeleth so great security, and so great rest
in Jesus, and so much savour of His goodness,
that it would ever be so, and never do other
work. It thinketh that it toucheth Jesus, and
through virtue of that unspeakable touching, it
is made whole and stable in itself, reverently
beholding Jesus only, as if there were nothing
but Jesus, one thing, and himself another, borne
up only by the savour and the wonderful good-
ness of Him ; that is that thing which he feeleth
and seeth. And this feeling is ofttimes without
special beholding of holy Writ, and with but few
words formed in the mind; only there falls in
among sweet words, according to the feeling
either of loving, or worshipping, or admiring, or
otherwise sounding, as the heart liketh. The
soul is very much separated from love or liking
of the world, through virtue of this gracious
feeling, and also very much from minding of the

• HaughtfuU


The Third Book 303

world in that time. It taketh no heed thereof,
for it hath no time thereto. But then sometimes
anon, together with this, falleth into a soul divers
illuminations through grace, which I call the
speakings of Jesus, and the sight of spiritual
things ; for be thou assured, that all the business
that Jesus maketh about a soul, is for to make
it a true perfect spouse to Him in the height and
the fulness of love, and that cannot be done
suddenly. Therefore Jesus, who is love, and of
all lovers the wisest, proveth by many ways, and
by many wonderful means, ere this can come
about. And therefore that it may come to the
effect of true espousing, He hath such gracious
speakings of a wooer to a chosen soul. He
sheweth His privy jewels ; many things He
giveth, and more He promiseth ; and showeth
courteous dalliance. He often visiteth her with
much grace and spiritual comfort, as I have said
before ; but how He doth this in particular, I
cannot fully tell thee, for it needeth not. Never-
theless somewhat shall I say, according as grace
enableth me.

Tlie drawing of a soul fully to perfect love, is,
first by the showing of spiritual things to a clean
soul, when the spiritual eye is opened ; not that
a soul should rest therein, and make an end
there, but should by that search Him and love
Him who is highest of all, without any beholding
of any other thing than He.

. But thou wilt ask, what are these spiritual
things, because I speak so oft of spiritual things ?
To this I say that spiritual things may be
said all the truth of holy Scripture. And there-
fore a soul that through light of grace can see
the truth of Scripture, seeth spiritual things, as I
have said before.


yu Tht Scale csf Pufccti oo


(BAFTER rv


cf die Spirxtial Eye

CT aod tTiuT so see the

Ustr Quivdi, as

c( Aogeb; and


Xeyerthf: f.Vs ocber spsritiial things tliere be
au^c^ whkJi ihrocg^ light of grace are showed to
the sool, aixi are these : the namre of all reason-
able ^ocls^and ihe gracicKis woridngs of our Lord
Jesus in them ; the natare of angels, both good
and bad, and their workings, and the knowledge
of the Blessed Trinity, according as grace
teacheth. Holy Writ saith of the Spouse thus
CmU, m. in the Canticles : Sar^am et drcuibo civUaitmy
&c. — I -anil ariUy and go aiomi ike dfyy and wtU
seek Htm Tthom my soul laoeiJL That is, I will
rise into highness of thought, and go about the
City. By this City is understood the University
of all creatures, corporal and spiritual, ordered
and ruled under God by laws of nature, of reason
and of grace. I go about this city when I behold
the natures and causes of bodily creatures, the
gifts of grace, and the blisses of spiritual crea-
tures. And in all these I seek Him whom my
soul loveth. It is pleasant looking with the
inner eye on Jesus in bodily creatures, to see His
power, His wisdom and His goodness in order-
ing of their natures; but it is much more
beautiful to look on Jesus in spiritual creatures :
First in reasonable souls, both elect and repro-
bate, to see the merciful calling of them to


The Third Book 305

election, how He turneth them from sin by the
light of His g^ace, how He helpeth them,
teacheth them, chasteneth them, comforteth
them ; He sanctifieth, cleanseth and feedeth
them; how He maketh them burning in love
and in light through plenty of His grace. And
thus doth He, not to one soul only, but to all
His chosen according to the measure of His grace.

Also concerning the reprobate, he seeth how
justly he forsaketh them, and leaveth them in
their sins, and doth them no wrong. How He
rewardeth them in this world, suffering them
to have the fulfilling of their own will, and after
to punish them endlessly. Lo, this is a little
beholding of holy Church, whilst it is militant
in this life, by seeing how black and how foul it
seemeth in souls that are reprobate; and how
fair and how lovely it is in chosen souls.

And all this spiritual sight is nought else but
the sight of Jesus, not in Himself but in His
mercifiil secret works, and in His righteous judge-
ments every day showed, remembered and re-
newed to reasonable souls. Moreover, to see
with the spiritual eye the pains of the repro-
bate and the joy and bliss of chosen souls is
full comfortable. For truth cannot be seen in a
clean soul without great delight and wonderful
content of blessed burning love.

Also the sight of the nature of Angels, first
of the damned, then of the blessed ; as it is a full
pleasant contemplation concerning the devil in a
clean soul. When grace bringeth the fiend into
the sight of the soul, as a clumsy caitiff bound by
the power of Jesus that he cannot hurt ; then the
soul beholdeth him not bodily, but spiritually,
seeing his nature and his malice, and turneth
him upside down and spoileth him and rendeth

20


3o6 The Scak of Perfection

him all to nought, scometh him and despiseth
him, and setteth nought by his malice. Thus
biddeth holy Writ, when it saith thus: Verie
Frwff. u. impium, el non erit, — Turn tfu wicked^ that is, the
fiend, upside down, and he shall be as nought.
Much wonder hath the soul that the fiend hath so
much malice and so little might. There is no
creature so weak as he is; and therefore it is
great cowardice that men fear him so much. He
can do nothing without leave of our Lord Jesus,
not so much as enter into a swine, as the Gospel

'/ Mmit YuL saith, much less can he do then to annoy any man.
Ajud therefore if our Lord Jesus give him
leave to tempt us, it is full worthily and merci-
fully done, that he doth so; and therefore
welcome be our Lord Jesus by Himself, and by
all His messengers. The soul feareth no more
the blustering of the fiend than the stirring of
a mouse. Wondrous wroth is the fiend when we
say nay to his temptations, but his mouth is
stopped with his own malice. His hands are
bound like a thieve's, worthy to be judged and
hanged in hell. And then the soul accuseth
him, and doth justly condemn him according to
his deserts. Wonder not at this saying, for
Si Paul meant the same, when he saith thus :

1 Cor. VI, 3. Ft aires nescitis^ &c. — Brelhreny knew ye not thai we
shall judge the angels f namely, those that are
wicked spirits through malice that were made
good angels by nature. As who should say,
yes; this judging is figured before the day of
judgement in Contemplative souls, for they feel a
little tasting in likeness of all that shall be done .
afterwards of our Lord Jesus openly in truth.
Shamed and troubled * is the fiend greatly in him-
self, when he is thus used by a clean soul. He

• ShenU


The Third Book 307

would fain fly away, but he cannot, for the power
of the Highest holdeth him still, and that griev-
eth him more than all the fire of hell. Then
falleth the soul wonderfully humble under Jesus
with hearty praises, for that He so mightily
saveth a simple soul from all the malice of so
cruel an enemy by His great mercy.


SECTION n

How by the same light of Grace the Nature of the
blessed Angels is seen* And how Jesus is God
and Man above all Creatures^ according to that
which the Soul may see of Him here

And then after this by the selfsame light may
the soul spiritually see the beauty of the Angels,
the worthiness of their nature, the subtlety of
their substance, their confirming in grace, their
fiilness in endless bliss, the diversity of their
orders; the distinctions of persons, how they
all live in light of endless truth ; and how they
burn all in love of the Holy Ghost, according
to the worthiness of their orders ; how they see
and love and praise Jesus in blessed rest with-
out ceasing. There is no sight of a body, nor
any figure in imagination, in this manner of work-
ing, but all spiritual, and of spiritual creatures.

Then beginneth the soul to have great ac-
quaintance and great fellowship with the blessed
spirits. They are full tender and full busy about
such a soul to help it, they are masters to teach
it. And often by their spiritual presence and
touching of their light drive out fancies from
the soul. They enlighten the soul graciously;
they comfort the soul with sweet words sud-


3o8 The Scale of Perfection

denly sounded in a clean heart; and if any
disease fall spiritually, they serve the soul and
minister to it all that it needeth. Thus St
Hth. I, Paul said of them : Know ye not that they are
all ministering spirits^ sent for them who shall
be heirs of salvation^ As if he had said thus:
Know ye that all this spiritual working- of words
and of reasons, brought to the mind, and such
fair likeness are made by the ministry of Angels,
when the light of grace abundantly shineth in
a clean soul. It cannot be told by tongue the
feelings, the enlightenings, the graces and the
comforts in special that clean souls perceive by
the favourable fellowship of blessed Angels. The
soul is so well pleased with beholding what they
do that it would willingly attend to nothing else.
But then with the help of Angels the soul yet
seeth more; for knowing in a clean soul riseth
higher above all this, and that is to behold the
blessed nature of Jesus. First of His glorious
humanity, how it is worthily exalted above the
nature of Angels, and afterwards of His blessed
Divinity, for by knowing of creatures is known
the Creator; and then beginneth the soul to
perceive a little of the m} steries of the Blessed
Trinity. And this it may do well enough, for
the light of grace going before, she cannot err
as long as she holdeth her in that light. Then
is opened really to the eye of the soul the unity
in substance, and distinction of persons in the
Blessed Trinity, as it may be seen in this life, and
much other truth of the Blessed Trinity pertinent
to this matter ; the which is openly declared and
shown by writings of holy doctors of holy Church.
And be you assured that one and the same verity
concerning the Blessed Trinity that these holy
doctors, inspired through grace, writ in their


The Third Book 309

books for the strengtheii! ng of our truth, a clean
soul may see in knowing through the same light
of grace. I will not express too much of this
matter here in particular, for it needeth not.

Wondrous great love feedeth the soul with
heavenly delight in feeling of this truth, when
it is wrought through special grace ; for love and
light go both together in a clean soul. There is
no love that riseth out of knowing, and from
special beholding that can sooner touch our
Lord than this can. For why? This knowing
of Jesus, God and Man, is alone in itself the
worthiest and the highest, if it be specially
shown by the light of grace. And therefore is
the fire of flaming love hereof more burning than
it is of any creature, corporal or incorporal. And
all these gracious knowings of the university of
all creatures felt in a soul in manner abovesaid,
and of our Lord Jesus, the maker and keeper
of all this fair university, I call fair words, and
sweet speakings of our Lord Jesus to a soul,
which He means to make His true Spouse.
He showeth His mysteries, proffereth rich gifts
out of His treasury, and arrayeth the soul with
them full beautifully. She need not thence-
forward be ashamed of the company of her
fellows, to appear before the face of Jesus her
Spouse. All this lovely dalliance of private
conference betwixt Jesus and a soul may be
called a hidden word; of the which Scripture
saith thus : Porro ad me dictum est verbum ab-
scondiium^ &c, — Moreover to me there was spoken job, iv.
a secret wordy and the veins of His whispering mine
ear hath perceived. The inspiration of Jesus is
a hidden word, for it is privily hid from all
lovers of the world, and shown to His lovers;
through which a clean soul perceiveth readily


310 The Scale of Perfection

the veins of His whispering-, that is the special
showings of His truth ; for every gracious know-
ing of truth felt with inward savour and spiritual
delight is a privy whispering of Jesus in the ear
of a clean soul. He must have much cleanness
and humility and all other virtues, and must be
half deaf to the noise of worldly j anglings, that
will wisely perceive those sweet spiritual whis-
perings, that is the voice of Jesus. Of the which
p$. xxviii. David saith thus : Vox Domtnt prcBparantis cervoSy
&c. — The voice of the Lord prepareth harts ^ and
shall discover thick woods. That is, the inspira-
tion of Jesus maketh souls light as deer, that
start from the ground over bushes and briars of
all worldly vanities; and He showeth to them
the thickets, that is. His mysteries, which can-
not be perceived but by a sharp eye. These be-
holdings, solidly grounded in grace and humility,
make a soul wise and burning in desire to the
face of Jesus. These are the spiritual things
that I spake of before, and they be called new
gracious feelings; and I do but touch them a
little for direction of a soul ; for a soul that is
pure, stirred up by grace to use this working,
may see more of such spiritual matter in an hour
than can be writ in a great book.

Thus finisheth this present book, which ex-
poundeth many notable doctrines in Contempla-
tion, which to me seemeth right expedient to
those that set their felicity in busying them-
selves specially for their souls' health.


The following verses form the colophon to Wynkyn
de Worde's edition of the ^Scale^^ and are re^
printed from the 1659 edition*

Infinite laud with thanktngs mantfoldy

I yield to Gody me succouring with His grace;
This Book to finishy which as ye behold^

Scale of Perfection'^ called in every place :
Whereof th' Author Walter Hilton wasy

AndWyvikin de Word this hath set in print;
In William Caxton'j house^ so fell the case^

God rest his souly in joy there may tt stint.

This heavenly Book more precious than gold

Was lately directed with great humility y
For godly pleasure thereon to beholdy

Unto the right noble Margaret as ye seCy
The King's Mother of excellent bounty y

Harry the seventhy that Jesus him preservCy
This mighty Princess hath commanded me

2* imprint this Book, her grace for to deserve.


ANOTHER TREATISE OF
THE SAME AUTHOR ji ji
Written to a devout man of secular
Estate j^ Teaching him how to lead
a spiritual life therein


iBTff


TREATISE WRITTEN TO A
DEVOUT MAN

CHAPTER I

That he who intends to become a Spiritual Man
must first use much Bodily Exercise in Penance^
and in Destroying of Sin

Dear Brother in Christ, — ^There be in the
holy Church two kinds of life, by the which
Christian souls do serve and please God, and
procure their own salvation. The one is cor-
poral, the other spiritual.

Corporal working appertaineth principally
to the men and women of the world, who for
the nature of their estate do lawfully use worldly
goods, and intermeddle and deal with worldly
businesses and affairs. This life also belongeth
to all young beginners in spirituality, who be
but newly converted from sensual and worldly
sins to the service of God; and this life is to
dispose and enable such persons for spiritual
working, by taming the body by corporal works
and exercises, and thereby bringing it into
obedience and subjection to the spirit, whereby
it may become supple and ready, and not much
contrarious to the spirit in her spiritual ex-
ercisings ; for as Si Paul saith, that woman was
made far matij and not man for woman. Even so
corporal working was ordained for spiritual, and


3i6 Treatise written

not spiritual working- for corporal. Corporal
working is to gx> before, and spiritual working
Cometh after, as the same St Paul saith in these
words: That is not first which is spiritual^ but
that which is sensible (or corporal), afterwarii
Cometh that which is spiritual. And the reason
why it should be so is this, that we are born
in sin and in corruption of the flesh, by the which
we are in souls so blinded and so overlaid that
we neither have the spiritual sight or knowing
of God by light of understanding, nor the spiritu-
al tasting or feeling of Him by a clean desire of
loving ; and therefore we cannot suddenly start
out of the dark night of this fleshly corruption
into the spiritual light ; for we are not as yet
able to endure such spiritual light, by reason of
the sickness of our souls, any more than we can
with our bodily eyes, when they are sore, behold
and look upon the light of the sun ; and for that
cause we must expect and work by degrees and
process of time. First, by corporal works dili-
gently, till we be discharged, or much lightened,
or eased from this heavy burden of sin and
sensuality, that hindereth us from spiritual
working; and till our souls be somewhat
cleansed from great outward sins, and enabled
for spiritual workings.

By the corporal working that I speak of,
thou must understand tliat I mean all manner
of good works or deeds that thy soul doth by the
senses or the members of thy body, either upon
or towards thyself, as in fasting, watching,
or in restraining thy fleshly or sensual desires,
by penance-doing, or other acts of mortification.
Or upon, or towards thy Christian brother, in
performance of the works of mercy, spiritual or
corporal. Or to, or towards God Himself by


to a Devout Man 317

suffering (for the love of Him and His justice)
all manner of bodily pains and afflictions that
shall occur for thee to undergo, either as im-
mediately from His own hands, or by the means
and from the hands of other creatures of His.
All these kind of works done in faith and out
of charity (without which they are of no worth)
do please God. Therefore whoso desireth to
become a spiritual man, it will be securest and
profitable for him that he be first, for a long
time, well exercised in these corporal workings,
for these corporal deeds are practices and tokens
of moral virtues, without which a soul is not
able to work spiritually. Break down first pride
within thee by bodily sufferings and bearings,
and also by thinking in thy mind of something
that will help to humble thee ; and, moreover, by
eschewing and avoiding all ostentations, boast-
ings, or praising of thyself, either privately by
thyself in thy mind, or by thy words or external
deeds, or carriage towards, or with others; by
this means casting away and mortifying within
thee all vainglory and complacence in thyself
for any talent, gift, or thing corporal or spiritual
that God hath bestowed on thee. Also mortify
and destroy within thee, so soon as thou art
able, all envy and anger towards thy Christian
brethren ; whether they be rich or poor, good or
bad, hate them not, nor disdain them, nor wil-
lingly offend them by words or by deeds. Like-
wise destroy and mortify in thee all coveting of
worldly goods, and see that neither for the
getting, or holding, nor saving of them, thou do
not offend thy conscience, nor break verity with
God, or thy Christian brother, for the love of
any earthly thing; but what thou gettest, or
hast, keep it without inordinate love or affection


3i8 Treatise writtoi

to it, and spend it as reasonable occasions shaO
require, for the honour of Grod, and the succour of
thy Christian brother. Mortify also, and de-
stroy as much as thou canst, all yielding to
bodily sloth, and unnecessary bodily ease, and
the sensual vices of gluttony and luxury, with j
the inordinations that rise out of them. And I
after that thou hast been well exercised and
tried in all such kind of corporal works, thoa
mayest then by the grace of God, ordain Ihe^
and apply thee to spiritual working.

The grace and goodness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that He hath showed to thee, in with-
drawing of thine heart from the love and liking
of worldly vanity, and from the use of fleshly and
sensual sins, and in turning of thy will entirely to
His service, bringeth into mine heart much matter
to love Him in His mercy; and also it greatly
moveth and urgeth me to strengrthen thee in thy
good purpose, and in the work which thou hast
begun between thee and God, so that it may be
brought to a good end. And so far as may be in
my power to help thee in it, my best endeavours
in it I shall most willingly afford thpe, first and
principally for the service and honour of God, and
next in requital of thy tender a£Fection of love
thou bearest to me, though I be a wretch, and
unworthy of thy love or favour. I know well the
desire of thy heart, as how that thou greatly covet-
est to serve our Lord both in soul and body, fully
and wholly, without intermeddling or troubling
thyself in worldly businesses, that so thou
mayest by the grace of God, attain to more
knowle'dge, and spiritual feeling of God, and of
spiritual things. Such desire of thine is (as
1 hope) good, and from God, for it is set upon
Him in charity spiritually. Nevertheless, as in
regard of external matters and workings in them,


to a Devout Man 319

such desire of thine is to be moderated and ruled
with discretion, according to the nature and
quality of thy estate, which thou art to regard in
thy spiritual intentions ; for charity unruled, that
is, not rightly ordered, turneth sometimes into
a fault or vice. And therefore it is said of our
Lord by a holy soul in the holy Scripture : He
hath ordered charity in me;* that is to say, our
Lord giveth to me charity, hath set it in order
and good rule within me, whereby it might not
err in its exercise, nor be lost through my in-
discreet doings. Even so the said desire and
charity which oiir Lord hath wrought in thee,
out of His goodness and mercy, must be so ruled
and moderated, that in the exercises of it, it do
regard the nature of thy estate and condition
of life, and the manner of living, which in former
time thou hast held, and the measure and quan-
tity of virtues that now are in thee. Thou must
not altogether follow thy said desire in giving
over or neglecting those businesses and cares of
the world that are necessary, and do belong to
thee, either for the upholding of thy own person
in his degree, or in the ruling or ordering of
other persons or things that pertain to thy
charge, and give thee wholly to retiredness,
spiritual devotions and holy meditations, as ii
thou wert a Friar or Monk, or another man that
were not bound (as thou art) to the world by
children or servants; for it is not for thee to
do so, and if thou dost, then keepest thou not the
order of charity. Also if thou wouldst alto-
gether leave and forbear all spiritual exercises
(especially now after the grace and calling that
Grod hath given thee for them) and give thy-
self wholly to the businesses of the world, in
fulfilling of the works of the active life, as fully
* CaaL ii, 4.


320 Treatise written

as do other men, that never felt such devotion,
nor had such grace or calling as thou hast, thou
dost then leave the order of charity ; for thy
state requireth of thee to attend to each of them
in divers times. Thou shalt mingle the works of
active life with the spiritual works of the con-
templative life, and then thou dost well; for
thou shalt sometimes be busy, with Martha, for to
order and govern thine household, thy children,
thy servants, thy neighbours and thy tenants. If
they do well, comfort and help them therein ; if
they do amiss, then tell and teach them for their
amendment, and chastise them as there shall be
cause. Thou shalt also wisely look after and
know thy things and thy worldly goods, as that
they be well and duly used or preserved by thy
servants, well ordered and reasonably spent,
whereby thou mayest the more plenteously, out
of thy temporal means, fulfil the deeds of mercy
and charity towards thy Christian brethren.
Also thou shalt sometimes, with Mary, leave
or lay aside the businesses of the world, and
shalt sit down at the feet of our Lord with hu-
mility, in prayers and holy thoughts, and in
Contemplation of Him, according to the grace
that He shall give thee for it, and so thou shalt
go from that one to that other, profitably and
fruitfully, and fulfil them both ; and so doing
thou observest well the order of charity.

CHAPTER II

To what kind of Men the Active Life pertaineth

But that thou mayest the less wonder at that
that I have said, and that thou mayest better
understand the reason thereof, therefore I shall
declare the matter a little more fully to thee.


to a Devout Man 321

Thou must understand that God is served by-
three kinds of life, as either by an active life,
or by a contemplative, or by a third, that is
mixed of them both, and therefore is commonly
called a mixed life. The active life belongeth
to worldly men and women that are gross and
ignorant, as to the understanding or knowledge
of spiritual exercises or ways, for they neither
feel nor taste devotion by fervour of love as
other men do, nor can they well conceive what
it is or how it may be come by ; and neverthe-
less, they have in them the fear of God and of
the pains of Hell, and therefore they eschew and
forbear sin, and have a desire for to please God,
and to attain to Heaven, and a good will they
bear to their Christian brethren. Unto these
men it is needful and speedful to use the works
of the active life as diligently as they can in the
help of themselves and of their Christian brethren,
for more they cannot do.


CHAPTER m

To whom the Contemplative Life appertaineth

The Contemplative life appertaineth only to such
men and women as for the love of God have for-
saken all notorious sins, both of the flesh and of
the world, and have given over all intermeddling
with the affairs and businesses of the world, or
with worldly goods, as also all care and charge
over others, and all superiority or offices that
concern the government of others (if ever they
had any such) and make themselves poor and,
as it were, naked from all the things of this life
save for what their corporal nature doth merely

21


322 Treatise written

need and of necessity require. Unto these men
and women it appertaineth diligently and seri-
ously to employ themselves in internal exercises,
for to get thereby (through the grace of our Lord)
cleanness in heart and peace in conscience by
destroying of sin and gaining of virtue, and so
to come to Contemplation ; since such cleanness
(necessary for Contemplation) cannot be had
without much exercise of body and continual
travail or industry in spirit, by devout prayers,
fervent desires and spiritual meditation.


CHAPTER IV
To whom appertaineth the Mixed Life

The third kind of life that is called the mixed
life belongeth to Prelates of holy Church and to
pastors and curates who have charge and supe-
riority over other men or women, for to teach
and govern them, both as to their bodies and as
to their souls, and principally to animate and
guide them in the performance of the deeds of
mercy both corporal and spiritual towards their
Christian brethren. Unto these men of the mixed
life it appertaineth sometimes to use the works of
mercy in active life, in help and sustenance of
themselves and of their subjects and of others
also, and sometimes for to leave all manner of
external businesses and to give themselves to
contemplative exercises, as to prayer and medi-
tations, reading of holy Scriptures or other good
books or to some other spiritual exercises, ac-
cording to what they shall feel themselves dis-
posed. Also, this mixed life appertaineth to
some temporal men, who are owners of much
land and goods and have withal some dominion


to a Devout Man 323

or mastership over other men, for to govern and
sustain them, as a father hath over his children,
and a master over his servants, and a lord over
his tenants ; the which men have received also
of our Lord's gift, the grace of Devotion, and in
some measure a taste and practice of spiritual
exercise. Unto these men, I say, belongeth the
foresaid mixed life, that is both active and con-
templative; for if these men having (as they
have) such external charge and cares lying on
them, out of some obligation or necessity, would
altogether leave or neglect such charge and busi-
nesses of the world pertaining to them, and give
themselves wholly to the exercises of contempla-
tive life, they would not do well in so doing, for
they observe not the order of charity ; for charity
(as thou well knowest) consisteth in the love of
God and of thy Christian brethren. And there-
fore he that hath charity in him, will not by oc-
casion of his devotions, used immoderately to-
wards God, omit that which he ought to do
towards his Christian brother, but will serve
both God and them for God, at divers times, as
now the one and then the other ; for he that for
the loving of God in Contemplation leaveth the
loving of his Christian brethren, and doth not
perform towards them that which he ought, and
is bound unto, he fulfiUeth not the rule and obli-
gation of charity. Likewise on the contrary side
whoso hath so great a regard to the works of the
active life and to the business of the world that
for the love of his Christian brethren, and the
serving of them, he leaveth or neglecteth all
spiritual exercises, God having given him a call
thereunto, he fulfilleth not charity, and so saith
St Gregory. For though our Saviour Christ, for
to stir up some to use the mixed life, took upon


324 Treatise written

H'mself the person of such manner of men, i.e.,
bi th of Prelates and of such other as are of the
said mixed estate, and gave them example by
His own working that they should upon occasion
use the exercises of the mixed life, as He Him-
self did at those times that He spoke with men
and meddled with them, showing- and exercising
His deeds of mercy towards them, taught the
ignorant by His preaching, visited the sick and
healed them of their diseases, fed the hungry and
comforted the sorrowful ; nevertheless, at other
times He left the conversation of worldly men,
and even of His own disciples, and went into the
desert upon the hills, and continued there all
night all alone in prayers, as the Grospel testi-
fieth to us. And this mixed life did our Lord in
Himself exercise, and show in the same manner,
for an example to all other men that have taken
on them the state or condition that requireth the
exercises of the said mixed life, that is to say,
that they should sometimes apply themselves to
the external affairs and businesses belonging to
their charge, and to the curing of such their
Christian brethren as pertain to them to look
to, instruct or provide for; and this to do ac-
cording to reason and discretion and their need;
and at another time to give themselves to devo-
tion and to the exercises of a Contemplative life,
being principally (as before I have said] reading
and praying. .

CHAPTER V

How holy Bishops held and used the said Mixed Life

The said mixed life did holy Bishops hold and
lead, who had charge over men's souls and had
the ministration and disposal of temporal goods ;


to a Devout Man 325

for those holy men did not wholly forsake the
administration, looking to, and the disposal of
worldly goods, and give themselves altogether,
or unreasonably to Contemplation, notwithstand-
ing the grace and gift they had for Contempla-
tion ; but very often left their own rest in Con-
templation (which for their parts they had much
rather have continued in still) for the love and
service of their Christian brethren, and were con-
tented to intermeddle with worldly businesses,
for succouring and helping of those that were
under their charge; and surely such doing of
theirs was true charity. For justly and discreetly
did they divide the time of their life into two
parts, whereof the one they bestowed in the lower
part of love and charity, that is to say, in the
works of the active life (for they were bound
thereto by taking on them their Prelacy) : and
another part of their time they spent in the
higher part of love and charity, and that was in
the contemplation of God, and of spiritual things
by prayers and holy recollections ; and so they
had and held charity to God and their Christian
brethren, both interiorly in affection of soul, and
also exteriorly by doing and performing good
corporal or external works. Other men that
were only contemplatives, and were free from all
cares and Prelacies, they also had charity towards
God and their Christian brethren, but it was only
interiorly in the affection of their soul, and not
used outwardly in corporal deeds ; and it may be
it was so increased inwardly through their con-
templations, that they needed not to intermeddle
with external things for the bettering their
charity ; nor did it belong to their state of life to
seek after such external workings, nor to inter-
meddle therewith, there being no necessity nor


326 Treatise written

obligation for it on them ; and so their internal
charity sufficed for them. But those, whom
before I mentioned, that were in Prelacy, and
others also that were holy secular men, had
perfect charity, both interiorly in their aflFection,
and did also exercise the same exteriorly in
bodily working or deeds, and such doing is
properly the mixed life which I have spoken of,
consisting of the active and contemplative both
together. And surely for such men that are in
spiritual superiority, or have charge of the souls
of others, as Prelates, Pastors and Curates have,
or that are in temporal authority in the govern-
ment of others, as worldly Lords and Masters
are, I hold this mixed life best, and most ex-
pedient or necessary for them, so long as they
remain in the said superiority and charge over
others. But as for others that are free, and not
obliged to any ministration or superiority, tem-
poral or spiritual, I judge that the contemplative
life alone by itself (if they have grace and calling
to it) were, in truth, the best, the most expedient,
most meritorious, most fair and most worthy for
them to use, and not willingly to leave it for any
outward working of the active life, unless it were
in case of great need, as for the helping or com-
forting of some other men, either in their bodies
or in their souls ; and need requiring it, he to go
about the doing of it, either when the party, or
some other for him, requesteth, and craveth at
his hands the doing of it ; or that himself sees a
mere necessity in» the case, or else (being re-
ligious) when he is bidden by his superior to
undertake or intermeddle with the work.


to a Devout Man 327


CHAPTER VI

What kind of Life was most fitting for him for whom
this Treatise was made

By that which I have said thou mayest partly
understand the differences between one and
another of the aforesaid three kinds of lives ; and
thou mayest by what I have said also judge
which of them best fitteth thee, since that our
Lord hath ordained and set thee in a state of
superiority (of such nature as it is) and authority
over others, and hath lent thee some store of
worldly goods and lands, by the which thou
mayest not only maintain and sustain thyself,
but also all those other special persons that are
under thy authority and government, and might-
est withal govern them according to thy best
knowledge and ability ; and therewith also thou
hast, through the goodness of our Lord, received
from Him the grace for to know thyself, and
a spiritual desire and taste of His love. I am of
the mind that the life which I have termed to be
mixed is best and most befitting thee ; and thou
accordingly to divide and dispose of thy time
wisely and to the satisfaction of the foresaid
rule of charity. For know thou well that if thou
leave the necessary business or the active life
belonging to thee, and be careless, and take no
heed of thy worldly goods as how they be kept
or spent, nor lookest after those that pertain to
thy charge to see they do well, nor wilt afford
thy help upon the necessity of thy Christian
brother by reason of thy love and desire thou
hast to apply thyself only to solitude and spiri-
tual exercises, imagining that by so doing thou


328 Treatise written

art excused and freed from thy foresaid obliga-
tions. If, I say, thou do so, thou dost not wisely
nor profitably for thy soul ; for what are thy
works or exercises worth (be they spiritual or
corporal) unless they be done according to justice
and reason, to the honour of God and agreeable
to His will ? surely they are even nothing- worth.
Therefore if thou leave or neglect that thing
which thou art bound unto by the law of charity,
justice or other obligation, and wilt entirely give
thee to another thing, voluntarily taken on thee,
under pretence of better pleasing and serving of
God, in a thing which thou art not bound unto,
in so doing thou dost no discreet or acceptable
service to Him. In so doing thou art careful to
do honour and worship to His head and to His
face, and to deck and adorn them fairly and
curiously, but thou neglectest and leavest His
body, with the feet, ragged and rent, and takest
no care nor heed of them, nor dost thou anything
honour Him ; and it is but a shame and an
indignity and no kind of honour for a man to be
curiously dressed and decked about his head with
pearls and precious stones, and therewith to
have all his body naked and bare, as it were
a beggar. Even so spiritually, it is no honour to
God for one to crown His head and leave His
body bare; for thou must understand that our
Lord Jesus Christ, as a man, is the head of His
spiritual body, which is the holy Church, the
members or limbs of His body are all Christian
men, some are arms, some are feet, and some are
other members, according to the qualities, con-
dition or estates they are of in the holy Church.
And now if thou be diligent with all thy skill
and ability for to deck and adorn His head, that
is, for to honour Him with the remembrance of


to a Devout Man 329

His passion and of His other works done in His
humanity, with devotion, love and thanks to
Him for the same, and forgettest or neglectest
His feet (which are thy children, thy servants,
thy tenants and all thy Christian brethren) and
lettest them to decay or perish for want of look-
ing to, or to want clothing -sujB&cient, or other
necessaries, or otherwise not looked unto and
provided for as they ought to be, then dost thou
not please Him, nor doest Him any honour; thou
seemest to kiss His mouth by devotion and
spiritual prayer, but thou treadest upon His feet,
and defilest them, inasmuch as thou wilt not tend
to them (through thy negligence) that belong to
thy charge and care. This is my opinion and ad-
vice to thee in this point ; nevertheless if thou be
of the mind that I say not aright in this matter,
for that thou thinkest it were a fairer and more
pleasing office to God for to do honour to His
head, as to be all day devoutly thinking of His
passion, and producing acts of inward affection
upon it, than for to go home to other works that
are more external, and make clean His feet, as
for to employ thyself both in words and deeds
about the helping or benefiting of thy Christian
brethren, in so thinking thou thinkest amiss, and
mistakest. For surely he will more thank thee
and reward thee for the humble washing of His
feet when they are very foul, and yield an ill
savour to thee, than for all the curious painting
and fair dressing or decking that thou canst
make about His head, by the devoutest remem-
brance of His humanity ; for it is fair enough,
and needeth not much decking or dressing from
thee ; but for His feet, and other His limbs, that
are sometimes ill-arrayed, and have need to be
holpen by thee (namely, since thou art bound


330 Treatise written

diereto\ oar Lord will render thee more thanks, if
tfaou wilt humbly and charirablj look unto them.

For the lower €t meaner that the service which
tboa dost to thy Lord seemeth to be, in regard
they are performed towards His members, and
not immediately towards Himself, yet doing it
for the love of Him, mhen reasonable occasions
<»- need require it, and that with a cheerful and
humble heart, thou much more pleasest Him
than in service immediately done to Himself
with omission of these offices of need or charity
towards thy Christian brethren. And that thou
mayest be the more wUling to go about such an
employment, thou shalt do well to think that it is
sufficient, and best of all for thee to be employed
in the very least degree, and lowest estate of His
service, especially since it is His will that it be
so. For thou must think, that since He hath put
thee into that charge and estate of life, that it is
the very best for thee, and that thou canst not do
better than in performing what belongs thereto
in the best manner and with all the willingness
and gladness of mind that thou art able.

This I tell thee not as though that already thou
dost it not, and better too ; but to the end that thou
shouldst do it with more alacrity and cheerful-
ness by occasion of this my writing ; and shouldst
not think it much sometimes to lessen or forbear
thy spiritual exercise for to go and deal in worldly
afiEairs pertaining to thee and thy estate, as to the
looking and seeing too, that thy goods be well
kept and spent according to reason, looking to
the behaviour of thy servants and thy tenants,
and doing other good deeds towards thy Chris-
tian brethren according to thy ability and their
need, but shouldst perform both these works and
exercises, that is to say, the internal and external,


to a Devout Man 331

at divers and several times, and with as good a
will the one as the other, so far as thou canst.
As for example, if thou hast been at thy prayer
and spiritual exercise, that finished thou shalt
go and busy thyself in some corporal or external
doing concerning thy Christian brethren, and
therefore spend reasonable time with willingness
and gladness of mind. And after that thou hast
been busily employed for a time about thy ser-
vants, and other men with whom thou shalt have
occasions, and hast profitably spent with them
so much time as shall be truly needful, thou shalt
then break fi-om these external doings, and shalt
return again to thy prayers and devotions, which
thou shalt perform according to the grace that
God shall give thee for it; and so doing, thou,
by the grace of our Lord, shalt put away and
avoid sloth, laziness, idleness and vain rest,
which often creep upon us through the deceit-
fulness of our nature, under pretence or colour
of contemplation or other spiritual recollections ;
whereby we come to omit the performance of
good and meritorious external affairs and busi-
nesses pertaining to us and our charge by the
appointment or providence of God. And thus
thou shalt be always in some good exercise or
other, internal or external, by turns, and in their
proper times.

Therefore thou shalt do well to observe and do
that spiritually, that is, in thy carriage in a spiri-
tual life, which Jacob did in a matter that was only
corporal or external. The holy Scripture telleth,
how that Jacobs when he began to serve his master
Laban^ he coveted Rachel his master's daughter for
her fairness to be his wife, and for the having of her
he served seven years ; but when he had thought
for to have had her to his wife, he had first Leah^


^e


332 Treatise wRttcn

the other daughter, instead of Rachel^ and after-
wards he takes Rachel^ and so he had both at
the last. By Jacob in holy Scripture is under-
stood an overcomer of sins ; by those two wives
are understood, as ^5*/ Gregory saith, the two
kinds of lives that are in the holy Church,
which are the active life and the contempla-
tive life. Leah is as much to say as labour
and painful working, and betokeneth the active
life. Rachel is as much as to say as a sight
of the beginning, which is Grod, and betokeneth
the contemplative life. Leah bore children, but
she was sore-eyed. Rachel was fair and lovely,
but she was barren. And now even as Jacob
coveted Rachel for her fairness, and yet had her
not when he would, but first took Leah and
afterwards Rachel^ even so, every man laboiu*-
ing, and heartily seeking (by compunction for
his former great sins of the flesh and of the
world) now to become a new servant to God in
cleanness of good living, hath a great desire to
have and come by Rachel^ which is to have rest
in spiritual sweetness, devotion and contempla-
tion^ for it is so fair, and so lovely a life, that
in hope for to have it he determined with him-
self, by the grace of our Lord, for to serve Him
with all his diligence and might ; but oft-times
when he thinketh to have Rachel^ that is, rest
in devottofiy our Lord suffereth him to be well
exercised and tried, either with the temptations
of the world, or of the devil, or of his flesh, or
else with some external businesses and doing,
corporal or spiritual, in help or succour of his
Christian brethren ; and when he is thus well
exercised, and in travails with Leahy and is
well-nigh overcome, then our Lord giveth him
Rackety that is, grace and devotion, and rest


to a Devout Man 333

in consciencei and then hath he both RacM
and Leah.

So shalt thou do, according to the example
of Jacobs these two lives, active and contem-
plative, since God calleth and enableth thee
for both, and use the one with the other of
them. By the one life (which is the active)
thou shalt bring forth the fruit of many good
deeds in help of thy Christian brethren ; and
by the other shalt thou be made to become
fair, clear-sighted and clean in the supreme
brightness and beauty, which is God, the be-
ginner and ender of all that is made ; and then
shalt thou be truly Jacobs and an out-goer and
overcomer of all sins ; and after that, by the
grace of God, thy name shall be changed, as
Jacob's name was, and turned into Israely and
Israel is as much as to say : a man seeing God.
Therefore, if thou be first Jacobs and will dis-
creetly use these two lives afterwards, in time
thou shalt be Israel^ that is, a true contemplative^
either in this life, if God will deliver thee, and
make thee free from the charges and businesses
which thou art bound to, or else after this life,
fully and perfectly in the bliss of heaven when
thou comest thither. A man shall desire a
contemplative life, for it is fair and full of merit,
therefore thou shalt ever have it in thy mind,
and in thy desire ; but thou shalt have in using
active life, for it is both expedient and necessary.
Therefore, if upon just occasions, either concern-
ing thy children or thy servants or any other
of thy Christian brethren, for their profit or
their heart's ease, upon reasonable cause, ask-
ing it of thee, thou be put from thy rest in
devotion, when thou hadst much rather stay
still thereat, be not angry with them, nor heavy


334 Treatise written

or sad within thyself, so far as thou art able
to help it, nor afraid, as if Grod would be angry
with thee, that thou leavest Him for any other
business or doing, for He will not be angry
but well pleased and delighted thou so do. And
therefore in such a case readily leave oflf thy
devotion of what kind soever it be, and go
about the deed, being service to thy Christian
brethren, and that as willing and readily, as if
our Lord Himself had called and bidden thee
to go about it. Do so, I say, and endure the
difficulty thou findest in it for His love; and
put away all grudging for it, so far as thou
canst; as also all bitterness and offence taken
against thy Christian brother for calling thee
to the said employment.

CHAPTER Vn

That a Man's Devotion sometimes will be the greater
by reason of the outward Work which before out
ot Charity he had been in hand with

And it may fall out sometimes that the greater
trouble thou hast exteriorly had in doing of thy
active works, the more inflamed desire shalt thou
afterwards have to Grod and the more sight of
God and spiritual things, through the grace of
our Lord, in devotion when thou comest thereto ;
for it fiureth thereby as if thou hadst a little coal
of fire, and wouldst make a fire therewith, and
make it burn ; thou wouldst first lay to some sticks,
and with them over-cover the coal so that there
is as yet no show or seeming hope of fire by it ;
nevertheless when thou hast abiden awhile and
afterwards blowest it a little, anon, suddenly
there will arise out a great flame of fire, so that
the sticks will be turned all into fire. Even so is


to a Devout Man 335

it spiritually ; thy will and thy desire that thou
hast to God is as it were a little coal of fire in
thy soul, for it giveth to thee somewhat of light
and of spiritual heat ; but it is very little that it
giveth, for often it waxeth cold and turneth
to a fleshly rest (or into a rest of flesh and sensu-
ality) and sometimes into idleness and doing of no
good; therefore it is expedient that thou put
to sticks, that is, some works of the active life;
and though it be so that those works do seem for
a time to be a let to thy desire, so that it may not
be so entire nor so fervent as thou wouldst
it were, yet be not daunted nor troubled thereat,
but abide and suffer awhile, and so blow at the fire;
that is, first go and do thy works, and afterwards,
go alone to thy prayers and devotions, and lift up
thine heart to God, and pray Him that of His
goodness He will accept thy works that thou doest
and receive them to His honour and glory ; hold
them as nothing in thine own sight, nor to be of
any worth save so far as God only out of His
goodness shall vouchsafe to accept of them;
humbly acknowledge thy wretchedness and
frailty, really attributing thy good deeds to Him;
and so much as they have any goodness in them,
and inasmuch as they are bad, or not done
discreetly with all circumstances requisite for
a good deed, ascribe them to thyself, and then for
this humility shall all thy good deeds turn into
a flame of fire as do sticks laid upon a coal ; and
thou thus doing, thy external good deeds shall not
hinder thy devotion but rather increase it* And
moreover, our Lord saith in holy Scripture thus:
Fire shall always burn in My Altar ^ and the Prtest
rising up tn the morning shall put wood thereunto^
so that the fire may not be extinguished,* This fire
* Lev. vi, 12, 13.


336 Treatise written

is love and desire to God in a soul, the which fire
requireth that it be nourished and maintained by
laying to sticks, so that it may not go out;
and these sticks are of divers matters, as some of
one kind of wood and some of another. A man
that is learned and hath some understanding
in the holy Scripture, if he have this fire of
devotion in his heart, it is good for him to get him
sticks of holy examples and devout prayers, and
nourish the fire with them. Another man that is
unlearned cannot so readily have at hand the
sayings of holy Scripture, or of Doctors for the
purpose, and therefore it is necessary for him to
do many good external deeds to his Christian
brethren, and thereby maintain and exercise
towards them the love he beareth them for God.

And so it is good that each man in his degree,
and according to what is most agreeable to the
benefit and disposition of his soul, do get him
sticks of one thing or another, as either by pray-
ing, considering, meditating or reading in some
good and devout book, or in doing of some
corporal or external work, thereby for to nourish
in his soul the fire of love so that it may not be-
come quenched ; for the affection of love is dainty
and tender, and will easily go out and vanish
away unless it be well kept and continually
nourished by good deeds or exercises, corporal or
spiritual.

Now therefore, since our Lord hath put into
thine heart a little sparkle of this blessed fire,
that is Himself^ (as holy Scripture saith. Our
Lord is a consuming fire \* for, as a material fire
wasteth all bodily things that may be wasted, so
a spiritual fire, that is God, wasteth all kind of
sin, and therefore our Lord is likened to fire

• Deut. iv, 24 ; Heb, xii, 29.


to a Devout Man 337

wasting) I pray thee to nourish this fire within
thee. This fire is nothing else but Love and
Charity. This hath He sent into the earth, as
He saith in the Gospel : / came to send fire into the
earthy and to what end^ but that it might burn ?* that
is, God hath put into man's soul a fire of love and
a good desire, and a great good will for to please
Him, and that He hath done to this end, that
man should know it, keep it, and nourish it, and
strengthen and increase it, and thereby be saved.
The greater desire that thou hast to Him and for
Him, the greater is the fire of love in thee,
and the less that the desire is in thee, the less is
the fire. The quantity or measure of thy desire
within thee, how much it is, neither thyself doth
know, nor doth any man know how great it is in
him, much less the quantity of love that is in an-
other man ; God only knoweth it, or he to whom
God shall reveal and make it known. And there-
fore dispute not with thyself as if thou wouldst
know how great thy desire is; be busy and serious
to desire as much as thou canst, but not to know
the quantity or measure of thy desire.


CHAPTER Vm

What the Desire of God for Himself is and how that
in Cleanness of Conscience is found true Com^
fort and Sweetness
Saint Augustine saith *hat the life of every good
Christian man is a continual desire to Gody and
such desire is of great power and virtue, for it is
a great crying in the ears of God ; the more
fervently thou desirest, the higher thou criest,
the better thou prayest, and the wiser are thy
thoughts. And what is this desire? Surely

* Luke xit, 49.

22


338 Treatise written

nothing but a loathing of all this worldly bliss,
a forsaking of all fleshly or sensual love in thine
heart, and an extreme loving, with a most hungry
longing and thirsting after God and the ever-
lasting bliss of Heaven ; this is that which may
be called a desire of God for Himself.

If thou hast this desire, as I verily hope and be-
lieve that thou hast, I pray thee keep it well and
nourish it diligently ; and when thou shalt pray
or meditate of God, make this desire of Him to
be the beginning and final intention of such thy
exercises, and of all other thy works and deeds,
thereby to increase it. Seek and nourish only
this, and seek not after any feeling in thy cor-
poral senses, external or internal, nor any sen-
sible sweetness or devotion, neither by the ear
nor by the taste of thy palate, nor by any won-
derful light or sight of thy eyes, nor seek the
sight of Angels, no, though our Lord Himself
would appear in His body to the sight of thy
eyes, make no great matter of that ; and there-
fore let all thy diligence be that thou mayest
truly and really perceive and find in thy soul,
and especially in thy will, a loathing and fiill
forsaking of all manner of sin and of all manner
of uncleanness, with a spiritual seeing or per-
ceiving how foul, how ugly and how painfiil
these things be; and that thou mayest have
within thee a mighty desiring of virtues, and,
namely, of humility and charity, and finally, of
the bliss of Heaven. This that I shall now tell
thee were (as I would think) a spiritual comfort,
and a spiritual sweetness in a man's soul ; and
that is, to have cleanness in conscience from
wickedness and from all worldly vanities, with
a firm faith and humble hope and a full desire
of God. Howsoever it be for having of othef


to a Devout Man 339

comforts and sweetnesses I esteem that sweet-
ness to be true, sound and secure that is found
in cleanness of conscience, with a strong will of
forsaking and loathing of all sins, and with in-
ward sight and fervent desire of spiritual things ;
all other comforts and sweetnesses caused by
any manner of feelings, unless they lead or help
to the said end, that is, to cleanness of con-
science and spiritual desire of God, are not se-
cure to rest on.

But now thou wilt perhaps ask, whether this
desire be love to God ?

As to that I answer and say : That this de-
sire is not properly love, but a beginning and
taste of love, for love properly is a perfect uniting
and coupling together of the lover and the loved
into one. Perfect love maketh God and the soul
to be as if they both together were but one thing.
But such perfect coupling and union may not be
had in this life, but only in desire and longing
thereto, as by the example that I shall now de-
liver thee. If a man love another man that is
absent, he greatly desireth his presence. Even
so spiritually, as long as we are in this life, our
Lord is absent from us, so that here we may
neither see Him nor feel Him as He is, and
therefore are not able (for want of such sight
and feeling) here to love Him in fulness and
perfection and in reality as we might do if we
had the sight of Him really, and as He is in His
own being; the which, because we have not, nor
shall have in this life, therefore all that we can
do here is to have a desire and a great longing
and thirsting for to be present with Him and see
Him in His bliss, and to be fully and perfectly
united unto Him in love. This desire we may
have in us (of His gift) in this life, by the which


340 Treatise written

we shall be saved, for it is love unto Him, such as
may here be had. Si Paul saith thus : We hum
thai while we are in this body we are pilgrtms (or
strangers) from God* That is, we abide in this
earth, or banishment, absent from Heaven, for
we here walk by faith, and not by sight (that is,
we here live in faith, not in real sight of Him as
He is) ; but we are bold, and have a good will
rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present to our Lord (that is, we, through clean-
ness of conscience and sure trust of salvation,
dare desire parting from our body by bodily
death, and thereupon to be present to our Lord) ;
nevertheless, because as yet we may not, there-
fore we endeavour, whether present or absent, to
please Him ; that is, we strive against the sins
of the world, and pleasures of the flesh, and
sensuality, by desire to Him, seeking to bum
and consume in the fire of such our desire all
things that may let or hinder us from Him.

But thou wilt perhaps further ask me :
Whether a man may continually have this desire
in his heart i and thou perhaps thinkest that he
cannot.

As to that I will answer according to my
opinion in it, which is, that thou mayest have
this desire in thine heart and intention virtually
or habitually, always and continually ; but thou
canst not so have it as to working or exercising
upon it, as thou mayest better understand by this
example. If thou wert sick, thou wouldst have,
as every man in such a case hath, continually
a natural desire in thine heart of bodily health ;
and this whether thou be asleep or awake, but
art thinking of some worldly things ; thou hast
then such a desire only in intention or habit, and
* 2 Cor. V, 6.


to a Devout Man 341

not in using or acting upon it. But when thou
thinkest on thy bodily sickness or on thy health,
then hast thou thy said desire of health in u>ing
and acting. Even so it is spiritually in the de-
sire of God. He who by the gift of God hath
this desire, though he sleep, or else thinketh not
on God, but on some other worldly things, yet
hath he this desire in his heart and soul till he
commit some deadly sin. But as soon as he
thinketh on God or purity of life or the joys of
Heaven, then his desire to God worketh actually,
as long as he keepeth his thought and intention
to please God, either in prayers, meditations, or
any other good action, so that all his endeavour
be to excite this desire, and discreetly use it
sometimes in one deed, sometimes in another,
according as he is disposed and hath grace thereto.
This desire is the root of all thy actions that
are rewardable. For whatever good deed thou
doest for God's sake, whether it be bodily or
spiritual, as when thou prayest or meditatest,
it is an exercising and using of this desire. And
therefore when thou doest any good work, scruple
not whether thou desirest God or no, for thy
deed showeth thy desire. Some ignorantly con-
ceive that they desire not God except they be
ever calling upon Him either with their mouths
or their hearts ; and therefore they are con-
tinually saying, Lord save viCy or some such-like
words; which words indeed are good, because
they stir up the heart to a desiring of God. Yet
nevertheless, without any such words, a pure
thought of God, or any spiritual thing, or of
virtue, or the humanity of Christ, or joys of
Heaven, or understanding of the holy Scrip-
tures, with love, may be better than such words.
And the more spiritual thy thought is, the more


342 Treatise written

is thy desire. Be not, therefore, in doubt whether
thou desirest God, when thou thinkest upon Him
or doest any outward good work to thy neigh-
bour, for thy deeds show it. Nevertheless, though
all thy good actions, spiritual and corporal, are
a demonstration of thy desire to God, yet is there
a great difference between spiritual and corporal
deeds, for deeds of a Contemplative life are not so
outward as the other; and therefore when thou
prayest unto, or meditatest upon God, thy desire
to Him is more entire, more fervent, more spiri-
tual than when thou doest external works of cha-
rity to thy neighbour.

Now, if thou ask me by what means thou
shalt keep this desire, and nourish it, I shall
tell a little in that point, not with the meaning
that thou shalt or must use the self-same form
ihat I tell thee for it ; but that thou thereby have
some kind of general example, whereof thou shalt
make use upon thy need and according to thy
manner — not my manner, unless mine seem more
for thy purpose, for I neither may nor can tell
thee fully what is best for thee to use ; but I shall
tell thee somewhat according to what I think.


CHAPTER IX

How thou shalt Dispose thee to Devotion

In the night after thy sleep, if thou wilt rise to
pray and serve our Lord, thou shalt feel thyself
at the first to be fleshly, heavy, and, as it
were, drowned in sensuality, and ofttimes im-
pertinent thoughts of the world or other vanities
pressing into thy mind. But then shalt thou
dispose thee to pray, or to think some good


to a Devout Man 343

thought, for to revive and quicken thine heart
towards God, and do thou use all thy discreet in-
dustry, for the drawing up of thy thoughts from
worldly vanities, and from vain imaginations
that come into thy mind, that so thou mayest
feel some devotion in such vocal prayers as
thou shalt then use, if thou use any such ; or
else (if thou wilt) enter thou into some spiritual
thoughts, whereby thou mayest not remain hin-
dered and troubled with such vain thoughts ot
the world or of thy flesh. And now as for matter
of good thoughts for thee, thou must know that
there be divers matters of such thoughts or
meditations, but which of them were best for
thee to take and use I cannot tell thee.

But I trow that such matter and manner ot
thinking or meditating, wherein thou feelest
greatest gust, facility and ease or pleasure, is
best for thee to use so long as it continueth
so grateful to thy spirit. Thou mayest (it
thou wilt) sometimes think on thy sins here-
tofore committed, and of the frailties into
which thou daily fallest, and ask mercy and for-
giveness for them. Also after this thou mayest
think on the frailties and sins and miseries,
corporal and spiritual, of thy Christian brethren,
with pity and compassion of them, and ask
mercy and forgiveness for them as tenderly as
for thyself, and as if thou hadst done them, and
that is a good exercise for the time. For I tell
thee for truth that thou mayest make of other
men's sins a precious ointment for to heal thine
own soul, when thou thinkest on them with com-
passion and sorrow for them ; this ointment is
precious and very medicinal, though the spicery
or things whereof it is composed be not clean,
or otherwise wholesome ; for it is treacle or


344 Treatise written

mithridate, made of poison for to do away and
destroy poison; that is to say, thine own and
other men's sins. If thou beat and bruise them
well with sorrow of thine heart, pity and com-
passion, they turn into treacle or mithridate, that
will cleanse and make whole thy soul from pride
and envy, and bring into it love and charity to
thy Christian brethren. Such thought is good
for thee sometimes to take into thee.


CHAPTERX

How a Man is to Think on the Humanity of Christ

Also for thy exercise of devotion thou mayest
think on the humanity of our Lord, as of His
birth, of His Passion or of any other of His
works, and feed thy thought with spiritual
imagination thereof, for to move thine affection
more to the love of Him. This thought (I mean
of something of our Saviour's himianity) is good
and expedient, namely, when it cometh freely
of God's gift, with devotion and fervour of spirit,
else a man will not likely find taste or devotion
in it. And if he have it not with such facility
and sending of God, I think it not expedient that
a man should much force himself in it, as if he
would get it by violence ; for so doing he might
hurt his head and body too, and yet be never the
nearer. Therefore I think that it is good for
a man to have in his mind and thought some-
times our Saviour's hmnanity, or some matter
thereof; and if devotion come withal, and relish
or gust found in it, then to hold it and follow
it for a time, but leave off soon, and hang not
long thereon. And if devotion come not by


to a Devout Man 345

thinking of the Passion, strive not, nor press too
much for to have and come by such devotion
or feeling in it, but take what will easily come ;
and if it come not easily betake thee to some
other matter, wherein thou thinkest or hopest
to find more devotion or gfust.


CHAPTER XI

How a Man shall think on Virtues and upon the
Saints

Also other thoughts there be that are more
spiritual, as to think on virtues, and to see by
light ot understanding the virtue of humility,
what it is, and what great reasons be why a man
should be humble ; and also what is patience,
cleanness in soul, justice, charity, sobriety and
other such like virtues ; and how worthy it is
that a man should labour for the getting of them,
and of the means by which they may be gotten,
and by such thoughts to have a great desire and
longing to the having of those virtues ; and also
for to have a spiritual sight of the three principal,
or Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity.
By the sight and desire of these virtues a soul
should see and feel much grace of our Lord,
without which grace a man's soul is half blind,
and without spiritual sweetness or taste. Also,
for to think on the saints, as the apostles,
martyrs, confessors and holy virgins, beholding
in his interior their holy living and the grace
and virtues that our Lord gave them in their
life, and by the remembrance and consideration
hereof, to stir thy heart for to take example from
them for leading a better and perfecter life.

22*


'^""^•^A


', • . '^J^BT 'vT- Treatise written


■ v> ::.


CHAPTER Xn

How a Man shall think of the Holiness of our Lord
Jesus and of our Blessed Lady

Also the thinking and considering- (above all
other saints) of our Lady Sf Mary ^nd her excel-
lency in grace and virtues is a good matter for
raising and exercise of devotion, by seeing ^th
thy spiritual eye the abundance of grace that was
in her holy soul when she was here living, which
our Lord had given her, above what He gave to
any of the other Saints ; for she was replenished
with all other virtues, without one spot of sin,
showing and manifesting by her life perfect
humility and fulness of charity, with the beauty
and excellence of all other virtues, the which
virtues altogether make her so holy, that there
would no temptation, or motion of pride, envy,
wrath or anger, sensual delight or of any other
kind of sin or imperfection enter into her heart
or defile her soul in any part of it. By the be-
holding of the beauty and excellency of this
blessed soul, a man's heart should be moved and
put into a great spiritual delight and comfort.

And much more and above that is the behold-
ing of the soul of our Lord Jesus, the which soul
of His was fully and wholly united to the divinity,
excelling without any comparison our blessed
Lady and all other creatures. For in the Passion
of Jesus are two natures, that is, Grod and man,
perfectly united together. By the virtue of this
most blessed union, which cannot be expressed
nor yet conceived by man's wit or understanding,
the soul of Jesus hath received the perfection
and fulness of all wisdom and goodness ; as the


•■ -^i^


^


to a Devout Man ^^ 347 *

Apostle saith : The fulness of the divinity doth
dwell tn Christ corporally ;* that is, the divinity of*
God was fully united to the humanity (or man's
nature) in the soul of Jesus, and so, by the means -
of His soul dwelling in His body, the remem-
brance of the humanity of our Lord after this
manner (that is, to regard the virtues and sur-
passing grace of the soul of Jesus) should be
right* comfortable to a man's soul.


CHAPTER Xm

Of seeing and beholding the Powei* (by some con'
sideration or thinking)^ the Wisdom^ the Goodness
and the Mercy of God in His Creatures

Also the remembrance of the power, the wisdom
and the goodness of our Lord in all His creatures ;
for as much as we living here on earth cannot
see God fully and as He is in His essence, there-
fore we are to see and behold Him, love and fear
Him upon the sight and consideration of His
creatures and His works ; and in them also are
we to admire and wonder at His power and
goodness. Also, for to think on the mercy of
our Lord, that He hath showed to me and to
thee, and to all sinful captives that sometimes
were in bondage to the devil, through the great-
ness and multitude of our sins; how He patiently
suffered us to live in our sin, and in our heinous
contempts of Him, and work no revenge on us
for the same, as He most justly might have done,
and might most worthily have cast us down
headlong into Hell, if His love had not hindered
Him ; but out of love He spared us, and sent His
grace into our souls, taking us out of the state of
heinous sins, and by His grace hath turned our

• Col ii, 9,


348 Treatise written

will entirely unto Him, and made us thereby,
for the having of Him, and for His love, to for-
sake all manner of sin. The remembrance of
His mercy and goodness, in these and in other
matters and points more and greater than I can
now reckon up, may justly cause and bring into a
soul a great truth and confidence in our Lord, and
a full hope of salvation, and greatly inflameth the
desire of love to aspire to the joys of Heaven*

CHAPTER XIV

How the Consideration and thinking on the Miseries
and Perils of this Life is apt to breed in a soul the
Desire of Heaven

Also to think upon the miseries, mischiefs and
perils, corporal and spiritual, that happen in this
life; and after that to think of the joys of
Heaven, as how great happiness is there, and
what wonderful joy and delight; for there is
neither sin, nor sorrow, nor passion nor pain,
hunger nor thirst, aches nor sickness, doubt nor
fear, shame nor blame, nor want of power, nor
strength, nor lack of light, nor coldness in love ;
but there is most excellent beauty, clearness,
strength, health, everlasting delights, perfect
wisdom, love, peace, honour, security, rest, joy
and bliss in abundance without ever having any
end. The consideration of these points ought to
cause thee the more fervently to covet and desire
those everlasting joys and rest of that same most
blessed life. Many men are covetous of worldly
goods, honours and earthly riches, and think
both in dreaming and waking how and by what
means they might come thereto ; and then they
forget all care of their souls' good, and all


to a Devout Man 349

thoughts of the pains of Hell, or of the joys of
Heaveiu Surely these men are not wise ; they
are like to children that run after butterflies, and,
because they look not to their feet, they some*
times easily fall down and break their legs.
What is all the pomp, honours, riches and jollity
of this world but a butterfly ? Surely it is no
more, yea, it is much less. Therefore, I pray
thee, be covetous of the joys of Heaven, and thou
shalt have honour and riches that shall last for
ever. For at the latter day, when worldly
covetous men bring no good in their hands
(because all their honour and riches, which they
only made account of, are turned into nothing
but sorrow and pain) then the good men of the
world, that have truly forsaken all vain honours
and riches of this world, or else if they had them
they made no account in their hearts of them, nor
did set their love or delight in them, but have
ever lived in the peace of God and in humility
and in hope, and sometimes in sorrows or afflic-
tions, and patiently expected the mercy of God ;
they (I say) shall then fully attain that which
they here coveted, for they shall be crowned as
kings, and shall ascend up with our Lord into
the bliss of Heaven. Also there be many other
good considerations or thoughts (more than I can
speak of) that serve to stir and raise a man's
mind and affection to loathe the vanities of this
world and to desire the joys of Heaven.

These matters I have not mentioned unto
thee as if I had withal fully showed the manner
how they are exercised in a man's soul; but I
have only touched them a little, to the end thou
mightest, by so much the better, understand
these things for such use as thou canst best
make of them*


350 Treatise written


CHAPTER XV

How a Man shall do when he feeleth no taste nor
comfort in his Mental Exercises

Nevertheless I would think it were good for
thee that when thou disposest thee to think on
Grody as I have before said, or in any other
manner, and peradventure fhou feelest no gust
nor devotion in thy exercise, but only a naked
mind and a weak will ; by which thou wouldst
fain think on God, but canst not ; then I think it
is good for thee that thou strive not too much
with thyself, for so thou mayest fall into greater
darkness, unless thou knowest how to work more
subtlely, and more above in spirit, and with all
quietness in the senses. But thou not knowing
how to do so for want of experience or skill in it,
I hold it more secure for thee in such a case for
to say thy Pater noster and thine Ave Marta, or
else thy Matins^ or to read in thy Psalter, for
that is evermore a sure standard that will not
fail. Whoso may cleave thereto he shall not err ;
and if thou canst by thy prayer get devotion,
look then that this devotion be only in affection,
that is to say in a great desire toward God, with
a spiritual delight. Hold on then such thy saying
of those vocal prayers, and not easily break off;
for oftentimes it happeneth that praying with the
mouth getteth and keepeth devotion, and if in
such a case thou cease from saying, thy devotion
withal vanisheth away.

Nevertheless, if Devotion in prayer bring into
thine heart a devout thought of the humanity of
our Lord, or of any of the other matters before
mentioned by me, and this thought should be


to a Devout Man 351

*
hindered by thy saying of the vocal prayers, then
will it be best for thee to cease from thy saying/
and to feed thy mind and affection with the
thought of the said good matter till it leave thee
and be vanished away.


CHAPTER XVI

Wliat a Man is to take heed of in his Prayers
and Meditations

But of certain things it behovetK thee to beware
in thy meditations ; of some of them I shall tell
thee. One is that when thou hast had a spiritual
thought or imagination of the humanity of our
Lord, or of other bodily things, and thy soul hath
been comforted and fed therewith, and afterward
it passeth away of itself; do not seek, as it were,
by mastery or force to hold it still, for then it
will turn thee into pain and bitterness. Also, if
it pass not away, but dwell still in thy mind,
without any travail or industry of thine, and
thou, for the comfort thou findest in it, wilt not
leave it, and thereupon it still continuing with
thee, Cometh to bereave or hinder thee of thy
sleep at nights, or else in the day times hindereth
thee from other good deeds, or else through the
great fervour that it worketh in thy body, thy
body or thine head by it falleth into a great
feebleness ; then must thou lessen or moderate,
and sometimes forbear such exercise of thine,
even when thou hast most devotion in it, or to
it, and wouldst otherwise be most loth to for-
bear it, or part from it ; and therefore thou must
needs use discretion in the matter, for to avoid
those mischiefs, or any of them, which now I
have reckoned up to thee, or any other mischief


35* Treatise written

or peril that may come to thee through indis-
creet fervour or love to those thy exercises;
and in particular, give it over when it is reason-
able time to give it over, or when thy Christian
brother may receive harm, or take just offence
at thee by occasion of thy long stay at such thy
devotions. If thou do otherwise in this matter
than I have told thee, I think thou dost not well
nor wisely in it.

A worldly man or woman that peradventure
feels not devotion twice in a year, if he (through
the grace of our Lord Jesus) feel great compunc-
tion for his sins, or think seriously or devoutly
on the Passion of our Lord, or upon any other
good matter, if he by occasion thereof, and his
devotion therein, be put from his sleep and his
rest, for one, or two, or three nights, until his
head ache, it makes no great matter, nor will
he be the worse for it ; such devotion cometh
but seldom upon such persons. But as for thee,
or any other man or woman, that every day duly
performest, or hath such devotions, and intend-
est to continue in pursuing of such daily exer-
cises, it is expedient for thee to use and hold
discretion in thy performance of those thy exer-
cises, and not ftilly to yield and plunge thyself
into devotion, so far as it will offer itself unto
thee, but moderate thyself in it, and take it
moderately, though it offer itself to thee in
abundance.

Also I hold it good, that thou observe this
discretion in thy exercise, which is, that thou
tarry not too long at it, that thereby thou put
thyself from taking thy meat or of thy sleep,
when the time shall be for taking of them, or do
give just cause of displeasure or damage to any
other man, through occasion of overlong tarry-


to a Devout Man 353

ing at such thy devotion. The wise man saith :
That all things have their time*

Another thing which behoveth thee to beware
of is that when thy mind hath been employed
for a time in the imagination of the humanity of
our Saviour, or any other good matter, and after
this thou seekest with all the desire of thine
heart, for to have a more spiritual knowing or
feeling of the divinity ; press not too much upon
such desire, nor suffer the desire of thine heart to
tarry too long therein, as if thou wert expecting
and tarrying for some better or higher elevation
of thy spirit, or for a feeling that had more
worth or excelling in it than any thou hast
hitherto had. Thou shalt not do so. It is enough
for thee and for me for to have a desire and
a longing to our Lord ; and if He out of His
grace and goodness will vouchsafe, over and
above such desires of ours, freely, and of His
own accord, to send us of His spiritual light,
and open our spiritual eye, for to see or know
more of Him than heretofore he did or could,
by our own labour and industry, let us thank
him for it ; but if He do not (because we are
not as yet humble enough, but were likely to
grow proud by reason of such extraordinary
favours, if He bestowed them on us, or are not
disposed in other respects, and namely, by clean-
ness of conscience through well living, for to
receive such grace and favour at His hands),
then let us humbly acknowledge our own un-
worthiness, and hold ourselves satisfied with the
desire we have of Him, and with other common
good thoughts, that may easily be had and used
by our imagination ; as thinking of our sins,
of Christ's Passion, or other such like things,

"^ i2.ccles iii.


,354 • -> • Trcatfce written

or else with some Tocal prayers of the Psalter
or other vocal* prayers, and thank Him with
all our hearts, that He bestoweth upon us any
portion of His grace or favour, though it be
the least that any man hath. And if thou do
■^otherwise, thou mayest easily be deceived (for
thy presumption) by the spirit of error; for it
is a great folly for a man of his own head or
wilfulness to press or strain himself too much,
to get into the sight or exercise of spiritual
things further than he seeth well that he hath
invitation and enablement for it. For the wise
man saith that the searcher pf the Majesty (of
God) shall he oppressed by the glory of Him; * for
not having humility, cleanness and worthiness
in soul, for such a sight he shall \^ cast down,
and made to know himself better than he did
through this confusion. A^id therefore the same
wise man in another place saith thus : Do not
seek for things that are higher ^ nor search into
things that pass thy strength ; t that is to say, high
things that are above thy natural reason and
apprehension seek not after, and great matters
that are above thy ability or strength do not
search into. By these words the wise man doth
not wholly forbid us to seek after and desire
the knowing and having of spiritual and
heavenly things, but he forbiddeth us to seek
for them in a preposterous manner, which is
too soon, and sooner than we are fit for them
or that God calleth us to them, as when we are
as yet sensual, and not cleansed from the vain
love of the world ; being in that degree, we
are not to take upon us as if we could or
would by our labour or industry, or by our
own wit, enable ourselves to d i scern, see or

* Prov. XXV, 27. + Ecclus iii, 22.


to a Devout Man " * 355'

know spiritual things; or procure in us great
fervour of the love of God; so that albeit we
see that wfe set at nought all worldly things,
and it seem to us . that we would for God's
love forsake all the wealth, honour and joys of
this world; yet for all this we are unfit and
indisposed for to seek and behold spiritual
things that are above us, until our souls
through precedent exercises of the imagination, *
become to be more subtle, or as it were thin,
or somewhat spiritual, and withal he become ^
well mortified and settled in virtues by pro-
cess of time and by increase in grace. For
(as Si Gregory saith) no man suddenly (or
hastily) becometh supreme or perfect in ^ace,
but beginneth with little, and proceedeth on by
little and little, until that he come to be per-
fect, th^ whicfi God grant that we all may one
day be. Amen.


Finis.
