Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


A.



^ - o



S


Sec *^''2- cl



3^0


.4



II



SYDENHAM SOCIETY



INSTITUTED

MDCCCXLIII


, I



THE



GENUINE WORKS



OF



HIPPOCRATES



TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK



WITH



A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE AND ANNOTATIONS



BT



FRANCIS ADAMS, LL.D.

SUBOEON.



IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. I.



LONDON

PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY

MDCCCXLIX.



• 1


1

•


_' *


\ •


• *


\


/'.'»


^ ;' '


'.\ '


<^ i


C. AND J. ADLARO, PRINTKRS,

' KAKTMULOUKW CI/MIK.



ADVERTISEMENT.



The Council of the Sydenham Society having done me the
honour of consulting me respecting a proposed volume of
translations from the Works of Hippocrates^ I ventured to
give it as my opinion that such a selection ought to compre*
hend the whole of those Treatises which are now regarded
as genuine; and this suggestion having been approved of^
I was appointed to the task of translating and editing them
according to the best of my judgment. The design^ then^
of the present Work/ is to give a translation of all the
genuine remains of the Great Hippocrates^ along with
such an amount of illustration as may be sufficient to render
them intelligible to any well-educated member of the profession
at the present day. It was understood^ indeed^ when I first
engaged in this undertakings that I was merely to give a faithful
translation of the original ; but I soon became satisfied^ that a
considerable amount of illustration, in the form of Annotations,
Arguments, and so forth, would be indispensable to the general
utility of such a publication. It is well known that many
parts of my author's works are very obscure, owing to the
conciseness of the language, and the difficulty which now exists
of properly apprehending the views entertained on certain
abstruse questions at so very distant a period; and, conse-
quently, it will readily be understood, that a simple version,
without either comment or illustration, would have been nearly

* It is necessary to iuform my readers in this place, that, owing to its bulk, it has
been judged expedient by the Council of the Sydenham Society to divide the work
into two separate parts or volumes.



vi ADVERTISEMENT.

as unintelligible to most of my readers as the original itself.
And that the works of Hippocrates stand in need of illustration
is rendered apparent from the number of commentaries which
have been written upon them in all ages, commencing almost
with his own time. But whether or not I have been fortunate
enough to give just such an amount of illustration as was
necessary, and have taken proper care at the same time not to
load my pages with superfluous matters of this description, must
be left to the judgment of my readers to determine. However,
I may be permitted to say, that whatever value shall be put
upon my performances in this line, I have certainly spared no
pains to make myself well acquainted with the true doctrines
of my author, and that for this purpose I have consulted all
the best authorities to which I could obtain access, from the
commentaries of ApoUonius and Galen down to the learned
labours of several continental scholars, my contemporaries,
especially Dr. Ermerins, of Holland, and MM. Littr^ and
Malgaigne, of Prance. I flatter myself it will also be ad-
mitted, that I have fiirther collected from a variety of sources,
a considerable store of valuable materials, for which I am in
nowise indebted to any of my predecessors in the same field of
research.

Considering how scanty all the information is which the
English language can supply on many questions connected with
the medical literature of the ancients, I have judged it necessary
to enter into a discussion of several of these subjects, in order
to prepare my readers for understanding the doctrines of my
author. These are contained in the Preliminary Discourse, and
will be found to relate principally to the origin of Grecian
Medicine, to the Biography of Hippocrates, and an analysis of
the works which bear his name, and to an exposition of the
principles of the Physical Philosophy which form the basis of
most of the hypotheses which occur in the Hippocratic Col-
lection. Having bestowed much pains on the illustration of the



ADVERTISEMENT. vii

philosopUcal tenets of the ancients^ I shall feel anxious to
learn how far the judgment pronounced by me on various
controverted points is approved of by persons possessing the
necessary degree of information to enable them to form a
correct estimate of them^ along with a proper degree of candour
in judging between the conventional opinions of the present
time, and those which prevailed in so remote an age.

That I have imposed upon myself a very serious additional
task, by engaging not only to give a true version of the
language of my author, but also to expound his opinions, and
place them, so to speak, in juxtaposition with those of the pre-
sent age, will be readily admitted) and I have reason perhaps to
apprehend, that I have thereby exposed myself to the strictures
of a certain class of critics, who have formed to themselves a
very different ideal of the duties of a translator, fancying that
he ought merely to concern himself with the words of the
original author, and not venture to sit in judgment on the doc-
trines. I shall not attempt, however, any formal defence of the
method which I have pursued, but may be allowed to remark,
tjiat, if I shall be found to have failed in satisfying the
reasonable expectations of such readers as are sincerely desirous
of becoming familiarly acquainted with the opinions of an
author, whom I verily believe to be the highest exemplar of
professional excellence which the world has ever seen, it is not
from want of zeal in the discharge of the arduous duties which
I had undertaken.

I have little left to say in this place respecting most of the
critical subjects connected with the work, as I have entered at
considerable length into the discussion of these matters in the
Preliminary Discourse. It is proper, however, to acknowledge
that I have derived great assistance from M. Littr^^s excellent
edition, of which the parts already published embrace all the
treatises here given, with the exception of the last four. On
all occasions I have freely availed myself of his labours.



I



viii ADVERTISEMENT.

more especially in amending the text^ in which respect his
edition undoubtedly surpasses all those which preceded it. I
have also not neglected to consult all the other standard
editions, especially those of Foes, Van der Linden, and Kiihn,
and likewise, as will be seen, many other editions of separate
treatises, so that, altogether, I trust it will be found that I
have not often failed in attaining the true meaning of my
author, as far as it can now be ascertained. I am aware, in-
deed, that, situated as I am, at a distance from public libraries,
and deprived of personal intercourse with learned men of con-
genial pursuits whom I could consult in cases where I felt myself
in doubt, I have laboured under disadvantages which may
render my work not so perfect in all respects as could have
been wished ; and that, by sending it to the press as soon as
completed, it is not unlikely I may have left it disfigured by
certain blemishes which multa dies et multa litura might have
enabled me to remove. But the urgency of my other pro-
fessional and private concerns forbade me to devote much
longer time to any one task, however interesting or important ;
while the weight of increasing years, and the confirmed con?
viction of the endless nature of literary research on such a
subject as this, disposed me, on the present occasion, to keep
in mind the solemn admonition of my Author, that ** Life is
short, and Art is long."

P. A.

Banchoky; Jan. 1849.



CONTENTS OF VOL. I.



PAGE
pRBLIlf INARY DlBCOURSK . . 1

Sect. I. — On the Origin of Grecian Medicine .3

Sketch of the Life of Hippocrates . . . . 9

Sect. II. — Disquisition on the Authenticity of the different Treatises which

have been attributed to Hippocrates . .24

Sect. III. — On the Physical Philosophy of the Ancients, and more especially

their Doctrines with regard to the Elements .131

- The Pythagoreans . . . 132

The Platonists . .135

The Peripatetics . . . . 139

The Stoics . .141

The Epicureans . . . 143



On Anciknt Medicine .155

The Argument ... 157

The Work . .161

On Airs, Watebs, AND Places . . 179

The Argument ...... 181

The Work . . 190

On the Prognostics ...... 223

The Argument . . . 225

The Work . .234

Appendix to the Book of Prognostics . . 257



X



CONTENTS.



On Regimen in Acute Diseases

The Argument ....
The Work . . . . .

Appendix to the work on Keginien in Acute Diseases
The Argument . . . ,

The Work ....



PAGE

. 271
. 273
. 282
. 306
ib.
. 313



First and Third Books of the Epidemics .
Book 1. — The Argument

The Work .
Book III. — The Argument
The Work



. 337
. 339
. 352

. 382
. 388



On Injuries of the Head
The Argument
The Work



. 421
. 423
. 445



Plates I, 11, III, with Description.



ERRATA.



Page.

26, /or Philenus, read Philinus.

b&,for Bacchus, read Bacchius.

7 if for bronchus, read branchus.
123, /or Prcecepta, read Precepts.
152,/or comporta, read composta.
183, /or Ka r), read Kai rj,
194, /or Re, read (Ec.



Page.

206,/or apaXut read wpata*

221 1 for avaploif read avapBoi.

237, line 10fr.foot,/or <rwfiat read vmtov.

290, for iriXtbvt read tteXiov.

42b f for rj/c, read Tr)v.

4 53, /or Ascllius, read Arantius.



9



EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES TO VOL. L



PLATE I.

Fio. 1. The Saw used by carpenters. (Taken from Chirurgia
i Grmco in Latinum canversa, Vido Vidio interprete
Lutetue Parisiorum, p. 115.)
2. A small Saw. (Ibid.)
8. The Modiolus^ or ancient Trephine. (Ibid.)

4. The Terebra, or Trepan, called Abaptiston. {Ibid,

p. 116.)

5. The Auger used by carpenters. {Ibid. p. 116.)

6. The Terebra, or Trepan, which is turned round by a

thong bound tight about its middle. {Ibid. p. 117.)

7. The Auger, or Trepan, which is turned round by a

bow. {Ibid, p. 118.)

8. A Terebra, or Trepan, which is turned round by a

thong on a cross-beam. {Ibid» p. 119.)

9. A Terebra, or Trepan, which has a ball in its upper

end, by which it is turned round. {Ibid, p. 120.)

10. A Terebra, or Trepan, which is turned round by a

cross piece of wood, or handle, on its upper end.
{Ibid. p. 120.)

PLATE II.

Fio. 1. A Terebra, or Trepan, turned round by a handle in
its middle. {Ibid. p. 122.) It resembles the centre-
bit of modern artisans.

1. A hole into which the iron head is fixed.

2. Upright part, three inches long.

3. Cross part, one inch long.

4. The part which is grasped in turning the instrument.

5. Cross part, an inch long.

6. Upright part.

7. A ball fixed to the top.

A. B. c. Different forms of the iron head fixed in the
hole 1.



EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES TO VOL. I.

Fig. 2. Scalper rectus, or straight Raspatory. [Ibid, p. 123.)

3. Scalper in medio recurvatus, or bent Raspatory. [Ibid.

p. 123.)

4, 5, 6. Ancient Modioli, as represented by Pott {Injuries

of the Head, p. 153).

PLATE III.

Figs. 1 and 2. A Scalper, or Raspatory, with which the
moderns scrape the bone. {Chirurgia i Grteco, §-c.,
p. 125.)

3. Scalper cavus, or scooped Raspatory. {Ibid. p. 126.)

4. A Lenticular. {Ibid. p. 127.)

5. A Malleolus, or Mallet. {Ibid. p. 126.)

6. A Lever, by which modem surgeons protect the dura

mater, and raise a depressed bone. {Ibid. p. 128.)

7. The ancient Meningophylax. {Ibid. p. 128.)

8. Forfex excisoria, or Cutting Scissors. {Ibid. p. 129.)

9. A Forceps, used for extracting bones. {Ibid. p. 130.)



PLATE I.


1 2


8



10


\ u



J < ■



PLATE II.


u



8


6


•l



PLATE III.


4


6



8



y<\'X'^



It



\



■■■4-y



*<v • V L



PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE



BY THE EDITOR.


^ *~i



PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE.



SECTION I.

ON THE ORIGIN OF GRECIAN MEDICINE^ WITH A SKETCH OF

THE LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES.

It is well known that the oldest documents which we possess
relative to the practice of Medicine^ are the various treatises
contained in the Collection which bears the name of Hippocrates.
Their great excellence has been acknowledged in all ages^ and
it has always been a question which has naturally excited lite-
rary curiosity^ by what steps the art had attained to such per-
fection at so early a period. This investigation^ however^
is attended with peculiar difficulties, and has never been
marked by any very satisfactory results. At one time, indeed,
it was usual to solve the question by supposing that Greece had
derived all the arts and sciences, in a state of considerable ad-
vancement^ from the oriental nations, who are admitted to have
possessed a considerable degree of civilization before the Hellenic
race became distinguished for intellectual development.^ The
question with regard to the origin of Medicine was thus supposed
to have met with a satisfactory solution. For, it being generally
admitted that the Hippocratic Medicine had emerged from the
schools of philosophy^ and it having been assumed as incontro-

* This is the view which is taken regarding the origin of Grecian medicine by
Schnlze, in his Historia Medicinse. He is a most learned and trustworthy authority
on the history of medicine, but in the present instance his judgment is biassed by
the opinion which was generally held in his age with respect to the origin of
Grecian philosophy. At that time it was customary to follow the later Platonists in
tracing the rise of philosophy to Egypt. Lord Monboddo, in his work on Ancient
Metaphysics, strongly espouses this opinion, which, in fact, was the established
belief of learned men down to a late period. Kant advocated the views which are here
adopted.



4 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. , [skct. i.

vertible that the early philosophy of the Greeks had been derived
from the East, the inference appeared to be qnite legitimate that
medicine^ in a state of considerable advancement^ had been im-
ported from the same quarter. Recent research, however, has
cast great doubts on the supposed descent of Grecian philosophy
from a foreign source, and it is now pretty generally admitted
that the Orientals, in early times, had never made any con-
siderable progress in mental science.^ Instead, then, of looking
upon philosophy as having been an exotic production in the
land of Hellas, we have every reason to believe that it was, what
its inhabitants, in the noble pride of political freedom and in-
tellectual superiority, boasted that their forefathers had been,
namely, " the offspring of their own soil.^'^ Since the philosophy
of the Greeks was indigenous, there is every reason to suppose
that their medicine was so in like manner. How long the union
between medicine and philosophy had subsisted before the time
of Hippocrates, has not been determined upon any contem-
porary evidence, but the disciples of Pythagoras, in after ages,
did not hesitate to ascribe to him the honour of effecting this
alliance' However this may be, it appears to me very doubtful
whether these philosophers ever practised medicine as a craft.
Indeed, it is much more likely that they merely speculated
upon the phenomena of disease. Thus we shall see afterwards,
that Plato himself did not discard speculative medicine from
his system of philosophy, although we are quite sure that he

> See in particular the introductory chapters to Hitter's History of Ancient Philo-
sophy ; Thirlwall's History of Greece, c. xii ; Grote's History of Greece, P. I, c. xvii.
The opinion now generally held on this subject may be explained in few words.
The Homeric poems are beyond all doubt of Grecian origin, for it cannot be shown
that the ancient Egyptians or Babylonians had anything resembling a regular epos.
Now, as Mr. Grote well observes, ** from the poetry of Homer to the history of
Thucydides, and the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, was a prodigious step, but
it was the native growth of the Hellenic youth into the Hellenic man, and what is
of still greater moment, it was brought about without breaking the thread either
of religious or poetic tradition — without any coercive innovation or violent change
in the mental feelings. The transition of Grecian mind from its poetical to its com-
paratively positive state was self-operated, and accomplished by its own inherent and
expansive force—aided indeed, but by no means either impressed or provoked, from
without.*' — L. c.

^ Plato, Menex.

' Celsiis mentions Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Democritus, as the most distin-
guished of the philosophers who cultivated medicine. — Prasfat.



SECT. I.] GRECIAN MEDICINE. 5

never cpractised it as an art. But this connexion between
medicine and philosophy was by no means regarded, . in after
times, as having been favorable to the advancement of the
former, for we find Hippocrates complimented by Celsus for
having brought about a separation between them.^

It is clearly established that, long before the birth of phi-
losophy, medicine had been zealously and successfully cultivated
by the Asclepiadae, an order of priest-physicians that traced its
origin to a mythical personage bearing the distinguished name
of iSIsculapius. Two of his sons, Podalirius and Machaon, figure
in the Homeric poems, not however as priests, but as warriors
possessed of surgical skill in the treatment of wounds, for which
they are highly complimented by the poet. It was probably
some generations after this time (if one may venture a conjec-
ture on a matter partaking very much of the legendary
character) that ^sculapius was deified, and that Temples of
Health, called Aaclejna^ presided over by the Asclepiadse, were
erected in various parts of Greece, as receptacles for the sick,
to which invalids resorted in those days for the cure of diseases,
under the same circumstances as they go to hospitals and spas
at the present time. What remedial measures were adopted in
these temples we have no means of ascertaining so ftdly as could
be wished, but the foUowing facts, collected from a variety of
sources, may be pretty confidently relied upon for their accuracy.
In the first place, then, it is weU ascertained that a large
proportion of these temples were built in the vicinity of
thermse, or medicinal springs, the virtues of which would no
doubt contribute greatly to the cure of the sick.^ At his

' " Hippocrates primus ab studio sapientis disdplinam banc separavit." — Pnefat.

' See the autborities quoted at Paulus iEoiNSTA, VoL I, p. 73, Syd. Soc. edition ;
also in particular Xenopbon's Memorabilia, iii, 13 ; and Pausanias, ii, 2. Tbe most
complete list wbicb is anywhere given of tbe ancient Asclepia, is tbat contained in
Scbulze's History of Medicine, i, 24. It is to be regretted, bowever, tbat tbe refer-
ences to Pausanias are made according to tbe pages of an old edition, instead of
books and cbapters, so tbat one experiences some difficulty in finding tbe passages
referred to. Tbe number of Asclepiain Greece noticed by bim is sixty .four. Plutarch
states in positive terms tbat all tbe Temples of Health were erected in high situations,
and where tbe air was wholesome. — (Quaest. Rom.) On tbe practice of medicine in
tbe ancient Temples of Health, see further Sprengel, Hist, de la M^., c. v. Sprengel,
however, does not acknowledge so candidly as he ought to have done his obligations
to bis predecessor Scbulze.



6 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

entrance into the temple^ the devotee waa subjected to purifi-
cations^ and made to go through a regular course of bathings
accompanied with methodical frictions^ resembling the oriental
system now well known by the name of shampooing. Fomen-
tations with decoctions of odoriferous herbs were also not for-
gotten. A total abstinence from food was at first prescribed,*
but afterwards the patient would no doubt be permitted to par-
take of the flesh of the animals which were brought to the
temples as sacrifices. Every means that could be thought of
was used for working upon the imagination of the sick, such
as religious ceremonies of an imposing nature, accompanied by
music, and whatever else could arouse their senses, conciliate
their confidence, and, in certain cases, contribute to their amuse-
ment.^ In addition to these means, it is believed by many in-
telligent Mesmerists of the present day, that the aid of Animal
magnetism was called in to contribute to the cure;* but on
this point the proof is not so complete as could be wished.
Certain it is, however, that as the Mesmerists administer medi-
cines which are suggested to the imagination of patients during
the state of clairvoyance, the Asclepiadse prescribed drugs as in-
dicated in dreams. These, indeed, were generally of a very
inert description; but sometimes medicines of a more dangerous
nature, such as hemlock and gypsum, were used in this way,*
and regular reports of the effects which they produced were
kept by the priests in the temples. It is also well known that
the Asclepiadse noted down with great care the symptoms and
issue of every case, and that, from such observations, they be-
came in time great adepts in the art of prognosis. When we
come to an analysis of the different Hippocratic treatises, it will
be seen that there is strong reason to believe we are still
possessed of two documents composed from the results of obser-
vations made in the ancient Temples of Health. It would also
contribute much to the increase of medical knowledge in this

I Philostratus, Vita Apollonii, i, 9 ; Strabo, Geogr., xiv.

' Pausanias, vii, 21.

^ This I have reason to know is the belief of the learned and estimable author of
the Ists Revelata.

^ Aristides, Orat. in iEsculap., viii. It may be proper to state that Sprengel, in
referring to this passage (Hist, de la Med., p. 160, French edition), falls into the
mistake of saying that these medicines were prescribed to Aristides himself.



SECT. I.] GRECIAN MEDICINE. 7

way, that the office of priesthood was hereditary in certain
families, so that information thus acquired would be transmitted
from father to son, and go on accumulating from one generation
to another.^ Whether the Asclepiadae availed themselves of the
great opportunities which they must undoubtedly have had of
cultivating human and comparative anatomy, has been much
disputed in modem times ; indeed, the contrary is expressly
maintained by some eminent authorities, such as Gruner^ and
Sprengel.^ But it will be shown in another place, that
there is good reason for believing that these two scholars have
greatly underrated the amount of anatomical knowledge pos-
sessed by Hippocrates, and his predecessors the priest-physicians
in the Temples of Health. Moreover, it is worthy of remark,
that Galen holds Hippocrates to have been a very successful
cultivator of anatomy.* Gtden further states, upon the authority
of Plato,^ that the Asclepiadae paid no attention to dietetics ; but
this opinion would require to be received with considerable
modification, for, most assuredly, whoever reflects on the great
amount of valuable information on this subject which is con-
tained in the Hippocratic treatises, will not readily bring him-
self to believe that it could have been all collected by one man,
or in the course of one generation. It is worthy of remark,
moreover, that Strabo, whose authority I need scarcely say
stands deservedly high in all literary matters, does not hesitate
to affirm that Hippocrates was trained in the knowledge of
dietetics, from documents preserved in the Asclepion of Cos.^
That gymnastics, as stated by Galen,^ were not recognised as
a regular branch of the healing art, until the age of Hippocrates,
is indeed not improbable, and this perhaps is what Plato meant
when he says that the Asclepiadae did not make any use of the
pedagogic art until it was introduced by Herodicus. But at the
same time there can be no doubt, as further stated by Gulen,^
that exercise, and especially riding on horseback, constituted

* Galen, de Administ. Anatom., ii.

' Censura Openim Hippocrat., p. 184.

' Hist, de la M^., i, 5, p. 175, French edit. Schulze, in like manner, depreciates
the anatomical knowledge of the Asclepiadae, and holds that it had been overrated
by Galen. — Hist. Med., i, 2, 5.

* Comment, in Libr. de Artie, iii, 28 ; de Decret. Hippocrat. et Platon., viii, 1.

* Polit., iii, 399 ; ed. Tauchnitz. " Geograph., xiv, 2.
' De Sanitate tuenda, i. ^ 1. c.



8 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

one of the measures used by the Asclepiadse for the recovery of
healthy having been introduced by :£sculapiu8 himself.

Of the Asclepia we have mentioned above, it will naturally
be supposed that some were in much higher repute than others^
either from being possessed of peculiar advantages, or from the
prevalence of fashion. In the beginning of the fifth century
before the Christian era, the temples of Rhodes, Cnidos, and
Cos were held in especial favour, and on the extinction of the
first of these, another rose up in Italy in its stead.^ But the
temple of Cos was destined to throw the reputation of all the
others into the background, by producing among the priests
of ^sculapius the individual who, in all after ages, has been
distinguished by the name of the Great Hippocrates.^

Before proceeding, however, to give a brief sketch of his
biography, I may state, partly by way of recapitulation, and
partly in anticipation of what will be found in a subsequent
part of this work, the leading facts which are known relative
to the state of medicine before his time.

1. The origin of Grecian medicine is involved in impenetrable
darkness, being anterior to all authentic history, and nothing
being known either as to its rise or the steps by which it grew
up to be a regular art.

2. There is no reason to suppose that the germs of medical
science, any more than those of philosophy, had been originally
imported into Greece from the East.

3. The earliest practitioners of medicine concerning whom we
have any authentic information, were the Asclepiadae, or priest-
physicians, who endeavoured to cure the sick partly by super-
stitious modes of working upon the imagination, and partly by
more rational means, suggested by observation and a patient
study of the phenomena of disease.

4. Though the men of letters who directed their attention to
the phenomena of disease, as constituting a branch of philosophy,
may in so far have improved the theory of medicine by freeing

•

1 Galen, Opera, torn, iv, ed. Basil, 35.

* Aristotle, Polit*, vii, 4. Notwithstanding the high compliment which Aristotle
here pays to the professional reputation of Hippocrates, there can be no doubt that
he does not always make proper acknowledgment for the many obligations which he
lies under to the Coan sage. Galen states repeatedly that the greater part of
Aristotle's physiology is derived from Hippocrates.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 9

it from the trammels of superstition^ it is not likely they could
have contributed much to the practice of medicine^ which is
well known to be founded on observation and experience.

5. Though there can be little or no doubt that the priest-
physicians^ and the philosophers together, were possessed of all
the knowledge of medicine which had been acquired at that
time, it is not satisfactorily ascertained by what means the art
had attained that remarkable degree of perfection which we shall
soon see that it exhibited in the hands of Hippocrates. But I
must now proceed with my Sketch of his Life.

That Hippocrates was lineally descended from iEsculapius
was generally admitted by his countrymen, and a genealogical
table, professing to give a list of the names of his forefathers,
up to ^sculapius, has been transmitted to us from remote
antiquity. Although I am well aware that but little reliance can
be put on these mythical genealogies, I wiU subjoin the list to this
section, in order that it may be at hand for reference, as many
allusions will have to be made to it in the subsequent pages.^

Of the circumstances connected with the life of Hippocrates
little is known for certain, the only biographies which we have
of him being all of comparatively recent date, and of little au-
thority. They are three in number, and bear the names of
Soranus Ephesius, Suidas, and Tzetzes. Of the age in which the
first of these authors flourished, nothing is known for certain; the
second is a lexicographer^ who lived in the beginning of the
eleventh century; and the third flourished in the twelfth century.
The birth of Hippocrates is generally fixed, upon the authority
of Soranus, as having occurred in the first year of the 80th
Olympiad, that is to say, in the 460th year before the vulgar era.
On this point, however^ I must say that I see no good grounds
for the unanimity of opinion which has generally prevailed
among modem scholars. In fact, the counter-evidence of
Aulus Gellius has always appeared to me to be unjustly over-

* See Bome iogeniona obflervations on these mythical genealogies in Grote*s His-
toiy of Greece, toI. i, p. 593. He holds that they are altogether unworthy of credit,
or at least that there is no test whereby one can separate the true from the false in
them. Clinton, indeed, in his Fasti Hellenid, attaches more importance to them ;
but apparently Mr. Grote's judgment on them is perfectly just. See further vol. ii,
p. 53, &c.



10 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

looked^ as I cannot but think that his authority ought to rank
much higher than that of Soranus, of whom nothing is known,
not even the century in which he lived. Aulus Gellius,
then, in an elaborate disquisition on Greek and Roman chro-
nology, states decidedly that Socrates was contemporary with
Hippocrates, but younger than he.^ Now it is well ascer-
tained, that the death of Socrates took place about the year
400 A.C., and as he was then nearly seventy years old, his
birth must be dated as happening about the year 470 a.c.
This statement would throw the birth of Hippocrates back
several years beyond the common date, as given by Soranus.
There is also much uncertainty as to the time of his death :
according to one tradition he died at the age of 85, whereas
others raise it to 90, 104, and even 109 years. These dates
of his birth and death, although vague, are sufficient to show
that the period at which we may reasonably suppose he had
practised his profession with the greatest activity and repu-
tation, must have been the latter part of the fifth century a.c.
It will readily occur to the reader, then, that our author flourished
at one of the most memorable epochs in the intellectual deve-
lopment of the human race. He had for his contemporaries,
Pericles, the famous statesman ; the poets iEschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides, Aristophanes, and Pindar ; the philosopher Socrates,
with his distinguished disciples Plato and Xenophon ; the
venerable father of history, Herodotus, and his young rival,
Thucydides; the unrivalled statuary, Phidias, with his illus-
trious pupils, and many other distinguished names, which have
conferred immortal honour on the age in which they lived, and
exalted the dignity of human nature. Nor was Greece the
only region of the earth remarkable at this time for moral and
intellectual improvement ; for, if we may believe oriental chro-
nology, Confucius and Zoroaster had gone off the stage of life only
a very few years before the dawn of this celebrated age of Grecian
superiority in the arts and sciences. Hippocrates, it thus ap-
pears, came into the world under circumstances which must
have co-operated with his own remarkable powers of intellect in
raising him to that extraordinary eminence which his name has
attained in all ages. From his forefathers he inherited a distin-
guished situation in one of the most eminent hospitals, or Temples

' Noctcs Atlicac, xvii, 21.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 1 1

of Healthy then in existence^ where he must have enjoyed free
access to all the treasures of observations collected during many
generations^ and at the same time would have an opportunity
of assisting his own father in the management of the sick.^
Thus from his youth he must have been familiar with the prin-
ciples of medicine, both in the abstract and in the concrete, —
the greatest advantage, I may be permitted to remark^ which
any tyro in the healing art can possibly enjoy. In addition to
all this, he had excellent opportunities of estimating the good
and bad effects resulting from the application of gymnastic
exercises in the cure of diseases^ under the tuition of Herodicus,
the first person who is known for certain to have cultivated this
art as a branch of medicine.^ He was further instructed in the
polite literature and philosophy of the age^ by two men of clas-
sical celebrity, Gorgias and Democritus ; the latter of whom is
well known to have devoted much attention to the study of
medicine, and its cognate sciences, comparative anatomy and
physiology.

Initiated in the theory and first principles of medicine, as now
described, -Hippocrates no doubt commenced the practice of his
art in the' Asclepion of Cos, as his forefathers had done before
him. Why he afterwards left the place of his nativity, and
visited distant regions of the earthy whither the duties of his
profession and the calls of humanity invited him^ cannot now
be satisfactorily determined. The respect paid to him in his
lifetime by the good and wise in all the countries which he
visited, and the veneration in which his memory has been held
by all subsequent generations, are more than sufficient to con-
fute the base calumny, invented, no doubt, by some envious
rival, that he was obliged to flee fix)m the land of his nativity
in consequence of his having set fire to the library attached to
the Temple of Health, at Cnidos, in order that he might enjoy

* That Hippocrates drew the rudiments of his medical knowledge from the reports
of cases collected in the Asclepion of Cos, is attested by good authorities. See
Strabo, Geogr., ziv ; Pliny, H. N., xxix, 2.

' On the introduction of the gymnastic exercises into the practice of medicine,
see Schulze, Hist. Med., i, 2, 8. The author of the VI Epidem. condemns Hero-
dicus for using exercises in the treatment of acute diseases. Herodicus is frequently
mentioned in the Dialogues of Plato. See Protagoras, $ 20; and de Repub.,
ill. Plato says, that being in ill health, he wore out first himself and aflerwards
many others, by combining gymnastics vdth medicine.



12 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

a monopoly of the knowledge whicli he had extracted from the
records which it had contained.^ Certain it is, that he after-
wards visited Thrace, Delos, Thessaly, Athens, and many other
regions, and that he practised, and probably taught, his profes-
sion in all these places.^ There are many traditions of what he
did during his long life, but with regard to the truth of them,
the greatest diversity of opinion has prevailed in modern times.
Thus he is said to have cured Perdiccas, the Macedonian king,
of love-sickness; and although there are circumstances con-
nected with this story which give it an air of improbability, it is
by no means unlikely that he may have devoted his professional
services to the court of Macedonia, since very many of the
places mentioned in his works as having been visited by him,
such as Pella and Acanthus, are situated in that country ; and
further, in confirmation of the narrative, it deserves to be men-
tioned, that there is most satisfactory evidence of his son
Thessalus having been court physician to Archelaus, king of
Macedonia;^ and it is weU ascertained that another of his
descendants, the Fourth Hippocrates, attended Boxane, the
queen of Alexander the Great.*

Our author's name is also connected with the great plague of
Athens, the contagion of which he is reported to have extin-
guished there and in other places, by kindling fires.^ The only
serious objection to the truth of this story is the want of proper
contemporary evidence in support of it. It is no sufficient objec-
tion, however, that Thucydides, in his description of the circum-
stances attending the outbreak of the pestilence in Attica, makes
no mention of any services having been rendered to the commu-

' Soranus alludes to this fiction, and quotes Andreas as an authority for it. See
also Pliny, H. N., xxix, 2. Tzetzes calls it the Temple of Cos, and not of Cnidos,
which was burned.

' See Plato, Protagoras.

' Galen, Comment, in Libr. de Nat. Human.

* Suidas in voce Hippocrates.

^ It was a common practice in ancient times to kindle great fires as digmfecimJt
or deodorizers. We have entered pretty fully upon this subject in our Commentary
on Pai;lu8 ^Gginbta, Vol. I, p. 274. There can be no doubt that it was the esta-
blished practice of the profession in the days of Hippocrates. The names of Acron,
Empedocles, and Hippocrates are particularly famous as having successfully adopted
the practice. See Aetius, v, 94 ; Paulus iEgineta, 1. c. ; Pliny, H. N., xxxvi, 69 ; and
Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 13

nity by Hippocrates; while, on the contrary, he states decidedly
that the skill of the physicians could do nothing to mitigate the
severity of this malady. It is highly probable, that, if Hippocrates
was actually called upon to administer professional assistance in
this way, it must have been during one of the subsequent attacks
or exacerbations of the disease which occurred some years after-
wards We know that this plague did not expend its fury in
Greece during one season, and then was no more heard of; but
on the contrary, we learn that it continued to lurk about in
Athens and elsewhere, and sometimes broke out anew with all
its original severity. Thucydides briefly mentions a second
attack of the plague at Athens about two years after the
first,^ attended with a frightful degree of mortality ; nor is
it at all improbable that this was not the last visitation of the
malady. Though the name of Hippocrates, then, may not
have been heard of at its first invasion, it is not at all
unlikely that, after he had risen to the head of his pro-
fession in Greece, as we know that he subsequently did, he
should have been publicly consulted regarding the treatment of
the most formidable disease which was prevailing at the time.^
What adds an appearance of truth to the tale is, that several of
the genuine works of Hippocrates, which were probably pub-
lished in his lifetime, relate to the causes and treatment of epi-
demic and endemic diseases.^ That the magistrates of Athens,
then, should have applied to him as the most eminent autho-
rity on the subject, to assist them in their sanitary regulations^

• Hist., iii, 87.

' It deserves to be mentioned further, as adding probability to the present narra-
tive, that it was quite common in ancient times for the Asclepiadie to be publicly
consulted by cities and states respecting the general health of the inhabitants, and
this both for the prevention and cure of diseases. See Aristid. Opera, i, p. 81.

' Galen, in many parts of his works, alludes to the professional services of Hip-
pocrates during the great plague described by Thucydides. He mentions decidedly
that Thucydides gives only those symptoms which would strike a common, that is
to say, a non-professional man ; whereas Hippocrates describes the disease accurately
like a professional man, but gives few of those symptoms which appeared most
interesting to Thucydides. — De Difficult. Respir., ii, 7.

* Thucydides mentions that the mortality of the plague was greatly aggravated by
the influx of the people from the country into the city, and the crowding of them in
ill-ventilated huts, (ii, 52.) Mitford, in describing the plague of Athens, remarks
that the want of sewers in ancient times must have contributed very much to the
severity of the disease. (Hist, of Greece, vol. ii, p. 195.) He refers (1. c.) to Strabo
(Geogr. v) for proof that the Romans were the first people who constructed sewers.



U PRELIMIX\RY DISCOURSB. [sect. i.

daring the prevalence of this ?reat pestilence, is so fkr firom
being improbable, that I think it would have been Tery extra-
ordinanr if ther had omitted to consalt him. seeing: that he
was nndonbtediy looked np to as the /ari/« princeps among the
phvscians of the day. That his serrices in this way have been
exaggerated by the blind admiration of his worshippers, both
at that time and in after aee:$, mav be readilr admitted : but
this cirenmstance ought not to make ns reject the whole story
as being fabuloos. I repeat, then, that although this part of
the history of Hippocrates be not Touched by any contemporary
evidence, it is by no means devoid of probability, while the
objections which have been started to it by modem authorities
have not so much weight as is generally supposed.

Another circumstance in the life of Hippocrates, for the
truth of which Soranus, Suidas, and a host of ancient autho-
rities concur in vouching, namely, that he refused a formal
invitation to pay a professional visit to the court of Persia, is
rejected with disdain by almost all the modem scholars who
have touched upon this subject. But was it an uncommon
thing for the king of Persia to manoeuvre in this way with
Grecian talent in order to attract it to his court? So far is the
contrary known to be the case, that, as every person who is
familiar with the early history of Greece must be well aware,
the manner in which *' the Great King*^ rendered himself most
formidable to the Grecian Republics after the humiliating
defeats which the military forces of Persia had sustained at
Marathon, Salamis, and Plataea, was by intriguing with all
those distinguished persons in Greece who would render them-
selves accessible to his bribes and flatteries, and thus endea-
vouring to detach them from the cause of their country. Of
this we have notable examples in the case of two illustrious
individuals, who were nearly contemporary with Hippocrates — I
mean Pausanias and Themistocles. Moreover, it is well known
that Grecian physicians at all times were in high repute at the
court of Babylon;^ witness Ctesias, the contemporary and
kinsman of Hippocrates,^ who was court physician to the king
of Persia, and was employed in that capacity in the most



' See Xenophon, Cyropsd.| i and viii.
^ Galen, Comment, in libr. de Artie, iii.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 15

serious emergencies.^ What more natural^ then, or more likely
to happen^ than that the king of Persia^ when he saw his
country overrun by the plague,^ should seek advice from a
neighbouring people, whose superiority to his own subjects in
all the arts of war and peace he and his predecessors had
learned from sad experience? I readily admit that the
letters in the Hippocratic Collection which relate to this story
can scarcely be received as genuine; but does this prove that
the event upon which they are made to turn is also devoid of
truth? I can see no probability in this supposition; for
whether we regard these documents as willful forgeries, executed
with the fraudulent intention of palming them on the literary
world as genuine productions, or whether we look upon them
as mere exercises made on given subjects by the Sophists or
Scholiasts to display their ability in sustaining an assumed
character, it would have been preposterous to make them
relate to stories of which every person of that age must have
been able to detect the Msehood. Were any person at the
present day, from whatever motive, desirous of palming upon
the public certain letters said to have been written by the cele-
brated John Hunter, he would surely not be so imprudent
as to endeavour to pass off as genuine a correspondence pur-
porting to have taken place between him and the king of
France, as every one at all acquainted with professional biography,
would at once perceive that the authenticity of the documents
in question was completely disproved by the falsity of the
narrative upon which they are founded. Seeing, then, that
these letters are admitted on all hands to be very ancient,
that is to say, of a date not much later than the time of

* Xenophon, Anabasis, i. It has never been clearly determined whether he was
in the suite of Artaxerxes the king, or of his brother Cyrus, before the battle of
Cunaza, in which the latter was killed, and the former being severely wounded, was
attended professionally by Ctesias. Diodorus Siculus, indeed, says decidedly that
he was taken prisoner on the occasion. (Bibl. ii, 32.) But we are certain, from the
authentic narrative of Xenophon, that he was not taken prisoner in the battle, nor is
it likely that he was one of those who were kidnapped afterwards, otherwise the
historian would certainly not have omitted the name of so distinguished a personage.
Besides, had he been brought to Babylon in this way, as a captive, Artaxerxes was
not likely to have intrusted his royal life to a person who had been so lately the
professional attendant on his rebel brother.

» See Thucyd., ii, 48.



16 PRBLIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

Hippocrates^ we may rest assured that the main facts to which they
allude were believed at the time to be of an authentic nature.

For the like reasons I am disposed to think that, although
the letters in the Collection which refer to a pretended corre-
spondence between him and Democritus are most probably to
be regarded as spurious^ it is far from being improbable that
the physician may have rendered the services of his profession
to the philosopher. Had there been no grounds whatever for
this story^ why so many ancient authors should have agreed in
giving credit to it I cannot imagine.

According to all the accounts which have come down to us of
his life^ he spent the latter part of it in Thessaly, and died at
Larissa, when far advanced in years. Tbe corruptions with
regard to numbers which, in the course of transcription, have
crept into all works of great antiquity, sufficiently account for
the differences already mentioned in the statements respecting
his age at the time of his death.

These are all the particulars of any importance which can
now be gathered regarding, the life of him who has been
venerated in all ages as " The Father of Medicine." That they
are scanty and rather unsatisfactory, must be admitted ; but yet
what more, in general, can we desire to know respecting
the biography of a physician than the manner in which he
was educated, how he was esteemed by his contemporaries,
and what he did and wrote to reflect credit on his profession ?
The approbation and gratitude of those who have consulted
him for the cure of their maladies are the best testimony to
the public character of a physician, and the estimation in which
his writings are held by the members of his own profession
is what constitutes his professional reputation. I need scarcely
say that, as a medical author, the name of Hippocrates stands
pre-eminently illustrious. In this way he has left monuments
of his genius more durable than the marble statues of Phidias,
his contemporary, and as enduring as the tragedies of
Sophocles, or the Olympiac odes of Pindar.

In the next section I intend to give a careful analysis of all
the writings which have come down to us from antiquity under
the name of Hippocrates, and to state clearly the grounds upon
which some are to be received as genuine, and others rejected
as supposititious. I shall conclude the present section.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 17

although it may appear that I am anticipating some things
which had better have come after the succeeding one^ with a
brief account of our author^s general principles^ both as regards
the theory and the practice of medicine ; and in doing this I
mean not to confine myself strictly to the treatises which are
acknowledged to be genuine^ as they are unfortunately so few
in number^ that we are often obliged to guess at the tenets of
our author &om those held by his immediate successors and
disciples.

The opinions which he held as to the origin of medicine^ and
the necessities in human life which gave rise to it^ are such as
bespeak the soundness of his views^ and the eminently practical
bent of his genius. It was the necessity^ he says^^ which men
in the first stages of society must have felt of ascertaining
the properties of vegetable productions as articles of food that
gave rise to the science of Dietetics ; and the discovery having
been made that the same system of regimen does not apply in
a disordered as in a healthy condition of the body^ men felt
themselves compelled to study what changes of the aliment are
proper in disease ; and it was the accumulation of facts bearing
on this subject which gave rise to the art of Medicine. Looking
upon the animal system as one whole^ every part of which con-
spires and sjrmpathises with all the other parts^ he would
appear to have regarded disease also as one^ and to have referred
all its modifications to peculiarities of situation.^ Whatever
may now be thought of his general views on Pathology^ all
must admit that his mode of prosecuting the cultivation of
medicine is in the true spirit of the Inductive Philosophy ; aU
his descriptions of disease are evidently derived from patient
observation of its phenomena^ and all his rules of practice are
clearly based on experience. Of the fallaciousness of expe-
rience by itself he was weU aware^ however^ and has embodied
this great truth in a memorable aphorism/ and therefore he
never exempts the apparent results of experience from the strict
scrutiny of reason. Above all others, Hippocrates was strictly

' De Prisca Medicina.

' See in the next sectioHi under xxiii. Though I have not admitted the treatise
here referred to into the list of genuine works, it wUl be seen below that it possesses
considerable evidence in its favour, and that beyond doubt it is very ancient.

' Aphor. 1, 1.

2



18 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

the physician of experience and common sense. In shorty the
basis of his system was a rational experience^ and not a blind
empiricism^ so that the Empirics in after ages had no good
grounds for claiming him as belonging to their sect.^

What he appears to have studied with particular attention
is the natural history of diseases, that is to say, their tendencies
to a favorable or fatal issue ; and without this knowledge, what
can all medical practice be but blind empiricism? — a hap-
hazard experiment, which perchance may turn out either to
cure or to kill the patient ? In a word, let me take this oppor-
tunity of saying, that the physician who cannot inform his
patient what would be the probable issue of his complaint, if
allowed to follow its natural course, is not qualified to prescribe
any rational plan of treatment for its cure.

One of the most distinguishing characteristics, then, of the
Hippocratic system of medicine, is the importance attached in
it to prognosis, under which was comprehended a complete
acquaintance with the previous and present condition of the
patient, and the tendency of the disease. To the overstrained
system of Diagnosis practised in the school of Cnidos, agree-
ably to which diseases were divided and subdivided arbitrarily
into endless varieties, Hippocrates was decidedly opposed; his
own strong sense and high intellectual cultivation having, no
doubt, led him to the discovery, that to accidental varieties of
diseased action there is no limit, and that what is indefinite
cannot be reduced to science.*

Nothing strikes one as a stronger proof of his nobility of soul,
when we take into account the early period in human cultivation
at which he lived, and his descent from a priestly order, than the
contempt which he everywhere expresses for ostentatious charla-
tanry, and his perfect freedom from all popular superstition.^ Of
amulets and complicated machines to impose on the credulity

* See Galen, Opera, torn, t, p. 488 ; ed. Basil.

^ This is clearly defined and stated by Aristotlei Phys., i. See also Boethius in
Pned., p. 113 ; ed. Basil.

' This is the more remarkable, as it does not appear to have been the established
creed of the greatest literary men and philosophers of the age, who still adhered or
professed to adhere to the popular belief in the extraordinary interference of the
gods with the works of Nature and the affairs of mankind. This at least was re-
markably the case with Socrates, whose mind, like that of most men who make a
great impression on the religious feelings of their age, had evidently a deep tinge of



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 19

of the ignorant multitude^ there is no mention in any part of
his works. All diseases he traces to natural causes^ and counts
it impiety to maintain that any one more than another is an
infliction from the Divinity. How strikingly the Hippocratic
system differs from that of all other nations in their infantine
state must be well known to every person who is well acquainted
with the early history of medicine.^ His theory of medicine
was further based on the physical philosophy of the ancients^
more especially on the doctrines then held regarding the
elements of things^ and the belief in the existence of a spiritual
essence diffused through the whole works of creation^ which
was regarded as the agent that presides over the acts of genera-
tion^ and which constantly strives to preserve all things in their
natural state^ and to restore them when they are pretematurally
deranged. This is the principle which he called Nature^ and
which he held to be a m medicatrix. " Nature/' says he, or
at least one of his immediate followers says, " is the physician
of diseases.'^' His physical opinions are so important, that I
have resolved to devote an entire section to an exposition of the
ancient doctrines on this head. (See Sect. III.)

Though his belief in this restorative principle would naturally
dispose him to watch its operations carefully, and make him
cautious not to do anything that would interfere with their
tendencies to rectify deranged actions, and though he lays it

mysticiBDi. See Xeooph. Memor., i, 1, 6-9 ; Ibid, iv, 7, 7 ; also Grate's History of
Greece, vol. i, p. 499. The latter remarks, " Physical and astronomical phenomena
are classified by Socrates among the divine class, interdicted to human study."
(Mem.,i, 1, 13.) He adds, in reference to Hippocrates, " On the other hand, Hippo-
crates, the contemporary of Socrates, denied the discrepancy, and merged into one
the t^o classes of phenomena — the divine and the scientifically determinable, —
which the latter had put asunder. Hippocrates treated all phenomena as at once
both divine and scientifically determinable." (p. 499.) He then quotes the me-
morable passage in the treatise *■ On Airs,' &c. It does not appear, however, that
in ancient times the charge of Ath^sm was ever brought against him. It has been
urged against him by modem fanatics, but scarcely deserves a serious refutation.
See Schulze (Hist. Med., i, 3, 2), and Ackerman (Hist. Lit. Hippocr., pp. xii, xiii ;
ed. Kiihn). By such persons, whoever does not join in their anthropomorphical
notions of a first cause is held up for an Atheist.

' For the medicine of the ancient Jews, Egyptians, and Babylonians, see the intro-
ductory chapters of Sprengel's Hist, de la Med. The medicine of the Hindoos, as
given in the * Susruta' of D'Hanvantare, abounds in superstitious practices.

' Epidem., vi.



20 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

«

dowu as a general rule by which the physician should regulate
his treatment, " to do good, or at least to do no harm/'* there
is ample evidence that on proper occasions his practice was
sufficiently bold and decided. In inflammatory affections of
the chest he bled freely, if not, as has been said, ad deliquum
animi,^ and in milder cases he practised cupping with or without
scarifications.^ Though in ordinary cases of constipation he
merely prescribed laxative herbs, such as the mercury (wier-
curialis perennis),^ beet,* and cabbage,* he had in reserve elate*
rium,^ scammony,® spurges,^ and other drastic cathartics, when
more potent medicines of this class were indicated. And
although, when it was merely wished to evacuate upwards in a
gentle manner, he was content with giving hyssop/ and other
simple means, he did not fail, when it was desirable to make
a more powerful impression, to administer the white hellebore
with a degree of boldness, which his successors in the healing art
were afraid to imitate.* A high authority has expressly stated
that he was the discoverer of the principles of derivation and
revulsion in the treatment of diseases.^® Fevers he treated as
a general rule, upon the diluent system, but did not fail to
administer gentle laxatives, and even to practise venesection in
certain cases.^^ When narcotics were indicated, he had recourse
to mandragora, henbane, and perhaps to poppy-juice.*'

In the practice of surgery he was a bold operator. He
fearlessly, and as we would now think, in some cases unneces-

' Epidem., i.

' De Diaeta in Morb. Acut., Prognost., 15. See the argument to the Appendix
to the former work.

' See Galen, Oper. torn, v, p. 106 ; ed. Basil.

* See De Morbis, pluries; de Prisca Med., 22.

* De Superfoet. et plories.

' De Ratione Yictus in Acut. There is some doubt, however, whether the o'va/A-
ftwviov of Dioscorides be the Convolvti^ut teummonia. Some rather take it for the
C taffiiiifoUui, *

7 De Superfcet. et alibi.

■ De Morb. Mulier.

' De Fract., Aphor. et alibL

^° Galen, Meth. Med., v, 3 ; Comment, in Libr. de Humor. See further in illus-
tration, (Econom. Hippocrat. under Uapoxtrivnv and 'AvriViranc; and Schulze,
Hist. Med., i, 3, 4, 10.

" See Epidem.y i and iii; Aphor., i, 16 ; and De Dicta Acutor., passim.

I* See De Morbis, ii ; and Le Clerc, Hist. Med., 1, 3, 20.



SECT. I.] LIFE OF HIPPOCRATES. 21

sarily^ perforated the skull with the trepan and the trephine in
injuries of the head. He opened the chest also in empyema and
hydrothorax. His extensive practice^ and no doubt his great
familiarity with the accidents occurring at the public games of
his country^ must have furnished him with ample opportunities
of becoming acquainted with dislocations and fractures of all
kinds j and how well he had profited by the opportunities which
he thus enjoyed, every page of his treatises ' On Fractures/
and 'On the Articulations/ abundantly testifies. In fact,
until within a very recent period, the modem plan of treat-
ment in such cases was not at all to be compared with his
skillful mode of adjusting fractured bones, and of securing them
by means of waxed bandages. In particular, his description
of the accidents which occur at the elbow- and hip-joints will
be allowed, even at the present day, to display a most won-
derful acquaintance with the subject. In the treatment of
dislocations, when human strength was not sufficient to restore
the displacement, he skillfully availed himself of all the mecha-
nical powers which were then known.^ In his views with
regard to the nature of club-foot, it might have been affirmed
of him a few years ago, that he was twenty-four centuries in
advance of his profession when he stated that in this case there
is no dislocation, but merely a declination of the foot ; and
that in infancy, by means of methodical bandaging, a cure
may in most cases be effected without any surgical operation.
In a word, until the days of Delpech and Stromeyer, no one
entertained ideas so sound and scientific on the nature of this
deformity as Hippocrates.

But I must not allow my enthusiastic admiration to carry
me too far. I will therefore conclude the present section by
making a few observations on the peculiar style of our author^s
writings. According to Galen, whose extensive acquaintance
with Greek literature rendered him a most competent judge,
the characteristics of his style are extreme conciseness, pre-
cision, and, in certain cases, obscurity, as the natural result of
laboured brevity.^ To these traits of character he adds, else-
where, that Hippocrates makes it a rule to avoid all superfluity
of discussion and unnecessary repetitions, and never says more

' See the work ' On the Articulations/ pluries.

' See in particular Venesect, adv. Erasistrat., Comment, in Lib. de Offic. Medic.



22 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. i.

than what is indispensable.^ Now, it is no proper objection to
this general view of the character of his style, as stated by M.
Littre, that it is not the same in all his works ; as, for example,
in his treatise ^ On Airs, Waters, and Places,' where the style
is certainly not so laconic as in some of his others; although,
even with regard to it, I must be permitted to say that I agree
with a most competent authority, the late Dr. Coray, that its
style is remarkable for conciseness.^ And, indeed, if brevity
of expression, bordering at times upon obscurity, be not the
characteristic of the style of Hippocrates, we must admit that
his mode of composition is not in accordance with the taste of
his age. There can be no doubt that the style of Hippocrates
is nearly akin to that of his contemporary, the historian
Thucydides, which is thus described by a very acute and
original critic : " The most obvious and characteristic of his
peculiarities is an endeavour to express as much matter as
possible in as few w ords as possible, to combine many thoughts
into one, and always to leave the reader to supply something
of his own. Hence his conciseness often becomes obscure.''^
I would beg leave to add that other peculiarities in the style
of Thucydides, which are severely animadverted upon by
Dionysius, may be clearly recognised also in the writings of
Hippocrates, especially irregularities of syntax, mth a some-
what rude and inartificial mode of constructing his sentences.
I mention this the rather that the English reader may not ex-
pect to find in my translation any of those well-turned periods
and graceful modes of construction by which elegant com-
position is now distinguished. I wish it to be known that in
making this translation, I have followed the example of the
modern authority lately referred to, that is to say, I have
been more studious of fidelity than of elegance, and have
endeavoured to give not only the matter, but also the manner,
of my author.*

* Dc Dyspn., ii, p. 181 ; ed. Basil. This brevity of style, Galen, in another pas-
sage of the same work, pronounces to be characteristic of all the old writings. In
fact, when the materials of writing were scarce and dear, it is not likely that authors
would indulge in an extravagant use of them.

' Coray, Traits de Hippocrat. des Airs, &c., Discours preliminaire, pp. 1, Ivii.
^ Dionjrsius Halicamassensis de iis quae Thucyd. propria sunt, et de Platon. judi-
cium.

* Opus supra laudatum, p. clxxiv.



SECT. I.] GENEALOGY OF HIPPOCRATES. 23

As promised above, I here subjoin the Mythical Genealogy
of Hippocrates from Tzetzes.

iEsculapius was the father of Podalirius, who was the father
of Hippolochus, who was the father of Sostratus, who was the
father of Dardanus, who was the father of Crisamis, who was
the father of Cleorayttades, who was the father of Theodorus,
who was the father of Sostratus II, who was the father of
Theodorus II, who was the father of Sostratus III, who was
the father of Nebrus, who was the father of Gnosidicus, who
was the father of Hippocrates I, who was the father of Hera-
chdes, who was the father of Hippocrates II, otherwise called
the Gbeat Hippocrates. (Chiliad., vii, 155.)

I may also add a few particulars, deserving to be known,
respecting the family of Hippocrates. As Galen relates, he
had two sons, Thessalus and Draco, each of whom had a son
who bore the name of Hippocrates. (Comment, ii, in Lib. de
Nat. Human.) It thus appears that there were in the family
four persons of the name of Hippocrates, closely related to one
another. First, the father of Heraclides, and grandfather of
Hippocrates II ; second, Hippocrates II, our author ; third and
fourth, his grandchildren, the sons of Thessalus and Draco.
Besides these, three or four other members of the family bear-
ing the name of Hippocrates are enumerated by Suidas. Of
Thessalus, it is related by Galen (1. c.) that he adhered strictly
to the principles of his father, and became physician to
Archelaus, king of Macedonia. Of Draco little mention is
made, only it is weD known that he also foDowed his father's
profession. But of all the family of Hippocrates the Great,
Polybus, his son-in-law, is the most celebrated. Galen calls
him the disciple of Hippocrates and successor in his school,
and adds, that he made no innovations on the doctrines of his
teacher. (Comment, i, in Libr. de Nat. Hum.)



24 PRELDID^AItT DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.



SECTION n.

DISQUISITION OX THE AUTHEXTICITT OF THE DIFFERENT TREA-
TISES WHICH HAVE BEEN ATTRIBUTED TO HIPPOCRATES.

There can scarcely be a doubt that Hippocrates followed
the practice which we know to have been adopted by almost
all the great writers of antiquity with regard to the publication
of their works^ namely, that of publishing them separately, at
the time they were composed. We know^ for example (to begin
with a distinguished author, regarding whom our information
is particularly ample), that Horace published his books of
satires, epistles, odes, and epodes separately, and at different
times; and that the collection of them in its present form
was not compiled until after his death.' We have every reason
for concluding that the same rule was followed by Martial/
Cicero,' and other Roman authors. It is further well ascer-
tained (to come to a period not far removed firom the age of
Hippocrates) that Plato^ and Aristotle^ likewise gave their works
to the literary world upon the same plan. We have every
reason, therefore, to suppose that Hippocrates published several
of his works separately, in his lifetime; and indeed Galen
often expresses himself so as to leave little or no ground for
doubt on this point.* It would be most interesting and im-
portant then to know, were this possible, in what order the dif-
ferent works of our author were published. But unfortunately

* See the editions of Horace by Bentley and Tate, planes.

* See in Bentley's Horace. The poet himself, in several of his pieces, alludes to
the separate publication of the Tarious books, as i, 97 ; vi, 1 ; ii, prsfat. ; et planes.

* See Middleton's Life of Cicero, planes.

* See the editions by Ast, Bekker, and Stallbaum, and the ancient authorities
there referred to.

* See the preliminary dissertation prefixed to Buhle's edition ; also Schneider's
edition of the Historia Animalium, Epimetrum iii.

* He mentions, in his commentary on the treatises entitled ' On Regimen in Acute
Diseases/ that, from the marks of confused arrangement about it, he was persuaded
the author had left it in an unfinished state, and that it had been published after
his death. See Opera, torn, v, p. 70 ; ed. BasiL



«BCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 25

this is a question which we have no proper data for solving
satisfactorily^ only as the ' Aphorisms^ are evidently made up
in a great measure of conclusions drawn firom the results of
discussions and observations recorded in other of his works^ we
have every reason to infer that this important work was among
the latest of his literary labours.^ But although we may not
be able to determine the order in which the different pieces
were composed and published, we need have no hesitation in
deciding with all the best authorities, ancient and modem, that
all the following treatises were composed by him, and, from the
first, obtained the sanction of his name, viz. : the ' Prognostics -/
the 'First and Third Epidemics;' *0n Kegimen in Acute
Diseases;' ' On Airs, Waters, and Places ;' *0n Wounds of the
Head -/ the * Aphorisms.' It is in so far satisfactory, then, to
know, that respecting the authorship of these works there has
never been any reasonable question, and that whoever enter-
tains doubts on this point of literary history, ought, on the same
principles of criticism, to dispute the authenticity of the
'Protagoras' and 'Phsedo' of Plato; of the 'History of Animals'
and 'Politics' of Aristotle; and of the 'Olynthiacs' and
'Philippics' of Demosthenes. In a word, nothing but the
most lawless spirit of scepticism can lead any one to challenge
the genuineness of the works which I have just now enumerated.
These, however, it will be seen, constitute but a very small por-
tion of the treatises contained in the Hippocratic Collection ;
and with regard to a very great number of the others, it is un-
fortunately not only impossible to bring any competent evidence
of their genuineness, but it is also quite apparent that they
betray marks of an entirely different authorship ; and this is
abundantly obvious, whether we look to the matters which they
contain, or the manner in which these are given. Thus in some
of the treatises we discover hypothetical doctrines and rules of
practice utterly at variance with those which are contained in
the works of acknowledged authenticity ; and in some of them,
instead of that nervous conciseness which, as we have already
stated, has always been held to be characteristic of the style
of Hippocrates, we find an insipid verbosity and vagueness of
expression, which clearly stamp them as being productions of
a very different hand. But, besides this internal evidence

' See Galeni de Crisibus, i, 6.



26 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

which we have to assist us in forming a correct judgment on
these works, we fortunately still possess a considerable number
of ancient Commentaries, written expressly in illustration of
tlicm, from which, in many instances, modem critics have been
enabled to draw very satisfactory data for forming a correct
judgment on the points at issue. Before proceeding further,
it is but fair to acknowledge that I have freely availed myself
of the labours of Vander Linden, Ackerman, Gruuer, Littr^,
and other learned men, who have preceded me in this field of
investigation, but at the same time I may venture to assure the
reader that there is scarcely a passage in any of the ancient
authorities, bearing on the points in discussion^ which I have
not examined carefully for myself.

The oldest commentator of whom we have any mention, is
the celebrated Herophilus, who flourished about the year
300 A.c.^ But of his Commentaries we have no remains, nor
of tliose of the other commentators down to Apollonius Citiensis,
a writer of the first century a.c. His Scholia on the Hippo-
cratic treatise, ' De Articulis/ along with those of Palladius,

' Golciif Gloss., torn, v, p. 705 ; ed. Basil. As frequent mention of the com-
luetitntors will occur in the course of this work, I will here suhjoin a complete list
of tliem, with a few brief notices of them, more especially of a chronological nature,
derived principally from the following sources: Ackerman, Bibliotheca Gneca; Dietz,
Pricfatio in Scholia ApoUonii, &c. ; Littre, Op. Hippocrat., torn, i, pp. 80-132 ;
Darcmberg, Cours sur I'llistoire et la Litt^rature des Sciences Medicales.

Jlerophilus, the famous anatomist of Alexandria; flourished about from 310-280 a.c.
Xcnocrates of Cos, quoted by Erotian as an authority on the Prognostics ; nearly

contemporary with Herophilus.
Philinus of Cos, contemporary with Herophilus, and probably a disciple.
Bacchius, contemporary with Philenus.

Glaucias immediately after Bacchius ; flourished probably between 290-260 a.c.
Zeuxis the Empiric, immediately after Glaucias and before Zeno; probably from

270-240 A.c. See Daremberg.
HeracUdes Tarentinus, somewhat later than Bacchius, probably about 260-240 a.c.
Zeno the Herophilean, the contemporary and rival of Heradides ; probably the same

as Zeno of Laodicea.
Apollonius Biblas, the contemporary and rival of Zeno.
Callimachus, according to Daremberg, an immediate disciple of Herophilus.
Epiceleustus of Crete, of uncertain date.
Apollonius Ophis, of uncertain date.
Lysimachus of Cos, uncertain.
Euphorion, nncertain.
Heraclides the Erythrean, rather uncertain: but, according to Daremberg, a con-



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 27

Stephanus^ Theophilus^ Meletius^ and Joannes Alexandiimis,
all writers of an uncertain date, but certainly much later than
the Christian era, were published by the late Dr. Dietz, at
Konigsburg, in 1831*. To these we have to add two others,
of much higher celebrity, namely, Erotian, who lived during

temporary with Heraclides Tarentinua. The same as Heraclides the Herophilean.
(Strabo, Geogr.t xiv.)

Epicles, uncertain.

Eurycles, uncertain.

Philonides of Sicily, uncertain.

lachomachus, uncertain.

Cydias, uncertain.

Cinesias, uncertain.

Demetrius, the Epicurean.

Diagoras, uncertain.

Nicander the Poet of Colophon, from 150-120 a.c.

Apollonius Citiensis ; Daremberg places him between 80-52 a.c. See also Dietz
and Littre.

Asclepiades of Bithynia, contemporary with Pompey the Great ; about 60-40 a.c

Thessalus, the famous Methodist ; about 50-70 p.c.

Erotian flourished in the reign of Nero, from 50-70 p.c. His Glossary still pre-
served.

Sabinus, of uncertain date, but probably not long anterior to Galen, by whom he is
frequently quoted. (Op., torn, v, p. 433.)

Metrodorus, disciple of Sabinus.

Rufus or Ruffus Ephesius, contemporary with Sabinus. Several of his works remain,
but no portion of his Commentaries on Hippocrates.

Marinus, the celebrated anatomist, about the beginning of the second century p.c.

Quintus, the Empiric, probably about from 110-130 p.c.

Lycus, the Macedonian, the disciple of Qiiintus ; from 120-140 p.c. See Daremberg.

Lycus, of Naples, date rather uncertain.

Artemidorus, a favorite of the Emperor Hadrian ; often blamed by Galen for his
alterations of the text; about 120-140 p.c

Dioscorides (no/ the author of the Materia Medica), an associate of Artemidorus.

Numesianus, somewhat later than Dioscorides.

Dionysius, about the time of the last.

Pelops, the disciple of Numesianus.

Satyrus, the disciple of Quintus.

Phedanos, the disciple of Quintus.

Julian the Alexandrian, the immediate predecessor of Galen, who frequently animad-
verts on his writings.

Galen, flourished between 150-190 p.c; wrote Commentaries, still in existence, on
the following works: — On the Nature of Man; on Regimen in Health; on
Regimen in Acute Diseases; on the Prognostics; on the First Book of the
Prorrhetics ; on the Aphorisms ; on the First, the Third, and the Sixth Books
of the Epidemics ; on the Treatise on Fractures ; on the Articulations ; on the



28 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

the reign of Nero, and the famous Galen, who, it is well known,
flourished in the latter part of the second century, p.c. It is
from the works of these two writers that the most important
facts are to be elicited, for forming a correct judgment respecting
the authenticity of the Hippocratic treatises. As we shall have
occasion to quote their opinions on the different heads of our
inquiry, it would be useless to occupy room by giving their
entire lists in this place. SuflSce it to say, that Erotian rarely
assigns any reason for admitting the treatises into his list of
genuine works, and that Galen generally rests his judgment,
when he assigns any grounds for it, upon the evidence of pre-
ceding authorities, and upon what he holds to be the charac-
teristics of the doctrines and style of Hippocrates. These,
assuredly, are most sound and legitimate principles of criticism ;
but it has been often supposed, that in applying them the
great commentator is at times very dogmatic, and not always
consistent with himself. But, upon the whole, all must allow
that Galen is our best guide on the subject of our present
inquiry. And, moreover, it is from his works especially that we
are enabled to glean whatever information we possess with re-
Physicians' Establishment or Surgery ; on the Humours ; fragments of the Com-
mentaries on AirSf Waters, Places, and on the Aliment. Besides these, he wrote
several other Commentaries, which are lost.
Doronus, of uncertain date, after Galen.

Attalion, like the last, cited in the Commentary attributed to Oribasius.
Philagrius, of uncertain date, quoted by Theophilus.
Gesius, of uncertain date.

Asclepius, of uncertain date, quoted by Theophilus. (Dietz, tom. ii, p. 458.)

Stephanus, the Athenian, supposed by Dietz to have lived in the reign of Heraclius,

that is to say, in the earlier part of the seventh century. According to Dietz,

not the same as Stephanus Alexandrinus.

Palladius, probably about the seventh century ; his Commentary on the book ' On

Fractures,* published by Foes, and a considerable portion of his Commentary

* On the Sixth Epidemic,' by Dietz.

Joannes Alexandrinus, probably near the time of Palladius ; part of his Commentary

* On the Nature of the Young Man,' published by Dietz.

Theophilus, or Philotheus, sumamed Protospatharius, probably flourished in the
seventh century p.c. See the Annotations of Dr. Greenhill, in his excellent
edition of the work 'De Corporis Humani Fabrica;' Oxford, 1842. Several of
his Commentaries on the Aphorisms, published by Dietz.

Meletius, of uncertain date ; part of his Commentaries on the Aphorisms, published
by Dietz. See also Anec. Gr., ed. Cramer.

Damascius, of uncertain date ; a few of his Commentaries on the Aphorisms, pub-
lished by Dietz.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 29

gard to the opinions of the earlier commentators^ firomHerophilus
down to his own times.

I will now proceed to give a brief sketch of the labours of
modem critics in this department.

The earliest modem authority is Lemos^ whose work was pub-
lished in the end of the sixteenth century. It appears that he
follows almost entirely the opinions of Galen^ and seldom or
never ventures to exercise an independent judgment of his own.

The work of Mercuriali is a much more elaborate and im-
portant performance^ and his principles of judgment appear to
me most unexceptionable^ being founded entirely upon ancient
authority and peculiarity of style ; only it may, perhaps, be ob-
jected, that he rather exaggerates the importance of the latter
at the expense of the former; for it must be admitted that very
contradictory conclusions have sometimes been founded on
imaginary peculiarities of style. I cannot agree with M. Littr^,
however, that the whole system of Mercuriali is founded on a
petitio principii; as if, before describing the style of his author,
he ought to have decided which were his genuine writings.^ For,
as already stated, any one is perfectly warranted in assuming
that certain of the works which bear the name of Hippocrates
are genuine, and from them, and the general voice of antiquity,
Mercuriali was further justified in deciding what are the pecu-
liarities of the style of Hippocrates, and in applying them as a
test of the genuineness of other works which had been attributed
to the same author. Mercuriali divides the Hippocratic treatises
into four classes, as follows : The first comprehends those which
bear the characters of his doctrine and style. The second com-
prises those which are composed of notes taken from memory,
and published by Thessalus, Polybus, or other of his disciples,
and contain foreign matter interpolated with them. The third
class consists of those which have not been composed by
Hippocrates, but are the work of his sons or disciples, and
represent his doctrines with greater or less exactness. The fourth
includes those tracts which have nothing to do with the school
of Hippocrates. As the views and principles of Mercuriali
accord, in the main, very well with my own, I think it proper
to set down his classification of the treatises.

* (Euvres d'Hippocrat., torn, i, p. 171.



30 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

CLASSIS I.

1. De Natura Humana.

2. De Aeribus, Aquis, et Locis.

3. Aphorismi.

4. Prognostica.

5. De Morbis popularibus.

6. De Morbis acutis.

7. De Vulneribus Capitis.

8. De Fracturis.

9. De Articulis.

10. De Officina Medici.

11. Mochlicus.

12. De Alimento.

13. De Humoribus.

14. De Ulceribus.

CLASSIS II.

1. De Locis in Homine.

2. De Flatibus.

3. De Septimestri Partu.

4. De Octimestri Partu.

5. De Ossibus.

CLASSIS III.

1. De Camibus sen Principiis.

2. De Genitura.

3. De Natura Pueri.

4. De Affectionibus.

5. De Affectionibus internis.

6. De Morbis.

7. De Natura Muliebri.

8. De Morbis Muliebribus.

9. De Sterilibus.

10. De Foetatione et Superfoetatione.

11. De Virginum Morbis.

12. De Sacro Morbo.

13. De Hemorrhoidibus.

14. De Fistulis.

15. De Salubri Diaeta.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 31

16. De Diseta, tres Libri.

17. De Usu Liquidorum.

18. De Judicationibus.

19. De Diebus Judicatoriis.

20. Prsedictionum Libri.

21. Coaese Prsenotiones.

22. De Insomniis.

CLASSIS iv.

1. Jusjurandum.

2. Prajceptiones.

3. De Lege.

4. De Arte.

5. De Arte Veteri.

6. De Medico.

7. De Decenti Omatu.

8. De Exsectione Foetus.

9. De Resectione Corporura.

10. De Corde.

11. De Glandulis.

12. De Deiititione.

13. De Visu.

14. Epistolae.

15. DeMedicamentispur^antibus^T ^- n . . i
T/? x^ TT • • oj^ J. JLatinetantum.

16. De Homims Structura )

Perhaps we may venture to affirm^ without much risk of
challenge^ that the works of no ancient author owe more to
the exertions of a single individual than those of Hippocrates
do to the labours of Foes. Of his excellencies as an editor^
and expositor of the meaning of his author^ I will have occa-
sion to speak afterwards ; and here I shall merely state regard-
ing him, that as a critic called upon to decide with regard to
the authenticity and spuriousncss of the different works^ his
merits are by no means proportionally high. He rarely or
never ventures to differ from Galen, and everywhere evinces
so easy a disposition to recognise the works in question as
being the productions of his beloved author^ that his opinion
on any point connected with theif authenticity is not deserving
of much weight.

1 See Schuize, Hist. Med., i, 3, 1.



i
.1



:yi PRELIMIXARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ir.

Hal]er arranges the Hippocratic treatises in the following
cla^v:;!^ : The first contains those which in all ages have been
a.di/jitted as being genuine.* The second embraces those
T»hich cr>ntain doctrines at variance with those *'of the divine
oJd man/' or inventions of a later date, or vices which Hippo-
cnit/::i» disclaims. The third embraces those which are mani-
ii>\\\ jjjjurious, as is obvious from their being mere compendia
<A the works of Hippocrates, or which betray a manner
t//taj]v at variance with his. The fourth embraces a certain
fjuwibc'r of pieces not contained in the preceding classes. Such
i* ifnllcr's arrangement, which, however, is not entitled to
r/j (J ch c^>n()i deration; for the illustrious author himself seems
t/> hfUfi'ii, candidly, that his critical knowledge of the language
w;3i» t/x> »lender to warrant him in trusting his own judgment
when it came into collision with any high authority, such as
y<jifi ; and, moreover, it would appear, that his edition of the
worku of Hippocrates had been got up in a very sloTcnly
tsiSiiiUiiT, by some incompetent person, after his death.

C/nmer in one of the most learned and original of our
authorities on the literature of the Hippocratic works.' His
ii(u:Wn}%i, with regard to the authenticity of the different pieces,
ift f/ja/ie to rest mainly on internal evidence, that is to say,
u\tim their possessing the proper characteristics of the lan-
guajre and style of Hippocrates. These he is at great pains
in Hijcywing to be, in the first place, brevity, approaching to
the laconic, which he justly holds with Galen'' to be one of the
inoHt striking peculiarities of the ancient style of writing. To
CTineiMrness and simplicity, he adds gravity of manner, and an
nhM'AKUi of all subtlety of reasoning. This last trait in the
literary character of Hippocrates I hold to be particularly

' It will be proper to giye this Class : —

L De Aifre, Aquis, ct Lods. 9. De Victu Acutomm.

2, De Natara Hominis. 10. De Fractoris.

3, De Locii in Homine. 11. De Articnlis.

4. De Homoribos. 12. Mochlicus.

5. De Alimento. 13. De Vulncribus Capitis.
C. De Morbis popularibus. 14. Officina Medici.

7. Prognotticon. 15. Aphorismi.

8. Pnedictionum, ii.

« Ceniura Librorum Hippocrateorum, Vratislavie, 1772.
' De Elementis, i, 9.



SECT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 33

apparent in tlie works whicli are generally admitted to be
genuine. Some stress is also laid by him on the use of the
Ionic dialect^ but this is a most fallacious criterion^ and had
better have been left out of the question altogether ; as there is
good reason to believe that great liberties were used with the Ian*
gnage of Hippocrates by the ancient editors and commentators,
more especially by Artemidorus Capito, who lived a short time
before Galen.^ And besides, as every person who is generally
acquainted with Greek literature knows, although the Ionic
dialect in the age of Hippocrates had been fused into the
Attic/ for several centuries afterwards it continued to be arbi-
trarily used by many writers, both of prose and verse, owing
to the high character which it possessed, as being the dialect
of the Homeric poems. Hence it is used in. later times, not
only by the poets, such as Quintus Smymseus, Nonnus, and
Oppian, but also by at least one great medical author, I mean
Aretaeus. It would appear, however, that Gruner himself was
sensible that much stress ought not to be laid on peculiarity

> Tom. y, p. 442 ; ed. BaiiL

* Galen, who U a most unexceptionable judge in such a case, says that the
language of Hippocrates inclines to the Attic, and that some had held it to be Old
Attic. (Tom. V, p. 525 ; ed. BasiL) Dionysius of Halicamassus, another admirable
critic, says that Herodotus is the most excellent standard of the Ionic (and so, by
the way, Photius also says, under the head of Cienas), and Thucydides of the Attic.
(De Platon. Judicium.) Now, since we have already made it appear that there is
a most striking similarity between the language of Hippocrates and Thucydides, the
judgment of Dionysius is evidently in accordance with that of Galen on this point.
Indeed, as briefly stated in the text, the Attic was nothing more than a new deve-
lopment of the Ionic, and scarcely more different from it than the English language .
in the age of Pope is from the same in the age of Milton. It is to be borne in mind
that the name Ionian was originally applied to the Thracians and the inhabitants
of Attica, who were evidently closely allied to one another in consanguinity. It was
in Thrace that learning and civilization first sprang up under the auspices of
Thamyris, Orpheus, and Mussbus, by whom the elegant arts were transplanted to
Athens. (See Hesychius, in voce /oiMt ; Eustathius, ad Iliad., ii; Diogenes Laertius,
Pntfai. ; also Hermes Philologus, p. 23, by the author of this disquisition, whose
mind now reverts with great delight, ad 9tudia qua adaleicefUiam alebtmi.) The
inhabitants of Asiatic Ionia and the adjoining islands were colonists from Attica.
(Thucyd., i, 12 ; Herodotus, viii, 44 ; Heraclides, de Polit.) From what has been
stated it will readily be understood that the only standard of polite Greek was the
Ionic, vrith its offspring the Attic. The iEoIic and Doric dialects, although used in
certain scientific and popular compositions, such as Bucolics and certain philosophical
treatises, were never looked upon as being fashionable and learned dialects.

3



34 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

of dialect; for^ in resuming his conclusions as to the proper
tests of genuineness in judging of the Hippocratic writings, he
determines them to be conciseness and gravity of knguage,
paucity of reasoning, and accuracy of observation, along with
the authority of the ancient critics, that is to say, of the com-
mentators. Now, it certainly must be admitted that, taken
together, these principles are most just and reasonable ; only
it is apparent, that, like Mercuriali, he has ranked last what
he ought to have laid most stress upon, namely, ancient autho-
rity. For, as remarked above, unless ancient authority had
previously determined certain works in the Collection to be
genuine, the modern critic would have had no premises from
which he could have drawn conclusions as to the characteristics of
our author's style. Starting, then, from the principles now stated,
Gruner arranges the works of Hippocrates in two divisions,
namely, the genuine and the supposititious. We shall only give
the former list, which embraces the following ten treatises :

1. Jusjurandum.

2. Aphorismi.

3. De Aere, Aquis, et Locis.

4. Prsenotiones.

5. Prsedictionum, ii.

6. De Officina Medici.

7. Popularium Morborum, i, iii.

8. De Victu Acutorum.

9. De Yulneribus Capitis.
10. De Fracturis.

It will be shown below that in this list he has admitted one
work (Praedict. ii), which certainly has not sufficient claims
to the place which he has assigned it; and, on the other
hand, he has acted most inconsistently in rejecting the work
' De Articulis,' while he admitted that ' De Fracturis,' for, as
we shall see, there is the strongest reason for believing that
the two originally constituted one work. But the truth of
the matter is, that Gruner having hastily adopted the notion
that Hippocrates was altogether ignorant of human anatomy,
the celebrated passage in this treatise which «o strikingly
alludes to the dissection of the human body^ would decide him
to reject it from his list of genuine works.

* De Artie, i.



SBCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 35

Thoagh Le Clerc, in his 'History of Medicine' (b. iii),
shows himself to be well acquainted with the fact that many of
the treatises ascribed to Hippocrates are supposititious^ he
nowhere lays down any rules for distinguishing the genuine
from the spurious^ only he insists strongly on conciseness as
being one of the most striking characteristics of the style of
Hippocrates, and shrewdly remarks that the treatises which
abound most in reasoning are those which are most suspected
of being spurious.

Schuke also, in his 'History of Medicine,' with much learning
and excellent judgment, enters cursorily upon the examination of
the question regarding the genuineness of the works ascribed to
Hippocrates, but he scarcely ever deviates from the rules laid
down by Mercuriali and Le Clerc. Indeed, he almost always
agrees with the latter. We shall have occasion to refer pretty
frequently to his opinions when we come to give our own judg-
ment on the authenticity of the particular treatises contained in
the Hippocratic Collection.

Ackerman,^ in the first place, gives an elaborate and very
lucid exposition of the labours of all preceding critics in the
same line, and then proceeds to deliver his own opinions
seriatim on the different treatises. He rests his judgment
generally on the authority of the ancients, and more especially
of Erotian and Galen; and in so doing, M. Littr^ thinks he acted
so judiciously, that he does not hesitate to pronounce Ackerman
to be the safest guide which we can follow. Like Gruner, he
divides the works into two classes, the genuine and the
spurious. The former list is as follows : —

1. Epidemica, i, iii.

2. Prsenotiones.

3. Prsedictorum, ii.

4. Aphorismi«

5. De Yictu Acutonun.

6. De Aere, Aquis, Lods.

7. De Vulneribus Capitis.

This, it will be remarked, is the smallest list which we have
yet encountered, and one cannot but feel saddened to find the
remains of the great Hippocrates thus reduced to so small a

> See his HistorU Literwia Hippocntis, in the Bibliotheca Gneca of Albertus
Fabridui, or in vol. i of Kuhn's edition of Hippocrates.



36 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

compass. We shall have occasion^ however, by and by, to
show that Ackerman has been too unsparing in applying the
obelisk^ to treatises of suspected authenticity.

Grimm, the German translator of Hippocrates, professes
also, like Ackerman, to be guided principally by ancient
authority, such as that of Galen and Erotian, but he only
reposes full confidence in it when confirmed by internal evi-
dence. The style, he says, should be simple, brief, and expressive,
and the language in accordance with the epoch. He adds, no
hypothesis, no subtlety, however ancient, no extraordinary
remedies or modes of treatment, should be found in these
books. Starting from these principles, which, it will be
remarked, are rather fancifully laid down, Grimm reduces the
number of genuine works to the following very meagre list :

1. Popularium Morborum, i, iii.

2. Prognostica.

3. Aphorismi.

4. De Victu Acutorum, p. i.

5. De Acre, Aquis, Locis.

The reader will not fail to remark, in this result of Grimm's
inquiry, indications of that bold spirit of scepticism for which
the learned criticism of Germany has been distinguished of late
— the spirit of her Wolfs and Lachmans, of her Asts and
Schliermachers, which has deprived the Iliad and Odyssey of
their ancient authorship, and reduced the bulky tomes of Plato
to a very small volume. It is impossible not to admire the
learning, the ingenuity, and the love of truth which these
critics display, but surely the sober judgment of other scholars,
not infected with the same spirit of innovation, will pause before
acquiescing in the justness of a verdict which would deprive so
many immortal performances of the prestige with which they
have so long been regarded. For my own part, I would venture
to B2Ly,pace tantorum virorum, that these learned critics are
deficient in a practical acquaintance with the laws of evidence,
and do not properly take into account that, in matters of
common life, negative evidence is never allowed to bear down
positive, unless the former be remarkably strong, and the latter
particularly weak. When, then, the voice of antiquity pro-
nounces strongly and consistently in favour of any work, no

' Galen, torn, v, p. 17; ed. Bafiil.



8BCT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 37

negative evidence^ unless of a yery remarkable character, ought
to be allowed to counterbalance the positive. In shorty what
I object to in Grrimm is, that he gives an undue preponderance
ta the internal evidence over the external, that is to say, over
the traditionary evidence of antiquity, and that in this respect
he goes greater lengths than even Gruner and Ackerman.

Kurt Sprengel is the author of a separate work on the
Hippocratic writings^ which I have not seen, but I have reason
to believe that the substance of it is contained in his ' History
of Medicine,' where (t. i, p. 295) he enters into a very elabo-
rate disquisition on the authenticity of the works ascribed to
Hippocrates. He insists much, as a test of authenticity, upon
the style, which, in imitation of Galen, he describes as being
concise and laconic to a degree which sometimes renders it
obscure. Hippocrates, he adds, avoids all superfluous discus-
sion and unseasonable repetitions, and expresses himself as
briefly as possible, without adding conditions or restrictions.
He justly remarks, that what Celsus says of Hippocrates, namely,
that he separated philosophy from medicine, must be received
with considerable limitations, and not in too strict a sense, as if
there were no philosophical tenets in his works. On the other
hand, Sprengel uses these philosophical doctrines as a guide
for determining the date of the different treatises. This is a
new, and no doubt a very important, element in the criticism
on these works ; but it is one very liable to be abused, as our
information on many occasions, with regard to the introduction
of new doctrines in philosophy, is by no means such as can be
safely trusted to. SprengeFs opinion on the various works in
question we shall have occasion to state when we come to
revise them separately.

We now proceed to the examination of the labours of two
very learned and ingenious critics. Link and Petersen, who,
treading in the footsteps of Sprengel, have expended much re-
search in endeavouring to solve the question regarding the date
of the Hippocratic treatises, by considering the philosophical and
pathological theories which prevail in them. I think it right to
state that I have not had an opportunity of consulting the work
of Link, and therefore have been obliged to judge of his opinions,

* Apologie, &c.



38 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

in a great measure^ from Petersen's essay^ which is professedly
based on the principles of Link. Of Petersen's little tracts
I have no hesitation in declaring that I have seldom seen
a work of the kind which displays more critical acnmen and
deep research; and although I cannot bring myself to sub-
scribe to many of his general conclusions^ I feel bound in
gratitude to acknowledge the benefit which I have derived firom
many of his special investigations.^ On one important pointy
which he is at great pains to make out^ I have already stated
that I am disposed to agree with him^ namely^ respecting the
date of our author's birth^ which I certainly think he has
proved by the most unexceptionable authorities to have been
considerably earlier than as generally stated. Petersen divides
the Hippocratic works into nine classes, in the following
chronological order: — ^The first contains those treatises in
which the flow of bile and phlegm is considered to be the cause
of disease ;' the second recognises fire/ and the third, air, as the
principle of things ;^ in the fourth, bile and phlegm are spoken
of as the primary humours of the human body ;^ in the fifth,
spirit {irvev^a) and humidity are held to be the first principles
of generation j^ in the sixth, the elements of the body are held
to be contrary to one another;^ in the seventh, yellow and black
bile, phlegm, and blood are set down as being the primary
humours of the human body;® in the eighth, bile, water,
phlegm, and blood are held to be the primary humours ;' and
in the ninth, fire and water are held to be the principles of
things.^^

' Hippocntis nomine qiue dicumferuntur scripta ad temporis rationes disposuit
Christianua Petersen, p. prior. Hambnrgi, 1839.

' Pnedict., i ; Coacae Pnenot. ; de Log. in Horn.

' De Came. ; de Part. Sept. ; de Part. Oct. ; de Superf. ; de Dent.

« DeFlat

^ De Morb. Popol., i, iii; de Morb., i; de Affect.; de Morbo Sacro; de Insan.;
de Veratr. Usu; de Victu Acut.; de Victu Sal.; Praen.; Pncdict, ii; Aphor.; de
Aere, Locis, et Aq. ; de Insom. ; de Haemorrh. ; de FistuL

• De Nat. Puer. ' De Prisca Med.

■ De Nat. Horn.; de Humor. ; de Nat. Oss. ; de Corde; de Corp. Sect. ; de Gland.;
de Visu; de Alim.; de Usu Liquid. ; de Affect. Intern. ; de Morb. Popul.,ii, iv, &c. ;
de Morb., ii» iii ; de Morb. Mulier. ; de Nat. Mulieb. ; de his quae ad Virg. Spect. ;
de SteriL; de Vulner.; de Jndic; de Dieb. Judic.

' De Morb., iv ; de Genitura ; de Remed. Purgant.

*^ De Victu Sanor. libri tres.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 39

Now, assuredly, no reasonable person will deny to the author
of this distribution the praise of great boldness and originality
of thought. We may well apply to him the words of the poet,
that if he has failed in attaining his object, '^ magnis tamen
excidit ausis/^ For my own part, I cannot but regret to see
so much talent and research expended upon conjectural points
of criticism, which, from their nature, can never be determined
with any degree of certainty ; for, after all his labours, few
scholars, I venture to predict, will prefer being guided by his
hypothetical reasoning, however ingenious, rather than by the
authority of the ancient commentators. I must also use the
liberty to remark, that M. Petersen appears to me to have no well
defined ideas regarding the doctrines which the ancient philoso-
phers held respecting the elements of things. For example, when
he states, as the basis of the theory which prevails in the tract
' On Ancient Medicine,' that the elements are the contraries
to one another, he evidently confounds the elements, namely,
fire, air, earth, and water, with the powers, or, aa we should
now call them, the qualities, hot, cold, moist, and dry. (See
the next Section.) And although, in the treatises 'On the
Seventh Month Foetus,' and * On the Eighth Month Fostus,'
much and deserved importance is attached to heat as the prime
mover of conception, and although, in the treatise ' On Airs,'
the importance of air as a cause of disease be strongly insisted
upon, one is not warranted, as he contends, in concluding that
the authors of these treatises recognise respectively fire and air
as the first principle of all things. M. Littr^, also, in his candid
review of M. Petersen's work, points out some very striking over-
sights which M. Petersen has committed in his arrangement
of the di£ferent treatises.^

I now come to M. Littr^, who, in the Introduction to his
edition of Hippocrates, has certainly surpassed all who went
before him, in the extent of his labours on the general literature
of the Hippocratic Treatises. How highly I estimate his work
I need not here stop to declare ; indeed the reputation it has
already gained is so established, that it would be vain to blame
and useless to praise it. I have to express my regret, however,
in entering upon my exposition of his opinions, that they are
given in a very expanded form, and with a degree of diffuse-

* Tom. ii, pp. 32, 33.



40 PRELDilNABT DISCOUBSB. [skct. ii.

ness, plus quam Galenica, so that I find it diflBcok, -within my
necessary limits, to convey to the reader a distinct view of the
yery important matters which M. Littre has brought together
to bear upon his subject.

He is at great pains to establiah the following positions with
r^ard to the Tarions treatises contained in the Collection which
bears the name of Hippocrates : 1st. That the Collection did not
exist, in an authentic form, earlier than the date of Herophilus
and his disciples, that is to say, until nearly 100 years after
the death of Hippocrates. 2d. That it contains portions which
certainly do not belong to Hippocrates ; and, 3d, also CoUec-
tions of Notes, &c., which would nerer lunre been published by
the author in their present form; and, 4th, Compilations,
which are either abridged, or copied word for word from other
works which still form part of the Collection. 5th. As the
different treatises do not all belong to the same author, so
neither were they all composed at the same time, some being
much more modem than the others. 6th. We find in the
Collection mention made of numerous treatises written by the
followers of Hippocrates, which are now lost, and which were
no longer in existence when the Collection was first published.
7th. The most ancient writers do not know, for certain, to whom
the several works forming the CoUection belonged; 8th, with the
exception of a small number, which all of them, for one reason
or another, agreed in attributing to Hippocrates himself.^

I have now a few observations to ms^e upon each of these
positions. The first, which is a most important one in con-
nexion with our present subject, I regret to say, is, I think,
by no means satisfactorily made out by M. Littre. He shows,
it is tnie, that Herophilus is the first commentator on any of
the Hippocratic Treatises of whom there is any mention, but
all we know of his labours in this line merely amounts to this,
that he had commented on certain passages in the 'Prognostics/
and probably also in the 'Aphorisms,'* but I do not see that
this amotmts to any proof either that the Collection was or was
not formed in his time. The proof of the second position
is made to rest upon a fact, which has attracted the attention

I (Euvres d'Hippocrate, torn, i, p. 263.

* See Stephanus, Commeut. in ProgTiost. Hippocrst., torn, ii, p. 61, ed. Diets. ;
and Galen, torn, v, p. 328, ed. Basil.



«BCT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 41

of all the critics on the Hippocratic Treatises^ namely, that
a memorable description of the veins, which appears in the
Hippocratic treatise ' On the Nature of Man/ is published by
Aristotle, in the third book of his ' History of Animals/ as the
production of his son-in-law, Polybus. Now, M. Littr^ argues
here, that as the publication of the Aristotelian Collection did
not take place until long after that of the Hippocratic, the
persons who made the latter could not have taken the passage
in question from the other, and the only way in which we can
account for the change of title, is by supposing that the works
of Polybus had retained the name of their true author in the
days of Aristotle, but had lost it at the time the Hippocratic
Collection was made. Hence he infers that the Hippocratic
Collection must have been made subsequently to the time of
Aristotle.^ But I must say that I do not recognise the force
of this argument; for, although the whole of Aristotle^s
works were not published in a collected form, until the
time of ApeUicon, we have every reason to believe that many
of his works were published separately, in his own lifetime.
The fact, then, would rather tell the other way, and it might
be argued, that the Hippocratic Collection must have been made
before the time of Aristotle, otherwise the persons who made it
would never have fallen into the mistake of attributing to
Hippocrates a passage which so high an authority as Aristotle
had referred to Polybus. But the truth is, that we are
not entitled to draw any positive inference from all this,
with regard to the epoch in question. It is well known that,

> The-well known story regarding the concealment of Aristotle's library by his
heir, Neleus of Scepsis, and its restoration by ApeUicon, is faithfully related by
Strabo, Geograph., ix. In this passage Strabo states, that before the restoration of
the library by ApeUicon, there were but few of Aristotle's works in the hands of the
peripatetic phUosophers, and these prindpaUy his exoteric works. But that the
treatise * On the History of Animals' was an exoteric work, can admit of no question.
This is confidently maintained by the learned Schneider in the prolegomena to hi^
edition of this work. Indeed, as he suggests, there is no good reason for doubting
that the treatise ' On the History of Animals' had been published by Aristotle in his
lifetime. (Epimetrum, u.) See also Buhle's dissertation prefixed to his edition of
Aristotle's works. I need scarcely add that, it being thus shown that aU the most
learned authorities on the Uterature of Aristotle's works are agreed that the History
of Animals, in which is contained this disputed fragment on the veins, was published
before the time when the Hippocratic CoUection is supposed to have been made,
M. Littr^'s conclusions on this head must faU to the ground.



42 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

in all ages^ literary publications have sometimes come abroad
into the world in an anonymous shape ; and it need excite no
surprise that^ with regard to the fragment in question^ as in
many other cases^ there should have been a diversity of opinion
as to its authorship.

The third we shall see fully made out in our analysis of
the different treatises given below.

The fourth will also be clearly proved, when we come to the
examination of certain treatises, as, for example, the ' Officina
Medici.'

The fifth is not made out to my satisfaction. M. Idttre,
however, thinks it is satisfactorily proved that the latest
epoch of these productions does not come lower down than
Aristotle and Praxagoras, and none so low as Erasistratns and
Herophilus. Hence he draws the conclusion that the CoUec-
tion must have been made between the time of Aristotle and
Herophilus. 1

The sixth we shall see clearly made out, in our critique on
the separate treatises.

The seventh is abundantly evident from what has been
already stated, and will be made more .apparent in the subse-
quent parts of this Section. But there is nothing peculiar to
the Hippocratic Collection in all this, for there is as great un-
certainty respecting many of the works ascribed to Plato, and
other collections of pieces which have come down to us from
high antiquity. Nay, every person who is conversant with
bibUcal criticism must be aware how difficult it has proved to
determine the authorship of many of the Psalms which bear the
sainted name of King David.^

In support of the eighth position, little need be said in ad-
dition to what has been already stated. I need only repeat
briefly that we have as much certainty that some of the treatises
in the Hippocratic Collection are genuine, as we have that any
other ancient works which have come down to us are the pro-

' The death of Aristotle is referred to a.c. 321. Now this is just altbut the date
of the foundation of the Royal lihrary at Alexandria, and very near the age when
Herophilus flourished. These (M. littr^'s) positions clearly made out, it would
follow that the dates of the treatises in the Collection come down very near to the
foundation of the Alexandrian Lihrary.

' See Hengstenberg's Commentaiy on the Psalms, pluries.



8BCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 43

ductions of the authors whose names they bear. But I hasten
to give M. Littr^'s distribution of the difiPerent works in the
Collection. He divides them into the following classes :

Class I. — The Works which truly belong to Hippocrates.

1. On Ancient Medicine.

2. The Prognostics.

8. The Aphorisms.

4. The Epidemics^ i^ iii.

5. The Regimen in Acute Diseases.

6. On Airs, Waters, and Places.

7. On the Articulations.
8; On Fractures.

9. The Instruments of Reduction (Mochlicus).

10. The Physician's Establishment, or Surgery.

11. On Injuries of the Head.

12. The Oath.

13. The Law.

Class II. — ^The Writings of Polybus.

1. On the Nature of Man.

2. Regimen of Persons in Health.

Class III. — Writings anterior to Hippocrates.

1. The Coan Prsenotions.

2. The First Book of Prorrhetics.

Class IV. — ^Writings of the School of Cos, — of the Contem-
poraries or Disciples of Hippocrates.

1. Of Ulcers.

2. OfFistulae.

3. Of Hemorrhoids.

4. Of the Pneuma.

5. Of the Sacred Disease.

6. Of the Places in Man.

7. Of Art.

8. Of Regimen, and of Dreams.

9. Of Affections.

10. Of Internal Affections.

11. Of Diseases, i, ii, iii.

12. Of the Seventh Month Foetus.

13. Of the Eighth Month Foetus.



41 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sbct. u.

CtANN V. — Bookii which are but Extracts and Noles.

1. KpidcmicB^ ii, iv, v, vi, viL

2. On the Surgery.^

CuAun VL — Treatises which belong to some unknown
authori and form a particular series in the Collection.

1. On Generation.

2. On the Nature of the Infant.
8. On Diseases^ iv.

4. On the Diseases of Women.

C. On the Diseases of Young Women.

fl. On Unfruitful Women.

Class VII. — Writing belonging to Leophanes.

On Superfoetation*

Class VIII. — Treatises posterior to Hippocrates^ and com-
posed about the age of Aristotle and Praxagoras.
L On the Heart.
2. On Aliment.
8. On Fleshes.

4. On the Weeks.

5. Prorrhetic, ii.

6. On the Glands.

7. A fragment of the piece ' On the Nature of

Bones.'

Class IX. — Series of Treatises^ of Fragments^ and of Com-
pilations which have not been quoted bj anj ancient
critic.

1. On the Physician*

2. On Honorable Conduct.

3. Precepts.

4. On Anatomy*

5. On the Sight.

6. On Dentition.

7. On the Nature of the Woman.

8. On the Excision of the Fcetus.

9. The eighth Section of the Aphorisms.

10. On the Nature of the Bones.

11. On Crisis.

12. On Critical Days.

13. On Purgative Medicines.

> Although this piece be admitted inio the fint class, it also merits a place here.



SECT. M.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 45

Class X. — ^Writings now lostj which once formed a part of
the Collection :

1. On dangerous Wounds.

2. On Missiles and Wounds.

8. The first Book of Doses — ^the Small.

Class XI. — Apocryphal pieces — Letters and Discourses.

Such is the classification of M. Littr^, which he professes to
have founded on the four following rules^ or principles : firstly^
on the authority of direct witnesses^ that is to say^ of authors
who preceded the formation of the Alexandrian Library;
secondly, on the consent of the ancient critics ; thirdly^ on
the application of certain points in the history of medicine,
which appear to him to offer a date, and consequently a posi-
tive determination; fourthly, on the concordance of the doc-
trines, the similitude of the writings, and the characters of the
style. Of these rules, the one which he professes to have been
most guided by is the first, all the others being of subordinate
importance. From what has now been stated, the reader will
not fail to remark that the principles upon which the classifi-
cation of Littre is founded scarcely differ at all from those of
Ackerman. The reasonableness of these rules, moreover, no
one, I presume, will venture to call in question, whatever may
be thought of the judgment with which they are applied in
particular instances. My own opinions on this point I need
not state here, as they will come out more properly in my own
disquisition on the characters of the particular treatises.

But^ before concluding this part of my task, I must not neglect
to notice the learned labours of a much esteemed friend and
countryman — the first, the last, the only, scholar (I lament to
say) which England has produced in this department of ancient
criticism — Dr. Greenhill, of Oxford, who, in his excellent article
on Hippocrates in Smith's ' Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Biography and Mythology,' enters into a very elaborate disqui-
sition on the authenticity of the various works which compose
the Collection. His general distribution appears to me to be
very ingenious, and his judgment in particular cases most
correct, but it is proper I should state that I, perhaps, am
scarcely qualified to pronounce an impartial judgment on this
point, having had the honour of being consulted by the author,
as he himself candidly acknowledges, while he was employed



46



PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE.



[SSCT. II.



on this task. The following is his tabular view of the different
divisions and subdivisions of the Collection :



The Hippocratic Collection consists of



I

Woiiu certainly written

bjr Hippocrates,

CUss L*



Works earlier than

Hippocrates,

aass III.'



Works authentic, bnt
not genuine, i. e.
not willful
forgeries.

Works by the

same author,

Class W



I
Works certainly not

written by

Hippocrates.



Works perhtgM written
by Hippocrates,
Class II.*



I
Works later than

Hippocrates.



Works about con-
temporary with
Hippocrates.



I

Works whose

author is

conjectured.

Class IV.«



I



WoriLB neither genuine
nor authentic, i. e.
willful forgeries,
Class VIIl.*



Works by various

authors,

Class VII.*



Works whose
author is
unknown.
Class V.»



* Praenotiones or Prognostica; Aphorism!; Epidemiorum, i, ill; de Digta Ac utu r um ;
de Aere, Aquis, et Lods ; de Capitis Vulneribus.

' De Prisca Medidna; de Articulis; de Fracturis; Mochlicns; Jusjurandum; Lex;
de Ulceribus ; de Fistulis ; de Haemorrhoidibus ; de Officina Medici ; de Mocbo Sacro.

* Prorrhetica, i ; Coace Prsnotiones.

* De Natura Hominis ; de Salnbri Victus Batione ; de Natura Muliebri ; de Morbis,
H, ill; de Superfeetatione.

* De Flatibus; de Lods in Homine; de Arte; de Dista; de Insomniis; de
Affectionibus ; de Intemis Affectionibus ; de Morbis, i ; de Septimestri Partu ; de
Octimestri Partu ; Epidemiorum, ii. It, yu ; de Humoribus ; de Usu Liquidorum.

' Epistoke; Thessali L^^ati Oratio; Oratio ad Aram ; Atheniensium Senatus-Con-
sultum.

7 De Gemtura; de Natura Pneri; de Morbis, It; de Muliemm Moifais; de Vir-
ginum Morbis ; de Sterilibus.

* Epidemiorum, v, rii ; de Corde ; de Alimento ; de Camibus ; de Septimanis ; de
Natura Ossium ; de Glandulis ; de Medico ; de Decenti habitu ; Pneceptiones ; de
Anatomia ; de Dentitione ; de Exsectione Foetus ; de Visu ; de Crisibus ; de Diebua
Critids ; de Medicamentis Purgatiris.



SECT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 47

Having now finished this survey of the labours of preceding
inquirers^ I proceed to state the results of my own investi-
gations in the same department ; and in doing so^ I shall give
seriatim the evidence for and against the authenticity of the
different treatises^ along with my own decision in every instance.
And^ in order to add to the value of this disquisition^ I mean
to give an abstract of the contents of those works which I look
upon as spurious^ that the reader may be enabled to compare
the doctrines contained in them with those which are delivered
in the treatises which are recognised as genuine. Moreover^
it is my object that the present volume should contain a sum-
mary of all the valuable matters to be found in the Hippocratic
Treatises^ whether genuine or not.

Before proceeding further^ I must state the rules by which I
test the genuineness of the works in the Hippocratic Collection :

1. All the works which are acknowledged as genuine by
the ancient commentators and lexicographers which have come
down to us, and especially by Erotian and Galen, are to be
admitted as such, unless it can be shown that still older
authorities held a different opinion regarding them, or that
they contain doctrines and views decidedly at variance with
those contained in the treatises which all allow to be genuine,
or that the style and mode of handling the subject-matter be
altogether different from the well-known method of Hippo-
crates.

2. The peculiar style and method of Hippocrates are held to
be — conciseness of expression, great condensation of matter,
and disposition to regard all professional subjects in a prac-
tical point of view, to eschew subtle hypotheses, and modes of
treatment based on vague abstractions.

8. No treatise is to be received as genuine which is not
recognised as such by any one of the ancient authorities, how-
ever strong a case may be made out in favour of its claims by
modem critics from internal evidence.



48 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

I. rifpi ap-^airig ItirpiKriQ — On Ancient Medicine,

Of all the treatises wliicli are recognised as the genuine
productions of "The Great Hippocrates/' by M. Littre, this
is decidedly the one which possesses the most questionable
title to that honour. The only ancient authority that admits
it as such is Erotian ; it is passed over unnoticed by Galen and
Palladius ; and Athenseus does not scruple to affirm^ respecting
it^ that some considered the one half of it spurious^ and others
the whole. (Deipn.^ ii, 16.) Foes, Schulze, and Zuinger,' are
almost the only modem names in its favour ; and it is rejected
by Mercuriali, Gruner, Conringius, Ackerman, and Eiihn.^ The
grounds, however, upon which Ackerman decides against its
authenticity are of little weight, namely, that as it is stated in
it (§ 1, 2) that medical works were numerous at the time it
was composed, this circumstance implies a date considerably
posterior to Hippocrates. But it is to be borne in mind^ that
Xenophon, who was almost contemporary with Hippocrates^
puts into the mouth of Socrates^ who was certainly nearly of
the same age, the saying, that there were many medical works
then in existence (Memorab.^ iv), so that at all events the
argument of Ackerman falls to the ground. M. Littre^ more-
over, espouses its claims with remarkable zeal, and persuades
himself that he has settled this point by showing that a passage
in the Phaedrus of Plato,* which is quoted by Galen, as referring
to a sentiment contained in the Hippocratic treatise ' De Natura
Pueri,'* does, in fact, have reference to the work now under
consideration. This position he labours hard to establish, and
succeeds at last so much to his own satisfaction, that he does
not hesitate to declare, as the result of his elaborate disqui-
sition, " that he had demonstrated the treatise ' On Ancient
Medicine' to be the work of Hippocrates.''^ Now, I must be
permitted to say, with great deference to M. Littr^, that
his prolix process of argumentation, spun out as it is over
twenty-six pages, does not carry the same conviction to my

> Hippocrat. Coi Comment. &c., Theod. Ztiingeri studio. Basil, 1579.
' See his additions to Ackerman's Dissertation, in his edition of the Works of
Hippocrates.

* § 122, torn, i, p. 172 (ed. Bekker), where see the note of Heindoif.

* Galeni Opera, torn, y, pp. 2, 16 ; ed. BasiL

* (EuYTfis Completes, &c, tom. i, p. 320.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 49

mind as it does to lus own.^ But still, as this treatise has, at all
events, one ancient authority in its favour, and as the matter
contained in it appears to me to be highly valuable, I have
not scrupled to follow the example of M. Littre in placing it
at the head of the Works of Hippocrates. I shall have occasion
to say more on the contents of it in the Argument prefixed to
my translation.

II. npoyi^aMrrcjcoi' — Prognostics.

Of the genuineness of this work there has never been any
question, so &r as I am aware, from the time of the earliest of
the ancient commentators, Herophilus, down to the present
day.' That it is an admirable specimen of the plan upon
which the Hippocratic practice was founded, there can be no
doubt. The most important critical question to be decided
with regard to it is the relation it bears to two other treatises
on the same subject, namely, the ' Prorrhetica,' and ' Coacae
Praenotiones,' whether the ' Prognostics' be founded on them,
or whether they be made up from the ' Prognostics.' This
question will come more properly to be discussed in the
Argument to the 'Prognostics/

Of this treatise there have been the following translations
into English :

'The Booke of the Presages of the Divine Hippocrates,
divided into three parts, &c. By Peter Low, Arrelian
Doctor in the Faculty of Chirui^ery in Paris. Lond.,
1597.'

■ The argument turns principally on the meaning of the expression, n frort Xiyu
*liriroKpdTtiQ Tt Koi 6 AXijdi^g X6yoc» which M. Littr^ contends signifies, "ce
qa' Hippocrate et la raison pourraient dire" Now I must say that, to me, the words
of Plato here quoted do not warrant, the interpretation which M. Littr^ puts upon
them ; and, not satisfied with my own judgment on this point, which happens in the
present instance to be an important one, I applied to one of the best authorities in
Britain on the minutise of the Greek language for his opinion, and was happy to find
that it entirely corresponded with my own. Having alluded in the text to the prolixity
of the discussion which M. Littr^ enters into on this occasion, I trust that eminent
scholar wiU not be offended (provided these pages ever meet his eyes) if I introduce
here an anecdote of the celebrated Kuster. Having been shown a work in which
the quantity of argumentation and reflection greatly overbalanced the amount of facts
and references, he laid it aside with the remark, " I find nothing here but reasoning ;
nan tie itur ad astral

* Galeni Opera, tom. v, p. 119 ; ed. Basil.

4



50 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. n.

' The Prognostics and Prorrhetics of Hippocrates^ translated
from the original Greek, with large annotaticms^ critical
and explanatory; to which is prefixed a short account of
the Life of Hippocrates. Bj John Moffat. Lond.^ 1788/
* Hippocrates on Air, Water, and Situation; or. Prog-
nostics, &c. Bj Francis Clifton, m.d. Lond., 1734/
Of these the last is the only one which possesses the slightest
claim to consideration. It is the work of a scholar, who had
evidently paid the most studious attention to his author with
the intention of publishing a new edition of his works, a de-
sign, by the way, which it is much to be regretted, that he did
not live to execute. What became of his literary labours in
this department I have never been able to ascertain. The
greatest fault I find with his translation is the quaintness of
his style ; for it cannot be alleged of him, as of Moffat, that
he often mistakes the meaning of his author. The trans-
lations of the latter are utterly worthless, in fact, they are
disgraceful to. the translator, who ought to have been ashamed
to engage in a task for which he was so utterly unqualified.
The translations by Low are done in a strangely antiquated
style, and otherwise have nothing to recommend them on the
score of fidelity. Moreover, all these translators introduce
confusion into the subject by mixing up together the contents
of the ' Prognostica,' ' Prorrhetica,' and ' Coacae Prsenotiones.'
Even Clifton is guilty of this indiscretion, although better
might have been expected from him; for, considering how
well acquainted he appears to have been with the spirit of his
author, he ought to have been able to appreciate properly the
obligations which Hippocrates had conferred on his profession
by methodising subject-matters which had previously been
destitute of scientific arrangement.

III. 'A^opc<rfcoi — AphorisfM.

That the greater part of the Book of Aphorisms is the
work of Hippocrates himself there can be little or no doubt,
but that it contains interpolations, some of which are of high
antiquity, is equally indisputable. This is distinctly stated by
Galen.* On this subject I would beg leave to quote the remarks

' Comment, vii ; et sect, vii, 53 et seq.



8BCT. II.] HIPPOCBATIC TREATISES. 51

of Dr. Greenhill : " Some doubts have arisen in the minds of
several eminent critics as to the origin of the Aphorisms^ and^
indeed^ the discussion of the genuineness of this work may be
said to be an epitome of the questions relating to the whole
Hippocratic Collection. We find here a reiy celebrated work,
which has, from early times, borne the name of Hippocrates,
but of which some parts have always been condemned as spu-
rious. Upon examining these portions, which are considered
to be genuine, we observe that the greater part of the first
three sections agrees ahnost word for word with passages to be
found in his acknowledged works; while in the remaining
sections we find sentences taken apparently from spurious or
doubtful treatises, thus adding greatly to our difficulties, in-
asmuch as they sometimes contain doctrines and theories
opposed to those which we find in the works acknowledged to
be genuine. And these facts are (in the opinion of the critics
alluded to) to be accounted for in one of two ways : either
Hippocrates himself, in his old age (for the Aphorisms have
always been attributed to this period of his life), put together
certain extracts from his own works, to which were afterwards
added other sentences taken from later authors ; or else, the
collection was not formed by Hippocrates himself, but by some
person or persons after his death, who made aphoristical ex-
tracts from his works, and from those of other writers of a
later date, and the whole was attributed to Hippocrates, be-
cause he was the author of the sentences that were most
valuable and came first in order. This account of the for-
mation of the Aphorisms appears extremely plausible, nor does
it seem to be any decisive objection to say, that we find among
them sentences which are not to be met with elsewhere ; for
when we recollect how many works of the old medical writers,
and perhaps of Hippocrates himself, are lost, it is easy to con-
ceive that these sentences may have been extracted from some
treatise that is no longer in existence. It must, however,
be confessed, that this conjecture, however plausible and pro-
bable, requires further proof and examination before it can be
received as true.'^' The fact of the matter is, that interpolation

' See under H^oeratet, in Smith's Greek and Roman Biographical and Mytho-
logical Dictionary.



52 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

is a mode of corruption from which few works of antiquity have
escaped altogether free, and it was, no doubt, often practised
upon them in a very innocent manner, and without any frau-
dulent intention. Thus, when the subject treated of by any
author came afterwards to receive any notable improvements or
alterations, the possessors of such a work would naturally mark
them down on the margins of their MS., and these annotations
in the course of transcription would often come to be incor-
porated with the genuine text. Such a work as the Aphorisms,
consisting of detached sentences, was particularly liable to
suffer in the manner now adverted to. Another mode of
vitiation, which has been frequently practised upon ancient
works, is the addition of appendices to them. Every classical
reader must be aware that the Odyssey of Homer is generally
admitted by the critics to have come down to us in this state ;
nay, many learned divines do not scruple to admit that certain
portions of the Sacred Volume have not been exempt from this
casualty. I may mention that the last chapter of the Pen-
tateuch, the last Psalm in the Septuagint, and even the last
chapter of the Gospel of St. John, have been suspected, by
very able critics, of being appendices. I have stated in
another place (Paulus ^Eqineta, Vol. Ill, p. 437), that an
addition in this way has probably been made to the medical
works of Aetius. On the addition of appendices to works, see
further, Galen (de Placit. Hippocrat. et Plat., vi, 3). Taking
all this into account, it need excite no wonder that an appendix
should have been added, by some unknown hand, to the seven
sections of Aphorisms, and, accordingly, it is generally admitted
that the eighth section is spurious.

I shall reserve my analysis of the contents of the genuine
sections to the Argument prefixed to the translation.

We have the following translations of the Aphorisms into
English.

' The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, translated into English :
' By S. H. Lond. 1610.'
' By Conrad Sprengel. Lond. 1708.'
' By T. Coar. Lond. 1822.'
' By J. W. Underwood. Lond. 1828.'
Of these I have only carefully examined the translations by



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 53

Sprengel and Coar. That of Sprengel displays considerable
pretensions to erudition^ bnt^ upon a careful examination, it
will be quite apparent that the translator was not possessed of
a competent acquaintance either with the Greek or English
language. In short, nothing can be conceived more quaint,
inelegant, and inaccurate, than the language of this translation.
Lest I should be suspected of prejudices against my predecessor,
and of exaggerating his faults, I shall subjoin a short list of
passages which I hold to be mistranslated, so that the reader
may judge for himself, whether my opinion of the work be well
founded or not. (See Aph. i, ll,i 15,^ 20,' 23 ;* ii, 6,^ 15,« 27,
31,34,40; iii, 16,21.)

The production of Coar is not destitute of some merit,
although it is but too apparent that he was not fully competent
for the task which he had undertaken. He gives, separately,
every Aphorism in Greek, to which he subjoins first a Latin
and then an English translation. In the Preface, he admits
that ''in executing the English translation considerable assist-
ance had been derived from the elegant French translation of
M. de Mercy .^' From this admission it will readily be gathered,
that the translator felt conscious that he did not possess a proper
acquaintance with the language of the original. I subjoin
references to a few of the passages which, upon examination,

> •* In all paroxysms, or sharp iSts of intermittiDg diseases, we must take away
meat, for then to give it is hurtful."

' " The belly is naturally hottest in winter and the spring, and most addicted to
rest. Consequently in these seasons a greater proportion of food is to be allowed,
because the inward heat is stronger, which is the reason that a more plentiful food
is necessary. This difference may be seen in such as are old, and in such as are
lusty and well-grown bodies."

' ** Those things that are or have been justly determined by nature, ought not to
be moved or altered, either by purging or other irritating medicines ; but should be
left alone.*'

« ** Things evacuated and purged are not to be estimated by the multitude and
quantity, but by their fitness to be avoided and sent forth ; and must be such as are
not too troublesome to the patient to bear. Though, where it is necessary, we must
proceed in evacuating, even to swooning and fainting, if the patient can bear it."

' '* Those who are grieved in any part of the body, and are scarce sensible of their
grief, have a distempered mind."

* ** When the upper parts of the throat or gullet are sore, or a breaking out of
amall tumours does arise in the body, we ought to look upon the excrements ; for
if they are choleric, the body is also sick ; but if they are like the excrements of
sound persons, the body may be noiurished without danger."



54 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

appeared to me to be incorrectly rendered. (See Aph. i^ 2/
10,^ 20;* ii, 49;* iii, 11/ 26, 31 ; iv, 1; v, 26, 44, 68.)

IV. 'EmStiiuiIiv a Kal y — The First and Third Books of the

Epidemics.

These are among the most undoubtedly genuine remains of
Hippocrates, and well sustain the high reputation of their great
author. In fact, of all the earlier records of medicine, these
are about the most precious which have come down to us.
Although, as I have stated, no one has questioned their genuine-
ness, Galen complains that, by some mishap or other, they had
not wholly escaped from some derangement of the subject-
matters which they contain, and from additions being made to
them.^

The following, I believe, are the only English translations
of them which have ever been published.

'A Comment on forty-two histories described by Hippocrates

in the First and Third Books of his Epidemics. By

J. Floyer.'

' The History of Epidemics, by Hippocrates, in Seven Books.

Translated into English from the Greek, with Notes and

Observations. By Samuel Farr, m.d. Lond. 1780.'

The former of these I have not been able to see. The other,

although it appears to have been got up with considerable care,

is manifestly the work of a man not properly acquainted with

the language and doctrines of his author. In proof of this, I

' " When that which ought to be evacuated is discharged by spontaneous vomiting
and diarrhoea, it is useful and easily endured ; but when otherwise, the contrary.
Thii ii equally true with regard to every veitel" &c.

* ** They in whom the greatest vigour of the disease is immediately perodved, are
to be immediately sparingly supplied with food ; but from those in whom it occurs
later, the food must at that time, or a little earlier, be abstracted. Previously, how-
ever, we must nourish more freely, that the sick may be supported."

' ** Whilst the crisis is forming, and when it is complete, nothing ought to be
moved or to be introduced, whether by purgatives or other irritants ; but all should
be left at rest."

* " They who are accustomed to daUy labour, although even weak or old, endure
it more easily than the robust or young, who are even accustomed to it."

* '* In regard to the seasons, if the winter have been dry and cold, and the spring
moist and warm, in summer acute fevers, ophthalmias, and dysenteries must neces-
sarily occur, chiefly, however, among females and men of pitoitous temperament."

' Tom. V, p. 399 ; ed. BasiL



■■HlBHBHiBBmBHMHH^B^IV^mKU



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 55

sabjoin below a few examples collected from the first book,
near tbe beginning.^

y. Tlepi Scairtic o^ifov — On the Regimen in Acute Diseases,

This work is acknowledged as genuine by Erotian^^ Palladius/
and Oalen/ and other ancient authorities, as well as by all the
modern critics^ from Mercuriali and Lemos down to Littre and
Greenhill. The authenticity of the latter part^ indeed, is ques-
tioned by Gralen, who pronounces the style, theories, and language
to be different from those of Hippocrates. Yet even he admits
that it is of great antiquity, being more ancient than the time
of Erasistratus, who lived within less than a century from the
death of Hippocrates.^ Even if not genuine, then, this part
(which is published by M. Littr^ as an appendix) possesses great
value, not only as containing important matter, but as frimishing
US with the opinions of the Coan school at a very early period
after the time of our author. We shall have occasion to give
a fuller analysis of its contents, in the Argument prefixed to
the translation of it.

VI. Ilepi aifiaVf viariaVi Kai Tontav — On Airs, Waters , and

Places.

Fortunately there are no reasonable grounds for questioning
the authenticity of this highly important work. It is admitted
as genuine by Erotian, Palladius,* Athenaeus,^ and Oalen,^ and
by every one of the modem critics, with the exception of
Haller, who pronounces against it upon very insufficient grounds.
He argues that it is obvious, from its contents, that the author

' " The state of the air being, upon the whole, dry, with a south wind, which was
just contrarj to what happened the year before, when the north chiefly prevailed ;
there were but few inflammatory fevers, and these were of a mild disposition, very
few being attended with hemorrhages, and much fewer, if any, with death." (p. 4.)

" They affected children, young persons, and those who were arrived at years of
maturity, and especially those who used much exercise, yet but few women." (Ibid.)

" Before the summer, and even during that season, nay, in winter likewise, there
were many who had been disposed to a phthisis who were now afflicted with that
disease," &c. (n>id.)

" The extremities were generally very cold, there was seldom any heat in them."
(p. 3.)

* Preefat. Gloss. ' Comment in Libr. de Fract.

* In Lib. Prognos. Comment. * Tom. v, p. 89 ; ed. Basil.

* Comment, in Lib. de Fract. ^ Deipnos, ii, 7.

* De Propr. Lib., in III Epid., Comm. ii, Pnef.



56 PRELIMINART DISCOURSE. [ssct. ii.

of this treatise was a European, which cannot be said of Hip-
pocratesy seeing that his natiye place, Cos^ was one of the Asiatic
islands.^ But^ if Haller had possessed any competent acquaint-
ance with classical literature, he must hare been aware that all
the inhabitants of the islands adjoining to Asia Minor were
colonists from Greece, and consequently looked npon themselyea
as Europeans, and not as Asiatics.^ Nor is this more remarkable
than that the present inhabitants of America should rank them-
selves ethnologically with the Europeans^ and not with the na-
tive inhabitants of the country they now occupy.

An edition of this treatise, with a French translation^ was
published at Paris by a learned modem Greek, Dr. Ck>ray, in
the beginning of this century ; the annotations to which are
highly valuable. The only English translation of it which we
possess, as far as I know, is the following :

' Hippocrates upon Air, Water, and Situation. By Francis
Clifton, M.D. Lond. 1734.'

This, I am inclined to think, is the best English translation
which we have of any of the Hippocratic treatises. It is
generally accurate, and the only drawback to it which I am
aware of, is the style, which is oft;en exceedingly quaint and
obsolete. The translator, as we stated above, was well acqu|dnted
with all the works of Hippocrates, and of his painstaking in-
dustry the notes in this treatise bear undoubted evidence. Of
these I have availed myself, whenever I could derive any assist-
ance from them, but from the translation itself I have never
copied literally.

VII. llipt apOpwv — On the Articulations.

This work was received as genuine by all the ancient
commentators^ from Bacchus and Philinus, the disciples of

> Bibl. Med., p. 1, 29, 59.

* The inhabitants of Asiatic Ionia, and the islands adjoining, were all oolonista
from Attica. (See in particular Thucyd., i, 12; and also Herodot., vui, 44; and
Heraclides, de Politiis.) Dr. Coray supposes that Hippocrates represents himself as
being a European, in consequence of his having composed this treatise in Europe, at
a distance from his native country. But there is no necessity for this supposition,
as Hippocrates, being of Grecian descent, would naturally enough consider himself a
European, since the great body of the Greeks were Europeans. Coray mentions a
striking instance of Haller's incapacity to form a correct judgment on the works of
Hippocrates, from want of a proper acquaintance with the Greek language. — Dis-
cours Prdllminaire, &c., p. IvL



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 57

Herophilus^ down to Erotian^ Oalen^^ and Palladius.^ It was
also admitted by all the earlier modem critics, down to Gruner^
who rejected it on these grounds: 1. Because it contains a
reference to the treatise ' On Glands/ which all acknowledge
to be spurious. 2. That in the course of the work a degree of
anatomical knowledge is evinced^ far beyond what its actual
state in the time ojf Hippocrates would warrant. 8. That the
legend of the Amazons, which is received as true history in the
treatise ^ On Airs, &c.,' is rejected as fabulous in this work.
Grrimm also agrees with Gruner in condemning it as spurious ;
but Littre shows good reasons for admitting it into the list of
genuine productions. He replies in a very satisfactory manner
to Gruner^s objections. Thus he shows, in particular, what we
have adverted to previously, that the knowledge of anatomy
which was possessed in the Hippocratic age, had been much
underrated by Gruner and others, and that the two passages in
which the Amazons are supposed to be referred to, are not
parallel, and do not admit of a comparison. He also very pro-
perly insists upon it, as a strong argument in favour of the
genuineness of this treatise, that it had been commented upon
I)y Ctesias.^ The work, indeed, contains so much valuable
matter, of which subsequent authors (as Celsus and Paulus
iEgineta) have freely availed themselves, in handling the sub*
jects which are treated of in it, that I have every disposition to
receive it as genuine. We shall see, afterwards, that, taken in
connexion with the next work, it is a perfect masterpiece on the
subject of Fractures and Dislocations.

VIII. Uipl ayfiwp — On Fractures.

Tried by the tests laid down by us above, this treatise must
undoubtedly be received as genuine. It is decidedly acknow-
ledged as such by Palladius, Erotian, Galen, and, in short, by
all the ancient authorities, and the only modem critics who
venture to question its claim, are Grimm, the German translator
of Hippocrates, and Kiihn; and, in fact, the latter does so
merely in deference to Grimm, for his arguments on the
question of its authenticity all tell the other way. That the
treatises 'On Fractures' and 'On Articulations' constituted

I De Placit. Hippocr., et Platon. ix; de Diff. Resp., iii, 7.
> ' Ap. Foes.| p. 197. ' Galeni Opera, torn, y, p. 652; ed. BasiL



56 PRELIMINABT DISCOURSE. [sbct. ii.

originally one work^ is sliown in a very convincing manner
by Galen^ in his introductory comment on the latter.^ This
is an additional reason for admitting the work ^ On Articu-
lations' as genuine. Indeed^ I do not hesitate to declare that
whoever refuses to admit these two treatises as genuine^ may
consistently dispute the claims of any other work of the same
date.

IX. Mo)^Xcjcoc — On the Instruments of Reduction.

This work is quoted by Galen as one of the acknowledged
books of Hippocrates^^ and is admitted by Erotian into his list of
genuine works ; nay^ it appears from the latter that it had been
commented upon by Bacchius. Of the modem authorities^ Foes
and Littr^ concur with the ancient in admitting its claims^, but
it is rejected by Lemos, Mercuriali^ Haller, Gruner^ Grimm,
and Eiihn. No one who reads it carefully can fail to remark
that^ as stated by Galen/ it is a compendium of the work
' On the Articulations/ so that whoever admits the latter to be
genuine must acknowledge the treatise now under consideration
to be one which embodies the opinions of Hippocrates^ whether
it were actually composed by him or not. Taking all this into
account^ it appears to me superfluous diligence in modem critics
to search out grounds for questioning its authenticity.

X. IIcpc r^v iv jce^aXy rpwfiaTfav — On Injuries of the Head.

This work is acknowledged as genuine by all the authorities^
ancient and modern. The only objection to its genuineness is
the appearance of certain interpolations towards the end of it.^
This^ however^ as we have remarked above (No. III)^ is a mode of
vitiation from which few ancient works are altogether exempt.

XI. ''Opjcoc — The Oath.

This interesting little piece is quoted as genuine by Erotian/
Theodore Priscian/ Soranus Ephesius/ St. Jerome/ Gregoiy

■ Open, torn, y, p. 578 ; ed. Basil. * Ibid., p. 170.

' In Pnedict. i, Comm. i, 4.

* V. Galen, in Exeges. in Todbus UKovv^ia, vfantfrnQ^ &c.

* Pnefat. Gloss. Hippocrat.

* Gvnaec., torn, i, P. I, p. 13.
^ In vita Hippocrat.

* Ad Nepotian. de vita Cleric., Ep. ii, p. 13, torn, i ; cd. Paris, 1643.



i



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 59

Nazianzen/ Suidas/ and Scribonius Largus.^ It is also
received as such by Foes^ Graner^ and Littr^^ but is rejected
by Mercuriali, Schuize, Haller^ Kiihn^ Ackerman^ and other
modem authorities^ as quoted by Ackerman. The only reason-
able grounds which I can see for questioning its authenticity is
the silence of Giden with regard to it ; but when we take into
account that Galen has nowhere given an entire list of what he
considers to be the genuine works of Hippocrates, this omission
on his part may be merely incidental, and is not of much
weight. On the other hand, the argument which M. Littr€
seeks to estabUsh in £EiYOur of its authenticity on fancied allu-
sions to it by Aristophanes^ and Plato/ appears to me to have
no weight ; indeed, he himself gives up the former in another
place.^

I have met with the following English translations of this
piece, and no doubt there may be others :

' The Protestation which Hippocrates caused his Scholars to
make, by Peter Low ; Lond. 1597/

* y by Francis Clifton, m.d. ; Lond. 1734.'

The translation by Low is in a quaint and antiquated style;
that by Clifton is carefully done.

XII. No/t*o€ — The Law.

This little piece is noticed by Erotian, and admitted as
genuine by M. Littr^, but Mercuriali, Gruner, Ackerman,
Kiihn, and Greenhill incline to reject it It is well written, but
the style is rather too scholastic for the age and taste of the
great Father of Medicine. At the same time, it has so many
points of accordance with ' The Oath,' that it seems inconsistent
to admit the one as authentic and reject the other as
spurious.

XIII. Kor' ci}rp€cov — On the Surgery.

All the ancient commentators which have come down to us,
such as Erotian^ Galen, and Palladius, admit it to be genuine ;

> Ont. Funebr. in Ccstrium Fratrem. ' Sub voce Hippocrates.

* Epift. ad C. Jal. Callistum. ^ Thesmophor., 1. 240.

* De Legg. iv, L vi, p. 134; ed. Tauchnitz. ^ Tom. ii, p. ilvili ; Add. et Corrig.



60 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. n.

but it would appear from Galen that some of the older com-
mentators were not satisfied upon this pointy some doubting
whether it was the production of the great Hippocrates or of
Thessalus^ and some referring it to Hippocrates^ the son of
Gnosidicus.^ It is received also by Foes, Gruner, and, after
a good deal of hesitation, by M. Littre. Schulze expresses
himself on this point doubtfully,^ and the work is rejected
by Grimm, Ackerman, and Kiihn. Beyond all doubt, it is a
compendium of the treatises ' On Fractures' and ' On the
Articulations,' so that, whether the composition of Hippocrates
himself or not, there can be no question that the subject-
matter of it is derived from him. Galen appears to have been
remarkably fond of this treatise, and makes frequent reference
to it in his great work ' On the Dogmata of Hippocrates and
Plato.' It would appear that Diodes, Philotimus, and Mantias
had written treatises bearing the same title.

There is some difficulty in determining accurately what was
the nature of the ancient latrium (itirpEcoi^). See an interest-
ing disquisition on this subject in Littrd's edition of Hippo-
crates, t. V, p. 25. It most probably was an establishment
kept by the physician, in which were contained not only all
sorts of medicines, but also all kinds of surgical apparatus.
Mention of the latrium is made by Plato (Legg. iv, p. 720, and
i, p. 646 ; ed. Tauch.) Aristotle is said to have possessed an
latrium, which, if the story be true, he had no doubt acquired
from his father, who was a medical practitioner.^ From what
is stated by Plato, it would appear that the assistants were
qualified to administer professional assistance in the absence
of their superior, and were also called doctors. (Legg. iv.) So
it appears that the modem abuse of this title was sanctioned
by classical usage ! It must be recollected that, in the time of
Hippocrates, eminent physicians were periodeuta, that is to say,
wanderers from place to place, and consequently they would
stand in need of such an establishment as we have described
the latrium to be. See further the Argument to this work.

' Tom. y, p. 526 ; ed. Basil, &c. Elsewhere he quotes it as being undoubtedly
genuine. — De Placit. Hippoc. &€., ix, 1.

* Hist. Med., p. 283.

* See Polybius, as quoted by Littr^, 1. c. ; ako section iii of the Preliminary Dis-
course.



SECT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 61

XIV. llepl ^vffcoic auOpiiwov — On the Nature of Man,

Erotian^ (jalen^ Palladius^ and Macrobius^ do not hesitate
to quote the doctrines contained in this treatise as being those
of the great Hippocrates^ but its authenticity has long been
considered very questionable^ owing to the circumstance that a
passage in it of considerable lengthy relative to the anatomy of
the venous system^ is quoted by Aristotle^ as being the pro-
duction of PolybuSy and it is accordingly received as such by
Haller/ Gruner^ Littr^^ and most of our recent authorities on
ancient medicine. Galen^ however^ contends that the passage
quoted by Aristotle is not the work either of Hippocrates or of
Polybus^ but an interpolation^ and that the rest of the treatise
is genuine.^ But Galen^ at the same time^ admits that
Dioscorides^ the Commentator (he must not be confounded
with the celebrated author of the Materia Medica)^ had marked
the first part of this treatise with the sign of the obelisk, as
indicating his suspicion of its being spurious, and that he held
it to be the work of Hippocrates, the son of Thessalus, that is
to say^ of a grandson of the great Hippocrates. But, whatever
may be decided regarding its authorship, a careful perusal of
the treatise will satisfy any one that it is a piece of patchwork,
made up of several fragments, which do not cohere properly
together. It certainly also appears to me that many of the
philosophical dogmata which are delivered in it do not accord
well with the doctrines contained in those treatises which are
nniversaUy admitted to be genuine.

Afker alluding briefly to the opinions of those philosophers
who held that the human body is formed from the four
elements, that is to say, fire, air, water, and earth, the writer
proceeds to state his own doctrines regarding the four humours,
namely^ blood, phlegm, yellow and black bile, and the diseases
which are occasioned by the prevalence of one or other of
them, according to the seasons of the year, and other circum-
stances. The doctrines, as herein stated, are very hypothetical,
and certainly, as already hinted, not in accordance with those
delivered in the genuine works. It is proper to mention,

* Satumal., vii, 6. * Hist. Animal., iii, 3.

* In BoerfaaaT. Meth. Stud. Med.

4 De Placit. Hippoerat. et Plat., yi, 3 ; et Opera, torn. ▼, p. 22 ; ed. Basil.



62 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sbct. n.

however^ that Oalen^ in several parts of his works^ makes
Hippocrates to be the author of the theories of the elements and
of the humours.^ The treatise contains certain general truths
and rules of practice not unworthy of some consideration^ such
as this^ that diseases are cured by their contraries^ that is to
say^ that diseases arising from repletion are remoyed by
evacuation^ and vice versa; and that diseases in general
are occasioned either by the food we eat^ or the air we
breathe, those which prevail epidemicaUy being produced by
the latter cause. All sudden changes of diet are held to be
attended with danger, and to be avoided. It is also an
important rule of practice that, in venesection, blood should be
abstracted from a part as distant as possible from the seat of
the pain and of the collection of blood. There can be no
doubt, in a word, as we have stated in the preceding section,
on the authority of Gralen, that Hippocrates was well acquainted
with the principle of revulsion in the practice of medicine. The
natural heat, or, as it is now called, the animal heat, is stated
to be greater the younger the body is — ^a jihysiological doctrine
strenuously advocated by Gtden in several parts of his works,
but more especially in the treatise ' Against Lycus.'' The
theory of the formation of urinary calculi is also discussed.
The same occurs in the treatise ' De Aere,' &c., and in the
work ' De Morbis' (iv, 28). Allusion is likewise made to the
occurrence of substances in the' urine resembling hairs.' The
last fragment of which this treatise is composed relates to fevers,
the greater part of which are held to be occasioned by bile.
It is said that there are four varieties of them, namely,
synochus, quotidian, tertian, and quartan ; that the synochus
is formed from the most intense bile, and comes soonest to a
crisis, and the others in the order we have stated them. This
is very unlike the doctrines of fever laid down in the genuine
works, and accordingly this portion of the treatise was a great
stumbling-block to those among the ancient commentators who
contended for the genuineness of the treatise.^ Altogether,
then, I must say, that a careful perusal of the work leads me
to the conclusion that, notwithstanding the high authorities in

* De Nat. Facalt., torn, i, p. 87. * Open, tom. t, p. 329 ; ed. BtnL

* See EngUth tnuulation of Paulus iEoiNSTA, Book I, p. 549.

* See Galen, tom. t, p. 2.



SECT, n.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 63

its favour, it does not deserve to be received as a genuine pro-
duction of Hippocrates.^

XV. Uepl Scairijc vyiHvriq — On Diet in Health.

This work is passed over unnoticed by Palladius and Erotian ;
and Cralen, although he wrote a commentary on it which still
remains, informs us that some of the elder commentators had
assigned it to Polybus, the son-in-law to Hippocrates.' He
further mentions that it had been variously referred to Eury-
phon, Phaon, Philistion, and others ; ancient authority in its
favour is, therefore, very equivocal. The modem critics are
pretty unanimous in rejecting it; indeed, Littre, improving
on the hint cast out by Galen, does not scruple to refer it and
the preceding treatise to Polybus. Though the subject-matters
of it are not, in the main, of much importance, it contains
some directions for the regulation of the diet, which are by no
means injudicious. One of his directions, with regard to
clothing, is very different, however, from what we might have
expected, considering the fondness of the ancients for the use
of oil to counteract the effects of cold.^ « The author of this
work directs oily garments to be used in summer, but clean ones
in winter. Emetics are recommended to be taken by persons
of a gross habit of body, but to be avoided by those who are
slender. This rule is expressed by Celsus in the following
terms : " Yomitus inutilis gracilibus et imbedUum stomachum
habentibus, utilis plenis et biliosis omnibus, si vel nimium se
repleverint vel parum concoxerint.''^ The author of this
treatise recommends hyssop as an emetic, and we find its use
in this way not unfrequently noticed in the Hippocratic
treatises, but not in the works of subsequent authorities, as far
as I am aware* The work concludes with a passage on diseases
of the brain, which also occurs, ^ De Morbis' (ii), and seems
much out of place here. It is said that they are first mani-
fested by stupor of the head, frequent passing of urine, and
other symptoms of strangury ; and it is added, that a discharge
of water or of mucus by the nose or ears relieves these com-
plaints.

Altogether, considering how slender the evidence is, both

■ See further, under No. I. ' Open, torn, y, pp. 17, 29.

* See Paulus ^oimsta, I, 50. * I, 3.



64 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

external and internal^ in favour of the authenticity of this
treatise^ I can have no hesitation in rejecting it as spurious.

XVI. UpoppriTiKov, a — First Book of Prorrhetics.

XVII. KtoaKcii vpoyvtJdHQ — Coan Prognostics.

These two works are so evidently allied to one another, that
I have judged it expedient to treat of them together. The
greatest difference of opinion has prevailed among the critics,
both ancient and modem, with regard to them. Erotian
declares expressly that the ' Prorrhetics/ both first and second,
are not genuine ; and Galen, although he writes a commentary
on the first book, complains of the difficulty he experienced in
explaining certain vocables of dubious meaning contained in
it,^ and elsewhere states that the treatise is composed of extracts
from the 'Prognostics,' 'Epidemics,' and 'Aphorisms.' Foes
is almost the only modem scholar of any note who stands up
for the genuineness of the first book of the ' Prorrhetics ;' and
it is decidedly rejected by Grimm, Ackerman, Haller, Littre,
and nearly all the 'other modern authorities. The ' Coacae
Praenotiones' have very little ancient authority in their favour,
and even Foes rejects the work with greater disdain than it
would seem to merit. Of late years, the opinion has gained
pretty general assent that these two treatises are more ancient
than the days of Hippocrates ;' that, in fact, they constitute
the materials out of which he composed the ' Prognostics,' and
are the results of the observations made by the priest-physicians
in the Asclepion, or Temple of Health, at Cos. This idea is
followed out with great ability by Dr. Ermerins, in his ' Specimen
Historico-Medicum Inaugurate de Hippocratis doctrina a Prog*
nosticc oriunda,' where, by a most ingenious and convincing
process of comparison, he appears clearly to make out that the
' Coacse Prsenotiones' are formed from the first book of the
' Prorrhetica,' and the ' Prognostics' from the ' Coacae Pneno*
tiones.' These positions, I repeat, he seems to me to have
established most satisfactorily, and I cannot hesitate to declare
it as my opinion that Dr. Ermerius has thereby thrown
great light on this department of the Hippocratic literature.

' Sect, ii, near the beginning. ' Comment, in III Epidem.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 65

M. Littr^ has justly appreciated tlie labours of Dr. Ermerins^
and adopted his views without reserve, (v. i, p. 351.) As I
shall have occasion to compare the contents of these two trea-
tises now under consideration with the subject-matters of the
* Prognostics' in my Argument to the latter, I shall confine
myself at present to a few observations, selected in a good
measure from M. Littre's argument to the 'Coacse Prseno-
tiones.'

In the first place, M. Littr^ makes some interesting remarks
on vomicae of the chest after pneumonia and pleurisy; but this
subject will come to be treated of in the notes on the * Pro-
gnostics/ He next gives some important observations on the
following passage in the ' Coacse Prsenotiones/ § 418 : " All
sprains are troublesome, and cause intense pains at the com-
mencement, and in certain cases occasion after-consequences ;
the most troublesome are those about the breast, and the most
dangerous are those in which there is vomiting of blood, much
fever, and pain about the mammae, chest, and back; when all these
occur, the patients quickly die ; but in those cases in which they
do not all occur, nor are severe, they are longer protracted ; the
inflammation at farthest is protracted to forty days/' He relates,
in iUustration of this passage, a case very much in point, from
the ' Journal de Medecine,' Juillet, 1843, of a healthy person
who, in lifting a log of wood, strained the parts about the chest so
as to experience a cracking sensation about the breast ; it was
followed by intense inflammation, which, in spite of plentiful
depletion, ended in an empyema which opened by the fifth inter-
vertebral space. The patient recovered. This case is a good
illustration of a species of accident frequently described in the
Hippocratic Collection. He then briefly considers the question
whether or not Hippocrates was acquainted with the croup, on
which he does not give any decided opinion. In my opinion, the
term croup is now used in a vague sense, being applied to cases
of angina, in which the inflammation spreads down to the
glottis and trachea, and also to cases of bronchitis attended with
a croupy cough. I am confident that pure cynanche trachealis,
that is to say, acute disease originating in the trachea, is of
very rare occurrence, at least, it certainly is so in the north of
Scotland. That the ancients were well acquainted with that
species of cynanche in which the disease spreads down to the

5



66 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. n.

windpipe there can be no doubt. See the Commentary on
§§ 26, 27, Book III, of Paulus ^oineta. It may reasonably
be doubted whether they were not fully as well acquainted with
diseases of the fauces and windpipe as the modems are.

M. Littre's observations on sphacelus of the brain* do not
at all accord with the opinions of Dr. Coray,^ nor with those
advanced in the Commentary on Paulus Mqiveta, B. Ill, § 7.
He thinks that Hippocrates meant by it necrosis of the cranium.
Although I still so far adhere to my former opinion that by
sphacelus was generally meant ramollissement of the brain, I
must admit that some of the passages in the Hippocratic
Collection, where it is described, would bear out M. Littre's
ideas regarding it. On the subject of sphacelus, see 'De Morbis,'
near the beginning.

M. Littre draws, from a variety of sources, much interesting
matter in illustration of § 500 of the ^ Coacae Prsenotiones :'
'^ Amaurosis is produced by wounds in the eyelash, and a
little above it ; the more recent the wound, they see the
better ; but when the cicatrix becomes older the amaurosis in-
creases.^^ Plattner^ held that in this case the amaurosis is
connected with lesion of the frontal nerve. Beer' shows that
the affection of the sight is not connected with injury of the
nerve, but is rather the result of concussion of the ball of
the eye. Walker, and Littre himself, are rather disposed to
question altogether the truth of the statement made by
Hippocrates.

M. Littre concludes his argument with some observations
on the lethargus of the ancients, which he holds, and correctly,
as I think, to be a pseudo-continual fever. My own opinion,
as delivered in the Commentary on Book III, § 9, of Paulus
^GiNETA, will be found to be very similar. Lethargus is there
stated to have been a species of remittent fever, resembling
the causus. M. Littre, further in illustration of this subject,
gives from the works of Mr. B. Clark, an English physician at
Sierra Leone, an interesting account of a sleepy-dropsy, to
which the Negroes there are subject.

The greater part of the contents of these treatises are mixed

' Ad Hippocrat. de Aere, Aquis, Locis, § 65.
' De Vulneribus 8Ui)€rcniis allatis. Lips., 1741.
^ Lehre von den Augen-krankheiten. Wien, 1813.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 67

up by Clifton with his translation of the ' Prognostics / and
Moffat gives a complete translation of this book of the ' Prorrhe-
tics/ The latter, like all the other translations by the same
hand, is utterly worthless. Clifton is only culpable for having
introduced confusion into the contents of works which had
been so admirably arranged by Hippocrates.

XVIII. UpopptiTiKov, /3' — The Second Book of Prorrhetics.

The reception which this work has met with from the critics,
ancient and modem, appears rather singular. Erotian and
Cralen, who, in general, are too fiacile in admitting the claims
of suspected works, in the present instance reject a work which
many modem authorities acknowledge as genuine; as, for
example, Haller, Gruner, Grimm, and, with certain qualifi-
cations, Ackerman and Kiihn. I must say, however, with Foes,
Littr^, and Greenhill, that I cannot see how we can con-
sistently recognise as genuine a work which has so large an
amount of ancient authority against it, and none in its favour.
At the same time, all must admit that the treatise in question
contains nothing unworthy of the name of Hippocrates, and
that, if estimated by the value of its contents, it is one of the
most important works in the whole Collection. I will, there-
fore, give an abstract of its contents, along with my translation
of the ' Prognostics.^ It is deserving of much attention, as being
the only work we possess which gives us an insight into the
method taken by the ancient physicians to gain the confidence
of their patients by their mode of conducting the preliminary
examination of every case. In my younger days I knew an
old physician, who was an adept in this art of conciliating the
confidence of his patients by anticipating their histories of their
own eomplaints.

XIX. Ilept bXkwv — On Ulcers.

This treatise is decidedly admitted as genuine by Galen,^
Erotian, Celsus, and by Foes, Lemos, Mercuriali, Schulze,' and
Vidus Vidius,* but is rejected by Haller, Gruner, Ackerman,

■ In VI Aphor., 3» Coram, vi ; Meth. Med., iv, 6.

* Hist. Med., i, 3, 4, 60. Hb language is particularly strong: " Maxim^ genuinus
ab omnibua judicatur.*'

' In his CoxDmentary on this work.



68 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

and Eiilin^ on internal evidence^ the nature of whicli we shall
presently examine. M. Littre in so far concurs in the judg-
ment of the authorities who reject it^ although he does not admit
the grounds of their decision. Oruner^s principal^ indeed I may
say his sole, argument against the authenticity of this work is
founded on the nature of the substances recommended by the
author for the treatment of ulcers ; namely, such acrid and
(as Gruner chooses to call them) absurd medicines as arsenic,
black hellebore, and cantharides. But how does it appear
that these are '^absurd^' applications to ulcers, when even at
the present day the two strongest of them, namely, arsenic
and cantharides, are the means often resorted to for the cure
of indolent and malignant ulcers? The same articles are
recommended by Celsus (v), and by Paulus ^gineta.^ It is
true that the titles given to certain of the prescriptions con-
tained in this treatise are not appropriate, such as etnoUieni
{fiaXOaKwSea), applied to applications which contain many acrid
ingredients. But in this case, as is remarked by Foes, we
should consider the text to be in so far corrupt, for certainly this
does not constitute a legitimate reason for rejecting the treatise
in toto,

Yidus Yidius, in his interesting commentary on this work,
mentions, as a proof of its authenticity, that most of the
principles laid down by Galen for the treatment of ulcers, are
taken from this part^ of the works of Hippocrates. In a
word, agreeably to the rules laid down by me for testing the
authenticity of these treatises, I do not see that I am warranted
in refusing to admit the claims of this work to be con«
sidered as genuine. I hold myself bound, therefore, to give a
translation of it.

It may be proper in this place to mention that the term
ulcer (cXjcoc) is used in this treatise to signify both a wound
inflicted by an external body, and a solution of continuity from
any internal cause. This usage of the word is sanctioned by
the older poets, as, for example. Homer (Iliad., ii, 723 ; lb., xiv,
130); Pindar (Nem., viii, 50 ; Pyth., iii, 84); and Bion (Adonis).

' Book It, 44. See the authorities quoted in the Commentary on this chapter
in the English edition. Schulze properly remarks, that the composition which he
recommends as an application to certain sores resembles the iEgyptiacom of modem
times.— Hist. Med., i, 3, 4, 63.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 69

XX. ricpi ffvplyytov — On Fistuke.

Though this work be acknowledged as genuine by Erotian^
Dioscorides^ Celsus^ Paulus ^gineta^ and by Foes and Vidus
Vidius, it is set down for spurious by Haller, Gruner, and
Ackerman; and even by Littre and Greenhill its claims are not
fully recognised. I can see no good reason^ however, for reject-
ing it, since, as I have stated, the ancient authority in favour of
it is very strong, and I can detect nothing in the doctrines and
rules of practice delivered in it which are at variance with
those laid down in the treatises which all admit to be genuine.
Ackerman, indeed, pretends that the theory of bile and phlegm,
as being the cause of disease, does not belong to Hippocrates
or his school. But this is evidently begging the question ;
and, moreover, Galen, who must be admitted to be a high
authority in such a case, decidedly holds Hippocrates to be
the author of the Theory of the Humours.^ Gralen seems to
say that this treatise, and the following one on hemorrhoids,
constituted one work in his time ; and he does not throw out
the slightest suspicion against the genuineness of either, as the
words of Ackerman wovQd lead one to suppose.'

Vidus Vidius, although he acknowledges Hippocrates as the
author of this work, holds that it had not been published by
him, but had been left in an unfinished state. The argument,
however, which he uses in proof of this opinion, is by no means
convincing ; he contends that the part which relates to inflam-
mation of the anus is quite out of place in a work devoted to
the consideration of fistulse. But few who have much prac-
tical acquaintance with the subject will agree with him on
this point, for it is well known that fistulae, for the most part,
originate in inflammation and abscess about the verge of the
anus.

XXI. TIboi ai/ioppoiSwv — On Piles,

This little tract has experienced the same reception from the
critics as the preceding one, that is to say, it is acknowledged

I Comment, in Lib. de Nat. Human.

' They are as follows : " Continuari cum libello de bemorrhoidis manifeste spnrio,
ideoque ipsum esse spurium, Galenus jam notat in Gloas., s. t. nripiva et 9TpvpKr\v"
Now, as stated above, Galen does not say a word against the authenticity of these
works.



70 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

as genuine by Erotian and Galen^ and by Foes and Vidus Vidius,
but is decidedly rejected as such by Mercuriali, Gruner, Grimm,
and Ackerman. I can remark nothing in it, however, which
appears to me at all inconsistent with the doctrines contained
in the genuine works, unless it be that in this tract the author
appears to direct that in operating upon hemorrhoids they should
be all extirpated, whereas in one of his Aphorisms, which is
quoted by Paulus ^gineta, in his chapter on this subject, he
recommends that one should be left, as an outlet to the super-
fluous blood, (vi, 79.) I do not know how this divergence of
opinion is to be explained, but^ at all events, such an apparent
contradiction would not warrant us in rejecting the treatise
altogether.

XXII. ricpJ «p^c vovffov — On the Sacred Diaease.

This work is acknowledged as genuine by Erotian, Galen,^
and Caelius Aurelianus,^ but is rejected by Lemos, Mercuriali,
Haller, Gruner, Ackerman, Kiihn, and even by M. Littre,
although the last of these admits that the grounds upon which
it had been reftised a place among the genuine works are very
equivocal. I feel very much at a loss what to decide with regard
to it. It is unquestionably the work of a man possessed of a
highly cultivated mind, free from the popular superstition of lus
age, and familiarly acquainted with comparative anatomy, and
having no contemptible knowledge of human physiology. There
is, in fact, no name, whether in ancient or modem times, to
which it might not do honour. That it is not unworthy, then,
of the great Hippocrates, all must allow, but whether or not he
be the actual author of it, there is much difficulty in determining
satisfactorily. That, in certain respects, it is very unlike his
other works, must be admitted ; the talent which it displays is
more of a reflective than of a perceptive nature, which is the
reverse of the common character of Hippocrates, who, in his
genuine works, evidently evinces a disposition to trust to accu-
rate observation rather than to acute ratiocination. The style,
too, I must admit, is more difiFuse than the true Hippocratic style

' Comment, i, in Hipp. Prognost. The quotation prefixed to this work in the
editions of Vander-linden and FrobeniuB, in which Galen is stated to have held this
work not to be genuine, is admitted by Littr^ to be of no authority.

' Morb. Diutum., i, 4.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 71

generally is. All this mighty no donbt, be accounted for^ upon
the supposition that the work was addressed to the general
reader, and not to the professional. Other reasons might be
imagined, to account for the diversity of style and matter, but
these I shall not occupy time in discussing, as I have decided
upon giving a translation of it, so that the English reader may
be enabled to judge for himself as to its genuineness. Whether
the tract in question be the work of Hippocrates, or, as some
have supposed, of his philosophical friend Democritus,^ there
can be little or no doubt that it is a production of that age, for
it appears to me that their contemporary, Ptato, has evidently
made reference to it. Thus, in that portion of his ' Timseus'
which treats of the causes of diseases, he clearly seems, in ac-
counting for epilepsy, to have had in view the doctrines con-
tained in this treatise. For although he uses the term '^ sacred
disease,^' and applies ''most divine,^' as an epithet to the cavities
(ventricles?) of the head, he still, in imitation of the author of
this work, accounts for the disease upon natural causes, that is
to say, from derangements of the pneuma and phlegm.^

XXIII. IIcpJ tfivawv — On Airs.

This treatise deserves, in many respects, to be put in the
same category as the last ; that is to say, it is generally admitted
by the ancient authorities, but rejected by the modem. Thus
it is noticed as genuine by Erotian and Galen, and by Gregory
Nazianzen and Stobseus.^ On the other hand, Mercuriali,
Le Clerc,^ Haller, Gruner, Ackerman, and Kiihn reject it.
M. Littr^, also, in deference to the opinion of later critics, re-
fuses it a place in his list of genuine works, but, at the same
time, expresses himself doubtfully on this point. Le Clerc,
although, as we have stated, he inclines to the opinion of those
who reject it, does not hesitate to declare, " that this book, upon
reading it, seems to be one of the most rational and coherent
of all Hippocrates's works.'' And I in so far agree with Le
Clerc, that the contents of it are of great importance for the
right understanding of the ancient theory of medicine, whether

> See Menage in Diogen. Laert,, p. 241.

^ See § 66, torn, vii, p. 359 ; ed. Bekker.

'* See all these authorities as quoted by Ackerman.

* Hist, de la M^d., i, iii, 4.



72 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

we refer the tract in question to Hippocrates or not. I shall
now give a summary of the doctrines contained in it^ which I
must say appear to me to smack rather of the school of philo-
sophy^ than of the practical good sense for which the author
of the First and Third Epidemics^ and of the Prognostics, is so
remarkable.

The author sets out with stating ''that there are certain
arts which are of laborious acquisitiouj but are profitable to
those who practise them; of general utility to the common
people, but painful to those who exercise them. Of such a
nature is the art of medicine. The physician contemplates
dreadful things (Secva), comes in contact with what are im-
pleasant, and reaps sorrow to himself from the aflSictions of
others ; but the sick are freed &om the greatest evils by the
art, namely, from diseases, pains, sorrow, and death ; for medi-
cine has been found decidedly to be a cure for all these. In
the manual parts of medicine (surgery) practice is necessary.
For in all that relates to manipulation, usage is the best teacher.
But with regard to the most obscure and difficult diseases, a
judgment is to be formed rather from opinion than art; and it
is in such cases that experience differs much from inexperience.
And it is a most important consideration to determine what is
the cause of diseases, and what the beginning and fountain-
head, as it were, of the evils in the body ; for if one be ac-
quainted with the cause of the disease, he may be able to apply
the suitable remedies to the affections of the body, judging of
diseases from their contraries: for this mode of cure is that
which is most in accordance with nature. Thus, for example,
hunger is a disease ; for whatever afflicts man is called a dis-
ease. What, then, is the cure of hunger ? Whatever will allay
hunger, that is to say, food, and by it the other is to be cured.
Again, drink cures thirst ; and, moreover, evacuation cures re-
pletion, and repletion evacuation, and rest labour, and labour
rest ; and, in a word, the contraries are the cure of contraries.
For medicine consists of addition and subtraction — the sub-
traction of what is redundant, and the addition of what is
deficient. And he that does these things best, is the best
physician; and he that is most removed from this system, is the
most removed from a knowledge of the art. The manner of
all diseases is the same, but they differ in place ; and hence



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 73

diseases appear to have no resemblance to one another, owing
to the diversity and dissimilarity of situations. For there is
but one form (cS/t}) of ail disease, and the cause is the same.
What that is I will attempt to explain in the following dis-
course. The bodies of men and of other animals are nourished
by three kinds of aliment, namely, food, drink, and airs ; and
those winds in the body are called spirits, which are named
airs out of it. This it is which exercises the greatest power
over the symptoms, and it is worth while to attend to the
power of it; for the wind is a current and stream of air.
When, then, much air makes a strong current, trees are torn
from their roots by the force of the blast, and the sea is raised
in billows, and ships of immense size are tossed aloft. Such
power it possesses, and yet it is invisible to the sight, and is
manifest only to the understanding. And what would there
be without it, and from what thing is it absent? and with
what is it not present? For the whole space between the
earth and heaven is full of air, and it is the cause of winter
and of summer ; in winter becoming condensed and cold, and
in summer mild and tranquil. The path also of the sun, moon,
and stars is through air — for air is the pabulum of fire, and

fire deprived of air could not live And with regard to

the sea, that it contains a portion of air is obvious to everybody.
For water-animals could not exist if they did not participate in
the air; and how could they participate in it otherwise, except
by means of the water, and by drawing in the air along with
it. And the moon's foundation is upon it, and this it is which
supports the earth,^ and nothing is void of it. And why the
air is possessed of such power in other things has been now
stated ; but in men this is the cause of life, and of disease to

' It may appear a singular idea that the earth is supported on air, and yet it was
▼ery generally held by the learned men of antiquity. The poet Lucan thus alludes
to this doctrine :

" Dum terra fretum terramque levabit
Aer." Pharsal., i, 89.

And in like manner Ovid :

" Nee circumfuBO pendebat in aere tellus
Ponderibus librata suis." | Met., I, 11 .

Bentley remarks, in his note on the passage in Lucan, " Omnis poetarum chorus
hoc praedicat ut et philosophorom veterum.''



74 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

those who are in ill health. And all bodies stand so much in
need of air, that whereas if deprived of everything else, such
as food and drink, a man may subsist for two, three, or more
days ; if the passage of air into the body be stopped, he will
perish in a short part of a day, so necessary is air to the body.
And, besides, there is some intermission of every other opera-
tion which men perform, for life is full of change ; but this
operation alone living animals perform incessantly, sometimes
inspiring, and sometimes expiring. That all living animals,
then, are closely connected with air has now been shown.
After this we must forthwith declare what infirmities probably
arise in an especial manner from this source — when it is re-
dundant or deficient in quantity, or when polluted with morbific
miasmata it enters the body. That diseases are the offspring
of air I will show from the most common of all diseases, I
mean, fever ; for this disease accompanies all others, and most
especially inflammations. This is well illustrated by the acci-
dents which befall the feet ; for along with the inflammation
a bubo and fever speedily supervene. There are two kinds of
fever (that I may touch upon that subject) ; the one common to
all, which is called the plague, and the other being connected
with vitiated food in those who use it. The air, then, is the
cause of both these. A common fever (epidemic ?) therefore is
such, because all draw in the same breath (pneuma).'' The
author afterwards attempts an explanation of the phenomena
of rigors, which, however, is not very intelligible, and then of
the febrile heat and sweats which succeed them. The latter
he compares to the condensed steam of boiling-water. He
afterwards proceeds to explain that when the blood is mixed
up with vitiated air (gases?), it occasions diseases in various
parts of the body ; for example, pain in the eyes, when it fixes
there ; when in the ears, the disease is seated there ; when in
the nose, coryza is the consequence; and when in the chest,
bronchus (bronchitis?), and so forth. To the same cause he
ascribes the origin of dropsy, namely, to the prevalence of airs,
and the melting down of the flesh. He also accounts for the
formation of apoplexy, by supposing that it arises from the
flesh of the parts being filled up with gases ; and in the same
way he explains the origin of epilepsy very elaborately, and
most ingeniously, but at too great length to suit my limits in



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 75

this place. Altogether the treatise is one of the most inter-
esting pieces of medical philosophy which has come down to
us from antiquity. It shows very decidedly what a talent for
dealing with ^abstract ideas the ancient Greeks were endued
with.

XXIV. Tlepl Towfov riav Kar avOptowov — On the Places in Man,

The ancient authority in favour of this treatise is pretty
strong. It is included in Erotian's list^ is quoted by Cselius
Aurelianus/ and hy Buffus Ephesius/ and is incidentally
noticed by Galen in two places of his Glossary.^ That it is
further quoted by Athenseus^as stated by Gruner and Ackerman^
would appear to me to be a mistake.^ It is admitted to be
genuine by Le Clerc^ Schulze^ Haller, Triller^ Sprengel^ Zuinger^
Petersen^ and others. It is rejected^ however^ by Lemos,
Mercuriali^ Duret^ Beinsius^ Gruner, and Ackerman. M.
Littr^ does not venture to assign it a place among the genuine
treatises, and yet he evidently inclines to the opinion that later
critics had rejected it on very doubtful grounds, and leaves the
question undecided. The following summary of its contents
will show that it is not destitute of valuable matter.

The author of it commences with announcing this important
physiological principle, which microscopical observations on the
development of the chick have amply confirmed : '^ It appears
to me that in the body there is no beginning, but that all
parts are alike beginning and end; for in a described circle
no beginning is to be found.'' He goes on to remark that, in"
consequence of this, diseases affect the whole body ; that when
seated in the dry parts of it they are more permanent, but
when in the fluid, more changeable; that one part of
the body imparts disease to the other parts, namely, the
stomach to the head, and the head to the stomach ; and that if
the very smallest part of the body suffer, it will impart its
suffering to the whole frame. He afterwards enters into a

' Morb. Chron., L ' Corp. Human. AppelL, ii, 1.

' See under ^iipiov and Kpiinv6u

* They refer apparently to Deipnos, ii, 7, where Atheneus quotes a treatise of
Hippocrates vtpi ron-uiv, but he evidently means by it the work ' de Aere, Aquis,
Lods.' It is to be borne in mind that Athensus often makes liis references in a
loose manner.



76 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

lengthened anatomical description of the parts of the body
which, although quoted by Galen, ^ and not unfavorably noticed
by Gruner,^ cannot now command much interest. He then
describes seven defluxions from the head, namely, to the nose ;
to the ears ; to the eyes ; to the chest — producing empyema
and phthisis; to the spine — producing another species of
phthisis {tabes dorsalis?); to the fleshy parts —inducing dropsy;
and to the joints — occasioning ischias and kedmata {morbus
coxarius?). All this seems very hypothetical, and does not
appear to savour of the strict process of induction which we
remark in the genuine treatises of Hippocrates. When the
disease is seated in the head, he directs numerous and deep
incisions to be made in the scalp, down to the bone. He
notices pleurisy, and its termination in empyema ; the latter,
he further remarks, may originate in ruptures {sprains?), and
in this case, on succussion, an undulatory sound may be heard.
He also states decidedly that empyema forms in phthisical
persons, and that, in their case, too, a sound like that of water
in a bladder may be heard on succussion. The symptoms
accompanying empyema are given very graphically. He also
describes the tabes dorsalis. He afterwards gives the treatment
of pleurisy and pneumonia, in which it is remarkable that no
mention is made of venesection, notwithstanding that, in the
work 'On Regimen in Acute Diseases,' Hippocrates recom-
mends bleeding ad deliquium in these diseases; and Gden
accounts for his silence respecting venesection in his treatment
' of fevers on the supposition that he did not notice it, because
he took it for granted, as a general rule, that the operation was
performed.^ This consideration, as much as any other, inclines
me to doubt the authenticity of this treatise. Ischiatic disease
he directs to be treated by cupping-instruments and heating
medicines, administered internally. Anasarca, in a young
person, he treats by scarifications. In the brief notice of

> De Facult Natur., ii ' Censura libr. Hippocrat., p. 115.

* Commeiit. in Epidem., ii, 3. See also Le Clerc, Hist, de la Med., iii. 17 ; and
Sprengel, Hist, de la M^, torn, i, p. 325, &c. A passage, which we shall see below,
in the Prognostics ($ 15) puts it beyond a doubt that venesection was part of the
routine of practice pursued by Hippocrates in cases of pneumonia. See also (and
this passage is very decisive) de Dinta in Morb. Acut., § 5 ; and Galen's Commentary,
pluries.



SECT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 77

injuries of the head here introduced^ much the same views are
advocated as in the work on that subject^ of which a trans*
lation is given in this volume. The treatment of callous ulcers^
as here laid down^ is deserving of great attention, " remove the
indurated parts by a septic medicine, and then produce reunion
of the parts.'' Every practical surgeon must recognise this as
a very sound and important rule of practice.

The treatment of suicidal mania appears singular : — '^ Oive
the patient a draught made from the root of mandrake, in a
smaller dose than will induce mania.'' He also, in like manner,
recommends mandragora in convulsions, applied by means of
fires lighted around the patient's bed. Pains of the head he
directs to be treated by opening the veins of the temples, or by
applying the cautery to them. He then insists, in strong
terms, that, under certain circumstances, purgatives will bind
the bowels, and astringents loosen them. And he further
makes the important remark that, although the general rule of
treatment be " contraria contrariis curantur," the opposite rule
also holds good in some cases, namely, '^similia similibus
curantur." It thus appears that the principles both of Allo-
pathy and Homceopathy are recognised by the author of this
treatise. In confirmation of the latter principle, he remarks
that the same substance which occasions strangury will also
sometimes cure it, and so also with cough. And further, he
acutely remarks, that warm water, which, when drunk, gene-
rally excites vomiting, will also sometimes put a stop to it by
removing its cause. He estimates successful and unsuccessful
practice according to the rule whether the treatment was rightly
planned or not ; for he argues what is done in ignorance cannot
be said to be correctly done, even if the results are favorable.
The work concludes with a short passage on the diseases of
women, all of which are said to be connected with the uterus.
We find here the first mention that is anywhere made of the
globus hystericus ; indeed, I do not remember to have met with
the term in any of the ancient medical works, with the excep-
tion of the Hippocratic treatises. He recommends fetid things
to be applied to the nose, and aromatic and soothing things to
the genital organs. The process of famigating the uterus is
fully described; and likewise suppositories and pessaries are
mentioned. In the treatment of uterine hemorrhage the rules



\



78 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

here laid down are most important. All heating things,
diuretics^ and purgatives are to be avoided; the foot of the
patient's bed is to be raised, and astringent pessaries are to be
introduced.

My own opinion of the work may now be given in a few
words. It undoubtedly contains much valuable matter, which
would be no discredit to Hippocrates, nor to any of the greatest
medical authorities, whether of ancient or modem times. I
desiderate in it, however, a proper unity of design, and think I
see too much of a speculative disposition to suit with the
character of the Coan sage. That it is to be referred to the
Cnidian school, as suggested by Gruner, seems doubtful ; for,
as we are informed by Hippocrates himself, the Cnidian phy-
sicians only gave the most obvious symptoms, while their practice
was very inert, consUting entirely of drastic purgatives, whey,
and milk, whereas in this work the diagnostic symptoms are
more profoundly stated than they are in most of the Hippo-
cratic treatises, and the practice, in many instances, is very
bold and decided. The knife, the actual cautery, the use of
strong purgatives and narcotics, are freely recommended in
various diseases. Altogether, then, although I would hesitate
to ascribe the present work to Hippocrates himself, I must
admit myself incUned rather to refer it to the Coan than the
Cnidian school. I see no proper data, however, for forming a
decided opinion on this head, more especially as we are but very
imperfectly acquainted with the tenets of the Cnidian school.^

XXV. Hepi rlyyri^ — On Art.

This treatise is sustained as genuine by Erotian, and even by
one of the older commentators, Heraclides of Tarentum, but it
is nowhere noticed by Galen, and Suidas would appear to refer
it to Hippocrates, the son of Gnosidicus.^ Mercuriali, Gruner,
Haller, Ackerman, Kiihn, and most of the modem authorities
hold it decidedly to be spurious. Foes and Zuinger, however, do

' The strongest argument in fayour of its being a production of the Cnidian
school is the mode of treating pneumonia here laid down, which certainly in so far
agrees with what Galen says of Cnidian practice in such cases, namely, that those
authorities omitted bleeding and purging. See Opera, tom. v, p. 87.

* See under 'I)rirocpari|c. The meaning of the passage, however, is somewhat
doubtful.



SECT. Ti.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 79

not object to its authenticity; and Littr^^ although he excludes
it from his list of the genuine works of Hippocrates^ admits that
it is very ancient^ and formed a portion of the Collection from
the commencement. To me it appears that it is written in too
subtle and abstract a style to admit the supposition of its being
the work of a practical physician like Hippocrates. Although
it contains a good deal of original thought^ there is not much
in it which would prove interesting to the medical reader of
the present day. It is an elaborate defence of the art of
medicine against the attacks of those who maintain that it is
no art at all, or one of an uncertain nature. According to the
author^s definition, the aim of the physician should be to
remove the pains of the sick, to blunt the intensity of diseases,
and not to interfere with those that are mastered by disease, as
knowing that medicine can be of no avail in such a case. In
conclusion, I shall merely remark that the evidence, both internal
and external, is against the supposition of its being genuine ;
but still there appears no good reason for doubting that it
emanated from the school of Cos.

XXVI. IIcpi SiaiTijc — On Regimen.

The evidence in favour of this large and interesting work,
unfortunately, is by no means strong. It is passed by unno-
ticed by Erotian, and Galen expresses himself, in general,
regarding the work in very equivocal terms, mentioning that
some had referred it to Euryphon, some to Phaon, others to
Philistion, and others, again, to Aristo.^ In other places, how-
eyer, he expresses himself less unfavorably as to the authenticity
of the last two books. Haller, Gruner, Ackerman, Kiihn, and,
in fact, nearly all the modern authorities, reject it.^ M. Littre,
although he agrees with them, remarks justly that the work is
one of great value, and exhibits many evident traces of confor-
mity with the writings which are truly Hippocratic.

The nature of the work is as follows : The first book is
altogether made up of abstract principles, which savour very
much of the dogmata of Heraclitus. Thus, the author of it
holds that there are in men, and in all other animals, two

> Comment, in Lib. Vict. Acut., i, p. 43 ; ed. Basil.

' Zutnger, however, stands up for its genuineness. Hippocratis Vigenti duo
Comment., &c., p. 386. He g^ves a most elaborate analysis of it.



80 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

principles^ different in power but consentaneous in use, namely,
fire and water ; that these together are sufficient for all others,
and for themselves; that the one contains the principle of
motion, and the other of nutrition ; that these give rise to the
separate existence of seeds and animals, of all varieties, shapes,
and characters ; that, in reality, none of those things which
exist either perish or are created, but they are altered by being
mixed together and separated from one another, but that men
suppose that the one passes from Hades to light, and the other
again from light to Hades. In a word, the contents of the
first book savour more of philosophy than of practical medicine.
For example, it is said, ^' The trainers of the athletse instruct
their pupils in this manner — ^to break the law according to law,
to commit injustice according to justice ; to deceive, to steal, to
rob, to commit violence, in the most elegant and disgracefiil
manner : he who cannot do these things is bad, he who can do
them is good ; which is a proof of the folly of the many who,
when they behold these things, decide that the one of these is
good and the others bad. Many wonder, but few are judges.
Men going to the market proceed thus : they deceive one
another in buying and selling, he who deceives most is admired.
They execute these things — they drink and become mad, they
run, they wrestle, they fight, they steal, they cheat ; the one is
preferred to all the others. Hypocrites and deceivers ! Before
the spectators they say one thing, and think another.^ The
same persons creep out, and they creep in not the same per-
sons ; to one man they say one thing, and do another; the same
person not always the same — sometimes he has one mind, and
sometimes another. In this manner all the arts have commu-
nion with human nature.^' All this is too fanciful and recondite
for the physician of whom Celsus says, '^primus ex omnibus
memoria dignis ab studio sapientiae disciplinam hanc separavit.''
It is clearly the production of a philosopher and not of a practical
physician, such as we know Hippocrates to have been. The latter
part of this book, however, is of a more practical nature, and
treats of many things relating to regimen and dietetics, such as
the arrangement of meals, of exercises, &c.

* These dreamy views of human life look very much like an anticipation of the
Fourierism of the present day. So true is the hackneyed saying, ** there is nothing
new under the sun ! "



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 81

The second book is a regular work on Dietetics^ and exhibits
this branch of medicine in a more advanced state than might
have been expected^ considering the time it was written.
After some preliminary observations on climate^ which bear
a great resemblance to those contained in the treatise 'On
Airs/ &;c.^ the author treats^ in a very scientific and methodical
manner^ of the various animal and vegetable substances which
are nsed as articles of food. It concludes with a discussion on
certain matters connected with regimen^ such as exercises^
baths^ sleep^ and so forth. Foes remarks that a great portion
of the opinions advanced by Celsus on the head of Dietetics is
borrowed from this book.

The third book treats again of various subjects connected
with Dietetics, such as exercises, the arrangement of meals, the
administration of emetics, the use of venery, and the like. It
is full of important matter, but looks like a distinct trea-
tise from the two preceding books, for one cannot conceive
that the author of one work would have twice resumed the
consideration of the same subjects. Le Clerc, with consider-
able appearance of reason, ascribes the book to Herodicus, the
master of Hippocrates in the gymnastic art.^

Altogether, the work is one of the highest importance in medi-
cal literatiure, whether we ascribe it to Hippocrates or not. On
this point the evidence, both external and internal, we have seen
to be very inconclusive. The most probable conclusion that can
be drawn regarding it is, that the work is a compilation of
important documents from a variety of sources, but who the
compiler was, whether Hippocrates or one of his successors
cannot be determined.'

XXVII. n«pi iwirviiov — On Dreams.

This little work is generally admitted to be a continuation of
the preceding one, and consequently stands npon much the

> Hist, de la M^., i, iii, 13.

' Hippocrates, in his treatise ' On Diet in Acute Diseases/ says decidedljr that the
ancients — ^that is to say, his predecessors — ^had written nothing of any value on the
subject of Dietetics ($ 1). From this we may infer that the present work was not
known in his days ; for it can scarcely be supposed that he would have spoken so
dispangingly of it.

6



82 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

same grounds as regards its authorship.^ As Le Clerc and
Oruner have well remarked, it is written with much acumen,
and evinces great freedom of spirit, and exemption from popular
errors and superstitions. It commences in the following strain :
'' He who forms a correct judgment of those signs which occur in
sleep, will find that they have a great efficacy in all respects ;
for the mind is awake when it ministers to the body, being
distributed over many parts ; it is not then master of itself,
but imparts a certain portion of its influence to every part of
the body, namely, to the senses, to the hearing, seeing, touch,
walking, acting, and to the whole management of the body,
and therefore its cogitations are not then in its own power.
But when the body is at rest, the soul, being in a state of
movement, steals over the organs of the body, manages its own
abode, and itself performs all the actions of the body; for the
body, being asleep, does not perceive, but the soul, being
awake, beholds what is visible, hears what is audible, walks,
touches, is grieved, reflects, and, in a word, whatever the offices
of the soul or body are, all these the sotd performs in sleep.'
Whoever, then, knows how to judge of these correctly, will
find it a great part of wisdom. But with regard to such dreams
as are divine, and prognosticate something, either good or evil,
to cities, or to a particular people, there are persons who have
the art of judging of them accurately, without falling into mis-
takes. But such affections of the body as the soul prognosti-
cates, namely, such as are connected with repletion and
evacuation, from the excess of customary things or the change of
unusual things, on these also persons pronounce judgment, and
sometimes they succeed, and sometimes they err, and under-
stand neither how this happens, that is to say, how it comes
that sometimes they are right, and sometimes they fall into
mistakes ; but warning people to be upon their guard lest some
mischief befall them, they do not instruct them how to guard
themselves, but direct them to pray to the gods ; and to offer
up prayers is no doubt becoming and good, but while praying

' Galen quotes it aa a portion of the work on Diet. See Opera, torn, v, p. 377 ;
ed. BaaiL

' This idea is well explained and enlarged upon by Alexander Aphrodisiensis. — ProbL
i, 118. This writer must not be confounded with the commentator on Aristotle.



SECT, n.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 83

to the gods a man ought also to ase his own exertions. With
regard to these^ then^ the matter stands thus : Such dreams as
represent at night a man's actions through the day, and exhibit
them in the manner in which they occurred, namely, as per-
formed and justly deliberated, these are good to a man, and
prognosticate health, inasmuch as the soul perseyeres in its
diurnal cogitations, and is not weighed down by any repletion,
evacuation, or any other external accident. But when the
dreams are the very opposite to the actions of the day, and
when there is a conflict between them — ^when this happens, I
say, it indicates a disorder in the body ; when the contrast is
great, the evil is great, and when the one is small, the other is
small also." For the cure of this state, as being connected
with repletion, he recommends evacuation by vomiting, active
exercise, and a restricted diet. The author of the treatise pro-
ceeds to state the signification of dreams which relate to the
sun, moon, and stars, of which the last are said to be connected
with the external parts of the body, the sun with the middle,
and the moon with the cavities. This is the nearest approach
to alchemy which I have met with in the works of any of the
ancient physicians. But I must not proceed much further
with my extracts from this work, which there is no reason to
suppose a genuine production of Hippocrates, and the substance
of which would not much interest the general reader nowa-
days, when the interpretation of dreams has been entirely
abandoned by the profession. The work concludes as follows:
'^ He who observes these rules as laid down by us will be
healthy through life. . . . The regimen, also, as far as it was
possible for a man to find it out with the assistance of the gods,
has been expounded by me.'' This looks like the conclusion of
a lai^ work, and gives probability to the supposition that this
treatise originally formed a part of the work ' On Diet/ as
stated above.^

It would appear that this work, although little regarded
now, was highly esteemed two himdred years ago, for we find
that the celebrated Julius Caesar Scaliger wrote an elaborate
commentary on it.* On the ' Oneirocritica,' see further Vander

> Zainger points out a striking mark of the connexion between it and the work
On Diet:' op. sap. land. p. 549.
' Amstel., 1658.



84 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

Linden^ ' Manuductio ad Medicinam/ who refers to this treatise
of Hippocrates^ and also to the works of Scaliger^ Ferrer, and
Cardanus on the same subject. The only other ancient writers
on this subject which have come down to us are Artemidorus,
Achmet, Astrampsychus, and Nicephorus.^ The work of
Artemidorus is an elaborate production on the interpretation of
all sorts of dreams ; and to the sober judgment of the present
generation it cannot but be regarded as a memorable instance
of the misapplication of himian intellect and industry. The
whole subject of the ' Oneirocritica/ however, may well deserve
the serious consideration of the most learned philosopher, as
affording a most striking and lamentable proof how prone men,
even of cultivated minds, are to view things exactly in the light
in which they fancy them to exist. This truth is most strik-
ingly illustrated by the work of Artemidorus, who first gives
the theory, as it were, of dreams, and in the last book relates
particular instances in confirmation of the principles previously
laid down by him. No one, assuredly, can rise from the perusal
of such a work without being strongly impressed with the great
truth embodied in our author's first aphorism, " Experience is
fallacious, and decision is difficult." The ' Oneirocritica' of
Achmet is the work of an Arabian, and is interesting as con-
taining all the superstitious notions of the Orientals, that is to
say, of the Persians, Egyptians, and Indians, on this subject.
Allusion is also made to the dreams recorded in the Jewish
Scripture. The author sets out with declaring that, from the
interpretation of dreams, one may acquire a certain foreknow-
ledge of all the casualties of life, namely, of life or death, of
poverty or riches, of disease or health, of joy or sorrow, of
victory over one's enemies or defeat, and this with £ar greater
accuracy than from astronomy (astrology ?), for that astrono-
mers differed much in opinion among themselves, whereas about
the interpretation of dreams there could be no doubt ! I

The following list of writers on the ' Oneirocritica' previous
to Artemidorus will show the attention which had been paid to
this subject in very early times : Artemon Milesius, Antiphon,
Apollodorus Tellmissensis, Apollonius Atalensis, Aristander
Telmissensis, Aristarchus, Alexander Myndius, Cratippus,
Demetrius Phalereus, Dionysius Rhodius, Epicharmus,

> Oneirocritica, &c. Lutetic, 1603.



mmm



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 85

Geminos Tyria8> Hermippua, Nicostratus Ephesius, Pboebus
Antiochenus^ Pbiloclionis^ Panyasis Halicamessensis^ Serapion^
Strabo. Mighty names once on a day ! Now they are but
" the dream of a shadow l"^

XXVIII. IIcpl iraOwv — On Affections.

This treatise being passed over in silence by Erotian^ and
rejected as unworthy of Hippocrates by Galen^ although he
acknowledges that it contains many fine things,^ has been
generally regarded as spurious by modem critics^ as for
example^ Foes, Haller, Gruner, Ackerman, Littr^, Greenhill,
and others. The work is carefully written^ but seemingly
without a plan^ or any well-defined object. It touches, in
general terms, on most of the diseases to which the human
body is subject, and concludes with some general observations
on regimen. All diseases are said to be derived from phlegm
or bile. This seems very unlike the etiology of diseases as laid
down in the true Hippocratic treatises. Pleurisy is to be
treated by purgatives and soothing applications, but without
any mention of bleeding. The termination of the disease in
empyema is described. The symptoms of pneumonia are also
given in brief but striking terms. The sputa, at first, are said
to consist of phlegm, and are thick and pure, but on the sixth
and seventh day they become somewhat bilious and sublivid.
This disease is also said to terminate in empyema. Some of
the general observations contained in this work are deserving of
attention. Of all diseases the acute are the most painful and
the most fatal, and they require the greatest care and the most
accurate treatment. No additional mischief should, at aU
events, be inflicted by the physician, but he must do the patient
as much good as lies in his power ; and if the physician treats
the case properly, and the patient sinks under the weight of
the disease, it will not be the physician's fault ; but if, while
the physician does not treat nor understand the disease properly,
the patient fall a victim to the disease, the physician will then
be to blame. In treating ileus, when a clyster fails to relieve
the bowels, they are to be inflated by means of a bladder
attached to a pipe, and then the pipe is to be removed, and

' Siciac ov<ip AvOpwiroi. Pind. Pyth., viii.
^ Comment, in Ldbr. de Ditet Acat., i.



86 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

a clyster immediately injected^ in which case^ if the bowels
admit the clyster, they will be opened^ and the patient will
recover, but if otherwise, he will die, especially on the seventh
day. The treatise further contains some very interesting
remarks on the causes and varieties of dropsy. When the water
is not otherwise removed, an incision is to be made either at
the navel, or behind at the loins. It deserves to be mentioned
that, in this treatise, there are frequent references to a work of
the author's ' On Medicines.' Whether it was the same as the
treatise bearing that title which we possess cannot be deter-
mined. In the course of the work, the use of the cautery is
freely recommended for the cure of diseases.

From the account which we have given of this treatise, and
the paucity of evidence in favour of its genuineness^ it will
readily be understood that we have no hesitation in deciding
that it is not one of the genuine productions of Hippocrates.

XXIX. Uipi rcuv ivroq 1^a0all^— On Internal Affections,

This treatise has but little ancient authority in support of it.
Erotian has omitted it in his list of the works of Hippocrates ;
Palladius does not mention it ; and Gralen notices it in a con*
fused manner under a variety of titles.^ Foes^ Schulze^ and
others, have referred it to the Cnidian school ; and if this point
could be made out satisfactorily, it would give the treatise a
remarkable degree of interest, as furnishing us with a key to
the opinions of one of the oldest sects in medicine. That the
reader may be enabled to form his own opinion in this matter^
we will now give a brief outline of its contents.

The work commences with a short description of haemoptysis,
which is said to originate either in ulceration or rupture of an
artery of the lungs, the ordinary causes of which are held to
be severe exercise, falls, blows, violent vomiting, or fevers.
The symptoms are pretty well described, and a mild system of
treatment recommended. Inflammation of the lungs is said
to be produced principally by drinking wine, and an immoderate
indulgence in eating mullets and eels. The treatment at first
is like what we have described the Cnidian system to have
been, consisting of milk, emetics, and purges ; but if these

' Tom. V, pp. 306, 614, &c. ; ed. Basil.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 87

do not answer^ the actual cautery is to be applied to the breast.
Erysipelas of the lungs is described in much the same terms as
at ' De Morbis/ i, 13 ; ii, 53.^ A correct description is given
of empyema as connected with tubercle of the side, for which
draughts are recommended, with broth made from poppies, &c.
When matter forms, it is to be let out either by the knife or
the cautery.' Three species of phthisis are described, the first
being derived from phlegm, the second from violent labour,
and the third being the tabes dorsalis. The treatment in all
these affections appears to be very empirical, and unlike the
usual therapeutics of Hippocrates. Four diseases of the kidneys
are described, of which the first is calculus, and the second
abscess, in which case the writer recommends an indsion to
be made, in order to furnish an outlet to the pus. Now, it is
deserving of remark, that, of all the ancient authorities which
have come down to us, Buffus Ephesius would appear to be the
only other author who makes mention of this practice.' The
author of the treatise states, that if the matter of the abscess
find vent by the intestinum rectum the patient may recover.
The disease altogether, he adds, is troublesome, and in many
cases ends in renal tabes. He most probably here alludes to
what is now called Bright's disease. From disease of the
kidneys is said to arise an affection of the vense cavse, which
run from the head near the jugulars, along the spine to the
malleolus externus. He says it originates in bile and phlegm
which collect in the veins. Varices, I suppose, are here meant
to be described. If not cured by purging with hellebore and
scammony, the actual cautery is to be applied at the shoulders,
below the scapulae, at the hip-joint, at the middle of the thigh,
above the knee, and at the ankle. Now it is deserving of
notice, that this disease is not mentioned by subsequent authors
on medicine, so that we are warranted in concluding that the
treatise was not looked upon by them as being a production of
the Great Hippocrates ; for if it had been so regarded, we are

■ See the Syd. Soc. edition of Pavlub i£oiMBTA, Vol. I, p. 264.

3 Galen, by the way, mentions that Euryphon, the celebrated Cnidian physician
in the days of Hippocrates, was in the practice of treating empyema with the actual
caotery. — Comment, in Aphor., yU, 44. This is a strong confirmation of the opinion
that this treatise must have emanated from the Cnidian school.

' See the Syd. Soc. edition of Paulus iEoiNSTA, VoL I, p. 354.



88 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

sore that Gralen^ Aretseus^ Celsus^ and all the worthies of the
Arabian school, would not have overlooked this description.
And^ moreover^ the description of the disease firom first to last
is vague and prolix^ being the very reverse of that graphic style
of delineation which we find in the genuine works of Hippo-
crates : and yet the work contains other matters of a difierent
stamp. For example, treating of dropsy, the author says it is
sometimes connected with tubercles of the lungs^ which get
filled with water, and burst into the chest. In proof of this^ he
appeals to observations on cattle, sheep, and swine, which are
said to be very subject to these tubercles (phymata) ; and he
argues that men are still more liable to them. And in many
cases, he adds, empyema originates in tubercles. In that case,
when the collection protrudes externally, he directs that an
opening should be made in it; but if not, he directs the patient
to be shaken by the shoulders, when the sound of the fluid
within will be heard. When the side in which the greater
collection is situated has been ascertained, he recommends us
to cut down to the third rib from the last, and then make a
perforation with a trocar^ {rpwavtf rpvyXnriipitf), so as to give
vent to a small portion of the fluid ; the opening is then to be
filled with a tent, and the remainder evacuated after twelve
days. Four species of icterus are described : these would ap-
pear to be febrile aflections. Five varieties of typhus are next
noticed in rather vague terms ; there can be little doubt that
they were all cases of remittent fever. Several varieties of a
disease which is called morbus crassus are described with much
prolixity, and so vaguely, as not to convey to us a distinct idea
of the disease. He says of two of the varieties, that they last
for six years. Unless these were varieties of elephantiasis (and
we have no evidence of its existence so early), I am at a loss
to comprehend what disease is alluded to. The treatise con-
cludes with an account of three species of tetanus.

From the analysis now given of its contents, it will be
readily seen that this work aboimds in interesting matter, but

' I presume it was the rib itself that was perforated, and not the intercostal
space. The term rpviravov was generally applied to the trepan. The epithet
rpvyXriTripiov, or, as Foes proposes to read it, rpuXoSvrtifnov, is probably derived
from TpbtyXtii a hole, and Svw, to penetrate ; joined together, they would signify a
trepan for boring holes.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 89

ibaiy at the same time, it is dearly of a di£ferent stamp from
what we find in the genuine works of Hippocrates, nay, that
in all probability it does not belong to the Coan school. In
conclusion, I have, then, to state that I think the presumption
of its being a production of the Cnidian school is very strong.

XXX. Hep I vouffcot' — On Diseases.

A work with this title is cited by Erotian, Caelius Aurelianus,^
and by Galen,^ but so confusedly that we must come to the
conclusion regarding these Books, that the ancient authority
in support of their genuineness is by no means satisfactory.
Galen evidently inclines to the opinion of Dioscorides the
Commentator, that the Second Book is the work of the younger
Hippocrates, that is to say, of a grandson of our author.
Almost all the modem authorities, as, for example. Foes, Haller,
Ackerman, Gruner, and Littr^, concur in rejecting the whole
four as spurious. The Fourth Book in particular is separated
by M. Littr^ from the other three, as being a portion of the
work ' On the Diseases of Women,' rather than of the work
' On Diseases.' We shall be better enabled to speak decidedly
on this and the other questions regarding the authenticity of
these books, when we have examined the nature of their con-
tents.

After a very striking exordium, in which it is stated that
the first object of him who turns his attention to the healing
art should be to consider the causes of disease, and the natural
tendencies of every one of them, that is to say, of their dis-
positions to death, or to loss of parts, the author proceeds to
deliver his doctrine as to the causes of them, which he assumes
to be either internal, namely, bile and phlegm; or external,
such as labour, wounds, and excess in heat, cold, dryness, and
humidity. The following accidents are said to be mortal : a
wound of the brain, of the spinal marrow, of the liver, of the
diaphragm, of the bladder, of a large blood-vessel, or of the
heart. He ranks the following as fatal diseases: phthisis,
dropsy, and, when they attack a pregnant woman, pneumonia,
causus, pleurisy, phrenitis, and erysipelas of the womb. The
issue of the following is set down as doubtful in ordinary cir-
cumstances: pneumonia, causus, phrenitis, pleuritis, quinsy,

' Morb. Acut., iii, 17. * De Humor., Comment, in VI Epidem.



90 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

enlargement of the uvula^ hepatitis^ splenitis^ nephritis^ dysen-
tery^ menorrbagia. The following are not deadly : chronic
defluxions on the joints (iccS^ara)^ melancholy^ gont, ischiatic
disease^ tenesmus, quartan and tertian fevers, strangury, oph-
thalmy, leprosy, lichen, arthritis; yet even from these patients
often become maimed in particular members, such as in the
limbs from arthritis, or in the eyes from ophthalmy. Diseases
also have a tendency to pass into one another, as, for example,
pleurisy into causus, phrenitis into pneumonia, tenesmus into
dysentery, and Uentery; and pleurisy, and pneumonia into* em-
pyema. He makes 7he foUowing oirious observations on the
awkward mistakes which a physician may commit in the prac-
tice of his profession : not to know when there is matter in an
abscess or tubercle ; not to ascertain the existence of fractures
or dislocations; having probed the head in case of injury
thereof, not to ascertain that there is a fracture of the skull ;
not to be able to introduce an instrument into the bladder, nor
to be able to ascertain whether there is a stone in it or not ;
in the case of empyema, not to ascertain the existence of matter
by succussion; and in using the knife or cautery, to apply
either of them to too great or too small an extent. The
treatise also contains many other general observations, which
are very ingeniously stated, as, for example, the following
enumeration of the untoward accidents which may occur to a
medical practitioner : Having administered an emetic for the
purpose of evacuating bile or phlegm upwards, to induce rup-
ture of a vessel by the act of vomiting, although the patient
had previously been sensible of no pain in the region ; having
given an emetic to a woman with child, to induce abortion in
consequence ; in curing empyema, when looseness of the bowels
is superinduced, and cuts off the patient ; in applying an oint-
ment for a disease of the eyes, when acute pains supervene,
which end either in rupture of the eye or amaurosis, the phy-
sician in such a case gets the blame for having applied the
ointment ; and when a physician gives anything to a woman
in labour on account of pains in the bowels, and the woman
gets worse or dies, the physician incurs censure. And in
diseases and injuries, when there is a necessary succession of
bad symptoms, the physician gets the blame, as men do not
perceive that the aggravation of the symptoms is a necessary



J



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 91

consequence of the nature of the disease. And if a physician
visits a patient in fever^ or who has met with an injury^ and
if the patient gets worse after the first medicine that is ad-
ministered^ the physician is blamed ; whereas he does not get
the same amount of credit if the patient improves^ as the
amendment is attributed to the nature of the case. This book
contains what I believe is the most circumstantial detail of the
phenomena of empyema that is to be met with in any ancient
work on medicine. The author ascribes the disease principally
to three causes : to the termination of pneumonia^ to a de-
fluxion from the head^ and to the consequences of a ruptured
vessel. Whoever is acquainted with the modem literature of
the subject^ or possesses a practical knowledge of the disease,
will not fail, from the accompanying description of the last of
these, to recognise a case of cavity of the lungs produced by
the ulceration of tubercles. True empyema, however, as the
result of chronic inflammation, is also described in distinct
terms. The never-failing test by suocussion is constantly ad-
verted to in these cases. Distinct mention is also made of the
rdle, by which the existence of matter in the lungs is ascer-
tained. Allusion is probably made here to the well-known
gurgling sound produced by matter in a cavity. There is a
good deal of other important matters in this book, but these
my necessary limits oblige me to pass over unnoticed. I shall
merely allude to the distinct mention which is made of ruptures,
by which was meant a severe sprain or other injury ending in
suppuration, or protracted pains in the part. Fever is said to
be formed in this manner : when bile or phlegm is heated, the
whole of the body is heated, and they are heated either by
internal things, such as food or drink, or by external, such
as labour, wounds, excess of heat or cold ; also from the sight
or hearing, but rarely from these. In the treatment of pneu-
monia, venesection i^ the ann is recommended. Altogether
this book contains much valuable matter, but mixed up with
hypothesis in a way not usually met with in the genuine works
of Hippocrates.

The second book, at the very commencement, betrays a
strong disposition to diagnosis. Eight diseases at the head are
described, but in such terms that we fail to recognise the dis-
tinguishing features of each. Besides these, a little way further



92 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

on tbe author describes several other diseases of the head^ in-
cluding hydrocephalus^ the symptoms of which are given with
great precision, namely, acute pain about the bregma and
temples, alternate rigor and fever, impairment of the sights
double vision, vertigo, &c. He recommends errhines, purga-
tives, and even trepanning of the skull. Even of this disease
several varieties are described in very striking terms ; so that
for once at least we are tempted to question the correctness
of the judgment which Hippocrates pronounced against the
rival school of Cnidos, for cultivating diagnosis to an undue
extent.

Several varieties of quinsy are likewise described, including
various diseases of the parts about the fauces, and among them
the disease named hypoglotiis, by which appears to be meant
an abscess below the tongue, attended with swelling of that
organ. Five varieties of polypus nasi are next described, and
suitable plans of treatment recommended, namely, with the
ligature, the knife, and the cautery. Pleurisy and pneumonia
are described, and their termination in empyema, the symptoms
of which are circumstantially described again ; and, moreover,
three varieties of it are noticed. Here, again, we find mention
made of the diagnostic method, by succussion, and a recom-
mendation of the operation o{ paracentesis thoracis, to evacuate
the fluid. Next are described several varieties of phthisis, in-
cluding the tabes dorsalis, of which a curious description is
given. An interesting account is also given of spermatorrhcea.
The treatment consists in abstinence from immoderate drinking,
venery, and excessive exercises, except walking, for a year,
avoiding cold and the sun, and taking the tepid bath. The
description of the varieties of pulmonic disease is most interest-
ing, although some of them are not sufficiently well defined.
Hydrothorax is also described, and paracentesis recommended
in the treatment of it. After describing lethargy, which was
clearly a species of remittent fever, he gives descriptions of cer-
tain diseases, under the names of morbus resiccatori/us [avavrrt),
Febris mortifera, Lividw morbus, morbus ructus dens, and
morbus pituitosus. No one can fail to recognise in these de-
scriptions the spirit of the Cnidian school of medicine, and one
very dififerent from that of Hippocrates. Indeed we have
positive authority for referring this work to the Cnidian school.



SBCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 93

for Galen assigns the description of the morbus lividus to the
Cnidian physician Enryphon.^ The author describes a singular
species of melancholy^ which^ he says^ is sometimes epidemic
in spring ; he calls it cura, morbus gravis. It appears to have
been a variety of the lycanthropia. See Paulus ^Egineta,!!!, 16.
The book concludes with a description of two species of mekena^
and of sphacelotes, the latter being a variety of the other. Now
what strikes one in going over this book is^ that it cannot be
a portion of the same work as the First Book^ for we cannot
conceive it probable that an author would have treated twice
of the very same subjects in one work. Moreover, as we have
statedj there are evidently many things in it which are not at
all in accordance with the principles of the Coan school.

In the third book very much the same ground is again gone
over as in the two preceding books. In the first place, diseases
of the head are described under the names of tumor cerebri,
plenitudo cerebri dolorem in/erens, sydere icti, sphacelismus, fe-
tharffus (then intervenes a brief account otFebris ardens, quite
out of place), of dolor capitis, and phrenitis. Afterwards comes
a description of cynanche, and paracynanche, next of icterus,
and afterwards of tetanus, for the cure of which the author
recommends the cold affusion. (On the merits and demerits
of this practice, see the English edition of Paulus ^Egineta,
III, 20.) For ileus, as in a preceding book, among other modes
of treatment, it is directed to inflate the bowels by means of a
pipe and bladder, and then to evacuate their contents with a
clyster. Afterwards, pneumonia and pleurisy are most circum-
stantially described, and the treatment of them laid down with
a degree of prolixity very unlike the usual manner of Hippocrates.
Thus, to promote the expectoration in pleurisy, he recommends
the flos eeiis, assafoetida, trefoil, pepper, &c.' I am not aware
that any other ancient authority recommends these medicines
for the cure of this disease. The symptoms and diagnosis of
empyema as the consequence of pleurisy, are given in much the
same terms as in the preceding book. Succussion is particularly
alluded to. For empyema, burning and incision are recom-

* Opera, torn, v, p. 456 ; ed. Basil.

' The silphium, indeed, is mentioned among the remedies for this case in the
treatise ' On Regimen in Acute Diseases' (7), but not the other articles.



94 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

mended. In performing paracentesis, he forbids all the matter
to be evacuated at once. Altogether, a perusal of this book
leads me to the positive inference that it is not the production
of the same author as the two preceding books ; for what could
induce the author to go over the same ground three different
times in one work ?

The fourth book is manifestly the production of a different
author from the others, indeed, as appears evident from the
conclusion of the work, it is continuous with the treatise ' On
the Nature of Women.' It commences with an elaborate dis-
cussion on the four humom's, blood, phlegm, water, and bile,
from which all diseases are said to derive their origin. The
whole book is tinged with the exposition of this doctrine ; indeed
all the contents of it are for the most part hTpothetica], and
very unlike the matter contained in the genuine compositions
of Hippocrates. From first to last there is no well-defined
description of disease in it. The observations on lumbrici and
calculus are the portions of it which command the greatest
interest.

I shall now briefly recapitulate the conclusions which I am
prepared to draw from a careful examination of the contents of
this work. 1. As the same diseases, for example, pleurisy,
pneumonia, and empyema, are all circumstantially treated of in
each of the first three books, it is impossible to suppose them all
portions of the same work, or even the productions of the same
author. 2. In the fourth a different hypothesis is advanced
from that which is laid down in the first, and from this cir-
cumstance, joined to many other considerations already enume-
rated, there can be no doubt that it is the production of an
entirely different author. 8. Although all parts of these books
contain abundance of valuable materials, many of the principles
and rules of practice which are developed in them are not akin to
those of Hippocrates, but rather savour of the Cnidian school,
which trusted too much to a fanciful diagnosis, instead of culti-
vating prognosis as the basis of its system, like the school of
Hippocrates and his followers. 4. The internal evidence in the
present instance against their genuineness, more than counter-
balances the small amount of ancient authority which there is in
support of these books.



8BCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 95

XXXI. Ilepi iirrafiiivov — On the Seven Months' Birth.

XXXII. Iltpi oicra/iifVov — On the Eighth Months* Birth.

Although the genuineness of these two works is admitted by
Galen^ and by Foes/ they are not looked upon as the produc-
tions of Hippocrates by almost any other of the authorities^
whether ancient or modem, and in particular, Palladius, Acker-
man, Gruner, Littre, and Greenhill reject them. Yet all admit
them to be of very high antiquity, so that, in this respect, they
are not destitute of considerable interest. The contents of
them are altogether of a philosophical nature, and such as we
might expect the school of Democritus to produce. The author
of them holds that foetuses born at the seventh month survive,
but not those of the eighth. It is clear that he was imbued
with the Pythagorean notions regarding the mystical power of
the number seven.^ Altogether, the style and matter of these
treatises do not appear to me to accord well with the spirit
which prevails in the true Hippocratic works, but at the same
time it must be admitted that the preponderance of authority
for or against their authenticity is not decided.^

XXXIII. 'ETTiSij/ioJv, /y, S', i, c , I'—The 2rf, 4/A, 5th, 6th, and

7th Books of the Epidemics.

With the exception of Erotian, who admits the whole of the
seven books of Epidemics into his list of the works of Hippo-
cratesj I am not aware that any of the authorities, ancient or
modem, recognise them as genuine. Galen says that the
seventh is allowed by all to be spurious ; that the fifth is the
work of Hippocrates, the son of Draco, that is to say, of a
grandson of the great Hippocrates ; and that the second, fourth,
and sixth were held by some to be the productions of a son of
Hippocrates, and by some they were looked upon as having
been written, indeed, by Hippocrates himself, but merely as
notes or commentaries. Galen himself inclines to the opinion
that these four books are the production of Thessalus, the son
of Hippocrates.^

' Ad Bpidem., yi, 6, 27. * Hippocrat. Opera, i, p. 318.

* The opinions on this subject aie given Tcry fuUy by Aulus GelUus. Noctes
Atticie, iii, 10.

* I should mention that Zuinger pronounces, without the slightest hesitation, in
favour of their genuineness : op. sup. laud. pp. 188, 199.

* De Difficult. Respir., ii, 8 ; ibid., iii, 1.



96 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

From what has been stated respecting these books^ it will be
clearly seen that, although there is no reason whatever to sup-
pose they were published by Hippocrates^ it is^ at the same
time^ highly probable that he had something to do with the
composition of them^ and that, at all events, they emanated
from the school upon which his name has cast so much
splendour. I think myself, therefore, called upon to give a
condensed view of their contents; and in doing so, I shall not
scruple to avail myself of the very important annotations made
on them by M. Littr^, in his recent edition of this portion of
the Hippocratic treatises.

With regard to these books, in general, he observes that
they are naturally divided into two groups, the one containing
the second, fourth, and sixth books, and the other the fifth and
seventh. The correctness of this division is quite evident from
a comparison of the contents of the different books, and, to a
certain extent, it is recognised by Oalen.^

As to the locality of these observations, M. Littr^ shows that
the spot of their greatest activity is Thessaly and Thrace,
although mention of Athens, and of certain cities of the
Peloponnesus occasionally occurs. He traces with much
minuteness the connexion of these books with the other works
in the Hippocratic Collection. For example, he shows the
connexion between those in the first group, with the 'Aphorisms,'
in particular, but also with the treatises, 'On Airs,' &;c.,
' The Mochlicus,' ' The Surgery,' &c., and of those in the
other group, with the work 'On Wounds of the Head' in
particular. I will now offer a few remarks on the contents of
each of these books.

M. Littre, in his argument prefixed to the second book,
treats of various matters contained in it, the most interesting
of which is his elaborate disquisition on the nature of the
carbuncles (av0paiccc) described in his book, during the course
of which he brings into review various collateral passages from
the works of subsequent authors, and discusses the question at
considerable length whether or not they apply to smallpox.
I am free to admit that it would have been to my advantage
if I had seen this part of the writings of M. Littr^ before

' Comm. Epid., vi, 2, 15.



SBCT. II.] HIPPOGRATIC TREATISES. 97

pUing my commentary on Paulus ^Eoineta^ B. IV, 25. I
most be permitted to say, however, that I see no reason for
changing my opinions with regard to the anthrax of the Greek
writers on medicine. I certainly cannot agree with M. Theod.
Kauser, in setting down the ancient descriptions of the anthrax
and plague (Xoi/uoc) as applying to the smallpox. Having
diligently studied the minute descriptions which the ancient
medical authors give of the dififerent varieties of cutaneous
disease, I am confident that if the smallpox had actually
existed in their days, they would not have passed over the
disease with a vague and casual notice, but would have given
us such a sketch of its appearances that no one could have
failed to recognise its features. The carbuncles, then, which
are incidentally mentioned by Hippocrates at the beginning of
this book, I am disposed to look upon as one of those anoma-
lous phases of disease which are every now and then making
their appearance, and I cannot persuade myself that they had
anything to do with smallpox.

Among the important matters contained in this book may be
noticed the remarks on deposits, an interesting subject, often
alluded to in the Hippocratic treatises, § 7. At § 22 a case is
obscurely noticed, which M. Littr^ concludes, but upon very
slight grounds, to have been a case of purulent infection. At
§ 24 spontaneous luxation of the cervical vertebrae is described, as
M. Littre, in his argument, remarks, with admirable judgment.
It is also alluded to at * Aphoris.' iii, 26, and ' De Articulis,'
torn, iv, p. 179, ed. Littre. This affection, which came afterwards
to be overlooked, has been redescribed of late years. In the
third section there is given an interesting account of causus,
the remittent fever of hot climates, so admirably described
afterwards by Aretaeus. The fourth section is occupied with a
description of the veins of the body, which is certainly con-
fused, and yet we find in it the distinction between the nature
of the arteries and veins clearly pointed out. It is curious,
moreover, that Galen, in one place, stands up for this part as
being genuine and accurate.^ See also b. v, § 46. The last
two sections treat professedly of physiognomy, but contain
other detached and unconnected observations on medical sub-

' Opera, torn, v, p. 24 ; ed. Basil.



98 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

jects. Altogether^ the impression which a careful perusal of
this book conveys to one is^ that it is a compilation of the most
incongruous matters^ strung together without any plan ; but^
at the same time^ one cannot fail to detect in it traces of no
contemptible talent for observation and description.

The fourth book^ of the whole number, is the one which is
written with the least unity of design. Yet, as M. Littre
remarks, it is interesting as containing the history of an epide-
mical causus, complicated with jaimdice and ophthalmia, which
would appear to have been very similar to the febrile epidemic
which prevailed in Scotland a few years ago. With this
opinion I entirely acquiesce, after having had a good deal of
experience in the treatment of that epidemic. It was decidedly
of the remittent type, was frequently accompanied with jaun-
dice, and the patients were very subject to relapses and affections
of the eyes.^ For Hippocrates's description of it see tom. v,
p. 169, ed. Littre. M. Littre also makes the important remark
that, of late years, proper attention has not been paid to the
state of the urine at the epoch of a crisis in fevers. He mentions
that M. Martin Solon holds that, at the resolution of diseases,
the urine is apt to become albimiinous ; but that^ in a true
crisis, the precipitate is generally composed of urate of ammonia.
M. Zimmerman found the urinary deposit composed of the urate
of ammonia, with the triple phosphates and the crystals of uric
acid. Certain observations on this critical deposit occur in this
book of the Epidemics, but they are met with more frequently
and more distinctly expressed in the genuine books, I mean
the first and third. It appears to me most remarkable that the
important observations made by Hippocrates on the state of the
urine in febrile diseases should have been lost sight of in an age
when the chemical characters of the urine have been so much
studied ; for I am fully satisfied, from my own practical acquaint-
ance with fevers, that in most cases the febrile crisis is marked by
a copious sediment in the urine. An interesting case of empyema,
which was treated by the cautery, is related at § 4. A case is
related at § 19 of a singular affection of the mouth in two children^

* See a series of papers in illustration of it, published in the Medical Gazette for
the year 1847, by Dr. Wardel. On one point I cannot agree with this writer; be
says, the fever was of a continued character, whereas in all the cases which I met
with it was decidedly remittent.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 99

attended with necrosis and exfoliation of the bones. At § 39
there is a case of metastasis of purulent matter from the hand
to the lungs. At § 11 a case is related of a child who sus-
tained an injury in the head from another child, was tre-
panned^ and died on the twenty-fourth day. We shall see in
the work ' On Injuries of the Head' that the ancients were very
free in the application of the trepan to the skull. Cases of
nyctalopia are alluded to at § 52, and at § 58 a case is related
of mania supervening on the cure of hemorrhoids. But^ upon
the whole, the most interesting part of this book is that which
contains the narratives of febrile cases, and the remarks on
relapses, § 28.

Though the fifth and seventh books of the Epidemics are
pronounced by Galen to be unworthy of the Great Hippocrates,
they contain detached observations of much interest, insomuch
that Haller was almost disposed to admit the genuineness of
the fifth. Lemos and Mercuriali, on the other hand, hold
them to be wholly removed from all connexion with the genuine
remains of Hippocrates. It is remarkable, however, that the
fifth is referred to by CelsuS,^ Quintilian,^ and Plutarch.*
This, in fact, is the book which contains the memorable passage
in which the author admits, that in a case of injury of the
head he mistook a fracture for a suture of the skuU,^ and for
this candid admission Hippocrates is highly lauded by the authors
we have just quoted. The Hippocratic treatises also contain
many other instances in which the author admits having com-
mitted mistakes. How much might the medical art not have
advanced before this time, if the example thus set of recording
for the benefit of posterity, the mistakes which one commits
had been more generally followed ?^ The first paragraph con-

» VHI, 4. » Institut., Orat. iii.

» Dc Perfect, in Virt. * § 27.

* It cannot but appear singular that so distinguished a person as Robert Boyle
should have found fault with Hippocrates for relating so many cases of which the
issue was fatal. He says, " Revera penes me non parum Hippocratis auctoritate de-
cedit, quod in scriptis suis tot sgrotorum epiphonema ipsos mortuoa esse legerem.'* —
£xer. V, de Utilitate Philosoph. Exper., p. 192. On the other hand, Mart. Lister
justly defends Hippocrates : "A me sane absit ilia quorundam nuperorum scriptorum
jactantia, qui nihil exhibent, nisi quod bonum eventum habuit ; errores et infortunia
caute abscondunt, aliter autem nobis profuit magnus Hippocrates, apud quern fere
non nisi casos funesti occurrunt, ac si iidem potioris doctrins essent." — Exercit. de
Hydrope.



y

iC



100 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

tains the case of a woman who had fever and took medicine
which did her no good; a hard swelling, accompanied with
severe pains, seized her below the navel, which were removed
by strongly rubbing in oil with the hands, after which she
had a copious discharge of blood downwards^ and recovered-
M. Littre, from a comparison of this passage with Epidem. ii,
6, 26; iv, 45, 56, draws the conclusion, that reference is
here made to the practice of compressing the bowels with the
hands in cases of ileus, for which Praxagoras, the master of
Herophilus, is censiired by Cselius Aurelianus.^ At § 9
there is the case of a man affected with prurigo^ and a
condition of the skin resembling leprosy, which nobody
could remove. He then went to the hot baths in the island
of Melos, and was cured of his cutaneous affection, but soon
after became dropsical and died. In § 10 there is related a
case of cholera, treated with hellebore, which produced great
evacuations upwards and downwards, and the patient recovered.
This mode of practice is animadverted upon by Cselius Aurelianus.
(Morb. Acut. iii, 20.) § 12th contains an instructive history of
headache in a woman, which nothing relieved but free men-
struation, and afterwards conception. At § 15, there is a
very interesting case of necrosis or caries at the hip-joint, for
the relief of which a large incision was made down to the
bone and the cautery applied ; on the eleventh day tetanus
supervened, and proved fatal on the eighth day afterwards,
although treated by embrocations, fomentations, and strong
purgatives. The author remarks in conclusion, that the patient
would have lived longer, if the purgative medicine had not been
administered. At § 16 there is a case of injury of the head,
where the surgeon at first sawed the bone down to the diploe,
a practice alluded to in the treatise ' On Injuries of the Head,'
§ 21. In this case erysipelas came on, and yet the patient
recovered. It is to be regretted that the text here is in a
corrupt state. At § 18 there is a case of pregnancy in which
the administration of a strong purgative was followed by fatal
results. At § 20 there is related a case of hemorrhoids,
seemingly mali moris, which proved fatal in consequence of
an operation having been performed upon them. § 24th
contains the history of a case of haemoptysis, which ended in
phthisis. The author makes the shrewd remark that the

' Acut. Morb., iii, 17.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 101

patient was indisposed before the vomiting of blood commenced.
I may here remark^ how well this accords with the doctrine of
Louis^ that haemoptysis is rather the consequence than the
cause of tubercular disease. At § 38 there is another case of
haemoptysis in which the patient was choked by a large quantity
of blood which he was bringing up ; the spleen also^ in this
case^ was affected, and there were bloody discharges down-
wards. This book contains a great variety of serious cases
connected with accidents. At § 50 is a fatal case of concus-
sion of the brain. At § 74 there is a fatal case of tetanus
supervening upon a slight injury of one of the fingers; and in
the following section there is a case of tetanus arising from a
strain of the thumb and proving fatal. In the next section
there is a case of fatal tetanus from the injudicious healing of
a sore on the leg.

Though Galen refuses to sustain the sixth book as genuine,
he has written an elaborate commentary upon it, and mentions
at the commencement that commentaries had been written
upon it before his time by Zeuxis of Tarentum, the Erythraean
Heraclides, and before them by Bacchius and Glaucias. It
is a large work, being divided into eight different sections,
which have little or no connexion with one another. Upon
the whole, as M. Littrd remarks, the most interesting portion
of it is the part in which are described the phenomena
attending an epidemic cough, or influenza, which reigned in
Perinthus. See § vii. It broke out in winter about the
solstice, and was preceded by great changes of the winds.
There was a great tendency to relapses, and it was further
complicated with pulmonic affections, nyctalopia, angina,
paralysis, &c. It was observed, that any member which was
much exposed to fatigue was the part most liable to be attacked.
All these complications occurred in the relapse, and never in
the original attack. Women were less liable to be affected
than men, the reason of which is supposed to have been, that
they do not expose themselves so much to the air as men do.
In women, too, all the attacks were mild; but in the men some
were mild and others fatal. When a febrile rigor supervened,
the attack speedily was mortal. The usual remedies were
tried, namely, purging, venesection, bleeding by the ranal
vein, and emetics ; but none of them did any good. M. Littre



102 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

remarks^ that in the course of his reading he has never met
with an example of an epidemic exactly resembling the one
here described. It is, therefore, an interesting picture of a
disease not otherwise known. The sixth section begins with
the announcement of the physiological doctrine so frequently
quoted with approbation, namely, that " the fleshy parts
attract both from the bowels and from without, and that the
whole body inspires and expires." This doctrine is fully ex-
panded and illustrated in an interesting volume by Abraham
Kaau.^ The fifth section opens with another philosophical
tenet, which Sydenham often quotes with approbation, namely,
that " Nature is the physician of diseases." " Nature," the
writer adds, " although untaught and uninstructed, does what
is proper." Galen's Commentary on this passage contains
much interesting matter, and is a fine specimen of the medical
philosophy of the ancients.*

The seventh book, as we have already remarked, is closely
allied to the fifth. Galen pronounces it to be universally
condemned as being spurious, and of more recent origin than
the others ; but Littre, although of course he does not stand
up for its genuineness, justly contends that it is replete with
valuable matter. Grimm holds, from the nature of its con-
tents, that it must have derived its origin firom the Cnidian
school, whereas the fifth sprung firom the Coan. I must say,
however, that I cannot see any good grounds for this opinion.
According to M. Littrd, it is a recueil of particular facts
superior to anything of the kind left to us by antiquity, and
such that its equal can scarcely be found in modem times.

' Perspiratio dicta Hippocrati.

^ By Nature, the ancient philosophers understood an inunaterial principle diffused
through all the works of creation, that is to say, an internal principle of motion and
of rest, which presides over the growth and nourishment of all substances. It is
well defined by Aristotle in different parts of his works. See De Anima, ii, 4 ; and
Auscultationes Naturales, pluries. That truly learned and ingenious author Bishop
Berkeley, in his ' Siris,' describes nature as being mind so fuddled with matter as to
have lost its consciousness. Probably, the distinction between a material and im-
material principle as the cause of the vital phenomena was not so well understood
until after Plato and Aristotle had cultivated mental philosophy with so great suc-
cess ; for, as we shall see in the next section, Hippocrates seems to identify mind
with heat, that is to say, he confounds the cause of motion and of change with its
first instrument, or co-cause {nvvdirtop).



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 103

The cases being for the most part of an isolated nature and
not susceptible of any arrangement^ it is not possible within my
narrow limits to give any general idea of the contents of this
book. I shall be content, therefore, with a very few extracts
as a specimen of it. It opens with two yery interesting cases
of fever, accompanied with sweats, which were treated mildly
by purgatives and clysters, and terminated favorably. It
strikes me as singular in reading these cases, that the cha-
racters of the urine are not distinctly given, as in the cases
related in the first and third Epid. All that is said on this
score is, that '' the urine was like that of chronic diseases.^'
The tenth is a case of ardent fever proving fatal by intestinal
hemorrhage. Some of the fatal cases of dropsy following
fever are very instructive, as §§ 20, 21. Two cases of empyema
(so they are marked by M. Littre) would appear to have
been phthisis with cavities in the lungs. In both, mention is
made of rdles. See §§ 26, 27, and also 93, 107. In the
29th and six following sections there are reports of cases of
severe wounds. Apparently they must have occurred in the
time of war. The 36th, 37th, and 38th, are cases of tetanus
supervening upon very slight wounds. A good many cases
of phthisis are reported, as at §§ 49, 50, 51 ; in the last of these
the pectoral rdles are particularly noticed. In the 49th the
disease is ascribed to the woman having been injured by
succussion in order to procure the expulsion of the after-
birth. (On this case see the interesting remarks of M. Littr^,
torn. V, p. 359.) At § 52 are the cases of two children who died
of disorder of the bowels, complicated with ani affection of the
head, as indicated by their constantly pressing on the part with
the hand ; and it is remarked^ that after death there was a
hollow in the seat of the bregma. Every experienced physician
must have met with such cases. M. Littre refers an illus-
tration of the disease here treated of to an analysis of a
work by M. ElssBsser, in the ' Archives Centrales de Medecine,'
March, 1845, p. 346 ; on ramollissement of the occiput. The
cases of phrenitis, here related, are evidently febrile affections,
as at §§ 79, 80. At § 102 a case is related in which serious
symptoms supervened on the eating of a raw mushroom. The
patient being treated by emetics and the hot bath, recovered.
At § 121 is related the case of a person who had convidsive



104 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

laughter connected^ as was supposed^ with a wound of the
diaphragm.

And now, having concluded my review of these Books of
Epidemics, I will venture to aflSrm, without fear of contra-
diction, that when we look to the importance and rarity of the
matters contained in them, the work, even at the present day,
is perfectly unrivalled. That the books are the composition
of different hands must be admitted, but altogether the con-
tents of them bear the imprint of the mind and spirit of
Hippocrates, and evince a talent for the cultivation of medicine
which has never been surpassed. What a noble people the
Greeks must have been in the days of Themistocles and
Pericles !

XXXIV. riepi ^v/iciiv — On the Humours.

It must be admitted that there are few treatises in the
Hippocratic Collection which unite such a concurrence of high
authorities,both ancient and modem, in their favour as this work,
and yet there seems good reason for joining the later critics
in refusing its claims to be received as genuine. In favour
of it may be quoted Erotian, Palladius, and Galen, among the
ancient, and Foes, Zuinger, and Haller, among the modem
authorities. Against it are ranged several of the older autho-
rities, namely, Zeuxis, Heraclides, and Glaucias, some of whom
refer it to a younger Hippocrates, some to Thessalus, others
to Polybus, and others again to Democritus.^ Accordingly, the
highest modern authorities, as Mercuriali, Gruner, Ackerman,
Kiihn, and Littre, refuse to receive it into the list of genuine
works ; and the last of these seems to make it out pretty
clearly that the treatise is composed of detached observations
extracted from the other Hippocratic works. After repeated
perusals of it, what strikes myself is, that it bears a close re-
semblance to the treatise 'On the Surgery,^ that is to say,
that it is a recapitulation of the conclusions arrived at in certain
of the other works of Hippocrates. Perhaps, then, it must be
admitted that there is some inconsistency in allowing the one
a place among the genuine works of Hippocrates, and refus-
ing the similar claims of the other. That the work in

* See the references given by Gruner, Ackerman, and littr^.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 105

question contains a most interesting summary of wliat were
regarded, in ancient times^ as great medical truths^ cannot be
doubted. From the condensed form in which the subject
matters of it are presented^ it will readily be apprehended that
they do not well admit of being given in the form of an
abstract^ and that any specimens of its contents will afford but
a very imperfect idea of its value as a whole. I would remark,
at the outset, that the title of the work, ' On the Humours/
appears not very applicable, since very few of the paragraphs
relate to the humours ; in fact, as already hinted, the treatise
may be said to be a recueil of various observations gathered
out of other works. I also feel at a loss to account for
M. Littre's disposition to rank it as the eighth book of the
Epidemics, as it bears no resemblance either in form or matter
to that work : the one consisting of isolated observations and
of particular facts, and the other of general principles; and
the style of the one being comparatively full, whereas the
other is remarkably succinct, so as to be nearly unintelligible
in many places. Take the following as a specimen of it :
" The earth is to trees what the stomach is to animals ; it
nourishes, heats, and cools ; cools when emptied, heats when
filled, as the earth when manured is hot in winter, so is it with
the stomach.^^ This important observation, that the earth, in
connexion with the vegetable productions, is analogous to the
stomach in animals, is repeated by Aristotle and other of the
ancient philosophers.^ The author makes the important remark,
(§ 14,) that we ought to study the condition of the body pre-
vious to the season in which the disease broke out ; in con-
firmation of which M. Littre, in his argument, gives some
very interesting observations by M. Forster.^ In the paragraph
on deposits, the author remarks, that in fevers attended with a
feeling of lassitude, the deposits generally take place to the
joints and jaws. It is afterwards stated — and if confirmed by
experience, as I think I have observed it to be in many cases,
it is an important remark — that " when the feet are hot, the
depositions point downwards, but when cold, upwards.'^ § 7.
In § 12 diseases are thus classified: ''with regard to the
modes of diseases, some are congenital, as may be learned

* See Musonius, Ap. Stobaei Sentent., xviii. It occurs frequently in Galen.
^ Des Maladies de la France dans leurs Rapports avec les Saisons, p. 193. Paris,
1840.



106 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

upon inquiry; some are connected with the nature of the
locality, (for many are a£fected, and therefore many are ac-
quainted with them) ; some with the condition of the body
and the diet, the constitution of the disease, and the seasons.
The localities which are ill situated in respect to the seasons
engender diseases similar to the season ; in like manner^ irre-
gularities as to heat and cold in the same day when it has
such effects, produce autumnal diseases in the locality^ and in
the other seasons likewise. The diseases which are engendered
by fetid and marshy waters are calculus and splenic diseases,
and such are influenced by good or bad winds.'* Altogether,
as will be readily seen, it is a work of great ability, and will
amply repay a diligent perusal. Galen esteemed it very much,
and did not hesitate to declare that, not only Plato, Aristotle,
and Theophrastus, but also several of the most distinguished
medical authors had copied freely from it.^

XXXV. IlcpJ xp^<riog vypdiv — On the Use of Liquids.

This would seem to be the work which appears in Erotian's
list under the title of ' On Waters* (Trcpi uSarwv) ; and, con-
trary to what is stated by Foes and Gruner, it is quoted by
Galen in two places -^ and it is further referred to by Athenaeus,
under the same title as that given to it by Erotian.* Foes pro-
nounces it to be a mutilated work, and one which is wanting
in many of the MSS. of the Hippocratic treatises ; and all the
modem critics, from Lemos and Mercuriali down to Littre and
Greenhill, regard it as spurious. Gruner speaks of it as being
a work of little importance, and Ackerman as being a mere
compilation from the Aphorisms.* Gruner further remarks,
that the title does not sxdt well with its contents, and this is
in so far correct, for undoubtedly the title given to it by Erotian
is more suitable, as it treats almost exclusively of the medicinal
properties of waters; and this it certainly does in a fuller and
more interesting manner than they are treated of in any other
ancient, and, I may almost venture to add, any modem work
with which I am acquainted. I look upon its contents, then,

' Natural. Facult., ii, 8 ; de Placit. Plat, et Hippocrat., viii, 5.
^ Opera, torn, v, pp. 257, 479 ; ed. Basil.
^ Deipnos, ii, 46.

* Zuinger considers it in the light of extracts from the Note-book of Hippocrates
(or llippocratea Adversaria).



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 107

as being extremely valuable^ even as the work has come down
to us^ but it is to be regretted that the text is in a yery un-
satisfactory state. Water the author of the treatise recommends
as a fomentation to the eyes^ when applied with a sponge ; and
further^ as a general or local fomentation^ for producing relaxa-
tion of any part when contracted. When poured over the head^
and other parts, it is said to induce sleep, is useM in convul-
sions, and relieves pains of the eyes and ears. Cold water in-
flames ulcers, except such as have a tendency to hemorrhage,
and also fractures, luxations, &c. In applying water to the
body, the author recommends the feelings of the patient to be
consulted, unless he be in a state of paralysis or of stupor, or
be suffering from exposure to great cold, or be in great pain.
In these cases, he adds, the patient may be insensible, and in-
stances have occurred of persons having their feet congealed
by cold, which have dropped off upon the affusion of hot water.
The immoderate use of hot water induces relaxation of the
fleshy parts (muscles ?), weakness of the nerves, torpor of the
understanding, hemorrhage, and deliquum animi, so as even to
prove fatal ; and much cold water will occasion spasms, tetanus,
lividity, and febrile rigors. The parts of the body which are
usually covered endure the cold water worst, and are most re-
freshed by hot. Cold water disagrees with the brain and its
processes, the bones, the teeth, and the nerves ; and hence, it
is added, convulsions, distensions, and febrile rigors, which are
induced by cold, are relieved by hot water. Hot water occa-
sions delight and determination (to the skin ?) ; cold, on the
other hand, pain and determination inwardly : wherefore the
loins, the breast, the back, and the hypochondriac region, are
injured by cold applications, but delight in warm. Cold water,
thrown on the extremities, relieves lipothymia, the reason of
which he states, but the text is so corrupt that I dare not
undertake to translate the passage. Ulcers, excoriated parts
of the body, and bums, bear cold ill. The extremities, the
bladder, and the organs of generation, delight in warm water.
Salt water is proper to itchy parts, and to parts affected with
pungent humours, but disagrees with bums, and abraded sur-
faces. Vinegar is said to have much the same properties as salt
water in the cure of these complaints. Warm water, in which
salt has been melted, is beneficial in lichen, leprosy, alphos,



108 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

and other complaints of a like nature. The lees of vin^ar
{caustic potass ?) also answer in these cases. The astiingen(7
of cold water is increased by having beet leaves, ivy, bramble,
sumach, sage, &c. boiled in it. Red pustules, like lentils, are
benefited by cold things, but eruptions arising finom cold, and
resembling millet, are improved by hot. There are certain
cases in which both hot and cold are applicable, such as gouty
affections, and most sprains : in these, cold applications deaden
the pain, and warm soothe it. Indurations and ancyloses of a
joint are to be removed by pouring warm water out of a vessel
upon it. Bheums of the eyes are relieved by rubbing them
with some fatty substance, to obtund the acrimony of the tears.
In pains, suppurations, pungent tears, and deep ulcers of the
eyes, hot water is most expedient ; when the eyes are merely
red, and free of pain, cold is to be preferred. Cold does not
agree with complaints of the rectum and uterus, nor with cases
of bloody urine. Cold raises pain when it is applied to ulcers,
hardens the skin, renders it painful, suppresses suppuration,
renders parts livid and black, is injurious in febrile rigors,
spasms, and tetanus. But, he adds, sometimes in a robust
young man, in the middle of summer, when labouring under
tetanus not connected with a wound, the affusion of cold water
brings back the heat. (See Aphor. v, 21, and Paulus
^GiNETA, B. Ill, 20.) Hot water does the same. It promotes
ulceration in all cases, softens the skin, attenuates it, is anodyne,
and soothes rigors, spasms, and tetanus, and removes heaviness
of the head. It is most particularly applicable in fractures,
when the bone is laid bare, and especially in injuries of the
head. Hot water agrees with all ulcerations, whether innate
or produced by artificial means, in herpes exedens, in blackened
parts, and in diseases of the ears, anus, and womb. But cold
water is inimical in all these cases, except when hemorrhage
is apprehended.

The above is a brief summary of the matters contained in
this little treatise. That they are highly important, and evince
an extraordinary talent for apprehending the true bearing of
practical points in medicine, will hardly be denied by any
person who is a competent judge. Many of the rules and
observations contained in it are, no doubt, the same as those
found in the Aphorisms (see Section v), but there is also no



SECT. II.] HIPPOCBATIC TREATISES. 109

lack of valuable matter in it^ which is not to be found elsewhere.
Though I am disposed, then, to agree with the authorities who
exclude it from the list of genuine works, I do not hesitate to
declare it as my decided opinion, that it is not unworthy of the
reputation of the great Hippocrates, and that, if not written by
him, it must be the production of some person who thoroughly
apprehended his high principles and discriminating views. How
much, then, is it to be regretted, that this treatise should have
come down to us ia so mutilated a state that the meaning, in
many places, can only be guessed at with considerable hesi-
tation !

XXXVI. Uepl yovijc — On Semen.

XXXVII. Ilfpl ^udtoc iraiSiov — On the Nature of the Infant,

That these two treatises originally constituted one work, has
been remarked by Foes, Gruner, Ackerman, Littre, and others.
Indeed, this will be made sufficiently obvious, upon comparing
the conclusion of the one with the beginning of the other.
Gralen, in one place,^ quotes the former of these as if he held
it to be a genuine work of Hippocrates, but elsewhere he men-
tions that it had been referred to Polybus.^ Erotian mentions,
among the works of Hippocrates, a treatise bearing the title of
the latter, under which he probably comprehended both treatises.
It is also noticed as a Hippocratic treatise by Palladius,^ and
by Macrobius.^ Both are rejected by Haller, Gruner, Ackerman,
Kiihn, Littre, and Greenhill. Indeed the story of the female
musician, whom the author gravely admits that he taught the
way how to get rid of a conception,^ is so alien to the morals
of Hippocrates, as declared in ' The Oath,' that it is impossible
for a moment to suppose him guilty of such an act of flagitious-
neiss. Moreover the treatise so abounds in little subtleties and
conceits, especially in reference to the Pythagorean doctrine of
numbers, that no competent judge will hesitate for a moment
in pronouncing it not to be the production of the Great
Hippocrates.^ Without doubt, however, these treatises are of

< Ad Aphor. v, 37. * De Fcetus fabricat.

' Comment, in Libr. de Fract. ap. Foes, p. 147.
* Somniom Scipionis, i, 6. ' VoL i, p. 386 ; ed. Kiihn.

' Even Zuinger admits that, both in style and matter, these treatises are unlike
the genuine works of Hippocrates.



110 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

great antiquity^ and are valuable as containing the hypotheses
with regard to the origin of the foetus which prevailed in the
schools down to the days of Harvey ; that is to say^ that the
embryo is formed from the male semen^ into which the uterine
vessels enter, and form the cotyledones {or placenta). It con-
tains^ moreover, an hypothesis adopted by Aristotle in several
of his physiological works regarding the semen, namely, that it
is collected from all parts of the body ; and hence, if any part
be mutilated in the parent, it is so likewise in the foetus.^ The
author moreover holds, that the foetus breathes, and is nourished
by the umbilicus,^ which may be looked upon as an anticipation
of the modern doctrine, that the placenta performs the function
both of a lung and of an intestine. It contains a statement re-
garding the incubation of the egg, which has been often repeated
in modern times, but which, from personal observation, I can
affirm not to be true ; namely, that the ben chips the shell to
let out the chick.' Presentations in delivery are divided into
those by the head, the feet, and crossways. I would mention,
in conclusion, that these works abound in repetitions, and are
written in a diflFuse style, very unlike that of Hippocrates.
Altogether, then, I can have no hesitation in pronouncing both
treatises to be spurious. From what has been stated of them
above, it must be obvious, however, that to the student of
ancient anatomy and physiology they are very interesting, and
will repay a careful perusal. Although, probably, later pro-
ductions than the age of Hippocrates, there can be no doubt
that they are anterior to the memorable epoch of Herophilus
and Erasistratus.

XXXVIII. Uepl yvvaiKiiwv — On the Diseases of Women,

We have already stated in our critical remarks on the
fourth book, ' On Diseases,^ that it and the present treatise
are evidently the productions of the same author. Although
Erotian and Galen^ make references to it, as if acknowledging
it to be the production of Hippocrates, its claim is rejected hy
Foes, Schulze, Gruner, and Ackerman, and all the modern
authorities of any note. Its connexion with the treatises ' De
Genitura' and ' De Natura Pueri,' is pointed out by Foes and

» Vol. i, p. 371 ; ed. Kiihn. * Ibid., p. 387.

^ Ibid., p. 420. ^ In Gloas. in voce dXf ira, &c



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 1 1 1

Gruner; and Littre does not hesitate to refer to the same
author the whole of the following treatises^ ' De Genitnra/
' De Natura Pueri/ ' De Morbis/ iv, ' De Morbis Mulierum/
' De Morbis Virginum/ ' De Sterilibus.' Although not the
composition of Hippocrates^ all these treatises are^ without doubt^
of high antiquity, and were anterior to the age of Aristotle.

The work now under consideration contains much valuable
matter, and deserves a careful perusal. I feel rather at a loss
what selections to make from it, as a specimen of its contents,
but shall be brief on the present occasion, more especially
as I have no difficulty in establishing the point, that the treatise
in question is not one of the genuine works of Hippocrates.

The observations contained in the first part of it, on menstru-
ation and the causes of sterility, are ingenious. For the cure
of sterility, fumigation of the uterus is recommended, and a
minute description is given of the mode of performing this
process, by means of a tube introduced into the os uteri, and
connected with a vessel which emits aromatic fumes. When
sterility is connected with the shutting up of the os uteri, the
author gives directions for expanding it by means of a wooden
or leaden pipe. We need scarcely remark, that this practice
has been revived of late years, A minute description is given
of a malformation of the vagina, in which the passage is nearly
obliterated by a membrane. Allusion is probably made here
to a preternatural rigidity of the hymen. The author directs
the membrane to be fairly torn, and the part dressed with wine
and myrrh. In transverse and footling presentations of the
child it will be best, he says, to bring it down by the head.
Both cases are said to be dangerous, so that either the mother
or child is lost, and sometimes both. Treating of retention of
the placenta, the author remarks, that if it is not cast off it
becomes putrid, and thus comes away on the sixth or seventh
day, or later. To promote its expulsion, he recommends
southernwood, dittany, the flowers of the white violet, and
assafoetida. The process of abortion, and the unpleasant cir-
cumstances connected with retention of the placenta in this
case, are given with much accuracy. Hydrops uteri is de-
scribed at considerable length. For an account of it, see
Paulus ^gtneta. Vol. I, p. 573, Syd. Soc. edition, and the
modern authorities there referred to. For ulcers of the womb.



112 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

he recommends applications consisting of many stimulating in-
gredients, such as the flos argentic &c. The subject of difficult
delivery is resumed; when the arm or leg of a living child
is protruding^ it is directed to be pushed back^ and the child
turned to the head ; and if the foetus be dead, either the same
thing may be done, or the projecting part may be cut off, and
the head opened with a sharp knife, and the bones thereof ex-
tracted, and the body brought along. The chest also may be
opened, if there be any difficulty in extracting the body. The
author expresses himself strongly in regard to the danger of
abortions. All abortions, he says, are attended with more
danger than deliveries at the full time. Artificial abortion never
takes place without violence, whether produced by medicine, a
draught, or food, or a suppository, or any other means.

The second book commences with a description of fluor albus,
an affection to which the old are stated to be more subject than
the young. It arises from suppression of the menses, firom par-
turition, or a fever. Among other means which he speaks of
for the cure of it, he mentions the application of cupping-
instruments to the mammae. Astringents from the vegetable
kingdom are to be administered, such as sumach boiled in
vinegar, mulberries^ or the like. A full account of the red fluor,
or uterine hemorrhage, is also given. It is said to be connected
principally with parturition. The treatment which is recom-
mended can scarcely be improved upon, even after the lapse of
two thousand years : a sponge is to be wetted and applied to
the pudenda ; soft garments are to be moistened with cold water,
and laid on the belly ; and the foot of the bed is to be raised.
When the hemorrhage is connected with putridity many women
thus perish, indeed few recover. A long description is given
of the hysterical convulsion which is said principally to attack
antiquated maids and widows. It is remarked that hysterical
complaints bring on cough, and other pectoral complaints. A
very striking and accurate description is given of procidentia
uteri. Inflation of the womb is also described. On it see
Paulus iEoiNETA, Vol. I, p. 632, Syd. Soc. edition. There is
also a ciirious description of the mole. The clitoris is described
under the name of columna.^

' See Foes, (Econom. Hippocrat, in voce ciwv.



SECT. 11.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 113

From the extracts now given^ it will be seen that these Books
contain a great variety of most important matter. Indeed, there
are few treatises in the Collection more deserving of an attentive
pemsal. They furnish the most indubitable proofs that the
obstetrical art had been cultivated with most extraordinary
ability at an early period. Beyond all doubt the complaints of
women, and the accidents attending parturition, must at that
time have come under the jurisdiction of the male practitioner.
But, considering the wandering life which Hippocrates led, and
that during the best part of it he must have been what is now
called a consulting physician, it is not at all likely that he could
have acquired that acquaintance with the minutiae of obstetrical
practice which this work displays. It is not, then, at all pro-
bable that he can be the author of it.

XXXIX. Ocpi aij^pwv — On Sterile Women.

This treatise is closely connected with the preceding one,
both in matter and style. It relates to a subject which, as we
have shown, is also treated of in the other work, I mean
sterility, the most common cause of which is held to be the
state of the os uteri, when it is oblique to the passage of the
vagina, constricted firom cicatrices, or otherwise diseased. Dis*
tinct directions are given for opening the mouth of the womb,
after which a cleansing application, composed of cantharides and
myrrh, is to be made to it. The mole^ and procidentia uteri^
are described in nearly the same terms as in the preceding
treatise. Though it bears a great resemblance, then, to the
work 'On the Diseases of Women,* it is not likely, as suggested
by Albertus Fabricius,^ that it is an appendix to it, for why
should an author treat twice of the same subject in the same
work?

XL. IIcpJ vapBwmv — On the Complaints of Young Women.

Foes looks upon this little tract as being the prelude to the
greater work ' On the Diseases of Women.' It is destitute of
all claims to be held as genuine^ and accordingly no critic,
ancient or modem, stands up for it. Gruner is inclined to
ascribe it to the author of the treatise 'On the Sacred

* Bibl. Grsec, ii, 24, p. 801.

8



I



114 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

Disease/ but I see no grounds for this opinion^ except it be that,
in the two treatises, there is a certain similarity of views with
regard to the nature of the hysterical convulsion. This, how-
ever, is not a sufficient reason for deciding that they both must
have come from the same source, for all the ancient authorities,
from Hippocrates to Actuarius, held pretty much the same
ideas regarding the nature of " Uterine suffocation." See
Paulus iEoiNETA, III, 71. The author of this little firagment
gives a very naive advice to virgins who are subject to hysterics;
instead of making costly oblations of garments and the like to
Diana, as recommended by the prophets, he gravely advises
them ci>c ra^^iara {TvvoiKriaai avcpatri ! I

XLI. Ilcp* cTri/cuffffioc — On Superfoetation.

This treatise, I believe, is not mentioned by any one of the
ancient authorities, and it is almost universally rejected by the
modern.

I need scarcely remark that it relates to a very curious
subject, and that great doubts are now entertained whether or
not superfoetation in women ever actually takes place. I can
state, however, that two trustworthy persons, the one a surgeon
and the other a sage femme, informed me, some years ago,
that they once attended together a case in which a woman
was first delivered of a foetus about four months old, and, about
thirty-six hours afterwards^ of a full grown child. The ancient
savans all believed in the occurrence of superfoetation. See
in particular Aristotle (Hist. Anim. vii, 5) ; and Pliny, (H. N.,
vii, 11.)

The following are a few of the most interesting observations
which I have remarked in perusing this treatise. When the
secundines are evacuated before the child, they cause difficult
parturition, and the case is dangerous unless the head present.
Presentations of the hand and foot are directed to be replaced.
When the placenta is retained after the expulsion of the child,
the child is to be laid upon wool, or upon two bladders filled
with water, either of which is to be pricked, so that the water
may run off gradually, and thus draw down the placenta.
When there is a copious discharge of blood before labour, there
is a risk that the child may be dead, or at least not viable.
When women with child long for coab, the appearance of



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 1 15

these things is to be seen on the child's head. (For the
opinions of the ancients on the effect of imagination on the
foetus in ntero, see the commentary on B. I^ § 1^ of Faulub
^oiNETA^ Syd. Soc. edition.) Some ridiculous things are con-
tained in this work, such as the following ; when a man wishes
to beget a male child let his left testicle be tied, and when a
female the right.^ The composition of suppositories for
cleansing the uterus is described at considerable length towards
the end of the treatise. Altogether, the work is by no means
devoid of interest, but, as I have already said, it is certainly
not the composition of Hippocrates. Littr^, on the authority
of the passage quoted from Aristotle on this head, refers the
treatise to Leophanes. From the account which we have given
of its contents, it will be remarked that the title and contents
of it do not well accord together. This remark, however,
applies to other of the Hippocratic treatises besides the one we
are now treating of.

XLII. IIcpJ yvvaiKUTig j^vaiog — On the Female Nature.

As Foes remarks, this work is mostly made up of excerpts
from the treatise ' De Muliebribus.' I need not, therefore,
occupy time in discussing its claims to be regarded as genuine,
nor in giving an outline of its contents.

XLIII. Ilfpi <cap&'ii€ — On the Heart.

Oalen, in one place, appears to cite a passage in this treatise,
but without naming it.^ It is not found in Erotian's list, and
all the modem authorities, including even Foes, who is more
disposed than most of the others to deal leniently with the claims
of the treatises which bear the name of Hippocrates, concur in
refusing to admit it as genuine. Still, however, there can be
no question as to its being a work of very high antiquity. It
is to be regretted, then, that the text is in a very unsatisfactory
state. It contains, upon the whole, a wonderfully accurate
description of all the parts about the heart — of its substance,
which is said to be a strong muscle ; of its pericardium, which
is described as being a smooth tunic, containing a little fluid

' Aristotle refers this opinion to Leophanes, De Generatione Animalium, v, 1.
' De Placit. Hippocrat et Plat., ix.



116 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

resembling urine ; of its ventricles (yatTrlpcc) ; of its auricles
{ovaTo) ; of the origin of the veins from it ; of its sigmoid
valves ; of its office^ to be^ as it were, the fountain head^ from .
which all parts of the bodv are irrigated^ and the seat of the
understanding, which is said to be in the left ventricle. The
understanding, it is added, is not nourished by the blood, but
by a pure and luminous (^<i>rociSf)c) superfluity from it. Alto-
gether, this little treatise bespeaks much practical acquaintance
with human anatomy, and, considering the age in which it was
written, must be the production of a very superior mind. It
contains an account of an experiment which has been much
animadverted upon, both by ancient and modem authorities.
The writer says, if a coloured fluid be given to an animal, such
as a sow, to drink, and if its throat be cut while it is in the act of
swallowing, it will be found that part of the fluid has passed down
by the gullet to the lungs. See in particular Aulus Gellius
(Noctes Attica, xvii, 11); Macrobius (Satumal. vii, 15); and
Plutarch (Sympos. vii, 1.) Aulus Gellius says decidedly that
Plato had adopted this opinion &om Hippocrates. Aulus Gellius
and Macrobius also quote Plutarch as having stated, in his
' Symposiacon/ that Hippocrates is the author of this opinion ;
but the text of Plutarch (1. c.) is in an unsatisfactory state.
See Schulze (Hist. Med. i, iii, vi, 12.)

XLIV. Ilepi rpo^nc — ^ Aliment,

It must be admitted that this treatise has very high autho-
rities in favour of its authenticity, such as Erotian, Gralen/
Aulus Gellius,^ Palladius,^ Stephanus ;* and, in modem times,
Mercuriali, Foes, Haller, and Le Clerc.^ It is rejected by
Casper Hoffman,^ Gruner, Ackerman, Kiihn, Littre^ and Green*
hill, though, by the last two, not in decided terms. Considering
the respectability of the external evidence in its favour, I should
certainly not have hesitated in admitting it as genuine, had
not a careful examination of its contents led me to form the

1 Ck>mmeiit., torn, xt, p. 224 ; ed. Kuhn.

' Noct. Attic, iii, 16.

' Ap. Foes; ed. Hippocrat.

* Comment, in Galen ; ed. Dietz.

* Hiat. Med., P. i, iii, 2, 257.

* In Boerhaav. Meth. Stud. Med., i, 3, p. 594.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 117

unbiassed decision that it must bfe the production of some
metaphysician, rather than of a medical practitioner, such as
we know Hippocrates to have been. The physiological dogmata
with which it abounds are announced in so antithetical, not to
say paradoxical, a manner, that I can conceive nothing more
foreign to the style and character of the true writings of Hippo-
crates. I shall give a few specimens : — '^ The species of aliment
is one and many ; all these (kinds of aliment ?) are one nature
and not one. Purging is upwards and downwards, and neither
upwards nor downwards. Purging in aliment is excellent,
purging in aliment is bad. Aliment not aliment, unless it
conveys nourishment ; it is aliment in name but not in deed :
aliment in deed and no longer in name only. Sweet and not
sweet ; sweet potentially, as water, sweet to the taste, as honey.
Things not animals are animated ; animals are animated, the
parts of animab are animated. It (the embryo) is and is not."
Now, I must say, that all this appears to roe to savour more of
the tastes of Democritus than of Hippocrates himself. It may
be said, indeed, that the very circumstance of Galen's having
admitted the work as genuine, and having composed an elabo-
rate commentary on it, is a most presumptive proof of its
authenticity; for where shall we find so exceUent a judge of the
doctrines of Hippocrates as his great commentator ? But then
it must be taken into account that Galen himself had a great
penchant towards metaphysical subtleties, and this would lead
him to believe that what was in accordance with his own
tastes must have been in accordance with those of his great
professional hero. But, notwithstanding the doubts which
hang over the question of its authorship, it may be confidently
affirmed regarding this treatise that, illustrated as it is by
Galen's commentary (even although it has come down to us
in a mutilated state), few works in the Collection are more
suggestive than the present one. I shall merely give a few
more specimens of it : — " The root of the veins is the liver,
and the root of the arteries is the heart ; and firom them blood
and spirits are carried to all parts, and heat passes to the same.''
This passage is frequently quoted and commented upon by
ancient authors ; as by Galen,^ and Aretseus.' We have seen

1 De PUcit. Hippocrat. et Platon.
' De Acat., i, 7 ; de Chron., i» 13.



118 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [skct. ii.

it stated in the preceding treatise that the heart is the place
from which both veins an4 arteries originate. This seems a
presumptive proof that these two treatises must have had a
distinct authorship. ''The aliment reaches to the hairs^ the
nails^ and the outer surface firom within; and aliment firom
without passes firom the most external to the most internal
parts, there is one conflux and one conspiration {^vppoia /jtia^
^vjiirvoia fi/a). All parts sympathise throughout the whole
fi-ame^ but in so far every part has its own peculiar action.''
This passage^ also, is very celebrated and frequently quoted.^
I need scarcely remark that it embraces a grand and most im-
portant view of the animal economy. " Milk is food to some with
whom it agrees, and to others not. To some wine is food, and
to others not ; and so with flesh and many other kinds of ali-
ment. We must look to situation and habit. Humidity is
the vehicle of food. The natures (instincts ?) of all things are
imtaught. Persons who perspire fireely are weak, more healthy,
and have easier recoveries than others. Those who perspire ill
are stronger than others before they become indisposed, but
being indisposed have more difficult recoveries. These remarks
apply to the whole and to the parts.'*

From these specimens it will be readily seen that the work
abounds in curious matters, but of a very different stamp from
those which the true Hippocratic treatises contain. Contrary,
then, to my general rule, I certainly feel disposed in the present
instance to reject, upon internal evidence, a treatise which has
the most unexceptionable external evidence in its favour.

XLV. Ilcpt (TapKwvj ri ap-^^tov — On Fleshes, or Principles.

This treatise does not appear in Erotian's list of the Hippo-
cratic works, and it is rejected by all the modem authorities,
firom Merouriali downwards. Galen is inconsistent in his
notice of it.^ Some of the philosophical dogmata which it con-
tains are curious, such as the following specimen : " It appears
to me that what we call heat is immortal, and that it knows
all, sees, hears, and perceives aU things that are and will be.'

* See Galen, de Facult. Natural., i ; de Diff. Febr., ii ; de Usu Pulsuum, i ; and
Alexander Trallian, i.
' In Epidem. Comm., iii, 29, &c.
=* See the remarks on thia passage in the next section.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 119

When things^ then^ were tlirown into confusion the greater
part of this passed off to the highest circle^ and this it is which
the ancients called ether.'' The following extract is held by
Groner, but probably without any sood reason, to evince a
d^ree of anatomical knowledge in advance of the age of
Hippocrates : " There are two hollow veins from the heart, the
one called the artery, and the other the vena cava. The artery
has more heat than the vein.'' The other veins are also
described with considerable accuracy. It is stated that the
foetus in utero sucks in fluid (liquor amnii ?) by its lips, and in
proof of this the author remarks that the child voids faeces soon
after delivery, which, it is argued, must be derived from food.
The opinion thus stated has been often maintained in modem
times, but does not appear to be well founded. The author
mentions correctly that persons in attempting to commit suicide
open the trachea, in which case, he adds, the patient lives, but
loses his voice until the opening be closed. Conringius and
Haller, with considerable plausibility but yet without any direct
proof, attribute this treatise to Democritus.

XLYI. n^pl ifiSo^aSwv— On Hebdomads.

This treatise exists now only in the Latin translation, which
M. Idttre has discovered in the Royal {National^ it is now
called !) Library in Paris, and will be published in his edition
of the works of Hippocrates. M. Littre gives an elaborate
and most interesting disquisition on it, and seems to make out
clearly that it is the production of the same author as the
treatise ' On Fleshes,' which we last noticed. It is cited by
Philo Judseus,^ and several other writers of antiquity. Galen,
however, held it not to be the production of Hippocrates. A
considerable extract from it is contained in the tract ' On
Critical Days,' and the eighth section of the Aphorisms,
which has always been looked upon as spurious, is said by
M. Littre to be mostly taken from this treatise.

XLVII. Hcpi a^vwu—On the Glands.

Erotian makes no mention of this treatise, and Galen pro-
nounces it to be the work of the recent Hippocratists.^ M. Littre

' Dc Cosmopoea. ^ Opera, torn, v, p. 594 ; ed. Basil.



120 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

remarks^ and with great truths tliat it is difficult to find out
the grounds upon which the ancient critics have rejected this
work. Certain it is that it contains a goodly store of inter*
esting matters^ none of which^ as far as I can discover^ are
inconsistent with the true doctrines of Hippocrates. In it a
pretty correct description is given of the glands^ including
those of the mesentery. The brain itself is said to be of a
glandular nature^ and also the kidneys. An ingenious account
is also given of the origin of scrofula^ which is said to be pro-
duced by the lodgement of humours in the glands of the neck,
which get into a state of slow inflammation. Olands, the
author says, are seated mostly in parts of the body which tnost
abound in humidities, such as the armpits and groins, and
hence such parts produce hairs. In the case of the mesentery,
however, no hairs are produced, because the humidities there
are excessive, and choke up, as it were, the seeds of the hairs ;
in like manner as seeds sown in marshy grounds perish. A
very ingenious account is given of the origin of phthisis, which
is said to spring from tubercles in the lungs and matter (pus),
which corrodes the lungs when '' the patients do not readily
recover.'^ A curious description is next given of the tabes
dorsalis, " in which disease the patient does not wish to live.''
How expressive this language is of the state of mind in the
case of the unfortunates who are subject to spermatorrhoea !
The treatise concludes with some striking remarks on the
sympathy between the mammee and uterus, and on the influence
which both exercise on the development of the female cha-
racter. Altogether the contents of this treatise are most valu-
able, and may suggest important views to the medical practi-
tioner and physiologist, even at the present day. We need have
no hesitation in pronouncing, with regard to it, that it reflects
infinite credit on the school firom which it emanated, and that
it is not unworthy of Hippocrates, although we have reason to
beheve that he was not actually the author of it.

XLVIII. Hcpi ^XfjSwi'— On the Veins.

This is merely an excerpt from the treatise 'On the
Nature of the Bones.'



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 121

XLIX. Ilcpt ifirpov — On the Physician.

I may mention in this place^ generally^ that the treatises
which follow have no ancient authority in support of them^
and that, with very few exceptions, they are also rejected by
all the modem critics. Their contents, moreover, are not of
much practical importance, and therefore I shall be very brief
in my analysis of them.

The treatise in question is held to be genuine by no one
critic, as far as I know, with the exception of Foes, who appears,
in part, to sanction its claims. The object of the author is
announced to be in order to instruct the physician how to
conduct matters connected with the iatrium, that is to say,
with his establishment or surgery. Mercuriali, I may men-
tion, is unjustly severe in his animadversions on the exordium.
(See Conringius, Introd. p. 120.) The physician should have
a healthy look himself, for the writer says, people fancy that a
person who does not keep himself in good health is not qualified
to take charge of the health of others. He should be of a
prudent disposition and a gentleman in morals.^ Minute
directions are given respecting the site and other circumstances
connected with the iatrium ; clean and soft towels are to be at
hand, linen is to be used for the eyes, and sponges for the
sores. In applying bandages, attention is to be paid to utility
rather than to display. The surgeon should pay great attention
to all matters connected with his operations ; for it is attended
with much disgrace when any manual operation does not suc-
ceed. Minute directions are given about the performance of
venesection at the arm, and mention is made of several
untoward accidents connected with it, such as the blowing up
of the vein, whereby the flow of blood is stopped ; and sup-
puration following as a consequence of the operation. In
order to acquire dexterity in the treatment of accidents, the
author recommends the young physician to attach himself to
some foreign army; and from this Gruner infers, that the work
cannot belong to Hippocrates, as domestic wars were but too
common in his time ; and there could have been no necessity

•

< Ka\6y Kal ayaQhv. See the Annotations on Mitchell's Aristophanes as to the
import of this eipression. I quote from memory.



122 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. n.

for the surgeon's seeking foreign service in order to gain expe-
rience. It does not occur to me^ however^ that there is much
force in this argument ; for intervals of peace were just as
common during the long life of Hippocrates^ as during the
interval between his death and the time when the Collection
was made. But^ in fact, there is no necessity to seek recondite
reasons for rejecting a treatise which has no proper authority
in support of.it.

L. Ilcpt Eua"j^ij/ioavvi|C""~On Decorum,

This work, like the last, has not the slightest claim to be
looked upon as genuine. Moreover, it has come down to us
in a very unsatisfactory state as regards the text, so that the
meaning is often very dark and uncertain ; and I must confess
that, as a general rule, I have little inclination to spend much
time in searching out a meaning, in obscure writings, when,
after if is discovered, it is not likely to repay the exertions
made in discovering it. I am always disposed to remember the
adyice which Galen repeatedly gives to the student of medicine,
" to concern himself more about things than about words.'' *
The object of the author seems to be to give general directions
with regard to decorum in the physician's communication with
the sick. It is evidently the production of some sophist,
according to Bernard, of some one belonging to the Stoical
sect. I shall be brief in my abstract of it. A philosophical
physician is equal to a god. In the practice of medicine all
the virtues relating to wisdom are exercised ; namely, contempt
of money, decency, modesty, simplicity in dress, character,
judgment, quietness, accessibility, purity of life, sententious
maxims, knowledge of the purifications which are proper and
necessary in life, abstinence from lucre, freedom from super-
stition, divine excellence. The physician should keep himself
aloof, and not hold much converse with the common people,
unless when necessary The surgeon should be well provided
with all the means required in the practice of his profession,
such as dressings, medicines, instruments, and so forth, as any
deficiency in these might produce serious results. Minute

' I quote here from memory, not having leisure to search the passages in Galen's
works where this saying occurs. It is a maxim, however, which he frequently re-
peats.



SBCT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 123

directions are given for the regulation of the physician's address
in entering the chamber of the sick^ and his conduct while
there.

LI. HapayyiXiai — Pracepta.

This little tract stands altogether in much the same circum-
stances as the preceding one^ that is to say^ it is wholly des-
titute of all good authority in its favour^ and the nature of its
contents is what might rather be expected from a sophist than
a practical physician. The text, moreover^ is in a most unsa-
tisfactory state. I shall dismiss it then with a very brief notice.
It opens with an advice to the physician not to trust to specu-
lation but to rational experience. He ought to learn remedies
from all quarters^ even firom the vulgar^ and not be avaricious
in his dealings with the sick^ more especially if strangers and
needy. The author alludes, as Schulze thinks, to the practice
then foUowed by the physicians of migrating from one city to
another, and of making a public declaration of their pretensions
at their first entry into any place. These physicians were
called periodeuta. The author of this tract advises the phy-
sician, in such a case, not to make any vainglorious or inflated
profession of his abilities. He also enjoins the medical prac-
titioner to look to the health of those who are free from
disease, as well as those who are indisposed.

LII. IlepJ avaTOfiriQ — On Dissection.

This small fragment of ancient anatomical science has no
claim to be regarded as the work of Hippocrates. Neither
Erotian nor Galen, nor any other ancient critic holds it as
such, and the modem autliorities are unanimous in rejecting
it. That it may have been the composition of Democritus, as
au^ested by Ornner, seems not unlikely. It abounds in
harsh and obsolete terms, which have never been satisfactorily
explained. Some parts of the anatomical description are diffi-
cult to determine, as for example, " the large bronchia which
extend from the heart to the liver ;*' " the vena scalena, which
extends from the liver to the kidneys.'^ The latter passage,
however, may be supposed to refer to the emulgent vein.



124 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. u.

LIII. llepl oSovTo^tviriQ — On Dentition.

This little tract is destitute of any competent evidence of
its authenticity. Some of the observations contained in it
bespeak a familiar acquaintance with the diseases of infancy.
Thus it is said^ that when the bowels are loose at the term of
dentition^ if the digestion be good^ the children thrive and are
not subject to convulsions. When children at the breast vomit
up their food, the bowels are constipated. When there is
fever accompanying dentition, children are seldom attacked
with convulsions. But when there is heavy sleep along with
dentition, there is danger of convulsions. All the children
that are seized with convulsions at the time of dentition do
not die. Children that take food during dentition bear vomiting
best. Ulcers on the tonsils are attended with danger.

LIV. rifpi cy/caTOTo/inc ififipvov — On Excision of the Fatus.

No one stands up for the genuineness of this treatise,^
which, however, is not wanting in interesting matter relative
to the extraction of the foetus in cross-presentations. For an
abstract of the practice there recommended, see Paulus
iEoiNETA, Vol. II, p. 389, Syd. Soc. edition. A circumstantial
description is also given of the process of sticcuasion, the dan-
gerous effects of which, in certain cases, are related in the
Epidemics.

LV. Ilcpi o}\iioQ — On Vision.

This little fragment is admitted by all the authorities to be
spurious. It contains a description of glaucoma, for which
purging of the head and the application of the actual cautery
are recommended, and also in certain cases venesection. In
epidemic ophthalmy, purging both of the head and bowels is
recommended.

LVI. IIcpi otrriwv ^uaioc — On the Nature of the Bones.

M. Littre has very ingeniously shown that this work is a
compilation made up of fragments of other works, and thus he
has announced his intention of excluding it altogether from

* One word {ix^vti) which occurs in this work is in the Glossaries of Galen and
Erotian. This is likely to be an interpolation.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 125

the Hippocratic Collection. Certain it is, beyond all dispute^
that the treatise is not the production of Hippocrates himself.
The following are a few of the most notable things which I
have observed in it. '^It appears to me that what we call
heat is immortal^ and that it understands^ sees^ hears^ and
perceives aU things that are and virill be.^' The heat^ it is
further said, is the origin of all movement in animals. This
will be recognised as the original of the doctrine of the Calidum
innatum, which figures in the works of our earlier physiologists
in modem times. See the works of Harvey and the other
physiologists of the seventeenth century ; also what is said on
this subject in the next section. The aorta and vena cava are
correctly described, the one as an artery, the other as a vein ;
and their origin from the ventricles of the heart is noticed.
The author states, (p. 440, ed. Kiihn,) that he had known cases
of attempted suicide in which the windpipe had been opened,
and yet death did not ensue ; only while the opening remained
the person lost the power of speaking. See No. XLY.

LVII. Utpl KpiffuDv — On the Crises.

This tract has no ancient authority whatever in support of
it, and Foes, Gruner, and Littr^ concur in holding it to be
a compilation from other Hippocratic treatises, more especially
the Aphorisms and Prognostics. This, indeed, must be obvious
to every person who reads it with any attention.

LVIII. n^pj KpiffifjuDP — On Critical Days.

This treatise stands in the same predicament as the preceding
o;ie, that is to say, it has no ancient authority in support of it ;
indeed Galen declares against it when he says that Hippocrates
had not given any work on the Critical Days. (Tom. iii, p. 440;
ed. Basil.) It is manifestly a compilation from the other trea-
tises, more especially from those 'On Internal Diseases' and
' On Diseases.' Still it appears to me to be an interesting and
well-written compilation. For example, it would be difficult to
point out in any other work, ancient or modem, a better de-
scription of pneumonia than is given towards the conclusion
of it. Tetanus also is accurately described. To be sure, Gruner
infers^ from the circumstance that three varieties of this disease
are described^ that the work in question must have emanated



126 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect.

from the Cnidian school. But Aretseus^ and, indeed^ all the
ancient authorities that treat of tetanus^ describe three varieties
of this disease; and therefore this is no good reason for exclud-
ing it from the Coan school.

LIX. Ilcpl (t^apfiQKwv — On Purgative Medicines.

Though it must be admitted that this little fragment can
boast of no competent authorities to establish its claim to be
placed among the genuine works of Hippocrates^ it bears un-
doubted marks of having been written by some person well
acquainted with his principles, and having no ordinary ac-
quaintance with professional matters. Thus the author states
very correctly the eflfects of idiosyncrasy in modifying the
operation both of purgatives and emetics^ and advises the
physician to make inquiry beforehand what effects such medi-
cines^ if formerly taken, had produced on the patient ; for, he
adds, it would be a disgraceful casualty to occasion a man's
death by the administration of a purgative medicine. He also
interdicts the administration of purgatives during the heat of
a fever, and during the very hot seasons of the year. These
practical rules appear to me to be highly important, and yet
how frequently do we see them disregarded I At the time we
have mentioned, the author prudently remarks that it is safer
to administer a clyster.

LX. ritpj sXXEjSopKr/ioi; — On the Administration of Hellebore,

This little tract is usually published among the Epistola,
and, as a matter of course, it has no evidence in support of its
genuineness further than they have, which, as we shall pre-
sently see, is very slender. It contains, however, very acute
and important observations on the administration of hellebore,
to which it is well known that the Hippocratists were very
partial. But these are mostly extracted from the Aphorisms,
and need not be noticed in this place. The Book of Prognostics
also is quoted, but seemingly by mistake.

LXI. 'EwioTo\ai—The Epistles.

No scholar can require to be informed that, since the me-
morable controversy in this country between the Honorable
C. Boyle and the celebrated Dr. Bentley, respecting the authen-



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 127

ticity of the Epistles which bear the name of Phalaris^ the
whole of the ' Epistolse Orsecanicse' have been generally con-
demned as spurious. Against this judgment I have no intention
to protest; but I maj be allowed to remark that many ancient
works which are usually acknowledged as genuine have not so
much external evidence in their favour as these Epistles possess.
The Epistles ascribed to Flato^ for example, are quoted as genuine
by Cicero/ and by Diogenes Laertius.^ Those of Hippocrates,
too, are quoted and recognised by Erotian, Soranus, and other
ancient authorities. Still, however, as I have stated, I have no
intention to stand up against the general opinion of scholars
from the Scaligers down to the present time, by which they
have been condemned as supposititious ; only I contend that, as
it is admitted on aU hands that they are very ancient,^ that is
to say, that they must have been composed within less than
a hundred years after the death of Hippocrates, it is utterly
incredible that the Sophists who wrote them, whether for a
fraudulent purpose that they might derive profit from them by
passing them off for the productions of the great name they
bear, or whether for the purpose of displaying their own skill
in sustaining an assumed character, should have made them
turn upon alleged occurrences in the life of Hippocrates which
every person at that early period must have been able to judge
whether they were fictitious or not. I see no reason, then, to
doubt that the main facts to which these Epistles relate are
real, although the Epistles themselves be supposititious.^

Having thus stated my opinion of these Epistles in general
terms, I shall now dismiss them with a very brief notice.

■ TnscoL Dispntat., t, 35. * In vita Platonis.

^ I have always looked upon the * E pistols Gnecanicae' as Yieing a species of literary
composition allied to the Declamationea of the Romans, that is to say, that they
were mere exercises in composition. On the latter, see Qointilian, Instit. Orator.,
iy, 2. We possess a volame of these Declamations under the name of Qointilian, but
they are not generally admitted to be genuine. They are exercises on themes pre-
scribed in the schools of rhetoric. The subjects were sometimes historical events,
connected with the lives of distinguished personages. The poet Juvenal alludes to
Dedamations in several places, as in Satir. i, 16; x, 167; vi, 169; vii, 161. The
Satyricon of Petronius Arbiter opens with a powerful invective against the declaimers
of the day, whom the author holds to have been the corrupters of aU true eloquence.

* Scaliger, Menage, Gruner, and Littr^, although they regard the Epistles as spu-
rious, admit that they are *' very ancient."



128 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. it.

They are diflferently arranged by modem authorities ; I shall
follow M. Littre in the few remarks which I have to offer upon
them.

The first series of these Epistles relates to the services which
Hippocrates is said to have rendered to the people of Athens
during the time of the memorable plague. The spuriousness
of these, it is generally held, is proved beyond all doubt by the
silence of Thucydides with regard to any such professional ser-
vices rendered by Hippocrates on the occasion ; and no doubt
if it were maintained that these took place at the outbreak of
the disease in Greece, that is to say, at the commencement of
the Peloponnesian war, the inference would be most legitimate.
But if we be permitted to suppose that, as the plague is known
to have lurked about in different parts of Greece for a con-
siderable time, the services of Hippocrates did not take place
until several years afterwards, there is nothing in the story
which bears the slightest air of falsehood, even if we adhere to
the common chronology respecting the birth of our author.
Indeed, I repeat, if the Sophist who composed these letters
had founded them on tales which everybody knew to be false,
he could never have hoped to impose upon the learned men of
the next generation, and make his forgeries pass for genuine.

The second series relates to Democritus, and these must be
admitted to be the most interesting of the whole group. Now
that Hippocrates visited Abdera, and that he was familiarly
acquainted with Democritus, are facts which the most sceptical
critic will hardly venture to call in ^ question.^ But that the
Epistles themselves were not written by the physician and
philosopher whose name they bear, I readily admit to be probable.
Most imdoubtedly the letter of Hippocrates, in which he is
made to describe his visit to Democritus, however full it may
be of curious matters, is written in a style and manner veiy
unlike the well-known characters of the true writings of
Hippocrates.

Third. The short letter inscribed from Hippocrates to his son
Thessalus, contains nothing from which its authenticity or the
contrary could be legitimately inferred, only it is destitute of
all ancient authority in its favour. In it the father recom-

> See Diog. Laert. ix. ^lian. Yar. Hist, iy, 20.



SECT. II.] HIPPOCRATIC TREATISES. 129

mends to the son the study of geometry and arithmetic^ as a
proper preparation to the study of medicine.

Fourth. This series, consisting of 'The Oration at the Altar/
' The Decree of the Athenians/ and ' The Oration of Thessalus,
son of Hippocrates^' although now generally regarded as spu-
rious^ possess more direct evidence in their &vour than any of
the others. In fact^ they are decidedly recognised as genuine by
Erotian. The documents in question have all reference to the
sendees of Hippocrates and his disciples in the pestilence which
pervaded Greece during the Peloponnesian war. These services
are alluded to by many ancient authorities, as we have shown
in the Commentary on Paulus ^qineta, Book II, § 35. In
conclusion^ I repeat that, supported as the main facts referred
to in these documents are by the highest testimony which
antiquity can furnish, I cannot but regard the facts as true,
although the documents themselves be given up as suppositi-
tious.

I will now briefly recapitulate the general results of the in-
vestigations on wUch I have been occupied in the present
section:

1. That all the authorities, ancient and moderUj^ who have in-
vestigated the question regarding the genuineness of the works
which have come down to us under the name of Hippocrates,
are agreed that a considerable portion of them are not the pro-
ductions of the author himself.

2. That it is almost universally admitted that the following
treatises are genuine, viz. : -:-^- .r.

The Prognostics. y<V^- l^ v

On Airs, &c. /^^ - : v

On Begimen in Acute Diseases. ^\ '

Seven of the Books of Aphorisms. \P,\



\

\ . ... (



Epidemics I and III. ^^^^^V* v""

On the Articulations.
On Fractures.

On the Instruments of Reduction.
The Oath.
3. That the following treatises may be pretty confidently
acknowledged as genuine, although the evidence in their favour
is not so strong as it is with regard to the preceding list: —

9



130 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ii.

On Ancient Medicine.

On the Surgery.

The Law.

On Ulcers.

On Pistulfie.

On Hemorrhoids.

On the Sacred Disease.

4. That as it certainly appears that the Book of Prognostics
is composed, in a great measure, from the contents of the First
' Prorrhetics' and the ^ Coacae Prsenotiones/ there can be little
or no doubt that these two treatises are more ancient than the
time of Hippocrates.

5. That although the exact time at which the Collection, as
it now stands, was made out has never been determined in a
very satisfactory manner, an examination of the contents of
the different treatises leads to the conclusion that most of
them represent pretty faithfully the opinions held by the family
of Hippocrates and his immediate successors in the Coan school
of medicine.

6. That a few of them, and more especially the two im-
portant works 'On Internal Affections' and 'On Diseases,'
would appear to bear distinct traces of having emanated from
the contemporary school of Cnidos.

7. That although the Epistles and certain public documents
usually published at the end of the Collection may justly be
suspected of being spurious, there is undoubted evidence that
they are of very ancient date, and were composed, most
probably, within less than a hundred years after the death of
Hippocrates, so that there is every reason for believing that they
relate to real events in the life of our author, and not to fictitious
as some have supposed.



y



sacT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 131



SECTION III.

ON THE PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY OF THE ANCIENTS^ AND MORE
ESPECIALLY THEIR DOCTRINES WITH REGARD TO THE
ELEMENTS.

As it is impossible to understand properly the medical theories
which occur in the Hippocratic treatises without a competent
acquaintance with the Physical Philosophy of the ancients^ I
have thought it necessary to devote an entirechapter to an exposi-
tion of the tenets held by the philosophers regarding the ele-
ments of things. I might have been able to dispense with this
labour provided there had been any modem publication to which
I could refer the reader for the necessary information on the sub-
ject in question ; but^ unfortunately^ there is no work in the
English language, as far as I am aware, in which the nature of the
ancient doctrines is properly described. To give an example
in point : Dr. Watson, the bishop of Llandaff, in his essay
'On the Transmutability of Water into Earth/ makes the
following remark's on the ancient doctrine concerning the
elements : '' If but one particle of water can, by any means,
be changed into a particle of earth, the whole doctrine of the
Peripatetic sect concerning the elements of things will be
utterly subverted : the diversities of bodies subsisting in the
universe will no longer be attributed to the different com-
binations of earth, air, fire, and water, as distinct, immutable
principles, but to the different magnitudes^ figures , and arrange^
ments of particles qf matter of the' same kind" ^

Now it will at once be perceived by any person who is at
all acquainted with modem science, that if the ancient dogmata
be as here represented, they are altogether destitute of any
solid foundation in truth and nature, and we may well wonder
that such a baseless structure should have endured for so long

* Chemical Essays, vol. iv, Essay 7.



132 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect, itk

a period. But before passing this severe judgment on the
tenets of our great forefathers in philosophy, it will be weD to
investigate their doctrines more accurately than Dr. Watson
appears to have done in this instance.

In pursuing the present investigation, I shall, in the first
place, give literal translations of extracts from the works
of the most celebrated sects of philosophers; namely, the
Pythagoreans, Platonists, Peripatetics, Stoics, and Epicureans.
It will, of course, be readily perceived, from what I have now
stated, that I do not mean to confine my inquiry to the period
of ancient philosophy which preceded Hippocrates, but that
I am to bring it down to a pretty late age. This course I
find it indispensably necessary to follow, as I could not derive
sufficient illustration of the subject were I to restrict myself
to the works of the earlier philosophers, who either preceded
our author or were his contemporaries. I shall first give the
extracts by themselves, and then make some remarks in illus-
tration of the doctrines which they expound. I think it proper
to mention further, that I am answerable for the correctness
of the translations in all cases, unless where it is otherwise
stated.

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

''Fire being compressed produces air, and air water, and
water earth : and from earth the same circuit of changes takes
place till we come to fire.^^*

" In that part of the universe where Nature and Generation
exert their powers, it is necessary that there should be these
three things : In the first place, that thing which being tangible
furnishes a body to everything which comes into existence.
This is the universal recipient and substance of impression for
things generated, bearing the same relation to things which
are generated from them that water does to juice, and silence
to sound, and darkness to light, and materials to the things
fabricated from them. For water is void of taste and quality,
bearing the same relation to sweet and bitter, and to sharp
and salt. The air is unformed as to sound, or speech, or
melody. And darkness is devoid of colour and shape, and
bears the same relation towards bright, and yellow, and white.

' Ocellus LocanuSi On the Universe.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 133

But white bears reference also both to the statuary art and
that which forms figures of wax. But matter admits of another
comparison with the art of statuary. For all things exist in
it poteniially before they are made^ but actually after they are
made and have received their nature. In order^ therefore^
that there should be generation^ it is necessary that there
should be some one substance as a substratum. In the second
place there are the contraries, in order that there may be
changes and transmutations^ the primary matter undergoing
passion and affection^ in order that the qualities (or powers,
SwafAH^), being mutually passive, may not destroy, nor be
destroyed, by one another. These (the contraries) are, heat
and cold, moisture and dryness. In the third place are those
substances in which these powers reside, namely, fire and
water, air and earth. For these differ from the powers
(qualities?). For the substances are consumed in place by
one another, but the powers are neither consumed nor formed,
for they are the incorporeal reasons of these.^ Of these four,
heat and cold are causes, and active j but dryness and humidity
are as the materials, and passive. In the first place there is
matter, the universal recipient, for it is the common subject
(or substratum) of all things, so that it is the first sensible body
in potentiality, and the original of all things : next are the
contraries, such as heat and cold, moisture and dryness ; and
in the third place there are fire, water^ earth, and air : these
all change into one another, but the contraries do not change.^' ^

The primary matter is afterwards defined to be '' the subject
body, that which receives all the changes, the universal reci-
pient, and that which potentially is the first to the touch.'' *

''The first principles of all created things are the sub-
stratum, matter, and the reason of shape ; namely, form. The
bodies are their offspring, namely, fire, air, earth, water.'' *

'' Pythagoras taught that the original of all things is the
monad, that from the monad sprung the duad, which is the
subject matter* to the efficient monad: that from the monad
and infinite duad were formed the numbers ; from the numbers

* Aoyoi ydp itrtltfAarot rvyxoLVOvot rovnav,
' Ocelliu Lucanua, On the Univene.

» Ibid.

* TimtBUS Locrus, On the Soul of the Universe.



134 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [skct. in.

the points; from them the lines, from these the figures of
superficies ; from the superficies the solid figures ; from these
the solid bodies, of which are the elements, fire, water, earth,
air : — that from these, changed and converted into every shape,
is formed the world, which is animated, intelligent, of a
spherical shape, comprehending in its middle the earth, which
also is spherical and inhabited all around.^

"Pythagoras said, that none of the elements is pure, fiir
that earth contains fire, and fire air, and water air, 8cc/' *

" Nor those which elements we call abide.
Nor to this figure, nor to that are ty'd :
For this eternal world is said of old
But four prolific principles to hold,
Four different bodies : two to heaven ascend,
And other two down to the centre tend ;
Fire first with wings expanded mounts on high.
Pure, void of weight, and dwells in upper sky :
Then air, because unclogged, in empty space
Flies after fire, and claims the second place ;
But weighty water, as her nature guides,
Lies on the lap of earth ; and mother Earth subsides.
All things are mixed of these, which all contain.
And into these are all resolved again :
Earth rarifies to dew ; expanding more
The subtile dew in air begins to soar :
Spreads as she files and weary of the name,
Extenuates still and changes into flame.
Thus having by degrees perfection won,
Restless they soon untwist the web they spun.
And fire begins to lose her radiant hue,
Mix'd with gross air, and air descends in dew :
And dew condensing does her form forego
And sinks a heavy lump of earth below.
Thus are their figures never at a stand.
But changed by Nature's innovating hand.'"

• Diogenes Laertius, Life of Pythagoras. That Monad and Duad, in the symboUcm]
language of Pythagoras, signified Mind and Matter, is positively stated by Philo JudKos.
'EtrdfiivoQ $* aKoXov^t^ ^itotiaq k^khvo XI^« 5r» fiovdc fikv toriv eUttv diriov
vpwTov, dvAc S( rroBtiTtic Kal diatpirriQ ^\ffc,—Dt Specialibus Legibus. It maybe
proper to mention here that it is not true, as has been often stated in modem woiks,
that Pythagoras himself taught the same system of the world as Copernicus ; the firmt
person who did so was Philolaus the Pythagorean phUosopher. See Diogenes Laertiiu.

« Jamblichus, Life of Pythogaras, § 27. I have adopted the emendation of the
text proposed by Obrechtus.

3 Ovid's Metamorph., translated by Dryden, Book xv.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 135

THE PLATONISTS.

" Let lift therefore say that the mother, or receptacle of every
visible^ nay of every sensible prodaction, is neither earth, nor
air, nor fire, nor water, nor any of the things which arise ont
of these, nor out of which these arise, but a certain invisible and
formless being, the imiversal recipient, concerning which being,
if we say that it is in a very dubious way intelligible, and
something most hard to be apprehended, we shall not speak
false.'' ^

The primary matter '' admits of everything, but partakes of
no shape nor resemblance to anything which enters into it.
It is the substance of impression^ to everything in nature,
being moved and altered by those things which enter into it,
{the forms ?), and by their means it appears sometimes one
thing and sometimes another.'' '

'* In the first place, we see that which we call water, being
compressed, become stones and earth. But being dissolved
and expanded, it becomes breath and air. Air, by combustion,
is converted into fire, which, being compressed and extinguished,
assumes its original form. Fire and air meeting together, and
being condensed, become cloud and vapour; and from the
condensation of these, running water is formed. And from
water again, earth and stones are formed.''^

Plato taught " that Ood, matter, and form, are the originab
of all things : — ^that matter is increate and incorruptible,
neither fire, nor water, nor any of the principles nor elements,
but a substance capable of form and subject to fabrication :

* Plato, in his Timseus.

' 'RKfiaytiov, Harris, in his Philosophical ArrangemeDts, translates this word
hy "impression;" but it does not, strictly speaking, signify impression, but the sub-
stance which receives the impression. Wax, for example, is not the impression of
the seal, but the substance which receives the impression. Matter, in like manner,
is not the impression of forms, but the substance which receives the impression.

' Plato, in his Timseus.

* Ibid. These opinions regarding the elements and the first matter are expressed
with much precision and clearness ; but, in other parts of his Timseus, it must be
admitted that he betrays some confusion of ideas on this sub>ect, as is remarked by
his illustrious pupil Aristotle (De Ortn et Interitu, ti, 1). A translation of part of
Plato's Timseus regarding the elements, may be seen in the Somnium Scipionis of
Macrobius, lib. i.



136 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. in.

that when rude and deprived of every quality of configuration,
God, the artificer, formed the universe firom it. He taught,
that matter is the original of all bodies, that it was stamped
with the impression of forms, and hence were produced the
elements, namely, fire, water, earth, and air.^^ ^

'^ Earth contains water, and water, as some suppose, carries
earth : air is formed from water, and firom dense air fire is
formed.^'*

^^ There being four kinds of bodies, by the mutual changes
of them the nature of the world is preserved. For water is
formed from earth, and air from water, and ether from air :
and then inversely, from ether, air ; from air, water ; and from
water, earth, which is lowest in the scale.'^ '

" Those who have investigated matter, if they have formed
any right conception of it, have agreed in considering it as the
subject and receptacle of forms.^' *

'^ Concerning the receptacle of bodies this may be said. In
the first place, that there must be a certain substratum to bodies
different from themselves, is demonstrated by the transmutation
of the elements into one another. For that wliich is changed
is not altogether consumed, or, if it is, a substance is changed
into a non-entity. And neither has that which is bom come
into existence from nothing, but it has undergone a change
from one form into another. For something remains which
has received the new form and cast off the other. And this
is shown by destruction, for it applies only to a compound body;
and, if this be true, every such body is compounded of matter
and form. Induction bears testimony to the truth of this,
by showing, that whatever is dissolved was compounded; and
analysis in the same manner, as, for example, if a phial be
resolved into gold, and gold into water ; and water, in like man-
ner, when it perishes, requires to be something analogous. But
the elements must be either form, or primary matter, or a
compound of form and matter. But they cannot be form, for
without matter, how could they be possessed of bulk and mag-
nitude ? But they are not primary matter, for it is not con-

* Apuleins the Platonic PhUosopher, On Natural Philosophy.
' Idem, On the Uni-vene.

' Cicero, On the Nature of the Gods, ii, 33.

* Plotlnus, £nnead ii, 4.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 137

Bumed. It follows^ thes^ that they must consist of form and
the primary matter. But form regards quality and shape^ but
it (the primary matter) pertains to the subject which is inde-
terminate, {aopuiTov or aoparov) because it is not {otm"^

" Matter of itself is devoid of form, matter is the subject of
aU things." «

^' The followers of Plato and Aristotle are of opinion, that
there is a difference between the first principles and the ele-
ments. For, the elements are compounded, but the first
principles are not compounded nor formed from any thing.
What we call the elements are fire, air, earth, and water ; but
we call that a principle which has nothing from which it is
formed, since otherwise it is not a principle, but that from
which it is formed. But there is something antecedent to
Iwater and earth, from which they are formed; namely, the
first matter which is devoid of shape and form ; then there is
form (which we call entelocheia) and privation.'^ ^

'' Plato, wishing to prove that the elements have one common
matter as a substratum to all, in his ' Timseus,' enters into a
discussion regarding their transmutation into one another.
But he being well acquainted with the art of demonstration, has
treated properly of the change of the first bodies into one an-
other. But Thales, Anaximenes, Anaximander, and Heraclitus,
assuming each that there is some one element, endeavour to
prove this from their changing into one another. Yet all
these seem to me to have had an obscure idea (oVciparrtiv) of some
matter, which is a common substratum to all the elements, and
seeing that it is single they supposed that there is but one
element. But instead of saying that this is a common element
firom which the others, I mean air, fire, water, and earth, are
formed, they passed it over altogether and endeavoured to de-
monstrate the same thing of some one of the elements, all
proceeding upon the same mode of demonstration, although
they did not all make choice of the same element.'^ ^

''With regard to the old philosophers, called physical, it
will be obvious to us when we read their writings on Nature,

' PlotiniUi Ennead ii, 6.

* Proclas, Inst. Tbeol., 72.

' Plutarch, On the Opinions of the Philosophers.

^ Galen, On the Elements, &c, iu



^



f



I3S PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

that thej held the existence of a tirst matter which is increate
and eternal, being the substratnm to all created and perceptible
things/' 1

" That the elements change into one another is admitted,
even by the followers of Thales, it being so apparent. Hence
it is inferred that the elements hare one common matter for a
substratum/'^

Philo, the platonic Jew of Alexandria, in his treatise ' On
the Creation of the World/ thus expresses his opinions regarding
the original state of matter. *' Whoever would wish to discover
the cause why tliis universe was framed, would not be tar from
the truth, in my opinion, if he said with one of the ancients,
that the Father and Maker of it is good, and for that reason
he spared not to impart of his most excellent nature to a sub-
stance having nothing beautiful in itself, but possessing the
capacity of becoming all things. Of itself it was devoid of
form, quality, and life ; and was full of contrariety, confusion,
and dissonance/'

" Moses, the chief of philosophers, and instructed in many
of the most comprehensive secrets of Nature by oracles, was
aware that it was most necessary that there should be in the
universe an active cause and a passive subject. That the
active is the most pure and perfect soul of the universe, more
excellent than virtue, more excellent than knowledge, more
excellent than even goodness and beauty. That the passive
is of itself without life and motion, but being moved and
figured, and enlivened by mind, it was changed into a most
perfect work." '

His opinion regarding the elements may be collected from
the following passages : — '' Fire being extinguished is con-
verted into thick air, and air being compressed subsides into
water, and water being still more compressed is changed into
earth, the densest of the elements."^

*' Nothing that is pure can be comprehended by the senses.*'*

''The elements are inanimate matter, of itself devoid of

> Galen, Commentary on the Nature of Man.
^ Idem, On the Elements, Sec.
» Philo, on the Creation of the World.
^ On the Indestructihility of the Universe.
'' On the Creation.



SBCT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 139



motion^ and subjected to the artificer^ bj whom it is trans- i

formed into all kinds of shapes and qualities.^' ^

I shall venture to give under this head the opinions of one
c^ the Arabian medical authors.

" It is to be kept in mind that the elements which are per-
ceived by the senses^ namely^ fire^ air^ earthy and water^ are by
no means the pure elements^ but such as are comprehended by
the mind. These are not to be perceived by the senses. None
of the others is pure^ nor without some admixture.''^

THE PERIPATETICS.

Aristotle defines the first matter as foUows : '' I call matter
the first subject of everything^ all things being formed from it
existing in them not accidentally ; and when anything is de-
stroyed, it comes to this at last.^

In his Logical work he thus defines his ideas regarding the first
substances, namely, mind and matter. '' The first substances
being the subjects of all other things, and as every other thing
may be predicated by them and exists in them, are called the
prime substances.^

" We must distinguish the first bodies from matter, for we
must suppose concerning them that they have a first principle
and origin, namely, matter, which is inseparable from them,
and is the subject of the contraries. For heat does not furnish
the materials to cold, nor it to heat, but the subject to both.
So that we have first the sensible body in potentiality, the first
principle ; then we have the contraries, I mean cold and heat ;
and thirdly, fire and water, and the like. These change into
one another, and not as Empedocles and others say of them.^

'' The material of all bodies, great and small, is the same.
This is apparent ; for when air is formed from water, the same
matter, when it becomes another thing, acquires nothing
new, only that which formerly existed in capacity now exists
actually.'^ •

The following extracts will show the opinions of his most
celebrated commentators :

* On A Contemplative Life. * Haly Abbas, Theor., i, 5.

* Ausculi. Natur.y i, near the end. * Categor.
^ On Birth and Death, ii, 1. * Auscolt. PhTS., iv.



140 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

" Air and fire have one common character^ namely, heat ;
therefore they readily change into one another. Air and water
readily change into one another, for they have a common
character^ namely^ moisture. In like manner, water and earth,
for they have an alliance, namely, coldness.^''

'^ The physical philosophers analyse any substance, as, for
example, a man into head, hands, and feet ; and these into
bones, flesh, and nerves ; and these into the four elements ;
and these again into matter and form.'

" Water is formed from air, and air from water, and fire firom
air, because they all have one common substratum, matter.^' '

The next two extracts will show the opinions entertained by
Aristotle's successor in the Peripatetic school of philosophy.

" Of the simple substances, fire has peculiar powers. For air,
water, and earth, admit only of changes into one another^ but
none of them can produce itself.^'*

'^ The nature of those substances called simple is mixed, and
existing in one another.^'*

" The Peripatetics divided Nature into two things, the one
of which is efficient, and the other that which furnishes it with
the materials from which anything is made. Power exists in
the one, and matter is the essence of the other.^'^

" The first principles are air, fire, water, and earth, for firom
them are formed all living things and the productions of the
earth: they are therefore called elements ; of these, air and fire
have the power of moving and forming the others (I mean water
and earth), of receiving or suffering. Besides these, Aristotle
thought that there is a fifth element, from which the stars and the
souls of individuals are made ; but that all these had for a sub-
stratum a certain matter devoid of form and quality, from which
all things are framed, a substance which has a capacity for all
things, and admits of all changes, that when it perishes it is
not reduced to nothing, but into its parts, which can be cut
and divided infinitely, since there is nothing in Nature that is
not divisible."^

1 Simpliciusi Comment, in Auscult. Nat., iv.

' Ammonias, Comment, in Porphyr. Introd. ' Ibid.

* Theophi-astus, On Fire. ^ Ibid.

* Cicero, Qasd. Acad., i, 6. ? Ibid., 7.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 141

THE STOICS.

*' They are of opinion that the first principles of all things
are two — the active and the passive : that the passive is matter^
a being devoid of all qualities ; the active^ or efficient^ is the
reason (Xoyoc) residing in it^ that is^ God. That he^ being
eternal, fabricates all things from it all (all matter?). That
there is a dificrence between the first principles and the
elements — that the former are increate and indestructible,
whilst the elements are destructible by burning {iKrrvfuotriv). —
That the first principles are bodies devoid of form, whereas
the elements are possessed of form. That Grod and Mind,
Fate and Jupiter, are one and the same being under difierent
appellations; that he formed the four elements, fire, air, water,
earth.'^^

" Our Stoics say, that there are two principles in Nature from
which all things are formed, namely, cause and matter. That
matter lies inert, a being prepared for all things, but inactive,
unless some one move it. — That cause, that is, reason, forms
matter, and changes it at will. There must be something by^
which everything is made and o/ which it is made : the former
is the cause, the latter the matter .^'^

** Some of our sect are of opinion that air, being changeable
into fire and water, &c.^'^

" We are of opinion that earth is changeable. To this we
may add that aU things are formed from aU things— air from
water — water from air — fire from air — air from fire; why,
then, should not earth be formed from water, and water from
earth? Earth is formed from water — why then not water from
earth ?^'*

" The Stoics divided Nature into two things, the one of which
is the efficient, and the other that which furnishes itself as the
materials from which anything is made.^^^

Suidas says, regarding the first principles : '' The first prin-
ciples of all things are two, the efficient and the passive. The
passive, then, is a being devoid of qualities — earth, matter.

' Diogenes Laertiiu, in the Life of Zeno the Stoic The reader must take care
not to confound him with Zeno the Eclectic.

* Seneca, Ep. 65. ' Seneca, Nat. Quiest., ii, 15.

* Seneca, Nat. Qosest., iii, 10. * Lactantius. Div. Inst, iii, 3.



142 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. ui.

The efficient is the reason residing in it^ namely^ God. The
principles and elements are different, inasmuch as the former
are increate and indestructible, while the elements are destruc-
tible by burning. Besides, the first principles are without
body and form, but the elements have form.^'^

*^ Zeno, the son of Mnaseas, the Citiensian, taught that there
are two principles, God and matter, the one efficient and the
other passive ; and that there are four elements.^'^

'^ The Stoics maintain that the first principles are two, God
and matter ; not that they consider God as an element, but as
the active principle, whilst matter is the passive.^'^

'' Always remember the saying of Heraclitus, that the dis-
solution of earth is to become water, and the dissolution of water
to become earth ; and the dissolution of air to become fire, and
conversely"^

" Contemplate the courses of the stars as if carried about
with them, and frequently revolve in your mind the mutual
transmutations of the elements into one another.^'^

" Acquire the habit of contemplating the transmutation of
all things into one another.^'^

" Fire, air, water, earth, were so formed by Nature as to
furnish aliment by turns to one another/'^

' See under &px<^'

* Plutarch, Concerning the Opinions of the Philosophers.

* SimpHciuSy Comm. in Aristot. Aoscult. Nat., p. 7 ; ed. Aid.

* Marcus Antoninus, iv, 46.

» Ibid. • Ibid.

7 Manilios, Astron., iii, 53 : —

" Principium rerum et cnstos natura latentftm
Cum tantas strueret moles per inania mundi :

« « « «

Aeraque et terras flammamque undamque natantem
Mutua in altemum pnebere alimenta juberet."



It



SJ5CT. ni.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 143



THE EPICUREANS.

Therefore all those who teach things took their birth

From simple fire, or water, air, or earth,

Lie under palpable mistakes. And those

That teach from doubled elements they rose,

As air and fire, as earth and water joined.

Or all four, earth, air, water, fire combined :

Thus sung Empedocles.

« « • «

If all things from four elements arose,
And are again by death dissolved to those :
What reason we should rather fondly deem
Them principles of things, than things from them ?
For they aUematefy are changed and show
Bach other'e figure and their nature too** '

The following passage will show the opinions of Democritus^
the contemporary and friend of Hippocrates^ from whom
Epicurus took his system of physics.* " He taught that the
atoms are infinite in magnitude and number^ that they re-
voWe in all space^ and that thus they formed the compound
bodies fire^ water, air, earth; for that even these are composed
from the atoms^ which are impassive and unchangeable owing
to their hardness/'*

These extracts prove clearly that the great philosophers of
antiquity stand acquitted of having held the erroneous opinions
generally ascribed to them respecting the elements of things^
and that nothing can be farther from the truth than the ac-
count of the Peripatetic doctrines given by Dr. "Watson. In-
stead of maintaining^ as he carelessly represents^ that *' earthy
air^ fire^ and water are distinct, uncompounded, immutable
principles ;'' they taught, on the contrary, as we have shown, that
all the elements are modifications of one common substance
called the primary matter, and consequently they held, like
himself, that ''the elements are different magnitudes, figures,
and arrangements of particles of matter of the same kind/'
This primary matter they demonstrated to be devoid of all
qualiiy and form, but susceptible of all forms and qualities.^

* Lucretiiis, Of the Nature of Things, Book i, translated by Creech.
' Cioero, Acad. Qusest., i, 2 ; Galen, de Elementis.

' Diogenes Laertius, Life of Democritus.

* 'H f^Xif <5irou>(. Galen, de Element, ex Hippocrat.



144 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

In the language of the Peripatetics^ it is everytliing in capa-
city, but nothing in actuality. They held that there are two
original principles, both increate and indestructible; the one
matter, the universal passive principle^ — the material from
which all things are formed ; and the other, the efficient cause
by which all things are made : — ^that the one is possessed of
universal privation, and the other of universal energy : — ^that
it is the one which impresses, and the other which receives the
forms of all things. They maintained that the original mate-
rials out of which all objects in the universe are composed
being the same, bodies owe their characteristic qualities not to
their substance, but to their form. The elements, then, ac-
cording to the notions of the ancient philosophers, are the first
matter arranged into certain distinguishing forms by the
efficient cause. That form with which solidity is associated
they call earth, under which they ranged all metals, stones,
and the like, for all these they held to be allied to one another
in nature, as well as in the form under which they are pre-
sented to our senses. The next arrangement of created sub-
stances is that which constitutes fluidity, and is called water,
under which term they comprehended not only the native
element, but every other modification of matter which assumes
a similar form, namely, all juices of vegetables and fluids of
animals.^ Some of their earliest speculators in philosophy
maintained that all the materials which compose the universe
existed at one time in this form ; and it is curious to reflect
that modem geology has reproduced nearly the same doctrine.
The third form of matter, as presented to oiur sense of touch,
is air, under which the ancient philosophers comprehended all

1 The eternity of matter is a doctrine which was maintained by all the ancient
philosophers and by several of the Christian fathers of the chnrch, bat is gene-
rally rejected by oar modem divines as being, in ihdr opinion, contradictory to
Revelation. Bat were it really so, it would hardly have found an advocate in the
learned and pious author of 'PanuUse Lost.' That such was truly hisopinioncan
now admit of no doubt, from what he states on the subject in his treatise oa
Christianity, published some years ago by the present Archbishop of Canteibory;
and the same might have been inferred from more than one passage in his great
poem. The Jewish philosopher, Philo, seems to admit the eternity of matter, al-
though he denies the eternity of the world. (On the Creation.)

* " There are varieties,'' says Strabo, " of the watery element ; for this kind is
saltish, and that sweet, and fit for drink; and others again poisonous, salataiy, deadlyt
cold, and hot.*' — Geograph., xvii, 1. See also Aristot., MeteoroL



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 145

matter in an aerial state, such as water converted into vapour,
and what are now called gases. Whether or not they believed
the atmosphere which surrounds this earth to be a homo-
geneous substance, in nowise affects the general principles of
their philosophy; for it is the same thing, as far as regards
their classification, whether they held that the atmosphere con-
sists of one or of several distinct combinations of the primary
matter with form. As they were well aware that several dis-
tinct modifications of matter are comprehended under each of
the other elements, it can hardly be doubted that they inferred
the like of air; and, indeed, it is quite apparent from the works
of Gralen that he knew very well that some kinds of air are
favorable, and others unfavorable to respiration and combustion.^
But those phenomena which we ascribe to oxygen gas, they,
without doubt, would have attributed to the operations of some
modification of the element fire. By fire, they meant matter in
its extreme state of tenuity and refinement. Of this elementary
principle, Plato* and Theophrastus* have enumerated many
varieties, and have speculated regarding their nature with great
precision and acuteness. The ancient philosophers believed
that fire is universally diffused through the universe, being
sometimes in a sensible, and sometimes in latent state ; or, as
Aristotle expressed it, heat exists sometimes in capacity, and
sometimes in energy.^ They attributed the phenomena of
lightning to an unequal distribution of this elemental fire.^
This is the element with which they supposed life to be most
intimately connected ; and, indeed, some of them would appear
to have considered fire as the very essence of the soul. " I am

' Aristotle inquires whether the atmosphere be a single substance or many, and
if many, of how many it consists. (Meteorol., i, 3.) I may be allowed to remark in
this place, that Galen's ideas regarding respiration are wonderfully accurate, and not
Tcry different from those now entertained by the profession. Thus he compares the
process of respiration to combustion, and says it produces the same change upon
atmospheric air. He further agrees with modem physiologists in considering it as the
Tital operation by which the innate (or animal) heat is preserved. (De Respiratione.)
Compare this treatise with Baron Cuvier's admirable section on Respiration, and
obsenre on how many points these two great physiologists agree. (Le9on8 d'Anatom.
Compar., 26.)

• Timseus. » De Igne.

• De Partibus Animalium, ii, 2. His great commentator, Averrhoes the Arabian,
states this distinction very correctly. See Cantic. Avicenns, tr. v.

• Lncan's Pharsalia, i, 157, 606.

10



146 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

of opinion/' says the author of one of the Hippocratic treatises^
'^that what we call heat is immortal, and understands, sees,
and hears all things that are or will be.^'^ This doctrine,
which, to say the least of it, is not very judiciously expressed
in this passage, is thus corrected by the great master of logic
and philosophy : " Some," says Aristotle, " improperly call fire
or some such power the soul ; but it would be better to say
that the soul subsists in such a body, because heat is, of all
bodies, the one most obedient to the operations of the soid ; for
to nourish and move are the operations of the soul, and these
she performs by the instrumentality of this power {or quality?).
To say that the soul is fire, is as if one were to call a saw or
a wimble the artisan or his art, because his work is accom-
plished in co-operation with these instruments. From this it
appears why animals stand in need of heat.^'^ And in like
manner he says, in another of his works : " Some are of
opinion that the nature of fire is plainly the cause of nourish-
ment and of growth; for it appears to be the only body or
element which nourishes and increases itself. Wlierefore one
might suppose that it is this that operates both in plants and
in animals. Yet it is but the co-cause {avvairiov)} for ii is
not, properly speaking, the cause, but rather the soid. For the
increase of fire is indeterminate in so far as it is supplied with
fuel. But of natural substances there is a certain limit and
reason (Xo'yoc) of magnitude and increase. This belongs to
the soul rather than to fire, to the reason rather than to the
matter.''*

From these observations, coupled with the information
supplied in the preceding extracts, it will be perceived that,
although . there be, at first sight, a great discrepancy among
physical doctrines of the ancient philosophers, they differed, in
fact, much less than they would appear to do, only that some
[ of them expressed themselves more scientifically than others in

' De Carnibiu. (See the preceding section.) In like manner Phomatns sap,
" our souls arc fire." (De Nature Deorum, ap. Gale's Opuscula Mytkologica, p. 142.)
I Such is also said to have been the doctrine of Hippocrates and Democritus. See

^ Macrobius (Somnium Scipiouis, i, 14) ; and Nemesius (de Nat. Hominis). In the

Hippocratic treatise De Septimadibus, which M. Littre has discovered in Latin, the
essence of the soul is held to be heat. (Ed. Littr^, i, p. 391.)
' De Partibus Animalium, ii, 7. ' De Anima, ii, 4.



SECT, m.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 147

handling the subject of the elements. Thus^ although Thales
seems to hold water y and Anaximander air, and Heraclitus^re^
to be original principles, we have eveiy reason to believe that,
as Griden says (1. c), even they had an idea that these are not
simple substances, but merely modifications of one unformed
principle, the first matter, from which they conceived that all
bodies in the universe are constructed. Contrary, then, to
what is very generally supposed, it would appear that there
was at bottom no very great difference of opinion between the
philosophers of the Ionic school and those of the other sects,
namely, the Pythagoreans, Platonists, Peripatetics, Stoics, and
Epicureans ,- and further, that, from the earliest dawn of
philosophy, down to the time when it fell into neglect and
came to be misunderstood, the physical doctrines of the philo*
sophers underwent l)ut little variation.

From the elements, then, constructed in the manner now
explained, out of the primary matter, the ancient philosophers
taught that all the secondary bodies in the universe are formed,
and as they maintained the transmutability of the elements
into one another, so, in like manner, they did not hesitate to
proclaim it as a great general truth '' that all things are con-
vertible into all things.'^^ The possibility, then, of such per-
mutations will not, I presume, be questioned by any one who
has formed correct ideas of the powers of the Great First
Cause, and the capacities of the first subject. Matter, and that
such permutations do actually take place in the course of
Nature may be inferred from many phenomena of daily occur-
rence in the vegetable and animal world. It cannot have
escaped the most careless observation what changes the great
pabulum, water, undergoes in the process of vegetation — how
it is converted into various woods, and barks, and leaves, and
flowers, all of which are resolvable, by the process of decay, into
air, or reducible into earth. It is also well known that,
although a more unfrequent occurrence, all the solid parts of
a tree may undergo a mutation into rock, that is to say, may
become petrified. But it is in the higher classes of animals
that these changes of simple matter admit of the greatest variety.

• "On irov U irai/roc yivkft^at irl^vre.— Ariatot, dc Ortu et Interitu, ct Auscul-
tationes Natarales, i.



H8 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

Let us contemplate for a moment some of the most remarkable
mutations which any article of food^ (as^ for example, flour-
bread), which has been presented to the stomach, is destined to
undergo in the animal frame. We know that the vital powers
of the stomach will convert the starch, of which it principally
consists, into a fluid state, that is to say, into what is called
first chyme, and afterwards, when it has undergone some further
change, is denominated chyle by the physiologists. Having
been thus changed, it passes, by a process about the nature of
which physiologists are still strangely divided in opinion, into
certain vessels ; and then, in some manner still less understood,
it is converted into a fluid sui generis, called blood, abounding
in globules of a singular construction, all fabricated, no doubt,
from the food, but, by some occult process, wldch has hitherto
defied the skilful manipulation of the chemist, and the accurate
observation of the microscopist, to explain in any satisfactoiy
manner.^ And so complete is the transformation that scarcely
one particle of the original food can be detected in the new
product by all the vaunted tests of modem science. But blood
is soon after converted into many other fluid and solid sub-
stances — into bones, cartilages, muscles, and vessels, and into
bile, mucus, and other recrementitious matters, all differing
greatly from one another, both in their appearances and in
their properties.* And when all the component parts of the
animal frame are constructed, and each seems to have acquired
a determinate structure, should the vital actions by which they
are formed become deranged, we may see the fair fabric undergo
the most wonderful mutations, so that arteries are converted
into bones, and bones into flesh and jelly .^ So many and so
extraordinary are the changes which a simple alimentary sub-
stance may undergo in the animal frame ! And if we admit,
with the ancient philosophers, that every such substance is
resolvable into one or more of the elements, and that all the

* See Simon's Chemistry, vol. i, p. 118, and the authorities there referred to.

' Baron Cnvier says : " En un mot, toutes les fonctions animales paroissent en
reduire a des transformations de fluides ; et c*est dans la maniere dont ces trans-
formations s'op^rent, que git le veritable secret de cette admirable ^nomie.''—
Lemons d'Anatom. Comp., lib. i.

' It will be readily understood that allusion is here made to the diseases ossifica-
tion and osteosarcoma.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 149

elements are bat different modifications of one common matter^
how wonderful a thing must Form be^ since it imparts such
varied appearances and qualities to one common substratum ?

In detailing these opinions of the ancient philosophers^ it is
not my present business to determine whether they be true or
not ; my task is fulfilled^ if I have given a distinct and faithful
exposition of them^ so that their real import and meaning may
be readily comprehended by the medical reader. I may be
allowed to remark^ however^ that^ strange although that Protean
beings the primary matter^ may appear to be to such men
of science as are not disposed to recognise the existence of any
substance which cannot be subjected to their senses^ and who
refuse to admit the legitimacy of every process of analysis^ but
what is conducted in the laboratory of the chemist^ opinions
similar to those of the ancient philosophers have been held by
some of the most profound thinkers and distinguished experi-
mentalists of modem times. Thus Lord Bacon^ the reputed
father of the inductive philosophy^ appears to admit all the
tenets of the ancients regarding the first matter^ which^ like
them^ he considers to have been embodied in the Homeric
fable of Proteus.^ He says, in reference to it, '^ that under
the person of Proteus is signified Matter, the most ancient of
all things, next to the Deity; that the herd of Proteus was
nothing else than the ordinary species of animals, plants, and
metals, into which matter appears to diffuse, and, as it were, to
consume itself; so that, after it has formed and finished those
several species, (its task being, in a manner, complete,) it
appears to sleep and be at rest, nor to labour at, attempt, or
prepare any species farther.'^^ That learned and accomplished
scholar, Mr. Harris, in his work on 'Philosophical Arrange-
ments/ writes thus on the subject we are now treating of:
'^ Here, then, we have an idea (such as it is) of that singular
being, the Primary Matter, a Being which those philosophers who

' The same application of this myth is made by Eustatheus, the commentator on
Homer (ad Odyss., iv, 417), and by Heraclides Ponticus (Gale's Opuscula Mytholog.,
p. 490). The 'words of Heraclides are very striking : " That hence it was with good
reason that the formless matter was called Proteus; and that Providence which
modified each being with its peculiar form and character was called Eidothia.''

' De Sapient. Vet., cap. xiii.



150 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. hi.

are immerged in sensible subjects know not well how to admit,
though they cannot well do without it ; a Being which flies the
perception of every sense, and which is at best, even to the
intellect, but a negative object, no otherwise comprehensible
than either by analogy or abstraction.

" We gain a glimpse of it by abstraction, when we say that
the first matter is not the lineaments and complexion which
make the beautiful face; nor yet the flesh and blood which
make these lineaments and that complexion j nor yet the liquid
and solid aliments, which make that flesh and blood; nor yet
the simple bodies of earth and water, which make those various
aliments; biit something which, being below all these, and
supporting them all, is yet different from them all, and essen-
tial to their existence.

'' We obtain a sight of it by analogy when we say that, as
is the brass to the statue, the marble to the pillar, the timber
to the ship, or any one secondary matter to any secondary form ;
so is the First and Original Matter to all forms in general/'^

Nay, the illustrious Sir Isaac Newton would seem, in the
following extract, to countenance the profound speculations of
the ancient philosophers with respect to the elements, and the
transmutations of these substances into one another. He says,
*' Are not gross bodies and light {or ether) convertible into one
another ? — and may not bodies receive much of their activity
from the particles of light which enter into their composition ?
The changing of bodies into light and of light into bodies is
very agreeable to the course of Nature, which seems delighted
with permutations. Water, which is a very fluid tasteless salt,
she changes by heat into vapour, a sort of air ; and by cold into
ice, which is a hard, pellucid, brittle, fusible stone, and this
stone returns into water by heat, and vapour returns into water
by cold. Earth, by heat, becomes fire, and by cold returns
into earth.'^^

* Op. cit., iv.

' These opinions of Newton bear a strong resemblance to those of Strabo, as ex-
pressed in the following passage : " Since all things are in motion and imdogoing
great changes, it is to be supposed that neither does the earth always remain the
same, so as neither to be augmented nor diminished ; nor yet water ; nor that either
always possesses the same seat, for that a change of one thing into another seems very
much according to nature. For that much earth is converted into water, and mocfa
water into earth."— Geograph., xvii, 1.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 151

I may farther mention that all the late researches of chemical
philosophers have tended to confirm the tenets of the ancients
regarding the Elements. Thus in that very singular perform-
ance ' The Elements of Physiophilosophy/ by Dr. Lorenz Oken,
the productions of the mineral kingdom are classified, very
much in accordance with the ancient arrangement, into four
classes, namely, into Earth-earths, Water-earths, Air-earths,
and Fire-earths.^ It is also well known that chemical experi-
ment has lately established that several animal and vegetable
substances, such as albumen, fibrin, and casein, which were
formerly looked upon as distinct substances, are all but modi-
fications of one substance, which is now regarded as the original
of all the tissues ; and further, that protein, in every respect
identical with that which forms the basis of the three aforesaid
animal principles, may be obtained from similar elements in
the vegetable kingdom.^ And if every step which we advance in
the knowledge of the intimate structure of things leads us to con-
tract the number of substances formerly held to be simple, I would
not wonder if it should yet turn out that oxygen, carbon, hydro-
gen, and nitrogen are, like what the ancients held the elements
to be — all nothing else but diflFerent modifications of one ever-
changing matter. But I will not indulge further in such
speculations, especially as I have reason to apprehend that I
may be thought to be wandering from my own proper sphere
in thus prosecuting researches which may be supposed to have
but a distant bearing on the subject now in hand. I must,
however, be allowed again to repeat my declaration, that it is
impossible to comprehend the theories contained in the Hippo-
cratic treatises without a proper acquaintance with the Physical
Philosophy of the ancients, and that these principles have been
misapprehended and misrepresented most unaccountably by
modem writers, so as to occasion corresponding mistakes with
regard to ancient medicine. I trust, then, that my present
labours will not be ineffectual in preventing such mistakes in
future ; though, at the same time, knowing, as I well do, the

' See p. 120, Ray Society's edition.

• Sec Simon's Chemistry, vol. i, p. 5 ; Sydenham Society's edition. The etymology
of the term protein is there given from itptarkvia, I am first ; but it may more pro-
perly be derived from Proteus, to which, as we have mentioned above, the first matter
was likened.



152 PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE. [sect. in.

practical bent of British science at the present day^ I cannot
but be apprehensive that a certain portion of my readers will
lend a deaf ear to speculative opinions^ of which they cannot
recognise the importance^ and will be disposed to discard the
doctrines of the ancient philosophers before they have rightly
comprehended their import :

*' Nee mea dona tibi studio comporta fideli
InteUecta prius quam sint, contempta relinquaa."'

I am sensible^ too^ that I may have just reason to suspect

that I still retain a too partial fondness for the fascinating

studies in which I indulged at one period^ beyond what,

perhaps, was prudent in a physician, and that it would have

been better for me if I had taken a lesson from the mythical

hero of the ^ Odyssey/ and had resisted the enchanting voice of

the ancient Siren when she sought to allure me £rom the active

duties of a professional life, with the confident assurance that

I should leave her " much delighted, and with an increase of
knowledge.^'2

Before concluding, I will briefly recapitulate the results to
which our present inquiry has conducted us : —

1st. That many of the medical theories which occur in the
Hippocratic treatises are founded on the physical philosophy of
the ancients, and more particularly on their doctrines with
regard to the elements of things.

2d. That all the great sects of the ancient philosopherlB held
that the four elements, namely, fire, air, earth, and water, are
transmutable into one another, being all of a homogeneous
nature, and based upon one common substratum, namely, the
primary matter.

* Lucretius, de R. N., i, 48.

' I have always looked upon the story of the Sirens as being one of the most
beautiful fictions in the Homeric poems. By the two Sirens I cannot but thijik
that the poet meant to represent Philosophy and Melody, these being, as it were, the
handmaids of Poetry. They assail the yirtue of Ulysses with no vulgar temptations,
by assuring him that they were well acquainted with all the martial exploits in which
he had been engaged, and that he would leave them *' much delighted, and with an
increase of knowledge."

'A\X' oye Ttpyj/afitvo^ vitrai Kai irXkiova it^ctfc*

Odyss. xii, 188.



SECT. III.] PHYSICAL PHILOSOPHY. 153

3d. That^ by reasoning from observation and analogy^ the
ancient philosophers arrived at the conclusion that this primary
matter is a substance devoid of all qualities and form's^ but
susceptible of all forms and qualities.

4th. That although certain of the philosophers^ the contem-
poraries and predecessors of Hippocrates^ appear to hold that
some one of the elements^ such as fire or water^ was the original
of all things^ even these had an idea^ although not expressed by
them in a definite manner, of a first matter, which serves as a
basis to all the elements.

5th. That these doctrines of the ancient philosophers,
whether well founded or not, are countenanced by many eminent
names in modem literature and philosophy.

6th. That the opinion generidly entertained regarding the
doctrines of the ancient philosophers on this subject is altogether
erroneous.



THE



WORKS OF HIPPOCRATES.



ON ANCIENT MEDICINE.



ON ANCIENT MEDICINE.



THE ARGUMENT.

Although^ as stated in the second section of the Preliminary
Discourse^ the evidence in support of this treatise be unfortu-
nately not such as clearly to establish its genuineness^ all who
read it with attention must admit that it is replete with im-
portant matters^ and that if not the production of Hippocrates^ it
is not unworthy of his high reputation. Notwithstanding, then,
that I am by no means so well convinced as M. Littre is, that
the work is genuine, I have not hesitated to follow his example
in placing it at the head of the list, as the nature of its contents
is such as to form an excellent introduction to the study of the
Hippocratic medicine.

It contains, as M. Littr^ remarks, a polemic, a method, and a
system. The polemic is directed against those of his predecessors
who had corrupted medicine by introducing hypotheses into it as
the causes of diseases, such as heat, cold, moisture, and dryness.
These it will be seen that he combats with great force of argu-
ment and clearness of illustration. The philosophical dogma
to which he is supposed to refer in this place are those of the
section of the Pythagoreans, called the Eleatic, who would
appear to have held nearly the same opinions as Pythagoras
himself with regard to the elements J But, in fact, as I trust
I have clearly made out in the third section of the Preliminary

' Diogenes Laertius, in fact, states that Xenophanes, the foander of the school,
held the doctrine of the four elements. On the Eleatic philosophy, see further,
Aristotle (de Xenophane ; and Metaphys., i, 5) ; and, of the modern authorities, Ritter
(History of Ancient Philosophy, vol. i) and Grote (Hist, of Greece, torn, iv, p. 518, &c.)
Whether or not these modem authors, however, have rightly apprehended the doc-
trine of Xenophanes and Anaumander with regard to the elements, may, I think, be
justly doubted. Dr. Thirlwall gives a very judicious exposition of the ethical opinions of
the Eleatic philosophers, but does not touch on their physical. (Hist, of Greece, k l^O



158 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

Discourse^ all the ancient philosophers held substantially the
same opinion regarding the elements^ although they did not
all express themselves in the same terms. It is of little con-
sequence^ then^ to attempt to find out what particular class of
philosophers our author directs his attack against, it being
sufficient to say that he decidedly condemns the practice of
founding the rules of medical practice on hypothesis.^ I may
here remark, that the censure thus bestowed on hypothetical
systems applies to modern times as well as to ancient, to those
who proclaim theories by which, like Broussais, they account
for all diseases upon figments which they call inflammations,
and those who, like CuUen, attribute most diseases to spasms.
We may rest assured, from the sensible observations which
Hippocrates makes on this subject in the present work, that
the causes of all diseases are realities, provided we could find
them out, and that they are not vague abstractions, as the
authors of these hypotheses suppose.

His method of cultivating medicine is founded on an atten-
tive examination of all the circumstances connected with real
life, and his system consists in studying the condition of the
humours in the body, their origin, their coction, and their dis-
appearance.

The most prominent feature, however, in the contents of
this little treatise is the practical view which is here given of the
origin of medicine, namely, from the necessities and weaknesses
of the human race. The author clearly makes it out that
Medicine is, as it were, a corollary to Dietetics. Nothing of the
kind can well be imagined more ingenious and original than
his observations and reasonings on this head in the intro-
ductory sections of this treatise. See in particular § 5.

The remarks in refutation of the hypothesis of cold, heat,
moist, and dry, are very interesting. (§ 13.)

The reflections on the origin of fevers and inflammations are

1 M. Littr^ is inclined to give the Pjrthagorean philosopher, Alcmaeon, the credit
of priority in broaching the philosophical theory which runs through this treatise.
His only authority, however, on this point is Plutarch (De Piacit. Philos., v, 30) ;
whereas Galen, as he admits, says expressly that Hippocrates himself is the author
of this theory. Now, I must say that, of the two, Galen appears to me to be the
better authority, being profoundly skilled both in medical and philosophical literature.
But further, neither Diogenes Laertius in his life, nor any other writer who has noticed
Alcmaeon, says anything of his having promulgated the theory of the Crasia.



ARGUMENT. 159

very just and original, but would appear not to have been
properly appreciated by his successors; for among all the
ancient authors who have treated of fever, there is, perhaps, no
one but himself who has stated in decided terms that there is
something more in a fever than a mere increase of the innate (or
animal) heat. See the Commentary on Paulus Mqiveta,

B. II, 1.

The remarks on the effects of the cold bath at ^ 16 are much
to the purpose, and deserve attention.

The observations on rheums or defluxions (§19) are also very
striking, and even at the present day, after the many vicissi-
tudes of medical theory which we have gone through, it would
be difficult to deny that the opinions here advanced are well
founded. At all events they must be allowed to be highly
interesting, as containing the first germ of a theory which long
flourished in the schools of medicine.

At § 20 the author seems to hold that philosophy is not
so necessary to medicine as medicine is to philosophy. Schulze,
with a considerable show of reason, argues that Celsus had this
passage in view when he pronounced, concerning Hippocrates,
that he was the first person who separated medicine fromr phi-
losophy. (Hist. Med. I, 3, i, 26.) Schulze contends that what
Celsus meant was, that Hippocrates discarded a priori argu-
ments in medicine, and drew all his inferences from actual
observation. This would appear to me the most plausible
interpretation which has ever been given to this celebrated
passage in the preface of Celsus. Philosophy, then, it would
appear, freed medicine from the delusions of superstition, by
substituting the errors of hypothesis in their place, and the
important office which he who was called the Father of Medicine
conferred upon the art was by discarding both superstition and
hypothesis, and substituting the results of actual observation
in the room of both.

From ^ 22 to the end of the work the author gives important
observations on the modifications which diseases undergo in
connexion with the peculiar organization of the part in which
they are situated. It may well be doubted whether the re-
marks and reflections herein contained have ever obtained all
the attention which they merit.

The style of this piece is certainly elegant and beautiful ;



160 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

and it is proper to mention that the text is remarkably im-
proved in M. Littre's edition. In all the previous editions it
was more corrupt than that of almost any other of the Hippo*
cratic treatises.

The following remarks of M. Littre on the present work
appear to me so just^ and are so elegantly expressed, that I
cannot deny myself the pleasure of introducing them here in
the original :

'^En resum^, le livre de PAncienne Midecine donne une
idee des problemes agites du temps d^Hippocrate, et de la
maniere donts ils etaient debattus. II s'agissait, dans la plus
grande generalite de la pathologic de determiner la cause des
maladies ou, en d'autres termes, de poser les bases d'un systeme
de medecine. Certains medecins disaient que cette cause,
^tant une, residait dans une propri^te unique du corps, propriete
quails specifiaient. Hippocrate repetait qu^en fait, cela ^tait
en contradiction avec ^experience, qu^en principe une hypothese
etait suspecte et sterile, et qu^il n'y avait de surete que dans
I'etudes des faits et dans la tradition de la science qui y ramene.
Ainsi, quatre cents ans avant J. C, on essayait de rattacher
toute la medecine h, une seule propri^t^ hypothetique, comme
on Pa essaye de nos jours; mais cette propriete ^tait ou le
chaud, ou le froid, ou Fhumide, ou le sec. Quatre cents ans
avant J. C, un esprit severe et ^clair6 combattait de telles
opinions au nom de Inexperience, montrait que les causes des
maladies ne pouvant pas se ramener k une seule, le champ de
la pathologic generale etait bien plus vaste qu'on ne croyait ; et
formulait ce que I'observation lui avait permis de conclure;
mais sa conclusion n'embrasse guere que la trouble dans le
melange des humeurs, que leur coction et leurs crises. Depuis
lors, la methode de ceux qu'Hippocrate avait combattus, et la
methode d^ Hippocrate, Phypothese et ^observation se sont
perp^tuees, ainsi que le temoigne Phistoire de la medecine,
mais ce ne sont plus ni Fancienne hypothese, ni Fancienne
observation.

*' H est certainement instructif d'^tudier, dans le cours du
temps, les problemes tels quails ont ^t^ poses, et les discussions
qu'ils ont soulev^es. On le voit, la science antique a de grandes
ressemblances avec la science modeme ; des Tepoque que nous
sommes forc^ de regarder comme Taurore de la medecine, des



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 161

lea premiers monuments que nous possedons, les questions
fondamentales sont debattues^ et les limites de Pesprit humain
sont touch^es. Mais en dedans de ces limites^ la science
trouve^ dans une immensite inepuisable de combinaisons^ les
materiaux qui la font grandir ; et il est impossible de ne pas
reconnaitre que^ sur un sol et avec les aliments que lui four-
nissent les choses et Fexp^rience^ elle se developpe en vertu
d'un principe interne de vie, qui reside dans Tenchainement
n^cessaire de son developpement successif/'^



ON ANCIENT MEDICINE.

1. Whoever having undertaken to speak or write on Medi-
cine, have first laid down for themselves some hypothesis to their
argument, such as hot, or cold, or moist, or dry, or whatever
else they choose, (thus reducing their subject within a narrow
compass, and supposing only one or two original causes of
diseases or of death among mankind,) are all clearly mistaken
in much that they say; and this is the more reprehensible as
relating to an art which aU men avail themselves of on the
most important occasions, and the good operators and prac-
titioners in which they hold in especial honour. For there
are practitioners, some bad and some far otherwise, which, if
there had been no such thing as Medicine, and if nothing had
been investigated or found out in it, would not have been the
case, but all would, have been equally unskilled and ignorant
of it, and everything concerning the sick would have been
directed by chance. But now it is not so ; for, as in all the
other arts, those who practise them differ much from one another
in dexterity and knowledge, so is it in like manner with Me-
dicine. Wherefore I have not thought that it stood in need
of an empty hypothesis, like those subjects which are occult
and dubious, in attempting to handle which it is necessary to
use some hypothesis; as, for example, with regard to things
above us and things below the earth ;^ if any one should treat
of these and undertake to declare how they are constituted,

* Tom. i, p. 567. » See Note, p. 19U

11



162 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

the reader or hearer could not find out, whether what is delivered
be true or false ; for there is nothing which can be referred to
in order to discover the truth.

2. But all these requisites belong of old to Medicine, and an
origin and way have been found out, by which many and elegant
discoveries have been made, during a length of time, and others
will yet be found out, if a person possessed of the proper ability,
and knowing those discoveries which have been made, should
proceed from them to prosecute his investigations. But who-
ever, rejecting and despising all these, attempts to pursue
another course and form of inquiry, and says he has discovered
anything, is deceived himself and deceives others, for the thing
is impossible. And for what reasons it is impossible, I will
now endeavour to explain, by stating and showing what the art
really is. From this it will be manifest that discoveries cannot
possibly be made in any other way. And most especially, it
appears to me, that whoever treats of this art should treat of
things which are familiar to the common people. For of
nothing else will such a one have to inquire or treat, but of
the diseases under which the common people have laboured,
which diseases and the causes of their origin and departure,
their increase and decline, illiterate persons cannot easily find
out themselves, but still it is easy for them to understand these
things when discovered and expounded by others. For it is
nothing more than that every one is put in mind of \^hat had
occurred to himself. But whoever does not reach the capacity
of the illiterate vulgar, and fails to make them listen to him,
misses his mark. Wherefore, then, there is no necessity for
any hypothesis.

3. For the art of Medicine would not have been invented
at first, nor would it have been made a subject of investigation
(for there would have been no need of it,) if when men are
indisposed, the same food and other articles of regimen which
they eat and drink when in good health were proper for them,
and if no others were preferable to these. But now necessity
itself made medicine to be sought out and discovered by men,
since the same things when administered to the sick, which
agreed with them when in good health, neither did nor do
agree with them. But to go still further back, I hold that
the diet and food which people in health now use would not



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 163

have been discovered^ provided it had suited with man to eat
and drink in like manner as the ox, the horse^ and all other
animals^ except man^ do of the productions of the earth, such
as fruits, weeds, and grass ; for from such things these animals
grow, live free of disease, and require no other kind of food.
And, at first, I am of opinion that man used the same sort of
food, and that the present articles of diet had been discovered
and invented only after a long lapse of time. For when they
suffered much and severely from this strong and brutish
diet, swallowing things which were raw, unmixed, and pos-
sessing great strength, they became exposed to strong pains
and diseases, and to early deaths. It is likely, indeed, that
from habit they would suffer less from these things then than
we would now, but still they would suffer severely even then ;
and it is likely that the greater number, and those who had
weaker constitutions, would all perish ; whereas the stronger
would hold out for a longer time, as even nowadays some, in
consequence of using strong articles of food, get off with little
trouble, but others with much pain and suffering. From this
necessity it appears to me that they would search out the food
befitting their nature, and thus discover that which we now use :
and that from wheat, by macerating it, stripping it of its hull,
grinding it all down, sifting, toasting, and baking it, they formed
bread; ^ and from barley they formed cake (maza),^ performing
many operations in regard to it ; they boiled, they roasted, they
mixed, they diluted those things which are strong and of in-
tense qualities with weaker things, fashioning them to the nature
and powers of man, and considering that the stronger things
Nature would not be able to manage if administered, and
that from such things pains, diseases, and deatl^ would arise,
but such as Nature could manage, that from them food, growth,
and health, would arise. To such a discovery and investigation

' The inyention of bread must have been very ancient, as is obTious from the
circumstance of its being referred to a mythological name, that is to say, Demeter
or Ceres. The ancients would appear to haye paid great attention to the manufacture
of bread. See Athenaeus Ddpnos, iii, 26 ; and Paulus iEoiNSTA, B. 1, 78, Syd. Soc.
edition.

' The maza was a sort of puddingor cake made from barleymeal mixed up with
water, oil, milk, oxymel, hydromel,or the like. It also was a Tery ancient invention,
for it is mentioned in one of the works of Hesiod, which is universally allowed to be
genuine, I mean the Opera et Dies, L 588.



164 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

what more suitable name coiild one give than that of Medicine ?
since it was discovered for the health of man^ for his nonrish-
ment and safety^ as a substitute for that kind of diet by which
pains^ diseases, and deaths were occasioned.

4. And if this is not held to be an art, I do not object.
For it is not suitable to call any one an artist of that which no
one is ignorant of, but which all know from usage and necessity.
But still the discovery is a great one, and requiring much art
and investigation. Wherefore those who devote themselves to
gymnastics and training, are always making some new discovery,
by pursuing the same line of inquiry, where, by eating and drink-
ing certain things, they are improved and grow stronger than
they were. ^

5. Let us inquire then regarding what is admitted to be
Medicine ; namely, that which was invented for the sake of the
sick, which possesses a name and practitioners, whether it also
seeks to accomplish the same objects, and whence it derived its
origin. To me, then, it appears, as I said at the commence-
ment, that nobody would have sought for medicine at all,
provided the same kinds of diet had suited with men in sickness
as in good health. Wherefore, even yet, such races of men
as make no use of medicine, namely, barbarians, and even
certain of the Greeks, live in the same way when sick as when
in health ; that is to say, they take what suits their appetite,
and neither abstain from, nor restrict themselves in anything
for which they have a desire. But those wha,have cultivated
and invented medicine, having the same object in view as
those of whom I formerly spoke, in the first place, I suppose,
diminished the quantity of the articles of food which they used,
and this alone would be sufficient for certain of the sick, and
be manifestly beneficial to them, although not to all, for there
would be some so affected as not to be able to manage even
small quantities of their usual food, and as such persons would
seem to require something weaker, they invented soups, by

> We haye stAted in our brief sketch of the Life of Hippocrates, that he studied
the application of gymnastics to medicine under the great master of the art,
Herodicos. He was a native of Selymbra in Thrace, and is generally represented as
the Esther of medicinal gymnastics; but, as we have mentioned aboye,this statement
must be received with considerable allowance, since there is every reason to believe
that the Asdepiadie applied exercises to the core of diseases.



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 165

mixing a few strong things with mnch water^ and thus ab-
stracting that which was strong in them by dilution and boiling.
But such as could not manage even soups^ laid them aside^
and had recourse to drinks, and so regulated them as to mixture
and quantity, that they were administered neither stronger nor
weaker than what was required.

6. But this ought to be well known, that soups do not
agree with certain persons in their diseases, but, on the con-
trary, when administered both the fevers and the pains are
exacerbated, and it becomes obvious that what was given has
proved food and increase to the disease, but a wasting and
weakness to the body. But whatever persons so afifected par-
took of solid food, or cake, or bread, even in small quantity,
would be ten times and more decidedly injured than those who
had taken soups, for no other reason than from the strength of
the food in reference to the affection ; and to whomsoever it is
proper to take soups and not eat solid food, such a one will be
much more injured if he eat much than if he eat little, but
even little food will be injurious to him. But all the causes of
the sufferance refer themselves to this rule, that the strongest
things most especially and decidedly hurt man, whether in
hefdth or in disease.

7. What other object, then, had he in view who is called a
physician, and is admitted to be a practitioner of the art, who
found out the regimen and diet befitting the sick, than he who
originally found out and prepared for all mankind that kind of
food which we all now use, in place of the former savage and
brutish mode of living ? To me it appears that the mode is the
same, and the discovery of a similar nature. The one sought to
abstract those things which the constitution of man cannot
digest, because of their wildness and intemperature, and the
other those things which are beyond the powers of the affection
in which any one may happen to be laid up. Now, how does
the one differ from the other, except that the latter admits of
greater variety, and requires more application, whereas the
former was the commencement of the process ?

8. And if one would compare the diet of sick persons with
that of persons in health, he will find it not more injurious
than that of healthy persons in comparison with that of wild
beasts and of other animals. For, suppose a man labouring



166 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

under one of those diseases which are neither serious and
unsupportable^ nor yet altogether mild, but such as that, upon
making any mistake in diet, it will become apparent, as if he
should eat bread and flesh, or any other of those articles which
prove beneficial to healthy persons, and that, too, not in great
quantity, but much less than he could have taken when in good
health ; and that another man in good health, having a consti-
tution neither very feeble, nor yet strong, eats of those things
which are wholesome and strengthening to an ox or a horse,
such as vetches, barley, and the like, and that, too, not in great
quantity, but much less than he could take ; the healthy person
who did so would be subjected to no less disturbance and
danger than the sick person who took bread or cake un-
seasonably. All these things are proofs that Medicine is to be
prosecuted and discovered by the same method as the other.

9. And if it were simply, as is laid down, that such things
as are stronger prove injurious, but such as are weaker prove
beneficial and nourishing, both to sick and healthy persons, it
were an easy matter, for then the safest rule would be to cir-
cumscribe the diet to the lowest point. But then it is no less
mistake, nor one that injures a man less, provided a deficient
diet, or one consisting of weaker things than what are proper,
be administered. For, in the constitution of man, abstinence
may enervate, weaken, and kill. And there are many other
ills, difierent from those of repletion, but no less dreadful,
arising from deficiency of food ; wherefore the practice in those
cases is more varied, and requires greater accuracy. For one
must aim at attaining a certain measure, and yet this measure
admits neither weight nor calculation of any kind, by which it
may be accurately determined, unless it be the sensation of the
body ; wherefore it is a task to learn this accurately, so as not
to commit small blunders either on the one side or the other,
and in fact I would give great praise to the physician whose
mistakes are small, for perfect accuracy is seldom to be seen,
since many physicians seem to me to be in the same plight as
bad pilots, who, if they commit mistakes while conducting the
ship in a calm do not expose themselves, but when a storm and
violent hurricane overtake them, they then, from their ignorance
and mistakes, are discovered to be what they are, by all men,
namely, in losing their ship. And thus bad and commonplace



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 167

physicianSj^ when they treat men who have no serious illness^
in which case one may commit great mistakes without producing
any formidable mischief^ (and such complaints occur much
more frequently to men than dangerous ones) : under these cir-
cumstances^ when they commit mistakes, they do not expose
themselves to ordinary men ; but when they fall in with a great,
a strong, and a dangerous disease, then their mistakes and want
of skill are made apparent to all. Their punishment is not far
off, but is swift in overtaking both the one and the other.^

10. And that no less mischief happens to a man from
unseasonable depletion than from repletion, may be clearly seen
upon reverting to the consideration of persons in health. For,
to some, with whom it agrees to take only one meal in the day,
and they have arranged it so accordingly; whilst others, for
the same reason, also take dinner, and this they do because they
find it good for them, and not like those persons who, for
pleasure or from any casual circumstance, adopt the one or the
other custom : and to the bulk of mankind it is of little conse-
quence which of these rules they observe, that is to say, whether
they make it a practice to take one or two meals. But there
are certain persons who cannot readily change their diet with
impunity ; and if they make any alteration in it for one day, or
even for a part of a day, are greatly injured thereby. Such
persons, provided they take dinner when it is not their wont,
immediately become heavy and inactive, both in body and mind,
and are weighed down with yawning, slumbering, and thirst ;
and if they take supper in addition, they are seized with flatu-
lence, tormina, and diarrhoea, and to many this has been the
commencement of a serious disease, when they have merely
taken twice in a day the same food which they have been in
the custom of taking once. And thus, also, if one who has
been accustomed to dine, and this rule agrees with him, should
not dine at the accustomed hour, he will straightway feel great
loss of strength, trembling, and want of spirits, the eyes of
such a person will become more pallid, his urine thick and hot,
his mouth bitter ; his bowels will seem, as it were, to hang
loose; he will suffer from vertigo, lowness of spirit, and
inactivity, — such are the effects ; and if he should attempt to
take at supper the same food which he was wont to partake of

' He means both the pilot and physician.



168 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

at dinner^ it will appear insipid^ and he will not be able to take
it off; and these things^ passing downwards with tormina and
rumbling; bum up his bowels; he experiences insomnolency
or troubled and disturbed dreams ; and to many of them these
symptoms are the commencement of some disease.

11. But let us inquire what are the causes of these things
which happened to them. To him^ then^ who was accustomed
to take only one meal in the day, they happened because he did
not wait the proper time, until his bowels had completely
derived benefit from and had digested the articles taken at the
preceding meal, and until his belly had become soft, and got
into a state of rest, but he gave it a new supply while in a
state of heat and fermentation, for such bellies digest much
more slowly, and require more rest and ease. And as to him
who had been accustomed to dinner, since, as soon as the body
required food, and when the former meal was consumed, and
he wanted refreshment, no new supply was furnished to it,
he wastes and is consumed from want of food. For all the
symptoms which I describe as befalling to this man I refer to
want of food. And I also say that all men who, when in a state
of health, remain for two or three days without food, experience
the same unpleasant symptoms as those which I described in
the case of him who had omitted to take dinner.

12. Wherefore, I say, that such constitutions as suffer
quickly and strongly from errors in diet, are weaker than
others that do not ; and that a weak person is in a state very
nearly approaching to one in disease ; but a person in disease
is the weaker, and it is, therefore, more likely that he should
suffer if he encounters anything that is unseasonable. It is
difficult, seeing that there is no such accuracy in the Art, to
hit always upon what is most expedient, and yet many cases
occur in medicine which would require this accuracy, as we
shall explain. But on that account, I say, we ought not to
reject the ancient Art, as if it were not, and had not been
properly founded, because it did not attain accuracy in all
things, but rather, since it is capable of reaching to the greatest
exactitude by reasoning, to receive it and admire its discoveries,
made from a state of great ignorance, and as having been well
and properly made, and not from chance.

13. But I wish the discourse to revert to the new method



« -



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 169

of those who prosecute their inquiries in the Art by hypothesis.
For if hot, or cold, or moist, or dry, be that which proves in-
jurious to man, and if the person who would treat him properly
must apply cold to the hot, hot to the cold, moist to the dry,
and dry to the moist — let me be presented with a man, not
indeed one of a strong constitution, but one of the weaker,
and let him eat wheat, such as it is supplied from the thrashing-
floor, raw and unprepared, with raw meat, and let him drink
water. By using such a diet I know that he will suffer much
and severely, for he will experience pains, his body will become
weak, and his bowels deranged, and he will not subsist long.
What remedy, then, is to be provided for one so situated?
Hot ? or cold ? or moist ? or dry ? For it is clear that it
must be one or other of these. For, according to this prin-
ciple, if it is one of these which is injuring the patient, it
is to be removed by its contrary. But the surest and most
obvious remedy is to change the diet which the person used,
and instead of wheat to give bread, and instead of raw flesh,
boiled, and to drink wine in addition to these : for by making
these changes it is impossible but that he must get better,
unless completely disorganised by time and diet. What, then,
shall we say ? whether that, as he suffered from cold, these
hot things being applied were of use to him, or the contrary ?
I should think this question must prove a puzzler to whomso-
ever it is put. For whether did he who prepared bread out of
wheat remove the hot, the cold, the moist, or the dry principle
in it ? — for the bread is consigned both to fire and to water,
and is wrought with many things, each of which has its peculiar
property and nature, some of which it loses, and with others
it is diluted and mixed.

14. And this I know, moreover, that to the human body it '
makes a great difference whether the bread be fine or coarse ;^
of wheat with or without the hull, whether mixed with much
or little water, strongly wrought or scarcely at all, baked or
raw — and a multitude of similar differences ; and so, in like

* KaOupbi: dpToc ij avyK0fiiar6c» There has been some difference of opinion
regarding these two kinds of bread ; but it appears to me probable that the former
was made of flour from which the bran had been entirely excluded, and the other
from flour containing the whole of the bran. Later authorites called the one tHigOf
and the other autqpyrtu. See Paulus iEoiNETA, Vol. I, p. 121.



170 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

manner^ with the cake (maza) ; the powers of each^ too, are
great, and the one nowise like the other. Whoever pays
no attention to these things, or, paying attention, does not
comprehend them, how can he understand the diseases which
befall a man ? For, by every one of these things, a man is
affected and changed this way or that, and the whole of his
life is subjected to them, whether in health, convalescence, or
disease. Nothing else, then, can be more important or more
necessary to know tl^an these things. So that the first inventors,
pursuing their investigations properly, and by a suitable train
of reasoning; according to the nature of man, made their dis-
coveries, and thought the Art worthy of being ascribed to a
god, as is the established belief. For they did not suppose
that the dry or the moist, the hot or the cold, or any of these,
are either injurious to man, or that man stands in need of
them; but whatever in each was strong, and more than a
match for a man's constitution, whatever he could not manage,
that they held to be hurtful, and sought to remove. Now, of
the sweet, the strongest is that which is intensely sweet ; of
the bitter, that which is intensely bitter; of the acid, that
which is intensely acid; and of all things that which is extreme,
for these things they saw both existing in man, and proving
injurious to him. For there is in man the bitter and the salt,
the sweet and the acid, the sour and the insipid,^ and a multi-
tude of other things having all sorts of powers, both as regards
quantity and strength. These, when all mixed and mingled
up with one another, are not apparent, neither do they hurt a
man ; but when any of them is separate, and stands by itself,
then it becomes perceptible, and hurts a man. And thus, of
articles of food, those which are unsuitable and hiurtful to man
when administered, every one is either bitter, or intensely so, or
saltish or acid, or something else intense and strong, and there-
fore we are disordered by them in like manner as we are by the
secretions in the body. But all those things of which a man
eats and drinks are devoid of any such intense and well-marked
quality, such as bread, cake, and many other things of a similar
nature which man is accustomed to use for food, with the
exception of condiments and confectionaries, which are made

* He alludes here to the secretions and humours in the body. See the Commen-
tary of Heurnius.



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 171

to gratify the palate and for luxury. And from those things^
when received into the body abundantly^ there is no disorder
nor dissolution of the powers belonging to the body; but
strength^ growth^ and nourishment result from them^ and this
for no other reason than because they are well mixed^ have no-
thing in them of an immoderate character^ nor anything strong,
but the whole forms one simple and not strong substance.

15. I cannot think in what manner they who advance this
doctrine^ and transfer the Art from the cause I have described
to hypothesis^ will cure men according to the principle which
they have laid down. For^ as far as I know, neither the
hot nor the cold, nor the dry, nor the moist, has ever been
found unmixed with any other quality ; but I suppose they use
the same articles of meat and drink as all we other men do.
But to this substance they give the attribute of being hot, to
that cold, to that dry, and to that moist. Since it would be
absurd to advise the patient to take something hot, for he
would straightway ask what it is ? so that he must either play
the fool, or have recourse to some one of the well-known sub«
stances : and if this hot thing happen to be sour, and that hot
thing insipid, and this hot thing has the power of raising a
disturbance in the body (and there are many other kinds of
heat, possessing many opposite powers), he will be obliged to
administer some one of them, either the hot and the sour, or
the hot and the insipid, or that which, at the same time, is
cold and somr (for there is such a substance), or the cold and the
insipid. For, as I think, the very opposite effects will result
from either of these, not only in man, but also in a bladder, a
vessel of wood, and in many other things possessed of far less
sensibility than man ; for it is not the heat which is possessed
of great efficacy, but the sour and the insipid, and other qualities
as described by me, both in man and out of man, and that
whether eaten or drunk, rubbed in externally, and otherwise
applied.

16. But I think that of all the qualities heat and cold
exercise the least operation in the body, for these reasons : as
long time as hot and cold are mixed up with one another they do
not give trouble, for the cold is attempered and rendered more
moderate by the hot, and the hot by the cold ; but when the
one is wholly separate from the other, then it gives pain ; and



172 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

at that season when cold is applied it creates some pain to a
man, but quickly, for that very reason, heat spontaneously
arises in him without requiring any aid or preparation. And
these things operate thus both upon men in health and in
disease. For example, if a person in health wishes to cool
his body during winter, and bathes either in cold water or in
any other way, the more he does this, unless his body be fairly
congealed, when he resumes his clothes and comes into a place
of shelter, his body becomes more heated than before. And
thus, too, if a person wish to be warmed thoroughly either by
means of a hot bath or strong fire, and straightway having the
same clothing on, takes up his abode again in the place he was
in when he became congealed, he will appear much colder, and
more disposed to chills than before. And if a person fan him-
self on account of a suffocating heat, and having procured
refrigeration for himself in this manner, cease doing so, the
heat and suffocation will be ten times greater in his case than
in that of a person who does nothing of the kind. And, to
give a more striking example, persons travelling in the snow,
or otherwise in rigorous weather, and contracting great cold in
their feet, their hands, or their head, what do they not suffer
from inflammation and tingling when they put on warm
clothing and get into a hot place ? In some instances, blisters
arise as if from burning with fire, and they do not suffer from
any of those unpleasant symptoms until they become heated.
So readily does either of these pass into the other; and I
could mention many other examples. And with regard to the
sick, is it not in those who experience a rigor that the most
acute fever is apt to break out? And yet not so strongly
neither, but that it ceases in a short time, and, for the most
part, without having occasioned much mischief; and while it
remains, it is hot, and passing over the whole body, ends for
the most part in the feet, where the chills and cold were most
intense and lasted longest; and, when sweat supervenes, and
the fever passes off, the patient is much colder than if he had
not taken the fever at all. Why then should that which so
quickly passes into the opposite extreme, and loses its own
powers spontaneously, be reckoned a mighty and serious affair?
And what necessity is there for any great remedy for it ?
17. One might here say — but persons in ardent fevers.



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 173

pneumonia^ and other formidable diseases^ do not quickly get
rid of the heat, nor experience these rapid alterations of heat and
cold. And I reckon this very circumstance the strongest proof
that it is not from heat simply that men get into the febrile
state, neither is it the sole cause of the mischief, but that this
species of heat is bitter, and that acid, and the other saltish,
and many other varieties ; and again there is cold combined
with other qualities. These are what proves injurious ; heat,
it is true, is present also, possessed of strength, as being that
which conducts, is exacerbated and increased along with the
other, but has no power greater than what is peculiar to itself.

18. With regard to these symptoms, in the first place those
are most obvious of which we have all often had experience.
Thus, then, in such of us as have a coryza and defluxion from
the nostrils, this discharge is much more acrid than that which
formerly was formed in and ran from them daily ; and it occa«
sions swelling of the nose, and it inflames, being of a hot and
extremely ardent nature, as you may know, if you apply your
hand to the place ; and, if the disease remains long, the part
becomes ulcerated although destitute of flesh, and hard ;
and the heat in the nose ceases, not when the defluxion takes
place and the inflammation is present, but when the running
becomes thicker and less acrid, and more mixed with the
former secretion, then it is that the heat ceases. But in all
those cases in which this decidedly proceeds from cold alone,
without the concourse of any other quality, there is a change
from cold to hot, and from hot to cold, and these quickly
supervene, and require no coction. But all the others being
connected, as I have said, with acrimony and intemperance
of humours, pass off in this way by being mixed and concocted.

19. But such defluxions as are determined to the eyes being
possessed of strong and varied acrimonies, ulcerate the eyelids,
and in some cases corrode the cheeks and parts below the eyes
upon which they flow, and even occasion rupture and erosion
of the tunic which surrounds the eyeball. But pain, heat,
and extreme burning prevail until the defluxions are concocted
and become thicker, and concretions form about the eyes, and
the coction takes place from the fluids being mixed up, diluted,
and digested together. And in defluxions upon the throat,
from which are formed hoarseness, cynanche, erysipelas, and



174 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

pneumonia^ all these have at first saltish, watery, and acrid dis-
charges, and with these the diseases gain strength. But when
the discharges become thicker, more concocted, and are freed
from all acrimony, then, indeed, the fevers pass away, and the
other symptoms which annoyed the patient; for we must account
those things the cause of each complaint, which, being present in
a certain fashion, the complaint exists, but it ceases when they
change to another combination. But those which originate from
pure heat or cold, and do not participate in any other quality,
will then cease when they undergo a change from cold to hot,
and from hot to cold ; and they change in the manner I have
described before. Wherefore, all the other complaints to which
man is subject arise from powers (qualities?). Thus, when
there is an overflow of the bitter principle, which we call yellow
bile, what anxiety, burning heat, and loss of strength prevail !
but if relieved from it, either by being purged spontaneously,
or by means of a medicine seasonably administered, the patient
is decidedly relieved of the pains and heat ; but while these
things float on the stomach, unconcocted and undigested, no
contrivance could make the pains and fever cease ; and when
there are acidities of an acrid and aeruginous character, what
varieties of frenzy, gnawing pains in the bowels and chest,
and inquietude, prevail I and these do not cease until the
acidities be purged away, or are calmed down and mixed with
other fluids. The coction, change, attenuation, and thickening
into the form of humours, take place through many and va-
rious forms ; therefore the crises and calculations of times are
of great importance in such matters ; but to all such changes
hot and cold are but little exposed, for these are neither liable
to putrefaction nor thickening. What then shall we say of
the change ? that it is a combination (crasis) of these humours
having difierent powers towards one another. But the hot
does not lose its heat when mixed with any other thing except
the cold ', nor again, the cold, except when mixed with the hot.
But all other things connected with man become the more
mild and better in proportion as they are mixed with the more
things besides. But a man is in the best possible state when
they are concocted and at rest, exhibiting no one peculiar
quality ; but I think I have said enough in explanation of them.
20. Certain sophists and physicians say that it is not possible *



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 175

for any one to know medicine who does not know what man
is [and how he was made and how constructed]^ and that who-
ever would cure men properly, must learn this in the first place.
But this saying rather appertains to philosophy, as Empedocles
and certain others have described what man in his origin is,
and how he first was made and constructed.^ But I think
whatever such has been said or written by sophist or phy-
sician concerning nature has less connexion with the art of
medicine than with the art of painting. And I think that one
cannot know anything certain respecting nature from any
other quarter than from medicine ; and that this knowledge is
to be attained when one comprehends the whole subject of
medicine properly, but not until then ; and I say that this
history shows what man is, by what causes he was made, and
other things accurately. Wherefore it appears to me necessary
to every physician to be skilled in nature, and strive to know,
if he would wish to perform his duties, what man is in relation
to the articles of food and drink, and to his other occupations,
and what are the effects of each of them to every one. And
it is not enough to know simply that cheese is a bad article of
food, as disagreeing with whoever eats of it to satiety, but what
sort of disturbance it creates, and wherefore, and with what
principle in man it disagrees ; for there are many other articles
of food and drink naturally bad which affect man in a different
manner. Thus, to illustrate my meaning by an example, un-
diluted wine drunk in large quantity renders a man feeble ;
and everybody seeing this knows that such is the power of
wine, and the cause thereof; and we know, moreover, on what
parts of a man^s body it principally exerts its action ; and I
wish the same certainty to appear in other cases. For cheese
(since we used it as an example) does not prove equally in-
jurious to all men, for there are some who can take it to satiety
without being hurt by it in the least, but, on the contrary, it
is wonderful what strength it imparts to those it agrees with ;
but there are some who do not bear it well, their constitutions
are different, and they differ in this respect, that what in their
body is incompatible with cheese, is roused and put in commotion
by such a thing; and those in whose bodies such a humour

» See Littr^, h. 1.



176 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

happens to prevail in greater quantity and intensity^ are likely
to suffer the more from it. But if the thing had been per-
nicious to the whole nature of man^ it would have hurt all.
Whoever knows these things will not suffer from it.

21. During convalescence from diseases^ and also in pro-
tracted diseases^ many disorders occur^ some spontaneously, and
some from certain things accidentally administered. I know
that the common herd of physicians, like the vulgar, if there
happen to have been any innovation made about that day, such
as the bath being used, a walk taken, or any unusual food eaten,
all which were better done than otherwise, attribute notwith-
standing the cause of these disorders, to some of these things,
being ignorant of the true cause, but proscribing what may
have been very proper. Now this ought not to be so ; but
one should know the effects of a bath or a walk unseason-
ably applied ; for thus there will never be any mischief from
these things, nor from any other thing, nor from repletion, nor
from such and such an article of food. Whoever does not
know what effect these things produce upon a man, cannot
know the consequences which result from them, nor how to
apply them.

22. And it appears to me that one ought also to know what
diseases arise in man from the powers, and what from the
structures. What do I mean by this ? By powers, I mean
intense and strong juices ; and by structures^ whatever con-
formations there are in man. For some are hollow, and frt>m
broad contracted into narrow ; some expanded, some hard and
rounds some broad and suspended,^ some stretched, some long,
some dense, some rare and succulent,^ some spongy and of loose
texture.^ Now, then, which of these figures is the best calcu-
lated to suck to itself and attract humidity from another body ?
Whether what is hollow and expanded, or what is solid and
round, or what is hollow, and from broad, gradually turning
narrow ? I think such as from hollow and broad are contracted
into narrow : this may be ascertained otherwise from obvious
facts : thus, if you gape wide with the mouth you cannot

* Meaning probably the diaphragm, with its membranes. See the Commentary
of Heumius, p. 92.

* Meaning the mamnue, according to Heumius.

* Such as the spleen and lungs.



ANCIENT MEDICINE. 177

draw in any liquid ; but by protruding^ contracting, and com-
pressing the lips, and still more by using a tube, you can readily
draw in whatever you wish. And thus, too, the instruments
which are used for cupping are broad below and gradually be-
come narrow, and are so constructed in order to suck and draw
in from the fleshy parts. The nature and construction of the
parts within a man a)re of a like nature ; the bladder, the head,
the uterus in women; these parts clearly attract, and are
always filled with a juice which is foreign to them'. Those parts
which are hollow and expanded are most likely to receive any
humidity flowing into them, but cannot attract it in like manner.
Those parts which are solid and round could not attract a humi-
dity, nor receive it when it flows to them, for it would glide past,
and find no place of rest on them. But spongy and rare parts,
such as the spleen, the lungs, and the breasts, drink up espe-
cially the juices around them, and become hardened and enlarged
by the accession of juices. Such things happen to these organs
especially. For it is not with the spleen as with the stomach,
in which there is a liquid, which it contains and evacuates
every day ; but when it (the spleen) drinks up and receives a
fluid into itself, the hollow and lax parts of it are filled, even
the small interstices ; and, instead of being rare and soft, it
becomes hard and dense, and it can neither digest nor discharge
its contents : these things it suffers, owing to the nature of its
structure. Those things which engender flatulence or tormina
in the body, naturally do so in the hollow and broad parts of
the body, such as the stomach and chest, where they produce
rumbling noises ; for when they do not fill the parts so as to
be stationary, but have changes of place and movements, there
must necessarily be noise and apparent movements from them.
But such parts as are fleshy and soft, in these there occur
torpor and obstructions, such as happen in apoplexy. But
when it (the flatus ?) encounters a broad and resisting structure,
and rushes against such a part, and this happens when it is by
nature not strong so as to be able to withstand it without suf-
fering injury ; nor soft and rare, so as to receive or yield to it,
but tender, juicy, full of blood, and dense, like the liver, owing
to its density and broadness, it resists and does not yield.
But flatus, when it obtains admission, increases and becomes

12



178 ANCIENT MEDICINE.

stronger, and rushes towards any resisting object ; but owing
to its tenderness, and the quantity of blood which it (the liver)
contains, it cannot be without uneasiness ; and for these reasons
the most acute and frequent pains occur in the region of it,
along with suppurations and chronic tumours (phymata).
These symptoms also occur in the site of the diaphragm, but
much less frequently; for the diaphragm* is a broad, expanded,
and resisting substance, of a nervous (tendinous?) and strong
nature, and therefore less susceptible of pain ; and yet pains
and chronic abscesses do occur about it.

23. There are both within and without the body many
other kinds of strucbire, which differ much from one another
as to sufferings both in health and disease ; such as whether
the head be small or large ; the neck slender or thick, long or
short j the belly long or round ; the chest and ribs broad or
narrow ; and many others besides, all which you ought to be
acquainted with, and their differences; so that knowing the
causes of each, you may make the more accurate observations.

24. And, as has been formerly stated, one ought to be
acquainted with the powers of juices, and what action each of
them has upon man, and their alliances towards one another.
What I say is this : if a sweet juice change to another kind,
not from any admixture, but because it has undergone a mu-
tation within itself; what does it first become? — bitter? salt?
austere ? or acid ? I think acid. And hence, an acid juice is
the most improper of all things that can be administered in
cases in which a sweet juice is the most proper. Thus, if one
should succeed in his investigations of external things, he would
be the better able always to select the best ; for that is best
which is farthest removed from that which is unwholesome.



ON AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.



ON AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.



THE ARGUMENT^

Dr. Cobay^ in his excellent edition of this treatise^ divides
it into six chapters^ as follows : firsts the Introduction (from
§ 1 — 3) comprehends some general observations on the
importance of cultivating a knowledge of the effects which the
different seasons^ the winds^ the various kinds of water^ the
situation of cities^ the nature of soils^ and the modes of life^
exercise upon the health, and the necessity of a physician's
making himself well acquainted with all these matters, if he
would wish to practise his profession successftilly. The author
insists, with particular earnestness, on the utility of studying
the constitution of the year and the nature of the seasons, and
refutes the opinions of those persons, in his days, who held
that a knowledge of all these things belongs to meteorology
rather than to medicine. The second chapter (from § 3 — 7)
treats of climate, and the diseases prevalent in localities charac-
terised by their exposure to particular winds. Those winds
being peculiar to Greece, their names occasion some trouble in
order to understand them correctly, and we shall give below a
summary of what the modem Greek Coray says in illustration of
them. This part of the present treatise appears to have been
highly elaborated, and contains much important information.
The third chapter (§ 7 — 10) treats of the various kinds of water,
and their effects in different states of the human constitution.
The remarks contained here are of an eminently practical
nature, and evidently must have been the results of patient
observation and experiment, so that, even at the present day,
it would be difficult to detect our author in a single error of
judgment. In this place he has occasion to deUver his opinions
on the formation of urinary calculi, which he jdoes at consider-



182 AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.

able length ; and I may be permitted to remark, whatever may
be thought of his etiology of the disease, it will be admitted
that his theory is plausible, and the best that could well have
been framed in the state of knowledge which then prevailed on
that subject. Indeed, even at the present day, it must be
allowed that this is a dark subject; we have acquired, it is true,
many new and curious facts connected with the minute struc-
ture of these concretions, but it can hardly be affirmed that we
have been able to evolve from them any general principles,
or certain rules of practice. In the fourth chapter (§ 10 — 12),
the nature of the seasons is treated of, and their influence on
the health circumstantially stated. Some of the observations
contained in this part of the work are remarkable for their
acuteness and originality, such as the following, that, in esti-
mating the effects of a season on the health, we ought to take
into account the seasons which preceded it. This is well
expressed by Celsus, as follows : *' neque solum interest quales
dies sint sed etiam quales prsecesserint.'' (Prsefat.) See
also Hippocrates (de Humoribus, § 8) ; and Coray (ad li. 1.
§ cix.) It will be seen in our annotations that a considerable
number of the Aphorisms are abstracted from this part of
the present treatise. In the fifth chapter (§ 12 — 17), the
effects of climate and the institutions of society on the inhabi-
tants of Asia are treated of at considerable length. Our author,
in this place, evinces a great acquaintance with human life, and a
most philosophical spirit in contemplating the subjects which he
is handling. Indeed few works in any language display so much
accurate observation and originality of thought. The varieties
of disposition, and of intellectual and moral development among
mankind, are set down as being derived, in a great measure,
from differences of climate and modes of government. Thus
the Asiatics are of an effeminate and slavish disposition, because
they live in a soft climate, on a rich soil, where they are little
exposed to hardships or labour, and under a despotic form of
government, which arrests the development of their mental
energies.^ This part also contains some interesting observations

* Although I shall touch cursorily on this subject in my annotations, I cannot deny
myself the pleasure of setting down here the following passage from the treatise of
Longinus ' On the Sublime.* It is to be borne in mind that it was written by a
noble-minded Greek, who lived at the court of an Oriental despot, and must hare



ARGUMENT. 183

on the Macroccphali and the inhabitants of Phasis. In the
sixth and last chapter (^ 17 to the end)^ the peculiar traits of
the European character^ as connected with climate and insti-
tutions, are described in a very interesting manner. Here the
observations on the Amazons^ Sauromatae^ and Scythians are
well deserving of an attentive perusal^ and more particularly
the description of the disease induced by continual riding on
horseback^ the probable nature of which we shall consider pre-
sently. Here^ too^ are given oiur author^s remarks on diseases
supposed to be divine^ which^ as we have stated in the Prelimi-
nary section on his life^ evince a wonderful exemption from the
superstitious belief of his age^ and indicate an extraordinary
depth of thought.

This is a general outline of the contents of this treatise^
which is one of the most celebrated in the whole Collection.
From what we have stated^ it will at once be seen that it relates
to a subject of commanding interest^ and deserves to be care-
fully studied^ as containing the oldest exposition which we
possess of the opinions entertained by an original and enlight-
ened mind on many important questions connected with Public
Hygiene and Political Economy^ two sciences which^ of late
years^ have commanded a large amount of professional attention.
Whether or not modem experience may confirm our author^s
judgment in every particular case^ it surely can neither be
unprofitable nor uninteresting to ascertain what his opinions on
these subjects actually were. Let us be thankful, then, that
the destroying hand of time has spared us so valuable a relic
of antiquity; and, instead of undervaluing our ancient instructor
because he shows himself ignorant of many truths which we are
now familiar with^ let us be grateful to him for the amount of

been a daOy observer of the effects which he so feelingly depicts. Who does not
lament to think of a generoas mind placed nnder circumstances where cowardice is
honoured and courage debased ? And what more melancholy picture of human
misery can be imagined than that which is here exhibited of the bodily and mental
powers in a state of arrested derelopment from the effects of confinement ?

"HfiifTv ydp T dpeTiiQ {kutA rbv^^OfAtipov) drrodivvrai dovXiov rjfiap' &<r'jrtp ovv
ifiyi ^fl^h TovTO tritniv Ifrri) Axovia Td yXuTrdKOfia, Iv oic oc Uvyfiatoi KaXov-
fitvot vdvoi Tpk«povTait oif fi6vov KutXvii r&v cyrcjcXcKT/xcvoiv rdg dv^rieniQ, dXXd
Kai avvdyii did rbv Tripuciifiivov roig vbjfiaei, ^tfffiot'' o^Jtutg Unatrav dovXiiav,
Kdj SiKautrdrri, yffvx^C yXutTrdKOfiov, Kai koiv6v Sff rtc diro^rivairo difffAui'
v^piov, — $ 39.



184 AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.

informatiou which he has supplied to us^ and for setting us an
example which it must be both safe and profitable for us to
follow. Surely great praise is due to the man who first mooted so
many important questions^ and stated their bearings in distinct
terms, although he did not always succeed in solving them.^

I may take the present opportunity of mentioning that
M. Littre, with some appearance of truth, blames Hippocrates
for having rather overrated the influence of climate and insti-
tutions in producing military valour, which, as he justly remarks,
has been proved by modern examples to be most intimately
connected with discipline, and a knowledge of the arts of war.
But if Hippocrates was wrong on this point, it was because he
did not avail himself properly of the lights of his own age ; for
he might have learned from his contemporary, Socrates, the
very doctrine which M. Littre here inculcates. " The question
being put to him,'* says Xenophon, " whether valour was a
thing that could be taught, or was natural ? I am of opinion,

' M. Littre thus states the four principal points to which Hippocrates here directs
attention :

** Ist. II cherche quelle est, sur le maintien de la sant^ et la production des maladies,
i'influence de Texposition des villes par rapport au soleil et aux vents.

" 2d. II examine quelles sont les propri^t^s des eaux, bonnes ou mauvaises.

*' 3d. II s'efTorce de signaler les maladies qui pr^ominent suivant les saisons, et
suivant les alternatives que chacune d'elles ^preuve.

'* 4th. Enfin, il compare TEurope et TAsie, et il rattache les differences physiques et
morales qui en separent les habitants, aux differences da sol et du dimat."

He goes on, however, to state, that these four questions, although neatiy put, are
merely sketched, and half insinuates that it is a defect in the work, that it merely con-
tains our author's assertions, without the corresponding proofs. In a modern work, he
remarks, the mode of procedure would be different ; for it would be expected that
the general truths should be supported by detailed and prolonged statistics on par-
ticular facts. It is to be borne in mind, however, that the work of Hippocrates was
probably meant merely as a text-book, on which were grounded his public prelec-
tions, wherein would, no doubt, be given all the necessary proofs and illustrations.
In this respect, it resembles the esoteric works of Aristotle, of which the author of
them said that when they were published the contents of them, in one sense, were
not communicated to the public, as they would be unintelligible without the illustra-
tions by which they were accompanied when delivered in his school. In conclusion,
I would beg leave to remark that, if the work of Hippocrates, in its present form,
appear defective when compared with what a modem work on the same subject
would be expected to be, it has also peculiar traits which would hardly be matched
in a modern composition. In a modem work we might have a greater abundance of
particular facts, and a more copious detail of individual observations, but would there
be buch an exuberance of general tmths, of grand results, and of original reflections ?



ARGUMENT. 185

he said^ that as one body is bom with greater powers than
another for enduring labour^ so is one soul produced by nature
stronger than another for enduring dangers. For I see persons
brought up under the same institutions and habits differing
much from one another in courage. But I think that every
nature may be improved in valour by learning and discipline.
For it is obvious that the Scjrthians and Thracians would not
dare to contend with the Lacedemonians with bucklers and
spears ; and it is clear that the Lacedemonians would not be
willing to contend with the Thracians with small targets and
javelins^ or with the Scythians with bows and iirrows.''
(Memorab. iii, 9.) The same doctrine is taught with remarkable
subtlety of argument and originality of thought in the
^ Protagoras' of Plato, (see § 97). If, then, Hippocrates was
wrong on this head, (which, however, may be doubted), it is
clear that he is not to be screened by the alleged ignorance of
his age, and that he might have put himself right by attending
to the instructions of a contemporary with whom he, in all
probability, was familiar, and who undoubtedly was the greatest
master of human natture that ever existed.

As there are certain matters connected with this treatise
which will require a more lengthened discussion than can well
suit with foot notes, I think it advisable to treat of them in
this place : —

I. With regard to the seasons of the year, as indicated by
the risings and settings of the stars, the following observations,
taken in a great measure from Clifton's Preface, will supply,
in as brief a space as possible, all the information that will be
required : ^' As the reader will find frequent mention of seasons,
equinoxes, solstices, risings and settings of the sun and stars
(particularly Arcturus, the Dog-star, and the Pleiades), it may
not be amiss to premise, in the first place, that as the year was
divided by the ancients into four parts, every one of these was
distinguished astronomically.

" Thus, for instance, the winter began at the setting of the
Pleiades, and continued to the vernal equinox.

^' The spring began at the vernal equinox, and ended at the
rising of the Pleiades.

" The summer began at the rising of the Pleiades, and ended
at the rising of Arcturus.



186 AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.

" The autumn began at the rising of Arctunis, and ended
at the setting of the Pleiiides.

" The rising and setting of the stars is always to be under-
stood of what astronomers call the heliacal rising or setting,
i. e. when a star rises or sets with the sun.

" The rising and setting of the sun in summer or winter
(an expression which often occurs in this treatise], implies those
points of the compass the aun rises and sets at."'

II. On the winds, of which frequent mention is made by
our author, Coray has treated with a degree of prolixity and
earnestness for which it is difficult to recognise the necessity.
The figure given below, if properly studied and understood,
will supply the professional reader with all the information he
will require on this head.



f/^


*^>


/ J^


^^F..S*


/l-i*cv


8 IK*


fc:


^^AnHMOTus


^^^^"


ii^r


'■j.Si-


x^


. "*^«


. \ ■■T


^-%


■^\. \


\. <*^


'•


Ul ^^


-. x„


< Tlie classical rcailer is referred to Tlicophrastus' trealiic De Signis Ai|uarum ct
Vcntorum, for much iaterestiog uiformatiDn on this suliject. — Sec also Galen, Op-
lorn. V, p. 346, 347, cd. Basil.



ARGUMENT. 187

III- One of the most singular diseases noticed in this work
is the effeminacy with which the Scythians are said to have
been attacked in consequence of spending the greater part of
their time on horseback. (See § 22.) As the subject has at-
tracted a good deal of attention lately^ I will give a summary
of the information which has been collected respecting it. See
Coray, &c., t. ii, p. 331 ; Littre, t. ii, p. 5, 6; and Avert., xxxix,
p. 47; t. iv, p. 9.

In the first place, then, it can scarcely admit of doubt that
the disease is the same as that which Herodotus describes in
the following passage : '^ Venus inflicted upon the Scythians,
who pillaged her temple at Ascalon, and on their descendants,
the feminine disease ; at least it is to this cause that they attribute
their disease ; and travellers that go to the land of Scythia see
how those persons are affected whom the Scythians call ac-
cursed (eVapccg).'' ^

All the opinions which have been entertained respecting this
affection are referred by M. Littr^ to the three following
categories :

1 . A vice, namely (a). Pederasty, which, he says is the most
ancient opinion we have respecting it, as indicated by Longinus^
(on the Sublime, 25), and defended by his commentators. Toll
and Pearce, and by Casaubon and Coster.' (b), Onanism, the
opinion to which Sprengel inclines in his work on Hippocrates.

2. A bodily disease, to wit : (a). Hemorrhoids, as main-
tained by Paul Thomas de Girac,* by Valkenaer, by Bayer,® and
by the Compilers of the ' Universal History.'* (b), A true men-
struation, as appears to be maintained by Lefevre and Dacier,'^
and by others, (c), Blenorrhagia, as Guy Patin® and others sup-
pose, (d), a true impotence as held by Mercuriali and others.

3. A mental disease, as maintained by Sauvages,® Heyne,^^
Coray ,^^ and others.

» I. 105.

' It appears to me, however, that the meaning of Longinua in this place is rather
overstrained.'
' Coster, Defense des (Euvres de Yoiture, &c., p. 194.

* Reponse a TApoIogie de Voiture, par Coster, p. 54.
^ Memoria Scythica, in Comm. Petropol. p. 377-78.

* P. Ti, p. 35. ^ Notae in Longinum.

* Comment, in vetus Monument, p. 415. ' Nosol. Meth. p. 365.
'^ De maribus inter Scythas morbo effeminatis, Slc, p. 28.

" Hipp, de Aere, &c., t. ii, p 326.



188 AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.

M. Rosenbaum is at great pains to make out that the affec-
tion in question was pederasty, and that the accursed (c vapc^c)
of Herodotus were the same as the pathici of the Romans. I
must say, that in my opinion Rosenbaum makes out a strong
case in support of this opinion. In particular it will be re-
marked, that Herodotus says, the descendants of these Scythians
were also inflicted with this complaint. Now Celsus Aurelianus
says expressly, that the affection of the pathici was hereditary.*
Taking everything into account, I must say that my own
opinion has always been that the disease in question must have
been some variety of spermatorrhoea, I need scarcely remark
that this affection induces a state, both of body and mind^
analogous to that of the pathici, as described by ancient authors.

Before leaving this subject, however, I should mention that
M. Littre, in the fourth volume of his Hippocrates (p. xi),
brings into view a thesis by M. Graff, the object of which is to
prove that the disease of the Scythians was a true sort of im-
potence ; and in illustration of it, he cites a passage from the
memoirs of M. Larrey, containing a description of a species of
impotence, attended with wasting of the testicle, which attacked
the French army in Egypt, But, as far as I can see, this dis-
ease described by Larrey had nothing to do with riding on
horseback, and I cannot see any relation between it and the
diseases described by Herodotus and Hippocrates.

IV. Of all the legendary tales of antiquity, there is probably
no one which was so long and so generally credited by the
best informed historians, critics, geographers, poets, and phi-
losophers, as the story of the Amazons. They are noticed
historically by Homer (Iliad, iii, 186 ; vi, 152) ; Apollonius
Rhodius (ii, 196) ; Pindar (Olymp. xiii, 84) ; Herodotus (ix, 27) ;
Lysias (Epitaph. 3) ; Plato (Menex.) ; Isocrates (Panyg.) ;
Ctesias (Persic.) ; Plutarch (Theseus) ; Strabo (Geogr. ix) ;
Pausanias (iv, 81, 6 ; vii, 2, 4) ; Arrian (Exped. Alexand.) ;
Quintus Curtius (vi, 4). Now it is singular that in all this list of
authorities, which, it will be remarked, comprehends the ilite of
ancient scholars, no one, with the exception of Strabo, ventures
to express the slightest doubt respecting the actual existence of
the Amazons. . Some of them, indeed, admit that the race had

' Morb. T&rd. iv, 9.



ARGUMENT. 189

become extinct in their time ; but they all seem satisfied that
the Amazons had truly existed in a bygone age^ and consequently
they acknowledge them as real historical personages. See^ in
particular^ Arrian^ who, although compelled by his respect for
truth to acknowledge that they did not exist in the days of
Alexander the Great, still does not hesitate to declare that it
appeared incredible that this race of women, celebrated as they
were by the most eminent authors, should never have existed
at all« Yet, notwithstanding the mass of evidence in support
of their actual existence^ I suppose few scholars now-a-days
will hesitate to agree with Heyne (ApoUodor. ii, 5, 9), and with
Grote (Hist, of Greece, i, 2), in setting down the whole story
as a mere myth. But, considering how generally it had been
believed, we need not wonder that Hippocrates in this treatise
should appear to entertain no doubt of their actual existence.
The reader will remark that he makes the locality of the
Amazons to be in Europe, among the Sarmatians, on the north
side of the Euxine. It is generally taken for granted, however,
in the ancient myths, that their place of residence was on the
banks of the Thermodon, in Cappadocia, and they are described
as having afterwards crossed to the opposite side of the Euxine,
when expelled from this locality. But, in fact, they are re-
markable so much for nothing as their ubiquity, being some-
times located in Asia, sometimes in Africa, and at other times
in Athens. I may remark, before concluding, that Mr. Payne
Knight (Symbolical Language, &c.. Classical Journal, 23), and
Creuzer (Symbolik. &c.), give a symbolical interpretation to
the story of the Amazons ; but this mode of explaining the
myths of antiquity is altogether fanciful and unsatisfactory.
It seems safer and more judicious to deal with them as Mr. Grote
has done^, that is to say, to receive them as tales in which the
ancients believed, without having any rational foundation for
their faith. That there may have been a certain basis of truth
in the story of the Amazons need not be denied ; but in this, as
in all the ancient myths, it is a hopeless task to attempt to sepa-
rate truth from fiction.

' Hist, of Greece, pluries.



190 AIRS, WATERS,



ON AIRS, WATERS, AND PLACES.

1. Whoever wishes to investigate medicine properly, should
proceed thus : in the first place to consider the seasons of the
year, and what effects each of them produces (for they are not
at all alike, but differ much from themselves in regard to
their changes). i Then the winds, the hot and the cold, es-
pecially such as are common to all countries, and then such as
are peculiar to each locality. We must also consider the
qualities of the waters, for as they differ from one another in
taste and weight, so also do they differ much in their qualities.
In the same manner, when one comes into a city to which he
is a stranger, he qught to consider its situation, how it lies as
to the winds and the rising of the sun ; for its influence is not
the same whether it lies to the north or the south, to the rising
or to the setting sun. These things one ought to consider
most attentively, and concerning the waters which the in-
habitants use, whether they be marshy and soft, or hard, and
running from elevated and rocky situations, and then if saltish
and unfit for cooking ; and the ground, whether it be naked
and deficient in water, or wooded and well watered, and
whether it lies in a hollow, confined situation, or is elevated
and cold ; and the mode in which the inhabitants live, and
what are their pursuits, whether they are fond of drinking and
eating to excess, and given to indolence, or are fond of exercise
and labour, and not given to excess in eating and drinking.^

2. From these things he must proceed to investigate every-

* The part in parenthesis is rather obscure. In the old French translation it is
rendered thus : ** EUes sont tres diffi^rentes entre elles par leur nature, et il arrive
d'ailleurs une infinite de changemens qui sont tous divers." On these changes, see
Aphor. iii| 2 — 15.

' I have translated this passage agreeably to the reading suggested by Coray, that
is to say, 6vk ISto^b^t which appears to be a great improvement, although it is not
adopted by Littr^. Without the negation (6vk) the contrast between the first and
the last clause of the sentence is entirely lost. It will be remarked that I have
translated dpt<rrrjTdtf eating to excess. The dpiVTOv, or dinner, was a meal which
persons of regular habits seldom partook of, and hence Suetonius mentions it as an
instance of the Domitian's gormandising propensities, that he was in the habit of
taking dinner. — See Vita Domiiiani ; also Paulus iEciNETA, B. I, 109.



AND PLACES. 191

thing else. For if one knows all these things well^ or at least
the greater part of them, he cannot miss knowing, when he
comes into a strange city, either the diseases peculiar to the
place, or the particular nature of common diseases, so that he
will not he in doubt as to the treatment of the diseases, or
commit mistakes, as is likely to he the case provided one had
not previously considered these matters. And in particular, as
the season and the year advances, he can tell what epidemic
diseases wiU attack the city, either in summer or in winter,
and what each individual will he in danger of experiencing
from the change of regimen. For knowing the changes of the
seasons, the risings and settings of the stars, how each of them
takes place, he will be able to know beforehand what sort of a
year is going to ensue. Having made these investigations,
and knowing beforehand the seasons, such a one must be ac-
quainted with each particular, and must succeed in the preser-
vation of health, and be by no means unsuccessful in the
practice of his art. And if it shall be thought that these
things belong rather to meteorology,^ it will be admitted, on
second thoughts, that astronomy contributes not a little, but a
very great deal, indeed, to medicine. For with the seasons
the digestive organs of men undergo a change.

3. But how each of the aforementioned things should be
investigated and explained, I will now declare in a clear
manner. A city that is exposed to hot winds (these are
between the wintry rising, and the wintry setting of the
sun), and to which these are peculiar, but which is sheltered
from the north winds ; in such a city the waters will be
plenteous and saltish, and as they run from an elevated source,

' It will be remarked that our author uses meteorology and astronomy almost as
synonymous terms. In his time meteorology was looked upon by practical men as a
visionary subject of investigation, which had a tendency to make those who engaged
in it atheists, and the enemies of Socrates took advantage of the prejudices then pre-
vailing against it to represent him as a meteorologist. See Aristophanes (Nub. 225.)
Aristophanes, who would appear to have been always too ready to pander to the
popular prejudices of the day, also represents the physicians as being " meteorolo-
gical impostors," — fiiTtwpo^vaKag, (Ibid. 330.) The enlightened mind of Aristotle,
however, regarded meteorology in a very different light, and accordingly he vrrote a
work on the subject replete with all the astronomical and geological knowledge of
his time. In it he professes to treat of the heavenly bodies and atmospherical pheno-
mena, including winds, earthquakes, and the like ; also of minerals, fossils, &c. See
the introduction to his Meteorohgica.



192 AIRS, WATERS,

they are necessarily hot in summer, and cold in winter;^ the
heads of the inhabitants are of a humid and pituitous constitu-
tion, and their bellies subject to frequent disorders, owing to
the phlegm running down from the head; the forms of their
bodies, for the most part, are rather flabby ; they do not eat
nor drink much ; drinking wine in particular, and more es-
pecially if carried to intoxication, is oppressive to them ; and
the following diseases are peculiar to the district : in the first
place, the women are sickly and subject to excessive menstrua-
tion; then many are imfruitful from disease, and not from nature,
and they have frequent miscarriages; infants are subject to
attacks of convulsions and asthma, which they consider to be con-
nected with infancy,2and hold to be a sacred disease (epilepsy).
The men are subject to attacks of dysentery, diarrhoea, hepialus,^
chronic fevers in winter, of epinyctis,* frequently, and of hemor-
rhoids about the anus. Pleurisies, peripneumonies, ardent
fevers, and whatever diseases are reckoned acute, do not often
occur, for such diseases are not apt to prevail where the bowels
are loose. Ophthalmies occur of a humid character, but not
of a serious nature, and of short duration, unless they attack

> Upon reference to the editions of Coray, Clifton, and Littre, it will be seen that
the text here is in a doubtful state. I shall not weary the reader by stating my
reasons for adhering to the meaning which I have adopted.

' In place of the common reading, iraidiovt Coray adopts Otiovt which certainly,
at first sight, appears to be an improvement. But I admit, with Littr^, that the
authority of Galen (tom. v, p. 447, ed. Basil), is quite decisive in favour of irai^iov.
It is also to be taken into account in this place that the author of the treatise on
Dentition brings prominently into view the connexion between infancy and con-
vulsions, which adds probability to the supposition that in those days convulsions
may have been called " the disease of infancy."

' The Hepialus is a species of intermittent fever, very common in warm climates.
It would appear to be a variety of the quotidian. See Paulus ^Eoimeta, Vol. I,
252, Syd. Soc. edition.

* Frequent mention of this disease of the skin occurs in the works of the ancient
writers on medicine. See Paulus i£GiNKTA, Vol. II, 40. We have there stated
that it would appear to have been some species of Eczema, with which we are now
unacquainted. Coray has a very lengthy note on it, but arrives at no satisfactory
conclusions on the subject. He brings into review three cutaneous diseases , namely,
the bouton d^Alep,., (described. Memoir, de la Socicte Royale de M^c, ann^ 1777,
1778, t. i, p. 313;) the pelagre^ (described, Toaldo, Essai M^teorolog., pp. 19, 20;
Comment, de Rebus in Scient. Nat. et Medec. Gestis., tom. xxxi, p. 553 ; and Joum.
de M^ec., tom. Ixxx, p. 272 ;) and the lepre dea Attnrieif or mai de la rota, (de«
scribed by Thieri, Joum. de Medec, tom. ii, p. 337.)



AND PLACES. 193

epidemically from the cliange of the seasons. And when they
pass their fiftieth year^ defluxions supervening from the brain,
render them paralytic when exposed suddenly to strokes of the
sun,^ or to cold. These diseases are endemic to them, and,
moreover, if any epidemic disease connected with the change
of the seasons, prevail, they are also liable to it.

4. But the following is the condition of cities which have
the opposite exposure, namely, to cold winds, between the
summer settings and the summer risings of the sun, and to
which these winds are peculiar, and which are sheltered from
the south and the hot breezes. In the first place the waters
are, for the most part, hard and cold. The men must neces-
sarily be well braced and slender, and they must have the
discharges downwards of the alimentary canal hrird, and of
difficult evacuation, while those upwards are more fluid, and
rather bilious than pituitous. Their heads are sound and hard,
and they are liable to burstings (of vessels ?) for the most part.
The diseases which prevail epidemically with them, are pleurisies,
and those which are called acute diseases. This must be the
case when the bowels are bound ; and from any causes, many
become affected with suppurations in the lungs, the cause of
which is the tension of the body, and hardness of the bowels ;
for their dryness and the coldness of the water dispose them to
ruptures (of vessels?). Such constitutions must be given to
excess of eating, but not of drinking ; for it is not possible to
be gourmands and drunkards at the same time. Ophthalmics,
too, at length supervene ; these being of a hard and violent
nature, and soon ending in rupture of the eyes ; persons under
thirty years of age are liable to severe bleedings at the nose in
summer ; attacks of epilepsy are rare but severe. Such people
are likely to be rather long-lived ; their ulcers are not attended
with serous discharges, nor of a malignant character ; in dis-
position they are rather ferocious than gentle. The diseases I
have mentioned are peculiar to the men, and besides they are
liable to any common complaint which may be prevailing from
the changes of the seasons. But the women, in the first place,

* CoupM de ioleil, or strokes of the sun, are often mentioned incidentally in the
works of th<t ancient authors, but no one has treated of them in any very systematic
manner, as far as I recollect. On the effects of exposure to cold and heat, see,
however, Pavlus iEoiNSTA, Vol. I, 49-51, Syd. Soc. edition.

13



194 AIRS, WATERS,

are of a hard constitution^ from the waters being hard^ in-
digestible^ and cold ; and their menstrual discharges are not
regular, but in small quantity, and painful. Then they have
difficult parturition, but are not very subject to abortions. And
when they do bring forth children, they are unable to nurse
them ; for the hardness and indigestible nature of the water
puts away their milk. Phthisis frequently supervenes after
childbirth, for the efforts of it frequently bring on ruptures and
strains.^ Children while still little are subject to dropsies in the
testicle, which disappear as they grow older 3 in such a town they
are late in attaining manhood. It is, as I have now stated,
with regard to hot and cold winds and cities thus exposed.

5. Cities that are exposed to winds between the summer
and the winter risings of the sun, and these the opposite to
them, have the following characters : — ^Those which lie to the
rising of the sun are all likely to be more healthy than such
as are turned to the North, or those exposed to the hot winds,
even if there should not be a furlong between them.* In the
first place, both the heat and the cold are more moderate.
Then such waters as flow to the rising sun, must necessarily
be clear, fragrant, soft, and delightful to drink, in such a city.
For the sun in rising and shining upon them purifies them, by
dispelling the vapours which generally prevail in the morning.
The persons of the inhabitants are, for the most part, well
coloured and blooming, unless some disease counteract. The
inhabitants have clear voices, and in temper and intellect are
superior to those which are exposed to the north, and all the
productions of the country in like manner are better. A city
so situated resembles the spring as to moderation between heat
and cold, and the diseases are few in number, and of a feeble

I 'Priyfiara gai trirdfffxaTa. There has heen much difference of opinion ts to the
exact import of these two terms. It would appear to me that they were intended to
apply to a rupture or straining of the fibres, occasioned by external violence.
M. Littr^ has a very interesting note on this subject, torn, v, p. 579. On these
strainings see further Coacse Pnenotiones, 376, 418. M. Littr^, 1. c, relates a case of
empyema brought on by lifUng a heavy piece of wood. On these terms see further
the Annotations on Demosthenes, Olynth. ii, 8, ed. Dobson ; and Foes, Re. Hippocr.

' Clifton translates this clause of the sentence thus : " Even if there be but a small
distance beween them," and, I think, correctly, although Corey is not quite satisfied
with this interpretation. The stadium was nearly the eighth part of a Roman mile,
that is to say, it consisted of 94 1 French toises, or 625 English feet.



AND PLACES. 195

kiad^ and bear a resemblance to the diseases which prevail in
regions exposed to hot winds. The women there are very
prolific^ and have easy deliveries. Thus it is with regard to
them.

6. But such cities as lie to the west^ and which are sheltered
from winds blowing from the east^ and whicH the hot winds
and the cold winds of the north scarcely touchy must neces-
sarily be in a very unhealthy situation : in the first place the
waters are not clear^ the cause of which is^ because the mist
prevails commonly in the mornings and it is mixed up with
the water and destroys its clearness^ for the sun does not shine
upon the water until he be considerably raised above the
horizon. And in summer^ cold breezes from the east blow and /
dews fall ; and in the latter part of the day the setting sun
particularly scorches the inhabitants^ and therefore they are
pale and enfeebled^ and are partly subject to all the aforesaid
diseases^ but no one is peculiar to them. Their voices are
rougl^ and hoarse owing to the state of the air^ which in such
a situation is generally impure and unwholesome^ for they have
not the northern winds to purify it ; and these winds they have
are of a very humid character^ such being the nature of the
evening breezes. Such a situation of a city bears a great
resemblance to autumn as regards the changes of the day,
inasmuch as the difference between morning and evening is
great. So it is with regard to the winds that are conducive
to health, or the contrary.

7. And I wish to give an account of the other kinds of
waters, namely, of such as are wholesome and such as are
unwholesome, and what bad and what good effects may be
derived from water; for water contributes much towards
health.^ Such waters then as are marshy, stagnant, and
belong to lakes, are necessarily hot in summer, thick, and
have a strong smell, since they have no current ; but being
constantly supplied by rain-water, and the sun heating them,
they necessarily want their proper colour, are unwholesome
and form bile ; in winter, they become congealed, cold, and

' In another place, I have given a summary of the information supplied by the
ancient authors on this subject, (Paulus ^Eginbta, Vol. 1, 66.) Upon the whole, none
of them gives so much valuable matter on it as our author. Coray has some elabo-
rate annotations on this passage.



196 AIRS, WATERS,

muddy with the snow and ice, so that they are most apt to
engender phlegm, and bring on hoarseness ; those who drink
them have large and obstructed spleens, their bellies are
hard, emaciated, and hot; and their shoulders, collar-bones,
and faces are emaciated; for their flesh is melted down
and taken up by the spleen, and hence they are slender;
such persons then are voracious and thirsty ; their bellies are
very dry both above and below, so that they require the
strongest medicines.^ This disease is - habitual to them both
in summer and in winter, and in addition they are very sub-
ject to dropsies of a most fatal character; and in summer
dysenteries, diarrhoeas, and protracted quartan fevers frequently
seize them, and these diseases when prolonged dispose such
constitutions to dropsies, and thus prove fatal. These are the
diseases which attack them in summer ; but in wiuter younger
persons are liable to pneumonia, and maniacal affections ; and
older persons to ardent fevers, from hardness of the belly.
Women are subject to oedema and leucophlegmasiae ;* when
pregnant they have difficult deliveries ; their infants are large
and swelled, and then during nursing they become wasted and
sickly, and the lochial discharge after parturition does not
proceed properly with th^ women. The children are particu-
larly subject to hernia, and adults to varices and ulcers on
their legs, so that persons with such constitutions cannot be
long-lived, but before the usual period they fall into a state
of premature old age. And further, the women appear to be
with child, and when the time of parturition arrives, the fulness
of the belly disappears, and this happens from dropsy of the

' It can scarcely admit of a doubt that oar author here alludes to scurvy. (See
Corey at this place, and Lind on Scurvy, iii, 1.) He also describes the disease dis-
tinctly in the second book of Prorrhetics, that is to say, if Hippocrates be actually
the author of that book. See also Epidem. ii, 1 ; de Affection., de inter, affect. ;
Caelius Aurelianus, Tard. Pass, iii, 4; Celsus, iv, 9; Aetius, x, 11; Pliny, H. N.,
XXV, 3 ; Aretaeus, Morb. Diutum, i, 14 ; and Paulus iEgineta, iii, 49 ; Marcellus, de
Medic, ii.

' The leucophlegmasia is treated of in different parts of the Hippocratic treatises,
as Aphor. vii, 29 ; de Morb. ii. By it he evidently meant a species of dropsy, as
Galen remarks in his commentary on the Aphorisms (1. c). It occurs in Aretaeus's
chapter on dropsy, Morb. Diutum, ii, 1 ; Octavius Horatianus, v. Celsus makes it to
be synonymous with anasarca, iii, 21. Our author would seem to notice these varieties
of dropsy as beiug affections to which pregnant women are subject.



AND PLACES. 197

uterus.' Such waters then I reckon bad for every purpose.
The next to them in badness are those which have their
fountains in rocks, so that they must necessarily be hard^ or
come from a soil which produces thermal waters, such as those
having iron, copper, silver, gold, sulphur, alum, bitumen, or
nitre (soda) in them ; for all these are formed by the force of
heat.^ Good waters cannot proceed from such a soil, but
those that are hard and of a heating nature, difficult to pass by
urine, and of difficult evacuation by the bowels. The best are
those which flow from elevated grounds, and hills of earth ;
these are sweet, clear, and can bear a little wine j they are hot
in summer and cold in winter, for such necessarily must be
the waters from deep wells. But those are most to be com-
mended which run to the rising of the sun, and especially
to the summer sun; for such are necessarily more clear,
frngrant, and light. But all such as are saltish, crude,
and hard, are not good for drink. But there are certain
constitutions and diseases with which such waters agree when
drunk, as 1 will explain presently. Their characters are
as follows : the best are such as have their fountains to the
east ; the next, those between the summer risings and settings
of the sun, and especially those to the risings ; and third, those
between the summer and winter settings ; but the worst are
those to the south, and the parts between the winter rising
and setting, and those to the south are very bad^ but those to

* On hydrops uteri see the authorities quoted in the Commentary on Paulus
^oiNETA, B. Ill, 48, Syd. Soc. edition. It may appear singular that hydatids of the
womb should be particularly prevalent in the case of women that drink unwholesome
water from marshes, and yet our author's observation is confirmed by a modem
authority, as quoted by Coray : " II a 6t4 ^galement prouv^ par les observations des
Modernes, que les fausses grossesses produites par les hydatides; 'sont tr^s-com-
munes dans les pays raar^cageux, ou la plupart des habitans ont une constitution
lache, propre a Taifection scorbutique, qui y est presque end^mique, qu'elles se ter-
niinent plus ou moins tard par Texcr^tion de ces hydatides." — (Notes surle Traitedes
Airs, &c., p. 106.) Sydenham, moreover, describes the symptoms of false pregnancy
in much the same terms as our author. (Tract de Hydrop.)

' On the Thermal waters of the ancients, see Paulus iSoiNBTA, Vol. I, 72. I
have treated fully of the ancient alum and niire under trrvirrtipia and XiTpov, in the
Third Volume. Coray, in his notes on this passage, does not throw much light on
this subject. The opinion here delivered by our author, that these metallic substances
are produced by the operation of heat, is adopted and followed out by Aristotle
towards the end of the third book on Metcorologia.



198 AIRS, WATERS,

the north are better. They are to be used as follows : who-
ever is in good health and strength need not mind^ but may
always drink whatever is at hand. But whoever wishes to
drink the most suitable for any disease^ may accomplish his
purpose by attending to the following directions : To persons
whose bellies are hard and easily burnt up, the sweetest, the
lightest, and the most limpid waters will be proper ; but those
persons whose bellies are soft, loose, and pituitous, should
choose the hardest, those kinds that are most crude, and the
saltest, for thus will they be most readily dried up ; for such
waters as are adapted for boiling, and are of a very solvent
nature, naturally loosen readily and melt down the bowels;
but such as are intractable, hard, and by no means proper for
boiling, these rather bind and dry up the bowels. People
have deceived themselves with regard to salt waters, fh)ra inex-
perience, for they think these waters purgative, whereas they
are the very reverse ; for such waters are crude, and ill adapted
for boiling, so that the belly is more likely to be bound up
than loosened by them.^ And thus it is with regard to the
waters of springs.

8. I will now tell how it is with respect to rain-water, and
water from snow. Rain waters, then, are the lightest, the
sweetest, the thinnest, and the clearest ; for originally the sun
raises and attracts the thinnest and lightest part of the water,
as is obvious from the nature of salts ; for the saltish part is
left behind owing to its thickness and weight, and forms
salts ; but the sun attracts the thinnest part, owing to its
lightness, and he abstracts this not only from the lakes, but
also from the sea, and from all things which contain humidity,
and there is humidity in everything ; and from man himself
the sun draws off the thinnest and lightest part of the juices.
As a strong proof of this, when a man walks in the sun, or
sits down having a garment on, whatever parts of the body

' Coray appears to me to be unnecessarily puzzled to account for our author's
statement, that saltish waters, although held to be purgative, are, in fact, astringent
of the bowels. But, although their primary effect certainly be cathartic, is it not
undeniable that their secondary effect is to induce or aggravate constipation of the
bowels ? Certain it is, moreover, that all the ancient authorities held salts to be
possessed of desiccaut and astringent powers. See Paulus iEoiMETA, Vol. Ill,
under &\ti'.



AND PLACES. 199

the 8un shines upon do not sweaty for the sun carries off what-
ever sweat makes its appearance; but those parts which are
covered by the garment^ or anything else, sweat, for the par-
ticles of sweat are drawn and forced out by the sun, and are
preserved by the cover so as not to be dissipated by the sun ;
but when the person comes into the shade the whole body
equally perspires, because the sun no longer shines upon it.^
Wherefore, of all kinds of water, these spoil the soonest ; and
rain water has a bad smell, because its particles are collected
and mixed together from most objects, so as to spoil the soonest.
And in addition to this, when attracted and raised up, being
carried about and mixed with the air, whatever part of it is
turbid and darkish is separated and removed from the other,
and becomes cloud and mist, but the most attenuated and
lightest part is lefl, and becomes sweet, being heated and con-
cocted by the sun, for all other things when concocted become
sweet. While dissipated then and not in a state of consistence
it is carried aloft. But when collected apd condensed by con-
trary winds, it falls down wherever it happens to be most
condensed. For this is likely to happen when the clouds
being carried along and moving with a wind which does not
allow them to rest, suddenly encounters another wind and other
clouds from the opposite direction : there it is first condensed,
and what is behind is carried up to the spot, and thus it
thickens, blackens, and is conglomerated, and by its weight it
falls down and becomes rain. Such, to all appearance, are
the best of waters, but they require to be boiled and strained ;'
for otherwise they have a bad smell, and occasion hoarseness
and thickness of the voice to those who drink them.^ Those
from snow and ice are all bad, for when once congealed, they
never again recover their former nature ; for whatever is clear,
light, and sweet in them, is separated and disappears ; but the

' Aristotle discusses the subject in his Problems, ii* 9, 36, 37 ; ii, 15 ; i, 53 ; v, 34,
and arrives at nearly the same conclusions as Hippocrates. See also Theophrastus de
Sudoribus.

' I cannot hesitate in adopting the emendation suggested by Coray (SurotrriBiirOai)
in place of the common reading {dvo^riirioOai), which evidently has no proper
meaning in this place. I am surprised that M. Littr^ should have hesitated in
admitting it into the text.

' Athensus, in like manner, praises rain water. Dcipnos ii, 5.



200 AIRS, WATERS,

mo$t turbid and weightiest part is left behind.* You may
.•v^certuiu this in the following manner : If in winter you will
pour water by measure into a vessel and expose it to the open
air until it is all frozen, and then on the following day bring
it into a warm situation where the iee will thaw, if you will
mcasun* the water asr^iin when dissolved you will find it much
loss in quantity. This is a proof that the lightest and thinnest
part is dissipated and dried up by the congelation, and not the
heaviest and thickest, for that is impossible :^ wherefore I hold
that waters frv>m snow and ice, and those allied to them, are
the worst of any for all purposes whatever. Such are the
eharncters of rain-water, and those from ice and snow.

9.^ Men become artected with the stone, and are seized with
diseases of the kidneys, strangiury, sciatica, and become ruptured,

' It ap;>eAr$ sinsrular tint Athoaxus, it ho is aniloubtedly a most learned and judi-
cious authority on ali matters relating: to Dietetics, speaks as favorably of water
ln>in iin^ as he <Ioes of niin Yii'dter. Both he pnuses for their lightness, (1. c.) Celsas
gi>cs the character of the ilitferent kinds of water with his characteristic terseness and
accuracy : ** Aqua levissima plnvialis e$t ; deimle foutana ; turn ex flamine ; turn ex
putco ; pi^st )ia.v e\ nive, aut v:laoie; grayior liis ex lacu : gravissima ex palnde/' (ii, 19.)
Galen tm'ats of the nieiiioiual and dieietical pnitperties of water in several of his works,
and uniformly agrees with HipixHTates in the judgment he prononnces on them.
See in particular, I)e Ptisana ; De Sanit. tuend. ii: Comment, ii. in Libr. de Ratione
victns in Morb. acut.

" Athenani$» on the other hand, argues from the fact that ice is lighter than water,
that water fomie<I fn>ni ice must be light. Pliny gives a lucid statement of the opinions
of thoi>e who held that water from ice is light and wholesome, and those who, like
Hippocrates, hehl it to l)c just the reverse. He says in thewords of Hippocrates, literally
translated, " nee vero ]>auci inter ipsos e contrario ex gelu ac nivibus insalubenimos
potius pncdicant, qiioniam exactum sit inde, quod tenuissimimi fuerit." (H.N. xxxi, 21.)
See also Seneca, Qiia^st. Natural, iv. It would appear that iced liqiuwrt were greatly
relished at the tables of goitnncnds in those days. I need scarcely remark that there
has been great ditTerence of opinion in modem times regarding the qualities of water
from melted snow and ice. It was at one time generally believed that it is the canse
of the goitres to which the inhabitants of the valleys bordering on the Alps are sub-
ject. This opinion, however, is by no means generally held at the present time.

' Tliis is a roost interesting chapter, as containing the most ancient observations
which we possess on the important subject of lurinary calculi. The ancients never
improved the theory, nor added much to the facts which are here stated by our
author. >rVe have given the summary of their opinions in the Commentary on
pArLvs .Ilgi NETA, B. Ill, 45. I would beg leave to remark that, notwithstanding the
number of curious facts which mo<leni chemistry has evolved regarding the compo-
sition of urinary calculi, the etiology of the disease is nearly as obscure now as it was
in the days of Hippocrates.



L



AND PLACES. 201

when they drink all sorts of waters, and those from great
rivers into which other rivulets run, or from a lake into which
many streams of all sorts flow, and such as are brought from
a considerable distance. For it is impossible that such waters
can resemble one another, but one kind is sweet, another saltish
and aluminous, and some flow from thermal springs ; and these
being all mixed up together disagree, and the strongest part
always prevails ; but the same kind is not always the strongest,
but sometimes one and sometimes another, according to the
winds, for the north wind imparts strength to this water, and
the south to that, and so also with regard to the others. There
must be deposits of mud and sand in the vessels from such
waters, and the aforesaid diseases must be engendered by them
when drunk, but why not to all I will now explain. When
the bowels are loose and in a healthy state, ^ and when the
bladder is not hot, nor the neck of the bladder very contracted,
all such persons pass water freely, and no concretion forms in
the bladder ; but those in whom the belly is hot, the bladder
must be in the same condition; and when pretem2;turally
heated, its neck becomes inflamed; and when these things
happen, the bladder does not expel the urine, but raises its
heat excessively. And the thinnest part of it is secreted, and
the purest part is passed off in the form of urine, but the
thickest and most turbid part is condensed and concreted, at
first in small quantity, but afterwards in greater; for being
rolled about in the urine, whatever is of a thick consistence it
assimilates to itself, and thus it increases and becomes in-
durated. And when such persons make water, the stone forced
down by the urine falls into the neck of the bladder and stops
the urine, and occasions intense pain ; so that calculous children
rub their privy parts and tear at them, as supposing that the
obstruction to the urine is situated there. As a proof that it
is as I say, persons affected with calculus have very limpid
urine, because the thickest and foulest part remains and is
concreted.^ Thus it generally is in cases of calculus. It

' Coray remarks that Prosper Martian, in his commentary on this passage, con-
firms the truth of the observation here made, that persons affected with calculus have
the bowels constipated.

' Theophihis, in his treatise De Urinis, would seem to contradict this ol)8en'ation
of Hippocrates, when he states that the urine of calculous persons is thick and



(P^/



202 AIRS, WATERS,

forms also in children from milk^ when it is not wholesome^
but very hot and bilious^ for it heats the bowels and bladder,
so that the urine being also heated undergoes the same change.
And I hold that it is better to give children only the most
diluted wine, for such will least bum up and dry the veins.
Calculi do not form so readily in women, for in them the urethra
is short and wide, so that in them the urine is easily expelled ;
neither do they rub the pudendum with their hands, nor handle
the passage like males ; ^ for the urethra in women opens direct
into the pudendum, which is not the case with men, neither
in them is the urethra so wide, and they drink more than
children do.^ Thus, or nearly so, is it with regard to them.

10. And respecting the seasons, one may judge whether the
year will prove sickly or healthy from the following observa-
tions:* — If the appearances connected with the rising and
setting stars be as they should be ; if there be rains in autumn ;

milky (8). But, according to Prosper Martian, when the calculus is in the state of
formation, its characters are as described by the latter, whereas, when the calculus is
already formed, the urine is limpid, as described by Hippocrates.

* It is worthy of remark that Celsus states just the reverse with regard to the
practice of women labouring under the stone ; he says : " Feminae vero oras naturalium
suorum manibus admotis scabere crebro coguntur.'' (ii, 7.) Are we to suppose that he
followed a different reading ? Considering how well he shows himself acquainted
with the works of Hippocrates, it cannot be thought that he had overlooked this
passage.

^Our author, it will be remarked, ascribes the comparative immunity firom calculus
which females enjoy to their freer use of liquids. Celsus, in laying down directions
for the regimen of a calculous person, as preparatory for the operation, among other
things, directs, " ut aquam bibat," (vii, 26-2.) Coray collects the opinions of several
modern authorities in favour of drinking water as a preventive of calculus. Thus
Tissot states that the Chinese, who drink so much water with their tea, enjoy almost
an immunity from the disease. (De la Sant^ des Gens de Lettres, p. 196.) Campfer,
in like manner, affirms that calculus has become less common in Europe since the
introduction of tea, which he justly attributes to the amount of water drunk with it,
rather than to any virtues of the plant itself. (Comment de Reb. in scient. nat. et
medic, gestis, vol. xvi, p. 594.) Metzger attributes the diminution of the number of
calculous cases in Konigsberg to the use of draughts of tepid water. (Journal de
Medec, voL Ixvii, 348.) The Turks, according to Thevenot, owing to their free use
of water, are almost exempt from the disease. (Voyage au Levant, c. xxvii, p. 70.)

^ Coray makes the following remarks on the natural characters of the seasons la
Greece. The natural temperature of the winter in Greece was cold and humid ; thua
a dry and northerly winter was reckoned an unnatural season. Spring was reckoned
unnatural when the heat and rain were excessive. See further Theophrast de Caus.
Plant, ii, 1.



AND PLACES. 203

if the winter be mild, neither very tepid nor unseasonably
cold, and if in spring the rains be seasonable, and so also
in summer, the year is likely to prove healthy. But if the
winter be dry and northerly, and the spring showery and
southerly, the summer will necessarily be of a febrile character,
and give rise to ophthalmies and dysenteries.^ For when
suffocating heat sets in all of a sudden, while the earth is
moistened by the vernal showers, and by the south wind, the
heat is necessarily doubled from the earth, which is thus soaked
by rain and heated by a burning sun, while, at the same time,
men's bellies are not in an orderly state, nor the brain properly
dried ; for it is impossible, after such a spring, but that the
body and its flesh must be loaded with humours, so that very
acute fevers will attack all, but especially those of a phlegmatic
constitution. Dysenteries are also likely to occur to women
and those of a very humid temperament. And if at the rising
of the Dogstar rain and wintry storms supervene, and if the
ctesian winds blow, there is reason to hope that these diseases
will cease, and that the autumn will be healthy ; but if not, it
is likely to be a fatal season to children and women, but least
of all to old men ; and that convalescents will pass into quartans,
and from quartans into dropsies ; but if the winter be southerly,
showery, and mild, but the spring northerly, dry, and of a
wintry character, in the first place women who happen to
be with child, and whose accouchement should take place
in spring, are apt to miscarry ; and such as bring forth, have
feeble and sickly children, so that they either die presently or
are tender, feeble, and sickly, if they live. Such is the case
with the women. The others are subject to dysenteries^ and
dry ophthalmies, and some have catarrhs beginning in the head
and descending to the lungs. Men of a phlegmatic temperament
are likely to have dysenteries ; and women, also, from the

* See Aphorism iii, 11.

^ The celebrated Haller charges Hippocrates with inaccurate observation in stating
that dysenteries are epidemic in spring, which, he contends, is contrary to modem
experience. (Bibl. Med. Pract., vol. i, p. 61.) Hippocrates, however, is defended by
Graner (Cens. libr. Hippocrat. ii, 5, p. 51), and by Coray. (Notes, &c., p. 159.) The
latter justly argues, that although dysentery may not prevail at that season in
Germany, that is no reason for holding why it may not be so in Greece. He also refers
to the works of Bimstiel and Stoll for descriptions of epidemical dysentery, occurring
in the season of spring.



204 AIRS, WATERS,

humidity of their nature, the phlegm descending downwards
from the brain ; those who are bilious, too, have dry ophthalmies
from the heat and dryness of their flesh ; the aged, too, have
catarrhs from their flabbiness and melting of the veins, so that
some of them die suddenly and some become paralytic on the
right side or the left.* For when, the winter being southerly
and the body hot, the blood and veins are not properly con-
stringed ; a spring that is northerly, dry, and cold, having come
on, the brain when it should have been expanded and purged,
by the coryza and hoarseness is then constringed and con-
tracted, so that the summer and the heat occurring suddenly,
and a change supervening, these diseases fall out. And such
cities as lie well to the sun and winds, and use good waters,
feel these changes less, but such as use marshy and pooly
waters, and lie well both as regards the winds and the sun,
these all feel it more. And if the summer be drv, those dis-
eases soon cease, but if rainy, they are protracted ; and ^here
is danger of any sore that there is becoming phagedenic
from any cause ; and lienteries and dropsies supervene at the
conclusion of diseases ; for the bowels are not readily dried up.
And if the summer be rainy and southerly, and next the
autumn, the winter must, of necessity, be sickly, and ardent
fevers are likely to attack those that are phlegmatic, and more
elderly than forty years, and pleurisies and peripneumonies ^
those that are bilioas. But if the summer is parched and
northerly, but the autumn rainy and southerly, headache and
sphacelus of the brain ^ are likely to occur ; and in addition
hoarseness, coryza, coughs, and in some cases, consumption.^
But if the season is northerly and without water, there being
no rain, neither after the Dogstar nor Arcturus ; this state
agrees best with those who are naturally phlegmatic, with those
who are of a humid temperament, and with women ; but it is
most inimical to the bilious ; for they become much parched

' See Aphorism iii, 12 ; also Aristot. Probl. i, 9 ; CelsuSi u, 1.

^ Coray, in this place, refers to an epidemic of the same description related by
Caillar, which prevailed in the winter of 1751, and was treated by emetics more
successfully than by bleeding^.

^ By sphacelus of the brain Clifton understands '* paralytic diseases/* which is not
far removed from the conclusion which we have arrived at respecting it in the Com>
nicntary on Paulus iCciNETA, Vol. I, p. 365. See Coray's lengthened note on this
passage. * Aphorism, iii, 13.



AND PLACES. 205

up, and ophthalmies of a dry nature supervene, fevers both
acute and chronic, and in some cases melancholy ; ^ for the
most humid and watery part of the bile being consumed, the
thickest and most acrid portion is left, and of the blood
likewise, whence these diseases come upon them. But all
these are beneficial to the phlegmatic, for they are thereby
dried up, and reach winter not oppressed with humours, but
with them dried up.

11. Whoever studies and observes these things may be
able to foresee most of the effects which will result from the
changes of the seasons ; and one ought to be particularly
guarded during the greatest changes of the seasons, and neither
willingly give medicines, nor apply the cautery to the belly,
nor make incisions there until ten or more days be past. Now,
the greatest and most dangerous are the two solstices, and
especially the summer, and also the two equinoxes, but espe-
cially the autumnal.^ One ought also to be guarded about the
rising of the stars, especially of the Dogstar, then of Arcturus,
and then the setting of the Pleiades ; for diseases are especially
apt to prove critical in those days, and some prove fatal, some
pass off, and all others change to another form and another
constitution. So it is with regard to them.

12. I wish to show, respecting Asia and Europe, how, in
all respects, they differ from one another, and concerning
the figure of the inhabitants, for they are different, and do
not at all resemble one another. To treat of all would be a
long story, but I will tell you how I think it is with regard to
the greatest and most marked differences. I say, then, that
Asia differs very much from Europe as to the nature of all
things, both with regard to the productions of the earth and
the inhabitants, for everything is produced much more beau-
tiful and large in Asia ; the country is milder, and the dispo-
sitions of the inhabitants also are more gentle and affectionate.^

' Aphorism iii, 14.

* I have stated in my analysis of the short treatise ' On Purgative Medicines/ that
the author of it forbids the administration of these medicines, that is to say, of drastic
purgatives, during excessive heat or cold.

' One may see, upon consulting the editions of Clifton, Coray, and Littr^, that
there are great varieties of readings in regard to the word which I have translated
** affectionate." It will be remarked that I have followed Coray and Littr^, in reading
iOopytirSTipa. Clifton adopts aepyortpat and translates it ** unactive."



206 AIRS, WATERS,

The cause of this is the temperature of the seasons^ because it
lies in the middle of the risings of the sun^ towards the east^
and removed from the cold (and heat)/ for nothing tends to
growth and mildness so much as when the climate has no
predominant quality^ but a general equality of temperature
prevails. It is not everywhere the same with regard to Asia,
but such parts of the country as lie intermediate between the
heat and the cold^ are the best supplied with fruits and trees^
and have the most genial climate^ and enjoy the purest waters^
both celestial and terrestrial. For neither are they much
burnt up by the heat, nor dried up by the drought and want
of rain, nor do they suffer from the cold ; since they are well
watered from abundant showers and snow, and the fruits of
the season,^ as might be supposed, grow in abundance, both
such as are raised from seed that has been sown, and such plants
as the earth produces of its own accord, the fruits of which
the inhabitants make use of, training them from their wild
state and transplanting them to a suitable soil j the cattle also
' which are reared there are vigorous, particularly prolific, and
bring up young of the fairest description ; the inhabitants, too,
are well fed, most beautiful in shape, of large stature, and
differ little from one another either as to figure or size ; and
the country itself, both as regards its constitution and mildness
of the seasons, may be said to bear a close resemblance to the
spring. Manly courage, endurance of suffering, laborious en-
terprise, and high spirit, could not be produced in such a state
of things either among the native inhabitants or those of a
different country, for there pleasure necessarily reigns. For
this reason, also, the forms of wild beasts there are much

* This expression of our author is ambiguous. Coray explains it thoa : " il entend
le lever d'cte, qu'il place a 45 degr^s de TEst au Nord, dans Thorizon de la Greoe, ei
particullerement eelui de llle de Cos ; et le lever d'hiver qu'il place a 45 degr^s de
FEst au Sud."

' The sense undoubtedly requires this addition, and therefore I have not scrupled
to follow the reading of Comarius, xai rov OtpfAov.

* The term here used meant particularly the Jrueiut hormi, or summer fruits ;
namely, cucumbers, gourds, and the like. (See Paulus ^Soinkta, B. I, § 80.)
Surely Coray forgot himself, when he wrote thus regarding the distinction between
the summer and autumnal fruits of his country : " les Grecs entendoient particuU^-
ment par &pdia les fruits de la fin de T^te, c'est-a-dire, de oette partie de Tann^
qu'ils appelloient dvutpaVf &c."



AND PLACES. 207

varied.' Thus it is^ as I thinks with the Egyptians and
Libyans.

13. But concerning those on the right hand of the summer
risings of the sun as far as the Palus Mseotis^ (for this is the
boundary of Europe and Asia), it is with them as follows : the
inhabitants there di£Per far more from one another than those
I have treated of above^ owing to the differences of the seasons
and the nature of the soil. But with regard to the country
itself, matters are the same there as among all other men ; for
where the seasons undergo the greatest and most rapid changes,
there the country is the wildest and most unequal ; and you
will find the greatest variety of mountains, forests, plains^ and
meadows ; but where the seasons do not change much there
the country is the most even ; and, if one will consider it, so
is it also with regard to the inhabitants; for the nature of
some is like to a country covered with trees and well watered ;
of some, to a thin soil deficient in water ; of others, to fenny
and marshy places ; and of some again, to a plain of bare and
parched land.^ For the seasons which modify their natural
frame of body are varied, and the greater the varieties of them
the greater also will be the differences of their shapes.

14. I will pass over the smaller differences among the nations,
but will now treat of such as are great either from nature or
custom ; and, first, concerning the Macrocephali.^ There is
no other race of men which have heads in the least resembling

> It is bat too apparent that there is a lacuna in the text here. A chapter de-
voted to an examination of the peculiarities of the Egyptians and Libyans is evidently
lost. As M. Littr^ has remarked, Galen appears to refer to the contents of the lost
chapter. (Opera, torn, xvi, p. 392 ; ed. Kiihn.)

' That is to say, the Sea of Azoff. See Herodotus, iv, 86, who calls it Mai^nc.
This was generally held to be the division between Europe and Asia, as stated by
our author. As Coray remarks, its borders on the north-west are occupied by the
inhabitants of Little Tartary : it has the Crimea on the south-west ; the Tartars of
Cuban and the Circassians on the south-east.

* That the inhabitants of a country bear a resemblance to the country itself, is no
doubt a profound and most philosophical remark, although it must be admitted that
the comparisons which our author makes are somewhat quaintly expressed, and hence
a German physician wished the passage expunged, as being unworthy of Hippocrates.
(Comment, de Reb. in Sdent. Natur. et Med. gestis, vol. xx, p. 131.) There can be
no question, however, that it embodies a grand general truth, although the particular
application of it may not always be apparent.

* On the Macrocephali, see Pliny, H. N. vi, 4 ; Stephanus, de Urbibus ; Suidas and



208 AIRS, WATERS,

theirs. At first, usage was the principal cause of the length
of their head, but now nature cooperates with usage. They
think those the most noble who have the longest heads. It is
thus with regard to the usage : immediately after the child is
born, and while its head is still tender, they fashion it with
their hands, and constrain it to assume a lengthened shape by
applying bandages and other suitable contrivances whereby the
spherical form of the head is destroyed, and it is made to in-
crease in length. Thus, at first, usage operated, so that this
constitution was the result of force ; but, in the course of time,
it was formed naturally, so that usage had nothing to do with
it ; for the semen comes from all parts of the body, sound from
the sound parts, and unhealthy from the unhealthy parts. If,
then, children with bald heads are born to parents with bald
heads ; and children with blue eyes to parents who have blue
eyes ; and if the children of parents having distorted eyes squint
also for the most psirt ; and if the same may be said of other
forms of the body, what is to prevent it from happening that
a child with a long head should be produced by a parent having
a long head ?^ But now these things do not happen as they
did formerly, for the custom no longer prevails owing to their

Ilarpocration in >f acpoicl^aXoi ; Pomponius Mela, i, 19; Strabo, xii; Scholiast
ApoUon. Rhod.f i ; Dionysius Periegetes.

The exact situation of the savage nation of the Macrocephali cannot be precisely
determined, but it was evidently not far from the Palus Maeotis, and most probably
in the vicinity of the Caucasus. Little is known of them, except what our author says
respecting the practice which they had of disfiguring their heads by squeezing them,
in early infancy, into an elongated shape. It is well known that the same absurd
usage prevailed among the early inhabitants of Mexico. I need scarcely say that
much important information respecting them has been obtained of late years. M.
Littr^, in the fourth vol. of his edition of Hippocrates, supplies some very important
information in illustration of this subject, from a recent publication of Dr. H. Rathke.
Certain tumuli having been excavated at Kertch, in the Crimea, there were found in
them, besides different utensils and statues, several skeletons, and it was most re-
markable that the form of the head was greatly elongated, in the manner described
by Hippocrates with regard to the Macrocephali. The author's words are : " On y
remarquait, en effet, un hauteur extraordinaire par rapport au diametre de la base,
et par Ik ils frappaient meme les personnes qui n'avaient aucune connaissance de la
structure du corps humain/'

* The same theory respecting the secretion of the semen is given in the treatises
' De Genitura' and ' De Morbo Sacro.' It is espoused by Galen, in his little work,
* Quod animal sit quod utero continetur.' Coray remarks that Hippocrates's theory
on the origin of the foetus does not differ much from that of Duffon.



AND PLACES. 209

intercourse with other men. Thus it appears to me to be with
regard to them.

15. As to the inhabitants of Phasis/ their country is
fenny^ warmi humid^ and wooded; copious and severe rains
occur there at all seasons ; and the life of the inhabitants is
spent among the fens; for their dwellings are constructed of
wood and reeds^ and are erected amidst the waters ; they seldom
practise walking either to the city or the market^ but sail about^
up and down^ in canoes constructed out of single trees^ for there
are many canals there.' They drink the hot and stagnant
waters, both when rendered putrid by the sun, and when swollen
with the rains. The Phasis itself is the most stagnant of all
rivers, and runs the smoothest;^ all the fruits which spring
there are imwholesome, of feeble and imperfect growth^ owing
to the redundance of water, and on this account they do not
ripen, for much vapour from the waters overspreads the country.
For these reasons the Phasians have shapes different from
those of all other men; for they are large in stature^ and of a
very gross habit of body, so that not a joint nor vein is visible;
in colour they are sallow^ as if affected with jaundice. Of all

* I need scarcely remark that both the river and city of this name are very cele-
brated in ancient mythology and history. See in particular ApoUonius Rhodius, with
his learned Scholiast, Arg. II ; Strabo, xi ; Pliny, II. N., vi, 4 ; Procopius, Pers., ii, 29 ;
Mela, i, 85 ; Arrian, periplus. The river takes its rise in the Cancasns, and termi-
nates in the Black Sea. It is called Bion by the inhabitants, and the river and a city
sitoated upon it are called Fache by the Turks. See Coray at this place, and
Mannert., Gcograph., iv, 394.

' Coray quotes from Lamberti, a modem traveller, a description of the Colchide
and its inhabitants, vrhich agrees wonderfully with the account of both given by onr
author. The following is part of his description : '' II sito della Colchide porta seco
un' aria tanto humida che forse in altro luogo non si h veduta la simile. £ la ragione
si e perchd venendo dall' ocddeute bagnata dall Eushio, et dair oriente cinta dal
Caucaso, dal quale soigano gran quantitii di fiumi rende da per tutto Taria humi-
dissima affatto. A questo s' agginngono la firequenza de' boschi, fra quali non viene
agitata Taria da* venti, et li spessi venti marini apportatoi di pioggie et de' vapori del
mare. Questa humiditii si grande genera poi gran quantita de' vapori, che soUevati
in alto si dissolvono in frequentiasime pioggie." — Relatione deUa Colchide, c. 27.
He goes on to state that a great part of the inhabitants are fishers.

* It is singular that Procopius, on the other hand, states that the Phasis is a very
rapid river, and Chardin confirms his statement. (Voyage en Perse, vol. i, p. 105.)
Lamberti reconciles these discrepant accounts by explaining that the river is rapid
in its course near where it rises among the mountains, but quite smooth and stagnant
when it arrives at the plain. — Relat. dell Colchid., 29.

14



210 AIRS, WATERS,

men they have the roughest voices, from their breathing an
atmosphere which is not clear, but misty and humid ; they are
naturally rather languid in supporting bodily fatigue. The
seasons undergo but little change either as to heat or cold ;
their winds for the most pail are southerly, with the exception
of one peculiar to the country, which sometimes blows strong,
is violent and hot, and is called by them the wind cenckron^
The north wind scarcely reaches them, and when it does blow
it is weak and gentle. Thus it is with regard to the different
nature and shape of the inhabitants of Asia and Europe.

16. And with regard to the pusillanimity and cowardice of
the inhabitants, the principal reason why the Asiatics are more
unwarlike, and of a more gentle disposition than the Europeans
is, the nature of the seasons, which do not undergo any great
changes either to heat or cold, or the like ; for there is neither
excitement of the understanding nor any strong change of the
body by which the temper might be ruffled, and they be roused
to inconsiderate emotion and passion, rather than living as they
do always in the same state. It is changes of all kinds which
arouse the understanding of mankind, and do not allow them
to get into a torpid condition. For the^e reasons, it appears
to me, the Asiatic race is feeble, and further, owing to their
laws ; for monarchy prevails in the greater part of Asia, and
where men are not their own masters nor independent, but are
the slaves of others, it is not a matter of consideration with
them how they may acquire military discipline, but how they
may seem not to be warlike, for the dangers are not equally
shared, since they must serve as soldiers, perhaps endure
fatigue, and die for their • masters, far from their children^
their wives, and other friends ; and whatever noble and manly
actions they may perform lead only to the aggrandisement of
their masters, whilst the fruits which they reap are dangers
and death ; and, in addition to all this, the lands of such per-
sons must be laid waste by the enemy and want of culture.^

' The best practica] proof of the justness of our author's reflections in this place
is the result of the battle of Salamis ; and the noblest intellectual monument which
ever the wit of man has raised to the triumph of freedom is the Persss of Achylns,
in celebration of that event. A single line, descriptive of the Greeks, is sufficient to
account for their superiority to the Asiatics :

0^ TivoQ J5vXoi cccXifvrai ^rb^, 6vi* virifKooi. — h 240.
None seem to have felt the force of this great truth so much as the Persian despots



AND PLACES. 211

Thus^ then^ if any one be naturally warlike and courageous^
his disposition will be changed by the institutions. As a strong
proof of all this^ such Oreeks or barbarians in Asia as are not
under a despotic form of government, but are independent,
and enjoy the fruits of their own labours, are of all others the
most warlike; for these encounter dangers on their own account,
bear the prizes of their own valour, and in like manner endure
the punishment of their own cowardice. And you will find
the Asiatics differing from one another, for some are better and
others more dastardly ; of these differences, as I stated before,
the changes of the seasons are the cause. Thus it is with Asia.
17. In Europe there is a Scythian race, called Sauromatse,
which inhabits the confines of the Palus Maeotis, and is different
from all other races.^ Their women mount on horseback, use
the bow, and throw the javelin from their horses, and fight with
their enemies' as long as they are virgins ; and they do not
lay aside their virginity until they kill three of their enemies,
nor have any connexion with men until they perform the sacri-

themfldvesy or to have estimated the effects of civil liberty higher than they did.
The younger Cyras, before the battle of Cynaxa, addresses his Grecian soldiers
in the following memorable words : 'O &vSptg "BWfivic, oifK dtfOpiainav dtroputv
fidp^dfmv m/fAfi&xovs vfiaQ dytay dWd vofUZutv ciiitivovag cat jcpeirrovc iroXXwv
paptdptmf iffias iivai iid. tovto irpoesXxitov brrvc oiv ItnvOi dvdpec d^ioi r^c
i\iv9tpiac, ^Q KiKTfi<r9t, Kal wip 17c vfidQ iyut Maiiiovi^ut' id ydp iertf ^rt r^v
IXivOtpiay iXoi/Aiyv &v dvri tav ix^tt irdvnav Koi d\Xiav flroXXairXa^iwv. — Anab.,
i, 7. Such being the established opinions of the intelligent portion of mankind in the
days of Hippocrates, the sentiment here expressed would then be regarded as a self-
erident troth. Plato, indeed, modifies this opinion in so far when he holds despotism
to be the consequence and not the cause of servility. — De Repub., viii.

■ The name Sauromatse or Sarmatse was applied by the ancient geographers to
certain inhabitants of that vast and, to them, nearly unexplored country, extending
from the Sinus Codanus or Baltic Sea, to the Euxine or Black Sea. It comprehends,
then, a large portion of Russia, Poland, and perhaps Prussia. (See Pomponius
Mela, iii, 4 ; Ptolemy, Geograph. ; and Maltebrun, Geograph., vol. i, p. 126.) That
the Sarmatians and Scythians were the same race of men, although some of the
authorities make a distinction between them, can scarcely admit of a doubt. Our
author, it will be remarked, seems to restrict the name to a peculiar race of Scythians,
who liyed near the Palus Meotis {or Sea of Asaph). From the account which he
gives of them it is impossible to doubt that he alludes to the Amazonians, so cele-
brated in ancient legends. The opinion which I entertain of them is pretty fully
stated in the Argument to this treatise. That our author should not have doubted
the real existence of the Amazonians need excite no wonder, considering the very
positive and very circumstantial account of them given by his contemporary Hero-
dotus (iv, 110-18;.



212 AIRS, WATERS,

fices according to law. Whoeyer takes to herself a husband^
gives up riding on horseback, unless the necessity of a general
expedition obliges her. They have no right breast ; for while
still of a tender age their mothers heat strongly a copper in-
strument, constructed for this very purpose, and apply it to
the right breast, which is burnt up, and its development being
arrested, all the strength and fulness are determined to the
right shoulder and arm.

18. As the other Scythians have a peculiarity of shape,
and do not resemble any other, the same observation applies to
the Egyptians, only that the latter are oppressed by heat
and the former by cold.^ What is called the Scythian desert
is a prairie, abounding in meadows, high-lying, and well
watered ; for the rivers which carry oflf the water from the
plains are large. There live those Scythians which are called
Nomades^ because they have no houses, but live in waggons.
The smallest of these waggons have four wheels, but some have
six ; they are covered in with felt, and they are constructed in
the manner of houses, some having but a single apartment, and
some three; they are proof against rain, snow, and winds.
The waggons are drawn by yokes of oxen, some of two and
others of three, and all without horns, for they have no horns,
owing to the cold.^ In these waggons the women live, but the
men are carried about on horses, and the sheep, oxen, and
horses accompany them ; and they remain on any spot as long
as there is provender for their cattle, and when that fails they
migrate to some other place. They eat boiled meat, and drink
the milk of mares, and also eat hippace, which is cheese pre-
pared from the milk of the mare. Such is their mode of life
and their customs.^

' It may at first sight appear singular that our author should have mixed up his
account of the Scythians with allusions to the Egyptians ; but he jHrobably had in
view Herodotus (ii, 103-6), who connects the Egyptians with the Scythians, and
more especially with the tribe of them called Colchians. He states in particular that
the Colchians and Egyptians resembled one another in the fashion of their linen,
their whole course of life, and in their language.

' Herodotus (iv, 28, 29) and Strabo (Geogr., vii) assign the same reason for the
Scythian cattle not having horns.

'' This description evidently applies to the wandering tribes which roam over the
steppes of Tartary. The passage is of classical celebrity, for I cannot but fancy that
certainly Virgil (Georg., iii, 349-83), and perhaps Horace (Od. iii, 24), had it in view



AND PLACES. 213

19. In respect of the seasons and figure of body^ the Scythian
race^ like the Egyptian^ have a uniformity of resemblance^
different from all other nations ; they are by no means prolific^
and the wild beasts which are indigenous there are small in
size and few in number^ for the country lies under the Northern
Bears^ and the Rhiphaean mountains^ whence the north wind
blows ; the sun comes very near to them only when in the
summer solstice^ and warms them but for a short period^ and
not strongly ; and the winds blowing from the hot regions of
the earth do not reach them^ or but seldom^ and with little
force; but the winds from the north always blow, congealed,
as they are, by the snow, the ice, and much water, for these
never leave the mountains, which are thereby rendered unin-
habitable. A thick fog covers the plains during the day, and
amidst it they live, so that winter may be said to be always
present with them ; or, if they have summer, it is only for a
few days, and the heat is not very strong. Their plains are
high- lying and naked, not crowned with mountains, but ex-
tending upwards under the Northern Bears.^ The wild beasts
there are not large, but such as can be sheltered under-ground;
for the cold of winter and the barrenness of the country prevent

vhen they drew their pictures of the nomadic life of the Scythians. The extra-
ordinary cold of that region, notwithstanding its southern latitude, has not heen
exaggerated by ancient authors; but to account for it, as the modem traveller,
Clark, remarks, is still a problem which no one has solved. Strabo mentions that
carts were driven across the Palus Maeotis (Geogr., vii, 3). The chariots covered in
from the inclemency of the weather with a roof of felt, are described also by
Strabo (Geogr., 1. c.) ; and, according to Dr. Coray, similar contrivances are still to
be found among the Kalmucs and other savage nations. (Notes snr le Traite des
Airs, &c., h. 1.) A preparation from milk resembling the hippace is still used by the
inhabitants of that region. On the people who lived upon this composition from
milk, see in particular Strabo, vii, 3.

' The following lines of Virgil, referred to above, may be almost said to be a
translation of this passage :

" Semper hiems, semper spirantes firigora Cauri.
Turn sol pallentes baud unquam diacutit umbras ;

# # •» •

Talis Hyperboreo septan subjecta trioni
Gens effrena vinkm Rhiphseo tunditur Euro.'*

It was in this region of mist and cold that the celebrated race of the Cimmerians
resided. See Ilerodot., i, 6, &c.*; Homer, Odyss. x, 14. The monies Rhiphaei would
appear to have been the Ural mountains which separate Russia from Siberia.



214 AIRS, WATERS,

their growth, and because they have no covert nor shelter.^ The
changes of the seasons, too, are not great nor violent, for, in
fact, they change gradually; and therefore their figures resemble
one another, as they all equally use the same food, and the
same clothing summer and winter, respiring a humid and
dense atmosphere, and drinking water from snow and ice;
neither do they make any laborious exertions, for neither body
nor mind is capable of enduring fatigue when the changes of
the seasons are not great.^ For these reasons their shapes are
gross and fleshy, with ill-marked joints, of a humid tempera-
ment, and deficient in tone : the internal cavities, and especi-
ally those of the intestines, are full of humours ; for the belly
cannot possibly be dry in such a country, with such a constitu-
tion and in such a climate ; but owing to their fat, and the
absence of hairs from their bodies, their shapes resemble one
another, the males being all alike, and so also with the women;
for the seasons being of an uniform temperature, no corruption
or deterioration takes place in the concretion of the semen,
unless from some violent cause, or from disease.^

20. I will give you a strong proof of the humidity (laxity?) of
their constitutions.^ You will find the greater part of the Scy-
thians, and all the Nomades, with marks of the cautery on their
shoulders, arms, wrists, breasts, hip-joint, and loins, and that
for no other reason but the humidity and flabbiness of their
constitution, for they can neither strain with their bows, nor
launch the javelin from their shoulder owing to their humidity
and atony; but when they are burnt, much of the humidity

' It is well known now that excessive cold has a tendency to retard the growth
of animals. This opinion is confirmed in several instances hy Pallas (Voy. en Russie,
i, 197; iii> 431). Strabo mentions, as the consequences of the cold which prevails in
the country of the Getae, that there are no asses in it, the cattle want horns, and the
horses are small. (Geogr., vii, 3.)

* Buffon, on the other hand, maintains that the Nomadic race are men of active
habits. (Hist. Nat., tom. iii, p. 384.) Pallas, however, confirms the judgment of
Hippocrates. (Voyag. en Russie, tom. i, p. 499.) See also Coray, ad h. L

' It is to be borne in mind that Hippocrates, and after him most of the ancient
authorities, held that the foetus is formed from the male semen. This doctrine pre-
vailed generally down to the days of Harvey. Some of the ancient physiologists,
however, maintained that " omne animal est ab ovo." See Plutarch, de Pladt. Philoa.

* "Typorriit when applied to the body, may signify both humidity and relaxation,
in like manner as the adjective (vypbg) signifies humid and relaxed. We shall see
an example of the latter signification in the Prognostics.



AND PLACES. 215

in their joints is dried np, and they become better braced,
better fed, and their joints get into a more suitable condition.^
They are flabby and squat at first, because, as in Egypt, they are
not swathed (?) ;' and then they pay no attention to horsemanship,
80 that they may be adepts at it ; and because of their sedentary
mode of life ; for the males, when they cannot be carried about
on horseback, sit the most of their time in the waggon, and
rarely practise walking, because of their frequent migrations and
shiftings of situation ; and as to the women, it is amazing how
flabby and sluggish they are. The Scythian race are tawny
from the cold, and not from the intense heat of the sun, for the
whiteness of the skin is parched by the cold, and becomes
tawny.

21. It is impossible that persons of such a constitution
could 'be prolific, for, with the man, the sexual desires are not
strong, owing to the laxity of his constitution, the softness and
coldness of his belly, from all which causes it is little likely
that a man should be given to venery ; and besides, from being
jaded by exercise on horseback, the men become weak in their
desires. On the part of the men these are the causes ; but on
that of the women, they are embonpoint and humidity ; for
the womb cannot take in the semen, nor is the menstrual dis-
charge such as it should be, but scanty and at too long intervals ;
and the mouth of the womb is shut up by fat, and does not
admit the semen ; and, moreover, they themselves are indolent
and fat, and their bellies cold and soft.^ From these causes

* This practice came to be one of the reg^ular operations of surgery, being per-
formed with the view of correcting the tendency of a joint to dislocation. It is
minutely described by Hippocrates (De Artie, xi), Paulus >£gineta (VI, 42), Albu-
casis (Chirurg., i, 27), Haly Abbas (Pract., ix, 73). See the Sydenham Society's
edition of Paulus iEoiNETA, ]. c.

* The meaning of this passage is ambiguous. I have followed Coray, who gives
some very interesting annotations on it. He translates these words, ** lis sont
naturellement d'une complexion lache et trapns ; premi^rement, parceque dans leur
enfance ils ne sont point emmaillot^, non plus que les iEgyptiens." Clifton has
given nearly the same meaning of the passage : " Their fluidness and breadth proceed
first from their neglect of bandages, as in Egypt.'' Li tire, on the other hand, appean
to give a different interpretation of the passage : ** D'abord parceque on ne les em-
maillotte pas, corome en Egypte."

' A fat condition of the body was also supposed adverse to conception in the case
of cattle. Virgil alludes to this opinion, and the means used to counteract the effects
of an excessively fat state of the body in the following verses, which have l>een



216 AIRS, WATERS,

the Scythian race is not prolific. Their female servants furnish
a strong proof of this ; for they no sooner have connection with
a man than they prove with child^ owing to their active course
of life and the slenderness of body.

22. And^ in addition to these^ there are many eunuchs
among the Scythians, who perform female work, and speak like
women. Such persons are called effeminates.^ The inhabi-
tants of the coimtry attribute the cause of their impotence to
a god, and venerate and worship such persons, every one dread-
ing that the like might befall himself; but to me it appears
that such affections are just as much divine as all others are,
and that no one disease is either more divine or more human
than another, but that all are alike divine, for that each
has its own nature, and that no one arises without a natural
cause.^ But I will explain how I think that the affection takes
its rise. From continued exercise on horseback they are seized
with chronic defluxions in their joints {kedmata^) owing to

always admired as an example how delicately a great genius can touch upon an
indelicate subject :

" Ipsa autem macie tenuant armenta Tolentes :
Atque, ubi concubitus primos jam nota voluptas
Sollicitat, frondesque negant» et fontibus arcent.
Sspe etiam cursu quatiunt et sole fatiguni ;
Hoc faciunt nimio ne luxu obtusior usus
Sit genitali arvo, et sulcos oblimet incites ;
Sed rapiat sitiens veneremf interiusque recondat/'

Georg., iiiy 136.

' On the nature of this affection see the Argument. There is a variety in the
reading, most of the MSS. having AvavSpuTct but the one usually marked 2146,
which is followed in the Aldine edition, reading Avipuic. See a long discussion in
Coray's edition on this point. There seems to be no good reason for at all inter-
fering with the text as, it now stands.

^ Our author in this place, as in the treatise on the Sacred DiseasCi holds the
philosophical opinion in opposition to the superstitious, that all diseases have natural
causes, and that no one more than another is to be ascribed to the extraordinary
interference of supernatural beings. Plato, his contemporary, would appear to have
endeavoured to steer a sort of middle course between the scientific and the popular
belief. Thus he ascribes epilepsy, Uke all other diseases, to a natural cause, uunely,
in this instance, to a redundancy of black bile ; but he qualifies this opinion by calling
the passages of the brain (the ventricles?) most divine, and adds that the disease had
been roost appropriately denominated sacred. (Timaeus, § 66.)

' The origin and signification of this term are by no means weU defined. See
Galen (Exeges. ^c). Foes ((Econ. llippocr.), and Coray (ad h. 1.). It has been applied
lirbt, to certain! varieties of morbus coxarius; secondly, to chronic buboes, super-



AND PLACES. 217

their legs always hanging down below their horses ; they after-
wards become lame and stiff at the hip-joint^ such of them^ .at
leasts as are severely attacked with it. They treat themselves
in this way : when the disease is commencing^ they open the
vein behind either ear, and when the blood flows, sleep/ from
feebleness, seizes them, and afterwards they awaken, some in
good health and others not. To me it appears that the semen
is altered by this treatment, for there are veins behind the ears
which, if cut^ induce impotence; now, these veins would
appear to me to be cut.^ Such persons afterwards, when they
go in to women and cannot have connection with them, at
first do not think much about it, but remain quiet ; but when,
after making the attempt two, three, or more times, they
succeed no better, fancying they have committed some offence
against the god whom they blame for the affection, they put
on female attire, reproach themselves for effeminacy^ play the
part of women, and perform the same work as women do. This
the rich among the Scythians endure, not the basest, but the
most noble and powerful, owing to their riding on horseback ;
for the poor are less affected, as they do not ride on horses.
And yet, if this disease had been more divine than the others,
it ought not to have befallen the most noble and the richest of
the Scythians alone, but all alike, or rather those who have

induced by disease of the hip-joint ; thirdly, to paralysis of the muscles about the
genital organs ; fourthly, aneurismal varix. (See Aretseus, Morb. Acut.,ii, 8; and the
note in Boerhaave's edition.) 1 must own that 1 find some difficulty in deciding to
which of these significations I should give the preference ; I rather incline, however,
to the first, from what oar author says towards the end of this section, namely, that
all men who ride much *' are afflicted with rheums in the joints, sciatica and gout,
and are inept at venery."

■ This opinion of our author was no doubt founded on the erroneous notion re-
garding the distribution of the veins which prevailed in his time, and which we find
advocated in the tract * on the Nature of Man,' and elsewhere. (See Artstot., H. N.,
iii, 3.) Coray strives hard, in his annotations on this passage, to make out that the
fact may be as stated by his ancient countryman, although the hypothesis by which
he explained it be false. It is singular, however, that, after the lapse of more than
two thousand years. Phrenology should have come to the assistance of Hippocrates in
this case. I need scarcely remark that Gall and his followers hold that the cere-
bellum is the seat of the animal appetites, so that, if this be really the fact, a close
sympathy between the back of the head and the genital organs may be very legiti-
mately inferred. At all events, this coincidence between ancient observation and
modern hypothesis must be admitted to be very remarkable.



218 AIRS, WATERS,

little^ as not being able to pay honours to tbe gods^ if, indeed,
they delight in being thus rewarded by men^ and grant favours
in return 5 for it is likely that the rich sacrifice more to the
gods, and dedicate more votive offerings, inasmuch as they
have wealth, and worship the gods ; whereas the poor, from want^
do less in this way, and, moreover^ upbraid the gods for not
giving them wealth; so that those who have few possessions
were more likely to bear the punishments of these offences
than the rich. But, as I formerly said, these affections are
divine just as much as others, for each springs from a natural
cause, and this disease arises among the Scythians from such a
cause as I have stated. But it attacks other men in like
manner, for whenever men ride much and very frequently on
horseback, then many are affected with rheums in the joints,
sciatica, and gout, and they are inept at venery. But these
complaints befall the Scythians, and they are the most impotent
of men for the aforesaid causes, and because they always wear
breeches, and spend the most of their time on horseback/ so
as not to touch their privy parts with the hand, and from the
cold and fatigue they forget the sexual desire, and do not make
the attempt until after they have lost their virility.' Thus it
is with the race of the Scythians.

23. The other races in Europe differ from one another^ both
as to stature and shape, owing to the changes of the seasons,
which are very great and frequent, and because the heat is
strong, the winters severe, and there are frequent rains, and
again protracted droughts^ and winds, from which many and
diversified changes are induced. These changes are likely to

1 Aristotle, on the other hand, holds that the effects of equitation are aphrodisiac
(Probl. iy, 12.) Coray attempts to reconcile the discordant opinions of the physician
and philosopher, by supposing that moderate exercises may excite the Tenereal appe-
tite, whereas excessive extinguish them. Van Swieten agrees with Hippocrates that
inordinate exercise in riding may induce impotence. (Comment, in Boerh. Aphor.,
§ 1063.)

^ It is a singular idea of our author that the wearing of breeches by confining the
development of the genital organs impairs the sexual desires. It is curious, as re-
marked by Coray, that the same opinion is advocated by Hunter in his treatise on
the Venereal Disease. Coray also quotes the following passage from Lalement:
" Saepe audivimus pistores et cseteros quorum partes pudendae subligaculis non
obteguntur sed liberius pendent crassos et bene nutritos habere testiculos." — Com*
ment. in Hippocrat. de Aer., &c.



AND PLACES. 219

have an effect upon generation in the coagulation of the semeu^
as this process cannot be the same in summer as in winter, nor
in rainy as in dry weather ; wherefore, I think, that the figures
of Europeans differ more than those of Asiatics : and they differ
very much from one another as to stature in the same city ;
for vitiations of the semen occur in its coagulation more fre-
quently during frequent changes of the seasons, than where
they are alike and equable. And the same may be said of
their dispositions, for the wild, the unsociable, and the passionate
occur in such a constitution ; for frequent excitement of the
mind induces wildness, and extinguishes sociableness and mild-
ness of disposition, and therefore I think the inhabitants of
Europe more courageous than those of Asia; for a climate
which is always the same induces indolence, but a changeable
climate, laborious exertions both of body and mind ; and from
rest and indolence cowardice is engendered, and from laborious
exertions and pains, courage. On this account the inhabitants
of Europe are more warlike than the Asiatics, and also owing
to their institutions, because they are not governed by kings
like the latter, for where men are governed by kings there
they must be very cowardly, as I have stated before ; for their
souls are enslaved, and they will not willingly or readily undergo
dangers in order to promote the power of another ; but those
that are free undertake dangers on their own account, and not
for the sake of others ; they court hazard and go out to meet
it, for they themselves bear off the rewards of victory, and thus
their institutions contribute not a little to their courage.^

* I trust I shall be excused in quoting entire Br. Coray's note on this section:
" Trente mille Mac^oniens (dit Pauw) ont conquis la Perse ; quarante mille Mogola
ont conquis les Indes ; cinquante mille Tartares ont conqnis la Chine, oil Ton compt-
ait alors plus de quarante millions d'habitans, qui abandonnerent leurs souverains.
On a Tu de nos jours Tarm^ du grand Visir deserter presque completement dans les
environs de Vama ; et jamais les Turcs n'eurent plus de bon sens qu'en cette occa-
sion U; car leurs tyrans ne m^ritent pas qu'on verse une seule goutte de sang pour
les maintenir sur le trone de ces contr^es quHls ont d^vast^s en voleurs et en brigands.
(Recherch. philosoph. sur les Grecs.) — Par ce dernier exemple on voit encore com-
bien les causes politiques ou moralesi et les causes naturelles, peuvent se modifier
r^iproquement. Les Russes, quoique soumis a un gouvememeut despotique, ont
cependant ^t^ la terreur des Turcs, a cause, sans doute, de la difference du climat, de
la discipline militaire, et des progrcs dans la civilisation. Ces circonstances ont con-



220 AIRS, WATERS,

Such is the general character of Europe and Asia.^
24. And there are in Europe other tribes^ differing from one
another in stature^ shape^ and courage : the differences are
those I formerly mentioned^ and will now explain more clearly.
Such as inhabit a country which is mountainous, ragged,
elevated, and well watered, and where the changes of the
seasons are very great, are likely to have great variety of shapes
among them, and to be naturally of an enterprising and warlike
disposition ;^ and such persons are apt to have no little of the
savage and ferocious in their nature; but such as dwell in
places which are low-lying, abounding in meadows and ill
ventilated, and who have a larger proportion of hot than of
cold winds, and who make use of warm waters — these are not
likely to be of large stature nor well proportioned, but^ are of
a broad make, fieshy, and have black hair ; and they are rather
of a dark than of a light complexion, and are less likely to be
phlegmatic than bilious ; courage and laborious enterprise are
not naturally in them, but may be engendered in them by
means of their institutions. And if there be rivers in the
country which carry off the stagnant and rain water from it,
these may be wholesome and clear ; but if there be no rivers,

couru a mitiger le despotisme Russe, et a le rendre si different da despotisme brnUl
des Turcs. II en est de meme des autres peuples Septentrionaux de TEurope.
Quoique gouverncs par des loix qui ne sont point lenr ouvrage, ils sont tres belli-
queuX) et par la nature de leur climate et par les lumicres que les sdenoes et lea arte
ont repandues parmi eux."

* Aristotle, in drawing the traits of the European and Asiatic cha]:acter, would
appeal' to have borrowed freely from our author. He says the inhabitants of cold
countries and of Europe are full of spirit, but deficient in intellect and skill ; they
therefore remain in a state of freedom, but without regular government, and they
are incapable of governing their neighbours. The inhabitants of Asia are described
by him as being intellectual and skilled in the arts, but deficient in courage, and
therefore they are in constant subjection and slavery. The Greeks, he maintains,
held an intermediate place between these two, have both courage and intellect, and
therefore enjoy freedom and good government. (Polit., iii, 7.)

* We have lately had a notable example of the warlike and independent spirit of
mountaineers in the detennined resistance which the Circassians have made to the
colossal power of Russia. Great Britain, too, I may be permitted to remark, ex-
perienced disasters in contending with the mountaineers of Aifganistan, such as she
had never met with in the rich plains of India. And, by the way, the conqueror of
Greece and of Persia was very nearly cut oflT by the same people. See Arrian, Exped.
Alexandr., iv, 22, &c.



AND PLACES. 221

but the inhabitants drink the waters of fountains^ and such as
are stagnant and marshy^ thej must necessarily have prominent
bellies and enlarged spleens. But such as inhabit a high
country^ and one that is level, windy, and well- watered, will be
large of stature, and like to one another ; but their minds will
be ratbe;r unmanly and gentle. Those who live on thin, ill-
water^, and bare soils, and not well attempered in the changes
of the seasons, in such a country they are likely to be in their
persons rather hard and well braced, rather of a blond than a
dark complexion, and in disposition and passions haughty and
self-willed. For, where the changes of the seasons are most
frequent, and where they differ most from one another, there
you will find their forms, dispositions, and nature the most
varied. These are the strongest of the natural causes of difference,
and next the coimtry in which one lives, and the waters ; for,
in general, you will find the forms and dispositions of mankind
to correspond with the nature of the country ; for where the land
is fertile, soft, and well-watered, and supplied with waters from
very elevated situations, so as to be hot in summer and cold in
winter, and where the seasons are fine, there the men are fleshy,
have ill-formed joints,^ and are of a humid temperament ; they
are not disposed to endure labour, and, for the most part, are
base in spirit ; indolence and sluggishness are visible in them,
and to the arts they are dull, and not clever nor acute. When
the country is bare, not fenced, and rugged, blasted by the
winter and scorched by the sun, there you may see the men
hardy, slender, with well-shaped joints,^ well-braced, and shaggy;
sharp industry and vigilance accompany such a constitution ;
in morals and passions they are haughty and opiniative, inclining
rather to the fierce than to the mild ; and you will find them
acute and ingenious as regards the arts, and excelling in military
affairs; and likewise all the other productions of the earth
corresponding to the earth itself.^ Thus it is with regard to

* 'Avapioi, The meftning of this term seems to be, persons whose joints are indis-
tinct owing to fatness.

' Coray supposes, and apparently with justice, that our author in this passage
tadtly refers to the inhabitants of Attica. It is worthy of remark that Thucydides
ascribes the early civilization of the Athenians to the infertility of the soiL ('Arricfjv
XiTToyEutVt h 2.) See Arnold's Note, h. 1. ; also the quotation from Aristotle at
§ 23; and Plato's Timieus, tom. iii, p. 247 ; ed. Bekker. According to Coray (but



222 AIRS, WATERS, ETC.

the most opposite natures and shapes; drawing conclusions
from them, you may judge of the rest without any risk of
error.

perhaps he was partially disposed towards his adopted country), the characters of
Provence and Marseilles are analogous to those of Attica and Athens, and the effects
on the inhabitants similar. That Marseilles was at one time a flourishing seat of
learning is undoubted ; see Tacitus (Agricola) and Strabo (Geogr., iii) ; but in literary
celebrity it cannot surely aspire to be put on a level with the region which produced
an i£8chyluS| a Thucydides, a Plato, and a Demosthenes 1 And it may be doubted
whether even the Marseillais Hymn equals in masculine energy the war songs of
Tyrtaeus !



ON THE PROGNOSTICS


ON THE PROGNOSTICS.



THE ARGUMENT.

Of the genuineness of this work I have treated in the Pre-
liminary Discourse, and have also briefly touched upon its
relation to two other important treatises in the Hippocratic
collection, the ' Prorrhetics' and the 'Coacse Prsenotiones/
The latter subject I am now to resume, and in doing so I
mean to avail myself of the talented dissertation of Dr. Ermerins,
to which also I have abready made allusion. Indeed, I am
persuaded that I cannot do a more acceptable service to my
profession in Britain than by laying before them a brief
exposition of the important views brought forward in this
' Dissertatio Inauguralis/^

After some preliminary observations on the ancient Temples
of Health, which are mainly derived from SprengePs ' History
of Medicine,'^ he passes on to consider the opinion started by
this author and others before his time, that the first book of
the ' Prorrhetics,' and the 'Coacse Prsenotiones' are the results
of isolated observations made upon the sick in the Asclepion
of Cos. The probability of this opinion being well founded he
shows to be very great ; and he next endeavours to solve the
question whether the first book of the * Prorrhetics' be derived
from the ' Coacae Prsenotiones,' or whether the latter be the
more modem work of the two. He comes to the conclusion
that the ' Prorrhetics' is the more ancient work, for the follow-
ing reasons : 1st. Because in it the names of the patients are
frequently given, which is rarely the case in the ' Coacse Prae-

' Its title is, specimen Historico-Medicum Inaugunle de Hippocratis Doctrina
a Prognofttioe Orianda. Lugduni Batavonim, 1832.
• Cap. V,

15



226 PROGNOSTICS.

notiones/ 2d. Because queries and doubts are oftener found in
this book than in the other^ when one takes into account the
number of presages. 3d. Because the number of observations
which this book contains is much smaller than those which
the ' Coacse^ embrace. 4th. This is confirmed by the circum-
stance that the enunciations of the prognoses arQ far less ex-
tended in the * Prorrhetics/ whence it is clearly proved that
they are not derived from so great a field of observations as
those we meet with in the other work. He then gives a most
lucid view of the parallelism which subsists between the
' Prorrhetica' and the ' Coacae/ and, as the results of his ob-
servations upon them, he draws the following most important
conclusions :

1. **By a most fortunate occurrence certain monuments of
the medical art, as cultivated by the Asclepiadse, are preserved
to us in the first ^ Prorrhetics,^ and the ' Praenotiones Coacae,'
which books appear to be fragments and excerpts from the
histories of diseases and cures which were formerly found on
the votive tablets of the Coan temple.

2. This sacerdotal medicine was at first a certain medical
divination, which, as it was the offspring of pure observation, so
the system of prognostics of the Coans was altogether aloof from
the theories and systems of the philosophers, and is therefore to
be reckoned most worthy of our attention, both from the great
love of observation which we admire in it, and from the exquisite
and beautiful sense of the simple truth which it evinces.

3. We must keep in view the origin of these presages from
individual observations gradually collected, in * order that we
may have a knowledge of this system of prognostic semeiology.
Hence we comprehend how we meet with so many doubtful
propositions, and so many uncertain and vague remarks, and
that imperfect etiology which confounded causes with their
effects, and again, the latter with the former.

4. The readers must particularly keep before their eyes this
origin, and the antiquity of those writings, if they would pass
a correct judgment on the merits of the Ascicpiadae towards
the art of medicine. Whatever in their works we have the
pleasure of posjiessing, all attest the infancy of the art ; many
things are imperfect, and not unfrequently do we see them,
^hile in the pursuit of truth, groping, as it were, and pro-



ARGUMENT. 227

ceeding with uncertain steps^ like men wandering about in
darkness ; but yet the method which they applied, and to which
they would seem to have betaken themselves of their own
accord, was so excellent, that nothing could surpass it. It
was the same method which Hippocrates himself always
adopted, and which, in fine, Lord Bacon, many ages after-
wards, commended as the only instrument by which truth in
medicine can be found out.

5. As this method is founded on true induction, so are its
dicta to be held the more worthy of admiration, the more they
possess a universal signification. To give an example ; what
assiduous observation, and what abundance of rational ex-
perience, must have been required for enunciating the follow-
ing admirable truth, and, as it were, law of nature : '' Those
things which bring alleviation with bad signs, and do not remit
with good, are troublesome and difficult.''

6. Many passages bear reference to the condition of the
vital powers, which they took into account at all times, both
in making presages and in exercising the art. For, although
they had not our theories of the vital force, they perceived its
effects very well by observation; and for this very reason, that
they did not search for the art in theories, but in observation
alone, we owe so many excellent things to them, since they
did not adapt their observation to theories, but related a trust-
worthy and faithful history of the operations of nature.

7. They sought after many things from a comparison of
health with disease, in which also they rightly calculated the
manners and customs of men. Thus they call that, in the
first place, the best mode of reclining, which is adopted by the
patient when in good health; and hence they estimate the
other modes as being less good, or' altogether unfavorable.
Nor did they only compare health with disease, but they com-
pared also the symptoms of diseases with one another, and
interpreted the one from the other. Thus they first depict
and pronounce a favorable opinion on the best kind of excre-
tions, and then they describe the other abnormal kinds, and
pass an unfavorable judgment on them.

8. They particularly relate the operations of a natura medu
catrix, which, in a region such as Greece is, and in athletic,
strong bodies, on which they appear to have practised the art,



228 PROGNOSTICS.

and for the most part in acute diseases^ and the few chronic
ones derived from them which they have left described^ might
especially be looked for. Hence that doctrine of crises most
deserving of attention, the rudiments, indeed^ of which we
only have here preserved, but a just notion of which we may
easily draw from these fragments.

9. The Asclepiadse would appear to have accommodated and
directed their art to this natural Therapia. Hence the advice
that convulsions arising from a great hemorrhage, forcibly
stopped, should be cured by the abstraction of blood. It is to be
regretted that but a few monuments of their practice remain ;
but these embrace admirable imitations of nature, and the most
prudent caution in administering remedies.

10. Neither did they neglect surgery, but deliver many
excellent remarks on things pertaining to wounds, ulcers, and
fractures.

11. Although it cannot be made out for certain that every-
thing which is preserved in these writings existed before
Hippocrates, there can be no doubt that many of them are
more ancient than he. And although we may attribute some
things rather to Hippocrates himself, it is nevertheless certain
that the method of deducing the art from observation and com-
parison had existed before him. Some may, perhaps, object
that these books are to be attributed to the youth of Hippo-
crates, and that the others, more elaborate and perfect, had
proceeded from the same person in his old age ; but this sup-
position we may refute by a single argument, namely, that it
would be absurd to ascribe so many observations about so many
diseases to one man.

12. From the whole Coan system of cultivating medicine,
the best hopes might justly have been expected ; and from what
follows it will be seen that the result did not disappoint this
expectation.''

These deductions, I must say, appear to be most legitimately
drawn ; and having thus satisfactorily made out that the 'Coacse
Praenotiones' are founded on the ' Prorrhetics,' Dr. Ermerins
proceeds to make an interesting comparison between the former
and the book of ' Prognostics.' Here again we can only find
room for the general conclusions.



ARGUMENT. 229

1. " We have compared together two monuments of antiquity
embracing entirely the same doctrine^ so that we may hold it
as put out of all doubt that they must have derived their origin
from the same school^ only the one yields to the other in
antiquity^ as its more expanded mode of expression shows.

2. The more recent work is attributed to Hippocrates by
all the critics and interpreters ; the most ancient authors have
made mention of it, and all the characteristic marks by which
the genuine works of Hippocrates are distinguished from the
spurious, without doubt, are found in it ; for whether you look
to the brevity and gravity of the language, or the paucity of
the reasonings, the correctness of the observations, or the
dialect in which they are expressed, or, in fine, its agreement
with the whole Hippocratic doctrine, — all these attest that ''the
divine old man" is the author of this work.

8. From a comparison of the 'Coacse Praenotiones* with the
'Prognostics,' it is as clear as the light of day that Hippocrates
composed this work from them, in such a manner that he cir-
cumscribed many of the symptoms, limited the enunciations,
and amplified them all by his own experience in the medical
Art. Hence the Prognostics may not inaptly be called the
Commentary of Hippocrates on the 'Coacse Prsenotiones.'

4. With regard to the exquisite and artificial order, in which
we see many things proposed in this book, we agree entirely
with Sprengel, who thinks that they have proceeded from a
more recent describer. This is confirmed by our comparison
of both works.

5. This work exhibits the fundamental principles and ori-
ginals of the Hippocratic doctrine, and although we hardly
know anything as to the manner in which Hippocrates com-
posed his writings, and of the form which he gave them, it
does not seem at all out of the way to hold this book to be the
oldest of all the works which " the Father of Medicine^' has
left to us.

6. Inasmuch as this work is entitled the Book of Pro-
gnostics, so it turns on the prescience {noovoia), that is to say,
the foreknowledge of the physician, which Hippocrates recom-
mends to physicians for three reasons: first, for the con-
fidence of mankind, which it will conciliate to the physician ;
then because it will free the practitioner from all blame, if he



2;0 PRfjGNOSnCS.

hzs aDDoaLc^i beforeLaad the fat^ result of diseases; mnd
further, a.i bein^ a ? erv ^res.t in^tnirrient in effecting the cure.

7. Like the Coan priests, Hippocrates drew his Prognostics
fro a* a com pari <«on of disease with health. This he held to be
of fto gn-at importance, that he first delirers physiological
semeiotics, and then adds pathologicaL

8. In calculating and judging of signs he neglected neither
age nor sex, and, in the first place^ directed his mind to the
power of habit on the human bodr.

9. Nor did Hippocrates stop here, but directed care to be
had of the attack of epidemics, and the condition of the season.

10. The Prognostics of Hippocrates are not of one time or
place, but extend through ererr age, and through the whole
world ; inasmuch as the prognostic signs have been proved to
be true in Libya, in Deles, and in Scrthia, and it should be
well known that every rear, and at every season of the year^
bad symptoms bode ill, and good symptoms good.

11. But he who would wibh to know properly beforehand
those who will recover from a disease, and those who will die^
and those in whom the disease will persevere for many days,
and those in whom it will last for a few, should be able to
comprehend and estimate the doctrine of all the signs, and
weigh in his mind and compare together their strength. The
Ilippocratic foreknowledge rests not only on the observation
of the signs, but also on the understanding of them.

12. The Book of Prognostics exhibits observations of
acute diseai^es, and of chronic arising from them, in which
Hippocrates has diligently noted the times and modes of the
cribcs.

13. Such is the authority of criticsil days and signs, that in
those fevers which cease without the symptoms of resolution,
and not upon critical days, a relapse is to be expected.

11. The series of critical days which Hippocrates delivers^
proceeds solely upon the observation of nature. Yet neither
can any of them be exactly numbered by entire days, since
neither the year nor the months are usually numbered by
entire days.''

Dr. Ermerins, in the remaining part of his Essay, shows, in
a very lucid manner, that the rules of Prognosis laid down in
this treatise by Hippocrates, are manifestly those by which he



ARGUMENT. 231

is regulated in bis other works^ and more especially in the
Epidemics and Aphorisms. We must not, however, occupy room
with any further exposition of the contents of this important
treatise, which does equal credit to the author himself, and to
the medical system of education pursued in the learned uni-
versity from which it emanated.

I will now give some remarks and reflections of my own
on the treatise under consideration.

In this work, then, Hippocrates appears to have had for his
object, to give such a general description of the phenomena of
disease as would apply to all the disorders of the animal frame.
With this intention he brings iuto review the state of the
countenance, the position of the patient in bed, the movements
of the hands, the respiration, the sweats, the state of the hypo-
chondria, dropsies which are the consequences of acute diseases,
the sleep, the urine, the alvine dejections, the vomitings, and
the sputa. In doing this, his uniform practice is to contrast
the healthy with the morbid appearances. Although M. Littre
regards it as a treatise on special Pathology, it appears to me
to be decidedly a general work on Semeiology. Certain it is
that all the best commentators, such as Erotian and Stephanus,^
decidedly regard it as a semeiological work. The class of ancient
writings with which it admits of being most closely compared,
are the works on the prognostics of the weather. On this
subject Greek literature contains several works of a very philo-
sophical nature, such as the Phenomena of Aratus, and several
of the minor tracts of Theophrastus. Now as the object of
these authors was to connect the most striking phenomena in
the sky, the earth, and the sea, with the changes in the weather,
of which they are the precursors, so the intention of the medical
writer of Prognostics was, to point out the alterations in the
animal frame, which certain preternatural symptoms usually
indicate. And as the utility of an acquaintance with pro-
gnostics of the weather to the husbandman and sailor is suf-
ficiently obvious, the benefit to be derived from a knowledge
of medical prognostics by the physician is equally so. Our
author, it will be seen in the Preface to this work, enumerates



' Comment, in Prognos. up. Dietz. j



232 PROGNOSTICS.

three objects to be attained by cultivating an acquaintance
with prognostics; firsts to attract the confidence of one's
patients ; second^ to free the physician from blame by enabling
him to announce beforehand the issue of the disorder about
which he is consulted ; and, third, to give him a decided
advantage in conducting the treatment by preparing him for
remarkable changes in the diseases before they occur. And,
in like manner, I may be allowed to remark, the master of a
ship who shows himself prepared for all changes of the weather,
will naturally attract the confidence of those intrusted to his
charge ; and whatever may be the result, he will be freed from
blame if his ship should be damaged in a storm which he had
previously predicted ; and surely his knowledge of impending
commotions in the sea and sky, will be of advantage to him by
enabling him to make preparations for them.

Looking then to the importance of general Prognostics, I
have often wondered why this branch of Semeiology is no longer
cultivated by the profession. Did not the ancient physicians
follow the best possible plan when they first described the general
phenomena of diseased action, and then applied them to parti-
cular cases ? Surely they did right in first taking a comprehen-
sive view of the whole subject of disease before attempting to
examine the different parts of it in detail. This, in fact, con-
stitutes the great superiority of the ancient savans over the
modem, that the former possessed a much greater talent for
apprehending general truths than the latter, who confine their
attention to particular facts, and too much neglect the observa-
tion of general appearances. I trust no one will be offended
if I venture to pronounce regarding the present condition of
our professional literature, that (to borrow an illustration
from the Logic of Kant) it is altogether Cyclopic, — that is to
say, it wants the eye of Philosophy, for, although we have
learned to examine particular objects with greater accuracy
than our forefathers did, the sphere of our mental vision, so to
speak, is more confined than theirs, and cannot embrace the
same enlarged views of general subjects. Surely then we might
gain a useful lesson by endeavouring to combine their more
comprehensive views with our own more accurate and minute
observation.

Some people may be inclined to think that we have greatly



ARGUMENT. 233

detracted from the credit which Hippocrates has long enjoyed
as being the undoubted author of this work^ by showing that
in composing it he was so much indebted to the labours of
his predecessors. But I have long been impressed with the
conviction that in compositions even of the highest order^ there
is much less originality than is generally supposed^ and that
true genius frequently is displayed more in its own felicitous
way of dealing with materials formerly prepared and collected
for its use than in searching out new matter to work upon^^
and hence it will be found upon examination that many of the
most distinguished efforts of human intellect have consisted in
the successftj performance of tasks which had been frequently
attempted by previous labourers in the same line. Many
artists, before the time of Phidias, had acquired reputation by
their attempts at making the statue of Jupiter ;' but this did
not deter him from undertaking the same task : and we may
well believe that he would avail himself of every practical
lesson which he could draw from the success or failure of his
predecessors, in perfecting that matchless performance which
completely cast all others into the backgroimd. The sad
misfortunes of (Edipus had been often represented on the
Athenian stage before Sophocles made them the subject of those
inimitable dramas, which still enjoy an unrivalled reputation,
nor will it be often considered how much assistance he may
have derived from the labours of those who had gone before
him. It is well known that of all the literary performances
of Aristotle, there is no one which gained him so enduring
a reputation as his Categories, and yet it is admitted that
his division of the subject into the ten Predicaments, was
taken from the Pythagorean philosopher Archytas ;^ in short,
the great merit of Aristotle on this as on many other occa-
^ sions, consisted in defining and arranging a subject on which
much had been previously effected by the labours of his

> The opinion here advanced is ezpreaaed with great precision by a French writer
who has been making some figure in the political world of late. *' Great men/'
says Louis Blanc* *' only govern society by means of a force which they themselves
borrow. They enlighten the world only by a burning focus of all the scattered rays
emanating from itself." — Organization of Labour, p. 98, English edition.

' Ascarus, a Theban statuary for one. See Pausaniaa, v, 24, 1.

* See the Commentary of SimpUcius. As I quote from memory I cannot refer to
the page.



234 PROGNOSTICS.

predecessors. And, to give one example more, long before the
time of Galen^ the temperaments, and the facts in physiology
and pathology bearing upon Hygiene, had been frequently and
successfully investigated, but he, by recasting all these subject-
matters into his Ars Medica, composed a work which posterity
regarded as his master-performance, and every word and tittle
of which, for a succession of ages, were commented upon and
admired in the Schools of Medicine. And of all our Author's
admired performances, there is perhaps no one which has
exerted so great an influence upon the literature of the pro-
fession as the present work, for all the Greek, Roman, and
Arabian writers on medicine, subsequent to him, make use of
his terms, and copy his descriptions of morbid phenomena.



THE BOOK OF PROGNOSTICS.

1. It appears to me a most excellent thing for the physician
to cultivate Prognosis ; for by foreseeing and foretelling, in the
presence of the sick, the present, the past, and the future, and
explaining the omissions which patients have been guilty of,^
he will be the more readily believed to be acquainted with
the circumstances of the sick; so that men will have confi-
dence to intrust themselves to such a physician. And he will
manage the cure best who has foreseen what is to happen from
the present state of matters. For it is impossible to make all
the sick well ; this, indeed, would have been better than to be
able to foretel what is going to happen ; but since men die,
some even before calling the physician, from the violence of
the disease, and some die immediately after calling him, having
lived, perhaps, only one day or a little longer, and before the
physician could bring his art to counteract the disease; it

> Galeoy in his Commentary on this clause of the sentence, acutely remarks that
patients are justly disposed to form a high opinion of a physician who points out to
them symptoms of their complaint which they themselves had omitted to mention to
him. And Stephanus further remarks that the patient naturally estimates highly
the acumen of the physician who detects any errors in regimen which he has been
guilty of, such as drinking water, or eating fruit when forbidden; (Ed. Diets, p. 54 ;)
or when he has some disease about him, such as bubo or inflammation, which he
wishes to conceal. (Ibid., p. 63.)



PROGNOSTICS. 235

therefore becomes necessary to know the nature of such affec-
tions^ how far they are above the powers of the constitution ;
and, moreover, if there be anything divine in the diseases,^ and
to learn a foreknowledge of this also. Thus a man will be the
more esteemed to be a good physician, for he will be the better
able to treat those aright who can be saved, from having long
anticipated everything ; and by seeing and announcing before-
hand those who will live and those who will die, he will thus
escape censure.'

2. He should observe thus in acute diseases : first, the
countenance of the patient, if it be like those of persons in
health, and more so, if like itself, for this is the best of all ;
whereas the most opposite to it is the worst, such as the fol-

' It has puzzled all the commentatorsy ancient and modem, to explain satisfactorily
why Hippocrates, in this place, seems to adopt the popular creed, and acknowledge
that a certain class of diseases are of divine origin ; whilst in his treatises ' On Airs,'
&c., and 'On the Sacred Disease' he combats this doctrine as being utterly un-
founded. Galen attempts to get oyer the difficulty by supposing that, in this place,
by divine our author means diseases connected with the state of the atmosphere ;
this, however, would merely imply that, on the present occasion, he expressed him-
self in accordance vdth the popular belief. And, by the way, I would beg leave to
remark that the plague which is described by Homer in the exordium to the Iliad,
and is referred to the wrath of a god, that is to say, of Apollo, was at the same time
held by Eustathius and other commentators to be connected with the state of the
atmosphere ; that is to say, agreeably to the vulgar belief, epidemical diseases were
looked upon as divine. See also Stephanus, the commentator, t.i, p. 77 ; ed. Dietz.
M. Littre has given, from a MS. in the Royal (National ?) Library at Paris, a gloss
never before published, which contains an interesting extract from one of the early
Hippocratic commentators, Xenophon of Cos, bearing upon this passage. It is to
this effect, that Bacchius, Callimachus, Philinus, and Heraclides Terentinus, sup-
posed that by divine, in this place, was meant pestilential, because the pestilence was
held to be from god ; but that Xenophon, the acquaintance of Praxagoras, reckoned
the nature of the critical days divine ; for, as to persons in a storm, the appearance
of the gods Dioscuri brings safety, so do the critical days bring life to men in disease.
(Opera, tom. i, p. 76.) See some remarks on this scholium by Grote, Hist, of Greece,
vol. i, p. 488. On the Biiov of Hippocrates see further Berends, Lect. in Aphor. p. 349.

' It will be remarked that, in his sketch of Prognosis {irpdvoia), in this place our
author uses the term with considerable latitude ; in fact, it comprehends the past,
the present, and the future condition of the patient. Hippocrates, in a word, appears
to have desired that the physician should be in his line what his contemporary,
Thucydides, describes Themistocles to have been as a statesman : " Quod de instan-
tibus (ut ait Thucydides), verissime judicabat, et de futuris callidissime conjiciebat."
— Cornelius Nepos, in vita Themistoclis. See also Thucydides, i, 138. Probably
both these writers had in his mind the character of the prophet as drawn by Homer :
"Oc 4^V ^^ '"' iovra rd r kvvofuva vp6 r lovra. (Iliad i.)



236 PROGNOSTICS.

lowing : a sharp nose, hollow eyes, collapsed temples ; the ears
cold, contracted, and their lobes turned out ; the skin about the
forehead being rough, distended, and parched; the colour of the
whole face being green, black, livid, or lead-cohured} If the
countenance be such at the commencement of the disease^ and
if this cannot be accounted for from the other symptoms^ inquiry
must be made whether the patient has long wanted sleep;
whether his bowels have been very loose ; and whether he has
suffered from want of food ; and if any of these causes be con-
fessed to^ the danger is to be reckoned so far less ; and it be-
comes obvious^ in the course of a day and a night, whether or
not the appearance of the countenance proceed firom these
causes.' But if none of these be said to exists and if the
sjrmptoms do not subside in the aforesaid time, it is to be known
for certain that death is at hand. And, also, if the disease be

' The groundwork of the matters contained in this section is to be found in the
Coacae Pnenotiones, 212; but it is greatly expanded and improved by our author.
I need scarcely remark that the description of the features of a dying man is of
classical celebrity. It is giyen in elegant prose by Celsus, ii, 6 ; and by Lncretioa it
is thus put into a poetical form :

" Item ad supremum denique tempos
Compresses nares, nasi primoris acumen
Tenue, cavati oculi, cava tempora, frigida pellis
Duraque, inhorrebat rictum, frons tenta minebat."

De Rerum Natura, vi, 1190.
Shakespeare's description of the death of Falstaff, by the way, contains images
which have always appeared to roe to be borrowed (at second-hand, no doubt) from
this and other passages of the present work : " For after I saw him fumble with the
sheets, and play with flowers, and smile upon his fingers'-ends, I knew there was but
one way : for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and he babbled of green fields. — So he
bade me lay more clothes on his feet : I put my hand into the bed and felt them, and
they were as cold as any stone," &c. — Henry V, ii, 3. Although perhaps it may be
thought rather hypercritical, I cannot omit the present opportunity of making the
remark, that it appears to me rather out of character to make the wandering mind
of a London debauchee dwell upon images **of green fields.'' One would have
thought that '*the ruling passion strong in death" would have rather suggested stews
and pot-houses to the imagination of such a person.

' It will be remarked that our author modifies his judgment on the result of the
entembie of dangerous symptoms which he has just described, provided they be con-
nected with want of food and of rest, or with looseness of the bowels. See Galen's
Commentary on this passage. Celsus renders this clause of the sentence as follows :
" Si ita haec sunt, ut neque vigilia praecesserit, neque ventris resolutio, neqne inedia."
•— u, 6. I may briefly mention that both Galen and Stephanus seem to have under-
stood this passage as I have translated it. Littr^ it will be seen, has rendered it
somewhat differently.



PROGNOSTICS. 237

t

in a more advanced stage either on the third or fourth dsj,

and the countenance be such, the same inquiries as formerly
directed are to be made, and the other symptoms are to be
noted, those in the whole countenance, those on the body, and
those in the eyes ; for if they shun the light, or weep iuTolun-
tarily, or squint, or if the one be less than the othef, or if the
white of them be red, livid, or has black veins in it ; if there
be a gum upon the eyes, if they are restless, protruding, or
are become very hollow ; and if the countenance be squalid
and dark, or the colour of the whole face be changed — ^all these
are to be reckoned bad and fatal symptoms. The physician
should also observe the appearance of the eyes from below the
eyelids in sleep ; for when a portion of the white appears,
owing to the eyelids not being closed together, and when this
is not connected with diarrhoea or purgation from medicine, or
when the patient does not sleep thus from habit, it is to be
reckoned an unfavorable and very deadly symptom ; but if the
eyelid be contracted, livid, or pale, or also the lip, or nose,
along with some of the other symptoms, one may know for
certain that deathns dose at hand. It is a mortal symptom,
also, when the lips are relaxed, pendent, cold, and blanched.
3.' It is well when the patient is found by his physician

* The prognostics, drawn from the position in which the patient is found reclining,
are mostly taken from the Coace Prsenotiones, 497. As usual, however, Hippocrates
has improved very much the materials which he avails himself of.

I would here point out a mistake which most of the modem translators have com«
mitted respecting the meaning of an expression contained in this paragraph. It is
Kal rb K^fiirav cdfia vypbv Ktifitvovt which Clifton, Moffat, and even Littr^ under-
stand as descriptive of the body's being in a moist state with sweat. Littr^'s trans-
lation is, ** Le corps entier en moiteur.'' The translators forget that the word vypbc
is used by the best classical authon to signify << relaxed" or " soft.'' Thus Pindar,
in his celebrated description of the eagle perched upon the sceptra of Jupiter, and
lulled asleep by the power of music (every English scholar will remember Gray's
venion of it in his Ode on the Progress of Poesy), has the expression vypbv o&na,
which Heyne interprets by /UxUe and htbrieum, (Ad Pyth., i.) See also the
Scholiast, in h. L Galen apprehends the meaning of the term as I have stated it ;
thus he defines it as applying to the position intermediate between complete exten-
sion and complete flexion, that is to say, half* bent or relaxed. Foes also renden the
expression correctly by *' corpus molliter positum." ((Econom. Hippocrat.) See also
Stephanus (p. 96, ed. Dietz), who decidedly states that the epithet (Juypbn), in this
place, means slightly bent or relaxed. Heumiua explains vypbv as signifying
'' molliter decumbens,*' p. 189. Celsus renden the words in question by *' cruribos
paulum reductis," ii. 3.



238 PROGNOSTICS.



t



reclining upon either his right or his left side^ having his hands^
neck, and legs slightly bent, and the whole body lying in a
relaxed state, for thus the most of persons in health recline, and
these are the best of postures which most resemble those of
healthy persons. But to lie upon one's back, with the hands,
neck, and the legs extended, is far less favorable. And if the
patient incline forward, and sink down to the foot of the bed,
it is a still more dangerous symptom ; but if he be found with
his feet naked and not sufficiently warm, and the hands, neck,
and legs tossed about in a disorderly manner and naked, it is
bad, for it indicates aberration of intellect. It is a deadly
symptom, also, when the patient sleeps constantly with his
mouth open, having his legs strongly bent and plaited together,
while he lies upon his back ; and to lie upon one's belly,
when not habitual to the patient to sleep thus while in
good health, indicates delirium, or pain in the abdominal
regions. And for the patient to wish to sit erect at the acme
of a disease is a bad symptom in all acute diseases, but particu-*
larly so in pneumonia.^ To grind the teeth in fevers, when
such has not been the custom of the patients from childhood,
indicates madness and death, both which dangers are to be
announced beforehand as likely to happen ; and if a person in
delirium do this it is a very deadly symptom. And if the
patient had an ulcer previously, or if one has occurred in the
course of the disease, it is to be observed ; for if the man be
about to die the sore will become livid and dry, or yellow and
dry before death.*

4. Respecting the movement of the hands I have these ob-
servations to make: When in acute fevers, pneumonia, phrenitis,
or headache, the hands are waved before the face, hunting
through empty space, as if gathering bits of straw, picking the
nap from the coverlet, or tearing chaff from the wall — all such
symptoms are bad and deadly.*

' This 18 taken pretty closely from the Coacs Pneiiotiones, 235.

* This sentence is thus translated by Celsus: "Ubi ulcus, quod aut ante, aut in
ipso morbo natum est, aridum, et aut pallidum, aut lividum factum est." (ii, 6.) It
is imitated from the Coacie Prsenotiones, 496.

' This graphic description of the movement of the hands in delirium is nearly
original, being but slightly touched upon in the Coacae Pnenotiones, 76. The terms are
copied by most of the ancient authors subsequent to Hippocrates, in their descriptions



PROGNOSTICS. 239

5. Respiration^ when frequent^ indicates pain or inflammation
in the parts above the diaphragm: a large respiration performed
at a great interval announces delirium ; but a cold respiration at
nose and mouth is a very fatal symptom. Free respiration is
to be looked upon as contributing much to the safety of the
patient in all acute diseases^ such as fevers, and those complaints
which come to a crisis in forty days.^

6. Those sweats are the best in all acute diseases which
occur on the critical days, and completely carry oflF the fever.
Those are favorable, too, which taking place over the whole body,
show that the man is bearing the disease better. But those
that do not produce this effect are not beneficial. The worst
are cold sweats, confined to the head, face, and neck ; these
in an acute fever prognosticate death, or in a milder one, a
prolongation of the disease ; and sweats which occur over the
whole body, with the characters of those confined to the neck,
are in like manner bad. Sweats attended with a miliary erup-
tion, and taking place about the neck, are bad ; sweats in the
form of drops and of vapour are good. One ought to know
the entire character of sweats, for some are connected with
prostration of strength in the body, and some with intensity of
the inflammation.^

7.^ That state of the hypochondrium is best when it is free

of phrenitis and febrile delirium. See in particular Paulus yEoiNETA, Book III, 6.
Stephanus, in hia Commentary, has several very philosophical remarks on this passage,
namely, upon the rationale of the ocular deception which leads to these extraordinary
movements of the hands. (Ed. Dietz, t. i, pp. 103, 104.)

■ This is imitated pretty closely from the Coacae Praenotiones, 260. Dr. Ermerins
remarks that there is a greater number of symptoms in the Pnenotiones than in the
Prognostics. He therefore suggests the question whether there may not be a lacuna
in the text. The description of the respiration preceding dissolution in the Prae-
notiones is certainly most graphic, and it appears wonderful that it should be omitted
by Hippocrates in the Prognostics.

' The paragraph on sweats is founded on the Coacae Praenotiones, 572, 573 ; but
the Prognostics is much fuller than the other. The cold sweats described in this
paragraph were called syncoptic by the ancients, and were supposed to be connected
with atony of the pores of the skin. See Galen, h. 1., and De Causts Sympt., iii, 9.
Stephanus, with rather too much logical parade, gives a good many acute and inter-
esting remarks on this passage. He says that cold sweats are connected with a
complete prostration of the innate heat (calidum innatum). (p. 114.)

' The characters of the hypochondriac region are copied in part from the Coacae
Praenotiones, 279, 280, 282 ; but they are much improved in the Prognostics. It
will be remarked that in the Epidemics great attention is paid to the state of the



240 PROGNOSTICS.

from pain^ soft^ and of equal size on the right side and the
left. But if inflamed^ or painful, or distended ; or when the
right and left sides are of disproportionate sizes ; — all these
appearances are to be dreaded. And if there be also pulsation
in the hypochondrium, it indicates perturbation or delirium ;
and the physician should examine the eyes of such persons ;
for if their pupils be in rapid motion, such persons may be
expected to go mad. A swelling in the hypochondrium, that
is hard and painful, is very bad, provided it occupy the whole
hypochondrium ; but if it be on either side, it is less dangerous
when on the left. Such swellings at the commencement of
the disease prognosticate speedy death ; but if the fever has
passed twenty days, and the swelling has not subsided, it turns
to a suppuration.^ A discharge of blood from the nose occurs
to such in the first period, and proves very useful ; but inquiry
should be made if they have headache or indistinct vision ; for
if there be such, the disease will be determined thither. The
discharge of blood is rather to be expected in those who are
younger than thirty-five years. Such swellings as are soft,
free from pain, and yield to the finger, occasion more pro-
tracted crises, and are less dangerous than the others. But
if the fever continue beyond sixty days, without any subsidence
of the swelling, it indicates that empyema is about to take
place ; and a swelling in any other part of the cavity will
terminate in like manner. Such, then, as are painful, hard,
and large, indicate danger of speedy death ; but such as are
soft, free of pain, and yield when pressed with the finger, are
more chronic than these. Swellings in the belly less frequently
form abscesses than those in the hypochondrium ; and seldomest
of all, those below the navel are converted into suppuration ;
but you may rather expect a hemorrhage from the upper parts.

hypochondria. Stephanus remarks that pulsation or pjilpitation in the hypochondria
is caused by violent throbbing of the aorta as it passes through this region, which is
occasioned by the effervescence and inflammation of the important parts which are
situated in it, and with which the brain is apt to sympathise, (p. 118.) Meteorism
of the hypochondriac region is often mentioned in the reports of the cases described
in the Epidemics.

* The author eridently alludes to hepatitLs ending in abscess. This would seem to
have been a very common termination of inflammation of the liver in Greece, as it
is often described in the ancient medical works. See Paulus JSoinsta, B. Ill, 46,
and the authorities quoted there in the Sydenham Society's edition.



PROGNOSTICS. 24 1

But the suppuration of all protracted swellings about these parts
is to be anticipated. The collections of matter there are to be
thus judged of : such as are determined outwards are the best
when they are small^ when they protrude very much^ and swell to
a point; such as are large and broad^ and which do not swell out
to a sharp pointy are the worst. Of such as break internally^
the best are those which have no external communication^ but
are covered and indolent ; and when the whole place is free
from discoloration. That pus is best which is white^ homo-
geneous^ smooth^ and not at all fetid ; the contrary to this is
the worst.

8.^ All dropsies arising from acute diseases are bad; for
they do not remove the fever, and are very painful and fatal.
The most of them commence from the flanks and loins, but
some from the liver ; in those which derive their origin from
the flanks and loins the feet swell, protracted diarrhoeas super-
vene, which neither remove the pains in the flanks and loins,
nor soften the belly;* but in dropsies which are connected
with the liver there is a tickling cough, with scarcely any
perceptible expectoration, and the feet swell ; there are no
evacuations from the bowels, unless such as arc hard and forced;
and there are swellings about the belly, sometimes on the one
side and sometimes on the other, and these increase and
diminish by turns.*

9. It is a bad symptom when the head, hands, and feet are

* The paragraph on the prognostics relating to dropsies is founded in a great
measure on the Coace Prxnotiones, 454. The ancient writers who treat systema-
tically of dropsy generally describe four varieties of it, namely, dropsy from disease
of the liver, from disease of the spleen, from fever, and from a sudden draught of
cold water. See De Morbis, and Paulus i£GiNBTA, B. Ill, 48, Sydenham Society's
edition.

* On this variety I have remarked in the Comment, on Paulua iGgineta : ** Hippo-
crates refers one species of dropsy to disease of the parts situated in the loins, by
which Galen and Stephanus agree that he means the jejunum, mesaraic veins, and
kidneys." (Paulus ^gineta, 1. c.) M. Littr^ accordingly holds it probable that allusion
ia made to granular degeneration of the kidneys, that is to say, to Bright's disease.
(Opera, &c, torn, ii, 388.)

' Dr. Ermerins remarks that the spedea of dropsy here described was most pro-
bably connected with organic disease of the parts situated in the abdominal region,
arising from inflammation with which they had been previously attacked.

16



242 PROGNOSTICS.

cold, while the belly and sides are hot ; but it is a very good
symptom when the whole body is equally hot.^ The patient
ought to be able to turn round easily, and to be agile when
raised up ; but if he appear heavy in the rest of his body as
well as in his hands and feet, it is more dangerous ; and if, in
addition to the weight, his nails and fingers become livid, im-
mediate death may be anticipated ; and if the hands and feet
be black it is less dangerous than if they be livid, but the other
symptoms must be attended to ; for if he appear to bear the
illness well, and if certain of the salutary symptoms appear
along with these, there may be hope that the disease will turn
to a deposition, so that the man may recover ; but the blackened
parts of the body will drop off. When the testicles and
member are retracted upwards, they indicate strong pains, and
danger of death.^

10. With regard to sleep — as is usual with us in health,
the patient should wake during the day and sleep during night.
If this rule be anywise altered it is so far worse : but there will
be little harm provided he sleep in the morning for the third
part of the day ; such sleep as takes place after this time is more
unfavorable ; but the worst of all is to get no sleep either night
or day ; for it follows from this symptom that the insomnolency

* This paragraph is pretty closely taken from the Coacs Praenotiones, 492. A
good deal of stress is laid upon the state of the temperature of the extremities in
the reports of the fehrile cases contained in the Epidemics. He announces it as a
general truth that coldness of the extremities in acute diseases is had. (Aphor. vii, 1.)
Sprengel considers that he has stated this fact in too general terms, as there are many
exceptions to it. (Hist, de la Med., tom.i, 317.)

' This is taken in part from the Coacae Pnenotiones, 493. Sprengel finds great
fault with Hippocrates for laying it down as a rule, that in cases of gangrene a black
colour of the part is less dangerous than a livid. Dr. Ermerins, however, espouses
the side of Hippocrates, and maintains that our author has acutely pointed out the
difference between gangrene proving critical, and gangrene connected with weakness
of the vital actions in the part. In the former case the part becomes perfectly black,
whereas in the other it is livid. He mentions that he observed in an hospital at the
same time a case of mortification firom cold, and another of the same from want and
congelation; that in the former the part was black, and the patient recovered; whilst
in the other the arms were livid, and the patient soon died. (Specimen Hist. Med.,
p. 68.) Stephaniis, by the way, gives nearly the same explanation of this remark,
(p. 142.) Perhaps our author had in view the plague of Athens, in which the disease
often terminated favorably in mortification of the fingers or toes. (Thncyd., ii, 49.)



PROGNOSTICS. 243

is connected with sorrow and pains^ or that he is about to be-
come delirious,^

11. The excrement is best which is soft and consistent, is
passed at the hour which was customary to the patient when
in healthy in quantity proportionate to the ingesta ; for when
the passages are such^ the lower belly is in a healthy state.^
But if the discharges be fluid, it is favorable that they are not
accompanied with a noise, nor are frequent, nor in great
quantity ; for the man being oppressed by frequently getting
up, must be deprived of sleep ; and if the evacuations be both
frequent and large, there is danger of his falling into deliquium
animi.^ But in proportion to the ingesta he should have
evacuations twice or thrice in the day, once at night and more
copiously in the mornings as is customary with a person in
health. The faeces should become thicker when the disease is
tending to a crisis ; they ought to be yellowish and not very
fetid. It is favorable that round worms be passed with the
discharges when the disease is tending to a crisis.^ The belly,
too, through the whole disease, should be soft and moderately
distended ; but excrements that are very watery, or white, or
green, or very red, or frothy, are all bad. It is also bad when
the discharge is small, and viscid, and white, and greenish, and
smooth ; but still more deadly appearances are the black, or
fatty, or livid, or verdigris-green, or fetid. Such as are of
varied characters indicate greater duration of the complaint,
but are no less dangerous; such as those which resemble
scrapings,^ those which are bilious, those resembling leeks, and
the black ; these being sometimes passed together, and some-
times singly,* It is best when wind passes without noise, but
it is better that flatulence should pass even thus than that it

> A considerable portion of the Prognostics from Sleep are taken from the Coacae
Pnenotiones, 497. This part is elegantly rendered by Celsus : ** Ubi noctuma vigilia
premitur, etiamsi interdin somnus aocedit ; ex qno tamen pejor est, qni inter quartam
honm et noctem est, quam qui matutino tempore ad quartam. Pessimum tamen est,
si somnus neque noctu, neque interdiu accedit ; id enim fere sine continuo dolore esse
non potest." (ii, 4.) Stephanus gives a philosophical disquisition on the nature and
causes of sleep, (pp. 142-S.)

* This is pretty closely taken from the CoacsB Pnenotiones, 601.

* A small part of this is to be found in the Coacae Pnenotiones, 609.

* Part of this is borrowed from the Coacae Pnenotiones, 601.

* Strigmentosa : that is to say, resembling the scrapings or strippings of the bowels.
' This in part is borrowed from the Coacae Pnenotiones, 604, 631.



244 PROGNOSTICS.

should be retained ; and when it docs pass thus^ it indicates
either that the man is in pain or in delirium, unless he gives
vent to the wind spontaneously.* Pains in the hypochondria,
and swellings, if recent, and not accompanied with inflammation,
are relieved by borborj^gmi supervening in the hypochondrium,
more especially if it pass off with fteces, urine, and wind ; but
even although not, it will do good by passing along, and it also
does good by descending to the lower part of the belly .^

12. The urine is best when the sediment is white, smooth,
and consistent during the whole time, until the disease come to
a crisis, for it indicates freedom from danger, and an illness of
short duration ; but if deficient, and if it be sometimes passed
clear, and sometimes with a white and smooth sediment, the
disease will be more protracted, and not so void of danger.
But if the urine be reddish, and the sediment consistent and
smooth, the affection, in this case, will be more protracted than
the former, but still not fatal.* But farinaceous sediments in
the urine are bad, and still worse are the leafy ;* the white and
thin are very bad, but the furfuraceous are still worse than
these. Clouds carried about in the urine are good when white,
but bad if black. When the urine is yellow and thin, it in-
dicates that the disease is unconcocted ; and if it (the disease)
should be protracted, there may be danger lest the patient
should not hold out until the urine be concocted.^ But the
most deadly of all kinds of urine are the fetid, watery,
black, and thick ; in adult men and women the black is of all
kinds of urine the worst, but in children, the watery.* In
those who pass thin and crude urine for a length of time, if

* This is pretty closely copied from the Coacse PrtenotioDes, 495.

^ This is taken from the Coacs Praenotiones, 281. Several of the other ancient
writers on medicine, both Greek and Arabian, have treated fully on the characters of
the alvine discharges ; but, upon the whole, have not added much to the information
contained in the Coacae Pnenotiones and Prognostics. See the Commentary on
Paulus iEoiNETA, B. II, 13. Stephanus has many interesting observations on the
prognostics from the urine. He remarks that the urine is a good index of the con-
dition which the digestive process is in, and more especially the process of sanguifica-
tion, (p. 162.)

* This is closely copied from the Coace Pnenotiones, 575.

* According to Stephanus, both the farinaceous and leafy sediments are the pro-
ducts of a melting of the solid parts, as a consequence of inflammatory heat. ( p. 165.)

* A small portion of the above occurs in the Coacae Pra:notiones, 578.

' For part of this our author is indebted to the Coacae Pnenotiones, 580.



PROGNOSTICS. 245

they have otherwise symptoms of conyalescence^ an abscess may
be expected to form in the parts below the diaphragm.' And
fatty substances floating on the surface are to be dreaded^ for
they are indications of melting. And oue should consider re-
specting the kinds of urine^ which have clouds^ whether they
tend upwards or downwards^ and the colours which they have ;
and such as fall downwards, with the colours as described, are
to be reckoned good and commended; but such as are carried
upwards, with the colours as described, are to be held as bad,
and are to be distrusted.* • But you must not allow yourself to
be deceived if such urine be passed while the bladder is diseased;
for then it is a symptom of the state, not of the general system,
but of a particular viscus.'

13. That vomiting is of most service which consists of
phlegm and bile mixed together, and neither very thick nor
in great quantity ; but those vomitings which are more unmixed
are worse. But if that which is vomited be of the colour of
Iccks, or livid, or black, whatever of these colours it be, it is
to be reckoned bad ; but if the same man vomit all these
colours, it is to be reckoned a very fatal symptom. But of all
the vomitings, the livid indicates the most imminent danger
of death, provided it be of a fetid smell. But all the smells
which are somewhat putrid and fetid, are bad in all vomitings.*

14. The expectoration in all pains about the lungs and
sides, should be quickly and easily brought up, and a certain
degree of yellowness should appear strongly mixed up with the
sputum. But if brought up long after the commencement of
the pain, and o^ a yellow or ruddy colour, or if it occasions
much cough, or be not strongly mixed, it is worse ; for that

> See Coaeae Pnenotioues, 582.

' This is partly taken from the Coacse Pnenotiones, 577.

3 Galen, in his Commentary, justly praises Hippocrates for the Acutenesa of the
remark contained in this sentence, since hoth, with regard to the urinary and fecal dis-
charges, it must be highly important to determine whether their characters be indi-
cative of the condition of the general system, or of the viscus by which they are
secreted. (Opera, v, p. 142 ; ed. Basil.) The ancients paid great attention to the
characters of the urine in disease, and their knowledge of the subject will be admitted,
even at the present day, to have been remarkable. The works of some of the later
authorities, particularly of Theophilus and Actuarius, are well deserving of an at-
tentive perusal. See Paulus vEgineta, Vol. I, p. 225.
Thib i* paitl\ taken from the Coaca* Prjcuotiuncb, 0j6.



i n



246 PROGNOSTICS.

which is intensely yellow is dangerous^ but the white^ and
viscid, and round, do no good. But that which is very green
and frothy is bad ; but if so intense as to appear black, it is
still more dangerous than these ; it is bad if nothing is ex-
pectorated, and the lungs discharge nothing, but are gorged
with matters which boil (as it were) in the air-passages. It is
bad when coryza and sneezing either precede or follow affec-
tions of the lungs, but in all other affections, even the most
deadly, sneezing is a salutary symptom.^ A yellow spittle
mixed up with not much blood in cases of pneumonia, is
salutary and very beneficial if spit up at the commencement of
the disease, but if on the seventh day, or still later, it is less
favorable. And all sputa are bad which do not remove the
pain. But the worst is the black, as has been described. Of
all others the sputa which remove the pain are the best.*

15. When the pains in these regions do not cease, either
with the discharge of the sputa, nor with alvine evacuations,
nor from venesection, purging with medicine, nor a suitable
regimen, it is to be held that they will terminate in suppura-
tions.^ Of empyemata such as are spit up while the sputum is

' These characters of the sputa are partly borrowed from the Coacas Prsenotiones,
390, 399.

^ They are founded on the Coaca: PrsBnotiones, 390, 391.

' This is taken in part from the Coacs Prscnotiones, 392, 394. The succeeding
paragraphs on empyema are also partly derived from the Coacae Pmnotiones, 393,
402, 428. I may be allowed to remark in this place that modem pathologists are
agreed that abscesses after pneumonia are of rare occurrence; at the same time,
however, purulent infiltration and its natural consequence, expectoration of pus, are
not so very uncommon results of the disease. True pulmonary abscess or empyema
is commonly occasioned by chronic inflammation. I am inclined to think that the
ancients appUed the term also to the cavities in the lung^ produced by the softening
of tubercles. It is difficult otherwise to account for the frequent mention of em-
pyemata in the works of the ancient authorities on medidne, especially in the Hippo-
cratic treatises. See De Locis in Homine, p. 415, ed. Foes ; and torn, i, p. 306, ed.
Kiihn, et alibL M, Littr^ makes the following remarks on the descriptions of em-
pyema which occur in the Hippocratic treatises : '* On remarquera dans le Pronostie,
et cette remarque s'etend a plusieurs autres des Merits Hippocratiques, qu'une ires-
large place est faite aux affections de la poitrine, p^ripneumoniea et pleur^ies. II
paraitrait que, sous le climat de la Gr^, ces affections ont une grande fr^uence,
plus peut-Stre qu'eUes n'en ont meme dans notre dimat. La description, fort abr^g^
11 est vraie, qu*en donne Hippocrate, me porte a penser que, si cette description est
exacte, elles ne siiivent pas la meme marche que parmi nous. En effei, que sont cea
empyemes que,suivant Hippocrate, se font jour au dehors sous forme d'expectoration



PROGNOSTICS. 217

still biliouSy are very fatal^ whether the bilious portion be
expectorated separate^ or along with the other; but more
especially if the empyema begin to advance after this sputum
on the seventh day of the disease. It is to be expected that
a person with such an expectoration shall die on the fourteenth
day^ unless something favorable supervene. The following are
favorable symptoms : to support the disease easily^ to have free
respiration^ to be free from pain, to have the sputa readily
brought up, the whole body to appear equally warm and soft,
to have no thirst, the urine, and faeces, sleep, and sweats to be
all favorable, as described before ; when all these symptoms
concur, the patient certainly will not die ; but if some of these
be present and some not, he will not survive longer than the
fourteenth day. The bad symptoms are the opposite of these,
namely, to bear the disease with difficulty, respiration large
and dense, the pain not ceasing, the sputum scarcely coughed
up, strong thirst, to have the body unequally affected by the
febrile heat, the belly and sides intensely hot, the forehead,
hands, and feet cold; the urine, and excrements, the sleep,

punilente ? On pent croire, que dans les d^nominationB d'empy^mes sont oompris lea
epanchements pleuretiques ; mais lea epanchements pleur^tiques ne se font pas jour
au dehors, ils se gudrissent par resorption ; alore, que sont ces empyemes signal^ par
llippocrate, comme terminaison des p^ripneumonies, et ces expectorations qui en
procurent Tevacuation ? II m'est impossible de r^pondre k ces questions : peut-etre
des observations faites dans la Grece merne, permettraient de r^soudre la difficult^/'
((Euvres Complets d'Hippocrate, torn, ii, p. 97<) Perhaps, as I have hinted above, the
most probable answer that could be returned to the questions put by M. Littr^ would
be, that many of the cases of pneumonia terminating in empyema, which occur in the
Ilippocratic treatises, were what are now described as cases of acute phthisis. See
Louis on Phthisis, ii, 2. In confirmation of my supposition that many of the cases
of empyema described by the ancients were, in fact, cases of phthisis, I would refer to
Paulus i£oiNBTA, B. Ill, 32, where it will be seen that the two diseases, phthisis
and empyema, are treated of under the same head. See also the second book of the
Prorrhetics, tom. i, pp. 198-201 ; ed. Kiihu.

M. Littr^ reverts to this subject in the Argument to the Coacae Pnenotiones, tom. v,
p. 576, where he relates, from two recent authorities, a case of empyema after pleurisy,
and another after pneumonia, in both of which the pus was evacuated by the mouth.
He also quotes the remark of an English writer, Dr. Twining, that, in and about
Bengal, abscess of the lungs after pneumonia is by no means very rare. Still M.
Littre admits that the paucity of such cases in modem works must lead to the con-
clusion either that Hippocrates had not observed correctly, or that this termination
is more rare now than formerly. I leave the reader to judge whether my suggestion
stated above does not remove this difficulty.



248 PROGNOSTICS.

and sweats^ all bad^ agreeably to the characters described above ;
if such a combination of symptoms accompany the expectora-
tion^ the man will certainly die before the fourteenth day, and
either on the ninth or eleventh. Thus then one may conclude
regarding this expectoration, that it is very deadly, and that
the patient will not survive until the fourteenth day. It is by
balancing the concomitant symptoms whether good or bad,
that one is to form a prognosis ; for thus it will most probably
prove to be a true one. Most other suppurations burst, some
on the twentieth, some on the thirtieth, some on the fortieth,
and some as late as the sixtieth day.^

16. One should estimate when the commencement of the
suppuration will take place, by calculating from the day on
which the patient was first seized with fever, or if he had a
rigor, and if he says that there is a weight in the place where
he had pain formerly, for these symptoms occur in the com-
mencement of suppurations. One then may expect the rupture
of the abscesses to take place from these times according to the
periods formerly stated. But if the empyema be only on either
side^ one should turn him and inquire if he has pain on the
other side ; and if the one side be hotter than the other, and
when laid upon the sound side, one should inquire if he has
the feeling of a weight hanging from above, for if so, the
empyema will be upon the opposite side to that on which the
weight was felt.^

17. Empyema may be recognised in all cases by the follow-
ing symptoms : In the first place, the fever does not go off,
but is slight during the day, and increases at night, and copious
sweats supervene, there is a desire to cough, and the patients

> ** The obsen'ations of Andral have in some measure confirmed the opinion of
Hippocrates and other authors, ancient and modern, that there are certain days in
the duration of the disease in which there is a greater tendency to amelioration. Of
ninety-three cases, he found twenty-three give way on the seventh, thirteen on the
eleventh, eleven on the fourteenth, and nine on the twentieth days. The recoveries
in the remaining cases commenced on twelve out of forty-two non-critical days, as
many as eleven being ascribed to the tenth day. Thus the recoveries on critical days
averaged as high as fourteen, while those on non-critical scarcely exceeded three."
(Dr. C. J. B. Williams on Pneumonia, Cyclop, of Pract. Med., vol. iii, p. 405.) Sec
also Andral, Clin. Med., c. ii, p. 365.

^ Stephanas has a lengthened and most important commentary on this passage,
containing an claborale disquisition on empyema, (pp. 184-91.)



PROGNOSTICS. 249

expectorate nothing worth mentioning^ the eyes become hollow^
the cheeks have red spots on them^ the nails of the hands are
bent^ the fingers are hot especially their extremities^ there are
swellings in the feet^ they have no desire of food^ and small
blisters (phlyctsense) occur over the body. These symptoms
attend chronic empyemata^ and may be much trusted to ; and
such as are of short standing are indicated by the same^ pro-
vided they be accompanied by those signs which occur at the
commencement^ and if at the same time the patient has some
difficulty of breathing. Whether they will break earlier or later
may be determined by these symptoms j; if there be pain at the
commencement^ and if the dyspncea, cough^ and ptyalism be
severe^ the rupture may be expected in the course of twenty
days or still earlier ; but if the pain be more mild^ and all the
other symptoms in proportion^ you may expect from these the
rupture to be later ; but pain^ dyspnoea, and ptyalism, must
take place before the rupture of the abscess. Those patients
recover most readily whom the fever leaves the same day that
the abscess bursts, — when they recover their appetite speedily,
and are freed from the thirst, — when the alvine discharges are
small and consistent, the matter white, smooth, uniform in
colour, and free of phlegm, and if brought up without pain or
strong coughing. Those die whom the fever does not leave, or
when appearing to leave them it returns with an exacerbation ;
when they have thirst, but no desire of food, and there are
watery discharges from the bowels ; when the expectoration is
green or livid, or pituitous and frothy ; if all these occur they
die, but if certain of these symptoms supervene, and others
not, some patients die and some recover, after a long interval.
But from all the symptoms taken together one should form a
judgment, and so in all other cases.

18, When abscesses form about the ears, after peripneumonic
affections, or depositions of matter take place in the inferior
extremities and end in fistula, such persons recover. The
following observations are to be made upon them : if the fever
persist, and the pain do not cease, if the expectoration be not
normal, and if the alvine discharges be neither bilious, nor
free and unmixed; and if the urine be neither copious nor
have its proper sediment, but if, on the other hand, all the
other salutary symptoms be present, in sucli cases abscesses



250 PROGNOSTICS.

may be expected to take place. They form in the inferior
parts when there is a collection of phlegm about the hypo-
chondria ; and in the upper when the hypochondria continue
soft and free of pain^ and when dyspnoea having been present
for a certain time, ceases without any obvious cause.^ All
deposits which take place in the legs after severe and
dangerous attacks of pneumonia, are salutary, but the best
are those which occur at the time when the sputa undergo
a change ; for if the swelling and pain take place while the
sputa are changing from yellow and becoming of a purulent
character, and are expectorated freely, under these circum-
stances the man will recover most favorably, and the abscess
becoming free of pain, will soon cease ; but if the expectoration
is not free, and the urine does not appear to have the proper
sediment, there is danger lest the limb should be maimed,
or that the case otherwise should give trouble. But if the
abscesses disappear and go back, while expectoration does
not take place, and fever prevails, it is a bad symptom ; for
there is danger that the man may get into a state of delirium
and die. Of persons having empyema after peripneumonic
affections, those that are advanced in life run the greatest risk
of dying ; but in the other kinds of empyema younger persons
rather die.^ In cases of empyema treated by the cautery or
incision, when the matter is pure, white, and not fetid, the
patient recovers ; but if of a bloody and dirty character, he dies.'
19. Pains accompanied with fever which occur about the
loins and lower parts, if they attack the diaphragm, and leave
the parts below, are very fatal. Wherefore one ought to pay
attention to the other symptoms, since if any unfavorable
one supervene, the case is hopeless : but if while the disease
is determined to the diaphragm, the other symptoms are
not bad, there is great reason to expect that it will end in
empyema.^ Wlien the bladder is hard and painful, it is an
extremely bad and mortal symptom, more especially in cases

1 This is taken pretty closely from the Coacae Pnenotionesi 395.

' A part of this is copied from the Coacse Pnenotiones, 396.

' It wUl be seen in our analysis of several of the Hippocratic treatises, such as
De Affect. Intern., De Morbis, &c., that it was the common practice in such cases to
evacuate the matter either by the cautery or the knife. See also Aphorism, vii, 44.

* Part of this is borrowed from the Coacae Pncnotiones, 108.



PROGNOSTICS. 251

attended with continued fever ; for the pains proceeding
from the bladder alone are enough to kill the patient ; and at
such a time the bowels are not moved^ or the discharges are
hard and forced. But urine of a purulent character^ and
having a white and smooth sediment^ relieves the patient.
But if no amendment takes place in the characters of the
urine, nor the bladder become soft, and the fever is of the
continual type, it may be expected that the patient will die in
the first stages of the complaint. This form attacks children
more especially, from their seventh to their fifteenth year.^

20. Fevers come to a crisis on the same days as to number
on which men recover and die. For the mildest class of fevers,
and those originating with the most favorable symptoms, cease
on the fourth day or earlier ; and the most malignant, and those
setting in with the most dangerous symptoms, prove fatal on
the fourth day or earlier. The first class of them as to violence
ends thus ; the second is protracted to the seventh day, the third
to the eleventh, the fourth to the fourteenth, the fifth to the
seventeenth, and the sixth to the twentieth. Thus these periods
from the most acute disease ascend by fours up to twenty.
But none of these can be truly calculated by whole days, for
neither the year nor the months can be numbered by entire days.
After these in the same manner, according to the same pro-
gression, the first period is of thirty-four days, the second of
forty days, and the third of sixty days. In the commencement
of these it is very difficult to determine those which will come
to a crisis after a long interval ; for these beginnings are very
similar, but one should pay attention from the first day, and
observe further at every additional tetrad, and then one cannot
miss seeing how the disease will terminate. The constitution
of quartans is agreeable to the same order. Those which will
come to a crisis in the shortest space of time, are the easiest
to be judged of ; for the differences of them are greatest from
the commencement, thus those who are going to recover
breathe freely, and do not suffer pain, they sleep during the
night, and have the other salutary symptoms, whereas those
that are to die have difficult respiration, are delirious, troubled

* This is in part deriyed from the Coacse Pnenotiones, 471. Galen, in his com-
mentary, is at pains to explain that by a hard bladder Hippocrates means a bladder in
a state of inflammation.



252 PROGNOSTICS.

with insomnolency^ and have the other bad symptoms. Matters
being thus^ one may conjecture^ according to the time^ and
each additional period of the diseases^ as they proceed to a
crisis. And in women^ after parturition^ the crises proceed
agreeably to the same ratio.^

21. Strong and continued headaches with fever, if any of
the deadly symptoms be joined to them, are very fatal. But if
without such symptoms the pain be prolonged beyond twenty
days, a discharge of blood from the nose or some abscess in the
inferior parts may be anticipated; but while the pain is recent,
we may expect in like manner a discharge of blood from the
nose, or a suppuration, especially if the pain be seated above
the temples and forehead ; but the hemorrhage is rather to be
looked for in persons younger than thirty years, and the sup-
puration in more elderly persons.*

22. Acute pain of the ear, with continual and strong fever,
is to be dreaded ; for there is danger that the man may become
delirious and die. Since, then, this is a hazardous spot, one
oiiglit to pay particular attention to all these symptoms from
the commencement. Younger persons die of this disease on
tlie seventh day, or still earlier, but old persons much later ; for
the fevers and delirium, less frequently supeiTcne upon them,
and on. that account the ears previously come to a suppuration,
but at these periods of life, relapses of the disease coming on,
generally prove fatal. Younger persons die before the ear
suppurates ; only if white matter run from the ear, there may

' The subject of the critical days is not touched upon in the Coacse Prsenotiones,
ho that the contents of this section are either original or taken from some source
with which we arc totally unacquainted. Galen, indeed, does not hesitate to declare
that Hippocrates himself was the first who treated of the critical days; but whether
he had any competent authority for pronouncing this opinion cannot be satisfactorily
determined. The critical days are incidentally treated of in the Epidemics and
A])horisms ; but, as we have stated in our critique on the Ilippocratic treatises in
the Preliminary Discourse, the work 'On Critical Days* is in all probability spurious.
The system of the critical days taught by Hippocrates was adopted by almost all the
ancient authorities, with the exception of Archigenes and his followers, who, how-
ever, were not numerous nor of any great name, with the exception of Celsus. See
the Commentary on Paulus iEcixETA, B. II, 7, Syd. See. edition.

' The contents of this section are borrowed in a great measure from the Coacie
Pricnotiones, 160. Dr. Ermcrins remarks that the headache here described is
]iiohably of a catarrhal or rheumatic nature. (Specimen IIi»t. Med. Inaug., &c.,
p. 81.)



PROGNOSTICS. 253

be hopes that a younger person will recover, provided any other
favorable symptom be combined.^

23. Ulceration of the throat with fever, is a serious affection,
and if any other of the symptoms formerly described as being
bad, be present, the physician ought to announce that his
patient is in danger.^ Those quinsies are most dangerous, and
most quickly prove fatal, which make no appearance in the
fauces, nor in the neck, but occasion very great pain and dif-
ficulty of breathing; these induce suffocation on the first day,
or on the second, the third, or the fourth.* Such as, in like
manner, are attended with pain, are swelled up, and have
redness (erythema) in the throat, are indeed very fatal, but
more protracted than the former, provided the redness be great.*
Those cases in which both the throat and the neck are red, are
more protracted, and certain persons recover from them, es-
pecially if the neck and breast be affected with erythema, and
the erysipelas be not determined inwardly.^ If neither the
erysipelas disappear on the critical day, nor any abscess form
outwardly, nor any pus be spit up, and if the patient fancy
himself well, and be free from pain, death or a relapse of the
erythema is to be apprehended. It is much less hazardous
when the swelling and redness are determined outwardly ; but
if determined to the lungs, they superinduce delirium, and fre-
quently some of these cases terminate in empyema.® It is

. * This is taken in great measure from the Coacae Prsenotiones, 189. Galen, in his
commentary, remarks that patients die of violent pains of the ear, owing to the brain
83nxipathi8ing, which brings on delirium, and sometimes occasions sudden death. I may
be allowed to remark that every experienced physician must have met with such cases.

' A considerable part of this section on ulcerated sore-throat is extracted from
the Coacs Praenotiones. The present sentence is from $ 276. The medical reader will
not fail to remark that Hippocrates displays a wonderfully accurate acquaintance
with these affections.

' This is founded on the contents of the Coacae Pnenotiones, 363. The disease
here described is evidently angina laryngaea.

* This is taken in part from the Coacas Pnenotiones, 364. As Dr. Ermerins re-
marks in his note on it, the disease here described is evidently angina pharyngaea.

' This is closely copied from the Coacae Pnenotiones, 365. The danger of ery.
thematous swelling being determined inwards, is weU understood now-a-days.

* This is taken, with slight alterations, from the Coacae Pnenotiones, 365, 367.
The latter clause is more fully expressed in the Coacae Pnenotiones than in the
Prognostics. " In those cases in which cynanche is determined to the lungs, some
die in seven days, and some escaping these get into a state of empyema, unless they
have a pituitous expectoration." This is evidently a correct description of the disease
spreading to the lungs.



254 PROGNOSTICS.

very dangerous to cut off or scarify enlarged uvulse vhile they
are red and large^ for inflammations and hemorrhages super-
vene ; but one should try to reduce such swellings by some
other means at this season. When the whole of it is converted
into an abscess, which is called Uva, or when the extremity
of the variety called Columella is larger and rounds but the
upper part thinner, at this time it will be safe to operate.
But it will be better to open the bowels gently before proceeding
to the operation, if time will permit, and the patient be not in
danger of being suffocated.^

24. When the fevers cease without any symptoms of resolu-
tion occurring, and not on the critical days, in such cases a
relapse may be anticipated.^ When any of the fevers is pro-
tracted, although the man exhibits symptoms of recovery, and
there is no longer pain from any inflammation, nor from
any other visible cause, in such a case a deposit, with swelling
and pain, may be expected in some one of the joints, and not
improbably in those below. Such deposits occur more readily
and in less time to persons under thirty years of age ; and one
should immediately suspect the formation of such a deposit, if
the fever be protracted beyond twenty days; but to aged
persons these less seldom happen, and not until the fever be
much longer protracted. Such a deposit may be expected,
when the fever is of a continual type, and that it will pass into
a quartan, if it become intermittent, and its paroxysms come
on in an irregular manner, and if in this form it approach
autumn. As deposits form most readily in persons below
thirty years of age, so quartans most commonly occur to persons
beyond that age. It is proper to know that deposits occur
most readily in winter, that then they are most protracted, but
are less given to return.^ Whoever, in a fever that is not of a
fatal character, says that he has pain in his head^ and that
something dark appears to be before his eyes, and that he has
pain at the stomach, will be seized with vomiting of bile ; but

> No part of this last clause is to be found in the Coacas Pnenotiones. The ope-
rations of excising and burning the diseased uvula are minutely described by Paulus
i£gineta and other of the ancient authorities. See Paulus ifioiNETA, B. VI, 31.
I need scarcely remark that both these operations have been revived of late years.

' This is taken with little variation from the Coacse PrenotioneSi 146.

' A part of what precedes is taken from the Coaca; Pnenotiones, 143 ; all that
follows, with the exception of a short sentence, is original.



PROGNOSTICS. 255

if a rigor also attack him^ and the inferior parts of the hypo-
chondrium are cold^ vomiting is still nearer at hand ; and if
he eat or drink anything at such a season^ it will be quickly
vomited. In these cases^ when the pain commences on the
first day^ they are particularly oppressed on the fourth and the
fifth ; and they are relieved on the seventh, but the greater
part of them begin to have pain on the third day, and are
most especially tossed on the fifth, but are relieved on the ninth
or eleventh ; but in those who begin to have pains on the fifth
day, and other matters proceed properly with them, the disease
comes to a crisis on the fourteenth day. But when in such a
fever persons afiected with headache, instead of having a dark
appearance before their eyes, have dimness of vision, or flashes
of light appear before their eyes, and instead of pain at the pit
of the stomach, they have in their hypochondrium a fulness
stretching either to the right or left side, without either pain
or inflammation, a hemorrhage from the nose is to be expected
in such a case, rather than a vomiting. But it is in young
persons particularly that the hemorrhage is to be expected, for
in persons beyond the age of thirty-five, vomitings are rather
to be anticipated. Convulsions occur to children if acute fever
be present, and the belly be constipated, if they cannot sleep,
are agitated, and moan, and change colour^ and become green,
livid, or ruddy. These complaints occur most readily to
children which are very young up to their seventh year ; older
children and adults are not equally liable to be seized with con-
vulsions in fevers, unless some of the strongest and worst
symptoms precede, such as those which occur in frenzy. One
must judge of children as of others, which will die and which
recover, from the whole of the symptoms, as they have been
specially described.^ These things I say respecting acute dis-
eases, and the affections which spring from them.

25. He who would know correctly beforehand those that
will recover, and those that will die, and in what cases the
disease will be protracted for many days, and in what cases

* Our author here and elsewhere impresses it upon his readers that it is from the
tout ensemble of the symptoms that a judg;ment is to be formed in every case. This
is evidently a remark of the most vital importance in forming a prognosis. Galen's
observations in the succeeding commentary are very interesting, and deserve an at-
tentive perusal.



256 PROGNOSTICS.

for a shorter time, must be able to form a judgment from
having made himself acquainted with all the symptoms, and
estimating their powers in comparison with one another, as has
been described, with regard to the others, and the urine and
sputa, as when the patient coughs up pus and bile together.
One ought also to consider promptly the influx of epidemical
diseases and the constitution of the season.^ One should like-
wise be well acquainted with the particular signs and the other
symptoms, and not be ignorant how that, in every year, and
at every season, bad symptoms prognosticate ill, and favorable
symptoms good, since the aforesaid symptoms appear to have
held true in Libya, in Delos, and in Scythia -? from which it
may be known that, in the same regions, there is no diflSculty
in attaining a knowledge of many more things than these ; if
having learned them, one knows also how to judge and reason
correctly of them. But you should not complain because the
name of any disease may happen not to be described here, for
you may know all such as come to a crisis in the afore-men-
tioned times, by the same symptoms.^

' That is to say, the physician ought to get speedily acquainted with the nature of
the epidemics which prevail at every particular season. I need scarcely remark that
this is a subject which is largely treated of in the works of our English Hippocrates,
Sydenham. Hippocrates himself is very full on this head, more especially in his
Epidemics and Aphorisms, as we shall see below.

' It has excited a great deal of discussion and difference of opinion to determine
what our author means by specifying these three places ; but the explanation given
by Galen in his Commentary seems to me quite satisfactory. According to him, the
meaning of our author is that good and bad symptoms tell the same in all places, in
the hot regions of Libya, the cold of Scythia, and the temperate of Delos. It is
further to be borne in mind that Odessus in Scythia, and Cyrene in Libya, were the
extremities of the Grecian world, whilst Delos may be regarded as its centre. It is
proper to remark, however, that by the three places mentioned, Erotian understands
the three quarters of the earth — Africa, Asia, and Europe. See under Aifivti,

' The meaning of this last sentence has been supposed to be somewhat ambiguous ;
but to me it appears evidently to be this, that the rules of prognosis, as laid down
above, apply to all diseases of an acute character, whether their names happen to b«
mentioned in the course of this work or not, so that it should not be considered a
defect in the work that any one is omitted.



APPENDIX



TO



THE BOOK OF PROGNOSTICS.

As announced in the Preliminary Discourse (Sect. II, 18),
I shall now proceed to give an abstract of the principal matters
contained in the Second Book of Prorrhetics, which appear
to me to be highly interesting, and as they relate to the sub-
jects treated of in the Prognostics, they may be more suitably
introduced here than in any other place.

The author commences the treatise with expressing his dis-
approval of certain modes of making prognostics which he had
seen practised. He says he had heard of many and famous
predictions having been made by physicians, such as he himself
did not pretend that he could make. Such, for example, as
for a physician to call in upon a patient who was looked upon
as being in a desperate condition by another physician, and
predict that he would not die, but would lose his sight. Or
to predict with regard to another patient supposed to be in a
bad way, that he wiU recover, but will become lame of a hand.
And of a third who, to all appearance, cannot recover, to
predict that he wiU get well, but that his toes will blacken
and putrefy. Similar predictions are related under this class.
Another mode of prediction is to prophecy to buyers and traders,
to one death, to another madness, and to the rest diseases, and
that from what is now occurring, or has occurred before, and all
the predictions to turn out true. Another kind of predictions
relates to Athletse, and those who practise gymnastic and
laborious exercises for the cure of diseases, where the prac-
titioner pretends to so much exactness, that if the patient is
guilty of liny act of omission or commission in regard to food,
drink, or venery, the physician will detect it. He himself
makes no pretensions to any such skill in divination, but
announces it as his object to describe the symptoms by which

17



258 APPENDIX.

it may be known whether a man will die or live^ and whether
his disease will be of short or of long duration. With regard
to the predictions of abscesses^ lameness^ deaths or madness^
the author holds that they can only be made after the morbid
conditions leading to them have fairly set in. He strongly
disapproves of all ostentatious modes of making predictions^
and gives it as his advice that in all such cases the greatest
prudence and reserve should be observed, since if a man
becomes an adept in this art of prognostications, he will gain
great credit with his patient, whereas if he fall into mistakes, he
will incur odium, and will be looked upon as being deranged.
With regard to the prognostics made by those who practise
gymnastics, he recommends them not to be made in a charlatan
manner, but with suitable caution, and directs minute atten-
tion to be paid to the circumstances of the patient, which one
has superior advantages in observing under this system. He
says, for example, that a physician who feels a patient's belly
and pulse, pays attention to the breathing at the nostrils, and
listens to the speech, and sound of the respiration, will be less
likely to be deceived in forming a prognostic on his patients
than he who neglects these things. He expresses himself,
however, as being incredulous as to the possibility of detecting
any little transgressions of orders which a patient may commit,
although greater departures from instructions may be suspected.
After some general observations in respect to diet, and other
matters relating to it, he proceeds to a more circumstantial
description of the symptoms upon which a prognosis is to be
founded. And first, with regard to the alvine dejections, those
of persons who live a laborious life, and use food and drink
sparingly, are small and hard, and are passed every day, every
third day, or every fourth day, but if they pass the last period
there is danger of the man's being seized with fever or diarrhoea.
When the stools are so liquid that they do not assume a shape,
they are all of a worse character in these cases. The dejec-
tions of persons who lead an active life are less copious than
those of the indolent, provided they use the same amount
of food. Liquid dejections taking place on the seventh day,
and quickly coming to a crisis, are beneficial, if they occur all
at once, and are not repeated. But if accompanied with fever,
or if the diarrhoea is prolonged, all such dejections are bad.



PRORRHETICS. 259

whether bilious^ pituitous^ or of indigested matters^ and require
a particular regimen and mode of treatment.

With regard to the urine, it should be in proportion to the
drink that is taken, and somewhat thicker than the fluid that
is drunk. If it be more copious than natural, this indicates
either that the patient has disobeyed orders as to the amount
of his drink, or that his body is in a state of atrophy. If the
urine is passed in deficient quantity, with a noise, it indicates
either that the man stands in need of purging, or that the
bladder is diseased. A small quantity of blood passed without
fever and pain does not indicate anything bad, but proves a solu-
tion to a state of lassitude. But if in large quantity, with the
addition of any of these symptoms, it is to be dreaded. But if
the urine be passed with pain, and if pus be passed along with the
urine in a fever, the physician should announce that the patient
will thus be relieved of his complaints.^ Thick urine having a
thin sediment indicates some pain and swelling about the
joints. All the other sediments which occur in the urine of
persons who practise exercises are connected with disease about
the bladder ; this will be clearly shown by the obstinate pains
with which they are accompanied. The author, although he
states that he had been conversant with the teachers of pro-
gnostics from urine, and their children and disciples, seems to
express himself doubtful as to the possibility of acquiring a
great degree of accuracy in regard to these matters.

Respecting dropsy, consumption, gout, and epilepsy, he states
generally that if they are hereditary they are difficult to
remove. A favorable prognosis is to be formed in dropsy
when the patient^s viscera are sound, when his strength is
firm, the digestion and respiration natural, when he is free of
pain, the temperature of the body moderate, and when there
is no wasting of the extremities. It is favorable when there
is no cough, thirst, nor dryness of the tongue, when the bowels
are easily moved by medicine, and when, at other times, the
dejections are consistent. Dropsy, supervening along with
fever, upon a great discharge of blood, is of a most intractable
nature, and the physician should intimate the danger to some
other person beforehand. When great swellings suddenly

' See Epidem., i and iii.



260 APPENDIX.

subside and rise again^ there is more hope in such a case than
in dropsies connected with a discharge of blood. He concludes
his observations on dropsies with the remark, that they are apt
to deceive the patients, so that they desert their physicians and
thus perish.

With regard to consumptive patients, he says, he has the
same observations to make with regard to the sputa and cough
as he had written with regard to empyema.* If the patient is
to recover, the sputa should be white, equable, of one colour,
withoi;t phlegm ; the defluxion from the head should be deter-
mined to the nose; there should be no fever, nor anorexia,
nor thirst j the aUdne discharges firm, proportionate to the
ingesta, and the patient should not get thin. The best form
of the chest is when it is quadrangular and hairy, and when
the cartilage is small, and covered with flesh. Young persons,
who become afl^ectcd with empyema from determination (metas-
tasis?), or fistula, or from any other similar cause, or firom the re-
trocession of an abscess, do not recover unless many of the favor-
able symptoms combine in the case. They die, most commonly,
in autumn, which proves peculiarly fatal in protracted diseases.
Of all others, virgins, and women suffering from amenorrhoea,
seldomest recover ; and in their cases there is no hope unless
menstruation be restored. All sexes, he seems to say (but
the meaning appears to me rather ambiguous), have a better
chance of recovery, when there is a discharge of blood, espe-
cially in those cases in which there are pains in the back and
chest, connected with black bile ; and if, after the evacuation,
there be a remission of the pain 3 if the cough and fever do
not set in ; and if the thirst be tolerable. He seems to state
(but the text is in an unsatisfactory condition), that relapses
take place unless there be deposits in the place, the best of
which are those which contain most blood ; and that in those
cases in which there are pains in the chest, if the patients get
emaciated, and cough, and a dyspnoea supervenes, without
fever or empyema, they should be asked whether, when they

> Empyema is treated of in the Prognostics, the first book of Prorrhetics, the
Coacae Praenotioues, and the work De Morbis. Which of these is here alluded to
cannot be determined for certain ; it seems probable, howeyer, that it is to the pre-
ceding book of Prorrhctics.



PRORRHETICS. 2G1

cough^ and have difficulty of breathings the sputa be compact^
and attended with little smell.

With regard to persona aflfected with the gout, those who
are aged, have tofi in their joints, who have led a hard life, and
whose bowels are constipated, are beyond the power of medicine
to cure. But, the best natural remedy for them is, an attack
of dysentery, or other determination to the bowels. Persons,
under opposite circumstances, may be cured by a skilful
physician.

The prognosis in epilepsy is unfavorable when the disease
is congenital, and when it endures to manhood^ and when it
ocdurs to a grown person, and without any obvious cause.
When connected with the head it is particularly to be appre-
hended, but least so when it seems to be derived from the
hands or feet. The cure may be attempted in young persons,
but not in old.

In the case of children, he mentions various complaints, such
as distortion of the eyes^ tubercles about the neck, pain in the
bowels, omental hernia, &c., which, upon inquiry, will be found
to be the consequences of an attack of epilepsy.

The judgment to be formed in the case of ulcers is to be
founded on the age of the patient, the situation of the sore,
and its appearance.

Strumous tubercles, which end in suppuration, occur most
frequently in young persons. Adults are subject to bad favi,
internal cancers, and herpetic sores, after epinyctis, until they
pass sixty. Old persons are subject to cancers, both deep-
seated and superficial, which never leave them. They are
particularly intractable when seated in the armpits, the loins,
and the thighs.

Of affections of the joints, the most dangerous are those
seated in the thumb and great toe. When there is a chronic
sore on the side of the tongue the surgeon should examine
whether it be not occasioned by the sharp edge of a tooth.^

The most dangerous wounds are those which implicate the
large veins (blood-vessels), in the neck and groins ; then those

* This important obserration i« thus rendered by Celsus : " Quae in latere Hnguas
ulcera nascuntur diutissimc durant. Videndamque est, num contra dens aliquis
acutior sit, qui sanescere saepe ulcus eo loco non sinit, idcoque limandus est." (vi, 12.)



262 APPENDIX.

of the brain and liver -, next, those of the bowels and bladder.
These cases are all dangerous, but not uniformly fatal, as some
suppose. Much depends upon constitution, as to liability to fever
and inflammation after a wound. Sometimes, also, the wounds
of smaller vessels prove fatal by inducing hemorrhage, fever, or
delirium. In all recent wounds, however, the physician should
endeavour to afford assistance.

Of spreading ulcers, the most fatal are such mortifications as
are very deep, black, and dry; and those are bad and dangerous
which are accompanied with a black ichorous discharge. Those
which are white and mucous are less dangerous, but are more
subject to relapse, and become inveterate. Herpes is the least
dangerous of the spreading sores, but is most difficult to remove
about deep-seated cancers.^ An ephemeral fever, with very white
and thick pus, is beneficial in such a case ; also, sphacelus of a
nerve, of a bone, or of both, in deep-seated and black mor-
tifications. For a free discharge of pus takes place and carries
off the mortification.

The prognostics in wounds of the head are given in nearly
the same terms as laid down in the treaties on that subject,
and therefore I need not enter minutely into an exposition of
what is stated regarding them here. Those in the upper part
of the head, more especially if they implicate a suture, are said
to be particularly dangerous. The author directs the surgeon
to inquire whether, at the time of the accident, the patient fell
down or became comatose, as in this case greater danger is to
be apprehended.

Large wounds of the joints, if they involve the connecting
nerves, necessarily leave the limb maimed. Several other
observations connected with these injuries are added, of which
one of the most important is the direction to practise flexion
and extension of the Umb, frequently, with the view, no doubt,
of preventing rigidity of the joint.

Large excisions in the arm becoming inflamed end in sup-
purations, which require to be evacuated by the knife or
cautery. Injuries of the spinal marrow, whether from disease
or accident, are attended with loss of motion and sensibility,
retention of the alvine and urinary discharges; but, after

' Allusion seems to be made to herpes exedens.



PRORRHETICS. 263

a time^ involuntary evacuations take place^ which are soon fol-
lowed by death. When the throat is frequently filled with
bloody and there is no headache or cough^ nor any other
morbid symptoms, the physician should examine whether there
be not an ulcer or a leech in the part.

With regard to the eyes, the prognostics are given with so
much prolixity of detail that I must be content with a brief
abstract of them. Much attention is paid to the characters
of the discharge from the eyes in diseases of them^ namely, of
the glutinous matter and tears ; thus, if the gum be white and
soft, the tears mixed with it not very hot, and the swelling
light and loose, under these circumstances the eyelids are glued
up during the night, so that the eye is free, of pain, and thus
the disease is without danger, and of short duration. The other
appearances of the eye, and the discharges, are also minutely
given. When the discharge is green or livid, the tears copious
and hot, a burning heat in the head, and pains darting through
the head to the eye, there must necessarily be ulceration in
the eye; and. there is much reason to apprehend that it will
burst. If, when one can get a sight of the eye, it should be
found burst, and the pupil projecting above the rupture, it is
bad and difficult to restore ; and, if there be sloughing, the eye
will be wholly useless. According to the form and depth of the
ulcers must be the subsequent cicatrices. These are minutely
described according to their diflferent varieties. Mention is
also made of the prognostics from the eyes in fevers, as de-
scribed by the author in another work. It is most likely that
allusion is here made to the first book of ' Prorrhetics.' In
conclusion, the surgeon is directed to pay great attention to
the state of the urine in diseases of the eyes.

Dysenteries, when they set in with fever, alvine discharges
of a mixed character, or with inflammation of the liver, or of
the hypochondrium, or of the stomach, such as are painful, with
retention of the food and thirst, all these are bad; and the
more of these symptoms there are, the greater the danger; and
the fewer, the more hope is there of recovery. Children from
five to ten years of age are the most apt to die of this com-
plaint ; the other ages less so. Such dysenteries as are of a
beneficial nature, and are attended with blood and scrapings of
the bowels, cease on the seventh, or fourteenth, or twentieth, or



♦TM



264 APPENDIX.

thirtieth day, or within that period. In such cases even a
pregnant woman may recover and not suffer abortion.

All cases of lientery are said to be of a bad character when
they are continued and protracted, both day and night, and
when the dejections are either very crude, or black, soft, and
fetid ; for they occasion thirst and determine the fluids other-
wise than to the bladder, give rise to ulcerations (aphthae?) in
the mouth, redness and ephelis^ of all colours, and at the same
time the belly is in a state of ferment, and has a foul, wrinkled
appearance externally. This disease is most to be dreaded by
old persons ; it is formidable to men of middle age, but less so
in the other ages. The indications of cure, it is acutely stated,
are to determine the fluids to the urine, to reheve the body
from its atrophy, and change the colour of the skin.

All the other varieties of diarrhoea without fever are of short
duration and mild ; for they will all cease when washed out, or
of their own accord. The discharge may be predicted as about
to cease when, upon touching the belly, there is no movement,
and flatulence passes with the discharge. Eversion of the gut
takes place in the case of middle-aged persons having piles, of
children affected with the stone, and in protracted and intense
discharges from the bowels, and of old persons having mucous
concretions (scybalae?).

Women may be judged of whether they are in a fit state
for conception or not by attending to the following circum-
stances : — In the first place to their shapes. Women of smaller
stature more readily conceive than taller persons; the thin
than the fat ; the white than the ruddy j the dark than the
pale; those who have prominent veins than the contrary. In
oldish women it is bad to have much flesh, but a good thing to
have swelled and large breasts. In addition, inquiry should be
made whether or not the menstruation be regular as to time
and quantity. And it should be ascertained whether the uterus
be healthy, of a dry temperament, and soft; neither in a state
of retraction nor prolapsus; and its mouth neither turned aside,
nor too close, nor too open. When any of these obstructions
come in the way, it is impossible that conception can take
place.

Such women as cannot conceive, but appear green, without

' See Paulus iEoiNKTA, D. Ill, 25.

I



I



.$


PRORRHETICS, 265

fever, and the viscera are not in fault ; these will say that the
head is pained, and that the menstrual discharge is vitiated and
irregular. But such of these as have the proper colour, are of
a fat habit of body, the veins are inconspicuous, they have no
pains, and the menses either never appear at all, or are scanty
and intense, and this is one of the most difficult states of ste-
rility to remove. In other cases the health is not to blame,
but the fault lies in the position of the womb. The other
contingencies in this place are attended with pains, discolora-
tion, and wasting.

Ulceration in the womb from parturition, an abscess of a
chronic nature, or from any other cause, is necessarily accom-
panied with fevers, buboes, and pains in the place ; and if the
lochial discharge be also suppressed, all these evils are more
intense and inveterate, along with pains of the hypochoudrium
and head. And when the ulcer heals, the part necessarily is
smoother and harder, and the woman is less adapted for
conception. If, however, the ulceration be in the right side
only, the woman may conceive of a female child, or if in the
left, of a male. When a woman cannot conceive, and fever
comes on with a slight cough, inquiry should be made whether
she has any ulcer about the uterus, or any other of the com-
plaints I have described ; for if she has no complaint in that
region to account for her loss of flesh and sterility, it may be
expected that she will have vomiting of blood, and the catamenia
will necessarily be suppressed. But if the fever be carried off
by the evacuation of blood, and if the catamenia appear, she
will then prove with child. But if looseness of the bowels
having a bad character take place before there is an evacuation
of blood, there is danger lest the woman perish before a vomit-
ing of blood can take place.

In cases of false conception, in which women are deceived
by the non-appearance of the menses, and by the increase of
the belly and movement in it, they will be found to have had
headache and pains about the neck and hypochondria, and
there is no milk in the breasts except a little of a watery
character. But when the swelling of the womb passes away
they will conceive, unless there be any other impediment.
For this affection is beneficial in so far as it produces a change
in the uterus, so that afterwards the woman may prove with



26C APPENDIX.

child. Women with child have not these pains unless the
headache be habitual to them^ and in addition they have milk
in their breasts. Women affected with chronic discharges are
to be asked whether they have pains in the head and loins^
and in the lower part of the belly, and whether their teeth be
set on edge, and if they have dimness of sight, and noises in
their ears. Such women as vomit bile for several days while
in a fasting state, though they are not with child nor have
fever, are to be asked whether they have vomited up round
lumbrici, and if they say not, they should be warned that this
will happen to them. This affection happens principally to
married women, then to virgins, and less seldom to other
people.

Pains without fever are not deadly, but mostly prove pro-
tracted, and have many changes and relapses. Several varieties
of headache are described, and the prognosis in each laid down.
The natural cure of them is a coryza, a discharge of mucus
from the nose, or sneezing. Pains spreading from the head to
the neck and back, are relieved by abscesses, expectoration of
pus, hemorrhoids, exanthemata on the body, or ptyriasis on
the head.

Heaviness and pruritus in the head, either in a part or
through the whole of it, if, on inquiry, they extend to the tip
of the tongue, indicate a confirmed disease, and one diflScult
to remove. They are best removed by the occurrence of an
abscess. But those cases which are accompanied with vertigo
are difficult to cure, and are apt to pass into mania. Other
diseases in the head, of a very strong and protracted character,
occur to both men and women, but especially to young persons,
and virgins at the season of manhood, and especially at the
catamenial period. Women^ however, are less subject to
pruritus and melancholic affections than the men, unless the
menses have disappeared.

Both men and women who have loug had a bad colour, but
not in the form of jaundice, are subject to headaches, eat stones
and earth, and have piles. Those who have green colours, without
decided jaundice, are affected in like manner, only instead of
eating stones and earth, they are more subject to pains in the
hypochondriac region. Persons who are pale for a length of
time, and have the face tumid, will be found to have headache^



PRORKHETICS. 267

or pains about the viscera^ or some disease in the anus ; and
in most cases^ not one^ but many^ or all these evils make their
appearance.

Nyctalopia is most apt to attack young persons^ either males
or females^ and to pass off spontaneously on the fortieth day
or in seven months^ and in some cases it endures for a whole
year. Its duration may be estimated from the strength of the
disease and the age of the patient. They are relieved by
deposits which determine downwards^ but these rarely occur in
youth. Married women and virgins that have the menstrual
discharge regular are not subject to the complaint. Persons
having protracted defluxions of tears who are attacked with
nyctalopia, are to be questioned whether they had any previous
complaint in the head.

Such persons as have frequent pains in the vertex and
temples, without fever or loss of colour, unless they have some
other obvious deposit in the face, or speak in a rough tone, or
have pain in the teeth, may be expected to have a hemorrhage
from the nose. Those who have bleeding at the nose, although
they may appear to be otherwise in good health, will be found
to have enlarged spleen, or pain in the head, or flashes of
light before their eyes. Most of these patients have both
headache and affection of the spleen.

The gums are diseased and the mouth fetid in persons who
have enlarged spleens. But persons who, although they have
enlarged spleens are exempt from hemorrhages and fsetor of the
mouth, have malignant ulcers on the legs and black cicatrices.
But if they have any obvious deposit in the countenance, or if
their speech be rough, or if they have toothache, a hemorrhage
from the nose may be expected. Those who have great
swellings below the eyes will be found to have enlarged spleens.
And if there come on swellings in the feet, and if they appear
to be dropsical, the belly and loins must be attended to.

Distortions of the countenance, if not sympathetic with
some other part of the body, quickly pass off either spon-
taneously or by remedial means. The others are of an apo-
plectic nature. In other cases, when the diseased part wastes
from want of motion, there can be no relief afforded. But
when wasting does not take place there may be recovery.
With regard to the time when this may occur, it is to be



268 APPENDIX.

prognosticated by attending to the severity of the disease^ to
its duration^ to the age of the patient^ and to the season^ it
being known that of all cases the inveterate^ and such as are
the consequences of repeated attacks^ are the worst, and the
most difficult to remove, and those in aged persons. Autumn
and winter are more unfavorable seasons for sach complaints
than spring and summer.

Pains in the shoulder, which, passing down the arms, oc-
casion torpor and pains, do not usually terminate in deposits^
but the patients get better by vomiting black bile. But when
the pains remain in the shoulders, or extend to the back, the
patients are relieved by vomiting pus or black bile. They are
to be judged of thus : — If their breathing be free, and if they
be slender, it is rather to be expected that they will vomit
black bile. But if they have more difficulty of breathing, and
if there is any unusual colour on the countenance, whether
reddish or black, it is to be expected that they will rather spit
blood. It should also be attended to whether there be swellings
on the feet. This disease attacks men most violently from
forty to sixty years of age. At this period of life ischiatic
diseases are most troublesome.

Ischiatic diseases are to be thus judged of : — In the case of
old persons, when the torpor and coldness of the loins and legs
are very strong, and when they lose the power of erections,
and the bowels are not moved, or with difficulty, and the faeces
are passed with much mucus, the disease will be very protracted,
and it should be announced beforehand that the disease will
not last shorter time than a year from its commencement ; and
amendment is to be looked for in spring and summer. Ischiatic
diseases are no less painful in young men, but are of shorter
duration, for they pass oflF in forty days ; and neither is the
torpor great, nor is there coldness of the legs and loins. In
those cases in which the disease is seated in the loins and leg,
but the patient does not suflfer so much as to be confined to
bed, examine whether any concretions have taken place in the
hip-joint, and make inquiry whether the pain extends to the
groin ; for if both these symptoms be present, the disease will
be of long duration. And the physician should also inquire
whether there be torpor in the thigh, and if it extend to the
ham ; and if he says so, he is to be again asked if it spreads



PRORRHBTICS. 269

along the leg to the ankle of the foot. Those who confess to
the most of these symptoms are to be told that the limb will
be sometimes hot and sometimes cold ; but those persons in
whom the pain leaves the loins^ and is turned downwards^ are
to be encouraged ; but when the disease does not leave the hip
and loins^ such persons are to be warned that it is to be dreaded.
In those cases in which there are pains and swellings about
the joints, and they do not pass off, after the manner of gout,
you will find the bowels enlarged, and a white sediment in the
urine ; and, if you inquire, the patient will admit that the
temples are often pained, and he will say that he has nightly
sweats. If the urine have not this sediment, nor do the
sweats take place, there is danger either that the joint will be-
come lame^ or that the tumour called meliceris will form in it.
This disease forms in those person who in their youth had
epistaxis, and in whom it had ceased afterwards. They are
to be interrogated whether they had discharges of blood in
their youth, and if they have pruritus in the breast and back.
And the same thing happens to those who have severe pains in
the bowels, without disorder of them, or who have hemorrhoids.
This is the origin of these complaints. But if the patients
have a bad colour, they are to be interrogated whether their
head be pained, for they will say that it is. In those cases
in which the bowels are pained on the right side, the pains are
stronger, and especially when the pain terminates in the hypo-
chondrium at the liver. Such pains are immediately relieved
if borborygmi take place in the belly. But when the pain
ceases, they pass thick and green urine. The disease is not
deadly, but very protracted. But when the disease is already
of long standing, the patients have dimness of sight in conse-
quence of it. But they are to be interrogated whether, when
young, they had a flow of blood, and regarding the dimness of
vision, the greenness of the urinary discharge, and regarding
the borborygmi, if they took place and gave relief; for they will
confess to all these symptoms.

Lichen, leprosy, and leuce, when they occur in young children
and infants, or when they appear at first small, and gradually
increase in the course of a long time — in these cases the erup-
tion is not to be regarded as a deposit, but as a disease ; but
when they set in rank and suddenly, this case is a deposit.



270 APPENDIX.

Leuce also arises from the most fatal diseases^ such as the
disease called phthisis ;^ but leprosy and lichen are connected
with black bile. These complaints are the more easily cured
the more recent they are, and the younger the patients, and
the more soft and fleshy the parts of the body in which they
occur.

' Foes inclines to think that the proper reading in this place is voifvoQ ^ivikiti,
and not 0div£ici), and that Galen alludes to this passage in his Exegesis under the
former of these terms, where he says that by (poiviKiri vovctoq was probably meant
elephantiasis. The other reading, however, would seem quite applicable, for I have
known phthisis and leprosy combined in the same case.



ON REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.



W •"- 17


^»



ON REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.



THE ARGUMENT.

In this treatise two very important questions are discussed :
first, a nosological question^ regarding the proper distinction
of diseases from one another; and secondly, a therapeutical^
respecting the rules by which the regimen in acute diseases
ought to be regulated. The former of these is of a polemical
nature, being an attack directed against the physicians of the
Cnidian school of medicine, who distinguished diseases from
one another in an arbitrary manner, from incidental varieties
in their constitution, and without a proper attention to their
true constitution and identity. As will be seen in the anno-
tations, the Cnidians pretended to recognise several varieties of
disease connected with bile, — several fancifril divisions of diseases
of the bladder, and so forth ; to which mode of distinguishing
diseases there would obviously be no end, since of incidental va<
r^eties in any case there can be no limit. The other question dis-
cussed in this treatise relates to what may justly be pronounced
to be one of the most important points connected with the prac-
tice of medicine, namely, the proper regimen in acute diseases ;
that is to say, in idiopathic fevers and febrile diseases, comprising
most of those diseases now classed under the head of Zymotic,
and which constitute by far the highest item in our bills of
mortality at the present day. Our author distinguishes them
by the names of pleurisy, pneumonia, phrenitis, lethargy,
causus, and their cognate diseases, including fever of the con-
tinual type. Now it is to be borne in mind, that the phrenitis,^
lethargy, and causus of Hippocrates, were all epidemic fevers,
so that, with the exception of pleurisy and pneumonia, all the

* The phrenitia of Sydenham in like manner was an epidemical fever, and not an
idiopathic inflammation of the brain. See Opera, p. 56 ; ed. Syd. Soc. That Hip-
pocrates regarded phrenitis as a variety of causus, attended with determination to
the brain, is obvious from Epidem. i. See Op. Galen., torn, v, p. 371 ; ed. Basil.

18



274 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

diseases here treated of are fevers of the country in which
Hippocrates resided. One, then, cannot well imagine a ques-
tion which from the commencement of the medical Art must
have heen felt of higlicr importance than this, — how so numerous
and formidable a class of diseases ought to be treated. In the
attempt to solve it, every imaginable mode of treatment, as
might have been expected beforehand, was tried, and its effects
determined by experience. Herodicus, the master of Hippocrates
in gymnastics, applied his panacea in the treatment of febrile
diseases, and, as we are informed, with the most disastrous
results. " Herodicus,^' says the author of the sixth Book of
Epidemics, '' killed persons in fever by promenading, much
wrestling, and fomentations.'' (§ iii, 18.) It may now appear
wonderful that so extraordinary a mode of practice should have
ever been attempted in this case ; but while men of all ranks
continue to resort for the cure of all sorts of diseases to any
individual who has got a single hobby with which he constantly
works to his own profit, whether it be gymnastics, or shampooing,
or the tvet sheet, we may expect to hear that such rash experi-
ments have been repeated. Truly mankind pay as dearly for
their tame submission to the insane practices of professional
chiefs, as the Greeks are represented by the poet to have suf-
fered from the follies of their princes :

" Qnicquid delirant Reges, plectnntar AchiyL" '

And surely it is much to be desired that men would learn a
lesson from the Past, and not allow every new page in the
history of society and of the profession to furnish a repetition
of the oft-told tale of supine credulity on the one side, and of
audacious folly on the other. From what has been stated, it
will readily be understood that it was soon settled that active
exercise is inadmissible in febrile diseases.* It would next come
to be determined, what rule was to be followed with regard to

* Horace, Serm. i, 2.

' One mode of exercise, namely, gestation, it to be excepted, ^hich had at least
one distinguished advocate in ancient times. Celsus writing of it says, ** Asclepiades
etiam in recenti vchementique, praecipueque ardente febre, ad discutiendam earn,
gestatione dixit utendum : sed id pericolose fit ; melinsque quiete ejusmodi impetus
sustinetur." (ii, 15.) A great modem authority on fever. Dr. R. Jackson, speaks
favoiably of this practice, although, as we see, it is so pointedly condemned by
Celsus. Celsus, however, admits of gestation in that species of remittent fever which
was called lethargus. (iii, 20.)



ARGUMENT. 275

the administration of food in fevers. On this pointy as will be
seen below in our annotations^ the most diametrically opposite
plans of treatment were essayed. One authority administered
the most highly nutritious articles of food, namely, fleshes, to
his patients, while, on the other hand, some wasted them by
enforcing a total abstinence for several days. Experience, we
may be well assured, was not long in deciding against both the
starving and the glutting system : the palled appetite would
soon refuse to accept of solids, and the parched tongue would
speedily crave some allowance of liquids. Even before the days
of Hippocrates, there is every reason to suppose that these ex-
treme modes of treatment had been abandoned ; but still he
complains that in his time many important points in the treat-
ment of acute diseases were wholly undetermined, such as the
following : whether plain drink, that is to say water, was to be
administered ; — or, water seasoned by the admixture of some-
thing farinaceous, such as the decoction of barley ; — whether
the same should be given so thick as to constitute a nutritious
gruel, or strained so as to form merely a drink ; — whether wine
should be given in small quantity, or more copiously ; — whether
any of these things should be given from the commencement
of the disease, or not until after an interval of certain days.
Hippocrates informs us that the most discordant opinions pre-
vailed upon these points, and his professed object, in this
treatise, is to reduce the rules of practice to certain fixed prin-
ciples. How our author performs this task, the reader is left
to judge for himself; it may be interesting, however, to know,
that Galen with all his devoted admiration of Hippocrates, is
not disposed to admit that his solution of the question at issue
is quite lucid and satisfactory. This opinion Galen pronounces
on two separate occasions ; in his commentary on this treatise,
and in his great Work ' On the Tenets of Hippocrates and
Plato.' As I look upon his observations contained in the latter
Work to be of great importance towards understanding the bear-
ing of this treatise, I shall not scruple to introduce a translation
of the greater part of them in this place.

The ninth book of the Work we have mentioned opens with
an elaborate disquisition on the logical principles which ought
to guide us in deciding with regard to identity and difference,
both in Philosopliy and Medicine: on the former of these



276 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

subjects he quotes freely from Plato, and on the other from
Hippocrates. Coming, then, to the question in hand, he
says : — "And thus Hippocrates proceeded in the work ' On
the Regimen of Acute Diseases,^ finding fault with the Cnidian
physicians, as being ignorant of the differences of diseases with
regard to genus and species; and he himself points out the
definitions according to which that which appears to be one,
being divided becomes many, not only in the case of diseases,
but also in that of all other things ; in which we find that many
of the most celebrated physicians fall into mistakes, even with
regard to the remedies. For some, coming to the particular
use of them, have established a most immethodical method of
instruction ; whilst others, stating a very general precept, lay
down a rule which at first sight appears very methodical, but
in truth is very bad, and hence they disagree among themselves ;
s6me, as for example those treating of the remedy for a certain
affection, such as pleurisy, declaring it to be venesection, others
purging, some fomentations by means of sponges, and others of
bags, or something of the like kind. And they differ, in the
same manner, with regard to the use and disuse of the bath, of
oxymel, of hydromel, and of water, of wine, and of ptisan, either
giving of the strained juice only, or of the barley portion only;
and some, with regard to food, giving discordant decisions as
to the differences of the sick, and the indications which a pleu-
ritic affection requires. And that he, as being the first dis-
coverer, has handled these subjects in rather a confused manner,
I have shown in my Commentary on the treatise which has
been improperly entitled, ^Against the Cnidian Sentences,'
and ' On the Ptisan.' But in order that those who are desirous
of learning, may have a clear exposition of this question in a
brief form, I shall not scruple to give here a summary of it.
In the commencement of pleuritic attacks, when the side is just
beginning to be pained, inasmuch as the nature of the disease
is not yet obvious, he directs fomentations, otherwise called
heating applications, to be tried, and he explains the materials
of which they consist. And then, if the complaint is not re-
moved, it is to be ascertained whether the patient took food
recently, and whether the bowels have been moved, and he
gives instructions what should be done in these cases. But if
the disease does not yield to these means, he gives definitions



ARGUMENT. 277

of those cases which require venesectioa and purging^ and those
in which one should use hydromel for drink^ or oxymel, or water
until the crisis^ without giving any food ; and those in which
the juice of ptisan is to be used^ or the barley along with it,
and when food is to be administered. In like manner, with
regard to the administration of wine, it is determined in what
cases it is to be given, and in what not, and when, and of what
quality. And in like manner respecting baths, and other
matters of the like kind. And as a twofold mistake is com-
mitted with regard to the divisions (of diseases), some doing it
in a deficient manner, and others carrying this process to excess,
Hippocrates, finding fault with both, expresses himself thus, in
the beginning of the book : ^ Some of them, indeed, were not
ignorant of the many varieties of each complaint, and their
manifold division, but when they wish to tell clearly the members
(species ?) of each disease, they do not write correctly ; for the
species would be almost innumerable if every symptom expe-
rienced by the patients were held to constitute a disease, and
receive a different name.' And again, respecting the remedies,
as being deficient, he writes thus : * And not only do I not
give them credit on this account, but also because those they
use are few in number.' Afterwards, assuming what is of great
importance to the question, he does not give a clear solution of
it, and therefore the whole bearing of the question is mis-
understood by many physicians. I have, therefore, given an
exposition of the whole subject, in my first Commentary ' On
the Regimen of Acute Diseases / and it is necessary to show
the import of it briefly. The question is given by Hippocrates
in the following terms: 'But it appears to me that those
things are more especially deserving of being consigned to
writing, which are undetermined by physicians, notwithstanding
that they are of vital importance, and either do much good or
much harm. By undetermined, I mean such as these : where-
fore certain physicians, during their whole lives, are constantly
administering unstrained ptisans, and fancy they thus accom-
plish the cure properly, whereas others take great pains that
the patient may not swallow a particle of the barley (thinking
it would do much harm), but strain the juice through a cloth
before giving it : others, again, will neither give thick ptisan
nor the juice, some until the seventh day of the disease, and



278 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

some until after the crisis. Physicians are not in the practice
of mooting such questions, nor perhaps, if mooted, would a so-
lution of them be readily found, although the whole Art is
thereby exposed to much censure from the vulgar, who fancy
that really there is no such science as Medicine, since, in acute
diseases^ practitioners differ so much among themselves, that
those things which one administers, as thinking it the best
that can be given, another holds to be bad/ And a little
afterwards : ' I say, then, that this question is a most excellent
one, and allied to very many others, and some of the most vital
importance in the Art : for, that it can contribute, much to the
recovery of the sick, and to the preservation of health in the
case of those who use it well, and that it promotes the strength
of those who take gymnastic exercises, and is useful to whatever
one may wish to apply it/ The inquiry regarding the differences
of opinion among practitioners, he says, is of the greatest con-
sequence, not only to the sick, for the recovery of health, but
also to those in health, for the preservation of it, and to those
who practise it for the recovery and preservation of deportment.
And he afterwards adds, ' to whatever one may wish ;' as indi-
cating that the solution of this inquiry is applicable not only to
medicine but to all the other arts to which one may choose to
apply it. For it is wonderful that physicians practising an art, in
which the remedies applied may be determined by experience
whether they are beneficial or hurtful, should yet make the most
conflicting statements respecting those things which are beneficial
and those which are prejudicial. For, in philosophy, it is not to be
wondered at that there should be no end to most disputes, since
these things cannot be clearly determined by experience ; and
therefore some hold that the world is uncreated, some that it was
created, some that there is nothing beyond its boundary, some
that there is, and some declaring what that which is contained is,
and some pronouncing it to be a vacuum, having no substance
in it, and some holding that worlds in inconceivable numbers^
and infinite, exist. For such discrepancy of opinion cannot be
set at rest by any clear appeal to the senses. But it is not so with
respect to the benefit or injury derived from remedies adminis-
tered to the body, since the differences among physicians, in this
case, may be decided by experience, as to which of them are
beneficial and which injurious. Wherefore the solution of this



ARGUMENT. 279

question is not very clearly stated by Hippocrates, and on that
account it has excited the observation of almost all tlie commen-
tators on this book. It is this : some of the sick require absti-
nence from food, until the disease come to a crisis, and some re-
quire food, and of these some require the unstrained ptisan, and
some the strained, as also some require still more substautialfood,
and, moreover, some require oxymel, or hydromel, and some
water, or wine. Wherefore to those physicians who have culti-
vated the Art upon experience alone, that only appears beneficial
which perchance has seemed useful in most cases. Neither do
they venture to try the opposite mode of regimen, for fear of
failure. He alone, then, who knows the constitution of the
sick, and the nature of the disease, and the powers of the remedy
which is administered, and the time in which it ought to be used,
will be able rationally to devise the remedy to be applied, and
confirm his expectation of it by experience/'

Galen gives other remarks, not devoid of interest, on the same
subject, but these want of room obliges me to pass by. I may
mention, however, that after giving, in the form of extract, the
passage on wine (§ 12), he makes the remark, that if the question
be put whether wine should be given to persons in fever, the
proper answer to it would be, that it is to be given in some cer-
tain cases, and in others not. (See torn, v, p. 773, ed. Kiihn.)
Thus far Galen.

Before quitting this subject, I would beg leave to make a
few remarks on some points of medical practice which are here
treated of, and which appear to me to be either overlooked, or
not satisfactorily determined at the present day ; and also upon
some modern innovations on the practice of the ancients. As
far as I have observed, it is quite a common practice now to
administer food, such as farinaceous gruels, or animal broths,
without much reserve, after evacuation of the system either by
purging or bleeding. Now it will be seen that Hippocrates
forbids food to be administered at such a season, as the body,
being weakened by the depletion, is unable to digest it properly,
and consequently what is given as a support to the frame proves
a load to it. To the reason here assigned for this practice,
might be added that the vascular system, having been emptied,
greedily absorbs the food before it is properly digested. I am
not sure that this physiological principle is stated in any of the
works of Hippocrates, but it is frequently to be met with in the



280 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

works of Galen, and in those of the toxicologists, from Nicander
to Actuarius. SccPaulus ^gineta, Book V. 2, Syd. Soc. edit.

I would beg leave to call the attention of my professional
readers to the guarded and judicious manner in which pleurisy
is treated by our author, beginning with hot fomentations to
the side, and gradually advancing to the more active means,
namely, purging and venesection. It will be remarked that
Hippocrates holds depletion to be the only legitimate mode of
removing the pain of the side, and that his commentator, in
illustration of his meaning, pointedly condemns the use of
narcotics in this case. Now this is a most important consi-
deration, as bearing on a mode of practice which has obtained
much favour of late years ; I allude, of course, to the treatment
by a combination of mercurials and opium. The experience of
some thirty years would seem to decide in its favour, but how
often have certain methods of treatment in other cases obtained
the sanction of professional favour for a much longer period,
and yet in the end been abandoned as positively prejudicial ?
In my younger days I knew old practitioners, of the highest
reputation, who administered these medicines in scrofula, — ^in
cancer, — in every case ! One cannot think of the change in
professional opinions on the mercurial treatment of syphilis^
since the days of John Hunter, without the most painful feeling
of distrust in all modes of treatment where one cannot recognise
some reasonable bond of connexion between the remedy ap*
plied and the effects produced, or where long experience and
analogy are in favour of them, and where the judgment runs
no risk of being imposed upon by fallacious appearances and
collateral circumstances. In a word, who docs not feel disposed^
in the practice of medicine, constantly to recur to the great
truth proclaimed by our author in his first Aphorism? '' Expe-
rience is fallacious, and judgment is difficult.^'

I am almost afraid further to put the question to the pro-
fession of the present day, whether or not the administration
of antimonials in pleuro-pneumonia be an improvement on the
ancient practice, or the reverse ? Shall we say, then, that ex-
perience has decided that this substance (antimony), which,
when applied to the cuticle, or to its prolongation, the epithe-
lium of the stomach and bowels, occasions pain, heat, and vas-
cular congestion, produces the very opposite effects on the lungs,
when absorbed into the blood and conveyed to them ? I dare



ARGUMENT. 281

not venture to answer these questions myself^ but suggest them
as deserving to be reconsidered^ with serious impartiality^ by
the profession. I trusty however^ it will not be supposed that
I incline to stand up for ancient modes of practice^ because
they are old, or to condemn modem methods because they are
new ; I merely state the reflections which the comparison of
ancient and modern usages, on this important subject, has
suggested to me.

Our author, it will be seen, attaches much importance to
the administration of the ptisan, or decoction of barley, in
pleuro-pnenmonia. Our modern Hippocrates, I mean, of course,
Sydenham, was equally partial to this practice,^ which is still
very much followed on the continent.

It will be remarked, that Hippocrates says nothing of
counter-irritants to the skin, in the treatment of pleurisy, all
his external applications being of the soothing kind. The
stimulant treatment, however, is not altogether modern, having
been recommended in certain cases by the Arabians. (See
Paulus ^GiNETA, Yol. I, p. 501.) Cclsus also approves of
sinapisms to the side, (iv, 6.)

The use of the bath and of the douche, or affusion of hot
water in febrile diseases, is an important question, which well
deserves to be reconsidered by the profession. (See the anno-
tations on § 18.)

The reader will no doubt have been struck with the remark
of Galen, in the extract given above, that our author's plan in
the present work is deficient in method, because he himself
was the discoverer of the subject-matters to which it relates.
Galen then seems to have been of opinion that it was too much
to expect from any individual, that he should produce a work
which would be remarkable at the same time for the originality
of its materials, and for the methodical arrangement of them.
In confirmation of Galen's judgment in this case, I would
direct attention to the difference that there is between this
treatise and the 'Prognostics;' for all must admit that the
matters of which the latter work is composed are admirably
methodised, and we have shown above that they were derived
in a great measure from the previous labours of the Asclepiadae.

* Observ. Med., vi, 3, 4.



282



ON REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

Those who composed what are called ' The Cnidian Seu-
tciices'^ have described accurately what symptoms the sick
experience in every disease, and how certain of them terminate ;
and in so far a man, even who is not a physician, might
describe them correctly, provided he put the proper inquiries
to the sick themselves what their complaints are. But those
symptoms which the physician ought to know beforehand,
without being informed of them by the patient, are, for the
most part, omitted, some in one case and some in others, and
certain symptoms of vital importance for a conjectural judg-
ment." But when, in addition to the diagnosis, they describe
how each complaint should be treated, in these cases I enter-
tain a still greater diflFerence of opinion with them respecting
the rules they have laid down ; and not only do I not agree
with them on this account, but also because the remedies they
use are few in number ; for, with the exception of acute
diseases, the only medicines which they give are drastic purga-
tives, with whey, and milk at certain times. If, indeed, these
remedies had been good and suitable to the complaints in
which they are recommended, they would have been still more
deserving of recommendation, if, while few in number, they

* The Cnidian Sentences in all probability were the results of the observations
and theories made in the Temple of Health at Cnidos. We may reasonably conclude
from what we know of them, that, like the Coacs Pncnotiones at Cos, the Cnidian
Sentences at Cnidos were looked up to in the time of Hippocrates as the great guides
to medical practice. How much, then, it is to be regretted that they have not
come down to us like the other ! It is clear, however, from Galen's Commentary,
that the work was extant in his time, and from it, as will be seen, we are enabled to
draw a few particulars respecting the theoretical and practical views of the Cnidians.
Le Clerc considers it likely that Euryphon was the author of the Cnidian Sentences
(Hist. Phys., i, 3, 30) ; but it is evident, from the terms in which Hippocrates refers
to them, that they were not the work of a single author. He makes mention, it will
be remarked, of more than one person being concerned in remodelling them.

' By this our author means that the Cnidians neglected Prorrhetics and Pro-
gnostics. This must be obvious to every person who has entered properly into the
spirit of tlic Hippocratic system of medicine.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 283

were sufficient; but this is by no means the case. Those^
indeed, who have remodelled these ' Sentences' have treated
of the remedies applicable in each complaint more in a medical
fashion. But neither have the ancients written anything worth
mentioning respecting regimen, although this be a great omis-
sion. Some of them, indeed, were not ignorant of the many
varieties of each complaint, and their manifold divisions, but
when they wish to tell clearly the numbers (species ?) of each
disease they do not write correctly ;^ for their species would be
almost innumerable if every symptom experienced by the
patients were held to constitute a disease, and receive a differ-
ent name.^

2. For my part, I approve of paying attention to everything
relating to the art, and that those things which can be done
well or properly should all be done properly ; such as can be
quickly done should be done quickly ; such as can be neatly
done should be done neatly ; such operations as can be per-
formed without pain should be done with the least possible
pain; and that all other things of the like kind should be done
better than they could be managed by the attendants. But I
would more especially commend the physician who, in acute
diseases, by which the bulk of mankind are cut off, conducts
the treatment better than others. Acute diseases are those
which the ancients named pleurisy, pneumonia, phrenitis,
lethargy, causus, and the other diseases allied to these, includ-
ing the continual fevers. For, unless when some general form
of pestilential disease is epidemic, and diseases are sporadic and
[not] of a similar character, there are more deaths from these

' The text of this sentence is in a very unsatisfactory state, and much difference
of opinion has prevailed respecting the meaning. See the annotations of Littr^, and
the remarks of Galen, as quoted in the Argument.

' Galen, in his Commentary, mentions that the Cnidians described seven species
of diseased bile, and twelve diseases of the bladder ; and, again, four diseases of the
kidneys ; and, moreover, four species of strangury, four species of tetanus, and four
of jaundice ; and, again, three species of phthisis. Galen, having made this state-
ment, remarks that they looked to the peculiarities of the body, instead of regarding
the identity of the diatheses, as was done by Hippocrates. In other words, they
split diseases into endless varieties, instead of attending to the essence or general
nature of each. The system of Hippocrates, then, was founded on a rational
prognosis, whereas that of the Cnidians was founded on mistaken principles of
diagnosis. The principles of the Ilippocratic system are admirably explained and
developed in Galen's great work On the Method of Cure, or Therapeutics.



284 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

diseases than from all the others taken together.^ The vulgar,
indeed, do not recognise the diflFerence between such physicians
and their common attendants, and are rather disposed to com-
mend and censure extraordinary remedies. This, then, is a
great proof that the common people are most incompetent, of
themselves, to form a judgment how such diseases should be
treated : since persons who are not physicians pass for physi-
cians owing most especially to these diseases, for it is an easy
matter to learn the names of those things which are applicable
to persons labouring under such complaints. For, if one names
the juice of ptisan, and^uch and such a wine, and hydromel,
the vulgar fancy that he prescribes exactly the same things as the
physicians do, both the good and the bad, but in these matters
there is a great diflFerence between them.

3. But it appears to me that those things are more especially
deserving of being consigned to writing which are undetermined
by physicians, notwithstanding that they are of vital impor-
tance, and either do much good or much harm. By undeter-
mined I mccin such as these, wherefore certain physicians,
during their whole lives, are constantly administering unstrained
ptisans, and fancy they thus accomplish the cure properly,
whereas others take great pains that the patient should not
swallow a particle of the barley (thinking it would do much
harm), l)ut strain the juice through a cloth before giving it;
others, again, will neither give thick ptisan nor the juice, some
until the seventh day of the disease, and some until after the
crisis.^ Physicians are not in the practice of mooting such
questions ; nor, perhaps, if mooted, would a solution of them

* Galen, in his Commentary on this passage, states that when a disease of a mild
character prcTaUed generally, it was called an epidemic ; and when of a malignant
nature, it was called the plague. (Sec further Paulus >Eoineta, Book II, 36, Syd.
Soc. edition.) It will be remarked that I have included the word {not) in brackets.
This I have done because not only the reading, as given in the common editions of
Galen, is in its favour, but because the sense appears to me to require it. Surely
when diseases are of an epidemic character they are similar; but when they are
sporadic, they are not similar. M. Littre, how^ever, rejects it altogether.

* The question here mooted is certainly one of the most important that can well
be entertained, namely, whether or not a certain portion of nutriment ought to be
given to persons labouring under fever. It would appear, from what is stated by
Galen upon the authority of Erasistratus, that the most diametrically opposite modes
of practice bad been followed by different individuals — that some had starved their



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 285

be found ; although the whole art is thereby exposed to much
censure from the vulgar^ who fancy that there really is no such
science as medicine^ since^ in acute diseases^ practitioners differ
so much among themselves^ that those things which one
administers as thinking it the best that can be given^ another
holds to be bad ; and, in this respect, they might say that the
art of medicine resembles augury, since augurs hold that the
same bird (omen) if seen on the left hand is good, but if on
the right bad : and in divination by the inspection of entrails
you will find similar differences ; but certain diviners hold the
very opposite of these opinions.^ I say, then, that this question is
a most excellent one, and allied to very many others, some of
the most vital importance in the Art, for that it can contribute
much to the recovery of the sick, and to the preservation of
health in the case of those who are well ; and that it promotes
the strength of those who use gymnastic exercises, and is useful
to whatever one may wish to apply it.

4. Ptisan, then, appears to me to be justly preferred before
all the other preparations from grain in these diseases, and I
commend those who made this choice,' for the mucilage of it

patients altogether for a considerable time ; whereas, on the other hand, a physician
of the name of Petronas allowed his patients flesh and wine. Our author, it will be
remarked, does not allude to these extreme modes of practice in this place, but enters
at great length into the question whether or not unstrained ptisan {or barley gruel)
should be administered in fevers, and, if so, under what circumstances.

* Galen, in his Commentary, has some very interesting remarks on the differences
of opinion among the diyiners. This, in fact, may well be supposed, since, as will
now be pretty generally acknowledged, the whole art was founded upon conjecture
and deception. The comparison of medicine to divination is therefore very discre-
ditable to the former.

* Our author now enters upon the consideration of one of his principal objects in
the present work, namely, to describe the modes of preparing ptisan {or the decoction
of barley), and its uses in acute diseases. He is so full on this subject that the pre-
sent treatise is quoted by Atheneus (Deipnos. ii, 16), by the name of the work On
the Ptisan. Galen states that, on the principle that diseases are to be cured by their
contraries, as the essence of a febrile disease is combined of heat and dryness, the
indication of cure is to use means of a cooling and moistening nature, and that the
ptisan fulfils both these objects. I may be allowed to remark in this place, that
probably there is not a more important rule in the whole practice of medicine than
this, that fevers are to be treated by things of a cooling and diluent nature. I may
mention further regarding the ptisan of the ancients, that it would appear to have
been very little different from the decoction of barley, as now in use ; that is to say.



286 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

is smooth^ consistent, pleasant, lubricant, moderately diluent,
quenches thirst if this be required, and has no astringency ;
gives no trouble nor swells up in the bowels, for in the boiling
it swells up as much as it naturally can. Those, then, who
make use of ptisan in such diseases, should never for a day
allow their vessels to be empty of it, if I may say so, but should
use it and not intermit, unless it be necessary to stop for a
time, in order to administer medicine or a clyster. And to
those who arc accustomed to take two meals in the day it is to
be given twice, and to those accustomed to live upon a single
meal it is to be given once at first, and then, if the case permit,
it is to be increased and given twice to them, if they appear to
stand in need of it. At first it will be proper not to give a
large quantity nor very thick, but in proportion to the quantity
of food which one has been accustomed to take, and so as that
the veins may not be much emptied. And, with regard to the
augmentation of the dose, if the disease be of a drier nature
than one had supposed,^ one must not give more of it, but
should give before the draught of ptisan, either hydromel or wine,
in as great quantity as may be proper ; and what is proper in
each case will be afterwards stated by us. But if the mouth
and the passages from the lungs be in a proper state as to
moisture, the quantity of the draught is to be increased, as a
general rule, for an early and abundant state of moisture indi-
cates an early crisis, but a late and deficient moisture indicates

it was prepared from pearl-barley roughly pounded and boiled for a time in watec
As will be seen by the text, it was given to the sick either strained or entire, accord-
ing to circumstances. A similar decoction was prepared from wheat, and was called
vTKTdvtj irvpivrj* See Galen (De 4-limcnt., i.) The simple term ptisan, however, is
always to be understood as applying to the decoction of barley.

' Galen gives the following illustration of what is meant by a disease of a pecu-
liarly dry nature. In pneumonia, pleurisy, and in all the affections about the lungs
and trachea, the disease is held to be of a dry nature when there is no expectoration
from the parts affected ; and in any complaints about the liver, the mesentery, the
stomach, the small or great intestines, or spleen, when the belly is either entirely
constipated, or when the discharges brought away by artificial means are dry and
scybalous ; and diseases of the arteries and veins are known to be dry by the dryness
of the tongue, and the parched appearance of the whole body. In the same manner
external ulcers are accounted dry when there is no discharge from them. And
ophthalmies are held to be dry when there is no discharge from the eyes or nose.
And, in short, all diseases are recognised as being dry which are not attended with
any discharge.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 287

a slower crisis.^ And these things are as I have stated for the
most part ; but many other things are omitted which are im-
portant to the prognosis^ as will be explained afterwards. And
the more that the patient is troubled with purging, in so much
greater quantity is it to be given until the crisis, and moreover
until two days beyond the crisis, in such cases as it appears to
take place on the fifth, seventh, or ninth day, so as to have
respect both for the odd and even day : after this the draught
is to be given early in the day, and the other food in place is to
be given in the evening. These things are proper, for che most
part, to be given to those who, from the first, have used ptisan
containing its whole substance; for the pains in pleuritic affec-
tions immediately cease of their own accord whenever the
patients begin to expectorate anything worth mentioning, and
the purgings become much better, and empyema much more
seldom takes place, than if the patients used a different regimen,
and the crises are more simple^ occur earlier, and the cases are
less subject to relapses.

5. Ptisans are to be made of the very best barley^ and are
to be well boiled, more especially if you do not intend to use
them strained. For^ besides the other virtues of ptisan, its lubri-
cant quality prevents the barley that is swallowed from proving
injurious, for it does not stick nor remains in the region of the
breast ; for that which is well boiled is very lubricant, excellent
for quenching thirst, of very easy digestion^ and very weak, all
which qualities are wanted. If, then, one do not pay proper
attention to the mode of administering the ptisan, much harm
may be done ; for when the food is shut up in the bowels,
unless one procure some evacuation speedily, before administer-
ing the draught, the pain, if present, will be exasperated ; and,
if not present, it will be immediately created, and the respira-
tion will become more frequent, which does mischief, for it dries
the lungs, fatigues the hypochondria, the hypogastrium, and
diaphragm. And moreover if, while the pain of the side persists,

* It is curions to remark that a double charge was founded against our author on
the ground of his treatment of febrile cases, as here laid down. The followers of
Thessalus held that he gorged his patients with too much food, whereas Erasistratus
and his followers held that he starved them. Galen, on the other hand, contends
that the practice of Hippocrates is the jutte milieu between these two extremes.
(Opera, torn, v, p. 47 ; ed. Basil.)



288 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

and does not yield to warm fomentations^ and the sputa are
not brought up, but are viscid and uneoncocted, unless one
get the pain resolved, either by loosening the bowels, or opening
a vein, whichever of these may be proper ; — if to persons so cir-
cumstanced ptisan be administered, their speedy death will be
the result.^ For these reasons, and for others of a similar
kind still more, those who use unstrained ptisan die on the
seventh day, or still earlier, some being seized with delirium,
and others dying suffocated with orthopnosa and r&les.^ Such
persons the ancients thought struck, for this reason^ more espe-
cially, that when dead the affected side was livid, like that of a
person who had been stnick. The cause of this is that they
die before the pain is resolved, being seized with difficulty of
respiration, and by large and rapid breathing, as has been
already explained, the spittle becoming thick, acid, and uncon-
cocted, cannot be brought up, but, being retained in the bronchi
of the lungs, produces r&les ; and, when it has come to this,
death, for the most part, is inevitable; for the sputa being
retained prevent the breath from being drawn in, and force it
speedily out, and thus the two conspire together to aggravate
the mischief; for the sputa being retained renders the respira-
tion frequent, while the respiration being frequent thickens the
sputa, and prevents them from being evacuated. These
symptoms supervene, not only if ptisan be administered un-
seasonably, but still more if any other food or drink worse than
ptisan be given.

6. For the most part, then, the results are the same, whether
the patient have used the unstrained ptisan or have used the juice
alone; or even only drink; and sometimes it is necessary to

1 This sentence shows that Hippocrates understood thoroughly the proper treat-
ment of pleurisy. When the disease did not yield to fomentations, but the pain
continued, either a vein was opened or the bowels moved ; for without first using
these means, it was reckoned fatal practice to administer ptisan. Galen relates that
it was also considered an unsafe practice to give opium, mandragora, or hyoscyamus
for the purpose of alleviating the pain, instead of having recourse to venesection or
purging for the removal of it. This is a practical remark weD deserving of the most
serious consideration.

' How briefly, and yet how graphically, our author has described the termination
of pleurisy ! It is singular that no succeeding author has written so learnedly of
r&les in affections of the breast as Hippocrates, down at least to the time of Laennec,
who repeatedly acknowledges his obligations to our author.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 289

proceed quite differently. In general^ one should do thus :
if fever commences shortly after taking food^ and before the
bowels have been evacuated^ whether with or without pain, the
physician ought to withhold the draught until he thinks that
the food has descended to the lower part of the belly ; and if
any pain be present, the patient should use oxymel, hot if it is
winter, and cold if it is summer ; and, if there be much thirst,
he should take hydromel and water.^ Then, if any pain be
present^ or any dangerous symptoms make their appearance, it
will be proper to give the draught neither in large quantity
nor thick, but after the seventh day, if the patient be strong.
But if the earlier-taken food has not descended, in the case of
a person who has recently swallowed food, and if he be strong
and in the vigour of life, a clyster should be given, or if he be
weaker, a suppository is to be administered, unless the bowels
open properly of themselves. The time for administering the
draught is to be particularly observed at the commencement
and during the whole illness ; when, then, the feet are cold,
one should refrain from giving the ptisan, and more especially
abstain from drink ; but when the heat has descended to the feet,
one may then give it ; and one should look upon this season as of
great consequence in all diseases, and not least in acute diseases,
especially those of a febrile character, and those of a very dan-
gerous nature. One may first use the juice, and then the ptisan,
attending accurately to the rules formerly laid down.

7. When pain seizes the side, either at the commencement
or at a later stage, it will not be improper to try to dissolve the
pain by hot applications.^ Of hot applications the most powerful
is hot water in a bottle, or bladder, or in a brazen vessel, or in
an earthen one ; but one must first apply something soft to
the side, to prevent pain. A soft large sponge, squeezed out

1 I need scarcely remark that the seaaonahle administration of drink, and especially
of water, is one of the most important points connected with the treatment of febrile
diseases. This is so much the case that, as Galen remarks in his Commentary on this
passage, fevers may often be extinguished at once by a large quantity of water given
in due season. This subject is fully treated of by him in his Methodus Medendi.

' The professional reader will not fail to remark, what is pointed out in strong lan-
guage by Galen, how judiciously our author commences with the most gentle means,
and gradually rises to the most powerful and dangerous ; namely, bleeding and the
administration of drastic pui|;atives. One cannot help being further struck with the
rich supply of informAtion which he has on the simple subject of fomentations.

19



290 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

of hot water and applied^ forms a good application ; but it
should be covered up above^ for thus the heat will remain the
longer^ and at the same time the vapour will be prevented from
being carried up to the patient^s breathy unless when this is
thought of use, for sometimes it is the case. And further,
barley or tares may be infused and boiled in diluted vinegar,
stronger than that it could be drunk, and may then be sewed
into bladders and applied; and one may use bran in like manner.
Salts or toasted millet in woollen bags are excellent for forming
a dry fomentation, for the millet is light and soothing. A soft
fomentation like this soothes pains, even such as shoot to the cla-
vicle. Venesection, however, does not alleviate the pain unless
when it extends to the clavicle. But if the pain be not dis^
solved by the fomentations, one ought not to foment for a length
of time, for this dries the lungs and promotes suppuration;
but if the pain point to the clavicle, or if there be a heaviness
in the arm, or about the breast, or above the diaphragm, one
should open the inner vein at the elbow, and not hesitate to
abstract a large quantity, until it become much redder, or
instead of being pure red, it turns livid,^ for both these states
occur. But if the pain be below the diaphragm, and do not
point to the clavicle, we must open the belly either with black
hellebore^ or peplium,^ mixing the black hellebore with carrot
or seseli,^ or cumin, or anise, or any other of the fragrant
herbs ; and with the peplium the juice of sulphium^ (assafoetida),
for these substances, when' mixed up together, are of a similar
nature.^ The black hellebore acts more pleasantly and effectu-

1 By livid (ttcXi^v) is here meant the colour intermediate between red and black.
See Galen, h. 1.

' Probably the Hettebantg ni^er. See Paulus ^oinbta, Vol. Ill, p. 108.

^ The Euphorbia pephu. See Ibid., Vol III, p. 294.

* Probably the Se9eU torivotum. See Ibid., VoL III, p. 330 ; and Dierbach, Arm.
der Hipp. p. 186.

' A species of assafoetida, probably the Liuerpetium deriat, Paulub iEoiNiTA,
Vol. Ill, p. 339.

' It is worthy of remark, that onr author directs aromatics to be mixed with the
purgatives. The reason for prescribing them, as Galen states, was to counteract
the bad effects of the purgatives upon the stomach. The ancients, in my opinion,
acted much more wisely in this respect than the modems generally do, for the latter
are constantly administering the most nauseous cathartics to their patients without
taking any pains to obviate their bad effects upon the stomach. On the ancient
modes of administering purgatives, see Paulus iEotHCTA, B. VII, 4.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 291

ally than the peplium^ while^ on the other hand^ the peplium
expels wind much more effectually than the black hellebore^
and both these stop the pain, and many other of the laxatives
also stop it^ but these two are the most efficacious that I am
acquainted with. And the laxatives given in draughts are
beneficial^ when not very unpalatable owing to bitterness, or
any other disagreeable taste^ or from quantity, colour, or
any apprehension. When the patient has drunk the medi-
cine, one ought to give him to swallow but little less of
the ptisan than what he had been accustomed toj but it is
according to rule not to give any draughts while the medicine
is under operation j^ but when the purging is stopped then he
should take a smaller draught than what he had been accus-
tomed to, and afterwards go on increasing it progressively, until
the pain cease, provided nothing else contra-indicate. This is
my rule, also, if one would use the juice of ptisan, (for I hold
that it is better, on the whole, to begin with taking the decoc-
tion at once, rather than by first emptying the veins before
doing so, or oil the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh day,
provided the disease has not previously come to a crisis in the
course of this time), and similar preparations to those formerly
described are to be made in those cases.

8. Such are the opinions which I entertain respecting the
administering of the ptisan ; and, as regards drinks, whichsoever
of those about to be described may be administered, the same
directions are generally applicable. And here I know that
physicians are in the practice of doing the very reverse of what
is proper, for they all wish, at the commencement of diseases,
to starve their patients for two, three, or more days, and then
to administer the ptisans and drinks ; and perhaps it appears
to them reasonable that, as a great change has taken place in
the body, it should be counteracted by another great change.
IS^ow, indeed, to produce a change is no small matter, but the
change must be effected well and cautiously, and after the
change the administration of food must be conducted still more

* Galen, in hit Commentary, remarks that the common herd of physicians followed
the very opposite rule to that here laid down by Hippocrates, that is to say, they
administered food copiously after evacuations. According to Galen, the object of
Hippocrates in proscribing food of all descriptions at that season is, because the powers
of the system, being then weakened, are unable either to bear food or to digest it.



292 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

so. Those persons, then, would be most injured if the change
is not properly managed, who used unstrained ptisans; they
also would suffer who made use of the juice alone ; and so also
they would suffer who took merely drink, but these least of all.
9. One may derive information from the regimen of persons
in good health what things are proper ; for if it appear that
there is a great difference whether the diet be so and so, in
other respects, but more especially in the changes, how can it
be otherwise in diseases, and more especially in the most
acute ? But it is well ascertained that even a faulty diet of
food and drink steadily persevered in, is safer in the main as
regards health than if one suddenly change it to another.
Wherefore, in the case of persons who take two meals in the
day, or of those who take a single meal, sudden changes induce
suffering and weakness ; and thus persons who have not been
accustomed to dine, if they shall take dinner, immediately
become weak, have heaviness over their whole body, and become
feeble and languid, and if, in addition, they take supper, they
will have acid eructations, and some will have diarrhoea whose
bowels were previously dry, and not having been accustomed to
be twice swelled out with food and to digest it twice a day,
have been loaded beyond their wont. It is beneficial, in such
cases, to counterbalance this change, for one should sleep after
dinner, as if passing the night, and guard against cold in winter
and heat in summer ; or, if the person cannot sleep, he may
stroll about slowly, but without making stops, for a good while,
take no supper, or, at all events, eat little, and only things
that are not unwholesome, and still more avoid drink, and
especially water. Such a person will suffer still more if he
take three full meals in the day, and more still if he take more
meids ; and yet there are many persons who readily bear to
take three full meals in the day, provided they are so accus-
tomed. And, moreover, those who have been in the habit of
eating twice a day, if they omit dinner, become feeble and
powerless, averse to all work, and have heartburn ; their bowels
seem, as it were, to hang loose, their urine is hot and green^
and the excrement is parched ; in some the mouth is bitter^
the eyes are hollow, the temples throb, and the extremities are
cold, and the most of those who have thus missed their dinner
cannot eat supper ; or, if they do sup, they load their stomachy



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 293

and pass a much worse night than if they had previously
taken dinner. Since^ then^ an unwonted change of diet for
half a day produces such effects upon persons in health, it
appears not to be a good thing either to add or take from. If,
then, he who was restricted to a single meal, contrary to usage,
having his veins thus left empty during a whole day, when he
supped according to custom felt heavy, it is probable that if,
because he was uneasy and weak from the want of dinner, he
took a larger supper than wont, he would be still more
oppressed ; or if, wanting food for a still greater interval, he
suddenly took a meal after supper, he will feel still greater
oppression. He, then, who, contrary to usage, has had his
veins kept empty by want of food, will find it beneficial to
counteract the bad effects during that day as follows: let
him avoid cold, heat, and exertion, for he could bear all these
ill ; let him make his supper considerably less than usual, and
not of dry food, but rather liquid ; and let him take some drink,
not of a watery character, nor in smaller quantity than is pro-
portionate to the food, and on the next day he should take a
small dinner, so that, by degrees, he may return to his former
practice. Persons who are bilious in the stomach bear these
changes worst, while those who are pituitous, upon the whole,
bear the want of food best, so that theysuffer the least from being
restricted to one meal in the day, contrary to usage. This,
then, is a sufficient proof that the greatest changes as to those
things which regard our constitutions and habits are most espe-
cially concerned in the production of diseases, for it is impossible
to produce unseasonably a great emptying of the vessels by
abstinence, or to administer food while diseases are at their
acme, or when inflammation prevails; nor, on the whole, to make
a great change either one way or another with impunity.^
10. One might mention many things akin to these respecting
. the stomach and bowels, to show how people readily bear such
food as they are accustomed to, even if it is not naturally good^
and drink in like manner, and how they bear unpleasantly such
food as they are not accustomed to, even although not bad, and
so in like manner with drink ; and as to the effects of eating
much flesh, contrary to usage, or garlic, or assafoetida, or the
stem of the plant which produces it, or things of a similar kind

' See CelsQs, I, 3.



294 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

possessed of strong properties^ one wonld be less surprised if
such things produce pains in the bowels^ but rather when one
learned what trouble^ swellings flatulence, and tormina the cake
(maza) will raise in the belly when eaten by a person not
accustomed to it ; and how much weight and distension of the
bowels bread will create to a person accustomed to live upon
the maza ; and what thirst and sudden fulness will be occa-
sioned by eating hot bread, owing to its desiccant and indiges-
tible properties; and what diflFerent effects are produced by
fine and coarse bread when eaten contrary to usage, or by the
cake when unusually dry, moist, or viscid ; and what different
effects polenta produces upon those who are accustomed and
those who are unaccustomed to the use of it ; or drinking of
wine or drinking of water, when either custom is suddenly
exchanged for the other ; or when, contrary to usage, diluted
wine or undiluted has been suddenly drunk, for the one will
create water-brash in the upper part of the intestinal canal and
-flatulence in the lower, while the other will give rise to throb-
bing of the arteries, heaviness of the head, and thirst; and
white and dark- coloured wine, although both strong wines, if
exchanged contrary to usage, wUl produce very different effects
upon the body, so that the one need the less wonder that a
sweet and strong wine, if suddenly exchanged, should have by
no means the same effect.

11. Let us here briefly advert to what may be said on the
opposite side ; namely, that a change of diet has occurred in these
cases, without any change in their body, either as to strength,
so as to require an increase of food, or as to weakness, so as to
require a diminution. But th6 strength of the patient is to be
taken into consideration, and the manner of the disease, and of
the constitution of the man, and the habitual regimen of the pa-
tient, not only as regards food but also drink. Yet one must
much less resort to augmentation, since it is often beneficial to
have recourse to abstraction, when the patient can bear it, until
the disease having reached its acme and has become concocted.
But in what cases this must be done will be afterwards described.
One might write many other things akin to those which have
been now said, but there is a better proof, for it is not akin to
the matter on which my discourse has principally turned, but
the subject-matter itself is a most seasonable proof. For some



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 295

at the commencement of acute diseases have taken food on the
same d&j, some on the next day ; some have swallowed what-
ever has come in their way^ and some have taken cyceon}
Now all these things are worse than if one had observed a dif-
ferent regimen; and yet these mistakes, committed at that
time, do much less injury than if one were to abstain entirely
from food for the first two or three days, and on the fourth or
fifth day were to take such food ; and it would be still worse,
if one were to observe total abstinence for all these days, and
on the following days were to take such a diet, before the dis-
ease is concocted ;' for in this way death would be the conse-
quence to most people, unless the disease were of a very mild
nature. But the mistakes committed at first were not so irre-
mediable as these, but could be much more easily repaired.
This, therefore, I think a strong proof that such or such a
draught need not be proscribed on the first days to those who
will use the same draughts afterwards. At the bottom, there*
fore, they do not know, neither those using unstrained ptisans,
that they are hurt by them, when they begin to swallow them,
if they abstain entirely from food for two, three, or more days ;
nor do those using the juice know that they are injured in
swallowing them, when they do not commence with the draught
seasonably. But this they guard against, and know that it
does much mischief, if, before the disease be concocted, the
patient swallow unstrained ptisan, when accustomed to use
strained. All these things are strong proofs that physicians
do not conduct the regimen of patients properly, but that in
those diseases in which total abstinence from food should not
be enforced on patients that will be put on the use of ptisans,
they do enforce total abstinence ; that in those cases in which
there should be no change made from total abstinence to

' The eyewn was a mixture of Tarioas articles of food, but generally contained
cheese, honey, and wine. See Athenseos (Deipnos, ii). It is described by Homer as
the potion which Circe administered to the followers of Ulysses* (Odyss. x, 235.)
There is frequent mention of it in the Hippocrmtic treatises, as at De Dista, ii ; de
Muliebribns, ii ; and in the works of the other medical authors.

* The meaning here is somewhat obscure, but appears to be this : that if a patient
fast for the first two or three days, and take food of a heavy nature on the fourth or
fifth, he will be much injured ; but that the mistake will be still more fatal if the
fast be continued for the first four or five days, and if he then indulge freely in food
ai the end oJP these.



296 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

ptisans^ they do make the change ; and that, for the most part,
they change from abstinence to ptisans, exactly at the time
when it is often beneficial to proceed from ptisans almost to
total abstinence, if the disease happen to be in the state of
exacerbation.^ And sometimes crude matters are attracted
from the head, and bilious from the region near the chest, and
the patients are attacked with insomnolency, so that the dis-
ease is not concocted; they become sorrowful, peevish, and
delirious ; there are flashes of light in their eyes, and noises in
their ears ; their extremities are cold, their urine unconcocted ;
the sputa thin, saltish, tinged with an intense colour and smell;
sweats about the neck, and anxiety ; respiration, interrupted in
the expulsion of the air,^ frequent and very large ; expression
of the eyelids dreadful ; dangerous deliquia; tossing of the bed-
clothes from the breast ; the hands trembling, and sometimes
the lower lip agitated. These symptoms, appearing at the
commencement, are indicative of strong delirium, and patients
so affected generally die, or if they escape, it is with a deposit,
hemorrhage from the nose, or the expectoration of thick matter,
and not otherwise. Neither do I perceive that physicians are
skilled in such things as these ; how they ought to know such
diseases as are connected with debility, and which are further
weakened by abstinence from food, and those aggravated by
some other irritation ; those by pain, and from the acute nature
of the disease, and what affections and various forms thereof our
constitution and habit engender, although the knowledge or igno-
ranee of such things brings safety or death to the patient. For
it is a great mischief if to a patient debilitated by pain, and the
acute nature of the disease, one administer drink, or more ptisan,
or food, supposing that the debility proceeds from inanition.

1 There is considerable difficulty as to the text at this place. See Foes in his
Annotations and (Economica, and a veiy lengthy note by Littr^.

* The preternatural mode of respiration here described is several times adverted
to by Galen, as at De Dyspncea, iii ; Comment, in Aphor., iv, 68 ; and Comment, in h. I.
Galen seems to understand the meaning to be, that the breathing is intercepted in
the inspiration. I should have rather been disposed to think that it is the expiratioii
which is said to be interrupted. But I suppose we must bow to so great an anthority
as Galen 1 I may mention, by the way, that his Commentary on this and the col-
lateral passages of our author is most interesting ; but, as usual, too diffuse for my
narrow limits. It relates to a most important point in medical practice, on which
great ignorance and uncertainty prevail among us, even at the present day.



BB6IMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 297

It is also disgraceful not to recognise a patient whose debility
is connected with inanition^ and to pinch him in his diet ; this
mistake, indeed, is attended with some danger, but much less
than the other, and yet it is likely to expose one to much
greater derision, for if another physician, or a private person,
coming in and knowing what has happened, should give to eat
or drink those things which the other had forbidden, the benefit
thus done to the patient would be manifest. Such mistakes of
practitioners are particularly ridiculed by mankind, for the
physician or non-professional man thus coming in, seems as it
were to resuscitate the dead. On this subject I will describe
elsewhere the symptoms by which each of them may be re-
cognised.

12. And the following observations are similar to those now
made respecting the bowels. If the whole body rest long, con-
trary to usage, it does not immediately recover its strength ;
but if, after a protracted repose, it proceed to labour, it will
clearly expose its weakness. So it is with every one part of
the body, for the feet will make a similar display, and any other
of the joints, if, being unaccustomed to labour, they be sud-
denly brought into action, after a time. The teeth and the
eyes will suffer in like manner, ancf also every other part
whatever. A couch, also, that is either softer or harder than
one has been accustomed to will create uneasiness, and sleeping
in the open air, contrary to usage, hardens the body. But it
is sufScient merely to state examples of all these cases. If a
person having received a wound in the leg, neither very serious
nor very trifling, and he being neither in a condition very fa-
vorable to its healing nor the contrary, at first betakes himself
to bed, in order to promote the cure, and never raises his leg,
it will thus be much less disposed to inflammation, and be much
sooner well, than it would have been if he had strolled about
during the process of healing ; but if upon the fifth or sixth day,
or even earlier, he should get up and attempt to walk, he will
suffer much more then than if he had walked about from the
commencement of the cure, and if he should suddenly make
many laborious exertions, he will suffer much more than if,
when the treatment was conducted otherwise, he had made the
same exertions on the same days. In fine, all these things
concur in proving that ail great changes, either one way or



298 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

another^ are hurtful. Wherefore much mischief takes place in
the bowels^ if from a state of great inanition more food than is
moderate be administered (and also in the rest of the body, if
from a state of great rest it be hastily brought to greater exer-
tion, it will be much more injured), or if from the use of much
food it be changed to complete abstinence, and therefore the
body in such cases requires protracted repose, and if, from a
state of laborious exertion, the body suddenly falls into a state
of ease and indolence, in these cases also the bowels would re-
quire continued repose from abundance of food, for otherwise
it will induce pain and heaviness in the whole body.

13. The greater part of my discourse has related to changes,
this way or that. For all purposes it is profitable to know these
things, and more especially respecting the subject under con-
sideration, — ^that in acute diseases, in which a change is made
to ptisans from a state of inanition, it should be made as I
direct ; and then that ptisans should not be used until the dis-
ease be concocted, or some other symptom, whether of evacua-
tion or of irritation, appear in the intestines, or in the hypo-
chondria, such as will be described. Obstinate insomnolency
impairs the digestion of the food and drink, and in other re-
spects changes and relaxes the body, and occasions a heated
state, and heaviness of the head.^

14. One must determine by such marks as these, when
sweet, strong, and dark wine, hydromel, water, and oxymel,
should be given in acute diseases.^ Wherefore the sweet affects
the head less than the strong, attacks the brain less, evacuates
the bowels more than the other, but induces swelling of the
spleen and liver ; it does not agree with bilious persons, for it
causes them to thirst ; it creates flatulence in the upper part
of the intestinal canal, but does not disagree with the lower

' Galen finds the language in this last sentence so confused, that he does not
hesitate to declare that he is convinced the work must have been left by Hippocntea
in an unfinished state, and not published untU after his death. He decides that
i^Oortit signifies a heated state connected with humours, and not with dryness;
that is to say, a condition analogous to boiling, and not to roasting.

* Galen, in his elaborate Commentary on this section, complains that our author's
account of wines is imperfect, inasmuch as several varieties are omitted ; at the same
time it must be admitted that his observations on this head are veiy much to the
purpose, and highly judicious. For the other ancient authorities on this subject,
see Paulus ^oimbta, Book I, 95, Syd. Soc. edit.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 299

part^ as far as regards flatulence ; and yet flatulence engendered
by sweet wine is not of a transient natiure, but rest« for a long
time in the hypochondria. And therefore it in general is less
diuretic than wine which is strong and thin ; but sweet wine is
more expectorant than the other. But when it creates thirsty
it is less expectorant in such cases than the other wine^ but if
it do not create thirst, it promotes expectoration better than
the other. The good and bad effects of a white, strong wine,
have been already frequently and fully stated in the disquisition
on sweet wine ; it is determined to the bladder more than the
other, is diuretic and laxative, and should be very useful in such
complaints ; for if in other respects it be less suitable than the
other, the clearing out of the bladder eflected by it is beneficial
to the patient, if properly administered. There are excellent
examples of the beneficial and injurious effects of wine, all which
were left undetermined by my predecessors. In these diseases
you may use a yellow wine, and a dark austere wine for the
following purposes : if there be no heaviness of the head, nor
delirium, nor stoppage of the expectoration, nor retention of
the urine, and if the alvine discharges be more loose and like
scrapings than usual, in such cases a change from a white wine
to such as I have mentioned, might be very proper. It deserves
further to be known, that it will prove less injurious to all the
parts above, and to the bladder, if it be of a more watery nature,
but that the stronger it is, it will be the more beneficial to the
bowels.

15. Hydromel, when drunk in any stage of acute disease,
is less suitable to persons of a bilious temperament, and to
those who have enlarged viscera, than to those of a different
character ; it increases thirst less than sweet wine ; it softens
the lungs, is moderately expectorant, and alleviates a cough ;
for it has some detergent quality in it, whence it lubricates the
sputum.^ Hydromel is also moderately diuretic, unless pre-
vented by the state of any of the viscera. And it also occasions
bOious discharges downwards, sometimes of a proper character,
and sometimes more intense and frothy than is suitable ; but

> I need scarcely mention that hydromel was a drink prepared by boiling honey
in a large proportion of water. It was of different degrees of strength ; sometimes
there were only two parts of water to one of honey, and at other times from seven
to eight parts were used. See Pavlus i£oiNBTA, Book I, 96, Syd. Soc. edit.



300 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

such rather occurs in persons who are bilious^ and have enlarged
viscera. Hydromel rather produces expectoration^ and softening
of the lungs^ when given diluted with water.^ But unmixed
hydromel, rather than the diluted, produces frothy evacuations,
such as are unseasonably and intensely bilious^ and too hot ;
but such an evacuation occasions other great mischiefs, for it
neither extinguishes the heat in the hypochondria, but rouses
it, induces inquietude, and jactitation of the limbs, and ulcerates
the intestines and anus. The remedies for all these will be
described afterwards. By using hydromel without ptisans, in-
stead of any other drink, you will generally succeed in the
treatment of such diseases, and fail in few cases ; but in what
instances it is to be given, and in what it is not to be given,
and wherefore it is not to be given, — all this has been explained
already, for the most part. Hydromel is generally condemned,
as if it weakened the powers of those who drink it, and on that
account it is supposed to accelerate death; and this opinion
arose from persons who starve themselves to death, some of
whom use hydromel alone for drink, as fancying that it really
has this effect. But this is by no means always the case. For
hydromel, if drunk alone, is much stronger than water, if it do
not disorder the bowels ; but in some respects it is stronger,
and in some weaker, than wine that is thin, weak, and devoid
of bouquet. There is a great difference between unmixed wine
and unmixed honey, as to their nutritive powers, for if a man
will drink double the quantity of pure wine, to a certain quan-
tity of honey which is swaUowed, he will find himself much
stronger from the honey, provided it do not disagree with his
bowels, and that his alvine evacuations from it will be much
more copious. But if he shall use ptisan for a draught, and
drink afterwards hydromel, he will feel full, flatulent, and un-
comfortable in the viscera of the hypochondrium ; but if the
hydromel be taken before the draught, it will not have the same
injurious effects as if taken after it, but will be rather beneficial.
And boiled hydromel has a much more elegant appearance than
the unboiled, being clear, thin, white, and transparent, but I

' Galen, in explanation, mentions that hydromel is of a detergent nature ; and
hence it clears out the air-passages, and thus promotes expectoration. When the
sputa are thick and viscid, it cuts and attenuates them. (Opera, torn, t, pp. 75, 76 ;
ed. Basil.)



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 301

am unable to mention any good quality which it possesses that
the other wants. For it is not sweeter than the unboiled^ pro-
vided the honey be fine^ and it is weaker, and occasions less
copious evacuations of the bowels, neither of which effects is
required from the hydromel. But one should by all means
use it boiled, provided the honey be bad, impure, black, and
not fragrant, for the boiling will remove the most of its bad
quaUties and appearances.

16. You will find the drink, called oxymel, often very useful
in these complaints, for it promotes expectoration and freedom of
breathing. The following are the proper occasions for admi-
nistering it. When strongly acid it has no mean operation in
rendering the expectoration more easy, for by bringing up the
sputa, which occasion troublesome hawking, and rendering
them more slippery, and, as it were, clearing the windpipe with
a feather, it relieves the lungs and proves emollient to them ;
and when it succeeds in producing these effects it must do
much good. But there are cases in which hydromel, strongly
acid, does not promote expectoration, but renders it more viscid
and thus does harm, and it is most apt to produce these bad
effects in cases which are otherwise of a fatal character, when
the patient is unable to cough or bring up the sputa. On this
account, then, one ought to consider beforehand the strength of
the patient, and if there be any hope, then one may give it,
but if given at all in such cases it should be quite tepid, and
in by no means large doses. But if slightly acrid it moistens
the mouth and throat, promotes expectoration, and quenches
thirst; agrees with the viscera seated in the hypochondrium,
and obviates the bad effects of the honey ; for the bilious quality
of the honey is thereby corrected. It also promotes flatulent
discharges from the boweb, and is diuretic, but it occasions
watery discharges and those resembling scrapings, from the
lower part of the intestine, which is sometimes a bad thing in
acute diseases, more especially when the flatulence cannot be
passed, but rolls backwards ; and otherwise it diminishes the
strength and makes the extremities cold ; this is the only bad
effect worth mentioning which I have known to arise from the
oxymel. It may suit well to drink a little of this at night
before the draught of ptisan, and when a considerable interval
of time has passed after the draught there will be nothing to



302 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

prevent its being taken. But to those who are restricted entirely
to drinks without draughts of ptisan^ it will therefore not be
proper at all times to give it, more especially from the fretting
and irritation of the intestine which it occasions, (and these
bad effects it will be the more apt to produce provided there
be no fseces in the intestines and the patient is labouring under
inanition,) and then it will weaken the powers of the hydromel.
But if it appears advantageous to use a great deal of this drink
during the whole course of the disease, one should add to it
merely as much vinegar as can just be perceived by the taste,
for thus what is prejudicial in it will do the least possible harm,
and what is beneficial will do the more good. In a word, the
acidity of vinegar agrees rather with those who are troubled
with bitter bile, than with those patients whose bile is black ;
for the bitter principle is dissolved in it and turned to phlegm,
by being suspended in it; whereas black bile is fermented,
swells up, and is multiplied thereby : for vinegar is a melano-
gogue. Vinegar is more prejudiciid to women than to men, for
it creates pains in the uterus.

17. I have nothing further to add as to the effects of water
when used as a drink in acute diseases ; for it neither soothes
the cough in pneumonia, nor promotes expectoration, but does
less than the others in this respect, if used alone through the
whole complaint. But if taken intermediate between oxymel
and hydromel, in small quantity, it promotes expectoration from
the change which it occasions in the qualities of these drinks,
for it produces, as it were, a certain overflow. Otherwise it
does not quench the thirst, for it creates bile in a bilious tem«
perament, and is injurious to the hypochondrium ; and it does
the most harm, engenders most bile, and does the least good
when the bowels are empty ; and it increases the swelling of
the spleen and liver when they are in an inflamed state ; it
produces a gurgling noise in the intestines and swims on the
stomach ; for it passes slowly downwards, as being of a coldish
and indigestible nature, and neither proves laxative nor diuretic;
and in this respect, too, it proves prejudicial, that it does not
naturally form faeces in the intestines : and, if it be drunk while
the feet are cold, its injurious effects will be greatly aggravated,
in all those parts to which it may be determined. When you
suspect in these diseases either strong heaviness of the head, or



RBOIMBN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 303

mental alienation, you must abstain entirely from wine, and in
this case use water, or give a weak, straw-coloured wine, entirely
devoid of bouquet^ after which a little water is to be given in
addition ; for thus the strength of the wine will less affect the
head and the understanding: but in which cases water is
mostly to be given for drink, when in large quantity, when in
moderate, when cold, and when hot; all these things have
either been discussed already or will be treated of at the proper
time. In like manner, with respect to all the others, such as
barley-water, the drinks made from green shoots, those from
raisins, and the skins of grapes and wheat, and bastard saffron^
and myrtles, pomegranates, and the others, when the proper
time for using them is come, they will be treated of along with
the disease in question, in like manner as the other compound
medicines.^

18. The bath is useful in many diseases, in some of them
when used steadily, and in others when not so. Sometimes it
must be less used than it would be otherwise, from the want
of accommodation ; for in few families are all the conveniences
prepared, and persons who can manage them as they ought to
be. And if the patient be not bathed properly, he may be
thereby hurt in no inconsiderable degree, for there is required
a place to cover him that is free of smoke, abundance of water,
materials for frequent baths, but not very large, unless this
should be required. It is better that no friction should be

' Although, as we have shown in our analysis of the treatise on the Use of
Liquids, Hippocrates and his followers were sufficiently liberal in the administration
of water on proper occasions, it will be seen from the contents of this section that
our author was by no means disposed to give water freely in febrile diseases, nor in
affections of the chest. Whatever may now be thought of his observations on this
point of practice, all must admit that they are deserving of high attention. Galen's
Commentary is also very interesting. It appears from it that he disapproved of giving
water alone, but always added a small proportion of wine to it in order to give it a
flavour. That the quantity of wine which was added to the water must have been
small, is obvious frt>m an anecdote which he relates in this place. He says that a
certain physician, who saw the insignificant amount of the wine which vras put into
the water, said, bantering him, " Your patient will have the pleasure of seeing the
wine indeed, but vrill not be able to taste it.*' Galen, however, contends that,
although the quantity thus added be small, it is suffiaent to act as a stomachic, and
to obviate the bad effects which the water would otherwise produce. (Opera, tom. v,
p. 82 ; ed. Basil.) It will be perceived from the context, that Hippocrates intended
to give a separate treatise on each particular disease, not considering the present work
on general therapeatics sufficiently explicit, as Galen remarks.



304 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

applied^ but if so^ a hot soap [smegmaY must be used in greater
abundance than is common, and an affusion of a considerable
quantity of water is to be made at the same time and after-
wards repeated. There must also be a short passage to the
basin, and it should be of easy ingress and egress. But the
person who takes the bath should be orderly and reserved in
his manner, should do nothing for himself, but others should
pour the water upon him and rub him, and plenty of waters^
of various temperatures, should be in readiness for the douche,
and the affusions quickly made;' and sponges should be used
instead of the comb [strigil,) and the body should be anointed
when not quite dry. But the head shoidd be rubbed by the
sponge until it is quite dry; the extremities should be protected
from cold, as also the head and the rest of the body ; and a
man should not be washed immediately after he has taken a
draught of ptisan or a drink ; neither should he take ptisan as
a drink immediately after the bath. Much will depend upon
whether the patient, when in good healthy was very fond of
the bath, and in the custom of taking it : for such persons^
especially, feel the want of it, and are benefited if they are
bathed, and injured if they are not. In general it suits better
with cases of pneumonia than in ardent fevers ; for the bath
soothes the pain in the side^ chest, and back; concocts the
sputa, promotes expectoration, improves the respiration, 'and
allays lassitude ; for it soothes the joints and outer skin, and

1 The smegma was an abstergent composition used by the ancients in bathing for
the purpose of cleansing the skin. For a full account of the smegmata, see Paulus
iGoiMBTA, Vol. Ill, pp. 536-41.

* Galen, in his Commentary, remarks that the physicians usually did not put their
patients into the bath, but made use of the do/uehe^ or affusion of hot water. He
adds, that persons in good health may leave the hot bath and plunge into the cold,
but that this practice is not safe in the case of inyalids. He recommends, then,
that there should be at hand a good supply of baths of various temperatures, so that
the patient may gradually pass from one of a high to others of a low temperature.
By the way, I have often wondered that Dr. Currie, who certainly had no incon-
siderable pretensions to classical scholarship, should have been so profoundly ignorant
as he appears to have been of the use of the warm affusion by Hippocrates and Galen
in the treatment of febrile diseases. His rival. Dr. Jackson, had a much more re-
spectable acquaintance with the ancient authorities on medicine ; and I have often
thought it was to be regretted that the profession at that period, in giving a trial
to the affusion of cold and hot water in fever, put itself under the leadership of
Currie instead of Jackson.



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES. 305

is diuretic^ removes heaviness of the head^ and moistens the
nose. Such are the benefits to be derived from the bath^ if
all the proper requisites be present ; but if one or more of these
be wanting^ the bath^ instead of doing good, may rather prove
injurious; for every one of them may do harm if not prepared
by the attendants in the proper manner. It is by no means a
suitable thing in these diseases to persons whose bowels are
too loose, or when they are unusually confined, and there has
been no previous evacuation ; neither must we bathe those who
are debilitated, nor such as have nausea or vomiting, or bilious
eructations; nor such as have hemorrhage from the nose,
unless it be less than required at that stage of the disease,
(with those stages you are acquainted :) but if the discharge
be less than proper, one should use the bath, whether in order
to benefit the whole body or the head alone. If then the
proper requisites be at hand, and the patient be well disposed
to the bath, it may be administered once every day, or if the
patient be fond of the bath there will be no harm, though he
should take it twice in the day. The use of the bath is much
more appropriate to those who take unstrained ptisan, than to
those who take only the juice of it, although even in their case
it may be proper ; but least of all does it suit with those who
use only plain drink, although, in their case too it may be
suitable : but one must form a judgment from the rides laid
down before, in which of these modes of regimen the bath will
be beneficial, and in which not. Such as want some of the
requisites for a proper bath, but have those symptoms which
woidd be benefited by it, should be bathed ; whereas those who
want none of the proper requisites, but have certain symptoms
which contraindicate the bath, are not to be bathed.



20



APPENDIX



TO



THE WORK ON REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES,



THE ARGUMENT.

No one can read tliis piece attentively without coming to
the conclusion that it is not a natural continuation of the sub-
ject discussed in the preceding work^ but that it is made up,
in a considerable measure^ of materials extracted from it. Ex-
positions of subjects which are there given methodically are
here presented in a disjointed form ; and rules of practice there
laid down with precision are here often delivered in a vague
and indefinite shape. Stilly however, it must be admitted|
that the reverse is sometimes the case, and that what is pre-
sented imperfect in the former part of the work is here some-
times reproduced very much improved. It has been therefore
a matter of much dispute among the critics whether this portion
be the composition of Hippocrates, or whether it be altogether
the work of a different hand. The most probable conjecture
respecting it seems to be, that as Hippocrates in the preceding
part several times announces his intention of giving a continua-
tion of the subject, some one of his immediate disciples undertook
the work which he had thus promised, and composed this
treatise from fragments left by the author himself, and from
materials collected from his other works. As stated by Galen
in his Commentary, and as we have explained in our remarks
on the ' Aphorisms,' in the second section of the Preliminary
Discourse, it was a common practice, in ancient times, to add
appendices to popular works. I can have no hesitation, then,
in following the example of M. Littr^, who recognises it as an
appendix to the preceding work. But I must say that I rather
incline, with Galen, to think that there are many things in it
which cannot have come from Hippocrates, than to hold with



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES— APPENDIX. 307

M. Littr^ that it is nearly or altogether his composition. But
however that may be^ it indisputably contains much interesting
matter, for which we have every reason to believe that we are
indebted to Hippocrates, either directly or at second hand. I
shall now give a brief abstract of its contents.

He commences with some general observations on the nature
and treatment of causus, the endemial fever of Greece. What
is said on this head is much to the purpose, but incomplete.
Then there is given a general rule for bleeding in diseases
which certainly is well deserving of attention at the present
day, when professional opinions on this point of medical practice
are very much unsettled. Now-a-days we have abandoned
all general rules of practice, and profess to be guided solely by
experience ; but how variable and uncertain are its results in
the present case ! I myself — albeit but verging towards the
decline of life — can well remember the time when a physician
would have run the risk of being indicted for culpable homicide
if he had ventured to bleed a patient in common fever ; about
twenty-five years ago venesection in fever, and in almost every
disease, was the established order of the day ; and now what
shall I state as the general practice that has been sanctioned by
the experience of the present generation ? I can scarcely say,-—
so variable has the practice in fever and in many other diseases
become of late years. One thing is remarkable in the present
work with regard to venesection in pneumonia and pleurisy,
namely, that it is directed to be carried the length of inducing
deliquium animi, contrary to the practice laid down in the pre-
ceding work, and to the rule which was followed by all the other
ancient authorities. Another of the rules regarding bleeding
here delivered is also deserving of attention, namely, that in
inflammatory diseases it is improper to purge before bleeding,
but that venesection should precede all other means of cure.

The section in which cynanche is treated of appears to me
to be highly interesting and important* I think it may be a
question whether the prognostic spirit of Hippocrates and his
followers had not in a great measure anticipated all the results
of modem diagnosis.

After this there follows some additional account of causus,
which, although out of place, contains observations of consider-
able interest.



308 ARGUMENT.

To the treatment of pleurisy and pneumonia we have already
alluded^ but the subject is so interesting that we cannot dismiss
it with so brief a notice. In the ancient method of treating
fevers and febrile affections three main objects would appear
to have been kept in view : 1st, by depletion, to remove the
morbid fluids from the general system, or to draw them off
from a particular spot in which they had fixed ; 2d, by diluents,
to supply the waste of fluids occasioned by the preternatural
heat of the body ; and, 3d, to support the strength by a suit-
able supply of such nutriment as the system is then capable
of receiving.

Now with regard to venesection, it will be seen in this and
the preceding work that the practice is regulated by certain
well-marked indications, namely, the seat of the pain, the con-
dition of the patient, and the characters of the sputa. The
purging is regulated by the state of matters below the chest,
it being held as a general rule that clysters should be admi-
nistered regularly every day during the first days of the fever.
After purging comes the cooling drinks, such as oxymel. The
administration of farinaceous food in a liquid state, that is to
say, of unstrained ptisan, is to be regulated by the state of
the sputa and urinary sediment, namely, when the sputa have
put on a purulent appearance, and the sediment has become
copious and reddish. Now this certainly seems to be a very in*
telligible and judicious rule for the administration of nutritious
articles in febrile diseases. I need scarcely remark that at the
present time there is scarcely a rule of practice in medicine
which is worse defined than this respecting the administration
of wine and other alimentary substances in febrile diseases.
In proof of what is now stated, I would beg leave to refer the
reader to what will be admitted to be one of the best autho-
rities in modem literature on fever, I mean to Dr. Tweedie's
elaborate article on this subject, in the ' Cyclopaedia of Medi-
cine.* It will be seen, at vol. ii, p. 208, that the rules for
the administration of wine and other articles of food are by
no means well defined. A cool skin and a soft pulse, when
combined with debility, are the indications upon which most
stress is laid; but the pulse, as long ago it was pronounced by
Celsus to be, is ^^ res fallacissima,** and of this the excellent
author seems to have been sensible ; for the injunctions which



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES— APPENDIX. 309

he gives to regulate the administration of the wine and other
articles^ by the effects they produce^ sufficiently show that he
was sensible how deficient in precision our knowledge of the
subject is at present. At the same time he makes it appear
that he was well aware of one important fact in the treatment
of febrile diseases^ which, although distinctly recognised by
Hippocrates, is still frequently overlooked by ordinary prac-
titioners, namely, that in convalescence the stomach partakes
of the general debility, and is unable to digest food in any
great quantity at that time.' M. Littr^ further calls attention
to another rule for the administration of wine, latelv laid down
by Dr. Stokes, of Dublin, which is certainly a most important
one, provided it is confirmed by time and experience. It is
founded on auscultation, and is to this effect ; that when the
impulse of the heart is abnormally weak, and when there is a
diminution of the proportion between the two bruits^ or when
there is a preponderauce in the sound of the second bruit, wine
may be freely administered. Now, as I have said, this rule, if
sanctioned by ample experience, is undoubtedly a most excellent
one ; but T may be allowed to remark, that my own observa-
tions on the heart in fever have led me to the conclusion that,
as I have stated respecting the pulse, its sounds are very
fallacious ; and I must say that the rule of Hippocrates appears
more likely to prove a certain guide in this instance. For is it
not a natural view of the subject, that wine and other articles
of food should be withheld while the emunctories are not in
a condition to cast off the recrementitious superfluities of the
system ; but that when the secretions are properly established,
alimentary substances may be safely administered?'

* Dr. Tweedie's observations agree so well with those of Hippocrates, that I will
(pve the reader an opportunity of comparing them together. " This organ (the sto-
mach), in convalescence, partakes of the external or muscular debility, and the con-
valescent may as well expect to be able to carry a heavy load on his shoulders as to
digest an undue quantity of food, even of a suitable kind." (p. 215.)

* The directions given by that excellent authority Alexander Trallian, for the re-
gulation of the regimen in phrenitis, are to the same effect. Wine is to be given
when there is much insomnolency, when the strength is reduced, when the fever is
no longer strong and ardent, and when concoction tqtpears already in the urine. The
anther makes the acute remark, that the remedy is attended with certain evil con-
sequences, hut that it is the part of a prudent physician to balance the good and bad
effects, and administer the article in question when the good preponderate, (i, 13.)



310 ARGUMENT.

There is another point connected with the regimen in acute
diseases on which I have a remark or two to make — ^it is the
administration of animal matters in a fluid state, such as beef-
tea, or soups from fowls. These we see frequently administered
in febrile cases by practitioners of the present day, but by the
ancient authorities they would appear to have been entirely
rejected. Which party is the safer guide in this case ? For
my own part^ I have long thought that animal matters, when
introduced into the system while in a febrile state, have a
tendency to become putrid, and thereby to occasion an increase
of the heat and general disorder.

After some defective observations on dysentery, our author
treats of tetanus; but here Galen objects to the characters
which he gives of the urine, and to his practice as regards the
administration of wine. His views, however, are not very
different from those which now prevail.

Having made some general remarks on the administration
of hellebore^ to which he was very partial, he proceeds to point
out the bad effects resulting firom any change in regimen. His
views here are very similar to the observations contained in the
preceding portion of the work, and in the treatise ' On Ancient
Medicine/

The account of dry cholera is confused and vague. By it
he would seem to mean flatulent colic, or dry bellyache. See
Opera, ed. Littre, tom. ii, p. 888.

The paragraph on dropsy is interesting, although the views
taken of the subject are incomplete. Tympanitis is recognised
as a variety of dropsy. Then follow some detached observations
on persons whose bowels are heated, and on the regulation of the
diet, with some remarks on the different states which counter-
indicate purging. At § 28 there are some practical observations
on various conditions of the constitution, which it would no
doubt be proper for the physician to make himself acquainted
with. The contents of all the remaining paragraphs would seem
to have nothing to do with the subject of this treatise.

From what is now stated the reader will readily perceive
that this treatise abounds in interesting matters, which, even
at the present day, may prove suggestive of important views in
the theory and practice of medicine. And although the style,
in the judgment of Galen, be very different from that of



REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES— APPENDIX. 311

Hippocrates^ and the mode of thought deficient in that precision
for which he is so remarkable^ the treatise is unquestionably
a work of great ability^ and contains what we have reason to
regard as the results of his experience and meditations on
many important subjects. I should have thought it quite un*
warrantable, therefore, to have rejected this piece from a
volume which professes to give all the genuine remains of our
great author. And moreover^ at the risk^ perhaps, of being set
down as an antique devotee, I do not hesitate to declare that
in my opinion this and the preceding portion, taken together,
contain more original information on the important subject to
which they relate than is to be found in any medical work
which has been written from the days of our author down to
the present time.

I shall conclude the present Argument by giving from Cselius
Aurelianus the criticisms of Soranus on the opinions of our
author, as delivered in these two treatises. It is to be borne
in mind that Soranus was the chief of the ancient sect of
physicians called Methodici, which was very inimically disposed
towards all the others, and more especially to Hippocrates.
Though most of the strictures are evidently overstrained, it
cannot fail to be interesting to the reader to have an oppor-
tunity of considering them, such as they are.

After giving an elaborate analysis of our author's views,
CffiliuB Aurelianus proceeds as follows: '^His Soranus re-
spondens ait. In calefactionibus acres esse sales^ ac necessario
tumorem provocare, febremque accendere^ poscam etiam con-
stringere et stricturam passionis augere. Item milium frixum
graveolens et nidorosum, atque capiti grave, maxime acute
fabricitantium esse perspicimus. Spongiis etiam erat melius
quenquam in dimissione patientes partes vaporare, atque oleo
calido perfundere. Est praeterea improprium, ac sine ratione,
tunc uti phlebotomo quoties ad superiora dolor tetenderit;
prohibere autem quoties ad inferiora descenderit. Oportet
ergo sub hoc argumento neque difficultate tumorum partibus
inferioribus impeditos phlebotomare : neque etiam podagricos
si quidem inferiora tumere videantur, sed necessarid quoties
dolor ad superiora tetenderit, phlebotomiam adhibendam
videmus. Siquidem ssepe pejorante ventris fluore, hoc adjutorii
genus prohibetur. Neque etiam (ut ait) oportet iuteriorem



312 ARGUMENT.

venam dividi. Siquidem et exterior! et media divisa corpora
releventur. Quippe quom e contrario interiorem prohibeaut^
propter magnitudinem, ne tumor augeatur. Item sanguiniB
mutatio iners est detractionis moderation!^ sicati de adjutoriis
scribentes demonstrabimus. Sese denique idem Hippocrates
impugnat in consequentibus^ dicens usque ad animi defectum
faciendam detractionem, quod magis TehemeHter est nocena :
siquidem est pericolosa defectio^ et neque si sit temporaliter
defectionis causa^ sensu carens segrotans^ dolore relevatua^ vide-
bitur (quum resumptus fuerit) rursum non dolere^ quum magia
atque magis ejusdem passionis debilia corpora yehementius
officiant. Item purgativa medicamina (quae Grseci ica0aprtjcd
vocant) acrimonise causa^ stomachum tumentem^ atque hype-
zocoia membranam acuunt in tumorem; et in periculum ventris
e£fusionem provocantia^ magnificam passionis ingerunt vehe-
mentiam. Nutrire etiam cibo post medicamen non oportebaL
Fugnat cnim purgation! faciundse illatum cibi nutrimenium.
Quippe quum medicamine corruptum, officii sui careat viribus.
Mitto etiam quod ex initio acescere facile ptisanse succus per-
spiciatur^ confectus quippe ex ordei succo^ qui sit digestione
difficilis. Dehine segrotantis corpus non valet tantum sustinere
nutrimentum^ quantum sanitatis tempore solitum videbatur.
Item mulsum ex aceto (quod oxymeli appellavit) sine discretioue
accipimus. Est etiam immodica usque ad septimum diem cibi
abstinentia^ quam custodiendam ordinavit.^ Quippe cum nuUus
vehementiam passionis sustinere ralet^ nisi nutrimento quamTis
parvo toleratus : et neque in declinatione passionis aliquid
humanius cibo largitur^ sed in iisdem sorbilibus perseverandum
existimat succis. At cum fuerint sputa segnioray tunc ut
existimat^ erit primo seger nutriendus^ quomodo necessarid
declinante passione occurrunt intolerato. In cseteris relin-
quendum temporibus absque nutrimento segrotantem aper-
tissime indicavit^ quum semper plurimum utilitatis adjutorium
cibi^ quam csetera possunt adjutoria^ largiatur. Omne etiam
corpus erit unctione cosequandum^ et non ejus particula.
Quippe cum totum cibo nutriatur^ ipsa quoque unctio non
exerta^ anxietatem ingerit segrotanti^ quse latentem difficultatem,
atque accessione veniente^ corporis proTOcat incendium."

■ This can scarcely be supposed anything else than a wilful misrepresentation of oar
author's rule of practice in this case. See the fourth section of the preceding part.


APPENDIX TO THB WORK

ON

REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

Ardent fever (causus)^ takes place when the veins^ being
dried up in the summer season, attract acrid and bilious
humours to themselves; and strong fever seizes the whole body^
which experiences aches of the bones^ and is in a state of lassi-
tude and pain. It takes place most commonly from a long
walk and protracted thirst, when the veins being dried up at-
tract acrid and hot defluxions to themselves. The tongue be-
comes rough, dry, and very black; there are gnawing pains
about the bowels; the alvine discharges are watery and yellow;
there is intense thirst, insomnolency, and sometimes wandering
of the mind. To a person in such a state give to drink water

' The CBUsus w ardent fever of the ancients was decidedly the same as the bilious
remittent fever of modem authors. See Paulus iCloiNBTA, Vol. I, p. 262. We
shall find many cases of it related in the Epidemics. In fact the causns is the ordi-
nary fever of Greece and other countries bordering upon the Mediterranean. Galen,
in his Commentary on this section, mentions that he had known it generally super-
induced by drinking wine after great fatigue in summer. There can be no doubt
that this was the fever of which Alexander the Great died. The description of the
disease in his case, as given by Arrian from the Royal Journals (/3a<r(Xf toi i^iifupiSte),
has so much the air of truth, and withal appears to me so interesting, that I shall be
excused introducing it in this place. *' And the Royal Journals ran thus : that he
drank at a jollification in the house of Medios ; then rising up and being bathed,
slept, and again supped with Mediiis, and again drank until the night was £sr ad-
vanced ; that giving over drinking he bathed \ and having bathed, ate a little, and
slept there, because he was already feverish ; that being carried on a litter to the
sacrifices, he performed them according to his daily practice ; that the sacrifices being
performed, he reclined in the dining-room {dvSpwv) until the dusk of evening, and
there gave orders to the commander respecting the march and voyage, that those
who had to proceed on foot should be prepared for marching on the fourth day, and
those who were to sail on the fifth ; that he was carried hence upon a couch to the
river, and being placed in a boat was taken across the river to the garden, and then
being again bathed, that he rested. Next day, that he again was bathed and per-
formed the appointed sacrifices; and going into a chamber, that he reclined and
conversed with Medius, and gave orders to the commanders to meet him in the
morning. That having done these things, he took a little supper ; and having been
carried back to the chamber, that he was in a continued state of fever during the



314 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

and as much boiled hydromel of a watery consistence as he
will take ; and if the mouth be bitter^ it may be advantageous
to administer an emetic and clyster ; and if these things do
not loosen the bowels^ purge with the boiled milk of asses.
Give nothing saltish nor acrid, for they will not be borne ; and
give no draughts of ptisan until the crisis be past. And the
affection is resolved if there be an epistaxis, or if true critical
sweats supervene with urine having white, thick, and smooth
sediments, or if a deposit take place anywhere ; but if it be
resolved without these, there will be a relapse of the complaint,
or pain in the hips and legs will ensue, with thick sputa, pro-
vided the patient be convalescent. Another species of ardent
fever : belly loose, much thirst, tongue rough, dry, and saltish,
retention of urine, insomnolency, extremities cold. In such a
case, unless there be a flow of blood from the nose, or an ab«
sccss form about the neck, or pain in the limbs, or the patient
expectorate thick sputa (these occur when the belly is consti-
pated), or pain of the hips, or lividity of the genital organs,

whole night ; that next day he hathed, and after the bath performed the sacrifices ;
that he gave orders to Nearchus and the other commanders respecting the Toyage,
that it should take place on the third day ; that next day he bathed again, and per-
formed the appointed sacrifices ; that the religious rites being over, he did not cease
to be feverish, but that calling the commanders he gave orders for having every
thing in readiness for the voyage ; that he was bathed next day, and being bathed
was already in a bad state. That next day being carried to the house adjoining the
bath, he performed the appointed sacrifices ; that he was in a bad state, but yet
that he called to him the chiefs of his commanders, and again gave orders respecting
the voyage ; that the following day he was carried with difficulty to the religions
rites and sacrificed, and that notwithstanding he gave orders to the commanders re-
specting the voyage. That next day, although already in a bad state, he performed
the appointed sacrifices ; that he gave orders that the commanders should watch in
the saloon, and the chiliarchs and pentacosiarchs before the doors ; and that being
altogether now in a bad state, he was carried from the garden to the palace. That
when the commanders came in he recognised them, but did not speak, being now
speechless ; that he was in a bad state of fever during that night and day, and during
another night and day. Thus it is written in the Royal Journals." Thus far the
report is no doubt to be strictly depended upon ; the historical embellishments added
to it from other sources can have no interest to the professional reader. (Appiani
Exped. Alexandr., vii, 37.) It deserves to be remarked, as a remarkable feature in
this case, that the mind appears to have been pretty entire during the whole course
of the fever. Now, this is one of the characteristics of causus as described by Aretaeoa
(Morb. Acut., ii, 4). It is further one of the most marked features of the yellow
fever, which, from all I can learn of it, would appear decidedly to be an aggravated
form of causus.



APPENDIX. 315

there is no crisis; tension of the testicle is also a critical
symptom. Give attractive draughts.^

2. Bleed in the acute affections^ if the disease appear strong^
and the patients be in the vigour of life^ and if they have
strength.^ If it be quinsy or any other of the pleuritic
affections^ purge with electuaries ; but if the patient be weaker^
or if yon abstract more bloody you may administer a clyster
every third day, until he be out of danger, and enjoin total
abstinence if necessary.

3. Hypochondria inflamed not firom retention of flatus, ten-
sion of the diaphragm, checked respiration, with dry orthopnoea,
when no pus is formed, but when these complaints are con-
nected with obstructed respiration ; but more especially strong
pains of the liver, heaviness of the spleen, and other phlegmasia
and intense pains above the diaphragm, diseases connected
with collections of humours, — all these diseases do not admit
of resolution, if treated at first by medicine, but venesection
holds the first place in conducting the treatment ; then we may
have recourse to a clyster, unless the disease be great and
strong; but if so, purging also may be necessary ; but bleeding
and purging together require caution and moderation. Those
who attempt to resolve inflammatory diseases at the commence-
ment by the administration of purgative medicines, remove
none of the morbific humours which produce the inflammation
and tension : for the diseases while unconcocted could not yield,
but they melt down those parts which are healthy and resist
the disease ; so when the body is debilitated, the malady ob->
tains the mastery ; and when the disease has the upper hand
of the body, it does not admit of a cure.^

4. When a person suddenly loses his speech, in connexion
with obstruction of the veins, — if this happen without warning
or any other strong cause, one ought to open the internal vein

^ Galen admits that be did not understand the exact import of this term.

* This is a general rule of such importance that GaJen wonders our author did not
embody it in one of bis Aphorisms. Galen's observations on venesection in this
commentaryi and in his two treatises on this subject, are highly important. It will
be remarked that three circumstances are held to form indications of the necessity
for bleeding : first, if the disease be of a strong nature ; second, if the patient be in
the vigour of life ; and, third, if his strength be entire.

' This section, as Galen remarks, contains a list of the principal cases in which
venesection is to be had recourse to.



316 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

of the right arm^ and abstract blood more or less according to
the habit and age of the patient. Such cases are mostly at-
tended with the following symptoms : redness of the face^ eyes
fixed^ hands distended^ grinding of the teeth^ palpitations^
jaws fixed, coldness of the extremities, retention of airs in the
veins.^

5. When pains precede, and there are influxes of black bile
and of acrid humours, and when by their pungency the internal
parts are pained, and the veins being pinched and dried be-
come distended, and getting inflamed attract the humours
Tunning into the parts, whence the blood being vitiated, and
the airs collected there not being able to find their natural
passages, coldness comes on in consequence of this stasis, with
vertigo, loss of speech, heaviness of the head, and convulsion,
if the disease fix on the liver, the heart, or the great vein
(vena cava?) ; whence they are seized with epilepsy or apoplexy,
if the defluxions fall upon the containing parts,^ and if they are
dried up by airs which cannot make their escape ; such per-
sons having been first fomented are to be immediately bled at
the commencement, while all the peccant vapours and humours
are buoyant, for then the cases more easily admit of a cure ;
and then supporting the strength and attending to the crises,
we may give emetics, unless the disease be alleviated ; or if the
bowels be not moved, we may administer a clyster and give the
boiled milk of asses, to the amount of not less than twelve
hemina), or if the strength permit, to more than sixteen.

6. Quinsy takes place when a copious and viscid defluxion
from the head, in the season of winter or spring, flows into the
jugular veins, and when from their large size they attract a
greater defluxion ; and when owing to the defluxion being of a
cold and viscid nature it becomes enfarcted, obstructing the
passages of the respiration and of the blood, coagulates the
surrounding bloody and renders it motionless and stationary, it
being naturally cold and disposed to obstructions. Hence they
arc seized with convulsive suffocation, the tongue turning livid,
assuming a rounded shape, and being bent owing to the veins

' I need scarcely point out to the professional reader that these symptoms are very
descriptive of congestion in the brain, threatening an attack either of apoplexy or
epilepsy. See the treatise on the Sacred Disease.

* Meaning apparently the gieat vcbsels. See Galen's Commentary.



APPENDIX. 317

which are seated below the tongue (for when an enlarged
uvula^ which is called uva, is cut^ a large vein may be ob-
served on each side). These veins^ then^ becoming filled^ and
their roots extending into the tongue^ which is of a loose and
spongy texture^ it^ owing to its dryness receiving forcibly the
juice from the veins^ changes from broad and becomes rounds
its natural colour turns to Uvid^ from a soft consistence it grows
hard^ instead of being flexible it becomes inflexible^ so that
the patient would soon be suffocated unless speedily relieved.
Bleeding, then, in the arm, and opening the sublingual veins,
and purging with the electuaries, and giving warm gargles,
and shaving the head, we must apply to it and the neck a
cerate, and wrap them round with wool, and foment with soft
sponges squeezed out of hot water ; give to drink water and
hydromel, not cold ; and administer the juice of ptisan when,
having passed the crisis, the patient is out of danger. When,
in the season of summer or autumn, there is a hot and nitrous
defluxion from the head (it is rendered hot and acrid by the
season), being of such a nature it corrodes and ulcerates, and
fills with air, and orthopnoea attended with great dryness super**
venes ; the fauces, when examined, do not seem swollen ; the
tendons on the back part of the neck are contracted, and have
the appearance as if it were tetanus; the voice is lost, the
breathing is small, and inspiration becomes frequent and
laborious. In such persons the trachea becomes ulcerated, and
the lungs engorged, from the patient^s not being able to draw
in the external air. In such cases, unless there be a spon-
taneous determination to the external parts of the neck, the
symptoms become still more dreadful, and the danger more
imminent, partly owing to the season, and the hot and acrid
humours which cause the disease.^

7. When fever seizes a person who has lately taken food,

* The description here given of cynanche, more especially of the Yariety in which
the ulceration spreads down to the trachea and produces engorgement of the lungs,
is most characteristic, and bespeaks a great practical acquaintance with the disease.
Judged of in a becoming spirit of candour, it must be admitted that eyen at the pre-
sent day we have scarcely made any advancement in our knowledge of this subject.
What are our descriptions of ulcerous sore-throat, diptherite, oedema glottidis, croup,
and laryngismus stridulus, but reproductions in a divided and (may I be allowed to
suggest?) a less accurate form, of the general views here presented by our author ?
For an abstract of the views of the other ancient authorities in medicine, see Paulub



318 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

and whose bowels are loaded with fseces which have been long
retained, whether it be attended with pain of the side or not,
he ought to lie quiet until the food descend to the lower region
of the bowels, and use oxymel for drink ; but when the load
descends to the loins, a clyster should be administered, or he
should be purged by medicine ; and when purged, he should
take ptisan for food and hydromel for drink ; then he may take
the cerealia, and boiled fishes, and a watery wine in small
quantity, at night, but during the day, a watery hydromel.
When the flatus is ofifensive, either a suppository or clyster ia
to be administered ; but otherwise the oxymel is to be discon-
tinued, until the matters descend to the lower part of the
bowels, and then they are to be evacuated by a clyster. But
if the ardent fever {causus) supervene when the bowels are
empty, should you still judge it proper to administer purgative
medicine, it ought not be done during the first three days,
nor earlier than the fourth. When you give the medicine, use
the ptisan, observing the paroxysms of the fevers, so as not to
give it when the fever is setting in, but when it is ceasing, or
on the decline, and as far as possible from the commencement.
When the feet are cold, give neither drink nor ptisan, nor
anything else of the kind, but reckon it an important rule to
refrain until they become warm, and then you may administer
them with advantage. For the most part, coldness of the feet
is a symptom of a paroxysm of the fever coming on ; and if at
such a season you apply those things, you will commit the
greatest possible mistake, for you will augment the disease in
no small degree. But when the fever ceases, the feet, on the
contrary, become hotter than the rest of the body ; for when
the heat leaves the feet, it is kindled up in the breast, and
sends its flame up to the head. And when all the heat rushes
upwards, and is exhaled at the head, it is not to be wondered
at that the feet become cold, being devoid of flesh, and tendi-
nous ; and besides, they contract cold, owing to their distance

^aiNBTA, Book III, 27. Aretsus deserves particularly to be consulted (Morb. Acnt.,
i, 7). It will be remarked that our author speaks of a spontaneous determination to
the skin, as being calculated to remove the urgent symptoms within. Galen, in com-
menting upon this clause, states that some physicians were in the practice of applying
to the skin certain medicines possessed of ulcerative powers, in order to determine to
the surface, and thus imitate Nature's mode of cure.



APPENDIX. 319

from the hotter parts of the body^ an accumulation of heat
having taken place in the chest : and again^ in like manner^
when the fever is resolved and dissipated^ the heat descends to
the feet^ and^ at the same time^ the head and chest become
cold. Wherefore one should attend to this; that when the
feet are cold^ the bowels are necessarily hot^ and filled with
nauseous matters ; the hypochondrium distended : there is jac-
titation of the body^ owing to the internal disturbance; and
aberration of the intellect^ and pains ; the patient is agitated^
and wishes to vomit^ and if he vomits bad matters he is pained ;
but when the heat descends to the feet^ and the urine passes
freely, he is every way lightened, even although he does not
sweat ; at this season, then, the ptisan ought to be given ; it
would be death to give it before.^

8. When the bowels are loose during the whole course of
fevers, in this case we are most especially to warm the feet, and
see that they are properly treated with cerates, and wrapped in
shawls, so that they may not become colder than the rest of
the body; but when they are hot, no fomentation must be
made to them, but care is to be taken that they do not become
cold ; and very little drink is to be used, either cold water or
hydromd. In those cases of fever where the bowels are loose,
and the mind is disordered, the greater number of patients pick
the wool from their blankets, scratch their noses, answer briefly
when questions are put to them, but, when left to themselves,
utter nothing that is rational. Such attacks appear to me to
be connected with black bile. When in these cases there is a
colliquative diarrhoea, I am of opinion that we ought to give
the colder and thicker ptisans, and that the drinks ought to be
binding, of a vinous nature, and rather astringent. In cases
of fever attended from the first with vertigo, throbbing of the
head, and thin urine, you may expect the fever to be exacerbated
at the crisis ; neither need it excite wonder, although there be
delirium. When, at the commencement, the urine is cloudy
or thick, it is proper to purge gently, provided this be other-
wise proper ; but when the urine at first is thin, do not purge
such patients, but, if thought necessary, give a clyster : such

* Though the contents of this section aire by no means devoid of interesti it must
be obvious to the reader that the observations on caosus are out of place here. See
the Commentary of Oalen.



320 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

patients should be thus treated ; they should be kept in a quiet
state^ have unguents applied to them^ and be covered up pro*
perly with clothes, and they should use for drink a watery
hydromel^ and the juice of ptisan as a draught in the evening;
clear out the bowels at first with a clyster, but give no pui^tive
medicines to them, for, if you move the bowels strongly^ the
urine is not concocted, but the fever remains long, without
sweats and without a crisis. Do not give draughts when the
time of the crisis is at hand, if there be agitation, but only
when the fever abates and is alleviated. It is proper to be
guarded at the crises of other fevers, and to withhold the
draughts at that season. Fevers of this description are apt to
be protracted, and to have determinations, if the inferior ex-
tremities be cold, about the ears and neck, or, if these parts
are not cold, to have other changes ; they have epistaxis, and
disorder of the bowels. But in cases of fever attended with
nausea, or distension of the hypochondria, when the patients
cannot lie reclined in the same position, and the extremities
are cold, the greatest care and precaution are necessary;
nothing should be given to them, except oxymel diluted with
water; no draught should be administered, until the fever
abate and the urine be concocted ; the patient should be laid
in a dark apartment, and recline upon the softest couch, and
he should be kept as long as possible in the same position, so
as not to toss about, for this is particularly beneficial to him.
Apply to the hypochondrium linseed by inunction, taking care
that he do not catch cold when the application is made ; let it
be in a tepid state, and boiled in water and oil. One may
judge from the urine what is to take place, for if the urine be
thicker, and more yellowish, so much the better ; but if it be
thinner, and blacker, so much the worse ;^ but if it undergo
changes, it indicates a prolongation of the disease, and the pa-
tient, in like manner, must experience a change to the worse

' I would beg leaye to direct the attention of the medical reader to the observa-
tions of our author in this and many other places on the characters of the urine in
ferera. That in febrile diseases the sediment is wanting previous to the crisis, and
that at and after the crisis, when favorable, the sediment becomes remarkably
copious, I believe to be certain facts ; and yet I question if, vrith all our boasted
improvements in urology, they be generally known and attended to. I have called
attention in the Argument to the important rule of practice which our author foands
on the state of the urine at the crisis.



APPENDIX. 321

and the better. Irregular fevers should be let alone until they
become settled^ and^ when they do settle^ they are to be treated
by a suitable diet and medicine^ attending to the constitution of
the patient.

9. The aspects of the sick are various ; wherefore the phy-
sician should pay attention^ that he may not miss observing the
exciting causes^ as far as they can be ascertained by reasonings
nor such symptoms as should appear on an even or odd day^
but he ought to be particularly guarded in observing the odd
days^ as it is in them^ more especially, that changes take place
in patients. He should mark^ particularly, the first day on
which the patient became ill, considering when and whence
the disease commenced, for this is of primary importance to
know. When you examine the patient, inquire into all par-
ticulars ; first how the head is, and if there be no headache, nor
heaviness in it ; then examine if the hypochondria and sides be
free of pain ; for if the hypochondrium be painful, swelled, and
unequal^ with a sense of satiety, or if there be pain in the side,
and^ along with the pain, either cough^ tormina, or belly-ache,
if any of these symptoms be present in the hypochondrium,
the bowels should be opened with clysters, and the patient
should drink boiled hydromel in a hot state. The physician
should ascertain whether the patient be apt to faint when he
is raised up^ and whether his breathing be free ; and examine
the discharges from the bowels, whether they be very black, or
of a proper colour, like those of persons in good health, and
ascertain whether the fever has a paroxysm every third day,
and look well to such persons on those days. And should the
fourth day prove like the third, the patient is in a dangerous
state.^ With regard to the symptoms, black stools prognosticate
death ; but if they resemble the discharges of a healthy person,
and if such is their appearance every day, it is a favorable
symptom ; but when the bowels do not yield to a suppository,
and when, though the respiration be natural, the patient when
raised to the night-table, or even in bed, be seized with deli-
quium, you may expect that the patient, man or woman, who
experiences these symptoms, is about to fall into a state of
delirium. Attention also should be paid to the hands, for if



> He means by this, that the disease is not of an intermittent type.

21



322 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

they tremble^ you may expect epistaxis ; and observe the nos-
trils, whether the breath be drawn in equally by both ; and if
expiration by the nostrils be large, a convulsion is apt to take
place ; and should a convulsion occur to such a person, death
may be anticipated, and it is well to announce it beforehand.

10. If, in a winter fever, the tongue be rough, and if there
be swoonings, it is likely to be the remission of the fever.
Nevertheless such a person is to be kept upon a restricted diet,
with water for drink, and hydromel, and the strained juices,
not trusting to the remission of the fevers, as persons having
these symptoms are in danger of dying ; when, therefore, you
perceive these symptoms, announce this prognostic, if you shall
judge proper, after making the suitable observations. When,
in fevers, any dangerous symptom appears on the fifth day,
when watery discharges suddenly take place from the bowels,
when deliquium animi occurs, or the patient is attacked with
loss of speech, convulsions, or hiccup, under such circumstances
he is likely to be affected with nausea, and sweats break out
under the nose and forehead, or on the back part of the neck
and head, and patients with such symptoms shortly die, from
stoppage of the respiration.^ When, in fevers, abscesses form
about the legs, and, getting into a chronic state, are not con-
cocted while the fever persists, and if one is seized with a sense
of suffocation in the throat, while the fauces are not swelled,
and if it do not come to maturation, but is repressed, in such
a case there is apt to be a flow of blood from the nose : if this,
then, be copious, it indicates a resolution of the disease, but if
not, a prolongation of the complaint; and the less the discharge,
so much worse the symptoms, and the more protracted the dis-
ease ; but if the other symptoms are very favorable, expect in
such a case that pains will fall upon the feet; if then they
attack the feet, and if these continue long in a very painful
and inflamed state, and if there be no resolution, the pains will
extend by degrees to the neck, to the clavicle, shoulder, breast,
or to some articulation, in which an inflammatory tumour will
necessarily form. When these are reduced, if the hands are
contracted, and become trembling, convulsion and delirium

1 This seems the most appropriate meaning in this place, but the passage may also
signify " a state of great emphysema or meteorism.*' See Galen*



APPENDIX. 323

seize such a person ; but blisters break out on the eyebrow,
erythema takes place, the one eyelid being tumefied overtops
the other, a hard inflammation sets in, the eye becomes strongly
swelled, and the delirium increases much, but makes its attacks
rather at night than by day. These symptoms more frequently
occur on odd than on even days, but, whether on the one or
the other, they are of a fatal character. Should you determine
to give purgative medicines in such cases, at the commencement,
you should do so before the fifth day, if there be borborygmi
in the bowels, or, if not, you should omit the medicines alto-
gether. If there be borborygmi, with bilious stools, purge
moderately with scammony ; but with regard to the treatment
otherwise, administer as few drinks and draughts as possible,
until there be some amendment, and the disease is past the
fourteenth day. When loss of speech seizes a person, on the
fourteenth day of a fever, there is not usually a speedy reso-
lution, nor any removal of the disease, for this symptom indi-
cates a protracted disease ; and when it appears on that day, it
will be still more prolonged. When, on the fourth day of a
fever, the tongue articulates confusedly, and when there are
watery and bilious discharges from the bowels, such a patient
is apt to fall into a state of delirium ; the physician ought,
therefore, to watch him, and attend to whatever symptoms may
turn up. In the season of summer and autumn an epistaxis,
suddenly occurring in acute diseases, indicates vehemence of
the attack, and inflammation in the course of the veins, and on
the day following, the discharge of thin urine ; and if the pa-
tient be in the prime of life, and if his body be strong from
exercise, and brawny, or of a melancholic temperament, or if
from drinking he has trembling hands, it may be well to an-
nounce beforehand either delirium or convulsion ;^ and if these
symptoms occur on even days, so much the better; but on
critical days, they are of a deadly character. If, then, a copious
discharge of blood procure an issue to the fulness thereof about
the nose, or what is collected about the anus, there will be an
abscess, or pains in the hypochondrium, or testicles, or in the
limbs ; and when these are resolved, there will be a discharge

1 It is impossible not to reoongise here a brief sketch of deiirium trement. The
trembling hands from drinking, with the subsequent delirium, can leave no doubts
on the subject. See further Littr^, torn, ii, p. 382.



324 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

of thick sputa^ and of smooth^ thin urine. In fever attended
with singultus^ give assafoetida^ oxymel^ and carroty triturated
together^ in a draught ; or galbanum in honey^ and cumin in
a linctus^ or the juice of ptisan. Such a person cannot escape^
unless critical sweats and gentle sleep supervene^ and thick and
acrid urine be passed^ or the disease terminate in an abscess :
give pine-firuit^ and myrrh in a linctus, and further give a very
little oxymel to drink; but if they are very thirsty, some
barley-water.

11. Peripneumonia^ and pleuritic affections^ are to be thus
observed : If the fever be acute, and if there be pains on either
side, or in both, and if expiration be attended with pain, if
cough be present, and the sputa expectorated be of a blond or
livid colour, or likewise thin, frothy, and florid, or having any
other character different from the common, in such a case, the
physician should proceed thus : if the pain pass upwards to the
clavicle, or the breast, or the arm, the inner vein in the arm
should be opened on the side affected, and blood abstracted
according to the habit, age, and colour of the patient, and the
season of the year, and that largely and boldly, if the pain be
acute, so as to bring on deliquium animi,^ and afterwards a
clyster is to be given. But if the pain be below the chest, and
if very intense, purge the bowels gently in such an attack of
pleurisy, and during the act of purging give nothing; but
after the purging give oxymel. The medicine is to be adminis-
tered on the fourth day ; on the first three days after the com-
mencement, a clyster should be given, and if it does not relieve
the patient, he should then be gently purged, but he is to be
watched until the fever goes off, and till the seventh day ; then
if he appear to be free firom danger, give him some unstrained
ptisan, in small quantity, and thin at first, mixing it with honey.
If the expectoration be easy, and the breathing free, if his sides
be free of pain, and if the fever be gone, he may take the
ptisan thicker, and in larger quantity, twice a day. But if he

' The fruit of the pimu phuuter. See Paulus ^gineta, YoL III, p, 301.

' It will be remarked, that in this place the author directs that the bleeding should
be carried to a greater extent than in the former part of this treatise. In general,
the ancient authorities forbade the abstraction of blood until it induced lipothymia.
This is decidedly the rule of practice laid down by Aretsus (De Curat Morb. Acut,
ii, 1).



k



- i



APPENDIX. 325

do not progress favorably^ he must get less of the drink^ and of
the draught, which should be thin, and only given once a day,
at whatever is judged to be the most favorable hour; this you
will ascertain from the urine. The draught is not to be given
to persons after fever, until you see that the urine and sputa
are concocted, (if, indeed, after the administration of the medi-
cine he be purged frequently, it may be necessary to give it,
but it should be given in smaller quantities and thinner than
usual, for from inanition he will be unable to sleep, or digest
properly, or wait the crisis ;) but when the melting down of
crude matters has taken place, and his system has cast off what
is offensive, there will then be no objection. The sputa are con-
cocted when they resemble pus, and the urine when it has
reddish sediments like tares. But there is nothing to prevent
fomentations and cerates being applied for the other pains of
the sides ; and the legs and loins may be rubbed with hot oil,
or anointed with fat ; linseed, too, in the form of a cataplasm,
may be applied to the hypochondrium, and as far up as the
breasts. When pneumonia is at its height, the case is beyond
remedy if he is not purged, and it is bad if he has dyspnoea,
and urine that is thin and acrid, and if sweats come out about
the neck and head, for such sweats are bad, as proceeding from
the suffocation, rdles, and the violence of the disease which is
obtaining the upper hand, unless there be a copious evacuation
of thick urine, and the sputa be concocted ; when either of
these come on spontaneously, that will carry off the disease.
A linctus for pneumonia : Galbanum and pine-fruit in Attic
honey; and southernwood in oxymel; make a decoction of
pepper and black hellebore, and give it in cases of pleurisy
attended with violent pain at the commencement. It is also
a good thing to boil opoponax in oxymel, and, having strained
it, to give it to drink ; it answers well, also, in diseases of the
liver, and in severe pains proceeding from the diaphragm, and
in all cases in which it is beneficial to determine to the bowels
or urinary organs, when given in wine and honey ; when given
to act upon the bowels, it should be drunk in larger quantity,
along with a watery hydromel.

12. A dysentery, when stopped, will give rise to an apos-
teme, or tumour, if it do not terminate in fevers with sweats.



326 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

or with thick and white urine^ or in a tertian fever^ or the pain
fix upon a varix, or the testicle, or on the hip-joints.^

13. In a bilious fever, jaundice coming on with rigor before
the seventh day carries off the fever, but if it occur without the
fever, and not at the proper time, it is a fatal symptom.

14. When the loins are in a tetanic state, and the spirits in
the veins are obstructed by melancholic humours, venesection
will afford relief.^ But when, on the other hand, the anterior
tendons are strongly contracted, and if there be sweats about
the neck and face, extorted by the violent pain of the parched
and dried tendons qf the sacral extremity (these are very thick,
sustaining the spine, and giving rise to very great ligaments,
which terminate in the feet), in such a case, unless fever and
sleep come on, followed by concocted urine and critical sweats,
give to drink a strong Cretan wine, and boiled barley-meal for
food; anoint and rub with ointments containing wax; bathe
the legs and feet in hot water, and then cover them up ; and
so in like manner the arms, as far as the hands, and the spine,
from the neck to the sacrum, are to be wrapped in a skin
smeared with wax ; this must extend to the parts beyond, and
intervals are to be left for applying fomentations, by means of
leather bottles filled with hot water, then, wrapping him up in
a linen cloth, lay him down in bed. Do not open the bowels,
unless by means of a suppository, when they have been long of
being moved. If there be any remission of the disease, so far
well, but otherwise, pound of the root of bryonia' in fragrant
wine, and that of the carrot, and give to the patient fasting early
in the morning, before using the afiusion, and immediately
afterwards let him eat boiled barley-meal in a tepid state, and
as much as he can take, and in addition let him drink, if he
will, wine well diluted. If the disease yield to these means, so
much the better, but, if otherwise, you must prognosticate
accordingly.

15. All diseases are resolved either by the mouth, the bowels,

* Galen, in his Commentary, remarks that this account of dysentery is vague, the
species of dysentery here alluded to not heing properly defined.

* This case is vague and undefined. I suppose the author alludes to opisthotonos
in this sentence, and to emprosthotonos in the succeeding part of this section.

' Bryonia dioica. See Dierbach, &c. p. 131.



APPENDIX. 327

the bladder, or some other such organ. Sweat is a common
form of resolution in all these cases.^

16. You should put persons on a course of hellebore who
are troubled with a defiuxion from the head. But do not
administer hellebore to such persons as are labouring under
empyema connected with abscesses, haemoptysis, and intem-
perament, or any other strong cause, for it will do no good ;
and if anything unpleasant occur the hellebore will get the
blame of it. But if the body have suddenly lost its powers, or
if there be pain in the head, or obstruction of the ears and
nose, or ptyalism, or heaviness of the limbs, or an extraordinary
swelling of the body, you may administer the hellebore, pro-
vided these symptoms be not connected with drinking, nor
with immoderate venery, nor with sorrow, vexation, nor insom-
nolency, for, if any of these causes exist, the treatment must
have respect to it.

17. From walking arise pains of the sides, of the back, of
the loins, and of the hip-joint, and disorder of the respiration has
often been from the same cause, for, after excesses of wine and
flatulent food, pains shoot to the loins and hips, accompanied
with dysuria.' Walking is the cause of such complaints, and
also of coryza and hoarseness.

18. Disorders connected with regimen, for the most part,
make their attack accordingly as any one has changed his
habitual mode of diet.' For persons who dine contrary to
custom experience much swelling of the stomach, drowsiness,
and fulness ; and if they take supper over and above, their
beUy is disordered ; such a person will be benefited by sleeping
after taking the bath, and by walking slowly for a considerable
time after sleep ; if, then, the bowels be moved, he may dine
and drink a small quantity of wine not much diluted ; but if
the bowels are not opened, he should get his body rubbed with
hot oil, and, if thirsty, drink of some weak and white wine, or
a sweet wine, and take repose; if he does not sleep he should

> Galen, in his CommenUry, remarks that the modes of solution in fevers are not
completely given in this place ; for example, our author omits those by the uterus
and the nose.

* The text is in a very unsettled state.

* The substance of this section occurs in the preceding part of this work, which
certainly amounts to a strong presumption that the present treatise is not genuine.
Very similar views are also laid down in the treatise On Ancient Medicine.



328 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

repose the longer. In other respects he should observe the
regimen laid down for those who have taken a debauch. With
regard to the bad effects of drinks^ such as are of a watery
nature pass more slowly through the body, they regurgitate,
as it were, and float about the hypochondria, and do not
flow readily by urine ; when filled up with such a drink, he
should not attempt any violent exertion, requiring either
strength or swiftness, but should rest as much as possible until
the drink has been digested along with the food ; but such drinks
as are stronger or more austere, occasion palpitation in the body
and throbbing in the head, and in this case the person affected
will do well to sleep, and take some hot draught for which he
feels disposed ; for abstinence is bad in headache and the effects
of a surfeit. Those who, contrary to usage, restrict themselves
to one meal, feel empty and feeble, and pass hot urine in con-
sequence of the emptiness of their vessels; they have a salt and
bitter taste in the mouth; they tremble at any work they
attempt; their temples throb; and they cannot digest their
supper so well as if they had previously taken their dinner.
Such persons should take less supper than they are wont, and
a pudding of barley-meal more moist than usual instead of
bread, and of potherbs the dock, or mallow, and ptisan, or
beets, and along with the food they should take wine in mode-
ration, and diluted with water; after supper they should take
a short walk, until the urine descend and be passed ; and they
may use boiled fish.

Articles of food have generally such effects as the fol-
lowing :^ Garlic occasions flatulence and heat about the chest,
heaviness of the head, and nausea, and any other habitual pain
is apt to be exasperated by it ; it is diuretic, which, in so far,
is a good property which it possesses : but it is best to eat it
when one means to drink to excess, or when intoxicated.
Cheese produces flatulence and constipation, and heats the
other articles of food ; and it gives rise to crudities and indi-
gestion, but it is worst of all to eat it along with drink after a
full meal. Pulse of all kinds are flatulent, whether raw, boiled,
or fried; least so when macerated in water, or in a green

' On the Dietetics of the ancients, see the Commentary on Paulus ^Ioinbta,
Vol. I, pp. 106-86.



APPENDIX. 329

state ; they should not be used except along with food prepared
from the cerealia. Each of these articles^ however^ has bad
effects peculiar to itself. The vetch, whether raw or boiled,
creates flatulence and pain. The lentil is astringent, and dis-
orders the stomach if taken with its hull. The lupine has the
fewest bad effects of all these things. The stalk and the juice
of silphium {assafoeiida), pass through some people's bowels
very readily, but in others, not accustomed to them, they
engender what is called dry cholera ;' this complaint is more
especially produced by it if mixed with much cheese, or eaten
along with beef. Melancholic diseases are most particu-
larly exacerbated by beef, for it is of an unmanageable nature,
and requires no ordinary powers of stomach to digest it; it
will agree best with those who use it well boiled and pretty
long kept. Goats' flesh has all the bad properties of beef; it
is as indigestible, more flatulent, and engenders acid eructa^
tions and cholera; such as has a fragrant smell, is firm, and
sweet to the taste, is the best, when well baked and cooled ; but
those kinds which are disagreeable to the taste, have a bad
smell, and are hard, such are particularly bad, and especially if
very fresh ; it is best in summer and worst in autumn. The
flesh of young pigs is bad, either when it is too raw or when it is
over-roasted, for it engenders bile and disorders the bowels.
Of all kinds of flesh, pork is the best ; it is best when neither
very fat, nor, on the other hand, very lean, and the animal had
not attained the age of what is reckoned an old victim ; it
should be eaten without the skin, and in a coldish state.

19. In dry cholera the beUy is distended with wind, there
is rumbling in the bowels, pain in the sides and loins, no
dejections, but, on the contrary, the bowels are constipated.
In such a case you should guard against vomiting, but endea-
vour to get the bowels opened. As quickly as possible, give a
clyster of hot water with plenty of oil in it, and having rubbed
the patient freely with unguents, put him into hot water, laying
him down in the basin, and pouring the hot water upon him
by degrees; and if, when heated in the bath, the bowels be

* By dry cholera would seem to be meant flatoleot colic. See Galen's Com*
mentary. It is also described below, and further with great accuracy by Alexander
Trallian (vii, 16).



330 REOIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

moved^ lie will be freed from the complaint. To a person in
such a complaint it will do good if he sleep^ and drink a thin^
old, and strong wine ; and you should give him oil, so that he
may settle, and have his bowels moved, when he will be relieved.
He must abstain from all other kinds of food; but when the
pain remits, give him asses' milk to drink until he is purged.
But if the bowels are loose, with bilious discharges, tormina,
vomitings, a feeling of sujSbcation, and gnawing pains, it is
best to enjoin repose, and to drink hydromel, and avoid
vomiting.

20. There are two kinds of dropsy, the one anasarca, which,
when formed, is incurable ; the other is accompanied with
emphysema (tympanites ?) and requires much good fortune to
enable one to triumph over it.^ Laborious exertion, fomenta-
tion, and abstinence (are to be enjoined). The patient should
eat dry and acrid things, for thus will he pass the more
water, and his strength be kept up. If he labours under
difficulty of breathing, if it is the summer season, and if he is
in the prime of life, and is strong, blood should be abstracted
from the arm, and then he should eat hot pieces of bread,
dipped in dark wine and oil, drink very little, and labour much.



' Galen, in his Commentary on this section, finds many things imperfectly stated,
and therefore unworthy of his great author. For example, he remarks, only two
Tarieties of dropsy are mentioned, namely, anasarca and tympanites ; whereas there
are three at least, and some even describe four varieties. By the three kinds of
dropsy, Galen and the other ancient authorities meant anasarca, ascites, and tym*
panitis. (See Paulus iEoiNBTA, Book III, 48.) That tympanites should have been
ranked with dropsy need excite no wonder, when we consider the resemblance of this
affection to ascites. In fact I have known cases of tympanites in which paracentesis
was performed by inexperienced surgeons under the impression that they were cases
of ascites. See some elaborate annotations on this head by Ermerins (^Specimen
Hist. Med., p. 125), and by Littr^ (Op. Hippocrat., tom. iv, p. 415). With r^;ard
to venesection in dropsy, Galen remarks that the rule of practice is not laid down
here with sufficient precision; it is only when the dropsy is connected with the sup-
pression of the hemorrhoidal or menstrual discharge, or when the patient is in a
plethoric state, that blood can be abstracted with advantage. He also finds fault
with the directions for the subsequent treatment, as not being accurately given. He
justly remarks, that none but persons in the vigour of life and in good health would
be able to digest dark-coloured wine and pork after venesection. I may mention
further that the text is faulty, that the words lyxeipif»»y yivurSai d^vxroc should
have been vmtten AwoKTHvtt ^ M^t 6 iStpoc liri}v yivtirau He attributes the
mistake to the first amanuensis who wrote the words in question*



APPENDIX. 331

and live on well-fed pork^ boiled with vinegar^ so that he may
be able to endure hard exercises.^

21. Those who have the inferior intestines hot^ and who
pass acrid and irregular stools of a colliquative nature^ if they
can bear it^ should procure revulsion by vomiting with hellebore ;
but if not^ should get a thick decoction of summer wheat in a
cold state^ lentil soup^ bread cooked with cinders^ and fish^
which should be taken boiled if they have fever^ but roasted if
not feverish ; and also dark-coloured wine if free of fever ; but
otherwise they should take the water from medlars^ myrtles,
apples, services, dates, or wild vine. If there be no fever, and
if there be tormina, the patient should drink hot asses' milk in
small quantity at first, and gradually increase it, and linseed,
and wheaten flour, and having removed the bitter part of
Egyptian beans, and ground them, sprinkle on the milk and
drink ; and let him eat eggs half-roasted, and fine flour, and
millet, and perl-spelt (chondrus) boiled in milk; — all these
things should be eaten cold, and similar articles of food and
drink should be administered.

22. The most important point of regimen to observe and
be guarded about in protracted diseases, is to pay attention to
the exacerbations and remissions of fevers, so as to avoid the
times when food should not be given, and to know when it
may be administered without danger ; this last season is at the
greatest possible distance from the exacerbation.

23. One should be able to recognise those who have headache
from gymnastic exercises, or running, or walking, or himting,
or any other unseasonable labour, or from immoderate venery ;
also those who are of a pale colour, or troubled with hoarseness ;
those who have enlarged spleen, those who are in a state of
ansemia, those who are sufiering from tympanites, those having
dry cough and thirst, those who are flatulent, and have the course
of the blood in their veins intercepted ; those persons whose hy-
pochondria, sides, and back are distended ; those having torpor ;
those labouring under amaurosis, or having noises in their ears;
those sufiering from incontinence of urine or jaundice, or
whose food is passed undigested ; those who have discharges of
blood from the nose or anus^ or who have flatulence and intense

' in reference to this practice Horace says :

'* Si noles sanus corret hydropiciu." (Serm. I, 1.)



333 BEOIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

pain^ and who cannot retain the wind. In these cases you
may do mischief^ but cannot possibly do any good by purging^
but may interrupt the spontaneous remissions and crises of the
complaints.^

24. If you think it expedient to let bloody see that the
bowels be previously settled^ and then bleed ; enjoin abstinence^
and forbid the use of wine ; and complete the cure by means
of a suitable regimen^ and wet fomentations.^ But if the
bowels appear to be constipated, administer a soothing clyster.

25.'' If you think it necessary to give medicines, you may
safely purge upwards by hellebore, but none of those should be
purged downwards. The most effectual mode of treatment is
by the urine, sweats, and exercise ; and use gentle friction so
as not to harden the constitution ; and if he be confined to bed
let others rub him. When the pain is seated above the dia-
phragm, place him erect for the most part, and let him be as
little reclined as possible ; and when he is raised up let him be
rubbed for a considerable time with plenty of hot oil. But if
the pains be in the lower belly below the diaphragm, it will be
useful to lie reclined and make no motion, and to such a person
nothing should be administered except the firiction. Those
pains which are dissolved by discharges from the bowels, by
urine, or moderate sweats, cease spontaneously, if they are
slight, but if strong they prove troublesome; for persons so
affected either die, or at least do not recover without further
mischief, for they terminate in abscesses.

1 Galen finds many things in this section also carelessly and confusedly written, and
therefore unworthy of Hippocrates. For example, the list of cases in which purging
is inapplicable, Galen holds to be incomplete ; and even in some of the cases specified
by Hippocrates he demurs to admit his views to be correct ; for example, in dis-
eases of the spleen he contends that melanogogues are strongly indicated. Many
more of the rules he considers to be vaguely and inaccurately stated. Altogether,
then, he holds that it is a loss of time to devote much attention to writings of such
a stamp ; but, he shrewdly remarks, there is no persuading many people to study only
such writings as are clear, and to leave such as are not so to the writers themselves ;
for it is just that, as they have paid no regard that we should understand what they
have written, we should not be very anxious to find out and learn what they say.

' Galen correctly remarks that this rule is applicable in certain cases, but not
in all.

* As Galen remarks in his Commentary, something appears to be wanting here in
order to indicate the disease to which these directions apply. Perhaps, as he sug-
gests afterwards, they are meant to apply to general pains.



APPENDIX. 333

26. A draught for a dropsical person. Take three cantharides/
and removing their head^ feet^ and wings^ triturate their bodies
in three cupfuls (cyathi) of water, and when the person who
has drunk the draught complains of pain, let him have hot
fomentations applied. The patient should be first anointed
with oil, should take the draught feisting, and eat hot bread
with oil.

27^. A styptic. Apply the juice of the fig inwardly to the
vein ; or having moulded biestings into a tent, introduce up
the nostril, or push up some chaldtis with the finger, and
press the cartilages of the nostrils together ; and open the bowels
with the boiled milk of asses : or having shaved the head apply
cold things to it if in the summer season.

28. The sesamoides^ purges upwards when pounded in
oxymel to the amount of a drachm and a half, and drunk ; it
is combined with the hellebores, to the amount of the third
part, and thus it is less apt to produce suffocation.

29. Trichiasis. Having introduced a thread into the eye of
a needle push it through the upper part of the distended eye*
lid, and do the same at the base of it ; having stretched the
threads tie a knot on them, and bind up until they drop out :
and, if this be sufficient, so far well ; but, if otherwise, you
must do the same thing again.^ And hemorrhoids, in like

' The cantharis of the ancients was indispatably the Mylakrit dehorii, or M.
Puitelutt. It continued to be used in ancient times as a diuretic, (see Paulvs
^GiNBTAi YoL III, p. 153 ;) and is well known in the East at the present day.

* All the remaining part of this work eyidently consists of firagments put together,
without any method or arrangement. Though not devoid of interest, they decidedly
haye no connexion with the treatise On Kegimen in Acute Diseases. Indeed an im-
partial examination of the whole Appendix must satisfy any one that there are but
too good grounds for holding with Galen, that the whole work is a disorderly com-
pilation, which, although it may have been made up of notes written or dictated by
Hippocrates, had certainly not been published by him.

* It most probably is the Beteda meditemmea. See Paulus ^oinbta, Vol. HI,
p. 331.

* This description has always been regarded as yery obscure. According to Galen
it is the operation which was afterwards named anabroehismMt, See Faulus
^oiMSTA, YoL HI, pp. 262, 269. M. Littre gives the following interesting observa-
tions on this passage by M. Malgaigne: " Quoiqu'il semble que Tauteur emploie deux
fiU, cependant il n'est fait mention que d'une aiguille. II parait bien indiqu^ que
I'aiguille traverse deux plis transverseaux en marchant de haut en has. Voici com-
ment je tradttirais le passage en question : pour le trichiasis, avec une aiguille armce



3S4 REGIMEN Cf ACUTE DISEASES.

manner, 70a maj treat by transfixing them with a needle and
tying them with a Terjr thick and large wooUen thread; far
thus the cure will be more certain. When yon lunre secnred
them^ use a septic application, and do not foment nntil they
drop off, and always leave one behind ; and when the patient
recoTcrs, let him be pnt upon a course of hellebore. Then let
him be exercised and sweated ; the friction of the gymnasium
and wrestling in the morning will be proper; but he must
abstain from running, drinking, and all acrid substances, except
marjoram ; let him take an emetic every seven days, or three
times in a month ; for thus will he enjoy the best bodily health.
Let him take straw-coloured, austere, and watery wine, and use
little drink.

30. For persons affected with empyema. Having cut some
bulbs of squill, boil in water, and when well boiled, throw this
away, and having poured in more water, boil until it appear to
the touch soft and well-boiled ; then triturate finely and mix
roasted cumin, and white sesames, and young almonds pounded
in honey, form into an electuary and give; and afterwards
sweet wine. In draughts, having pounded about a small aceta-
bulum of the white poppy, moisten it with water in which
summer wheat has been washed, add honey, and boil. Let him
take this frequently during the day. And then taking into
accoimt what are to happen, give him supper.

81. For dysentery. A fourth part of a pound of cleaned
beans, and twelve shoots of madder having been triturated,
are to be mixed together and boiled, and given as a linctus
with some fatty substance.

32. For diseases of the eyes. Washed spodium (tutty?)
mixed with grease, and not of a thinner consistence than dough.



d'an iilf traven^ de haut en bas le point le plus Aer^ (on la base) de la paopi^re
lup^rieure, aprb lui ayoir fait former un pli, et repasaer Taiguille de la meme
manidre un pen plus bu (on pr^ du bord libre) ; rapprochez lea extr^mit^ du fil,
et fixez-les par un noend ; puis laissez-Ies tomber d'eux-mSmes. Si cela riussit, e'est
bien j si non, U faudra recommencer." (Op. Hippocrat., torn, iii, p. xliv.) In my
Commentary on Paulub iEoiNiTA (Vol. II, p. 162), I have in so far fallen into the
mistake of supposing this description to apply to the lower eyelid, and M. Ermerins
would appear to have done the same. See Littr^, 1. c. The operation by the liga.
ture on hemorrhoids will be found more circumstantially described in the treatise on
that subject, of which a translation is given in this volume.



APPENDIX. 335

is to be carefully triturated^ and moistened with the juice of
unripe raisins ; and having dried in the sun, moisten until it
is of the consistence of an ointment. When it becomes again
dry^ let it be finely levigated^ anoint the eyes with it^ and dust
it upon the angles of the eyes.

33. For watery eyes. Take one drachm of ebeny and nine
oboli of burnt copper^ rub them upon a whetstone^ add three
oboli of saffiron; triturate all these things reduced to a fine
powder^ pour in an Attic hemina of sweet wine^ and then place
in the sun and cover up ; when sufficiently digested^ use it.^

34. For violent pains of the eyes. Take of chalcitis/ and of
raisin, of each I dr., when digested for two days, strain ; and
pounding myrrh and saffron, and having mixed must, with
these things, digest in the sun ; and with this anoint the eyes
when in a state of severe pain. Let it be kept in a copper vessel.

35 . Mode of distinguishing persons in an hysterical fit. Pinch
them with your fingers, and if they feel, it is hysterical ; but
if not, it is a convulsion.

36. To persons in coma, (dropsy ?) give to drink meconium
{euphorbia peplus ?) to the amount of a round Attic leciskion
(small acetabulums).

37. Of squama seris, as much as three specilla can contain,
with the gluten of summer wheat : levigate, pound, form into
pills, and give ; it purges water downwards.

38. A medicine for opening the bowels. Pour upon figs the



' For the weights and measures mentioned here, and in other parts of our author's
works, see the Comment on the last section of Paulus ^ginbta, Syd. Soc. edit.

' A mineral, consisting principally of sulphate of copper. See Paulus jEoinkta,
Vol. Ill, pp. 400-2.

* The fujffwviov was applied to three totally distinct substances : Ist, To a sort
of opium, that is to say, the expressed juice of the poppy (see Paulus iEoiNXTA,
Vol. Ill, p. 280) ; 2d, to the Ei^horbia pephu, L. (see Appendix to Dunbar's Greek
Lexicon, under the name) ; and, 3d, to the excrement of newborn children. It is
singular that the learned Foes, in his (Economia Hippocratica, should apply it in this
place to the last of these ; for if Hippocrates had used such a substance medicinally,
we may be well assured that it would not have been overlooked by Dioscorides and
Galen. There is every reason, however, to suppose that it is the same as the
iriirXoc of Dioscorides and Galen, that is to say, the Euphorbia pephu^ which was
recommended as a drastic purgative by all the ancient authorities on the Materia
Medica, and consequently would be a medicine very applicable either in coma or
dropsy.



336 REGIMEN IN ACUTE DISEASES.

juice of spurge, in the proportion of seven to one : tlien put

into a new vessel and lay past when properly mixed. Give
before food.

39. Pounding meconium, pouring on it water, and straining,
and mixing flour, and baking into a cake, with the addition of
boiled honey, give in affections of the anus and in dropsy; and
after eating of it, let the patient drink of a sweet watery wine,
and diluted hydromel prepared from wax : or collecting meco-
nium, lay it up for medicinal purposes.'

* All the commentators admit that the last section is ohscure. It woald appear t4)
me that Galen understands the expression rb Aw6 rCtv Konpiiav as applying f^picoic,
that is to say, to affections of the anus. I have followed Littr^ in giving the passage
a very different interpretation, hut I am by no means sure that Galen may not be
right.



FIRST AND THIRD BOOKS



OV



THE EPIDEMICS.



22



THE EPIDEMICS.



BOOK I.



THE ARGUMENT.

The ancient physicians commonly used the term Epidemic
in the same sense as it is understood now, that is to say^ as
applying to any disease which attacks a multitude of persons
in a locality at any particular period. This^ as will be seen in
our annotations below, is nearly the definition which Galen
gives of it ; and it is generally used by Hippocrates, in the
first and third books of the 'Epidemics/ in pretty much
the same sense as it is used by our great modem authority on
epidemics, Sydenham. But, although this be the strict sense
in which the ancient authorities use the term, it must be
borne in mind that, as applied to the whole seven books of
the ' Epidemics,^ it must be taken in a much wider significa-
tion ; for there are many things treated of in them to which
the term epidemic can by no means be thus applied, such as
surgical cases, fragments of anatomical descriptions, philoso-
phical speculations, empirical remedies, general reflections on
various topics, and so forth. In fact, the work entitled * The
Books of Epidemics' can be viewed in no other light than as
an Adversaria^ or Memorandum Book, in which is coUected a
variety of isolated facts and detached observations, to serve as
the materials for more elaborate and finished works on profes-
sional subjects. Indeed, Gtden does not hesitate to give it as
his opinion^ that some of the most celebrated of our author's
productions^ such as the ' Aphorisms' and ' Prognostics,' are in a
great measure made up from the materials originally laid up in



340 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

this capacious repertory of obseryations ;^ and^ with regard to
the former of these works^ there is no person familiarly
acquainted with it but must admit the truth of Galen's remark.
But, respecting the other, although it must be obvious, upon
a comparison of them, that there is a close connexion between
it and the ' Epidemics,' there can be no doubt that, in com-
posing the ^ Prognostics,' Hippocrates availed himself of other
materials ready prepared for his use, in the ' Prorrhetics' and
' Coan Praenotions' of his predecessors, the Asclepiadae -^ so
that, of all his admired productions, it, perhaps, is the one
which has the least pretension to any originality of matter.
If it be thought strange that the term epidemics should have
been applied to a work composed of such heterogeneous mate-
rials, I would remark, in explanation, that, although the
subject-matters of which it consists are not all of this nature,
the most valuable portion of them refers to epidemics, and it
is not to be wondered at that the whole collection should have
got its appellation from the most prominent subject to which
it relates.

I shall now proceed to give a succinct analysis of the various
subjects which are contained in the First and Third Books of
the ' Epidemics.'

The first book opens with a description of the leading
phenomena of a certain season, which is called the First Con-
stitution ; it was southerly, coldish, rainy, clouded and misty,
with some intervals of drought. The most noted diseases of
spring in this constitution were causus and an epidemical
parotitis. But the most important subject which is handled
under this head, is an epidemic phthisis, of which a very inte-
resting description is given.

The Second Constitution is described as being northerly and
humid; humid ophthalmies, dysenteries, and diarrhoeas are
described among the prevailing diseases of the season ; but the
most marked affection which is said to have occurred in this
constitution, is a continual fever of a serious character, which
did not come to a crisis until after it had run a long course.
It is described as passing off by deposits, and principally by

> De Diebus Decretoriis, i. ' See the Argument of the Prognostics.



ARGUMENT. 34 1

dropsies, and an affection of the urinary organs. One cannot
help being struck with the remark which Hippocrates makes,
that he never knew a case prove fatal in which the strangury
supervened. The directions as to the treatment he condenses
into one general rule, which well deserves to be engraved in
letters of gold, that *' the aim of the physician should be to do
good to his patient, or, at least, to do no harm" The descrip«
tion of this constitution concludes with some general reflections
on the prognostics in causus and phrenitis.

The Third Constitution is described as being of a very vari-
able character; winter stormy, spring rainy, summer hot,
autumn cold and dry. The ardent fevers {or causi) began
early in the season, but did not assume a fatal character until
autumn. This disease came to a crisis in four modes — by an
epistaxis, by a copious flow of urine, by a deposit, or by an
alvine discharge. In women, there was also sometimes a crisis
by menstruation.

The Fourth Constitution is one which, by Galen and the
other authorities, has been entitled the pestilential, and has
attracted great attention, as being supposed to have derived its
peculiar characters from the great Plague which prevailed
during the Peloponnesian war, and which is described in so
interesting a manner by Thucydides. Galen, not only in his
Commentary, but in various other parts of his works, advocates
this opinion, and it will be seen from what is stated in our
annotations, that there is in reality a striking resemblance
between the features of the plague, as delineated by Thucydides,
and the epidemical diseases which are noticed by Hippocrates
as having prevailed during this constitution. Of all the
diseases here described the most remarkable is the erysipelas,
which, although not of a very fatal character, was still of a
formidable nature, as it frequently terminated in gangrene.
Causus, phrenitis, and anthrax are also described as being
common under this constitution. The last of these being a
well-known symptom of the Oriental plague, it has naturally
excited a good deal of speculation to determine whether or not
our author here refers to the glandular plague. See our
remarks on Epidem. III.

In these books it is remarkable that phthisis is treated of as



312 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

a febrile disease, and in particular as anpervening upon attacks
of the semi-tertian. There seems reason to suppose that our
author means to describe a hectic fever succeeding to inter-
mittents, which had caused organic derangement of the internal
viscera, more especially of the liver and spleen. See Paulus
^GiNETA, Book II, 82.

In the first book, fourteen cases of disease are related, and
in the beginning of the third twelve, and sixteen in the end ;
thus making forty-two in all. It is worthy of remark, that in
twenty-five of these the resiQt was fatal. There is every reason,
then, to suppose that they were selected for a purpose, but
what that purpose was cannot now be easily determined. The
most natural would no doubt have been to illustrate, by
examples, the forms of the different diseases which are described
as occurring during the Constitutions previously described.
But there seems to be little or no reason to suppose that this
is the object for which they are related. In proof of this, I
may mention that there is not in the collection a single case
of the epidemical erysipelas which is described as having been
the prevailing disease during the fourth Constitution. Indeed
it must strike everybody, who reads them carefully, aa a sin-
gular feature in these cases, that the lineaments of a particular
disease are seldom to be recognised, and this perhaps may be
regarded as a proof of the faithfulness with which they have
been copied from nature. In short, we here recognise the
features of disease in the concrete, and not in the abstract.
And is not this what we should expect in all true copies firom
Nature ? How often does the candid physician find himself
forced honestly to admit that he is at a loss what name to give
to the combination of morbid actions which he is called upon
to treat I The common herd of mankind would seem to fancy,
as in Nature there are certain types of all animal and vegetable
substances, and the botanist has no difficulty in classing such
a plant, for example, as the canium maculatum; and the natural
historian can readily pronounce that such a bird is the alcedo
Ispida; that the physician, in like manner, upon examining
the characteristic features of any case, shoiQd have no difficulty
in pronouncing that it is pleuriiis, for example, or pneumonia,
or the like. But how often does it happen, that the complaint
in question is an aggregate of symptoms, produced by pecu-



ARGUMENT. 343

liarities of constitution, and incidental circumstances, which,
taken together, constitute an ensemble which does not well
admit of being referred to any one of the general forms of dis-
ease described in our nosological systems ? Now, I say the most
wonderfiQ feature in the cases related by Hippocrates, is that
they are descriptive of the symptoms observed in certain dis-
eased individuals, instead of being, what most modem cases
are, symptoms drawn to correspond with certain ideal forms of
disease. What, in my opinion, likewise adds very much to the
value of these cases is, that (as Galen somewhere remarks in
his Commentary) the author never aimed to make his Books
of Epidemics a work on Therapeutics, and hence, in noting
morbid phenomena, his mind is not warped by any particular
hypothesis, nor by any selfish interest, in order to place some
&vorite mode of practice, advocated by himself, in a favorable
light. May I be permitted here to remark, that the reader
will be much struck with our author^s admirable talent for de-
scribing the phenomena of disease as they are actually presented
to us, if he will compare the cases related by him in these two
books with those of almost any modern authority whatever ; —
for example, with those related by the late Dr. James Hamilton,
in his celebrated work on Purgative Medicines ? In the latter,
you look in vain for the strongly-marked features which present
themselves in all the cases related by our author, — for a de-
scription of the condition of the hypochondriac region, — of the
state of the animal heat in the extremities, — of the minute
characters of the alvine and urinary discharges, — of the respi-
ration, — of the patient's position in bed, — and many other
symptoms, which are invariably noticed by Hippocrates. And
what reasonable person will venture to deny, that the symptoms
I have just now mentioned are most important features in every
febrile disease, and that no one can be said to have a sufficient
view of such a case, who does not take these into account ?
To confine our attention at present to only one of these sym*
ptoms, — can it ever be a matter of indifference what are the
physical characters of so important an excretion as the urine ?
that is to say, whether the grosser particles of it, which usually
fall to the bottom, be present in the urine or not ? Yet in all
the seventeen cases related in the modem work just now re-
ferred to, the characters of the urine are not given in a single



344 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

instance. And although the object of the writer is to enforce
hid own peculiar views^ as to the utility of purgatire medicines
in this disease, he scarcely erer gives the minute characters of
the alvine discharges, as is uniformly the case with Hippocrates;
or if they are noticed at all, it is in so confused a manner that
the reader is at a loss to determine whether they are produced
by the disease^ or by the medicines which have been adminis-
tered. For the issue of the case no obvious cause is stated^
but the reader is expected to draw the conclusion that, as pur-
gatives were freely given, and a considerable proportion of the
cases did well, — (agreeably to the hacknied rule, post quod', ergo
propter quod,) — the purgatives brought about the fortunate re-
sult. Had the cases been fully and circumstantially detailed, it
might have been found that, as in those related by Hippocrates,
the recovery was preceded by a critical discharge of urine, ac-
companied with a copious sediment ; and then the more probable
inference would have been, that the amendment was referable
to it, and not to the purgative medicines which were adminis-
tered. It is, I regret to say, a notable example of the want
of logical training in the education of professional men, in the
present age, that inferences regarding a peculiar method of
practice were allowed to be founded upon narratives of obser-
vations so defective, and one-sided, as those I refer to.

I cannot quit the present subject of discussion, without
saying a few words in reference to what must strike the reader
as a singular feature in the cases related in the books of the
Epidemics; I mean the general omission of any mention of
treatment. The reader will find in our annotations various
remarks of Galen on this head, from which he will learn that
the Great Commentator inclines to the opinion, that in all
these cases the usual routine of practice was followed, but that
no mention is made of medicines, unless when there was some
deviation from the established rules. For example, in a certain
febrile case, it is stated that the patient was bled on the eighth
day, and Galen contends that venesection is noticed in this in-
stance, merely because it was contrary to the established rule
of not bleeding after the fourth day ; for that if the practice
had been in accordance with the general rule, it would not
have been noticed at all. Now it must be admitted, that this



ARGUMENT. 345

supposition is by no means improbable, and that examples of
this usage are not wanting, even in the modern literature of
medicine. To give an example, which just occurs to me:
in not a few of the cases of cerebral disease related by Dr.
Abercrombie, in his work ^ On the Brain/ there is no allusion
whatever to remedies, although no one, who recollects the
vigorous system of treatment then pursued by the profession in
"Modern Athens," will doubt for a moment that they must have
been applied. As this eminent authority, then, when he believed
that the treatment had no perceptible effect on the course
which the disease ran, thought himself warranted in omitting
all mention of it, it might be supposed, in like manner, that
Hippocrates may have passed over the remedies applied, from
some such motive or consideration. But another reason for the
absence of remedies in these Reports may be readily supposed.
May not Hippocrates have been at first quite undecided what
was the proper plan of treatment to be adopted in these cases,
and thought it the wisest course to attempt nothing rashly,
but to be for a season the quiet spectator of the course which
the diseases in question were naturally disposed to run, before
attempting to interfere in the stniggle between morbific agents
with which he was imperfectly acquainted, and their great
physician, as he held Nature to be ? ^ And however much the
advocates for a bold system of treating diseases may be disposed
to deride this expectant method, which Asclepiades contemp-
tuously denominated " the contemplation of death,'' ^ it does
not want the sanction of a name which is second only to
Hippocrates in the literature of epidemical fevers. Sydenham
admits, that with all the diligence which he had applied to the
study of these diseases, he was always greatly puzzled what plan
of treatment to adopt at the first breaking out of a new epidemic,
and that it was only '^ingenti adhibita cautela intentisque
animi nervis,'' that he coiQd make up his mind what course of
treatment to adopt in such an emergency. Need it be wondered
at, then, that two thousand years earlier the modest mind of
our great author should have hesitated for a time, before de-

' Mfidiv itKij, iiriSkv virtpopyv, (Epid. yi, 2, 12.) "Sovtrtav ^vtruc Ifirpoi ' iviV"
piffKii 4 pvffic avrj) iiavry rdc I^Sovq' dwaiSevroQ rf ^voiq iovtra jcat ov fiaSovea
TO. Biovra irotec. (Ibid, vi, 5, 1.)

' Galen, De Venesect, adv. Erasist., c. iii.



346 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

ciding how to act under similar circumstances ? I must own^
therefore, that I have long inclined to the opinion^ that^ dis-
tracted with the conflicting plans of treatment adopted by his
contemporaries, Hippocrates at first did little or nothing in the
treatment of epidemical fevers, and that it was only after a pa-
tient study of their symptoms, and many cautious trials, that
he ventured to lay down those excellent rules of treatment
which he has described so admirably in his work ' On Regimen
in Acute Diseases/ This, however, is merely my individual
opinion, and tlie reader must receive it as such.

M. Littre, in the Argument prefixed to his translation of
the Epidemics, enters very fully into the discussion of the
question regarding the nature of the diseases which are treated
of in the course of this work. This is a task, however, which
I deem it superfluous to undertake at any length, as I have
stated my opinions on this subject, in the Commentaries on the
Second Book of Paulus jEoineta, and after maturely weighing
what has been elicited by subsequent inquirers, I find no cause
to retract any of the opinions which are there advanced. That
the causus of Hippocrates, and the other ancient authorities, was
not the typhus of the more temperate parts of Europe, but a
bilious fever, of the remittent type, must be quite apparent to
every person at all acquainted with the medical literature of
febrile diseases. M. Littr^'s researches lead him to exactly the
same conclusion, and much deference is due to his judgment
in this case, as it must be admitted that a French physician
is now very favorably situated for contrasting the diseases of
temperate and hot climates, owing to the familiar intercourse
which at present subsists between Paris and Algiers. Of all
the materials which he has collected from the observations of
French physicians in Algeria, the most interesting are those
which he draws from a work on Fevers, by M. Maillot. The
description which is there given of " la fievre algide,*' is so
striking, and is so much calculated to illustrate the nature of
the fevers which are treated of in this work of Hippocrates,
that I shall not scruple to quote it entire.

" La fievre algide (dit M. Maillot) n'est pas g^n^ralement,
comme on le dit, la prolongation indefinie du stade de froid ;
je Tai vue rarement debuter de la sorte. II y a mdme entre
ces deux ctats une contraste frappante. Dans le premier stade



ARGUMENT. 347

des fievres intermittentes, la sensation du froid est bore de toute
proportion avec Pabaissement reel de la temperature de la peau^
tandis que^ dans la fievre algide, le froid n'est pas per9u par le
malade, alors que la peau est glacee. C'est ordinairement
pendant la reaction que commencent les symptdmes qui la
caracterisent ; souvent ils surviennent tout k coup au milieu
d'une reaction qui paraissait francbe. Au trouble de la
circulation succede en pen d'instants et presque sans transition
le ralentissement du pouls, qui devient bientot tres rare^ fuit
sous le doigt et disparait ; Tabaissement de la temperature du
corps va vite et suit la progression promptement decroissante
de la circulation ; les extremites^ la face^ le torse^ se refroi-
dissent successivement ; Tabdomen seul conserve encore quelque
temps un pen de cbaleur ; le contact de la peau donne la sensa-
tion de froid que procure le marbre. Les levres sont de-
colorees, Tbaleine froide, la voix cassee, les battemens du coeur
rares^ incomplets^ appreciables seulement par ^auscultation ; les
facultes intellectuelles sont intactes, et le malade se complait
dans cet ^tat de repos^ surtout lorsqu'il succede k une fievre
violente^ la physionomie est sans mobility Pimpassibilite la plus
grande est peinte sur son visage ; ses traits sont morts. La
marcbe de cette fievre est tr^s insidieuse ; il n'cst peut-Stre per-
sonnel dont elle n^ait surpris la vigilance ; avant d'etre fami-
liarise avec Fobservation des accidens de cette nature, on prend
souvent pour une tres grande amelioration due aux depletions
sanguines, le calme qui succede aux accidents inflammatoires ;
et plus d'une fois, dans de semblables ciroonstances, on n'a et^
detrompe que par la mort soudaine du malade. Toutes les fois
qu'k une reaction plus ou moins forte, on verra succ^der tout k
coup nn ralentissement du pouls, avec pftleur de la langue et
decoloration des levres, on ne devra hesiter k diagnostiquer
une fievre algide. La temporisation ici donne la mort, en
quelques heures. Dans quelques cas tres rares, j'ai cependant
TU cet etat algide se prolonger trois ou quatre jours. Le malade
expire en conservant toutes ses facultes intellectuelles,^ il s'eteint

' One cannot help being struck with the resemblance between this description and
a passage in Aretjeus's chapter on Causus : "f^vx^C KardoratriQf diaBfi^iQ ffv/ifratra
KaOaprj, Stdvoia XtvT'^, yvwfAff fiavTiKt^, c. r. X. In the yellow fever of the West
Indies, which would certainly appear to me to be a variety of the causus, the mind is
said to be wonderfully entire to the last. Dr. Fergusson gives a very striking instance
of this in describing the case of Sir James Leith, the British Governor of Guadaloupe.



348 EPIDEMICS- BOOK I.

comme par un arret de TiDnervation. Lorsque la mort n'est
pas le terme de cet etat morbide si grave^ le pouls se releve ;
la peau reprend sa chaleur naturelle; quelquefois alors la
reaction determine une irritation de Tencephale ou des Toies
digestives; mais rarement elle est assez intense poor qu'on
soit oblige de la combattre par des depletions sanguines/'^
I shall add a remark^ wliich M. Littr^ gives on the same au-
thority : " J'ai tenu k mentionner ici Timpression qu'eprouva
M. Maillot au debut de sa pratique en Alg^rie^ et qui est si
instructive ; car, aller subitement de France exercer la mede-
cine dans un pays chaud, ou lire les observations d'Hippocrate^
c'est tout un : ^impression est la la&me, le changement de scene
est aussi grand /'^

I cannot help remarking in this place, however, that it
appears to me singular, that M. Littre should represent the
febris algida as being confined to southern climates, and should
speak of it as being unknown in Paris ; for, at all events, there
seems to be no doubt that it prevails in a more northerly
region, namely, in Holland. It is thus described by the cele-
brated Franciscus de le Boe {or Sylvius), who was professor of
practical medicine at Leyden about the middle of the 17th
century : ^* Fcbres algidse observantur nonnunquam, non
tantum frigore prsesertim, sed frigore tantum molests ; adeo ut
aliquando et frequentius levis, aliquando et rarius nuUus
scquatur calor. Tales, etiam semper algidas in Nosocomio
academico habuimus ita manifestas, ut non tantum incipiente,
atque augesccnte, sed etiam vigente et declinante, imo cessante
paroxysmo, id est, semper tum suo, turn adstantium, tum medi-
corum sensu moleste ubique frigerent, nunquam teperent,
minus calerent uUibi segri. Suntque hse algidse graviores
semper forsan quotidianse/^' The febris algida is also named
" rigor without heat,'* by the Greek authorities, and " frigus
quod non calcfit'' by the Arabians, who, like Sylvius, as quoted
above, regard it as a variety of the quotidian intermittent.
See Paulus Eoineta, Book II, 26.

M. Littre^ quotes the remark of an excellent English

> Traits des Fi^vres ou Irritations Cer^TO-spinales intermittentes, d'apr^ des Ob*
servatioDS recueillies en France, en Corse et en Afrique. Paris, 1836.
' GBavres d'Hippocrate, &c., torn, ii, p. 565.
3 Prax. Med. nova Idea, i, 31. * Tom. ii, p. 565.



ARGUMENT. 349

authority on fever^ J. JohnsoD^^ that it is singular the effects
of marsh effluvia should have escaped the observation of Hip-
pocrates^ more especially as the remittent and intermittent
fevers, of which he treats so fully, are mostly derived from this
source. Now I must say, that I am not aware of there being
any passage in the works of Hippocrates where the effects of
marsh effluvia in engendering such fevers are distinctly noticed ;
but if Hippocrates was ignorant of this fact, in the etiology of
fevers, it was well known to Oaleu, as may be seen on reference
to his very interesting work 'On the Difference of Fevers.'* The
Arabians also were familiar with the fact. See Avicenna,iv, 1, 2, 1 .
In the treatise ' On Airs^' which, although not admitted by
us into the list of genuine works, has considerable pretension
to be so regarded, the causes of fever are treated of with great
precision, and there the pestilential fevers are said to derive
their origin from miasma, but whether or not under this term be
included marsh effluvia, cannot be determined. But perhaps a
better reason might be assigned for there being little or no
allusion to malaria in the works of Hippocrates, namely, that
after all, this was not the cause of the epidemical diseases which
he describes. The following extract from a work of very high
authority on fever is well deserving of consideration in this
place : " A question has arisen as to whether or not the in-
flammatory states of fever, in warm countries, are caused by
malaria, or by the other causes now instanced (excess of heat,
&c.) There can be no doubt that malaria very frequently
produces in the plethoric, young, and robust, who have recently
arrived in a hot climate, fever of an inflammatory and con-
tinued kind; but it must also be conceded that this fever
chiefly occurs, even in persons thus constituted, during the dry
season, and at times and in places where the existence of
malaria is doubtful, or, at least, by no means proved. It is
notoriously admitted that the inflammatory states of continued
fever, in both the East and West Indies, appear among those
soldiers, sailors, and civilians, who have not been long in a
warm country, and who have not suffered from disease since
their arrival ; and that they take place chiefly during the dry
and warm seasons, and in situations where the usual effects of

I On the Influence of Tropical Climates. * Tom. vii, p. 290 ; ed. Kiihn.



350 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

malaria are never observed. This is the result of the experience
of Jackson^ Annesley, Boyle, Twining, Conwell, and the other
experienced practitioners in warm countries. It agrees with
my own observations^ and is even admitted by Dr. Fergusson,
who has gone much further than any one else in assigning
malaria as the cause of intertropical fevers/*^ I may mention,
moreover, that Hippocrates and his contemporaries were evi-
dently not ignorant of the fact, that the atmosphere in the
vicinity of marshes and large rivers is unwholesome to the in-
habitants of warm climates. See De Diseta, ii, 2.

The following are part of the conclusions which M. Littr^
draws from his investigations into the nature of the fevers
described by Hippocrates. I quote them as being strongly
confirmatory of the opinions delivered by me in the Com-
mentary on the Second Book of Paulus JEgineta.

^'Les fievres decrites dans les Epidimies d'Hippocrate
different de nos fievres continue.

'^ Les fievres decrites dans les Epidemies ont, dans leur ap-
parence generale, une similitude tres grande avec eelles des
pays chauds.

^^ La similitude n'est pas moins grande dans les details que
dans Tensemble.

" Dans les unes comme dans les autres les hypochondres sont
pour un tiers des cas, le si^ge d'une manifestation toute speciale.

" Dans les unes comme dans les autres, il y a une forte ten-
dence ou refroidissement du corps, k la sueur froide et k la
lividit^ des extr^mit&.''

On almost all the other diseases treated of in these books,
M. Littr^'s opinions, in like manner, exactly coincide with those
delivered by me in the above-mentioned work. Thus he arrives
at the conclusion, that the Phrenitis and Lethai^^ of Hippo-
crates were varieties of the Causus. Compare Paulus ^Boineta,
Book III, 6, 9. He refers them to les fihvres pemicieuses
comateuses pseudo-caniinues, et les Jiivres pemicieuses dolorantes
pseudO'Continuis of M. Maillot. It would appear from the extracts
which he quotes from a work of M. Roux, on the Diseases of
Morea, that a similar tendency to pass into phrenitis andlethargy
is still observable in the land of Greece. The fevers of the

1 Copland's Dictionary of Practical Medicine, P. iv, p. 974.



ARGUMENT. 351

East Indies also^ as described by Dr. Twining^^ appear to
partake very much of the same character. In a word, the
conclusions to which a patient study of modern authorities on
the subject have brought me amount to this ; that the fevers
described by Hippocrates in his ' Epidemics/ are exactly the
same as those which are now described as still prevailing in
the land of Greece : that they correspond very well with those
described by Cleghom as occurring in Majorca ; differ but little
from those described by Pringle, Monro, and Sylvius, as hap-
pening in the Low Countries, and differ from those described
by Twining, as happening in Bengal, only in a few particulars.

From the analysis of their contents given above it will readily
be understood that the subject-matters of these two books are
not arranged methodically. Indeed it is quite obvious from
the nature of the work that the matters which are treated of
in it had never been methodised by the author. Certainly
then, as proposed by Desmair,^ it would be a much more natural
arrangement to give the four Constitutions of the seasons first,
and then to give the forty-two cases together. But the present
arrangement being of old standing, no editor has thought him-
self warranted to depart from it.

There are two important professional subjects of which it may
appear surprising that there is no mention in the ^ Books of
the Epidemics,' I mean sphygmology and contagion. Galen
repeatedly declares it as his opinion, that Hippocrates paid no
attention to the characters of the arterial pulse, and that the
subject was not at all studied until after his time ; and as far
as I can see there is no ground for calling in question this
opinion of Galen. Herophilus, in fact, would appear to have
been the first person that made any progress in this study.
It is more remarkable that Hippocrates should omit all allusion
to the other subject, more especially as the contagiousness of
certain diseases would appear to have been the popular belief
of his age. Thus his contemporary, Thucydides, in describing
the plague, expresses himself in such terms, as puts it beyond
a doubt that he regarded the disease as being of a contagious
nature. And another contemporary, Isocrates, makes such

> Cliuictl Obaenrations on the more importtnt Diseases of Bengal. Calcutta,
1835.
' Epidem. d'Hippocrate.



352 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

observations on a certain case of empyema^ by which he eyi-
dently means phthisis pulmonalis^ as to show that it also was
regarded as being communicable.^ How the omission is to
be accounted for I do not know, but certain it is that not the
least reference to contagion, in any shape, is to be found in
any of the Hippocratic treatises.



BOOK I— OP THE EPIDEMICS.

Sect. I. — Constitution Pibst.

1. In Thasus/ about the autumnal equinox, and under the
Pleiades,^ the rains were abundant, constant, and soft, with
southerly winds; the winter southerly, the northerly winds
faint, droughts ; on the whole, the winter having the character
of spring. The spring was southerly, cool, rains small in
quantity. Summer, for the most part, cloudy, no rain, the
Etesian winds, rare and small, blew in an irregular manner.
The whole constitution of the season being thus inclined to the
southerly, and with droughts early in the spring, from the pre-
ceding opposite and northerly state, ardent fevers occurred in a
few instances, and these very mild, being rarely attended
with hemorrhage, and never proving fatal.^ Swellings
appeared about the ears, in many on either side, and in the
greatest number on both sides, being unaccompanied by fever
so as not to confine the patient to bed; in all cases they

' See /Egineta. The naxTatiye contains the most distinct and imeqaivocal traces of
the belief in the contagiousness of consumption.

> Thasus is an island in the Mg^an sea, off the coast of Thrace, which bears the
modem name of Thaso or Tasso. It was in a flourishing condition in the time of
Hippocrates, and a tributary to Athens, but revolted from that power after its dis-
asters in Sicily during the Peloponnesian war. See Herodot., vi, 47 ; Thucydid., i, 101 ;
Tiii, 66. Galen states that it is cold, with a northerly exposure.

' According to Galen, in his Commentary on this passage, the setting of the Pleiades
takes place fifty days after the autumnal equinox. See the Argument to the treatise
On Airs, &c.

* We have already stated that the ardent fevers or causi, of which repeated men-
tion is made in the Hippocratic treatises, were fevers of the remittent type, in shoii
that they were the same as the bilious remittent fevers of Pringle and Monro.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 353

disappeared without giving trouble^ neither did any of them
come to suppuration^ as is common in swellings from other
causes. They were of a lax, large, diffused character, without
inflammation or pain, and they went away without any critical
sign. They seized children, adults, and mostly those who
were engaged in the exercises of the palestra and gymnasium,
but seldom attacked women. Many had dry coughs without
expectoration, and accompanied with hoarseness of voice. In
some instances earlier, and in others later, inflammations with
pain seized sometimes one of the testicles, and sometimes both ;^
some of these cases were accompanied with fever and some not ;
the greater part of these were attended with much suffering.
In other respects they were free of disease, so as not to require
medical assistance.'

2. Early in the beginning of spring, and through the
summer, and towards winter, many of those who had been long
gradually declining, took to bed with symptoms of phthisis;
in many cases formerly of a doubtful character the disease then
became confirmed; in these the constitution inclined to the
phthisical.' Many, and, in fact, the most of them, died ; and
of those confined to bed, I do not know if a single individual
survived for any considerable time ; they died more suddenly

* I need scarcely say that the disease here described is cynanche parotidaa, or
parotitis. It is a remarkable proof of our author's talent for observation, that he
has pointed out the tendency of the disease to be complicated with swelling and in-
flammation of the testicles. Altogether the description of the disease here given is
quite applicable to the mumps of modem times. As stated by him, the swelling of
the testicles is generally painful. See the Commentary of Galen.

' On reference to Galen's Commentary it will be seen that anciently the reading
of this passage was reckoned equivocal. According to one of the readings, the
meaning is that those who were sick did not require to come to the latrium for
advice. See also Littr^'s annotations on this passage.

* Galen thinks our author expresses himself confusedly in this place, but Littr^
justly defends him from this charge. According to Littrd, Hippocrates means that
those who had been long affected with consumption (the term used, vvo^OiLpofjiivwVf
rather signifies had obscure symptoms of consumption), then betook themselves to
bed ; but those who were in a doubtful state, then first manifested signs of confirmed
phthisis ; and, finally, that there were some who then, for the first time felt the at-
tack of phthisis, and that these were persons who were predisposed to it. According
to Galen, the phthisical constitution is marked by a narrow and shallow chest, with
the scapula: protuberant behind like wings; and hence he says chests of this con-
struction have been named alar. He further states that there are two forms of
consumption, the one originating in a defluxion from the head, and the other being

23



354 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

than is common in snch cases. But other diseases^ of a pro-
tracted character, and attended with fever, were well supported^
and did not prove fatal : of these we will give a description
afterwards. Consumption was the most considerable of the
diseases which then prevailed, and the only one which proved
fatal to many persons. Most of them were affected by these
diseases in the following manner : fevers accompanied with
rigors, of the continual type, acute, having no complete inter-
missions, but of the form of the semi-tertians, being milder the
one day, and the next having an exacerbation, and increasing
in violence ; constant sweats, but not diffused over the whole
body; extremities very cold, and warmed with difficulty;
bowels disordered, with bilious, scanty, unmixed, thin, pungent,
and frequent dejections. The urine was thin, colourless,
unconcocted, or thick with a deficient sediment, not settling
favorably, but casting down a crude and unseasonable sedi-
ment. Sputa small, dense, concocted, but brought up rarely
and with difficulty ; and in those who encountered the most
violent symptoms there was no concoction at all, but they con-
tinued throughout spitting crude matters. Their fauces, in
most of them, were painful from first to last, having redness
with inflammation; defluxions thin, small, and acrid; they
were soon wasted and became worse, having no appetite for
any kind of food throughout ; no thirst ; most persons delirious
when near death. So much concerning the phthisical affec-
tions.^

3. In the course of the summer and autumn many fevers of

connected with the rupture of a yessel in the lungs. I may be allowed to mention
in this place, in confirmation of our author's accuracy of observation with regard to
the connexion of hemoptysis with phthisis, that Louis found hemoptysis to a greater
or less extent in two thirds of his cases. (Researches on Phthisis, p. 166, Sydenham
Society edition.) The same author relates several cases in which death occurred
suddenly and unexpectedly, as Hippocrates states to have happened to some of his
patients. (Ibid.)

' I am of opinion that the species of phthisis noticed in the latter part of this
section was the acute form of phthisis described by Louis (p. 351). Our author, it
will be remarked, states that his patients were mostly delirious when near death.
Louis, in like manner, mentions delirium in, I believe, every one of the cases of acute
phthisis which he relates. Galen justly remarks, that, in the ordinaiy forms of
phthisis, delirium is not a common symptom. I would also call attention to our
author's observation regarding the inflamed state of the fauces, which is also amply
confirmed by the observation of Louis in this form of phthisis*



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 355

the continual type, but not violent j' they attacked persons
who had been long indisposed, but who were otherwise not in
an uncomfortable state. In most cases the bowels were dis-
ordered in a very moderate degree, and they did not suffer
thereby in any manner worth mentioning ; the urine was gene-
rally well coloured, clear, thin, and after a time becoming
concocted near the crisis. They had not much cough, nor
was it troublesome ; they were not deficient in appetite, for it
was necessary to give them food, (on the whole, persons
labouring under phthisis were not affected in the usual
manner.)^ They were affected with fevers, rigors, and defi-
cient sweats, with varied and irregular paroxysms, in general
not intermitting, but having exacerbations in the tertian form.
The earliest crisis which occurred was about the twentieth day,
in most about the fortieth, and in many about the eightieth.
But there were cases in which it did not leave them thus at
all, but in an irregular manner, and without any crisis; in
most of these the fevers, after a brief interval, relapsed again ;
and from these relapses they came to a crisis in the same
periods ; but in many they were prolonged so that the disease
was not gone at the approach of winter. Of all those which
are described under this constitution, the phthisical diseases
alone were of a fatal character ; for in all the others the patients
bore up well, and did not die of the other fevers.^

' The nature of the continual fevers of the ancients is fully explained in the Com-
mentary on the twenty-seventh section of the Second Book of Paulus ^Egineta.
Galen, in his Commentary on this passage, marks their nature very distinctly in few
words. He says that such fevers as have an exacerhation of fever ending in complete
apyrexia are called intermittents, whereas such as do not end in a complete remission
of the fever are called continuaL See fiirther De D'lff. Febr., ii, 2. In a word, the con-
tinual fevers were decidedly of the remittent type. See further Donald Monro's work
on Army Diseases, in the beginning of the chapter on the Bilious Remittent Fever.

^ The iiltroduction of phthisis in this place has created some difficulty in the inter-
pretation, as maybe seen on reference to Galen and Littr^. Galen gives a very interesting
account of the way in which interpolations often took place. (Opera, tom. v, p. 356.)

' The text of this last sentence is in an unsettled state. The following would be
a translation of it as it stands in the Basle edition of Galen's Works : *' Of all the
cases described under this constitution, those alone which were of a phthisical
character proved fiital. But they (the phthisical aflections ?) did not supervene upon
the other fevers." Provided this be the true meaning of the passage, it would merit
great attention, as seeming to contain a declaration that intermittent fevers super-
induced an immunity to phthisis. I need not say that this supposed fact has been
exciting a great deal of interest lately in the profession, more especially in France.



356 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

Sect. II. — Constitution Second.

1. In Thasus^ earlj in aatnmn^ the winter suddenly set in
rainy before the nsual time^ with mnch northerly and southerly
winds. These things all continued so during the season of the
Pleiades^ and until their setting.^ The winter was northerly,
the rains frequent, in torrents, and large, with snow, but with
a frequent mixture of fair weather. These things were all
so, but the setting in of the cold was not much out of season.
After the winter solstice, and at the time when the zephyr
usually begins to blow, severe winterly storms, out of season,
with much northerly wind, snow, continued and copious rains;
the sky tempestuous and clouded ; these things were protracted,
and did not remit until the equinox. The spring was cold,
northerly, rainy, and clouded ; the summer was not very sultry,
the Etesian winds blew constant, but quickly afterwards, about
the rising of Arcturus, there were again many rains with north
winds. The whole season being wet, cold, and northerly,
people were, for the most part, healthy during winter; but
early in the spring very many, indeed, the greater part, were
valetudinary. At first ophthalmies set in, with rheums, pains,
unconcocted discharges, small concretions, generally breaking
with difficulty, in most instances they relapsed^ and they did
not cease imtU late in autumn.^ During summer and autumn
there were dysenteric aflTections, attacks of tenesmus and lien-
tery, bilious diarrhoea, with thin, copious, undigested, and acrid
dejections^ and sometimes with watery stools ; many had copious
defluxions, with pain, of a bilious, watery, slimy, purulent

' It is to be borne in mind that the autumn began with the rising of Arcturus,
and ended with the setting of the Pleiades. The setting of the Pleiades then indi-
cated the commencement of winter. The classical reader wiU find the different
seasons, strikingly defined by the rising and setting of the stars, in Virgil's Geoi^cs.
See in particular Georg. i, 221.

' Galen thus explains the origin of the ophthalmies. He says, the constitution of
the air being not only cold and humid, but attended also with hurricanes, the eyes
were thus injured, and consequently were the first part of the body to show symptoms
of disease. The dysenteric and other alvine complaints which followed, he ascribes
to the constriction of the skin induced by the cold, and to the humours of the system
aggravated and increased by the humid state of the season. These humours being
thus shut up by the occlusion of the pores of the skin, part of them were determined
to the intestines, occasioning diarrhoea, tenesmus, dysentery, &c. ; some to the bladder,
inducing strangury ; and some to the mouth of the stomach, occasioning vomiting.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 357

nature^ attended with strangury^ not connected with disease of
the kidneys^ but one complaint succeeding the other ; vomit-
ings of bile^ phlegm, and undigested food, sweats, in all cases
a redundance of humours. In many instances these complaints
were unattended with fever, and did not prevent the patients
from walking about, but some cases were febrile, as will be
described. In some all those described below occurred with
pain. During autumn, and at the commencement of winter,
there were phthisical complaints, continual fevers ; and, in a
few cases, ardent; some diurnal, others nocturnal, semi-
tertians, true tertians, quartans, irregular fevers. All the fevers
which are described attacked great numbers. The ardent fevers
attacked the smallest numbers, and the patients suffered the
least from them, for there were no hemorrhages, except a few
and to a small amount, nor was there delirium ; all the other
complaints were slight ; in these the crises were regular, in most
instances, with the intermittents, in seventeen days; and I
know no instance of a person dying of causus, nor becoming
phrenitic.^ The tertians were more numerous than the ardent
fevers, and attended with more pain ;' but these all had four
periods in regular succession from the first attack, and they
bad a complete crisis in seven, without a relapse in any
instance. The quartans attacked many at first, in the form of
regular quartans, but in no few cases a transition from other
fevers and diseases into quartans took place ; they were pro-
tracted, as is wont with them, indeed, more so than usual.
Quotidian, nocturnal, and wandering fevers attacked many
persons, some of whom continued to keep up, and others were
confined to bed. In most instances these fevers were prolonged
under the Pleiades and till winter. Many persons, and more
especially children, had convulsions from the commencement ;'

' Galen states in his Commentary that the phrenitis is connected with inflamma-
tion of the parts ahout the brain. We have mentioned before that the phrenitis of
the ancients was a febrile affection, and not idiopathic inflammation of the brain, as
is generally supposed.

' According to Galen, the cansi or ardent fevers are occasioned by yellow bile
collected about the yessels of the liver and stomach, and the tertians by the same
diffused over the whole body.

* Galen states in his Commentary that children are peculiarly subject to convul-
sions owing to the weakness of their nervous system. He adds, that in their case
convulsious are not attended with so much danger as in other cases. See the
Hippocratic treatise On Dentition.



Z:.^ EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

and Xhdj Lad fever, and the codthImods snperrened upon
the fey en; in most ca^es ther were protracted, bnt free
from dan jrer, unles* in tho*e who were in a deadly state from
other complaints. Those fevers which were continual in the
main, and with no intermi&sionSy bat having exacerbations in
the tertian form,' there being remissions the one day and
exiujerbations the next, were the most violent of all those which
occurred at that time, and the most protracted, and occnrring
with the greatest pains, beginning mildly, always on the whole
increasing^ and being exacerbated, and always turning woise^
having nmall rcmisnions, and after an abatement having more
violent paroxysms, and growing worse, for the most part, on
the critical days. Rigors, in all cases, took place in an irre-
gular and uncertain manner, very rare and weak in them, but
greater in all other fevers ; frequent sweats, but most seldom
in them, bringing no alleviation, bat, on the contrary, doing
mischief. Much cold of the extremities in them, and these
were warmed with difficulty. Insomnolency, for the most
part, especially in these fevers, and again a disposition to
coma. The bowels, in all diseases, were disordered, and in a
bad state, but worst of all in these. The urine, in most of
tliem, was either thin and crude, yellow, and after a time with
sliglit symptoms of concoction in a critical form, or having
the proper thickness, but muddy, and neither settling nor
subniding; or having small and bad, and crude sediments;
thcMo being the worst of all. Coughs attended these fevers,
but I cannot state that any harm or good ever resulted from
tlio cougli. The most of these were protracted and trouble-
some, went on in a very disorderly and irregular form, and, for
tlie most part, did not end in a crisis, either in the fatal cases
or in the others ; for if it left some of them for a season it
soon returned again. In a few instances the fever terminated
with a crisis ; in the earliest of these about the eightieth day,
and some of these relapsed, so that most of them were not free

* The fever here described is evidently the semitertian. See Paulus JEaifOSTA,
Book 1 1 , 34. " The true scinitcrtian/' says M. Bartels, as quoted by M. Littr^, " is a real
complication of an intermittent fever vrith another fever of a continual type. It does
not show itself but rarely in our countries ; but it is more frequent in the hotter
countries of Europe, although the false semitertian has oftener than once been con.
founded with the true. In the true, the intermittent fever is tertian; the non-
iiitennittcnt is quotidian/* See also Galen, Opera, torn, v, p. 362 ; ed. Baail.



EPIDEMICS—BOOK I. 35D

from the fever daring the winter; but the fever left most of
them without a crisis, and these things happened alike to those
who recovered and to those who did not. There being much
want of crisis and much variety as to these diseases, the greatest
and worst symptom attended the most of them, namely, a
loatHng of aU articles of food, more especiaUy with those who
had otherwise fatal symptoms ; but they were not unseasonably
thirsty in such fevers. After a length of time, with much
suffering and great wasting, abscesses were formed in these
cases, either unusually large, so that the patients could not
support them, or unusually small, so that they did no good,
but soon relapsed and speedily got worse. The diseases which
attacked them were in the form of dysenteries, tenesmus, lien-
tery, and fluxes ; but, in some cases> there were dropsies,
with or without these complaints. Whatever attacked them
violently speedily cut them off, or again, did them no good.
Small rashes, and not corresponding to the violence of the
disease, and quickly disappearing, or swellings occurred about
the ears, which were not resolved, and brought on no crisis.^
In some they were determined to the joints, and especially to
the hip-joint, terminating critically with a few, and quickly
again increasing to its original habit. Persons died of all
these diseases, but mostly of these fevers, and especially infants
just weaned, and older children, until eight or ten years of
age, and those before puberty. These things occurred to those
affected with the complaints described above, and to many
persons at first without them. The only favorable symptom,
and the greatest of those which occurred, and what saved
most of those who were in the greatest dangers, was the con-
version of it to a strangury, and when, in addition to this,
abscesses were formed.^ The strangury attacked, most especi-
ally, persons of the ages I have mentioned, but it also occurred

' The text here is in an unsatisfactory state, and, as nsual in snch cases, no in-
genuity nor pains can do much to mend it. See Foes and Littr^. I have translated
the disputed words ** not resolved," which seems to me to agree best with the sense.
Every practical physician knows that swellings of the glands, which continue long
and do not suppurate, are unfavorable in fevers.

* The modern physician will not ful to be struck with this observation as to the
termination of certain cases of fever in determination to the kidnevs. Galen remarks

w

in his Commentary on this passage, that as the general system is often purged by the
bowels, so is it also sometimes by the kidneys and bladder. This, he adds, is a pro-



360 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

in many others, both of those who were not confined to bed
and those who were. There was a speedy and great change
in all these cases. For the bowels, if they happened previously
to have watery discharges of a bad character, became regular,
they got an appetite for food, and the fevers were mild after-
wards. But, with regard to the strangury itself, the symptoms
were protracted and painful. Their urine was copious, thick,
of various characters, red, mixed with pus, and was passed with
pain. These all recovered, and I did not see a single instance
of death among them.

5.^ AVith regard to the dangers of these cases, one must
always attend to the seasonable concoction of all the evacua*
tions, and to the favorable and critical abscesses. The con-
coctions indicate a speedy crisis and recovery of health ; crude
' and undigested evacuations, and those which are converted
into bad abscesses, indicate either want of crisis, or pains, or
prolongation of the disease, or death, or relapses; which of these
it is to be must be determined from other circumstances. The
physician must be able to tell the antecedentSj know the present, and
foretell the future — must meditate these things, and have two spe-
cial objects in view with regard to diseases, namely, to do good or
to do no harm. Tfte art consists in three things — the disease, the
patient, and the physician. The physician is the servant of the art,
and the patient must combat the disease along vnth the physician?

tracted and painful mode of resolution in fevers. The reader will remark the cha-
racters of the urine as stated below by our author. One cannot help being struck
with his statement, that all these cases recovered. I am not aware of any modem
observations bearing on this point.

' There is considerable difficulty here in determining the reading. See Littr^,
whom I have followed.

' I need scarcely remark that this passage is of dassical celebrity. Galen, in his
Commentary, remarks that the first time he read it he thought it unworthy of Hip-
pocrates to lay it down as a rule of practice, that " the physician should do good to
his patient, or at least no harm ;" but that, after having seen a good deal of the
practice of other physicians, and observed how often they were justly exposed to
censure for having bled, or applied the bath, or given medicines, or wine unseasonably,
he came to recognise the propriety and importance of the rule laid down by Hippo-
crates. The practice of certain physicians, Galen remarks, is like playing at the dice,
when what turns up may occasion the greatest mischief to their patients. The last
clause of this passage is very forcibly put. Galen, however, informs us that in some
of the MSS. instead of " art" he found " nature ;" that is to say, that the physidan
is " the minister {or servant) of nature." Either of the readings, he remarks, will
agree very well with the meaning of the passage.



■ I ■ ^



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 361

6. Pains about the head and neck^ and heaviness of the
same along with pain^ occur either without fevers or in fevers.
Convulsions occurring in persons attacked with irenzy^ and
having vomitings of verdigris-green bile^ in some cases quickly
prove fatal. In ardent fevers^ and in those other fevers in which
there is pain of the neck^ heaviness of the temples^ mistiness
about the eyes^ and distension about the hypochondriac region,
not unattended with pain, hemorrhage from the nose takes
place/ but those who have heaviness of the whole head, cardi-
algia and nausea, vomit bilious and pituitous matters ; children,
in such affections, are generally attacked with convulsions, and
women have these and also pains of the uterus ; whereas, in
elder persons, and those in whom the heat is already more
subdued, these cases end in paralysis, mania, and loss of sight.

Third Constitution.

7. In Thasus, a little before and during the season of
Arcturus,^ there were frequent and great rains, with northerly
winds. About the equinox, and till the setting of the Pleiades,
there were a few southerly rains : the winter northerly and
parched, cold, with great winds and snow. Great storms about
the equinox, the spring northerly, dryness, rains few and cold.
About the summer solstice, scanty rains, and great cold until
near the season of the Dog-star.^ After the Dog-days, until the
season of Arcturus, the summer hot, great droughts, not in
intervals, but continued and severe : no rain ; the Etesian winds
blew ; about the season of Arcturus southerly rains until the
equinox.

* The reader will find it interesting to refer here to the Prognostics. See also the
Commentary of Galen. Let me here impress upon the reader the necessity of making
frequent comparisons of the Prognostics with this work, if he would wish rightly to
apprehend the hearing and meaning of the latter. That the Epidemics are entirely
founded upon the principles of prognosis there can he no doubt.

' It is to be recollected that the rising of Arcturus marked the beginning of autumn,
and the setting of the Pleiades the end of it. See above.

* The season of the Dog-star was immediately after the summer solstice, namely,
when the sun enters the constellation Leo. The classical reader will readily bring to
his recollection the lines of Horace, which are descriptive of this season : ^^ ^^''

" Jam Procyon furit, /. ^ ^ ' . N

£t Stella Yesani Leonis, ^' >. . . - v \

Sole dies refercnte siccos." 'i; :, . . •

■> ■ » -* .,

5S ••



' • -s.



362 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

8. In this state of things^ during winter^ paraplegia set in,
and attacked many, and some died speedily ; and otherwise the
disease prevailed much in an epidemical form, but persons re-
mained free from all other diseases.^ Early in the spring,
ardent ferers commenced and continued through the summer
until the equinox. Those then that were attacked immediately
after the commencement of the spring and summer, for the
most part recovered, and but few of them died. But when the
autumn and the rains had set in, they were of a fatal character,
and the greater part then died.' When in these attacks of
ardent fevers there was a proper and copious hemorrhage firom
the nose, they were generally saved by it, and I do not know
a single person who had a proper hemorrhage who died in this
constitution. Philiscus, Epaminon, and Silenus, indeed, who
had a trifliDg epistaxis on the fourth and fifth day, died.^ The
most of those seized with the disease had a rigor about the time
of the crisis, and especially those who had no hemorrhage;
these had also the rigor associated. Some were attacked with
jaundice on the sixth day,* but these were benefited either by
an urinary purgation, or a disorder of the bowels, or a copious
hemorrhage, as in the case of Heraclides, who was lodged with
Aristocydes : this person, though he had the hemorrhage from
the nose, the purgation by the bladder, and disorder of the

' Galen, in his Commentary, remarks that the attacks of paraplegia (that is to
say, of apoplexy) were brought on by the cold winds of the winter succeeding to a
humid autumn.

' The causi or ardent fevers, it is worthy of remark, began this season in spring*
but were not of a fatal character until autumn. In modern times the bilious remit-
tent fever has uniformly been found to be most aggravated in autumn, and hence it
has been named by some authorities the autumnal remittent fever. See the works
of Sydenham, Pringle, Monro, and Cleghom. Monro mentions that be seldom saw
it in spring, but that it is common in the neighbourhood of London towards the end
of summer and beginning of autumn. All these authorities are agreed that it is of a
highly bilious nature.

* Monro mentions epistaxis as occurring in the autumnal remittent fever ; he says
it did not prove a crisis in any case.

* The complication of the autumnal remittent fever with jaundice is noticed by
Sir John Pringle (Obs. iii, 4), and by Monro (On Army Diseases, p. 161). Galen,
in his Commentary, remarks that when nature is unable to evacuate the bile, it it
collected in the skin, and occasions jaundice. He adds, that the occurrence of the
jaundice in this case was unfavorable, owing to its taking place before the seventh
day. When occurring on the seventh day, jaundice was reckoned a favorable symptom.
See On Crises, 3 ; Aphorism, iv, 62, 64.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 363

bowels^ experienced a favorable crisis on the twentieth day^
not like the servant of Phanagoras, who had none of these
symptoms, and died. The hemorrhages attacked most persons^
but especially young persons and those in the prime of life, and
the greater part of those who had not the hemorrhage died :^
elderly persons had jaundice or disorders of the bowels, such
as Bion, who was lodged with Silenus. Dysenteries were epi«
demical during the summer, and some of those cases in which
the hemorrhage occurred, terminated in dysentery, as happened
to the slave of Eraton, and to Mullus, who had a copious
hemorrhage, which settled down into dysentery, and they reco-
vered. This humour was redundant in many cases, since in
those who had not the hemorrhage about the crisis, but the
risings about the ears disappeared, after their disappearance
there was a sense of weight in the left flank extending to the
extremity of the hip, and pain setting in after the crisis, with
a discharge of thin urine; they began to have small hemorrhages
about the twenty-fourth day, and the swelling was converted
into the hemorrhage. In the case of Antiphon, the son of
Critobulus,the fever ceased and came to a crisis about the fortieth
day. Many women were attacked, but fewer than of the men,
and there were fewer deaths among them. But most of them
had difficult parturition, and after labour they were taken ill,
and these most especially died, as, for example, the daughter of
Telebolus died on the sixth day after delivery.^ Most females
had the menstrual discharge during the fever, and many girls
had it then for the first time : in certain individuals, both the
hemorrhage from the nose and the menses appeared; thus, in the
case of the virgin daughter of Daetharses, the menses then took
place for the first time, and she had also a copious hemorrhage
from the nose, and I knew no instance of any one dying when
one or other of these took place properly. But all those in the
pregnant state that were attacked had abortions, as far as I

* The reader may feel interested to learn Galen's hypothesis by which he accounts
for the hemorrhage in this case. He says it is produced by the redundancy of yellow
bile, which, being mixed up with the blood and heating it, is carried up to the head,
where it produces rupture of the vessels and hemorrhage.

* Modern observations have confirmed this account of the generslly fstal issue of
febrile diseases after parturition. In the Hippocratic work On Diseases, fever after
delivery in a woman is reckoned among the cases which generally prove fatal.



364 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

observed. The urine in most cases was of the proper colour,
but thin^ and having scanty sediments :^ in most the bowels
were disordered with thin and bilious dejections ; and many,
after passing through the other crises^ terminated in dysente-
ries^ as happened to Xenophanes and Critias. The urine was
watery^ copious^ clear^ and thin ; and even after the crisis, when
the sediment was natural, and all the other critical symptoms
were favorable, as I recollect having happened to Bion, who
was lodged in the house of Silenus, and Critias, who lived with
Xenophanes, the slave of Areton, and the wife of Mnesistratus.
But afterwards all these were attacked with dysentery. It
would be worth while to inquire whether the watery urine was
the cause of this.^ About the season of Arcturus many had
the crisis on the eleventh day, and in them the regular re-
lapses did not take place, but they became comatose about this
time, especially children ; but there were fewest deaths of all
among them.

9. About the equinox, and until the season of the Pleiades,
and at the approach of winter, many ardent fevers set in ; but
great numbers at that season were seized with phrenitis, and
many dicd;^ a few cases also occurred during the summer.
These then made their attack at the commencement of ardent
fevers, which were attended with fatal symptoms ; for immedi-
ately upon their setting in, there were acute fever and small
rigors, insomnolency, aberration, thirst, nausea, insignificant
sweats about the forehead and clavicles, but no general per-

' I would again request the attention of my contemporaries to the characters of
the urine before a crisis, as given by Hippocrates ; and, in confirmation of them, I will
venture to introduce here an extract from Donald Monro's admirable account of the
autumnal remittent fever : " The urine in the beginning was commonly of a high
colour, though sometimes it was pale and limpid ; but when the fever came to remit,
there was often a small sediment after each paroxysm ; and as the fever was going
ofT, it let fall a sediment in all,** (Army Diseases, &c., p. 159.) The absence of the
sediment in the urine before the crisis is an important fact in the history of febrile
diseases, which I have reason to think is not now sufficiently adverted to.

' Galen does not hesitate to give it as his opinion that the dysentery was owing to
the bile not being properly purged off by the urine.

' The reader will find it interesting here to mark the alliance between the caosus
and phrenitis, to which we formerly adverted. Galen remarks that both arise from
the same humour, that is to say, bile, which when it collects in the veins of the lower
part of the body gives rise to causus; but from the beginning of autumn to the
equiuox, produces phrenitis by being determined to the brain.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 365

spiratdon ; they had much delirious talking^ fears, despondency,
great coldness of the extremities, in the feet, but more espe-
cially in their hands : the paroxysms were on the even days ;
and in most cases, on the fourth day, the most violent pains set
in, with sweats, generally coldish, and the extremities could not
be warmed, but were livid and rather cold, and they had then
no thirst ; in them the urine was black, scanty, thin, and the
bowels were constipated ; there was an hemorrhage from the
nose in no case in which these symptoms occurred, but merely
a trifling epistaxis ; and none of them had a relapse, but they
died on the sixth day with sweats.^ In the phrenitic cases, all
the symptoms which have been described did not occur, but in
them the disease mostly came to a crisis on the eleventh day,
and in some on the twentieth. In those cases in which the
phrenitis did not begin immediately, but about the third or
fourth day, the disease was moderate at the commencement, but
assumed a violent character about the seventh day. There was
a great number of diseases, and of those affected, they who died
were principally infants, young persons, adults having smooth
bodies, white skins, straight and black hair, dark eyes, those
living recklessly and luxuriously; persons with shrill, or
rough voices, who stammered and were passionate, and women
more especially died from this form. In this constitution, four
sjrmptoms in particular proved salutary ; either a hemorrhage
from the nose, or a copious discharge by the bladder of urine,
having an abundant and proper sediment, or a bilious disorder
of the bowels at the proper time, or an attack of dysentery.^
And in many cases it happened, that the crisis did not take
place by any one of the symptoms which have been mentioned,
but the patient passed through most of them, and appeared to
be in an uncomfortable way, and yet all who were attacked with
these symptoms recovered. All the symptoms which I have

' This is perhaps the most striking account of an aggravated form of causus which
is anywhere to be found. Although less finished than the celebrated picture of the
disease given by Aretsus, it is evidently more original. In fact, any human produc-
tion which is very original cannot well be finished, and consequently a very finished
work can scarcely be expected to be very original.

* It is impossible to overrate the importance of these observations on crises in
fevers, provided they be correct and confirmed by general experience. Monro, with-
out appearing to have our author in view, seems to give an ample confirmation of his
doctrines on crises as here laid down.



366 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

described oocnrred also to women and girls ; and whoever of
them had anj of these symptoms in a fiivorable manner, or
the menses appeared abundantly, were sared thereby, and had
a crisis, so that I do not know a single female who had any of
these faTorably that died. Bat the daughter of Philo, who
had a copious hemorrhage from the nose, and took supper
unseasonably on the seventh day, died. In those cases of
acute, and more especially of ardent fevers, in which there is an
involuntary discharge of tears, you may expect a hemorrhage
from the nose, unless the other symptoms be of a fatal cha-
racter, for in those of a bad description, they do not indicate a
hemorrhage, but death. Swellings about the ears, with pain
in fevers, sometimes when the fever went off critically, neither
subsided nor were converted into pus ; in these cases a bilious
diarrhoea, or dysentery, or thick urine having a sediment, car-
ried off the disease, as happened to Hermippus of Clazomenae.
The circumstances relating to crises, as far as we can recognise
them, were so far similar and so far dissimilar. Thus two
brothers became ill at the same hour (they were the brothers
of Epigenes, and lodged near the theatre), of these the elder
had a crisis on the sixth day, and the younger on the seventh^
and both had a relapse at the same hour ; it then left them for
five days, and from the return of the fever both had a crisis
together on the seventeenth day. Most had a crisis on the
sixth day ; it then left them for six days, and from the relapse
there was a crisis on the fifth day.^ But those who had a crisis
on the seventh day, had an intermission for seven days ; and
the crisis took place on the third day after the relapse. Those
who had a crisis on the sixth day, after an interval of six days
were seized again on the third, and having left them for one day^
the fever attacked them again on the next and came to a crisis^
as happened to Evagon the son of Dsetharses. Those in whom
the crisis happened on the sixth day, had an intermission of
seven days, and from the relapse there was a crisis on the
fourth, as happened to the daughter of Aglaidas. The greater
part of those who were taken ill under this constitution of
things, were affected in this manner, and I did not know a
single case of recovery, in which there was not a relapse

* From Galen's Commentary it appears that the text here is in a doubtful state.
See also Littre.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 367

agreeably to the stated order of relapses ; and all those reco«
vered in which the relapses took place according to this form :
nor did I know a single instance of those who then passed
through the disease in this manner who had another relapse.
In these diseases death generally happened on the sixth day^ as
happened to Epaminondas, Silenus^ and Philiscus the son of
Antagoras. Those who had parotid swellings experienced a
crisis on the twentieth day^ but in all these cases the disease
went off without coming to a suppuration, and was turned upon
the bladder. But in Cratistonax, who lived by the temple of
Hercules, and in the maid servant of Scymnus the fuller, it
turned to a suppuration, and they died. Those who had a
crisis on the seventh day, had an intermission of nine days, and
a relapse which came to a crisis on the fourth day from the
return of the fever, as was the case with Pantacles, who resided
close by the temple of Bacchus. Those who had a crisis on
the seventh day, after an interval of six days had a relapse, Arom
which they had a crisis on the seventh day, as happened to
Phanocritus, who was lodged with Gnathon the painter. During
the winter, about the winter solstices, and until the equinox,
the ardent fevers and frenzies prevailed, and many died. The
crises, however, changed, and happened to the greater number
on the fifth day from the commencement, left them for four
days and rdapsed ; and after the return, there was a crisis on
the fifth day, making in all fourteen days. The crisis took
place thus in the case of most children, also in elder per-
sons. Some had a crisis on the eleventh day, a relapse on the
fourteenth, a complete crisis on the twentieth ; but certain per-
sons, who had a rigor about the twentieth, had a crisis on the
fortieth. The greater part had a rigor along with the original
crisis, and these had also a rigor about the crisis in the relapse.
There were fewest cases of rigor in the spring, more in summer,
still more in autumn, but by far the most in winter ; then
hemorrhages ceased.

Sect. III.

10. With regard to diseases, the circumstances from which
we form a judgment of them are, — ^by attending to the general
nature of all, and the peculiar nature of each individual, — to



368 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

the disease^ the patient^ and the applications, — ^to the person
who applies them, as that makes a difference for better or for
worse, — ^to the whole constitution of the season, and particu-
larly to the state of the heavens, and the nature of each
country; — ^to the patient^s habits, regimen, and pursuits; —
to his conversation, manners, taciturnity, thoughts, sleep, or
absence of sleep, and sometimes his dreams, what and when
they occur ; — to his picking and scratching ; * — to his tears ; —
to the alvine discharges, urine, sputa, and vomitings ; and to the
changes of diseases from the one into the other; — ^to the de-
posits, whether of a deadly or critical character ; — to the sweat,
coldness, rigor, cough, sneezing, hiccup, respiration, eructation,
flatulence whether passed silently or with a noise ; — to hemor-
rhages and hemorrhoids ; — from these, and their consequences,
we must form our judgment.*

11. Fevers are, — the continual, some of which hold during
the day and have a remission at night, and others hold during
the night and have a remission during the day ;^ semi-tertians,
tertians, quartans, quintans, septans, nonans. The most acute,
strongest, most dangerous, and fatal diseases, occur in the con-
tinual fever. The least dangerous of all, and the mildest and
most protracted, is the quartan, for it is not only such from
itself, but it also carries off other great diseases.* In what is
called the semi-tertian, other acute diseases are apt to occur,
and it is the most fatal of all others, and moreover phthisical
persons, and those labouring under other protracted diseases,

' Allusion is here made to the symptoms of delirium as described in the fourth
paragraph of the Prognostics. See Galen's Commentary on this passage.

* What an admirable and comprehensive enumeration of all the circumstances
upon which the prognosis and diagnosis of diseases are to be founded ! Here we
find nothing either wanting or redundant ; and with what conciseness and precision
the whole is stated ! Galen gives an elaborate and, upon the whole, a very interest-
ing Commentary on this section, but does not supply any new views, and there are
few terms in it requiring explanation.

' Having already stated in this work, as well as in the Commentary on Paulus
iEoiNETA, Book II, 27, my opinion respecting the nature of the continual fevers, I
need not enlarge on the subject in this place. Whoever wishes for more information
may find much to interest him in the Commentary of Galen. Respecting the septans
and nonans, he remarks, that, although conversant with fevers from his youth, he
had never met with any cases of these.

* Galen, in illustration, states that epilepsy is sometimes carried off by an attack
of quartan fever.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 369

are apt to be attacked by it.^ The nocturnal fever is not very
fatal^ but protracted ; the diurnal is still more protracted, and
in some cases passes into phthisis. The septan is protracted,
but not fatal ; the nonan more protracted, and not fatal. The
true tertian comes quickly to a crisis, and is not fatal ; but
the quintan is the worst of all, for it proves fatal when it pre-
cedes an attack of phthisis, and when it supervenes on persons
who are already consumptive.^ There are peculiar modes, and
constitutions, and paroxysms, in every one of these fevers ; for
example, — the continual, in some cases at the very commence-
ment, grows, as it were, and attains its full strength, and
rises to its most dangerous pitchy but is diminished about and at
the crisis ; in others it begins gentle and suppressed, but gains
ground and is exacerbated every day, and bursts forth with all
its heat about and at the crisis ; while in others, again, it com-
mences mildly, increases^ and is exacerbated until it reach its
acme, and then remits until at and about the crisis.^ These
varieties occur in every fever, and in every disease. Prom these
observations one must regulate the regimen accordingly. There
are many other important symptoms allied to these, part of
which have been already noticed, and part will be described
afterwards, from a consideration of which one may judge, and
decide in each case^ whether the disease be acute, and whether
it will end in death or recovery ,* or whether it will be protracted,

* The semitertian was always looked apon as a very formidable form of fever. See
Paclcs iGoiNSTA, Book II, 34. Galen gives a prolix, but not a very distinct
account of it.

' Galen, in his CoDunentary, states that he had often seen persons in consumption
attacked vrith tertian and quotidian intermittents, but admits that he had no more
experience of quintans than he had of septans and nonans. Avicenna, however, is
not so sceptical as to the occurrence of these rare forms of intermittents. Indeed he
says, he had often met with quintans, and that a trustworthy physician of great ex-
perience had assured him that he had met with nonans. (iii, 1, 3, 67.) Rhazes also
would appear to acknowledge the occurrence of all these varieties of intermittent
fever. (Contin., xxx, 10, 1, 409.)

' The text is much improved in Littr^'s edition, so that the meaning is pretty in-
telligible without any commentary. Galen states in explanation, that the three
varieties of fever are thus marked and distinguished from one another : in the first,
the fever attains its height at the commencement, and gradually diminishes until the
crisis ; in the second, it begins mild, and gradually reaches its height at the crisis ;
in the third, the fever begins mild, gradually attains its height, and then gradually
subsides until the crisis.

24



370 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

and will end in death or recovery ; and in what eases food is
to be given^ and in what not ; and when and to what amount^
and what particular kind of food is to be administered.

13. Those diseases which have their paroxysms on even days
have their crises on even days ; and those which have their
paroxysms on uneven days have their crises on uneven days.
The first period of those which have the crisis on even days^ is
the 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 14th, 20th, 30th, 40th, 60th, 80th, lOOth;
and the first period of those which have their crises on uneven
days, is the 1st, 3d, 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, 17th, 21st, 27th, 31st.
It should be known, that if the crisis take place on any other
day than on those described, it indicates that there will be a
relapse, which may prove fatal. But one ought to pay attention,
and know in these seasons what crises will lead to recovery and
what to death, or to changes for the better or the worse.
Irregular fevers, quartans, quintans, septans, and nonans should
be studied, in order to find out in what periods their crises
take place.

13. Fourteen Cases of Disease.^

Case I. — Philiscus, who lived by the WaD, took to bed on
the first day of acute fever; he sweated; towards night was
uneasy. On the second day all the symptoms were exacerbated ;
late in the evening had a proper stool from a small clyster, the
night quiet. On the third day, early in the morning and until
noon, he appeared to be free from fever ; towards evening, acute
fever, with sweating, thirst, tongue parched ; passed black urine;
night uncomfortable, no sleep ; he was delirious on all subjects.
On the fourth, all the symptoms exacerbated, urine black;
night more comfortable, urine of a better colour. On the fifth,
about mid-day, had a slight trickling of pure blood from the
nose; urine varied in character, having floating in it round
bodies, resembling semen, and scattered, but which did not
fall to the bottom ; a suppository having been applied, some
scanty flatulent matters were passed; night uncomfortable,
little sleep, talking incoherently; extremities altogether cold,

* These are all febrile diseases, and for the most part of the ardent type. In
order to enter properly into the spirit of thenii the reader will find it necessary to
revert frequently to the Prognostics, and compare the parallel passages. See also the
Argument.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 371

and could not be wanned ; urine black ; slept a little towards
day j loss of speech^ cold sweats ; extremities livid ; about the
middle of the sixth day he died. The respiration throughout,
like that of a person recollecting himself, was rare, and large,
the spleen was swelled up in a round tumour, the sweats cold
throughout, the paroxysms on the even days.^

Case II, — Silenus lived on the Broad-way, near the house
of Evalddas. From fatigue, drinking, and unseasonable exer-
cises, he was seized with fever. He began with having pain
in the loins; he had heaviness of the head, and there was
stiffness of the neck. On the first day the alvine discharges
were bilious, unmixed, frothy, high coloured, and copious;
urine black, having a black sediment ; he was thirsty, tongue
dry ; no sleep at night. On the second, acute fever, stools
more copious, thinner, frothy ; urine black, an uncomfortable
night, slight delirium. On the third, all the symptoms exacer-
bated; an oblong distension, of a softish nature, from both
sides of the hypochondrium to the navel; stools thin, and
darkish ; urine muddy, and darkish ; no sleep at night ; much
talking, laughter, singing, he could not restrain himself. On
the fourth, in the same state. On the fifth, stools bilious, un-
mixed, smooth, greasy; urine thin, and transparent; slight
absence of delirium. On the sixth, slight perspiration about
the head ; extremities cold, and livid ; much tossing about ; no
passage from the bowels, urine suppressed, acute fever. On the
seventh, loss of speech; extremities could no longer be kept
warm ; no discharge of luine. On the eighth, a cold sweat
all over ; red rashes with sweat, of a round figure, small, like
van, persistent, not subsiding ; by means of a slight stimulus,
a copious discharge from the bowels, of a thin and undigested

* Galen, in his Commentary, remarks that the fatal issue of this case might have
been anticipated alter the return of the fever on the third day, with a complication
of bad symptoms, such as great thirst, dry tongue, black urine, delirium, coldness
of the extremities, and so forth. The modern reader will be struck with the
description of the respiration, namely, that the patient seemed like a person who
forgot for a time the be$oin de retpirer, and then, as it were, suddenly recollected
himself. Such is the meaning of the expression as explained by Galen in his
Commentary, and in his work On Difficulty of Breathing. By "rare" is always
meant '' few in number." The reader will remark that this is a striking case of a
fever having regular exacerbations on the even days,and slight remissions on the uneven.



372 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

character, with pain ; urine acrid, and passed with pain ; ex-
tremities slightly heated ; sleep slight, and comatose ; speechless;
urine thin, and transparent. On the ninth, in the same state.
On the tenth, no drink taken ; comatose, sleep slight ; alviue
discharges the same ; urine abundant, and thickish ; when al-
lowed to stand, the sediment farinaceous and white ; extremities
again cold. On the eleventh, he died. At the commencement,
and throughout, the respiration was slow and large ; there was
a constant throbbing in the hypochondrium ; his age was about
twenty.^

Case III. — Herophon was seized with an acute fever ; alvine
discharges at first were scanty, and attended with tenesmus;
but afterwards they were passed of a thin, bilious character,
and frequent ; there was no sleep ; urine black, and thin. On
the fifth, in the morning, deafness ; all the symptoms exacer-
bated ; spleen swollen ; distension of the hypochondrium ; al-
vine discharges scanty, and black ; he became delirious. On
the sixth, delirious ; at night, sweating, coldness ; the delirium
continued. On the seventh, he became cold, thirsty, was dis-
ordered in mind ; at night recovered his senses ; slept. On
the eighth, was feverish ; the spleen diminished in size ; quite
collected ; had pain at first about the groin, on the same side
as the spleen ; had pains in both legs ; night comfortable ;
urine better coloured, had a scanty sediment. On the ninth,
sweated ; the crisis took place ; fever remitted. On the fifth
day afterwards, fever relapsed; spleen immediately became
swollen ; acute fever ; deafness again. On the third day after
the relapse, the spleen diminished ; deafness less ; legs painful ;

> ThU, it ivill be remarked, is a case of fever induced from obvious causes, namely,
excessive fatigue and dissipation. We must take into account, however, the febrile
constitution of the season. According to Galen, the fatal result could have been
confidently foreseen from the seventh day. The distension in the hypochondriac
region here described would appear to have been meteorism. The throbbing in this
region was no doubt owing to the same cause. The rash was most probably mUiary.
It is described as resembling tfari (tovOoc), by which was probably meant acne. See
Paulus iEoiNKTA, Vol. I, p. 454. Upon reference to the Prognostics, it will be
remarked that the characters of the urine are all bad, that is to say, it was either
suppressed, or the sediment was either wanting or black and farinaceous. See
Prognost. 12. By '' black,'' as applied to the urine, is to be understood " a dark-red
colour," like that of wine.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 373

sweated during the night ; crisis took place on the seventeenth
day ; had no disorder of the senses during the relapse.^

Casb IV. — In Thasus, the wife of Philinus^ having been
delivered of a daughter^ the lochial discharge being natural^
and other matters going on mildly, on the fourteenth day after
delivery was seized with fever, attended with rigor ; was pained
at first in the cardiac region of the stomach and right hypo-
chondrium ; pain in the genital organs ; lochial discharge ceased.
Upon the application of a pessary all these symptoms were al-
leviated j pains of the head, neck, and loins remained ; no
sleep ; extremities cold ; thirst ; bowels in a hot state ; stools
scanty; urine thin, and colourless at first. On the sixth,
towards night, senses much disordered, but again were restored.
On the seventh, thirsty; the evacuations bilious, and high
coloured. On the eighth, had a rigor; acute fever; much
spasm, with pain ; talked much, incoherently ; upon the appli-
cation of a suppository, rose to stool, and passed copious dejec-
tions, with a bilious flux; no sleep. On the ninth, spasms.
On the tenth, slightly recollected. On the eleventh, slept;
had perfect recollection, but again immediately wandered ;
passed a large quantity of urine with spasms, (the attendants
seldom putting her in mind,) it was thick, white, like urine
which has been shaken after it has stood for a considerable
time until it has subsided, but it had no sediment ; in colour
and consistence, the urine resembled that of cattle, as far as I
observed. About the fourteenth day, startings over the whole
body ; talked much ; slightly collected, but presently became

' There is nothing in this case very remarkahle, or which stands in need of eluci-
dation ; but yet the reader may feel interested in Galen's reflections upon it. The
recovery he holds to have been unexpected, as a different result might have been
anticipated from the characters of the alvine discharge, and of the urine at the com-
mencement. The favorable change he attributes to the swelling of the spleen,
whereby the peccant humours were attracted to it ; and he further remarks, that as
the swelling of the spleen diminished, the humours are described as having passed
down to the extremities, after having first affected the groin of the side on which the
spleen is situated. He further calls attention to the improved characters of the urine
when the swelling of the spleen and pains of the limbs supervened. Still, however,
he adds, there was a remnant of the cacochymy in the system which gave rise to
the relapse on the fourteenth day, so that the complete crisis did not take place until
the seventeenth day.



374 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

again delirious. About the seventeentli day became speechless^
on the twentieth died.^

Case V. — The wife of Epicrates, who was lodged at the
house of Archigetes, being near the term of delivery, was seized
with a violent rigor, and, as was said, she did not become heated;^
next day the same. On the thirds she was delivered of a
daughter, and everything went on properly. On the day fol-
lowing her delivery, she was seized with acute fever, pain in
the cardiac region of the stomach, and in the genital parts.
Having had a suppository, was in so far relieved ; pain in the
head, neck, and loins; no sleep; alvine discharges scanty,
bilious, thin, and unmixed ; urine thin, and blackish. Towards
the night of the sixth day from the time she was seized with
the fever, became delirious. On the seventh, all the symptoms
exacerbated ; insomnolency, delirium, thirst ; stools bilious,
and high coloured. On the eighth, had a rigor; slept more.
On the ninth, the same. On the tenth, her limbs painfully
affected; pain again of the cardiac region of the stomach;
heaviness of the head ; no delirium ; slept more ; bowels con-
stipated. On the eleventh, passed urine of a better colour, and
having an abundant sediment, felt lighter. On the fourteenth,
had a rigor; acute fever. On the fifteenth, had a copious vomit-
ing of bilious and yellow matters; sweated; fever gone; at night
acute fever ; urine thick, sediment white.* On the seventeenth,

' This is endently a well-marked case of puerperal ferer, or of ferer complicated
with the puerperal state. There is nothing particularly interesting in Galen's Com-
mentary on it. He states that the application made in order to remove the suppression
of the lochial discharge may either have been a pessary or a suppository. It seems
most likely to have been the former. On the composition of the ancient pessaries, see
Paul us i£oiNBTA, Book VII, 24. He remarks that the symptoms first stated are
unfavorable, but not necessarily fatal, until we come to the coldness of the extre-
mities, which is an extremely mortal symptom in the beginning of a disease when
combined with a very violent fever. The modem reader will be struck with the
expression that " the attendants seldom put her in mind'' to make water; it is very
descriptive, however, of the state of stupor the patient was in when she was so in-
sensible that she did not attend to the calls of nature.

' Galen remarks that it was reckoned very extraordinary for a rigor not to be
followed by febrile heat. See Comment, et de Rigore ; de Diff. Febr., ii ; and Foes's
long annotations on this passage.

'It will be remarked that the characters of the urine throughout are &vorabIe.
Though darkish at first, this was reckoned not unfavorable, as being connected with



EPIDEMICS— BOOK L 375

an exacerbation ; night uncomfortable ; no sleep ; delirium. On
the eighteenth^ thirsty ; tongue parched ; no sleep ; much de-
lirium ; legs painfully aflFected. About the twentieth, in the
morning, had a slight rigor ; was comatose ; slept tranquilly ;
had slight vomiting of bilious and black matters ; towards night
deafness. About the twenty-first, weight generally in the left
side, with pain ; slight cough ; urine thick, muddy, and reddish ;
when allowed to stand, had no sediment ; in other respects felt
lighter; fever not gone; fauces painful from the commence-
ment, and red; uvula retracted; defluxion remained acrid,
pungent, and saltish throughout. About the twenty-seventh,
free of fever ; sediment in the urine ; pain in the side. About
the thirty- first, was attacked with fever, bilious diarrhoea ; slight
bilious vomiting on the fortieth. Had a complete crisis, and
was freed from the fever on the eightieth day.^

Case VI. — Cleonactides, who was lodged above the Temple
of Hercules, was seized with a fever in an irregular form ; was
pained in the head and left side from the commencement, and
had other pains resembling those produced by fatigue ;
paroxysms of the fevers inconstant and irregular ; occasional
sweats ; the paroxysms generally attacked on the critical days.
About the twenty-fourth was cold in the extremities of the
hands, vomitings bilious, yellow, and frequent, soon turning to
a verdigris-green colour ; general relief. About the thirtieth,
began to have hemorrhage from both nostrils, and this con-
tinued in an irregular manner until near the crisis ; did not
loathe food, and had no thirst throughout, nor was troubled
with insomnolency ; urine thin, and not devoid of colour.
When about the thirtieth day, passed reddish urine, having a
copious red sediment; was relieved; but afterwards the characters
of the urine varied, sometimes having sediment, and sometimes
not. On the sixtieth, the sediment in the urine copious, white,
and smooth ; all the symptoms ameliorated ; intermission of the
fever ; urine thin, and well coloured. On the seventieth, fever
gone for ten days. On the eightieth had a rigor, was seized

the lochial discharge. (See Galen» Comment. 2» Epid. iii.) The sediments afterwards
are aU of good omen ; but, as Galen remarks, its first characters indicated a prolonged
fever.

1 On the Critical Days, see Paulus iEoiNKTA, Book II, 7.



376 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

with acute fever^ sweated mucli ; a red^ smooth sediment in the
urine ; had a perfect crisis.^

Case VII. — Meton was seized with fever; there was a
painful weight in the loins. Next day, after drinking water
pretty copiously, had proper evacuations from the bowels. On
the third, heaviness of the head, stools thin, bilious, and
reddish. On the fourth, all the symptoms exacerbated ; had
twice a scanty trickling of blood from the right nostril ; passed
an uncomfortable night ; alvine discharges like those on the
third day ; urine darkish, had a darkish cloud floating in it,
of a scattered form, which did not subside. On the fifth, a
copious hemorrhage of pure blood from the left nostril ; he
sweated, and had a crisis. After the fever restless, and had
some delirium; urine thin, and darkish; had an affusion of
warm water on the head ; slept, and recovered his senses. In
this case there was no relapse, but there were frequent
hemorrhages after the crisis.^

Case VIII. — Erasinus, who lived near the Canal of Bootes,
was seized with fever after supper; passed the night in an
agitated state. During the first day quiet, but in pain at
night. On the second, symptoms all exacerbated; at night
delirious. On the third, was in a painful condition ; great
incoherence. On the fourth, in a most uncomfortable state ;
had no sound sleep at night, but dreaming and talking;
then all the appearances worse, of a formidable and alarming
character ; fear, impatience. On the morning of the fifth, was
composed, and quite coherent, but long before noon was

' On comparing the symptoms here enumerated with the Prognostics, it will be
remarked that none of them are of fatal omen. But the white sediment, and after-
wards the reddish colour of the urine, while they indicated recovery, at the same
time prognosticated a protracted attack of fever. See Prognost, 12. The reader
will further remark that there is an absence of all the decidedly fatal symptoms, such
as delirium, coldness of the extremities at the commencement, and so forth.

* The rapid recovery in this case would seem to be partly attributable to the decided
plan of treatment, namely, the copious affusion of hot water on the head. Hippocrates
probably had it in view when he wrote the forty-second Aphorism of the Seventh
Book : '* In fever not connected with bile, if a large quantity of hot water be poured
over the head, it proves a resolution of the fever.'' Galen points it out as a remark-
able circumstance, that in this case the crisis took place without concoction of the
urine, in consequence of the hemorrhage from the nose, and the sweating.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 377

furiously mad^ so that he could not constrain himself; extre-
mities cold^ and somewhat livid ; urine without sediment; died
about sunset. The fever in this case was accompanied by
sweats throughout; the hypochondria were in a state of
meteorism^ with distension and pain ; the urine was blacky had
round substances floating in it^ which did not subside ; the
alvine evacuations were not stopped; thirst throughout not
great ; much spasms with sweats about the time of death.^

Case IX. — Criton, in Thasus, while still on foot, and going
about, was seized with a violent pain in the great toe ; he took
to bed the same day, had rigors and nausea, recovered his
heat slightly, at night was delirious. On the second, swelling
of the whole foot, and about the ankle erythema, with disten-
sion, and small bullae (pblyctsense) ; acute fever ; he became
furiously deranged; alvine discharges bilious, unmixed, and
rather frequent. He died on the second day from the com-
mencement.^

Case X. — ^The Clazomenian who was lodged by the Well of
Phrynichides was seized with fever. He had pain in the head,
neck, and loins from the beginning, and immediately after-
wards deafness ; no sleep, acute fever, hypochondria elevated
with a swelling, but not much distension ; tongue dry. On
the fourth, towards night, he became delirious. On the fifth,
in an uneasy state. On the sixth, all the symptoms exacer-

* In this case» as Galen remarks, the continued sweats, unfavorable condition of
the hypochondriac reg;ion, and the black urine, precluded all hopes of recovery. He
thinks our author related the case as an instance of sudden death in fever, this
patient having died on the fourth day after the attack (the first not being counted).
See his Commentary. He also makes reflections upon this case in his work On
DiflSculty of Breathing, where he points out the danger of meteorism of the hypo-
chondriac region as being necessarily accompanied with dyspnoea, and connected with
inflammation (2).

' This case, as Galen remarks, is interesting from the suddenness of the fatal re-
sult. We should not hesitate nowadays to set it down as a case of malignant
erysipelas ; the pain, swelling, and bulls of the foot and ankle must have been of
this nature. By the way, these bullae, when not followed by suppuration, are re-
presented in the Coacae Pnenotiones, as a fatal symptom. Galen thinks it strange that
this patient was not bled, but accounts for it by supposing that Hippocrates had been
called in too late. He remarks on this case in the Second Book of his work On
Difliculty of Breathing.



378 EPIDEMICS— BOOK I.

bated. About the eleventh a slight remission ; from the com-
mencement to the fourteenth day the alvine dischai^es thin^
copious, and of the colour of water, but were well supported ;
the bowels then became constipated. Urine throughout thin,
and well coloured, and had many substances scattered through
it, but no sediment. About the sixteenth, urine somewhat
tliicker, which had a slight sediment; somewhat better, and
more collected. On the seventeenth, urine again thin;
swellings about both his ears, with pain ; no sleep, some inco-
herence ; legs painfully affected. On the twentieth, free of
fever, had a crisis, no sweat, perfectly collected. About the
twenty-seventh, violent pain of the right hip ; it speedily went
off. The swellings about the ears subsided, and did not sup-
purate, but were painful. About the thirty-first, a diarrhoea,
attended with a copious discharge of watery matters, and
symptoms of dysentery ; passed thick urine ; swellings about
the ears gone. About the fortieth day, had pain in the right
eye, sight dull. It went away.*

Case XI. — The wife of Dromeades having been delivered of
a female child, and all other matters going on properly, on the
second day after was seized with rigor and acute fever. Began
to have pain about the hypochondrium on the first day; had
nausea and incoherence, and for some hours afterwards had no
sleep ; respiration rare, large, and suddenly interrupted. On
the day following that on which she had the rigor, alvine dis-
charges proper; urine thick, white, muddy, like urine which
has been shaken after standing for some time, until the sedi-

' Galen looks upon this patient as an example of paradigm of general principles in
Prognostics. Thus, with regard to the characters of the urine, it is stated that on
the eleventh day the urine was thin, of a good colour, and having many substances
floating about in it, but without sediment. Thus matters remained until the sixteenth,
when the urine became somewhat thicker, and had a slight sediment. Now Galen
remarks (as the reader will find on turning to the Book of Prognostics) that these
characters of the urine are indicative of recovery after a protracted disease. Galen
further points out that no one of the fatal symptoms are mentioned, and that
swellings of the parotid glands and the dysenteric affections of the bowels indicated
that the crisis would be distant. He also calls attention to the case as confirmatory
of the doctrines of Critical Days. In the Second Book of his work On Difficulty of
Breathing, he makes some remarks, of no great importance however, on the
meteorism of the h3rpochondriac region, as noticed in this case.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 379

ment had fallen to the bottom ; it had no sediment ; she did
not sleep during the night. On the third day, about noon,
had a rigor, acute fever ; urine the same ; pain of the hypo-
chondria, nausea, an uncomfortable night, no sleep ; a coldish
sweat all over, but heat quickly restored. On the fourth,
slight alleviation of the symptoms about the hypochondria;
heaviness of the head, with pain ; somewhat comatose ; slight
epistaxis, tongue dry, thirst, urine thin and oily ; slept a little,
upon awaking was somewhat comatose ; slight coldness, slept
during the night, was delirious. On the morning of the
sixth had a rigor, but soon recovered her heat, sweated all
over; extremities cold, was delirious, respiration rare and
large. Shortly afterwards spasms from the head began, and
she immediately expired.^

Case XII. — A man, in a heated state, took supper, and
drank more than enough; he vomited the whole during the
night ; acute fever, pain of the right hypochondrium, a softish
inflammation from the inner part; passed an uncomfortable
night ; urine at the commencement thick, red, but when allowed
to stand, had no sediment, tongue dry, and not very thirsty.
On the fourth, acute fever, pains all over. On the fifth, urine
smooth, oily, and copious ; acute fever. On the sixth, in the

' In this case, as Galen remarks, the characters of the urine from the first were
such as to indicate a fatal and speedy result. On the second day the urine was turbid,
and without any sediment ; on the third day the same, and consequently confirming
the anticipation of the disease' proving mortal ; on the fourth, oily urine, with
epistaxis, so that it was not to be wondered at that the patient died on the sixth.
Indeed, when we further take into account the state of the breathing, the coldness
of the extremities, the meteorism of the hypochondriac region, and the subsultus
tendinum, it is difilcult to imagine a more hopeless case of fever. Having mentioned
« oily urine," it may be well to state its characters, as fully given by one of the later
authorities on urology, namely, Theophilus. He says, when the urine in fevers as-
sumes the colour of oil, it indicates that the fat of the body is melting down ; when
the appearance of the urine still more resembles oil, it shows a still greater melting ;
and when the urine in consistence and colour exactly resembles oil of a dark colour,
it prognosticates a fatal collapse. (De Urinis, 17; ed. Ideler.) On this subject, see
further some very interesting observations by Foes, in his annotations on this passage
(p. 988). With regard to the respiration in this case, see also the remarks of Galen
in the Third Book of his work On Difiiculty of Breathing (tom. vii, p. 932 ; ed.
Kiihn). As Galen here remarks, Hippocrates explains the meaning of this passage
in one of his Aphorisms, where he writes thus : " In fevers, when the respiration
stops, it is a bad symptom, for it prognosticates convulsion."



380 EPIDEMICS— BOOK L

evening, very incoherent, no sleep during the night. On the
seventh, all the symptoms exacerbated; urine of the same
characters ; much talking, and he could not contain himself;
the bowels being stimulated, passed a watery discharge with
lumbrici : night equally painful. In the morning had a rigor ;
acute fever, hot sweat, appeared to be free of fever ; did not
sleep long ; after the sleep a chill, ptyalism ; in the evening,
great incoherence ; after a little, vomited a small quantity of
dark bilious matters. On the ninth, coldness, much delirium,
did not sleep. On the tenth, pains in the limbs, all the
svmptoms exacerbated ; he was delirious. On the eleventh, he
died.^

Case XIII. — A woman, who lodged on the Quay, being
three months gone with child, was seized with fever, and
immediately began to have pains in the loins. On the third
day, paiu of the head and neck, extending to the clavicle,
and right hand ; she immediately lost the power of speech ; was
paralysed in the right hand, with spasms, after the manner of
paraplegia; was quite incoherent; passed an uncomfortable
night ; did not sleep ; disorder of the bowels, attended with
bilious, unmixed, and scanty stools. On the fourth, recovered
the use of her tongue ; spasms of the same parts, and general
pains remained ; swelling in the hypochondrium, accompanied
with pain; did not sleep, was quite incoherent; bowels dis-
ordered, urine thin, and not of a good colour. On the fifth,
acute fever; pain of the hypochondrium, quite incoherent;
alvine evacuations bilious ; towards night had a sweat, and was
freed from the fever. On the sixth, recovered her reason ;
was every way relieved ; the pain remained about the left
clavicle ; was thirsty, urine thin, had no sleep. On the seventh,
trembling, slight coma, some incoherence, pains about the

' According to Galen, this case is an instructive example of the danger of neglect-
ing the diet at the commencement of complaints which appear unimportant. This
man, having taken supper at the beginning of a fever which appeared slight, suffered
therefrom as the result showed ; that is to say, vomiting ensued, followed by serious
symptoms, among which Galen particularises, as indicating a fatal result, urine at
first thick and without sediment, and afterwards oily. So much importance did the
ancient physicians attach to observations on the urine in fevers 1 Galen further
calls attention to the fact, that the patient died on a critical day, that is to say, on
the eleventh.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK I. 381

clavicle and left arm remained ; in all other respects was alle-
viated; quite coherent. For three days remained free from
fever. On the eleventh, had a relapse, with rigor and fever.
About the fourteenth day, vomited pretty abundantly bilious
and yellow matters, had a sweat, the fever went oflF, by coming
to a crisis.^

Case XIV. — Melidia, who lodged near the Temple of Juno,
began to feel a violent pain of the head, neck, and chest.
She was straightway seized with acute fever ; a slight appear-
ance of the menses ; continued pains of all these parts. On
the sixth, was affected with coma, nausea, and rigor ; redness
about the cheeks; slight delirium. On the seventh, had a
sweat ; the fever intermitted, the pains remained. A relapse ;
little sleep ; urine throughout of a good colour, but thin ; the
alvine evacuations were thin, bilious, acrid, very scanty, black,
and fetid ; a white, smooth sediment in the urine ; had a sweat,
and experienced a perfect crisis on the eleventh day.^

* Galen, in the Commentary, makes a remark regarding this report, which appears
more important to him than it will do to most modem readers, namely, that he
wonders Hippocrates did not state the age of this patient. He adds, that it is
very rare for a pregnant woman to have such a serious fever without parting with
her child. He thinks the patient, in the present instancei owed her recovery to the
strength of her constitution, as ** urine white, and not of a good colour," in combi-
nation with the other bad symptoms, indicated an unfavorable result. By the way,
upon reference to the Basle edition of Galen, and to Foes*s annotations on this case, it
will be seen that there is a difference of reading in the words descriptive of the
nrine, that is to say, some read AxP^*^^* b<>™^ ivxpowv. Certainly it appears to
me that Foes is right in preferring the latter. The decided crisis, it will be remarked,
took place on a critical day, that is to say, the fourteenth, by a sweat.

' Here again Galen calls attention principally to the characters of the urine, which
is first described as being '* of a good colour, but thin." Now, by a good colour of
the urine, Galen observes, was meant of a slightly yeUoW colour. In this case, as
usual, the crisis was marked by a sediment in the urine.



382



BOOK III— OF THE EPIDEMICS.



THE ARGUMENT.

Though in the Argument prefixed to the First Book of the
Epidemics I have given a pretty full summary of the contents
both of that book and the thirds I have still a few observations
to make on some important points, which were not sufficiently
considered on that occasion ; and this I do the more readily^
as it will afford me an opportunity of noticing a subject on
which M. Littre has bestowed very extensive research. I allude
to the origin of the Glandular Plague. As I make it a rule^
in giving these my annotations, not to enter into any lengthy
details, I shaU now state, in a very succinct manner, the re-
suit of my inquiries. The reader is referred, for a fuller dis-
cussion of the subject, to the more ample disquisitions of M.
Littre. 1

The opinion has been pretty generally maintained by modem
authorities, that the first description which we have of the
glandular plague of the East is that given by the historian
Procopius, in the sixth century ; and the inference drawn there-
from is that the disease was unknown until his time. This
opinion is still held, to a certain extent, by Hecker, Bosenbaum^
Pariset, Nauman, and others of the most distinguished scholars
of the day, but it appears to be untenable after the discovery
of the ^Fragment' of Ruffus, published by Mai, Rome, 1831.
As the passage is very important, I shall give a translation of
it in this place. It is as follows : '' The buboes called pesti-
lential are most fatal and acute, especially those which are seen
occurring about Libya, Egypt, and Syria, and which are men-
tioned by Dionysius Curtus. Dioscorides and Posidonius
make much mention of them in the plague which occurred in
their time in Libya; they say it was accompanied by acute

' (Euvres d'Hippocrate, torn, iii, Arg., pp. xxxyi-zlii ; torn. ▼, pp. 57-70.



ARGUMENT. 383

fever^ pain, and prostration of the whole body, delirium, and
the appearance of large and hard buboes, which did not sup-
purate^ not only in the accustomed parts, but also in the groins
and armpits/' The only thing which detracts from the value
of this paragraph is the difficulty of determining exactly who
the authorities are which are referred to in it. Of Dionysius
Curtus nothing is known ; indeed it is more than probable,
that there is some mistake in this name. There are several
medical authors of the name of Dioscorides and Posidonius, and
it is difficult to determine to which of them reference is here
made. Still, however, there seems to be no reason for ques-
tioning the authenticity of the passage. BufTus, I may add, is
generally admitted to have flourished in the reign of Trajan.^

To this important document let me join an interesting ex-
tract from Galen's work *0n Fevers.' Galen, treating pro-
fessedly of Pestilential Fevers, which he maintains are all con-
nected with a tendency to putridity, expresses himself as follows :
'* Moreover, as Hippocrates says, all fevers from buboes are bad,
with the exception of ephemerals ; although the bubo is also of
the class of phlegmons. And I agree in so far with what is
said of putrefaction, for this is the cause of the fever in inflam-
mations, and not as Erasistratus supposed.^ But yet there are
certain fevers from buboes of the class of ephemerals, as certain
others proclaim them to be ; diseases difficult to cure, which de-
rive their origin from an inflammation, an ulcer, an abscess, or
some other such affection in a viscus. But the ephemeral fevers
from buboes differ from those connected with putrefactions,
either in a certain viscus, or in the hollow and very large vessels,
that in those from buboes, which always impart their heat to
the surrounding parts, the heat is communicated to the heart,
and the putrefactive fume does not reach it, but remains cir-
cumscribed in the seat of the bubo, and the heat reaching the
heart solely by a change in the connecting parts, in like manner
as in those exposed to excessive heat and fatigue, the diffusion
of the heat takes place from the parts first wanned to the source
of vitality ; but in a putrefaction about the viscera and large

' There is some doubt, however, even on this head ; indeed Riolanas does not
scruple to affirm, with a considerable degree of plausibility, that Ruffus must have
lived after Galen, since he is nowhere mentioned by the latter. (Anthropographia, i, 5.)

* In illustration, consult Plutarch (Phicit. Philosoph., v, 29).



384 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

vessels, a fume, as it were^ from the putrefying humours reaches
the cavities of the heart, &c/' ^ From these two passages alone,
without taking into account several others of less importance,
which might be gathered from other medical authorities/ it
must be quite obvious that the glandular plague was kuown^
at all events, in the second century of the Christian era.
Moreover it is equally clear, that Galen did not look upon it as
a new disease, but considered that it was noticed in the works
of Hippocrates. To my mind, then, there can be no doubt that
the pestilence which prevailed during the Peloponnesian war
partook of the nature of the glandular plague. What has
tended to create doubts on this subject, in the minds of many
learned men, is the omission of any distinct mention of buboes
in the graphic description of it given by Thucydides. But it
should always be taken into account that Thucydides was not
a professional man, and therefore there is a strong pre-
sumption that his acquaintance with the disease, even although,
as he states, he himself had experienced an attack of it, must
have been altogether of a general nature. Indeed Galen, both
in the treatise from which I have quoted above and in many
other parts of his works, does not hesitate to declare, that the
historian describes the disease as a common, that is to say, a
non-professional man, whereas Hippocrates gives its characters
as a physician. It is also to be borne in mind, that the de-
scription of it given by Thucydides applies to it only at its out-
break in the city of Athens, and it is a well-known characteristic
of pestilential epidemics that they change very much during
their progress. This character of them was well illustrated in
the Plague of Aleppo, so admirably described by Dr. Russel ;
for although the glandular form of the disease prevailed in a
large number of cases, a considerable proportion of them were
unaffected with buboes. Indeed it appears to me to be too
much the practice for the profession, as well as the public, to
imagine to themselves a certain type or ideal of every disease,
and when they do not recognise the exact characters which
they fancy it should present, they immediately set down such
cases as constituting an entirely different disease. This is an

' De Differ. Feb., i, 7 ; torn, vii, p. 296, ed. Ktihn.

' Commentary on Paulus i£6iNETA, Book II, 16,36; IV,25,Syd. Soc. edition.



ARGUMENT.

error that is constantly committed^ and one which I believe to
be at the bottom of the discordant opinions which prevail among
professional men^ on the subject of the glandular plague. It
would be well for the physician to bear in mind how many
varieties of symptoms the fever designated as Typhus puts on,
— some with the rash reckoned peculiar to this fever, and
some without it, — some with petechie, and miliary eruptions,
and others without them ; and many other complications of
symptoms, which are sometimes present and sometimes not.

With regard to the hypothesis lately advanced by M. Theod.
Krause,^ and in so far countenanced by M. Littre, that the
plague of Athens was an epidemical variola, I must say that I
can see no probability in this supposition ; for that a disease so
strongly marked as smallpox should have prevailed in ancient
times, and yet not be distinctly noticed by the Greek and
Roman writers on medicine, I cannot conceive, more especially
when we call to recollection the very accurate descriptions which
they have left us of other cutaneous diseases, by no means at-
tended with symptoms of so obvious a nature. Indeed it
appears to me most wonderful, that such an opinion should
have been entertained by any person at all acquainted with the
Arabic writers on medicine, who describe most distinctly both
the plague and the smallpox. Not to lose ourselves amidst a
host of authorities, I would refer the reader, in particular, to
Avicenna, iv, 1, 4, where the two diseases are treated of most
distinctly, so that I cannot entertain a doubt that the Arabian
physicians considered them to be essentially different.

In a considerable number of the cases reported in this book,
there are affixed to them in the original certain characters, the
interpretation of which the reader will find given in the trans-
lation. It will be necessary, then, to give the reader some
account of the origin of these characters, regarding which our
sole authority is Galen, who, in his Commentaries on this book,
enters on the question in his usual elegant and attractive style.
He admits that he derived his information principally from
Zeuxis, one of his predecessors in the office of commenting
upon the works of Hippocrates. (See § 2, of the Preliminary
Discourse.) It appears that Ptolemy Philadelphus was so

* Disquisitio Historico-Medica de Natura Morbi Atheniensiura. Stuttgart, 1831.

25



386 EPIDEMICS-BOOK III.

zealous in his search for books to adorn his library^ in Alexandria,
that he gave instructions to the masters of ships going on dis-
tant voyages to collect all the books they could procure, and
bring them back with them ; that he ordered copies to be taken
of books brought to him in this way, and kept the originals,
but returned the copies, along with large sums of money, in
certain cases, to those who had lent them to him ; and that the
works so obtained were presented in a separate department of
the library, with the inscription, " The Books of the Ships."
Among these was found a copy of the Third Book of the
Epidemics, with the inscription, "One of the Books of the
Ships, according to the redacteur Memnon of Sida." Others
say, that the term '^redacteur'' was wanting, and that the
book bore simply the inscription of " Memnon f and that the
servants of the king inscribed the names of all the seamen who
had brought these books, when they were installed on the
shelves of the library. This, it would seem, was not done im-
mediately after their arrival in Alexandria, but that at first
they were collected together in certain houses. Memnon, the
librarian, then, is generally supposed to have surreptitiously
introduced the characters into one of the copies, in order that
he might raise himself into importance by interpreting them.
But whether or not this ruse was actually perpetrated by
Memnon, the general belief of the commentators was, that
Hippocrates himself had nothing to do with them. In fact,
Zeno would appear to have been the only commentator who
held them to be genuine, and ascribed the introduction of them
to our author. The opinion thus advanced by Zeno led him
into a violent controversy with the two ApoUonii, namely, the
Empiric and Biblas, who strenuously maintained that the cha-
racters were an interpolation executed by Memnon. This came
to be the settled opinion of the commentators, and among
others of Galen, who, although he gives a key to the interpre-
tation of the characters, maintains, on all occasions, that they
are of no authority, and had in fact been forged by Memnon.
The following is the key which Galen gives to the interpre-
tation of the characters : a, signifies oTro^Oopai^y abortion, or
inriiXuap, loss; y, signifies -yoi^ottftc ovpov, urine resembling
semen ; 8, punctuated below, thus, S^^, signifies iSpwra, sweat,
and Siappoiap, diarrhoea, and Siaijiopriaiv, perspiration, or in fact



ARGUMENT. 387

any other evacuation which it is wished to express ; e, signifies

iiro-j^riv, retention, or tSpav, seat ; ^ signifies 2^i}rf}fca^ the object

of research; 0, signifies Oavarov, death; i, signifies iS^ciiraj

sweat ; Kj signifies Kpimu, crisis, or KoiXiaKiiv SiaOitriif ; fi,

signifies /laviav, madness, or /nilrpav, the womb; v, signifies

ueoTiyra, youth, or viKpttKTiv, mortification; 5, signifies .^ai/fliji'

XoXiJi/, yellow bile, or ^ci/ov n kqi cnraviov, something strange

and rare, or ^va/nw, irritation, or ^lypdriyra, dryness ; o, signifies

oSvvag, pains, or oupoi/^ urine (but some think that it is only

when it has a v above it that it signifies urine) ; tt, signifies ^

TrXrjOo^, abundance, or imieXov, sputum, or wvpov {wvppov?),

yellow, or irvperov, fever, or Tri^eufiovoc iraOog, affection of the

lungs ; tt, with a character i in its middle (77* or 7D ), signifies

TTtOavoif, probable; p, signifies pvcriv, flux, or pcyoc> chill;

0, signifies f^pivlnv, phrensy ; a, signifies Girarr^ov, convulsion,

or aro/uavoG i} aro/xar oc fca/coxrcv, illness of the stomach or mouth;

T, signifies tokov, accouchement ; v, signifies vyuav, health, or

v1^o')^ouSplov, hypochondrium ; j^, signifies )^oXi}v, if/^, or j^o-

XcuScc^ bilious ; \p, signifies \f/v^iv, congealing ; w, signifies

(ofAOTtiTa^ crudity. See Galeni Opera, t. v, p. 412, ed. Basil. ;

and Littre's Hippocrates, t. iii, p. 33.

According to this key, the characters at the end of the first
case are thus explained by Galen : they are ^ IIOYMY.
Here, then, 79 signifies irc0avov, it is probable; U, ttX^Aoc,
that an abundance, ov, ovpwv, of urine; M, on the 40th day ;
Y, vyuav, brought health. It is more fully expressed thus by
Galen : wiOavov Itpai Sea to ttXy/Ooc rtou iKpidevnov ovptov avro
XvOrjvai TO i/(>(7t)/ia Kat vyii) yti^caOai rov ai^OptjJvov iv Ty Tetrtra"
paKOiTTy Twv ri^Bptiu, that is to say, " it is probable that, owing
to the copious discharge of urine, the disease was resolved, and
the patient became well on the fortieth day"



388 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.



BOOK III— OF THE EPIDEMICS.

Sect. I.

Case I. — Pythion, who lived by the Temple of the Earth :
on the first day, trembling commencing from his hands ;
acute fever, delirium. On the second, all the symptoms were
exacerbated. On the third, the same. On the fourth, alvine
discharges scanty, unmixed, and bilious. On the fifth, all the
symptoms were exacerbated, the tremors remained ; little
sleep, the bowels constipated. On the sixth, sputa mixed,
reddish. On the seventh, mouth drawn aside. On the eighth,
all the symptoms were exacerbated ; the tremblings were again
constant ; urine, from the beginning to the eighth day, thin, and
devoid of colour ; substances floating in it cloudy. On the tenth
he sweated ; sputa somewhat digested, had a crisis ; urine thinish
about the crisis ; but after the crisis, on the fortieth day, an
abscess about the anus, which passed off by a strangury.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
great discharge of urine brought about the resolution of the
disease, and the cure of the patient on the fortieth day.^

1 On this case Galen has left very lengthy and elaborate commentaries, containing
much important and amusing matter, but not a little verbose trifling, to say the least.
Our limits, as well as our tastes, dispose us to be very sparing in our extracts from
them. Passing over his remarks on the solecism in syntax, with which the
Report commences, and his observations on the absence of all mention of the
exciting causes, as is the usual practice of our author, I shall proceed to state what
Galen says on the apparent neglect of venesection in a case where it would certainly
appear to have been clearly indicated. In this case, as Galen remarks, one or other
of these suppositions may be made: either that bleeding was not practised, or
that the author did not think of mentioning the practice here, as supposing that
it would be taken for granted that it was applied. Now, he adds, the former sup-
position is very improbable, considering how partial our author shows himself to this
practice in his works which are unquestionably genuine, such as On the Regimen
in Acute Diseases, the Aphorisms, the work On the Articulations, and even in this
very book, where in one place he mentions that he abstracted blood copiously on the
eighth day. If, then, he bled so late in febrile diseases, Galen contends that he was
not likely to neglect the operation in an earlier stage, when so much more demanded.
He argues further, that in many of the other reports of cases he neglects to mention
that the usual routine of practice was followed; and therefore he inclines to the
opinion that it is omitted to be mentioned here, because the author supposed there



1



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 389

Case II. — Hermocrates, who lived by the New Wall,^ was
seized with fever. He began to have pain in the head and
loins ; an empty distension of the hypochondrium ; the tongue
at first was parched; deafness at the commencement; there
was no sleep ; not very thirsty ; urine thick and red, when
allowed to stand it did not subside ; alvine discharge very dry,
and not scanty. On the fifth, urine thin, had substances
floating in it which did not fall to the bottom f at night he was
delirious. On the sixth, had jaundice f all the symptoms were
exacerbated; had no recollection. On the seventh, in an
uncomfortable state ; urine thin, as formerly ; on the following
days the same. About the eleventh day, all the symptoms

could be no question on this point, more especially as it was his universal rule to
bleed in all great complaints, when not prevented by the age or powers of the patient.
He afterwards insists strongly on venesection having been indicated in this case, in
order to procure revulsion from the brain. ' As usual with the commentator, he calls
attention to the characters of the urine, and explains the meaning of the term
" cloudy/' as applied to the eneorema, or substances floating in the urine, by which he
contends is to be understood a colour intermediate between white and black. What
follows in this very lengthy Commentary is very interesting in a general point of
view as regards the views of some of the older commentators, but is not directly
applicable to the present case. His observations on the characters affixed to this
and many of the subsequent cases have been noticed in the Argument. The reader
will further remark of this case that it is an instance of fever passing into a deposit
{or abscess), and the latter into strangury, of which our author had made mention
in the First Book of the Epidemics. I may further mention that the reader will find
much interesting matter in Galen's work On Trembling, in illustration of the nature
of the attack under which the patient laboured.

' Galen, in his Commentary, communicates a singular notion which one of the earlier
commentators maintained respecting the name of the place where this patient was
laid, that is to say, that this new wall, having been recently washed with quicklime,
had been the cause of this patient's illness. Galen, however, rejects this paltry con-
ceit. He says on his own authority, that there being three distinct classes of fever,
namely, the ephemeral, the hectic, and those connected vnth putrid humours, the
present case belongs to the last of these.

' Galen compares the characters of the urine with their indications as given in the
Prognostics. None of them are favorable, although not decidedly fatal.

' This complication cannot fail to attract attention, from its resemblance to an
epidemic which prevailed in Scotland in the year 1843. In this epidemic, as in the
present case, the fever was very subject to relapses and to jaundice at an early stage.
Hippocrates, in one of his Aphorisms, pronounces jaundice in fevers before the
seventh day to be a fatal symptom, (iv, 62, 64.) Galen justly thinks it somewhat
singular that no further mention of the jaundice is made in the course of the report ;
but he inclines from this to draw the conclusion that it remained in the same state
throughout. As there was no crisis by the stomach, the bowels, the urine, or sweat,



390 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

appeared to be lightened. Coma set in; urine thicker, reddish,
thin substances below, had no sediment ; by degrees he became
collected. On the fourteenth, fever gone ; had no sweat ;
slept, quite collected ; urine of the same characters. About
the seventeenth, had a relapse, became hot. On the following
days, acute fever, urine thin, was delirious. Again, on the
twentieth, had a crisis; free of fever; had no sweat; no
appetite through the whole time; was perfectly collected;
could not speak, tongue dry, without thirst ; deep sleep. About
the twenty-fourth day he became heated ; bowels loose, with a
thin, watery discharge; on the following days acute fever,
tongue parched. On the twenty-seventh he died. In this
patient deafness continued throughout ;^ the urine either thick
and red, without sediment, or thin, devoid of colour, and
having substances floating in it : he could taste nothing.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that it was
the suppression of the discharges from the bowels which occa-
sioned death on the twenty- seventh day.

Case III. — The man who was lodged in the Garden of
Dealccs :^ had heaviness of the head and pain in the right
temple for a considerable time, from some accidental cause,
was seized with fever, and took to bed. On the second, there
was a trickling of pure blood from the left nostril, but the
alvine discharges were proper, urine thin, mixed, having small
substances floating in it, like coarse barleymeal, or semen. On
the third, acute fever ; stools black, thin, frothy, a livid sedi-

he concludes that the jaundice could not have been carried off. From all that has
been said, he adds, it is clear that the organ primarily affected was the liTer. Galen,
then, decidedly opposes the Tiew taken in the Explanation of the Characters re-
specting the cause of this man's death, which he contends was not connected with
any suppression of the alvine discharges, but with the affection of the liver. On the
Scotch Epidemic, see Ed. and Lond. Med. Journal, March 1844.

' Most of the ancient authorities regarded deafness as an unfavorable symptom in i

fevers. See Paulus iEciNETA, Book II, 4. The modem are divided in opinion on
this point. Pringle and Huxham regard it as a favorable symptom, but Home looks
upon it as unfavorable.

' Here again Galen mentions the absurd notion of Sabinus the commentator, that
this man's disease was occasioned by the locality in which he was laid. Galen, on
the other hand, thinks it likely that the patient was conveyed to the garden as being
a favorable situation for a person ill of fever. He further alludes to this case in the
Second Book of his work On Critical Days.



EPIDEMICS -BOOK III. 391

ment in the dejections ; slight coma ; uneasiness at the times
he had to get up ; sediment in the urine livid^ and somewhat
viscid. On the fourth, slight vomiting of bilious, yellow
matters, and, after a short interval, of the colour of verdigris ;
a few drops of pure blood ran from the left nostril ; stools the
same ; urine the same ; sweated about the head and clavicles ;
spleen enlarged, pain of the thigh on the same side; loose
swelling of the right hypochondrium ; at night had no sleep,
slight delirium. On the sixth, stools black, fatty, viscid, fetid ;
slept, more collected. On the seventh, tongue dry, thirsty,
did not sleep ; was somewhat delirious ; urine thin, not of a
good colour. On the eighth, stools black, scanty, and com-
pact ; slept, became collected ; not very thirsty. On the ninth
had a rigor, acute fever, sweated, a chill, was delirious, strabis-
mus of the right eye, tongue dry, thirsty, without sleep.^ On
the tenth, much the same. On the eleventh, became quite
collected; free from fever, slept, urine thin about the crisis.
The two following days without fever; it returned on the four-
teenth, then immediately insomnolency and complete delirium.
On the fifteenth, urine muddy, like that which has been shaken
after the sediment has fallen to the bottom ; acute fever, quite
delirious, did not sleep ; knees and legs painful ; after a sup-
pository, had alvine dejections of a black colour. On the six-
teenth, urine thin, had a cloudy eneorema, was delirious. On the
seventeenth, in the morning, extremities cold, was covered up
with the bedclothes, acute fever, general sweat, felt relieved,
more collected ; not free of fever, thirsty, vomited yellow bile,
in small quantities ; formed faeces passed from the bowels, but
soon afterwards black, scanty, and thin ; urine thin, and not
well coloured. On the eighteenth, not collected, comatose.
On the nineteenth, in the same state. On the twentieth,
slept ; quite collected, sweated, free from fever, not thirsty, but
the urine thin. On the twenty-first, slight delirium; some-
what thirsty, pain of the hypochondrium, and throbbing about
the navel throughout. On the twenty-fourth, sediment in the
urine, quite collected. Twenty-seventh, pain of the right hip-
joint ; urine thin and bad, a sediment ; all the other symptoms
milder. About the twenty-ninth, pain of the right eye ; urine

I Galen remarks, that as there is no mention of a single favorable symptom up to
this date, the patient would certainly have died if he had not been of a vigorous
constitution.



392 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

thin. Fortieth, dejections pituitous, white, rather frequent;
sweated abundantly all over ; had a complete crisis.^

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that, by
means of the stools, the urine, and the sweat, this patient was
cured in forty days.

Sect. II.

Case IV. — In Thasus, Philistes had headache of long con-
tinuance, and sometimes was confined to bed, with a tendency
to deep sleep ; having been seized with continual fevers from
drinking, the pain was exacerbated ; during the night he, at
first, became hot. On the first day, he vomited some bilious
matters, at first yellow, but afterwards of a verdigris-green
colour, and in greater quantity ; formed faeces passed from the
bowels ; passed the night uncomfortably. On the second,
deafness, acute fever ; retraction of the right hypochondrium ;
urine thin^ transparent, had some small substances like semen
floating in it ; delirium ferox about mid-day. On the third,
in an uncomfortable state. On the fourth, convulsions; all
the symptoms exacerbated. On the fifth, early in the morning,
died.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
death .of the patient on the fifth day is to be attributed to a
phrenitis, with unfavorable evacuations.^

Case V. — Charion,whowas lodged atthe house of Demaenetus,
contracted a fever from drinking. Immediately he had a pain-

* Thus, as Galen remarks, after two ineffectual attemptSi Nature accomplished a
cure on the fortieth day.

' There is not much to remark in this case. A modem reader will suspect that
there had been cerebral disease before the attack of the fever, and that matters had
been brought to a crisis by the drinking of wine. Indeed Galen, in his Commentary,
remarks that the precursory symptoms indicate a congestion of humours in the brain,
which of course would be much aggravated by the wine, the brain then being, as he
says, in a bad state; and the patient having inflicted an additional injury to the
organ, by means of the drink, brought on the acute attack, which proved fatal in five
days. The deafness, delirium, spasms, and bilious vomitings all indicate a cerebral
affection. The state of the hypochondria, as described in the report, Galen would
seem to attribute to a spasmodic affection of the diaphragm, from sympathy with the
brain. Retraction of the hypochondrium is pronounced to be a bad symptom in the
First Book of the Prorrhetics. Galen justly contends that there is no reason in this
case to suspect any inflammation in that region.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 393

ful heaviness of the head ; did not sleep ; bowels disordered,
with thin and somewhat bilious discharges. On the third day,
acute fever ; trembling of the head^ but especially of the lower
lip; after a little time a rigor^ convulsions; he was quite
delirious ; passed the night uncomfortably. On the fourth,
quiet, slept little, talked incoherently. On the fifth, in pain ;
all the symptoms exacerbated; delirium; passed the night
uncomfortably; did not sleep. On the sixth, in the same
state. On the seventh had a rigor, acute fever, sweated all
over his body ; had a crisis. Throughout the alvine discharges
were bilious, scanty, and unmixed ; urine thin, well coloured,
having cloudy substances floating in it. About the eighth
day, passed urine of a better colour, having a white scanty
sediment ; was collected, free from fever for a season. On the
ninth it relapsed. About the fourteenth, acute fever. On the
sixteenth, vomited pretty frequently yellow, bilious matters.
On the seventeenth had a rigor, acute fever, sweated, free of
fever ; had a crisis ; urine, after the relapse and the crisis, well
coloured, having a sediment ; neither was he delirious in the
relapse. On the eighteenth, became a little heated; some
thirst, urine thin, with cloudy substances floating in it ; slight
wandering in his mind. About the nineteenth, free of fever,
had a pain in his neck ; a sediment in the urine. Had a com-
plete crisis on the twentieth.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
patient was cured in twenty days, by the abundance of bilious
stools and urine. ^

Case VI. — The daughter of Euryanax, a maid, was taken
ill of fever. She was free of thirst throughout, but had no
relish for food. Alvine discharges small, urine thin, scanty,
not well coloured. In the beginning of the fever, had a pain
about the nates. On the sixth day, was free of fever, did not
sweat, had a crisis ; the complaint about the nates came to a
small suppuration, and burst at the crisis. After the crisis, on
the seventh day, had a rigor, became slightly heated, sweated.

> Galen's remarkB on this case are unusually brief; he attributes the fever to a
bilious plethora, and states that the result was such as might have been anticipated
from a knowledge of the critical days, and of the characters of the uiine. Indeed
the latter appear to me well deserving of attention.



394 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

On the eighth day after the rigor, had an inconsiderable rigor ;
the extremities cold ever after. About the tenth day, after a
sweat whicli came on, she became delirious, and again imme-
diately afterwards was collected ; these symptoms were said to
have been brought on by eating grapes. After an intermis-
sion of the twelfth day, she again talked much incoherently ;
her bowels disordered w4th bilious, scanty, unmixed, thin, acrid
discharges ; she required to get frequently up. She died on
the seventh dav after the return of the delirium. At the com-
mencement of the disease she had pain in the throat, and it
was red throughout; uvula retracted; defluxions abundant,
thin, acrid ; coughed, but had no concocted sputa ; during the
whole time loathed all kinds of food, nor had the least desire
of anything ; had no thirst, nor drank anything worth men-
tioning; was silent, and never spoke a word; despondency;
had no hopes of herself. She had a congenital tendency to
phthisis.^

Case VII. — The woman affected with quinsy, who lodged
in the house of Aristion : her complaint began in the tongue ;

* This is in many respects an interesting case, and more especially from its being

stated that the disease was complicated with hereditary consumption. Galen, in his

Commentary, remarks that some authorities denied that any disease is congenital,

but this opinion he decidedly rejects. The phthisical affection, however, as he justly

remarks, would not have occasioned so sudden an issue if it had not been compli-

cated with a complete prostration of the natural powers. He insists strongly on the

striking description here given of the total loss of the natural appetite, both in regard

to food and drink. Of course, no worse state of the system can be imagined than

that in which it is totally insensible to its own wants, nay, that it loathes the very

articles which it stands most in need of. Galen properly remarks in another place

(Comment. I, in Epid. i), that it is an extremely unfavorable symptom when in an

ardent fever there is no thirst. The small abscess about the nates would seem to

have been an incidental complication. It would appear to be now settled by the

best pathological authorities that there is no natural alliance between phtkUit and

fistula in ano, as was at one time suspected. See Andral (Cliniq. Medicale, torn, ir,

p. 308), and Louis (On Phthisis, p. 89, Sydenham Society's edition). The affection

of the fauces and throat, which is described as having attacked the patient at ** the

commencement of the disease," would appear to have been a common compUcation

of that epidemic. It is noticed in the First Book of the Epidemics. Foes remarks,

however, that some had referred it to that redness of the fauces to which persons

labouring under consumption are liable. Compare Louis, 1. c. p. ii, $ 12. Galen

makes mention of a difference of reading in the MSS. he used in reference to the

Critical Days.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 395

speech inarticulate ; tongue red and parched. On the first day^
felt chilly, and afterwards became heated. On the third day, a
rigor, acute fever; a reddish and hard swelling on both sides
of the neck and chest, extremities cold and livid ; respira-
tion elevated ; the drink returned by the nose ; she could
not swallow ; alvine and urinary discharges suppressed. On
the fourth, all the symptoms were exacerbated. On the sixth
she died of the quinsy.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
cause of death on the sixth day was the suppression of the
discharges.^

Case VIII. — ^The young man who was lodged by the Liars'
Market was seized with fever from fatigue, labour, and running

* On this briefcase Galen has left a lengthy and elaborate Commentary, abounding
in most interesting matters on a variety of subjects ; as, for example, the different
readings and opinions of the more ancient commentators on the characters at the
end of this and the other reports ; on the formation of the Ilippocratic Collection,
and the extraordinary zeal of the Ptolemies in procuring books for their great Library
at Alexandria, and so forth. There is not much in it, however, which bears directly
on the present case, and therefore we shall give but a very brief abstract of it. It
appears from Galen that there was a considerable diversity of readings in the latter
part of it, more especially in regard to the number of days the patient lived *, some
of the old authorities having placed the death on the fifth, some on the seventh, and
others on the eighth. Galen inclines to hold by the text as we now have it, and
maintains, apparently with good reason, that under such a combination of fatal
symptoms it was not likely that the patient's strength should have stood out longer
than the fourth day. Another curious subject connected with this case which Galen
slightly touches upon, but without throwing any light upon it, is the omission of
the treatment. He justly remarks, that if Hippocrates treated the patient himself,
or superintended the treatment as managed by another, it is singtdar that there is
no mention of a clyster having been administered, nor of a cataplasm having been
applied, nor of venesection having been practised. I shall not attempt to solve the
question here propounded by Galen. See the Argument. His Commentary also con-
tains an interesting discussion on the meaning of the expression *' respiration elevated.*'
To give the sum of what has been advanced on this subject in a few words, it may
signify laborious breathing so as to move the labia of the nose ; or it may mean
simply orthopnoea, or it may signify laborious respiration, attended with elevation
of the chest. By the way, this is evidently the ** sublimis anhelitus" of Horace, in
his famous ode entitled ** Nireus." I have often wondered that such a learned physi-
cian as Julius Cesar Scaliger, in his celebrated critique on Horace in his Poetics,
should have remarked on this expression : '* Ex toto Galeno non intelligo quid sit
sublimis anhelitus." Galen, in fact, treats fully of the '* sublimis anhelitus" in
various parts of his works. See in particular On Difficulty of Breathing.



396 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

out of season. On the first day, the bowels disordered, with
bilious, thin, and copious dejections ; urine thin and blackish ;
had no sleep ; was thirsty. On the second all the symptoms
were exacerbated ; dejections more copious and unseasonable ;
he had no sleep ; disorder of the intellect ; slight sweat. On
the third day, restless, thirst, nausea, much tossing about,
bewilderment, delirium; extremities livid and cold; softish
distension of the hypochondrium on both sides. On the
fourth, did not sleep ; still worse. On the seventh he died.
He was about twenty years of age.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
cause of his death on the seventh day was the unseasonable
practices mentioned above. An acute affection.*

Case IX. — The woman who lodged at the house of
Tisamenas had a troublesome attack of iliac passion: much
vomiting; could not keep her drink; pains about the hypo-
chondria, and pains also in the lower part of the belly ; con-
stant tormina ; not thirsty ; became hot ; extremities cold
throughout, with nausea and insomnolency ; urine scanty and
thin ; dejections undigested, thin, scanty. Nothing cotild do
her any good. She died.*

Case X. — A woman of those who lodged with Pantimides,

> Galen has given us a lengthy Commentary on this case, but a great part of it
relates to the characters and to other matters not of any very great importance in
this place. As he remarks, it is a striking example of an acute fever indaced by
immoderate fatigue. It appears from his Commentary, moreover, that some of the
older authorities had added "drinking" to the excesses which induced this affection;
that is to say, they proposed to read wdriav instead of irSvwv. The symptoms, upon
reference to the Prognostics, are all such as indicated a fatal result, namely, the
blackish and thin urine, "the fumbling with the bedclothes," the coldness and
lividity of the extremities, the meteorism, and so forth.

' In Galen's Commentary on this case there is not much of any great interest to
the professional reader of the present day. He animadverts again on the omission
of all mention of the treatment, although, as he states, venesection and the other
usual means had no doubt been tried ; indeed the report implies as much. Hippo*
crates, he repeats, never thinks of mentioning the usual routine of practice, as he
takes it for granted that the reader will understand that it was not neglected. It is
only on special occasions, then, that he thinks of making any particular reference to
the treatment. Galen remarks, that ileus being an inflammation of the upper intes-
tines, is a particularly dangerous affection.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 397

from a miscarriage^ was taken ill of fever. On the first day,
tongue dry, thirsty nausea^ insomnolency^ belly disordered,
with thin, copious, iindigested dejections. On the second day,
had a rigor, acute fever; alvine discharges copious; had no
sleep. On the third, pains greater. On the fourth, delirious.
On the seventh she died. Belly throughout loose, with
copious, thin, undigested evacuations : urine scanty, thin. An
ardent fever.^

Case XI. — Another woman, after a miscarriage about the
fifth month, the wife of Ocetes, was seized with fever. At first
had sometimes coma and sometimes insomnolency ; pain of the
loins; heaviness of the head. On the second, the bowels
were disordered, with scanty, thin, and at first unmixed dejec-
tions. On the third, more copious, and worse ; at night did
not sleep. On the fourth was delirious ; frights, despondency ;
strabismus of the right eye; a faint cold sweat about the head;
extremities cold. On the fifth day, all the symptoms were
exacerbated ; talked much incoherently, and again immediately
became collected ; had no thirst ; laboured" under insomno-
lency ; alvine dejections copious, and unseasonable throughout;
urine scanty, thin, darkish; extremities cold, somewhat livid.
On the sixth day, in the same state. On the seventh she
died. Phrenitis.^

■ As remarked by Galen in his Commentary, this was no doubt a case of ardent
fever or causus, complicated with an incidental miscarriage. There is no reason for
looking upon it as being a case of puerperal fever. Galen thinks that the last word
(causus) is an addition made by the copyists, having been transferred from the
Glossarium to the text in the course of transcription. Galen, as usual, directs at-
tention to the characters of the urine, which in this case are particularly unfavorable,
being defective both in quantity and quality.

' Galen's remarks on the circumstances of this case are sufficiently to the purpose,
but there is nothing very striking in them. He states that the abortion may have
been occasioned either by external causes — such as the application of pessaries for
this purpose, and the like — or internal, such as hemorrhage from the neck of the
uterus, and so forth. As in the former case, he pronounces the last word (phrenitis)
to be an addition to the text, as Hippocrates never enters upon the diagnosis of dis-
eases, as is done in the work On Diseases. I suppose he means that our author's
real works are all founded on Prognosis ; whereas the other, being derived from the
Cnidian school, is founded on Diagnosis. See our obserxations on this subject in
the Preliminary Discourse, and the Argument to the Prognostics.



398 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

Case XII. — A woman who lodged near the Liars^ Market,
having then brought forth a son in a first and difficult labour,
was seized with fever. Immediately on the commencement had
thirst, nausea, and cardialgia ; tongue dry ; bowels disordered,
with thin and scanty dejections ; had no sleep. On the second,
had slight rigor, acute fever; a faint cold sweat about the
head. On the third, painfully affected ; evacuations from the
bowels undigested, thin, and copious. On the fourth, had a
rigor; all the symptoms exacerbated; insomnolency. On
the fifth, in a painful state. On the sixth, in the same
state; discharges from the bowels liquid and copious. On
the seventh, had a rigor, fever acute; much thirst; much
tossing about ; towards evening a cold sweat over all ; extre-
mities cold ; could no longer be kept warm ; and again at night
had a rigor ; extremities cotild not be warmed ; she did not
sleep ; was slightly delirious, and again speedily collected. On
the eighth, about mid-day, she became warm, was thirsty,
comatose, had nausea ; vomited small quantities of yellowish bile;
restless at night, did not sleep ; passed frequently large quan-
tities of urine without consciousness. On the ninth, all the
symptoms gave way ; comatose, towards evening slight rigors ;
small vomitings of bile. On the tenth, rigor ; exacerbation of
the fever, did not sleep at all ; in the morning passed much
urine having a sediment ; extremities recovered their heat. On
the eleventh, vomited bile of a verdigris-green colour ; not long
after had a rigor, and again the extremities cold ; towards
evening a rigor, a cold sweat, much vomiting ; passed a pain-
ful night. On the twelfth, had copious black and fetid
vomitings; much hiccup, painful thirst. On the thirteenth,
vomitings black, fetid, and copious ; rigor about mid-day, loss
of speech. On the fourteenth, some blood ran from her nose,
she died. In this case the bowels were loose throughout ;
with rigors : her age about seventeen. An ardent fever. ^

* Galen remarks, that with such a combination of fatal symptoms, namely, cold-
ness of the extremities, fetid vomiting, &c., it is wonderful that this patient stood
out until the fourteenth day. He thinks, however, that this is to be explained from her
age and constitution. He justly remarks that the occurrence of the epistaxis could
not be supposed sufficient to carry off such a combination of unfavorable symptoms.
He once more protests against the last word of the report (causus) being admitted
as genuine. He confesses himself unable to determine whether ** The Liars' Market''
was in Athens or elsewhere.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 399

Section III. — Constitution 2.^

The year was southerly, rainy; no winds throughout.^
Draughts having prevailed during the previous seasons of the
year, the south winds towards the rising of Arcturus were at-
tended with much rain. Autumn gloomy and cloudy, with
copious rains. Winter southerly, damp, and soft. But long
after the solstice, and near the equinox, much wintery weather
out of season ; and when now close to the equinox, northerly,
and winterly weather for no long time. The spring again
southerly, calm, much rain throughout until the dog-days.
Summer fine and hot ; great suffocating heats. The Etesian
winds blew small and irregular ; again, about the season of
Arcturus, much rains with north winds. The year being
southerly, damp, and soft towards winter, all were healthy, ex-
cept those affected with phthisis, of whom we shall write after-
wards.

3. Early in spring, along with the prevailing cold, there
were many cases of erysipelas, some from a manifest cause, and
some not.^ They were of a malignant nature, and proved fatal
to many ; many had sore-throat and loss of speech. There
were many cases of ardent fever, phrensy, aphthous affections
of the moutli,^ tumours on the genital organs ; of ophthalmia,

' This is entitled the pestilential constitution hy Galen. By constitution, he ex-
plains, is meant not only the preternatural state of the atmosphere, but also of every-
thing else which influences the state of the general health.

' Galen remarks, that in the First Book of the Epidemics three constitutions of
the year are described, and also that others are described in the Second Book ; but
that these are not carefully drawn out for publication like those of the First and
Third. He further remarks on this head, that the constitution of the season might
prepare us for the putrid diseases, which are described below, as heat is the active,
and humidity the material, cause of all putrefaction.

' Galen remarks that erysipelas is occasioned by a bilious deflujdon, but that it is
not always of a malignant and putrid nature ; on the contrary, when the defluxion is
mild, and the bile which produces it is natural, it is not attended with any consider-
able injury to the body, if properly managed ; but that the humour which produced
the erysii>elas about to be described was not such, but of a malignant, corrosive, and
septic nature, being engendered by the humid and calm state of the weather in such
persons as were of a choleric constitution.

* According to Galen, aphthae in general are superficial ulcerations in the mouth,
produced by the acrimony of the nurse's milk, and which are easily removed by an
astringent application. But in the present instance the aphthae were of a malignant
nature.



400 EPIDEMICS— BOOK HI.

anthrax/ disorder of the bowels, anorexia, with thirst and
without it; of disordered urine, large in quantity, and bad in
quality; of persons affected with coma for a long time, and
then falling into a state of insomnolency. There were many
cases of failure of crisis, and many of nnfavorable crisis ; many
of dropsy and of phthisis. Such were the diseases then epi-
demic.^ There were patients ati'ected with every one of the
species which have been mentioned, and many died. The
symptoms in each of these cases were as follows :

4. In many cases erysipelas, from some obvious cause, such
as an accident, and sometimes from even a very small wound,
broke out all over the body, especially, in persons about sixty
years of age, about the head, if such an accident was neglected
in the slightest degree ; and this happened in some who were
under treatment : great inflammation took place, and the ery-
sipelas quickly spread all over.* In the most of them the
abscesses ended in suppurations, and there were great fallings
off (sloughing) of the flesh, tendons, and bones ; and the de-
fluxion which seated in the part was not like pus, but a sort of
putrefaction, and the running was large and of various cha-
racters. Those cases in which any of these things happened
about the head were accompanied with falling off of the hairs

' The carbuncle (anthrax), Galen says, is always dangeroos, and the product of
bad humours. See Paulus JEqiseta, Vol. II, pp. 78, 79. Galen, in his excellent
work On the Difference of Fevers, writes thus : " In constitutions of the year, sinailar
to those which Hippocrates describes as taking place in Cranon (see £p. ii), I have
known cases of anthrax prevailing epidemically in no few numbers, the formation
and other symptoms of which were exactly as described by him." (Tom. vii, p. 293 ;
ed. Kiihn.)

' Galen explains under this head that the term epidemic is not applied to any one
disease, but that when many cases of any disease occur at the same time in a place,
the disease is called an epidemic ; and that when it is remarkably fatal it is called a
plague.

' The history of the epidemical erysipelas here described cannot fail to prove
interesting to the modern reader. I need scarcely remark that epidemics of a similar
nature are occasionally met with in Great Britain at the present day. I myself have
encountered two such epidemics in the locality where I am now writing, the one in
1823, and the other in 1846. As described by Hippocrates, the disease sometimes
supervened upon a slight injury, and generally terminated in gangrene. On epide-
mical erysipelas, see De Haen (Ratio Medendi), Bartholinus (Hist. Anatom. Rat.
Hist., 56), Wells (Transactions of a Society for the Improvement of Medical and
Chirurgical Knowledge), Cooper's Surgical Dictionary ; and Cyclopaedia of Practical
Medicine, under ErysipeUu.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 401

of the head and chin^ the bones were laid bare and separated^
and there were excessive runnings ; and these symptoms hap*
pened in fevers and without fevers. But these things were more
formidable in appearance than dangerous ; for when the con-
coction in these cases turned to a suppuration, most of them
recovered; but when the inflammation and erysipelas disap-
peared, and when no abscess was formed, a great number of
these died.^ In like manner, the same things happened to
whatever part of the body the disease wandered, for in many
cases both forearm and arm dropped o£f ; and in those cases
in which it fell upon the sides, the parts there, either before or
behind, got into a bad state ; and in some cases the whole femur
and bones of the leg and whole foot were laid bare. But of
all such caseSi the most formidable were those which took place
about the pubes and genital organs.^ Such was the nature of

* Galen amply oonfirms this statement, that when erysipelas fixes on a particular
part of the body it is more formidable in appearance than in reality, and that the
disease is attended with most danger when it leaves an external member, and is
determined inwardly.

* The classical reader will here call to his recollection a striking passage in the
celebrated description of the Plagne of Athens, as given by Thucydides : ** For the
mischief, being at first seated in the head, spread over the whole body, and if one sur-
vived the most formidable symptoms, an attack on the extremities manifested itself;
for it was determined to the genital organs and to the hands and feet, and many
escaped with losing them, and some with the loss of their eyes.'* (ii, 49.) The passage
is thus rendered by Lucretius :

" tamen in nenros huic morbus et artus
Ibat et in partes genitales corporis ipsas ;
Et graviter partim metuentes limina lethi
Vivebant ferro privati parte virili :
Et manibus sine nonnnlli pedibusque manebant
In vita tamen et perdebant lumina partim." (vi, 1203.)

Lucretius, it will be remarked, understands the historian to mean that the mortified
parts were amputated; and this opinion, although rejected by most of our non-
professional editors of Thucydides, is confirmed by what Galen says in his Commentary
on this passage, namely, that in erysipelas of the genital organs ** we (meaning the
physicians of his own time) are often obliged to excise the putrid parts, and apply
the cautery to them." I would here further point out a singular mistake into which
Dr. Bloomfield falls in his note on this passage of Thucydides ; he says that the
words of the original (acpac x^'P^C '^^'^ ir6iac) ** can only signify the ends of or
lower joints of the fingers and toes." No one who is acquainted with the language
of our author will require to be told that this is an entire misconception. In the
works of Hippocrates x<(p<c is often put for the arms, and x<^P<C dtpai are always
applied to the hands.

26



402 EPIDEMICS— BOOK HI.

these cases when attended with sores^ and proceeding from an
external cause ; but the same things occurred in fevers^ before
fevers, and after fevers. But those cases in which an abscess
was formed, and turned to a suppuration, or a seasonable
diarrhoea or discharge of good urine took place, were relieved
thereby; but those cases in which none of these symptoms
occurred, but they disappeared without a crisis, proved fatal.
The greater number of these erysipelatous cases took place in
the spring, but were prolonged through the summer and during
autumn.

5. In certain cases there was much disorder, and tumours
about the fauces, and inflammations of the tongue, and ab-
scesses about the teeth. And many were attacked with im-
pairment or loss of speech -^ at first, those in the commencement
of phthisis, but also persons in ardent fever and in phrenitis.

6. The cases of ardent fever and phrenitis occurred early in
spring after the cold set in, and great numbers were taken ill
at that time, and these cases were attended with acute and fatal
symptoms. The constitution of the ardent fevers which then
occurred was as follows : at the commencement they were af-
fected with coma, nausea, and rigors ; fever not acute, not much
thirst nor delirium, slight epistaxis,^ the paroxysms for the most
part on even days ; and, about the time of the paroxysms, for-
getfulness, loss of strength and of speech, the extremities, that
is to say, the hands and feet, at all times, but more especially
about the time of the paroxysms, were colder than natural ;
they slowly and imperfectly became warmed, and again re-
covered their recollection and speech.* They were constantly
affected either with coma, in which they got no sleep, or with

> Upon reference to the Glossary of Erotian, the Commentary of Galen, and the
Annotations of Foes and Littr^, the reader will see that there is great difficolty in
determining the text in this place. After examining all that has been written on
the subject, one cannot come to any satisfactory conclusion as to the tme reading.
I have adopted the meaning which seems to suit best with the passage. The pro-
fessional reader will scarcely require to be reminded that in cases of phthisia there
b often a notable impairment of the voice.

* Galen makes the important remark on this word, that, in febrile diseaseSi epis-
taxis is always a bad symptom.

' This obliviousness is a feature of the plague, as described by Thucydides : '^ And
some, when they first left their beds, were seized with an utter foi^tfulness of all
things, and knew not themselves nor their relatives." (1. c.)



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 403

insomnolency^ attended vrith pains ;< most bad disorders of the
bowels^ attended with undigested^ thin^ and copious evacuations;
urine copious^ thin^ having nothing critical nor favorable about
it j neither was there any other critical appearance in persons
affected thus ; for neither was there any proper hemorrhage^
nor any other of the accustomed evacuations, to prove a crisis.
They died, as it happened, in an irregular manner, mostly
about the crises, but in some instances after having lost their
speech for a long time, and having had copious sweats. These
were the symptoms which marked the fatal cases of ardent fever ;
similar symptoms occurred in the phrenitic cases ; but these
were particularly free from thirst, and none of these had wild
delirium^ as in other cases, but they died oppressed by a bad
tendency to sleep, and stupor.

7. But there were also other fevers, as will be described.
Many had their mouths affected with aphthous ulcerations.
There were also many defluxions about the genital parts, and
ulcerations, boils (phymata), externally and internally, about
the groins.' Watery ophthalmies of a chronic character, with
pains ; fungous excrescences of the eyelids, externally and in«
temally, called fici, which destroyed the sight of many persons.^
There were fungous growths, in many other instances, on ulcers,
especially on those seated on the genital organs. There were
many attacks of carbuncle (anthrax) through the summer, and

* Our author alludes to the afFection called coma Tigil by the later authorities. In
this affection, as Galen remarks, the patient lies with his eyes shut, but can get no
sound sleep. This, of course, is so mnch more the case provided pain be present, as
it necessarily will prevent the occurrence of sleep. See Galen's tract On Coma.

' The low muttering delirium of typhoid fevers is here evidently alluded to.
Galen, in his Commentary, guards the reader against supposing that the fever passed
into lethargus.

' This description apparently can refer to nothing but pestilential buboes.

* It is impossible not to recognise this as a description of jmruieni ophthalmia.
Celsus thus describes the ficus : ** Est etiam ulcus quod a fici similitudine avKutaiQ
Grsecis nominatur, ubi caro excresdt*; et id quidem generale est. Sub eo vero dus spe- I
des sunt. Alterum ulcus durum et rotundum est : aherom humidum et insequale.

Ex duro exiguum quoddam et glutinosum exit : ex humido plus, et mali odoris."
See the Lexicons of Hesychius and Phavorinus, and also Paulob iEciVBTA, Book

III, 3. It will be remarked that Hippocrates also makes mention of fungous ex«
crescences about the pudenda. Were they syphilitic ? In other words, did they derive
their origin from elephantiasis ? See the Annotations on Paulus iGoiNBTA, Book

IV, 1, Sydenham Society's edition.



404 EPIDEMICS— BOOK IIL

other affections, which are called " the putrefaction*' {seps) ;
also large ecthymata/ and large tetters {herpetes) in many in-
stances.

8. And many and serious complaints attacked many persons
in the region of the belly. In the first place, tenesmus, aC'
companied with pain, attacked many, but more especially
children, and all who had not attained to puberty ; and the
most of these died. There were many cases of lientery and of
dysentery; but these were not attended with much pain.^
The evacuations were bilious, and fatty, and thin, and watery ;
in many instances the disease terminated in this way, with and
without fever ; there were painful tormina and volvuli of a
malignant kind; copious evacuations of the contents of the
guts, and yet much remained behind ; and the passages did
not carry off the pains, but yielded with difficulty to the means
administered ; for in most cases purgings were hurtful to those
affected in this manner; many died speedily, but in many
others they held out longer. In a word, all died, both those
who had acute attacks and those who had chronic, most espe-
cially from affections of the belly, for it was the belly which
carried them all off.

9. All persons had an aversion to food in all the afore-
mentioned complaints to a degree such as I never met with
before,' and persons in these complaints most especially, and
those recovering from them, and in all other diseases of a
mortal nature. Some were troubled with thirst, and some not ;
and both in febrile complaints and in others no one drank un-
seasonably or disobeyed injunctions.

10. The urine in many cases was not in proportion to the
drink administered, but greatly in excess ; and the badness of
the urine voided was great, for it had not the proper thickness,
nor concoction, nor purged properly ; for in many cases purgings
by the bladder indicate favorably, but in the greatest number

' The meaning of this tenn is not precisely determined. Galen's aooonnt of it
may apply both to exanthemata and pastulse. The description of the eruption in
the Plague of Athens is likewise yague and indeterminate. (Thucyd. ii, 49.)

' These intestinal complaints are all mentioned in the description of the Plague at
Athens. (1. c.) Upon reference to the Ckimmentary of Galen, the reader will remark
that there is a question here respecting the reading.

' Galen, in his Ck>mmentary, makes the remark that he observed the same symptom
in the plague which raged in his time.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 406

they indicated a melting of the body^ disorder of the bowels,
pains, and a want of crisis.^

11. Persons labouring under phrenitis and causus were par-
ticularly disposed to coma ; but also in all other great diseases
which occurred along with fever. In the main, most cases
were attended either by heavy coma^ or by short and light sleep.

12. And many other forms of fevers were then epidemic,
of tertian, of quartan, of noctumal^^ of continual, of chronic,
of erratic, of fevers attended with nausea, and of irregular
fevers. All these were attended with much disorder, for the
bowels in most cases were disordered, accompanied with rigors,
sweats not of a critical character, and with the state of the
urine as described. In most instances the disease was pro-
tracted, for neither did the deposits which took place prove
critical as in other cases ; for in all complaints and in all cases
there was difficulty of crisis, want of crisis, and protraction of
the disease, but most especially in these. A few had the crisis
about the eightieth day, but in most instances it (the disease?)
left them irregularly. A few of them died of dropsy without
being confined to bed. And in many other diseases people were
troubled with swelling, but more especially in phthisical cases.

13. The greatest and most dangerous disease, and the one
that proved fatal to the greatest number, was the consumption.'
With many persons it commenced during the winter, and of
these some were confined to bed, and others bore up on foot ;

' It will readily be undentood that a oolliquative diabetes would prove a very on*
favorable complication of these complaints.

' By Docturaal fevers, according to Galen, was meant quotidians, which had their
paroxysms during the night. Foes inclines to think that diurnal should also lie
inserted in this place. These nocturnal fevers are thus described by D. Monro:
*'The sick were restless and uneasy at night ^ but commonly felt themselves cooler
and lighter in the daytime ; and although they had no cold fit, as the fever came on
«/ nigktt, and many of them no breathing sweat, as they became cooler and freer
from the fever in the morning; yet the fits were so remarkable, that many of the
patients used to say that they had a regular fit of an ague every niffhtt and some few
that they had the fit every second night,** (Army Diseases, &c., p. 158.)

* The account of the origin and progress of consumption here given is, upon the
whole, wonderfully coirect. Common experience seems to have decided that spring
and autumn aro the most fatal seasons to phthisical patients. Avicenna makes the
remark, which is very important, and deserves to be kept in mind, that by phthisis,
in this place, Hippocrates most probably meant hectic fever, connected with disease
of the internal viscera, which had been in an inflamed state during the acute attack
of the fever, (iii, 1, 3, 67.)



406 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

the most of those died early in spring who were confined to bed;
of the others, the cough left not a single person, but it became
milder through the summer; during the autumn, all these were
confined to bed, and many of them died, but in the greater
number of cases the disease was long protracted. Most of these
were suddenly attacked with these diseases, having firequent
rigors, often continual and acute fevers ; unseasonable, copious^
and cold sweats throughout ; great coldness, from which they
had great difficulty in being restored to heat; the bowels
variously constipated, and again immediately in a loose state,
but towards the termination in all cases with violent looseness
of the bowels ; a determination downwards of all matters col-
lected about the lungs ; urine excessive, and not good; trouble*
some melting. The coughs throughout were frequent, and
sputa copious, digested, and liquid, but not brought up with
much pain ; and even when they had some slight pain, in all
cases the purging of the matters about the lungs went on
mildly. The fauces were not very irritable, nor were they
troubled with any saltish humours; but there were viscid,
white, liquid, frothy, and copious defluxions from the head.
But by far the greatest mischief attending these and the other
complaints, was the aversion to food, as has been described.
For neither had they any relish for drink along with their food,
but continued without thirst. There was heaviness of the body,
disposition to coma, in most cases swelling, which ended in
dropsy ; they had rigors, and were delirious towards death.

14. The form of body peculiarly subject to phthisical com-
plaints was the smooth, the whitish, that resembling the lentil;
the reddish, the blue-eyed, the leucophlegmatic,^ and that with

* I Bhall not enter into a discussion of the different readings of this interesting
passage. I may mention that our great pathological authority on phthisis. Dr.
Louis, agrees with Hippocrates in deciding that the lymphatic temperament consti-
tutes a more or less marked predisposition to the development of phthisis, (p. 483.)
Galen describes the phlegmatic temperament as being attended with a soft and
slightly tumid skin. He attributes the disease in their case to a cacochymy, that ia
to say, to cachexia. I need scarcely remark that this opinion is strongly advocated
by one of the highest authorities of the day, I mean Sir James Clark. See his
treatise on Tubercular Phthisis. Galen gives a discussion on the colour of the eyea,
about which there is some difficulty, as the ancient terms which relate to colours are
not very well defined. The term here used (x<i/>07rdc) may signify either blue or
gray. Galen considers this colour of tlic eyes as a symptom of a cold and humid
tetnpcramcjit.



"•^



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 407

the scapulae having the appearance of wings : and women in like
manner/ with regard to the melancholic and subsanguineous,
phrenitic and dysenteric affections principally attacked them.
Tenesmus troubled young persons of a phlegmatic temperament.
Chronic diarrhoea^ acrid and viscid discharges from the bowels
attacked those who were troubled with bitter bile.

15. To all those which have been described, the season of
spring was most inimical, and proved fatal to the greatest
numbers : the summer was the most favorable to them, and
the fewest died then; in autumn, and under the Pleiades,
again there died great numbers. It appears to me, accord-
ing to the reason of things, that the coming on of summer
should have done good in these cases ; for winter coming on
cures the diseases of summer, and summer coming on removes
the diseases of winter. And yet the summer in question was
not of itself well constituted, for it became suddenly hot, south-
erly, and calm ; but, notwithstanding, it proved beneficial by
producing a change on the other constitution.

16. I look upon it as being a great part of the art to be able
to judge properly of that which has been written. For he that
knows and makes a proper use of these things, would appear to
me not likely to commit any great mistake in the art. He
ought to learn accurately the constitution of every one of the
seasons, and of the diseases ; whatever that is common in each
constitution and disease is good, and whatever is bad ; whatever
disease will be protracted and end in death, and whatever will
be protracted and end in recovery ; which disease of an acute
nature will end in death, and which in recovery. From these
it is easy to know the order of the critical days, and prognosti-
cate from them accordingly. And to a person who is skilled
in these things, it is easy to know to whom, when, and how
aliment ought to be administered.^

* There is an ambiguity in the part of the sentence which relates to women, as
Galen states in his Commentary. Galen does not hesitate to declare that women are
more subject to phthisis than men, an opinion upon which modem authorities are
not at all agreed. See the recent publications of Louis and Clark on Phthisis.

' The last paragraph, and the latter clause of the preceding one, were at first at-
tached to the end of the subsequent cases, and were transferred to their present
position by Dioscorides the commentator a short time before Galen. They evidently
embody a most distinct and admirable enumeration of the general facts with which
the practical physician ought to make himself acquainted.



40^ EPIDEMICS— BOOK UI.

§ 17. SiXTEEK Ca8S8.^

Case I. — In Thasas, tbe Pttrian who lodged above the
Temple of Diana was seized with an acute fer^, at first
of a continual and ardent type; ihirstjr, inclined to be coma-
tose at first, and afterwards troubled with insomnolenqr ;
bowels disordered at the b^iinning, urine thin. On the sixth
day, passed oily urine, was delirious. On the scTentb^ all the
symptoms were exacerbated ; had no sleep, but the urine of the
same characters, and the understanding disordered ; alvine de*
jections bilious and fatty. On the dghth, a slight epistaxis ;
small vomiting of ver^gris-green matters ; slept a little. On
the ninth, in the same state. On the tenths all the symptoms
gave way. On the eleventh, he sweated, but not over the whole
body; he became cold, but immediately recovered his heat
again. On the fourteenth, acute fever ; dischai^es bilious, thin,
and copious ; substances floating in the urine; he became inco-
herent. On the seventeenth, in a painful state, for he had no
bleep, and the fever was more intense. On the twentieth,
sweated all over; apyrexia, dejections bilious; aversion to food,
comatose. On the twenty-fourth, had a relapse. On the
thirty-fourth, apyrexia; bowels not confined; and he again reco-
vered his heat. Fortieth, apyrexia, bowels confined for no long
time, aversion to food ; had again slight symptoms of fever, and
throughout in an irregular form; apyrexia at times, and at
others not ; for if the fever intermitt^, and was alleviated for
a little, it immediately relapsed again ; he used much and im-
proper food ; sleep bad ; about the time of the relapse he was
delirious ; passed thick urine at that time, but troubled, and of
bad characters ; bowels at first confined, and again loose ; slight
fevers of a continual type; discharges copious and thin. On the
hundred and twentieth day he died. In this patient the bowels
were constantly from the first either loose, with bilious, liquid,
and copious dejections, or constipated with hot and undigested
fceces ; the urine throughout bad ; for the most part coma, or in-
somnolency with pain; continued aversion to food. Ardent fever.

' We learn from the Commentary of Galen that aome of the older critics sap-
posed that the sixteen cases about to be related had been selected by Hippocntes
in illustration of his doctrines, as laid down in the preceding description of what
is generally entitled the Pestilential Season. Galen, however, does not incline to
this opinion.



i^a I |^«< !•■ 1^1 ■■■ v« II. , ■!■ v^^^^mw^^fv^^V^^^'^^'i^^mmmYf ww^^^^^^Y



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 409

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
. weakness produced by the fever^ the phrenitis, and affection of
the hypochondrium caused death on the hundred and twentieth
day.^

Case II. — In Thasus^ the woman who was lodged near the
Cold Water, on the third day after delivery of a daughter, the
lochial discharge not taking place, was seized with acute fever,
accompanied with rigors. But a considerable time before
delivery she was feverish, confined to bed, and loathed her food.
After the rigor which took place, continual and acute fevers,
with rigors. On the eighth and following days, was very inco-
herent, and immediately afterwards became collected ; bowels
disordered, with copious, thin, watery, and bilious stools; no
thirst. On the eleventh was collected, but disposed to coma;
urine copious, thin, and black ; no sleep. On the twentieth,
slight chills, and immediately afterwards was warm; slight
incoherence ; no sleep ; with regard to the bowels, in the same
condition ; urine watery, and copious. On the twenty-seventh,
free from fever ; bowels constipated ; not long afterwards vio-
lent pain of the right hip-joint for a considerable time ; fevers
afterwards supervened ; urine watery. On the fortieth, com-
plaints about the hip-joint better; continued coughs, with
copious, watery sputa ; bowels constipated ; aversion to food ;
urine the same ; fever not leaving her entirely, but having
paroxysms in an irregular form, sometimes present, sometimes
not. On the sixtieth, the coughs left her without a crisis, for
no concoction of the sputa took place, nor any of the usual

' This U an example of one of those protracted fevers of an intermittent type,
which, as I have been informed by an intelligent physician who practised for several
years in the Ionian Islands, are so common in the climate of Greece. There is not
much of any particular value in Galen's Commentary on this case. He informs us
that one of the older commentators absurdly maintained the opinion that the country
of this patient was given because, according to Asclepiades, the inhabitants of Paros
were most especially benefited by bleeding. But, as Galen says, this remark is
particularly out of place here, since no mention of venesection occurs in the report.
Galen, and after him Foes, have given very lengthy and elaborate disquisitions on
the nature of oily urine. The result is, that it is an unfavorable, but not necessarily
a' fatal, character. It is minutely described by the later authorities on urology,
namely, Theophilus and Actuarius. See also the Commentary on Paulvs iEoiNKTA,
Book II, 14, Sydenham Society's edition.



410 EPIDEMICS^BOOK III.

abscesses; jaw on the right side couTulsiTely retracted; coma-
tose^ was agaia incoherent^ and immediately became collected;
utter aversion to food; the jaw became relaxed; alvine
charges small^ and bilious; fever more acate^ affected
rigors ; on the following days lost her speech, and again became
collected, and talked. On the eightieth she died. In this case
the urine throughout was blacky thin, and wateiy; coma
supervened ; there was aversion to food, despondency, and inaom-
nolency; irritability, restlessness; she was of a melancholic
turn of mind.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
suppression of the lochial dischai^ caused death on the
eightieth day.^

Case III. — In Thasus, Pythion, who was lodged aboye the
Temple of Hercules, from labour, fatigue, and neglected diet,
was seized with strong rigor and acute fever ; tongue diy,
thirsty, and bilious; had no sleep; urine darkish, eneorema
floating on the top of the urine, did not subside. On the
second day, about noon, coldness of the extremities, especially
about the hands and head ; loss of speech and of articulation ;
breathing short for a considerable time ; recovered his heat ;
thirst ; passed the night quietly ; slight sweats about the head.
On the third, passed the day in a composed state; in the even-
ing, about sunset, slight chills ; nausea, agitation ; passed the
night in a painful state ; had no sleep ; small stools of compact
faeces passed from the bowels. On the fourth, in the morning,
composed ; about noon all the symptoms became exacerbated ;
coldness, loss of speech, and of articulation ; became worse ;
recovered his heat after a time ; passed black urine, having
substances floating in it ; the night quiet ; slept. On the
fifth, seemed to be lightened, but a painful weight about the
belly ; thirsty, passed the night in a painful state. On the
sixth, in the morning, in a quiet state ; in the evening the
pains greater; had a paroxysm ; in the evening the bowels pro-

* This appears clearly to be a case of fever, complicated with, but not produced by
partttrition. Galen, however, seems to ascribe the teyer and its fiital retnhs to the
retention of the lochial discharge. The characters of the orine, he properly remarks,
are unfavorable, being copious, thin, and black. He also caUs attention to the want
of proper concoction in the sputa, to which he attributes the fatal relapse.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 411

perly opened by a small clyster; slept at night. On the
seventh^ during the day^ in a state of nausea, somewhat dis-
turbed ; passed urine of the appearance of oil ; at night, much
agitation, was incoherent, did not sleep. On the eighth, in
the morning, slept a little ; but immediately coldness, loss of
speech, respiration small and weak ; but in the evening reco-
vered his heat again ; was delirious, but towards day was some-
what lightened ; stools small, bilious, and unmixed. On the
ninth, affected with coma, and with nausea when roused j not
very thirsty ; about sunset he became restless and incoherent ;
passed a bad night. On the tenth, in the morning, had become
speechless ; great coldness ; acute fever ; much perspiration ; he
died. His sufferings were on the even days.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
excessive sweats caused death on the tenth day.^

Case IV. — ^The patient affected with phrenitis, having taken
to bed on the first day, vomited largely of verdigris-green and
thin matters ; fever, accompanied with rigors, copious and con-
tinued sweats all over ; heaviness of the head and neck, with
pain ; urine thin, substances floating in the mine small, scat-
tered, did not subside ; had copious dejections from the bowels;
very delirious ; no sleep. On the second, in the morning, loss
of speech ; acute fever ; he sweated ; fever did not leave him ;
palpitations over the whole body, at night, convulsions. On the
third, all the symptoms exacerbated ; he died.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the
sweats and convulsions caused death.^

* Galen's Commentary on this case is written in his usual light and diiAise style,
but contains very little which is calculated to throw light on the text, or on the
nature of the disease which is here described. If any one find difficulty in compre*
bending the characters of the respiration, as given in this narrative, he can turn to
Galen's work, On Difficulty of Breathing, where they are explained very fully. I may
just mention that by shortness of breath (/Spaxvirvooc) was understood, by Hippo-
crates and Galen, frequency of the act of respiration.

* This case, as Galen remarks, is an instance of the most acute form of phrenitis.
He states that he himself had met with cases of phrenitis in which the patients had
died on the fourth and fifth day, but that he had never seen a case which proved so
suddenly fatal as the present one. He further makes some very interesting reflections
on the suddenness of the attack in such cases, which is the more wonderful, as the
exciting cause of them must be gradually collecting in the system, and acquiring
strength and intensity, and it is singular that it should then be developed all at once,



412 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

Case V. — In Larissa^ a man^ who was bald^ suddenly was
seized with pain in the right thigh ; none of the things which
were administered did him any good. On the first day, fever
acute, of the ardent type, not agitated, but the pains persisted.
On the second, the pains in the thigh abated, but the fever in-
creased ; somewhat tossed about ; did not sleep ; extremities
cold ; passed a large quantity of urine, not of a good character.
On the third, the pain of the thigh ceased ; derangement of the
intellect, confusion, and much tossing about. On the fourth^
about noon, he died. An acute disease.^

and cut off the patient in a very short time, as if he had swallowed poison, or had
been stung by a venomous animaL He compares the latency of the febrile homoor
in the system to that of the mad dog, which will remain for a long time in the body
of a person who has been bitten, and then all at once will manifest its effects, by
inducing the rage. For the ancient views on the subject of Hydrophobia, see Paulus
iEoiNBTA, Book V, 4, Sydenham Society's edition.

' Galen, in his Commentary on this case, enters into a train of reflections how a
physician ought to proceed when called in to a patient so circumstanced. He ought,
in the first place, as the Commentator properly remarks, to make careful inquiry, in
order to find out whether the pain in the limb be occasioned by any external cause,
as persons often meet with local injuries by sudden twisting and movements of
their limbs, or even by laying a limb uucomfortably in bed, without being aware of
it. When no such cause of the complaint can be discovered, Galen says the physician
should try to ascertain whether or not it be connected with the regimen or tempera-
ment of the patient. If it shall turn out that the body is in a plethoric state, general
bleeding must be had recourse to, before any local applications are made to the part.
It is then to be fomented, and liquid and heating medicines applied to h. Whether
or not this was the mode of treatment which Hippocrates adopted in this case, Galen
cannot take upon himself to affirm, as no mention is made in the report of venesection,
nor of the particular remedies which were used. I am of opinion that this is one of
the most interesting cases in the whole Collection, for I believe it to be a faithful
report of a disease which on three several occasions I have met with during an active
professional practice of thirty years, and which I have not seen described elsewhere.
In all my cases, indeed, the patients were from twelve to sixteen years old, but in
other respects the symptoms were the same as here described by Hippocrates. In
every one of the cases the patient was seized with pain and swelling of the thigh,
attended with high fever, great jactitation, and partial delirium. They all proved
fatal in the course of three or four days. A¥hether the disease be connected vrith
diffuse infiammation of the areolar substance, or with inflammation of the veins,
or whether it be a general fever complicated with a local affection of the limb, or
what may be the exact nature of the affection, I have not been able to determine.
From what is stated above, it will be clearly seen how justly Hippocrates deservea
the compliment paid to him by Galen, of having been, of all medical authorities,
the most careful in observing the phenomena of disease. (Opera Galeni, torn, vii,
p. 829, ed. Kuhn.)



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 413

Case VI. — In Abdera^ Pericles was seized with a fever of the
acute^ continual type^ with pain; much thirsty nausea^ could
not retain his drink ; somewhat swelled about the spleen^ with
heaviness of the head. On the first day, had hemorrhage from
the left nostril^ but still the fever became more violent ; passed
much muddy^ white urine, which when allowed to stand did not
subside. On the second day, all the symptoms were exacer-
bated, yet the urine was thick, and more inclined to have a
sediment; the nausea less; he slept. On the third, fever was
milder ; abundance of urine, which was concocted, and had a
copious sediment ; passed a quiet night. On the fourth^ had a
copious and warm sweat all over about noon; was free of fever,
had a crisis, no relapse. An acute affection.^

Case VII, — In Abdera, the young woman who was lodged
in the Sacred Walk was seized with an ardent fever. She was
thirsty^ and could not sleep ; had menstruation for the first time.
On the sixth, much nausea, flushing, was chilly, and tossed
about. On the seventh^ in the same state ; urine thin, but of
a good colour ; no disturbance about the bowels. On the eighth,
deafness, acute fever, insomnolency, nausea, rigors, became
collected ; urine the same. On the ninth, in the same state, and
also on the foUowing days ; thus the deafness persisted. On the
fourteenth, disorder of the intellect ; the fever abated. On the
seventeenth, a copious hemorrhage from the nose ; the deafness
slightly better ; and on the following days, nausea, deafness, and
incoherence. On the twentieth, pain of the feet ; deafness and
delirium left her ; a small hemorrhage from the nose ; sweat,
apyrexia. On the twenty-fourth, the fever returned, deafness
again ; pain of the feet remained ; incoherence. On the twenty-
seventh, had a copious sweat, apyrexia; the deafiiess left her;
the pain of her feet partly remained ; in other respects had a
complete crisis.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the

< Galen remarks, that this b one of those cases which appear formidable to the
inexperienced, bat which those who are practised in the art jodge of as being
likely to come to a speedy crisis. He adverts to the slight swelling of the spleen
and the characters of the urine, which soon showed a proper sediment, as being
particularly favorable symptoms. The more that we study Hippocratic medicine,
we shall be the more convinced that too little attention has been paid of late years to
the physical characters of the urine in all febrile complaints.



414 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

restoration of healtli on the twentieth day was the result of the
evacuation of urine.^

Case VIII. — In Abdera, Anaxion^ who was lodged near the
Thracian Gates^ was seized with an acute fever ; continued pain
of the right side ; dry cough^ without expectoration during the
first days^ thirsty insomnolency ; urine well coloured^ copious^
and thin. On the sixths delirious ; no relief firom the warm
applications. On the seventh, in a painful state, for the fever
increased, while the pains did not abate, and the cough was
troublesome, and attended with dyspnoea. On the eighth, I
opened a vein at the elbow, and much blood, of a proper cha-
racter, flowed; the pains were abated, but the dry coughs
continued. On the eleventh, the fever diminished; slight
sweats about the head ; coughs^ with more liquid sputa ; he was
relieved. On the twentieth, sweat, apyrexia; but after the
crisis he was thirsty, and the expectorations were not good. On
the twenty-seventh the fever relapsed ; he coughed, and brought
up much concocted sputa : sediment in the urine copious and
white ; he became free of thirst, and the respiration was good.
On the thirty-fourth, sweated all over, apyrexia, general crisis.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the eva-
cuation of the sputa brought about the recovery on the thirty-
fourth day.^

■ Galen's Commentary on this case is unusually brief. He holds it to be a case
connected with general plethora, as indicated by the good colour of the urine. He
once more makes the remark that a favorable -issue of the case might have been
anticipated, from the characters of the urine.

' Galen remarks in his Commentary, that of all the cases related in the First and
Third Books of the Epidemics, this is the only one in which Hippocrates says that
the patient was bled, not, he adds, that this was the only case in which venesection
was adopted, but because, although the general rule was not to bleed after the fourth
day, the patient, in the present instance, was bled on the eighth. Many others,
he says, were no doubt bled on the second, third, and fourth days, but of these
bleedings, and the other means used, Hippocrates in general takes no notice, except
that he sometimes states, in order to render the malignity of the disease more
apparent, that it was nowise benefited by the remedies applied. In other cases be
adds, he would appear, from the words he uses (such as '* as far as I am aware"), not
to have attended the patient at the commencement. Galen further directs attention
to the characters of the expectoration, the concoction of which he looks upon as
having proved the means of carrying off this fever. Galen has reviewed the symptoms
of this case very fully, and in a most interesting manner, in the Second Book of his



EPIDEMICS-BOOK III. 415

Case IX. — In Abdera, Heropythus^ while still on foot, had
pain in the head, and not long afterwards he took to bed ; he
lived near the High Street. Was seized with acute fever of
the ardent type; vomitings at first of much bilious matter;
thirst ; great restlessness ; urine thin, black, substances some-
times floating high in it, and sometimes not ; passed the night
in a painful state ; paroxysms of the fever diversified, and foi^
the most part irregular. About the fourteenth day, deafness ;
the fever increased; urine the same. On the twentieth and
following days, much delirium. On the thirtieth, copious
hemorrhage from the nose, and became more collected ; deaf*
ness continued, but less ; the fever diminished ; on the following
days, frequent hemorrhages, at short intervals. About the
sixtieth, the hemorrhages ceased, but violent pain of the
hip-joint, and increase of fever. Not long afterwards, pains
of all the inferior parts ; it then became a rule, that either the
fever and deafness increased, or, if these abated and were light-
ened, the pains of the inferior parts were increased. About
the eightieth day, all the complaints gave way, without leaving
any behind ; for the urine was of a good colour, and had a
copious sediment, while the delirium became less. About the
hundredth day, disorder of the bowels, with copious and bilious
evacuations, and these continued for a considerable time, and
again assumed the dysenteric form with p^n ; but relief of all
the other complaints. On the whole, the fevers went off, and
the deafness ceased. On the hundred and twentieth day, had
a complete crisis. Ardent fever.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the bilious
discharge brought about the recovery on the hundred and
twentieth day.^

work, On Difficulty of Breathing, see ed. Kiihn, torn, vil, p. 854, &c. That it was a
case of fever complicated with pleurisy seems clear, as Galen remarks. Galen
further treats of the characters of the sputa in this case, in the First Book of his
work. On Crises. Upon reference to the edition of Littr^, it will be seen that
unfortunately there is considerable variation in the readings of this passage.

* On this case Galen makes the remark that this patient must have had a strong
constitution, otherwise it could not have withstood such an affection. He adds
that, moreover, his pulse must have possessed strength, but that, as formerly said by
him, this department of prognostics is altogether omitted by Hippocrates, in his
reports of febrile cases. He further remarks that the respiration and appetite were
not to complain of, and the only bad symptom was the thinness and blackness of the



416 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

Case X. — In Abdera^ Nicodemus was seised with fever from
venery and drinking. At the commencement lie was troubled
with nausea and cardialgia ; thirsty^ tongue was parched ; urine
thin and dark. On the second day, the fever exacerbated ; he
was troubled with rigors and nausea ; had no sleep ; vomited
yellow bile ; urine the same ; passed a quiet night, and slept.
On the third, a general remission; amelioration; but about
sunset felt again somewhat uncomfortable; passed an uneasy
night. On the fourth, rigor, much fever, general pains ; urine
thin, with substances floating in it; again a quiet night. Ou
the fifth, all the symptoms remained, but there was an ame-
lioration. On the sixth, some general pains ; substances float-
ing in the urine; very incoherent. On the seventh, better.
On the eighth, all the other symptoms abated. On the tenth,
and following days, there were pains, but all less; in this
case throughout, the paroxysms and pains were greater on the
even days. On the twentieth, the urine white and thick, but
when allowed to stand had no sediment ; much sweat ; seemed
to be free from fever; but again in the evening he became
hot, with the same pains, rigor, thirst, slightly incoherent. On
the twenty-fourth, urine copious, white, with an abundant
sediment ; a copious and warm sweat all over ; apyrexia ; the
fever came to its crisis.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that the cure
was owing to the bilious evacuations and the sweats.^

Case XI. — In Thasus, a woman, of a melancholic tnm of
mind, from some accidental cause of sorrow, while still going
about, became affected with loss of sleep, aversion to food, and
had thirst and nausea. She lived near the Pylades, upon the
Plain. On the first, at the commencement of night, frights,
much talking, despondency, slight fever ; in the morning, fre-
quent spasms, and when they ceased, she was incoherent and

urine, which therefore required a long time for nature to overcome, by occasioniog
hemorrhage, pain of the hip-joint, and determination downwards. He adds, that great
diseases require decided crises, and that even with those now mentioned, the disease
was not entirely removed in this case, until concoction in the urine took place.

' Galen passes over this case without any remark vrorth mentioning. I cannot
but think that the abundant sediment in the urine, which preceded the ftvorable
crisis, is a fact in the case well deserving to be noticed. Galen, however, in the
present instance, omits all notice of it, and ascribes the recovery to the profuse sweat.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III. 417

talked obscurely ; pains frequent^ great^ and continued. On
the second^ in the same state ; had no sleep ; fever more acute.
On the thirds the spasms left her ; but coma^ and disposition
to sleep^ and again awaked^ started up^ and could not contain
herself ; much incoherence ; acute fever ; on that night a copious
sweat all over ; apyrexia^ slept^ quite collected ; had a crisis.
About the third day^ the urine blacky thin^ substances floating
in it generally rounds did not fall to the bottom ; about the
crisis a copious menstruation.^

Case XII. — In Larissa,^ a young unmarried woman was
seized with a fever of the acute and ardent type; insorano*
lency, thirst ; tongue sooty and dry ; urine of a good colour,
but thin. On the second, in an uneasy state, did not sleep.
On the third, alvine discharges copious, watery, and greenish,
and on the following days passed such with relief. On the
fourth, passed a small quantity of thin urine, having substances
floating towards its surface, which did not subside ; was delirious
towards night. On the sixths a great hemorrhage from the
nose ; a chill, with a copious and hot sweat all over ; apyrexia,
had a crisis. In the fever, and when it had passed the crisis,
the menses took place for the first time, for she was a young
woman. Throughout she was oppressed with nausea, and
rigors ; redness of the face ; pain of the eyes ; heaviness of the
head ; she had no relapse, but the fever came to a crisis. The
pains were on the even days.^

Case XIII. — ApoUonius, in Abdera, bore up (under the

' The only thing of importance in Galen's Commentary on this case is the remark
that this woman's melancholy was most probably connected with suppression of the
menses, and that to this cause the dark colour of the urine in the present instance is
most probably to be ascribed. To the critical evacuations by the sweat and men-
struation he attributes the recovery.

' There were several ancient cities of this name, but there can be no doubt that
the one here referred to is the celebrated city of Thessaly. See Strabo, Geograph. ix.

' Galen considers it a remarkable feature in this case that although the crisis
occurred on the sixth day, there was no relapse. The recovery he ascribes to the
copious menstruation which then took place for the first time. He also calls attention
to the characters of the urine, which, he says, are those which usually accompany
delirium, although this is omitted in the Prognostics.

27



418 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

fever ?) for some time, without betaking himself to bed. His
viscera were enlarged, and for a considerable time there was a
constant pain about the liver, and then he became affected with
jaundice; he was flatulent, and of a whitish complexion. Having
eaten beef, and drunk unseasonably, he became a little heated
at first, and betook himself to bed, and having used large
quantities of milk, that of goats and sheep, and both boiled
and raw, with a bad diet otherwise, great mischief was occa-
sioned by all these things ; for the fever was exacerbated^ and
of the food taken scarcely any portion worth mentioning was
passed from the bowels ) the urine was thin and scanty ; no
sleep; troublesome meteorism ; much thirst; disposition to coma;
painful swelling of the right hypochondrium ; extremities alto*
gether coldish ; slight incoherence, forgetfulness of everything
he said; he was beside himself. About the fourteenth day
after he betook himself to bed, had a rigor, became heated, and
was seized with furious delirium; loud cries, much talking,
again composed, and then coma came on ; afterwards the bowels
disordered, with copious, bilious, unmixed, and undigested
stools ; urine black, scanty, and thin ; much restlessness ; alvine
evacuations of varied characters, either black, scanty, and ver-
digris-green, or fatty, undigested, and acrid ; and at times the
dejections resembled milk. About the twenty-fourth, enjoyed
a calm ; other matters in the same state ; became somewhat
collected; remembered nothing that had happened since he
was confined to bed ; immediately afterwards became delirious ;
every symptom rapidly getting worse. About the thirtieth,
acute fever ; stools copious and thin ; was delirious ; extremities
cold ; loss of speech. On the thirty-fourth he died. In this
case, as far as I saw, the bowels were disordered ; urine thin
and black; disposition to coma; insomnolency ; extremities
cold ; delirious throughout. Phrenitis.^

' Galen, in his Ckimmentary, merely remarks that Hippocrates, at the conclnsion
of the report, briefly enumerates the more prominent symptoms from which a fatal
result might have been confidently prognosticated. By enlarged yisceni, in this
case, we are informed by Galen in another place, that our author meant inflamnattoB
and swelling (Comment, in Rat. Vict, in Acut. c. iii). There can be no doubt that
by viscera Hippocrates meant the liver and spleen (see the work just referred to).
Galen briefly remarks on this case towards the end of the Second Book of his work,
On Difficulty of Breathing.



EPIDEMICS— BOOK III/ 419

Case XIV. — In Cyzicus/ a woman who had brought forth
twin daughters, after a difficult labour, and in whom the lochial
discharge was insufficient, at first was seized with an acute
fever, attended with chills; heaviness of the head and neck,
with pain ; insomnolency from the commencement ; she was
silent, sullen, and disobedient ; urine thin, and devoid of colour ;
thirst, nausea for the most part ; bowels irregularly disordered,
and again constipated. On the sixth, towards night, talked
much incoherently; had no sleep. About the eleventh day
was seized with wild delirium, and again became collected;
urine black, thin, and again deficient, and of an oily appear-
ance ; copious, thin, and disordered evacuations from the bowels.
On the fourteenth, frequent convulsions ; extremities cold ; not in
anywise collected ; suppression of urine. On the sixteenth,
loss of speech. On the seventeenth, she died. Phrenitis.

Explanation of the characters. It is probable that death
was caused, on the seventeenth day, by the affection of the
brain consequent upon her accouchement.^

Case XV. — In Thasus, the wife of Dealces, who was lodged
npon the Plain, from sorrow was seized with an acute fever, at-
tended with chills. From first to last she wrapped herself up in her
bedclothes ; still silent, she fumbled, picked, bored, and gathered
hairs (from them) ; tears, and again laughter; no sleep; bowels
irritable, but passed nothing; when directed, drank a little;
urine thin and scanty ; to the touch of the hand the fever was
slight ; coldness of the extremities. On the ninth, talked much
incoherently, and again became composed and silent. On the
fourteenth, breathing rare, large, at intervals ; and again hurried
respiration. On the sixteenth, looseness of the bowels from a
stimulant clyster ; afterwards she passed her drink, nor could
retain anything, for she was completely insensible ; skin parched
and tense. On the twentieth, much talk, and again became
composed; loss of speech; respiration hurried. On the twenty-

■ Cyzicus was a flourishing city on the Propontis. See Strabo, Geogr. xii ; and
Pliny, H. N. v. 32.

' Galen, in his Commentary, accounts for this fatal disease upon the supposition
that the uterus was inflamed, and affected the brain by sympathy, hence maniacal
delirium and convulsions were the consequence. Galen, both in his Commentary,
and in his work On Crises, refers to this case, in confirmation of his doctrine of
critical days.



420 EPIDEMICS— BOOK III.

first she died* Her respiration throughout was rare and large;
she was totally insensible; always wrapped up in her bed-
clothes; either much talk, or complete silence throughout.
Phrenitis.^

Case XVI. — In Meliboea/ a young man haying become
heated by drinking and much venery, was confined to bed;
he was affected with rigors and nausea ; insomnolency and ab-
sence of thirst. On the first day much faeces passed from the
bowels along with a copious flux ; and on the following days
he passed many watery stools of a green colour ; urine thin,
scanty, and deficient in colour ; respiration rare, large, at long
intervals; soflish distension of the hypochondrium, of an oblong
form, on both sides; continued palpitation in the epigastric
region throughout ; passed urine of an oily appearance. On the
tenth, he had calm delirium, for he was naturally of an orderly
and quiet disposition ; skin parched and tense ; dejections either
copious and thin, or bilious and fatty. On the fourteenth, all
the symptoms were exacerbated; he became delirious, and talked
much incoherently. On the twentieth, wild delirium, jactita-
tion, passed no urine; small drinks were retained. On the
twenty-fourth he died. Phrenitis.*

' I will Tenture to affirm, without much fear of contradiction, t)iat in all the works
on medicine, both ancient and modem, there is not to be found so vivid a delineatioB
of the symptoms of fever, complicated with effusion on the brain. Those who have
added new features to the picture, have thereby detracted from the general effect.
Galen, in his Commentary, insists more especially on the character of the respiration,
but there does not appear to me to be any particular obscurity about it. He also
touches on this case towards the end of the Second Book, On Difficulty of Breathing.
After reading all his prolix disquisition on the subject, one does not feel much better
instructed on the subject. Galen at times, nay, very frequently, seems to forget a
favorite saying of his own, namely, that he who would wish to lay in a copious store of
knowledge during life, should trouble himself little about w^ords, and attend principally
to things.

^ There were two Thessalian cities of this name, the one in Bstiaeous, and the
other in Magnesia. This would appear to be the latter. See Pliny, H. N. iv, 9;
and Livy, xliv, 13.

* Galen's Commentary contains few observations of much interest, and whidi are
not sufficiently obvious. Excesses in drinking and debauchery, he remaxks, hurt the
nerves and the origin of them, that is to say, the brain. Thus he accounts for the
delirium with which this case of fever was attended. All the other prominent symptoms,
such as the palpitation in the epigastric region, the swelling of the hypochondrium,
and the like, were noticed previously. Galen also reviews the symptoms of this case
in his work On Difficulty of Breathing, 11.



T



4,'



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.


ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



THE ARGUMENT.

This treatise opens with a descriptioa of the bones of the
head^ which^ although in most respects pretty accurate^ is re-
markable for containing an account of particular configurations
of the cranium^ and of certain varieties in the arrangement of
the sutures, which it has puzzled modern authorities in anatomy
to explain, otherwise than upon the supposition that the writer
must have been but imperfectly acquainted with the subject.
But as the work otherwise bears evidence that our author must
have examined the bones of the head very carefully, and more-
over, as in all his works he displays a wonderfully minute ac-
quaintance with osteology, (to say nothing of the historical
tradition, mentioned by Pausanias, that he was possessed of a
skeleton, which at his death he bequeathed to the Temple of
Apollo, at Delphi,) it seems incredible that he should have
committed most glaring blunders in describing the prominent
features of a part to which it is clear that he had paid very
great attention. Moreover, the reputation of Hippocrates for
accuracy stood so high, that an eminent authority does not
hesitate to declare of him, that he was a man who knew not
how to deceive or be deceived.^ An easy way of getting rid
of the difficulty would no doubt be, to adopt the conjecture ad-
vanced by Scaliger,^ and in part approved of by Biolanus,^ that
the treatise had suffered much in early times, from the interpola-
tions of ignorant transcribers ; or to hold, with M. Malgaigne,

' " Hippocrates qui tarn fallere quam falli neadt.'' (Macrobius in Somn. Scipionis,
i,6.)

' Hippocratis Coi de Cap. Vuln., &c., a Frandaco Vertaniano. Ejusdem textin
Gnecus a J. Scalig. Castigatua, &c.

^ Comment, de Ossibus.



424 INJURIES OF THB HEAD.

that the whole work is to be condemned as spurious. But it
would be a dangerous practice in ancient criticism^ to reject as
spurious a work which has such unexceptionable evidence in its
favour^ although it may contain matter which appears to us dero-
gatory to tlie reputation of its author, and it will be admitted, by
any competent judge who examines the arguments by Scaliger,
that the proofs which he brings forward of great interpolations
in this treatise, are generally of a very fanciful nature.

On a point so obscure, and which has puzzled so many emi-
nent scholars, it is to be feared that I shall not be able to throw
much additional light, but as, consistently with my general
plan, I cannot well avoid stating some opinion on the question^
I shall endeavour to elucidate it in so fitr, by giving, in the
first place, a brief sketch of the information supplied by all the
other ancient authorities who have touched upon this subject.
I shall begin, then, with Aristotle, the contemporary of our
author, who, in his work ' On the History of Animals,' gives
the following very inaccurate description of the sutures of the
human skull : " The female cranium has one circular suture,
but men generally three, which unite in one point. But a
male skull has been seen not having a suture."^ Celsus de-
scribes the sutures in the following terms : " Ex ceteris, quo
sutune pauciores sunt, eo capitis valetudo commodior est. Neqne
enim certus eorum numerus est, sicut ne locus quidem. Fere
tamen duse, super aures, tempora a superiori parte discemunt ;
tertia, ad aures, occipitium a summo capite deducit ; quarta,
ab eodem vertice per medium caput ad frontem procedit ; eaqne
modo sub imo capillo desinit, modo frontem ipsam secans inter
supercilia finitur/' (viii, 1.) " Nam neque utique certa sedes^
ut supra posui, suturarum est." (viii, 4.) Pliny gives the fol-
lowing description of the head, which it is impossible not to
recognise as having been borrowed from our author : "Vertices
bini hominum tantum aliquibus. Capitis ossa plana, tenuia,

' Hist. Animftl., i, 7. In reference to this description, it ia stated by Vesalius,
who in the course of his life had examined a great number of crania, that it is very
raro indeed to meet with a skull in which the sutures are wanting. He accounts for
the statement made by Herodotus (Hist, ix) and Aristotle (I. c), respecting skulls
without sutures, upon the supposition that the observations of these authors must
have been made upon those of old persons, in whom the sutures are often very in-
distinct. (Chirurg. Magn., i, 17.)



ARGUMENT. 425

sine meduUiSj serratis pectinatim structa compagibus/' ^ Of
Ruffus Ephesius I may just mentioDj that his descriptions of
the human body are in general remarkable for their correctness,
which is not to be wondered at^ as he would appear to have
followed, in general, Erasistratus and the other authorities be-
longing to the great Alexandrian period in anatomy ; and that
he has described very accurately all the sutures of the human
cranium, but says not a word of the different configurations of
the head^ as here given by our author.* We now come to Galen,
who gives a very lengthy description of the various forms of
the head, in nearly the same terms as our author, and after
alluding to the uses of the sutures, the principal of which he
holds to be to permit transpiration from the brain, he proceeds
thus to describe the distribution of the sutures : " That there
is ou^ which runs straight along the middle of the head, (the
sagittal?) and two transverse, (the coronal and lambdoid?)
has been stated previously, and need not require many words
in this place. For, the head being like an oblong sphere, one
was justly made to extend straight through its middle from
behind forwards, and two transverse sutures meet it, and the
form of the three sutures is like the letter H. For the whole
head being more elongated in this case than usual, and, as it
were, compressed towards the ears, it was equitable that the
number of the sutures should be unequal as to length and
breadth, otherwise Nature wotdd undeservedly have been named
just, by Hippocrates, in thus giving equal gifts to the unequal.
But it is not the case ; for being most just, she formed the
strongest suture which extends along the length of the head
single, being thus proportionate to the width of the parts on
both sides of it ; namely, on the right and on the left ; but
she formed the transverse double in number, the one behind,
as formerly said, called the lambdoid, and the other before^
called the coronal, so that the bone of the head between these
two sutures might be equal to those in the middle, on each
side (the parietal bones?). The sutures of the head, in that
configuration which is acuminated,^ furnish a very great example

* H. N., xi, 48 ; ed. Hardouin. ' De Partib. Animal., p. 34 ; ed. Londin.

' <l>o(oc* 'Hie exact meaning of this term is well defined by Euatatbius in his
Commentary on Homer (ad Iliad., ii, 219)i o Iiq 6^i Xriyovcav tx^v ryg KtfaXrjv.
It is excellently expressed by Damm as follows : " One whose head diminishes to-
wards the top like a sugar-loaf." (Lexicon Ilomericum in voce ipoKog.)



426 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

of tlie justness of Nature. For there are three principal figures
of the head : the one entirely opposed to the natural configu-
ration ahready described, when the head loses both its protube-
rances^ that behind and the other before, and is equal on all
hands, and like a true sphere ; and two others, the one form
having no protuberance in front, and the other none in the
occiput. The sutures of the spherical head are like the letter )(,
two only in number, and intersecting one another ; the one ex-
tending transverse from the one ear to the other, and the other
extending straight through the middle of the vertex to the middle
of the forehead. For, as when one part of the head is exces-
sive, being longer than the other, it was just that the longer
form should have more sutures, so, when both are alike, Natiire
bestowed an equal number on both. But in the head which
wants the protuberance at the occiput, the straight and the
coronal sutures remain, but the lambdoid is wanting (it being
near to the protuberance that is wanting), so that the figure of
the two resembles the letter T ; as also when the protuberance
of the head in front is wanting, the coronal at the same time
is wanting, but there remains the one running lengthways and
joining the lambdoid, and this form of construction is made to
resemble the letter T. A fourth species of acuminated (sugar-
loaf) head might be imagined, but which does not occur, with
the head more prominent at the two ears than in front and
behind.'^ He goes on to state the reasons why there is no
such construction of the head as this, and concludes as follows :
^' Wherefore Hippocrates described four configurations, and the
sutures of each, in the manner we have now said that they
exist, being justly distributed to each configuration by Nature
as to position and number .^^^ The description of the bones and
sutures of the head, given in the Latin work ' De Ossibus,'
generally attributed to Gralen, is to the same effect. The same
number of distinct configurations of the head, and the same
characters as regards the sutures, is also given by Avicenna,
who professedly copies from Galen. (I, i, 5, 3.)

When examined together, these descriptions certainly must
be admitted to have the appearance of being all derived from
one original, namely, from our author, in this place ; and taken
literally, there can be no doubt that their meaning amounts to

' De Usu Pariium, ix, 17.



ARGUMENT. 427

this : that the number of the sutures varies with the form of
the head ; that when there are protuberances both before and
behind^ the head in its upper part has two transverse sutures^
namely, the coronal and the lambdoid, and one longitudinal,
namely, the sagittal; that if the anterior protuberance be
wanting, the coronal is wanting, and, if the posterior, the
lambdoid. Now I need scarcely remark, that modern anatomists
do not recognise such varieties in the configuration of the head
nor in the numbers of the sutures, and that it is very rare
indeed for either the coronal or the lambdoid suture to be
found wanting. To all appearance, then, Galen was mistaken,
and it only appears remarkable that, with all his knowledge of
anatomy, theoretical and practical, and considering the oppor-
tunities which he must have possessed of examining human
skeletons in Alexandria, he should have failed to observe and
describe the bones of the cranium for himself.

Before stating my own conjectures on this question, it may
be interesting to examine the solution of it attempted by
authorities who lived about the period when the original study
of human anatomy was revived in modern times. In the first
place, then, I may mention that Ambrose Pare, who, I need
scarcely say, was possessed of no mean talent for original obser-
vation, in treating of fractures of the head, adopts exactly the
description given by Hippocrates ; thus he describes " the
bunches of the head^' in nearly the same terms as our author,
and adds, that " such bunches change the figure and site of the
sutures,^' and that ^' there be some skulls that want the fore-
most suture, and other some the hind, and sometimes none of
the true sutures, but only the false, or spurious, remain/*^
Nay, it cannot but appear remarkable, that Yesalius, the great
antagonist of Galen and of the ancient authorities in general, in
the present instance does not venture to call in question their
opinion, but gives a description of the different forms of the
head, and the varieties of the sutures, which scarcely at all
differs from that given by Hippocrates.* It is singular, also,
that certain other authorities, who were much more disposed to
show a leaning to antiquity, such as Columbus, Eustachius,
Fallopius, and Riolanus, should, in the present instance, have

' Surgery, ▼, 4. * Chirurg. Mag.» i, 17.



428 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

manifested a more independent spirit in challenging the aatbo-
rity of Hippocrates, though, at the same time, they show a
disposition to find out some mode of bringing him clear off.
Thus, for example, Biolanus is compelled to admit that there
is no such variety in the forms and numbers of the sutures as
Hippocrates describes ; but he attempts to free him from error,
by suggesting that the cases in which Hippocrates fonnd them
wanting must have been those of old men.^ He also quotes
some very extraordinary instances, in which something approach-
ing the varieties described by our author had been remarked.'
Fallopius does not hesitate, in his great anatomical work, to
express the surprise he felt that all the authorities should have
assented to the descriptions of the protuberances and sutures
of the head given by Hippocrates ; for that he, after having
examined large heaps of crania in the Musea of Ferrara and
Florence, had not found that they agreed with the descriptions
given by Hippocrates; that he had seen crania without a
suture, and yet not wanting in the protuberances ; and in Uke
manner, that he had seen the coronal suture obliterated^ and
yet the skull possessed its anterior prominence, and the lambdoid
wanting, although the posterior protuberance was as usual.
Altogether, then, in this work he modestly ventures to impugn
the authority of Hippocrates.^ In his work entitled ' Expositio
in Librum Galeni de Ossibus,' he adopts the same views, and
there declares that he had never seen the sutures obliterated
except from old age. But, in his work entitled ' Expositio in
Lib. Hippocrat. de Yulneribus Capitis,^ he gives two suppo-
sitions, which he had devised in order to defend the authority
of Hippocrates: first, that Hippocrates did not give these
varieties of form as real, but as hypothetical ; and second, that
he merely described them as being the vulgar opinion, without
pledging himself to the correctness of the description. These,
as far as I am aware, are the only defences which have ever
been set up for our author in this matter, and it must be ad-
mitted that they are not very satisfactory. I shall now present
the reader with the conjectural explanation which has oociirred
to myself. I have imagined that what Hippocrates meant was

* It is well known that in very advanced age the sutures get nearly effaced. See
the Cyclopfedia of Anatomy, vol. i, p. 745.
' Comment, de Ossibus. ^ Obs. Anatom.



ARGUMENT. 429

to eiLpress himself to the following effect : when the forehead
is remarkably prominent^ and^ at the same time^ there is a
great depression behind^ the cranium^ if looked upon from
above, will show the coronal suture running across the fore part
of the head^ and the sagittal through its middle^ while the
lambdoid will be inconspicuous^ from being below the level of the
coronal. The two together, then^ would form some resemblance
to the letter T. When, on the other hand, the forehead is low,
that is to say, wants its normal development, and the occiput
is unusually prominent, the lambdoid suture joins the sagittal,
so as to present some appearance of the same letter reversed.
But in a square-built head, where the frontal and occipital
regions have protuberances equally developed, the coronal and
lambdoid sutures run nearly parallel to one another, and are
joined in the middle by the sagittal, in which case the three
sutures may be imagined to present some resemblance to the
Greek letter H. When there is no protuberance either before
or behind, and the sagittal suture passes through the middle of
the bone down to the nasal process, the coronal suture inter^
sects it, so as to give them something like the shape of the
Greek letter )^.^ I offer this explanation, however, merely as
a conjecture, and wish the reader to judge of it accordingly.

I now proceed to give an analysis of the contents of this
treatise, and to attempt to form a correct estimate of their
value.

Injuries of the cranial bones are divided by our author into
five orders, as follows : 1, simple fractures, or fissures of various
kinds and sizes (^ 4) ; 2, contusion, without fracture or de-
pression (§ 5) ; 3, fractures attended with depression (§ 6) ;
4, the hedra, that is to say, the indentation or cut in the
outer table of the bone, and not necessarily attended either with
fracture or contusion (§ 7) ; 5, the counter-fissure, or fracture
par contre-coup (§ 8). Of these, the first and second, that is
to say, the simple fracture and the severe contusion, require
the operation of trepanning; whereas neither the kedra {or
simple cut) nor the depressed fracture require it, and the
counter-fissure does not admit it, owing to the obscurity of the
symptoms with which it is attended (§ 9).

' Th)« letter was very varied in form. See Galen and Fo^s.



430 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

In the first place^ the surgeon is to ascertain the nature and
situation of the wound^ by a careful investigation of all the
circumstances of the case^ but so as to avoid the use of the
sound, if possible (§§ 9, 10).

Next are described the various kinds of injury which the
different sorts of weapons are most likely to inflict, and from
the consideration of them the surgeon is to form an estimate
of the probable nature of the accident (§ 11).

The characters of the hedra, or superficial injury of the
cranium, and the difficulty of forming a correct estimate of it,
when complicated by the presence of a suture, are strongly
insisted upon (§ 12).

The principles upon which the treatment of injuries situated
in different parts of the head should be treated, are carefully
defined and stated. Great, and as now would be thought,
superfluous directions are given, for ascertaining whether or
not a fissure exists in the bone. The treatment, as far as
applications go, is to be mild and desiccant. When a fracture
cannot be made to disappear by scraping, the trepan is to be
applied (§§ 13, 14).

The dangers which the bone incurs of becoming aflTected
from the soft parts, are strongly insisted upon, and applications
of a drying nature are prescribed (§ 15).

The condition of a piece of bone which is going to exfoliate
is correctly and strikingly described (§16).

The treatment of depression is laid down, and the danger
of applying the trepan in this case is strongly insisted upon

(§17).

The peculiarities in the case of children are pointed out.

Under certain circumstances, when there is contusion combined

with the fracture, he admits of perforating the skull with a

small trepan (§ 18).

When, after a severe injury, symptoms of irritation and in-
flammation appear to be coming on, the surgeon is to lose no
time in proceeding to the operation. Some correct observations
are made on the consequences of injuries of the head on other
parts of the body (§ 19).

The treatment of erysipelatous inflammation is distinctly
laid down (§ 20).

The operation of trepanning the skull is circumstantially



ARGUMENT. 431

described^ and an interesting description is given of a mode of
doing the operation peculiar to our author^ (^ 21).

This then^ as far as I know^ is the first exposition ever
made of a highly important subject in surgery^ upon which
professional men are still greatly divided in opinion. I cannot,
then^ resist the temptation to offer some remarks on the views
of practice here recommended, and to institute a comparison
between them and certain methods of treatment which have
been in vogue of late years.

I can scarcely doubt but it will be generally admitted that
the exposition of the subject here given is remarkably lucid,
that our author's divisions of it are strongly marked, and his
rules of practice, whether correct or not, distinctly laid down.
At all events, it will not be affirmed that there is any confusion
in his ideas, or that his principles of treatment are not properly
defined. After all that has been written on injuries of the
head, it would be difficult to point to any better arrangement
of them than that of our author, into five orders : 1st, simple
fractures without depression ; 2d, contusions without fracture or
depression ; 3d, depression with fracture ; 4th, simple incisions
without fracture ; 5th, fractures par conire-coup.

As regards the operation of trepanning the skull, then, our
author's rule of practice is sufficiently well defined : we are to
operate in the first two of these cases, that is to say, in simple
fractures and contusions, but not in the last three, that is to
say, in fracture with depression, in simple incisions in the skull,
and in the counter-fissure. To begin, then, with the examina-
tion of those cases in which the operation is proscribed : it is
not to be had recourse to in the counter-fissure, because, from
the nature of it, there is generally no rule by which its existence
can be positively ascertained, and therefore the case is to be
given up as hopeless.

In the simple incision of the bone, that is to say, in the
slash or indentation, when the effects of the injury are not
transmitted to the brain, it must be obvious that all instru-
mental interference must be strongly contraindicated.^

' The operation consisted in sawing the bone nearly through, and leaving it in this
state until it exfoliated, or until the bone could be separated from the dura mater
without violence. See below.

' It is no doubt true that a simple cut in the outer table of the bone, whe*^ accom-



432 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

At first sight it will appear remarkable to a surgeon^ who
approaches the subject with views exclusively modern^ that our
author should have interdicted the use of instruments in that
class of injuries in which one would be inclined to suppose that
they are most clearly indicated^ namely^ in a fracture of con-
siderable extent^ attended with depression of part of the bone
from its natural level. Several questions present themselves
here to be solved. Is the operation generally required?
Has it been successful when it has been had recourse to?
When it is to be performed^ should it be done immediately, or
not until the bad efibcts of the injury have manifested them-
selves ?

With regard, then, to the necessity of the operation for
depressed fractures, the most discordant opinions have prevailed
in modern times, and even within a very recent period. Not
to go farther back than Pott, it is well known that he established
it as the general rule of practice, that in every case of fracture
with depression, the skull should be perforated, and the
depressed portion of the bone either raised to its level, or
entirely removed. But since his time a great change of
opinion has taken place on this subject, and of late it has
become the general rule of practice (if rule can be predicated,
where opinions are so vague and indeterminate) not to interfere,
even in cases of depression, unless urgent symptoms have super-
vened. The late Mr. Abemethy took the lead in question-
ing the propriety of the rule laid down by Pott; and with
the view of demonstrating that the operation may be often
dispensed with in fractures complicated with depression, and in
order, as he says, ''to counteract in some degree the bias
which long-accustomed modes of thinking and acting are apt
to impress on the minds of practitioners,'^ he relates the

panied with concassion or contusion, may produce fatal effects within, and this, in
fact, is stated by our author ; but, of itself, as he says, the simple incision or kedm
cannot be of a dangerous nature, nor require any recourse to instruments. The cues
related by M. Littre in the Argument were all evidently complicated with contusion,
and are thus referable to the second class of these injuries. It is most worthy of
remark, that in the very interesting account of " slicing cuts," given in Mr. Guthrie's
«xcellent work. On Injuries of the Head, the resiUt, without any operation, by the
most simple system of treatment, was in general very favorable, (pp. 95, 96.) On
these cuts and superficial injuries of the skull, see further Hennen (pp. 283, 284),
Thomson (pp. 51, 52), and Chelius (vol. i, p. 388).



ARGUMENT. 433

histories of five cases of fracture with depression^ which^ in the
space of twelve months, occurred under his own eyes in St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, and which all terminated favorably,
although no operation was performed. These cases, supported
by the authority of so great a name as Mr. Abernethy, made
a deep impression on the profession, especially in this country,
so that it became the established rule of practice in British
surgery never to interfere in cases of fracture, unless with the
view of removing urgent symptoms. See Cooper^s Surgical
Dictionary, edit. 1825, and the previous edition. The old
Hippocratic rule in regard to the trepan, when it is at all to
be applied, namely, that of applying it as a preventive of bad
consequences, was altogether eschewed, and it was held to be
perfectly unwarrantable to perforate the skull, except with the
intention of removing substances which were creating irritation
and pressure of the brain. This practice, I say, was sanctioned
by all the best army and hospital surgeons, from about the
beginning of the present century, down to a very recent period.
What, then, it will be asked, have been the results ? Has
experience confirmed the safety of this rule of practice, or has
it not ? To enable us to solve these queries, we have most
elaborate and trustworthy statistics, published a few years ago
by Dr. Laurie of Glasgow, which deserve to be seriously studied
by every surgeon who may be called upon to discharge the
duties of his profession in such cases. I cannot find room for
long extracts from these valuable papers, but may be allowed
to state a few of the more important results which are to be
deduced from Dr. Laurie's interesting investigation. Coming
then at once to the point, it deserves to be remarked that
Dr. Laurie's ample experience has led him to reject decidedly
the rule of practice, which, as I have stated, was established
by Mr. Abernethy, about forty years ago, namely, that, in cases
of depression, the symptoms of compression should be our
guide to the employment of the trephine. He adds, '^ however
well this rule may sound, when delivered ex cathedrd, it will
be found of very little practical utility, for this reason, that if
we limit interference to cases exhibiting urgent symptoms of
compression, we had much better not interfere at all, inasmuch
as such cases prove almost invariably fatal. Such, at least,
has been the experience of the Glasgow hospitals ; for out of

28



434 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

fifty-six cases operated upon^ including^ in point of time^ a
period little short of fifty years, there does not appear in our
records a single unequivocal instance of profound insensibility,
in which the mere operation of trepanning removed the coma
and paralysis, or in any way conduced to the recovery of the
patient. We wish to be clearly understood as speaking of the*
trephine used in reference to the state of the bone in cases of
profound insensibility, not employed to remove extravasated
blood. Nor does the cause of our want of success appear at
all obscure. We believe that in practice the cases of urgent
compression dependent on depressed bone alone are very few
indeed ; we are well aware that many such are on record, we
do not presume to impugn their accuracy, we merely affirm
that the records of the Glasgow Infirmary do not add to the
number.'^ He thus states his views with regard to the
principles by which the application of the trephine should be
regulated. " From what we have said, it will appear that we
coincide with those who, in using the trephine, in cases of
compound fracture of the skull, look more to the state of the
bone than to the general symptoms, and who employ it more as
a preventive of inflammation and its consequences^ tJian as a
cure for urgent symptoms, the immediate result of the accidents*
He goes on to state that " the details we have given are by no
means in favour of the trephine. Of fifty-six cases operated
upon, eleven recovered, and forty-five died. We feel assured
that this afibrds too favorable a view of the actual results.''^

From the extracts now given, it will be readily seen that
this very able authority has rejected entirely the rule of
practice established by Mr. Abernethy, and that, in so far, he
has reverted to the principle upon which the use of the instru-
ments in simple fractures of the skull was regulated by Hippo-
crates, namely, as a preventive of the bad consequences of
fracture on the brain, rather than with the view of relieving
them when established. It will further be seen that, in what-
ever way applied, the use of perforating instruments in the
case of depressed fractures is attended with so unsatisfactory
results, that it may be doubted if any other operation in

' London and Edinburgh Medical Journal, 1844.



ARGUMENT. 435

surgery^ recognised as legitimate^ be equally fatal.^ Less than
one fifth of the patients operated upon recovered. In fact^ he
very candidly admits *' that it would not have been greatly to
the disadvantage of the patients admitted into the Glasgow
Infirmary^ if the trephine had never found its way within its
walls/^ He further^ in conclusion, adverts to the well-known
fact that Desault, in the end, completely abandoned the opera-
tion, and that Mr. Lawrence states, '^ as far as the experience
of this Hospital (St. Bartholomew's) goes, he can cite very few
instances in which the life of the patient had been saved by
the operation of trephining/'*

Altogether, then, it will be allowed to be very questionable
whether, in general, the Hippocratic treatment, in cases of
fracture with depression, would not be fully as successful as
the modem practice of perforating the skull. Moreover, it is
by no means well ascertained, as generally assumed by super-
ficial observers of facts in medical practice, that depressed
fractures are more dangerous than other injuries of the skull
attended with less formidable appearances. Indeed, recent
experience has shown, in confirmation of the opinion advanced
by our author, that extensive fractures, with great depression,
are frequently not followed by any very dangerous train of
consequences. (See Thomson's 'Observations made in the
Military Hospitals of Belgium,' pp. 59, 60 ; Hennen's ' Military
Surgery,' p. 287; Cooper's 'Lectures,' xiiij Mr. Guthrie's
* Lectures on Injuries of the Head,' p. 56.) All these, in
substance, coincide with Mr. Guthrie, who mentions with
approbation that ''it has been stated from the earliest anti*
quity that the greater the fracture, the less the concussion of
the brain." I may mention further, that I myself, in the
course of my own experience, have known many instances in
which fractures with considerable depression were not followed,
either immediately or afterwards, by any bad consequences ;

* Although, as we have stated, Dr. Laurie's rule of practice now be to use the
trephine on the preventive principle, it is probable that most of his cases occurred at
a period when the practice of Mr. Abemethy was universally followed. His
statistics therefore are no test of the results of the operation, when performed on the
preventive principle.

* See Lawrence's Clinical Lecture in the Medical Gazette, vol. xxi, p. 345 ; and
Guthrie's work, On Injuries of the Head, p. 113.



436 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

while, on the other hand, I have known cases in which simple
contusion of the bone, without fracture or extravasation, and
without even very urgent symptoms of concussion at first, have
proved fatal in the course of a day or two. Now, in such circam-
stances, Hippocrates would have operated by either perforating
the skull at once, down to the meninx, and removing a piece
of it, or by sawing it nearly through, and leaving the piece of
bone to exfoliate. It will be asked here, what object can he
have had in \iew by this procedure ? This he has nowhere
distinctly defined ; but, judging from the whole tenor of this
treatise, and that of his commentator, Galen, I can have no
doubt in my mind that what he wished to accomplish was to
loosen the bones of the head, and give greater room to the
braiuj which he conceived to be in a state of congestion and
swelling, brought on by the vibration, or trimonssement, com-
municated directly to the brain by the contusion. It is, in
fact, an opinion which Hippocrates repeatedly inculcates, not
only with regard to the brain, but also respecting injuries of
the chest and joints, that severe contusions are, in general,
more dangerous than fractures, the effects of the vibration in
the former case being more violent than in the latter.^
Believing, then, that, in contusions, the internal structure of
the brain is extensively injured, and that irritation, with hyper-
trophy, are the consequences, he advocated instrumental
interference, in order as I have stated, to give more room
to the brain, and relieve it from its state of compression.'
This, no doubt, was the rationale of his practice also in simple
fractures, not attended with depression, that is to say, his
object in perforating the skull was to remove tension, and
furnish an outlet to the collection within, whether of a liquid
or a gaseous nature.

There can be no doubt that our author also had it in view,
by perforating the skull, to afford an issue to extravasated
blood and other matters collected within the cranium. This
clearly appears from what is stated in section 18, and the
same rule of practice is distinctly described by Celsus in the
following terms : '^ Raro, sed aliquando tamen evenit, ut os

' See De Articulis, $ 50 ; and Mochlicus, $ 36.

' On hypertrophy and swelling of the hrain after injuries, see the very interestiog
ohservations made by Mr. Guthrie, in his work on Injuries of the Head, p. 125.



^



ARGUMENT. 437

quidem totum integrum maneat^ intus vero ex ictu veua aliqua
in cerebri membrana rupta aliquid sanguinis mittat ; isque ibi
concretus . magnos dolores moveat, et oculos quibusdam
obcaecet .... Sed fere contra id dolor est^ et^ eo loco cute
incisa^ pallidum os reperitur : ideoque id os quoque exciden-
dum est/' (viii, 4.) It is quite certain, then^ that one of the
objects for which oitr author recommended trepanning, was to
give issue to extravasated blood on the surface of the skull.
This naturally leads me to compare the results of modem
experience in the treatment of cases of contusion, with or
without extravasation of blood.

All the earlier of our modern authorities on surgery, such as
Theodoric, Pet. c. Largelata, Ambrose Par^, Wiseman, and
FaUopius, distinctly held that contusions of the skull, even
when not complicated with a fracture, are often of so formi-
dable a nature as to require the use of perforating instruments.
The same views are strenuously advocated by Pott, who has
described the effects of contusion in very elegant and impres-
sive language. See page 42 ; ed. Lond. 1 780. The upshot is,
that one of the consequences of a severe contusion of the bone
frequently is separation of the pericranium, '^ which is almost
always followed by a separation between the cranium and the
dura mater; a circumstance extremely well worth attending to in
fissures and undepressed fractures of the skull, because it is from
this circumstance principally that the bad symptoms and the
hazard in such cases arise.^' (p. 50.)^ After insisting, in very
strong terms, on the danger attending severe contusions of the
skull, he proceeds to lay down the rules of treatment, which,
in a word, are comprehended in the two foUowing intentions :—
first, to prevent bad consequences by having recourse, at first,
to depletion ; and, second, to procure the discharge of matter
collected under the cranium, which can be answered only by
the perforation of it. He agrees with Archigenes that the
operation is generally too long deferred, and that the sooner it
is performed the better. Still, however, it is to be borne in
mind that even Pott does not make it a general rule to operate at

* It is proper to mention in this place that Quesnay, with great good sense, dis*
cusses the question, whether or not the separation of the pericranium in this case
be a sure indication of matter being collected within the cranium. He decides in
the negatiye. (p. 17, Syd. Soc. edition of Selected Mem. of the Acad, of Surgery.)



438 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

first, before the bad symptoms have come on, that is to say, during
the first three days, and that he rather appears to have followed
Celsus, who alludes to the method of Hippocrates, and describes
his rule of practice in the following terms : — " In omni vero
fisso fractoque osse, protinus antiqniores medid ad ferramenta
veniebant, quibus id exciderent. Sed multo melius est ante

emplastra experiri, etc Si vero sub prima curatione

febris intenditur, . . magni dolores sunt, cibique super haec
fastidium increscit ; tum demum ad manum scalpmmque
venieudum est/^ (viii, 4.) Pott then, it appears^ follows the
rule of Celsus, and does not operate until unpleasant effects
have developed themselves ;^ but, at the same time^ he candidly
admits that, although the course now described be all that our
art is capable of doing in these melancholy cases, he wishes he
could say that it was frequently successful. He then goes on to
relate several cases : first, of simple contusion without a wound;
second, of contusion with a wound; and, third, of contusion
with extravasation. In all these classes of cases he operated
with very equivocal results ; but then it is to be borne in mind,
that, as I have said, he operated, like Celsus, after the bad effects
had come on, and not, like Hippocrates, at first, in order to
prevent them. Even with all these discouraging results, he
continued to adhere to this rule of treatment, which, under the
sanction of his name, became the established practice of the
profession. The late Mr. Abernethy, who took the lead in
innovating upon Pott's rules for the application of the trephine,
did not venture to make any material change in this case when
he supposed that there was any considerable extravasation of
blood ; and he delivered it as a test whereby we might judge
whether or not a great vessel had been ruptured within the
skull, to examine whether or not the bone bled, having gene-
rally found, as, indeed, had been clearly laid down by Celsus,
that in these cases the bone does not bleed. The rule of
practice, then, to operate in order to remove the coagula of
blood and matters which form between the skull and the dura
mater, was sanctioned by Sir Charles Bell and Sir Astley
Cooper; but they, like Mr. Abernethy, generally condemn

' I ought to mentioDi however, in this place, that in simple undepressed fractures.
Pott allows of the operation as a preventive ; that, at least, is one of his objects in
having recourse to the operation, (p. 130.)



ARGUMENT. 439

interference "when the fluids are situated below the membrane.
On this subject Mr. Guthrie remarks: — ^'The operation of
incising the dura mater, to admit of the discharge of blood or
matter from beneath, and even of puncturing the brain, is
much more commonly performed in France than in Great
Britain, where it is very rarely had recourse to, and which may
be an error/' etc. (p. 125.)

After thirty years' further experience, this practice has been
tested by the recent statistics of Dr. Laurie, and the results, as
stated by him, are very discouraging. In the Hospital of
Glasgow, it was found in practice that there was no certain
symptom whereby it could be determined at what part of the
head the blood had been effused, nor, when discovered, could
it, in general, be removed by trephining the skull. The results,
in short, were the following: "We have thus thirty-nine cases
in which extravasation existed as the principal lesion, or as an
important complication, in only one of which extravasation
existed as the principal lesion, or as an important compli-
cation ; in only one of which could an operation have saved the
patient; and of the seventeen cases operated upon, not one
recovered after, or was benefited by, the removal of the
coagula.''

Such, then, are the results of modem experience, as far as
they are at present ascertained, in the use of the trephine for
the treatment of contusion, and undepressed fracture, compli-
cated with the effusion either of blood or of matter, from the
days of Pott down to the present time. The reader, however,
should bear in remembrance that the practice, of which the
results have been shown to be so ujisatisfactory, is not that
of Hippocrates, but of Celsus; for, in the present instance,
even Dr. Laurie repudiates the idea of operating " for the pur-
pose of relieving the evil consequences which may follow
concussion of the brain,'' and holds distinctly in this case that
one is not warranted in even entertaining the idea of operating,
unless — " first, when the puffy tumour indicates the spot which
probably has sustained the greatest amount of injury ; second,
such an inflamed and suppurating condition of the injured soft
parts as renders it more than probable that the corresponding
portion of the dura mater is in a similarly diseased condition ;
third, inflammatory fever, preceded or followed by rigors, and



440 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

symptoms of compression/' From what has been stated, then,
it must appear evident that the recent statistics furnish no test
whatever of the results of the practice laid down by Hippocrates,
which was founded upon an entirely different principle, namely,
the preventive.

But^ however anxious I may feel to prosecute further this
comparison of the results of ancient and of modern experience
on this highly interesting subject, my necessary limits compel
me to bring this discussion to a close. Before doing so, how-
ever, I shall briefly state the inferences which I think may
be drawn from a careful study of all the principal authorities
who have written on injuries of the head firom Hippocrates
down to the present time :

1. All the serious injuries of the skull may be arranged
conveniently under the classes of contusions, simple firactures,
and fractures with depressions.

2. Hippocrates recommended the operation of perforating
the cranium, in cases of simple fractures and contuBions, when-
ever he apprehended that these would be followed by serious
consequences, such as inflammation, extravasation of blood,
and the effusion of matter.

3. Hippocrates operated in these cases dmring the first three
days, before any serious symptoms had come on, but Celsus
rejected this rule, and postponed the operation until after these
effects had been developed.

4. The objects which Hippocrates had in view by perforating
the skull, either entirely through or nearly so, would appear
to have been to slacken the tightness of the skull, and procure
the evacuation of extravasated blood lying within it.

5. The object for which Celsus opened the skull would
appear to have been solely to remove bodies which were creating
irritation in the brain.

6. All the ancient authorities looked upon contusions and
simple fractures as being very formidable injuries, which gene-
rally produce congestion in the brain, with inflammation and
effusion.

7. In modern times, at least within the last hundred years,
the trephine has never been applied in cases of contusion and
simple fracture, upon the principle of the operation acting as
a preventive of subsequent mischief, but only with the object



ARGUMENT. - 441

of relieving effusion wlien it was supposed to have taken place
within the cranium^ that is to say^ upon the plan recommended
by Celsus.

8. The most contradictory accounts are given by modern
authorities^ especially by the French surgeons of the eighteenth
century, as to tbe different results in cases of this description^
when let alone, and when treated upon the Celsian principle ;
and the recent statistics of the operation are extremely un-
favorable.

9. Hippocrates regarded fractures accompanied with depres-
sion and a considerable separation of the bones as being gene-
rally less dangerous than severe contusions and simple frac-
tures, as in the former case the brain is usually less hurt by
the vibration of the shock which inflicted the injury, and there
is an outlet to any noxious matters which may get congested in
the brain.

10. Hippocrates, as a general rule, did not operate in cases
of depression, not even in cases of comminuted fracture, but in
the latter case left the pieces of bone to separate gradually by
suppuration.

11. Celsus, on the other hand, approved of removing
spiculse at once, of raising the depressed comer of a fractured
bone, by sawing off the superincumbent part, and even of per-
forating the adjoining bone, and, in certain instances, of
removing the whole of the depressed portion.

12. Pott laid it down as a general rule of practice, to
operate with the trephine in all cases of fracture accom-
panied with any considerable degree of depression, and this
formed the established practice in this country, until the
late Mr. Abemethy, about forty years ago, introduced the rule
of not interfering in such cases until urgent symptoms had
come on.

13. Of late years a further innovation has taken place in
this rule of practice in cases of depressed fracture, the opera-
tion being had recourse to by Dr. Laurie and others, on the
principle of preventing the bad effects likely to result from the
injury.

14. On whatever principle applied, the statistics of large
hospitals exhibit the results of the operation in a most
unfavorable light, insomuch that many of the most able and



V"



442 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

experienced surgeons of the day hesitate whether, as a general
rule, the operation ought not to be abandoned altogether.

Finally y a careful study of t/ie whole literature of the subject,
from Hippocrates down to the present time, leads to the conclu-
sion that what constitutes the great difficulty in the treatment of
injuries of the head is, that the operation, to be successful, would
require to he performed early, and rather with a view of pre-
venting serious consequences, than of removing them after they have
come on; and that these can seldom be estimated so correctly as
could be unshed, since they frequently bear no proportion to the
apparent magnitude of the mischief which the cranium has sus-
tained}

As the reader may find some difficulty in apprehending
correctly the nature of the instruments and other apparatus
used by the ancients in surgical operations, I have sub-
joined drawings of them, taken principally from the works of
Vidus Vidius and Andreas k Cruce, who both lived at a time
when these instruments must have been sufficiently common
in the cabinets of learned physicians, so that there is every
presumption that the figures which they give are suffi-
ciently correct. The manner in which they were used will
readily be comprehended from their shapes, assisted by the
following lucid description of the ancient process of trepanning
the skull, given by Mr. Pott : '' If the piece of bone intended
to be removed was larger than could be comprehended within
the modiolus {trephine?) then in use, and which was a very
defective instrument in many respects, the operation was thus
performed by means of terebrse. The piece intended to be
taken away was surroimded with perforations made at small
distances from each other, and then either the scalper exciso-
rius or the scalper lenticulatus was introduced, and, by means
of repeated strokes with a heavy mallet, was driven through all
the interspaces between each perforation. By these means the
portion of bone so surrounded was removed, and the dura
mater was laid bare.^^^ That the modiolus of Celsus was a

■ Ambrose Par^ expresses very strongly the difficulty of forming a correct
prognosis in injuries of the head : ** Ex quo intelligere licet, multos ab exiguis vul-
nerlbus mortem oppetere, alios ex ingeutibus et penitus magius desperatisque con-
valesccre." (Opera, ix, 9.)

' Injuries of the Head, p. 148.



ARGUMENT. 443

small circular saw with a pivot, exactly like the modem trephine,

- seems quite obvious from his own description of it ; and that

the instrument called by our author terebra serrata (Trpicni'
XaoaKTo^) was identical with it, cannot admit of any doubt.
See Foes, CEc. Hipp, in voce Trpiwv.

Before concluding, I must also say a few words on one im-
portant point connected with the constitutional treatment, which
the modem reader may at first sight be surprised to find no
mention made of in this treatise — I mean the use of venesection
in the treatment of injuries of the head. Now certainly it

I does not appear that Hippocrates regarded bleeding as neces-

sarily forming a portion of the system of treatment in injuries
of the bones of the head any more than in those of other
bones. But, although these were his views, it can be as
little doubted, by any one who is acquainted with his general

^ views of practice, that he bled whenever the abstraction of

blood was indicated, either to produce evacuation or revulsion.

r We know, for example, that in pains of the back part of the

head he opened the temporal vessels,^ and that in all inflam-

r mations and febrile diseases he abstracted blood freely, nay,

perhaps, ad deliquium antmi? And that Hippocrates enforced
the depletory system of treatment in injuries of the head, when
pain and inflammatory fever supervened, is quite obvious, from
its having been the system pursued in such cases by all the sub-
sequent authorities, who looked up to him as their great guide
in practice. See Paulus jEgineta, Book VI, 90, Syd. Soc. Edit.
I may mention further, as a proof that I am not straining a
point in the present instance, in order, as might be supposed,
to bring my author clear ofi^ in a case where he would appear
to have been in fault, that Ambrose Pare, who is a great ad-
vocate for depletion in the treatment of fractures of the skull,
is at great pains to show that he has Hippocrates on his side in
support of this practice.^ But while it is maintained that our
author did not omit venesection when properly indicated, I do
not mean to say that he or any of the ancient authorities carried
the abstraction of the blood to the extent practised by Pott, or
the members of the Royal Academy of Surgery in France, nor

• Aphor. V, 68.

' See the Argument to the treatise, On Regimen in Acute Diseases.

> Opera, ix, 10.



444 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

as was done by the army and hospital surgeons of this country
during the late war.^ Whether or not this was a defect in
ancient practice I shall not take it upon me to offer an opinion.
Suffice it to say^ that there is undoubted evidence that in in-
juries of the head the ancient surgeon, as is naively recom-
mended by Avicenna^ " bled his patient when he stood in need
of being bled -/'^ that is to say, according to special indications,
and not in obedience to any general rule.^

There is another point of practice in injuries of the head to
which it is proper that I should draw attention — I mean cold
applications. Now it is beyond a doubt that the application
of cold in diseases of the brain is pointedly condemned by
Hippocrates, and that he used hot applications instead ;^ and,
moreover, that most of the ancient authorities adhered to his
rule on this point. At the same time it would appear, that
in extreme cases certain of them did not scruple to apply ice
to the shaved head.^ I shall only remark further, that in this
case, as in diseases of the eyes, perhaps the safest rule is, to be
guided very much by the feelings and habits of the patient.

' Sir Astley Cooper mentions an instance in which 208 ounces of blood were
abstracted from a patient ! ! In Qoesnay's Memoir there is nothing more common
than to find it reported that he had bled a patient three or four times in the ooone
of a day. In one case 160 ounces were taken in nine days; *'but/' it is ffrttvdj.
added, " two years elapsed before she was quite well again.''

« IV, 5, 3, 1.

' The principles upon which depletion by bleeding and pur^ng should be regu-
lated are fully stated and discussed by Galen, in the Fourth Book of his great work
on Therapeutics. The rule is briefly given by Hippocrates in his Second Aphorism :
*' respect being paid to place, season, age, and the diseases in which it is proper or
not."

* See Aphor. t, 18, 22 ; and § 12 of this treatise. The professional authorities c£
the present day are not agreed as to the expediency of using poultices or cold lotions
in Injuries of the scalp. Guthrie and Hennen recommend the latter ; but South, in
the edition of Chelius, prefers the former.

* This is related of Philagrius in a very interesting scholium on the Aphorism just
quoted. See Scholia in Hippocrat. et Galen., torn, ii, p. 457 ; ed. Dietz.

[The Plates referred to will be found at the end of the work.]



445



ON INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

1. Men's heads are by no means all like to one another,
nor are the sutures of the head of all men constructed in the
same form. Thus, whoever has a prominence in the anterior
part of the head (by prominence is meant the round protuberant
part of the bone which projects beyond the rest of it), in him
the sutures of the head take the form of the Greek letter tau^
T ; for the head has the shorter line running transverse before
the prominence, while the other line runs through the middle
of the head, all the way to the neck.^ But whoever has the
prominence in the back part of the head, in him the sutures
are constructed in quite the opposite form to the former ; for in
this case the shorter line runs in front of the prominence, while
the longer runs through the middle all along to the forehead.*
But whoever has a prominence of the head both before and be-
hind, in him the sutures resemble the Greek letter 6ta, fij ; for
the long lines of the letter run transverse before each prominence,
while the short one runs through the middle, and terminates in
the long lines.' But whoever has no prominence on either part, he
has the sutures of the head resembling the Greek letter X; for the
one line comes transverse to the temple, while the other passes
along the middle of the head.* The bone at the middle of the

' Perhaps the meaning here is, that when the forehead is much eleyated, and the
occiput much depressed, if one looks down upon the skull from above, the sagittal
and coronal sutures will present the appearance of the letter T.

' The meaning, I suppose, may be, that when the forehead is Tery low, and when
the occiput is protuberant, if one looks down upon the skull from above, the sagittal
and lambdoidal sutures will present the appearance of the letter T reversed.

' The meaning would appear to be, that in a square-built head, that is to say, when
it is prominent both before and behind, the coronal and sagittal sutures run nearly
parallel to one another, and the sagittal connects them together in the middle. In
this case they would present the appearance of the letter H reversed.

* Perhaps this alludes to the form of the head in which the sagittal snture passes
through the middle of the os frontis down to the nose, in which case we may
imagine that the coronal suture intersects the lambdoidal in such a manner as to have
some resemblance to the letter x* It is to be borne in mind, that the character
of this letter was very variable in ancient writing. Ruffus Ephesius describes the
sagittal suture as sometimes passing down the middle of the frontal bone.



446 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

head is double^ the hardest and most compact part being tk
upper portion, where it is connected with the skin^ and tte
lowest, where it is connected with the meninx (dura mater] ;
and from the uppermost and lowermost parts the bone graduallv
becomes softer and less compact, till you come to the diplot:
The diploe is the most porous, the softest, and most cavernous
part. But the whole bone of the head, with the exception of a
small portion of the uppermost and lowermost portions of it, is
like a sponge ; and the bone has in it many juicy substances,
like caruncles ; and if one will rub them with the fingers, some
blood will issue from them.* There are also in the bone certain
very slender and hollow vessels fiill of blood. So it is with
regard to hardness, softness, and porosity.

2. In respect to thickness and thinness ; the thinnest and
weakest part of the whole head is the part about the bregma;
and the bone there has the smallest and thinnest covering of
flesh upon it, and the largest proportion of brain is situated in
that region of the head. And hence it happens that from
similar or even smaller wounds and instruments, when a person
is wounded to the same or a less degree, the bone of the head
there is more contused, fractured, and depressed ; and that in-
juries there are more deadly and more difficult to cure ; and it
is more difficult to save one's life in injuries there than in any
other part of the head ; that from having sustained a similar or
even a less wound a man will die, and that, too, in a shorter space
of time than from a wound in any other part of the head. For
the brain about the bregma feels more quickly and strongly any
mischief that may occur to the flesh or the bone ; for the brain
about the bregma is in largest quantity, and is covered by the
thinnest bone and the least flesh. Of the other portions, the
weakest is that about the temples ; for it is the conjunction of
the lower jaw with the cranium, and there is motion there up
and down as at a joint; and the organ of hearing is near it;

1 This passage was considered by Scaliger as a gloss, but as interpreted by M.
Littre, whom I have followed, the meaning is quite suitable. See his note, h. 1.

3 It is difficult to say what can be meant by caruncles in this place, but >tiU I
agree with M. Littr^ that Scaliger was not warranted in proposing to eject the
passage from the text as an interpolation. Unless the glanduUs Paeckioni v^
meant (and the description must be admitted not to be quite applicable to theiD)T I
cannot pretend to explain or account for the description.



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 447

and further^ a hollow and important vein runs along the temple.
But the whole bone of the head behind the vertex and the ear
is stronger than the whole anterior part, and the bone itself
has a larger and deeper covering of flesh upon it. And hence
it follows, that when exposed to the same or even greater in-
juries from instruments of the same or greater size, the bone
is less liable to be fractured and depressed than elsewhere ; and
that in a fatal accident the patient will live longer when the
wound is in the posterior part of the head than when elsewhere ;
and that piis takes longer time to form and penetrate through
the bone to the brain, owing to the thickness of the bone ; and
moreover, as there is less brain in that part of the head, more
persons who are wounded in the back part of the head escape
than of those who are wounded in the anterior part.' And
in fatal cases, a man will survive longer in winter than in
summer, whatever be the part of the head in which the wound
is situated.

3. As to the hadriB (dints or marks ?) of sharp and light
weapons, when they take place in the bone without fissure,
contusion, or depression inwards (and these take place equally
in the anterior and posterior part of the head), death, when it

' I need scarcely remark, that if by this is strictly meant that wounds in the posterior
part of the head are less dangerous than those in the anterior, the statement is at
variance with the experience of certain modem authorities. See, in particukr, Pott
and Liston, p. 46. At the same time, it is, no doubt, anatomically correct, that the
occipital bone can bear more violence, without being seriously fractured, than the
frontal or parietal bones, and it is worthy of remark, that the views and experience of
Mr. Guthrie are very consonant with those of Hippocrates. He says : " The result of
my experience on this point is, that brain is more rarely lost from the fore part of
the head with impunity, than from the middle part ; and that a fracture of the skull,
with even a lodgement of a foreign body, and a portion of the bone in the brain, may
be sometimes borne without any great inconvenience in the back part. ... I have
never seen a person live with a foreign body lodged in the anterior lobe of the brain,
although I have seen several recover with the loss of a portion of the brain at this
part. My experience, then, leads me to believe, that an injury of apparently equal
extent is more dangerous on the forehead than on the side or middle of the head,
and much less so on the back part than on the side. A fracture of the vertex is of
infinitely less importance than one of the base of the cranium, which, although not
necessarily fatal, is always attended with the utmost danger." (On Injuries of the
Head, p. 3.) I feel difficulty in reconciling these discordant results of modern
experience. Perhaps the fact of the matter is, that injuries in the upper part of the
occipital region are the least dangerous of any, whereas those in the lower part of it,
are particularly fatal.



448 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

does occur^ does not properly result from them. A suture
appearing in a wound^ when the bone is laid bare^ on whatever
part of the head the wound may have been inflicted^ is the
weakest point of the head to resist a blow or a weapon, when
the weapon happens to be impinged into the suture itself;
but more especially when this occurs in the bregma at the
weakest part of the head, and the sutures happen to be
situated near the wound, and the weapon has hit the sutures
themselves.^

4. The bone in the head is liable to be wounded in the
following modes, and there are many varieties in each of these
modes of fracture : When a wounded bone breaks, in the bone
comprehending the fissure, contusion necessarily takes place
where the bone is broken ; for an instrument that breaks the
bone occasions a contusion thereof more or less, both at the

' Vidua Vidius thus explains the hedra or sedet: " Inciditor os ita at teli yestigiim
remaneat, quod genus fractune appellatur a Hippocrate ItSpa, id est sedes, quom
(ut ipse inquit) appareat in osse qua telum insederit ; fit autem ab acuto telo, quod et
ipse in sequentibus, et Galenus, in Commentario, in librum memoriae prodidit, qaum
sub telo acuto ineidi os dixit. Requirit autem sedes ut incisum os nuUo modo ad
cerebri membranam inclinatur." (Chimrg. Grsec, p. 71.) Andreas a Cmce defines it
thus : " Potissimum vero sedes vocatur ubi osse in suo statu remanente qua parte
telum insederit apparet." (De Vulneribus, i, 2.) By hedra would appear to hare
been understood a dint, or impression, left in a bone by a blow which hts not
produced fracture or depression. It was also applied to a cut or slash affecting only
the outer plate of the skull. Hippocrates, it will be remarked, pronounces this sort
of injury not to be dangerous of itself, but M. Littr^ relates a case taken from the
* Journal de M^decine,' in which a sabre-cut, which only penetrated throogii the
external plate of the cranium, and did not touch the internal, proved fiatal. (Op-
Hippocrat., iii, p. 1 70.) Our author, in the latter part of this paragraph, mentioot
cursorily injury of the skull at a suture, and more circumstantially in the tweliih
paragraph. This accident is very correctly described by the later writers, under
the name of diastasia. See Heliodorus (ap. Chirurg. Veterea, p. 100), and Archigen«s
(ibid., p. 117). Pott declares that he did not remember having ever seen a single
instance of recovery when there was separation of the bones at a suture. Moigago',
in like manner, represents the case as being of a particularly serious character. (0<
Cans, et Sed. Morb.) I once saw a strongly marked case in which there was a
considerable separation of the bones at the upper part of the temporal suture, along
with an extensive wound, unguardedly inflicted by the scalpel of a juvenile surgeon,
in order to explore the nature of the accident. As might have been expected, nndtf
these circumstances, the case had a fatal issue. Mr. Guthrie writes thus of diniaui
" It is well known, that when a violent shock has been received on the bead,
particularly by a fall on the vertex, the sutures are often separated to a considerabU
extent; thete combm untalfy terminate fataUy" (p. 135.)



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 449

fracture and in the parts of the bone surrounding the fracture.^
This is the first mode. But there are all possible varieties of
fissures ; for some of them are fine^ and so very fine that they
cannot be discovered, either immediately after the injury, or
during the period in which it would be of use to the patient if
this could be ascertained. And some of these fissures are
thicker and wider, certain of them being very wide. And some
of them extend to a greater, and some to a smaller, distance.
And some are more straight, nay, completely straight ; and some
are more curved, and that in a remarkable degree. And some
are deep, so as to extend downwards and through the whole
bone ; and some are less so, and do not penetrate through the
whole bone.

5. But a bone may be contused, and yet remain in its natural
condition without any fracture in it ; this is the second mode.
And there are many varieties of contusion ; for they occur to
a greater and less degree, and to a greater depth, so as some-
times to extend through the whole bone ; or to a less depth,
so as not to extend through the whole bone ; and to a greater
and smaller length and breadth. But it is not possible to re-
cognise any of these varieties by th§ sight, so as to determine
their form and extent ; neither, indeed, is it visible to the eyes
when any mischief of this kind takes place, and immediately
after the injury, whether or not the bone has been actually
bruised, as is likewise the case with certain fractures at a dis-
tance from the seat of injury.^

6. And the bone being fractured, is sometimes depressed

* The meaning here is somewhat obscure, but as Arantius states in his commentary
on this tract, our author probably means that a fissure is necessarily complicated
with a contusion, or, in other words, that there can be no fissure without contusion.

' Arantius and Porralius, in their conjoined commentary on this treatise, mention
that in contusion sometimes only the outer plate of the skull is contused, but the
inner is depressed upon the dura mater. This is a case of which we have examples
in modem surgery ; but it does not appear clearly to be alluded to in this place by
our author. Mr. Guthiie, indeed, understands the dwrixtifta of the Greek authors,
and retonitua of the Latin, to apply to this variety of fracture ; but he appears
to me to be mistaken, for these terms unquestionably refer to the eotUre'eoup, of
which we will treat presently. Quesnay, indeed, uses the term eonire-eot^ in this
double sense, but, as I think, very injudiciously, as it tends to introduce confusion of
ideas ; for assuredly the case of a fracture on a dififerent part of the head from
that which received the blow, and a fracture on the inner plate of the skull from an
iijuiy on the outer, are quite different cases. See Quesnay, &c., p. 20, Syd. Soc. edit.

29



450 INJURIES OP THE HEAD.

inwards from its natural level along with the firactures^ other-
wise there would be no depression ; for the depressed portion,
being fractured and broken off, is pushed inwards^ while the
rest of the bone remains in its natural position ; and in this
manner a fracture is combined with the depression.^ This
is the third mode. There are many varieties of depression,
for it may comprehend a greater and a smaller extent of bone,
and may either be to a greater depth, or less so^ and more
superficial.^

7. When a hedra, or dint of a weapon, takes place in a bone,
there may be a fracture combined with it ; and provided there
be a fracture, contusion must necessarily be joined^ to a greater
or less extent, in the seat of the dint and fracture, and in the
bone which comprehends them.* This is the fourth mode.
And there may be a hedra, or indentation of the bone, alon^
with contusion of the surrounding bone, but without any frac-
ture either in the hedra or in the contusion inflicted by the
weapon. But the iadentation of a weapon takes place in a
bone, and is called hedra, when the bone remaining in its
natural state, the weapon which struck against the bone leaves
its impression on the part which it struck. In each of these
modes there are many varieties, with regard to the contusion
and fracture, if both these be combined with the hedra, oi if
contusion alone, as it has been already stated that there are
many varieties of contusion and fracture. And the hedra, or
dint, of itself may be longer and shorter, crooked, straight, and
circular ; and there are many varieties of this mode, according
to the shape of the weapon ; and they may be more or less
deep, and narrower or broader, and extremely broad. When

* The expressions in this place are somewhat confused, bat the meaning evvitaiUj
is, that without fracture there can be no depression.

' This third mode of fracture is thus defined by Celsus: '* At ubi medium desedit.
eandem cerebri membranam os urget : interdum etiam ex fractura quibnsdam y^^
aculeis pungentibus." (viii, 4.) Hippoc^tes, it will be remarked, makes no mention
of spiculae in his description of depression, t^alen describes two yarieties of depres-
sion ; in the one the depressed portion retains its situation, and in the other it w»
again to its former level. (De Cans. Morb.) Hippocrates does not appear to hMSt
been acquainted with the latter. Modem experience has shown that it sometiiiio
occurs in children.

■ It ia almost impossible to know what to make of thia passage, owing to the
corrupt state of the text.



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 451

a part is clefb^ the cleft or notch which occurs in the bone, to
whatever length or breadth, is a hedra, if the other bones com-
prehending the cleft remain in their natural position, and be
not driven inwards ; for in this case it would be a depression,
and no longer a hedra^

8. A bone may be injured in a different part of the head
from that on which the person has received the wound, and
the bone has been laid bare. This is the fifth mode. And
for this misfortune, when it occurs, there is no remedy ; for
when this mischief takes place, there is no means of ascertaining
by any examination whether or not it has occurred, or on what
part of the head.^

* The nature of this mode of injury is explained in the annotations on the third
paragraph. It does not appear clear why our author has given two separate descrip-
tions of this injury. He describes, it will be remarked, several varieties of it,
according as it is comphcated or not with contusion and fracture. Galen uses hedra
in one place. (Meth. Med. vi.) The term hedra is rendered teU sedes by the Latin
translators of the Greek medical authors. (See Asellii Comment, in Hippocrat. de
Vuln. Capit.) It is used also by Ambrose Par^, Wiseman, and all our earlier writers on
surgery. Wiseman thinks the term most appropriate when applied to wounds
inflicted by a pole-axe, halberd, or the like, (v, 9.) Par6 applies it to a kind of injury,
in which the bone is not broken through, but the print of the weapon is left on the
skull, (xx, 7.) Fallopius gives an interesting discussion on it. (In librum Hippocrat.
de Yuln. Capit.) The term incision, borrowed from Paulus i£gineta, has been since
used in its stead. See Quesnay, on the Use of the Trepan, p. 29, Syd. Soc. edition ;
and on simple incisions or sabre-cuts, see, in particular, Mr. Guthrie, Injuries of the
Head, p. 86.

* This, it will readily be perceived, is the Jraehtra per regonituiHf that is to say,
the fracture par eontre'coup, or counter-fissore of modem authorities. Except
Paulus iGgineta, I am not aware that any of the ancient authorities question the
occurrence of this species of the accident, and, with the exception of Yidus Vidius,
Guido, Fallopius, and Dinus de Garbo, it is generally recognised by the best
modem authorities, from Bertaphalia and Andreas a Grace, down to Sir Astley
Cooper and Mr. Liston. Mr. Guthrie, indeed, remarks, that in recent times there
has been no well-authenticated instance of fracture on the one side of the head
from a blow on the other. Such cases, however, are not wanting in the works of
the earlier modern authorities. Quesnay writes thus : " We find in authors, also,
many cases of fracture by contre-coup, from one part of the head to the part opposite ;
and in honour of the ancients we may cite the case related by Amatus, who applied
the trepan to the part of the head opposite to the wound, when he found that the
symptoms were not relieved by applying it on the side wounded, and that the patient
suffered from severe pain on the other side. This second trepan proved very apropos,
for it allowed the escape of pus, which had collected under the skull." (On the Use of
the Trepan.) All our modern authorities, including Mr. Guthrie, admit the reality
of the case in which fracture of the base of the skull is produced by a blow on the



452 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

9. Of these modes of fracture, the following require tre-
panning : the contusion, whether the bone be laid bare or not ;
and the fissure, whether apparent or not. And if^ wHen au
indentation (hedra) by a weapon takes place in a bone, it be
attended with fracture and contusion, and even if contusion
alone, without fracture, be combined with the indentation, it
requires trepanning. A bone depressed from its natural position
rarely requires trepanning ; and those which are most pressed
and broken require trepanning the least ; neither does an in-
dentation {hedra) without fracture and contusion require tre-
panning ; nor does a notch, provided it is large and wide ; for
a notch and a Iiedra are the same.^

10. In the first place, one must examine the wounded person,
in what part of the head the wound is situated, whether in the
stronger or weaker parts ; and ascertain respecting the hairs
about the wound, whether they have been cut oflF by the in-
strument, and have gone into the wound ; and if so, one should
declare that the bone runs the risk of being denuded of flesh,
and of having sustained some injury from the weapon. These
things one should say from a distant inspection, and before
laying a hand on the man ;^ but on a close examination one
should endeavour to ascertain clearly whether the bone be
denuded of flesh or not ; and if the denuded bone be visible to

upper part of the head. In imitation of our author, this case was denominated
" infortunium'' by the earlier authorities, such as Asellias and PorraUus, being accounted
an irremediable misfortune, because its seat could not be detected ; and it is noticed
in the following terms by Sir Astley Cooper, who did not trouble himseK much about
the writings of his predecessors, but formed his opinions from actual obserration :
" When the basis of the skull is fractured from a high fall, from the whole pressure
of the body resting upon that part, on opening the brain and tearing up the dura
mater, extravasated blood is commonly observed: ihi»kmd rfjraeture mutt metitaklif
prove fatal, nor eon U be discovered till after death" (Lectures, xiii.)

' Whatever opinion may now be formed of the rule of practice here laid down, sil
must admit that it is clearly stated and distinctly defined. We have seen above
that our author describes five modes of injury in the skull, namely, the incision or
indentation, confined to its outer table ; the contusion ; the direct fivctore \ the
fracture jMrr eontre^coup ; and the depression. He now states decidedly that it is
only in the case of contusion and simple fracture, that the trepan can be applied
with advantage. I have entered so frilly into the rationale of this practice in tbe
Argument, that I do not think it necessary to say more on the subject in this place.

' This passage indicates strongly our author's partiality for prognostics, or rstber,
I should say, for prorrhetics. It would appear to have been a primary oonaiderstioa
with him, in all cases, to secure the physician frx>m blame, and to teach him how to


INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 453

the eyes, this will be enough ; but otherwise an examination
must be made with the sound. And if you find the bone
denuded of the flesh, and not safe from the wound, you must
first ascertain the state of the bone, and the extent of the mis-
chief, and what assistance it stands in need of. One should
also inquire of the wounded person how and in what way he
sustained the injury ; and if it be not apparent whether the
bone has sustained an injnry or not, it will be still more ne-
cessary, provided the bone be denuded, to make inquiry how
the wound occurred, and in what manner ; for when contusions
and fractures exist in the bone, but are not apparent, we must
ascertain, in the first place from the patient's answers, whether
or not the bone has sustained any such injuries, and then find
out the nature of the case by word and deed, with the exception
of sounding. For sounding does not discover to us whether
the bone has sustained any of these injuries or not; but
sounding discovers to us an indentation inflicted by a weapon,
and whether a bone be depressed from its natural position, and
whether the bone be strongly fractured ; all which may also be
ascertained visibly with the eyes.^

11. And a bone sustains fractures, either so fine as to escape
the sight, or such as are apparent, and contusions which are
not apparent, and depression from its natural position, especially
when one person is intentionally wounded by another, orwhen^

gain the confidence of the patient and his attendants. Few who have practised
medicine for a great many years, will question the propriety of these rules of conduct,
or doubt the importance of taking all honorable steps to ensure the confidence and
good-will of patients and their friends.

* There is a remark made by Asellius and Porralins on the latter part of this
paragraph, which, although it appears to be scarcely warranted by anything in the
text of our author, I quote for its importance, as showing that the earlier authorities
were well aware of the danger and impropriety of treating injuries of the head in
children by instruments : " Sed prae ceteris iUud notandum quod dizerit (luufa^o osw)
quasi dicat, eo non denudato quamvis coUiso aut fisso, quod raro accidit, non esse
tamen sectione denudandam calvariam : nam in pueris, ubi deddunt non raro accidit
ut eorum collidatur calvaria, frangaturque, cute Integra, quod etsi accidat, et tactu
hoc probe percipiatur, sang^sque e venis effusus sub cute fluctuat, abstinendum
tamen a sectione est, neminem enim servatum Tidi, cui sectio adhibita sit, propterea
quod eorum calor facile dissipetur, eoque magis, quum gemitu et clamore caput
valde incalescat, et ad fluxiones suscipiendas proclive reddatur,'* (Comm. in Hip. de
Vuln. Cap.) It will be seen at $ 18, that our author allowed the application of a
small trepan in children when strongly indicated.



454 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

whether intentionally or not, a blow or stroke is received firom
an elevated place, and if the instrument in the hand, whether
used in throwing or striking, be of a powerful nature^ and if a
stronger person wound a weaker. Of those who are wounded
in the parts about the bone, or in the bone itself, by a fall, he
who falls from a very high place upon a very hard and blunt
object is in most danger of sustaining a fracture and contusion
of the bone, and of having it depressed firom its natural position ;
whereas he that falls upon more level ground, and upon a
softer object, is likely to suffer less injury in the bone, or it
may not be injured at all. Of those instruments which, falling
upon the head, wound the parts about the bone, or the bone
itself, that which falls from a very high place, and the least on
a level with the person struck, and which is at the same time
very hard, very blunt, and very heavy, and which ia the least
light, sharp, and soft, such an instrument would occasion a
fracture and contusion of the bone. And there is most danger
that the bone may sustain these injuries, under such circum-
stances, when the wound is direct and perpendicular to the
bone, whether struck from the hand or from a throw, or when
any object falls upon the person, or when he is wounded by
falling, or in whatever way the bone sustains a direct wound
from this instrument. Those weapons which graze the bone
obliquely are less apt to fracture, contuse, or depress the bone,
even when the bone is denuded of flesh ; for in some of those
wounds thus inflicted the bone is not laid bare of the flesh.
Those instruments more especially produce firactures in the
bone, whether apparent or not, and contusions, and inward
depression of the bone, which are rounded, globular, smooth
on all sides, blunt, heavy, and hard ; and such weapons bruise,
compress, and pound the flesh ; and the wounds inflicted by
such instruments, whether obliquely or circularly, are round,
and are more disposed to suppurate, and to have a discharge,
and take longer time to become clean ; for the flesh which has
been bruised and pounded must necessarily suppiurate and slough
away. But weapons of an oblong form, being, for the most
part, slender, sharp, and light, penetrate the flesh rather than
bruise it, and the bone in like manner ; and such an instru-
ment may occasion a hedra and a cut (for a hedra and a cut are
same thing) ; but weapons of this description do not produce



^



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 455

contusions^ nor fractures^ nor depressions inwardly. And in
addition to the appearances in the bone, which you can detect
by the sight, you should make inquiry as to all these particulars
(for they are symptoms of a greater or less injury), whether
the wounded person was stunned, and whether darkness was
diffused over his eyes, and whether he had vertigo, and fell to
the ground.^

12. When the bone happens to be denuded of flesh by the
weapon, and when the wound occurs upon the sutures, it is
difficult to distinguish the indentation {hedra) of a weapon
which is clearly recognised in other parts of the bone, whether
it exist or not^ and especially if the hedra be seated in the
sutures themselves. For the suture being rougher than the
rest of the bone occasions confusion, and it is not clear which
is the suture, and which the mark inflicted by the instrument,
imless the latter {hedra) be large. Fracture also for the most
part is combined with the indentation when it occurs in the
sutures ; and this fracture is more difficult to discern when the
bone is broken, on this account, that if there be a fracture, it is
situated for the most part in the suture. For the bone is liable
to be broken and slackened there, owing to the natural weak-
ness of the bone there, and to its porosity, and from the suture
being readily ruptured and slackened: but the other bones which
surround the suture remain unbroken, because they are stronger

* This passage is rendered as follows by Celsns : ** Igitur, ubi ea percussa, protinus
requirendum est, num bilem is homo yomuerit; num oculi ejus obcaecati sint;
nuro obmutuerit ; num per nares auresque sanguis ei effluxerit : num conciderity num
sine sensu quasi dormiens jacuerit. Haec enim non nisi osse fracto eveniunt ; atque,
ubi inciderunt, scire licet, necessariam, sed difficilem curationem esse." (viii, 4.) Now,
although it is no doubt true, as remarked by Pott (Injuries of the Head, $ 4), that
these symptoms sometimes take place, without there being any fracture of the skull,
and that, on the other hand, as had been previously pointed out by Pare and Le
Dran, fractures do sometimes take place without being accompanied by all these
symptoms, still there can be no donbt that as a general rule the doctrine of Celsus
is correct, and that, at all events, a case is to be treated as serious in which these
symptoms occur. With regard to one of the characteristics of a fracture, thus
noticed by Celsus, a modem authority of great experience, but little acquaintance
with ancient learning, observes, " Blood flowing from the nose and ears is a symptom
attending fracture of the skuU. It may be consequent on mere concussion, a vibration
which ruptures the membranes ; but oftener it is a consequence of fissure across the
bone." (Institutes of Surgery, by Sir Charles Bell, vol. i, p. 173.)



456 , INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

•

than the suture.^ For the firacture which occurs at the sntore is
also a slackening of the suture^ and it is not easy to detect
whether the bone be broken and slackened by the indentation
of a weapon occurring in the suture^ or from a contusion of the
bone at the sutures ; but it is still more difScult to detect a
fractiure connected with contusion. For the sutures^ having
the appearance of fissures, elude the discernment and sight of
the physician, as being rougher than the rest of the bone^ unless
the bone be strongly cut and slackened, (for a cut and a hedra
are the same thing.)^ But it is necessary, if the wound has
occurred at the sutures, and the weapon has impinged on the
bone or the parts about it, to pay attention and find out what
injury the bone has sustained. For a person wounded to the
same, or a much smaller, extent, and by weapons of the same
size and quality, and even much less, will sustain a much greater
injury, provided he has received the blow at the sutures^ than
if it was elsewhere. And many of these require trepanning, but
you must not apply the trepan to the sutures themselves, but
on the adjoining bone.^

' The separation of the bones at a suture, usually called diattasii, is notioed id
the annotations on $ 3. I have also alluded, in my analysis of the Fifth Book
of the Epidemics, to the case in ivhich the author, generally supposed by aodeot
authorities to be Hippocrates, mistook a suture for a fracture of the skull. See
Epidem. v, 14 ; and Celsus, Tiii, 4.

* On the terms which occur parenthetically, the philological reader may consult
the note of Stephanus, contained in the edition of Erotian by Franziua, under UpdMC-
I may here remark, that it is diflScult to account for the frequent repetition of these
words in parentheses.

' It will be remarked that, as a general rule, Hippocrates forbids ns to apply the
trepan at the sutures, but, notwithstanding this prohibition, it would appear to have
been departed from in two cases related in the Sixth Book of the Epidemics. (See
$ 27 and 28.) The rule, however, to avoid the application of the trepan at the
sutures, was generally obsenred by nearly all the modem authorities down to Pott,
and even he admits that the sutures should be avoided when the trephine may with
equal utility be set on any other part. Louis, in a paper lately reprinted from the
Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Surgery, by the Sydenham Society, gives sd
interesting examination of the doctrine of the ancient and modem authors on this
rale of practice. Most of the authorities quoted by him are averse to the application
of the trepan over sutures, except when very urgently required. C. Pomlius, in his
marginal notes on Arantius's Commentary on this work of Hippocrates, assigns
three reasons for avoiding the sutures in this operation : Ist, because the booe is
weak at that place ; 2dly, because the membrane there being in dose connexion with



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 457

13. And with regard to the cure of wounds in the head^ and
the mode of detecting injuries in the bone which are not appa-
rent^ the following is my opinion : — In a wound of the head,
you must not apply anything liquid, not even wine, but as httle
as possible, nor a cataplasm, nor conduct the treatment with
tents, nor apply a bandage to an ulcer on the head, unless it be
situated on the forehead, in the part which is bare of hairs, or
about the eyebrow and eye, for wounds occurring there require
cataplasms and bandages more than upon any other part of the
head.^ For the rest of the head surrounds the whole forehead,
and the wounds wherever situated become inflamed and swelled,
owing to an influx of blood from the surrounding parts.' And
neither must you apply cataplasms and bandages to the forehead
at all times ; but when the inflammation is stopped and the
swelling has subsided, you must give up the cataplasms and ban-
dages. A wound in any other part of the head must not be
treated with tents, bandages, or cataplasms, unless it also re-
quires incision. You must perform incision on wounds situated
on the head and forehead, whenever the bone is denuded of flesh,
and appears to have sustained some injury from the blow, but
the wound has not sufficient length and breadth for the in-
spection of the bone, so that it may be seen whether it has
received any mischief from the blow, and of what nature the
injuiy is, and to what extent the flesh has been contused, and

the bone, is in danger of being injured ; 3dly, because, by the contraction of the
callus, the transpiration there will be stopped. The last of these reasons is based on
the physiological doctrine of the ancient authorities respecting the uses of the sutures,
one of which was, to permit transpiration from the brain. See Galen, de Usu
Partium, ix, 1, 2.

' Our author, it wiU be remarked, forbids liquid applications, tents, cataplasms,
and bandages, in wounds of the head. He seems to have approved most of things
of a diying nature. The other authorities would appear to differ considerably in
their yiews regarding the proper principles upon which wounds on the head are to be
treated. Celsus directs us, after laying bare the dura mater by trepanning, to apply
strong vinegar to it, and when the membrane is inflamed, he approves of tepid rose-
water, (viii, 4.) Paulus ^gineta, after the operation of trepanning, directs a piece
of cloth, or small ball of wool dipped in oil, to be applied to the part. I believe they
all agreed in rejecting sutures. See Galen, de Med. sec. Genera III.

* Hippocrates would seem to hold the fanciful idea, that the forehead is environed
by the rest of the head, and that an afflux of blood takes place from the parts around
to it. Scaliger rejects this passage as containing a doctrine whoUy unworthy of our
author.



458 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

whether the bone has sustained any injury, or whether it be un-
injured by the blow, and has suffered no mischief; and with
regard to the treatment, what the wound, and the flesh, and the
injury of the bone stand in need of. Ulcers of this description
stand in need of incision ; and, if the bone be denuded of the
flesh, and if it be hollow, and extend far obliquely, we cut up
the cavity wherever the medicine cannot penetrate readily, what-
ever medicine it may be ; and wounds which are more inclined
to be circular and hollow, and for the most part others of the
like shape, are cut up by making a double incision in the circle
lengthways, according to the figure of the man, so as to make
the wound of a long form. Incisions may be practised with
impunity on other parts of the head, with the exception of the
temple and the parts above it, where there is a vein that runs
across the temple, in which region an incision is not to be
made. For convulsions seize on a person who has been thus
treated ; and if the incision be on the left temple, the con-
vulsions seize on the right side ; and if the incision be on the
right side, the convulsions take place on the left side.^

14. When, then, you lay open a wound in the head on ac-
count of the bones having been denuded of the flesh, as wishing
to ascertain whether or not the bone has received any injury
from the blow, you must make an incision proportionate to the
size of the wound, and as much as shall be judged necessary.
And in making the incision you must separate the flesh from
the bone where it is united to the membrane {pericranium ?)
and to the bone, and then fill the whole wound with a tent,
which will expand the wound very wide next day with as little

' The danger of incisions, in the temporal region, is adverted to in several parts
of the Hippocratic Collection, as in the work On the Articulations, in the Prorrheticsy
and the Coan Prsnotions. Even at the present day, when the treatment of hemor-
rhage is better understood than in the days of the great Fathers of Grecian medicine,
a large incision in that quarter is regarded with considerable apprehension. Con-
vulsion, that is to say, tetanus, was supposed to be the frequent, if not the invariable,
result of a wound in the temporal muscle. Pott, indeed, contends that lock-jaw is
not necessarily produced by a wound there ; he admits, however, that the application
of the trepan to the temple is not often successful, but the reason of this he con-
tends is, that in these fractures the breach generally extends to the base of the
skull (§ 5). Quesnay, however, inclines to support the views of Hippocrates. (On
the Use of the Trepan, p. 15, Syd. Soc. edit.) Scultet, in like manner, pronounces
decidedly that a wound in the temple is a very dangerous affair. (Armam. Chimrg.,
TabL xxxi.)



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 459

pain as possible ; and along with the tents apply a cataplasm^
consisting of a mass {maza) of fine flour pounded in vinegar, or
boiled so as to render it as glutinous as possible.^ On the next
day, when you remove the tent, having examined the bone to
see what injury it has sustained, if the wound in the bone be
not right seen by you, nor can you discover what mischief the
bone itself has sustained, but the instrument seems to have
penetrated to the bone so as to have injured it, you must scrape
the bone with a raspatory to a depth and length proportionate
to the suture of the patient, and again in a transverse direction,
for the sake of the fractures which are not seen, and of the con-
tusions which are not discovered, as not being accompanied with
depression of the bone from its natural position. For the scraping
discovers the mischief, if the injuries in the bone be not other-
wise manifest. And if you perceive an indentation {hedra) left
in the bone by the blow, you must scrape the dint itself and
the surrounding bones, lest, as often happens, there should be
a fracture and contusion, or a contusion alone, combined with
the dint, and escape observation. And when you scrape the
bone with the raspatory, and it appears that the wound in the
bone requires the operation, you must not postpone it for three
days, but do it during this period, more especially if the weather
be hot, and you have had the management of the treatment
from the commencement. If you suspect that the bone is
broken or contused, or has sustained both these injuries, having
formed your judgment from the severity of the wound, and from
the information of the patient, as that the person who inflicted
the wound, provided it was done by another person, was remark-
ably strong, and that the weapon by which he was wounded
was of a dangerous description, and then that the man had been
seized with vertigo, dimness of vision, and stupor, and fell to
the ground, — under these circumstances, if you cannot discover
whether the bone be broken, contused, or both the one and the
other, nor can see the truth of the matter, you must dissolve
the jet-black ointment,^ and fill the wound with it when thus

' The maza was evidently a poultice prepared with barleymeal and yinegar, or
water. See the Annotations on the treatise On Ancient Medicine.

' Celsus translates this passage as follows : " At si ne turn quidem rima manifesta
est, induccndum supra os atramentum scriptorium est, deinde scalpro id deradeudum;
nigritiem enim continei, si quid fissum est." (viii, 4.) Arantius properly remarks,



460 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

dissolved^ and apply a linen rag smeared with oil^ and tlien a
cataplasm of the maza with a bandage ; and on the nest day,
having cleaned out the wound^ scrape the bone with the rasp-
atory. And if the bone is not sound, but fractured and con-
tused^ the rest of it which is scraped will be white; but the firac-
ture and contusion^ having imbibed the preparation, will appear
black, while the rest of the bone is white. And you must again
scrape more deeply the fracture where it appears black ; and, if
you thus remove the fissure, and cause it to disappear, you may
conclude that there has been a contusion of the bone to a greater
or less extent, which has occasioned the fracture that has disap-
peared under the raspatory ; but it is less dangerous^ and a
matter of less consequence, when the fissure has been effaced.
But if the fracture extend deep, and do not seem likely to dis-
appear when scraped, such an accident requires trepanning.
£ut having performed this operation, you must apply the other
treatment to the wound.

15. You must be upon your guard lest the bone sustain any
injury from the fleshy parts if not properly treated. When the
bone has been sawed and otherwise denuded, whether it be
actually sound, or only appears to be so, but has sustained some
injury from the blow, there may be danger of its suppurating
(although it would not otherwise have done so), if the flesb
which surrounds the bone be ill cured, and become inflamed and
strangled ; for it gets into a febrile state, and becomes much
inflamed.^ For the bone acquires heat and inflammation from
the surrounding flesh, along with irritation and throbbing, and
the other mischiefs which are in the flesh itself, and from these
it gets into a state of suppuration. It is a bad thing for the
flesh (granulations ?) in an ulcer to be moist and mouldy, and

that the ancient ink must not be confounded with the modern, which is composed
principally of copperas and galls. It was, no doubt, the milder kind prepared from
the soot of pines with gum which was used in this case. On the writing-ink of the
ancients, see Dioscorides (M. M., v, 182) and Pliny (H. N., xxxv, 6).

' The text in the beginning of this paragraph is in a very unsatisfactory state. It
seems pretty clear, however, that in this place our author describes caries of the
bone brought on by an unhealthy state of the integuments. The description — allow-
ance being made for the corruption of the text — is sufficiently distinct, and most pn>-
bably has reference to that condition of the parts which is so graphically described
by Pott as forming " a pufTy, drcumscribed, indolent tumour of the scalp, and a
spontaneous separation of the pericranium from the skull under such tumour.**



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 461

to require a long time to become clean. Bat the wound should
be made to suppurate as quickly as possible ; for, thus the parts
surrounding the wound would be the least disposed to inflam-
mation, and would become the soonest clean ; for the flesh which
has been chopped and bruised by the blow, must necessarily sup-
purate and slough away. But when cleaned the wound must be
dried, for thus the wound will most speedily become whole,
when flesh devoid of humours grows up, and thus there will
be no fungous flesh in the sore. The same thing applies to the
membrane which surrounds the brain : for when, by sawing the
bone, and removing it from the meninx, you lay the latter bare,
you must make it clean and dry as quickly as possible, lest
being in a moist state for a considerable time, it become soaked
therewith and swelled ; for when these things occur, there is
danger of its mortifying.'

16. A piece of bone that must separate from the rest of
the bone, in consequence of a wound in the head, either from
the indentation {hedra) of a blow in the bone, or from the bone
being otherwise denuded for a long time, separates mostly by
becoming exsanguous. For the bone becomes dried up and
loses its blood by time and a multiplicity of medicines which
are used ; and the separation will take place most quickly, if
one having cleaned the wound as quickly as possible will next
dry it, and the piece of bone, whether larger or smaller. For
a piece of bone which is quickly dried and converted, as it were,
into a shell, is most readily separated from the rest of the
bone which retains its blood and vitality ; for, the part having
become exsanguous and dry, more readily drops oCF from that
which retains its blood and is alive.'

> Oar author in this place would appear to treat of indpient hernia cerebri, as
immediately before he treats of fungous ulcers on the pericranium. Galen, in like
manner, praises powerfully deaiccant medicines upon the authority of Meges the
Sidonian, who, he says, had great experience in these cases. He speaks of the plaster
caUed Isis as being a most efficacious application to the dura mater, when laid bare.
Its prindpal ingredients are of an escharotic and detergent nature, such as squama
«ris, burnt copper, ammoniac salts, myrrh, aloes, and the like. See Paulus
iEoiNBTA, Vol. Ill, p. 564. Galen concludes his remarks on this subject with stating
that, before getting into an inflamed state, the dura mater, as being of a dry nature
endures the most powerful medidnes. (Meth. Med., vi, at the end.)

* This description of a piece of bone which is going to exfoliate, is remarkably
correct. Compare it with the following narrative : " A girl of ten or twelve years of
age ¥ras struck on the head by an iron rod falling on her ; the blow caused no wound,



462 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

17. Such pieces of bone as are depressed from their natand
position, either being broken off or chopped off to a consider-
able extent^ are attended with less danger^ provided the mem-
brane be safe ; and bones which are broken by numerous and
broader fractures are still less dangerous and more easily ex-
tracted.^ And you must not trepan any of them^ nor run any
risks in attempting to extract the pieces of bone, until they
rise up of their own accord^ upon the subsidence of the swelling.
They rise up when the flesh {granulations) grows below^ and
it grows from the diploe of the bone, and from the sound portion,
provided the upper table alone be in a state of necrosis. And
the flesh will shoot up and grow below the more quickly^ and
the pieces of bone ascend, if one will get the wound to suppurate
and make it clean as quickly as possible. And when both the
tables of the bone are driven in upon the membrane^ I mean
the upper and lower, the wound, if treated in the same way,
will very soon get well, and the depressed bones will quickly
rise up.^

and the young woman was soon well, with the exception of a fixed pain of no gmi
extent, which remained over one of the parietal bones. The pain continued for
several years. M. Mareschal, who was at last consulted, considered it neoessarf to
trepan. He exposed the bone at the painful part, and applied one crown of a trepan ;
he observed, that the bone, when tawed, appeared dry, like a shiU thai had been
buried.*' (Quesnay, on the Use of the Trepan.) This agrees excellently with the
description given by Hippocrates. It is to be regretted, however, that the text here,
as far as regards one word airoorpajcdc), is in a very unsatisfactory state. The
conjectural emendation of Schneider {ainattkriKhQ) seems to be a plausible emendatioD,
but it is not adopted by Littre.

' Our author delivers the same doctrine in the work On the Articulations, and
states that extensive fractures of the bones are often less dangerous than others
which appear not so formidable. I need scarcely remark that modem experience
has confirmed the truth of this position. How often has it been seen that one patient
died from a slight injury to the skull, while another recovered from an extensive
fracture of it ? Mr. Guthrie appears in so far to agree in opinion with onr author,
that extensive fractures are less dangerous than they appear ; he says, " Mr. Keatr,
who has had great opportunities for observation in St. George's Hospital, has in*
variably remarked that the symptoms dependent on extravasation have been less
severe in the first instance, in proportion as the separation of the edges of the frac-
ture have been greater one from the other, or when the sutures have yielded to the
shock and have been separated. It has been stated from the earliest antiquity, that the
greater the fracture, the less the concussion of the brain.'' (p. 56.) See the Argument

' It will be remarked as a striking feature in our author's views of practice in
injuries of the head, not to interfere with fractures attended with depression. See
the Argument, where the rationale of this practice is fully discussed.



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 463

18. The bones of children are thinner and softer^ for this
reason^ that they contain more blood [than those of adults] ;
and they are porous and spongy, and neither dense nor hard.
And when wounded to a similar or inferior degree by weapons
of the same or even of an inferior power, the bone of a young
person more readily and quickly suppurates, and that in less
time than the bone of an older person ; and in accidents, which
are to prove fatal, the younger person will die sooner than the
elder. But if the bone is laid bare of flesh, one must attend
and try to find out, what even is not obvious to the sight, and
discover whether the bone be broken and contused, or only
contused ; and if, when there is an indentation in the bone,
whether contusion, or fracture, or both be joined to it ; and if
the bone has sustained any of these injuries, we must give
issue to the blood by perforating the bone with a small trepan,
observing the greatest precautions, for the bone of young per-
sons is thinner and more superficial than that of elder persons.^

19. When a person has sustained a mortal wound on the
head, which cannot be cured, nor his life preserved, you may
form an opinion of his approaching dissolution, and foretell
what is to happen from the following symptoms which such a
person experiences.* When a bone is broken, or cleft, or
contused, or otherwise injured, and when by mistake it has
not been discovered, and neither the raspatory nor trepan has
been applied as required, but the case has been neglected as if
the bone were sound, fever will generally come on before the
fourteenth day if in winter, and in summer the fever usually
seizes after seven days. And when this happens, the wound
loses its colour, and the inflammation dies in it ; and it becomes
glutinous, and appears like a pickle, being of a tawny and

> Although these directions of our author regarding the treatment of children be
most important, I am not aware that any other of the ancient anthorities has shown
his sense of their value of them by repeating them. It is well known that in children
there is but one table, and that it is very thin. Our author, as remarked above, does
not entirely omit the operation in the case of children, but uses a small trepan.

' The reader will again remark an instance of our author's fondness for prognosis,
and his observance of the rule at all times to prevent the surgeon from committing
himself by attempting hopeless cases. Celsus, writing in the same spirit, says,
** Ante omnia scire medicum oportere, quae vulnera insanabilia sint, quae difficilem
curationem habeant ; . . . non attingere, nee mbirettpeciem efui, ut oceiti, quern tore
qmut mteremit,** (v, 26.)



464 INJURIES OF THE HEAD.

somewhat livid colour ; and the bone then begins to sphacelate,
and turns black where it was white before, and at last becomes
pale and blanched. But when suppuration is fairly established
in it, small blisters form on the tongue and he dies delirious.
And, for the most part, convulsions seize the other side of
the body ; for, if the wound be situated on the left side, the
convulsions will seize the right side of the body; or if the
wound be on the right side of the head, the convulsion attacks
the left side of the body.^ And some become apoplectic. And
thus they die before the end of seven days, if in summer ; and
before fourteen, if in winter. And these symptoms indicate,
in the same manner, whether the wound be older or more
recent. But if you perceive that fever is coming on, and that
any of these symptoms accompany it, you must not put off,
but having sawed the bone to the membrane {meninx)^ or scraped
it with a raspatory, (and it is then easily sawed or scrapedj
you must apply the other treatment as may seem proper, at-
tention being paid to circumstances.' «

20. When in any wound of the head, whether the man has
been trepanned or not, but the bone has been laid bare, a red
and erysipelatous swelling supervenes in the face, and in both
eyes, or in either of them, and if the swelling be painful to
the touch, and if fever and rigor come on, and if the wound
look well, whether as regards the flesh or the bone, and if the
parts surrounding the woimd be well, except the swelling in
the face, and if the swelling be not connected with any error
in the regimen, you must purge the bowels in such a case with
a medicine which will evacuate bile; and when thus purged
the fever goes off, the swelling subsides, and the patient gets

* This is an opinion held by all the ancient authorities. Some interesting cases in
point are related in the First Book of the Continens of Rhazes. It was explained
on the principle that the cerebral nerves decussate. (See Aretsus, on the Causes of
Disease, i, 7.) Modem experience, in the main, is in accordance with the ancient
on this point. Paralysis has generally been found on the opposite side to that whidi
has receired the injury. See Thomson's Observations, &c., p. 52 ; Larrey's Mem.
de Chirurg., iv, p. 180 ; Hennen's Principles, p. 301.

* This passage is thus translated by Celsus: *' Si sub prima curatione febris inten-
ditur, brevesque somni, et iidem per summa tumultuosi sunt, ulcus madet, neque
alitur, et in cervidbus glandule oriuntur, magni dolores sunt, cibiqae super hoc
fastidium increscit, turn demum ad manum scalprumque veniendum est." (viii, 4.)



INJURIES OF THE HEAD. 465

well. In giving the medicine you must pay attention to the
strength of the patient.*

21. With regard to trepanning, when there is a necessity
for it, the following particulars should be known. If you have
had the management of the case from the first, you must not
at once saw the bone down to the meninx ; for it is not proper
that the membrane should be laid bare and exposed to injuries
for a length of time, as in the end it may become ftingous :
And there is another danger if you saw the bone down to the
meninx and remove it at once, lest in the act of sawing you
should wound the meninx. But in trepanning, when only a
very little of the bone remains to be sawed through, and the
bone can be moved, you must desist from sawing, and leave
the bone to fall out of itself.' For to a bone not sawed through,
and where a portion is left of the sawing, no mischief can
happen ; for the portion now left is sufficiently thin. In other
respects you must conduct the treatment as may appear suit-
able to the wound. And in trepanning you must frequently
remove the trepan, on account of the heat in the bone, and
plunge it in cold water. For the trepan being heated by
running round, and heating and drying the bone, bums it and
makes a larger piece of bone around the sawing to drop off,
than would otherwise do. And if you wish to saw at once
down to the membrane, and then remove the bone, you must
also, in like manner, frequently take out the trepan and dip
it in cold water. But if you have not charge of the treatment
from the first, but undertake it from another after a time, you
must saw the bone at once down to the meninx with a serrated
trepan,^ and in doing so must frequently take out the trepan

* The practice advocated in this paragraph is alhided to by Paulus iEgineta, in his
chapter on Fractares of the Skull, (vi, 90.)

* The operation here described by our author is the more deserving of attention,
as it appears to have been peculiar to him. It is not described by Celsus, Paulus
iGgineta, Albucasis, nor any one of the ancient authorities, as far as I can find ;
neither am I aware of its having been attempted in modern times. The object of it,
however, seems to be very rational, namely, to avoid doing serious injury to the dura
mater by tearing the bone forcibly from it at once.

' The instrument here used is named jrpwv xap<urrdc ; and, as far as I can see,
was the same as the modiolus of Celsus, and the xotvueic of the later authorities. It
would certainly appear to have been a circular saw, and consequently not unlike our
modem trephine. See the figures and the Argument.

30



466



INJURIES OF THE HEAD.



and examine with a sound (specillum)^ and otherwise along the
tract of the instrument.^ For the bone is much sooner sawn
through, provided there be matter below it and in it, and it
often happens that the bone is more superficial^^ especially if
the wound is situated in that part of the head where the bone
is rather thinner than in other parts. But you must take
care where you apply the trepan, and see that you do so only
where it appears to be particularly thick, and having fixed the
instrument there, that you frequently make examinations and
endeavour by moving the bone to bring it up. Having removed
it, you must apply the other suitable remedies to the wound.
And if, when you have the management of the treatment from
the first, you wish to saw through the bone at once, and remove
it from the membrane, you must, in like manner^ examine the
tract of the instrument frequently with the sounds and see that
it is fixed on the. thickest part of the bone, and endeavour to
remove the bone by moving it about. But if you use a perforator
(trepan ?),yo\k must not penetrate to the membrane, if you operate
on a case which you have had the charge of from the first, but
must leave a thin scale of bone^ as described in the process
of sawing.

' The following sentence, taken from Sir Charles Bell's description of the operation,
looks like a translation of this passage of Hippocrates ; but it is well known that oor
English surgeon was not guilty of reading Greek ! " Withdraw your trephine from
time to time, brush it, and run the flat probe round the circular cut." The spedUum
of the ancient surgeons was, in most respects, not unlike our modem probe.

' The meaning here would seem to be, that the bone does not extend so deep as
might be supposed. See Foes, (Econ. Hippoc., under liriiroXai<Sr£pov 6mov.



END OP VOL. I.


\
