H I R A M: 

OR, THE 

GRAND MASTER-KEY 

To the Door of both 

ANTIENT and MODERN 

FREE-MASONRY. 

[Price Two Shillings,] 

r i ^ 

H I R A M: 

OR, THE 

GRAND MASTER-KEY 

To the Door of both 

ANTIENT and MODERN 

FRE E-MASONRY: 

Being an accurate Defcription of every Degree of the Brother- 
hood, as authorized and delivered in all good Lodges, 

The whol^ comprehending (among an Entertaining Variety 
of others) the following Articles, m. 

1. Hiftory of the Rife and Progrefs of 
Mafonry. » 

x The antient Conftitutions, Laws and 
Charges of the Order. 

3 The only true and regular Form' ufed 
in Making aMafon. 

4. The Ledlures, Oaths, Obligations, 
Sec. of each Degree: viz. Appren- 
tice, Fellow-Craft, Mailer, Sec. ver- 
batim. 

5. Ceremony of the Mop and Pail, 

6. Word and Grip of each Degree. 

7. Description of the different Claps, I 

and Manner of Drinking with Three 
Times Three. 

8. Hiram's Murder, Burial, and raif- 
ing, with the Pumlhment of the Af- 
failins. 

9. Account of the four folcmn Penal- 
ties. 

10. Manner of conflicting a new 
Lodge. 

1 1. All the Toafts ufed by Free Mafons, 

12. A complete Collection of new 
Songs. 

13. A new and correct Lift of Lodges. 

Containing more than any Book on the Subjedt ever before 
published. 

THE SECOND EDITION. 

IJJuftrated with proper Remarks, See. neceflary to explain the Whole 
' to the meaneft Capacity, whether Brethren or not. 

And embellifhed with a beautiful Copper-Plate of the Drawing on 
the Floor of a Lodge, at the Admiffton of a new Member, 

By a MEMBER of ROYAL ARCH. 
L^O NDON: 

Printed fer W. Griffin, ^Catharine-Street, in the Strand* 

m DCC LXVI, 

a .. 

digitized' by GfX 

the: 

GRAND MASTER-KEY 

T O 

FREE-MASONRY. 

T HAT the Science of Masonry is the moft ancient 
in the World ^annot be in the leaftdifputed 5 it was 
pra^ifed in the earliefts Ages, and its fundamental 
Rules have been handed down, from Time to Time, with t!^ e 
greateft Care by our Forefathers. Its Foundation is fixed on 
the Bafis of V.rtue, and the grand Principles are Brotherly 
Love, Relief, and Truth to each other, and Univerfal Benevo- 
lence to Human Society in general. It has been countenan- 
ced by the Wife and Great in all Ages and Nations ; Empe* 
tors, Kings and Nobles have at all Times honoured this So- 
ciety with their peculiar Patronage and Protedion, and thought 
it no Difgrace to call the meaneft Members, Brethren and Fel~ 
lows. 

The various Attempts of late to defcribe and publifh to the 
World, Accounts, of the Antiquity, Rife, Progrefs, and 
chief Intent of this Noble Science, have come far fhort of the. 
End propofed \ for, by picking out here and there a Trifle, and 

B blending 

1 

r »; I 

Blending it with Matters no way relative to the Subject, the’ 
Readers are bewildered in their Refearches, while the Art it- 
lelf gains Difcredit and Ridicule, by being reprefented,. in thefe 
perplexed and inaccurate Accounts,* as a Parcel of Abfurdity 
and Nonfenfe.- . 

To obviate and clear up fuch Reproaches and falfe Conclu- 
Cons, and to (hew that the Bajis of Free-Masonry is Wis- 
dom ; its Shaft , Strength and its Chapiter , Beauty;. 
will be the Author’s chief Defign ; for which Purpofe he has 
drawn together and arranged every Part, from the beft- received 
Teftimonies and authentic Records preferred in all the regular- 
ly-conftituted Lodges in the World, in fuch a M^anner as to 
be of the utmoft U(e to all the Brotherhood ; and will at the 
fame Time not only ferve as a Pocket Companion to every Free - 
Mafon , who is not thoroughly acquainted with the Manner of 
performing his Doty in a' Lodge, but alfo improve hitxH in the^ 
Le&ures ufed in each Degree ; by perufing which He will foon 
become an ufeful Member, and'be an Ornament to the Society. 

From this general Account of his Defign, he iiow proceeds 
to the Hiftory and Foundation of the Crafty with* all the Or- 
ders and Charges originally belonging to iu 

Tha Hiftory* and Antient Conftitutions , Orders andt 
Charges of Free and Accepted Mafons ~ 

\Extratted from an Original Record.] 

T HE. Might of the Father in Heaven, and the Wifdom 
of the glorious Son, through the Grace of the Holy 
Ghoft, be with us, and gracioufly govern us in our living, 
that, we may come to his Klifs that never fliall end. Amen.. 

Good Brethren, 

It is our Purpofe to acquaint you after what Manner this 
worthy Craft of Masonry was begun ; and afterwards how 
it was kept up, and encouraged by worthy Kings .and Princes, 
and by many other Worfhipful Men. 

Likewifc to thofe that are here,, we charge by the Charges 
that belong to every Free-Mason to keep ; for, in Truth, 
Free-Masonry is worthy to be kept well ; it is a worthy 
Craft, and a curious Science. 

There are feven liberal Sciences; of winch feven it is one* 
ar.d the Names of them are as follow : 

1 . Grammar which teaches us to write and fpeak properly,. 

2. —Rhetoric y 

r 3 i 

—2. 'Rhetoric ; which teaches us to fpeak in fair and foft 
Terms.— 3. Logick ; by which we learn to diftinguifli Truth 
from Falfehood, — 4. Arithmetic ; which (hews us to reckon 
or count all manner of Numbers. — 5. Geometry ; this teaches 
the Menfuration of Lines, Superficies, Solids, &c. and this 
Science is the Bafis of Masonry. — 6. Mufic ; which teaches 
the Proportions, . Harmony, and Difcords of Sounds, &c. — 7. 
AJlronomy\ which teacheth' the Motions of the Luminaries, 
Planets, &c. and how to meafure their Magnitudes, and de- 
termine their Diftances*. 

. The Rife of this Science was before Noah's Flood. In the 4th 
Chapter of Genefts it is faid there was a man named La?nech y 
who had two Wives named Adah and Zillah ; by Adah he be- 
gat two Sons, Jabal and Jubal ; by Zillah he begat one Son, 
called Naamab. Thefe Children found out the Beginning of 
all the Crafts in the World : Jabal found out Geometry ; he 
divided Flocks of Sheep, and built the firfl: Houfe of Timber 
and Stone. — Jubal found out the Art of Mufic ; and was the 
Father of all thofe who handled the Harp. — Tubal Cain was 
the Inftru&erof all Artificers in Iron andBrais ; and his Daugh- 
ter difeovered the Craft of Weaving. 

Thefe perfons kn.ew well that God would take Vengeance 
for Sin either by Fire or Water; wherefore they wrote the 
Sciences they had found out on two Pillars, that they might 
be found after Noah’s Flood. — One of the Pillars was Marble, 
which could not be burnt by Fire ; and the other Pillar named 
Eatemes, which would not fink in water. 

In the next Place we Ihali inform you after what Manner 
thefe Pillars were found, on which the Sciences were en- 
graved.— Hermes y who. lived Anno Mundi .2076 , in the Reign 
of Ninus y found one ,of them. He was the firfl: that left off 
Aftrology* to fearch into the Wonders of nature ; he proved 
there was 'but one God, and divided the Day into twelve 
flours ; be was thought to be the firfl: who divided the Zodiack 
into twelve Signs ; was Counfellor to Ofyris King of Egypt y 
and is reported to have invented Writing and Hieroglyphics, 
and alfo drew up the firfl: Laws of the Egyptians . 

In the Year of the World 18 jo, at the bu Tiding of Babylon , 
Majonry was in fuel) great Efieem, that Nimrod , King of 

* From what is faid above we learn, that thefe Seven Sciences are contained tin- 
ker that of Geometry, which teacheth the Menfuratior., Po i Vcra' ; o'n, or Weight of 
every Thing in anu upon the Earth. For as every Cr.Ttfrrrr., Ha’bandmn, Navi- 
gator, &c. works by Meafure, fo, without Geometry , ihofc Arts can.no more fub- 
than Logic can without Grammar . 

.. Babylon , 

I 4 ] 

Habylon* was a Mafon himfelf $ and when the City of Niniveby 
and other Eeftern Cities were to be built, Nimrodknt feveral 
Mafons, at'the Defire of his Coufin the Kingol Niniveb, and 
gave them the following Charge: That they fhould be true 
to one another, and that they fhould ferve the Lord truly 
€i for their Pay, fo that their Matter might have Honour, and 
all that belonged unto him ;” and feveral other Charges he 
gave them. This was the firft Time that ever a Mafon had 
any Charge of his Craft. 

When Abraham and Sarah went into Egypt , to teach the 
Egyptians , A . M . 2084, he had a Scholar whofe Name was 
Hermes ; and in his Days the . Lords and Eftates of the Realm 
had fo many Sons, that they had no competent Livelihood to 
find their Children ; on which they confulted with the King 
of the Country, how they might provide for their Children 
honeftly, but could find no good Way; and proclaimed it 
through all the Land, that if there were any Man who could 
inform them, he fhould come unto them, and be well rewarded 
for his Travel. On this Hermes faid ; “ If you will give me 
*‘your Children to govern, I will teach them one. of the 
€C feven Sciences, by following which they may liv.e honeftly 
as Gentlemen fhould, on Condition that I may have power 
^ to rule them, as the Science ought to be ruled.” Upon 
which the King and Cougcil granted and fealed his Com- 
jnifiion. And then this Hermes took to him thefe Lords Sons, 
and taught them the Science of Geometry, to work in Stone 
all Manner of Work, that belongeth to the building of 
Churches, Temples Towers, Cattles, &c. and like wife gave 
them a Charge in the following Manner : 

1. That they fhould be true to the King, and to the Lord 
that they ferved, and to the Fellowfhip whereunto they are 
admitted ; that they fhould call each other Fellow, or Brother, 
and not Servant or Knave, nor any other foul Name; and 
that they fhould truly deferve their Pay of the Loid or Matter 
pf the Work they ferved. 

2. That they fhould order the wifeft of them to be Matter 
pf the Work; and, neither for Loye, Riches, nor Favour, 
to fet another that, hath but little Cunning to be Matter of the 
^Lord’s Work, whereby the Lord fhould be evil ferved, and 
they afhamed ; and alfo that they fhould call the Governor of 
the Work, Matter, in the Time that they work with him. 

And many other Charges he gave them ; and ail thefe 
Charges he made them* fwear to keep by an Oath ; he alfo or- 
dained for them a reafonable Pay, by which they might live 
fcpneftly ; and alfo that they fhould affemble together once in 

every 

I 

1 

t « I 

every Year, to confult how they might work beft to ferve the 
Lord for hi* Profit, and to their own Credit ; and to correct 
within themfelves thofe that had been guilty of a Trefpafs a- 
gainft the Craft, 

Thus wasrthe Craft grounded there; aud Euclid gave it the 
Name of Geometry ; and it is now called Mafonry . 

A* M \ 2472. Sithence, long Time after, when * the ChikU 
ren of Ifrael were come into Jehu, which is now called Jeru* 
falemj King David began the Temple of the Lord, or the 
Temple of Jerufalem ; and he had a great Refpeft for Mafons % 
and he gave them good Pay, and feveral Charges after the 
Manner of thofe given in Egypt* 

When King David died, Solomon fent to Hiram King of 
Tyre , for an expert Workman, named Hiram Abiff , the Sonr 
of a Woman of the Line of Naptbali , and of Urias the Ifrae~ 
lite . The Letter being to the following Purport : 

KNOW Thou, that my f Father having a Will to build z 
Temple to God, hath been withdrawn from the Performance 
thereof, by the continual Wars and Troubles he hath had, for 
he never took Reft before he either defeated his Enemies, or 
made them Tributaries unto him. For mine own Part, I blef$ 
God for the Peace I poffefs; and for that, by Means thereof, 
I have an Opportunity of building a Temple unto God ; for he 
foretold my Father, that his Houfe flbould be built during my 
Reign : For which Reafon, I pray you fend fomeof your moft 
flcilful Men, with my Servants, to the Wood Libanus , to hew 
down Trees in that Place, as the Macedonians are more (kilfut 
in hewing knd preparing Timber than our People are, and I 
Will pay them according to your Dire&ion. 

To which Hiram , King of Tyre , replied as follows : 

THOU haft Caufe to thank God §, in that he has delivered 
thy Father’s Kingdom into thy Hands; and for this Caufe, 
fince no News can come unto me more welcome, nor any 
Office of Love more efteemed, I will accomplilh thy Requeft ; 
and when I havecaufed a great Quantity of Cedar and Cyprefs 
Wood to be hewn, I will fend itto thee by Sea, by my Servants, 
whom I will furnifh with convenient Veffels of Burthen, to 

* 2 Sam. v. 6. 

*|* 1 Kings, vii. 13, 

J See 1 Kings , ch. v. ver. 3 to 6 5 and 2 Chron . ch. 5 u 

$ See 1 Kings, ch, v. ver, 7 to 9 3 and % Cbron* ch, ii| 

t « 1 

End it may be delivered in what Part of thy Kingdom Jf 
fhall pleafe thee beft. You (hall provide us with Corn, which 
we ftand in need of, as we inhabit an Ifland. 

Solomon , in order to finifli the Temple that his Father, King 
David, had begun, fent for Mafons into divers Countries, to the 
Number of Four-fcore Thoufand, Three Thoufand of whom 
were appointed to be Matters arid Governors of his Work. 

And Hiram , King of Tyre, fent his Servants to Solomon, 
with Timber and Workmen to forward the Building of the 
Temple ; and he fent Hiram Abif, a Widow’s Son, of the 
Tribe of Napthali , who was a Matter of all his Mafons, Car- 
vers, Engravers, and Caftors in Brafs, and other Metals that 
were ufedin the Temple ; and King Solomon confirmed all the 
Charges which King David had given to Mafons . Thus was 
*the worthy Craft of Mafonry confirmed in Jerufalem , and many 
other Kingdoms; and he firiilhed the Temple A . M. 3000. 

A. M. 343i> happened the Deftru&ion of the firft Temple 
t>f Nebuchadnezzar , after it had flood four hundred and thirty 
Years. . 

The fecond Temple began in the Reign of Cyrus, feventy 
Years after that Deftru&ion : but it being hindered, it was for- 
ty-fix Years in building, and was finifhed in the Reign of 
Darius, A, M. 352*2* 

A. M. 3815, in the Reign of Ptolemy and Cleopatra , Onias 
built a Jewijfh Temple in c Egypt , in a Place called Bubaftis , and 
called it by his own Name. 

The Tower of- Stratton, alias Ceefarea, was built by Herod , 
in ! Palejline , A , M. 3942 ; and many other curious Works of 
Marble; as the Temple of Cafar Agrippa , to his Memory, 
in a Country named Zenodoras , near Panion , A . M. 3946. 

He likewife pulled down the fecond Temple that was finifli- 
od in the Reign of Darius , and appointed one thoufand 
Carriages to draw Stone to the Place, and chofe out ten thou- 
sand expert Workmen to hew and mould Stone; and. pne 
thoufand he cloathed, and made them Matters and Rulers of 
the Work, and built a new Temple, A \ M • 3947, on the 
Foundation which Solomon had laid, which was not inferior to 
the firft, and was finifhed nine Years before the Birth of 
our Saviour. 

In the Year 43, after *he*Birth otChrift, Mafons firft came into 
j England , and built a Monaftry near Glqftonbury , in Somerfetjhire . 

In St. Albans Time, the King of England , who was a 
Pagan, walled in the Town that was then called Verulum . St. 
Alban was Steward of the iCing’s Houfhold, and bad the Go- 
vernment of .the Realm ; he loved Mafons , cherifhed them 

much. 

It 1 

much, and made their Pay right good, ftanding as the Kealii* 
did ; for he gave them two Shillings a Week, and three Pence 
to their Chear : before that Time, in Englandy a Mafon had 
but a Penny a Day and his Meat. 

He alfo gave them a Charter of the King to hold a general 
Council, and gave it the Name of an Affembly, and was 
prefent himfelf, and aflifted in making MafonSy and ga,ve them 
Charges. 

Sbon after the Martyrdon of St. Albany a certain King in- 
vaded the Land, and deftroyed molt of the Natives with Fire 
and Sword ; fo that the Science of Mafonry was much decayed 
until the Reign of Etbelberty King of Kent> A * D . 616, when 
Gregory the Firft, fent into Britain a Monk, and other learned 
Men, to preach the Chriftian Faith to this Nation, which aa 
yet had not fully received it. Ethelbert likewife built a Church 
at Canturburyy and dedicated it to St. Peter and St. Paul ; 

Siberty King of the Eajl Saxons , who was alfo a Mafon t 
having received the Chriftian Faith, built the Monaftry at 
Wejlminjlery A . D. 630, to the Honour of God and St. PeUr* 

A. Z). 915, Sigeberty King of the Eajl Angeky began to 
ereft the Univerfity of Cambridge. 

Atheljiane built a Monaftry at Wilton y near Salijburyy and 
another at Mitcheiney in Somerfetjhire • befides thefe, there 
Were but few Monaftries in the Realm which he did not adora 
with fome new Pieces of Building, Jewels, Books, or Por- 
tions of Land ; he alfo greatly enriched the Churches of 
York. 

Edwiny Brother lo .King Athelftane , took Notice of Ma* 
fons more than his Brother did; and he delighted much to 
commune and talk with them, to learn their Craft ; and 
for .the Love he had to Mafom and to the Craft, he was. 
made a Mafony and obtained of the King his Brother a Char- 
ter and Commiifion to hold every Year an Allembly where 
they would within the Realm, and to correct within them- 
felves Faults and Trefpaffes that were committed by the Craft y 
and held an- Affembly himfelf at YorkPy and thefe he made 
Mafonsy and gave them Charges, and ordered their Rules to. 
be kept for ever after : he alfo gave them the Charter and Com- 
miffion to keep, and made an Ordinance that it (hould be re- 
newed from King to King ; and when the Affembly was ga- 
thered together, he proclaimed that all old Mafon* and young, 

* This was the firft rtgular Grand Lodge ever held in England. Edwin's Seat 
was at the Place now called Auldby, fix Miles from the City of Tork. He alio 
laid the Foundation of a Church of Frce-ftone In the find City, which was fini/hed. 
hy his Succeflbr, OjwUd. 

wh* 

r » ] 

who had any Writing or Underftanding of the Charges and 
Manners that were made before in this Land, or in any others 
Shat they (hould bring them# And when it was proved there 
were found fome in Greeks fome in French , and fome in Eng* 
lijhy and fome in other Languages, and that they were all to 
one Intent and Purpofe* he made a Book thereof, to (hew how 
the Craft was founded ; and he ordered himfelf and commanded* 
that it (hould be read and told when any Mafon fliould be made* 
and for to give him his Charges : and from that Day until this 
Time, the Mariners of Mafons have been kept in that Form* 
as well as Men might govern it. 

Furthermore* at diverfe Aflemblies, certain Charges have 
been made by the Advice of Maflers and Fellows, to the foi* 
lowing Effe£t : 

Every Man that is a Mafoti) take right good Heed to thefe 
Charges; and if any Man find himfelf guilty in any of thole 
Charges, that he ought to pray to God for his Grace to amend} 
and efpecially you that are to be charged, take Heed that you 
may keep thefe Charges right well; for it is a great Peril for a 
Man to forfwear himfelf upon a Book. 

The firft Charge is* that you (hall be true Men to God* and 
the Holy Church, and that you ufe no Error or Herefy by your 
Underftandingor Difcretion; but be you wife difcreet Men, of 
wife Men in each Thing. 

Alfo, that you (hall be Liegemen to the King, without Trea- 
fon or any other Fallhood, and that you know no Treafon or 
Treachery, but you amend privily, if you may, or elfe warn 
the King, or his Council thereof. 

You (hall be true to one another; that is to fay, to every 
Mafon of the Craft of Mafonry , that be Mafons allowed : you 
(hall do unto them as you would they (hould do unto you. 

That you (hall keep all the Councils of your Fellows truly* 
be it in Lodge or in Chamber, and all other Councils that 
ought to be kept by Way of Brotherhood. 

No Mafon (hall be a Thief, or Thief’s Fellow, or conceal 
any fuch unjuft Adion, fo far has he may will or know. 

You (hall be true each unto other, and to the Lord or Ma- 
tter that you ferve, and truly to fee unto his Profit and his 
Advantage. 

You fhall call Mafons your Fellows or Brothers; and no 
foul Name. 

You fhall not take a Brother or Fellow’s Wife in Villainy; 
nor defire ungodly his Daughter, nor his Servant; nor put him 
to any Difworfhip. 

That 

[93 

That you pay truly for your Meat and Drink, where you 
go to Board. 

You (hall do no Villainy, whereby the Craft may be (ten- 
dered. 

Thefe are the true Charges that belong to every Mafon to 
keep, both Mafters and Fellows. 

Here follows other Charges made for the Ufe of the 
Antient Masons. 

Firtt, That no Matter or Fellow (hall take upon him 
any Lord’s Work, nor any other Man’s Work, unlefs he 
know himfelf able and fufficient of Skill and Ability to per- 
form the fame, fo that the Craft have no Slander nor Dif- 
worftip thereby, but that the Lord may be well and truly 
ferved. 

That no Matter take no Work, but that he take it reafon- 
able; fo that the Lord may be well ferved with his own Good, 
and the Matter to live honeftly and to pay his Fellows. 

That no Matter nor Fellow (hall fupplant any other of their 
Work in hand ; or elfe ftand Matter of the Lord’s Work ; he 
(hall not put him out, except he be incapable to finifh the 
fame. 

That no Matter or Fellow take an Apprentice but for the 
Term of Seven Years, and that the Apprentice be able of Birth, 
that is to fay, free born, and whole of Limbs as a Man ought 
to be. 

That no Matter or Fellow take no Allowance from any to 
be made Mafons> without the Aflent and Council of his Fel- 
lows, and that he take him for no lefs Term than five or feven 
Years ; and, that he who is to be made a Mafon , be able in all 
Manner of Degrees, that is to fay, free born, come of good 
Kindred, true, and no Bondman; and alfo, that he have his 
right Limbs as a Man ought to have. 

That no Mafon take any Apprentice unlefs he have fufficient 
Occupation to fet him pn, or to fet three of his Fellows, or two 
-of them at the leaft on Work. 

That no Matter nor Fellow (hall tabt no Man’s Work to 
Tafk, that was defirous to go a Journey. 

That every Matter (hall pay to his Fellow but as they de- 
ferve, fo that he be not deceived by falfe Workmen. 

That no Mafon (lander another behind his Back, to make 
him lofe his good Name, or his wordly Goods. 

C That 

I 1 

That no Fellow within the Lodge, or without, mifanfwer 
another ungodly or reproachfully, without a reafonable Caufip. 

That every Mafon fliall reverence his Elder, and put him to 
Worfhip. 

That no Mafon (ball be a common Player at Hazard, or at 
Dice, or at any other unlawful Plays, whereby the Craft may 
be (landered. 

That no Mafon fhall ufe Letchery, nor be a Pander, H>r 
Bawd, & c. whereby the Craft may be flandered. 

That no Fellow go into the Town in the Night Time, ex- 
cept he have a Fellow with him that ifiay bear him Witnefs 
that he was in honeft Company. 

That every Mafter and Fellow, that have trefpafled againft 
the Craft, fliall ftand to the Award of the Matters and Fellows, 
to make them accorded if they can ; and if they may not accord 
them, then to go to the common Law* 

That no Mafter or Fellow, Make, Mould, Square, nor 
Rule, to no Leyer, nor fet no Leyer within the Lodge, nor 
without, to hew nor mould Stones. 

That every Mafon receive and cherifli ftrange Fellows, 
when they come from other Countries, and fet them to Work, 
if they will as the Manner is ; that is to fay, if they have mould 
Stones in their Place, or elfe he (hall refrefh him with Money 
unto the next Lodge. 

That every Mafon fhall truly ferve the Lord for his Pay, 
and every Mafter truly to make an End of bis Work, be it 
Tafk or Journey, if he have his Demand, and all that be 
ought to have. 

A . D. 1070. The Norman Princes gave great Encourage- 
ment to the Craft, as well as their Saxon and Danijh Predecef- 
fors; and particulary Gundulph Biftiop of Rochejier , and Roger 
de Montgomery Earl of Shrewjbury, and Arundel , who, about 
the Year 1090, built Wejlminjler-Hall , which was 270 Feet 
/ in length, and 74 broad. 

A . D, 1114. During the Reign of King Stephen , Mafons 
were much employed, and Gilbert de Clare , Marquis of ivw- 
broke, was their Grand Majler^ who built the Chapel of St* 
Stephen in the Palace at Wejlminjler , which is at this Time the 
Houfe of Commons; and in the Year 1357* King Edward 
the Thirds became their Patron; and all their Charges were 
new-modelled and revifed, as we are informed by an old Re* 
cord ; which fays, “ In the glorious Reign of King Edward 
<c the Third, when Lodges were many and frequent, the 
- w Grand'Ma/ler , with bis Wardens at the Head of the Grand- 

44 Lodge, 

I » ’] . 

, «« Lodge, with the Confent of the Lprds of the Realm, then 

generally Free-Mafons , ordained : 

* 44 I. That for the future, at the Making or Admiffion of a 
44 Brother, the Conftitutions and proper Charges and Moni- 
44 tions fliould be read by the Matter or Warden : 

44 II. That Mafter-Mafons or Matters of Work, {hall be 
44 examined, if they be able of Cunning to ferve their refpec- 
44 tive Lords, as well the Higheft as theLoweft, to the Ho- 
, 4C our and Worfhip of theaforefaid Art, and to the Profit of 
44 of their Lords ; for they be their Lords that employ them, 
44 and pay them for their Service and Travel : 

44 III. That when the Matter and Wardens meet in a 
44 Lodge, the Sheriff, if need be, or the Mayor or Aldermen, 
44 if a Brother, where the Chapter or Congregation is held, 
44 * (hall be made Fellow and Sociate to the Matter, in help of 
44 him againft Rebels, and for up-bearing the Rights of the 
44 Realm : 

44 IV. That Entered ’Prentices at their Making {hall be 
44 charged not to be Thieves, nor Thieves Maintained. 
44 That the Fellow-Crafts {hall travel honeftly for their Pay, 
44 and love their Fellows as themfelves, and that all (hall be 
44 true to the King of England* to the Realm, and to the Lodge : 

44 V. That if any of the Fraternity* (hall be fradious, 
44 mutinous, or difobedient to the Grand- Majler's Orders, 
44 and after proper Admonitions,* fhould perfift in his Rebellion, 
* 44 then the Lodge {hall determine againft him, that he (hall 
44 forfwear, or renounce his Mafonry , and (hall no more be 
44 of the Craft ; the which if he prefume to do, he (hall be 
44 prifoned ’till his Grace be Granted him and iffued : For this 
44 Caufe, principally, have thefe Congregations been ordained, 
44 that as well the Loweft as the Higheft fliould be well and 
44 truly ferved in this Art. Amen. Sp mote it be.” 

Richard II. coming to the Throne of his Grandfather, 
be employed William of Wickham , Btfhop of Whinchejler, then 
their Grand-Matter, to rebuild Wejlminjler-Hall in the Man- 
ner it now ftands ; and alfo New-College at Oxford ; but Ri- 
•chard' being murdered, Henry IV. afeended the* Throne, and 
appointed Thomas fitz- Allen* Earl of Surry , Grand-Mafter* 
who was the Founder of Battle- Abbey* and Fother ingay ; and in 
.this Reign Mafonry was in a flourifliing State; but foon after, 
iijj the Minority of Henry VI. A. D. 1425, the Commons of 
England began ta difturb their Repofe; and in the third Year 
of his Reign the following Claufe was made in an A£t. 

44 Whereas by the yearly Congregations and Confederacies 
44 made by the Mafom in their General Affembliqs, the good 

C z 44 Courfe 

[ 12 ] 

44 Courfc and Effeft of the Statutes of Labourers be openly 
44 violated and broken, in Subverfion of the Law, and to 
44 the great Damage of all the Common^ : Our Sovereign 
44 Lord the King, willing in this Cafe to provide a Remedy, 
44 by the Advice and Confent aforefaid, and at the fpecial Re- 
44 queft of the Commons, hath ordained and eftabliflied, that 
44 fuch Chapters and Congregations fhalj not be hefeafter hold* 
44 en ; and if any fuch be made, they that caufe fuch Chap- 
44 ters and Congregations to be holden, and thereof convicted, 
44 it fhall be adjudged Felony: and that the other Mafons , 
44 who come to fuch Chapters and Congregations, be punifhed 
44 by Prifonmentof their Bodies, and make Fine and Ranfom 
44 at the King’s Will/' 

But this menancing Aft was never put in Force, nor were 
the Mafons in the leaft intimidated from holding their Affem- 
bli :s and Communications ; nor did they ever contrive to get it 
repealed, as they did not prefume to meddle with State-Affairs ; 
and by their own Laws they were forbid to engage in any Com- 
binations. 7 'bough the Craft fuffered greatly by the bloody 
Wars between the Houfes of York and Lancajler s ’till the 
Union of the two Kingdoms, when true Mafonry began again 
to dawn in this Part of the World, notwithftanding Queen 
Elizabeth was no Encourager of the Study of Arcbitediure. 
This Princefs having been told that Mafons had Secrets that 
they would not difcover, began to be jealous of their Aflem- 
blies ; and, on St. John 9 s Day, A, Z>. J561, fent an armed 
Force to drfiolve their annual Communication. But Sir Thomas 
Sackville , then Grand- Majier^ fent feveral of the Queen’s 
great Officers, who Were Mafons , who making honourable 
Report of the Craft to her Majefty, (he ever after eftecmed 
them, and (hewed them many Royal Aftsof her Favour. 

When fames J. afcended the Throne Mafonry flouriOied 
more than it had ever done before, and the famous Inigo Jones 
being Grand Mafier^ thebeft Craftfmen from all Parts came to 
him, and he allowed them very good Wages, and ajfo held the 
Quarterly Communication of the Grand-Lodge , and the Annu- 
al General Aflembly on St. Johris Day. He was annually re- 
chofen, ’till the Year i6j8 \ when William Earl of Pembroke 
was chofe, and being approved of by the King, Inigo Jones 
was appointed Deputy Grand-Mafter \ and many eminent, 
learned, and worthy Men were admitted Brethren ; but un- 
happily for the Craft, the Civil War* brpke out, when tho 
Mafons met very feldono* , 

After the Restoration, Charles II. giving himfelf entirely up 
to his Pleafures (though he had been made a Mafin Abroad) 

neglected 

t «3 ] 

'iieglefied the Society very much ; however, in the Year i6dj, 
Henry Jermyn, Earl of St. Albans, was defied Grand- Mafter, 
•Sir John Denham , Deputy Grand- Mafter, Sir Chriftopher Wren , 
and Mr. John Webb, Grand- Wardens, who made the following 
{Regulations, viz . 

I. That no Perfori of what Degree foever be accepted a 
.Free-Mafon, ^nlefs in a regular Lodge, whereof one to be a 
Mafter or a Warden, in that Divifion where fuch Lodge is 
kept, and another to be a Craftfman in Mafonry. 

II. That no Perfon hereafter be accepted but fuch as, are 
able of Body, honeft in Parentage, of good Reputation, and 
an Obferver of ihe Laws of the Land. 

, III. I hat no Perfon, who (hall be accepted a Free-Mafon* 
(ball be admitted into any Lodge, until he has brought a Cer- 
tificate of the Time and Place of his Acceptation, from the 
Mailer of the Limit where he was made, and the Lodge kept. 
And the Mafte> (hall enrol the fame in Parchment, and (hall 
give an Account of fuch Acceptations at every General Affem- 
bly. 

IV. That every Perfon, who is now a Free-Mafon, (hall 
bring to the Mafter a Note of the Time of his Acceptation, to 
the end that it may be enrolled in fuch Priority of Place as the 
.Brother deferves ; and that the whole Company and Fellows 
may the better know each other. 

V. That, for the Future, the faid Fraternity of Free-Ma - 
Jons (hall be regulated and governed by one Grand-Mafter, and 
as many Wardens as the (aid Society (hall think fit to appoint 
at every General Aflembly. 

VI. That no Perfon (hall be accepted, unlefs he be twenty- 
one Years old or upwards. 

A. D. 1666, Thomas Savage , Earl Rivers, fucceeded the 
Earl of St. Alban 9 s as Grand- Majier $ and in this Year the 
greateft Part of the City of London was confumed by Fire, fo 
that the Free-Mafom were encouraged to rebuild it agaiq, and 
the Deputy Grand- Majier, Sir Chriftopher Wren, formed a 
noble Defign, in order to render it the moil regular aud fplen- 
did City in the World; but his Defign in general proved abor- 
tive by the Obftinacy of fome private Perfons, who would not 
be perfwaded to part with their Properties \ though he gave us 
an elegant Specimen of his Workmanlhip, in the re-building 
St. Fours. 

A. D. 1674, George Vi liters, Duke of Buckingham, be- 
came Grand- Mafter ; and was fucceeded, in 1679, by Henry 

Bennet , 

1 H 1 

Eettiet, Earl of Arlington, who, being much engaged in State 
Affairs, could hot attend to the Welfare of the Craft} though, 
dhring his Grand- Mafterjbip, many Perfons of the hrft Dif- 
tinftibn were admitted^ 

A . D. 1685, upon the Death of the Earl of Arlington , the 
Lodges met and chofe Sir Chriftopher Wren, Grand-Mafter ; 
but at this Time particular Lodges were chiefly occafional $ Sir 
Robert Clayton had an occafional Lodge of Mailers who met at 
St. Thomas' s-Hofpital in 1673. 

King William being privately made a Mafon , approved of 
the Choice of Sir Chriftopher Wren , and greatly promoted the 
Interefts of the Craft ; he likewise appointed the Palace of 
Greenwich to be an Hofpital for old and difabled Seamen, and 
ordered it to be fimmed after Inigo Jones ’6 old Defign, 
A. D. 1695. 

The fame Year, Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox was 
rhofen Gr and- M after, at the Annual Aflembly in London , and 
approved of by King William ; and Sir Chriftopher Wren a&ed 
as his Deputy; but W&$ again made Grand-Mafter in 1698* 

In the Begining of Queen Anne's Reign Mafonry was ra- 
ther negle&ed, which was oecafioned through the Carelefsnefs 
of federal Matters and Wardens, in not chufing a Grand- 
Mafter for fome Years, Sir Chriftopher being by Age and bodily 
Infirmhies rendered incapable of prefid ing over them. But 
after the Rebellion in the Year 1715, the Matters and War- 
dens of the Lodges in London , viz. at the Goofe and Gridiron , 
St. Pauls Church-yard ; the Crown, in Parker's- Lane, Drury - 
Lane*, the Apple-Tree in Charles- Street, Covent-Garden \ the 
Rummer , Channel- Row, Weftminfter, held a Quarterly Com- 
munication, in order to confider of a proper Perfon to prefide 
over them; and on St. John's Day, 1717, at their Annual Feaft 
chofe the oldeft Mafter Mafon from among themfelves, which 
was Mr. Anthony Sayer, who was accordingly inftalled at the 
Goofe and Gridiron. 

A* D. 1718, George Payne, Efq. was elefted in the room of 
Mr. Sayer ; and in the following Year John Theopbilus Defagu- 
tiers, F. R. S. was appointed; and after him, in 1720, Mr. 
George Payne was re-ele&ed. The Brotherhood were nowre- 
quefted to bring to the Grand-Lodge any antient Writings or 
Records, they might have in their Pofleffion that refpefted 
Mafonry , and they' were revifed and ordered to be carefully 
tranfcribed for the Ufe of the Lodges then in Being; and the 
Grand- Ma ier had the Power given him of appointing hisown 
Deputy Gr ind, and alfo his Grand-Wardens, agreeable to anti- 
ent Cuftom* 

A.D. 

r *5 j 

A.D. 1721, at the Grand-Lodge held in due land ample 
Form on Lady-day 1720, the Craft had the Satisfaction of feeing 
Mafonry flourtfh in a moft extraordinary Degree ; and the then 
Grand- Mafter Payne propofed the moft Noble John Montague , 
Duke of Montague , for his Succeilor, who was accordingly 
eleCted on the twenty-fourth of June y 172 I, at the J$>ueens- 
ArmSy in St. Paul's Church-yardy .when feveral noble and emi- 
nent Perfonages were admitted, and among the reft the prefent 
Earf of Chefterjield. Dr* Defaguliers (poke an eloquent Ora- 
tion in Praife of the Craft ; and they then marched in Proceffion? 
to Stationer 9 s-Hall) where a grand Entertainment was pro* 
Tided ; and the whole was conducted with great brotherly Love 
and Decorum. His Grace the Duke of Montague caufed fe- 
veral Communications to beheld, in all which he endeavoured 
to encourage the Craft : and their Conftitutions and Laws were 
collected into one Body by his Order, and printed for the Edi- 
fication of future Lodges. 

A* D. 1722, Philip Wharton y Duke of Wharton , was elect- 
ed Grand- Mafter $ his Grace was very aCtive in vifiting the 
old Lodges, and creating new ones ; and many Clergymen* 
Gentlemen and Merchants gained Admiffion into this honour- 
able Fraternity. And from this Time to the prefent, the 
Craft has been honoured by having the firft of our Nobility at 
its Head ; but in Order to gratify our Readers, who. may 
perhaps be curious to know their Names, we fhall infert them, 
in their Order, viz . 

Francis Scott y Earl of Dalkeith « 

Charles Lenox y Duke of Rhhmondy LenoXy and Aubigny * 

• J* Hamiltony Lord Paifley. > 

■ William O Brien r Earl of Incbiquhu 

Henry Hare y Lord Qolraine. : 

James Kingy Lord Kingfton. 

Thomas Howard , Duke of NorfoIL 

T. Cokey Lord Lovell : . 

Anthony Brown > Lord Vifcount Montacute* 

James Lyon y Earl of Strathmore • • ; . . 

John Lindfayy Earl of Craufurd. 

' Thomas Thynney Lord Vifcount Weymouth. ■ , 

1 John Campbell , Earl of Loudoun • 

Edward Blighy Earl of DarnBy. 

H. Bridges, Marquis of Carnarvon . 

Robert Raymond , Lord Raymond. 

John Keith, Earl of Kin tore. 

? . Douglasy Earl of Morton% 

ohn Ward , Lord Ward. Thorra? 

t 16 J 

Thomas Lyon , Earl of Strathmore . 

James Cranjloun , Lord Cranjioun . 
William Byron , Lord Byron. 

John Proby y Lord CarysforU 
James Bridges , EaH of Carnavan. 
Sholto y Charles Douglas , Lord Aberdour • 
/^. Shirley , Lord Ferrers . 

By the above noble Lift of Grand Majlers y fuch as no Age* 
Society or Nation could ever boaft to have ruled over them* 
Mafonry has been fixed on the folid Balls it now Hands. We 
have indeed omitted to mention the Names of all the worthy 
Deputy Grand Majlers y Grand Wardens and Secretaries , as it 
would only ferve to fwell out our Work beyond the Limit? 
which we intended to affign it ; for which Reafon, we (hall 
haften to give an Account of other Matters, more immediately 
relative to this worthy Craft. 

In the next Place, before we proceed to (hew our Readers the 
Manner of initiating a Perfon into the firft Branch of Mafonry ^ 
it will be neceflary to inform him of the proper Enquiries which 
ought to be made into the Chara&er of every Candidate wha 
defires to become a Member of this Honourable Fraternity; 
and this we (hall do in the Words of a worthy Brother, via, 
Mr. Edward Oakley , at a Lodge held at the Carpenter's Arms $ 
Silver-Street , Golden- Square y Dee. 31, 1728. 

c I muft now (fays he, at the Conclufion of his Speech) 
4 in the ftri&eft Manner, charge you to be careful and dili- 
4 gent to'enquire into the Character of fuch Perfons who (ball 
4 interceed to be admitted of this Honourable Fraternity : I 
4 therefore,, according to. my Duty, forewarn you to admit, or 
4 even to recommend to be initiated Mafons y fuch as are Wine 
4 Bibbers or Drunkards, witty Punfters on Religion of Poli- 
4 ticks, Tale-Bearers or Liars; litigious, quarrelfome, irreli- 
4 gious or profane Perfons ; lewd Songfters, Perfons illiterate, 
4 and of mean Capacities ; and efpecially beware of fuch who 
4 defire to gain Admittance with a felfijh View of Gain to them- 
4 (elves ; all which Principles and Practices tend to the Deftruc- 
4 tion of Morality, a Burden to Civil Government, notorioufly 
4 fcandalous, and entirely repugnant to the facred Order and 
4 Conftitutions of Free and Accepted Mafons. 44 And if any 
44 fuch have already crept in amongft us, through the Negligence 
44 or Ignorance of the Watchmen upon the Walls, hard is our 
44 Lot indeed — For mod dangerous arc a Man’s Enemies, when 
44 they are of his own Houfe. 

“ Tbcfe, 

[ I? ) 

♦ 4 Thefe, my deareft Brethren, are Thieves and Robbers, and 
44 never entered into the Sheep-Fbld by the Door, but climbed 
44 up fome other Way : Thefe make their Belly their God, and 
44 their little fordid Intereft their Idol Thefe follow the 
44 Brethren as the Multitude did our great Lord for the Loaves 
44 and Fillies; and, like them, would cry Hofanna To-day, 
44 and To-morrow Crucify , Crucify 

44 Let thefe be ever excluded the Congregation of the Faith- 
44 ful ; let their Names be erazed out of the Book M. and buri- 
44 ed in eternal Oblivion.” 

4 Such Perfons whom you honour with the moft antient and 
€ truly valuable Badge and Dignity of a Free and Accepted 
4 Mafon , their Character and Behaviour ought to be fuch, aj 
4 (hall not be liable to bring any Refle&ion on the Craft/ 

Another worthy Brother, the Rev. Mr. Entick , advifes hi$ 
Brethren to fuffer thofe only who are fober and temperate, to 
be admitted ; 44 for,” fays he, 44 of much Wine or ftrong 
44 Drink cometh Contention, Brawling, and fometimes Blows 
44 and Bloodflied : And to prevent Difcord and Deformity iit 
44 your Lodge, and to obviate all Oppofition to Mafonry from 
44 without ; beware of Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing. - Let us 
44 never be prevailed upon, by any private or felfifh Confidera- 
44 tion, to admit an unworthy Perfon to our Secrets and well- 
44 governed Society ; nor to permit a reprobate falfe Brother to 
44 Continue amongft us, and to bring a bad Report upon th$ 
44 Craft*” 

From the Cautions we have now*recited, may be perceived, 
what kind of Men Free Mafons ought to be ; and this alone 
one would think fufficient to filence the Clamour of the Envi- 
ous and Ill-natured, againft our Antient and truly Honourable 
Society. But fuch is the prefent flourifliing State of Mafonry , 
that nothing can harm us if we are Followers of that which is 
good, and adorn our Lives and Conventions with the Beauty of 
Holinefs ; if we promote Virtue, difcourage Vice, and purfue 
with Diligence and Honefty the different Callings and Ways of 
Life, in which by the Providence of God, we are placed. 

This being the State and Condition of our Crafty we (hall * 
purfue our Defign, and endeavour tp give a clear and perfect 
Account of what further relates to the Order ; and in the firfl: 
Place (how you the Manner of Opening a Lodge , each Night of 
Meeting , (according to the mo^ft approved and regular Method.) 
which fignifies, that it is lawful to fpeak freely among one ano- 
ther of the Secrets of Mafonry . 

P The 

f 18 3 

tfhe Ceremony of opening a Lodge , and fet ting the Men 
. to Work . 

Mafler to the D ROTHER, what is the chief Care of 
fuqior Deacon . ^ a Mafon ? 

Anf To fee that his Lodge is tyled. 

Maf Pray do your Duty, 

£ Junior Deacon knocks at the Door three Times 5 and the J Tyler on the other 
Side anfwers by Three Knocks : On which the Junior Deacon fays to the Matter J 

Jun . Deacon . Right Worihipful, the Lodge is tyled. > 
Maf Pray where, is the Junior Deacon’s Place in th$ 
Lodge? • 

Anf. At the Back of the Senior Warden \ or at his Right 
Hand, if he permits. 

Maf. Your Bufinefs there ? 

Anf To carry Meflages from the Senior to the Junior War-< 
den, that they may be difperfed round the Lodge. 

Majier to the Senior Deacon . Pray where is the Senior Dea- 
con’s Place in the Lodge * ? , 

Sen. Deacon's Anf At the Back of the Mafterj or at hif 
Right Hand, if he permits. .> 

t Maf Your Bufinefs there. Brother? , 

Anf To carry Meflages from the Mafter to the Senior, 
Warden. , 

Maf The Junior Warden’s Place in the Lodge ? 

Anf In the South. • 

Maf Why in the South Brother ? 

fun. Wardens Anf The better to obferve the Sun at high 
Meridian, to call the Men off from Work to Refrelhment, 
and to fee that they come on in due Time, that the Mafter 
may have Pleafure and Profit thereby, 

Maf Pray where is the Senior Warden’s Place in the 
Lodge ? 

Anf In the Weft, Right Worihipful. 

Maf to the Sen. Warden. Your Bufinefs there. Brother? 

Sen . Wardens Anf As the Sun fets in the Weft to clofe the 
Day, fo the Senior Warden ftands in the Weft to clofe the 
Lodge, to pay the Men their Wages, and difinifs them from 
their Labour, 

1 A Ccntincl placed at the Lodge-Door, to give the Sign when anyone begs Ad- 
mittance, -that the Wardens may examine hixnj he is a Member and has a Salary for 
his Attendance, 

r *9 i 

Maf The Matter’s Place in the Lodge l 

Sen. Warden's Anf. In the Eaft. 1 

Maf His Bufinefs there. Brother? 

Sen . Warden s Anf As the Sun tifes in the Eaft to open the 
Day, fo the Matter ftands in the Eaft to open his Lodge, and 
fet his men to Work. 

[The Matter taking oft* his Hat, declares the Lodge open by faying :] 

Maf This Lodge is open, in the Name of Holy St. John* 
forbidding all Curling, Swearing, or Whifpering, and all 
profane Difcourfe whatever, under no lefs Penalty than what 
the Majority fliall think proper. 

After this he puts on his Hat, and gives three Strokes on 
the Table with a fmall wooden Mallet, the reft of the Bre- 
thren being uncovered. 

The Queftion being afked by the Matter, if any Perfon is in 
Waiting to be made, and being anfwered in the affirmative by 
one of the Company who had previoufly recommended Some- 
body tfs a proper Perfon to be admitted a Brother; the Senior 
v and Junior Warden, and an Affiitant or two, are ordered to 
go out into the Room where he is waiting, and to prepare 
him for Admiflion, in the following manner : 

They a(k him, if it is his own Defire and Choice to be made 
a Free-Mafon , and alfo his Name, Profeffion, and Place of A- 
bode; to which he anfwers ; then they uncover his Right 
Knee by taking off his Garter, and unbuckling his Left Shoe, 
flip the Heel down ; or, in forrfe Lodges, put on a Slipper. 
When this is done, his Shoe and Knee Buckles, Silver Buttons, 
Rings, Breeches Buckle, (if he has one) and the Money in his 
Pockets is taken from him ; (and in fome Lodges they take the 
Buttons from the Coat, and all the Lace off ; but this is not the 
general Cuftom,) he then is blinded by a Handkerchief or two 
tyed over his Eyes, and in this Situation is led into the Room ad- 
joining to the Lodge, where the Tyler ftands at the Door. 

While the Wardens are doing this the Brethren in the Lodge 
put every Thing in Order for his Reception ; and the Shape 
or Figure of a Lodge, i« very curioufly drawn with Chalk, 
Stone Blue and Charcoal intermixed; or with red and white 
Tape, fattened with little Nails, on the Floor,* at one End 
of the Room. At the Eaft End of this Drawing (for it ought 
to be due Eaft and Weft) ip placed an Arm-Chair, or fmall 
Table or Stool, behind which the Mafter ftands, properly 

* See the Frontifpiece to this Work, which is the exa<!ft Shape of the Drawing, 
though different Lodges vary as to the ornamental Part of it $ as that depjnos cn the 
Fancy of the Perfon who draws it. 

cloath^d 5 

> 0<3 

[ 20 ] 

cloathed ; on the Seat of the Chair, or on the Table, Is laid the 
Holy-BibIe y opened, at the Gofpel of St* John\ the other 
Officers, and all the Brethren arranging themfelves accord- 
ing to their Degree and Seniority ; the Room is grandly il- 
luminated, and three large lighted Candles, in elegant carved 
Candlefticks, are put in a triangular Form one on each Side 
the Bible, and the other at the Bottom ; and in many Lodges 
fome powdered Rozin mixed with fhining Sand, is ftrewed on 
the Floor. 

The Candidate being in waiting at the Outfide blindfold, 
the Wardens, or Cortdu&ors give three Diftindt Knocks at 
the Door of the Lodge, and the Matter anfwers on the Infide 
with three Strokes, and fays, Who comes there ?” The 
Candidate then repeats after aPerfon who prompts him, One 
who begs to be received into the Fellowfhip of this Worfliip- 
ful Lodge, as many Brothers and Fellows have done before 
me.” On faying this, the Door is opened, and he is taken 
Hold of by the right and left Arm by the Wardens, and led 
three Times round the Room, being blindfold, arid brought 
tip to the Drawing on the Floor prepared as- before men- 
tioned for the Making, all the Brethren placing themfelves 
on the Sides in Order, properly cloathed with white Aprons* 
Gloves* &c. and the different Officers wearing round their 
7 Necks the Emblems of their Rank. 

The Matter taking his Place at the Upper End of the 
Drawing, and the Candidate Handing at the Lower End 
fronting him, clofe to the Firft Step, called the Firft Degree, 
or Entered Apprentice’s Step, the Bible being placed before 
the Matter in a large Chair, or on a finall Table, opened at 
the Gofpel of St . John, the Matter fays, “ Is it of your own 
Free Will and Choice, that you defire to become a MafonV * 
and, upon his anfwering “ It is;” the Matter fays Let him 
« fee the Light,” and the Junior Warden immediately unties 
the Handkerchief that has all along blinded him. 

He is then (hewn- how to advance, and place his Feet at 
three Steps properly fronting the Chair or Table in which the 
Bible is laid, and a Pair of Compaffes are placed againft his 
naked left Breaft, which he holds with his left Hand : his 
right Knee being bare, he kneels on a little Stool placed on 
purpofe, and the Shoe of his' left Foot is flipped down, or 
rather a Slipper is placed on his left Foot ; and in this Pofturs 
one of the Wardens addreffes him to the following Purport : 

That he is now entering into a refpe&able Society ; that ic 
contains nothing contrary to Law, Religion, or Morality ; nor 
is there any Thing io it uwnftftent with the Allegiance due 

[ 21 ] 

tohisMajefty, ox Mqfier % and then the Worflilpful Granfc 
Majier^ fays, (the Compares being held to the hakecT left 
Breaft of the Perfon to be made, and his right Hand laid on 
the Bible) 44 Will you promife never to difclofe, in any Man- 
ner whatever, the Secrets of Pree-Mafonry y except to a Bro- 
ther at the Lodge, and in the Prefence of the Majier i ft and, on 
his anfwering, 44 I will he repeats the following Oath after 
the Matter, which is called The Entered apprentice’s Oath : 

44 L G. F . of my own Free Will and Accord, and in the 
44 Prefence of Almighty God y * and this Right Worfhipful 
44 Lodge, dedicated to St John y do hereby and herein moil 
44 folemnly and fincerely fwear, that I will always hale, con- 
44 ceal, and never reveal any of the Secrets or Myfteries of 
44 Free-Mafonry y that £ball be delivered to me now, or at any 
44 Time hereafter, except it beto^true and lawful Brother \ or 
44 in a juft and lawful Lodge of Brothers and Fellows, him or 
i4 them whom I {hall find tobefuch, after juft Trial anddueExa- 
€t mination. — I furthermore do fwear, that I will not write it, 
44 3 1 * cut it, flint it, mark it, ftain or engrave it, or caufc 
C4 fo to be done, upon any Thing moveable or immoveable, un- 
44 der the Canopy of Heaven, whereby it may become legible or 
44 intelligible, or the lead Appearance of the Character of a 
44 Letter, whereby the fecret Art may be unlawfully obtained. 
44 All this I fwear, with a ftrong and fteady Refolution to ^er- 
44 form the fame, without any Hefitation, mental Refervation, 
44 or Self Evafion of Mind in me whatsoever, under no lefs 
44 Penalty than to have my Throat cut acrofs, my Tongue 
44 torn out by the Root, and that to be buried in the Sands of 
44 the Sea, at Low Water Mark, a Cable’s Length from the 
44 Shore, where the Tide ebbs and flows twice in Twenty- 
44 four Hours. So help me God and keep me ftedfaft in this 
4 4 my Entered Apprentice’s Obligation.” [He kijfes the Book.] 

Among the Antient Free-Mafons they ufe a Prayer, which is 
inferted in the Le&ure, but the Modern Mafons omit it, and, 
as foon as the above Obligation is finiflied, the new-mad?; 
Member is taught tht'Sign 9 Grip, and Pafs-word of an En- 
tered Apprentice , as follows : 

The Sign is by drawing your Right Hand acrofs edgeways % 
as the Penalty of his Obligation is, that an Entered Appren- 
tice would fooncr have his Throat cut, than difcover the Secrets 
of Mafonry . 

* The Form of the Oath differs in many Lodges, though this is the ftri&eft in Ufe $ 
and in fome Societies, inftead of faying, “In the Presence of Almighty (Sod,** It 
jttrns tbps, “J j>rwniff feffop CfMt Architect of th* Vniyerfc/’ 

DigitteeckbyX-jOO - Ic 

1 

t *2 ) 

The Grip , is by taking the Warden or a Brother with your 
Right Hand, and preffipg hard with your Thumb-nail upon 
the firft Joiht of the Fore Finger of his Right Hand. 

The word is by whifpering in his Ear, J ACHIN'. 

The Ceremony being now ended, he is defired to pay the 
ufual Fees of being made; which offering to do by putting his 
v Hand into his Pocket, he finds no Money; and this generally 
caufes a Laugh among the Brethren, as all Kind of Metal had 
been taken from him before he was admited into the Room ; 
but being now reftored, he difcharges his Fees, and an Apron 
being brought him (for which he pays a Shilling,) and a Lift of 
the Lodges, he is congratulated by his Brethren; but before 
he fits down a Mop and Pail is brought, and he is told he muft 
wafh out the Drawing on the Floor , with which he muft com- 
ply, to the no fmall Diverfion of the Company. In fome 
Lodges, in order, to prevent this difagreeable Part of the Cere- 
mony, they make Ufe of red Tape and Nails to form the Draw- 
ing or Figure of the Lodge, which prevents any Mark or Stain 
on the Floor, and is certainly preferable to that of Chalk. 

They now begin to take their Seats at the Table, according 
to, their Degree, and the new Member is placed, for that 
Night only, on the Right Hand of the Matter ; and the Table? 
being plentifully Sored with Wine, Punch, Tobacco, Pipes,’ 
&c. the Matter drinks to the new-made Mafon> and is joined 
by the Company, all Handing up, except the new Brother, 
who fits; and the Warden inftru&s him how to return the 
Compliment in proper Form. Having filled a Bumper, he 
fays as follows : “ To the Right Worfhipful the Majler , the 
Senior and Junior Wardens, and the reft of the Officers and 
Members of this Lodge, wifhing them Succeft in all their pub^ 
lie and private Undertakings; to Mafonry in general, and this 
Lodge in particular, craving your Affiftance.” They anfwe'r,' 
We will affift you ;” he then drinks his Glafs ; throws it out 
ftrait from his Mouth, and brings it back three Times, all the’ 
Company keeping the fame Motion with their empty Glafies, 
and then fet them all down together at once on the Table, 
and all clapping the Hand three Times, keeping due Time,, 
and flopping a little between every three Times, This is 
termed Firing among them. 

After they|have regaled themfelves a little Time, the Wor- 
fhipful Mafter calls to order, and fays, they muft proceed to 
inftru& their new Brother in wbat further belongs to the Crafty 
which is by Way of Catechifm, orLe&ure; the Mafter afk- 
ing theQueftions, and the Members, properly feated, making 
the Anfwers one after the other ; this is termed Working ; 

and 

> ( 

C 23 ] 

and when It comes to any Member’s Turn to anfvirer who 
perhaps is not properly qualified, by not having a good Me- 

* f tS T 3 p c,a PP i f 1 ghis Right Hand on his Left 
Breaft, makes a low Bow ; which is confidered as an Excufe 
and it paffes on to the next Perfon on his Left Hand. * 

The LeEiure ufed after the Making an Entered Apprentice 
as delivered in the Itf Lodges , though in fome they do 
not ufe one Half of it . y ; 

. £ ROT HER, is there any Thing between you 

Anf. There is. Right Worfliipful. 

4*j What is it. Brother ? . 

A* A Secret. 

What is that Secret, Biother? ' 

A* Mafonry . 

Then I prefume you are a Mafon ? , 

lovw* I am fo taken and accepted amongft Brothers, and Fel- 

Q ^Jiat ^ ort of Ma « ought a Mafon to be f 
A. A Man born of a Free Woman. 

f: 1™%' h”.T° " prepa,e<l “ be “* * 

- gK Where was you next prepared ? 

A. In a Room near to the Lodge. 

4L- How was you prepared Brother? 

A. I was neither haked nor doathed: barefoot nor fW . 
deprived of all Metal ; hoodwinked, with a Cable of Tow 
about my Neck, when I was led to the Door of the Lodoe 
theHand of a Friend, whom I afterwards found to be aBrS 

f d ,° 7 °u know it to be a Door, being blinded ? 
AdmitfaLe S 3 ^ and a « Entrance or 

How got you Admittance ? 

A. By Three Knocks. 

What was faid to you within ? 

A- Who comes there. 

- Q What Anfwer did you make, Brother? 

. vJne who begs to have and receive Parf nf r ' + 

Ji. Right Woribipful Lodge, ded^StVSt 4i! B '” el!, ° ( 

Bro ' he i? “one beS“ t? 7 “ "“r 

-O By what Means did you expect to obtain it i 

A . By 

L 24 ] 

A . By Being Free Born and well reported. 

What waS faid to you then? 

J. Enter. 

ifj. How did you enter, and upon what? 

A* Upon the Point of a Sword or Spear, or fome fharp In- 
firument, prefented to my naked Left Breaft. 

What was faid to you then ? 

Ay I was a(ked if I fejt any Thing. 

[ jP. What was your Anfwer? 

A. I did. 

You have told me the Manner of your being received, 
pray who received you ? 

A. The Junior Warden. 

How did he difpofe of you ? 

A • He delivered me to the Mafler, who ordered me to kneel 
down, when the following Prayer was made*. 

44 Lord God, thou great and univerfal Mafon of the 
44 World, and firft Builder of Man, as it were a Temple ; 
44 be with us, O Lord , as thou haft promifed, when to or three 
44 are gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt be in the Midft 
44 of them: Be with us, O Lord , and blefs all our Undertake 
44 irigs, and grant that this our Friend may become a faithful 
• 4 Brother. Let Grace and Peace be multiplied unto him, 
44 through the Knowledge of our Lord Jefus Chriji : And 
44 grant, O Lord y as he putteth forth his Hand to thy Holy 
44 Word, that he may alfo put forth his Hand to ferve a 
«• Brother, but not to hurt himfelf or his Family ; that where- 
44 by may be given to us great and precious Promifes, that by, 
44 this we may be' Partakers of thy Divine Nature, having 
44 efcaped the Corruption that is in the World through Luft, 

44 O Lord God 9 add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue 
46 Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to 
44 Temperance Prudence, and to Prudence Patience, and 
44 to Patience Godlinefs, and to Godlinefs Brotherly Love, 
44 and to Brotherly Love Charity ; and grant, U Lord , 
44 that Mafonry may be bleft throughout the World, and thy 
44 Peace be upon us, O Lord\ and grant that we may be all 
44 united as one, through our Lord Jefus Cbrifty who liveth 
44 and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen” 

When you had received this Prayer, what was faid to 

you t 

- * The Modern Mafias make Ufe of no Prayer, and very feldom repeat Half the 
Ltf&ure. 

A. I 

ie 

A. I was afked who I put mv truft in* ' 

S$j Your Anfwer, Brother T 
A • In God* 

JjK What Was faid to ybu next ) 

A . I Wis taken by the Right-Hand by a Brother, and he faid, 
Rife up, follow your Leader, and fear rio Danger* 1 / 1 : 
J^* After all this, how was you difpofed of? 

A* I Was lbd Three tithes round the Lodge. 

JP. Where did you iheet with the firft Oppofition ) 
a! At the Back of the Junior Warden in the South* 'Where 
I gave Three Knocks as at the Door. - 

What anfwer did you receive ? ;• 

A. He faid, who comes there. . - . 

§t* Your Anfwer ). 

A. The fame as at the Door, one who Be£$ to hdvd and re- 
ceive, See. 

i?. Where did you meet with the fecond Opposition ? " 

A* At the Back of the Senior Watderi in the Weft, vfchere 
I made the fame Repetition as at the Door* He faid. Who 
comes here. One who begs to have and receive, &c.~ r * . . 
Where did you meet with the third Opposition ? c / " * 
A * At the Back of ,the Matter in the Eaft^ where I made the 
Repetition as before. 

'4£. What did the Matter do With you? 

A * He ordered me back to the Senior Warden In the Weft* 
to receive Inttru&ions. - 

What Were the Infiru&ions he gave you i ; 

A. He taught me-to take one Step upon thefirRStep of a 
right Angle oblong Square, with my left Knee bare bent, my 
Body upright, my Right Foot forming a Square, tny naked 
Right Hand upon the Holy Bible, with the Square and Com- 
pafs thereon, mv Left Hand fupporting the fame j where! took 
that folemn Obligation or Oath of a Mafon * 

' "Q: Brother, can you repeat that Obligation ? 

A. I will do my Endeavour With your Affiftanec, Right 
Worfiiipful. 

• Stand up and begin. 

/ [Hefe the Oath is repeated* as mentioned before.*] 

Brother* after you received the Obligation, whit was 
faid to you ? 

A. I was afked, what I mott defired ? 

* As foon&s the Oath is repeated, they chargi their Gla&es, and drink, To the 
tteart that conceals, and to the Tongue that never r < veals, ai.d draw the Glafl'es a- 
crofs their Throats, the Penalty of the Obligation b ejng that of having their 
Throats cut. Sec, 

E jg.What 

C 

2$. What was your Anfwer ? 

A* To be brought to Light* 
j^. Who brought you to Light ? 

A . The Matter ^nd theureft of the Brethren. 

;-^^Whe» you was thus brought to Light, whit were thtf 
firlPThings you faw t 
A . The Bible, Square, and Cooipafe. 

What was it they told you they fignified? 

A . Three great Lights in Mafonry • 

. i9. Explain them, Brother* 

A. The Bible, to rule and govern our Faith ; the Square* 
to (quare our Anions * the Cotnpafs, to keep us within 
Bounds with all Men* 

f , What were the next Things that were (hewn to you ? 
Three Candles* which I was told were three letter Lights 
i ft Mafonry. 

S%j What do they reprefent ? 

, . jL The Sun, Moon, and MaJier^Mafon. 

1 ■ 4y Why (b, Brother ? 

A • Therb is the Sun to rule the Day, the Moon to rule the 
Night* and the Mafiet-Mafon his Lodge* 

<• What was then done to you ? / 

A. The Mattel took me by the Right-Hand, and gave me 
the Grip and Word of an Entered Apprentice, and faid, Rife* 
my Brother, JrAG H I N 

( [The Sign is frequently gtveh before the Grip and JVcrd] 

3. Have ypu got this Grip and Wordy Brother ? 

A. I have. Right Worlhipful. 

Pray give* it to your next Brother* 

4 [Takes his Left-Hhnd Brother by the Right-hand, arid 1 gives him the Grip ahd 
i . Wordw before deferibsd ; and the- Brother telh the Matter that is sight*] 

Fjrft Brother gives him the Grip, (econd Brother (ays, 

; What’s. this ? Firft Brother* The Grip of an Entered Appren- 
tice* Second Brother, Has it got a Name? Firft Brother, It 
has. Second Brother, Will you give it me? Firft Brother, 
jl’li fetter it with you, or halve it* Second Brother* I’ll halve 
if witli you. Firft Brother, Begin. Second Brother, No, yoii 
begin firft. Firft Brother, J A 5 Second Brother* G BIN* 
Firft Brother, JACHIN* 

Firft Brother fays. It is> right,' Worfliipful Matter* 

4jJ* What was the next Thing that was (hewn to you ? 

A • The Guard or Sign of an Entered Apprentice* 
jp. Have you got that Guard, or Sign ? 

[Hcdraws his Right ‘‘fcjarid acrofs his Throat edgtirays (as aforfifaid,)- to ffcevV the* 
Matter that he has.] 

jp. After this what wa* faid to you r 

A. I 

r *7 ] 

A. I was ordered to be raken bac)c, $nd invefted wrth 
What I had been divefted of ; and to be brought back to re- 
turn Thanks, and to receive the Benefit of ? Lecture, if Time 
would permit. 

^ After what you had been divefted of was reumed, what 
was done to you ? 

A . I was brought to the North-Weft Corner of the Lodge, 
in order to return Thanks. 

Q How did you return Thanks ? 

A* I ftood in the North-Weft Corner of the Lodge, and, 
with the Inftru&ioo of a Brother, I faid, ** Right Wor&ip- 
ful Mafter, Senior and Junior Wardens, Senior and Junior 
Deacons, and the reft of the Brethren of this Lodge, I return 
you Thanks for the Honour you have done me, in making me 
a Mafori, and .admitting me a Member of this worthy Society.” 

J K What was faid to you then i 
• The Mafter called me up to the North-JEaft Comer pf. 
the Lodge, and placed me at his Right-Hand, 

Q Did he prefent you with any Thing ? 

A . He prefented me with an Apron, which he put cm me : 
and told me it was a Badge of Innocence, more antient than the 
Golden Fleece or the Roman Eagle; more honoured than the 
otar and Garter, or any other Order under the Sun, that 
could be conferred upon me at that Time, or any Time 
hereafter* 

3 . What were the next Things (hewn to vpu ? 

A, The Mafter (hewed me the working Tools of an En- 
tered Apprentice* 

f . What were they ? 

The 24. Inch Gauge, the Square, and common tGavel 
or fetting Maul. 

What are their Ufes ? 

A • The Square to fquare my Work, the 24 Inch Gauge to 
sneafure my Work, the common Gavel to knock off all fuper- 
fluous Matters, whereby the Square may fit eafy and juft. 

Brother, as we are not all working Majons, we apply- 
them to your morals, which we call fpirituaiizing ; explain 
them. 

A • The 24 Ihch Gauge reprefents the 24 Hours of the Day* 

, 9 . How do you fpend them. Brother ? . 

A. Six FJours to work ih, Six Hours toierve God , Six to 
ferve a Friend or a Brother, as far as lies in my Power, with- 
out being detrimental to ihyfelf or Family; and Six to refrelh 
spyfidf by Sleep, 

Ea ^ Why 

[■*«> 

, Jg. Why was you neither naked nor cloathed, Jjarc-faot 
not food, with a Cable-Tow (or Halter) about your Neck? 

A. If I had recanted, and ran out in the Street, the Eeoplp 
would have faid I was mad ; but if & Brother had feen me, hp 
would have brought me back, and feen Juftice done me. 

Why was you hoodwink’d ? / 

A . That my Heart might conceal, before my Eyes did 
difcover ? 

The fecond Reafon, Brother ? 

, ; A~ Asl wa? in Darknpfs at that Time, I (hould keep all 
the World in Darlcnefs for the future- 

Why was you deprived of all Metal ? 

. A* That I Ihould bring nothing offenfive or defenfive into 
the Lodge. 

9 There is another Reafon, Brother, pray give it me ? 

Jt. Asl was poor and peonylefs when I was made a Ma- 
fen, it informed me that I Ihould affift poor and pennylefs Bre- 
thren, cs far as lay in my Power. 

Brother, you told me you gave Three Diftinft Knocks 
at the Door : Pray what do they fignifv ? 

A. A certain Text in Scripture. 

What is that Text, Brother ? 

Aik, and you (hall have ; feek, arid you il^all find ; 
and it fhall be opened unto youi 
j?. How do you’ apply this Text in Mafonry Jf 
A. J. fought in my Mind ; J afked of my Friend $ I knocked}, 
*rtd the Door of Mafonry was opened unto me. 

j^>. Why had you a Sword, Spear, or feme other warlike 
Jnftrument, prefen ted to your naked Left-Breaft particularly t 
A. Becaufe the Left-Breaft is the neareft the Heart, that it 
might be the more a Prick to my Conference as it pricked 
my Flelh at that Time. 

Why was you led Three Times round the Lodge ? 

A, That all the-Brethen might fee I was duly prepared. 

When you was made an Apprentice, why was your 
Left-Knee bare bent. 

As Becaufe the Left Knee is the weakeft Part <yf my Body, 
and an Entered Apprentice is the weakeft Part of Mafonry ^ 
jyhich I was them entering into : 

.f 

As foon $s the before mentioned Part of the Leflure is fi«- 
ni(hed,they begin to regale chemfelves with Wine and Punch, 
and fome Health is propofed ; *£be King and the ' Royai Family • 
5T i all Mafons , wberefoever difperfed ; andthefe Healths or TbaftS* 
are all drank with Three Times Three, and art Huzza at the : 
‘ * ^ ' ' ’ • .End. 

[29 3 

End. Having retted for a few Minutes, they proceed with the 
Le&ure, and the Matter begins, and fays, 

Q Brother, we have been mentioning a Lodge ; pray what 
quakes a Lodge ? 

A . A certain Number of MafonSy Right WorfliipfuJ. 

J§>. Pray what Number makes a Lodge ? 

A • Three, Five, Seven or Eleven.. 

Why do Three make a Lodge ? 

A . Becaufe there were Three Grand Mafons in building the 
World. 

jfj. The fecond Reafon, Brother. 

A* There were Three Grand- Mafons at the building Solo- 
fnon’s Temple. 

3. Why do Five make a Lodge ? 

A. Becaufe every Man is endued with Five Senfes. 

3. What are the Five Senfes ? 

A. Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tatting, and Feeling. 

§1* What Ufe are thofe Five Senfes to you in fldfafonry? 

A. Three are of great Ufe: viz. Hearing, Seeing, and 
Feeling. 

In what Manner, Brother ? 

A- Hearings to hear the Wordy Seeing , to fee the Sign; 
Feelingy to feel the Grip , that I may know a Brother as well 
py Night as by Day. 

4J; Why fhould Seven make a Lodge? 

A • Becaufe there are Seven liberal Sciences. 

3. Will you name them. Brother? 

A- Grammar, Rhetorick, Logick, Arithmetick, Geometry, 
Mufick, and Aftronomy. 

Brother, what doth thofe Sciences teach you ? 

A. Grammar teaches me the Art of Writing and Speaking 
|the Language. 

£>. What doth Rhetorick teach you ? 

A- The Art of Difeourfing upon any Topick whatfoever. 

What doth Logick teach you ? 

An The Art of Reafoning well, whereby to difeover Truth 
from Fallhood. 

4J. What doth Arithmetick teach you? 

A • The Vjrtue of Numbers. 

What doth Geometry teach you ? 

An The Art of Me^furing, whereby the Egyptians found 
put their oWn Land. 

£>. What doth Mufick teach you. Brother ? 

A. The Virtue of Sounds. 

• What 

. t 3 ° 1 

^ What doth Aftronomy teach you ? 

A. The Knowledge of the Heavenly Bodies. 

Why fhould Eleven make a Lodge, Brother ? 

A. There were Eleven Patriarchs , when JafefA was fol# 
into Egypt* and fuppofed to b.e loft. 
j£. The fecond Reafon, Brother ? 

A . There were but Eleven Appftles, when Juiajt betrays# 
Chrtft . 

JjjjK What Form k your Lodge ? 
jf. An oblong Square. 

f How long. Brother ? 

From Eaft to Weft, 

How wide, pray ? 

A* Between North and South. 

$k How high. 

A . From the Earth to the Heavens. 

IJowdeep ? 

A . From the Surface of the Earth to the Center,. 

&K Why is ypur Lodge faid to be from the Surface to tb$ 
Center of the Earth l 

jf. Becaufe that Mafonry is univerfak 

3). Why i$ your Lodge iituated Eaft and Weft ? 

/ Becaufe all Churches and Chapels are, or ought to be fo* 
£>. Why fo. Brother ? 

A. Becaufe the Gofpel was firft preached in the Eaft and ex- 
tended itfelf to the Weft. 

J K What fupports your Lodgp ? 

: Three great Pillars. 

What are their Names ? 

A \ Wifdom, Strength, and Beauty, 

Who doth the Pillar of Wifdom reprefent £ 

A . The Matter in the Eaft. 

Who doth the Pillar of Strength reprefent ? 

A . The Senior Warden in the Weft. 

4>i Who doth the Pillar of Beauty reprefent ? 

A . The Junior Warden in the South. 

GK Why Chould the Matter reprefent the Pillar of Wifdom f 
A* Becaufe he gives Inftru&ions to the Crafts to carry on 
their Work with good Harmony. 

jg. Why ihould the Senior Warden reprefent the Pillar of 
Strength ? 

A. As the Sun fets to finifh the Day, fo the Senior Warden 
ftands in the Weft to pay the Hirelings their Wages, which j$ 
the Strength and Support of all Buftnefs. 

Why Ihould the Junior Warden xeprefent the Pillar of 
Beauty f 

. >ogle 

£ 3 » 1 

A. Becaufe he ftands in the South, at high Twelve at Noon* 
*h?ch Is the Beauty of the Day, to call the Men off from Wodc 
to RefreQimerit, and to fee that they come on again in dae 
Time, that the Mafter may have Pleafdre and Profit therein. 

jp. Why is it faid that your Lodge is fupported by thole three 
great Pillars, Wifdom, Strength, and Beauty? 

A. Becaufe Wifdom, Strength, and Beauty, are the Finifh- 
Crs of all Works, and nothing can be carried on without them. 

iP; Why fo,- Brother ? 

A. Becaufe there is Wifdom to contrive, Strength tofupport, 
and Beauty to adorn. 

4*. Had you any Covering to your Lodge ? 

A- Yes, a cloudy Canopy, of divers Colours, or the Clouds. 

2>. How blows a Mafirfi Wind, Brother? 

A- Due Eaft and Weft. 

What is it o’Clock, Brother ? 

A» High Twelve-. 

4>. Call the Men off from Work to Refreshment, and fee 
that they come on again m due Time. 

[Before the Ceremony of Catting the Men affront JPerk, -the Entered Apprentice's 
$ong y inferted in the Collection of Songs at the End of this Book) is fung, all the 
Brethren Banding up ; and, at the End of each Vcrfe, they join Hands crofsways, fo 
as to form a Link, or Chain, and fhake their Hands up and down, and (lamp their 
Feet hard on the Floor, keeping duo Time ; and this is wha&furpiizes any Strangers 
who may be in a Room underneath, or near the Lodge, It is termed by Maj»ns $ 
Driving, of Piles , 2 

The Lefture belonging to the Entered Apprentice being now 
ended, it is neceflary the Brethren fhould have a little Reipite $ 
and, perhaps it is Nine o’Clock in the Evening, when feme of 
the Members chufe to have a Bit for the Tooth. Thofe who 
have ordered any Thing for Supper, retire into another Room* 
after the following Ceremony is over : viz. 

T&e Manner of Calling the Men from Work ter refrefh 

tbemfelves . 

#i r l HE Mafter whifpers to the Senior Deacon at his Right 
x Hand, and fays, 

<c It is my Will and Pleafure that this Lodge be called from ' 
€C Work to Refrefhment, during Pleafure.” 

The Senior Deacon carries it to the Junior Warden, By 
whifpering the above Words in his^Ear ; and he whifpers it to 
the Junior Deacon at his Right ftandj the Junior Warden 
receives it in the feme Manner from the Junior Deacon, and 

declares 

£ 32 ] 

declares it aloud in the above Terms to the Lodge; then the 
Junior Warden fets his Column upright, and the Senior lays. hi* 
downj the Care of the Lodge, during the Members Refresh- 
ment, being configned into the Hands of the Junior Warden, 
The Senior and Junior Warden’s Columns, which they carrjt 
-iiV thfeir Hands, are generally a Foot and an Half long, and 
, reprefent the Columns or , Portico at the Entrance of the 

Temple of Solomon, called JACH1N and BOAZ.; J the Ju- 
, nior’sis called J ACHIN', which fignifies. To ejlabltjh in the Lord} 
and the Senior’s BO A Z, which denotes St ren gth* . 

After a propet* Time allowed for Ref*e{hm£nt, the Maftef* 
.defires the Junior Warden to give the Word for the Appearance 
of the Brethren again in the Lodge, which Ceremony, is perform* 
ed as follows : 

The Mafter fayr, 

<c It is my Will and Pleafure that this Lodge J>e called ftotli 
: Refreshment to Work.” 

And the Junior Warden laying do^n his Column, theSe- 
nior fets his up.— If Time permits them to go on with the Lec- 
ture, they proceed to the FelloWS-Cfaft’s Part, ifithe new-made 
Brethren have been promoted to that Degree. It is the general 
- Cuftom now to make them Entered Apprentices and Fellow- 
Crafts on the fame Night } and as the Ceremony is the fame as 
1 that of the Entered Apprenticed, except the Odtky Wordy 8ign f 
Gripy Pafs-Gripy and Pafs- Wordy we (hall give" out Readers 
♦that Part, and then goon to the Fellow- Craft’s Le&nre. 

The Oath of * a Fellow Craft* 

c * T G, F, of my own Will and Accord, and in the Prefende 
44 *■* of Almighty God and this right worlhipful Lodge, dedi- 
44 cated to St. John , do hereby and hereon, moft folemnly and 
u fincerely (wear, that I Will always hail, conceal, and never 
<c will reveal that Part of a Fellow-Craft to' an Entered Ap- 
44 prentice, or either of them, except it be in a true and lawful 
44 Lodge of Crafts, him or them whom I. (hall find to be fuch 
44 after juft Trial and due Examination. 

44 I furthermore do fwear, that I will anfwer all Signs apid 
<c Summonfes fent to me from a Lodge of Crafts, if within the 
4 * Length of my Cable-Tow. 

44 I alfo fwear that I will mot wrong a Brother or fee hirtl . 
44 wrong’d, but give him ^rmely Notice of all approaching Dan- 
44 gers whatfoever, as far A a$ my Knowledge leads me. I will > 

J See the firft Book of Kings, Chapter vii. 

44 alfo 

f C 33 3 

* 4 aVfo ferve a Brother as far as lies in my Power, without being 
44 detrimental to myfelf or Family 5 and I will keep all mjr Bro«* 
ther*s Secrets as my own, that {hall be delivered to me as 
44 fuch, Murder and Treafon only excepted. 

44 And that at my own free Will, all this I fwear with a firm 
44 and fteady Refolution to perform the fame, without any 
44 Equivocation or Hefitation in the whatfoever, under no left 
44 Penalty than to have my Heart torri from under my Left- 
44 breaft, and given to the Vultures of the Air as a Prey : So 
44 help me God, and keep rfiefteadfaft in this my Graft’s Obli- 
* 4 gation.*’ He kijfes the Book . 

[Note. If a Brotbet is within the Length of a Cable-Tow, which is Three Miles, he 
ought to come to his Lodge ; but this Part of his Oath is now difpenfed with, as no 
Brother is required to go oftencr than he chufcs.] 

The tVori is BOA3£< 

The Sign* Lay the Right Hahd to the Left Breaft, and keep 
the Thumb quite on a Square ; and hold the Left Hand exa< 5 U 
1 y upright, forming a Square. 

The Pafi-Grip. Put the Thumb-Nail of the Right Hand 
between the firft and fecond Joint of your Brother’s Right 
Hand, and prefs it clofe. 

The Pafs-fVord. SHIBBOLETH. 

The Grip . The fame as the Pafs-Grip ; blit in thfc Place of 
prefling the Thumb Nail betiveen the firft and fecond Joint of 
a Brother’s Right Hand, let it be put on the fecond Joint only. 

The Fellow-Craft is always taught the due Guard, as it is 
termed, of his Part, by taking two Steps upon the Second Step 
of the Drawing on the Floor, with his Right Knee bent, and 
quite bare; his Left Foot forming a Square ; bis Bodyered; 
when he kneels to receive the Oath, his Right Hand is on the 
Bible, and his Left Hand fupported by the Point of a Pair, of 
Compafies, fo as to form a Square* When he returns Thanks 
for being admitted a Fellow Craft, he repeats the fame Words 
as the Entered Apprentice, Only with this Difference, for ad * 
mining me a Fellow-Craft. 

5 The Manner of repealing the Pellow-Craft's Leftute. 

IJROTHER, are you a Fellow-draft ? 

Anf. lam; try me, aiid prove me. 

Q Where was you made a Craft i 
A . In a juft and lawful Lodge of Crafts. 

How Was you prepared to be made a Craft ? 

F 4 x was 

- gitized by LjOOQle 

■ . : f ;+ ] 

A . I was neither naked nor cloathed, barefoot norfliodj in a 
« . halting moving Poftu re ; and being deprived of all Metal, I was 
led to the Door of the Lodge by the Hand of a Brother. 

How got you Admittance ? 

• A. By three diilin<2 Knocks. 

What was faid to you from within ? ' 

A* Who comes there. 

jp. Your Anfwer, Brother ? 4 

A. One who hath ferv’d his Time juftly and lawfully as' an 
Entered Apprentice ought to do, and now begs to become more 
perfect in Mafonry y by being admitted a Fellow -Craft. 

How do you expe<3 to attain it, Brother? * 

A . By the Benefit of a Pafs-Word. 

Q Have you got that Pafs-fPord ? 

A. I have. 

Give it me," Brother ? 

A. SHIBBOLETH. 

J^. What did he fay to you then ? 

• -/f. Pafs, SHIBBOLETH. 

What became of you then ? 

A. I was twice led round the Lodge. 

Where did you meet with the firfl: Oppofition ? * 

' ■ AzAt the Bade of the Senior Warden, where I made, the 
fame Repetition as at the Door. 

4J. Where did you meet with the fecond Oppofition ? 

; A* At the Back of the Mailer, where I made the fame Re- 
petition as at the Door. 

What dicj he do with you ? 

A. He order’d me back to the Senior Warden, to/receiVe 
Inilru£ljons. : , 

What Inilru&ions did he give you ? 

A . He taught me to fhew the Mailer my due Guard, and 
to take two Steps upon the fecond Step of a right-angled oblong 

• Square, with my Right Knee bent bare, my Left Foot forming 

a Square, my Body upright,* my Right Hand upon the holy 
Bible, my Left Arm fupported by the Point of the Compafles, 
forming a Square^ where I took the* Obligation of a Fellow 
Craft. r 

What did heathen do to you ? 

1 A . He ordered me back, and to be in veiled with what I had 
been divefted of, and then I was brought back in older to re- 
turn Thanks*. 

*When a Member anfwers. any of thefe QnefHons with Readinefs, the Mailer 
, -lays, Thank you, Brother j and then proceeds, -They generally fmoke and drink 
<furing the Time the Lecture is repeating. 

^ After 

t 35 ] ' 

1>K After you was thus admitted a Fellow Craft, did you 
ever work as a Craft ? 

A. Yes, in the Building of the Temple. 

Where did you receive your Wages ? 

A. In the middle Chamber. 

6). When you came to the Door of the middle Chamber* 
who did you fee ? 

A . A Warden. 

9. What did he demand of you. Brother? 

A . The Pafs-word of a Craft. 

i 

Did you give it him ? 
I did/ 

What was it? 
SHIBBOLETH. 

How got you to the middle Chamber ? 

A. Through the Porch. 

Did you fee any Thing there worth your Notice. 

Brother? . . . 

; A, I did, Right Worlhipful. 

Q. What was it? 

A. Two fine Brafs Pillars. ' 

-What were they called ? 

A. jACHINandBOAZ. 

How high were thefe Pillars, Brother ? 

A* Thirty - five Cubits, with a (rjhapiter of five Cubits, 
which makes it forty high. 

£ In the Firft Book of Kings, Chap. vii. Ver. 00, it is faid they were but 18 Cubits 
high,* and a Line of 12 Cubits meafured them round, which is about 4 Cubits 
Diameter : this bears no Proportion, according to the Rules of Architecture. £#- 
lomon s Temple was a grand Building, and every Thing bore true Proportion, and 
it anfwers exaftly with the Corinthian or Compofite Order, for it is about Ten 
Diameters high. In the 3d Chap, of the fecond Book of Chronicles, Ver. 15,, it 
is mentioned they were 35 Cubits high, and the Chapiters 5 Cubits each, which 
makes 40 Cubits, fo that is was exactly 60 Feet high of our EngUJh Meafure.- 

What were they adorned with. Brother ? 

A • Two Chapiters, Five Cubits high each* 

£K What elfe were they adorned with ?* ? 

A. Net-Work, Lilly-work, and Pomegranates. 

4J. Where they hollow, Brother? ■ 

* Aw They were hollow; * * * . 

• Jg.- How thick was the Shell ? .. . V * 

A* Four Inches, or an Hand’s Breafdth. _ - v • 

I Wfiere were they caft ? 

A* On the Plain of Jordan , between -Sotcooib 1 and Zdrtbtr f 
where the reft of Solomon's holy Veffels were caft. 

% Wh# 

C 36 1 

Jg. Who call them ? 

4 * Hiram Abiff* the Widow’s Son. 

End of the Fellow-Craft's Lefiure, 

There are fome Mailers of Lodges who pretend to argue 
farther; particularly in the Irijh Lodges. Some will alk, Why 
. they were fquare ; Why hollow ; Why coftly ; Why hewn 
or fawed Stones. The Reader need only compare the £th, 6th, 
^tb, and Sth Chapters of the Firft Book of Kings; and the 
2d, 3d, and 4th of the Second Book of Chronicles , and he wiU 
find all the Reafons ever ufed t 

This Le£ture is always clofed with the fellow- Craft’s Song, 
inferted at the End of the Book ; and by this'Time it is per- 
haps between Ten and Eleven at Night ; when the Mailer 
orders the Lodge to be (hut, which is performed in the fame 
planner as that of opening it. The Senior Warden Hands 
tip and declares, 

“ It is our* Right Worlhipful Mailer’s Will and Pleafure 

that this Lodge Hands clofed ’till the Firft, Second, or 
ic Third Day (mentioning the Day of the Week) in the next 

Month.” 

The Mailer, Wardens, Deacons, Secretary, and all the Officers 
and Brethren take off their Jewels from their Necks, and each 
Member may go or ftwas he thinks proper; nothing of Ma- 
fonry mull be mentioned during the Remainder of the Night; 
and it fometimes happens* that after the Lodge is clofed, fome 
Member, being warmed with the Juice of the Grape, thinks 
he may difpenfe with the Laws of Decency, and indulge him- 
felf with an obfeene Song ; but though it is a Maxim pretty 
generally received, that good Singers lhould be free from all 
Reilridlions, yet the better Sort of Free-Mafons have not a- 
dopted it, though they do not exclude gay and joyous Songs 
after the Lodge is ihut. 

In all Companies it is looked upon as a Breach of Politenefs 
to whifper, but it is generally oonfidered only as a Breach of 
Politenefs ; by Free-Mafons it is looked upon as a Crime, which 
is often puniftied with greater or lefs Severity, as the offending 
Party may or may not be elevated with Liquor, 

The next Degree in Afafonry to the Fellow-Craft is that of 
Mailer ; which we (hall give a Relation of in the bell Manner 
poffib!e,a$ the Cuftpoi varies greatly in different Lodges.-r-The 
Drawing on the Floor is more grand, and finely decorated 
en?blenyatic 4 Figures. 

The 

t 37 I 

The Way to prepare him is the fame as the Apprentice’s 
and Fellow-Craft’s, but both Shoes are taken off, his Arms and 
Bread are naked, and he gives all the Words, Signs, and Grips 
of the two firft Degrees. 

The Pafs-Word isTUBAL-CAIN. 

The Sign. Draw the Right Hand acrofs your Belly ; that 
being the Penalty of the Obligation. 

The Grip. Take hold of the Right Hand of the Mailer 
with your Right Hand, and prefs your Fore Finger Nails hard 
under his Wriftj put your Right Foot to hisj your Right 
Knee to his ; and your Right Bread to his, with your Left 
Hand round his Back $ and then whifper foftly in his Ear, The 
Wordy M AHABONE *, if of the Antient Mafons j if of the 
Modern, MACBENAC. 

But as the Ceremony of Making will be underftood better 
from the Mafter's Lefturey we (hall give it you in the follow* 
ing Words, as performed in all good Lodges. 

The Mafttr’s Lefture f. 

£<{• XXT HERE have you been. Brother? 

VV J. In the Weft. 

And where are you going? 

A» To the Eaft. 

4J. Why do you leave the the Weft and go to the Eaft ? 

A* Becaufe the Light of the Gofpel was firft Ihewn in the 
Eaft. 

What are you going to do in the Eaft, Brother ? 

A* To look for a Lodge of Mafters. 

Q Then I prefume you are a Majler Ma forty Brother i 

A. I am fo taken and accepted amor\gft Mafters. 

Where was you paft Mailer, Brother ? 

A • In a Lodge of Mafters. 

J?. In what Manner was you prepared to bemade a Mailer? 

A* My Shoes were taken off my Feet* both my Arms and 
Bread were naked ; and being deprived of all Metal, I was led 
to the Door of the Lodge 

4>. How got you Admittance, Brother ? 

jf> By three diftinft Knocks. 

What was faid to you from within ? 

* Mababcnt Ripifitt Rotten to the Boney it is held as facred among 
they are very cautious in fpeaking it. 

- a •‘f The Maker's Lcflure is never performed but in a Lodge of Mafters $ no Appitty* 
fice or Fellow-Craft can be allowed to be prefeat. 

J. Who 

c *u 

A* Who comes there. 

4>. Your Anfwer, Brother? 

A. One who hath juflly and lawfully fcrved his Time as aq 
Enter’d Apprentice and Fellow-Craft, and who now begs to, 
become more perfect in Mafohfy, by being admitted a Matter. 

<%• How do you expert to attain it ? 

A • By Virtue of a Pafs-word. 

J£P. Will you give me that Pafsrwprd ? 

A. I will. 

jp. Pray giye it me then. Brother? 

A. TUBAL-CAIN *. . . 

. What was faid to you then ? 

'A. Enter TUB AL-CAIN, : 

In what Manner was you difpofed of? 

A * I was led once tound the Lodge. 

, 4k Where did you meet with the firft Oppofition ? ; 

A • At the Back of tha Matter. . . 

4k What did he demand of you, Brother?* 

A . The fame as at the Door. • * • , 

4k How was you di/pofed of ? ‘ 

A. He order’d me back to the Senior Warden iiv the Weft, 
to receive Inftru&ions. 

4k What were the Inftru&ions. you received fr6m the Senior, 
Warden ? 

A. -He taught me as { flopd in the Weft to lhew the Matter 
in the Eaft m.y, due Guard or §ign of an Apprentice, and to Jake 
one Step upon the ririi ^>tep of tnc Right-Angle oblong Square* 
my other Foot forming a Square. /, t 

2 dly. I was taught to take two Steps jupon .the fame oblong 
Square, fhewing him jhe Sign of a Fellow-Qraft* 

3 <ily. I was taught to take three Steps upon the fame oblong 
Square, with both my Knees bent bare, my pody upright, my 
Right Hand upon the Holy fiibje, both the Points of. the 
Compaffqs extended to my Right and Left Breaft, where I took 
the fjlemn Obligation or Oath or a Majler-Mafon 
r 4k Gjin you repeat the Obligation you fpeak of? • 

A . ril do my Endeavour, Right Worflhipful, craving yoiuj 
Affiftance. 

4k Stand up and begin. Brother. 

* Tubal Cain ; he was the Inventor of Brafs, Iron and other Metals. He came 

iiom .Cain by the fitch Generation. In the fourth Chapter ,of Gencfis, js a 
full Account of the Origin of the Family.' ‘ * ; ' ' " ' ' ‘ ' 

C 39 1 .. 

A . “ T G. of my t own free Will and Accord, and in 
' the ‘Prefence of Almighty God, and this Right 
“ Worfhipful Lodge, dedicated to St. John , do hereby and 
“ hereon moil folemnly and fincerely (We^ar, that I will always 
“ hail, conceal, and never reveal, that part of a Mafter Mafon 
“ to a Fellow-Craft, no more than that of a Fellow-Craft, to 
“ an Enter’d Apprentice, or any of them to the reft of the 
“ World $ except it be to a true anti lawful Lodge of Mailers, 
“ him or them, whom I lhall find to be fuch, after juft Trial 
“ and due Examination. I furthermore do fwear, that I will 
“ anfwer all Signs and Summonfes, fent to me from a Lodge 
“ of Matters, if within the Length of a Cable- Tow. I alfo 
“ will keep all the Secrets of my Brethren as my own, that is 
‘‘ delivered to me as fuch. Murder and Treafon excepted, and 
“ that at my own free Will : l WiRnot wrong a Brother, or 
“ lee him wrong’d, but give him timely Notice of all approach* 
*. c ing Dangers, as far as itiy Knowledge leads me; I alfo will 
V. /ferve a Brother as far as lies in my Power, without being 
“ detrimental to myfelf or Family. 

• “ And I furthermore do promife, that I will not have any 

* c carnal Conveirfatioh with' a Brother’s Wife, Sifter of Baugh* 
t( ter, and that I will never difcovtf ydikt ifc done in'theLfodge, 
“ but 'will be agreeable to* all Laws whatfaever. All this I 
“ fwear, with a firm and Heady Refolutionrto perform the fame, 
“ without any Hefitation ih me Whatever, uhder nd lefs Pe- 
“ nalty than to have niy Body . fe‘ver*din two, the one Part 
“ carried to the South, and the bthfcr~fd thb Ncfrth ; my Bowels 
“ burnt to Alhes in the South, atttftfye Allies to be fcattered 
“ before the Four Winds, th^t hich a ^ile Wretch isTlhould 

be , remembered no mote ^m6n^ l> ^ny MaJnner of Men, 
“ ,( particularly Majoris )' fo help' me Vjtfd, 1 and keep the ftedfaft 
“ In this my Matter’s Obligation?*" "KiJJes the Book. 

$>. What was Ihewh to you after' you had received this Ob* 
ligation ? ' , \ “* 

. A . One of the Mailer’s Signs; . ^ 

, [Gives the-Mafter’s Sign, and ^.Apprentice's Grip.] 

S}>. Has it got a Name? 

A . It has; 

Will you gitre it hie ? ' - • • 

A. JACHIN. 

Will you be of or from? 

A . From. 

4J. Fr6m wli at. Brother ? ‘ ' ~ 

* & From an Entered Apprentice to a Fellow* Craft. 

igitized 

C 40 j 

A. Pafs, Brother? 

[He gives the Grip and Pafs- word. J 

What was done to you then f 

A . He took me by the Gripe of a Fellow-Cfaft, and faid* 
what is this ? 

Your Anfwer, Brother ? 

A - The Gripe of a Fellow-Craft. 

f Has it got a Name ? 

It ha?. 

^ Will g>u give it me ? 

What was faid to you then? 

A . Rife up, Brother* 

What was then faid to you. Brother ? 

A- He told me I then reprefented one of the greateft Men 
in the World, our Grand Matter Hiram, who was killed juft 
at the Finifhing of the firtt Temple, as you (hall hear. 

Fifteen Fellow- Crafts, (finding the Temple almoft finifhecf, 
and not having received the Matter’s Word, becaufe their Tim? 
was not come) agreed to extort it from Hiram the firtt Oppor- 
tunity, that they might pafs for Matters in other Countries, * 
and receive Matter’s Wages ; but twelve of thefe Crafts re- 
canted, and the other three were refolved to carry it on j their 
Names were Jubela , Jubelo , and Jubelum , who knew it was 
always Hiram s Cuttom at high Twelve at Noon, when the 
Men were called off to Refrefhment, to go into the Sanftum 
Santtorum, to pay his Adoration to the true and living God: 
Thefe Ruffians. placed themfelves at the three Entrances of the 
Temple, viz . at the Weft, the South, and Eaft Doors. 

At the North Door there was no Entrance, becaufe the Sun 
darted no Rays from thence t thus they waited till he had 
finifhed his Prayer to the Lord , to extort the Word and Grip 
as he came out, or his Life* ; and Hiram came to the Eaft 
Door, and Jubela demanded the Matter’s Word ; but Hiram 
told him he mutt wait, and Time and a little Patience would 
bring him to it ; and that it was not in his Power to deliver it 
alone, except Three were together, viz. Solomon King of Ifrael ; 
Hiram King of Tyre ; and himfelf. Being diffatisfied with this 
Anfwer, he (truck him acrofs the Throat with a Twenty-four 
Inch Gauge: Hiram Abiff fled from thence to the South 
Door, where he thought to have made his Efcape ; but he was 
accofted in the fame Manner by Jubelo 9 to whom he gave the 

* Sense Mafons will infill upon it that it was M he well; into thtJTerople ; but 
give no fox their Afltnion, 

* fame 

, C -4* 3 ■ 

fame Anfwer as the former; and he nop being pleafed with it, 
gave him a Blow with a Square upon his Left Breaft, which made 
him reel : Having recovered his Strength, he ran to the* Weft 
Door, the only Way left as he thought to make his Efcape; 
but he was accofted in the fame Manner by Jebulum> to virhom 
he made the fame Reply as to the two former ; but he.not being 
fatisfied therewith, gave him a more violent Blow than any of 
the others, with a common Gavel, or Setting Maul, upon his 
Head, which killed him on the Spot. After this they carried 
him out at the Weft Door, and hid him in a Heap of Rubbilh 
till Twelve at Night, when they found Means to bury him on 
the Side of a Hill, Six Foot Eaft and Weft, and Six Foot per- 
pendicular*. 

4>. After you was thus knocked down f, what was faid to 
you then ?. 

A. He faid I reprefented one of the greateft Men in the 
World, our Grand Matter Hiram , lying dead. 

Jp. Thank you. Brother.— Pray go on. 

A, As I lay on my Back, the Matter informed me how 
Hiram was found ; and by what Means the three Ruffians were 
difcovered, as follows : 

« Our Mafter Hiram not Goming to view the Workmen as 
' ufual. King Solomon caufed ftridt Enquiry to be made ; but this 
proving ineffe&ual, he was fuppofed to be dead. The twelve 
Fellow-Crafts who had recanted, hearing the Report, went 
to Solomon with white Aprons and Gloves, as Emblems of their 
Innocence, and informed him of every Thing relative to the 
Affair, as far as they knew ; and offered their Affiftance in 
order to difcover the three Fellow-Crafts, who had difappeared. 
They feparated themfelves into four Parties ; three went Eaft, 
three Weft, three North, and three South, in Queft of the 
'Murderers. One of the twelve travelling on the Sea fide, near - 
Joppa , being fatigued, fat down to refrefli himfelf; but was 
foon alarmed by the following hideous Exclamations from the 
Cliff of a Rock : “ Oh ! that my Throat had been cut acrofs, 
** my Tongue torn out by the Root, and buried in the Sands 

* The Mafont differ alfo in this Particular t fome will infift upon it that he was 
not carried out at the Weft Door, but that the Attain ns took up a Stone on the Spot , 
where he was killed, dug a Hole, buried him in it, and then carried away the Rub* 
bifh in their Aprons. As it is a Matter which at this Time cannot be proved, it ia 
Cot worth while to have any Difputes about it. ' 

f Every Mafter, at the lime of Making, is knocked down ; the Junior War* 
den ftrikes him with a 24 Inch Gauge acrofs his Throat ; the Senior ftrikes • him 
with the Square on his Left Breaft, and the Mafter ftrikes him upon the Head with 
i Gavel till he falls, though not entirely by their Blows, the Brethren pulling him 
down at the very Intent the Blows arc given. 

G “of 

r C 4 2 1 

of the Sw at Low Water Mark, a C*bfc'$ Length fam the 
c ‘ Shore where the Tide ebbs and flows twice in Tw e nty-fon,r 
u Hours, ere I had confented to the Death of our Qrand 
c< Mafter Hiram \ ’V— “ Oh ! (fays another) that my Heart 
<c had been torn from under my naked Left Breaft, ancf given 
€t a Prey to the Vultures of the Air, rather than I had been 
concerned in the Death of fogood a Mafter !” “ But (fays 
u a Third) I ftruck him harder than you both; ’twas I that 
killed him. Oh ! that my Body had been fevered in two, 
and fcattered to the South and North ; my Bowels burnt tp 
cc Affies in the South, and fcattered between the four Winds 
(i of the Earth, ere I had been tjhe Caufe of the Death of oiy: 
<6 good Mafter Hiram." The Fellow-Craft hearing this, went 
in Queft of his two Afiociates ; and they entered the Cliff of 
the Kock, took and bound them fa ft, and brought them tp 
King Solomon^ before whom they confefled their Guilt; and 
begged io die. The Sentence palled op them was the faipe $$ 
they expiefled in their Exclamation in the Cliff; Juhzlcfs 
Throat was cut acrofs ; Jubelo's Heart was torn from under his 
J^eft Breaft ; and Jubelum's Body was fevered in twQ f and 
fcattered in the South and North. 

After their Execution, King Solomon fent the twelve Crafts 
to raife their Mafter Hiram , in order that he might be interred 
in the Sanftum Sanfiorum. And Solomon told them, that if they 
Could not find a Key-word/in him, or about him, it was loft; 
for there were but three in the World that kueyv it, and if 
never could be dilivered without the three were together ; 
therefore, as one was dead, it was loft. But the firft Sign and 
Word tha£ was made and fpoke at his railing, fhopld be bis 
ever after. The twelve Crafts went and cleared the Rubbifh, 
and found their Mafter in a madgled Condition, having lain 
fifteen Days; upon which they lifted up their Hands above 
their Heads in aftonifliment, and faid 0 Lord my God! This 
being the firft Word and fign. King Solomon adopted it a$ the 
grand Sign of a Mafar Mqjon , and it is ufed at this Day in aU 
the Lodges of Mafters. ' 

£>. Brother, when Hiram was thus found dead, how was he 

jra ? itd } . 

A. By the five Points of FeHowfhip. 

f What are the five Points of FeHowfhip? 

He was taken by the Entered Apprentice’s Grip, aiuPtb* 
Skin flipped off. Then was he taken by the Fellow-Craft’s 
prip, which aifo flipped off ; and 1 aftly by the Maker’s Grip, 

4^ Brother, it appears you could not have been raifed but bjr 
the hvc Points of FeHowfhip, Pray explain them. 

A. Hand 

{ 43 ] 

A. Htnd in Hand ftgnifies, that I Will alwtys put forth ifcy 
Hand to ferve a Brother as fiir as in my power lies. — Foot to 
Foot, that I never will be afraid to go a Foot out of my Way 
to ferve 1 Brother .^-Knee to Knee, that when I Pray, I 
Should ntver forget my Brother's Welfare — Breaft to Breaft, 
to fhew I will keep my Brother's Setrets as my own.— The 
Left Hand fupporting the Back, that 1 will always fupport a 
Brother, as far as I can, without being detrimental to my own 
Family. 

1 i£. Thank you, Brother. — But pray why was you deprived 

of all Metal ? 

A. Becaufe there was neither Axe, Hammer, or Sound of 
'Metal tool heard in building the Temple of Strtmvn, 
r §. Why fo, Brother? 

A. Becaufe it fhould not be polluted. 

4^ How is it po&ble. Brother, that fuch a large Buildmg 
ihould be carried on, without the Ufe or Sound of feme Metal 
tool? 

A . It was prepared in the Fore# of Ltban&i, and brought 
down upon proper Carriages, and fet up with wooden Mauls 
made cm Putpofe for the Occafion. 

f , Why were both, your Shoes taken from off yotrr Feet? 
Becaufe the Place I flood on when I web made a Mafon 
Was Holy Ground. 

§• What fuppom. out Lodge ? 

A. Three Pillars 

f . Pray what are their Names, Brother ? 

Wifdom, Strength, and Beauty. 

Who do they reprefent ? 

A . Three Grand Matters; Svlomtm, King of If reel \ HindR, 
ting of Tyre\ and Hiram Abiff*, Who was killed by the t&rife 
Fellow-Crafrs. 

Were thefe three Grand Matters Concerned in bmlflihjj 
'Solomon’s Temple? 

A. They were. ' ' • ' ' 

4£. What was their Bafiners, Brother ? 

A . Solomon found Provifion and Money to pay the Work?* 
Ihert j Hiram , King of 7y**, provided Materials for the Build- 
ing ; and Hiram Performed or fuperintended the Workl 
This concludes the Matter's Part, and contains more thah 
jone Lodge in ten makes Ufe of ; though in others they pre- 
tend to alk Other Queftioiis, no Way relative to -Majonty. 

[ 44 ] 

The Manner of Conftituting a Lodge , according to Ancient 

Cujiom. 

The Grand Mafter (hould be prefent at the confecrating a 
new Lodge* with his Deputy, Wardens, &c. but it is more 
common now to do it by his Deputy. Though, if the Deputy 
isabfent, the Grand Wardens may perform the Ceremony. 

The Lodge being opened, the new Mafter and Wardens 
being among the Fellow-Crafts, the Grand Mafter a(ks his 
Deputy, if he has examined them, and whether be finds them 
duly inftrufted in the Myfteries of the Order ; and, on the De- 
puty’s anfwering in the affirmative, the Candidate is taken 
from among his Fellows, and prefented to the Grand Mafter 
by the Deputy, who fays, 44 Right Worlhipful Grand Mafter, 
44 the Brethren attending here, defire to be formed into & Re- 
44 gular Lodge ; and accordingly I prefent this worthy Brother 
44 [mentioning his Name] to be inftalled their Mafter, as I 
44 have good Reafon to believe him to be true and trufty, and 
44 he will be an Honour to the Fraternity.” 

The Candidate is then placed on the Grand Matter’s Left 
Hand, and, having had the; unanimous Confent of all the Bre- 
thren, the Grand Mafter fayS, 

44 1 conftitute and form thefe good Brethren, into a New 
44 and Regular Lodge, and appoint you [mentioning his 
44 Chriftian and Sirname] Mafter of it, not in the leaft doubt- 
44 ing of your Capacity and Care to preferve the Credit and 
44 Character of your Lodge.” 

Then the Deputy gives him the Charges, and Orders belong- 
ing to a Mafter, and afks if he will fubmit to the faid Charges, 
as all Matters have done before him : he anfwers, 44 1 will by 
your help”; and then he takes the following Oath, which is 
given to every new Mafter annually, on their Knees. 

44 T — <?, F, of my own free Will and Confent, in the Pre- 
44 *■* fence of Almighty God and this right Woiihipful Lodge, 
44 dedicated to St. Jobn y do moft foiemnly and fincerely fwear, 
44 that I will not deliver the Word and Grip belonging to the 
44 Chair whilft I am Mafter, or at any Time hereafter, except 
44 it be to a Mafter in the Chair, or apart Mafter, him or them 
44 whom I (hall find to be fuch after due Trial and Examina- 
44 tion. — I alfo fwear, that I will aft as Mafter of this Lodge 
till next St. Johns Day, and fill the Chair every Lodge 
44 Night, if I am within the Length of my Cable Tow. — I 
44 likewife further promife, that I will not wrong this Lodge, 
44 but aft in every Refpeft for the good of Majonry , by be- 
44 having myfelf agreeable to the reft of the Brethren ; and 

maintaining 

Uy G oOglg 

t 45 1 

c< maintaining good Order and Regularity in this Lodge, as 
u far as lies, in my Power. All this I fwear, with a firm and 
c< ftedfaft Resolution to perform the fame, under no lefs than the 
u four following Penalties; my Throat cut acrofs, my Tongue 
fc torn out, my Heart tom from my Left Breaft, and my Body 
u fever’d in two. So help me Go*d and aflift me in this my 
<c Obligation belonging to the Chair/* \K\Jfes the Bock ] He 
is then raifed* up, and prefented with his Warrants, the Book 
of Conftitutions, the Lodge-Book, and the Inftruments of 
his Office. 

Then the Members of this new Lodge with their Matter, 
make their Obedience to the Grand Matter, or whoever offi- 
ciates in his Abfence, return Thanks in a very refpeftful Man- 
ner, and promife Obedience to the Grand. 

The Grand Matter then bids the new Matter enter upon 
the Duties of his Office, which he does by prefenting his Se- 
nior Warden for his Worlhip’s Approbation ; and upon this the 
Senior Grand Warden gives him his Charges, and the Inttru- 
ments of his Office, and inftals him in his proper Place. 

The new Matter then nominates his Junior Warden, and he 
is alfo prefented to the Junior Grand Warden, and receives his 
Charges, the Enfigns of his Office, and is inftalled* 

When this is done, the Grand Matter congratulates the Bre- 
thren of the new Lodge, and gives them Joy of their Matter 
and Wardens, recommending Harmony, and hoping they Will 
. ufe their utmoft Endeavours in the Cultivation of the Royal 
Art, and the focial Virtues. Then the Grand Secretary, or 
whoever is ordered by the Grand Matter, proclaims the Lodge 
duly conftituted, and gives them the Number of the Lodge, 
and orders it to be regiftered in the Grand Lodge Book, and 
to notify the fame to all the other Lodges* As foon as they 
have received and returned the ufual Demonftrations of Satis- 
faction and Joy on the above Account, the Grand Matter or- 
ders the Senior Grand Warden to clofe the Lodge. 

A Prayer frequently ufed at the making of a Member . 

<c Holy and glorious Lord God , thou great Architeft of 
“ ^ Heaven and Earth, who art the Giver of all good Gifts 
and Graces, and has promifed that were two or three are 
** gathered together in thy Name, thou wilt be in the Midft 
w of them : In thy Name we affemble and meet together, mod 
cc humbly befeeching thee toblefs us in all our Undertakings, 
c< that we may know and ferve thee aright, that all our Doings 
“ may tend to thy Glory, and the Salvation of our Souls. — 

<c And 

i 4* ] . x 

u Arid We be fetch thee, O Lord Odd, td Hefs this but j>r$- 
« fent Undertaking, and grant that thifc 61* hew Brcrthet may 
** dedicate his Lift td thy Service, and be a trrie and faithful 
<c Brother among as : Eftdae him with a Competency of thy 
Divine Wifdom, that he may, with the Secrets of Free 
u Mafohryi be able to unfold the Myfteries of Oodlinefs and 
tc Chriftianity. This wc tiroft humbly beg in the Name of 
J e f us 'Cbrijl our Lit A and Stroibtft. Jttiien.” 

Defcription cf the Claps belonging to each Degree of M&- 

fonry. 

A T the Beginning of the federal Degrees of Majonty in the 
^ former Part of mis Book, we gave the $ign> wora, Poft- 
VPordy and Grip y belonging to each ; and the following is the 
Manner of giving the Cl'aps : trffc. 

The Mqflefs Clap. Hold both your Hands Over your Head, 
and then ftrikfe them upon tout Apron $ both Feet mtfft keep 
Time upon the Floor, fluking the Floors by ftamprhg with 
your Feet as much as poffible. There are two Reafons for this 
Sign. lit. When the Crafts faw their Grand Matter Mirant lye 
dead, they lifted up both their Hands in great Smprize, arid 
exclaimed, a O Lord my God!" 2d. When Sohttutn dedicated 
the Temple to the Lbrd> he flood Up, arid, lifting both his 
Hands over his Head, faid, u O Lord my God, great art Thou 
u above all Gods ; for this Hour will I adore thy Name. 0 

The Fellow-Craft' s Clap. Form the Sign of the Craft, by 
holding the Left Hand quite ftjuare and upright; and clap 
your Right and Left Hands together ; ttrikeyour Left Breatt 
With the Right Hand, and then give a Clap with the fame 
Hand on your Apron, keeping due Time with your Right 
Foot. 

Entered apprentices have no Clop belonging to their Degree. 

Manner of Drinking among Mafons in a Ledge. 

P' VERY Member is at Liberty to chufe his own Liquor; 
^ and he may even drink as often as he pleafes, provided. 
When a Public Health or Toaft is given, that he joins the 
Company. At different Parts of the Evening, when the 
Matter Chufes to propofe a Public Toaft* he fills his Glafs, and 
defires the Senior and Junior Wardens to fee the fame is done 
at their refpe&ive Parts of the Table ; then the Matter 'gets up 
and fays, 

u Brethren, are you all charged ? . > ‘ - 

The 

I 47 3 

The Setjioi and Junior Wardens anf^ib . . - 
« We are all charged in the South ?nd Weft, Right Wor-r 
^fhiprtaK" 

Then all (tending up, they tofs their Qlafles off, obferving 
the Motion of the Matter; and if the Health or Toaft wa$, 
pippofed with Three Tin»e$ Three, they throw their Right 
Hand with the empty Glafles quite from their Breafts, and 
draw them three Timet acrofe the Throat ; then at three . 
Motions they are put on the Table again, all at once, and 
raifing their Hands as high as the Breaft, give nine Claps a- 
gainft each other,, flopping a Moment at every Third, and, 
finifhing fometimes with a Huzza. 

A Free Mafon may be known in any Company by a Brother*, 
without a Stranger’s being privy to it ; and likewife what De- 
gree he belongs to, as follows, viz . 

If he takes his Glafs or Pot, and draws it acrofs his Throat 
either before or after he drinks, he i$ an Entered Apprentice , as. 
by the Obligation he took when made, the Penalty of it was, 
that he would fooner have his Throat cut acrofs, than dif*. 
cover any Thing of Mafonry. 

By drawing the Glafs acrofs his Left Breaft, and touching 
it, proves him a Fellow-Craft \ the Penalty of his Obligation, 
being this, that he would fogner have his Heart torn from under 
his Left Breaft, and given to the Birds of the Air as a Prey, 
than difeover any part of Mafonry. 

If he draws it aejafs his Belly, he is a Maflery the Penalty 
of his Obligation being this, That he would fooner have hi$ 
Body fevered in Two; one Part carried into the South, and 
the other to the North, and his Bowels tp be burnt in the South 
and North, than difcovef any Part of Mafonry. 

Toajts ufeid ty Mqfm* 

To the King and the Craft, as Mafter Mafms 
To all the Kings, , Princes and Potentates that ever propa- 
gated the Royal A>tt 

To his Imperial Majefty (our Brother) Francis , Emperor of 
Germany 

To all the Fraternity round the Globe 
To the Right Worfhipful the Qrapd Matter 
To all the Noble Lords, and Right Worfhipful Brethren, 
that have been Grand Matters 
To all well-difpofed charitable Mafons 
To the Worfhipful Grand Wardens 
To the perpetual Honour of Free Mafoni 

T* 

f 4 * ] 

To the Mafters.and Wardens of all Regular Lodges 
To all tiue and faithful Brethren, &c. 

To .all the freeborn Sons of the Antient and Honourable Craft 
To the Memory of him who firft planted a Vine 
To Mafons and to Mafons Bairns, 

And Women with both Wit and Charms, 

That love to lie in Mafons Arms. 

To all the Female Friends of Free Mafons 
To him that firft the Work began, &c. 

To the Memory of the Tyrian Artift 
To the Memory of Virtruvius , Angelo t Wren , and other noble 
Artifts 

To the antient Sons of Peace 

To all upright and pure Mafons 

Profperity to the moft antient and honourable Craft 

To the Secret and Silent . 

To all Mafons who walk the Line 

To the King’s good Health 
The Nation’s Wealth ; 

The Prince God blefs, 

The Fleet Succefs, 

The Lodge no lefs. 

To him that did the Temple rear, &c. • 

To each true and faithful Heart, 

That ftill preferves the fecret Art. 

To all thofe who live within Compafs and Square 

To all focial Free Mafons 

To the innocent and faithful Crafts, &c. 

To all true Mafons and upright. 

Who faw the Eafl where rofe the Light. 

To each charming Fair, and faithful fhe. 

That loves the Craft of Mafonry. ■ 

To the Increafe of perpetual Friendflup and Peace among the 
antient Craft 

To each faithful Brother, both antient and young. 

Who governs his Paflions and bridles his Tongue. 

To all antient Mafons^ wherefoever difperfed, or opprefied 
round the Globe, &c, . 

To Solemn' s Sons . 

To the Memory of P. H. Z. L. and I, A» 

To all true and faithful Mafons. 

SONGS 

S O N G S 

by Feee-Masons in all good Lodges* 
The Entered Apprentice's SONG* 

By the late Mr. Matthew Birkhead. 

fung at the End of the Entered Apprentice’s Le&ure, 
with the Mailer’s Leave. 

C OME let us prepare. 

We Brothers that are 
Aflembled on merry Occafion ; 

Lets drink, laugh, andflng ; 

Our Wine has a Spring ; 

Here’s a Health to an Accepted Mafon . 

Chorus . 

The World is in Pain 
Our Secrets to gain, 

And (till let them wonder and gaze on : 

They ne’er can divine 
The IVord or the Sign 
Of a Free and an Accepted Mafon . 

Chorus, 

’Tis This , and ’tis That y 
They cannot tell What , 

Why fo many Great Men of the Nation 
Should Aprons put on, 

T o make themfel ves one 
With a Free and an Accepted Mafon. 

Choruf • 

Great Kings y Dukes , and Lords 9 
Have laid by their Swords, 

Our MyfFry to put a good Grace on. 

And ne’er been aiham’d 

To hear themfelves nam’d 
With a Free and an Accepted Mafon. 

Chorus. 

H Aft* 

Ufed 

To be 

Digitized -by. i_xQOQle 

iso) 

, Antiquity’s Pride 

We have on our Side, 

And it maketh Men juft in their Station: 

There’s nought but what’s good 
To be underftood 
By a Free and an Accepted Mafon • 

Chorus. 

Then join Hand fn Handy 
T’ each other firm ftand. 

Let’s be merry, and put a bright Face on : 

What Mortal can boaft 
So Noble a Toaft % 

Asa Free and an Accepted Mafon ? 

Chotus. 

The following Verfe is generally fung between the Fifth and Sixth 

Verfes . 

We’re true and fincere, 

And juft to the Fair 9 
Who will truft us on ev’ry Occafion : ‘ 

No Mortal can more 
^ The Ladies adore* 

Than a Free and an Accepted Mafon • 

Chorus . 

THE 

Fellow-Craft’s SON G. 

By Charles Delafaye, Efq. 

To be fung at the End of the Fellow-Craft’s Lecture. 

T_J AIL Masonry ! thou Craft divine I 
***** Glory of Earth from Heav’n reveal’d ; 

Which doth with Jewels precious Ihine, . 

From all but Atafons Eyes conceal’d, 

Chorus. 

Tby Praifes due who can rehearfe 
In nervous Profe or flowing Verfe f 

As Men from Brutesdiftinguifh’d are, 

A Mafon other Men excels $ 

Eor 

c ii i 

For what’s in Knowledge choice arid rare 

But in his Brea^ fecurely dwells. 

G H -O * U S.- - 

His JUent Breajl and faithful Heart, 

Preferve the Secrets of the Art. 

From fcorching Heat, and piercing Cold ; 

From Beafts whofe roar theForeft rends * 
From the Affaults of Warriors bold,. 

The Mafons Art Mankind defends. 

C- H O R U S. 

Be to this Art due Honour paid. 

From which Mankind receives fuch Aid., 

Enfigns of State, that feed our Pride, 
Diftin&ions troublefome arid vain ! 

By Mafons true are laid afide : 

Art’s free-born Sons fuch Toys difdain. 

C H O R V s«- 
Ennobled by the Name they bear % 

Pi/litfguijfcd by the Badge they wear* - 

Sweet Fellowlhip, from Envy free, . 

Friendly Converfe of Brotherhood, " 
The Lodge’s laftingCement he ! : 

Which has for Ages firmly flood. 

C h o r u 

A Lodge, thus built for Ages pafl. 

Has lafed and will ever lajl . 

Then in our Song be Juftie? done - 
To thofe who have enrich’d the Art, 
From Jabel down to Burlington , 

And let each brother beair a Part 

C K'Ot tf s. 

Let noble Mafons Healths go round 'f 
Their Praife in lofty Lodge refound. . 

H 2 

C 52 3 

The M A ST E R’s SON G. 

HUS mighty Eajlern Kings * and fome 
** Of Abraham* s Race, and Monarchs good. 

Of Egypt ^ Syria , Greece , and Rome y 
True Architecture underftood: 

No wonder then if Mafons join, 

* To celebrate thofe Mafon Kings 
With folemn Note and flowing Wine, 

Whilft ev’ry Brother jointly fings. 

pH OR US. 

Who can unfold the Royal Art ? 

Or fing its Secrets in a $ mg ? ; 

Tbeyrefafely kept in Mafon’s Heart, 

And to the Antient Lodge belong . 

The WAR D E NV SON G; 

Or, H I S T O R Y of MASO N R Y,~ 

By Dr. 'Anduson, 

To be fung at the Quarterly Communication . 

'ITT’HENE’ER we are alone. 

And ev’ry Stranger gone. 

In Summer, Autumn, Winter, Spring, 

Begin to Play, begin to Sing, 

The Mighty Genius of the lofty Lodge 7 
I9 ev’y Age 

That did engage, < 

And well infpir’d the Prince, the Prieft the Judge, 
The Noble and the Wife, to join. 

In rearing Mafons Grand Defign . 

The Grand Defign to rear, 

,, - Was ever Mafons care, . 

"From Adam down before the Flood, 

Whofe Art old Noah underftood. 

And did impart to Japhat , Sbem and Mam f 
Who taught their Race 
To build apace 

Proud Babefs Town and Tow’r, until it came 

T# 

&t grt + zod by CjOO^Ic 

f S3 '3 

To be admir’d too much, and then 

Difperfed were the “Sons of Men. 

- • 

But tho’ their Tongues confus’d 

In diftant Climes they us’d. 

They brought from Shinah Orders good. 

To rear the Art they underftood : 

Therefore fing fir ft the Princes of the Iiles ; 

Next Belas Great, 

Who fixt his Seat 

In old Affyria , building ftately Piles 5 

And Mitzr aim’s Pyramids among 

The other Subje£b of our Song. 

And Sbem who did inftil 

The ufeful wond’rous Skill 

Into the Minds of Nations great; 

And Abram next who did relate 

Th’ AJJyrian Learning to his Sons, that, when 1 
In Egypt's Land, 

By Pharaohls Hand, 

Were roughly taught to be moft fkilful Men; 
’Till their Grand-Mafter Mofes rofe. 

And them deliver’d from their Foes. 

But who can fing his Praile, 

Who did the Tent upraife ; 

Then fing his Workmen true as Steel, 

Aholiah and Bezaleel 5 

Sing Tyre and Sidon 9 and Pbenicians old ? 

But Sdmpfon* s Blot 

Is ne’er forgot : 

He blabb’d his Secrets to his Wife that fold 

Her Hufband, who at laft pull’d down 

The Houfe on all i n-Gaza Town. * 

• . - " - 

But Solomon the King' 

With folemn Note we fing. 

Who rear’d at length the Grand Dejign , 

By Wealth, and rower, and Art divine; 

Helpt by the learned Hiram , Tyrian Prince, 

By Craftfmen good. 

That underftood 

.Wife Hiram AbijjF* charming Influence : 

He 

He aided Jervijh Matters bright, 

Whofe curious Works non# *an recite, 

Thefe glorious. Mdfit* Kings, 

Each thankful Brother fing?. 

Who to its Zenith raised the Art, 

And to all Nations did impart 
The ufeful Skill : For from the Temp!* fine 
To ev’ry Land, 

And foreign Strand, 

The Craftfman march’d, taught the Gr*t td Deftgn 

Of which the Kings, with mighty Peer*, 

And learned Men, were Overfeers, 

Diana's Temple next, ' . \ 

In Lejfer Afia fixt ; 

And Babylon's proud W*lls the Seat 
Of Nebuchadnezzar the Great t 
The Tomb of MAufoljts tb e.Gmw Kmg i 
With many a Pile 
Of lofty Stile 

In Africa and Greater Afia-, fing, 

In Greece, in Sicily, pniReme, 

That had thofe Nations ovefc ome. 

Then fing Augujlus t too. 

The Gen’ral Matter true, . 

Who by Vitruvius did re fine 

And fpread the Mafons Grand Deftgn, 

Thro North and Wefi\ till antkflt J fattens chofc 
The Royal Art 
In ev’ry Part, 

And Roman Archite&uro Could difelofej 
Until the Saxons warlike Rage, . 

Deftroy’d the Skill of many an Age. 

At length the Gothic Style • 

Prevail’d in Britain's Ilk, 

When Mafon’s Grand Deftgn reviv’d. 

And in their wejl- form’d Bodge* thriv’d, 

Tho’ not as former^, in. Romm Days ; 

Yet fing the Fanes 
Of Saxons, Danes, 

Of Scotch, Welch, Irtfn butfagfijtfttbc Praife 

I 65 1 

Of Athelftan and Edwin Prince, 

Our Matter of great Influence* 

And eke the Norman Kings 
The Britijh Mafons fiflgs* 

Till Roman Style revived there. 

And Britijb Crowns united were 
In learned James, a Mafon King, Who faiPd 
Fine Heaps of Stones 
By Inigo Jones , 

That rivaPd wife Palladio , jufUy praifd 
In Italy and Britain too. 

For Archite&ure firm andtrue. 

And thence in ev’ry Reign 
Did Mafonry obtain, 

With Kings, the Noble aftd the Wife, 
Whofe Fame refounding to the Skies, 
Excites the prefent Age in Lodge 10 join* 

And Aprons wear 
With Skill and Care 

Toraife the Mafons antient Grand Dejign y 
And to revive th’ Augujlan Stole 
In many an artful glorious Pile. 

From henceforth ever fiilg 
The Crdftfman and the King ; 

With Poetry and Mufick fweet. 

Refound their Harmony compleat ; 

And with Geometry in fkilful Hand, 

Due Homage "pay, 

Without Delay, 

To ~Byron, noble Lord, our Matter Grand ; 
He rules the Free-born Sons of Art , 

By Love and Friendflup, Hand and Heart# 

CHORUS. 

Who can rehearfe the Praife, 

In foft Poetic Lays, . 

Or folid Profe, of Mafons true, * 
Whofe Art tranfcetids the common View ? 
Their Secrets ne’er to Strangers yet expos’d, 
Preferv’d fhall be 
By Mafons Free , 

And only to the antient Lodge difclos’d ; 

* 

I 56 ] 

Becaufe they’re kept in Major! s Heart , 

By Brethren of the Royal Art. 

A New SONG, by Brother Oates; 

I S Mafonry unites Mankind, 

To generous Anions forms the Soul j 
So ftri£k in Union we’re conjoin’d. 

One Spirit animates the Whole. 

C h o R u s. 

Then let Mankind our Deeds approve , 

Since Union y Harmony and Love 9 
Shall waft us to the Realms above • 

Where e’er afpiripg Domes arife. 

Wherever facrea Altars (land 5 
Thofe Altars blaze up to the Skies, 

Thofe Domes proclaim the Major! s Hand. 

Then let , &V. 

The Stone unlhap’d as Lumber lies, 

’Till Mafon y s Art its Form refines ; 

So Paiiions do our Souls difguife, 

’Till focial Virtue calms our Minds. 

Then let , GV. 

Let Wretches at our Manhood rail. 

But thofe who once our Judgment prove. 

Will own that we who build fo well. 

With equal Energy can love. 

' Then let , £s fc 

Tho’ ftill our chief Concern and Care, 

Be to defervtf a Brother’s Name j 
For ever mindful of the Fair, 

Their choiceft Favours ftill we claim. 

Then let , £$V. 

From us pale Difcord long is fled. 

With all her Train, of Mortal Spite, 

Nor in our Lodge dares (hew her Head, 

Sunk in the Gloom of ehdlefs Night. 

Then let yK ft. 

My 

' [ 57 ] 

^My Brethren charge your Glaffes high. 

To our Grand Mailer’s noble Name ; 

Our Shouts (hall beat the vaulted Sky, 

And every Tongue his Praife proclaim. 

Then let, &c. 

Here the Grand Majlers Health is to be dr akk. 

A S O N G by Brother Oates. 

T> Y MaforCs Art the afpiring Dome 

In various Columns lhall arife ; , 

All Climates are their native Home, 

Their Godlike Anions reach the Skies. 

Heroes and Kings revere their Name, 

While Poets fi/ig their lafting Fame. 

Great, noble, generous, good, and brave. 

Are Titles they molt juftly claim ; 

Their Deeds lhall live beyond the Grave, 

Which fome unborn lhall loud proclaim. 

Time lhall their glorious Acts inroll. 

While Love and Friendlhip charm the Soul. 

SONG ^ by a Brother * 

T E T Masonry be now my Theme, 

Throughout the Globe to fpread its Fame, 

And eternize each worthy Brother's ^ Name \ 

Your Praife lhall to the Skies refound. 

In lafting Happinefs abound, , . 

And with fweet Union all your Deeds, your Deeds be crown’d. 

Chorus. 

Sing then my Mufe to Mafons Glory, 

Your Namef are Jo rever'd in Story , 

That all th * admiring World do now adore ye . 

Let Harmony Divine infpire 

Your Souls with Love and gen’rous Fire, 

To copy well wife Solomon your Sire : 

Knowledge fublime lhall fill each Heart 
The Rules of Geometry t’ impart, 

Whilfl Wifdom, Strength and Beauty crown the glorious Art. 

Sing, &c. 

I Let 

C 53 3 

Let noble Crawford's Health go round, 

In fwelling Cups, all Care be drown’d. 

And Hearts united ’tnongft the Craft be found; * 

May evcrlafting Scenes of Joy 
His peaceful Hours of Blifs employ, 

Which Time’s all-conqu’ring Hand fhall ne’er, fhall ne’er de» 
ftroy. Sing* 

My Brethren , thus all Cares refign, 

Your Hearts let glow with Thoughts divine, 

And Veneration fhow to Solomon's Shrine. 

Our Annual Tribute thus we’ll pay. 

That late Pnfteritv fhall fay. 

We’ve crovyn’d vyith Joy this glorious, happy, happy Day. 

Sing) 

SONG, by a Brother - 9 Tune, Greedy Midas. 

\\f ITH Harmony and flowing Wine, 

: * My Brethren all come with me join 
To celebrate this happy Day, 

And to our Matter Homage pay. 

Hail ! happy, happy, facred Place, 

Where Friendfhip fmiles in ev’ry Facs* 

And Royal Art doth fill the Chair, 

Adorned with his Noble Square. 

Next fings my Mufe our Warden’s Praife, 

With Chorus loud in tuneful Lays; 

Oh ! may thefe Columns ne’er decay. 

Until the World diflolves away. 

My Brethren all, come join with me, * 

To fing the Praiie of Mafonry ; 

The Noble, Faithful, and the Brave, 

Whofe Arts fhall live beyond the Grave. 

Let Envy hide her fhameful Face, 

Before us antient Sons of Peace; 

W hole golden Precepts ftill remain, 

Free from Envy, P«de, or Stain.. ' . 

SOLOMONS 

SOLOMON’S TEMPLE: 

AN 

ORATORIO. 

As it was performed at the Philharmonic Room, in 
Fijbamble-ftreet , Dublin , for the Benefit of Sick and 
Diftrefied Free-Mafons. 

XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 

The Words by Mr. JAMES EYRE WEEKS. 

The Mufic competed by Mr. Richard Broadway; Orga- ■ 
nift of St. Patrick’s Cathedral. 

DramatJs Person je. 

SOLOMON, the. Grand Mafter. 
HIGH PRIEST. 

H I R A M, the Workman. 

URIEL, Angel of the Sun. 
SHEBA, Quepn of the South. 

• Chorus pf Priefts and Nobles. 

Solomon. 

RECITATIVE. 

C Onven’d we’re met-r Chief Oracle of Heav’n, ' 

To whom the facred Myfteries are giv’n. 

We’re met 'to bid a Splendid Fabrick rife. 

Worthy the Mighty Ruler of the Skiei. 

High Priest. 

And lo ! where Uriel, Angel of the Sun, 

Arrives, to fee the Mighty Bufinefs done. 

• I 2 A I R. 

r 3 
a 1 r . 

Behold he comes upon the Wings of Light, 

And with his Sunny Veftment chears the Sight. 

Uri e^l. 

RECITATIVE. 

The Lord-Supreme,- Grand Mafter of the Skies J 
Who bid Creation from a Chaos rife. 

The Rules of Architecture firft engrav’d 
Ou Adam’s Heart. 

Chorus of Priefts and Nobles. 

To Heaven’s high Architect all Praife, 

All Gratitude be giv’n. 

Who deign’d the Human Soul to raife. 

By Secrets fprung from Heav’n. 

Solomon, 

RECITATIVE. 

Adam, well verPd in Arts, 

Gave to his Sons the Plumb and Line; 

By Mafonty, fage Tubal Cain 
To the deep Organ tun’d the Strain. ' 

AIR. 

And while he fwell’d the melting Note, 

'On High the Silver Concords float. 

High Priest. 

RECIT ATIVE, accompany’d. 

Upon the Surface of. the Wavesi - . • 

fWhen God a mighty Deluge ppurs) . ^ 

Noah a chofe Remnant faves, f 

And lay’d the Ark’s ftupendous Floors. 

U r i t L. 

A I R. 

Hark from on High the Mafori Wbfd 1 
44 David, my Servant, (hall not build 
44 A Lodge for Heaven’s all Sov’reign Lord ; 

44 Since Blood and War have ftain’d his Shield : 

44 That for our Deputy, his Son, — ' ; 

44 We have referv’d — -Prince Solomon. Da Capo 
C h o R u $ of Priefts and Nobles. 

Sound Great J EH O V A’s Praife ! 

Who bid young Solomon the Temple raife. 

Solo m on. 
'RECITATIVE. 

So grand a Structure fhali we raife, 

That Men ihell wonder ! Angels gaze ! 

‘ A By 

[ jS. ) 

By Art Divine it fliall be rear’d, . ' 

Nor fhall the Hammer’s Noife be heard. 

CHORUS* 

Sound Great J E H O V A ’s Praife 1 
Who bid King Solomon the Temple raifc. » 

Uriel. 

RECITATIVE. 

To plan the Mighty Dome, 

Hie a m, the Mafter-Mafon’s come. 

AIR, by U r i e If. 

We know thee, by thy Apron whjte. 

An Architeft to be. 

We know thee, by thy Trowel bright. 

Well fldll’d in Mafonry. 

We know thee, by thy Jewel’s Blazer 
Thy manly Walk and A*r* 

Inftru&ed, thou the Lodge (halt raife ; 

Let all for Work prepare. 

Hiram. 

A I R. 

Not like Babel’s haughty Building, 

Shall our greater Lodge he fram’d: £ 

That to hideous Jargon yielding, 

Juftly was a Babel nam’d : 

There Confufion, all o’er-bearing. 

Neither Sign, nor Word they knew, 

We, our Work with Order fquaring. 

Each Proportion fliall be true. 

,SotOMOKi 

RECITATIVE, , 
Cedars, which fince Creation grew. 

Fall of themfelves to grace the Dome; 

All Lebanon, as if (he knew 
The great Occafion — lo, is come ? 

Uriel, 

AIR. 

Behold, my Brethren of the Sky, 

The Work begins, worthy an Angel’s Eye. 

Chorus of Priefts and Nobles. 
Be prefent all ye heavenly Hoft, 

The Work; begins — The Lord defrays the Coft ! 

A C 

{ 6z 1 

ACT II. 

Messenger. 

RECITATIVE, 

"D E H O L D, attended by a numerous Train, 

" Queen of the South, fair Sheba, greets thy Reign!' 

In Admiration of thy Wiftiom, fhe 
Comes to prefent the bended Knee. 

Solomon to Hiram 
% RECITATIVE. 

Receive her with a fair Salute ; 

Such as with Majefty may fuit. 

(Hiram, 

AIR. 

When Allegiance bids obey, 

» We with Pleafure own its Sway. 

Enter Sheba attended . ■ 

Obedient to fuperior Greatnefs, fee. 

Our Scepter hails thy mightier Majefty. 

Thus Phebe, Queen of Shade and Night, 

Owning the Sun’s fuperior Rays, 

With feebler Glory, leffecLighc • 

Attends the Triumph of his Blaze. 

Oh, all- excelling Prince, receive 
The Tribute due to fuch a King! 

Not the Gift, but Will, believe \ 

Take the Heart, not what we bring. t>> C. 

Solomon. 

RECITATIVE. 

Let Meafures foftly iweet * 

IUuftrious Sheba’s Prefence greet. 

Solomon. 

AIR. 

Tune the Lute and firing the Lyre* 

Equal to the Fair we fing ! 

Who can fee and not admire 
Sheba, Confort for a King ! 

Enlivening Wit and Beauty join, 

Meltiqg Senfe and graceful Air, 

Here united Powers combine 
To make her brighteft of the Fair. D. C. 
Solomon. 

RECITATIVE. 

Hiram, our Brother and our Friend, 

Do thou the Qneen with me attend. 

S C E N 

)igitizeeH9y )ogle 

r 63 1 

SCENE II. A View of the Tmpte. 

High Priest. 
RECITATIVE, 

Sacred to Heaven behold the Dome appears ; 

Lo, what auguft Solemnity it wears ; 

Angels themfelves have deign’d to deck the Frame, 

And beauteous Sheba lhall report its Fame. 

A I R. 

When the Queen of the South (hall return 
To the Climes which acknowledge her Sway, 

Where the Sun’s warmer Beams fiercely burn. 

The Princefs with Tranfport (ball fay, 

Well* worthy my Journey, I’ve feen 
A Monarch both graceful and wife, 

Deferving the Love of a Queen ; 

And a Temple well worthy the Skies . 1 D. C. 
CHORUS. 

Open ye Gates, receive a (^oeen who (hares 
With equal Senfe your Happinefs and Cares. 

Hiram. 

RECITATIVE. 

,Of Riches much, but more of Wifdom,,fee, 

Proportion’d Workmanfliip and Mafonry. 

Hiram. 

AIR. 

Oh charming Sheba, there behold. 

What mafly Stores of burni(h’d Gold, 

Yet richer is our Art : 

Not all the orient Gems* that Chine, 

Nor Treafures of rich Ophir’s Mine, 

Excel the Mafon’s Heart ; 

T rue to the Fair, he honours more. 

Than glittering Gems or brighteft Ore, 

The plighted Pledge of Love ; 

To ev’ry Tie of Honour bound, 

In Love and Friendfliip conftant found. 

And favour’d from Above. 

Solomon and Sheba. 

DUET. 

f One Gem beyond the reft I fee, 

C And charming Solomon is he. 

I On Gem beyond the- reft I fee, 
t Faireft of Fair-ones, thou art (he# 

Oh thou furpaffing all Men wife ; 

And thine excelling W omens Eyes, 

HlRAJvf 

Sheba* 

Solomon. 

Sheba. 

£olomon. 

C 64 ] 

H I. RAM. . . 

RECITATIVE. 

Wifdom and Beauty doth cpmbine 
Our Art to raife, our Hearts to join, 

CHORUS. 

Give to Mafonry the Prize, 

Where the Faireft chufe thp Wife : 
Beauty ftill fhould Wifdorn love j 
Beauty and Order reign above. 

I 

I 

AN 

Googl 

A N' ; ’ ; 

E X A C T LI ST 

O F A L L T H E 

L O D G E S 

Under the Authority of the . 

GRAND-MASTER of ENGLAND, 
With the Days of Forming in each Month. 

Firft Monday. 

S U N, Ludgate-ftreet 

Windmill, Rofemary-Lane 
Salutation and Cat, Newgate^ftreet x 
Boar’s Head. Eaft-cheap 

Princefs of Wales’s Arms, Cranborne-alley, Leicefter-fields 
King’s Arms, TowOr-ftreet, Seven-dials 
Sun, at Shadwell v 

Firft Tuefday, 

Pon’s Coffee-houfe, Caftle-ftreet 
Chapman’s CofFee-houfe, Sackville-ftreet 
Talbot-inn, Strand 
Sun, Mill-ftreet 

Crown and Ball, Playhoufe-yard, Black-friars 
King’s Head, Fenchurch^ftreet, Sea-captains 
George, Corner of Maggot-coart, Piccadilly 

Firft Wednefday. 

Fox andGaofe, King-ftreet, Seven-dials 
Fiih and Bell, Charles-ftreet, Soho-fquare 
Red-Cow, Weft-Smithfield 
Red-Crofs, Barbican 

Eaft-India-arms, John-ftreeC f Horiley-dowtt 
BeU-Iim> pppofite Fetter-lane, Holborn 
Granby’s-head, near St. George’ s-ftreet, Southwsfk 
Jack of Newbury, Chifwell-flreet 
w hite-harv St. James’s-ftreet 
Queen’s-head, Bath-ftreet, Cold-bath-fields 
King’s-arms, New Bond-ftrqet 

Firft Thurfday. 

Feathers, Cheapfide, the Caledonian Lodge 
.Sun and Punch-bowl, High-hol bourn, third in Rank 
Sampfbn add Lion, Eaft-Smithfield 
.Fountain, Snow-hill 

K Swan, 

[ 66 1 

Swan, Old French Lodge, Graftcm-ftreet 
White -horfe. Corner of New Burlington-ftreet 

Firft' Friday. 

St. Andrew, the Mariners Lodge, near the Hermitage 
Globe, Hatton-Garden 

Anchor and Hope, Aldgate-ward Coffee-houfe, Leaden-hall-ftreet* 
Pewter-Platter, White-Lion-yard, Norton -falgate 
Green-Man, Berwick-ftreet 

Second Monday. 

Feathers, Cheap-fide, late the Mourning-Bu(h 
^White-Lion, Cornhill - . 

Old Magpye, Bifliopgate-ftreet 
Rainbow, Fleet-ftreet 
Black-lion, Nottingham-court, Seven-diab 
Ship, Leadenhall-ftreet 

Lion and Goat, Grofvenor-ftreet ' g 

Angel, Piccadilly 

Bacchus and Grapes, Bloomibury-market 
Second Tuefday. 

Crown and Rolls, Chancery-lane, fourth in Rank 
Albermarle, Dover-ftreet 
Turk’s-he^d, Gerrard-ftreet, Soho 
King’s-arms, Marybone-ftreet . 

Crown, Leadenhall-ftreet 

George, Iromongerriane 

Vine, High-holborn, Winter Half-year 

Mitre, Union-ftreet, Weftminfter 

Chequers, Charing-crofs ■< 

. Second Wednefday. 

Queen’s Arms, St. Paul’s Church-yard, the Weft India and Ame- 
rican Lodge, firft in Rank 
St. John of Jerufalem, Clerkeftwell 
Sun, St. Paul’s Church yard r 

King’s-head, High-holborn 
Caveac- tavern, Finch-lane 
King’s-arms and one Tun, Hyde-park-corner 
Crown and Horfe-ftioe, corner of Bartlet’s-buildings, Holborn 
King’s head, rTrinces^ftreet, Cavendifh-fquare 
White-hart, Manfell-ftreet, Goodman’s-fields * * . - 

Second. Thurfday. 

King’s-arms, New Bohd-ftreet 

Dundee-arms, a private Roqii>> Red-lion-ftreet, Wapping 
Anchor and BaptiiVs-head, Chancery-lane , 

Pewter PI at re r, Crofs-ftreet, Hatton-garden 
Red-Crois Inn, Southwark 

Three Compafies and Punch-howl, SiLver-ftreet, Golden-dqtiare 

.Fountain, 

r «7 j 

Fountain, Shoreditch 

Horn, Palace-yard, Weftminfter, fecond in Rank . 

Second Friday. 

Mourning-bufh,' Alderfgate 
Half-moon, Cheapfide 
Three Tons, Spital-fields 
Crown and Anchor, Strand 

Turk’s head, King-ftreet, Bloomlbury,, Winter and Summer 
The Crown, Eaft-Smithfield 

> Third Monday. . 

Sun, Ludgate-ftreet v _ 

St. Alban’s, St. Alkaa’s-ftreet 
Salutation and Cat, Newgate-Ibeefc 
King’s-arms, Magaret’s-hill 

Queen’s-head, Gray’s-inn-gate ~ 

Poar’s-head, Eaflcheap 

Princefs of Wales’s-arms, Cranbome alley, Leicefler-fields 
King’s-arms, Tower-ftreet, Seven-dials 
Sun, at Shadwell 

Queen’s -head, Batb-ftreet, Cold-bath-fields 
Third Tuefday. 1 
“Pon’s CofFee-houfe,' Caftle-ltreet 
Cock and Lion, St. Michael ’s-al ley, Cornhill 
Blue-pods, Southampton-buildings, Holborq - 
Chapman’s CofFee-houfe, Sackviue-dr^ct 
Sun, Milk-dreet, 

Ship, James-dreet, Covent-Garden 
King’s-head, Fenchurch-ftreet ? Sea-captains 
George,* Comer of Maggoucourt, Piccadilly 
Third Wednefday. . 

pox and Gpofe, King-dreet, Seven-dials 
pifh and gell, Charles dreet, Soho-fquare 
JRed-Cow, Wed-Smithfield 
Red-crofs, Barbican, a Mailer’s Lodge 
Ead-India-arms, John-dreet, Horlley-down 
Horn in Fleet-ftreet, Stewards Lodged publick Nights in fylttch and 
December 

.White-hart, St. James Vlrept 
Jack of Newbury, Chiiwell-llreet 
King’s arms, new Bond dreet 

. Third Thurfday. 

leathers. Cheapfide, the Caledonian Lodge. 

Sun and Punch-bowl, High-holborn, third in Rank 
Sampfon and Lion, Eaft-Smithfield 
Horn, Fleet-ftr^et 

Swan, old French Lodge, Gjafton-ftreet 
White-horfe, Corner of New Burlington-dreef 

I $8 ;] 

. Third Friday. ' ‘ \ ‘ 

King’s head, Poultry 
Green-man, Berwick-ftrept 
Lebeck’s-head,- Strand 

St. Andrew, the Mariners Lodge, near the Hmr»itag$ 
fourth Monday. 

White-lion, Cornhill 

Black-lion, Nottingham-court^ Seven-dials < 

Ship, Leadenhall-ftreet 

Lion and Goat, Grofvenor-ftreet 

Angel, Piccadilly 4 

Feathers, Cheapfxde, late the Mourning-Buih t ■; ' 

Fourth Tuefday. 

Crown and Rolls, fourth in Rank* Chan cery-lan$ 

Albermarle, Dover-ftreet - . 

Turk’s-head, Gerrard-ftyeet, Soho . 

King’s-arms, Maryboiie-itreet ; v 

George, Ironmonger-lane 

Vine, High-holborn, Winter Half-year ' ^ w 

Fourth Wednefday- 

Queen’s arms, St. Paul’s Church-yard, Weft India and America 
Lodge, Mailer’s Night 

Running-horfe, David-ftreet. Grofvenor-fquare 
St. John of Jerufalem, Clerkenwell 
Sun, St. Paul’s Church-yard ‘ 

King’s-head, High-holborn N , ; . 

Rifing-fun, Falhion-ftr^et . ' 

King’s-arms and one T un, Hyde-garkrcorney ‘ . . 

King’s-head, Princes-ftreet, Cayehdifli-fqoafe *' 

White-hart ? Manfellrftreet, GoodmanVhelds 

.Fourth Thurfday. ' ‘ ‘ 

Dundee-arms, a private Room, Red-lioa-ftreet, Wapping 
Swan, White-crois-ftreet * 

Pewter Platter, Crofs-ftreet, Hatton-garden / 

Vine, High-holborn, Summer 
Crown and Anchor, Strand' ‘ 

Fourth Friday - 
Mourning-bufh, Alderfgate 
Half-moon, Cheaplide - - 

Three Tuns, Spital-fields . 

Turk’s-head, King-ftreet, Bloomfljury* Winter 
Hermione and A&ive Frigate, Corner of Coxhpton-ftrcet,* St. Anne*s$ 
the Royal Mecklenburg Lodge 

Laft Wednefday. 
paveac Tavern, Finch-lane 

l^aft T]l>^rf4ay^ 

KingVarms, New Bondrftreet ^ ' 

Anchor and Baptid’s-head, Qhancerydane 

No certain Day of Forming* 

Union Lodge, private Room,' Bell-lane, SpitS-fields 

A'LiJi of th* ' Lodges in differ*** Parts of England. - 

i jT * 1 LOBE, in Globe-lane Chatham, ift and 3d Monday 

King’s-arms, Wandfvyorth,- id Tuefday : 

Golden-anchor, Ballad-key, Ead- Greenwich, ad and 4th Tuefday 
Thatch’d-boufe, Norwich, id Thurfday 

Three-tuns, Fortfmouth, id and !id Friday, fojax o’ Clock ■' 
Queen’s head, at Stockton upon Tees in the County pf Durham, 
id and 3d Friday . ' 

Red-lion, Lynn; Reais, Notfoifc-id Friday . , > 

.Caftfe at Rutney, adj^d^th Tuefday , . - . .. ./ 

Angel, Macclesfield, Cfieihire ' !• ' ; 

king’s-arms, Leight, in - f > > • ,_;r 

New Inn, n at Exeter. . . . . ; ' . , / , 

Roy at-o a fv,.;Derby, ail and 3d Tuefday . g 

Bolton Lee-more, Lancashire, next Wednefiiay to every Full Mpop 
Cornifh Cough, Salifbury, lit and 3d Wedneiday : ... . •_%« 

Wed Cowes, Ifleof Wight, ad and 4th, Monday . ~ 

Swan, Chelfea, zd and 4th Tuesday ; > : . ... 

Bear, Bath, id and 3d Tuefday 

Red-lion, Bury, Lancalhire, next Thurfday ta every Full Moos. 

Talbot, in, Stourbridge, Worcedcr • . .. - . , r . 1 

Swan, Birmingham, lad Monday 

Barndaple-Inn, PlymoutiiTdocb, id and 3d Friday 

Fencers, near Newcaftle upon Tyne, id Monday 

Angel, Cholcheder, 2d and 4th Monday 

Fountain, Gatelhed, Biflioprkk of Durham, adand 4th, Wednesday 

Green Man, Shrewfbury, id Monday . 

King ; s-head, Norwich, every other Thurfday 

The Cuftcfm-houfe, by the Old Dock, Liverpool, id Wednesday 

Rofe, Edgbadan-dreet, Birmingham, 2d and fed Thurfday 

Angel, Shipton-mallet y . Somerfetlhire,. lit and 3d Monday 

Swan, Glouceder, id and, 3d Friday 

Halifax Yorkihire, id and 3d Thurfday 

The Fox, near the Square, Mancheder, id and 3d Monday 

Swan, Watergate-dreet, Cheder, 2d Tuedjay 

Red-lion, Horn-church, in Efifex, id Friday 

Three Lions,. Banbury, Oxfordshire 

Bufh-tavern, Corn-drectr, Rri dol, 2d and 4th Wedaefday 

George, Whithaven, Cumberland, id Monday 

Ship and Cadle, Haverford-wefl; 

Three Hoife-lhoes, Leominfber, Hereforddiire 
Angel, Dolgelly, Merionetblhir% id Tuefday 

Tl 11 

t7° [ J 

Bull, High^ftreet, Briftol,* i ft and 3d Tuefday 
The Bear, Norwich, 2d and 4th Tuefday 
Maid’s-head, Norwich, 3d Tuefday 
Prince George, Plymouth, 1 ft and 3d Monday 
Sun, Cambridge, 2d Monday . ■ - 

Sun, St. Peter’s, Mancroft, Norwich, 2d and 4th Wednefday 
Key, St. Peter’s, Mancroft, Norwich, zd and 4th Mofcday 
King’s-arms, Falmouth, 2d and laft Thiirfday 
Angel, Great Yarmouth in Norfolk '» 

King’s-head, Gravefend, rft and 3d Thijrfday 
King’s-arms, Helfton in Cornwall 
Maiotis-arms, Truro in Cornwall, 2d and laft Tuefday 
B I ack-moor’s-head, Nottingham 
‘Nag’s-head, Wine-ftreet, Briftol, 2d and 4th Tuefday 
Red- lion, Market-ftreet, Carmarthen, 1 ft and 3d Monday 
Church-ftyle, St. Peter’s, Mancroft Norwich, 3d Wednefday 
Rofe and Crown, at Prefcot, Lancashire, Wednefday next be foie 
Full Moon 

Redruth in Cornwall, ill and 3d Thurfday 

Three-tuns, North Cornsford, Norwich, 1 ft and 3d Monday 

Burnley-hall, Lancafhire, every Saturday neareft the FullcMoqn 

‘Swan, Ramfgate, Thanet, zd and 4th Monday 

Parrot, Cow-lane, in Leeds, lift Wednefday ' 

Pelican, Leicefter, ift and 3d Tuefday ^ 

Red-houfe, Cardiff, Glamorganfhire, 2d Monday 
Bear, Cow-bridge, Glamorganfhire, laft ^donda^ 

Queen’s-head, Leoftoffe, in Suffolk, '2d Monday 

Crompton’s Coftee-houfe, Manchefter, 1 ft and 3d Thurfday 

No. 8, the King’s own Regiment, 1 ft and 3d Tuefday 

Ship and Caftle, Penzance, 1 ft and 3d Wednefday 

Shoulder of Mutton, St. Auguftine’s, Norwich, 1 ft and 3d Moq? 

day . . , • j. 

Golden-lion, Foregate-ftreet, Chefter, every other Monday 
White-lion, Beccels in Suffolk 

Rofe, St. Auguftine’s, St. Mary, Norwich, ift and 3d Friday 
Sunderland, near the Sea, Durham, 1 ft Friday # 

Feathers, Bridges-ftreetj Chefter 
Capt. Bell’s Troop, in Lord Ancram’s Dragoons 
Merlin’s-cave, Old-fhambles, Liverpool 

Marquis of Caemarvan’s, at Sunderland near the Sea, rft and 3 d 
Tudday 

Three Kings, at Briftol, 2d and 4th Thurfday 
Star, Lynn Regis, 4th. Wednefday 

Dove and Olive-branch, St. Lawrence’s, Norwich, 2d Wednefday 

Cock, Head of the Side, Newcaftle, 1 ft Monday 

Cock, St. Mary’s Norwich, every other Wednefday 

Three Crowns, Southfide-ftreet, Plymouth, 2d and 4th Monday 

Bell, Broad-ftreet, Briftol, 2d and 4th Monday 

Swan, Sea CaptainlLodge, Yarmouth, Norfolk . 

Three 

C 7* 3 

Three Crowns, 2d Divifion of Marines, Plymouth * 

Sun, Newton-Abbot, Dorfet, ift and 3d TJiurfday 
Mead way’s Wine-vaults, Weft town of Crediton, Devon. 1 ft Mon* 
day . 

Royal-oak, Portfmouth-comtnon, 2d and 4th Friday 
Square and Compaifes, Barnard CafUe, 1 ft Monday 
Mermaid, Windfor, 3d Monday 
The Temple Lodge, Briftol, 1 ft and 3d Monday 
Black-bull, Mighton’s gate, Hull, 2d and kift Thurfday 
King’s-head, Canterbury, ift and 3d Wcdnefday 
On board his Majefty’s Ship Vanguard 4 
Talbot, Leeds, 2d and 4th Wediieiday, a Matter’s Lodge 
Punch-bowl, Stonegate, York, ift and 3d Monday 
Square and Compaifes, White-haven, 2d Monday 
Granby ’s-head, Dover, ift and 3d Thurfday 
Bay-horfe and Jockey, Darlington ~ : 

Spread-eagle, Wilbech, Ifleof Ely, ift and 2d Tuefdoy 

Three Black-birds, Union ftreet, Portfmouth-common 

Kingfton upon Hull, 2d and 4th Thurfday 

All-faints Lodge, Wooler, Northumberland 

St. George’s Lodge, Exeter, 2d and 4th Friday 1 

Green-man, Ipfwich 

George, Digbeth-ftreet, Birmingham 

Private Room, Appledore, Devonlhire 

Hole in the Wall, Colne, Lancafhire t 

Bell, Portfmouth-common 

Fox-Inn, Salop, ift and 3d Wednefday 

On board his Majefty’s Ship, at Plymouth 

Fleece, Barnftable, ift and 3d Monday 

Three-King’s, Deal 

Duke’s-head, Lynn Regis 

Half-moon, Othley, Yorkfhire, ift Monday 

Workington in Cumberland, ift Monday 

White-hart, Hereford, ift Thutfday ' 

Vine, Portsmouth 

Punch-bowl, Peck-lane, Nottingham 

Sun-Inn, Cambridge, 2d Thurfday 

Black-bull, Hexham, ift and 3dWednefday 

White-heart, Chippenham, the Lodge of perfelt Union 

Mafon’s-arms, Richmond, YOrkfhke 

Bear, Havant, 1 ft and 3d Wednefday , 

White-lion, Dover 

Private Room, Hubbington, near Titchfield, Hampfhire 
Seven-flars, St. Thomas the Appoftle’s, Exeter, ift and 3d Wed- 
nefday 

Granby Vhead, Durham, ift Tueftay 

Lodges 

. t > 1 

. tUget tn Farfifti JPartt. 

AmftercUm, 

iTODGE, Nov, 30, i7jj . 

2 Lodge of Charity, 1755 

3 Lodge of Peace • r- 

4 Lodge of. Regularity^ 1757 

La Loge de Freres Remus, . . ' . . 

Virtutis et Artis Amici, 176a . \ 

~ Antigua* 

Parham, Jan. 31, 1,737-8 

St. John’s Great Lodge,, ad and 4th Wedpeflay, November zu 
1758 

Bakers Lodge, St. MaryVAreet , 

St. John’s, 1738 * 

Evangelifts, * 1753 

The Caftle of Aubigny in Fraocp *■ 

Barbados 

1 St. Michael’s at -Bridgetown 

2 St. John’s Ditto 4th Monday 

3 St. Peter’s Lodge, Speight’*Tbw*, rft and 3d Saturday 

4 St. James’s Lodge 

St. James’s Lodge^ 1758 : . ! 

Bermuda, the Union Lodge at Snow-lane* rft Wednesday. 

Bengal. 

1 Lodge at Calcutta, 1740 

2 Ditto ; : 

3 Ditto 

4 Chandernagore, the chief French Settlement 
Calcutta, 8th Lodge * * 

Bombay, 24th March, "1758 V 

Bofton, in New England, 2d and 4th Saturday 
Copenhagen. 

New Lodge, St. Martin’s Lodge ; , 

St. Chriftopher’s 

Bafie Terre, Old Road-Sandy Point, 1 ft. Thurfday 
Santa Croix* a Banifh Ifland, Weft -Indies , . 

St. Euftatius, Weft Indies, No. . 1. and 2 ; . : . 

Francfort, The Union ; 

Gibralter, ill Tuefday, Nov. 1728 , .... 

Lodge of inhabitants^ 1,763 • 

Guernsey. The Lilly Tavern 

Three Crowns, lit and 3d Monday 
George Town Winyaw, Prince Qf otfg£ Lodge, once a Mouthy 
1743 

, Hague. 

Firft. t Second 

Hanovtr. The Grand Lodge, Frederick 

The 

[ 73 ] 

Hamburgh. 

The Bunch of Grapes, Decker-ftreet, every other Wednefday, Oc- 
tober 23, 1740. 

St. George, Emperor’s Court. Ditto, 24th Sept. 1743 

Jamaica. 

Kingfton ift and 3d Saturday 
Ditto 2d 

Port Royal 

St. Jago de la Vega Firft 
Ditto Second 

\ Savannah la Mar 

Old Harbour 
St. Mary’s 

Laufanne in Switzerland 

Madrafs, or Fort St. George, in Coromandel 

Madrid, 1 Sunday, 1727 

Muiquita Shore, the Lodge of Regulants, St. John’s Hall, Blaek 
River, 1763. 

Minorca. 

No, 1. iftThurfday 
No. 3. 2d Tuefday 

J No; 3. i ft Wednefday 4 

No, 4. 1 ft Monday 
Norfolk in Virginia, iftThurfday 

New York, No. 2. St. John’s Lodge, Ann-ftreet, 2d and 4th 
Wednefday 

Paris. A La Ville de Tonnere Rue de Boucheries 
Quebec. The Merchants Lodge, 1762 
Rotterdam. The Lodge of Orange 
Rotterdam. Royal Frederick 

South Carolina. 

& Beaufort, Port Royal, every other Wednefday, 1756 

Charles Town, 2d and 4th Thurfday 

The Union Lodge, 173 c 
A Matter’s Lodge, ad and 4th Thurfday, 1756, 

St. Mark’s, Lodge, 1763 
Savannah in Georgia, 1735 

Schwerin, St. Michael’s Lodge, in the Duchy of Mechlenburgh 

Valenciennes in French Flanders 

Wilmington, on Cape Fear River, North Carolina ‘ 

York Town, Virginia, ift and 3d Wednefday. 

FINIS. 

CEDRIC CHIVERS. BATH
