Historia Augusta, Vol. I (Magie, 1921)
Unknown (David Magie, trans.)

Source: Internet Archive — https://archive.org/details/scriptoreshistor0001tran
Edition: David Magie's translation (Loeb Classical Library, 1921), via Internet Archive scan. Latin facing-page text removed; English translation only.
Public domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel library, 2026-10-09.

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


EDITED BY
E. CAPPS, Pu.D, LL.D. T. E. PAGE, Lirr.D. W. H. D. ROUSE, Litt.D.


THE SCRIPTORES HISTORIAE
AUGUSTAE


THE SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY


DAVID MAGIE, Pn.D.


IN THREE, VOLUMES ©
I


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
MCMXXII


CONTENTS
PREFACE . : ~


INTRODUCTION—

I. Tue Scope AND LITERARY CHARACTER
OF THE H'/srOR/A AUGUSTA ; xi

II. Tue Trapition or THE HISTORIA
AUGUSTA . ; : : . Xxiv
Tur Manuscripts . 2 i : . Xxxiii
EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS . : i xxxvii
HADRIAN : p . ; ; : : 3
AELIUS . : : , ; ; : . 88
ANTONINUS Pius . "ROC : : . 101
Marcus AURELIUS ANTONINUS . : f . 133
Lucius Verus. : i E i .. 207
AviDIUS Cassius ; ; . : : . 933


CoMMoDus : . : ; : j . 265


CONTENTS


Dipivs JuLiANUS
SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS .
Pescennius NIGER


CLoDiUs ALBINUS


PAGE


INTRODUCTION


I


THe Scope AND LITERARY CHARACTER
OF THE


HISTORIA AUGUSTA


Amone the remnants of Roman literature preserved
by the whims of fortune is a collection of biographies
of the emperors from Hadrian to Carinus—the Vitae
Diversorum Principum et Tyrannorum a Divo Hadriano

e ad Numerianum Diversis compositae, as it is en-
titled in the principal manuscript, the Codex Palatinus
of the Vatican Library. It is popularly known, ap-
parently for convenience’ sake, as the Historia Augusta,
a name applied to it by Casaubon, whereas the original
title was probably de Vita Caesarum or Vitae Caesarum.! .
The collection, as extant, comprises thirty biographies,
most of which contain the life of a single emperor,
while some include a group of two or more, classed
together merely because these emperors were either
akin or contemporary. Not only the emperors who
actually reigned, the “ Augusti," but also the heirs


1 See Mommsen, Hermes, xiii. (1878), p. 301 = Gesammelte
Schriften, vii. p. 801. .
xi


INTRODUCTION


presumptive, the “ Caesares," and the various claim-
ants to the empire, the “ Tyranni," are included in the
series.

According to the tradition of the manuscripts the
7 biographies are the work of six different authors ;
some of them are addressed to the Emperor
Diocletian, others to Constantine, and others to im-
portint personages in Rome. The biographies of
the emperors from Hadrian to Gordian are attributed
to four various authors, apparently on no principle
whatsoever, for not only are the lives of successive,
or even contemporary, princes ascribed to different
authors and those of emperors widely separated in
time to tlie same writer, but in the case of two of
the authors some lives are dedicated to Diocletian
and some to Constantine.

In the traditional arrangement the biographies are
assigned to the various authors as follows:

I. Aelius Spartianus: the vitae of Hadrian, Aelius,
Didius Julianus, Severus, Pescennius Niger, Caracalla,
and Geta. Of these, the Aelius, Julianus, Severus,
and Niger are addressed to Diocletian, the Geta to
Constantine. The preface of the Aelius! contains
mention of the Caesars Galerius Maximianus and
Constantius Chlorus, and from this it may be inferred
that the vilae of the Diocletian group were written
between 293, the year of the nomination of these
Caesars, and 305, the year of Diocletian's retirement.
In the same preface? Spartianus announces that it is
his purpose to write the biographies, not only of the
emperors who preceded Hadrian, but also of all the
princes who followed, including the Caesars and the
pretenders.


1 Ael., ii. 2. —— 3 Ael, i. 1.
xii


INTRODUCTION


II. Julius Capitolinus: the vitae of Pius, Marcus
Aurelius, Verus, Pertinax, Clodius Albinus, Macrinus,
the Maximini, the Gordiani, and Maximus and
Balbinus. Of these, the Marcus, Verus, and Macrinus
are addressed to Diocletian, while the Albinus, the
Maximini, and the Gordiani are addressed to
Constantine, evidently after the fall of Licinius in
394.1 Like Spartianus, Capitolinus announces his
purpose of composing an extended series of imperial
biographies.?

III. Vulcacius Gallicanus: the vita of Avidius
Cassius, addressed to Diocletian. He too announces
an ambitious programme ?—the composition of bio-
graphies of all who have worn the imperial purple,
both regnant emperors and pretenders to the throne.

IV. Aelius Lampridius: the vitae of Commodus,
Diadumenianus, Elágabalus, and Severus Alexander. -


Pd


Emperor s own request,* and they were written after
the defeat of Licinius at Adrianople in 323.5 Lam-


pridius claims to have written the biographies of at `


least some of the predecessors of Elagabalus and to
cherish the plan of composing biographies of the
emperors who reigned subsequently, beginning with
Alexander and including in his work not only Dio-
cletian but Licinius and Maxentius, the rivals of
Constantine .®


1 Gord., xxxiv. 5; see H. Peter, Die Scriptores Historiae
Augustae (Leipzig, 1892), p. 35.

2 Maz., i. 1-8 ; Gord., i. 1-5.

3 Av. Cass., iii. 3.

* Heliog., xxxv. 1.

5 Heliog., vii. 7; see Peter, Scriptores, p. 32.

6 Heliog., xxxv. ; Alex., lxiv. 1.

xiii


INTRODUCTION


V. Trebellius Pollio: the vitae from Philip to
Claudius; of his work, however, the earlier part,
containing the biographies from Philip to Valerian,
has been lost from the collection,! and we have only
the vitae of the Valeriani (in part), the Gallieni, the
Tyranni Triginta, and Claudius.  Pollio's biographies
were dedicated, not to the emperor, but to a friend,
apparently an official of high degree. His name has
been lost, together with the preface which must have
preceded the vita of Philip. The only clue to his
identity is a passage in which he is addressed as a
kinsman of an Herennius Celsus, a candidate for the
consulship.? The extant biographies were written
after Constantius nomination as Caesar in 293,3 and,
in the case of the Tyranni Triginta, after the com-
mencement of the Baths of Diocletian in 298.* The
collection was finished, according to his successor and
continuer Vopiscus, in 303.5

VI. Flavius Vopiscus : the vitae of Aurelian, Tacitus,
Probus, Firmus and his three fellow- -tyrants, and
Carus and his sons. These biographies, like those of
Pollio, are not dedicated to any emperor, but to
various friends of the author. Vopiscus wrote, he
declares in his elaborate preface, at the express
request of his friend Junius Tiberianus, the city-
prefect. Tiberianus was city-prefect for the second
time in 303-4,’ and, even granting that his con-
versation with the author as well as his promise of


! These biographies were included in the collection by Pollio ;
see Aur., ii, 1.

2 Tyr. Trig., xxii. 12.

- 3 Gall, vii. 1 and elsewhere,

t Tyr. Trig., xxi. 7; see Peter, Scriptores, p. 36 f.

5 Aur., ii. 1. $6 Aur., 1.-ii.

1B. Borghesi, Oeuvres Complètes (Paris, 1862-97), ix. p. 892.


xiv


mr acd e n r


apum Rt E
[o pm i


E INTRODUCTION


the documents from Trajan’s library are merely
rhetorical ornaments,! this date is usually regarded
as marking the beginning of Vopiscus’ work. It is
confirmed by an allusion to Constantius as imperator?
(305-306) and to Diocletian as iam privatus (after


305)3 This collection was completed, according to:


internal evidence, before the death of Diocletian in
316,* perhaps even before that of Galerius in 311.5
The series written by Vopiscus has been preserved in
its entirety, for it was his intention to conclude his
work with the lives of Carus and his sons, leaving to
others the task of writing the biographies of Dio-
cletian and his associates.*

The plan to include in the collection not only
“ Augusti," but also “ Caesares" and “ Tyranni," has
resulted in a double series of biographies in that
section of the Historia Augusta which includes the
emperors between Hadrian and Alexander. To the
life of a regnant emperor is attached that of an heir-
presumptive, a colleague, or a rival. In each case
the minor vita stands in a close relationship to the
major, and, in many instances, passages seem to have
been transcribed bodily from the biography of the
* Augustus ” to that of the “ Caesar " or ‘‘ Tyrannus ”’.

In the composition of these biographies the model
used by the authors, according to the testimony of
two of them,’ was Suetonius. The Lives of Suetonius
are not biographies in the modern sense of the word,
but merely collections of material arranged according


1 Peter, Scriptores, p. 39.


2 Aur., xliv. 5. 3 Aur., xliii. 2,
*Car., xviii. 5; see Peter, Scriptores, p. 45 f.
5 Car., ix. 8.


€ Prob., i. 5; Bonos., xv. 10.
1 Maz.—Balb., iv. 5; Prob., ii. T; Firm., i. 2.
XV


AA - m e oe ee ÓÀ


INTRODUCTION


to certain definite categories,! and this method of
composition is, in fact, employed also by the authors
of the Historia Augusta. An analysis of the Pius, the
most simply constructed of the series, shows the
general scheme most clearly.? This vita falls natur-
ally into the following divisions: ancestry (i. 1-7);
life previous to his accession to the throne (i. 8—v. 2) ;
policy and events of his reign (v. 3—vii. 4); personal
traits (vii. 5—xii. 3); death (xii. 4-0); personal
appearance (xiii. 1-9); honours after death (xiii.
3-4), | :
A fundamental scheme similar to this, in which
the several sections are more or less clearly marked,
serves as the basis for all the biographies. The series
of categories is compressed or extended according
to the importance of the events to be narrated or the
material that was available, and at times the prin-
ciple of composition is obscured by the elaboration of
a particular topic to an altogether disproportionate
length. Thus the mention of the peculiar cults to
which Commodus was addicted (the category religiones)
leads to a long and detailed list of-acts of cruelty,’
stones nearly one half of the life of Elagabalus is de-
voted to an enumeration of instances of his luxury
and extravagance,‘ and in the biography of Severus
Alexander the fundamental scheme is almost unre-
cognizable as a result of the confused combination
of various narratives.?

2 Peter, Scriptores, p. 106 f.; F. Leo, Die Griechisch-
Römische Biographie (Leipzig, 1901), p. 273 f.

3 Com., ix. 6—xi. 7.

4 Heliog., xviii, 4—xxxiii. 1. |

5 Leo, p. 280 f.


xvi


|


|


INTRODUCTION


It was also characteristic of Suetonius that he
amplified his biographies by means of gossip, anec-
dotes, and documents, but nowhere in his Lives are
these used as freely as in certain of the vitae of the


Historia Augusta. The authors take a peculiar de-.


light in the introduction of material dealing with the
personality of their subjects. Not content with
including special divisions on personal characteristics,
in which are enumerated the individual qualities of


an emperor, they devote long sections to elaborate ,


|


-—


details of their private lives, particularly before their -


elevation to the throne. For this more intimate
detail there was much less material available than
for the narration of public events. The careers of
short-lived emperors and pretenders afforded little
of public interest, and consequently their biographies
were padded with trivial anecdotes. In fact, a com-
parison between a major vita and its corresponding


minor biography shows that the latter contains


little historical material that is not in the former.
The rest is made up of amplifications, anecdotes,
speeches, letters and verses, and at best these minor
vitae represent little more than a working over of the
material contained in the major biographies with the
aid of rhetorical expedients and literary embellish-
ments.

The model for the emphasizing of. the private life
of an emperor seems to have been not so much
Suetonius as Marius Maximus, the author of a series
of imperial biographies from _ Nerva to Elagabalus or


Severus Alexander. Not content with the narration


le,g. in the Pius, liberalitas et clementia (viii, 5—ix. 5);
auctoritas (ix. 6-10); pietas (x. 1-5); liberalitas (x. 6-9);
civilitas (xi.); see Peter, Scriptores, p. 157.


xvii


INTRODUCTION


of facts in the manner of Suetonius, Maximus sought
to add interest to his biographies by the introduction
of personal material. His lives are cited by the
authors of the earlier vitae of the Historia Augusta
Las their sources for gossip, scandal, and personal
minutiae,! and he is probably justly referred to as
‘homo omnium verbosissimus qui et mythistoricis se vol-
uminibus implicavit2 In gossip and search after
detail, however, Maximus seems to have been out-
dene by Aelius Junius Cordus, cited in the vitae of
' Albinus, Maximinus, the Gordiani, and Maximus and
Balbinus. He made it a principle to describe the
emperor's appearances in public, and his food and
clothing,? and the citations from him include the
enumeration of the amounts of fruit, birds and oysters
consumed by Albinus. Readers who desire further |
information on trivial or indecent details are scorn-
fully referred to his biographies.’

The manner of Marius Maximus and Cordus is
most clearly reproduced in the lives attributed to
Vopiscus. The more pretentious biographies of
Aurelian and Probus especially® contain a wealth of
personal detail which quite obscures the scant his-
torical material After an elaborate preface of a
highly rhetorical nature, there follows a description
of the character of the emperor in which the
emphasis is laid on his noble deeds and his virtues,
These are illustrated by anecdotes and attested by
* documents," much to the detriment of the narration


! Hadr., ii. 10; xxv. 3; Ael, v. 4; Avid. Cass., ix: 9;


2 Firm., i. 2. 3 Macr., i. 4.

* CI. Alb., xi. 2-3.

5 Cl. Alb., v. 10; Maz., xxix. 10; Gord., xxi. 3.
8 Leo, p. 991 f.


xviii


INTRODUCTION


of facts. No rhetorical device is neglected and the
whole gives the impression of an eulogy rather than a
biography.

The method employed by Marius Maximus and
Cordus was, however, productive of a still more
detrimental element in the Historia A ugusia—the
alleged documents which are inserted in many of


the vilae, Suetonius, as secretary to Hadrian, had
had access to the imperial archives and. thus obtained


`” various letters and other documents which he inserted
in his biographies for the illustration or confirmation
of some statement. His practice was continued by
` his successors in the field of biographical literature.
Thus Marius Maximus inserted documents, both
speeches and letters, in the body of his text and even
added them in appendices. Some of these may
have been authentic; but since the references to


MA —À


pose that Maximus bad. iiri die UB archives i


considerable doubt must arise as to their genuineness.
Cordus, too, inserted in his biographies letters alleged
to have been written by emperors? and speeches and
acclamations uttered in the senate-house,? but, to
judge from the specimens preserved in the Historta


Augusta, these “documents” deserve even less cred- :
k


ence than those of Maximus.

The precedent thus established was followed by
some of the authors of the Historia Augusta. The
collection contains in all about 150 alleged docu-
ments, including 68 letters, 60 speeches and proposals


1 Marc., xxv. 8; Com., xviii. 1; Pert., ii. 8; xv. 8; see Peter,
Scriptores, p. 108 f. |
3? CI. Alb., vii. 2-6; Mav., xii. 5. 3 Gord., xi.


INTRODUCTION


to the people or the senate, and 20 senatorial decrees
and acclamations.! The distribution of these, how-
ever, is by no means uniform. Of the major vitae
from Hadrian to Elagabalus inclusive, only the Com-
modus and the Macrinus are provided with “ docu-
ments," and these have but two apiece.? On the
other hand, the group of vitae of the Maximini, the
Gordiani, and Maximus and Balbinus contains in all


26 such pieces, and Pollio's Valeriani, Tyranni Triginta —


and Claudius? have together 27. It is, however,
Vopiscus who heads the list, for his five biographies
contain no less than 59 so-called documents of various
kinds.

In a discussion of the genuineness of these docu-
ments a distinction must be drawn between the
speeches, on the one hand, and the letters and sena-
torial decrees and acclamations on the other. Since
the time of Thucydides it had been customary for an
historian to insert speeches in his history, and it was
an established convention that they might be more
or less fictitious, Accordingly, none would question
the right of the biographer to attribute to the subject
of his biography any speech that he might wish to
insert in his narrative. With the letters and decrees,
however, the case is different. Like those cited by
Suetonius, these claim to be actual documents and it
is from thjs claim that the question of their authen-
ticity must proceed. In spite of occasional expressions
of scepticism, the genuineness of these documents was
not seriously questioned until 1870, when C. Czwalina
published an examination of the letters contained in

per Lécrivain, Etudes sur l'Histoire Auguste (Paris, 1904),

. 45 f.
h 3 Com., xviii.-xix.; xx. ; Macr., ii. 4-5; vi. 2-9.

? There are none in the Gallienus.

XX


em _


INTRODUCTION


the vita of Avidius Cassius.! He showed that various
letters, professedly written by different persons, show
the same style and tricks of expression, that they
were all written with the purpose of praising the
clemency and generosity of Marcus, and that they
contain several historical errors. He thus reached
the conclusion that they were forgeries, but not com-
posed by the author of the vifa since his comments
on them are inconsistent with their content?

A similar examination of the letters and documents
in the other biographies, particularly in those at-


tributed to Pollio and Vopiscus, reveals the hand of :


the forger even more plainly.’ They abound not
only in errors of fact that would be impossible in
genuine documents, but also in the rhetorical bombast
and the stylistic pecularities that are characteristic of
the authors of these series. The documents cited by
Pollio, moreover, show the same aim and purpose as
his text—the glorification of Claudius Gothicus as
the reputed ancestor of Constantius Chlorus and the
vilification of his predecessor Gallienus,—while the
documents of Vopiscus show the same tendency to
sentimentalize over the past glories of Rome and
over the greatness of the senate that is characteristic
of his own work, and, like those cited by Pollio, they
too have a purpose—the praise of Vopiscus’ hero
Probus.

An entirely different type of spurious material is
represented by the frequent interpolations in the
text. These consist of later additions, of passages


1 De Epistolarum Actorumque quae a Scriptoribus H. A. pro-
feruntur Fide atque Auctoritate. Pars I. (Bonn, 1870); see
also E. Klebs, Rhein. Mus., xliii. (1888), p. 328 f.

2¢.g. ix. 10 and xiv. 8; see Peter, Scriptores, p. 197 f.

3 Peter, Scriptores, p. 156 f.

xxi


ggg


INTRODUCTION


introduced by editors of the whole series, and of
notes added by commentators, presumably on the
margins, and subsequently incorporated in the body
of the work.! Frequently they are inserted with
utter disregard to the context, so that the continuity
of a passage is completely interrupted. They vary
in size from passages of several pages to brief notes
of a few lines. The most extensive is a long passage
in the vita of Marcus, which is inserted between the
two main portions of the biography.? It consists of
an epitome of the events of the latter part of. his
reign, enumerated again and at greater length in the
Second main portion of the vila. That this epitome
is an interpolation is evident not only from the
double narrative of certain events, but also from the
fact that it agrees closely with the narrative of
Marcus' reign which is found in Eutropius.?

An extensive interpolation has been made also in
the Vita Severi. Here, however, the problem is less
simple. The detailed narrative of the earlier part of
Severus’ reign‘ is followed by a brief summary of
the events of the whole period of his rule,’ closing
with a long address to Diocletian. This summary is
little more than a duplicate of the account of Severus'
reign as given by Aurelius Victor in his Caesares,"

! Peter has attempted in his second edition of the text to
distinguish the various types by different kinds of parentheses ;
see his Praefatio, p. xxxiv.

? c, xv. 8.—xix. 12.

3 Breviarium, viii. 11-14. Eutropius’ material is generally
supposed to have been taken from an extensive history of the
empire, now lost, which is usually termed the “Imperial
Chronicle ”’ (Kaiserchronik) ; see A. Enmann, Hine Verlorene
Geschichte der Römischen Kaiser, Philologus, Suppl. Band iv.
(1884), pp. 397-501. |

te, i.—xvii. 4. 5c, xvii, 5—xix.

Sc, xx.-xxi. ? Caes., xx. 1-8.

xxii


INTRODUCTION


and either it has been taken directly from Victor
or it is a parallel excerpt from his source, the
* Imperial Chronicle ". It, in turn, is followed by a
section containing the narration of single incidents,
frequently repetitions of what has preceded, forming
a I00001y composed and ill connected appendix to the
whole.!

Similar additions are to be found in the vifa of
Caracalla ;? they contain repetitions and elaborations
of previously narrated incidents and are evidently
not the work of the writer of the bulk of the life.
Besides these longer and more obvious interpolations
there are countless others of varying extent, consisting
of entries of new material and corrections and
comments of later writers. Many of these have been
inserted in the most inappropriate places, to the great
detriment of the narrative, and the excision of these
passages would contribute greatly to the intelligibility
of many a vita,

The literary, as well as the historical, value of the
Historia Augusta has suffered greatly as a result of
the method of its composition. In the arrangement
in categories of the historical material, the authors did
but follow the accepted principles of the art of bio-
graphy as practised in antiquity, but their narratives,
consisting often of mere excerpts arranged without
regard to connexion or transition, lack grace and
even cohesion. The over-emphasis of personal
details and the introduction of anecdotal material
destroy the proportion of many sections, and the
insertion of forged documents interrupts the course
of the narrative, without adding anything of historical
value or even of general interest. Finally, the

1 c, xxii.-xxiv. 20. vii.-viii.; x. 1—xi. 4.
xxiii


INTRODUCTION


later addition of lengthy passages and brief notes,
frequently in paragraphs with the general content of
which they have no connexion, has put the crowning
touch to the awkwardness and incoherence of the
. whole, with the result that the oft-repeated charge
, seems almost justified, that these biographies are
' little more tha 1 literary monstrosities.


II


Tue TRADITION
OF THE


HISTORIA AUGUSTA


In spite of its defects in style, its deliberate falsifica-
tions, and the trivial character of much of its con-
tent, the Historia Augusta has always been a subject
for scholarly research and an important source for the
history of the second and third centuries. At the
beginning of the sixth century it was used by Aurelius
Memmius Symmachus,! the last member of a famous
family, in his Historia Romana, the sole extant frag-
ment of which? cites at considerable length the vita
of the Maximini. Later, several selections from it
were included in the elaborate Collectaneum,? or col-

! Consul in 485.

2 Preserved in Jordanes, de Rebus Geticis, xv. 83.

? Preserved in a manuscript of the twelfth century in the
library of the Hospital of St. Nicholas at Cues, near Trier, to
which it was bequeathed by the famous collector of manu-
scripts, Nicholas of Cues (Nicolaus Cusanus), on his death in
1464; see L. Traube, Abh. d. Bayer. Akad., xix. 2 (1891), p.


364 f., and S. Hellman, Sedulius Scottus, in L. Traube,
. Quellen u. Unters, z. lat. Philol. d. Mittelalters, i. (1906).


XXIV


INTRODUCTION


lection of excerpts, made at Liége about 850 by the
Irish scholar Sedulius Scottus, and citations from the
Marcus, the Maximini, and the Aurelian are contained
in Sedulius’ Liber de. Rectoribus Christianis, written
about 855.

During the period in which Sedulius was compiling
his Collectaneum there was copied at the monastery at
Fulda our chief manuscript, the Codex Palatinus, now
in the Vatican Library (No. 899). This manuscript,
written in the ninth century in the Carolingian min-
uscule of that period,! represents a recension of the
text which is somewhat different from that of the
excerpts preserved in the Collectaneum.? As early,
then, as the ninth century there were two editions of.
the Historia Augusta, depending, of course, on a com-
mon original, but exhibiting minor differences in the
text.

Such was the interest in Germany in the Historia
Augusta that not long after this Fulda manuscript was
finished a copy of it was made, now preserved in the
library at Bamberg, written in Anglo-Saxon characters
and dating from the ninth or tenth century. About
the same period, also, another manuscript was made
either from the original of the Fulda manuscript or
from this codex itself. This was contained in the
library of the Abbey at Murbach in the eleventh
century, in the catalogue of which it is listed as Codex
Spartiam. It was the fate of this manuscript to be
sent to Erasmus to be used in the preparation of the
Froben edition of the Historia Augusta, published at


1H. Dessau, Hermes, xxix. (1894), p. 397 f.

*'Th. Mommsen, Hermes, xiii. (1878), p. 298 f. But for &
modification of this view see S. H. Ballou, The Manuscript
Tradition of the Hist. Aug. (Leipzig, 1914), p. 77 f.


XXV


INTRODUCTION


Basel in 1518.! The first half of the biographies,
however, had been printed before its arrival, and
accordingly it could be used for this portion only as
a source for variant readings, while for the later vitae,
from the Diadumenus onward, it served as the basis
of the text. Unfortunately, however, it then dis-
appeared, and as early as 1738 no trace of it could
be found.

At some time between the latter half of the tenth
and the beginning of the fourteenth century the
Fulda Codex was taken to Italy and was placed in
the library of the Cathedral of Verona. Here it
was used by Giovanni de Matociis in the preparation
of his Historia Imperialis, written at Verona at the
beginning of the fourteenth century, and in the de
Originibus Rerum of Guglielmo da Pastrengo of
Verona. Moreover, excerpts from it were included
in the so-called Flores Moralium Aucloritatum, tran-
scribed in 1329, and still preserved in the Cathedral
library.

While in Verona the codex containing the Historia
Augusta came to the notice of Petrarch, presumably
through Pastrengo, his friend and correspondent.
That it came into the actual possession of the great
humanist and formed part of his library has been
asserted t and denied *5 with equal vehemence. It is
conceded by all, however, that he inscribed on its


1 H. Dessau, Hermes, xxix. (1894), p. 415.

? Bee R. Sabbadini, Le Scoperte dei Codici Latini e Greci
ne’ Secoli xiv. e xv. (Florence, 1905), p. 2 f.; S. H. Ballou,

88 f.
di 3 Sabbadini, p. 15 f.

*See P. de Nolhac, Pétrarque et l’ Humanisme, Nouv. Bér.
(Paris, 1907), ii. p. 47 f.; S. H. Ballou, p. 18 f.

5 E. Hohl, Hermes, li. (1916), p. 154 f.


'Xxvi


*


INTRODUCTION


margins many notes and comments, and that he had
a copy of it made at Verona in 1356,! to which he
later added many a comment and correction. The
results of his study of the biographies, furthermore,
appear in his works. Thus in his letter de Militia
Veterum, he cites the Hadrian, the Pescennius, the
Avidius Cassius, the Maximini, and the Probus; and
in the de Re Publica bene administranda? he quotes
from the Hadrian, the Avidius Cassius, the Elagabalus,
the Alexander, and the Aurelian.

After the death of Petrarch, the Fulda Codex, it
has been maintained, came into the possession of
Coluccio Salutati,* and many of the marginal correc-
tions which it bears are said to be his. On the
other hand, it has been asserted with equal vigour
that Coluccio did not even see this manuscript.’
However this may be, the Historia Augusta was well
known to Coluccio, and his letters written in the
years 1381-93 cite the vitae of Hadrian, Pius,
Marcus, and Alexander?; moreover, the fact that in
one letter he names the six authors of the Historia
Augusta in the order in which they are contained in
the manuscript? seems to indicate that he had a
first-hand acquaintance with the text.


1 Codex Parisinus 5816.

2 Epist. de Rebus Familiaribus, xxii. 14 aen in 1360) ;
see also de Reb. Fam., xx. 4.

3 Epist. Seniles, xiv. 1 (1378) ; see also Ey. Sen., ii. 1; xv. 3.

*H. Dessau, Hermes, xxix. (1894), p. 410, n. 2; S. H.
Ballou, p. 30 f.

5 Coluccio's use of this codex is denied by Hohl, l.c., p. 158,
and Klio, xv. (1918), p. 87 f.

5 Epistolario di Coluccio Salutati, ed. by F. Novati (Rome,
1891-6), vol. ii., ' pP. 40 f., 55, 415.

1 Epistolario Coluccio Salutati, ed. by F. Novati (Rome,
1891- à. vol. ii., p. 299.


xxvii


INTRODUCTION


In the fifteenth century the famous codex passed
into the hands of the merchant and theologian
Giannozzo Manetti (1396-1459). His possession is
attested by the presence of his name on the first
page, and he too is supposed to have shown his
interest in the Historia Augusta by inscribing many
a note on the margins. Later, probably in 1587,
with other of Manetti's books, the codex contain-
ing the Historia Augusta passed to the Palatine
Library at Heidelberg, there to be known as the
Codex Palatinus and there to remain until, with the
rest of that famous collection, it was sent to Rome
in 1623 by Maximilian of Bavaria, and placed in the
library of the Vatican.

The general interest in the Historia Augusta in the
fifteenth century is well attested by the number of
manuscripts that were made in that period.? Among
them was the copy of the Codex Palatinus which was
made by the famous Poggio Bracciolini with his own
hand and is still preserved in Florence. *

The same interest in the Historia Augusta that led
to the multiplication of the manuscripts was respons-
ible for its early appearance in printed form. One
of the recent copies of the Codex Palatinus? came
into the hands of Bonus Accursius and from this was
made the Editio Princeps, published in Milan in 1475.
This was soon followed by an Aldine edition published


! H, Dessau, l.c., p. 409.

? S. H. Ballou, p. 40.

3 See Peter's text, 2nd Ed. Praefatio, p. xxiii. f.

4 The Codex Riccardianus 551; see S. H. Ballou, p. 29.

5 Usually supposed to have been the Codex Vaticanus 5301 ;
see Dessau, l.c., p. 400 f. It has been maintained by Miss
S. H. Ballou (p. 82 f.), however, that Accursius used Petrarch's
manuscript, the Parisinus 5816,


xxviii


INTRODUCTION


at Venice in 1516, and by the more famous text
edited by Erasmus, and published by Froben in Basel
in 1518.

In these early editions the emphasis had been laid
: on the Latin text, but in the seventeenth century the
work of the editors included not only textual emen-
dation, but comment and illustration. Of these
editions the first was that of Casaubon, published in
1603. It was not unnatural that these biographies
should have attracted the editor of Suetonius and
Polybius and the scholar who wrote in the preface to
his edition. of the Historia Augusta that “political
philosophy may be learned from history, and ethical
from biography ".!

Casaubon's edition was soon followed by that of
Gruter, published at Hanover in 1611. As professor
in “Heidelberg, Gruter had access to the Codex
Palatinus and based his text on this manuscript. It is
therefore not unnatural that he should have con-
cerned himself most of all with the text. Yet his
notes are by no means confined to a discussion of the
readings of his manuscript, but include comment on
the narrative and the citation of parallels from other
classical authors. Yet his commentary lacks the
scope of Casaubon's, and in many a note he refers
the reader to the work of his great predecessor,
amicissimus noster, as he calls him.?

The work of Casaubon and Gruter was carried on
by the great Salmasius (Claude de Saumaise) in his
edition published in 1620. His contribution con-
sisted, not in the text, which was merely a re-publi-


1M. Pattison, Isaac Casaubon, 2nd Ed. (London, 1892),


p. 440.
? e.g. note to Hadr., ii. 5.
Xxix


INTRODUCTION


cation of Casaubon's, but in his commentary. As
might be expected from one of his great learning, he
included in his edition notes of wide scope and vast
erudition, and little was left unnoticed that the
knowledge of the age afforded.!

So far, the Historia Augusta had been a subject for
textual criticism and comment rather than a source
for Roman history. The historical researches of the
humanistic period dealt almost exclusively with the
Roman Republic, or, at the latest, with Augustus?
and left these imperial biographies untouched.  Be-
sides Giovanni de Matociis and Guglielmo da
Pastrengo, only Benvenuto Rambaldi da Imola? in
his Romuleon, a compendium of Roman history from
the founding of Rome to the period of Constantine,
written soon after 1360, seems to have been largely
dependent on the Historia Augusta for the history of
the second and third centuries. In the later Renais-
sance, when the interest of scholars concerned itself
with antiquarian,* rather than strictly historical,
research, the biographies would be valuable only for
incidental information 5 rather than for historical
material. In the seventeenth century, on the other
hand, they receivéd serious attention. The de


1 The notes of Casaubon, Gruter, and Salmasius are all
rr ies in the variorum edition, published at Leyden in
1671.

2G. Voigt, Wiederbelebung d. Class. Alt. (Berlin, 1893),
li. p. 490 f.

3Used by Casaubon and erroneously cited by him as
Robertus a Porta Bononiensis, ¢.g., note to Hadr.,i.1; see
E. Hohl, Berl. Philol. Woch., xxxv. (1915), 221 f.

4See O. Wachsmuth, Einleitung 1. d. Stud. d. Alt. Gesch.
(Leipzig, 1895), p. 7 f.

$e.g., the Antiquitates Romanae of J. Rosinus (Basel,
1585 f.), where the vitae are frequently cited.


XXX


7^ 77 wwe = 0—


INTRODUCTION


Historicis Romanis of G. J. Vossius, published in 1627,
devoted considerable space not only to the six bio-
graphers themselves, their respective dates, and the
problem of the distribution of the various vitae among
them, but also to the authors cited by them, especially
Marius Maximus and Junius Cordus! Of much more
importance, however, was their use by Lenain de
Tillemont in his Histoire des Empereurs et des autres
Princes qui ont régné durant les six premiers Siècles de
l'Eglise.^ In spite of his general denunciation of the
biographers as unworthy of the name of historian?
and his occasional strictures on their self-contra-
dictions,* the chronological inexactness of Spartianus,’
and the crime-inspiring character of Lampridius’
work,? the Historia Augusta was a main source,
together with Cassius Dio, for that part of his work
which dealt with the second and third centuries.

Similarly important was the place that the Historia
Augusta occupied among the sources used by Gibbon.
Although his critical acumen detected many an in-
stance of historical inaccuracy, and although he did
not hesitate to score single instances with character-
istic vigour,’ he accepted in general the information
that it offered and even the point of view of the
biographer.?

1 See Lib. ii., cap. 2 f. 2 In five volumes, Paris, 1690 f,

3 [b., vol, iii. p. 217.

3e,g., ib., iii. p. 447 (Spartianus); iii, p. 489 f, (Capitoli-
nus) ; iii. p. 526 (Pollio.)

5 Ib., ii. p. 518; iii, pp. 448 f., 459. — *Ib, ii. p.981. €

7e.g., his contrast between Cassius Dio who spoke “as a
senator who had supped with the emperor" and Capitolinus
who spoke “like a slave who had received his intelligence
from one of the scullions " ; Gibbon-Bury, vol. i. p. 99.

? e.g., his erroneous judgment on Gallienus, due to the vita ;
see Gibbon-Bury, vol i. p. 446.

xxxi
c


&


INTRODUCTION


In the nineteenth century the work of the bio-
graphers was still accorded respectful, though not
uncritical, consideration. Thus Merivale held that
* we may perhaps rely upon them generally for the
account of the salient events of history and their
views of character; but we must guard against the
trifling and incredible anecdotes with which they
abound,"! and, true to his principle, he constantly
cites them as sources. Schiller, too, while observing
that the later biographies are inferior to the earlier
ones and that the value of their information varied
with the source employed, regarded the material that
they afford as useful for the political history of the
empire,? and used them as sources, considering them, .
apparently, as important as Dio and Herodian. Even
‚Mommsen in his Römisches Staatsrecht does not dis-
‘dain these biographies, but cites them among his
authorities in his reconstruction of the public law and
administration of imperial Rome. It was left for the
last decade of the nineteenth century and the first
two decades of the twentieth to bring the charge of
utter spuriousness against the Historia Augusta and to
assert that it is the work of a forger ?—a charge which,
in return, has led to a somewhat fanciful attempt to
trace through many of the biographies the purple
thread of an otherwise unknown historian of prime
importance, * |

! Hist. of the Romans under the Empire, 4th Ed. (American
reprint, New York 1863-65), vii. p. 321, n. 1.
oe Gesch. d. Rim, Kaiserzeit (Gotha, 1883), pp. 595 f. and

? H. Dessau, Hermes, xxiv. (1889), pp. 337-392; xxvii. (1892),
pp. 961-605.

40, Th. Schulz, Beiträge z. Kritik uns. litt. Ueberlieferung
f. d. Zeit von Commodus’ Sturze bis auf d. Tod d. M. Aurelius
Antoninus (Caracalla), Leipzig, 1908. -
XXXII


THE MANUSCRIPTS


THE manuscripts of the Historia Augusta are divided
into two main classes, each of which has such definite
characteristics that the distinction between them is
sharp and clear. Both classes are, indeed, derived
from a common original, made after the loss of the
vilae of the emperors from Philip to Valerian! and
of considerable portions of the vitae of the Valeriani
and the Gallieni. On the other hand, there is a con-
spicuous difference between the two classes in the
manner in which the text has been treated. In one
class, usually designated as Class II, the treatment
has been most conservative. The text has been pre-
served free from all interpolations or additions, and
especially the /acunae in the biographies of the Vale-
riani and the Gallieni have been carefully indicated
by dots marking the missing letters. This class is
also characterised by a confusion in the order of the
biographies between Verus and Alexander and by
the misplacement of two long passages from the
Alexander and the Maximini (Alex., xliii, 7—1viii, 1, -
and Max., v. 3—xviii. 2), each of which corresponds
to a quire of the original which became loose and.
and was then inserted in a wrong place. A similar


1 See Intro., p. xiv.
xxxiii


THE MANUSCRIPTS


transposition occurs in the Carus, where c. xiii. 1—
xv. 5 has been inserted in c. ii.

The manuscripts of the other class, designated as
Class X, differ from those of Class II in that the text
has been treated with the utmost freedom. In many
places, where the original was corrupt, drastic emen-
dations have been made, and where none seemed
possible, the corrupt parts have been omitted alto-
gether. This is especially conspicuous in the /acunae
in the vitae of the Valeriani and the Gallieni, where
all trace of the loss has been covered up by the in-
sertion of words and the formation of a continuous
text. In all this the aim has been to construct a
smooth and easily readable narrative. In other places,
such as the end of the Caracalla and of the Maximus-
Balbinus and the beginning of the Valeriani, additions
have been made to the text; and in the case of the
Marcus considerable sections have been shifted about
and then connected in their new places by arbitrary
changes in the context. It is also characteristic of
this class that the vitae (with the single exception of
the Avidius Cassius) are arranged in chronological
order and that the sections transposed in Class II are
in their rightful places.

- The manuscripts of Class II were supposed by
Peter to consist of three main groups, all derived
from the same archetype, and represented respec-
tively by the Coder Palatinus 899 (P); the Codex
Bambergensis (B); and the Coder Vaticanus 5301
with others. Peter accordingly regarded the Pala-
tinus and the Bambergensis as equally authoritative.
-More recent investigation, however, as carried on by
Mommsen! and Dessau,? has shown that the Codex


1 Herm., xxv. (1890), pp. 281-292 = Ges. Schr., vii, pp.
352-362.

3 Herm., xxix, (1894), pp. 399-416.
XXxiv


THE MANUSCRIPTS


Palatinus is the parent manuscript, and that all the
others of Class IT are only direct or indirect copies
of it. All contain errors and omissions which can
be due only to a transcription of the Palatinus, over
faithful or unskilful, as the case may be. Accord-
ingly, only the Palatinus can be regarded as authori-
tative in this class, and the others may be used only
for the purpose of confirmation or supplement.

The tradition contained in the manuscripts of
Class X, though regarded as untrustworthy by Peter,
was admitted by him to be possibly independent of |
that of Class If. This independence is more strongly
maintained by Dr. Ernst Hohl! He points to the
chronological order of the vitae and to the correct
arrangement of the quires transposed in the manu-
scripts of Class II as evidence for his conviction that
the manuscripts of this class represent a tradition
different from that of Class II, although, as the
various omissions show, derived from a common
original. He has, furthermore, cited in proof of his
theory various passages in the biographies of Alex-
ander and Aurelian contained in the manuscripts of
Class X but not in the Codex Palatinus, and argues that
these were excised from the original of the latter be-
cause of allusions to pagan deities. These considera-
tions, together with a number of readings which are
better than those of the Palatinus, have convinced
him that the 3 manuscripts are derived ultimately
from an original at least as old as the Palatinus
and retaining more correctly many of the readings
of their common archetype. On the other hand,


1 Klio., xiii, (1913), pp. 258-288, 387.428; xv. (1918),
pp. 78-98.


XXXV


THE MANUSCRIPTS


Miss Susan H. Ballou,! following the opinion ex-
pressed by Dessau, argues that these divergencies
from the tradition of Class II are of such a character
that they can be merely the work of a clever, though
unscrupulous, redactor. She holds that this man
made his transcription from the Codex Palatinus,
having before him all the corrections and additions
that had been introduced by all the later correctors,
and taking from all of them as many as suited his
purpose. This transcription, she believes, was the
original of the extant X manuscripts, which, accord-
ingly, represent, not an independent tradition, but
merely the work of an editor, who, by means of
intelligent and original treatment of the material
contained in the Palatinus and by the unscrupulous
use of interpolation and re-arrangement, created a
readable but unsound version of the text.

With only the present evidence available the
problem of the value of the manuscripts of Class X
must be regarded as still unsolved. The arguments
advanced by Dr. Hohl are not altogether convincing,
and it has not yet been fully demonstrated that the
tradition of the X manuscripts is independent of
those of Class If. For the present, therefore, any
constitution' of the text must be based on the
readings of the Codex Palatinus.


1 The. Manuscript Tradition of the Historia Augusta,
Leipzig, 1914.


XXxvi


EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS,


EDITIONS—

Editio Princeps: edited by Bonus didum Milan, 1475. -

Venice Editions: printed by Bernadinus Ricius (Rizus),
1489, and J. Rubens de Vercellis, 1490.

Aldine Edition : edited by J. B. Egnatius, Venice, 1516;
Florence, 1519.

Desiderius Erasmus: published by Froben, Basel, 1518.

Isaac Casaubon: Paris, 1608. .

Janus Gruter: Hanover, 1611.

Claudius Salmasius; containing also Casaubon's notes:
Paris, 1620; London, 1652.

C. Schrevel: Leyden, 1661.

Variorum Edition; containing the commentaries of
Casaubon, Gruter, and Salmasius: published by Hack,
Leyden, 1671.

Ulrich Obrecht: Strassburg, 1677.

J. P. Schmidt, with preface by J. L. E. Püttmann: Leipzig,
1774.

Bipontine Edition, 2 vols.: Zweibrücken and Strassburg,
1787 and 1789. |

Panckouke, 3 vols. : Paris, 1844-1847.

Thomas Vallaurius: Turin, 1853.

H. Jordan and F. Eyssenhardt, 2 vols.: Berlin, 1864.

Hermann Peter, 2 vols. (Teubner Text): Leipzig, lst
Edition, 1865; 2nd Edition, 1884.


TRANSLATIONS—
GERMAN—
J. P. Ostertag, 2 vols.: Frankfurt a. Main, 1790,
1798.
L. Storch; Hadrian, Aelius, and Antoninus Pius:
Prenzlau, 1829.
C. A. Oloss, 6 vols.: Stuttgart, 1856-1657.
FRENCH—


G. de Moulines, 8 vols.: Berlin, 1788; 2nd Edition,
Paris, 1806.
SPANISH—
F. Navarro y Calvo, 2 vols. : Madrid, 1889-1890.


xxxvii


SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE


VOL. I. ; B


AELII SPARTIANI


DE VITA


HADRIANI


I. Origo imperatoris Hadriani vetustior a Picentibus,
posterior ab Hispaniensibus manat ; si quidem Hadria
ortos maiores suos apud Italicam Scipionum tempori-
bus resedisse in libris vitae suae Hadrianus ipse

2commemorat.! Hadriano pater Aelius Hadrianus
cognomento Afer fuit, consobrinus Traiani impera-
toris; mater Domitia Paulina Gadibus orta, soror
Paulina nupta Serviano, uxor Sabina, atavus Marul-
linus, qui primus in sua familia senator populi
Romani fuit.

3 Natus est Romae VIIII kal. Feb. Vespasiano septies


! commemorat P corr. ; commemoret P!, Petschenig.


! For the Autobiography of Hadrian, now lost, cf. c. xvi. It
seems to have been written toward the close of his life, and,
to judge from scanty citations from it, its purpose was to con-
tradict current statements about himself which he considered
derogatory to his reputation &nd to present him in a favour-
able light to posterity.

2An ancient town of Picenum, which became a Roman
colony, probably about the time of Sulla.

3In Hispania Baetica, on the Baetis (Guadalquiver),


BY


AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. The original home of the family of the Emperor
Hadrian was Picenum, the later, Spain ; for Hadrian
himself relates in his autobiography! that his fore-
fathers came from Hadria,? but settled at Italica? in
the time of the Scipios. The father of Hadrian was
Aelius Hadrianus, surnamed Afer, a cousin of the
Emperor Trajan ; his mother was Domitia Paulina, a
native of Cadiz; his sister was Paulina, the wife of
Servianus,* his wife was Sabina,’ and his great-grand-
father's grandfather was Marullinus, the first of his
family to be a Roman senator.

Hadrian was born in Rome 5 on the eighth day be- 25 Jan., 16.
fore the Kalends of February in the seventh consul-


founded by Scipio Africanus about 205 B.c., received the
rights of a municipality under Julius or Augustus, and was
made a colony by Hadrian.

4L. Julius Ursus Servianus, frequently mentioned in this
biography. He governed several provinces under Trajan, and
was made consul for a third time by Hadrian in 184. On his
death in 136, see c. xxiii. 2,8; xxv. 8; Dio, lxix. 17.

5See c. ii. 10 and note.

6 This is, of course, a fiction, and the biography contradicts
itself, for Italica is clearly the patria referred to in c. ii. 1
and 2, and c. xix. 1.


B2


4et Tito quinquies consulibus. ac decimo aetatis anno
patre orbatus Ulpium Traianum praetorium tunc,!
consobrinum suum, qui postea imperium tenuit, et
Caelium Attianum equitem Romanum tutores habuit.
5imbutusque impensius Graecis studiis, ingenie eius
sic ad ea declinante ut a nonnullis Graeculus :
II. diceretur. quintodecimo anno ad patriam rediit ac
statim militiam iniit, venandi? usque ad reprehen-
2sionem studiosus. quare a Traiano abductus a patria
et pro filio habitus nec multo post decemvir litibus
iudicandis datus atque inde tribunus secundae
3 Adiutricis legionis creatus. post hoc in inferiorem
Moesiam translatus extremis iam Domitiani ? tempori-
4bus. ibi a mathematico quodam de futuro imperio
id dicitur comperisse quod a patruo magno Aelio
Hadriano peritia caelestium callente praedictum esse
5compererat. Traiano a Nerva adoptato ad gratula-
tionem exercitus missus in * Germaniam superiorem


liunc P!; uirum P corr. 2 uenandi Novak ; uenando
P, Peter. 3 domilianis P!, Potschenig: 44m omitted
by P!, added by P corr.


1Trajan was praetor about 85, and so, until he became
consul, in 91, was a vir praetorius.

2The name Caelius is an error. His name was Acilius
Attianus, as it appears on an inscription from Elba; see Rim.
Mitt., xviii. 63-67. He became prefect of the guard under
Trajan and seems to have been instrumental in securing the:
throne for Hadrian. On his retirement from the prefecture,
see c, viii. 7; ix. 3-5.

3 The decemviri stlitibus iudicandis had originally, in the
didus period, the duty of determining disputed claims
to freedom. Augustus removed suits for freedom from their
jurisdiction, and gave them the conduct of the court of the
Centumviri, which dealt with suits for inheritances. Ap-
pointment to this, or to one of five other minor magisterial


HADRIAN I. 4—II. 5


ship of Vespasian and the fifth of Titus. Bereft of
his father at the age of ten, he became the ward of
Ulpius Trajanus, his cousin, then of praetorian rank,!
but afterwards emperor, and of Caelius Attianus,? a
knight. He then grew rather deeply devoted to
Greek studies, to which his natural tastes inclined so
much that some called him * Greekling." II. He
returned to his native city in his fifteenth year and
at once entered military service, but was so fond of
hunting that he incurred criticism for it, and for this -
reason Trajan recalled him from Italica. Thence-
forth he was treated by Trajan as his own son, and not
long afterwards he was made one of the ten judges
of the inheritance-court,? and, later, tribune of the
Second Legion, the Adjutrix After this, when
Domitian's principate was drawing to a close, he was
transferred to the province of Lower Moesia.
There, it is said, he heard from an astrologer the
same prediction of his future power which had been
made, as he already knew, by his great-uncle, Aelius
Hadrianus, a master of astrology. When Trajan was
adopted $ by Nerva, Hadrian was sent to convey to
him the army’s congratulations and was at once


boards constituting the viginiiri, was the first step in a
career of public office,

*So called because it had been recruited (by Vespasian)
from an auxiliary force of marines. At this time it was serv-
ing probably in the province of Pannonia Inferior.

5 As tribune of the Fifth Legion, the Macedonica. This
command is listed among his other offices in an inscription
set up in his honour at Athens in 112 (C.J.L., iii. 550 = Dessau,
Inser. Sel., 308), and it is known that this legion was quartered
in Moesia Inferior at this time.

‘Trajan was governor of the province of Germania
Superior; he seems to have been appointed by Nerva in 96.


6translatus est. ex qua festinans ad Traianum, ut
primus nuntiaret excessum Nervae, a Serviano, sororis
viro, (qui et sumptibus et aere alieno eius prodito
Traiani odium in eum movit) diu detentus fracto-
que consulte vehiculo tardatus, pedibus iter faciens
7 eiusdem Serviani beneficiarium antevenit. fuitque
in amore Traiani, nec tamen ei per paedagogos
puerorum quos Traianus impensius diligebat, . . .
8Gallo favente! defuit. quo quidem tempore cum
sollicitus de imperatoris erga se iudicio, Vergilianas
sortes consuleret,
Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis olivae
sacra ferens? nosco crines incanaque menta
regis Romani, primam qui legibus urbem
fundabit, Curibus parvis et paupere terra
missus in imperium magnum, cui deinde subibit . . .
sors excidit, quam alii ex Sibyllinis versibus ei prove-
9nisse dixerunt. habuit autem praesumptionem im-
perii mox futuri ex fano quoque Nicephorii Iovis
manante responso, quod Apollonius Syrus Platonicus
10 libris suis indidit. denique statim suffragante Sura
ad amicitiam Traiani pleniorem rediit, nepte per


Lacuna suggested by Gemoll; diligebat Gallo fauente de-
fuit P.


1 As tribune of the Twenty-second Legion, the Primigenia
Pia Fidelis, according to the Athenian inscription (see p. 5,
n. 5).

Y beneficiarius was & soldier who had been relieved of
active service by some commandant and was attached to the
suite of this official.

3For similar consultations, cf. Cl. Alb., v. 4; Alex., iv. 6;
xiv. 5; Claud., x. 4f. l

4 Aen., vi. 808-812. The passage refers to Numa Pompilius.

5 Perhaps the place of this name near Pergamon.

$ Unknown.


HADRIAN II. 6-10


transferred to Upper Germany.! When Nerva died, Oct., 97.
he wished to be the first to bring the news to Trajan,
but as he was hastening to meet him he was detained
by his brother-in-law, Servianus, the same man who
had revealed Hadrian’s extravagance and indebted-
ness and thus stirred Trajan’s anger against him. He
was: further delayed by the fact that his travelling-
carriage had been designedly broken, but he never-
theless proceeded on foot and anticipitated Servianus'
personal messenger? And now he became a
favourite of Trajan's, and yet, owing to the activity of
the guardiaus of certain boys whom Trajan loved
ardently, he was not free from . . . which Gallus
fostered. Indeed, at this time he was even anxious
about the Emperor's attitude towards him, and con-
sulted the Vergilian oracle. This was the lot given
out : 4

But who is yonder man, by olive wreath

Distinguished, who the sacred vessel bears ?

I see a hoary head and beard. Behold

The Roman King whose laws shall stablish Rome

Anew, from tiny Cures’ humble land

Called to a mighty realm. Then shall arise . . .
Others, however, declare that this prophecy came to
him from the Sibylline Verses. Moreover, he re-
ceived a further intimation of his subsequent power,
in a response which issued from the temple of Jupiter
at Nicephorium * and has been quoted by Apol-
lonius of Syria,? the Platonist. Finally, through the
good offices of Sura," he was instantly restored to a
friendship with Trajan that was closer than ever, and


7L. Licinius Sura was consul for the third time in 107.
He commanded the army in the wars in Dacia and received
the triumphal insignia and other high honours.


sororem Traiani uxore accepta favente Plotina, Traiano
leviter, ut Marius Maximus dicit, volente.

III. Quaesturam gessit Traiano quater et Articuleio
consulibus, in qua cum orationem imperatoris in
senatu agrestius pronuntians risus esset, usque ad
summam peritiam et facundiam Latinis operam dedit.


! Vibia Sabina, the daughter of L. Vibius and Matidia, who
was the daughter of Marciana, Trajan's sister. Plotina was
Trajan's wife.

2 L. Marius Maximus was the author of biographies of the
emperors from Nerva to Elagabalus, frequently cited in these
Vitae; see Intro., p. xvii f. He is probably the senator of
the same name who held many important administrative
posts under Septimius Severus and his successors,

? He is called in the Athenian inscription quaestor impera-
toris Traiani, i.e. he was one of the quaestors detailed to
transact business for the emperor, and particularly to con-
vey his messages to the senate and read them before the
house.

1The official known as curator actorum senatus or ab actis
senatus drafted the record of the senate’s transactions.


HADRIAN II. 10—III. 7


he took to wife the daughter of the Emperor's sister !
—a marriage advocated by Plotina, but, according to
Marius Maximus; little desired by Trajan himself.

He held the quaestorship? in the fourth con-
sulship of Trajan and the first of Articuleius, and 101.
while holding this office he read a speech of the Em-
peror's to the senate and provoked a laugh by his-
somewhat provincial accent. He thereupon gave
attention to the study of Latin until he attained
the utmost proficiency and fluency. After his
quaestorship he served as curator of the acts of the
senate,* and later accompanied Trajan in the Dacian
war ĉ on terms of considerable intimacy, seeing, in-
deed, that falling in with Trajan's habits, as he says
himself, he partook freely of wine, and for this was
very richly rewarded by the Emperor. He was made
tribune of the plebs in the second consulship of105.
Candidus and Quadratus, and he claimed that he re-
ceived an omen of continuous tribunician power
during this magistracy, because he lost the heavy
cloak which is worn by the tribunes of the plebs in
rainy weather, but never by the emperors. And
down to this day the emperors do not wear cloaks
when they appear in public before civilians. In the 105-106.
second Dacian war, Trajan appointed him to the
command of the First Legion, the Minervia, and took
him with him to the war; and in this campaign his
many remarkable deeds won great renown. Because
of this he was presented with a diamond which


5The first Dacian war (101-102). The inscription cited
&bove reads: Comes expeditionis Dacicae, donis militaribus
ab eo (Traiano) donatus bis.
€ An allusion to the tribunician power held by the emperors,
which was regarded as the basis of their civil powers; see
note to Marc., vi. 6. °


ianus a Nerva acceperat donatus ad spem successionis
8erectus est. praetor factus est Suburano! bis et Ser-
viano iterum consulibus, cum sestertium iterum? vicies

9 ad ludos edendos a Traiano accepit. legatus postea
praetorius in Pannoniam inferiorem missus Sarmatas
compressit, disciplinam militarem tenuit, procuratores
10]atius evagantes coercuit. ob hoc consul est factus.
in quo magistratu ut? a Sura comperit adoptandum
se a Traiano esse, ab amicis Traiani contemni desiit
llac neglegi. et defuncto* quidem Sura Traiani ei
familiaritas crevit," causa praecipue orationum quas
IV. pro imperatore dictaverat. usus Plotinae quoque
favore, cuius studio etiam legatus expeditionis
2Parthicae tempore destinatus est. qua quidem
tempestate utebatur Hadrianus amicitia Sosii Papi et
Platorii® Nepotis ex senatorio ordine, ex equestri


1 Suburano Mommsen ; sub surano P, Peter. ? iterum
deleted by Mommsen. Sut P corr. ; et P!. 4 defuncto
P corr. ; definito P!. S creuit P corr. ; creauit P!; crebuit


Peter. 6 Platori Borghesi ; pletori P.


! Due to & precedent established by Augustus, who, when
ill in 28 B.c., gave his ring to Agrippa, apparently intending
him to be his successor; see Dio, liii, 30.

2The reading of P is impossible, for no such person as
Suranus is known, but it is difficult to emend the text
satisfactorily, since Suburanus was consul for the second time
in 104, &nd Servianus was consul for the second time in 102.
The consuls of 107, in which year Hadrian was probably
praetor, were Sura, for the third time, and Senecio, for the
second time.

3 This province was one of the ** imperial provinces," which
were governed in theory by the emperor but in practice by &
deputy appointed by him with the title legatus Augusti pro
praetore. The governor of the province under the control of
the senate, on the other hand, had the title of proconsul.


HADRIAN III. 8—IV. 2


Trajan himself had received from Nerva, and by this
gift he was encouraged in his hopes of succeeding
to the throne. He held the praetorship in the
second consulship of Suburanus and Servianus,?
and again received from Trajan two million ses-
terces with. which to give games. Next he was
sent as praetorian legate to Lower Pannonia,’ where
he held the Sarmatians in check, maintained
discipline among the soldiers, and restrained the
procurators,* who were overstepping too freely the
bounds of their power, In return for these services
he was made consul. While he was holding this 108.
office he learned from Sura that he was to be adopted |
by Trajan, and thereupon he ceased to be an object |
of contempt and neglect to Trajan’s friends. Indeed,
after Sura's death Trajan’s friendship for him in-
creased, principally on account of the speeches which
he composed for the Emperor. IV. He enjoyed, too, '
the favour of Plotina,’ and it was due to her interest
in him that later, at the time of the campaign against 114.
Parthia, he was appointed the legate of the Emperor.
At this same time he enjoyed, besides, the friendship
of Sosius Papus and Platorius Nepos," both of the


Hadrian is called here legatus praetorius because he held this
position as a vir praetorius, i.e. one who had been praetor but
not yet consul.

4The procurator was charged with the collection of taxes
and other sources of revenue in an imperial province and their
transmission to the fiscus, or privy purse.

5 Cf. c. ii. 10.

€ The appointment as legate refers to his governorship of
Syria; see § 6.

"A. Platorius Nepos was prominent under Trajan as a
magistrate at Rome and the governor of several important
provinces and was consul with Hadrian in 119. He after-
ward incurred Hadrian’s enmity; see c. xv. 2; xxiii, 4.


. autem Attiani, tutoris quondam sui, et Liviani et!

4lapsis. secundo consul favore Plotinae factus totam

6 Quintum iduum Augustarum diem legatus Syriae
litteras adoptionis accepit ; quando et natalem adop-

7 tionis celebrari iussit. tertium iduum' earundem,
quando et natalem imperii statuit celebrandum, ex-
cessus ei Traiani nuntiatus est.


lei omitted by P, added by Hirschfeld. 2 adfectatae

` Petschenig ; adiectae P ; adfectae Peter with Salm. 3 sepe-

lisse P ; ad se pellexisse Peter?, 4 famáliarior P ; famili-
ariorum B, Peter.


!T. Claudius Livianus was prefect of the guard under
Trajan and held à command in the first Dacian war; see
Dio, ]xix. 9.

?For the career of Q. Marcius Turbo under Trajan and
Hadrian see c. v-vii. He was finally appointed prefect of the
guard; see c. ix. 4.

3 A. Cornelius Palma and L. Publilius Celsus held impor-
tant offices under Trajan and statues were erected in their


HADRIAN IV. 3-9


senatorial order, and also of Attianus, his former
guardian, of Livianus,! and of Turbo,? all of eques-
trian rank, And when Palma and Celsus,? always
his enemies, on whom he later took vengeance, fell
under suspicion of aspiring to the throne, his adoption
seemed assured ; and it was taken wholly for granted
when, through Plotina's favour, he was appointed
consul for the second time. That he was bribing
Trajan's freedmen and. courting and corrupting his
favourites all the while that he was in close attend-
ance at court, was told and generally believed.

On the fifth day before the Ides of August, while 9 Aug 117.
he was governor of Syria, he learned of his adoption
by Trajan, and he later gave orders to celebrate this
day as the anniversary of his adoption. On the third
day before the Ides of August he received the news 11 Aug.,
of Trajan's death, and this day he appointed as the 117.
anniversary of his accession.

There was, to be sure, a widely prevailing belief
that Trajan, with the approval of many of his friends,
had planned to appoint as his successor not Hadrian
but Neratius Pfíscus, even to the extent of once
saying to Priscus: ‘‘I entrust the provinces to your
care in case anything happens to me ". And, indeed,
many aver that Trajan had purposed to follow the
example of Alexander of Macedonia and die without
naming a successor. Again, many others declare that


~


honour. Nothing is known of the suspicion alluded to here,
but the two men, together with Nigrinus and Lusius Quietus, |
were later accused of a conspiracy against Hadrian and put .
to death; see c. vii. 1-3.

L. Neratius Priscus was a famous jurist and his works
were used in the compilation of Justinian’s Digest. He was
a member of Trajan’s imperial council, and later was one of
Hadrian's advisers in legal questions; see c. xviii. 1.


sore moreretur, multi ad senatum eum orationem
voluisse mittere petiturum, ut, si quid ei evenisset,
principem Romanae rei publicae senatus daret, ad-
ditis dum taxat nominibus ex quibus optimum idem
10 senatus eligeret. nec desunt qui factione Plotinae
mortuo iam Traiano Hadrianum in adoptionem ad-
scitum esse prodiderint, supposito qui pro Traiano
fessa voce loquebatur.! :
V. Adeptus imperium ad priscum se statim morem
| instituit et tenendae per orbem terrarum paci operam
impendit.? nam deficientibus iis nationibus quas
Traianus subegerat, Mauri lacessebant, Sarmatae
bellum inferebant, Britanni teneri sub Romana
dicione non poterant, Aegyptus seditionibus urge-
batur, Libya? denique ac Palaestina rebelles animos
3 efferebant. \ quare omnia trans Euphraten ac Tigrim
reliquit exemplo, ut dicebat, Catonis, qui Macedones
liberos pronuntiavit, quia tueri non poterant]
4 Parthamasirin,* quem Traianus Parthis regem fecerat,


1 loqueretur P corr. 2 impendit P corr., Petschenig, No-
vak, and Lessing ; intendit P!, Peter. 9$ Libya Cas. ; licia
P. 4 Parthamasirin, see Prosop. III, p. 18; sarmatosirin
P; Partomasirin Peter?.


! Augustus had bequeathed as a policy the consilium coer-
cendi intra terminos imperii (Tacitus, Annals, i. 11), these
natural boundaries being the Rhine, Danube, and Euphrates.
This policy had been abandoned by Trajan in his conquests
¿of Dacia, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria. Hadrian's
new policy is proclaimed in the legends on his coins, Justitia
(Cohen, ii?, p. 179, No. 874 f.) and Pax (Cohen, ii?, p. 190, No.
1011 f.). m
2 cts 8 and c. vi. 7. . 3Cf. c. vi. 6.
* i.e. Alexandria, where the Jews were rioting, incited per-
haps by the example of their fellow-countrymen in Palestine.


14 (


HADRIAN IV. 10—V. 4


he had meant to send an address to the senate, request-
ing this body, in case aught befell him, to appoint a
ruler for the Roman empire, and merely appending
the names of some from among whom the senate
might choose the best. And the statement has even!
been made that it was not until after Trajan's death.
that Hadrian was declared adopted, and then only.
by means of a trick of Plotina's; for she smuggled in;
someone who impersonated the Emperor and spoke
in a feeble voice.

V. On taking possession of the imperial power
Hadrian at once resumed the policy of the early,
sapere and devoted his attention to maintaining
peace throughout the world. For the nations which
Trajan had conquered began to revolt ; the Moors,
moreover, began to make attacks,? and the Sarmatians
to wage war,? the Britons could not be kept under
Roman sway, Egypt * was thrown into disorder by
riots, and finally Libya 5 and Palestine 5 showed the
spirit of rebellion. Whereupon he relinquished all
the conquests east of the Euphrates and the Tigris,
following, as he used to say, the example of Cato,
who urged that the Macedonians, because they could
not be held as subjects, should be declared free and
independent.’ And Parthamasiris,? appointed king

54.0. the Cyrenaica, where at the end of Trajan’s reign
the Jews had risen and. massacred many Greeks and Romans ;
see Dio, lxviii. 32.

€ Cf. § 8.

7This measure was apparently advocated in a speech made
before the senate in 167 B.c. after the defeat of Perseus, the
last king of Macedonia, at Pydna (see Livy, xlv. 17- -18).
Macedonia was divided into four independent districts, an
arrangement which proved untenable.


8 An error for Parthamaspates. This prince had deserted
his cousin, the Parthian king, and sided with Trajan in the


6 quamvis Crassum postea procurator egressum insula,
quasi res novas moliretur, iniusso! eius occiderit.

7 militibus ob auspicia imperii duplicem largitionem

8dedit. Lusium Quietum sublatis gentibus Mauris,
quos regebat, quia suspectus imperio fuerat, exarmavit,
Marcio Turbone Iudaeis compressis ad deprimendum
tumultum Mauretaniae destinato.

9 Post haec Antiochia digressus est ad inspiciendas


l 4niusso P, accepted by Petschenig ; iniussu Peter’.


Parthian war; he was rewarded by being made king after
Trajan’s victory in 116-117. The Parthians deposed him,
and Hadrian accordingly assigned to him, at least for a time,
the district of Osrhoene in north-western Mesopotamia. Cf.
c. xxi. 10, and Dio, lxviii. 30 and 33.

lThe biography is anticipating here. This letter was
doubtless written after Attianus had returned to Rome with
Trajan's ashes; see § 10.

? Baebius Macer was one of the friends and correspondents
of the younger Pliny; see Pliny, Epist., iii. 5. The prefect
of the city was in command of the three cohorts which were
responsible for the maintenance of order in Rome.

3 M’. Laberius Maximus seems to have held a command
in the first Dacian war, and was consul for the second tim.
in 108. Nothing further is known of these “ designs”.

: * C. Calpurnius Crassus Frugi conspired against Nerva and
was banished to Tarentum. He was later brought to trial on
the charge of conspiring against Trajan &nd was condemned
(Dio, lxviii. 3 and 16).

ë Lusius Quietus, a Moor by birth and a captain of a squad-


—— ee o o a s
— -


HADRIAN V. 5-9


of the Parthians by Trajan, he assigned as ruler to the
neighbouring tribes, because he saw that the man was
held in little esteem by the Parthians.

Moreover, he showed at the outset such a wish to,
be lenient, that although Attianus advised him by 4
letter in the first few days of his rule! to put to death
Baebius Macer? the prefect of the city, in case he op-
posed his elevation to power, also Laberius Maximus,’
then in exile on an island under suspicion of designs
on the throne, and likewise Crassus Frugi,* he never-
theless refused to harm them. Later on, however,
his procurator, though without an order from Hadrian,
had Crassus killed when he tried to leave the island,
on the ground that he was planning a revolt. He
gave a double donativeto the soldiers in order to ensure
a favourable beginning to his principate. He deprived
Lusius Quietus 5 of the command of the Moorish
tribesmen, who were serving under him, and then dis-
missed him from the army, because he had fallen
under the suspicion of having designs on the throne ;
and he appointed Marcius Turbo, after his reduction
of Judaea, to quell the insurrection in Mauretania.

After taking these measures he set out from
Antioch to view the remains of Trajan,? which were


ron of Moorish horse, had been & commander in Trajan's
Parthian war. He had subsequently been appointed governor
of Judaea by Trajan. The dismissal of the Moorish troops
was & preliminary to the enforced retirement of Quietus,
aince he was now unable to offer any resistance to Hadrian.
e was afterwards accused of conspiring against Hadrian and
.'&8 put to death; see c. vii. 1-3.
- $SProbably to Seleucia, whither Trajan’s body was brought
from Selinus in Cilicia, the place of his death. Herethe body
was burned and the ashes sent to Rome; cf. Victor, Epit.,
xiv. 12.


c


VOL. I.


reliquias Traiani, quas Attianus, Plotina et Matidia


1 See note to c. ii. 10.

2L. Catilius Severus was a friend and correspondent of
Pliny; see Pliny, Hpist., i. 22; iii. 12. He became consul for
the second time in 120, was proconsul of Asia, and in 188 pre-
fect of the city; see c. xxiv. 6-8. He was the great-grand-
father of Marcus Aurelius; see Marc., i. 4.

3 Used here to denote the provinces along the southern
bank of the Danube. His route lay across Asia Minor, and it
was probably in this region that he received the news of the
war threatened by the tribes north of the river; cf. c. vi. 6.
He arrived in Moesia in the spring of 118, and finally reached
Rome in July, 118; cf. c. vii. 3.

4 Acclamation by the army constituted a strong de facto
claim to the imperial power, but it is now generally recognized
(in spite of Mommsen's theory to the contrary) that id the
senate could legally confer the imperium.

S This triumph was commemorated by coins bearing on the
obverse the head of Trajan with the legend Divo Traiano Parth


HADRIAN V. 10—VI. 5


being escorted by Attianus, Plotina, and Matidia.!
He received them formally and sent them on to Rome
by ship, and at once returned to Antioch ; he then
appointed Catilius Severus? governor of Syria, and
proceeded to Rome by way of Illyricum.?

VI. Despatching to the senate a carefully worded
letter, he asked for divine honours for Trajan. This
request he obtained by a unanimous vote ; indeed, the
senate voluntarily voted Trajan many more honours
than Hadrian had requested. In this letter to the sen-
ate he apologized because he had not left it the right
to decide regarding his accession;*'explaining that the
unseemly haste of the troops in acclaiming him em-
peror was due to the belief that the state could not be
without an emperor. Later, when the senate offered
him the triumph which was to have been Trajan's, he
refused it for himself, and caused the effigy ofthe dead
Emperor to be carried in a triumphal chariot, in order
that the best of emperors might not lose even after `
death the honour of a triumph.> Also he refused for
the present the title of Father of his Country, offered
to him at the time of his accession and agaiu later
on, giving as his reason the fact that Augustus
had not won it until late in life. Of the crown-


ico) Aug(usto) Patri and on the reverse & four-horse chariot
riven by the Emperor who holds a laurel-branch and a
sceptre, with the legend triumphus Parthicus ; see Cohen, ii?,
p. 78, No, 585.
€ This title was conferred on Augustus in 2 B.C., twenty-five
years after he recéived the imperium and the name of
Augustus. In the case of the Julio-Claudian emperors after
Tiberius (who never held this title) about a year was allowed
to elapse before the honour was conferred. Hadrian finally
accepted it in 128; see note to c. xiii. 4. The precedent of
& postponement was also followed by Pius (Pius, vi. 6), and
Marcus (Marc., ix. 3). i


c2


coronarium Italiae remisit, in provinciis minuit, et
quidem difficultatibus aerarii ambitiose ac diligenter
expositis.

6 Audito dein tumultu Sarmatarum et Roxolanorum

7 praemissis exercitibus Moesiam petiit. Marcium
Turbonem post Mauretaniam! praefecturae infulis
ornatum Pannoniae Daciaeque ad tempus praefecit.

8cum rege Roxolanorum, qui de inminutis stipendiis "
querebatur, cognito negotio pacem composuit.

2quare Palma  Tarracinis, Celsus Baiis, Nigrinus
Faventiae, Lusius in itinere senatu iubente, invito
3 Hadriano, ut ipse in vita sua dicit, occisi sunt. unde
statim Hadrianus ad refellendam tristissimam de se


1 Maurelaniam Peter; maurataneae P!; mauritaniae
P corr.


1A contribution for the purpose of providing gold wreaths
(in imitation of laurel) which were held over the head of the
general in his triumph. Such contributions were originally
voluntary, but soon became obligatory. Augustus had re-
mitted them (Mon. Anc., c. 21), but his example does not seem
to have been followed by his immediate successors. Partial
remission is recorded in the cases of Pius (Pius, iv. 10) and
Alexander (Alex., xxxii. 5), and proclamations of remission
by Trajan and Marcus are preserved in a papyrus (Fayoum
Towns and their Papyri, No. 116).

2The compressed style of the narrative combines those two
tribes here, but they must be carefully distinguished. The
Roxolani lived at the mouth of the Danube; they had been
constituted a vassal-state by Trajan. On the other hand, the
term Sarmatae is used to denote the independent Iazyges


HADRIAN VI. 6—VII. 3


money ! for his triumph he remitted Italy's contribu-
tion, and lessened that of the provinces, all the while
setting forth grandiloquently and in great detail the
straits of the public treasury.

Then, on hearing of the incursions of the Sarma-
tians and Roxolani? he sent the troops ahead and
set out for Moesia. He conferred the insignia of a
prefect on Marcius Turbo after his Mauretanian cam-
paign and appointed him to the temporary command
of Pannonia and Dacia? When the king of the
Roxolani complained of the diminution of his subsidy,
he investigated his case and made peace with him. -.——

VII. A plot to murder him while sacrificing was
made by Nigrinus, with Lusius and a number of
others as accomplices, even though Hadrian had
destined Nigrinus * for the succession ; but Hadrian
successfully evaded this plot. Because of this con-
spiracy ‘Palma was put to death at Tarracina, Celsus
at Baiae, Nigrinus at Faventia," and Lusius on his
journey homeward, all by order of the senate, but
contrary to the wish of Hadrian, as he says himself
in his autobiography. ‘Whereupon Hadrian entrusted


who lived in the great plain between the Theiss and the
Danube. i

3 This was an extraordinary command, for Pannonia and
Dacia, like other imperial provinces, were always assigned to
senatorial legates, and Turbo was a knight. The only instance
of an equestrian governor was the prefect of Egypt, the viceroy
of the emperor (who in theory was king of Egypt), and
this appointment of a knight to govern the provinces on the
Danube seemed to have a precedent in the prefecture of
Egypt (cf. c. vii. 3).

3 Probably C. Avidius Nigrinus, mentioned by Pliny in
Epist. ad Traian., lxv. 'and lxvi. On the other conspir-
ators see notes to c. iv. 3, and v. 8.

5 Now Faenza ; in the Po valley, &bout thirty miles S.E.
of Bologna.


opinionem, quod occidi passus esset uno tempore
quattuor consulares, Romam venit, Dacia Turboni
credita, titulo Aegyptiacae praefecturae, quo plus
auctoritatis haberet, ornato, et ad comprimendam de
se famam congiarium duplex praesens populo dedit,
4ternis iam per singulos aureis se absente divisis. in
senatu quoque excusatis quae facta erant iuravit se
numquam senatorem nisi ex senatus sententia pu-
5niturum. statum! cursum fiscalem instituit, ne
6 magistratus hoc onere gravarentur. ad colligendam
autem gratiam nihil praetermittens, infinitam pe-
cuniam, quae fisco debebatur, privatis debitoribus in
urbe atque Italia, in provinciis vero etiam ex reliquiis
ingentes summas remisit, syngraphis in foro divi
Traiani? quo magis (securitas omnibus roboraretur,
7incensis, damnatorum bona in fiscum privatum


! statum Peter; statim P (defended by Herzog R. Stvf. II,
359, 1). 2hadriant P! ; al’ traiant P corr.


1 As he had already done for the soldiers; see c. v. 7.

? A gold coin of the value of 100 sesterces or 25 denarii, or
(very approximately) five dollars.

3 Tt had long been a moot question whether the emperor
had the right to put senators to death without formal trial and
condemnation by the senate. Neither the later Julio-
Claudian nor the Flavian emperors had recognized the right
of & senator to trial by his fellow-senators only. Nerva, on
the other hand, took an oath that he would not put & senator
to death (Dio, lxviii. 2), and Trajan seems to have followed
his example (Dio, lxviii. 5). For the practice of later em-

' perors see Marc., x. 6; xxv. 6; xxvi. 13; xxix. 4.

* Also called cursus vehicularius (Pius, xii. 3), and munus
vehicularvum (Sev. xiv. 2). Previous to Hadrian’s reform the
cost of the maintenance of the post had fallen on the provin-
cial towns, but henceforth it was borne by the fiscus. The
department was under the direction of an official of equestrian
rank, known as the praefectus vehiculorum.

5The sum remitted was 900,000,000 sesterces; see coins


HADRIAN VII. 4-7


the command in Dacia to Turbo, whom he dignified,
in order to increase his authority, with a rank analogous
to that of the prefect of Egypt. He then hastened ,
to Rome ih order to win over public opinion, which :
was hostile to him because of the belief that on one .
single occasion he had suffered four men of consular :
rank to be put to death. In order to check the :
rumours about himself, he gave in person a double
largess to the people,! although in his absence three
aurei ? had already been given to each of the citizens.
In the senate, too, he cleared himself of blame for
what had happened, and pledged himself never to in- :
flict punishment on a senator until after a vote of the
senate.? He established a regular imperial post,‘ in.
order to relieve the local officials of such a burden.
Moreover, he used every means of gaining popularity.
He remitted to private debtors in Rome and in Italy
immense sums of money owed to the privy-purse,5
and in the provinces he remitted large amounts of .
arrears ; and he ordered the promissory notes to be
burned in the Forum of the Deified Trajan, in order
that the general sense of security might thereby be
increased. He gave orders that the property of
condemned persons should not accrue to the privy-


of 118, Cohen, ii?, p. 208 f., Nos. 1210-1213, and an inscription
found at Rome, C.I.L., vi. 967. He also issued an order pro-
viding for a similar cancelling every fifteen years; see Dio,
lxix. 8, 1; cf. also Marc., xxiii. 3, and note.

6 Situated at the south-western corner of the Esquiline Hill,
a part of which was cut away in order to provide sufficient
space. It was surrounded by colonnades, portions of which
are extant, and on its north-western side was the Basilica
Ulpia ; north-west of this was the column of Trajan, flanked
by two buildings containing the Bibliotheca Ulpia. Just be-
yond was the Templum Divi Traiani et Plotinae, erected by
Hadrian (c. xix. 9). 9A


1 praestiterit Cas. ; resteterit P! ; restituerit P corr. 2 sct-
rent Ellis; sciret P, Peter.


1The alimenta were grants of money paid by the imperial
government to the children of the poor of Italy. The plan
was made by Nerva but actually carried out by Trajan. For
the purpose of the distribution of these grants Italy was
divided into districts, often known by the name of the great
roads which traversed them (see Pert., ii. 2).

? The sum necessary for the position of senator was 1,000,000
sesterces.
3'The custom had arisen that on important occasions in


HADRIAN VII. 8—VIII. 5


purse, and in each case deposited the whole amount
in the public treasury. He made additional appro-
priations for the children to whom Trajan had allotted
grants of money.! He supplemented the property of
senators impoverished through no fault of their own,
making the allowance in each case proportionate to
the number of children, so that it might be enough
for a senatorial career?; to many, indeed, he paid
punctually on the date the amount allotted for their
living. Sums of money sufficient to enable men to
hold office he bestowed, not on his friends alone, but
also on many far and wide, and by his donations he
helped a number of women to sustain life. He gave
gladiatorial combats for six days in succession, and
on his birthday he put into the arena a thousand
wild beasts.

VIII. The foremost members of the senate he ad-;
mitted to close intimacy with the emperor's majesty.
All cireus-games decreed in his honour he refused,
except those held to celebrate his birthday.? Both
in meetings of the people and in the senate he used
to say that he would so administer the commonwealth
that men would know that it was not his own but the
people's. Having himself been consul three times,
he reappointed many to the consulship for the third
time and men without number to a second term ;
his own third consulship he held for only four months,
and during his term he often administered justice.
the reign of &n emperor races in the Circus should be voted
by the senate asa mark of honour. From the time of Augus-
tus the birthday of the emperor was similarly celebrated, and
in the case of some emperors, e.g. Pertinax and Severus, also
the natalis imperii or day of the accession to the throne; see


Pert., xv. 5, and Dio, lxxviii. 8. Pius followed: Hadrian's
example in accepting birthday-games only ; see Psus, v. 2.


! This did not include a seat in the senate, but consisted
of the privilege of sitting with the senators of consular rank
at the public festivals and at sacred banquets and of wearing
the toga praetexta on such occasions. Since the time of Nero
this honorary rank had often been bestowed on prefects of the
guard on their retirement from office; see also Pius, x. 6.

2 See note to c. vii. 4.

3 The consilium of the emperor was a development from the
old principle that & magistrate, before rendering &n important
decision, should ask &dvicefrom trusted friends. So Augustus


HADRIAN VIII. 6—IX.


He always attended regular meetings of the senate if
he was present in Rome or even in the neighbourhood.
In the appointment of senators he showed the utmost
caution and thereby greatly increased the dignity of
the senate, and when he removed Attianus from the
post of prefect ofthe guard and created him a senator
with consular honours,! he made it clear that he had
no greater honour which he could bestow upon him.
Nor did he allow knights to try cases involving
senators? whether he was present at the trial or not.
For at that time it was customary for the emperor,
when he tried cases, to call to his council? both
senators and knights and give a verdict based on
their joint decision. Finally, he denounced those
emperors who had not shown this deference to the
senators. On his brother-in-law Servianus, to whom
he showed such respect that he would advance to
meet him as he came from his chamber, he bestowed
a third consulship, and that without any request or
entreaty on Servianus' part; but nevertheless he did
_ not appoint him as his own colleague, since Servianus
had been consul twice before Hadrian, and the
Emperor did not wish to have second place.*

IX. And yet, at the same time, Hadrian abandoned
many provinces won by Trajan,? and also destroyed,


and his successors had their boards of advisers. Until the time
of Hadrian this board was not official or permanent, but from
his reign on its members, the consiliarii Augusti, had a
definite position and received a salary. Jurists of distinction
were included in it; see c. xviii. 1.

4 If Servianus, who was consul for the second time in 102,
were associated with Hadrian in the Emperor's second consul- -
ship in 118 or third in 119, he would by reason of his seniority
outrank his imperial colleague ; see Mommsen, Rim. Staats-
recht, iii. p. 976, n. 4.

S Cf. c. v. 8.


5tem; cum quidem etiam Simili alteri praefecto
Septicium Clarum successorem dedit.

6  Summotis his a praefectura, quibus debebat im-
perium, Campaniam petiit eiusque omnia oppida
beneficiis et largitionibus sublevavit, optimum quem-

7que amicitiis suis iung@ns. Romae vero praetorum
et consulum officia frequentavit, conviviis amicorum
interfuit, aegros bis ac ter die et nonnullos equites
Romanos ac libertinos visitavit, solaciis refovit, con-

displicere uidisset P corr. ; displicerentur uidisse P!,
2 secreto Mommsen ; decreto P! ; decreta P corr.


1 Cf. c. vii. 2-3, |

*The term of office of the prefect of the guard was un-
limited, and often was for life. This passage seems to show
that at least a form of voluntary resignation from the office
was customary. Attianus, according to precedent, was ad-
vanced to senatorial rank with the ornamenta consularia ;
see c. viii. 7.

3 C. Sulpicius Similis was prefect of the grain-supply, of
Egypt, and, finally, of the praetorian guard. According to
Dio (lxix, 20), it was only with difficulty that he secured
Hadrian's permission to retire.

* From the time of Augustus the old republican principle
of colleagueship had been applied to the command of the
praetorian guard and there were ordinarily two prefects with


I HADRIAN IX. 2-7


contrary to the entreaties of all, the theatre which
Trajan had built in the Campus Martius. These
measures, unpopular enough in themselves, were still
more displeasing to the public because of his pre-
tence that all acts which he thought would be offen-
sive had been secretly enjoined upon him by Trajan.
Unable to endure the power of Attianus, his prefect
and formerly his guardian, he was eager to murder
him. He was restrained, however, by the knowledge
that he already laboured under the odium of murder- '
ing four men of consular rank,! although, as a matter:
of fact, he always attributed their execution to the
designs of Attianus, And as he could not appoint a
successor for Attianus except at the latter’s request,
he contrived to make him request it,? and at once
transferred the power to Turbo ; at the same time
Similis ? also, the other prefect,* received a successor,
namely Septicius Clarus.®

After Hadrian had removed from the prefecture
the very men to whom he owed the imperial power, 119.
he departed for Campania, where he aided all the
towns of the region by gifts and benefactions * and
attached all the foremost men to his train of friends.
But when at Rome, he frequently attended the official
functions of the praetors and consuls, appeared at the


equal powers. The principle, however, had been disregarded
at times, e.g. in the case of Sejanus under Tiberius (Dive, lvii.
19). Under the later emperors there were sometimes three
prefects ; cf. Com., vi. 12; Did. Jul., vii. 5; Zosimus, i. 11.

5C. Septicius Clarus was the friend of Suetonius, who
dedicated to him his Lives of the Caesars. He also en-
couraged Pliny to publish his letters; see Plin., Epist., i. 1.
On his retirement from the prefecture see c. xi. 3.

$ The following are abtested by inscriptions of the years
121-122: Antium, Caiatia, Surrentum, and the road from
Naples to Nuceri& ; see C.I.L., x. 6652, 4574, 676, 6939, 6940.


HADRIAN `


1 ciuitates uariis (libertatibus) Rob. Bonon., supported by
Rösinger and Damsté ; casuariis P ; causarios Peter. i


! By a largess of spices (see c. xix. 5), and by issuing coins
bearing the legend Divae Matidiae Socrui with & representa-
tion of & temple-like building in which Matidia is seated be-
tween niches holding statuettes of Victory; see Cohen, ii?,
p. 152, No. 550.

2 His first journey is described in c. x. 1—xi. 2 and xii. 1—
xiii. 3. It covered the years 121-125. Then followed a journey
to Africa and back in 128. This was followed by his second
journey, which included the eastern part of the empire only,
in 128-134; see c. xiii. 6—xiv. 6 (the portion of the journey
which fell after 180 is not included).

? His visit was commemorated by coins with the legends
Adveniui Galliae (Cohen, ii?, p. 109 f., Nos, 31-35) and Re-
stitutor Galliae (Cohen, ii?, p. 211, Nos. 1247-1257).

4 His journey probably lay along the road from Lugdunum


HADRIAN IX. 8—X. 2


banquets of his friends, visited them twice or thrice

a day when they were sick, even those who were

merely knights and freedmen, cheered them by words

of comfort, encouraged them by words of advice, and

very often invited them to his own banquets. In

short, everything that he did was in the manner of a

private citizen. On his mother-in-law he bestowed Dec., 119.
especial honour by means of gladiatorial games and

other ceremonies.!

X, After this he travelled? to the provinces of121.
Gaul, and came to the relief of all the communities’
with various acts of generosity ; and from there he:
went over into Germany.* Though more desirous
of peace than of war, he kept the soldiers in training
just as if war were imminent, inspired them b
proofs of his own powers of endurance, actually led a
soldier's life among the maniples,® and, after the
example of Scipio Aemilianus, Metellus, and his
own adoptive father Trajan, cheerfully ate out of
doors such camp-fare as bacon, cheese and vinegar.
And that the troops might submit more willingly to
the increased harshness of his orders, he bestowed

ifts on many and honours on a few. For he re-
established the discipline of the camp,’ which since —-


(Lyon) to Augusta Treverorum (Trier), which was repaired in
121; see Brambach, Corp. Inscr. Rhen., 1936. His visit to the
German armies was commemorated on coins with the legend -
Exercitus Germanicus ; see Cohen, ii, p. 156, Nos. 573 and 574.

5 Used here merely to denote the common soldiers ; the
“ maniple ” consisted of two centuriae.

€ i.e. Scipio Africanus the younger, conqueror of Carthage.
Q. Caecilius Metellus Numidicus commanded in the war
against Jugurtha in 109-107 p.c. (cf. Sall. Jug., 43-80).

7 Hadrian's reforms are also described in Dio, xix. 9. They
are commemorated by coins with the legend Disciplina
Aug(usti); see Cohen, ii?, p. 151 f., Nos. 540-549. |


X[.eorum numerus sciretur. laborabat praeterea, ut


1 st omitted by P!, added by P corr.


HADRIAN X. 3—XI.


the time of Octavian had been growing slack through
the laxity of his predecessors. He regulated, too,
both the duties and the expenses of the soldiers, and
now no one could get a leave of absence from camp
by unfair means, for it was not popularity with the
troops but just deserts that recommended a man for
appointment as tribune. He incited others by the
example of his own soldiery spirit; he would walk as
much as twenty miles fully armed ; he cleared the
camp of banqueting-rooms, porticoes, grottos, and
bowers, generally wore the commonest clothing,
would have no gold ornaments on his sword-belt or
jewels on the clasp, would scarcely consent to have .
his sword furnished with an ivory hilt, visited the
sick soldiers in their quarters, selected the sites for-
camps, conferred the centurion’s wand on those only
who were hardy and of good repute, appointed as
tribunes only men with full beards or of an age to
give to the authority of the tribuneship the full mea-
sure of prudence and maturity, permitted no tribune
to accept a present from a soldier, banished luxuries
on every hand, and, lastly, improved the soldiers’
arms and equipment. Furthermore, with regard to
length of military service he issued an order that no one
should violate ancient usage by being in the service at
an earlier age than his strength warranted, or at a
more advanced one than common humanity permitted.
He made it a point to be acquainted with the soldiers
and to know their numbers. XI. Besides this, he
strove to have an accurate knowledge of the military
stores, and the receipts from the provinces he examined
with care in order to make good any deficit that might
occur in any particular instance. But more than any
other emperor he made it a point not to purchase or
maintain anything that was not serviceable.
VOL. I. D


HADRÍAN


a Ergo conversis regio! more militibus Britanniam
petiit, in qua multa correxit murumque per octoginta
milia passuum primus duxit, qui barbaros Romanosque
divideret.


l egregio: Novak; rigido Frankfurter; recio Baehrens.
2 iniussu eius P corr. (uniussu P!), defended by Bitschofsky
(meaning ‘‘ without his consent"); im usu eius Peter?, fol-
lowing Petschenig.


! From Germany he visited the provinces of Raetia and
Noricum, and then returned to the lower Rhine, where his
presence is commemorated in the name Forum Hadriani
(near Leyden). From Holland he crossed to Britain. The
legend Adventut Aug. Britanniae appears on coins; see
Cohen, ii?, p. 109, No. 28.

? This fortification extended from Wallsend at the mouth
of the Tyne to Bowness on the Firth of Solway, & distance
of 734 English miles. Its remains show that it consisted of
two lines of embankment with a moat between them, and a
stone wall running parallel on the north. In the space be-
tween the embankment and the wall were small strongholds
about a mile apart with an occasional larger stronghold, all


HADRIAN XI. 2-6


And so, having reformed the army quite in the
manner of a monarch, he set out for Britain,! and 122.
there he corrected many abuses and was the first tol
construct a wall? eighty miles in length, which was
to separate the barbarians from the Romans.

He removed from office Septicius Clarus,? the pre-
fect of the guard, and Suetonius Tranquillus,* the | --
imperial secretary, and many others besides, because -
without his consent they had been conducting them- .
selves toward his wife, Sabina, in a more informal
fashion than the etiquette of the court demanded.
And, as he was himself wont to say, he would have
sent away his wife too, on the ground of ill-temper
and irritability, had he been merely a private citizen.
Moreover, his vigilance was not confined to his own!
household but extended to those of his friends, and
by means of his private agents? he even pried into:
all their secrets, and so skilful that they were
never aware that the Emperor was acquainted with
their private lives until he revealed it himself. In
this connection, the insertion of an incident will not
be unwelcome, showing that he found out much about
his friends. The wife of a certain man wrote to her
husband, complaining that he was so preoccupied by


- connected by a military road; see inscriptions dating from
Hadrian’s time, C.I.L., vii. 660 f., 835.

3 See c. ix. 5.

*The author of the de Vita Caesarum and the de Viris
Illustribus.

5 The frumentarit, at first petty-officers connected with the
commissary of the army, became, probably under Trajan,
couriers charged with the conveyance of military dispatches ;
see Maz.-Balb., x. 3; Victor, Caes., xiii. 5,6. Many of them
were then attached to the imperial service as a sort of secret
police; see also Macr., xii. 4 and Claud., xvii. 1..


—


D2


HADRIAN |

7 mihi, scripsit?" et hoc quidem vitiosissimum putant

XII. Compositis in Britannia rebus transgressus in
Galliam Alexandrina seditione turbatus, quae nata
est ob Apidem, qui, cum repertus esset post multos
annos, turbas inter populos creavit, apud quem

2deberet locari, omnibus studiose certantibus. per
idem tempus in honorem Plotiriae basilicam apud
3Nemausum opere mirabili exstruxit. post haec
Hispanias petiit et Tarracone hiemavit, ubi sumptu
4suo aedem Augusti restituit. omnibus Hispanis
Tarraconem in conventum vocatis dilectumque


1 The sacred bullock of the Egyptians, begotten, according
to their belief, by a ray of light from heaven (Herodotus, iii.
28). He was recognized by certain markings, including repre-
sentations of the sun and the moon, and his appearance was
the occasion of great rejoicing. It was apparently customary
at this period to keep the young Apis, for a time at least, in the
locality in which he appeared (Aelian, Nat. An., xi. 10). The
riot was checked by a severe letter from Hadrian (Dio, 1xix.
8, 1, frag. from Petr. Patr. exc. Vat. 108).

2 According to Dio, lxix. 10, 3, the building was erected in


HADRIAN XI. 7—XII. 4


pleasures and baths that he would not return home
to her, and Hadrian found this out through his
private agents. And so, when the husband asked for
a furlough, Hadrian reproached him with his fondness
for his baths and his pleasures. Whereupon the
man exclaimed : * What, did my wife write you just
what she wrote to me?" And, indeed, as for this
habit of Hadrian's, men regard it as a most grievous
fault, and add to their criticism the statements which
are current regarding the passion for males and the
adulteries with married women to which he is said
to have been addicted, adding also the charge that
he did not even keep faith with his friends.

XII. After arranging matters in Britain he crossed
over to Gaul, for he was rendered anxious by the
news of a riot in Alexandria, which arose on account
of Apis; ! for Apis had been discovered again after
an interval of many years, and was causing great dis-
sension among the communities, each one earnestly
asserting its claim as the place best fitted to be the
seat of his worship. During this same time he
reared a basilica of marvellous workmanship at
Nimes in honour of Plotina.? After this he travelled 122-123.
to Spain? and spent the winter at Tarragona,* and
here he restored at his own expense the temple of
Augustus. To this place, too, he called all the
inhabitants of Spain for a general meeting, and when


honour of Plotina after her death, which occurred about this
time.

3See the coins with the legend Adventui Aug(usti) His-
paniae, Cohen, ii?, p. 110, Nos. 36-41. His benefactions and
public works were commemorated by coins inscribed Resti-
tutor Hispaniae, Cohen, ii*, p. 211 f., Nos. 1258-1272.

* Made a Roman colony in 45 B.c. and the chief city of
Hispania Tarraconensis.


| HADRIAN

j
ioculariter, ut verba ipsa ponit Marius Maximus,
retractantibus Italicis, vehementissime ceteris pru-

6 Per ea tempora et alias frequenter in plurimis
locis, in quibus barbari non fluminibus sed limitibus
dividuntur, stipitibus magnis in modum muralis
saepis funditus iactis atque conexis barbaros separavit.

7 Germanis regem constituit, motus Maurorum com-

XIII. Post haec per Asiam et insulas ad Achaiam


l ef omitted by P, added by B3.


1 Levies from these Italian settlers seem to have been for-
bidden by Trajan; see Marc., xi. T.

2 Just such a palisade has been found on the German
frontier where the rivers Main and Neckar do not constitute
a natural boundary; see the Limesblatt of the Imperial Ger-
man Limeskommisston for 1894, pp. 302, 483 f., and Pelham,
Essays on Roman History, p. 200 f.

* Although not necessarily in person ; see C.I.L., viii. praef.
p. xxi.


HADRIAN XII. 5—XIII. |


they refused to submit to a levy, the Italian settlers!
jestingly, to use the very words of Marius Maximus,
and the others very vigorously, he took measures
characterized by skill and discretion. At this same
time he incurred grave danger and won great glory ;
for while he was walking about in a garden at Tarra-
gona one of the slaves of the household rushed at him
madly with a sword. But he merely laid hold on
the man, and when the servants ran to the rescue
handed him over to them. Afterwards, when it was
found that the man was mad, he turned him over to
the physicians for treatment, and all this time showed
not the slightest sign of alarm.

During this period and on many other occasions
also, in many regions where the barbarians are held
back not by rivers but by artificial barriers, Hadrian
shut them off by means of high stakes planted deep
in the ground and fastened together in the manner
of a palisade.? He appointed a king for the Germans,
suppressed revolts among the Moors,? and won from
the senate the usual ceremonies of thanksgiving.
The war with the Parthians had not at that time ad-
vanced beyond the preparatory stage, and Hadrian
checked it by a personal conference.*

XIII. After this Hadrian travelled by way of Asia
and the islands to Greece? and, following the 123-125.

* The process of abbreviation has obscured the narrative —
by omitting the description of Hadrian’s journey from Spain
to Syria in the spring of 123. This journey was almost cer-
tainly made by sea from Spain to Antioch. The danger of
the Parthian war seems to have been connected with the
overthrow of the Romanized pretender, Parthamaspates (see
note to c. v. 4), and the restoration of the legitimate dynasty
in the person of Osrhoes (cf. c. xiii. 8).


is route lay from the Euphrates across Asia Minor to
Ancyra in Galatia (cf. 7. G. R., iii. 209) and thence to Bithynia,


l| tam Peter; tantum P, Petschenig.


where bis arrival is commemorated on coins inscribed Ad-
venturi Aug(usti) Bithyniae (Cohen, ii?, p. 109, Nos. 26 and 27)
and Restitutori Bithyniae (1d., p. 210 f., Nos. 1238-1246). He
then travelled through Mysia, founding the town of Hadriano- :
therae (see c. xx. 13), to Ilion and thence southward to
Ephesus. From here he sailed to Rhodes (see an inscription
from Ephesus, Dittenberger, Sylloge?, No. 388), north west
through the Aegean to Samothrace and Thrace (see an
inscription from Callipolis of 123-124, C.I.G., 2013). Thence he
visited the provinces of Moesia and Dacia (see Weber, p. 150f.),
and travelled southward through Macedonia and Thessaly
to Athens, where he arrived probably in September, 124.

1 Father of Alexander the Great.

2 Admitted to the lower grade of uúørns. On his second visit
to Athens in 128-129 he was initiated into the higher grade,
of érérrns; see Dio, lxix. 11. An epigram inscribed on the
base of a statue erected in honour of the priestess who initi-
ated him is extant (J.G., iii. 900 = Kaibel, Epigr. Gr., 864).

3 The Dionysia, in March, 125. Previous to this he had
made & journey through the Peloponnesus, visiting the prin-
cipal cities; dedications to him are recorded in extant in-
scriptions, and various benefactions of his are mentioned by
Pausanias.


HADRIAN XIII. 2-6


example of Hercules and Philip,! had himself initi-
ated into the Eleusinian mysteries.? He bestowed
many favours on the Athenians and sat as president
of the public games.. And during this stay in
Greece care was taken, they say, that when Hadrian
was present, none should come to a sacrifice armed,
whereas, as a rule, many carried knives. Afterwards
he sailed to Sicily,* and there he climbed Mount
Aetna to see the sunrise, which is many-hued, they
say, like the rainbow. Thence he returned to Rome,’
and 5 from there he crossed over to Africa," where he 128.
showed many acts of kindness to the "provinces.
Hardly any emperor ever travelled with such speed
over so much territory.

Finally, after his return to Rome from Africa,
he immediately set out for the East, journeying by


‘Travelling by way of the Corinthian Gulf, he visited
"Delphi (cf. C.I.G., 1718), Actium, and Dyrrhachium, and
sailed thence to Sicily. His arrival was commemorated by
coins inscribed Adveníui Aug(usti) Siciliae (Cohen, ii?, p. 112,
No. 75), and Restitutori Siciliae (id., ii?, p. 214, Nos. 1292-
1295. |

5In the summer of 125. Coins commemorating his return
bear the legend Adventui Aug(usti) Italiae (Cohen, ii?, p. 110,
Nos. 42-50).

5 Here a period of over three years is omitted, in which
Hadrian built many public buildings in the towns of ltaly.
Early in 128 he finally accepted the title of Pater Patriae
(cf. note to c. vi. ^' ; see Eckhel, D.N., vi. 515 f.

? See the coins inscribed Adventui Aug(usti) Africae and
Restitutori Africae (Cohen, ii?, p. 107 f., Nos. 8-15, and p. 209 f.,
Nos. 1221-1232), and Adventui Aug(usti) Mauretaniae (Cohen,
ii? p. 111, Nos. 63-71). His stay in Africa lasted about four ,
months in the spring and early summer of 128. On the ;
Kalends of July was delivered his famous allocutto or address ;
to the troops at Lambaesis, fragments of which are now in j
the Louvre,


7 deinde a Cappadocibus servitia castris profutura sus-
8cepit. toparchas et reges ad amicitiam invitavit,


9itidem capta fuerat. cumque ad eum quidam reges


10 eius invitationem superbe neglexerit. et circumiens


XIV.


f 1 His stay in Athens was from September 128 to Match 129. .

? The Olympieion, on the southern edge of the city near
the Ilissos. After the dedication of this building in 181-132,
Hadrian accepted the title "OAdumos and received divine
honours in the temple (Dio, lxix. 16, 1) ; hence the ara men-
tioned here.

3 They were later called simply ‘‘ Hadrian's temples," and
it was asserted that he had intended to consecrate them to
Christ; see Alex., xliii. 6. They were, in fact, temples dedi-
cated to the cult of the emperors, including Hadrian himself,
who was worshipped in the cities of Asia Minor as well as in
the Olympieion at Athens. In inscriptions he has the cult-
name Olympios or Zeus Olympios.

*'The camp of a Cappadocian legion (12th., Fulminata)
was &t Melitene, near the upper Euphrates. Hadrian probably
travelled thither from Antioch. His visit to the camp was
commemorated by coins inscribed Exercitus Cappadocicus
(Cohen, ii?, p. 153, No. 553).

5 More correctly Osrhoes; see also note to c. xii. 8.

$ Antoninus Pius refused to keep this promise; see Pius, ix. 7.


bh


HADRIAN XIII. 7—XIV.
(^

way of Athen Here he dedicated the public
works which he had begun in the city of the
Athenians, such as the temple to Olympian Jupiter?
and an altar to himself; and in the same way, while
travelling through Asia, he consecrated the temples
called by his name? Next, he received slaves from
the Cappadocians for service in the camps.* To
petty rulers and kings he made offers of friendship,
and even to Osdroes,5 king of the Parthians. To
him -he also restored ‘his daughter, who had been
captured by Trajan, and promised to return the
throne captured at the same time. And when
some of the kings came to him, he treated them in
such a way that those who had refused to come re-
gretted it. He took this course especially on account
of Pharasmanes,’ who had haughtily scorned his
invitation. Furthermore, as he went about the pro-
vinces he punished procurators and governors as their
actions demanded, and indeed with such severity
that it was believed that he incited those who brought
the accusations. XIV. In the course of these travels
he conceived such a hatred for the people of Antioch
that he wished to separate Syria from Phoenicia, in
order that Antioch might not be called the chief
city of so many communities. At this time also the

7 King of the Hiberi, who inhabited part of the district
which is now Trans-Caucasia. On the gifts exchanged by
him and Hadrian see c. xvii. 11-12 and xxi. 13.

$ The statement that Hadrian hated Antioch seems to be con-
tradicted by the fact that he built many public buildings there ;
see Malalas, p. 278 B. It may be a deduction from the fact
that he did raise three other cities of Syria, Tyre, Damascus
and Samosata, to the rank of uyrpómoAis. The actual division
of Syria into two provinces, Syria Coele and Syria Phoenice,
took place under Severusin 194. The object of the division was
to lessen the power of the governor of so important a province.


2 moverunt ea tempestate et ludaei bellum, quod

3 vetabantur mutilare genitalia. sed in monte Casio,
cum videndi solis ortus gratia nocte ascendisset,
imbre orto fulmen decidens hostiam et victimarium

4sacrificanti adflavit. ^ peragrata Arabia Pelusium
venit et Pompeii tumulum magnificentius exstruxit.

5 Antinoum suum, dum per Nilum navigat, perdidit,


! According to Dio, lxix. 12-14, probably a more correct
account, the outbreak of the war was due to the anger of the
Jews at the dedication of a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus on
the site of the Temple of Jehovah. This was done in con-
nection with the “founding” of the new colony in 130; ac-
cordingly, this sentence is not in chronological order. The
war was actually begun after Hadrian's departure from
Egypt, and finally recessitated his return. The outbreak
was quelled, after much bloodshed, in 134.

? Probably the mountain of this name at the mouth of the
river Orontes. This incident is also narrated as having
happened to Hadrian at Antioch immediately after he be-
camo emperor; see Dio, lxix. 2, 1.

# See the coins inscribed Adventui Aug(usti) Arabiae
(Cohen, ii’, p. 108 f., Nos. 20-23). He seems to have travelled
thither by way of Palmyra and Damascus. His visit to
Gerasa (mod. Djerash), in the north-western part of the pro-
vince of Arabia, is attested by an inscription of 180 (I.G.R.,
iii. 1847). From here he went probably by way of Phila-
delphia (mod., 'Ammán) to Jerusalem, which he ‘ founded "
as the Colonia Aelia Capitolina.

1 According to Dio, lxix. 11, 1, Hadrian offered a sacrifice
to the manes of Pompey and in a line of poetry expressed his
sorrow at the meanness of the tomb.

5 He also visited Alexandria, and his &rrival was com-
memorated by coins of the city struck in 130; see also the


HADRIAN XIV. 2-7


Jews began war, because they were forbidden. to
practise circeumcision.! As he was sacrificing on
Mount Casius,? which he had ascended by night in
order to see the sunrise, a storm arose, and a flash of
lightning descended and struck both the victim and
the attendant. He then travelled through Arabia 3130.
and finally came to Pelusium,* where he rebuilt Pom-
peys tomb on a more magnificent scale.5 During a ,
journey on the Nile he lost Antinous;? his favourite, |
and for this youth he wept like a woman. Concerning
this incident there are varying rumours? ; for some
claim that he had devoted himselftodeath for Hadrian, |
and others—what both his beauty and Hadrian's sensu-
ality suggest. But however this may be, the Greeks dei-
fied him at Hadrian’s request, and declared that oracles
were given through his agency, but these, it is com-
_ monly asserted, were composed by Hadrian himself.?.


Roman coins with the legend Adventui Aug(usti) Alexandriae
(Cohen, ii?, p. 108, Nos. 15-18).

6 This beautiful youth was a native of Bithynium in Bithy-
nia’ see Dio, lxix. 11. He died near Besa, near the southern :
end of the Heptanomis. Here Hadrian founded a new city, -
called Antinoe or Antinoopolis,and consecrated shrine to him. ;,'

7 According to Dio, lxix. 11, Hadrian claimed in his auto- |
biography (see note toc. i. 1) that Antinous was drowned in
the Nile; he then adds that the true cause of his death was
his voluntary sacrifice of himself, apparently in consequence
of some prophecy, in order to save the Emperor’s life.

“ 8 Here the narrative of Hadrian's journey breaks off
abruptly. After a visit to Thebes, where he and Sabina heard
‘tthe singing Memnon ” (I.G.R., i. 1186 and 1187), he re-
turned to Alexandria, and thence travelled, apparently by
ship (Cat. of Coins in the Brit. Mus., Alez., p. 101, No. 871),
to Syria and Asia Minor. During & stay at Athens he dedi-
cated the Olympieion (cf. note to c. xiii. 6) in 131-132; see
Dio, lxix. 16, 1. He was then called to Judaea on account of
the long duration of the Jewish revolt (see note to c. xiv. 2).
He finally returned to Rome early in 134.


1 Probably merely a gloss. ^| —?So Novak, deleting asa
gloss for comis laetus, which follows seuerus in P, and &dding
festinans to offset cunctator ; Peter divides: seuerus laetus,
comis grauis, lasciuus cunctator. 3 simplex, omitted in P,
is supplied by Peter?, following Reimarus ad Dio LXIX, 5,
p. 652; werus Peter!, Novak.


1 But see c. viii. 7, and ix. 4. ? See c. iv. 2, and xxiii. 4.

* Probably C. Publicius Marcellus, governor of Syria about
132. l

4 Apparently the philosopher mentioned in c. xvi, 10, and


HADRIAN XIV. 8—XV. 7


In poetry and in letters Hadrian was greatly =i
interested. In arithmetic, geometry, and painting; |.“ ’
he was very expert. Of his knowledge of flute-play-
ing and singing he even boasted openly. He ran to
excess in the gratification of his desires, and wrote
much verse about the subjects of his passion. «He
composed love-poems too. He was also a connoisseur
of arms, had a thorough knowledge of warfare, and
knew how to use gladiatorial weapons. He was, in
the same person, austere and genial, dignified and
playful, dilatory and quick to act, niggardly and
generous, deceitful and straightforward, cruel ‘and
merciful, and always in all things changeable.

XV. His friends he enriched greatly, even though.
they did not ask it, while to those who did ask, he
refused nothing. And yet he was always ready to .
listen to whispers about his friends, and in the end `
he treated almost all of them as enemies, even the |
closest and even those whom he had raised to the `
highest of honours, such as Attianus! and Nepos?
and Septicius Clarus. Eudaemon, for example, who
had been his accomplice in obtaining the imperial
power, he reduced to poverty; Polaenus and Mar-
cellus ? he drove to suicide ; Heliodorus * he assailed
in a most slanderous pamphlet ; ; Titianus 5 he allowed
to be accused as an accomplice in an attempt to seize
the empire and even to be outlawed ; Ummidius Qua-
dratus,5 Catilius Severus, and Turbo he persecuted


probably to be identified with Avidius Heliodorus, the father
of Avidius Cassius; see Av. Cass., i. 1.

5 Probably either T. Atilius Rufus Titianus, consul in 127,
or Atilius Titianus, who was accused affectats imperii under
Pius and condemned; see Pius, vii. 3.

* Mentioned as a iuvenis egregiae indolis by Pliny the younger
(Epist., vi. 11; vii. 24). He was consul with Hadrian in 118.


l3iucundissimum movit. ait enim: “Non recte
suadetis, familiares, qui non patimini me illum
doctiorem omnibus credere, qui habet triginta
legiones ”.

2Catachannas libros obscurissimos Antimachum imi-
3tando scripsit. Floro poetae scribenti ad se:


1 A well-known rhetorician, a native of Arelate (Arles) in
Gaul. He was a friend of Plutarch and of Aulus Gellius,
whose Noctes Atticae are full of allusions to him.

?On the autobiography see note to c. i. l. The ruse de-
scribed jn this passage was not successful, for the true author-
ship of the autobiography was known to the writer of the
present biography (see c. i. 1; iii. 3 and 5; vii. 2), and also to
Cassius Dio (lxix. 11, 2).

3 Antimachus of Colophon about 409 B.c.; the author of


HADRIAN XV. 8—XVI. 3


vigorously ; and'in order to prevent Servianus, his
brother-in-law, from surviving him, he compelled
him to commit suicide, although the man was then in
his ninetieth year. And he even took vengeance on
freedmen and sometimes on soldiers. And although
he was very deft at prose and at verse and very ac-
complished in all the arts, yet he used to subject the
teachers of these arts, as though more learned than
they, to ridicule, scorn, and humiliation. "With these
very professors and philosophers he often debated by
means of pamphlets or poems issued by both sides in
turn. And once Favorinus,! when he had yielded to
Hadrian's criticism of a word which he had used, raised
a merry laugh among his friends. For when they re-
proached him for having done wrong in yielding to
Hadrian in the matter of a word used by reputable
authors, he replied: ** You are urging a wrong course,
my friends, when you do not suffer me to regard as the
most learned of men the one who has thirty legions ”

XVI. So desirous of a wide-spread reputation was
Hadrian that he even wrote his own biography ; this
he gave to his educated freedmen, with instructions
to publish it under. their own names? For indeed,
Phlegon's writings, it is said, are Hadrian's in reality.
He wrote Catachannae, a very obscure work in imita-
tion of Antimachus.? And when the poet Florus *
wrote to him:
an epic, the Thebais, and of an elegiac poem, on the death of
his wife Lyde. In general, his style was considered obscure,
and his poems were full of learned allusions. According to
Dio, Ixix. 4, Hadrian preferred him to Homer. Nothing is
known of the Catachannae.

* Probably the poet Annius Florus, some of whose verse is
preserved in the Codex Salmasianus, a collection of miscellan-


eous poetical selections; see Riese, Anthologia Latina, i.,
Nos. 87 and 245-252.


| VOL, I. E


4 rescripsit :

5amavit praeterea genus vetustum dicendi. contro-

6versias declamavit. Ciceroni Catonem, Vergilio
Ennium, Sallustio Caelium praetulit eademque iacta-

10in summa familiaritate Epictetum et Heliodorum
philosophos et, ne nominatim de omnibus dicam,
grammaticos rhetores musicos geometras pictores
astrologos habuit, prae ceteris, ut multi adserunt,


! Omitted in P, but to be supplied from 84 (where Spengel
would delete latitare per popinas, Abh. d. bayer. Akad. hist.
phil. Kl. IX, p. 817). ` * wero Meursius; seroP. > ~


1L. Caelius Antipater, an historian living in the second


century B.C., whò wrote‘a history of the Second Punic War.


2 According toAel., iii.9, this statement is made on the
authority of Marius Maximus,
50 MAC UAE Oa AC de


ea i ee ee eee +


— i —ÀáÀ m


HADRIAN XVI. 4-10 .


* | don't want to be a Cesar,
Stroll about among the Britons,
Lurk about among the .
And endure the Scythian winters,"

he wrote back

“I don't want to be a Florus,
Stroll about among the taverns,
Lurk about among the cook-shops,
And endure the round fat insects."


Furthermore, he loved the archaic style of writing,
and he used to take part in debates. He preferred
Cato to Cicero, Ennius to Vergil, Caelius! to Sal-
lust; and with the same self-assurance he expressed !
opinions about Homer and Plato. In astrology he
considered himself so proficient that on the Kalends
of January he would actually write down all that
might happen to him in the whole ensuing year, and
in the year in which he died, indeed, he wrote down
everything that he was going to do, down tothe very
hour of his death.?

However ready Hadrian might have been to
criticize musicians, tragedians, comedians, gram-
marians, and rhetoricians, he nevertheless bestowed
both honours and riches upon all who professed these
arts, though he always tormented them with his
questions. And although he was himself responsible
for the fact that many of them left his presence with
their feelings hurt, to see anyone with hurt feelings,
he used to say, he could hardly endure. He treated
with the greatest friendship the philosophers Epic-
tetus? and Heliodorus, and various grammarians,
rhetoricians, musicians, geometricians—not to men-
tion allbyname—painters and astrologers ; and among


3 The well-known Stoic philosopher.
E 2


1 sibi iussit adpont Mommsen ; quibusque (quiq P*) adponi
Pl; quibusque iussit adpont P corr. ; quibusque adponit Peter.
2 parieti inserted here by Kellerbauer and accepted by Peter? ;
omitted in P.


l The name Sigillaria was given to the last days of the
Saturnalia, in which it was customary to send as gifts little
figures (sigilla) of pottery or pastry.


,


HADRIAN XVI. 11—XVII. 8


them Favorinus, many claim, was conspicuous above
all the rest. Teachers who seemed unfit for their
profession he presented with riches and honours and
then dismissed from the practice of their profession.
XVII. Many whom he had regarded as enemies,
when a private citizen, when emperor he merely ig-'
nored ; for example, on becoming emperor, he said to
one man whom he had regarded as a mortal foe, “ You
have escaped ". When he himself called any to mili-
tary service, he always supplied them with horses,
mules, clothing, cost of maintenance, and indeed
their whole equipment. At the Saturnalia and
Sigillaria ! he often surprised his friends with presents,
and he gladly received gifts from them and again
gave others in return. In order to detect dishonesty
in his caterers, when he gave banquets with several
tables he gave orders that platters from the other
tables, even the lowest, should be set before himself.
He surpassed all monarchs in his gifts. He often
bathed in the public baths, even with the common
crowd. And a jest of his made in the bath became
famous. For on a certain occasion, seeing a veteran,
whom he had known in the service, rubbing his back
and the rest of his body against the wall, he asked
him why he had the marble rub him, and when the
man replied that it was because he did not own a
slave, he presented him with some slaves and the cost
of their maintenance. But another time, when he
saw a number of old men rubbing themselves against
the wall for the purpose of arousing the generosity
of the Emperor, he ordered them to be called out
and then to rub one another in turn. His love for 5
the common people he loudly expressed. So fond
was he of travel, that he wished to inform himself in |


! tegeret Exc. Cus. and P corr. ; texeret P! ; texerit Peter.
3 ingentia munia dona P; munia deleted by Petrarch ;


munia dono Peter. 3 Iuuentium Cas. ; 4ulium P. 4 ali-
qua... dirueretur Petschenig; alique . . . dirueretur P! ;
diruerentur P corr. 5 ullius P corr. (so Peter, but conj.


` élus) ; ullis P! ; utilis Cornelissen ; uilis Mommsen.


1 Especially in connection with his conference with the
minor potentates of the Orient; see c. xiii. 8.

? Pharasmanes; see also c. xiii. 9 and note.

3 See c. viii. 9 and note.

4 His Digesta in thirty-nine books were used in the com-
pilation of the Digest of Justinian.

5 Famous as the compiler of the Edictum Perpetuum, a
systematized collection of praetors' edicta, or statements of


HADRIAN XVII. 9—XVIII. 3


person about all that he had read concerning allt:
parts of the world. Cold and bad weather he could!
bear with such endurance that he never covered his
head. He showed a multitude of favours to many
kings,! but from a number he even purchased peace,
and by some he was treated with scorn; to many he
gave huge gifts, but none greater than to the king
of the Hiberi,? for to him he gave an elephant and
a band of fifty men, in addition to magnificent presents.
And having himself received huge gifts from Pharas-
manes, including some cloaks embroidered with gold,
he sent into the arena three hundred condemned
criminals dressed in gold-embroidered cloaks for the
purpose of ridiculing the gifts of the king.

^ XVIII. When he tried cases, he had in his council 3
not only his friends and the members of his staff, but
also jurists, in particular Juventius Celsus,* Salvius
Julianus,’ Neratius Priscus,? and others, only those,
however, whom the senate had unanimously approved.
Among other decisions he ruled that in no commun-
ity should any house be demolished for the purpose
of transporting any building-materials to another
city. ^ To the child of an outlawed person he granted


the principles to be used in administering justice; see Eutrop.,
viii. 17, and Codex lust., vi. 61, 5. His Digesta in ninety
books are cited in Justinian's Digest. See also Sev., xvii. 5.

5 See note to c. iv. 8. i

1 This prohibition is an application of the general principle
laid down in a senatus consultum of 44 (Bruns$, No. 51),
that no building in Italy shall be demolished with a view to
making profit out of the demolition. The destruction of
buildings for any purpose except their immediate reconstruc-
tion, unless permission has been given by the curia, is pro-
hibited in the various laws of the coloniae and municipia ;
see Lex Col. Genelivae, c. 75, Lex Mun. Malac., c. 62, and
Lex Mun. Tarent., c. 4.


4duodecimas bonorum concessit. maiestatis crimina
5non admisit. ignotorum hereditates repudiavit nec
6 notorum accepit, si filios haberent. de thesauris ita
cavit ut, si! quis in suo repperisset, ipse potiretur,
si quis in alieno, dimidium domino daret, si quis in
7publico, cum fisco aequabiliter partiretur. servos a
dominis occidi vetuit eosque iussit damnari per
8iudices, si digni essent. lenoni et lanistae servum
9 vel ancillam vendi vetuit causa non praestita. de-
coctores bonorum suorum, si suae auctoritatis essent,
catomidiari in amphitheatro et dimitti iussit. ergastula
loservorum et liberorum tulit. lavacra pro sexibus
ll separavit. si dominus in domo interemptus esset,
non de omnibus servis quaestionem haberi sed de iis
qui per vicinitatem poterant sentire praecepit.
XIX. In Etruria praeturam imperator egit. per


1 $4 lacking in P!, added by P corr.


!Tt was a principle of Roman law that the property of those
executed or exiled should be confiscated ; see Digest., xlviii.
20,1 pr. It had become customary, however, to allow to the
children a certain proportion. In the first century this often
amounted toa half (see Tac., Ann., iii. 17; xiii. 48); in the
time of Theodosius I, the law established this amount, except
only in cases of treason, in which the children were to receive
one sixth ; see Cod. T'heo1., ix. 42,8 and 24 = Cod. Iuwust., ix.
49, 8 and 10. The amount prescribed by Hadrian must be
regarded as a minimum.


2Originally the principle seems to have been that the .


finder of treasure became the owner; so Hor., Sat., ii. 6, 10 f.


HADRIAN XVIII. 4—XIX.


a twelfth of the property. Accusations for lèse
majesté he did not admit. Legacies from persons|
unknown to him he refused, and even those left to
him by acquaintances he would not accept if they
had any children. In regard to treasure-trove, he
ruled that if anyone made a find on his own property
he might keep it, if on another's land, he should turn
over half to the proprietor thereof, if on the state's,
he should share the find equally with the privy-purse.?
He forbade masters to kill their slaves, and ordered—
that any who deserved it should be sentenced by the
courts. He forbade anyone to sell a slave or a maid- ,
servant to à procurer or trainer of gladiators without
giving a reason therefor. He ordered that those who
had wasted their property, if legally responsible, should
be flogged inthe amphitheatreand thenletgo. Houses .
of hard labour for slaves and free he abolished. He |
provided separate baths for the sexes. He issued an :
order that, ifa slave-owner were murdered in his house,
no slaves should be examined save those who were |
near enough to have had knowledge of the murder.?

XIX. In Etruria he held a praetorship * while em-
Hadrian’s modification was adopted by Marcus and Verus
(Just., Digest., xlix. 14, 8, 10), and by Severus Alexander
(Alez., xlvi. 2), and was finally incorporated in Justinian’s
Institutes (ii. 1, 89).

3A senatus consultum Silanianum of a.D. 10 had ordained
that on the murder of a slave-owner by a slave, all the slaves
present in the house should be examined by torture; see
Just., Digest., xxix. 5. This was extended by a senatus con-
sultum of 57 to include all freedmen present in the house;
see Tac., Ann., xiii. 32. For an instance of such a murder
see Tac., Ann., xiv. 42-45,

* He held the honorary post of chief magistrate of various
towns. Praetor was the original title of this magistrate (the
‘Roman consuls also were originally called praetores), and
many towns retained the old name. 7

57 -


| HADRIAN


Latina oppida dictator et aedilis et duumvir fuit, apud
Neapolim demarchus, in patria sua quinquennalis et
item Hadriae quinquennalis, quasi in alia patria, et
Athenis archon fuit.
2 In omnibus paene urbibus et aliquid aedificavit et
3ludos edidit. Athenis mille ferarum venationem in
4stadio exhibuit. ab urbe Roma numquam ullum
6venatorem aut scaenicum avocavit. Romae post
ceteras immensissimas voluptates in honorem socrus
suae aromatica populo donavit, in honorem Traiani
balsama et crocum per gradus theatri fluere iussit.
6 fabulas omnis generis more antiquo in theatro dedit,
7 histriones aulicos publicavit. in Circo multas feras
8 et saepe centum leones interfecit. militares pyrrichas
populo frequenter exhibuit. gladiatores frequenter
9spectavit. cum opera ubique infinita fecisset, num-
quam ipse nisi in Traiani patris templo nomen suum
10 scripsit. Romae instauravit Pantheum, Saepta, Basil-


ì The Duoviri iure dicundo were the chief magistrates of a
colony, analogous to the consuls at. Rome, and gradually
most of the municipalities adopted this form of government.
It was customary for the emperors to hold this magistracy as
a compliment to the town.

? Naples, which was a Greek city, retained the original
title of its chief magistrate, 5fuapyos; see Strabo, v. p. 546
&nd many inscriptions extending down to the fourth century.

3 Italica in Hispania Baetica; see c. i. 1.

*In 112, before he became emperor; see the inscription :
from Athens, C.I.L., iii. 550 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 808

5 See c, ix. 9 and note.

€ Originally a war-dance, but sometimes used in panto-
mimes (cf. Suet., Nero, xii. 2).

7 See note to c, vii. 6.

8 Originally built by Agrippa in 27 B.c. The present build-
ing bears the inscription of Agrippa, M. Agrippa L. f. consul
ter(tium) fecit, but an examination of the bricks used in its


HADRIAN XIX, 2-10


peror. In the Latin towns he was dictator and aedile
and duumvir,! in Naples demarch,? in his native city?
duumvir with the powers of censor. This office he
held at Hadria, too, his second native city, as it were,
and at Athens he was archon.*

In almost every city he built some building and
gave public games. At Athens he exhibited in the
stadium a hunt of a thousand wild beasts, but he
never called away from Rome a single wild-beast-
hunter or actor. In Rome, in addition to popular
entertainments of unbounded extravagance, he gave
spices to the people in honour of his mother-in-law,’
and in honour of Trajan he caused essences of balsam
and saffron to be poured over the seats of the theatre.
And in the theatre he presented plays of all kinds in
the ancient manner and had the court-players appear
before the public. In the Circus he had many wild
beasts killed and often a whole hundred of lions.
He often gave the people exhibitions of military
Pyrrhic dances,® and he frequently attended gladia-
torial shows. / He built public buildings in all places
and without number, but he inscribed his own name
on none of them except the temple of his father
Trajan. At Rome he restored the Pantheon,? the
Voting-enclosure,? the Basilica of Neptune, very


construction has revealed the fact that it is wholly the work
of Hadrian.

? In the Campus Martius, where the centuries gathered for
voting. The building was begun by Julius Caesar but finished by
. Agrippa and called Saepta Iulia in 27 B.c. (Dio, liii. 23). It was

burned under Titus (Dio, Ixvi. 24) but rebuilt under Domitian.
10 North of the Saepta. Built by Agrippa in 25 p.c. to com-
memorate the victories over Sextus Pompeius and Antony
(Dio, liii. 27) and burned under Titus. The north wall of
Hadrian's building and eleven columns are extant, and form

part of the facade of the modern stock-exchange.


icam Neptuni, sacras aedes plurimas, Forum Augusti,
Lavacrum Agrippae; eaque omnia propriis auctorum !

XX. In conloquiis etiam humillimorum civilissimus
fuit, detestans eos qui sibi hanc voluptatem humani-
tatis quasi servantes? fastigium principis inviderent.


! auctorum Peter, from Suet. Domit. 5; ueterum P. ? ser-
uantes Roos, Mn. 41, p. 144; seruantis P.


1 North-west of the Forum Romanum, and containing the
temple of Mars Ultor.

?Immediately south of the Pantheon, built by Agrippa in
25 B.C. (Dio, liii. 27). These baths were burned under Titus
but rebuilt under Domitian (Martial, iii. 20 and 36).

>The Mausoleum Hadriani, on the right bank of the Tiber,
now the Castel S. Angelo. The bridge named after him
Pons Aelius led to it. The Mausoleum was finally completed
by Antoninus Pius in 139; see Pius, viii. 2, and C.I.L., vi. 984
= Dessau, Ins. Sel., 322.

*The Aedes Bonae Deae Subsaxanae was on the slope of
the eastern peak of the Aventine Hill (the Remuria or
Saxum); for its legend see Ovid, Fast., v. 155.


HADRIAN XIX. 11—XX. 3


many temples, the Forum of Augustus,! the Baths of
Agrippa? and dedicated all of them in the names of
their original builders. Also he constructed the
bridge named after himself, à tomb on the bank of
the Tiber,? and the temple of the Bona Dea.* With
the aid of the architect Decrianus he raised the Co-
lossus * and, keeping it in an upright position, moved
it away from the place in which the Temple of Rome ®
is now, though its weight was so vast that he had to
furnish for the work as many as twenty-four elephants.
This statue he then consecrated to the Sun, after
removing the features of Nero, to whom it had previ-
ously been dedicated, and he also planned, with the
assistance of the architect Apollodorus, to. make a
similar one for the Moon.

XX. Most democratic in his conversations, even
with the very humble, he denounced all who, in the
beliefthat they were thereby maintaining the imperial
dignity, begrudged him the pleasure of such friendli-
ness. In the Museum at Alexandria’ he propounded
many questions to the teachers and answered himself
what he had propounded. Marius Maximus says that


5 A colossal statue of Nero which stood in the vestibule of
Nero’s Golden House; see Suet., Nero, xxxi. 1. According
to Suetonius it was 120 feet high, according to Pliny (N.H.,
xxxiv, 45) 1064 feet. The statue was moved by Hadrian to
& place immediately north-west of the Colosseum, where a
portion of its base is still preserved.

‘The Temple of Venus and Rome, built by Hadrian in 135
from a plan made by himself; see Dio, Ixix. 4. It stood on
the Velia at the highest point of the Sacra Via on a part of
the site of Nero's Golden House. The western portion is
built into the church of S. Francesca Romana, the eastern
portion is partly extant. |

7 An academy founded by Ptolemy Philadelphus in imita-
tion of the schools of Plato and Aristotle at Athens.


—— M H—


! Domitian was assassinated by some palace-attendants.

2 This portion of the city lay east of the Acropolis, between
the old wall of Themistocles and the Ilissus. A gate in the
old wall was replaced by a new one, bearing on its twe sides
respectively the lines :—

AW’ elo’ 'A05yai Onodws 1) wply wéis.
AW’ eic" 'AbpiavoU kal obx) Onvéws róis.
(I.G., iii. 401).


HADRIAN XX. 4-12


he was naturally cruel and performed so many kind- ,
nesses only because he feared that he might meet '
the fate. which had befallen Domitian.!

Though he cared nothing for inscriptions on his
publie works, he gave the name of Hadrianopolis to
many cities, as, for example, even to Carthage and a
section of Athens;? and he also gave his name to
aqueducts without number. He was the first to ap- .
point a pleader for the privy-purse.?

Hadrian's memory was vast and his ability was un-
limited ; for instance, he personally dictated his
speeches and gave opinions on all questions. He
was also very witty, and of his jests many still sur- -
vive. The following one has even become famous :
When he had refused a request to a certain gray-
haired man, and the man repeated the request but
this time with dyed hair, Hadrian replied: “I have
already refused this to your father". Even without
the aid of a nomenclator he could call by name a
great many people, whose names he had heard but
once and then all in a crowd; indeed, he could
correct the nomenclators when they made mistakes,
as they not infrequently did, and he even knew the
names of the veterans whom he had discharged at
various times, He could repeat from memory, after,
a rapid reading, books which to most men were not
known at all. He wrote, dictated, listened, and,
incredible as it seems, conversed with his friends, all
at one and the same time. He had as complete a
knowledge of the state-budget in all its details as


3 The advocatus fisci represented the interests of the privy-
purse in law-suits in which it became involved. The office
was held by knights and constituted the first step in the
equestrian cursus honorum.


l3sic amavit ut iis sepulchra constitueret. oppidum
Hadrianotheras in quodam loco, quod illic et feliciter
esset venatus et ursam occidisset aliquando, constituit.
XXI. De iudicibus omnibus semper cuncta scru-
tando tamdiu requisivit quamdiu verum inveniret.
2libertos suos nec sciri voluit in publico nec aliquid
apud se posse, dicto suo omnibus superioribus prin-
-cipibus vitia imputans libertorum, damnatis omnibus
3 libertis suis, quicumque se de eo iactaverant. ` unde
exstat etiam illud severum ! quidem sed prope ioculare
de servis. nam cum quodam tempore servum suum
inter duos senatores e conspectu ambulare vidisset,
misit qui ei colaphum daret diceretque?: '* Noli inter
4eos ambulare quorum esse adhuc potes servus". in-
ter cibos unice amavit tetrapharmacum, quod erat de
phasiano sumine perna et crustulo.
5 Fuerunt eius temporibus fames pestilentia terrae
motus, quae omnia, quantum potuit, procuravit mul-
6 tisque civitatibus vastatis per ista subvenit, fuit etiam
7 Tiberis inundatio. Latium multis civitatibus dedit,
tributa multis remisit.


lseuerum Petschenig; seuero P ; seuere P corr. ; seue B?,
whence Peter saewe. ?so Mommsen; colafum daret et
diceret P corr. (from P! colla fundar et qui); qui et collafum
daret ; cui “ Noli," etc. Bitschofsky.


1 Especially for his favourite hunting-horse Borysthenes,
which died at Apte in Gallia Narbonensis; in its honour he
erected a tomb with a stele and an inscription ; see Dio, lxix.
10. The inscription is preserved, C.I.L., xii, 1122 = Bücheler,
Carm, Epigr., ii. 1522,

3 [n Bithynia.

3 Also called pentapharmacum ; see Ael., v. 4f. It was also
a favourite dish of Severus Alexander's; see Alez., xxx. 6.


HADRIAN XX. 13—XXI. 7


any careful householder has of his own household.
His horses and dogs he loved so much that he pro-
vided burial-places for them,! and in one locality he
founded a town called Hadrianotherae,? because once |
he had hunted successfully there and killed a bear.

XXI. He always inquired into the actions of all his
judges, and persisted in his inquiries until he satisfied
himself of the truth about them. He would not allow |
his freedmen to be prominent in public affairs or to
have any influence over himself, and he declared that
all his predecessors were to blame for the faults of.
their freedmen ; he also punished all his freedmen |
who boasted of their influence over him. With regard!
to his treatment of his slaves, the following incident,
stern but almost humorous, is still related. Once
when he saw one of his slaves walk away from his
presence between two senators, he sent someone to
give him a box on the ear and say to him: “ Do not
walk between those whose slave you may some day
be". As an article of food he was singularly fond
of tetrapharmacum,? which consisted of pheasant,'
sow’s udders, ham, and pastry.

During his reign there were famines, pestilence,
and earthquakes. The distress caused by all these
calamities he relieved to the best of his ability, and
also he aided many communities which had been
devastated by them. There was also an overflow
of the Tiber. To many communities he gave Latin
citizenship,* and to many others he remitted their


tribute.


*The ius Latium was a peculiar status, granted originally
to certain of the cities of Latium. It conferred on their
inhabitants certain private rights of a Roman citizen, especi-
ally those of holding property and trading at Rome and of
intermarriage with Romans. In the time of the Empire the


| 65
VOL. I. F


l nimiam P corr., Novak; nimiae P! ; nimie Peter’. 36
Mesopotamiis Novak after P corr. omitting a; Mesopotamenos
P!, Peter. Stoga. summa diligentia in dies Mommsen ;
toga summissa diligentia iudices P ; iudicis Peter.


possession of this status meant chiefly local autonomy and
the bestowal of Roman citizenship on local magistrates.

! Except the war in Judaea; see c, xiv. 2 and note,
66 |


HADRIAN XXI. 8—XXII. 7


There were no campaigns of importance during his í
reign,! and the wars that he did wage were brought
to a close almost without arousing comment. The’
soldiers loved him much on account of his very great
interest in the army? and for his great liberality to
them besides. The Parthians always regarded him
as a friend because he took away the king? whom
Trajan had set over them. The Armenians were
permitted to have their own king,* whereas under
Trajan they had had a governor, and the Mesopotam-
ians were relieved of the tribute which Trajan had
imposed. The Albanians? and Hiberians he made his
friends by lavishing gifts upon their kings, even
though they had scorned to come to him. The kings
of the Bactrians sent envoys to him to beg humbly
for his friendship.

XXII. He very often assigned guardians. Disci-
pline in civil life he maintained as rigorously as he did
in military. He ordered senators and knights to wear
the toga whenever they appeared in public except
when they were returning from a banquet, and he
himself, when in Italy, always appeared thus clad.
At banquets, when senators came, he received them:
standing, and he always reclined at table dressed
either in a Greek cloak or ina toga. The cost of a
banquet he limited according to the nature of the
occasion, all with the utmost care, and he reduced
the sums that might be expended to the amounts


2 See c. x.

34.6. Parthamaspates ; see c. v. 4 and note.

* 4.e. he relinquished their country together with the other
conquests of Trajan east of the Euphrates; see c. v. 1 and 8
and notes.

5The eastern part of Trans-Caucasia, east of the Hiber
(for whom see c. xvii. 11).


F2


8passus est. ab epistulis et a libellis primus equites
9 Romanos habuit. eos quos pauperes et innocentes
vidit sponte ditavit, quos vero calliditate ditatos,
10etiam odio habuit. sacra Romana diligentissime
curavit, peregrina contempsit. pontificis maximi
11 officium peregit. causas Romae atque in provinciis
frequenter audivit, adhibitis in consilio suo consulibus
12atque praetoribus et optimis senatoribus. Fucinum
13lacum emisit. quattuor consulares per omnem Italiam
l4iudices constituit. quando in Africam venit, ad ad-
ventum eius post quinquennium pluit, atque ideo ab
Africanis dilectus est.
XXIII. Peragratis sane omnibus orbis partibus
capite nudo et in summis plerumque imbribus atque
2 frigoribus in morbum incidit lectualem. factusque de
successore sollicitus primum de Serviano cogitavit,


! Beginning with the Lex Orchia of 181 B.c. the Roman
republic tried by a succession of sumptuary laws to restore
the constantly increasing cost of banquets. The Lex Fannia
of 161 B.C. fixed a maximum of 100 asses for the great holidays,
of 10 asses for ordinary days; the latter sum was later in-
creased to 30 asses. The Lez Cornelia of Sulla allowed three
hundred sesterces for holidays and thirty for other days; this
latter was increased by a law of Augustus to two hundred
sesterces ; see Gellius, ii, 24 and Macrobius, Sat., iii. 17. Which
sum is meant here is unfortunately not clear.

? One of the most important of Hadrian's reforms. The
great court-offices had previously been held chiefly by freed-
men of the emperor as prlvate posts in his household.
Hadrian, in providing that they should be held by knights,


HADRIAN XXII. 8—XXIII. 2


prescribed by the ancient laws.! He forbade the
entry into Rome of heavily laden waggons, and did
. not permit riding on horseback in cities. None but
invalids were allowed to bathe in the public baths
before the eighth hour of the day. He was the first
to put knights in charge of the imperial correspond-
ence and of the petitions addressed to the emperor.?
Those men whom he saw to be poor and innocent he
enriched of his own accord, but those who had become
rich through sharp practice he actually regarded.
with hatred. He despised foreign cults, but native.
Roman ones he observed most scrupulously; more-'
over, he always performed the duties of pontifex
maximus. He tried a great number of lawsuits him-
self both in Rome and in the provinces, and to his
council ? he called consuls and praetors and the fore-
most of the senators. He drained the Fucine Lake.*
He appointed four men of consular rank as judges
for all Italy. When he went to Africa ĉ it rained on
his arrival for the first time in the space of five years,
and for this he was beloved by the Africans.

XXIII, After traversing, as he did, all parts of the
world with bare head and often in severe storms and


transformed them into official government positions. More-
over, this opening to the equestrian order of a career of great
influence and distinction led to the result that by the end of
the third century most of the important administrative posts
were held by knights.

3 See c. viii. 9 and note.

Q'Now Lago di Celano. It is in the centre of Italy, due
east of Rome. An attempt to drain it by means of a tunnel
was made by Claudius (see Tac., Ann., xi. 56 and 57), but not
very successfully. Another attempt, made by Trajan, is re-
corded in an inscription (C.1.L., ix. 3915).

5 See c. xiii. 4.


! item om. in P, inserted by Peter.


1 See c. xv. 8.

2 Pedanius Fuscus, the grandson of Servianus, was killed
at the age of eighteen; see Dio, lxix, 17.

3 See c, iv. 2 and note,

4D. Terentius Gentianus held an important command in
Trajan's wars in Dacia and became a patron of the colony of
Sarmizegetusa, the capital of the proxinons see C. I. L., iii. 1463.

5 See c. xxvi. 5.


6 i.e. the guard that was tagala on duty at the Palace;
see Suetonius, Tib., xxiv. 1; Nero, xxi. 1.


HADRIAN XXIII. 3-1i


frosts, he contracted an illness which confined him to
his bed. And becoming anxious about a successor
he thought first of Servianus. Afterwards, however,
as I have said,! he forced him to commit suicide;
and Fuscus,? too, he put to death on the ground that,
being.spurred on by prophecies and omens, he was
hoping for the imperial power. Carried away by
suspicion, he held in the greatest abhorrence Platorius
Nepos,? whom he had formerly so loved that, once,
when he went to see him while ill and was refused ad-
mission, he nevertheless let him go unpunished. Also
he hated Terentius Gentianus,* but even more vehe-
mently, because he saw that he was then beloved by
the senate. At last, he came to hate all those of
whom he had thought in connection with the imperial
power, as though they were really about to be em-
perors. However, he controlled all the force of his
innate cruelty down to the time when in his Tiburtine
Villa é he almost met his:death through a hemorrhage.
Then he threw aside all restraint and compelled
Servianus to kill himself, on the ground that he aspired
to the empire, merely because he gave a feast to the
royal slaves, sat in a royal chair placed close to his _
bed, and, though an old man of ninety, used to arise
and go forward to meet the guard of soldiers, He
put many others to death, either openly or by
treachery, and indeed, when his. wife Sabina died,.
the rumour arose that the Emperor had given her:


ison.

Hadrian then determined to adopt Ceionius Com- 136.
modus, son-in-law of Nigrinus, the former conspirator,
and this in spite of the fact that his sole recommen- |
dation was his beauty. Accordingly, despite the
opposition of all, he adopted Ceionius Commodus


n


Verum invitis omnibus eumque Helium Verum Cae-
l2sarem appellavit. ob cuius adoptationem! ludos
circenses dedit et donativum populo ac militibus
13 expendit. quem praetura honoravit ac statim Pan-
noniis imposuit decreto consulatu cum sumptibus.?
eundem Commodum secundo consulem designavit.
14 quem cum minus sanum videret, saepissime dictitavit :
* [n caducum parietem nos inclinavimus et perdidi-
mus quater milies sestertium, quod populo et militi-
15 bus pro adoptione Commodi dedimus". Commodus
autem prae valetudine nec gratias quidem in senatu
léagere potuit Hadriano de adoptione. denique ac-
cepto largius antidoto ingravescente valetudine per
somnum periit ipsis kalendis Ianuariis. quare ab
Hadriano votorum causa lugeri est vetitus. |
XXIV. Et? mortuo Helio Vero Caesare Hadrianus
ingruente tristissima valetudine adoptavit Arrium
Antoninum, qui postea Pius dictus est, et ea quidem *
1 adoptationem P, Petschenig ; adoptionem Peter. ? con-


! More correctly, L. Ceionius Commodus; he was adopted
under the name L. Aelius Caesar. The cognomen Verus,
given to him here and in his biography (Ael., ii. 1 and 6), is
not attested by inscriptions or coins, and seems to have arisen
through a confusion with his son, adopted by Antoninus Pius,
and, after his accession to the throne, called L. Aurelius
Verus. The form Helius which is used throughout the Historia


HADRIAN XXIII. 12—XXIV.
Verus ! and called him Asli Verus Caesar. On the \


occasion of the adoption he gave games in the Circus
and bestowed largess upon the populace and the
soldiers? He dignified Commodus with the office of
praetor ? and immediately placed him in command of
the Pannonian provinces, and also conferred on him
the consulship together with money enough to meet
the expenses of the office. He also appointed Com-
modus to a second consulship. And when he saw
that the man was diseased, he used often to say |
“We have leaned against a tottering wall and have
wasted the four hundred million sesterces which we
gave to the populace and the soldiers on the adoption
of Commodus *'". Moreover, because of his ill-health,
Commodus could not even make a speech in the senate :
thanking Hadrian for his adoption. Finally, too large
a quantity of medicine was administered to him, and
thereupon his illness increased, and he died in his sleep
on the very Kalends of January.’ Because of the date 1 Jan., 138.
Hadrian forbade public mourning for him, in order
that the vows for the state might be assumed as usual.
XXIV. After the death of Aelius Verus Caesar,
Hadrian was attacked by a very severe illness, and 25 Feb.,
thereupon he adopted Arrius Antoninus? (who was 138.


Augusia has no warrant whatsoever; its substitution for
Aelius is probably due to some editor.

2? Of. Ael., iii. 3; vi. 1.

3 This statement, as found here and in Ael., iii. 2, isincorrect,
for he was praetor in 130 and consul in 136, the year in which
he was adopted. He was consul for the second time in 137
&nd was then placed in command of the two provinces of
Pannonia.

* Cf. Ael., vi. 3. 5 Cf. Ael., iv. 7.

* More correctly, T. Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius
Antoninus; see Pius, i. 1. After his adoption his name was
T. Aelius Caesar Antoninus.


! dicente . . . occidi follows in P statimque . . . praeter-
misst; transposed to follow wt... ferret by Gemoll, so Peter?.


! The names of the two adopted sons of Antoninus Pius are
entirely confused. The biographer is referring here to L.
Ceionius Commodus, the son of L. Aelius Caesar, called, after
his adoption by Antoninus, L. Aelius Aurelius Commodus.
On his succession to the throne, he took the cognomen of his
adoptive brother Annius Verus (M. Aurelius Antoninus) and
reigned as L. Aurelius Verus.

2 His name before adoption was M. Annius Verus; after
adoption he seems to have been called M. Aelius Aurelius
Verus. On the death of Antoninus Pius he called himself
M. Aurelius Antoninus,

3 So also Pius, ii. 3. * See c. xxv. 8 and Pius, ii. 4.


HADRIAN XXIV. 2-11


afterwards called Pius), imposing on him the condition
that he adopt two sons, Annius Verus! and Marcus
Antoninus.? These were the two who afterwards
ruled the empire together, the first joint Augusti.
And as for Antoninus, he was called Pius, it is said,
because he used to give his arm to his father-in-law
when weakened by old age.* However, others assert
that this surname was given to him because, as
Hadrian grew more cruel, he rescued many senators
from the Emperor‘; others, again, that it was because
he bestowed great honours upon Hadrian after his
death.5 The adoption of Antoninus was lamented by
many at that time, particularly by Catilius Severus,’
the prefect of the city, who was making plans to secure
the throne for himself. When this fact became known,
a successor was appointed for him and he was deprived
of his office.

But Hadrian was now seized with the utmost dis-
gust of life and ordered a servant to stab him with a
sword. When this was disclosed and reached the
ears of Antoninus, he came to the Emperor, together
with the prefects, and begged him to endure with
fortitude the hard necessity of illness, declaring
furthermore that he himself would be no better than
a parricide, were he, an adopted son, to permit
Hadrian to be killed. The Emperor then became
angry and ordered the betrayer of the secret to be
put to death; however, the man was saved by
Antoninus. Then Hadrian immediately drew up his
will, though he did not lay aside the administration
of the empire. Once more, however, after making


5 See c. xxvii. 4 and Pius, ii. 5.
$ He had been the colleague of Antoninus in the consulship
in 120; see Pius, ii. 9.


Sec ERES


A eo
.


° HADRIAN

5 Post haec Hadrianus Baias petiit Antonino Romae

7 periit die VI iduum [uliarum. invisusque omnibus
sepultus est in villa Ciceroniana Puteolis.


l est con. P. . ?*oculos om. in P, supplied by Gleye;
uisum (added after recepit), P corr., so Peter, but see Novak
I, p. 8. 34nsomnium Cas. ; in somnio P; somnium Novak.
! ut B corr., om. in P; supra dictum est deleted by Peter.

S superuiueret Petrarch; suprauiueret P, Peter.


1 See c. xv. 8 and xxiii. 2 and 8.


HADRIAN XXIV. 12—XXV. 8


his will, he attempted to kill himself, but the dagger
was taken from him. He then became more violent,
and he even demanded poison from his physician,
who thereupon killed himself in order that he might
not have to administer it.

XXV. About this time there came a certain woman,
who said that she had been warned in a dream to
coax Hadrian to refrain from killing himself, for he
was destined to recover entirely, but that she had
failed to do this and had become blind ; she had never-
theless been ordered a second time to give the same
message to Hadrian and to kiss his knees, and was
assured of the recovery of her sight if she did so.
The woman then carried out the command of the
dream, and received her sight after she had bathed
her eyes with the water.in the temple from which
she had come. Also a blind old man from Pannonia
came to Hadrian when he was ill with fever, and
touched him ; whereupon the man received his sight,
and the fever left Hadrian. All these things, how-
ever, Marius Maximus declares were done as a hoax.

After this Hadrian departed for Baiae, leaving
Antoninus at Rome to carry on the government.
But he received no benefit there, and he thercaponi
sent for Antoninus, and in his presence he died there
at Baiae on the sixth day before the Ides of July. 10 July,
Hated by all, he was buried at Puteoli on an estate 138.
that had belonged to Cicero.

Just before his death, he compelled Servianus, then
ninety years old, to kill himself, as has been said
before,! in order that Servianus might not outlive
him, and, as he thought, become emperor. He like-
‘wise gave orders that very many others who were
guilty of slight offences should be put to death ; these,


TT


9inus reservavit. et moriens quidem hos versus
fecisse dicitur :

XXVI. Statura fuit procerus, forma comptus, flexo
ad pectinem capillo, promissa barba, ut vulnera, quae
in facie naturalia erant, tegeret, habitudine robusta.

2 equitavit ambulavitque plurimum armisque et pilo se

3semper exercuit. venatus frequentissime leonem
manu sua occidit. venando autem iugulum et costam
fregit. venationem semper cum amicis participavit.

4in convivio tragoedias comoedias Atellanas sambucas

6 Signa mortis haec habuit: natali suo ultimo, cum


1 multos P ; multo Peter. 2 LXII Salm. ; LXXII P.
$ XX Cas. ; XXI P.


r———————M


1 Translated by A. O'Brien-Moore.
he name was derived from Atella, a Campanian town,
where, it was supposed, farces of this type originated.
s This palace was built by Hadrian during the last years of
his reign; it was a characteristic expression of both his


HADRIAN XXV. 9—XXVI. 6


C were spared by Antoninus. And he is said,
as heMay dying, to have composed the following lines : |
. «XO blithe little soul, thou, flitting away,
Guest and comrade of this my clay,
hither now goest thou, to what place
Bar? and ghastly and without grace?
Nor, as thy wont was, joke and play." !
Such verses as these did he compose, and not many
that were better, and also some in Greek.

He lived 62 years, 5 months, 17 days. He ruled
20 years, 11 months.

XXVI. He was tall of statuxe and elegant in ap-
pearance ; his hair was curled on a comb, and he wore
a full beard to cover up the natural blemishes on
his face; and he was very strongly built. He rode
and walked a great deal and always kept himself in
training by the use of arms and the javelin. He also
hunted, and he used often to kill a lion with his own
-hand, but once in a hunt he broke his collar-bone and
a rib; these hunts of his he always shared with his
friends. At his banquets he always furnished, ac-
cording to the occasion, tragedies, comedies, Atellan |
farces,? players on the sambuca, readers, or poets.
His villa at Tibur? was marvellously constructed, and .
he actually gave to parts of it the names of provinces
and places of the greatest renown, calling them, for
instance, Lyceum, Academia, Prytaneum, Canopus,
Poecile and Tempe. And in order not to omit any-

. thing, he even made a Hades. |

The premonitions of his death were as follows: On


eccentricity and his magnificence. Its extensive remains,
covering, together with its gardens, about 160 acres, are still
to be seen on the edge of the plain about three miles south-
east of Tibur (Tivoli).


potionem soporiferam impetrzsse, item somniavit a


2dicta. acta eius inrita fieri senatus volebat. nec
appellatus esset! divus, nisi Antoninus rogasset.
3templum denique ei pro sepulchro apud Puteolos
constituit et quinquennale certamen et flamines et
sodales et multa alia, quae ad honorem quasi numinis
4pertinerent. qua re, ut supra dictum est, multi
putant Antoninum Pium dictum.
lest P. ;
a e E
1 He was praying, according to the regular Roman custom,
with a part of his toga drawn over his head:
? For the significance of this omen see note to c. iii. T.
? The Sodales were & board of priests to whom was com-
mitted the cult of a deified emperor. . Under the empire there


were, in all, four such boards: the Sodales Augustales, created
for the cult of Augustus, and after the deification of Claudius


HADRIAN XXVI. 7—XXVII, 4


his last birthday, when he was commending Antoninus
to the gods, his bordered toga fell down without
apparent cause and bared his head.! His ring, on
which his portrait was carved, slipped of its own


accord from his finger? On the day before his —


birthday some one came into the senate wailing; by
his presence Hadrian was as disturbed as if he were
speaking about his own death, for no one could under-
stand what he was saying. Again, in the senate,
when he meant to say, “after my son's death," he
said, “after mine". Besides, he dreamed that he
had asked his father for a soporific; he also dreamed
that he had been overcome by a lion.

XXVII. Much was said against him after his death,
and by many persons. The senate wished to annul
his acts, and would have refrained from naming him
“the Deified" had not Antoninus requested it.
Antoninus, moreover, finally built a temple for him
at Puteoli to take the place of a tomb, and he also
established a quinquennial contest and flamens and
sodales? and many other institutions which appertain
to the honour of one regarded as a god. It is for this
reason, as has been said before, that many think that
Antoninus received the surname Pius.*


extended to Sodales Augustales Claudiales; the Sodales
F'laviales for Vespasian, after the deification of Titus extended
to Sodales Flaviales Titsales ; the Sodales Hadrianales; and
the Sodales Antoniniani created in 161. The theory was that
one sodalitas should care for the cults of the emperors of the
same house.

4See c. xxiv, 5 and note.


VOL. f. l G


ae


HELIUS
AELII SPARTIANI


Diocletiano Augusto Aelius Spartianus
suus sal. |

II. Ceionius Commodus, qui et Helius Verus appel- `


lenormior P3; al’ morosior P*.


! On his adoption by Hadrian he took the cognomen Caesar,


BY
AELIUS SPARTIANUS


To Diocletian Augustus, his devoted servant,
Aelius Spartianus, greeting :


I. It is my purpose, Diocletian Augustus, greatest
of a long line of rulers, to present to the knowledge
of your Divine Majesty, not only those who have held
as ruling emperors the high post which you maintain
—I have done this as far as the Deified Hadrian—
but also those who either have borne the name of
Caesar, though never hailed emperors or Augusti, or
have attained in some other fashion to the fame of the
imperial power or the hope of gaining it. Among
these I must tell first and foremost of Aelius Verus,
who through his adoption by Hadrian became a mem-
ber of the imperial family, and was the first to receive
only the name of Caesar.! Since I can tell but little


of him, and the prologue should not be more extensive.


than the play, I shall now proceed to tell of the man
himself.
II. The life of Ceionius Commodus, also called Aelius


but, as he did not become emperor, he never assumed any of
the imperial titles From this time on, it was customary for
the son of the reigning emperor to bear the name Caesar.
G2


—á


1 ueri et Obrecht and others; uiri et P; uirtute Peter, fol-
lowing Bernhardy. 2al’ adeptus P corr.


1 On the correct form of his name see note to Hadr., xxiii. 11,

? Tn 186; see Hadr., xxiii. 10.

3 The biographer seems to be thinking of the testamentary
adoption of Octavian by Julius Caesar.

4 Trajan, on his adoption, did not assume the name Caesar ;
this seems to be the only difference.

5 The elephant appears as an emblem on a coin of Julius
Caesar; see Cohen, i?, p. 17, No. 49.

8 A caeso matris utero dictus, Plin., Nat. Hist., vii. 47.

Tie., caesaries. This etymology is given by Festus, p. 57,


AELIUS II. 2-6


Verus,! adopted by Hadrian? after his journey through
the world, when he was burdened by old age and,
weakened by cruel disease, contains nothing worthy ;
of note except that he was the first to receive only |
the name of Caesar. This was conferred, not by last
will and testament, as was previously the custom,? nor
yet in the fashion in which Trajan was adopted,* but
well nigh in the same manner as in our own time your
Clemency conferred the name of Caesar on Maxim-
ianus and on Constantius, as on true sons ofthe imperial
house and heirs apparent of your August Majesty.

. Now whereas I must needs tell something of the
name of the Caesars, particularly in a life of the man
who received this name alone of the imperial titles,
men of the greatest learning and scholarship aver
that he who first received the name of Caesar was
called by this name, either because he slew in battle
an elephant,* which in the Moorish tongue is called
caesai, or because he was brought into the world after
his mother's death and by an incision in her abdomen,
or because he had a thick head of hair 7 when he came
forth from his mother's womb, or, finally, because he
had bright grey eyes? and was vigorous beyond the
wont of human beings. At any rate, whatever be the
truth, it was a happy fate which ordained the growth
of a name so illustrious, destined to last as long as the
universe endures.

This man, then, of whom I shall write, was at first
called Lucius Aurelius Verus,? but on his adoption by
Hadrian he passed into the family of the Aelii, that


and both this and the preceding derivation are listed by
Isidorus (Orig., ix. 3, 12).

8 i.e., oculis caestis.

? An error; see note to Hadr., xxiii. 11,


! deputans P! ; al? iam deputatus P corr.


1 L. Ceionius Commodus, consul in 106. None of the vari-
e names given in the following clauses was ever borne by
im. i
? For the correct form of his name and for his adoption by
Antoninus Pius see Hadr., xxiv. 1 and note.
3 See Hadr,, xxiii. 10 f.
* On this error see note to Hadr., xxiii, 13,


AELIUS II. 7—III. 6


is, into Hadrian's, and received the name of Caesar.
His father was Ceionius Commodus,! whom some have
called Verus, others, Lucius Aurelius, and many,
Annius. His ancestors, all men of the highest rank,
had their origin for the most part in Etruria or
Faventia. Of his family, however, we will speak at
greater length in the life of his son, Lucius Aurelius
Ceionius Commodus Verus Antoninus? whom An-
toninus was ordered to adopt. For all that pertains .
to the family-tree should be included in the work
which deals with a prince of whom there is more to
be told.

III. Aelius Verus was adopted by Hadrian at the `
time when, as we have previously said,? the Emperor's
health was beginning to fail and he was forced to take
thought for the succession. He was at once made
praetor * and appointed military and civil governor of
the provinces of Pannonia‘; afterwards he was created 136.
consul and then, because he had been chosen to
succeed to the imperial power, he was named for a 137.
second consulship. On the occasion of his adoption
largess was given to the populace,® three hundred
million sesterces were distributed among the soldiers,
and races were held in the Circus ; in short, nothing
was omitted which could signalize the public rejoicing.
He had, moreover, such influence with Hadrian, even
apart from the affection resulting from his adoption,
which seemed a firm enough tie between them, that
he was the only one who obtained his every desire,
even when expressed in a letter. Besides, in the
province to which he had been appointed he was by
no means a failure ; for he carried on a campaign with
success, or rather, "with good fortune, and achieved


5 Cf. c. vi. 1 and Hadr., xxiii. 19.


potius feliciter etiamsi non summi, medii tamen ob-
tinuit ducis famam.

* nimium vobis Romana propago
visa potens, superi, propria haec si dona fuissent,"

3 Hadrianus dixisse fertur ** hos versus vita non capit

Veri," illud addens :


1S0 P!; al’ petiuerit P corr. ; uolueritque Oberdick and


others. ? «olueritque eum amouere . . . et amouisset si
forte uixisset Novak. * So P; eundem de Peter, following
B, eidem.


1 Of. Hadr., xvi. 7.
?'This and the two following quotations from the Aeneid
are taken from the famous passage, vi. 869-886, commemorat.


AELIUS III. 7—IV. 3


the reputation, if not of a pre-eminent, at least of an
average, commander.

Verus had, however, such wretched health that
Hadrian immediately regretted the adoption, and
since he often considered others as possible successors,
he might have removed him altogether from the im-
perial family had Verus chanced to live longer. In
fact, it is reported by those who have set down in
writing all the details of Hadrian's life, that the Em-
peror was acquainted with Verus' horoscope, and that
he adopted a man whom he did not really deem suit-
able to govern the empire merely for the purpose of
gratifying his own desires, and, some even say, of
complying with a sworn agreement said to have been
contracted on secret terms between himself and
Verus. For Marius Maximus represents Hadrian as so
expert in astrology, as even to assert that he knew all
about his own future, and that he actually wrote down
beforehand what he was destined to do on every day
down to the hour of his death.! IV. Furthermore,
it is generally known that he often said about Verus:

* This hero Fate will but display to earth
Nor suffer him to stay.” ?
And once when Hadrian was reciting these verses
while strolling about in his garden, one of the literary
men, in whose brilliant company he delighted,? hap-
pened to be present and proceeded to add,
* The race of Rome,
Would seem to You, O Gods, to be too great,
Were such gifts to endure,"
Thereupon the Emperor remarked, it is said, * The
life of Verus will not admit of these lines," and added,
ing Marcellus, the nephew and heir presumptive of Augustus,


who died in 23 B.c. at the age of twenty years.
? Of. Hadr., xvi, 8 f. l


lal’ eum P corr. 2 nunc lamen cum ewm P and Peter ;
tunc Petschenig. 3 So P; quod Peter! with B. `


1 An allusion to the practice of deifying deceased members
of the imperial family. Asa matter of fact, however, Aelius
was not deified.


AELIUS IV. 4—V. 2


* Bring lilies with a bounteous hand ;

And I the while will scatter rosy blooms,

Thus doing honour to our kinsman's soul

With these poor gifts—though useless be the task."
At the same time, too, Hadrian, it is reported, re-
marked with a laugh: “ I seem to have adopted, not a
son, buta god ".! Yet when one of these same literary
men who was present tried to console him, saying:
“What if a mistake has been made in casting the
horoscope of this man who, as we believe, is destined
tolive"? Hadrian is said to have answered: “ It is
easy for you to say that, when you are looking for an
heir to your property, not to the Empire”. This
makes it clear that he intended to choose another
heir, and at the end of his life to remove Verus from
the government of the state. However, fortune aided
his purpose. For after Verus had returned from his
province, and had finished composing, either by his
own efforts or with the help of imperial secretaries
or the rhetoricians, a very pretty speech, still read
- nowadays, wherein he intended to convey his thanks
to his father Hadrian on the Kalends of January, he 1 Jan., 138.
swallowed a potion which he believed would benefit
him and died on that very day of January.? All public
‘lamentation for him was forbidden by Hadrian because
it was the time for assuming the vows for the state.

V. Verus was a man of joyous life and well versed
in letters, and he was endeared to Hadrian, as the
malicious say, rather by his beauty? than by his
character. In the palace his stay Was but a short
one ; in his private life, though there was little to be
commended, yet there was little to be blamed.


3 Cf, Hadr., xxiii, 16 f, — . ? Of, Hadr., xxiii. 10.


let quidem Lessing ; equidem P, Peter. ? udum Ober-"
dick ; tabum Novak. 3 So Peter; atque idem ouidii ab
aliis relata idem apici libros amorum P, which Salm. ar-
ranged : idem Apicii relata idem Ouidii libros am.


1 Hadr., xxi. 4.*

? Apparently the extant Apicii Caelii de re coquinaria
libri X, a collection of culinary recipes, which, however, in
its present form is to be dated in the third century. The
name of the compiler was probably taken from that of M.
Gavius Apicius, a noted gourmet of the time of Tiberius,


AELIUS V. 3-10


Furthermore, he was considerate of his family, well-
dressed, elegant in appearance, a man of regal beauty, ~
with a countenance that commanded respect, a
speaker of unusual eloquence, deft at writing verse,
and, moreover, not altogether a failure in public life.
His pleasures, many of which are recorded by his
biographers, were not indeed discreditable but some-
what luxurious. For it is Verus who is said to have
been the inventor of the tetrapharmacum, or rather
pentapharmacum, of which Hadrian was thereafter
always fond, namely, a mixture of sows’ udders,
pheasant, peacock, ham in pastry and wild boar. Of
this article of food Marius Maximus gives a different
account, for he calls it, not pentapharmacum, but
tetrapharmacum, as we have ourselves described it in
our biography of Hadrian. There was also another
kind of pleasure, it is said, of which Verus was the
inventor. He constructed, namely, a bed provided
with four high cushions and all inclosed with a fine
net; this he filled with rose-leaves, from which the
white parts had been removed, and then reclined on
it with his mistresses, burying himself under a coverlet
made of lilies, himself anointed with perfumes from
Persia. Some even relate that he made couches and:
tables of roses and lilies, these flowers all carefully
cleansed, a practice, which, if not creditable, at least
did not make for the destruction of the state. :
Furthermore, he always kept the Recipes of Caelius ’
Apicius? and also Ovid's Amores at his bedside, and |
declared that Martial? the writer of Epigrams, was í
his Vergil. Still more trivial was his custom of:
fastening wings on many of his messengers after the


3 M, Valerius Martialis, born &bout 40, died &bout 102.


AELIUS -


1 non tantum P corr. ? set P corr. ; et PL 3So P corr.
and Peter? ; incuibimus P1,


! On this error see Marc., v. 1 and note.
2? 4.e. by Antoninus Pius; see c. ii. 9 and note.


AELIUS V. 11—VI. 5 E


fashion of Cupids, and often giving them the names .
of the winds, calling one Boreas, another Notus, others :
Aquilo, or Circius, or some other like name, and forc- `
ing them to bear messages without respite or mercy. :
And when his wife complained about his amours with :
others, he said to her, it is reported: “Let me in- |
dulge my desires with others; for wife is a term of |
honour, not of pleasure ". :

His son was Antoninus Verus, who was adopted
by Marcus, or rather, with Marcus,’ and received an
equal share with him in the imperial power. For
these are the men who first received the name of
Augustus conjointly, and whose names are inscribed
in the lists of the consuls, not as two Antonini but
as two Augusti. And such was the impression
created by the novelty and the dignity of this fact
that in some of the lists the order of the consuls
begins with the names of these emperors.

VI. On the occasion of the adoption of Verus,
Hadrian bestowed a vast sum of money on the popu-
lace and the soldiery.* But, being a rather sagacious
man, when he saw that Verus was in such utterly
wretched health that he could not brandish a shield
of any considerable weight, he remarked, it is
said:* “We have lost the three hundred million
sesterces which we paid out to the army and to
the people, for we have indeed leaned against a
tottering wall and one which can hardly bear even
our weight, much less that of the Empire". This
remark, indeed, Hadrian made to his prefect, but the
man repeated it, and as a result Aelius Cesar grew
worse every day from anxiety, as a man does who has


3 Of. c. iii. 3 and Hadr., xxiii. 12.
* Cf. Hadr., xxiii. 14.


i AELIUS


Marco, ut iam diximus, dedit, saepe dicens: ** Habeat


! On the resignation of the prefect, see note to Hadr., ix. 4.
? See note to c. ii. 1.
3 Annia Galeria Faustina the younger; see Pius, x. 9.


AELIUS VI. 6—VII. 2


lost hope. Thereupon Hadrian appointed a successor!
for the prefect who had divulged the remark, wishing
to give the impression that he had qualified his harsh
words. But it profited him nothing, for Lucius
Ceionius Commodus Verus Aelius Cæsar (for he was
called by all these names?) died and was accorded an
emperor's funeral, nor did he derive any benefit from
his imperial position save honour at his death.
Hadrian, then, mourned his death as might a good
father, not a good emperor. For when his friends
anxiously asked who could now be adopted, Hadrian
is said to have replied to them: “I decided that even
when Verus was still alive," thereby showing either
his good judgment or his knowledge of the future.
After Verus’ death Hadrian was in doubt for a time -
as to what he should do, but finally he adopted
Antoninus, who had received the surname Pius. And
he imposed on Antoninus the condition that he in
turn should adopt Marcus and Verus, and should give
his daughter? in marriage to Verus, rather than to
Marcus. Nor did Hadrian live long thereafter, but
succumbed to weakness and illnesses of various kinds,
all the while declaring that a prince ought to die,
not in an enfeebled condition, but in full vigour.

VII. Hadrian gave orders that colossal statues of
Verus should be set up all over the world, and in some
cities he even had temples built. Finally, out of re-
gard for him, Hadrian gave his son Verus (who had
remained in the imperial household after his father's -
death) to Antoninus Pius, as I have already said,* to
be adopted as his son along with Marcus, treating the
boy as if he were his own grandson; and he often
remarked: “Let the Empire retain something of


5c. ii. 9; v, 12; vi. 9; Hadr., xxiv. 1.


VOL. I. ` H


^ Haec sunt quae de Vero Caesare mandanda litteris


AELIUS VII. 3-5


Verus". "This indeed contradicts all that very many
authors have written with regard to Hadrian's regret
for his adoption of Verus, since, save for a kindly
character, there was nothing in the character of the
younger Verus capable of shedding lustre on the im-
perial family.

These are the facts about Verus Cesar which have
seemed worthy of being consigned to letters. I was
unwilling to leave him unmentioned for the reason
that it is my purpose to set forth in single books the
lives of all the successors of Cesar the Dictator, that
is, the Deified Julius, whether they were called
Caesars or Augusti or princes, and of all those who
came into the family by adoption, whether it was as
sons or as relatives of emperors that they were im-
mortalized by the name of Cesar, and thereby to
satisfy my own sense of justice, even if there be many
who will feel no compelling need of seeking such
information.


H 2?


IULII CAPITOLINI


I. Tito Auxelio Fulvo Boionio Antonino Pio pater-
num genus e Gallia Transalpina, Nemausense scilicet,
2avus Titus Aurelius Fulvus, qui per honores diversos
ad secundum consulatum et praefecturam urbis
3 pervenit, pater Aurelius Fulvus, qui et ipse fuit con-
4sul, homo tristis et integer, avia materna Boionia
Procilla, mater Arria Fadilla, avus maternus Arrius
Antoninus, bis consul, homo sanctus et qui Nervam
5miseratus esset, quod imperare coepisset, soror
6 uterina Iulia Fadilla, vitricus Iulius Lupus consularis,
7socer Annius Verus, uxor Annia Faustina, filii mares
duo, duae feminae, gener per maiorem filiam Lamia
Silanus, per minorem Marcus Antoninus fuere.


1The correct form of his name prior to his adoption was
T. Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus; see C.I.L.,
viii. 8239.

2The year is unknown; his first consulship was in 85.
He had previously commanded the Third Legion, the Gall4ca,
and had been honoured by Otho for successes against the
Sarmatians.

s His first consulship was in 69; thre year of the second is
not known. He was one of the correspondents of the
younger Pliny.

4 See Marc., i. 2.

5 Her full name was Annia Galeria Faustina.

ê Their names are given in their sepulchral inscriptions
from the Mausoleum of Hadrian as M. Aurelius Fulvus


REA -—— m- ee m


BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Antoninus Pius !
was descended, on his father's side, from a family which
came from the country of Transalpine Gaul, more
specifically, from the town of Nimes. His grandfather
was Titus Aurelius Fulvus, who after various offices
of honour attained to a second consulship? and the
prefecture of the city ; his father was Aurelius Fulvus,
also consul, and a stern and upright man. His
mother was Arria Fadilla; her mother was Boionia
Procilla and her father Arrius Antoninus, twice con-
sul? and a righteous man, who pitied Nerva that he
assumed the imperial power. Julia Fadilla was his
mother's daughter, his stepfather being Julius Lupus,
a man of consular rank. His father-in-law was
Annius Verus* and his wife Annia Faustina,5 who
bore him two sons? and two daughters, of whom the
elder? was married to Lamia Silanus and the younger ?
to Marcus Antoninus.


Antoninus and M. Galerius Aurelius Antoninus; see C.I.L.,
vi. 988 and 989. Both died before their father was adopted
by Hadrian.

7 Aurelia Fadilla. She died before her father’s adoption
(cf. c. iii. 6). Her sepulchral inscription is preserved (C.1.L..,
vi. 990


L Annia Galeria Faustina the younger. On her marriage
to Marcus see c. x. 2 and note. Í


.8 Ipse Antoninus Pius natus est XIII. kal. Oct.
Flavio Domitiano XII. et Cornelio Dolabella con-
sulibus in villa Lanuvina. educatus Lorii in Aurelia,
ubi postea palatium exstruxit, cuius hodieque re-

lI. Fuit vir forma conspicuus, ingenio ! clarus, mori-
bus clemens, nobilis vultu, placidus ingenio, singu-
laris? eloquentiae, nitidae litteraturae, praecipue
sobrius, diligens agri cultor, mitis, largus, alieni ab-
stinens, et omnia haec cum mensura et sine iactantia,

2in cunctis postremo laudabilis et qui merito Numae

4reddat*), vel quod eos quos Hadrianus per malam


l ingenio deleted by Peter, following Salm:, who divides:
forma conspicuus, clarus moribus, clemens, nobilis, uultu
placidus, ingenio singulari, eloquentiae nitidae, latteraturae
praecipuae, sobrius, diligens agri cultor, etc. ; P punctuates :
forma, conspicuus ingenio clarus.moribus clemens . nobilis
uultu placidus ingenio . singulari eloquentiae . nitidae lit-
teraturae . praecipue sobrius . diligens . agri cultor., etc.
2 singularis P corr. 3conparatus P; conparetur Keller-
bauer. 4quod quidem . . . reddat suspected as a marginal
comment by Kellerbauer, probably rightly.


lIn southern Etruria, about ten miles W. of Rome. The


Via Aurelia ran N.W. from Rome along the coast of Etruria.


ANTONINUS PIUS Í. 8—1I. 6


Antoninus himself was born at an estate at Lanu- 19 re
vium on the thirteenth day before the Kalends of 96
October in the twelfth consulship of Domitian and first
of Cornelius Dolabella. He was reared at Lorium! on
the Aurelian Way, where he afterwards built the
palace whose ruins stand there to-day. He passed
his childhood first with his paternal grandfather, then
later with his maternal; and he showed such a duti-
ful affection toward all his family, that he was en-
riched by legacies from even his cousins, his
stepfather, and many still more distant kin.

II. In personal appearance he was strikingly hand-
some, in natural talent brilliant, in temperament |
kindly ; he was aristocratic in countenance and calm
in nature, a singularly gifted speaker and an elegant
scholar, conspicuously thrifty, a conscientious land-
holder, gentle, generous, and mindful of others’ rights.
He possessed all these qualities, moreover, in the
proper mean and without ostentation, and, in fine,
was praiseworthy in every way and, in the minds of
all good men, well deserving of comparison with
Numa Fompilius, He was given the name of Pius
by the senate,? either because, when his father-in-law
was old and weak, he lent him a supporting hand in
his attendance at the senate (which act, indeed, is
not sufficient as a token of great dutifulness, since a
man were rather undutiful who did not perform this
service than dutiful if he did), or because he spared
those men whom Hadrian in his ill-health had con-


?'The first three of the following reasons for the bestowal
of the surname Pius on Antoninus are also given in Hadr.,
xxiv. 3-5. The third is also given in Dio, lxx. 2, 1, and
the last in Eutrop., viii. 8; Suidas, s. v. Antoninus; and
Orosius, vii. 14, 1.


: ANTONINUS PIUS


luita om. in P, supplied (before priuata) by P corr.
? trallis P.


1 Of. Hadr., xxiv. 9.

? The early rate of interest,said to have been fixed by the
Twelve Tables, seems to have been 10 per cent. In the later
republican period 12 per cent. was frequently exacted, but in
64 B.c. money could be had for 4 per cent. and the rise of the


ANTONINUS PIUS II. 7—III. 3


demned to death, or because after Hadrian's death he
had unbounded and extraordinary honours decreed
for him in spite of opposition from all, or because,
when Hadrian wished to make away with himself,
by great care and watchfulness he prevented him
from so doing,! or because he was in fact very kindly
by nature and did no harsh deed in his own time.
He also loaned money at four per cent, the lowest
rate ever exacted,? in order that he might use his
fortune to aid many. 2»

As quaestor ê he was generous, as praetor illustrious,
and in the consulship he had as colleague Catilius 120.
Severus. His life as a private citizen he passed
mostly on his estates but he was well-known every-
where. He was chosen by Hadrian from among the
four men of consular rank under whose jurisdiction
Italy was placed,* to administer that particular part
of Italy in which the greater part of his own holdings
lay ; from this it was evident that Hadrian had regard
for both the fame and the tranquillity of such a man.

III. An omen of his future rule occurred while he
was administering Italy ; for when he mounted the
tribunal, among other greetings some one cried,
* God save thee, Augustus". His proconsulship in
Asia he conducted in such a fashion that he alone
excelled his grandfather; and in this proconsulship,
too, he received another omen foretelling his rule;
for at Tralles a priestess, being about to greet him
after the custom of the place (for it was their custom
rate to 8 per cent. was a matter for comment; see Cicero,
ad Att., iv. 15,7; ad Quint. Fr., ii. 14, 4. |

3 About 111.

1 See Hadr., xxii. 13.


5 About 185. An inscription set up at Ephesus during his
proconsulship is extant; see C.I.L., iii. 2065.


1 cilici P! (for cidici ; Salm.) ; cilicie (i.e. ae) P corr. 2 So
Peter; monitus sed penitus eius P; monitus est penatibus eius
Cas. ; monilus se dis penatibus eius Salm. ? de om. in P,
supplied by Jordan. * uel lauans P corr.


! Aurelia Fadilla; see note to c. i. 7.


ANTONINUS III. 4—IV. 3


to greet the proconsuls by their title), instead of
saying “ Hajl, proconsul," said “ Hail, imperator";
at Cyzicus, moreover, a crown was transferred from an
image of a god to a statue of him. After his consul-
ship, again, a marble bull was found hanging in his
garden with its horns attached to the boughs of
a tree, and lightning from a clear sky struck his
home without inflicting damage, and in Etruria
certain large jars that had been buried were found
above the ground again, and swarms of bees settled
on his statues throughout all Etruria, and frequently
he was warned in dreams to include an image of
Hadrian among his household gods. |

While setting out to assume his proconsular office
he lost his elder daughter. About the licence and
loose living of his wife a number of things were said,
which he heard with great sorrow and suppressed.
On returning from his proconsulship he lived for
the most part at Rome, being a member of the coun-
cils of Hadrian,? and in all matters concerning which
Hadrian sought his advice, ever urging the more
merciful course.

IV. The manner of his adoption, they say, was some-
what thus: After the death of Aelius Verus, whom
Hadrian had adopted and named Caesar, a day
was set for the meeting of the senate, and to this
Arrius Antoninus came, supporting the steps of his
. father-in-law. For this act, it is said, Hadrian
adopted him.? But this could not have been the
only reason for the adoption, nor ought it to have
been, especially since Antoninus had always done well
in his administration of public office, and in his pro-


2 See note to Hadr., viii. 9.
3 But see c. ii. 8; Hadr., xxiv. 3.


! ab uxore P corr. (P! omits ab); uxor Mommsen ; cum ab
uxore argueretur quasi carum (or rarum) nescio quid suis
largiens Salm. 2 militibus, before populo in P, deleted by
Jordan; militibus ac populo Vulg.


! Of. Hadr., xxiv. 1; Ael., vi. 9; Dio, Ixix. 21, 1. On the


names of his two &dopted sons see notes to Hadr., xxiv. 1.

? According to the Calendar of Philocalus of 354 the date
was afterwards commemorated by races in the circus at
Lorium ; see C.I.L., i?, pp. 258 and 310.

? By the bestowal of these two powers, the basis of the
civil and of the military power of the emperor respectively,
he became consors imperii, or partner in the imperial power.
Such a position had often been bestowed on the heir-apparent
of the emperor. With regard to the proconsular power,


POM ML d


ANTONINUS IV. 4-10


consulship had shown himself a man of worth and
dignity. At any rate, when Hadrian announced a
desire to adopt him, he was given time for deciding
whether he wished to be adopted. This condition:
was attached to his adoption,’ that as Hadrian took :
Antoninus as his son, so he in turn should take Mar-
cus Antoninus, his wife’s nephew, and Lucius Verus, '
thenceforth called Verus Antoninus, the son of that
Aelius Verus whom Hadrian had previously adopted. :
He was adopted on the fifth day before the Kalends 25 Feb.,
of March? while returning thanks in the senate for 138.
Hadrian’s opinion concerning him, and he was made
colleague to his father in both the proconsular and
the tribunician power.? . It is related as his first
remark, that when he was reproved by his wife
because he was not sufficiently generous to his house-
hold in some trifling matter, he said: ‘ Foolish
woman, now that we have gained an empire, we have
lost even what we had before". To the people he
gave largess on his own account 4 and also paid the
moneys that his father had promised. He contributed .
a large amount of money, too, to Hadrian's public
works, and of the crown-gold 6 which had been
presented to him on the occasion of his adoption, he
returned all of Italy's share, and half of their share
to the provinces.


the convention was always observed that it was valid only in
the provinces, and the title of proconsul was not borne by the
emperor within the confines of Italy.

*Commemorated by coins of 189 with the legend Libera-
litas; see Cohen, ii?, p. 316 f., Nos. 480-482.

5 Attested by inscriptions from various towns of nos ; 866
E. E. Bryant, Reign of Ant. Pius (Cambridge, 1896), p.

$ See Hadr., vi. 5 and note.


2eum rettulit. uxorem Faustinam Augustam appellari
a senatu permisit. Pii appellationem recepit. patri et
matri atque avis et fratribus iam mortuis statuas decre-
tas libenter accepit. circenses natali suo dicatos non
respuit aliis honoribus refutatis. clipeum Hadriano
magnificentissimum posuit et sacerdotes instituit.


lecum aduixit P! ; quoad uéixtt P corr.; dum aduixit Salm;
cum aduixerit Peter.


1 See Hadr., xxv. 6. ? See Hadr., xxvii. 2.

3 On the coins issued in her honour during her life-time she
is regularly called Faustina, Aug. anm Aug. P. P.; see
Cohen, ii?. p. 424 f.

* The name appears on coins of the latter part of 188; see
Cohen, ii. p. 277, No. 66 f.

5On such games see Hadr., viii. 2 and note. Races in
honour of Antoninus are listed for the 19 September (his birth-
day) in the Calendar of Philocalus.

ê The clipeus was a shield-shaped plate of metal, in this
case doubtless of gold. It contained, sometimes an honor-
ary inscription, sometimes a bust in high relief.

1 See Hadr., xxvii. 3 and note.

8Q. Lollius Urbicus had held a command in the war in
Judæa under Hadrian, and later had been governor of
Germania Inferior.

® Probably in 142, for in an inscription of this year he is
designated as Imp. IL. ; ; see C.I.L., x. 515 = Dessau, Ins. Sel.,


ANTONINUS PIUS V. 2-4


V. His father, as long as he lived, he obeyed most
scrupulously, and when Hadrian passed away at
Baiae! he bore his remains to Rome with all piety
and reverence, and buried him in the gardens of
Domitia; moreover, though all opposed the measure,
he had him placed among the deified.? On his wife
Faustina he permitted the senate to bestow the name
of Augusta,? and for himself accepted the surname
Pius.* The statues decreed for his father, mother,
grandparents and brothers, then dead, he accepted
readily ; nor did he refuse the circus-games ordered
for his birthday,’ though he did refuse other honours.
In honour of Hadrian he set up a superb shield ê and
established a college of priests."

After his accession to the throne he removed none
of the men whom Hadrian had appointed to office,
and, indeed, was so steadfast and loyal that he re-
tained good men in the government of provinces for
terms of seven and even nine years. He waged a
number of wars, but all of them through his legates.
For Lollius Urbicus, his legate, overcame the
Britons ° and built a second wall, one of turf,!° after
driving back the barbarians. Through other legates or
governors, he forced the Moors to sue for peace," and


340. The victory is commemorated on coins with the legend
Britannia and designs signifying a victory ; see Cohen, ii?. p.
281 f., Nos. 118-116, 119. The revolt was begun by the
Brigantes, who lived just south of Hadrian’s wall; see Paus.,
viii. 43, 4.

19 Tt ran from the Firth of Forth to the Firth of Clyde, &
distance of 40 miles. It was constructed by the soldiers of
three legions, the II. Augusta, the VI. Victrix, and the XX.
Valeria Victrix; see C.I.L., vii. p. 191-194. Severus replaced
it by a stone wall; see Sev., xviii. 2.

11 The rebellion seems to have been in western Mauretania,
the province of Mauretania Tingitana; see Paus., viii. 48,


ANTONINUS PIUS-


1 8o P corr.; terdecentes P'.


8, and C.I.L., iii. 5211-5215. It probably took place about
145, although it is argued by Bryant (op. ctt. p. 711.) that it is
to be placed in 152. The victory is commemorated in an in- .
scription in Rome, C.I.L., vi. 1208.
1This victory is also commemorated in the inscription
C.I.L., vi. 1208. The time of this campaign is set by Bryant
(p. 52) as between 140 and 145.
 ? About 157. See Aristid., Or., xiv, vol. i. 351 Dind., and
C.I.L., iii. 1416. i
3It is described by Aristides (Or., xiv. i. 351 Dind.) as an
outbreak of those who lived on the shore of the Red Sea.
According to Joannes Malalas (p. 280 f. Bonn) Antoninus went
in person to Alexandria at the time of the revolt, but this is
almost certainly an error (cf. c. vii. 11).
1 This people lived in south-eastern Russia, between the Don
and the Caspian Sea, and had made raids into Armenia and


ANTONINUS PIUS V. 5—VI. 6


crushed the Germans! and the Dacians ? and many
other tribes, and also the Jews, who were in revolt.
In Achaea also and in Egypt? he put down rebellions
and many a time sharply checked the Alani * in their
raiding. VI. His procurators were ordered to levy |


i
only a reasonable tribute, and those who exceeded a :
proper limit were commanded to render an account :


of their acts, nor was he ever pleased with any reven-
ues that were onerous to the provinces. Moreover,
he was always willing to hear complaints against his
procurators.

He besought the senate to pardon those men whom
Hadrian had condemned,’ saying that Hadrian him-


self had been about to do so. The imperial pomp he ,


reduced to the utmost simplicity and thereby gained
the greater esteem, though the palace-attendants op-
posed this course, for they found that since he made
no use of go-betweens, they could in no wiseterrorize
men or take money for decisions about which there
was no concealment. In his dealings with the
senate, he rendered it, as emperor, the same respect
that he had wished another emperor to render him
when he was a private man. When the senate
offered him the title of Father of his Country, he


Cappadocia in the time of Hadrian. They afterwards spread
toward the west, and invaded the Empire by way of Moesia.

5 See Hadr., xxv. 8.

$ Under those emperors who were careless in the announce-
ment of decisions or in answers to petitions it was not un-
usual for a dishonest favourite or official to demand money
from petitioners for securing a favourable answer; he would
then either actually influence the emperor in his decision, or,
more often, merely claim that & favourable decision had been
secured by his own efforts, and demand the payment of the
bribe. This practice was known as fwmos vendere; see c.
xi. 1; Alex., xxiii. 8; xxxvi. 2. —


VOL. I. I


A


i


|


LU
H


1See Hadr., vi. 4 and note. Pius accepted the title in
139, for it appears for the first time on coins of this year; e.g.,
Cohen, ii?. p. 279, No. 98 f.

* Many coins were struck in her honour with the title
Diva Faustina. The actual apotheosis is represented by her
ascension to heaven on an eagle with the legend Consecratio ;
see Cohen, ii?. p. 427, Nos. 182-185.

3 On the Sacra Via, near the eastern end of the Forum. It
is still standing and is used as the church of S. Lorenzo in
Miranda. It was also dedicated to Antoninus after his death


ANTONINUS PIUS VI. 7—VII. 3


at first refused it, but later accepted it with an
elaborate expression of thanks. On the death of
his wife Faustina, in the third year of his reign, the 141,
senate deified her? and voted her games and a
temple? and priestesses and statues of silver and of
gold. These the Emperor accepted, and further-
more granted permission that her statue be erected
in all the circuses; and whem the senate voted
her a golden statue, he undertook to erect it himself.
At the instance of the senate, Marcus Antoninus, 140.
now quaestor, was made consul; also Annius Verus,*
he who was afterwards entitled Antoninus, was ap-
pointed quaestor before the legal age.’ Never did
he resolve on measures about the provinces or render
a decision on any question without previously con-
sulting his friends, and in accordance with their
opinions he drew up his final statement. And indeed
he often received his friends without the robes of
state and even in the performance of domestic duties.

VII. With such care did he govern all peoples ’
under him that he looked after all things and, all men `
as if they were his own. As a result, the provinces
all prospered in his reign, informers were abolished,
the confiscation of goods was less frequent than
ever before, and only one man was condemned as .
guilty of aspiring to the throne. This was Atilius :
(c. xiii. 4), and the names of both Antoninus and Faustina
appear in the inscription on the architrave (C.I.L., vi. 1005).

*i.e., Lucius Verus.

5 In the time of the empire the minimum age was twenty-
five. Exceptions to this, however, were common in the case
of members of the imperial family; see also the case of
Marcus (Marc., v. 6). Verus was made quaestor at the age
of twenty-three; see Verus, ii. 11.

$ Apparently, the members of his consilium; see Hadr.,
viii. 9. :

I 2


4adfectatae tyrannidis reus, hoc est Atilius Titianus,
senatu puniente, a quo conscios requiri vetuit, filio
eius ad omnia semper adiuto. periit et Priscianus
reus adfectatae tyrannidis, sed morte voluntaria. de
qua coniuratione quaeri vetuit.

8conferret. unde etiam Mesomedi lyrico salarium
inminuit. rationes omnium provinciarum adprime

9scivit et vectigalium. patrimonium privatum in
filiam contulit, sed fructus rei publicae donavit.


Lal’ anticipare P corr.


pO na,


1 See note to Hadr., xv. 6. 2 Hadr., vii. 4.

3In view of this statement, it seems necessary to refuse
credence to the assertion of Aristides (Or., xxiii. i. 453 f. Dind.)
and Malalas (p. 280 Bonn) that Antoninus went in person to
Egypt and Syria; see note to c, v. 5.


ANTONINUS PIUS VII. 4-12


Titianus,! and it was the senate itself that conducted
his prosecution,? while the Emperor forbade any in-
vestigation about the fellow-conspirators of Atilius
and always aided his son to attain all his desires.
Priscianus did indeed die for aspiring to the throne,
but by his own hand, and about his conspiracy also
the Emperor forbade any investigation.


The board of Antoninus Pius was rich yet never,
open to criticism, frugal yet not stingy ; his table was -


furnished by his own slaves, his own fowlers and
fishers and hunters. A bath, which he had previously
used himself, he opened to the people without charge,
nor did he himself depart in any way from the manner
of life to which he had been accustomed when a private
man. He took away salaries from a number of men


who held obvious sinecures, saying there was nothing :


meaner, nay more unfeeling, than the man who nibbled
at the revenues of the state without giving any service
in return; for the same reason, also, he reduced the
salary of Mesomedes, the lyric poet. The budgets of
all the provmces and the sources of revenue he knew
exceedingly well He settled his private fortune on
his daughter, but presented the income of it to the
state. Indeed, the superfluous trappings of royal state
and even the crown-lands he sold, living on his own
private estates and varying his residence according to
the season. Nor did he undertake any expedition ?
other than the visiting of his lands in Campania, aver-
ring that the equipage of an emperor, even of one over
frugal, was a burdensome thing to the provinces. And
yet he was regarded with immense respect by all na-
tions, for, making his residence inthe city, as he did, for
the purpose of being in a central location, he was able to
receive messages from every quarter with equal speed.


—


gu


VIII. Congiarium populo dedit, militibus donativum
addidit. puellas alimentarias in honorem Faustinae
2Faustinianas constituit. opera eius haec exstant:
Romae templum Hadriani, honori patris dicatum,
Graecostadium post incendium restitutum, instaura-
tum Amphitheatrum, sepulchrum Hadriani, templum
3 Agrippae, Pons Sublicius, Phari restitutio, Caietae
portus, Tarracinensis portus restitutio, lavacrum
Ostiense, Antiatum aquae ductus, templa Lanuviana.
4multas etiam civitates adiuvit pecunia, ut opera vel
nova facerent vel vetera restituerent, ita ut et magis-
tratus adiuvaret et senatores urbis ad functiones suas.
5  Hereditates eorum qui filios habebant repudiavit.
primus constituit, ne poenae causa legatum relictum
6maneret. successorem viventi bono iudici nulli dedit


1 On nine different occasions, according to coins with the
legend Liberalitas; see Cohen, ii?. p. 316-322, Nos. 480-532.

7 In 145, on the occasion of the marriage of his daughter
Faustina to Marcus; see c. x. 2.

3 Similar endowments for destitute children had been
made by Nerva (Aur. Vict., Epit., xii. 4) and by Trajan (Dio,
Ixviii. 5, and C.I.L., xi. 1146). This memorial to Faustina
was commemorated on coins with the legend Puellae
Faustinianae ; see Cohen, ii?. p. 433, Nos. 261-263. A similar
endowment in memory of the younger Faustina was es-
tablished by Marcus; see Marc., xxvi. 6.

4Situated in the Campus Martius, probably not far from
the Pantheon. It is represented as an octastyle temple on a
coin of 151; see Cohen, ii?, p. 330, No. 618. The temple was
probably dedicated in 145; see Verus, iii. 1.

5 Probably the Graecostasis. It was a sort of platform,
between the Senate-house and the Rostra, used by. envoys
from foreign nations; see Varro, Ling. Lat., v. 155.

® See c. ix. i. 7 4.e. the Colosseum.

8 See Hadr., xix. 11 and note.

? If this reading is correct the Pantheon must be meant;
see note to Hadr., xix. 10. However, perhaps it is an error


ANTONINUS PIUS VIII. 2-6


VIII. He gave largess to the people,! and, in ad-
dition, a donation to the soldiers,? and founded an
order of destitute girls, called Faustinianae ? in honour
of Faustina. Of the public werks that were con-
structed by him the following remain to-day: the
temple of Hadrian * at Rome, so called in honour of
his father, the Graecostadium,? restored by him after
its burning,® the Amphitheatre,’ repaired by him, the
tomb of Hadrian,’ the temple of Agrippa,’ and the
Pons Sublicius,!? also the Pharus, the port at Caieta,
and the port at Tarracina, all of which he restored,
the bath at Ostia, the aqueduct at Antium, and the


temples at Lanuvium. Besides all this, he helped.


many communities? to erect new buildings and to
restore the old; and he even gave pecuniary aid to
Roman magistrates and senators to assist them in the
performance of their duties.

He declined legacies from those who had children
of their own and was the first to establish the rule
that bequests made under fear of penalty !? should not
be valid. Never did he appoint a successor to a
worthy magistrate while yet alive, except in the case


for Templum Augusti, the restoration of which is commemo-
rated on coins of Pius; see Cohen, ii?, p. 270, Nos. 1-12.

1? The earliest, and for & long time the only, bridge across
the Tiber. It was built of piles, and after the construction of
other bridges was preserved for religious and sentimental
reasons. Its site was near the Forum Boarium, now the
Piazza della Bocca di Verità.

u This had been promised by Hadrian; see the dedicatory
inscription, C.I.L., xiv. 98 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 334.

13 For a list see Bryant, p, 116 f.

13 Apparently an allusion to the law which provided that a
senator must leave a specified sum to the public treasury (or
to the emperor). This was rescinded by Pius; see Zonaras,
xii, 1, p. 593 D., and Malalas, xi. p. 281 Dind.


oo


8 Maximus successit., in cuius demortui locum duos
praefectos substituit Fabium Cornelium Repentinum

2 centas quadraginta insulas vel domos absumpsit. et


1 So Borghesi and Hirschfeld ; Fabium Repentinum et Cor-
nelium Victorinum P. ? fabula famosa Novak; famosa P ;
famosa voce P corr. ; famosis Peter. 3So Peter ; damno P.


! Severa] inscriptions set up in his honour are extant; ac-
cording to these he was granted consular honours on his re-
tirement ; see Hadr., viii. 7 and note, and c. x. 6.

? Commemorated in severalinscriptions. He was prefect
of the vigiles, the watchmen and firemen, in 156, &nd was
advanced to the prefecture of the guard about 158.

3 See note to Hadr., ix. 5.

* For his death see Marc., xiv. 5.

5 See note to Hadr., vii. 4.

It is said that 1112 persons were kilJed ; see Mommsen,
Chron. Min., i. 146,


ANTONINUS VIII. 7—IX. 2


of Orfitus, the prefect of the city, and then only at
his own request. For under him Gavius Maximus,!
a very stern man, reached his twentieth year of
service as prefect ofthe guard ; he was succeeded by
Tattius Maximus,? and at his death Antoninus ap-
pointed two men? in his place, Fabius Cornelius
Repentinus and Furius Victorinus,* the former of
whom, however, was ruined by the scandalous tale
that he had gained his office by the favour of the
Emperor's mistress. So rigidly did he adhere to his
resolve that no senator should be executed in his
reign, that a confessed parricide was merely
marooned on a desert island, and that only because
it was against the laws of nature to let such a one
live. He relieved a scarcity of wine and oil and
wheat with loss to his own private treasury, by buy-
ing these and distributing them to the people free.
IX. The following misfortunes and prodigies oc-
curred in his reign : the famine, which we have just
mentioned, the collapse of the Circus, an earth-
quake ’ whereby towns of Rhodes and of Asia were
destroyed—all of which, however, the Emperor re-
stored in splendid fashion, —and a fire at Rome which
consumed three hundred and forty tenements and
dwellings. The town of Narbonne,’ the city of


7 The earthquake which destroyed Rhodes occurred about
140; a description of it is given in an oration of Aristides
(804 Dind.) The neighbouring island of Cos and the city of
Stratonicea jn Caria were also devastated. There seems to
have been a second earthquake about 151, which devastated
Bithynia, Lesbos, Smyrna and Ephesus.

8 Mentioned also by Gellius, xv. 1, 2.

? See C.I.L.,xii. 4342 and p. 521. Narbo Martius, which
had received the status of & colony in 45 B.c., was the capital
of ihe province of Gallia Narbonensis,

. Al


(


Narbonensis civitas et Antiochense oppidum et Car-
3thaginiense forum arsit. fuit et inundatio Tiberis,
apparuit et stella crinita, natus est et biceps puer, et
4uno partu mulieris quinque pueri editi sunt. visus
est in Arabia iubatus anguis maior solitis, qui se a
cauda medium comedit. lues etiam in Arabia fuit.
hordeum in Moesia in culminibus arborum natum
5est. quattuor praeterea leones mansueti sponte se
capiendos in Arabia praebuerunt. l
6 Pharasmanes rex ad eum Romam venit plusque illi
quam Hadrianodetulit. Pacorum regem Laziis dedit.
Parthorum regem ab Armeniorum expugnatione solis
litteris reppulit. Abgarum regem ex orientis parti-
7 bus sola auctoritate deduxit. causas regales termina-
vit. sellam regiam Parthorum regi repetenti, quam
8 Traianus ceperat, pernegavit. Rhoemetalcen! in
regnum Bosphoranum audito inter ipsum et cura-
9 torem ? negotioremisit. Olbiopolitis contra Tauroscy-
thas in Pontum auxilia misit et Tauroscythas usque
10ad dandos Olbiopolitis obsides vicit. tantum sane


| rimethalcen P. ? Eupatorem Cary, Hist. des Rois du
Bosphore, p. 64 (ed. Berol.). |


! Also included among his benefactions in Paus., viii.
48, 4.
? King of the Hiberi ; see Hadr., xiii. 9 and note. He had
refused to come to meet Hadrian (Hadr., xxi. 18), but now
came to Rome with his wife; see Dio, lxix. 15, 3 = 1xx. 9, 1
(Boissevain).

3The Lazi lived on the south-eastern shore of the Black
Sea, south of the river Phasis (Rion).

1 Vologases III. He seems to have made preparations for
& war against the Romans (Marc., viii. 6), and troops were
despatched to Syria ob bellum Parthicum; see C.I.L., ix.
2457 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1076.

5 Of Osrhoene.


LU


ANTONINUS PIUS IX. 3-10


Antioch, and the forum of Carthage! also burned.
Besides, the Tiber flooded its banks, a comet was seen,
a two-headed child was born, and a woman gave
birth to quintuplets. There was seen, moreover, in
Arabia, a crested serpent larger than the usual size,
which ate itself from the tail to the middle; and
also in Arabia there was a pestilence, while in Moesia
barley sprouted from the tops of trees. And besides
all this, in Arabia four lions grew tame and of their
own accord yielded themselves to capture.
Pharasmenes,? the king, visited him at Rome and
showed him more respect than he had shown Hadrian.
He appointed Pacorus king of the Lazi,? induced the
king of the Parthians* to forego a campaign against
the Armenians merely by writing him a letter, and
solely by his personal influence brought Abgarus the
king * back from the regions of the East. He settled
the pleas of several kings.6 The royal throne of the
Parthians, which Trajan had captured, he refused to
return when their king asked for it,’ and after hear-
ing the dispute between Rhoemetalces? and the im-
perial commissioner, sent the former back his kingdom
of the Bosphorus. He sent troops to the Black Sea
to bring aid to Olbiopolis ? against the Tauroscythians
and forced the latter to give hostages to Olbiopolis.


5See the coins of 140-144 with the legends Rex Armeniis
datus and Rex Quadis datus, Cohen, ii?, p. 388 f., Nos. 686-
689. ;

? It had been promised by Hadrian to Osrhoes, the prede-
cessor of Vologases; see Hadr., xiii. 8.

8 T. Julius Rhoemetalces, king of the Cimmerian Bos-
phorus (the Crimea and the district east of the Strait of
Kertch) from 131 to 153. Several inscriptions and coins of
his are extant.

? Olbia or Olbiopolis was a Greek city on the river Hypanis
(Bug) in south-western Russia.


1 calchida P. ? in omitted in P. 3 wetareturque P
corr. ; reuocareturque Cas.


! Of. Eutrop., viii. 8. According to Aur. Victor, Epit., xv.
4, ambassadors from the Indi, Bactri, and Hyrcani came to
him.

? She had been betrothed by Hadrian to Lucius Verus; see
: Ael., vi. 9; Marc., vi. 2; Verus, ii. 3.

3A Stoic philosopher, the teacher of both Marcus and
Verus; see Mare., ii. 7; iii. 1; Verus, ii. 5. Heis mentioned
with gratitude by Marcus in eis éavrór i. 8. His home


ANTONINUS PIUS IX.—X. 5


No one has ever had such prestige among foreign
nations as he,! for he was ever a lover of peace, even
to such a degree that he was continually quoting the
saying of Scipio in which he declared that he would
rather save a single citizen than slay a thousand foes.
X. When the senate declared that the months of
September and October should be called respectively
Antoninus and Faustinus, Antoninus refused. The :
wedding of his daughter Faustina, whom he apóused |ui:
to Marcus Antoninus, he made most noteworthy,
even to the extent of giving a donative to the soldiers.
He made Verus Antoninus consul after his quaestor- 154.
ship. On one occasion, he sent word to Apollonius,’
whom he had summoned from Chalcis, to come to the
House of Tiberius * (where at the time he was stay-
ing) in order that he might put Marcus Antoninus
in his charge, but Apollonius replied **The master
ought not come to the pupil, but the pupil to the
master". Whereupon the Emperor ridiculed him,
saying “It was easier, then, for Apollonius to come
to Rome from Chalcis than from his house to my
palace”. The greed ofthis man he had noticed even
in the matter of his salary. It is related of him,
too, as an instance of his regard for his family,
that when Marcus was mourning the death of his
tutor and was restrained by the palace servants from
this display of affection, the Emperor said: ‘Let
him be only a man for once; for neither philosophy
nor empire takes away natural feeling ".


was Chalcedon, according to Marc., ii. 7, Nicomedia, accord-
ing to Dio, lxxi. 85. 1; Chalcis is evidently an error.

*The Domus Tiberiana was at the northern end of the
Palatine Hill; very extensive ruins are extant. It seems to
have been the usual residence of Pius when at Rome; see
Marc., vi. 8; Verus, ii. 4.


1 cum tigridibus, in P before exhibuit, placed after leones
by Peter, deleted by Salm. and Novak.


1See note to Hadr., viii. 7.

2 Probably in 148, in commemoration of the tenth anni-
versary of his accession to power. Coins, evidently referring
to these spectacles, were issued in 149 bearing the legend
Munificentva and representations of a lion and an elephant;
see Cohen, ii?, p. 325, Nos. 562-566.


ANTONINUS PIUS X. 6—XI. 8


On his prefects he bestowed both riches and con-
sular honours.! If he convicted any of extortion he
nevertheless delivered up the estates to their children,
providing only that the children should restore to the
provinces what their fathers had taken. He was very
prone to acts of forgiveness. He held games? at which
he displayed elephants and the animals called corocot-
tae and tigers and rhinoceroses, even crocodiles and
hippopotami, in short, all the animals of the whole
earth; and he presented at a single performance as
many as a hundred lions together with tigers.

XI. His friends he always treated, while on the
throne, just as though he were a private citizen, for
they never combined with his freedmen to sell false
hopes of favours,? and indeed he treated his freed-
men with the greatest strictness. He was very fond
of the stage, found great delight in fishing and hunt-
ing and in walks and conversation with his friends,
and was wont to pass vintage-time in company with
his friends in the manner of an ordinary citizen.
Rhetoricians and philosophers throughout all the
provinces he rewarded with honours and money.
The orations which have come down in his name,
some say, are really the work of others, according to
Marcus Maximus, however, they were his own. He
always shared his banquets, both public and private,
with his friends ; and never did he perform sacrifices
by proxy except when he was ill. When he sought
offices * for himself or for his sons all was done as by
a private individual. He himself was often present
at the banquets of his intimates, and among other


* See note to c. vi.
* i.e. went through ‘the formality of asking the senate to
confer them.


1 M. Valerius Homullys, cos. in 152, He tried to arouse
the suspicion of Pius &gainst Lucilla, Marcus' mother; see
Marc., vi. 9.

? As incorporated in the Digesta and the Codez of Justinian,
these deal with the questions of inheritances, adoption and
guardianship, manumission, and the treatment of slaves by
their masters.

3 Verus, Maecianus and Marcellus are frequently cited in
the Digesta. Maecianus was Marcus’ instructor in law; see
Marc., iii. 6.

* Apparently an error for Iavolenus (Priscus), the celebrated
jurist. He, however, was an older contemporary of Pliny,


ANTONINUS PIUS XI.—XII. 5


things it is a particular evidence of his graciousness
that when, on a visit at the house of Honnullus,! he
admired certain porphyry columns and asked where
they came from, Homullus replied “When you
come to another's house, be deaf and dumb," and he
took it in good part. In fact, the jibes of this
same Homullus, which were many, he always took in
good part.

` XII. A number of legal principles ? were established
by Antoninus with the aid of certain men, experts in
jurisprudence, namely, Vindius Verus,’ Salvius Valens,
Volusius Maecianus, Ulpius Marcellus, and Diavo-
lenus.* Rebellions, wherever they occurred, he sup-
pressed 5 not by means of cruelty, but with modera-
tion and dignity. He forbade the burial of bodies
within the limits of any city ; he established a maxi-
mum cost for gladiatorial games ; and he very care-
fully maintained the imperial post. Of everything
that he did he rendered an account, both in the
senate and by proclamation.

He died in the seventieth" year of his age, but his? Mar.,
loss was felt as though he had been but a youth
They say his death was somewhat as follows: after
he had eaten too freely some Alpine cheese at dinner
he vomited during the night, and was taken witha
fever the next day. On the second day, as he saw
that his condition was becoming worse, in the presence
of his prefects he committed the state and his daughter
to Marcus Antoninus, and gave orders that the
golden statue of Fortune, which was wont to stand


and it can hardly be supposed that he was actually consulted
by Pius.
Y s See c. V. 4-5. € See note to Hadr., vii. 5.
1 Really in his seventy-fifth year; cf. c. i. 8.


VOL. 1. K


principum poni solebat, transferri ad eum iussit,
6signum! tribuno aequanimitatis dedit atque ita con-
versus quasi dormiret, spiritum reddidit apud Lorium.

2 pectore positis fasciabatur, ut rectus incederet. senex
etiam, antequam salutatores venirent, panem siccum
comedit ad sustentandas vires. fuit voce rauca et
sonora cum iucundidate.

ìl signum Novak (so Peter!); signatum P; signum tum
Peter* with Petschenig. 2 sine omitted in P.


! Of. Marc., vii. 8; see also Sev., xxiii. 5.
? Cf. c. vii. 9. 3 See note to c. vi. 7.
1 See note to Hadr., xxvii. 3. ;


ANTONINUS PIUS XII. 6—XIII. 4


in the bed-chamber of the emperor,! be given to him.
Then he gave the watchword to the officer of the day
as “ Equanimity," and so, turning as if to sleep, gave
up the ghost at Lorium. While he was delirious with
fever, he spoke of nothing save the state and certain
kings with whom he was angry. To his daughter he ,
left his private fortune,? and in his will he remem- !
bered all his household with suitable legacies.

XIII, He was a handsome man, and tall in stature ;
but being a tall man, when he was bent by old age
he had himself swathed with splints of linden-wood
bound on his chest in order that he might walk erect.
Moreover, when he was old, he ate dry bread before
the courtiers came to greet him, in order that he
might sustain his strength. His voice was hoarse
and resonant, yet agreeable.

He was deified by the senate, while all men vied
with one another to give him honour, and all extolled
his devoutness, his mercy, his intelligence, and his
righteousness. All honours were decreed for him
which were ever before bestowed on the very best of
emperors. He well deserved the flamen and games
and temple? and the Antoninine priesthood.* Almost,
alone of all emperors he lived entirely unstained by :
the blood of either citizen or foe so far as was in his :
power, and he was justly compared to Numa, whose
good fortune and piety and tranquillity and isis
rites he ever maintained.


PHILOSOPHUS


IULII CAPITOLINI


I. Marco Antonino, in omni vita philosophanti viro
et qui sanctitate vitae omnibus principibus antecellit,
2pater Annius Verus, qui in praetura decessit, avus
Annius Verus, iterum! consul et praefectus urbi,
adscitus in patricios? a Vespasiano et Tito censoribus,
3patruus Annius Libo consul, amita Galeria Faustina
Augusta, mater Domitia Lucilla, Calvisii Tulli bis
. 4 consulis filia, proavus paternus Annius Verus praetorius
ex Succubitano municipio ex Hispania * factus senator,
proavus maternus Catilius Severus bis consul et prae-
fectus urbi, avia paterna Rupilia Faustina, Rupilii
Boni consularis filia, fuere.


literum P ; tertium Petschenig. 3 a principibus, follow-
ing patricios in P, removed by Salm. 3 Lucilla Borghesi ;
Caluilla P, Peter. * spania, P!, Peter; yspania P corr.


1M. Annius Verus was const] three times, first under
Domitian, again in 121 and 126.
2 See Pius, i. 6. |


THE PHILOSOPHER


BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. Marcus Antoninus, devoted to philosophy as long
as he lived and pre-eminent among emperors in
purity of life, was the son of Annius Verus, who died
while praetor. His grandfather, named Annius Verus
also, attained to a second consulship,! was prefect of
the city, and was enrolled among the patricians by
Vespasian and Titus while they were censors. Annius
Libo, a consul, was his uncle, Galeria Faustina
Augusta,” his aunt. His mother was Domitia Lucilla,
the daughter of Calvisius Tullus, who served as consul
twice.? Annius Verus, from the town of Succuba in
Spain, who was made a senator and attained to the
dignity of praetor, was his father's grandfather; his
great-grandfather on his mother's side was Catilius
Severus,* who twice held the consulship and was pre-
fect of the city. His father's mother was Rupilia
Faustina, the daughter of Rupilius Bonus, a man of
consular rank.


3 First in 109; the second date is unknown.
*See note to Hadr., v. 10.


5 Natus est Marcus Romae VI. kal. Maias in Monte
Caelio in hortis avo suo iterum et Augure consulibus.
6 cuius familia in originem recurrens a Numa probatur
sanguinem trahere, ut Marius Maximus docet; item a
rege Sallentino Malemnio, Dasummi filio, qui Lupias
7 condidit. educatus est in eo loco in quo natus est et
8 in domo avi sui Veri iuxta aedes Laterani. habuit et
sororem natu minorem Anniam Cornificiam, uxorem
9 Anniam Faustinam, consobrinam suam. Marcus
Antoninus principio aevi sui nomen habuit! Catilii
10 Severi, materni proavi. post excessum vero patris ab
. Hadriano Annius Verissimus vocatus est, post virilem
autem togam Annius Verus. patre mortuo ab avo
paterno adoptatus et educatus est. |
II. Fuit a prima infantia gravis. at ubi egressus
est annos qui nutricum foventur auxilio, magnis prae-
ceptoribus traditus ad philosophiae scita pervenit.
2usus est magistris ad prima elementa Euphorione
litteratore et Gemino comoedo, musico Androne
eodemque geometra. quibus omnibus ut discip-
3 linarum auctoribus plurimum detulit. usus praeterea
grammaticis, Graeco Alexandro Cotiaeensi,? Latinis


1 et, after habuit in P, deleted by Petrarch. 2 cotidianis
P; Cotiaensi Uhlig, Peter.


l In Calabria, about 20 miles S. of Brundisium.

? Annia Cornificia Faustina. She was married to Um-
midius Quadratus.

3 See Pius, i. T.

4 Probably M. Annius Catilius Severus,

*So also Dio, Ixix. 21, 2. This name appears on Greek


MARCUS ANTONINUS I. 5—Il. 3


Marcus himself was born at Rome on the sixth day 26 Apr.,
before the Kalends of May in the second consulship }2!-
of his grandfather and the first of Augur, in a villa on
the Caelian Hill. His family, in tracing its origin
back to the beginning, established its descent from
Numa, or so Marius Maximus tells, and likewise from
the Sallentine king Malemnius, the son of Dasummus,
who founded Lupiae. He was reared in the villa
where he was born, and also in the home of his grand-
father Verus close to the dwelling of Lateranus. He
had a sister younger than himself, named Annia
Cornificia ;? his wife, who was also his cousin, was
Annia Faustina. At the beginning of his life Marcus
Antoninus was named Catilius Severus* after his
mother's grandfather. After the death of his real
father, however, Hadrian called him Annius Verissi-
mus,5 and, after he assumed the toga virilis, Annius
Verus. When his father died he was adopted and
reared by his father's father. —

II. He was a solemn child from the very beginning ;
and as soon as he passed beyond the age when chil-
dren are brought up under the care of nurses, he was
handed over to advanced instructors and attained to
a knowledge of philosophy. In his more elementary
education, he received instruction from Euphorion in
literature and from Geminus in drama, in music and
likewise in geometry from Andron ; on all of whom,
as being spokesmen of the sciences, he afterwards
conferred great honours. Besides these, his gram-
marians were the Greek Alexander of Cotiaeum,5 and


ee al


coins, Eckhel, D.N., vii. 69. It is perhaps an allusion to his
love of frankness ; see Fronto, Epist., pp. 29, 34, 49.


$ See eis éaur, i. 10. His funeral oration was delivered by
Aristides, Or., xii.


7 usus est etiam Commodi ? magistro, cuius ei adfinitas
fuerat destinata,? Apollonio Chalcedonio Stoico philo-

2domum Apollonii discendi causa veniret. audivit et
Sextum Chaeronensem Plutarchi nepotem, Iunium
Rusticum, Claudium Maximum et Cinnam Catulum,


1 polono P ; Polione Peter. ? graeco P. 3 So P corr. ;
animo P!, 4 oneribus Turnebus ; honoribus P. 5So
Obrecht ; commodo P. $ usus est et, repeated before A poll.
Chal. in P, removed by Obrecht. 742 om. in P! ; in im-
peratoriam dignitatem P corr.


1 Ti, Claudius Atticus Herodes, consulin 143. The foremost
orator of his time, he had a school at Athens attended bya
great number of students. He presented public buildings to
very many of the cities of Greece, but particularly to his
native city, Athens, where he built the Odeum on the S. E.
slope of the Acropolis and rebuilt the Stadium, using Pentelic .
marble. His life by Philostratus is extant (Vet. Soph., ii. 1).

2M. Cornelius Fronto, famous as an orator and man of b


"^


l


\


|


MARCUS ANTONINUS II. 4—III. 2


the Latins Trosius Aper, Pollio, and Eutychius Pro-
culus of Sicca ; his masters in oratory were the Greeks
Aninius Macer, Caninius Celer and Herodes Atticus,!
and the Latin Cornelius Fronto? Of these he con-
ferred high honours on Fronto, even asking the senate
to vote him a statue; but indeed he advanced Pro-
culus also—even to a proconsulship, and assumed the
burdens ? of the office himself.

He studied philosophy with ardour, even as a youth.-
For when he was twelve years old he adopted the
dress and, a little later, the hardiness of a philosopher,
pursuing his studies clad in a rough Greek cloak and
sleeping on the ground ;* at his mother's solicita-
tion, however, he reluctantly consented to sleep on
a couch strewn with skins. He received instruc-
tion, furthermore, from the teacher of that Com-
modus? who was destined later to be a kinsman of
his, namely Apollonius of Chalcedon,? the Stoic;
III. and such was his ardour for this school of philo-
sophy, that even after he became a member of the
imperial family, he still went to Apollonius' resi-
dence for instruction. In addition, he attended the
lectures of Sextus of Chaeronea,’ the nephew of
Plutarch, and of Junius Rusticus,® Claudius Maximus,?
and Cinna Catulus,? all Stoics. He also attended


letters, and for his correspondence with Pius, Marcus, and

34.6. the giving of circus-games, the expense of which
caused many to resign from the consulship ; see Dio, lx. 27, 2.
The cost of the games given by Fronto was borne by Pius;
see Fronto, Epist., p. 25.

4 At the advice of his teacher Diognetus ; see eis éavr, i. 6.

54.e. Lucius Verus; see note to Hadr., xxiv. 1.


6 See Pius, x. 4 and note. 7 See eis éavr, i. 9.
8 See eis éavr, i. 7. ?See eis éavr, i. 15. !^ See eis éavr, i. 13.


1 So Peter; studiosos P ; $ruds0sts Cas., Jordan. ? om.
by P!; ex P corr.


1Perhaps the '*à8eAQós" Severus mentioned in eis éaur,
i. 14.

2The custom had arisen that the emperor should bestow
a ceremonial kiss of greeting upon the senators and the fore-
most of the equestrian order; see Suet., Otho, vi; Plin., Pan.,
23; Tac., Agr., 40.

3 For the first time in 133, for the second in 162; he was
also prefect of the city.


138 i


MARCUS ANTONINUS III. 3-9


the lectures of Claudius Severus,! an adherent of the
Peripatetic school, but he received most instruction
from Junius Rusticus, whom he ever revered and
whose disciple he became, a man esteemed in both
private and public life, and exceedingly well ac-
quainted with the Stoic system, with whom Marcus
shared all his counsels both public and private,
whom he greeted with a kiss prior to the pre-
fects of the guard,? whom he even appointed consul
for a second term,? and whom after his death he-
asked the senate to honour with statues. On his
teachers in general, moreover, he conferred great
honours, for he even kept golden statues of them in
his chapel,* and made it a custom to show respect for
their tombs by personal visits and by offerings of
sacrifices and flowers. He studied jurisprudence as
well, in which he heard Lucius Volusius Maecianus,
and so much work and labour did he devote to his
studies that he impaired his health—the only fault to
be found with his entire childhood. He attended
also the public schools of rhetoricians. Of his fellow-
pupils he was particularly fond of Seius Fuscianus 5
and Aufidius Victorinus,’ of the senatorial order, and
Baebius Longus and Calenus, of the equestrian. He
was very generous to these men, so generous, in fact,
that on those whom he could not advance to public
office on account of their station in life, he bestowed
riches.


. See the similar practice of Severus Alexander, Alex.,
xxix. 2.
5 Prefect of the city under Commodus (see Pert., iv. 8), and
consul for the second time in 188.
* C. Aufidius Victorinus held a command in Germany (see
c. viii. 8), was proconsul of Africa, &nd consul for the second
time in 1883. He married Fronto's daughter.


1 est P corr. ; esset P!. 2 equi publici sexenni Salm. ; et
qui publicis exenni (exenntis) P. 3 fuit autem uitae indul-
gentia, P, Peter; (anta uitae indulgentia Novak.


1c, i. 10.

2 At the official banquet held by the Salii in some temple
on their feast-day.

34.e., L. Aelius Caesar, the adopted son of Hadrian; see
also c. vi. 2. The daughter was probably the Fabia men-
tioned in c. xxix. 10 and Ver., x. 3-4.

* Under the republic, this official was charged with the
administration of Rome when both consuls were absent from
the city conducting the Feriae Latinae on Mons Albanus.
In the empire the office was continued, although only as &
formality, and was given to young men of high rank and


140 ,


MARCUS ANTONINUS IV. 2-8


IV. He was reared under the eye of Hadrian, who ų
called him Verissimus, as we have already related,! and
did him the honour of enrolling him in the equestrian
order when he was six years old and appointing him
in his eighth year to the college of the Salii. While
in this college, moreover, he received an omen of his
future rule; for when they were all casting their
crowns on the banqueting-couch? of the god, ac-
cording to the usual custom, and the crowns fell into
various places, his crown, as if placed there by his
hand, fell on the brow of Mars. In this priesthood
he was leader of the dance, seer, and master, and
consequently both initiated and dismissed a great
number of people; and in these ceremonies no one
dictated the formulas to him, for all of them he had
learned by himself.

In the fifteenth year of his life he assumed the 135-136
toga virilis, and straightway, at the wish of Hadrian,
was betrothed to the daughter of Lucius Ceionius
Commodus.? Not long after this he was made prefect '
of the city during the Latin Festival,* and in this
position he conducted himself very brilliantly both in
the presence of the magistrates and at the banquets
of the Emperor Hadrian. Later, when his mother |
asked him to give his sister 5 part of the fortune left
him by his father, he replied that he was content
with the fortune of his grandfather and relinquished
all of it, further declaring that if she wished, his `
mother might leave her own estate to his sister in its |
entirety, in order that she might not be poorer than:
her husband. So complaisant was he, moreover, that


often to princes of the imperial family; see Tac., Ann., iv.
86, and Suet., Nero, vii.
é See c. i, 8 and note.


ut cogeretur nonnumquam vel in venationes pergere
vel in theatrum descendere vel spectaculis interesse.

2sibi Lucium Commodum adoptaret. sane ea die qua
adoptatus est Verus in somnis se umeros eburneos
habere vidit sciscitatusque, an apti essent oneri
3ferundo, solito repperit fortiores. ubi autem com-
perit se ab Hadriano adoptatum, magis est deter-
ritus quam laetatus iussusque in Hadriani privatam
domum migrare invitus de maternis hortis recessit.
4cumque ab eo domestici quaererent, cur tristis in
adoptionem regiam transiret, disputavit quae mala in
. se contineret imperium.


1 D4ogeneto P, Peter.


1 See Hadr., xxiv. 1; Ael., vi. 9; Pius, iv. 5. The state-
ment that Lucius Verus was adopted by Marcus (so also Ael.,
v. 12) is erroneous.


"MARCUS ANTONINUS IV. 9—V. 4


at times, when urged, he let himself be taken to hunts |
or the theatre or the spectacles. Besides, he gave
some attention to painting, under the teacher
Diognetus. He was also fond of boxing and wrestling
and running and fowling, played ball very skilfully,
and hunted well But his ardour for philosophy dis- |
tracted him from all these pursuits and made him
serious and dignified, not ruining, however, a certain
geniality in him, which he still manifested toward
his household, his friends, and even to those less in-
timate, but making him, rather, austere, though not
unreasonable, modest, though not inactive, and
serious without gloom.

V. Such was his character, then, when, after the 1 Jan., 138
death of Lucius Cesar, Hadrian looked about for a
successor to the throne. Marcus did not seem suit-
able, being at the time but eighteen years of age;
and Hadrian chose for adoption Antoninus Pius,
the uncle-in-law of Marcus, with the provision that
Pius should in turn adopt Marcus and that Marcus
should adopt Lucius Commodus. And it was on
the day that Verus? was adopted that he dreamed
that he had shoulders of ivory, and when he asked if
they were capable of bearing a burden, he found
them much stronger than before. When he dis-
covered, moreover, that Hadrian had adopted him,
he was appalled rather than overjoyed, and when told
to move to the private home of Hadrian, reluctantly
departed from his mother’s villa. And when the
members of his household asked him why he was
sorry to receive royal adoption, he enumerated to
them the evil things that sovereignty involved.

2 i.e., Marcus. The story of the dream is told also by Dio
(Ixxi. 36, 1).


diss. spons. L. Ceionii Commodi (i.e. Vert) quae cum filia
fecerat, quam ei desponderi uol., e&c. ; see also Jaekel, loc. cit.


! On his name after his adoption see note to Hadr., xxiv. 9.


MARCUS ANTONINUS V. 5—VI. 3


At this time he first began to be called Aurelius
instead of Annius, since, according to the law of
adoption, he had passed into the Aurelian family,
that is, into the family of Antoninus. And so he.
was adopted in his eighteenth year, and at the in-
stance of Hadrian exception was made for his age? and
he was appointed quaestor for the year of the second 139
consulship of Antoninus, now his father. Even after
his adoption into the imperial house, he still showed
the same respect to his own relatives that he had
borne them as a commoner, was as frugal and care-
ful of his means as he had been when he lived in
a private home, and was willing to act, speak, and
think according to his father's principles.

VI. When Hadrian died at Baiae? and Pius de- 10 Jul.,
parted to bring back his remains, Marcus was left at 133
Rome and discharged his grandfather's funeral rites,
and, though quaestor, presented a gladiatorial spectacle
as a private citizen. Immediately after Hadrian's
death Pius, through his wife, approached Marcus,
and, breaking his betrothal with the daughter of
Lucius Ceionius Commodus,* . . . he was willing to
espouse one so much his junior in years, he replied,
after deliberating the question, that he was. And
when this was done, Pius designated him as his col-
league in the consulship, though he was still only 140
quaestor, gave him the title of Ceesar,? appointed him
while consul-elect one of the six commanders of the


3 See Pius, vi. 9-10 and note.

3 See Hadr., xxv. 6; Pius, v. 1.

1 See c. iv. 5 and note.

5 See note to 4el., i. 2. On coins of 189-140 he is called
Aurelius Ces(ar) Aug(usti) Pii f(ilius) ; see Cohen, ii?, p. 409 f.,
Nos. 1-40. .


VOL. I. L


4 dotum iubente senatu recepit. secundum etiam con-
sulem designavit, cum ipse quartum pariter inierit.

7relationis. tantumque apud Pium valuit ut! num-


n


1 ut P corr., om, by P!.


1 The seviri equitum Romanorum were the six commanders
of the equestrian order. They received their appointment
from the emperor, and were usually young men ot senatorial
families who had not as yet been admitted to the senate and
sometimes princes of the imperial house, as Marcus, and
Gaius, grandson of Augustus (Zonaras, x. 35). Marcus had
also the title of princeps iuventutis or honorary chief of the
equestrian order (Dio, lxxi. 85, 5), a title bestowed by the
acclamation of the order, with the consent or at the command
of the emperor, upon the heir apparent.

2 See note to Pius, x. 4.

? Especially the four great colleges of which the emperor
was always a member, t.e., the pontifices, the augures, the
quindecimviri sacris faciendis or keepers of the Sibylline
Books, and the sepiemviri epulonum, and probably also the
fratres arvales and the sodales of the various deified emperors
(see note to Hadr., xxvii. 3). The son of the emperor usually


MARCUS ANTONINUS VI. 4-9


equestrian order! and sat by him when he and his
five colleagues were producing their official games,
bade him take up his abode in the House of Tiberius ?
and there provided him with all the pomp of a court,
though Marcus objected to this, and finally took him
into the priesthoods? at the bidding of the senate.
Later, he appointed him consul for a second term at 145
the same time that he began his fourth. And all
this time, when busied with so many public duties of
his own, and while sharing his father's activities that
he might be fitted for ruling the state, Marcus worked
at his studies * eagerly.

At this time he took Faustina to wife? and, E
begetting a daughter,? received the tribunician power
and the proconsular power outside the city," with the
added right of making five proposals in the senate.

-* Such was his influence with Pius that the Emperor
was never quick to promote anyone without his advice.
Moreover, he showed great deference to his father,
though there were not lacking those who whispered
things against him, especially Valerius Homullus,?


became & member of these colleges when he received the
name Caesar.

1 Especially in rhetoric and literature ; see Fronto, p. 36.

5See Pius, x. 2. Coins struck in honour of the occasion
bear the heads of Marcus and Faustina on the obverse and
reverse respectively; see Cohen, ii?. p. 127, Nos. 3-4.

€ Annia Galeria Aurelia Faustina, born in 146, was the
eldest of Marcus' children.

7 See note to Pius, iv. 7.

8 The newly-elected emperor was regularly empowered by
senatus consultum to propose a definite number of measures
in each meeting of the senate, these proposals to take pre-
cedence over any others. The number varied but never seems
to have exceeded five ; see Pert.,v. 6; Alex.,i.3; Prob., xii. 8.

? Of. Pius, xi. 8.

L2 -


10 apud Pium nihil valuit; tanta erat Marci probitas et

VII. tanta in imperatorio participatu! modestia. existi-
mationis autem tantam curam habuit ut et procura-
tores suos puer semper moneret, ne quid arrogantius
facerent, et heredidates delatas reddens proximis

3 cresceret, nec praeter duas noctes per tot annos ab eo
mansit diversis vicibus.

 4Marci cubiculum transire iussit. bonorum mater-
norum partem Ummidio? Quadrato, sororis filio, quia
illa iam mortua erat, tradidit.

5 Post excessum divi Piia senatu coactus regimen
publicum capere fratrem sibi participem in imperio
designavit, quem Lucium Aurelium Verum Com-
modum appellavit Caesaremque atque Augustum


!yparticipatum P; principatu Peter, following B princi-
patum. ? Ummidio Borghesi; Mummio P, Peter.


1 Cf. Pius, xii. 5-6.
2M. Ummidius Quadratus, consul 167, was the son of
Annia Cornificia Faustina (c. i. 8, and iv. 7).


MARCUS ANTONINUS VI. 10—VII. 5


who, when he saw Marcus' mother Lucilla worshipping
in her garden before a shrine of Apollo, whispered,
“Yonder woman is now praying that you may come
to your end, and her son rule". All of which
influenced Pius not in the least, such was Marcus’
sense of honour and such his modesty while heir
to the throne. "VII. He had such regard for his
reputation, moreover, that even as a youth he admon-
ished his procurators to do nothing high-handed and
often refused sundry legacies that were left him, re-
turning them to the nearest kin of the deceased.
Finally, for three and twenty years he conducted .
himself in his father's home in such a manner that
Pius felt more affection for him day by day, and never
in all these years, save for two nights on different |
, occasions, remained away from him.

For these reasons, then, when Antoninus Pius saw

- that the end of his life was drawing near, having
summoned his friends and prefects, he commended
Marcus to them all and formally named him as his
successor in the empire. He then straightway gave
the watch-word to the officer of the day as * Equa-
nimity," and ordered that the golden statue of For-
tune, customarily kept in his own bed-chamber,
be transferred to the bed-chamber of Marcus.! Part
of his mother's fortune Marcus then gave to Ummidius
Quadratus,? the son of his sister, because the latter .
was now dead.

Being forced by the senate to assume the govern- 7 Mar., 161
ment of the state after the death of the Deified Pius,
Marcus made his brother his colleague in the empire,
giving him the name Lucius Aurelius Verus Com-
modus and bestowing on him the titles Cesar and
Augustus. Then they began to rule the state on


6dixit. atque ex eo pariter coeperunt rem publicam
regere tuncque primum Romanum imperium duos
Augustos habere coepit, cum imperium sibi relictum !
cum alio participasset. Antonini mox ipse nomen
7recepit. et quasi pater Lucii Commodi esset, et
Verum eum appellavit addito Antonini nomine filiam-
8que suam Lucillam fratri despondit. ob hanc con-
iunctionem pueros et puellas novorum nominum
9 frumentariae perceptioni adscribi praeceperunt. actis
igitur quae agenda fuerant in senatu pariter castra
praetoria petiverunt et vicena milia nummum singulis
ob participatum imperium militibus promiserunt et
10ceteris pro rata. Hadriani autem sepulchro corpus
patris intulerunt magnifico exsequiarum officio. mox
iustitio secuto publice quoque funeris expeditus est
liordo. et laudavere uterque pro rostris patrem
flaminemque ei ex adfinibus et sodales ex amicissimis
Aurelianos creavere.

23stringeret. funebre munus patri dederunt? dabat


1S0 Mommsen; habere coepit lictum P; habere coepit
eO. lictum (lictum cum alio participasset perhaps a fragment
of a marginal comment) Peter. 2 This sentence Peter re-
moved, as introduced from the margin of vii. 10.


1 Coins of 161 and 162 show Marcus and Lucius standing
with clasped hands and bear the legend Concord(ia)
Augustor(um) ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 8, Nos. 45-59.

? Annia Lucilla, his third child, born about 148.

? Like the puellae alimentariae Faustinianae, founded by
Pius; see Pius, viii. 1.

4 i.e., the centurions and other officers. Largess was also
given to the populace; see coins of 161 with legend Lib(eralitas)


MARCUS ANTONINUS VII. 6—VIII. 2.3


equal terms,! and then it was that the Roman Empire '
first had two emperors, when Marcus shared with:
another the empire he had inherited. Next, he him-,
self took the name Antoninus, and just as though he |
were the father of Lucius Commodus, he gave him the |
name Verus, adding also the name Antoninus ; he also;
betrothed him to his daughter Lucilla,? though legally

he was his brother. In honour of this union they

gave orders that girls and boys of newly-named orders ê

should be assigned a share in the distribution of grain. -

And so, when they had done those things which
had to be done in the presence of the senate, they
set out together for the praetorian camp, and in
honour of their joint rule promised twenty thousand
sesterces apiece to the common soldiers and to the
others * money in proportion. The body of their
father they laid in the Tomb of Hadrian 5 with ela-
borate funeral rites, and on a holiday which came
thereafter an official funeral train marched in parade.
Both emperors pronounced panegyrics for their father
from the Rostra, and they appointed a flamen for him
chosen from their own kinsmen and a college of
Aurelian priests ô from their closest friends.

VIII. And now, after they had assumed the im- ,
perial power, the two emperors acted in so democratic '
a manner that no one missed the lenient ways of Pius ;
for though Marullus, a writer of farces of the time,
irritated them by his jests, he yet went unpunished.
They gave funeral games for their father. And


Augustor(um) and representation of the two emperors stand-
ing in front of & recipient (Cohen, iii?, p. 41, Nos. 401-406).
5 See Hadr., xix. 11.
$ i.e., the Sodales Antoniniani; see Pius, xiii. 4, and note
to Hadr., xxvii, 3.


! Cf. the coins of 161 with the legend Fel(icitas) Temp(orum)
(Cohen, iii?, p. 21, Nos. 196-198).

? See Pius, ix. 6 and note.

3 This war, called officially bellum Armeniacum et Parthi-
cwm, arose, as was usually the case with wars between the
Romans and the Parthians, in & struggle for the control of
the buffer-state Armenia. After defeating Aelius Severianus,
the governor of Cappadocia, at Elegeia, on the upper Eu-
phrates, and annihilating his legion (Dio, lxxi. 2; Fronto,
Prin. Hist., p. 209), the Parthians established their candidate
on the Armenian throne. Then followed the defeat of Cor-
nelianus in 161.

4K. of the Rhine N. and E, of the Taunus Mountains,


MARCUS ANTONINUS VIII. 4-11


Marcus abandoned himself to philosophy, at the same -
time cultivating the good-will of the citizens. But
now to interrupt the emperor's happiness ! and repose,
there came the first flood of the Tiber—the severest
of their time—which ruined many houses in the city,
drowned a great number of animals, and caused a
most severe famine ; all these disasters Marcus and
Verus relieved by their own personal care and aid.
At this time, moreover, came the Parthian war, which 161
Vologaesus planned under Pius? and declared under
Marcus and Verus, after the rout of Attidius Cornel-
ianus, then governor of Syria.? And besides this, 162
war was threatening in Britain, and the Chatti * had
burst into Germany and Raetia. Against the Britons
Calpurnius Agricola ? was sent; against the Chatti,
Aufidius Victorinus. But to the Parthian war, with
the consent of the senate, Marcus despatched his
brother Verus, while he himself remained at Rome,
where conditions demanded the presence of an em-
peror. Nevertheless, he accompanied Verus as far as
Capua,’ honouring him with a retinue of friends from
the senate and appointing also all his chiefs-of-staff.
And when, after returning to Rome, he learned that
Verus was ill at Canusium,® he hastened to see him,
after assuming vows in the senate, which, on his re-


5 Mentioned in British inscriptions as governor (legatus
Augusti pro praetore) of the province of Britain. He after-
wards held a command in the Marcomannic War.

6 See c. iii. 8.

7 Verus’ departure took place in the spring of 162. It was
commemorated by coins of Verus with the legends Profectto
Aug(usti) and Fort(una) Red(uz) ; see Cohen, iii*, p. 183 f.,
Nos. 132-141, and p. 180 f., Nos. 86-102.

8 In Apulia, modern Qanosa, On Verus’ illness see Ver.,
vi, T,


. Romam rediit audita Veri transmissione, statim red-

13cum Marcus horis omnibus rei publicae actibus in-
cubaret patienterque delicias fratris sed perinvitus ac

3quod postea recepit. patris patriae autem nomen
delatum fratre absente in eiusdem praesentiam


1 Suggested by Peter in note; et prope inuitus ac uolens
(nolens P corr. P, Peter; et prope non inuitus ac uolens
Novak. 2 hoc P corr., om. by P!.


1 See also Ver., vi. 8-vii. 1.

? After the capture of Artaxata by Statius Priscus; see c.
1X. 1.

3 The title Armeniacus appears on Verus’ coins of 163, to-
gether with the representation of conquered Armenia; see
Cohen, iii?, p. 172, Nos. 4-6, and p. 208, Nos. 380-331.
Marcus’ coins, on the other hand, do not show it until 164;
see Cohen, iii?, p. 5, Nos. 5-8; p. 48, Nos. 466-471, etc. The
capture of Artaxata enabled Rome to make her candidate,
Soaemus (Fronto, p. 127), king of Armenia; this event was
commemorated by coins of 164 with the legend Rez Armeniis
Datus; see Ver., vii. 8, and Cohen, iii?, p. 185 f., Nos. 157-165.

4By the capture of Seleucia and Ctesiphon in 165; see
Ver., viii. 3, and Dio, Ixxi, 2,3. The title Parthicus Mazi-


MARCUS ANTONINUS VIII. 12—IX. 3


tum to Rome after learning that Verus had set sail,
he immediately fulfilled. "Verus, however, after he
had come to Syria, lingered amid the debaucheries
of Antioch and Daphne and busied himself with
gladiatorial bouts and hunting.! And yet, for waging
the Parthian war through his legates, he was acclaimed
Imperator? while meantime Marcus was at all hours
keeping watch over the workings of the state, and,
though reluctantly and sorely against his will, but
nevertheless with patience, was enduring the de-
bauchery of his brother. In à word, Marcus, though
residing at Rome, planned and executed everything
necessary to the prosecution of the war.

IX. In Armenia the campaign was successfully 163
prosecuted under Statius Priscus, Artaxata being
taken, and the honorary name Armeniacus was given
to each of the emperors? This name Marcus refused
at first, by reason of his modesty, but afterwards ac-
cepted. When the Parthian war was finished,* more-
over, each emperor was called Parthicus; but this
name also Marcus refused when first offered, though
afterwards he accepted it. And further, when the
title * Father of his Country " was offered him in his
brother's absence, he deferred action upon it until
the latter should be present.’ In the midst of this 164
war he entrusted his daughter, who was about to be
married and had already received her dowry, to the
care of his sister, and, accompanying them himself as
far as Brundisium, sent them to Verus together with


mus appears on Verus’ coins of 165 (Cohen, iii?, p. 188 f., Nos.
190-196), and on Marcus' coins of 166 (Cohen, iii?, p. 86 f.,
Nos. 877-880).
5 It was finally taken by both Marcus and Lucius after the
return of the latter in the summer of 166; see c. xii. 7.
6 Lucilla; see c. vii. 7, and Fer., vii. 7.


4distulit. medio belli tempore et Civicam, patruum
Veri, et filiam suam nupturam commissam sorori suae
eandemque locupletatam Brundisium usque deduxit,

5 ad eum misit Romamque statim rediit, revocatus eorum
sermonibus qui dicebant Marcum velle finiti belli
gloriam sibimet vindicare atque idcirco in Syriam

6 proficisci. ad proconsulem scribit, ne quis filiae suae
iter facienti occurreret.

8nomine imposito. per provincias tabulariorum publi-
corum usum instituit, apud quos idem de originibus
fieret quod Romae apud praefectos aerarii, ut, si forte
aliquis in provincia natus causam liberalem diceret,

9testationes inde ferret. atque hanc totam legem de
adsertionibus firmavit aliasque de mensariis et auctioni-
bus tulit.
X. Senatum multis cognitionibus et maxime ad se
pertinentibus iudicem dedit. de statu etiam de-
2functorum intra quinquennium quaeri iussit.! neque
quisquam principum amplius senatui detulit. 'in
senatus autem honorificentiam multis praetoriis et
consularibus privatis decidenda negotia delegavit,


1This sentence Peter b following Dirksen, transposed to
precede senatum . . . dedit.


1 M. Ceionius Civica Barbarus, consul 157, & brother of L.
Aelius Cæsar.

24.e., of Asia. Verus met her at Ephesus; Fer., vii. 7.

3 The officials in charge of the public treasury, kept in the
Temple of Saturn,


MARCUS ANTONINUS IX. 4—X. 2


the latter's uncle, Civica! Immediately thereafter
he returned to Rome, recalled by the talk of those
who said that he wished to appropriate to himself the
glory of finishing the war and had therefore set out
for Syria. He wrote to the proconsul,? furthermore,
that no one should meet his daughter as she made
her journey.


In the meantime, he put such safeguards shout


suits for personal freedom—and he was the first to
do so—as to order that every citizen should bestow
names upon his free-born children within thirty
days after birth and declare them to the prefects of
the treasury of Saturn? In the provinces, too, he
established the use of public records, in which entries
concerning births were to be made in the same
manner as at Rome in the office of the prefects of the
treasury, the purpose being that if any one born in
the provinces should plead a case to prove freedom,
he might submit evidence from these records. In-
deed, he strengthened this entire law dealing with
declarations of freedom,‘ and he enacted other laws
dealing with money-lenders and public sales.

X. He made the senate the judge in many in-
quiries and even in those which belonged to his own
jurisdiction. With regard to the status of deceased
persons, he ordered that any investigations must be
made within five years. Nor did any of the emperors
show more respect to the senate than he. To do the
senate honour, moreover, he entrusted the settling of

* e.g., see. c. x. 1,

5 This principle was already in existence; Marcus limited
it by the order that in case any person had been formally de-
clared free-born, any investigation leading to a revision of


this declaration could be made only during his life-time; see
Dig., xl. 15, 1.


Ln

10 Judiciariae rei singularem diligentiam adhibuit.
fastis dies iudiciarios addidit, ita ut ducentos triginta
dies annuos rebus agendis litibusque disceptandis con-


1 So Novak; senatibus uel pauperibus s. c. senatoribus P;
equitibus uel pauperibus . . . senatoribus Peter?, incorrectly (cf.
Mommsen, HSt. II?, p. 941, 2). ? prodiret P. — * Plaetoria
Jordan (cf. Savigny, Opp. Misc. II, 330); Laetoria P, Peter.


1 See Hadr., vii. 4 and note.

2 This office was instituted before Verus’ death in 169.
The first holder was Arrius Antoninus, who is described in an
inscription as praetor cut primo iurisdictio pupillaris a sanc-
tissimis imp(eratoribus) mandata est (C.I.L., v. 1874= Dessau,
Ins. Sel., 1118).


MARCUS ANTONINUS X. 3-12


disputes to many men of praetorian and consular
rank whothen held no magistracy, in order that their
prestige might be enhanced through their adminis-
tration of law. He enrolled in the senate many of
his friends, giving them the rank of aedile or praetor ;
and on a number of poor but honest senators he be-
stowed the rank of tribune or aedile. Nor did he
ever appoint anyone to senatorial rank whom he did
not know well personally. He granted senators the
further privilege! that whenever any of them was to
be tried on a capital charge, he would examine the evi-
dence behind closed doors and only after so doing
would bring the case to public trial; nor would he allow
members of the equestrian order to attend such investi-
gations. He always attended the meetings of the
senate if he was in Rome, even though no measure was
to be proposed, and if he wished to propose anything
himself, he came in person even from Campania. More
than this, when elections were held he often remained
even unti] night, never leaving the senate-chamber
until the consul announced, *We detain you no
longer, Conscript Fathers". Further, he appointed
the senate judge in appeals made from the consul.
To the administration of justice he gave singular
care. He added court-days to the calendar until he
. had set 230 days for the pleading of cases and judg-
ing of suits, and he was the first to appoint a special
praetor in charge of the property of wards,? in order
that greater care might be exercised in dealing with


trustees ; for previously the indictment of trustees.


had been in the hands of the consuls. As regards
guardians, indeed, he decided that all youths might
have them appointed without being obliged to show
cause therefor, whereas previously they were ap-


f


ruplatorum intercessit adposita falsis delatoribus nota, `


2delationes, quibus fiscus augeretur, contempsit. de
alimentis publicis multa prudenter invenit. curatores
multis civitatibus, quo latius senatorias tenderet dig-

3 nitates, a senatu dedit. Italicis civitatibus famis
tempore frumentum ex urbe donavit omnique frum-

5 vias! etiam urbis atque itinera? diligentissime curavit,
rei frumentariae graviter providit.

6 Datis iuridicis Italiae consuluit ad id exemplum


quo Hadrianus consulares viros reddere iura praecep-


7erat. Hispanis exhaustis? Italica adlectione contra
8 Traiani quoque * praecepta verecunde consuluit, leges


|. uineas P!; al’ uias P corr. 2 itinera Jordan, Novak ;
itinerum P, Peter. 3erhausit P. 4 Thus Ellis; contra
iranique p. P}; Traianique P corr.; contra iniqua p. Pet-
Schenig; Peter assumes a lacuna after contra.


1The Lex Plaetoria de circumscriptione minorum annis .


XXV was passed prior to 191 B.c.; it is mentioned in Plautus,
Pseud., 303. It aimed to protect persons under 25 from fraud,
and it accordingly directed that such persons should apply to
the praetor for guardians.


?'The Twelve Tables provided that the prodigus and the:


furiosus should not administer their own property but be
under guardians ; see Dig., xxvii. 10, 1, and Cic., de Inv., ii.
50,148. `

3 See note to Hadr., vii. 8.

4 These officials were appointed by the emperor to admini-


MARCUS ANTONINUS X.—XI. 8


pointed only under the Plaetorian Law,! or in cases
of prodigality or madness.?

XI. In“the matter of public expenditures he was
exceedingly careful, and he forbade all libels on the
part of false informers, putting the mark of infamy
on such as made false accusations. He scorned such
accusations as would swell the privy-purse. He de-
vised many wise measures for the support of the
state-poor,? and, that he might give a wider range to
the senatorial functions, he appointed supervisors for
many communities* from the senate. In times of
famine he furnished the Italian communities with
food from the city; indeed, he made careful pro-
vision for the whole matter of the grain-supply. He
limited gladiatorial shows in every way, and lessened
the cost of free theatrical performances also, decree-
ing that though an actor might receive five aurei,
nevertheless no one who gave a performance should
expend more than ten. The streets of the city
and the highways he maintained with the greatest
care. As for the grain-supply, for that he pro-
vided laboriously. He appointed judges for Italy
and thereby provided for its welfare, after the
plan of Hadrian? who had appointed men of
consular rank to administer the law ; and he made
‘scrupulous provision, furthermore, for the welfare
of the provinces of Spain, which, in defiance
of the policy of Trajan, had been exhausted by


ster the finances of communities in cases where mismanage-
ment of the public funds had made such a measure necessary.

*See Hadr., xxii. 18; Pius, ài. 11. The arrangement
seems to have been given up by Pius; see Appian, Bell. Civ.,
i. 38. Under Marcus ex-praetors were appointed to this office;
see C.I.L., v. 1874 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1118.


VOL. I, M


etiam addidit de vicensima hereditatum, de tutelis
libertorum, de bonis maternis et item de filiorum suc-
cessionibus pro parte materna, utque senatores pere-
9grini quartam partem in ltalia possiderent. dedit
praeterea curatoribus regionum ac viarum potestatem,
ut vel puntrent vel ad praefectum urbi puniendos re-
mitterent eos qui ultra vectigalia quicquam ab aliquo
10 exegissent. ius autem magis vetus restituit quam
novum fecit. habuit secum praefectos, quorum et
auctoritate et periculo semper iura dictavit. usus
autem est Scaevola praecipue iuris perito.
XII. Cum populo autem non aliter egit quam est
2actum sub civitate libera. fuitque per omnia moder-
antissimus in hominibus deterrendis a malo, invitandis
ad bona, remunerandis copia, indulgentia liberandis
fecitque ex malis bonos, ex bonis optimos, moderate
3etiam cavillationes nonnullorum ferens. nam cum
quendam Vetrasinum famae detestandae honorem
petentem moneret, ut se ab opinionibus populi vindi-
caret, et ille contra respondisset multos, qui secum
in arena pugnassent, se praetores videre, patienter
4tulit. acne in quemquam facile vindicaret, praetorem,


1 Of. Hadr., xii. 4.

*The 5 °/, tax on inheritances had been instituted by
Augustus. Under Caracalla it was temporarily raised to 10 °/,.

? This was the Senatus Consultum Orfitianum of 178; see
Dig., xxxviii. 17.

4Trajan had already ordered that candidates for public
office must invest a third of their capital in Italian land ; see
Plin., Epist., vi. 19.

5 This marks the beginning of the change in the functions
of the prefect of the guard from purely military to pre-
eminently judicial. Under Severus and Alexander the office


MARCUS ANTONINUS XI. 9—XII. 4


levies from the Italian settlers! Also he enacted
laws about inheritance-taxes,? about the property of
freedmen held in trust, about property inherited from
the mother,’ about the succession of the sons to the
mother's share, and likewise that senators of foreign
birth should invest a fourth part of their capital in
Italy.* And besides this, he gave the commissioners
of districts and streets power either themselves to
punish those who fleeced anyone of money beyond
his due assessment, or to bring them to the prefect of
the city for punishment. He engaged rather in the
restoration of old laws than in the making of new, and
ever kept near him préfects with whose authority and
responsibility he framed his laws. He made use of
Scaevola also, a man particularly learned in juris-
prudence.

XII. Toward the people he acted just as one
acts in a free state. He was at all times exceed-
ingly reasonable both in restraining men from evil
and in urging them to good, generous in reward-
ing and quick to forgive, thus making bad men good,
and good men very good, and he even bore with
unruflled temper the insolence of not a few. For
example, when he advised à man of abominable
reputation, who was running for office, a certain
Vetrasinus, to stop the town-talk about himself, and
Vetrasinus replied that many who had fought with
him in the arena were now pretors, the Emperor took
it with good grace. Again, in order to avoid taking
an easy revenge on any one, instead of ordering a


was held by the foremost jurists of Rome, Papinian, Ulpian,
and Paullus.
6 As a member of his consilium (see Hadr., viii. 9); Q.
Cervidius Scaevola is often cited in the Digesta.


M2


qui quaedam pessime egerat, non abdicare se praetura
5iussit, sed collegae iuris dictionem mandavit. fisco
6in causis compendii numquam iudicans favit. sane,

quamvis esset constans, erat etiam verecundus.

8 moderatissime gessisset. corona praeterea civica ob-
lata est ambobus ; petiitque Lucius ut secum Marcus
triumpharet. petiit praeterea Lucius ut filii Marci


1 cwm om. in P. 2 recte P! ; al’ rete P corr.


1 Seo c. ix. 3 and note.


? Of oak leaves, presented to a man who had saved the life
of a fellow-citizen in battle.


3 M. Aurelius Commodus (b. 161), and M. Annius Verus
(b. 162-3). The ceremony took place on 12 October, 166 ; see
Com., i. 10; xi. 13. Their effigies appear on coins (Cohen,
iii?, p. 169 f.).

* This title appears for the first time in inscriptions of 172 ;


MARCUS ANTONINUS XII. 5-13


pretor who had acted very badly in certain matters
to resign his office, he merely entrusted the ad-
ministration of the law to the man's colleague.
The privy-purse never influenced his judgment in
law-suits involving money. Finally, if he was firm,
he was also reasonable.

After his brother had returned victorious from 166
Syria, the title * Father of his Country" was de-
creed to both,! inasmuch as Marcus in the absence of
Verus had conducted himself with great consideration
toward both senators and commons. Furthermore,
the civic crown? was offered to both ; and Lucius
demanded that Marcus triumph with him, and de-
manded also that the name Caesar should be given to
Marcus’ sons? But Marcus was so free from love of
display that though he triumphed with Lucius,
nevertheless after Lucius’ death he called himself
only Germanicus,* the title he had won in his own
war. In the triumphal procession, moreover, they 166
carried with them Marcus’ children of both sexes,
even his unmarried daughters ; and they viewed the
games held in honour of the triumph clad in the
triumphal robe. Among other illustrations of his
unfailing consideration towards others this act of
kindness is to be told After one lad, a rope-dancer,
had fallen, he ordered mattresses spread under all
rope-dancers. This is the reason why a net is
stretched under them to-day.

While the Parthian war was still in progress, the 166
Marcomannic war broke out, after having been post-
poned for a long time by the diplomacy of the men
who were in charge there, in order that the Marco-


the probable date of its assumption was 15 October ; see Com.,
xi. 13, and cf. Dio, lxxi. 3, 5. |
| 165


14mannicum agi posset. et cum famis tempore populo
insinuasset de bello, fratre post quinquennium reverso
in senatu egit, ambos necessarios dicens . bello
XIII. Germanico imperatores. tantus autem terror belli
Marcomannici fuit ! ut undique sacerdotes Antoninus
acciverit, peregrinos ritus impleverit, Romam omni
genere lustraverit retardatusque a ? bellica profectione
2sit. celebravit et Romano ritu lectisternia per septem
3 dies. tanta autem pestilentia fuit ut vehiculis cadavera
4sint exportata sarracisque. tunc autem Antonini
leges sepeliendi sepulchrorumque asperrimas sanxe-
runt, quando quidem caverunt ne quis villae ad-
fabricaretur? sepulchrum, quod hodieque servatur.
5et multa quidem milia pestilentia consumpsit multos-
que ex proceribus, quorum amplissimis Antoninus
6statuas conlocavit. tantaque clementia fuit ut et
sumptu publico vulgaria funera iuberet efferri * et vano
cuidam, qui diripiendae urbis occasionem cum quibus-
dam consciis requirens de caprifici arbore in Campo
Martio contionabundus ignem de caelo lapsurum
1 fuit P corr., om. by P}. 2a om. in P. 3'Thus Mad-
vig and Petschenig; welle abfricaretur P ; ne quis ubi uellet
fabricaretur s. Novak. *efferi Jordan; et eo ferri P; ferri
et eo ferri P corr.


l Called officially bellum Germanicum; see C.I.L., vi.
1549 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1100.

2The Marcomanni and Quadi actually invaded Italy and
laid siege to Aquileia ; see Amm. Marc., xxix. 6, 1. Furius
Victorinus, the prefect of the guard, who was sent to resist
them, was killed and a portion of his army annihilated; see
c. xiv. 5.

3 A very ancient purificatory ceremony, in which statues of
the gods were placed on banqueting.couches in some public
place aud served with an offering on & table. According to
tradition it was first celebrated in 399 B.c. in order to stay &
plague; see Livy, v. 13, 5-6.


*


MARCUS ANTONINUS XII. 14—XIII. 6


mannic war! might not be waged until Rome was
done with the war in the East. Even at the time of
the famine the Emperor had hinted at this war to the
people, and when his brother returned after five
years service, he brought the matter up in the
senate, saymg that both emperors were needed
for the German war. XIII. So great was the dread
of this Marcomannic war,? that Antoninus sum-
moned priests from all sides, performed foreign re-
ligious ceremonies, and purified the city in every
way, and he was delayed thereby from setting out
to the seat of war. The Roman ceremony of the
feast of the gods? was celebrated for seven days.
And there was such a pestilence,* besides, that the
dead were removed in carts and waggons. About
this time, also, the two emperors ratified certain very
stringent laws on burial and tombs, in which they
even forbade any one to build a tomb at his country-
place, a law still in force. Thousands were carried
off by the pestilence, including many nobles, for the
most prominent of whom Antoninus erected statues.
Such, too, was his kindliness of heart that he had
funeral ceremonies performed for the lower classes
even at the public expense; and in the case of one
foolish fellow, who, in a search with divers confeder-
ates for an opportunity to plunder the city, continu-
ally made speeches from the wild fig-tree on the
Campus Martius, to the effect that fire would fal


* It was supposed to have been brought from the East by
the returning army of Verus (see Ver., viii. 1-2), aud it
ravaged Europe as far as the Rhine; see Amm. Marc., xxiii.
6, 24. It was still raging in 180 (see c. xxviii. 4, and C.I.L.,
iii. 5567 of 182), and it seems to have broken out again with
great violence under Commodus ; see Dio, lxxii. 14, 3;
Herodian, i. 12, 1-2.


finemque mundi affore diceret, si ipse lapsus ex
arbore in ciconiam verteretur, cum statuto tempore
decidisset atque ex sinu ciconiam emisisset, perducto
ad se atque confesso veniam daret.

XIV. Profecti tamen sunt paludati ambo impera-
tores et Victualis et Marcomannis cuncta turbantibus,
aliis etiam gentibus, quae pulsae a superioribus bar-
baris fugerant, nisi reciperentur, bellum inferentibus.


ì utque P.


1 See note to c. xiii, 1.

*The war in Pannonia was prosecuted successfully, and
after a victory the emperors were acclaimed Imperatores for
the fifth time and gave honourable discharge to some soldiers ;
see C.I.L., iii. p. 888 (dated 5 May, 167).


MARCUS ANTONINUS XIII.—XIV. 7


down from heaven and the end of the world
would come should he fall from the tree and be
turned into a stork, and finally at the appointed
time did fall down and free a stork from his robe,
the Emperor, when the wretch was hailed before :
him and confessed all, pardoned him.

XIV. Clad in the military cloak the two emperors 166
finally set forth, for now not only were the Victuali and
Marcomanni throwing everything into confusion, but
other tribes, who had been driven on by the more
distant barbarians and had retreated before them, were
ready to attack Italy if not peaceably received. And
not: a little good resulted from that expedition, even
by the time they had advanced as far as Aquileia, for
several] kings retreated, together with their peoples,
and put to death the authors of the trouble. And
the Quadi, after they had lost their king, said that
they would not confirm the successor who: had been
elected until such a course was approved by our em-
perors. Nevertheless, Lucius went on, though re-
luctantly, after a number of peoples had sent
ambassadors to the legates of the emperors asking
pardon for the rebellion. Lucius, it is true, thought
they should return, because Furius Victorinus, the
prefect of the guard, had been lost, and part of his
army had perished ;1 Marcus, however, thinking that
the barbarians were feigning flight and using other
ruses which afford safety in war, held that they
should persist in order that they might not be over-
whelmed by the mere burden of their vast prepara-
tions. Finally, they crossed the Alps, and pressing
further on, completed all measures necessary for the
defence of Italy and Illyricum.? They then decided,
at Lucius' insistence, that letters should first be sent


missis ad senatum litteris Lucius Romam rediret.

8 via quoque !, postquam iter ingressi sunt, sedens cum
fratre in vehiculo Lucius apoplexi arreptus periit.

2 Multum sane potuerunt liberti sub Marco et Vero

. Geminas et Agaclytus.


1Thus Bitschofsky; bia quoque P; wiaque Salm., Peter.
? displiceret P, but cf. c. xvi. 4. 3 cum Pl; wel eum P corr.
4 Cassius . . . desciwit probably from margin of c. xxiv. 5.


1 In 169 at Altinum in Venetia; see Ver., ix. 10-11.

? Of Fer., ix. 8.

? The section of the vita from this point through c. xix. is
& later interpolation ; see Intro., p. xxii.

5 Of. c. xx. 1-2, and the coins of Divus Verus with the
legend Consecratio ; see Cohen, iii*, p. 176 £., Nos. 58-59.

5 Of. c. xx. 5.

ë See note to Hadr., xxvii. 3, and Pius, xiii. 4. This
priesthood was now called sodales Antoninianá Veriani, after


MARCUS ANTONINUS XIV. 8—XV. 6


ahead to the senate and that Lucius should then re-
turn to Rome. But on the way, after they had set
out upon their journey, Lucius died from a stroke of
apoplexy! while riding in the carriage with his
brother.

XV. It was customary with Marcus to read, listen
to, and sign documents at the circus-games ; because of
this habit he was openly ridiculed, it is said, by the
people.

The freedmen Geminas and Agaclytus ? were very
powerful in the reign of Marcus angl Verus.

Such was Marcus’ sense of honour,’ moreover, that -
although Verus' vices mightily offended him, he con- `
cealed and defended them ; he also deified him after
. his death,‘ aided and advanced his aunts and sisters
by means of honours and pensions,? honoured Verus
himself with many sacrifices, consecrated a flamen for
him and a college of Antonine priests, and gave him
all honours that are appointed for the deified. "There
is no emperor who is not the victim of some evil tale,
and Marcus is no exception. For it was bruited
about, in truth, that he put Verus out of the way,
either with poison—by cutting a sow's womb with
a knife smeared on one side with poison, and then
offering the poisoned portion to his brother to eat,
while keeping the harmless portion for himself “—or,
at least, by employing the physician Posidippus, who
bled Verus, it is said, unseasonably. After Verus'
death Cassius revolted from Marcus.?


Marcus’ deification Marciani was added, after Pertinax! death
Helviani'(Pert., xv. 4), after Severus’ Severiani (C.I.L., vi.
1365), after Alexander's Alezandriani (Alez., Ixiii. 4).

"TOf. Ver., xi. 2; Dio, lxxi. 3, 1. According to another
story, he was poisoned by Faustina ; see Ver., x. 1-5.

8 In 175; see c. xxiv. 6 f.; Av. Cass., vii. f.


MARCUS ANTONINUS |

3 Post Veri obitum Marcus Antoninus solus rem
publicam tenuit, multo melior et feracior ad virtutes,


tet Commodum quidem P, Bitschofsky ; Commodum re-
moved by Jordan. *So Peter; sine imperator filio P.
?So Peter; simulatis callidae seueritatis P. |


14.e.,, Commodus. 2 See c. xii. 8 and note.

*On 20 January, 175; see Com., i. 10; xii. 1. On the
priesthood held by sons of emperors see note to c. vi. 3.

4On 27 November, 176; see Com., ii. 4; xii. 4.

5On 23 December, 176; see Com., ii. 4; xii. $. This,
however, seems not to have been the triumph held by Marcus
in celebration of his victory in Pannonia; see c. xvii. 8 and
note.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XVI. 2-7


XVI. Such was Marcus' kindness toward his own
family that he bestowed the insignia of every office
on all his kin, while on his son,! and an accursed and
foul one he was, he hastened to bestow the name of ,
Caesar? then afterward the priesthood,? and, a little :
later, the title of imperator * and a share in a
triumph 5 and the consulship. It was at this time 177
that Marcus, though acclaimed imperator, ran on foot
in the Circus by the side of the triumphal car in
which his son was seated.

After the death of Verus, Marcus Antoninus held
the empire alone, a nobler man ‘by far and more
abounding in virtues, especially as he was no longer
hampered by Verus’ faults, neither by those of exces-
sive candour and hot-headed plain speaking, from
which Verus suffered through natural folly, nor by
those others which had particularly irked Marcus
Antoninus even from his earliest years, the principles
and habits of a depraved mind. Such was Marcus’
own repose of spirit that neither in grief nor in joy
did he ever change countenance, being wholly given
over to the Stoic philosophy, which he had not only
learned from all the best masters, but also acquired
for himself from every source. For this reason
Hadrian would have taken him for his own successor
to the throne had not his youth prevented. This in-
tention, indeed, seems obvious from the fact that he
chose Marcus to be the son-in-law of Pius,’ in order
that the direction of the Roman state might some
~ time at least come into his hands, as to those of one
well worthy.


6 Of. c. ii. 6— iii. 8.
7'This is an error, for Hadria betrothed him to the.


daughter of Aelius Caesar; see c. iv. 5 and vi. 2,


l quanto P.


l See c. xiii. 3.

? This sentence sums up the war from Marcus' departure
from Rome in October, 169 (cf. coins with Profectio Augusti,
Cohen, iii?, p. 51, No. 500) to the victory over the Sarmatians
in 175, after which Marcus was acclaimed Imperator for the
eighth time and assumed the title Sarmaticus ; see.c. xxiv. 5
and Cohen, iii?, p. 91 f., Nos. 916-925.

3See c. xvi. 2. His triumph over the Gorman and the
Sarmatians was held in 176 after his return from the Kast ;
see c. xxvii. 3; Cohen, iii?, p. 17, No. 154, and p. 18, No. 164 ;
C LL. vi. 1014 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 374. Since thecoins and
the inscriptions date this triumph in the 30th year of the tri-


MARCUS ANTONINUS XVII. 2-5


XVII. Toward the provinces from then on he
acted with extreme restraint and consideration. He
carried on a successful campaign against the Germans.
He himself singled out the Marcomannic war—a
war which surpassed any in the memory of man—
and waged it with both valour and success, and
that at a time when a grievous pestilence had
carried away thousands of civilians and soldiers.!
And so, by crushing the Marcomanni, the Sarmatians,
the Vandals, and even the Quadi, he freed the Pan-
nonias from bondage,? and with Commodus his son,
whom he had previously named Caesar, triumphed at
Rome, as we told above.? When he had drained the
treasury for this war, moreover, and could not bring
himself to impose any extraordinary tax on the
provincials, he held a public sale in the Forum of the 169
Deified Trajan * of the imperial furnishings, and sold
goblets of gold and crystal and murra,’ even flagons
made for kings, his wife's silken gold-embroidered
robes, and, indeed, even certain jewels which he had
found in considerable numbers in a particularly
holy cabinet of Hadrian's. This sale lasted for two
months, and such a store of gold was realised thereby,
that after he had conducted the remainder of the
Marcomannic war in full accordance with his plans,
he gave the buyers to understand that if any of them
wished to return his purchases and recover his money,
he could do so. Nor did he make it unpleasant for
anyone who did or did not return what he had bought.


bunician power of Marcus (10 December, 175—9 December,
176), and since the triumph of Commodus was held on 23 De-
cember, 176, the statement that Commodus triumphed with
his father, as made here and in Com., ii. 4, must be erroneous.
4 See note to Hadr., vii. 6.
5 Probably & variety of agate; see J. Marquardt, Privatle-
ben d. Rómer?, ii., p. 765 f.


2 diem ultimum clausit. tantusque illius amor eo die
regii funeris? claruit ut nemo illum plangendum cen-
suerit, certis omnibus quod ab diis commodatus ad


1 unam missionem P; una in missione Peter. 2 So P;
Peter, foll. Mommsen, interfecit eos. 3 So P ; regii funeris
removed by Peter, eo by Jordan.


1 See c. xxviii.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XVII. 6—XVIII. 7


At this time, also, he granted permission to the more
prominent men to hold banquets with the same pomp
that he used himself and with servants similar to his
own. In the matter of public games, furthermore,
he was so liberal as to present a hundred lions to-
gether in one performance and have them all killed
with arrows.

XVIII. After he had ruled, then, with the good-
will of all, and had been named and beloved variously
as brother, father, or son by various men according
to their several ages, in the eighteenth year of his
reign and the sixty-first of his life he closed his last 17 Mar.,
day.| Such love for him was manifested on the day 180
of the imperial funeral that none thought that men
should lament him, since all were sure that he had
been lent by the gods and had now returned to them.
Finally, before his funeral was held, so many say, the
senate and people, not in separate places but sitting
together, as was never done before or after, hailed
him as a gracious god.

This man, so great, so good, and an associate of the
gods both in life and in death, left one son Com- -
modus ; and had he been truly fortunate he would |
not have leftason. It was not enough, indeed, that
people of every age, sex, degree and rank in life, gave
him all honours given to the gods, but also whosoever
failed to keep the Emperor's image in his home, if his
fortune were such that he could or should have done
so, was deemed guilty of sacrilege. Even to-day, in
fine, statues of Marcus Antoninus stand in many a
home among the household gods. Nor were there
lacking men who observed that he foretold many
things by dreams and were thereby themselves
enabled to predict events that did come to pass.

VOL. I. N


2 esse de eo natum sed de adulterio, ac talem fabellam
vulgari sermone contexunt: Faustinam quondam, Pii
filiam, Marci uxorem, cum gladiatores transire vidisset,
unius ex his amore succensam, cum longa aegritudine

8toriaselegisse. dequa cum diceretur Antonino Marco,


1 So Peter with Madvig ; desacrata P ; de sacratis P corr.
2 decorum P. š adultero P, but cf. c. xix, 1 (see Lessing
Lez.).


1 See note to Hadr., xxvii. 8, and c. xv. 4.

2 See Com., xi. 12; xii. 11.

? For similar stories see c. xxiii. 7 and xxix. 1-3; Victor,
Caes., xvi 2. Evidence to the contrary seems to be afforded


MARCUS ANTONINUS XVIII. 8—XIX. 8
Therefore a temple was built for him and priests were
appointed, dedicated to the service of the Antonines, -
both Sodales ! and flamens, and all else that the usage
of old time decreed for a consecrated temple.

XIX. Some say, and it seems plausible, that Com- :
modus Antoninus, his son and successor, was not
begotten by him, but in adultery ; they embroider
this assertion, moreover, with a story current among
the people. On a certain occasion, it was said,
Faustina, the daughter of Pius and wife of Marcus,
saw some gladiators pass by, and was inflamed with
Iove for one of them ; and afterwards, when suffering
from a long illness, she confessed the passion to her
husband. And when Marcus reported this to the
Chaldeans, it was their advice that the gladiator
should be killed and that Faustina should bathe in
his blood and thus couch with her husband. When
this was done, the passion was indeed allayed, but
their son Commodus was born a gladiator, not really
a prince; for afterwards as emperor he fought almost
a thousand gladiatorial bouts before the eyes of the
people, as shall be related in his life.? This story is
considered plausible, as a matter of fact, for the
reason that the son of so virtuous a prince had habits
worse than any trainer of gladiators, any play-actor,
any fighter in the arena, or, in fine, anything brought
into existence from the offscourings of all dishonour
and crime. Many writers, however, state that Com-
modus was really begotten in adultery, since it is
generally known that Faustina, while at Caieta, used
to choose out lovers from among the sailors and
gladiators.5 When Marcus Antoninus was told about


by Marcus’ own affection and respect for her; see eis éavr.,
i. 17, 7


N 9


1 So Petschenig; dos autem quid habebatur nisi imperium
edd. ? reueratorá uita P. 3 in, following diuini, deleted
by P corr. ; inde Peter.


1 See c. xiv. 8. The interpolated section ends with c. xix. ;
see note to c. xv. 3. l

2 1.e., the Tomb of Hadrian ; see Ver., xi. 1. His sepulchral
inscription is C.I.L., vi. 991 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 369.

3 Cf. c. xv. 3-4.


180 i


MARCUS ANTONINUS XIX. 9—XX. 3


this, that he might divorce, if not kill her, he is
reported to have said “If we send our wife away,
we must also return her dowry”. And what was her!
dowry ? the Empire, which, after he had been adopted:
at the wish of Hadrian, he had inherited from his
father-in-law Pius.

But truly such is the power of the life, the holiness,
the serenity, and the righteousness of a good emperor
that not even the scorn felt for his kin can sully his
own good name. For since Antoninus held ever to
his moral code and was moved by no man's whispered
machinations, men thought no less of him because his
son was a gladiator, his wife infamous. Even now
he is called a god, which ever has seemed and even
now seems right to you, most venerable Emperor
Diocletian, who worship him among your divinities,
not as you worship the others, but as one apart, and
who often say that you desire, in life and gentleness,
to be such a one as Marcus, even though, as far as
philosophy is concerned, Plato himself, were he to
return to life, could not be such a philosopher. So
much, then, for these matters, told briefly and con-
cisely. |

XX. But as for the acts of Marcus Antoninus after
the death of his brother,! they are as follows : First
of all, he conveyed his body to Rome and laid it in
the tomb of his fathers? Then divine honours were
ordered for Verus. Later, while rendering thanks
to the senate for his brother's deification, he darkly
hinted that all the strategic plans whereby the Par-
thians had been overcome were his own. He added,
besides, certain statements in which he indicated
that now at length he would make a fresh beginning
in the management of the state, now that Verus, who


Ld


6  Proficiscens ad bellum Germanicum filiam suam non
decurso luctus tempore grandaevo equitis Romani
filio Claudio Pompeiano dedit genere Antiochensi

XXI. Cum Mauri Hispanias prope omnes vastarent,

4aure tubere septennem amisit. quem non plus quin-

. que diebus luxit consultusque etiam medios! actibus


1Thus Peter with Lipsius ; consolatusque etiam medicos P.


1 Cf. c. xv. 8.

? After his return to Rome with the body of Verus. He
set out in October, 169 ; see note to c. xvii. 3.

3 Lucilla, the widow of Verus.

4Cf. c. xxii. 11. The date is probably 172-173, see Sev.,
ii. 4.

5 According to Av. Cass., vi. 7, this statement is taken
from Marius Maximus’ Life of Marcus. The rebellion is
somewhat more fully described in Dio, Ixxi. 4. The Boukoloi,
& tribe of herdsmen &nd brigands, lived in the N.W. of the
Delta, not far from Alexandria. According to Dio's chron-
ology, the rebellion happened after Marcus’ assumption of
the name Germanicus, i.e. in 172-178.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XX. 4—XXI. 4


had seemed somewhat negligent, was removed. And
the senate took this precisely as it was said, so that
Marcus seemed to be giving thanks that Verus had
departed this life. Afterwards he bestowed many
privileges and much honour and money on all Verus'
sisters, kin, and freedmen.! For he was exceedingly
solicitous about his good reputation, indeed he was.
wont to ask what men really said of him, and to
correct whatever seemed justly blamed.

Just before setting out for the German war,’ and |
before the period of mourning had yet expired, he
married his daughter? to Claudius Pompeianus, the
son of a Roman knight, and now advanced in years,
a native of Antioch, whose birth was not sufficiently
noble (though Marcus later made him consul twice),
since Marcus' daughter was an Augusta and the
daughter of an Augusta. Indeed, Faustina and the
girl who was given in marriage were both opposed
to this match.

XXI. Against the Mauri, when they wasted almost
the whole of Spain,* matters were brought to a suc-
cessful conclusion by his legates; and when the
warriors of the Bucolici did many grievous things in
Egypt," they were checked by Avidius Cassius, who
later attempted to seize the throne. Just before
his departure,’ while he was living in retreat at
Praeneste, Marcus lost his seven-year-old son, by
name Verus Caesar,’ from an operation on a tumour
under his ear. For no more than five days did he
mourn him; and even during this period, when con-
sulted on public affairs he gave some time to them.


6 See c. xxiv. 6 f; Av. Cass. vii. f.
7 4.e., for the German war; see c. xx. 6.
8 M. Annius Verus ; see note to c. xii. 8.


publicis reddidit. et quia ludi Iovis Optimi Maximi

6 Instante sane adhuc pestilentia et deorum cultum
diligentissime restituit et servos, quemadmodum bello
Punico factum fuerat, ad militiam paravit, quos volun-

7tarios exemplo volonum appellavit. armavit etiam
gladiatores, quos obsequentes appellavit. latrones
etiam Dalmatiae atque Dardaniae milites fecit.
armavit et Diogmitas. emit et Germanorum auxilia

8 contra Germanos. omni praeterea diligentia paravit
legiones ad Germanicum et Marcomannicum bellum.

9 et, ne provincialibus esset molestus, auctionem rerum
aulicarum, ut diximus, fecit in foro divi Traiani, in qua
praeter vestes et pocula et vasa aurea etiam signa

10cum tabulis magnorum artificum vendidit. Mar-
comannos in ipso transitu Danuvii delevit et praedam


! Probably the Ludi Capitolini, held on 15 October.

2 Germanicus! name had been similarly inserted in this
song after his death; see Tac., Ann., ii. 82.

3 See c. xiii. 3.

4 The name given to the slaves who volunteered for mili-
tary service after the defeat at Cannae in the Second Punic
War; see Livy, xxii. 57, 11, and Festus, p. 370.

5'The district east of southern Dalmatia; it is now the
southern portion of the kingdom of Serbia.

ê The Diogmitai were the military police maintained by
the Greek cities. They were also called upon to perform
military service—the suppression of brigands—in 368; see
Amm. Marc., xxvii. 9, 6.

1 These new legions were named Legio II Pia and Legio


? 184 :


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXI. 5-10


And because the games of Jupiter Optimus Maximus!
were then in progress and he did not wish to have
them interrupted by public mourning, he merely
ordered that statues should be decreed for his dead
son, that a golden image of him should be carried
in procession at the Circus, and that his name should
be inserted in the song of the Salii.?

And since the pestilence ê was still raging at this
time, he both zealously revived the worship of the
gods and trained slaves for military service—just as
had been done in the Punic war—whom he called
Volunteers, after the example of the Volones.* He
armed gladiators also, calling them the Compliant,
and turned even the bandits of Dalmatia and Dar-
dania into soldiers. He armed the Diogmitae,9
besides, and even hired auxiliaries from among the
Germans for service against Germans. And besides
all this, he proceeded with all care to enrol legions’
for the Marcomannic and German wars. And lest
all this prove burdensome to the provinces, he held
an auction of the palace furnishings in the Forum of
the Deified Trajan, as we have related,? and sold
there, besides robes and goblets and golden flagons,
even statues and paintings by great artists. He over-
whelmed the Marcomanni while they were crossing
the Danube,? and restored the plunder to the pro-
III Concordia ; see C.I.L., iii. 1980. They were afterwards
called Legio II and III Italica ; see Dio, lv. 24, 4.

8 See c. xvii. 4-5.

? This is probably the victory commemorated by coins of
172 with a representation of Marcus and his soldiers crossing
a bridge, presumably over the Danube; see Cohen, iii?, p. 99 f.,
Nos. 999-1001. Other coins of this year bear the legend
Germania Subacta ; see Cohen, iii^, p. 23, Nos. 215-216. It
was in this year too that Marcus took the name Germanicus ;
see C.I.L., iii, 1450.


2 magno igitur labore etiam suo gentes asperrimas vicit
militibus sese imitantibus, ducentibus etiam exer-
citum legatis et praefectis praetorio, accepitque in
deditionem Marcomannos plurimis in Italiam tra-
ductis.

5 voluntatem sequantur". sane quia durus videbatur
ex philosophiae institutione Marcus ad militiae labores

8 bus statuas in foro Ulpio conlocavit. quare frequenter
amici suaserunt, ut a bellis discederet et? Romam
veniret, sed ille contempsit ac perstitit nec prius reces-

9sit quam omnia bella finiret. provincias ex procon-


1Some name is lost in these words: Petschenig suggests
Hariique. 2 loquentum P (P corr. adds dictis) ; loquentibus
(or loquentum uel sermoni) Peter. ? et omitted in P.


1 Cf. c. xxiv. 3. l

2 i.e., his consilium ; see Hadr., viii. 9 and note,
3 See note to Hadr., vii. 6.

1 But see c. xxiv. 5 and xxv, 1.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXII. 2-9


vincials. XXII. Then, from the borders of Illyricum
even into Gaul, all the nations banded together
against us—the Marcomanni, Varistae, Hermunduri
and Quadi, the Suebians, Sarmatians, Lacringes and
Buri, these and certain others together with the
Victuali, namely, Osi, Bessi, Cobotes, Roxolani,
Bastarnae, Alani, Peucini, and finally, the Costoboci.
Furthermore, war threatened in Parthia and Britain.
Thereupon, by immense labour on his own part, while
his soldiers reflected his energy, and both legates and
prefects of the guard led the host, he conquered
these exceedingly fierce peoples, accepted the sur-
render of the Marcomanni, and brought a great
number of them to Italy.!

Always before making any move, he.conferred with
the foremost men? concerning matters not only of |
war but also of civil life. This saying particularly
was ever on his lips: “ lt is juster that I should yield
to the counsel of such a number of such friends than
that such a number of such friends should yield to
my wishes, who am but one". But because Marcus,
as a result of his system of philosophy, seemed harsh
in his military discipline and indeed in his life in
general, he was bitterly assailed ; to all who spoke
ill of him, however, he made reply either in speeches
or in pamphlets. And because in this German, or
Marcomannie, war, or rather I should say in this
* War of Many Nations," many nobles perished, for
all of whom he erected statues in the Forum of
Trajan,? his friends often urged him to abandon
the war and return to Rome. He, however, dis-
regarded this advice and stood his ground, nor did
he withdraw before he had brought all the wars
to a conclusion.* Several proconsular provinces he


187 -


1 Hirschfeld (Wien. Stud., III, p. 116) would insert ex
procuratoris before praetor ias. ? in omitted in P.


14,e,, he took them from under the control of the senate
and made them imperial provinces governed by legates of
consular rank ; see note to Hadr., iii. 9.

2 i.e., transferred from the control of the emperor to that

of the senate.
e ? Either the author fails to understand what he is trying
to say here, or an omission in the text must be assumed, such
as Hirschfeld's proposed insertion ez procuratoriis. He seems
to mean that certain provinces now received as governors
legates of praetorian rank (see note to Hadr., iii. 9). As
there is no evidence for the supposition that any provinces
were transferred from the “consular” class to the “ prae-
torian,” it must be assumed that the provinces in question
were previously governed by equestrian procurators. Such a
transfer from ** procuratory " to ** praetorian " provinces was
actually made under Marcus in the cases of Raetia and Nori-
cum, to which were sent the two new legions mentioned in
c. xxi. 8.

* Cf. c. xxi. 1.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXII. 10—XXIII. 3


changed into consular, and several consular pro-
vinces into proconsular? or praetorian,? according to
the exigencies of war. He checked disturbances
among the Sequani by a rebuke and by his personal
influence ; and in Spain,* likewise, he quieted the
disturbances which had arisen in Lusitania. And
having summoned his son Commodus to the border
of the empire, he gave him the toga virilis,? in honour 9 Jul., 175
of which he distributed largess among the people,
and appointed him consul before the legal age.’ 177.
XXIII. He was always displeased at hearing that
anyone had been outlawed by the prefect of the city.
. He himself was very sparing of the public money in
giving largess9—a fact which we mention rather in
praise than in disparagement—but nevertheless he
gave financial assistance to the deserving, furnished
aid to towns on the brink of ruin,? and, when neces-
sity demanded, cancelled tribute or taxes. And


5 See Com., ii. 2; xii. 3; Dio, lxxi, 22, 2. The ceremony
took place on the Danube frontier immediately prior to
Marcus' departure for Syria.

6 Commemorated on coins of 175 with the legend Liber-
alitas Aug(usti) VI ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 43, Nos. 416-420.

7 Under the empire the minimum age for the consulship
seems to have been 33. See also note to Pius, vi. 10.

8 Yet his coins record seven different largesses to the
populace; see Cohen, iii*, p. 41 f., Nos. 401-427. See also
c. xxvii. 5 and note. His donation to the soldiers on his
accession was unusually large (see c. vii. 9), but on another
occasion he is said to have refused the army’s request for a .
donation; see Dio, lxxi. 3, 3.

9 See also c. xi. 3. He also came to the relief of Smyrna
when destroyed by an earthquake in 178; see Dio, lxxi. 32, 2.

10 [n 178 all arrears due the treasury or the privy-purse
were cancelled; see Dio, lxxi. 32,2. This was merely an ap-
plication of the principle established by Hadrian; see note
to Hadr., vii. 6.


l nonis Salm.; mon uotis P. 2 pelosiae P; Pelustaca
Novak.
1See c. xix. * Of. Hadr., xviii. 10.


3The Serapia, the annual festival of the Egyptian deity
Serapis, was celebrated on 25 April; see Calendar of Philo-
calus(C.I.L.,i?, p. 262). A festival called Pelusia, celebrating
the annual overflow of the Nile, was held on 20 March; see
Lydus, de Mens., iv. 40. The statement of the biographer
has been explained by Mommsen (C.J.L., i?. p. 818) as mean-
ing that the customary licence of the Pelusia was limited in
order to save the festival of Serapis from desecration. But
in view of the interval between the dates this explanation is
not altogether convincing; furthermore, licence is an un-
natural meaning for vulgaritas and sacra Serapidis does not
necessarily refer to the Serapia. The sentence seems rather


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXIII. 4—XXIV. 2


while absent from Rome he left forceful instructions
that the amusements of the Roman people should be
provided for by the richest givers of public spectacles,
because, when he took the gladiators away to the
war, there was talk among the people that he intended
to deprive them of their amusements and thereby
drive them to the study of philosophy. Indeed, he
had ordered that the actors of pantomimes should
begin their performances nine days later than usual
in order that business might not be interfered with.
There was talk, as we mentioned above,! about his :
wife's intrigues with pantomimists; however, he
cleared her of all these charges in his letters. He
forbade riding and driving within the limits of any
city. He abolished common baths for both sexes.?
He reformed the morals of the matrons and young
nobles which were growing lax. He separated the ©
sacred rites of Serapis from the miscellaneous cere-
monies of the Pelusia. There was a report, further-
more, that certain men masquerading as philosophers
had been making trouble both for the state and for
private citizens ; but this charge he refuted.

XXIV. It was customary with Antoninus to punish
all crimes with lighter penalties than were usually
inflicted by the laws; although at times, toward
those who were clearly guilty of serious crimes he
remained implacable. He himself held those trials
of distinguished men which involved the death-
penalty, and always with the greatest justice. Once,
indeed, he rebuked a praetor who heard the pleas of
accused men in too summary a fashion, and ordered


to mean that the rites of Serapis were isolated from the mass
of Egyptian cults celebrated at the Pelusia; so also Wilcken,
Klio, ix. p. 181 f.


1 So P, which Lessing restores; rebellasset sub eodem in
oriente atque . . . appellasset Peter. ?nec eius affectus
seui P ; restored by Peter from Av. Cass., vii. 5. — 3 relecto P.


! Cf. c. xxii. 2.

2 In the war:against the Quadi in 174; see Dio, lxxi. 8-10.
According to Dio, the thunder-storm was sent by Hermes at
the prayer of an Egyptian magician. The Christian legend,
on the other hand, declared that the storm was an answer to
the prayers of the Twelfth Legion, the Fulminata, entirely
composed of Christians; see Xiphilinus in Dio, lxxi. 9.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXIV. 3—XXV. 3


him to hold the trials again, saying that it was a
matter of concern to the honour of the accused that
they should be heard by a judge who really repre-
sented the people. He scrupulously observed justice,
moreover, even in his dealings with captive enemies.
He settled innumerable foreigners on Roman soil.!
By his prayers he summoned a thunderbolt from
heaven against a war-engine of the enemy, and suc-
cessfully besought rain for his men when they were
suffering from thirst.?

He wished to make a province of Marcomannia and .
likewise of Sarmatia,? and he would have done so had
not Avidius Cassius just then raised a rebellion in the
East. This man proclaimed himself emperor, some
say, at the wish of Faustina, who was now in despair
over her husband's health ; others, however, say that
Cassius proclaimed himself emperor after spreading
false rumours of Antoninus’ death, and indeed he had
called him the Deified. Antoninus was not much dis-
turbed by this revolt, nor did he adopt harsh measures
against Cassius’ dear ones. The senate, however, de-
clared Cassius a public enemy and confiscated his:
property to the public treasury. XXV. The Emperor, '
then, abandoning the Sarmatian and Marcomannic
wars, set out against him. At Rome there was aJul., 175
panic for fear that Cassius would arrive during
Antoninus’ absence; but he was speedily slain and:
his head was brought to Antoninus. Even then,
. Marcus did not rejoice at Cassius’ death, and gave.


-3 In 175, after a victory so decisive that Marcus was ac-
claimed Imperator for the eighth time, and took the title
Sarmaticus; see Cohen, iii?, p. 91 f., Nos. 916-925; C.I.L.,

viii. 2276.
` . *C€t. Av. Cass,, vii f,


VOL. I, o


5cisus est. in conscios defectionis vetuit senatum

6graviter vindicare. simul petiit, ne qui senator tem-
pore principatus sui occideretur, ne eius? pollueretur
7imperium. eos etiam qui deportati fuerant revocari
iussit, cum paucissimi centuriones capite essent puniti.

2 omnibus orientalibus provinciis carissimus fuit. apud

3multas etiam philosophiae vestigia reliquit. apud
Aegyptios civem se egit et philosophum in omnibus


1 socium suggested by Peter for filium of P, which is cer-


tainly wrong; see c. xxvi. 11; Av. Cass., vii. 4. ? ne nece
etus Peter, following Madvig. Somne Peter!; omnium P,
Peter.? 3 This sentence, which precedes postea . . . vidit


in P, was transposed by Cas.


!Possibly, though not probably, the jurist L. Volusius
Maecianus (see Pus, xii. 1).

? For his general policy in the punishment of senators,
see c. x. 6. .

? Faustina and Commodus scem to have accompanied him


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXV. 4—XXVI. 3


orders that his head.should be buried. Maecianus,!
Cassius' ally, in whose charge Alexandria had been
placed, was killed by the army; likewise his prefect
of the guard-—for he had appointed one—was also
slain. Marcus then forbade the senate to impose
any heavy punishment upon those who had conspired
in this revolt; and at the same time, in order that
his reign might escape such a stain, he requested
that duritm his rule no senator should be executed.?
Those who had been exiled, moreover, he ordered to
be recalled ; and there were only a very few of the
centurions who suffered the death-penalty. He par-
doned the communities which had sided with Cassius,
and even went so far as to pardon the citizens of
Antioch, who had said many things in support of
Cassius and in opposition to himself. But he did
abolish their games and public meetings, including
assemblies of every kind, and issued a very severe
edict against the people themselves. And yet a
speech which Marcus delivered to his friends, re-
ported by Marius Maximus, brands them as rebels.
And finally, he refused to visit Antioch when he
journeyed to Syria? nor would he visit Cyrrhus,
the home of Cassius. Later on, however, he did visit
Antioch. Alexandria, when he stayed there, he
treated with clemency.

XXVI. He conducted many negotiations with
kings, and ratified peace with all the kings and
satraps of Persia when they came to meet him. He
was exceedingly beloved by all the eastern provinces,
and on many, indeed, he left the imprint of philo-
sophy. While in Egypt he conducted himself like a


on this journey through Syria and Egypt; see c. xxvi. 4 and
Com., ii. 3.
o 2


1 stadiis Peter with Salm.; studiis P, which Mommsen
defends. ? locis P (by error ocis Peter?, from which Momm-
sen conj. oecis, and Novak, odeis).


1 According to Dio, lxxi. 29, 1, her death was by some
attributed to suicide.

2 Cf. c. xix.

5 Cf. Pius, viii. 1. See also C.I.L., vi. 10222.

4 Commemorated by coins of Diva Faustina, with the-
legend Consecratio ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 141 f., Nos. 65-88. She
also received the name Pia; see the cojns and C.I.L., vi.
1019 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 382.

5 After his victory over the Quadi in.174; see Dio, lxxi.
10, 5. The title appears on her coins issued both before and
after her deification ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 149 f., Nos, 159-167.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXVI. 4-12


private citizen and a philosopher at all the stadia,
temples, and in fact everywhere. And although the
citizens of Alexandria had been outspoken in wishing
Cassius success, he forgave everything and left his
daughter among them. And now, in the village of
Halala, in the foothills of Mount Taurus, he lost:
his wife Faustina, who succumbed to a sudden ill- 176
ness! He asked the senate to decree her divine
honours and a temple, and likewise delivered a
eulogy of her, although she had suffered grievously ,
from the reputation of lewdness.? Of this, however, :
Antoninus was either ignorant or affected ignorance.
He established a new order of Faustinian girls? in
honour of his dead wife, expressed his pleasure at her
deification by the senate,* and because she had accom-
panied him on his summer campaign, called her
“ Mother of the Camp ”.5 And besides this, he made
the village where Faustina died a colony, and there
built a temple in her honour. This, however, was
afterwards consecrated to Elagabalus.®

With characteristic clemency, he suffered rather.
than ordered the execution of Cassius, while Helio-
dorus, the son of Cassius, was merely banished, and
- others of his children exiled but allowed part of their
father’s property.’ Cassius’ sons, moreover, were
granted over half of their father’s estate and were
enriched besides with sums of gold and silver, while
the women of the family were presented with jewels.
Indeed, Alexandria, Cassius’ daughter, and Drunci-
anus, his son-in-law, were allowed to travel wherever


€ The sun-god of Emesa in Syria, whose worship was in-
troduced into Rome by the Emperor Elagabalus ; see Carac.,
xi. 7; Hel., i. 5 f.

7 Of. Av. Cass., ix. 2-4.


! Of. c. xxv. 6.

2 As Hadrian had done; see Hadr., xiii. 1.

3See Hadr., xxii. 2-3. His return was commemorated
by coins with the legend Fort(una) Red(ur); see Cohen, iii?,
p. 22, No. 210.

* 4.6., while they were in Italy.

5 See note to c, xvii. 3.

5 On the significance of this appointment see Pius, iv. 8
&nd note. It is commemorated on coins of Commodus of
177; see Cohen, iii?, p. 326 f., Nos. 733.738.

T According to Dio, lxxi. 39, 1, each citizen received eight


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXVI. 13—XXVII. 8


they wished, and were even put under the protection
of the Emperor's uncle by marriage. And further
than this, he grieved at Cassius' death, saying that
he had wished to complete his reign without shed-
ding the blood of a single senator.! |

XXVII. After he had settled affairs in the East he Sept., 176
came to Athens, and had himself initiated into the
Eleusinian mysteries? in order to prove that he was
innocent of any wrong-doing, and he entered the
sanctuary unattended. Afterwards, when returning
to Italy, he encountered a violent storm on the way.
Then, reaching Italy by way of Brundisium, he
donned the toga ? and bade his troops do likewise,
nor indeed during his reign were the soldiers ever i
clad in the military cloak.* When he reached Nov., 176
Rome he triumphed,’ then hastened to Lavinium.
Presently he appointed Commodus his colleague in 177
the tribunician power,® bestowed largess upon the
people,’ and gave marvellous games; shortly there-
after he remedied many civil abuses, and set a limit
to the expense of gladiatorial shows. Ever on his
lips was a saying of Plato’s, that those states pros-
pered where the philosophers were kings or the kings -
philosophers. He united his son in marriage with
the daughter of Bruttius Presens,? performing the
ceremony in the manner of ordinary citizens ; and
in celebration of the marriage he gave largess to the
people. | |
aurei (one for each year of Marcus’ absence from Rome), a
largess greater than had ever been given before.

8 Her name was Bruttia Crispina; see Dio, lxxi. 31, 1,
and C.I.L., x. 408 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1117. The marriage
was commemorated by coins, Cohen, iii?, p. 388 f. She was


afterwards banished on a charge of adultery and put to death
in exile; see Dio, lxxii. 4, 6.


9 Dein ad conficiendum bellum conversus in adminis-
tratione eius belli obiit, labentibus iam filii moribus ab

loinstituto suo. triennio bellum postea cum Marco-
mannis Hermunduris Sarmatis Quadis etiam egit ! et,
si anno uno superfuisset, provincias ex his fecisset.

llante biduum quam exspiraret, admissis amicis dicitur
ostendisse sententiam de filio eandem quam Philippus
de Alexandro, cum de hoc male sentiret, addens
nimium ? se aegre ferre filium superstitem relinquen-

12tem.? nam iam Commodus turpem se et cruentum
ostentabat.

! triennio bellum . . . egit Klein would transpose to pre-
cede Dein . . . ab instituto suo. 2nimium Peter with
Salm.; minime P. — ?*So Cas.; relinquens P, whence Novak :


se aegre ferre quod discederet f. s. relinquens. Saut P.
5 uictu Jordan; wi P.


1He and Commodus left Rome for Pannonia on 8 August,
178; see Com., xii. 6. This war seems to have been called
the Expeditio Germanica Secunda (C.I.L., ii. 4114, and vi.
8541 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1140 and 1573) or the Hapeditio
Sarmatica (C.I.L., x. 408 = Dessau, 1117).

2 Probably uttered during the period of estrangement
when Alexander was living in Illyricum ; see Plut., Alex., ix,

3Cf, Com., i. 7-9.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXVII. 9—XXVIII. 4


He then turned his attention to completing the
war,! in the conduct of which he died. During this
time the behaviour of his son steadily fell away from
the standard the Emperor had set for himself. For
three years thereafter he waged war with the Mar- 178-180
comanni, the Hermunduri, the Sarmatians, and the
Quadi, and had he lived a year longer he would have
made these regions provinces. Two days before his
death, it is said, he summoned his friends and ex-
pressed the same opinion about his son that Philip
expressed about Alexander when he too thought
poorly of his son,? and added that it grieved him ex-
ceedingly to leave a son behind him. For already
Commodus had made it clear that he was base and
cruel.’

XXVIII. He died in the following manner : 4
When he began to grow ill, he summoned his son and
besought him first of all not to think lightly of what
remained of the war, lest he seem a traitor to the
state. And when his son replied that his first desire
was good health, he allowed him to do as he
wished,’ only asking him to wait a few days and not
leave at once. Then, being eager to die, he re-
frained from eating or drinking, and so aggravated
the disease. On the sixth day he summoned his
friends, and with derision for all human affairs and
scorn for death, said to them: “Why do you weep


* His death occurred at Sirmium (Mitrowitz on the Save)
according to Tertullian, Apologet., 25, at Vindobona (Vienna)
according to Victor, Caes., xvi. 12, Epit., xvi. 12. According
to a story preserved by Dio (Ixxi. 33, 4), his physicians
. poisoned him in order to please Commodus. It has been
supposed that he died of the plague (cf. §§ 4 and 8), but
without very good reason.

5 Apparently, to abandon the campaign ; cf, Com., iii. 5.


! So Peter, following Jordan ; quideme P!; quid me P corr.
? Tutilium Scaliger; utilium P.


! See note to c. xiii. 3.
2 Of, Dio, lxxi. 34, 1, and Herodian, i. 4.
3 Cf. Dio, lxxi. 33, 4. 3 See note to Com., viii. 1.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXVIII. 5—XXIX. 3


for me, instead of thinking about the pestilence!
and about death which is the common lot of us all ?”’
And when they were about to retire he groaned and
said: “If you now grant me leave to go, I bid you ~
farewell and pass on before". And when he was
asked to whom he commended his son he replied :
** To you,” if he prove worthy, and to the immortal
gods". The army, when they learned of his sick-
ness, lamented loudly, for they loved him singularly.
On the seventh day he was weary and admitted
only his son, and even him he at once sent away in
fear that he would catch the disease. And when his
son had gone, he covered his head as though he
wished to sleep and during the night he breathed
his last. It is said that he foresaw that after his M Mar.,
death Commodus would turn out as he actually did, 180
and expressed the wish that his son might die, lest,
as he himself said, he should become another Nero,
Caligula, or Domitian.

XXIX. It is held to Marcus’ discredit that he
advanced his wife's lovers, Tertullus and Tutilius *.
and Orfitus and Moderatus, to various offices of
honour, although he had caught Tertullus in the very:
act of breakfasting with his wife. In regard to this
man the following dialogue was spoken on the stage
in the presence of Antoninus himself. The Fool
asked the Slave the name of his wife's lover and
the Slave answered * Tullus" three times; and
when the Fool kept on asking, the Slave replied,
** [ have already told you thrice Tullus is his name ".5
But the city-populace and others besides talked a
great deal about this incident and found fault with
Antoninus for his forbearance,


5 Ter-tullus means “ Thrice- Tullus ”.


4 Ante tempus sane mortis, priusquam ad bellum
Marcomannicum rediret, in Capitolio iuravit nullum
senatorem se sciente occisum, cum etiam rebelliones

8 Parentibus consecrationem decrevit, amicos paren-
tum etiam mortuos statuis ornavit.

9  Suffragatoribus non cito credidit, sed semper diu
quaesivit quod erat verum.

. duceret novercam..


! fictus Novak; e$ uictus P; efficius Peter with Erasmus.


1 See c. x. 6; xxv. 5-6; xxvi. 18.
* He had been betrothed to her in his youth; see c. iv. 5.


MARCUS ANTONINUS XXIX. 4-10


Previous to his death, and before he returned to
the Marcomannic war, he swore in the Capitol that :
no senator had been executed with his knowledge
and consent, and said that had he known he would
have spared even the insurgents.! Nothing did he
fear and deprecate more than a reputation for
covetousness, a charge of which he tried to clear
himself in many letters. Some maintain—and held
it a fault—that he was insincere and not as guileless
as he seemed, indeed not as guileless as either Pius
or Verus had been. Others accused him of en-
couraging the arrogance of the court by keeping
his friends from general social intercourse and from
banquets.

His parents were deified at his command, and
even his parents’ friends, after their death, he
honoured with statues.

He did not readily accept the version of those
who were partisans in any matter, but always searched
long and carefully for the truth.

After the death of Faustina, Fabia? tried to
manceuvre a marriage with him. But he took a con-
cubine instead, the daughter of a steward of his wife's,
rather than put a stepmother over so many children.


IULII CAPITOLINI

2dinem sed vivendi; ego vero, quod prior Marcus
imperare coepit, dein Verus, qui superstite periit
Marco, priorem Marcum dehinc Verum credidi cele-
brandum.


! secutus P! ; secuti sunt P corr. ? caelius P. 3 pari P.


14.e. Marcus succeeded to the throne, and then associated
Verus with himself as partner in the imperial power; see


Marc., vii. 5. ;
2 He never bore all these names at the same time. For


his names before and after his adoption by Pius see note to


Hadr. xxiv. 1.
3 Of. Ael., vii. 2 It would be more accurate to say that he


JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. Most men, I well know, who have enshrined in
literature and history the lives of Marcus and Verus,
have made Verus known to their readers first, follow-
ing the order, not of their reigns, but of their lives.
I, however, have thought, since Marcus began to rule
first and Verus only afterwards ! and Verus died while
Marcus still lived on, that Marcus’ life should be
related first, and then that of Verus,

Now, Lucius Ceionius Aelius Commodus Verus
Antoninus ?—called Aelius by the wish of Hadrian,’
Verus and Antoninus because of his relationship to
Antoninus *—is not to be classed with either the
good or the bad emperors. For, in the first place, it
is agreed that if he did not bristle with vices, no
more did he abound in virtues; and, in the second
place, he enjoyed, not unrestricted power, but a
sovereignty on like terms and equal dignity with
Marcus, from whom he differed, however, as far as
morals went, both in the laxity of his principles and


received the name Aelius when he was adopted by Pius, who
had received it on his adoption by Hadrian.
3 Of. Marc., vii. 7. `


! falephum P. ? Hefaestionem Peter ; fertionem B...
5 arpocrationem P*; acprocrationem P^.


1 See Marc., xvi. 4; xxix. 6; c. iii. 7.

? See Ael., i. 2 and note.

3 Of. Hadr., xxiii. 16; Ael., iv. 7.

*His grandfather was L. Ceionius Commodus, consul in
106 (cf. Ael, ii. 7); his great-grandfather was probably L.
Ceionius Commodus, consul in 78.

5 The year is established by c. ii. 10, for he was adopted
by Pius in Jan., 138; the day is confirmed by the Calendar of
Philocalus; see C.I.L., i?, p. 278.

€ Of. Suet., Nero, vi. 1. 7 Cf. Ael., ii. 8.

8 See note to c. i. 3.


VERUS I. 5—1l. 5


the excessive licence of his life. For in character he ,
was utterly ingenuous and unable to conceal a thing.! |

. His real father, Lucius Aelius Verus (who was
adopted by Hadrian), was the first man toreceive the
name of Caesar? and die without reaching a higher
rank? His grandfathers and great-grandfathers * and
likewise many other of his ancestors were men of
consular rank. Lucius himself was born at Rome
while his father was praetor, on the eighteenth day 15 Dec.,
before the Kalends of January,5 the birthday of139
Nero as wellé—who also held the throne. His
father's family came mostly from Etruria, his mother's
from Faventia."

II. Such, then, was his real ancestry ; but when his
father was adopted by Hadrian he passed into the
Aelian family,® and when his father Caesar died, he
still stayed in the family of Hadrian. By Hadrian
he was given in adoption to Aurelius? when Hadrian,
making abundant provision for the succession, wished
to make Pius his son and Mafcus his grandson ; and
he was given on the condition that he should espouse
the daughter of Pius. She was later given to Mar-
cus, however, as we have related in his life,!! because
Verus seemed too much her junior in years, while
Verus took to wife Marcus’ daughter Lucilla.? He
was reared.in the House of Tiberius,? and received
instruction from the Latin grammarian Scaurinus
(the son of the Scaurus !* who had been Hadrian’s
grammarian), the Greeks Telephus, Hephaestio,
Harpocratio, the rhetoricians Apollonius, Caninius

9 i.e. Pius; see Marc., v. 1 and note.

10 See Ael., vi. 9. 11 Of. Marc., vi. 2.

13 See Marc., vii. 7; ix. 4. 13 See note to Pius, x. 4.

14 A famous grammaticus ; see Plin., Epist., v. 11; Gellius,
xi. 15, 3.


VOL. I. Í l P


1 So P; woluptuarius Peter. 2 se resedit P.
1 See Marce., ii. 4. 2 See Pius, x. 4; Marc., ii. 7.
3 See Mare., iii. 2. 1i.e. was adopted by Pius.


54e. he did not hold any public office, although it was
usual to bestow such on young members of the imperial house-


VERUS II. 6—III. 3


Celer! Herodes Atticus, and the Latin Cornelius
Fronto, his teachers in philosophy being Apollonius ?
and Sextus. For all of these he cherished a deep
affection, and in return he was beloved by them, and
this despite his lack of natural gifts in literary studies.
In his youth he loved to compose verses, and later on
in life, orations. And, in truth, he is said to have
been a better orator than poet, or rather, to be strictly
truthful, a worse poet than speaker. Nor are there
lacking those who say that he was aided by the wit
of his friends, and that the things credited to him,
such as they are, were written by others; and in fact
it is said that he did keep in his employ a number of
eloquent and learned men. Nicomedes was his tutor.
He was devoted to pleasure, too care-free, and very
clever, within proper bounds, at every kind of frolic,
sport, and raillery. At the age of seven he passed 138
into the Aurelian family,* and was moulded by the
manners and influence of Marcus. He loved hunt-
ing and wrestling, and indeed all the sports of:
youth. And at the age of three and twenty he was
still a private citizen ? in the imperial household.

III. On the day when Verus assumed the toga virilis
Antoninus Pius, who on that same occasion dedicated
a temple to his father, gave largess to the people ;6
and Verus himself, when quaestor, gave the people
a gladiatorial spectacle, at which he sat between Pius
and Marcus. Immediately after his quaestorship he 154


hold; see Pius, vi. 9-10 &nd note. "Verus was evidently
quaestor in 153.

6 This was probably in 145, for the toga virilis was assumed
by Marcus in his fifteenth year; see Marc. iv.5. Antoninus’
coins of 145 bear the legend Liberalitas IV; see Cohen, ii?,
p. 318 f., Nos. 490-501.

7 See Pius , vi. 10.


P2


geum ante Commodus vocaretur. Lucius quidem


1 Sextio Peter with Clinton; sestilio P. tei P. 3 nam
neque Jordan ; namque P. 4 puritatemque P, perhaps a
corruption; Peter suggests hilaritatemque. 5 post conste-


latus Petrarch ; proconsulatos P! ; proconsuiatus P corr.


1 See Marc., vi. 8-6.
2 This is confirmed by inscriptions, e.g., C.I.L., iii. 8849 =
Dessau, Ins. Sel., 358.


VERUS III. 4—IV. 2


was made consul, with Sextius Lateranus as his
colleague, and a number of years later he was created .
consul for a second term together with his brother 101
Marcus. For a long time, however, he was merely
a private citizen and lacked the marks of honour with
which Marcus was continually being decorated.!
For he did not have a seat in the senate until he was
quaestor, and while travelling, he rode, not with his
father, but with the prefect of the guard, nor was any
title added to his name as a mark of honour save only
that he was called the son of Augustus.? He was
fond of circus-games no less than of gladiatorial
spectacles. And although he was weakened by such
follies of debauchery and extravagance, nevertheless
Pius retained him as a son, for the reason, it seems,
that Hadrian, wishing to call the youth his grandson,
had ordered Pius to adopt him. Towards Pius, so
far as it appears, Verus showed loyalty rather than
affection. Pius, however, loved the frankness of his
nature? and his unspoiled way of living, and en-
couraged Marcus to imitate him in these. When
Pius died, Marcus bestowed all honours upon Verus,
even granting him a share in the imperial power ;
he made him his colleague, moreover, when the
senate had presented the sovereignty to him alone.‘
IV. After investing him with the sovereignty, then,
and installing him in the tribunician power,? and after
rendering him the further honour of the consulship, 161
Marcus gave instructions that he be named Verus,
transferring his own name to him, whereas previously
he had been called Commodus. In return for this,


3 See note to c. i. 5. 4 Of. Marc., vii. 5.
5 See note to Psws, iv. 7.
* On his name see note to Hadr., xxiv. 1.


postea, P, Peter. 7 deuertebat P, which Lessing restores ;
diuertebat edd.


1 4,e. the praetorian guard; see Marc., vii. 9.

2 See note to Marc., viii. 10. 3 Cf. Marc., viii. 12.

4 This is told about Nero (Tac., Ann., xiii. 25; Suet., Nero,
xxvi. ; Dio, lxi. 8), but not, at least by extant authors, about


i


VERUS IV. 3-8


Verus obeyed Marcus, whenever he entered upon
any undertaking, as a lieutenant obeys a proconsul
or a governor obeys the emperor. For, at the begin-
ning, he addressed the soldiers! in his brother's be-
half as well as his own, and in consideration of the
‘joint rule he conducted himself with dignity and
observed the moral standard that Marcus had set up.
When he set out for Syria,? however, his name was 162

smirched not only by the licence of an unbridled life,?
but also by adulteries and by love-affairs with young |
men. Besides, he is said to have been so de-
praved as to install a cook-shop in his home after he
returned from Syria, and to repair thither after
Marcus' banquets and have all manner of foul persons
serve him. It is said, moreover, that he used to
dice the whole night through, after he had taken up
that vice in Syria, and that he so rivalled Caligula,
Nero, and Vitellius in their vices as to wander about
at night through taverns and brothels with only a
common travelling-cap for a head-covering, revel
with various rowdies, and engage in brawls, conceal-
ing his identity the while *; and often, they say,
when he returned, his face was beaten black and
blue, and once he was recognised in a tavern even.
though he had hidden himself. It was his wont also
to hurl large coins into the cook-shops and therewith
smash the cups. He was very fond also of chario-
teers, favouring the * Greens ".5 He held gladiatorial :


Caligula or Vitellius. The samething is also told about Otho
(Suet., Otho, ii. 1) and Commodus (Com. , iii. 7).

5The teams and drivers competing in the races were
supplied by four racing syndicates, named, after the colours
which they adopted, the ** Greens,” the ** Blues," the ** Reds,”
and the ** Whites". Caligula and Nero were also partisans
of the '* Greens " ; see Suet., Cal., lv, 2, and Nero, xxii.


9 Prasino favens. gladiatorum etiam frequentius pug-
nas in convivio habuit, trahens cenas in noctem et in
toro convivali condormiens, ita ut levatus cum stro-

10 matibus in cubiculum perferretur. somni fuit permo-
dici, digestionis facillimae. .

11 Sed Marcus haec omnia bene sciens! dissimulabat

V. pudore? illo ne reprehenderet fratrem. et notissi-
mum eius quidem fertur tale convivium, in quo primum
duodecim accubuisse dicitur,. cum sit notissimum
dictum de numero convivarum * septem convivium,

5redirent. omne autem convivium aestimatum dicitur

6 sexagies centenis milibussestertiorum. hoc convivium
posteaquam Marcus audivit, ingemuisse dicitur et

7doluisse publicum fatum. post convivium lusum


1 So Oberdick ; omnia nesciens P ; omnia non nesciens Peter.
2 So Novak ; prae (* R + in P) before pudore Peter. — *So P;
quadrupedium B, Peter. * So P^; alienis temporibus P corr.


lThis saying is not found elsewhere; all the evidence,
both literary and monumental, shows that nine was the
normalnumber. There was an old principle that the number


VERUS IV. 9—V. 7


bouts rather frequently at his banquets, and after
continuing the meal far into the night he would fall -
asleep on the banqueting-couch, so that he had to be -
lifted up along with the covers and carried to his |
bedroom. He never needed much sleep, however; —
and his digestion was excellent.

But Marcus, though he was not without knowledge
of these happenings; with characteristic modesty
pretended ignorance for fear of censuring his brother.
V. One such banquet, indeed, became very notori-
ous, This was the first banquet, it is said, at which:
couches were placed for twelve, although there is a\
very well-known saying about the proper number of
those present at a banquet that * seven make a dinner,
nine make a din ".! Furthermore, the comely lads
who did the serving were given as presents, one to
each guest ; carvers and platters, too, were presented to
each, and also live animals either tame or wild, winged
or quadruped, of whatever kind were the meats
. that were served, and even goblets of murra? or of
Alexandrine crystal were presented to each man for
each drink, as often as they drank. Besides this, he
gave golden and silver and even jewelled cups, and
garlands, too, entwined with golden ribbons and
flowers out of season, golden vases with ointments
made in the shape of perfume-boxes, and even
carriages, together with mules and muleteers, and
trappings of silver, wherewith they might return
home from the banquet. The estimated cost of the;
whole banquet, it is reported, was six million sesterces. !
And when Marcus heard of this dinner, they say, he
groaned and bewailed the fate of the empire. After


&t & banquet should not be less than the Graces or greater
than the Muses; see Gellius, xiii. 11, 2.
? See note to Marc, xvii. 4, 217


"^ VERUS


1 e added by Salm. ; prouincialibus P corr.


1 See note to c. iv. 8. ? 4.6, ** Flyer".
3 See note to Prus, x. 4. 1 See Marc., viii. 9 f, and note.


VERUS V. 8—VI. 7


the banquet, moreover, they diced until dawn. And
all this was done after the Parthian war, whither
Marcus had sent him, it is said, either that he might
commit his debaucheries away from the city and the
eyes of all citizens, or that he might learn economy
by his travels, or that he might return reformed
through the fear inspired by war, or, finally, that he
might come to realize that he was an emperor. But
how much good all this did is shown not only by the
rest of his life, but also by this banquet of which we
have just told.

VI. Such interest did Verus take in the circus-
games that frequently even in his province he des-
patched and received letters pertaining to them. And
finally, even at Rome, when he was present and seated
with Marcus, he suffered many insults from the
* Blues,"! because he had outrageously, as they
maintained, taken sides against them. For he had a
golden statue made of the “Green " horse Volucer,?
and this he always carried around with him ; indeed,
he was wont to put raisins and nuts instead of barley
in this horse's manger and to order him brought to
him, in the House of Tiberius,’ covered with a blanket
dyed with purple, and he built him a tomb, when he
died, on the Vatican Hill. It was because of this horse
that gold pieces and prizes first began to be demanded
for horses, and in such honour was this horse held,
that frequently a whole peck of gold pieces was de-
manded for him by the faction of the “Greens”.

. When Verus set out for the Parthian war, Marcus 162
accompanied him as far as Capua *; from there on lie
gorged himselfin everyone's villa, and in consequence
he was taken sick at Canusium, becoming very ill, so
that his brothor hastened thither to see him. And


aegrotavit. quo ad eum ! visendum frater contendit.


1 So Peter; quod eum P! (m later erased). 2 So Peter? ;
inpulsum ... secunde P! ; inpulsu. . . secum P corr.


! Aelius Severianus, governor of Cappadocia; see note to
Marc., viii. 6.

: * Governor of Cappadocia; he carried on a successful cam-
paign in Armenia in 164. Later, he informed Marcus of the
revolt of Avidius Cassius (see Dio, lxxi. 23), and afterwards
became Cassius’ successor in the governorship of Syria.

3 See Marc., ix. 1-2 and notes, The Armenian campaign


VERUS VI. 8—VII. 7


now in the course of this war there were revealed
many features of Verus' life that were weak and base.
For while a legate was being slain, while legions .
were being slaughtered, while Syria meditated revolt, .
and the East was being devastated, Verus was hunt-
ing in Apulia, travelling about through Athens and
Corinth accompanied by orchestras and singers, and :
dallying through all the cities of Asia that bordered

on the sea, and those cities of Pamphylia and Cilicia

that were particularly. notorious for their pleasure-
resorts. VII. And when he came to Antioch, there

he gave himself wholly to riotous living. His generals,
meanwhile, Statius Priscus, Avidius Cassius, and
Martius Verus? for four years conducted the war un-

til they advanced to Babylon and Media, and re-
covered Armenia? He, however, gained the names
Armeniacus, Parthicus, and Medicus ; and these were
proffered to Marcus also, who was then living at
Rome. For four years, moreover, Verus passed his 163-166
winters at Laodicea, his summers at Daphne, and the

rest of the time at Antioch. As far as the Syrians .
were concerned, he was an object for ridicule, and
many of the jibes which they uttered against him on

the stage are still preserved. Always, during the
Saturnalia and on holidays he admitted his more
pampered slaves to his dining-room. Finally, how-
ever, at the insistence of his staff he set out for the
Euphrates, but soon, in order to receive his wife
Lucilla, who had been sent thither by her father
Marcus,’ he returned to Ephesus, going there chiefly

in order that Marcus might not come to Syria with


--


was the first one, then followed the cam palgas in Parthia and
Media.
4 Cf. Marc., viii. 12. 5 Cf. Marosi ix. 4.


1 urbemque P.


——


1 Verus’ coins of 166 bear the legends Pax and Pax
Aug(usti).

2 Armenia, Osroëne, and probably other client-kingdoms.
For the coins see note to Marc., ix. 1.

3 Cf. Marc., xii. 8 f.

4Armeniacus, Parthicus Maximus, and Medicus; see
notes to Marc., ix. 1-2;

5 Probably the famous Panthea; see Marcus, eis éaur
viii. 87; Lucian, Imag., x. ; xx.

^ Of. Marc., xiii. 3 f.


VERUS VII. 8—VIII. 5


her aifid discover his evil deeds. For Marcus had
told tlhe senate that he himself would conduct his
daughfter to Syria. Then, after the war was finished,! 166
he ass}gned kingdoms? to certain kings, and provinces
to certain members of his staff, to be ruled, and re-
turned] to Rome for a triumph,’ reluctantly, however,
sincejhe was leaving in Syria what almost seemed his.
own |kingdom. His triumph he shared with his
broth\er, and from the senate he accepted the names
which he had received in the army.* It is said,
furthermore, that he shaved off his beard while in
Syria to humour the whim ofa low-born mistress ; ?
and because of this many things were said against
him by the Syrians.

VIII. It was his fate to seem to bring a pestilence
with him to whatever provinces he traversed on his
return, and finally even to Rome.® It is believed that
this pestilence originated in Babylonia, wherea pes-
tilential yapour arose in a temple of Apollo from a
golden casket which a soldier had accidentally cut
open, and that it spread thence over Parthia and
the whole world. Lucius Verus, however, is not to
blame for this so much as Cassius, who stormed
Seleucia in violation of an agreement, after it had
received our soldiers as friends. This act, indeed,
many excuse, and among them Quadratus," the his-
torian of the Parthian war, who blames the Seleucians
as the first to break the agreement.

Such respect did Verus have for Marcus, that on


7 Asinius Quadratus, &uthor of & history of Rome from
the foundation of the city to the reign of Severus Alexander;
see Suidas, s.v. Kodparos. His history of the Parthian wars is
cited by Stephanus of Byzantium, frag. 12 f.; see also Av.
Cass., i. 1.


1 So Richter; paribus P, Peter. 2 praesentiae nulla
Novak ; praesentia ulla P ; in praesentia nulla Peter.


1 See note to c. vii. 9. ? Of. c. ix. 3-5.

* Also mentioned by Fronto, Prin. Hist., p. 209 N.

4Running N.W. from Rome through central Etruria,
branching off from the Via Cassia near Veii. The villa of
Verus was probably on the Via Cassia, near the modern Acqua


Traversa, north of the Pons Mulvius.
54.e, “ Enjoyable”. After his manumission he took the


name L. Aelius Aurelius Apolaustus Memphius. He is
224:


VERUS VIII. 6-11


the day of the triumph, which they celebrated to-
gether, he shared with his brother the names which
had been granted to himself! After he had returned
from the Parthian war, however, Verus exhibited less


regard for his brother; for he pampered his freedmen ? !
shamefully, and settled many things without his


brother's counsel. Besides all this, he brought actors
out of Syria? as proudly as though he were leading
kings to a triumph. The chief of these was Maxi-
minus, on whom he bestowed' the name Paris. Further-
more, he built an exceedingly notorious villa on the
Clodian Way,* and here he not only revelled himself
for many days at a time in boundless extravagance
together with his freedmen and friends of inferior
rank in whose presence he felt no shame, but he even


invited Marcus. Marcus came, in order to display to


his brother the purity of his own moral code as
worthy of respect and imitation, and for five days, stay-
ing in the same villa, he busied himself continuously
with the examination of law-cases, while his brother,
in the meantime, was either banqueting or preparing
banquets. Verus maintained also the actor Agrippus,
surnamed Memphius, whom he had brought with him
from Syria, almost as a trophy of the Parthian war,
and named Apolaustus.5 He had brought with him,
too, players of the harp and the flute, actors and
jesters from the mimes, jugglers, and any kind of
slave whose entertainment had amused him in Syria
and Alexandria, and in such numbers, indeed, that
he seemed to have concluded a war, not against
Parthians, but against actors. |
commemorated in numerous inscriptions, and he received
many local honours in the cities of Italy. He was put to
death in 189; see Com., vii. 1.


VOL. I. l Q


4 Marco Libonis uxorem. denique nuptiis a Vero 4


! haec . . . diuersitas P. 2 fratrem suum se Peter; fra-
tres suos P. ?qui P. 4ab Vero Peter; habero P.
" adiccit P.


!Probably the M. Annius Libo named in & senatus con-
sultum of the time of Pius; see C.I.L., iii. p. 7060.

? Marc., xv. 2.

3 Of. Com., xv. 2. The identification, however, of Verus’
freedman with Eclectus, the murderer of Commodus, has
been doubted.

3 Of. Marc., xiv. and notes.


VERUS IX. 2-7


IX. This diversity in their manner of life, as well as
many other causes, bred dissensions between Marcus
and Verus—or so it was bruited about by obscure
rumours although never established on the basis of
manifest truth. But, in particular, this incident was
mentioned: Marcus sent a certain Libo,! a cousin
of his, as his legate to Syria, and there Libo acted
more insolently than a respectful senator should,
saying that he would write to his cousin if he
happened to need any advice. But Verus, who was
there in Syria, could not suffer this, and when, a little
later, Libo died after a sudden illness accompanied
by all the symptoms of poisoning, it seemed probable
to some people, though not to Marcus, that Verus
was responsible for his death; and this suspicion
strengthened the rumours of dissensions between the
Emperors. :

Verus' freedmen, furthermore, had great influence ,
with him, as we related in the Life of Marcus? |
namely Geminas and Agaclytus. To the latter of:
these he gave the widow of Libo in marriage against
the wishes of Marcus ; indeed, when Verus celebrated
the marriage ceremony Marcus did not attend the
banquet. Verus had other unscrupulous freedmen
as well, Coedes and Eclectus and others. All of these
Marcus dismissed after Verus' death, under pretext
of doing them honour, with the exception of Eclectus,
and he afterwards slew Marcus' son, Commodus.?

When the German war broke out, the two Em- 166
perors went to the front together, for Marcus wished
neither to send Lucius to the war alone, nor yet, be-
cause of his debauchery, to leave him in the city.
When they had come to Aquileia,* they proceeded to
cross the Alps, though this was contrary to Lucius'


22T
Q2


6 festinatum Peter; destinatum P. ? Lucilla Mommsen ;
luci P; uel Marci P corr. 8 ut Novak; ut si P; uti Peter.


! Marc., xiv. 8-4.
2 In Venetia, at the mouth of the Plavis (Piave); its modern
name is Altino.


VERUS IX. 8—X. 5


desire ; for aslong asthey remained in Aquileia he did
nothing but hunt and banquet while Marcus made
all the plans. As far as this war was concerned, we
have very fully discussed in the Life of Marcus! what
was accomplished by the envoys of the barbarians
when they sued for peace and what was accomplished
by our generals. When the war in Pannonia was
settled, they returned to Aquileia at Lucius' insistence,
and then, because he yearned for the pleasures of
the city, they hastened cityward. But not far from
Altinum, Lucius, while in his carriage, was suddenly
stricken with the sickness which they call apoplexy,
and after he had been set down from his carriage
and bled, he was taken to Altinum,? and here he169
died, after living for three days unable to speak.

X. There was gossip to the effect that he had
violated his mother-in-law Faustina. And it is said
that his mother-in-law killed him treacherously by
having poison sprinkled on his oysters, because he
had betrayed to the daughter? the amour he had
had with the mother. However, there arose also
that other story related in the Life of Marcus,* one
utterly inconsistent with the character of such a man.
Many, again, fastened the crime of his death upon
his wife, since Verus had been too complaisant to
Fabia, and her power his wife Lucilla could not en-
dure. Indeed, Lucius and his sister Fabia did be-
come so intimate that gossip went so far as to claim
that they had entered into a conspiracy to make
away with Marcus, and that when this was betrayed
to Marcus by the freedman Agaclytus, Faustina cir-

3 Lucilla.


* Apparently the one contained in Marc., xv. 5, and re-
peated in the appendix to this biography, c. xi. 2.


libertum proditum Marco, anteventum! Lucium
a Faustina,? ne praeveniret. l

6 Fuit decorus corpore, vultu geniatus, barba prope
barbarice demissa, procerus et fronte in supercilia ad-

7 ductiore venerabilis. dicitur sane tantam habuisse
curam flaventium capillorum, ut capiti auri ramenta
respergeret, quo magis coma inluminata flavesceret.

8 lingua impeditior fuit, aleae cupidissimus, vitae
semper luxuriosae atque in pluribus Nero praeter

9 crudelitatem et ludibria. habuit inter alium luxuriae
apparatum calicem crystallinum nomine Volucrem ex
eius equi nomine quem dilexit, humanae potionis ?
modum supergressum.

3sed hoc nefas est de Marco putari, quamvis Veri et

_ nec adulatio videatur potuisse confingere.


1 ante aduentum P. 2 a Faustina Mommsen; a omitted
in P. 3 positionis P. 4 se ad hoc P.
! Cf. Dio, lxxi. 8, 1 = Zonaras, xii. 2. ? See c. vi. 3.


* Evidently an error, for he was born 15 Dec., 130 (oc. i.
8), and died in Jan., 169.

* An error; his reign was 161-169.

5 Of. Marc., xx. 1 and note. $ See note to c. x. 2,


230 7


VERUS X. 6—XI. 4


cumvented Lucius in fear that he might circumvent
her.!

Verus was well-proportioned in person and genial
of expression. His beard was allowed to grow long,
almost in the style of the barbarians; he was tall,
and stately in appearance, for his forehead projected
somewhat over his eyebrows. He took such pride
in his yellow hair, it is said, that he used to sift
gold-dust on his head in: order that his hair, thus
brightened, might seem yellower. He was some-
what halting in speech, a reckless gambler, ever of
an extravagant mode of life, and in many respects,
save only that he was not cruel or given to acting,
a second Nero. Among other articles of extrava-
gance he had a crystal goblet, named Volucer after
that horse of which he had been very fond,? that
surpassed the capacity of any human draught.

XI. He lived forty-two years? and, in company
with his brother, reigned eleven.* His body was
laid in the Tomb of Hadrian, where Caesar, his real
father, was also buried.

There is a well-known story, which Marcus’
manner of life will not warrant, that Marcus handed
Verus part of a sow's womb which .he had poisoned
by cutting it with a knife smeared on one side with
poison. But it is wrong even to think of such a deed
in connection with Marcus, although the plans and
deeds of Verus may have well deserved it ; nor shall
we leave the matter undecided, but rather reject it
discarded and disproved, since from the time of
Marcus onward, with the exception of your Clemency,
Diocletian Augustus, not even flattery, it seems, has
been able to fashion such an emperor.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS!


VULCACII GALLICANI V.C.


I. Avidius Cassius, ut quidam volunt, ex familia
Cassiorum fuisse dicitur, per matrem tamen ; homine
novo? genitus Avidio Severo, qui ordines duxerat et


lIn P the 9th Vita, 4.e. following Pertinax. 2 homine
nouo genitus Klebs, Prosop. i. p. 188; homine omitted in P ;
auo genitus Peter (vulg.). 3 So P corr. ; in ciuilium P!,


* Thus Peter with Mommsen ; esse grauius nomine P.


1The honorary title of Vir Clarissimus was regularly
borne by senators during the later empire.
* Tn reality his name was C. Avidius Heliodorus. A native
. of Oyrrhus in Syria (see Dio, lxxi. 22, 2), he was made im-
perial secretary by Hadrian, and was prefect of Egypt under
Antoninus; see C.I.L., iii. 6025 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 2615.
He is probably to be identified with the philosophus Heliodorus,
mentioned in Hadr., xvi. 10. The expression novus homo .


VULCACIUS GALLICANUS.
Of the Senatorial Order.!


I. Avidius Cassius is said, according to the state-
ments of some, to have belonged to the family of the
Cassii, but only on his mother's side. His father was
Avidius Severus,? the first of the family to hold public
office, who at first commanded in the ranks,? but later
attained to the highest honours of the state. Quadra-
tus* mentions him in his history, and certainly with
all respect, for he declares that he was a very distin-
guished man, both indispensible to the state and in-
fluential with Marcus himself; for he succumbed to
the decrees of fate, it is said, when Marcus had
already begun to rule.

Now Cassius, sprung, as we have said, from the
family of the Cassii who conspired against Gaius
Julius,’ secretly hated the principate and could not
brook even the title of emperor, saying that the name
of empire was all the more onerous because an


was regularly used, as here, to denote the man who was the
first of his family to hold public office.

3 As chief centurion of a legion, or primus pilus; the ex-
pression is regularly used in this sense; see Maxim., iv. 4;
Firm., xiv. 2; Prob., iii. 2.

1 See note to Ver., viii. 4.

- Šie. C. Cassius Longinus and C. Cassius Parmensis.


! inde, following iam in P, removed by Novak. ? omnia
ei nostra displicent P corr. (ediplicent P!); omnia enim nostra
ei d. Peter. ? consulat P. * quam omitted by P!, &dded
by P corr.


!It is now generally agreed that the letters and other al-
leged documents contained in this vita are pure forgeries, and
the same is in general true about the other documents of this
sort in the Historia Augusta ; see Intro., p. xx.

? Pius. The allusion to Pius as the grandfather of Verus
is in itself enough to prove the letter a forgery, since it pre-
supposes that Verus was adopted by Marcus, which was not


AVIDIUS CASSIUS I. 5—II. 3


emperor could not be removed from the state except
by another emperor. In his youth, they say, he tried
to wrest the empire from Pius too, but through his
father, a righteous and worthy man, he escaped de-
tection in this attempt to seize the throne, though he
continued to be suspected by Pius' generals. Against
Verus he organized a genuine conspiracy, as a letter
of Verus’ own, which I append, makes clear. Extract
from the letter of Verus!: ‘‘ Avidius Cassius is avid
for theethrone, as it seems to me and as was well-
known in the reign of my grandfather,? your father ;
I wish you would have him watched. Everything we
do displeases him, he is amassing no inconsiderable
wealth, and he laughs at our letters. He calls you
a philosophical old woman, me a half-witted spend-
thrift. Consider what should be done. I do not dis-
like the man, but look to it lest you take too little
heed for yourself and for your children when you
keep in active service a man whom the soldiers are
glad to hear and glad to see." II. Marcus’ answer
concerning Avidius Cassius: “ I have read your letter,
which is that of a disquieted man rather than that of
a general, and one not worthy of our times. For if
the empire is divinely decreed to be his, we cannot
slay him even should we so desire. Remember what
your great-grandfather? used to say, ‘No one ever
kills his suecessor'. And if this is not the case, he
will of himself fall into the toils of fate without any
act of cruelty on our part. Add that we cannot judge
a man guilty whom no one has accused, and whom,
as you say yourself, the soldiers love. Furthermore,


the case ; see note to Marc., v. 1. The forger is not consistent,


for in c. ii. 5 Hadrian is referred to as Verus’ grandfather.
3 Trajan.


! adfectata Petschenig ; adfectu P ; adfecta Peter. 3 malui
omitted by P!, supplied by P corr. 3 siue tusta causa siue
iniusta Novak; siue iniusta Pl; siue iuste siue iniuste P
corr.; siue iusta ex causa siue iniusta Peter with Mommsen.


4 ———— ————————M MM ——— À— M À—— ái


l) It is attributed to Domitian in Suet., Dom. xxi.
? Cf. Ael., i. 1.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS II. 4—1II. 4


in cases of treason it is inevitable that even those who
have been proved guilty seem to suffer injustice. For
you know yourself what your grandfather Hadrian
said, * Unhappy is the lot of emperors, who are never
believed when they accuse anyone of pretending to the
throne, until after they are slain’. I have preferred,
moreover, to quote this as his, rather than as Domi-
tian's,! who is reported to have said it first, for good
sayings when uttered by tyrants have not as much
weight as they deserve. So let Cassius keep his own
ways, especially as he is an able general and a stern
and brave man, and since the state has need of him.
And as for your statement that I should take heed for
my children by killing him, by all means let my
children perish, if Avidius be more deserving of love
than they and if it profit the state for Cassius to live
rather than the children of Marcus," Thus did Verus,
thus did Marcus, write about Cassius.

III. But let us briefly portray the nature and char-
acter of the man ; for not very much can be known
about those men whose lives no one has dared to
render illustrious through fear of those by whom they
were overcome. We will add, moreover, how he
came to the throne, and how he was killed, and where
he was conquered. For I have undertaken, Diocle-
tian Augustus, to set down in wrung the lives of all
who have held the imperial title? whether rightfully .
or without right, in order that you may become ac-
quainted with all the emperors that have ever worn
the purple.

Such was his character, then, that sometimes he
seemed stern and savage, sometimes mild and gentle,
often devout and again scornful of sacred things,
addicted to drink and also temperate, a lover of ‘eat-


1 The words hoc est praeceptionum, which follow paraeneseos
in P, removed by Cas. 2The words id est materiam,
following centum in P, removed by Cas.


! Apparently in allusion to Catiline's plan for the murder
"of Cicero, although Sallust's description of Catiline seems also
to have been in the writer's mind.

? The rà eis éavróv in 12 books.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS III. 5—IV. 5


ing yet able to endure hunger, a devotee of Venus
and a lover ofchastity. Nor were there lacking those
who called him a second Catiline,! and indeed he re-
joiced to hear himself thus called, and added that he
would really be a Sergius if he killed the philoso-
phizer, meaning by that name Antoninus. For the
emperor was so illustrious in philosophy that when
he was about to set out for the Marcomannic war,
and everyone was fearful that some ill-luck might be-
fall bim, he was asked, not in flattery but in all
seriousness, to publish his “Precepts of Philoso-
phy ";? and he did not fear to do so, but for three
days discussed the books of his ** Exhortations" one
after the other. Moreover, Avidius Cassius was a
strict disciplinarian and wished to be called a
Marius.?

IV. And since we have begun to speak of his strict-
ness, there are many indications of what must be called |
savagery, rather than strictness, on his part. For, in |
the first place, soldiers who had forcibly seized any- ;
thing from the provincials he crucified on the very :
spot where they had committed the crime. He was :


the first, moreover, to devise the following means .
of punishment : after erecting a huge post, 180:
feet high, and binding condemned criminals on it from '


top to bottom, he built a fire at its base, and so burned  :


some of them and killed the others by the. smoke,
the pain, and even by the fright. Besides this, he
had men bound in chains, ten together, and thrown
into rivers or even the sea. Besides this, he cut off
the hands of many deserters, and broke the legs and


!


hips of others, saying that a criminal alive and |


3As the type of a stern disciplinarian and successful
general,


7imperii reverentia, et cum ingens seditio in exercitu ?
orta esset, processit nudus campestri solo tectus et
ait, * Percutite," inquit, * me, si audetis, et corruptae

8disciplinae facinus addite". tunc conquiescentibus

2tradidit. nam et virgis caesos in foro et in mediis

lauiuentis (a later erased) P; aduiuentis Peter? with


Baehrens. ? in exercitum orta P, Peter. 3 ipse om. by
Peter.


1 Known only from this citation.
240 |


AVIDIUS CASSIUS IV. 6—V. 2


wretched was a more terrible example than. one who
had been put to death. Once when he was Eom.
manding the army, a band of auxiliaries, at the sug-

gestion of their centurions and without his knowledge,

slaughtered 3,000 Sarmatians, who were camping

somewhat carelessly on the bank of the Danube, and

returned to him with immense plunder. But when

the centurions expected a reward because they had

slain such a host of the enemy with a very small force

while the tribunes were passing their time in indolence

and were even ignorant of the whole affair, he had

them arrested and crucified, and punished them with

the punishment of slaves, for which there was no

precedent; “It might," he said, ‘have been an

ambush, and the barbarians’ awe for the Roman

Empire might have been lost." And when a fierce

mutiny arose in the camp, he issued forth clad only

in a wrestler’s loin-cloth and said: “Strike me, if
you dare, and add the crime of murder to breach of
discipline". Then, as all grew quiet, he was held in

well deserved fear, because he had shown no fear

himself. This incident so strengthened discipline

among the Romans and struck such terror into the

barbarians, that they besought the absent Antoninus

for a hundred years' peace, since they had seen even.
those who conquered, if they conquered wrongfully,

sentenced to death by the decision of a Roman

general.

V. Many ofthe stern measures he took to put down
the licence of the soldiers are recorded in the works
of Aemilius Parthenianus,! who has related the history
of the pretenders to the throne from ancient times
even to the present. For example, after openly
beating them with the lictors' rods in the forum and


241-
VOL. I. R


* Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque.'


1 praefecists P corr. ; praefectis P!.


! Also brought. as a reproach against the Syrian army in
Alex., liii. 2.

2 A line from Ennius’ Annales, quoted in Cicero, de Rep.,
v.; see Augustinus, Civ. Dei, ii. 21.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS V. 3—VI.


in the midst of the camp, he beheaded those who de-
served it with the axe, and in numerous instances
cut off his soldiers’ hands. He forbade the soldiers,
moreover, to carry anything when on the march save
lard and biscuit and vinegar, and if he discovered any-
thing else he punished the breach of discipline with
no light hand. There is a letter concerning Cassius
that the Deified Marcus wrote to his prefect, running
somewhat as follows: “I have put Avidius Cassius
in command of the Syrian legions, which are running
riot in luxury and conducting themselves with the
morals of Daphne ; concerning these legions Caesonius
Vectilianus has written that he found them all ac-
customed to bathe in hot water.! And I think I have
made no mistake, for you too know Cassius, a man
of true Cassian strictness and rigour. Indeed, the
soldiers cannot be controlled except by the ancient
discipline. You know what the good poet says, a line
universally quoted :


‘The state of Rome is rooted in the men and
manners of the olden time.’ ?


Do you take care only that provisions are abundantly
provided for the legions, for if I have judged Avidius
correctly I know that they will not be wasted.” The
prefect’s answer to Marcus runs: “ You planned
wisely, Sire, when you put Cassius in command of
the Syrian legions. Nothing benefits Grecianized
soldiers like a man who is somewhat strict. He will
certainly do away with all warm baths, and will
strike all the flowers from the soldiers’ heads and
necks and breasts. Food for the soldiers is all pro-
vided ; and nothing is lacking under an able general,
for but little is either asked or expended.” VI. And


R 2


2 Daphnen, discinctus rediret. arma militum septima
die semper respexit, vestimenta etiam et calciamenta
et ocreas, delicias omnes de castris summovit iussitque
eos hiemem sub pellibus agere nisi corrigerent suos

VII. Hic imperatorem se in oriente appellavit,eut


1 cum et P. ? item P; idem Peter.


1 Discinctus means ‘deprived of his sword-belt ’—a
punishment inflicted upon disobedient soldiers.

2An attempt to summarize the important and brilliant
campaign of 164-166, in which Cassius drove the Parthians
out of Syria, overran Mesopotamia, and finally captured
Ctesiphon, the Parthian capital; see Marc., ix. 1; Ver., vii.
1-2; Dio, lxxi. 2.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS VI. 2—VII


Cassius did not disappoint the expectation that had
been formed of him, for he immediately had the
proclamation made at assembly, and posted notices
on the walls, that if any one were discovered at
Daphne in his uniform he would return without it.!
Regularly once a week he inspected his soldiers’
equipment, even their clothes and shoes and leggings,
and he banished all dissipation from the camp and
issued an order that they would pass the winter in
their tents if they did not mend their ways ; and they
would have done so, had they not conducted them-
selves more respectably. Once a week there was a
drill of all the soldiers, in which they even shot
arrows and engaged in contests in the use of arms.
For he said that it was shameful that soldiers should
not be trained, while athletes, wild beast fighters and
gladiators were, for the soldiers’ future labours, if
familiar to them, would be less onerous.

And so, having stiffened military discipline, he
conducted affairs in Armenia and Arabia and Egypt
with the greatest success? He was well loved by
all the eastern nations, especially by the citizens of
Antioch, who even acquiesced in his rule, as Marius
Maximus relates in his Life of the Deified Marcus.
And when the warriors of the Bucolici did many
grievous things in Egypt, they were checked by
Cassius? as Marius Maximus also relates in the
second book of those he published on the Life of
Marcus. |

VII. Finally, while in the East,* he proclaimed him4175


3 See Marc., xxi. 2 and note.

‘After his victorious campaign against the Parthians he
was appointed governor-general of all the eastern provinces ;
see Dio, lxxi. 3, 1.


2regia infantes de medio tolleret. alii autem dicunt,
hanc artem adhibuisse militibus et provincialibus
Cassium contra Marci amorem, ut sibi posset con-
sentiri, quod diceret Marcum diem suum obisse.

3nam et divum eum appellasse dicitur, ut desiderium
illius leniret.

6senatus illum hostem appellavit bonaque eius pro-
scripsit. quae Antoninus in privatum aerarium con-
geri noluit, quare senatu praecipiente in aerarium

7 publicum sunt relata. nec Romae terror defuit, cum


1 senserat P.


1S0 also Marc., xxiv. 6, and Dio, lxxi. 22, 3f. Dio adds
the not improbable story that Faustina bade Cassius hold
himself in readiness, in case aught befell Marcus, to marry
her and seize the sovereignty, and that when a false report of
Marcus' death was brought he declared himself emperor.
According to c. ix. 9, the version in the text was given by
Marius Maximus,

? i.e. on receipt of the report of his death; see last note.

3 Of. Marc., xxv. 4.

4The prefect of Egypt, Flavius Calvisius, declared for
Cassius; see Dio, Ixxi. 28, 3. Evidence that Egypt recog-
nized him as emperor is afforded by a papyrus, dated in the


AVIDIUS CASSIUS VII. 2-7


self emperor, some say, at the wish of Faustina,! who
mow despaired of Marcus’ health and was afraid that
she would be unable to protect her infant children by
herself, and that some one would arise and seize the
throne and make away with the children. Others,
however, say that Cassius employed an artifice with
the soldiers and provincials to overcome their love for
Marcus so that they would join him, saying that
Marcus had met his end. And, indeed, he called him
“the Deified," ? it is said, in order to lessen their grief
for him.

When his plan of making himself emperor had
been put into effect, he forthwith appointed prefect
of the guard the man who had invested him with the
imperial insignia, This man was later put to death |
by the army? against the wishes of Antoninus. The,
army also slew Maecianus, in whose charge Alexandria
had been placed ; he had joined Cassius * in the hope
of sharing the sovereignty with him, and he too was
slain against the wishes and without the knowledge


. , of Antoninus.


For all that, Antoninus was not seriously angered :
on learning of this revolt, nor did he vent his rage -
on Cassius children or on his kin. The senate,
however, pronounced him a public enemy and con-
fiscated his property. But Antoninus was unwilling
that this should be forfeited to the privy-purse, and
so, at the bidding of the senate, it was delivered to
the public treasury. And there was no slight con-
sternation at Rome; for many said that Avidius
Cassius would advance on the city in the absence of


first year of Imperator Caesar Julius Avidius Cassius; see
Bull. Inst. Egypt., vii. (1896), p. 123.
5 Cf. Marc., xxiv. 9.


!parsurum P corr. ; passurum P!.


———


1Cf. Marc., xxv. 3. According to Dio, lxxi. 27, 2-3,
Cassius was killed by two petty-officers, who then took his
head to Marcus.

? Nero committed suicide in order to escape death at the
hands of the guard after Galba had been proclaimed emperor
and he himself had been declared a public enemy by the
senate; see Suet., Nero, xlvii.-xlix. Caligula was assassinated
by two officers of the guard; see Suet., Cal., lviii. Otho
committed suicide after his defeat by the army of Vitellius


AVIDIUS CASSIUS VII. 8—VIII. 4


Antoninus, who was singularly loved by all but the
profligates, and that he would ravage it like a tyrant,
especially because of the senators who had declared
him an enemy to the state and confiscated his
property. The love felt for Antoninus was most
clearly manifested in the fact that it was with the
consent of all save the citizens of Antioch that


Avidius was slain. Antoninus, indeed, did not so


much order his execution as suffer it; for it was clear
to all that he would have spared him had it been in
his power. VIII. And when his head was brought to
Antoninus he did not rejoiee or exult,! but rather


was grieved that he had lost an opportunity for show-.


ing mercy ; for he said that he had wished to take
him alive, so that he might reproach him with the
kindness he had shown him in the past, and then
spare his life. Finally, when some one said that
Antoninus deserved blame because he was so indulgent
toward his enemy and his enemy's children and kin,
and indeed toward every one whom he had found
concerned in the outbreak, and added furthermore,
* What if Cassius had been successful ?" the Emperor
said, it is reported: * We have not worshipped the


gods in such a manner, or lived such lives, that he |


could overcome us". Thereupon he pointed out
that in the case of all the emperors who had been
slain there had been reasons why they deserved to
die, and that no emperor, generally recognized as
good, had been conquered or slain by a pretender,
adding that Nero had deserved to die and Caligula
had forfeited his life, while neither Otho nor Vitellius
had really wished to rule.2 He expressed similar


(Suet., Otho, xi.), and Vitellius was murdered by the soldiers
of Vespasian (Suet., Vit., xvii).


ái


1So Peter with Boxhorn; nam P. 2 de Pertinace et
Galba P. 3 So P corr; antiochensis P!. 5 qui P ; quoque


Peter with Madvig. 5 sed et his P, Peter?. 8 illi seuam
P! ; illis P corr.


1Galba’s refusal to give tle expected donative to the troops
so embittered the soldiers that they refused to swear allegiance
to him (Suet., Galb., xvi.); his stinginess also caused the
guard to join Otho in the conspiracy by which he was
murdered (id., xvii f.).

? Of, Marc., xxv. 5-6 and note.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS VIII. 5—IX. 4


sentiments concerning Galba also, saying that in an
emperor avarice was the most grievous of all failings.!
And lastly, he said, no rebels had succeeded in over-
coming either Augustus, or Trajan, or Hadrian, or
his own father, and, although there had been many
of them, they had been killed either against the
wishes or without the knowledge of those emperors.
Antoninus himself, moreover, asked the senate to re-
frain from inflicting severe punishment on those men
who were implicated in the rebellion; he made this
request at the very same time in which he requested
that during his reign no senator be punished with
capital punishment ?—an act which won him the
greatest affection. Finally, after he had punished a
very few centurions, he gave orders that those who had
been exiled should be recalled.? IX. The citizens of
Antioch also had sided with Avidius Cassius, but
these, together with certain other states which had
aided Cassius, he pardoned, though at first he was
deeply angered at the citizens of Antioch and took
away their games and many of the distinctions of the
city, all of which he afterwards restored. To the
sons of Avidius Cassius Antoninus presented half of
their father's property,* and his daughters he even
graced with gold and silver and jewels. To Alexan-
dria, Cassius’ daughter, and Druncianus, his son-in-
law, he gave unrestricted permission to travel wher-
ever they liked. And they lived not as the children
of a pretender but as members of the senatorial order
and in the greatest security, as was shown by the
orders he gave that not even in a law-suit should they
be taunted with the fortunes of their family, and by
his convicting certain people of personal affront who


3 Cf. Marc., xxv. 7 f. * Of. Marc., xxvi. 12.


in eos petulantes fuissent. quos quidem amitae suae
marito commendavit. -

5 Si quis autem omnem hanc historiam scire de-
siderat, legat Marii Maximi secundum librum de vita
Marci, in quo ille ea dicit quae solus! Marcus mortuo

12istos rebelliones acerrime persequaris. male enim
assueverunt duces et milites,* qui nisi opprimuntur,
X. oppriment.” item alia epistula eiusdem Faustinae
ad Marcum: “Mater mea Faustina patrem tuum
Pium in defectione ? Celsi hortata 9 est, ut pietatem

3filios. Commodus noster vides in qua aetate sit,

4 Pompeianus gener et senior est et peregrinus. vide


! solum P. ?So Peter with Salm.; herispatores P.
? urget P; urguet edd. * el duces milites P! ; et duces et
milites P corr. . Pevusdem in def. P ; eiusdem removed by
Cas. 8 sic hortata P; sic removed by Novak ; cohortata
Peter ?.
! See note toc. i. 7. ? See note to c. vii. 1.
? Nothing is known of any such revolt.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS IX. 5—X. 4


had: been insulting to them. He even put them
under the protection of his uncle by marriage.

If any one wishes, moreover, to know the whole of
this story, let him read the second book of Marius
Maximus on the life of Marcus, in which he relates
everything that Marcus did as sole emperor after the
death of Verus. For it was during this time that
Cassius rebelled, as a letter written to Faustina shows,
from which the following is an extract :! “ Verus told
me the truth about Avidius, that he desired to rule.
For I presume you heard what Verus’ messengers re-
ported about him. Come, then, to our Alban villa,
so that with the help of the gods we may prepare for
everything, and do not be afraid.” It would appear
from this that Faustina knew nothing of the affair,
though Marius Maximus, wishing to defame her, says
that it was with her connivance that Cassius attempted
to seize the throne.? Indeed, we have also a letter
of hers to her husband in which she urges Marcus
to punish Cassius severely. A copy of Faustina's
letter to Marcus reads: “I shall come to our Alban
villa to-morrow, as you command. Yet I urge you
now, if you love your children, to punish those rebels
with all severity. For soldiers and generals have an
evil habit of crushing others if they are not crushed
themselves." X. Another letter of this same Faus-
tina to Marcus reads similarly: ** When Celsus re-
volted,? my mother, Faustina, urged your father, Pius,
to deal righteously first with his own kin, and then with
strangers. For no emperor is righteous who does not
take thought for his wife and children, You can see
how young our son Commodus is; our son-in-law
Pompeianus * is an elderly man and a foreigner be-


5 See Marc., xx. 6.


9adhibere. signatas! mihi litteras Calpurnius dedit ;
ad quas rescribam, si tardavero, per Caecilium senem

10spadonem, hominem, ut scis, fidelem. cui verbo
mandabo, quid uxor Avidii Cassii et filii et gener de
te iactare dicantur."

XI. Ex his litteris intellegitur Cassio Faustinam
consciam non fuisse, quin etiam supplicium eius
graviter exegisse, si quidem Antoninum quiescentem
et clementiora cogitantem ad vindictae necessitatem


1 signitas P, which Ellis thinks perhaps right in sense of
** in cipher ". 2 cit, i.e. cum. P.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS X. 5—XI. 5


sides. Consider well what you will do about Avidius
Cassius and his accomplices. Do not show forbearance
to men who have shown no forbearance to you and
would show none either to me or to your children,
should they be victorious. I shall follow you on your
way presently ; I have not been able to come to the
Formian villa because our dear Fadilla! was ill.
However, if I shall fail to find you at Formiae, I will
follow on to Capua, a city which can furnish help'to
me and our children in our sickness. Please send the
physician Soteridas to Formiae. I have no confidence
in Pisitheus, who does not know how to treat a young
girl. Calpurnius has brought me a sealed letter; I
shall reply to it, if I linger on here, through Caecilius,
the old eunuch, a. a man to be trusted, as you know. I~
shall also report “through him, in a verbal message,
what Cassius’ wife and children and son-in-law are
said to be circulating about you."

XI. From these letters it can be seen that Faustina
was not in collusion with Cassius, but, on the contrary, .
earnestly demanded his punishment ; for, indeed, it-
was she who urged on Antoninus the necessity of:
vengeance when he was inclined to take no action
and was considering more merciful measures. The’
following letter tells what Antoninus wrote to her in
reply: * Truly, my Faustina, you are over-anxious
about your husband and children. For while I was
at Formiae I re-read the letter wherein you urged
me to take vengeance on Avidius’ accomplices. I,
however, shall spare his wife and children and son-
in-law, and I will write to the senate forbidding any
immoderate confiscation or cruel punishment. For
there is nothing which endears a Roman emperor to


! Arria Fadilla, fourth child of Marcus, born about 150.


6 mentia, haec Caesarem deum fecit, haec Augustum
consecravit, haec patrem tuum specialiter Pii nomine
7ornavit. denique si ex mea sententia de bello iudi-
8catum esset, nec Avidius esset occisus. esto igitur
secura ; |
| ‘di me tuentur, dis pietas mea

— — cordi est’.


Pompeianum nostrum in annum sequentem con-
sulem dixi" haec Antoninus ad coniugem.
XII. Ad senatum autem qualem orationem miserit,
2interest scire. ex oratione Marci Antonini: ** Ha-
betis igitur, patres conscripti, pro gratulatione
vietoriae generum meum consulem, Pompeianum
dico, cuius aetas olim remuneranda fuerat consulatu,
nisi viri fortes intervenissent, quibus reddi debuit
3quod a re publica debebatur. nunc quod ad defec-
tionem Cassianam pertinet, vos oro atque obsecro,
patres conscripti, ut censura vestra deposita meam pie-
tatem clementiamque servetis, immo vestram, neque
4quemquam ! senatus occidat. nemo senatorum punia-
tur, nullius fundatur viri nobilis sanguis, deportati rede-
5 ant, proscripti bona recipiant. utinam possem multos ?
etiam ab inferis excitare! non enim umquam placet
in imperatore vindicta sui doloris, quae si iustior
6fuerit, acrior videtur. quare filiis Avidii Cassii et


! quemquam ullum P ; ullum removed by Lessing ; quem-
quam unum Peter. 2 multos P, which Lessing restores ;
multatos Peter.


1Cf. Hadr., xxiv. 4; Pius, ii. 4.

* Horace, Odes, i. 17, 13.

3 The fact that the second consulship of Pompeianus (see
Marc., xx. 6) was in 173, two years prior to Cassius’ revolt,
shows that this ietter is not genuine,


AVIDIUS CASSIUS XI. 6—XII. 6


mankind as much as the quality of mercy. This
quality-eaused Caesar to be deified and made Augustus
a god, and it was this characteristic, more than any
other, that gained your father his honourable name
of Pius.! . Indeed, if the war had been settled in ac-
cordance with my desires, Avidius would not have
been killed. So do not be anxious ;


* Over me the gods keep guard, the gods hold dear
myrighteousness.?


I have named our son-in-law Pompeianus consul for
next year." 3 Thus did Antoninus write to his wife.

XII. It is of interest, moreover, to know what sort
of a message he sent to the senate. An extract from .
the message of Marcus Antoninus: “So then, in return
for this manifestation of joy at our victory, Conscript
Fathers, receive my son-in-law as consul —Pompeianus,
I mean, who has come to an age that were long since
rewarded with the consulship, had there not stood in
the way certain brave men, to whom it was right to
give what was due them from the state. And now,
as to Cassius’ revolt, I pray and beseech you, Con-
script Fathers, lay aside your severity, and preserve
the righteousness and mercy that are mine—nay rather
I should say, yours—and let the senate put no man
to death. Let no senator be punished ; let the blood
of no distinguished man be shed ; let those who have
been exiled return to their homes ; let those who have
been outlawed recover their estates. Would that I
could also recall many from the grave! Vengeance
for a personal wrong is never pleasing in an emperor,
for the juster the vengeance is, the harsher it seems.
Wherefore, you will grant pardon to the sons and son-
in-law and wife of Avidius Cassius. For that matter,


VOL; I. S


genero et uxori veniam dabitis. et quid dico veniam?
7 cum illi nihil fecerint. vivant igitur securi, scientes
sub Marco vivere. vivant in patrimonio parentum
pro parte donato, auro argento vestibus fruantur, sint
divites, sint securi, sint vagi et liberi et per ora om-
nium ubique populorum circumferant meae, circum-
8ferant vestrae pietatis exemplum. nec magna haec
est, patres conscripti, clementia, veniam proscriptorum
9liberis et coniugibus dari. ego vero a vobis peto, ut
conscios senatorii ordinis et equestris a caed& a pro-
scriptione, a timore, ab infamia, ab invidia, et postremo
ab omni vindicetis iniuria detisque hoc meis tem-
10 poribus, ut in causa tyrannidis qui in tumultu cecidit
probetur occisus."
XIII. Hanc eius clementiam senatus his adclama-
2 tionibus prosecutus est: “ Antonine pie, di te servent.
Antonine clemens, di teservent. Antonine clemens,!
3di te servent. tu voluisti quod licebat, nos fecimus
quod decebat. Commodo imperium iustum rogamus.
progeniem tuam robora. fac securi sint liberi nostri.
4 bonum imperium nulla vis laedit. Commodo Antonino
tribuniciam potestatem rogamus, praesentiam tuam
5rogamus. philosophiae tuae, patientiae tuae, doc-
trinae tuae, nobilitati tuae, innocentiae tuae. vincis .
inimicos, hostes exsuperas, di te tuentur," et reli-
qua. |
6  Vixerunt igitur posteri Avidii Cassii securi et ad


1 So P; repetition from the preceding has crowded out
some other adj.


! For similar outcries alleged to have taken place in the
senate see Com., xviii.-xix.; Alex., vi.-xi.
? Bestowed in 177; see Marc., xxvii. 5, and note,


AVIDIUS CASSIUS XII. 7—XIII. 6


why should I say pardon? They have done nothing.
Let them live, therefore, free from all anxiety, know-
ing that they live under Marcus. Let them live in
possession of their parents' property, granted to each
in due proportion ; let them enjoy gold, silver, and
raiment ; let them be rich ; let them be free from
anxiety ; let them, unrestricted and free to travel
wheresoever they wish, carry in themselves before the
eyes of all nations everywhere an example of my for-
bearance, an example of yours. Noris it any great act
of mercy, Conscript Fathers, to grant pardon to the
wives and children of outlawed men. I do beseech
you to save these conspirators, men of the senatorial
and equestrian orders, from death, from proscription,
from terror, from disgrace, from hatred, and, in short,
from every harm, and to grant this to my reign, that
whoever, in the cause of the pretender, has fallen in
the strife may, though slain, still be esteemed."

XIII. The senate honoured this act of mercy with
these acclamations:! “ God save you, righteous An-
toninus. God save you, merciful Antoninus. God
save you, merciful Antoninus. You have desired what
was lawful, we have done what was fitting. We ask
lawful power for Commodus. Strengthen your off-
spring. Make our children free from care. No vio-
lence troubles righteous rule. We ask the tribunician
power ? for Commodus Antoninus. We beseech your
presence. All praise to your philosophy, your
patience, your principles, your magnanimity, your
innocence! You conquer your foes within, you
prevail over those without, the gods are watching
over you,’ and so forth.

And so the descendants of Avidius Cassius lived un-.
molested and were admitted to offices of honour.


s 2


8 Haec sunt quae de Cassio Avidio comperimus.

3 cupidos et divites patitur, misera. Marcus homo sane
optimus, qui dum clemens dici cupit,? eos patitur

6sentit pro re publica. vides multis opus esse gladiis,
multis elogiis, ut in antiquum statum publica forma

7reddatur. ego vero istis praesidibus provinciarum—
an ego proconsules, an ego praesides putem, qui ob
hoc sibi a senatu et ab Antonino provincias datas cre-


1 So Vielhaber; non modo clemens sed bonus P ; non modo


c. et b. Peter. ?So P; Peter by error attributes clementes
to P, and reads, following Petschenig, clementem se. 3 de
clementes P! ; de clementts P corr. 7


AVIDIUS CASSIUS XIII, 7—XIV. 8


But after his deified father’s death Commodus
Antoninus ordered them all to be burned alive, as if
they had been caught in a rebellion.

So much have we learned concerning Avidius
Cassius. His character, as we have said before,! was
continually changing, though inclined, on the whole,
to severity and cruelty. Had he gained the throne,
he would have made not a merciful and kind emperor
but a beneficent and excellent one. XIV. For we
have a letter of his, written to his son-in-law after he
had declared himself emperor, that reads somewhat
-as follows: * Unhappy state, unhappy, which suffers
under men who are eager for riches and men who
have grown rich! Marcus is indeed the best of men,
but one who wishes to be called merciful and hence
suffers to live men whose manner of life he cannot
sanction. Where is Lucius Cassius,? whose name we
bear in vain? Where is that other Marcus, Cato the
Censor? Where is all the rigour of our fathers?
Long since indeed has it perished, and now it is not
even desired. Marcus Antoninus philosophizes and
meditates on first principles, and on souls and
virtue and justice, and takes nothought for the state.
There is need, rather, for many swords, as you see
for yourself, and for much practical wisdom, in order
that the state may return to its ancient ways. And
truly in regard to those governors of provinces—can
I deem proconsuls or governors those who believe :
that their provinces were given them by the senate
and Antoninus only in order that they might revel
and grow rich? You have heard that our philo- '

! c, iii, 4.


3 Evidently an error for C. Cassius Longinus; see note to
c. i. 4.


fieret mendicum et pauperem, sed subito divitem
factum. unde, quaeso, nisi de visceribus rei publicae
provincialiumque fortunis? sint sane divites, sint
locupletes. aerarium publicum refercient;! tantum
di faveant bonis partibus,? reddant? Cassiani rei pub-
licae principatum." haec epistula eius indicat, quam
severus et quam tristis futurus fuerit imperator.


! Thus Petrarch ; referient P. 2 patribus P. Sred-
dant P; reddent Casaubon, Peter.


AVIDIUS CASSIUS XIII. 8


sopher’s prefect of the guard was a beggar and a
pauper three days before his appointment, and then
suddenly became rich. How, I ask you, save from
the vitals of the state and the purses of the provin-
cials? Well then, let them be rich, let them be
wealthy. In time they will stuff the imperial .
treasury ! ; only let the gods favour the better side,
let the men of Cassius restore to the state a lawful
government." This letter of his shows how stern
and how strict an emperor he would have been.


1 4.e., they will be forced to disgorge their ill-gotten gains.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


AELII LAMPRIDII


I. De Commodi Antonini parentibus in vita Marci

enatus est. habuit litteratorem Graecum Onesicratem,
Latinum Capellam Antistium ; orator ei Ateius San-
ctus fuit.


! Marce., i. 1-4. ? Of. Pius, i. 8.


ro —————— a


COMMODUSANTONINUS


BY


AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS


I. The ancestry of Commodus Antoninus has been
sufficiently discussed in the life of Marcus Antoninus.!
As for Commodus himself, he was born, with his twin
brother Antoninus, at Lanuvium-—where his mother's
father was born, it is said ?—on the day before the
Kalends of September, while his father and uncle31 Aug.,
were consuls. Faustina, when pregnant with Com- 161
modus and his brother, dreamed that she gave birth
to serpents, one of which, however, was fiercer than
the other. But after she had given birth to Com-
modus and Antoninus, the latter, for whom the as-
trologers had forecast a horoscope as favourable as
that of Commodus, lived to be only four years old.
After the death of Antoninus, Marcus tried to educate
Commodus by his own teaching and by that of the
greatest and the best of men, In Greek literature
he had Onesicrates as his teacher, in Latin, Antistius
Capella; his instructor in rhetoric was Ateius Sanctus,

However, teachers in all these studies profited him
not in the least—such is the power, either of natural
character, or of the tutors maintained in a palace.
For even from his earliest years he was base and dis- F
honourable, and cruel and lewd, defiled of mouth, more-


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


1 constuppatus P. . *suo Vero Ursinus; Seuero P.
3 sacerdotis P. *trossulos Lipsius; tres solos P. 5 prin-
ceps P. € go P corr. ; et cum om. in P!,


! Dio, on the other hand, describes him as not naturally
vicious, but weak and easily influenced ; see lxxii. 1, 1.

? On the coast of Etruria, near the southern end ; it is the
modern Cività Vecchia.

3 Of. c. xi. 18; Marc., xii. 8 and note.

4M. Annius Verus, who died in 169; see Marc., xxi. 3.

9$ Of, c. xii. 1; Marc., xvi. 1 and note. His election to the
college of pontifices is commemorated on a coin ; see Cohen,
iii?, p. 311, no. 599.

6 Of. c. xii. 3; Marc., xxii. 12 and note.

7See note to Marc., vi. 3. The title princeps iuventutis
appears on his coins of this period (Cohen iii?, p. 311 f.,
nos. 601-618), and in an inscription from Africa (C.I.L., viii.
11928). T'rossuli was an old name given to the Roman


COMMODUS ANTONINUS I. 8—11. 3


over, and debauched.! Even then he was an adept :


in certain arts which are not becoming in an emperor
for he could mould goblets and dance and sing and
whistle, and he could play the buffoon and the


gladiator to perfection. In the twelfth year of his |
life, at Centumcellae,? he gave a forecast of his |
cruelty. For when it happened that his bath was |
drawn too cool, he ordered the bathkeeper to be cast ;
into the furnace ; whereupon the slave who had been


ordered to do this burned a sheep-skin in the furnace,
in order to make him believe by the stench of the
vapour that the punishment had been carried out.


While yet a child he was given the name of 12 Oct.,


Caesar, along with his brother Verus,* and in his four-
teenth year he was enrolled in the college of priests.’
U. When he assumed the toga, he was elected one of
the leaders of the equestrian youths,’ the trossuli, and
even while still clad in the youth's praetexta he gave
largess 8 and presided in the Hall of Trajan.? He


Jan.,


assumed the toga on the Nones of July—the day on 7 July,


which Romulus vanished from the earth—at the
time when Cassius revolted from Marcus. After he
had been commended to the favour of the soldiers he
set out with his father for Syria!? and Egypt, and
` with him he returned to Rome.!! Afterward he was


cavalry. It was supposed to have been derived from Tros.


sulum, & town captured by the cavalry, but even in the
second century B.c., its meaning was no longer understood ;
see Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxiii. 2, 35 f.


3 Commemorated on coins; see Cohen, iii?, p. 266 f., nos. |


291-294.

9 See note to Hadr., vii. 6.

W In July, 175. See Marc., xxv. 1.

n See Marc., xxvii. 3. Commodus’ return to Rome was
celebrated by an issue of coins with the legend Adventus
Caes(aris) ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 228, nos. 1-2. 6


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


loer speciem Turnebus; perficium P!; perficiens P corr.
3 atque se Editor; aquam P, Peter. 3 crederet P.


1 Cf. Marc., xxii. 12 and note.

2 On the occasion of Marcus’ triumph ; see c. xii. 4; Marc.,
xvi. 2 and note.

3 See c. xii. 5 and note to Marc., xvii. 3.

5 See c. xii. 6 and Marc., xxvii. 9.

5 But not in public, except on moonless nights; see Dio,
Ixxii. 17, 1. l


COMMODUS ANTONINUS II. 4—1lI. 2


granted exemption from the law of the appointed
year and made consul, and on the fifth day before 177
the Kalends of December, in the consulship of Pollio ?7 Ev
and Aper, he was acclaimed Imperator together with
his father, and celebrated a triumph with him.?23 Dec.,
For this, too, the senate had decreed. Then he set, 1
out with his father for the German war.* 178"
The more honourable of those appointed to super-
vise his life he could not endure, but the most evil he |
retained, and, if any were dismissed, he yearned for
them even to the point of falling sick. And when
they were reinstated through his father's indulgence,
he always maintained eating-houses and low resorts
for them in the imperial palace. He never showed:
regard for either decency or expense. He diced in:
his own home. He herded together women of un-
usual beauty, keeping them like purchased prostitutes
in a sort of brothel for the violation of their chastity.
He imitated the hucksters that strolled about from
market to market. He procured chariot-horses for
his own use. He drove chariots in the garb of a pro-
fessional charioteer,® lived with gladiators, and con-
ducted himself like a procurer’s servant. Indeed,
one would have believed him born rather to a life of
infamy than to the high place to which Fortune
advanced him. |
III. His father's older attendants he dismissed,9 and
any friends? that were advanced in years he cast aside.


5e.g.-Tarrutenius Paternus, now prefect of the guard
(see c. iv. 1), and C. Aufidius Victorinus, governor of Ger-
mania Superior under Marcus. He retained his father's
friends for a “ few years ° (Herodian, i. 8, 1), 4.e. until about
183. >

7 See note to Hel., xi. 2.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


! ob P, Petschenig ; ad Peter. ? serius P. 3 uehit P!,


! P. Salvius Julianus, consul in 175. He was apparently
in command of troops on the Rhine.

? See c. iv. 8.

? According to Herodian (i. 6) he gave up the war against
the advice of Marcus' friends &nd advisers, especially his own
brother-in-law, Pompeianus. He did, however, force the
Quadi, Marcomanni, and Buri to accept terms of peace
which were not discreditable to Rome (Dio, Ixxii. 2-3) and was
acclaimed Imperator for the fourth time. |

‘For the official expression of reception see c. xii. 7.
His return is commemorated by coins of 180 with thé legends
Adventus Aug(usti) and Fort(una) Red(ux); see Cohen, iii,
p. 228, no. 3, and p. 248, no. 165.

5 Called in an inscription triumphus felicissimus Germani-
cus secundus ; see C.I.L., xiv. 2922 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1420.

8 Of. Ver., iv. 6.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS III. 3—IV.


The son of Salvius Julianus, the commander of the
troops,! he tried to lead into debauchery, but in vain,
and he thereupon plotted against Julianus? He
degraded the most honourable either by insulting
them directly or giving them offices far below their
deserts. He was alluded to by actors as a man of
depraved life, and he thereupon banished them so
promptly that they did not again appear upon the
stage. He abandoned the war which his father had
almost finished and submitted to the enemy's terms?
and then he returned to Rome.* After he had come 72 Oct.,
back to Rome he led the triumphal procession 5 with | 180
Saoterus, his partner in depravity, seated in his chariot, '
and from time to time he would turn around and kiss
him openly, repeating this same performance even in
the orchestra. ` And not only was he wont to drink:
until dawn and squander the resources of the Roman |
Empire, but in the evens he wauld ramble through :
taverns and brothels. He sent out to rule the
provinces men who were either his companions in/
crime or were recommended to him by criminals.
He became so detested by the senate that he in his
turn was moved with cruel passion for the destruction
of that great order,’ and from having been despised
he became bloodthirsty.

IV. Finally the actions of Commodus drove Quad-
ratus and Lucilla, with the support of Tarrutenius


? Especially after the conspiracy of Quadratus and Lucilla,
according to Herodian, i. 8, 7.

8 On this conspiracy, formed probably toward the end of
182, see Dio, lxxii. 4, 4-5, and Herodian, i. 8, 3-6. Quadratus
was probably the grandson of Marcus’ sister; see Marc., vii.
4. Lucilla was Commodus’ elder sister, the wife of Lucius
Verus, and after his death, of Claudius Pompeianus; see
Marc., xx. 6.


: 271


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


2 fecti praetorio Tarrutenii Paterni consilio. datum au-
temest negotium peragendae necis Claudio Pompeiano

3propinquo. qui ingressus ad Commodum destricto
gladio, cum faciendi potestatem habuisset, in haec
verba prorumpens ‘Hunc tibi pugionem senatus
mittit ' detexit facinus fatuus nec implevit, multis cum

6id vero gravius quam de se ipso Commodo fuit.


1 According to Dio, lxxii. 5, 2, Paternus had no share in the
conspiracy.

3 Apparently Claudius Pompeianus Quintianus, the son of
Lucilla’s husband, Claudius Pompeianus, by a former mar-
riage. Herodian speaks of him as & youth at this time.

* Lucilla was exiled to Capri, where she was put to death ;
see c. v. 7.

* See note to Hadr., xi. 4.

s Tigidius Perennis, appointed co-prefect with Paternus in
182. |

* He was granted the right to wear the broad purple
stripe on his tunic, the exclusive privilege of the senatorial


COMMODUS ANTONINUS IV. 2:8


Paternus, the prefect of the guard,! to form a plan for)
his assassination. The task of slaying him was as-
signed to Claudius Pompeianus, a kinsman.? But he,
as soon as he had an opportunity to fulfil his mission,
strode up to Commodus with a drawn sword, and,
bursting out with these words, * This dagger the
senate sends thee," betrayed the plot like a fool, and
failed to accomplish the design, in which many others
along with himself were implicated. After this
fiasco, first Pompeianus and Quadratus were executed,
and then Norbana and Norbanus and Paralius ; and
the latter's mother and Lucilla were driven into exile.?
Thereupon the prefects of the guard, perceiving
that the aversion in which Commodus was held was `
all on account of Saoterus, whose power the Roman :
people could not endure, courteously escorted this :
man away from the Palace under pretext of a
sacrifice, and then, as he was returning to his villa,’
had him assassinated by their private agents.* But this
deed enraged Commodus more than the plot against
himself. Paternus, the instigator of this murder,
who was believed to have been an accomplice in the
plot to assassinate Commodus and had certainly
sought to prevent any far-reaching punishment of
that conspiracy, was now, at the. instigation of
Tigidius,5 dismissed from the command of the prae-
torian guard by the expedient of conferring on him
the honour of the broad stripe. And a few days
thereafter, Commodus accused him of plotting, say-
ing that the daughter of Paternus had been be-
trothed to the son of Julianus” with the under-


order. For other instances of the elevation of a prefect of
the guard into the senatorial order see note to Hadr., viii. 7.
7 See c. iii. 1-2, and for his execution Dio, lxxii. 5, 1.
VOL. I. T


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


! Condiani Casaubon ; condiciani P. ? conciutt Egna-
tius; concilii P. * uà pretiisque Madvig, Peter? ; nuptiisque
P; uultusque Turnebus, Peter!,


1The brothers Sex. Quintilius Condianus and Sex. Quin-
tilius Valerius Maximus. According to Dio, Ixxii. 5, 9.4,
their reputation and wealth caused them to be suspected.

? More correctly, the son of Quintilius Valerius Maximus
&nd consul in 180. He was included in the sentence pro-
nounced against his father and uncle. On his escape see
Dio, lxxii. 6.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS IV. 9— V. 4


standing that Julianus would be raised to the
throne. On this pretext he executed Paternus
and Julianus, and also Vitruvius Secundus, a very
dear friend of Paternus, who had charge of the


imperial correspondence. Besides this, he exter- ;
minated the whole house of the Quintilii,! because `


Sextus, the son of Condianus,? by pretending death,
it was said, had made his escape in order to raise a
revolt. Vitrasia Faustina, Velius Rufus,? and Eg-


natius Capito, a man of consular rank, were all slain. :


Aemilius Iuncus and Atilius Severus, the consuls,*
were driven into exile. And against many others he
vented his rage in various ways.

V. After this Commodus never appeared in public
readily, and would never receive messages unless
they had previously passed through the hands of
Perennis?. For Perennis, being well acquainted
with Commodus' character, discovered the way to
make himself powerful, namely, by  persuading
Commodus to devote himself to pleasure while
he, Perennis, assumed all the burdens of the
government—an arrangement which Commodus joy-
fully accepted. Under this agreement, then, Com-
modus lived, rioting in the Palace amid banquets and


in baths along with 300 concubines, gathered together .


for their beauty and chosen from both matrons and :


harlots, and with minions, also 300 in number, whom :


he had collected by force and by purchase indiscrim-
inately from the common people and the nobles


3 Consul in 178.

‘The year of their consulship is unknown. They were
not necessarily consuls in 182.

5 According to Herodian, i. 11, 5, he spent most of the
time in his suburban estate.


T9


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


5chabatur. inter haec habitu victimarii victimas im-
molavit. in harena rudibus, inter cubicularios gladia-
tores pugnavit lucentibus aliquando mucronibus.

7 vertit, praedam omnem in sinum contulit. ipseautem
Commodus Lucillam sororem, cum Capreas misisset,

80ccidit. sororibus dein suis ceteris, ut dicitur, con-
stupratis, consobrina patris complexibus suis iniuncta
uni etiam ex concubinis matris! nomen imposuit.

9uxorem,? quam deprehensam in adulterio exegit,

10exactam relegavit et postea occidit. ipsas con-

llcubinas suas sub oculis suis stuprari iubebat. nec
inruentium in se iuvenum carebat infamia, omni parte
corporis atque ore in sexum utrumque pollutus.

14 spoliati sunt vel etiam interempti. iis autem quibus

. deerat ficti criminis adpositio obiciebatur, quod

scribere noluissent 3 Commodum heredem.


1 matris P ; patris Salmasius, Peter. 2 inposuit. uxorem
Heer; inposuit uxoris P, Peter. 3 noluissent Casaubon,
Baehrens ; uoluissent P, Peter. l


1 Dio, on the other hand, declares that his administration
was characterized by integrity and restraint; see lxxii. 10, 1.
Herodian (i. 8) has the same point of view as the biography.

2 See note to c. vii. 7. i


COMMODUS ANTONINUS V. 5-14


solely on the basis of bodily beauty. Meanwhile, |
dressed in the garb of an attendant at the sacrifice,
he slaughtered the sacrificial victims. He fought
in the arena with foils, but sometimes, with his
chamberlains acting as gladiators, with sharpened :
swords. By this time Perennis had secured all the :
power for himself. He slew whomsoever he wished .
to slay, plundered a great number, violated every
law, and put all the booty into his own pocket.!
Commodus, for his part, killed his sister Lucilla,
after banishing her to Capri. After debauching his

` other sisters, as it is said, he formed an amour with
a cousin of his father,? and even gave the name of.
his mother to one of his concubines. His wife,? whom
he caught in adultery, he drove from his house, then
banished her, and later put her to death. By his
orders his concubines were debauched before his own
eyes, and he was not free from the disgrace of in-
timacy with young men, defiling every part of his
body in dealings with persons of either sex.

At this time Claudius also, whose son had previ-
ously come into Commodus' presence with a dagger,
was slain,* ostensibly by bandits, and many other,
senators were put to death, and also certain women |
of wealth. And not a few provincials, for the sake
of their riches, were charged with crimes by Perennis
and then plundered or even slain ; and some, against -
whom there was not even the imputation of a fic-
titious crime, were accused of having been unwilling
to name Commodus as their heir. :


3 Crispina ; see note to Marc., xxvii. 8.

*See c. iv. 2 and note. The biographer has apparently
confused the father with the son, for Claudius Pompeianus
was alive in 193; see Pert., iv, 10; Did. Jul., viii. 3.


att


COMMODUS ANTONINUS .


! According to Herodian, i. 9, this son of Perennis, in
command of the Illyrian troops, formed a conspiracy in the
army to overthrow Commodus, and the detection of the plot
led to Perennis’ fall and death.

2In 184. According to Dio, lxxii. 8, the Britons living
north of the boundary-wall invaded the province and anni-
hilated a detachment of Roman soldiers. They were finally
defeated by Ulpius Marcellus, and Commodus was acclaimed
Imperator for the seventh time and assumed the. title
Britannicus ; see c. viii. 4 and coins with the legend Vict(oria)
Brit(annica), Cohen, iii?, p. 349, no, 945.

3 An innovation which became general in the third cen-
tury, when senatorial commanders throughout the empire
were gradually replaced by equestrian.

4 According to Dio, lxxii. 9, it was at the demand of a
delegation of 1500 soldiers of the army of Britain, whom
Perennis had censured for mutinous conduct (cf. c. viii, 4).


COMMODUS ANTONINUS VI. 2-7


VI. About this time the victories in Sarmatia won
by other generals were attributed by Perennis to his
own son. Yet in spite of his great power, sud-
denly, because in the war in Britain? he had dis-
missed certain senators and had put men of the
equestrian order in command of the soldiers? this
same Perennis was declared an enemy to the state,
when the matter was reported by the legates in|
command of the army, and was thereupon delivered
up to the soldiers to be torn to pieces.* In his
place of power Commodus put Cleander, one of his 185.
chamberlains.

After Perennis and his son were executed, Com-
modus rescinded a number of measures on the ground
that they had been carried out without his authority,
pretending that he was merely re-establishing pre-
vious conditions. However, he could not maintain
this penitence for his misdeeds longer than thirty
days, and he actually committed more atrocious
crimes through Cleander than he had done through.
the aforesaid Perennis. Although Perennis was suc-
ceeded in general influence by Cleander, his successor
in the prefecture was Niger, who held this position as
prefect of the guard, it is said, for just six hours. In
fact, prefects of the guard were changed hourly and


The mutiny was finally quelled by Pertinax; see Pert., iii.
5-8.

5A Phrygian by birth, brought to Rome as a slave; see
Herodian, i. 19, 8. After securing his freedom he rose in
the Palace and finally became chamberlain, after bringing
about the fall and death of his predecessor, Saoterus; see c.
tv. 5 and Dio, lxxii. 12,2. He also contributed to the fall
of Perennis; see Dio, Ixxii. 9, 8. He was not made prefect
until 186, but exercised great influence in his capacity as
chamberlain (see 88 6 and 12).


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


l senatu P. *libertinus Jordan; lsbertinos P. 3 factis


1 So also Dio, lxxii. 12, 3-5.
2L. Antistius Burrus; he seems to have been previously
accused on the same charge by Pertinax; see Pert., iii. 7,


COMMODUS ANTONINUS VI. 8—VII. '


daily, Commodus meanwhile committing all kinds of |
evil deeds, worse even than he had committed before. !
Marcius Quartus was prefect of the guard for five |
days. Thereafter, the successors of these men were
either retained in office or executed, according to the
whim of Cleander. At his nod even freedmen were
enrolled in the senate and among the patricians, and
now for the first time there were twenty-five consuls
in a single year. Appointments to the provinces 189
. were uniformly sold ; in fact, Cleander sold everything
for money.! He loaded with honours men who were
recalled from exile; he rescinded decisions of the
courts. Indeed, because of Commodus' utter de-
generacy, his power was so great that he brought
Burrus,? the husband of Commodus' sister, who was
denouncing and reporting to Commodus all that was
being done, under the suspicion of pretending to the
throne, and had him put to death; and at the same
time he slew many others who defended Burrus.
Among these Aebutianus was slain, the prefect of
the guard; in his place Cleander himself was made
prefect, together with two others whom he himself
chose. Then for the first time were there three
prefects of the guard, among whom was a freedman,
called the “ Bearer of the Dagger ”.3

VII. However, a full worthy death was at last meted
out to Cleander also. For when, through his intrigues,
Arrius Antoninus * was put to death on false charges
in revenge for Attalus, whom Arrius had condemned


36e. Cleander himself. The dagger was the symbol of
the office of prefect.

4Together with Burrus he had been accused by Pertinax
of aspiring to the throne (see Pert., iii. 7), but he seems to
have been a highly respected man and official.


! Pactumeium Casaubon; Pactuleium P. ? «ires Ur-
sinus; uirtis P!; iuirtis P corr.


1 In 189, on the occasion of a riot due to a lack of grain,
for which the mob held Cleander responsible; see Dio,
Ixxii. 13. -

2See Fer., viii. 10.

$3 He married one of them, Damostratia, according to
Dio, lxxii. 12, 1.

*For Julianus! death see Dio, lxxii. 14, 1. He is prob-
ably to be identified with L. Julius Vehilius Gratus Julianus,
whose interesting career is recorded in an inscription from
Rome ; see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1327.

5 Perhaps M. Servilius Silanus, consul in 188.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS VII. 2-8


during his proconsulship in Asia, Commodus could
not endure the hatred of the enraged people and
gave Cleander over to the populace for punishment.!
At the same time Apolaustus? and several other
freedmen of the court were put to death. Among:
other outrages Cleander had debauched certain of
Commodus' concubines,? and from them had begotten :
sons, who, together with their mothers, were put to ;
death after his downfall.

As successors to Cleander Commodus appointed |
Julianus and Regillus, both of whom he afterwards |
condemned. After these men had been put to
death he slew the two Silani, Servilius ë and Dulius,
together with their kin, then Antius Lupus 5 and the
two Petronii, Mamertinus and Sura,’ and also Mamer- |
tinus son Antoninus, whose mother was his own
sister ;9 after these, six former consuls at one time,
Allius Fuscus, Caelius Felix, Lucceius Torquatus,
Larcius Eurupianus, Valerius Bassianus and Pactu-
meius Magnus,? all with their kin ; in Asia Sulpicius
Crassus, the proconsul, Julius Proculus, together with
their kin, and Claudius Lucanus, a man of consular
rank ; and in Achaia his father's cousin, Annia Faus-
tina,! and innumerable others. He had intended to
kill fourteen others also, since the revenues of the
Roman empire were insufficient to meet his expendi-
tures.


6 His grave-inscription is preserved; see C.I.L., vi. 1843.

1 The. brothers M. Petronius Sura Mamertinus and M.
Petronius Sura Septimianus were consuls in 182 and 190
respectively.

8 Perhaps Cornificia. ? Consul in 183.

10 Annia Fundania Faustina, daughter of M. Annius
Libo, Marcus’ uncle (see Marc., i. 3). She is probably the
woman referred to in c. v. 8.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


1 senatu semet inridente Peter? ; senatu semettridente P! ;
senatu ridente Peter}. 2 et om. in P. 3 lanuuium P.
4 cui P.


! Probably L. Tutilius Pontianus Gentianus, said to have
been one of Faustina’s lovers (see Marc. xxix. 1), and consul
suffectus in 183, the year in which the name Pius was be-
stowed on Commodus.

* The name is borne by Commodus in the Acts of the
Arval Brothers for 7 Jan., 183; see C.I.L., vi. 2099, 12. It
also appears on the coins of 183, e.g. Cohen, iii?, p. 229,
no. 18; the real reason for its assumption is not known.

3 This name appears on his coins of 185; e.g. Cohep, iii 3,
P 233, no. 49. It had been assumed as a cognomen by the

ictator Sulla. :

*Julius Alexander, from Emesa in Syria. According to
Dio, Ixxii. 14, 1-3, his execution was ordered because he had
speared a lion while on horseback; he killed those sent to
execute him and then made his escape, but was overtaken.

5 See c. iv. 1-4.

$ An allusion to the mutiny in Britain; see note to c, vi, 2,


COMMODUS ANTONINUS VIII. 2-6


VIII. Meanwhile, because he had appointed to the
consulship a former lover of his mother's,! the senate 183
mockingly gave Commodus the name Pius ;? and
after he had executed Perennis, he was given the
name Felix? as though, amid the multitudinous 185
executions of many citizens, he were a second Sulla.
And this same Commodus, who was called Pius, and
who was called Felix, is said to have feigned a plot;
against his own life, in order that he might have an:
excuse for putting many to death. Yet as a matter
of fact, there were no rebellions save that of Alex-
ander,* who soon killed himself and his near of kin,
and that of Commodus’ sister Lucilla. He was
called Britannicus by those who desired to flatter
him, whereas the Britons even wished to set up an
emperor against him. He was called also the
Roman Hercules,’ on the ground that he had killed 192
wild beasts in the amphitheatre at Lanuvium ; and,
indeed, it was his custom to kill wild beasts on his
own estate. He had, besides, an insane desire that
the city of Rome should be renamed Colonia Com-
modiana.9 This mad idea, it is said, was inspired in


TSee also 8 9. Romanus Hercules appears among his
titles as given by Dio, lxxii. 15, 5, and also in an inscription
of Dec., 192; see C.I.L., xiv. 3449 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 400.
He had the lion's skin and club, the attributes of Hercules,
carried before him in the streets (Dio, lxxii. 17, 4), and had
himself portrayed as Hercules on coins (Cohen, iii?, p. 251 f.,
nos, 180-210), and in statues (c. ix. 2; Dio, lxxii. 15, 6), e.g.
the famous bust in the Capitoline Museum, Rome.

8 So also Dio, lxxii. 15, 2. Col(onia) L(ucia) An(toniniana)
Com(modiana) appears on coins of 190; see Cohen, iii?, p.
233, nos, 89-40. He also gave the name Commodianus to
the senate (S 9 and Dio, ibid.), the people (c. xv. 5), the
Palace (c. xii. 7), the legions (Dio, ibid.), the city of Carthage,
and the African fleet (c. xvii. 8).


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


! His mistress, who afterwards conspired against him ; see
c. xvii. 1. v

2 Called chiridotae Dalmatarum in Pert., viii. 2. It was a
long-sleeved tunic reaching to the knee. Dio describes it
(Ixxii. 17, 2) as made of white silk with gold threads.

3 See note to c. viii, 5.

4An Egyptian deity regarded as the protector of corpses
and tombs and represented with the head of a jackal, or, by
the Greeks and Romans, with that of a dog. His cult was
often combined with that of Isis, and according to Juvenal


COMMODUS ANTONINUS VIII. 7—IX. 6


him while listening to the blandishments of Marcia.!
He had also a desire to drive chariots in the Circus, ,
and he went out in public clad in the Dalmatian :
tunic? and thus clothed gave the signal for the :
charioteers to start. And in truth, on the occasion
when he laid before the senate his proposal to call
Rome Commodiana, not only did the senate gleefully
pass this resolution, out of mockery, as far as we
know, but also took the name ** Commodian " to itself,
at the same time giving Commodus the name Her-
cules, and calling him a god.

IX. He pretended once that he was going to Africa,
so that he could get funds for the journey, then got
them and spent them on banquets and gaming instead.
He murdered Motilenus, the prefect of the guard, by
means of poisoned figs. He allowed statues of him-
self to be erected with the accoutrements of Her-
cules ;? and sacrifices were performed to him as to a
god. He had planned to execute many more men
besides, but his plan was betrayed by a certain young
servant, who threw out of his bedroom a tablet on
which were written the names of those who were to
be killed.

He practised the worship of Isis and even went so 5
far as to shave his head and carry a statue of Anubis.‘ `
In his passion for cruelty he actually ordered the -
votaries of Bellona to cut off one of their arms,’ and .
as for the devotees of Isis, he forced them to beat


(vi. 534), the chief priest of Isis was often dressed as
Anubis.

5 The cult of Bellona, brought to Rome from. Asia Minor in
the time of Sulla, was characterised by orgiastic music and
dances, in which the votaries, like Mohammedan dervishes,
slashed their arms and bodies ; for a description see Tibullus,
i. 6, 45 f.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS

3si quis sane * se mori velle praedixisset, hunc invitum
praecipitari iubebat.


1 gentibus P. 2 legerentur Petschenig, Peter?; degerer-
entur P, Peter’. 3 illihic P. 4 sane P, Peter; ante
Mommsen. 5 eum Jordan ; eam P.


14.e, dressed as Hercules; see note to c, viii. 5.

3 According to Dio, lxxii. 20, he actually attached figures
of serpents to their legs. The performance was an imitation
of the mythical combats between the gods and the giants, in
which the latter are usually represented, e.g. on the great
altar from Pergamum, as having serpents for legs.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS IX.—X. 4


their breasts with pine-cones even to the point of '
death. While he was carrying about the statue of |
Anubis, he used to smite the heads of the devotees |
of Isis with the face of the statue. He struck with í
his club, while clad in a woman's garment or a lion's |
skin,! not lions only, but many men as well. Certain
men who were lame in their feet and others who}
could not walk, he dressed up as giants, encasing ;
their legs from the knee down in wrappings and
bandages to make fhem look like serpents,? and then !
despatched them with his arrows. He desecrated the |
rites of Mithra? with actual murder, although it was |
customary in them merely to say or pretend some-
thing that would produce an impression of terror.

X. Even as a child he was gluttonous and lewd.*;
While a youth, he disgraced every class of men in his `
company and was disgraced in turn by them. Who-
soever ridiculed him he cast to the wild beasts. And
one man, who had merely read the book by Tran-
quillus® containing the life of Caligula, he ordered
cast to the wild beasts, because Caligula and he had
the same birthday. And if any one, indeed, ex-
pressed a desire to die, he had him hurried to death,
however really reluctant.

In his humorous moments, too, he was destructive. Y
For example, he put a starling on the head of one -


3A Persian deity, whose cult was brought to Rome in the
time of Pompey, and became very popular about the end of
the first century after Christ. In the course of the next
two centuries the god, under the name Sol Invictus Mithras,
was worshipped throughout the Empire, and his cult was
probably the most formidable rival of Christianity.

* But see note to c. i. 7.

54.6. Suetonius; see note to Hadr., xi. 3.

6 See c. i. 2, and Suetonius, Caligula, viii. 1.


VOL. I. U


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


miculos habere, sturno adposito, qui se vermes sectari


crederet, capite suppuratum reddebat obtunsione oris.!


homines appellatos nominibus vefendorum utriusque

XI. dicitur saepe pretiosissimis cibis humana stercora
miscuisse nec abstinuisse gustum aliis, ut putabat,
2inrisis. duos gibbos retortos in lance argentea sibi
sinapi perfusos exhibuit eosdemque statim promovit
3ac ditavit, ^ praefectum praetorii suum Iulianum
togatum praesente officio suo in piscinam detrusit.
quem saltare etiam nudum ante concubinas suas iussit
4quatienteni cymbala deformato vultu. genera * legu-
minum coctorum ad convivium propter luxuriae con-

5 tinuationem raro vocavit. lavabat per diem septies


lobiunsione oris Petschenig, Peter?; obtunsioneris P; øb-


tunsionibus Peteri. *30culos om. in P!, add. in P corr,
3 osculis Ursinus; oculis P. $ genera . . . uocaust P,
Peter?; genere . . . uacauit Salmasius, Peter.!

1 i.e. ASS.


? Apparently & private cult, carried on in one of the em-
peror's suburban estates,
3 See c. vii. 4,


COMMODUS ANTONINUS X. 5—XI. 5


man who, as he noticed, had a few white hairs, re-
sembling worms, among the black, and caused his
head to fester through the continual pecking of the
bird's beak—the bird, of course, imagining that it
was pursuing worms. One corpulent person he cut
open down the middle of his belly, so that his in-
testines gushed forth. Other men he dubbed one-
eyed or one-footed, after he himself had plucked out
one of their eyes or cut off one of their feet. In ad-
dition to all this, he murdered many others in many
places, some because they came into his presence in
the costume of barbarians, others because they were
noble and handsome. He kept among his minions
certain men named after the private parts of both
sexes, and on these he liked to bestow kisses. He also
had in his company a man with a male member larger
than that of most animals, whom he called Onos.!
This man he treated with great affection, and he
even made him rich and appointed him to the priest-
hood of the Rural Hercules? XI. It is claimed
that he often mixed human excrement with the most
expensive foods, and he did not refrain from tasting
. them, mocking the rest of the company, as he thought.
He displayed two misshapen hunchbacks on a silver
platter after smearing them with mustard, and then
straightway 'advanced and enriched them. He
pushed into a swimming-pool his praetorian prefect
Julianus,? although he was clad in his toga and ac-
companied by his staff; and he even ordered this
same Julianus to dance naked before his concubines,
clashing cymbals and making grimaces. The various
kinds of cooked vegetables he rarely admitted to his
banquets, his purpose being to preserve unbroken the
succession of dainties. He used to bathe seven and


v2


COMMODUS ANTONINUS

7imitatus est et medicum, ut sanguinem hominibus
emitteret scalpris feralibus.

10 Gladiatorium ? etiam certamen subiit et nomina
gladiatorum recepit eo gaudio quasi acciperet trium-

llphalia. ludum semper * ingressus est et, quotiens in-

12 grederetur, publicis monumentis indi iussit. pugnasse
autem dicitur septingenties tricies quinquies.

13  NominatusinterCaesaresquartum iduum Octobrium,
quas Herculeas postea nominavit, Pudente et Polli-

14one consulibus. appellatus Germanicus idibus Hercu-


- 1 adibat ins. by Klein. 2pollutus P; polluit Peter.
3 gladiatorum P. * semper P, Lenze ; saepe Casaubon, Peter.


1 Similar mutilations are recorded by Dio, lxxii. 17, 2.

? The complete list of the new names as given to the months
is contained in Dio, lxxii. 15, 3. They are all Commodus’ own
names and titles. In Dio’s enumeration the new names are
applied differently from the list as given here, but the dates
given in c. xi.-xii. accord with Dio, and comparison with
known events shows that his is the correct order.

3 See note to c. viii. 6.

4 For a description of a spectacle lasting fourteen days, in
which Commodus fought with wild beasts and gladiators, see
Dio, lxxii. 18-21.

5 See c, xv, 8, 6 Of. c. xv. 4. 1 But see c. xii, 11.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XI. 6-14


eight times a day, and was in the habit of eating ,
while in the baths. He would enter the temples of |
the gods defiled with adulteries and human blood. \
He even aped a surgeon, going so far as to bleed |
men to death with scalpels.!.

Certain months were renamed in his honour by his
flatterers ; for August they substituted Commodus,
for September Hercules, for October Invictus, for
November Exsuperatorius, and for December
Amazonius, after his own surname.? He had been
called Amazonius, moreover, because of his passion
for his concubine Marcia,? whom he loved to have
portrayed as an Amazon, and for whose sake he even
wished to enter the arena of Rome dressed as an
Amazon.

He engaged in gladiatorial combats,* and accepted .
the names usually given to gladiators 5 with as much ;
pleasure as if he had been granted triumphal decora- :
tions. He regularly took part in the spectacles, and:
as often as he did so, ordered the fact to be inscribed |
in the public records. It is said that he engaged |
in gladiatorial bouts seven hundred and thirty-five;
times.”

He received the name of Caesar on the fourth day
before the Ides of the month usually called October, 12 Oct.,
which he later named Hercules, in the consulship of
Pudens and Pollio.? He was called Germanicus !! on
the Ides of ** Hercules" in the consulship of Maxi- Mod


3 On these names of the months see note to c..xi, 8.

? For these dates see c. ii. 1-5, and notes.

10 The surname was doubtless assumed by Commodus at
the same time that it was taken by Marcus (see note to Marc.,
xii. 9). It appears on a coin of Marcus and Commodus of
172; see Cohen, iii?, p. 183, no. 2.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


! go Peter; iterum et Apro P. 2quinties P.


! The official language describing his enthronement.

? See note to c. viii. 6.

3 Perhaps because of the plague (see Marc., xiii. 3) which
seems to have broken out again about this time; see Dio,
]xxii. 14, 3; Herodian, i. 12, 1-2.

4A gladiator provided with a heavy net in which he tried
to entangle his opponent; if successful he then killed him
with a dagger.

5 But see c. xi. 12. - $ See note to c. xi. 10.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XII. 2—XIII.


mus and Orfitus, XII. He was received into all the :
sacred colleges as a priest on the thirteenth day 20 Jan.,
before the Kalends of “Invictus,” in the consulship 175
of Piso and Julianus. He set out for Germany on
the fourteenth day before the Kalends of the month.19 May,
which he later named Aelius, and assumed the toga 175
in the same year. Together with his father he was
acclaimed Imperator on the fifth day before the 27 Nov.,
Kalends of ‘“ Exsuperatorius,’ in the year when
Pollio and Aper served their second consulships, and
he celebrated a triumph on the tenth day before the 23 Dec.,
Kalends of January in this same year. He set out
on his second expedition on the third day before the 3 Aug.,
Nones of ** Commodus " in the consulship of Orfitus
and Rufus. He was officially presented by the
army and the senate to be maintained in perpetuity
in the Palatine mansion,! henceforth called Commodi-
ana, on the eleventh day before the Kalends of?2 oct.,
* Romanus," in the year that Praesens was consul 180
for the second time. When he laid plans for a third
expedition, he was persuaded by the senate and
people to give it up. Vows? were assumed in his
behalf on the Nones of * Pius," when Fuscianus was 5 April
consul for the second time, Besides these facts, it is | ! 188
related in records that he fought 365 gladiatorial
combats in his father's reign. Afterwards, by van- :
quishing or slaying retiarii,* he won enough gladia- .
torial crowns to bring the number up to a thousand.’ `
He also killed with his own hand thousands of wild .
beasts of all kinds, even elephants. And he fre- :
quenty did these things before the eyes ofthe Roman .
people.

XIII. But, though vigorous enough for such ex-
ploits, he was otherwise weak aud diseased ; indeed,


COMMODUS ANTONINUS

3 etiam in opere suo Marius Maximus gloriatur. virium
ad conficiendas feras tantarum fuit, ut elephantum
conto transfigeret ! et orygis cornu basto transmiserit
et singulis ictibus multa milia ferarum ingentium con-

6 perium eius recusantibus provincialibus. quae omnia

8' Vale’ tantum scriberet. agebanturque omnia per
alios, qui etiam condemnationes in sinum vertisse


1 transigeret P. 2én om. in P.


1 An inscription from Mauretania, set up between 184 and
the death of Commodus, records the construction and repair
of redoubts along the border, and is probably to be connected
with this outbreak; see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 996. This may
also be the revolt &lluded to in Pert., iv. 2.

2 Probably in 182, when Commodus was acclaimed Im-
perator for the fifth time (see Cohen, iii?, p. 337, nos. 840-
847). A large number of Dacians who had been driven from
their homes were granted land in Roman territory ; see Dio,
Ixxii, 3, 3.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XIII. 2—XIV.


he had such a conspicuous growth on his groin that:
the people of Rome could see the swelling through his :
silken robes. Many verses- itten alluding to
this deformity ; and Marius Maxinrus prides himself
on preserving these ‘in ru Map of Commodus.
Such was his prowess in the slaying of wild beasts,
that he once transfixed an elephant with a pole,


pierced a gazelle’s horn with a spear, and on a
thousand occasions dispatched a mighty beast with a


propriety, that time and again he sat in the theatre


single blow. Such was his complete indifference re |


or amphitheatre dressed in a woman’s garments
and drank quite publicly.

The Moors! and the: Dacians? were conquered
during his reign, and peace was established in the
Pannonias,? but all by his legates, since such was the
manner of his life. The provincials in Britain,* Dacia,
and Germany 5 attempted to cast off his yoke, but all
these attempts were put down by his generals.
Commodus himself was so lazy and careless in signing !
documents that he answered many petitions with the
same formula, while in very many letters he merely
wrote the word * Farewell". All official business was \
carried on by others, who, it is said, even used con-
demnations to swell their purses. XIV. And because
he was so careless, moreover, a great famine arose in


3 An inscription of 185 records the construction of redoubts
along the Danube; see C.I.L., iii. 3385 = Dessau, Ins. Sel.,
395.

* See c. vi. 2 &nd note.

5 Probably in 187-188. It is referred to in an inscription as
expeditio felicissima tertia Germanica ; see C.I.L., v. 2155
= Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1574. According to c. xii, 8, Commodus
wished to lead the expedition but the **senate and people ”
would not allow it.


pn ies


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


1 So P (Ballou in “ Class. Philol.," iii. p. 273) ; et non in P
. acc. to Peter. 2 Eclectus Mommsen, Peter; electus P.


1 See note to c. vii. 1.

2 It was enacted by special decree, according to Dio, lxxii.
15, 6.

3 See c. iv. 7-8 and vi. 2.

* Of. c. vi. 6-8; vii. 4; ix. 2. Even Cleander was prefect
only from 186 to 189.


6 He had been a freedman and favourite of Lucius Verus;
see Ver., ix. 6.
8 Seo c. xvii. 1.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XIV. 2—XV. 4


Rome, not because there was any real shortage of
crops, but merely because those whothen ruled the state
were plundering the food supply.! As for those who
plundered on every hand, Commodus afterwards put
them to death and confiscated their property ; but
for the time he pretended that a golden age had
come,” * Commodian’”’ by name, and ordered a general
reduction of prices, the result of which was an even
greater scarcity.

In his reign many a man secured punishment for -
another or immunity tor himself by bribery. Indeed,
in return for money Commodus would grant a change
of punishment, the right of burial, the alleviation of.
wrongs, and the substitution of another for one con-
demned to be put to death. He sold provinces and
administrative posts, part of the proceeds accruing to
those through whom he made the sale and part to
Commodus himself. To some he sold even the
lives of their enemies. Under him the imperial
freedmen sold even the results of law-suits. He did
not long put up with Paternus and Perennis as pre-
fects ; 3 indeed, not one of the prefects whom he him- '
self had appointed remained in office as long as three
years. Most of them he killed, some with poison,
some with the sword. XV. Prefects of the city
he changed with equal readiness. He executed his
chamberlains with no compunctions whatever, even
though all that he had done had been at their bidding.
One of these chamberlains, however, , Eclectus by
name,5 forestalled him when he saw how ready
Commodus was to put the chamberlains to death, and
took part in a conspiracy to kill him.®

At gladiatorial shows he would come to watch and
stay to fight, covering his bare shoulders with a purple


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


l The Acta Urbis or Acta Diurna was a publication begun
by Julius Caesar and continued by his successors, which con-
tained official announcements, and general news that the
government desired to convey to the public.

? Cf. c. xi. 11. 3 See c. viii. 6 and note.

1 See c, xi. 10 and note.

5 In 192 a fire devastated the district east of the Forum and
& portion of the Palatine ; see Dio, Ixxii. 24, and Herodian, i.
14, 2-6. This seems to be the fire here alluded to, but accord-
ing to Dio, Commodus was in no way responsible for it.
After rebuilding what the fire had destroyed, Commodus as-
sumed the title Conditor ; see Cohen, iii?, p. 251 f., nos. 181-
184.

6 See c. xvii, 1.

7 According to Dio, Ixxii. 22, 3, this was engraved along with
his other titles on the Colossus (see c. xvii. 10). The term


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XV. 5—XVI. 2


cloth. And it was his custom, moreover, to order
the insertion in the city-gazette ! of everything he
did that was base or foul or cruel, or typical of a
gladiator? or a procurer—at least, the writings of
Marius Maximus so testify. He entitled the
Roman people the “ People of Commodus," ? since he |
had very often fought as a gladiator in their presence.’
And although the people regularly applauded him in
his frequent combats as though he were a god, he be-
came convinced that he was being laughed at, and
gave orders that the Roman people should be slain in
. the Amphitheatre by the marines who spread the.
awnings. He gave an order, also, for the burning of
the city,? as though it were his private colony, and
this order would have been executed had not Laetus,®
the prefect of the guard, deterred him. Among
other triumphal titles, he was also given the name
“ Captain of the Secutores ” 7 six hundred and twenty
times.

XVI. The prodigies that occurred in his reign, both
those which concerned the state and those which
affected Commodus personally, were as follows. A
comet appeared. Footprints of the gods were seen in
the Forum departing from it. Before the war of the
deserters 8 the heavens were ablaze. On the Kalends 1 Jan.,


' 193
primus palus is formed on the analogy of primus pilus, the


first centurion of a legion. The palus was the wooden pike
used by gladiators in practice. A secutor wore a helmet and
greaves and was armed with a long shield and a sword.

8 An outbreak in Gaul in 186, headed by a soldier named
Maternus, who gathered a band of fellow-soldiers and desper-
adoes and plundered the country. The Roman troops under
Pescennius Niger defeated and scattered them; whereupon,
Maternus himself fied to Italy and attempted to assassinate
Commodus, but was cenen and beheaded ; see Herodian, i.
10, and Pesc. Nig., iii. 4.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


3lucem fuerant etiam incendiariae aves ac dirae. de
Palatio ipse ad Caelium montem in Vectilianas aedes

7 vestimentis praesidens. galea eius bis per portam
Libitinensem elata est.

8  Congiarium dedit populo singulis denarios septin-
genos vicenos quinos. circa alios omnes parcissimus
fuit, quod luxuriae sumptibus aerarium minuerat.!


! minueret P.


! Regarded in early times as birds of ill-omen ; in the first
century after Christ, however, there was considerable difference
of opinion as to their identification ; see Plin., Nat. Hist., x. 86.

2 The school for gladiators; it was in the general neighbour-
hood of the Colosseum. Commodus planned to spend the
night of 31 Dec., 192 here, before appearing in public on the
next day as a secutor ; see Dio, lxxii. 22, 2.

316 was an ancient custom that these gates should be open
when Rome was at war.

3 See note to c. ix, 4.

5'The two porticus Minuciae were situated in the low-lying
district between the Capitoline Hill and the Tiber, close to
the Theatre of Marcellus, They were called respectively
Vetus and F'rumentaria ; in the latter were distributed the
tickets which entitled the holders to receive grain from the
public granaries,

€ According to Dio, lxxii. 21, 3, these cloaks were never
worn at the theatre except when an emperor died.


`


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XVI. 3-8


of January a swift coming mist and darkness arose in
the Circus ; and before dawn there had already been
fire-birds ! and ill-boding portents. Commodus him-
self moved his residence from the Palace to the
Vectilian Villa? on the Caelian hill, saying that he
could not sleep in the Palace. The twin gates of the
temple of Janus? opened of their own accord, and a
marble image of Anubis* was seen to move. In
the Minucian Portico a bronze statue of Hercules
sweated for several days. An owl, moreover, was
caught above his bed-chamber both at Lanuvium and
at Rome. He was himself responsible for no incon-
siderable an omen relating to himself ; for after he had
plunged his hand into the wound of a slain gladiator he
wiped it on his own head, and again, contrary to cus-
tom, he ordered the spectators to attend his gladia-
torial shows clad not in togas but in cloaks, a practice
usual at funerals, while he himself presided in the
vestments of a mourner. Twice, moreover, his helmet
was borne through the Gate of Libitina."

He gave largess to the people, 725 denarii to each
man. Toward all others he was close-fisted to a
degree, since the expense of his luxurious living had
drained the treasury. He held many races in the
Circus,? but rather as the result of a whim than as

7The gate of an amphitheatre through which were dragged
the bodies of slain gladiators, Libitina was the goddess who
presided over funerals.

8 This sum must be greatly exaggerated, unless it is a com-


Paon of what each citizen received during the whole of
ommodus’ reign. According to Dio, lxxii. 16, 1, he often


gave individual largesses of 140 denarii, and his coins show `


nine occasions when largess was given by him, seven of which
date from the time of his reign as sole emperor.

? On one occasion he exhibited thirty races in two hours;
see Dio, lxxii. 16, 1,


=e ot


—


COMMODUS ANTONINUS

XVII. His incitati, licet nimis sero, Quintus
Aemilius Laetus praefectus et Marcia concubina eius

5 Opera eius praeter lavacrum, quod Cleander nomine

6 ipsius fecerat, nulla exstant. sed nomen eius alienis

8ridicule etiam Carthaginem Alexandriam Commodian-
am togatam appellavit, cum classem quoque Africanam

9Commodianam Herculeam appellasset. | ornamenta


1 See note to Ver., iv. 8.

2 The story of the murder is given in greater detail by Dio,
lxxii. 22, 4, and especially by Herodian, i. 16-17. Eclectus
was also one of the conspirators ; see c. xv. 2,

*It was customary to fasten a hook to the bodies of con-
demned criminals and thus drag them to the Tiber. The
populace had demanded that this should be done to the body
of Tiberius (Suetonius, Tiberius, lxv. 1).

4Cf. c. xx, 1, and Dio, lxxiii. 2, 1. For his sepulchra] in-
scription see C.I.L., vi. 992 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 401.

S' The Thermae Commodianae ; their exact site is unknown.


-— —— A rr rg gr € coU MI


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XVI. 9—XVII: à


Ali act of religio, and also in order to enrich the
leaders of the factions.!

XVII. Because of these thirigs—but all too late—
Quintus Aemilius Laetus, prefect of the guard, atid
Marcia, his concubine, were roused to action and
entered into a conspiracy against his life, First they
gave him poison; and when this proved ineffective -
they had him strangled by the athlete with whom 31 b«c,
he was accustomed to exercise.? 192

Physically he was very well proportioned. His ex-
pression was dull, as-is usual in drunkards, and his
speech uncultivated. His hair was always dyed and
made lustrous by the use of gold dust, and he used to
singe his hair and beard because he was afraid of
barbers.

The people and senate demanded that his body be
dragged with the hook and cast into the Tiber; 3
later, however, at the bidding of Pertinax, it was
borne to the Mausoleum of Hadrian.*

No public works of his are in existence, except the
bath which Cleander built in his name. But
he inscribed his name on the works of others ; this
the senate erased.? Indeed, he did not even finish
the public works of his father. He did organize an
African fleet, which would have been useful, in case
the grain-supply from Alexandria were delayed."
He jestingly named Carthage Alexandria Com-
modiana Togata, after entitling the African fleet
Commodiana Herculea.2 He made certain additions


‘Of. c. xx. 5. Many inscriptions found throughout the
empire show Commodus’ name carefully erased. The same
procedure followed the death of Domitian.

7 The fleet was to convey grain to Rome from the province
of Africa.

8 See note to c. viii. 6.


VOL. I. X


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


3 “Hosti patriae honores detrahantur.  parricidae


honores detrahantur. parricida trahatur. hostis
patriae, parricida, gladiator in spoliario lanietur.
4 hostis deorum, carnifex senatus, hostis deorum, par-
5 ricida senatus; hostis deorum, hostis senatus. gladi-
atorem in spoliario. qui senatum occidit, in spoliario
ponatur; qui senatum occidit, unco trahatur; qui
innocentes occidit, unco trahatur. hostis, parricida,


! quantum Peter; quam P.


!On the Colossus see Hadr., xix. 12-18 and note. This
passage is incorrect, since Hadrian had replaced the head of
Nero by that of the Sun. According to Dio, lxxii. 22, 3,
Commodus also added the club and lion's skin characteristic


of Hercules (see c. viii, 5). Dio also gives the inscription .


(cf. c. xv. 8).
?Commemorated by coins with the legend Consecratio;


f ee ee |


——e eee — —À €


——


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XVII. 10—XVIII. 5


to the Colossus by way of ornamentation, all of which
were later taken off, and he also removed its head,
which was a likeness of Nero, and replaced it by a
likeness of himself, writing on the pedestal an inscrip-
tion in his usual style, not omitting the titles Gladia-
torius and Effeminatus.! And ‘yet Severus, a stern
emperor and a man whose character was well in keep-
ing with his name, moved by hatred for the senate—
or so it seems—exalted this creature to a place among
the gods? and granted him also a flamen, the
* Herculaneus Commodianus,” whom Commodus
while still alive had planned to have for himself.

Three sisters? survived him. Severus instituted
the observance of his birthday.

. XVIII. Loud were the acclamations of the senate
after the death of Commodus. And that the senate's
opinion of him may be known, I have quoted from
Marius Maximus the acclamations themselves,* and
the content of the senate's decree :

* From him who was a foe of his fatherland let his
honours be taken away; let the honours of the
murderer be taken away ; let the murderer be dragged
in the dust. The foe of his fatherland, the murderer,
the gladiator, in the charnel-house let him be
mangled. He is foe to the gods, slayer of the senate,
foe to the gods, murderer of the senate, foe of the
gods, foe of the senate. Cast the gladiator into the
charnel-house. He who slew the senate, let him be
dragged with the hook ; he who slew the guiltless, let


see Cohen, iii?, p. 234, no. 61; see also p. 359, nos, 1009-1010.
He also appears as Divus Commodus in inscriptions.

3 Arria Fadilla, Cornificia, and Vibia Aurelia Sabina.

4 Cf. Av. Cass., xiii. 1 and note. The outcries are mentioned
by Dio, lxxiii. 2, 2-4. i


x 2


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


6vere vere. qui sanguini suo non pepercit, unco

7 trahatur. qui te occisurus fuit, unco trahatur. no-
biscum timuisti, nobiscum periclitatus es. ut salvi
simus, luppiter optime maxime, serva nobis Per-

8tinacem. fidei praetorianorum feliciter. praetoriis
cohortibus feliciter. exercitibus Romanis feliciter.
pietati senatus feliciter.

9  Parricida trahatur. rogamus, Auguste, parricida

10 trahatur. hoc rogamus, parricida trahatur. exaudi `
Caesar: delatores ad leonem. exaudi Caesar: Spera-

l1tum ad leonem. victoriae populi Romani feliciter.
fidei militum feliciter. fidei praetorianorum feliciter.
cohortibus praetoriis feliciter.

12 Hostis statuas undique, parricidae statuas undique,
gladiatoris statuas undique.  gladiatoris et parricidae

13 statuae detrahantur. necator civium trahatur. parri-
cida civium trahatur. gladiatoris statuae detrahantur.

14te salvo salvi et securi sumus, vere vere, modo vere,
modo digne, modo vere, modo libere.

15 Nunc securi sumus ; delatoribus metum. ut securi
simus,? delatoribus metum. ut? salvi simus, delatores
de senatu, delatoribus fustem. te salvo delatores ad

16leonem. te imperante delatoribus fustem.


! uere Peter; seuere P. ? sumus P. 3 ut ins. by
Salmasius; om. in P.


! Evidently addressed to Pertinax.
? Of. Pert., v. 1. ? Apparently an informer.


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XVIII. 6-16


him be dragged with the hook—a foe, a murderer,
verily, verily. He who spared not his own blood, let
him be dragged with the hook ; he who would have
slain you,! let him be dragged with the hook. You
were in terror along with us, you were endangered
along with us. That we may be safe, O Jupiter Best
and Greatest, save for us Pertinax.? Long life to the
guardian care of the praetorians! Long life to the
praetorian cohorts! Long life to the armies of Rome!
Long life to the loyalty of the senate!

Let the murderer he dragged in the dust. We
beseech you, O Sire, let the murderer be dragged in
the dust. This we beseech you, let the murderer be
dragged in the dust. Hearken, Caesar: to the lions
with the informers! Hearken Caesar: to the lions
with .Speratus!? Long life to the victory of the
Roman people! Long life to the soldiers’ guardian
care! Long life to the guardian care of the prae-
torians! Long life to the praetorian cohorts !

On all sides are statues of the foe, on all sides are
statues of the murderer, on all sides are statues of
the gladiator. The statues of the murderer and
gladiator, let them be cast down. The slayer of
citizens, let bim be dragged in the dust. The
murderer of citizens, let him be dragged in the dust.
Let the statues of the gladiator be overthrown.
While you are safe, we too are safe and untroubled,
verily, verily, if in very truth, then with honour, if
in very truth, then with freedom.

Now at last we are secure; let informers tremble.
That we may be secure, let informers tremble. That
we may besafe, cast informers aut of the senate, the club
for informers! While you are safe, to the lions with
informers! While you are ruler, the club for informers!


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


XIX.  Parricidae gladiatoris memoria aboleatur,
parricidae gladiatoris statuae detrahantur. impuri
gladiatoris memoria aboleatur. gladiatorem in spoli-

2ario. exaudi Caesar : carnifex unco trahatur. carnifex
senatus more maiorum unco trahatur. saevior Do-
mitiano, impurior Nerone. sic fecit, sic patiatur.
memoriae innocentium serventur. honores innocent-
ium restituas, rogamus.  parricidae cadaver unco

3trahatur. gladiatoris cadaver unco trahatur. gladi-
atoris cadaver in spoliario ponatur. perroga, perroga :

omnes censemus unco trahendum. qui omnes occi-

. dit, unco trahatur. qui omnem aetatem occidit, unco
trahatur. qui utrumque sexum occidit, unco trahatur.

5qui sanguini suo non pepercit, unco trahatur. qui
templa spoliavit, unco trahatur. qui testamenta de-
levit, unco trahatur. qui vivos spoliavit, unco trahatur.

6servis serviimus, qui pretia vitae exegit, unco tra-
hatur. qui pretia vitae exegit et fidem non servavit,
unco trahatur. qui senatum vendidit, unco trahatur.
qui filiis abstulit hereditatem, unco trahatur.


7 Indices de senatu, delatores de senatu, servorum


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XIX. 2-7


Let the memory of the murderer and the gladiator
be utterly wiped away. Let the statues of the mur-
derer and the gladiator be overthrown. Let the
memory of the foul gladiator be utterly wiped away.
Cast the gladiator into the charnel-house. Hearken,
Caesar: let the slayer be dragged with the hook. In
the manner of our fathers let the slayer of the senate |
be dragged with the hook. More savage than \
Domitian, more foul than Nero. As he did unto /
others, let it be done unto him. Letthe remembrance
of the guiltless be preserved. Restore the honours
of the guiltless, we beseech you. Let the body of
the murderer be dragged with the hook, let the body
of the gladiator be dragged with the hook, let the body
of the gladiator be cast into the charnel-house. Call
for our vote, call for our vote: with one accord we
reply, let him be dragged with the hook. He who
slew all men, let him be dragged with the hook!
He who slew young and old, let him be dragged;
with the hook. He who slew man and woman, let:
him be dragged with the hook. He who spared not
his own blood, let him be dragged with the hook. ;
He who plundered temples, let him be dragged with
the hook. He who set aside the testaments of the
dead, let him be dragged. with the hook. He who
plundered the living, let him be dragged with the
hook. We have been slaves to slaves. He who de-
manded a price for the life of a man, let him be
dragged with the hook. He who demanded a price
for a life and kept not his promise, let him be dragged
with the hook. He who sold the senate, let him be
dragged with the hook. He who took from sons
their patrimony, let him be dragged with the hook.

Spies and informers, cast them out of the senate.


H


COMMODUS ANTONINUS


subornatores de senatu. et tu nobiscum timuisti ;
8omnia scis et bonos et malos nosti. omnia scis,
omnia emenda; pro te timuimus. o nos felices, te
vere! imperante! de parricida refer, refer, perroga.
9 praesentiam tuam rogamus. innocentes sepulti non
sunt. parricidae cadaver trahatur. parricida sepultos
eruit; parricidae cadaver trabatur."  -

2, 8 senatus adclamavit : ** Quo auctore sepelierunt ? par-
ricida sepultus eruatur,? trahatur."  Cincius Severus
dixit: **Iniuste sepultus est. qua pontifex dico, hoc

4 collegium pontificum dicit. quoniam laeta? percensui,
nunc convertar ad necessaria: censeo quas * is, qui
nonnisi ad perniciem civium et ad dedecus suum vixit,
ob honorem suum decerni coegit, abolendas statuas,

5 quae undique sunt abolendae, nomenque ex omnibus
privatis publicisque monumentis eradendum menses-
que iis nominibus nuncupandos quibus nuncupabantur,
cum primum illud malum in re publica incubuit."


1 uere Editor (cf. Claud., iv. 8); uiro P; uero Exc. Cusana,


Mommsen; wiso Hirschfeld, Peter 2. 2serualur P.
3laeta Peter!; laetam P; laeta tam Baehrens, Peter?,
* quae P.


! Commemorated in an inscription from Rome, C.I.L., vi.
2126. He is one of the characters in the Deipnosophistai of
Athenaeus.

? An office probably created by Claudius. The patrimonium
comprised the estates regarded as the property of the emperor
and transmitted from one emperor to another, even when
there was no direct succession. It was distinguished, both
from the fiscus, or imperial treasury, and from the res privata,
the private property of any indiyidual emperor; the latter


Bla


COMMODUS ANTONINUS XIX. 8—XX. 5


Suborners of slaves, cast them out of the senate.
You, too, were in terror along with us; you know all,
you know both the good and the evil. You know all
that we were forced to purchase ; all we have feared
for your sake. Happy are we, now that you are
emperor in truth. Put it to the vote concerning the
murderer, put it to the vote, put the question. We
ask your presence. The guiltless are yet unburied ;
let the body of the murderer be dragged in the
dust. The murderer dug up the buried; let the
body of the murderer be dragged in the dust."

XX. The body of Commodus was buried during
the night, after Livius Laurensis,! the steward of the
imperial estate,? had surrendered it at the bidding of
Pertinax? to Fabius Cilo,* the consul elect. At this.
the senate cried out: ‘With whose authority have:
they buried him? The buried murderer, let him be:
dug up, let him be dragged in the dust."  Cincius
Severus? said: **Wrongfully has he been buried,
And as I speak as pontifex, so speaks the college of
the pontifices. And now, having recounted what is
joyful, 1 shall proceed to what is needful: I give it
as my opinion that the statues should be overthrown
which this man, who lived but for the destruction of
his fellow-citizens and for his own shame, forced us to
decree in his honour ; wherever they are, they should
be east down. His name, moreover, should be erased
from all public and private records, and the months 7
should be once more called by the names whereby they
were called when this scourge first fell upon the state.”


was placed in charge of a special procurator by Severus; see
Sev., xii. 4.

3 See c. xvii. 4. 1 See Carac., iii. 2 and note.

5 Bee Sev., xiii. 9, 6 See c, xvii. 6, ? See c, xi. 8.


HELVIUS PERTINAX
IULII CAPITOLINI


I. Publio Helvio Pertinaci pater libertinus Helvius
Successus fuit, qui filio nomen ex continuatione lig-
nariae negotiationis, quod pertinaciter eam rem -

2gereret, imposuisse fatetur, natus est Pertinax in
Appennino in villa matris. equus pullus ea hora qua
natus est in tegulas ascendit atque ibi breviter com-

6ronum, ducendi ordinis dignitatem petiit. dein prae-


1et om. in P. 2 stirpem P; stipem Peter.


1At Alba Pompeia in Liguria, according to Dio, lxxiii. 1.
For the date see c. xv. 6,

2 The text is almost certainly corrupt,

3 Frequently cited in the Noctes Atticae of Aulus Gellius,
one of his pupils. He is well known asthe composer of metri-
cal summaries of the Aeneid and of Terence’s comedies,

* Consul in 144.


BY


JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. Publius Helvius Pertinax was the son of a freed-
man, Helvius Successus by name, who confessed that
he gave this name to his son because of his own long-
standing connection with the timber-trade, for he had
conducted that business with pertinacity. Pertinax
himself was born in the Apennines! on an estate Aug.,
which belonged to his mother. The hour he was born 126
a black horse climbed to the roof, and after remaining
there for a short time, fell to the ground and died.
Disturbed by this occurrence, his father went to a
Chaldean, and he prophesied future greatness for the
boy, saying that he himself had lost his child.? Asa
boy, Pertinax was educated in the rudiments of
literature and in arithmetic and was also put under
the care of a Greek teacher of grammar and, later? of
Sulpicius Apollinaris ;? after receiving- instruction
from this man, Pertinax himself took up the teaching
of grammar.

But when he found little profit in this profession,
with the aid of Lollianus Avitus, a former consul * ,
and his father's patron, he sought an appointment to |
a command in the ranks.’ Soon afterwards, in the


5 As chief centurion; see note to Av. Cass., i. 1.


1 persecuta P. 2 artibus Peter; a partibus P.


! 4.e. Antoninus Pius,

? An independent company of infantry, normally number-
ing five hundred and usually commanded by & young man of
the equestrian order as the first stage in his official career.

? The war waged under the nominal command of Verus in
162-166 ; see Marc., ix. 1 and Ver., vii.

4 Probably as tribune of a legion ; see Dio, lxxiii. 3, 1. Dio
adds that he secured this post through the favour of Claudius
Pompeianus (cf. § 4), his former school-mate.

5 As praefectus alae, or commander of an independent
squadron of cavalry. This was the third of the military posts
required of members of the equestrian order who were as-
pirants for & political career,

sOn the alimenia see note to Hadr., vii, 8. The Via
Aemilia ran from Ariminum (Rimini) on the Adriatic through
Bononia (Bologna) to Placentia (Piacenza) on the Po,


——-


PERTINAX I. 6—II. 6


reign of Titus Aurelius,! he set out for Syria as pre-
fect of a cohort,? and there, because he had used the
imperial post without official letters of recommen-
dation, he was forced by the governor of Syria to
make his way from Antioch to his station on foot.
II. Winning promotion because of the energy he
showed in the Parthian war, he was transferred to
Britain* and there retained. Later he led a squadron 5
in Moesia, and after that he supervised the distribution
of grants to the poor on the Aemilian Way. Next,
he commanded the German fleet His mother
followed him all the way to Germany, and there she
died, and her tomb is said to be still standing there.
From this command he was transferred to Dacia? at
a salary of two hundred thousand sesterces, but
through the machinations of certain persons he came
to be distrusted by Marcus and was removed from
this post ; afterwards, however, through the influence
of Claudius Pompeianus, the son-in-law of Marcus,?
he was detailed to the command of detachments as
though likely to be appointed Pompeianus' aide.!^
Meeting with approval in this position, he was en-
rolled in the senate. Later, when he had won suc-
cess in war for the second time, the plot which had
been made against him was revealed, and Marcus, in
order to remedy the wrong he had done him, raised


7 The fleet on the Rhine.

® As procurator, with the rank of ducenarius. He had the
supervision of the finances of the province.

? See Marc., xx. 6. Pompeianus had befriended him previ-
ously (see § 1 and note).

! Pompeianus was governor of Pannonia Inferior in 167
(see note to Marc., xx. 7), &nd it was probably at this time
that he appointed Pertinax to this command.


— —


lef om. in P. 2coactiliariam Scaliger, Mommsen ;
coactiliriam P; cocitliciam Salmasius, Peter.


14,e, the rank in the senate of those who had held the
ry iba

2The First Adiutrix, which in the second century was
quartered in Upper Pannonia.

*In connection with Marcus’ campaign in Pannonia; see
note to Marc., xiv. 6.

* He evidently accompanied Marcus thither at the time of
Cassius’ revolt; see Marc., xxv. 1.

5 Of, c. ix. 4-6; xiii. 4.


PERTINAX II. 7—1II. 3


him to the rank of praetor ! and put him in command
of the First Legion? Whereupon Pertinax straight-
way rescued Raetia and Noricum from the enemy.?
Because of his conspicuous prowess in this campaign
he was appointed, on the recommendation of Marcus,
to the consulship. Marcus' speech has been preserved ca. 175
in the works of Marius Maximus ; it contains a eulogy
of him and relates, moreover, everything that he did
and suffered. And besides this speech, which it would
take too much space to incorporate in this work,
Marcus praised Pertinax frequently, both in the as-
semblies of soldiers and in the senate, and publicly
expressed regret that he was a senator and therefore
could not be made prefect of the guard. After Cassius’
revolt had been suppressed, Pertinax set out from Syria *175
to protect the bank of the Danube, and presently he
was appointed to govern both the Moesias and, soon
thereafter, Dacia. And by reason of his success in
these provinces, he won the appointment to Syria.

ILI. Up to the time of his administration of Syria,,
Pertinax preserved his honesty, but after the death |
of Marcus he became desirous of wealth, and was in |
consequence assailed by popular gibes.* It was:
not until after he had governed four consular pro-
vinces and had become a rich man that he entered
the Roman senate-chamber, which, during all his
career as senator, he had never before seen, for
during his term as consul he had been absent from
Rome. Immediately after this, he received orders
. from Perennis to retire to his fathers farm in182
Liguria, ^ where his father had kept a cloth-maker's

* He seems to have been in Syria during the short term for


which he was appointed consul; see c. ii. 7 and 10.
7 See note to c. i. 2.


! litteris Peter; litteras P. ? contra «se ipse Lenze ;
contra ipse P ; contra imperatorem Obrecht, Peter. 3 Bri-
tanniam P, Peter. - *carminum Peter? ; earum P.


1 See Com., vi. 2 and notes. 2 See Com., vi. 11 and vii. 1.

3 See Hadr., vii. 8, and c. ii. 2. He was now praefectus
alimentorum, charged with the supervision of the alimenta
for the whole of Italy, whereas previously he had been respon-
sible for one district.


PERTINAX III. 4—IV. 3


shop. On coming to Liguria, however, he bought
up a great number of farms, and added countless
buildings to his father's shop, which he still kept in
its original form ; and there he stayed for three years
carrying on the business through his slaves.

After Perennis had been put to death, Commodus 185
made amends to Pertinax, and in a letter asked him
to set out for Britain.! After his arrival there he kept
the soldiers from any revolt, for they wished to set
up some other man as emperor, preferably Pertinax
himself. And now Pertinax acquired an evil oharacter
for enviousness, for he was said to have laid before |
Commodus the charge that Antistius Burrus and
Arrius Antoninus were aspiring to the throne.? And `
certainly he did suppress a mutiny against himself in
Britain, but in so doing he came into great danger ;
for in a mutiny of a legion he was almost killed, and
indeed was left among the slain. This mutiny
Pertinax punished very severely. Later on, however,
he petitioned to be excused from his governorship,
saying that the legions were hostile to him because
he had been strict in his discipline. IV. After he had
been relieved of this post, he was put in charge of the
grants to the poor? Next he was made proconsul
of Africa. During this proconsulship, it is said, he
suppressed many rebellions by the aid of prophetic
verses which issued from the temple of Caelestis.*
Next he was made prefect ofthe city, and in this office,
as successor to Fuscianus,* a very stern man, Pertinax


‘The tutelary goddess of Carthage, Tanith, worshipped in
the imperial period under the name of Caelestis Afrorum Dea.
Her cult extended through northern Africa to Spain and was
spread by soldiers over the empire. See also Macr., iii. 1.

5 See Marc., ili. 8.


VOL. I, Y


ipsi Commodo plurimum placuit, quia . . . . illi esset

8imperator appellatus. factus est autem sexagenario

9maior imperator pridie kal. Ian. de castris nocte
cum ad senatum venisset et cellam curiae iussisset
aperiri, neque inveniretur aedituus, in Templo Con-


! electus P. 2et Salmasius; ut P. 3 electo P. ME ger-
manici P. 5 commodo P.


! No successful attempt has been made to fill this lacuna.

2 See Com., xvii. 1.

3 Twelve thousand sesterces, or three thousand denarii;
see c. xv. 7, and Dio, lxxiii. 1, 2. According to c. xv. 7, he
paid only half of it, but according to Dio, lxxiii. 5, 4, he paid
all that he had promised.

1 According to Dio, lxxiii. 1, 3, the soldiers were not en-
thusiastic.


= + oo


PERTINAX IV. 4-11


was exceedingly gentle and considerate, and he ~
proved very pleasing:to Commodus himself, for he
was . . .! when Pertinax was made consul for the 192
second time. And while in this position, Pertinax,
did not avoid complicity in the murder of Commodus,
when a share in this plot was offered him by the other
conspirators.

After Commodus was slain, Laetus, the prefect
of the guard, and Eclectus, the chamberlain, came to
Pertinax and reassured him, and then led him to the .
camp. There he harangued the soldiers, promised
a donative,? and said that the imperial power had been
thrust upon him by Laetus and Eclectus. It was
pretended, moreover, that Commodus had died a
natural death, chiefly because the soldiers feared that |
their loyalty was merely being tested. Finally, and `
at first by only a few, Pertinax was hailed as emperor.* |
He was made emperor on the day before the Kalends 31 Dec.,
of January, being then more than sixty years old. 19?
During the night he came from the camp to the
senate, but, when he ordered the opening of the hall
of the senate-house and the attendant could not be
found, he seated himself in the Temple of Concord.5
And when Claudius Pompeianus, Marcus' son-in-law,
came to him and bemoaned the death of Commodus,
Pertinax urged him to take the throne; Claudius,
however, seeing that Pertinax was already invested
with the imperial power, refused. Without further
delay, therefore, all the magistrates, in company with
the consul, came to the senate-bouse, and Pertinax,
who had come in " night, was saluted as emperor.


* 5Sixty-six.
$ At the western end of the Forum at the foot of the Capi-
toline Hill. The senate often met there.
y 2


3scelerum Commodi, post te videmus ". cui Pertinax
respondit: “Iuvenis es consul nec parendi scis
necessitates. paruerunt? inviti Commodo, sed ubi
habuerunt facultatem, quid semper voluerint osten-

5 primus sane omnium ea die qua Augustus est appel-


1 marcianum P. 2 parauerunt P. 3 non ins. in P
corr.; om. in P!, 1 omnis P}.


1 See Com., xviii.-xix.

2 Pertinax refused this name for his wife and that of Caesar
for his son; see c. vi, 9 and Dio, lxxiii. 7, 1-2. Dio suggests
that it was on account of her bad character; see also c. xiii.
8. However, Titiana is called Augusta in inscriptions and on
coins,

? See Hadr., vi. 4 and note. 3 See note to Marc., vi. 6.


PERTINAX V. 2-7


V. Pertinax, on his part, after his own praises had
been recited by the consul and Commodus had been
execrated in the outcries of the senate,! returned.
thanks to the senate in general, and in particular to `
Laetus, the prefect of the guard, through whose in--
strumentality Commodus had been slain and he him-
self declared emperor. |

When Pertinax had returned thanks to Laetus,
however, Falco, the consul, said: “We may know
what sort of an emperor you will be from this, that we
see behind you Laetus and Marcia, the instruments
of Commodus' crimes". To him Pertinax replied:
“ You are young, Consul, and do not know the neces-
sity of obedience. They obeyed Commodus, but
against their will, and as soon as they had an oppor-
tunity, they showed what had always been their
desire.” On the same day that he was entitled
Augustus, at the very hour at which he was paying
his vows on the Capitolium, Flavia Titiana, his wife,
was also given the name of Augusta? Of all the
emperors he was the first to receive the title of
Father of his Country on the day when he was named
Augustus? And at the same time he received the
proconsular power and the right of making four pro-
posals to the senate *—a combination which Pertinax
regarded as an omen. —

And so Pertinax repaired to the Palace, which was
vacant at that time, for Commodus had been slain in
the Vectilian Villa.5 And on the first day of his
reign, when the tribune asked for the watchword, he
gave “let us be-soldiers,” as if reproving the former
reign for its inactivity. As a matter of fact, he had
really used this same watchword before in all his


5 See Com., xvi. 3.


VI. dederat. exprobrationem autem istam milites non
tulerunt statimque de imperatore mutando cogitarunt.
2ea die etiam ad convivium magistratus et proceres
senatus rogavit, quam consuetudinem Commodus
3praetermiserat. sane iam! postero kalendarum die
cum statuae Commodi deicerentur, gemuerunt mili-
tes, simul quia iterum signum idem dederat imperator.
4timebatur autem militia sub sene imperatore. de-
nique tertium nonarum diem votis ipsis milites Tria-
rium Maternum Lascivium, senatorem nobilem, ducere
in castra voluerunt, ut eum rebus Romanis imponerent.
5sed ille nudus fugit atque ad Pertinacem in Palatium
venit et post ex urbe decessit.
6 Timore sane Pertinax coactus omnia quae Commo-
7 dus militibus et veteranis dederat confirmavit. susci-
pere se etiam imperium a senatu dixit, quod iam sponte
8inierat. quaestionem maiestatis penitus tulit cum
iureiurando, revocavit etiam eos qui deportati fuerant
crimine maiestatis, eorum memoria restituta qui occisi
9fuerant. filium eius senatus Caesarem appellavit.
sed Pertinax nec uxoris Augustae appellationem re-
10 cepit et de filio dixit: “cum meruerit". et cum
Commodus adlectionibus innumeris praetorias mis-
cuisset, senatus consultum Pertinax fecit iussitque


!4am Peter; cum P.


Ld


1 Of, Com., xx. 4-5.

2 Yet according to c. iv. 11 and Dio, lxxiii. 1, 4, he was
regularly elected by the senate.

3 According to Dio, Ixxiii. 5, 3, their bodies were disinterred
and then laid 1n their ancestral tombs.

4 See note to c. v. 4. ? See note to c. ii. 6. `


PERTINAX VI. 2-10


commands. VI. Butthe soldiers would not tolerate a
reproof and straightway began to make plans for chang-
ing the emperor. On this same day also he invited
the magistrates and the chief men of the senate to a
banquet, a practice which Commodus had discon-
tinued. But, indeed, on the day after the Kalends? Jan.,
of January, when the statues of Commodus were 193
overthrown,! the soldiers groaned aloud, for he gave
this same watchword for the second time, and besides
they dreaded service under an emperor advanced in
years. Finally on the third of the month, just as the
vows were being assumed, the soldiers tried to lead
Triarius Maternus Lascivius, a senator of distinction,
to the camp, in order to invest him with the sove-
reignty of the Roman Empire. He, however, fled
from them quite naked and came to Pertinax in the
Palace and presently departed from the city.

Induced by fear, Pertinax ratified all the concessions
which Commodus had made to the soldiers and
veterans. He declared, also, that he had received
from the senate the sovereignty which, in fact, he had
already assumed on his own responsibility? He
abolished trials for treason absolutely and bound
himself thereto by an oath, he recalled those who
had been exiled on the charge of treason, and he re-
established the good name of those who had been:
slain. The senate granted his son the name of;
Caesar, but Pertinax not only refused to allow the
name Augusta to be conferred on his wife but also,
in the case of his son, said: “ Only when he earns it ’’.*
And since Commodus had obscured the significance
of the praetorian rank? by countless appointments
thereto, Pertinax, after securing the passage of a
decree of the senate, issued an order that those who


leonuictos Faber, Peter; uinctos P. *adiluram P.
3 satius Gruter; statius P!; sanctius P corr. 4 pecuniam P.


1 In cases where there was no will or no natural heir the
í property reverted to the imperial treasury.
? Cf, c. vi. 6.
*This figure is also given by Dio, lxxiii. 5, 4 (250,000
denarii). ;
4Q. Hedius Rufus Lollianus Gentianus was the son of the
patron of Pertinax' father; see c. i, 5.


PERTINAX VI. 11-®VII. 7


had secured the rank of praetor not by actual service,
but by appointment, should be ranked below those
who had been praetors in reality. But by this act
also he brought on himself the bitter enmity of many
men. VII. He gave orders for the taking of a new
census. He gave orders, too, that men convicted of
lodging false accusations should be punished with
severity, exercising, nevertheless, greater modera-
tion than former emperors, and at the same time
ordaining a separate punishment for each rank in
. ease any of its members should be convicted of
this offence. He enacted a law, moreover, that
an old will should not become invalid before the new
one was formally completed, fearing that some time
the privy-purse might in this way succeed to an
inheritance.! He declared that for his own part he
would accept no legacy which came to him either:
through flattery or by reason of legal entanglements if-
thereby the rightful heirs and the near of kin should
be robbed of their rights, and when the decree of the
senate was passed, he added these words: *It is
better, O Conscript Fathers, to rule a state that is im-
. poverished, than to attain to a great mass of wealth by
paths of peril and dishonour". He paid the donatives
and largesses which Commodus had promised,? and pro-
vided with the greatest care for the grain-supply. And
when the treasury was drained to such a degree that he
was unable to put his hands on more than a million
sesterces,?as he himself admitted, he was forced, in vio-
lation of a previous promise, to exact certain revenues
which Commodus had remitted. And finally, when .
Lollianus Gentianus,* a man of consular rank, brought
him to task for breaking his promise, he excused him-
self on the ground that it was a case of necessity.


* PERTINAX

9 Palatio videbantur inserti. et de iis quos vendi iussit
multi postea reducti ad ministerium  oblectarunt
senem, qui! quidem per alios principes usque ad
10senatorium dignitatem pervenerunt. scurras turpis-
simorum nominum dedecora praeferentes ? proscripsit
llac vendidit. cuius nundinationis pecuniam, quae
VIII. ingens fuit, militibus donativo dedit. a libertis etiam
ea exegit quibus Commodo vendente ditati fuerant.
2auctio sane rerum Commodi in his insignior fuit:
vestis subtegmine serico aureis filis insigni opere,’
tunicas paenulasque, lacernas et chiridotas Dalmatarum
et cirratas militares purpureasque chlamydes Grae-

3 canicas atque castrenses. et cuculli Bardaici et toga
4armaque gladiatoria gemmis auroque.composita. et
machaeras Herculaneas et torques gladiatorias vasaque
de luto* auro ebore argento citroque composita.
5atque etiam phallovitrobuli? ex materie eadem et
vasa Samnitica calfactandae resinae ac pici devel-
6lendis hominibus ac leviginandis. nec non vehicula
arte fabricae nova perplexis divisisque rotarum orbi-


1 gu om. in P. ? perferentes P. 3 4nsigni opere
Casaubon ; insignior per P. ide luto Editor; eludo P;
eluto Peter’; de ludo Krauss, Peter’. 5 phallouitrobuli


Egnatius, Peter’; phandowirobuli P, Peter?,


1 See Com., v. 4.

?Com., X. 8. According to Dio, lxxiii. 6, 2, it was Laetus
who offered these for sale.

3 See c. iv. 6. He also gave a largess of 100 denarii to
each; see c. xv. 7; Dio, Ixxiii. 5, 4; and the coins with the
legend Liberalitas Aug(usti), Cohen, iii*, p. 392 f., nos. 23-98.

+See Com., xiv., 4-7. 5 Corn., viii, 8.

ê The bardocucullus, a heavy coarse cloak with a hood. It
seems to have been named from the Bardaei, a tribe in


PERTINAX VII. 8—VIII. 6


He held a sale of Commodus' belongings, even,


ordering the sale of all his youths and concubines, |
except those who had apparently been brought to,
the Palace by force.! Of those whom he ordered ;


sold, however, many were soon brought back to his-


service and ministered to the pleasures of the old
man, and under other emperors they even attained
to the rank of senator. Certain buffoons, also, who
bore the shame of unmentionable names,? he out-
lawed and sold. The moneys gained in this traffick-
ing, which were immense, he used for a donative to the
soldiers? "VIII. He also demanded from Commodus’
freedmen the sums wherewith they had been en-
riched when Commodus held his sales. In the
sale of Commodus' goods the following articles were
especially noteworthy : robes of silk foundation with
gold embroidery of remarkable workmanship ; tunics, .
mantles and coats; tunics made with long sleeves in
the manner of the Dalmatians ? and fringed military
cloaks; purple cloaks made in the Greek fashion,
and purple cloaks made for service in the camp.
Also Bardaean hooded cloaks,9 and a gladiator's toga
and harness finished in gold and jewels ; also swords,
such as those with which Hercules is represented,


and the necklaces worn by gladiators, and vessels,
some of pottery, some of gold, some of ivory, some of :


silver, and some of citrus wood. Also cups in the |
shape of the phallus, made of these same materials; .
and Samnite pots for heating the resin and pitch used -


for depilating men and making their skins smooth.
And furthermore, carriages, the very latest master-
pieces of the art, made with entwined and carven
Illyricum, but it was also manufactured in Gaul (see Martial,
i, 58, 5).


— oo


bus ! et exquisitis sedilibus nunc ad solem declinandum
7 nunc ad spiritus opportunitatem per vertiginem ; et
alia iter metientia horasque monstrantia et cetera
vitiis eius convenientia. |
8 Reddidit praeterea dominis eos qui se ex privatis
9 domibus in aulam contulerant. convivium impera-
torium ex immenso ad certum revocavit modum.
10 sumptus etiam omnes Commodi recidit? exemplo
autem imperatoris, cum ille parcius se ageret, ex
1l omnium continentia vilitas nata est. nam impera-
torium sumptum pulsis non necessariis ad soliti dimi-
IX. dium detraxit. praemia militantibus posuit. aes
alienum, quod primo imperii tempore contraxerat,
2solvit. aerarium in suum statum restituit. ad opera
publica certum sumptum constituit. reformandis
viis? pecuniam contulit. stipendia plurimis retro
debita exsolvit. obeundis postremo cunctis muneri-
3 bus fiscum parem fecit. alimentaria etiam compendia,
quae novém annorum ex instituto Traiani debebantur,
obdurata verecundia sustulit.
4  Avaritiae suspicione privatus non caruit, cum apud *
Vada Sabatia oppressis faenore possessoribus latius
5suos tenderet 5 fines. denique ex versu Luciliano
6agrarius mergus est appellatus. multi autem eum


! urbibus P. ? recidit Egnatius ; reddit P. 3 uiis
Casaubon; suis P. 4 aptit P. 5 tenderet Casaubon ;
teneret P.

1 Cf. c, xii. 5.


2See note to Hadr., vii. 8. Pertinax had himself held
offices in this branch of the government ; see c. ii. 2 and c.
iv. 1.

? Cf. c. iii. 1. * Cf. c. xiii. 4.

5 The famous satirist of the second century B.C.


PERTINAX VIII. 7—IX. 2


wheels and carefully planned seats that could be .
turned so as to avoid the sun at one moment, at -
another, face thé breeze. There were other carriages
that measured the road, and showed the time; and
still others designed for the indulgence of his vices.

Pertinax restored to their masters, moreover, all
slaves who had come from private homes to the
Palace. He reduced the imperial banquets from
something absolutely unlimited to a fixed standard,}
and, indeed, cut down all expenses from what they;
had been under Commodus. And from the example
set by the emperor, who lived rather simply, there
resulted a general economy and a consequent reduc-
tion in the cost of living; for by eliminating the
unessentials he reduced the upkeep of the court to
half the usual amount. IX. He established rewards
for the soldiers, paid the debt which he had con-
tracted at the beginning of his reign, and restored
the treasury to its normal condition. He set aside
a fixed sum for public buildings, furnished funds for
repairing the highways, and paid the arrears in the
salaries of very many men. Finally, he made the
privy-purse capable of sustaining all the demands
made upon it, and with rigorous honesty he even
assumed the responsibility for nine years' arrears of
money for the poor? which was owed through a
statute of Trajan's.

Before he was made emperor he was not free from |
the suspicion of greed,’ for he had extended his own,
holdings at Vada Sabatia * by foreclosing mortgages ;
indeed, in a line quoted from Lucilius 5 he was called
a land-shark.6 Many men, moreover, have set down


8 Properly a kind of sea-gull, proverbial asa type of voracious-
ness; see Pliny, Nat. Hist., xi. 202.


etiam in provinciis, quas consularis gessit, sordide se
egisse in litteras rettulere. nam vacationes et lega-
7tiones militares dictur vendidisse. denique cum
parentum minimum esset patrimonium, et nulla
hereditas obvenisset, subito dives est factus.
8 Omnibus sane possessiones suas reddidit quibus
9 Commodus ademerat, sed non sine pretio. senatui
legitimo semper interfuit ac semper aliquid rettulit.
civilem se salutantibus et interpellantibus semper ex-
10 hibuit. eos qui calumniis adpetiti per servos fuerant
damnatis severius! delatoribus liberavit, in crucem
sublatis talibus servis; aliquos etiam mortuos vindi-
cavit. °
X. Insidias paravit ei Falco consul, qui ? questus est
2in senatu volens imperare. cui ? quidem credidit sena-
tus * cum 5 sibi quidam servus, quasi Fabiae t setique 9
filius ex Ceionii Commodi familia, Palatinam domum
ridicule 7 vindicasset, cognitusque iussus esset ê flagellis
3caesus domino restitui. in cuius vindicta ii qui?
oderant Pertinacem occasionem seditionis invenisse
4dicuntur. Falconi tamen pepercit et a senatu im-


lseuerius Walter; seruis P, Peter. ? Falco consul, qui
questus Editor; Falco conquestus P ; lacuna ind. by Peter.
3cuí Editor; quo P; quod Egnatius, Peter’; +quo Peter?.
4 senatus ins. by Editor; credidit, P, Peter. 5 cum sugg.
by Peter; dum P, Peter. 680 P; fauiae esset filius Edit.
princeps, Peter!, 7 ridicula P. 8 esset Baehrens,
Unger, Peter?; est P, Peter!. 9 guod P.


! According to Dio, lxxiii. 8, 2, the conspiracy was organized
by Laetus and the guard, which objected to the stern discipline
enforced by Pertinax; Falco was chosen merely as a promis-
ing candidate for the throne.

2 The text is hopelessly corrupt and the name of the pre-
tender's father has been lost ; on Fabia see Marc., xxix. 10;
Ver., x. 8-4.


PERTINAX IX. 7—X. 4


in writing that in those provinces which he ruled as.
proconsul he conducted himself in a grasping manner ; ;
for he sold, they said, both exemptions from service;
and military appointments, And lastly, although his:
father's estate was very small, and no legacy was left
him, he suddenly became rich.

As a matter of fact, however, he restored to every- -
one the property of which Commodus had despoiled
him, but not without compensation. He always at-
tended the stated meetings of the senate and always
made some proposal. To those who came to greet
him or who accosted him he was always courteous.
He absolved a number of men whose slaves had
assailed them with false charges, and punished
severely those who brought the accusation, crucifying
all such slaves ; and he also rehabilitated the memory
of some who had died.

X. A plot was attempted against him} by Falco
the consul, who, being eager to rule, made complaint
in the senate.” He, in fact, was believed by the
senate, when a certain slave, on the ground that he
was the son of Fabia and . . .? of the household of
Ceionius Commodus, laid a baseless claim to the resi-
dence on the Palatine and, on being recognised, was
sentenced to be soundly flogged and returned to his
master. In the punishment of this man those who
hated Pertinax are said to have found an opportunity
for an outbreak. Nevertheless, Pertinax spared
Falco, and furthermore asked the senate to pardon
him.? In the end Falco lived out.his life in security


3 He had been declared a public enemy by the senate, but
Pertinax asked that his life should be spared, declaring that
he wished no senator to be put to death Maris his reign ;
see Dio, Ixxiii. 8, 5.


laedes Egnatius; caedes P. 2e castris Petschenig; cas-
tris P ; de castris Peter. 3 quam om. in P.


1 The account of the murder of Pertinax, as given in Dio,
lxxiii. 9-10, agrees in the main with this version.

2 According to Dio, Laetus had them put to death, alleging
that it was by order of Pertinax.

3 Two hundred, according to Dio.

4 An auditorium built by Hadrian, where rhetoricians and


PERTINAX X. 5—XI. 4


and in possession of his property, and at his death his
son succeeded to the inheritance. Many men, how-
ever, claimed that Falco was unaware that men were
planning to make him emperor, and others said that
slaves who had falsified his accounts assailed him
with trumped-up charges.

However, a conspiracy! was organized against
Pertinax by Laetus, the prefect of the guard, and
sundry others who were displeased by his integrity.
Laetus regretted that he had made Pertinax emperor,
because Pertinax used to rebuke him as a stupid
babbler of various secrets. It seemed to the soldiers,
moreover, a very cruel measure, that in the matter of
Falco he had had many of their comrades put to
death on the testimony of a single slave.? Xl. And
so three hundred soldiers,’ formed into a wedge,
marched under arms from the camp to the imperial
residence. On that day, it was said, no heart had
been found in the victim when Pertinax performed a
sacrifice, and when he tried to avert this evil omen,
he was unable to discover the upper portion of the
liver. And so on that day, the great body of the
soldiers remained in the camp. Some, indeed, had
come forth from the camp in order to act as escort
to the emperor, but Pertinax, because of the un-
favourable sacrifice, postponed for that day a pro-
jected visit to the Athenzum,‘ where he had planned
to hear a poet, and thereupon the escort began to re-
turn tothe camp. But just at that moment the band
of troops mentioned above arrived at the Palace, and
neither could they be prevented from entering nor
could their entrance be announced to the Emperor.


poets recited their works; see Aler., xxxv. 2; Gord., iii. 4;
Victor, de Caesaribus, 14.
VOL, I. Z


2tus simplex. et cum verbis esset affabilis, re erat


1 praecessit P. 2 Eclectus Peter; eiectus P.


! Consisting mostly of the liberti Augusti, or imperial freed-
men, They hated Pertinax because he had compelled them
to disgorge their ill-gotten wealth; see c. viii. 1; xiii. 9;
Dio, lxxiii. 8, 1. M

2? 4.6. a son and a daughter; see c, xiii. 7 and Dio, lxxiii. 7,
8. Dio relates that Pertinax, after becoming emperor, trans-
ferred his property to them and bade them take up their


PERTINAX XI. 5—XII. 2


In fact, the palace-attendants ! hated Pertinax with so
bitter a hatred that they even urged on the soldiers
to do the deed. The troops arrived just as Pertinax
was inspecting the court-slaves, and, passing through
the portico of the Palace, they advanced as far as the
spot called Sicilia and the Banqueting-Hall of Jupiter.
As soon as he learned of their approach, Pertinax sent
Laetus, the prefect of the guard, to meet them; but
he, avoiding the soldiers, passed out through the por-
tico and betook himself home with his face hidden
from sight. After they had burst into the inner
portion of the Palace, however, Pertinax advanced to
meet them and sought to appease them with a long
and serious speech. In spite of this, one Tausius, a


Tungrian, after haranguing the soldiers into a state |
of fury and fear, hurled his spear at Pertinax' breast. :


And he, after a prayer to Jupiter the Avenger, veiled
his head with his toga and was stabbed by the rest.
Eclectus also, after stabbing two of his assailants, died
with him, and the other court-chamberlains (his own
chamberlains, as soon as he had been made emperor,
Pertinax had given to his emancipated children ?) fled
away in all directions. Many, it is true, say that
the soldiers even burst into his bedroom, and there,
standing about his bed, slew him as he tried to flee.

XII. He was a stately old man, with a long beard
and hair brushed back. His figure was somewhat
corpulent, with somewhat prominent abdomen, but
his bearing was regal. He was a man of mediocre
ability in speaking, and suave rather than kindly, nor
was he ever considered ingenuous. Though friendly


residence with their grandfather (see also c. xiii, 4). They
were accordingly regarded as freed from the patria potestas,
and so are described as emancipat.
Z2


linliberalis Jordan; inliberabilis P. ? pomasi P.
3 cumeditawl P. 4 ut om. in P. 5 litteratus P.


1 Cf. c, viii. 9-11. So also Dio, lxxiii. 3, 4.

2 Regarded as great dainties, and used by wise and frugal
emperors only on occasions of especial importance ; see Alex.,
xxxvii. 6 and Tac., xi. 5. For the converse see Hel., xxxii. 4.

? Cf. c. i. 4.

*The Parilia, celebrated on the 21st April; for the rites
that were performed see Ovid, Fasti, iv. 721 f.

5 Cf. c, xv. 8.

ë The favourable impression made by Pertinax on the senate


PERTINAX XII. 3—XIII. 2


enough in speech, when it came to deeds, he was
ungenerous and almost mean—so mean, in fact, that
before he was made emperor he used to serve at his
banquets lettuce and the edible thistle in half portions.
And unless someone made him a present of food, he
would serve nine pounds of meat in three courses, no
matter how many friends were present; if anyone
presented him with an additional amount, moreover,
he would put off using it until the next day, and
would then invite a great nümber of guests. Even
after he had become emperor, if he had no guests he
would dine in the same style.! And whenever he in
turn wished to send his friends something from his
table, he would send a few scraps or a piece of tripe,
or occasionally the legs of a fowl. But he never ate
pheasants ? at his own banquets or sent them to others.
And when he dined without guests, he would invite
his wife and Valerianus, who had been a teacher to-
gether with him,’ in order that he might have literary
conversation. f

He removed none of those whom Commodus had
put in charge of affairs, preferring to wait until the
anniversary of the founding of the city,* which he
wished to make the official beginning of his reign ;
and thus it came about, it is said, that the servants of
Commodus plotted to slay him in his bath. XIII. The |
imperial power and all the appurtenances thereof
he abhorred,* and he always made it quite evident |
that they were distasteful to him. In short, he did
not wish to seem other than he really was. In the
senate-house he was most punctilious,’ doing reverence
to the senate when it expressed its good will and con-


is reflected all through the narrative of Dio (himself a senator
at the time), but particularly in lxxiii. 3, 4.


3participaret. voluit etiam imperium deponere atque
4 ad privatam vitam redire. filios suos in Palatio nutriri
noluit.!

7 Reliquit filium et filiam superstites et? uxorem,
Flavii Sulpiciani filiam, quem praefectum urbi loco

9 terea Cornificiam infamissime dicitur dilexisse. libertos
aulicos vehementissime compressit, unde grande quo-
que odium contraxit.

2 hominem cum gladio infestantem. et ea die qua occisus


1 uoluit P. 2 Hut P.


1 See note to c, xi. 19. 2 Of, c, ix. 4.

* A rendering of the Greek xpnoroAdyos, which, according
to Victor, Epitome, 18, 4, was applied to Pertinax because he
was blandus magis quam beneficus.

* See note to c. xi. 12. 5 Flavia Titiana ; see c. v. 4.

ê See Did. Jul., ii. 4 f.


PERTINAX XIII. 3—XIV. 2


versing with all the senators as though still prefect of
the city. He even wished to resign the throne and
retire to private life, and was unwilling to have
his children reared in the Palace.!


On the other hand, he was so stingy and eager for ,
money that even after he became emperor he carried :


on a business at Vada Sabatia ? through agents, just
as he had done as a private citizen. And despite his
efforts, he was not greatly beloved; certainly, all
who talked freely together spoke ill of Pertinax,
calling him the smooth-tongued,? that is, a man who
speaks affably and acts meanly. In truth, his
fellow-townsmen, who had flocked to him after his
accession, and had obtained nothing from him, gave
him this name. In his lust for gain, he accepted
presents with eagerness.

He was survived by a son and a daughter,* and by
his wife, the daughter of the Flavius Sulpicianus 9
whom he made prefect of the city in his own place.
He was not in the least concerned about his wife's


fidelity, even though she carried on an amour quite -
openly with a man who sang to the lyre. He him- |
self, it is said, caused great scandal by an amour with .


Cornificia.’ The freedmen attached to the court he
kept within bounds with a strong hand, and in this
way also he brought upon himself a bitter hatred.?
XIV. The warnings of his death were these: three
days before he was killed he himself, on looking into
a pool, seemed to behold a man attacking him with
a sword. And on the day he was killed, they say,
the pupils of his eyes, as wellas the little pictures
7 Probably the daughter of Marcus; see note to Com., xvii.


12.
8 See c. xi, 5 and note,


luisae P; uisae sunt Peter. 2 diem Casaubon ; dies P.
3et ins. by Peter; om. in P.


1 c. xi. 9. 2 Of. Did. Jul., ii. 8.

3In Africa; see c. iv. 1 and Did. Jul., ii. 3.

4 Cf. c. x. 10 and xi. 5.

5 See Sev., vii. 8, and the coins with Divus Pertinax and
Consecratio, Cohen, iii?, p. 390 f., nos, 6-12, The elaborate


PERTINAX XIV. 3—XV.


which they reflect, were invisible to those who looked
into them. And when he was performing sacrifices
tothe Lares the living coals died out, though they
are wont to flame up. Furthermore, as we related
above,! the heart and upper portion of the liver could
not be found in the victims. And on the day before
he died, stars of great brilliancy were seen near the
sun in the day-time. He was responsible himself, it
is said, for an omen about his successor, Julianus.
For when Didius Julianus presented a nephew of his,
to whom he was betrothing his daughter, the Emperor
exhorted the young man to show deference to his
uncle, and added:  * Honour my colleague and
successor. ? For Julianus had previously been his
colleague in the consulship and had succeeded him ca. 175
in his proconsular command.?

The soldiers and court-retainers regarded him with:
hatred,* but the people felt great indignation at his,
death, since it had seemed that all the ancient customs;
might be restored through his efforts. His head, fixed
on a pole, was carried through the city to the camp.
by the soldiers who killed him. His remains, in-|
cluding his head, which was recovered, were laid in
the tomb of his wife's grandfather. And Julianus,
his successor, buried his body with all honour, after
he had found it in the Palace. At no time, however,
did he make any public mention of Pertinax either
before the people or in the presence of the senate,
but when he, too, was deserted by the soldiers Pertinax
was raised to the rank of the gods by the senate and
the people. XV. In the reign of Severus, moreover,
after Pertinax had received the full official approval


funeral-ceremonies are described in detail by Dio, an eye-
witness; see Ixxiv. 4-5,


1 genstalicit qui Casaubon ; geniti aliqui P. 2 Bsbulo P.
3 inserere Puteanus ; inseri P.


1 See note to Sev., vii. 8. 2 See Sev., vii. 9 and note.

3 See note to Marc., xv. 4.

*'They are listed in the Calendar of Philocalus of 854 A.D. ;
see C.I.L., i?, p. 270. On the custom of celebrating an
emperor's birthday by races in the circus see note to Hadr.,
viii. 2.


PERTINAX XV. 2-8


of the senate, an honorary funeral, of the kind that
would be accorded to a censor, was. held for him,!
and Severus himself honoured him with a funeral
eulogy. Severus, furthermore, out of respect for so
good a ruler, accepted from the senate the name
Pertinax.? Pertinax' son was made his father's priest,
and the Marcian brotherhood,? who performed the
sacrifices to the Deified Marcus, were called Helviani
in honour of Helvius Pertinax There were added,
also, circus-games and a celebration to commemorate
the anniversary of his accession, but these were after-
wards abolished by Severus. The birthday-games
decreed for him, however, are still observed.*

He was born on the Kalends of August in thel Aug.,
consulship of Verus and Ambibulus, and was killed !?
on the fifth day before the Kalends of April in the 26 Mar.,
consulship of Falco and Clarus. He lived sixty 198
years, seven months and twenty-six days, and reigned
for two months and twenty-five days. He gave the
people a largess of one hundred denarii apiece,® and
promised twelve thousand sesterces to each soldier of
the guard, though he gave only six thousand.” The
sum promised to the armies he did not give for the
reason that death forestalled h'm. A letter which
Marius Maximus included in his life of Pertinax shows
that he shrank from taking the imperial power,’ but
. this letter, on account of its great length, I have not
thought best to insert.


5 More correctly, sixty-six. 5 See note to c. vii. 11.
7 See note to c. iv. 6. 8 CL c. xiij. 1.


DIDIUS IULIANUS
AELII SPARTIANI

2nobilem fecit, mater Clara Aemilia, pater Petronius
Didius Severus, fratres Didius Proculus et Nummius
Albinus, avunculus Salvius Iulianus. avus paternus
Insubris Mediolanensis, maternus ex Hadrumetina
colonia. 3


1l albius P.


1 See Hadr., xviii. 1 and note. Itisimprobable that Didius
\ was related to Salvius Julianus, for his family came from
Milan, andsince an inscription which connected Salvius with
this city has been shown to be a forgery, there is no reason for
supposing that he was a native of Milan. At any rate,
Salvius, who was born toward the end of the first century,
was not the great-grandfather of Didius, who was born not
later than 137 (see c, ix. 3 and note),
*See Marc., i. 3.


| BY
AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. Didius Julianus, who gained possession of the
empire after Pertinax, was the great-grandson of
Salvius Julianus,! a man who was twice consul, pre-
fect of the city, and an authority in jurisprudence—
which, more than anything else, had made him
famous. His mother was Aemilia Clara, his father
Petronius Didius Severus, his brothers Didius Pro-
culus and Nummius Albinus ; another Salvius Julianus
was his uncle. His father's father was an Insubrian
from Milan, his mother's came from the colony of
Hadrumetum.

He himself was reared at the home of Domitia
Lucilla? the mother of the Emperor Marcus, and
through the support of this lady he was elected to
the Board of Twenty.? He was appointed quaestor
a year before he reached the legal age,* and through
the support of Marcus he attained to the office of
aedile. Again with thesupport of Marcus he became
praetor. After his praetorship he commanded the


š According to an inscription found at Rome (C.I.Z., vi.
1401 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 412) he was decemvir litibus iudi-
candis, on which see note to Hadr., ii. 2.

4 See note to Pius, vi. 10.

5 A rescript addressed to him by Marcus is mentioned in
Digesta, xxviii. 1, 20, 9.


7 Germania vicensimae secundae Primigeniae. inde
Belgicam sancte ac diu rexit. ibi Chaucis, Germaniae
populis qui Albin fluvium adcolebant, erumpentibus

8restitit tumultuariis auxiliis provincialium. ob quae
consulatum meruit testimonio imperatoris. Chattos

9 etiam debellavit. inde Dalmatiam regendam accepit
eamque a confinibus hostibus vindicavit. post Ger-

. suam Iulianus despondens adfini suo ad Pertinacem
venisset idque intimasset, dixit: *. . . . que debita
reverentia, quia collega et successor meus est."

4statim enim mors Pertinacis secuta est. quo inter-


lidem P.


1 The inscription does not mention this command, but re-
cords that he was assistant (legatus) to the proconsuls both of
Achaia and Africa.

? This and the four other provincial governorships are all
enumerated in the inscription.

3 See note to Pert., iv. l. The mention of this office seems
to be out of the chronological order, for he was consul about
175 (see below), and the alleged conspiracy of P. Salvius
Julianus against Commodus was not until 182 (see Com., iv.


8).


DIDIUS JULIANUS I. 7—II. 4


the recommendation of the emperor, he was deemed
worthy of the consulship. He also gained a crushing
victory over the Chatti. Next he took charge of
Dalmatia and cleared it of the hostile tribes on its
borders, II. Then he governed Lower Germany ; and
after that he was deemed worthy of superintend-
ing the distribution of grants of money to the poor
in Italy. In this position he was accused by one
Severus Clarissimus, a soldier, of being an associate of
Salvius * in his conspiracy against Commodus. But
Commodus had already put many senators and many
distinguished and powerful men to death on the
charge of treason, and so he was afraid of acting too
‘harshly and therefore pardoned Didius and executed
his accuser. Thus acquitted, Didius was sent again
to govern a province. Then he governed Bithynia,
but not as creditably as the other provinces.


His consulship he served with Pertinax; in the ca, 175


proconsulship of A frica,5 moreover, he succeeded him.
Pertinax always spoke of him as his colleague and ;
successor; on that day, in particular, when Julianus, _
after betrothing his daughter to a kinsman of his own,
came to Pertinax and informed him of the fact,
Pertinax said: * . . . and due respect, for he is my:
colleague and successor ”.6 The death of Pertinax .
ensued immediately afterwards. After his death, `


1 4.e, P. Salvius Julianus.
5 Of. Pert., iv. 1. 8 Cf. Pert., xiv. 4.


1Cf. Pert., xiii. 7. ;

2? The scene at the camp is described in greater detail by
Dio (Ixxiii. 11), especially the famous auction of the empire
by the soldiers, in which Sulpicianus and Didius bid against


DIDIUS JULIANUS II. 5——III. 2


when Sulpicianus! was making plans to be hailed
emperor in the camp, Julianus, together with his
son-in-law, came to the senate, which, he heard,
had been summoned, but found the doors closed.
At the same time he discovered there two tri-
bunes, Publius Florianus and Vectius Aper, who
immediately began urging him to seize the throne ;
and though he pointed out to them that another
man was already proclaimed emperor, they held
him fast and conducted him to the praetorian
camp. When they arrived at the camp, however,
Sulpicianus, the prefect of the city and the father-in-
law of Pertinax, was holding an assembly and claiming
the empire himself, and no one would let Julianus
inside, despite the huge promises he made from out-
side the wall. Julianus then first warned the soldiers
not to proclaim anyone emperor who would avenge
Pertinax, and next wrote on placards that he would
restore the good name ? of Commodus ; so he was ad-
mitted and proclaimed emperor, the soldiers at the
same time requesting that he would not in any way
injure Sulpicianus for aiming at the throne.

III. Immediately thereafter, on the recommenda-
tion of the praetorians themselves, Julianus appointed
Flavius Genialis and Tullius Crispinus prefects of
the guard, and through the efforts of Maurentius,
who had previously declared for Sulpicianus, he was
attended by the imperial body-guard. Although he
had promised five and twenty thousand sesterces to


each other. Dio’s account, however, must be used with
caution, for his whole narrative shows a decided animus
against Didius.

3i.e. restore it to the public records and monuments; see
Com,, xvii. 6; xx. 5.


VOL. I. AA


3dein! habita contione militari vespera in senatum
venit totumque se senatui permisit factoque senatus
consulto imperator est appellatus, et tribuniciam
potestatem ius proconsulare in patricias familias re-

4latus emeruit. uxor etiam Manlia Scantilla et filia

exitium praesagirent. praefectum urbi Cornelium
Repentinum, generum suum, fecit in locum Sulpici-
ani.

7 Erat interea in odio populi Didius Iulianus ob hoc,
quod creditum fuerat emendationem temporum Com-
modi Pertinacis auctoritate reparandam, habebaturque

8ita, quasi Iuliani consilio esset interemptus. et iam
hi primum qui Iulianum odisse coeperant dissemina-
runt prima statim die Pertinacis cena despecta
luxuriosum parasse convivium ostreis et altilibus et
piscibus adornatum. quod falsum fuisse constat.

9nam Iulianus tantae parsimoniae fuisse perhibetur,


1 dein Peter; in PL. 2 inuitisque Peter! ; inuitis eo P;
t inuitis eo Peter?. |


1 Marcus and Verus had given twenty thousand (Mare., vii.
9), Pertinax twelve thousand (Peri. xv. T). According to
Herodian (ii. 7, 1) Didius did not pay what he had promised,
because the money was not. available.

? His appearance before the senate is more fully described
by Dio, who was present; see lxxiii. 12. Dio’s account is
much less favourable to Didius than the account given here,
which seems to aim at representing him as the choice of the
senate.

?'The emperors of the Julio-Claudian house had been patri-
cians, and hence it was considered necessary for the emperor
to have this rank, Accordingly, when a plebeian was elected


DIDIUS JULIANUS IIl. 3-9


each soldier, he gave thirty.! Then, after holding an
assembly of the soldiers, he came in the evening to
the senate,? and entrusted himself to it without con-
ditions ; thereupon, by decree of the senate he was
acclaimed emperor and, after being raised to a place
among the patrician families? he received the tribu-
nician power and the rights of a proconsul. His
wife Manlia Scantilla, moreover, and his daughter,
Didia Clara, were given the name Augusta ; * and
. thereupon he betook himself to the Palace and
thither summoned his wife and daughter, who came,
though with considerable trepidation and reluctance
as if they already foresaw impending doom.® Corne-
lius Repentinus, his son-in-law, he made prefect of
the city in place of Sulpicianus.


The people, meanwhile, detested Julianus because


it had been their belief that the abuses of Com-
modus' régime were to be reformed by the influence


of Pertinax, and he was considered to have been
killed with Julianus' connivance. And now, those:
who had begun to hate Julianus were the first
to spread it abroad that on the very first day of 7


his reign, to show his contempt for Pertinax’ board,
he had served an extravagant banquet embellished
- with such dainties as oysters and fatted birds and fish.
This story, it is generally agreed, was false.” For
according to report, Julianus was so frugal as to make


(as was the case from Vespasian onward, with the sole ex-
ception of Nerva), the senate raised him to the patriciate.
t See note to Pius, iv. 7.
` SAugusia appears on the coins of both ; see Cohen, iii?, p.
401 f.
€ According to Herodian (ii. 6, 7) it was the two women
who persuaded Didius to bid for the throne.
» 7 Dio, however, asserts it as a fact; see lxxiii. 13. 1.


AA 2


let P. ? fratrem Peter?; pairem P. 5 mites P!.
ine litaret Edit. princeps ; elitaret P.


!On the other hand, Herodian (ii. 7, 1) emphasizes his
luxury and extravagance.
? A similar description of what happened in front of the


.- = me e ee ee ee | ee o a O an


DIDIUS JULIANUS III. 10—IV. 6:


a suckling pig or a hare last for three days, if anyone
by chance presented him with one ; and often, more-
over, even when there was no religious reason there-
for, he was content to dine on cabbages and beans
without meat! Furthermore, he gave no banquet
until after Pertinax was buried, and, because of his
death, took what food he did in a very depressed
state of mind, and passed the first night in continual
wakefulness, disquieted by such a fate.

IV. But when the day dawned, he admitted the
senators and knights who came to the Palace, and
greeted each very cordially, either as brother, or son,
or father, according to his age. The populace, how-
ever, at the Rostra and in front of the senate-house,?
assailed him with violent revilings, hoping that he
might resign the sovereignty which the soldiers had
given him; and they even launched a shower of
stones. As he came down to the senate-house with
the soldiers and senate, they heaped curses upon him,
and when he performed the sacrifices, wished that he
might not obtain favourable omens ; they even hurled
stones at him, though Julianus, with uplifted hand,
continually sought to calm them. When he entered
the senate-house, he spoke calmly and discreetly, and
returned thanks because he had been chosen, and be-
cause he, his wife, and his daughter, had been given
the titles of Augustus and Augusta. He accepted
also the name of Father of his Country, but refused
a silver statue. Then, as he proceeded from the
senate-house to the Capitol, the populace placed
themselves in his way, but by the sword, by wounds,
and by promises of gold-pieces, the number of which


senate-house and in the Circus is given in Dio, lxxiii. 13,
3-5.


! quod P. Zest P. "niger in illyrico $. seuerus in
syria P. 1 el om. in P. ^4mpetrawitque P (Dessau) ;
amperauitque Peter.


1 The populace took the seats that were reserved for senators
and knights.


2 Cf. Pesce. Nig., iii. 1.

3 Except to give his body honourable burial; see c. iii. 10
and Pert., xiv. 9.

4 Under the command of Clodius Albinus.

5 Cf. Pese. Nig., ii. 4.


DIDIUS JULIANUS IV. 7—V. 4


he himself, in order to inspire trust, kept show-
ing to them on his fingers, they were dispersed
and beaten back. Thereupon, all went to the games
at the Circus; but here, after everyone had seized
seats indiscriminately,! the populace redoubled their
insults against Julianus and called for Pescennius
Niger (who was said to have already declared himself
emperor) to protect the city.? All this Julianus took ,
with perfect equanimity ; indeed all through the time
he was on the throne he was exceedingly tolerant.
The populace, however, kept inveighing with the ut-
most violence against the soldiers, who had slain
Pertinax, so they said, for money. And so, in order
to win favour with the people, Julianus restored many
measures.which Commodus had enacted and Pertinax
had repealed. Concerning Pertinax himself he took
no steps either good or evil? a fact which to very
many seemed a serious matter. It is generally agreed,
however, that it was his fear of the soldiers that
caused him to keep silent about the honours due

V. Asa matter of fact, however, Julianus had no fear :
of either the British * or the Illyrian army ; but being
chiefly afraid of the Syrian army, he despatched a
centurion of the first rank with orders to murder
Niger.’ Consequently Pescennius Niger in Syria?
and Septimius Severus in Illyricum," together with
the armies which they commanded, revolted from
Julianus, But when he received the news of the
revolt of Severus, whom he had not suspected, then
he was greatly troubled and came to the senate and
prevailed upon them to declare Severus a public
enemy. As for the soldiers who had followed Severus,


8 See Pesc. Nig., ii. 1. ? See Sev., v. 1.


Severum secuti fuerant dies praestitutus, ultra quam,
si cum Severo fuissent, hostium numero haberentur.
5missi sunt praeterea legati a senatu consulares ad
milites, qui suaderent ut Severus repudiaretur, et is
6 esset imperator quem senatus elegerat. inter ceteros
legatus est Vespronius Candidus, vetus consularis,
olim militibus invisus ob durum et sordidum im-
7perium. missus est successor Severo Valerius Catul-
linus, quasi posset ei succedi, qui militem iam sibi
8tenebat. missus praeterea Aquilius centurio, notus
gcaedibus senatoriis, qui Severum occideret. ipse
autem Iulianus praetorianos in campum deduci iubet,
muniri turres, sed milites desides et urbana luxuria
dissolutos invitissimos ad exercitium militare produxit,
ita ut vicarios operis, quod unicuique praescribebatur,
mercede conducerent.


1 Marciam una Mommsen; marci mannum P,


! He had been governor of Dacia under Commodus ; see
C.I.L., iii. 1092.

2 Of. Pese. Nig., ii, 5. * Of. Sev., v. 8; Pesc. Nig., ii. 6.

1 A picture of the confusion in Rome is given in Dio, lxxiii. 16.

According to Dio (lxxiii. 16, 5) he executed Laetus,
Marcia and the athlete Narcissus in order in punish those
guilty of the murder of Commodus.


DIDIUS JULIANUS V. 5—VI. 2


a day was appointed for them after which they
would be considered as public enemies if they were
still with Severus. Besides this, legates of consular
. rank were sent by the senate to the soldiers to per-

suade them that they should reject Severus and let
him be emperor whom the senate had chosen. Among
others of the legates was Vespronius Candidus,! an
old man of consular rank, now for a long time re-
pugnant to the soldiers because of his harsh and
penurious rule. Valerius Catullinus was sent as
Severus’ successor,’ as if, in sooth, it were possible to
appoint a successor to a man who already had an
army devoted to himself. And in addition to these
others, the centurion Aquilius, notorious as the
assassin of senators, was sent for the purpose of
murdering Severus.? But as for Julianus himself, he
gave orders that the praetorians should be led out-
side the city, and that the fortifications should be
manned ;* but it was a slothful force that he led out,
and one demoralized by the fleshpots of the city and
intensely averse to active service, so much so, indeed,
that they actually hired substitutes for the duties
severally enjoined upon them.

VI. All the while, Severus was approaching the city ,
with a hostile army; but in spite of that, Didius |
Julianus accomplished nothing with his praetorian
troops, and the populace hated and laughed at him
more and more every day. And although he had
escaped from Commodus' clutches by the aid of
Laetus, nevertheless, unmindful of this great favour,
Julianus ordered Laetus to be put to death in the
expectation that he would side with Severus? He
gave orders likewise that Marcia should be put to
death at the same time.


3. Sed dum haec egit lulianus, Severus classem
Ravennatem occupat, legati senatus, qui Iuliano
promiserant operam suam, ad Severum transierunt.

. 4 Tullius Crispinus, praefectus praetorio, contra Severum
missus ut classem produceret, repulsus Romam rediit.

7 eum qui armis adversario non posset resistere. cui
multi senatores consenserunt. quare iratus Didius
milites e castris petiit, qui senatum ad obsequium


! rem ins. by Peter; om. in P. ? Plautius Peter; phaus-
tius P.


1The station of the Adriatic fleet; the headquarters of the
fleet that guarded the western coast were && Misenum, on the
Bay of Naples.

? Of. Sev., v. 6. - ;

3 His troops deserted to Severus; see c. viii. 4 and Dio,
Ixxiii. 17, 1.


DIDIUS JULIANUS VI. 3—VII. 2


While Julianus was engaged in these activities, how-
ever, Severus seized the fleet stationed at Ravenna ;!
whereupon the envoys ofthe senate who had promised
their services to Julianus passed over to Severus.”
Tullius Crispinus, the prefect of the guard, who had
been sent to oppose Severus and lead out the fleet,
failed in his attempt? and therefore returned to
Rome, When Julianus learned of these events, he
came to the senate with a proposal that the Vestal
Virgins and the priests, along with the senate itself,
should go out to meet Severus' troops and entreat
them with fillets held in outstretched hands *—a
futile step, surely, to take against soldiers of barbarian
blood. In this proposal, however, Plautius Quintillus,
an augur and man of consular rank,’ opposed him, de-
claring that he who could not withstand an opponent
by force ofarms had noright to rule; in this objection
many senators agreed with him. Infuriated at this,
Didius Julianus called for soldiers from the camp in
order either to force the senators to obedience or to |
slaughter them. But this plan found no favour. For
it was scarcely fitting that the senate, after declar-
ing Severus.a public enemy for Julianus' sake, should
find an enemy in this same Julianus. And so Julianus
came to the senate with a better plan, and asked it;
to pass a decree effecting a division of empire. And
this was forthwith done.

VII. At that time an omen, for which Julianus
himself had been responsible when he accepted the
imperial power, came to everyone's mind. For when
the consul-elect, in voting on Julianus, delivered


4The conventional attitude of suppliants.
5 He was consul in 177. 6 Of, Sev., v. T.


! habui P. ? consuluissel P ; contulisset Peter. 3 man-
datamque Ursinus; tantamque P. 1 putaret Egnatius;
uitaret P.: | "ducunt P.


1? This name appears in the inscription cited above (see note
to c. i. 4) and on some of his coins; see Cohen iii’, p. 398 f.,
nos., 1, 3, 7, etc. ]

?1.e. to Severus, offering him a share of the empire.

3'See note to Hadr., ix. 5.


DIDIUS JULIANUS VII. 3-11


himself of the following: “I vote that Didius
Julianus be declared emperor," Julianus prompted
** Say also Severus," the name of his grandfather and
great-grandfather, which he had added to his own.!
However, there are some who say that Julianus never
planned to slaughter the senate, because it had passed ]
so many decrees in his favour.

After the senate had passed this decree, Didius
Julianus forthwith despatched? one of the prefects,
Tullius Crispinus, and he also created a third prefect ?
in the person of Veturius Macrinus, whom Severus
had already notified by letter that he was to be
prefect. Nevertheless, the people avowed and
Severus suspected that this peace was merely a .
strategem and that Tullius Crispinus, the prefect of
the guard, was commissioned to murder Severus.
Finally, in accordance with the general wish of his
soldiers, Severus declared that he would rather be
Julianus' enemy than colleague ; he at once, moreover,
wrote to a great number of men at Rome, and secretly
sent proclamations, which were posted up. Julianus,
furthermore, was mad enough to perform a number of
rites with the aid of magicians, such as were calculated
either to lessen the hate of the people or to restrain the ©
arms of the soldiers. For the magicians sacrificed cer-
tain victims that are foreign to the Roman ritual * and
chanted unholy songs, while Julianus performed rites,
which took place, so we are told, before a mirror, into
which boys are said to gaze, after bandages have been
bound over their eyes and charms muttered over their
heads. Andinthis performance one lad, it is said, saw
the arrival of Severus and the retirement of Julianus.


4 According to Dio, lxxiii. 16, 5, he sacrificed a number of
children. )J


! se P; om. by Peter.


1 See c. vii. 4.

? He was very old and in poor health. During the reign of :
Pertinax he remained at Rome and attended meetings of the
senate, but when Pertinax was killed, he withdrew to his
country estate; see Dio, Ixxiii. 3.

8 See c. vi. 4 and note.

4 Acting on this order the soldiers of the guard seized the
murderers and informed the consul of the fact; see Dio, lxxiii.
17, 3.

5 Of. c. iii. 6.


DIDIUS JULIANUS VIII. 1-9


VIII. And as for Crispinus,! he met with Severus’
advance-guard and was put to death by Severus on
the advice of Julius Laetus. The decrees.of the
senate, moreover, were torn down, and when Julianus
called a meeting of the senate and asked their
opinions as to what should be done, he could get
nothing definite out of them. Presently, however, —
on his own responsibility he ordered Lollianus
Titianus to arm the gladiators at Capua, and called,
Claudius Pompeianus from his estate at Tarracina? ;
to share the empire with him, because he had been '
an emperor's son-in-law. and had long been in com- '
mand of troops. Claudius, however, refused on the
ground that he was now old and his eye-sight was
weak. The soldiers in Umbria had meanwhile
deserted to Severus,? and Severus had sent on letters
in advance in which he ordered the murderers of
Pertinax to be kept under guard.*

In a short time Julianus was deserted by all and:
left alone in the Palace with one of his prefects,
Genialis, and with  Repentinus, his son-in-law.5 |
Finally, it was proposed that the imperial power be
taken away from Julianus by order of the senate.9
This was done, and Severus was forthwith acclaimed |
emperor, while it was given out that Julianus had
taken poison. Nevertheless, the senate despatched |
a delegation and through their efforts Julianus was
slain in the Palace by a common soldier, while be-
seeching the protection of Caesar, that is to say,
Severus. He had emancipated’ his daughter when he
got control of the empire and had presented her with
her patrimony, but this, together with the name


$ A description of this meeting is given in Dio, lxxiii. 17, 4.
See note to Pert., xi. 12.


quod ei cum Augustae nomine statim sublatum est.

10 corpus eius a Severo uxori Manliàe Scantillae ac filiae
ad sepulturam est redditum et in proavi monumenta
translatum miliario quinto Via Labicana.

2fuisset humillimus. fuit autem contra humanissimus
ad convivia, benignissimus ad subcriptiones, modera-
tissimus ad libertatem.

3 Vixit annis quinquaginta sex mensibus quattuor.
imperavit mensibus duobus diebus quinque. repre-
hensum in eo praecipue, quod eos, quos regere
auctoritate sua debuerat, regendae rei publicae sibi
praesules ipse fecisset. s


1 This road ran S.E. from the city, joining the Via Latina
at Toleria. It tookits name from the town of Labici, on the
northern slope of the Alban hills.

? See c, iii. 9 and note.

3 Sixty years, according to Dio, lxxiii. 17, 5; this figure is


DIDIUS JULIANUS VIII. 10—IX. 4


Augusta, was at once taken away from her. His
‘body was, by order of Severus, delivered for burial
to his wife, Manlia Scantilla, and to his daughter,
and it was laid in the tomb of his great-grandfather
by the fifth mile-storfe on the Labican Way.!

IX. These charges were brought against Julianus: ,
that he had been a glutton and a gambler; that he
had exercised with gladiatorial arms; and that he had |
done all these things, moreover, when advanced in '
years, and after escaping the stain of these vices in
his youth. The charge of pride was also brought
against him, although he had really been very unassum-
ing as emperor. He was, moreover, very affable at
banquets, very courteous in the matter of petitions,
and very reasonable in the matter of granting liberty.

He lived fifty-six years? and four months. He
ruled two months and five days.* This particularly
was held to his discredit: that men whom he ought
to have kept under his own governance he appointed
as his officials for governing the state.


usually regarded as more correct than that given in the bio;
graphy; accordingly, he was born in 138,

Q*Sixty-six days, according to Dio, Lc. Accordingly, he
was killed on 1st June, 193.


VOL. I. BB


SEVERUS
AELII SPARTIANI


I. Interfecto Didio Iuliano Severus Africa oriundus
2imperium obtinuit. cui civitas Lepti, pater Geta,
maiores equites Romani ante civitatem omnibus
datam; mater Fulvia Pia, patrui magni! Aper et
Severus consulares, avus paternus. Macer, maternus?
3 Fulvius Pius fuere. ipse natus est Erucio Claro bis et
4 Severo consulibus, VI idus Apriles. in prima pueritia,
priusquam Latinis Graecisque litteris imbueretur,
quibus eruditissimus fuit, nullum alium inter pueros
ludum nisi ad iudices exercuit, cum? ipse praelatis
fascibus ac securibus ordine puerorum circumstante *
5sederet ac iudicaret. octavo decimo anno publice
declamavit.? postea studiorum causa Romam venit,


!magni Aper Madvig, Peter?; magnaper P; Marcus Aper
Peter!. ? So Casaubon ; maternus Macer paternus P, Peter.
Seum P!. 4 circumstantes Pi, 5 adclamauit P.


!His full name was P. Septimius Geta, according to an
inscription found at Cirta in Africa; see C. I. L., viii. 19493.

2Citizenship was granted to all the inhabitants of the
Empire by an edict of Caracalla, Severus’ son, in 212,

3 Aper was consul in some year under Pius; Severus is
perhaps to be identified with the Severus who was consul in
155.


i


SEVERUS


BY


AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. Ox the murder of Didius Julianus, Severus, a native
of Africa, took possession of the empire. His native
city was Leptis, his father was Geta ;! his ancestors
were Roman knights before citizenship was made
universal? Fülvia Pia was his mother, Aper and
Severus, both of' consular rank,? his great-uncles.
His father's father was Macer, his mother's father


|


Fulvius Pius. He himself was born six days before g Apr. E


the Ides of April,* in the first consulship of Severus
and the second of Erucius Clarus. While still a child,
even before he had been drilled in the Latin and
Greek literatures (with which he was very well
acquainted), he would engage in no game with the
other children except playing judge, and on such
occasions he would have the rods and axes borne
before him, and, surrounded by the throng of children,
he would take his seat and thus give judgments.
In his eighteenth year he delivered an oration in
public. Soon after, in order to continue his studies,
he came to Rome ; and with the support of his kins-


4 His birthday was the 11th April, according to Dio, Ixxvi.
17,4, and this dateis confirmed by the Calendar of Philocalus
(see C.I. L., i?, p. 262) and by inscriptions set up on this day ;
see C.I.L., xi. 1822; xiv. 168 and 169.


BB 2


*


SEVERUS


1 habuit P. 2 omisso tribunatu Hirschfeld, Golisch,
Peter? ; omnis sortibus natu P.


1 See note to Com., iv. 7. 2 See Hadr., xxii. 2.

3 It is impossible to know who is meant here. The bio-
grapher is certainly wrong in identifying him with Didius
Julianus, who was proconsul of Africa after Pertinax and
shortly before his own elevation to the throne; see Did. Jul.,
ii. 3.


SEVERUS I. 6—II. 4


man Septimius Severus, who had already been con-
sul twice, he sought and secured from the Deified
Marcus the broad stripe.!

Soon after he had come to Rome he fell in with
a stranger who at that very moment was reading the
life of the Emperor Hadrian, and he snatched at this


incident as an omen of future prosperity. He had.


still another omen of empire: for once, when he
was invited to an imperial banquet and came wearing
a cloak, when he should have worn his toga,? he was
lent an official toga of the emperor’s own. And that
same night he dreamed that he tugged at the udders
of a wolf, like Remus and Romulus. He sat down,
furthermore, in the emperor's chair, which a servant
had carelessly left accessible, being quite unaware
that this was not allowed. And once, while he was
sleeping in a tavern, a snake coiled about his head,


and when his friends awoke from their sleep and.


shouted at it, it departed without doing him any harm.

II. His early manhood was filled with follies and
not free from crime. He was charged with adultery,
but pleaded his own case and was acquitted by the
proconsul Julianus,? the man who was his immediate
predecessor in the proconsulship, his colleague in the
consulship, and likewise his predecessor on the
throne. Omitting the office of tribune of the soldiers,
he became quaestor and performed his duties with
diligence. At the expiration of his quaestorship he
was allotted the province of Baetica,* and from here
he crossed over to Africa in order to settle his


1 He was quaestor in Rome and was then allotted to serve as
quaestor (properly proquaestor) of the senatorial province of
Hispania Baetica. Such double quaestorships appear fre-
quently in inscriptions.


s - 373


—a


SEVERUS


pro Baetica Sardinia ei attributa est, quod Baeticam
5 Mauri populabantur. acta igitur quaestura Sardini-
6ensi legationem proconsulis Africae accepit. in qua
legatione cum eum quidam municipum suorum Lepti-
tanus! praecedentibus fascibus ut antiquum contu-
bernalem ipse plebeius amplexus esset, fustibus eum
sub eiusmodi elogio? praeconis cecidit: * Legatum
populi Romani homo plebeius temere amplecti noli ”.
;ex quo factum ut in vehiculo etiam legati sederent,
8qui ante pedibus ambulabant. tunc in quadam
civitate Africana, cum sollicitus mathematicum con-
suluisset, positaque hora ingentia vidisset astrologus,
dixit ei: “Tuam non alienam pone genituram ".
9cumque Severus iurasset suam esse, omnia ei dixit
quae postea facta sunt.
III. Tribunatum plebis Marco imperatore. decern-
ente promeruit eumque severissime exsertissimeque
2egit. uxorem tune Marciam duxit, de qua tacuit in
historia vitae privatae. cui postea in imperio statuas
3conlocavit. praetor designatus a Marco est non in


! bracketed by Peter?. ? eiusmod elogio Hirschfeld ;
elogio evusdem P, Peter.


è? See Marc., xxi. 1. The year was about 172, since Severus
was quaestor probably about the normal age of twenty-five ;
see note to Pius., vi. 10. The invasion of the Moors seems to
have made it necessary to administer Baetica as an imperial
province, and Sardinia was accordingly temporarily assigned
to the senate as a substitute.

* Her name was Paccia Marciana, according to an inscrip-
tion from Africa; see C.I.L., viii. 19494 = Dessau, Ins. Sel.,
440.

34.e. his autobiography, written after the death of Albinus,


374 °- À


SEVERUS II. 5—1II. 3


domestic affairs, for his father had meanwhile died.
But while he was in Africa, Sardinia was assigned him
in place of Baetica, because the latter was being
ravaged by the Moors.! He therefore served his
quaestorship in Sardinia, and afterwards was appointed

- aide to the proconsul of Africa. While he was in this .
office, a certain fellow-townsman of his, a plebeian, |
embraced him as an old comrade, though the fasces :
were being carried before him ; whereupon he had -
the fellow beaten with clubs and then ordered a pro-
clamation to be made by the herald to this effect ::
“ Let no plebeian embrace without due cause a legate
of the Roman people ". On account of this incident, |
legates, who had previously gone on foot, thereafter
rode in carriages. About this time, also, being
worried about the future, he had recourse to an
astrologer in a certain city of Africa. The astrologer,
when he had cast the horoscope, saw high destinies in
store for him, but added: * Tell me your own
nativity and not that of another man". And when
Severus swore an oath that it was really his, the
astrologer revealed to him all the things that did
later come to pass.

III. He was promoted to be tribune of the plebs by
order of the Emperor Marcus, and he performed his
duties with austerity and vigour. It was then that
he married Marcia,” but of her he made no mention
in the history of his life as a private man.? After-
wards, however, while emperor, he erected statues in
her honour. In the thirty-second year of his life 178
Marcus appointed him praetor, although he was not


ad


apparently with the purpose of accusing his rivals and clear-
ing himself of charges of cruelty; see c. xviii. 6; Cl. Alb.,
vii. 1; Dio, Ixxv. 7, 3.


SEVERUS


IV.est. a Gallis ob severitatem et honorificentiam et


abstinentiam tantum quantum nemo dilectus est.


1 leuabatur P. è


1A certain number of each board of magistrates were not
chosen by the senate but nominated directly by the emperor.
These appointees were called technically candidati Caesaris,
and the phrase in candida (toga) seems to be only a variation
of this expression.

? See Hadr., xii. 8 and note.

? In the time of the empire the conduct of the public games
was one of the most important functions of the praetor.

‘There is some error here, for this legion was never
quartered at Marseilles, and from the middle of the first
century on it was stationed in Syria.


SEVERUS III. 4—IV.


one of the Emperor's candidates but only one of the
ordinary crowd of competitors! He was thereupon
sent to Spain, and here he had a dream, first that he
was told to repair the temple of Augustus at Tarraco,?
' which at that time was falling into ruin, and then
that from the top of a very high mountain he beheld
Rome and all the world, while the provinces sang
together to the accompaniment of the lyre and
flute. Though absent from the city, he gave games.?
Presently he was put in command of the Fourth
Legion, the Scythica, stationed near Massilia,* and
after that he proceeded to Athens— partly in order
to continue his studies and perform certain sacred
rites, and partly on account of the public buildings
and ancient monuments there. Here he suffered
certain wrongs at the hands of the Athenians ; and
on that account he became their foe, and afterwards,
as emperor, took vengeance on them by curtailing
their rights. After this he was appointed to the
province of Lugdunensis as legate. He had mean-
while lost his wife, and now, wishing to take another,


he made inquiries about the horoscopes of marriage- '


able women, being himself no mean astrologer ; and
when he learned that there was a woman in Syria
. whose horoscope predicted that she would wed a king

(I mean Julia,® of course), he sought her for his wife,


d


and through the mediation of his friends secured her.
By her, presently, he became a father.^ IV. And


because he was strict, honourable and self-restrained,
he was beloved by the Gauls as was no one else.


5Julia Domna, the elder daughter of Julius Bassianus,
high-priest of the god Elagabalus at Emesa in Syria.
$ His elder son Bassianus (Caracalla) was born &t Lyons on
the 4th April, 186.


SEVERUS :


1 sed Peter; et P. 2 Germanico Baehrens, Peter? ; Ger-
mano P, Peter!. 30m. in P!, 44n Venetia Salmasius,
et iam Editor; inuenit etiam P ; in uicinia Peter. 5 nobi-
litatem P. Fs


l'This item is out of its proper order. He was not
appointed to Pannonia until after his consulship; see § 4.

? Geta, born in 189, the year, as it seems, of Severus'
consulship ; see Get., iii. 1.

3 Under the régime of Cleander; see Com., vi. 7 f.; vii. 1.


SEVERUS IV. 2-7


Next he ruled the Pannonias! with proconsular
powers, and after this he drew in the allotment the
proconsular province of Sicily. At Rome, mean-|
while, he was presented with a second son.* While
he was in Sicily he was indicted for consulting
about the imperial dignity with seers and astrologers,
but, because Commodus was now beginning to be
detested,? he was acquitted by the prefects of the
guard to whom he had been handed over for trial,
while his accuser was crucified. He now served his
first consulship, having Apuleius Rufinus* for his ? 189
colleague—an office to which Commodus appointed
him from among a large number of aspirants. After
the consulship he spent about a year free from public
duties; then, on the recommendation of Laetus he
was put in charge of the army in Germany.’ Just as
he was setting out for Germany, he acquired elabo-
rate gardens, although he had previously kept only
an unpretentious dwelling in the city and a single
farm in Venetia, And now, when he was reclining
on the ground in these gardens, partaking of a frugal
supper with his children, his elder son, who was then
five years old, divided the fruit, when it was served,
with rather a bounteous hand among his young play-
mates. And when his father reproved him, saying:
* Be more sparing; for you have not the riches of
a king," the five-year-old child replied: * No, but I
shall have". On coming to Germany, Severus con-
ducted himself in this office in such a manner as to
increase a reputation which was already illustrious.


4 His name is given as Vitellius in Get., iii. 1.

5 An error for Pannonia (cf. § 2), for he was acclaimed
emperor at Carnuntum (see c. v. 1); see also Dio, lxxiii. 14, 8
and Herodian, ii. 9, 2.


SEVERUS


V. Et hactenus rem militarem privatus egit. dehinc


1quot Rühl; quod P, Peter. 2iter Peter; item P.
3 gallicanis P. 4 consulatum P!, 5 miásissent P.


1 Of. Did. Jul., iv. 2 f.

? An error, for Didius Julianus was killed on the 1st June (see
note to Did. Jul., ix. 3), and Severus was then not far from
Rome. The date was probably the Ides of April.

54.e. each legionary.

4 Used inexactly to denote the armies of the Danube and
the Rhine. His coins of 193 show the names of fifteen
different legions belonging to these armies (see Cohen iv?,
p. 81 f, nos. 255-278). To these is to be added the Tenth


SEVERUS V. 1-8


~

V. So far did he pursue his military career as a
subject. Now, when it was learned that Commodus .
had been slain and that Julianus was holding the
throne amid general hatred,! at the behest of many,
but against his own will, he was hailed emperor by
the German legions; this took place at Carnuntum
on the Ides of August. A thousand sesterces—a 13 Aug.,
sum which no prince had ever given before— were | 193
presented to each soldier. And then, after garrison-
ing the provinces which he was leaving in his rear,
he hastened his march on Rome. Wherever his path
lay, all yielded to him, and the legions in Illyricum
and Gaul * had already, under compulsion from their
generals, espoused his cause, for he was universally
regarded as the avenger of Pertinax. Meanwhile, at
Julianus’ instigation, the senate declared him a publie
enemy,* and legates were sent to his army with a
message from the senate ordering his soldiers in the
name of the senate to desert him. And in truth,
when Severus heard that legates had been sent
by unanimous order of the senate, he was at first
terrified ; afterwards, however, he managed to bribe
the legates to address the army in his favour and then
to desert to his side themselves. When Julianus
learned of this, he caused the senate to pass a decree
that Severus and he should share the throne.5
Whether this was done in good faith or treacherously
is not clear; for already, ere this, Julianus had sent
certain fellows, notorious assassins of generals, to
murder Severus? and indeed he had sent men


Legion, the Gemina, stationed in Pannonia Superior, of:
which, as it happens, no coin has been preserved.
6 Of. Did. Jul., v. 3. €Of. Did. Jul., v. 5.
? Of. Did. Jul., vi. 3. 8 Of. Did. Jul., vi. 9.
? Cf. Did. Jul., v. 8; Pesc. Nig., ii. 6.


SEVERUS

10 statimque auditus est. nam et Iulianus occisus est

VI. Occiso Iuliano cum Severus in castris et tentoriis
quasi per hosticum veniens adhuc maneret, centum
senatores legatos ad eum senatus misit ad gratulan-

2dum rogandumque. qui ei occurrerunt Interamnae
armatumque circumstantibus armatis salutarunt, ex-
3cussi ne quid ferri haberent. et postera die occur-
4rente omni famulicio aulico, septingenos! vicenos
aureos legatis dedit eosdemque praemisit, facta
potestate si qui vellent remanere ac secum Romam
5redire. fecit etiam statim praefectum praetorii
Flavium Iuvenalem, quem etiam lulianus tertium
praefectum sibi adsumpserat.


1 seplingenos Hirschfeld ; septuagenos P, Peter.


1 Of. Did. Jul., v. 1; Pesc. Nig. ., li. 4.

3 Of. Pesc. Nig. ii. 1. 5 Of. Did. Jul., viii. 5 f.

* Hirschfeld points out that through the use of base metal
the denarius had so depreciated that 25,000 den. (100,000
sesterces) was now equal to only 720 aurei instead of 1000.
Accordingly, the sum that was presented to each of the


SEVERUS V. 9—VI. 5


to murder Pescennius Niger as well! who, at the
instigation of the armies in Syria,? had also declared
himself emperor in opposition to Julianus. How-
ever, Severus escaped the clutches of the men whom
Julianus had sent to kill him and despatched a letter
to the guard instructing them. either to desert
Julianus or to kil him; and his order was im-
mediately obeyed.? For not only was Julianus slain


in the Palace, but Severus was invited to Rome. -
And so, by the mere nod of his head, Severus became '


the victor—a thing that had befallen no man ever
before—and still under arms hastened towards Rome.

VI. After the murder of Julianus Severus still re-
mained encamped and in his tents as though he were
advancing through a hostile territory; the senate,
therefore, sent a delegation of a hundred senators to
bear him congratulations and sue for pardon. And
when these met him at Interamna, they were searched
for concealed weapons and only then suffered to greet
him as he stood armed and in the midst of armed
men. But on the following day, after all the palace
attendants had arrived, he presented each member of
the delegation with seven hundred and twenty pieces
of gold,* and sent them on ahead, granting to such as
desired, however, the privilege of remaining and re-
turning to Rome with himself. Without further de-
lay, he appointed as prefect of the guard that Flavius
Juvenalis whom Julianus had chosen for his third
prefect.’


legates was the equivalent of 100,000 sesterces reckoned ac-
cording to the later standard. See von Domaszewskiin Rhein.
Mus., liv. (1899), p. 312.

, Probably on the death of Tullius Crispinus ; see Did. Jul.,
viii. 1.


SEVERUS


6 Interim Romae ingens trepidatio militum civium-
que, quod armatus contra eos Severus veniret, qui

7se hostem iudicassent. his accessit quod comperit
Pescennium Nigrum a Syriacis legionibus imperatorem

9 proponerentur populo vel legerentur in curia. eodem
tempore etiam de Clodio Albino sibi substituendo
cogitavit, cui Caesareanum decretum auctore Com-

2rianis ademerat supinis non erectis. tota deinde urbe


l auctore Commodo iam nomen Oberdick; nomen om. by


Editor; aut Commodianum P. ? so Peter! ; pertimescende
P; pertimescendo P corr., Peter?. 5 iudicabat P, Peter! ;
inuidebat Peter?, 4om. in P.


1Cf. Cl. Alb., ii. 1; vi. 4-5; xiii. 4. This is doubtless a
fiction.

? Or Bithynia, according to Pesc. Nig., v. 2, but the reading
Britannias is probably the correct one. About this time
Severus, in order to attach Albinys to his cause, offered him
the name Caesar (see note to Cl. Alb., i. 2), and Heraclitus
may have been sent for this purpose.

3 Of. Pesc. Nig., v. 2. On C. Fulvius Plautianus see c. xiv.
5 f.

* He then reproached them for their treachery to Pertinax


SEVERUS VI. 6—VII. 2


Meanwhile at Rome a mighty panic seized both
soldiers and civilians, for they realized that Severus
was advancing under arms and against those who had
declared him a public enemy. The excitement was
further increased when Severus learned that Pescen-
nius Niger had been hailed emperor by the legions
in Syria. However, the proclamations and letters
that Pescennius sent to the people and senate were,
with the connivance of the messengers who had been
' sent with them, intercepted by Severus, for he wished
to prevent their being published among the people or
read in the senate-house. At the same time, too, he
considered abdicating in favour of Clodius Albinus,
to whom, it appeared, the power of a Caesar! had
already been decreed at the instance of Commodus.
But instead, he sent Heraclitus to secure Britain?
and Plautianus to seize Niger's children,’ in fear of
these men and having formed a correct opinion about
them. And when he arrived at Rome, he ordered the ,
guard to meet him clad only in their undergarments ;
and without arms ; then, with armed men posted all:
about him, he summoned them, thus apparelled, to the
tribunal.*

VII. Severus, armed himself and attended by armed
men, entered the city and went up to the Capitol ;?
thence he proceeded, still fully armed, to the Palace,
having the standards, which he had taken from the
praetorians, borne before him not raised erect but trail-
ing on the ground. And then throughout the whole


disarmed and disbanded them, and banished them from the
city ; see Dio, Ixxiv. 1, 1 and Herodian, ii. 13, 4 f. This took
place just outside the walls.
5 A vivid description of his triumphal entry is given ih Dio,
]xxiv. a 9-*,


VOL. I. Cc


SEVERUS


milites in templis, in porticibus, in aedibus Palatinis,
3quasi in stabulis manserunt, fuitque ingressus Severi
odiosus atque terribilis, cum milites inempta diripe-
4rent, vastationem urbi minantes. alia die armatis
stipatus non solum militibus sed etiam amicis in
senatum venit. in curia reddidit rationem suscepti
imperii causatusque est, quod ad se occidendum
5 Iulianus notos ducum caedibus misisset. fieri etiam
senatus consultum coegit, ne liceret imperatori in-
6consulto senatu occidere senatorem. sed cum in
senatu esset, milites per seditionem dena milia
poposcerunt a senatu, exemplo eorum qui Augustum
Octavianum Romam deduxerant tantumque accepe-
Trant. et cum eos voluisset comprimere Severus nec
potuisset, tamen mitigatos addita liberalitate dimisit.
8 funus deinde censorium Pertinacis imagini duxit
eumque inter divos sacravit, addito flamine et soda-
3libus Helvianis, qui Marciani fuerant. se quoque


1 Of. c. v. 8; Did. Jul., v. 8; Pesc. Nig., ii. 5.

? So also Dio, lxxiv. 2, 1 and Herodian, ii. 14, 8-4. Dio ob-
serves that Severus violated this decree almost at once.

3 See Dio, xlvi. 46.

4 He gave to each one thousand sesterces ; see Dio, ibid.

5'This funeral is described in detail in Dio, Ixxiv. 4-5.

€ A survival of the republican period, when the senate fre-
quently honoured. a dead ex-magistrate by decreeing that he
might be buried in his robe of office. Of these robes the
purple toga of the censor was considered the highest, and a
funus censorium was, accordingly, the most honourable type
of public funeral. It was later accorded by vote of the senate
to emperors, e.g. to Augustus (Tacitus, Annals., xii. 69) and tc
Claudius (7d., xiii. 2).

7 See note to Marc., xv. 4; see also Pert., xv. 8-4.


SEVERUS VII. 3-9
city, in temples, in porticoes, and in the dwellings on
the Palatine, the soldiers took up their quarters as
though in barracks ; and Severus' entry inspired both
hate and fear, for the soldiers seized goods they did
not pay for and threatened to lay the city waste. On
the next day, accompanied not only by armed soldiers
but also by a body of armed friends, Severus appeared
before the senate, and there, in the senate-house,
gave his reasons for assuming the imperial power,
alleging in defence thereof that men notorious for
assassinating generals had been sent by Julianus to.
murder him.! He secured also the passage of a
senatorial decree to the effect that the emperor should ;
not be permitted to put any senator to death without
first consulting the senate. But while he was still
' in the senate-house, his soldiers, with threats of
mutiny, demanded of the senate ten thousand ses-
terces each, citing the precedent of those who had
conducted Augustus Octavian to Rome and received a
similar sum.? And although Severus himself desired
to repress them, he found himself unable ; eventually,
however, by giving them a bounty he managed to ap-
pease them and then sent them away.* Thereupon
he held for an effigy of Pertinax 5 a funeral such as is
given a censor, elevated him to a place among the
deified emperors and gave him, besides, a flamen
and a Helvian Brotherhood, composed of the priests
who had previously constituted the Marcian Brother-
hood.” Moreover, he himself was, at his own com-
mand, given the name Pertinax ;? although later he


8 According to Herodian, ii. 10, 1, he assumed this name be-
fore he left Pannonia. It appears in his inscriptions and on
his coins, especially those issued during the first part of his
reign.


cc 2


SEVERUS


Pertinacem vocari iussit, quamvis postea id nomen
aboleri voluerit quasi! omen.

VIII. Amicorum dehinc aes alienum? dissolvit.
filias suas dotatas maritis Probo et Aetio dedit. et
cum Probo genero suo praefecturam urbi obtulisset,
ille recusavit dixitque minus sibi videri praefectum

2esse quam principis generum. utrumque autem gen- |
3 erum statim consulem fecit, utrumque ditavit. alia
die ad senatum venit et amicos Iuliani incusatos pro-
4scriptioni ac neci dedit. causas plurimas audivit.
accusatos a provincialibus iudices probatis rebus
5graviter punivit. rei frumentariae, quam minimam
reppererat, ita consuluit, ut excedens vita septem
annorum canonem populo Romano relinqueret.
6 Ad orientis statum confirmandum profectus est,
;nihil adhue de Nigro palam dicens. ad Africam
tamen legiones misit, ne per Libyam atque Aegyptum
Niger Africam occuparet ac populo Romano penuria
8rei frumentariae perurgueret. Domitium Dextrum
in locum Bassi praefectum ? urbi reliquit atque intra |
triginta dies quam Romam venerat est profectus.
9 egressus ab urbe ad Saxa Rubra seditionem ingentem
: ob locum castrorum metandorum ab exercitu passus
l0est. occurrit ei et statim Geta frater suus, quem


! quae P. 2 alienos P. "praefectum Mommsen;
praefecti P.


1 Of, Pesc. Nig., v. A f.

? Before setting out he gave largess; see the coins of 193
with-the legend Liberalitas Aug(usti); Cohen, iv?, p. 32 f.,
nos. 279-257.

* On the Via Flaminia, about ten miles north of Rome.

+P. Septimius Geta. His province was probably Dacia, of
which he was governor in 195; see C.I.L., iii. 905.


SEVERUS VIIL—VIII. 10


wished it withdrawn, for fear that it would pone an
omen.

VIII. Next he freed his friends from debt. He
then settled dowries on his daughters and gave them
in marriage to Probus and Aetius. As for his son-
in-law Probus, when he offered to make him prefect
of the city, Probus declined, averring that it meant
less to him to be prefect of the city than son-in-law -
. tothe emperor. However, he immediately appointed

each of them consul and made each rich. ‘Soon there-? 193
after he appeared before the senate, and bringing in‘
accusations against the friends of J ulianus, caused `
them to be outlawed and put to death. He heard a;
vast number of lawsuits, and magistrates who had been
accused by the provincials he punished severely
whenever the accusations against them were proved ;
and finding the grain-supply at a very low ebb, he
managed it so well that on departing this life he left
the Roman people a surplus to the amount of seven
years' tribute.

And now he set out to remedy the situation in the July, 193
East, still making no public mention of Niger. None
the less, however, he sent troops to Africa, for fear
that Niger might advance through Libya and Egypt
and seize this province, and thereby distress the
Roman people with a scarcity of grain. Then,
leaving Domitius Dexter as prefect of the city in
place of Bassus, within thirty days of his coming to
Rome he set out again ;? and he had proceeded from
the city no farther than Saxa Rubra è when he had to
face a great mutiny in his army, which arose on ac-
count of the place selected for pitching camp. Then
his brother Geta* came at once to meet him, but
merely received orders to rule the province already


SEVERUS


provinciam sibi creditam regere praecepit! aliud
ll sperantem. Nigri liberos ad se adductos in eo habuit
12honore quo suos. miserat sane legionem, quae
Graeciam Thraciamque praeciperet, ne eas Pescennius
13 occuparet. sed iam Byzantium Niger tenebat.  Per-
inthum etiam Niger volens occupare plurimos de
exercitu interfecit atque ideo hostis cum Aemiliano
14est appellatus. cumque Severum ad participatum
15 vocaret, contemptus est. promisit sane Nigro tutum
` exsilium, si vellet, Aemiliano autem non ignovit.
16 Aemilianus dehinc victus in Hellesponto a Severi
ducibus Cyzicum primum confugit atque inde in
aliam civitatem, in qua eorum iussu occisus est.
17 fusae sunt item copiae ab iisdem ducibus etiam Nigri.
IX. his auditis ad senatum Severus quasi confectis rebus
litteras misit. dein conflixit cum Nigro eumque apud
Cyzicum interemit caputque eius pilo circumtulit.
2filios Nigri post hoc, quos suorum liberorum cultu
habuerat, in exsilium cum matre misit.
3 Litteras ad senatum de victoria dedit. neque


——_—


1 See c. vi. 10 and ix, 2.

2 Agellius Aemilianus, the proconsul of Asia and commander
of Niger's army.

3 See Pesc. Nig., v. 6-7.

‘This was after the defeat at Perinthus (§ 16) ; see Pesc.
Nig., v. 8.

5 Probably at Perinthus on the Propontis.

5 Near Nicaea in Bithynia; see Dio, Ixxiv. 6, 5 f.

‘This is an error, repeated in Pesc. Nig., v. 8. Niger was
finally defeated near Issus in Cilicia; see Dio, Ixxiv. 7 and
Herodian, iii. 4, 2 f. The date has recently been determined


SEVERUS VIII. 11—IX. 3


in his charge, though Geta had other hopes. Niger's
children, who were brought to him, he treated with
the same care that he showed his own.! Previous to
this, he had sent a legion to occupy Greece and
Thrace, and thereby prevent Niger from seizing
them. But Niger already held Byzantium, and now
wishing to seize Perinthus too, he slew a great number
of this force and accordingly, together with Aemili-


anus? was declared an enemy to the state. He


next proposed joint rule with Severus; this was re- :
jected with scorn. As a matter of fact, Severus did


promise him an unmolested exile if he wished it,‘
but refused to pardon Aemilianus. Soon there-
after Aemilianus was defeated by Severus' generals
at the Hellespont * and fled first to Cyzicus and
from there to another city, and here he was put
to death by order of Severus’ generals. Nigers own
forces, moreover, were routed by the same generals.®
IX. On receipt of this news Severus despatched
letters to the senate as if the whole affair were
finished. And not long afterwards he met with:
Niger near Cyzicus,’ slew him, and paraded his head :
on a pike. Niger’s children, whom he had main-
tained in the same state as his own,® he sent into:
exile after this event, together with their mother.
He sent a letter to the senate announcing the
victory,” but he inflicted no punishment upon any of


as the close of 193. Niger fled but was overtaken by some of
Severus’ soldiers between Antioch and the Euphrates and be-
headed; see Dio, lxxiv. 8, 3.

8 Seo c. viii. 11. They were afterwards put to death ; see
c. x. 1 and Pesc. Nig., vi. 1-2.

? He was acclaimed Imperator for the third time; see the


coins of 194 with the legends Mars Pacator and Paci Augusti,


Cohen, iv’, p. 35, no. 308, and p. 40, no. 359.


€M—


SEVERUS


! orientem P, Peter. 2 uictum Peter?. 3 saeue Peter;
se P


! See c. vii. 5. This statement is confirmed by Dio; see
Ixxiv. 8, 4.

? Niger's head appears on a coin of Colonia Aelia Capitolina
(Jerusalem) ; see Cohen, iii”, p. 413, no. 82.

? Notably Byzantium, which his army captured after a long
siege; see Dio, lxxiv. 14, 3. Í
^ 4The campaign actually took place in northern Meso-
potamia, in the neighbourhood of Nisibis, which had been
invaded by the surrounding tribes. Most of the fighting
seems to have been done under the command of the legates,
Laetus, Anulinus, and Probus, who crossed the Tigris and in-
vaded Adiabene; see Dio, lxxv. 1-3.

5In the inscriptions and on the coins of this period he is


SEVERUS IX. 4—X.


the senators who had sided with Niger,! with the
exception of one man. Towards the citizens of
Antioch he was more resentful, because they had
laughed at him in his administration of the East and
also had aided Niger with supplies. Eventually he
deprived them of many privileges. The citizens of
Neapolis in Palestine, because they had long been
in arms on Niger's side,? he deprived of all their
civie rights, and to many individuals, other than
members of the senatorial order, who had followed
Niger he meted out cruel punishments. Many com- |
munities,? too, which had been on Niger's side, were
punished with fines and degradation; and such
senators as had seen active service on Niger's side :
with the title of general or tribune were put to death. |

Next, he engaged in further operations in the
region about Arabia * and brought the Parthians back
to allegiance and also the Adiabeni—all of whom
had sided with Pescennius. For this exploit, after
he returned home, he was given a triumph and the
names Arabicus, Adiabenicus, and Parthicus.? He
refused the triumph, however, lest he seem to
triumph for a victory over Romans ; and he declined
the name Parthicus lest he hurt the Parthians' feel-
ings.

X. And then, just as he was returning to Rome,
after the civil war caused by Niger, he received news 196


called Arabicus Adiabenicus, or Parthicus Arabicus Parthicus
Adiabenicus ; see Dessau, Ins. Sel.,417 f., and Cohen, iv?, p. 8,
nos. 48-52, and p. 40 f., nos. 368-368. The statement in § 11,
accordingly, is not accurate. However, the cognomen
Parthicus is not used without these qualifying words until
after his campaign of 198 (see c. xvi. 2). These names were
taken in 194, when he was acclaimed Imperator for the fourth
time.


SEVERUS


1 filet Nigri om. in P.


l See c. vi. 9; Cl. Alb., viii. 4 f.

? More correctly, Britain, of which he was governor. He
had previously uc from Severus the title of Caesar (see
note to Cl, Alb., i. 2), and he now assumed that of Augustus.

3See c. ix. 2 and note.

3 On his march from Byzantium through Moesia to Gaul.
As Hirschfeld has pointed out, there is no reason to suppose
that Severus went to Rome at this time; see Kl. Schrsften
(Berlin, 1913), p. 432.

5 From this time on, in inscriptions and on coins he always
bears the name M. Aurelius Antoninus.

ë See note to Ael., i. 2. In this instance, the purpose of
the step was to nullify Albinus’ claim to the name and to the
succession (see note to § 1). .

Tie. Severus’ younger son.


SEVERUS X. 2-7


of another civil war, caused by Clodius Albinus,! who ,
had revolted in Gaul? It was because of this .revolt
that Niger's children and their mother were later put
to death.? As for Albinus, Severus at once declared
him a public foe, and likewise those who, in their
letters to him or replies to his letters, had expressed
themselves as favourably inclined to him. As he
was advancing against Albinus, moreover, and had
reached Viminacium * on his march, he gave his elder
son Bassianus the name Aurelius Antoninus * and the
title of Caesar,® in order to destroy whatever hopes of
succeeding to the throne his brother Geta had con-
ceived. His reason for giving his son the name An-
toninus was that he had dreamed that an. Antoninus.
would succeed him. It was because of this dream,
some believe, that Geta 7 also was called Antoninus,®
in order that he too might succeed to the throne.
Others, however, think that Bassianus was given the
name Antoninus because Severus himself wished to
pass over into the family of Marcus.?

At first, Severus' generals ! were worsted by those
of Albinus ; ! but when, in his anxiety, he consulted
augurs in Pannonia, he learned that he would be


8 The statement that Geta was given the name Antoninus
is frequently made in these biographies ; see c. xvi. 4; xix. 2;
Get., i. 1 f.; v. 8. It is questioned, on the other hand, in
Diad., vi, 9, and as this name does not appear in the inscrip-
tions or on the coins of Geta, the statement is probably in-
correct. l ;

9 So also Dio, lxxv. 7, 4, and lxxvi. 9. 4. In his inscrip-
tions from this time on he appears as Divi Marci Antonini
Pii Germ, Sarm. filius, etc, He also'assumed the name
Pius about this time.

19 See also Cl. Aib., ix. 1-4.

u Jn particular, Lupus, who was badly defeated by Albinus
about this time ; see Dio, Ixxv. 6, 2.


SEVERUS
'


lsed . . . . periturum rejected by Peter? as repetition from
Pesce. Nig., ix. 5. ? cadit P.


! Probably the modern Tournus on the Saóne about twenty
miles north of Macon. A description of the engagement is
given in Dio, lxxv. 6-7. According to his version, Albinus
killed himself after the defeat; but see 8S 6-9 and Cl, Alb.,
ix, 3.

24.e. Julius Laetus ; see Herodian, iii. 7, 4; cf. c. xv. 6.

? His brother, according to Cl. Alb., ix. 6; xii. 9, but this
is probably an error,

1 See Com., xvii, 11.

5 According to Dio, lxxv. 7, the announcement of Com-
modus' deification did cause the senate great consternation.
Severus’ real purpose, however, was probably to carry out


SEVERUS X. 8—Xl. 7


the victor, and that his opponent would neither fall
into his hands nor yet escape, but would die close by
the water. Many of Albinus’ friends soon deserted
and came over to Severus ; and many of his generals
were captured, all of whom Severus punished. XI.
Meanwhile, after many operations had been carried
on in Gaul with varying success, Severus had his
first successful encounter with Albinus at Tinurtium.!
Through the fall of his horse, however, he was at one
time in the utmost peril ; and it was even believed
that he had been slain by a blow with a ball of lead,
and the army almost elected another emperor.? ]t
was at this time that Severus, on reading the resolu-
tions passed by the senate in praise of Clodius
Celsinus, who was a native of Hadrumetum and
Albinus kinsman,? became highly incensed at the
senate, as though it had recognized Albinus by this
act, and issued a decree that Commodus should be
placed among the deified,* as though he could take
vengeance on the senate by this sort of thing.? He
proclaimed the deification of Commodus to the
soldiers first, and then announced it to the senate in
a letter, to which he added a discourse on his own
victoty. Next, he gave orders that the bodies of the
senators who had been slain in the battle should be
mutilated. And then, when Albinus body was
brought before him, he had him beheaded while still
half alive,? gave orders that his head should be taken
to Rome, and followed up the order with a letter.
Albinus was defeated on the eleventh day before the 19 Feb.,
Kalends of March. 197


further his policy of attaching himself to the house of the
Antonines ; see c. x. 6.
8 See note to § 1.


SEVERUS


Reliquum autem cadaver eius ante domum pro-

8 priam exponi ac diu videri ! iussit. equum praeterea

ipse residens supra cadaver Albini egit expavescen-

temque admonuit et effrenatum ut audacter protereret.

9addunt alii quod idem cadaver in Rhodanum abici
praecepit, simul etiam uxoris liberorumque eius.


1 diu uideri Salmasius ; diuidere P. 24mperatoriam von
Domaszewski ; imperator iam P, Peter.


` 1These executions took place in Gaul (Herodian, iii. 8, 2) ;
they are to be distinguished from the later executions at
Rome; see c. xiii.


SEVERUS XI. 8—XIl. 8


The rest of Albinus' body was, by Severus' order,
laid out in front of his own home, and kept there for
a long time exposed to view. Furthermore, Severus
himself rode on horseback over the body, and when
the horse shied, he spoke to it and loosed the reins,
that it might trample boldly. Some add that he
ordered Albinus' body to be cast into the Rhone, and
also the bodies of his wife and children.

XII. Countless persons who had sided with Albinus.
were put to death,! among them numerous leading |


men and many distinguished women, and all their :


goods were confiscated and went to swell the public |


treasury. Many nobles of the Gauls and Spains were:


also put to death at this time. Finally, he gave his
soldiers sums of money such as no emperor had ever


given before. Yet as a result of these confiscations, -


he left his sons a fortune greater than any other
emperor had left to his heirs, for he had made a
large part of the gold in the Gauls, Spains, and
Italy imperial property. At this time the office of
steward for private affairs? was first established.


After Albinus’ death many who remained loyal to`


him were defeated by Severus in battle. At this
same time, moreover, he received word that the
legion in Arabia had gone over to Albinus.®

And so, after having taken harsh vengeance for
Albinus’ revolt by putting many men to death and
exterminating Albinus’ family, he came to Rome filled
with wrath at the people and senate. He delivered


a eulogy of Commodus before the senate and before ;


an assembly of the people and declared him a god ;

he averred, moreover, that Commodus had been un-
? See note to Com., xx. 1. i
3 The Third Legion, the Cyrenaica.


we


SEVERUS


9 tissime furere. post hoc de sua clementia disseruit,
cum crudelissimus fuerit et senatores infra scriptos
XIII. occiderit. occidit autem sine causae dictione hos
nobiles: Mummium Secundinum, Asellium Claudi-
2 anum, Claudium Rufum, Vitalium Victorem, Papium
Faustum, Aelium Celsum, Iulium Rufum, Lollium
Professum, Aurunculeium Cornelianum, Antonium !
Balbum, Postumium Severum, Sergium Lustralem,
3Fabium Paulinum, Nonium Gracchum, Masticium
Fabianum, Casperium Agrippinum, Ceionium Albinum,
4 Claudium Sulpicianum, Memmium Rufinum, Cas-
perium Aemilianum, Cocceium Verum, Erucium Cla-
5rum, Aelium? Stilonem, Clodium Rufinum, Egnatu-
6leium Honoratum, Petronium luniorem, Pescennios
Festum et Veratianum et Aurelianum et Materianum
et Iulianum et Albinum, Cerellios Macrinum et Faust-
7 inianum et Iulianum, Herennium Nepotem, Sulpicium?
Canum, Valerium Catullinum, Novium Rufum, Claudi-
gum Arabianum, Marcium * Asellionem. horum igitur
tantorum ac tam inlustrium virorum, nam multi in his
consulares, multi praetorii, omnes certe summi viri
9 fuere, interfector ab Afris ut deus habetur. Cincium
Severum calumniatus est quod se.veneno adpetisset,
XIV. atque ita interfecit. Narcissum dein, Commodi
strangulatorem, leonibus obiecit. multos praeterea


! Antonium Hirschfeld, acc. by Peter,? Praef., p. xlii. ;
Antoninum P, Peter. ? Aelium Hirschfeld, acc. by Peter?
Praef., p. xlii. ; L. P, Peter. 3 Sulpius P, Peter. + Mar-
cium Hirschfeld, acc. by Peter,? Praef., p. xlii. ; Marcum P,
Peter.


1 A few telling sentences from the speech are recorded ìn

m ^io, lxxv. 8. Dio also relates that he praised the severity

R ml ‘cruelty of Marius and Sulla ; these names were afterwards
o ied to him; see Pesc. Nig., vi. 4.


- SEVERUS XII. 9—XIV.


popular only among the degraded.! Indeed, it was
evident that Severus was openly furious. After this


he was really exceedingly blood-thirsty and executed


|


he spoke about the mercy he had shown, whereas /


the senators enumerated below.? XIII. He put to
death without even a trial the following noblemen :
Mummius Secundinus, Asellius Claudianus, Claudius
Rufus, Vitalius Victor, Papius Faustus, Aelius Celsus,
Julius Rufus, Lollius Professus, Aurunculeius Cor-
nelianus, Antonius Balbus, Postumius Severus, Sergius
Lustralis, Fabius Paulinus, Nonius Gracchus, Masticius
Fabianus, Casperius Agrippinus, Ceionius Albinus,
Claudius Sulpicianus, Memmius Rufinus, Casperius
Aemilianus, Cocceius Verus, Erucius Clarus, Aelius
Stilo, Clodius Rufinus, Egnatuleius Honoratus, Petro-
nius Junior, the six Pescennii, Festus, Veratianus,
Aurelianus, Materianus, Julianus, and Albinus ; the
three Cerellii, Macrinus, Faustinianus, and Julianus ;
Herennius Nepos, Sulpicius Canus, Valerius Catullinus,
Novius Rufus, Claudius Arabianus, and Marcius Asel-
lio. And yet he who murdered all these distinguished
men, many of whom had been consuls and many


praetors, while all were of high estate, is regarded -


by the Africansas agod. He falsely accused Cincius
Severus of attempting his life by poison, and there-
upon put him to death; next, he cast to the lions
Narcissus, the man who had strangled Commodus.?


XIV. And besides, he put to death many men from.


? According to Dio, ibid., he executed twenty-nine and par-
doned thirty five. The following list of forty-one probably
includes some of the partisans of Niger, whom Severus had
previously refrained from putting to death ; see c. ix. 3.

3Cf. Com., xvii. 2. But according to Dio, Narcissus w^
put to death by Didius Julianus; see note to Did. Jul..


i
i
f


~


VOL, I.


SEVERUS


l excitus Editor; exciti Petschenig; estiti P; extincti
Peter? ; rumor . . . extitit, Peter.? 2 cum eo Capitolium
Peter; cum eo om. in P.


1 See note to Hadr., vii. 5.
? Bassianus had already received the name Caesar (see c.
x. 9) ; it was now confirmed by the senate. He was also at
this time made a member of some of the priestly colleges to
which the emperor belonged (see note to Marc., vi. 3), and he
was apparently recognized officially as his father’s successor,
for from now on he bore the title of Imperator Destinatus ;
see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 442, 446, 447.
3 See c. xv. f. * See c. iii. 2 and note,
$C, Fulvius Plautianus, prefect of the guard. -For an ac-
the^ount of his great power and his influence over Severus see
Ron ;, lxxv. 14-15. He received the ornamenta consularia
308 ?u +a to Hadr., viii. 7), and was consul in 203.


i


SEVERUS XIV. 2-7


the more humble walks of life, not to speak of those,
whom the fury of battle had consumed.

After this, wishing to ingratiate himself with the
people, he took the postal service! out of private
hands and transferred its cost to the privy-purse.
Then he caused the senate to give Bassianus An-
toninus the title of Caesar and grant him the imperial
insignia.? Next, when called away by the rumour of 201
a Parthian war,’ he set up at his own expense statues
in honour of his father, mother, grandfather and first
wife. He had been very friendly with Plautianus ; ?
but, on learning his true character, he conceived such
an aversion to him as even to declare him a public ca. 203-4
enemy, overthrow his statues,? and make him famous
throughout the entire world for the severity of his
punishment, the chief reason for his anger being that
Plautianus had set up his own statue among the
statues of Severus' kinsinen and connections. He re-
voked the punishment which had been imposed upon
the people of Palestine " on Niger's account. Later,
he again entered into friendly relations with Plauti-
anus, and after entering the city in his company like
one who celebrates an ovation,? he went up to the
Capitol, although in the course of time he killed him.
He bestowed the toga virilis on his younger son,


$ This incident is described quite differently in Dio, lxxv.
16, 2; apparently, an order to melt some of the bronze
statues of Plautianus gave rise to the belief that he had been
disgraced.

T See c, ix. 5.

8 A minor triumph, in which the general rode through the
city instead of driving a chariot. It was celebrated in case
the war had not been formally declared, or the vanquishecbr


was not a recognized hostis, c or the victory had been bloo?'


see Gellius, v. 6, 21.


SEVERUS


3 Getae minori filio togam virilem dedit, maiori Plau-
9 tiani filiam uxorem iunxit. ii qui hostem publicum
Plautianum dixerant deportati sunt. ita omnium
10 rerum semper quasi naturali lege mutatio est. filios
dein consules designavit. Getam fratrem extulit.
11 profectus dehinc ad bellum Parthicum est, edito
12 gladiatorio munere et congiario populo dato. multos
inter haec causis vel veris vel simulatis occidit,
13 damnabantur autem plerique, cur iocati essent, alii,
cur tacuissent, alii, cur pleraque figurata! dixissent.
ut *ecce imperator vere nominis sui, vere Pertinax,
vere Severus ”
XV. Erat sane in sermone vulgari Parthicum bel-
ium adfectare Septimium Severum, gloriae cupiditate
2non aliqua necessitate deductum. traiecto denique
exercitu a Brundisio continuato itinere venit in
3 Syriam Parthosque summovit. sed postea in Syriam
rediit, ita ut se pararet ac bellum Parthis inferret.
4inter haec Pescennianas reliquias Plautiano auctore
persequebatur, ita ut nonnullos etiam ex amicis suis
5 quasi vitae suae insidiatores appeteret. multos etiam,
quasi Chaldaeos aut vates de sua salute consuluissent,


1 figurata P ; figurate Peter.


! Fulvia Plautilla. The marriage took place in 202; she
received the title of Augusta, which appears in inscriptions and
on her coins (Cohen, iv’, pp. 248 and 247 f). When her
father was assassinated in the Palace (see Dio, lxxvi. 4) in
205, she was banished; later on she was put to death.

‘thes * Apparently after Geta’s death—by a public funeral and
Ron' » 1.^ in the Forum; see Dio, lxxvi. 2, 4.
398 9€ +o t, -*higns had entered: Mesopotamia and were at-


SEVERUS XIV. 8—XV. 5


Geta, and he united his elder son in marriage with
Plautianus’ daughter.! Those who had declared
Plautianus a public enemy were now driven into
exile. Thus, as if by a law of nature, do all things
ever shift and change. Soon thereafter he appointed
his sons to the consulship ; also he greatly honoured 205
his brother Geta? Then, after giving a gladiatorial
show and bestowing largess upon the people, he set
out for the Parthian war. Many men meanwhile.
were put to death, some on true and some on trumped- ;
up charges. Several were condemned because they
had spoken in jest, others because they had not
spoken at all, others again because they had cried)
out many things with double meaning, such as:
“ Behold an emperor worthy of his name—Perti- .
nacious in very truth, in very truth Severe "

XV. It was commonly rumoured, to be sure, that in
planning a war on the Parthians, Septimius Severus .
was influenced rather by a desire for glory than by
a! realnecessity.? Finally, he transported his army
~ a Brundisium, reached Syria without breaking

. voyage, and forced the Parthians to retreat.*
after that, however, he returned to Syria in order to
make preparations to carry on an offensive war against
the Parthians. In the meantime, on the advice of
Plautianus. he hunted down the last survivors of
Pescennius' revolt, and he even went so far as to
bring charges against several of his own friends on
the ground that they were plotting to kill him. He
put numerous others to death on the charge of having
asked Chaldeans or soothsayers how long he was
tacking Nisibis, the seat of Severus’ operations in his former


campaign ; see note to c. ix. 9.
3 $.e. from Nisibis.


SEVERUS


interemit, praecipue suspectans! unumquemque

idoneum imperio, cum ipse parvulos adhuc filios

essent nonnulli, Severus se excusabat et post eorum


1 suspectans Casaubon, Peter?; suspectos P; suspectus
Salmasius, Peter!. ? quibus seui P. 3 herbarum Eg-
natius, Peter!; culparum P; t culparum Peter?; caeparuin
Kellerbauer. *ob hoc Ed. princeps, Peter! ; ob P; ideo
Peter?.


! His legate in his former campaign and the defender of
Nisibis against the Parthians; see notes to c. xv. 1-2. He
was put to death during the siege of Hatra, which followed
the capture of Ctesiphon ; see Dio, lxxv. 10, 3.

? See note to Com., iv. 7.


SEVERUS XV. 6—XVI. 3


destined to live; and he was especially suspicious of
anyone who seemed qualified for the imperial power,
for his sons were still very young, and he believed
or had heard that this fact was being observed by
those who were seeking omens regarding their own
prospects of the throne. Eventually, however, when
several had been put to death, Severus disclaimed
all responsibility, and after their death denied that
he had given orders to do what had been done.
Marius Mdximus says that this was particularly true
in the case of Laetus.! His sister from Leptis once
came to see him, and, since she could scarcely speak
Latin, made the emperor blush for her hotly. And
so, after giving the broad stripe? to her son and many
presents to the woman herself, he sent her home
again, and also her son, who died a short time after-
wards.

XVI. When the summer was well-nigh over,
Severus invaded Parthia, defeated the king, and came 198
to Ctesiphon ; and about the beginning of the winter
season he took the city. For indeed in those regions
it is better to wage war during the winter, although
the soldiers live on the roots of the plants and so
contract various ills and diseases. For this reason
then, although he could make no further progress,
since the Parthian army was blocking the way and
his men were suffering from diarrhea because of the
unfamiliar food, he nevertheless held his ground,
took the city, put the king to flight, slew a great
multitude, and gained the name Parthicus? For
this feat, likewise, the soldiers declared his son,


3 Parthicus Maximus; this cognomen appears in his in-
scriptions and on his coins from 198 onward. On his pre-
vious cognomina see note to c. ix. 10.


SEVERUS


Bassianum Antoninum, qui Caesar appellatus iam
fuerat, annum xin agentem participem imperii
4dixerunt milites. Getam quoque, minorem filium,
Caesarem dixerunt, eundem Antoninum, ut plerique
5 in litteras tradunt, appellantes. harum appellationum
causa donativum militibus largissimum dedit, con-
cessa omni praeda oppidi Parthici, quod milites
6 quaerebant. inde in Syriam rediit victor, et Parthicum!
deferentibus sibi patribus triumphum idcirco recusavit,
quod consistere in curru adfectus articufiri morbo
7 non posset. filio sane concessit, ut triumpharet ; cui
senatus Judaicum triumphum decreverat, idciro quod
et in Syria res bene gestae fuerant a Severo.
8 Dein cum Antiochiam transisset, data virili toga
filio maiori secum eum consulem designavit, et statim
9 in Syria consulatum inierunt. post hoc dato stipendio
XVII. cumulatiore militibus Alexandriam petiit. in itinere
Palaestinis plurima iura fundavit. Iudaeos fieri sub
gravi poena vetuit. idem etiam de Christianis sanxit.
2deinde Alexandrinis ius buleutarum dedit, qui sine
publico consilio ita ut sub regibus ante vivebant, uno


1 parihicus P.


! He was acclaimed Augustus by the soldiers and received
the tribunician power from Severus. The date was prior to
the 3rd May, 198, since he is called Augustus in an African
inscription of that date; see C.I.L., viii. 2465 = Dessau, Ins.
Sel. 2485.

? Of. c. x. 3 and xiv. 3.

3 He is called Nobilissimus Caesar in inscriptions from 198
onward.

* See note to c. x. 5.

5Ctesiphon. The sack of the city is also mentioned in
Dio, Ixxv. 9, 4.

5 But not until after two unsuccessful sieges of Hatra in
Mesopotamia ; see Dio, Ixxv. 10-12.


SEVERUS XVI. 4—XVII. 2


Bassianus Antoninus, co-emperor;! he had already
been named Caesar? and was now in his thirteenth
year. And to Geta, his younger son, they gave the
name Caesar,’ and called him in addition Antoninus,*
as several men relate in their writings. To celebrate
the bestowal of these names Severus gave the soldiers
an enormous donative, none other, in truth, than
liberty to plunder the Parthian capital,? a privilege
for which they had been clamouring. He then
returned victorious to Syria. But when the senators
offered him a triumph for the Parthian campaign,
he declined it because he was so atflicted with gout
that he was unable to stand upright in his chariot.
Notwithstanding this, he gave permission that his
son should celebrate a triumph ; for the senate had
decreed to him a triumph’ over Judaea because of
the successes achieved by Severus in Syria.’

Next, when he had reached Antioch, he bestowed
the toga virilis upon his elder son and appointed
him consul as colleague to himself; and without
further delay, while still in Syria, the two entered
upon their consulship. XVII. After this, having 202.
first raised his soldiers’ pay, he turned his steps
toward Alexandria, and while on his way thither he
conferred numerous rights upon the communities of
Palestine. He forbade conversion to Judaism under
heavy penalties and enacted a similar law in regard to
the Christians. He then gave the Alexandrians the
privilege of a local senate, for they were still without
any public council, just as they had been under their
native kings,? and were obliged to be content with


7 As Caracalla was only twelve years old it is hardly likely
that he won a victory in person.
8 Of. c. xiv. 6. ? The Ptolemaic dynasty. .


SEVERUS


3 iudice contenti, quem ! Caesar dedisset. multa prae-


lom. in P!, added in P corr. 2 bello eorum P. 3 saluti
P *quam ez P; atque Peter. 5 obtulisset atque dixisset
Peter ?; obtulissetque dixisset P; obtulisset dixissetque Peter.!
8 illi quid facturus esses Mommsen ; ille quod facturus esset
P; ille . . . quod facturus esset Peter.


1The wurtdicus Alexandriae. Augustus had refused to
allow Alexandria to have a local senate; see Dio, li. 17, 2.

2The famous “singing Memnon ” at Thebes, a colossal
statute of Amenophis III.

3 In the Fayüm in Middle Egypt. A description of it is
given by Herodotus, iii. 148.

* This section of the biography (xvii. 5—xix. 4) bears a close
resemblance, often in the actual wording, to Victor, de
Caesaribus, XX., and in some passages it seems to be & mere
abbreviation of Victor’s narrative; see Intro., p. xxii.

5 See note to c. vi. 11. 8 Of, c. vii. 8; Pert., xiv. 10.

‘In both this passage and the corresponding sentence in
Victor (Caes., xx. 1) there seems to be a confusion between


SEVERUS XVII. 3-7


the single governor appointed by Caesar. Besides
this, he changed many of their laws. In after years
Severus himself continually avowed that he had
found this journey very enjoyable, because he had
taken part in the worship of the god Serapis, had
learned something of antiquity, and had seen un-
familiar animals and strange places. For he visited
Memphis, Memnon, the Pyramids, and the Laby-
rinth,? and examined them all with great care.

But since it is tedious to mention in detail the
less important matters, only the most noteworthy of
his deeds are here related.* He discharged the
cohorts of the guard? after Julianus was defeated
and slain; he deified Pertinax against the wishes of
the army ;$ and he gave orders that the decisions of
Salvius Julianus should be annulled,’ though this he
did not succeed in accomplishing. Lastly, he was,
given the surname Pertinax, not so much by his.
own wish, it seems, as because of his frugal ways.?
In fact, he was considered somewhat cruel, both on,
account of his innumerable executions !? and because,
when one of his enemies came before him on a certain .
occasion to crave forgiveness and said “ What would
you have done?”’,!! Severus was not softened by so


Salvius Julianus and his Edictum Perpetuum (see note to
Hadr., xviii. 1), on the one hand, and Didius Julianus and his
Acta, on the other. The Acta were doubtless rescinded, but
the Edictum remained in force.

5 But see c. vii. 9 and note. He assumed the name in
order to strengthen his own position.

? Cf. c. xix. 7-8. Pertinax was famous for his frugality ;
see Pert., viii. 9-11; xii. 2-6.

10 See c. xii-xiii.

u The story is preserved in complete form in Victor, Caes.,
xx. 11.


. 411


SEVERUS


emollitus! tam prudente dicto interfici eum iussit.
8 fuit praeterea delendarum cupidus factionum. prope
XVIII.a nullo congressu digressus? nisi victor. Persarum
regem Abgarum subegit. Arabas in dicionem accepit.
2 Adiabenos in tributarios coegit. Britanniam, quod
maximum eius imperii decus est, muro per trans-
versam insulam ducto utrimque? ad finem Oceani
munivit. unde etiam Britannici nomen accepit.
3 Tripolim, unde oriundus erat, contunsis bellicosissimis
. gentibus securissimam reddidit, ac populo Romano
diurnum oleum gratuitum et fecundissimum in
aeternum donavit.
^ Idem cum  implacabilis delictis fuit, tum ad-
erigendos industrios quosque iudicii singularis.
5 philosophiae ac dicendi studiis satis deditus, doctrinae
6quoque nimis cupidus. latronum ubique hostis.
vitam suam privatam publicamque ipse composuit ad
7 fidem, solum tamen vitium crudelitatis excusans. de
hoc senatus ita iudicavit, illum aut nasci non debuisse


1 so Peter? ; est emollitus P, Peter.! ? inserted by Casau-
bon. 3 utrumque P. 4 diurnum Casaubon ; diuturnam P.


1 The ambiguity of this sentence is due to excessive com-
pression of the original as preserved in Victor, Caes., xx. 18-
14. The transition from the suppression of conspiracies to
success in foreign wars is entirely omitted.

? Abgar IX., King of Osroene, who joined Severus on his
Parthian campaign, gave his sons as hostages and assumed
the name Septimius; see Herodian, iii. 9, 2. According to
Herodian, this happened in connection with Severus! second
campaign, in 198, but it has been maintained that the in-
cident should be connected with the first campaign, in 195.

3 Of. c. ix. 9 and note.

4This does not refer to the construction of a new wall, but
to the restoration either of the wall of Hadrian (see Hadr., xi.
2) or of the earthen rampart of Pius (see Péws, v. 4.)


SEVERUS XVII. 8— XVIII 7


sensible a speech, but ordered him to be put to
death. He was determined to crush out conspira-
cies. He seldom departed from a battle except as-
victor! XVIII. He defeated Abgarus, the king of
the Persians He extended his sway over the Arabs.
He forced the Adiabeni to give tribute.? He built
a wall‘ across the island of Britain from sea to sea,
and thus made the province secure—the crowning
glory of. his reign; in recognition thereof he was
given the name Britannicus. He freed Tripolis, 210
the region of his birth, from fear of attack by crushing
sundry warlike tribes. And he bestowed upon the
Roman people, without cost, a most generous daily
allowance of oil in perpetuity.®

He was implacable toward the guilty ; at the same
time he showed singular judgment in advancing the
efficient. He took a fair interest in philosophy and
oratory, and showed a great eagerness for learning
in general. He was relentless everywhere toward
brigands.” He wrote a trustworthy account of his
own life, both before and after he became emperor,’
in which the only charge that he tried to explain away
was that of cruelty. In regard to this charge, the
senate declared that Severus either should never have


? Britannicus Maximus; it appears in his inscriptions of
210. The cognomen Britannicus is found on his coins of 211,
bearing the legend Victoriae Britannicae; see Cohen, iv?, p.
75 f., no. 722 f.

$ Of. c. xxiii. 2; Alex., xxii. 2. Previous to this time oil,
like grain, had been sold by the government at low prices,
but from now on until after the time of Constantine it was
given to the populace.

7 Especially one famous brigand named Bulla Felix, who
with a band of six hundred men terrorized Italy for two years ;
see Dio, lxxvi. 10. i

8 See note to c. iii. 2.


SEVERUS ]

9 coniurationis. idem, cum pedibus aeger bellum
moraretur, idque milites anxie ferrent eiusque filium
Bassianum, qui una erat, Augustum fecissent, tolli se
atque in tribunal ferri iussit, adesse deinde omnes
10 tribunos centuriones duces et cohortes quibus auc-
toribus id acciderat, sisti deinde filium, qui Augusti
nomen acceperat. cumque animadverti in omnes auc-
tores facti praeter filium iuberet rogareturque? omni-
bus ante tribunal prostratis, caput manu contingens ait :


lream Salmasius; eam P. 2 rogareturque | Peter ! ;
rogareturquem P; rogareturque «Cuenia >m Klein, Peter?,
but see use of rogatus in Pesc. Nig., x. 5.


1 There is no suggestion in Dio that she was guilty of either
adultery or conspiracy. Both charges are probably due to the
machinations of Plautianus, who tried to poison Severus’
mind against her; see Dio, lxxv. 15, 6; lxxviii. 24, 1. The
statement of an incestuous relationship between her and
Caracalla found in the Historia Augusta (c. xxi. 7 and Carac.,
x. 1-4) and in other writings of a late date (e.g. Victor, Caes.,
xxi.) represents a definite historical tradition composed by a
traducer of Julia.


SEVERUS XVIII. 8—XIX. 2


been born at all or never should have died, because,
on the one hand, he had proved too cruel, and on the
other, too useful to the state. For all that, he was
less careful in lis home-life, for he retained his wife
Julia even though she was notorious for her adulteries
and also guilty of plotting against him.! On one
occasion,? when he so suffered from gout as to delay
a campaign, his soldiers in their dismay conferred on
his son Bassianus, who was with him at the time,
the title of Augustus. Severus, however, had him-
self lifted up and carried to the tribunal, summoned
all the tribunes, centurions, generals, and cohorts
responsible for this occurrence, and after commanding
his son, who had received the name Augustus, to
stand up, gave orders that all the authors of this deed,
save only his son, should be punished. When they
threw themselves before the tribunal and begged for
pardon, Severus touched his head with his hand and
said, * Now at last you know that the head does the
ruling, and not the feet". And even after fortune
had led him step by step through the pursuits of
study and of warfare even to the throne, he used to
say: “Everything have I been, and nothing have I
gained ”’.

XIX. In the eighteenth year of his reign, now an
old man and overcome by a most grievous disease,
he died at Eboracum in Britain, after subduing 4 Feb.,
various tribes that seemed a possible menace to the ?l!


2The following incident is related in almost exactly the
same words in Victor, Caes., xx. 25-26. It probably occurred
during the war in Britain, where, according to Dio, Ixxvi. 14,
Caracalla made various plots against his father. The title of
Augustus had been conferred on Caracalla some years pre-
viously in Mesopotamia; see note to c. xvi. 3.


SEVERUS


liquit filios duos, Antoninum Bassianum et Getam, cui
et ipsi in honorem Marci Antonini nomen imposuit.

4quasi Augusti adscribendum putaret. ipse a senatu
agentibus liberis, qui? ei funus amplissimum exhib-
uerunt, inter divos est relatus.

5 Opera publica praecipua eius exstant Septizonium
et Thermae Severianae. eiusdemque etiam Sep-
timianae ? in Transtiberina regione ad portam nominis
sui, quarum forma intercidens statim usum publicum
invidit. |


lanlegatus P. ? liberisque P. 3 Seplimianae Zange-
meister; eius denique etiam 1anae P ; eiusdemque etiam ianuae
Peter; altae Hirschfeld, acc. by Peter?, Praef., p. xlii.


1 Especially the Caledonii and the Maeatae, the former of
whom lived north of the '* wall which divides the island into
two parts," the latter south of it; see Dio, Ixxvi. 12, 1.

? See note to c. x, 5.

?4,e. the Tomb of Hadrian (see note to Hadr., xix. 11), in

: which Marcus and the other members of the house of the
Antonines were buried.

4 See c. xi. 3.

5 Commemor&ted on coins with the legends Divo Severo
Pio and Consecratio; see Cohen, iv?, p. 12 f., nos. 80-91.

‘This was a three-storied portico at the south-eastern
corner of the Palatine Hill. Its purpose was to give an orna-


SEVERUS XIX. 3-6


province.! He left two sons, Antoninus Bassianus
and Geta, also named by him Antoninus? in honour
of Marcus. Severus was laid in the tomb of Marcus
Antoninus,? whom of all the emperors he revered so
greatly that he even deified Commodus * and held
that all emperors should thenceforth assume the
name Antoninus as they did that of Augustus. At
the demand of his sons, who gave him a most splendid
funeral, he was added to the deified. |
The principal public works of his now in existence
are the Septizonium ? and the Baths of Severus.” He
also built the Septimian Baths in the district across
the Tiber near the gate named after him;? but the
aqueduct fell down immediately after its completion
and the people were unable to make any use of them.
After his death the opinion that all men held of


him was high indeed ; for, in the long period that |
followed, no good came to the state from his sons,


and after them, when many invaders came pouring
in upon the state, the Roman Empire became a thing
for free-booters to plunder.


mental front to the Palace at the place where it faced the
Appian Way; see c. xxiv. 3.

7 According to an ancient description of Rome dating from
the time of Constantine (the Notitia Regionum), these baths
were in the First Region, the southernmost part of the city.
All trace of them, however, has disappeared, and they may
have been absorbed in the Thermae Antoninianae, i.e., Baths
of Caracalla ; see Carac., ix. 4 f.

8 The Porta Septimiana, where the modern Via della
Lungara passes through the Wall of Aurelian, probably cor-
responds with the site of this gate. The Thermae Septimtanae
(if Zangemeister’s reading be correct) must have been in this
neighbourhood. The name seems to be preserved in the ex-
pression ¿l Settignano, which was formerly applied to the
southern end of the Via della Lungara.


VOL. I. EE


—


SEVERUS

8umeros velaret.^ cibi parcissimus, leguminis patrii
avidus, vini aliquando cupidus, carnis frequenter

XX. Legisse me apud Aelium ? Maurum Phlegontis
Hadriani libertum memini Septimium Severum in-
moderatissime, cum moreretur, laetatum, quod duos
Antoninos pari imperio rei publicae relinqueret,
exemplo Pii, qui Verum et Marcum Antoninos per


1 uix et Salmasius ; uizit P. 3 soleret P. 3 Helius
P, Peter. 1 neminem prope Edit. princeps, Peter’; nemi-
nem facere prope P!, Peter?; neminem fere [prope] Salmasius.


1 Cf. c. xvii. 6. Dio also comments on the simplicity of
Severus' mode of life ; see Ixxvi. 17.

2 See Hadr., xvi. i.

3 Geta received the title of Augustus in 209; see his coins
of 209, Cohen, iv?, p. 266 f., nos. 199-181.

t This statement is made in other rhetorical portions of
the Historia Augusta (Carac., x. 1; Geta, vii. 8) and in


SEVERUS XIX. 7—XX. 4


His clothing was of the plainest ; indeed, even his :
tunic had scarcely any purple on it, while he covered |
his shoulders with a shaggy cloak. He was very
sparing in his diet,! was fond of his native beans,
liked wine at times, and often went without meat.
In person he was large and handsome. His beard
was long; his hair was gray and curly, his face was
such as to inspire respéct. His voice was clear, but
retained an African accent even to his old age. After ,
his death he was much beloved, for then all envy of
his power or fear of his cruelty had vanished.

XX. I can remember reading in Aelius Maurus,
the freedman of that Phlegon? who was Hadrian's
freedman, that Septimius Severus rejoiced exceedingly
at the time of his death, because he was leaving two
Antonini to rule the state with equal powers,’ herein
following the example of Pius, who left to the state
Verus and Marcus Antoninus, his two sons by adop-
tion; and that he rejoiced all the more, because,
while Pius had left only adopted sons, he was leaving
sons of his own blood to rule the Roman state,
namely Antoninus Bassianus, whom he had begotten
from his first marriage, and Geta, whom Julia had
borne him. In these high hopes, however, he was
grievously deceived; for the state was denied the
one by murder, the other? by his own character.
And in scarcely any case did that revered name’ long
or creditably survive. Indeed, when I reflect on the
matter, Diocletian Augustus, it is quite clear to me


historians of the later period (e.g., Victor, Caes., xxi., 3). It
is not only untrue, but it contradicts the statement of Sev.,
iii. 9 and iv. 2.

5 Geta, murdered in 212; see note to c. xxi. 7.

6 Bassianus. 74,e., Antoninus.


EE 2


SEVERUS
v»

magnorum virorum optimum et utilem filium reliquisse
5satisclaret. denique aut sine liberis veris ! interierunt
aut tales habuerunt plerique, ut melius fuerit de
XXI. rebus humanis sine posteritate discedere. et ut
ordiamur a Romulo, hic nihil liberorum reliquit, ni-
hil Numa Pompilius, quod utile posset esse rei
publicae. quid Camillus? num sui similes liberos
habuit? quid Scipio? quid Catones qui magni
2fuerunt? iam vero quid de Homero, Demosthene,
Vergilio, Crispo, Terentio? Plauto ceterisque aliis
loquar ? quid de Caesare? quid de Tullio, cui soli
3 melius fuerat liberos non habere? quid de Augusto,
qui nec adoptivum bonum filium habuit, cum illi
eligendi potestas fuisset ex omnibus ? falsus est etiam
ipse Traianus in suo municipe ac nepote deligendo,
4sed ut omittamus adoptivos, ne nobis Antonini Pius
et Marcus, numina rei publicae, occurrant, veniamus
5ad genitos. quid Marco felicius fuisset, si Commodum
6non reliquisset heredem? quid Severo Septimio,
si Bassianum nec genuisset ? qui statim insimulatum
fratrem insidiarum contra se cogitatarum parricidali
7 etiam figmento interemit; qui novercam suam—et
quid novercam ? matrem quin immo, in cuius sinu
8Getam filium eius occiderat, uxorem duxit; qui


1 ueris Salmasius; uiri P. ? So Peter; et Terentio P.


lScipio Africanus, the younger, who seems to have left
no children.

? C. Sallustius Crispus, the historian.

3 Cicero's son had none of his father's ability ; he had,
moreover, & bad reputation for drunkenness.

4 Hadrian. This sentiment represents the tradition hostile
to Hadrian which grew up after his death as & result of the
enmity felt for him by some of the senators.


SEVERUS XX. 5—XXIL. 8.


that practically no great man has left the world a son
of real excellence or value. In short, most of them:
either died without issue of their own, or had such:
children that it would have been better for humanity |
had they departed without offspring. XXI. As for
Romulus, to begin with him, he left no children who
might have proved useful to the state, nor did Numa
Pompilius. What of Camillus? Did he have chil-
dren like himself? What of Scipio?! What of the
Catos, who were so distinguished ? Indeed, for that
matter, what shall I say of Homer, Demosthenes,
Vergil, Crispus,? Terence, Plautus, and such as they : ?
What of Caesar? What of Tully ?—for whom, par-
ticularly, it had been better had he had no son.?
What of Augustus, who could not get a worthy son
even by adoption, though he had the whole world to
choose from? Even Trajan was deceived when he


|


l


-———


chose for his heir his fellow-townsman and nephew.‘ |


But let us except sons by adoption, lest our thoughts |


turn to those two guardian spirits of the state, Pius
and Marcus Antoninus, and let us proceed to sons by


birth. What could have been more fortunate for .
Marcus than not to have left Commodus as his heir? .


What more fortunate for Septimius Severus than -


not to have even begotten Bassianus ?—a man who '


speedily charged his brother with contriving plots
against him—a murderous falsehood—and put him to
death ; who took his own stepmother to wife *—step-
mother did I say ?—nay rather the mother on whose
bosom he had slain Geta, her son ; who slew, because


5 See note to c. xviii. 8.
5 See Carac., ii. 4, and, for & detailed description of the
murder, Dio, lxxvii. 2.


SEVERUS

2 vixit, nam ad imperium senex venit. cumque positus


! regalis P. ? om. in P. 3 diu immo P. 4 frusta
P; lacuna est. by Casaubon.


! See Carac., iv. 1 and viii. ? Sallust, Jugurtha, x.
3 Sce Carac., ix. 7. 3 See Carac., ix. 4 f.


SEVERUS XXI. 9—XXII. 2


he refused to absolve him of his brother's murder,!
Papinian, a sanctuary of law and treasure-house of
jurisprudence, who had been raised to the office of
prefect that a man who had become illustrious through
his own efforts and his learning might not lack
official rank. In short, not to mention other things,
I believe that it was because of this man's character
that Severus, a gloomier man in every way, nay even
a crueller one, was considered righteous and worthy
of the worship of a god. Once indeed, it is said,
Severus, when laid low by sickness, sent to his elder
son that divine speech in Sallust in which Micipsa
urges his sons to the ways of peace.? In vain, how-
ever. . . . Fora long time, finally, the people hated
Antoninus, and that venerable name was long less
beloved, even though he gave the people clothing
(whence he got his name Caracallus?) and built the
most splendid baths.* There is a colonnade of Severus
at Rome,’ I might mention, depicting his exploits,
which was built by his son, or so most men say.
XXII. The death of Severus was foreshadowed by
the following events: he himself dreamed that he was
snatched up to the heavens in a jewelled car drawn by
four eagles, whilst some vast shape, I know not what,
but resembling a man, flew on before. And while he
was being snatched up, he counted out the numbers
eighty and nine,5 and beyond this number of years
he did not live so much as one, for he was an old man
when he came to the throne. And then, after he


5 Also mentioned in Carac.,ix. 6. Its site is unknown.

6 This same number of the years of his life is given in Pesc.
Nig., v. 1, but it is in direct contradiction with the positive
statement in c. i. 8 that he was born in 146. According to
Dio’s computation, he was born in 145; see Ixxvi. 17, 4.


SEVERUS


1So Peter?; maurum apud uallum missum P, Peter!.
2 uolens P'. 3 hominis P}. 4 fuisti P, Peter! ; fudisti
Hirschfeld, Peter?,


1 The podium was a platform close to the arena, occupied
by members of the imperial family.
? Now Carlisle. ? Cf. c. xviii. 11.


SEVERUS XXII. 3-6


had been placed in a huge circle in the air, for a long
time he stood alone and desolate, until finally, when
he began to fear that he might fall headlong, he saw
himself summoned by Jupiter and placed among the
Antonines, Again, on the day of the circus-games,
when three plaster figures of Victory were set up in
the customary way, with palms in their hands, the
one in the middle, which held a sphere inscribed
with his name, struck by a gust of wind, fell down
from the balcony! in an upright position and re-
mained on the ground in this posture ; while the one
on which Geta’s name was inscribed was dashed down
and completely shattered, and the one which bore
Bassianus’ name lost its palm and barely managed
to keep its place, such was the whirling of the
wind. On another occasion, when he was return-
ing to his nearest quarters from an inspection of the
wall at Luguvallum ? in Britain, at a time when he had
not only proved victorious but had concluded a per-
petual peace, just as he was wondering what omen
would present itself, an Ethiopian soldier, who was
famous among buffoons and always a notable jester,
met him with a garland of cypress-boughs. " And when
Severus in a rage ordered that the man be removed
from his sight, troubled as he was by the man’s
ominous colour and the ominous nature of the gar-
land, the Ethiopian by way of jest cried, it is said,
** You have been all things,? you have conquered all
things, now, O conqueror, be a god". "And when on
reaching the town he wished to perform a sacrifice,
in the first place, through a misunderstanding on the
part of the rustic soothsayer, he was taken to the
Temple of Bellona, and, in the second place, the
victims provided him were black. And then, when


SEVERUS

. Palatinae imperatorem secutae sunt,

3 Ultima verba eius dicuntur haec fuisse : * Turbatam
rem publicam ubique accepi, pacatam etiam Bri-
tannis relinquo, senex et pedibus aeger firmum im-
perium Antoninis meis relinquens, si boni erunt,


1 uita Salmasius; ciuitate P. 3 urbis add. by Egnatius,
om. in P.


1 4.e., the imperial residence in the provincial town.
? Of. c. viii. 5. 3 See c. xviii. 3.
3 See Pert., v. 7. 5See Pius, xii. 5.


SEVERUS XXII. 7—XXIII. 6


he abandoned the sacrifice in disgust and betook
himself to the Palace,! through some carelessness on
the part of the attendants the black victims followed
him up to its very doors.

XXIII. In many communities there are public
buildings erected by him which are famous, but par-
ticularly noteworthy among the achievements of his
life was the restoration of all the public sanctuaries
in Rome, which were then falling to ruin through
the passage of time. And seldom did he inscribe
his own name on these restorations or fail to preserve
the names of those who built them. At his death he
left a surplus of grain to the amount of seven years’
tribute,’ or enough to distribute seventy-five thousand
pecks a day, and so much oil? indeed, that for five
years there was plenty for the uses, not only of the
city, but also for as much of Italy as was in need
of it.

His last words, it is said, were these: * The state, .
when I received it, was harassed on every side; I |
leave it at peace, even in Britain; old now and:
with crippled feet, I bequeath to my two Antonini
an empire which is strong, if they prove good, feeble,
if they prove bad". After this, he issued orders to
give the tribune the watchword * Let us toil," be-
cause Pertinax, when he assumed the imperial power,
had given the word * Let us be soldiers ”.4 He then
ordered a duplicate made of the royal statue of For-
tune which was customarily carried about with the
emperors and placed in their bedrooms,’ in order that
he might leave this most holy statue to each of his
sons ; but later, when he realized that the hour of
death was upon him, he gave instructions, they say,
that the original should be placed in the bed-chambers


SEVERUS


1 septizodium P, Peter?, 2 absente opere P.


1]t was made of porphyry, according to Dio, lxxvi. 15, 4, of
alabaster, according to Herodian, iii. 15, 7.


" SEVERUS XXIII. 7—XXIV. 5


of each of his sons, the co-emperors, on alternate
days. As for this direction, Bassianus ignored it and
then murdered his brother.
_ XXIV. His body was borne from Britain to Rome,
and was everywhere received by the provincials with
profound reverence. Some meri say, however, that
only a golden urn! containing Severus’ ashes was so
conveyed, and that this was laid in the tomb of the
Antonines,? while Septimius himself was cremated
where he died.

When he built the Septizonium ? he had no other
thought than that his building should strike the eyes
of those who came to Rome from Africa. It is said
that he wished to make an entrance on this side
of the Palatine mansion—the royal dwelling, that is
—and he would have done so had not the prefect of
the city planted his statue in the centre of it while
he was away. Afterwards Alexander* wished to
carry out this plan, but he, it is said, was prevented
by the soothsayers, for on making inquiry he ob-
tained unfavourable omens.


? See c. xix. 3 and note. 3 See c. xix. 5 and note.
* i.e., Severus Alexander, the emperor.


PESCENNIUS NIGER


AELII SPARTIANI


ideo vix omnia de his plene in monumentis atque an-.

«etiam nunc habetur. hic eruditus mediocriter
litteris, moribus ferox, divitiis inmodicus, vita parcus,

5 libidinis effrenatae ad omne genus cupiditatum. or-


1 quod P. ? guo Closs; qua P, Peter.


1 See note to Marc., xi. 2.


PESCENNIUS NIGER
BY
AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. It is an unusual task and a difficult one to set
down fairly in writing the lives of men who, through
other men's victories, remained mere pretenders, —
and for this reason not all the facts concerning such
men are preserved in our records and histories in full.
For, in the first place, notable events that redound
to their honour are distorted by historians; other
events, in the second place, are suppressed ; and, in
the third place, no great care is bestowed upon in-
quiries into their.ancestry and life, since it seems
sufficient to recount their presumption, the battle in
which they were overcome, and the punishment they
suffered.

Pescennius Niger, then, was born of humble
parentage, according to some, of noble, according
to others. His father was Annius Fuscus, his mother
Lampridia. His grandfather was the supervisor of
Aquinum,! the town to which the family sought to
trace its origin, though the fact is even now con-
sidered doubtful. As for Pescennius himself, he was
passably well versed in literature, savage in disposi-
tion, immoderately wealthy, thrifty in his habits,
and unbridled in indulgence in every manner of |


PESCENNIUS NIGER


dines diu duxit multisque ducatibus pervenit, ut
exercitus Syriacos iussu Commodi regeret, suffragio
maxime athletae qui Commodum strangulavit, ut
omnia tunc fiebant.

II. Is postquam comperit occisum Commodum,
Iulianum imperatorem appellatum eundemque iussu
Severi et senatus occisum, Albinum etiam in Gallia
sumpsisse nomen et ius! imperatoris, ab exercitibus
Syriacis, quos regebat, appellatus est imperator, ut
quidam dicunt, magis in Iuliani odium quam in aemula-


lef ius Salmasius, Lenze; eius P; eius del. by Peter.
? om. in P. 3 seuer} P.


^ ! But see c. vi. 6, where the contrary is stated emphatically.
2 As chief centurion; see note to Avid. Cass., i. 1. ^
. %The posts are referred to in the letter in c. iv. 4, as mili-
tary tribuneships, and although this letter, like the others in
the Historia Augusta, is fictitious, its statement in this in-
stance is nearer the truth than that of the present sentenee.
4See Com., xvii. 2. .
5As a matter of fact, this happened after Niger's revolt;
see Sev., x. 1 and notes.


PESCENNIUS NIGER I.—II. 4


passion! For a long time he commanded in the
ranks,’ and finally, after holding many generalships,?
he reached the point where Commodus named him
to command the armies in Syria, chiefly on the
recommendation of the athlete who afterward
strangled Commodus ; * for so, at that time, were all
appointments made.

II. And now, after he learned that Commodus had
been murdered, that Julianus had been declared
emperor, and then, by order of Severus and the senate,
put to death, and that Albinus, furthermore, had as-
sumed in Gaul the name and power of emperor,
Pescennius was hailed imperator by the armies he
commanded in Syria ;—though more out of aversion
to Julianus, some say, than in rivalry of Severus.
Even before this, during the first days of Julianus'
reign, because of the dislike felt for the Emperor,
Pescennius was so favoured at Rome, that even the
senators, who hated Severus also, prayed for his suc-
cess, while with showers of stones and general
execrations ê the commons shouted “ May the gods
preserve him as Emperor, and him as Augustus ".
For the mob hated Julianus because the soldiers had
slain Pertinax and declared Julianus emperor con-
trary to their wishes ; and there was violent rioting
on this account. Julianus, for his part, had sent a
senior centurion to assassinate Niger’—a piece of
folly, since the attempt was made against one who
led anarmy and could protect himself, and as though,
forsooth, any sort of emperor could be slain by a re-
tired centurion! With equal madness he sent out a


ê See Ded. Jul., iv. 8 f.
7 Cf. Did. Jul., v. 1; Sev., v. 8.


VOL. 1. ; FF


1 se subsellia P. 3 populi Kellerbauer; populus P, Peter.


1 Of. Did. Jul., v. 7-8; Sev., v. 8.
? Of. Did. Jul., iv. T. 3 Of. c. ii. 9.
* Cf. Ser., iii. 8. 5 See Com., xvi. 2 and note.


————— — ——


PESCENNIUS NIGER II. 5—IIL. 6


successor for Severus when Severus had already be-
come emperor; and lastly he sent the centurion
Aquilius,! notorious as an assassin of generals, as if
such an emperor could be slain by a centurion! It
was similarly an act of insanity that he, according to
report, dealt with Severus by issuing a proclamation
forbidding him to seize the imperial power, so that


he might seem to have established a prior claim to


the empire by process of law !

III. What the people thought of Pescennius Niger
is evident from the following: when Julianus gave
circus-games at Rome, the people filled the seats of
the Circus Maximus without distinction of rank, as-
sailed him with much abuse, and then with one accord
called for Pescennius Niger to protect the city ?—
partly out of hatred for Julianus, as we have said,’
and partly out of love for the slain Pertinax. Onthis
occasion Julianus is reported to have said that neither
he himself nor Pescennius was destined to rule for
long, but rather Severus, though he it was who was
more worthy of hatred from the senators, the soldiers,
the provincials and the city-mob. And this proved
to be the case.

Now Pescennius was on very friendly terms with
Severus at the time that the latter was governor of
the province of Lugdunensis. For he was sent to
apprehend a body of deserters who were then
ravaging Gaul in great numbers,? and because he con-
ducted himself in this task with credit, he gained
the esteem of Severus, so much so, in fact, that the
latter wrote to Commodus about him, and averred
that he was a man indispensable to the state. And
he was, indeed, a strict man in all things military.
No soldier under his command ever forced a provincial

| 435
FF 2


PESCENNIUS NIGER


militari vehemens fuit. numquam sub eo miles pro-

12 sed scias idque de Nigro, militem timere non posse,

IV. nisi integri fuerint tribuni et duces militum." haec
de Pescennio Severus Augustus.

De hoc? adhuc milite Marcus Antoninus ad Corne-

lium Balbum: * Pescennium mihi laudas, agnosco ;

nam et decessor tuus eum manu strenuum, vita


1amperator tam P corr., Peter; tmperatorium P}. 2 pos-
sumus P. 3 uiuent P. ! hoc uocant cum s. m. potarunt
Editor; uocant cum hoc s. m. potare P; uocant ills hoc s. m.
potare Peter. 5 uana P. Stimuerit . . . lenebis Pet-
schenig, cf. Hohl, Klio, xiii., p. 143; limueris . . . timebis
P; «non timuerss t. timeberis Peter. 7de hoc om. in P.


1 These were prohibited at this time (see also Aler., xv. 5),


PESCENNIUS NIGER III. 7—IV.


to give him fuel, oil, or service. He himself never :
accepted any presents from a soldier, and when
he served as tribune he would not allow any to be
accepted. Even as emperor, when two tribunes
were proved to have made deductions from the
soldiers’ rations,! he ordered the auxiliaries to stone
them.

There is extant a letter written by Severus to
Ragonius Celsus, who was then governor of Gaul?:
* [t is a pity that we cannot imitate the military
discipline of this man whom we have overcome in
war. For your soldiers go straggling on all sides ;
the tribunes bathe in the middle of the day; they
have cook-shops for mess-halls and, instead of bar-
racks, brothels; they dance, they drink, they sing,
and they regard as the proper limit to a banquet un-
limited drinking. How, pray, if any traces of our an-
cestral discipline still remained, could these things
be? So then, first reform the tribunes, and then
the rank and file. For as long as these fear you, so
long will you hold them in check. But learn from
Niger this also, that the soldiers cannot be made to
fear you unless the tribunes and generals are ir-
reproachable." IV. Thus did Severus Augustus write
about Pescennius.

While Pescennius was still in the ranks, Marcus
Antoninus wrote thus to Cornelius Balbus about him :
* You sound the praises of Pescennius to me, and I
recognize the man ; for your predecessor also declared
that he was vigorous in action, dignified in demeanour,


but at a later period they were recognized by law; see Cod.
Just., xii. 38, 12.

? On the authenticity of such letters as the following see
note to Avid. Cass., i. 6.


437 .


PESCENNIUS NIGER

4 De hoc eodem Commodus: “ Pescennium fortem
virum novi et ei tribunatus iam duos dedi; ducatum
mox dabo, ubi per senectutem Aelius Corduenus rem

7tur. in vita sua Severus dicit se, priusquam filii sui
id aetatis haberent ut imperare possent, aegrotantem
id in animo habuisse, ut, si quid forte sibi accidisset,
Niger Pescennius eodem et Clodius Albinus succe-
derent, qui ambo Severo gravissimi hostes exstiterunt,

8 unde apparet, quod etiam Severi de Pescennio iudicium

V.fuerit. si Severo credimus, fuit gloriae cupidus
Niger, vita fictus, moribus turpis, aetatis provectae,
cum in imperium invasit. ex quo cupiditates eius


1 se seuerus P.


1See c. i. 5 and note. ? Cf, c. v. 8; Sev., viii. 15.

3 Prior to 189, in which year Severus seems to have been
consul; see Sev., iv. 4.

‘See note to Sev., iii. 2.


PESCENNIUS NIGER IV. 9—V,


and even then more than a common soldier. Ac-
cordingly, I have sent letters to be read at review in
which I have ordered him placed in command of
three hundred Armenians, one hundred Sarmatians,
and a thousand of our own troops. It is your place
to show that the man has attained, not by intrigue,
which is displeasing to our principles, but by merit,
toa post which my grandfather Hadrian and my great-
grandfather Trajan gave to none but the most
thoroughly tried.”

Again, Commodus said of this same man: “ I know
Pescennius for a brave man, and I have already made
him tribune twice. Presently, when advancing
years shall make Aelius Corduenus retire from public
life, I will make him a general" Such were the
opinions that all men had of him. And in truth
Severus himself frequently declared that he would
have pardoned him had he not persisted.? |

Finally, Commodus appointed him consul,’ and ad-
vanced him thereby over Severus, greatly indeed to
the latter's wrath, since he thought that Niger had
gained the consulship on the recommendation of the
senior centurions, Yet in hisautobiography * Severus
says that on one occasion, when he had fallen sick
and his sons had not yet reached an age when they
could rule, he intended, if anything by any chance
should happen to him, to appoint Pescennius Niger
and Clodius Albinus as his heirs to the throne, even
these two men who in time became his bitterest
enemies. From this it is evident what Severus thought
of Pescennius. V. But if we may believe Severus,
Niger was greedy for glory, hypocritical in his mode
of life, base in morals, and well advanced in years
when he attempted to seize the empire—for which


PESCENNIUS NIGER


1 tantum sane illud P; Tantum sane ille Damsté ; statum
lantum. sane illud Peter!; statum mutaniem. sane illud
Petschenig, Peter?. ? uidebatur Peter ; et uidebatur P.


1 See Sev., xxii. 1 and note.

? See Sev., vi. 10 and notes, 3 Cf. Sev., viii. 7.
4 On Niger's revolt see Sev., viii. 12 f. and notes.

5 Near Nicaea in Bithynia; see note to Sev., viii. 17.


PESCENNIUS NIGER V. 2-8


reason Severus inveighs against his ambition, just
as if he himself came to the throne young! For
though he understated the number of his years,
after ruling eighteen years he died at the age of
eighty-nine.!

Now Severus dispatched Heraclitus to secure
Bithynia and Fulvius to seize Niger's adult children.?
Nevertheless, although he had already heard that
Niger had seized the empire, and although he him-
self was on the point of setting out to remedy the ^
situation in the East, he made no mention of Niger
in the senate. In fact, on setting out, he did only July, 193
this—namely, send troops to Africa, fearing that
Niger would seize it and thereby distress the Roman
people' with a famine. For such a plan was pos-
sible of accomplishment, it seemed, by way of Libya
and Egypt, the provinces adjacent to Africa, for all
that it was no easy journey either by land or
sea. As for Pescennius, he slew a multitude of
distinguished men and got control of Greece,
Thrace, and Macedonia, while Severus was still on
his way to the East. He then proposed to Severus
that they two share the throne between them;
whereupon Severus, because of the men whom Niger
had slain, declared him and Aemilianus enemies to
the state. Soon after, Niger gave battle under the
leadership of Aemilianus and suffered defeat from
Severus’ generals, Even then, Severus promised him:
safety in exile if he would lay down his arms.
Niger, however, persisted and gave battle a second |
time, but was defeated ^; and in his flight while near -
the lake at Cyzicus he was wounded and was thus |
brought before Severus, and presently he was dead. :
VI. His head was paraded on a pike and then sent |


PESCENNIUS NIGER

6 Nigri nomen acceperit, cetera corporis parte candidus
et magis pinguis, vini avidus, cibi parcus, rei veneriae

7nisi ad creandos liberos prorsus ignarus. denique
etiam sacra quaedam in Gallia, quae semper! castissimis
decernunt consensu publico celebranda, suscepit.

8 qune in Commodianis hortis in porticu curva pictum

e musivo ? inter Commodi amicissimos videmus sacra


lguae semper Editor ; qua se P ; + qua se Peter. 2 musio
P, Peter. 3 pausas Gruter; paucas P.


1 See Sev., x. 1. - 2 The revolt of Albinus.

3 See Sev., xiii.

4An allusion to the proscriptions of Marius and Sulla.
According to Dio, lxxv. 8, 1, Severus in a speech to the senate
praised their severity. He is called '' Punic” because he
came from Africa.


PESCENNIUS NIGER VI. 1-9


to Rome. His children were put to death, his wife;
was murdered, his estates were confiscated, and his `
entire household utterly blotted out. All this, how- ;
ever, was done after news of the revolt of Albinus |
was ‘received, 1 for before that Niger’s children and ;
their mother had merely been sent into exile. But
Severus was exasperated by the second civil war, or |
rather the third,? and became implacable ; and it was
then that he put countless senators to death? and
got himself called by some the Punic Sulla, by others
the Punic Marius.*

In stature Niger was tall, in appearance attractive ;
and his hair grew back in a graceful way toward the
crown of his head. His voice was so penetrating
that when he spoke in the open he could be heard a
thousand paces away, if the wind were not against -
him. His countenance was dignified and always
somewhat ruddy; his neck was so black that many
men say that he was called Niger on this account.
The rest of his body, however, was very white and
he was inclined to be fat. He was fond of wine,
sparing in his use of food, and as for intercourse with '
women, he abstained from it wholly save for the pur- ~
pose of begetting children.’ Indeed, certain religious _
rites in Gaul, which they always by common consent
vote to the most chaste to celebrate, Niger himself
performed. On the rounded colonnade in the garden
of Commodus he is to be seen pictured in the mosaic.
among Commodus’ most intimate friends and per-
forming the rites of Isis. To these rites Commodus
was so devoted as even to shave his head, carry the
image of Anubis, and make every one of the ritual-
istic pauses in the procession.


5 But see c. i, 4. 8 See Com., ix. 8 f.


PESCENNIUS NIGER

3 deinde ne novi ad regendam rem publicam accederent
praeter militares administrationes intimavit, ut as-
sessores in quibus provinciis adsedissent, in his


1 scaeuis Salmasius; sceui P.


! On the distinction see note to Hadr., iii. 9.

2The assessores (also called consiliarii), the governor's
especial assistants in all matters pertaining to the adminis-
tration of justice, sat by him at trials (hence the name) and
gave him advice in legal matters. On this office see Digesta,
i. 22,

SIn his capacity as prefect of the guard. These three men
were the famous jurists constantly cited in the Digesta.

4 These two officials, together with three others, the secre-
tary of the emperor (ab epistulis, see Hadr., xi. 3), the secretary
for the imperial trials (a cognitionibus), and the emperor’s


PESCENNIUS NIGER VI. 10—VII. 4


As a soldier, then, he was excellent; as a tribune,
without peer; as a general, eminent ; as a governor,
stern ; as a consul, distinguished ; as a man, one to
be noted both at home and abroad; but as an em-
peror, unlucky. Under Severus, who was a forbid-
ding sort of man, he might have been of use to the
state had he been willing to cast in his lot with
him. VII. But this could not be, for he was de-
ceived by the sinister counsels of Aurelianus, who
espoused his daughters to Niger’s sons and made him
persist in his attempt at empire.

He was a man of such influence that when he saw the
provinces being demoralized by frequent changes of
administration, he ventured to write to Marcus, and
later to Commodus, making two recommendations :
first, that no provincial governor, legate or proconsul,!
should be superseded within a term of five years,
because otherwise they laid down their power before
they learned how to rule; and second, that save for
posts held by soldiers, no man without previous experi-
ence should be appointed to take part in the government
of the empire, the purpose of this being that assistants ?
should be promoted to the administration of those
provinces only in which they had served as assistants.
Afterwards this very principle was maintained by
Severus and many of his successors, as the prefectures
of Paulus and Ulpian prove—for these men were
assistants to Papinian,? and afterwards, when the one
had served as secretary of memoranda and the other
as secretary of petitions,* both were next appointed


literary adviser (a studiis) were important and influential mem-
bers of the imperial cabinet. Originally, these posts were held
by freedmen of the emperor, but after Hadrian's reform of the
civil service they were assigned to Equites; see Hadr., xxii. 8.


PESCENNIUS NIGER

o inquit, “illi qui vos vincunt aquam bibunt ". idem
Palaestinis rogantibus ut eorum censitio levaretur
idcirco quod esset gravata respondit: “Vos terras
vestras levari censitione vultis ; ego vero etiam aerem
vestrum censere vellem ".

VIII. Denique Delphici Apollinis vates in motu ! rei
publicae maximo, cum nuntiaretur tres esse impera-
tores, Severum Septimium, Pescennium Nigrum,
Clodium Albinum, consultus quem expediret rei pub-
licae imperare, versum Graecum huiusmodi fudisse ?
dicitur :


** Optimus est Fuscus, bonus Afer, pessimus Albus.”


1 immo P. 2 fuisse P.


1$,e.,, the assessores. Salaries had already been granted to
them by Antoninus Pius; see Digesta, 1. 18, 4. If the present
passage and Alex., xlvi. 1 are correct, however, it would seem
that the grant had not been carried out in full.


— — —— m -= =


PESCENNIUS NIGER VII. 5—VIII.


prefects of the guard. It was also a recommendation
of his that no one should serve as assistant in the
province of his birth, and that no one should govern
a province who was not a Roman of Rome, that is,
a man born in the city itself. He also recommended
salaries for the members of the governor's council,!
in order to prevent their being a burden to those to
whom they were advisers, adding that judges ought
neither to give nor receive. With his soldiers he
was severity itself; once, for example, when the
frontier troops in Egypt asked him for wine, he
replied: * Do you ask for wine when you have the
Nile?" In fact, the waters of the Nile are so sweet
that the inhabitants of the country do not ask for
wine. And similarly, when the troops made a
great uproar after they had been defeated by the
Saracens, and cried out, * We get no wine, we cannot
fight! ", “Then blush," said he, “for the men who
defeat you drink water." Likewise, when the people


of Palestine besought him to lessen their tribute, :


saying that it bore heavily on them, he replied: “So
you wish me to lighten the tax on your lands ; VEM
if I had my way, I would tax your air’

VIII. Now when the confusion in the state was at
its height, inasmuch as it was made known that there
were three several emperors, Septimius Severus,
Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus, the priest
of the Delphic Apollo was asked which of them as
emperor would prove of most profit to the state,
whereupon, it is said, he gave voice to a Greek verse
as follows :


* Best is the Dark One, the African good, but the
worst is the White One.”


-


—_—


-——


PESCENNIUS NIGER


2ex quo intellectum Fuseum Nigrum appellatum vatici-
natione, Severum Afrum, Album vero Albinum dic-


* Fundetur sanguis Albi Nigrique animantis,
imperium mundi Poena reget urbe profectus."


4 item, cum quaesitum esset quis illi! successurus esset,
respondisse itidem Graeco versu dicitur :


* Cui dederint superi nomen habere Pii."

6item cum quaereretur quamdiu imperaturus esset,
respondisse Graece dicitur :


* Bis denis Italum conscendit navibus aequor,
si tamen una ratis transiliet pelagus."


ex quo intellectum Severum viginti annos expletu-
rum. |


1 ¿llis P.


! See Sev., x. 3. ? An &daptation of Aeneid, i. 381.


D eee rs o


PESCENNIUS NIGER VIII. 2—IX.


And in this response it was clearly understood that
Niger was meant by the Dark One, Severus by the
African, and Albinus by the White One. Thereupon
the curiosity of the questioners was aroused, and they
asked who would really win the empire. To this
the priest replied with further verses somewhat as
follows : ;


“ Both of the Black and the White shall the life-blood
be shed all untimely ;

Empire over the world shall be held by the native of
Carthage.”


And then when the priest was asked who should suc-
ceed this man, he gave answer, it is said, with another
Greek verse:


* He whom the dwellers above have called by the
surname of Pius."


But this was altogether unintelligible until Bassianus
. took the name Antoninus, which was Pius’ true
surname. And when finally they asked how long he
should rule, the priest is said to have replied in-
Greek as follows :


Ke Surely with twice ten ships he will cleave the
Italian waters,?
Only let one of his barques bound oer the plain of
the sea.’


From this they perceived that Severus would round
out twenty years.

IX. This, Diocletian, greatest of emperors, is what
we have learned concerning Pescennius, gathering it
from many books. For when a man consigns to
books the lives of men who were not rulers in the

VOL. I. GG -


PESCENNIUS NIGER

5 Ac ne quid ex iis quae ad Pescennium pertinent
praeterisse videamur, licet aliis libris cognosci possint,
de hoc Septimio Severo vates dixerunt quod neque
vivus neque mortuus in potestatem Severi venturus

6esset, sed iuxta aquas illi pereundum esset. quod
quidam! dicunt ipsum Severum de mathesi, qua
callebat, dixisse. nec abfuit ? responsis veritas, cum
ille inventus sit iuxta paludem semivivus.


1 quidem P. 2 adfuit P.


1 Of. c. i. 1. :

? C. Julius Vindex, the governor of Gallia Lugdunensis, who
led & revolt against Nero in 68 and was defeated by the army
from Germany; see Suetonius, Nero, xl. f.

3C. Calpurnius Piso, the nominal head of a wide-spread


conspiracy formed against Nero in 65; see Tacitus, Annals,
xv. 48-59.


PESCENNIUS NIGER IX. 2—X.


state, or of those, again, who were not declared
emperors by the senate, or, lastly, of those who were
so quickly killed that they could not attain to fame,
his task is difficult, as we said at the beginning of
this work. It is for this reason that Vindex? is
obscure and Piso? unknown, as well as all those
others also who were merely adopted, or were hailed
as emperors by the soldiers (as was Antonius‘ in
Domitian's time), or were speedily slain and gave up
their lives and their attempt at empire together. It
now remains for me to speak of Clodius Albinus,’
who is considered this man's ally, in a way, since
they rebelled against Severus similarly, and were
similarly overcome by him and put to death. But
we have no clear information concerning him either,
since he and Pescennius were the same in fate, how-
ever much they differed in their lives. |

And lest we seem to omit any of the tales which
are told of Pescennius, for all that they can be read
in other books, the soothsayers told Severus con-
cerning Pescennius that neither living nor yet dead
would he fall into Severus' hands but would perish
near the water. Some say that Severus himself
made this statement, learning it from astrology, in
which he was very skilled. Nor was the augu
devoid of truth, for Pescennius was found half dead
near a lake.9

X. Pescennius was a man of unusual rigour; when
he learned, for instance, that various soldiers were
drinking from silver cups while on a campaign, he


4L. Antonius Saturninus, governor of Upper Germany,
who with two legions attempted a revolt in 88, but was soon
defeated and put to death; see Suetonius, Domitian, vi.
5 See Sev., x-xi; Cl. Alb., ix. $ Cf. c. v. 8.


" GG 2


PESCENNIUS NIGER


bibere vidisset, iusserit omne argentum summoveri
de usu expeditionali, addito eo ut ligneis vasis ute-
rentur. quod quidem illi odium militare concitavit.
2dicebat enim posse fieri, ut sarcinae militares in po-
.testatem hostium venirent, nec se barbarae nationes
argento nostro gloriosiores facerent, cum alia minus
3apta hosticam viderentur ad gloriam. idem iussit
vinum in expeditione neminem bibere, sed aceto
4 universos esse contentos. idem pistores sequi ex-
peditionem prohibuit, bucellato iubens milites et
5omnes contentos esse. idem ob unius gallinacei
direptionem decem commanipulones, qui raptum ab
uno comederant, securi percuti iussit; et fecisset, nisi
ab omni exercitu prope usque ad metum seditionis
6 esset rogatus. et cum pepercisset, iussit ut denorum
gallinaceorum pretia provinciali redderent decem,
qui simul furto convixerant, addito eo ut tota ig ex-
peditione in commanipulatione nemo focum faceret,
ne umquam recens coctum cibum sumerent, sed
pane ac frigida vescerentur, adpositis speculatori-
7 bus, qui id curarent. idem iussit, ne zona milites ad
bellum ituri! aureos vel argenteos nummos portarent,
sed publice commendarent, recepturi post proelia


litem P.


! Of. Hadr., x. 2.


AM ——— A, ——— a


PESCENNIUS NIGER X. 2-7


gave orders that all silver whatever should be
banished from the camp in war-time, and added that
the soldiers should use wooden cups—a command
that gained him their resentment. For it was not
impossible, he said, that the soldiers individual
baggage might fall into the hands of the enemy, and
foreign tribes should not be given cause for glorying
in our silver, when there were other articles that
would contribute less to a foeman's glory. He gave
orders, likewise, that in time of campaign the soldiers
should not drink wine but should all content them-
selves with vinegar! He also forbade pastry-
cooks to follow expeditions, ordering both soldiers
and all others to content themselves with biscuit.
For the theft of a single cock, furthermore, he gave.
an order that the ten comrades who had shared the.
bird which one of them had stolen, should all be be-
headed; and he would have carried out the sentence,
had not the entire army importuned him to such a)
degree that there was reason to fear a mutiny. And!
when he had spared them, he ordered ‘that each of
the ten who had feasted on the stolen bird should
pay the provincial who owned it the price of ten
cocks. At this same time he ordered that no one
during the whole period of the campaign should
build a hearth in his company-quarters, and that
they should never eat freshly-cooked food, but should
live on bread and cold water. And he set spies to
see that this was done. He gave orders, likewise,
that the soldiers should not carry gold or silver coin
in their money-belts when about to go into action,
but should deposit them with a designated official.
After the battle, he assured them, they would get
back what they had deposited, or the official who had


PESCENNIUS NIGER


! cui Salmasius; qui P. ad perniciem Edit. Princeps;
perniciem P, Peter. Smagis uiuo quam mortuo Editor;
magis isla quam mortuo P; lacuna before mortuo Peter.
4 putauit Hirschfeld, Peter?; portauit P, Peter!. 5 esse
quae P. Segisse Salmasius ; esse P. Tom. in P.


8 <uel> cuiusuis Baehrens, Peter? ; cuius P; «uel alius
Peter!,


PESCENNIUS NIGER X. 8—XI. 6


received it would pay it to their heirs—that is,
their wives and children— without fail. Thus, he
reasoned, no plunder would pass to the enemy, should
fortune bring some disaster. Allthese stern measures,
however, worked to his disadvantage in times so slack
as those of Commodus. For even if there was no
one who seemed to his own times a sterner general,
these measures availed to damage him rather during
his life than after his death, when both envy and
malice were laid by.

XI. On all his campaigns he took his meals in
front of his tent and in the presence of all his men,
and he ate the soldiers’ own fare, too; nor did he
ever seek shelter against sun or against rain if a
soldier was without it. In time of war he assigned |
to himself and to his slaves or aides as heavy bur- |
dens as were borne by the soldiers themselves, ex- '
pounding to the soldiers the reason therefor; for in
. order that his slaves might not’ be without burdens
on the march while the soldiers carried packs and this
seem a grievous thing to the army, he loaded them
withrations. Hetook an oath, besides, in the presence
of an assembly, that as long as he had conducted cam-
paigns and as long as he expected to conduct them,
he had not in the past and would not in the future
act otherwise than as a simple soldier—having before
his eyes Marius and such commanders as he. He
never told anecdotes about anyone save Hannibal and
others such as he. Indeed, when some one wished
to recite him a panegyric at the time that he was
declared emperor, he said to him: ** Write praises of
Marius, or Hannibal, or of any pre-eminent general
now dead, and tell what he did, that we may imitate
him, For the praise of the living is mere mockery,


PESCENNIUS NIGER


laudare inrisio est, maxime imperatores, a quibus
speratur, qui timentur, qui praestare publice possunt,
qui possunt necare, qui proscribere.’’ se autem
vivum placere velle, mortuum etiam laudari.

4 Domus eius hodie Romae visitur in Campo Iovis,
quae appellatur Pescenniana.? inqua simulacrum eius
in trichoro consistit, positum? ex Thebaico marmore,
quod ille ad similitudinem sui factum a' grege*

5 Thebaeorum acceperat. exstat etiam epigramma
Graecum, quod Latine hanc habet sententiam :


lQuinctium et Marcium Jordan; quintum marcium P.
2 nescenniant P. 3 consistit, positum Peter ; constituit statim
post annum P. 4 grege Lumbroso; rege P, Peter.


! M. Furius Camillus, who as dictator captured Veii in 896
B.C. and later defeated the Volscians.

2L, Quinctius Cincinnatus, dictator in 458 B.c., when he
defeated the Aequi.

? Leader of the Romans against the Volscians, whom, after


PESCENNIUS NIGER XI. 6—XII. 5


and most of all the praise of emperors, in whose
power it lies to kindle hope or fear, to give advance-
ment in public life, to condemn to death, and to de-
clare a man an outlaw.” He added that he wished
to give satisfaction in his life-time, and after his
death to be praised as well.

XII. His favourites among his predecessors were ;
Augustus, Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, Pius, and Marcus ;
the others, he averred, were either puppets or |
monsters. Among the characters of history he ad- `
mired most of all Marius, Camillus,! Quinctius,? and
Marcius Coriolanus? And once, when asked his
opinion concerning the Scipios, he replied, it is said,
that they were rather fortunate than forceful, as was
shown by their home-lives and by their youth, which,
in the-case of both, had not been conspicuous at home.
All men are agreed that he proposed, had he gained
the throne, to correct all the evils. which Severus,
later, either could not or would not correct ; and this
he would have accomplished without any cruelty, or:
rather even with mercy, but yet the mercy of a
soldier, not weak or absurd and a subject for mockery.

His house, still called by the name of Pescennius,
may still be seen in the Field of Jupiter. Within, in
a certain room with three compartments there stands
his statue, carved in Theban marble,? depicting his
likeness, and given him by the common people of
Thebes. There is preserved, besides, an epigram in
Greek which, rendered into Latin, runs as follows:


he was exiled from Rome in 491 B.C., he joined and led against
Rome.

4 The site of this is unknown.

5 Black basalt, called by the ancients basanites, was
brought to Rome from upper Egypt ; ; see Pliny, Nat. Hist.,
xxxvi. 58.


PESCENNIUS NIGER


6 “Terror Aegyptiaci Niger astat militis ingens,
Thebaidos socius, aurea saecla volens.
hunc reges, hunc gentes amant, hunc aurea Roma,
hic Antoninis carus et ! imperio.
Nigrum nomen habet, nigrum ? formavimus ipsi,
ut consentiret forma, metalle, tibi."


vicisse ; immo sic sit, quia fuit talis."


! om. in P. 2nigram P.


PESCENNIUS NIGER XII. 6-8


‘ Glorious Niger stands here, the dread of the soldiers

of Egypt,

Faithful ally of Thebes, willing a golden age.

Loved by the kings and the nations of earth, and by
Rome the all golden,

Dear to the Antonines, aye, dear to the Empire too.

Black i is the surname he bears, and black is the statue
we've fashioned,

Thus do surname and hue, hero and marble, agree."


As for these verses, Severus refused to erase them
when this was proposed by his prefects and masters
of ceremonies, and said, besides: ‘‘ If indeed he was
such a man, let all men learn how great was the man
we vanquished ; if such he was not, let all men deem
that such was the man we vanquished ; no, leave it


3?


as it is, for such he really was ".


VITA
CLODII ALBINI
IULII CAPITOLINI


I. Uno eodemque prope tempore post Pertinacem,
qui auctore! Albino interemptus est, Iulianus a
senatu Romae, Septimius Severus ab exercitu in ll-
lyrico,? Pescennius Niger in Oriente, Clodius Albinus

3 Fuit autem Clodius Albinus familia nobili,

4 Hadrumetinus tamen ex Africa. quare sortem illam,
qua 9 Severum laudatum in Pescennii vita diximus, ad

! auctor P. 2 Illyrico Erasmus; syria P. - 3 clodius


P. 4seuerum P. 5 Germaniciani Salmasius; germani-
ani P. 8 quae P.


1 Repeated in c. xiv. 2 and 6, and found in other late writers.
There is no suggestion of it in Dio or Herodian and it seems
to be wholly untrue.

? Albinus was not acclaimed emperor until 196, after Niger's
revolt was crushed; see Sev., x. 1.

3 See Sev., x. 7—xi. 9.


CLODIUS ALBINUS


BY


JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. After the death of Pertinax, who was slain at
Albinus' advice,! various men were hailed emperor at
about one and the same time 2 —by the senate Julianus
at Rome, and by the armies, Septimius Severus in
Illyricum, Pescennius Niger in the East, and Clodius
Albinus in Gaul? According to Herodian, Clodius
had been named Caesar by Severus. But as time
went on, each chafed at the other's rule, and the
armies of Gaul and Germany demanded an emperor
of their own naming, and so all parts of the empire
- were thrown into an uproar.

Now Clodius Albinus came of a noble family,5 but
he was a native of Hadrumetum in Africa. Because
ofthis, he applied to himself the oracle in praise of
Severus, which we quoted in the Life of Pescennius,


* See Herodian, ii. 15, 3; Dio, lxxiii. 15, 1. These writers
indicate that this was merely a trick on Severus’ part, the
purpose of which was to prevent Albinus from attacking him
during his campaign against Niger. According to c. iii. 4-5
and x. 3, on the other hand, Severus really intended to make
Albinus his successor. The name Caesar appears in Albinus’
inscriptions (see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 414 and 415) and on his
coins (see Cohen, iii?, p. 416 f.).

5 According to Herodian, i ii, 15, 1, the family was of sena-
torial rank.


| 461


CLODIUS ALBINUS

2 *Imperator Commodus Clodio Albino. alias ad
te publice de successione atque honore tuo misi, sed
hanc familiarem et domesticam, omnem, ut vides,
manu mea scriptam, qua tibi do facultatem, ut, si
necessitas fuerit, ad milites"prodeas et tibi Caesarea-

5 cum de aerario volueris imperare. sane ut tibi insigne
aliquod ? imperialis maiestatis adiciam,* habebis
utendi coccini pallii facultatem in praesenti 5 et ad me,


! Pesc. Nig., viii, 1.


2 On this and the other letters in this biography see mote to
Avid. Cass., i. 6.


3 See Sev., vi. 9 and note,


CLODIUS ALBINUS I. 5—1I. 5


for he did not wish it to be interpreted as * the worst
is the White One," which is contained in the same
line in which Severus is praised and Pescennius Niger
commended.! But before I discourse on his life and
his death I should relate the manner in which he be-
came ennobled. .

II. There is a certain letter ? which Commodus sent
Albinus once, on naming his successor in office, in
which he bade him assume the name of Caesar ;?
of this letter I append a copy:

“ The Emperor Commodus to Clodius Albinus greet-
ing. I wrote you once officially about the succession
to the throne and your own elevation to honour, but I
am now sending you this private and confidential mes-
sagé, all written with my own hand, as you will see,
in which I empower you, should emergency arise, to
present yourself to the soldiers and assume the name
of Caesar. For I hear that both Septimius Severus
and Nonius Murcus are speaking ill of me to their
troops, hoping thereby to get the appointment to the
post of Augustus. You shall have full power besides,
when you thus present yourself, to give the soldiers
a largess of three aurei apiece. You will get a letter
which I am sending to my procurators to this effect,
sealed with my signet of an Amazon,* which you
will deliver to my stewards when the need arises,
that they may not refuse your demands on the treasury.
And that you may receive some definite symbol of an
emperors majesty, I authorize you to wear both at
the present time and at my court the scarlet cloak.’

* Commodus had his concubine Marcia portrayed as an
Amazon ; 8ee Com., xi. 9.

5 The paludamenium, worn in the republican period by tbe


commanding general In the imperial era its use was
restricted to members of the emperor's family.


CLODIUS ALBINUS

5 Albinum sibi substitueret. sed postea et filiis iam

la nonio P. á uidens Salmasius; umen P. 3 timens


! A development of the paludamentum and regarded as the
specific costume of the emperor. It was dyed with the liquor
of & peculiar variety of shellfish (see Pliny, Nat. Hist., ix.
130) whereas the scarlet paludamentum was dyed. with
cochineal.


CLODIUS ALBINUS Iil. 2-5


Later, when you are with me, you shall have the im-
perial purple,! though without the embroidery in gold.?
For my great-grandfather Verus,’ who died in boyhood,
received this from Hadrian, who adopted him."

III. Albinus received this letter, but he utterly
refused to do what the Emperor bade. For he saw
that Commodus was hated because of his evil ways,
which were bringing destruction upon the state and
dishonour upon himself, and that he would sometime
or other be slain, and he feared that he might perish
with him. l

There is still in existence the speech he made when
he accepted the imperial power—some say, indeed, by
Severus’ wish and authorization—in which he makes
allusion to this refusal. Of this speech I append a
copy : “It is against my will, my comrades, that I
am exalted to empire, and a proof of it is this, that
when Commodus once gave me the name of Caesar, I
scorned it. Now, however, I must yield to your
desire and to that of Severus Augustus, for I believe
that under an upright man and a brave one the
state can be well ruled.”

It is an undeniable fact, moreover, and Marius
Maximus also relates it, that Severus at first intended
to name Pescennius Niger and Clodius Albinus as his
successors, in case aught befell him.* Later, as it
happened, in the interest of his growing sons, and
through envy of the affection in which Albinus was


2The triumphal toga was purple, embroidered with gold.
It was worn by the emperors on occasions of special import-
&nce.

3T, Aelius Caesar. He was, of course, not &n &ncestor of
Commodus, for he was the father of Lucius Verus.

4 See c. i. 2 and note.


VOL. I. HH


CLODIUS ALBINUS


lallos utrosque P corr. ? abductus P corr. 3 gut, cum
nascuntur, solent Lessing; qui nascuntur et solent P, Peter.
irubore P. — 5esse P. — 8ueri Pl — "om. in Pt,

1c, i. 8.


2 This array of names seems to have the purpose of using
Albinus as a means of connecting the Ceionii Albini, a famous
family of the fourth century, with the Postumii Albini, famous
in the republican era and especially in the second century
before Christ. The same purpose seems to appear in the
name assigned to Albinus' father (8 3), which is composed of
the names of two gentes of famous Albini, regardless of the


CLODIUS ALBINUS III. 6—IV. 6


held, and most of all because of his wife's entreaties,
he changed his purpose and crushed both of them in
war. But he did name Albinus consul, and this he
never would have done had not Albinus been a
worthy man, since he was ever most careful in his
choice of magistrates.

IV. To return to Albinus, however, he was a
native of Hadrumetum, as I have said before,! but he
was both of noble rank there and traced his descent
from noble families at Rome, namely the Postumii,
the Albini, and the Ceionii? The last of these
families is among the noblest to-day, for you, most
puissant Constantine, have exalted it and shall exalt
it further, though it gained its greatest prestige by
the favour of Gallienus and the Gordians, He was
born at Hadrumetum in a modest home, in slender
circumstances,’ and of righteous parents, Ceionius
Postumus and Aurelia Messalina, and he was their
first-born son, When taken from his mother's womb,
unlike the common run of infants, who are red at
birth, he was very white in hue, and for this reason
he was named Albinus. The truth of this is proved
by a letter which his father wrote to Aelius Bas-
sianus, then proconsul of Africa and, as it seems, a
kinsman of the family. The letter of Ceionius Postu-
mus to Aelius Bassianus : ** A son was born to me on
the seventh day before the Kalends of December,


difference in usage between Postumius as the name of a gens
and Postumus as the cognomen of a family. This attempt to
find famous ancestors for the Ceionii Albini has been used as
an argument for the theory that portions, at least, of the
Historia Augusta were not written before the end of the fourth
century.

3 According to Herodian, ii. 15, 1, he was brought up in
wealth and luxury.


HH 9


CLODIUS ALBINUS


H1 . . . e. . 93
Arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis,
repetens
“ Arma amens capio.”


* Hic rem Romanam magno turbante tumultu
sistet eques,? sternet Poenos Gallumque rebellem."


1 Vergil, Aeneid, ii. 314. — ? Vergil, Aeneid, vi. 857-858.
^. 3Cf. c. vi. 8.


CLODIUS ALBINUS IV. 7—V. 5


and so white was his body at birth that it was whiter
than the linen clothes in which we wrapped him.
I acknowledged him, therefore, as one of the family
of the Albini, who are common kin to you and me,
and bestowed upon him the name Albinus. And
now remember, I pray you, our country, yourself and
me. |

V. All his boyhood, then, Albinus spent in Africa,
where he got a fair education in Greek' and Latin
letters. And even at that time he showed signs of
a haughty and warlike spirit, for at school, it is said,
he used often to recite to the children :


** Madly I seized my arms, though in arms there
lay little reason ”.1


And he repeated again and again the words, “ Madly
I seized my arms ".

It is said that his rule was predicted by a number
of omens that occurred at the time of his birth. For
instance, a snow-white bull was born, whose horns were
of a deep purple hue. And he is said to have placed
these, when tribune of the soldiers, in the temple of
Apollo at Cumae, and when he made inquiry of
the oracle there concerning his fate, he received a
response, it is said, in the following lines:


* He shall establish the power of Rome though
tumult beset her,

Riding his horse he shall smite both Poeni and
Galli rebellious,” ?


And, indeed, it is well known that he conquered many
tribes in Gaul? He himself always believed, more-
over, that the prediction “he shall smite the Poeni "
referred to him and Severus, because Severus was


CLODIUS ALBINUS


1 testudine albeis P. ? diei P. 3 e4s P. ine P;
Peter. 5 et ins. by Frankfurter. ê inlitus P’.


! See Intro., p. xviii.


CLODIUS ALBINUS V. 6-10


a native of Africa. There was another indication of
his future rule besides these. A peculiar custom
was observed in the family of the Caesars, namely,
that the infants of this house should be bathed in
tubs of tortoise-shell. Now when Albinus was a
newly born infant, a fisherman brought as a gift to
his father a tortoise of enormous size, and he, being
well versed in letters, regarded the gift as an omen
and accepted the tortoise gladly. He then gave an
order that they should prepare the shell and set it
apart for the child for use in the hot baths that are
given to infants, hoping that this gift portended
noble rank for his son. "And again, although eagles
appear but rarely in the region in which Albinus was
born, on the seventh day after his birth, at the very
hour of a banquet in honour of the bestowal of his
name, seven young eagles were brought in from a
nest and placed as though in jest about the cradle of
the child, Nor did his father scorn this omen either,
but commanded that the eagles be fed and guarded
with care. ' Still another omen occurred. It was
customary in his family that the bàndages in which
the children are wrapped should be of a reddish colour.
In his case, however, it chanced that the bandages
which had been prepared by his mother during her
pregnancy had been washed and were not yet dry, and
he was therefore wrapped in a bandage of his
mother's, and this, as it happened, was of a purple
hue. For this reason his nurse, jestingly, gave him
the name Porphyrius. ‘These were the omens that
betokened his future rule. There were others besides
these, but he who desires to learn what they are may
read them in Aelius Cordus,! for he relates all trivial
details concerning omens of this sort.


CLODIUS ALBINUS

VII. Ad imperium venit natu 5 iam grandior et maior

Pescennio Nigro, ut Severus ipse in vita sua loquitur.


l legione P. ? quod P. 3 gentibus Peter; fugenisbus P.
4 declaratur P. Scum Pescennio Jordan; Pescenmio P;
«et» Pescennium Peter! ; [Pescennio] Peter?. 6 natura P.


l The Legio I. Italica in Moesia Inferior and the Legio IV.
Flavia in Moesia Superior.

2 Probably as governor of Germania Inferior.

3 See Sev., vi. 9 and note.


CLODIUS ALBINUS VI. 2—VII.


VI. As soon as he came of age he entered military
service, and by the aid of Lollius Serenus, Baebius
Maecianus and Ceionius Postumianus, all his kinsmen,
he gained the notice of the Antonines. In the
capacity of a tribune he commanded a troop of
Dalmatian horse; he also commanded soldiers of
the First and the Fourth legions.! At the time of
Avidius' revolt he loyally held the Bithynian army 157
to its allegiance. Next, Commodus transferred him
to Gaul ;? and here he routed the tribes from over
the Rhine and made his name illustrious among both
Romans and barbarians. This aroused Commodus'
interest, and he offered Albinus the name of Caesar ?
and the privilege, too, of giving the soldiers a present
and wearing the scarlet cloak.* But all these offers
Albinus wisely refused, for Commodus, he said, was
only looking for a man who would perish with him,
or whom he could reasonably put to death. The
duty of holding the quaestorship was in his case
remitted. This requirement waived, he became
aedile, but after a term of only ten days he was
despatched in haste to the army. Next, he served
his praetorship under Commodus, and a very famous
one it was. For at his games Commodus, it is said,
gave gladiatorial combats in both the Forum and the 194
theatre. And finally Severus made him consul at -
the time when he purposed to make him and
Pescennius his successors.

VII. When he at last attained to the empire he
was well advanced in years, for he was older, as-
Severus himself relates in his autobiography,’ than
Pescennius Niger. But Severus, after his victory


4See note to c. ii. 5. 5 Of. c. lii. 1.
$ See § 2. 7 See note to Sev., iii. 2.


CLODIUS ALBINUS

3rem publicam regeret. quarum exemplum hoc esse
Cordus ostendit: ‘Imperator Severus Augustus
Clodio Albino Caesari, fratri amantissimo et desider-

4antissimo, salutem. victo Pescennio litteras Romam
dedimus, quas senatus tui amantissimus libenter
accepit. te quaeso, ut eo animo rem publicam regas
quo delectus es frater animi mei, frater imperii.

6 munera digna suo loco tuoque mittemus. tu velim
exercitus rei publicae ac nobis retentes, mi unanime,
mi carissime, mi amantissime."


1 fidefui P!.


1 See also Herodian, iii. 5, 2.
?'This same story of the attempted assassination and the
frustration of the plot is told in Herodian, iii. 5, 8-8.


47 4


CLODIUS ALBINUS VII. 2—VIII. 2


over Pescennius, desiring to keep the throne for his
sons, and observing that Clodius Albinus, inasmuch
as he came of an ancient family, was greatly beloved
by the senate,! sent him certain men with a letter
couched in terms of the greatest love and affection, in
which he urged that, now that Pescennius Niger was
slain, they should loyally rule the state together.
The following, so Cordus declares, is a copy of this
letter: ‘‘The Emperor Severus Augustus to Clodius
Albinus Caesar, our most loving and loyal brother,
greeting. After defeating Pescennius we despatched
a letter to Rome, which the senate, ever devoted to
you, received with rejoicing. Now I entreat you that
in the same spirit in which you were chosen as
the brother of my heart you will rule the empire as
my brother on the throne. Bassianus and Geta send
you greetings, and our Julia, too, greets both you and
your sister. To your little son Pescennius Princus
we will send a present, worthy both of his station and
your own. I would like you to hold the troops in
their allegiance to the empire and to ourselves, my
most loyal, most dear, and loving friend."

VIII. This was the letter that he gave to the
trusted attendants that were sent to Albinus. He
told them to deliver the letter in public; but, later,
they were to say that they wished to confer with
him privately on many matters pertaining to the war,
the secrets of the camp, and the trustworthiness of
the court, and when'they had come to the secret .
meeting for the purpose of telling their errand,
five sturdy fellows were to slay him with daggers
hidden in their garments.? And they showed no lack
of fidelity. For they came to Albinus and delivered
Severus' letter, and then, when he read it, they said


CLODIUS ALBINUS


qua lecta cum dicerent quaedam secretius sug-
gerenda et locum semotum ab omnibus arbitris
postularent, et cum omnino neminem paterentur ad
porticum longissimam cum Albino progredi ea specie
ne mandata proderentur, Albinus intellexit ! insidias.


lentellegit P1. 3qui eius Casaubon ; cuius P, Peter.
3 necem P.


‘1It was at this time, in 196, that he was acclaimed
Augustus; see c. i. 1.
3 See Sev., x. 7—xi. 2. 3 Of. Sev., xi. 6.


CLODIUS ALBINUS VIII. 3—1X. 4


that they had some matters to tell him more privately,
and asked for a place far removed from all who could
overhear. But when they refused to suffer anyone to
go with Albinus to this distant portico, on the ground
that their secret mission must not be made known,
Albinus scented a plot and eventually yielded to his
suspicions and delivered them over to torture. And
though at first they stoutly denied their guilt, in
the end they yielded to extreme measures and dis-
closed the commands that Severus had laid upon
them.

Thus all was revealed and the plot laid bare, and
Albinus, now seeing that what he had merely sus-
: pected before was true, assembled a mighty force and
advanced to meet Severus and his generals.! IX. In
the first engagement, indeed, which was fought with
Severus’ leaders,” he proved superior. Later Severus
himself, after causing the senate to declare Albinus
a public enemy, set out against him and fought in
Gaul, bitterly and courageously but not without vicis-
situdes of fortune. At last, being somewhat per-
turbed, Severus consulted an augur, and received
from him the response, according to Marius Maximus,
that Albinus would in truth fall into his power, but
neither alive nor dead. And so it happened. For
after a decisive engagement, where countless of his
soldiers fell, and very many fled, and many, too, surren-
dered, Albinus also fled away and, according to some,
stabbed himself, according to others, was stabbed by
aslave. Atanyrate, he was brought to Severus only
half alive.? So the prophecy made before the battle
was fulfilled. Many, however, declare that he was
slain by soldiers who asked Severus for a bounty for
his death.


4TT


CLODIUS ALBINUS

7 cumularent. iacuisse ante praetorium Severi Albini
corpus per dies plurimos dicitur usque ad fetorem,
laniatumque a canibus in profluentem abiectum est.

20sum. sed haec belli tempore vel post bellum,

6 “Marcus Aurelius Antoninus praefectis * suis salu-
tem. Albino ex familia Ceioniorum, Afro quidem


l ut ins. by Peter; om. in P. 2 miset lit P', 3 sen-
serunt P corr. 4 praefectus P!.


1 The Rhone; see Sev., xi. 9; cf. also § 7. .
? See c. xii. 1. ? See Sev., xi. 3 and note.


CLODIUS ALBINUS IX. 5—X. 6


According to certain writers, he had one son, but
according to Maximus, two. At first Severus granted ;
these pardon, but later he killed them, together with /
their mother, and had them cast into running water.)
Albinus' head was cut off and paraded on a pike, and
finally sent to Rome. With it Severus sent a letter
to the senate, in which he reviled it bitterly for its
great love for Albinus,? inasmuch as his kinsmen, and
notably his brother,? had been heaped with illustrious
honours. Albinus’ body lay for days, it is said, be-
fore Severus’ headquarters, until it stank and was
mangled by dogs, and then it was thrown into run-
ning water.

X. With regard to his character there is great di-
vergence of statement. Severus, for his part, charged
him with being depraved and perfidious, unprincipled
and dishonourable, covetous and extravagant. But
all this he wrote either during the war or after it, at
a time when he merits less credence, sinee he was
speaking of a foe. Yet Severus himself sent him
many letters, as though to an intimate friend. Many
persons, moreover, thought well of Albinus, and even
Severus wished to give him the name of Caesar,’ and
when he made plans for a successor, he had Albinus
foremost in mind.

There are extant, besides, some letters of Marcus
concerning Albinus, which bear witness to his virtues
and character. One of these, addressed to his pre-
fects and dealing with Albinus, it were not out of
place to include: ‘Marcus Aurelius Antoninus to his
prefects, greeting. Albinus, one of the family ofthe
Ceionii? son-in-law of Plautillus, and a native of


* See Sev., iii. 2 and note. 5 Cf. c. i. 2.
6 See note to c. iv. 1.


, 479


CLODIUS ALBINUS

1 See c. vi. 2. ? Of, c. vi. 2.


CLODIUS ALBINUS X. 7—XI. 2


Africa, but with little of the African about him, I have
placed in command of two squadrons of horse.! He
is a man of experience, strict in his mode of life, re-
spected for his character. He will prove of value, I
think, in the service of the camp, and I am certain
he will prove no detriment. I have ordered him
double ration-money, a plain uniform but one be-
fitting his station, and fourfold pay. Do you urge
him to make himself known to the state, for he will
get the reward that he merits."

There is also another letter, which Marcus wrote -
about Albinus in the time of Avidius Cassius, a copy 175
of which reads as follows: '' Albinus is to be com-
mended for his loyalty. For he held the soldiers in
check when they were wavering in their allegiance
and were making ready to join Avidius Cassius,? and
had it not been for him, they would have done this.
We have in him, therefore, a man who deserves the
consulship, and I shall name him to succeed Cassius
Papirius, who, I am told, is now at the point of death.
But this, meanwhile, I would not have you publish,
lest somehow it come to Papirius or to his kin, and
we seem to appoint a successor to a consul who is
stillalive." XI. These letters, then, prove the loyalty
of Albinus,’ as does this fact besides, that he sent a
sum of money wherewith to restore the cities that
Niger had ravaged. He did this, also, to win their
inhabitants more easily to his cause.

Now Cordus, who recounts such details at length
in his books, declares that Albinus was a glutton—so
much so, in fact, that he would devour more fruit than
the mind of man can believe. For Cordus says that


3 Dio speaks of him as a brave soldier and a skilful general ;
see Ixxv. 6, 2.


VOL. I. II


CLODIUS ALBINUS


! ei Mommsen; et P. 2 postulabit P.


1 See Sev., iii. 2 and note.

2 The term centuriones ordinarii was applied to centurions
actually in command of centuries, as opposed to those detailed
for service on the staff of a governor, those in the praetorian
guard, and thosein command of independent bodies of troops.

3 Probably in verse, in imitation of Vergil.

* A name applied to collections of stories of an erotic char
acter, Jt was taken from the earliest of these collections.


«
Me


CLODIUS ALBINUS XI. 35—XII.


when hungry he devoured five hundred dried figs


(called by the Greeks callistruthiae), one hundred Cam-
panian peaches, ten Ostian melons, twenty pounds’
weight of Labican grapes, one hundred figpeckers, and
four hundred oysters. In his use of wine, however,
Cordus says he was sparing, but Severus denies
this! claiming that even in time of war he was
drunken. As a rule, he was on bad terms with his
household, either because of his drunkenness, as
Severus says, or because of his quarrelsome disposi-
tion. Toward his wife he was unbearable, toward
his servants unjust, and in dealings with his soldiers
brutal. For he would often crucify legionary cen-
turions,? even when the character of the offence did
not demand it, and he certainly used to beat them
with rods and never spared. His clothing was ele-
gant, but his banquets tasteless, for he had an eye
only to quantity. As a lover of women he was noted
even among the foremost philanderers, but of un-
natural lusts he was innocent, and he always punished
these vices. In the cultivation of land he was
thoroughly versed, and he even composed Georgics.’
Some say, too, that he wrote Milesian tales,* which
are not unknown to fame though written in but a
mediocre style.

XII. He was beloved by the senators * as no one
of the emperors before him. This was chiefly due,
however, to their hatred of Severus, who was greatly


called MiA«eiakd, written by Aristeides about the end of the
second century before Christ and translated into Latin by
Cornelius Sisenna. Several stories of this type are included
in Apuleius’ Metamorphoses.

5 Cf. c.ix. 6; xiii. 3; Herodian, iii. 5, 2. s According to Dio,
most of the senators refrained from any active partisanship ;
see Ixxv. 4, 2.


II 2


CLODIUS ALBINUS


1 milis P! 2 speratis P, Peter? ; sperastis Peter 3,


1 See Sev., xiii. 2 See c. ix. 3 and Sev., xi. 1 and 6.

3 Herodian also says that Severus used Albinus’ papers as
evidence against senators ; see iii, 8, 6.

* Cf. Sev., viii. 5. 5 Of, Sev., xviii. 3.

5 See note to c. iv. 1. 7 Cf. c. ix. 6. S


CLODIUS ALBINUS XII. 2-9


detested by the senate because of his cruelty. For
after he defeated Albinus, Severus put a great num-
ber of senators to death, both those who were really
of Albinus' party and those who were thought to be.!
Indeed, when Albinus was slain near Lugdunum;
Severus gave orders to search through his letters to
find out to whom he had written and who had written
to him ; ? and everyone whose letters he found, by his
orders the senate denounced as a public enemy. And
of these he pardoned none, but killed them all, placing


their goods on sale and depositing the proceeds in,


the public treasury.

There is still in existence a letter from Severus,
addressed to the senate, which shows very clearly his
state of mind; whereof this is a copy: ‘ Nothing
that can happen, O Conscript Fathers, could give me
greater sorrow than that you should endorse Albinus
in preference to Severus. It was I who gave the city
grain,* I who waged many wars for the state, I who


gave oil to the people of Rome,5 so much that the-


world could hardly contain it, and I who slew
Pescennius Niger and freed you from the ills of a
tyrant. A fine requital, truly, you have made me, a
fine expression of thanks! A man from Africa, a
native of Hadrumetum, who pretends to derive
descent from the blood of the Ceionii, you have
raised to a lofty place; you have even wished to
make him your ruler, though I am your ruler and
my children are still alive. Was there no other man
in all this senate whom you might love, who might
love you? You raised even his brother to honours ; ?
and you expect to receive at his hands, one a consul-
ship, another a praetorship, and another the insignia
of any office whatever. You have failed, moreover,


€ tee e o


CLODIUS ALBINUS


illi Damsté ; ille P, Peter. ?et P, Peter!; om. by
Peter?. Sata Petschenig, Peter?; ef P; om. by Peter’.


!uarius nam Peter! ; uarii nam P ; uar amans Petschenig,
Peter?.


t See Pesc. Nig., ix. 2 and note.


CLODIUS ALBINUS XII. 10—XIII. 2


to show me the spirit of gratitude which your fore-
fathers showed in the face of Piso's plot,! which they
showed Trajan, and showed but lately in opposing
Avidius Cassius, This fellow, false and ready for lies
of every kind, who has even fabricated a noble lineage,
You have now preferred to me. Why, even in the
senate we must hear Statilius Corfulenus proposing
to vote honours to Albinus and his brother, and all
that was lacking was that the noble fellow should also
vote himatriumph over me. Itisevena greater source
of chagrin, that some of you thought he should be
praised for his knowledge of letters, when in fact he
is busied with old wives' songs, and grows senile amid
the Milesian stories from Carthage that his friend
Apuleius wrote and such other learned nonsense.”
From all this it is clear how severely he attacked the
followers of Pescennius and Albinus. Indeed, all
these things are set down in his autobiography,? and
those who desire to know them in detail should read
Marius Maximus among the Latin writers, and
Herodian among the Greek, for they have related
many things and with an eye to truth.

XIII. He was tall of stature, with unkempt curly
hair and a broad expanse of brow. His skin was
wonderfully white; many indeed think it was
from this that he got hisname.? He had a womanish
voice, almost as shrill as a eunuch’s. He was easily
roused, his anger was terrible, his rage relentless.
In his pleasures he was changeable, for-he sometimes
craved wine and sometimes abstained. He had
a thorough knowledge of arms * and was not ineptly
called the Catiline of his age.


2 See Sev., iii. 2 and note.
3Cf. c. iv. 4. 1 See c. xi. 1 and note.


CLODIUS ALBINUS


! didicerunt P, Peter!; tradiderunt followed by lacuna


Peter?. 2et om, in P, added by Peter! ; senatus subegit ins.
before Hispanias by Peter?. 5 stauarum P. 3 dixisse P.
1 See c. xii. 1 and note. 3 See note to c. iv. 1.


CLODIUS ALBINUS XIII. 3-8


We do not believe it wholly irrelevant to recount
the causes which won Clodius Albinus the love of the
senate. After Commodus had bestowed upon him
the name of Caesar, and while by the Emperor's
orders he was in command of the troops in Britain,
false tidings were brought that Commodus had been
slain. Then he came forth before the soldiers and
delivered the following speech: “If the senate of
the Roman people but had its ancient power, and if
this vast empire were not under the sway of a single
man, it would never have come to pass that the
destiny of the state should fall into the hands of
a Vitellius, a Nero, or a Domitian. Under the rule
of consuls there were those mighty families of ours,
the Ceionii, the Albini, and the Postumii,? of whom
your fathers heard from their grandsires and from
whom they learned many things. It was surely the
senate, moreover, that added Africa to the dominions
of Rome, the senate that conquered Gaul and the
Spains, the senate that gave laws to the tribes of the
East, and the senate that dared to attack the
Parthians—and would have conquered them, too, had
not the fortune of Rome just then assigned our army
so covetous a leader. Britain, to be sure, was
conquered by Caesar, but he was still a senator and
not yet dictator. Now as for Commodus himself,
how much better an emperor would he have been
had he stood in awe of the senate! Even as late as
the time of Nero, the power of the senate prevailed,
and the senators did not fear to deliver speeches
against a base and filthy prince and condemn him,‘


3 Probably Crassus is meant, who was defeated by the
Parthians in 53 B.c.
+See Suetonius, Nero, xlix. 2,


CLODIUS ALBINUS

XIV. Haec contio vivo adhuc Commodo Romam de-
lata est. quae Commodum in Albinum exasperavit,
statimque successorem misit Iunium Severum, unum ex

4 ‘Aurelius Commodus suis? praefectis salutem.
audisse vos credo, primum fictum esse quod ego
meorum consilio interfectus essem, deinde contionem
Clodii Albini apud milites meos habitam, qua? se
multum senatui commendat, idque, quantum videmus,

5non frustra. nam qui principem unum in re publica

! tenebant P. 2quod P. 3et ins. by Petschenig ; om.
in P, Peter. :| occidendi P. 5 iuliano P. 6 suis


Casaubon, Peter!; seuerus P; [Seuerus] Peter?. ? qua
Jordan ; quod P.


CLODIUS ALBINUS XIII. 9—XIV. 5


even though he still retained both power of life and
death and the empire too. Wherefore, my comrades,
the name of Caesar, which Commodus now confers on
me, I do not wish to accept. May the gods grant
that no one else may wish it! Let the senate have
rule, let the senate distribute the provinces and
appoint us consuls. But why do I say the senate?
It is you, I mean, and your fathers; you yourselves
shall be the senators."

XIV. This harangue was reported at Rome while
Commodus was still alive and roused him greatly
against Albinus. He forthwith despatched one of
his aides, Junius Severus, to replace him. The
senate, however, was so much pleased that it honoured
Albinus, though absent, with marvellous acclamations,
both while Commodus still lived and, later, after his
murder. Some even counselled Pertinax to ally
himself with Albinus, and as for Julianus, Albinus' in-
fluence had the greatest weight in his plan for murder-
ing Pertinax. In proof, moreover, that my statements
are true, I will quote a letter written by Commodus
to the prefects ofthe guard, in which he makes clear
his intention of killing Albinus; ** Aurelius Commodus
to his prefects, greeting. You have heard, I believe,
in the first place, the false statement that I had been
slain by a conspiracy of my household ; in the second,
that Clodius Albinus has delivered an harangue to
my soldiers in which he commends himself to the
senate at great length—and not for nothing, it seems
tome. For whoever asserts that the state ought not


1This is entirely fictitious, for all the evidence shows
clearly that Albinus was governor of Britain when Commodus
was killed.


? See note on c. i. 1.


CLODIUS ALBINUS


negat esse debere quique adserit a senatu oportere
totam rem publicam regi, is per senatum sibi petit
imperium. cavete igitur diligentissime; iam enim
hominem scitis vobis militibus populoque vitandum."
6 Has litteras cum Pertinax invenisset, in Albini
odium publicare studuit. quare Albinus occidendi
.Pertinacis Iuliano auctor fuit.


1 publicasse tu id P.


CLODIUS ALBINUS XIV. 6


to be under the sway of one man, and that the senate
should rule the empire, he is merely seeking to get
the empire himself through the senate. Keep a
diligent watch then; for now you know the man
whom you and the troops and the people must avoid.”

When Pertinax found this letter he desired to
make it public in order to stir up hatred against
Albinus ; and for thisreason Albinus advised Julianus
to bring about Pertinax's death.


THE SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
DAVID MAGIE, Pa.D.


IN THREE VOLUMES
JI


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS


MCMXXIV


o^-23-21. 444


Let A


“Yuk We ww
qe al at


AN aba


CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION : THE AUTHORSHIP AND DATE oF et

THE Historia AUGUSTA : . vii
BIBLIOGRAPHY . : : ; : xxxvii
CARACALLA f ; : ; f : 9
GETA . i : ; 5 f ; . 32
OPELLIUS MACRINUS j i . A . 48
DIADUMENIANUS ) : i : . 82
ELAGABALUS . : ; : : F . 104
SEVERUS ÁLEXANDER : Eo Hg i . 178
Tue Two Maxminı ; I : ; . 314
Tue Tuneke GonpiaNs . . l ; . 380
Maximus AND BALBINUS . . ; ; . 448


INTRODUCTION


THe AUTHORSHIP AND DaTE
OF THE
HISTORIA AUGUSTA


Tue traditional assignment of the several biographies
to six different authors involves many difficulties and
apparent inconsistencies and gives rise to various
questions, Did each of the first four authors actually
write a complete series of imperial biographies from
which the various vitae of this collection have been
selected? If so, who made the selection and on what
principle was it made? Why did * Spartianus ” write
his Severus and ‘‘Capitolinus” his Marcus Aurelius,
Verus, and Macrinus under Diocletian, and the former
his Geta and the latter his Albinus, Maximini, and
Gordiani under Constantine twenty years later?
Why do the biographies attributed to the four authors
of the earlier vitae bear a close resemblance to one
another, not merely in the general scheme of con-
struction (which might be attributed to the imitation
of the same model), but in the use of the same un-
usual phrases and words, many of which appear also


vii


INTRODUCTION


in the vitae ascribed to Pollio and Vopiscus? Why
do the minor vi/ae contain material which is little
more than repetition from the corresponding major
biographies! and why does * Spartianus" in the
Niger? refer to the vita of Albinus as his work, when
the Albinus in the collection is attributed to Capito-
linus ?

An answer to these questions has been sought by
various scholars in various hypotheses of a more or
less radical nature, and these in their turn have been
attacked by conservative writers who have attempted
to explain away the objections and inconsistencies
and to uphold the traditional authorship. The most
radical have gone so far as to attribute all the vitae
to a single author, who, they maintain, assigned his
work to six different names as a “literary” device.
On the other hand, the most conservative stoutly
uphold the plural authorship and the traditional date
of the several biographies. Between these extremes
are other writers more moderate, who admit a plural
authorship, at the same time holding that the
traditional assignment is entirely untrustworthy and
ascribing many of the general resemblances, as well
as the inconsistencies and the interpolations, to the
hand of a later editor.

The discussion was begun in 1889 when Hermann
Dessau? advanced the startling hypothesis that the
whole Historia Augusta is the work, not of a group of
writers living in the early fourth century, but of a


le.g. the Marcus Aurelius and the Avidius Cassius, the
Severus and the Niger.

? c, ix. 3.

? Hermes, xxiv. (1889), pp. 337-392; xxvii. (1892), pp. 561-
605. /


viii


INTRODUCTION


single ** forger " of the period of Theodosius, who, in
order to secure for his work a semblance of authority,
sought to give it the appearance of an earlier origin,
and in order to arouse additional interest, used the
expedient of attributing his vitae to six different
authors. A further motive was alleged—namely, his
realization of the lack of material for his work and
his desire to cover up his shortcomings by fabrications
which would be less easily discovered were his
biographies assigned to an earlier period.

In support of his theory Dessau found in the
various biographies many inconsistencies with the
period in which they claim to have been written.
He argued that the glorification of Constantius
Chlorus in the Vita Claudii would not have been
composed while he was merely Caesar. He con-
tended, moreover, that the names of many persons
introduced into the biographies are those of important
families of the latter part of the fourth century, and
that no persons of these names were prominent in the
earlier period ; that the ignorance of many details
displayed in the vitae of Aurelian and Carus is incom-
prehensible if these biographies were really written
about 305; and that many of the technical terms
employed in reference to the administration of the
Empire do not seem to have been in use under
Diocletian and Constantine, but were, on the other
hand, current in the age of Valentinian and Theo-
dosius. He argued, further, that the relationship
between the duplicate narrative in the vita of Marcus !
and the corresponding passage in Eutropius, and
between the summary of Severus' reign and the
corresponding section of Victor, can be explained


! See Intro. to Vol. i. p. xxii. f,
iX


INTRODUCTION


only by the hypothesis that the writer took his
material from Eutropius and Victor, who composed
their works in the third quarter of the fourth century.
He then proceeded to point out the obvious difficulties
of the traditional plural authorship—the uniformity
in use of conventional rubrics, in phraseology, and
in rhetorical devices, the similarity of the various
apologies pleading a lack of material in extenuation
of the shortcomings of the work, and the fact that
each of the alleged writers included documents which
are evident forgeries. On these and similar grounds
Dessau argued for a single authorship and that at
the end of the fourth century.

The conclusions of Dessau were carried further by
Otto Seeck.! He, too, held that the biographies are
the work of a single writer, but attempted to set him
at a date later than Dessau's ** Theodosian forger,”
contending that he lived at the beginning of the fifth
century. In defence of his theory he enumerated
many apparent allusions to the post-Constantinian ad-
ministrative and military system and asserted the
presence of many inconsistencies with the earlier
period. He discovered also various covert thrusts
at the Emperor Honorius? and concluded that the
work was written under Constantine llI., a usurper
who appeared in Gaul in 407 and maintained his rule
for three years.

In reply to these extreme theories of Dessau and
Seeck a more conservative position was maintained


! Jahrbb. f. Class, Philol., cxli. (1890), pp. 609-639 ; Rhein.
Mus., xlix. (1894), pp. 208-224. He has repeated his theory,
with many ingenious arguments, in Rhein. Mus., xvii. (1912),
pp. 591-608.

2In Sev., xx. 4—xxi. 12; Alez., lxii. 2; Claud., ii. 6.


X


INTRODUCTION


by Elimar Klebs! and Eduard von Wólfllin.? Klebs
admitted that the assignment of the vitae from the
Hadrian to the Mazimus-Balbinus to the four tradi-
tional authors is certainly incorrect and that there is
a confusion in the names of the writers which cannot
be rectified, but at the same time he contended that
the Historia Augusta is altogether a product of the
period of Diocletian and Constantine. He showed at
great length that the sections in the Marcus and the
Severus which bear a close relationship to the cor-
responding portions of Eutropius and Victor were not
taken from these authors but from their common
souroe, and maintained that these sections could not
be omitted from the respective vitae without breaking
the connexion with what follows and that therefore
they cannot be regarded as later interpolations.

In his second article Klebs emphasized the differ-
ences exhibited by the various groups. While ad-
mitting that they bear a certain resemblance to one
another, which he explained by their common imita-
tion of Suetonius, he showed that the several groups
exhibit well-marked peculiarities both in content and
in form ; thus, even the groups ascribed to Pollio and
Vopiscus, while they resemble each other closely in
containing elaborate prefaces, in introducing citations
from oral tradition, and in naming contemporar:es,
show marked differences in style and method, which
distinguish them, not only from the earlier vitae, but
also from each other. In the earlier series, Klebs
pointed out that the eight major vitae from Hadrian
to Caracalla, together with the biographies of Aelius


! Rhein, Mus., xlv. (1890), pp. 436-464 ; xlvii. (1892), pp.
1-52, 515-519.
2 Sitzungsber. d. Bayer. Akad., 1891, pp. 465-538.


xi


INTRODUCTION


and Verus, form a connected group of ten vitae with
certain definite peculiarities : they are simple collec-
tions of excerpts in which the author seldom appears ;
save for the two minor vilae they are without pre-
faces ; their sources are seldom named and there are no
documents; the technical terms employed in regard
to the administration of the Empire are regularly those
of the period prior to Diocletian ; finally, rhetorical
devices are conspicuously absent. In the other vitae
of the first section Klebs distinguished between a
* Lampridius group," consisting of the vitae of
Elagabalus and Severus Alexander, and a “ Capitol-
inus group," consisting of the Albinus, the Maximini,
the Gordiani, and the Maximus- Balbinus. He pointed
out that the vitae of the former group are distinguished
by their great length, their fullness of detail, and
their wordy epilogues, while the biographies of the
* Capitolinus group" are characterized especially by
their close dependence on Herodian and by the fact
that they contain citations from Cordus. He held
that the Niger, the Geta, the Macrinus and the
Diadumenus are also to be assigned to this group,
while the Avidius Cassius, differing, as it does, from all
the others, not only in the number and character of
its forged documents, but also in its vocabulary and
general method, must be regarded as the work of a
special author. Thus did Klebs defend the traditional
number of six Scriptores, though admitting that per-
haps some of the vitae cannot be definitely assigned
to a particular writer.

Wolfilin attempted to solve the problem on the basis
of language and style. He pointed out that in spite
of the fact that all the biographies contain words
and phrases taken from Suetonius, there are distinct


xii


INTRODUCTION


differences among them, not only in the manner of
narration but also in the grammatical usage and the
employment of stock formulae. On this basis he
defended the plural authorship, emphasizing par-
ticularly the difference in linguistic usage between
Spartianus on the one hand and Pollio and Vopiscus
on the other—unfortunately he omitted from his
discussion the vitae ascribed to Capitolinus and
Lampridius. On the other hand, in contrast to
Klebs, he advanced the theory that there was a
general editor who compiled the collection and
added much of his own work. According to Wólfflin,
this editor was none other than Vopiscus, who, after
writing the vitae of the emperors from Aurelian to
Carinus, formed a larger collection of imperial bio-
graphies by the incorporation both of the vitae written
by Pollio and of those of the earlier emperors from
Hadrian to Caracalla written by Spartianus—how the
period between Caracalla and Philippus Arabs was
treated Wölfflin does not explain. According to this
theory, Vopiscus wrote the minor vitae of Aelius, Niger
and Geta and inserted addresses to Diocletian as well
as notes and items of information in the biographies
written by Spartianus. In the case of the Aelius,
Wölfflin attempted to prove his theory by showing a
list of words and phrases that are to be found in
Vopiscus but not in any of the major vitae written by
Spartianus. In the case of the Geta he could explain
the address to Constantine only by supposing it to be
due to a copyist's error.

A position midway between that of Dessau and the
more conservative point of view represented by Klebs
and Wölfflin was taken by Theodor Mommsen.!


1 Hermes, xxv. (1890), pp. 228-292 = Gesammelte Schriften,


vii. pp. 802-362, xiii


INTRODUCTION


While refusing to admit that the biographies were
composed in the time of Theodosius, Mommsen
maintained that the series is a compilation of various
collections written under Diocletian and Constantine,
which was subjected to a general revision at the end
of the fourth century and increased by the addition
of some relatively unimportant material. He denied
that any forger could have so skilfully assumed the
mask of a former age and so carefully avoided every
reference to his own time. While maintaining, in
opposition to Dessau and Seeck, that the administra-
tive and military terms are not later than the third or
early fourth century, he admitted that the insertion
of names well known in the fourth century and the
relationship of the sections in the vitae of Marcus and
Severus to the histories of Eutropius and Victor seem
to indicate a later origin. He pointed out, however,
that the names occur in passages which interrupt the
course of the narrative, and maintained that the
duplicate sections in the Marcus and the Severus are
evidently subsequent additions.

In his discussion of the origin of the earlier bio-
graphies Mommsen distinguished between two groups
of major vitae, a Diocletian-group, including the vitae
from Hadrian to Macrinus, and a Constantine-group,
including those from Heliogabalus to Maximus- Balbinus,
but showed that no reliance can be placed on the
traditional assignment of authors. He declared that
the minor vitae were the work of a general editor, who
dedicated some of his biographies to Diocletian and
some to Constantine, and assigned to them the names
of the authors attached to the major biographies of
each group. ‘The two series attributed to Pollio and
Vopiscus he accepted as genuine works composed at
the beginning of the fourth century.

xiv


INTRODUCTION


The general editor, who wrote the minor vitae as
well as compiled the whole work, Mommsen supposed
to be the author of the Constantine-group. He as-
sumed, however, the existence of a later editor, who
at the end of the fourth century added certain material,
as indicated by Dessau, to the collection as he found
it, and who was responsible for the repetitions and
the instances of confusion in the order of the narrative
and for many of the unusual words and expressions
which give to the phraseology of the whole the
appearance of unity.

In repudiation of the work of Dessau, Seeck, and
Mommsen, the extreme conservative position was
reasserted by Hermann Peter! While admitting
the existence of an editor who made the selection
of the vitae preserved in our collection, he held fast
to the traditional assignment to six Scriptores. He
empbasized the inherent improbability of Dessau's
theory, maintaining that it failed to solve many of the
problems involved. He argued that none of the
passages cited by the advocates of a late authorship
or editorship was necessarily written at the end of the
fourth century and that there are many of them which
could not have been composed in this period, and he
expressed his conviction that the collection was
completed about 330, and that the final redaction took
place at this time.

The moderate conservative position was next main-
tained by S. Frankfurter? In an examination of
the prefaces and epilogues he found differences which
preclude the belief that they were composed by a
single author. On the other hand, he admitted that,


1 Die Scriptores Historiae Augustae (Leipzig, 1892), p. 242 f.
2 Eranos Vindobonensis (Vienna, 1893), pp. 218-232.
xv


INTRODUCTION


while the prefaces to the Maximini and the Gordiani
show that these were composed by the same author,
this writer was not the author of the earlier vilae
ascribed to Capitolinus. Furthermore, after pointing
out the fact that the preface to the Helogabalus and
the epilogue of the Alexander show that these two
form a single group, he followed Mommsen in main-
taining that the dedications to Constantine and other
indications are sufficient evidence for the belief that
this group was written by the author of the Maximini
and the Gordiani.

A similarly conservative point of view was taken by
H. Vermaat.! He emphasized the lack of any definite
allusion to the later fourth century, pointing out that
even in the matter of the introduction of the names of
persons prominent in this century there is only negative
evidence to show that there were not important men
of these names in the earlier period. While granting
the presence of interpolations in most of the bio-
graphies and the assumption of a genera] editor who
formed the existing collection, he refused to admit
either (with Mommsen) that this editor was the
author of the series Maximini-Mazximus and of the
minor vitae, or (with Wölfflin) that he was Vopiscus.
Basing his argument on the preface to the Aelius, he
held that there were two collections of lives of the
emperors from Hadrian to Caracalla, one containing
biographies of both * Augusti " and * Caesares " and
the other those of the * Augusti" only. He held
that the editor used the latter collection as the basis
of his corpus, inserting in it the minor vitae of the
former series and certain material of his own, notably


! De Aetate qua conscripta est Historia BU (Leyden,
1893).


xvi


INTRODUCTION


the sections in the Marcus and the Severus which
contain the digressions and duplicate narratives, and
then took from a third source the vitae of Albinus and
Geta, finally adding to the whole the Constantine- -
group Heliogabalus- Maximus (composed in 324-327)
and the biographies by Pollio and Vopiscus (composed
respectively in 300-303 and 306-308).

At the beginning of the present century the in-
vestigation into the problem of the origin of the
Historia Augusta took a new turn. Friedrich Leo,}
after a brief mention of the theories of Dessau and
his opponents, expressed the judgment that the real
question was not whether, but to what extent, the
biographies are a forgery, and this dictum gave the
impulse to a new line of discussion. Henceforth it
was not only the authorship and the date that formed
the object of learned research, but also the character
of the sources from which the material was drawn.

At first the discussion was concentrated on the
. earlier vitae from Hadrian to Macrinus. It had been
generally assumed that these biographies were chiefly,
if not altogether, compiled from the lives of the
emperors written by Marius Maximus.” An intensive
study of the material, however, pointed to a different
conclusion.

An investigation of this sort was first attempted by
J. H. Drake? In a study of the historicity of the


1 Die Griechisch- Rómische Biographie, p. 301.

2J. J. Müller, Der Geschichtschreiber L. Marius Maximus,
Büdinger's Untersuchungen, iii. (Leipzig, 1870), pp. 17-202; J.
Plew, Marius Maximus als direkte und indirekte Quelle der
S.H A. (Strassburg, 1878), and Quellenuntersuchungen zur
Geschichte des Kaisers Hadrian (Strassburg, 1890).

3 Studies in the S.H.A.; Am. Journ. of Philol., xx. (1899),
pp. 40-58.

xvii


b


INTRODUCTION


fifth chapter of the Caracalla he pointed out that the
latter part of this vita! shows evident similarity with
the accounts of Caracalla's reign by Aurelius Victor
-~ and Eutropius. He inferred therefrom that the
author used the lost *Imperial Chronicle "? as his
source for this part of tbe biography, but at the same
time he conceded that the first part, which shows
little or no similarity to the narratives of Victor and
Eutropius, was taken from Marius Maximus.

More extensive results were reached by J. M.
Heer,’ the first of a series of scholars to distinguish
in detail between two types of sources used by the
Scriptores. In an examination of the vita of Commodus
he detected two different kinds of material—an
annalistic historical section and a strictly biographical
portion. He argued that the differences between
these in respect to the method of narration, the choice
of phrases and words, and the value of the historical
material are so marked and the instances of double
versions are so frequent, that the two cannot be
regarded as an organic whole, but rather as the
combination of two different works. He held further
that tbe historical section,* thoroughly consistent
within itself and without repetitions, is evidently a
series of excerpts from an epitome of some important
historical work, and that this work was written in
Latin, its narrative being entirely independent of
Cassius Dio or Herodian. He then proceeded to
maintain that the author of this history was not Marius
Maximus, showing that not only in the Commodus, but


! See Intro. to Vol. i. p. xxiii. 2 Ibid., p. xxii. f.

3 Der Historische Wert der Vita Commodi ; "Philolog ua:
Suppl. Band. ix. (1901-1902), pp. 1-208.

1c. i. 1-6; i. 10—ix, 3; xvii. 1-12.


xviii


INTRODUCTION


also in the other vitae of the earlier group, the citations
from Marius Maximus are added to the body of the
text in order to amplify or illustrate it and sometimes
merely to state the opinion of Maximus as divergent
from the main narrative.

Heer then examined the strictly biographical portion
of the Commodus,' pointing out that here also there is
no reason for supposing that the material was taken
from Marius Maximus. He showed that this portion
of the biography consists of generalizations with few
concrete facts, and that its statements are merely
proofs or illustrations of Commodus' vices, or summaries
of events taken from the whole of his reign made
without any regard to chronological order and always
characterized by hostility toward the Emperor. He
then concluded that the author of the Vita Commodi
was little more than a compiler, who combined
excerpts from au epitome of an historical work with
material selected from a biography arranged according
to rubrics, making no attempt to construct an organic
whole and content with the production of a me-
chanical compilation.

The method and the results of Heer were carried
on much further by O. Tb. Schulz? In a series of
three monographs he examined the vitae from Hadrian
to Geta and presented a new point of view with regard
to the historical material. Following the lead of
Heer, he maintained that these biographies are built


lc, ix, 4—xv. 2; xvi.

3 Beiträge zur. Kritik unserer litterarischen Ueberlieferung
für die Zeit von Commodus! Sturze bis auf den Tod des
M. Aurelius Antoninus (Caracalla) (Leipzig, 1908); Leben
des Kaisers Hadrian (Leipzig, 1904); Das Kaiserhaus der
Antonine und der letzte Historiker Roms (Leipzig, 1907).


xix


INTRODUCTION


up around a core of facts taken from an historian
who wrote a history of the emperors from Hadrian
(perhaps from Nerva) to Caracalla, treating each reign
in a single monograph. He contended, moreover,
that this historian greatly surpassed Cassius Dio (of
whom he was a contemporary) in keenness of vision
and political insight, and that his work represents the
best tradition that we possess for the history of the
second and third centuries. Schulz then maintained
that this history was utilized by a writer (or writers)
of the time of Diocletian and Constantine, who,
making excerpts from it, combined with these excerpts
material from another source, more strictly bio-
graphical in character and frequently anecdote or
gossip only, and added thereto certain elaborations
and amplifications of his own. Schulz then supposed
an extensive revision in the period of Theodosius—
presumably with the addition of the biographies of
the emperors subsequent to Caracalla, which are left
undiscussed—holding that the final redactor removed
portions of the strictly historical material, added new
and supposedly more interesting biographical detail,
and even inserted certain fictitious statements de-
signed to add lustre to the forefathers of some of the
important families of the time. His most important
additions, according to Schulz, were made from the
biographies of Marius Maximus, which he used not
only in his vita of Avidius Cassius (which Schulz
regarded as altogether the work of the final redactor),
but also in his additions to the other biographies. It
was Marius Maximus, according to Schulz, who forged
the letters and acclamations in the vitae of Avidius
Cassius and Commodus. It was his work also, and not
the ** Imperial Chronicle," that constituted the source


XX


INTRODUCTION


of Eutropius and Victor, and the resemblances between
their histories and the corresponding sections of the
vitae of Marcus and Severus are explained by the
hypothesis that the redactor took these sections
directly from Maximus. This redactor, too, is held
responsible for the arbitrary assignment of the names
of the authors to whom the biographies are tradi-
tionally attributed.

A parallel investigation was carried on by Ernst
Kornemann.! Adopting Schulz's theory of the de-
pendence of the earlier vitae on the work of a lost
historian—the so-called Anonymus,—he maintained
that this history was also used in the compilation
of the biographies of Macrinus, Elagabalus, and
Alexander. Not content with this, however, he
attempted to draw inferences concerning the person-
ality and point of view of the Anonymus, and even
gave him a name, identifying him with Lollius
Urbicus, cited, in connexion with an evidently forged
letter in the Diadumenus, ? as the author of an “ historia

sui temporis.”

The attempt to distinguish between a trustworthy
historical source and more trivial biographical material
was next made for the biographies of Elagabalus and
Severus Alexander. An examination of the former
was undertaken by Miss O. F. Butler? After noting
the fact that this vita falls into two distinct sections—
a brief history of the emperor's reign * and a mass of


1 Kaiser Hadrian und der letzte grosse Historiker von Rom
(Leipzig, 1905).

? Diad., ix. 2.

3 Studies in the Life of Heliogabalus ; in Univ. of Michigan
Studies, vol. iv. (New York, 1910).

5 c, i, 4—xviii. 3.


xxi


INTRODUCTION :


biographical and anecdotal material! she formulated
the hypothesis that the author had before him an
epitomized account of the life of Elagabalus drawn
from the ‘Imperial Chronicle," which he used for a
few statements in the opening chapters of the vita,
combining with it material drawn from other sources.
This portion of the work, Miss Butler then showed, is
followed by a longer section, which contains a mass of
details, compiled from various sources and arranged
without regard to chronology or orderly sequence.
For some of the material Marius Maximus is cited as
the source.? This portion is followed, in turn, by the
narrative of Elagabalus’ downfall and death. It is
clear and chronolozically accurate, and its fullness of
detail precludes the supposition that it was taken from
an epitome of the ** Imperial Chronicle," Miss Butler
then drew the conclusion that the first section of the
vita, which gives a brief history of Elagabalus' reign,
cannot be regarded as the work of any one author, for
a plurality of sources is evident from the varying value
of the material and the many dissimilarities and self-
contradictions, and the belief is precluded that either
Marius Maximus or the Anonymus was largely re-
sponsible for this biography.

A brief study of the vita of Severus Alexander was
made by W. Thiele? who contented himself with
listing those passages of the biography which he
deemed worthy of credence and those which seemed
suspicious as either the annotations of the compiler
or additions taken from untrustworthy sources. This
work was soon followed by the more extensive


1 c, xviii. 4—xxxili, 8. ? c. xi. 6.
*De Severo Alexandro Imperatore, Cap. I. de Fontibus.
(Barlin, 1908).


xxii


INTRODUCTION


treatise of K. Hónn.! Inregard to the biography of
Elagabalus Hónn held that material taken from the
* Imperial Chronicle ” is scattered through the first
twelve chapters, though greatly amplified by the addi-
tions of the author. In the vita of Alexander, on the
other hand, he detected only a slight use of the “ Im-
perial Chronicle.” Certain brief definite statements
of fact, scattered through the biography, agree with
the narrative of Victor, and these were supposed by
Hónn to have been taken from a much epitomized
version of the * Chronielé." The rest of the material
in the vita he condemned as valueless. The account
of Alexander’s Persian War, he maintained, was
derived from Herodian, and the description of the
various legislative and administrative measures from
the Codex of Theodosius. The strictly biographical
material, especially in the long section which is wholly
biographical in character,? Hónn believed to be ficti-
tious. He held that, except for certain details taken
from the Codex Theodosianus, it is made up almost
entirely of statements modelled on those in the other
vitae and of items recorded for the purpose of con-
trasting Alexander with Elagabalus. He maintained
that the acclamations of the senate and the speeches
of the Emperor ? are similar pieces of patchwork made
up of phrases taken from other biographies. He then
proceeded toa study of the style of the vita and arrived
at the conclusion that the combined evidence of the
matter and the manner of the narration argued that
the author wrote in the early part of the fifth century
and that he was of Gallic origin. He furthermore


! Quellenuntersuchungen zu den Viten des Heliogabalus u.
des Severus Alexander $m Corpus der 8. H.A. (Le:pzig, 1911).
? c, xxix.-liv, 3 c, vi.-xi. ; lvi.-lvii.


^ xxiii


INTRODUCTION


affirmed that this author also wrote the Macrinus,
the Diadumenus, and the Heliogabalus, and, moreover,
that the Gordiani, the Aurelianus, the T'acitus and the
Probus were adapted from his work.

Recent work on the Historia Augusta has followed
the lead of Hónn in reverting to the theory of Dessau.
In a dissertation published in 1911! E. Hohl main-
tained, on the basis of a study of the vita of Tacitus,
that the biographies attributed to Vopiscus were
written in the time of Theodosius and that the material
was drawn from the * Imperial Chronicle," from
Victor's Caesares, and from a Greek source. He cited,
furthermore, certain resemblances between Vopiscus'
biographies and the vitae of Avidius Cassius and Severus
Alexander as evidence that these vitae also were written
by this author, and re-asserted the hypothesis once
advanced by Wölfflin, that Vopiscus was the final
redactor and editor of the whole collection.

Not content, however, with identifying Vopiscus
with Dessau's “ Theodosian forger,” Hohl next pro-
ceeded, on the basis of the appearance, in the bio-
graphies attributed to Pollio, of the names of some
persons mentioned by Vopiscus, to identify Vopiscus
with Pollio.? He maintained that the * forger ” used
the three pseudonyms, Vulcacius Gallicanus, Pollio,
and Vopiscus, in three different sections of the Historia
Augusta.

In a third article? Hohl appeared as an out and
out advocate of Dessau's hypothesis and ardently
championed the theory that the Historia Augusta is

! Vopiscus und die Biographie des Kaisers Tacitus ; Klio,
xi. (1911), pp. 178-229; 284-325 = Dis. Tübingen, 1911.

* Vopiscus und Pollio; Klio, xii. (1912), pp. 474-482.

* Neue Jahrbb. f. d. Klass, Alt., xxxiii. (1914), pp. 698-712,


xxiv e


INTRODUCTION


entirely the work of a fourth century “ forger.” After
analysing the psychology of the ** Theodosian forger,”
he declared that the * forger's" reason for choosing
the emperors of the second and third centuries as his
subjects and for attributing his work to the period
of Diocletian and Constantine, was his opposition to
Christianity and his desire to display this feeling by
writing about a period in which it could not prove
dangerous to himself. He then proceeded to absolve
the “ forger ” of actual forgery by the contention that
his vitae belong to a type of literature of which
historical accuracy was not demanded, pointing out
instances in which he even claimed that the author
is making fun both of himself and his readers. Yet
Hohl did not deny that his “ forger” used sources
which contained historical material. He admitted
the use of an *'annalistic" source but refused to
follow Schulz in his reconstruction of an * Anonymus,”
holding that there has been too great a reaction
against the belief in the dependence of the Historia
Augusta on Marius Maximus. |

The theory of the “ forger” has been adopted also
by Alfred von Domaszewski in a series of four articles
on the references to the topography of Rome and
the geography of the Empire, and on the dates and
the personal names found in the Historia Augusta.}
Beginning with the assertion that the names Lam-
pridius, Capitolinus, Pollio, and Vopiscus were
invented by the “ forger ” to designate material drawn
respectively from Dio, Herodian, Nicostratus of
Trapezus, and Eusebius, all with additions from
Eutropius and Victor, Domaszewski proceeded to


! Sitzungsber. d. Heidelberger Akad., Phil.-hist. Klasse,
1916-1918.
XXV


INTRODUCTION


examine various erroneous and obscure allusions to
places in Rome, as found in the biographies from
Severus onward, and to maintain that the “ forger '—
who had no personal knowledge of the city—gathered
these in a blundering fashion from various ancient
authors and especially from glosses added to a list of
buildings in Rome similar to that of the “Chrono-
grapher of 354." In like manner he argued that the
allusions, in the later biographies, to districts and
towns throughout Italy and the provinces were also
taken by the ignorant “ forger” from various works,
including the earlier vitae, and amplified with the help
of an official list of the provinces, similar to the
Laterculus of Polemius Silvius. He then attempted
to show that the dates occurring in the Historia
Augusta (mostly in the so-called * documents ") were
taken by the “ forger” from a trustworthy list used
by the * Chronographer of 354,” but in the process
many were confused by him and even attached to
events to which they did not belong. The fourth,
and by far the most extensive, of Domaszewski's
articles applied this same method of reasoning to the
names of persons, especially those found in the later
vitae. In it he maintained that the “forger,” utterly
ignorant ofthe correct form of a Roman name, invented
combinations made up from the gentilicia. of the
emperors and a few well-known families together
witb various cognomina which he found in Cicero and
other writers, even down as far as Jordanes. Thus
the period in which the “ forger” wrote is determined
as subsequent to Jordanes, and therefore not earlier
than the latter half of the sixth century. A still more
astounding hypothesis is advanced in regard to his
nationality. On the supposition that in Sev. i. 5


xxvi


INTRODUCTION


he has confused Carnuntum in Pannonia with the
town of the Carnutes in Gaul, and because of his
tendency to glorify Gaul, previously pointed out by
Seeck, and his knowledge of the Gallic poets Sidonius
Apollinaris and Ausonius it is asserted that he was of
Gallic birth ; furthermore, his home must have been
in the province of Narbonensis, since he shows especial
interest in the worship of the Magna Mater (whose
cult was popular in this province), and because his
list of dona militaria in Prob. v. 1 bears a close re-
semblance to those enumerated in some inscriptions
from Nemausus (Nimes), this town, it is maintained,
was his actual home. On this supposition his
erroneous references to places in Rome are explained
by the hypothesis that he is locating in the capital
various buildings which in reality were in Nimes.
Further arguments for a belief in the theory of the
late “ forger " have been recently advanced by Dom-
aszewski's pupil Johannes Hasebroek,! who has gone
beyond Dessau and adopted the conclusion of Seeck.
In his examination of the lives of Pescennius Niger
and Clodius Albinus he maintained that the material
for these biographies was taken from the Vita Severi,
Herodian, Eutropius and Victor, and denied the use
and even the existence of the “ Imperial Chronicle."
The point of view of Dessau and Hohl has recently
been accepted by Arthur Rosenberg in his useful
hand-book on the sources of Roman history.? In his


1 Die F'ülschungen der Vitae Nigri u. Albini in den S.H.A.
(Berlin, 1916); see review by Hohl in Berl. Philol. Woch.,
1917, 424.426. The same point of view is taken in his
Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius Severus
(Heidelberg, 1921).

? Einleitung und Quellenkunde zur Rómischen Geschichte
(Berlin, 1921),

xxvii


INTRODUCTION


statement of the origin of the Historia Augusta, which
smacks of the methods of the modern business-world,
Rosenberg imagines that about 375 a writer, who was
perhaps also a book-seller, wishing to enter into
competition with Marius Maximus and other popular
writers of imperial biographies, composed the present
series of viae, attempting to outdo Maximus in
spiciness and in fullness of detail, especially in
embellishment of his narrative by means of ** docu-
ments." Then, not daring to publish the work under
his own name, he pretended that he had discovered
an older work, attempting to deceive the public by
the attribution of his biographies to six imaginary
authors and by dedications to Diocletian and
Constantine.

Another recent contribution to the discussion is
that of Wilhelm Soltau.! Beginning with Mommsen's
conclusions, he posited the composition in the time of
Diocletian of two series of biographies, (A) the major
vitae from Hadrian to Macrinus, and (D) the vitae
ascribed to Vopiscus. These two collections, he
asserted, were worked over and amplified about 400
A.D. by Julius Capitolinus, the general editor of the
Corpus. According to Soltau's theory, Capitolinus
wrote the six minor viae in Group A and the
biographies of the four usurpers in Group D ; he also
inserted all the dedications to the emperors and the
duplicate sections in the Marcus and the Severus, taking
these directly from Eutropius and Aurelius Victor.
The original author of the major vitae (A), Soltau
maintained, was Spartianus; his name Capitolinus
removed from some of the vitae on the occasion of his


1 Philologus, Ixxiv, (1917), pp. 384-445.
xxviii


INTRODUCTION


general ed:ting and replaced it with his own, while
in similar fashion he assigned some of his new minor
vilae to himself and some to Spartianus. The
biographies of Elagabalus and Alexander Soltau
believed to be the work of a Lampridius, and he too
may perhaps be regarded as the original author of the
three following vitae, but if so, these were completely
rewritten by Capitolinus, who also made various
additions to the two former vitae, and inserted all the
dedications to Constantine with a view to making this
collection (Group B) seem the work of an earlier
period.

Thus far Soltau followed the general conclusions of
Mommsen. However, in dealing with the biographies
of Trebellius Pollio (Group C), he advanced a new
and strange theory. Beginning with Chapter II. of
Vopiscus' vita of Aurelian, which, he held, breaks the
general connexion and hence is a later interpolation
or rather a shameless forgery, he claimed that Vopiscus
did not, as this chapter asserts, follow Pollio, but on
the contrary, that the latter wrote at a subsequent
period. After an examination of the vita of Claudius
he arrived at the following conclusions: that this
biography is founded upon a panegyric of Claudius
written in Greek about 305 by a Trebellius Pollio,
who sought, by lauding Claudius, to carry on a sort of
propaganda for Constantius; that this same writer
caused his freedman to compile material dealing with
Gallienus and the Tyranni Triginta, vilifying Gallienus
in order to add lustre to Claudius ; finally that about
the middle of the fourth century a freedman of
Trebellius Pollio, whom Soltau dubs Pollio Libertus,
used all this material in the composition of biographies
of Valerian, Gallienus, and Claudius, together with


xxix


INTRODUCTION


the summaries dealing with the Thirty Tyrants, and,
in order to give his work a certain prestige, issued it
under the name of his patron, claiming that he was
the author also of biographies of the emperors from
Philip to Trebonianus Gallus.

Thus Capitolinus, about 400 a.p., is supposed by
Soltau to have combined four series of biographies
with six minor viae written by himself and the
summaries of the four usurpers attributed to Vopiscus
and to have inserted the duplicate narratives in the
Marcus and the Severus, the dedications addressed
to the emperors, and the many passages scattered
through the whole corpus which bear the hall-mark
of the fourth century, and in this way to have created
the Historia Augusta.


As a result of the controversy concerning the
authorship and date of the Historia Augusta it is
evident that the traditional assignment of the bio-
graphies to the six Scriplores must be abandoned.
Similarly, it has become clear that the radical theory
that the viae are all the work of a “forger” who
lived at the end of the fourth century or the beginning
of the fifth, is untenable. Even Dessau and Seeck
failed to prove their contention, and the recent articles
by Hénn, Hohl, and Soltau, brilliant though they
are, contain no real proof that the vtae with which
they deal were composed at this date. Nor can the
theory of a single author explain satisfactorily the
great divergences in method and style which appear
in the several biographies and the striking variations
displayed within a single biography. On the other
hand, Klebs’ attempt to divide the biographies into
groups irrespective of the traditional authorship and


XXX


INTRODUCTION


Mommsen's distinction between major and minor
vitae and his theory of a later revision, all point to
the true solution of the problem. The work begun
by Heer and Schulz, which distinguished between
historical and anecdotal material and showed that
many of the biographies are awkward compilations
amplified by later additions, has also contributed to
the understanding of their origin.

At the present stage of our knowledge no definite
statement as to authorship can be made. Once rid,
however, of the tradition that the biographies,
irrespective of the character of their content and their
chronological order, are to be assigned to the several
authors whose names they bear, and, on the other
hand, unconvinced by the arguments for the pre-
posterous theories that the whole work is a forgery
of the fourth or fifth century, we may follow the lead
of Klebs, of Mommsen, and (in so far as he follows
Mommsen) of Soltau, aided by the work of Heer and
Schulz. It is clear that the character of the material,
the method of presentation, and the purpose of the
author are by no means uniform throughout the
series, and that single vitae or groups of vitae show
such individual characteristics that it is impossible to
believe that all were originally the work of the same
author. On the other hand, the presence in almost
every biography of interpolated material, frequently
inserted at inopportune places, the resemblance
between passages of a highly rhetorical character, and
the use of certain stock phrases, all betray the hand
of some one writer, apparently a very ignorant person
and. certainly one devoid of any literary sense, who
has worked over the whole collection.

Proceeding from this standpoint it is possible to


xxxi


INTRODUCTION


establish certain definite groups of biographies, differ-
ing from one another in content, manner, and the
period in which they purport to have been written.
A few vitae, it is true, can be brought into one of
these groups only with considerable difficulty, but at
least certain main divisions can be made for the
purpose of classification. The fact that these groups
are six in number is a striking coincidence with the
traditional number of Scriptores, but there seems to
be little warrant for drawing any inferences there-
from.

The groups thus established are as follows :—

A. The major vilae: Hadrian, Pius, Marcus
Aurelius, Commodus, Pertinax, Julianus, Severus,
Caracalla. In these vitae the name of Diocletian
occurs only in the. digressions in the Marcus and the
Severus. Except for occasional bursts of rhetoric,
notably in these digressions, these biographies consist
of brief statements put together in the manner of
excerpts and without any attempt at literary style.
They contain no prefaces or epilogues. Schulz has
shown that each is built up about a core of historical
material and that this has been taken from an
extensive historical work. He has, however, gone
too far in his admiration for the work of his Anonymus
and especially in his assertion that this writer was an
historian comparable to Tacitus and Dio. On the
other hand, he has done well to lessen the importance
of Marius Maximus. While he has not demonstrated
sufficiently that the citations from Maximus are all
due to the late redactor and has gone too far in his
condemnation of the biographer, he has shown that
these citations do not belong to the strictly historical
material and that they are of secondary importance.


xxxii


INTRODUCTION


B. The minor vitae : Aelius, Verus, Avidius Cassius,
Pescennius Niger, Clodius Albinus, Geta. Of these,
the first four are. addressed to Diocletian, the other
two to Constantine. In the Verus and the Niger the
emperor is addressed only in an epilogue; in the
Niger the address is followed by some miscellaneous
material which is evidently a later addition. In the
: Albinus the address to Constantine is contained only
in the section intended to glorify the family of the
Ceionii,! which is also to be regarded as an addition
by a later editor.

In contrast to the major vitae these biographies are
rhetorical in character and embellished with verses,
forged documents and anecdotes. They contain little
or no historical material that is not in the major vitae.
Schulz has tried to show that they also derived their
historical matter from the Anonymus but his attempt
does not give satisfactory results,

The differences in manner and matter between
these minor vitae and the major biographies of Group
A show clearly that their author did not compose
the major vitae in their original form. On the other
hand, he used them as sources for his historical
material. It is his purpose, he says in the preface
and the epilogue of the elus? to present to the
knowledge of Diocletian the lives of all the * Augusti,"
the * Cesares," and the pretenders to the throne,
and a similar purpose is proclaimed in the Avidius
Cassius,’ but there is no statement in either of these
vitae to the effect that the biographies of the
** Augusti” were actually composed by him.

We are therefore inclined to believe that a writer


1 c, iv. 1-3, 2c, 1. 1; vii. 5. 8 c, ili. 3.
xxxiii
C


INTRODUCTION


of the time of Diocletian issued a collection of bio-
graphies of the emperors from Hadrian to Macrinus.
In this he incorporated parts of an epitome of an older
series of vitae of the ‘‘ Augusti " —corresponding, in
general, to the work of Schulz's Anonymus—and
added thereto a considerable amount of anecdotal
and personal material. To this series of “ Augusti ”’
he added biographies of the princes and pretenders, -
which he either composed himself or found already
in existence. The Macrinus was probably also con-
tributed by him. The presence in it of some historical
material suggests that it may have been included in
the older series, but its rhetorical preface and the
many *literary " embellishments which it contains
make it clear that it was at least largely rewritten,
probably as a sort of appendix to the collection. On
the other hand, the Geta, unless some drastic emenda-
tion or excision is made in the address to Constantine,
must be attributed to some later author or editor.

C. The vitae of Elagabalus and Alexander, assigned
by the manuscript tradition to Lampridius. These
two biographies form a unit, with a preface at the
beginning of the former and an epilogue at the end
of the latter. Both are addressed to Constantine,
The worthlessness of most of the material has been
demonstrated by Miss Butler and Hónn, and a general
wordiness and fullness of unimportant detail dis
tinguish these vitae from those of Groups A and B.
The fact that Marius Maximus is cited as a source for
many of the enormities of Elagabalus suggests that
he was the source of a large part of this vila, for it
consists principally of material of this sort. Moreover,
when it is remembered that the biography of Alex-
ander is largely a panegyric of the Emperor and that


xxxiv


INTRODUCTION


the iniquities of Elagabalus are utilized to shed
greater lustre on his successor, it becomes ‘more
probable that Marius Maximus, who lived under
Alexander, may have been used for much that is in
these vitae. The worthlessness and wordiness of the
vila of Diadumenus suggests that it too is to be
placed in this group, and it is perhaps no accident
that the tradition assigns it also to Lampridius. The
rhetoric that is expended on the amabile nomen of
Antoninus! accords well with the Heliogabalus and the
Alexander, and the similar digressions in the Macrinus?
may be later additions by the same hand.

D. The vitae of the Maximini, the Gordiani, and
Maximus and Babinus. Of these, the first two have
prefaces addressed to Constantine, while the last is
without a preface, evidently because it is so closely
connected with the Gordiam. This series, it is almost
universally admitted, constitutes an independent
group. For many of its statements Herodian is cited
as authority, and undoubtedly much of the historical
material has been taken from him, apparently without
any intermediary? The Chronicle of Dexippus of
Athens is also cited, but always as the source of what
are evident additions or interpolations.

E. The vitae assigned to Pollio.

F. The vitae assigned to Vopiscus.

The vitae by Pollio were composed, according to
internal evidence, about 300, and those by Vopiscus
a short time afterward.* They appear to have been
independent collections, incorporated in the series by

! Diad., vi. 1—viii. 1. ? c, ii, 5—iii. 9; vii. 5-8.

3E. Diehl, in Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, Realencycl., viii. p.
2081 f. ; the citations from Herodian in the vitae of Elagabalus
and Alexander are evidently later additions.


4 See Intro. to Vol, i. p. xiv.
XXXV


INTRODUCTION


the editor of the corpus. They are much more highly
rhetorical than the earlier biographies, and much
more full of errors, particularly in connexion with
topography, geography, and the administration of the
Empire. While Hohl's attempt to show that they
were written by the same author in the period of
Theodosius is utterly lacking in proof, and Soltau's
theory of a '' Pollio Libertus" is too fantastic to de-
serve serious consideration, itis clear that these groups
did not escape the attentions of the later redactor
who made his interpolations here, as well as in the
other biographies, and who may have been responsible
for many of the ignorant and erroneous statements.
These groups, A-B, E and F, of the time of
Diocletian, and C and D, of the time of Constantine,
were combined, worked over, and edited by some
later writer, probably at the end of the fourth century.
He added much new material, including selections
from Eutropius and Victor (or their common source)
and, probably, most of the “documents.” This
material he often inserted in the wrong connexion
and thereby added greatly to the confusion of the
whole. The attempts to establish his name and
identity can be regarded as little more than guesses.
It is ardently to be hoped that the forthcoming
elaborate historical commentary promised by the
Heidelberg Academy under the general supervision
of Alfred von Domaszewski! may help to solve this
problem, as well as the many others connected with
the Historia Augusta, but in the present lack of
evidence it can only be said of this question “adhuc
sub iudice lis est.”
! See Hohl in Neue Jahrbb. f. d. Klass, Alt., xxxiii (1914),


p. 710; A. von Domaszewski in Stteungsber. d. Heidelberger
Akad., Phil. hist. Klasse, T Abh., p. 8.


xxxvi


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Baehrens, E. Adversaris Critica in S. H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class.
Philol., ciii. (1871), 649-664. :

—— Nova Adversaria Critica in S.H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class.
Philol., cxxxiii. (1886), 218-224.

Ballou, S. H. The Manuscripts of the Historia Augusta ;
Class. Philol., iii. (1908), 278-278.

—— De Clausulis a Flavio Vopisco Syracusio Scriptore
Historiae Augustae adhibitis; Weimar, 1912.

—— The „Manuscript Tradition of the Historia Augusta;


Leipzig, 1914.

Bernhardy, G. De Scriptoribus H. A.; Prooemia duo; Halle,
1847. |

Bitschofsky, R. Kritisch-exegetische Studien zu den S.H.A.;
Vienna, 1888.


Brocks, E. De quattuor prioribus Historiae Augustae Script-
oribus; Kónigsberg, 1869.

—— Studien zu den S.H.A.; Marienwerder, 1877.

Brunner, J. Vopiscus Lebensbeschreibungen ; in Büdinger's
Untersuchungen sur Rim. Kaisergeschichte (Leipzig,
1868), ii., 3-111.

Bryant, E. The Reign of Antoninus Pius; Cambridge, 1896.

Butler, O. F. Studies in the Life of Heliogabalus; in Roman
History and Mythology, Univ. of Michigan Studies,
Humanistic Series, iv. (New York, 1910), 1-169.

Callegari, E. Delle Fonti per la Storia di Alessandro Severo ;
Padua, 1895.

Ceuleneer, A. de. Essai sur la Vie et le Règne de Septime
Sévére; Brussels, 1880.

EX J.J. Ad S.H.A. ; Mnemosyne, xi. (1883), 246-

59.

Cotta, ©. Quaestiones Grammaticae et Criticae de Vitis a

S.H.A. conscriptis; Breslau, 1883.


xxxvii


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Crees, d A E. The Reign of the Emperor Probus; London,

Czwalina, O. De Epistularum Actorumque quae a S.H.A.
a E Fide atque Auctoritate, Pars I.; Bonn,
1870.

Damsté, P. H. Ad S.H.A.; Mnemosyne, xxxix. (1911), 185-
194, 225-241; xl. (1912), 259-276.

Dannhüuser, E. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers
Probus (276-282) ; Jena, 1909.

Dessau, H. Ueber Zeit und Persönlichkeit der S.H.A.;
Hermes, xxiv. (1889), 337-392.

—— Ueber die S.H.A.; Hermes, xxvii. (1892), 591-605.

—— Die Ueberlieferung der S.H.A.; Hermes, xxix. (1894),
893.416.

Diehl, E. Historia Augusta; in Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll,
Realencycl., viii. 2051-2110.

Dirksen, H. E. Die S.H.A.: Andeutungen zur Texteskritik
und Auslegung derselben; Leipzig, 1842.

Domaszewski, A. von Die Topographie Roms bei den
S.H.A.; Sitzungsber. d. Heidelberger Akad., Phil.- Hist.
Klasse, 1916, 7te Abh

—-— Die Geographie bei den S.H.A.; Sitzungsber. d. Heidel-
berger Akad., Ph4l.- Hist. Klasse, 1916, 15te Abh.

—— Die Daten bei den 8.H.A. von Severus Alexander bis
Carus; Sitzungsber. d. Heidelberger Akad., Phil.- Hist.
Klasse, 1917, iste Ath.

—-— Die Personennamen bei den S.H.A.; Siteungsber. d.
Heidelberger Akad., P hil.- Hisl. Klasse, 1918, 18te Abh.

—— Der Staat bei den S.H.A. ; Siézungsber. d. Heidelberger
Akad., Ph4l.-Hist. Klasse, 1920, 6te Abh.

Drake, J. H. Studiesin the S.H.A.; Am. Journal of Philol.,
‘Xx. (1899), 40-58.

Dreinhofer, A. De Fontibus et Auctoribus Vitarum quae
feruntur Spartiani, Capitolini, Gallicani, Lampridii ;
Halle, 18775,

Ellis, R. On the Historia Augusta; Hermathena, xiii. (1905),
899-420; xiv. (1906), 1-17.

Enmann, A. Eine Verlorene Geschichte der Róm. Kaiser
und das Buch De Viris Illustribus Urbis Romae;
Philologus, Suppl. iv. (1884), 335-501.

Frankfurter, S.  Textkritisches zu den S.H.A.; Wiener
Studien, xiii, (1891), 245-254.


xxxvili


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Frankfurter, S. Zur Frage der Autorschaft der S.H.A.;
Eranos Vindobonensis (1898), 218-282.

Gemoll, A. Specilegium Criticum in S.H.A.; Wohlau, 1876.

—— Die S.H.A:, Pars I.; Striegau, 1886.

Giambelli, O. Gli Scrittori della: Storia Augusta studiati
princip. nelle loro Fonti; in Atti della Regia Accad. det
n Mem. d. Classe di: Scienze Morali, vi. (1881),

8-455.

Golisch, J. Beiträge zur Kritik der S.H.A.; Schweidnitz,

1870. `


—— . Fortgesetzte Reitriige zu den S.H.A. ; Schweidnitz, 1877.

Gregorovius, F. The Emperor Hadrian; A Picture of the
Graeco-Roman: World. in his Time; trans. by M. E.
Robinson; London 1898.

Grosse, O. Bemerkungen zum Sprachgebrauch und Wortschatz
der S. H.A.; Leipzig, 1913.
Habel, P. Zu den S.H A.; Woch. für Klass. Philol., vii.
(1890), 418-491.
Hasebroek, J. Die Fülschungen der Vitae Nigri und Albini in
den S,H.A. Beiträge zur Lösung des Quelienproblems ;
Berlin, 1916.

—~— Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers Septimius
Severus; Heidelberg, 1921.

Hay, J. S. The Amazing Emperor Heliogabslus; London,


Heer, J. M. Ter historische Wert der Vita Commodi in der
ams der S.H.A.; Phélologus, Suppl. ix. (1904),
1-208.

Hirschfeld, O. Bemerkungen zu den. S.H.A.; Hermes, iii.
(1869), 230-282.

—— S.H A.; in Antiquariech-kritische Bemerkungen zu
Rom. Schriftstellern ; Wiener Studien, iii. (1881), 108-
117, 275-2'76.

—— Bemerkungen zu der Biographie des Septimius Severus.;
Wiener Studien, vi. (1884), 121-127.

—— &.H.A.; in Zu Róm. Schriftstellern; Hermes, xxiv.
(1889), 101-107.

—— Decimus Olodius Albinus; Historische Zeilschrift, xliii.
redd 452-484 = Kleine Schriften: (Berlin, 1918), 411-

—— Die Abfassungszei' der Sammlung der:.S.H.A. ; in Kleine
Schriften (Berlin, 1918), 887-891.


XXXiX


BIBLIOGRAPH Y


Hónn, K. Quellenuntersuchungen zu den Viten des Helio-
gabalus und des Severus Alexander im Corpus der
S.H.A.; Leipzig, 1911.

Hohl, E. Vopiscus und die Biographie des Kaisers Tacitus ;

Tübingen, 1911 = Klio, xi, (1911), 178-229, 284-324.

Vopiscus und Pollio; Klio, xii. (1912), 474-482.

—— Beiträge zur Textgeschichte der Historia Augusta; Klio,
xiii. (1918), 258-288, 387-423.

—— Zur Historia Augusta (Vita Severi, xvii, 6); Rhein.
Museum, lxviii. (1913), 316-319.

—-— Das Problem der Historia Augusta; Neue Jahrbb. für das
Klass, Altertum, xxxiii. (1914), 698-712.

— — Wer ist Robertus a Porta, Bononiensis? Berliner
Philol. Woch., xxxv. (1915), 221-224. |

—— Textkritisches zur Historia Augusta; Rhein. Museum, xx.
(1915), 474-479.

—— Petrarca und der Palatinus 899 der Historia Augusta;
Hermes, li. (1916), 154-159,

— — Zur Textgeschichte der Historia Augusta (ein Kritisches
Nachwort); Klio, xv. (1918), 78-98.

Homo, L. Essai sur le Règne de l'Empereur Aurélien (270.
275); Paris, 1904.

Hopkins, R. V. N. The Life of Alexander Severus; Cambridge,
1907.

Kellerbauer, A. Zu den S.H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class. Philol., cxv.
(1877), 628-648. .

Klebs, E. Die Vita des Avidius Cassius; Rhein. Museum,
xliii. (1888), 321-846.

—— Zu den 8.H.A. ; Philologus, xlvii. (1889), 559-562.

—— Die Sammlung der S.H.A.; Rhein. Museum, xlv. (1890),
436-464,

—— Die S.H.A. ; Rhein. Museum, xlvii. (1892), 1-52, 515-549.

Klein, J. Kritische Bemerkungen zu den S.H.A.; Rhein.
Museum, xxxiv. (1879), 142-147 ; xxxvii. (1882), 274-291.

Kornemann, E. Kaiser Hadrian und der Letzte Grosse
Historiker von Rom ; Leipzig, 1905.

Krause, A. De Fontibus et Auctoritate Scriptorum Historiae
Augustae; 2 Teile; Neustettin, 1857-74.

Krauss, F. S. De Praepositionum Usu apud sex S.H.A.;

Vienna, 1882.

Lécrivain, C. Études sur l'Histoire Auguste; Paris, 1904.


xl


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Lehmann, K. F. W. Kaiser Gordian III.; 238-244 n. Chr. ;
Berlin, 1911.

Lenze, W. Quaestiones Criticae et Grammaticae ad S.H.A.
pertinentes; Münster, 1894.

Lessing, K. Studien zu den S.H.A. ; Berlin, 1889.

—— Scriptorum Historiae Augustae Lexicon; Leipzig, 1901-


Linsenbarth, O. Der Rómische Kaiserbiograph Flavius
Vopiscus; Kreuznach, 1876.

Lumbroso, G. Osservazioni sopra un Luogo degli S.H.A.
(Pesc. Nig., xii. 4); in Rendiconti della Regia Accad.
dei Lincei, Classe di Scienze Morali, Ser. 5, i. (1892),
582-584. |

Maurice, J. Sur les Chrétiens et les Seconds Flaviens dans
P “ Histoire Auguste” et l'Époque de la Rédaction de
cette Histoire; in Comptes Rendus de l'Acad. des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 1913, 206-216.

Menadier, K. Die Münzen und das Münzwesen bei der
S.H.A.; Berlin, 1913 = Zeitschrift fiir Numismatik,
xxxi. (1914), 1-144. E

Mommsen, Th. Zu den S.H.A.; Hermes, xiii. (1878), 298-801

: = Gesammelte Schriften, vii. 298-301.

—— Die S.H.A.; Hermes, xxv. (1890), 228-292 = Gesammelte
Schriften, vii. 802-362.

Müller, J. J. Der Geschichtschreiber Marius Maximus; in
Büdinger's Untersuchungen sur Rim, Kassergeschichie
(Leipzig, 1868), iii., 19-202.

Novak, R. Observationes in S.H.A.; Prague, 1896.

Oberdick, J. Zu den S.H.A.; Zeitschrift für die Oesterr.
Gymnasien, xviii. (1868), 340-848 ; xxiii. (1873), 808-807.

Pasciucco, G. Elagabalo; Contributi agli Studi sugli S.H.A. ;
Feltre, 1905.

Patzig,E. Zur Textkritik der S.H.A.; Byzantinische Zeit-
schrift, xiii. (1904), 44-50.

Pauoker, C. De Latinitate Scriptorum Historiae Augustae
Meletemata ; Dorpat, 1870.

Perino, E. De Fontibus Vitarum Hadriani et Septimii Severi
Imperatorum ab Aelio Spartiano conscriptarum ; Frei-
burg, 1880.

Peter, H. Historia Critica Scriptorum Historiae Augustae ;
Leipzig, 1860.

— Exercitationes Criticae in S.H. A. ; Posen, 1868.


xli
c*


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Peter, H. Zu den S.H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class. Philol., cxxix.
(1884), 75-80.

—— Die S.H.A.: Sechs Litterar-geschichtliche Untersu-
chungen; Leipzig, 1892.

—— Zur Textgeschichte der S.H.A.; Archiv f. Lateinische
Lexikographie, xv. (1908), 23-29.

—— Die Rómischen sogenannten Dreissig Tyrannen; Ab-
handlungen der Kinigl. Sachs. Gesellschaft d. Wissens-
chaften, Philol.- Hist. Klasse, xxvii. (1909), 181-222.

Petschenig, M. Beiträge zur Textgeschichte der S.H.A.;
Sttzungsber. d. Kaiserl. Acad. d. Wissenschaften,
P hilol.- Hist. Klasse, xciii. (1879), 355-418.

—— Zur Kritik der S. H.A. ; Graz, 1885.

—— Bemerkungen zum Text der S.H.A.; Philologus, lii.
(1893), 348-865.

Platnauer, M. The Life and Reign of the Emperor L.
Septimius Severus ; Oxford, 1918.

Plew, J. De Diversitate Auctorum Historiae Augustae;
Königsberg, 1859.

—— Marius Maximus als Directe und Indirecte Quelle der
S.H.A.; Strassburg, 1878.

—— Kritische Beitráge zu den S.H.A.; Strassburg, 1885.

—— Quellenuntersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers
Hadrian ; Strassburg, 1890.

Purser, L. C. Notes on Vopiscus; Hermathena, xv. (1909),
1-55.

Richter, F. Ueber die Scriptores vi. Historiae Augustae;
Rhein. Museum, vii. (1850), 16-51.

Richter, G. Zu Julius Capitolinus; Rhein. Museum, xxiv.
(1869), 638-639.

Rosinger, E. De S.H.A. Commentatio Critica; Schweidnitz,


868.

Romano, B. De Ablativi Absoluti Usu apud S.H.A.; Turin,
1906.

Rubensohn, M. Zu der Chronologie des Kaisers Severus
Alexanders und ihrer Litterarischen Ueberlieferung ;
Hermes, xxv. (1890), 340-350.

Rübel,K. De Fontibus quattuor priorum Historiae Augustae
Scriptorum ; Bonn, 1872.

Rühl, F. Die Zeit des Vopiscus ; Rhein. Museum, xliii. (1888),
597-604.

—— Zu den S.H.A.; Rhein. Museum, lxii. (1907), 1-8.


xlii


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Saekel, A. Zwei Kritische Bemerkungen zu den S.H.A.;
Klio (1912), 121-125.

Sanctis, G. de. Gli Scriptores Historiae Augustae; Riv. di
Storia, Antica, i. (1896), 90-119.

Schulz, O. Th. Beitráge zur Kritik unserer litterarischen
Ueberlieferung f. d. Zeit von Commodus' Sturz bis auf
n Tod des M. Aurelius Antoninus (Caracalla); Leipzig,

8.

—-— Leben des Kaisers Hadrian; Quellenanalysen und
Historische Untersuchungen ; Leipzig, 1904.

—— Das Kaiserhaus der Antonine und der letzte Historiker
Roms; Leipzig, 1907.

—— Der Römische Kaiser Caracalla ; Genie, Wahnsinn, oder
Verbrechen ?; Leipzig, 1909.

Seeck, O. Die Entstehungszeit der S.H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class.
Philol., cxli. (1890), 609-639.

—— Zur Echtheitsfrage der S.H.A.; Rhein. Museum, xlix.
(1894), 208-224.

—— Politische Tendenzgeschichte im Fünften Jahrhunderte
n. Chr.; Rhein. Museum, lxvii. (1912), 591-608.

Smits, J, O. P. De Fontibus e quibus Res ab Heliogabalo et
Alexandro Severo gestae colliguntur; Maastricht, 1908.

—— Die Vita Commodi und Cassius Dio; Leyden, 1914.

Soltau, W. Julius Capitolinus; Berliner Philol. Woch., xxxvii.
(1917), 1541-1544.

—— Die Echten Kaiserbiographien. Der Weg zur Lósung
des Problems der S.H.A.; Philologus, lxxiv. (1917),
884-445.

Tropea, G. Studi sugli S. H.A., i.-v. ; Messina, 1899-1901.

Antonini Nomen negli S.H.A.; Riv. di Storia Antica, iv.

(1899), 233-245.

—— La Data della Composizione dell’ Ultima Biografia
negli S.H.A.; Riv. dt Storia Antica, iv. (1899), 247-262.

—-— Intorno alla Patria di Adriano Imperatore; Riv. di Storia
Antica, vi. (1902), 185-255.

Unger, R. Zur Kritik der S.H.A.; Jahrbb. f. Class. Philol.,
cxix. (1879), 493-512; cxxiii. (1881), 209-224.

Vermaat, H. De Aetate qua conscripta est Historia Augusta ;
Leyden, 1893.

Vielhaber, L. Zu den S.H.A; Zeitschrift f. Oesterr.
Gymnasien, xviii. (1867), 626-680.

Vulic, N. Miscellanea sugli S.H.A.; Riv. di Storia Antica,
viii. (1904), 104-107.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Walter, F. Beiträge zur Textkritik der S.H.A. ; Regensburg,
1909.


Weber, W. Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Kaisers
Hadrian ; Leipzig, 1907.

Wilcken, U. Zur Geschichte Pelusiums (Vita Marci, xxiii. 8) ;
Klio, ix, (1909), 131-134.

Winterfeld, P. von. Historiae Augustae Scriptores; in
Schedae Criticae in Scriptores et Poetas Romanos ;
Berlin, 1895.

— — Satzschluesstudien zur Historia Augusta; Rhein. Museum,
lvii. (1902), 549-558.

Wirth, A. Quaestiones Severianae; Leipzig, 1888.

Wölfflin, E. von. Die S.H.A.; Sitzungsber. d. Bayer. Acad.,
Phil.-hist. Klasse, 1891, "465-588.

Woldt, A. De S.H.A. Copia Verborum et Facultate dicendi ;
Greifswald, 1914.

Zangemeister, K. Zur Römischen Topographie (Vita Severi,
xix.); Rhein. Museum, xxxix. (1884), 635-636.

Zeitler, A. Zu Spartianus’ Vita Hadriani; Eichstadt, 1875.


xliv


SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE


VOL. II. B


ANTONINUS CARACALLUS
AELII SPARTIANI


1 Antoninum ins. by Petschenig ; om. in P; Aníoninos ins.
after Bassianum (l. 2) by F. Richter and Peter.


———


1He was originally named Julius Bassianus after: his
maternal grandfather; see note to Sev., iii. 9. In 196 Severus
gave him the name M. Aurelius Antoninus and by this he was
officially known for the rest of his life; see Sev., x. 8 and note.
The nickname Caracalla (more correctly Caracallus) by
which he is usually known was the name of the Gallic cloak
which he made fashionable in Rome; see c. ix. 7-8; Sev., xxi.
11. .


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


BY
AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. The two sons left by Septimius Severus, Geta
and Bassianus,! both received the surname Antoninus,?
one from the army, the other from his father, but
Geta was declared a public enemy,’ while Bassianus
got the empire. The account of this emperor's
ancestors I deem it needless to repeat, for all this has
been fully told in the Life of Severus.4 He himself
in his boyhood was winsome and clever, respectful to
his parents and courteous to his parents’ friends,
beloved by the people, popular with the senate, and
well able to further his own interests in winning
affection. Never did he seem backward in letters or
slow in deeds of kindness, never niggardly in largess
or tardy in forgiving—at least while under his parents.
For example, if ever he saw condemned criminals
pitted against wild beasts, he wept or turned away
his eyes, and this was more than pleasing to the people.


2 See note to Sev., x. 5.

3 After Geta’s murder his statues were destroyed, his name
officially erased from inscriptions, and coins bearing his like-
ness melted down ; see Dio, 1 xxvii. 12, 6, and Dessau, Ins. Sel.,
458-460.

4 Sev., i. 1-2.


BQ


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


6septennis puer, cum conlusorem suum puerum ob
Iudaicam religionem gravius verberatum audisset,
neque patrem suum neque patrem pueri velut auctores

2 Alexandrum Magnum eiusque gesta in ore semper
habuit. Tiberium et Sullam in conventu plerumque

3laudavit. patre superbior fuit; fratrem magna eius
humilitate despexit,


The rights of Antioch, taken away after Niger’s defeat
(Sev., ix. 4), were probably restored when Caracalla received the
toga virilis and assumed his first consulship there; see Sev.,
xvi. 8. Byzantium surrendered to Severus’ army in 196 after
a siege of nearly three years; see Dio, lxxiv. 10-14. It was
then deprived of its rights and ordered to pay tribute, and its
walls were destroyed. Its later restoration by Severus is
recorded by Malalas, p. 291, and Hesychius of Miletus (C.
Müller, Fragm. Hist. Graec., iv. p. 153).

2 See note to Sev., xiv. 5.

3 See note to Hadr., xvii. 3.

1 Immediately after Severus’ death in Britain on 4 Feb,
211, Caracalla and Geta patched upa peace with the rebels
and returned to Rome, where they arrived in May. The


ANTONINUS CARACALLA I. 6—II. 4


Once, when a child of seven, hearing that a certain
playmate of his had been severely scourged for adopting
the religion of the Jews, he long refused to look at
either the boy's father or his own, because he regarded
them as responsible for the scourging. It was at his
plea, moreover, that their ancient rights were restored
to the citizens of Antioch and Byzantium, with
whom Severus had become angry because they had
given aid to Niger! He conceived a hatred for
Plautianus? because of his cruelty. And all the gifts
he received from his father on the occasion of the
Sigillaria? he presented of his own accord to his
dependents or to his teachers.

II. All this, however, wasin his boyhood. For when
he passed beyond the age of a boy, either by his father's
advice or through a natural cunning, or because he
thought that he must imitate Alexander of Macedonia,
he became more reserved and stern and even some-
what savage in expression, and indeed so much so
that many were unable to believe that he was the
same person whom they had known as a boy.
Alexander the Great and his achievements were ever
on his lips, and often in a public gathering he would
praise Tiberius and Sulla. He was more arrogant than
his father; and his brother, because he was very
modest, he thoroughly despised.

After his father's death * he went to the Praetorian
Camp 5 and complained there to the soldiers that his
brother was forming a conspiracy against him. And


period of their joint rule, extending from their arrival to the
murder of Geta about 26 Feb., 212, is omitted by the bio-


grapher.
At the N E. corner of the city, near the modern Porta
Pia.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


10 questus est de fratris insidiis involute et incondite ad


HI.


1 quasi Peter; quos P. ? ducibus P. 3 So P corr.,


Peter! ; uero excusdtionem om. in F}; excusationem sui
Peter*.


1Geta was killed in the arms of his mother; see Dio,
Ixxvii. 2.

2The biographer has compressed the narrative to the
point of obscurity. Immediately after the murder of Geta,
Caracalla hurried from the Palace to the Praetorian Camp,
where he declared that Geta had made & plot against him.
He then promised the soldiers a donative ; see Dio, Ixxvii. 3,
1-2; Herodian, iv. 4, 3-7.

?The Second Legion, the Parthica, which Severus, after
his discharge of the praetorian guard in 193 (see Sev., vi. 11),


ANTONINUS CARACALLA II. 5—III. 1


so he had his brother slain in the Palace, giving
orders to burn his body at once. . He also said in the
Camp? that his brother had made preparations to
poison him and had shown disrespect to their mother.
To those who had killed his brother he rendered
thanks publicly, and indeed he even gave them a
bonus for being so loyal to him. Nevertheless, some
of the soldiers from Alba ? received the news of Geta's
death with anger, and all declared they had sworn
allegiance to both the sons of Severus and ought to
maintain it to both.* They then closed the gates of
the Camp, and the Emperor was not admitted for a
long time, and then not until he had quieted their
anger, not only by bitter words about Geta and by
bringing charges against him, but also by enormous
sums of money, by means of which, as usual, the
soldiers were placated. After this he returned to
Rome and then attended a meeting of the senate,’
wearing a cuirass under his senators robe and
accompanied by an armed guard. He stationed this
in a double line in the midst of the bencbes and so
made a speech, in which, with a view to accusing his
brother and excusing himself, he complained in a
confused and incoherent manner about his brother's
treachery. The senate received his speech with little
favour, when he said that although he had granted
his brother every indulgence and had in fact saved him
from a conspiracy, yet Geta had formed a most danger-
ous plot against him and had made no return for his
brotherly affection. III. After this speech he granted


had stationed in permanent garrison at Alba, the modern
Albano.

3 Cf. Get., vi. 1-2.

5 On the day atter the murder; see Dio, lxxvii. 3, 3.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


! locutus P. 24tem ins. by Petschenig and Peter?; om. in
P, Peter!. 3a om. in P, Peter.


1 Aemilius Papinianus, the famous jurist. He had been
made prefect of the guard in 205 and was much beloved and
trusted by Severus. For accounts of his death see c. iv. 1;
viii. 1-9; Get., vi. 3.

2L, Fabius Cilo, cos. 198; ; see Com., xx. 1. He held
many important offices under Severus, including a second
consulship in 204 and the prefecture of the city—alluded to in
c. iv. 5. He was much esteemed by Severus and afterwards by
Caracalla, but he almost lost his life when Papinian was
murdered ; see c. iv. 5 and Dio, lxxvii. 4.

? Probably Maecius Laetus, co-prefect with Papinian


ANTONINUS CARACALLA III. 2-8


those who had been exiled or sent into banishment
the right of returning to their fatherland.

From the senate he betook himself to the
praetorians and spent the night in the Camp. The
following day he proceeded to the Capitolium ; here
he spoke cordially to those whom he was planning to
put to death and then went back to the Palace
leaning on the arm of Papinian! and of Cilo.? Here
he saw Geta's mother and some other women weeping
for his brother's death, and he thereupon resolved
to kill them; but he was deterred by thinking how
this would merely add to the cruelty of having slain
his brother. Laetus, however, he forced to commit
suicide, sending him the poison himself; he had been
the first to counsel the death of Geta and was himself
the first to be killed. Afterwards, however, the Em-
peror frequently bewailed his death. Many others,
too, who had been privy to Geta's murder were put
to death, and likewise à man who paid honours to
his portrait.

After this he gave orders that his cousin Afer
should be killed, although on the previous day he
had sent him a portion of food from his own table.
Afer in fear of the assassins threw himself from a
window and crawled away to his wife with a broken
leg, but he was none the less seized by the murderers,
who ridiculed him and put him to death. Pompeianus
too was killed, the grandson of the Emperor Marcus,
—he was the son of his daughter and that Pompeianus *
who was married to Lucilla after the death of the
Emperor Verus and made consul twice by Marcus


According to Dio, lxxvii. 5, 4, Caracalla planned to kill him
but refrained because he was very ill.
*See Marc., xx. 6 and note.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


! Patruinus Borghesi ; patrous P.


! Of. Get., vi. 3.

2 Valerius Patruinus,  apparenily  co-prefect of the
praetorian guard and colleague of Papinian and Laetus; see
Prosopographia Imp. Rom., iii. p. 872.

3 The Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, on the N.E.
side of the Forum, now the church of S. Lorenzo in Miranda.

4 According to Dio, lxxvii. 4, 1, 20,000 persons were put to
death as partisans of Geta. Only the most important are
enumerated here.

5 The author of various works of an antiquarian character,
all of which have been lost. His Rerum Heconditarum Libri
is quoted by Macrobius (Saturnalia, iii, 9, 6), who also refers


ANTONINUS CARACALLA IV. 1-7


and placed in command of all the most important
wars of the time —and he was killed in such a way as to
seem to have been murdered by robbers. IV. Next, in
the Emperor's own presence, Papinian was struck with
an axe by some soldiers and so slain. Whereupon
the Emperor said to the slayer, * You should have
used a sword in carrying out my command."!
Patruinus,? too, was slain by his order, and that in
front of the Temple of the Deified Pius,? and his body
as well as Papinian's were dragged about through
the streets without any regard for decency. Also
Papinian's son was killed, who was a quaestor and
only three days before had given a lavish spectacle.
During this same time there were slain men without
number, all of whom had favoured the cause of Geta,*
and even the freedmen were slain who had managed
Geta's affairs. Then there was a slaughtering in all
manner of places. Even in the public baths there
was slaughter, and some too were killed while
dining, among them Sammonicus Serenus,* many of
whose books dealiug with learned subjects are still in
circulation. Cilo, moreover, twice prefect and consul,
incurred the utmost danger merely because he had
counselled harmony between the brothers. For not
until after the city-soldiers 5 had seized Cilo, tearing
off his senator’s robe and pulling off his boots, did
Antoninus check their violence. After this he
committed many further murders in the city, causing
many persons far and wide to be seized by soldiers
and killed, as though he were punishing a rebellion.


to him as vir saeculo suo doctus. See also Get., v. 6; Gord.,
xviii. 2. On his son see Alex., xxx. 2 and note.

€ The three cohorts under the command of the praefectus
urbi and responsible for the maintenance of order in Rome.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


1 se ins. by Klein; om. in P, Peter.


l See Pert., vi. 9; xv. 3. A witticism made by him is
supposed to have been the cause of his death ; see c. x. 6 and
Get., vi. 6.

?In the imperial period it was customary for a consul to
remain in office for only a portion of the year, The consuls
(one of whom was frequently the emperor) who assumed their
office on J&n. 1 were known as consules ordinari; those
who succeeded them after the expiration of a few months,
and also their successors in their turn, were known as
consules suffecti.

3In the spring of 218. His departure was commemorated
by an issue of coins with the legend Profectio Aug(usti) ; see
Cohen ?, iv. pp. 508 f., nos. £08-509.

*'The province of Gallia Narbonensis was named from its
capital Narbo, now Narbonne. It included south-eastern
France as far north as Vienne and as far west as Toulouse.

5 The biography omits the account of Caracalia’s campaign


ANTONINUS CARACALLA IV. 8—V. 4


He put to death Helvius Pertinax,! substitute consul,?
for no other reason than because he was the son of
an emperor, and he would never hesitate, whenever
an opportunity presented itself, to put to death those
who had been his brothers friends. He often
delivered insolent invectives against the senate and
against the people, issuing proclamations and
publishing harangues, and he even declared that he
would be a second Sulla.

V. After doing all this he set out for Gaul? and
immediately upon his arrival there killed the pro-
consul of Narbonensis. Thereby great consternation
was caused among all who were engaged in adminis-
tering Gaul, and he incurred the hatred felt for a
tyrant; and yet he would at times assume a kindly
demeanour, despite the fact that by nature he was
very savage. After many measures directed against
persons and in violation of the rights of communities
he was seized with an illness and underwent great
suffering. Yet even toward those who nursed him he
behaved most brutally.®

Then he made ready for a journey to the Orient,’
but interrupted his march and stopped in Dacia. In
the region of Raetia " he put a number of the natives
to death and then harangued his soldiers and made


of 218 in northern Raetia (Bavaria) against the Alamanni, his
invasion of German territory, and his victory on the river
Main, as a result of which he assumed the cognomen
Germanicus Maximus and issued coins with the legend
Victoria Germanica ; see Cohen, iv. p. 210, nos. 645-646.

*In the spring of 214. His route was through Carniola and
thence down the valley of the Save to the Danube.

7 The incidents narrated in this and the following sentences
are out of place here and should be connected with his
campaign of 213. |


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


interemit militesque suos quasi Sullae milites et

8 Per Thracias cum praefecto praetorii iter fecit.
inde cum in Asiam traiceret, naufragii periculum
adiit antemna fracta, ita ut in scapham cum protec-
toribus descenderet. unde in triremem a praefecto
classis receptus evasit.

9  Excepit apros frequenter, contra leonem etiam
stetit. quando‘ missis ad amicos litteris gloriatus est
seque ad Herculis virtutem accessisse iactavit.


1 See Com., viii. 5; ix. 2; Diad., vii. 2-3.

? The surname that he actually assumed was Germanicus
Maximus; see note toc. iv. 10. Apparently this is some pun
on the meaning of germanus as ** brother," like Cicero's pun
Germanum Cimber occidit, cited by Quintilian, viii. 8, 29.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA V. 5—VI. 1.


them presents quite as though. they were the troops
of Sulla. He did not, however, as Commodus had
done,! permit his men to call him by the names of the
gods, for many of them had begun to address him as
Hercules because he had killed a lion and some other
wild beasts. Yet he did call himself Germanus?
after defeating the Germans, either in jest or in
earnest, for he was foolish and witless and asserted
that had he conquered the Lucanians ? he should have
been given the name Lucanicus. At that time men
were condemned to death for having urinated in
places where there were statues or busts of the
Emperor or for having removed garlands from his
busts in order to replace them by others, and some
were even condemned for wearing them around
their necks as preventives of quartan or tertian
fever.

Then he journeyed through Thrace accompanied by
the prefect of the guard. While he was crossing over
from here into Asia the yard-arm of his ship broke
and he ran great danger of shipwreck, so that, together
with his bodyguard, he had to climb down into a
lifeboat. From this he was taken up into a trireme
by the prefect of the guard and so was rescued.

He took wild boars in great numbers and once he
even faced a lion—an occasion on which he prided
himself, writing to his friends and boasting that he had
attained to the prowess of a Hercules.

VI. After this, turning to the war with the Armen-
ians and Parthians, he played the part of a military
leader—a róle in keeping with his natural bent. Then


*In southern Italy. The point of the joke is not evident;
possibly some pun on the meaning of Lucanicus as a variety
of sausage is intended.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


2bus, fecit. inde Alexandriam petiit, in gymnasium
populum convocavit eumque obiurgavit; legi etiam

3validos ad militiam praecepit. eos autem quos
legerat occidit exemplo Ptolemaei Euergetis qui
octavus hoc nomine appellatus est. dato praeterea
signo militibus, ut hospites suos occiderent, magnam
caedem Alexandriae fecit.

5 feris etiam bestiis in hostes inmissis. datis ad senatum
quasi post victoriam litteris Parthicus appellatus est ;
nam Germanici nomen patre vivo fuerat consecutus.

6 deinde cum iterum vellet Parthis bellum inferre atque
hibernaret Edessae atque inde Carrhas Luni dei gratia
venisset, die natali suo, octavo idus Apriles, ipsis
Megalensibus, cum ad requisita naturae discessisset,
insidiis a Macrino praefecto praetorii positis, qui


! After spending the winter of 214-215 at Nicomedia in
Bithynia he travelled through Asia Minor to Antioch, where
he remained for some time. From there he went on to
Alexandria; see Dio, Ixxvii. 18-22.

3 More correctly, Ptolemy VII. Physcon Euergetes, who died
in 116 p.c. For the massacre see Polybius quoted by Strabo,
xvii. p. 797 f.

3 From Alexandria he returned to Antioch, where he spent
the winter of 215-216. In the spring of 216 he marched
across northern Mesopotamia and over the Tigris to Arbela,


ANTONINUS CARACALLA VI. 2-6


he betook himself to Alexandria,! and here he called
the people together into the Gymnasium and heaped
abuse on them ; he gave orders, moreover, that those
who were physically qualified should be enrolled for
military service. But those whom he enrolled he put
to death, following the example of Ptolemy Euergetes,”
the eighth of those who bore the name Ptolemy. In
addition to this he issued an order to his soldiers to
slay their hosts and thus caused great slaughter at
Alexandria.

Next he advanced through the lands of the Cadusii
and the Babylonians? and waged a guerilla-warfare
with the Parthian satraps, in which wild beasts
were even let loose against the enemy. He then
sent a letter to the senate as though he had won
a real victory * and thereupon was given the name
Parthicus^; the name Germanicus he had assumed
during his father's lifetime. After this he wintered
at Edessa? with the intention of renewing the war
against the Parthians. During this time, on the
eighth day before the Ides of April, the feast of the 6 Apr., 217.
Megalensia ? and his own birthday, while on a journey


but apparently, in spite of the statement of the biographer,
he did not actually meet the Parthians in battle, for they fled
before his advance; see Dio, lxxviii. 1, 1-2.

* Coins were issued with the legend Vic(toria) Part(hica) ;
see Cohen,? iv. pp. 210 f., nos. 647-656. |

5This cognomen had been bestowed on him in 199 on the
occasion of his father's victory over the Parthians.

$ But see note to c. v. 8.

7 Now Urfa, in northern Mesopotamia; here he spent the
winter of 216-217.

8The feast of the Great Mother (h MeydAn Myrfp), cele-
brated at Rome on 4-10 April. According to Dio, lxxviii. 6, 5,
his birthday was the 4th April.


VOL, H. c


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


! Triccianusque Henzen; Recianusque P, Peter.


! Famous as the scene of the defeat of Crassus by the
Parthians in 53 B.c.

?4.e. the Semitic male moon-deity Siu, who was worshipped
at Carrhae and is depicted on the coins of the city. The name
Lunus seems to have been coined for the purpose of indicating
the male sex of this deity. lt has been incorrectly used by
modern writers to designate the Phrygian moon-god Mén
(M4y), who was worshipped throughout Asia Minor, but in
reality there is no evidence that this god was ever called
Lunus; see Roscher, Lexicon d. Griech. u. Rim. Mythologie,
it. 2689, note. In the pseudo-learned discussion in c. vii. 3-5
the cult of Sin seems hopelessly confused with that of ZeAfjvn,
and according to Herodian, iv. 13, 3, Caracalla’s intended
visit was to the temple of Selene.

3 Nemesianus and Apollinaris were tribunes in the praetor-
ian guard.

4 Aelius Decius Triccianus, prefect of the Second Legion
under Caracalla and Macrinus, afterwards appointed by
Macrinus governor of Pannonia Inferior; see Dio, lxxviii.
18; Ixxix. 4.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA VI. 7—VII. 3


to Carrhae! to do honour to the god Lunus,; he
stepped aside to satisfy the needs of nature and was
thereupon assassinated by the treachery of Macrinus
the prefect of the guard, who after his death seized
the imperial power. The accomplices in the murder
were Nemesianus,? his brother Apollinaris, and
Triccianus,* who was serving as prefect of the Second
Legion, the Parthian,’ and commanded the irregular
cavalry. Marcius Agrippa, too, the commander of
the fleet, was privy to it, as well as many members of
his staff acting on the instigation of Martialis.’

VII. He was slain in the course of a journey -
between Carrhae and Edessa,’ when he had dis-
mounted for the purpose of emptying his bladder and
was standing in the midst of his body-guard, who were
accomplices in the murder. For his equerry, while
helping him to mount, thrust a dagger into his side,
and thereupon all shouted out that it had been done
by Martialis.

Now since we have made mention of the god Lunus,
it should be known that. all the most learned men
have handed down the tradition, and it is at this day


5 See note to c. ii. 7.

6A slave by birth, he became an advocatus fisci under
Severus and was promoted by Caracalla to the posts of a
cognitionibus and ab epistulis and, later, raised to the sena-
torial order; Macrinus made him governor, first of Pannonia,
then of Dacia; see Dio, lxxviii. 18. The fleet which he
commanded at this time was probably the one used to
transport the troops to Asia Minor.

7 Julius Martialis, the actual murderer. He was a former
soldier, now serving as an evocatus, and bore a grudge against
Caracalla because he had refused to make him a centurion;
see Dio, Ixxviii. 5, 3.

8 On this portion of the vtéa see Intro. to Vol. i, p. xxiii.


c2


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


hunc quoque a Carrhenis praecipue haberi, ut qui
Lunam femineo nomine ac sexu putaverit nuncupan-

4dam is addictus mulieribus semper inserviat; qui
vero marem deum esse crediderit, is dominetur uxori

5neque ullas muliebres patiatur insidias. unde,
quamvis Graeci vel Aegyptii eo genere quo feminam
hominem etiam Lunam deum dicant, mystice tamen
Lunum dicunt.!

VIII. Scio de Papiniani nece multos ita in litteras
rettulisse, ut caedis non adsciverint causam, aliis alia
referentibus; sed ego malui varietatem opinionum

$secundam uxorem, memoriae traditur; et huic prae-
cipue utrumque filium a Severo commendatum atque
ob hoc concordiae fratrum Antoninorum favisse? ;


! Lunum Hirschfeld ; deum P, Peter. ?ewmque ..
successisse om. in P!; ins. in P corr. ; placed after commend-
atum in Peter’s editions, after Seuero by Peter, on evidence of
P, in Jahresb. cxxx. (1906), p. 35; del. as interpolation by
Mommsen and Hohl. 3 fauisse Salm.; fuisse P.


! Cf. c. iv. 1. ? Julia Domna.

3 Q. Cervidius Scaevola; see Marc., xi. 10 and note.

*See note to Hadr., xx. 6. The statement that Severus
held this office is also made in Get., ii. 4; Eutropius, viii. 18 ;
Victor, Caesares, xx. 30, but, inasmuch as there is no mention


‘20


ANTONINUS CARACALLA VII. 4—VIII. 5


so held, particularly by the people of Carrhae, that
whoever believes that this deity should be called
Luna, with the name and sex of a woman, is subject
to women and always their slave; whereas he who
believes that the god is a male dominates his wife and
is not caught by any woman's wiles. Hence the
Greeks and, for that matter, the Egyptians, though
they speak of Luna as a “god " in the same way as
they include woman in * Man," nevertheless in their
mystic rites use the masculine * Lunus."

VIII. Many, I know, have told the story of Papin-
ian's death,! but in such a way as to show that they did
not know its cause, and each has given a different
version. I, however, have preferred to record a variety
of opinions rather than to remain silent about the
murder of so great a man. It is generally reported
that Papinian was a close friend of the Emperor
Severus— related to him, some say, through his second
wife,?—and that he had given instruction along with
Severus under Scaevola's? direction and later suc-
ceeded Severus as pleader for the privy-purse.* It is
further reported that Severus had particularly en-
trusted him with the care of his two sons, and for this
reason he had always tried to reconcile the brothers
Antoninus, and had even pleaded with Bassianus, when
he accused his brother of treachery, not to put Geta
to death ; and for this reason he, together with Geta's
supporters, was killed by the soldiers, not only with the
consent but even with the encouragement of Antoninus.
Many, again, relate that Bassianus, after killing his
brother, commanded Papinian to explain away his crime


of it in the vita of Severus, it is usually regarded as suspicious;
see Prosop. Imp. Rom., iii. p. 218.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


1 ¿llud Salm., Peter; aliud P., 2 dicens eum
Petschenig, Peter?; dicentem P. 3 Antoninum ins. by
Erasmus; om. in P.


e a ———— —


l c, vi. 6.

? See Macr., ii. 5; v. 1, and notes.

3 This is an erroneous statement based on the belief that he
was the son of Severus’ first wife Pacciana Marciana (see note
toc. x. 1). He was actually twenty-nine years old at the time
of his death ; see Dio, lxxviii. 6, 5.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA VIII. 6—IX. 2.


for him in the senate and before the people ; to which
Papinian replied that it was not so easy to defend
fratricide as to commit it. There is also the story
that Papinian refused to compose a speech in which,
to improve the murderer's case, the brother was to
be attacked; and that in his refusal he had de-
clared that to accuse an innocent man who had been -
murdered was a second act of murder. All of which
does not accord with facts; for the prefect of the
guard may not compose speeches, and, besides, it is
well established that Papinian was killed for being one
of Geta’s supporters. It is further related that
Papinian, when, seized by the soldiers, he was being
haled to the Palace to be put to death, foretold the
future, saying that whoever should succeed to his
position would be an utter fool did he not take
vengeance for this brutal attack on the prefecture.
And this actually came to pass; for, as we have
previously related,! Macrinus murdered Antoninus ;
then, after he had been acclaimed emperor in the
camp, together with his son, he gave the latter, who
was called Diadumenianus, the name Antoninus,? for
the reason that an Antoninus w.s earnestly desired by
the praetorian guard.

IX. Bassianus lived for forty-three years * and ruled
for six. He was borne to the grave with a public
funeral. He left a son, who afterward received, like
his father, the name Antoninus—Marcus Antoninus
Elagabalus‘; for such a hold had the name of the
Antonines that it could not be removed from the
thoughts of the people, because it had taken root in
the hearts of all, even as had the name of Augustus.


* See note to Heliog., i. 1.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA

4 Opera Romae reliquit thermas nominis sui eximias,
quarum cellam soliarem architecti negant posse ulla

6reliquit et porticum patris nomine, quae gesta illius


1The famous Thermae Antoninianae or Baths of Cara-
calla, the impressive ruins of which are on the Via Appia just
within the modern Porta San Sebastiano. It was surrounded
by a portico built by Elagabalus and Alexander; see Heliog.,
xvii. 8-9; Alex., xxv. 6.

2 By this term, the meaning of which is uncertain, the
biographer refers to the frigidarium, or great entrance-hall,
which contains a large swimming-pool. The vaulting of this
hall was supported by a sort of grating made of iron bars
riveted together, great quantities of which were found in the
ruins ; seeJ. H. Middleton, Remains of Ancient Rome, ii. p. 163,

3See Sev., xxi. 12 and note.

3 See note to c. i. 1.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA IX. 3-11]


His mode of life was evil and he was more brutal
even than his cruel father. He was gluttonous in his
use of food and addicted to wine, hated by his house-
hold and detested in every camp save that of the
praetorian guard ; and between him and his brother
there was no resemblance whatever.

Among the publie works which he left at Rome
was the notable Bath named after himself! the cella
solaris? of which, so the architects declare, cannot be
reproduced in the way in which it was built by him.
For it is said that the whole vaulting rested on
gratings of bronze or copper, placed underneath it,
but such is its size, that those who are versed in
mechanics declare that it could not have been built
in this way. And he left a portico, too, named after
his father? and intended to contain a record of his
achievements, both his triumphs and his wars. He
himself assumed the name Caracallus, taken from the
garment reaching down to the heels,* which he gave
to the populace and which before his time had not
been in vogue. Hence at this present day, too, the
hooded cloaks of this kind, affected especially by the
Roman plebs, are called Antonine. He also con-
structed a new street ? at the side of his bath (that is
to say, the Antonine Bath), one more beautiful than
which it were hard to find among all the streets of
Rome. He brought the cult of Isis to Rome and
built magnificent temples to this goddess everywhere,
celebrating her rites with even greater reverence than
they had ever been celebrated before. In all this,
however, it is a source of wonder to me how it can be


5 Probably the Vicus Sulpicius, & street running across the
Via Appia and forming an approach to the south side of the
Thermae Antonimanae ; see Heliog., xvii. 8.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


1 Germani P.


1 See Com., ix. 4 and 6; Pesce. Nig., vi. 9.

24,e, the Sepulcrum Hadriani ; see Sev., xix. 9 and note.

3The fabrication of an incestuous relationship between
Caracalla and Julia Domna, and the equally false statement
that Julia was the Emperor’s stepmother, appear together in
a definite historical tradition ; see notes to Sev., xviii. 8 and
xx. 2.

3 See note to c. v. 6.

5 See note to c. vi. 5.

$ The cognomen Arabicus is not found on coins or in official
inscriptions. It does appear, however, in a few provincial


ANTONINUS CARACALLA IX. 12—X. 6


said that it was he who first brought the rites of Isis to
Rome, for Antoninus Commodus celebrated them too,
and he even carried about the statue of Anubis and
made all the ritualistic pauses.! Perhaps, however,
Bassianus merely added to the renown of the goddess
and was not actually the first to bring her to Rome.

His body was laid in the tomb of the Antonines,?
in order that the resting-place which had given him
his name might also receive his remains.

X. It is of interest to know the way in which they
say he married his stepmother Julia? She was a very
beautiful woman, and once when she displayed a
considerable part of her person, as it were in careless-
ness, Antoninus said, “1 should like to, if I might,"
whereupon, they relate, she replied, “If you wish,
you may ; are you not aware that you are the emperor
and that you make the laws and do not receive
them?" By these words his violent passion was
strengthened for the perpetration of a crime, and he
contracted a marriage, which, were he in truth aware
that he made the laws, it were his sole duty to forbid.
For he took to wife his mother (by no other name
should she be called), and to fratricide he added
incest, for he joined to himself in marriage the woman
whose son he had recently slain.

It is not out of place to include a certain gibe that
was uttered at his expense. For when he assumed
the surnames Germanicus,* Parthicus, Arabicus, and
Alamannicus" (for he conquered the Alamanni too),


MESA dg mostly of the years 213-214. It was, therefore,
probably not borne officially, or, if so, only for & short time;
see Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl., ii. 2437.

"There is no evidence that he ever bore the cognomen
Alamannicus. The following anecdote is told also in Get.,
vi. 6.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


annorum gentem devicerat) Helvius Pertinax, filius
Pertinacis, dicitur ioco dixisse, ** Adde, si placet, etiam
Geticus Maximus," quod Getam occiderat fratrem, et
Gothi Getae dicerentur, quos ille, dum ad orientem
transiit, tumultuariis proeliis devicerat.
XI. Occidendi Getae multa prodigia exstiterunt, ut
2in vita eius exponemus. nam quamvis prior ille e vita
excesserit, nos tamen ordinem secuti sumus, ut qui
et prior natus est et qui prior imperare coeperat,
prior scriberetur.


1 pugnassent P. 2 grauis P, Peter.


——


1 Qet., iii. 2-9; iv. 5.

? See Sev., xviii. 9-11.

* His deification at the request of Macrinus is also attested
by Dio, Ixxviii. 9, 2, On coins and inscriptions of the period
of Elagabalus and Alexander he is designated as Divus Magnus
Antoninus.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA XI. 1-5


Helvius Pertinax, the son of Pertinax, said to him in
jest, so it is related, “Add to the others, please,
that of Geticus Maximus also" ; for he had slain his
brother Geta, and Getae is a name for the Goths,
whom he conquered, while on his way to the East,
in a series of skirmishes.

XI. Many omens predicting Geta's murder oc-
curred, as we shall relate in his biography.! For
although Geta was the first to depart from this life,
we shall none the less follow our usual plan, that
the first to be born and the first to begin his rule
shall be the first to be described.

On that occasion, moreover, when the soldiers
hailed him as Augustus though his father was still
alive,? because it seemed to them that Severus, now
afflicted with a disease in his feet, could no longer rule
the Empire, Severus, it is said, when the plot of the
soldiers and tribunes was crushed, had thought of
putting him to death ; this, however, was opposed by
the prefects, who were men of great influence. Some,
on the other hand, say that the prefects wished
to have him killed, but Severus refused, for fear that
the severity of the act might be misrepresented as a
piece of mere cruelty, and that, whereas it was in
reality the soldiers who were guilty, the young man
might pay the penalty for an act of rash folly with
the stigma of a punishment so severe—namely, of
seeming to have been put to death by his father.

Nevertheless, this emperor, the most cruel of men,
and, to include all in a single phrase, a fratricide and
committer of incest, the foe of his father, mother,
and brother, was raised to the rank of the gods? by
Macrinus, his slayer, through fear of the soldiers,
especially the praetorians. He has a temple, he has a


ANTONINUS CARACALLA


6 habet templum, habet Salios, habet sodales Antonin-
ianos, qui Faustinae templum et divale nomen eripuit,


————————Ó—————————————— —


1 This statement is not strictly true; see note to Marc., xv.
4; certainly no Salii were ever created in his honour.


ANTONINUS CARACALLA XI. 6-7


board of Salii, he has an Antonine brotherhood,! he who
himselftook from Faustina not only her temple but also
her name as a goddess—that temple, at least, which
her husband had built her in the foot-hills of the
Taurus,? and in which this man's son Elagabalus
Antoninus afterwards made a shrine, either for him-
self or for the Syrian Jupiter (the matter is uncertain)
or for the Sun.?


? See Marc., xxvi. 4.
3 See Marc., xxvi. 9, and Heliog., i. 5 f.


ANTONINUS GETA
AELII SPARTIANI

4cessurum, quare statim ad milites processit et
Bassianum, filium maiorem natu, Marcum Aurelium


1guod fecisset P. 2 uel Jordan, Peter! ; et P.


! There is no real evidence for the statement that this name
was given to him; see note to Sev., x. 5. In inscriptions he is
regularly called P. Septimius Geta Nobilissimus Caesar.

2 This is also related in Sev., x. 4.


ANTONINUS GETA


BY
AELIUS SPARTIANUS


I. I am well aware, Constantine Augustus, that
many besides Your Clemency may raise the question
why I should also write the life of Geta Antoninus.
With regard to this man, before I tell of his life, or
rather of his death, I will set forth the reason why his
father Severus gave to him too the name Antoninus.!
For there is not much to relate in the life of a man
who was removed from human affairs before he could
take the imperial power conjointly with his brother.

Once when Septimius Severus asked about the
future and prayed that it might be revealed to him
who should be his successor when he died, he learned
from a dream that an Antoninus would succeed him.
Whereupon he went at once to the army and gave
Bassianus, the elder of his sons, the name Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus.? After this, when it was brought
to his mind either by fatherly reflection, or, as some
relate, by Julia his wife, who was skilled in dreams,
that by this action he himself had cut off his younger
son from any chance of reigning, he ordered that
Geta, his younger son, should also receive the name
Antoninus. And so he always gave him this name in

VOL II. D


ANTONINUS GETA


let quidem Editor; atque P ; idque Salm., Peter.
? quem fratrem suum semper Jordan; uel f. s. sem P.


1 See Sev., viii. 10 and note.

? See Sev., i. 2 and note.

3 The meaning of septenarius, as used here, is unknown.

* Of. Sev., xix. 8.

5In his inscriptions, however, Severus called himself Divi
Marci Antonini filius ; see note to Sev., x. 6.


ANTONINUS GETA I. 6—II. 5


letters to members of his household, writing, when-
ever he chanced to be absent from home, ‘Give
greetings to the Antonines, my sons and successors ”.
But all his fatherly care was of no avail, for he was
succeeded by that son alone who had first been given
the name Antoninus. So much about the name
Antoninus.

II. Now Geta was named after either his uncle! or
his paternal grandfather? concerning whose life and
habits Marius Maximus has written at sufficient length
in the first section ? of his Life of Severus. He was
given the surname Antoninus, moreover, because
Severus purposed that every emperor from that time
onward should be called Antoninus, just as they were
called Augustus.* This he did out of love for Marcus,
whom he always called his brother,5 and whose studies
in philosophy and training in letters he always sought
to imitate. Some say, however, that it was not so
much in honour of Marcus that Severus gave his son
the name Antoninus, since this was Marcus' name by
adoption only,? as in honour of him who bore the
surname Pius, Hadrian's successor, I mean; and,
furthermore, that Severus gave it because it was this
emperor who raised him from a pettifogger in the
law-courts to the post of pleader for the privy-purse,’
and the way to great advancement had been opened
up to him by the happy augury of an appointment
by Antoninus to the first step in his career, or rather
his first public office; and at the same time because
no prince seemed to him more auspicious for lending


$ See Hadr., xxiv. 1 and note.
7 On this office see note to Hadr., xx. 6. On this statement
that it was held by Severus see note to Carac., viii. 3.


p. 2


ANTONINUS GETA


1 cum om. in P.


1 Pius, Marcus Aurelius, Lucius Verus, and Commodus.

2 Cf. Sev., iii. 9.

3 Flavius Juvenalis, the prefect of the guard, appointed by
Didius Julianus and retained in office by Severus ; see Sev., vi. 5.

* The play on words in divus, vivus cannot be reproduced.
So far from being ceified, Geta underwent damnatio memoriae ;
his statues were overthrown, his name was erased from public
monuments, and coins bearing his effigy. were melted down ;
see Dio, Ixxvii. 12, 6 and inscriptions, e.g., Dessau, Ins. Sel.,
458-460.


ANTONINUS GETA II. 6—III. 4


his name, than the one whose personal name had now
been borne by four of the emperors.!

With regard to this same Geta, Severus, on learning
his horoscope—a study in which, like most Africans,
he was very proficient?—is said to have made the
remark : “ It seems to me strange, my dear Juvenalis,’
that our Geta is destined to be a deified emperor,
for in his horoscope I see nothing imperial" Now
Juvenalis was his prefect of the guard. And Severus
was not mistaken. For when Bassianus had killed
Geta and was in fear of being branded as a tyrant
because of his act of fratricide, he was told that his
crime could be mitigated were he to give his brother
the appellation of the Deified ; he then remarked, it
is said, * Let him be deified provided he is not alive "'.*
Accordingly, he placed him among the deified emperors
and so came back into favour with a good reputation,
fratricide though he was.

III. Geta was born in the consulship of Severus and
Vitellius on the sixth day before the Kalends of June 27 May, 189.
at Mediolanum 5—though some have related other-
wise. He wasthe son of Julia, whom Severus married
because he found out that her horoscope showed that
she should be the wife of a king,9 while he was still
only a subject, though he held even then an excellent
place in the state. Immediately after Geta was born
some one announced that a purple egg had been laid
by a hen in the palace. This egg was then brought in,
and Bassianus his brother, seizing it, dashed it upon
the ground, as a child would do, and broke it ; where-
upon Julia, it is said, exclaimed in jest, “ Accursed
fratricide, you have killed your brother". ' But this,


5 According to Sev., iv. 2, he was born in Rome.
8 Of, Sev., iii. 9.


ANTONINUS GETA


1 idque quod ioco dictum est Editor; idque ioco quod dictum
P; (idque ioco] quod dictum Peter, 2g0 Peter; ut postea
ingens P. 3 amorum tractator Editor ; anarbore tractator
P; tanarbo retractator Peter.


! Especially the partisans of Clodius Albinus; see Sev., xiii.


ANTONINUS GETA III. 5—IV. 3


which was said as a jest, Severus took more seriously
than any of those who were present, though afterwards
all who were there testified to it as uttered by divine
inspiration. ~“ There was also another omen. For on
the very day and at the very hour when Geta was
born, there was born on the farm of a certain plebeian
named Antoninus, a lamb which had purple wool on
its forehead ; thereupon the owner, learning from a
soothsayer that after Severus an Antoninus should
reign, interpreted the prophecy as referring to himself,
but fearing any indication of so great a destiny, he
thrust a knife in the lamb. And this too was a sign
that Geta should be killed by Antoninus, as became
later abundantly clear. "There was, moreover, as was
later shown by the outcome, another important pre-
diction of the crime which indeed came to pass. * For
when Severus was making ready to celebrate the
birthday of the infant Geta, the sacrificial victim was
slain by a boy named Antoninus. At the time no
one looked for a hidden meaning in this or com-
mented upon it, but later its importance was under-
stood.

IV. As ‘a youth, he was handsome, brusque in his
manners though not disrespectful, incontinent in love,
gluttonous, and a lover of food and of wine variously
spiced. There is quoted a famous remark of his
in his boyhood; for when Severus was planning to
kill the men of the opposite factions! and said to
his family, “1 am ridding you of your enemies,”
Bassianus gave his approval, even declaring that
should he be consulted, their children too should be
slain, but Geta, it is said, asked how large was the
number of those to be put to death. When his
father informed him, he asked again, * Have they


ANTONINUS GETA


sponsum esset habere, ait, “Tum plures! ergo in

V. Fuit in litteris adsequendis tenax veterum scripto-
rum, paternarum etiam sententiarum memor, fratri
semper invisus, matri amabilior quam frater, subbalbe

5emitterent, velut: agni balant, porcelli grunniunt,


! go Peter; haberet complures P. ? pater ius. by Peter;
om. in P.


1C. Fulvius Plautianus ; see note to Sev., xiv. 5.
2 See c. ii. 7 and note.
3 See Sev., xvi. 4.


ANTONINUS GETA IV. 4—V. 5


parents, have they kinsmen?" And when answer
was made that they had, he remarked, * Then there
will be more in the state to mourn than to make
merry at our victory." And he would have carried
his point, had not the prefect Plautianus,! or rather
Juvenalis? stood out against him in the hope of
proscriptions, from which they became enriched.
They were also encouraged by the great brutality of
Bassianus. He, in the course of his argument, urged,
half in jest half in earnest, that all those of the
opposite factions be slain together with their children ;
whereupon Geta, it is said, exclaimed, ** You, who
spare no one, are capable even of killing your
brother "—a remark which received no attention
then, but afterwards passed for an omen.

V. In his literary studies he held fast to the
ancient writers. He was ever mindful of his father's
sayings, always regarded by his brother with hatred,
more affectionate than his brother toward their
mother, speaking with a stammer though his voice
was melodious. He was very fond of bright clothing
—so much so, in fact, that his father would laugh at
him. Whatever he received from his parents he
used for his own adornment, and he never gave
presents to any.

After the Parthian war, his father, who was then
at the height of his glory and had named Bassianus
partner in the imperial power, gave Geta the name
of Caesar? and, according to some, of Antoninus
also.

It was a common practice of his to propound
puzzles to the grammarians, asking them to char-
acterize the cries of the different animals, as for
example: the lamb bleats, the pig squeals, the dove


ANTONINUS GETA


lrudiunt Peter; ragiunt P. 2 fuerant P.


1See Carac., iv. 4 and note. 2 Lit., ** wild-boar meat."

3 A variety of duck.

4 Repeated from Carac., ii. 7-8.

5 See Carac., iv. € See Carac., iv. 6 and note.


ANTONINUS GETA V. 6—VI. 4


coos, the hog grunts, the bear growls, the lion roars,
the leopard snarls, the elephant trumpets, the frog
croaks, the horse neighs, the ass brays, the bull
bellows ; and in proof he would cite the ancient
writers. His favourite books were the works of
Serenus Sammonicus,! addressed by him to Antoninus.
He was accustomed, moreover, to have skilful slaves
serve meals, and especially dinners, according to a
single letter of the alphabet, as, for instance, one in
which there were goose, gammon,? and gadwall,? or,
again, pullet, partridge, peacock, pork, poisson, pig's-
thigh, and other kinds of food beginning with this
letter, or pheasant, farina, figs and so forth. For this
reason he was considered a good comrade, even in his
youth.

VI. After the murder of Geta, those soldiers who
had not been bribed received the news of the fratricide
with anger, and all declared they had sworn allegiance
to both sons and ought to maintain it to both.* They
then closed the gates of the Camp and for a long
time the Emperor was not admitted. And not until
he had quieted their anger by bitter words about
Geta and by giving them great sums of money, was
Bassianus able to return to Rome. Next, Papinian
and many others besides, who had either desired
concord or had been partisans of Geta, were killed ° ;
men of both senatorial and equestrian rank were
slain while in the bath, or at table, or in the street,
and Papinian himself was struck down with an axe,
whereupon Bassianus found fault that the business
had not been done with a sword. At last matters
came to the point of a mutiny among the city-
troops 5; Bassianus, however, brought them to order
with no light hand, and their tribune was put to death,


ANTONINUS GETA


1 faustum P,


1 See Carac., ii. 9-11.

? See Carac., iv. 8.

3 This cognomen was never borne by Caracalla, For the pun
on Geticus and Gothicus see Carac,, x. 6.

*The biographer has confused the Sepulchrum Hadriani,
where the Antonines and Severus (and later Caracalla) were
buried (see Sev., xix. 3 and Carac., ix. 12), with the Septizonium
built by Severus on the Palatine Hill, facing the Via Appia
(see Sev., xix. 5).


ANTONINUS GETA VI. 5—VII. 4


as some relate, or, as others, sent into exile. Yet
Bassianus himself was in such fear that he entered the
Senate-house wearing a cuirass under his broad-striped
tunic and thus clad rendered an account of his actions
and of the death of Geta.! It was at this time, too,
it is said, that Helvius Pertinax, the son of Pertinax,
afterwards killed by Bassianus,? remarked to the
praetor Faustinus, who was reading aloud and had
uttered the titles Sarmaticus Maximus ? and Parthicus
Maximus, “ Add to these also Geticus Maximus," that
is to say, Gothicus. This remark sank deep into the
heart of Bassianus, as was afterwards proved by his
murder of Pertinax, and not of Pertinax alone, but,
as we have said before, of many others as well, far
and wide and with utter injustice. He suspected
Helvius, moreover, of aspiring to the imperial office,
merely because he was loved by all and was the son
of Pertinax the Emperor—a combination none too
safe for any man content to remain a commoner.

VII. The funeral of Geta was too splendid, it is
said, for a man supposed to have been killed by his
brother. He was laid in the tomb of his ancestors,
of Severus, that is, on the Via Appia at the right as
you go to the gatet; it was constructed after the
manner of the Septizonium, which Severus during his
life had embellished for himself.

Antoninus also planned to slay Geta's mother, his
own step-mother,? because she mourned for his
brother, and with her the women whom on his
return from the Senate-house he found in tears. He
was, moreover, so cruel that he lavished his favours
particularly on those whom he had destined for death,


5See note to Carac., x. 1.


ANTONINUS GETA


limmota P.


ANTONINUS GETA VII. 5-6


so that his favour was viewed with more fear than his
anger. It seemed, indeed, strange to all that he him-
self wept for the death of Geta whenever he heard his
name mentioned or saw his portrait or his statue.
Such, however, was the caprice, or rather the blood-
thirstiness, of Antoninus Bassianus, that he slew, now
the partisans of Geta, and now his enemies, according
as chance threw them in his way. Asa result, Geta
was the more regretted.


OPILIUS MACRINUS


IULII CAPITOLINI


1 qui ins. by Baehrens and Peter?; om, in P.


! In the manuscripts of the Historia Augusta, Victor, and
Eutropius, the gentile name of Macrinus is regularly spelled
Opilius. On coins and in inscriptions, however, it is invari-
ably given as Opellius, and this is evidently the correct form,


OPELLIUS' MACRINUS


BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. The lives of such emperors, usurpers or Caesars,
as held their throne for no long time lie hidden away
in darkness, because, in the first place, there is nothing
in their private lives worth telling, since they would
have remained totally unknown had they not aspired
to the throne ; and, in the second place, not much can
be said about their sovereignty, because they did not
hold it long. None the less, we shall bring forward
what we have discovered in various historical works—
and they shall be facts that are worthy to be related.
For there is no man who has not done something or
other every day of his life; it is the business of the
biographer, however, to relate only those events that
are worth the knowing. Junius Cordus,? indeed, was
fond of publishing the lives of those emperors whom
he considered the more obscure. He did not, how-
ever, accomplish much ; for he found but little in-
formation and that not worth noting. He openly
declared that he would search out the most trivial
details, as though, in dealing with a Trajan, a Pius, or


2 On the biographer Aelius Junius Cordus see Introduction
, to Vol. i. p. xviii.


VOL. Il. E


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

3mebatur, adulescendi potestatem demit; quamvis
senatus eum imperatorem odio Antonini Bassiani
libenter acceperit, cum in senatu omnibus una vox

5 Et mirum omnibus fortasse videatur, cur Diadume-


1 priuatus cubabat P,


1 See Carac., vi. 6—vii. 2.

? He was procurator rei privatae (see also c. vii. 1). On
this office see note to Com., xx. 1,

3 So also Dio; see Ixxviii. 11, 1. On the other hand, there
seems to be no foundation for the insulting remarks said to
have been made about him after his downfall; see c. iv. 1-6.

4 His official name after his accession was M. Opellius


OPELLIUS MACRINUS I. 5—II. 5


a Marcus, it should be known how often he went
out walking, when he varied his diet, and when he
changed his clothes, whom he advanced in public life
and at what time. By searching out all this sort of
thing and recording it, he filled his books with
gossip, whereas either nothing at all should be said of
petty matters or certainly very little, and then only
when light can thereby be thrown on character. It
is character, of course, that we really want to know,
but only to a certain extent, that from this the rest
may be inferred.

II. Now after the murder of Antoninus Bassianus,!
Opellius Macrinus, who was his prefect of the guard
and had previously been the steward of his private
property ,? laid hold upon the imperial power. Though
of humble origin ? and shameless in spirit as well as in
countenance, and though hated by all, both civilians
and soldiers, he nevertheless proclaimed himself now
Severus and now Antoninus. Then he set out at.
once for the Parthian war? and thus gave no oppor-
tunity either for the soldiers to form an opinion of him,
or for the gossip by which he was beset to gain its
full strength. The senators, however, out of hatred:
for Antoninus Bassianus, received him as emperor
gladly, and in all the senate there was but the one
cry : * Anyone rather than the fratricide, anyone rather
than the incestuous, anyone rather than the filthy,
anyone rather than the slayer of the senate and
people ! " ^

It may perhaps seem to all a matter for wonder


Severus Macrinus Augustus. He never bore the name An-
toninus.

5In the summer of 217; see c. viii. 3 and note.

8 The same attitude is shown in Dio, lxxviii. 18.


E 2


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


num filium Macrinus Antoninum ! voluerit nuncupari,


III. cum auctor necis Antoninianae fuisse dicatur. de


1 so Cas. and Peter; Diadumenus filius Macrini Antoninus
P. ? dea Peter? ; de P. 3 nomen Augusti P; Augusti
del. by Jordan and Peter. 4qut aut Egnatius; aut qui P:
ut qui Peter. ‘et plurimi fuerunt P.


1 He is called Diadumenus in the Historia Augusta and by
Eutropius and Victor. On coins and in inscriptions, however,
and in Dio and Herodian his name is invariably given as
Diadumenianus, and this is evidently the correct form.
After his father's &ccession to power he was officially called
M. Opellius Antoninus Diadumenianus Caesar.


-52


OPELLIUS MACRINUS III. 1-7


that Macrinus wished his son Diadumenianus ! to re-
ceive the name Antoninus, when he himself, it was
reported, was responsible for the murder of an An-
toninus. III. Concerning this matter I will relate what
has been recorded in books of history. The priestess
of Caelestis ? at Carthage was wont, when inspired by
the goddess, to predict the truth. Now once, in the
reign of Antoninus Pius, she was foretelling the future
to the proconsul, who, according to custom, was con-
sulting about the public welfare as well as his own
hopes of power, and when she came to the emperors
she bade him in a loud voice count the number of
times she said Antoninus. Then, to the amazement
of all, she uttered the name Antoninus eight times.
All interpreted this to mean that Antoninus Pius
would reign for eight years, but he exceeded this
number and those who had faith in the priestess,
either then or later, felt sure that her words had some
different meaning. And in fact, if all who bore the
name Antoninus be counted, this will be found to be
their number. For Pius first, Marcus second, Verus
third, Commodus fourth, Caracalla fifth, Geta sixth,
Diadumenianus seventh, Elagabalus eighth—all bore
the name Antoninus ; while the two Gordians, on the
other hand, must not be placed among the Antonini,
for they either had only their praenomen or were
called Antonii, not Antonini? Hence it came about
that Severus called himself Antoninus, as most writers
relate, and Pertinax too and Julianus, and likewise
Macrinus * ; and the Antonines themselves, who were
the true successors of Antoninus, used this name


? See Pert., iv, 2 and note.

3 See Gord., iv. 7 and note.

* None of these four ever &ssumed the name Antoninus.


e


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


l imperare Peter; imperatorem P. 2ut om. in P,
. . , -
3nobilem P. 5 4n P.
] See C. ix-x.


? On these statements see note to c. ii. 1.

3 Otherwise unknown and perhaps wholly fictitious.

?* Worn by members of the equestrian order as a sign of
their rank.

5 This is, of course, not Lucius Verus, for Macrinus was not
born until 164; either Commodus or Severus must be meant.
Such an error in the name of the emperor is a fair indication
of the value of the whole passage.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS III. 8—IV. 5


rather than their own personal names. Thus some
have related it. Others, however, assert that
Macrinus gave the name Antoninus to his son
Diadumenianus merely for the purpose of removing
the soldiers suspicion that he himself had slain
Antoninus. Others, again, declare that so great was
the love for this name that the people and soldiers
would not deem a man worthy of the imperial power
did they not hear him called by the name Antoninus.

IV. Now with regard to Macrinus himself, many of
the senators, when the news had been brought that
Varius Elagabalus was emperor! and when the
senate had hailed Alexander as Caesar, related such
things as to make it clear that he was ignoble, low,
and base. In fact, such statements? as these were
made by Aurelius Victor, surnamed Pinius?: that
Macrinus under the reign of Commodus was a freed-
man and a public prostitute, engaged in servile tasks
about the imperial palace ; that his honour could be
purchased and his manner of life was base; that
Severus had even dismissed him from his wretched
duties and banished him to Africa, where, in order to
conceal the disgrace of his condemnation, he devoted
himself to reading, pleaded minor cases, engaged
in declamation, and finally administered the law;
further, that through the support of his fellow-freed-
man Festus, he was presented with the golden ring,‘
and under Verus Antoninus was made pleader for
the privy-purse.? But not only are these statements
reported as doubtful, but others are made by various
authors, which also we will not fail to relate. For
many have said that he fought in a gladiatorial


$ See note to Hadr., xx. 6.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


eum exhibuisse dixerunt et accepta rudi ad Africam
6isse ; venatorem primo, post etiam tabellionem fuisse,
deinceps advocatum fuisse fisci. ex quo officio ad
7 amplissima quaeque pervenit. dein cum esset prae-
fectus praetorii collega ablegato, Antoninum Cara-
callum imperatorem suum interemit tanta factione,!
8ut ab eo non videretur occisus. nain stratore eius
redempto et spe ingenti proposita, id egit ut quasi
militaribus insidiis, quod vel ob parricidium vel in-
cestum ? displiceret, interemptus diceretur.
V. Statim denique arripuit imperium filio Diadu-
meno in participatum adscito, quem continuo, ut
2 diximus, Antoninum appellari a militibus iussit. dein
corpus Antonini Romam remisit, sepulchris maiorum
3 inferendum. mandavit collegae dudum suo praefecto
praetorio, ut munus suum curaret ac praecipue Anto-
ninum honorabiliter sepeliret ducto funere regio, quod
sciebat ob vestimenta populo congiaria data multum
4 Antoninum a plebe dilectum. adcedebat etiam illud,
quod militarem motum timebat, ne eo interveniente
suum impediretur imperium, quod raptum ierat, sed
quasi invitus acceperat; ut sunt homines, qui ad ea


1 factione P, Petschenig ; fictione Peter. ? uel ne inces-
tum P.


! Given to a gladiator when honourably discharged.

? See Carac., vi. 6—vii. 2.

3 See Carac., x. 1 and note. 5 See Carac., ix. 12.

5Oclatinius Adventus. Macrinus made him a member of
the senate, appointed him prefect of the city for a short time,
and finally had him elected consul with himself for 218; see
Dio, Ixxviii. 14. 2-4. The statement of § 5 that Adventus
would not have been unwilling to t&ke the imperial power is
also made by Dio; Herodian, on the other hand, records
(iv. 14, 1) that the soldiers offered it to him but he refused it.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS IV. 6—V. 4


combat, received the honorary staff,! and then went
to Africa; that he was first of all a huntsman in the
arena, then a notary, and after that a pleader for the
privy-purse—an office from which he was advanced
to the very highest honours. Then, when prefect of
the guard, after his colleague was banished, he slew
his emperor, Antoninus Caracalla,? employing such
treachery that it did not appear that the Emperor
had been slain by him. For by bribing the imperial
equerry and holding out great hopes, he caused the
report to spread that the Emperor was killed by a
conspiracy of the soldiers, because he had incurred
their displeasure through his fratricide or his incest.?

V. Then he seized the imperial power at once and
advanced his son Diadumenianus to a share in it,
immediately ordering the soldiers, as we have said
before, to give him the name Antoninus. Next, he
sent back Antoninus' body to Rome to be laid in the
tomb of his forefathers.4 He charged the prefect of
the guard,* formerly his colleague, to perform the
duties of his office, and particularly to bury Antoninus
with all honour, providing a funeral train worthy of
a monarch; for he knew that Antoninus had been
greatly beloved by the people because of the
garments which he had presented as gifts to the
plebs.6 There was also the further reason, that he
dreaded a soldiers’ uprising, fearing that if this oc-
curred he might be barred from the power, which he
had purposed to seize but had accepted with a show
of reluctance. Such, indeed, is the way of men, for
they say that they are forced to accept what they
get for themselves, even through crime. Macrinus


€ See Carac., ix. 7-8.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

7tur. unde iocus exstitit, * Sic Macrinus est Severus
quomodo Diadumenus Antoninus." statim tamen ad
delendum militum motum stipendium et legionariis
et praetorianis dedit solito uberius, utpote qui extenu-
8are cuperet imperatoris occisi crimen.  profuitque
pecunia, ut solet, cui innocentia prodesse non poterat.

- retentus est enim aliquanto tempore in imperio homo
vitiorum omnium.

9 Ad senatum dein litteras misit de morte Antonini,
divum illum appellans excusansque se et iurans quod
de caede illius nescierit. ita sceleri suo more hominum
perditorum iunxit periurium, a quo incipere decuit
hominem improbum.!


la quo... improbum del. by Peter. ? So Cas. and
Jordan; cum ad senatum scriberet, Interest Peter.


! See c. ii. 1 and note.

2 See Dio, lxxviii. 19. 2. The language of Dio is obscure,
but he seems to say that when the name Antoninus was be-
stowed on Diadumenianus, Macrinus gave each soldier a
second donative of 3000 sesterces, indicating that he had
presented the same sum to them on his accession.  Entirely
different figures are given in the fictitious speech in Diad.,
ii l.- *


OPELLIUS MACRINUS V. 5—VI. 1


moreover, feared also his colleague, lest he too might
desire to rule; for all hoped that he would, and,
had he received the support of a single company
of soldiers, he himself would not have been un-
willing. All, indeed, would most gladly have had
him because of their hatred for Macrinus on account
of his evil life or his humble origin, for all former
emperors had been noble in birth. Furthermore, he
emblazoned himself with the name of Severus,!
although not connected with him by any tie of kin.
Hence arose the jest, ** Macrinus is as much a Severus
as Diadumenianus is an Antoninus". Nevertheless,
in order to prevent an uprising among the soldiers,
he at once presented a donative? to both the legion-
aries and the praetorians, rewarding them more
liberally than was customary, and as a man would
who sought to mitigate the crime of having slain
the emperor. Thus did money, as often happens,
avail a man whom innocence could not have availed.
For Macrinus kept himself in power for some time,
though addicted to every kind of evil.?

He then sent the senate a letter relating the
death of Antoninus, in which he gave him the title
of the Deified, at the same time clearing himself of
guilt and swearing that he knew nothing of the
murder. Thus to his crime (as is the manner of evil
men) he added perjury—an act with which it well
became a scoundrel to begin.

VI. It is of interest to know what manner of
oration that was in which he cleared himself when
writing to the senate, for thus his shamelessness may
be understood, and the sacrilege with which this evil


3 There seems to be no ground for this statement.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


1eohonestetur Jordon, Petschenig; quo honestetur P;
cohonestaretur Peter.


1 This speech is, of course, wholly fictitious ; see Intro. to Vol.
i. p. xix f. An altogether different version, probably equally
fictitious, is given in Herodian, v. 1.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS VI. 2-7


emperor began his reign. Passages from the speech
of the Emperors Macrinus and Diadumenianus ! :
“We could have wished, O Conscript Fathers, to be-
hold Your Clemency, with our beloved Antoninus
safe and riding back in triumph. For then indeed
would the state be happy and all of us be joyous,
were we under the rule of an emperor whom the
gods had given us in the place of the Antonines. But
inasmuch as an uprising of the soldiers has prevented
this from coming to pass, we would inform you, in
the first place, of what the army has done concerning
ourselves, and, in the second, we decree for him to
whom we swore our allegiance the honours of a god,
as is indeed our fi?st duty. For the army has deemed
no one a more worthy avenger of the murder of
Bassianus than his own prefect, whom he himself
would certainly have charged with the punishing of
the conspiracy, could it have been in his power to
detect it while yet alive." And farther on: “They
have offered me the imperial power, O Conscript
Fathers, and for the time being I have accepted its
guardianship, but I will retain its governance only if
you also desire what has been the desire of the
soldiers, to whom I have already ordered a donative
to be given as well as all other things, according to
the custom of emperors”. Likewise, farther on:
* To my son Diadumenianus, who is known to you,
the soldiers have given both the imperial power and
the name—for they have called him Antoninus—that
he might be honoured, first with this name, but also
with the office of monarch. And this act we beseech
you, O Conscript Fathers, to approve with all good
and prospering auspices, in order that you may still
have with you the name of the Antonines, which


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


8maxime diligitis." item infra: * Antonino autem
divinos honores et miles decrevit, et nos decernimus
et vos, patres conscripti, ut decernatis, cum possimus
imperatorio iure praecipere, tamen rogamus, dicantes
ei! duas statuas equestres, pedestres? duas habitu
militari, sedentes civili habitu duas, item Divo Severo

9duas triumphales. quae omnia, patres conscripti, vos
impleri iubebitis nobis religiose pro prioribus ambien-
tibus.”

VII. Lectis igitur in senatu litteris contra opinionem
omnium et mortem Antonini senatus gratanter accepit
et Opilium Macrinum libertatem publicam curaturum
sperans primum in patricios allegit, novum hominem

3 nomine decreto. diu tamen lectis litteris, cum omnino


l ei Golisch, Peter? ; et P, Peter !. 2 pedes P.


14,e, Caracalla ; see Carac., xi. 5 and note.

2 See note to c. ii. 4.

3 See c, ii. 1 and note.

4 See note to Com., xx. 1.

5'This statement is taken directly from Livy, xxii. 57, 8. The
pontifices minores were originally servants of the pontifices.
In the course of time they formed & corporation of their own
&nd gradually acquired more and more prestige, until, in the
imperial period, their office was one of the most respected of
the priesthoods open to the equestrian order; see G. Wissowa,
Religion u. Kultus d. Römer, p. 447.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS VI. 8—VII. 4


you so greatly love." Likewise, farther on: * For
Antoninus,! moreover, both the soldiers have decreed
divine honours and we decree them, and we
request you—though by our power as emperor we
might command you—to decree them also, and we
ourselves shall dedicate to him statues, two on horse-
back, two on foot clad in the garb of a soldier, and
two seated clad in civil garb, and likewise to the
Deified Severus two, clad in the robes of a trium-
phant general. These measures, O Conscript Fathers,
you will order to be carried out in accordance with
our dutiful solicitation in behalf of our predecessors.”

VII. So, when this letter had been read to the
senate, contrary to the general expectation the senate
not only received with pleasure the news of Antoninus'
death ? but expressed the hope that Opellius Macrinus
would be guardian of the public liberty, first of all
enrolling him among the patricians, though he was
a man without ancestry ? and had been only a short
time before the steward of the emperor's private
property.! This man, though he had been merely
one of the pontifical clerks (whom they now call the
Minor Pontifices 5), the senate made Pontifex Maxi-
mus,? decreeing him also the surname Pius.” Never-
theless, for a long time after the letter was read there
was silence, for no one at all believed the news of
Antoninus' death. But when it was certain that he
was slain, the senate reviled him as a tyrant, and
forthwith offered Macrinus both the proconsular
command and the tribunician power.?


€ This office was held by every emperor.

1 He frequently bears this name in inscriptions. In c. xi.
2, he is said to have refused it.

8 See note to Pius, iv. 7.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


5 Filium sane suum, cum ipse Felicis nomen recepisset,
ut suspicionem occisi a se Antonini removeret, Anto-
eninum vocavit, Diadumenum antea dictum. quod
quidem nomen etiam Varius Heliogabalus, qui se
Bassiani filium diceret, homo sordidissimus et ex
7 meretrice conceptus, idem postea accepit. denique
versus exstant cuiusdam poetae, quibus ostenditur
Antonini nomen coepisse a Pio et paulatim per Anto-
ninos usque ad sordes ultimas pervenisse, si quidem
solus Marcus nomen illud sanctum vitae genere auxisse
videatur, Verus autem degenerasse, Commodus vero
8 etiam polluisse sacrati nominis reverentiam. iam quid
de Caracallo Antonino, quidve de hoc potest dici?
postremo etiam quid de Heliogabalo, qui Antoninorum
ultimus in summa impuritate vixisse memoratur ?
VIII. Appellatus igiturimperator, imperio suscepto !
contra Parthos profectus est magno apparatu, studens
sordes generis et prioris vitae infamiam victoriae magni-
2tudine abolere. sed conflictu habito contra Parthos
defectu legionum, quae ad Varium Heliogabalum con-
fugerant, interemptus est. sed anno amplius imperavit.
3 Sane cum esset inferior in eo bello quod Antoninus
gesserat, Artabane graviter necem suorum civium
vindicante, primo Macrinus repugnavit; postea vero
missis legatis petiit pacem, quam libenti animo inter-
4fecto Antonino Parthus concessit. inde cum se


1<imperio> suscepto Editor; susceptos P; susceptos
Peter.


1So also c. xi. 2. He frequently bears this name in in-
scriptions.

? Both it and Pius are among the cognomina regularly
borne by Elagabalus.

3 See Heliog., ii. 1-2.


 OPELLIUS MACRINUS VII, 5— VIII 4


Now to his son, previously called Diadumenianus,
he gave the name Antoninus (after he had himself
assumed the appellation Felix!) in order to avert the
suspicion of having slain Antoninus. This same
name was aftewards taken by Varius Elagabalus also,?
who claimed to be the son of Bassianus, a most filthy
creature and the son of a harlot.’ Indeed, there are
still in existence some verses written by a certain
poet, which relate how the name of the Antonines,
which began with Pius, gradually sank from one
Antonine to another to the lowest degradation ; for
Marcus alone by his manner of life exalted that holy
name, while Verus lowered, and Commodus even
profaned the reverence due to the consecrated name.
And what can we say of Caracalla Antoninus, and
what of this youth Diadumenianus? And finally,
what of Elagabalus, the last of the Antonines, who is
said to have lived in the lowest depths of foulness ?

VIII. And so, having been acclaimed emperor,
Macrinus assumed the imperial power and set out
against the Parthians with a great array,* eager to
blot out the lowliness of his family and the infamy of
his early life by a magnificent victory. But after
fighting a battle with the Parthians he was killed in
a revolt of the legions, which had deserted to Varius
Elagabalus. He reigned, however, for more than a

ear.

Though defeated in the war which Antoninus had
waged—for Artabanus exacted a cruel revenge for
the death of his subjects— Macrinus, nevertheless,
at first fought stoutly. But later he sent out envoys
and sued for peace, which, now that Antoninus was


4 See c. ii. 2 and viii. 3 and note. 5 Sce c. ix.


VOL. IL | F


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

IX. Fuitaliqua mulier Maesa sive Varia ex Emesena
urbe, soror Iuliae uxoris Severi Pertinacis Afri, quae
post mortem Antonini Bassiani ex aulica domo fuerat
expulsa per Macrini superbiam ; cui quidem omnia

2concessit Macrinus, quae diu illa collegerat. huic
erant duae filiae, Symiamira et Mamaea, quarum
maiori filius erat Heliogabalus, qui! et Bassiani et
Antonini nomen accepit, nam Heliogabalum Phoenices
3vocant solem. sed Heliogabalus pulchritudine ac
statura et sacerdotio conspicuus erat ac notus omnibus
hominibus qui ad templum veniebant, militibus prae-
4cipue. his Maesa sive Varia dixit Bassianum filium
esse Antonini, quod paulatim omnibus militibus


1 gui Edit. princ. ; om. in P.


1 This war, begun in the summer of 217, is also mentioned
iu c. ii. 2. According to Dio, lxxviii. 26,2—27,2, Macrinus
was defeated at Nisibis in Mesopotamia by the Parthian
king Artabanus, and in 218 surrendered all prisoners and
gave presents to Artabanus amounting to 200 million sesterces.
The account of the battle and the ensuing negotiations, as
given by Herodian (iv. 15), is as non-committal as that of the
biography. According to Dio, lxxviii. 27, 3, the senate, on
the receipt of Macrinus’ account of the battle, voted a suppli-
catio and conferred on him the cognomen Parthicus—which
he refused to accept. Coins were also issued with the legend
Victoria Parthica ; see Cohen, iv.? pp. 303-301, nos. 133-141.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS IX. 1-4


slain, the Parthian granted readily.! Thereupon he
proceeded to Antioch and gave himself over to luxury
and thus furnished the army just grounds for putting
him to death and taking up the cause of the supposed
son of Bassianus, Elagabalus Bassianus Varius, after-
wards called both Bassianus and Antoninus.?

IX. Now there was a certain woman of the city of
Emesa,? called Maesa * or Varia ; she was the sister
of Julia, the wife of Severus Pertinax the African,’
and after the death of Antoninus Bassianus she had
been expelled from her home in the palace through
the arrogance of Macrinus—though Macrinus did
grant to her all her possessions which she had gathered
together during a long period. This woman had
two daughters, Symiamira and Mamaea,’ the elder
of whom was the mother of Elagabalus ; he assumed
the names Bassianus and Antoninus, for the Phoeni-
cians give the name Elagabalus to the Sun.? Elaga-
balus, moreover, was notable for his beauty and
stature and for the priesthood which he held, and he
was well known to all who frequented the temple,
and particularly to the soldiers. To these, Maesa,
or Varia as she was also called, declared that this
Bassianus was the son of Antoninus, and this was


? On his names see note to Heliog., i. 1.

3 In central Syria, on the Orontes. 1t is now called Homs.

*Julia Maesa, the daughter of Bassianus, the high-priest
of the Sun-god worshipped at Emesa. There is no evidence
that she ever bore the name Varia. Her husband was Julius
Avitus.

54.e., Septimius Severus.

5 For her name see note to Heliog., ii. 1.

“Julia Mamaea, the mother of Severus Alexander; see
note to Heliog., v. 1.

8 See note to Heliog., i. 5.


F2


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


1The Third Legion, Gallica, which was encamped near
Emesa ; see Herodian, v. 8, 9. The following account of the
revolution against Macrinus led by Maesa agrees with the
detailed and reasonable narrative of Herodian and the frag-
ments of Dio (Ixxviii,. 31-38). It is the only portion of this
biography that has any historical value. On Maesa’s claim
that her grandson was & natural son of Caracalla see note to
Heliog., i. 1.

? i.e., the camp of the Third Legion.

3 Ulpius Julianus, the prefect of the guard.

4At a village 180 stadia from Antioch, on the 8th June,
218, according to Dio, lxxviii. 37, 3; 39, 1. Both Dio and
Herodian relate that Macrinus fled from the field before the
battle was finished.

5 Macrinus was captured at Chalcedon on the Bosphorus
and put t» death on the journey back to Antioch. He had
sent Diadumenianus to the Parthian king, but the boy was
captured on the way and killed ; see Dio, lxxviii. 40, 1.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS IX. 5—X. 4


gradually made known to all the soldiers.! Maesa
herself, furthermore, was very rich (whence also
Elagabalus was most wasteful of money), and through
her promises to the soldiers the legions were per-
suaded to desert Macrinus. For after she and her
household had been received into the town? by night,
her grandson was hailed as Antoninus and presented
with the imperial insignia.

X. When the news of this was brought to Macrinus,
then encamped near Antioch, marvelling at the
audacity of the women and at the same time regard-
ing them with contempt, he sent Julianus the prefect ?
with the legions to lay siege to them. But when
Antoninus was shown to these troops, all turned to
him in wonderful affection, and, killing Julianus the
prefect, they all went over to him. Then, having a
part of the army on his side, Antoninus marched
against Macrinus, who was hastening to meet him.
A battle was then fought,‘ in which, as a result of
the soldiers’ treachery to him and their love for
Antoninus, Macrinus was defeated. He did, indeed,
escape from the battle together with his son and a
few others, but he and Diadumenianus were after-
wards slain in a certain village of Bithynia,* and his
head was cut off and carried to Antoninus.

It should be recorded, furthermore, that the boy
Diadumenianus is said to have been made merely
Caesar and not Augustus, for many have related


‘This statement is technically correct, for the title of
Augus:us was never conferred on him officially. On coins of
Antioch, however, he has the titles of Avroxpdrwp (Imperator)
and ZeBfaords (Augustus); see Eckhel, Doctrina Numorum,
vii. p. 242. He was created Imperator by his father after the
defeat of Julianus ; see Dio, lxxviii. 34, 2.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

3Pii habere noluit. unde in eum epigramma non
inlautum Graeci cuiusdam poetae videtur exstare,
quod Latine hac sententia continetur :


5 hos versus nescio qui de Latinis * iuxta eos qui Graeci


Inget . . . recepit P. ? impius Baehrens; imperium P,
Peter. ? est et erit P. 3de Latinis Peter?; delatis P;
Latinos Peter !.


1 He never bore the name Pertinax.
? See c, vii. 2 and 5 and notes.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS X. 5—XI. 5


that he had equal power with his father. The son
also was slain, having gotten from his power only
this—that he should be killed by the soldiery. For
in his life there will be found nothing worthy of
being related, save that he was annexed, as a sort of
bastard, to the name of the Antonines.

XI. Macrinus, in his life as emperor, was, in spite
of all, rather rigid and stern, thinking that so he
could bury in oblivion all his previous career, though
in fact this very sternness of his presented an oppor-
tunity for criticising and attacking him. For he
wished to bear the names Severus and Pertinax!
both of which seemed to him to connote harshness,
and when the senate conferred on him the names
Pius and Felix, he accepted the name of Felix but
refused that of Pius.? This refusal, it seems, was
the cause of an epigram against him, written by a
certain Greek poet and not without charm, which
has been rendered into Latin in the following vein:


* Play-actor agéd and sordid, oppressive, cruel, and
wicked,
Blest and unrighteous at once—that was the thing
he would be. |
Righteous he wished not to be, but yet would gladly
be happy ;
Butthis which nature denies, reason will not allow.
Righteous and blesséd together he might have
appeared and been surnamed,
Unrighteous, unblesséd too, now and forever is
he."


These verses some Latin writer or other displayed
in the Forum together with those which had been


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


erant propositi in foro posuit. quibus acceptis Ma-
crinus his versibus respondisse fertur,


6 Si talem Graium tetulissent fata poetam,
qualis Latinus gabalus iste fuit,
nil populus nosset, nil nosset curia, mango
nullus scripsisset carmina taetra mihi.

4nicis inmanitatibus tristiorem. cum quidam milites
ancillam hospitis iam diu pravi pudoris adfectassent,
idque? per quendam frumentarium ille didicisset,


1 conatus Peter; coactus P.
? so Salm. and Peter; pudore suffectassent atque P corr.


1 See note to Hadr., xi. 4.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS XI. 6—XII. 4


published in Greek. On hearing them, Macrinus, it.
is said, replied in the following lines :


* Had but the Fates made the Grecian as wretched
a poet as this one,

Latin composer of verse, gallows-bird aping a bard,
Naught had the populace learned and naught learned

the senate; no huckster

Ever had tried to compose scurrilous verses on

me."
In these lines, which are much worse even than the
other Latin verses, Macrinus believed that he had
made adequate reply, but he became no less of a
laughing-stock than the poet who tried to translate
from the Greek into Latin.

XII. Macrinus, then, was arrogant and bloodthirsty
and desirous of ruling in military fashion. He found
fault even with the discipline of former times and
lauded Severus alone above all others. For he even
crucified soldiers and always used the punishments
meted out to slaves, and when he had to deal with a
mutiny among the troops, he usually decimated the
soldiers—but sometimes he only centimated them.
This last was an expression of his own, for he used to
say that he was merciful in putting to death only one
in a hundred, whereas they deserved to have one in
ten or one in twenty put to death. It would be too
long to relate all his acts of brutality, but neverthe-
less I will describe one, no great one in his belief,
yet one which was more distressing than all his
tyrannical cruelties. There were some soldiers who
had had intercourse with their host's maid-servant,
who for some time had led a life of ill-repute.
Learning of their offence through one of his spies,! he


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

8exanimum traxit. reddidit etiam Mezentii supplic-
ium, quo ille vivos mortuis inligabat et ad mortem

9cogebat longa tabe confectos. unde etiam in Circo,
cum favor publicus in Diadumenum se proseruisset,
adclamatum :


* Egregius forma iuvenis,"
“cui pater haud Mezentius esset."


10 vivos etiam homines parietibus inclusit et struxit.
adulterii reos semper vivos simul incendit iunctis
corporibus. servos qui dominis fugissent reppertos

11 ad gladium ludi deputavit. delatores, si non proba-


! See c. viii. 3.

2 Tiridates, the claimant to the Armenian throne, went
through the usual form of homage and received the diadem
from Macrinus ; see Dio, Ixxviii. 27, 4.

? Nothing is known of any campaign in Arabia Felix.

*'The mythical king of Caere in Etruria, who fought with
Turnus against Aeneas. For the punishment here described
see Vergil, Aeneid, viii. 485-488.

5The first half-line is from Aeneid, xii. 275, where the
phrase is used of an Arcadian killed by Tolumnius ; the second
describes Lausus, son of Mezentius, and is taken from Aeneid,
vii. 654.


T+


OPELLIUS MACRINUS Xil. 5-11


commanded them to be brought before him and
questioned them as to whether it were really true.
When their guilt was proved, he gave orders that two
oxen of extraordinary size should be cut open rapidly
while still alive, and that the soldiers should be thrust
one into each, with their heads protruding so that they
could talk to each other. In this way he inflicted
punishment on them, though neither our ancestors
nor the men of his own time ever ordained any such
penalty, even for those guilty of adultery. Yet in
spite of all this, he warred against the Parthians,!
the Armenians,? and the Arabs who are called the
Blest,? and with no less bravery than success.

A tribune who allowed a sentry-post to be left un-
guarded he caused tobe bound under a wheeled waggon
and then dragged living or dead all through the
entire march, He even reproduced the punishment
inflicted by Mezentius,* who used to bind live men to
dead and thus force them to die consumed by slow
decay. Hence it came about that even in the Circus,
when general applause broke forth in honour of Dia-
dumenianus, some one cried out :


* Peerless in beauty the youth,"
* Not deserving to haveas his father Mezentius.” 5


He also put living men into walls, which he then
built up. Those guilty of adultery he always burned
alive, fastening their bodies together. A slave who
had fled from his master and had been found he
would sentence to a combat with the sword in the
public games. A public informer, if he could not
make good his accusation, he would condemn to
death ; if he could make it good, he would present


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


rent, capite adfecit, si probarent, delato pecuniae
praemio infames dimisit.

? Inannonis tribuendis largissimus fuit, in auro parcis-

5 parcissimus, in cena effusissimus. adhibuit convivio
litteratos, ut loquens de studiis liberalibus necessario
abstemius.


! werberandis Madvig, Peter?; werandis P. — ?wero Peter? ;
uel P, Peter !.


l* Butcher,” a comic formation frcm macellum, a meat-
market.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS XIII. 2—XIV. 1


him with his reward in money and send him away in
disgrace.

XIII. Inthe administration of the law he was not
without wisdom, and he even determined to rescind
all decisions of earlier emperors, in order that judg-
ments might be rendered on the basis of the law and
not of a decision ; for he used to say that it would
be a crime to give the force of law to the whims of
Commodus and Caracalla and other untrained men,
when Trajan had always refused to render decisions
in response to petitions, in order that rulings which
might seem to have been made out of favour might
not be applied to other cases.

In bestowing largesses of grain he was most
generous, while in gifts of money he was niggardly.
But in flogging his palace-attendants he was so un-
just, so unreasonable, and so cruel, that his slaves
used to call him Macellinus! instead of Macrinus,
because his palace was so stained with the blood of
his household-servants that it looked like a shambles.
In his use of food and wine he was most gluttonous,
sometimes even to the point of drunkenness, but
only in the evening hours. For if he had breakfasted
even in private with great simplicity, he would be most
extravagant in his diuner. He used to invite literary
men to his banquets, as though he would perforce be
more sparing in his diet if conversing about liberal
studies.

XIV. But when men thought of his old-fashioned
niggardliness and saw the savagery of his ways, they
could not bear that so malodorous a man should have
the imperial power, and most of all the soldiers, who
remembered many deeds of his that were most cruel
and sometimes even most base. So, forming a plot,


TT


OPELLIUS MACRINUS


Vidimus in somnis cives, nisi fallor, et istud :
Antoninorum nomen puer ille gerebat,

qui patre venali genitus sed matre pudica,

en Pius, en Marcus, Verus nam non fuit ille.

XV. Genus mortis, ut diximus, tale fuit: cum in
Antoninum Heliogabalum exercitus inclinasset, ille
fugit belloque victus est et occisus in suburbano
Bithyniae, suis partim deditis partim occisis partim


!so P (see S. H. Ballou, Cl. Philol. iii., p. 273 f.) ; om. in
P acc. to Peter; ez «Graeco 7 Peter!; sex Peter”.


——M ———M—M M M—À—M—— — ———


1 This is incorrect ; see c. x. 3 and note.


? Cf. Diad., v. 1.
? Apparently a pun on the meaning of verus = “ true".
*c. x. 8. 5 But see c, x. 3 and notes.


$4.0e., Caracalla’s ; see c. ix. 4.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS XIV. 2—XV. 2


they murdered him and his son, the boy Diadu-
menianus, surnamed Antoninus, of whom it was said
that he was Antoninus only in his dreams—a saying
which gave rise to the following verses :


“This we beheld in our dreams, fellow-citizens, if I
mistake not :

How that the Antonine name was borne by that
immature stripling,

Sprung from a father corrupt, though virtuous truly
his mother ;

Lovers a hundred she knew and a hundred were
those whom she courted.?

Lover was also the bald-head, who later was known
as her husband ;

Pius indeed, aye Marcus indeed, for ne' "er was he
Verus." ?


These lines have been translated from Greek into
Latin. In the Greek they are very well written,
but they seem to me to have been translated by some
commonplace poet. When they were read to Macri-
nus he composed iambics, which have not been pre-
served but are said to have been most delightful.
They were, for that matter, destroyed in that same
uprising in which he himself was slain, when all his
possessions were overrun by the soldiers.

XV. The manner of his death, as we have previously
related,* was the following: After the army went
over to Elagabalus Antoninus, Macrinus fled, but he
was defeated and killed in a rural district of Bithynia,’
while his followers were partly forced to surrender,
partly killed, and partly put to flight. So Elagabalus
achieved glory because he was thought to have
avenged his father’s death, and so established


OPELLIUS MACRINUS

3 Haec de Macrino nobis sunt cognita, multis aliqua


! See Heliog., xvii. 1-8.


OPELLIUS MACRINUS XV. 3-4


himself on the throne, which he disgraced by his
enormous vices, his extravagance, his baseness, his
feasting, his arrogance, and his savagery. He, too,
vs fated to meet with an end corresponding to his
ife.!

These are the facts we have learned concerning
Macrinus, though many give different versions of
certain details, according to the character of each
man's history ; these we have gathered together from
many sources and have presented to Your Serenity,
Diocletian Augustus, because we have seen that you
are desirous of learning about the emperors of former
times.


VOL. il. G


DIADUMENUS ANTONINUS
AELII LAMPRIDII


1 For the correct form of the name see note to Macr., ii. 5.

? He was not acclaimed Imperator until after the revolution
had broken out under Maesa and Elagabalus; see note to
Macr., x. 4.

? This statement is hardly correct. e

*This speech is wholly fictitious; see Intro. to Vol. i.,
p. xix f.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


BY


AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS


I. The life of the boy Antoninus Diadumenianus !
who, together with his father, Opellius Macrinus, was
proclaimed emperor by the army ? when Bassianus had
been slain through the treachery of Macrinus, con-
tains nothing memorable, save that he received the
name of Antoninus and that there befell him astonish-
ing omens signifying that his reign would be but a
short one—and so it really came to pass. Now as
soon as it became known among the legions that
Bassianus was slain, great sorrow beset the hearts of
all, for they thought, because they had not an An-
toninus at the head of the state, that with Bassianus
the Roman Empire would come to an end. When
word ofthis was brought to Macrinus, who by this
time was emperor, he became afraid that the army
would turn to some one of the Antonines, many of
whom, being of the kin of Antoninus Pius, were
among the leaders. He therefore gave orders at
once to compose an harangue, and then bestowed
upon his son, this lad, the name Antoninus. His
harangue.*: ** You behold me, Comrades, now advanced
in years, and Diadumenianus still a lad, whom, if the


G2


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


1dudum Peter; diuum P. 2 dignus om. in P; patre
Antoninus <Cdignus > Mommsen, Jordan; imperatorem.
Antoninus Peter. s duxistis Jordan, Peter; dixistis P.


1 See note to Macr., v. T.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS I. 5—II. 3


gods are gracious, you will have for many years as
your prince. Furthermore, I perceive that there still
remains among you a great yearning for the name of
the Antonines. And so, since the nature of human
weakness seems to leave me but a short space of life,
with your sanction I bestow upon this lad the name
Antoninus, and he for long years to come shall be in
your eyes an Antoninus indeed." Outcries of the
soldiers: * Macrinus, our Emperor, may the gods
keep you! Antoninus Diadumenianus, may the gods
keep you! An Antoninus have we all for a long
time desired. Jupiter, Greatest and Best, grant long
life to Macrinus and to Antoninus. Thou knowest,
O Jupiter, that no man can conquer Macrinus. Thou
knowest, O Jupiter, that no man can conquer
Antoninus. An Antoninus we have, and in him we
have all things ; an Antoninus, indeed, have the gods

nted to us. Worthy of his sire is Antoninus, aye
worthy of the Empire too.” II. Macrinus the Emper-
or spoke : ** Accept, therefore, Comrades, in return for
the bestowal of the imperial power, three aurei for
each one of you, and for the bestowal of the name
Antoninus five aurei for each,! together with the ad-
vancements prescribed by custom, but at this time
doubled. The gods will grant that such gifts shall
be often bestowed upon you, but we shall give you
every five years what we have deemed right to give
today." Thereupon the child himself, Diadumeni-
anus Antoninus, the Emperor, spoke: “I bring you
thanks, Comrades, because you have bestowed upon
me both imperial office and name ; and inasmuch as
you have deemed us worthy, both my father and my-
self, to acclaim us Emperors of Rome and to commit
the state to our keeping, my father, for his part, will


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


pater quidem meus curabit ne desit imperio, ego
autem elaborabo ne desim nomini Antoninorum.
scio enim me Pii, me Marci, me Veri suscepisse nomen,
4quibus satis facere perdifficile est. interim tamen
causa imperii, causa nominis, id omne quod pater et
tantundem promitto, honoribus, ut et venerandus
5 Macrinus pater praesens promisit, duplicatis." Hero-
dianus Graecus scriptor haec praeteriens Diadumenum
tantum Caesarem dicit puerum a militibus nuncupa-
tum et cum patre occisum.
6 Hac habita contione statim apud Antiochiam
moneta Antonini Diadumeni nomine percussa est,
7 Macrini usque ad iussum senatus dilata est. missae
etiam ad senatum litterae quibus nomen Antonini
indicatum est. quare etiam senatus imperium id
libenter dicitur recepisse, quamvis alii Antonini Cara-
8 calli odio id factum putent. paraverat sane paenulas
populo coloris ru:sei dare Macrinus imperator in
honorem Antonini filii sui, quae vocarentur Antonini-
anae, ut caracallae Bassiani dictae sunt, adserens
melius filium suum Paenuleum vel Paenularium
dicendum quam Caracallus esset dictus Bassianus.
gcongiarium etiam per edictum Antoninianum
promisit, ut ipsum edictum poterit indicare.


1Herodian, v. 4, 12. Diadumenianus was born in 208;
consequently he was nine years old when he is supposed to
have delivered the foregoing speech.

? See Macr., vi. 2-7.

* Of. Macr., ii. 3-4 and note; vii, 4.

4 See Carac., ix. 7-8.

* From paenula, a long cloak worn on journeys and in
rainy weather.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS II. 4-9


take good care not to fail the Empire, and I, more-
over, will strive earnestly not to fail the name of the
Antonines. For I know that it is the name of Pius
and of Marcus and of Verus that I have taken, and
to live according to the standard of these is difficult
indeed. Meanwhile, however, in return for the im-
perial office and in return for my name, I promise you
all that my father has promised and as much as he
has promised, doubling all advancements, even as my
revered father.Macrinus has promised here in your
presence." Herodian, the Greek writer, omits these
details and records only that Diadumenianus as a
child received from the soldiers the title of Caesar
and that he was slain along with his father.!
Immediately after this harangue a coin was struck
at Antioch bearing the name of Antoninus Diadumeni-
anus, but coinage with the name of Macrinus was
postponed until the senate should give command.
Moreover, despatches announcing the bestowal of the
name Antoninus were sent to the senate.? In return,
it is said, the senate readily acknowledged his rule—
although some think they did so only out of hatred
for Antoninus Caracalla. Now Macrinus, as emperor,
purposed in honour of his son Antoninus to present to
the populace mantles of a reddish hue, to be called
* Antoninian ' as Bassianus’ Gallic manties had been.
For it was more fitting, he said, that his son should
be called Paenuleus or Paenularius,? than that Bas-
sianus should have been called Caracalla. He
also issued an edict, promising a largess? in the
name of Antoninus, as the edict itself will prove.


6 Apparently commemorated by an issue of coins with the
legend Liberalitas Augusti; see Cohen, iv?. p. 294, nos. 41-44.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS

2 Puer fuit omnium speciosissimus, statura longius-
cula, crine flavo, nigris oculis, naso deducto, ad omnem
decorem mento composito, ore ad ! oscula parato, fortis

4 Nunc veniamus ad omina imperii, quae cum. in


! ad om. in P, ?so P; haec < fere > Peter! ; haec
« sunt > quae de imperio Peter ?.


NL


1 See Pius, viii. 1 and note.

2Yet according to Dio, lxxviii. 19, 2, Macrinus had the
statues of Caracalla at Rome removed.

* There was no such office as this. Perhaps it is an error
for procurator thesawrorum, for the thesauri seem to have in-
cluded the imperial] robes; see note to Alez., xl. 3,


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS II. 10—IV. 2


The text of the edict: “I would, Fellow-citizens,
that we were now present in person; for then your
Antoninus himself would give you a largess in his
own name. He would, furthermore, enroll boys as
Antoniniani and girls as Antoninianae,! that they
might extend the glory of so dear a name” ; and so
forth throughout.

IIT. When he had done all in this fashion he
gave orders that the standards in the Camp and the
colours should be called Antonine and he had statues
of Bassianus made of gold and of silver? ; and cere-
monies of thanksgiving were celebrated for seven
days in honour of the naming of Antoninus.

The boy himself was beautiful beyond all others,
somewhat tall of stature, with golden hair, black eyes,
and an aquiline nose; his chin was wholly lovely in
its modelling, his mouth desigyjed for a kiss, and he
was by nature strong and by training graceful. And
when first he assumed the scarlet and purple gar-
ments and the other imperial insignia used in the
camp, he was radiant as a being from the stars or a
dweller in heaven, and he was beloved of all because
of his beauty. This much there is to be said con-
cerning the boy.

Now let us proceed to the omens predicting his
imperial power—which are marvellous enough in the
case of others, but in his case beyond the usual wont.
IV. On the day of his birth, his father, who then
chanced to be steward of the greater treasury,? was
inspecting the purple robes, and those which he
approved as being brighter in hue he ordered to
be carried into a certain chamber, in which two
hours later Diadumenianus was born. ` Furthermore,
whereas it usually happens that children at birth are


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


!so Cas., Peter; uiris intersedentibus P. ? quasi om.
in P.


1 This belief has been perpetuated. The caul was supposed
to impart the gift of eloquence and to be a protection against
drowning; see also D. Jonson, Alchemist, i. 1.

? 1,e., ** of good omen" ; they are otherwise unknown.

? Of. Macr., xiv. 2.

4A similar omen is described in Livy, i. 34, 8.

5 Apparently Antoninus Pius, born on 19th Sept. (Pius,


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS IV. 3—V. 4


provided by nature with a caul, which the midwives
seize and sell to credulous lawyers (for it is said
that this brings luck to those who plead?!), this
child, instead of a caul, had a narrow band like a
diadem, so strong that it could not be broken, for
the fibres were entwined in the manner of a bow-
string. The child, they say, was accordingly called
Diadematus, but when he grew older, he was called
Diadumenianus after the name of his mother's father,
though the name differed little from his former ap-
pellation Diadematus. " Also they say that twelve
purple sheep were born on his father's estate and
of these only one had spots upon it. And it is well
known, besides, that on the very day of his birth
an eagle brought to him gently a tiny royal ring-
dove, and, after placing it in his cradle as he
slept, flew away without doing him harm. * Moreover,
birds called pantagathi? built a nest in his father's
house. V. And about the time of his birth, the as-
trologers, on reading his horoscope, cried out that
he was both the son of an emperor and an emperor
too, just as though his mother had been seduced
—as, indeed, public gossip maintained.? More-
over, when he was walking about in the open
country, an eagle bore away his cap ; * and when the
child's comrades shouted out, the bird set it upon
the statue of a king on a royal monument near the
farm-house in which his father then lived, fitting it
close to the head. This seemed portentous to many
and a sign of an early death, but later events showed
it to be a prediction of glory. He was born, further-
more, on the birthday of Antoninus," at the same


i. 8. According to Dio, lxxviii. 20, 1, Diadumenianus was
born on 14th Sept.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS

VI. Haec sunt quae digna memoratu in Antonino
Diadumeno esse videantur. cuius vitam iunxissem
patris gestis, nisi Antoninorum nomen me ad eden-
dam puerilis specialem expositionem vitae coegisset.


! et om. in P; ins. by Paucker, Petschenig, Peter ?. ? ut
quae Unger, Peter?; atque P.


1 See note to Macr., iii. 6.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS V. 5—VI. 3


hour as Antoninus Pius and with the stars in almost
the same positions. Wherefore the astrologers said
that he would be both the son of an emperor and an
emperor himself, but not for long. On the day of
his birth, which was also the birthday of Antoninus,
a certain woman, who lived near by, cried out, it is
said, * Let him be called Antoninus". : Macrinus,
however, was afraid and refused the imperial name,
both because none of his kin was called by this
name and at the same time because rumours con-
cerning the significance of his horoscope had already
spread abroad. These omens and others, too, oc-
curred, or so numerous writers have related, but the
following one is especially worthy of note. As
Diadumenianus was lying in his cradle, some say, a
lion broke its chains and dashed about savagely, but
when it came to the cradle of the child it only
licked him and left him unharmed ; but when the
nurse—the only person who chanced to be present
in the open place in which the child was lying—
threw herself at the lion, it seized her in its teeth
and she perished.

VI. These are the details concerning Antoninus Dia-
dumenianus which seem to be worthy of mention.
His life, indeed, I should have combined with the
achievements of his father, had not the name of the
Antonines constrained me to publish a special dis-
cussion of the life of this boy. And in fact the name
of the Antonines was at that time so greatly beloved,
that he who had not the prestige of this name did
not seem to merit the imperial power. Wherefore
some also think that Severus and Pertinax and
Julianus should be honoured with the praenomen
Antoninus,! and that later on the two Gordiani,


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


1 Antonino P. “cum om. in P. 3 clarius Jordan,
Peter!; clarior P; clarior <honor> Peter’.


1 See Gord., iv. 7 and note.

? See Marc., i. 10, and Hadr., xxiv. 1 and note.
3 See note to Hadr., xxiv. 1.

1 See Sev., x. 4; Get., 1. 8.

5 See Sev., x. 5, and Get., i. 1 and notes.

454.6. the prefecture of the guard.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS VI. 4— VII. 1


father and son, had Antoninus as surname.! How-
ever, it is one thing to assume this as praenomen and
another to take it as an actual name. In the case of
Pius, for instance, Antoninus was his actual name and
Pius only a surname. Moreover, the true name of
Marcus was Verissimus,? but when this was set aside
and annulled, Antoninus was conferred on him not
as a praenomen but as his name. So the original
name of Verus was Commodus,? but when this was
annulled, he too was called Antoninus not as a prae-
nomen but as a name. Commodus, however, was
given the name Antoninus by Marcus, and on the
day of his birth he was so enrolled in the public
records. As for Caracalla Bassianus, it is well known
that he was called Antoninus on account of a dream
beheld by Severus, which revealed that an Antoninus
was fore-ordained to be his successor, and that he
was given the name in his thirteenth year, when, it
is said, Severus conferred on him also the imperial
power. Geta, moreover, who, many aver, was not
called Antoninus at all, was given the name, it is
generally said, with the same intention as Bassianus
—namely that he might succeed his father Severus ° ;
but this never came to pass. After him, the name
Antoninus was given to this very Diadumenianus, in
order, it is generally said, that he might thereby find
favour with the army, the senate, and the people of
Rome, since there was a great yearning for Bassianus
Caracalla.

VII. There is stil] in existence a letter written by
Opellius Macrinus, father of Diadumenianus, in which
he boasts, not so much that he attained to the
imperial power, having previously held second place
in the Empire,® as that he had become the father of


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS

3deorum nomen commode videretur adiungi. versus
in Commodum Antoninum dicti :


Commodus Herculeum nomen habere cupit,
Antoninorum non putat esse bonum,

expers humani iuris et imperii, e.
sperans quin etiam clarius esse deum,

quam si sit princeps nominis egregii.

non erit iste deus nec tamen ullus homo.


4 hi versus a Graeco nescio quo compositi a malo poeta
in Latinum translati sunt, quos ego idcirco inserendos
putavi, ut scirent omnes Antoninos pluris ! fuisse quam
deos ab? trium principum amore, quo sapientia,
bonitas, pietas consecrata sit, in Antonino pietas, in

5 Vero bonitas, in Marco sapientia. redeo nunc ad
epistulam Macrini Opilii :

“ Opilius Macrinus Noniae Celsae coniugi. quid
boni adepti sumus, mi uxor, caret aestimatione. et
fortassis de imperio me putes dicere; non magnum


1 plures P. ?ab Peter? ; ac P, Peter!,


1 See Com., viii. 5; ix. 2; Carac., v. 5.
* This and the following letters are fictitious.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS VII. 2-5


one bearing the name Antoninus, than which no
name was then more illustrious—no, not even that of
the gods. But before I insert this letter, I wish to
. include some verses directed at Commodus, who had
taken the name of Hercules, in order that I may
show to all that the name of the Antonines was so
illustrious that it was not deemed suitable to add to
it even the name of a god. The verses directed
against Commodus Antoninus are as follows :


Commodus wished to possess Hercules' name as his
own ;

That of the great Antonines did not seem noble
enough.

Nothing of common law, nothing of ruling he knew,

. Hoping indeed as a god greater renown to acquire

Than by remaining a prince called by an excellent
name,

Neither a god will he be, nor for that matter a man.


These verses, written by an unknown Greek, some
unskilful poet has rendered into Latin, and I have
thought it right to insert them here for the purpose
of showing toall that the Antonines were deemed
greater than the gods as a result of the love felt for
the three emperors, a love which has enshrined their
wisdom, kindness, and righteousness—righteousness
in the case of Pius, kindness in the case of Verus,
and wisdom in the case of Marcus. I will now return
to the letter written by Opellius Macrinus : ?

** Opellius Macrinus to his wife Nonia Celsa. The
good fortune to which we have attained, my dear
wife, is incalculable. Perhaps you may think I
allude to the imperial power, but this is nothing


VOL. JI, H


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


est istud quod etiam indignis fortuna concessit.
6 Antonini pater factus sum ; Antonini mater es facta.
o nos beatos, o fortunatam domum, praeclaram laudem
7 nunc demum felicis imperii. di faxint et bona Iuno,
quam colis, ut et ille Antonini meritum effingat, et
ego, qui sum pater Antonini, dignus omnibus videar."
VIII. hac epistula indicatur, quantum gloriae adeptus sibi
videretur quod vocatus est filius Antoninus.
2 Hic tamen quarto decimo mense imperii ob in-
civilem patris atque asperum principatum interfectus
3 est cum patre, non suo nomine ; quamvis etiam istum
ultra aetatem saevisse in plerosque reperiam, ut
docent litterae ab hoc eodem ad patrem m'ssae.
4 nam cum quidam defectionis suspicionem incurrissent,
et eos Macrinus saevissime punisset filio forte absente,
atque hic audisset auctores quidem defectionis occisos,
conscios ! tamen, quorum dux Armeniae erat et item
legatus Asiae atque Arabiae, ob antiquam familiaritatem
dimissos, his litteris convenisse patrem dicitur, paribus
missis etiam ad matrem, quarum exemplum historiae
causa inserendum putavi :
5 ‘Patri Augusto filius Augustus. non satis, mi
pater, videris in amore nostro tenuisse tuos mores,
qui tyrannidis  adfectatae ^ conscios  reservasti,


1 conscios ins. by Paucker, Peter?; om. in P, Peter.


1 See Macr., x. 8 and note.

? This office did not exist at the time in which this letter
is alleged to have been written. The duces were the generals
in command of the armies stationed on the various frontiers ;
they were instituted at the end of the third century, when the
civil authority in the provinces was separated from the
military.

* See Macr., x. 4 and note.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS VII. 6—VIII. 5


great and Fortune has bestowed it on even the un-
deserving. No! I have become the father of an
Antoninus; you have become the mother of an
Antoninus. Blessed indeed are we, fortunate is our
house, and noble the meed of praise now at length
attained by this happy empire! May the gods. grant,
and kindly Juno too, whom you revere, both that he
may achieve the deserts of an Antoninus, and that I,
who am now the father of an Antoninus, may be
deemed worthy in the sight of all." VIII. This letter
indicates how much glory he thought he had gained
from the fact that his son was called Antoninus.

Yet in spite of all, Diadumenianus was killed with
his father in the fourteenth month of their reign,!
not, indeed, for any fault of his own, but because of his
father's harsh and tyrannical rule. Nevertheless,
I find in many writers that he himself was cruel.
beyond his years, and this is shown by a letter which
he sent to his father. For when certain men had
falen under the suspicion of rebellion, Macrinus
visited upon them the most cruel punishments in the
absence, as it chanced, of his son; but when the
latter learned that the instigators of the rebellion
had indeed been put to death, but their accomplices,
among whom were the military governor of Armenia *
and the governors of Asia and Arabia, had, on account
of a long-standing friendship, been sent away un-
harmed, he addressed, it is said, the following letter
to his father, sending an identical one to his mother
also. A copy of this letter I think, for the sake of
history, should be inserted :

* Augustus the son? to Augustus the father. You
do not seem, my dear father, to have kept close
enough to your usual ways or to your affection for


H 2


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


sperans eos vel amiciores tibi futuros, si iis par-
ceres, vel ob antiquam familiaritatem! dimittendos.


7  *Site nulla movet tantarum gloria rerum,
Ascanium surgentem et spes heredis Iuli
respice, cui regnum Italiae Romanaque tellus
debetur.'


1 familiam lamen P. 2 proderit Unger, Peter? ; poterit P-
3 diligenter P.


1 Aeneid, iv. 272-276.
? Otherwise unknown.
3 Presumably the officials alluded to in c. viii. 4; the names


are evidently fictitious,
* Otherwise unknown, but see Intro. to Vol. ii. p. xxi.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS VIII. 6—IX. 2


me; for you have spared the lives of men engaged
in a plot to seize the imperial power, either in the
hope that if you spare them now they will prove
more kindly disposed to you in the future, or else
believing that because of an ancient friendship they
ought to be sent away unharmed. This should not
have been done, nor will it prove of any avail. : For,
in the first place, they cannot love you now, rendered
sore, as they are, by suspicion; in the second, those
who have forgotten their ancient friendship and have
joined your bitterest enemies will prove to be all the
more cruel foes. Consider also the fact that they still
have armies.


* Even should you yourself regard not the fame of
such actions,

Think of the youthful Ascanius, the hopes of Iulus
your scion ;

Fated for him is Italy's realm and the land of the
Romans.’ 1


These men must be executed, if you wish to live in
safety, for, thanks to the evil ways of mankind, there
will be no lack of other foes, if the lives of these be
spared.” This letter, attributed by some to Dia-
dumenianus himself, by others to his teacher Caeli-
anus,? formerly a rhetorician in Africa, shows how
cruel the young man would have been, had he lived.

IX. There is still in existence another letter,
which he wrote to his mother, reading as follows:

* Our Lord and Emperor loves neither you nor
himself, for he spares the life of his foes. See to it,
then, that Arabianus, Tuscus, and Gellius ? be bound
to the stake, lest if an opportunity arise, they may
not let it slip." And, as Lollius Urbicus * records


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS


lSee Macr., ix.-x.


ANTONINUS DIADUMENIANUS IX. 3-6


in his history of his own time, these letters, when
made public by his secretary, are said to have done
the boy much harm among the soldiers. For after
his father was slain many wished to spare him, but
his chamberlain came forward and read these letters
before an assembly of the troops.

And so, when both had been slain and their heads
borne about on pikes, the army out of affection for his
name went over to Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.! He
was said to be the son of Bassianus Caracalla, but he
was, in point of fact, a priest of the temple of Elaga-
balus and the filthiest of men, who through some
decree of Fate was to bring disgrace upon the Roman
Empire. But the details concerning him, for they
are many, I will relate in their own proper place.


ANTONINUS HELIOGABALUS
AELII LAMPRIDII


I. Vitam Heliogabali Antonini, qui Varius etiam
dictus est, numquam in litteras misissem, ne quis
fuisse Romanorum principem sciret, nisi ante Cali-
gulas et Nerones et Vitellios hoc idem habuisset im-


1 His original name was Varius Avitus. He was theson of
Julia Soaemias (or Symiamira, see note to c, ii. 1) and Sex.
Varius Marcellus (see C.I.L., x. 6569 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 478).
In order to strengthen his claim to the throne his grand-
mother Maesa dec'ared that he was the natural son of Carac-
alla (see Carac., ix. 2; Macr., ix. 4), and he became.emperor
under the name of M. Aurelius Antoninus, by which he was
officially known ; in hisinscriptions he is regularly styled son
of Antoninus (Caracalla) and grandson of Severus. As the
hereditary priest of Elagabalus, the patron-deity of Emesa
(see note to $ 5), he was called by the name of his god, but
this name was never official, and there ia no evidence that it


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


BY


AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS


1. The life of Elagabalus Antoninus, also called
Varius,! I should never have put in writing—hoping
that it might not be known that he was emperor of
the Romans—,were it not that before him this same
imperial office had had a Caligula, a Nero, and a
Vitellius. But, just as the selfsame earth bears not -
only poisons but also grain and other helpful things,
not only serpents but flocks as well, so the thoughtful
reader may find himself some consolation for these
monstrous tyrants by reading of Augustus, Trajan,
Vespasian, Hadrian, Pius, Titus, and Marcus. At
the same time he will learn of the Romans’ discern-
ment, in that these last ruled long and died by
natural deaths, whereas the former were murdered,
dragged through the streets, officially called tyrants,
and no man wishes to mention even their names.


was applied to him during his lifetime; see O. F. Butler,
Studies in the Life of Heliogabalus (New York, 1910), p. 119.
This name the Latin writers (Hist. Aug., Victor, Eutropius)
always reproduce in the erroneous form Heliogabalus. He
is sometimes called Bassianus (e.g. Macr., viii. 4; ix. 4;
Herodian, v. 3, 6), but there is no real evidence that he ever
bore this name.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


4 Igitur occiso Macrino eiusque filio Diadumeno, qui
pari potestate imperii Antonini etiam nomen ac-
ceperat, in Varium Heliogabalum imperium conlatum

6amaretur. et hie quidem prius dictus est Varius,
post Heliogabalus a sacerdotio dei Heliogabali, cui
templum Romae in eo loco constituit in quo prius


1 altissimus P.


ìl See Macr., ix-x.

2The patron-god of Emesa, where he was worshipped in
the form of a conical blaok s'one, or BaírvAos, supposed to
have tallen from Heaven; see Herodian, v. 3, 5. He was
popularly regarded as & sun-god, and in Rome atter his im-
portation by the new Emperor (see c. iii. 4) he was officially
called Deus Sol Elagabalus or Invictus Sol Elagabalus. This
identificaticn was responsible for the erroneous form Helio-
gabalus, applied both to the god and to the emperor.

š See note on c. iii. 4.

4The correct form of her name is Julia Soaemias Bassiana ;
see C.I.L., viii. 2564; x. 6569. On her coins she is regularly
called Julia Soaemias Augusta; see Cohen, iv.? pp. 387-389.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS I. 4—II. 1


Now when Macrinus had been slain and also his
son Diadumenianus,! who had been given an equal
share of the power and also the name Antoninus, the
imperial office was bestowed upon Varius Elagabalus,
solely because he was reputed to be the son of Bas-
sianus. As a matter of fact, he was the priest of
Elagabalus (sometimes called Jupiter, or the Sun ?),
and had merely assumed the name Antoninus in
order to prove his descent or else because he had
learned that this name was so dear to mankind that
for its sake even the parricide Bassianus had been
greatly beloved. Originally, he had the name Varius,
but later he was called Elagabalus because he was
priest of this god— whom he afterwards brought with
him from Syria to Rome, founding a temple for him
on the site of an earlier shrine of Orcus? Finally,
when he received the imperial power, he took the
name Antoninus and was the last of the Antonines
to rule the Roman Empire.

II. He was wholly under the control of his mother
Symiamira,* so much so, in fact, that he did no public
business without her consent,’ although she lived like
a harlot and practised all manner of lewdness in the
palace. For that matter, her amour with Antoninus
Caracalla was so notorious that Varius, or rather
Elagabalus, was commonly supposed to be his son.


The masculine form Zóauuos (or Suhaim) is a well-established
Syrian name. The peculiar forms Symiamira, by which she
is knowa in this biography and in the Macrinus (ix. 2), and
Symiasera, as she is called by Eutropius (viii. 22), have not
been satisfactorily explained. They may be derivations from
the name of the Syrian goddess Simea ; see O. HF. Butler,
p. 120, and Ronzevalle, Rev. Arch., ii. (1903), p. 48.

5 This is over-stated. The controlling influence was that
of Maesa; see O. F. Butler, p. 40.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


2retur. et aiunt quidam Varii etiam nomen idcirco
eodem inditum a condiscipulis quod vario semine,

8 de meretrice utpote, conceptus videretur. hic fertur
occiso Macrini factione patre, ut dicebatur, Antonino
in templum dei Heliogabali confugisse, velut in asylum,
ne interficeretur a Macrino, qui saevissime cum filio


l damnari P.


!See note to c. i. 1. The manner of life imputed to
Soaemias in this passage is certainly much exaggerated and
quite in keeping with the general tone of this biography. An
amour b. tween her and Gannys, her son's tutor, is alluded to
by Dio (Ixxix. 6, 2).

2 See Macr., xi.-xii. "There is no evidence, however, that
Macrinus showed any cruelty to the relatives of Caracalla.
Dio (lxxviii. 28, 2) emphasizes his considerate treatment of
Julia Domna, The sta ement (repeated also by Victor, Caes.,
xxiii. 1) that Elagabalus fled to the temple at Emesa is a
wholly incorrect inference from his permanent residence
there as hereditary high-priest.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS II. 2—1II. 2


The name Varius, some say, was given him by his
school-fellows because he seemed to be sprung from
the seed of * various" men, as would be the case
with the son of a harlot! And then, when his
reputed father Antoninus was slain by Macrinus’
treachery, he sought refuge in the temple of Elaga-
balus the god, as in a sanctuary, for fear that
Macrinus would kill him; for Macrinus and his
wasteful and brutal son were wielding the imperial
power with the greatest cruelty.? But enough con-
cerning his name—though he defiled this venerated
name of the Antonines, which you, Most Sacred Con-
stantine, so revere that you have had portrayed in gold
both Marcus and Pius together with the Constantii
and the Claudii, as though they too were your an-
cestors, just as you have adopted the virtues of the
ancients which are naturally suited to your own
character, and pleasing and dear to you as well.

III. But let us return to Varius Antoninus.
After obtaining the imperial power he despatched
couriers to Rome,’ and there all classes were filled
with enthusiasm, and a great desire for him was
aroused in the whole people merely at the mention
of the name Antoninus, now restored, as it seemed,
not in an empty title (as it had been in the case of
Diadumenianus *), but actually in one of the blood—
for he had signed himself son of Antoninus Bassianus.’
He had the prestige, furthermore, which usually
comes to a new ruler who has succeeded a tyrant ;
this is permanent only when the highest virtues


3 From Antioch ; see Dio, Ixxix. 1.

* See Diad., i. 3-8.

5 He also assumed all the imperial titles; see Dio, Ixxix.
9. 9,


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

quis Romae deus nisi Heliogabalus coleretur. dice-
bat praeterea Iudaeorum et Samaritanorum religiones
et Christianam devotionem illuc transferendam, ut


ì infausta P.


1 According to Dio, lxxix. 2, and Herodian, v. 5, 2, the
senate acclaimed him emperor only out of fear of the soldiers.

2 In July, 219; see O. F. Butler, p. 75. He spent the
winter of 218-219 at Nicomedia in Bithynia ; see c. v. 1.

3 He brought the sacred stone of Elagabalus to Rome with
him and built two temples for the god, one on the Palatine—
the so-called Eliogabalium (Mommsen, Chron. Min., i. 147)—
and the other in the suburb known as Ad Spem Veterem east
of the city, near the modern Porta Maggiore; see O. Richter,
Top. d. Stadt Rom ?, p. 315. On the other hand, nothing is
known of the Aedes Orci mentioned in c. i. 6.

4His plan was to unite all cults and to make Elagabalus
the chief deity of Rome; see Dio, Ixxix. 11, 1; Herodian, v.
5,7. He particularly desired to form & union between his
god and Vesta as the representative of the Roman state, and
to this end he transferred to the Eliogabalium the fire of


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS III. 8-5


are present and has been lost by many a mediocre
emperor.

In short, when Elagabalus’ message was read in
the senate, at once good wishes were uttered for
Antoninus and curses on Macrinus and his son,! and,
in accordance with the general wish and the eager
belief of all in his paternity, Antoninus was hailed
as emperor. Such are the pious hopes of men, who
are quick to believe when they wish the thing to
come true which their hearts desire.

As soon as he entered the city,? however, neglect-
ing all the affairs of the provinces, he established
Elagabalus as a god on the Palatine Hill close to the
imperial palace?; and he built him a temple, to
which he desired to transfer the emblem of the
Great Mother, the fire of Vesta, the Palladium, the
shields of the Salii, and all that the Romans held
sacred, purposing that no god might be worshipped
at Rome save only Elagabalus.4 He declared, further-
more, that the religions of the Jews and the Samaritans
and the rites of the Christians must also be transferred


Vesta and the sacred objects kept in her temple, such as the
Ancilia and the Palladium. The latter, an image of Pallas,
supposedly of Trojan origin, he seems to have regarded as
the image of Vesta, who, in fact, was not represented in
image-form. He further symbolised the union between the
two deities by his own marriage with a Vestal; see c. vi. 6
and note. Since his combination of these cults aroused the
greatest indignation in Rome, he divorced the Vestal and
chose & new consort for his god in the Carthaginian deity
Caelestis (see note to Pert., iv. 2), whose image was brought
to Rome and placed in the Bliogabalium ; see Dio, Ixxix. 12,
1, Since she was frequently identified with the Magna Mater
the Matris typus of the text probably refers to this image ;
see O. F. Butler, p. 91 f,


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1This statement is almost certainly a later add'tion, for
there would be no significance in a combination of these sects
with the cult of Elagabalus; see O. F. Butler, p. 126.

2 He himself bore the title sacerdos amplissimus Dei Solis
Elagabali, giving this sacred office a higher place than that
of Pontifex Maximus; see G. Wissowa, Religion u. Kullus
der Römer, p. 305.

3 On his arrival in Rome in July, 219.

5 There is no other voucher for this statement. According
to c. xii. 8 it was his grandmother Maesa who came into the
senate.

* Nero's mother Agrippina was allowed to be present at a
meeting of the senate, but concealed behind a curtain; see
Tacitus, Annals, xiii. 5.
= $ Mentioned also in Aurel., xlix. 6. Senaculum properly
denotes a place in which the senators waited while the senate
was not in session; the name seems to have been applied to


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS IV. 2-4


to this place,! in order that the priesthood of Elaga-
balus? might include the mysteries of every form of
worship.

IV. Then, when he held his first audience with
the senate,? he gave orders that his mother should be
asked to come into the senate-chamber. On her
arrival she was invited to a place on the consuls'
bench and there she took part in the drafting—
that is to say, she witnessed the drawing up of the
senate's decree% And Elagabalus was the only one
of all the emperors under whom a woman attended
the senate like a man, just as though she belonged
to the senatorial order.5

He also established a senaculum,§ or women's senate,
on the Quirinal Hill. Before his time, in fact, a
congress of matrons had met here, but only on certain
festivals, or whenever a matron was presented with
the insignia of a “ consular marriage "—bestowed by
the early emperors on their kinswomen, particularly
on those whose husbands were not nobles, in order
that they might not lose their noble rank. But
now under the influence of Symiamira absurd decrees
were enacted concerning rules to be applied to
matrons, namely, what kind of clothing each might
wear in public, who was to yield precedence and to
whom, who was to advance to kiss another, who


this gathering of matrons merely for the purpose of giving it
a quasi-political importance ; see Mommsen, Staatsrecht, iii.
p. 914. The conventus matr onalis was an organization dating
from the early republican period. Its rulings—here con-
cerned with matters of court etiquette—seem to have received
some sort of official recognition &nd hence are incorrectly
called senatus consulta.

7A woman who married & man of lower status lost her
r&nk, unless authorized to retain it by imperial decree.


VOL. Il. I


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

5subactorem reiectis et oppositis. vultum praeterea
eodem quo Venus pingitur schemate figurabat, corpore
toto expolitus, eum fructum vitae praecipuum existi-
mans, si dignus atque aptus libidini plurimorum
videretur.


1The son of Julia Avita Mamaea, younger daughter of
Julia Maesa, and Gessius Marcianus. He was originally
called Alexionos (Herodian, v. 8, 8) or Bassianus (Dio, Ixxviii.
80, 8), but after he was formally adopted by Elagabalus in
221 and given the title of Caesar, he was known as M.
Aurelius Alexander. On his accession to the throne he took
the name M. Aurelius Severus Alexander. The biography is


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS V. 1-5


might ride in a chariot, on a horse, on a pack-animal,
or on an ass, who might drive in a carriage drawn
by mules or in one drawn by oxen, who might be
carried in a litter, and whether the litter might be
made of leather, or of bone, or covered with ivory
or with silver, and lastly, who might wear gold or
jewels on her shoes.

V. After he had spent the winter in Nicomedia, 218-219.
living in à depraved manner and indulging in un-
natural vice with men, the soldiers soon began to
regret that they had conspired against Macrinus to
make this man emperor, and they turned their
thoughts toward his cousin Alexander,! who on the
murder of Macrinus had been hailed by the senate
as Caesar. For who could tolerate an emperor who
indulged in unnatural lusts of every kind, when not
even a beast of this sort would be tolerated? And
even at Rome he did nothing but send out agents
to search for those who had particularly large organs
and bring them to the palace in order that he might
enjoy their vigour. Moreover, he used to have the
story of Paris played in his house, and he himself
would take the róle of Venus, and suddenly drop his
clothing to the ground and fall naked on his knees,
one hand on his breast, the other before his private
parts, his buttocks projecting meanwhile and thrust
back in front of his partner in depravity. He would
likewise model the expression of his face on that
with which Venus is usually painted, and he had
his whole body depilated, deeming it the chief
enjoyment of life to appear fit and worthy to arouse
the lusts of the greatest number.


here in error in the statement that Alexander received the
title of Caesar on the death of Macrinus.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


!Ct. c. xi. 1; xii. 1-2, The same charge is made by
Herodian (v. 8, 6-7).

? Otherwise unknown.

* Called Gordius by Dio (Ixxix. 15, 1). He was appointed
praefectus vigilum (c. xii. 1) but was removed from office at
the demand of the soldiers (c. xv. 2).

* Originally a slave, from Caria, the pupil and favourite of
Cordius; see Dio, Ixxix. 15. ln 221 the praetorian guard
forced Elagabalus to dismiss him, together with other of his
unworthy favourites; see c. xv. 2-4; Dio, Ixxix. 19, 3. He
was finally killed by the soldiers after Elagabalus’ murder;
see Dio, Ixxix. 21, 1.

5 An arcient festival, held 28 April-3 May. The theatrical
performances held in conjunction with it were characterized
by lack of decorum and even lewdness and were the target for


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS VI. 1-7


VI. He took money for honours and distinctions
and positions of power, selling them in person or
through his slaves and those who served hislusts. He
made appointments to the senate without regard to
age, property, or rank, and solely at the price of
money, and he sold the positions of captain and tri-
bune, legate and general, likewise procuratorships
and posts in the Palace. The charioteers Proto-
genes? and Cordius,’ originally his comrades in the
chariot-race, he later made his associates in his daily
life and actions. Many whose personal appearance
pleased him he took from the stage, the Circus, and
the arena and brought to the palace. And such
was his passion for Hierocles* that he kissed him in
a place which it is indecent even to mention, declar-
ing that he was celebrating the festival of Flora.’

He violated the chastity of a Vestal Virgin,
and by removing the holy shrines he profaned the
sacred rites of the Roman nation." He also desired
to extinguish the everlasting fire. In fact, it was
his desire to abolish not only the religious cere-
monies of the Romans but also those of the whole
world, his one wish being that the god Elagabalus
should be worshipped everywhere. He even broke
into the sanctuary of Vesta, into which only Vestal
Virgins and the priests may enter,? though himself
defiled by every moral stain and in the company of


the criticism of early Christian writers; see Lactantius, Inst.,
i. 20, 10; Tertullian, de Spect., 17.

€ Aquilia Severa, whom he married early in 221, after the
divorce of his first wife Paula. On this marriage see note to
c. iii. 4.

7On this and the following statements see c. iii. 4 and
note.

8 As Pontifex Maximus he was entitled to enter.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


l Quam ei uirgo Jordan, Novak; quamquisgo P! ; quamque
uirgo Petschenig, Peter?. 2 tinctum Hirschfeld, Peter? ;
uinctum P, Peter!.


1 In the Penus Vesia2, the Holy of Holies of the Temple of
Vesta, were preserved various sacred objects which none but
the Vestals and the Pontifex Maximus might look upon. Ac-
cording to Servius (note to Aeneid, vii. 188), there were seven
of these pignora, including the Palladium. They seem to have
been kept in a large earthenwara crock ; Plutarch, Camillus,
xx., records that two such vessels were kept in the sanctuary,
one of which was empty—a belief which seems to be respon-
gible for the statements made here.

? See c. iii. 4 and note.

3A rite connected with the worship of Caelestis and
especially with that of the Magna Mater and in great vogue
in Rome in the second and third centuries. Originally a
sacrifice of & bull and & ram, it came to have an especial
significance as a rite of purification and initiation. The
neophyte stood in a pit covered with perforated boards on
which & bull was slaughtered. The blood flowing down upon


]18


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS VI. 8—VII. 3


those who had defiled themselves. He also at-
tempted to carry away the sacred shrine,! but instead
of the true one he seized only an earthenware one,
which the Senior Vestal had shown him in an at-
tempt to deceive him, and when he found nothing
in it, he threw it down and broke it. The cult,
however, did not suffer &t his hands, for several
shrines had been made, it is said, exactly like the
true one, in order that none might ever be able to
take this one away. Though this be so, he never-
theless carried away the image which he believed to
be the Palladium, and after washing it over with
gold he placed it in the temple of his god.

VII. He also adopted the worship of the Great /
Mother ? and celebrated the rite of the taurobolium ? ;
and he carried off her image and the sacred objects
which are kept hidden in a secret place. He would
toss his head to and fro among the castrated devotees
of the goddess, and he infibulated himself, and did all
that the eunuch-priests are wont to dot; and the
image of the goddess which he carried off he placed
in the sanctuary of his god. He also celebrated the
rite.of Salambo* with all the wailing and the frenzy


the person beneath signified his purification and spiritual
re-birth and at the same time his initiation as priest of the
Magna Mater; see G. Wissowa, Religion u. Kultus d.
. Rómer, p. 268 f.

*Orgiastic rites, including the act of castration practised
in connexion with various eastern cults and especially with
that of the Magna Mater, seem to have been performed in
the worship of the god Elagabalus. It was believed that
magic rites also were celebrated and children sacrificed in his
honour; see c. viii. 1-2 and Dio, lxxix. 11, 3.

5 A Semitic goddess, probably akin to Aphrodite and Tanith-
Caelestis, associated with a ceremony of lamentation like the
mourning for Adonis.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1 simulacrum ins. by Obrecht and Peter; om. in P.


1 On the Syrian coast, now Latakiyeh. The tutelary god-
dess of the place was assimilated to the Greek Artemis Taupo-
TóAos, Who, as a result of the similarity in name, was blended
with the Tauric goddess, brought to Attica, according to
Euripides, by Orestes and Iphigenia. The sacred image at
Laodicea, presented by King Seleucus, was alleged, like many
others in various sanctuaries, to be the original one brought
by Orestes, which, it was claimed, had been carried away from
Attica to Susa by the Persians; see Pausanias, iii. 16, 8.

? An ancient Thraeian town called by various names, among
them Orestias, re-founded by Hadrian as Hadrianopolis, now
Adrianople. It became famous as the scene of a battle be.
tween Constantine and Licinius in 323 and of the defeat of


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS VII. 4—VIII. 1


of the Syrian cult—thereby foreshadowing his own
impending doom. In fact, he asserted that all gods
were merely the servants of his god, calling some its
chamberlains, others its slaves, and others its attend-
ants for divers purposes. And he planned to carry
off from their respective temples the stones which are
said to be divine, among them the emblem of Diana,
from its holy place at Laodicea,! where it had been
dedicated by Orestes.

Now Orestes, they say, dedicated not merely one
image of Diana in one place, but many and in many
places. And after he purified himself at the Three
Rivers in the Hebrus region in obedience to a divine
response, he founded the city of Oresta?—a city
destined to be often stained with human blood. As
for this city of Oresta, Hadrian, after he had begun
to suffer from madness, ordered that it should be
called after his own name—also acting in obedience
to a divine response, for he had been told to steal
into the house or into the name of some madman.
Thereupon, they say, he recovered from his madness,
which had caused him to order the execution of many
senators, all of whom, however, were saved by Antoni-
nus ; for he won the surname of Pius by leading them
into the senate after all supposed that they had been
put to death by the Emperor's order.?

VIII. Elagabalus also sacrificed human victims,* and


Valens by the Goths in 878. Both these battles seem to be
alluded to in this passage. and this ha; been used as an
argument for the theory that the Historia Augusta was
written at the end of the fourth century; see Intro, to vol. ii.
p. viii f. This whole paragraph, however, breaks the continuity
of the narrative and is evidently & later addition.

? See Hadr., xxiv. 4; Pius, ii. 4.

* See c. vii. 2 and note,


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

6 Lavacrum publicum in aedibus aulicis fecit, simul
et Plautini populo exhibuit, ut ex eo condiciones bene

7vasatorum hominum colligeret. idque diligenter


! uel om. in P. ? optimos P. 3 Pseudoantoninum
et Pseudophilippum P'; et Ps. del. by Salm. and Peter.
*impatibilia Editor; mipace P; impia Egnatius, Peter! ;
inepta Peter?, 5 lururia dictu Editor; dictum luxuria P;
Diadumeni luxuria Peter. 6 disputare ut in uita P ; dispu-
tarent in uita Salm., Peter! ; disputare, ut in uita eius . . .
Peter?,


1 This is related by Herodian (v. 6, 9) in connection with
the removal of the god Elagabalus from the Palatine to his
suburban temple (see note to c. iii, 4).

2 See Diad., i. 8; vi. 10.

3 These details are not in the Vita Diadumeni.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS VIII. 2-7


for this purpose he collected from the whole of Italy
children of noble birth and beautiful appearance,
whose fathers and mothers were alive, intending, I
suppose, that the sorrow, if suffered by two parents,
should be all the greater. Finally, he kept about
him every kind of magician and had them perform
daily sacrifices, himself urging them on and giving
thanks to the gods because he found them to be well-
disposed to these men; and all the while he would
examine the children's vitals and torture the victims
after the manner of his own native rites.

When he entered upon his consulship he threw
presents to the populace to be scrambled for, no mere
pieces of silver and gold, indeed, or confectionery or
little animals, but fatted cattle! and camels and
asses and slaves, declaring that this was an imperial
custom.

He made a savage attack on the memory of Ma-
crinus and a still more savage one on that of Dia-
dumenianus because he had received the name
Antoninus *—he called him a Pseudo-Antoninus—and
because it was asserted that from a veritable profligate
he had become very brave and honourable and digni-
fied and austere. And he even forced certain writers
to recount concerning his profligacy some details
which were unspeakable, or, more properly, intoler-
able to relate, considering that this was in a biography
of him.’

He made a public bath in the imperial palace and
at the same time threw open the bath of Plautinus t
to the populace, that by this nfeans he might get a
supply of men with unusually large organs. He also


* Otherwise unknown.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

X. Sed milites pestem illam imperatoris velari no-
mine pati nequierunt ac primum inter sese deinde per
coronas iecere sermones, in Alexandrum omnes in-
clinantes, qui iam Caesar erat a senatu eo tempore

!onobeli Lipsius, Peter? ; monobiles P. ? factum Peter! ;
factus P ; sacris Petschenig, Peter? 3 carminibus et con-


secratione. cumque Jordan, Peter?; carminibus. et consecra-
tionem cum P, Peter!, Lenze.


1 i.e. like an ass in this respect.
2 Probably Caracalla’s campaign against the Alamanni is
meant; see note to Carac., v. 8. Perhaps, however, it is an


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS IX. 1—X. 1


took care to have the whole city and the wharves
searched for onobelt,! as those were called who seemed
particularly lusty.

IX. When he was making plans to take up the war
against the Marcomanni, which Marcus Antoninus ?
had fought with great glory, he was told by certain
persons that it was by the help of astrologers and
magicians that Marcus had made the Marcomanni
forever the liegemen and friends of the Roman
people, and that it had been done by means of magic
rites and a dedication. But when he inquired what
this was or where it could be obtained, he could get
no response, For it was generally reported that he
inquired about this dedication solely for the purpose
of destroying it, hoping thereby to bring on the war ;
for he had been told that there was a prophesy that
the Marcomannic war should be ended by an An-
toninus—whereas he was called Varius and Elaga-
balus and a public laughing-stock, and he was, more-
over, a disgrace to the name of Antoninus, on which
he had laid violent hands. This report, moreover, was
spread by those most of'all who were aggrieved that
men well equipped for gratifying his lusts and of
larger resources were opposed to themselves. And
for this reason they even began to plot his death.
So much for domestic affairs. |

X. Asforthe soldiers, they could not endure to have
such a pest clothed with the name of emperor, and
they all expressed their views, first one to another,
then in groups, turning their thoughts to Alexander,
who previously, at the time when Macrinus was


allusion to the Marcomannic war of Marcus Aurelius, as a
result of which the Marcomanni accepted terms like those
described here; see Dio, lxxii, 2.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


180 Petschenig; eo tempore quo Macrinus huius Ant. P;
eo tempore consobrinus huius Salm., Peter. 2s0 Gemoll,
Peter; enorme sperans P. Sita ut Kellerbauer, Peter? ;
aut P. *et om. in P.


1 An error; see note to c. v. 1. This paragraph forms a
transition to the narrative of the attempted assassination of
Alexander and the consequent outbreak among the soldiers
(c. xiii.-xv.) The connexion is broken by the more personal
material contained in c. x. 2—xii.

? Aurelius Zoticus, an athlete from Smyrna, brought to
Rome by order of Elagabalus. His father had been a cook
and he was accordingly given the nickname of Máyeipos
(= cook). For a further account of him see Dio, lxxix. 16.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS X. 2-6


murdered, had been hailed by the senate as Caesar!
—he was the cousin of this Antoninus, for both were
grandsons of Varia, from whom Elagabalus had the
name Varius.

During his reign Zoticus? had such influence that
all the chiefs of the palace-departments treated
him as their master's consort. This same Zoticus,
furthermore, was the kind to abuse such a degree
of intimacy, for under false pretences? he sold all
Elagabalus' promises and favours, and so, as far as he
could, he amassed enormous wealth. To some men
he held out threats, and to others promises, lying to
them all, and as he came out from the Emperor's
presence, he would go up to each and say, ‘‘In
regard to you I said this," “in regard to you I was
told that," and “in regard to you this action will
be taken". That is the way of men of this kind,
for, once admitted to too close an intimacy with a
ruler, they sell information concerning his intentions,
whether he be good or bad, and so, through the
stupidity or the innocence of an emperor who does
not detect their intrigues, batten on the shameless
hawking of rumours.* -With this man Elagabalus
went through a nuptial ceremony and consummated
a marriage, even having a bridal-matron and ex-
claiming, “Go to work, Cook "—and this at a time
when Zoticus was ill. After that he would ask
philosophers and even men of the greatest dignity
whether they, in their youth, had ever experienced
what he was experiencing—all without the slightest


3 See note to Pius, vi. 4.
* An implicit comparison with the policy of Alexander; see
Alez., xxiii. 8; Ixvii. 2.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

XI. Fecit libertos praesides, legatos, consules,
duces, omnesque dignitates polluit ignobilitate homi-

2 num perditorum. cum ad vindemias vocasset amicos
nobiles et ad corbes sedisset, gravissimum quemque
percontari coepit, an promptus esset in Venerem,
erubescentibusque senibus exclamabat “ Erubuit, salva
res est," silentium ac ruborem pro consensu ducens.

8 addidit praeterea ipse quae faceret, sine ullius pudoris

7 Maximus dicit in vita ipsius Heliogabali. erant


1 dicens Peter; dicere P.


1 Cf, c. vi. 1-4; xii. 1-2.

? The term amici Augusti denoted those persons sd were
officially recognized as qualified to enter the emperor's
presence, and the word amici is used in this sense in this and
the following biographies and occasionally also in the pre-
ceding, e.g. Hadr. » Xviii, 1; Pius, vi. 11; Marc., vii. 85 x. 8;
xxvii.-xxix. ; Com., ii. 1. The amici included. probably all
the senators and selected members of the equestrian order;
their names were announced in the Acta Urbis (see note to
Com., xv. 4) aud were probably entered in an official register.
From their numbers were taken the consiliarii Augusti (see


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS X. 7—XI. 7


shame. For indeed he never refrained from filthy
conversation and would make indecent signs with
his fingers and would show no regard for decency
even in public gatherings or in the hearing of the
people.

XI. He made his freedmen governors and legates,
consuls and generals, and he brought disgrace on all
offices of distinction by the appointment of base-born
profligates.! On one occasion he invited the nobles
of the court? to a vintage-festival, and when he had:
seated himself by the baskets of grapes, he began to
ask the most dignified of them one by one whether
he were responsive to Venus, and when the old men
would blush he would cry out, “ He is blushing, it’s
all right," regarding their silence and blushes as a
confession. He then narrated his own doings with-
out any cloak of shame. But when he saw that the
elders blushed and kept silent, because either their
age or their dignity made them hold back, he turned
to the young men and began to question them about
all their experiences. And when they told him
what one would expect of their age, he began to be
merry, declaring that a vintage celebrated in such a
manner was truly bacchanalian. Many relate, further-
more, that he was the first to devise the custom of
having slaves make jibes at their masters’ expense
during a vintage-festival, even in the hearing of
their masters, which jibes he had composed himself,
most of them in Greek; several of these, indeed,
are quoted by Marius Maximus in his Life of Ela-
gabalus. His courtiers, moreover, were men of


note to Hadr., viii. 9) and the comites (Hadr., xviii. 1; Ver.,


vii. 6-8; Alex., xxxii. 1), who were officially appointed to ac-
company the emperor on his journeys.


VOL. II. K


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

XII. Ad praefecturam praetorii saltatorem, qui
histrionicam Romae fecerat, adscivit, praefectum
vigilum Cordium aurigam fecit, praefectum annonae

2 Claudium tonsorem.! ad honores reliquos promovit
commendatos sibi pudibilium enormitate membrorum.
ad vicensimam hereditatium mulionem curare iussit,
iussit et cursorem, iussit et cocum et claustrarium


1 tonsorem Salm., Peter; censorem P.


! Probably Valerius Comazon Eutychianus, & freedman ; see
Dio, lxxviii. 81, 1; Ixxix. 4, 1-2; Herodian, v. 7, 6. He aided
in the overthrow of Macrinus &nd was appointed prefect of
the guard. Later he received the consular insignia and in
220 was Elagabalus' colleague in the consulship. He was
prefect of the city on three different occasions.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XII. 1—XIII. 1


depraved life, some of them old men looking like
philosophers, who would do up their hair in nets,
declare that they were living a life of depravity, and
boast that they had husbands. Some say, however,
that they only made a pretence of this in order that
by counterfeiting the Emperors vices they might
stand higher in his favour.

XII. As prefect of the guard he appointed a dancer!
who had been on the stage at Rome, as prefect of
the watch a chariot-driver named Cordius,? and as
prefect of the grain-supply a barber named Claudius,’
and to the other posts of distinction he advanced
men whose sole recommendation was the enormous
size of their privates. As collector of the five-per-
cent tax on inheritances * he appointed a mule-driver,
a courier, a cook, and a locksmith. When he went
to the Camp or the Senate-house he took with him
his grandmother, Varia by name, whom I have previ-
ously mentioned,’ in order that through her prestige
he might get greater respect—for by himself he got
none. And never before his time, as I have already
said, did a woman come into the Senate-chamber or
receive an invitation to take part in the drafting
of a decree and express her opinion in the debate.
At his banquets he preferred to have perverts placed
next to him and took special delight in touching or
fondling them, and whenever he drank one of them
was usually selected to hand him the cup.

XIII. Among the base actions of his life of de-
pravity he gave orders that Alexander, whom he had


? See c. vi. 3 and note.
3 Otherwise unknown.
4 See note to Marc., xi. 8.
5 See c. iv. 2 and note,


K 2


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


XIV. modo, vel in balneis vel veneno vel ferro. sed nihil


agunt improbi contra innocentes. nam nulla vi quis


1 Alexander, ut postea Salm., Peter; Alexandrum postea P.


1The account of the attempt to remove Alexander and the
ensuing mutiny of the troops and the story of Elagabalus’
downfall as contained in c. xiii.-xvii. form a coherent and
seemingly correct narrative, which presents & great contrast
to the ill-arranged and often absurd details contained in the
earlier chapters of the biography. It is evidently taken from
a different source, and itis fuller and clearer than the account
of either Dio or Herodian.

2The general popularity of Alexander is attested by Dio,
]xxix. 19, 1. According to Herodian, v. 8, 2-8, the soldiers’
devotion to him was strengthened by Mamaea, who secretly
distributed money among them.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XIII. 2—XIV. 1


formally adopted, be removed from his presence,!
saying that he regretted the adoption. Then he
commanded the senate to take away from Alexander
the name of Caesar. But when this was announced
to the senate, there was a profound silence. For
Alexander was an excellent youth, as was afterwards
shown by the character of his rule, even though,
because he was chaste, he was displeasing to his
adoptive father—he was also, as some declare,
his cousin. Besides, he was loved by the soldiers
and acceptable to the senate and the equestrian
order. Yet the Emperor's madness went the length
of an attempt to carry out the basest design;
for he despatched assassins to kill Alexander, and
that in the following way: Leaving his mother,
grandmother, and cousin in the Palace, he himself
withdrew to the Gardens of Spes Vetus? on the
ground that he was forming designs against some
new youth, and there he issued an order to slay Alex-
ander, a most excellent young man and one of whom
the state had need. He also sent a written order to
the soldiers bidding them take away from Alexander
the name of Caesar, and he despatched men to smear
mud on the inscriptions on his statues in the Camp,*
as is usually done to a tyrant. He sent, further-
more, to Alexander's guardians, ordering them, if
they hoped for rewards and distinctions, to kill him
in any way they wished, either in his bath, or by
poison, or with the sword. XIV. But evil men can
accomplish nothing against the upright. For no
power could induce any to commit so great a crime,


3 See note to c. iii. 4.
* See note to Carac., ii. 4.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

3 ricidalis animi tandem a re publica depellerent. et
cum in Palatium venissent, Alexandrum cum matre
atque avia custoditum diligentissime postea in Castra

4duxerunt. secuta autem erat illos Symiamira mater

6 nuntiaretur consobrinus occisus. qui subito militum
strepitu exterritus in angulum se condit obiectuque
vei cubicularis, quod in introitu erat cubiculi, se texit,

7 missis? praefectis alio ad compescendos milites in
Castra, alio vero ad eos placandos qui iam in hortos


1 sit om. in P. ? augurandi P. ? so Lenze; misit
praefectis alio . . . alio P; misit praefectos alios . . . altos
Peter. + et sacramenti Peter; et not in P acc. to S.H.


Ballou (Cl. Philol. iii, p. 278).


1 Otherwise unknown, but evidently prefect of the guard.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XIV. 9—XV. 1


and the weapons which he was making ready for
others were turned against himself, and it was by the
same violent means that he was directing at others
that he himself was put to death.

But immediately after the inscriptions on Alex-
anders statues were smeared with mud, all the
soldiers were fired with anger, and they set out, some
for the Palace and some for the gardens where
Varius was, with the purpose of protecting Alexander
and finally ridding the state of this filthy creature full
of murderous intent. And when they had come to
the Palace they set a guard about Alexander and his
mother and grandmother and then escorted them
with the greatest care to the Camp; Symiamira,
Elagabalus' mother, followed them on foot, filled with
anxiety about herson. Then the soldiers went to the
gardens, where they found Varius making prepara-
tions for a chariot-race and at the same time eagerly
awaiting the news of his cousin's murder. Alarmed
by the sudden clatter of the soldiers, he crouched
down in a corner and covered himself with the
curtain which was at the door of the bed-chamber,
sending one of the prefects to the Camp to quiet the
soldiers there and the other to placate those who had
just entered the gardens. Then Antiochianus,! one of
the prefects, reminded the soldiers who had come to
the gardens of their oath of allegiance and finally per-
suaded them not to kill the Emperor—for, in fact,
only a few had come and the majority had remained
with the standard, which the tribune Aristomachus
had kept back. So much for what happened in the
gardens. XV. In the Camp, on the other hand, the
soldiers replied to the entreaties of the prefect that
they would spare Elagabalus' life on the condition


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1 neue Baehrens, Peter? ; ne uel P, Peter!, ? omnia P.
3 praetorem Mommsen ; pr P ; praefectum Peter. 4 alium
quem Peter?; aliquam P.


! See c. vi. 3-5.

? Otherwise unknown.

3 For their formal inauguration as consuls in the temple of
Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitolium.


‘


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XV. 2—XVI. 1


that he would send away all his filthy creatures, his
chariot-drivers, and his actors, and return to a decent
mode of living, dismissing particularly those who, to
the general sorrow, possessed the greatest influence
over him and sold all his decisions, actual or pretended.
He did, finally, dismiss Hierocles, Cordius, and
Mirissimus? and two other base favourites who were
making him even more ofa fool than he was naturally.
The soldiers, furthermore, charged the prefects not to
permit him to continue longer his present mode of
living, and also to keep watch over Alexander that
no violence might be done him, and at the same time
to prevent the Caesar from seeing any of the friends
of the Augustus, lest he imitate their baseness. But
Elagabalus with earnest entreaties kept demanding
back Hierocles, that most shameless of men, and daily
increased his plotting against Alexander. Finally,


on the Kalends of January, he refused to appear in1 Jan., 222.


public with his cousin ?—for they had been designated
joint consuls. At last, however, when he was told by
his grandmother and mother that the soldiers were
threatening that they would kill him unless they saw
that harmony was established between himself and
his cousin, he put on the bordered toga and at the
sixth hour of the day entered the senate, inviting
his grandmother to the session and escorting her to
a seat. But then he refused to proceed to the
Capitolium to assume the vows for the state and con-
duct the usual ceremonies, and accordingly everything
was done by the city-praetor, just as if there were no
consuls there.

XVI. Nevertheless he did not give up the murder
of his cousin, but first, for fear that if he killed him
the senate would only turn to some one else, he gave


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


2rentur. Sabinum consularem virum, ad quem libros


Ulpianus scripsit, quod in urbe remansisset, vocato


8 centurione mollioribus verbis iussit occidi. sed cen-


4saluti fuit. removit et Ulpianum iuris consultum ut


XVII.


2milites mitterent. sed cum non cepisset cloaca


fortuito, per pontem Aemilium, adnexo pondere ne


lguae .. . pararentur Editor; qui . . . pararant P,
Peter. 2 facta Jordan ; factaque P ; 4 factaque Peter?,
S conscii genere mortis P; consciuere mortem his Salm.,.
Peter!; T conscii genere mortis Peter?.


! Perhaps Fabius Sabinus, later a member of Alexander's
consilium; see Alex., lxviii. 1.

2 Domitius Ulpianus, the famous jurist, often quoted in the
Digesta. He had been appointed assistant to Papinian, the
prefect of the guard, by Severus and had held other cabinet-
offices ; see Pesc. Nig., vii. 4. He was made prefect of the
guard by Alexander and had great influence during the latter’s


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XVI. ?—XVII. 2


orders that the senate should at once leave the city.
Even all those senators who had no carriages or slaves
were ordered to set out at once, some of them being
carried by porters, others using animals that chance
threw in their way or that they hired for money.
And because Sabinus,! a man of consular rank, to
whom Ulpian ? dedicated some of his books, remained
in the city, the Emperor called a centurion and
ordered him to kill him, speaking in a low tone.
But the centurion, who was rather deaf, thought that
he was being ordered to eject Sabinus from the city
and acted accordingly ; and so a centurion's infirmity
saved Sabinus' life. He dismissed both Ulpian the
jurist because he was a righteous man and Silvinus
the rhetorician, whom he had appointed tutor to
Alexander. Silvinus, in fact, was put to death, but
Ulpian was spared.

The soldiers, however, and particularly the members
of the guard, either because they knew what evils
were in store for Elagabalus, or because they foresaw
his hatred for themselves, formed a conspiracy to set
the state free. First they attacked the accomplices
in his plan of murdering Alexander, killing some by
tearing out the vital organs and others by piercing
the anus, so that their deaths were as evil as their
lives. XVII. Next they fell upon Elagabalus him-
self and slew him in a latrine in which he had taken
refuge. Then his body was dragged through the
streets, and the soldiers further insulted it by thrust-
ing it into a sewer. But since the sewer chanced to
be too small to admit the corpse, they attached a
weight to it to keep it from floating, and hurled it


reign; see Alex. pass. He was finally killed by the mutinous
praetorians ; see Dio, lxxx. 2.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


fluitaret, in Tiberim abiectum est, ne umquam sepeliri
3posset. tractum est cadaver eius etiam per Circi
spatia, priusquam in Tiberim praecipitaretur.

8 Opera publica ipsius praeter aedem Heliogabali
dei, quem Solem alii, alii Iovem dicunt, et Amphi-
theatri instaurationem post exustionem et lavacrum
in vico Sulpicio, quod Antoninus Severi filius coeperat,


lsubditicio Salm., Peter!; subdecio P; subditiuo Opitz,
Peter?,


1 Crossing the Tiber at the Forum Boarium, approximately
the position of the modern Ponte Emilio.

2 It is erased in many of his inscriptions; see Dessau, Ins.
Sel., 468 f.

3 See note to c. i. 1.

4 Because his body was thrown into the Tiber; so also Dio,
xxix. 21, 8.

5The Colosseum, It had been struck by lightning during
the reign of Macrinus (Dio, lxxvii. 25, 2.3).


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XVII. 3-9


from the Aemilian Bridge! into the Tiber, in order
that it might never be buried. The body was also
dragged around the Circus before it was thrown into
the Tiber.

His name, that is to say the name Antoninus, was
erased from the public records by order of the senate ?
—though the name Varius Elagabalus was left ?—, for
he had used the name Antoninus without valid claim,
wishing to be thought the son of Antoninus. After
his death he was d&bbed the Tiberine,* the Dragged,
the Filthy, and many other such names, all of which
were to signify what seemed to have been done during
hisrule. And he wasthe only one of all the emperors
whose body was dragged through the streets, thrust
into a sewer, and hurled into the Tiber. This befell
him as the result of the general hatred of all, against
which particularly emperors must be on their guard,
since those who do not win the love of the senate, the
people, and the soldiers do not win the right of
burial. 7

His public works do not exist, save for the temple
of the god Elagabalus (called by some the Sun, by
others Jupiter), the Amphitheatre ? as restored after
its destruction by fire, and the publie bath in the
Vicus Sulpicius, begun by Antoninus, the son of
Severus. This bath, in fact, had been dedicated by
Antoninus Caracalla, who bathed in it himself and
opened it to the public, but the portico was left un-
built, end this was added after his death by this
spurious Antoninus, though actually completed by
Alexander.’


6 See Carac., ix. 4 and 9 and notes.
7 See Alex., xxv. 6.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

Occisa est cum eo et mater Symiamira probrosissima

2 apparatum imperatorium publice vendiderat. deinde
aestiva convivia coloribus exhibuit, ut hodie prasinum,
vitreum alia die, venetum deinceps ? exhiberet, semper


le priuatis . . . imperatorum uero Petschenig, Peter?;
priuatus . . . imperatorem uero P. 2 et deinceps P.


1 See Gord., iv. 7 and notes.

2 According to Dio, lxxix. 20, 2, he was killed in her arms
and her body was dragged about the streets with his.

3 See c. iv. 1-2. l

4 The rest of this biography is entirely made up of these
anecdotes.

5 S2e Ael., v. 9 and note.

€ See Marc., xvii, 4-6; xxi. 9.


e


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XVIII. 2—XIX. 2


XVIII. He was the last of the Antonines (though
many think that later the Gordians had the cognomen
Antoninus, whereas they were really called Antonius
and not Antoninus !), a man so detestable for his
life, his character, and his utter depravity that the
senate expunged from the records even his name.
I myself should not have referred to him as Antoninus
save for the sake of identification, which frequently
makes it necessary to use even those names which
officially have been abolished.

With him was also slain his mother Symiamira,? a
most depraved woman and one worthy of such a son.
And the first measure enacted after the death of
Antoninus Elagabalus provided that no woman should
ever enter the senate,? and that whoever should cause
a woman to enter, his life should be declared doomed
and forfeited to the kingdom of the dead.

Concerning his life many filthy anecdotes have
been put into writing, but since they are not worthy
of being recorded, I have thought I ought to relate
onl]y such deeds as illustrate his extravagance.*
Some of these, it is said, were done before he ascended
the throne, others after he was made emperor; for
he himself declared that his models were Apicius ?
among commoners and, among emperors, Otho and
Vitellius. XIX. For example, he was the first com-
moner to cover his couches with golden coverlets—
for this was lawful then by authorization of Marcus
Antoninus, who had sold at public auction all the im-
perial trappings. Also, he gave summer-banquets in
various colours, one day a green banquet, another day
an irridescent one, and next in order a blue one, varying
them continually every day of the summer. More-
over, he was the first to use silver urns and casseroles,


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

8et narcissis. hic non nisi unguento nobili aut croco

9 piscinis infectis natavit. nec cubuit in accubitis
facile nisi iis quae pilum leporinum haberent aut
plumas perdicum subalares, saepe culcitas mutans.

XX. Senatum nonnumquam ita contempsit, ut
mancipia togata appellaret, populum Romanum unius
fundi cultorem, equestrem ordinem in nullo loco


lofficiorum Salm., Peter? ; horum P.


1Rome was divided by Augustus into fourteen regiones,
each of which was administered by a praetor, aedile, or tri-
bune of the plebs. Later, probably under Hadrian, each
regio was administered by one or two curatores of non-sena-
torial rank, apparently freedmen ; see Mommsen, Staatsrecht,
ii. p. 1036. The plan of Elagabalus seems to have been
carried out, at least in part, by Alexander, who appointed
fourteen curatores of consular rank, representing the fourteen


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XIX. 3—XX. 2


and vessels of chased silver, one hundred pounds in
weight, some of them spoiled by the lewdest designs.
He was also the first to concoct wine seasoned with
mastich and with pennyroyal and all such mixtures,
which our present luxury retains. And rose-wine,
of which he had learned from others, he used
to make more fragrant by adding pulverized pine-
cone. In fact, all these kinds of cups are not met
with in books before the time of Elagabalus. Indeed,
for him life was nothing except a search after pleasures.
He was the first to make force-meat of fish, or of
oysters of various kinds or similar shell-fish, or of
lobsters, crayfish and squills. He used to strew
roses and all manner of tlowers, such as lilies, violets,
hyacinths, and narcissus, over his banqueting-rooms,
his couches and his porticoes, and then stroll about in
them. He would refuse to swim in a pool that was
not perfumed with saffron or some other well-known
essence. And he could not rest easily on cushions
that were not stuffed with rabbit-fur or feathers from
under the wings of partridges, and he used, moreover,
to change the pillows frequently.

XX. He often showed contempt for the senate,
calling them slaves in togas, while he treated
the Roman people as the tiller of a single farm
and the equestrian order as nothing at all He
frequently invited the city-prefect to a drinking-bout
after a banquet and also summoned the prefects of
the guard, sending a master of ceremonies, in case
they declined, to compel them to come. And he
wished to create a city-prefect for each region of
Rome, thus making fourteen for the city!; and he


regiones, to act as assistants and advisers to the prefect of
the city ; see Alex., xxxiii. 1.


VOL, II. L


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS

^  Hicsolido argento factos habuit lectos et tricliniares


3 lances ins. by Salm., om. in P!; ingentes dapes P corr.;
magides Peter. 4 nascentis P.


1 Of. c. xxv. 1.
? An important city in Syria, on the river Orontes.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XX. 3—XXI. 5


would have done it, too, had he lived, for he was
always ready to promote men of the basest character
and the lowest calling.

He had couches made of solid silver for use in his
banqueting-rooms and his bed-chambers. In imita-
tion of Apicius he frequently ate camels-heels and
also cocks-combs taken from the living birds, and the
tongues of peacocks and nightingales, because he
was told that one who ate them was immune from
the plague. He served to the palace-attendants,
moreover, huge platters heaped up with the viscera
of mullets, and flamingo-brains, partridge-eggs, thrush-
brains, and the heads of parrots, pheasants, and pea-
cocks. Andthe beards of the mullets that he ordered
served were so large that they were brought on, like
cress or parsley or pickled beans or fenugreek, in
well filled bowls and disk-shaped platters—a particu-
larly amazing performance.

XXI. He fed his dogs on goose-livers. Among his
pets he had lions and leopards, which had been ren-
dered harmless and trained by tamers, and these he
would suddenly order during the dessert and the
after-dessert to get up on the couches, thereby causi
an amusing panic, for none knew that the beasts
were harmless.! He sent grapes from Apamea ? to
his stables for his horses, and he fed parrots and
pheasants to his lions and other wild animals. For
ten successive days, moreover, he served wild sows'
udders with the matrices, at the rate of thirty a day,
serving, besides, peas with gold-pieces, lentils with
onyx, beans with amber, and rice with pearls ; and
he also sprinkled pearls on fish and truffles in lieu of
pepper. In a banqueting-room with a reversible
ceiling he once overwhelmed his parasites with violets


L2


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1 absentato P, Peter.


! Nero did this also (Suetonius, Nero, xxxi.), and a similar
ceiling in the house of Trimalchio is described in Petronius,
Sal., lx.

2 Follis, as a result of its meaning of ‘‘leathern money-
bag," was used to denote, in the late empire, various sums
of money or coins. The follis aeris was a small copper coin
containing a slight admixture of silver and equal in value to
two denarii of the depreciated currency of Diocletian (see


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXI. 6—XXII 4.


and other flowers,! so that some of them were actually
smothered to death, being unable to crawl out to the
top. He flavoured his swimming-pools and bath-
tubs with essence of spices or of roses or wormwood.
And once he invited the common mob to a drinking-
bout, and himself drank with the populace, taking
so much that on seeing what he alone consumed,
people supposed he had been drinking from one of
his swimming-pools. As banquet-favours, he gave
eunuchs, or four-horse chariots, or horses with saddles,
or mules, or litters, or carriages, or a thousand aurei
or a hundred pounds of silver. XXII. At his ban-
quets he would also distribute chances inscribed on
spoons, the chance of one person reading “ten
camels,” of another “ten flies," of another “ten
pounds of gold," of another * ten pounds of lead," of
another “ten ostriches,” of another “ten hens-
eggs, so that they were chances indeed and
men tried their luck. These he also gave at his
games, distributing chances for ten bears or ten dor-
mice, ten lettuces or ten pounds of gold. Indeed
he was the first to introduce this practice of giving
chances, which we still maintain, Aud the performers
too he invited to what really were chances, giving
as prizes a dead dog or a pound of beef, or else a
hundred aurei, or a hundred pieces of silver, or a
hundred coppers,? and so on. All this so pleased
the populace that after each occasion they rejoiced
that he was emperor.

XXIII. He gave a naval spectacle, it is said, on the


note to c. xxiv. 3). As the word follis does not seem to have
been applied to this coin until the time of Diocletian, the
biographer seems to be employing the terminology of his own
time and not that of the period of Elagabalus.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


! (ta ins. by Editor. 2 eas dimitteret Jordan; teos
demitt-r-t P, Peter?.


l Ewripus, ‘‘strait,” denoted in particular the narrow
channel between Boeotia and Euboea. It then came to mean
any canal or ditch, and was applied to the canal around the
Circus, dug by Julius Caesar (Suetonius, Julius, xxxix. 2) and
filled up by Nero (Pliny, Nat. Hist., viii. 21).

? The Circus Vaticanus was constructed by Caligula at the
north end of the Janiculum (the present site of the Church
of St. Peter) Under Nero it was the scene of the tortures
inflicted on the Christians; see Tacitus, Annals, xv. 44. The
context of the present passage, however, seems to indicate
that it was not this circus that was the scene of Elagabalus’
exploit, but the immediate vicinity, generally known as Vati-
canum, where remains of tombs have been discovered ; see
O. Richter, Topographie d. Stadt Ronm, p. 280 f.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXIII. 1-7


Circus-canals,! which had been filled with wine, and
he sprinkled the people's cloaks with perfume made
from the wild grape; also he drove a chariot drawn
by four elephants on the Vatican Hill? destroying
the tombs which obstructed the way, and he harnessed
four camels to a chariot at a private spectacle in the
Circus. It is also said that he collected serpents
with the aid of priests of the Marsic nation? and
suddenly let them loose before dawn, when the popu-
lace usually assemb'ed for the more frequented
games, and many people were injured by their fangs
as well as in the general panic. He would weara
tunic made wholly of cloth of gold, or one made of
purple, or a Persian one studded with jewels, and at
such times he would say that he felt oppressed by
the weight of his pleasures. He even wore jewels
on his shoes, sometimes engraved ones—a practice
which aroused the derision of all, as if, forsooth, the
engraving of famous artists could be seen on jewels
attached to his feet. He wished to wear also a
jewelled diadem in order that his beauty might be
increased and his face look more like a woman's ;
and in his own house he did wear one. He promised
a phoenix to some guests, it is said, or in lieu of the
bird a thousand pounds of gold, and this sum he handed
out in the imperial residence. He constructed
swimming-pools filled with sea-water in places
especially far from the coast, and would hand them
over to individual friends who swam in them, or at


? An ancient people of central Italy living around the
Lacus Fucinus or Lago di Celano (see note to Hadr., xxii.
12), which has recently been drained. They were famous as
snake-charmers ; see Vergil, Aeneid, vii. 753-755 ; Pliny, Nat.
Hist., vii. 15; xxv. 30; Gellius, Noct. Atticae, xvi. 11.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


singulis amicis natantibus dimisit et iterum cum

8 piscibus implevit. montem nivium in viridiario do-
mus aestate fecit advectis nivibus. ad mare piscem
numquam comedit, in longissim s a mari locis omnia
marina semper exhibuit. murenarum lactibus et lu-
porum in locis mediterraneis rusticos pavit.

XXIV. Pisces semper quasi in marina aqua cum
colore suo coctos conditura veneta comedit. momen-
tarias de rosato et rosis piscinas exhibuit et lavit! cum
omnibus suis caldarias de nardo exhibens. idem in

! lauit Peter; uiuit P. 2 ez uiuartis Edit. princ. ;

seuwuarit P.


! Sestertium is regularly used to denote the sum of 1000
sestertii. The evaluation of 100,000 sesterit: = 30 Ibs. silver,
however, presents a difficult problem, for the biographer is
not using the system in vogue under Elagabalus. According
to Mommsen (Ges. Schr., vii. p. 316), he has confused the
sestertius with the depreciated denarius of the time of Dio-
cletian, of which 50,000 = 1 lb. gold, or approximately
8700 = 1 Ib. silver. Seeck, on the other hand, who contends
that the Historia Augusta was composed in the fifth century
(see Intro. to Vol. ii. p. ix), pointed out (Jahrbb., cxli. p.
629 f.) that in the time of Constantine (when this vita pur-
ports to have been written) 432,000 den. = 1 lb. gold, an
evaluation which is, of course, incompatible with this passage.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXIII. 8—XXIV. 5


another time he would fil one with fish. One
summer he made a mountain of snow in the pleasure-
garden attached to his house, having snow carried
there for the purpose. When on the sea-coast he
never ate fish, but in places most remote from the
sea he regularly served all manner of sea-food, and
the country-folk in the interior he fed with the milk
of murenas and pikes.

XXIV. The fish that he ate were cooked in a
bluish sauce that preserved their natural colour, as
though they were still in the sea-water. He supplied
swimming-pools that he used for the moment with
essence of roses and with the flowers themselves, and
when he bathed with all his courtiers he would
furnish oil of nard for the hot-rooms; he also
furnished balsam-oil for the lamps. He never had
intercourse with the same woman twice except with
his. wife, and he opened brothels in his house for his
friends, his clients, and his slaves. He never spent
. less ona banquet than one hundred thousand sesterces,
that is, thirty pounds of silver’; and sometimes he
even spent as much as three million when all the cost
was computed. In fact, he even outdid the banquets
of Vitellius and Apicius? He would take fish from
his ponds by the ox-load, and then, as he passed
through the market, bewail the public poverty. He
used to bind his parasites to a water-wheel and, by
a turn of the wheel, plunge them into the water and
then bring them back to the surface again, calling


He argued, therefore, that the system here presupposed is
that introduced in 445 by Valentinian III., according to
which 1750 den. = 1 lb. silver, and that the half-denarius is
meant here by the term sestertius.

2 See c. xviii. 4.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


summum revolvebat eosque Ixiones amnicos ! vocavit.

3sub mensis invenirentur prandentes. primus denique
invenit sigma in terra sternere, non in lectulis, ut a
pedibus utres per pueros ad reflandum spiritum sol-
verentur.

4 In mimicis? adulteriis ea quae solent simulato fieri

5 effici ad verum iussit. meretrices a lenonibus cunctis


l1So Hirschfeld, Peter?; Ixionios amicos P, Peter!. ? in
mimicis Scaliger, Peter; inimicis P.


1A green porphyry—now called serpentino—quarried near
Croceae, in southern Laconia and close to the modern village
of Stephania. The red porphyry, brought from Egypt, was
used in Rome in enormous quantities. The mosaic pave-
ments made of these stones were afterwards called opus
Alexandrinum ; see Alex., xxv. 7.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXIV. 6—XXV. 6


them meanwhile river-Ixions;. He used Lacedae-
monian stone ! and porphyry to pave the open spaces
in the Palace, which he called Antonine; this pave-
ment lasted down to within our own memory but
was lately torn up and destroyed. And he planned
to erect a single column of enormous size, which
could be ascended inside, and to place on its summit
the god Elagabalus, but he could not find enough
stone, even though he planned to bring it from the
district of Thebes.?

XXV. When his friends became drunk he would
often shut them up, and suddenly during the night
let in his lions and leopards and bears—all of them
harmless—so that his friends on awakening at dawn,
or worse, during the night, would find lions and
leopards and bears in the room with themselves;
and some even died from this cause. Some of his
humbler friends he would seat on air-pillows instead
of on cushions and let out the air while they were
dining, so that often the diners were suddenly found
under the table. Finally, he was the first to think
of placing a semi-circular group on the ground
instead of on couches, with the purpose of having
the air-pillows loosened by slaves who stood at the
feet of the guests and the air thus let out.

When adultery was represented on the stage, he
would order what was usually done in pretence to
be carried out in fact. He often purchased harlots
from all the procurers and then set them free. Once
during a private conversation the question arose as
to how many ruptured people there were in the city
of Rome, and he thereupon issued an order that all


2 In upper Egypt. 3 Of. c. xxi. 1.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


balneas suas exhiberi! et cum iisdem lavit, nonnullis

7etiam honestis. gladiatores ante convivium pug-

XXVI. Primus Romanorum holoserica veste usus
fertur, cum iam subsericae in usu essent. linteamen
lotum numquam attigit, mendicos dicens qui linteis

3 Omnes de Circo, de theatro, de Stadio, et omnibus
locis et balneis meretrices collegit in aedes publicas


lexhibert Petschenig ; exhibere P, Peter. 2 uidit Peter? ;
sibi P, Peter’, 3 pyctas, frequenter strauit Peter?,


1 Also related of Lucius Verus; see Ver., iv. 9.

? Of. c. xxvii. 4-5.

'His fondness for silk clothing is also mentioned by
Herodian, v. 5, 4. Its use was forbidden by later emperors ;
see Alex., xl. 1; Aurel., xlv. 4; Tac., x. 4; Codex Theodosi-
anus, xv. 9, 1.

4A mixture of silk and linen or cotton—ordinarily called
sericum. Under Tiberius men were forbidden to wear it
(Tacitus, Annals, ii. 38, 1), but Caligula, nevertheless, ap-
peared in public thus clad (Suetonius, Cal., lii.). Elagabalus
gave garments of this sort as presents; see c. xxix. 6.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXV. 7—XXVI. 3


should be noted and brought to his baths, and then
he bathed with them, some of them being men of
distinction. Before a banquet he would frequently
watch gladiatorial fights and boxing matches, and he
had a couch spread for himself in an upper gallery
and during luncheon exhibited criminals in a wild-
beast hunt. His parasites would often be served
during dessert with food made of wax or wood or
ivory, sometimes of earthenware, or at times even of
marble or stone; so that all that he ate himself
would be served to them too, but different in sub-
stance and only to be looked at,? and all the while
they would merely drink with each course and wash
their hands, just as if they had really eaten.

XXVI. He was the first of the Romans, it is said,
who wore clothing wholly of silk,’ although garments
partly of silk * were in use before his time. Linen
that had been washed he would never touch, saying
that washed linen was worn only by beggars. He
would often appear in public after dinner dressed in
a Dalmatian tunic,? and then he would call himself
Fabius Gurges® or Scipio, because he was wearing
the same kind of clothing which Fabius and Cornelius
wore when in their youth they were brought out in
public by their parents in order to improve their
manners.

He gathered together in a public building all the
harlots from the Circus, the theatre, the Stadium and


5 See note to Com., viii. 8.

€ Presumably he meant Q. Fabius Maximus Gurges, consul
292, 276, 265 B.c. No such incident, however, as that de-
scribed in the text is known, nor can the Scipio be identified.
The Dalmaticus was not in use in the republican period, but
long-sleeved tunics were worn, though generally considered
effeminate; see Gellius, Noct. Atticae, vi. (vii.) 12.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


et apud eas contionem habuit quasi militarem, dicens
eas conmilitones, disputavitque de generibus schema-
4tum et voluptatum. adhibuit in tali contione postea
lenones, exsoletos undique collectos et luxuriosissimos

5 puerulos et iuvenes. et cum ad meretrices muliebri
ornatu processisset papilla eiecta, ad ! exsoletos habitu
puerorum qui prostituuntur. post contionem pro-
nuntiavit iis quasi militibus ternos aureos donativum
petiitque ab iis ut a dis peterent ut alios haberent ipsi ?
commendandos.

8huiusmodi monstris. claudebat in eiuscemodi vasis
infinitum muscarum, apes mansuetas eas appellans.


! ad om. in P. ? haberent ipsi Petschenig; haberet ipsis
P, Peter. 3 cellario salarii annua Salm., Peter; cellarios
salarii annua P.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXVI. 4—XXVII. 3


all other places of amusement, and from the public
baths, and then delivered a speech to them, as one
might to soldiers, calling them * comrades " and dis-
coursing upon various kinds of postures and de-
baucheries. Afterward he invited to a similar gather-
ing procurers, catamites collected together from all
sides, and lascivious boys and young men. And
whereas he had appeared before the harlots in a
woman's costume and with protruding bosom, he met
the catamites in the garb of a boy who is exposed for
prostitution. After his speech he announced a largess
of three aurei for each, just as if they were soldiers,
and asked them to pray the gods that they might
find others to recommend to him.

He used, too, to play jokes on his slaves, even
ordering them to bring him a thousand pounds of
spiders-webs and offering them a prize; and he
collected, it is said, ten thousand pounds, and then
remarked that one could realize from that how great
a city was Rome. He also used to send to his para-
sites jars of frogs, scorpions, snakes, and other such
reptiles, as their yearly allowance of provisions, and he
would shut up a vast number of flies in jars of this sort
and call them tamed bees.

XXVII. He often brought four-horse chariots from
the Circus into his banqueting-rooms or porticoes
while he lunched or dined, compelling his guests to
drive, even though they were old men and some of
them had held public office. Even when emperor,
he would give an order to bring in to him ten
thousand mice, a thousand weasels, or a thousand
shrew-mice. So skilful were his confectioners and
dairymen, that all the various kinds of food that were
served by his cooks, either meat-cooks or fruit-cooks,


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


4 modo de dulciis modo de lactariis exhiberent. exhi-
buit parasitis cenas et de vitreis et nonnumquam tot
picta mantelia in mensam mittebat, iis edulibus picta
quae adponerentur, quot missus esset habiturus, ita

7amicis. iusserat et canonem populi Romani unius
anni meretricibus, lenonibus, exsoletis intramuranis
dari, extramuranis alio promisso, cum eo tempore
iuxta provisionem Severi et Traiani septem annorum
canon frumentarius Romae esset,

9 privatus in agris suis fecit. processit in publicum et
quattuor cervis iunctis ingentibus. iunxit sibi et
leones, Matrem magnam se appellans. iunxit et
tigres, Liberum sese vocans eodemque habitu agens


! idemque Peter; idque P.


1 See Sev., viii. 5.

? Apparently the sacred healing snake of the god Knuphis
(Chnum), often represented, sometimes with a lion's head, on
gems and amulets.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXVII. 4-XXVIII. 3


they also would serve up, making them now out of con-
fectionery or again out of milk-products. His para-
sites he would serve with dinners made of glass, and
at times he would send to their table only embroidered
napkins with pictures of the viands that were set be-
fore himself, as many in number as the courses which
he was to have, so that they were served only with re-
presentations made by the needle or the loom. Some-
times, however, paintings too were displayed to them,
so that they were served with the whole dinner, as
it were, but were all the while tormented by hunger.
He would also mix jewels with apples and flowers,
and he would throw out of the window quite as much
food as he served to his friends. He gave an order,
too, that an amount of public grain equal to one year’s
tribute should be given to all the harlots, procurers,
and catamites who were within the walls, and promised
an equal amount to those without, for, thanks to the
foresight of Severus and Trajan, there was in Rome at
that time a store of grain equal to seven years’ tribute. !
XXVIII. He would harness four huge dogs to a
chariot and drive about within the royal residence, -
and he did the same thing, before he was made
emperor, on his country-estates. He even appeared
in publie driving four stags of vast size. Once he
harnessed lions to his chariot and called himself the
Great Mother, and on another occasion, tigers, and
called himself Dionysus ; and he always appeared in
the particular garb in which the deity that he was
representing was usually depicted. He kept at Rome
tiny Egyptian snakes, called by the natives “ good
genii," ? besides hippopotami, a crocodile, and a rhi-
noceros, and, in fact, everything Egyptian which was
of such a kind that it could be supplied. And


VOL. II. M


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


4poterant. struthocamelos exhibuit in cenis aliquo-
tiens, dicens praeceptum Iudaeis ut ederent.

4 de his omnibus risus citaret. donavit et argentum
omne convivis quod habuit in convivio et omnem

5apparatum poculorum, idque saepius. hydrogarum


lamicos «admisit > cottidie Golisch ; amicos cottidie P ;
amicis cottidie « aliquid dabat > Cas., Peter.


lie. likening them to oxen; cf. the saying faenum edere,
cited by Cicero, de Orat. ii, 238.

? Those ornamented with ivory or bronze were in common
use; see Aurel., xlvi. 3. Alexander permitted the use of
silver; see Alex., xliii. 1.

3 Garum was a preparation made from the entrails of fish,
particularly the mackerel, which were salted down and allowed
to ferment. The liquid thus formed was called garum.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXVIII. 4-—XXIX. 5


sometimes at his banquets he served ostriches, saying
that the Jews had been commanded to eat them.

It seems indeed a surprising thing that he is said to
have done when he invited men ofthe highest rank
to a luncheon and covered a semi-circular couch with
saffron-flowers, and then said that he was providing
them with the kind of hay ! that their rank demanded.
The occupations of the day he performed at night,
and those of the night in the daytime, and he con-
sidered it a mark of luxury to wait until a late hour
before rising from sleep and beginning to hold his
levee, and also to remain awake until morning. He
received his courtiers every day, and he seldom let
any go without a gift, save those whom he found to
be thrifty, for he regarded these as worthless.

XXIX. His chariots were made of jewels and gold,
for he scorned those that were merely of silver or
ivory or bronze? He would harness women of the
greatest beauty to a wheel-barrow in fours, in twos,
or in threes or even more, and would drive them about,
usually naked himself, as were also the women who
were pulling him.

He had the custom, moreover, of asking to a dinner
eight bald men, or else eight one-eyed men, or eight
men who suffered from gout, or eight deaf men, or
eight men of dark complexion, or eight tall men, or,
again, eight fat men, his purpose being, in the case
of these last, since they could not be accommodated
on one couch, to call forth general laughter. He
would present to his guests all the silver-plate that
he had in the banqueting-room and all.the supply of
goblets, and he did it very often too. He was the
first Roman emperor to serve at a public banquet fish-
pickle? mixed with water, for previously this had


M 2


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


! «4 ius Salm., Peter; sicus P. 2 pretia rerum P.


1The Agger Tarquinii Superbi was that portion of the so-
called ** Wall of Servius Tullius" (probably a work of the
early republican period) which protected Rome on the east,
running over the level tops of the Quirinal and Esquiline
Hills; see Pliny, Nat, Hist., iii. 67.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXIX. 6 —XXX. 5


been only a soldier's dish—a usage which later was
promptly restored by Alexander. He would propose
to his guests, furthermore, by way of a feat, that they
should invent new sauces for giving flavour to the
food, and he would offer a very large prize for the
man whose invention should please him, even pre-
senting him with a silk garment—then regarded as a
rarity and a mark of honour. On the other hand, if
the sauce did not please him, the inventor was
ordered to continue eating it until he invented a
better one. Of course he always sat among flowers
or perfumes of great value, and he loved to hear the
prices of the food served at his table exaggerated,
asserting it was an appetizer for the banquet.

XXX. He got himself up as a confectioner,
a perfumer, a cook, a shop-keeper,' or a procurer,
and he even practised all these occupations in his
own house continually. At one dinner where there
were many tables he brought in the heads of six
hundred ostriches in order that the brains might be
eaten. Occasionally he gave a banquet in which he
would serve twenty-two courses of extraordinary
viands, and between each course he and his guests
would bathe and dally with women, all taking an oath
that they were deriving enjoyment. And once he
gave a banquet in which one course was served in the
house of each guest, and although one lived on the
Capitoline Hill, one on the Palatine, one beyond the
Rampart,! one on the Caelian Hill, and one across
the Tiber, nevertheless each course was served in
order in one of the houses, and they went about to
the homes of all. It was difficult, therefore, to finish
the banquet within a whole day, especially as between
the courses they bathed and dallied with women.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


finitum est, cum et lavarent per singula fercula et
6 mulieribus uterentur. Sybariticum missum semper
exhibuit ex oleo et garo, quem quo anno Sybaritae
7 reppererunt, et perierunt. dicitur et balneas fecisse
multis locis ac semel lavisse atque statim destruxisse,
ne ex usu balneas haberet. hoc idem de domibus, de
3 praetoriis, de diaetis! fecisse dicitur. sed et haec et
alia ? nonnulla fidem transeuntia credo esse ficta ab iis
qui in gratiam Alexandri Heliogabalum deformare
voluerunt.
XXXI. Fertur et meretricem notissimam et pulcher-
rimam redemisse centum sestertiis eamque intactam
2velut virginem coluisse. huic eidem privato cum
quidam diceret * Non times pauper fieri?" dixisse
dicitur * Quid melius, quam ut ipse mihi heres sim
3et uxori meae?" habuerat praeterea facultates a
multis dimissas gratia patris. idem filios se nolle
4 dicebat, ne quis ei frugi contingeret. odores Indicos
sine carbonibus ad vaporandas diaetas? iubebat incendi.
iter* privatus numquam minussexaginta vehiculis fecit,
avia sua Varia reclamante quod omnia perditurus esset.
5 imperator vero etiam sescenta vehicula dicitur duxisse,
adserens decem milibus camelorum Persarum regem
iter facere et Neronem quingentis carrucis iter inisse.
6 causa vehiculorum erat lenonum, lenarum, meretricum,


1diaetis Lessing; zetis P; zaetis Peter. ? et alia ins. by
Cas. and Peter; om. in P. 3diaelas Lessing; zetas P;
zaetas Peter. sin P.

1 510 B.C.


2 i.e. Julia Maesa; see note to Macr., ix. 1.
3 According to Suetonius, Nero, xxx. 3, never with fewer
than a thousand.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXX. 6—XXXI. 6


He always served a course of Sybariticum, consisting
of oil and fish-pickle, which the men of Sybaris in-
vented in the year in which they all perished.! It is
further related of him that he constructed baths in
many places, bathed in them once, and immediately
demolished them, merely in order that he might not
derive any advantage from them. And he is said to
have done the same with houses, imperial headquar-
ters, and summer-dwellings. However, these and
some other things which surpass credence, I believe
to have been fabricated by those who wished to vilify
Elagabalus in order to curry favour with Alexander.
XXXI. He purchased, it is said, a very famous
and very beautiful harlot for one hundred thousand
sesterces, and then kept her untouched, as though
she were a virgin. When someone asked him before
he was made emperor, * Are you not afraid of becom-
ing poor ? " he replied, so they say, ‘‘ What could be
better than that | should be my own heir and my
wife's too?" He had abundant means besides, be-
queathed to him by many out of regard for his father.
Furthermore, he said that he did not wish to have
sons, lest one of them should chance to be thrifty.
He would have perfumes from India burned without
any coals in order that the fumes might fill his
apartments. Even while a commoner he never made
a journey with fewer than sixty wagons, though his
grandmother Varia? used to protest that he would
squander all his substance; but after he became
emperor he would take with him, it is said, as many
as six hundred, asserting that the king of the Persians
travelled with ten thousand camels and Nero with
five hundred carriages? The reason for all these
vehicles was the vast number of his procurers and


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


exsoletorum, subactorum etiam bene vasatorum multi-

XXXII. Calciamentum numquam iteravit, anulos
etiam negatur iterasse. pretiosas vestes saepe con-
scidit, balaenam? cepit et adpendit atque ad eius

2aestimationem ponderis pisces amicis exhibuit. naves
onustas mersit in portum, magnanimitatis hoc esse
dicens. onus ventris auro excepit, in murrinis et
3onychis minxit. idem dixisse fertur, “Si habuero
heredem, dabo illi tutorem, qui illum haec facere cogat
4 quae ipse feci facturusque sum," habuit etiam istam
consuetudinem, ut cenas sibi exhiberet tales ut una die
nonnisi de * phasianis totum ederet omnesque missus
sola phasianorum carne strueret, item alia die de
pullis, alia de pisce illo et item illo, alia de porcis,
alia de struthionibus, alia de oleribus, alia de pomis,
5alia de dulciis, alia de opere lactario. saepe amicos


1 So P ; accurabantur < loco 7 Cas., Peter. 2nouaculam
Gruter, von Winterfeld ; nouaclum P, Peter. 3 So Madvig ;
conscidit uel lanam P; + uel lanam Peter?, ! de om. in P.


! The allusion is obscure ; the custom seems to be analogous
to that of Caligula and Nero, who had the sand of the Circus
sprinkled with chrysocolla, a silicate of copper, in order to give
it & greenish colour; see Suetonius, Calig., xviii. 3; Pliny,
Nat. Hist., xxxiii. 90.

2 See note to Pert., xii. 6.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXXI. 7—XXXIlI. 5


bawds, harlots, catamites and lusty partners in de-
pravity. In the public baths he always bathed with
the women, and he even treated them himself with
a depilatory ointment, which he applied also to his
own beard, and shameful though it be to say it, in
the same place where the women were treated and
at the same hour. He shaved his minions' groins,
using the razor with his own hand—with which he
would then shave his beard. He would strew gold
and silver dust about a portico and then lament that
he could not strew the dust of amber also; and he
did this often when he proceeded on foot to his
horse or his carriage, as they do today with golden
sand.!

XXXII. He never put on the same shoes twice
and never, it is said, wore the same ring a second
time. He often tore up costly garments. Once he
took a whale and weighed it and then sent his friends
its weightinfish. Hesank some heavily laden ships in
the harbour and then said that this was a sign of great-
ness of soul. He used vessels of gold for relieving
himself and his urinals were made of murra or onyx.
And he is said to have remarked : * If I ever have an
heir, I shall appoint a guardian for him, to make him
do what I have myself done and intend to do". He
was accustomed, furthermore, to have dinners served
to bim of the following kind : one day he would eat
nothing at all but pheasant,? serving only pheasant-
meat at every course; another day he would serve
only chicken, another some kind of fish and again a
a different kind, again pork, or ostrich, or greens, or
fruit, or sweets, or dairy-products. He would often
shut up his friends in halting-places for the night
with old hags from Ethiopia and compel them to stay


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1The Emperor Philippus Arabs. His prohibition of this
vice is also recorded in Alex., xxiv. 4, and Victor, Caes., xxviii.


2A musical instrument with three strings, probably re-
sembling the lute, The name has been perpetuated in &
modern Italian instrument of the mandoline type.

3 See Suetonius, Tib., xliii. 1, and Tacitus, Annals, vi. 1.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXXII. 6—XXXIII. 7


there until morning, saying that the most beautiful
women were kept in these places. He did this same
thing with boys too—for then, before the time of
Philip ! that is, such a thing was lawful. Sometimes
he laughed so loud in the theatre that no one else
could be heard by the audience. He could sing and
dance, play the pipes, the horn and the pandura,? and
he also performed on the organ. On one single day,
it is said, he visited every prostitute from the Circus,
the theatre, the Amphitheatre, and all the public
places of Rome, covering his head with a muleteer's cap
in order to escape recognition ; he did not, however,
gratify his passions, but merely gave an aureus to each
prostitute, saying as he did so: ‘“ Let no one know
it, but this is a present from Antoninus". XXXIII.
He invented certain new kinds of vice, even going
beyond the perverts used by the debauchees of old,
and he was well acquainted with all the arrangements
of Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero.?

The prophecy had been made to him by some
Syrian priests that he would die a violent death. And
so he had prepared cords entwined with purple and
scarlet silk, in order that, if need arose, he could put
an end to his life by the noose. He had gold swords,
too, in readiness, with which to stab himself, should
any violence impend. He also had poisons ready,
in ceraunites and sapphires and emeralds, with which
to kill himself if destruction threatened. And he
also built a very high tower from which to throw him-
self down, constructed of boards gilded and jewelled
in his own presence, for even his death, he declared,
should be costly and marked by luxury, in order that
it might be said that no one had ever died in this
fashion. But all these preparations availed him


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


1 So Bernhardy and Peter; nemo wir eğ P. ? So Lectius
and Peter; credidisse reficiendum P.


1 See c, xvii. 1-3.

2 Nero committed suicide. Vitellius was killed by the
soldiers of Vespasian, and Caligula was assassinated by a
tribune of the praetorian guard.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXXIII. 8-XXXIV. 6


nothing, for, as we have said,! he was slain by common
soldiers, dragged through the streets, contemptuously
thrust into sewers, and finally cast into the Tiber,

He was the last of those in public life to bear the
name Antoninus, and all knew that in the case of this
Antoninus his life was as false as his name.

XXXIV. It may perhaps seem strange to some,
revered Constantine, that such a scourge as I have
described should ever have sat on the throne of the
emperors, and, moreover, for nearly three years. Such
was the lack at that time in the state of any who
could remove him from the government of Rome's
majesty, whereas a deliverer from the tyrant had not
been wanting in the case of Nero, Vitellius, Caligula?
and other such emperors. But first of all I ask for
pardon for having set down in writing what I have
found in various authors, even though I have passed
over in silence many vile details and those things
which may not even be spoken of without the greatest
shame. But whatever I have told, I have covered up
as best I could by the use of veiled terms. Then too
I have always believed that we must remember what
Your Clemency is wont to say: “It is Fortune that
makes a man emperor". There have indeed been
unrighteous rulers and even very base ones. But, as
Your Piety is wont to declare, men must look to it
that those be worthy of the imperial office whom the
power of Fate has called to the destiny of being
emperor. Furthermore, since this man was the last
ofthe Antonines and never again did one of this name
appear in public life as emperor, the following fact
must also be mentioned, in order that no confusion
may arise when I shall begin to tell of the two
Gordians, father and son, who desired to be called


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


l Licinius Seuerus Alexander P; S.A. del. by Mommsen
and Peter. 2 yis P.


1 See Gord., iv. T and note.

2 See Claud., ix. 9 and note.

3 Apparently an allusion to his character as a rough soldier
and in contrast with his colleague Diocletian, of whom
Victor (Caes., xxxix. 8) says: '* Eoque ipso, quod dominum
dici passus, parentem egit.”

4 Maxentius was defeated by Constantine at the Pons


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXXIV. 7—XXXV. 6


after the family of the Antonines: in the first place,
they had not the surname but only the praenomen of
the Antonines ; in the second, as I find in many books,
their name was Antonius, and not Antoninus.!
XXXV. So much concerning Elagabalus, the de-
tails of whose life you have wished me, though un-
willing and reluctant, to gather together from Greek
and Latin books and to set down in writing and
present to you, inasmuch as I have already presented
the lives of earlier emperors. Now I shall begin to
write of emperors who followed after. Of these the
most righteous and the most worthy of careful nar-
ration was Alexander (who was emperor for thirteen
years, whereas the others ruled for but six months or
at most for one or two years), the most distinguished
was Aurelian, but the glory of them all was Claudius,
the founder of your family. About this man I fear
to tell the truth in writing to Your Clemency, lest I
may seem to the malicious to be a flatterer ; but yet
I shall be delivered from the envy of evil men, inas-
much as I have seen that in the eyes of others also
he was most illustrious. To these rulers must be
joined Diocletian, father of the golden age, and
Maximian, father of the iron,? as they commonly say,
and all the others down to the time of Your Piety.
But as for you, O revered Augustus, you shall receive
honour in the many and more eloquent pages of those
to whom a more kindly nature has granted this boon.
To these emperors we must add Licinius and
Maxentius, all whose power has been made subject to
your sway,* writing of them, however, in such a way


Mulvius near Rome in 312, Licinius near Chalcedon in Bith-
ynia in 324.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS


! de om. in P.


ANTONINUS ELAGABALUS XXXV. 7


that full justice shall be done to their prowess. For
I will not, as is the wont of many writers, detract
from the greatness ofthose who have been vanquished,
since I perceive that if, in writing of them, I shall tell
the whole truth concerning the noble qualities which
they possessed, it will but enhance your glory.


VOL. If. N


AELII LAMPRIDII


1 See Heliog., xvii. 4 and note.

? On his name see note to Heltog., v. 1.

3 Arca Caesarea or Caesarea ad Libanum in Syria, on the
western slope of the Lebanon range, a short distance N.E. of
the modern city of Tripoli.

* His father's name was Gessius Marcianus. "Varius Mar-
cellus was the father of Elagabalus.

54.e. Julia Maesa, erroneously called Varia in these bio-
graphies; see note to Macr., ix. 1.

*This statement is incorrect; see note to Heliog., v. 1.

? See Pius, iv. 7 and note.


VEI
Dites


av one


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


BY
AELIUS LAMPRIDIUS


I. After the murder of Varius Elagabalus—for thus
we prefer to call him rather than Antoninus, for,
plague that he was, he showed none of the traits of
the Antonines, and his name Antoninus, furthermore,
was expunged from the public records by order of
the senate!—for the curing of the human race
the imperial power passed to Aurelius Alexander.?
He was born in the city of Arca? and he was the son
of Varius,* the grandson of Varia,? and the cousin of
Elagabalus himself. The name of Caesar had been
bestowed on him by the senate previously, that is,
after the death of Macrinus; now he was given the
name of Augustus, and it was further granted him
by the senate that on the same day he should take
the title of Father of his Country, the proconsular
command, the tribunician power," and the privilege
of making five proposals to the House.?

Now lest this quick succession of honours may
seem precipitate,? I will set forth the reasons which


8 See note to Marc., vi. 6.

? The title of Pater Patriae, particularly, had not teen
assumed by earlier constitutional emperors nntil some time
after their accession to power; see Hadr., vi. 4; Pius, vi. 6.


N 2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1 Antoninum P.


lOn Vindex and Antonius Saturninus see notes to Pesc.
Niga ix. 2.

? See Sev., v. 1.

3 On his popularity see Heliog., xiii. 3 and note.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER I. 5—II. 4


moved the senate to grant and the Emperor to
accept them. For it befitted neither the senate's
dignity to bestow all of them together, nor yet a
good prince to seize upon so many honours at one
time. But the soldiers had now grown accustomed
to appoint their own emperors, often in a disorderly
fashion, and also to change them at will, sometimes
alleging in their own defence that they had taken
action only because they did not know that the
senate had named a ruler. For they had chosen as
emperors Pescennius Niger, Clodius Albinus, Avidius
Cassius, and, in earlier years, Lucius Vindex and
Lucius Antonius 1; and they had chosen even Severus
too, after the senate had already named Julianus as
prince.? And thus were sown the seeds of civil wars,
in which it necessarily happened that soldiers en-
listed to fight against a foreign foe fell at the hands of
their brothers. II. For this reason, then, the senate
hastened to bestow all these honours on Alexander
at the same time, as though he had long been em-
peror. To this, moreover, must be.added the great
desire of the senate and people for Alexander? now
that they had been delivered from that scourge who
had not only sullied the name of the Antonines but
brought shame upon the Roman Empire. Indeed,
they vied with one another in bestowing on him all
manner of titles and powers. He, then, was the first
of all the emperors to receive at one time all insignia
and all forms of honour, commended to them, as he
was, by the name of Caesar, earned some years pre-
viously, but commended still more by his life and
morals. He had won great favour, too, from the
fact that Elagabalus had tried to slay him, but with-
out success because of the resistance of the soldiers


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lorationes declamatae P corr, 2 44 om. in P. 5 ex om.
in P. 4 eos digno adesce P.


! See Heltog., xiii. 4 f.
? So he is called Alexander Mamaeae in c. v. 2; Aurel.,
xli. 4; Car., iii. 4. The appellation ‘‘ son of Mamaea " was,
of course, not official, but it is significant as denoting his
entire subjection to his mother; see note to c. xiv. 7.

? Nothing is known of any of these.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER II. 5—IlI. 5


and the opposition of the senate.! All these con-
siderations, however, would have availed him little,
had he not shown himself worthy that the senate
should honour him, that the soldiers should be eager
for his preservation, and the voice of all good citizens
name him their prince.

III. Alexander, then, the son of Mamaea (for so
he is called by many ?), had been nurtured from his
earliest boyhood in all excellent arts, civil and mili-
tary. Nota single day, indeed, did he allow to pass
in which he did not train himself for literature and
for military service. His teachers were ?: during his
early childhood, Valerius Cordus, Titus Veturius, and
Aurelius Philippus (his father's freedman who after-
wards wrote his life); while he lived in his native
town, the Greek grammarian, Neho, the rhetorician
Serapio, and the philosopher Stilio; and when he
was at Rome, the grammarian Scaurinus (the son of
Scaurinus * and a most famous teacher) and the
rhetoricians Julius Frontinus, Baebius Macrianus,
and Julius Granianus, whose exercises in rhetoric
are in use today. In Latin literature, however, he
was not very proficient, as is shown by the orations
which he delivered in the senate, and also by the
speeches which he made before the soldiers or the
people. And indeed he did not greatly value the
power to speak in Latin, although he was very fond
of men of letters, fearing them at the same time,
lest they might write something harsh about him.
Indeed, it was his wish that those whom he found
worthy of the privilege should be informed of all


3 Probably the Terentius Scaurinus who was the teacher
of Lucius Verus; see Ver., ii. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

5semper curaret. erat praeterea cunctis hominibus
amabilis et ab aliis Pius appellabatur, ab omnibus

6certe sanctus et utilis rei publicae. huic sors in


1 cum antea ins. by Egnatius; om. in P; lacuna assumed by
Peter. 2ac wirilem  Eyssenhardt, Peter?; aculem P.
3 decorem ei inesset Peter? ; decurewm esse P.


1 Dominus was the title by which the emperor was usually
addressed. Its use had been discouraged by the early
emperors, notably by Augustus and Tiberius; see Suetonius,
Aug, lii; Tib., xxvii. ; Dio, lvii. 8. It was adopted by
Domitian and was regularly in use after his time.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER IV. 1-6


that he did, both officially and in his private life, and
he even gave them information himself if they
chanced to be absent at the time, begging them that
if it were true, they should include it in their books.

IV. He forbade men to call him Lord,! and he
gave orders that people should write to him as they
would to a commoner, retaining only the title
Imperator. He removed from the imperial footwear
and garments all the jewels that had been used by
Elagabalus,? and he wore a plain white robe without `
any gold, just as he is always depicted, and ordinary
cloaks and togas. He associated with his friends?
on such familiar terms that he would sit with them
as equals, attend their banquets, have some of them
as his own daily guests, even when they were not
formally summoned, and hold a morning levee like
any senator with open curtains and without the
presence of ushers, or, at least, with none but those
who acted as attendants at the doors, whereas pre-
viously it was not possible for people to pay their
respects to the emperor for the reason that he could
not see them.

As to his physique, in addition to the grace and the
manly beauty still to be seen in his portraits and
statues, he had the strength and height of a soldier
and the vigour of the military man who knows the
power of his body and always maintains it. Besides
this, he endeared himself to all men ; some even
called him Pius, but all regarded him as a holy man
and one of great value to the state. And when
Elagabalus was plotting against him, he received in


? See Heliog., xxiii. 3-4.
3 See note to Heliog., xi. 2.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


templo Praenestinae talis exstitit, cum illi Helio-
gabalus insidiaretur :


Si qua fata aspera rumpas,
tu Marcellus eris.


V. Alexandri nomen accepit quod in templo dicato
apud Arcenam urbem Alexandro Magno natus esset,
cum casu illuc die festo Alexandri cum uxore pater isset!

5 recusavit et Magni nomen ei quasi Alexandro oblatum *
senatus iudicio.

VI. Interest relegere orationem, qua nomen


! pater isset Petschenig, Peter?; patris P. ? eum om. in
3 Caracallo Lessing, Petschenig ; : Caracalli P, Peter.
test oblatum P ; est del. by Gruter and Pe'er.


1 Fortuna Primigenia, whose temple at Praeneste (mod.
Palestrina) in Latium was famous for its oracle. Its re.
sponses were issued on sortes, i.e. pieces of wood on which
utterances were inscribed.

2 Aeneid, vi. 882-883, addressed to Marcellus, the nephew
of Augustus.

3 Undoubtedly a fiction, invented because of his name.

4 His birthday was lst October, 208; see the Calendar of


SEVERUS ALEXANDER V. 2—VI. 1


the temple of the Praenestine Goddess ! the follow-
ing oracle :


“If ever thou breakest the Fates’ cruel power,
Thou a Marcellus shalt be." ?


V. He was given the name Alexander because he
was born in a temple dedicated to Alexander the
Great? in the city of Arca, whither his father and
mother had chanced to go on the feast-day of Alex-
ander for the purpose of attending the sacred festival.
The proof of this is the fact that this Alexander, the
son of Mamaea, celebrated as his birthday that very
day on which Alexander the Great departed this
life. The name Antoninus was proffered him by the
senate, but he refused it, although he was connected
with Caracalla by a closer degree of kinship than the
spurious Antoninus. For, as Marius Maximus nar-
rates in his Life of Severus, Severus, at that time
only a commoner and a man of no great position,
married a noble-woman from the East, whose horo-
scope, he learned, declared that she should be the
wife of an emperor 5 ; and she was a kinswoman of
Alexander, to whom Varius Elagabalus, as a matter
of fact, was a cousin on his mother'sside. He refused
also the title of ‘‘ the Great," which, because he was
an Alexander, was offered to him by vote of the
senate.

VI. It will not be without interest to re-read the


Philocalus, C.I.L.,i?, p. 274. Alexander the Great, on the
other hand, died in June.

5 This statement is incorrect, for the mothers of Alexander
and Elagabalus were sisters, the daughters of Julia Maesa
and hence first cousins of Caracalla.

€ i.e., Julia Domna; see Sev., iii. 9.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


Antonini et Magni delatum sibi a senatu recusavit.
quam priusquam praeferam innectam! adclamationes
2senatus, quibus id decretum est. ex actis urbis:
A. d. pridie nonas Martias, cum senatus frequens in
curiam, hoc est in Aedem Concordiae templumque
inauguratum, convenisset, rogatusque esset Aurelius
Alexander Caesar Augustus ut eo veniret,? ac primo
recusasset, quod sciret de honoribus suis agendum,
3 deinde postea venisset, adclamatum : ‘‘ Auguste inno-
cens, diteservent. Alexander imperator, di te servent.
di te nobis dederunt, di conservent. dite ex manibus
4 impuri eripuerunt, dite perpetuent. impurum tyran-
num et tu perpessus es, impurum et obscenum et tu
vivere doluisti. di illum eradicarunt, di te servarunt.
5 infamis imperator rite damnatus. felices nos imperio
tuo, felicem rem publicam. infamis unco tractus est
ad exemplum timoris. luxuriosus imperator iure
punitus est, contaminator honorum iure punitus est.
di immortales Alexandro vitam. iudicia deorum hinc


VII. apparent.” et cum egisset gratias Alexander, ad-


clamatum est: “ Antonine Alexander, di te servent.


linnectam Kellerbauer, Peter?; etiam P. ? ut eo ueniret
Peter; ut concineret P.


! For similar acclamations see c. lvi. 9-10; Avid. Cass.,
xiii. 1-5 ; Com., xviii.-xix. ; Maxim., xvi. 3-7; xxvi. ; Gord., xi.
9-10; Maz.-Balb.,ii. 9-12. "Their genuineness is very doubt-
ful.

2 See note to Com., xv. 4.

3s The correctness of this date is open to question, for the
best evidence points to the 11th March as the day of the murder
of Elagabalus; see O. F. Butler, Studies in the Life of Hel.
(1910), p. 105 f.

* See note to Pert., iv. 9.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER VI. 2—VII. 1


oration in which Alexander refused the names of
Antoninus and “ the Great," which were offered him
by the senate. But before I quote it, I will insert
the acclamations of the senate,! by which these names
were decreed. Extract from the City Gazette ?; On
the day before the Nones of March,’ when the 6 Mar., 222
senate met in fullsession in the Senate-Chamber
(that is, in the Temple of Concord,* a formally conse-
crated sanctuary) and when Aurelius Alexander
Caesar Augustus had been requested to proceed
thither and, after at first refusing for the reason that
he knew that action was to be taken with regard to
his titles, had finally appeared before the senate, the
following acclamations were uttered: “ Augustus,
. free from all guilt, may the gods keep you! Alexander,
our Emperor, may the gods keep you! The gods
have given you to us, may the gods preserve you!
The gods have rescued you from the hands of the foul
man, may the gods preserve you forever! You too
have endured the foul tyrant, you too had reason to
grieve that the filthy and foul one lived. The gods
have cast him forth root and branch, and you have
they saved. The infamous emperor has been duly
condemned. Happy are we in your rule, happy too
is thestate. The infamous emperor has been dragged
with the hook,® as an example of what men should
fear; justly punished is the voluptuous emperor,
punished justly he who defiled the public honours.
May the gods in Heaven grant long life to Alexander!
Thus are the judgments of the gods revealed.” VII.
And when Alexander had expressed his thanks the ac-
clamations arose again: * Antoninus Alexander, may


5 See Heliog., xvii. 1-6.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


Antonine Aureli, di te servent. Antonine Pie, di te
2servent. Antonini nomensuscipias rogamus. praesta
bonis imperatoribus ut Antoninus dicaris. nomen
Antoninorum tu purifica. quod ille infamavit tu
purifica. redde in integrum nomen Antoninorum.
3sanguis Antoninorum se cognoscat. iniuriam Marci tu
vindica. iniuriam Veri tu vindica. iniuriam Bassiani
4tu vindica. peior Commodo solus Heliogabalus, nec
imperator nec Antoninus nec civis nec senator nec
6 nobilis nec Romanus. in te salus, in te vita. ut
vivere delectet, Antoninorum Alexandro vitam. ut
vivere delectet, Antoninus vocetur. Antoninorum
templa Antoninus dedicet. Parthos et Persas An-
6toninus vincat. sacrum nomen sacratus accipiat.
sacrum nomen castus accipiat. Antonini nomen di?
cognoscant, Antoninorum honorem di conservent.
in te omnia, per te omnia. Antonine, aveas."

2contulistis." et cum diceret, adclamatum: “ Haec


1 delectet et P. ? di Jordan, Peter; ut P.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER VII. 2—VIII. 2


the gods keep you! Aurelius Antoninus, may the
gods keep you! Antoninus Pius, may the gods
keep you! Receive the name Antoninus, we be-
seech you. Grant to our righteous emperors this
boon, that you should be called Antoninus. Purify the
name of the Antonines. Purify what he has defiled.
Restore to its former glory the name of the Antonines.
Let the blood of the Antonines know itself once
more. Avenge the wrongs of Marcus. Avenge the
the wrongs of Verus. Avenge the wrongs of
Bassianus. Worse than Commodus is Elagabalus
alone No emperor he, nor Antoninus, nor citizen,
nor senator, nor man of noble blood, nor Roman.
In you is our salvation, in you our life. That we
may have joy in living, long life to Alexander of
the house of the Antonines! That we may have
joy in living, let him be called Antoninus. The
temples of the Antonines let an Antoninus consecrate.
The Parthians and the Persians let an Antoninus
vanquish. The sacred name let the consecrated
receive. The sacred name let the pure receive.
May the gods remember the name of Antoninus,
may the gods preserve the honours of the Antonines !
In you are all things, through you are all things.
Hail, O Antoninus! ”

VIII. After these acclamations Aurelius Alexander
Caesar Augustus spoke: “I thank you, O Conscript
Fathers, and not now for the first time, both for the
name of Caesar and for the life that has been spared
to me, and also because you have bestowed on me
the name of Augustus, the office of Pontifex Maxi-
mus, the tribunician power, and the proconsular
command, all of which you have conferred on me
without precedent on a single day.” And when he


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


3 suscepisti, Antonini nomen suscipe. mereatur senatus,
Antonini mereantur. Antonine Auguste, di te servent,
di te Antoninum conservent. monetae nomen An-
tonini reddatur. templa Antoninorum Antoninus con-
secret."

4 Aurelius Alexander Augustus : “ Ne quaeso, patres
conscripti, ne me ad hanc certaminis necessitatem
vocetis, ut ego cogar tanto nomini satis facere, cum
etiam hoc ipsum nomen licet peregrinum tamen

IX. degentem! in clarissima specie dignitatum?" item
adclamata quae supra. item imperator dixit : “ An-
toninorum nomen? vel iam numen potius quantum?
fuerit, meminit vestra Clementia. si pietatem, quid
Pio sanctius? si doctrinam, quid Marco prudentius ?
si innocentiam, quid Verosimplicius? si fortitudinem,


! degentem Gruter, Peter; digerentem P. 2 omen om.
in P. 3guantum Baehrens, Peter? ; quam P. 434 hoc
ipse P. l


! M. Terentius Varro (116-127 B.c.), a writer of great learn-
ing and versatility. He wrote 74 different works in about
620 books, of which only the Res Rusticae and a part of the
de Lingua Latina are extant.

2 Q. Caecilius Metellus, surnamed Pius because of his efforts
to have his father Metellus Numidicus recalled from the
banishment into which he had been driven in 100 B.c. as the
result of his opposition to Marius and his party.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER VIII. 3—IX. 3


had spoken, they cried out: ‘These honours you
have accepted, now accept also the name Antoninus.
Let the senate be deemed worthy of this boon, let
the Antonines be deemed worthy. Antoninus
Augustus, may the gods keep you, may the gods pre-
serve you as Antoninus! Let the name of Antoninus
appear again on our coins. Let an Antoninus con-
secrate the temples of the Antonines."

Then Aurelius Alexander Augustus spoke again:
* Do not, I beseech you, O Conscript Fathers, do not
force upon me the necessity of so difficult a task, that
I should be constrained to do justice to so great
a name, when even this very name which I now bear,
albeit a foreign one, seems to weigh heavily upon
me. Forallillustrious names are burdensome indeed.
Who, pray, would give the name of Cicero to one who
was dumb, or Varro! to one who was unlearned, or
Metellus? to one who was undutiful? And who
would endure—though this may the gods forfend !—
that the man who failed to live up to the tradition of
his name should continue to dwell amid the most
illustrious forms of honour?" IX. Again the same
acclamations as above. Again the Emperor spoke:
* How great was the name, or rather the divinity, of
the Antonines, Your Clemency remembers well. If
you think of righteousness, who was more holy than
Pius? Ifof learning, who more wise than Marcus?
If of innocence, who more honest than Verus? If of
bravery, who more brave than Bassianus? For on
Commodus I have no wish to dwell, who was the more
depraved for this very reason, that with those evil
ways of his he still held the name of Antoninus.
Diadumenianus, moreover, had neither the time nor
the years, and it was only through his father's


VOL. HU, Oo


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


linpie Petschenig; inte P; inepte Peter. ? lantum P
corr. ; tactum P!; sanctum Salm., Peter. 3 ornabis. id
certe scimus Baehrens, Petschenig ; ornawisit. cerle sumus P ;
ornabis. cerle praesumimus Peter. 4ut Peter; aut P.


1 See Macr., v. 1; vi. 6; Diad. i-i.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER IX. 4—X. 8


artifice that he seized upon this name."! Again the
same acclamations as above. Again the Emperor
spoke: “Surely, not long ago, O Conscript Fathers,
when that filthiest of all creatures, both two-footed
and four-footed, vaunted the name of Antoninus, and
in baseness and debauchery outdid a Nero, a Vitellius,
and a Commodus, you remember what groanings
arose from all, and how in the gatherings of the
populace and of all honourable men there was but
a single cry—that he was unworthy to bear the
name of Antoninus, and that by such a plague as he
that great name was profaned." When he had spoken,
there were again acclamations : ** May the gods avert
such evils! We fear them not with you as our
emperor. We are safe from them with you as our
leader. You have triumphed over vice, you have
triumphed over crime, you have triumphed over dis-
honour. You will add lustre to the name of Anto-
ninus. We foresee it surely, we foresee it clearly.
From your childhood on we have esteemed you, now
too we esteem you." Aga‘n the Emperor: ‘ It is
not that I shrink, O Conscript Fathers, from accept-
ing this revered name merely because I fear that my
life may fall into vices which will cause me to feel
shame for the name; but I do not desire to take a
name which, in the first place, belongs to a house that
is no kin to me, and, in the second, I feel assured,
^ will weigh heavily upon me.” X. And when he had
spoken, there were acclamations as before. Again
he spoke: “ If indeed I take the name of Antoninus,
I may take also the name of Trajan, the name of
Titus, and the name of Vespasian.” And when he
had spoken, there were acclamations: *'As you are
now Augustus, so also be Antoninus." Again the


o2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! moueat om. in P. ? nomen om. in P. 3 primus
Peter; saepius P. di... faueant Flor. Cusanum (see
Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii. p. 801); om by P and Peter.
Ü plurimas gratias sed P corr. ; plurimas sed P! ; plurimas et

eter.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER X. 4—XI. 2


Emperor : “ I see, O Conscript Fathers, what impels
you to bestow upon us this name also. The first
Augustus was the first founder of this Empire, and to -
his name we all succeed, either by some form of
adoption or by hereditary claim. Eventhe Antonines
themselves bore the name of Augustus. Likewise
the first Antoninus gave his name to Marcus and also
to Verus by a process of adoption, while in the case
of Commodus it was inherited, in Diadumenianus
assumed, in Bassianus simulated, but in Aurelius it
would be a mockery.” And when he had spoken,
there were acclamations: “ Alexander Augustus,
may the gods keep you! May the gods in Heaven
look with favour upon your modesty, your wisdom,
your integrity, your purity! Hence we can see what
an emperor you will be, and hence we esteem you.
You will be a proof that the senate can choose its
rulers with wisdom. You will be a proof that the
choice of the senate is the best of all. Alexander
Augustus, may the gods keep you! Let Alexander
Augustus consecrate the temples of the Antonines.
Our Caesar, our Augustus, our emperor, may the gods
keep you! May you be victorious, may you prosper,
and may you rule for many years!" Xl. Alexander
the Emperor spoke : “ I perceive, O Conscript Fathers,
that I have obtained my desire, and I count it as
gain, feeling and expressing the deepest gratitude.
And I will endeavour to make the name which I
tring to this office so famous that it will be coveted
by future emperors and be bestowed upon the
righteous in testimony of your loyalty." Thereupon
there were acclamations: “QO Great Alexander,
may the gods keep you! If you have rejected the
surname Antoninus, accept then the praenomen of


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! accipiam Peter; accepi P. ? uiro ins. by Peter; om.
in P.


! Tn fanciful allusion to Alexander the Great.

? This explanation of the assumption of the name Severus
by Alexander (repeated in c. xxv. 2) is wholly incorrect. He
took the name in order to emphasize his connexion with
Septimius Severus, as Elagabalus had assumed the name
M. Aurelius Antoninus in order to connect himself more
closely with Caracalla. The explanation given here is based
on the general fondness of these biographers for punning on


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XI. 3—XII. 5


‘the Great,'! O Great Alexander, may the gods
keep you!" And when they had cried this out many
times, Alexander Augustus spoke: “It would be
easier, O Conscript Fathers, to take the name of the
Antonines, for in so doing I should make some con-
cession either to kinship or to a joint possession in
that imperial name. But why should 1 accept the
name of ‘the Great’? What great thing have I
done? Alexander, indeed, received it after great
achievements, and Pompey after great triumphs. Be
silent then, O revered Fathers, and do you in your
greatness hold me as one of yourselves rather than
force upon me the use of the name of ‘the Great. ' "
XII. Thereupon they cried out: “Aurelius Alex-
ander Augustus, may the gods keep you!" and all
the rest in the usual manner.

When the senate had adjourned after the trans-
action of much other business on that same day, the
Emperor returned home in the manner of one cele-
brating a triumph. For he seemed much more
illustrious for refusing to receive names which did
not belong to him than if he had received them, and
he obtained from his refusal a reputation for stead-
fastness and mature dignity, since, though but one
single man, or rather youth, he could not be moved
by the persuasions of the entire senate. Neverthe-
less, although the entreaties of the senate could not
persuade him to take the name of either Antoninus
or “the Great," the troops conferred on him the
name Severus? on account of his great strength of
spirit and his marvellous and matchless fortitude in
the face of the soldiers' insolence. This won him


the n&mes of the emperors; see Perí., i. 1; Sev., xiv. 18;
Macr , xi. 2.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


leurrereni P. 2 quod om. in P.


lAlexander seems to have been unable to control the
soldiers, and there was & succession of mutinies during his
reign ; see c. lii. 3; liii. 3; lix. 4, and the final mutiny which
led to his murder (see note to c. lix. 1). Another mutiny in
Mesopotamia, is recorded by Dio (lxxx. 4) and a mutiny of
the praetorian guard led to the murder of Ulpian; see c.
li. 4.

3 Alexander's strictness in discipline is a favourite topic
of the biographer; see c. xxv. 2; 1. 1; li. 6; lii.liv.; lix.
5; lxiv. 3. It is even assigned as the cause of his assassina-
tion (c. lix. 6) but wholly incorrectly; see note to c. lix. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XIII. 1-5


profound respect in his own time, and great renown
among later generations, especially since it came to
pass further that he was given this name on account
of his courageous spirit ; for he is the only one of
whom it is known that he dismissed mutinous legions,
as I shall tell at the proper place,! and, moreover,
inflicted the harshest punishments on soldiers who
chanced to commit any deed which could seem un-
lawful, as we shall also relate in its own place.*.
XIII. The omens that predicted his rule were as
follows: First, he was born on the anniversary of
that day on which, it is said, Alexander the Great
departed this life; secondly, his mother bore him.
in a temple dedicated to Alexander ; and thirdly, he
was called by Alexanders name. Furthermore, a
dove's egg of purple hue,® laid the very day he was
born, was presented to his mother by an old woman ;
and from this the soothsayers prophesied that he
would indeed be emperor, but not for long, and that
he would speedily succeed to the imperial power.
Furthermore, a picture of the Emperor Trajan, which
hung over his father's marriage-bed, fell down upon
the bed at the time that Alexander was born in the
temple. We must add, moreover, that a woman
named Olympias acted as his nurse—this was also
the name of the mother of Alexander the Great—
and it happened by chance that he was reared by
a certain peasant named Philip—which was the name
of Alexander's father.* It is said that on the day


In general, there is no reason to believe that he was a severe
disciplinarian, &nd this quality seems to be attributed to him
as part of the tendency of the biography to eulogize him.

3 For a similar portent see Geta, iii. 2.

* These statements seem wholly fanciful.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


die apud Arcam Caesaream stella primae magnitudinis
visa et sol circa domum patris eius fulgido ambitu
6coronatus. cum eius natalem haruspices commen-
darent, dixerunt eum summam rerum tenturum, id-
circo quod hostiae de ea villa quae esset Severi im-
peratoris adductae essent, et quas in illius honorem
7 coloni parassent. nata in domo laurus iuxta persici
arborem intra unum annum persici arborem vicit.
| unde etiam coniectores dixerunt Persas ab eo esse
XIV. vincendos. mater eius pridie quam pareret somniavit
2se purpureum dracunculum parere. pater eadem
nocte in somniis vidit alis se Romanae Victoriae, quae
3 in senatu, ad caelum vehi. ipse cum vatem consuleret
de futuris, hos accepisse dicitur versus adhuc par-

4 vulus; et primum quidem sortibus


1 referretur Jordan, Peter! ; referetur P, Peter’. 2 musica-
que <cad> Jordan, Peter? ; et musica quae P.


1 The native city of his father; see c. i. 2 and note.
2The peach (malus Persica) was brought to Italy from
Persia or Transcaucasia in the first century after Christ.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XIII. 6—XIV. 5


after his birth a star of the first magnitude was visible
for the entire day at Arca Caesarea,! and also that in
the neighbourhood of his father’s house the sun was
encircled with a gleaming ring. And the soothsayers,
when they commended his birthday to the favour of
the gods, declared that he would some day hold the
supreme power, because some sacrificial victims were
brought in from a farm of the Emperor Severus,
which the tenants had made ready in order to do
honour to the Emperor. ‘Also, a laurel sprang up in
his house close to a peach-tree, and within a single
year it outgrew the peach, and from this the sooth-
sayers predicted that he was destined to conquer the
Persians? XIV. The night before he was born his
mother dreamed that she brought forth a purple snake,
and on the same night his father saw himself in a dream
carried to the sky on the wings of the Victory of
Rome which is in the Senate-Chamber. And when
Alexander himself consulted a prophet about his
future, being still a small child, he received, it is
said, the following verses, and first of all, by the
oracle


“Thee doth empire await on earth and in Heaven’


it was understood that he was even to have a place
among the deified emperors ; then came


‘Thee doth empire await which rules an empire "


by which it was understood that he should become
ruler of the Roman Empire; for where, save at Rome,
is there an imperial power that rules an empire? This
same story, too, is related with regard to some Greek
verses. Moreover, when at his mother's bidding he
turned his attention from philosophy and music to


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


traduceret, Vergilii sortibus huiusmodi inlustratus
est :


Excudent alii spirantia mollius aera,

credo equidem, vivos ducent de marmore vultus,
orabunt causas melius caelique meatus
describent radio et surgentia sidera dicent ;

tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento.
hae tibi erunt artes pacisque imponere morem,
parcere subiectis et debellare superbos.


6fuerunt multa alia signa, quibus principem humani
generis esse constaret,

Nimius ardor oculorum et diutius intuentibus gravis,
divinatio mentis frequentissima, rerum memoria
singularis, quam mnemonico Acholius ferebat adiutam.

XV. Ubi ergo Augustum agere coepit, primum re-
movit omnes iudices a re publica et a ministeriis atque


1 Aeneid, vi. 848-854.

2Cited also in c. xlviii. 7; lxiv. 5. In Aurel., xii. 4, he is
said to have been the magister admissionum of Valerian.
Nothing else is known of him, and it is not improbable that
he and Encolpius (c. xvii. 1; xlviii, 7) are inventions of the
biographer.

? Alexander was 18 years old at his accession and the
government was carried on entirely by Mamaea after the death
of Julia Maesa in 226; see Herodian, vi. 1, 1-5. She was
clever enough to conceal the weak and indolent character of
her son by providing him with excellent advisers, notably
ee and attributing to him all the reforms instituted by
them,

‘Her greed is attested by Herodian (vi. 1, 8). It brought
the reign of Alexander into great disrepute and was one of the


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XIV. 6—XV. 1


other pursuits, he seemed to be alluded to in the
following verses from the Vergil-oracle ! :


“Others, indeed, shall fashion more gracefully life-
breathing bronzes,

Well I believe it, and call from the marble faces
more lifelike,

Others more skilfully plead in the court-room and
measure out closely

Pathways through Heaven above and tell of the stars
in their risings ;

Thou, O Roman, remember to rule all the nations
with power. |

These arts ever be thine: The precepts of peace
to inculcate,

Those that are proud to cast down from their seats,
to the humbled show mercy.”


There were many other portents, too, which made it
clear that he was to be the ruler of all mankind.

His eyes were very brilliant and hard to look at
for a long time. He was very often able to read
thoughts and he had an exceptional memory for
facts—though Acholius? used to maintain that he
was aided by a mnemonic device. After he succeeded
to the imperial power, while still a boy, he used to do
everything in conjunction with his mother, so that
she seemed to have an equal share in the rule,’ a
woman greatly revered, but covetous and greedy
for gold and silver.*

XV. When he began to play the part of emperor, his
first act was to remove from their official posts and


causes of his downfall. Alexander's own tendency for amassing
wealth is alluded to in c. xliv. 2 and lxiv. 3.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


quem adscriptum, id est vacantivum, haberet, ne an- —


nonis rem publicam gravaret, dicens malum publicum?
esse imperatorem, qui ex visceribus provincialium
homines non necessarios nec rei publicae utiles pas-


—— —— ———À


4ceret. furesiudices? iussit in civitatibus ullis numquam
videri et si essent visi deportari per rectores provinci- .


! nisi om. in P!, 2 publicum Cas., Jordan ; pupillum P
populi uillicum Salm., Peter. 3 iudices Editor (see
xvii. 1-2); iudicare P, Peter; iudicata re von Winterfelc
Walter, 3 per om, in P.


! i.e. the thirty-five tribes made up of the free citizens.

* Legionary soldiers received full citizenship when honour-
ably discharged from the service.

3 See note to Pesc. Nig., iii. 8.

1 This body was the consilium principis, further described
in c. xvi. 1-2. Some of its members are enumerated in
c. lxviii, 1. It included, besides Ulpian, his fellow. prefect,


Cee all


——_ *


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XV. 2—XVI. 1


duties and from all connexion with the government
all those judges whom that filthy creature had raised
from the lowest class, Next, he purified the senate
and the equestrian order; then he purified the
tribes! and the lists of those whose positions de-
pended on the privileges accorded to soldiers,? and
the Palace, too, and all his own suite, dismissing from
service at the court all the depraved and those of ill-
repute. And he permitted none save those who
were needed to remain in the retinue of the Palace.
Then he bound himself by an oath that he would not
retain any supernumeraries, that is, any holders of
sinecures, his purpose being to relieve the state of the
burden of their rations; for he characterized as a
public evil an emperor who fed on the vitals of the
provincials any men neither. necessary nor useful to
the commonwealth. He issued orders that judges
guilty of theft should never appear in any city, and
that if they did, they should be banished by the ruler of
the province. He gave careful attention to the
rationing of the troops, and he inflicted capital
punishment on tribunes who gave any privileges to
soldiers in return for tithes of their rations? He
issued instructions that the chiefs of the bureaus and
those jurists who were most learned and most loyal
. to himself,* of whom the foremost at that time was
Ulpian,® should examine and arrange in order all
state-business and all law-suits, and then submit
them to himself.

XVI. The respective rights of the people and the
privy-purse he provided for in innumerable just laws,


the other great jurist of the time, Julius Paulus ; see c. xxvi.
5; Pesc. Nig., vii. 4.
è On Ulpian see c, xxvi. 5 and Helieg., xvi. 2.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


l In 11 B.c. this number was lowered by Augustus to under
400; see Dio, liv. 85, 1. Afterwards, however, he ordered
that the number should vary with the importance of the
measure to be enacted; see Dio, lv. 8. In 356 A.D. a quorum
for the election of & praetor consisted of only fifty senators;
see Cod, Theodosianus, vi. 4, 9.

? Not necessarily members of the consilium but experts
summoned to give &dvice on some particular question.

3 Mentioned also in c. xlviii. 7, but not otherwise known.
Both he and Septimius (§ 2, also cited in c. xlviii. 7) are


- Jue e -


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XVI. 2—XVII. 2


and he never formally issued an imperial order save
in conjunction with twenty of the most learned
jurists and at least fifty men of wisdom who were also
skilled in speaking, his purpose being to have in his
council as many votes as were requisite to pass a
decree of the senate. The opinion of each man
would be asked and whatever he said written down,
but before anyone spoke, he was granted time for
inquiry and reflection, in order that he might not be
compelled to speak without due thought on matters
of great importance. It was his custom, furthermore,
when dealing with matters of law or public business,
to summon only those who were learned and skilled
in speaking,? but when matters of war were discussed,
to summon former soldiers and old men who had
served with honour and had knowledge of strategic
positions, warfare, and camps ; and he would also
send for all the men of letters, particularly those
versed in history, and ask them what action in cases
like those under discussion had been taken by pre-
vious emperors, either of the Romans or of foreign
nations. |

XVII. Encolpius? with whom Alexander was on
most intimate terms, used to say that the Emperor,
whenever he saw a thieving judge, had a finger ready
to tear out the man's eye; such was his hatred for
those whom he found guilty of theft. It is told,
furthermore, by Septimius, who has given a góod
account of Alexander's life, that so great was his in-
dignation at judges, who, although not actually found


probably, like Acholius (c. xiv. 6), wholly fictitious, invented
by the biographer in order to embellish his narrative with the
citation of sources.
VOL. Il. P


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


furtorum fama laborassent, etiamsi damnati non
essent, ut, si eos casu aliquo videret, commotione
animi stomachi choleram evomeret toto vultu in-


3ardescente,! ita ut nihil loqui posset. nam cum qui-


4 principem? salutatum venisset, exclamavit : “O Marna,


XVIII.


2salutatus consessum obtulit omnibus senatoribus at-


à


l uultui non ardescente ?!, 2 principem Edit. princ.,
Peter?; principes P, Peter!. Sne ins. by Edit. princ. and
Peter?; om. in P.


1The patron-deity of Gaza in Palestine, later identified
with Zeus. His cult is frequently mentioned in early
Christian writers as an opponent of Christianity.

? 4.e. not as Domine ; seec. iv. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XVII. 3—XVIII. 4


guilty, yet laboured under the reputation of being
dishonest, that, even if he merely chanced to see
them, he would vent all the bile of his anger in great
perturbation of spirit and with his whole countenance
aflame, so that he became unable to speak. Indeed,
when a certain Septimius Arabianus, who had been
notorious because of accusations of theft, but had
been acquitted under Elagabalus, came with the
senators to pay his respects to the Emperor, Alexander
exclaimed: “QO Marna,! O Jupiter, O ye gods in
Heaven, not only is Arabianus alive, but he comes
into the senate, and perhaps he is even hoping for
some favour from me ; does he consider me so foolish
and so stupid ? ”

In greeting him at his levees it was customary to
address him by his name only, that is, “ Hail,
Alexander ”.? XVIII. And if any man bowed his
head or said aught that was over-polite as a flatterer,
he was either ejected, in case the degree of his
station permitted it, or else, if his rank could not be
subjected to graver affront, he was ridiculed with loud
laughter. At his levees he granted an audience to
all senators, but even so he admitted to his presence
none but the honest and those of good report; and—
according to the custom said to be observed in the
Eleusinian mysteries, where none may enter save
those who know themselves to be guiltless—he gave
orders that the herald should proclaim that no one
who knew himself to be a thief should come to pay
his respects to the emperor, lest he might in some
way be discovered and receive capital punishment.
Also, he forbade any one to worship him, whereas
Elagabalus had begun to receive adoration in the
manner of the king of the Persians. Furthermore,


P2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


‘O word kAéjras óAtya. Sods éexpevferar.


XIX. Praefectum praetorii sibi ex senatus auctori-
tate constituit, praefectum urbi a senatu accepit.
alterum praefectum praetorii fecit, qui ne fieret
etiam fugerat, dicens invitos non ambientes in re

3adprobati, sine ullius indulgentiae proposito. idem
senatores nonnisi ad summorum in Palatio virorum
suffragium fecit, dicens magnum virum esse oportere

4qui faceret senatorem, idem libertinos numquam in
equestrem locum redegit, adserens seminarium sena-
torum equestrem locum esse.


'erearetur Edit. princ. and later editors; curaretur P;
carcumiretur. Peter.


1This was in accord with Alexander’s general policy of
granting the senate a larger share in the administration of
the empire and increasing its prestige; see also c. xxiv. 1;
xlii. 2; xlvi. 5. It had been customary to advance the pre-
fect of the guard, on his retirement, to membership in the
senatorial order (see Hadr., viii. 7 and note; Com., iv. 7), but
now the office was opened to senators as well as knights, and
those knights who were appointed to it were raised to
senatorial rank; see c. xxi. 3.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XVIII. 5—XIX. 4


he was the originator of the saying that only thieves
complain of poverty—their purpose being to conceal
the wickedness of their lives. He used also to quote
a well known proverb about thieves, using a Greek
version which is rendered into Latin thus: ‘‘ Whoso
steals much but gives a little to his judges, he shall
go free." The Greek, however, is as follows:


* Who much has thieved, through payment small
shall be absolved.”


XIX. He always chose his prefects of the guard
subject to the authorization of the senate! and the
senate actually appointed the prefect of the city.
Once he even appointed as second prefect of the
guard? a man who had tried to avoid the appoint-
ment, saying that it was the reluctant and not the
seekers of office who should be given positions in the
state. Fle never appointed anyone to the senate
without consulting all the senators present; for it
was his policy that a senator should be chosen only in
accordance with the opinions of all, that men of the
highest rank should give their testimony, and that, if
either those who gave testimony or those who subse-
quently expressed their opinion had spoken falsely,
they should be degraded to the lowest class of citizens,
the sentence being carried out without any prospect
of mercy, just as if they had been found guilty of fraud.
Moreover, he never appointed senators except on
the vote of the men of highest rank in the Palace,
asserting that he who created a senator should himself
be a great man. And he would never enrol freedmen
in the equestrian order, for he always maintained
that this order was the nursery for senators.


2See note to Hadr., ix. 5,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lquod sentiebant Peter, Jordan; consentiebant P!; con-
sentiebat P corr., acc. to Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii., p. 355.
? idque in factum P. 3 obicerent et ins. by Peter; om. in P.
4 perraras Peter; erraras P! ; naras P corr., acc. to Mommsen,
Ges. Schr., vii., p. 855.


1 On the amici see note to Heliog., xi. 2. They were divided
into amici primae and secundae admissionis, corresponding in
general to the senatorial and equestrian orders, although this
principle of distinction was not carried out rigidly.

3 She is not mentioned elsewhere. In the autumn of 225
Alexander married Sallustia Barbia Orbiana, mentioned in
inscriptions and portrayed on coins of 225-227. Memmia (if
the name is not apocryphal) was perhaps the wife (unnamed)


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XX. 2—XXI. 1


XX. Soconsiderate was he that he would never have


anyone ordered to stand aside, always showed him- >-


self courteous and gracious to all, visited the sick, not
merely his friends of the first and second degrees,!
but also those ot lower rank, desired that every man
should speak his thoughts freely and heard him when
he spoke, and, when he had heard, ordered improve-
ment and reform as the case demanded ; but if any-
thing was not done well he would reprove it in
person, though without any arrogance or bitterness of
spirit. He would grant an audience to any except
those whom persistent rumours charged with dis-
honesty, and he would always make inquiries con-
cerning the absent. Finally when his mother
Mamaea and his wife Memmia,? the daughter of
Sulpicius, a man of consular rank, and the grand-
daughter of Catulus, would often upbraid him for
excessive informality, saying, “ You have made your
rule too gentle and the authority of the empire less
respected," he would reply, * Yes, but I have made
it more secure and more lasting." In short, he
never allowed a day to pass without doing some kind,
some generous, or some righteous deed, and yet he
never ruined the public treasury.

XXI. He gave orders that few sentences should
be pronounced, but those that were pronounced he
would not reverse. He assigned public revenues to


of whom Herodian records that Mamaea became jealous
of her and had her banished to Africa, at the same time
putting to death on the charge of conspiracy her father, who
had been promoted to high office by Alexander; see Herodian,
vi. 1, 9-10. This event is also alluded to in c. xlix. 3-4, where
the father-in-law is called Macrinus, but he cannot be
identified with certainty with the Sulpicius of the present
passage.


| 215


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


2proprias fabricas deputavit. faenus publicum tri-
entarium exercuit, ita ut pauperibus plerisque sine
usuris pecunias dederit ad agros emendos, reddendas
de fructibus.

5 Maximus dixit. Alexander autem idcirco senatores
esse voluit praefectos praetorii, ne quis non senator
de Romano senatore iudicaret.

9  Commeatum populi Romani sic adiuvit, ut, cum


!non diu P. *continentes ins. by Kellerbauer and Peter? ;
om. in P. 3cumins.in Pcorr.; om.in Pl, ‘4 prouehendis
Mommsen ; prouendis P, &cc. to Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii.,
p. 855; promouendis Peter.


— — —Ó—


1 This was a very low rate; see Pius, ii. 8 and note.

? See note to c. xix. 1.

3On the title see note to Avid. Cass., i. 1.

*4.e. dismiss him from office; see note to Hadr., ix. 4.

5 On this principle see Hadr., vii. 4 and note; Sev., vii. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXI. 2-9


individual communities for the advancement of their
own special handicrafts. And he loaned out public
money on interest at four-per-cent,! but to many of
the poor he even advanced money without interest
for the purchase of lands, the loans to be repaid from
their profits.

His prefects of the guard he would promote to the
rank of senator? in order that they might belong to
the class of The Illustrious? and be so addressed..
Previous to his time such promotions had been made
rarely, or, if made at all, had been of short duration ;
indeed—as Marius Maximus says in many of his
biographies—whenever an emperor wished to appoint
a successor to the prefect of the guard,‘ he merely
had a freedman take him a tunic with the broad
stripe. Alexander, however, in wishing the prefects
to be senators had this end in view, namely, that no
one might pass judgment on a Roman senator who
was not a senator himself.’

He knew all about his soldiers, wherever he might
be; even in his bed-chamber he had records contain-
ing the numbers of the troops and the length of each
man's service, and when he was alone he constantly
went over their budgets, their numbers, their several
ranks, and their pay, in order that he might be
thoroughly conversant with every detail Finally,
whenever there was anything to be done in the
presence of the soldiers, he could even call many of
them by name. He would also make notes about
those whom he was to promote and read through
each memorandum, actually making a note at the
same time both of the date and the name of the man
on whose recommendation the promotion was made.

He greatly improved the provisioning of the


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


l hic empta Salm., Peter; uicem pia P. ? conferre
rationes P, Peter. 3 retinendos Cornelissen, Peter?; redi-
mendos P, Peter.!


———


1 The coins of Alexander show five different liberalitates, or
distributions of grain or money to the people; see Cohen, iv?,
p. 412-417, nos. 107-145. This number is not in accord
with the statement in c. xxvi. 1, which, accordingly, is in-
correct.

? By remitting the tax levied on them; see c. xxxii. 5.

3 See Sev., xviii. 3.

5 i.e. Claudius, a barber; see Heliog., xii. 1.

5 The text is evidently corrupt.

5 Perhaps the buildings described in c. xxv. 3-6,

"A reversal of Severus policy; see Sev., xvii. 1l. On his
general interest in Judaism and Christianity see c. xxix. 2;
xliii. 6-7; xlv. 7; xlix. 6; li. 7.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXII. 1-7


populace of Rome, for, whereas Elagabalus had
wasted the grain-supply, Alexander, by purchasing
grain at his own expense, restored it to its former
status! XXII. In order to bring merchants to Rome
of their own accord he bestowed the greatest privileges
on them,? and he established anew the largess of oil
which Severus had given to the populace? and
Elagabalus had reduced when he conferred the
prefecture of the grain-supply on the basest.* The
right of bringing suit, which that same filthy
wretch had abrogated, he restored to all. He erected .
in Rome very many great engineering-works.6 He
respected the privileges of the Jews and allowed the
Christians to exist unmolested.’ He paid great
deference to the Pontifices, to the Board of Fifteen,
and to the Augurs, even permitting certain cases in-
volving sacred matters, though already decided by
himself, to be reopened and presented in a different
aspect. Whenever he discovered that the praises
accorded to a returning provincial governor were
genuine and not the result of intrigue, he would
always ask the man to ride in his own carriage with
him when on a journey and also help him by means
of presents, saying that rogues should be driven from
public office and impoverished, but that the upright
should be retained and enriched. Once, when the
populace of Rome petitioned him for a reduction of
prices, he had a herald ask them what kinds of food
they considered too dear, and when they cried out


8 The quindecimviri sacris faciendis, or keepers of the
Sibylline Books, which contained formulas or verses officially
consulted by the senate at great crises. The emperor was
always a member of this board as well as of the pontifices and
augures ; see note to Marc., vi. 3.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1 octo minutulis Mommsen ; oclominutalis P, Peter. 2un-
tumquemque P. 3agebai Editor; ageret P; agere Peter.
4 fumos P corr., acc. to Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii., p. 355;
fumus P! ; fumum Peter.


l The argenteus minutulus (so also Aurel., ix. 7; xii. 1)
was the small silver coin current in the third century, corres-
ponding to the denarius of the earlier period but much de-
preciated in value; see Mommsen, Rim. Miingwesen, p. 783,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXII. 8—XXIII. 8


immediately * beef and pork" he refused to proclaim
a general reduction but gave orders that no one
should slaughter a sow or a suckling-pig, a cow or a
calf. As a result, in two years or, in fact, in little
more than one year, there was such an abundance of
pork and beef, that whereas a pound had previously
cost eight minutuli, the price of both these meats
was reduced to two and even one per pound.

XXIII. When soldiers brought charges against
their tribunes he would hear them with attention,
and whenever he found a tribune guilty, he would
punish him in proportion to the degree of his
offence, leaving no prospect of pardon. In gather-
ing information about any person he would always
use agents whom he could trust, and it was his
practice to employ for this purpose men whom no
one knew, for he used to say that every man could
be bribed. He always had his slaves wear slaves'
attire, but his freedmen that of the free-born. He
removed all eunuchs from his service and gave orders
that they should serve his wife as slaves. And whereas
Elagabalus had been the slave of his eunuchs,?
Alexander reduced them to a limited number and
removed them from all duties in the Palace except
the care of the women's baths ; and whereas Elaga-
balus had also placed many over the administration
of the finances and in procuratorships, Alexander
took away from them even their previous positions.
For he used to say that eunuchs were a third sex of
the human race, one not to be seen or employed by
men and scarcely even by women of noble birth.
And when one of them sold a false promise in his


? Of, c. xxxiv. 3; xlv. 4; lxvi. 8.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


militari centum aureos acceperat, in crucem tolli
iussit per eam viam qua esset servis suis ad suburbana
imperatoria iter frequentissimum.
XXIV. Provincias legatorias praesidales! plurimas
fecit, proconsulares ex senatus voluntate ordinavit.
2 balnea mixta Romae exhiberi prohibuit, quod quidem
iam ante prohibitum Heliogabalus fieri permiserat.
3lenonum vectigal et meretricum et exsoletorum in
sacrum aerarium inferri vetuit, sed sumptibus publicis
ad instaurationem theatri, Circi, Amphitheatri, Stadii
4 deputavit. habuit in animo ut exsoletos vetaret, quod
postea Philippus fecit, sed veritus est ne prohibens
publicum dedecus in privatas cupiditates converteret,
cum homines inlicita magis prohibita poscant furore
Siactati. bracariorum, linteonum, vitrariorum, pellio-
num, claustrariorum, argentariorum, aurificum et


1 praesidales P corr., acc. to Mommsen, ibid. ; praesidiales
P!, Peter.


1 See note to Pius, vi. 4. For his punishment of one
offender see c. xxxvi. 2-3.

?O0n the distinction between imperial provinces (here,
legatoriae) and senatorial (proconsulares) see note to Hadr., iii.
9. In the present passage the work praesidales presents con-
siderable difficulty. The term praeses was used loosely to
designate any provincial governor (see Digesta, i. 18, 1) as in,
e.g., c xxii, 6; xlii. 4; xlvi. 5; Hadr., xiii. 10; Pius, v. 8.
Again, it was used in the later period, after the separation of
the civil and military powers in the provinces, to designate
the civil governor as opposed to the military commander, and
this has been thought to be its application here. There is,
however, no other evidence that this separation was carried
out until the latter part of the third century, and it is very
doubtful if this change can be attributed to Alexander. A
third use of praeses was its application to a procurator of
equestrian rank charged with the governorship of a minor
imperial province as opposed to a senatorial legatus (see


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXIV. 1-5


name ! and received a hundred aurei from one of the
soldiers, he ordered him to be crucified along the
road which his slaves used in great numbers on their
way to the imperial country-estates.

XXIV. Very many provinces which had previously
been governed by legates were transferred by him to
the class which was ruled by equestrian governors,’
and the provinces which were under proconsuls were
governed according to the wish of the senate. He
forbade the maintenance in Rome of baths used
by both sexes—which had, indeed, been forbidden
previously ? but had been allowed by Elagabalus.
He ordered that the taxes imposed on procurers,
harlots, and catamites should not be deposited in the
public treasury, but utilized them to meet the state's
expenditures for the restoration of the theatre, the
Circus, the Amphitheatre, and the Stadium.‘ In fact,
he had it in mind to prohibit catamites altogether—
which was afterwards done by Philip *—but he feared
that such a prohibition would merely convert an evil
recognized by the state into a vice practised in private
—for men when driven on by passion are more apt
to demand a vice which is prohibited. He imposed
a very profitable tax on makers of trousers, weavers of
linen, glass-workers, furriers, locksmiths, silversmiths,
goldsmiths, and workers in the other crafts, and gave


Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsbeamten, p. 385 f.) and it seems most
reasonable to interpret it in this sense here.

3See Hadr., xviii. 10; Marc., xxiii. 8.

4The Theatre of Marcellus (see c. xliv. 7), the Circus
Maximus, the Colosseum, struck by lightning under Macrinus
(see Heliog. , xvii. 8 and note), and the stadium built by
Domitian in the Campus Martius—the site of the modern
Piazza Navona.

5 See c. xxxix. 2; Heliog., xxxii. 6.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! non ante auroram X codd., acc. to Hohl, Klio, xiii., p.
406; annonam P; ante nonam Gruter; ante nonam non
Peter. ? inter P!; principes add. in P corr. ; in thermis
Jordan; imperator Peter.


lSeec xxv. 3.

?'The early closing-hour was restored by the Emperor
Tacitus; see Tac., x. 2.

3 See c. lii. 2.

4 This is not true; see note to c. xii. 4.

5 See c. xxiv. 3 and note.

The Thermae Alexandrianae were a re-building and ex-
tension of the Thermae Neronianae in the Campus Martius
immediately N.E. of the Pantheon ; the name was still ap-
plied fo this locality in the eleventh century. These Thermae
are depicted on coins of 226; see Cohen, iv?, p. 431, no. 297;
p. 449 f., nos. 479-450; p. 483 f., nos. 14 and 17.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXIV. 6—XXV. 6


orders that the proceeds should be devoted to the
maintenance of the baths for the use of the populace,
not only those that he had himself built,! but also
those that were previously in existence; he also as-
signed certain forests as a source of income for the
public baths. In addition, he donated oil for the
lighting of the baths, whereas previously these were
not open before dawn and were closed before sunset.?

XXV. Some writers have maintained in their books
that Alexander's reign was without bloodshed.?
This, however, is not the case, for he was given the
name of Severus by the soldiers because of his
strictness,* and his punishments were in some cases
much too harsh.

. He restored the public works of former emperors 5
and built many new ones himself, among them the
bath which was called by his own name ĉ adjacent to
what had been the Neronian and also the aqueduct
which still has the name Alexandriana. Next to
this bath he planted a grove of trees on the site of
some private dwellings which he purchased and then
tore down. One bath-tub he called “the Ocean”
—and he was the first of the emperors to do this, for
Trajan had not done this? but had merely called his
tubs after the different days. The Baths of Anto-
ninus Caracalla he completed and beautified by the


7 It brought the water for his Thermae, conveying it from
springs near Gabii about eleven miles E. of the city—the
source of the modern Acqua Felice constructed in 1585. It
entered the city at the Porta Maggiore, about 3 km. outside
which, near Vigna Certosa, its ruins are still visible, though
all traces of it inside the walls have vanished.

84.0. in his Thermae, the ruins of which are on the
Esquiline Hill, N.E. of the Colosseum.


VOL. Il. Q


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

8genere marmorandi. statuas colossas in urbe multas

10 A mulieribus famosis matrem et uxorem suam

llsalutari vetuit. contiones in urbe multas habuit

XXVI. more veterum tribunorum et consulum. congiarium
populo ter dedit, donativum ter, carnem populo ad-

2 didit. usuras faeneratorum contraxit ad trientes

3 pensiones, etiam pauperibus consulens. senatores si
faenerarentur, usuras accipere primo vetuit, nisi
aliquid muneris causa acciperent; postea tamen
iussit ut semisses acciperent, donum munus tamen

4sustulit. statuas summorum virorum in foro Traiani
conlocavit undique translatas.

5 Paulum et Ulpianum in magno honore habuit, quos
praefectos ab Heliogabalo alii dicunt factos, alii ab


1plateis ins. by Peter?; om. in P.


! See Carac., ix. 4; Heltog., xvii. 9.

2 See Heliog., xxiv. 6 and note.

3 See c. xxvi. 4 ; xxviii. 6.

* Probably an allusion to the many coins on which he ap-
pears in full armour, e.g. Cohen, iv?, p. 442, no. 406.

5 An alloy of silver and gold. Coins made of it were fre-
quently issued by the cities of Greece and Asia Minor and by
Carthage, but no such Roman coins appear to be extant.

ê See c. xxi. 9 and note.

7TSee c. xxi. 2; Pius, ii. 8 and note.

8 On its site see Hadr., vii. 6 and note.

® The two famous jurists ; see Pesc. Nig., vii. 4 and Heliog.,
xvi, 2and notes. The statement that they were made pre-
fects of the guard by Elagabalus is incorrect, for he seems to


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXV. 7—XXVI. 5


addition of a portico.! Moreover, he was the first to
use the so-called Alexandrian marble-work, which is
made of two kinds of stone, porphyry and Lacedae-
monian marble? and he employed this kind of
material in the ornamentation of the open places in
the Palace. He set up in the city many statues of
eolossal size,? calling together sculptors from all
places. And he had himself depicted on many of
his coins in the costume of Alexander the Great,*
some of these coins being made of electrum 5 but
most of them of gold.

He forbade women of evil reputation to attend the
levees of his mother and his wife. According to the
custom of the ancient tribunes and consuls he made
many speeches throughout the city. XXVI. Thrice
he presented a largess to the populace,? and thrice a
gift of money to the soldiers, and to the populace he
also gave meat. He reduced the interest demanded
by money-lenders to the rate of four-per-cent "— in
this measure, too, looking out for the welfare ofthe
poor—and in the case of senators who loaned money,
he first ordered them not to take any interest at all
save what they might receive as a gift, but afterwards
permitted them to exact six-per-cent, abrogating,
however, the privilege of receiving gifts. He placed
statues of the foremost men in the Forum of Trajan,’
moving them thither from all sides.

He held in especial honour Ulpian and Paulus,’
whom, some say, Elagabalus made prefects of the


have removed Ulpian from office (see Heliog., xvi. 4) and
banished Paulus (Victor, Caes., xxiv. 6). Alexander's appoint-
ment of these two jurists to the prefe ture of the guard was an
E step in the transformation of this post from a
military office to a judicial one.


99';
o2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

7 Basilicam Alexandrinam instituerat inter Campum
Martium et Saepta Agrippiana in lato pedum centum
in longo pedum mille, ita ut tota columnis penderet.

9et omnibus mysticis. in matrem Mamaeam unice
pius fuit, ita ut Romae in Palatio faceret diaetas
nominis Mamaeae, quas imperitum vulgus hodie * ad
Mammam ” vocat, et in Baiano palatium cum stagno,
10quod Mamaeae nomine hodieque censetur. fecit et
alia in Baiano opera magnifica in honorem adfinium
llsuorum et stagna stupenda admisso mari. pontes
quos Traianus fecerat instauravit paene in omnibus
locis, aliquos etiam novos fecit, sed instauratis nomen
Traiani reservavit,
XXVII. In animo habuit omnibus officiis genus
vestium proprium dare et omnibus dignitatibus, ut a


——— — — — i M M MÀ — ——— —À ——— — — A M


1 See c. xvi. 1 and note.

?'The a libellis under Caracalla; see Pesc. Nig., vii. 4 and
note. It was probably from this office that he was removed
by Elagabalus. In an edict of Alexander's of 31st March,
222 (Codex Justinianus, viii. 37, 4) he appears as praefectus
annonae ; in a later one of Ist Dec., 222 (id., iv. 65, 4) he is
prefect of the guard.

3 On the assessores see notes to ruo Nig., vii. 9-4.

4 See Carac., iii. 2 and note.

5Otherwise unknown, but probably connected with his
Thermae.

8 See note to Hadr., xix. 10.

7 This double sanctuary was in the Campus Martius between
the Pantheon and the Saepta, E. of the modern church of
S. Maria sopra Minerva. Originally founded in 43 B.c. (Dio,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXVI. 6—XXVII. 1


guard, others, Alexander himself. Ulpian, it is rela-
ted, was a member of Alexander's council! as well
as chief of à bureau,? but both of them are said to
have sat on the bench? with Papinian.*

Alexander also began the Basilica Alexandrina,‘
situated between the Campus Martius and the Saepta
of Agrippa, one hundred feet broad and one
thousand long and so constructed that its weight
rested wholly on columns ; its completion, however,
was prevented by his death. The shrines of Isis and
Serapis 7 he supplied with a suitable equipment, pro-
viding them with statues, Delian slaves,? and all the
apparatus used in mystic rites. Toward his mother
Mamaea he showed singular devotion, even to the
extent of constructing in the Palace at Rome certain
apartments named after her (which the ignorant mob
of today calls * ad Mammam " ?) and also near Baiae
a palace and a pool, still listed officially under the
name of Mamaea. He also built in the district of
Baiae other magnificent public works in honour of
his kinsmen, and huge pools, besides, formed by
letting in the sea. The bridges which Trajan had
built he restored almost everywhere, and he con-
structed new ones, too, but on those that he restored
he retained Trajan's name.

XXVII. It was his intention to assign a peculiar
type of clothing to each imperial staff, not only to the
various ranks—in order that they might be distin-
guished by their garments—but also to the slaves as


xlvii. 15) it was burned under Titus (Dio, lxvi. 24) but rebuilt
by Domitian (Eutropius, vii. 23).

8 Apparently castrated slaves (see Petronius, Sat., xxiii.),
named from the island of Delos, famous as a slave-mar! et.

? Apparently & popular corruption of Mamaea's name.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


vestitu dinoscerentur, et omnibus servis, ut in populo
possent agnosci, ne quis seditiosus esset, simul ne
2servi ingenuis miscerentur. sed hoc Ulpiano Paulo-
que displicuit, dicentibus plurimum rixarum fore, si
3faciles essent homines ad iniurias. tum satis esse
constituit, ut equites Romani a senatoribus clavi
4qualitate discernerentur. ^ paenulis intra urbam
frigoris causa ut senes uterentur permisit, cum id
vestimenti genus semper itinerarium aut pluviale
fuisset. matronas tamen intra urbem paenulis uti
vetuit, itinere permisit.

7augures vicerit. geometriam fecit. pinxit mire,
cantavit nobiliter, sed numquam alio conscio nisi

8 pueris suis testibus. vitas principum bonorum versi-

9bus scripsit. lyra, tibia, organo cecinit, tuba etiam,
quod quidem imperator numquam ostendit.  palaestes


1The convention had long been in existence that senators
should wear a broad purple stripe on their tunics (see note to
Com., iv. 7) and knights a narrow one.

2 See c. ii. 4.

3See also c. xliv. 4. Astrologers, usually called Chaldaei,
had always been looked upon with suspicion by the Roman
government and were officially banished from Rome as early
as 189 B.c. Though periodically ordered to leave the city
dwing the early empire (see Tacitus, Annals, ii, 82; xii. 52;
Hist., ii. 62), they continued to practise their art and were
consulted by many and even by the emperors themselves.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXVII. 2.9


a class—that they might be easily recognized when
among the populace and held in check in case of
disorder, and also that they might be prevented from
mingling with the free-born. This measure, however,
was regarded with disapproval by Ulpian and Paulus,
who declared that it would cause much brawling in
case the men were at all quick to quarrel. There-
upon it was held to be sufficient to make a distinc-
tion between Roman knights and senators by means
of the width of the purple stripe.! But permission
was given to old men to wear cloaks in the city as a
protection against the cold, whereas previously this
kind of garment had not been used except on journeys
or in rainy weather. Matrons, on the other hand,
were forbidden to wear cloaks in the city but per-
mitted to use them while on a journey.

He could deliver orations in Greek better than in
Latin,? he wrote verse that was not lacking in charm,
and he had a‘taste for music. He was expert in
astrology, and in accordance with his command
astrologers even established themselves officially in
Rome * and professed their art openly for the purpose
of supplying information. He was also well versed
in divination, and so skilled an observer of birds was
he that he surpassed both the Spanish Vascones*
and the augurs of the Pannonians. He was a student
of geometry, he painted marvellously, and he sang
with distinction, though he never allowed any
listeners to be present except his slaves. He com-
posed in verse the lives of the good emperors. He
could play the lyre, the clarinet, and the organ, and
he could even blow the trumpet, but this he never


4In mod. Navarre, the ancestors of the Basques. Their
skill in augury is not attested elsewhere. i


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lIn 222, 226, and 229. On the consul ordinarius see note
to Carac., iv. 8.

2 Originally used to denote the market-day—every eighth
day—the word nundinium (nundinae) came to signify the
portion of the year during which a pair of consuls (ordinarii
or suffecti) held office. This use of the word seems to be due
to the fact that in the early period the consul took over the
fasces from his colleague on the nundinium ; see Mominsen,
Rim. Staatsrecht, ii?, p. 84.

. 3A narrow forum (35-40 metres in width), N.E. of the
Forum Romanum. Its purpose was to connect the Forum
Augusti with the temple of Pax built by Vespasian, and hence
it was called Transitorium. Of the elaborate wall which


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXVII. 10—XXVIII. 6


did openly while emperor. Moreover, he was a
wrestler of the first rank, and he was great in arms,
winning many wars and with great glory. |
XXVIII. He held the regular consulship only
three times,! merely entering upon the office and on
the first legal day? always appointing some one else
in his place. As a judge he was especially harsh
toward thieves, referring to them as guilty of daily
crime, and he would pronounce most severe sentences
on them, declaring that they were the only real
enemies and foes of the state. When a clerk at a
meeting of the imperial council brought in a falsified
brief of à case, he ordered the tendons of his fingers
to be cut, in order that he might never be able to
write again, and then banished him. Once a certain
man, who had held public office and had at some time
been accused of evil living and theft, sought by
means of undue intriguing to enter military service
and was admitted because he had paid court to cer-
tain friendly kings; but immediately thereafter he
was detected in a theft, even in the very presence of
his patrons, and was ordered to plead his case before
the kings, and his guilt being established he was
convicted. Thereupon the kings were asked what
enalty thieves suffered at their hands, and they
plied “the cross,” and at this reply the man was
crucified. So not only was the intriguer condemned
by his own patrons, but also Alexander's policy of
clemency, which he particularly desired to maintain,
was duly upheld.
In the Forum of Nerva? (which they call the


surrounded this forum two Corinthian columns with & portion
of the frieze are still in situ.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! festo editors, Peter; frusta P ; a scurra Salm. ? laces-
siuerant editors, Peter; lacessitus erat P, Salm., Petsche-
nig. 3 et om. in P. 3 primum ut P; ut del. by
Peter. 5 huius P.


! N.W. of the Forum Nervae. Its chief adornment was
the Temple of Mars Ultor, built by Augustus, extensive ruins
of which are still preserved.

? Of, c. xliv. 3; lxiv. 3.

5 4.6. apxiepevs or chief-priest ; it was evidently an allusion
to the high-priesthood of tue god Elagabalus of Emesa, which
was hereditary in his mother's family.

3 Apollonius ot Tyana in Asia Minor, a Pythagorean phil-
osopher and miracle-worker of the first century aíter Christ.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXVIII. 7—XXIX. 3


Forum Transitorium) he set up colossal statues of the
deified emperors, some on foot and nude, others on
horseback, with all their titles and with columns of
bronze containing lists of their exploits, doing this
after the example of Augustus, who erected in his
forum! marble statues of the most illustrious men,
together with the record of their achievements. He
wished it to be thought that he derived his descent
from the race of the Romans, for he felt shame at
being called a Syrian,? especialiy because, on the
occasion of a certain festival, the people of Antioch
and of Egypt and Alexandria had annoyed him with
jibes, as is their custom, calling him a Syrian syna-
gogue-chief and a high priest.?

XXIX. Before I tell of his wars and his campaigns
and his victories, I will relate a few details of his private
every-day life. His manner of living was as follows :
First of all, if it were permissible, that is to say, if
he had not lain with his wife, in the early morning
hours he would worship in the sanctuary of his
Lares, in which he kept statues of the deified
emperors—of whom, however, only the best had been
selected—and also of certain holy souls, among them
Apollonius,* and, according to a contemporary writer,
Christ, Abraham, Orpheus, and others of this same
character and, besides, the portraits of his ancestors.’
If this act of worship were not possible, he would
ride about, or fish, or walk, or hunt, according to the
character of the place in which he was. Next, if the
hour permitted, he would give earnest attention to


5Containing also a statue of Alexander the Great; see
c. XXXi. 5, Marcus Aurelius had had a similar chapel, in which
he kept statues of his teachers ; see Mare., iii. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


| permultam Krauss, Peter? ; post multam P.


1 See c, xvi. 3.

2 The son of Sammonicus Serenus the antiquary ; see
Carac.,iv. 4 and note. A series of sixty-three medical pre.
scriptions written in hexameter verse, attributed in the manu-
Scripts to Quintus Serenus, is usually supposed to have been
written by him.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXIX. 4—XXX. 4


public business, for all matters both military and civil,
were, as I have said previously,! worked over by his
friends—who were, however, upright and faithful and
never open to bribes—and when they had been thus
worked over they were given his endorsement, ex-
cept when it pleased him to make some alteration.
Of course, if necessity demanded it, he would give
his attention to public business even before dawn and
continue at it up to an advanced hour, never growing
weary or giving up in irritation or anger, but always
with a serene brow and cheerful in every task. He
was, indeed, a man of great sagacity, and he could
not be tricked, and whoever tried to impose on him
by some sharp practice was always found out and
punished.

XXX. After the public business, whether military
or civil, he would give even greater attention to read-
ing Greek, usually Plato's Republic. When he read
Latin, there was nothing that he would read in
preference to Cicero on Duties and on the State, but
sometimes he would read speeches or the poets,
among them Serenus Sammonicus,? whom he himself
had known and loved, and also Horace. He would
read, too, the life of Alexander the Great, whom he
particularly sought to resemble, although he always
denounced his drunkenness and his brutality toward
his friends, in spite of the fact that these vices were
denied by trustworthy writers, whom Alexander in
most cases believed. After his reading he would
devote himself to exercise, either ball-playing or run-
ning or some mild wrestling. Then, after having
himself rubbed with oil, he would bathe, but rarely,
if ever, in a hot bath, for he always used a swimming-
pool, remaining in it about an hour ; and before he


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1g ins. by Jordan and Peter? ; om. in P,


1The Aqua Claudia, begun by Caligula and finished by
Claudius in 52 A.D., drew its water from the Sabine Mountains
in the neighbourhood of the mod. Subiaco. "Together with the
Aqua Anto Novus, it enters Rome on high arches at the Porta
Maggiore.

?See Hadr., xxi. 4; Ael., v. 4-5.

3 See note to Pesc. Nig., vii. 4.

* On the amici see note to Heliog., xi. 2.

5 Cf. c. lxvii. 2.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXX. 5—XXXI. 4


took any food he would drink about a pint of cold
water from the Claudian aqueduct.! On coming out
of the bath he would take a quantity of milk and
bread, some eggs, and then a drink of mead. Thus
refreshed, he would sometimes proceed to luncheon,
sometimes put off eating until the evening meal, but
more frequently he took luncheon. And he often
partook of Hadrian's tetrapharmacum,? which Marius
Maximus describes in his work on the life of Hadrian.

XXXI. The afternoon hours he always devoted to
signing and reading letters. Meanwhile, the heads
of the bureaus of the Imperial Correspondence, the
Petitions, and the Memoranda ? would always stand
beside him, or occasionally, if unable to stand on
account of ill-health, they would be seated, while the
secretaries and those who administered the particular:
bureau re-read everything to him; then he would
add with his own hand whatever was to be added,
but in conformity with the opinion of the man who
was regarded as the most expert. After attending
to the letters, he would receive his friends,* all of
them at once, and speak with all equally, and he
never received anyone alone except the prefect of the
guard,’ Ulpian that is, who, because he was so pre-
eminently just, had always been his assistant on the
bench. Moreover, whenever he sent for anyone for
a consultation, he would give orders to summon
Ulpian also.

He used to call Vergil the Plato of poets and he
kept his portrait, together with a likeness of Cicero, in
his second sanctuary of the Lares,5 where he also had


€ In distinction from the lararium maius, for which see
c. xxix, 2.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! As the chief judicial officials; see note to c. xxvi. 5.

? [n contrast with the extravagant gifts that were continu-
ally made by Elagabalus; see Heliog., xxi. 7; xxii, 3; xxvi.
5. On Alexander's liberalitates see c. xxi. 9 and note.

3 See note to Hadr., vi. 5.

3 See Heliog., xx. 3 and note.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXI. 5—XXXIII. 2


portraits of Achilles and the great heroes. But
Alexander the Great he enshrined in his greater
sanctuary along with the most righteous men and the
deified emperors.

XXXII. He never showed harshness to any of
his friends or companions, or, for that matter, to any
of the heads of the bureaus or the chiefs of staff.
Indeed, he would always refer their cases to the pre-
fects of the guard,! declaring that if any one deserved
harsh treatment from the emperor, he ought to be
condemned and not dismissed. Whenever he ap-
pointed a successor to anyone in the man's own
presence, he would always add, ** The State is grate-
ful to you " ; and he would reward him, too, in order
that after his retirement he might live respectably
and in keeping with his rank, presenting him with
such gifts as lands, cattle, horses, grain, tools, the
cost of building a house, marbles for beautifying it,
and the labour which the character of the con-
struction demanded. He rarely distributed gold or
silver except to the soldiers,? maintaining that it was
a sin for the steward of the state to use for his own
pleasures or those of his friends that which was con-
tributed by the people of the provinces. But to the
city of Rome be remitted the tax on merchants and
the crown-gold.?

XXXIII. He appointed fourteen overseers of the
city of Rome,* chosen from among the ex-consuls, and
these he commanded to hear city-cases in conjunction
with the prefect of the city, giving orders that all of
them, or at least a majority, should be present when-
ever the records were made. He also formed guilds
of all the wine-dealers, the green-grocers, thé boot-
makers, and, in short, of all the trades, and he granted


VOL. II. R


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

XXXIV. magnas? ad usum revocavit suum. in convivio aurum
nesciit, pocula mediocria sed nitida semper habuit.
ducentarum librarum argenti pondus ministerium
eius numquam transiit.

4occidi sine auctoritate iudicii, mulieres infames,
quarum infinitum numerum deprehenderat, publicari
iussit, exsoletis omnibus deportatis, aliquibus etiam


! atque Peter! ; idque P ; idemque Peter?, 2 pertinerent
Jordan, Baehrens ; pertineret P, Peter. Set purpureas
non magnas editors; et purpureaque non magna P, susp.
by Peter.


1 Of. c, xxxvii. 1. 2 Not otherwise known.

3See Sev., xix, 7.

*Of. c. xli. 4; in contrast with Elagabalus, see Heliog.,
xix. 3.

5 Cf, c. xxiii. 4-7.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXIII. 3—XXXIV. 4


them advocates chosen from their own numbers and
designated the judge to whose jurisdiction each
should belong.

To actors he Br presented either gold or silver,
and rarely money. He did away with the costly
garments which Elagabalus had provided, and he
dressed the soldiers who are called the Paraders,? in
bright uniforms, not costly, indeed, but elegant. Nor
did he ever spend much for their standards or for the
royal outfit of gold and silk, declaring that the
imperial power was based, not on outward show, but
on valour. For his own use he re-introduced the
rough cloaks worn by Severus? and tunics without
the purple stripe and those with long sleeves and
purple ones of small size. XXXIV. Moreover, his
banquets were utterly devoid of gold plate, and his
goblets were always moderate in size though elegant.
And his service of plate never exceeded the weight
of two hundred pounds of silver.*

All the dwarfs, both male and female, fools,
catamites who had good voices, all kinds of enter-
tainers at table, and actors of pantomimes he made
publie property ; those, however, who were not of any
use were assigned, each toa different town, for support,
in order that no one town might be burdened by a new
kind of beggars. The eunuchs, whom Elagabalus had
had in his base councils and had promoted,5 he pre-
sented to his friends, adding a statement to the effect
that if they did not return to honest ways, it should
be lawful to put them to death without authority from
the courts. Women of ill repute, of whom he arrested
an enormous number, he ordered to be publicly dis-
graced, and he deported all catamites,* some of them,


8 But cf. c. xxiv. 4.
R 2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! qui erant eminentes libenter Editor; quam netuls ueniter
P; canentes libenter Salm., Peter. 3 praetorum P.


! Cf, c. xxx. 2. ? See Pesc. Nig., xi. 5.

3 See note to Pert., xi. 3.

1 Contests (&ywves) modelled after the great Greek contests
had been in vogue in Rome since 186 B.c. Originally purely
athletic, they were soon extended to include musicians and,
later, poets, The most famous were the Ludi pro salute
Augusti (to commemorate the battle of Actium), the Agon
Neroneus, held in 60 and 65 and restored in honour of Minerva
by Gordian IlI., and the Agon Capitolinus, instituted by Domi-


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXIV. 5—XXXV. 4


with whom that scourge had carried on a most
pernicious intimacy, being drowned by shipwreck.

None of his servants ever wore a garment orna-
mented with gold, not even at a public banquet.
When he dined with the members of his household,
he would invite Ulpian or some other man of learn-
ing, in order to have conversation of a literary char-
acter, for this, he used to say, refreshed and nourished
him. And when he dined in private he would even
keep a book on the table and read, usually Greek ;
Latin poets, however, he used to read also. His
state-dinners were conducted with the same simplicity
as his private ones, except that the number of covers
and the crowd of guests was greatly increased, though
this was always displeasing to him, and he would say
that he was feeding in a theatre or a circus.

XXXV. He heard orators and poets with pleasure—
not, indeed, when they made laudatory addresses to
himself, which, following the example of Pescennius
Niger,? he considered a foolish custom, but when they
recited speeches or the deeds of ancient men of
eminence—and with still greater pleasure, when they
related the praises of Alexander the Great or of the
better emperors of the past, or of the great men of
the city of Rome. Moreover, he often resorted to
the Athenzum? to hear both Greek and Latin
rhetoricians and poets, and he would listen to the
orators of the Forum, as they read aloud the pleas
which they had already delivered before himself or
the city-prefects. And he used to preside at contests,
particularly at the Hercules-contest, which was held
in honour of Alexander the Great.*


tian. Nothing further is known of the Agon Herculeus ; to
judge from the name it was athletic in character.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


Solos! post meridiem ve] matutinis horis idcirco


numquam aliquos videbat, quod ementitos de se multa


6cognoverat, speciatim Verconium Turinum. quem


XXXVI.


praesidium postularet, ut pro eo Alexandro secreto


2suggereret. quod cum factum esset et Turinus suffra-


per testes omnibus, et quibus praesentibus quid ac-


1 solos P!, Lessing, Lenze ; solus Peter,


1 On the expression fumum vendere see note to Pius, vi. 4.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXV. 5—XXXVI. ?


There were certain men that he always refused to
see alone in the afternoon or, for that matter, in the
morning hours, because he found out that they had
said many things about him falsely, and chief among
them was Verconius Turinus. For Turinus had been
treated by him as an intimate friend, and all the
while he had sold favours under false pretences, with
the result that he brought Alexander's rule into dis-
repute, for he made the Emperor seem a mere fool,
whom he, Turinus, had completely in his power and
could persuade to do anything ; in this way he made
all believe that the Emperor did everything at his
beck and call. XXXVI. He was finally caught, how-
ever, by the following trick: A certain man was
deputed to present a petition to the Emperor publicly,
but secretly to ask Turinus, as it were for protection,
namely, that he would privately plead with Alexander
in his behalf. All this was done, and Turinus
promised him his support and later told him that he
had said certain things to the Emperor (whereas in
reality he had said nothing at all) and that it now
depended on him alone whether or not the request
would be granted; he then offered a favourable
decision in return for money, And when Alexander
ordered the petitioner to be summoned for a second
hearing, Turinus, though apparently occupied in doing .
something else, signalled to the man by nodding his
head, but said nothing to him in the room ; then his
petition was granted, and Turinus, in return for a
favour sold under false pretences,! received a huge
reward from the successful petitioner. Thereupon
Alexander ordered him to be indicted, and when
all the charges had been proved by witnesses, of
whom some were present and saw what Turinus had


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


cepisset et quibus audientibus quid promisisset, in
foro Transitorio ad stipitem illum adligari! praecepit
et fumo adposito, quem ex stipulis atque umidis lignis
fieri iusserat, necavit praecone dicente, ‘‘ Fumo punitur


ladligart Jordan, Peter; // legari P!; ligari P corr.
2concubsi P.


! See c. xxviii. 6. ? Cf. c. xxxiii. 8.
3In contrast with Elagabalus ; see Heliog., xx. 4-7 ; xxiv. 8.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXVI. 3—XXXVII. 5


received and others heard what he had promised, he
issued instructions to bind him to a stake in the
Forum Transitorium.! Then he ordered a fire of
straw and wet logs to be made and had him suffocated
by the smoke, and all the while a herald cried aloud,
* The seller of smoke is punished by smoke." And
in order‘ that it might not be thought that he was too
cruel in thus punishing one single offence, he made a
careful investigation before sentencing Turinus, and
found that when selling a decision in a Jaw-suit he
had often taken money from both parties, and that
he had also accepted bribes from all who had obtained
appointments to commands or provinces.

XXXVII. He used to attend the public spectacles,
but he was very niggardly in giving presents,” saying
that the actors and wild-beast hunters and chariot-
drivers should be treated as if they were our slaves,
or huntsmen, or grooms, or ministers to our pleasure.
His banquets were neither sumptuous nor yet too
frugal, but always characterized by the greatest good-
taste. None but white napkins were used, though
they often had a scarlet stripe; but they were never
embroidered in gold, though these had been intro-
duced by Elagabalus, and even before his time, they
say, by Hadrian. The daily provision for his table was
as follows: thirty pints of wine for a whole day,thirty .
pounds of bread of the first quality, and fifty pounds of
bread of the second quality used for giving away—for
he always gave away to his table-servants not only
bread but also portions of greens or meat or vegetables,
all with his own hand, playing the part of the father
of a household with all the maturity of an old man.
The provision further included thirty pounds of
various meats and two fowls. On feast-days, however,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lei mulst Mommsen; et mulis P; amuli Scaliger, Peter.


! Regarded as a great dainty; see Pert., xii. 6 and note.

2The 25th March, celebrated in much the same manner as
the modern Carnival.

3 The 6th-13th July; they were especially characterized by
theatrical performances. i

* There were two Epula Jovis, the 18th Sept. and the 18th
Nov., connected respectively with the Ludi Romani (4th-19th
Sept.) and the Ludi Plebeit (4th-17th Nov.). The first of these
is doubtless meant here. It was celebrated as the anniversary
of the founding of the temple of Jupiter on the Capitolium,
and in the earliest period was regarded as the first day of the
year.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXVII. 6—XXXVIII. 1


a goose was served, and a pheasant! on the Kalends
of January and also during the Hilaria of the Great
Mother,? the Games of Apollo,’ the Feast of Jupiter,*
the Saturnalia, and other festivals of this kind, and
sometimes even a brace was brought in besides the
two fowls. He hada hare every day and often game,
but this he would share with his friends, chiefly those
whom he knew to have none of their own. For he
never gave any of these gifts to the rich, though he
was always ready to receive presents from them.
Every day he had four pints of mead without pepper
and two with pepper. In short, lest it be too tedious
to give an account of al] that he ate, which has been
done in great detail by Gargilius,* a contemporary
writer, everything was served to him in due measure
and according to reason. But he was inordinately
fond of fruit and usually had it served to him as
dessert ; hence arose the witticism that Alexander
had, not a second course, but a second meal. He
himself would consume the greatest amount of food
and he would drink wine neither too sparingly nor
yet in large quantities, but nevertheless in fair
amounts. He always drank pure cold water as well,
but in summer he would add wine flavoured with
essence of roses—the only one of Elagabalus's various
kinds of flavourings * that he retained.

XXXVIII. Now—since mention has been made


5 Called Gargilius Martialis in Prob., ii. 7. He is probably
to be identified with the Q. Gargilius Martialis who wrote
a treatise on husbandry, including also an account of the
medicinal use of farm-products and of veterinary art. Parts
of it have been preserved in the so-called Medicina Plinit, a
manual of medicine dating from the fourth century.

€ See Heliog., xix. 5; xxi. 6; xxiv. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


2 “Cum leporem mittis, semper mihi, Gellia, mandas :
‘septem formosus, Marce, diebus eris.’
si verum dicis, si verum, Gellia, mandas,
edisti numquam, Gellia, tu leporem."


5 hos versus cum ad eum quidam ex amicis detulisset,
respondisse ille dicitur Graecis versibus in hanc sen-
tentiam :


) pulchrum om. in P. ? guod. Syrum detulit propago P ;
quem Syrum tetulit propago, «pulchrum; Peiper, Pcter? ;
« pulchrum quod sua detulit propago Damsté, 3 putas
esse <Cuestrum> regem Egnatius, Peter; putasse se regem P,
4tu ins, by Egnatius and Peter; om. in P.

1 Martial, v. 29, with several variations. The superstition
is mentioned also in Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxviii. 260.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXVIII. 2-6


of hares—his custom of having a hare every day gave
rise to a witticism in verse ; for many say that those
who have eaten a hare are beautiful for the next
seven days, and this belief is also indicated in an
epigram of Martial’s directed at a woman named
Gellia as follows ! :


** When you send me a hare, dear Gellia, you send
me a message plain :

‘For the next seven days, dear Marcus, a beautiful
man you'll remain.'

If you tell me the truth, dear Gellia, if you send me
a promise fair,

You have never yourself, dear Gellia, you have never
eaten a hare."


These verses, however, Martial wrote to a woman
who was ugly, but a poet of Alexander's time wrote
to him the following :


* [f you see our king is fair,
Fair the child of Syrian race,

"Tis the hunt and meals of hare
Give him everlasting grace."


And when one of his friends brought him these
lines, he replied, it is said, in Greek verses to the
following effect :


“ Since you think your king is fair,
Fool, by vulgar stories taught,
I'm not angry—if you're right.
But I wish you'd eat a hare
And remove your ugly thought ;
Cease to hate the fair with spite."


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


XXXIX, Cum amicos militares habuisset, ut usum
Traiani, quem ille post secundam mensam potandi
usque ad quinque pocula instituerat, reservaret, unum
tantum poculum amicis exhibebat in M honorem
Alexandri Magni, idque brevius, nisi si quis, quod

2 licebat, maius libere postulasset. usus Veneris in eo
moderatus fuit, exsoletorum ita expers, ut, quemad-
modum supra diximus, legem de his auferendis ferre
voluerit.

3  Horrea in omnibus regionibus publica fecit, ad quae
conferrent bona ii qui privatas custodias non haberent.
balnea omnibus regionibus addidit, quae forte non

4 habebant. nam hodieque ! multa dicuntur Alexandri.

5fecit et domos pulcherrimas easdemque amicis suis
maxime integris viris donavit.

7tuncque primum semisses aureorum formati sunt,
tunc etiam, cum ad tertiam aurei partem vectigal
desidisset, tremisses, dicente Alexandro etiam quar-


! dieque P.


! Trejan had the reputation of being a hard drinker; see
Hadr., iii. 8; Dio, lxviii. 7, 4; Victor, Caes., xiii. 4.

3 See c. xxiv. 4.

3 Fourteen in number ; see note to Heliog., xx. 3.

*This statement can hardly be literally correct, but that
the taxes were reduced seems evident from c. xvi. 1 and
xxxii. 5.

5 His attempts to improve the currency are attested by
copper coins with the legends Restitutor Mon(etae) and


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXIX. 1-8


XXXIX. When he had with him friends of the
military class he would observe a custom which
Trajan had introduced, namely, that of drinking
after .he dessert as many as five goblets; he, how-
ever, would serve his friends one goblet only, to be
drunk in honour of Alexander the Great, and it was
a rather small one too, though it was always permis-
sible to ask openly for a larger one. In the enjoy-
. ment of love he was temperate, and he would have
nothing to do with catamites, in fact, he even wished
to have a law passed, as I have said before,? doing
away with them altogether.

He built a public store-house in each region of the
city,? and to this anyone who had no store-house of
his own might take his property. He built a bath,
too, in every region which happened to have none,
and even today many of these are still called Alex-
ander’s. And he also constructed magnificent dwel-
lings and presented them to his friends, especially to
the upright.

The taxes paid to the state were so reduced that
those whose tax under Elagabalus had amounted to
ten aurei now paid a third of an aureus, a thirtieth,
that is, of their former tax. Then for the first time
half-aurei were minted, and also third-aurei,® after
the tax had been reduced to this amount; and
Alexander declared that quarter-aurei too would be
issued—for he could not issue a smaller coin. And
he did indeed coin these, but kept them in the mint,


Mon(eta) Restituta; see Cohen, iv’, p. 453 f., nos. 516-518,
and p. 420,no. 180. The aureus and half-aureus of Alexander
are well known, but no third-aureus is known prior to the
time of Valerian (253 4.D.); see Mommsen, Rim. Miinzwesen,
p. 776.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lAurei. The name solidus was applied to the aureus from
the period of Constantine onward. i

?4,e. 50 aurei; at this time 1 lb. gold = 50 aurei; see
Cohen, i?, Intro., p. xviii, It is difficult to believe that such
huge gold pieces were ever coined.

3 On the use and prohibition of silk garments see notes to
Heliog., xxvi., 1.

4The emperor's robes, because of their great value, were
regarded as forming part of the imperial treasury, &nd, accord-
ingly, were under the charge of the procurator thesaurorum
(this is probably the meaning of the term procurator aerarii
maioris in Diad., iv. 1); see Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsbeamten,
p. 307 f., n. 8. The manufacture of these robes constituted a
separate department of the imperial administration under the


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XXXIX. 9—XL. 4


waiting to issue them until he could reduce the tax;
however, when this proved impossible because of the
needs of the state, he had them melted down and
issued only third-aurei and solidi! He also melted
down the pieces of two, three, four, and ten aurei,
and the coins of larger denominations even up to the
value of a pound ? and of a hundred aurei—which had
been introduced by Elagabalus—and so withdrew
them from circulation. The coins made therefrom
were designated only by the name of the metal itself,
for, as he himself said, it would result in the emperor's
giving too generous largesses, if, when it were possible
for him to bestow many pieces of smaller value, he
should be compelled to bestow thirty or fifty or a
hundred by giving the value of ten or more in a
single piece.

XL. He himself had very few silk garments, and
he never wore one that was wholly silk or gave away
one that was even partly silk. He envied no man
his wealth. He gave aid to the poor; and in the
case of men who had held public office, when he saw
that their poverty was genuine, and not simulated or
due to extravagance, he would always help them with
many useful gifts, such as lands, slaves, draught-
animals, herds, and farm-implements. He always
kept his robes in his treasury * for a year® and then
ordered them to be given away at once. Every
garment that he gave away he inspected in person.


name of ratio purpurarum. A procurator of Alexander
charged with its conduct is commemorated in an inscription
from Corinth; see C.I.L., iii. 536. In 383 the manufacture
of purple robes became an imperial monopoly; see Cod.
Justinianus, iv. 40, 1.

5 In contrast with Elagabalus ; see Heliog., xxxii. 1.


VOL. Il. S


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1linteaminis Salm., Peter; linae P! ; linaei P corr. ? ut
om. in P, 3 ad om. in P.


1 The procurator baphii is mentioned in the Codex Justini-
anus and other documents of the later empire.

2 See c. xlii. 1. On this type of cloak see notes to Cl. Alb.,
ii. 5.

3 So also Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius ; see Hadr., xxii,
8; Marc., xxvii. 8.

3 On the triumphal toga see note to Cl. Alb., ii. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XL. 5-11


He would give away all his gold and silver, and very
frequently too. He would also give away equipment
for the troops, such as leggings, trousers, and boots.
He would always insist most rigorously on having
purple of the brightest hue, not for his own use but
for that of matrons, in case they were able or eager
to have it, and in any case with a view to having it

ut on sale; and even today that purple is still
called Alexandrian, which is commonly spoken of as
Probian merely because Aurelius Probus, the super-
intendent of the dye-works,! invented this kind of
dye. He himself usually wore a scarlet cloak,? but
when in Rome and the cities of Italy he was always
dressed in the toga.? On the other hand, he never
assumed the bordered or the gold-embroidered toga *
except when consul, and then it was always the one
which was brought out from the temple of Jupiter
and assumed by all the other praetors and consuls.?
He also assumed the bordered toga when he per-
formed sacrifices, but then only as pontifex maximus,
and not as emperor. He was always eager to get
good linen, without any purple in it, for he used to
say, “If these garments are made of l'nen in order
to prevent their being rough, what is the use of hav-
ing purple in the linen?" And as for inserting gold
threads, he deemed it madness, since in addition to
being rough they also made the garment stiff. He
always wore bands on his legs,? and he used white


$ See note to Gord., iv. 4.

$ Woollen or linen bands wrapped about the calves as a
protection against the cold. Augustus wore them in winter
(Suetonius, Aug., lxxxii.), but in the first century they were
considered as suitable for invalids only ; see Quintilian, xi. 3,
144.


s2 `


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1 pistores Loisel, Peter; pictores P, Jordan. - et om. in
P. 3 nec haoc P. 3 ministros et stromata Editor; mistro
mantea P; ministeria, mutua Pet Y?,


1Tightly-fitting trousers gathered in at the ankle, the
characteristic costume of the northern barbarians. ‘These
appear clad in them on Trajan’s Column and the Arch of
Constantine. In the first century toey were regarded as a
barbarum tegmen (so Tacitus, Hist., ii. 20), but the present
passage seems to suggest that their use in the third century
was not uncommon. Their use in Rome was prohibited at


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLI. 1-5


trousers,! not scarlet ones, as had formerly been the æ
custom.

XLI. All the jewels that he had he sold and the pro-
ceeds he deposited in the public treasury, saying that
men had no need of jewels,? and that the women of
the royal household should be content with one hair-
net, a pair of earrings, a necklace of pearls, a diadem
to wear while sacrificing, a single cloak ornamented
with gold, and one robe with an embroidered border,
not to contain more than six ounces of gold. And
in every way he exercised acensorship onthe customs
of his age quite in keeping with his own manner of
life, for illustrious men followed his example and
noble matrons that of his wite. The palace-servants
were so reduced in number that in each department
there were no more than absolute necessity de-
manded ; and the fullers, the tailors, the bakers, the
cup-bearers, and all the camp-servants were granted
rations but not any official rank, as had been the
practice of that scourge, and only single rations too,
rarely double ones. And since he never had more
than two hundred pounds of silver-plate in his table
service,? and a correspondingly small number of ser-
vants, when he gave banquets he would borrow from
his friends silver-plate, servants, and couch-covers—
a custom still in vogue to-day when the prefects give
banquets in the emperor’s absence. He never had
dramatic entertainments at his banquets,* but his


the end of the fourth century; see Codex Theodosianus, xiv.
10, 2.

? In contrast with Elagabalus ; see Heliog., xxiii. 3-4; xxix. 1.

3 Cf. c. xxxiv. 1.

4As Elagabalus had gladiatorial fights; see Heliog., xxv.
1-8.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

6sum et deorsum volitarent. habuit sane in Palatio
unum genus voluptatis, quo maxime delectatus

7 est et quo sollicitudines publicas sublevabat. nam
aviaria instituerat pavonum, phasianorum, gallina-
ceorum, anatum, perdicum etiam, hisque vehementer
oblectabatur, maxime palumborum, quos habuisse ut
ad xx milia dicitur, et ne eorum pastus gravaret an-
nonam, servos habuit vectigales, qui eos ex ovis ac
pullicenis ac pipionibus alerent.


Lut aut Petschenig; aut P; wt Peter. ? galbulae Salm.,
Peter!; gacplae P ; auicolae Madvig, Peter?, 3 pistores
Peter; picatores P. 3 wicena, mulas Salm., Peter; wicenam
filas P.


! Ct. c. xliv. 4.
? In, Verrem, Act. II., iv. 5,9.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLI. 6—XLII. 4


chief amusement consisted in having young dogs
play with little pigs, or partridges fight with one
another, or tiny little birds fly about to and fro. He
did have one kind of amusement in the Palace which
gave him the greatest pleasure and afforded him
relief from the cares of state; for he arranged
aviaries of pea-fowl, pheasants, hens, ducks, and
partridges, and from these he derived great amuse-
ment, but most of all from h s doves, of which he had,
it is said, as many as twenty thousand. And in order
that the food for these might not become a burden
to the grain-supply, he had slaves to provide the
necessary income, who maintained the doves on the
proceeds of the eggs and the squabs and young birds.

XLII. He frequently used the public baths in
company with the populace, especially in summer,
using both those built by himself and the older ones,
and he would return to the Palace in his bathing-
costume, retaining only this much of the emperor,
namely, that he put on a scarlet cloak. As runners
he had none but slaves, for he said that a free-born
man ought not to run except in a contest held in
honour of a god; and he had none but slaves as
cooks, bakers, fullers, and bath-keepers, buying more
if there was any lack. During his reign only one
palace-physician received a salary, while all the
others, of whom there were never more than six,
received double or triple rations, one being of the
finest kind, the others of different quality. When-
ever he advanced judicial officers he provided them,
after the custom of the ancients (described also by
Cicero”), with silver and all needed equipment, pro-
viding a provincial governor with twenty pounds of
silver, six she-mules, a pair of mules, a pair of horses,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

XLIII. Leges innumeras sanxit. carrucas Romae
et raedas senatoribus omnibus ut argentatas haberent,
permisit, interesse Romanae dignitatis putans, ut his


1 instituit uel dies uel tempora P; uel . . . tempora del. by
Cas. and Peter.


1 See Heliog., xxix. 1 and note.

? See note to Carac., iv. 8.

3 See note to c. xxviii. 1.

4The quaestores candidati principis were named directly
by the emperor without the formality of an election. Both
these and the quaestors elected in the ordinary way were
obliged to provide public games at their own expense. Accord-
ing to the present passage, Alexander limited this obligation
to the quaestores candidati and provided the others (the


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLIII. 1-5


two garments for use in the forum, two for use at
home, and one for the bath, one hundred aurei, one
cook, one muleteer, and a concubine in the case of a
man who had no wife and could not live without a
woman. Of these, the mules and the horses, the
muleteer and the cook were to be returned when
the governor laid down his office; the rest, however,
he might keep if he had governed well, but if ill, he
must return them fourfold and also undergo the
punishment imposed for embezzlement or extortion.
XLIII. He enacted laws without number. He
permitted every senator to use a carriage in the city
and to have a coach ornamented with silver,! thinking
that it enhanced the dignity of Rome that these
should be used by the senators of so great a city. In
appointing consuls, either regular or substitute,? he
always asked for the opinion of the senate ; he reduced
their expenses, furthermore, and arranged for the days
of their entry into office? in accordance with the
ancient system. He issued an order that a quaestor
who was the nominee of the emperor should give
games to the people at his own expense,* but with
the understanding that after the quaestorship he was
to receive a praetorship and then govern a province ;
ordinary quaestors, on the other hand, were authorized
to pay for their games—which were less lavish—out
of the revenues of the privy-purse. And it was his
intention to have the games given at regular intervals
throughout the whole year, in order that the people
might have a spectacle every thirty days, but this
plan, for some unknown reason, was never carried
out. Every seven days, when he was in the city, he


quaestores arcarii) with funds from the privy-purse; see
Mommsen, C.I.L., i?, p. 386, and Staatsrecht, ii’, p. 584 f.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


septimo quoque die, cum in urbe esset, ascendit,

XLIV. Jn iocis dulcissimus fuit, in fabulis amabilis,

4  Rhetoribus, grammaticis, medicis, haruspicibus,
mathematicis, mechanicis, architectis salaria instituit
et auditoria decrevit et discipulos cum annonis pau-

5 perum filios modo ingenuos dari iussit. etiam in pro-
vinciis oratoribus forensibus multum detulit, plerisque
etiam annonas dedit, quos constitisset gratis agere.


! In P the portion of the vita which begins with fecisset and
ends with de Isuuria in c. lviii. 1 is transposed to the Vita
Maximinorum, v. 3, where it is inserted after occiso Helio-
gabalo ubi primum ; this portion is retained, in its proper
place in the Z codices ; see Intro, to Vol. I., p. xxxiii. f.


1Of. c. xxii. 4 and note.

? See Hadr., xiii, 6 and note.

3He and his mother were criticized for this; see note to
c. xiv. 7.

4 Cf. c, xxviii. 7. 5This was, of course, fictitious.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLIII. 6—XLIV. 5


went up to the Capitolium, and he visited the other
temples frequently. He also wished to build a.
temple to Christ and give him a place among the
gods !—a measure, which, they say, was also considered
by Hadrian. For Hadrian ordered a temple without
an image to be built in every city, and because these
temples, built by him with this intention, so they
say, are dedicated to no particular deity, they are
called today merely Hadrian's temples.? Alexander,
however, was prevented from carrying out his purpose,
because those who examined the sacred victims
ascertained that if he did, all men would become
Christians and the other temples would of necessity
be abandoned.

XLIV. He was very kindly in his jests, agreeable
in his conversation, and generous at his banquets, so
much so, in fact, that anyone might ask for what-
ever he wished. He was diligent in amassing gold,?
careful in keeping it, and zealous in procuring it, yet
he never put any one to death. He did not like to
be called a Syrian‘ and asserted that his ancestors
were Romans, and he had his family-tree depicted,
showing that he was descended from the Metelli.’

To rhetoricians, grammarians, physicians, sooth-
sayers, astrologers, engineers, and architects he paid
regular salaries and assigned lecture-rooms, and he
ordered rations to be given to their pupils, provided
these were sons of poor men and free-born. Also in
the provinces he granted many privileges to pleaders
in the courts, and to some, whom he appointed to
plead cases without remuneration, he even gave
rations. The laws governing literary contests? he


6 See c, xxxv. 4 and note.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


6 leges agonis ! firmavit easque etiam ipse diligentissime
7servavit. theatralia spectacula saepe obiit. Theatrum
8 Marcelli reficere voluit, multis civitatibus, quae post
terrae motus deformes erant, sumptus ad instaura-
tionem operum et publicorum et privatorum ex vecti-
9galibus? dedit. in templis sane numquam praeter
quatiuor aut quinque argenti libras auri ne guttulam
quidem aut bratteolam posuit, susurrans versum Flacci
Persii :
* [n sanctis quid facit aurum ? "


XLV. Expeditiones bellicas habuit, de quibus ordine


!agonis Mommsen ; agnos P, susp. by Peter. 2 pecuniam
ez uectigalibus P; pecuniam del. by Salm. and Peter. 3 et
iam P. * operam dabant Editor ; ambulabant P, susp. by
Peter; et omnes amb. del. by Jordan.


— —— ——— — — ——À—— —— — —-—


1 See c. xxiv. 3 and note.
2 Persius, Saturae, i1. 69. The MSS. of Persius read sancto.


$ See c. 1. f.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLIV. 6—XLV. 4


made more stringent, always observing them most
serupulously himself, and he frequently attended
performances in the theatre. He planned to repair
the Theatre of Marcellus,! and in many cities, which
had been rendered unsightly by earthquakes, he
made an appropriation from the publie revenues to
pay for the restoration of both public and private
buildings. But to temples he never made donations
of more than four or five pounds of silver, and of gold
not even a mite or the thinnest leaf, and he was even
heard to murmur a line of Persius Flaccus? :


* What place has gold in sanctuaries ?”’


XLV. He conducted military expeditions, which I
shall describe in their proper place.? But first I will
tell of his way of dealing with matters to be kept
secret or announced publicly. He always kept secret
the plan for a campaign, but announced openly the
lensth of each day's march; and he would even issue
a proclamation two months beforehand, in which was
written, * On such and such a day, and at such and
such an hour, I shall depart from the city, and, if the
gods so will, I shall tarry at the first halting-place."
Then were listed in order all the halting-places, next
the camping-stations, and next the places where pro-
visions were to be found, for the whole length of the
march as far as the boundaries of the barbarians'
country. From here on everything was kept secret
and all took every precaution to keep the barbarians
in ignorance of the plans ofthe Romans. It is certain,
moreover, that he never practised any deception in
anything that he announced publicly, for he de-
clared that he would not allow the palace-officials to
sell his plans, as had been done under Elagabalus,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

2  Thesauros reppertos iis qui reppererant donavit et,
si multi essent, addidit his eos quos in suis habebat

3officiis. cogitabat secum et descriptum habebat


1 propositos P, Peter.


! See c. xxiii. 4-7.

? The term rationalis, originally applied to the official (also
called a rationibus) who had the supervision of the privy-
purse at Rome, was in the later third and the fourth centuries
used generally, though not officially, to designate any pro-
vincial procurator; see Marim., xiv. 1; Gord., vii. 2.

? On his interest in Judaism and Christianity see c. xxii. 4
and note,

3See Pesc. Nig., vii. 3-6 and notes.

5 On laws dealing with treasure-trove see Hadr., xviii. 6 and
note.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLV. 5—XLVI. 3


when everything was sold by the eunuchs !—a class of
men who desire that all the palace-affairs should be
kept secret, solely in order that they alone may seem
to have knowledge of them and thus possess the
means of obtaining influence or money.

Now since we happen to have made mention of his
practice of announcing his plans publicly—whenever
Alexander desired to name any man governor of a
province, or make him an officer in the army, or
appoint him a procurator, that is to say, a revenue-
officer,? he always announced his name publicly and
charged the people, in case anyone wished to bring
an accusation against him, to prove it by irrefutable
evidence, declaring that anyone who failed to prove
his charge should suffer capital punishment. For, he
used to say, it was unjust that, when Christians and
Jews observed this custom in announcing the names of
those who were to be ordained priests,? it should not
be similarly observed in the case of governors of
provinces, to whose keeping were committed the
fortunes and lives of men. XLVI. Furthermore, the
assistants of the governors were granted regular
salaries,* though he often said that only those men
ought to be promoted who could carry on the ad-
ministration of the state by their own efforts and did
not need the aid of assistants, adding that soldiers
had their own particular sphere, and scholars theirs,
and that accordingly it was the duty of every man to
do whatever he could.

Treasure-trove he always gave to the finders,’ and if
these were numerous he would include among them
the officials of his various departments. He always
remembered and wrote down the names of those to
whom, he had granted some favour, and if he knew


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! et om. in P. * et om. in P.


1 i.e. the holding of some public office.

?Of. Hadr., vii. 7; xviii. 3; Avid. Cass., vii. 6.

* See notes to c. xxiv. 1 and Hadr., iii. 9.

*So also Ammianus Marcellinus xvii. 9, 2; plus dimidiati.
mensis cibaria, Cicero, Tusc. Disp., ii, 37,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLVI. 4—XLVII. 3


that there was a man who had not asked for some-
thing, or at any rate not much, which would cause his
expenses to increase,! he would call him and say, “ Why
is it, that you do not ask for some present? Is it be-
cause you wish me to be your debtor? Ask for some-
thing, then, that you may not, by remaining a private
citizen, have cause to complain of me." When he
granted favours, moreover, he would grant those which
would not damage his reputation, such as, for in-
stance, the property of those who had suffered punish-
ment, but never the gold or the silver or the jewels,
for all these he deposited in the public treasury ?; or
he would grant civil offices, but never military, or
else those posts which had to do with the collection
of the revenues. Hisrevenue -officers he would change
frequently, and none held office for longer than a
year; and even if the officers were upright, he de-
tested them and referred to them as a necessary evil.
And when he appointed governors of provinces, pro-
consuls, or legates,? it was never as a favour but
solely on the basis of his own judgment or that of the
senate.

XLVII. During his campaigns he made such care-
ful provision for the soldiers that they were furnished
with supplies at each halting-place and were never
compelled to carry food for the usual period of
seventeen days,* except in the enemy's country.
And even then he lightened their burdens by using
mules and camels, saying that he was more concerned
for the soldiers’ welfare than for his own, for on them
depended the safety of the state. When any of the
soldiers were ill he would visit them personally in
their tents, even those of the lowest rank, and have
them carried in carts and provided with every


VOL. Il. T


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

XLVIII. Cum quidam Ovinius Camillus senator
antiquae familiae delicatissimus rebellare voluisset
tyrannidem adfectans, eique nuntiatum esset ac statim
probatum, ad Palatium eum rogavit eique gratias egit,
quod curam rei publicae, quae recusantibus bonis im-


! honestioribus Salm., Peter; hominibus P. 2 quod et
P, Peter.


— — M —————M M M € M ——— ]e a —— MÀ P —


1 Otherwise unknown.


ll ie ae Uam. nm. cmt


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLVIII. 1-6


necessity; and if by any chance they grew worse,
he would quarter them on the most upright house-
holders or highly esteemed matrons in the cities and
the country-districts, paying back the expenses which
they incurred, whether they recovered or died.
XLVIII. Once, when a certain Ovinius Camillus,!
a senator of ancient family but very pleasure-loving,
made plans to rebel and seize the throne, and this
was reported to Alexander and forthwith proved, he
summoned him to the Palace and thanked. him for
voluntarily offering to assume the responsibility for
the state, which had been imposed on many a good
man against his will. Then he proceeded to the
senate and greeted as partner in the imperial power
this trembling wretch now overcome with weakness at
the realization of his guilt. Next, he conducted him to
the Palace, invited him to a banquet, and presented
him with the imperial insignia, of a better quality,
even, than his own. Later, when an expedition
against the barbarians was announced, he urged him
either to set forth on his own responsibility, did he
so desire, or to proceed in company with himself.
And since he himself travelled on foot, he invited
Camillus to share his labours, but when the man fell
behind after five miles, he bade him ride a horse, and
again, when after two days' journey he was tired out
by riding, he had him put in a carriage. And when
Camillus refused even this, either through fear or in
sincerity, and even resigned his power and made
ready to die, Alexander sent him away, commending
him to the soldiers, by whom he himself was
singularly beloved, and bidding him go in safety to
his country-estate. Here he lived for a long time,
but afterwards he was put to death by the Emperor's


T2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

3  Dexippus dixit uxorem eum cuiusdam Macrini filiam
duxisse, eundemque ab eo Caesarem nuncupatum.

4verum cum vellet insidiis occidere Alexandrum


‘et a militibus occisus esset P ; del. by Peter’. 1 uitae
scriptores ceterique P, Peter!; uitae scriptores del. by Peter?.
* *rapiant Madvig; pariant P, Peter.


a a iae —————— M— —— rr ———Ó M — —— -


! Cited also in Prob., ii. 7, but otherwise unknown and per-
haps apocryphal. He 1s possibly to be identified with the
Valerius Marcellinus of Mag.-Balb., iv. 5.

? Verus and Valens are otherwise unknown.

3 See c. xiv. 6; xvii. 1-2 &nd note.

5i.e. the right to inflict capital punishment, which in
theory belonged only to the emperor or the senate. In the
third century this right was granted by the emperor to all
provincial governors; see Ulpian in Digesta, i. 18, 6, 8.

5 See note to c. xxii. 5.

€ P. Herennius Dexippus of Athens. His Chronicle, fre-
quently cited in the later biographies of the Historia Augusta,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLVIII. 7—XLIX. 4


command, and, because he was a soldier, he was put
to death by soldiers. The common crowd, I know,
ascribes this incident, which I have just related, to
Trajan, but Marius Maximus has not published it in
his Life of Trajan, nor yet Fabius Marcellinus! or
Aurelius Verus or Statius Valens,? all of whom have
written accounts of Trajan’s entire life. On the
other hand, Septimius and Acholius and Encolpius ?
and his other biographers have related just such
stories as this about Alexander, and I have included
this one here in order that no one may accept common
rumour rather than real history, which at least will
be found more authentic than the talk of the crowd.

XLIX. The right of wearing the sword * he would
never allow to be sold, for he said: “It must inevit-
ably happen that he who buys will also sell, and I
will not tolerate traffickers in offices or men on whom,
if they should plunder, I could not impose sentence.
For I blush at the thought that a man who buys and
sells should be able to inflict punishment.” The
office of pontifex and also membership in the College
of Fifteen č and the augurship he bestowed by im-
perial mandate, but always on condition that the®
appointment be ratified by the senate.

Dexippus 5 has related that Alexander married the
daughter of a certain Macrinus " and that he gave
this man the name of Caesar; moreover, that when
Macrinus tried to kill him by treachery, Alexander,


began apparently with the mythical period and extended
down to 268 a.D. He held important muvicipal offices in
Athens, and about 267 a.D., with the aid of a hastily collected
army, he repelled an invasion of the Goths (the Heruli); see
Gall., xiii. 8.

7 See note to c. xx.:8.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


Macrinus, detecta factione et ipsum interemptum et

5 uxorem abiectam. idem dicit patruum fuisse An-
toninum Heliogabalum Alexandri, non sororis eius-


lgororis eiusdem matris Cas., Jordan; uxoris sororis
ciusdem P, Peter.


! An error, for their mothers were sisters.

24.6. the Persians; see c. lv. 1.

3 See c. xii. 5 and note.

*This seems to be contradicted by the many mutinies
under him ; see note to c. xii. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER XLIX. 5—L. 5


on detecting the plot, not only put Macrinus to
death but also divorced his wife. The same writer
says also that Antoninus Elagabalus was the uncle of
Alexander, and not the son of his mother's sister.
And when the Christians took possession of a certain
place, which had previously been public property,
and the keepers of an eating-house maintained that
it belonged to them, Alexander rendered the decision
that it was better for some sort of a god to be wor-
shipped there than for the place to be handed to the
keepers of an eating-house.

L. And so, after showing himself such a great and
good emperor at home and abroad, he embarked
upon a campaign against the Parthians?; and this he
conducted with such discipline? and amid such re-
spect, that you would have said that senators, not
soldiers, were passing that way. Wherever the
legions directed their march, the tribunes were
orderly, the centurions modest, and the soldiers
courteous, and as for Alexander himself, because of
these many great acts of consideration, the inhabi-
tants of the provinces looked up to him as to a god.
And the soldiers too loved their youthful emperor
like a brother, or a son, or a father‘; for they were
respectably clad, well shod, even to the point of
elegance, excellently armed, and even provided with
horses and suitable saddles and bridles, so that all
who saw the army of Alexander immediately realized
the power of Rome. In short, he made every effort
to appear worthy of his name and even to surpass
the Macedonian king, and he used to say that there
should be a great difference between a Roman and a
Macedonian Alexander. Finally, he provided him-
self with soldiers armed with silver shields and with


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

9 surae, vendi eos iussit. cum pretium non invenirent,
ne exemplum malum a regina nasceretur, si eo
uteretur, quod emi non posset, inauribus Veneris eos
dicavit.

5 In procinctu atque in expeditionibus apertis papili-
onibus prandit atque cenavit. cum militarem cibum:
cunctis videntibus atque gaudentibus sumeret, cir-


lin Peter!, Novak; inter P; in terra Petschenig, Peter?.
2 suae Jordan, Peter; summae P.


——


!During the Indian campaign of Alexander the Great a
picked corps of infantrymen was formed, armed, as an
especial mark of honour, with shields decorated with silver;
hence they were known as dpyupdomides. A similar corps
with shields decorated with gold and hence named xpuodomdes
is mentioned uy Pollux, i. 175.

2 See note 'o c, lv. 1. 3Seec xli. 1.

‘Notably in his vain attempt to protect Ulpian against


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LI. 1-5


golden,! and also a phalanx of thirty thousand men,
whom he ordered to be called phalangarii, and with
these he won many victories in Persia. This phalanx,
as a matter of fact, was formed from six legions, and
was armed like the other troops, but after the Persian
wars received higher pay.

LI. Gifts presented to him by kings he would
always dedicate in a temple, but the jewels that were
given to him he sold, ma ntaining that jewels were
for women and that they should not be given to a
soldier or be worn by a man. And when one of his
legates presented to the Emperors wife through
Alexander himself two pearls of great weight and
uncommon size, he ordered them to be sold. But
when no offer could be found, fearing that a bad ex-
ample might be set by the queen, were she to wear
jewels too costly to find a buyer, he dedicated them
to Venus for earrings.

He always treated Ulpian as his guardian—a fact
which called forth, first the opposition of his mother,
but, later, her gratitude—and he frequently protected
him from the soldiers’ ill-will by sheltering him under
his own purple robe.* In fact, it was because he
ruled chiefly in accordance with Ulpian's advice that
he was so excellent an emperor.?

When in the field or on a campaign he lunched
and dined in an open tent and ate the soldiers' ordin-
ary food in the sight of all and greatly to their plea-
sure ^; and he used to go about to all the tents and


the praetorian guards, who mutinied in 228 and killed him.
see Dio, !xxx. 2, 2; see aiso c. xli. 5 and note.

5See note to c. xiv. 7.

$So also c. lxi. 2. This is told also of Hadrian and Pescen-
nius Niger; see Hadr., x. 2; Pesc. Nig., xi. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


—— ————————— ——M—MMÓ — MÀ —— — — M e  —M — MM —


1 See note to c. xxii. 4.

2 Herodian, vi. 1,7; 9, 8.-

3 See c, xii. 5 and notes.

4 Modelled after the famous incident related of Julius
Caesar, that he quelled a mutiny by addressing the troops as


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LI. 6— LII. 3


never permitted anyone to be absent from the colours,
Moreover, if any man turned aside from the road
into someone's private property, he was punished in
the Emperor's presence according to the character of
his rank, either by the club or by the rod or by con-
demnation to death, or, if his rank placed him above
all these penalties, by the sternest sort of a rebuke,
the Emperor saying, ‘‘ Do you desire this to be done
to your land which you are doing to another's?"
He used often to exclaim what he had heard from
someone, either a Jew or a Christian,! and always
remembered, and he also had it announced by a
herald whenever he was disciplining anyone, ‘‘ What
you do not wish that a man should do to you, do not
do to him." And so highly did he value this senti-
ment that he had it written up in the Palace and in
public buildings.

LII. Once, on learning that a soldier had maltreated
an old woman, he dismissed the man from the ser-
vice and gave ‘him to the woman as a slave, in order
that he might support her, for he was a waggon-
maker. And when the soldiers grumbled at this
action, he persuaded them all to submit quietly and
actually frightened them. His rule, though harsh
and stern, was called bloodless for the reason that he
never put a senator to death—or so Herodian, a
Greek writer, declares in his history of his own times.?
Moreover, so stern was he toward the soldiers that
frequently he discharged entire legions,’ addressing
the men as “Citizens " instead of ** Soldiers” $; and
he never felt any fear of his troops, for it could not
be said as a criticism of his character that his tribunes


Quirites (i.e. “ Citizens") ; see Suetonius, Julius, Ixx. The
speech attributed to Alexander is given in c. liii.-liv.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! non timendus si sugg. by Peter in note; non timet nisi P,
Peter.


1 See c. xv. 5 and note.

* His practice of addressing the troops is attested by coins
with the representation of Alexander on a platform haranguing
soldiers and the legend Adlocutio Augusti ; see Cohen, iv?,
p. 402, nos, 3-7; p. 480, no. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LII. 4—LIII. 7


or generals ever took tithes out of the soldiers'
pay,! his motto being : “ A soldier is not to be feared
if he is clothed and armed and shod, and has a full .
stomach and something in his money-belt." And
this was because poverty in a soldier drove him,
when in arms, to every desperate deed. Last of all,
he did not permit the tribunes and generals to use
soldiers as their servants, and he gave orders that
four soldiers should walk in front of a tribune, six in
front of a general, and ten in front of a legate, and
that they should take their men into their quarters.
LIII. Now in order to show his strictness I have
thought it right to insert one military harangue,?
which reveals his methods of dealing with the troops.
After his arrival in Antioch the soldiers began to use
their leisure in the women's baths and the other
pleasures? but when Alexander learned of it he
ordered all who did so to be arrested and thrown into
chains. When this was made known, a mutiny was
attempted by that legion whose members were put
in chains. Thereupon, after bringing all those who
had been thrown into chains to the tribunal, he
mounted the platform, and, with the soldiers standing
about him, and that too in arms, he began as follows :
* Fellow-soldiers, if, in spite of all, such acts as have
been committed by your comrades are to you dis-
pleasing, the discipline of our ancestors still governs
the state, and if this is weakened, we shall lose both
the name and the empire of the Romans. For never
shall such things be done in my reign which were but
recently done under that filthy monster. Soldiers of


3 Also told of the troops quartered in Syria under Marcus
Aurelius ; see Avid, Cass., v. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! So Editor; lauant Graecorum morem. etquidem se institu-
unt P ; lauant Graecorum «an» morem. i occid st insistunt
Salm., Peter. 3 de P.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LIII. 8—LIV. 6


Rome, your companions, my comrades and fellow-
soldiers, are whoring and drinking and bathing and,
indeed, conducting themselves in the manner of the
Greeks. Shall I tolerate this longer? Shall I not
deliver them over to capital punishment?”  There-
upon an uproar arose. And again he spoke: ‘ Will
you not silence that shouting, needed indeed against
the foe in battle but not against your emperor? Of
a certainty, your drill-masters have taught you to use
this against Sarmatians, and Germans, and Persians,
but not against him who gives you rations presented
by the men of the provinces, and who gives you
clothing and pay. Therefore cease from this fierce
shouting, needed only on the battle-field and in war,
lest I discharge you all today with one speech and with
a single word, calling you “ Citizens." But I know
not whether I should even call you Citizens ; for you
are not worthy to be members even of the populace
of Rome, if you do not observe Rome's laws." LIV.
And when they clamoured still more loudly and even
threatened him with their swords, he continued :
* Put down your hands, which, if you are brave men,
you should raise against the foe, for such things do
not frighten me. For if you slay me, who am but
one man, the state and the senate and the Roman
people will not lack someone to take vengeance for


me upon you," And when they clamoured none the
less at this, he shouted, '' Citizens, withdraw, and
lay down your arms.” Then in a most marvellous


fashion they laid down their arms and also their
military coats, and all withdrew, not to the camp, but
to various lodgings. And on that occasion, parti-
cularly, it was seen how much could be accom-
plished by his strictness and discipline. Finally, his


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


qui imperatorem circumdederant in castra rettulerunt,


1 felis Petschenig, Peter?; tuteli P. 2et ins. by Pet-
schenig ; om. in P and Peter.


1 See note to Sev., xxii. 7.

?In his interest in &necdote and trivial detail the bio-
grapher has failed to give any coherent account of Alexander's
war in the Orient. In 227 Ardashir (Artaxerxes), a Persian
chieftain, who had gradually conquered all Persia, defeated
and killed Artabanus V., the Parthian king, and founded the
new Persian monarchy and the Sassanid dynasty (named
from Sasan, his grandfather). In 230 he overran Mesopotamia
and threatened Syria and Cappauocia, so that in 231 Alex-
ander was forced to take the field against him: see the coins
of 281 with the legend Prof(ectw) Aug(usti), Cohen, iv?,
p. 450 f., no. 486; p. 484, no. 18. The most detailed account
of the campaign is given by Herodian (vi. 5-6), who relates


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LIV. 7—LV. 2


attendants and those who stood about his person
carried the standards back to the camp, and the
populace gathering up the arms bore them to the
Palace.! However, thirty days afterwards, before
he set out on the campaign against the Persians, he
was prevailed upon to restore the discharged legion
to its former status; and it was chiefly through its
prowess in the field that he won the victory. Never-
theless, he inflicted capital punishment on its tribunes ©
because it was through their negligence that the
soldiers had revelled at Daphne or else. with their
connivance that the troops had mutinied.

LV. And so, having set out from there against the
Persians with a great array, he defeated Artaxerxes,?
a most powerful king. In this battle he himself
commanded the flanks, urged on the soldiers, exposed
himself constantly to missiles, performed many brave
deeds with his own hand, and by his words encouraged .
individual soldiers to praiseworthy actions. At last
he routed and put to flight this great king, who had
come to the war with seven hundred elephants,
eighteen hundred scythed chariots, and many
thousand horsemen. Thereupon he immediately
returned to Antioch and presented to his troops the
booty taken from the Persians, commanding the
tribunes and generals and even the soldiers to keep


that one division of the Roman army was annihilated and
the other two (one under the command of Alexander) forced
to retire, but says nothing of the victories recorded here and
by Victor (Caes., xxiv.) and Eutropius (Brev., viii. 23). On
the other hand, the fact that Ardashir refrained from any
&dvance and that the Roman-Parthian boundary remained
unchanged points to the belief that Alexander was not wholly
unsuccessful.


VOL. II. U


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


let P. |. *wpcccSalm. (cf. c. lv. 2); mille se adducere P ;
mille tse. adducere Peter.


lHis return is commemorated on coins of 233 with the
representation of Alexander crowned by Victory and having
the Tigris and Euphrates at his feet; see Cohen, iv’, p. 445,
no. 446. Also coins of Mamaea with the legend Fortuna
Redux (Cohen, iv?, p. 493, no. 80) probably celebrate this
return.

?The citation is supposed to be from the official records
of the senate’s transactions, They are also cited as & source
in Prob., ii. 1, but the genuineness of these citations is more
than dubious.

3 The xardppaxro: were a body of cavalry whose horses were
clad in full mail; they were Persian in origin but were also
used by the Seleucid kings, and they appear in the Roman
army of the late empire (see Ammianus Marcellinus, xvi, 10, 8)


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LV. 3—LVI. 5


for themselves the plunder they had seized in the
country. Then for the first time Romans had
Persian slaves, but because the kings of the Persians
deem it*a disgrace that any of their subjects should
serve anyone as slaves, ransoms were offered, and
these Alexander accepted and then returned the
men, either giving the ransom-money to those who
had taken the slaves captive, or depositing it in the
publie treasury.

LVI. After this, returning to Rome, he conducted
a most splendid triumph! and then first of all
addressed the senate in the following speech: From
the transactions of the senate for the seventh day 25 Sept.,
before the Kalends of October? ; “ Conscript Fathers, 293.
we have conquered the Persians, There is no need
of lengthy rhetoric; you should know, however, this
much, namely, what their arms were, and what their
array. First of all there were seven hundred
elephants provided with turrets and archers and
great loads of arrows. Of these we captured thirty,
we have left two hundred slain upon the field, and
we have led eighteen in triumph. Moreover, there
were scythed chariots, one thousand eight hundred
in number. Of these we could have presented to
your eyes two hundred, of which the horses have
been slain, but since they could easily be counterfeited
we have refrained from so doing. One hundred and
twenty thousand of their cavalry we have routed, ten
thousand of their horsemen clad in full mail, whom
they call cuirassiers,* we have slain in battle, and


under the name clibanaru. The word clibanarii would seem
from the present passage to be Persian (so Du Cange, Glos-
sarium, ii. p. 371), but it seems more natural to connect it
with xA(Bavos, an iron vessel.


v2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


illi clibanarios vocant, decem milia in bello intere-
mimus, eorum armis nostros armavimus. multos
6 Persarum cepimus eosdemque vendidimus., terras
interamnanas, Mesopotamiae scilicet, neglectas ab
7 impura illa belua recepimus. Artaxerxen, potentis-
simum regem tam in re quam nomine, fusum fuga-
vimus, ita ut eum terra Persarum fugientem videret,
et qua ducta fuerant quondam signa nostrorum, ea
8rex ipse signis effugit relictis. haec sunt, patres
conscripti, gesta. eloquentiae opus non est. milites
divites redeunt, laborem in victoria nemo sentit.
9 vestrum est supplicationem decernere, ne dis videa-
mur ingrati.” adclamatio senatus: ‘ Alexander
Auguste, di te servent. Persice Maxime, di te ser-
vent. vere Parthicus, vere Persicus. tropaea tua et
10 nos videmus, victorias et nos videmus. iuveni im-
peratori, patri patriae, pontifici maximo. per te
victoriam undique praesumimus. ille vincit qui
militem regit. dives senatus, dives miles, dives
LVII.Populus Romanus." dimisso senatu Capitolium as-
cendit atque inde re divina facta et tunicis Persicis
in templo locatis contionem huiusmodi habuit:
** Quirites, vicimus Persas. milites divites reduximus.
vobis congiarium pollicemur, cras ludos circenses
Persicos dabimus."


‘i.e. Elagabalus.

2 The standards of Crassus captured by the Parthians at
Carrhae in 53 B.c. and of Antony’s legates Saxa and Statianus
captured respectively in 40 and 36 B.c.

3 For similar acclamations see c. vi.-xi.; Avid. Cass., xiii. ;
Com., xviii.-xix. and notes.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LVI. 6—LVII. 1


with their armour we have armed our own men. We
have captured many of the Persians and have sold
them into slavery, and we have re-conquered the
lands which lie between the rivers, those of Meso-
potamia I mean, abandoned by that filthy monster.!
Artaxerxes, the most powerful of kings, in fact as
well as in name, we have routed and driven from the
field, so that the land of the Persians saw him in full
flight, and where once our ensigns were led away in
triumph,’ there the king himself fled apace leaving
his own standards. These are our achievements,
Conscript Fathers, and there is no need of rhetoric.
Our soldiers have come back enriched, and in victory
no one remembers his hardships. It is now your
part to decree a general thanksgiving, that we may
not seem to the gods to be ungrateful" Then
followed the acclamations of the senate? : “ Alexander
Augustus, may the gods keep you! Persicus Maximus,
may the gods keep you! Parthicus in truth, Persicus
in truth. We behold your trophies, we behold your
victories too. Hail to the youthful Emperor, the
Father of his Country, the Pontifex Maximus!
Through you we foresee victory on every band. He
conquers who can rule his soldiers. Rich is the senate,
rich the soldiers and rich the Roman people!”
LVII. Thereupon he dismissed the senate and went
up to the Capitolium, and then, after offering sacrifices
and dedicating the tunics of the Persians in the
temple, he delivered the following address: * Fellow-
citizens, we have conquered the Persians. We have
brought back the soldiers laden with riches. To you
we promise a largess, and to-morrow we will give
games in the Circus in celebration of our victory over
the Persians.”


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

5levabatur manibus hominum Alexander, vixque illi
per horas quattuor ambulare permissum est, undique
omnibus clamantibus : ** Salva Roma, salva res publica,!

7 Romano dedit. puellas et pueros quemadmodum
Antoninus Faustinianas instituerat, Mamaeanas et
Mamaeangs instituit.


1 salua res publica Flor. Cusanum, acc. to Mommsen, Ges.
Schr., vii., p. 301; om. in P and Peter.


! Herodian, vi. 6, 3; see also note to c. lv. 1.

? Probably the Liberalitas Aug(usti) quinta of his coins ;
see Cohen, iv’, p. 416 t., nos. 141-145.

? See Pius, viii. 1 and note; Marc., xxvi. 6.

* Presumably his father-in-law ; see c. xlix. 3-4 and note.

5It was customary to send a wreath of laurel with the


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LVII. 2—LVIII. 1


All this we have found both in the annals and in
many writers. Some assert, however, that he was
betrayed by one of his slaves and did not conquer
the king at all, but, on the contrary, was forced to
flee in order to escape being conquered. But those
who have read most of the writers are sure that this
assertion is contrary to the general belief. It is also
stated that he lost his army through hunger, cold,
and disease, and this is the version given by Herodian,!
but contrary to the belief of the majority.

After this, with the greatest glory and accompanied
by the senate, the equestrian order, and the whole
populace, with the women and children, particularly
the wives of the soldiers, crowding about him on
every side, he went up on foot to the Palace, while
behind him four elephants drew his triumphal chariot.
And the populace kept lifting him up in their arms,
and for four hours they scarcely permitted him to
put his foot to the ground, while on all sides they
kept shouting out, “Secure is Rome, secure is the
commonwealth, for secure is Alexander." On the
following day he gave. games in the Circus and
spectacles on the stage, and immediately thereafter
he presented a largess? to the Roman people. And
he founded an order of girls and boys, to be called
Mamaeanae and Mamaeani, as Antoninus had
founded the Faustinianae.?

LVIII. Other victories also were won—in Maure-
taniaTingitana by Furius Celsus, in xp dps by Varius
Macrinus, Alexander's kinsman,* and in Armenia by
Junius Palmatus, and from all these places laurelled
letters? were sent to Alexander. When these had


official report of an important victory. Nothing further is
known of any of these campaigns.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


1 With Isauria ends the portion of the vita transposed to


Maxim., v. 8; see crit. note to c. xliii. 7. 2 optatae uenis-
sent P, acc. to Hohl, Klio, xiii., p. 287; t uario t. c. e. d. I.
optate uenisset Peter. * essent militarent P.


! An error, for none is found in his inscriptions or on his coins.

? See note to Hadr., viii. 7.

: 3A similar policy was followed by Probus in Isauria (see
Prob., xvi, 6) and also by the emperors of the fifth century
(see Codex Justinianus, xi. 60. 3).

4 Probably in 284. An account of the German expedition is
given by Herodian, vi. 7. The Germans, taking advantage of
the fact that the armies on the Danube and the Rhine had
been depleted in order to supply troops for the campaign
against Ardashir, crossed the rivers and invaded Roman ter-
ritory. Alexander, marching northward hastily, crossed the
Rhine on a bridge of boats (portrayed on a coin of 235,
Cohen, iv?, p. 483, no. 16) and attempted to make peace,


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LVIII. 2—LIX. 1


been read, on different occasions, before the senate
and the people and wished-for tidings had arrived
from Isauria also, honorary cognomina taken from the
names of all these lands were conferred on the
Emperor.! Moreover, those who had won success in
the administration of the state received the consular
insignia, with the addition of priestly offices and
grants of land for any who were poor and now
burdened with age. The captives taken from the
various nations, if their childhood or youth permitted
it, were given to the Emperor's friends, but those
who were of royal blood or noble rank were enrolled
for warfare, though not for any of great importance.
The lands taken from the enemy were presented to
the leaders and soldiers of the frontier-armies,? with
the provision that they should continue to be theirs
only if their heirs entered military service, and that
they should never belong to civilians, for, he said,
men serve with greater zeal if they are defending
their own lands too. He added to these lands, of
course, both draught-animals and slaves, in order that
they might be able to till what they had received,
and that it might not come to pass that, through a
lack of inhabitants or the old age of the owners, the
lands bordering on the country of the barbarians
should be left uninhabitated, for this, he thought,
would be most discreditable.

LIX. After this he was regarded with the greatest
affection by both the populace and the senate, and
when he set out for the war against the Germans,‘
promising to fulfil their conditions and offering them large
sums of money. The anger of the troops at these negotia-
tions led to a revolt under the leadership of Maximinus (8 7-8)
and the murder of Alexander and Mamaea; see Maxim., vii.
4; Herodian, vi., 8-9.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


! On Alexander's severity see c. xii. 5 and note. It certainly
was not responsible for this mutiny; see note to § 1.

? Victor also says that he was killed at Sicilia, & vicus
Britanniae (Caes., xxiv. 4), but this is, of course, an error
due to some confusion in the name. All the testimony points
to the belief that his death occurred at or near Mainz; see
C.I.L., xiii. 2, p. 298.

3 Maximinus (Thrax), his successor; see Marim., vii.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LIX. 2—-LX. 1


though all hoped for victory, they were unwilling to let
him depart and escorted him on his way for a distance
of a hundred or a hundred and fifty miles. It was,
indeed, a very grave matter both for the state and
for himself that Gaul should be plundered by German
inroads, and his sense of humiliation was increased by
the thought that now that the Parthians had been
defeated a nation should still be hanging over the
neck of the commonwealth, which, even under in-
significant emperors, had seemed to be in a state of
subjection. Therefore he hastened against the enemy
by long marches, and the soldiers, too, were eager.
But on his arrival he found that there also the
legions were ready to mutiny, and accordingly he
ordered them to be disbanded. The Gallic temper,
however, which is rough and surly and frequently a
source of danger to emperors, would not brook his
excessive strictness,! which seemed all the greater
after Elagabalus. And finally, while he was in
quarters with a few men in Britain, or, according to
some, in Gaul, in a village named Sicilia? some
soldiers murdered him. This was not done in re-
sponse to any general sentiment but rather as the
act of an assassin, the ringleaders being men who had
thriven on the gifts of Elagabalus and would not
tolerate a stricter prince. Many, indeed, relate that
he was slain by some recruits despatched by
Maximinus? (to whom they had been assigned for
their training), and many others give different
accounts. Nevertheless, it is generally agreed that
those who killed him were soldiers, for they hurled
many insults at him, speaking of him as a child and
of his mother as greedy and covetous.

LX. He ruled for thirteen years and nine days, and
he lived for twenty-nine years, three months, and


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


2 xxviii mensibus 111 diebus vir. egit omnia ex consilio
matris, cum qua occisus est.

4cum qua constiterat, cruentavit. laurus in Palatio
cuiusdam ! civitatis, a qua proficiscebatur ad bellum,

6 cum tentoria imperatoria his adnexa essent. mulier
Druias eunti exclamavit Gallico sermone, ** Vadas
nec victoriam speres nec te militi tuo credas."

3repertum. et cum quiesceret post convivium, hora
diei ferme septima, unus ex Germanis, qui scurrarum
officium sustinebat, ingressus dormientibus cunctis,

4solo tamen imperatore intervigilante visus est; cui


1 cuiusdam P corr. ; cuius P! ; eius Peter. ? el, om. in P.


1 As his birthday was 1st October, 208 (see note to c. v. 2),
these figures are incorrect,

? See Sev., xxii. 7 and note.

3 Described by Pliny as dark with white lines and called
delicata ; see Nat. Hist., xv. 70.

4 See c, li. 5.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LX. 2—LXI. 4


seven days.! He did everything in accordance with
his mother's advice, and she was killed with him.

The omens portending his death were as follows:
When he was praying for a blessing for his birthday
the victim escaped, all covered with blood, and, as he
was standing in the crowd dressed in the clothes of a
civilian, it stained the white robe which he wore. In
the Palace? in a certain city from which he was
setting out to the war, an ancient laurel-tree of huge
size suddenly fell at full length. ` Also three fig-trees,
which bear the kind of figs known as Alexandrian,”
fell suddenly before his tent-door, for they were close
to the Emperor's quarters. Furthermore, as he went
to war a Druid prophetess cried out in the Gallic
tongue, ** Go, but do not hope for victory, and put no
trust in your soldiers”. “And when he mounted a
tribunal in order to make a speech and say something
of good omen, he began in this wise: “On the
murder of the Emperor Elagabalus". But it was
regarded as a portent that when about to go to
war he began an address to the troops with words
of ill-omen.

LXI. All these portents, however, he looked upon
with the profoundest contempt. And having set out
for the war, he was slain in the aforementioned vil-
lage in the following manner. He had lunched, as
it happened, in his usual way * at a general meal, that
is to say, in an open tent and on the same food that
was used by the troops—for no other kind of food
was found in the tent by the soldiers when they tore
it to pieces. And as he was resting after the meal,
at about the seventh hour, one of the Germans, who
was performing the duties of guard, came in while
all were asleep; the Emperor, however, who alone


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lest hoc Petschenig ; est hic P; istic Jordan, Peter. -et
om. in P. 3 dimiserunt ins. after optimum in P corr. ;
lacuna assumed by Peter.


1 This account of the murder is wholly misleading ; see note
to c. lix. 7. :
? Archers from Armenia, Osroene (N. W. Mesopotamia), and


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXI. 5—LXII. 4


was awake at the moment, saw him and said, * What
is it, comrade? Do you bring news of the enemy ? "
But the fellow, terrified by his fears and having no
hope that he could escape, seeing that he had burst
into the Emperor’s tent, went out to his comrades
and urged them to kill their rigorous prince. Where-
upon a great number in arms quickly entered the
tent, and after slaying all who, though unarmed, re-
sisted, they stabbed the Emperor himself with many
thrusts.| Some relate that nothing at all was said
and that the soldiers merely cried out, ** Go forth,
depart," and thus slaughtered this excellent man.
But all the military array, which Maximinus afterwards
led to Germany, was Alexander's, and it was a very
powerful one, too, by reason of the soldiers from
Armenia, Osroene, and Parthia,? composed, as it was,
of men of every race.

LXII. Alexander's contempt for death is clearly
shown both by the intrepid spirit with which he
always put down the soldiery, and also by the follow -
ing incident. When Thrasybulus the astrologer, with
whom he was on the most friendly terms, told him
that it was his destiny to fall by the sword of a bar-
barian, he first expressed his joy, thinking that he
was fated to die in battle in a manner worthy of an
emperor; then, speaking at length he pointed out
that all the noblest men had died a violent death,
mentioning Alexander himself, whose name he bore,
then Pompey, Caesar, Demosthenes, Cicero, and
other men of note, none of whom had met with a
peaceful end. And such was his courage that he


Parthia were serving in the Roman army; see Maxim., xi. 7 f.
and Herodian, vii. 2. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

LXIII. Mortem eius milites et qui exauctorati ab

LXIV. Hactenus imperium populi Romani eum


lromana P.


l'This statement is certainly incorrect.

2 Commemorated on coins with the legends Divo Alexandro
and Consecratio ; see Cohen, iv?, p. 463, nos. 597-599.

3 See note to Marc., xv. 4.

4The 1st October; see note to c. v. 2.

5 This version is not so far from the truth ; see notes to c, lix,
1 and 7.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXII. 5—LXIV. 1


thought that he ought to be likened to the gods,
were he to perish in battle. But the result deceived
his hopes; for he did, indeed, fall by the sword of
a barbarian and by the hand of a barbarian guard,
but it was not in battle, though during the course
of a war.

LXIII. His death was greatly lamented by the
soldiers, even by those whom he had discharged, and
they slew the men who had committed the murder.!
But the Roman people and all the senate and all the
inhabitants of the provinces never mourned anything
with greater sorrow and bitterness of spirit; and at
the same time the cruel necessity of fate seemed to
be shown in the harshness and roughness of his suc-
cessor Maximinus (natural enough in a soldier), on
whom, together with his son, the imperial power was
conferred after Alexander. The senate raised him
to the rank of the gods,? and he was granted the
honour of a cenotaph in Gaul and a magnificent tomb
in Rome. Moreover, a college of priests was ap-
pointed in his honour, called Alexandrian,’ and a
feast-day, too, was decreed, called by his mother's
name as well as by his, which even today is scrupu-
lously observed at Rome on the anniversary of his
birth.* |

The cause of his murder, so others maintain, was
this, namely, that his mother wished toabandon the war
against the Germans and return to the East in order
to display her power there, and at this the soldiers
grew angry. But this is only a fiction of the friends
of Maximinus, who did not wish to let it appear that
the best of emperors had been slain by a friend in
defiance of all law, both human and divine.

LXIV. Up to this time the Roman Empire had


VOL. Il. X


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


principem habuit qui diutius imperaret, post eum

certatim inruentibus et aliis semestribus, aliis annuis,

plerisque per biennium, ad summum per triennium

imperantibus, usque ad eos principes qui latius im-

perium tetenderunt, Aurelianum dico et deinceps.

' 2de quibus, si vita subpeditaverit, ea quae comperta
fuerint publicabimus.

4 Scio sane plerosque negare hunc a senatu Caesarem
appellatum esse sed a militibus, qui verum prorsus
ignorant; dicere praeterea non hunc fuisse consob-

LXV. Soles quaerere, Constantine maxime, quid
sit quod hominem Syrum et alienigenam talem
principem fecerit, cum tot Romani generis, tot
aliarum provinciarum reperiantur improbi, impuri,

2crudeles, abiecti, iniusti, libidinosi. iam primum
possum 'de bonorum virorum respondere sententia


leuris priuatis Madvig; curas priuatis P ; curas «de
priuatis Salm., Peter.


! Yet the biographies of Aurelian and his successors which
are included in the Historia Augusta are attributed to
Vopiscus.


2 This statement is incorrect; see c. i. 2; Heliog., v. 1.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXIV. 2—LXV. 2


been governed by princes who had reigns of consider-
able length, but after Alexander various men seized
the power in rivalry with one another, of whom some
reigned only six months, others for a year, and a
number, again, for two or, at the most, three years,
down to the time of those emperors, who extended
the Empire to wider bounds—Aurelian, I mean, and
his successors, concerning whom, if life be granted
me, I shall publish all I have learned.!

The following charges were brought against Alex-
ander : That he did not like to be regarded as a Syrian,
that he was too fond of gold, that he was full of sus-
picions, that he invented many new taxes, that
he wished to seem a second Alexander the Great,
that he was too harsh toward the soldiers, and that
he conducted all publie business on his private re-
sponsibility.

There are many indeed, I know, who assert that
he was given the name of Caesar, not by the senate,
but by the soldiers.? These writers, however, are
wholly ignorant of the truth ; and they say, besides,
that he was not the cousin of Elagabalus.’ But in
order to follow my version they need only to read
the historians of that time, particularly Acholius,*
who also wrote about Alexander's journeys.

LXV. You are wont to inquire, most mighty Con-
stantine, why it was that a man who was a Syrian
and an alien-born became so great an emperor,
whereas so many of Roman stock and so many from
other provinces proved to be evil, filthy, cruel, base,
unjust, and lustful. I might say in reply, following
the opinion of many good men, that, in the first place,


3 Repeated in c. xlix. 5. * See c. xiv. 6 and note.


x2


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


lgui .. . hominibus commendauerat Edit. princ.; man-
dauerit Ellis ; quae rem p. lemporis uitae ille P, susp. by
Peter. 2 After fuit P has nam hoc nemo uult nisi bonus ;


del. by Jordan and Peter.


` lie. Elagabalus; for his murder see Heliog., xvii. 1.
? Perhaps the father of the Valerius Homullus mentioned
in Pius, xi. 8; Marc., vi. 9.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXV. 3—LXVI. 2


it is possible for a good prince to be produced by
Nature, who is the one universal mother, and that,
in the second, it was fear that made this man the
best of emperors, because the worst had been slain! ;
but since I must lay the truth before you, I shall
disclose the fruits of my reading to Your Clemency
and Piety. For it is well known to Your Piety, since
you have read it in the work of Marius Maximus,
that the state in which the ruler is evil is happier
and almost safer than the one in which he has evil
friends; for, indeed, one evil man can be made
better by many righteous, but in no way can many
evil men be held in check by one man, however
righteous he may be. And this very thing was told
even to Trajan by Homullus,? who said that Domitian
was, indeed, a most evil man but had righteous
friends, whereas Trajan was held in greater hatred
because he entrusted the state to men of evil ways,
for it is better to endure one evil man than many.
LXVI. But as for Alexander, to return to my
theme, he was himself a most righteous man and
followed the counsels of a righteous mother? ; and,
moreover, he had friends who were upright and re-
vered, not spiteful, or thieving, or seditious, or crafty,
or leagued together for evil, or haters ofthe righteous,
or lustful, or cruel, or deceivers of their prince, or
mockers, or desirous of hoodwinking him like a fool,
but, on the other hand, upright, revered, temperate,
pious, fond of their prince, men who neither mocked
him themselves nor wished him to become an object
of mockery to others, who sold nothing, who lied in
nothing, who falsified nothing, and who never fell


3 But see c. xiv. 7 and notes.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER

LXVII. Scio, imperator, quod vius ista dicantur
apud imperatorem, qui talibus serviit, sed salva re
publica posteaquam intellexisti quid mali clades istae
habeant et quemadmodum principes cireumveniant,
et tu eos eo loci habes ut nec chlamyde uti iusseris
sed de necessitatibus domesticis delegaris.

3vendiderat. his accessit, quod amicos et parentes


1 amicis summouent Cod. Vaticanus 5114 (see Hohl, Klio,
xiii., p. 418), Salm., Peter; amicissimum mouent P. ? serui
fuerint Petschenig ; perui fuerit P; serui euirati Peter.


1 See c. xxiii. 5-6 and notes.

?ie. the paludamentum or genesis cloak; see note to
Cl. Alb., ii. 5.

3 Seo c, xxxi. 2. * See c. xxxvi. 2-3.


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXVI. 3—LXVII. 3


short of the expectations of their prince but were
always devoted to him. It must be added, further-
more, that he never had eunuchs in his councils or
in official positions I—these creatures alone cause the
downfall of emperors, for they wish them to live in
the manner of foreign nations or as the kings of the
Persians, and keep them well removed from the
people and from their friends, and they are go-be-
tweens, often delivering messages other than the
emperors reply, hedging him about, and aiming,
above all things, to keep knowledge from him. And
since they are nothing but purchased chattels and
slaves, how, pray, can they have knowledge of the
right? And indeed, this was Alexander's own opinion
too; for he used to say, “I will not permit slaves
purchased with money to sit in judgment on the
lives of prefects and consuls and senators ”’.

LXVII. I know, O Prince, that it is perilous to
say these words to an emperor who has been in sub-
jection to such creatures, but now that, greatly to
the welfare of the state, you have learned how much
evil resides in these pests, and how they mislead
rulers, you too keep them in their proper place, and
never bid them wear a soldier's cloak? but assign
them only to the necessary duties of your household.

Now this too is a noteworthy thing, that never
did Alexander grant an audience in the Palace to
anyone alone except the prefect of the guard, that
is Ulpian,? and he never gave anyone an opportunity
of selling false promises in his name or of telling
him evil things about others, especially after the
death of Turinus, who had often sold the promises of
the Emperor as though he were a fool and a weak-
ling. And to this we must add that if Alexander


SEVERUS ALEXANDER


ltolis Peter; tota P; tuta Eyssenhardt, Baehrens.
3 parens uir Mommsen; ipsa res uiri P; filius scientia
iuris Peter. 3 After amplissimus the first Venice edition
has: Pomponius legum peritissimus, Alphenus, Aphricanus,
Florentinus, Martianus, Callistratus, Hermogenes, Venuleius,
Triphonius, Metianus, Celsus, Proculus, Modestinus: hi
omnes iuris professores discipuli fuere splendidissimi Papini.
ant, et Alexandri imperatoris familiares et socii, ut scribunt
Acholius et Marius Maximus ; om. in P and rejected by Cas.
and Peter; retained by Patzig, Bys. Zeitschr., xiii., p. 44 f.

- 3 Surum Salm., Peter; suum P.


! Perhaps the Sabinus mentioned in Heliog., xvi. 29. Save
for Ulpian and Paulus none of these consiliarii is otherwise


SEVERUS ALEXANDER LXVIII. 1-4


discovered that his friends or his kinsmen were dis-
honest he always punished them, but if the length
of their friendship or degree of kinship did not per-
mit of their punishment, he dismissed them from his
presence, saying, ‘‘ Dearer to me than all of these is
the commonwealth ”.

LXVIII. And that you may know what men were
in his council, he had Fabius Sabinus,! the son of the
famous Sabinus and the Cato of his time; Domitius
Ulpianus, the learned jurist; Aelius Gordianus, a
relative of Gordian the Emperor and a famous man ;
Julius Paulus, the learned jurist; Claudius Venacus,
.& most distinguished orator; Catilius Severus, his
own kinsman, the most learned of them all; Aelius
Serenianus, the most highly revered of them all;
Quintilius Marcellus, a more righteous man than
whom is not found in history. What wicked tbing
could be planned or executed by all these men and
others like them, when they were leagued together
for good? In his early days, indeed, a band of evil
. men, which surrounded Alexander, had thrust these
men aside, but when this company were slain or
driven away by the young man's good sense, these
upright friends held sway. These are the men who
made the Syrian a good emperor, as likewise evil
friends caused native Romans to seem evil, even to
posterity, for they burdened them with the weight
of their own iniquities.


known. Aelius Gordianus, if the name is correct, cannot
have been a relative of the emperor Gordian, for the gentile
name of the latter was Antonius.


MAXIMINI DUO
| IULII CAPITOLINI


Ne fastidiosum esset Clementiae tuae, Constantine
maxime, singulos quosque principes vel principum
liberos per libros singulos legere, adhibui modera-
tionem, qua in unum volumen duos Maximinos, patrem

2 filiumque, congererem. servavi deinceps hunc ordi-
nem, quem Pietas tua etiam ab Tatio Cyrillo, Claris-
simo Viro, qui Graeca in Latinum vertit, servari voluit.

4 Maximinus senior sub Alexandro imperatore enituit.

5 militare autem sub Severo coepit. hic de vico


lOtherwise unknown. On the title see note to Avid. Cass.,
i. 1.
2C. Julius Verus Maximinus (Thrax). The biography is
constructed mainly out of material taken from Herodian
(called Arrianus in c. xxxiii. 3; Gord., ii. 1; Maz.-Balb., i.
2). This is supplemented by anecdotes and by a few state.
ments from the ‘‘Imperial Chronicle" which appears in a
reduced form in Victor's Caesares and Eutropius! Breviarium ;
see Intro. to Vol. i. p. xxii. f. The modern tendency, however,


— —— "€


THE TWO MAXIMINI


BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. Lest it should be distasteful to Your Clemency,
great Constantine, to read the several lives of the
emperors and the emperors' sons, each in a separate
volume, I have practised a certain economy, in that
I have compressed the two Maximini, father and son,
into one single book. And from this point onward I
have kept this arrangement, which Your Holiness
wished also Tatius Cyrillus! of the rank of the
Illustrious, to keep in his translation from Greek into
Latin. And I shall keep it, indeed, not in one book
alone, but in most that I shall write hereafter, except-
ing only the great emperors ; for their doings, being
greater in number and fame, call for a longer re-
counting.

Maximinus the elder? became famous in the reign
of Alexander; but his service in the army? began


is to discard as unhistoric all that is not contained in
Herodian; see Hohl in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl., x. 852 f.

774.6. as a private soldier. If we may believe the statement
of Zonaras (xii. 16) that he was sixty-five years old at the
time of his death, he was born in 178.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


l iuuenum etiam procer, et Hohl (Rh. Mus., 1xx., p. 477) ;
nonnum etiam procerle P; nonnumquam eiiam + procerte
Peter. 2quibus nec P.


1 See note to Pius, v. 5.

380 also Jordanes (de Rebus Geticis, xv. 83), who narrates
too the anecdote contained in c. ii. 8—iii, 6, citing as his
authority Aurelius Memmius Symmachus, who evidently took
it from this vita ; see Intro. to Vol. i., p. xxiv.


THE TWO MAXIMINI I. 6—II. 6


under Severus. He was born in a village in Thrace :
bordering on the barbarians, indeed of a barbarian
father and mother, the one, men say, being of the


Goths, the other of the Alani! At any rate, they ` z


say that his father's name was Micca, his mother's
Ababa.? And in his early days Maximinus himself
freely disclosed these names; later, however, when .
he came to the throne, he had them concealed, lest |
it should seem that the emperor was sprung on both
sides from barbarian stock.?

II. In his early youth he was a herdsman and the
leader of a band of young men, a man who would
waylay marauders and protect his own folk from -
forays. His first military service was in the cavalry.*
For certainly he was strikingly big of body, and
notable among all the soldiers for courage, handsome
in a manly way, fierce in his manners, rough, haughty,
and scornful, yet often a just man.

It was in the following way that he first came into
prominence in the reign of Severus. Severus, on the `
birthday of Geta, his younger son, was giving mili-
tary games, offering various silver prizes, arm-rings, `
that is, and collars, and girdles. This youth, half
barbarian and scarcely yet master of the Latin tongue,
speaking almost pure Thracian, publicly besought the
Emperor to give him leave to compete, and that with
men of no mean rank in the service, Severus, struck |
with his bodily size, pitted him first against sutlers—
all very valorous men, none the less—in order to
avoid a rupture of military discipline. metu


3 Of. semibarbarus, c. ii. 5, and se i Herodnis, vi.


1.
” 480 also Herodian, vi. 8, 1. art
i 817


THE TWO! MAXIMINI


7tunc Maximinus sedecim lixas uno sudore devicit
sedecim acceptis praemiis minusculis non militaribus
III. iussusque militare. tertia forte die cum processisset
Severus ad campum, in turba exultantem more bar-
barico Maximinum vidit iussitque statim tribuno, ut
2 eum coerceret ac Romana disciplina! imbueret. tunc
ille, ubi de se intellexit imperatorem locutum, suspica-
tus barbarus et notum se esse principi et inter multos
conspicuum, ad pedes imperatoris equitantis accessit.
3tum volens Severus explorare quantus in currendo
esset, equum admisit multis circuitionibus, et cum
senex imperator laborasset, neque ille a currendo per
multa spatia desisset, ait ei: ‘“‘ Quid vis, Thracisce ?
num quid delectat luctari post cursum ?" tum * Quan-
4tum libet," inquit, *Imperator." post hoc ex equo
Severus descendit et recentissimos quosque ac fortis-
5 simos milites ei comparari iussit. tum ille more solito
septem fortissimos uno sudore vicit solusque omnium
a Severo post argentea praemia torque aureo donatus
est iussusque inter stipatores corporis semper in aula
6consistere. hinc igitur factus conspicuus inter milites
clarus, amari a tribunis, a conmilitonibus suspici, im-
petrare ab imperatore quod vellet, locis etiam militiae
a Severo adiutus, cum esset peradulescens, longitudine
lac Homana disciplina Baehrens, Lessing; ac Romanam
disciplinam P, Peter!.


THE TWO MAXIMINI II. 7-—II!I. 6


Maximinus overcame sixteen sutlers at one sweat,
and received his sixteen prizes, all rather small and
not military ones, and was commanded to serve in
the army. III. The second day thereafter, when
Severus had proceeded to the parade-ground, he
happened to espy Maximinus rioting in his barbarian
way among the crowd, and immediately ordered the
tribune to take him in hand and school him in Roman
discipline. And he, when he perceived that the
Emperor was talking about him—for the barbarian
suspected both that he was known to the Emperor
and conspicuous even among many—, came up to the
Emperor's feet where he sat his horse. And then
Severus, wishing to try how good he was at running,
gave his horse free rein and circled about many times,
and when at last the aged Emperor had become weary
and Maximinus after many turns had not stopped
running, he said to him, “ What say you, my little
Thracian? Would you like to wrestle now after your
running?" And Maximinus answered, ‘As you
please, Emperor". On this Severus dismounted and
ordered the most vigorous and the bravest soldiers
to match themselves with him ; whereupon he, in his
usual fashion, vanquished seven at one sweat, and
alone of all, after he had gotten his silver prizes, was
presented by Severus with a collar of gold; he was
ordered, moreover, to take a permanent post in the
palace with the body-guard. In this fashion, then,
he was made prominent and became famous among
the soldiers, well liked by the tribunes, and admired
by his comrades. He could obtain from the Emperor
whatever he wanted, and indeed Severus helped him
to advancement in the service when he was still very
young. In height and size and proportions, in his


THE TWO MAXIMINI

2 quod satis constat, holeribus semper abstinuit, a frigidis

5 Alani quicumque ad ripam venerunt amicum eum
donis vicissim recurrentibus adprobabant. |

7nam dicitur cum eo iocatus esse Heliogabalus


! sed om. in P.


l The amphora was the unit of liquid measure, containing
about 26:2 litres (= 64 gals.). A vessel of standard size was
kept on the Capitoline Hill as a model, Various vessels have
been preserved with inscriptions signifying that they contain
the requisite amounts according to the Capitoline standard ;
see Dessau, Ins. Sel. 8627-8629. For a fanciful explanation
of this expression see Hohl, Hermes, lii. p. 472 f.

3 Gee Intro. to Vol. i., p. xviii.


THE TWO MAXIMINI IV. 1-7


great eyes, and in whiteness of skin he was pre-
eminent among all.

IV. It is agreed, moreover, that often in a single
day he drank a Capitoline amphora! of wine, and ate
forty pounds of meat, or, according to Cordus,? no
less than sixty. It seems sufficiently agreed, too,
that he abstained wholly from vegetables, and almost
always from anything cold, save when he had to
drink. Often, he would catch his sweat and put it
in cups or a small jar, and he could exhibit by this
means two or three pints of it.

For a long time under Antoninus Caracalla he
commanded in the ranks of the centuries ? and often
held other military honours as well. But under
Macrinus, whom he hated bitterly because he had
slain his Emperor's son,* he left the sérvice and
acquired an estate in Thrace, in the village where
he was born, and here he trafficked continually with
the Goths. He was singularly beloved by the Getae,
moreover, as if he were one of themselves. Andthe
Alani, or at least those of them who came to the river-
bank,5 continually exchanged gifts with him and
hailed him as friend.

When Macrinus and his son were slain, however,
and he learned that Elagabalus was reigning as
Antoninus’ son, he went to him, being now of
mature age, and besought him to hold the same
opinion of him that his grandfather Severus had done.
But he could have no influence with that filthy man.
For Elagabalus is said to have made sport of him


3 On this expression see note to Avid. Cass., i. 1.
34.e. Caracalla.

54.e, the Danube; see note to c. i. 5.

5 See note to Heliog., i. 1.


VOL. Il, Y


THE TWO MAXIMINI


ldicens : <diceris> Editor; dicens P, Peter!; diceris
Mommsen, Peter?. ?Here follows in P the misplaced
portion of the Vita Alexandri, c. xliii. 7, fecisset et, to c. lviii.
1, de Isauria ; see Intro. to Vol. i. p. xxxiii. The portion of
the Vita Mazim. beginning comperit Alexandrum and ending
omnes qui mecum, c. xviii. 2, has been similarly transferred to
Maza.-Balb., viii. 2, after homines vulgares. Sita om. in P.
tet om. in P.


! Distinctive of the senatorial order; see note to Com., iv.
7. "This statement is evidently spurious, for Maximinus on his


THE TWO MAXIMINI IV. 8—V. 5


most foully, saying, ** You are reported, Maximinus, to
have outworn at times sixteen and twenty and thirty
soldiers ; can you avail thirty times with a woman ? "
And when Maximinus saw the disgraceful prince
beginning thus, he left the service. In the end,
however, the friends of Elagabalus retained him, lest
this also be added to Elagabalus' ill-fame, that the
bravest man ofhis time—whom some called Hercules,
others Achilles, and others Ajax—had been driven
from his army. V. Under this filthy creature, there-
fore, he held only the honour of a tribuneship; but
never did he come to take the Emperor's hand and
never did he greet him, but during the whole of
three years he was always hastening from one place
to another ; now he was occupied with his fields, now
with resting, now with feigned illnesses.

On the death of Elagabalus, as soon as he learned
that Alexander was proclaimed emperor, he hastened
to Rome. And Alexander received him with marvel-
lous joy and marvellous thanksgiving ; indeed, in
the senate he used expressions like these : * Maximinus,
Conscript Fathers, the tribune to whom I have given
the broad stripe,! has taken refuge with me—he who
could not serve under that foul monster, and who,
under my deified kinsman Severus, was what you
know him to have been by report". He at once
made him tribune of the Fourth Legion,? which he


elevation to the imperial power was nondum senator ; see
c. viii. 1 and also Eutropius, ix. 1.

2 If there is any truth in this statement the legion was the
Legio IV Flavia, quartered in Upper Moesia. That it was
formed out of recruits is hardly true, and the biographer has
probably confused this tribuneship with Maximinus' subsequent
command of the recruits in the army on the Rhine; see c. vii, 1.


Y2


THE TWO MAXIMINI


linter Madvig; in P, Peter.


THE TWO MAXIMINI V. 6—VI. 7


himself had formed out of recuits, giving him his
promotion with the following words: “I have not
entrusted veterans to you, my most dear and loving
Maximinus, because I feared that you cannot root
out the faults that have grown in them under other
commanders. You have fresh recruits; after the
pattern of your habits, your courage, your industry,
make them learn their service, so that from yourself,
who are one, you can make me many Maximini,
men most desirable for the state.”

VI. Having therefore accepted the legion, he im-
mediately began to train it. On every fifth day he.
had his men advance to the attack and fight a sham
battle against one another. Their swords, corselets,
helmets, shields, tunics, in fact all their arms, he in-
spected daily ; indeed, he himself provided for their
boots, so that he was exactly like a father to the
troops. And when certain tribunes remonstrated
with him, saying, “ Why do you work so hard, now
that you have attained a rank where you can become
a general?" he replied, it is said, * As for me, the
greater I become, the harder I shall work”. He
was wont also to join the soldiers at their wrestling,
and he stretched them on the ground by fives, sixes,
and sevens, though now an old man. Now every
one became jealous, and one insolent tribune, a man
of great size and proved courage, and therefore the
bolder, said to him, “ You do nothing very great, if
you vanquish your own soldiers, being a tribune your-
self". Maximinus replied, ** Would you like to fight ? ”
And when his opponent nodded assent and advanced
against him, he smote him on the breast with the palm
of his hand and knocked him flat on his back, then
said, * Give me another, and this time a real tribune ".


THE TWO MAXIMINI

9 iam illa prope in vulgi ore sunt posita, quod hamaxas
manibus adtraheret, raedam onustam solus moveret,
equo si pugnum dedisset, dentes solveret, si calcem,
crura frangeret, lapides oficios friaret, arbores
teneriores scinderet, alii denique eum Crotoniaten
Milonem, alii Herculem, Antaeum alii vocarent.

VII. His rebus conspicuum virum Alexander, mag-
norum meritorum iudex, in suam perniciem omni ex-
ercitui praefecit, gaudentibus cunctis ubique tribunis,


1 digito uideretur P.


1 Cf. c, xxviii. 8; his size is also commented on by Herodian ;
see vi. 8. 1; vii. 1. 2.

?'This is incorrect. He was put in command of all the re-
cruits in the army on the Rhine (probably with the title of
praefectus tironum); see Alex., lix. 7 and Herodian, vi. 8. 2.

3 Probably Mainz; see note to Alez., lix. 6.

* A detailed account of the mutiny of the recruits, their


THE TWO MAXIMINI VI. 8—VII. 5


He was of such size, so Cordus reports, that men
said he was six inches over eight feet in height}; and
his thumb was so huge that he used his wife's brace-
let for a ring. Other stories are reported almost as
common talk—that he could drag waggons with his
hands and move a laden cart by himself, that if he
struck his horse with his fist, he loosened its teeth,
or with his heel, broke its legs, that he could crumble
tufaceous stone and split saplings, and that he was
called, finally, by some Milo of Croton, by others
Hercules, and by others Antaeus.

VII. When these things had now made him
a distinguished man, Alexander, a good judge of
great worth, to his own destruction put him in
command ofthe entire army.? Everyone, everywhere,
was pleased —tribunes, generals, and men. So now
Alexanders whole army, which had fallen into a
lethargy to a great extent under Elagabalus, Maxi-
minus brought back to his own standard of discipline.
And this, as we have said, proved a very serious thing
for Alexander—a very good emperor, to be sure, but
one whose youth from the very beginning could
readily make him an object of contempt. For when
he was in Gaul, and had pitched camp not far from
a certain city,? of a sudden the soldiers were incited
against him—some say by Maximinus, others say by
the barbarian tribunes—, and as he fled to his mother
he was slain, while Maximinus had already been
hailed emperor.* And, indeed, some say the cause of
Alexander's death was one thing, others say another.
For some maintain that Mamaea was the prime cause,


acclamation of Maximinus as Imperator, and the murder of
Alexander is given in Herodian, vi. 8-9. See also Alez., lix.
7-8.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


bello Germanico orientem peteret, atque ideo mili-

6tes in seditionem prorupisse. quidam, quod ille
nimis severus esset et voluisset ita in Gallia legiones
exauctorare ut exauctoraverat in oriente.

3, 4numquam ille annonam cuiuspiam tulit. numquam
sivit ut? quis in exercitu miles faber aut alterius rei,


! primus Ursinus (cf. Eutrop., ix. 1; Victor, Caes., xxv.) ;
primum P, Peter. ? modo ins. by Damsté; om. in P and
Peter. 5 ut om. in P, 4+Gygam Peter; gigantam P.


This seems to be a blundering statement of the fact that
the uprising which resulted in his death was due, at least in
part, to his attempt to end the war by negotiations; see note
to Alex., lix. 1.

2 See notes to Aler., xii. 5.

SHe was later accepted by the senate, and, on the 25th
March, 235, received the usual honours; see C.I.L., vi. 2001 ;
2009.

* His name was C. Julius Verus Maximus according to the
testimony of coins and inscriptions, whereas in this biography
and in Victor, Caes., xxv. 2, he is incorrectly called Maxi-
minus. He was made Caesar in 236, and was given the title
Princeps Iuventutis ; see Cohen, iv?, p. 525 f., nos. 10-15.
He never received the title Augustus.


THE TWO MAXIMINI VII. 6—VIII. 6


as she wished herson to leave the Germanic war and
go to the East, and on that account the soldiers
broke out in mutiny.! Others say that Alexander
was too strict and had wished to discharge the legions
in Gaul as he had done in the East.?

VIII. However that may be, after Alexander was
killed, Maximinus, who was the foremost man in
the army and not yet a senator, was acclaimed
Augustus by the army without a decree of the
senate,? and his son was made his colleague.* And
about the latter we shall tell later on 5 the few things
that we know. Now Maximinus was always clever
enough not to rule the soldiers by force alone ; on
the contrary, he made them devoted to him by re-
wards and riches. He never took away any man’s
rations ; he never let any man in his army work as
a smith or artisan, which most of them are, but kept
the legions busy only with frequent hunting. Along
with these virtues, however, went such cruelty that
some called him Cyclops, some Busiris, and others
Sciron,’ not a few Phalaris? and many Typhon ° or
Gyges. The senate was so afraid of him that prayers


5 See c. xxvii.-xxxiii.

, $A mythical king of Egypt who sacrificed strangers to
eus.

7 A robber who lived on the coast near the border of Attica
and Megaris; he is said to have been killed by Theseus.

8 Tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily about 560 B.c. He used
to roast condemned persons in & bronze bull and finally him-
self met with this same fate.

? Also called Typhoeus, a hundred-headed Titan, son of
Gai& &nd Tartarus, struck with lightning by Zeus and buried
under Aetna. |

10 Also called Gyas; a giant with a hundred arms, the son
of Gaia and Uranus.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


1 se om. in P.


1 His natural brutality seems to have been increased by
the revolts described in o. x.-xi., but this highly-coloured
account seems to be much exaggerated. His cruelty is com-
mented on briefly by Herodian, vii. 1, 12.


THE TWO MAXIMINI VIII. 7—IX. 3


were made in the temples both publicly and privately,
and even by women together with their children,
that he should never see the city of Rome. For
they kept hearing that he hung men on the cross,
shut them in the bodies of animals newly slain, cast
them to wild beasts, dashed out their brains with
clubs, and all this for no desire for personal authority
but because he seemed to wish military discipline
to be supreme, and wished to amend civil affairs on
that pattern.) All of which does not become a
prince who wishes to be loved. As a matter of fact,
he was convinced that the throne could not be held
except by cruelty. He likewise feared that the
nobility, because of his low barbarian birth, would
scorn him, remembering in this connection how he
had been scorned at Rome by the very slaves of the
nobles, so that not even their stewards would admit
him to their presence; and as is always the way
with fatuous beliefs, he expected them to be the
same toward him now that he was emperor. So
powerful is the mere consciousness of a low-born
spirit. IX. For to hide the lowness of his birth
he put to death all who had knowledge of it, some
of whom, indeed, were friends who had often pitied
him for his poverty and made him many presents.
And never was there a more savage animal on earth
than this man who staked everything on his own
strength, as though he could not be killed. Eventu-
ally, indeed, when he almost believed himself im-
mortal because of his great size and courage, a certain
actor, they say, recited Greek verses in a theatre

| 331


THE TWO MAXIMINI

7 peraret.! praeterea omnes Alexandri ministros variis

2inierat, cum in se imperium transferre cuperet. et


1 imperaret Baehrens, Lessing ; imperabat P, Peter. ? et
ins. by Petschenig; om. in P and Peter.


1A Thracian gladiator, who in 73 B.c. collected an army of
gladiators, slaves, and desperadoes. He defeated several
Roman generals but was finally overcome by Marcus Crassus.

2A Cilician slave, who led a slave-revolt in Sicily in 104
B.C. and terr: rized the island. He was finally defeated by
Manius Aquillius in 101 or 100 B.c.

3 Herodian (vii. 1, 3) relates that he sent away all of Alex-


THE TWO MAXIMINI IX. 4—X. 2


while he was present, the sense of which in Latin
was this :


And he who cannot be slain by one, is slain by many.
The elephant is huge, and he is slain ;

The lion is brave, and he is slain ;

The tiger is brave, and he is slain ;

Beware of many together, if you fear not one alone.


And this was recited while the Emperor himself was
present. But when he asked his friends what the
clown on the stage had said, they told him that he
was simply singing some old verses written against
violent men, and he, being a Thracian and a barbar-
ian, believed them. He suffered no nobleman at all
to be near his person, ruling in this respect precisely
like Spartacus! or Athenio.? He put all of Alex-
ander's ministers to death in one way or another and
disregarded his directions? And while he held
Alexander's friends and ministers under suspicion,
he became more cruel.

X. And now when he had already taken on the
life and character of a wild beast, he was made still
harsher and more savage by a revolt which Magnus,
a certain man of consular rank, plotted against him.*
This man had entered into a conspiracy with a
number of soldiers and centurions to stab Maximinus,


ander’s friends and counsellors, not wishing to have any
noblemen in the army. This was probably the result of the
revolts described in c. x.-xi.

‘This account of the conspiracy is similar to that given
by Herodian (vii. 1, 4-8), who, however, adds that all the
senators in the army joined in it. Herodian also casts doubt
on its genuineness, but there seems to be no good reason for
supposing it to have been invented by Maximinus.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

XI. Fuit etiam sub eodem factio desciscentibus
sagittariis Osrhoenis ab eodem ob amorem Alexandri
et desiderium, quem a Maximino apud eos occisum


1 manu Cas., Peter; magnus P. 2 libus Jordan, Peter ;
militibus P. 3 Titum Salm., Peter; ticum P.


1 See note to Alex., lxi. 8. This account of the revolt agrees
with Herodian's narrative, except that Herodian calls the leader
Quartinus, a consularss, and his assassin Macedo; see Herodian,
vii. 1, 9-10. A biography of this “Titus” is given in Trig.
Tyr., xxxii.


Wu


THE TWO MAXIMINI X. 3—XI. 3


wishing thereby to get the imperial power for him-
self. It was a conspiracy of this sort: Maximinus
wished to make a bridge and cross over against the
Germans, and it was resolved that the conspirators
should cross over with him and then, breaking the
bridge behind them, surround Maximinus on the
barbarians' side and kill him, while Magnus seized
the throne. For Maximinus had begun waging all
manner of wars—and very valiantly, too—as soon as
he had been made emperor, inasmuch as he was
skilled in the art of war and wished, on the one hand,
to guard the reputation he had already won, and, on
the other, to surpass in everyone's eyes the glory of
Alexander, whom he had slain. For this reason,
even as emperor he engaged his soldiers in exercise
every day, and, indeed, himself appeared in armour
and demonstrated many points to the army with his
own hand and body. But about that revolt it is
asserted that Maximinus himself invented it in order
to make an occasion for barbarity. At any rate,
without judge, accusation, prosecutor, or defence he
put all of them to death and confiscated their pro-
perty, and even after slaying over four thousand men
he was not yet content.

XI. There was also in his reign a revolt of the
Osroénian bowmen,! who rebelled against him through
love of Alexander and regret for his loss, having agreed
among themselves that Maximinus had certainly slain
him; nor could they be persuaded otherwise. They
accordingly made one of their number, a certain Titus,
whom Maximinus had already discharged from the
army, their general and emperor. Indeed, they girt
him with the purple, furnished him with royal pomp,
and barred access to him like the soldiers of a king,


THE TWO MAXIMINI

6 his rebus in dies inmanior fiebat, ferarum more, quae
vulneratae magis exulcerantur.

9 mirandum autem adparatum belli Alexander habuit,

XII. cui Maximinus multa dicitur addidisse. ingressus
igitur Germaniam Transrhenanam per triginta! vel
quadraginta ? milia barbarici soli vicos incendit,’
greges abegit, praedas sustulit, barbarorum plurimos
interemit, militem divitem reduxit, cepit innumeros,
et nisi Germani omnes‘ ad paludes et silvas con-
fugissent, omnem Germaniam in Romanam ditionem


1 triginta Salm., Peter; trecenta P. * quadringenta P.
3 incendit om. in P. tomnes Eyssenhardt; amnes P; a
campis Peter. Seum sui om. in P; cum suo equo ån-


haerentem P, Peter! ; eum sui equo inhaerente Peter?. |


! His campaign in Germany is described in Herodian, vii. 2.
*? See Alex., lxi. 8 and note.
* His campaign seems to have been in Württemberg. An


THE TWO MAXIMINI XI. 4—XII. 3


all, it must be said, against his will. But while this
Titus was sleeping at his home, he was slain by one
of his friends, Macedonius by name, who resented his
preferment above himself, and so betrayed him to
Maximinus and brought the Emperor his head. And
at first Maximinus gave him thanks, but later on,
hating him as a traitor, he killed him. Through these
events, then, he became fiercer day by day, as wild
animals grow more savage with their wounds.

After these events he crossed over into Germany !
with the whole army and with the Moors, Osroénians,
Parthians, and all the other forces that Alexander
took when he went to war.? He took these eastern
auxiliaries with him chiefly for the reason that no
forces are more useful against Germans than light
bowmen. And truly Alexander had constructed a
splendid war-machine, and Maximinus, they say,
greatly added toit. XII. He marched, then, into Ger-
many across the Rhine, and throughout thirty or forty
miles of the barbarians' country ? he burned villages,
drove away flocks, slew numbers of the barbarians
themselves, enriched his own soldiers, and took a host
of captives, and, had not all the Germans fled to the
swamps and forests, he would have brought all Ger-
many under Roman sway. He himself did much
with his own hand, especially when he rode into a
swamp * and would have been cut off by the Germans
had not his men extricated him as he was mired with
his horse. For he had that barbaric rashness which


inscription of Maximinus, found at Tübingen, seems to be a
relic of his occupation of the country; see O.I.L., xiii., 9083.

4 According to Herodian, vii. 2, 6, it was to encourage his
men in the pursuit.


VOL. II, Z


THE TWO MAXIMINI


! uel ins. by Peter; om. in P. ? ac ins. by Peter; om.
in P


1 He himself assumed the cognomen Germanicus Maximus
and gave it to his son; see the inscriptions in Dessau, Ins. Sel.,
488-490, and the coins in Cohen, iv?, p. 505 f. He aiso issued
coins with the legend Victoria Germanica, Cohen, iv?, p. 515 f.,
nos, 105-116.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XII. 4—XIII. 2


made him think that even the emperor always owed
the help of his own hand. In the end, a sort of naval
battle was fought in the swamp, and very many
were slain.

And when he had thus conquered Germany, he
despatched a letter,? written to dictation, to the senate
and people at Rome, the purport of which was this:
* We cannot, Conscript Fathers, tell you all that we
have done. Throughout an area of forty or fifty miles
we have burned the villages of the Germans, driven
off their flocks, carried away captives, killed men in
arms, and fought a battle in a swamp. And we should
have pushed on to the forests, had not the depth of
the swamps prevented our crossing." Aelius Cordus
says that this oration was entirely his own; and
it is easily believed. For what is there in it of which
a barbarian soldier were not capable? He wrote
likewise to the people, to the same effect but with
greater respect, this because of his hatred ofthe senate,
by which, he believed, he was mightily despised. He
gave orders, furthermore, for pictures to be painted
and hung up before the Senate-house, illustrating the
conduct of the war, in order that the art of painting,
too, might tell of his exploits, But after his death
the senate caused these pictures to be taken down
and burned.

XIII. There were many other wars and battles in
his reign, and from them all he always returned
triumphant with immense plunder and numerous
captives. We have an oration of his, sent to the
senate, whereof this is a sample: “In a short time,
Conscript Fathers, I have waged more wars than any


2 Fictitious. Herodian merely says that one was sent.


Z2


THE TWO MAXIMINI

3  Pacata Germania Sirmium venit, Sarmatis inferre
bellum parans atque animo concupiens usque ad
Oceanum septentrionales partes in Romanam ditionem

4redigere; quod fecisset, si vixisset, ut Herodianus
dicit, Graecus scriptor, qui ei, quantum videmus, in
odium Alexandri plurimum favit.


1 non ins. by Eyssenhardt and Peter; om. in P.


1 Mod. Mitrowitz on the lower Save near its junction with
the Danube.

? Herodian says nothing about an intended invasion of
Sarmatia. Some sort of & war, however, must have been
waged north of the Danube, for in his inscriptions of 287 and
238 he and Maximus bear the titles Sarmaticus Maximus and
Dacicus Maximus ; see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 488-489. Perhaps
these campaigns are the bella mentioned in § 1.

3 vii. 2, 9.

* According to Herodian, vii. 8, 4, they were thus brought
to him while in Pannonia from all parts of the Empire.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XIII. 3-6


of the ancients ever did. I have carried away more
plunder than a man could hope for, and 1 have brought
back so many captives that the lands of Rome scarce
suffice to hold them." The rest of the oration is un-
necessary for this narrative.

Germany now being set at peace, he went to
Sirmium! with the intention of waging war against
the Sarmatians? ; and indeed in his heart he desired
to bring all the northern regions up to the Ocean
under Roman sway. And he would have done it had
he lived, so Herodian says?; though Herodian was
always well disposed to Maximinus, through hatred,
as far as we can see, of Alexander.

But by this time the Romans could bear his
barbarities no longer—the way in which he called up
informers and incited accusers, invented false offences,
killed innocent men, condemned all whoever came to
trial, reduced the richest men to utter poverty and
never sought money anywhere save in some other's
ruin, put many generals and many men of consular
rank to death for no offence, carried others about in
waggons without food and drink,* and kept others in
confinement, in short neglected nothing which he
thought might prove effectual for cruelty—and, unable
to suffer these things longer, they rose against him in
revolt. And not only the Romans, but, because he
had been savage to the soldiers also, the armies which
were in Africa rose in sudden and powerful rebellion


6 The rapacity of Maximinus is regarded by Herodian also as
the chief cause of the revolt which led to his overthrow; see
vii. 3, 5-6. His exactions seem to have been due, not to
personal greed, but to the need of money for his northern
campaigns.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


!superantes Editor (cf. Herodian, vii. 4, 6); per P; tper
Peter. ? propere Peter; per P.


1 Gordian I. ; see Gord., ii. 2 f.

2 This narrative of the revolt in Africa agrees with the
account given in Gord., vii.-x., but it is less detailed. Both are
evidently taken from Herodian, vii. 4-7.

3 On rationalis see note to Alex., xlv. 6.

* Gordian II. ; see Gord., iv. 2 and note.

5 About 175 km. S.E. of Carthage, near the coast.

$ He was assassinated by the qu&estor and the soldiers whom


THE TWO MAXIMINI XIV. 1-5


and hailed the aged and venerable Gordian! who was
proconsul there, as emperor. This rebellion came
into being in the following manner.?

XIV. There was a certain imperial steward in
Libya, who in his zeal for Maximinus had despoiled
every one ruthlessly, until finally the peasantry,
abetted by a number of soldiers, slew him, after over-
coming those who out of respect for Maximinus
defended the agent of the privy-purse.? But soon
the promoters of this murder saw that they must
seek relief through sharper remedies, and so, coming
to the proconsul Gordian, a man, as we have said,
worthy of respect, well-born, eminent in every virtue,
whom Alexander had sent to Africa by senatorial
` decree, and threatening him with swords and ever
other kind of weapon, they forced him, though he
cried out against it and cast himself on the ground, to
assume the purple and rule. In the beginning, it is
true, Gordian took the purple much against his will;
but later, when he saw that this course was unsafe
for his son * and family, he willingly undertook to rule,
and at the town of Thysdrus® he, together with his
son, was proclaimed Augustus by all the Africans.
From here he went speedily to Carthage with royal
pomp and guards and laurelled fasces, and sent letters
to the senate at Rome. And the senate, after the
murder of Vitalianus, the prefect of the guard,
received these with rejoicing because of their hatred
for Maximinus,’ and proclaimed both the elder and


Gordian sent to Rome with his letter to the senate ; see Gord.,
x. 5-8; Herodian, vii. 6, 5-9.

7 The assassins of Vitalianus spread the rumour that Maxi-
minus had been killed, and thereupon all his statues were
demolished by the mob ; see Gord., xiii. 5-6 ; Herodian, vii. 6,
9—7, 1.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

5 interfecti sunt; paucae civitates fidem hosti publico
servaverunt, quae proditis iis qui missi ad eos fuerant
ad Maximinum cito per indices detulerunt.

7 dis faventibus Gordianum proconsularem, virum sanc-
tissimum et gravissimum senatorem, principem me-
ruimus, Augustum appellavimus, nec solum illum, sed
etiam in subsidium rei publicae filium eius Gordianum


1 They revoked the honours conferred on him, according to
Herodian, vii. 7, 2. Both this statement and that of the vita
are tantamount to saying that the senate deposei him, as it
had done Didius Julianus; see Did. Jul., vii. 7. Similarly,
Nero, after his deposition, was formally declared a hostis by
the senate; see Suetonius, Nero, xlix. 2.

? Neither this document nor the following “ senatus con-
sultum " is in Herodian, and both are evidently fictitious. An


THE TWO MAXIMINI XV. 1-8


the younger Gordian Augusti. XV. Then all the
informers and accusers and all Maximinus' friends
were put to death, and Sabinus, the prefect of the
city, was beaten by the populace and slain.

And when this had been done, the senate, now
fearing Maximinus all the more, openly and freely
proclaimed him and his son enemies of the state.! It
next despatched letters to all the provinces, asking
their aid for the common safety and liberty ; and all
of them gave heed. Lastly Maximinus' friends and
administrators, generals, tribunes, and soldiers were
everywhere put to death. A few communities, how-
ever, remained loyal to the public enemy; these
betrayed the messengers who had been sent to them
and promptly handed them over to Maximinus
by means of informers.

The following is a specimen of the letters that the
senate sent out?: * The senate and Roman people,
now beginning to be delivered from a most savage
monster by the two princes Gordian, to the pro-
consuls, governors, legates, generals, tribunes, magis-
trates, and several states, municipalities, towns,
villages, and fortified places, wish prosperity, which
they are now just beginning to regain for themselves.
With the help of the gods we have obtained the pro-
consul Gordian, a most righteous man and eminent
senator, as emperor. We have given to him the title
of Augustus, and not only to him, but also, for the
further safeguarding of the state, to that excellent
man Gordian his son. It is now your part to unite,
that the state may be made secure, that evil doings
may be repelled, and that the monster and his friends,


entirely different and equally spurious version of the ** senatus
consultum ” is given in Gord., xi.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


9 fuerint, persequendos. a nobis etiam Maximinus cum
filio suo hostis est iudicatus."

2 imperatoris, patris patriae, proconsulis recitavit : “ In-
vitum me, patres conscripti, iuvenes, quibus Africa
tuenda commissa est, ad imperium vocarunt. sed
intuitu vestri necessitatem libens sustineo. vestrum
est aestimare quid velitis. nam ego usque ad senatus

3iudicium incertus et varius fluctuabo." lectis litteris
statim senatus adclamavit: * Gordiane Auguste, di te
servent. felix imperes, tu nos liberasti. salvus im-
peres, tu nos liberasti. perte salva res publica. omnes
4tibi gratias agimus." item consul rettulit: “ Patres
conscripti, de Maximinis quid placet?" responsum
est: “ Hostes, hostes. qui eos occiderit, praemium

5 merebitur." item consul dixit: ** De amicis Maximini

quid videtur?" adclamatum est: * Hostes, hostes.
6qui eos occiderit, praemium merebitur." item adcla-
matum est: “Inimicus senatus in crucem tollatur.
hostis senatus ubicumque feriatur. inimici senatus
vivi exurantur. Gordiani Augusti, di vos servent.

7 ambo feliciter agatis, ambo feliciter imperetis. nepoti

Gordiani praeturam decernimus, nepoti Gordiani con-


1 At the southern corner of the Forum; three of its columns
are still standing.

2 This date is incorrect ; see note to Maz.-Balb., xv. T.

3 For other acclamations see note to Alex., vi. 1.

5 See c. xx. 2 and note.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XV. 9—XVI. 7


wherever they be, may be hunted down. We have
pronounced Maximinus and his son enemies of the
state.”

XVI. This was the senate’s decree: After they
had assembled in the Temple of Castor and Pollux! on
the sixth day before the Kalends of July,? Julius 26 June, 238
Silanus, the consul, read the letter which had been
received from Africa from Gordian the proconsul,
emperor and father of his country: “ Conscript
Fathers, the young men, to whom was entrusted
Africa to guard, against my will have called on me to
rule. But having regard to you, I am glad to endure
this necessity. It is yours to decide what you wish.
For myself, I shall waver to and fro in uncertainty
until the senate has decided." As soon as the letter
was read the senate forthwith cried out ?: “Gordian
Augustus, may the gods keep you! May you rule
happily; you have delivered us. May you rule
safely; you have delivered us. Through you the
state is made safe. All of us, we thank you.” So
then the consul put the question: * Concerning the
Maximini, Conscript Fathers, what is your pleasure?"
They replied, * Enemies, enemies! He who slays
them shall have a reward." Again the consul spoke:
* Concerning the friends of Maximinus, what seems
good?" And they cried out, “ Enemies, enemies |
He who slays them shall have a reward." And then
they cried out: * Let the foe of the senate be hanged
on a cross. Let the senate's enemy everywhere be
smitten. Let the senate's foes be burned alive.
Gordiani Augusti, may the gods keep you! Luckily
may you live! Luckily may you rule! We decree
the grandson of Gordian * the praetorship, we promise
the grandson of Gordian the consulship. Let the


THE TWO MAXIMINI


1The highly coloured description that follows is entirely
lacking in Herodian and is probably an invention. Herodian
says ** ekvOpwmós re Ñv kal èv peyddAas $povríci," and adds that
for two days he remained in private, consulting with his friends,


THE TWO MAXIMINI XVII. 1-7


grandson of Gordian be called Caesar. Let the third
Gordian take the praetorship.”’

XVII. When this decree of the senate reached
Maximinus, being by nature passionate, he so flamed
with fury that you would have thought him not a man
but a wild beast. He dashed himself against the
walls, sometimes he threw himself upon the ground,
he screamed incoherently aloud, he snatched at his
sword as though he could slaughter the senate then
and there, he rent his royal robes, he beat the palace-
attendants, and, had not the youth retreated, certain
authorities affirm, he would have torn out his young
son’s eyes. He was enraged with his son, as it
happened, because he had ordered him to go to Rome
when he was first declared emperor, and this the
youth, because of his excessive fondness for his father,
had not done. And now Maximinus imagined that
if he had been at Rome the senate would have dared
none of this. Blazing with rage, then, his friends got
him to his room. But still he could not control his
fury, and finally, to get oblivion from his thoughts, he
so soaked himself with wine on that first day, they
say, that he did not know what had been done. On
the next day, admitting his friends—and they indeed
could not bear to see him, but stood silent and silently
commended what the senate had done,—he held a
council as to what he should do. From the council
he proceeded to an assembly, and there said much
against the Africans, much against Gordian, and more
against the senate, urging his soldiers to avenge their
common wrongs.


and on the third day made a speech to the soldiers, which his
friends had prepared for him; see Herodian, vii. 8, 1-3.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

$ ergo si viri estis, si vires habetis, eamus contra senatum

XIX. Sed Gordianus in Africa primum a Capeliano
quodam agitari coepit, cui Mauros regenti successorem


1 Here ends the portion of this Vita that has been trans-
ferred in P to Maa..Balb., viii. 2; see note to c. v. 8.
? mortui Lenze; metu P, Peter; metu del. by Cas. 3 sub-
didit Peter ; subtit P; subuertit P corr.


1 This speech bears no resemblance to that attributed to him
by Herodian. Still another version is given in Gord., xiv. 1-4.

?An allusion to the proverbial bad faith of the ancient
Carthaginians; see Livy, xxi. 4,9 (of Hannibal), perfidia plus
quam Punica. See also Gord., xiv. 1; xv. 1; xvi. 8.

3 According to one version of the myth, Romulus was
murdered by the senators; see Livy, i. 16, 4


THE TWO MAXIMINI XVIII. 1—XIX. 4


XVIII. His speech was altogether that of a soldier!
this being the general purport of it: * Fellow soldiers,
we are revealing something you already know. The
Africans have broken faith. When did they ever
keep it?? Gordian, a feeble old man on the brink of
death, has assumed the imperial office. Those most
sacred Conscript Fathers, who murdered Romulus?
and Caesar, have pronounced me a public enemy, me,
who fought for them and conquered for them too ;
and not only me but you also, and all who stand with
me. The Gordians, both father and son, they have
called Augusti. If you are men, then, if there is any
might in you, let us march now against the senate
and the Africans, and you shall have the goods of
them all" He then gave them a bounty—and a
huge one, too—and turning towards Rome began to
march thither with his army.

XIX. But now Gordian began to be harassed in
Africa by a certain Capelianus,* whom he had deposed
from the governorship of the Moors. And when
finally he sent his son against him, and his son after
a desperate battle was killed, the old man hanged
himself, well knowing that there was much strength
in Maximinus and in the Africans none, nay rather
only a great faculty for betraying. And forthwith
Capelianus, the victor, in the name of Maximinus slew
and outlawed all of the dead Gordian's party in Africa,
sparing none. Indeed, he seemed to perform these
duties quite in Maximinus’ own temper. He over-
threw cities, ravaged shrines, divided gifts among his


* He was governor of Numidia, which adjoined the province
of Africa on the east. A fuller account of his overthrow of the
Gordians is given in Gord., xv.-xvi. and Herodian, vii. 9.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


diripuit, donaria militibus divisit, plebem et principes

5 civitatum concidit. ipse praeterea militum animos
sibi conciliabat, proludens ad imperium, si Maximinus
perisset.


let Balbinum om. in P! ; et Clodium Balbinum (cf. Gord.,
x. 1; xxii. 1) P corr., Peter.


1The senate had previously, after the deposition of Maxi-
minus (c. xv. 2), appointed a commission of X X viri rei publicae
curandae to provide for the defence of Italy in the absence of
the newly-named emperors, see c. xxxii. 8; Gord., x. 1-2; xxii.
1; C.I.L. xiv. 8209; Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1186.

? M. Clodius Pupienus Maximus, one of the XX viri. For
his ** biography "' see Maz.-Balb., v.-vi.

3D. Caelius Calvinus Balbinus, also one of the XX viri.
He is incorrectly called Clodius Balbinus in Gord., x. 1; xxii. 1.
For his “ biography " see Maz.-Balb., vii.

4 Afterwards Gordian III. ; see Gord, xxii. f.

5 Also described in Mac.-Bailb., ix.-x. A much fuller account
is given by Herodian (vii. 10, 5—12, 4), whose narrative differs
from that of the Historia Augusta in placing the first riot (as


THE TWO MAXIMINI XIX. 5—XX. 6


soldiers, and slaughtered common folk and nobles in
the cities, At the same time he strove to win over
the affections of his soldiers, playing for the imperial
power himself in the event that Maximinus perished.

XX. When news of these events was brought to
Rome, the senate, fearing Maximinus' barbarity—
natural at all times and inevitable now that the two
Gordians were dead,—elected two other emperors,!
Maximus,? who had been prefect of the city and
had held many other offices with distinction before
that, humble by birth but eminent by his virtues, and
Balbinus? who was somewhat fonder of pleasure.
These were acclaimed Augusti by the people; and by
the soldiers and the same people the little grandson of
Gordian * was hailed as Caesar. With three emperors,
therefore, was the state propped against Maximinus,
Maximus, however, was the most rigorous of life, the
most sagacious, and the most uniformly courageous of
the three, so finally both the senate and Balbinus
entrusted the war against Maximinus to him. But
after Maximus had set out to war against Maximinus,
Balbinus was beset with civil war and domestic dis-
turbances at Rome,’ especially after two soldiers of
the praetorian guard were slain by the populace at the


a result of which the populace forced the senate to give the
young Gordian the name Caesar) before the departure of
Maximus. The second riot (which was subsequent to Maximus’
departure) was the result of the action of Gallicanus and
Maecenas, two senators, who assaulted some praetorian soldiers,
who had entered the Senate-house, and then incited the populace
to attack the guard. Fierce fighting ensued, which Balbinus
was powerless to prevent. The much abridged narrative in
the present passage has been rendered unintelligible by the
lacuna in the text. The two riots are hopelessly confused in
Gord., xxii. 7—xxiii. 1,


VOL. IJ. AA


THE TWO MAXIMINI


1 Peter suggests as a reading to fill the lacuna: praecipue
<duobus praetorianis a Gallicano et Maecenate et instigan-
tibus contra praetorianos> [per] populum ; cf. Gord., xxii. 8.
2 sed Peter; et P.


1Mod. Laibach in Carniola. His advance from Sirmium
is described by Herodian, viii. 1, 1-4.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XX. 7—XXI. 5


instigation of Gallicanus and Maecenas. The popu-
lace, indeed, were cruelly butchered by the guard
when Balbinus proved unable to quell the uprising.
And in the end a great part of the city was burned.
Meanwhile the Emperor Maximinus had been
greatly cheered by hearing of the death of Gordian
and Capelianus' victory over his son. But when he
received the second decree of the senate, in which
Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordian were declared
emperors, he then realized that the senate's hatred
for him was never to end and that everyone really
considered him an enemy. XXI. Hotter than ever,
then, he pushed on into Italy. He then learned that
Maximus had been sent against him, and in a violent
rage came up to Emona! in line of battle. But the
plan agreed on for all the provincials was this?: that
they should gather up everything that could be useful
for the commissariat and retire within the cities in
order that Maximinus and his army might be pinched
by famine. And, indeed, when he pitched camp on
the plain for the first time and found no provisions,
his army was incensed at him because they suffered
from hunger even in Italy, where they expected to
be refreshed after the Alps, and they began at first to
murmur and then indeed to speak out openly. And
when Maximinus attempted to punish this, the army
was much inflamed, but silently stored up its hate for
the moment and produced it again at the proper time.
Many authorities say that Maximinus found Emona
empty and abandoned, and foolishly rejoiced because
the entire city, as it seemed, had retreated before
him.? ©
2 See c, xxiii. 2; Max.-Balb. x. 1-2.
-3 So Herodian, viii. 1, 5.
AA 2


THE TWO MAXIMINI

XXII, bus. cum igitur frustraobsideret Aquileiam Maximinus,
legatos in eandem urbem misit. quibus populus
paene consenserat, nisi Menophilus cum collega resti-
tisset, dicens etiam deum Belenum per haruspices


loropugnatio Salm., Peter; oppugnatio P. 2 pondisse
P; spopondisse Edit. princ.


! They had been sent to Aquileia for that purpose by the
senate; see Maz.-Paib. xii. 2; Herodian, viii. 1, 5.

2 A deity worshipped in several plazes in Venetia and the
Carnic Alps, as many inscriptions in his honour testify. To
judge from § 2 and Herodian (viii. 3, 8), he was akin to Apollo.

3 The Sontius, mod. Isonzo. According to Herodian, it was
sixteen miles from Aquileia, and as it was swollen by the melt-


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXI. 6—XXII. 6


After this he came to Aquileia, which shut its
gates against him and posted armed men about the
walls. Nor did the defence lack vigour, being con-
ducted by Menophilus and Crispinus,! both men of
consular rank. XXII. So when Maximinus found he
was besieging Aquileia in vain, he sent envoys to the
city. And the people had almost yielded to them, had
not Menophilus and his colleague opposed it, saying
that the god Belenus? had declared through the sooth-
sayers that Maximinus would be conquered. Whence
afterwards the soldiers of Maximinus boasted, it is
said, that Apollo myst have fought against them,
and that really victory belonged not to the senate
and Maximus but to the gods. But, on the other
hand, it is said that they advanced this theory because
they blushed, armed men as they were, to have been
defeated by men practically unarmed. At any rate,
after making a bridge of wine-casks, Maximinus
crossed the river? and began to invest Aquileia closely.
And terrible then was both the assault and the danger,
for the townsmen defended themselves from the
soldiers with sulphur, fire, and other defensive de-
vices of this same kind *; and of the soldiers some
were stripped of their arms, others had their clothing
burned, and some were blinded, while the investing
engines were completely destroyed. Amid all this
Maximinus, with his young son whom he, had entitled
Caesar, strode about the walls, just far enough off to
be safe from the throw of javelins, and besought now


ing snow and the bridge had been destroyed by the natives it
delayed Maximinus for three days ; see viii. 4, 1-4.

4In c. xxxiii. 1; Maz.-Balb., xi. 3; xvi. 5 the picturesque
(but probably unhistoric) detail is added that the women of
Aquileia gave their hair for bowstrings.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


7nunc suos verbis, nunc oppidanos rogare. verum

XXIII. Quare Maximinus sperans suorum ignavia
bellum trahi duces suos interemit, eo tempore quo
minime oportebat. unde sibi milites etiam iratiores

XXIV. Hic finis Maximinorum fuit, dignus crude-
litate patris, indignus bonitate filii. quibus mortuis
ingens laetitia provincialium, dolor gravissimus
barbarorum.


1 See Max.-Balb., x. 1.

2 The Legio II. Parthica; see note to Carac., ii. T.

3 Another version is given in c. xxxii, 5.

* Especially the Pannonian and Thracian soldiers, who had
made him emperor ; see Herodian, viii. 6, 1.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXII. 7—XXIV. 1


his own men, now the men of the town. But it pro-
fited him nothing. For against him, because of his
cruelty, and against his son, who was a most beautiful
creature, the townsmen merely hurled abuse.

XXIII. And so now Maximinus, flattering himself
that the war was being prolonged by the cowardice of
his men, put his generals to death, just at the time
when he could least afford to do so; by which act he
made his soldiers still further enraged against him. In
addition to that, he now ran short of provisions, be-
cause the senate had sent letters to all the provinces
and to the overseers of ports to prevent any provisions
coming into Maximinus’ power. It had sent praetors
and quaestors throughout all the cities, moreover, to
keep guard everywhere and defend everything against
Maximinus. Finally, it came to pass that he him-
self, while besieging, suffered the distress of one be-
sieged. At this juncture it was announced that the
whole world was agreed in hatred of Maximinus.
And so some of the soldiers, whose wives and children
were on the Alban Mountain,” becoming fearful, in the
middle of the day, when they rested from the fighting,
slew Maximinus and his son as they lay in their tent,’
and putting their heads on poles, showed them to the
citizens of Aquileia. And thereupon in the neigh-
bouring town the statues and portraits of Maximinus
were immediately thrown down and his prefect of
the guard, together with his more notable friends,
were slain. Their heads were sent to Rome.

XXIV. This was the end of the Maximini, worthy
the cruelty of the father, unworthy the goodness of
theson. Amongthe provincials there was tremendous
rejoicing at their death, but among the barbarians t
the most grievous sorrow.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

4 Dici vix potest quanta laetitia fuerit, cum Romam
per Italiam caput Maximini ferretur, occurrentibus

gdeinde Maximus Romam venit senatumque ingressus


! propere Peter!, Jordan; P P; pretio Peter?. — ?refectisque
Peter; fecistisque P. 3 gui ubi P, Novák; atque ibi Peter.
*quare statim P, Peter; quare del. by Eyssenhardt and
Novák. 5urbe Damsté ; urbem P, Peter.


1 On their deification see Max.-Balb., iv. 1-8.

? See note to c. xxxiii. 4. 3 See Maz.-Baib., xi. 1.

*'This is an error, for they came to Rome with him; see
Maz.-Balb., xiii. 5.

5 See note to Alex., lviii. 1.

€ See Maz.-Dalb., xi. 4-6.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXIV. 2—XXIV. 8


And now that the public enemies were slain, the
soldiers were taken in by the townsfolk at their own
request—but on condition that they would worship
before the portraits of Maximus and Balbinus and also
of Gordian, for all told them that the elder Gordians
had been placed among the gods. This done, a
mighty store of provisions was speedily carried from
Aquileia to the camp, which was suffering from
hunger, and after the soldiers were refreshed, on a
later day they came to an assembly. And there
they all swore allegiance to Maximus and Balbinus,
and hailed the elder Gordians as divine.

One can scarcely describe how great the joy was
when the head of Maximinus was carried through
Italy to Rome. From all sides folk came running as
to a public holiday. Maximus, whom many call
Pupienus,? was at Ravenna, preparing with the aid of
German auxiliaries for war?; but when he le4rned
that the army had come over to himself and his col-
leagues, and that the Maximini were slain, he at once
dismissed the German auxiliaries, whom he was get-
ting ready against the enemy, and sent a laurelled
letter* to Rome. And this caused unbounded re-
joicing in the city ; indeed at altars, temples, shrines,
and holy places everywhere, everyone offered up
thanks. As for Balbinus, a somewhat timid soul by
nature, who trembled when he heard Maximinus’ very
name, he sacrificed a hecatomb® and gave orders
that the gods should be worshipped with an equal
sacrifice in every town. Soon thereafter Maximus
came to Rome,’ and after going into the senate,®

7™He went first to Aquileia to receive the surrender of


Maximinus’ army ; see Maz.-Balb., xii. 3.
8 See Max.- Balb., xiii. 1-2.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


1S0 P, Peter! ; «senatus hostes, populi R. < hostes >
Kellerbauer, Peter ?, 1


1 These acclamations cannot, of course, be properly called a
senatus consultum. On acclamations see note to Alez., vi. 1.
24e. from the public records and his inscriptions, as in


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXV. 1—XXVI. 3


where thanks were offered him, he held an assembly,
whence he and Balbinus and Gordian victoriously be-
took themselves to the Palace.

XXV. It is of interest to know what sort of decree
the senate passed and what the day was in the city,
when it was announced that Maximinus was slain.
For, in the first place, the messenger who had been
sent to Rome from Aquileia, by changing his horses
managed to gallop with such speed that he reached
Rome on the third day after leaving Maximus at
Ravenna. As it happened, games were be:ng held
that day, when suddenly, while Balbinus and Gordian
were seated, the messenger entered the theatre; and
at once, before he uttered a word, the people cried out
with one voice, ** Maximinus is dead!” Thus the mes-
senger was anticipated and the Emperors, who were
present, by nodding in assent expressed the public
rejoicing. The performance, then, being brought to a
close, everyone immediately rushed to his religious
duties, and thereafter the nobles sped to the Senate-
house, the people to the assembly.

XXVl. The decree of the senate was as follows :!
After the Emperor Balbinus Augustus had read the
letter, the senate cried: * The gods take vengeance
on the foes of the Roman people. Most great Jupiter,
we give you thanks. Revered Apollo, we give you
thanks. Maximus Augustus, we give you thanks.
Balbinus Augustus, we give you thanks. We decree
temples for the Deified Gordians. The name of Maxi-
minus, previously expunged,” is now to be stricken
from our hearts. Let the head of the public foe be
east into running water. Let no man burn his body.


Dessau, Ins. Sel., 487-489. This measure was probably included
in the formal act of deposition ; see c. xv. 2.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


merebatur, occisus est. qui senatuivincula minatus est,
4 ut debebat, interemptus est. sanctissimi imperatores,
gratias vobis agimus. Maxime, Balbine, Gordiane, di
vos servent. victores hostium omnes desideramus.
praesentiam Maximi omnes desideramus. Balbine
Auguste, di te servent. praesentem annum consules
vos ornetis. in loco Maximini Gordianus sufficiatur.”’
5post rogatus sententiam Cuspidius Celerinus haec
verba habuit : ** Patres conscripti, eraso nomine Maxi-
minorum appellatisque divis Gordianis victoriae causa
principibus nostris Maximo, Balbino et Gordiano sta-
tuas cum elephantis decernimus, currus triumphales
decernimus, statuas equestres decernimus, tropaea de-
6cernimus." post haec misso senatu supplicationes
7;per totam urbem decretae. victores principes in
Palatium se receperunt, de quorum vita in alio libro
deinceps dicemus.


! de om. in P.


! Otherwise unknown.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXVI. 4—XXVII. 2


He who threatened death to the senate is slain as he
deserved. He who threatened chains for the senate
is killed as he deserved. Most reverend Emperors,
we offer you thanks. Maximus, Balbinus, Gordian,
may the gods keep you! victorious over your foes, we
all desire your presence. We all desire the presence
of Maximus. Balbinus Augustus, may the gods keep
you! Honour the present year by being this year's
consuls. In the place of Maximinus let Gordian be
chosen." After this, Cuspidius Celerinus,! being
asked for his opinion, spoke thus : ** Conscript Fathers,
having expunged the name of the Maximini and
deified the Gordians, in honour of the victory we
decree to our princes Maximus, Balbinus, and Gordian
statues with elephants, triumphal cars, equestrian
statues, and trophies of victory”. After this, the
senate being dissolved, supplications were ordered
throughout the whole city. The princes betook them
victoriously to the Palace, but of their lives we shall
write later in another book.


XXVII. The descent of the younger Maximinus ?
has been related above. He himself was so beautiful
that the more wanton of women loved him indiscrimin-
ately, and not a few desired to be gotten with child
by him. He gave such promise of height, moreover,
that he might have reached his father's stature had
he not perished in his twenty-first year, in the very
flower of his youth, or, as some say, in his eighteenth.
Even so, he was well versed in Greek and Latin


3 On the correct form of his name and his titles see note to
c. viii. 1.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

4in imaginibus ipsius pueri. qui versus Graecos fecit
ex illis Latinis Vergilii, cum ipsum puerum de-
scriberet :


1 Fabillus, like Philemon and Eugamius, mentioned in § 5,
is otherwise unknown.

* Aeneid, viii. 589 and 591, describing Pallas, son of Evan-
der; the third line is not in the Aeneid,

$ Perhaps Herennius Modestinus, a jurist and a pupil of
Ulpian ; see Digesta, xlvii. 2, 52, 20.

3 Probably Julius Titianus, whose Chorographia (Servius on
Vergil, Aen., .v. 42) is probably the provinciarum libri of this
passage. In Ausonius, Epist., i. 1 he is named as the author
of letters of famous women and dubbed Oratorum Simia. The
son is included in a list of imperial tutors in Ausonius, Grat.
Actio, vii. 81; he is probably the translator of fables men-
tioned by Ausonius, Epist., xvi. 78.

5 Not otherwise known, and probably, in view of the general


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXVII. 3-7


letters, for he got his first schooling under the
Greek man of letters Fabillus,! many of whose Greek
epigrams are extant today, chiefly on statues of the
boy himself. This Fabillus also made Greek verses
from those Latin lines of Vergil, meaning to describe
this same boy :


* Like to the star of the morning when he, new-
bathéd in Ocean,

Raises his holy face and scatters the darkness from
heaven?

So did the young man seem, fair-famed in the name
of his father."


Latin grammar he studied under Philemon, jurispru-
dence under Modestinus,? and oratory under Titianus,
the son of that elder Titianus* who wrote a very
beautiful work on the provinces and was called the ape
of his age because he imitated everything. He em-
ployed also the Greek rhetorician Eugamius, who was
famous in his day.

Junia Fadilla,? the great-granddaughter of Antoni-
nus, was betrothed to him; but afterwards she was
espoused by Toxotius, a senator of the same family,
who died after serving his praetorship, certain poems
of his being extant today. The regal betrothal-gifts
that he had presented her with, however, she kept.
Junius Cordus, who was an investigator of these things,


character of this vita, to be regarded as apocryphal, as is also
Toxotius. At the end of the fourth century the Toxotii were
prominent in Roman society, and on the theory that the name
was introduced here in honour of them, its presence has been
used as an argument for the contention that the Historia
Augusta is & work of the late fourth century; see Dessau,
Hermes, xxiv., p. 351.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


8rerum persecutor est!) fuisse dicuntur: monolinum
de albis novem, reticulum cum? prasinis undecim,
dextrocherium cum costula de hyacinthis quattuor,
praeter vestes auratas et omnes regias? ceteraque
insignia sponsaliorum.


1< qui h. r. persecutor est Lenze; h. r. persecutores P ;
«ul h. r. persecutor est Petschenig, Peter?. ? cum ins.
by Peter; om. in P. 5 omnes regias P, Damsté, Lenze;
gemmis ornatas Peter.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXVII. S-XXVUL 8N


says that they were such as these: a necklace of nine
pearls; a net-work cap with eleven emeralds; a
bracelet with a row of four sapphires; and besides
these, gowns worked with gold, all of them royal, and
other betrothal pledges.

XXVIII. The young man Maximinus was most ex-
cessively insolent; indeed, when even his father, a
very hard man, rose to greet many distinguished men,
he remained seated. He was fond of gay living, very
sparing in the use of wine, but voracious in respect
to food, especially game, eating only boar's flesh, ducks,
cranes, and everything that is hunted. The friends of
Maximus, Balbinus and Gordian, and particularly the
senators, spoke ill of him because of his excessive
beauty ; for they were not willing that his beauty, fallen,
as it were, from heaven, should be pure. Indeed, that
time when he walked about the walls of Aquileia with
his father, asking its surrender, nothing but filthy in-
sinyations were hurled at him,!—though far removed
from his real life. He was very careful of his dress,
and no woman was more elegantly groomed. It was
wonstrous how his father's friends fawned on him,
in hopes chiefly of gifts or largess. For he was ex-
ceedingly haughty at his levees—he stretched out his
hand, and suffered his knees to be kissed, and some-
times even his feet. This the elder Maximinus never
permitted; for he said * God forbid that any free
man should ever print a kiss on my feet". And
while we are speaking of the elder Maximinus we
should not forbear to mention this amusing thing: as
we have said,? Maximinus was almost eight and a half
feet tall; and certain men deposited a shoe of his,


1 See c. xxii. 6—7. 2 See c. vi. 8.


VOL. II. BB


b


a“


=


a


"d THE TWO MAXIMINI
luco, qui est inter! Aquileiam et Arciam, posuerunt,
quod constitit pede maius fuisse hominis vestigii
9mensura. unde etiam vulgo tractum est, cum de
longis et ineptis hominibus diceretur **caliga Maxi-
10 mini, quod idcirco indidi, ne quis Cordum legeret
me praetermisisse crederet aliquid quod ad rem?
pertineret. sed redeam ad filium.
XXIX. De hoc adulescente Alexander Aurelius ad
matrem suam scribit Mamaeam, cupiens ei sororem


2suam Theocliam dare, in haec verba: ‘‘ Mi mater,


1 ¿nter om. in P. ? rem P, Peter! ; patrem Kellerbauer,
Peter?, | ? S0 Peter; quod dicere P, def. by Petschenig.


1 Unknown.

?i.e. Severus Alexander. There is no mention elsewhere of
& sister of his named Theoclia, and, like Junia Fadilla (xxvii.
6) she is probably apocryphal.

3 This letter is obviously spurious, since the incorrect form


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXVIII. 9—XXIX. 6


that is, one of his royal boots, in a grove which lies
between Aquileia and Arcia,! because, forsooth, they
agreed that it was a foot longer than the measure of
any foot of man. Whence also is derived the vulgar
expression, used for lanky and awkward fellows, of
* Maximinus’ boot". I have put this down lest any
one who reads Cordus should believe that I have over-
looked anything which pertained to my subject. But
now let me return to the son.

XXIX. Aurelius Alexander? wished to give him
his sister Theoclia in marriage and wrote to his mother
Mamaea these words concerning the youth : “ Mother,
were there not an element of the barbarian in the char-
acter of the elder Maximinus—he who is our general,
and a very good one, too—1 had already married your
Theoclia to Maximinus? the younger. But I am
afraid that such a product of Greek culture as my
sister could not endure a barbarian father-in-law, how-
ever much the young man himself seems handsome
and learned and polished in Greek elegance. This
is what I think ; but nevertheless I ask your advice.
Tell me, do you wish Maximinus, the son of Maximinus,
for a son-in-law, or Messalla, who is a scion of a noble
house, a very powerful speaker, very learned, and, if
I mistake not, a man who would prove himself gallant
on the field if occasion should arise?" Thus Alexander
on Maximinus. As for us, we have nothing further
to say of him.

And yet—lest we seem to have omitted anything
at all—I have set down a letter written by his father
Maximinus, when he had now become emperor, in


of the young man’s name is given here, as elsewhere in the
Historia Augusta; see note to c. viii. 1.


BB 2


THE TWO MAXIMINI

XXX. Omina sane imperii haec fuerunt: serpens
dormienti caput circumdedit. posita ab eodem vitis
intra annum ingentes uvas purpureas attulit et mirae


spices duos imperatores non diuturnos ex una domo


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXIX. 7—XXX. 2


which he says that he had proclaimed his son emperor
in order to see, either in painting or actuality, what
the younger Maximinus would look like in the purple.
The letter itself was of this nature: *I have let my
Maximinus be called emperor, not only because of the
fondness which a father owes a son, but also that the
Roman people and that venerable senate may be able to
take an oath that they have never had a more handsome
emperor". After the fashion of the Ptolemies this
youth wore a golden cuirass ; he had also a silver one.
He had a shield, moreover, inlaid with gold and
jewels, and also a gold-inlaid spear. He had silver
swords made for him, too, and gold ones as well, every-
thing, in fact, which could enhance his beauty—
helmets inset with precious stones and cheek-pieces
done in the same fashion.

These are the facts which can be known and related
of the boy with propriety. But whoever desires to
know the rest, about the sexual and amorous affairs
with which Cordus bespatters him, let him read
Cordus; as for us, we make an end of our book here,
and hasten on, as though bidden by a public duty,
to other things.

XXX. The omens that he would be emperor were
these: A snake coiled about his head as he was
sleeping. A grape-vine which he planted produced
within a year huge clusters of purple grapes, and
grew to an astounding size. His shield blazed in the
sun. A small lance of his was split by lightning and
in such a manner that the whole of it, even through
the iron, was cleft and fell into two halves. And
from this the soothsayers declared that from the one
house there would spring two emperors of the same
name, whose reign would be of no long duration.


THE TWO MAXIMINI

2dicere voluisse *Succurrite." canes circa tentorium
eius in secunda mansione ultra duodecim ulularunt et
animam quasi flendo posuerunt ac prima luce mortui
3sunt deprehensi. lupi! quingenti simul ingressi sunt
in eam urbem in quam? se Maximinus contulerat ;
plerique dicunt Emonam, alii Archimeam, certe quae
4 deserta a civibus venienti Maximino patuit. longum
est omnia persequi, quae qui scire desiderat, is velim,


1lupi urbem P; urbem del. by Peter. ? guam Damsté ;


qua P, Peter.
! See c. xxi, 1 and 5, ? Unknown,


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXX. 3—XXXI. 4


His father's cuirass—many saw it—was stained not


with rust, as is usual, but all over with a purple colour. :


These omens, moreover, occurred for the son: When
he was sent to a grammarian, a certain kinswoman
of his gave him the works of Homer all written in
letters of gold on purple. And while he was yet a
little boy, he was asked to dinner by Alexander as a
compliment to his father, and, being without a dinner-
robe, he wore one of Alexander’s. When still an
infant, moreover, he mounted up into a carriage of
Antoninus Caracalla's that unexpectedly came down
the public way, seeing it empty, and sat down; and only
with great ado was he routed out by the coachmen.
Nor were there lacking then those who told Caracalla
to beware of the child. But he said, “It is a far


chance that this fellow will succeed me". For at
that time he was of the undistinguished crowd and
very young. |


XXXI. The omens of his death were these: When
Maximinus and his son were marching against Maxi-
mus and Balbinus they were met by a woman with
dishevelled hair and woeful attire, who cried out,
* Maximini, Maximini, Maximini," and said no more,
and died. She wished to add, it seemed, ‘‘ Help
me!" And at their next halting-place hounds, more
than twelve of them, howled about his tent, drawing
their breath with a sort of sobbing, and at dawn were
found dead. Five hundred wolves, likewise, came in
a pack into that town whither Maximinus had betaken
himself—Emona,! many say, others Archimea?; at
any rate, it was one which was left abandoned by its
inhabitants when Maximinus approached. It is a
lengthy business to enumerate all these things ; and
if anyone desires to know them, let him, as I have


Pd


THE TWO MAXIMINI

4quos contra eum principes fecerunt. idem addidit in
conspectu Maximini iam deserti a militibus et prae-

2 deessent nervi ad sagittas emittendas. quod aliquando


1 umbra pulchri oris Haupt, Peter?; umbrae pulchrioris P,
Peter!,


lOtherwise unknown.
2 See note to Alex., xlix. 3.


-


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXXI. 5—XXXIII. 2


often said, read Cordus, who has related them all, to
the point of telling idle tales.

They have no tombs. For their corpses were cast
into running water and their heads, while the mob
capered, were burned in the Campus Martius.

XXXII. Aelius Sabinus! has written, and we must
not omit it, that such was the beauty of the son's face
that even in death his head, now black, and dirty,
shrunken, and running with putrid gore, seemed still
the shadow, as it were, of a beautiful face. And in-
deed, though there was great joy at seeing the head
of Maximinus, there was almost equal grief when the
son's head was carried with it. Dexippus? says that
Maximinus was hated so thoroughly that when the
Gordians perished the senate elected twenty men to
oppose him.’ Among these were Maximus and Bal-
binus, and these two they made emperors against him.
This same Dexippus says also that Maximinus’ prefect
of the guard and his son were slain before his eyes,
after his soldiers had deserted him. And there are
not lacking historians who say that Maximinus also,
after he had been deserted and had seen his son
slain before his eyes, killed himself with his own
hand,‘ that nothing womanish might attach to him.

XXXIII. Nor can we fail to mention the extra-
ordinary loyalty displayed by the Aquileians in de-
fending the senate against Maximinus. For, lacking
bow-strings with which to shoot their arrows, they
made cords of the women’s hair.’ It is said that this
once happened at Rome as well, whence it was that


3 See note to c. xx. 1.
4 Sce c. xxiii. 6 and note.
5See note to c. xxii. 5.


THE TWO MAXIMINI


Romae dicitur factum, unde in honorem matronarum
templum Veneri Calvae senatus dicavit.

3 pugnasse dixerunt eundemque vicisse. qui error unde
natus sit, scire non possum, nisi forte idem est Pupie-

4nus qui Maximus. quod ideo testatum posui, ne quis
me hoc nescisse crederet, quod re vera magnum stupo-
rem ac miraculum crearet!


! crearet Peter?; creat P; quod . . . creat del. by Eyssen-
hardt and Peter!.


14.6. the Bald. Hertemple at Rome is mentioned by Lac-
tantius, Inst., i. 20, 27. Various legends accounting for her
name are iecorded by Servius, note to Vergil, Aen., i. 720.
One of these agrees with the incident alluded toin the present
passage, assigning it to the siege of the Capitoline Hill by
the Gauls in 382 p.c. In reality the name seems to be due
to the existence of & bald female statue, regarded as Venus ;
see Wissowa, in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyl., iii. 1408.


THE TWO MAXIMINI XXXIII. 3-4


the senate, in honour of the matrons, dedicated the
temple of Venus Calva.!

We can by no means be silent about the following
point. For although Dexippus, Arrianus,? and many
other Greek writers have said that Maximus and Bal-
binus were set up as emperors against Maximinus,
and that Maximus, being sent out with the army,
prepared for war at Ravenna, and did not see Aquileia
until after he was victorious,? Latin writers have said
that it was not Maximus but Pupienus who fought
Maximinus at Aquileia and beat him. Whence this
error arose I cannot say, unless it be that Maximus
and Pupienus were one and the same.* At any rate,
I have set this statement down with its authorities,
in order that no one may believe that I did not know
it—which indeed would cause great wonder and
amazement !


2 i.e. Herodian ; see note to c, i. 4.

3 See note to c. xxiv. 8.

‘In Max.-Balb. the author seems sometimes to be aware
that the two names refer to the same person (on his name
see note to c. xx. 1), and sometimes to doubt the identifica-
tion, especially in Maz.-Balb., i. 2; xv. 4-5; xvi. 7; xviii.
where the question is fully discussed. In Victor (Caes., xxvi.—
xxvii.) and Eutropius (ix. 2), and presumably in their source
(probably the Lattni scriptores) he is always called Pupienus.


GORDIANI TRES
IULII CAPITOLINI


1 4.0. Gordian I, the proconsul of Africa, acclaimed emperor
in 238, Gordian II, his son (see note to c. iv. 2), and Gordian
III, his grandson, emperor 238-244, all of whom are treated
in this biography. On the other hand, Victor (Caes., xxvii)
and Eutropius (ix. 2), and presumably also their common
source, knew of only two Gordiaus, combining the second and
the third into one person.


THE THREE GORDIANS
BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. It had been my plan, revered Augustus, following
the example of many writers, to present each separate
emperor to Your Clemency, each in a separate book.
For I have either seen for myself that many writers
have done this, or I have so understood from my
reading. It did not seem proper, however, either to
perplex Your Piety with a multitude of books or to
expend my own labour on many volumes. For this
reason in this book I have bound the three Gordians
together, having a care both for my own labour and
for your reading, lest you be compelled to unroll
many volumes and yet read scarcely onestory. Butlet
not me, who have always fled long books and many
words, seem to run into the very thing I pretend
cleverly to avoid ; and so to my subject ! l

II. There were not, as certain uninformed writers
maintain, two Gordians, but three.! These writers
might have learned this from Arrianus,? the writer
of Greek history, and likewise from Dexippus,? the


? i.e. Herodian ; see note to Maxim., i. 4.
8 See note to Alex., xlix. 3.


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 Called in his inscriptions M. Antonius Gordianus Sempro-
nianus Romanus Aíricanus; see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 498. The
last two cognomina were probably conferred on him on his
accession to power (see c. ix. 3-4), that of Sempronianus is
perhaps responsible for the claim that he was descended
from the Gracchi, Nothing of his ancestry is known except
what is related here.

2The famous house built by Pompey on the Carinae, $.e.
the western slope of the Esquiline Hill; see Suetonius,
Tiberius, xv. After Pompey's death it became the property
of Marcus Antonius, and, later, of the Emperor Tiberius, It


THE THREE GORDIANS II. 2?2—III. 3


Greek writer, both of whom have investigated the
wholequestion, briefly perhaps, butstillconscientiously.
Of the three, Gordian the elder, that is the first,
was the son of Maecius Marullus and Ulpia Gordiana.
On his father's side he traced his descent from the
house of the Gracchi, on his mother's from the
Emperor Trajan. His own father, his grandfather,
and his great-grandfather, his wife's father and grand-
father, and likewise another of his wife's grandfathers
and two of her great-great-grandfathers, were consuls.
He himself as consul was most rich and powerful ; at
Rome he owned the House of Pompey,? and in the
provinces more land than any other subject. After
his consulship, which he served with Alexander,’ he
was sent out as proconsul to Africa by decree of the
senate.

III. But before I tell of his rule, I shall speak a
little of his character. When the Gordian of whom
we are speaking was a young man, he wrote poetry,
all of which has been preserved. As a matter of
fact, all the subjects were those which Cicero also
treated, that is, Marius, Aratus, Alcyonae, Uxorius and
Nilus. And he wrote these in order that Cicero's
poems might seem out of date. Besides these, just as


was ornamented with the beaks of ships, presumably trophies
of Pompey’s war against the pirates, and hence it is called in
c. ili. 6 domus rostrata; see c. iii. 6 and Cicero, Philippicae,
ii. 28, 68.

3 See c. iv. 1 and note.

* His poetry is unknown except for this reference.

5Cicero’s Epic on Marius is quoted by himself in de
Legibus, i. 2 and de Divinatione, i. 106. By Aratus is meant
his translation of Aratus’ famous poem, the $ewóueva. A
fragment from the Alcyonae is preserved in Nonius Marcellus
s.v. Praevius. The others are unknown.


THE THREE GORDIANS

5  Quaesturam magnificentissimam gessit. aedilitatis
suae tempore duodecim populo Romano munera, id
est per singulos menses singula de suo exhibuit, ita ut
gladiatorum nonnumquam quingena paria exhiberet,

7 quam Philippi temporibus vester fiscus invasit. inqua
pictura etiam nunc continentur cervi palmati ducenti
mixtis Britannis, equi feri triginta, oves ferae centum,
alces decem, tauri Cypriaci centum, struthiones Mauri
miniati trecenti, onagri triginta, apri centum quin-

IV. Praeturam nobilem gessit. post iuris dic-
tionem consulatum primum iniit cum Antonino Cara-


1 Alexandriados Unger, Peter?; elidos P!; ylidos P corr.;
Iliados Jordan.


1 See also c. iv. 7.

2 See note to Pert., xi. 8.

34.0, lions; see Ovid, Fasti, ii. 209; v. 178.
* See note to c. ii. 8.


THE THREE GORDIANS III. 4—IV. 1


Vergil wrote an Aeneid, Statius an Achilleid, and many
others Alerandriads, he wrote an Antonintad —the lives,
that is, of Antoninus Pius and Marcus Antoninus,
most learnedly versified in thirty books, wherein
he recounted their wars and other doings both public
and private.! And all this he did as a young boy.
Later on, when he grew to manhood, he declaimed
and disputed at the Athenaeum,? at times in the
presence of his emperors. i

He served his quaestorship most splendidly. When
he was aedile he gave the Roman people twelve ex-
hibitions, that is one for each month, at his own ex- .
pense; at times, indeed, he provided five hundred
pairs of gladiators, and never less than a hundred
and fifty. He produced a hundred wild beasts of
Libya? at once, and likewise at one time a thousand
bears. There exists also today a remarkable wild-
beast hunt of his, pictured in Gnaeus Pompey's
' House of the Beaks” *; this palace belonged to him
and to his father and grandfather before him until your
privy-purse took it over in the time of Philip. In
this picture at the present day are contained two
hundred stags with antlers shaped like the palm of a
hand, together with stags of Britain, thirty wild
horses, a hundred wild sheep, ten elks, a hundred
Cyprian bulls, three hundred red Moorish ostriches,
thirty wild asses, a hundred and fifty wild boars, two
hundred chamois, and two hundred fallow deer. And
all these he handed over to the people to be killed
on the day of the sixth exhibition that he gave.

IV. He served a famous praetorship. "Then, after
administering the law, he entered upcn his first


54.e. Philippus (Arabs), emperor 244-249.


; 385
VOL. II. cc


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 clauum om. in P.


! According to his coins, he was consul only once; see
Cohen, v?, p. 2, nos. 2-3. If he held that office in the same
year as Caracalla, it was in 218. The statement that he was
consul with Alexander (also in c. ii. 4) is &ccordingly incorrect.
It may be the result of confusion with his son, who held the
consulship during Alexander's reign ; see c. xviii, 5.

? He had the s&me name as his father, M. Antonius
Gordianus Sempronianus Romanus Africanus; see Dessau,
Ins. Sel., 493. Though he had held the consulship, he was
serving as his father's legatus in Africa, and with his father
was acclaimed Augustus.in the province and later by the
senate in Rome; see c. ix. 6; Maxim., xiv. 3-5. A “ bio-
graphy " of him is given in c. xvii.-xxi.

3 See c. xv.-xvi.

*The mother of Gordian III; see c. xxii. 4. Neither her
name nor her husband's is found elsewhere.


THE THREE GORDIANS IV. 2-7


consulship with Antoninus Caracalla, his second with
Alexander! He had two children, one the son
who attained consular rank and was named Augustus
with himself ? and perished in the war in Africa near
Carthage,? the other a daughter, Maecia Faustina by
name,* who was married to Junius Balbus, a man of
consular rank. His consulships were more brilliant
than those of any other man of his time; even
Antoninus envied him, admiring now his togas, now
his broad stripe,? and now his games, which surpassed
the imperial games themselves He was the first
Roman subject to possess for his own a tunic em-
broidered with palms * and a gold-embroidered toga ;
for previously even the emperors had gotten theirs
either from the Capitol or the Palace. ^ With the
emperors' permission he distributed a hundred Sicilian
and a hundred Cappadocian horses among the
factions. And he endeared himself greatly to the
people, who are always touched by acts of this nature.
Cordus ? says that he gave stage-plays and Juvenalia !?
in all the cities of Campania, Etruria, Umbria,
Flaminia, and Picenum, for four days at his own ex-
pense. He wrote prose eulogies also of all the


5 See note to Com., iv. 7.

$ Worn in the period of the republic by triumphant generals.
under the toga picta (on which see note to Cl. Alb., ii. 5).

7ie. when made consul; see Alex., xl. 8. The triumphal
vestments were kept in the temple of Jupiter on the Capitolium
and brought out when needed.

8 On the circus-factions see note to Ver., iv. 8.

? See Intro. to Vol. i., p. xviii.

10 Scenic games, first given by Nero to: commemorate the
shaving his beard for the first time; see Dio, lxi. 19; Tacitus
Annals, xiv. 15. Juvenalia, including a wild-beast hunt, were
also given by Domitian; see Dio, lxvii. 14. 3.


cc 2


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 See c. iii. 3.

?'The statement is frequently made and again frequently
contradicted that the Gordians bore the name Antoninus; see
c. ix. 5; xvii. 1-2; Macr., iii. 5; Heliog., xviii. 1; xxxiv. 6-7.
It is, of course, wholly incorrect, for none of them ever had
this name. The origin of the error is perhaps the easy
confusion between Antonius and Antoninus, or, again, the
tendency to bestow the name Antoninus on all emperors.

3 See Marc., ix. 7.

4 Under Alexander; see Maxim., xiv. 2.

5 The presence of the name Antoninus as given to Gordian
is sufficient proof that this letter is a forgery.


THE THREE GORDIANS IV. 8—V. 6


Antonines who had preceded him. He admired
the Antonines marvellously 1; many say that he him-
self assumed the name Antoninus or, as more declare,
Antonius.^ And certainly there is no doubt that he
embellished his son with the name Antoninus, when,
after the Roman custom, he acknowledged him be-
fore the prefect of the Treasury and entered his
name in the public records.?

V. After his consulship he was appointed proconsul
of Africa* through the efforts of all those who desired
Alexander's reign to seem and to be brilliant in Africa
through the splendour of its proconsul. Indeed there
still exists a letter of Alexander's in which he thanks
the senate for electing Gordian proconsul for Africa.
It runs in this style: “ You could have done nothing
more pleasing or agreeable to me, Conscript Fathers,
than to send Antoninus? Gordian as proconsul to
Africa, for he is well-born, high-minded, eloquent, just,
moderate, virtuous,’ and so on. It is clear from this
how great a man Gordian was even at that time. He
was beloved by the Africans as no other proconsul
ever had been before; some called him Scipio, others,
Cato, and many, Mucius,? Rutilius,” and Laelius An
acclamation of theirs which Junius * noted’ down has
been preserved. For when on one occasion he was


€Q. Mucius Scaevola, consul 95 s.c. He distinguished
himself by his administration of Asia in 98, and his name
became proverbial as that of a righteous governor. He was
also a famous jurist and the teacher of Cicero.

7 P. Rutilius Rufus, consul 105 B.c., a friend of Scaevola and
his legate in Asia.

8 C. Laelius Sapiens, consul 140 B.C., the famous friend of
Scipio Africanus the younger.

9 i.e. Cordus.


THEATHREE GORDIANS


l litteras Jordan, Lessing; litteris P, Peter. 2 familiam
Damsté ; familta P, Peter.


! He had been consul, according to c. ii. 2, but is otherwise
unknown.


THE THREE GORDIANS V. 7—VII. 1


reading an imperial act and began with the mention
of the proconsuls Scipio, the people shouted, ** The
new Scipio, the true Scipio, the proconsul Gordian ".
He was often greeted with these and similar
acclamations.

VI. In height he was characteristically Roman.
He was becomingly gray, with an impressive face,
more ruddy than fair. His face was fairly broad, his
eyes, his countenance, and his brow such as to
command respect. His body was somewhat stocky.
In character he was temperate and restrained ; there
is nothing you can say that he ever did passionately,
immoderately, or excessively. His affection for his
kin was remarkable, for his son and grandson beyond
the ordinary, for his daughter and granddaughter
most devoted. He was as deferential to his father-in-
law Annius Severus! as though he considered that he
had passed over into his family as a son; he never
washed himself in his company, he never sat in his
presence until he became praetor. And when he was
consul either he always remained at the old man's
house, or, if he stayed at the House of Pompey, he
went either at morning or evening to see him. He
was sparing in the use of wine, very sparing in the
use of food. His dress was elegant. He was fond of
bathing ; indeed, during the summer, he would bathe
four or five times a day, in the winter twice. His love
of sleep was enormous; he would doze off even at
table, if he were dining with friends, and without any
embarrassment. This he seemed to do at nature's
bidding and not because of intoxication or wantonness.

VII. But all his virtuous behaviour profited him
nothing. For this old man, worthy of respect as such
a life had made him, who passed his days with Plato


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 filio ins. by Salm. and Peter; om. in P.


! For parallel accounts of the bestowal of the imperial
power on Gordian see Maxim., xiii. 5—xv. 5 and Herodian, vii.
4-7. It took place in February or March, 238.

2 On rationalis see Alex., xlv. 6.

? Neither his name nor his speech is included in Herodian's
narrative.

54.6, member of the curia, or local senate of a provincial
town having the rights of & colony or & municipality.


THE THREE GORDIANS VII. 2—VIII. 2


and Aristotle, Cicero and Vergil, finally suffered an
end other than that he deserved.

For, in the time of Maximinus, a grim and savage
man, he was ruling Africa as proconsul,! and his son
was with him as his legate, having been so appointed
by the senate from among the consuls. Now there
was a certain agent of the privy-purse,? who ran riot
against a great number of Africans even more violently
than Maximinus himself allowed. He outlawed a
great many, he put many to death, he assumed all
powers in excess even of a tax-gatherer's ; and when
he was finally restrained by the proconsul and legate
he threatened those noble consular men with death.
The Africans at length were unable to suffer these
unwonted injuries any longer, and so, with the aid of
a number of soldiers, they first killed him. Then, after
he was killed and while the whole world was blazing
with hatred of Maximinus, his slayers began to take
counsel how this conflict which had arisen between
the agents of Maximinus and the peasants, or rather
the Africans, might go unpunished. Then a certain
fellow, Mauritius? by name, a municipal councillor,‘
who had great influence with the Africans, held a sort
of assembly on his farm near Thysdrus * and made a
most notable oration to the people of the town and
the country, saying: VIII. ** Let us give thanks to the
immortal gods, citizens, that they have given us a
chance, and truly a needed one, of protecting our-
selves against that madman Maximinus. We have
slain a tax-gatherer of his, one patterned after himself
in character and conduct, and unless we make an
emperor of our own we are lost. Wherefore, since


5 See note to Maxim., xiv. 3.


THE THREE GORDIANS

5 His actis propere ventum est ad oppidum
Thysdrum, inventusque senex venerabilis post iuris
dictionem iacens in lectulo, qui cireumfusus purpura

3 Appellato igitur Gordiano imperatore iuvenes, qui
auctores huius facinoris erant, statuas Maximini
deiecerunt, imagines perfregerunt, nomen publicitus


1 So Peter?, following Herodian, vii. 5, 5; quod Maximi-
nianis necessario fautoribus dubie P. ? So Baehrens ; alti
quidem occiso . . . Gordianus P, Peter.


-


1 So also Herodian, vii. 5, 2; he was 79 according to Zon-
aras, xii. 17.
? See c. v. 1.


THE THREE GORDIANS VIII. 3—IX. 8


not far off there is a man of noble blood, a proconsul,
and with him his son, a consular legate, both of whom
that pest has threatened with death, we shall hail
them emperors, if it please you, taking the purple
from the standards, and giving them their proper
trappings make them secure by Romanu law." Where-
upon they shouted, “It is good, it is right. Gordian
Augustus, may the gods keep you safe! Rule happily,
rule with your son.”

Upon this, they came hastily to the town of Thys-
drus, and there they found the venerable old man
returned from the law-courts and lying on a couch.
They girt him straightway with the purple, but he
would have none of it and cast himselfon the ground ;
and they lifted him up still refusing. But when he
saw that he could do nothing else, for the sake of
escaping from a danger which threatened him for
certain at the hands of his supporters and only doubt-
fully from the Maximinians, the old man suffered
himself to be acclaimed emperor. IX. He was then
eighty years of age,! and, as we have said,” had ruled
many provinces before; and he had so commended
himself to the Roman people by his conduct in these
that they thought him worthy of ruling the whole
empire. With regard to the killing of the agent,
Gordian had had no previous knowledge. But when
he learned of the act, being now near to death and
fearing greatly for his son, he preferred to die
honourably rather than be handed over to the chains
and prison-cell of Maximinus.

However, having now acclaimed Gordian emperor,
the young men who were the authors of the deed
proceeded to cast down the statues of Maximinus,
break his busts, and publicly erase his name.


THE THREE GORDIANS

2 Gordiani duo in Africa interempti sunt. illos sane


lin aliis Peter; alii P. ? scriptor ins. by Eyssenhardt
and Peter; om. in P. 3 pari Peter; erased in P; erari P
corr. ; rari B.


! See note to c. ii. 2,

? This explanation is, of course, wholly incorrect. Accord-
ing to c. ii. 2 he claimed descent from the Gracchi.

? See note to c. iv. 7.

4 An allusion to the fact that Scipio Africanus the elder was


THE THREE GORDIANS IX. 4—X. 2


They also gave Gordian the name Africanus.! Some
add that he was granted this honorary name, not be-
cause he became emperor in Africa, but because he
was descended from the family of the Scipios.? In
most books, moreover, I find that Gordian and his son
were declared emperors with equal rank and both
given the name Antoninus; certain other books,
however, say that they were given the name
Antonius.?

After this, with kingly pomp and laurelled fasces,
they came to Carthage, and there his son—who, after
the example of the Scipios,* as Dexippus the writer
of Greek history says, was his father's legate—was in-
vested with equal power. Upon this an embassy was
despatched to Rome, bearing letters from the Gordians
to announce all that had taken place in Africa, which
was received by Valerian, the chief of the senate
(who was afterwards emperor?) with rejoicing.
Letters were sent also to their noble friends, in order
that powerful men might support their action and from
friends might become still greater friends.

X. But the senate received them so joyfully as
emperors against Maximinus that not only did it ratify
all that had been already done but further elected
twenty men 9. including Maximus, known also as
Pupienus,’ and Clodius Balbinus,? both of whom were
made emperors after the two Gordians were slain in


the legate of his brother L. Scipio Asiaticus (Asiagenus) in
the campaign against Antiochus III. in 190 p.c.

5253-260. According to Zosimus, i. 14, he was sent to
Rome from Africa as the envoy of the Gordians. He is not
mentioned by Herodian,

5 See Maxim., xx. 1 and note.

7 See note to Maxim., xxxiii. 3.

38 Clodius is an error; see note to Maxim., xx. 1.


Lad


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 guo om. in P.


1 See Maz.-Balb., i.—ii.


2 There is no mention of this in Mazim., xvii.—xviii. or in
Herodian.


THE THREE GORDIANS X. 3—XI. 1


Africa l—among whom the districts of Italy were
portioned out to be guarded for the Gordians against
Maximinus. Embassies then came to Rome from
Maximinus? promising to redress the past. But the
embassy of the Gordians overcame them. For they
promised all good things; they promised a huge
bounty to the soldiers and fields and a largess to the
people, and they were trusted. In fact, so much
more trust was placed in the Gordians than in the
Maximini, that Vitalianus, the prefect of the guard,
was put to death at the senate’s command, a quaestor
and some soldiers performing the deed with great
daring. This Vitalianus had conducted himself with
great cruelty before; and now they feared some
greater piece of savagery pleasing and agreeable to
one of Maximinus’ character. The following story is
related about his death.? A forged letter, purporting
to come from Maximinus and sealed as if with his
ring, was brought to Vitalianus by soldiers in charge
of a quaestor, who added that there was further in-
tormation, not in the letter, to be imparted in secret.
They retired, therefore, to a distant portico, where he
inquired what it was that was to be told him secretly.
But first they urged him to look at the seal on the
letter, which he did. And while he was regarding it,
they cut him down, and then persuaded the soldiers
that he had been slain by command of Maximinus.
And when this affair had been settled, the letters and
images of the Gordians were displayed in the Camp.

XI. I think it my duty to set down in writing the
decree of the senate in which the Gordians were


*So also Herodian, vii. 6, 5-9. His death is merely
mentioned in Maxim., xiv. 4. )


THE THREE GORDIANS


! adclamauit Peter; clamauit P. 2sic Mommsen ; si P,
Peter.


1A * senatus consultum "—consisting of a letter from the
Gordians to the senate and the senate's acclamations—which
purports to commemorate this same occasion is given in
Maxim., xvi. The two “ documents " differ entirely and both
are, undoubtedly, forgeries.

? His name was Junius Silanus according to Maxim., xvi. 1.


THE THREE | GORDIANS XI. 2-10


declared emperors and Maximinus a public enemy.!
On an extraordinary, not a regular, day for the meeting
of the senate, the consul, having foregathered at his
own home with the praetors, the aediles, and the tri-
bunes of the people, came to the Senate-house. The
prefect of the city, who had somehow got wind of some-
thing and had not received the official notice, kept away
from the meeting. But as it turned out, that was
as well, for before the usual acclamations were made
or anything was said favourable to Maximinus, the
consul? cried : “ Conscript Fathers, the two Gordians,
father and son, both ex-consuls, the one your pro-
consul, the other now your legate, have been declared
emperors by a great assembly in Africa. Let us give
thanks, then, to the young men of Thysdrus, and
thanks also to the ever loyal people of Carthage;
they have freed us from that savage monster, from
that wild beast. Why do you hear me with quaking ?
Why do you look around? Why do you delay ?
This is what you have always hoped for. Maximinus
is our enemy ; the gods shall bring it to pass that he
may now cease to be, and that we with joyful hearts
may enjoy the happy sagacity of the elder Gordian,
the intrepid virtue of the younger." After this he
read the letters which the Gordians had sent to the
senate and to himself. And then the senate cried
aloud?: * We thank you, O gods. We are freed
from our enemies ; so may we be wholly freed! We
adjudge Maximinus an enemy. We consign Maxi-
minus and his son to the gods below. We call the
Gordians Augusti. We recognize the Gordians as
princes. May the gods keep safe the senate's


3 For other acclamations see note to Alex., vi. 1.


VOL, II. DD


THE THREE GORDIANS


senatu di conservent, imperatores nobiles victores
videamus, imperatores nostros Roma videat. hostes
publicos qui occiderit, praemium meretur."

4proderetur. factum est ergo senatus consultum
tacitum, ne res ad Maximinum perveniret.


1 It is hard to know how much of all this learned discussion
&bout the senatus consultum tacitum is true. Noother instance
of such a secret document is known.

? The clerks attached to the bureau of the magister censuum,
who was charged with the duty of assessing the property of the


THE THREE GORDIANS XII. 1—XIII. !


emperors, may we see our noble emperors victorious,
may Rome see our emperors! Whoever shall kill the
public enemies shall get a reward."

XII. Junius Cordus says that this was a secret
decree of the senate.! Just what this is, and why it
is so called, I shall briefly explain. Today the equiva-
lent of a secret decree of the senate is, in general,
nothing more than the action of those inner councils
of elders by which Your Clemency settles those affairs
which are not to be published abroad. You are
accustomed to take oath when discussing these matters,
moreover, that no one shall hear or know anything of
them until the business is completed. But among the
ancients the custom was introduced in the interests of
the state, that, if by any chance violence threatened
at the hands of their enemies, which forced them
either to adopt ignoble counsels or resolve on things
which should not be disclosed until they were ready to
be put into effect, or if they were unwilling for certain
measures to be divulged to friends, the senate passed
asecret decree. At these sessions not even the clerks
or public servants or officers of the Census? were
present; the senators took over and the senators per-
formed the duties of all the clerks and officers of the
Census, lest anything by any chance should be
betrayed. To prevent news of it reaching Maximinus,
therefore, this decree of the senate was made secret.

XIII. But as is the way with the minds of men—of
such of them, at least, as blush if any knowledge of
theirs does notbecome knownand consider it abject not
tobetray atrust— Maximinusstraightway learned every-
thing. Indeed, he got a copy of the senate's secret
senators for the purpose of taxation. Certain minor police and
clerical functions seem to have been added to their duties,

DD 2


THE THREE GORDIANS


! faecem Eyssenhardt, Peter; facem P.


1 See Maxim., xvii. 1-3 and note.

? According to the more credible account in Herodian, vii. 6,
9, this rumour was circulated by the assassins of Vitalianus.

3 See Mazim., xv. 1; Herodian, vii. 7, 3-4.

4 For other versions of this speech seenote to Maxim., xviii. 1.


THE THREE GORDIANS XIII. 2—XIV. 1


decree—a thing that had never previously occurred.
There is a letter of his to the city-prefect which says :
“I have read the senate's secret decree about those
emperors of ours ; perhaps you, being city-prefect, did
not know it had been passed, for you were not present
on that occasion. I have sent you a copy, however,
hoping that you may learn how to rule the common-
wealth of Rome." The fury that shook Maximinus
when he learned that Africa had revolted from him
is impossible to describe.! For when he finally com-
prehended the decree of the senate, he dashed himself
against the walls, he rent his garments, he snatched
his sword as though he could slay them in a body,
he seemed, indeed, to go wholly mad.

The prefect of the city now got even more violent
letters and made an address to the people and the
soldiers, wherein he said that Maximinus had been
slain.? Upon this great rejoicing arose and the statues
and portraits of the public enemy were immediately
cast down. The senate, moreover, employed the
powers which belonged to it for impending war.
Informers, false accusers, personal agents, in fact all
the filth of the Maximinian despotism, it ordered to
be put to death.? But this, the senate's decision,
was not enough ; the people decided that after they
were put to death they should be dragged about and
cast into the sewer. Then also Sabinus, the prefect of
the city and a man of consular rank, was beaten with
a club and slain; his corpse was left lying in the
streets.

XIV. When Maximinus learned of these last
measures he at once assembled his troops and har-
angued them in the following manner *: ** Consecrated
fellow-soldiers, or rather partakers of my consecration,


THE THREE GORDIANS

XV. Dum haec aguntur, in África contra duos Gor-
dianos Capelianus quidam, Gordiano et in privata vita
semper adversus et ab ipso imperatore iam cum Mauros
Maximini iussu regeret veteranus dimissus, conlectis


1 See note to Maxim., xviii, 1.

2The governor of Numidia. For parallel accounts of the
defeat and overthrow of the Gordians see Maxim., xix. and
Herodian, vii. 9.


THE THREE GORDIANS XIV. 2—XV. 1


who have, most of you, fought with me wars that were
wars indeed, when we defended the majesty of Rome
from Germany, when we redeemed Illyricum from
the barbarians, the Africans have kept Punic faith.!
They have acclaimed the two Gordians emperors; one
of whom is so broken with old age that he cannot rise,
the other so wasted with debauchery that exhaustion
serves him for old age. And lest this be not enough,
that glorious senate of ours has approved what the
Africans have done. They for whose children we
bear arms have set up twenty men against us, and
passed all such decrees against us as are passed against
a foe. Up! then, as men should; we must hasten to
the city. For against us twenty men, all of consular
rank, have been chosen ; they must be withstood, we
bravely leading, you happily fighting." But that this
harangue left his soldiers with indifferent feelings, and
not with quickened spirits, even Maximinus himself
realized. In fact, he at once wrote to his son, who
was following at a distance behind, to hasten speedily,
lest the soldiers devise some plot against him in his
absence. Junius Cordus gives the purport of the
letter thus: * My attendant Tynchanius is coming to
tell you my last advices on what has taken place in
Africa and Rome, and also how the soldiers feel. I
beseech you, hasten as fast as you can, lest this mob of
soldiers take further measures, as soldiers are wont
to do. What I fear, you will learn from him whom I
have sent you."

XV. But while all this was taking place, the Gor-
dians were attacked in Africa by a certain Capelianus.?
He had always been hostile to Gordian even in private
life, and now the Emperor himself dismissed him
when, as an old soldier, he was governing the Moors


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 See c. xviii-xix.

? Herodian says nothing of this storm, but &dds that Gor-
dian's men were untrained and inadequately armed ; see vii.
9, 5-6.

? They reigned 20-22 days in February and March, 238.

4 See Maz.-Balb., iv. 1-2.


THE THREE GORDIANS XV. ?2—XVI. 4


by Maximinus' appointment. And so when Gordian
dismissed him, he gathered the Moors together and
with a turbulent band of them came up to' Carthage,
the people of which, with typical Punic faith, came
over to him. None the less, Gordian desired to
hazard the chances of war, and sent against them his
son, now well advanced in years (he was then forty-six.
years old), and at that time his father's legate ; we
shall give a resumé of his character in its proper place.!
But in military affairs not only was Capelianus the
bolder man, but the younger Gordlan was less well
trained, placed at a disadvantage, as he was, by the
luxurious life of the nobility. When they joined battle,
eer he was beaten, and in the same campaign
slain.

XVI. Such a host of Gordian’s party fell in this
campaign, it is said, that the body of the younger
Gordian, although it was long searched for, could not
be found. There was a great storm, moreover,—a rare
thing in Africa—which scattered Gordian’s army be-
fore the battle and also made the soldiers less fit for
the fight, and on this account Capelianus’ victory was
the easier.”

And when the elder Gordian learned of this, seeing
there was no aid in Africa, and being distressed
with a great fear of Maximinus and by knowledge of
Punic faith, also because Capelianus was assailing him
very sharply, and because in the end the struggle had
wearied him in mind and soul, he took a rope and
hanged himself.

This was the end of two of the Gordians.? Both
of them were named Augusti by the senate and after-
wards placed among the gods.


THE THREE GORDIANS


GORDIANUS IUNIOR

. hificari voluit in senatu ; quae singula videntur fa-

3 milias designare. sed ego Iunium Cordum sequor, qui
dicit ex omnibus his familiis Gordianorum coaluisse

4nobilitatem. idem igitur natus patri primus ex Fabia
Orestilla, Antonini pronepte, unde Caesarum quoque

XVIII. In studiis gravissimae opinionis fuit, forma
conspicuus, memoriae singularis, bonitatis insignis,
adeo ut semper in scholis, si quis puerorum verbera-


!quam ins. in Edit. princ. and by Jordan ; om. in P and by
Peter. 2 ut nonnulli . . . duxit del. by Peter. 3 desider-
ant P, Novak; disserant Peter. 4 Antonii Ursinus, Peter ;
Antonini P.


1 On the confusion of the names Antoninus and Antonius
as borne by the Gordians see note to'*c. iv. 7.

? See c. ix. 3-4 and notes. 3 See c. ii. 3.

* She is not otherwise known ; her father is called Annius


THE THREE GORDIANS XVII.—1 XVIII. 1


XVII. This was the son of the old Gordian, the
proconsul of Africa. He too was named Augustus by
the Africans and the senate at the same time as his
father, and he was illustrious in culture and character
as well as in noble rank ; the last, according to many
writers, he derived from the Antonines, although
most say from the Antonii! Others adduce the
following facts as evidence to show the high quality
of his family—that the elder Gordian was called
Africanus, the honorary surname of the Scipios?;
that he possessed the House of Pompey in the
city ?; that he was always given the surname of the
Antonines ; and that he himself expressed a desire
in the senate that his son should be known as
Antonius. Each of these, they believe, represents a
family connection. I, however, follow Junius Cordus,
who says that the nobility of the Gordians was derived
from all these families. At any rate, he was the first
offspring of his father, Gordian, and Fabia Orestilla,
the great-granddaughter of Antoninus,* through whom
he seemed also to be linked with the family of the
Caesars. A few days after his birth he was given the
name Antoninus ; later, in the senate, he was publicly
named Antonius ; and the people finally began to call
him Gordian.

XVIII. He took his studies very seriously. In
person he was remarkably good looking ; his memory
was extraordinary. He was very kind of heart;
indeed, when any of the boys was flogged at school,


Severus in c. vi. 4. Her alleged descent from Marcus Aurelius
is probably apocryphal and quite in keeping with the general
tendency to connect the Gordians with the Antonines.


THE THREE GORDIANS


l qui Gordiano P. — ?obsecutus P, Peter!, Bitschofsky ; ab
senatu Madvig, Peter?,


1 See Alex., xxx. 2 and note.


2 See note to c. iv. 1. * See c. vii. f.
4 The father of 50 sons; see Iliad, xxiv. 495.
5 The god of fertility.


THE THREE GORDIANS XVIII. 2—XIX. 4


he could not restrain his tears, Serenus Sammoni-
cus,! a great friend of his father's, was his tutor, and
a very beloved and agreeable one he was; in fact,
when he died, he left the young Gordian all the books
that had belonged to his father, Serenus Sammonicus,
and these were estimated at sixty-two thousand. .
And this raised him to the seventh heaven, for being
now possessed of a library of such magnitude and
excellence, thanks to the power of letters he became
famous among men.

He won his quaestorship upon the recommenda-
tion of Elagabalus ; for the wildness of the young man,
which was nevertheless neither extravagant nor de-
praved, had found him favour with that extravagant
emperor. He held thecity-praetorship on the recom-
mendation of Alexander, and did so well in this office,
chiefly in administering the law, that he was im-
mediately given the consulship,” which his father had
won late in life. And in the time either of Maximinus
or of this same Alexander, being sent to his father’s
proconsular command, he served as his legate, and
then happened what has been related above.?

XIX. He was somewhat fond of wine, but always,
however, of wine in some way spiced, at one time with
roses, again with mastic, again with wormwood and
various other herbs—all of which are most pleasing
to the palate. He ate sparingly ; indeed he finished
his luncheon —if he lunched at all—or his dinner in
an instant. He was very fond of women; indeed,
it is said that he had twenty-two concubines decreed
him, from all of whom he left three or four children
apiece. He was nicknamed, in fact, the Priam‘ of
his age, but often the crowd jestingly called him not
Priam but Priapus,’ as being nearer to his character.


THE THREE GORDIANS


5 vixit in deliciis, in hortis, in balneis, in amoenissimis
nemoribus, nec pater aspernatus est, saepissime di-
cens illum quandoque in summa claritate cito esse

7 denique etiam senatus libentissime illum Augustum

Sappellavit atque in eo spem publicam posuit. vestitu

5cantabat praeterea versus senex, cum Gordianum
filium vidisset, hos saepissime :


! So (in general) Salm.; uita sua nec tamen fortitudinem
bonis P, regarded as corrupt by Peter?. ? et om. in P.


1 See c. xxii. 4 and note.
2 Vergil, Aeneid, vi. 869-871, where they describe Marcellus,


THE THREE GORDIANS XIX. 5—XX. 5


He lived in revelry—in gardens, in baths, and in most
delightful groves. Nor did his father ever rebuke
him, but on the contrary very often said that sometime
soon he would die in the greatest eminence. Yet
in his manner of life be never was inferior to the good
in bravery, and he was ever among the most distin-
guished of citizens and never failed the common-
wealth with advice. And the senate, finally, entitled
him Augustus with the greatest joy and laid on him
the hopes of the state. He was very elegant in his
dress, and beloved by his slaves and entire household.
Cordus says that he wished never to have a wife,
but Dexippus thinks that the third Gordian was his
son!—the boy, that is, who was afterwards made
emperor with Balbinus and Pupienus (or Maximus).

XX. At one time the elder Gordian consulted an
astrologer about his son's nativity, and the astrologer,
it is said, answered that the child would be both son
and father of an emperor, and that he also would be
emperor. Gordian laughed ; but then, they say, the
astrologer pointed out the constellation and read from
ancient books until he proved that he had spoken the
truth. This same astrologer, moreover, predicted
truthfully the day and the manner of the deaths of both
father and son, and the places where they would die,
all with stubborn firmness. In after days, it is said,
the elder Gordian recounted all of this in Africa, at
a time when he was emperor and had nothing to
fear—indeed, he spoke of his own death and his
son's and of the manner in which they would die.
Often, too, the old man recited these verses when he
saw his son? :


Augustus’ nephew and heir presumptive. They are also applied
to Aelius Verus, adopted son of Hadrian, in Ael., iv. 1-2.


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 appareant Damsté ; appareat P, Peter. 2 ut ins. by
Oberdick &nd Peter?; om. in P and Peter !. 3 dicenda sunt
quae Salm., Peter; dicentes unoque P.


1 Nothing is known of these works.


THE THREE GORDIANS XX. 6—XXI. 4


* Him the fates only displayed to the circle of lands,
and no longer

Suffered to be. Too great, too great did Rome's
generations

Seem to you else, O Gods, had this gift really been
granted."


There are still in existence various things written by
the younger Gordian in both prose and verse,! which
are often quoted by his kinsmen today. These are
neither good nor yet very bad, but rather mediocre.
They seem, in truth, the work of one who was really
talented but gave himself over to pleasure and wasted
his genius.

XXI. He was extremely fond of fruit and greens ;
in fact, though very abstemious in his use of other
kinds of food, he was continually eating fresh fruit.
He had a craving for cold drinks, and passed the
summer with great difficulty unless he drank cold
drinks and a great many of them. He was of huge
size, as a matter of fact, and this somewhat stimulated
his longing for cold drinks.

This is what we have discovered about the younger
Gordian that is worthy of mention. For we do not
think we need recount absurd and silly tales such as
Junius Cordus has written concerning his domestic
pleasures and petty matters of that sort. Ifany desire
to know these things, let them read Cordus ; Cordus
tells what slaves each and every emperor had and
what friends, how many mantles and how many
cloaks. Knowledge of this sort of thing does no one
any good. It is the duty of historians, rather, to set
down in their histories such things as are to be
avoided or sought after.


VOL, Il. EE


THE THREE GORDIANS


GORDIANUS TERTIUS


XXII. Post mortem duorum Gordianorum senatus
trepidus et Maximinum vehementius timens ex viginti
viris, quos ad rem publicam tuendam delegerat,
Pupienum sive Maximum et Clodium Balbinum


14nde ins. by Jordan and Peter; om. in P.


! Nothing is known of him, There is no reason for identify-
ing him, as has sometimes been done, with the Vulcacius
mentioned by Jerome (Apol. c. Rufinum, i. 16) as a com-
mentator to Cicero.

2 See Mazim., xx. 1 and notes; Maz.-Balb., i.—ii.

* As the result of a riot on the part of the city-mob (with
whom Maximus was unpopular), instigated apparently by the
partisans of the Goidians; see Herodian, vii. 10, 5-9 and note
to Maxim., xx. 6. In Maz.-Balb., iii. 2-5 and viii. 3 the ac-
clamation of Gordian as Caesar is described as peaceful,


THE THREE GORDIANS XXI. 5—XXII. 3


But truly I have decided that I must not omit this, -
which I read in Vulcatius Terentianus,! who wrote a
history of his time, because it seems a marvellous
thing. So I write it down. The elder Gordian
resembled the face of Augustus perfectly ; he seemed,
indeed, to have his very voice and mannerisms and
stature; his son, in turn, seemed like to Pompey,
although it is true that Pompey was not obese of
person ; his grandson, finally, whose portraits we can
see today, bore the appearance of Scipio Asiaticus.
This, because of its very strangeness, I have decided
should not be passed over in silence.


XXII. On the death of the two Gordians, the
senate, being now thoroughly agitated and in even
more violent terror of Maximinus, chose Pupienus
(or Maximus) and Clodius Balbinus, both ex-consuls,
from the twenty men whom they had elected to
protect the state, and declared them emperors.? But
on this the populace and soldiers demanded that the
child Gordian should be made Caesar,’ he being then,
so most authorities declare, eleven years old ; some,
however, say thirteen,* and Junius Cordus says sixteen
for Cordus says that he was in his twenty-second year
when he died). At any rate, he was hurried to the
senate and thence taken to an assembly, and there
they clothed him in the imperial garments and hailed
him as Caesar.?


while in ix. 2-4 the riot is described as happening on a later
occasion.
4This seems to be the correct figure; so also Max.- Balb.,
iii. 4; Herodian, viii. 8, 8.
5 He is called Nobilisstimus Caesar in the inscriptions of
Maximus and Balbinus, e.g. Dessau, Ins. Sel., 496.


EE 9


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 wilttaris.P, Peter.


1 This is the correct version; so also Max.-Balb., iii. 4 and
Herodian, vii. 10. 7. In his inscriptions he is called Divi
Gordiani nepos et Divi Gardiani sororis filius ; see e.g. Des.
sau, Ins. Sel., 498 and 500. In Victor (Caes., xxvii. 1) and
Eutropius (ix. 2) he is confused with Gordian II. ; see note to
c.j, l. For the names of his parents see c. iv. 2.

? For the length of their rule see note to Maz.-Balb., xv.
7; for their deaths see 2b., xiv. 2-7.

“Probably in June 238, according to the evidence of
papyri; see Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl, i. 2621 f.

+The connection has become confused, probably by the


THE THREE GORDIANS XXII. 4—XXIII. 1


According to most authorities, he was the son of
Gordian's daughter,! but one or two (I have been un-
able to discover more) say that he was the child of
that son of Gordian who was killed in Africa. How-
ever this may be, after he was made Caesar he was
reared at his mother's house. But when Maximus
and Balbinus had ruled for two years after the death
of the Maximini ? they were slain in a mutiny of the
soldiers, and the young Gordian, who had been Caesar
until then, was declared Augustus?—the soldiers,
populace, senate, and all the peoples of the Empire
uniting with great love, great eagerness, and great
gratitude to do so. For they loved him exceedingly
because of his grandfather and uncle (or father), who
had both taken up arms in behalf of the senate and
Roman people against Maximinus and had both
perished, the one by a soldier's death, the other
through a soldier's despair.

After this * a body of veterans came to the Senate-
house to learn what had taken place. And two of
them, having gone up to the Capitol—for the senate
was meeting there,—were slain by Gallicanus, a
former consul, and Maecenas, a former general, be-
fore the very altar, and a civil war sprang up, in which
even the senators were armed ; for the veterans were
unaware that the young Gordian was holding the im-
perial power alone. XXIII. (Dexippus says that


insertion of the preceding paragraph; this narrative should
follow immediately after 8 3. The riot here described
(brietly alluded to in Maxim., xx. 6) took place during the
absence of Maximus in N. Italy and consequently betore the
death of Maximus and Balbinus; see Maz.-Balb., x. 4-8;
Herodian, vii. 11.

5 This is incorrect ; he was only Caesar.


THE THREE GORDIANS

6 consulibus bellum Persicum natum est. quando et


adulescens Gordianus, priusquam ad bellum proficis-


! Dezippus . . . natum del. by Becker and Peter.


! For 239. ? Probably that of the 2nd April, 238.
3 The history of Herodian closes with the murder of
Maximus and Balbinus. From this point on, therefore,


THE THREE GORDIANS XXIII. 2-6


Gordian the third was the child of Gordian's son).
But shortly afterwards, when it was understood
among the veterans that Gordian was ruling alone, a
peace was confirmed between the populace and the
soldiers and veterans, and an end of the civil strife
was made when the boy was given the consulship.!
There was an omen, however, that Gordian was not
to rule for long, which was this: there occurred an
eclipse of the sun,? so black that men thought it was
night and business could not be transacted without
the aid of lanterns. None the less, after it the popu-
lace devoted itself to spectacles and revelry, to dull
the memory ofthe hard things that had been done
before.

In the consulship of Venustus and Sabinus? a re- 240
volt broke out in Africa against Gordian the third
under the leadership of Sabinianus.* But the gover-
nor of Mauretania, who was first beset by the con-
spirators, crushed it for Gordian so severely that all
of them came up to Carthage to surrender Sabinianus
and confessed their wrong and sought pardon for it.
When, however, this trouble in Airica had been
ended, a war broke out with the Persians *—this being
in the first consulship of Pompeianus and the second of 241
Gordian. But before setting out for this war the


the biographer is dependent on some other source. The
exact statement of events and dates, as here and in § 5,
as well as c. xxvi. 3 and c. xxix. 1, suggests the use of an an-
nalistic work, which is probably the Chronicle of Dexippus ;
see note to Alez., xlix. 3. The material afforded by this work
was hen padded in the usual manner with anecdotes and
spurious “ documents,” |

4 Perhaps the governor of the province of Africa.

5 See c. xxvi. 3 f.


THE THREE GORDIANS


ceretur, et duxit uxorem filiam Misithei, doctissimi
viri, quem causa eloquentiae dignum parentela sua


1 parte Peter; pietate P. 2 wel om. in P. 3 est om.
in P.


—— — —MMM—— a ee — - -—————— —


1The correct form of his name was C. Furius Sabinius
Aquila Timesi' heus, as it is preserved in an inscription, C.I.L.,
xiii. 1807 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 1880. The origin of the in-
correct form Misitheus is uncertain. His daughter's name
was Furia Sabinia Tranquillina; see Dessau, Ins. Sel., 502-
504. Timesitheus was a member of the equestrian order and
had held many important procuratorships previous to his &p-
pointment as preíect of the guard. All the evidence points
to the belief that he was an able and conscientious official


THE THREE GORDIANS XXIII. 7—XXIV. 3


young Gordian took a wife, the daughter of Timesi-
theus,! a most erudite man, whom Gordian considered
worthy of being his relation because of his powers of
eloquence and immediately made his prefect. After
this his rule seemed not in the least that of a child
or contemptible, since he was aided by the advice of
this excellent father-in-law, while he himself, on his
own account, developed considerable sagacity and
did not let his favours be sold by the eunuchs and
attendants at court through his mother’s ignorance
or connivance.

XXIV. There is still in existence a letter from
Gordian to his father-in-law and also one from his
father-in-law to him, in which we can see how fault-
lessly and zealously he and his father-in-law strove
to perfect their age. This is a copy of the letters:

“To my imperial son and Augustus, from Timesi-
theus, his prefect and father-in-law. One serious
scandal of our age we have escaped; the scandal, I
mean, that eunuchs and those who pretend to be your
friends (though really they are your worst enemies)
arrange all things for money. This is all the more
agreeable, and it should make this improvement more
pleasing to you too, because if there have been any
failings, it seems assured, my revered son, that they
have not been yours. For noone could bear it when
commissions in the army were given out on the
nomination of eunuchs, when labours were denied
their due reward, when men who should not have


and a skilful general, and the biographer is doubtless correct
in attributing to him the successes of the Persian campaign
(c. xxvii, 2) as well as in his general statement that he was
the mainstay of this reign; see § 7; c. xxiv. 1; c. xxv. 5-7;
c. xxviii.


THE THREE GORDIANS

4tuas fabulas venderent. dis igitur gratias, quod

XXV. Item Gordiani ad ipsum:

“Imperator Gordianus Augustus Misitheo patri et
praefecto. nisi di omnipotentes Romanum tuerentur
imperium, etiam nunc per emptos spadones velut in


! fe Peter’; in te P. 2ut... dinumerare m tiam,
non fuisse Haupt, Peter?; wi... dinumera em mulia non
esse P. Set mater nos Petschenig ; ad mauros P; Admau t
nos Peter.


1 This name and the others which immediately follow are
wholly unknown, and, like the letter itself, are probably
fictitious. For an attempt to prove that both letters were


THE THREE GORDIANS XXIV. 4—XXV. 3


been were slain or set free through caprice or bribery,
when the treasury was drained, when conspiracies
were fomented by those who moved cunningly about
you every day, that you, too, might be finally en-
snared, while all evil men settled beforehand among
themselves what to advise you about the righteous,
drove away the good, introduced the abominable,
and, in the end, sold all your secrets for a price.
Let the gods be thanked, then, that this evil has
been done away with, as you, too, desired! Truly it
delights me to be the father-in-law of a worthy
emperor ; and of one, too, who inquires into every-
thing and wishes to know everything, and has driven
away the men who formerly sold him as though he
were set up in open market."

XXV. Likewise Gordian's letter to Timesitheus :

* From the Emperor Gordian Augustus to Timesi-
theus, his father-in-law and prefect. Were it not
that the mighty gods watch over the Roman Empire,
even now we should be sold by bought eunuchs as
though under the hammer. Now at last I know
that a Felicio! should not have been put in command
of the praetorian guard and that I should not have
entrusted the Fourth Legion to a Serapammon ; in
fact, to give no further examples, that I should not
have done much that I did do; but now, the gods be
thanked, I have learned from suggestions by you,
who are incorruptible, what I could not know by
myself. For what could I do?—-since even our
mother was betraying us, she who used to take
counsel with Gaudianus, Reverendus, and Montanus
and then praise men or traduce them accordingly,


written by Timesitheus see K. F. W. Lehmann, Kaiser Gordian
III (Berlin, 1911), pp. 19 f., 65 f.


THE THREE GORDIANS

5 His epistulis intellectum est adulescentem soceri


1 adprobaret sugg. by Peter; adprobarem P.


l The sanctuary of Janus, on the N.E. side of the Forum,
near the Senate-house, consisting of two arches, facing E.
and W., connected by side-walls.

? They had apparently advanced into northern Mesopotemia
during the reign of Maximinus; see Maz-Balb., xiii. 5;
Zonaras, xii. 18. Now, under their new king Sapor I,
son of Ardashir, the founder of the Sassanid dynasty (see
note to Alez., lv. 1), they crossed the Euphrates and threatened
Antioch—which, in spite of the statement in §§ 5-6, does not
seem to have been captured by them; see Mommsen,


THE THREE GORDIANS XXV. 4—XXVI. 3


and by their testimony as though by the evidence of
witnesses she would prove what she had said. My
father, I should like you to hear a true thing:
wretched is an emperor before whom men do not
speak out the truth, for since he himself cannot walk
out among the people he can only hear things, and
then believe either what he has heard or what the
majority have corroborated.”

From these letters one can see how the young man
had been improved and bettered by his father-in-
law’s counsel. Some say that Timesitheus' letter was
written in Greek but in any case to the above effect.
So great was the power, móreover, of his strength
of character and righteousness, that he rose from
great obscurity to make the Emperor Gordian illus-
trious not only for his noble birth but also for his
deeds. :

XXVI. There was a severe earthquake in Gordian's
reign—so severe that whole cities with all their in-
habitants disappeared in the opening of the ground.
Vast sacrifices were offered through the entire city
and the entire world because of this. And Cordus
says that the Sibylline Books were consulted, and
everything that seemed ordered therein done;
whereupon this world-wide evil was stayed.

But after this earthquake was stayed, in the con-
sulship of Praetextatus and Atticus, Gordian opened 242
the twin gates of Janus,! which was a sign that war
had been declared, and set out against the Persians ?
with so huge an army and so much gold as easily to
conquer the Persians with either his regulars or his


Provinces of the Rom, Emp., Eng. Trans., ii. p. O8. Gordian's
departure from Rome was commemorated by coins with the
legend Profectio Aug(usti) ; see Cohen, v?, p. 54, no. 294.


THE THREE GORDIANS

4 facile Persas evinceret. fecit iter in! Moesiam atque
in ipso procinctu quicquid hostium in Thraciis fuit

4 Exstat oratio Gordiani ad senatum, qua de rebus
gestis? suis scribens Misitheo praefecto suo et socero
ingentes gratias agit. cuius partem indidi, ut ex eo

5 vera cognosceres : ‘‘ Post haec, patres conscripti, quae,


linter P. *ciutbus Jordan; ciuitatibus P, Peter. % gests
ins. by Jordan and Peter; om. in P.


1 These were probably the Carpi and the Goths; see Maz.-
Balb., xvi. 3 and notes. The Alani were probably associated
with them; see c. xxxiv. 4.

? His passage of the Hellespont is commemorated by coins
with the legend Traiectus Aug(usti), Cohen, v?, p. 58 f., no.
342 f.

3 A decisive victory was gained at Resaina (mod. Rás-el-Ain)
in northern Mesopo‘amia between Carrhae and Nisibis; see
Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 5,17. From here he marched


THE THREE GORD!ANS XXVI. 4—XXVII. 5


auxiliaries. He marched into Moesia and there, even
while making ready, he destroyed, put to flight, ex-
pelled, and drove away whatever forces of the enemy
were in Thrace! From there? he marched through
Syria to Antioch, which was then in the possession of
the Persians. There he fought and won repeated
battles, and drove out Sapor, the Persians’ king.?
After this he recovered Artaxanses,* Antioch, Carrhae,
and Nisibis, all of which had been included in the
Persian empire. XXVII. Indeed the king of the
Persians became so fearful of the Emperor Gordian
that, though he was provided with forces both from
his own lands and from ours, he nevertheless evacuated
the cities and restored them unharmed to their
citizens; nor did he injure their possessions in any
way. All this, however, was accomplished by
Timesitheus, Gordian’s father-in-law and prefect.
And in the end Gordian's campaign forced the
Persians, who were then dreaded even in Italy, to
return to their own kingdom, and the Roman power
occupied the whole of the East.

There is still in existence an oration of Gordian's
to the senate, wherein while writing of his deeds he
gives boundless thanks to his prefect and father-in-
law Timesitheus. I have set down a part of it, that
from this you may learn his actual words: “ After
those deeds, Conscript Fathers, which were done


southward along the river Khabür, apparently having Ctesi-
phon as his objective (Zonaras, xii. 18), to its junction with
the Euphrates, near which he was killed. His conquest of
northern Mesopotamia is attested by the coins minted in his
honour by Edessa (mod. Urfa). Carrhae, Nisibis, and other
cities of that rezion ; see C hen, v?, p. 86 f.

4 Unknown; the text is probably corrupt.


THE THREE GORDIANS

10 huiusmodi : “ Misitheo eminenti viro, parenti princi-
pum, praefecto praetorii et totius urbis,! tutori rei
publicae senatus populusque Romanus vicem red-
didit."

2accederet. cuius viri tanta in re publica dispositio


1 < praefecto > praetorii, t totius urbis Peter! ; praetotius
urbis P! ; praetori totius urbis P corr. ; prae < fecto prae >
torii, << tutori > tolius urbis Peter?,


! M. Julius Philippus (Arabs), a native, probably, of Philip-
popolis (mod. Shehba) in the Trachonitis in northern Arabia.
He succeeded to the post of Timesitheus (c. xxix.) and after the
murder of Gordian was emperor 244-249, The charge that he


THE THREE GORDIANS XXVII. 6—XXVIII. 2


while on our march and done everywhere in a manner
. worthy of as many separate triumphs, we (to compress
much into little) removed from the necks of the
people of Antioch, which were bent under the Persian
yoke, the Persians, the kings of the Persians, and the
Persians' law. After this we restored Carrhae and
other cities also to the Roman sway. We have pene-
trated as far as Nisibis, and if it be pleasing to the
gods, we shall even get to Ctesiphon. Only may our
prefect and father-in-law Timesitheus prosper, for it
was by his leadership and his arrangements that we
accomplished these things and shall in the future
continue to accomplish them. It is now for you to
decree thanksgivings, to commend us to the gods,
and to give thanks to Timesitheus."

After this was read to the senate, chariots drawn by
four elephants were decreed for Gordian, in order that
he might have a Persian triumph inasmuch as he had
conquered the Persians, and for Timesitheus a six-horse
chariot and a triumphal car and the following inscrip-
tion: “To His Excellency Timesitheus, Father of
Emperors, Prefect of the Guard and of the entire City,
Guardian of the State, the senate and the Roman
people make grateful acknowledgment.”

XXVIII. But such felicity could not endure. For,
as most say, through the plotting of Philip! who was
made prefect of the guard after him, or, as others say,
because of a disease, Timesitheus died, leaving the
Roman state as his heir. Everything that had been
his was added to the city's revenues. So excellent
was this man's management of public affairs that there


was responsible for the death of Timesitheus is repeated in
88 5-6. It is not substantiated by any evidence.


VOL. II. FF


THE THREE GORDIANS

2 Misitheus tantum ubique, quantum diximus, habuerat


! fossata eorum Salm., Peter; fossatorum P. .? sed om.
in P


1 So also Victor, Epit., xxviii. 4, where his father is charac-
terized as nobilissimus latronum ductor.

2A similar, though briefer, account is given in Zosimus, i,
18, 3—19, 1 and Zonaras, xii. 18.


THE THREE GORDIANS XXVIII. 3—XXIX. 2


was nowhere a border city of major size, such as could
contain an army and emperor of the Roman people,
that did not have supplies of cheap wine, grain, bacon,
barley, and straw for a year; other smaller cities had
supplies for thirty days, some for forty, and not a few
for two months, while the very least had supplies for
fifteen days. When he was pretect, likewise, he con-
stantly inspected his men’s arms. He never let an old
man serve and he never let a boy draw rations. He
used to go over the camps and theirentrenchments, and
he even frequently visited the sentriesduring the night.
And because he so loved the emperor and the state,
everyone loved him. The tribunes and generals both
loved and feared him so much that they were unwilling
to do wrong and, for that matter, in no way did wrong.
Philip, they say, was mightily in fear of him for many
reasons and on this account plotted with the doctors
against his life. He did it in this way: Timesitheus,
as it happened, was suffering from diarrhea and was
told by the doctors to take a potion to check it. And
then, they say, they changed what had been prepared
and gave him something which loosened him all the
more ; and thus he died.

XXIX. When he died, in the consulship of Arrianus
and Papus, Philippus Arabs was made prefect of the 243
guard in his place. This Philip was low-born! but
arrogant, and now could not contain himself in his
sudden rise to office and immoderate good fortune,
but immediately, through the soldiers, began to plot
against Gordian, who had begun to treat him as a
father. He did it in the following manner? As we
have said, Timesitheus had stored up such a quantity
of supplies everywhere, that the Roman administration
could not break down. But now Philip intrigued


FF 2


THE THREE GORDIANS


1 Otherwise unknown.


THE THREE GORDIANS XXIX. 3—XXX. 4


first to have the grain-ships turned away, and then
to have the troops moved to stations where they could
not get provisions. In this way he speedily got them
exasperated against Gordian, for they did not know
that the youth had been betrayed through Philip's in-
triguing. In addition to this, Philip spread talk among
the soldiers to the effect that Gordian was young and
could not manage the Empire, and that it were better
for someone to rule who could command the army
and understood public affairs. Besides this, he won
over the leaders, and finally brought it about that
they openly called him to the throne. Gordian’s
friends at first opposed him vigorously, but when
the soldiers were at last overcome with hunger
Philip was entrusted with the sovereignty, and the
soldiers commanded that he and Gordian should rule
together with equal rank while Philip acted as a sort
of guardian. |

XXX. Now that he had gained the imperial power
Philip began to bear himself very arrogantly towards
Gordian ; and he, knowing himself to be an emperor,
an emperor's son, and a scion of a most noble family,
could not endure this low-born fellow's insolence.
And so, mounting the platform, with his kinsman |
Maecius Gordianus ! standing by him as his prefect,
he complained bitterly to the officers and soldiers in
the hope that Philip's office could be taken from him.
But by this complaint—in which he accused Philip of
being unmindful of past favours and too little grateful
—he accomplished nothing. Next he asked the
soldiers to make their choice, after openly canvassing
the officers, but as a result of Philip’s intriguing he
came off second in the general vote. And finally,
when he saw that everyone considered him worsted,


THE THREE GORDIANS

XXXI. Imperavit Gordianusannissex. atque dum
haec agerentur, Argunt Scytharum rex finitimorum
regna vastabat, maxime quod compererat Misitheum
perisse, cuius consilio res publica fuerat gubernata.

2 Philippus autem, ne a crudelitate nancisci videretur
imperium, Romam litteras misit, quibus scripsit Gordi-


flexa Peter; ficta P; uicta Walter, — ?repetenti Peter! ;
[||| recenti P; re recenti B, Peter?,


! Near Circesium at the junction of the Khabür and the
Euphrates; see c. xxxiv. 2.

? Probably to be identified with Argaithus, a Gothic leader,
who, according to Jordanes (de Reb. Goth., xvi.), devastated the
Dobrudja under Philip and laid siege to Marcianopolis. This
was evidently a renewal of the barbarian invasion which had


THE THREE GORDIANS XXX. 5—XXXI. 2


he asked that their power might at least be equal,
. but he did not secure this either. After this he asked
to be given the position of Caesar, but he did not gain
this. He asked also to be Philip's prefect, and this,
too, was denied him. His last prayer was that Philip
should make him a general and let him live. And to
this Philip almost consented—not speaking himself,
but acting through his friends, as he had done through-
out, with nods and advice. But when he reflected that
through the love that the Roman people and senate,
the whole of Africa and Syria, and indeed the whole
Roman world, felt for Gordian, because he was nobly
born and the son and grandson of emperors and had
delivered the whole ‘state from grievous wars, it was
possible, if the soldiers ever changed their minds,
that the throne might be given back to Gordian if he
asked for it again, and when he reflected also that the
violence of the soldiers’ anger against Gordian was
due to hunger, he had him carried, shouting protests,
out of their sight and then despoiled and slain.! At
first his orders were delayed, but afterwards it was
done as he had bidden. And in this unholy and
illegal manner Philip became emperor.

XXXI. Gordian reigned six years. And while the
preceding events were taking place, Argunt,? the
king of the Scythians, was devastating the kingdoms
of his neighbours, chiefly because he had learned that
Timesitheus, by whose counsels the state had been
guided, was now dead.

And now, that he might not seem to have obtained
the imperial office by bloody means, Philip sent a


been temporarily checked by Gordian and Timesitheus on their
way to the East; see note to c. xxvi. 4.


THE THREE GORDIANS


lfetrastylo Salm., Peter ; intrastylo P. 2 quinquaginta
om. in P.


1 So also Zosimus, i. 19, 1.

2So also $ 7 and Eutropius, ix. 2, 8. He is called Divus in
the fictitious inscription in c. xxxiv. 8, but this title does not
appear in any of his inscriptions or on any coin.

3 See c. ii. 8 and note.
4Running E. by S. from Rome to Praeneste (mod, Pales-

rina).

5 From Carystosin Eubœa. It is now known as cipollino—
from cipolla, ** onion," because of its wavy lines of white and
green.


THE THREE GORDIANS XXXI. 3—XXXII. 2


letter to Rome saying that Gordian had died of a
disease! and that he, Philip, had been chosen em-
peror by all the soldiers. The senate was naturally
deceived in these matters of which it knew nothing,
and so it entitled Philip emperor and gave him the
name Augustus and then placed the young Gordian
among the gods.?

He was a light-hearted lad, handsome, winning,
agreeable to everyone, merry in his life, eminent in
letters; in nothing, indeed, save in his age was he
unqualified for empire. Before Philip's conspiracy he
was loved by the people, the senate, and the soldiers
as no prince had ever been before. Cordus says that
all the soldiers spoke of him as their son, that he was
called son by the entire senate, and that all the
people said Gordian was their darling. And indeed
Philip, after he had killed him, did not remove his
portraits or throw down his statues or erase his name,
but always called him divine, even among the soldiers
with whom he had made his conspiracy, and wor-
shipped him with a mixture of a serious spirit and the
shrewdness of an alien.

XXXII. The house of the Gordians? is still in
existence, This was embellished by this Gordian very
beautifully. There is also a villa of theirs on the
Praenestine Way,* with two hundred columns in the
inner court, fifty of them of Carystian marble,’ fifty of
Claudian? fifty of Phrygian,’ and fifty of Numidian 5—


$ Probably red porphyry from Mons Claudianus on the east
coast of Egypt.

1 From Synnada in Phrygia. It is now known as pav-
onazetto (‘*peacock-marble”’), because of its rich purple
markings.

8 Now known as giallo antico. It is golden-yellow in colour,
varying toward orange or pink.


THE THREE GORDIANS

4 Familiae Gordiani hoc senatus decrevit ut a tutelis
atque a legationibus et a publicis necessitatibus, nisi
si vellent, posteri eius semper vacarent.

XXXIII. Fuerunt sub Gordiano Romae elephanti
triginta et duo, quorum ipse duodecim miserat,
Alexander decem, alces decem, tigres decem, leones
mansueti sexaginta, leopardi mansueti triginta, belbi,

1 aeque Petschenig; qua P; aequa Peter, 3pariter


! None are known.
? Probably the Quirinal is meant.


THE THREE GORDIANS XXXII. 3—XXXIII. 1


all of equal size. In this same house there were three
basilicas one hundred feet long and other things
suitable to such a building, and there were baths that
could be equalled nowhere in the world save in the
city as it was at that time.

The senate passed a decree for the family of Gordian
to the effect that his descendants ! need never serve
as guardians or on embassies or in public duties unless
they wished.

There are no public works of Gordian now in .
existence in Rome save a few fountains and baths. /
And these baths were built for commoners and were
therefore correspondingly equipped. He had pro-
jected, however, a portico on the Campus Martius,
just under the hill,? a thousand feet long, intending
to erect another of equal length opposite to it with a
space of five hundred feet stretching evenly between.
In this space there were to be pleasure-parks on both
sides, filled with laurel, myrtle, and box-trees, and
down the middle a mosaic walk a thousand feet long
with short columns and statuettes placed on either
side. This was to be a promenade, and at the end
there was to be a basilica five hundred feet long.
Besides this, he had planned with Timesitheus to
erect summer-baths, named after himself, behind the
basilica, and to put winter-baths at the entrance to
the porticos, in order that the pleasure-parks and
porticos might not be without some practical use.
But all this is now occupied by the estates and

rdens and dwellings of private persons.

XXXIII. There were thirty-two elephants at Rome
in the time of Gordian (of which he himself had sent
twelve and Alexander ten), ten elk, ten tigers, sixty
tame lions, thirty tame leopards, ten belb: or hyenas,


THE THREE GORDIANS


! quae omnia . . . occidit del. by Peter. 2a Philippis P.
3 se om, in P; interisse Peter?, 1 tertio in ins, by Ursinus ;
om. in P and by Peter; duobus . . . finibus del. by Peter.


1Celebrated with great magnificence in April, 248.
24.e. Julius Cesar. Suetonius (Jul., lxxxix.) relates that
hardly any died a natural death and that some slew themselves.


THE THREE GORDIANS XXXIII. 2—XXXIV. 3


a thousand pairs of imperial gladiators, six hippo-
potami, one rhinoceros, ten wild lions, ten giraffes,
twenty wild asses, forty wild horses, and various other
animals of this nature without number. All of these
Philip presented or slew at the secular games. All
these animals, wild, tame, and savage, Gordian in-
tended for a Persian triumph; but his official vow
» proved of no avail, for Philip presented all of them
at the secular games, consisting of both gladiatorial
spectacles and races in the Circus, that were celebrated
on the thousandth anniversary of the founding of the
City,! when he and his son were consuls.

. Cordus writes that the same thing that is related of
Gaius Caesar? happened to Gordian. For after the
two Philips were slain, all who, had fallen upon
Gordian with the sword (there were nine of them, it
is said) are said to have slain themselves with their
own hands and swords, and those the same swords
with which they had stricken him.

XXXIV. This, then, was the life of the three Gor-
dians, all of whom were named Augustus, two of whom
perished in Africa, one within the confines of Persia.
The soldiers built Gordian a tomb near the camp at
Circesium,? which is in the territory of Persia, and
added an inscription to the following effect in Greek,
Latin, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian letters, so that
all might read: * To the deified Gordian, conqueror
of the Persians, conqueror of the Goths, conqueror of


3 Twenty miles from Circesium (see note to c. xxx. 8), accord-
ing to Eutropius, ix. 2,3; between Zaitha and Dura (on the
Euphrates below Circesium), according to Ammianus Mar-
cellinus, xxiii. 5,7. It seems to have been merely a cenotaph,
for according to Eutropius, l.c., Philip took Gordian's ashes
back to Rome.


THE THREE GORDIANS


Sarmatarum, depulsori Romanarum seditionum, victori

60riginem trahere. quae omnia, Constantine maxime,
idcirco sum persecutus,! ne quid tuae cognitioni dees-
set, quod dignum scientia videretur.


! secutus P.


1 The inscription as recorded here can hardly be authentic.
The statement that it had been destroyed before the vita was
written is in itself suspicious, and the pun on Philippi is more
characteristic of the style of these biographers than of a


THE THREE GORDIANS XXXIV. 4-6


the Sarmatians, queller of mutinies at Rome, con-
queror of the Germans, but no conqueror of Philippi ".!
This was added ostensibly because he had been
beaten by the Alani in a disorderly battle on the
plains of Philippi and forced to retreat; but at the
same time it seemed to mean that he had been slain
by the two Philips. But Licinius, it is said, de-
stroyed this inscription at the time when he seized
the imperial power; for he desired to have it appear
that he was descended from the two Philips. All of
this, great Constantine, I have investigated, in order
that nothing might be lacking to your knowledge
which seemed worth the knowing.


funerary inscription. Moreover, it is difficult to believe that
Gordian fought with the Alani as far south as Philippi in
Macedonia; see c. xxvi. 4 and note.

? See Heliog., xxxv. 6.


IULII CAPITOLINI


l. Interemptis in Africa Gordiano seniore cum filio,
cum Maximinus ad urbem furens veniret, ut quod
Gordiani Augusti appellati fuerant vindicaret, senatus
p aetrepidus in aedem Concordiae VII idus Iulias!
concurrit, Ludis Apollinaribus, remedium contra furo-


1 Iulias Peter (cf. Maxim., xvi, 1); Iunias P.


1See Maxim., xx. 1; Gord., xxii. 1.

? See note to Pert., iv. 9.

3This date is incorrect; see note on c. xv. 7.

* 6th-15th July.

5 For their complete names see note to Maxim., xx. 1.


BY
JULIUS CAPITOLINUS


I. When the elder Gordian and his son were now
slain in Africa and Maximinus came raging toward
the city to take vengeance because the Gordians had
been named Augusti,! the senate, in great terror, came
together in the Temple of Concord? on the seventh 9 July, 238
day before the Ides of July?—the time, that is, of
the Apollinarian Games*—to seek some safeguard
against the fury of that evil man. When, then, two
men of consular rank, and of distinction too, Maximus
and Balbinus 5 (Maximus is not mentioned in many
histories, the name of Pupienus being inserted in his
place, but both Dexippus’ and Arrianus? say that
Maximus and Balbinus were chosen against Maximinus
after the Gordians), the one noted for his goodness,
the other for his courage and firmness—when these
two came into the Senate-house, showing plainly on
their brows their terror at Maximinus' coming, and


8 On this confusion see note to Maxim., xxxiii. 3.
7 See note to Alex , xlix. 8.
8 i.e. Herodian; see note to Maxim., i. 4.


VOL. II GG


sule de aliis rebus, qui primam sententiam erat dic-
3 turus sic exorsus est: “ Minora vos sollicitant, et prope
aniles res ferventissimo tempore tractamus in Curia.
4quid enim opus de restitutione templorum, de basilicae
ornatu, de thermis Titianis, de exaedificatione Amphi-
theatri agere, cum inmineat Maximinus, quem hostem
mecum ante dixistis, Gordiani duo, in quibus praesid-
ium fuerat, interempti sint, neque in praesenti ullum
5sit auxilium, quo respirare possimus? agite igitur,
patres conscripti, principes dicite. quid moramini ?
ne, dum singulatim pertimescitis, in timore potius
II. quam in virtute opprimamini.". post haec tacentibus
cunctis, cum Maximus, qui et natu grandior erat et
meritis et virtute ac severitate clarior, dicere senten-
tiam coepisset, quae ostenderet duos principes esse
faciendos, Vettius Sabinus ex familia Ulpiorum rogato
consule, ut sibi dicere atque interfari liceret, sic ex-
2orsus est: “Scio, patres conscripti, hanc rebus novis
inesse oportere constantiam, ut rapienda sint consilia,
non quaerenda, verbis quin etiam plurimis abstinen-
3 dum sit atque sententiis, ubi res perurguent. cervices
suas quisque respiciat, uxorem ac liberos cogitet avitas
patriasque fortunas ; quibus omnibus inminet Maxim-
inus, natura furiosus, truculentus, inmanis, causa vero,
4 ut sibi videtur, satis iusta truculentior. ille quadrato
agmine castris ubique positis ad urbem tendit, vos


, lOn the S.W. slope of the Esquiline Hill, on part of the
site of Nero's Golden House. They were adjoined on the
north-east by the Baths of Trajan, with which they have fre-
quently been confused.

2 The Colosseum; on its restoration by Elagabalus see
Heliog., xvii, 8.
3 See Maxim., xv. 2. 3 See note to c. xv. 2.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS I. 3—Il. 4


the consul began to bring up other questions, he who
gave the first opinion began thus: “ You are disturbed
with petty things; while the world blazes we in the
Senate-house are busied with an old woman's cares.
For what is the use of our discussing the restoration
of temples, the embellishment of a basilica, and the
Baths of Titus,! or building the Amphitheatre,? when
Maximinus, whom you and I once declared a public
enemy,? is upon us, the two Gordians, in whom was
our defence, are slain, and there is now no help
whereby we can be relieved? Come, then, Conscript
Fathers, appoint emperors. Why do you delay? Do
not be overcome while fearing each for himself and
showing terror instead of courage." II. Upon this all
were silent; but finally, when Maximus, who was
older * and more famous by reason of his merits, his
courage, and his firmness, began to give his opinion,
maintaining that two emperors should be appointed,
Vettius Sabinus,’ one of the family of the Ulpii, asked
the consul that he might be permitted to interrupt
and speak, and thus began: “I am well aware, Con-.
script Fathers, that in revolution we should be so
well agreed that plans should not be sought but |
seized; indeed, we should refrain from lengthy
words and opinions when events press. Let each
look to his own neck, let him think of his wife and
children, of his father’s and his father’s father’s goods ;
all of these Maximinus threatens, by nature passionate,
fierce, and bloody, and now with just cause, so it
seems to him, still fiercer. In battle-order, with camps
pitched everywhere, he is coming towards the city ;
and you with sitting and consulting waste away the


5 See c. iv. 4.


GG 2


6cum exercitu latronibus pergat. ego principes dico,
vos firmate, si placet, sin minus, meliores ostendite :

9ritis." post haec adclamatum est uno consensu:

10* Aequum est, iustum est. sententiae Sabini omnes
consentimus. Maxime et Balbine Augusti, di vos
servent. divos principes fecerunt, di vos conservent.
vos senatum a latronibus vindicate, vobis bellum con-

11 tra latrones mandamus. hostis publicus Maximinus

.cum filio pereat, hostem publicum vos persequimini.
felices vos iudicio senatus, felicem rem publicam

12vestro imperio. quod vobis senatus detulit fortiter
agite, quod vobis senatus detulit libenter accipite.”

HI. his atque aliis adclamationibus imperatores facti sunt
Maximus atque Balbinus.

2  Egressi igitur a senatu primum Capitolium escende-

3runt ac rem divinam fecerunt. deinde ad Rostra
populum convocarunt. ubi cum orationem de sen-


l ignobilitatem . . . t.xerst Lipsius, Damsté (cf. Mazwn.,
xx, 1); nobilitatem . . . t ei lexerit P, Peter. 2 est Peter;
sit P.


On acclamations in the senate see note to Alex., vi. 1.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS II. 5—1II. 3


day. There is no need for a long speech; we must
make an emperor, nay we must make two princes,
one to manage the affairs of state, one to manage the
affairs of war; one to stay at home, and one to go
out to meet these bandits with an army. I, then,
nominate for emperors—and do you confirm them, if
it please you, or if not, show me better ones— Maximus
and Balbinus, of whom one is so great in war that he
has concealed the lowness of his birth by the splendour
of his valour, the other, as he is illustrious of birth, so
he is dearto the state by reason both of his gentle char-
acter and of his blameless life, which from his earliest
years he has passed in study and in letters. Conscript
Fathers, you have my opinion—one more perilous
perchance to me than to you, but by no means safe
for you unless you make these men or others emperors.”
Upon this they cried out with one accord! : “ It is
right, it is just. We agree with the opinion of
Sabinus, all of us. Maximus and Balbinus Augusti,
may the gods keep you! The gods have made you
emperors ; may the gods keep you! Save the senate
from the bandits ; we entrust you with the war against
the bandits. May the public enemy Maximinus and
his son perish! Hunt down the public enemy. You
are happy in the judgment of the senate, the state
is happy in your rule. What the senate has given
you, perform stoutly ; what the senate has given you,
take gladly." III. With these and other acclamations
Maximus and Balbinus were made emperors.

Coming out from the senate, then, they first
mounted up to the Capitol and made sacrifice, and
then summoned the people to the Rostra. But there,
after they had delivered speeches about the senate's
decision and their own election, the Roman people,


atus sententia et de sua electione habuissent, populus
Romanus cum militibus, qui forte convenerant, ad-
clamavit, ‘‘Gordianum Caesarem omnes rogamus."
4hic nepos erat Gordiani ex filia! annum agens

4lum rapuit. post has igitur relationes praefectura
urbi in Sabinum conlata? est, virum gravem et Max-
imi moribus congruentem, praetoriana in Pinarium
Valentem,


! After filia P reads qui est àn Africa occisus ; del. by Peter.
? conlocata P. 3 persecutus Peter; prosecutus P.


l On the riot which accompanied this demand see note to
Gord., xxii. 2.

2 On his parentage see note to Gord., xxii. 4.

3 On his age see Gord., xxii, 2 and note.

4Their deification was known at Aquileia at the time of
the surrender of Maximinus’ army; see Maxim., xxiv. 2-3 ;
Herodian, viii. 6, 3. They are called Divi in inscriptions of
Maximus and Balbinus and of Gordian III; see Dessau, Ins.
Sel., 496-498 ; 500.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS III. 4—IV. 5


together with some soldiers who had by chance
assembled, cried out, “We all ask Gordian for Caesar".
This was the grandson of Gordian by his daughter?
being then, so most say, in his fourteenth year.* And
so Gordian was hurried away, and by a new kind
of senatorial decree, passed on that very same day,
he was brought into the Senate-house and declared
Caesar.

IV. The first proposal, then, of the Emperors was
that the two Gordians be entitled divine. Some,
indeed, think that only one, namely the elder, was so
entitled ; but I remember having read in the books
which Junius Cordus wrote, of which there were
plenty, that both were placed among the gods. And
truly the elder put an end to his life by hanging him-
self, whereas the younger was destroyed in war, and
accordingly deserves greater respect because war took
him. At any rate, after these proposals were made,
the city-pretecture was given to Sabinus,’ a serious
man and suitable to one of Maximus' character, the
prefecture of the guard to Pinarius Valens.$

But before I speak of their acts it seems best to
tell of their characters and birth—not in the way
in which Junius Cordus sought eagerly after every-
thing,’ but rather as Suetonius Tranquillus? and
Valerius Marcellinus did. For although Curius


5 See c. ii. 1.

€ A relative of Balbinus; see c. v. 5. In c. xv. 6 the bio-
grapher rightly contradicts a statement that the young Gordian
III was made prefect of the guard.

7 See Intro. to Vol. i., p. xviii.

8The author of the de Vita Caesarum, from Julius to
Domitian. Marcellinus and Fortunatianus are otherwise un-
known, unless the former is the Fabius Marcellinus mentioned
in Alex., xlviii. 6 and Prob., ii. 7.


} pueri Salm., Peter; uiri P. 2 parentis Peter; patris P.
Sac ins. by Peter; om. in P. ‘tandem Cas, ; tamen P, Peter.
50uae om. in P.


a Ó


lSo also c, xiv. 1; xvi. 2; Maaim., xx, 1. On the other
hand, Herodian speaks of both Maximus and Balbinus as
patricians (ebwarp{Sa:) ; see viii. 8, 1 and 4.

? A Jupiter Praestes (i.e. ‘‘ Protector") was worshipped at
Tibur (mod. Tivoli); see an inscription found there, C.I.L.,
xiv. 3555. No sanctuary of his at Rome, however, is known.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS V. 1-9


Fortunatianus, who wrote the history of all this
period, touched upon only a few things, Cordus wrote
so much as to include a great mass of detail, some of
which was not even decent.

V. The father of Maximus was also Maximus.
He was one of the plebs,! and according to some, a
blacksmith, according to others, a carriage-maker.
He begot Maximus from a wife nained Prima, together
with four brothers and four sisters, all of whom died
before the age of puberty. At Maximus’ birth an
eagle, it is said, dropped a piece of beef—and a big
one, too—into their dwelling where a narrow aperture
lay open to the sky ; and later, when it lay there,
no one daring to touch it through superstitious fear,
it picked it up again and carried it off to the nearest
shrine, which was that of Jupiter Praestes? At the
time this did not seem anything of an omen; it was
done, however, not without reason and showed his
future rule.

All his childhood he passed in the house of his
kinsman Pinarius, whom he promptly elevated, as
soon as he was made emperor, to the prefecture of
the guard. He paid little attention to grammar and
rhetoric, cultivating always a soldierly valour and
sternness. And at length he became military tribune
and commander of many detachments ; afterwards he
served a praetorship, the expenses of which were
borne by Pescennia Marcellina, who adopted and
supported him as a son. Thereafter he served as
proconsul of Bithynia, then of Greece, and thirdly of
Gallia Narbonensis.? Besides this, he was sent out
as a special legate and crushed the Sarmatians in


3 See note to Carac., v. 1.


'et Cod. Admont., Petschenig; in P; om. by Eyssenhardt
and Peter. ? nobili ins. by Lenze; om. in P; t ueluti Peter.


! His governorship of Germany is mentioned by Herodian,
viii. 6, 6; 7,8.

? Even to the extent that he became unpopular with the
city mob ; see Herodian, vii. 10, 4 and 6 (cf. c. viii. 2).

3 So also Herodian, vii. 10, 4; viii. 8, 4. Eutropius errone-
ously asserts the contrary; see ix. 2, 1.


a


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS V. 10—VII. 2


Illyricum ; from there he was transferred to the Rhine!
and conducted a campaign against the Germans with
very happy results. After this he proved himself a
very sagacious, very able, and very unbending city-
prefect.? And so, although he was a man of new
family, nevertheless, as though he were of noble birth,
the senate, though it was contrary to law, bestowed
on him the sovereignty—for all confessed that at that
time there was no man in the senate fitter to receive
the title of prince.

VI. And since many desire even less important
details, he was fond of food, very sparing of wine, ex-
ceedingly continent in affairs of love, and both at
home and abroad always so stern as even to get the
name of gloomy. He was extremely grave and even
morose of countenance, tall of stature, very healthy
of body, repellent in manner, but none the less just,
and never, even to the end of his activities, either
cruel or unmerciful. When asked, he always granted
pardon and never grew angry except when it. was
only proper to be angered. He never lent himself to
conspiracies ; he clung to an opinion and did not
trust others before himself. For these reasons he
was greatly beloved by the senate and held in awe
by the people; indeed, the people were not unmind-
ful of his rigid conduct as prefect and saw that this
might even increase in vigour when he became
emperor.

VII. Balbinus was of very noble birth,? twice con-
sul,* and the ruler of innumerable provinces. Indeed,
he had managed the civil administration of Asia,
Africa, Bithynia, Galatia, Pontus, Thrace, and the


* Consul for the second time in 218. The year of his first
consulship is uncertain.


Gallias civilibus administrationibus rexerat, ducto
nonnumquam exercitu, sed rebus bellicis minor fuerat
quam in civilibus ; attamen bonitate, nimia sanctitate
ac verecundia ingentem sibi amorem conlocaverat.!

3familiae vetustissimae, ut ipse dicebat, a Balbo Cor-
nelio Theophane originem ducens, qui per Gnaeum
Pompeium civitatem meruerat, cum esset suae patriae
nobilissimus idemque historiae scriptor.

5 eloquentia clarus, poemate ? inter sui temporis poetas


lconlocauerat P, Petschenig, Bitchofsky; conciliauerat
Peter. 2 poemate Jordan; poemata P; poeta Peter.
5 defuit ins. by Jordan and Peter; om. in P.


1 There were no legions stationed in any of these provinces.
Whatever troops he commanded must have been independent
auxiliary cohorts.

*The biographer seems to have confused two men: L.
Cornelius Balbus of Cadiz (cos. 40 B. c.), who, having fought
under Pompey in Spain and so acquired Roman citizenship,
was afterwards & trusted subordinate of Caesar and became
well known through Cicero's speech in his behalf (the pro


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS VII. 3-7


Gauls, and at times had commanded an army!; he
was less capable in military affairs, however, than in
civil. Nevertheless, by his good, righteous, and
modest life, he won himself great love. He came of
a very ancient family—or so he himself asserted,
tracing his descent from Cornelius Balbus Theo-
phanes,? who became a citizen through the aid of
Gnaeus Pompey; this Balbus was very noble in his
own country and likewise a writer of history.

He was equally tall of stature, remarkable for the
excellence of his body and excessive in his pleasures.
In this he was encouraged by his abounding wealth ;
for he was rich by inheritance on the one hand, and
had himself accumulated a great deal through legacies
on the other. He wasrenowned for eloquence and in
poetry he ranked high among the poets of his time.?
He was fond of wine, of eating, and of love, elegant
in dress, nor was anything lacking to make him agree-
able to the people. He was pleasing also to the
senate.

This is what we have discovered about the lives of
each. Some, indeed, have thought that these two
should be compared in the fashion that Sallust com-
pares Cato and Caesar *É—that the one was stern and
the other genial, the one virtuous and the other stead-
fast, the one by no means munificent, the other rich


Balbo); and Theophanes of Mitylene, who accompanied
Pompey on his campaign against Mithradates, wrote & history
of the war, and was in 62 B.C. rewarded with Roman
citizenship. The confusion is less strange because Balbus,
when a mature man, was adopted by Theophanes.

3 Nothing is known of his poetry.

4 An abbreviation of the comparison in Sallust, de Con-
surattone Catilinae, liv.


d


VIII. entem copiis omnibus dicerent. haec de moribus


atque genere.

Decretis ergo omnibus imperatoriis honoribus atque
insignibus, percepta tribunicia potestate, iure procon-
sulari, pontificatu maximo, patris etiam patriae nomine

4nomine nuncuparunt, his gestis celebratisque sacris,
datis ludis scaenicis ludisque circensibus gladiatorio
etiam munere, Maximus susceptis votis in Capitolio
ad bellum contra Maximinum missus est cum exercitu
ingenti, praetorianis Romae manentibus.


!Here follows in P the misplaced portion of the Véta
Mazim. beginning comperit Alexandrum, c. v. 3, and ending
omnes qui mecum, c. xviii, 2; see Intro, to Vol. i. p. xxxiii.


1 See note to Pius, iv. 7.

?The old republican principle of colleagueship was so
strictly maintained that both Maximus and Balbinus bear this
title (previously never held by more than one man) in their
inscriptions and on their coins; see Dessau, Ins. Sel. 496 and
Cohen, v3, p. 11, nos. 18-22, p. 17, nos. 26-31.

3 See c. iii. 3. 4 See Gord., xxii. 2-8.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS VIII. 1-6


in all possessions. "VIII. So much for their characters
and birth.

All the imperial titles and trappings having been
decreed them, they assumed the tribunician power, the
proconsular command,! the office of Pontifex Maxi-
mus,? and the name Father of his Country, and
entered upon their rule. But while they were at the
Capitol making sacrifice the Roman people objected
to the rule of Maximus. For the men of the crowd
feared his strictness, which, they believed, was very
welcome to the senate and very hostile to themselves.
And for this reason it came about, as we have related,’
that they demanded the youthful Gordian as their
prince; and thus he was straightway entitled.
Indeed Maximus and Balbinus were not suffered to
go to the Palace with armed attendants until they
had invested the grandson of Gordian with the name
of Caesar. And now, this being done, sacred rites
were performed, stage-plays and sports in the Circus
given, a gladiatorial show was presented,5 and Maxi-
mus, after assuming vows in the Capitol, set out with
a mighty army to war against Maximinus. The
praetorian guard, however, remained at Rome.

Whence this custom arose, that emperors setting
out to war gave an entertainment of gladiators and
wild beasts, we must briefly discuss. Many say that
among the ancients this was a solemn ritual performed
against the enemy in order that the blood of citizens
being thus offered in sacrifice under the guise of


5 They also gave a largess to the people; see the ** Chrono-
grapher of 354 a.D. " (Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii. p. 576) and
coins with the legend Liberalitas Augustorum, Cohen, v?,
"p. 9 f., nos. 10-18, p. 15 f., nos. 14-18.

$ See Maxim., xx. 5-6,


1 The biographer is wholly wrong in his explanation of the
origin of gladiatorial spectacles. They were brought to Rome
from Etruria and were always held in connection with im-
portant funerals as a substitute for the human sacrifices origin-
ally performed at the grave. Here they are confused with the
devolio—& wholly different ceremony, by which a general


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS VIII. 7—IX. 5


battle, Nemesis (that is a certain avenging power of
Fortune) might be appeased.! Others have related
in books, and this I believe is nearer the truth, that
when about to go to war the Romans felt it necessary
to behold fighting and wounds and steel and naked
men contending among themselves, so that in war
they might not fear armed enemies or shudder at
wounds and blood.

IX. Now when Maximus set out to the war the
guard remained at Rome; and between them and
the populace such a rioting broke out that it led to a
domestic war,? to the burning of the greater part of
Rome, the defiling of the temples, and the pollution
of all the streets with blood—when Balbinus, a some-
what mild man, proved unable to quell the rioting.
For, going out in public, he stretched out his hands
to this person and that and almost suffered a blow
from a stone and, according to some, was actually
hit with a club; nor would he have finally quelled
the disturbance had not the young Gordian, clothed
in the purple, been perched on the neck of a very
tall man and displayed to the people. When he
was seen, however, the populace and soldiers were
reconciled and through love of him returned to
harmony. No one in that age was ever so beloved ;
this was because of his grandfather and uncle, who
had died for the Roman people in Africa opposing


sacrificed himself or some of his men to the deities of the
Lower World in order to secure a victory ; see the story of
P. Decius Mus, Livy, viii. 9-10.

*'The account of this riot has been misplaced by the bio-
grapher. It took place in connexion with the acclamation
of Gordian III. as Caesar; see c. iii. 3; Maxim., xx. 6; Gord.,
xxii. 2 and notes.


VOL. Il. HH


verant. tantum apud Romanos memoria bonarum
rerum valet.


1quae om. in P.


1 See Maxim., xix. ; Gord., xv.-xvi.

2 See Maxim., xxi. 2; xxiii. 2-8.

3 On frumentarius see note to Hadr., xi. 4.

4 This riot was the result of an attack on some soldiers of
the guard by two senators; see Maxim., xx. 6 ; Gord., xxii. 7-8
&nd note.


$4.6. those which supplied the Camp. Thereupon the


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS X. 1-8


Maximinus.! So powerful among the Romans is the
memory of noble deeds.

X. And now, after Maximus had set out to the
war, the senate sent men of the rank of consul,
praetor, quaestor, aedile, and tribune throughout the
districts in order that each and every town should
prepare provisions, arms, defences, and walls so that
Maximinus should be harassed at each city? It
was further ordered that all supplies should be
gathered into the cities from the fields, in order that
the public enemy might find nothing. Couriers ? were
sent out to all the provinces, moreover, with written
orders that whosoever aided Maximinus should be
placed in the number of public enemies.

At Rome, meanwhile, rioting between the populace
and soldiers broke out a second time.* And after
Balbinus had issued a thousand edicts to which no
one listened, the veterans, together with the guard
itself, betook themselves to the Praetorian Camp,
where the populace besieged them. Nor would
amity have ever been restored had not the populace
cut the water-pipes. In the city, however, before
it was announced that the soldiers were coming
peacefully, tiles were cast down from the roofs
and all the pots in the houses were thrown out,
so that thereby the greater part of the city was
ruined and the possessions of many lost. For robbers
mingled with the soldiers and plundered things that
they knew where to find.


soldiers made a sally from the Camp and drove the populace
into the houses of the city, where they defended themselves
with stones and tiles until the soldiers set fire to the buildings;
seo Herodian, vii. 12, 8.7, which seems to give the correct
account.


HH 2


6et ad eas centum sues, centum oves mactantur. iam,
si imperatorium sacrificium sit, centum leones, cen-
tum aquilae et cetera huius modi animalia centena

2integro et copiis exspectabat; si quidem Maximinus


lerines . . . emittendas totondisse P corr., Jordan; crines
. emittendasse P'; crinibus . . . emiliendas usi esse
Peter. 2ut om. in P.


1 See Maxim., xxiv. 5. ? See Maxim., xxii.—xxiii.

3 See note to Maxim., xxii. 5.

4 So also Maxim., xxiv. 7 ; Herodian, viii, 6, 8. The learned
discussion on the hecatomb (like that on the senatus consultum
tacitum, Gord. xii.) is pure invention. In the early period of
Greece a hecatomb was any large sacrifice; see Iliad, xxiii.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XI. 1—XII. 2


XI. While this was taking place at Rome, Maximus
(or Pupienus) was at Ravenna! making ready, with
an enormous equipment, for war. He feared Maxi-
minus mightily ; very often, indeed, in referring to
him he said that he was waging war against not a
man but a Cyclops. As it happened, however, Maxi-
minus was beaten so badly at Aquileia that he was
slain by his own men,? and his head, with that of
his son, was brought to Ravenna, whence it was
despatched by Maximus to Rome. We must not
neglect to mention at this place the loyalty to the
Romans displayed by the citizens of Aquileia, for it is
said that they cut off their women's hair to make
bow-strings to shoot their arrows.?

Such was the joy of Balbinus, who was in even
greater terror, that he sacrificed a hecatomb as soon
as Maximinus head was brought to him.* Now a
hecatomb is a sacrifice performed in the following
manner: a hundred altars made of turf are erected
at one place, and before them a hundred swine and
a hundred sheep are slaughtered. Furthermore, if it
be an emperor's sacrifice, a hundred lions, a hundred
eagles, and several hundreds of other animals of this
kind are slain. The Greeks, it is said, at one time
used to do this when suffering from a pestilence, and
it seems generally agreed that it was performed by
many emperors.

XII. When this sacrifice, then, had been per-
formed, Balbinus began looking for Maximus with the
greatest rejoicing as he returned from Ravenna with
his untouched army and supplies. For really Maxi-


146 f.; Odyssey, iii. 7 and 59. Usually bulls and cows were
slaughtered, but sometimes small animals as well.


1 octo om. in P.


lSee Herodian, viii. 7, 1-8; &ccording to Herodian the
deputations that met him at Aquileia came from the various
cities of Italy.

? Herodian (viii. 7, 7) relates that Maximus sent Maximinus'
troops back to their stations in the provinces.

3See Mazim., xxiv. 8; Herodian, viii. 7, 8. Coins were
issued bearing the legend Victoria Aug(ustorum) ; see Cohen,
v?, p. 12, nos. 27-30, p. 18, nos. 37-41.

4 This statement is out of place here. In Herodian’s


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XII. 3-8


minus was conquered by the townsfolk of Aquileia,
together with a few soldiers who were there and the
consulars Crispinus and Menophilus, who had been
sent thither by the senate, and Maximus had only
gone up to Aquileia,! in order to leave everything
safe and undisturbed up to the Alps, and also, if there
were any of the barbarians who had favoured Maxi-
minus left, to suppress these. Twenty representa-
tives of the senate (their names are in Cordus), among
whom were four of the rank of consul, eight of the
rank of praetor, and eight of the rank of quaestor,
were sent out to meet him with crowns and a decree
of the senate in which equestrian statues of gold were
decreed him. At this, indeed, Balbinus was a little
nettled, saying that Maximus had had less toil than
he, since he had suppressed mighty wars at home,
while Maximus had sat tranquilly at Ravenna. But
such was the power of wishing, that to Maximus,
merely because he had set out against Maximinus,
a victory was decreed which he did not know
had been gained. At any rate, having taken up
Maximinus’ army,? Maximus came to the city with a
tremendous train and multitude,? while the soldiers
grieved that they had lost the emperor whom they
themselves had chosen and now had emperors selected
by the senate. Nor could they hide their grief, but
showed it severally on their faces; and now they
no longer refrained from speech, although, in fact,
Maximus had previously often addressed the soldiers,


narrative it describes the feelings of Maximinus' army after its
gurrender and before its dismissal by Maximus; see Herodian,
viii. 7, 8. The biographer has confused this with the discon-
tent among the praetorian troops in Rome, which is described
by Herodian in viii. 8, 1-2.


teritorum esse debere et stipendia magna donasset et

3autem et Maximum a senatoribus. his auditis milites
gravius saevire coeperunt, in senatum praecipue, qui
sibi triumphare de militibus videbatur.


! contingerent P, Peter! ; «non 7 contingerent Peter?.


1 This is, of course, not a senatus consultum. In Maxim.,
xxvi. 1 acclamations in the senate are similarly called a
senatus consultum.

2 i.e. the Persians ; see note to Gord., xxvi. 8.

3 See.c. xvi. 8 and note.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XII. 9—XIII. 5


saying that there ought to be a general forgetting of
the past, and had given them high pay and discharged
the auxiliaries at whatever place they had chosen.
But the minds of soldiers, once they are infected with
hate, cannot be restrained. And when they heard
the acclamations of the senate which referred to
them, they became even more bitter against Maxi-
mus and Balbinus and daily debated among them-
selves whom they ought to make emperor.

XIII. The decree of the senate by which they were
aroused was of this nature ! : When Balbinus, Gordian,
the senate, and the Roman people went out to meet
Maximus as he entered the city, acclamations which
referred to the soldiers were made publicly first.
Thereafter they went to the Senate-house, and there,
after the ordinary acclamations which are usually
made, they said: “So fare emperors wisely chosen, so
perish emperors chosen by fools". For it was under-
stood that Maximinus had been made emperor by
the soldiers, Maximus and Balbinus by the senators.
And when they heard this, the soldiers began to rage
even more furiously—especially at the senate, which
believed it was triumphing over the soldiers.

And now, to the great joy of the senate and Roman
people, Balbinus and Maximus began governing the
city, doing so with great moderation. They showed
great respect for the senate ; they instituted excellent
laws, they heard lawsuits with justice, they planned
the military policy of the state with great wisdom.
But when it was now arranged that Maximus should
set out against the Parthians? and Balbinus against
the Germans,’ while the young Gordian remained at
Rome, the soldiers, who were seeking an opportunity
of killing the Emperors, and at first could not find


1:quem postula«Cre putabat Peter; quem postulabat P.


1 According to Herodian, viii. 7, 8, these were volunteers
who followed Maximus to Rome out of personal devotion to
him. Herodian also relates (viii. 8, 2) that their presence in
Rome aroused the anger of the city soldiers and was one of the
causes of the overthrow of the two Emperors. In Maxim.,
xxiv. 6 it is incorrectly stated that they were discharged by
Maximus at Ravenna.


474:


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XIV. 1-5


because Maximus and Balbinus were ever atended
by a German guard, grew more menacing every
day, XIV. There was dissension, too, between Max-
imus and Balbinus?—unspoken, however, and such
as could be surmised rather than seen—for Balbinus
scorned Maximus, as being humbly born, and Max-
imus despised Balbinus for a weakling. And this
fact gave the soldiers their opportunity, for they knew
that emperors at variance could be slain easily. So
finally, on the occasion of some scenic plays,? when
many of the soldiers and palace-attendants were busy,
and the Emperors remained at the Palace alone with
the German guard, they made a rush at them. When
the soldiers thus began to riot it was announced
to Maximus that he could not escape from this
disturbance and commotion unless he summoned the
Germans, and they, as it happened, were in another
part of the Palace with Balbinus. He sent to
Balbinus, accordingly, asking him to send aid. But
Balbinus, suspecting that Maximus was asking for
the guard to use against himself, since he believed
that Maximus desired to rule alone, at first refused
and finally began to wrangle over it. And while they
were engaged in this dispute the soldiers came upon
them, and stripping them both of their royal robes
and loading them with insults, they dragged them
from the Palace. Thence, after handling them very
roughly, they started to hurry them through the
centre of the city to the Camp, but when they


2 So also Herodian, viii.8,4. His account of the overthrow
of Maximus and Balbinus agrees closely with this one and is
evidently its source.

3 According to Herodian, viii. 8, 8, this was the Agon
Capitolinus ; see note to Alex., xxxv. 4.


6sed ubi compererunt Germanos ad defensionem illo-
rum supervenire, ambos occiderunt et in itinere medio

8perunt. Germani sane, ne sine causa pugnarent
occisis iam imperatoribus suis, extra urbem, ubi suos
habebant, se contulerunt.


lid est Augustus del. by Eyssenhardt and Peter. 2 cer-
tantium Cas., Peter; errantium P.


1For Balbinus’ consulship see c. vii. 1. He was never
prefect of the city.
2 According to Zonaras, xii. 17, Balbinus was sixty years old


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XIV. 6—XV. 5


learned that the Germans were following to defend
them, they slew them both and left them in
the middle of the street. In the meantime Gordian
Caesar was lifted up by the soldiers and hailed emperor
(that is, Augustus), there being no one else at hand ;
and then, jeering at the senate and people, the
soldiers betook themselves immediately to the Camp.
As for the German guard, not wishing to fight
needlessly now that their Emperors were slain, they
betook themselves to their quarters outside the city.

XV. This was the end of these good emperors, an
end unworthy of their life and characters. For never
was anyone braver than Maximus (or Pupienus) or
more kindly than Balbinus, as one may see from the
facts in the case. Thesenate did not choose unworthy
men when it had the power. And besides this, they
were tested by many honours and offices, for the one
was consul twice and prefect,! the other consul and
prefect, and they were advanced in years? when they
attained the sovereignty. They were beloved by the
senate and even by the people, although the latter
were slightly in awe of Maximus. This is the in-
formation we have gathered concerning Maximus,
chiefly from the Greek author Herodian.

Many, however, say that Maximinus was conquered
at Aquileia, not by Maximus, but by the Emperor
Pupienus, and that it was he, also, who was slain with
Balbinus ; they omit the name of Maximus altogether.?
Such is the ignorance, moreover, or the usage of these
disputing historians, that many desire to call Maximus


and Maximus seventy-four—a figure which it is hard to reconcile
with his personal conduct of the campaign against Maximinus.

3 On this question, which is further discussed in c. xvi. 7 and
xviii., see note to Maxim., xxxiii. 3.


4TT


1non Puppienus P. ? After biennium the first Venice
edition reads: Nec reticendum est quod Maximus, cum et sibi et
Balbino deferretur iudicio senatus imperium, Balbino dixisse
fertur, ut Herodianus dicit, ** Quid tu, Balbine, et ego mere-
bimur, cum hanc tam immanem beluam exitio dederimus ? ”
cumque Balbinus dixisset, ** Senatus populique Romani feruen-
tissimum amorem, et orbis terrarum," dixisse fertur Maximus,
“ Vereor ne militum odium sentiamus et mortem ”; om. in P
and rejected by Jordan and Peter; retained by Patzig, Byz.
Zeitschr., xiii. p. 45 f.


! See c. iv. 4 and note. ? See c. ix. 4.

3 For ninety-nine days, according to the ** Chronographer of
854 " (Mommsen, Ges. Schr., vii. p. 576), and this seems to be
the correct figure. Their overthrow and the accession of
Gordian III. as sole emperor seem to have occurred in June 238,
and accordingly their election to the throne is to be placed about


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XV. 6—XVI. 3


the same as Pupienus, although Herodian, who wrote
of his own lifetime, speaks of Maximus, not of
Pupienus, and Dexippus, the Greek author, says that
Maximus and Balbinus were made emperors against
Maximinus after the two Gordians, and that Maxi-
minus was conquered by Maximus, not by Pupienus.
In addition to this, they show their ignorance by say-
ing that the child Gordian was prefect of the guard,!
not knowing that he was often carried on a man’s
neck to be displayed to the soldiers.?

Maximus and Balbinus reigned for one year,’ after
Maximinus and his son had reigned for two years,
according to some, for three according to others.*

XVI. Balbinus' house is shown in Rome to this day
in the Carinae,’ large and impressive and still in the
possession of his family. Maximus, who many think
was Pupienus, was of slender substance, though of the
most ample courage. |

In their reign the Carpi* waged war with the
Moesians. The Scythian’ war began, and the


the 15th March; see v. Rohden in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl.,
i. 2621 f. According to this reckoning the dates in the senatus
consulta in c. i. 1 and Maxim., xvi. 1 are wholly incorrect and
evidently as fictitious as the ** documents `” themselves.

3 Three years, four months, and two days, according to the
* Chronographer of 354,” i.e. from Jan. or Feb. 235 to April or
May 238.

54.e. “the Keels,” the western slope of the Esquiline Hill.

€ A Dacian tribe, which at the beginning of the third century
moved into Moldavia and from this time on took part in the
barbarian invasions of Dacia and Moesia. They were driven
out of Roman territory by Philip in 245.247, but in company
with the Goths invaded Thrace and defeated and killed Decius
in 251. They were subdued by Aurelian in 272; see Aurel.,
Xxx. 4.

7 i.e. the Goths. These are the ** Germani" of c. xiii. 5.


excidium eo tempore, ut autem Dexippus dicit,
Istricae civitatis,

5qualem Graeci plerique dixerunt, addit praeterea
tantum! contra Maximinum Aquileiensium odium
fuisse, ut de crinibus mulierum suarum arcubus


! tantum om. in P.


——^—€—€—€£^^—^A—^—^—^—————————————


! Usually Istros ; an ancient city in the Dobrudja, originally
a co.ony of Miletus (Herodotus, ii, 33), conquered by Lucullus
in 72 B.c. (Eutropius, vi. 10). It seems to have been merely


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XVI. 4—XVII. 1


destruction of Istria! or, as Dexippus calls it, the
Istrian city, took place at the same time.

Dexippus praises Balbinus highly, and declares that
he rushed at the soldiers with a gallant spirit and so
died. He did not fear death, he says, being trained
in all the philosophical disciplines. Maximus, he
declares, was not the sort of man that most of the
Greeks said he was. He adds that such was the
hatred of the citizens of Aquileia for Maximinus that
they made strings for their bows from their women's
hair, and thus shot their arrows. Dexippus and
Herodian, who investigated the history of these
princes, say that Maximus and Balbinus were the
princes selected by the senate to oppose Maximinus
after the death of the two Gordians in Africa, and that
the third Gordian, the child, was chosen with them.
In the majority of the Latin authors, however, I do
not find the name of Maximus, and as emperor with
Balbinus I discover Pupienus; indeed this same
Pupienus is said to have fought against Maximinus at
Aquileia, whereas, according to the testimony of the
afore-mentioned writers, we are told that Maximus
did not even fight against Maximinus but remained at
Ravenna and there learned that the victory had been
gained. And so it seems to me that Pupienus and
he who is called Maximus are the same.’

XVII. For this reason I have appended a con-
gratulatory letter that was written about Maximus
and Balbinus by a consul of their time. In it he


plundered and not destroyed by the Goths at this time, for it
is often mentioned subsequently.

3 See note to Maxim., xxii. 5.

3 On this question, which is also discussed in c. xv. 4-5 and
xviii., see note to Maxim., xxxiii. 3.


VOL II, I


Pupieno et Balbino, in qua laetatur redditam ab his
post latrones improbos esse rem publicam :

2 *Pupieno et Balbino Augustis Claudius Iulianus.
cum primum Iovis Optimi Maximi et deorum in-
mortalium senatusque iudicio et consensu generis
humani suscepisse vos rem publicam a nefarii latronis
scelere servandam regendamque Romanis legibus,
domini sanctissimi et invictissimi Augusti, quamquam
nondum! ex divinis litteris, sed tamen ex senatus
consulto quod ad me Vir Clarissimus Celsus Aelianus
collega transmiserat, comperissem ; gratulatus sum
urbi Romae, cuius ad salutem estis electi, gratulatus
senatui, cuius pro iudicio quod in vos habuit,
reddidistis pristinam dignitatem, gratulatus Italiae,
quam cum maxime ab hostium vastatione defend-
itis, gratulatus provinciis, quas inexplebili avaritia
tyrannorum laceratas ad spem salutis reducitis,’
denique legionibus? ipsis et auxiliis, quae ubique
terrarum iam vultus vestros adorant, quod deposito
dedecore pristino nunc in vestro nomine dignam


1 modam P. ? So Peter?; reducilis om. in P. 3 de
legionibus P. *tam ins. by Gruter and Peter; om. in P.
5 sit Lessing, Damsté ; sint P, Peter.


1 Otherwise unknown and, like the letter, probably fictitious,


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XVII. 2-4


rejoices that they had restored the state after it had
been in the hands of wicked bandits.

* Claudius Julianus! to the Emperors Pupienus and
Balbinus. When first I learned that by choice of
Jupiter Optimus Maximus, of the immortal gods and
of the senate, together with the agreement of all
mankind, you had undertaken to preserve the state
from the sins of that impious bandit and rule it in
accordance with Roman law, my lords and most holy
and unconquerable Augusti, when first I learned this,
not yet from your own sacred proclamations but from
the decree of the senate that my illustrious ? colleague
Celsus Aelianus forwarded to me, I felicitated the city
of Rome, that you had been chosen to preserve it; I
felicitated the senate, that you, in return for its choos-
ing you, had restored to it its early dignity ; I felici
tated Italy, that you are defending it particularly from
spoliation by the enemy ; I felicitated the provinces,
torn in pieces by the insatiable greed of tyrants, that
you are restoring them to some hope of safety ; I felici-
tated the legions, lastly, and the auxiliaries, which now
worship your images everywhere, that they have
thrust away their former disgrace and have now, in
your name, a worthy symbol of the Roman principate.
No voice will ever be so strong, no speech will ever
be so happy, no talent will ever be so fortunate, as
ever adequately to express the state's felicity. How
great this felicity is, and of what sort, we can see at
the very beginning of your reign. You have restored
Roman laws, you have restored justice that was
abolished, mercy that was non-existent, life, morality,


? On this title see note to Av. Cass., i. 1. Aelianus, like
Julianus, is almost certainly fictitious.


1 sceleratus Peter; sicelatus P. 2 ut ins. by Bitscnofsky ;
om. in P and by Peter. 3eog P. * After dicantur some
editors print: Sed Fortunatiano credamus, qui dicit Pupiénum
dictum nomine suo, cognomine uero paterno Maximum, ut
omnium stupore legentibus aboliti uideantur; rejected by
Jordan and Peter; retained (with emendations by Cas.) by
Patzig, Bye. Zeitschr., xiii, p. 49 f.


MAXIMUS AND BALBINUS XVII. 5—XVIII. 2


liberty, and the hope of heirs and successors. It is
difficult even to enumerate these things, and much
more to describe them with a fit dignity of speech.
How shall I tell or describe how you have restored
us our very lives, after that accursed bandit, sending
executioners everywhere throughout the provinces,
had sought them to the point of openly confessing
that he was enraged at our whole order, especially
when my insignificance cannot express even the per
sonal rejoicing of my own mind, to say nothing of the
public felicity, and when I behold as Augusti and
lords of the human race those by the unwavering
elegance of whose lives I would like my own conduct
and sobriety to be approved as by the ancient censors ?
And though I might trust to have them approved by
the attestation of former princes, still I would glory
in your judgment as a weightier one. May the gods
preserve—and they will preserve—this felicity for
the Roman world! For when I observe you, I can
hope for nothing else than what the conqueror of
Carthage ! is said to have implored ofthe gods, namely,
that they preserve the state in the condition in which
it was then, since no better one could be found. And,
therefore, I pray that they may preserve this state,
that has tottered up to now, in the condition in which
you have established it.”

XVIII. This letter shows that Pupienus and he
whom most call Maximus were the same. Among
the Greeks, indeed, Pupienus is not easily discovered
in this period and among the Latins, Maximus; but
what was done against Maximinus is sometimes related
as done by Pupienus, sometimes as by Maximus.


14e. Scipio Africanus the younger. The anecdote that
follows is told by Valerius Maximus, iv. 1, 10,


ABERDEEN : THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


-x e» ee ^o


THE SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE
WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY


DAVID MAGIE, Ps.D.


TN THREE VOLUMES


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK: G. P. PUSNAM’S SONS


MOMS AXIT


CONTENTS


PAGE
, ADDITIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY . ] . vi
Tie Two VALERIANS £ ; i : . 9
Tur Two GALLIENI. . : : : 16
Tug Truirry PRETENDERS . : 00.5 04
Tre Derriep Crauprus . ; 5 . 152
Tie DEgnikD AURELIAN . 2x x ) . 192
Tacitus, i : ‘ : . 294


Pnosus . ; ; ; ; 1 . 334

Firmus, Saturnrnus, PnocuLUs AND BoNosus , 386

Carus, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN . : . 416


Inpex or Names  . : ; ; ; . 453


ADDITIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
(1919-1930)


Berptores Historiae Augustae edidit E, Hohl. 2vols. Leipzig,
1927 (very valuable, as giving the readings of the 2
codices).


Alfoldi, A. Das-Problem des “ verweiblichten” Kaisers Gall-
enus; Zérselsift fair Numismatik, xxxvill. (1928), 156-
208.

Bassett, H. J. Macrinus and Diadumemanus; Menasha,
Wisconsin, 1920.

Baynes, N. H. The Date of the Composition of the Histona
Augusta; Classwal Review, xnmvili. (1924), 165-169.

—— The Ebstoria Augusta: its Date and Purpose; Oxford,
1926.

Birt, T. Zu Marius Maximus (S.H.A. Geta 2, 1); Philologus,
Ixxvi, (1920), 862-366,

——— Zu den S.H.A.; Philologus, xxxm. (1927), 177-178.

Dessau, H. Die Samaritamer bei den S.H.A., in Janus:
Arbeiten zur alien und Byzantinischen Geschichte
(Vienna, 1921), 124-128.

Fisher, W. He The Augustan Vita Aureliani, Journal of Roman
Studies, xix. (1929), 195-149.

Geficken, J. Rehgionsgeschichthches in der Historia Augusta;
Hermes, ly. (1920), 279-295.

Hadas, M. Rabbinic Parallels to S.H.A.; Classical Philology,
xiv. (1020), 258-202.

Harrer, G. A, The Chronology of the Revolt of Fesconnius
Niger; Journal of Roman Studies, x. (1920), 155-163.

Henderson, D, W. The Life and Principate of the Emperor
Hadrian, A.D. 76-188; London, 1923.


VOL. III vii


ADDITIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY


Hohl E. Ueber den Ursprung der Historia Augusta: Hermes,
lv, (1920), 296-310.

—— Bericht uber die Literatur zu den S.H.A. fur die Jahre
1916-1923; Jahresberichte uber die Fortschritte der
klassischen Altertumswissenschaft, ce. (1921), 167-210.

— — Grundsatzhches zur Textgestaltung der S.H.A.; Philo-
logische Wochenschrift, xlvi. (1928), 1115-1118.

Homo, L. La grande Crise de l'an 238 ap. J.C. et le Probléme
de Histoire Auguste; Revue Historique, oxxxi. (1919),
209-264; exxxil, (1919), 1.38.

—— Les Documents de Fhistoire Auguste et leur Valeur
historique, Revue Historique, ch. 61026), 161-198: cln.
(1926), 1-31.

Jardé, A. fitudes entiques sur la Vie et le Règne de Sevóre
Alexandre; Pans, 1926.

Jorga, N. LeProblémedel'Abandon dela Dacie par Empereur
Auréhen; Revue Historique du Sud-Hst Huropéen, i.
(1994), 37-58.

Klotz, A- Beitrage zur Textgeschichte und Texünük dar
S.H.A.; Rhewwsches Museum, lxxvii. (1999), 268-314,
432.

Mattingly, H., and Sydenham, E. A. The Roman impeual
Ooinage, Vol. v., Maré 1 (Valerian to the Interrognum),
by P. H. Webb, London, 1927.

Milne, J. G. Aemihanus the “Tyrant”, Jow nal of Egyptian
Archaeology, x. (1924), 80-82.

Orth, E, Zu den S.H.A; Philologische Wochensehrift, xhx,
(1929). 1470-1471.

—— Von Orpheus bis Grillius (on Tac., 10, 8); PAlologiehe
Wochenschrift, 1. (1980), 895-400.

Pasol, re : L/'Uso di Exodiano nella ** Vita Maximmi”; Milan,
1927. ^

— Sulla Composizione die due Bram paralleli degli *€ S.EL A,"
(Mac, 18, 5—19 e Gord., 7, 2—16) m Annali del R. Liceo-
Gunnasio Ugo Foscolo dy Pavia del Anno 1927-1928;
Voghera, 1999. 4

Perret, tu. I’Histore de Empereur Géta; Revue dés Héuedes
Historiques, xci. (1925), 119-180.

aep Zu @m S.H.A.; Philologus, lxx. (1925),

Reuss, W. Der historische Wert der Caracallavito in den
S.H.A,: Kho. Bewhefi 94 (1981).


vii


ADDITIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY


Rohde, J. Die Mareomanenkriege Marc Aurels; Hallo,
1924, e

Rosenberg, A. Han Document zur Reichsrefornf dos Kaisors
Galhenus; Hermes, lv. (1920), 319-321.

Rostovtseff, M. La Crise sociale et politique de L'Empire
Romain au III Siècle ap. J.C.; Musée Belge, xxvn.
(1923), 238-249,

Schmiedler, B. Adam von Bremen und die 8.H.A.; Historische
Viertelj ahrschroft, 1920, 138f.

——- Die S.H.A. und der Helige Hieronymus. Em Betrag
zur Entstehungszeit der falschen Kaiserviten; Phalo-
logische Wockenschrift, xlvu. (1927), 955-960.

Schnabel, P. Die Chronologie Aurehans, Kho, xx. (1925-6),
363-368,

Schwendemann, J. Der historische Wert der Vita Mara bei
den S.H.A.; Heidelberg, 1928.

Sedgwick, H. D Marcus Aurelius; Oxford, 1921.

Sjogren, H, Kleme textkritische Beitrage (Hadr. 13, 3; Alex.
18, 6); Eranos, xix. (1928), 163-172. á

Stan, A. Zur Chronologie der Romischen Kaiser von Decus
bis Diocletian; Archi für Papyrusforsehung, vi. (1928),

. 30-51; vim. (1926), 11-13.

—— Zertbestummungen von Calhenw? bis Aurelian, Kho, xx1.
(1926-7), 78-82.

—~— Observations on the Chronology of the Roman Emperors
in the Second Half of the Third Century; Jowrnal of
Egyptian Archaeology, xiv. (1928), 16-19.

Thornell, G. Ad diversos Serrptores Comiectanea et Interpret-
atonia ; m Sirena phalologwa Uysalrensis (Upsala, 1922),
383-392.

——— Ad S.H.À. et Ammianum Marcelhnum Adnotationes;
Teipzfg, 1927.

Tidner, E. De Parücuhs copulativis apud S.H.A, Quaestiones
selectae; Upsala, 1992.

— — In SHA, Adnotatiunculae; in Sirena philologica Un-
saiensis (Upsala, 1922), 149-162.

Townsfnd, P. W. The Chronology of the Year 288 a.p.; Yale
Classical Studaes, 1. (1928), 231-238.

Van Sickle, C. E, A hypothetical Chwonology for the Year of
the Gordians ; Classical Philology, xxu. (1997), 416-417,

—— Phe Legal Status of Clodius Albinus in the Years 193-196;
Clussieas Phalology, xxiii, (1928), 193-197.


ADDITIONS TO THE BIBLIOGRAPHY


Van Sickle, C. E. Some further Observations on tho Cliro-
nology of the Year 288 a.n., Classical P'halology, xxiv.
(1929), 284-289.

Vorbrodt, T. Kaiser Gallienus (253-268), Halle, 1923,

Westermann, W. L. The Papyr and the Chronology of the
Reign of the Emperor Probus; Aegyptus, 1. (1920),
297-801.


SCRIPTORES
HISTORIAE AUGUSTAE


VOL. Iti,


VALERIANI DUO
TREBELLII POLLIONIS


L] * * 1


280 Salm.; aporis rex regum uel solus P; Velsolus Poter?
Hohl. *sepe 2; ; nempe P corr.


e i m m MATS Hila petitam e a TA men te


1 The biographies of the emperors Philippus Arabs (244-249),
Decius (249-251), Trebonianus Gallus (251-253), Acmulianus
(253), and perhaps of their sons also, presumably formed part
of the series (see Aur., IT. 1), but are missing frtin the
collection as extant. With them has disappeared also the
greater part of the vite of Valerian (P. Licimus Valerianus),
made emperor in 258 and taken prisoner by Sapor [., Sassanid
king of the Persians (see note to God., xxvi. 8) m 259 or 260.
The only extant portion of this vita is the close, containing


THE TWO VALERIANS!
BY


TRÉBELLIUS POLLIO


IL ... to Sapor, the King of Kings? or, in fact, Sole
King: “Did I but know for a certainty that the
Romans could be wholly defeated, I shoüld con-
gratulate you on the victory of which you boast.
But inasmuch as that nation, either through Fate or
its own prowess, 15 all-powerful, look to it lest the
fact that you have taken prisoner an aged emperor,
and that indeed by guile, may turn out ill for your-
self and your descendants. Consider what mighty
nations the Romans have made their subjects instead
of their enemies after they had often suffered defeat at
their hands, We have heard, in fact, how the Gauls
conquered them and burned that great city of theirs ;
it is a fact that the Gauls are now servants to the
Romans. What of the Africans? Did they not
conquer the Romans ? It is a fact that they serve


chiefly the fabricated “documents” so greatly beloved by
these authors; soe Vol. I., Intro., p. xx f.

“Tho title ** King of Kings” was used by Sapor on his coins
and in lus inseriptions (e.g., GaeiAebs Barirdwr In OC.J.G., 4676
== OG Las 434).


a


THE TWO VALERIANS


inferioribus 1 nihil dico. Mithradates Ponticus totam
Asiam tenuit; certe victus ast, certe Asia Roman-

60rum est." si meum consilium requiris, utere oc-
casione pacis et Valerianum suis redde, ego gratulor
felicitati tuae, si tamen illa uti tu scias.”

II. Velenus rex Cadusiorum sie seripsit: “ Remissa
mihi auxilia integra et incolumia gratanter accepi.
at captum Valerianum principem principum non salis
gratulor, magis gratuler, s1 redderetur. Romani enim

2graviores tunc sunt, quando vincuntur. age igitur ut

prudentem decet, nec fortuna te inflammet, quae
multos decepit. Valerianus et filium imperatorem
habet et nepotem Caesarem, et quid ad omnem
orbem illum Romanum, qui contra te tetus insurget ?

III. Artavasdes rex Armeniorum talem ad Saporem
epistulam misit; “In partem gloriae venio, sed


l nferioribus Obrecht, Peter; interioribus P, X.


1 A Median people, living on the S. W. coast of the Caspian
Sea, also called Gael :

? 4,0., Gallienus.

? There were three Armenian kings of this name during the
second and first centuries before Christ and the first fentury
after Christ, but none m the third century. If tho author 15
not merely using a wellknown name to give verisimiliiude fo
the letter, as seems most likely, he may have in mind
Artavasdes the Mamiconaean, regent for the young Tiridates
ITI. during the period which followed the death of his father,


THE TWO VALERIANS I. 6—III. 2


them now. Examples more remote and perhaps less
unportant I wil] not eite. Mithradates of Pontus
held all of Asia ; it is a fact that he was vanquished
and Asia now belongs to the Romans. Ifyou ask my
advice, make use of the opportunity for peace and give
back Valerian to his people. I do indeed congratulate
you on your good fortune, but only if you know how
to use it aright.”

II Velenus, King of the Cadusii,! wrote as follows:
“I have received with gratitude my forces returned
to me safe and sound. Yet I cannot wholly con-
gratulate you that Valerian, prince of princes, is
captured ; I should congratulate you more, were he
given back to'his people. For the Romans are never
more dangerous than when they are defeated. Act,
therefore, as becomes a prudent man, and do not
let Fortune, which has tricked many, kindle your
pride. Valerian has an emperor for a son? and a
Caesar for a grandson, and what'of the whole Roman
world, which, to a man, will rise up agamst you?
Give back Valerian, therefore, and make peace with
the Romans, a peace which will benefit us as well
because of the tribes of Pontus,”

III. Artavasdes,’ King of the Armenians, sent the
following letter to Sapor: “I have, indeed, a share
in your glory, but I fear that you have not so much
conquered as sown the seeds of war, For Valerian
is being sought back by hus son, his grandson, and
the generals of Rome, by all Gaul, all Africa, all
Spain? all Italy, and by all the nations of Ilyrieum,
the East, and Pontus, which are leagued with the


Chosroes L., about 250, as is supposed by P. Asdouriau, Polit.
Beziehungen ew. Armenien u, Dom. p. 127 1.


THE TWO VALERIANS

2 Sed Valeriano apud Persas consenescente Odae-
nathus Palmyrenus collecto exercitu rem Romanam

3prope in pristinum statum reddidit. cepit regis
thesauros, cepit etiam, quas thesauris cariores habent

8 Et ut scias quanta vis in Valeriano mentorum


1 cepista sed Petschenig, Hohl; cepistes et P,


r


——— a ieee ene Ae


! F'rom Trans-Caucasig. ? Seo note to ffadr., xxx 13.
3 In S, Russia, north of the Crimea,
4See Tyr. Trig., xv. 5 Soo. Lyn. Trige xviii.


THE TWO VALERIANS III. 3—V. 3


Romans or subject to them. So, then, you have
captured one old man but have made all the nations
of the world your bitterest foes, and ours too, perhaps,
for we have sent you aid, we are your neighbours,
and we always suffer when you fight with eacb
other."

IV. The Bactrians, the Hiberans,! the Albanians,”
and the Tauroseythians ? refused to receive Sapor's
letters and wrote to the Roman commanders,
promising aid for the liberation of Valerian from
his captivity.

Meanwhile, however, while Valerian was growmg
old in Persia, Odaenathus the Palmyrene * gathered
together an army and restored the Roman power
almost to its pristine condition. He captured the
king's treasures and he captured, too, what the
Parthian monarchs hold dearer than treasures,
namely his concubines. For this reason Sapor was
now in greater dread of the Roman generals, and
out of fear of Ballista * and Odaenathus he withdrew
more speedily to his kingdom. And this, for the
time being, was the end of the war with the Persians.

V. This 15 all that 1s worthy of being known about
Valerian, whose life, praiseworthy for sixty years long,
finally rose to such glory, that after holding all
honours and offices with great distinction he was
chosen emperor, not, as often happens, in a motous
assemblage of the people or by the shouting of
soldiers, but solely by right of his services, and, as it
were,*by the single voice of the entire world. In
short, if all had been given the power of expressing
their choice as to whom they *lesired as emperor,
none other would have been chosen.

Now in order that you may know what power lay


THE TWO VALERIANS


fuerit! publicorum, ponam senatus consulta, quibus
animadvertant omnes quid de illo semper ampliss:-
mus ordo iudicaverit.

4 Duobus Decus consulibus sexto kal. Novembrium
die, cum ob imperatoris htteras in Aede Castorum
senatus haberetur, ireturque per sententias singu-
lorum, cur deberet censura deferri (nam id Deci:
posuerant in senatus amplissimi potestate), ubi
primum praetor edixit “ Quid vobis videtur, patres
conseripti, de censore dehgendo ?7 atque eum, qui
erat princeps tune senatus, sententiam  rogasset
absente Valenano (nam ille m procinctu cum Decio
tune agebat), omnes una voce dixerunt interrupto
more dicendae sententiae: “Valeriani vita censura

pest. ille de omnibus mdicet, qui est omnibus melior.
ile deessenatu iudicet, qui nullum habet crimen.
ile de vita nostra sententiam ferat, cui nihil potest

6obici, Valerianus a prima pueritia fut censor.
Valerianus in tota*vita sua fuit censor. prudens
senator, modestus senator, gravis senator. amicus
bonorum, inimicus tyrannorum, hostis criminum,

7 hostis vitiorum. hune censorem omnes accipimus,

hunc imitari omnes volumus. primus genere, nobilis


1 fuer &, Peter, Hohl; fuii P.


ee mmea erm HM Un» Al ve


=


1 The spuriousness of this “ senatus consultum " is sufficiently
shown by the fact that Decus died in the summer of 951.
For other such “senatus consulta" see Mazim., xvi;
Gord., x. ; Tyr. Trig., xxi. 8-4; Claud.,1v.; AUT, xix. ; xli, ;
Tae, ni. ; Prob., xi. 5-9. i

? See note to Macim., xvi. 1.

* The attempt to revave the censorship, as described horo/'is
as fictitious as the “‘ senatus consultum " itself, and is merely
a part of the biographer’s tendency to magnify the importance
of the senate. Itis true, however, that Decius in 250 conferred


—— te


THE TWO VALERIANS V. 4-7


in the publie services of Valerian, I will cite the
decrees of the senate,! which will make ıt clear toall
what judgement concerning him was always expressed
by that most illustrious body.

In the consulship of the two Decii, on the sixth 27 Oct., 2
day before the Kalends of November, when, pursuant
to an imperial mandate, the senate convened in the
Temple of Castor and Pollux,? and each senator was
asked his opinion as to the man to whom the censor-
ship è should be offered (for this the Decii had left in
the power of the most high senate), when the praetor
had first announced the question, “What is your
desire, Conseript Fathers, with regard to choosing
a censor ? " and then asked the opinion of hum who
was then the prince of the senate * in the absence of
Valerian (for at that time he was m military service
with Decius) then all, breaking through the usual
mode of giving the vote, exied out with one voice . ?
* Valerian's life is a censorship "Let him judge all,
who is better than all. Let him judge the senate,
who is free from guilt. Let him pronounce sentence
on our lives, against whom no reproach can be brought.
From early childhood Valerian has been a censor.
All his life long Valerian has been a censor. A wise
senator, a modest senator, a respected senator. The
friend of the good, the enemy of tyrants, the foe of
crimes, the foe of vices. He it is whom we all accept
as censor, whom we all desire to imitate. Foremost


on Valopian some important position —4 r&v vpaypdr cv Biolknots,
&ecording to Zonaras, xii. 20. i
a Valerian is said to have held thus office as carly as 288;
sco C'ord., ix. T. i
t On such acclamations in the senato soo noto to Aler. vi. 1.
They are also found in Glati, iv. 3-45 xviii. 9-8; Tae, iv,
Jets v. 1-4; vii. 15 Prob., xi. 6-9; xu. 8,


THE TWO VALERIANS

VI. Hoc senatus consultum ubi Decius accepit,
omnes aulicos convocavit, ipsum etiam Valerianum
praecepit? rogari, atque in conventu summorum

2 virorum recitato senatus consulto, * Felicem te," in-
quit, * Valerianum, totius senatus sententia, ummo
animis atque pectoribus 3 totius orbisshumani, suscipe
censuram, quam tib detulit Romana res publica, quam
solus merens, iudieaturus de moribus ommum, 1udica-

aturus de moribus nostris. tu aestmnabis qui manere
in Curia debeant, tu equestrem ordinem m antiquum
statum rediges, tu censibus modum pones, tu vecti-
galia fifmabis divides statues, tu * res pubheas recen-
4Sebis; tibi legum scribendarum auctoritas dabitur, tibi
5 deordinibus militum iudicandum est; tu arma respicies ;
gtu de nostro Palatio, tu de iudicibus, tu de praefectis
emmentissimis wdicabis ; ; excepto denique praefecto
urbis Romae, exceptis consulibus ordmarus et sac-
rorum rege ac maxima virgme Vestalium (si tamen
incorrupta permanebit) de omnibus sententias feres,
laborabunt autem etiam illi, ut tibi placeant, de quibus
7non potes iudicare." haec Decus. sed Valeriano
sententia huiusmodi fuit: “ Ne, quaeso,” sanctissime
imperator, ad hanc me necessitatem alhges, ut ego


1 exemplo P, Hohl. 2 9} aecegat a; praecipit P, Poter,
3 pectoribus & , peccatoribus P. 4 statues tu Hohe, statuts
2; statu P; tu Peter.
%


lor rim ened mete ital Gris irs HH saa pH iere EAR TT


1 See note to Carde., iv. 8.


THE TWO VALERIANS V. 8—VI. 7


in fanily, noble in blood, free from stam in his life,
famed for his learning, matchless in character, a sample
of the olden times.” When all this had been said
repeatedly, they added, ‘All with one accord,” and
so they departed.

VI, When this decree of the senate was brought
to Decius, he called all his courtiers together and
gave orders that Valerian, too, should be summoned.
Then, having read the decree before this assemblage
of the foremost men, he said: “ Happy are you, Vale-
rian, 1n this vote of the entire senate, or rather in the
thoughts and the hearts of the whole world of men.
Recewe the censorship, which the Roman common-
wealth has offered you and which you alone deserve,
you who are now about to pass judgement on the
character of all men, on the character of ourselves as
well. You shall decide who are worthy to remain m
the Senate-house, you shall restore the equestrian
order to its old-time condition, you shall determme the
amount of our property, you shall safeguard, apportion
and order our revenues, you shall conduct the census
in our communities ; to you shall be given the power
to write our laws, you shall judge concerning the
rank of our soldiers, and you shall have a care for
their arms; you shall pass judgement on our Palace,
our judges and our most eminent prefects; in short,
except for the prefect of the aty of Rome, except
for the regular consuls, the king of the sacrifices,
and the senior Vestal Virgin (as long, that is, as she
remains unpolluted), you shall pronounce sentence on
alh Even those on whom you may not pass judge-
ment will strive to win your approval" Thus Decius;
bat Valerian's reply was as follows: “ Do not, I pray
you, most venerated Emperor, fasten upon me the


THE TWO VALERIANS

VII. Poteram multa alia et senatus consulta et
iudicia principum de? Valeriano proferre, nisi et vobis
pleraque nota essent, et puderet altius virum extollere,
qui fatali quadam necessitate superatus est. nune
ad Valerianum minorem revertar.

VIIL Valerianus 1unior, alha guam Gallenus
matre genitus, forma conspicuus, verecundia proba-
bilis, eruditione pro aetate clarus, moribus periucundus
atque a fratris dissolutione serunctus, a patre absente
Caesar est appellatas, a fratre, ut Caelestinus dicit,

3 Et quoniam scio errare plerosque, qui Valeriani im-
peratoris titulum in sepulchro legentes illus Valeriani
redditum putant corpus, qui a Persis est captus, ne
ullus error obrepat, mittendum im htteras censui hunc
Valerianum circa Mediolanum sepultum addito titulo
Claudii iussu: * Valerianus imperator."


!propter om. 1n. P and J. * de 2, Poter; seu P,


! See note to Gall., xiv. 10, ? Otherwise unknown,


THE TWO VALERIANS VI. 8—VIII. 3


necessity of passing judgement on the people, the
soldiers, the senate, antl all judges, tribunes and
generals the whole world over. It is for this that
you have the name of Augustus, You it is on whom
the office of censor devolves, for no commoner can
duly fill it. Therefore I ask to be excused from this
office, to which my life is unequal, my courage un-
equal, and the times so unfavourable that human
nature does not desire the office of censor.”

VII. I could, indeed, cite many other senatorial
decrees and imperial judgements concerning Valerian,
were not most of them known to you, and did I not
fee] ashamed to extol too greatly a man who was
vanquished by ‘what seems a destined doom. Now
let me turn to the younger Valerian.

VIII. Valerian the younger,! the son of a different
mother from Gallienus, conspicuous for his beauty,
admired for his modesty, distinguished in learning for
one of his years, amiable in his manners, and holding
aloof from the vieious ways of his brother, received
from his father, when absent, the title of Caesar and
from his brother, so says Caelestinus," that of Augustus.
His life contains nothing worthy of note, save that
he was nobly born, excellently reared, and pitiably
slain.

Now since'I know that many are in error, who have
read the inscription of Valerian the Emperor on a
tomb, and believe that the body of that Valerian who
was captured by the Persians was given back again,
I have thought ıt my duty, that no error might creep
in, £o set down in writing that it was this younger
Valerian who was buried near Milan and that by
Claudius’ order the inseription was added: “ Valerian
the Emperor,"


THE TWO VALERIANS


t


! Italics are supplements of Peter to fill lacunae m P.


THE TWO VALERIANS VIII. 4-5


Nothing further, I think, should be demanded con-
ecrnmg either older or younger Valerian, And since
I fear to exceed the proper limit of a volume, if I add
to this book Valenan's son Gallienus, concerning
whom we have already said much, and perchance too
much, m the life of his father, or even Gallienus’ son
Salonmus, who is called in the history of his time
both Saloninus and Gallienus, let us now pass, as we
are bidden, to another volume, For, indeed, we have
ever submitted to«you and to Fame, to whom we can
make no refusal


1 See Gall., xix 1-4.


GALLIENI DUO
TREBELLII POLLIONIS


1Ttalics are supplements of Obrecht and Peter to fill lacunae
in P

1P. Liemius Egnatius Gallienus Augustus (253-260 with
Valerian; 260-268 sole emperor). The biegrapher, like
Eutropius and Aurelius Victor, portrays Gallienus in the
worst possible hght—a tendency due, partly, to senatorial
hostility aroused by his exclusion of senators irom military
commands (Aur, Victor, Caes., 88, 83 f.), but particularly to the
desirs, by blackening Gallienus, to enhance the gloyjes of his
successor Claudius, who, as the reputed ancestor of Constantius
Chlorus (see note to Giaud., xui. 2), 18 made the hero of ¢his
series of biographies. Consequently, the deprociation of
Gallhenus, as neglecting ihe welfare of the Empire and
interested only in amusements and debauchery, and the


THE TWO GALLIENI


BY
TREBELLIUS POLLIO


I. When Valerian was captured (for where should
we begm the biography of Gallienus,! if not with
that calamity which, above all, brought disgrace on his
life >), when the commonwealth was tottering, when
Odaenathus had seized the rule of the East, and when
Gallienus was rejoicing in the news of his father’s
captivity, the armies began to range about on all
sides, the generals in all the pfovmces to murmur,
and great was the grief of all men that Valerian, a
Roman emperor, was held asa slave im Persia. But
greater far was the grief of them all that now having
received the imperial power, Gallienus, by his mode
of life, as his father by his fate, brought ruin on the
common wealth.?


exaltation of Claudius (and his descendant) form the prin-
crpàl theme of the series. A more favourable and, as 1t is
now generally beheved, a more truthful, account of his reign
is given by the Greck wmters Zosimus (i. 30-40) and Zonaras
(xi. 24°25). Tho modern point of view (based on these
wrters and supported by the evidence of inscriptions and
archaeological research), which reprdBents Galhenus as an
active and able ruler, has been excellently presented by
L. Homo in Rev. Hast., exih. pp. 1-22; 225-267.
2Gf, Tyr. Trig. xii. 8,


THE TWO GALLIENI

5 dispendia. hue accedebat quod liberi eius, fortissimi
iuvenes, tota mente in bellum ruebant, ut essent
legionibus exemplo ad omnia munera ? militaria.

21dem Macrianus Pisonem, unum ex nobilibus ae
principibus senatus, ad Achaiam destinavit ob hoc ut
Valentem, qui illic proconsulari imperio rem publicam


180 P; lacunae closed up in 2. * munera suppl. by


Editor; lacuna in P. 31bahos are supplements of Jordan
to fill lacunae 1n P. 4a¢ Kellerbauer, Hohl; a P; et Peter.


—— ——— gl DO


1 The date 261 1s incorrect, for papyri show that Macrinus
and Quietus were recognized as emperors in Egypt in Sept.,
260. On this revolt see Tyr, Trig., xu-xiv.; xvii. This vita,
beginning as ıt does with this event, omits any account of
Galhenus' success in repelling the Germans who attempted ta


THE TWO GALLIENI I. 2—II. 3


So then, when Gallienus and Volusianus were 261
consuls, Macrianus and Ballista met together, called
m the remains of the army, and, since the Roman
power in the Kast was tottering, sought someone to
appoint as emperor) For Gallienus was showing
himself so careless of public affairs that his name was
not even mentioned to the soldiers. It was then
finally decided to choose Macrianus and his sons as
emperors and to undertake the defence of the state.
And so the imperial power was offered to Macrianus.
Now the reasons why Macrianus and his sons should
be chosen to rule were these: First of all, no one of
the generals of that time was held to be wiser, and
none more suited to govern the state; in the second
place, he was the richest, and could by his private
fortune make good the public losses. In addition to
this, his sons, most valiant young men, rushed with
all spirit into the war, ready to serve as an example
to the legions in all the duties of Soldiers.

II. Accordingly, Macrianus sought reinforcements
on every side and, in order to strengthen his power,
took control of the party which he himself had formed.
So well did he make ready for war that he was a
match for all measures which could be devised against
him. He also chose Piso,? one of the nobles and of the
foremost mén in the senate, as governor of Achaea, in
order that he might crush Valens,? who was administer-
ing that province with the authority of a proconsul.
Valens, however, learning that Piso was marching
against* him, assumed the imperial power. Piso,
therefore, withdrew into Thessaly, and there he,


invade Gaul ın 254-258 or of his suppression of the revolt of
Ingenuus in Pannonia in 258 or 259 (see Tyr. Trig., 1x.).
*Soe Tyr. Loge, Xxi. $ Soo Pyr, Trig, xix.


THE TWO GALLIENI


4in Thessaliam se recepit, ubi missis a Valente militi-
bus eum plurimis interfectus est. ipse quoque im-
perator appellatus cognomento Thessalicus.
5 Et! Macnanus retento in oriente uno ex filis,
acatis 1am rebus, Asiam primum vent et? Illyricum
8petiit. inIllyrico cum Aureoli: imperatoris, qui contra
Galhenum imperium sumpserat, duce, Domutiano
nomine, manum conserut, unum ex flus secum
7 habens et triginta miha militum ducens. sed victus
est Macrianus cum filio Macriano nmomme deditusque
omnis exereitus Aureolo imperatori.

III. Turbata interim re publica toto penitus orbe
terrarum, ubi Odaenathus comperit Macrianum cum
filio interemptum, regnare Áureolum, Galenum re-
mussius rem gerere,? festinavit ad alterum filium
Macriani eum exercitu, si hoc daret fortuna, capien-


l ej Peter; haec P. ^ei ins. by Peter; om. in P and by
Hohl. ? rem gerere Salm., Peter; gerea P, + deme 27
Peter; id est P.


—— € ——————— MÁS ARE


1 See Tur, Trig., xii. 14.

2 This statement {afso 1m c. ni. 1) is incorrect, for Aureolus
did not declaro himself emperor until 268, and was at this tame
acting as Gallienus’ general; see note to Tyr. Prga xi. 1.

? See Tyr, Trig., xv.


THE TWO GALLIENI II. 4—1II. 4


together with many, was slain by the soldiers sent
against him by Valens, *Now Piso, too, was saluted
as emperor with the surname Thessalicus.

Macrianus, moreover, now that the East was
brought mto subjection, left there one of his sons,
and came first of all into Asia, and from there set out
for Illyricum. Here, having with him one of his sons
and a force of thirty thousand soldiers, he engaged
in battle with Domitianus! a general of Aureolus the
emperor, who had assumed the imperial power in
opposition to Gallienus? He was, however, defeated,
together with his son, Macnanus by name, and his
whole army surrender ed to the Emperor Aureolus.

III. Meanwhile, when the commonwealth had been
thrown into confusion throughout the entire world,
Odaenathus,? learmng that "Macrianus and his son
had been slam, that "Aureolus was rulmg, and that
Gallienus was admimstering the state with still greater
slackness, hastened forward to seize the other son of
Macrianus, together with his army, should Fortune so
permit. But those who were with Macrianus’ son—
whose name was Quietus—taling sides with Odae-
nathus, by the instigation of Ballista, Macrianus' prefect,
killed the young man, and, casting his body over the
wall, they all in large numbers surrendered to Odae-
nathus, Arid so Odaenathus was made emperor over
almost the whole East, while Aureolus held Illyricum
and Gallienus Rome. This same Ballista murdered,
in addition to Quietus and the guardian of his treasures,
many 8f the people of Emesa, to whom Macrianus’
sokhers had fled, with the result that this city was
nearly destroyed. Odaenathus, "meanwhile, as if


t The city of Homs in central Syria.


THE TWO GALLIENI


5 Odaenathus inter haec, quasi Galliem partes ageret,
cuneta eidem nuntiari ex veritate faciebat.

7recepto, libidini et voluptat se dedidit, ludos cir-
censes ludosque scaenicos, ludos gymnicos, ludiariam
etiam venationem et ludos gladiatorios dedit popu-
lumque quasi victorialibus diebus ad festivitatem ac

IV. Per idem tempus Aemilianus apud Aegyptum
sumpsit imperium occupatisque horreis multa oppida
21nalo famis pressit. sed hune dux Galheni Theodotus
conflictu habito cepit. atque imperatoris ornamentis
exutum Gallieno vivum transmisit. Aegyptus post haec
Theodoto data est ; Aemilianus in carcere strangulatus ;
(m Thebaitanos ralites quoque saevitum est interfectis
compluribus.?

1 que ins, by Klotz: cum . . . potuisset Peter, Hohl.


? Italics are supplements of Obrecht to fill lacunae in P (ef.
Tyr, Trig., xxii. 8). E


THE TWO GALLIENI III. 5—IV. 3


taking the side of Gallienus, caused all that had
happened to be announced to him truthfully.

Gallienus, on the other hand, when he learned that
Macrianus and his sons were slain, as though he were
secure in his power and his father were now set free,
surrendered himself to lust and pleasure. He gave
spectacles in the circus, spectacles in the theatre,
gymnastic spectacles, hunting spectacles, and gladia-
torial spectacles also, and he invited all the populace
to merriment and applause, as though it were a day
of victory. And whereas most men mourned at his
father’s captivity, he, under the pretext of doing him
honour—on the ground that his father had been
caught through his zeal for valour—made merry be-
yond measure. It was generally supposed, moreover,
that he could not endure his father’s censure and that
it was his desire to feel no longer his father’s authority
bearing heavily upon his neck.

IV. During this same time Aemilianus? in Egypt
took the imperial power, and seizing the grananes he
overcame many towns by the pressure of hunger.
However, Theodotus, Gallienus’ general, after fight-
ing a battle captured him, and stripping him of his
emperors trappings sent him alive to Gallienus.
After this Egypt was assigned to Theodotus. As for
Aemilianus, he was strangled in prison, while the
soldiers of Thebes were’ cruelly punished and many
were put to death.

Now while Gallienus, continuing in luxury and
debauchery, gave himself up to amusements and revel-
ling and administered the commopwealth like a boy
who plays at holding power, the Gauls, by nature
unable to endure princes who are frivolous and given
over to luxury and have fallen below the standard of


THE TWO GALLIENI


ferre non posse, Postumum ad imperium vocarunt,
exercitibus quoque ? consentientibus, quod occupatum
4imperatorem libidimbus querebantur. contra hune
ipse Gallienus exercitum duoi ; cumque urbem, 1n qut
erat Postumus, obsidere coepisset, acriter eam defen-
dentibus? Gallis, Gallienus muros circumiens sagitta
5ictus est, nam per annos septem Postumus imperavit
et Gallias ab omnibus eircumfluentibus barbaris validis-
gsime vindicavit. his coactus mahs Gallienus pacem
eum Aureolo facit oppugnandi Postami studio longo-
que bello tracto per diversas obsidiones ac proelia rem
7 modo feheiter modo infeliciter gerit, accesserat prae-
terea his malis? quod Seythae Bithyniam invaserant
gcivitatesque deleverant. denique Astacum,* quae
Nicomedia postea dicta est, incensam graviter vasta-
gverunt. denique quas comuratione totus mundi
concussis orbis partibus etiam in Sicilia quasi quoddam
servile bellum exstitit latronibus evagantibus, qui vix
V, oppressi sunt, et'haec omnia Gallieni contemptu
fiebant. neque enim quicquam est ad audaciam malis,
ad spem bonorum bonis promptius, quam cum vel
malus timetur vel? dissolutus contemnitur imperator,


. iquogue Peter; qui P, ? So Salm. to fill lacunao in P.
Imats 2, Peter; magis P. 4 Astacum Egnatius, Peter t;
contum P, uel dX’, Peter; om. in P,


t On the revolt of Postumus, see Tyr. Trig, 11. and notes

? But see note to Tyr. Trig, ii. 4.

? But see note to Tyr. Trig., xi. 1. In fact, Aureolus was
entrusted, during Galhenus’ absence, with the conduct of the
war against Postumus, but he did not push the campajen
very vigorously; see Zfonaras, xii. 24.

* Gallienus seems to have been called away in the course of
the war, but he returned to ıt later on; sea o. vii. 1. The
cause of the interruption may have been the raid of the


THE TWO GALLIXENI IV, 4—V. 1


Roman valour, called Postumus to the imperial power ; !
and the armies, too, joined with them, for they com-
plained of an emperor who was busied with his lusts.
Thereupon Gallienus himself led his army against
him, and when he began to besiege the city mn
wlnuch Postumus was, the Gauls defended it bravely,
and Gallienus, as he went around the walls, was
struck by an arrow, So for seven years? Postumus
held his power and with the greatest vigour protected
the regions of Gaul from all the barbanans surging
about Forced by this evil phght, Galhenus made
peace with Aureolus? in his desire to fight with
Postumus, and, as the war dragged on to great
length amid various sieges and battles, he conducted
the campaign, now with good success and again with
11. These evils had been further increased By the
fact that the Scythians? had invaded Bithynia and
destroyed its cities. Finally they set fire to Astacus,
later called Nicomedia, and plundered it cruelly.
Last of all, when all parts of the Empire were thrown
into commotion, as though by a conspiracy of the
whole world, there arose in Sicily also a sort of slave-
revolt, for bandits roved about and weie put down
only with great difficulty. V. All these things were
done out of contempt for Gallienus, for there is noth-
ing so quick" to mspire evil men to daring and good
men to the hope of good things as an evil emperor
who 1s feared or a depraved one “who is despised.


Alamant, who about this time invaded northern Italy as far
ag Ravenna, but were defeated by Gallionus at Milan; see
Zonaras, xi, 24.

*Phroughout these biograpmes the ‘as Scythian is often
used for Goth, as had been done regularly by Doxippus. This
invasion of Bithynia soonis to have taken place m 258,


THE TWO GALLIENI

6 Saeviente fortuna, cum hine terrae motus, inde
hiatus soli, ex diversis partibus pestilentia orbem
Romanam vastaret, capto Valeriano, Galhs parte
maxima obsessis, cum bellum Odaenathus inferret,
cum Aureolus perurgueret [lyricum,*? cum Aemilianus
Aegyptum occupasset, Gothorum pars* . . ., quod
nomen, ut% dictum est superius, Gothis inditum est,
occupatis Thraciis, Macedoniam vastaverunt, Thessa-
lonicam obsederunt, neque usquam quies mediocriter

1 Fausiano from C.J.L. xiv, 58387 ; Fausiwano P.
2 dies om. in P. 3 Tilyricum ins. by Balm, , lacuna in P.


*8o Hohl; gothorilodius P corr, 3; Gothom Clodius Pever.
5So Jordan; a quo dictum P,


1Salutaris is meluded by Cicero (de F'imibus, iii. 66) among
the cognomina of Jupiter, and dedicatory inscriptions to Iovi
Optimo Maximo Salutan have been found at Rome. "

?l$ had previously raged in the Hast and wrought great
havoc among the troops of Valerian; seo Zosimus, i. 36. Por
a vivid description of its ravages in Egypt, seo Husobius, Mist.
Heeles,, vii. 92.

*The Goths invaded Macedonia and besieged Thessalonica


THE TWO GALLIENI V. 2-6


In the consulship of Gallienus and Fausianus, 26
amid so many calamitie? of war, there was also a ter-
rible earthquake and a darkness for many days There
was heard, besides, the sound of thunder, not like
Jupiter thundering, but as though the earth were
roaring. And by the earthquake many structures
were swallowed up together with their inhabitants,
and many men died of fright. This disaster, indeed,
was worst in the cities of Asia; but Rome, too, was
shaken and Libya also was shaken. In many places
the earth yawned open, and salt water appeared in the
fissures, Many cities were even overwhelmed by the
sea, "Therefore the favour of the gods was sought by
consulting the Sibylline Books, and, according to their
command, sacrifices were made to Jupiter Salutaris.!
For so great a pestilence,? too, had arisen in both
Rome and the cities of Achaea that m one single day
five thousand men died of the same disease.

While Fortune thus raged, and while here earth-
quakes, there clefts in the ground, and in divers
places pestilence, devastated the Roman world, while
Valerian was held in captivity and the provinces of
Gaul were, for the most part, beset, while Odaenathus
was threatening war, Aureolus pressing hard on My-
ricum, and Aemilianus in possession of Egypt, a por-
tion of the Goths . . . which name, as has previously
been related, was given to the Gotbs, having seized
Thrace and plundered Macedonia, laid siege to Thes-
salonica,? and nowhere was hope of peace held out,


1n 259 or 254 (Zosimus, i. 29, 2), but, if the chronological order
is roliable, this would seem to be a lat& incursion, 1n 262, 1n
the course of which they were driven back by Marcianus; seo
c, vi. 1— unless, as is not improbable, this notice belongs io
the invasion of 267, deseribod in c. mii. 6 f.


THE TWO GALLIENI


l saltem Ellis, Hohl; salutem P, E, Peter?. , 780 Salm.,
Peteri, Hohl, osteniaee P, X. ? So Petschenig, Hohl;
ope fame satis nota populos P. 5 amitieret 255 mitteret P,


v


1 See note to c. v. 6; on Marcianus’ later victory seo c. xiii,
10 and Zosimus, 1. 40, 1. T

?4.6., the famous temple of Artemis; this invasion (men-
tioned also in o. vii, $ was in 268.

?'The Atrebates lived in northern Gaul, around the modern
Arras, later famous for its tapestry, but the centre of the m-
dustry 1n antiquity seems to have boen Turnacum (Tournai).


THE TWO GALLIENI V. T—VI. 9


even to a slight degree. All these things, as J have
frequently said, were dohe out of contempt for Gal-
henus, a man given over to luxury and ever ready,
did he feel free from danger, for any disgraceful deed.

VI. Against these same Goths a battle was fought
in Achaea under the leadership of Marcianus,! and
being defeated they withdrew from there through the
country of the Achaeans. The Scythians—they are
a portion of the Goths—devastated Asia and even
plundered and burned the Temple of the Moon at
Ephesus,? the fame of which building is known
through all nations. I am ashamed to relate what
Gallienus used often to say at this time, when such
things were happening, as though jesting amid the
ills of mankind. For when he was told of the revolt
of Egypt, he is said to have exclaimed * What" We
cannot do without Egyptian linen!" and when in-
fonned that Asia had been devastated both by the
violence of nature and by the inroads of the Scythians,
he said, “ What! We cannot do without saltpetre!”
and when Gaul was lost, he is reported to have
laughed and remarked, “Can the commonwealth be
safe without Atrebatic® cloaks?” Thus, m short,
with regard to all parts of the world, as he lost them,
he would jest, as though seeming to have suffered the
loss of somé article of trifling service. And finally,
that no disaster might be lacking to his times, the
city of Byzantium, famed for its naval wars and the
key to the Pontus, was destroyed by the soldiers of
Gallientis himself so completely, that not a single soul
survived.* In fact, no ancient fgmily can now be


Tho causo of this onthroak is unknown; on the punish-
mont inflicted, sce c. vit, 2.


Oo


THE TWO GALLIENI


apud Byzantios invenitur, nisi $1 aliquis peregrinatione
vel militia occupatus evasit,qui antiquitatem generis
nobilitatemque repraesentet.

9dere quod promiserat. per eadem tempora etiam
Seythae in Asia Romanorum ducum virtute ac ductu
vastati ad propria recesserunt.

4  Interfectis sane Militibus apud Byzantium Gallienus,
quasi magnum aliquid gessisset, Romam cursu rapido
convolavit convocatisque patribus decennia celebravit
novo genere ludorum, nova specie pomparum, ex-

LÀ


*So Gruter and Peter; imewet cum P, ? quiriiyone Cas. 3
A a A. 3 albato milite Baehrens, Peter”; lbeetos
milites P.


1 See c, iv. 6 and note.

? See Claud., xiii, Z and note. S See Tyr. Trig., vi.

+The Decennalia were celebrated in the autumn of 262, at
the beginning of the tenth year after Gallienus’ joint accession
with Valerian; the festival was commemorated by an issue of


THE TWO GALLIRENI VII. 1—VIIL 1


found among the Byzantines, unless some member,
engaged in travel or wawfare, escaped to perpetuate
the antiquity and noble descent of his stock.

VIL Galienus, then, entered into war agamst
Postumus,! having with him Aureolus and the general
Claudius, afterwards emperor and the head of the
family of Constantius our Caesar. And Postumus, too,
with many auxiliary troops of Celts and Franks ad-
vanced to the fight, in company with Victorinus? with
whom he had shared the imperial power. After
several battles had been fought with varying outcome,
the side of Gallienus was finally victorious. In fact,
Gallienus had the boldness of suddenly aroused
valour, for at times he was violently stirred by af-
fronts. Then finally he went forth to avenge the
wrongs of ihe Byzantines. And whereas he had no
expectation of being received within the walls, he
was admitted next day, and then, after placing a ring
of armed men around the disarmed’ soldiers, contrary
to the agreement he had made he caused them all to
be slain. Durmg this time, too, the Seythians in
Asia were routed by the courage and skill of the
Roman generals and retired to their own abode.

Now Gallienus, after the slaughter of the soldiers
at Byzantium, as though he had performed some
mighty feat, “hastened to Rome in a rapid march,
convened the senators, and celebrated a decennial
festival with new kinds of spectacles, new varieties of
parades, and the most elaborate sort of amusements.*
VIII. First of all, he repaired to the Capitol with
the senators and the equestrian order dressed in their
togas and with the soldiers dressed all in white, and


coins with the legends Votis Decennahbus and Fotis X et XX;
see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 188, nos, 92-96.


Oi


THE TWO GALLIENI


muhenbus cum cereis facibus et lampadis praece-
2dentibus Capitolium petiit. praecesserunt ebam
altrinsecus centeni albi boves cornuis auro iugatis et
3 dorsuahibus sericis discoloribus praefulgentes ; agnae
candentes ab utraque parte ducentae praecesserunt et
decem elephanti, qui tune erant Romae, mille ducenti
gladiatores pompabihter ornati cum auratis vestibus
matronarum, mansuetae ferae divers: generis ducentae
ornatu quam maximo affectae, carpenta eun miuus et
omni genere histnonum, pugiles flacculis non veritate
pugilantes. Cyclopea etiam luserunt omnes apinarn,
ita ut miranda quaedam et stupenda monstrarent.
4 omnes viae ludis strepituque et plausibus personabant
Sipse medius cum picta toga ei tuniea palmata inter
patres, ut diximus, omnibus sacerdotibus praetextatis
6 Capitolium petut, hastae auratae altrmsecus qum-
genae, vexilla centena praeter ea quae collegiorum
erant, dracones et signa templorum omniumque
7legionum ibant. ibant praeterea gentes smmulatae, ut


! flaceuls occurs only here, but 1$ may perhaps bo the same
as the iudvres of uaAakóTepo: in use at Elis in Pausanias’
time (see Paus, vi. 28, 8), or the oldest type of the boxing-
straps, the untanned peAtya:, contrasted in Paus., vurn 40, 8
with the harder íuàs ótós, a development of which was the
nietal-studded cestus.

*Apina, supposed to have been ihe name of a town in
Apulia (Phny, Nat. Hst., 11. 104), scems to have been used, 1n
the plural, like tricae, to denote trifies; it is applied thus to
literary work of a light nature (nugae) by Martial, i. 113, 2;
xiv. 1, 7. Hence the adjective may be supposed to mean
t buffoons.” x "

*The Cyclops Pélyphemus seems in the Hellenistic poriod
to have become a figure in low farcical comody, perhaps
somewhat as represented in the burlesque in Aristoplianos,
Plutus, 290 f, both as the lover of Galatea, and as a comic


THE TWO GALLIENI VIII 2-7


with all the populace going ahead, while the slaves of
almost all and the women preceded them, bearmg
waxen flambeaux and torches. There preceded them,
too, on each side one hundred white oxen, having
thew horns bound with golden cords and resplendent
in many-coloured silken covers; also two hundred
lambs of glistening white went ahead on each side,
besides ten elephants, which were then in Rome, and
twelve hundred gladiators decked with all pomp, and
matrons in golden cloaks, and two hundred tamed
beasts of divers kinds, tricked out with the greatest
splendour, and waggons bearing pantomumists and
actors of every sort, and boxers who fought, not in
genuine combat, but with the softer straps. All the
buffoons? also acted a Cyclops-performance,? giving
exhibitions that were marvellous and astonishing. So
all the streets resounded with merry-making and
shouts and applause, and in the nudst the Emperor
himself, wearing the triumphal foga and the tunic
embroidered with palms, and accompanied, as I have
said, by the senators and with all the priests dressed
in bordered togas, proceeded to the Capitol, On
each side of him were borne five hundred gilded
spears ånd one hundred banners, besides those which
belonged to the corporations, and the flags of auxili-
aries and tlie statues from the sanctuanes * and the
standards of all the legions. There marched, further-
more, men dressed to represent foreign nations, as


drunkard. In this latter capacity especially he appeared im
the Roman mimes (see Horace, Sat., i. 5, 04, and Epist., ii. 9.
1253), and the Cyclopea mentioned here and in Car., xix 8,
probably consisted of comic dancing of, possibly, comic feats
of strength.

*1,0,, those in tho camps of the legions, as also in Herodian,
iv. 4, 8,


THE TWO GALLIENI


1decursis Hyssenhardt, Petschenig, Hohl; depuísig P,


Peter. 2 rem P. Srimantes Ellis, Walter, Damsié ;
mirantes P, Peter. —. agerent Jordan; ageret P, Peter, *


Abram bata ien Ta SO a RR a


18ee Tur, Trig., x. 2 See Pyr, Trig., xxii.
34,6.. Odaenathus; see c, x. 1.3,


THE TWO GALLIENI IX. 1-8


Goths and Sarmatians, Franks and Persians, and no
fewer than two hundred paraded in a single group.

IX. By this procession the foolish man thought to
delude the people of Rome; nevertheless—for such
is the Romans’ love of a jest—one man kept support-
ing Postumus, another Regalianus, another Aureolus
or Aemilianus, and another Saturnmus ?—for he, too,
was now said to be rulmg. Amd all this there was
loud lamentation for the father whom the son had left
unavenged and for whom foreigners had tried, in one
way or another, to exact a vengeance.? Gallienus,
however, was moved to no such deed, for his heart was
dulled by pleasure, but he merely kept asking of those
about hum, * Have we anything planned for luncheon ?
Haveany amusements been arranged? What manner
of play will there be to-morrow and what manner of
circus-games ?" So, having finished the procession, he
offered hecatombs and returned to the royal residence,
and then, the banquets and feastings having come to
an end, he appointed further days for the public amuse-
ments. One well-known mstance of jesting, however,
must not be omitted. Asa band of Persians, supposed
to be captives, was being led along in the procession
(such an absurdity !), certain wits mingled with them
and most carefully scrutinized all, examining with
open-mouthed astonishment the features of every one ;
and when asked what they meant by that sagacious
investigation, they replied, ** We are searching for the
Emperors father." When this incident was reported
to Gallienus, unmoved by shame or grief or filial affec-
tiom, he ordered the wits to be burned alive-—a
measure which angered the people more than anyone
would suppose, but so grieved the soldiers that not
much later they requited the deed.


THE TWO GALLIENI


lat Oas., Peter; ac P, Hohl.


1See Tyr. Trig., xv. 1 and note.

? As a matter of fact, he was acting as the géneral of
Gallienus and under his command.

3 Coins of 264, cel€orating this triumph, show Gallienus in
a four-horse chariot; see Matt.-Syd. v. pp. 166-167, nos. 419-413,
The cognomina Persicus Maximus and Parthicus Maximus
are found in papyri: and inscriptions,


THE TWO GALLIENI X. 1-8


X. In the consulship of Gallienus and Saturninus 264
Odaenathus, king of thé Palmyrenes, held the rule
over the entire East i —chiefly for the reason that by
his brave deeds he had shown himself worthy of the
imsignia of such great majesty, whereas Gallienus was
doing nothing at all or else only what was extravagant,
or foolish and deserving of ridicule. Now at once he
proclaimed a war on the Persians to exact for Valerian
the vengeance neglected by Valerian’s son. He
immediately occupied Nisibis and Carrhae, the people
of which surrendered, revihng Gallienus. Neverthe-
less, Odaenathus showed no lack of respect toward
Gallienus, for he sent him the satraps he captured—
though, as it séemed, merely for the purpose of in-
sulting him and displaying his own prowess.? After
these had been brought to Rome, Gallienus held a
triumph because of Odaenathus' victory ;? but he
still made no mention of his father and did not even
place him among the gods, when he heard he was
dead, until compelled to do so*— although in fact
Valerian was still alive, for the news of his death was
untrue. Odaenathus, besides, besieged an army of
Parthians at Ctesiphon and devastated all the country
round about, killing men without number, But when
all the satraps from all the outlying regions flocked
together to Ctesiphon for the purpose of common
defence, there were long-lasting battles with varying
results, but more long-lasting still was the success
of the Romans. Moreover, since Odaenathus’ sole
purposé was to set Valerian free, he daily pressed
onward, but this best of commanders, now on a
foreign soul, suffered greatly because of the difficult
round,


4'There is no other evidence of Valorian's consecration.
3T


THE TWO GALLIENI


XI. Dum haee apud Persas geruntur, Scythae in
Cappadociam pervaserunt. illic captis civitatibus bello
etiam vario dim acto se! ad Bithyniam contulerunt.

5 magnorum arbitrio cesserint virorum. Areopagitarum
praeterea cupiebat ingeri numero contempta prope re


lacio se Salm.; actos P. 2docta P, 22; duct: Baehrens,
Peter, Hohl.


1 This mvasion of" Cappadocia is mentioned in Zosimus, i.
T A as in the year 252 or 253, whereas 14 actually took placo
m 264.


THE TWO GALLIENI XI. 1-7


XI. While these events were happening among the
Persians, the Scythians made their way into Cap-
padocia! After capturing many cities there and
waging war for a long time with varying success,
they betook themselves to Bithyma. Wherefore the
soldiers again considered the choosing of a new
emperor; but since he could not placate them or win
thew support, Gallienus, after his usual fashion, put
all of them to death.

Just, however, when the soldiers were looking for
a worthy prince, Gallienus was holding the office of
archon—chict magistrate, that is—at Athens, showing
that same vanity which also made him desire to be
enrolled among its citizens and even take part in all
its sacred rites—which not even Hadrian had done at
the height of his prosperity or Antonmus dutng a
long-established peace, and these emperors, too,
were schooled by so much study of Greek letters
that in the judgement of gret men they were
scarcely inferior to the most learned scholars. He
desired, furthermore, to be included among the
members of the Areopagus, almost as though he
despised pubhe affairs, For indeed ıt cannot be
demed that Gallienus won fame in oratory, poetry,
and all the arts. Hias, too, 1s the epithalamium which
had the chief place among a hundred poets. For,
when he was joming in marriage the children of his
brothers, and all the poets, both Greek and Latin, had
recited their epithalamia, and that for very many
days, Gallienus, holding the hands of the bridal pair,


? Hadrian had been archon at A®hens, but before his
accession to power (see Hadr., xix. 1), and both he and Marcus
Aurelius were initiated into the Hicusinian Mysteres (Hadr.
xii, 1; Mare., xxvii. 1).


aQ


THE TWO GALLIENI


manus sponsorum teneret, ut quidam dicunt, saepius t
ita. dixisse fertur:

XII. Laudatur sane eius optimum factum. nam
consulatu 4 Valeriani fratris sur et Lucilli propinqui,
ubi comperit ab Odaenatho Persas vastatos, redactam
Nisibin et Carrhas in potestatem Romanam, omnem
Mesopotamiam nostram, denique Ctesrphontem esse
perveritum, fugisse regem, captos satrapas, plurimos
Persarum occisos, Odaenathum participato imperio
Augustum vocavit eiusque monetam, qua Persas
captos traheret, cut iussit. quod et senatus et urbs
et omnis aetas gratanter accepit.

2 Fut praeterea idem ingemosissimus, cuius osten-


'sdépwus Cas., Hohl; seepóus P, oxwrrinds Oberdick,


Peter?, ? esi P. ? 40, P. 4 consulatu Czwalima,
Peter?; consulta P, X. Sostendend: acuminis Madvig,
Hohl; ostendentia cum in has P. ^ wector D.


E


1? Found also in the lost ** Codex Bellovacensis" of Binetus
(Riese, Anth. Lat., 1.2, p. 176, no. 711 = Baehrous, P. D. Mea
iv. pp. 108 104) with the addition of two moro lines: “ Ludito:
sed vigiles nolite extinguere lyohnos. | Omnia nocte vident
nil cras meminere lucernae." '


THE TWO GALLIENI XI. $—XII 3


so it is reported, is said to have recited repeatedly
the following verses :


* Come now, my children, grow heated together in
deep-seated passion,

Never, indeed, may the doves outdo your billings and
cooings,

Never the ivy your arms, or the clinging of sea-shells
your kisses." !


It would be too long a task to collect all his verses
and speeches, which made him illustrious among both
the poets and the rhetoricians of his own time. But
it 1s one thing that is desired in an emperor, and
another that is demanded of an orator or a poet.

XII. One excellent deed of his, to be sure, is
mentioned with praise For m the consulship of his 265
brother Valerian and his kinsman Lucillus, when he
learned that Odaenathus had rawaged the Persians,
brought Nisibis and Carrbae under the sway of Rome,
made all of Mesopotamia ours, and finally arrived at
Ctesiphon, put the kmg to flight, captured the satraps
and killed large numbers of Persians, he gave him
a share in the imperial power, conferred on him the
name Augustus,” and ordered coins to be struck in his
honour, which showed him haling the Persians into
captivity. This measure the senate, the city, and
men of every age received with approval.

Gallienus, furthermore, was exceedingly clever, and
I wish £o relate a few actions of his in order to show
his wit. Once, when a huge bull was led into the
arena, and a huntsman came forte to fight him but
was unable to slay the bull though it was brought out


2Thiy ig incorrect; soo note to Tyr. Trig., xv. 1.


THE TWO GALLIENI


4 potuisset occidere, coronam venatori misit, mussanti-
busque cunctis, quid rei esset quod. homo ineptissimus
eoronaretur, ille per curionem diei iussit. “Taurum

4 fortius atque sollertius, Gallienus sane, ubi ei nun-
tiatum Odaenathum interemptum, bellum Persis ad
seram nimis vindictam patris paravit collectisque per


lueras pro urtrers P, 2. ?ue ins. by Bitschofsky; om.
m P; naua .... sni del. by Peter. ? etn D. igue
quaeque Peter?; quoque P ; quo quae Hohl, "


—ÓÓ—— gH TI eerte tomos sip


1 Mod, Benderegh on the northern coast of Bithynia; this
seems to have been in 9266.
? See Tyr. Trig., xv. 55 xvii. ? Boe Tyr, Trig xvi.


THE TWO GALLIENI XII. 4—XIIE 4


ten times, he sent the huntsman a garland, and when
all the erowd wondered ‘what it might mean that so
foolish a fellow should be erowned with a garland, he
bade a herald announce: “It is a difficult thing to
miss à bull so many times.” On another occasion,
when a certain man sold his wife glass jewels instead
of real, and she, discovering the fraud, wished the
man to be punished, he ordered the seller to be haled
off, as though to a lon, and then had them let out
from the cage a capon, and when all were amazed at
so absurd a proceeding, he bade the herald proclaim :
“He practised deceit and then had ıt practised on
hun." Then he let the dealer go home.

But while Odaenathus was busied with the war
against the Persians and Gallienus was devoting
himself to most foolish pursuits, as was his custom,
the Scythians built ships and advanced upon Hera-
clea,! and thence they returned with booty to their
native land, although many were 18st by slupwreck or
defeated in a naval engagement.

XIII. About this same time Odaenathus was
treacherously slam by his cousm,? and with him his
son Hexrodes,? whom also he had hailed as emperor.
Then Zenobia, his wife, since the sons who remained,
Herennianus and Timolaus,* were still very young,
assumed the power herself and ruled for along time,
not in feminine fashion or with the ways ot a woman,
but surpassing in courage and skill not merely Gallienus,
than whom any girl could have ruled more success-
fully, Vut also many an emperor. As for Gallienus,
indeed, when he learned that, Odaenathus was

+
murdered, he made ready for war with the Persians—


1 Seo Tyr. Trig., xxvii-xxviii, 5 Soo Tyr. Thag., XXX.


THE TWO GALLIENI


Heraclianum ducem militibus sollertis principis rem


1 If this is true, it means a breaking of the friendly relations
which had hitherto existed between Rome and Palmyra—
perhaps an attempt to put an end to the unusual powers hold
by Zenobia—but we have no other evidence of 1t.  Odaoe-
nathus was killed sometime ın 266-67, and in the summer of
268 Herachanus was with Galienus at Milan; seo o. xiv. 1.

2 This was the great invasion of the Eruh, a Germanic
tribe, ım 267. Setting forth with 500 ships from the Sea of
Azov, they sailed into the mouth of the Danube. Calhenus,
engaged in the war against Postumus, deputed the various
generals here mentidned to deal with them, but despite thoir
efforts the invaders overran Greece, evon as far as the
Peloponnese. They were defeated by Dexippus in an attempt
to take Athens on their return northward, and again by


THE TWO GALLIENI XIII. 5-9


an over-tardy vengeance for his father—and, gather-
ing an army with the help of the general Heraclianus,
he played the part of a skilful pmmee. This Hera-
chanus, however, on setting out agamst the Persians,
was defeated by the Palmyrenes and lost all the
troops he had gathered, for Zenobia was ruling
Palmyra and most of the East with the vigour of
a man.

Meanwhile the Scythians sailed across the Black
Sea and, entering the Danube, did much damage on
Roman soi? Lear ning of this, Gallienus deputed
Cleodamus and Athenaeus the Byzantines to repair
and fortify the cities, and a battle was fought near
the Black Sea, in which the barbarians were conquered
by the Byzantine leaders. The Goths were algo de-
feated in a naval batile by the general Venerianus,
though Venerianus himself died a soldier's death.
Then the Goths ravaged Cyzicus and Asia and then
all of Achaea, but were vanquished by the Athenians
under the command of Dexippus, an historian of
these times.’ Driven thence, they roved through
Epirus, Macedonia and Boeotia. Gallienus, mean-
while, roused at last by the public ills, met the Goths
as they roved about in Illyrieum, and, as it chanced,
killed a great number. Learning of this, the
Seythians, "after making a barricade of wagons, at-
tempted to escape by way of Mount Gessaces.4 Then
Marcianus made war on all the Seythians with varying


Gallienus himself (who had left the war against Postumus
and, hurried to mech tham) in a batulo onthe river Nesios, the
boundary between Macedoma and Thrace. For a fuller
account see Syneellus, p, 717.

" See noto to Alem, xbx. 3.

4Unknown; perhaps Mt, Rhodope in Thrace.


THE TWO GALLIENI


! Gallienus, summoned home by the revolt of Aureolus (see
note to c. xiv. 1), left Marcianus (cf. c. v1. 1) and Claudius (cf.
roe vi. 1) to complete the victory and hurried to northern

aly.

? According to the more complete accounts in Zosimus, 1. 40
and Zonaras, xii. 25, Gallienus defeated Auroolus fat Pons
Aureolus = Pontirolo, Aur. Victor, Caes., 38, 18) and shut him
upin Milan. Thereg conspiracy was mado against Gallianus,
which included Claudius and Aurelian as well as Heraclianus,
the prefect of the guard. Later, sn attempt was made to
show that Claudius had nothing to do with il, as here and in
Claud., i. 8, and a scene was eyen invonted in which Clallionus


THE TWO GALLIENI XIII. 10—XIV. 7


SUCCESS eor os de x which measures roused all the
Seythians to rebellion.

XIV. Such, in fact, was the devotion of the general
Heraclianus to the commonwealth, But bemg un-
able to endure further all the iniquities of Gallienus,
Marcianus and Heraclianus formed a plan that one of
them should take the imperial power?....... And
Claudius, ın fact, was chosen, the best man of all, as we
shall narrate in the proper place. He had had no part
in their plan, but was held by all m such respect that
he seemed worthy of the mmperial power, and justly
so, as was proved by later events. For he is that
Claudius from whom Constantius, our most watchful
Caesar, derives liis descent.? These men had also as
their comrade in seeking the power a certain Cergnius,
or rather Cecropius, commander of the Dalmatians,
who aided them with the greatest shrewdness and
wisdom, But being unable to seize the power while
Galhenus was still alive, they decided to proceed
agamst him by a plot of the following nature, purpos-
ing, now that the state was exhausted by disasters, to
remove this most evil blot from the governance of the
human race and to save the commonwealth, now given
over to the theatre and circus, from gomg to de-
struction through the allurements of pleasure. Now
the nature of their plot was as follows: Gallienus was
at enmity with Aureolus, who had seized upon the
position of prince, and was daily expecting the coming
of this usurping ruler—a serious and, indeed, an un-
endurable thing. Being aware ofthis, Marcianus and
on hfs deathbed was represented as bestowing the imperial
insignia on Claudius; see Aur. Victor, Caes., 88, 28; Apet.,
34, 2. The evidence of papyri places the murder in July or
August, 265.

ë See Claud., xiii. 2 and note,


THE TWO GALLIENI

3publieos rettulerunt. sic mulitibus sedatis Claudius,


l felo Peter?; om. in P.


!He was consul (for the second timo) iu 265; cf. c. xn, 1.
He is mentioned in hterature only here and in Fal, viii,
where also he 18 said to have received the title of Augustus.
However, no coins oan be defintely provel to he his {sec
Matt.-Syd. v. p. 28), and in the lack of any evidoned it may he
seriously doubted that he was cither Augustus or Cacsar,, ‘The
“inscription” citeh in Fal, vii, 8 18 of equally httle value
with that quoted in e. xix. 4,

* This, if true, had no legal significanee, for a damnato
could be pronounced only by the senate, According ta Aur,


THE TWO GALLIENI XIV. 8.—XV. 8


Cecropius suddenly caused word to be sent to Gallienus
that Aureolus was now Approachmg. He, therefore,
mustered his soldiers and went forth as though to
certam battle, and so was slam by the murderers sent
for the purpose. It is reported, indeed, that Gallienus
was pierced by the spear of Cecropius, the Dalmatian
commander, some say near Milan, where also his
brother Valerian was at once put to death. This man,
many say, had the title of Augustus, and many, that of
Caesar, and many, again, neither one—which, indeed,
is not probable, for we have found written in the
official lists, after Valerian had been taken prisoner,
“Durmg the consulship of Valerian the Emperor.”
So who else, pray, could this Valerian have been but
the brother of Galhenus?! There ıs general agree-
ment concerning his family, but not concernmg his
rank or, as others have begun to say, concerning his
imperial majesty. x

XV. Now after Gallienus was slain, there was a
great mutiny among the soldiers, for, hoping for booty
and publie plunder, they maintained, in order to
arouse hatred, that they had been robbed of an
emperor who had been useful and indispensable to
them, courageous and competent. Wherefore the
leaders took counsel how to placate Gallienus’ soldiers
by the usual means of winning their favour. So,
through the agency of Marcianus, twenty aurei were
promised to each and accepted (for there was on hand
a ready supply of treasure), and then by verdict of the
soldiers they placed the name of Gallienus in the
public records as a usurper.? he soldiers thus


Victor, Caes, 38, 81-34, the senate and people gave general
vent to ther hostility. Nevertheless, Claudius ordered that
he should bo deified m the usual manner.

AO


THE TWO GALLIENI


vir sanctus ac iure venerabilis et bonis omnibus earus,
amicus patriae, amicus lebibus, acceptus senatui,
populo bene cognitus aecepit imperium.

2 muheres illo melius imperarent. acne eius praetere-
atur miseranda sollertia, veris tempore cubicula de
rosis fecit. de pomis castella composuit. uvas triennio
servavit. hieme summa melones exhibuit, mustum
quemadmodum toto anno haberetur docuit. ficos
vindes et poma ex arboribus recentia semper alienis

8 mensibus praebuit. mantelibus aureis semper stravit,

4gemmata vasa fecit eademque aurea. crinibus suis
auri scobem aspersit. radiatus saepe processit. cum
chlamyde purpurea gemmatisque fibulis et aureis
Romae visus est, ubi semper togati principes vide-
bantur. purpuream tunicam auratamque virilem
eandemque manicatam habuit. gemmato balteo usus
est. corrigías? gemmeas adnexuit, cum campagos

5 reticulos appellaret. convivatus m publico est. con-

6giariis populum molhvit. senatui sportulam sedens


uiginti P, 2, Hohl; triginta Salm., Peter. ? ney om.
n P: 3 cor was Mommsen, Hohl ; catigus P; calsgas 2,
eter,


1The manuscript reading vipini here and also ino, xix. 6
and xxi. 1 seems to show that the author's origmal plan was
to include twenty pretenders, nob thirty, in the work mow
called Tyranni Trigenia ; see note to Tyr. Trig.,i. 1 amd Peter,
Die S. H. A., p. 87 f.

? A crown surrounded by projecting rays, originally regarded
as the emblem of a deified emperor, but apparently worn by


THE TWO GALLIENI XVI. 1-6


quieted, Claudius, a venerated man and justly re-
spected, dear to all good men, a friend to his native
land, a friend to the laws, acceptable to the senate,
and ‘favourably known to the people, received the
imperial power.

XVI. Such was the life of Gallienus, which I have
briefly described in writing, who, born for his belly
and his pleasures, wasted his days and nights in wine
and debauchery and caused the world to be laid waste
by pretenders about twenty in number,! so that even
women ruled better than he. He, forsooth,—in order
that his pitiable skill may not be left unmentioned—
used in the spring-time to make sleeping-placesof roses.
He built castles of apples, preserved grapes for three
years, and served melons in the depth of winter., He
showed how new wine could be had all through the
year. He always served out of season green figs and
apples fresh from the trees He always spread his
tables with golden covers. He made jewelled vessels,
and golden ones too. He sprinkled his hair with
gold-dust. He went out in public adorned with the
radiate crown,? and at Rome—where the emperors
always appeared in the toga—he appeared in a purple
cloak with jewelled and golden clasps. He wore a
man’s tunic of purple and gold and provided with
sleeves. He used a jewelled sword-belt and he
fastened jewels to his boot-laces and then called his
boots *retieulate."3 He used, moreover, to banquet
in public. He won the people’ s favour by largesses,
and he distributed, seated, portions of food to the


the wiles of the third century, for 16 1s regularly shown on their
coins.

34,2, like the network caps worn by women and efleminate
men (of, Heliog., xi. 7).


THE TWO GALLIENI


erogavit. matronas ad consilium ! suum rogavit usdem-
que manum sibi osculantibus quaternos aureos sui
XVII. nomus dedit. ubi de Valeriano patre comperit quod
captus esset, id quod philosophorum optimus de filio
amisso dixisse fertur, “Sciebam me genuisse morta-
lem," ille sic dixit?: * Seiebam patrem meum esse
mortalem."
2 Nec defut Annus Cornicula, qui eum quasi con-
stantem principem falso? sua voce laudaret. peior
Stamen ille qui credidit * saepe ad tibicmem processit,
ad organum se recepit, cum processui et recessu: cani
4ruberet. lavit ad diem septimo aestate vel sexto,
Shieme secundo vel tertio, bibit ım aureis semper
poculis aspernatus? vitrum, ita ut diceret iu] esse
6 compmun:us. semper vina variavit neque unquam
7m uno convivio ex uno vino duo pocula bibit. con-
cubinae in eius triclinus saepe accubuerunt. mensam
secundam scurrarpm et mimorum semper prope habuit.
8 cum iret ad hortos nominis su, omnia Palatina. officia
sequebantur ibant et praefecti et magistri offieiorum
ommum adhibebanturque conviviis et natationibus *
9lavabant simul cum principe. adimittebantur saepe
etiam mulieres, cum ipso pulchrae puellae, cum illis
anus deformes, et iocan se dicebat, cum orbem


l consulatum P. ^ *So Peter, mortalem, mec defuit an ille
se digi P; nec defuit ........mor talem del. by Hohl. — * falsw
E. * peior...... . Credidit om, in E and dol. by Hohl.

5 natus P. Sita ut 2, Hohl; om. in P; cum Bam.,
Peter. 7 nabaiimnabus a, Peter? Hohl; nationibus P.
Dd


£ ^

i This is attributed to Anaxagoras by Cicero, Tusc, Disp.,
ni, 80 and 58, by Valerius Maximus, v. 10, Het, 3, and by
Plutarch, de Cohab. Ira 16 and de Trung. An, 16., and to
Xenophon by Diogenes Laertius, ii. 6,55. Lt was paraphrased


59 e


THE TWO GALLIENI XVII. 1-9


senate. He invited matrons into his council, and to
those who kissed his hand he presented four aurei
bearing his own name. XVII. When he learned that
lus father Valerian was captured, just as that best of
philosophers, ıt 1s said, exclaimed on the loss of his
son, “I knew that I had begotten a mortal! so he
exclaimed, “I knew that my father was mortal.”
There has even been an Annius Cornicula? to raise
his voice in praise of Gallienus as a steadfast prince,
but untruthfully. However, he who believes him is
even more perverse, Gallienus often went forth to
the sound of the pipes and returned to the sound of
the organ, ordering music to be played for his going
forth and his returning. In summer he would bathe
six or seven times in the day, and in the winter twice
or three. He always drank out of golden cups, for
he scorned glass, declaring that there was nothing
more common. His wines he continually changed,
and at a banquet he never drank*two cups of the
same wine His concubines frequently reclined in
his dining-halls, and he always had near at hand
a second table for the jesters and actors. Whenever
he went to the gardens named after him, all the staff
of the Palace followed him. And there went with
him, too, the prefects and the chiefs of all the staffs,
and they were invited to his banquets and bathed in
the pools along with the prince. Women, too, were
often sent in, beautiful girls with the emperor, but
with the others ugly old hags. And he used to say
that he «vas making merry, whereas he had brought


by Efnius in lus Telamon irg. 312 Vahler (quoted by Cicero,
Tuse, Disp., iti, 28), from whom it was taken by Seneca, Cons.
ad Polyb., 11, 2,

2 Otherwise unknown.


THE TWO GALLIENI

2 Statuam sibi maiorem Colosso fieri praecepit Solis
habitu, sed ea imperfecta periit. tam magna deni-
que coeperat fieri, ut duplex ad Colossum videre-

Longum est? eius euneta in litteras mittere, quae
qui volet scire ¢egat Palfurium Suram, qui ephe-
meridas eius vitae composuit. nos ad Saloninum


revcrtamur.
1scapum Scaliger; caput P, EX. 2 allissuma Haupt,
Peter? ; acitussuna Pt, Fest 27; om. m P,


1 But see note to Tyr. Trig., ix. 8.
2 See note to Hadr., xix, 19.


THE TWO GALLIENI XVIIL 1-6


the world on all sides to ruin. XVIII But the

soldiers he treated with excessive cruelty,! killing as

FEN as three or four thousand of them m a single
ay.

He gave orders to make a statue of himself arrayed
as the Sun and greater than the Colossus,? but 1t was
destroyed while still unfinished. It was, in fact,
begun on so large a scale that it seemed to be double
the size of the Colossus, Hus wish was that it should
be placed on the summit of the Esquiline Hill, hold-
ing a spear, up the shaft of which a child could climb
to the top. The plan, however, seemed foolish to
Claudius and after him to Aurelian, especially as he
had ordered a chariot and horses to be made in pro-
portion to the size of the statue and set up on a
very high base. He planned to construct a Flaminian
portico è extending as far as the Mulvian Bridge, and
having columns in rows of four or, as some say, in
rows of five, so that the first 19w should contain
pillars with columns bearing statues in front of them,
while the second and third and the rest should have
columns in lines of four.

It would be too long to set down in writing all that
he did, and if anyone wishes to know these things,
he may read Palfurius Sura,* who composed a journal
of his life. Let us now turn to Saloninus.


34,8., extending along the Via Flaminia northward from
the Porta del Popolo.
4 Otherwise unknown.


THE TWO GALLIENI


SALONINUS GALLIENUS

4quondam in re publica viri. fuit demque hactenus
statua in pede Montis Romulei, hoc est ante Sacram
Viam, inter? Templum Faustinae ae Vestam * ad
Arcum Fabianum, quae haberet inscriptum “ Gallieno
iuniorij “Salonmo” additum. ex quo eis nomen
intellegi poterit.


1 gulem prope Kellerbauer, Peter?; quippe P. ? quod
dignum P, X. 2 inter Mommsen, Peter?; mira DP, 2
sac Vestam Jordan, Peter *; aduentam P, X. 5Aong om. 1n.
P aud 2. 849a P, S, Hohl, irigwita Peter; but seo


e. xvi, 1.


! He was the younger of the two sons of Gallienus, and the
correct form of his name 1s shown by inscriptions and coms
to have been P. Lieimuus Cornelius Salommus Valerianus.
He received the title af Caesar after the death of lus older
brother, Valerian, in 258. Since the Alexandrian coins boar-
ing hls name cease with the year 260-61, ib ig generally
mferred that he died in this year; but he may Fe the son


THE TWO GALLIENI XIX. 1-6


SALONINUS GALLIENUS


XIX. He was the son of Gallienus! and the grand-
son of Valerian, and concerning him there is scarcely
anything worth setting down m writmg, save that he
was nobly born, royally reared, and then killed, not
on his own account but his father’s. With regard to
his name there is great uncertainty, for many have
recorded that it was Gallienus and many Saloninus.
Those who call him Salonimus declare that he was
so named because he was born at Salonae;? and
those who call him Gallienus say that he was named
after his father and Gallienus’ grandfather, who once
was a very great.man in the state. Asa matter of
fact, a statue of him has remamed to the present
time at the foot of the Hill of Romulus,’ in front of
the Sacred Way, that is, between the Temple of
Faustina and the Temple of Vesta near the Fabian
Arch, which bears the inseription. “To Gallienus the
Younger " with the addition of “ Saloninus," and from
this his name can be learned.*

It is well enough known that the rule of Gallienus
exceeded ten years. This statement I have added
for the reason that many have said that he was killed
in the ninth year of his rule. There were, moreover,
other rebels during his reign, as we shall relate in


who, according to Zonaras, xu. 26, was killed by the senate
after the death of Gallienus.

“On the Dalmatian coast. This derivation is nonsense,
for ns vague was taken fiom that of his mother Cornelia
Salonma, as is correctly stated 1n c. xxi. 8.

?'Tleo Palatine Ehil

tSince there is no evidence whatsoever that he bore the
name Gallienus, this. “inserption,” like that in Fal., vin. 8,
may be regarded as ono of the author's fabrications.

5 Seo c, xxi 5 and note.


THE TWO GALLIENI

2emplum Protreptici scripsit, unum tamen ponam,
quod iucunditatem quandam sed vulgarem habuit,
8morém tamen novum fecit. nam cum cingula sua
plerique miltantium, qui ad convivium venerant,
ponerent hora convivii, Salonmus puer sive Gallienus
his auratos costilátosque balteos rapuisse perhibetur,
et, cum esset diffieile in. aula Palatina requirere quod
perisset, ac taciti ex mihtibus? viri detrimenta pertu-
lissent, postea rogati ad convivium cincti adcubuerunt.

5 tore cincti discumberent. negare non possum aliunde


1 dicta sunt aha ins. by Peter; om. in P. *tales Cas.,
Peter; guales P, Hohl. ? baci ex malitibus Salm., Polor! ;
tacts maWabus P, X; tacis wuliibus Haupt, Peter?, Hohl,


1 See note to c. x'vi. 1,

? A lost work, written in 45 p.c.

? Aristotle’s Tporoerrixds, now lost, an exhortation Lo the
study of philosophy.


THE TWO GALLIENI XIX. 7-—XX. 5


the proper place; for it 1s our purpose to include
twenty pretenders! m ene single book, since there
is not much to be told about them, and many tlungs
have already been said m the Life of Gallienus.

It will suffice, meanwhile, to have told in this
book these facts concerning Gallienus; for much
has already been said in the Life of Valerian, and
other things shall be told in the book which is to be
entitled “Concerning the Thirty Pretenders,” and
these it seems useless to repeat here and relate too
often. It must also be added that I have even
omitted some facts on purpose, lest his descendants
should be offended by the publication of many details
XX. For you know yourself what a feud such men
maintain with those who have written certain things
concermng their ancestors, and I thunk that you are
Sinn with what Marcus Tullius said in his
Hortensius? written in imitation of the JProtrepitcus.?
One incident, however, I will incfude, which caused
a certain amount of amusement, albeit of a common-
place kind, and yet brought about a new custom.
For since most mihtary men, on coming to a banquet,
laid aside their sword-belts when the banquet began,
the boy Saloninus (or Gallienus), it is related, once
stole these belts studded with gold and adorned with
rows of jewels, and since it was difficult to search in
the Palace for anything that had disappeared, these
military men bore their losses in silence, but when
afterwards they were bidden to a banquet, they
reclined at table with their sword-belts on. And
when asked why they did not lag aside their belts,
they replied, it is said, “ We are wearing them for
Saloninus.” And this gave rise to the custom that
always thereafter they should dine with the emperor


THE TWO GALLIENI

XXI. Nune transeamus ad viginti! tyrannos, qui
Gallieni temporibus contemptu mali principis ex-
stiterunt, de quibus breviter et pauca dicenda sunt.

4quare ’ Gallienus cum suis semper flavo ermem condit.


l wigv P, Hohl; tragunta Peter; but see c. xvi. 1. * Quá
Pcorr., Z, Hohl; om. in P!; Galhent . . . eustiterunt del. by
Peter. Soccupetur Kellerbauer, Hohl; occuparetur P, X,
Peter. 4 dicat Salm., Jordan; om. in P; lacuna assumed
by Peter and Hohl. 8 Quam 8 Balm., Peteri; quamuis
P, Peter?, Hohl. 6 et doleait ins. by Editor; lacuna in P
assumed by Peter and Hohl. T guare ins. by Editor.


! See note to c. xvi. 1.

? Cornelia Salonina Augusta. Her name and head appear
on many coins. i "

? Pipa, according to Aur. Victor, Caes., 33, 6 and Epris 83, 1.
Her father was a German (Marcomannic) king, with whom
Gallienus made a treaty ceding part of Pannonia —porhaps in
return for aid against Germanic invaders.


THE TWO GALLIENI XXI. 1-5


belted. I cannot, indeed, deny that many beheve
this custom had a different origi ; for, they say, at
the soldiers’ ration (prandsum)—which they called
a * preparration" (parandum) because it prepares them
for fighting—men come m wearing belts, and the
proof of this statement is that with the emperor
men still dine unbelted. These details 1 have given
because they seemed worthy of being related and
known.

XXI, Now let us pass on to the twenty pretenders,!
who arose in the time of Gallienus because of con-
tempt for the evil prince. With regard to them
I need tell but a few things and briefly ; for most of
them are not worthy of havmg even their names put
into a book, although some of them seem to hawe had
no little merit and even to have been of much benefit
to the state,

Various, indeed, are the opinians concerning the
name of Saloninus, but the author who believes he
speaks most truthfully declares that he was named
from his mother Salonina,? whom Gallienus loved to
distraction. He loved also a barbaran maid, Pipara
by name, the daughter of a king. And for this
reason Gallienus, moreover, and those about him
always dyed their hair yellow.

With regard to the number of years through which
the rule of Gallienus and Valerian extended, such
varied statements are made that, whereas all agree
that together they ruled for fifteen years,* that is,


4253-268. Since Valerian ceased to rele not later than 260,
the “almost ten years” is, of course, an error, evidently due
to the celebration of the Decennalia (seo c. vn. 4 £.) in 262,
at the beginning of the tenth year after Gallienus’ joint
accession with his father.


^1


THE TWO GALLIENI


log Peter; bs P.


THE TWO GALLIENI XXI. 6


that Gallienus himself attained to his fifteenth year,
while Valenan was captured in his sixth, some have
set down in writing that Gallienus ruled for nine
years, and others, again, that 1t was almost ten— while,
on the other hand, it is generally known that he
celebrated a decennial festival at Rome, and that
after this festival he defeated the Goths, made peace
with Odaenathus, entered into friendly relations with
Aureolus,! warred against Postumus and against Lol-
hanus,* and did many things that mark a virtuous
life, but more that tend to dishonour. For he used
to frequent public-houses at night, it 1s said, and
spent his hfe with pimps and actors and jesters.


1 See c. ii. 6 and note. *See Tyr. Trig., v.


TYRANNI TRIGINTA
TREBELLII POLLIONIS


1 The collection actually contains 32 names, of which the
last two form a sort of appendix containing two men ad-
mittedly not of the tame of Gallienus. The author's original
plan, according to Gall., xvi. 1; xix, 6; xxi. 1, was to mchide
20, but as Peter has pomied out (Abh. Buchs. Ches., xxvi.
p 190 f), this number was raised to that of the Thirty Tyrants
of Athens by padéing with ten additional names. If we take
from the list the names of the two woincn and the six youths
who never held the imperial power, the list is reduced to 22.
Of these it may be definitely asserted of Cyriados, Odaenathus,
Maeonius and Ballista that they never assumed the purple,


Ah


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


BY
TREBELLIUS POLLIO


I. After having written many books in the style of
neither an historian nor a scholar but only that of a lay-
man, we have now reached the series of years in which
the thirty pretenders ! arose—the years when the Em-
pire was ruled by Gallienus and Valerian, when Valer-
ian was busied with the great demands of the Persian
War and Gallienus, as will be shown in the proper
place, was held in contempt not only by men but by
women as well. But since so obscure were these men,
who flocked in from divers parts of the world to seize
the imperial power, that not much concerning them
can be either related by scholars or demanded of
them, and since all those historians who have written


and the same may be said with almost equal certainty of
Valens, Piso and Aemilianus, Saturninus, Trebellianus and
Celsus may be regarded as inventions of the author. Of the
twelve remaining names, Valens “Superior” was of the time
of Decius and Victorinus and Tetricus of the time of Claudius
and Aurelian. The list, then, of the authentic pretenders
under Gallienus reduces itself to nine, viz., Postumus (258-268),
Laelianus, Marius, Ingenuus (258), Regalianus (258?), Aureolus
(268), and Macrianus and his two sons (260-261).


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


CYRIADES


JI. Hie patrem Cyriadem fugiens, dives et nobilis,
cum luxuna sua et moribus perditis sanctum senem
gravaret, direpta magna parte auri, argenti etiam in-


! ec ins, by Erasmus, om. in P.


l'To be identified with the adventurer Mareades, or Marn-
ades, a native of Antioch 1n Syria, who, atter being banished
from his native city for embezzling public fuuds, brought over
into Syria the ade Sapor, which captured and plupdered
Antioch He was later put to death by Sapor; see Aminianus
Marcellinus, xxiii. 5, 8 and Malalas, x. p. 205 f£, There is no


reason to suppose that he was ever proclaimed Caesar or
Augustus,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS II. 1-4


in Greek or in Latin have passed over some of them
without dwelling even on ther names, and, finally,
since certam details related about them by many have
varied so widely, I have therefore gathered them all
into a single book, and that a short one, especially as
it is evident that much concerning them has already
been told in the Lives of Valerian and Gallienus and
need not be repeated here.


CYRIADES


Ij. This man,! rich and well born, fled from his
father Cyriades when, by his excesses and profligate
ways, he had become a burden to the righteous old
man, and after robbing him of a great part of his old
and an enormous amount of silver he departed to the
Persians. Thereupon he joined King Sapor and be-
came his ally, and after urging him,to make war on
the Romans, he brought first Odomastes? and then
Sapor himself into the Roman dominions; and also
by capturing Antioch and Caesarea? he won for him-
self the name of Caesar. Then, when he had been
hailed Augustus, after he had caused all the Orient
to tremble in terrorat his strength or his daring, and
when, moreover, he had slain his father (which some
historians deny), he himself, at the tıme that Valerian
was on his way tothe Persian War, was put to death
by the treachery of his followers Nor has anything
more that seems worthy of mention been committed
to histofy about this man, who has obtained a place


? Perhaps an error for Oromastes (Hormizd), Sapor’s son and
SULCGESSOY.

? Mod. Kaisariyoh in Cappadocia, taken by Sapor after the
capture of Valerian.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


parrieidium et aspera tyrannis et! summa luxuria
litteris dederunt,


POSTUMUS


III. Hie vir in bello fortissimus, in pace constantis-
simus, 1n omni vita gravis, usque adeo ut Saloninum
fitum suum eidem Gallienus m Gallia positum crede-
rei, quasi custodi vitae et morum et actuum imperi-


let X; em P.


1M. Cassianius Latnius Postumus Augustus; the name
Iulus given to him in c. vi ıs accordingly incorrect, like
practically all that is said of him 1n this via ; see Mommsen,
Hist. Rom. Provinces (Hing. Trans.), 1. pp. 178-179.

? After successful campaigns against the Germans he was
left in command of the Rhme frontier by Gallienus when he
departed to put down the revolt of Ingenuns (see c. ix.), but
rivalry broke out between him and Silvanus (or Afbaarus), to
whose care Galhenps had entrusted his son-—perhaps as the
nominal ruler of the West. In consequence of this rivalry
Postumus seized Cologne and caused Silvanus and the prince
to be put to death; soe Zosimus, i, 88, 9 and Zonaras, xii, 24.
Thereupon he declared himself emperor and, despite the efforts


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS HI. 1-4


in letters solely by reason of his famous flight, his act
of parricide, his cruel tyranny, and his boundless
excesses,


POSTUMUS


UI. This man,! most valiant in war and most stead-
fast ın peace, was so highly respected for his whole
manner of hfe that he was even entrusted by Gallienus
with the care of his son Salonmus (whom he had
placed in command of Gaul), as the guardian of his
life and conduct and his mstructor in the duties of a
ruler; Nevertheless, as some writers assert —though
it does not accord with his character—he afterwards
broke faith and after slaying Salomnus? seized the
imperial power. As others, however, have related
with greater truth, the Gauls themselves, hating
Gallienus most bitterly and bemg unwilling to endure
a boy as their emperor, hailed as thelr ruler the man
who was holding the rule in trust for another, and
despatching soldiers they slew the boy. When
he was slam, Postumus was gladly accepted by
the entire army and by all the Gauls, and for seven


of Gallienus (see Gall, 1v. 4-5; vii. 1), remained practically
independent ruler of Gaul until his death at Mainz in 268 or
269.

3 The question of the date of Postumus’ assumption of the
imperial power 1s bound up with that of the name of this
murdoiod prince, also given as Saloninus in Zosumus, i. 38, 2.
Saloninus, however, Galienus’ younger son (cf. Gali., xix. 1
and note) seems to have been alive as late as 260-261. More-
over, according to Epit., 382, 9; 83, 1, 1% was the elder son
(Vaderian) who was pub to death at Cologne; he is shown by
the evidence of papyri to have died in 258, This accords with
the evidence of e. 1x. 1, that the rovoli of Ingenuus was in


258.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


ut Gallias instauraverit, cum Galhlenus luxuriae et po-
pinis vacaret et amore barbarae mulieris consenescerct,
5 gestum est tamen a Gallieno contra hune bellum tune,
6 cum sagitta Galhenus est vulneratus. siquidem ninuus
amor erga Postumum omnium crat in Galheanorum
mente ! populorum, quod summotis ommbus Germani-
cis gentibus Romanum in pristmam securitatem re-
7 vocasset imperium. sed cum se gravissime gereret,”
more illo, quo Gall novarum rerum semper sunt
cupidi, Lolliano agente interemptus est.
8 Siquis sane Postumi meritum requint, iudicium de
eo Valenani ex hac epistula, quam ille ad Gallos iusit,
gintelleget : “ Transrhenani lumitis ? ducem et Galliae
praesidem Postumum fecimus, virum dignissimum se-
ventate Gallorum, praesente quo non miles in castris,
non^iura in foro, non in tribunalibus htes, non in curia
dignitas pereat, qui unieuique proprium et suum servet,
virum quem ego prae ceteris stupeo, et qui locum
principis mereatür iure, de quo spero quod mihi gratias
lÜagetis. quod si me fefellerit opinio quam de illo
habeo, sciatis nusquam gentium reperi qui possit
ll penitus adproban huius fiho Postumo nomme tribu-
natum Vocontiorum dedi, adulescenti qui se dignum
patris moribus reddet."


‘mente Salm.; gente P, X. “ger ereb Baehrens, Peter ;
regeret P, X. 3 males P, X.


180 also Gall., iv. 5. Asa matter of fact he ruled for ten
years, according to his coins with tub. poi. X (Cohen, vi?
p. 45, nos. 284-286}and Hutropis, in. 10.

2 Seo Gall., xxi. 8. 3 Of. Gall, iv. 4.

3 Cf. Fum., vn. 1.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS HL 5-11


years! he performed such exploits that he completely
restored the provinces of Gaul, while Gallienus spent
his time in debauchery and taverns and grew weak
in loving a barbarian woman.? Galhenus, however,
was warring agamst him at that time when he
himself was wounded by an arrow.? Great, indeed,
was the love felt for Postumus in the hearts ofall the
people of Gaul because he had thrust back all the
German tribes and had restored the Roman Empire
to its former security. But when he began to conduct
himself with the greatest sternness, the Gauls, follow-
ing their custom of always desiring a change of
government,‘ at the instigation of Lollianus put him
to death.

If anyone, mdeed, desires to know the merits of
Postumus, he may learn Valerian’s opinion concerning
him from the following letter which he wrote to the
Gauls: ‘ As general in charge of the Rhine frontier
and governor of Gaul we have ndined Postumus, a
man most worthy of the stern discipline of the Gauls.
He by his presence will safeguard the soldiers in the
camp, civil rights m the forum, law-suits at the bar
of judgement, and the dignity of the council-chamber,
and he will preserve for each one his own personal
possessions; he is a man at whom I marvel above all
others and well deserving of the office of prince,
and for him, I hope, you will render me thanks. If,
however, I have erred in my judgement concerning
him, you may rest assured that nowhere m the world
will a man be found who can win complete approval.
Upan his son, Postumus by name, a, young man who
wil show himself worthy of his father's character, I
have bestowed the tribuneship of the Vocontii.”


Tl


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS
POSTUMUS IUNIOR


e

unius capitis lectio prima statim fronte demonstnt,


LOLLIANUS


! Gallia ms. by Paucker, Peter,? Hohl; om. in P and Z.


There 1s no other evidence of his participation in the
impeual power or even of his existence.

? Presumably ihe extant collection of Declamathres (or
controve? sia’, 4.06. imaginary law-cases used in the schools of
rhetoric) atirbuted t6 Quiniilian, the famous author of Lhe
Institutio Oratorio, bub probably not his work.

3 The expression primu state fronte is used in just thik
sense by Quintilian 1n Inst. Orat., xii. 7, 8.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS IV. 2—V. 3
POSTUMUS THE YOUNGER


IV. Concerning this man ! there is naught to relate
save that after receiving the name of Caesar from his
father and later, as a mark of honour to him, that of
Augustus, he was killed, 1t 15 saud, together with his
father at the time when Lollianus, who was put in
Postumus' place, took the imperial power offered to
him by the Gauls. He was, moreover—and only this
is worthy of mention—so skilled in rhetorical exer-
ases that his Confroversies are said to have been
inserted among those of Quintilian,? who, as the read-
ing of even a single chapter will show at the first
glance,? was the sharpest rhetorician of the Roman
race.


LOLLIANUS


V. In consequence of this man’s * rebellion in Gaul,
Postumus, the bravest of all men, was put to death
after he had brought back the power of Rome into its
aneient condition at the time when Gaul was on the
bruk of rum because of Gallienus’ excesses, Loll-
anus was, indeed, a very biave man, but in the face
of rebellion lus strength was insufficient to give him
authority over the Gauls. He was killed, moreover,
by Victormus, son of Vitruvia, or rather Victoria,? who
was later entitled Mother of the Camp and honoured
by the name of Augusta, though she herself, doing
her utmost to escape the weight of so great a burden,


? Has eorrech naine was ©. Ulpius Cornelius Laelianus
Augustus, accoiding to his coins; see Cohen, vi.?p. 66 f. He
reboltd agamst Postumus and seized tho impenal power at
Maing, but (despite the statements in $$ 1-4) he was defeated
by Postumus; see Aurelius Victor, Caes , 33,8, and Eutropius,
1x9.

Dee C. XXXI.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

5 Ita Gallieno perdente rem publicam in Gallia pri-
mum Postumus, demde Lollianus, Victorinus deinceps,
postremo Tetricus, (nam de Mario nihil dicimus) ad-

6sertores Romanı nommis exstiterunt. quos omnes
datos divinitus credo, ne, cum illa pestis mauditae
luxuriae impediretur malis, possidendi Romanum so-

7lum Germanis daretur facultas, qui si eo genere
tune evasissent quo Gothi et Persae, consentientibus
in Romano solo gentibus venerabile hoe Romani


VICTORINUS


!guae 2; om. in Py 3a» 2; om. m P.


! See o, XXIV.-XXV. ? Bee note to c. 111. 4.

3M. Piavonius Victorinus Augustus, according fo his in-
scriptions and coing, see Cohen, vi? pp. 68-84, He seryed as
general under Postumus, bui the statement of the vita and of
Gall., vii, 1 that he was made co-ruler by Postumus is probably
false, for, according to Aur. Victor, Caes., 88, 12 and Eutropius,
ix, 9 he seems to have held the power after Mu ius (e. viti.) tor


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS V. 4—VI, 1.


had bestowed the unperial power first on Marius and
then on Tetricus together with his son}  Lollianus,
m fact, did to some extent benefit the commonwealth ;
for many of the communes of Gaul and also some of
the camps, built on barbarian soil by Postumus duning
his seven years,* but after his murder plundered and
burned during an incursion of Germans, were restored
by hun to their ancient condition Then he was slain
by his soldiers because he exacted too much labour.

And so, while Gallienus was bringing rum on the
commonwealth, there arose m Gaul first. Postumus,
then Lolhanus, next Victorinus, and finally Tetricus
(for of Marius we will make no mention), all of them
defenders of the renown of Rome. All of these, I
beleve, were given by gift of the gods, in order that,
while that pestiferous fellow was caught in the toils
of unheard-of excesses, no opportumty might be
afforded the Germans for seizing Roman soil. For if
they had broken forth then in the same manner as
did the Goths and the Persians, these foreign nations,
actmg together in Roman territory, would have put
an end to this venerable empire of the Roman nation.
As for Lollianus, his life is obscure in many details,
as 1s also that of Postumus, too—but only their private
lives, for while they lived they were famed for their
valour, not for their importance m rank.


VICTORINUS


VI. When the elder Postumus saw that Gallienus
was marching against him with great forces, and that
he seeded the aid not only of soliers but also of a
second prince, he called Victorinus,? a man of soldierly
two pears, apparently under Claudius (so Ep:t., 34, 3) and so
probably 270-271. TÈ

7i


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


12,0,, Cologne. 3 S00 6. XXXL
*Noi otherwise known and probably an invention of the
biographer's.


5 See note to c. iii, 1.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS VI. 2-8


energy, to a share in the imperial power, and in com-
pany with him he fought’ against Galhenus. Having
summoned to their aid huge forces of Germans, they
protracted the war for a long time, but at last they
were conquered, Then, when Lollianus, too, had
been slain, Victorinus alone remained in command,
He also, because he devoted his time to seducing the
wives of his soldiers and officers, was slain at Agrip-
pina! through a conspiracy formed by a certain clerk,
whose wife he had debauched; his mother Vitruvia,
or rather Victoria,? who was later called Mother of
the Camp, had given his son Victorinus the title of
Caesar, but the boy, too, was immediately killed after
his father was slain at Agrippina.

Concerning Victorinus, because he was most valiant
and, save for his lustfulness, an excellent emperor,
many details have been related by many writers.
We, however, deem it sufficient tognsert a portion of
the book of a certain Julius Atherianus,® in which he
writes of Victorinus as follows: “With regard to
Victorinus, who ruled the provinces of Gaul after
Julius + Postumus, I consider that no one should be
given a higher place, not Trajan for his courage, or
Antoninus for his kindness, or Nerva for his noble
dignity, or Vespasian for his care of the treasury, or
yet Pertinax or Severus for the strictness of their
whole lives or the severity of their military discipline.
All these qualities, however, were offset to such an
extent by his lustfulness and his desire for the pleasures
gotten from women that no one would dare to set forth
in writing the virtues of one who, all are agreed, de-
served to be punished," And so, since this is the
judgement that writers have given concernmg Victo-
rinus, | consider that I have said enough regardmg his
character, 77


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS
VICTORINUS IUNIOR


MARIUS


l titulus Cas. ; unus P, X.


1 The head of a son of Victorinus appears on a coin of tho
pretender (Cohen, vi." p. 84), but ihe boy is included.here, hke
Postumus Iunior in c. iv., merely for the purpose of increasing
the number of the Syrann.

2 M. Aurelius Marius Augustus. Hoe held the mporial power
before Victorinus; sce note to c. vi. 1, The lengih of his vule
given here as three days (two days by Aurelius Victor and
Eutropius) is certainly wrong, for the large number of his


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS VII. 2—VIII. 3
VICTORINUS THE YOUNGER


VII. Concerning him! nothing has been put into
writing save that he was the grandson of Victoria
and the son of Victorinus and that he was entitled
Caesar by his father or grandmother on the eve of
his father's murder and was at once slam m anger
by the soldiers. Their tombs, indeed, are still to be
seen near Agrippina, humble monuments covered
with common marble, and on them is earved the
inscription, * Here lie the two Victorini, pretenders.”


MARIUS


VIII. After Victorinus, Lollianus and Postumus
were slain, Marius,? formerly a worker in iron, sd'it is
said, held the imperial power, but only for three days.
What more can be asked concerning him I know not,
save that he was made more famou® by the shortness
of his rule. For, just as that consul? who held the
office as substitute for six hours at midday was ridiculed
by Cicero 1n the jest, '* We have had a consul so stern
and severe that during his term of office no one has
breakfasted, no one has dined, and no one has slept,"
so the same, it would seem, ean be said of Marius,
who on the first day was made emperor, on the second
seemed to rule, and on the third was slain.

He was, indeed, an active man and rose through
the various grades of military service to the imperial


coins,is sufficient evidence of a longer rgign; see Cohen, vi.?
pp. 87-89,

3 O0. Caninius Rebilus, consul on 81 Dec., 45 B.C. A jest of
Cicero's concerning him, differing somewhat from the follow-
ing quotation is contained in Ejnst. ad Fam., vii. 80, 1.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


* 25


fecisti.
8 Huws contio prima talis fuisse dicitur : “ Scio, con-


Lompellendum 2, implendum P. * duw essel. Case,
Hyssenhardt, Hohl; dumsset P corr, Peter. "wrbu
Editor; uerbo P, ES; «eo Salm. Peter, Fenitur


Petschenig, Hohl; wm ftaha P, E, foll. by lacuna Pajor.


!Mamurius Veturius was tho legendary forgor of the
ancilia, the shields of the Salü; his name was inserted in


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS VII t-1i


power itself—this one whom many called Mamurius
and some Veturius, because, forsooth, he was a
worker in iron. But we have already said too much
about this man, concerning whom ıt will be sufficient
to add that there was no one whose hands were
stronger, for either striking or thrusting, since he
seemed to have not veins in his fingers, but sinews
For he is said to have thrust back on-coming waggons
by means of his foretinger and with a single finger to
have struck the strongest men so hard that they felt
as much pain as though hit by a blow from wood or
blunted iron; and he erushed many objects by the
mere pressure of two of his fingers. He was slain by
a soldier whom, because he had once been a worker
in hus smithy, he had treated with scorn either when
he commanded troops or after he had taken the
imperial power. Hus slayer is said to have added the
words, “This 15 a sword which yeu yourself have
forged.”

His first publie harangue, ıt is said, was as follows :
* | know well, fellow-soldiers, that 1 can be taunted
with my former trade, of which all of you are my wit-
nesses. However, let anyone say what he wishes.
As for me, may I always labour with steel rather than
ruin myself with wine and garlands and harlots and
gluttony, as does Gallienus, unworthy of his father
and the noble rank of his house. Let men taunt me
with working with steel as long as foreign nations
shall know from their losses that I have handled the
steel, In short, I will strive to the utmost that all
Alamannia and Germany and the nations round about
shall deem the Roman people a steel-clad folk, and


the Carmen Sahare as a reward for his labour; see Festus,
p. 131 M.; Ovid, Masta, 11. 983 f.
RY


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


1gspecialiter m nobis ferrum timeant, vos nnen cogi-
tetis velim fecisse vos principem, qui numquam quic-


INGENUUS

2 qui fessis rebus mederi sua virtute potuisset. causa
autem ipsi arripiendi tune imperu fut, ne suspectus
esset imperatoribus, quod erat fortissimus ac rei pub-
licae necessarius et militibus, quod imperantes vehe-


l'The correctness of this date has been questioned, for
Aurehus Victor (Caes, 88, 2) places the revolt of Tngennus
alter the capture of Valerian, 2.e.1m 960. Tt ocontwod, how.
ever, shortly before the revolt of Postumus, and there is
peri to beheve that this was in 958 or 259; seo ngbe to
oin».

* At Mursa (mod. Eszek) or at Sirmium (Mitroviiz) in
Pannonia; see Aur. Victor, Caes, 33, 2; Eutropius, ix. 8, 1;
Zonaras, xu. 24.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS VIII 19—IX. 3


that it shall be most of all the steel that they fear in
us. But as for you, | wish you to rest assured that
you have chosen as emperor one who will never know
how to deal with aught but the steel. And this I say
because I know that no charge can be brought against
me by that pestiferous profligate save this, that I have
been a forger of swords and armour."


INGENUUS


IX. In the consulship of Tuscus and Bassus,! while 258
Gallienus was spending his time m wine and gluttony
and giving himself up to pimps and actors and harlots,
and by continued debauchery was destroying the
gifts of nature, Ingenuus, then ruler of the Pannonian
provinces, was acclaimed emperor by the legions of
Moesia, and those in Pannonia assented thereto.
And, in fact, it appeared that m yo other case had
the soldiers taken better counsel for the common-
wealth than when, in the face of an inroad of the
Sarmatians, they chose as their emperor one who by
his valour could bring a remedy to the exhausted
state. Hus reason, moreover, for seizing the power
at that time was his fear of becoming an object of
suspicion tothe emperors, because he was both very
brave and necessary to the commonwealth, and also
—a cause which rouses rulers most of all—well
beloved by the soldiers. Gallienus, however, worth-
less and degraded though he was, could still, when
necessity demanded, show himself quick in action,
courageous, vigorous and cruel, anfl finally, meeting
Ingenuus m battle,” he defeated him and, after slay-
ing him, vented his anger most fier cely on all the
Moesians, soldiers and civilians alike. For he left


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

80ccidi possent. occidendus est quicumque male
voluit, ocecidendus est quicumque male dixit contra
me, contra Valerian filum, contra tot principum

9 patrem et fratrem. Ingenuus factus est imperator.
lacera, occide, coneide, anumum meum intellege, mea
mente irascere, qui haec manu mea seripsi.”’


REGALIANUS


1 On the other hand, Gallenus’ clemency is noted by the
Continuator of Cassius Dio, fry. 163 (ed. Boissevain, ui. p. 743)
and Zonaras, xn. 25, and, in other instances, by Anunianus
Marcelinus, xxi. 16, 10.


RA


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS IX. 4—X. 1


none exempt frora his cruelty,! and so brutal and
savage was he, t htin mmy communities he left not
a single male alive. Itis said of Ingenuus, indeed,
that when the et-y was captured, he threw himself
into the water, and so put an end to his hfe,? that
he might not fallinto the power of the brutal tyrant.

There is, indee d, still in existence a letter of
Galhenus, written to Celer Verianus,? which shows
his excessive biv&alaty This I have inserted, m
order that all may learn that a profligate, if necessity
demand, can be th e most brutal of men *

“ From Galàaexrus to Verianus. You wil not
satisfy me if yeu kill only armed combatants, for
these even chance could have killed m the war.
You nust slay every male, that is, 1f old men and
immature boys can. be put to death without bridging
odium upon us. You must slay all who have wished
me ill, slay all who have spoken 11] wot me, the son of
Valenan, the ther and brother of so many princes.
Ingenuus has been created emperor! Therefore
mutilate, kill, sLaughter, see that you understand my
purpose and show your anger with that spirit which I
am show ing, I who have written these words with my
own hand,’


REGALIANUS


X. It was the public destiny that in the time of
Gallienus whosoever could, sprang up to seize the


? According to piel xu. 24, he" was killed by his
ationdanb soldirs Gluring his füght. Tt is difficult to re-
concile this witha ny of the suggested readings of § 4,

3 Unknown and probably fictitious


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


1 loco P, X. ? wmposuwt E, Hohl, foll. by Klotz; posui
P, Peter. Sre ins by Novák; om.in P!, ins. adterenilitari
P corr, Peter,


1P.Q ... .. Regalianus Augustus, according to his coins ;
see Cohen, vı.? p. 10. The form Regilianus im which his name
appears in the MSS. of this viia (except 8 5) and’ also in
Gall. 1x. 1 and Clazsd., vu. 4 seems to owe its origin tp the
deme to make the pun contammed m §3f. Aur. Vietor (33, 9)
agrees with the biographer in relating that he rallied the
remains of Ingenuus' army and renewed the war against
Gallienus,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS X 2-8


imperial power And so Regalianus, who held the
command in Illyricum, was declared emperor, the
prime movers being the Moesians, who had previously
been defeated with Ingenuus and on whose kinsmen
Galhenus had vented his anger severely. He, in-
deed, performed many brave deeds against the
Sarmatians, but nevertheless, at the instigation of
the Roxolani? and with the consent of the soldiers
and the provincials, who feared that Galhenus might,
on a second occasion, act even more cruelly, he was
put to death.

It may perhaps seem a matter for wonder if
I relate the origin of his rule, for it was all because
of a notable jest that he gained the royal power.
For when some soldiers were dining with him and
a certain acting-tribune arose and said, “ Whence
shall we suppose that Regahanus gets his name?”
another replied at once, “I suppose from his regal
power" Then a schoolmaster who was present
among them began, as it seemed, to decline gram-
matically, saying, “ Rer, regis, regs, Regalanus,”
whereupon among the soldiers—a class of men who
are quick to express what they have in mmd—one
cried out, *‘So, then, can he be regal?" another,
* So, then, can he hold regal sway over us?" and
again another, * God has given you a regent's name."
Why should I then say more? The next day after
these words were spoken, on going forth m the morn-
ing he was greeted as emperor by the front-line
troops.» Thus what was offered to others through
darjng or reasoned choice was offered to him through
a clever jest.

It cannot, indeed, be denied that he had always


“See note to Hadr., vi. 6.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

9cebali ipsius, ut fertur, adfinis, exstat epistula divi
Claudi tune privat, qua Regaliano, Illyrici duci,
gratias agit ob redditum Illyrieum, cum omma
Gallen segnitia deperirent. quam ego repertam in
authenticis inserendam putavi; fuit enim publica.

10 “Claudius Regahano multam salutem. — felicem
rem publicam quae te talem virum habere in eastris
bellicis * meruit, felicem. Gallienum, etiamsi ei vera

ll nemo nee de bonis nec de malis nuntiat, pertule-
runt ad me Bonitus et Celsus, stipatores principis
nostri qualis apud Seupos in pugnando fueris, quot
uno die proelia et qua celeritate confecers. dignus

138 Hac epistula ostenditur quid de Regaliano senserit
Claudius, euius gravissimum iudicium suis temporibus
fuisse non dubium est.


1 bellicas Baehrens, Peter; belli «us T.


d


1 The formidable king of the Dacians who was finally
overcome by Trajan, aftertwo wars, in 107.
* Probably Zlokuchan near Uskub (Skoplje) in Jugoslavia,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS X, 9-14


won approbation in warfare and had long been
suspected by Gallienus because he seemed worthy
to rule; he was, moreover, a Dacian by birth and
a kinsman, so it was said, of Decebalus! himself.
There ıs still in existence a letter written by the
Deified Claudius, then still a commoner, in which he
expresses his thanks to Regalianus, as general in
command of Illyricum, for recovering this district, at
a time when Gallienus’ slothfulness was bringing all
things to ruin. This letter, which I have found in
the original form, I think should be inserted here,
for it was written official! ly"

“From Claudius to Regalianus many greetings.
Fortunate is the commonwealth, which has deserved to
have sucha man as yourself in its military camps, and
fortunate is Gallienus, though no one tells him ‘the
truth about either good men or bad. Word has been
brought to me by Bonitus and Celsus, the attendants
of our emperor, how you conducted fourself in fight-
ing at Seupi? and how many battles you fought in
a single day and with what great speed. You were
worthy of a trumph, did but the olden times still
remain. But why say more? I could wish that you
might be mindful of a certain person and therefore
be more cautious in gaimng victories. I should like
you to send me some Sarmatian bows and two military
cloaks, but provided with clasps, for I am sending
you some of my own."

This letter shows what opinion of Regalianus was
held by Glaudius, whose judgement was without doubt
most weighty in his own time.

It was not, indeed, from Gallienus "that Hegalianus
received his promotion, but from his father, Valerian,
as did also Claudius, Macrianus, Ingenuus, Postumus


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

15 mirabile autem hoe fuit m Valeriano principe, quod
omnes, quoscumque duces fecit, postea militum testi-
monio ad imperium pervenerunt, ut appareat senem
imperatorem in dehgendis re: publicae ducibus talem
fuisse, qualem Romana felicitas, sı conunuani fataliter


+


AUREOLUS


XI. Hie quoque Illyrcianos exercitus regens in
contemptu Galheni, ut omnes eo tempore, coactus
2a miitibus sumpsit mnperium. et cum Macnmanus
cum filio suo Macriano contra Gallienum veniret cum
plurimis, exercitus eius cepit, aliquos corruptos fidei
$suae addixit. et cum factus esset hine validus! im-
perator eumque Gallienus expugnare virum fortem


1 hine validus Salm., Peter; validats P, X.


! Despite the assurance contained in $8 6-7, practically our
only information concerning this really important man comes
from Zonaras (xi. 94). Aureolus as commander of*Gallienus!
cavaliy contributed greatly to the successful battle against
Ingenuus. Later ho was sent to Thrace to oppose the afivance
of Macrianus (c. xu. 18-14; Gell, à. 0-7), whose woops he
porsuaded to surrender without a battle. in 268 he declared
himself emperor and advanced on Milan, Here Galhenus


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS X. 15—XI 3


and Aureolus, who all were slam while they held
the imperial power, although they deserved to hold
it, [€ was, moreover, a matter for marvel in Valerian
as emperor, that all who were appointed commanders
by him, afterwards, by the voice of the soldiers, ob-
tained the unperial rule, so that it is clear that the
aged emperor, in choosing the generals of the common-
wealth, was, in fact, such an one as the felicity of
Rome—could it only have been permitted by fate to
continue under a worthy prince—ever required. Oh
that it might have been possible either for those who
seized the imperial power to rule for a longer time, or
for this man's son to rule less long, that somehow our
commonwealth might have kept itself in :ts proper
position! But Fortune claimed for herself too much
indulgence, when with Valerian she took away our
righteous princes, and preserved Gallienus for the
commonwealth longer than was meet.


AUREOLUS


XI. This man! also, while commanding the Illyrian
armies, was urged on by the soldiers in their con-
tempt for Gallienus (as were all others at that time)
and so seized the imperial power. And when Macri-
auus and his son Macrianus marched against Gallienus
with very large forces, he took the troops, and some
he won over to his cause by bribery. When Aureolus
had thus become a mighty emperor, Gallienus, after
trying in’ vain to conquer so brave a man and being


- $
besieged him but fell during the siege {see Gall, xiv. 6-9).
After his death Atmeolus submitted to Claudius but agam
planned a revolt, at the outset of which he was killed by his
soldiers (Claud., v. 1-8).


9i


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

4 Hunc eundem Aureolum Claudius interfecto mm
Gallieno conflictu habito apud eum pontem interemit
qui nune pons Aureol: nuncupatur, atque illie ut

5 tyrannum sepulchro humihore donavit. exstat etiam
nune epigramma Graecum m hane formam '


Dono sepulchrorum victor post multa tyranm
proelia 1am felix Claudius Aureolum

munere prosequitur mortal et iure superstes,
vivere quem vellet, si pateretur amor

militis egregii, vitam qui iure negavit
omnibus indignis et magis Aureolo.

ille tamen clemens, qui corporis ultima servans
el pontemegAureoli dedicat et tumulum.

7ad eloquentiam pertinet mhil curo. rem enim vobis


1 fecit &, Hohl; om, in P; ins. after pugnaturus by Pater.
? 400, om. 1n P.


DRE EE rt —— MA PREPARA


1 Mod. Pontirolo” on the Adda, about 20 mniles Nk, of
Milan.

? The epigram is given in a Greek version, apparently hy
Andrea Alciatus, in Z. G., xiv. no. 355% (p. 32*).


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XI. 4-7


now on the point of begmning a war against Postumus,
made peace with him-—of which events many have
already been related and many are still to be told.
This same Aureolus, after Gallienus was slain,
Claudius met in battle and kiled at that bridge
which now bears the name of Aureolus’ Bridge,! and
there he bestowed upon him a tomb, but a lowly one
as became a pretender. There is even now in exist-
ence an epigram in Greek ? of the followmg purport .


“Sepulture’s gift, after many a battle agast the
pretender,

Claudius, flashed with success, gives to Aureolus now,

Domg him honour in death, himself the rightful
survivor.

Fam had he kept him alive, only his glorious troops

Suffered it not in their love, for they put out of life
very rightly

All who deserved not to live—wny not Aureolus
more ?

Merciful, though, was that prince, who preserved
what was left of his body,

And in Aureolus name built both a bridge and a
tomb."


These verses, translated by a certain teacher of
grammar, I have given in such a way that their
accuracy 1s retained, although they could be trans-
lated more elegantly; but I do it with the purpose
of preserving historical truth, which I have thought
should be guarded above all else, afd caring naught
for considerations of literary style. For, mdeed, it 1s
fact that I have determined to put before you and
not mere words, especially when we have such an


OR


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


proposui deferre, non verba, maxime tanla rerum
copia ut m trigmta tyrannorum simul vitis.


MACRIANUS


XII. Capto Valeriano, diu clarissimo principe ovi-
tatis, fortissimo demde imperatori, ad postremum om-
mum infelicissime, vel quod senex apud Persas con-
senuit vel quod indignos se posteros dereliquit, eum
Gallienum contemnendum Ballista praefectus Valeri-
ani et Macrianus primus ducum! intellegerent, quae-
rentibus etiam militibus principem, unum in locum

2 concesserunt quaerentes quid faciendum esset, tunc-
que constitit, Gallieno longe posito Aureolo usurpante
imperium, debere aliquem principem fier, et quidem


l ducum Salm.; dum P, J.


1M. Fulvius Macnanus Augustus. As Valerian’s «duns
ray Üqcavpüy Kal éperras TH Gyopz ToU círov he was not
present when the Emperor was captured; later he succeeded
in rallying the soldiers at Samosata; see Continnator of
Cassius Dio, frg. 159 (ed. Boissevain, in. p. 742). Further
details of his revolt m 261, as described here, aro givon in
Gall iiL and im Zonaras, x1. 94. His coms show that the
correct form of hig name and his son's is Macrianus, and nob


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XII. 1-6


abundance of facts as im the lives of the thirty
pretenders taken together.


MACRIANUS!


XII. After the capture of Valerian, long a most
noble prince in the state, then a most vahant emperor,
but at the last the most unfortunate of all men (either
because m his old age he pined away among the
Persians or because he left behind him unworthy
descendants), Ballista,? Valerian's prefect, and Macri-
anus, the foremost of his generals, since they knew
that Gallienus was worthy only of contempt and since
the soldiers, too, were seeking an emperor, withdrew
together to a certain place, to consider what should
be done. They then agreed that, since Gallienus
was far away and Aureolus was usurping the imperial
power, some emperor ought to be chosen, and, indeed,
the best man, lest there should arise some pretender.
Therefore Ballista (or so Maeonus Astyanax,’ who
took part in their council, relates) spoke as follows:
'" As for myself, my age and my callmg and my
desires are all far removed. from the imperial office,
and so, as [ eannot deny, l am searching for a
worthy prince. But who, pray, is there who can fill
the place of Valerian except such a man as yourself,
brave, steadfast, honourable, well proved in publie
affairs, and—what is of the highest importance for
holding the imperial office— possessed of great wealth ?


Macrittus, as it frequently appears im the MSS. of the Historia
Augusla aod in other authors, see Cohen, vi." pp. 2-8. Papyn
dated in the first year of Macrianus and Quietus (c. xiv.) show
that they were accepted in Egypt as emperors in 260,

2See c. xvni. ? Otherwise unknown.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


l partibus E; patribus P,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XII 7-11


Therefore, take this post which your merits deserve.
My services as prefect shall be yours as long as you
wish. Do you only serve the commonwealth well,
so that the Roman world may rejoice that you have
been made its prince.” To this Macrianus replied :
“I admit, Ballista, that to the wise man the imperial
offiee is no light thing. For I wish, indeed, to come
to the aid of the commonwealth and to remove that
pestiferous fellow from administering the laws, but I
am not of an age for this; I am now an old man, I
cannot ride as an example to others, I must bathe too
often and eat too carefully, and my very riches have
long since kept me away from practicmg war. We
must seek out some young men, and not one alone,
but two or three of the bravest, who in different parts
of the world of mankind can restore the common-
wealth, which Valerian and Gallienus have brought
to ruin, the one by his fate, the other by his mode
of hfe.” Whereupon Ballista, perceiving that Macri-
nus, in so speaking, seemed to have in mind his own
two sons, answered him as follows: “ To your wisdom,
then, we entrust the commonwealth. And so give
us your sons Macrianus and Quietus, most valiant
young men, long since made tribunes by Valerian,
for, under the rule of Gallienus, for the very reason
that they are good men, they cannot remain un-
harmed.” Then Macrianus, finding out that his
thoughts had been understood, replied : *I will yield,
and from my own funds I will present to the soldiers
a double bounty. Do you but give me your zealous
service as prefect and furnish rationsein the needful
places. I will now do my best that Gallienus, more
contemptible than any woman, may come to know his
father's generals.’ And so, with the consent of all


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


12 factus est igitur cum Macriano et Quieto duobus filiis
cunctis mihtibus volentibu$ imperator ac statim contra
Galhenum venire coepit utcumque rebus in oriente

l4 interemptus est. trigmta demque milia militum in
Aureoli potestatem concessere. Domitianus autem
eundem vicit, dux Aureoli fortissimus et vehementis-
sunus, qui se originem diceret a Domitiano. impera-
tore! trahere atque a Domitilla,

15 De Macriano autem nefas mihi videtur iudicium
Valeriani praetenre, quod ille in oratione sua, quam
ad senatum e Persidis finibus miserat, posuit. mter

16 cetera ex oratione divi Valeriani: “ Ego, patres con-
seripti, bellum Persicum gerens Macriano totam rem
publicam credidi et? quidem a parte militari. ille
vobis fidelis, ille mihi devotus, illum et amat et timet
miles. uteumque res exegerit, cum exercitibus agit.

17 nec, patres conscripti, nova vel inopina nobis sunt;
puer eius virtus in Italia, adulescentis in Gallia,
iuvenis in Thracia, in. Africa 1am provecti, senescentis
denique in Illyrico et Dalmatia comprobata est,
cum m diversis proeliis ad exemplum fortiter faceret.


lemperatore ins. by P corr, iol, by Klotz; om. by Peter
and Hohl. — ?et om. im P,


! Mentioned also m c. xiii. 3 and GalL, n. 6. He is probably
tha pretender of «his name who arose under Aurelian; sec
Zosimus, 1. 40, 2. A coin of his has been found in France on
which he bears the titles Caesar and Augustus; sce Babelou in
Comptes Rendus de Acad des Insers., 1901, p. 900. His
descent is evidently & fabrication of the biographer’s, for


OR a


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XIL 12-17


.he soldiers, Macrianus was made emperor, together
vith his two sons Macrianus and Quietus, and he
mmediately proceeded to march against Galhenus,
eaving affairs in the East in whatever state he could.
But while he was on the march, having with him a
'orce of forty-five thousand soldiers, he met Aureolus
n Illyricum or on the borders of Thrace, and there
1e was defeated and together with his son was slain.
l'hen thirty thousand of his men yielded to Aureolus’
;ower. It was Domitianus, indeed, who won this
netory, the bravest and most active of Aureolus'
eaders, who claimed to be the descendant of the
&mperor Domitian and Domitilla,

in writing of Macrianus, moreover, it would seem
0 me wrong to leave out the opinion of Valerian,
which he expressed in the message he sent to the
senate from the frontier of Persia. A portion of the
nessage of the Deified Valerian: 4 Bemg now en-
"aged in the war with the Persians, Conscript Fathers,
l have entrusted all public affairs, and even those
which concern the war, to Macrianus, He is faithful
70 you, loyal to me, and both beloved and feared by
the soldiers. He with his army will act as the case
shall demand. And in this, Conscript Fathers, there
is nothing new or unexpected by us. For while a
3oy in Italy, while a youth in Gaul, while a young
man in Thrace, while a mature man in Africa, and,
inally, while well advanced in years in Illyricum and
Dalmatia, his valour has been well proved, for in
livers battles he has done brave deeds which may
jervee as a pattern to others. I wfll add, besides,
that he has young sons, worthy of being our associates


Domitilla was Domutian’s niece, not his wife; the latter was
Domitia Longina.


THE THIRTY PRETENDEHS


18 hue accedit quod habet iuvenes filios Romano dignos !
collegio, nostra dignos! amicitia," et reliqua.


MACRIANUS IUNIOR


QUIETUS


! dignos 3; dignus P, Peter, Hohl. * quad ins. by Helm,
foll. by Hohl, om. ın P and Z , ad fata aut «n bellis quantum
Peter following Salm. and Obrecht.


1T, Fulvius Iu‘ius Macrianus Augustus, according" to his
coms; see Cohen, vi.? pp. 8-6.

2 T, Fulvius Iunius Quietus Augustus, according to his coins ;
see Cohen, vi.? pp 6-8. For bis death, see e. xv. 4 and (all,
ni. 2, According to Zonaras (xh. 24), he was defeated near


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XII. 18—X]V. 1


E


in Rome and worthy, too, of our friendship," and so


forth. a


MACRIANUS THE YOUNGER


XIII. I have already given a foretaste, in the
account of his father's rule, of many details about this
man, who would never have been chosen emperor,
had it not seemed well to trust to his father's wisdom.
Many marvellous stories, it is true, are related con-
cerning him, all of which have to do with the bravery
of youthful years. But what, after all, does one
single man’s bravery avail against fate or how much
does it profit in war? For, though active himself and
accompanied by the wisest of fathers (through whose
merits he had begun to rule), he was defeated by
Domitianus, and despoiled, as I have previously said,
of an army of thirty thousand soldiers, being himself
of noble birth through his mother, 4or his father was
merely brave and ready for war, and had risen from
the lowest rank in the army with exalted distinction
to the highest command.


QUIETUS


XIV, This man,? as we have said,? was the son of
Macrianus and was made emperor, along with his
father and brother, in accordance with the judgement
of Ballista. But when Odaenathus, who had now
for some time held the East, learned that the two
Macriani, the father and brother of Quietus, had been


Emesa (Homs) by Odaenathus and then put to death by the
people of the city.
So, xii, 12,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


i These writers hgve a liking for representing descendants of
emperors or pretenders as alive m their own day; see c. xxxih.
5; Gord ,xx. 6; Maz.-Balb xvi. 1; dwr ,1. 8; xin. 1; Prob.,
xxiv, 1; Fim., xii, 5. Most of these persons avo probably
fiotitious, `


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XIV. 2-6


defeated by Aureolus, and that their soldiers had
yielded to his power in the belief that he was uphold-
ing the cause of Gallienus, he put the young man to
death and with him Ballista, for a long time prefect.
This young man, too, was worthy to hold the power
at Rome, so that he seemed to be truly the son of
Macrianus and also the brother of Macrianus, who
together were well able to govern the commonwealth
in its stricken state.

It does not seem to me, in telling of the family of
the Macriani (which is still flourishing to-day),! that I
should fail to speak of a peculiar custom which they
have always observed. For an embossed head of
Alexander the Great of Macedonia was always used
by the men on their rings and their silver plate, and
by the women on their head-dresses, their bracelets,
their rings and ornaments of every kind, so that
even to-day there are still in that family tunics and
fillets and women's cloaks which show the likeness
of Alexander in threads of divers colours. We, our-
selves, recently saw Cornelius Macer, a man of that
same family, while giving a dinner in the Temple of
Hercules,’ drink the health of a pontiff from a bowl
made of electrum,? which had in the centre the face
of Alexander and contained on the circumference his
whole history in small and minute figures, and this he
caused to be passed around to all the most ardent
admirers of that great hero. All this I have included
because it is said that those who wear the likeness of
Alexander carved in either gold or silver are aided in
all that they do.


* There were several temples of Hercules in Rome.
3 An alloy of gold and silver; a somewhat similar bowl is
described in Martial, viii. 51.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


ODAENATHUS


XV. Nisi Odaenathus, prmceps Palmyrenorum,
capto Valeriano, fessis Romanae rei publicae viribus,
sumpsisset imperium, in orjente perditae res essent


1Septimius Odaenathus, son of Septimius Hairanes. A
member of the most 1mportant family of Palmyra, he received
from the Roman government the title of consulans, which he
bears m an inscription of 258 (Lebas-Wad. 2602) and on his
coins. Later he received from Gallienus the office of rrparnyds
Tis Egas Or mas 'AvaroAS«, See Zonaras, xn. 23-24 and
Syncellus, I., p. 716 (cf. GalL, ni. 8; x. 1) This nidicates a
general vmperwum over all the Asiatic proviuces and Egypt, but
subject to that of the Roman Emperor. He atterwards” took
the title of King of Palmyra (§ 2), and on a Palmyrene inscrip-
tion set up in 271 after his death he is called * King of Kings.”
There is no evidence that he ever received the title of Augustus


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XV. 1-5


ODAENATHUS


XV. Had not Odaenathus,! prince of the Palmy-
renes, seized the imperial power after the capture of
Valerian, when the strength of the Roman state was
exhausted, all would have been lost in the East. He
assumed, therefore, as the first of his line, the title of
King, and after gathering together an army he set
out against the Persians, having with him his wife
Zenobia,? his elder son, whose name was Herodes,
and his younger sons, Herennianus and Timolaus.?
First of all, he brought under his power Nisibis and
most of the East together with the whole of Meso-
potamia, next, he defeated the king himself and
compelled him to flee. Finally, he pursued Sapor
and his children even as far as Ctesiphon, and cap-
tured his concubines and also a great amount of booty ;
then he turned to the oriental previnces, hoping to
be able to crush Macrianus,* who had begun to rule
m opposition to Gallienus, but he had already set out
against Aureolus and Gallienus. After Macrianus
was slain, Odaenathus killed his son Quietus also,
while Ballista, many assert, usurped the imperial
power? in order that he, too, might not be slain.
Then, after he had for the most part put in order
the affairs of the East, he was killed by his cousin


from Galhenus (Gall., xi. 1), or assumed 15, himself, or in any
way formally rebelled against the power of Rome, although in
fact his position was almost that of an mdependent prince. On
his suppression of the revolt of Quietus see also o, xiv, 1 and
Gall, in. 1-5, and on his mvasion of Mesopotamia after the
capture of Valerian see Val., iv. 2-4; Gall., x. 3-8 Am a 1,

? See c, XXX. ? See c. xxvi-xxvili.

i Ree c. xh. 9 Seo note to e. xvni. 1.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

6 Perside cum patre imperator est appellatus. iratum
fuisse rei publicae deum credo, qui interfecto Valer-

7ano noluit Odaenathum reservare. ille plane cum
uxore Zenobia non solum ornentem, quem iam in
pristinum reformaverat statum, sed et omnes ommino
totius orbis partes reformasset, vir acer in bellis et,
quantum plerique scriptores loquuntur, venatu me-
morabili semper inclitus, qui à prima aetate capiendis
leonibus et pardis, ursis ceterisque silvestribus anı-
malibus sudorem officii viris umpendit quique semper
in silvis ac montibus vixit, perferens calorem, pluvias
et omnia mala quae in se continent venatoriae volup-


HERODES


! smetrosissumam 2i ; saepedassumam, PH


! See also Gall., xni. Í Ou Maeonius, see note to c. xvn. 1.
According to Zosimus, 1, 39, 2, the murder took place at Emesa
(Homs); if can be dated m 266-267, as Alexandrian coins show
this to be the first wear of Vaballathus, Odaenathus’! son and
Snocessor.

? Otherwise unknown and perhaps fictitious.

3 Mentioned also in oe. xv. 2 and 5, xvii. 1; Gall, xiu. 1.
The statement that he was killed with his father seams to


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XV, 6—XVI. 1.


Maeonius ! (who also had seized the imperial power),
together with his son Herodes, who, also, after return-
ing from Persia along with his father, had received the
title of emperor. Some god, I believe, was angry
with the commonwealth, who, after Valerian’s death,
was unwilling to preserve Odaenathus alive. For of
a surety he, with his wife Zenobia, would have re-
stored not only the East, which he had already
brought back to its ancient condition, but also all
parts of the whole world everywhere, since he was
fierce in warfare and, as most writers relate, ever
famous for his memorable hunts; for from his earliest
years he expended his sweat, as is the duty of a man,
in taking lions and panthers and bears and other
beasts of the forest, and always lived in the woods
and the mountains, enduring heat and rain and all
other hardships which pleasures of hunting entail.
Hardened by these he was able to hear the sun and
the dust in the wars with the Persians; and his wife,
too, was inured to hardship and in the opmion of
many was held to be more brave than her husband,
being, indeed, the noblest of all the women of the
East, and, as Cornelius Capitolmus? declares, the most
beautiful.


HERODES


XVI. Herodes,? who was the son, not of Zenobia,
but of a former wife of Odaenathus, received the
imperial, power along with his father, though he was
the most effeminate of men, wholly oriental and given
over to Grecian luxury, for he had embroidered tents


he borne out by Zonaras (xii. 24), who says that Odaenathus'
older son was killed with him.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


dicantur.
MAEONIUS


est.
BALLISTA


!So Salm. foll. by Peter; fih herodes P; filia Herodis
<lucuriem> Helm foll. by Hohl,


1 Of c. xv. 4; Val., iv 3.

? He is represented here, as well as 11 c. xv. 5 and Gall, xiii.
1, as Odaenathus’ cousin, but 1n. Zonaras (xii. 24) as hig nephew.
Here and in o. xv. 5 his name is given as Maeonius, while
Syneellus (T. p. 734) kuows him as Odaenathus, and the
Continuator of Cassius Dio frg. 166 (ed. Boissevain., m p. 744),
as Rufinus. The statement that he was vested with the
imperial power and not killed until later seems to he an
invention of the biographer's, due to his desire to swell the


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XVI. 2—XVIIL 1


and pavilions made out of cloth of gold and every-
thing in the manner of the Persians. In fact,
Odaenathus, complying with his ways and moved by
the promptings of a father’s indulgence, gave him all
the kmg's concubines! and the riches and jewels
that he captured. Zenobia, indeed, treated him in
a step-mother’s way, and this made him all the more
dear to his father. Nothing more remains to be said
concerning Herodes.


MAEONIUS


XVII. This man,? the cousin of Odaenathus,
murdered that excellent emperor, being moved
thereto by nothing else than contemptible envy,
for he could brmg no charge against him save that
Herodes was hisson. It is said, however, that previ-
ously he had entered into a conspiracy with Zenobia,
who could not bear that her stepson Herodes should
be called a prmee in a higher rank than her own two
sons, Herenuianus and Timolaus. But Maeonius,
too, was a filthy fellow, and so, after being saluted as
emperor through some blunder, he was shortly there-
after killed by the soldiers, as his excesses deserved,


BALLISTA


XVIII. As to whether this man ? held the imperial
power or not historians do not agree. For many


number of his “ Thirty " According to Zonaras he was killed
immediately after the murder.

? On his services m aiding Odaenathus to repel the Persians
after Naleriau's capture, soe Val.,1v.4; Zonavas, xii. 23 (where
he is called Calhstus). On his co-operation with Macnanus and
his sons and his death, see c. xu, 1-8; xiv. 1; xv. 4; Gall., 1, 2-4;
iii. 9. There is no evidence for the statement that he assumed
the purple, x


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

4 fuit vir insignis, eruditus ad gerendam rem publicam,
in consilus vehemens, in expeditionibus clarus, in
provisione annonaria singulars, Valeriano sie ac-
ceptus ut eum quibusdam litteris hoc testimonio pro-
secutus sit :

5  'Valenanus Ragonio Claro praefecto Illyrici et
Galharum. si quid in te bonae frugis est, quam esse
scio, parens Clafe, dispositiones tu Ballistae persc-

8culis aut sumptibus rem publicam gravent. Galatia
frumentis abundat, referta est Thracia, plenum est
Ilyneum; illic pedites conlocentur, quamquam in

6 z


! Presumably Daphne near Antioch.
* Otherwise unknown and probably, like the letter, fictitious,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XVIII. 2-8


assert that when Quietus was killed by Odaenathus,
Balhsta was pardoned, but nevertheless took the
imperial power, putting no trust in either Galhenus
or Aureolus or Odaenathus. Others, agam, declare
that while still a commoner he was killed on the
lands which he had bought for himself near Daphne.!
Many, indeed, have said that he assumed the purple
m order to rule in the Roman fashion, and that he
took command of the army and made many promises
on his own account, but was killed by those de-
spatehed by Aureolus for the purpose of seizing
Quietus, Macrianus’ son, who, Áureolus averred, was
his own due prey. He was a notable man, skilled
in administering the commonwealth, vehement m
counsel, winning fame in campaigns, without an equal
in providing for rations, and so highly esteemed by
Valerian that ın a certam letter he honoured him
with the following testimony .

* From Valerian to Ragonius Clarus? prefect of
Illyricum and the provinces of Gaul If you are
a man of good judgement, my kinsman Clarus, as
I know that you are, you will carry out the axrange-
ments of Balhsta. Model your government on them.
Do you see how he refrains from burdening the
provincials, how he keeps the horses in places where
there is fodder and exacts the rations for his soldiers
in places where there is grain, how he never compels
the provincials or the land-holders to furnish grain
where they have no supply, or horses where they
have nó pasture? There is no arrangement better
than» to exact in each place what i$ there produced,
so that the commonwealth may not be burdened by
transport or other expenses. Galatia is rich in grain,
Thrace is well stocked, and Illyricum is filled with


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

91am vinum,! laridum, 1am ceterae species m iis dandae

12 Hic igitur vir in tentorio suo cubans a quodam gre-
gano mihte in Odaenathi et Gallieni gratiam dicitur


VALENS


XIX. Hie vir militaris, simul etiam civilium virtu-
tum gloria pollens, proconsulatum Achaiae dato a
2Gallieno tune honore gubernabat. quem Macrianus
vehementer reformidans, sumul quod in omni genere


liam umum Peter,? Hohl; san an D, “agit E, Lessing,
Hohl; ait P, Peter. 5 fh bene Cornelissen foll. by
Hohl; e£ tribunum P, Pater.


[Mime


1 See also c. xxi^ 9 and Call, n. 2-4, lle w also md in
Epit., 82, 4 to have declared himself emperor in Macedonia,
and he 1s listed with Aureolus, Postumus and Ingenuus as an
opponent of Gallienus by Ammianus Marcellinus, xxt, 16, 10,
but no coins of his are known,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XVIII. 9—XIX. 2


it; so let the foot-soldiers be quartered in these
regions, although in Thrace cavalry, too, can winter
without damage to the provineials, since plenty of
hay can be had from the fields. As for wine and
bacon and other forms of food, let them be handed
out in those places m which they abound in plenty.
All this is the policy of Ballista, who gave orders that
any province should furnish only one form of food,
namely that in which it abounded, and that from ıt
the soldiers should be kept away. This, in fact, has
been officially decreed.”

There ıs also another letter, m which he gives
thanks to Ballista, showing that he himself had
received from him instruction in governing the state,
and expressing his pleasure that he had on his staff
no supernumerary tribune (that 1s, one unassigned to
some duty), no one m attendance who did not truly
perform some office, and no soldier who was not truly
a fighter.

This man, then, while resting in his tent was slain,
it is said, by a certain common soldier, in order to
gain the favour of Odaenathus and Gallienus. I,
however, have not been able to find out sufficiently
the truth concerning him, because the writers of his
time have related much about his prefecture but
little about his rule.


VALENS


XIX. This man,! à warrior and at the same lime
excelling in glory for his qualities as a citizen, was
holditig the proconsulship of Achaea} an honour con-
ferred on him by Gallienus. Macrianus feared him
greatly, both because he had learned that he was
distinguished for his whole manner of life and because


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


VALENS SUPERIOR


PISO


XXI. Hie a Macrano ad interficiendum Valentem
missus, ubi eum providum futurorum imperare cog-
novit, Thessaliam concessit atque illic paueis sibi
— consentientibus sumpsit imperium Thessalicusque ap-
pellatus v1? interemptus est, vir summae sanctitatis


=1 forma P. ? cum om. in P, ins. by Hohl; before alle
in X. 544 P, om. by Peter and Hohl,
Db


riam, MAEAEA NE AA OD EAA e aree AA e RH Pr CU V ri aaa de eim pg tuendi


! Probably Iuhus Valens Licinianus 1s meant, who pro-
claimed himself emperor in Romo duung the absence of the
Emperor Decius in¢gihe war against the Goths in 250, bet was
promptly put to death; see Aur. Victor, Caes. 20, 3; Mpita
29,5. Asthe biographer himself admuts iu c. xxxi, 8, he haa
no place &uong ihe rivals of Galhenus, and he is inserted
solely for th. purpose of increasing the number of Ty anni.


114.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XIX. 3—-XXI. 1


he knew him to be his epemy out of hatred for his
virtues. He therefore despatched Piso, a member of
a family then most noble and, m fact, of consular
rank, with orders to put him to death. Valens,
however, who kept a most careful watch, foreseeing
the future and believing that there was no other
means of protecting himself, seized the imperial power
and soon was slain by the soldiers.


VALENS THE ELDER


XX. It has fortunately occurred to us that, in
speaking of this Valens, we should make some men-
tion also of the Valens! who was killed in the time
of the earlier emperors. For he, it is said, was the
great-uncle of the Valens who seized the power under
Gallienus. Others, however, assert that he was only
his uncle. But the fate of them both was alike, for
he, too, was killed after he had ruléd for a few days
in Illyricum.


PISO


XXI. This man? was despatched by Macrianus to
kill Valens, but on learning that he, foreseeing the
future, had declared himself emperor, he withdrew
into Thessaly ; there by consent of a few he assumed
the imperial power, taking the surname Thessalcus,
but was then slain by violence. He was a man of
the utmost righteousness and during his life-time he


2Known also from e. xix. 2 and Gail. i 2-4, but un-
mentioned by any other author. That Macnanus during his
march through the Balkan Peninsula (see c. xi. 12-14) sent
& force into Macedonia (Achaea) is not improbable; but no
coms of Piso's ara known, and the story of his assumption of
the power, hke the “ senatezs consultum" conferring honours
on a rebel (!), must be regarded as fiction. ,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


et temporibus suis Frugi dietus et qui ex illa Pisonum
familia ducere origmem diceretur cui se Cicero nobili-

8 Senatus consultum de Pisone factum ad noscendam
eius maiestatem libenter inserm: Die septimo kal.
Iuliarum eum esset nuntiatum Pisonem a Valente in-
teremptum, ipsum Valentem a suis occisum, Arellius
Fuscus, consularis primae sententiae, qui in locum

1d probata os Salm. ; vmperaturos P. * cler consulium


P. ? locum ins. by Richter and Hohl; om. in P and J;
alıb Peter,


Del
! Cicero's daughter Tullia was married to O, Calpurnius Piso
Frugi. They were Setrothed ın 67 B.o after Cicero had been
elected praetor.
? On such “ senatus consulta” see note to Val., v. 3.
_ *Awriter of this name (if Salinasius’ conjecture be correct)
is cited in c. xxv. 2, but he may well be fictitious. Also an


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXI. 2-7


was given the name Frugi, and he was said to denve
his descent from that f&nuly of Pisos with which
Cicero had formed au allance for the purpose of
entering the nobility.! He was highly esteemed by
all the emperors ; in fact, Valens himself, who 1s said
to have sent the assassins against him, declared, it is
told, that never could he render account to the gods
of the lower world for having given an order to
put Piso to death, albeit his enemy, for his like the
Roman commonwealth did not contain.

I have gladly inserted the senate’s decree ? which
was passed concerning Piso, in order that his honours
may be made known: On the seventh day before the
Kalends of July, when word had been brought that
Piso was slain by Valens and Valens himself by his
own soldiers, Arellus Fuscus, the consular whose
rigbt it was to give his opinion first, having succeeded
to the place of Valerian, said © ** Consul, consult us."
And on being asked his opmion, hé' said, * I propose
divine honours for Piso, Conscript Fathers, and I
firmly believe that this will be approved by our
emperors, Gallienus, Valerian, and Saloninus; for
never was there a better man or a braver." After
him the others also on being consulted voted Piso
a statue among the triumphant generals and also
a four-horse chariot. His statue is still to be seen,
but the chariot which they decreed was erected only
to be moved elsewhere, and it has not yet been brought
back. For it was set up in the place where the Bath
of Diocletian * was afterwards built, destined to have
a nape as undying as it is revered. +
Arolhus Fuscus was proconsul of Asia in 274-275, according to


Aur, xl. 4.
4 Now the Museo Nazionale delle Terme.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


AEMILIANUS


?


lest Peter, et P. ?uelut Baehrens, Peter?, wel P, X.
3 quibusque Editio Princ.; quibus usque P; quibusque usque
Peter. 5 45, ins. by Petschenig and Hohl; om. in P.
* defui Cod. Laurent. foll. by Peter; de P.


1 See also c. xxvi. 4, Gall, 1v. 1-9; v. 6, 1x. 1; Ho 18 also
mentioned in pri., 82, 4. It is known from papyri that
L. Mussius Aemihanus and Aurelius Theodotos (8 8) were
prefecis of Egypt, the former as late as Oct. 259, tlre latter 1u
August 262. Aemjhanus would seem to have held central
Egypt (the Thebais) for Gallienus against Macrianis and
Quietus, who were acknowledged as emporors m lower Egypt
in 260. However, no genuine coins of his are known, and it is
unhkely that he ever assumed the imperial power; therefore it


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXII 1-6


AEMIDIANUS t


XXII. Itis the wont of the people of Egypt that
like madmen and fools they are led by the most trivial
matters to become highly dangerous to the common-
wealth ;? for merely because a greeting was omitted,
or à place in the baths refused, or meat and vegetables
withheld, or on account of the boots of slaves or some
other such things, they have broken out mto riots,
even to the pomt of becoming highly dangerous to
the state, so that troops have been armed to quell
them. Wrth their wonted madness, accordingly, on
a certain occasion, when the slave of the chief magis-
trate ? then governing Alexandria had been killed by
a soldier for asserting that his sandals were better
than the soldier's, à mob gathered together, and,
coming to the house of the general Aemilianus, it
assailed him with all the implements and the frenzy
usual in riots; he was pelted with stenes and attacked
with swords, and no kind of weapon used in a riot
was lackmg. And so Aemilianus was constrained to
assume the imperial power, knowmg well that he
would have to die in any event. To this step the
army m Egypt agreed, chiefly out of hatred for
Gallienus. He did not, indeed, lack energy for
administering public affairs. For he marched through
the district of Thebes and, in fact, the whole of


is hard to understand why he should have been arrested by order
of Galhenus, see Milne in Journ. Egypt. Arch., 1x, p. 80 f.

? See also Pr, vil. 4.

?0n the curator es publicae in the second century see note
io Mure., xi. 2. Im the third century Xe became a regular
official, chosen by the local curia but ratified by the emperor
and charged with the genoral admunisivation of the cty with
control over ihe finances and the power to veto municipal
legislation,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


! et Baehrens, Peter?; sed P. ^de E, Peter; om. in. P.
3nune Petschenig, Peter; non P. * cum ins. by Peter and
Hohl; om. un P.


! e,g., Jugurtha and Vercingetors, strangled in the Tulianum
at Rome. P

* Aulus Gabinius, who had restored Ptolemy Auletes to his
throne, was, on his return to Rome m 54, attacked by Cicero
1n a speech now lost; soo Cassius Dio, xxxix, 62, 2.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXII 7-14


Egypt, and to the best of, his powers drove back the
barbarians with courage ‘and firmness. Finally, he
won by his merits the name of Alexander, or else
Alexandrinus—for this 1s considered uncertain. But
when he was making ready for a campaign against
the people of India, the general Theodotus was sent
against him by order of Gallienus, and so he suffered
punishment, for it is related that, like the captives of
old,! he was strangled m prison.

Now, since I am speaking of Egypt, I think I must
not fail to relate what the history of former times has
suggested and, in connection therewith, a deed of
Gallienus. For when he wished to confer procon-
sular power on Theodotus, the priests forbade it,
saying that it was not lawful for the consular fasces
to be brought into Alexandria. This, we know well
enough, was mentioned by Cicero m his speech
against Gabinius,? and, in fact, it is still remembered
that this practice was maintamed. Therefore, your?
kinsman Herennius Celsus,* in seeking the consul-
ship, ought to know that what he desires 1s not law-
ful. For at Memphis, they say, it was written on
a golden column in Egyptian letters that Egypt would
at last regain its freedom when the Roman fasces and
the Roman bordered toga had been brought into the
land. This may be found in Proculus® the grammarian,
the most learned man of his time, in the place where
he tells of foreign countries.


3 On the person addressed see Vol. T., eS p. xv.

4 Otherwise unknown.

Possibly ethor Eutychius padka (Mare., n. 3) or
Proklos, the author of a xp"rvTojuá0eim ypaupariucy cited by
Photios, but more probably, hke the “inscription,” fictitious.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


SATURNINUS


®
TETRICUS SENIOR


XXIV. Interfecto Victorino et eius fiio mater eius
Victoria sive Vitruvia Tetricum senatorem populi
Romani praesidatum in Gallia regentem ad imperium


! denudarentur X, Peter, Hohl; nudaseniur P.


1 Mentioned in GalU.,1ix. land also in Fum., xi. 1, where
a careful distinction 1s made between him and the histoneal
Saturninus, à pretender of the time of Probus. In the lack of
any evidence for his existence he may be supposed torbe merely
an invention of the,biographer’s.

°C. Pius Hsuvius Tetricus Augustus, according to This i-
scriptions and coins, see Cohen, vi. pp.i91-115, His elevation
to power alter the death of Victormus 1s mentioned also in c. v.
8 and xxxi. 2, and Aur. Victor, Caes., 33, 14, and further details


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXII. 1—XXIV. 1


SATU RNI NUS


XXIIL The best of the generals of the time of
Gallienus, though, in fact, he was chosen by Valerian,
was Saturninus! He also, being unable to endure
the loose ways of Galhenus, who revelled all mght in
public places, and preferring to command the soldiers
m his own way rather than m that of his emperor,
accepted the imperial power from the army. He was
a man uncqualled in wisdom, outstanding in dignity,
lovable in his ways, and because of his victories well
known everywhere, even among the barbarians. On
the day on which the soldiers clothed him with the
imperial robe he called together an assembly, it 1s
related, and said. “ Fellow-soldiers, you have lost
a good general and made a bad emperor." Finally,
after doing many vigorous deeds during his rule,
merely because he was too severe and too harsh to
the soldiers he was killed by those very men who
had made him emperor. He is famous for having
commanded the soldiers, when reclinmg at table, to
wear military cloaks in order that their lower limbs
might not be bared, heavy ones m winter and very
light ones in summer.


TETRICUS THE ELDER.


XXIV. After Victorinus? and his son were slain,
his mother Victoria (or Vitruvia) urged Tetricus, a
Roman senator then holding the governorship of


of his career are given by Mubropius and Aurehus Victor. The
storyzoncorning nim is fairly consistent and in the main per-
haps cerrect, but he does not belong in the hst of the protenders
of the tune of Gallienus, for he assumed the imponal power m
270 at the earliest,
3? Boe e. vi.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS

3 versus denique illius fertur, quem furtim? ad Aureli-
anum seripserat .


* Erpe me his, invicte, malis."

5bus Odaenathi, Herenniano et Timolao. pudore
tamen victus vir nimium severus eum quem tri-
umphaverat correctorem totius Italiae fecit, id est
Campaniae, Sammi, Lucaniae, Bruttiorum, Apuliae,
Calabriae, Etruriae atque Umbriae, Piceni et Flam-
niae omnisque annonariae regionis, ac Tetricum non
solum vivere, sed etiam in summa dignitate manere


1 fun tun Peter; statwn P, Hohl.


! More correctly, Aquitania, according to Aur. Victor, Caes.
88, 14 and Eutropius, 1x. 10, according to the latter he was ac-
clauned emperor by the soldiers at Bordeaux.

2 Apud, Catalaunos (Oh&lons-sur-Marno) according to Eiutvo-
pius, ix. 18, 1, who tells the same story of his surrender. Further
details are given by Aur. Victor, Caes., 35, 4-5. .

3 Aeneid, vi. 865

*In 274, cf. c. xxx. 24-96, AUT., xxxn. 45 xxxiv. 2-37

5 See c, xxVit.-xx viii.

8 Corrector Lucamae, according to Aur., xxxix, 1; Aur.
Victor, Caes., 35, 5; Epil, 35, 7; Xiutropius, ix. 13, 9. It


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXIV. 2-5


Gaul! to take the imperii] power, for the reason,
many relate, that he was her kinsman; she then
caused him to be entitled Augustus and bestowed on
his son the name of Caesar. But after Tetricus had
done many deeds with success and had ruled for a
long time he was defeated? by Aurelian, and, being
unable to bear the impudence and shamelessness of
his soldiers, he surrendered of his own free will to
this prince most harsh and severe. In fact, a quota-
tion of his is cited, which he secretly sent in writing
to Aurelian :—

“Save me, O hero unconquered, from these my
misfortunes,” ?

And so Aurelian, who did not readily plan aught
that was guileless or mereiful or peaceful, led this
man, though he was a senator of the Roman people
and a consular and had ruled the provinces of Gaul
with a governor's powers, in lus triumehal procession
at the same time * as Zenobia, the wife of Odaenathus,
and the younger sons of Odaenathus, Herennianus
and Timolaus. Aurelian, nevertheless, exceedingly
stern though he was, overcome by a sense of shame,
made Tetricus, whom he had led in his triumph,
supervisor over the whole of Italy,® that is, over
Campania, Samnium, Lucania, Bruttium, Apulia,
Calabria, Etruria and Umbria, Picenum and the
Flaminian district, and the entire grain-bearing
region, and suffered him not only to retam his life


seoms probable that this is the more correg version and that
the stattinont in the text is exaggerated, lke tnat in 8 4, although
the earhost corrector of a distret of Italy is found in an msenp-
lion of 283-284 and occasional instances of conectores of all
Italy are found oarlier; see Pauly-Wissowa, Realencycl., 1v.
1651 i.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


passus est, cum illum saepe collegam, nonnumquam
commilitonem, ahquando etiam iumperatorem appel-
laret.


TETRICUS IUNIOR


lAvelhius Salm., Hohl; Dagellias P, susp. by Peter.
? So Peter foll. by Hohl; cycle 2icturaae P. 5 yPuse0 P,
Peter, Hohl.


1C. Pius Esuvius Tetiicus Caesar, according to his msorip-
tions and coins, see Cohen, vi.? pp. 118-129. According to Aur.,
xxxiv, 2 he was acclaimed imperator, and some of his coms bear
the title Augustus, Sui as none of these portrays him with the
laurel i$ 1s not probable that he ever had this title.

2 See note to c. xx. 3.

3The citation from the writer's father or grandfather, found
here and in Aur., 43, 2; Fum., ix. 4; xv. 4; Car. xii. 35 xiv. 1;


126 i


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXV. 1-4


but also to remain in the highest position, calling hun
frequently colleague, sometimes fellow-soldier, and
sometimes even emperor.


TETRICUS THE YOUNGER


XXV. He,! when a little lad, received the name of
Caesar from Victoria when she herself had been en-
titled by the army Mother of the Camp. He was,
furthermore, led in triumph along with his father, but
later he enjoyed all the honours of a senator ; nor was
his inheritance diminished, and, indeed, he passed it
on to his descendants, and was ever, as Arellius Fus-
cus? reports, a man of distinction My grandfather?
used to declare that he was a friend of his own, and
that never was any one given preference over him
either by Aurelian or by any of the dater emperors.
The house of the Tetrci is still standing to-day,
situated on the Caelian Hill between the two groves
and faemg the Temple of Isis built by Metellus ; * and
a most beautiful one it is, and in it Aurelian 1s depicted
bestowing on both the Tetric: the bordered toga and
the rank of senator and receiving from them a sceptre,
a chaplet, and an embroidered robe. "This picture is
in mosaic, and it is said that the two Tetrici, when
they dedicated it, invited Aurelian himself to a
banquet.


xv. 1, is merely a device modelled after similar citations made
by Suetenius, Otho, x. 1 and Cal., xix. 3. €

! A temple of Isis stood on the northem side of the Caehan
Hill near the modern Via Labicana, and, although we know of
no connection between 1$ and any Metellus, 15 may be the temple
which tho author has in mind.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


TREBELLIANUS

31ussit. palatium in arce lsauriae constituit, qui
quidem cum se in intima et tuta Isaurorum loca
munitus difficultatibus locorum et montibus contulisset,
4aliquamdim apud Cileas imperavit. sed per Galheni
ducem Camsisoleum, natione Aegyptium, fratrem
Theodot: qui Aemilianum ceperat, ad campum de-


Lowa erat Eiyssenbaxdt foll. by Hohl, quare P, 2, Peter.
? elem, Petschemg foll. by Hohl; e£ cum P, &, Patoy,


iTrebellianus 1s known only from this “vita,” for tho Tre-
bellvamus mentioned briefly m Eutropius, ix. 8, 1 is evidently an
error for Regahanus. Itis hardly hkely that this “ archipirata ”
ever assumed the purple. .

? A mountamoug district in southeim Asia Minor, N.W. of
Cilicia, and notorious as the haunt of brigands. T

3Noecomsofhisareknown. Itappears to have been a favourite
deviceof these biographersto incroasethe unportanceof pretenders
by asserting that they issued coins; cf. c.xxx1.3, Parima 1i. 1.

4Otherwise unknown. On Theodotus see c. xxii. 8.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXVI. 1-7


TREBERLIANUS


XXVI. Lam by this time ashamed to tell how many
tyrants there were in the reign of Gallienus, all on
aceount of the vices of that pestiferous man, for such,
indeed, were his excesses that he deserved to have
many rebels rise up against him, and such his cruelty
that he was rightly regarded with fear. This cruelty
he showed also toward Trebelhanus,! who was made
ruler in Isauria?—for the Isaurians desired a leader
for themselves. He, though others dubbed hum arch-
pirate, gave himself the title of emperor. He even
gave orders to strike coins? and he set up an imperial
palace in à certam Isaurian stronghold. Then, when
he had betaken himself into the inmost and safest
parts of Isauria, where he was protected by the
natural difficulty of the ground and by the mountains,
he ruled for some time among the Cilicians, Camsi-
soleus,* however, Gallienus’ general and an Egyptian
by race, the brother of that Theodotus who had cap-
tured Aemihanus, brought him down to the plains
and then defeated and slew him. Never afterwards,
however, was it possible to persuade the Isaurians,
fearing that Gallienus might vent his anger upon them,
to come down to the level ground, not even by any
offer of kindness on the part of the emperors. In
fact, since the time of Trebelhanus they have been
considered barbarians; for indeed their district,
though m the midst of lands belonging to the Romans,
is guarded by a novel kind of defence, comparable to
a frontier-wall, for ıt 1s protected no» by men but by
the nature of the country. For the Isaurians are not of
noble stature or distinguished courage, not well pro-
vided with arms or wise m counsel, but they are kept


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


arms, non consiliis prudentes, sed hoc solo securi
quod in editis positi adir nequeunt. quos qudem
divus Claudius paene ad hoc perduxerat ut a suis
semotos locis m Cilicia conloearet, daturus uni ex
amicissimis omnem Isaurorum possessionem, ne quid
ex ea postea rebellionis oreretur.


HERENNIANUS


XXVII. Odaenathus moriens duos parvulos reliquit,
Herennianum et fratrem eius Timolaum, quorum
nomine Zenobia usurpato sibr imperio diutius quam
feminam decuit rem publicam obtinuit, parvulos
Romani imperatoris habitu praeferens purpuratos
eosdemque adhibens contionibus, quas ila virihter
frequentavit, Didonem et Semiramidem et Cleopatram


TIMOLAUS


1 manent X, Hohl; maneat P.


1 irap ret a tA


1 There 1s no mention of this in connection with Claudius, but
a similar measure was employed by Probus; seo Prob., xvi, 6.

* Herennianus ard Timolaus, mentioned in this series af vitae
as the sons of Odaenathus and Zonobia and as ruling with their
mother (Gali, xui 2; c. xxx. 2), are known from no other
source. The son of Odaenathus who succeeded him in 266-267,
and reigned jointly with Zenobia, was Vaballathus Athenodorus ;


THIRTY PRETENDERS XXVII. 1—XXVIIL 2


safe by this alone that, dwelling, as they do, on the
heights, no one can approach them. The Deified
Claudius did, it is true, almost persuade them to
leave their native lands and settle in Cilicia, plan-
ning to give the entire possessions of the Isaurians to
one of his most loyal friends in order that never again
might a rebellion arise therein,


HERENNIANUS


XXVII. Odaenathus, when he died, left two little
sons, Herennianus and his brother Timolaus,? m whose
name Zenobia seized the imperial power, holding the
government longer than was meet for a woman.
These boys she displayed clad in the purple robe of
a Roman emperor and she brought them to public
gatherings which she attended in the fashion of a
man, holding up, among other examples, Dido and
Semiramis, and Cleopatra, the founder of her family.?
The manner of their death, however, 1s uncertain ;
for many maintain that they were killed by Aurelian,
and many that they died a natural death, since
Zenobia’s descendants still remain among the nobles
of Rome.


TIMOLAUS


XXVIII. With regard to him we consider only
those things to be worth knowing which have been
told concerning his brother, One thing there is,


see noie io c. xxx. 2. Even the author of tls vifa of Aurelian
(see xxxvin. 1) knew of him as hus father's successor. If these
two princes existed at all, they were younger sons who never
ruled.

s See C, XXX. 2,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


fratre separat, quod tanti fut ardoris ad studia
Romana ut brevi consecutus quae insinuaverat gram-
maticus esse dicatur, potuisse quin etiam summum
Latinorum rhetorem facere.


CELSUS


XXIX. Occupatis partibus Gallicanis, orientalibus,
quin etiam Ponti, Thraciarum et Illyrici, dum Galhenus
popinatur et balneis ac lenonibus deputat vitam, Afn
quoque auctore Vibio Passieno, proconsule Africae, et
Fabio Pomponiano, duce limitis Libya, Celsum 1m-
peratorem appellaverunt peplo deae Caelestis ornatum.

2 hie privatus ex tribunis in Africa positus ın agris suis
vivebat, sed ea 1ustitia et corporis magnitudine ut

4inter obscuros principes vix relatus est. corpus eius
a canibus consumptum est Siccensibus, qui Gallieno
fidem servaverant, perurgentibus, et novo iniunae
genere imago in crucem sublata persultante vulgo,
quasi patibulo ipse Celsus videretur adfixus.


! Mentioned nowhere else except in the spurious letter in
Claud., vii. 4, and probably an mvention of the biogrepher's.
Nothing is known of either Passienus or Pomponianus, or the
alleged murderess, whose existence Hubert Goltzius attempted
to prove by forging coins bearing the legend Laen, Gaillhena
Aug. ; see Eckhel, D.N., vii. p. 412 f.

2 Seo note to Pert., 1v. 2.

? Mod. el-Kef in western Tunisia.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXIX. 1-4


however, which distinguighes him from his brother,
that is, that such was his eagerness for Roman studies
that in a short time, it is said, he made good the
statement of his teacher of letters, who had said that
he was in truth able to make him the greatest of
Latm rhetoricians.


CELSUS


XXIX. When the various parts of the empire were
seized, namely Gaul, the Orient, and even Pontus,
Thrace and Illyricum, and while Gallienus was spend-
ing his time in public-houses and giving up his life to
bathing and pimps, the Africans also, at the instance
of Vibius Passienus, the proconsul of Africa, and
Fabius Pomponianus, the general m command of the
Libyan frontier, created an emperor, namely Celsus!
decking him with the robe of the goddess Caelestis.?
This man, a commoner and formerly a tribune
stationed in Africa, was then living on his own
estates, but such was lus reputation for justice and
such the size of his body that he seemed worthy of
the imperial power. Therefore he was made emperor,
but on the seventh day of his rule he was killed by a
woman named Gallena, a cousin of Galhenus, and so
he has scarcely found a place even among the least
known of the emperors. Hais body was devoured by
dogs, for such was the command of the people of
Sicca,? who had remained faithful to Gallienus, and
then-with a new kind of insult his 4mage was set up
on a cross, while the mob pranced about, as though
they were lookmg at Celsus himself affixed to a
gibbet.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


ZENOBIA

3 quam femmeus sexus patiebatur imperavit. si quidem
Gallieno adhuc regente rem publicam regale muher
superba munus obtinuit et Claudio bells Gothicis
occupato vix denique ab Aureliano victa et triumphata
concessit ın 1ura Romana.

4  Exstatepistula Aureliani, quae captivae mulieritesti-
monium fert. nam cum a quibusdam reprehenderetur,
quod mulhlerem' veluti ducem aliquem vir fortissimus
triumphasset, missis ad senatum populumque Romanum

5 litteris hac se adtestatione defendit: “ Audio, patres


1 enım P, def. by Tidner; etiam Peter; < peregi ma > enum,
Petschenig, Hohl. *Dadonis Salm., domes P.


! Septimus Zenobia, wife of Septimius Odaenathus. In the
inscriptions erected fo her during her rule ati Palmyra she is
called 4 Aaurpordry BacíAweaa(O.G. I.648-650) andin one (O.G.I.
647) she actually has the title of S<«@acry (Augusta), but, as has
been pointed out by Mommsen, this 1s probably an honorary
designation, and her son and co-ruler Vaballathus Athenodorus
(see note to c. xxvu. 1) bore, at first, only the titles of consul, rea
and duw vmyes ater Romanorum, and there is no reason to believe
that she actually claimed the imperial power. For her myasion


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXX. 1-5


ZENOBIA


XXX. Now al shame is exhausted, for m the
weakened state of the commonwealth things came
to such a pass that, while Galhenus conducted him-
self in the most evil fashion, even women ruled most
excellently. For, in fact, even a foreigner, Zenobia !
by name, about whom much has already been said,
boasting herself to be of the family of the Cleopatras
and the Ptolemies,* proceeded upon the death of her
husband Odaenathus to cast about her shoulders the
imperial mantle; and arrayed in the robes of Dido
and even assuming the diadem, she held the imperial
power in the name of her sons Herennianus and
Timolaus,? ruling longer than could be endured from
one of the female sex. For this proud woman per-
formed the functions of a monarch both while Gal-
lienus was rulmg and afterwards when Claudius was
busied with the war against the Goths,* and in the
end could scarcely be conquered by Aurelian himself,
under whom she was led in triumph and submitted to
the sway of Rome.

There is still in existence a letter of Aurelian's
which bears testimony concerning this woman, then
in captivity. For when some found fault with him,
because he, the bravest of men, had led à woman in
triumph, as though she were a general he sent a
letter to the senate and the Roman people, defending
himself by the following justification: “I have heard,


of Egypt, see Claud., xi. 1. On Aurehand campaign against
her and his subsequent tnumph, see Aut., XXD.-XXX. ; XXXUI-
xxxiv,

? So also c. xxvii. 2. It was, of course, a fiction.

? See note to c. xxvi. 1. å Gee Olaud., Vi. xl.


T&R


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


l alla sit Peter, Hohl, alas P. ? consulte Paucker, Corne-
lissen, Peter’ occulie P, Petert, 3 temptandis Cornelissen,
Hohl; temptates P, Peter.


i See c, xv, 3-4.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXX. 6-12


Conscript Fathers, that men are reproaching me for
having performed an unmanly deed in leading Zenobia
in triumph. But in truth those very persons who find
fault with me now would accord me praise in abun-
dance, did they but know what manner of woman she
is, how wise im counsels, how steadfast in plans, how
firm toward the soldiers, how generous when necessity
calls, and how stern when disciplme demands. I
might even say that ıt was her doing that Odaenathus
defeated the Persians and, after putting Sapor to
flight, advanced all the way to Ctesiphon.! I might
add thereto that such was the fear that this woman
inspired in the peoples of the East and also the
Egyptians that neither Arabs nor Saracens nor
Armenians ever moved against her. Nor would I
have spared her life, had I not known that she did a
great service to the Roman state when she preserved
the imperial power m the East for herself, or for her
children. Therefore let those whom nothing pleases
keep the venom of their own tongues to themselves.
For if it is not meet to vanquish a woman and lead
her in triumph, what are they saying of Gallienus, in
contempt of whom she ruled the empire well? What
of the Deified Claudius, that revered and honoured
leader? For he, because he was busied with his
campaigns against the Goths, suffered her, or so it is
said, to hold the imperial power, doing it of purpose
and wisely, in order that he himself, while she kept
guard over the eastern frontier of the empire, might
the more safely complete what he had taken in hand.”
This "speech shows what opinion AuYelian held con-
cerning Zenobia.

Such was her continence, it is said, that she would
not know even her own husband save for the purpose


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


cum semel concubuisset, éxspectatis menstruis con-
tinebat se, si praegnans esset, sin minus, iterum
13 potestatem quaerendis liberis dabat. vixit regali
pompa. more magis Persico adorata est, regum
14 more Persarum convivata est. imperatorum more
Romanorum ad contiones galeata processit cum limbo
purpureogemmis dependentibus per ultimam fimbriam,
media etiam cochlide veluti fibula muliebri adstricta,
15 bracchio saepe nudo. fuit vultu subaquilo, fusci
coloris, oculis supra modum vigentibus ! mgris, spiritus
divini, venustatis incredibils. tantus candor in
dentibus ut margaritas eam plerique putarent habere,
lónon dentes. vox clara et virilis, severitas, ubi
necessitas postulabat, tyrannorum, bonorum prm-
cipum clementia, ubi pietas requirebat. larga
prudenter, conservatrix thesaurorum ultra femineum
17 modum. usa vehiculo carpentario, raro pilento, equo
saepius. fertum autem vel tna vel quattuor milia
18 frequenter cum peditibus ambulasse. venata * est
Hispanorum cupiditate. bibit saepe cum ducibus,
cum esset alias sobria; bibit et cum Persis atque
19 Armeniis, ut eos vinceret. usa est vasis aureis
gemmatis ad convivia, iam usa? Cleopatranis. in
ministerio eunuchos gravioris aetatis habuit, puellas


! 4igentibus E, Peter; engentebus P. ? enata, Kiesshng,
Peter: nata P. 3 So Editor; conuwawacwnusa Pb; conta
non 15181 Peter, conta, usa Hohl.


eam!


Found in Arabia according to Pliny, Nat. Hist., xxxvii.
194, and often of such great size that they were used by eastern
kings on the frontals of their horses and as ornamental
pendants.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXX. 13-19


of conception. For when once she had lain with him,
she would refrain until the time of menstruation to
see if she were pregnant; if not, she would again
grant him an opportunity of begetting children. She
lived in regal pomp. It was rather in the manner of
the Persians that she received worship and m the
manner of the Persian kings that she banqueted , but
it was 1n the manner of a Roman emperor that she
came forth to public assemblies, wearing a helmet
and girt with a purple fillet, which had gems hanging
from the lower edge, while its centre was fastened
with the jewel called cochlis,! used instead of the
brooch worn by women, and her arms were frequently
bare. Her face was dark and of a swarthy hue, her
eyes were black and powerful beyond the usual wont,
her spirit divinely great, and her beauty incredible.
So white were her teeth that many thought that she
had pearls in place of teeth.  Her,roice was clear
and like that of aman. Her sternness, when neces-
sity demanded, was that of a tyrant, her clemency,
when her sense of right called for it, that of a good
emperor. Generous with prudence, she conserved
her treasures beyond the wont of women. She made
use of a carriage, and rarely of a woman's coach, but
more often she rode a horse; it is said, moreover,
that frequently she walked with her foot.soldiers for
three or four miles. She hunted with the eagerness
of a Spaniard. She often drank with her generals,
though at other times she refrained, and she drank,
too, with the Persians and the Armenians, but only
for the purpose of getting the better of them. At
her banquets she used vessels of gold and jewels, and
she even used those that had been Cleopatra's. As
servants she had eunuchs of advanced age and but


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


20 nimis raras. filios Latine loqui iusserat, ita ! ut Graece

23 Cum illam Aurelianus cepisset atque in conspectum
suum adductam sic appellasset, “ Quid est,? Zenobia ?
ausa es insultare Romanis imperatoribus ?" illa dixisse
fertur: “ Imperatorem te esse cognosco, qui vincis,
Gallienum et Aureolum et ceteros principes non
putavi. Victoriam mei similem credens in consortium
regni venire, si facultas locorum pateretur, optavi.”

96 posse. vincti erant praeterea pedes auro, manus
etiam catenis aureis, nec collo aureum vinculum


lata Peter; «d P. ? cohabsto Peter; cohibita P, Hohl.
Sest X, Mommsen, Hohl; es P corr. ; O Peter, * «ta ins.
by Walter and Hohl; om. in P.


! See c, xxxi, * Of. AUT., xxxiv. 3,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXX. 20-27


very few maidens. She ordered her sons to talk
Latin, so that, in fact, they spoke Greek but rarely
and with difficulty, She herself was not wholly con-
versant with the Latin tongue, but nevertheless,
mastering her timidity she would speak it; Egyptian,
on the other hand, she spoke very well In the
history of Alexandria and the Orient she was so well
versed that she even composed an epitome, so it is
said; Roman history, however, she read in Greek.
When Aurelan had taken her prisoner, he caused
her to be led into his presence and then addressed her
thus: “ Why is it, Zenobia, that you dared to show
insolence to the emperors of Rome?" To this she
replied, ıt is said: ‘ You, I know, are an emperor
indeed, for you win victories, but Gallienus and
Aureolus and the others I never regarded as em-
perors. Believing Victoria! to be a woman like me,
I desired to become a partner in the royal power,
should the supply of lands permit” And so she
was led in triumph with such magnificence that
the Roman people had never seen a more splendid
parade. For, in the first place, she was adorned
with gems so huge that she laboured under the
weight of her ornaments ; for it is said that this
woman, courageous though she was, halted very
frequently, saying that she could not endure the load
of her gems. Furthermore, her feet were bound
with shackles of gold and her hands with golden
fetters, and even on her neck she wore a chain
of gold, the weight of which was borne by a Persian
buffoon.? Her life was granted her*by Aurelian, and
they say that thereafter she lived with her children
in the manner of a Roman matron on an estate that
had been presented to her at Tibur, which even to


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


VICTORIA


18, 1ng. by Peler; om. in P.


! See note to Hadr., xxvi. 5.

? Frequently mentioned as responsible, after the death of
her son Victorinus, for the bestowal of the imperial powor, first
on her grandson, thfn on the various pretenders im Gaul; see
Cc. V. 9, vi. 8; Vi. 1; xxiv. 1; xxv. 1; Aur. Victor, Caes.,
xxxin. 14. The name Vitruvia, given as an alternate form m
the a Triginta and mn Claud., 1v. 4, seems to have no
warrant.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXXI. 1-5


this day is still called Zenobia, not far from the palace
of Hadrian ! or from that place which bears the name
of Concha.


VICTORIA


XXXI. It would, indeed, be an unworthy thng
that Vitruvia also, or rather Victoria,? should be given
a place in letters, had not the ways of Gallienus brought
it about that women, too, should be deemed worthy
of mention For Victoria, after seeing her son and
grandson slain by the soldiers, and also Postumus,
then Lolhanus, and Maris? too (whom the soldiers
had named emperor) all put to death, urged Tetricus,
of whom I have spoken above,* to seize the power,
solely that she might always be daring the deeds of
a man. She was distinguished, furthermore, by her
title, for she called herself Mother of the Camp.?
Coins, too, were struck in her name, Sof bronze and
gold and silver, and even to-day the type is still in
existence among the Trevir.” She did not, indeed,
hve long; for durmg Tetricus’ rule she was slain,
some say, while others assert that she succumbed to
the destiny of fate.


This 1s all that I have deemed worthy of being
1elated concerning the thirty pretenders, all of whom
I have gathered into one book, lest the telling of
each single detail about each one singly might bring
about an aversion that is undeserved and not to be


? See c, 11. ; V. ; Viii. 4 See caxxiv.

* The title Mater Castrorum, first borne by Faustina (see
Mare., xxvi. 8), was regularly used by the later empresses.

9$ None are known , see note to c. xxvi. 2.

7 Their capital was the modern Trier (Augusta Trevirorum).


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


7 Studiose in medio femunas posui ad ludibrium
Gallieni, quo nihil prodigiosius passa est Romana res
publiea, duos etiam nune tyrannos quasi extra
numerum, quod aheni essent temporis, additurus,
unum qui fuit Maximini temporibus, alterum qui
Claudi, ut tyrannorum triginta vitae? hoc volumine

gdestmaveram, sed errorem meum memor historiae

lliaetitare, posuisse. habent integrum numerum ex


lsalivm 25; saluta P. uttag Peter; u: P, Hohl.
Scum risu et oco tiansp. by Peter; after hpannos in P.
Saddentu: sugg. by Peter?, om. m P.


1 Quintillus; sec Claud., xu.

? See c. xx.

3 Built, with an enclosing forum, by Vespasian, N.E. of the
Forum Romanum. Adjacent to ıt was the Bibliotheca Templi
Pacis, apparently a resort of critics.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXXI. 6-19


borne by my readers. Now I will return to the
Emperor Claudius. Concernmg him I think I should
publish a special book, short though :t be, for his
manner of hfe deserves it, and I must say something,
besides, about that peerless man, his brother,! in order
that at least a few facts may be told of so righteous
and noble a family.


It was with deliberate purpose that I included the
women, namely that I might make a mock of Gal-
lenus, a greater monster than whom the Roman
state has never endured; now I will add two pre-
tenders besides, supernumeraries, so to speak, for
they lived each at a different period, since one was of
the time of Maximinus, the other of the time of Clau-
dius, my purpose being to include in this book the
lives of thirty pretenders. I ask you, accordingly,
you who have received this book now completed, to
look on my plan with favour and to consent to add
to your volume these two, whom I had purposed to
include after Claudius and Aurelian among those who
lived between Tacitus and Diocletian, just as I in-
cluded the elder Valens? in this present book. This
error on my part, however, your accurate learning,
mindful of history, prevented. And so I am grateful
that the kindliness of your wisdom has filled out my
title. Now no one in the Temple of Peace? will say
that among the pretenders I included women, female
pretenders, forsooth, or, rather, pretendresses—for
this they are wont to bandy about concerning me
with merriment and jests.  They* have now the
number complete, gathered into my writings from
the secret stores of history. For I will add to my
work Titus and Censormus, the former of whom, as


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


TITUS


1 alm P, def. by Lenze.


! On this “ pretender," called Quartinus by Herodian, vii. 1,
9-10, see Mazım., xi. 1-4 and note.

? See note to Alex., xhx. 8.

? Herodian, vu. 1, 9.

i See Maaun., x.

? According to Mamim., xi 1 and Herodian le., they were
Osroenians.

€L. Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus, consul in 148 s.c., be-
queathed his second surname to his descendants, among whom
was the consul of 58 n.c., made famous by Cicero’s invective,


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXXII 1-5


I have said, lived under Maximinus and the latter
under Claudius, but both were slain by the very
soldiers who clothed them with the purple.


TITUS }


XXXII. It is related by Dexippus? and not left
unmentoned by Herodian ? or any of those who have
recorded such things for posterity to read, that Titus,
once a tribune of the Moors but reduced by Maximinus
to the position of a civilian, fearing a violent death,
as they narrate, but reluctantly, so most assert, and
compelled by the soldiers, seized the imperial power.
But within a few days, after the revolt was put down
whieh Magnus,* a man of consular rank, led against
Maximinus, he was slan by his own troops. He
reigned, however, for the space of six months. He
was one who especially deserved the praise of the
commonwealth both at home and abroad, but in
his ruling he had ill-fortune. Some say, on the
other hand, that he was made emperor by the
Armenian? bowmen, whom Maximinus hated as
devoted to Alexander and to whom he had given
offence. You will not, indeed, wonder that there is
such diversity of statement about this man, for even
his name is scarcely known. His wife was Calpurnia,
a revered and venerated woman of the stock of the
Caesonini (that is, of the Pisos), to whom our fathers
did reverence as a priestess married but once and
among the most holy of women, and whose statue

^


but there is no reason for beheving that the family was in
existence rn the third century, and this Calpurnia is probably
an invention of the author's, due to his desire to ornament his
work with great names.


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


adorarunt, cuius statuam in Templo Veneris adhuc

6 vidimus acrolitham sed auratam. haec uniones Cleo-
patranos habuisse perhibetur, haec lancem centum
librarum argenti, euius plerique poetae meminerunt,
in qua maiorum eius expressa ostenderetur historia.

7 Longius mihi videor processisse quam res postulabat,
sed quid faciam? scientia naturae facilitate verbosa


CENSORINUS


XXXIII. Vir plane militaris et antiquae in curia
dignitatis, bis consul, bis praefectus praetorii, ter
praefectus urbi, quarto pro consule, tertio consularis,
legatus praetorius secundo, quarto aediiems, tertio
quaestorius, eXtra ordinem quoque legatione Persica
functus, etiam Sarmatica.

3 cumque se gravissime gereret neque a militibus ob
disciplinam censoriam ferri posset, ab iis ipsis a quibus

4 factus fuerat interemptus est. exstat eius sepulchrum


1 Despite the imposing array of offices which this * pre-
tender" 1s said tothave held, no trace of bum is found in any
record of any kind, and, if he existed at all, he was certamly
nob the man of importance that the wrter would have us
believe.

? Apparently a pun on claudus = ** laine,”


THIRTY PRETENDERS XXXIL 6—XXXIII 4


we have seen still standing in the Temple of Venus,
its head, hands and feet made of marble but the rest
of it gilded. She ıs said to have owned the pearls
that once belonged to Cleopatra and a silver platter
weighing a hundred pounds, of which many poets
have made mention and on which was shown wrought
in relief the history of her forefathers.

I seem to have gone on further than the matter
demanded. But whatam I todo? For knowledge
is ever wordy through a natural inclination. Where-
fore I shall now return to Censorinus, a man of noble
birth, but said to have ruled for seven days not so
much to the welfare as to the hurt of the state,


CENSORINUS!


XXXIII. He was a soldier, indeed, and a man of
old-tume dignity in the senate-house, having been
twice consul, twice prefect of the guard, three times
prefect of the city, four times proconsul, three times
legate of consular rank, twice of praetorian, four times
of aedihcian, three times of quaestorian, and having
held the post of envoy extraordinary to the Persians
and also to the Sarmatians.

Nevertheless, after all these offices, while living on
his own estates, now an old man and lame in one foot
from a wound received in the Persian War under
Valerian, he was created emperor and by a jester's
wittieism given the name of Claudius? But when he
proceeded to act with the greatest severity and be-
came intolerable to the soldiers because of his rigid
discipline, he was put to death by the very men
who had made him emperor. His tomb is still in


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS


1 circa Bononiam transp. by Eyssenhardt, foll. by Peter ;
after h£teris ın P. ^ adseripium est Hohl, asseraptus est X;
adserapest P!, adserr potest P corr, Peter. Sfidelater X,
Peter; fele: P.


! See note to c. xiv. 8.

? The Templum Gents Flaviae, originally the private house
of Vespasian, was converted into a temple by Domitian (Suet.,
Dom., 1. 1) and was used as the bunal-place of ihe Flavian


THE THIRTY PRETENDERS XXXIII, 5-8


existence near Bologna, and on it are inseribed in
large letters all the honours he had held, but in the
last line there is added: * Happy in all things, as
emperor most hapless.” His family ıs still in exist-
ence,! well known by the name of Censorini, some of
whom, in their hatred of all things Roman, have
departed to Thrace, and some to Bithynia. His
house, too, is still in existence, and a most beautiful
one it is, adjacent to the Flavian House,? which is said
to have once belonged to the Emperor Titus.

You have now the complete number of the thirty
tyrants, you who used to dispute with those ill dis-
posed to me, though always in a kindly spirit. Now
bestow on any one you wish this little book, written
not with elegance but with fidelity totruth. Nor, in
fact, do I seem to myself to have made any pronuse
of literary style, but only of facts, for these little
works which I have composed on the lives of the
emperors I do not write down but only dictate, and
I dictate them, indeed, with that speed, which,
whether I promise aught of my own accord or you
request it, you urge with such insistence that I have
not even the opportunity of drawing breath.


emperors. It stood on the Quirmal Hill close to the modern
Quattro Fontane. The term Gentes Flaviae used im the text
to denote this building 1s given as Gentem Flamam m the
Notitia Regionum and the Curioswm.


DIVUS CLAUDIUS
TREBELLII POLLIONIS


I. Ventum est ad principem Claudium, qui nobis
intuitu Constantii Caesaris cum cura m litteras dige-
rendus est. de quo ego idcirco recusare non potui
quod alios, tumultuarios videlicet imperatores ac
regulos, scripseram eo libro quem de triginta tyrannis
edidi, qu Cleopatranam etiam stirpem Victoriamque!


1 Yacioriumque Peter; Vactorimamque P, Hohl.
2 seliguet ins. by Salm. foll. by Peter; om. in P.


!M. Aurehus Claudius Augustus (268-270). The names
Flavius (c. vii. 8; Aw?., xvu. 2) and Valerius (c. xvni. 3) ave
incorrectly given to him by the biographer for the purpose of
connecting him more closely with Flavius Valerius Constantius
(Ohlorus), his reputed descendant; see note to c. xin. 2. He
seems to have been born m INyricum (e. xi. 9), probably in
214, and to have sCrved under Galhenus m the wars against
Postumus (Gal, vi. 1) and against the Goths; see c. vi. 1:
xvin 1. For his accession to power and his victory over
Aureolus, see c. v. 1-8; Gail, xiv. 2 f.; xv. 8; Tur. Trig.,
xi. £, The biographer omits [rom this hysterical panogynie all


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS
BY
TREBELLIUS POLLIO


I. I have now come to the Emperor Claudius,!
whose life I must set forth in writing with all due
care, out of respect for Constantius Caesar. I could
not, indeed, refuse to write of him, inasmuch as I had
already written of others, emperors created in tumult,
I mean, and princes of no importance, all m that book
which I composed about the thirty pretenders and
which now includes even a descendant of Cleopatra ?
and a Victoria ;? for things had come to such a pass
that, for the sake of comparison with Gallienus, I was
forced to write even the lives of women. And, in
fact, it would not be right to leave unmentioned an
emperor who left us such a scion of his race,’ who
ended the war agaimst the Goths by his own valour,


mention of bus great victory in 268 over the Alamanni, near
Lake Garda, recorded by Epit., 84, 2 and an mscmption m
which he has the cognomen Germanicuse as well as by hus
coms with the legend Victoria Germamea (Matt.-Syd., v. p. 232,
nos. 2477-250).

24,é., Zenobia; see Tur. Trig., xxx. 2.

3 Seo Tyr, Trig., xxxi. 1-4. 3 Of. Tyr. Prig., xxi. 1.

5 Constantius Chlorus; see c. xiii. 2 and note.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


confecit, qui manum publicis cladibus victor imposuit,
qui Gallienum, prodigiosum imperatorem, etiamsi
non auctor consihi fuit, tamen ipse imperaturus bono
generis humani, a gubernaculis publier depulit, qui,
si diutius in hae esset commoratus re publica, Sci-
piones nobis! et Camillos omnesque illos veteres suis
viribus, suis consilus, sua providentia reddidisset
II. Breve illius, negare? non possum, in imperio fuit
tempus, sed breve fuisset, etiamsi quantum hominum
vita suppetit, tantum vir talis imperare potuisset,
2quid enim in illo non mirabile ? quid non con-
spicuum ? quid non triumphalibus vetustissimis prae-
3 ferendum ? in quo Trajiam virtus, Antonmi pietas,
Augusti moderatio, et magnorum principum bona sic
fuerunt, ut non ille? ab aliis exemplum caperet, sed,
etiamsi ili non fuissent, hic ceteris reliquisset ex-
4emplum. doctissimi mathematicorum centum viginti
annos hominiead vivendum datos mdicant neque
amplius cuiquam iactitant esse concessos, etiam illud
addentes Mosen solum, dei, ut Iudaeorum hbri lo-
quuntur, famiharem, centum viginti quinque annos
vixisse; qui cum quereretur quod iuvenis interiret,
responsum ei ab incerto ferunt numine neminem plus
5 esse vieturum. quare etiamsi centum et viginti quinque
annos Claudius vixisset, ne necessariam quidem mortem
eius exspectandam fuse, ut Tullius de Scipione


l1409bis Salm.; boms P. “negare Eyssenhardt, Peter ,
genere P, X. 3 alle Salm. ; mhul P, X.


1 See note to Gall, xiv. 1.

? Usually applied to Abraham , but cf. Hxodus, xxxii 11 and
Jcelessastactis, xliv. 1.

3120 years, according to Deuteronomy, xxxiv. 11.

4 Cicero, pro Malone, 16, of the younger Scipio Africanus,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS II. 1-5


who as victor laid a healing hand upon the public
miseries, who, though not the contriver of the plan,!
nevertheless thrust Gallienus, that monstrous emperor,
from the helm of the state, himself destined to rule
for the good of the human race, who, finally, had he
but tarried longer in this commonwealth, would by
his strength, his counsel, and his foresight have re-
stored to us the Scipios, the Camilli, and all those
men of old.

IL Short, indeed. was the time of his rule—I can-
not deny it—but too short would it have been, could
such a man as he have ruled even as long as human
life may last. For what was there in him that was
not admirable? that was not pre-eminent? that was
not superior to the triumphant generals of remote
antiquity? The valour of Trajan, the righteousness
of Antoninus, the self-restramt of Augustus, and the
good qualities of all the great emperors, all these
were his to such a degree that he did not merely take
others as examples, but, even if these others had
never existed, he himself would have left an example
to all who came after. Now the most learned of the
astrologers hold that one hundred and twenty years
have been allotted to man for living and assert that
no one has ever been granted a longer span; they
even tell us that Moses alone, the friend of God,?
as he is called in the books of the Jews, lived for one
hundred and twenty-five years? and that when he
complamed that he was dying in his prime, he re-
ceived from an unknown god, so they say, the reply
that no one should ever live longer. But even if
Claudius had lived for one hundred and twenty-five
years—as his life, so marvellous and admirable, shows
us—we need not, as Tullius says of Scipio,* have


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


6loqmtur,! stupenda et mirabilis docet vita. quid enum
magnum vir ille domi forisque non habuit ? amavit
parentes; quid mirum ? amavit et fratres ; iam potest °
dignum esse miraculo. amavit propinquos ; res nostris
temporibus comparanda miraculo. invidit nulli, malos

7 persecutus est. fures iudices palam aperteque dam-
navit, stultis quasi neglegenter indulsit, leges

8 optimas dedit — talisin re publica fuit, ut eius stirpem
ad imperium summ: principes eligerent, emendatior
senatus optaret.

iili quod nulh antea, populus Romanus sumptu suo
in Capitolio ante lovis Optimi Maximi Templum

5 statuam. auream decem pedum conlocavit. illi totius
orbis iudieio in Rostris posita est columna palmata


18o Cas, foll by Peter; sw loquitur pro Muone P.
? potest 2; ; post P, Sexpresso Salm.; expressa P, Peter,
Hohl,


i The author protests frequently and m vam against the
imputation of flattery; see c. v1. 5; vui. 2; xi. 5.

? See note to Paus, v. 2.

5Às a matter of fact, the masculine form is the more
common,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS II. 6—III. 5


expected for him even a natural death. For what
great quality did not that man exhibit both at home
and abroad? He loved his parents; what wonder in
that? He loved also his brothers, that, indeed, may
seem worthy of wonder. He loved his kinsmen ;
and that, in these times of ours, may well be com-
pared to a wonder. He envied none, but he punished
evil-doers. Judges guilty of theft he condemned
openly and in publie; but to the stupid he extended
a sort of careless indulgence. He enacted most excel-
lent laws. Indeed, so great a man did he show
himself m publie affars, that the greatest princes
chose a descendant of his to hold the imperial power,
and a bettered senate desired him.

IIl, Some one perhaps may believe that I am speak-
ing thus to win the favour of Constantius Caesar, but
your sense of justice and my own past life will bear
me witness that never have I thought,or said or done
anything to curry favour! I am speaking of the
Emperor Claudius, whose manner of hfe, whose up-
nghtness, and whose whole career in the state have
brought him such fame among later generations that
after his death the senate and people of Rome be-
stowed on him unprecedented rewards: ın his honour
there was set up in the Senate-house at Rome, by
desire of the entire senate, a golden clhpeus?—or
chpeum, as the grammarians say?—and even at the
present time his likeness may be seen in the bust that
stands out in relief; in his honour—and to none
before him—the Roman people at their own expense
erected a golden statue ten feet high on the Capitol
in front of the Temple of Jupiter, Best and Greatest ;
in his honour by action of the entire world there was
placed on the Rostra a column bearing a silver statue


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


statua superfixa hbrarum argenti mille qungentarum.
cille, velut futurorum memor, Gentes Flavias, quae
Vespasiani quoque et Titi, nolo autem dicere Domi-
tiam, fuerant, propagavit. ille bellum Gothicum brevi
7tempore implevit. adulator igitur senatus, adulator
populus Romanus, adulatrices exterae gentes, adula-
trices provinciae, si quidem omnes ordines, omnis
aetas, omnis civitas statuis, vexillis, coronis, fanis,
arcubus, aris ac templis? bonum principem hono-
raverit,

2licae mentis adnoscant. nam cum esset nuntiatum
IX kal. Aprilis ipso in Sacrano Matns sanguinis die
Claudium imperatorem faetum, neque cogi senatus
sacrorum celebrandorum causa posset, sumptis togis
itum est ad Apollinis Templum, ae lectis Ltteris
3Claudi principis haec in. Claudium dicta sunt “ Au-
guste Claudi di te praestent," dictum  sexagies.
“Claudi Auguste, te pnneipem aut quals tu es
semper optavimus," dictum quadragies, “ Claudi


! Vespaswams quoque 2, Hohl; om. in P. 22s ac
templis transp. by Klotz; after principem in P, Peter,


1 See note to Gord., iv. 4.

2 See note to Tyr. Trig., xxxiii. 6.

3 See 0. V1.-Xl,

4 The date is incofrect, for Gallienus was killed probably in
July; see note to Gall., xiv. 1,

5 March 24 was the second day of the great four-day festival
held 1n honour of the Magna Mater, whose temple stood on the
Palatine Hill. Origmally the day of the castration of the Calli,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS HI 6—IV. 3


arrayed m the palm-embroidered tunic! and weigh-
ing fifteen hundred pounds. It was he who, as
though mindful of the future, enlarged the Flavian
House," which had also belonged to Vespasian and
Titus, and—TI say it reluctantly—of Domitian as well.
It was he who, in a brief space of time, put an end
to the war against the Goths.? Therefore the senate
and people of Rome, foreign nations and provinces,
too, must all be his flatterers, for indeed all ranks, all
ages, and all communities have honoured this noble
emperor with statues, banners, and crowns, shrines
and arches, altars and temples.

IV. It will be of interest, both to those who imitate
righteous princes and to the whole world of mankind
as well, to learn the decrees of the senate that were
passed about this man, in order that all may know
the official opinion concerning him. For when it was
announced in the shrine of the Great Mother on the
ninth day before the Kalends of April,* the day of
the shedding of blood,’ that Claudius had been
created emperor, the senators could not be held to-
gether for performing the sacred rites, but donning
their togas they set forth to the Temple of Apollo,®
and there, when the letter of the Emperor Claudius
was read, the following acclamations were shouted in
his honour’: “ Claudius Augustus, may the gods pre-
serve you!” said sixty times. ‘Claudius Augustus,
you or such as you we have ever desired for our
emperor,’ said forty times. “Claudius Augustus, the


or priests of the goddess, it was later the occasion of a ceremony
n which the Archigallus cut his arm and so shed blood
symbolically.

8 The great temple on the Palatine Hill, built by Augustus.

T See note to Val., v. 4.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


Auguste, te res publica requirebat," dietum quad-
ragies, “Claudi Auguste, tu frater, tu paler, tu
amicus, tu bonus senator, tu vere princeps," dictum

4octogies. “Claudi Auguste, tu nos ab Aureolo vin-
dica," dictum quinquies. ‘Claud: Auguste, tu nos a
Palmyrenis vindica,” dictum quinquies. * Claudi Au-
guste, tu nos a Zenobia et a Vitruvia hbera," dictum
septies, “Claud: Auguste, Tetricus nihil fecit,"
dictum septies.

V. Qui primum ut factus est imperator, Aureolum,
qui gravior rei pubheae fuerat, quod Gallieno multum
placebat, confhetu habito a rei publicae gubernaculis
depulit tyrannumque missis ad populum edictis, datis

2etiam ad senatum orationibus, mudicavit. his accedit
quod rogantem Aureolum et foedus petentem impera-
tor gravis et serius non audivit, responso tali re-
pudiatum: “Haec a Galheno petenda fuerant; qui
8consentiret moribus, poterat et timere." denique
iudicio suorum militum apud Mediolanum Aureolus
dignum exitum vita ac moribus suis habuit. et hunc
tamen quidam historici laudare conati sunt, et ridicule
4quidem. nam Gallus Antipater, ancilla honorum et his-
toricorum dehonestamentum, principium de Aureolo
habuit: “Venimus ad imperatorem nominis sui,"
5 magna videhcet virtus ab auro nomen accipere, at
ego scio saepius mter gladiatores bonis propugnatori-


1 See Tyr, Trag., xi. ? Otherwise unknown.
? Probably imitated from Sallust (Afistor:ae i. frg. 55, 22):
ancilla turpis, bonor um omnium dehonestameniwn,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS IV. 4—V. 5


state was in need of you," said forty times. “Claudius
Augustus, you are brother, father, friend, righteous
senator, and truly prince," said eighty times
' Claudius Augustus, deliver us from Aureolus,” said
five times. “ Claudius Augustus, deliver us from the
men of Palmyra,” said five times. ‘Claudius
Augustus, set us free from Zenobia and from Vit-
ruvia,' said seven times. “Claudius Augustus,
nothing has Tetricus accomplished," said seven
times.

V. As soon as he was made emperor, entering
into battle against Aureolus! who was the more
dangerous to the commonwealth because he had
found great favour with Galhenus, he thrust him
from the helm of the state ; then he pronounced him
à pretender, sending proclamations to the people and
also despatching messages to the senate. It must be
told in addition that when Aurcolus pleaded with him
and sought to make terms, this stern "and unbending
emperor refused to hearken, but rejected him with
a reply as follows: “This should have been sought
from Gallienus; for his character was like your own,
he, too, could feel fear." Finally, near Milan, by the
judgement of his own soldiers Aureolus met with an
end worthy of his life and character. And yet certam
historians have tried to praise him, though mdeed
most absurdly. For Gallus Antipater,? the hand-
maiden of honours and the dishonour of historians,’
composed a preface about Aureolus, beginning as
follows: * We have now come to an emperor who
resembled his own name." Great virtue, forsooth, to
get one's name from gold! I, however, know well
that among gladiators thus name has often been given
to courageous fighters. Indeed, only recently your


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


bus hoe nomen adpositum. habuit proxime tuus libel-
lus munerarius hoc nomen in indice ludiorum,

2denique Seytharum divers populi, Peucimi, Greu-
thung:, Austrogothi, Terving:, Visi? Gepedes, Celtae
etiam et Eruli, praedae cupiditate in Romanum solum
ijnruperuntí atque illie pleraque vastarunt, dum aliis
oceupatus est Claudius dumque se ad 1d bellum quod
confecit imperatore mstruit, ut videantur fata Romana
3boni prnerpis occupatione lentata, sed credo, ut
Claudu gloria aderesceret eiusque fieret gloriosior toto
4penitus orbe victoria. armatarum denique gentium
5trecenta viginti mila tune fuere, dicat nunc qui nos
adulationis accusat Claudium minus esse amabilem.
armatorum trecenta viginti miha, quis tandem


* So Gruter, foll, by Peter; dimus triginta P. 21d Peter,
quid P. * Names corr. by Muellenhoff ; virtingus swgypedes P.
*anruperuni Peter, Hohl; en rep. uenerunt P.


1 See Call., vi. 1; xim. 10 and notes.

* ;,e., under Gallienus, see note to c. i. 1.

? Cc. vi.-xi, deseribe the great Gothic invasion of 269-270, the
most important event of Claudius’ reign. The account, padded
with fabricated letters and rhetorical questions, 1s hopelessly
inadequate. A fuller description is given by Zosimus, 1. 49-48 ;
45. The Hast and West Gothic tribes, Greuthungi-Austrogothi
and Tervingi-Visi (the author has made four out of two), and
the Gepidae, led, apparently, by the Bruli (seo Gall. xhi. 6-10)


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS VI. 1-5


own announcement of games contained in the list of
the eombatants this very name.

VI. But let us return to Claudius. For, as we have
said before, those Goths who had escaped when
Marcianus chastised them! and those whom Claudius,
hoping to prevent what actually came to pass, had not
allowed to break forth,? fired all the tribes of their
fellow-countrymen with the hope of Roman booty.?
Finaly, the various tnbes of the Seythians, the
Peuem:i, Greuthungi, Austrogothi, Tervingi, Visi, and
Gepedes, and also the Celts and the Eruh, in their
desire for plunder burst into Roman territory and
there proceeded to ravage many districts; for mean-
while Claudius was busied with other things and was
making preparation, hke a true commander, for that
war which he finally brought to an end; and so it
may seem that the destiny of Rome was retarded by
the diligence of an excellent prince, but I, for my
part, believe that it so came to pass in order that the
glory of Claudius might be enhanced and his victory
have a greater renown throughout the whole world.
There were then, in fact, three hundred and twenty
thousand men of these tribes under arms. Now let
him who accuses us of flattery * say that Claudius was
not worthy of bemg beloved! Three hundred and


and accompanied by some of the Peucini from the mouth of the
Danube invaded Thrace and Macedonia and the Propontis by
land and sea. After a vain attempt to take Byzantium and
Cyzicus they laid siege to Thessalonica and Cassandrea but
were called away by the arrival of Claudius, who completely
defeated and scattered their forces at Naissis (modern Nish in
Jugoslavia). The figures of 320,000 men (8 4) and 2000 ships
(c. vill. 1) are, of course, gross exaggerations, like the number
of Germans in P»ob., xui. T.
4 See c, tii. 1 and note.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


Xerxes hoc habuit? quae fabella istum numerum ad-
finxit? quis poeta composuit? trecenta viginti mulia

2 “Senatu populoque Romano Claudius princeps.”
(hane autem ipse dietasse perhibetur, ego verba

3 magistri memoriae non requiro.) “ Patres conscripti,
mirantes! audite quod verum est trecenta viginti
mulia barbarorum in Romanum solum armati venerunt.
haee si vicero, vos vicem reddite meritis ; $1 non vicero,

6 Hos igitur Claudius mgenita illa virtute superavit,
hos brevi tempore adtrivit, de his vix aliquos ad


loarantes Obrecht, Peter; »whianies D. amali v.
Winterfeld, ako P; Galena Egnatius, foll, by Peter and
Hohl.


F
lAccordiug to Herodotus, vii. 60 and 87, Xerxes brought
across the Hellespont 1,700,000 foot and 80,000 horse; these
figures are certainly greatly exaggerated.
2 See Pesc. Nig., vil. 4 and noto.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS VI. 6—V II. 6


twenty thousand armed men! What Xerxes, pray,
had so many? What tale has ever imagined, what
poet ever conceived such a number? There were
three hundred and twenty thousand armed men!
Add to these their slaves, add also their families,
their waggon-trains, too, consider the streams they
drank dry and the forests they burned, and, finally,
the labour of the earth itself which carried such a
swollen mass of barbarians!

VII. There 1s still m existence a letter of his, sent
to the senate to be read before the people, in which
he tells the number of the barbarians. It is as follows:
“ From the Emperor Claudius to the senate and people
of Rome.” (This letter, it 15 said, he dictated himself,
and Í will not demand the version of the secretary of
memoranda.?) “Conscript Fathers, you will hear with
wonder what is only the truth. Three hundred and
twenty thousand barbarians have come m arms into
Roman terntory. If I defeat them, do you requite
my services, if I fal to defeat them, reflect that I
am striving to fight after Gallienus reign. The whole
commonwealth is exhausted We are fighting now
after Valerian, after Ingenuus, after Regalianus, after
Lolhanus, after Postumus, after Celsus, and after a
thousand others, who, in their contempt for an evil
prince, revolted against the commonwealth. No
shields, no swords, no spears are left to us now. The
provinces of Gaul and Spain, the sources of strength
for the state, are held by Tetricus, and all the bow-
men-—I blush to say it—-Zenobia now possesses. Any-
thing we accomplish will be achievement enough.”

These barbarians, then, Claudius overcame by his
own inborn valour and crushed in a brief space of
time, suffering scarcely any to return to their native


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


patrium solum redire permisit. rogo, quantum pre-
tium est clipeus m Curia tantae vietoriae? quantum
7 una aurea statua? dicit Ennius de Scipione: * Quan-
tam statuam faciet populus Romanus, quantam colum-
8 nam, quae res tuas gestas loquatur?” possumus dicere
Flavium Claudium, unicum in terris principem, non
columnis, non statuis sed famae viribus adiuvari,
VIII Habuerunt praeterea duo milia navium, du-
plicem scilicet numerum quam illum, quo tota pariter
Graecia omnisque Thessalia urhes Asiae quondam ex-
pugnare conata est. sed illud poeticus stilus fingit,
2hoe vera continet historia. Claudio igitur scriptores
adulamur, qui duo milia navium barbararum et tre-
centa viginti milia armatorum delevit, oppressit, ad-
trivit, qui carraginem tantam, quantam numerus hic
armatorum sibimet aptare potuit et parare, nunc in-
cendi fecit, nune cum omnibus famiis Romano ser-
3vitio deputavit, ut docetur eiusdem epistula, quam
ad Iunium Broechum scripsit Illyricum tuentem .
4 “Claudius Broccho. delevimus trecenta viginti
6mula Gothorum, duo milia navium mersimus. tecta
sunt flumina scutis, spathis et lanceolis omnia litora
operiuntur. campi ossibus latent tecti, nullum iter
6 purum est, ingens carrago deserta est. tantum muli-
erum cepmmus ut binas et ternas mulieres victor sibi
IX. miles possitadiungere. et utinam Gallienum non esset
passa res pubhea! utinam sescentos tyrannos non


1 See c. jii. 3.

2 Evidently from Ennius’ Serpio, a poem eulogizing the elder
Africanus. These two lines are unmetrical and are plainly an
inexact quotation, *

3 See note to c. 1. 1.

‘The thousand ships of the Greeks in the war agaist Troy.
But see note to c. vi. 1.

5 See c. 1i1. 1 and note. 5 Otherwise unknown,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS VII. 7—IX. 1


soil. What reward for such a victory, I ask you, is a
shield! in the Senate-house? What reward is one
golden statue? Of Scipio Ennis wrote?: “What
manner of statue, what manner of column shall the
Roman people make, to tell of your deeds?" We
can say with truth that Flavius? Claudius, an emperor
without peer upon earth, is raised to eminence not by
any columns or statues but by the power of fame.

VIII. They had, furthermore, two thousand ships,
twice as many, that 1s, as the number with which all
Greece and all Thessaly together once sought to
conquer the cities of Asia.t This number, however,
was devised by the pen of a poet, while ours 1s found
in truthful history. And so do we writers flatter
Claudius ! 5 the man by whom two thousand barbarian
ships and three hundred and twenty thousand armed
men were crushed, destroyed and blotted out, and by
whom a waggon-train, as great as this host of armed
men could fit out and make ready, was in part con-
signed to the flames and in part delivered over, along
with the families of all, to Roman servitude. This is
shown by the following letter of his, written to Junius
Broechus,$ then in command of Illyricum :

* From Claudius to Brocchus. We have destroyed
three hundred and twenty thousand Goths, we have
sunk two thousand ships. The rivers are covered
over with their shields, all the banks are buried under
their swords and their spears. The fields are hidden
beneath their bones, no road is clear, their mighty
waggon-tram has been abandoned. We have cap-
tured so many women that the victbrious soldiers can
take for themselves two or three apiece. IX. And
would that the commonwealth had not had to endure
Gallienus! Would that it had not had to bear six


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


pertulisset ! salvis militibus, quos varia proeha sustu-
lerunt, salvis legionibus quas Gallienus male victor
2 occidit, quantum esset additum rei publicae! sı qui-
dem nune membra! naufragi public: colligit nostra
diligentia ad Romanae re: publicae salutem,” ?
3 Pugnatum est enun apud Moesos, et multa proelia
4fuerunt apud Mareianopolim. multi naufragio perie-
runt, plerique capti reges, captae diversarum gentium
nobiles femmae, impletae barbaris servis Scythicisque ?
cultoribus Romanae provinciae. factus limitis * bar-
5 bari colonus e Gotho. nec ulla fuit regio quae Gothum
6 servum triumphah quodam servitio non haberet. quid
boum barbarorum nostri videre maiores? quid ovium ?
quid equarum, quas fama nobihtat, Celticarum ? hoc
totum ad Claudii gloriam pertmet. Claudius et secu-
ritate rem publicam et opulentiae nimietate donavit.
7 pugnatum praeterea est apud Byzantios, ipsis qui
8superfuerant? Byzantinis fortiter facientibus, pugna-
tum apud Thessalomcenses, quos Claudio absente ob-
9sederant barbari. pugnatum in diversis regionibus, et
ubique auspicus Claudianis victi sunt Gothi, prorsus
ut iam tunc Constantio Caesari nepoti futuro videretur
Claudius securam parare rem publicam.


1membra Damsté, Thornell, uerba P, X, Peter; pegua
Cas., Hohl. * salutem ins. by Hohl; om. in P ; lacuna
assumed by Peter. c. ix. 1-2 incl, in letter of Claudius by
Thornel and Hohl; letter ended in c. vin. 6 by Peter.

3 Seythlacisque Closs foll. by Peter and Hohl, senibusque

a 4 lunetas Peter, males P, X. 5 supe: fuerant X,
Peter; superius fuerant P.


^


1 Àn allusion to Galhenus’ victores over the Goths and
Aureolus; see Gall., xui, 6 and xiv. 1 and notes,

2The capital of the provmce of Moesia, now Preslav near
Devna in eastern Bulgaria, founded by Trajan and named for


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS IX 2-9


hundred pretenders! Had but those soldiers been
saved who fell in divers battles, those legions saved
which Gallienus destroyed, disastrously victorious,!
how much strength would the state have gamed!
Now, indeed, my diligence has but gathered together
for the preservation of the Roman commonwealth the
scattered remains of the shipwrecked state."

For there was fighting in Moesia and there were
many battles near Marcianopols? Many perished
by shipwreck, many kings were captured, noble
women of divers tribes taken prisoner, and the Roman
provinces filled with barbarian slaves and Scythian
husbandmen.? The Goth was made the tiller of the
barbarian frontier, nor was there a single district which
did not have Gothic slaves in triumphant servitude.
How many cattle taken from the barbarians did our
forefathers see? How many sheep? How many
Celtie mares, which fame has rendered renowned?
All these redound to the glory of Claudius, For
Claudius gave the state both security and an abun-
dance of riches. There was fighting, besides, at
Byzantium! for those Byzantmes who survived acted
with courage. There was fightmg at Thessalonica,
to which the barbarians had laid siege while Claudius
was far away. There was fighting m divers places,
and in all of them, under the auspices of Claudius, the
Goths were defeated, so that even then he seemed
to be making the common wealth safe in days to come
for his nephew Constantius Caesar.?


his sister Marciana, Tt was unsuccessfully attacked by the
Goths on their southward march.

$ Underlying the rhetoric is the fact, related in Zosimus 1.
46, that many of the Goths who survived the battle were settled
as farmas m Roman territory.

3 See note to c. vi. 1. 5 See note to c. xiii. 2.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


3 * Tu, qui nunc patrias gubernas oras
et mundum regis, arbiter deorum,
tu vinces! veteres tuis novells ;
regnabunt etenim tui? minores
et reges facient suos minores."


4item cum in Appennino de se consuleret, responsum
huius modi accepit


“Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit aestas."


6 item cum de posteris suis:


* His ego mec metas rerum nec tempora ponam."


6ilem cum de fratre Quintillo, quem consortem habere
volebat imperii, responsum est:


e Ostendent terris hunc tantum fata,"


liu unces Salm. ; an P, £. ? iu om. in P.
ae M ÀÀ—— MM n aan aana a a aana CR Pat


1'Mod. Tulln on the Danube, about 20 m. N.W, of Vienna.

? Cf. Alex., 1v. 6 and note and. Firm., 12. 4.

3 4eneid, i. 265. ! Aeneid, 1. 278. 5 See c. xii.
6 Aeneid, vi. 669; quoted also in Ael., 1v. 1 and Gor d., xx. 5,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS X. 1-7


X. It has fortunately come into my mind, and so
I must relate the oracle given to Claudius in Coma-
gena,! so it is said, in order that all may know that
the family of Claudius was divinely appointed to bring
happiness to the state. For when he mquired, after
being made emperor, how long he was destined to
rule, there came forth the following oracle? :


“Thou, who dost now direct thy fathers’ empire,
Who dost govern the world, the gods’ vicegerent,
Shalt surpass men of old 1n thy descendants ,

For those children of thine shall rule as monarchs,
And make their children into monarchs also."


Similarly, when once in the Apennines he asked about
his future, he received the following reply :


“ Three times only shall summer behold him a ruler
in Latium 8.”
Likewise, when he asked about hus descendants :


* Neither a goal nor a limit of time will I set for their
power *."


Likewise, when he asked about his brother Quintillus,’
whom be was planning to make his associate in the
imperial power, the reply was:


* Him shall Fate but display to the earth.® "


These oracles I have included, in order that it may be
clear to all that Constantius, scion of a family divinely
appointed, our most venerated Caesar, himself springs
from a house of Augusti and will give us, likewise,
many Augusti of his own—with all safety to the
Augusti Diocletian and Maximian and his brother
Galerius.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


1 Atticiano P, Peter. 2 nos ins. by Hohl; om. in P and
by Peter.


1 According to the better account in Zosimus 1. 44, Septiinius
Zabdas (Saba), the general of Zenobia (see also Aur., xxv. 3),
aided by the Egyptian Timagenes conquered Hgypt and left
a garrison m it. Piobatus (or Probus), Claudius! admiral, aided
by some of the Egyptians, drove out the Palmyrenes, but he was
later caught in a trap by Timagenes and his army was destroyed.
He committed suicide after being captured, and Egypt remained
in ihe possession ofthe Palmyrenes. The statement § 2 that
Egypt submitted to Claudius seems to be the usual fabrication
for the purpose of eulogy.

*In this name the biographer 18 anticipating, for Haemi-
montum was the name of one of the six provinces mto which


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XI. 1-6


XI. While these things were being done by the
Deified Claudius, the Palmyrenes, under the generals
Saba and Tumagenes, made war against the Egyptians,!
who defeated them with true Egyptian pertinacity
and unwearied continuance in fighting. Probatus,
nevertheless, the leader of the Egyptians, was killed
by a trick of Timagenes’. All the Egyptians, how-
ever, submitted to the Roman emperor, swearing
allegiance to Claudius although he was absent.

In the consulship of Antiochianus and Orfitus the 270
favour of heaven furthered Claudius’ success. For
a great multitude, the survivors of the barbarian tribes,
who had gathered in Haemimontum,? were so stricken
with famine and pestilence that Claudius now scorned
to conquer them further. And soat length that most
cruel of wars was brought to an end, and the Roman
nation was freed from rts terrors ?

Now good faith forces me to speak fhe truth, and
also the desire of showing to those who wish me to
appear as a flatterer * that I am not concealing what
history demands should be told: namely, that at the
time when the victory was won in full, a number of
Claudius’ soldiers, puffed up with suecess—which
“ weakens the mmds of even the wise” *—turned to
plundering ; for they did not reflect that, while busied


Diocletian divided the diocese of Thrace. Zosimus (i. 45) gives
the scene more correctly as Mt. Haemus, 1.2., the Balkan Range.

3The victory was commemorated by Claudius! assumption of
the cognomen Gothicus, which appears m an insenption and on
the coms issued after his death with the legend Divo Claudio
Gothico (Matt.-Syd., v. p. 234, nos. 263-265); 16 was also com-
memorated by an issue of coins with the legend Victoriae
Gothicae ; sec bid., pp. 232-233, nos. 251-252.

4See note to c. 11. 1.

‘A quotation from Sallust, Catilina, xi, T,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS

9 vindicta praesumpta est. in quo bello, quoad ? gestum
est, equitum Dalmatarum ingens exstitit virtus, quod
originem ex ea provincia Claudius videbatur ostendere,
quamvis alii Dardanum et ab Ilo Troianorum rege *
atque ab ipso Dardano sanguinem dicerent trahere.

2 Finito sane. bello Gothico gravissimus morbus
inerebruit, tune eum etiam Claudius adfectus morbo
mortals rehquit et famılare virtutibus suis petut

3 caelum. quo ad deos atque ad sidera demigrante


1 fugarı Petschenig, Hohl; fatigari P, Peter. — ? praesides
P. %quoad Petsehenig, Ellis; quod P; guod foll. by lacuna
Peter. *rege ins, by Salm. ; om. m P., 5 aeque
Bıtschofsky ; aique P ; aique < fame 7 Salm., Peter.


! Hess referred to as an Illyrian m c. xiv. 2, and he may well
have been a native of the district of Dardania, m southern Jugo-
slavia, extending northwards from Uskub. An easy confusion
between thus region and the Asiatic Dardanus near Troy, com.
bined with a desire to give the emperor royal ancestry, led to
the story of his descent from the Trojan kings.

* Zosimus (1, 46) records that the Goths with ther fleet m-


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XI. 7—XII. 3


m mind and m body, they gave themselves up to
seizing their prey, a very few could put them to flight.
And so, at the very moment of victory, about two
thousand soldiers were slain by a few barbarians, who
had already been routed. When Claudius learned this,
however, he assembled his army and seized all those
who had shown a rebellious spirit, and he even sent
them to Rome in chains to be used in the public
spectacles. So, whatever damage either fortune or
the soldiers had caused was made good through the
courage of the excellent prince, and not only was
victory won from the enemy, but revenge was taken
as well, In this war, throughout its whole length,
the valour of the Dalmatian horsemen stood out as
especially great, because it was thought that Claudius
claimed that province as his original home ! , others,
however, declared that he was a Dardanian and derived
his descent from Ilus, a king of the Twojans and, in
fact, even from Dardanus himself.

XII. During this same period the Scythians at-
tempted to plunder in Crete and Cyprus as well, but
everywhere ther armies were likewise stricken with
pestilence and so were defeated?

Now when the war with the Goths was finished,
there spread abroad a most grievous pestilence, and
then Claudius himself was stricken by the disease,
and, leaving mankind, he departed to heaven, an
abode befitting his virtues.? He, then, moved away


vaded Crete and Rhodes but did no harm worthy of mention;
he says nothing about this division suffermg from pestilence.

*He died early in 270 at Sirmium (mod. Mitrovitz on the
lower Save), according to Zonaras xn. 26, The tendency to
exalt him caused the fabrication of a romantic story which re-
presented his death as a voluntary sacrifice; see Aur. Victor,
OUES. 34, 3-5; Epit, 34, 3,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


1 Qomtollaum Salm., Peter; Claudium P, Hohl. 2 fila
2; famaha P.


1M. Aurelius Quintillus Augustus, according to his coms;
see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 238 f.

? Mod. Anchiah on the Gulf of Burgas on the western shore
of the Black Sea.

3 Mod. Star Nikub in southern Bulgaria.

‘The length of Quintillus’ reign is also given as 17 days in
Eutropius 1x. 12 and Zonaras xn. 26, but as 77 days by the
* Ohronographer of 354" and as a few months by Zosimus
(1. 47). As the coins bearing his name are very numerous, we
must suppose a longer reign than 17 days; on the other hand,
as, according to a papyrus dated 25 May, 270, Aurelian was


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XII. 4—XIII. 3


to the gods and the stars, and his brother Quintillus,!
a righteous man and the brother indeed, as I might
truly say, of his brother, assumed the imperial power,
which was offered him by the judgement of all, not
as an inherited possession, but because his virtues de-
served it; for all would have made him emperor, even
if he had not been the brother of the Claudius their
prince. In his time those barbarians who still sur-
vived endeavoured to lay waste Anchialus? and even
to seize Nicopolis,? but they were crushed by the
valour of the provincials. Quintillus, however, could
do naught that was worthy of the mperial power
because his rule was so short, for on the seventeenth
day of his reign? he was killed, as Galba? had been
and Pertinax * also, because he had shown himself
stern and unbending toward the soldiers and promised
to be a prince in very truth. Dexippus,’ to be sure,
does not say that Quntillus was killed, but merely
that he died. He does not, however, relate that he
died of an illness, and so he seems to feel doubt.
XIII. Since we have now described his achieve-
ments in war, we must tell a few things, at least, con-
cerning the kindred and the family of Claudius, lest
we seem to omit what all should know : now Claudius,
Quintillus, and Crispus were brothers, and Crispus bad
a daughter Claudia; of her and Eutropius, the noblest
man of the Dardanian folk, was born Constantius


then known in Egypt to be emperor, the period of 77 days is
too long. He may be supposed to have ruled for six weeks at
the most; see Stein in Arch, f. Pap.-Forsch., vii. p. 45£. Ac-
cording to Aur., xxxvu.6 and Zosimus and Zonaras, he killed
himself by opening his veins.

5See Tacitus, Hest., 1. 18 f.

€ See Peri., x1. 7 Seo note to Alex., xlix. 8.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


etiam sorores, quarum una, Constantina nomine,
4nupta tribuno Assyriorum, in primis annis defecit. de
avis nobis parum cognitum ; varia enim plerique
prodiderunt.

6 fecerat hoc etiam adulescens in militia, cum ludicro
Martiali in Campo luctamen inter fortissimos quosque


praecepit, ne quid atrocius quam luctamen exigit
faceret.


1 quae res Hohl; quaeres P ; quaerens editors,
Z, Hohl; om. in P ana by Peter.


1 The statement of the relationship of Constantius to Claudius
as given here differs from that of Eutropius (ix. 22) and Zona-
ras (xii. 26 end), both of whom represent Constantius as the
son of Clauuius’ daughter, while the «epos of c. ix. 9 is am-
biguous. On the other hand, the accepted official version,
found in the Panegyrics addressed to Constantine and in the
inscriptions of both the emperor himself and his sons, in which
Constantine appears as Claudius’ grandson, presupposes the
theory that Constantius was Claudius’ son. This divergence
leads inevitably to the suspicion that the relationship was


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XIII. 4-8


Caesar.| There were also some sisters, of whom one,
Constantina by name, was married to à tribune of the
Assyrians, but died at an early age. Concerning his
grandparents we know all too little, for varying state-
ments have been handed down by most of the writers.

Now Claudius himself was noted for the gravity of
his character, and noted, too, for hus matchless life
and a singular purity; he was sparing in his use
of wine, but was not averse to food; he was tall
of stature, with flashing eyes and a broad, full face,
and so strong were his fingers that often by a blow of
his fist he would dash out the teeth of a horse or
a mule. He even performed a feat of this kind as
a youth in mihtary service, while taking part in a
wrestling-match between some of the strongest cham-
pions at a spectacle m the Campus Martius held in
honour of Mars For, becoming angry at one fellow
who grasped at his private parts instegd of his belt,
he dashed out all the man’s teeth with one blow of
his fist. This action won him favour for thus protect-
ing decency ; forthe Emperor Decius, who was present
when this was done, publicly praised his courage and
modesty and presented him with arm-rings and col-
lars,? but bade him withdraw from the soldiers’ con-
tests for fear he might do some more violent deed
than the wrestling required.


wholly a fabrication, designed, in the interests of the dynasty,
to provide the parvenu Constantius with ancestors. This is
strengthened by the fact that, with the exception of Quintillus,
none of the members of Claudius’ family named ım this chapter
is known to us, and by the wholly incorrect attribution to
Claudius of the names Flavius and Valerius which wore those
of Constantius; see note toc. 1. 1.

5 4,£,, the usual rewards given to soldiers, see Mamm., 11.4;
Aur., vii. 75 Prob., v. 1.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


9 Ipsi Claudio liberi nulli fuerunt, Quintillus duos
reliquit, Crispus, ut diximus, filiam.

2 Epistula Valeriani ad Zosimionem, procuratorem Sy-
riae. “Claudium, Illyricianae gentis virum, tribunum
Martiae quintae legioni fortissimae ac devotissimae ?
dedimus, virum devotissimis quibusque ac fortissimis

8veterum praeferendum. ^ huie salarium de nostro
privato aerario dabis annuos frumenti modios tria
milia, hordei sex milia, laridi hbras duo milia, vini
veteris sextarios tria milia quingentos, olei boni
sextarios centum quinquaginta, olei secundi sextarios
sescentos, salis modios viginti, cerae pondo centum
quinquaginta, feni, paleae, aceti, holeris, herbarum
quantum satis-est, pellium tentoriarum decurias tri-
ginta, mulos annuos sex, equos annuos tres, camelas
annuas decem, mulas annuas novem, argenti in opere
annua pondo quinquaginta, Philippeos nostri vultus
annuos centum quinquaginta et in strenis quadraginta

4Septem et trientes centum sexaginta. item in cauco


! de om in P. 208 deuolssvmae £, Hohl; om. in P and
by Peter.


! None of the persons to whom this letter and the following
ones (cc. xv.-xvul.) are addressed is otherwise known. They are
probably as fictiigus as the letters themselves.

? No Legio V. Martia is known, but a Legio IV. Martia is
mentioned as stationed in Arabia m the early fifth century ;
see Not, Dig. Or. xxxvii. 22. |

‘This name, originally given to the famous gold stater of
Philp II. of Macedonia, was also occasionally apphed to the


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XIII 9—XIV. 4


Claudius himself had no children, but Quintillus
left two sons, and Crispus, as I have said, a daughter.

XIV. Let us now proceed to the opimons that
many emperors expressed about him, and in such
wise, indeed, that it became apparent that he would
some day be emperor.

A letter from Valerian to Zosimio, the procurator
of Syria!: “We have named Claudius, a man of
Illyrian birth, as tribune of our most valiant and loyal
Fifth Legion, the Martian,? for he is superior to all
the most loyal and most valiant men of old. By way
of supplies you will give him each year out of our
private treasury three thousand pecks of wheat, six
thousand pecks of barley, two thousand pounds of
bacon, three thousand five hundred pints of well-
aged wine, one hundred and fifty pints of the best
oil, six hundred pints of oil of the second grade,
twenty pecks of salt, one hundred and fifty pounds
of wax, and as much hay and straw, cheap wine, greens
and herbs as shall be sufficient, thirty half-score of
hides for the tents; also six mules each year, three
horses each year, ten camels each year, nme she-
mules each year, fifty pounds of silverware each year,
one hundred amd fifty Philips,? bearing our likeness,
each year, and as a New-year's gift forty-seven Philips
and one hundred and sixty third-Philips. Likewise
in eups and tankards and pots eleven pounds. Also


Roman aureus, but the author is probably using it loosely here,
as also m Feirm., xv. 8, thinking of 16 as named after Philippus
Arabs; see note to Aur., ix. 7. Coins of a third-aureus are
said to have been issued for the first time by Severus Alexander
(Alez., xxxix. T), but no certain examples either of these or of
any of Galhenus and Saloninus are in existence; see Menadier,
Die Munzen ... ber den S. H. A. p. 80 f.


1&R1


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


set seypho et zema pondo undecim. tunicas russas
militares annuas duas,! sagochlamydes annuas duas,
fibulas argenteas inauratas duas, fibulam auream cum
acu Cyprea unam. balteum argenteum mauratum
unum, anulum bigemmem unum uncialem, brachialem
unam unciarum septem, torquem libralem unum,
cassidem inauratam unam, scuta chrysographata duo,
6loricam unam, quam refundat, lanceas Herculianas
duas, aclides duas, falces duas, falces fenarias quattuor.
7 cocum, quem refundat, unum mulionem, quem re-
fundat, unum, mulieres speciosas ex captivis duas.
8albam subsericam unam cum purpura Girbitana, sub-
9armalem unum cum purpura Maura notarium, quem
refundat, unum, structorem, quem refundat, unum.
10 accubitalium Cypriorum paria duo, interulas puras
duas, fascias viriles duas,? togam, quam refundat,
llunam, latum clavum, quem refundat, unum. vena-
tores, qui obsequantur, duo, carpentarium unum,
curam praetoni unum, aquarum unum, piscatorem
12 unum, dulcianum unum. lign: cotidiani pondo mille,
sı est copia, sin minus, quantum fuerit. et ubi. fuerit ;
i3coctilium cotidiana vatilla quattuor. — balneatorem
unum et ad balneas l;gna, sm minus, lavetur in publico.


!dwas ms. by Cas. foll. by Hohl; om. in P and by Peter.
?fascias . . . duas 2, Hohl; om. 1n P and by Peter.


1 The adjective Hercuhanus, if the form ıs correct, is
evidently from Herculius, the name assumed by Maximan. jt
occurs m the forms Hercuha and Hereuhani erven by him to
legions and other bodies of troops, and the name of the lances
here mentioned seems to have the same denvation ; its preseuce
in a letter attributed to Valenan is an unfortunate slip on the
part of the author. It is, of course, possible to alter the read-
ing to Hereulaneus, but Heracles is almost uniformly repre-


IRD


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XIV 5-13


two red military tunies each year, two military cloaks
each year, two silver clasps gilded, one golden clasp
with a Cyprian pin, one sword-belt of silver gilded,
one rng with two gems to weigh an ounce, one arm-
let to weigh seven ounces, one collar to weigh a
pound, one gilded helmet, two shields mlaid with
gold, one cuirass, to be returned. Also two Her-
culian? lances, two javelins, two reapmg-hooks, and
four reaping-hooks for cutting hay. Also one cook,
to be returned, one muleteer, to be returned, two
beautiful women taken from the captives. One
white part-silk? garment ornamented with purple
from Girba,? and one under-tunie with Moorish
purple. One secretary, to be returned, and one
server at table, to be returned. Two pairs of Cyprian
couch-covers, two white under-garments, a pair of
men's leg-bands,* one toga, to be returned, one broad-
striped tunic, to be returned. Two huntsmen to
serve as attendants, one waggon-maEer, one head-
quarters-steward,? one waterer, one fisherman, one
confectioner. One thousand pounds of fire- wood each
day, if there 1s an abundant supply, but if not, as
much as there 1s and wherever it is, and four braziers
of charcoal each day. One bath-man and firewood
for the bath, but if there is nome, he shall bathe in
the publie bath. All else, which cannot be enume-


sented with a club; the spear appears as his weapon only in
the Hesiodic Shield and on coins of Hrythrae; see Roscher,
Lexikon, i. 2187-2188.

? See note to Helog., xxvi. 1.

? Mod Djerba, an island off the coast of southern Tunisia
aud the seat of an imperial purple-factory.

5 Seo note to Alew., xl. 11.

5 More correctly a curis or domacurwus ; see Pauly- Wissowa,
Realeneyel., iv. 1178.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS

2populum conqueri iactabas. dux factus est et dux
totius Illyrici. habet in potestatem Thracios, Moesos,

4praetorianam praefecturam. sane scias tantum ei
a nobis decretum salarii quantum habet Aegypti
praefectura, tantum vestium quantum proconsulatui
Afncano detulfmus, tantum argenti quantum accipit
curator lllyrici metallarius,? tantum munisteriorum
quantum nos ipsi nobis per singulas quasque decer-
nimus civitates, ut intellegant omnes quae sit nostra
de viro tali sententia."

XVI. Item epistula Decii de eodem Claudio :

“Decus Messallae praesidi Achaiae salutem."


1 dues loco Mommsen, Hohl; ducem loco P, 2; ducendos
er Peter. ?neiallarvus Mommsen, Hohl; Metlarius P,
eter.


1The silver mimes m eastern Dalmatia were under the
charge of an imperial procurato) metallorum Pannomorum et
Delmatwortm (C.1.L., m. 12721).


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XIV. 14—XV1.


rated here because of its insignificance you will supply
in due amount, but in no case shall the equivalent m
money be given, and if there should be a lack of any-
thing in any place, it shall not be supplied, nor shall
the equivalent be exacted m money All these things
l have allowed him as a special ease, as though he
were not a mere tribune but rather a general, because
to such a man as he an even larger allowance should
be made.”

XV. Likewise in another letter of Valerian’s,
addressed to Ablavius Murena, the prefect of the
guard, among other statements the following: ‘ Cease
now your complaints that Claudius is still only a
tribune and has not been appointed the leader of our
armies, about which, you were wont to declare, the
senate and people also complain. He has been made
a general, and, in fact, the general in command
of all Illyricum. He has under his rule the armies of
Thrace, Moesia, Dalmatia, Pannonia, and Dacia.
Indeed, this man, eminent m my estimation as well,
may hope for the consulship, and, if it accords with
his wishes, he may receive the prefecture of the guard
whenever he desires I would have you know, more-
over, that we have allotted to him the same amount
of supphes that the prefect of Egypt receives, the
same amount of clothing that we have allowed to the
proconsulate of Africa, the same amount of silver that
the procurator of the mines in Illyricum 1 receives,
and the same number of servants that we allot to
ourselves in each and every community; for I wish
all to know my opinion of such a man."

XVI. Likewise a letter of Decius concerning this
same Claudius :

* From Decius to Messalla, the governor of Achaea,


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


inter cetera: ''Tribunum vero nostrum Claudium,
optimum iuvenem, fortissimum militem, constantissi-
mum civem, castris, senatui et rei publicae necessarium,
in Thermopylss ire praecipimus mandata eidem cura
Peloponnensium, scientes. neminem melhus omnia
2quae miungimus esse curaturum. hwc ex regione
Dardanica dabis mulites ducentos, ex cataphractariis
centum, ex equitibus sexaginta, ex sagittariis Creticis
3 sexaginta, ex tironibus bene armatos mille. nam bene
illi novi creduntur exercitus; neque enim illo guis-
quam devotior, fortior, gravior invenitur."
XVII. Item epistula Gallieni, cum nuntiatum esset
per frumentarios Claudium irasci, quod ille mollius
2viveret: ' Nihil me gravius accepit quam quod no-
taria tua intimasti Claudium, parentem amicumque
nostrum, insinuatis sib: falsis plerisque graviter irasci,
àquaeso igitur, mi Venuste, si mihi fidem exhibes, ut
eum facias a Grato et Herenniano placari, nescientibus
hoc militibus Daciscianis, qui 1am saeviunt, ne graviter
4res erumpant.| ipse ad eum dona misi, quae ut
hbenter accipiat tu facies, curandum praeterea est,
ne me hoc scire intellegat ac sibi suscensere 1udicet
Set pro necessitate ultimum consilium capiat. misi
autem ad eum pateras gemmatas trilibres duas, scyphos
aureos gemmatos trilibres duos, diseum corymbiatum


1 yes erumpant Salm. foll. by Peter! and Lenze; reser tum P;
rem fer ani Petschenig, Poter? Hohl.


1 See note to c. x1.9. The district must have been under the
command of the governor of Moesia, not of Achaea.

? See note to Alex., Ivi. 5.

3 See note to Hadr., xi. 4. * Otherwise unkuown.,


- h


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XVI. 9—XVII. 5


greetings.” Among other orders the following:
* But to our tribune Claudius, an excellent young
man, a most courageous soldier, à most loyal citizen,
necessary ahke to the camp, the senate, and the
commonwealth, we are giving instructions to proceed
to Thermopylae, entrusting to his care the Pelopon-
nesians also, for we know that no one will carry out
more carefully all our injunctions. You will assign
lum from the district of Dardanma ! two hundred foot-
soldiers, one hundred cutrassiers,? sixty horsemen,
sixty Cretan archers, and one thousand new recruits,
all well armed.  Foritis well to entrust new troops
to him, masmuch as none can be found more loyal,
more valiant, or more earnest than he."

XVII. Likewise a letter of Gallienus', written when
he was informed by his private agents ? that Claudius
was angered by his loose mode of life: ** Nothing has
grieved me more than what you have stated in your
report, namely, that Claudius, my kinsman and friend,
has been made very angry by certam false statements
that have reached his ears I request you, therefore,
my dear Venustus, if you are faithful to me, to have
him appeased by Gratus and Herennianus,* while the
Dacian troops, even now in a state of anger, are still
in ignorance, for I fear there may be some serious
outbreak. I myself am sending him gifts, and you
wil see to it that he accepts them willingly. You
will take care, furthermore, that he shall not become
aware that I know all this and so suppose that I am
incensed against hum, and, accordingly, out of neces-
sity adopt some desperate plan. I am sending to him,
moreover, two sacrificial saucers studded with gems
three pounds in weight, two golden tankards studded
with gems three pounds in weight, a silver disk-shaped


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


argenteum librarum viginti, lancem argenteam pampi-
natam libiarum triginta, patenam argenteam hede-
raciam librarum viginti et trium, boletar halieuticum
argenteum librarum viginti, urceos duos auro inclusos
argenteos librarum sex et in vasis minoribus argenti
libras viginti quinque, caliees Aegyptios operisque

6 diversi decem, chlamydes veri luminis limbatas duas,
vestes diversas sedecim, albam subsericam, para-
gaudem triuncem unam, zanchas de nostris Parthicas
paria tria, singiliones Dalmatenses decem, chlamydem
Dardanicam mantuelem unam, paenulam Illyricianam

7 unam, bardocucullum unum, cucutia villosa duo, oraria
Sarabdena quattuor, aureos Valerianos centum quin-
quaginta, trientes Saloninianos trecentos."

XVIII. Habuit. et senatus iudicia, priusquam ad
imperium perveniret, ingentia nam cum esset nun-
tiatum illum cùm Marciano fortiter contra gentes in

2]llyneo dimicasse, adclamavit senatus: “ Claudi, dux
fortissime, ayeas! virtutibus tuis, devotioni tuae!
Claudio statuam omnes dicamus. Claudium consulem
3omnes cupimus, qui amat rem publicam sic agit, qui
amat principes sic agit, antiqui milites sie egerunt,
felicem te, Claudi, iudicio principum, felicem te


‘The paragaudes or paragauda f(rapayddns), also men-
tioned 1n. Aur., xv. 4; xlvi. 6, Prob., 1v. 5, is described by
Lydus (de Magisiratıbus, i. 17, i. 4) as a xerdy Aoyywrds,
a tunic of eastern origin, having sleeves and a purple border
embroidered with designs m gold. The Edict of Justinian
permits its use by mon as a special distinction.

? See Com., vi. 8 and note.

38ee Peri, vi. 8 and note.

* Near Sidon in Phoenicia and famous for its purple.


T&R


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XVII. 6—XVIII. 3


platter with an ivy-cluster pattern twenty pounds m
weight, a silver dish with a vme-leaf pattern thirty
pounds in weight, a silver bowl with an ivy-leaf
pattern twenty-three pounds in weight, a silver vessel
for fish twenty pounds in weight, two silver pitchers
embossed with gold six pounds in weight and smaller
vessels of silver amounting to twenty-five pounds in
weight, ten cups of Egyptian and other workmanship,
two cloaks with purple borders of the true brilliance,
sixteen garments of various kinds, a white one of part-
suk, one tunic with bands of embroidery! three
ounces in weight, three pairs of Parthian shoes from
our own supply, ten Dalmatian? striped tunics, one
Dardaman great-coat, one Illyrian mantle, one hooded-
cloak,? two shaggy hoods, four handkerchiefs from
Sarepta*; also one hundred and fifty aurei with the
likeness of Valerian and three hundred third-auxei
with that of Saloninus.’’ ?

XVIII. He had also the approval of the senate
before he became emperor, and weighty, indeed, it
was, For when the announcement was made that
he, together with Marcianus,? had fought valiantly
against the barbarian tribes in Illyricum, the senate
acclaimed him thus’: “Claudius, our most vahant
leader, hail! Hail to your courage, hail to your
loyalty! Let us all decree a statue to Claudius.
We all desire Claudius as consul. So acts he who
loves the commonwealth, so acts he who loves the
emperors, so acted the soldiers of old. Happy are
you, Claudius, in the approval of princes, happy are
you in your own valour, you our consul, you our


5 See note to c. mv. 3. 8 See Gall., vi. 1.
TOf. o. iv. 3.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS


virtutibus tms, consulem te, praefectum te! vivas
Valeri, et ameris a principe!”


! See note to c. i. 1.


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS XVIII. 4


prefect! Long may you live, Valenus, and enjoy
the love of your prince |”

it would be too long to set forth all the many
honours that this man earned ; one thing, however,
I must not omit, namely, that both the senate and
people held him in such affection both before his
rule and during his rule and after his rule that it is
generally agreed among all that neither Trajan nor
any of the Antonines nor any other emperor was so
beloved.


DIVUS AURELIANUS


FLAVII VOPISCI SYRACUSII


I. Hilaribus, quibus omnia festa et fieri debere
scimus et dici, impletis sollemnibus vehiculo suo me
et iudiciali carpento praefectus urbis, vir inlustris ae
praefata reverentia nominandus, Iunius Tiberianus ac-

2cepit. ibi cum animus a causis atque a negotiis pub-
licis solutus uc liber vacaret, sermonem multum a
Palatio usque ad Hortos Varianos instituit et in eo
3 praecipue de vita principum. cumque ad Templum
Solis venissemus ab Aurehano principe consecratum,
quod ipse non nihilum ex eius origine sanguinem
duceret, quaesivit a me quis vitam eius in htteras ret-
4tulisset. cui eum ego respondissem neminem a me
Latinorum, Graecorum aliquos lectitatos, dolorem


! Celebrated in honour of the Magna Mater on 25 March.

“Junius Tiberianus was consul in 281 and 991. He was
prefect of the city, according to the list of the ** Chronographer
of 354,” from 18 Feb., 291, to 3 Aug., 292, and again from
12 Sept., 308, to 4 Jan., 304. Since neither this group of
biographies nor those ascribed to Trebellius Pollio was writien
as early as 292, 16 must be his second prefecture that is meant
here. This, howeyer, did not include the Hilaria, and one 1s


Pw um


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


BY
FLAVIUS VOPISCUS OF SYRACUSE


I. At the festival of the Hilaria!— when, as we
know, everything that 1s said and done should be of
a joyous nature—when the ceremonies had been
completed, Junius Tiberianus,’ the prefect of the
city, an illustrious man and one to he named only
with a prefix of deep respect, took me up into his
carriage, that is to say, his official coach. There, his
mind being now at leisure, relaxed and freed from
law-pleas and public business, he engaged in much
conversation all the way from the Palatine Hull to
the Gardens of Varius? his theme being chiefly the
lives of the emperors And when we had reached
the Temple of the Sun,* consecrated by the Emperor
Aurelian, he asked me—for he derived his descent m
some degree from him—who had written down the
record of the life of that prince. When I replied
that I had read none in Latin, though several in


forced to the conclusion that, unless the feast of Isison 3 Nov.,
sometimes also referred to as the Hilaria, is meant, the episode
described here is merely a hterary device,

3 Otherwise unknown. +See e, xxxv, 9 and note.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


1 So Mommsen; parrumipane P, parut Tiberian: Peter.


1 The reviler of Agamemnon ın Thad, ii. 212 f,

? He persuaded the Trojans to bring into their city the
Wooden Horse; see Aeneid, x. 67 f.

? Probably, like the whole incident, fictitious. They seem
to have been suggested by the Labri Linter, contaming lists of
magistrates, cited by the annalsts C. Lacimus Macer and
Q. Aehus Tubero, of the first century B.c. (see Livy, iv. 7, 12;
23, 2), but regarded by many modern scholars as apocryphal.

!In the Forum of Trajan; see note to Madr., vi. 6. This


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN I. 5-10


Greek, that revered man poured forth in the follow-
ing words the sorrow that his groan implied: ** And
so Thersites ! and Sinon ? and other such monsters of
antiquity are well known to us and will be spoken of
by our descendants ; but shall the Deified Aurelian,
that most famous of princes, that most firm of rulers,
who restored the whole world to the sway of Rome,
be unknown to posterity ? God prevent such mad-
ness! And yet, if I am not mistaken, we possess
the written journal of that great man and also his
wars recorded in detail in the manner of a history,
and these I should like you to procure and set forth
in order, adding thereto all that pertaims to his life.
All these things you may learn in your zeal for
research from the linen books,’ for he gave instruc-
tions that in these all that he did each day should
be written down. I will arrange, moreover, that the
Ulpian Library‘ shall provide you with the linen
books themselves. It would be my wish that you
write a work on Aurelian, representing him, to the
best of your ability, just as he really was." I have
earried out these instructions, my dear Ulpianus,’
I have procured the Greek books and laid my hands
on all that I needed, and from these sources I have
gathered together into one httle book all that was
worthy of mention. You I should wish to think
kindly of my work, and, if you are not content there-
with, to study the Greeks and even to demand the
linen books themselves, which the Ulpian Library will
furnish you whenever you desire.


a favourite source for the erudition displayed by this biographer ;
see Tac., vin. 1, Frob., n. 1; Car., xi. 8.

9 Only a tentative restoration of the text and wholly un-
known (cf. note to Prob., 1. 3).


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

III. Ac ne multa et frivola prooemiis odiosus in-
texam, divus Aurelianus ortus, ut plures loquuntur,
Sirmii famiha obscuriore, ut nonnull, Dacia Ripensi.


1 p aeterea P, Lessing, Hohl; propterea Cas., Peter. 34),
rebus Peter; uiribus P, 2.


1 Bee note to Val., 1. 1.

? Pompeius Trogus, of the time of Augustus, who wrote
Historie Philippicae, extant only in the abndgement by
Justinus.

iL. Domitius Aurehanus Augustus (270-275).

4 According to Epi., 35, 1, bis father was a colonus of a
senator named Aurelius.

5 Mod. Mitrovitz, His actual birthplace is, indeed, unknown,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN II. 1—III 3


II. Now, when m the same carnage our talk had
fallen on Trebelhus Pollio, who has handed down to
memory all the emperors, both illustrious and obscure,
from the two Philips! to the Deified Claudius and his
brother Qumtillus, Tiberianus asserted that much of
Pollio's work was too careless and much was too brief ;
but when I said in reply that there was no writer, at
least m the realm of history, who had not made some
false statement, and even pointed out the places in
whieh Livy and Sallust, Cornelius Tacitus, and, finally,
Trogus ? could be refuted by manifest proofs, he came
over wholly to my opimion, and, throwing up his
hands, he jestingly said besides “Well then, write
as you will. You will be safe in saying whatever you
wish, since you will have as comrades im falsehood
those authors whom we admire for the style of their
histories.”

III. So then—lest I become tiresome by weaving
too many trifles mto my preface—the Deified
Aurelian? was born of a humble family,* at Sirmium 5
according to most writers, but in Dacia Ripensis  ac-
cording tosome. I remember, moreover, having read
one author who declared that he was born in Moesia ;
and, indeed, it often comes to pass that we are ig-
norant of the birthplaces of those who, born in a
humble position, frequently mvent a birthplace for
themselves, that they may give their descendants a
glamour derived from the lustre of the locality. How-
ever, in writing of the deeds of a great emperor, the


but there ıs no doubt that, hke Claudius, Probus, Carus and
Diocletian, he came of the hardy Illyrian stock which m this
period furnished the greater part of Rome’s soldiers. He was
born in 214 or 215.

6 A new province formed by Aurelian himself (see c. xxxix. 7),
and so not unnaturally supposed to be his native place.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

IV. Atque, ut ad ordinem redeam, Aurelianus modi-
cis ortus parentibus, a prima aetate ingenio vivacissi-
mus, viribus elarus, nullum umquam diem praetermisit,
quamvis festum, quamvis vacantem, quo non se pilo
et sagittis ceterisque armorum exerceret officiis.


tsun Mommsen; qui P, 2; lacuna after parentes assumed
by Peter.


1 À pupil of Parmenides, born m Elea (Veha) in Italy about
485 B.C. and resident in Athens about 450, the mventor of the
argument about Achilles and the tortoise.

2A Scythian prince who travelled to Greece and was sup-
posed to have lived in Athens iu the early sixth century as the
friend of Solon and to have been the author of a series of apho-
risms ; see Diog. Tiaert., 1, 8, 101 f.


1 (8


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN III 4—IV. 4


chief thing to be known is not in what place he was
born, but how great he was in the State. Do we
value Plato more highly because he was born at
Athens than because he stands out illumined as the
peerless gift of philosophy? Or do we hold Aristotle
of Stagira or Zeno of Elea! or Anacharsis ? of Scythia
in less esteem because they were born in the tiniest
villages, when the virtue of philosophy has exalted
them all to the skies ?

IV. And so—to return to the course of events—
Aurelian, born of humble parents and from his earhest
years very quick of mind and famous for his strength,
never let a day go by, even though a feast-day or a
day of leisure, on which he did not practise with the
spear, the bow and arrow, and other exercises 1n arms.
As to ius mother, Calherates of Tyre,? by far the most
learned wrter of the Greeks, says that she was a
priestess of the temple of his own Syn-god * in the
village m which his parents lived; she even had the
gift of prophecy to a certain extent, for once, when
she was quarrelling with her husband and reviling him
for his stupidity and low estate, she shouted at him,
** Behold the father of an emperor!" From which it
is clear that the woman knew sometlung offate. The
same writer says also that there were tbe following
omens of the rule of Aurelian: First of all, when he
was a child, a serpent wound itself many times around
his wash-basin, and no one was able to kill it; finally,
his mother, who had seen the occurrence, 1efused to
have the serpent killed, saying that it was a memher


? Otherwise unknown and probably fictitious.

* An allusion to the cult of the Sun founded by him at Rome ;
see c. xxxv. 3 and note. This factis probably the origi of the
story that his mother was a priestess of the deity.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


1* que” etm also Hohl; auebrinalao P*; * aua vmperator "
Peter?. ?31e ing. by Lessing, v. Winterfeld, Hohl; om. in P
and by Peter.


1 Phny (Nat. Hast., xxix. 72) tells of snakes kopt as pets in
Rome. The snake was, in fact, regaided as the symbol of the
genvus of the owner of a house, and 1s often found at Pompei
painted on the wall of the shrine of the household-gods along
with the figures of the Lares and Penates.

? For a similar “ omen” see Ci, Alb., v. 9.

? It had been forbidden by M. Aurehus; see Mure , xxiii. 8.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN IV 5—V. 5


of the household.! Furthermore, ıt is said, the priest-
ess made swaddling-clothes for her son from a purple
cloak,? which the emperor of the time had dedicated
to the Sun-god. This, too, is related, that Aurelian,
while wrapped im his swaddling-clothes, was lifted out
of his cradle by an eagle, but without suffering harm,
and was laid on an altar in a neighbourmg shrine
which happened to have no fireupon it The same
writer asserts that on hus mother's land a calf was born
of marvellous size, white but with purple spots, which
formed on one side the word “haul,” on the other
side a crown. V. I remember also reading m this
same author much that has no importance; he even
asserts that when Aurehan was born there sprang up
in this same woman's courtyard roses of a purple
colour, having the fragrance of the rose but a golden
centre. Later, when he was in multary service, there
were also many omens predicting, as events showed,
his future rule. For instance, when he entered
Antioch in a carriage, for the reason that because of
a wound he could not ride his horse, a purple cloak,
which had been spread out in his honour, fell down
on him in such a way as to cover his shoulders, Then,
when he desired to change to a horse, because at that
time the use of a carriage in a city was attended with
odium,? a horse belonging to the emperor was led up
to him, and in his haste he mounted ıt. But when he
discovered to whom it belonged, he changed to one
of his own. Furthermore, when he had gone as
envoy to the Persians, he was presented with a sacri-
ficial saucer, of ihe kind that the king of the Persians
is wont to present to the emperor, on which was en-
graved the Sun-god in the same attire in which he
was worshipped 1n the very temple where the mother


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


6fueratsacerdos. donatus eidem etiam elephantus prae-
cipuus, quem ille imperatori obtulit, solusque omnium
privatus Aurelianus elephanti dommus fuit,

4sidiarüs solus adtrivit. refert Theoclius, Caesarea-
norum temporum scriptor, Aurelianum manu sua bello
Sarmatico une die quadraginta et octo interfecisse,
plurimis autem et diversis diebus ultra nongentos
quinquaginta, adeo ut etiam ballistia pueri et salta-
tiunculas in! Aurelianum tales componerent,? quibus
diebus festis militariter saltitarent :


5  ' Mille mille mille decollavimus.
unus homo mille decollavimus.
mille bibat? quisquis * mille occidit,
tantum vini nemo habet quantum fudit sanguinis."
! 444 orn. 1n P. ? componerent X, editors; om. in P.


? bibat Bucheler, Hohl; wuat P, X, Peter. * guísquas
Basore; qui P, X, Peter.


! In Juvenal, xu. 106-107, clephants are designated as Caesars
armentum, NULA serve paratum | provato.

? Similarly, a centurion in the army of the Danube in A.D.
14 had the nickname of ** Cedo alteram " (** Give-me-another ”) ;
see Tacitus, dnnals i. 23, 4.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN V 6—VI. 5


of Aurelian had been a priestess. He was also pre-
sented with an elephant of unusual size, which he then
gave to the emperor, and Aurelian was the only com-
moner of them all who ever owned an elephant!

VI. But, to omit these and similar details, he was
a comely man, good to look upon because of his manly
grace, rather tall in stature, and very strong in his
muscles; he was a little too fond of wine and food,
but mdulged his passions rarely; he exercised the
greatest severity and a disciphne that had no equal,
being extremely ready to draw his sword. And, in
fact, since there were in the army two tribunes, both
named Aurehan, thus man and another, who later was
captured with Valerian, tbe soldiers gave him the nick-
name of “ Sword-m-hand,” ? so that, if anyone chanced
to ask which Aurelian had done anything or performed
any exploit, the reply would be made “ Aurelian
Sword-in-hand," and so he would be identified

Many of the remarkable deeds which he did as a
commoner are still well known: For instance, he and
three hundred men of his garrison alone destroyed
the Sarmatians when they burst into Illyricum.
Theoclius,? who wrote of the reigns of the Caesars,
relates that in the war against the Sarmatians Aurelian
with his own hand slew forty-eight men in a single
day and that in the course of several days he slew
over nine hundred and fifty, so that the boys even
composed in his honour the following jingles and
dance-ditties, to which they would dance on holidays
in soldier fashion :


« Thousand, thousand, thousand we've beheaded now.
One alone, a thousand we’ve beheaded now.

He shall drink a thousand who a thousand slew.

So much wine is owned by no one as the blood which


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


* Mille Sarmatas, mille Francos semel et semel
occidimus,
LE
mille Persas quaerimus.

4solus demque omnium militem, qui adulterium eum
hospitis uxore commuserat, ita punivit ut duarum
arborum capite, inflecteret, ad pedes militis dehigaret
easdemque subito dimitteret, ut scissus ille utrimque
penderet. quae res ingentem timorem omnibus
fecit.

5 Huius epistula militaris est ad vicarium suum data
huius modi: “ Si vis tribunus esse, immo si vis vivere,
manus militum contine. nemo pullum alienum rapiat,
ovem nemo contingat, uvam nullus auferat, segetem
nemo deterat, oleum, salem, lignum nemo exigat,
annona sua contentus sit. de praeda hostis, non de


ldwwnus om. an P.


! Presumably during the German invasions of 254-258. No
Legio VI Galheana is known.
Ihe same punishment, but for a different oftence, was used
by Alexander the Great, see Plutarch, Alex., 48, 8.


-æ .


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN VI. 6—VII. 5


I perceive, indeed, that these verses are very trivial,
but since the author mentioned before has included
them in his writings, in Latin just as they are here,
I have thought they ought not to be omitted. VII.
Likewise, when at Mainz as tribune of the Sixth
Legion, the Galhean, he completely crushed the
Franks, who had burst mto Gaul and were roving
about through the whole country, killing seven
hundred of them and capturing three hundred, whom
he then sold as slaves. And so a song was again
composed about him :


“Franks, Sarmatians by the thousand, once and once
again we've slam.
Now we seek a thousand Persians."


He was, moreover, so feared by the soldiers, as I
have said before, that, after he had once punished
offences in the camp with the utmost severity, no one
offended again. In fact, he alone among all com-
manders inflicted the following punishment on a soldier
who had committed adultery with the wife of the man
at whose house he was lodged: bendmg down the
tops of two trees, he fastened them to the soldier's
feet and then let them fly upward so suddenly that
the man hung there torn in two?—a penalty which
inspired great terror in all.

There 1s a letter of his, truly that of a soldier, written
to his deputy, as follows: * If you wish to be tribune,
or rather, if you wish io remam alive, restrain the
hands of your soldiers. None shall steal another's
fowl or touch his sheep. None shall carry off grapes,
or thresh out grain, or exact oil, salt, or firewood, and
each shall be content with his own allowance. Let


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


6lacrimis provincialium victum! habeant arma tersa
sint, ferramenta samiata, calciamenta fortia. vestis
nova vestem veterem excludat. stipendium m balteo,

7non in popma habeat. torquem, brachialem, anulum
adponat. equum et sagmarium suum defricet,
capitum animalis non vendat, mulum centuriatum

8communiter curent, alter alteri quasi miles,? nemo
quasi servus obsequatur, a medicis gratis curentur,
haruspicibus nihil dent, in hospitiis caste se agant, qui
litem fecerit vapulet."

VIII. Inveni: nuper in Ulpia Bibliotheca inter
linteos libros epistulam divi Valerian: de Aureliano
principe scriptam, quam ad verbum, ut decebat,
inserui,

2  * Valerianus Augustus Antonino Gallo consuli.
culpas me familiaribus litteris, quod Postumo filium
meum Gallienum magis quam Aureliano commiserim,
cum utique sereriori et puer credendus fuerit et exer-
citus. ne tu? id diutius iudicabis, si bene scieris


1 uictum ins. by Novak; om. in P and by Hohl; habeant
replaced by uuant by Peter. 2 miles Obrecht, Peteri,
on P. * ne tu P, J, def. by Baehrens and Hohl; nec tomen
Peter.


1 See Claud., xiu, 8 and note. ? Seo c. i, 7 and notes,

3? No consul of this name is known.

4 This is certainly an error, probably due to confusion with
the fact that Gallienus entrusted his son Valerian to the care
of Silvanus; see notes to Pyr, Prig., n1. 1.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN VIL 6—VIII 4


them get their living from the booty taken from the
enemy aud not írom the tears of the provincials.
Their arms shall be kept burnished, their implements
bright, and their boots stout. Let old uniforms be
replaced by new. Let them keep their pay in their
belts and not spend it in public-houses. Let them
wear their collars, arm-rings,! and finger-rings. Let
each man curry his own horse and baggage-animal,
let no one sell the fodder allowed him for his beast,
and let them take care in common of the mule be-
longing to the century, Let one yield obedience to
another as a soldier and mo one as a slave, let them
be attended by the physicians without charge, let
them give no fees to soothsayers, let them conduct
themselves in their lodgings with propriety, and let
anyone who begins a brawl be thrashed."

VIII. I have recently found among the linen books
i the Ulpan Library? a letter, written by the
Deified Valerian concerning the Emperor Aurelian,
which I have inserted word for word, as seemed
right :

“From Valerian Augustus to Antoninus Gallus,’
the consul. You find fault with me in a personal
letter for confiding my son Galhenus* to Postumus
rather than to Aurelian, on the ground, of course,
that both the boy and the army should be entrusted
to the sterner man. Of a truth you will continue
to hold this opinion when once you have learned
how stern Aurelian is; for he is too stern, much
too stern, he is harsh and his actions are not suited
to those of our time. Moreover, I call all to wit-
ness that I have even feared that he will act too
sternly toward my son also, m case he does aught in
behaving with too great frivolity—for he is naturally


-— m ma


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

2 “Valenanus Augustus Ceionio Albmo praefecto
urbi. vellemus quidem simgulis quibusque devotis-
simis rei publicae viris multo maiora deferre compendia
quam eorum dignitas postulat, maxime ubi honorem
vita commendat—debet enim quid praeter dignitatem
pretium esse metitorum,—sed facit rigor publicus ut
accipere de provinciarum inlationibus ultra ordinis


1non ins. by Peter; om. in P.


! Perhaps M. Nummaas Ceionius Annius Albinus of C. I. Dn,
vi. 814 b, who may be identical with the Nummuius Albinus
who was prefect of the city in 256; but see note to Cl. Alb.,
iv. 1.

2 M. Valerius Corvus (or Corvinus), six times consul betwoon
348 and 299 B.o. and victor over the Volsci and Samnites, and
his descendants, especially M. Valerius Messalla Corvinus,


JAR


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN VIII, 5—IX 6


prone to merry-makmg." This letter shows how
great was his sternness, so that even Valerian said
that he feared him.

IX. There is another letter by the same Valerian,
sounding his praises, which I have brought out from
the files of the city-prefecture. For when he came
to Rome the allowance usually made to his rank was
assigned to him. A copy of the letter:

“From Valerian Augustus to Ceionius Albinus;
the prefect of the city. It had, indeed, been our
wish to bestow on each and every man who has been
loyal to the commonwealth a much larger recompense
than his rank demands, but especially when his
manner of life recommends him for honours—for
there should be some other reward for merit than
rank—, but the public disciple requires that none
shall receive from the income of the provinces a
greater sum than the grade of his pogition permits.
Wherefore we have now chosen Aurelian, a very
brave man, to inspect and set mm order all our camps,
for, by the general admission of the entire army,
both we ourselves and the whole commonwealth as
well are so m his debt tbat there are scarcely any
rewards that are worthy of him, or, indeed, too great.
For what quality has he that is not illustrious? that
cannot be compared with the Corvmi? and the
Scipios? He is liberator of Illyricum, saviour of the
provinces of Gaul, and asa general a great and perfect
example. And yet there is nothing but this that I
ean bestow on such a man by way of reward for his
services; for a wise and careful administration of the
commonwealth will not permit it. Wherefore your


famous as a general m the early principate of Augustus and
the patron of Tibullus,


THE DREIFIED AURELIAN


Lua, mi parens carissime, supra dicto viro adiciet,!
quamdiu Romae fuerit, panes militares mundos se-
decim, panes militares castrenses quadraginta, vini
mensalis sextarios quadraginta, porcellum dimidium,
gallinaceos duos, porcinae pondo triginta, bubulae
pondo quadraginta, ole: sextarium unum et item
hquaminis sextarium unum, salis sextarium unum,
7 herbarum ? holerum quantum sat est. sane quoniam
e1 aliquid praecipue decernendum est, quamdiu Romae
fuerit, pabula exira ordinem decernes, ips: autem ad
sumptus aureos Antoninianos diurnos binos, argenteos
Philippeos minutulos quinquagenos, aeris denarios
centum. reliqua per praefectos aerarü praebe-
buntur,"
X. Frivola haec fortassis cuipiam et nimis levia esse
2 videantur, sed curiositas nihil recusat. habuit ergo
multos ducatus, plurimos tribunatus, vicarias ? ducum
et tribunorum diversis temporibus prope quadraginta,


ladicwi Gruter, Madvig, Petex?; adficet P,! Peter’.
?herbas P, 2 waearros P.


1 These coms are also mentioned in simular “ letters” im
e. xL 1; Prob, 1v.5; Feirm., xv. 8. That gold coms of any
of the Antonines were current at the time when these “ letters”
were supposed to have been written is very doubtful. The
name Antoninianus is usually apphed (though with no other
warrant than these “ letters”) to the new silver coin that was
issued by Caracalla and the later emperors of the third century,
but there is no reason to suppose that it was ever given to the
aureus. The term Phihppeus was familiar, from long-standing
tradition, as a designation for the aureus (see note to Claud.,
xiv. 8), but neither the small silver minutuli (see note to Alez.,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN IX. 7—X 2


Integrity, my dearest kinsman, will supply the afore-
said man, as long as he shall be in Rome, with sixteen
loaves of soldiers’ bread of the finest quality, forty
loaves of soldiers’ bread of the quahty used in camp,
forty pmts of table-wine, the half of a swme, two
fowl, thirty pounds of pork, forty pounds of beef, one
pint of oil and likewise one pint of fish-pickle, one pmt
of salt, and greens and vegetables as much as shall be
sufficient. And indeed, since something out of the
ordinary must be allowed him, as long as he shall be
in Rome, you will allow him fodder beyond the usual
amount and for his own expenses, moreover, a daily
grant of two aure: of Antoninus,! fifty silver minutuli
of Philip, and one hundred denarii of bronze? All
else will be furnished by the prefects of the treasury 5,"

X. These details may perhaps seem to someone to
be paltry and over trivial, but research stops at noth-
ing. He held, then, very many commands as general
and very many as tribune, and acted"as deputy for
generals or tribunes on about forty different occasions.


xxii. 8) nor the bronze coms had any possible connection with
Philip of Macedonia, nor is there any reason to suppose that
they took their name from Philippus Arabs, who did not
institute any reform in the comage, It would seem that the
author, failng to understand the real significance of the term
Philippeus and supposing that it was derived from the name
of the emperor, has apphed both ib and Antoninianus to all
coins indiscnmunately, for the purpose of creating the impres-
sion of greater learning, see Menadier, p. 27 i; p. 47 f.

2The expression aes denarios 18 nonsense, since these
coins were not made of bronze but of base metal washed with
silver.

? The statement that supplies will be furnished to an army
officer by the prefect of the aerarvum (the old senatona! treasury)
15 sufficient evidence that this letter 1s a forgery. Equally fc-
tutions is this official m c. xu. 1 and c. xx, 8.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


usque adeo ut etiam Ulpu Criniti, qui se de Troiam
genere referebat, et fortissimi re vera vin et Traiani
simillimi, qui pictus est cum eodem Aurehlano in
Templo Soli, quem Valerianus Caesaris loco habere
instituerat, vicem sumeret, exercitum duceret, limites
restitueret, praedam militibus daret, Thracias bubus,
equis, mancipiis captivis locupletaret, manubias in
Palatio conlocaret, quingentos servos, duo mulia
vaccarum, equas mille, ovium decem milia, caprearum
quindecim m privatam villam Valeriani congereret.
3 tunc enim? Ulpius Crimtus publice apud. Byzantium
sedenti Valeriano in thermis egit gratias, dicens
magnum de se iudicium habitum, quod eidem
vicarium Aurelianum dedisset. quare eum statuit
adrogare.

XI. Interest epistulas nosse de Aureliano scriptas et
ipsam adrogationem, epistula Valeriam ad Aurel-
anum: ‘Si esset alius, Aureliane iucundissime, qui
Ulpi Crimiti vicem posset umplere, tecum de eius
virtute ac sedulitate conferrem nunc tu—cum alium
non? requirere potuissem—suscipe bellum a parte

2Nicopolis, ne nobis aegritudo Criniti obsit. fac
quiequid potes. multa non dico. in Lua erit potestate
3 militiae magisterium. habes sagittarios Ituraeos
trecentos, Armenios sescentos, Arabas centum quin-


l cum P. ? So Editor; tecum P; lacuna assumed by
Peter? after tu, cum, te cum «non meliorem; Hohl.


1 Mentioned also in c. xxxvin. 2-3, but otherwise unknown.
It ıs probably true that under Valerian Aurelian was engaged
in the defence of Thrace against the Goths, but the episode as
developed in the following chapters, with the account of
Valerian’s audience at Constantinople, the adoption of Aurelian
and his appointment to the consulship, all embellished with


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN X. 3—XI 3


Indeed, he even acted as deputy for Ulpius Crinitus!
who used to assert that he was of the house of Trajan
—he was, 1m aetual fact, a most brave man and very
similar to Trajan—, who was painted together with
Aurelian in the Temple of the Sun, and whom
Valenan had planned to appomt to the place of a
Caesar. He also commanded troops, restored the
frontiers, distributed booty among the soldiers, en-
riched the provinces of Thrace with captured cattle,
horses, and slaves, dedicated spoils in the Palace, and
brought together to a private estate of Valerian’s five
hundred slaves, two thousand cows, one thousand
mares, ten thousand sheep, and fifteen thousand goats.
At this time, then, Ulpius Crinitus gave thanks formally
to Valerian as he sat m the public baths at Byzantium,
saying that he had done him great honour in giving
him Aurelian as deputy. And for this reason he
determined to adopt Aurelian.

XI. It is of interest to know the letters that were
written concerning Aurelian and also the account of
his adoption itself. Valerian’s letter to Aurelian :
“If there were anyone else, my dearest Aurelian,
who could fill the place of Ulpms Crinitus, I should
be consulting with you in regard to his courage and
industry. But now do you—since I could not have
found any other—take upon yourself the war around
Nicopolis,? m order that the illness of Crinitus may
cause us no damage. Do whatever you can. I will
be brief. The command of tbe troops will be vested
in you. You will have three hundred Ituraean bow-
men, sx hundred Armenians, one hundred and fifty


fabricated. ** documentis," must be considered an invention of


the authors,
2 See Claud., xi. 4 and note.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


l «anum Madvig, Petex?; «wm P, X. 2 wcemgue Cas.,
Cornelissen, Hohl; fidemque P, 2’, Peter. ! So P, &, foll. by
Hohl, a puero Peter".


1 Mentioned also in a “speech " of Valerian’s in Prob., v. 6,
but otherwise unknown, for none of the five Third Legions of
which we know had the cognomen Felix.

2 See note to Alex, lvi. 5.

? Evidently intended to be names of German chieftains in
Roman service.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XI 1—XII. 1


Arabs, two hundred Saracens, and four hundred
irregulars from Mesopotamia; you will have the
Third Legion, the Fortunate, and eight hundred
mounted cuirassiers.* You will also have with you
Hariomundus, Haldagates, Hildomundus and Chario-
viscus.? The prefects have arranged for the needful
supplies in all the camps. Your duty ıt is, with the
aid of your wisdom and skill to place your winter
and summer camps where you will lack nothing, and,
furthermore, to ascertam where the enemy's train is,
and to find out exactly how great his forces are and
of what kind, in order that no supplies may be used
in vain or weapons wasted, for on these depends all
success in war. I, for my part, expect as much from
you, if the gods but grant their favour, as the common-
wealth could expect from Trajan, were he still alive.
And indeed, he, in whose place I have made you
deputy, is no less great a man. I¢ is, therefore,
proper that you should expect the consulship,* with
this same Ulpius Crinitus as colleague, for the follow-
ing year, beginning on the eleventh day before the
Kalends of June, to fill out the term of Gallienus and
Valerian, and your expenses shall be paid from the
public funds. For we should aid the poverty of those
men-—and of none more than those—who after a long
life in publie affairs are neverlheless poor." This
letter also shows how great a man Aurelian was—
and truly great, indeed, for no one ever reached the
highest place who did not from his earliest years climb
up by the ladder of noble character.

XII. The letter about the consulship: “From
Valerian Augustus to Aelius Xiphidius, the prefect
4 Aurelian’s fii st consulship was in fact, in 271.

$ Otherwise unknown and jiobably fictitious.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


aerarii. Aureliano, cui consulatum detulimus, ob
paupertatem, qua ille magnus est, ceteris maior,
dabis ad editionem circensium aureos Antoninianos
trecentos, argenteos Philippeos minutulos tria milia,
in aere sestertium quinquagies, tunicas multicias
viriles decem, lineas Aegyptias viginti, mantelia
Cypria paria duo, tapetia Afra decem, stragula Maura

2decem, porcos centum, oves centum. convivium
autem publicum edi iubebis senatoribus et ! equitibus
Romanis, hostias maiores duas, minores quattuor."

4quaeso ne odiosior verbosiorve in ea re videar, quam
fidei causa inserendam credidi ex libris Acholii, qui
magister admissionum Valeriani principis fuit, libro
actorum eius nono:

XIII. Cum consedisset Valerianus Augustus in
thermis apud Byzantium, praesente exercitu, prae-
sente etiam officio Palatino, adsidentibus Nummila
Tusco consule ordinario, Baebio Macro praefecto
praetorii, Quinto Anchario praeside orientis, ad-
sidentibus etiam a parte laeva Avulnio Saturnino
Seythici limitis duce et Murrentio Mauricio ad


let om in P. ? Nummio Fasti Cons., Hohl; Nemmio P;
Menunio Peter.


1 See c. ix. 7 and note.

? Sec Alex., xiv. 6 and note.

*In the early empire known as ab admissione, a freedman
whose duty it was to admit persons to audiences with the emperor.
The title magister admissionum was held in the Byzantine
period by an official of high degree, but this reference is the
only evidence for the existence of the office as early as the third
century and it is probably a fabrication.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XII. 2—XIII. 1


of the treasury. To Aurelian, whom we have named
for the consulship, because of his poverty—in whieh
he is great and greater than all others—you will
supply for the performance of the races in the Circus
three hundred aurei of Antoninus, three thousand
silver minutul: of Philip, five million bronze sesterces,
ten finely-woven tunics of the kind used by men,
twenty tunics of Egyptian linen, two pairs of Cyprian
table-covers, ten African carpets, ten Moorish couch-
covers, one hundred swine, and one hundred sheep.
You will order, moreover, that a banquet shall be
given at the state's expense to the senators and Roman
kmghts, and that there shall be two sacrificial victims
of major aud four of minor size "

And now, inasmuch as I have said in reference to
his adoption that I would include certam things which
concern so great a prince, I ask you not to consider
me too tedious or too wordy in the following statement,
which I have thought I should introduce, for the sake
of accuracy, from the work of Acholus,? the master
of admissions? under the Emperor Valerian, m the
ninth book of his records

XIII. When Valerian Augustus had taken lus seat
in the public baths at Byzantium, 1n the presence of
the army and in the presence of the officials of the
Palace, there being seated with him Nummuus Tuscus,
the consul-regular,* Baebius Macer,* prefect of the 258
guard, and Quintus Ancharius, governor of the East,
and seated on his left hand Avulnius Saturninus,
general in command of the Scythian frontier,
Murrentius Mauricius, just appomted to Egypt,


* Seo nole to Carde., 1v. 8.
5 Unknown, like all those whose names follow.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


Aegyptum destinato et Iulio Tryphone orientalis
limitis duce et Maecio Brundisino praefecto annonae
orientis et Ulpio Crinito duce Illyriciani limitis et
Thracici et Fulvio Boio duce Raetici limitis, Valeri-
2anus Augustus dixit: * Gratias tibi agit, Aureliane,
res publica, quod eam a Gothorum potestate liberasti.
abundamus per te praeda, abundamus gloria et iis
3 omnibus quibus Romana felicitas crescit. cape igitur
tibi pro rebus gestis tuis coronas murales quattuor,
coronas vallares quinque, coronas navales duas,
coronas civicas duas, hastas puras decem, vexilla
bicolora quattuor, tunicas russas ducales quattuor,
pallia proconsularia duo, togam praetextam, tunicam
palmatam, togam pictam, subatmalem profundum,
4sellam eburatam. nam te consulem hodie designo,
scripturus ad senatum, ut tibi deputet scipionem,
deputet etiam fasces; haec enim imperator non solet
XIV. dare, sed a senatu, quando fit consul, aecipere." post
haee Valeriani dicta Aurelianus surrexit atque ad
manus accessit agens gratias militaribus verbis, quae
propria et ipsa adponenda decrevi. Aurelianus dixit :
2 * Et ego, domine Valeriane, imperator Auguste, ideo
cuncta feci, ideo vulnera patienter excepi, ideo et


1 Made of gold with a decoration in the form of a battlement,
presented to the man who first scaled the enemy’s wall.

* Made of gold with a decoration in the form of a rampart,
presented for forcing a way into a hostile camp.

5 Made of gold and adorned with the beaks of ships, pre-
sented to the man who first boarded an enemy’s ship.

4See Mare., xii. 8 and note.

5 Frequently presented as a mark of distinction (so also
Piob., v. 1.)

5 See note to Gord., 1v. 4.

7 Originally carned by the tnumphant general on the day


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XIII 9— XIV. 2


Julius Trypho, general m command of the frontier
of the East, Maecius Brundisinus, prefect of the
grain-supply for the East, Ulpius Crinitus, general in
command of the Illyrian and Thracian frontier, and
Fulvius Boius, general in command of the Raetian
frontier, Valerian Augustus «poke as follows: “ The
commonwealth thanks you, Aurelian, for having set
it free from the power of the Goths. Through your
efforts we are rich in booty, we are rich in glory and
m all that causes the felicity of Rome to increase.
Now, therefore, m return for your great achievements
receive for yourself four mural crowns, five rampart
crowns, two naval crowns,? two erie crowns,* ten
spears without points,* four bi-coloured banners, four
red general's tunics, two proconsul’s cloaks, a bordered
toga, a tunic embroidered with palms,’ a gold-em-
broidered toga, a long under-tunic, and an ivory-
chair. For on this day I appoint yoà consul, and
l wil write to the senate that it may vote you the
sceptre of office’ and vote you also the fasces; for
these insignia the emperor is not wont to give, but,
on the contrary, to receive from the senate when
he is ereated consul" XIV. After this speech of
Valerians Aurelian arose and bending over the
Emperors hand, he expressed his thanks in words
befitting a soldier, and these I have considered suit-
able and worthy of being quoted here. He spoke as
follows: ‘ As for myself, my lord Valerian, Emperor
and Augustus, it was with this end in view that
I have done all that I did, have suffered wounds with
patience, and have exhausted my horses and my


of his triumph, but from the second century onward, like the
other insignia of office here mentioned, permitted to the consul
on the occasion of his solemn procession to the Capitol.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


Tega P.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XIV. 3—XV. 2


sworn comrades, namely, that I might win the ap-
proval of the commonwealth and of my own con-
science. You, however, have donemore Therefore,
I am grateful for your kindness and I will accept the
consulship which you offer me. May a god, and
a god in whom we can put our trust, now grant that
the senate also shall form a like judgement concerning
me." And so, when all who stood about expressed
their thanks, Ulpius Crinitus arose and delivered the
following speech: ** According to the custom of our
ancestors, Valerian Augustus,—a custom which my
own family has held particularly dear, —men of the
highest birth have always chosen the most eourageous
to be their sons, in order that those families which
either were dying out or had lost their offspring by
marriage might gain lustre from the fertility of a bor-
rowed stock. This custom, then, which was followed
by Nerva in adopting Trajan, by Trajan m adopting
Hadrian, by Hadrian in adopting Antoninus, and by
the others after them according to the precedent thus
established, I have thought I should now bring back
by adopting Aurelian, whom you, by the authority of
your approval, have given to me as my deputy. Do
you, therefore, give the order that it may be sanctioned
by law and that Aurelian may become heir to the
sacred duties, the name, the goods, and the legal
rights of Ulpius Crimitus, already a man of consular
rank, even as through your decision he is straight-
way to become a consular.” XV. It would be too
long to include every detail in full. For Valerian
expressed his gratitude to Crinitus, and the adoption
was carried out in the wonted form. I remember
having read in some Greek book what I have thought
I ought not to omit, namely, that Valerian commanded


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


A eelunquemus von Winterfeld ; relnqeamus P, editors.


! No such consul 18 known.

? See note to Claud., xvii. 6.

3 The vita omits any mention of Aurelian’s participation 1n
Gallienus’ campaign against Aureolus at Milan (see Zonaras,
xii. 25) and of his share in the conspiracy for the murdor of
Galhenus (see Gall., xiv. 1 and note).

4See Claud., xu. 2-6.

5 There 1s no reason to suppose that Aurelian had anything


ITHE DEIFIED AURELIAN XV. 3—XVI. 2


Crinitus to adopt Aurelian, chiefly for the reason that
he was poor; but this question I thmk should be left
undiseussed.

Now, inasmuchas I have previously inserted the letter
in accordance with which Aurehan was furnished with
the money needed for his consulship, I have thought
I should tell why I inserted a detail apparently trivial.
We have recently beheld the consulship of Furius
Placidus! celebrated in the Circus with so much dis-
play that the chariot-drivers seemed to receive not
prizes but patrimonies, for they were presented with
tumes of part-silk, with embroidered tunics? made of
fine linen, and even with horses, while right-thinkimg
men groaned aloud. For it has come to pass that
the consulship is now a matter of wealth, not of men,
because, of course, if 1t 1s offered to merit, 1t ought
not to impoverish the holder. Gone are those former
days of mtegrity, destined to disappear, stll further
through the currying of popular favour. But this
question, too, as is our wont, we shall leave un-
discussed.

XVI. So then, raised to a high position by these
many expressions of approval and these rewards,
Aurelian became so illustrious during the tune of
Claudius? that, after this emperor’s death and the
murder of his brother Quintillus,* he alone received
the imperial power; for Aureolus, with whom
Gallienus had made peace, had been put to death.
Concerning this matter there is great diversity of
opinion among the historians, even among the Greeks,
for some say that Aureolus was killed by Aurelian
against Claudius will? others that it was by lus


to do with the death of Aureolus, who was killed by his
soldiers; see Claud., v. 1-3. e
$ ot


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

XVII. Exstat epistula, quam ego, ut soleo, fidei
causa, nnmo ut alios annahum scriptores fecisse video,
inserendam putavi:

2 “Flavius Claudius Valerio Aureliano suo salutem.
expetit a te munus solitum nostra res publica.
adgredere. quid moraris? tuo magisterio mulites
uli volo, tuo ductu tribunos. Gothi oppugnand: sunt,
Gothi a Thraciis amovendi. eorum enim plerique
Haemimontum Europamque vexant, quite pugnante

3 fugerunt. omnes exercitus Thracicos, omnes Illyrici-
anos, totumque limitem ín tua potestate constituo ;
solitam en nobis ede virtutem. tecum erit etiam

4frater Quintillus, cum occurrent. ego ahis rebus
occupatus summam belh illius virtutibus tuis credo.
misi sane equos decem, loricas duas et cetera quibus
munire ad bellum euntem necessitas cogit."


14., the Brul, thus called because they came from the
shores of Lake Macotis (the Sea of Azov); on their invasion see
Claud.,vi.xi. Aurelian seems to have distinguished himself
in the course of this war (see also c. xvii. 5), and after a serious
disaster to the cavalry toward its close (Claud., xi. 6-8) to have
been appointed by Claudius to the command of the whole
oy (c. xviii. 1) and theroupon io have avenged the previous

efeat.
“These names were never borne by Claudius and Aurelian ; see
note to Claud., i. 1.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XVI. 3—XVITL 5


command and desire, others again that he was killed
by Aurehan after assuming the imperia] power, and
still others that it was while he was yet a commoner.
But these things, too, we shall leave undiscussed, to
be learned from those who have put them m writing.
This much, however, 1s agreed among all, namely,
that the Deified Claudius entrusted the whole conduct
of the war against the Maeotidae! to no one in pre-
ference to Aurehan.

XVII. There is still in existence a letter, which,
for the sake of accuracy, as is my wont, or rather
because I see that other writers of annals have done
so, Í have thought I should insert: “From Flavius
Claudius to his dear Valerius? Aurehan greeting:
Our commonwealth demands of you your wonted
services. Up then! Why this delay? I wish the
soldiers to reap the benefit of your command, the
tribunes of your leadership. The Goths must be
crushed, they must be driven from Thrace. For large
numbers of them ae ravaging Haemimontum ? and
Europe, those very ones who fled when you fought
against them. I now place under your command all
the armies in Thrace, all in Illyricum, and, in fact,
the whole frontier; come now, show us your wonted
prowess. My brother Quintillus, as soon as he meets
you, will also give you his aid. Busied as I am with
other tasks, I am entrusting to your valour the whole
of this war. I am sending you, moreover, ten horses,
two cuirasses, and all else with which necessity bids
me equip one going out to fight,"

So, making use of success won in battles fought
under Claudius’ auspices, he brought back the empire


3 Soa Claud., xi. 3 and note.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


ut supra diximus, consensu omnium legionum factus
est imperator.

2 Item Aurelianus contra Suebos et Sarmatas iisdem
temponbus vehementissime dimicavit ac florentissi-


! Before 25 May, 270, on which day he appears 1n a papyrus
as emperor. Immediately after Claudius’ death, in the spring
of 270, Quintillus was proclaimed emperor in Italy; see Claud.,
xu. 2.5 and notes. According to Zonaras, xi. 26, Quintillus
and Aurehan were proclaimed simultaneously, the former by
the senate and the latter by the army. This would seem to
mean that the army, recently victomous over the Goths, refused
to acknowledge the unwarhke Quintillus and bestowed the m-
perial power on its most competent general, then in Pannonia,
whereupon Quintillus committed suicide (cf. c. xxxvu. 6).

? See Claud., xi. 6-8.

3 More correctly, Juthungi, akin to the Alamanni and, like
them, living north of the upper Danube. Taking advantage of
the disturbances following Claudius’ death, they invaded Raetia,
1n 270 and seem even to have entered northern Italy. On the
news of Aurelian’s approach from Pannonia they withdrew,
but were overtaken south of the Danube by Aurelian and de-
feated in a great battle. A speech, supposedly delivered by
Aurelian to their envoys after this battle, 1s preserved from the
Zxvoind of Dexippus; see Fragm. Hast. Graec , di. p. 682 f,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XVIIL 1-4


to its previous condition and was at once, as we have
related before, declared emperor by the unanimous
voice of all the leg1ons.!

XVIII. Aurelian, in fact, commanded all the cavalry
before he received the power and while Claudius was
still ruling, after the leaders of the horse had incurred
reproach for having fought rashly and without the
Emperor's orders.?

Aurelian, too, during that same time, fought with
the greatest vigour against the Suebi ? and the Sarma-
tians * and won a most splendid victory. Under him,
it ıs true, a disaster was inflicted by the Marcomanni 8
as the result of his blunder. For, while he was making
no plan to meet them face to face during a sudden
invasion, but was preparing to pursue them from the
rear, they wrought great devastation in all the region
around Milan. Later on, however, he conquered even
the Marcomanni also. á

During that panic, moreover, while the Marcomanni
were devastating far and wide, great revolts arose at
Rome,’ for all were afraid that what had happened


$ This invasion seems to have necessitated Aurelian’s return
to Pannonia immediately after his defeat of the Juthungi.

5 The biographer here omits any mention of Aurelian’s journey
to Rome, in the late summer of 270, and his reception by the
senate, which was soon followed by a rapid return to Pannoma
1n order to repel an invasion of Vandals ; see Zosimus, i 48.

t More correctly, Alamanni and Juthungi They invaded
Italy in the winter of 270-271, while Aurelian was absent fight-
ing against the Vandals. Aurelian hurned to meet them, but
the vita fails to make his tactics clear; it would seem that he
tried to attack them from the north as they were advancing.
He then followed them and was badly defeated at Placentia
(c. xxi. 1-3), while the invaders continued their advance.

T See c. xoa, 5-6.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

XIX. Die tertio iduum Januariarum Fulvius Sabinus
praetor urbanus dixit: “ Referimus ad vos, patres con-
scripti, pontificum suggestionem et Aurelian principis
litteras, quibus iubetur ut inspieiantur fatales libri,
quibus spes belh termmand: sacrato deorum imperio

2continetur. scitis enim ipsi, quotiescumque gravior ali-
quis exstitit motus, eos semper inspectos, neque prius
mala publica- esse finita quam ex iis sacrificiorum pro-
8cessit auctoritas," tune surrexit primae sententiae
Ulpius Silanus atque ita locutus est: “Sero nimis,
patres conscripti, de rei publicae salute consulimur,
sero ad fataha 1ussa respicimus more languentium, qui
ad summos medicos nis: in summa desperatione non
mittunt, promde quas: peritioribus viris maior facienda


14g., an invasion by Alamanni; see note to Gall., 1v. 6.

*They advanced south-eastwaid along the Via Aemiha as far
as the mouth of the Metaurus, where Aurelian defeated them in
a great battle at Fano, forcing them to retieal. Thereupon he
followed them and again defeated them near the mver Tanus ;
see Epb., xxxv. 2. After this victory the title Germanicus
Maximus was conferred on him by the senate, and coms were
issued with the legend Victoria Germanica, see Matt.-Syd., v.
p. 305, no 355.

3 On such “senatus consulta," see note to Val, v. 3.


DIOR


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XVIII 5—XIX. 3


under Gallienus! might occur once more. Therefore
they even consulted the Sibylline Books, famed for
their benefits to the State, and in these it was found
that saerifices should be made in certain places, which
the barbarians then would not be able to pass And
so all those measures which were ordered were carried
out with divers kinds of ceremonies, and thus the bar-
barians were checked, all of whom, as they wandered
about in small divisions, Aurelian later destroyed.?

It 1s my desire to give in full the text of the senate's
decree ? itself, in which the authority of that most
illustrious body ordained that the Books should be
consulted .

XIX. On the third day before the Ides of January 11 Jan.
Fulvius Sabinus,* the city-praetor, spoke as follows: ©
“We bring before you, Conseript Fathers, the recom-
mendation of the pontiffs and a message from Aurelian
our prince, bidding us consult the Books of Fate, in
which, by the sacred command of the gods, are con-
tamed our hopes of ending the war. For you your-
selves are aware that, whenever any serious commotion
arose, they were always consulted, and tbat never
have the public ils been brought to an end until
there issued from them the command to make sacri-
fice," Then Ulpius Silanus, whose right it was to
give his opinion first, arose and spoke as follows; “It
is over late, Conscript Fathers, for us to be consulted
now concerning the safety of the commonwealth, and
over late for us to look to the commands of Fate,
even as do the sick who do not send for the great-
est physicians save when in the greatest despair,
exactly as though more skilful men must needs give


! Neither he nor Ulpius Silanus (§ 3) 1s otherwise known.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


lonserwmendun ... praeceptis ins. from 2’ by Hohl; om. m
P and by Peter. ? deorum . . . est ins. from £ by Hohl,


dei, the rest om. in P and by Peter. 3 consiraue £;
constuste P; consiwWanle editors. i«uelaiis Salm.: uertamas
P!: veteranis P corr. $5abirumas . . . wdrcemes ms. from


& by von Winterfeld and Hohl; om. in P and by Peter.


1The expression (also used in Heliog., vin. 1) means pro-
perly * with both parents living”, this was a pre-requisite for
service ab the sacrifices, sacied meals, and other tenple-
aa A sunilar chorus sang the Carmen Saeculare of
Torace.


FaTtafn!


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XIX. 4—XX. 2


a more certam cure, whereas it were better far to
meet every disease at the outset. For you re-
member, Conseript Fathers, that I often said m this
body, when the invasion of the Marcomann: was first
announced, that we should consult the commands of
the Sibyl, make use of the benefits of Apollo, and
submit ourselves to the bidding of the immortal gods ;
but some objected, and objected, too, with cruel guile,
saying in flattery that such was the valour of the
Emperor Aurelian that there was no need to consult
the deities, Just as though that great man does not
himself revere the gods and found his hopes on the
dwellers in Heaven. Why say more? We have
heard his message asking for the help of the gods,
which never causes shame to any. Now let this most
courageous man receive our assistance. Therefore
come, ye pontiffs, and do ye, pure and cleansed and
holy, attired as is meet and with spigits sanctified,
ascend to the temple, deck the benches with laurel,
and with veiled hands unroll the volumes, and inquire
into the fate of the commonwealth, that fate which is .
unchanging. And finally, do ye also enjoin a sacred
song upon those boys who may lawfully aid ın the
ceremonies. We, for our part, will decree the money
to be expended for the sacred rites and all that is
needful for the sacrifices, and we will proclaim for the
fields the festival of the Ambarvalia." ^ XX. Atter
this speech many of the senators were asked for their
opimions and gave them, but these it would be too
long to include. Then, while some raised their


? An ancient ceremony of purification held in May, m which
a bull, a ram, and a pig were conducted about the Roman terri-
tory and then sacrificed to Mars. It was entrusted by Augustus
to the revived priestly college of the Fratres Arvales.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


lhbri, st Baehrens, Peter?; bres P.


1A festival held, apparently, on 2 Feb, for the puiifieation ot
the city, in which the sacnficial victims (as in the Ambarvaha)
were led around its confines.

2? See note to c. xvin. 8.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XX. 3—XXI. 1


hands and others went on foot to give their votes
and others agam expressed their assent in words, the
senate's decree was enacted. Then they went to the
temple, consulted the Books, brought forth the verses,
purified the city, chanted the hymns, celebrated the
Amburbium,! and proclamed the Ambarvalia, and
thus the sacred ceremony which was commanded
was carried out.

Aurelian’s letter concerning the Sibyllme Books—
for I have meluded ıt also as evidence for my state-
ments: “I marvel, revered Fathers, that you have
hesitated for so long a time to open the Sibylline
Books, just as though you were consulting m a gather-
ing of Christians and not in the temple of all the
gods. Come, therefore, and by means of the purity
of the pontiffs and the sacred ceremonies bring aid to
your prince who is harassed by the plight of the
commonwealth. Let the Books be comsulted; let
all that should be done be performed; whatever ex-
penses are needful, whatever captives of any race,
whatever princely animals, I will not refuse, but will
offer them gladly, for ıt ıs not an unseemly thing to
win victories by the aid of the gods It was with
this that our ancestors brought many wars to an end
and with this that they began them. Whatever costs
there may be I have ordered to be paid by the prefect
of the treasury, to whom I have sent a letter. You
have, moreover, under your own control the money-
chest of the State, which I find more full than were
my desire.”

XXI. Aurehan, however, since he wished, by
massing his forces together, to meet all the enemy
at once, suffered such a defeat near Placentia? that
the empire of Rome was almost destroyed. This


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

4ineumbente turbarunt. denique nisi divina ope post
inspectionem Librorum sacrificiorumque curas mon-
stris quibusdam speciebusque divinis ımpheitı essent
barbari Homana victoria non fuisset,

5  Fimto proeho Marcomannico Aurelianus, ut erat
natura ferocior, plenus irarum Romam petut vindictae
cupidus, quam seditionum asperitas suggerebat. m-
civilius denique usus imperio, vir alias optimus, sedi-
tionum auctoribus interemptis cruentius ea quae

9dieum, sed mala ratione curantem, his actis cum


—,


v


1 gerodiendum Salm., Husehfeld, Hoh! , perfodiendum P,
Peter M


n


w


1 The occasion of this revolt was the successful advance of
the Germans (see c. xviii, 4), but masmuch as senators seen?-t0
have been involved in ıt (so also c. xxxix. 8 and Zosimus, i^
49, 2), 16 may be that the opponents of this emperor created by
the army took advantage of the opportumity to attempt his
overthrow, It has been suggested that the revolt of the mint.
workers (c. xxxvin. 2-3) was a part of this movement.

* According to Ammianus Marcellmus, xxx. 8, 8, he con-


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXI. 2-9


peril, in fact, was caused by the cunning and perfidy
of the barbarians’ mode of attack. For, bemg unable
to meet him in open battle, they fell back into the
thickest forests, and thus as evening came on they
routed our forces. And, indeed, if the power of the
gods, after the Books had been consulted and the
sacrifices performed, had not confounded the bar-
barians by means of certain prodigies and heaven-
sent visions, there would have been no victory for
Rome.

When the war with the Marcomanni was ended,
Aurelian, over-violent by nature, and now filled with
rage, advanced to Rome eager for the revenge which
the bitterness of the revolts had prompted.1 Though
at other times a most excellent man, he did, in fact,
employ his power too much like a tyrant, for in slay-
ing the leaders of the revolts he used too bloody a
method of checking what should have bten cured by
milder means. For he even killed some senators of
noble birth,? though the charges against them were
trivial and could have been held in disdam by a more
lement prince, and they were attested eithei by a
single witness or by one who was himself trivial or
held in but httle esteem. Why say more? By the
blow of a graver ill-repute he then marred that rule
which had previously been great and of which high
hopes were cherished, and not without reason. Then
men ceased to love and began to fear an excellent
prince, some asserting that such an emperor should
be hated and not desired, others that he was a good
physician indeed, but the methods he used for healing
were bad. Then, since all that happened made it


fiscated much property ; this was perhaps to provide money for
the war against Palmyra.


ABS


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


l pomini sunt Salm., Peter; nomims P, 2.


~


! See c. xxxix. 2 and note.

? The ancient ceremonial boundary-line of the city, enclosing
the area within which auspices could be taken. Origmally
surrounding the Palatime Hull only, 16 was extended to meclude
the Septimontium and then the four Regions, Sulla extended
it on the punerple stated here (see Aulus Gelhus, xm. 14, 3-4),
as did, apparently, Julius Caesar and Augustus and, certainly,
Claudius, some of whose boundary-stones sje extant, and
Vespasian also. No extensions made by Nero or Trajan are
known.

? The kingdom of Polemo I. and his descendants, annexed to
the Empire m 63 and incorporated, first, in the province of
Galatia and later in Cappadocia. It consisted of a distret
along the southern coast of the Black Sea, extending eastward
from the mouth of the river Ins (Yeshil Iimak) to Ootyova
(Ordu) and as far south as Sebastaa (Sivas).

4 Named from Cottinus, who ruled the district under Augustus.
It lay on both sides of the present Franco-Itahan boundary,
including Sugusio (Susa) on the north-east and Ebrodunum


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXI. 10—XXII. 2


seem possible that some such thing mught occur
agam, as had happened under Gallienus, after asking
advice froin the senate, he extended the walls of the
city of Rome.! The pomerium,? however, he did not
extend at that time, but later. For no emperor may
extend the pomerium save one who has added to the
empire of Rome some portion of foreign territory.
It was, indeed, extended by Augustus, by Trajan,
and by Nero, under whom the districts of Pontus
Polemoniacus? and the Cottian Alps * were brought
under the sway of Rome.

XXII. And so, having arranged for all that had to
do with the fortifications and the general state of
the city and with civil affairs as a whole, he directed
his march agaist the Palmyrenes, or rather against
Zenobia, who, in the name of her sons, was wielding
the imperial power in the East. On this march he
ended many great wars of various kands. For in


(Embrun) on the south-west. It was made a province by Nero
and put under a procurator et p aeses.

5 Bee note to Tyr. Trig., xxx. 1. After the death of Odee-
nathus she had, while acting as regent for her son (c. xxxvin.
1), developed an 1mpenahstie policy, sending an army to Egypt,
which succeeded m holding most of that countiy (see Claud.,
xi. 1 and note), and extending her sway northward over Syna,
mcluding Antioch, and Asia Manor as far as Ancyra (Angora).
Without actually rebelling against Roman iule, she had created
what seems to have been virtually an independent kingdom.
Encouraged, however, by Aurelian’s ill-success against the
Alamanm, she determined on a definite break with Rome, and
m the spring or early summer of 271 coms were issued in
Antioch and Alexandria, bearmg the portrait of her son Vabal-
lathus, with the titles of Imperator and Augustus. She seems
to have now formed the plan of setting up m the East a rival
power after the pattern of the independent empire in Gaul, and
a war with Aurelian was inevitable,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


iig., the Goths, who invaded the country south of the
Danube in the summer of 271. On the spoils and captives
taken by Aurelian see c. xxxiu. 8-4 and xxxiv. 1. He com-
memorated the victory by assuming the name Gothicus
Maximus and by coins with the legend Vacioria Gothica, see
Matt.-Syd. v. p. 803, no. 889. It was probably at this time
that the districts north of the Danube were evacuated; see note
toc. xxxix. T.

? Meanwhile the Palmyrenes were driven out of Egypt by
Probus, according to Prob., ix. 5. This happened after 11 Mar.,
271 (of which date there 1s a, papyrus dated in the joint reign of
Aurehan and Vaballathus) and before 29 Aug., 271, after which
there are no Alexandrian coins of Vaballathus.


THE DEIFIED AUERLIAN XXII. 3—XXIII. 3


Thrace and Illyricum he defeated the barbarians!
who came against him, and on the other side of the
Danube he even slew the leader of the Goths,
Cannabas, or Cannabaudes as he is also called, and
with him five thousand men. From there he crossed
over by way of Byzantium into Bithynia, and took
possession of it without a struggle. Many were the
great and famous things that he said and did, but we
cannot include them all in oar book without causmg a
surfeit, nor, indeed, do we wish to do so, but for the
better understanding of his character and valour a
few of them must be selected. For instance, when
he came to Tyana? and found its gates closed against
him, he became enraged and exclaimed, it 1s said

*In this town I will not leave even a dog alive.”
Then, mdeed, the soldiers, in the hope of plunder,
pressed on with greater vigour, but a certain Hera-
clammon, feanng that he would be killed along with
the rest, betrayed his native-place, and so the city
was captured, XXIII. Aurelian, however, with the
true spirit of an emperor, at once performed two
notable deeds, one of which showed his severity, the
other his lenieney. For, like a wise victor, he put
to death Heraclammon, the betrayer of his native-
place, and when the soldiers clamoured for the
destruction of the city in accordance with the words
in which he had declared that he would not leave a
dog alive in Tyana, he answered them, saying: “I
did, indeed, declare that I would not leave a dog
alive in this city; well, then, kill all the dogs.”
Notable, indeed, were the prince’s words, but more


3 Mod. Kizli-Hissar in S.W. Cappadocia, whence led the
route over the Taurus into Cilicia.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


apis dictum, grandius militum factum! ; nam 10catum
prmceipis, quo praeda negabatur, civitas servabatur,
totus exercitus ita quasi ditaretur accepit.

2 Taceri non debet res quae ad famam venerabilis

3vim pertinet. fertur enim Aurehanum de Tyanae
civitatis eversione vere dixisse, vere cogitasse; verum
Apollonium Tyanaeum, celeberrimae famae auctorita-
tisque sapientem, veterem philosophum, amicum
verum ? deorum, ipsum etiam pro numine frequentan-
dum, recipienti se in tentorium ea forma qua videtur


! factum Gruber, Peter, vocatum P, ? gerum editors ;
uu Pl; uwume?P corr.


l Aurelian apparently wished to appear as the deliverer of
Asia, Minor and Syria from the Falmyrenes, for he followed a
similar policy at Antioch ; see c, xxv. 1.

Otherwise unknown. $ See note to Alem., xxix. 9.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXIII 4—XXIV. 3


notable still was the deed of the soldiers; for the
entre army, just as though it were gaming riches
thereby, took up the prince’s jest, by which both
booty was denied them and the city preserved intact!

The letter concerning Heraclammon: “ From
Aurelian Augustus to Mallius Chilo? I have suffered
the man to be put to death by whose kindness, as it
were, I recovered Tyana. But never have I been
able to love a traitor and I was pleased that the
soldiers killed him ; for he who spared not his native
eity would not have been able to keep faith with me.
He, indeed, ıs the only one of all who opposed me
that the earth now holds. The fellow was rich, I
cannot deny it, but the property I have restored to
the children of him to whom it belonged, that no one
may charge me with having permitted a man who
was rich to be slain for the sake of his money."

XXIV. The city, moreover, was captured in a
wonderful way. For after Heraclammon had shown
Aurelian a place where the ground sloped upward by
nature in the form of a siege-mound, up which he
could climb in full attire, the emperor ascended there,
and holding aloft his purple cloak he showed himself
to the towns-folk withm and the soldiers without, and
so the eity was captured, just as though Aurelian's
entire army had been within the walls.

We must not omit one event which enhances the
fame of a venerated man. For, it is said, Aurelian
did indeed truly speak and truly think of destroying
the city of Tyana; but Apollonius of Tyana,’ a sage
of the greatest renown and authority, a philosopher
of former days, the true friend of the gods, and him-
self even to be regarded as a supernatural being,
as Aurelian was withdrawmg to his tent, suddenly


VOL. III. R


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


lef S's; om. in P. 2 fauora isque quaque placer P
corr ; favorruscuertt Pl; favor nos sue ví Peter.


1 The only one extant is the biography written by Flavius
Philostratos early in the Third Century (trans. by F. O. Cony-
beare 1n the L.C. Z..).

? The best acoountof the war against Zenobia isin Zosimus,
i, 50-56. According to this, the battle took place on the
Orontes, whereas the engagement at Daphne occurred during
the retreat of the Palmyrenes. Zenobia herself was present
at the main battle, the victory at which was due to a skilful


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXIV. 4—XXV, 1


appeared to him in the form in whieh he is usually
portrayed, and spoke to him as follows, usmg Latin in
order that he might be understood by a man from Pan-
nonia. * Aurehan, if you wish to conquer, there 1s
no reason why you should plan the death of my
fellow-citizens. Aurelian, if you wish to rule, abstam
from the blood of the innocent. Aurelian, act with
mercy 1f you wish to live long." Aurelian recog-
nized the countenance of the venerated philosopher,
and, in fact, he had seen his portrait in many a
temple. And so, at once stricken with terror, he
promised him a portrait and statues and a temple,
and returned to his better self. This incident I have
learned from trustworthy men and read over agam in
the books m the Ulpian Library, and I have been the
more ready to believe it because of the reverence in
which Apollonius is held. For who among men has
ever been more venerated, more revered, more re-
nowned, or more holy than that very man? He
brought back the dead to life, he said and did many
things beyond the power of man. If any one should
wish to learn these, let him read the Greek books
which have been composed concerning his life! I
myself, moreover, 1f the length of my life shall permit
and the plan shall continue to meet with his favour,
will put into writmg the deeds of this great man,
even though it be briefly, not because his achieve-
ments need the tribute of my discourse, but in order
that these wondrous things may be proclaimed by the
voice of every man.

XXV. After thus recovering Tyana, Aurelian, by
means of a brief engagement near Daphne,” gained
manœuvre of the Roman cavalry, the infantry taking no part
in the fight.

R2


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

2 Epistula ipsius exstat ad Mucaporem mussa, in qua


1Septumius Zabdas (Zàba, see Claud., xi. 1), who had com-
manded in the battle near Antioch, after abandoning the city
to Aurelian, fell back to the south along the Orontes to Emesa
(Homs), wheie the great battle of the war was fought.
enobia’s troops, 70,000 strong, greatly outnumbered the
Romans, and her cavalry drove the Roman horse from the
field, but her infantry was badly defeated by Aurelian. The
defeated remnants of the Queen’s army took refuge in the city,
but the hostility of the towns-folk forced her to retreat across
the desert to Palmyra, 90 miles distant, leaving behind a great
amount of treasure,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXV, 2—XXVI. 2


possession of Antioch, having promised forgiveness
to all; and thereupon, obeying, as far as is known,
the mjunctions of that venerated man, Apollonius,
he acted with greater kindness and mercy. After
this, the whole issue of the war was decided near
Emesa in a mighty battle fought against Zenobia and
Zaba,! her ally. When Aurelian’s horsemen, now
exhausted, were on the point of breaking their ranks
and turning their backs, suddenly by the power of
a supernatural agency, as was afterwards made known,
a divine form spread encouragement throughout the
foot-soldiers and rallied even the horsemen. Zenobia
and Zaba were put to flight, and a victory was won
in full, And so, having reduced the East to its
former state, Aurelian entered Emesa as a conqueror,
and at once made his way to the Temple of Elaga-
balus,? to pay his vows as if by a duty common to all.
But there he beheld that same divine foym which he
had seen supporting his cause in the battle. Where-
fore he not only established temples there, dedicating
gifts of great value, but he also built a temple to the
Sun at Rome, which he consecrated with still greater
pomp, as we shall relate in the proper place.?

XXVI. After this he directed his march toward
Palmyra,* in order that, by storming it, he might put
an end to his labours. But frequently on the march
his army met with a hostile reception from the
brigands of Syria, and after suffering many mishaps
he meurred great danger during the siege, being
even wounded by an arrow.

A letter of his is still in existence, addressed to


2 Bee note to Heliog., 1. 5.
3 See o. xxxv. 8. 4 Barly in 272.


æ 245


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


de huius belli difficultate ultra pudorem imperialem
3fatetur: “Romani me modo dicunt bellum contra
feminam gerere, quasi sola mecum Zenobia et suis
viribus pugnet, atque hostium quantum si vir a me
oppugnandus esset, illa! conscientia et timore longe
4deteriore. diei non potest quantum hic sagittarum
est, qui belli apparatus, quantum telorum, quantum
lapidum ; nulla pars muri est quae non binis et ternis
balhstis occupata sit; ignes etiam tormentis iaciuntur.
squid plura? timet quasi femina, pugnat quasi poenam
timens. sed credo adiuturos Romanam rem publicam
vere? deos, qui numquam nostris conatibus defuerunt."
6 Denique fatigatus ac pro malis fessus htteras ad
Zenobiam musit "deditionem illius petens, vitam pro-
mittens, quarum exemplum indidi .
j^ E Aurelianus umnperator Roman: orbis et receptor
orientis Zenobiae ceterisque quos societas tenet bellica.
gsponte facere debuistis id quod meis litteris nune iu-
betur. deditionem enim praecipio impunitate vitae
proposita, 1ta ut illic, Zenobia, cum tuis agas vitam ubi
9te ex senatus amplissimi sententia conlocavero. gem-
mas, aurum, argentum, sericum, equos, camelos in
Romanum aerarium conferatis, Palmyrenis ius suum
servabitur ”


lalla Editor, «m P, Peter. uere Petschenig; wr P;
veros Salm., Peter,


1 See c, xxxv, 5,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXVI. 3-9


Mueapor, in which, without the wonted reserve of
an emperor he confesses the difficulty of this war:
“The Romans are saying that I am merely waging
a war with a woman, just as if Zenobia alone and
with her own forces only were fighting agamst me,
and yet, as a matter of fact, there is as great a force
of the enemy as if I had to make war against a man,
while she, because of her fear and her sense of guilt,
is a much baser foe. It cannot be told what a store
of arrows is here, what great preparations for war,
what a store of spears and of stones; there is no
section. of the wall that is not held by two or three
engines of war, and their machines can even hurl fire.
Why say more? She fears hke a woman, and fights
as one who fears punishment I believe, however, that
the gods will truly bring aid to the Roman common-
wealth, for they have never failed our endeavours."

Finally, exhausted and worn out by reason of
ill-success, he despatched a letter to Zenobia, asking
her to surrender and promising to spare her life ; of
this letter I have inserted a copy:

* From Aurelian, Emperor of the Roman world and
recoverer of the East, to Zenobia and all others who
are bound to her by alliance in war. You should
have done of your own free will what I now command
in my letter. For I bid you surrender, promising
that your lives shall be spared, and with the condition
that you, Zenobia, together with your children shall
dwell wherever I, acting in accordance with the wish
of the most noble senate, shall appoint a place. Your
jewels, your gold, your silver, your silks, your horses,
your camels, you shall all hand over to the Roman
treasury. As for the people of Palmyra, their rights
shall be preserved.”


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

2plum indidi: “Zenobia regina orientis Aurehano

grebus bellicis est gerendum. deditionem meam pets,
quasi nescias Cleopatram reginam perire maluisse

6 Hane epistulam Nicomachus se transtulisse in
Graecum ex lingua Syrorum dicit ab ipsa Zenobia
dictatam. nam illa superior Aurelian: Graeca missa
est, i

XXVIII. His acceptis htteris Aurelianus non eru-


1 Otherwise unknown

? These were probably not very numerous, for the old enemy
of the Romans, Sapor L., was nearing his end; he died in tho
RR dun of 272, after making his son Hormizd I. king in his
stead,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXVII. 1—XXVIII. 2


XXVII. Onreceiving this letter Zenobia responded
with more pride and insolence than befitted her
fortunes, I suppose with a view to inspirmg fear; for
a copy of her letter, too, I have inserted .

“From Zenobia, Queen of the East, to Aurelian
Augustus. None save yourself has ever demanded
by letter what you now demand. Whatever must be
accomplished in matters of war must be done by
valour alone. You demand my surrender as though
you were not aware that Cleopatra preferred to die
a Queen rather than remain alive, however high
her rank. We shall not lack remforcements from
Persia, which we are even now expectmg. On our
side are the Saracens, on our side, too, the Armenians.
The brigands of Syria have defeated your army,
Aurelian. What more need be said? If those forces,
then, which we are expecting from every side, shall
arrive, you will, of a surety, lay aside that arrogance
with which you now command my surrender, as
though victorious on every side."

This letter, Nicomachus! says, was dictated by
Zenobia herself and translated by him into Greek
from the Syrian tongue. For that earher letter of
Aurehan's was written in Greek.

XXVIII. On receiving this letter Aurelian felt no
shame, but rather was angered, and at once he
gathered together from every side his soldiers and
leaders and laid siege to Palmyra; and that brave
man gave his attention to everything that seemed
incomplete or neglected. For he cut off the rein-
forcements which the Persians had sent, and he
tampered with the squadrons of Saracens and Ar-
menians, bringing them over to his own side, some by
forcible means and some by cunning. Finally, by


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

XXIX. De qua pauca saltem hbet dicere. mem-
nistis enim fuisse in Templo Iovis Optimi Maximi Cap-
itolini pallium breve purpureum lanestre, ad quod cum
matronae atque ipse Aurelianus iungerent purpuras
suas, cineris specie decolorar: videbantur ceterae divini
2comparatione fulgoris. hoc munus rex Persarum ab
Indis mteroribus sumptum Aureliano dedisse per-
hibetur, seribens: * Sume purpuram, qualis apud nos


l! superbior Salm., editors; superior P, ? «latae iiae
Purser, «(ae P; allatae Peter, wWlatae Eyssenhardt, Hohl.
Stume Peter; tum P. ised ... fini X,Hohl, om. in P
and by Peter.


! According to Zosimus, the supplies of the Palmyrenes were
exhausted and 16 was decided that Zenobia should go 1n person
to the Persians to seek aid, but she was captured after crossing
the Euphrates. Soon afterwards the peace-party in Palmyra
gained the upper hand and surrendered the city after exacting
€ sei the promise that no punishment should be
inflicted.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXVIII 8—XXIX. 3


a mighty effort he conquered that most powerful
woman. Zenobia, then, conquered, fled away on
camels (which they call dromedaries), but while seek-
ing to reach the Persians she was captured by the
horsemen sent after her, and thus she was brought
into the power of Aurelian.

And so Aurelian, victorious and m possession of the
entire East, more proud and msolent now that he
held Zenobia m chams, dealt with the Persians,
Armenians, and Saracens as the needs of the occasion
demanded. "Then were brought in those garments,
encrusted with jewels, which we now see in the
Temple of the Sun, then, too, the Persian dragon-
flags? and head-dresses, and a species of purple such
as no nation ever afterward offered or the Roman
world beheld.

XXIX Concermng this I desire to say at least few
words, For you remember that there was in the
Temple of Jupiter Best and Greatest on the Capitolium
a short woollen cloak of a purple hue, by the side of
which all other purple garments, brought by the
matrons and by Aurelian himself, seemed to fade to
the colour of ashes in companion with its divine
brilliance. This cloak, brought from the farthest
Indies, the King of the Persians is said to have pre-
sented as a gift to Aurelian, writing as follows:
“ Accept a purple robe, such as we ourselves use.”
But this was untrue. For later both Aurelian and
Probus and, most recently, Diocletian made most
diligent search for this species of purple, sending out


? À flag depicting a dragon was used by the Orientals and
by the northern barbarians as shown on the Columns of Trajan
and M, Aurehus. It was later adopted by the Romans also
and carried by a draconas vus (o. xxxi. 7).


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

Sostentui. grave inter eos qui caesi sunt de Longino
philosopho fuisse perhibetur, quo illa magistro usa
esse ad Graecas litteras dicitur quem quidem
Aurelianus ideirco dieitur occidisse, quod superbior
ila epistula ipsius diceretur dictata consilio, quamvis
Syro esset sermone contexta.

4 Pacato igitur oriente m Europam Aurelianus redut
victor atque ilic Carporum copias adflixit et, cum
illum Carpicum senatus absentem vocasset, mandasse
ioco! fertur: “Superest, patres conscripti, ut me

5 etiam Carpisculum vocetis.” carpisclum enim genus


12069 Cornelissen, Hohl; loco P; e loco Peter.


! Usually the term given to a mixture of red sulphide of
arsenic and red ochre, but here, apparently, the name of a
plant, as also m Vergil, Buc., iv. 45, see Pliny, Nat. Mist.,
xxxv. 40,

? This was at Emesa, whither Aurelian withdrew after the
surrender of Palmyra, summoning there for tnal both Zenobia
and her counsellors. The latter were accused by the Queen in
an el to save herself, and many of them were then put to

eath,

3 See c. xxxii-Xxxiv.

t Cassius Longinus, Neo-Platonist philosopher, rhetorician
and philologian. After a long career as a teacher in Athens
he withdrew to the court of Zenobia. Of his many works


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXX. 1-5


their most diligent agents, but even so it could not be
found. But mdeed it is said that the Indian sandyx !
yields this kind of purple 1f properly prepared.

XXX. But to return to my undertaking: despite
all this, there arose a terrible uproar among all the
soldiers, who demanded Zenobia for punishment.?
Aurelian, however, deeming it improper that a woman
should be put to death, killed many who had advised
her to begin and prepare and wage the war, but the
woman he saved for his triumph, wishing to show her
to the eyes of the Roman people.’ It was regarded
as a cruel thing that Longinus the philosopher * should
have been among those who were killed. He, it is
said, was employed by Zenobia as her teacher in
Greek letters, and Aurelian is said to have slain him
because he was told that that over-proud letter of
hers had been dictated in accord with his counsel,
although, in fact, ıt was composed im the Syrian
tongue.

And so, having subdued the East, Aurelian re-
turned as a victor to REurope,? and there he defeated
the forces of the Carpi *; and when the senate gave
him in his absence the surname Carpicus, he sent
them this message, it is said, as a jest: “It now only
remains for you, Conscript Fathers, to call! me Carpis-
culus also "—for it is well known that carpisclum is


there remain only fragments of lus Rhetoric, although the
nl Tlep) “Ywous, by an unknown author, was long attributed
to him

5 He seems to have made some sort of a punitive expedition
into Persian territory; see c. xxxv. 45 xh 9. He received
from the senate the title of Persicus Maximus or Parthicus
Maximus and issued coms with the legend Factoria Parthica ;
see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 291, no. 240.

®On the Lower Danube, see note to Max.-Bald., xvi. 8.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

2mediocriter rebellarunt  Sandarionem enim, quem
in praesidio ilie Aurelianus posuerat, cum sescentis
sagittarus occiderunt, Achilleo cuidam parenti Zenobiae


1 diceretur 3; disceretur P.


1 Of these names, Gothicus, Parthicus and Carpicus, as well
as Germanicus, appear in an inscription of Aurelian’s last
year (C.Z.L., vi, 1112); the others do not seem to have been
borne by him,

? According to the fuller account in Zosimus, i. 60-61, the
Palmyrenes under the leadership of Apsatos (perhaps the Sep-
tmuus Apsaios to whom C.J.G,, 4487 is dedicated) tred to
persuade Marcelhnus, who had been left in charge of the
Euphrates frontier, to take part in a revolt. He put them off


254,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXI. 1-6


a kind of boot This surname appeared to him as
ignoble, since he was already called both Gothicus
and Sarmatieus and Armeniacus and Parthicus and
Adiabenicus.+

XXXI. It is a rare thing, or rather, a difficult
thing, for the Syrians to keep faith. For the Palmy-
renes, who had once been defeated and crushed, now
that Aurelian was busied with matters in Europe,
began a rebellion of no small size. For they killed
Sandario, whom Aurelian had put m command of the
garrison there, and with him six hundred bowmen,
thus getting the rule for a certain Achilleus, a kins-
man of Zenobia’s. But Aurelhan, indeed, prepared
as he always was, came back írom Rhodope and,
because it deserved it, destroyed the city. In fact,
Aurelian's cruelty, or, as some say, his sternness, is
so widely known that they even quote a letter of his,
revealing a confession of most savage fogy ?; of this
the following 1s a copy :

“From Aurelian Augustus to Cerromus Dassus.*
The swords of the soldiers should not proceed further.
Already enough Palmyrenes have been killed and
slaughtered. We have not spared the women, we
have slam the children, we have butchered the old
men, we have destroyed the peasants. To whom, at
this rate, shall we leave the land or the city? Those
who still remain must be spared. For it is our belief
that the few have been chastened by the punishment


with ainbiguous replies and sent word of the plot to Aurelian,
Meanwhile the Palmyienes invested Antiochus (whom the vata
Jat AQUI oaot the royal msignia. This seems to have
jen sch ce c sumer of 272.
Yo. acecidieg .o Zosimus, he spared Antiochus’ life,
4 Otherwise unknown.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


7esse correctos, "Templum sane Solis, quod apud
Palmyram aquilifer: legionis tertiae cum vexilhferis
et draconario et cornicmibus atque liticinibus diri-
puerunt, ad eam formam volo, quae fut, reddi.
Shabes trecentas aur: hbras de! Zenobiae capsulis,
habes argenti mille oetingenta pondo de Palmyre-
9norum bonis, habes gemmas regias. ex his omnibus
fac cohonestari templum ; mihi et dis inmortalibus
gratissimum feceris, ego ad senatum scribam, petens
10ut mittat pontificem qui dedicet templum." haec
htterae, ut videmus, indicant satiatam esse mmani-
tatem principis duri,
XXXII. Securior denique iterum in Europam redit
atque illic omnes qui vagabantur hostes nota illa sua
2virtute contudit. interim res per Thracias Europam-
que omnem Aureliano ingentes agente Firmus quidam
exstitit, qui sibi Aegyptum sine insignibus imperi,
3quasi ut esset civitas libera, vindicavit. ad quem
continuo Aurelianus revertit, nec ule defuit felicitas
solita. nam Aegyptum statim recepit alque, ut erat
ferox animi, cogitationem. ultus, vehementer irascens,
quod adhue Tetrieus Gallias obtineret, occidentem
petiit atque ipso Tetrico exercitum suum prodente,
quod erus scelera ferre non posset, deditas sibi
4legiones? obtinuit. prmceps igitur totius orbis
Aurelianus pacatis oriente et? Gallis atque ubique


ldeins.bySalm.; om.in P.  ĉ2regiones P, 3. — ?so Peter;
omentem P,


! Still the chief glory of the rums of Palmyra,

2 Bee note toc xxviii. 5.

3 See Firm., iu.-v. According to the more correct version of
Zosimus (1. 61, 1), Aurelian marched directly from Palmyra to
Alexandria,


+ See Tyr, Trig., xxiv. 1-2 and notes.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXI. 7—XXXII. 4


ofthe many. Now as to the Temple of the Sun! at
Palmyra, which has been pillaged by the eagle-bearers
of the Third Legion, along with the standard-bearers,
the dragon-bearer,? and the buglers and trumpeters, I
wish it restored to the condition m which it formerly
was. You bave three hundred pounds of gold from
Zenobia's coffers, you have eighteen hundred pounds
of silver from the property of the Palmyrenes, and
you have the royal jewels. Use all these to embellish
the temple ; thus both to me and to the immortal gods
you will da a most pleasing service. I will write to
the senate and request it to send one of the pontiffs
to dedicate the temple." This letter, as we can see,
shows that the savagery of the hard-hearted prince
had been glutted.

XXXII. At length, now more secure, he returned
again to Europe, and there, with his well-known
valour, he crushed all the enemies who,were roving
about. Meanwhile, when Aurelian was performing
great deeds in the provinces of Thrace as well as in
all Europe, there rose up a certain Firmus, who laid
claim to Egypt, but without the imperial insignia and
as though he purposed to make it into a free state.’
Without delay Aurelian turned back against him, and
there also lis wonted good-fortune did not abandon
him. For he recovered Egypt at once and took
vengeance on the enterprise—violent in temper, as
he always was; and then, being greatly angered that
Tetricus still held the provinces of Gaul, he departed
to the West and there took over the legions which
were surrendered to him 4—for Tetricus betrayed his
own troops since he could not endure their evil deeds.
And so Aurelian, now ruler over the entire world,
having subdued both the East and the Gauls, and


VOL, IH. S


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


1So Helm in Hohl's ed. ; terror. weto P, after which P has
eripe me his, amwicie, malas, evidently a repetition from Zur,
Trig., xxiv, 8.


1 He had, in fact, re-united the Roman Empire, divided ever
since 258, when Postumus established lis mdependent power
in Gaul. Huis successes were commemorated by the official as-
sumption of the title Hestatwior Orbis, which appears im in-
scriptions and on coins; the latter bear also the titles Pacator
Orbis, Restitutor Saeculi, Restatutor Gentis, Restitutor Orien-
tis, Pacator Orientis, Pax Aeterna, Paz Augusto.

3 Tn 278.

3 According to an account preserved in AZAosimus, i, 59,
Zenobia died on the way to Europe either by disease or by her


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXIII. 1-4


victor in all lands, turned his march toward Rome,
that he might present to the gaze of the Romans
a triumph over both Zenobia and Tetricus, that is,
over both the East and the West.!

XXXIII. It is not without advantage to know what
manner of triumph Aurelian had,? for it was a most
brilliant spectacle. There were three royal chariots,
of which the first, carefully wrought and adorned with
silver and gold and jewels, had belonged to Odaena-
thus, the second, also wrought with similar care, had
been given to Aurehan by the king of the Persians,
and the third Zenobia had made for herself, hoping
in it to visit the city of Rome. And this hope was
not unfulfilled; for she did, indeed, enter the city in
it, but vanquished and led in triumph.? There was
also another chariot, drawn by four stags and said to
have once belonged to the king of the Goths.4 In
this—so many have handed down te memory—
Aurelian rode up to the Capitol, purposing there to
slay the stags, which he had captured along with this
chariot and then vowed, 1t was said, to Jupiter Best
and Greatest. There advanced, moreover, twenty
elephants, and two hundred tamed beasts of divers
kinds from Libya and Palestine, which Aurelian at
once presented to private citizens, that the privy-
purse might not be burdened with the cost of their
food ; furthermore, there were led along in order four
tigers and also giraffes and elks and other such
animals, also eight hundred pairs of gladiators besides


own hand. All other writers, however, agree with the version
given in the text, and it may be supposed that the account m
Zosimus was invented for the purpose of hkening her to
Cleopatra.

4See o. xxii, 2.


s2


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


praeter captivos gentium barbararum.  Blemmyes,
Axomitae, Arabes Eudaemones, Indi, Bactriani,
Hiberi, Saraceni, Persae cum suis quique muneribus ;
Gothi, Alani, Roxolani, Sarmatae, Franci, Suebi,
5 Vandali, Germani, religatis manibus captivi. prae-
cesserunt! inter hos etiam Palmyreni quisuperfuerant
‘XXIV. principes civitatis et Aegyptii ob rebellionem. ductae
sunt et decem mulieres, quas virili habitu pugnantes
inter Gothos ceperat, cum multae essent interemptae,
quas de Amazonum genere titulus indicabat—praelati
2sunt tituh gentium nomina continentes. inter haec
fuit Tetricus chlamyde coccea, tunica galbina, brae:s
Gallicis ornatus, adiuncto sibi filio, quem imperatorem
gin Gallia nuneupaverat. incedebat etiam Zenobia,
ornata gemmis, catenis aureis, quas ali: sustentabant
praeferebantur coronae ommum civitatum aureae
4,tituls eminentibus proditae. 1am populus ipse
Romanus, i^m vexilla collegiorum atque castrorum
et cataphractarü milites et opes regiae et omnis
exercitus et senatus (etsi aliquantulo tristior, quod
senatores triumphar videbant) multum pompae ad-
5diderant. denique vix nona hora m Capitolium
e pervenit, sero autem ad Palatium. sequentibus diebus


! poterae cesserunt P.


i From the kingdom of Axomis (mod. Axum) in the district
of Tigré in northern Abyssmua; see Mommsen, Hist Rom. Prov,
(Eng. Trans.), 1. p. 805i The king seems to have extended
his sway over the Blemmyes (see also Prob., XVu. 2; xix. 1,
Firm., i. 8), a robber nomad-people m lower Nubia, and also
over the Arabs of the Yemen (the Homernta:, see Mommsen,
ibid., p. 921). It would appear that Aurehan had entered into
fnendly relations with this ruler dunng his expedition to Egypt.

? From Trans-Oaucasia.

3 See note to Pius, v. 5.


DRIFIED AURELIAN XXXIII. 5—XXXIV. 6


the captives from the barbarian tribes, There were
Blemmyes, Axomitae, Arabs from Arabia Felix,
Indians, Bactrians, Hiberians,? Saracens and Per-
sians, all bearing their gifts; there were Goths,
Alans,? Roxolani, Sarmatians, Franks, Suebians,‘
Vandals and Germans—all captive, with their hands
bound fast. There also advanced among them certain
men of Palmyra, who had survived its fall, the fore-
most of the State, and Egyptians, too, because of
their rebellion. XXXIV. There were led along also
ten women, who, fighting ın male attire, had been
eaptured among the Goths after many others had
fallen ; these a placard declared to be of the race of
the Amazons—for placards were borne before all, dis-
playing the names of their nations. In the proces-
sion was Tetricus also, arrayed ın scarlet cloak,
a yellow tunic, and Gallie trousers,® and with him
his son, whom he had proclaimed in Gaukas emperor.®
And there came Zenobia, too, decked with jewels
and in golden chains, the weight of which was borne
by others. There were carried aloft golden crowns
presented by all the cities, made known by placards
earried aloft. Then came the Roman people itself,
the flags of the guilds and the camps, the mailed
cuirassiers,’ the wealth of the kings, the entire army,
and, lastly, the senate (albeit somewhat sadly, since
they saw senators, too, being led in triumph)—all
adding much to the splendour of the procession,
Scarce did they reach the Capitol by the ninth hour
of the day, and when they arrived at the Palace it


44.¢., Juthungi and Alamanni; see notes to c. xviii. 2-8.
5 See note to Alez., xl. 11.
$ See note to Tyr, Trug., xxv. 1.
7 See note to Alex., lvi. 5.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


datae sunt populo voluptates ludorum scaenicorum,
ludorum circensium, venationum, gladiatorum, nau-
machiae.


l So Peter; ef unusquisque P, Hohl,


1 His daily distribution of bread (mentioned also in c. xlvni.
land Zosimus, 1. 61, 8) took the place of the monthly distribu-
tion. It was commemorated by issues of coins with the legends
Annona Aug. and Inbderahtas Aug.; see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 268,
no. 21, and p. 290, no. 229, The cost was covered by additional
appropriations from the revenues from Egypt, and the boatmen
on the Nile and the Tiber were organised into compulsory
guilds in order that the service might be improved; see c. xlv.
1 and xlvn. 1-3. This distribution, like that of pork, which
was now added to the previous allowances of salt and oil
(c. xlvii. 1), seems to have been due to the necessity of reliev-


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXV. 1-8


was late indeed. On the following days amusements
were given to the populace, plays in the theatres,
races in the Circus, wild-beast hunts, gladiatorial
fights and also a naval battle.

XXXV, I think that I should not omit what both
the people remember and the truth of history has
made current, namely, that Aurelian, at the time of
his setting out for the East, promised, if he came back
vietorious, to give to the populace crowns weighing
two pounds apiece ; the populace, however, expected
crowns of gold, and these Aurelan either could not
or would not give, and so he had crowns made of the
bread now called wheaten and gave one to each
separate man, providing that each and every one
might receive his wheaten bread every day of his life
and hand on his right to his heirs! The same
Aurehan, too, gave the allowance of pork to the
. Roman people which 1s given them also te-day.

He enacted very many laws, and salutary ones
indeed.? He set the priesthoods in order, he con-


ing the needs of Rome, impoverished by the economic decline of
Italy and threatened with starvation; see Rostovtzeff, Social
and Econ. Hist. of the Roman Emp., p. 611 f. and p. 618.

2 The vita omits any mention of the reform of the coinage,
which is recorded in Zosimus, i. 61, 8, and attested by the coins
themselves. As the result of lack of uniformity in coming and
the absence of any fixed standard, the ‘‘ Antoninianus ” had
become worthless. This coin was now replaced by a new piece,
which not only was better made and contained more silver, but
also bore a fixed relation (20:1) to a coin of definite value,
perhaps the aureus or the denarius of real silver or even the
reduced denarius; see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 9 f. Also a smaller
coin (the denanus) and bronze coms (the sestertius and
dupondius) were issued again after a lapse of many years.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


dotia composuit, Templum Solis fundavit et pontifices
roboravit; decrevit etiam emolumenta sartis tectis et
ministris.

4 Hus gestis ad Gallias profectus Vindelicos obsidione
barbarica liberavit, deinde ad Illyricum rediit para-
toque magno potus quam ingenti exercitu Persis,
quos eo quoque tempore quo Zenobiam superavit


1 pontafices P, £, def. by Purser; poribus Scaliger, foll,
by Peter and Hohl


1 This temple, ın campo Agrappae according to the Notitiae,
has been identified with a temple that stood on the western
edge of the Quixinal Hill, just above the gardens of the Palazzo
Colonna, where some magnificent remains are preserved , but
1b 18 perhaps more probable that it was the temple that stood
farther north, on the eastern side of the Corso, where the Via
Frattima now enters ib. It contamed, according to Zosumus,
i. 61, statues of Hehos and Belos. The latter was the patron-
god of Palmyra, and he seems to have been the particular deity
in whose honour Aurelian erected the temple, but transformed
into a Roman god with the usual national priests and festival
and evidently intended to be the centre of worship for the
whole Empire, since on coms of Aurelian he 1s called Sol
Domnus Impera Romani, see Wissowa, Relig. u. Kultus
der Romer, p. 807, and Matt.-Syd., v. p. 801, nos. 319-99.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXV. 4—XXXVI. 3


structed the Temple of the Sun,! and he founded its
college of pontiffs ^, and he also allotted funds for
making repairs and paying attendants.

After doing these things, he set out for the regions
of Gaul and delivered the Vindehe: from a barbarian
inroad 3; then he returned to Illyricum and having
made ready an army, which was large, though not of
inordinate size, he declared war on the Persians, whom
he had already defeated with the greatest glory at
the time that he conquered Zenobia +*+ While on his
way thither, however, he was murdered at Caeno-
phrurium,? a station between Heraclea and Byzantium,
through the hatred of his clerk but by the hand of
Mucapor °

XXXVI. Both the reason for his murder and the
manner in which he was slain I will set forth briefly,
that a matter of such moment may not remain con-
cealed. Aurelian—it cannot be denied—#was a stern,
a savage, and a blood-thirsty prince. And so, when
he pushed his sternness to the length of slaying his
sisters daughter’ without any good or sufficient
reason, he meurred, first of all, the hate of his own


2The Pontifices Sales, modelled on the ancient college of the
Pontifices and equal to ıt ın rank, see Wissowa, p. 307.

3 Early in 278. These invaders are also mentioned in
c. xh. 8, but ib is not known who they were. The statement
in fae, im. 4 (cf. Prob., xin. 5), that the barbarians, after
Aurehan's death, broke through the Limes Transrhenanwus
suggests that he entered Germany and restored this boundary.

4See note to c. xxx, 4

5 Near the modern station of Simekli, about 50 m. W. of
Constantinople.

8 Addressed in the fictatious letter m c. xxv. 2-5. In Aur.
Victor, Caes., 86, 2, he 18 called duc and is said to have been
tortured to death by Tacitus.

7 See c. xxxix, 9.


THE DEIFIED jAURELIAN

6viri sint, subvenire. hi? cum exarsissent, timore qui
merebantur offensam, dolore innocentes, quod? bene-
ficiis atque officis Aurelianus videbatur ingratus, in
supra dicto loco iter facientem principem subito adorti
interemerust,


120 Peter, Hohl, quo P, X, def. by Purser. ? h4 3j, Hohl;


hic P, Peter. 3 quod ins. by Salm. and Hohl; om. in P and
by Peter.


1 In Zosimus, i. 62, 1, and Zonaras, xi. 27, he1s called Eros.
The name Mnestheus, found only here, has been supposed to
be ac eror for pnyurds, which occurs in the expression Táw
ëkwlev pepouévwv amokpiaeor unveTis, by which both Zosimus
and Zonaras (and consequent:v their source) describe his office.


DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXVI. 4—XXXVII. 2


kinsmen, It came to pass, moreover, as things do
happen by decree of fate, that he roused the anger
of a certain. Mnestheus !—his freedman, some say—
whom he had employed as his confidential clerk,
because he had threatened him, suspecting him on
some ground or other. Now Mnestheus, knowing
that Aurelian neither threatened in vain nor pardoned
when he had threatened, drew up a list of names, in
which he mixed together both those at whom Aurelian
was truly angry and those toward whom he bore no
ill-will, including his own name also, ın order there-
by to lend greater credence to the fear that he sought
to mspire. This list he read to the various persons
whose names were contained therem, adding that
Aurelian had made arrangements to have them all
put to death, and that, if they really were men, they
should save their lives. Thereupon all were aroused,
those who had deserved his anger beinge moved by
fear, and those who were innocent by sorrow, since
Aurelian seemed ungrateful for their services and
their fidelity, and so they suddenly attacked the
Emperor while on the march ın the aforesaid place,
and put him to death.

AXXVII. Such was the end of Aurelian, a prince
who was necessary rather than good. After he was
slain and the facts became known, those very men
who had killed him gave him a mighty tomb and
a temple. Mnestheus, however, was afterward haled
away to a stake and exposed to wild beasts, as is
shown by the marble statues set up on either hand
in that same place, wbere also statues were erected


According to Aur. Victor, Caes., 35, 7-8, the conspiracy was due
to Aurelian’s sternness m repressing the extortion practised
by the officials in the provinces,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


significant, ubi et in columnis divo Aureliano statuae

XXVIII, factionum, Aurelianus toto penitus orbe purgavit. hoc

quoque ad rem pertinere arbitror, Vaballathi filii
nomine Zenobiam, non Timolai et Herennian, im-
perium tenuisse quod tenuit.

2 Fuit sub Aureliano etiam monetariorum bellum


1 eum derelictum Peter; ea delectum P.


15 yrs. 6 mos., according to Epit, 35,1; 5 yrs. 4 mos.
20 days, according to the ‘‘ Chronographer of 854.” He was
killed probably in October or November, 275; see Stem in
Arch. f. Pap.-Forsch., vix. p. 46.


268.


b


us


DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXVII. 3—XXXVIII. 2


on columns in honour of the Deified Aurelian. The
senate mourned his death greatly, but the Roman
people still more, for they commonly used to say
that Aurelian was the senators’ task-master. He
ruled six years save for a few days, and because of
his great exploits he was given a place among the
deified princes,’

An incident related in history I must not fail to
include, inasmuch as it has todo with Aurelian. For
it is told by many that Quintillus, Claudius’ brother,
in command of a garrison in Italy, on hearing of
Claudius’ death seized the imperial power? But
later, when it was known that Aurelian was emperor,
he was abandoned by all his army ; and when he had
made a speech attacking Aurelian and the soldiers
refused to lsten, he severed his veins and died on
the twentieth day of his rule.

Now whatever crimes there were, whz*ever guilty
plans or harmful practices, and, lastly, whatever plots
—all these Aurelian purged away throughout the
entire world. XXXVIII. This also, I think, has to
do with my theme, namely, that it was in the name
of her son Vaballathus and. not in that of Timolaus or
Herennianus that Zenobia held the imperial power,*
which she did really hold,

There was also during the rule of Aurelian a revolt
among the mint-workers, under the leadership of


2 The portion of the vita that follows (co. xxxvi. 5—xh. 15)
seems to bea sort of appendix, contamumg many instances of
repehiion of what has been already told. Much of t shows
a close resemblance to the matenal in Eutropius and Aurelius
Victor and seems to have been taken from a common source.

3 See o. xvu, 5 and Claud., xu. 3-5 and notes.

3 See c. xxn, 2 and Tyr. Trig., xxx, 1 and notes.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


Felicissimo rationali auctore, quod acerrime severis-
simeque compescuit, septem tamen mihbus t suorum
militum mteremptis, ut epistula docet missa ad Ulpium
Crinitum ter consulem, qui eum ante adoptaverat .

8 “ Aurelianus Augustus Ulpio patr. quasi fatale
quiddam mihi sit, ut omnia bella quaecumque gessero,
omnes motus ingravescant, ita etiam seditio mtra-
murana bellum mihi gravissimum peperit, monetari
auctore Felicissimo, ultimo servorum, cui procura-
tionem fisei mandaveram, rebelles spiritus extulerunt,

XXXIX. Tetricum  triumphatum —correctorem

2 Lucaniae fecit, filio eius in senatu manente. Tem-
plum Solis magnificentissimum constituit, muros
urbis Rome sic ampliavit, ut quinquaginta prope


1 militibus P,


l This revolt ıs described also in Aur. Victor, Caes., 35, 6;
Epit., 35, 2, and Eutropius, 1x, 14. According to these authors,
the munt-workers, who, with the connivance of Fehossimus,
had adulterated the metal appropriated for the comage, fearmg
punishment, broke out into open war. It would appear that
they had been keeping a part of the silver that was to have
been used for the bulon (i.¢., adulterated) coins. Though the
number of soldiers said to have fallen 1s, of course, greatly
exaggerated, a battle seems to have been fought on the Caehan
Fill, near the mint, which was on the Via Labicana. The
date is uncertam; it may have been on the occasion of the
German invasion of 270-271 (see c. xxi. 5) or in 274, just prior
to the reform of the currency (see note to c. xxxv. 8).

2 See c, x. 2 and note.


DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXVIII. 3—XXXIX. 9


Felicissimus, the supervisor of the privy-purse.t This
revolt he crushed with the utmost vigour and harsh-
ness, but still seven thousand of his soldiers were
slain, as 1s shown by a letter addressed to Ulpius
Crinitus,* thrice consul, by whom he had formerly
been adopted :

“From Aurelan Augustus to Ulpius his father.
Just as though it were ordained for me by Fate that
all the wars that I wage and all commotions only
become more difficult, so also a revolt within the city
has stirred up for me a most grievous struggle. For
under the leadership of Felicissimus, the lowest of
all my slaves, to whom I had committed the care of
the privy-purse, the mmt-workers have shown the
spirit of rebellion. They have indeed been crushed,
but with the loss of seven thousand men, boeatmen,?
bank-troops, camp-troops * and Dacians. Hence it is
clear that the immortal gods have granted me no
victory without some hardship.”

XXXIX. Tetricus, whom he had led in triumph, he
created supervisor of Lucania,® and his son he retained
in the senate. The Temple of the Sun ? he founded
with great magnificence. He so extended the wall
of the city of Rome’ that its circuit was nearly fifty


3 2.8., from the fleets on the Danube.

4 Terms applied in the fourth century to troops stationed in
permanent garnsons along the bank of the Danube or in the
castra on the frontier.

5 See Tyr. Trig., xxiv. 5 and note.

8 See c. xxxv. 8 and note.

7 Begun in 271 after the war against the Marcomanni (see
c. xxi, 9) and finished by Probus (Zosimus, i. 49). Most of it,

i ios : "oo ME ^ * t shll remains,
&bout twelve


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


3milha murorum eius ambitus teneant. idem quadru-
platores ac delatores ingenti severitate persecutus est.
tabulas publicas ad privatorum securitatem | exuri in
4 Foro Traian: semel iussit. amnestia etiam sub eo
dehetorum publicorum decreta est de exemplo Athe-
niensium, cuius rei etiam Tullius in Phuilippiess
5meminit. fures provinciales repetundarum ac pecu-
latus reos ultra militarem modum est persecutus, ut
6eos mgentibus suppliciis cruciatibusque puniret. 3n
Templo Solis multum auri gemmarumque constituit.
7;cum vastatum Illyricum ae Moesiam deperditam
videret, provinciam Transdanuvinam Daciam a Traiano
constitutam sublato exercitu et provincialibus rehquit,
desperans eam posse retineri, abductosque ex ea
populos in Moesia conlocavit appellavitque eam?
Daciam, quae nune duas Moesias dividit.
gs Dicitur praeterea huius fuisse crudelitatis, ut
plerisque *enatoribus simulatam ingereret factionem
coniurationis ac tyrannidis, quo? facilius eos posset
goccidere. addunt nonnull: filium sororis, non filiam,
ab eodem interfectum, plerique autem etiam fihum
sororis.


l seueriatem P. *eam sugg. by Peter, Purser (cf,
Eutrop., ix. 15); swam P. ? quo om. in P.


! In imitation of Hadman, see Hadr., vu. 6 and note.

2 Cicero, Phelippes, i. 1; Cicero is speaking of the decree of
ihe senate on 17 March, 44 B.c., granting amnesty to all those
implicated in the murder of Caesar.

3 See note to c. xxxvi .4.

4 The various Gothic invasions had shown that the districts
north of the Danube could no longer be held without constant
fighang, and this led to their evacuation, probably mm 971.
The new province was formed out of portions of the two
Moesias, Thrace aud Dardania, with ris capital at Serdica (mod,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XXXIX. 3-9


mies long. He punished with mordinate harshness
both informers and false accusers. In order to in-
crease the sense of security of the citizens in general,
he gave orders that the records of debts due the State
should be burned once and for all in the Forum of
lrajan.! Under him also an **amnesty " for offences
against the State was decreed according to the example
of the Athenians, which Cicero also cites in his
Philippus? Thieving officials in the provinces, accused
of extortion or embezzlement, he punished with more
than the usual military severity,® mflicting on them un-
wonted penalties and sufferings. He dedicated great
quantities of gold and jewels in the Temple of the
Sun. On seemg that Illyricum was devastated and
Moesia was in a rumous state, he abandoned the
province of Trans-Danubian Dacia, which had been
formed by Trajan, and led away both soldiers and
provincials, giving up hope that it could be retamed.*
The people whom he moved out from it he established
in Moesia, and gave to this district, which now divides
the two provinces of Moesia, the name of Dacia.

It is said, furthermore, that so great was his cruelty
that he brought agamst many senators a false accusa-
tion of conspiracy and intention to seize the throne,
merely in order that it might be easier to put them
to death.5 Some say, besides, that it was the son of
his sister, and not her daughter that he killed,® many,
however, that he slew the son as well.


Sofia). In order to avoid any loss of prestige, Aurehan assumed
the title Dacicus Maximus and issued coins with the legend
Dacia Feliz ; sea Matt.-Syd., v. p. 277, no. 108.

5 See note to c. xxi. 5.

8 The daughter, according to o, xxxvi. 3; the son, according
to Eutropius, 1x. 145 Epit. 85, 9.


VOL. Ili. T


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

*Fehees ac fortes exercitus senatui populoque
Romano. «Aurelianus imperator noster per fraudem
unius hominis et per errorem bonorum ae malorum

21nteremptus est. hune mter deos referte, sancti domin
patres conscripti, et de vobis aliquem, sed dignum
vestro iudicio, principem muttite. nos enim de us qui
vel errarunt vel? male fecerunt, imperare nobis
neminem patimur."

3 Rescriptum ex senatus consulto. cum die III
nonarum Februariarum senatus amplissimus in Curiam


! delectus est Salm. ; delega? P. ? qua uel P.


1 On this incident, see Tac., 1.-vi.

2 Perhaps the consularis of this name in Tyr. Trg., xxi. 8.
Faltonius Probus 1s unknown.

3 On such “ senatus consulta " see note to Val., v. 3.

4 This date is certainly incorrect, for Aurelian was probably
killed in October or November; see note to c, xxxvn. 4. The


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XL. 1—XLI. 3


XL. How difficult it is to choose an emperor in the
place of a good ruler is shown both by the dignified
action of a revered senate and by the power exerted
by a wise army. For when this sternest of priees
was slam, the army referred to the senate the busi-
ness of choosing an emperor,! for the reason that it
beheved that no one of those should be chosen who
had slan such an excellent ruler. The senate, how-
ever, thrust this selection back on the army, knowing
well that the emperors whom the senate selected
were no longer gladly received by the troops.
Finally, for the third time, the choice was referred,
and so for the space of six months the Roman world
was without a ruler, and all those governors whom
either the senate or Aurelian had chosen remained
at their posts, save only that Faltonius Probus was
appomted proconsul of Asia m the place of Arellius
Fuscus.? em

ALI. It is not without interest to insert the letter
itself which the army sent to the senate :

* From the brave and victorious troops to the
senate and the people of Rome. Aurelian our em-
peror has been slain through the guile of one man and
the blunder of good and evil alike. Do you, now,
our revered lords and Conscript Fathers, place Aure-
lian among the gods and send us as prince one of
your own number, whom you deem a worthy man.
For none of those who have erred or committed crime
will we suffer to be our emperor."

To this a reply was made by decree of the senate.?
When on the third day before the Nones of February *


consul Aurelius Gordianus 1s perhaps intended to be the same
as Velius Cornificius Gordianus m Tae, ni. 2, but both are
equally unknown.
T9


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


Pompilianam convenisset, Aurelius Gordianus consul
dixit: “ Refermus ad vos, patres conscripti, litteras
4exercitusfelicissimi," quibus recitatis Aurelius Tacitus,
primae sententiae senator, ita locutus est (hie autem
est qui post Áurelianum sententia omnium imperator
Best appellatus): “ Recte atque ordine consuluissent di
immortales, patres conscripti, si boni principes ferro
inviolabiles exstitissent, ut longiorem ducerent vitam,
neque contra eos aliqua esset potestas iis qui neces
6:nfandas tristissima mente concipiunt. viveret enim
princeps Aurelianus, quo neque fortior! neque utilior
Tfuit quisquam. respirare certe post infelicitatem
Valeriani, post Galheni mala imperante Claudio eoep-
erat nostra res publica, at eadem reddita fuerat
8 Aureliano toto penitus orbe vincente. ille nobis
Galhas dedit, ille Italiam liberavit, ille? Vindelicis
iugum barbameae servitutis amovit. illo vincente Illy-
ricum  restutum est, redditae Romanis legibus
9 Thraciae. ille, pro pudor! orientem femmeo pressum
iugo in nostra iura restibut, ille Persas, insultantes
10 adhuc Valeriam nece, fudit, fugavit, oppressit. illum
Saraceni, Blemmyes, Axomutae, Bactriani, Seres,
Hiberi, Albani, Armeni, populi etiam Indorum veluti
11 praesentem paene venerati sunt deum. illius donis,


i negue fortior ms, by Salm.; om. in P. 2 inde P,


! This name is apphed to the Cure Julia only hero and in
Tac., ii. 2. It may be due to an attempt to attribute the
foundation of the earliest senate-house to Numa Pompiuhus
instead of Tullus Hostihus, but ıt 18 more probable that it is
an invention of the author's.

2 See Tae., vii. T. 3 See notes to o, xxxiii. 4.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLI. 4-11


the most high senate had assembled in the Senate-
house of Pompilius, Aurelius Gordianus, the consul,
said: “We now lay before you, Conscript Fathers,
the letter from our most victorious army." When
this letter was read, Tacitus, whose right it was to
give his opinion first (it was he, moreover, who was
acclaimed as emperor after Aurelian by the voice of
all?), spoke as follows: '* Well and wisely would the
immortal gods have planned, Conscript Fathers, had
they but rendered good emperors invulnerable to
Steel, for so would they have longer lives and those
have no power against them who with most grievous
mtent contrive abominable murder. And if it were
so, our emperor Aurelian would stil be alive, than
whom none was ever more brave or more beneficial.
For after the misfortune of Valerian and the evil
ways of Gallienus our commonwealth did indeed under
Claudius rule begin to breathe oncesmore, but
Aurelian it was who won victories throughout the
entire world and restored it agam to its former state.
He ıt was who gave us back the provinces of Gaul,
he who set Italy free, he who removed from the
Vindehci the yoke of barbarian enslavement. He by
his victories won back Illyricum and brought again
the districts of Thrace under the laws of Rome. He
restored to our sway the Orient, crushed down (oh,
the shame of it!) beneath the yoke of a woman, he
defeated and routed and destroyed the Persians, still
vaunting themselves in the death of Valerian. He
was revered as a god, almost as though present in per-
son, by the Saracens, the Blemmyes, the Axomitae,?
the Bactrians, the Seres, the Hiberians, the Albanians,
the Armenians, and even by the peoples of India.
His donations, won from barbarian tribes, fill the


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


1 Otherwise unknown; see note to Tyr, Trig., xiv. 8. A
proconsul of Cilicia is mentioned also in Car., iv. 6, but no
such office had existed since the time of the Republic, Dung
the first three centuries of the Empire this province was
governed by an imperial legatus, after Diocletian by a procon-
sularis. Hence the title seems to be an invention of the
autor’s due to lus de::e to introduce antiquarian details.
Morcover, it 1: unprobable that a great-grandson of Aurelian’s


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLI. 19—XLII. 4


Capitol; by his liberahty one temple alone contains
fifteen thousand pounds of gold, and with lus gifts all
the shrmes m the city are gleaming. Wherefore,
Conscript Fathers, I could justly bring charges against
even the very gods, who suffered such a prince to
perish, were it not that perchance they preferred to
have him among themselves. I therefore propose
divine honours, and these I believe you all will bestow.
With regard to the choice of an emperor, mdeed,
you should refer it, I thmk, to this army. For in a
proposal of this kmd, unless that which is urged be
done, there is both danger for those who are chosen
and odium for those who choose.” The proposal of
Tacitus found favour; but after the matter had been
referred back again and again, by decree of the senate
Tacitus, as we shall relate in his Life, was chosen as
emperor.

XLII. Aurelian left only a daughter, whose descen-
dants are even now m Rome, For Aurehanus,!
proconsul of Cilicia, a most excellent senator m his
own. true right and venerated for his manner of life,
who now 1s living m Sicily, 1s a grandson of hers.

Now what shall I say of this, that whereas so many
have borne the name of Caesar, there have appeared
among them so few good emperors? For the list of
those who have worn the purple from Augustus to
the Emperors Diocletian and Maximian is contained
in the public records. Among them, however, the
best were Augustus himself, Flavius Vespasian, Titus
Flavius, Coeceius Nerva, the Deified Trajan, the
De:fied Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus Anto-
nimus, Severus the Afmean, Alexander the son of


was a mature man in 306, when this vita purports to have been
written.


THE DEIFIED AUERLIAN

5 nibus infelicitas separavit.| vide, quaeso, quam pauci
sint principes boni, ut bene dietum sit a quodam
minuco scurra Claudii huius temporibus in uno anulo


1 separavit Gruter; paru P.


14.¢., Gallienus; see note to Gall., i. 1.
2 See note to Tyr, Trig., xxv. 8,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLII. 5—XLIII. 4


Mamaea, the Deified Claudius, and the Deified Aure-
lan. For Valerian, though a most excellent man,
was by his misfortune set apart from them all. Ob-
serve, I pray you, how few m number are the good
emperors, so that it has well been said by a jester on
the stage in the time of this very Claudius that the
names and the portraits of the good emperors could
be engraved on a single ring. But, on the other
hand, what a list of the evil! For, to say naught of
a Vitellius, a Caligula, or a Nero, who could endure a
Maximinus, a Philip, or the lowest dregs + of that dis-
orderly crew? I should, however, except the Decii,
who in their lives and their deaths should be likened
to the ancients.

XLIII. The question, mdeed, is often asked what
it is that makes emperors evil; first of all, my friend,
it is freedom from restraint, next, abundance of wealth,
furthermore, unscrupulous friends, pernigjous atten-
dants, the greediest eunuchs, courtiers who are fools
or knaves, and—it cannot be denied—ignorance of
public affairs. And yet I have heard from my father?
that the emperor Diocletian, while still a commoner,
declared that nothing was harder than to rule well.
Four or five men gather together and form one plan
for deceiving the emperor, and then they tell him to
what he must give his approval. Now the emperor,
who is shut up in his palace, cannot know the truth.
He is forced to know only what these men tell him,
he appoints as judges those who should not be ap-
pointed, and removes from public office those whom
he ought to retain. Why say more? As Diocletian
himself was wont to say, the favour of even a good
and wise and righteous emperor is often sold. These
were Diocletian’s own words, and I have imserted


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


l dos 3; om. m P,


1 See P?0b., xxii. 3.

2 See note to Prob., xxu. 3. Nothing is known of any history
written by him. Oelsinus 1s unknown.

3 Other prophecies by Drud women are given in Aleg., 1x. 6,
and Car., xiv. 3 f,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLIII. 5—XLV. 1


them here for the very purpose that your wisdom
might understand that nothing ıs harder than to be a
good ruler.

XLIV. Now Aurelhan, indeed, is placed by many
among neither the good nor the evil emperors for the
reason that he lacked the quality of mercy, that fore-
most dower of an emperor. In fact, Verconnius
Herennianus,' Diocletian's prefect of the guard, used
often to say—or so Asclepiodotus? bears witness—
that Diocletian, in finding fault with Maximian's
harshness, frequently said that Aurelian ought to
have been a general rather than an emperor. So
displeasing to Diocletian was Aurelian’s excessive
ferocity.

This may perhaps seem a marvellous thing that
was learned by Diocletian and is said to have been
related by Asclepiodotus to Celsinus his counsellor,
but concerning it posterity will be the jedge. For
he used to relate that on a certain occasion Aurelian
consulted the Druid priestesses ? in Gaul and inquired
of them whether the imperial power would remain
with his descendants, but they replied, he related,
that none would have a name more illustrious in the
commonwealth than the descendants of Claudius
And, in fact, Constantius is now our emperor, a man
of Claudius’ blood,* whose descendants, I ween, will
attain to that glory which the Druids foretold. And
this I have put in the Life of Aurelian for the reason
that this response was made to him when he inquired
in person.

XLV. Aurelian set aside for the city of Rome the
revenues from Egypt, consisting of glass, paper, linen,
and hemp, in fact, the products on which a perpetual


4See Claud., xin. 2.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


lef om. in P.


‘The anabolieum, mentioned frequently m papyri, seems to
have been a tax 1m kind on products (especially those enumerated
here), in the manufacture of which the State had a monopoly.
On the distribution of food un Rome, see o. xxxv. 1-2 and note.

? See Helwog., xvi. 1 and note,

3 According to the Edict of Diocletian a pound of blatia
serica (uerataBAdr rn, raw sulk dyed purple) was worth 150,000


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLV. 2—XLVI 5


tax was paid in kind! He planned to erect a public
bath in the Transtiberme district for use in winter,
since in this district the water was less cold. He
began to construct a forum, named after himself, at
Ostia on the sea, 1n the place where, later, the public
magistrates’ office was built. He gave wealth to his
friends with wisdom and moderation, in order that
they might avoid the ills of poverty and yet, because
of the moderate size of their fortunes, escape the
envy that riches bring. Clothing made wholly of
Silk ? he would neither keep in his own wardrobe nor
present to anyone else for his use; and when his wife
besought him to keep a single robe of purple silk, he
replied, “God forbid that a fabric should be worth its
weight in gold," For at that time a pound of silk
was worth a pound of gold? XLVI. He had m
mind to forbid the use of gold on ceilings and tunics
and leather and also the gilding of silver, stying that
nature had provided more gold than silver, but the
gold was wasted by being used variously as gold-leaf,
spun gold, and gold that is melted down, while the
silver was kept for its proper use. He had, indeed,
given permission that those who wished might use
golden vessels and goblets, He furthermore granted
permission to commoners to have coaches adorned
with silver, whereas they had previously had only
carriages ornamented with bronze or ivory. He also
allowed matrons to have tunies and other garments
of purple, whereas they had had before only fabries
of changeable colours, or, as frequently, of an opal-
bue. He also was the first to allow private soldiers


denari: (approximately $940); according to his system of com-
age, L lb. of gold = 50,000 denarii.
4 See Alex., xhi 1, and Henog., xxix. 1 and note.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


aureas gregarii milites haberent idem primus conces-

XLVII. Panibus urbis? Romae unciam de Aegyptio
vectigali auxit, ut quadam epistula data ad praefectum
annonae urbis etiam ipse gloriatur

3carum genus iuvi. quod ut esset perpetuum, navi-
cularios Niliacos apud Aegyptum novos et Romae
amnicos posui, Tibermas exstruxi ripas, vadum alvei
tumentis effodi, dis et Perennitati vota constitui, almam


1 rectas purpureas editors; rectas purpureis P, Hohl. ? 22 des
3; uerbis P,


1 See note to Claud., xvii, 6. ? Ses c, xlv. 1 and note,
3 Otherwise unknown. 3 See c, xxxv. 1-2 and note,


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLVI. 6—XLVIIL 1


to have clasps of gold, whereas formerly they had had
them of silver. He, too, was the first to give tunics
having bands of embroidery! to his troops, whereas
previously they had received only straight-woven
tunies of purple, and to some he presented tunics
with one band, to others those having two bands or
three bands and even up to five bands, like the tunics
to-day made of linen.

XLVII. To the loaves of bread for the city of
Rome he added one ounce, which he got from the
revenues from Egypt,? as he himself boasts in a
certain letter addressed to the prefect of the city’s
supply of grain:

“From Aurelian Augustus to Flavius Arabianus,?
the prefect of the grain supply. Among the various
ways in which, with the aid of the gods, we have
benefited the Roman commonwealth, there is noth-
ing in which I take greater pride than that by adding
an ounce J have increased every kind of grain for the
city. And to the end that this may be lasting, 1
have appointed additional boatmen on the Nile in
Egypt and on the river m Rome, I have built up the
banks of the Tiber, I have dug out the shallow places
in its rising bed, I have taken vows to the gods and
the Goddess of Perpetual Harvests, and I have con-
secrated a statue of fostering Ceres. It 1s now your
task, my dearest Arabianus, to make every effort that
my arrangements may not be in vain, For nothing
can be more joyous than the Roman people when
sufficiently fed."

XLVIII. He had planned also to give free wine to
the people of Rome, in order that they might be sup-
plied with it as they were with o and bread and
pork,‘ all free of cost, and he had designed to make


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN

argumento est id vere Aurelianum cogitasse, immo
etiam facere disposusse vel ex aliqua parte fecisse,
quod in porticibus Temph Solis fiscalia vina ponuntur,
5non gratuita populo eroganda sed pretio. sciendum
tamen congiania illum ter dedisse, donasse etiam populo
Romano fftnicas albas manicatas ex diversis provinciis
et lineas Afras atque Aegyptias puras, ipsumque
primum donasse oraria populo Romano, quibus ute-
retur populus ad favorem
XLIX. Dispheebat ej cum esset Romae, habitare
in Palatio, ae magis placebat in Hortis Sallustii vel in


J pretia editors; grata P; grates 3, Hohl,


1 The Via Aurelia ran along the coast of Fitruna to Pisa and
was continued thence to Genoa by the Via Aemilii Scaun.

2 This attempt to revive viticulture in Italy was made on
& wider scale ın the provinces by Probus; see Prob., xvin. 8.

3 Sea c. xxxv. 8.

* According to the “ Chronographer of 354," there was only
one distribution, 500 denaru to each person. There was an


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLVIII. 2—XLIX. 1


this perpetual by means of the following arrange-
ment. In Etruria, all along the Aurelian Way! as
far as the Maritime Alps, there are vast tracts of
land, rich and well wooded. He planned, therefore,
to pay ther price to the owners of these uncultivated
lands, provided they wished to sell and to settle
thereon families of slaves captured im war, and then
to plant the hills with vines,? and by this means to
produce wine, which was to yield no profit to the
privy-purse but to be given entirely to the people of
Rome. He had also made provision for the vats,
the casks, the ships, and the labour. Many, how-
ever, say that Aurelian was cut off before he carried
this out, others that he was restrained by his prefect
of the guard, who 1s said to have remarked: “If we
give wine to the Roman people, it only remains for
us to give them also chickens and geese.” There is,
indeed, proof that Aurelian really considered this
measure, or, rather, made arrangements for carrying
it out and even did so to some extent; for wine be-
longing to the privy-purse is stored m the porticos of
the Temple of the Sun,? which the people could
obtain, not free of cost but at a pnce. It should
be known, however, that he thrice distributed largess *
among them, and that he gave to the Roman people
white tunics with long sleeves, brought from the
various provinces, and pure limen ones from Africa
and Egypt, and that he was the first to give hand-
kerchiefs to the Roman people, to be waved in show-
ing approval.

XLIX. He dishked, when at Rome, to reside m
the Palace, and preferred to hve in the Gardens of


issue of coins with the legend Liberaliias Aug.; see Matt-Syd.,
v, p. 290, no. 229.


VOL. II, U


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


! On the northern slope of the Quimnal Hull, extending north-
ward as far as Aurehan’s wall, and bounded on the east by the
Via Salaria Vetus (Via di Porta Salaria). Laid out by Sallust
the historian, they became imperial property, probably under
penis qe Only scanty ruins of the buildings in them are
extant.

? On the right bank of the Tiber, contaming the Mausoleum
of Hadnan (Castel S. Angelo); see Pius, v. 1.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN XLIX. 2—L. 3


Sallust! or the Gardens of Domitia. In fact, he
built a portico in the Gardens of Sallust one thousand
feet long, in which he would exercise daily both him-
self and his horses, even though he were not in good
health. His slaves and attendants who were guilty
of crime he would order to be slain in his own pres-
ence, for the purpose, some say, of keeping up dis-
cipline, or, according to others, through sheer love of
cruelty. One of his maid-servarts, who had com-
mitted adultery with a fellow-slave, he punished with
death, and many slaves from his own household, who
had committed offences, he delivered over to publie
courts to be heard according to law.

He had planned to restore to the matrons their
senate, or rather senaculum,? with the provision that
those should rank first therein who had attained to
priesthoods with the senate's approval. He forbade
men to wear boots of purple or wax-colour or white
or the colour of ivy, but allowed them to women.
He permitted the senators to have runners dressed
like his own. He forbade the keeping of free-born
women as concubines, and limited the possession of
eunuchs to those who had a senator's rating, for the
reason that they had reached inordinate prices. His
silver vessels never went beyond thirty pounds in
weight, and his banquets consisted mainly of roasted
meats. Hetook most pleasure in red wine. L., When
ill he never summoned a physician, but always
cured himself, chiefly by abstaining from food. He
held a yearly celebration of the Sigillaria* for his
wife and daughter, like any private citizen. To his
slaves he gave when emperor the same kind of cloth-
ing that he had given them when a commoner, save


3 See Helivg., iv. 3 and note. í See Hadr., xvii. 3.


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN


detulit, Antistum et Gillonem; qui! post eum ex

5  Habut tempus praeter seditiones quasdam domesti-
cas fortunatissimum. populus eum Romanus amavit,
senatus et timuit,


! gu om, in P.


to
e


THE DEIFIED AURELIAN L 4-5


for two old men, Antistius and Gillo, who received
many privileges from him, just as though they were
freedmen, and who after his death were set free by
vote of the senate. Ilis amusements, indeed, were
few, but he took marvellous pleasure in actors and
had the greatest delight in à gourmand,! who could
eat vast amounts to such an extent that in one single
day he devoured, in front of Aurelian's own table, an
entire wild boar, one hundred loaves of bread, a sheep
and a pig and, putting a funnel to his mouth, drank
more than a caskful.

Except for certain internal riotings his reign was
most prosperous. The Roman people loved him,
while the senate held him in fear.


14.8., poydr, “an eater.”


TACITUS


FLAVII VOPISCI SYRACUSII


1 According to the official version Romulus disappeared from
the earth during an eclipse or a storm ; see Cicero, de Re Publica,
ii. 17, and Livy i. 16.  Ewcessus is similarly used to denote his
* disappearance " by Cicero in de Re Publ., n. 23 and 59.

2 The proclamation of an interregnum was the regular practice
of the Roman Republic on those occasions when there were no
magistrates with consular or dictatorial power in office, «.e.
when both consuls died during their year’s term or this term
expired before their successors were elected. The practice is
also said by the historians to have been m vogue during the
time of the kings, and a full account of the institution is given
n connection with the choice of Numa Pompilus as Romulus’
succes» see Listy, i. 17. This serves as the basis for the


TACITUS


BY


FLAVIUS VOPISCUS OF SYRACUSE


I. A certain measure adopted after the departure of
Romulus,’ during the infancy of Rome's power, and
recorded by the pontiffs the duly authorized writers
of lustory,—namely, the proclamation of a regency
for the interval in which one good prince^was being
sought for to succeed another ?— "was also adopted after
the death of Aurelian for the space of six whole months?
while the senate and the army of Rome were engaged
in a contest, one that was marked not by envy and un-
happiness but rather by good feeling and sense of duty.
This occasion, however, differed in many ways from that
former undertaking. For originally, when the regency


description given here. Despite the suspicions aroused by the
hographer’s love of antiquarian lore and his tendency to exalt
ihe rule of the senate, we may believe that an interregnum was
actually proclaimed at this tame, though only in the sense that
the government was carried on by the senate, 16 is mentioned
also in Aur. Victor, Caes., 85, 9-12, 36, 1, and Hpat., 85, 9, and
seems to be attested by coms bearing the legend Genus P. R.
and Int. Urb. (Interregnum Urbis?) S. C.; see Matt..Syd. v.
. 961.
d See note to c. n. 6.


TACITUS


! Five days only, according to Livy.

*These consular tribunes formed a board of magistrates,
varying from three to six, elected instead of consuls during the
early republic, 1n those years 1n which there was need for more
than two officials vested with supreme power.

?'There are 28 known years in the history of the repubhe
in which interreges were appointed; the last was 52 n.c.

+A period of five years (= 375-371 B.C.) according to Livy,
vi. 35, 10, of four years according to Eutropius, n. 8, or of one
year according to Diodorus, xv. 75. It 1s generally agreed that
such a period of anarchy could never have existed. An ex-
planation has been sought 1n the theory that these years were
inserted in blank in the official lists in an attempt to make


TACITUS I 3—IL 1


was proclamned after the reign of Romulus, regents
were actually created, and that whole year was divided
up among the hundred senators for periods of three,
or four, or five days apiece,! in such a way that there
was only one smgle regent who held the power From
this it resulted that the regency remained in force for
even more than a year, 1n order that there might be no
one of those equal m rank who had not held the rule
at Rome. To this must be added that also in the time
of the consuls and the military tribunes vested with
consular power,” whenever a regency was proclaimed
there were always regents, and never did the Roman
commonwealth so entirely lack this office that there
was not some regent created, though it might be for
only two or three days? I perceive, indeed, that the
argument can be brought up against me that for the
space of four years? during the time of our ancestors
there were no curule magistrates in the commonwealth.
There were, however, tribunes of the plebs vested with
the tubumein power, which is the most important
element of the power of a kmg. Even so, it is no-
where stated that there were no regents in that time ;
and indeed it has been declared on the authority of
more reliable historians that consuls ? were later created
by regents for the purpose of conducting the election
of the other magistrates

II. And so the senate and people of Rome passed
through an unusual and a difficult situation, namely,


these agree with the synchronism of events which was adopted
by Roman chronographers, see Cambr. Ane. Hast., vu. p. 322.
Another explanation presupposes that during this time there
was 1n control a revolutionary government, which later was not
recognized as legal, seo Beloch, Rom. Gesch., p. 31.

$5,0., the emperor, see note to Patis, 1v. 7.

6 Consular tribunes according to Livy, vi. 36, 8.


TACITUS


menses, dum bonus quaeritur, res publica non haberet.

amereri, interfecto fraude Aurehano, ut superiore
libro scriptum est, calliditate servi nequissimi errore
mihtarium (ut apud quos quaelibet commenta pluri-
mum valent, dum modo irati audiunt, plerumque
temulenti, certe consihorum prope semper expertes *),
reversis ad bonam mentem omnibus eisdemque ab
exercitu graviter confutatis, coeptum est quaeri ecquis

5fieri deberet ex omnibus princeps tune odio prae-
sentium exercitus, qui creare imperatorem raptim
solebat, ad senatum litteras misit, de quibus priore
libro iam dictum est, petens ut ex ordine suo princi-

gpem legerent. verum senatus, sciens lectos a se
principes militibus non placere, rem ad mulites rettulit.
dumque id saep.us fit, sextus peractus est mensis.


lfu Draeger, Peter, fuert P. — ?eblom.m P. — ?eadem
posteris Jordan, Elhs, Hohl; eadem posteros P; ebam ad
posteros Peter?. +ennertes Jordan; exvertrs P, Peter.


1 ÅU., XXXVI. 2 dur., xh. 1-2.
3 So also c. 1. 15; di. 1, Aur., xl. 4; but 1n fact the interval
was not more than two months, since Aurelian was lalled in
October or Novembor, 275 (see note to Aur., xxxvii. 4), and


TACITUS Il. 2.6


that for six;months, while a good man was being sought,
the'commonwealth had no emperor. What harmony
there was then among the soldiers! What peace for
the people! How full of weight the authonty of the
senate! Nowhere did any pretender arse, and the
judgement of the senate, the soldiers and the people of
Rome guided the entire world, it was not because they
feared any emperor or the power of a tribune that they
did righteously, but—what ıs the noblest thing in life
—because they feared themselves.

I must, however, describe the cause of a delay so
fortunate and an instance of unselfishness which should
both receive special mention in the public records and
be admired by future generations of the human race, in
order that those who covet kmgdoms may learn not to
seize power but to merit it. After Aurelian had been
treacherously slain, as I have described m the previous
book,! by the trick of a most base slave and the folly
of the officers (for with these any falsehood gains
credence, provided only they hear it when angry, bemg
often drunken and at best almost always devoid of
counsel), when all returned again to sanity and the troops
had sternly put down those persons, the question was at
once raised whether any one of them all should be
chosen as emperor. Then the army, which was wont
to create emperors hastily, in their anger at those who
were present, sent to the senate the letter of which I
have already written in the previous book,? asking it to
choose an emperor from its own numbers. The senate,
however, knowing that the emperors it had chosen
were not acceptable to the soldiers, referred the matter
back to them. And while this was being done a
number of times the space of six months elapsed.’


Tacitus was made emperor before ihe end of the year. The
date 1n c. i, 2 (cf. also c. xui. 6) 1s therefore too early.


TACITUS


icum om. in P, 2qncertam . . . dweset P.


! M, Claudius Tactus Augusius (275-276) ; there is no warrant
foi the name Aurelius given io him iu dur, xli. 4, According
to Zonalas, xu. 28, he was at tlus time 75 years old.

2See Aur., xh. 3 and notes,

3 See note to Aur., xxxv. 4, +See note to Val., v. 4,


TACITUS HI. 1—IV. 3


III. It is 1mportant, however, that it should be
known how Tacitus! was created emperor On the
seventh day before the Kalends of October, when the 25 Sept (27:
most noble body had assembled in the Senate-house of
Pompihus,? Vehus Cormficius Gordianus the consul
spoke as follows. * We shall now bring before you,
Conscript Fathers, what we have often brought before
you previously ; you must choose an emperor, because
it ıs not right for the army to remain longer without
a prince, and at the same time because necessity
compels. For it is said that the Germans have broken
through the frontier beyond the Rhine ? and have seized
cities that are strong and famous and rich and powerful.
And even if we hear nothing now of any movement
among the Persians, reflect that the Syrians are so
light-minded that rather than submit to our righteous
rule they desire even a woman to reign over them.
What of Africa? What of Illyricium? ^ What of
Egypt and the armies of all these regions? How long,
do we suppose, can they stand firm without a prince?
Wherefore up, Consenpt Fathers, and name a prince.
For the army will either accept the one you name or,
if it reject him, will choose another."

IV. Thereupon when Tacitus, the consular whose
night ıt was to speak his opinion first, began to express
some sentiment, it is uncertain what, the whole senate
acclaimed him*, ‘Tacitus Augustus, may God keep
you! We choose you, we name you prince, to your
care we commit the commonwealth and the world.
Now take the imperial power by authority of the
senate, for by reason of your rank, your life and your
mind you deserve it. Rightfully is the prince of the
senate created Augustus, rightfully is the man whose
privilege it is to speak his opmion first created our


TACITUS


4perator creatur. ecquis melius quam gravis imperat ?
ecquis melius quam litteratus imperat? quod bonum
faustum salutareque sit, diu privatus fuisti. scis
quemadmodum debeas imperare, qui alios principes
pertulistt. scis quemadmodum debeas imperare, qui
de aliis principibus iudicast:.”

5 At ille: “ Miror, patres conscripti, vos m locum
Aurelian, fortissimi imperatoris, senem velle prin-

6 cipem facere. en membra, quae iaculari valeant, quae
hastile torquere, quae clipeis intonare, quae ad ex-
emplum docendi militis frequenter equitare, vix
munia senatus implemus, vix sententias, ad quas nos

7locus artat, edicimus. videte dihgentius quam
aetatem de cubiculo atque umbra in pruinas aes-
tusque mnfittatis. ac probaturos senem imperatorem

V. Post haec adclamationes senatus haec fuerunt :
“Et Traianus ad imperium senex venit.” dixerunt
decies. “Et Hadrianus ad imperium senex venit."
dixerunt decies. “ Et Antoninus ad imperium senex
venit.” dixerunt decies. “Et tu legisti: *In-
canaque menta regis Romani'" dixerunt decies.
* Ecquis melius quam senex imperat?" dixerunt
decies. "Imperatorem te, non militem facimus."


! Aeneid, vi. 809-810; cf, Hadr., 1i. 8.


TACITUS IV. 4—V 1


emperor. Who ean rule more ably than a man of
authority? Who can rule more ably than a man of
letters? May it prove happy, auspicious, and to the
general welfare! Long have you been a commoner.
You know how you should rule, for you have been
subject to other princes. You know how you should
rule, for on other princes you have rendered judge-
ment."

Tacitus, however, replied: “I marvel, Conseript
Fathers, that in the place of Aurelian, a most valiant
emperor, you should wish to make an aged man your
prince Behold these members, which should be able
to cast a dart, to hurl a spear, to clash a shield, and,
as an example for instructing the soldiery, to ride with-
out ceasing.  Searce can | fulfil the duties of a senator,
scarce can I speak the opinions to which my position
constrains me Observe with greater care my advanced
age, which you are now sending out from the shade of
the chamber into the cold and the heat. And think
you that the soldiers will welcome an old man as their
emperor? Look you lest you give the commonwealth
a prince whom you do not really desire and lest men
begm to raise this as the sole objection against me,
namely, that you have chosen me unanimously."

V, Thereupon there were the following acclama-
tions from the senate: “Trajan also came to power
when an old man." This they said ten times.
* Hadrian also came to power when an old man."
This they said ten times “Antoninus also came to
power when an old man." This they said ten times.
“You yourself have read, ‘And the hoary beard of
a Roman king. "! This they said ten times “Can
any one rule more ably than an old man?" This they
said ten times. “ We are choosing you as an emperor,


TACITUS


1 qnterrogaís 3, Peter; vnterrogatis P. 2 potes P.


1 Seo Sev., xviu. 10. ? Otherwise unknown,


TACITUS V, 9—VI. 5


not as a soldier,” This they said twenty times. “Do
you but give commands, and let the soldiers fight.”
This they said thirty times, “ You have both wisdom
and an excellent brother.” This they said ten times.
** Severus said that it ıs the head that does the ruling
and not the feet." This they said thirty times. “ It
is your mind and not your body that we are choosing.”
This they said twenty times. “Tacitus Augustus,
may the gods keep you!”

Then all were asked their opinions. In addition,
Maecius Faltonius Nicomachus,? a senator of consular
rank, whose place was next to Tacitus’, addressed
them as follows: VI. “Always indeed, Conseript
Fathers, has this noble body taken wise and prudent
measures for the commonwealth, and from no nation
m the whole world has sounder wisdom ever been
awaited. At no time, however, has a more wise or
more weighty opinion been voiced in this sagred place.
We have chosen as prince a man advanced in years,
one who will watch over all like a father. From him
we need fear nothing ill-considered, nothing over hasty,
nothing cruel. All his actions, we may predict, will
be earnest, all dignified, and, in fact, what the common-
wealth herself would command. For he knows what
manner of prince he has ever hoped for, and he can-
not show himself to us as other than what he himself
has sought and desired. Indeed, if you should wish
to consider those monsters of old, a Nero, I mean, an
Elagabalus, a Commodus—or rather, always, an łn-
commodious—you would assuredly find that their vices
were due as much to their youth as to the men them-
selves. May the gods forfend that we should give the
title of prince to a child or of Father of his Country to
an immature boy, whose hand a schoolmaster must

VOL M X


TACITUS

2 Inde itum ad Campum Martium, ubi comuitiale
tribunal ascendit. ibi? praefectus urbis Aehus Cesetti-


lungarum Peter, Hohl; magnarum Ph *quo Salm.,
Peter; quod P. eb ins. by Salm. ; om. in P. *$4b) oo
ib Peter; 4b: . . . ub P, Hohl.


14.8., adopt a successor.
“Otherwise unknown. According to the list of the ‘‘ Chrono-


eas of 354,” Postumius Suagrus was prefect of the city in


TACITUS VI. 6—VII. 9


guide for the signing of his name and who is induced
to confer a consulship by sweetmeats or toys or other
such childish delights. What wisdom is there—a
plague upon it!—in having as emperor one who has
not learned to care for fame, who knows not what the
commonwealth is, who stands in dread of a guardian,
who looks to a nurse, who 1s in subjection to the blows
or the fear of a schoolmaster’s rod, who appoints as
consuls or generals or judges men whose lives, whose
merits, whose years, whose families, whose achieve-
ments he knows not at all? But why, Consenpt
Fathers, do I proceed farther. Let us rejoice that we
have an elder as our prince, rather than recall again
those times which appear more than tearful to those
who endured them. And so I bring and offer thanks
to the gods in heaven in behalf, indeed, of the entire
commonwealth, and I appeal to you, Tacitus Augustus,
asking and entreating and openly demandmg in the
name of our common fatherland and our laws that, 1f
Fate should overtake you too speedily, you will not
name your young sons as heirs to the Roman Empire,
or bequeath to them the commonwealth, the Conscript
Fathers, and the Roman people as you would your
farm, your tenants, and your slaves. Wherefore look
about you and follow the example of a Nerva, a Trajan,
and a Hadrian! It is a great glory to a dying prince
to love the commonwealth more than his own sons.”

VII. By this speech Tacitus himself was greatly
moved and the whole senatorial order was deeply
affected, and at once they shouted, “So say we all
of us, all of us.”

Thereupon they proceeded to the Campus Martius,
where Tacitus mounted the assembly-platform, There
Aelius Cesettianus,? the prefect of the city, spoke as

x2


TACITUS


Sanus sie locutus est: “Vos, sanctisshni mulites et
sacratissimi vos Quirites, habetis principem, quem de
sententia omnium exercituum senatus elegit, Tacitum
dico, augustissimum virum, ut qui hactenus sententiis
suis rem publicam, nune adiuvet! iussis atque con-

5 Hoe loco tacendum non est plerosque in litteras
rettulisse Tacitum absentem et in Campania positum

VIII. imperium. ac ne quis me temere Graecorum alicui
Latinorumve aestimet credidisse, habet. in. Biblioiheeca


Ulpia in armario sexto librum elephantinum, in quo
hoo Somdnereonisiltum perscriptum est, cui Tacitus ipse

gmanu sua subseripsit. mam diu haec senatus consulta
quae ad primcipes pertinebant in libris elephantinis
scribebantur.

3 Inde ad exercitus profectus bi quoque, cum pri-
mum tribunal ascendit, Moesius Gallicanus praefectus

4praetoni in haec verba disseruit: “ Dedit, sanctissimi
commulitones, senatus principem, quem petistis; paruit
praeceptis et voluntati? castrensium ordo ille nobilis-
Simus. plura mihi apud vos praesente iam imperatore


l adiıuuet Peter, Hohl; duet P. 2uoluniati 2,
woluptat: P.


180 also Zonaras, xii. 128.


2 See Aur., i. 7 and notes; the “ivory book" is doubtless as
fictitions as the * libri linter”
$ Otherwise unknown.


TACITUS VII. 3—VIIT. 4


follows: “ You have now, most venerated soldiers, and
you, most revered fellow-citizens, an emperor chosen
by the senate at the request of all the armies, Tacitus,
I mean, the most august of men, who, as he has in the
past benefited the common wealth by his counsels, will
now benefit ıt by his commands and decrees.” The
people then shouted, “Tacitus Augustus, most blessed,
may the gods keep you!” and all else that it is
customary to say.

At this point I must not leave 1t unmentioned that
many writers have recorded that Tacitus, when named
emperor, was absent and residing in Campania!; this
is indeed true, and I cannot dissemble. For when the
rumour spread that he was to be made emperor, he
withdrew and lived for two months at his house at
Baie, But after being escorted back from there he
took part m this decree of the senate, as though
actually a commoner and one who in treth would
refuse the imperial power. VIII. And now, lest any
one consider that I have rashly put faith in some
Greek or Latin writer, there is in the Ulpian Library,*
in the sixth case, an ivory book, in which is written
out this decree of the senate, signed by Tacitus himself
with his own hand.  Forthose decrees which pertained
to the emperors were long inseribed in books of
ivory.

He proceeded thence to the troops. Here also, as
soon as he mounted the platform Moesius Gallicanus,?
the prefect of the guard, spoke as follows: ‘The
senate has given you, most venerated fellow-soldiers,
the emperor you sought; and that most noble order
has carried out the instructions and the wishes of the
men of the camps. More I may not say, for the
emperor is now present with you. Do you, then, as


TACITUS


non licet loqui. ipsum igitur, qui tuer: nos debet,

2tur.” in eadem oratione Aureliano statuam auream
ponendant in Capitolo decrevit, item statuam argen-
team in Curia, item in Templo Solis, item in Foro divi
Traiani. sed aurea non est posita, dedicatae autem
3sunt solae argenteae. in eadem oratione cavit ut
si quis argento publice privatimque aes muscuisset, si
quis auro argentum, si quis aeri plumbum, capital esset
4cum bonorum proseriphone. in eadem oratione cavit
ut servi in dominorum capita non interrogarentur, ne


lat saltem E; ad salutem P. ? $6 E, sot P. 3 uestrum
a; uerum P.


1See Aur., XXXV. 8 and note.

2 See note to Hadr., vi. 6.

This principle had been established by a vetus senatus
consulinm ; see Tacitus, Annals, u, 90, 3. But by Cicero's
time an exception was made in cases of sacrilege and con-
spiracy , see Cicero, Orat. Par bones, 118.


TACITUS VII 5—IX, +


he speaks, listen to him with all respect, for his duty
it ıs to watch over us.” Thereupon Tacitus Augustus
spoke: “Trajan also came into power in his old age, but
he was chosen by a single man, whereas I have been
judged worthy of this title, first by you, most venerated
fellow-soldiers, who know how to approve your
emperors, and then by the most noble senate Now I
will endeavour and make every effort and do my
utmost that you may have no lack, if not of brave
deeds, at least of counsels worthy of you and of your
emperor ”

IX. After this he promised them their pay and the
eustomary donative, and then he dehvered his first
speech to the senate as follows: “So surely may it be
granted me, Consermpt Fathers, to rule the empire in
such a way that ıt will be apparent that I was chosen
by you, as I have determined to do all things by your
will and power. Yours it is, therefore, t9 command
and enaet whatsoever seems worthy of yourselves,
worthy of a well-ordered army, and worthy of the
Roman people" In this same specch he proposed
that a golden statue of Aurelian be set up in the
Capitolium, likewise a silver one 1n the Senate-house,
in the Temple of the Sun,! and in the Forum of the
Deified Trajan? The golden one, however, was never
set up and only the silver ones were ever dedicated.
In the same oration he ordained that if any one, either
officially or privately, alloyed silver with copper, or gold
with silver, or copper with lead, it should be a capital
offence, involving confiscation of property. In the
same speech he ordained that slaves should not be
questioned against thar master when on trial for hs
life,? not even in a prosecution for treason. He added
the further command that every man should have a


TACITUS

X. Patrimonium suum publicavit, quod habuit in re-
ditibus, sestertium bis milies octingenties. pecuniam,
quam domi collegerat, in stipendium militum vertit.
togis et tunicis iisdem est usus quibus privatus.


lin E; ut P,


1There was already in existence a large structure built by
Domatian, consisting of two temples of Vespasian and Titus with
a great enclosing portico, called the Porticus Divorum, the
whole complex being known as the Templum Divorum. Its
site was the mod. Piazza Grazioli and the land to the south.

291 Aprn], orginally a festival in honour of an ancient
pastoral detty named Pales, and later celebrated as the birth-
day of Rome.

$The Votorum Nuneupatio on 3 Jan., on which vows for the
emperor’s health were taken by the officials and priests.

$ See c. xiii. 6 f.

5See notes to Carac., iv. 8, and Alex., xxvi, 1,


TACITUS IX. 5—X. 3


ainting of Aurelian, and he ordered that a temple to
he deified emperors+ be erected, in which should be
laced the statues of the good princes, so that sacrificial
akes might be set before them on their birthdays, the
aria? the Kalends of January, and the Day of the
Jows. In the same speech he asked for the consul-
hip for his brother Florian, but this request he did
1ot obtain for the reason that the senate had already
ixed all the terms of office for the substitute consuls.’
t is said, moreover, that he derived great pleasure
rom the senate's independence of spint, because it
'efused him the consulship which he had asked for his
other. Indeed he is said to have exclaimed, “ The
ienate knows what manner of prince it has chosen."
X. He presented to the state the private fortune
which he had in investments, amountng to two
1undred and eighty million sesterces, and the money
which he had accumulated m his house he u3ed for the
»ay of the soldiers. He contmued to wear the same
cogas and tunics that he had worn while a commoner.
He forbade the keeping of brothels m the city—
which measure, indeed, could not be maintamed for
long. He gave orders that all publie baths should be
closed before the hour for hghtng the lamps,® that
no disturbance might arise during the night He had
Cornelius Tacitus, the wnter of Augustan history,’
placed in all the hbraries, claming him as a relative? ;


6 They had been kept open at night by Severus Alexander ;
see Alex., xxiv. 6.

7 From this passage Casaubon took the title which has ever
since been given erroneously to this collection; see vol. I.,
Intro., p. xi.

8 The difference between the names of their respective gentes
shows this to be impossible,


TACITUS


bibhothecis conlocari iussit; ne! lectorum incuria
deperiret, librum per annos singulos decies scribi
publicitus m + evicosarchis? iussit et in bibliothecis
4&poni  holosericam vestem viris omnibus interdixit.
domum suam destrui praecepit atque 1n eo loco ther-
5mas publicas fieri privato sumptu iussit columnas
centum Nunudicas pedum vieenum ternum Osti-
ensibus donavit de proprio. possessiones, quas in
Mauretania habuit, sartis tectis Capitohi deputavit,
6argentum mensale, quod privatus habuerat,? minis-
teriis conviviorum, quae in templis fierent, dedicavit.
7servos urbanos omnes manu misit utriusque sexus,
intra centum tamen ne Canmiam transire videretur.
XI. Ipse fuit vitae parcissimae, ita ut sextanum
vini tota die numquam potaverit, saepe intra heminam.
2convivium vero unius gallinacei, ita ut sinciput ad-
deret et ova. prae omnibus holeribus adfatim minis-
tratis lacfucis impatienter indulsit, somnum enim se
mercari ila sumptus effusione dicebat. amariores
3cibos adpetivit, balneis raro usus est atque adeo vali-
dior fuit in senectute.  vitreorum diversitate atque
operositate vehementer est delectatus. panem nisi
siccum numquam comedit eundemque sale atque alus
4rebus conditum. fabricarum peritissimus fuit, mar-
morum cupidus, nitoris senatorii, venationum studiosus.


ise Hohl, nec P, neue Peter, ? So P; no successful
emendations have been proposed. %habuerat X; habuerit P.


1 See Hesog., xxvi. 1 and note.

? See note to Gord., xxxii. 2.

3 The Lex Fufia Caninia of 2 B.C., designating specified pro-
portions of & household of slaves that might be manumutted,
the maximum bemg one hundred, see Gaius, i. 42-46,


TACITUS X. 4—XI. 4


id m order that his works might not be lost through
ie carelessness of the readeis he gave orders that ten
pies of them should be made each year officially in
1e copying-establishments and put in the hbraries.
fe forbade any man to wear a garment made wholly
f silk. He gave orders that his house should be
estroyed and a publie bath erected on the site at his
wn expense To the people of Ostia he presented
'om his own funds one hundred columns of Numidian
iarble,? each twenty-three feet ın height, and the
states which he owned m Mauretania he assigned for
eeping the Capitohum m repair. The table-silver
rich he had used when a commoner he dedicated
9 the service of the banquets to be held in the
emples, and all the slaves of both sexes whom he had
1 the city he set free, keeping the number, however,
elow one hundred m order not to seem to be trans-
ressing the Canmian Law.? 3

XI. In his manner of hving he was very temperate,
o much so that in a whole day he never drank a pmt
£ wine, and frequently less than a half-pmt. Even
t a banquet there would be served a single cock, with
he addition of a pig's jowl and some eggs. In pre-
erence to all other greens he would indulge himself
vithout stint in lettuce, which was served ın large
juantities, for he used to say that he purchased sleep
jy this kind of lavish expenditure. He especially
iked the more bitter kinds of food. He took baths
rarely and was all the stronger in lus old age. He
lelighted greatly m varied and elaborate kinds of
zlassware. He never ate bread unless it was dry, but
he flavoured it with salt and other condiments. He
was very skilled m the handicrafts, fond of marbles,
truly senatorial in his elegance and devoted to hunting.


TACITUS

gfatim seripsit. legit sane senex minutulas litteras ad
stuporem nec umquam noctem intermisit qua non ali-
quid vel scriberet ille vel legeret praeter posterum
kalendarum diem.

XII. Nec tacendum est et frequenter intimandum !
tantam senatus laetitiam fuisse, quod eligendi principis
cura ad ordinem amplissimum revertisset ut et suppli-
cationes decernerentur, et hecatombe promitteretur,
smguli denique senatores ad suos scriberent, nec ad
suos tantum sed etiam ad externos, mitterentur prae-
terea htterae ad provincias: “scirent omnes socii
omnesque nationes in antiquum statum redisse rem
publicam ac senatum principes legere, immo ipsum
senatum principem factum, leges a senatu petendas,


Luntimandum Salm. ; wndandam P.


! See note to Peri., xii, 6. ? Beo Aur., xlvi. 1.

? Unknown and probably fictitious.

t His reign was regarded thoughout as Lhe 16-establishment
of the rule of bie scnaic he ie-to:ed to the senators the night
to hold mub'aiy eommards (Am. Viewor, Cues, 37, 6) and
sued gold coms mseribed 5.6. (Matt.-Syd., v. p. 388, no. 75;
pp. 346-347, nos. 205 and 209). This policy found expression m


TACITUS XI. 5—XII. 1


His table, indeed, was supplied only with country
produce, and he never served pheasants ! except on his
own birthday and on those of his family and on the
chief festivals, He always brought back home the
sacrificial victims and bade his household eat them.
He did not permit lus wife to use jewels and also for-
bade her to wear garments with gold stripes. In fact,
it 1s said. that it was he who impelled Aurelian to forbid
the use of gold on clothmg and ceilings and leather?
Many other measures of his are related, but it would
be too long to set them all down in writing, and if
anyone desires to know everything about this man, he
should read Suetonius Optatianus,? who wrote his hfe
in full detail. Though he was an old man, he could
read very tmy letters to an amazing degree and he
never let a night go by without writing or reading
something except only the mght following the day
after the Kalends.

XII. It must not be left unmentioned, and in fact
it should become widely known, that so great was the
joy of the senate that the power of choosing an
emperor had been restored to this most noble body,
that it both voted ceremonies of thanksgiving and
promised a heeatomb and finally each of the senators
wrote to his relatives, and not to his relatives only but
also to strangers, and letters were even despatched to
the provinces, all in the following vein: “Let all the
allies and all foreign nations know tbat the common-
wealth has been restored to its ancient condition, and
that the senate now creates the ruler, nay ratber the
senate itself has been created ruler, and henceforth


the titles Verae Libertatis Auctor given to him in an inscription
from Gaul (C.I.L. xi. 5568 = Dessau, Ins. Gel. 591) and
Restitutor Rer Publicae on coms (Cohen, vi." p. 231, no. 107).


TACITUS


reges barbaros senatui supplicaturos, pacem ac bella


l gesserit quam quemadmodum rest, by Salm. from Cicero ;
om. n P.


! ec. XVIII.-XIX,

? See Aur. xxxvi. 2. Others were punished by Probus;
see Prob., xui. 2.

è The Sea of Azov ; see note to Aur., xvi. 4. Afulleraccount
of this invasion of the Eiruli in 275-276 is found im Zosimus, 1.
68, Land Zonaras, xu. 28. Entermg Asia Minor from Colchis,
they overran Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia and Cilicia, where
they were defeated by Tacitus with the aid of Flonan, He
celebrated the victory by assuming the cognomen Gothicus
Maximus and by coins (of 276) with the legend Pretoria
Gothica; see Mati.-Syd., v. p. 887, no. 110.

t Gee Aur., XEXV, 4. 5 In Pisonem 3.


TACITUS XIL 9—XIII 5


laws must be sought from the senate, barbarian kings
bring their entreaties to the senate, and peace and war
be made by authority of the senate." In fact, in
order that nothing may be lacking to your knowledge,
I have placed many letters of this sort at the end of
the book,! to be read, as I think, with enjoyment, or
at least without aversion.

XIII. His first care after being made emperor was
to put to death all those who had killed Aurelian,
good and bad alike, although he had already been
avenged,? Then with wisdom and courage he crushed
the barbarians—for they had broken forth in great
numbers from the district of Lake Maeotis? The
Maeotidae, 1n fact, were flocking together under the
pretext of assembling by command of Aurelian for the
Persian War,* in order that, should necessity demand
it, they might render aid to our troops. Now Cicero
declares 5 that it ig rather a matter for boasting to tell
how one has conducted, rather than how one has ob-
tained, the consulship ; in the case of Tacitus, however,
it was a noble achievement that he obtained the
impenal power with such glory to himself, but by
reason of the shortness of his reign he performed no
great exploit. For m the sixth month of lus rule, he
was slain,® according to some, by a plot among the
troops, though according to others he died of disease.’


€ At Tyana (Kizh-Hissar) in Cappadocia, accoiding to Aur.
Victor, Caes., 36, 2. Zosimus (1. 68, 2) and Zonaras (xu. 28)
relate that he was killed by some soldiers who had murdered
his kinsman Maximinus, the governor of Syria, and then
feared punishment from him. As there are papyri of June
276, drawn up while he was ruling, his death could not have
taken place before this month.

"This version, evidently incorrect, seems to appear also in
Prob., x. Land Car., iii. 7, and in. Epb., 36, 1.


TACITUS


factionibus eum oppressum mente atque ammo de-

Huic frater Florianus in imperio successit, de quo
pauea ponenda sunt.

3tantus autem Probus fuit in re! militari ut illum sena-

-tus optaret, miles ehgeret, ipse populus Romanus ad-


lin ve X, Peter, Hohl; entere P.


1 See c i1 6 and note,

2 M. Annius Florianus Augustus. His name shows that the
biographer is correct in his statement, m c. xvi 4, that he was
the son of Tacitus’ mother by a second husband; accordingly,
the “germanus ” ofc. xiv, 1 18 incorrect In direct contradic-
tion of c. xiv. 1 Zonaras says that he was recognised by the
senate, and both he and Zosimus relate that he was acknow-
ledged emperor by the Euiopean and African portions ot the
empire; this is supported by the evidence ot inscriptions from
the various western provinces,

3 Of. c. v1. 8.

4 He reigned for eighty days according to Eutropius, ix 16,
and for eighty-eight according to the ** Ohronographor of 354."
Since Tamtus seems to have been killed in June, 276 (sca note
to c. xii, 5), and Flonan is said by Zosimus (1. 64, 2) to have


TACITUS XIII. 6—XIV. 4


It is, nevertheless, agreed among al] that, crushed by
plots, he grew weak both in mind and m spirit. He
likewise pave command that the month of September
should be called Tacitus, for the reason that m that
month he was not only born but also created emperor!

He was succeeded in the imperial power by his
brother Floman,? about whom a few things must now
be related.

XIV. Florian was own brother to Tacitus, and after
his brother's death he seized the imperial power, not
by authorisation of the senate but on his own volition,
just as though the empire were an hereditary posses-
sion, and although he knew that Tacitus had taken
oath in the senate that when he came to die he would
appoint as emperor not his own sons but some excel-
lent man.? Fmally, after holding the imperial power
for scarce two months t he was slam at Tarsus by the
soldiers, who heard that Probus, the choye of the
whole army, was now in command. So great, more-
over, was Probus in matters of war that the senate
desired him, the soldiers elected him, and the Roman
people itself demanded him by acclamations.® Florian
was also an imitator of his brother's ways, though not


been killed during the summer, his death may be supposed to
have taken place about August.

5Zosimus (1. 64, 2) relates that he carned on the war against
the Hruli with success and that he had cut off their retreat
when he was forced by Probus assumption of the nnpenal
power to return to Cilicia, Aiter a battle of no importance
Probus’ soldiers deposed Florian and placed lim under guard ;
when he made an attempt to recover his position he was killed
by his own troops 26 the mstigation of Probus! emissaries. The
biographer, both hero and m P7ob., x. 8, suppresses al] sugges-
tion of complicity in Flonan's death on the part of hus hero
Probus,

8 Soo Prob., x. -xii,


VOL. I. Y


TACITUS

2sipatae. quo tempore responsum est ab haruspicibus
quandocumque ex eorum familia imperatorem Roma-
num futurum seu per feminam seu per virum, qui det
iudices Parthis ac Persis, qui Francos et Alamannos
sub Romanis legibus habeat, qu per omnem Africam
barbarum non relinquat, qui Taprobanis praesidem
imponat, qui ad luvernam? insulam proconsulem
muttat, qui Sarmatis omnibus 1:udicel, qui terram
omnem, qua Oceano ambitur, captis ommibus genti-
bus suam faciat, postea tamen senatui reddat imperium
et antquis legibus vivat, ipse victurus annis centum


1 post . . . nuncupat, P, retained by von Winterfeld ; del.
by Salm., Peter, Hohl. *? Juvernam Purser, Hohl;
Romanam P, Peter. 3 vost X; yer P.


! Mod. Terni, about 60 m. N. of Rome.
2 Cf. Prob., xx. 2. 3 Ceylon.
4Treland—if the emendation in the text is correct.


TACITUS XIV. 5—XV,. 4


in every respect, For the frugal Tacitus found fault
with his lavishness, and his very eagerness to rule
showed him to be of a different stamp from his brother.

So then there arose two princes from one' house, of
whom the one ruled for six months and the other for
scarce two—merely regents, so to speak, between
Aurelian and Probus, and themselves named princes
after a regency.

AV. Their two statues, made of marble and thirty
feet in height, were set up at Interamna,! for there
cenotaphs were erected to them on their own land ;
but these were struck by lightning and so thoroughly
broken that they lay scattered in fragments. On
this oceasion the soothsayers foretold that at some
future time there would be a Roman emperor from
their family,? descended through either the male or
the female line, who would give judges to the Parthians
and the Persians, subject the Franks and the Ala-
manni to the laws of Rome, drive out every barbarian
from the whole of Africa, establish a governor at
Taprobane,? send a proconsul to the island of Iuverna,*
act as judge to all the Sarmatians, make all the land
which borders on the Ocean his own territory by
conquermg all the tribes, but thereafter restore the
power to the senate and conduct himself in accord-
ance with the ancient laws, being destined to live for
one hundred and twenty years? and to die without
an heir. They declared, moreover, that he would
come one thousand years from the day when the
lightning struck and shattered thestatues. It showed
no great skill, indeed, on the soothsayers' part to de-
clare that such a prince would come after an interval
of one thousand years, for their promise applied to


5 Of, Ciaud,, n. 4,
¥2


TACITUS

6 Nunc nobis adgrediendus est Probus, vir domi foris-
que conspicuus, vir Aureliano, Traiano, Hadriano,
Antoninis, Alexandro Claudioque praeferendus, quia *
in ilis varia, in hoc omnia praecipua iuncta? fuere,
qui post Tacitum omnium iudicio bonorum imperator
est factus orbemque terrarum pacatissimum guber-
navit, deletis barbaris gentibus, deletis etiam plurimis
tyrannorum, qui eius temporibus exstiterunt, de quo


1 pollwcenies . . . hasioria transp. by Salm. ; after mendacia
m P. 2 scrupia sunt 3, Hohl, om. im P and by Peter.
Sgurbus Hohl; quo P, Peter, quers Cas. t So Peter; misi
guia P, Hohl. 5 puncta Baehrens, Peter? ; tune P,


! Commemozated by coins with the legend Annona Augusta ;
see Matt.-Syd., v. p. 889, nos. 123-125,
2 Unknown. 3 See note to Prob., i. 3,


TACITUS XV. 5—XVI. 6


a time when such a story will scarce be remembered,
whereas, if they had said one hundred years, their
falsehood could perhaps be detected, AHN this, never-
theless, I thought should be included in this volume
for the reason that someone who reads me might think
that I had not read.

XVI. Tacitus scarcely gave a largess! to the Roman
people in six months’ time. Huis portrait was placed
in the house of the Quintilii,? representing him in five
ways on & single panel, once in a toga, once m a
military cloak, once in armour, once in a Greek
mantle, and once in the garb of a hunter, Of this
picture, indeed, a writer of epigrams made mock,
saying: “I do not recognise the old man im the
armour, I do not recognise the man in the military
cloak,” and so forth, “ but I do recognise the man in
the toga." Both Florian and actus left many
children, whose descendants, I suppose, are awaiting
the coming of the thousandth year. About them
many epigrams were written, ridiculing the sooth-
sayers who made the promise of the nnperial power.
This is all that I remember learnmg about the lives
of Tacitus and Florian that is worthy of record.

Now we must take up Probus, a man of note both
at home and abroad, and one to be preferred to
Aurelian, to Trajan, to Hadrian, to the Antonines, to
Alexander, and to Claudius, for the reason that, while
they had various virtues, he had all combined and to
a surpassing degree. He was made emperor after
Tacitus by the vote of all good men, and he ruled
a world to which he had brought perfect peace by
destroying barbarian tribes and by destroying also
the very many pretenders who arose in his time, and
about him it was said that he was worthy to be called


TACITUS


dictum est dignum esse! ut Probus diceretur, etiamsi
Probus nomme non fuisset. quem quidem muiti
ferunt etiam Sibyllinis Libris promissum, qui si diutius
7 fuisset, orbis terrae barbaros non haberet. haec ego
in aliorum vita de Probo credidi praelibanda, ne dies,
hora, momentum aliquid sibi vindicaret in me neces-
8 sitate fatali ac Probo indicto deperirem. ^ nunc quon-
iam mterim meo studio satisfeci, claudam istud volu-
men,? satisfactum arbitrans studio et cupiditati meae.
XVII. Omma imperii Tacito haec fuerunt: fanati-
cus quidam in Templo Silvani tensis membris ex-
clamavit, “Tacita purpura, tacita purpura," idque
septimo ; quod quidem postea omini deputatum est.
2 vinum, quo libaturus Tacitus fuerat in templo Herculis
8Fundani, subito purpureum factum est. vitis, quae
uvas Amunnias albas ferebat, eo anno quo ille im-
perium meruit purpureas tulit? plurima purpurea
4facta sunt. mortis omina haec fuerunt : patris sepul-
chrum disruptis ianuis se aperuit. matns umbra se
per diem et Tacito et Floriano velut viventis obtulit,
nam diversis patribus nati ferebantur. m larario di
omnes seu terrae motu seu casu aliquo conciderunt.


! dygwum esse ns. by Cas., Peter? ; om. in P. * salisfecs
. uolumen 3, Hohl; om. im P and by Peter. 3 So Salm. ;
pusrascere P, purpurascere ... Peter, Hohl.


! 164, Upright; cf. Prob., iv. 4; x. 4.

?There were in Rome many private shrines of Silvanus,
which are attested by inscriptions, but there was no official cult
of the god or any temple,

7A dedicatory inscription to Hercules Fundanius has been
found in Rome (C.I.L., vi. 311 = Dessau, Ins. Sel., 3449), but
the adjective may refer to the town of Fundi (mod. Fondi) on
the Via Appia.


TACITUS XVI. 7—XVII. 4


Probus! even if that had not been his name. Many,
indeed, declare that he was even foretold by the
Sibylline books, and had he but hved longer the
world would contam no barbarians. These state-
ments about him I thought should be given im the
life of others as a foretaste, lest the day, the hour,
and the moment should put forth some claim against
me because my fate is destined, and I should die
without mention of Probus. Now, since I have for
the time satisfied my zeal, I will bring this book to
a close, believing that I hive given satisfactory ex-
pression to my devotion and my desire.

XVIL The omens that predicted the rule of Tacitus
were the following: A certain madman in the Temple
of Silvanus? was seized with a stiffening of the lunbs
and shouted out, “ There is tacit purple, there is tacit
purple,” and so on for seven times; and this, indeed,
was later regarded as an omen. The winepmoreover,
with which Tacitus was about to pour a libation in
the Temple of Hercules Fundanius,? suddenly turned
purple, and a vme, which had previously borne white
Aminnian grapes,* in the year in which he gained the
imperial power bore grapes of a purple colour. Very
many other things, too, turned purple. Now the
omens predicting his death were these: His father’s
tomb burst its doors asunder and opened of its own
accord, His mother's shade appeared in the daytime
as though alive to Tacitus and to Florian as well—it
is said, indeed, that they had different fathers? AH
the gods in their private chapel fell down, overthrown
either by an earthquake or by some mischance, The


* One of the most famous of the Italian grapos; see Vergil,
Georg., 1. 97, and Plny, Nat. Hista, xav. 21-98.
5 See note to c, xiin 6.


TACITUS

XVIII Et quonim me promis aliquas epistulas
esse positurum, quae creato Tacito principe gaudia
senatus ostenderent, his additis finem  seribendi
faciam.

Epistulae publieae :

2. * Senatusamplissimus curiae Carthaginiensi salutem
dicit. quod bonum, faustum, felix salutareque sit rei
publicae orbique Romano, dandi ius imperii, appel-
landi principis, nuneupandi Augusti ad nos revertit.

5 Aha epistula :

* Senatus amplissimus curiae Trevirorum. ut estis
liberi et semper fuistis, laetari vos erednnus. creandi
principis iudieium ad senatum rednt, simul etiam


! veseruemus Z, Peischemg, Hohl; veseraemur P; reuertemur
Peter. 3 graefecty 2 ; quae P,


Te. xn. 2.

? As the representative of the senate, so also Prob., xui. 1.
The principle had been laid down by Nero that appeals trom
Italy and the senatonal provinces should be made to the consuls
(1.¢., the senate), while those from the imperial provinces should
be made to the emperor; see Tacitus, Annals, xii. 4. This was


TACITUS XVII. 5—XVIII. 5


statue of Apollo, worshipped by them both, was found
removed from the top of its pedestal and laid on a
couch, all without the agency of any human hand.
But to what end shall I proceed further? There are
others to relate these things; let us save ourselves
for Probus and for Probus' famous deeds.

XVIII. Now since I have promised ! to quote some
of the letters which showed the joy of the senate
when Tacitus was created emperor, I will append the
following and then make an end of writing.

The official letters :

* From the most noble senate to the council of
Carthage, greeting. May it prove happy, auspicious,
of good omen, and to the welfare of the common-
wealth and the Roman world! The right of con-
ferring the imperial power, of naming an emperor,
and of entitling him Augustus has been restored to
us. To us, therefore, you will now refer all matters
of importance. Every appeal shall now be made to
the prefect of the city,? but it shall come up to him
from the proconsuls and the regular judges. And
herein, we believe, your authority also has been re-
stored to its ancient condition, for this body is now
supreme, and in recovering its own power it is pre-
serving the rights of others as well."

Another letter:

* From the most noble senate to the council of the
Treviri.2 We believe that you are rejoicing that you
are free and have ever been free. The power to
create the emperor has been restored to the senate,


now extended, on the theory that the senate was the supreme
governing body, to all the provinces,
8 See note to Tyr. Trig., xxxi. 3.


TACITUS


praefecturae urbanae appellatio universa decreta
est."

6 Eodem modo scriptum est Antiochensibus, Aqui-
leiensibus, Mediolanensibus, Alexandrinis, Thessalon:-
censibus, Corinthiis et Atheniensibus.

XIX. Privatae autem epistulae haec fuerunt :

* Autrono Iusto patri Autronius Tiberianus salutem.
nune te, pater sancte, interesse decuit senatui amplis-
simo, nune sententiam dicere, cum tantum auctontas
ampbssimi ordinis creverit ut reversa m antiquum
statum re! publica nos principes demus, nos faciamus

3 Item aha:

“Claudius Sapilianus Cerexo Maeciano patruo salu-
tem — obtinuimus,? pater sancte, quod semper optavi-
mus; in antiquum statum senatus revertit nos
prie:pes facimus, nostri ordinis sunt potestates.

4 gratias exercitu: Romano et vere Romano; reddidit
5nobis quam semper habuimus potestatem.  abice
Baianos Puteolanosque secessus, da te urbi, da te
Curiae. floret Roma, floret tota res publica. impera-
tores damus, principes facimus ; possumus et prohibere
qui coepimus facere. dietum sapienti sat est."


! So Peter; reuera . . . rea P. Zoptunwuneus E;
optimus P.


! Neither these persons nor those mentioned 1n the next letter
are otherwise known.


TACITUS XVIII 6—XIX. 5


and at the same time the prefect of the city has been
authorized to hear all appeals."

After the same manner letters were written to the
people of Antioch, of Aquileia, of Milan, of Alexandria,
of Thessalonica, of Cormth, and of Athens.

XIX. The private letters, moreover, were as
follows :

“From Autronius Tiberianus to Autronius Justus !
his father, greeting. Now at last it is fitting, my
revered father, for you to be present in the most noble
senate, and now to speak your opinion, for so greatly
has the authority of that noble body increased that,
now that the commonwealth has been restored to its
ancient position, we name the princes, we create the
emperors, we, in fine, give the Augusti their title.
Now look to it that you grow strong, ready to be
present once more in the ancient Senate-house. We
have recovered the proconsular command, and to the
prefect of the city have been restored the appeals
from every office and from every rank."

Likewise another letter:

* From Claudius Sapilianus to Cereius Maecianus
his uncle, greeting. We have obtamed, revered sir,
what we have always desired; the senate has been
restored to its ancient position. We now create the
emperors and in our body is vested every power.
All thanks to the Roman army, aye, Roman in truth!
It has restored to us the power which we always held.
Now away with retirement to Baiae and Puteoli!
Present yourself in the city, present yourself in the
Senate-house. Happy is Rome, happy the entire
commonwealth. We name the emperors, we create
the princes; and we who have begun to create are
also able to depose. To the wise a word is sufficient.”


TACITUS


laperwent 23 aperent P. ? waeberent Cas., Peter .
praeuene»ent Pt,


TACITUS XIX. 6


It would be too long to include all the letters that
I have found and read I will say only this much,
that all the senators were so carried away by joy that
they all m their houses sacrificed white victims, un-
covered everywhere the portraits of their ancestors,
sat arrayed m white garments, served more sumptuous
banquets, and supposed that the ancient times had
been restored.


PROBUS


FLAVII VOPISCI SYRACUSII

2cuiusque! facta deseripserint. inde est quod Alex-
ander Magnus Macedo, cum ad Achillis sepulchrum
venisset, graviter ingemescens “Felicem te," inquit,
"iuvenis gu: talem praeconem tuarum virtutum rep-
persti," Homerum intellegi volens, qu Achillem
tantum m virtutum studio fecit ^ quantum ipse valebat
ingenio.

3 Quorsum haec pertmeant, mı Celsine, fortassis requi-


lowvusque 2j ; cursus P, ? facit Peter; fu P.


! What follows is not a quotation, but a reflection based on
Sallust, Catu., 9, 4 and Cato's Origines quoted by Aulus Gollius,
in. 7,19. "Theactualwordsof Sallust aie cited by Jerome in his
Vita Helarionss, 1, in ummedate connection with the anecdote
related ın § 2, though without the refereuco to Cato. The co-
incidence and the exactness of Jerome's quotation from Ballust
have suggested the posmbility that the begrapher has taken


PROBUS


BY
FLAVIUS VOPISCUS OF SYRACUSE


I. It is true—as Sallustius Crispus and the historians
Marcus Cato and Gellius! have put into their writings
as a sort of maxim—that all the virtues of all men are
as great as they have been made to appeay by the
genius of those who related their deeds. Hence it was
that Alexander the Great of Macedonia, as be stood at
the tomb of Achilles, said with a mighty groan,
* Happy are you, young man, in that you found such
a herald of your virtues," * making allusion to Homer,
who made Achilles outstanding ın the pursuit of
virtue in proportion as he himself was outstanding in
genius.

* But to what does all this apply," you may perhaps


this passage from the Veta Eharimnas (written about 390), and

that, accordingly, the Probus was not composed before the ond of

R ari century; see B, Schmiedler in Phil, Woch., 1927,
. 055 I.

E ? Related also by Plutarch, Alexander, 15, 4; Arrian, Asad.

Alew.,1. 12, 1; Oicero, pro Archia, 24, and referred to by Cicero

in Jpist. ad F'annlares, v. 12, 7.


PROBUS


ris Probum principem, cuius imperio onens, occidens,
meridies, septentrio omnesque orbis partes in totam
securitatem ! redactae sunt, senptorum inopia iam

II. Usus autem sum, ne in aliquo fallam canssimun
mihi famiharitatem tuam, praecipue hbris ex Bibho-
theca Ulpia, aetate mea Thermis Diocletianus, et item
ex Domo Tiberiana, usus etiam regestis scribarum
Porticus ,Porphyretieae, actis etiam senatus ac populi,

2 et quoniam me ad colligenda talis viri gesta ephemens
Turduh Gallicani plurimum iuvit, vı honestissimi ac
sincerissimi, beneficium amici senis tacere non debui,


l1secwrilalem Àj, seuerataiem P.


1 Inke the other persons to whom Vopiscus! biographies are
addressed (Aur., 1, 9, and Farm., i1, 1), unknown, unless heis the
Celsinus of Aur., xliv. 8.

? M. Aurelius Probus Augustus (276-282). Thename Valerius,
by which he 1s called 1n c. xi. 5, 18 incorrectly given to him, as
also to Claudius; see note to Claud.,1. 1. Probus is the hero of
this group of biographies and this vita is httle mere than a
panegyme; sce especially c. xxi-xxni; ef. Tae, xvi. 6; Crown,
135.

?See Aur., 1. 7 and note. This is the only authonty for its
removal to the Baths of Diocletian (on which seo note to Tyr,
Proge, SEL T).


PROBUS I. 4—II. 2


be inquirmg, my dear Celsinus) It means that
Probus, an emperor whose rule restored to perfect
safety the east, the west, the south, and the north,
indeed all parts of the world, is now, by reason of
a lack of writers, almost unknown to us. Perished
— shame be upon us !—has the story of a man so great
and such as is not to be found either in the Punic
Wars or in the Gallic terror, not in the commotions of
Pontus or the wiles of the Spaniard. But I will not
permit myself—I who at first sought out Aurelian alone,
relating the story of his hfe to the best of my powers,
and have since written of Tacitus and Florian also—to
fail to rise to the deeds of Probus, purposmg, should
the length of my life suffice, to tell of all who remain
as far as Maximian and Diocletian No flueney or
elegance of style can I promise, but only the record of
their deeds, which I will not suffer to die.

Il. I have used, moréover—not to deceyve m any
respect your friendly interest which I hold most dear
—chiefly the books from the Ulpian Library? (in my
time in the Baths of Diocletian) and likewise from the
House of Tiberius,* and I have used also the registers
of the clerks of the Porphyry Portico 5 and the transac-
tions of the senate" and of the people . and since in
collecting the deeds of so great a man I have received
most aid from the journal of Turdulus Gallicanus,’
a most honourable and upright man, I ought not to
leave unmentioned the kindness of this aged friend.


4Seo Prus, X. 4 and note. This hbrary is also monloned
in in Gellius, xii. 90, 1, and Fronto, post. ad M. Caes.,
iV. »

S'Ehis portico (called Purpuretica) :3 montioned 1n au senp-
tion as part of the Forum of Trajan (ef. Hadr., vi. G); sce
C.I.L., vi T191 = Dessau, Ins. Sel. 8729.

$ Soo note to Alex., 1vi. 9. T Otherwise unknown.


VOL. ILL Z


PROBUS


3 Cn. Pompeium, tribus fulgentem triumphis belli
pratic! belli Sertoriani, bell: Mith 'adatiei multarum-
que rerum gestarum maiestate sublimem, quis tandem
nosset, nisi eum Marcus Tullus et Titus Livius in

4 litteras rettulissent?  Publiun Seinen Afmeanum,
immo Scipiones omnes, seu Lucios seu Nasicas, nonne
tenebrae possiderent ac tegerent, nis: commendatores
eorum historic: nobiles atque ignobiles exstitissent ?

5 longum est omnia persequi, quae ad exemplum huiusce

9 plura cupitis. et ne diutius ea, quac ad meum consilium


i pirater E; Parthici P. ?ufins. by Peter; om. m P.
3 infitaas Peter; infinitas PL


! Lucius Cornelius Sorpio Asiagenus, the brother of Africanus,
was nominally in command of the Roman army at the battle
of Magnesia, 190 s.c.

?'Theie were no less than six men named P. Cornelius Scipio
Nasica, the most famous of whom were the consul of 191 R.C.,
who m 204 had been declared by the senate to be the best man
in Rome and so qualified to receive the image of the Magna


PROBUS II. 8-9


Who, pray, would know of Gnaeus Pompey, re-
splendent m the three triumphs that he won by his
war against the pirates, his war against Sertorius, and
his war agamst Mithradates, and exalled by the
grandeur of his many achievements, had not Marcus
Tulhus and Titus Livius brought him into their
works? And as for Publius Scipio Africanus, or rather
all the Seipios, whether called Lucius! or Nasica?
would they not he hidden m darkness, had not
historians, both famous and obscure, arisen to grace
their deeds? It would, indeed, be too long to
enumerate all the cases which might be brought up
by way of example of this sort of thing, even if I were
silent. I do but wish to call to witness that I have
also written on a theme which anyone, if he so desire,
may narrate more worthily in leftier utterance. As for
me, mdeed, it has been my purpose, in relating the
lives and times of the emperors, to imitate, not a
Sallust, or a Livy, or a Tacitus, or a Trogus,’ or any
other of the most eloquent writers, but rather Marius
Maximus,‘ Suetonius Tranquillus, Fabius Marcellus,‘
Gargihus Martialis?" Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lam-
pridius, and the others who have handed down to
memory these and other such details not so much with
eloquence as with truthfulness. For I am now an
investigator—1 cannot deny it—incited thereto by you,
who, though you know much already, are desirous of
learning much more besides. And now, lest I speak
at too great length concerning all that has to do with


Mater, and his son, consul in 162 and 155 B.C., conqueror of
Dahnatia and a famous orator.

3? See note to dur, 1i. 1. 1 See note to Hadr., 11. 10.

5 Seo note to Alex., xlvii. 6.

$ See note to AleX., xxxvu. 9.


%2


PROBUS

2nobihssimus virtutibus claruit, Probo, ut quidam m
htteras rettulerunt, pater nomme Maximus fuit, qui,
cum ordines honestissime duxisset, tnbunatum adep-
tus apud Aegyptum vita functus est uxore ac filio et

4 medio relmquemus. unum tamen dico, quod m ephe-
meride legisse me memini, a Claudia sorore Probum

gimberbis acciperet. exstat epistula Valeriani ad Gal-
lienum, qua Probum laudat adhue adulescentem et

7imutationi omnium proponit. ex quo apparet nemi-
nem umquam pervenisse ad virtutum summam iam
maturum, nisi qui puer semmario virtutum generosiore
concretus aliquid inclitum designasset,

IV. Epistula Valeriani:


i Mitrovitz ; see note to Aur., ii. 1.

2 See note to Av. Cass., L 1.

3 Evidently a fiction, due to & desire on the part of the bio.
grapher to connect his hero with Pollto's.

* Probably fictitious, on account of her name, unless wo may
suppose that she was a half-sister.


PROBUS HI. 1—IV. 1


my plan, I will hasten on to an emperor great and
illustrious, the hke of whom our history bas never
known.

IH. Probus was a native of Pannonia, of the city of
Sirmium,! his mother was of nobler birth than his
father, his private fortune was modest, and his
kindred unmportant. Both as commoner and as
emperor he stood forth illustrious, famed for hs
virtues. Hus father, so some have said in them writ-
ings, was a man named Maximus, who, after com-
manding in the ranks? with honour and winning
a tnbuneship, died m Egypt, leaving a wife, a son,
and a daughter. Many aver that Pr obus was a rela-
tive of Claucius, ? thal most excellent and venerated
prince, but this, because it has been stated by only
one of the Greek writers, we shall leave undiscussed.
This one thing I will say, however, which I remember
reading in the journal, namely, that Probus was
buried by a sister named Claudia As a youth
Probus beeame so famed for his bodily strength that
by approval of Valerian he received a tribuneship
almost before his beard was grown, There is still in
existence a letter written by Valerian to Gallienus, m
which he praises Probus, then still] a youth, and holds
him up for all to imitate. From this it 1s clear that
no man has ever in his maturity attained to the sum
of the virtues except one who, trained in the nobler
nursery of the virtues, had as a boy given some sign
of distinction.

IV. Valenan’s letter :

“From Valerian the father to Gallienus the son, an
Augustus to an Augustus. Following out the opinion
which I have always held concerning Probus from his
early youth, as well as that held by all good men,


PROBUS


eundem sui nominis virum dicunt, tribunatum in eum
contuli datis sex cohortibus Saracenis, ereditis etiam
auxiliaribus Gallis cum ea Persarum manu quam nobis

2 Artabassis Syrus mancipavit. te quaeso, fili carissime,
ut eum iuvenem, quem imitari pueris omnibus volo,
in tanto habeas honore quantum virtutes eius et merita
pro debito mentis splendore desiderant."

3 Alia epistula de eodem ad praefectum praetorio
cum salario:

* Valerianus Augustus Mulvio Gallieano praefecto
praetorio. mireris fortassis, quod. ego imberbem tri-
bunum fecerim contra sententiam ! divi Hadriani, sed

4non multum miraberis, si Probum cogitas; est adules-
cens vere probus; numquam enim aliud mihi, cum
eum cogito, nisi eius nomen occurrit, quod nisi nomen
Shaberet, potuit habere cognomen. huic igitur dari
iubebis, quoniam mediocris fortunae est, ut eius digni-
tas incrementis iuvetur, tunicas russulas duas, pallia
Gallica duo fibulata, interulas paragaudias duas, pati-
nam argenteam librarum decem specellatam, aureos
Antoninianos centum, argenteos Aurelianos m lle,
6aereos Philippeos decem milia ; item in salario diurno,
bubulae pondo . . .„ porcinae pondo sex, caprinae
pondo decem, gallinaceum per biduum, olei per
biduum sextarium unum, vini veteris diurnos sextarios


1 contra sententiam Gruter, Peter: constentiam P 4,


! Unknown ; the form is probably an error for the Armenian
name Artavasdes ; cf. Val., i. 1.

2 Otherwise unknown. ? Seo Hadr., x. 6.

* Ot. Tac., xvi. G. ? See note to Claud., xvii. G.

6 Seo Aur., ix. 7 and note.


PROBUS IV, 2-6


who say that he is à man worthy of his name, I have
appointed him to a tiibuneship, assigning him six
cohorts of Saracens and entrusting to him, besides,
the Galhe regulars along with that company of
Persians which Artabassis! the Syrian delivered over
to us. Now I beg of you, my dearest son, to hold
this young man, whom I wish all the lads to imitate,
in the high honour that his virtues and his services
call for in view of what is owed him by reason of the
brilliance of his mind."

Another letter about him, written to the prefect of
the guard with an order for rations:

‘From Valerian Augustus to Mulvius Gallicanus,?
prefect of the guard. You may perhaps wonder why
it is that contrary to the ruling of the Deified Hadrian ?
l have appointed as tribune a beardless youth. You
wil not, however, wonder much if you consider
Probus; he is a young man of probity indetd.* For
never, when I consider him myself, does aught suggest
itself to me but his name, which, were it not his name
already, he might well receive as a surname. There-
fore, since his fortune is but a modest one, that his
rank may be enhanced by an additional remuneration,
you will order him to be supplied with two red tunics,
two Gallic cloaks provided with clasps, two under-
tunics with bands of embroidery,’ a silver platter,
polished to reflect the light, to weigh ten pounds, one
hundred aurei of Antoninus,® one thousand silver pieces
of Aurelian, and ten thousand copper coins of Philip ;
likewise for his daily rations, . . . pounds of beef,
Six pounds of pork, ten pounds of goat's meat, one
fowl every second day, one pint of oil every second
day, ten pmis of old wine every day, and a sufficient
quantity of bacon, biscuit, cheap wine, salt, greens,


PROBUS


decem cum larido, bucellati,! aceti, salis, holerum, hg-
7 norum quantum sat est. hospitia praeterea cidem ut
tribunis legionum praeberi iubebis."

V. Et haec quidem epistuhs declarantur. nune
quantum ex ephemeride colligi potuit: eum bello
Sarmatico iam tmbunus transmisso Danuvio multa
fortiter fecisset, publice m contione donatus est hastis
puris quattuor, coronis vallaribus duabus, corona civica
una, vexillis puris quattuor, armillis aureis duabus,
torque aureo uno, patera sacrificali qumnquelibri una.

2quo quidem tempore Valerium Flaccinum, adulescen-
tem nobilem, parentem Valeriani e Quadorum libe-
ravit manu. unde illi Valerianus coronam civieam

8detuht verba Valemani pro contione habita: “ Sus-
cipe, Probe, praemia pro re publica, suscipe coronam

3 Epistula de legione tertia :


! bucellatv aceta Purser (cf. Av. Cass. v. 8); bolulaci P;
pabule aceti Peter, Hohl.


1 See notes to Aw., xau. 8. ? Seo note to Mære., xii, 8.
3 See note to Claud., xii. 8. 4 Otherwise unknown.


PROBUS IV. 7—V. 7


and firewood. You will order, furthermore, that
quarters bè assigned to him as they are to the tribunes
of the legions.”

V. The foregoing details are attested by the letters.
Now as to what I have been able to gather from the
journal: Whereas during the Sarmatian war, while
holding the rank of tmbune, he had crossed the
Danube and performed many brave exploits, he was
formally presented ın an assembly with four spears
without points,’ two rampart-crowns, one evic crown,?
four white banners, two golden arm-bands,? one golden
collar, one sacrificial saucer weighing five pounds. At
this same tıme, indeed, he delivered out of the hands
of the Quadi Valerius Flaceinus,* a young man of
noble birth and a kmsman of Valerian's, and it was for
this reason that Valerian presented him with the civic
crown. The words of Valerian spoken before the
assembly were: “ Receive these rewards, Pr@bus, from
the commonwealth, receive this civic crown from
a kmsman” At this time, too, he added the Third
Leg'on to his command, with a testimonial as follows.

The letter concerning the Third Legion:

* Your exploits, my dear Probus, are causing me to
appear too tardy m assigning you larger forces, and
yet I will assign them with haste, So take under
your faithful care the Third Legion, the Fortunate,’
whieh as yet I have not entrusted to any save one
wel advanced m years; it was entrusted to me,
moreover, at an age when he who entrusted it, along
with congratulations, beheld my grey haws. In your
case, however, I shall not wait for age, for your virtues
are now illustrious and your character is strong.
I have given command to supply you with three sets


5 Sco note to Aur., xu. 4.


PROBUS


8 fulgeas,! et moribus polleas. vestes tibi triplices dari
iussi, salarium duplex feci, vexillarium deputavi."

2docet Galliem epistula ad tribunos data qui fuerit
Probus :

* Galhenus Augustus tribunis exercituum Illyrici-
anorum. etiamsi patrem meum fatalis bell Persici
necessitas tenuit, habeo tamen parentem Aurelium
Probum, quo laborante possim esse securus qui si
adfuisset, numquam ille ne nomunandus quidem
3tyrannus sibi usurpasset umperium. quare omnes vos
consihis eius cupio parere? qui et patris iudicio pro-
batus est'et senatus."

6  '" Aurelianus Augustus Probo salutem dicit. ut seias


, lfulgeas X, fulges P. ^ vnleremetat £; vnieremat P,
3 parere &, parare P,


t See note to Val., 1, 1.


PROBUS V. 8—VI. 6


of garments, I have ordered you double rations, and
I have assigned you a standard-bearer.”

VI. It would be a lengthy task, were I to enume-
rate all the exploits of so great a man, which he per-
formed as a commoner under Valenan, under Gallienus,
under Aurelian, and under Claudius, how many times
he scaled a wall, tore down a rampart, slew the enemy
m a hand-to-hand fight, won the gifts of emperors,
aud by his valour restored the commonwealth to its
ancient condition. Gallienus’ letter, addressed to the
tribunes, shows what manner of man was Probus:

“From Gallienus Augustus to the tribunes of the
armies m Illyricum. Even if the destined fate of the
Persian war has taken away my father, I have still
my kinsman Aurelius Probus, through whose efforts
I may be free from care. Had he been present,
never would that pretender, whose name even should
not be mentioned, have dared to usurp the7imperial
power. Wherefore, it 1s my wish that all of you
should obey the counsels of one who has been ap-
proved by the judgement both of my father and of the
senate.”

It may seem perhaps that the judgement of Gal-
lienus, so weak an emperor, is not worth much, but
at least ıt cannot be denied that no one, not even
a weakling, entrusts himself to the protection of
a man unless he believes that his virtues will profit
him. But be it so! Let Gallienus’ letter be set
aside. What will you say to the judgement of
Aurelian? For he handed over to Probus the soldiers
of the Tenth Legion, the bravest of Ins army, with
whom he himself had done mighty deeds, giving him
the following testimonial :

“From Aurelian Augustus to Probus, greetings. In


PROBUS


quanti te faciam, decimanos meos sume, quos Claudius
muh eredidit. isti enim sunt qui quadam felicitatis
praerogativa praesules nisi futuros principes habere non
norunt"

VII lam Claudii, 1am Taciti iudicia de Probo longum
est mnectere, quamvis feratur m senatu Tacitus dixisse,
cum eidem offerretur imperium, debere Probum prin-
cipem fieri. sed ego senatus consultum ipsum non
inveni,

2 Ipse autem Tacitus imperator primam talem ad
Probum epistulam dedit

s “Tactus Augustus Probo. me quidem senatus prin-
cipem fecit de prudentis exercitus voluntate attamen
scendum tibi est tuis nune umeris magis incubuisse
rem pubheam. qui et quantus sis omnes novimus,
sat senatus adesto igitur nostris necessitatibus, tuae

4familiae adsere, ut soles rem pubhcam. nos tbi
decreto totius orientis ducatu salarium quinquiplex
fecunus, ornamenta militara  gemunavimus, con-
sulatum in annum proximum nobiscum decrevimus ; te
enim manet pro virtutibus tms Capitolina palmata.’

5 Ferunt quidam Probo id pro mperii omine fuisse,
quod Tacitus scripsit, “ Te manet Capitolina palmata.”


1 There is no evidence for this, and 16 is evidently only an
attempt to legitimatize the impe1ium of the author's hero.

2 Asa matter of fact, Probus was not consul until 277,

3 See Gord., iv. 4 and notes.


PROBUS VI, 7—VII. 5


order that you may know how much I think of you,
take the command of my Tenth Legion, which Claudius
entrusted to me. For these are soldiers who know as
commanders none but those destmed to be emperors
—an assurance, as il were, of favourable fortune."

From this ıt was seen that Aurelian had in mind,
in case aught befell him—wise and far-sighted that he
was—to make Probus emperor.

VII. Now the judgement of Claudius concerning
Probus and thit of Tacitus also ıt would be too long
to include ; but ıt is reported that Tacitus said in the
senate, when offered the imperial power, that Probus
should be chosen as emperor.) But the senate's decree
itself I have not been able to find.

Tacitus himself, moreover, sent to Probus his first
letter as emperor in the following vem:

“From Tacitus Augustus to Probus, I, it ıs true,
have been made emperor by the senate in coAformity
with the wishes of our sagacious army. You, how-
ever, must know that it is on your shoulders that the
burden of the commonwealth has now been laid more
heavily. What sort of man and how great you are
we all have learned, and the senate also knows. And
so aid us in our need and, as is your custom, look upon
the commonwealth as a part of your own household.
We have voted to you the command of the entire Hast,
we have granted you five-fold rations, we have doubled
your military msignia, we have appointed you consul?
for the coming year as colleague to ourselves; for by
reason of your virtues, the palm-embroidered tunic
from the Capitolium ? awaits you."

Some relate that Probus regarded it as an omen of
imperial power that Tacitus should have written, “ The
palm-embroidered tunie from the Capitolium awaits


PROBUS


sed in hane sententiam omnibus semper consuhbus
scribebatur.

VIII. Amor militum erga Probum ingens semper
fuit. neque enim umquam ille passus est peccare
militem. lle quin etiam Aurelianum saepe a gravi

7 quarto fecisset, quarto Probi noinen effusum est. tune
omnis exercitus equum illum Probo duci dicavit, ipsis
etiam militibus, quorum nomina exierant, id volenti-
bus,


1 hic P. 2So Walter; nomina om. in P; nomen swim ins,
after «uss1$ by Peter and Hohl. ? So Peter and Hohl;
e» geret ev om. m P.


! Seo note to Pius, v. 5.


PROBUS VIIL 1-7


you," ibut as a matter of fact this expression was
always used in writmg to every consul.

VIII The soldiers’ love for Probus was always un-
bounded. Never, indeed, did he permit any of them
to commit a wrong. Moreover, he often prevented
Aurelian from some act of great cruelty. He visited
each maniple and mspected its clothing and boots,
and whenever there was plunder he divided it so as to
keep naught for himself but weapons and armour.
Onee, indeed, when a horse was found among the
booty taken from the Alani! or some other nation—
for this is uncertam— which, though not handsome or
especially large, was reputed, according to the talk of
the captives, to be able to run one hundred miles ın a
day and to continue for eight or ten days, all sup-
posed ihat Probus would keep such a beast for
himself. But first he remarked, '*'Thi horse is
better suited to a soldier who flees than to 9ne who
fights" and then he ordered the men to put their
names into an urn, that the one drawn by lot should
receive the horse, Then, since there were in the army
four other soldiers named Probus, it so chanced that
the name of Probus appeared on the lot that first came
forth, though the general's name had not been put into
the um. And when the four soldiers strove with one
another, each maintainng that the lot was his, he
ordered the urn to be shaken a second time. But a
second time, too, the name of Probus came forth; and
when it was done for the third and the fourth time,
on the fourth time also there leaped forth the name
of Probus. Then the entire army set apart that horse
for Probus their general, and even those very soldiers
whose names had come forth from the urn desired it
thus.


PROBUS


IX. Pugnavit et contra Marmaridas in Africa
fortissme eosdemque vicit atque ex Libya Cartha-
ginem transht eandemque a rebelhonibus vindicavit.

aut vectigal frumentarum solus adiuverit. pontes,
templa, porticus, basilicas labore militum struxit, ora
flummum multa patefecit, paludes plerasque siccavit

5atque in his segetes agrosque constituit. pugnavit
etiam contra Palmyrenos Odaenathi et Cleopatrae
partibus Aegyptum defendentes, primo feliciter,
postea t&mere, ut paene caperetur; sed postea re-
fectis viribus Aegyptum et orentis maximam partem
in Aureliani potestatem redegit.

X. Cum his igitur tot ac? tantis virtutibus eniteret,


lterra elato P corr., Salm. ; terra elatum Pt, Peter, Hohl.
2ac om. in P.


1 The inhabitants of Marmanca, the district between Egypt
and Cyienaica; they had been conquered by P. Sulpicius
Quirinus about 20 8.0,

? Unknown,

3 This may have been in connection with Aurelian’s policy
of using ihe revenues from Egypt for ihe benefit of the city of
Rome (e£. Aur., xlv. 1; xIvu. 1-3), but perhaps this statement
is out of the proper order, for a papyrus dated 1 April, 278
(Probus' third year as emperor) contams un other) command
for building dykes and cleaning canals. As this would scarcely


PROBUS IX. 1—X I


IX. He also fought with great bravery against the
Marmaridae! m Africa and defeated them too, and
from Libya he passed over to Carthage and saved it
from rebels. And he fought a single combat in Africa
against a certain Aradio* and overcame him, and be-
cause he had seen that he was a valiant and resolute
man, he honoured him with a mighty tomb, stil
standing on a mound of earth two hundred feet high
piled up by the soldiers. whom he never allowed to
be idle. There are still to be seen in many cities in
Egypt pubhe works of his, which he caused to be
built by the soldiers. On the Nile, moreover, he did .
so much that lus sole efforts added greatly to the
tithes of gram. He constructed bridges and temples,
porticos and basilieas, all by the labour of the soldiers,
he opened up many river-mouths, and drained many
marshes, and put m their place gram-fields and
farms, He fought also against the Pahnyrsnes who
held Egypt for the party of Odaenathus and Cleopatra,*
fighting at first with suecess, but later so recklessly
that he nearly was captured; later, however, when
his forces were strengthened, he brought Egypt ? and
the greater part of the Orient under the sway of
Aurelian,

X. And so, resplendent by reason of these many


have been necessary if Probus had caused it to be done as here
desorbed, 16 would seem that the work was begun in 278 and
was still in operation in 280, when Probus may have been iu
Egypt (c. xvu. 2-8); soe W. Le Westermann in degypius, 1.
. LOT i.

or n6, Zenobia. This campaign uw described in Claud. xi.
1-2, where the Roman general is called Probatus, There is no
reason to suppose that Probus was m Egypt under Claudius,

^ Bebween March and September, 271; see note to Aur.
xxi. 9.


WOT TTT


PROBUS

6 Prima ews epistula, data ad Capitonem praefectum
praetorio, talis fuit^ “Imperium numquam optavi et
invitus accepi. deponere mihi rem imvidiosissimam


inepta Z, amaegyptum P.


1 See Tac., xin. 5 and note.

*As there are Alexandrian coms of Probus minted before
29 Aug., 276 (J, Vogt, die Alex. Munzen, p. 218), he was made
emperor in the summer of 276. He was probably acclaimed
in the East about the same time that Flonan was acclaimed
m the West; see note to Tac., xiv. 29. Zosimus (1. 64, 1) and
Zonaras (xu. 29) relate that he was acknowledged m Syria,
Palesjine, and Egypt, while Asia Minor and Hurope supported


PROBUS X. 2-7


great virtues, when Tacitus had been removed! by
ihe decree of Fate and Florian was seizing the rule,
he was created emperor by all the troops of the East.?
Nor 1s the story of how he got the imperial power an
idle or tiresome tale When the news came to the
armies, the soldiers’ first thought was how to forestall
the armies of Italy, that the senate might not a second
tme appoint a prince. But when discussion arose
among them as to who should be chosen and the
tribunes addressed them by maniples on their parade-
ground, saying that they must look for a prince who
would be brave and revered, modest and gentle anda
man of probity,’ and this was repeated, as is wont to
be done, throughout many groups, all on all sides, as
though by divine command, shouted out, “ Probus
Augustus, may the gods keep you!" Then they ran
together, a tmbunal of turf was erected, and Probus
was saluted as emperor, being even decked with a
purple robe, which they took from a temple-statue ;
trom there he was led to the palace,* agamst his will
and protesting and saying again and again, “ It is not
to your own interest, soldiers, with me you will not
fare well, for I cannot court your favour.”

His first letter, addressed to Capito,’ prefect of the
guard, was as follows: “I have never desired the
mperial power and I have accepted it against my
wil. I may not refuse an office which is most dis-
tasteful to me. I must play the part which the
soldiers have assigned me. I beg of you, Capito, as


Florian. Probus’ proclamation as emperor by the army of the
Hast seems to be commemorated by coms with the legend
Faereius Pers(ieus); see Cohen, vi.* p. 278, no. 207.
“See Pac., xvi. 6 and note. 4 Seo note to Sev., xxii. 7.
5 Otherwise unknown,


^A C


PROBUS

8 Cognito itaque quod imperaret Probus milites Floria-
num, qui quasi hereditarium arripuerat imperium,” m-
teremerunt, scientes neminem dignius posse imperare

2 Oratio Probi prima ad senatum :

4 maiestas vestra fecisset. nune quoniam ille nnperrum
arripuit, nobis a militibus delatum est nomen Augus-
tum, vindicatum quin etiam in illum a prudentioribus
militibus, quod fuerat usurpatum. quaeso ut de meis
meritis iudicetis* facturus quiequid iusserit vestra
clementia,"


lm à; mahies P. — ?arrwpuerai wnperum 2, ins. by
Peter and Hohl; om. in P. 3446 37; ad P. 3 videtis
ins. by Hohl (Helm); om, m P and by Peter.


1 Apparently modelled on Cicero, 1 Cati., vv. 11.
“See Tac., xiv. 2 and note,


PROBUS X. 8—XI. 4


you hope to enjoy with me the state in safety,! to
supply the soldiers everywhere with gram and pro-
visions and all necessities. I assure you that in so
far as it lies m me, I will have no other prefect if you
admumster all things well."

And so, when it was known that Probus was
emperor, the soldiers killed Florian,? who had seized
the imperial power as though an inheritance, for they
knew well that no one could rule more worthily than
Probus, Accordingly, without any effort of his, the
rule of the whole world was conferred upon him by
the voice of both army and senate.

XI. Now, since we have mentioned the senate, it
should be made known what he himself wrote to the
senate and likewise what reply that most noble body
wrote back to him:

The first message of Probus to the senate:

“ Rightly and duly did you act, Conscrip? Fathers,
in the last year that has passed, when your clemency
gave to the world a prince,? and one, indeed, from
among yourselves, you who are the princes of the
world, as you have ever been m the past and shall
continue to be in the days of your descendants. And
I would that Florian also had been content to wait
for this and had not claimed the imperial power as
though an inheritance, or even that your majesty had
made him or some other man your prince. But now,
since he has seized the imperial power, we have been
offered the name of Augustus by the army, while he
has even been punished by the wiser soldiers because
he usurped ıt. I beg you, therefore, to judge con-
cerning my meriis, for I am ready to do whatsoever
your clemency shall command.”


dada, Tacitus; soo Tac., 1.-vi.


PROBUS


5 Item senatus consultum :

Die III nonas Feb. in Aede Concordiae inter cetera
Aelius Secorpianus consul dixit: “ Audistis, patres con-
scripti, htteras Aurehi Valern Probi; de his quid vide-

86tur?" tune adclamatum est: “ Probe August, di te
servent. olm dignus et fortis et iustus, bonus ductor,
bonus imperator, exemplum militiae, exempium im-

7peru. dite servent. adsertor rei publicae felix im-
peres, magister militiae felix amperes, te cum tuis

gdi eustodiant. et senatus antea te dolegit. aetate
Tacito posterior, ceteris prior, quod imperium suscep-
sti gratias agimus tuere nos, tuere rem publicam.

9 bene tib: committimus quos ante servasti tu Franci-
cus, tu Gothicus, tu Sarmaticus, tu Parthicus, tu omnia.
et prius fuisti semper dignus imperio, dignus triumphis.
felix agas, feliciter imperes."


! On such “ senatus consulta " and acclamations, see notes to
Fal., v. 8 and 4.

? This date is also given (incorrectly) as that of the announce-
ment in Rome of Aurehan’s death; see Aur., xh. 3. In this
instance jb is also incorrect, since Flonan was killed in the
summer (probably August) of 276; see note to Tac., xiv. 9.
There 1s no record of any consul named Seorpianus in 276.

3 ee note to Pert., 1v. 9.

* Seo note to o. i. 8.

‘Of all these cognomina only Gothicus was ever Lorne by
Probus; see note to c. xin. 5.


PROBUS XI. 5—XII 2


Likewise the decree of the senate! :

On the third day before the Nones of Febr nary,*
in the Temple of Concord,’ Aelius Scorpianus, the
consul, sad during his speech : * Consetipt Fathers,
you have listened to the letter of Aurehus Valerius +
Probus; now what is your pleasure concerning it?”
Thereupon they shouted out: ‘ Probus Augustus,
may the gods keep you! Long since worthy, brave
and just, a good leader, a good commander, an ex-
ample in warfare,an example in command. May the
gods keep you! Deliverer of the commonwealth,
may you be happy in your rule, master m warfare,
may you be happy in your rule! May the gods guard
you and yours! Even before this the senate chose
you, In yearsinferior to Tacitus, m all else superior.
For having accepted the imperial power we give you
our thanks. Protect us, protect the commonwealth.
Rightly do we entrust to your keeping tisse whom
you formerly saved. You are Francicus, you are
Gothicus, you are Sarmaticus, you are Parthicus,5 you
are all things. In former years, too, you were ever
worthy of command, worthy of triumphs. Happily
may you live, happily rule!"

XII. Thereupon Manhus Statianus,? whose night it
then was to give his opinion first, spoke as follows:
** All thanks to the immortal gods, Conscript Fathers,
and above the others to Jupiter the Best, for they
have given us such an emperor as we always desired.
If we consider the matter rightly we need seek no
Aurelian, no Alexander, no Antonines, no Trajan, no
Claudius. All thew qualities are found in this one
prince, knowledge of warfare, a merciful spit, a


8 Otherwise unknown.


PROBUS


venerabilis, exemplar agendae rei publicae atque om-
3nium praerogativa virtutum. enimvero quae mundi
pars est, quam ille non vmcendo didicerit? testes sunt
Marmaridae, in Africae solo victi, testes Franc, m1
invus strati paludibus, testes Germani et Alamanni,
4longe a Rheni summoti ltonbus. 1am vero quid Sar-
matas loquor, quid Gothos, quid Parthos ac Persas
atque omnem Ponticum tractum ? ubique vigent? Probi
ő virtutis msignia. longum est dicere quot reges mag-
narum gentium fugarit, quot duces manu sua occident,
6 quantum armorum sit, quae ipse cepit privatus. superi-
ores principes quas illi gratias egerint, testes sunt lit-
terae publicis insertae monumentis dı boni, quotiens
ille donis mihtaribus est donatus! quas militum laudes
emeruit | adulescens tribunatus, non longe post adules-
7 centiam regendas legiones accepit. luppiter Optime
Maxime, Iuno Pegina tuque virtutum praesul Mmerva,
tu orbis Concordia et tu Romana Victona, date hoe
senatui populoque Romano, date mihtibus, date socus
atque exters nationbus?. imperet quemadmodum
8muhtavit! — decerno igitur, patres conscripti, votis
ommum conementibus nomen mperatorium, nomen
Caesareanum, nomen Augustum, addo proconsulare
imperium, patris patriae reverentiam, pontificatum
maximum, ius tertiae relationis, tribumciam potes-
tatem." post haec adclamatum est, “ Omnes, omnes."


lon om in P, ugeni E; wigeant P. ^aalionibus X ;
nationes P.


UU NERSNN NERONI Nt
1 See Mare., vi. 6 and notes.


PROBUS XII. 8-8


revered life, à pattern for conducting the common-
wealth, and the assurance of every virtue. For what
part of the world ıs there which he has not learned
to know by conquering it? Witness the Marmaridae,
conquered on African soil, witness the Franks, over-
thrown amid pathless marshes, witness the Germans
and the Alamanni, driven far back from the banks of
the Rhine. But why need I now speak of Sarma-
bans, of Goths, of Parthians and Persians, and all the
expanse of Pontus? In all places the signs of Probus’
valour abound It were too long to relate how many
kings of mughty nations he drove into flight, how
many commanders he slew with his own hand, how
many arms he captured unaided while still a com-
moner. What thanks former emperors gave hun their
letters attest, now placed in the public memorials.
Ye Gods, how many times he has been presented
with military gifts! What praise he has won from
the soldiers! As a youth he received a tribuneship,
not long after his youth the command of legions. O
Jupiter, Best and Greatest, thou, Juno our Queen,
thou, Minerva, patroness of the virtues, thou, Concord
of the world and thou, Victory of Rome, do ye al
grant this to the senate and the people of Rome,
grant this to our soldiers, grant this to our allies and
to foreign nations: may he rule even as he has served !
Therefore, Conscript Fathers, m accordance with the
harmonious wish of us all I vote him the name of
emperor, the name of Caesar, the name of Augustus ;
and I add thereto the proconsular command, the re-
vered title of Father of his Country, the chief pontifi-
cate, the right of three proposals in the senate,! and
the tribunieian power." Thereupon they shouted
out, “So say we al] of us, all of us."


PROBUS


XIII Accepto igitur hoe senatus consulto secunda
oratione permisit patribus ut ex magnorum iudicum ap-
pellatiombus ips. cognoscerent, proconsules crearent,
legatos proconsuhbus! darent, ius praetorium prae-
sidibus darent, leges quas Probus ederet senatus con-
sultis propriis consecrarent.

2 Statim deinde, si quidam ex mnterfectoribus Aureliani
superfuerant, vario genere vindicavit, molhus tamen
moderatiusque quam prius exercitus el postea Tacitus


! proconsulibus Mommsen; consul bus P, ex consulibus
Salm , Peter. ?dauaias etiam Cas; dwuimas tamen P.


1 See note to Tac., xvii. 8.

*This 1$ nob clear, for the provincial governors had always
had judicial functions.

3 See Aur. xxxvi. 2 and Tac., xui. 1. According io Xosi-
mus, 1. 65, he resorted to the ruse of inviting them to a banquet
and had them killed there.

4 See Tac., xiv. 2 and note.


PROBUS XIII 1-7


XIII. On receiving this decree of the senate, then,
Probus in a second message granted the fathers the
right to decide on appeals from the highest judges,!
to appoimt ihe proconsuls, to name the proconsuls'
legates, to confer on the governors the rights of a
praetor? and to sanction by special decree of the
senate all the laws that Probus enacted.

Immediately thereafter he punished m various ways
all the slayers of Aurelian who still survived, but he
used iherem more mildness and leniency than the
army at first and Tacitus later had shown.? Next he
punished those also who had formed a plot against
Tacitus, but the comrades of Florian he spared, be-
cause they seemed to have followed no mere pre-
tender but the brother of their prmce. He then
received the submission of all the armies of Europe,
who had made Florian emperor and then had killed
him.’ i

This done, he set out with a huge army for the
provinces of Gaul,’ which since the death of Postumus
had all been in turmoil, and after the murder of
Aurelian had been seized by the Germans.* There,
moreover, he fought battles so great and successful
that he took back from the barbarians sixty most
famous communes of Gaul, besides all the booty, by
which the Germans, even apart from the actual wealth,
were puffed up with glory. And whereas they were
wandering at large on our bank, or rather through all
the country of Gaul, Probus, after slaying about four


5]1n 277. In the autumn of 276 he probably completed the
war begun by Tacitus and Florian against the Goths in Asia
Minor, since in an inscription of 277 he bears the tite Gothicus ;
see C. 1. lin xi. 1178 b.

8 Soo note to A ur., xxxv. 4.


PROBUS


quadrmgentis milibus, qui Romanum occupaverant
solum, reliquos! ultra Nicrum fluvium et Albam re-
amovit. tantum his praedae barbaricae tulit quantum
ıpsı Romanis abstulerant. contra urbes Romanas
castra in solo barbarico posuit atque illic milites col-


XIV.loeavit. agros et horrea et domos et annonam Trans-


ljeliquos. 2, reliquas D,


! Greatly exaggerated, like the number 1n Claud., vi. 4.

? The Swabian Alb, a plateau south of the Neckar and cast of
the Black Forest; seo Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyel., i. 1299.
According to the much fuller account in Zosimus, 1. 67-68,
Probus conducted this campaign (against the Alaman) m
person, while his generals fought agaist the Franks furiher
north. Zosimus’ nariative 1s embellished with picturesque de-
tails such as a muaculous rain, which saved Probus’ army
from starvation, and the capture of a German ehiofiam of the
Longiones (Lugu) named Semnon, Asecond campaign, against
the Burgundians and Vandals, which Zosimus records, is omitted


PROBUS XIII 8—XIV. 7


hundred thousand! who had seized upon Roman soil,
drove all the rest back beyond the river Neckar and
the district of Alba? getting from them as much bar-
barian booty as they themselves had seized from the
Romans. Opposite the Roman cities, moreover, he
built camps on barbarian soil? and in these he
stationed troops. XIV. He also provided farms and
store-houses, homes and rations of gram for all beyond
the Rhine, for those only, that is, whom he placed
in the garrisons there. All the while the heads of
barbarians were brought in to him daily, now at the
price of an aureus apiece, and he never ceased fight-
ing until nine princes of different tribes came before
him and prostrated themselves at hisfeet. From these
he demanded, first hostages, which they gave him at
once, then grain, and last of all their cows and their
sheep. It 1s said, moreover, that he sharply ordered
them not to use swords, since now they might count
on protection from Rome in case they must be de-
fended against any foe. It appeared, however, that
this could not be aecomplished, unless the Roman
frontier were advanced and the whole of Germany
turned into a provmee. Nevertheless, with the
princes’ consent, he punished severely those who did
not faithfully give back the booty. He took, besides,
sixteen thousand recruits, all of whom he scattered


by the biographer, unless we are to suppose with Dannhauser
(Untersuch. 2. Gesch. d. Kaisers Probus, p. 56 f.) that this battle
took place when Probus was m Raetia; soe c. xvi. 1. In cele-
bration of his suecess ho assumed the title Gormanicus Maxi-
mus and issued coins with the legend Victoris Germ(anaeda) ;
see Cohen, vi, p. 328 fu, nos. 754-776,

?4.6,, o the nght bank of the Rhine, which he hoped to
mako the frontier mstead of the old (unes (on which soe note to
Hadr., xii. G)


PROBUS

XV. Compositis igitur rebus in Gallia tales ad sena-
tum htteras dedit: “Ago dis inmortalibus gratias,
patres consenpti, quia vestra in me iudicia compro-

2barunt. subacta est omnis qua tenditur late Ger-
mania, novem reges gentium diversarum ad meos
pedes, immo ad vestros, supplices stratique iacuerunt.
omnes iam barbari vobis arant, vobis 14m serunt! et
3contra interiores gentes muhtant supplicationes
igitur vestro more decermte. nam et quadrigenta
milia hostium caesa sunt, et sedecim milia armatorum
nobis oblata, et septuaginta urbes nobilissumae a cap-
tivitate hostium vindicatae, et omnes pemtus Galliae
4liberatae: coronas, quas mih: obtulerunt omnes Gal-
hae civitates aureas, vestrae, paires conscripti clemen-
tiae dedicavi eas Jovi Optimo Maximo ceterisque dis
deabusque inmortalibus vestris manibus consecrate.
5 praeda omnis recepta est, capta etiam alia, et quidem
6 maior quam fuerat ante direpta. arantur Galhcana
rura barbans bubus et iuga Germanica captiva prae-
bent nostris colla cultoribus, pascuntur ad nostrorum
alimoniam gentium pecora diversarum, equinum pecus
nostro iam fecundatur equitatui, frumento barbarico
plena sunt horrea, quid plura? illis sola rehnquimus


leerunt Salm., Peter, se» «unt P, X, Hohl.


t According to Zosimus, 1. 68, 8, he settled some of the cap-
tured Germans in Bntain,


PROBUS XV. 1.6


through the various provinces, mcorporating bodies
of fifty or sixty in the detachments or among the
soldiers along the frontier , for he said that the aid
that Romans received from barbarian auxiliaries must
be felt but not seen.

XV. And so, the affairs in Gaul bemg settled,
he sent to the senate the following letter: “I give
thanks, Conscript Fathers, to the immortal gods that
they have confirmed your judgment of me. For all of
Germany, throughout its whole extent, has now been
subdued, and nine princes of different tribes have lam
suppliant and prostrate at my feet, or, I should say, at
yours Now all the barbarians plough for you, plant
for you, and serve against the more distant tribes.
Therefore do you, m accord with your custom, decree
thanksgivings. For four hundred thousand of our foes
have been slain, sixteen thousand armed men are at
our disposal, seventy most famous cities have been
rescued from the enemy's possession, and all the Gallic
provinces have been made entirely free. The crowns of
gold which all the communes of Gaul have bestowed
upon me I have dedicated to your clemency, Conseript
Fathers. Do you, with your own hands, now con-
secrate them to Jupiter Best and Greatest and to the
other immortal gods and goddesses. All booty has
been regained, other booty too has been captured,
greater, indeed, than that which was previously
taken The barbarians’ oxen now plough the farms
of Gaul, the Germans’ yoked cattle, now captive,
submit their necks to our husbandmen, the flocks of
divers tribes are fed for the nourishing of our troops,
their herds of horses are now bred for the use of our
cavalry, and the grain of the barbarians fills our
granaries, Why say more? We have left them solely


PROBUS


7sola, nos eorum omnia possidemus. volueramus,
patres conscripti, Germaniae novum praesidem facere,
sed hoe ad plemora vota distulumus. quod quidem
credimus conferre, cum divina providentia nostros
uberius secundarit exercitus."

4 His gestis orientem petüt atque itinere? potentis-
simo quodam latrone Palfuerio capto et interfecto
omnem Isaumam lberavit, populs atque urbibus


Isola X, solo P. 2 So P, Lessing , «v itinere E, Peter,
Hohl.


1 Probably in 279. Hus benefits to this region were com-
memoiated by coms minted at Siscia (mod, Sisseh) with the
legend Restit(utor) Illy er, see Cohen, vi. p. 304, no, 505.

?In Thrace, on both banks of the lower Danube. Probably
those tribes who inhabited the northern bank, despite Auichan’s
evacuation of the country in their favour (seo 1a, xxxiv. Th
had crossed over to plunder Roman terntory, or perhaps they
had been driven over by the Goths dwelling further north.


PROBUS XV. 7—XVI. 6


their soil, and all their goods we now possess. It had
been our wish, Conseript Fathers, to appoint a new
governor for Germany, but this we have postponed for
the completer fulfilment of our prayers. This indeed
we believe will come to pass when divine providence
shall more richly have prospered our armies ”

XVI. After this he set out for Illyricum, but before
going thither he left Raetia 1n so peaceful a state that
there remamed therein not even any suspicion of fear.
In Illyricum t he so erushed the Sarmatians and other
tribes that almost without any war at all he got back
all they had ravaged. He then directed his march
through Thrace, and received in either surrender or
friendship all the tribes of the Getae,? frightened by
the repute of his deeds and brought to submission by
the power of his ancient fame.

This done, he set out for the East,? and while on his
march he captured and killed a most powerfial brigand,
named Palfuenus, and so set free the whole of Isauria
and restored the laws of Rome to the tribes and the
cities. By fear or favour he entered the places held
by the barbarians living among the Isaurians, and
when he had gone through them all he remarked : ** It is
easier far to keep brigands out of these places than to
expel them." And so all those places which were
difficult of access he gave to his veterans as ther own
private holdings, attaching thereto the condition that
their children, that is, the males only, should be sent


?Ín 280, Zosimus (1. 69-70) tells a romantic story of an
Isauriam brigaud named Lydius (perhaps the samo man as
Palfuerius here mentioned), who, after ravaging Pamphylia and
Lyca, seized the strongly fortified colony Oremna (m Pisidia)
and there resisted the Romans until he was killed by the
treachery of one of his men.


VOL. IL. BB


PROBUS


decimo, mares dumtaxat, ad mihtiam mitterentur, ne
latrocmare umquam discerent.
XVII. Pacatis denique omnibus Pamphyliae partı-
bus ceterarumque provinciarum, quae sunt Isauriae
2vicinae, ad orientem iter flexit. Blemmyas etiam
subegit, quorum captivos Romam transmisit qui mra-
bilem sui visum stupente populo Romano praebuerunt.
3 Copten praeterea et Ptolemaidem urbi ereptas bar-
4barico servitio. Romano reddidit rr. ex quo tantum
profecit ut Parthi legatos ad eum mitterent confitentes
timorem pacemque poscentes, quos ille superbius
Sacceptos magis timentes domum remisit. fertur
etiam epistula lus repudiatis doms, quae rex mi-
serat, ad Narseum talis fuisse: ** Miror te de omnibus
quae nostra futura sunt tam pauca misisse. habeto
interim orania illa quibus gaudes. quae si nos habere
cupiamus, scimus quemadmodum possidere debeamus."
6his acceptis litteris. Narseus maxime territus, et eo
praecipue quod Copten et Ptolemaidem comperit
a Blemmyis, qui eas tenuerant, viudicatas caesosque
ad mternecionem eos qui gentibus fuerant ante terrori,
XVIII. Facta igitur pace cum Persis ad Thracias
redut et centum mila Bastarnarum in solo Romano


1 For a similar policy, see Alex., Ivni. 4.

? From Nubia; see note to Au? a xxxi. 4. Undaunted by the
defeat administered under Aurelian they had broken forth again
and had overrun all Upper Egypt. According to Zosimus, 1.
71, 1, they were now defeated by Probus’ generals; because of this
statement 1t has been questioned whether Probus himself was
in Egypt at all,

$4.¢., the Persians, against whom the present eastern expedi-
iion was directed in resumption of the war which had been eut
short by the murder of Aurehan; see Lur., xxxv. 4-5.


PROBUS XVII. 1—XVIII 1


to the army? at the age of eighteen, in order that they
never might learn to be brigands.

XVII. Having finally established peace in all parts
of Pamphyha and the other provinces adjacent to
Isauria, he turned his course to the East. He also
subdued the Blemmyae,? and the captives taken from
them he sent back to Rome and thereby created a
wondrous 1mpression upon the amazed Roman people.
Besides this, he rescued from servitude to the bar-
barians the cities of Coptos and Ptolemais and restored.
them to Roman laws. By this he achieved such fame
that the Parthians? sent envoys to him, confessing
their fear and suimng for peace, but these he received
with much arrogance and then sent back to their
homes in greater fear than before. The letter, more-
over, which he wrote to Narseus,* rejecting the gifts
which the king had sent, is said to have been as
follows: “I marvel that you have sent us so few of
the riches all of which will shortly be ours For the
time bemg, keep all those things in which you take
such pleasure. If ever we wish to have them, we
know how we ought to get them.” On the receipt of
this letter Narseus was greatly frightened, the more
so because he had learned that Coptos and Ptolemais
had been set free from the Blemmyae, who had previ-
ously held them, and that they, who had once been
the terror of nations, had been put to the sword.

XVIII. Having made peace, then, with the Persians,”
he returned to Thrace, and here he settled one hundred


4 Clearly a fabrication, for Narses was king of the Persians in
298.302; the long at this time was Bahram II.

5 Tt is probable that le was ready to patch up a peace because
of the revolts of the pretenders in the West; see § 5. He
evidently regarded 16 as a temporary measure, forn 282 he set
forth ou another war; see c. xx. 1.


BB 2


PROBUS

6 Ac ne requiras plura vel de Saturnmo vel de
Proculo vel de Bonoso, suo eosdem inseram hbro,


1North of the mouth of the Danube. Lake the Gotao, they
may have been driven southward by the pressure of the Goths,
and now they were admitted to Roman territory.

2 Both Gothic tribes; see Claud., vi. 2 and note. Nothing 1s
known of any of these settlers, but Zosimus (i. 71, 2) tells of a
colony of Franks settled by Probus near the mouth of the
Danube, who, as soon as the Emperor had left the region, built
ships and, after plundermg the coasts of Gieece, Sicily and
northern África, sailed off to their home, near the mouth of the
Rhine. The biographer may have generalised this 1neident,

3 See Firm, Vile-Kle $ See P'irm., x1.-xni.

5 Seo Farm., xiv-xv,


PROBUS XVIII 2-6


thousand Bastarnae! on Roman soil, all of whom re-
mained loyal. But when he had likewise brought over
many from other tribes, that is, Gepedes, Greuthungi ?
and Vandals, they all broke faith, and when Probus
was busied with wars against the pretenders they
roved over well mgh the entire world on foot or m
ships and did no httle damage to the glory of Rome.
He crushed them, however, at divers times and by
various victories, and only a few returned to their
homes, enjoying glory because they had made their
escape from the hands of Probus. Such were Probus’
exploits among the barbarians,

He also had to cope with revolts of pretenders, and
they were serious indeed. For Saturmnus,? who had
seized the rule of the East, he overcame only by
battles of various kinds and by his well-known valour.
But when Saturninus was crushed, such quiet prevailed
in the East that, as the common saying isnot even
a rebel mouse was heard. Then Proculus* and
Bonosus* seized the rule at Agmppina in Gaul, and
proceeded to claim all of Britain t and Spain and the
provinces, also, of Farther Gaul,’ but these men he
defeated with the aid of barbarians,

But in order that you may not ask for more informa-
tion now about either Saturninus, or Proculus, or


‘The revolt in Bntam had no connection with the rising
either of Proculus or of Bonosus, but was the act of the governor
stationed thera. It was quelled by Victormus, who treacherously
killed the revolting governor; see Zonaras, xi. 29.

7 Literally “ trousered,’? a term dermed from  bracae
(** breeches”), the native costume of the northern barbarians ;
seo noto to Alex., xl. 11. The name Galla Bracata was often
used to designate the three provinces of Farther Gaul, viz, Galha
Lugdunonsis, Gallia Belgica, and Aquitania, as contrasted with
Gallus Togata, re., Galha Narbonensis.


PROBUS


tat om. in P. ? sjeperare ins. by Peter, om. m P.


1This measure 1s mentioned also by Aur. Victor, Caes., 37, 2
and Eutropius, ix. 17, 9. It does not imply that there had been
& general prohibition, but meant the rescinding of an order of
Domitian (Suetonius, Dom., vn. 2), which attempted to provide,
both for the increase 1n the production of gram and for the pio-
tection of Italan vine-growers, that no new vineyards should be
planted in Italy and that half of those in the provinces should
be cut down. This order seems never to have been enforeed in
Asia Minor or southern Gaul or Spain, and even in the Danube
provinces vines wee planted belore the time of Probus. An
attempt had been made by Aurehan to promote viticulture m
Italy (see Aur., xlvni. 2), but apparently without much success,
and the attempt was now extended to the northern provinces,
with the result that the prosperity of Gaul, at least, was revivad ;


PROBUS XVIII 7—XIX. 4


Bonosus, I will put them all in a special book, relating
a little concerning them, as seems fitting, or rather,
as need demands. One fact, indeed, must be known,
namely, that all the Germans, when Proculus asked
for their aid, preferred to serve Probus rather than
rule with Bonosus and Proculus. Hence he granted
permission to all the Gauls and the Spamards and
Britons to cultivate vineyards and make wines,! and
he himself planted chosen vines on Mount Alma ? near
Sirmium in Illyricum, after having had the ground dug
up by the hands of the soldiers.

XIX. He also gave the Romans their pleasures,
and noted ones, too, and he bestowed largesses also.
He celebrated a triumph? over the Germans and the
Blemmyae, and caused companies from all nations,
each of them contammg up to fifty men, to be led
before his triumphal procession. He gave in the
Circus a most magnificent wild-beast hunt; at which
all things were to be the spoils of the people. Now
the manner of this spectacle was as follows: great
trees, torn up with the roots hy the soldiers, were set
up on a platform of beams of wide extent, on which
earth was then thrown, and in this way the whole
Circus, planted to look hke a forest, seemed, thanks to
this new verdure, to be putting forth leaves. Then
through all the entrances were brought in one thousand


seo Rostovtzeff, Soc. and Econ. Hist, of the Rom. Eme, pp.
189, 545, 621,

?Probably the Fruska-Gora range, north of Mitrovitz, stil
rich in vineyards,

*In 281, according to the coms of Ius fomth consulship, on
which he is represented in a quadriga and crowned by a Victory
(Cohen, vi.?, p. 800, no. 465) or similarly on a six-horse chariot
with the legend Gloria Orbis (ibid., p. 279, no. 269).


Ub


PROBUS


1e ins. by Salm., who explains posticis, om. 1n P.


1815 had been presented by Pompey and 400 by Juhus
Caesar; seo Pliny, Nat. Hast., vin. 58.


PROBUS XIX. 5—XX. 4


ostriches, one thousand stags and one thousand wild-
boars, then deer, :bexes, wild sheep, and other grass-
eating beasts, as many as could be reared or captured.
The populace was then let m, and each man seized
what he wished. Another day he brought out in the
Amphitheatre at a single performance one hundred
maned lions,! which woke the thunder with their roar-
ing. All of these were slaughtered as they came out of
the doors of their dens, and being killed in this way
they afforded no great spectacle. For there was none
of that rush on the part of the beasts which takes place
when they areletloosefrom cages. Besides, many, un-
willing to charge, were despatched with arrows. Then
he brought out one hundred leopards from Libya, then
one hundred from Syria, then one hundred lhonesses
and at the same tıme three hundred bears; all of
which beasts, it is clear, made a spectacle more vast
than enjoyable. He presented, besides, three hundred
pairs of gladiators, among whom fought many of the
Blemmyae, who had been led in his triumph, besides
many Germans and Sarmatians also and even some
[sauran brigands.

XX. These spectacles finished, he made ready for
var with Persia, but while on the march through
lyrneum he was treacherously killed by his soldiers.
[he causes of his murder were these: first of all, he
iever permitted a soldier to be idle, for he built many
vorks by means of their labour, saymg that a soldier
hould eat no bread that was not earned. To this he
dded another remark, hard for them, should it ever
ome true, but beneficial to the commonwealth,
amely, that soon there would be no need of
oldiers, What had he in his mind when he made


? Temporarily abandoned in 280; see o. xviii. 1.


PROBUS


dicebat? nonne omnes barbaras gentes subegerat!
pedibus totumque ? mundum fecerat iam Romanum ?
5 * Brevi," inquit, “ milites necessarios non habebimus."
quid est aliud dicere: Romanus iam miles erit nullus ?
ubique regnabit, omnia possidebit? secura res publica.
6orbis terrarum non arma fabricabitur, non annonam
praebebit, boves * habebuntur aratro, equus nascetur
ad pacem, nulla erunt bella, nulla captivitas, ubique
pax, ubique Romanae leges, ubique iudices nostri.
XXI. Longius amore imperatoris optimi progredior
quam pedestris sermo desiderat. quare addam illud
quod praecipue tanto viro fatalem properavit necessi-
2tatem. nam eum Sirmium venisset ae solum patrium
effecundani cuperet et dilatari, ad siccandam quandam
paludem multa simul milia mihtum posuit, ingentem
parans fossam, qua deiectis in Savum ? naribus loca
3 Sirmiensibus profutura siccaret. hoc permoti? milites
confugientem eum in turrem ferratam, quam ipse
speculae causa elatissummam exaedificaverat, intere-
4merunt anno imperu sw qumto, postea tamen ingens
ei sepulchrum elatis aggeribus omnes pariter milites


1 subegerat Editor (cf. c. xv. 2; xvii, 2) ; suberat P ; subw-
cerat X, Peter, Hohl. ? pedibus totumque E, Peber!; perdr-
busque totum P ; penitusque totum Kellerbauer, Peter?, Hohl.
3 nossidebit Salm., Peter; possadebunus P, X.  *b ues Salm. ;
uobis P. 3 Sauwm Closs, Peter, saltum P. $50 X,
Petschenig, Hohl; hac permotw P; hac ve moti Salm., Peter,


! The same account of his death is given m Aur. Victor, Caes.,
37, 4 and. Eubropius, 1x. 17, 2 , on the other hand, Zoaumus (1. 71,
4-5) and Zonaras (xit, 29) relate that after the departure of Probus
the armies of Raetia and Noricum foiced their connnandoer,
Carus, to assume the purple. The troops sent by Probus to
quell the uprismg joined the revolt, and when tho remaindor of
Probus’ force learned of this they killed the Emperor, This


PROBUS XX. 5—XXI 4


this remark? Had he not put down all barbarian
nations under his feet and made the whole universe
Roman? “Soon,” he said, ** we shall have no need
of soldiers," What else is this than saying: “ Soon
there will not be a Roman soldier? Everywhere the
commonwealth will reign and will rule all in safety.
The entire world will forge no arms and will furnish
no rations, the ox will be kept for the plough and the
horse be bred for peace, there will be no wars and no
captivity, in all places peace will reign, in all places
the laws of Rome, and in all places our judges."

XXI But in my love for a most excellent emperor
I am proceeding further than a prosaic style requires.
Wherefore, I will add only that which, most of all,
hastened on for this great man his destined doom.
When he had come to Sirmium, desinng to enrich:
and enlarge his native place, he set many thousand
soldiers together to draming a certain marsh, plan-
ning a great canal with outlets flowing into the Save,
and thus draining a region for the use of the people
of Sirmium, At this the soldiers rebelled, and pur-
suing him as he fled to an iron-clad tower, which he
himself had reared to a very great beight to serve as
a look-out, they slew him there in the fifth year of
his reign. Afterwards, however, all the soldiers
together built him a mighty tomb on a lofty mound,


version, simpler and free from the laudatory tendencies of the
account given in the eid, scoms more credible; an attempt to
absolve Carus from the charge of treachery 1s made in Car.,
vi. 1. Probus’ death took place after 29 Aug., 289, since there
aia Alexandrian coins of Ins eighth year, which began on that
day. As he began to rule in the summer of 276, the five-year
reign allotted to him here is evidently too short; the period of
six years and four months given by Zosimus is more nearly
correct.


PROBUS

XXII Conferenti mihi cum aliis imperatoribus prin-
eipem Probum omnibus prope Romanis ducibus, qua
fortes, qua! clementes, qua prudentes, qua mirabiles ex-
stiterunt, intellego hunc virum aut parem fuisse aut, si

4exstiterunt conferat nune, cui placet, viginti Traiam
Hadrianique annos, conferat prope totidem Anto-
ninorum nam quid de Augusto loquar, cuius imperii

annis? vix potest advivi? malos autem principes


logua om, 1n P and by Hohl. ? anm P.


1Tuhus Asclepiodotus (see also Aur., xlv. 2) and Afranius
Hannibalianus were consuls 1n 292 and prefects of the guard in
996; the former aided Constantius to suppress the revolt of
Allectus, and the latter was city-prefect in 297. Heronnianus
1s perhaps Verconnius Herennianus, Diocletian’s prefect,


PROBUS XXII. 1—XXIII. 2


with an mscription carved on marble as follows:
* Here les Probus, the Emperor, a man of probity
mdeed, the conqueror of all barbarian nations, the
conqueror, too, of pretenders.”

XXII. As for myself, when I compare Probus as
a ruler with other emperors, m whatever way almost
all Roman leaders have stood out as courageous, as
merciful, as wise, or as admirable, I perceive that he
was the equal of any, or indeed, if no insane jealousy
stands m the way, better than all. For during his
five years' rule he waged so many wars through the
whole of earth's circle, all of them, too, unaided, that
we can only marvel how he faced all the battles. He
did many deeds with his own hand and trained most
ulustrious generals. For from his training came
Carus, Diocletian, Constantius, Asclepiodotus,! Han-
nibalianus, Leonides, Cecropius, Pisonianus, Heren-
nianus, Gaudiosus, Ursinianus, and all the others
whom our fathers admired and from whom many
good princes arose. Let him now, who will, compare
the twenty years of Trajan or Hadrian, let him com-
pare the years of the Antonines, nearly equal in
number, For why should I mention Augustus, the
years of whose reign all but exceeded the life of
aman? Of the evil princes, moreover, I will keep
sient. That most famous remark of Probus itself
reveals what he hoped to have brought about, for he
said thal soon there would be no need of soldiers.
XXIII. He, truly conscious of his powers, stood in
fear of neither barbarian nor pretender. What great
bliss would then have shone forth, if under his rule
there had ceased to be soldiers! No rations would


mentioned in Aur., xhv. 2. Leonmdes and those who follow are
unknown,


PROBUS


nonam provineiahs daret nullus, stipendia de largitioni-
bus nulla erogarentur, aeternos thesauros haberet
Romana res publica, nihil expenderetur a principe,
nihil a possessore redderetur ; aureum profecto saecu-

3lum promittebat, nulla futura erant castra, nusquam
htuus audiendus, arma non erant fabrieanda. populus
iste militantium, qui nunc bells eivilibus rem publicam
vexat, araret, studus incumberet, erudiretur artibus,
navigaret. adde quod nullus occideretur m bello.

4 di boni, quid tantum vos offendit Romana res publica,

5eui talem principem sustulistis? eant nunc, qui ad
avila bella milites parant, m germanorum necem
arment dexteras fratrum, hortentur m patrum vulnera
liberos et divinitatem Probo derogent, quam impe-
ratores nostri prudenter et consecrandam vultibus et
ornandam templis et! celebrandam ludis circensibus
iudicarunt,


let E; om, in P. ? ogeta P,


1 He was eventually deified ; for he is called Divus Probus
in the Panegyric addressed to Constantius, c. 18, and in the hst
of the emperor’s birthdays (C.I.L., 1.2 p. 255).

? See note to Tyr. Trg., xiv. 8. The Acta Sanctorum and
the chronicler Nicephorus (1. p. 773) list, the former Probus’
son Dometius, the latter his brother Dometius and two nephews,
among the Patriarchs of Constantinople, but the correctness
of such statements 1s very doubtful. The prominence m the
fourth century of a family which supplied four consuls, Petron-
rus Probianus (cos. 822), Petronius Probinus (cos. 841), Sex.
Petronrus Probus (cos. 371), and Anicius Probinus (cos. 395),


PROBUS XXIII, 8— XXIV. 2


now be furnished by any provincial, no pay for the
troops taken out of the publ largesses, the common-
wealth of Rome would keep its treasures forever, no
payments would be made by the prince, no tax re-
quired of the holder of land; it was in very truth
a golden age that he promised. There would be no
camps, nowhere should we have to hear the blast of
the trumpet, nowhere fashion arms. That throng of
fightmg-men, which now harries the commonwealth
with civil wars, would be at the plough, would be
busy with study, or learning the arts, or sailing the
seas. Add to this, too, that none would be slam in
war. O ye gracious gods, what mighty offence in
your eyes has the Roman commonwealth committed,
that ye should have taken from it so noble a price ?
Now away with those who make ready soldiers for
eivil strife, who arm the hands of brothers to slay
their brothers, who call on sons to wound their fathers,
and who deny to Probus the divinity! which our
emperors have wisely deemed should be immortalised
by likenesses, honoured by temples, and celebrated by
spectacles in the circus !

XXIV. The descendants of Probus,? moved either
by hate or by fear of jealousy, fled from the region of
Rome, and established their household gods in Italy
near Verona and the Lakes Benacus and Larius? and
in all that district. 1 cannot indeed leave unmen-
tioned that when a portrait of Probus in the region of
Verona was struck by lightmng in such a fashion that


suggested to Dessau that the present chapter was written in
their honour at the ond of that century (see Vol. i. Intro.,
p. 1x.), but as Dannhauser (op. cab., p. 90) has pointed out, this
seams to be refuted by the statement in § 3.

? Lakes Garda and Como,


PROBUS

6 Haec sunt, quae de Probo cognovimus vel quae


1 Of. Tae., xv. 1-2. ? Of. Car., ni. B,


PROBUS XXIV. 3-8


the colour of its bordered toga was altered, the sooth-
sayers responded that future generations of his family
would rise to such distinction in. the senate that they
all would hold the highest posts? As yet, however,
we have seen none, and moreover it would seem that
the “ future generations " are unlimited in time and
not a defimte number.

The senate mourned greatly at the death of Probus,
and likewise the people also. But when they were
told that Carus was emperor, a good man,? to be sure,
but far removed from the virtues of Probus, remem-
bermg his son Carmus, who had always hved a most
evil life, both the senate and people shuddered. For
while each one feared a sterner prince, they dreaded
still more a wicked successor.

This is all we have learned of Probus, or rather all
we have deemed worthy of mention Now m another
book, and that a short one, we will tell of Firenus and
Saturninus, Bonosus and Proculus. For it has not
seemed suitable to combine a four-span of pretenders
with a righteous prmce Then next, if the length of
our life suffice, we will proceed to hand down to
memory Carus and his sons.


VOL. ITI. Cc


FIRMUS SATURNINUS
PROCULUS ET BONOSUS


FLAVII VOPISCI SYRACUSII

2prus libris sed ahenis mnexuit. et de Suetonio non
miramur, cui familare fut amare brevitatem. quid
Manus Maximus, homo omnium verbosissimus, qui et
mythistoricis se voluminibus implicavit, num ad istam
8 descriptionem curamque descendit? atque contra
Trebellius Pollo ea fmt diligentia, ea cura in edendis
bonis malisque principibus ut etiam trginta tyrannos
uno breviter hbro concluderet, qui Valeriani et Gal.
lieni nec multo superiorum aut inferiorum principum


1 que ins. by Peter; om. 1n P and by Hohl. 2 So Peter ;
Manvnus gaa P, def. by Hohl.


! See notes to Pese Nig., 1x. 9
? See Vol. T., Intro., p xvii. f.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS,
PROCULUS, AND BONOSUS


BY
FLAVIUS VOPISCUS OF SYRACUSE


I, The minor pretenders, I am well aware, have
either been wholly omitted by most of the writers or
else passed over briefly. For Suetonius Tránquillus,
a most accurate and truthful author, has said nothing
of Antonius! or Vindex, content with having touched
on them in passing, and Marius Maximus ? treated of
Avidius in the time of Marcus and of Albmus and
Niger under Severus in no special books of their own
but merely jomed them to the lives of others. Now
in regard to Suetonius we feel no wonder, for he was
naturally a lover of brevity. But what of Marus
Maximus, the wordiest man of all, who involved him-
self in pseudo-historieal works? Did he descend to
such accuracy of detail? But, on the other hand,
Trebellius Pollio, in wrting of the emperors, both
good and bad, showed such industry and care that
he also included, though briefly and in a single book,
the thirty pretenders of the time of Valerian and
Gallienus and the emperors who hved shortly before

cc 2


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,

II. Seis enim, mi Basse, quanta nobis contentio
proxime fuerit cum amatore historiarum Marco
Fonteio, cum ille diceret Firmum, qui Aureliam
temporibus Aegyptum occupaverat, latrunculum
fuisse non principem, contra ego mecumque Rufius
Celsus et Cexonius Iulianus et Fabius Sossianus con-
tenderent, dicentes illum et purpura usum et percussa
moneta Augustum esse vocitatum, cum etiam nummos
eius Severus Archontius protulit, de Graecis autem
Aegyptisque libris convicit illum atroxparopa in


1mobis Edit. Princ.; etwwn P; left as corrupt by Peter,
? n0. tanta ins. by Lenze and Thornell; om. in P, — 34»oinde
P, S, Hohl; perynde Peter.


1 See note to Tyr. Trig. 1. 1. ? Beo dur., xxxii , 2.8.
3 Unknown; see note to Prob,, i. 8.
+All these are otherwise unknown, and, hike the whole con-


AND BONOSUS I. 4—II 3


or after them.! Wherefore we also, even though we
may show no such diligence as his, will yet make it
by no means our smallest care, after telling of Aurelian,
Tacitus and Florian, and Probus, too, that great and
peerless prinee, and having further to tell of Carus,
Carnus and Numerian, to see to it that Saturninus
and Bonosus and Proculus and Firmus, who revolted
under Aurelan,? be not passed over in silence.

II. For you know, my dear Bassus,’ how great an
argument we had but recently with Marcus Fonteius,‘
that lover of history, when he asserted that Firmus,
who had seized Egypt in the time of Aurelan, was
not an emperor but merely a bngand, while I, and
together with me Rufius Celsus and Ceionius Julianus
and Fabius Sossianus, argued against him, mamtaming
that Firmus had both worn the purple and called
himself Augustus on the coms that he struck, and
Archontius Severus even brought out certain coins of
his and proved, moreover, from Greek and Egyptian
books that in his edicts he had called himself
emperor. Fontes, on the other hand, in his con-
tention against us, had only the argument that
Aurelian wrote in one of his edicts, not that he had
slain a pretender, but that he had rid the state of a
brigand—just as though a prmce of such renown could
properly have called so obscure a fellow by the name
of pretender, or as though mighty emperors did not
always use the term of brigand in speaking of those
whom they slew when attempting to seize the purple!
I myself, indeed, in my Life of Aurelian, before I
learned the whole story of Firmus, thought of him,


versation and that reported in Aur, i 1-8, probably fictitious,
No coms of Firmus are known; sce note to Tyr. Trig , xxvi. 3.
5 d2p.,xxxu 9.


| 389


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


quasi quendam latronem; quod ideirco dixi ne quis
4me obhtum aestimaret mei. sed ne volummi, quod
brevissumum promisi, multa conectam, veniamus ad
Firmum.


III. Firmo patria Seleucia fuit, tametsi plerique
Graecorum alteram tradunt, ignari eo tempore ipso
tres fuisse Firmos, quorum unus praefectus Aegypti,
alter dux limitis Africani idemque pro consule, tertius
iste Zenobiae amicus ac socius, qui Alexandriam
Aegyptiorum incitatus furore pervasit, et quem Aure-
lianus solita virtutum suarum felicitate contrivit

8posse papyro et glutine. idem et eum Blemmyis
societatém maximam tenuit et cum Saracenis, naves
4quoque ad Indos negotiatorias saepe musit ipse
quoque dicitur habuisse duos dentes elephanti pedum
denum, e quibus Aurelianus sellam constituerat facere
additis aliis duobus, in qua Iuppiter aureus et gem-
matus sederet cum specie praetextae, ponendus in


Lomstounisse Ursinus, Peter; 2troduasse P, £.


! His revolt is attested by Zosimus, 1. 61, 1, though without
mention of his name. The account given briefly in Awr.,
xxxii, 2-3 is more correct than this " viia," for Firmus seems
to have made no claim to the imperial power (cf. o. v 1), but
merely to have attempted (probably in the summer of 272) to
restore the supremacy of the Palmyrenes in Alexandria.
Aurelian, after destroying Palmyra, marched to Alexandria and
promptly quelled the revolt,


AND BONOSUS IL 4—HI 4


not as one who had worn the purple, but only as a
sort of brigand; and this I have stated here that no
one may think that I am inconsistent. Lest I add too
much, however, to a book which I promised to make
very short, we shall now proceed to Firmus.


III. Now Firmus! was a native of Seleucia,? though
many of the Greeks write otherwise, not knowing that
at that same time there were three men called Firmus,
one of them prefect of Egypt, another commander of
the African frontier and also proconsul? and the third
this frend and ally of Zenobia's, who, mcited by the
madness of the Egyptians, seized Alexandria and was
erushed by Aurelian with the good fortune that was
wont to attend his valour.

Concerning the wealth of this last-named Firmus
much ıs related. For example, it is said that he fitted
his house with square panes of glass set 1n vath pitch
and other such substances and that he owned so many
books that he used often to say ın publie that he could
support an army on the paper and glue. He kept up,
moreover, the closest relations with the Blemmyae? and
Saracens, and he often sent merchant-vessels to the
Indians also. He even owned, it is said, two elephant-
tusks, ten feet in length, to which Aurelian planned
to add two more and make of them a throne on which
he would place a statue of Jupiter, made of gold and
decked with jewels and clad in a sort of bordered


? Which of the many cities of this name 1s meant is not
clear

? Neither of these 1s known ; an attempt has been made by
P, Meyor in Hermes, xxxu1,, p. 268 f£, to identify the latter with
the hero of this méa.

i See note to Aur., xxxiii. 4 and Frob., xvi. 2 f.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


Ladwis Elhs, Walter, Hohl; additis P, X; adductus Peter,
* quam ins by Haupt and Peter; om. in P. ‘et om. in P,
ieum X; eius P.


! See Aur., xxxv 3 and note,
* Of. Alex, 1v. 6 and Claud., x. 4. No such Jupiter is


known
3 The name of two famous strong men, father and son, the


former a gladiator, the latter a soldier of Pompey's, whose


AND BONOSUS III 5—IV. 4


toga, to be set up m the Temple of the Sun! ; and,
after asking adviee of the oracle in the Apennines, 2
he purposed to call hum Jupiter the Consul or the
Consulting. These tusks, however, were later pre-
sented by Carmus to a certain woman, who ıs said
to have made them into a couch; her name, both
because it is known now and because future genera-
tions will have no profit from knowing it, I will leave
unmentioned. So under a most evil prince the gift
of the Indians, consecrated to Jupiter Best and
Greatest, seems to have become both the instrument
and the reward of lust,

IV. But as for Firmus himself, he was of huge
size, his eyes very prominent, his hair curly, his brow
scarred, his face rather swarthy, while the rest of lus
body was white, though rough and covered with hair,
so that many called him a Cyclops. He would eat
great amounts of meat and he even, so it is s&id, con-
sumed an ostrich in a smgle day. He drank little
wine but very much water. He was most resolute
in spirit, and in sinews most strong, so that he sur-
passed even Tritannus,? of whom Varro makes
mention. For he would hold out resolutely when
an anvil was placed on his chest and men struck it,
while he, leaning backward face up, supporting his
weight on his hands, seemed to be suspended rather
than to be lying down. In drinking, moreover, he
would compete with Aurelian’s generals whenever
they wished to test him. For example, when a
certain fellow named Burburus, one of the standard-
bearers and a notable dnnker, challenged him to a
contest in drinking, he drained two buckets full of


muscles and feats of strongth are described by Phny (Nat.
Jdist , vii, 81) on the authority of Varro.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,

3 “Amantissimo sui populo Romano Aurelianus
Augustus salutem dieit, Pacato undique gentium
toto qua late patet orbe terrarun, Firmum etiam
latronftn Aegyptium, barbaricis motibus aestuantem
et feminei propudii reliquias colligentem, ne plurimum
loquar, fugavimus, obsedimus, cruciavimus et occidi-

5 fuerat, integer veniet. sit vobis cum senatu concordia,
cum equestri ordme amicitia, cum praetoriams ad-
fectio. ego efficiam ne sit aliqua sollieitudo Romana.

6 vacate ludis, vacate circensibus. nos publicae neces-
sitates teneant, vos oceupent voluptates, quare
sanctissimi Quirites," et reliqua.

VI. Haee nos de Firmo cognovisse scire debuisti,


iom. in P.


AND BONOSUS V. 1—VI. i


wine and yet remained sober throughout the whole
bauquet; and when Burburus asked, * Why did you
not drink up the dregs?" he rephed, * You fool, one
does not drink earth" But we are narrating mere
trifles when we should be telling what is of greater
importance.

V. He, then, seized the 1mperial power in opposi-
tion to Aurelian with the purpose of defending the
remainder of Zenobia’s party. Aurelian, however,
returmng from Thrace defeated him. Many relate
that he put an end to his life by strangling, but
Aurelian himself in his proclamations says otherwise ;
for when he had conquered him he gave orders to
issue the following proclamation in Rome:

“From Aurelian Augustus to his most devoted
Roman people, greeting. We have established peace
every where throughout the whole world in its widest
extent, and also Firmus, that brigand in Egypt, who
rose in revolt with barbarians and gathered together
the remaining adherents of a shameless woman—not
to speak at too great length—we have routed and
seized and tortured and slain. There ıs nothing now,
fellow-citizens, sons of Romulus, which you need fear.
The grain-supply from Egypt, which has been inter-
rupted by that evil brigand, will now arrive undimin-
ished. Do you only maintain harmony with the
senate, friendship with the equestrian order, and
good will toward the praetorian guard. I will see to
it that there is no anxiety in Rome. Do you devote
your leisure to games and to races in the circus. Let
me be concerned with the needs of the state, and do
you busy yourselves with your pleasures. Wherefore,
most revered fellow-eitizeus," and so forth.

VI. This 1s what you should know that we have


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


2sed digna memoratu. mam ea quae de ilo Aurelius
Festivus, hbertus Aurehani, singillatim rettulit si vis
cognoscere, eundem oportet legas, maxime cum dicat
Frmum eundem inter crocodillos, unctum crocodil-
lorum adipibus, natasse et elephantum rexisse et
hippopotamo sedisse et sedentem ingentibus struthi-

ő purpura. quare finem de Firmo faciemus venientes ad
Saturninum, qui contra Probum imperium sibimet in
orentis partibus vindicavit,


VII. Satuminus oriundo fut Gallus, ex gente
hominüm inquietissima et avida semper vel faciendi
2prineipis vel imperu. huie mter ceteros duces, quod
vere summus vir esse? certe videretur, Aurelianus


latas Cod. Chigianus, Hohl, wie P; uiam Salm , Peter.
?15 ms. by Klem and Hohl; om.in P and by Peter,  ^wuerisset
P; %7 esset Peter, Hohl.


1 Nothing is known of him or of any wok by him.

2 P. Clodius Pulcher, the tribune of 58 B.c., who was mstru-
mental in bungmg about the banishment of Ciccio. He was
killed in 52 B.c. in a brawl with his enemy, T. Annius Milo,
who was then defended by Ciceio, 1n the speech pro Malone.

*Tulius Saturninus Augustus, according to a coin issued by
him in Egypt, see Rev. Nummus, xiv. (1896), p. 1531, The
account of Zosimus (1. 66 1), which 1s probably more correct
than this vita, represents hum as a Moor by birth: (of. c, x. 4), and
ielates that he was a ínend of Probus’ and was appoiuted by


AND BONOSUS VI. 2—VII. 2


found out concernmg Firmus, all, however, that is
worthy of mention, For as to what Aurelius Festivus,!
Aurelian’s freedman, has reported about him in detail, if
you wish to learn it, you should read him yourself, most
of all the passage which tells how this same Firmus
went swunming among the crocodiles when rubbed
with crocodiles’ fat, how he drove an elephant and
mounted a hippopotamus and rode about sitting upon
huge ostriches, so that he seemed to be flying. But
what avails it to know all this, especially as both Livy
and Sallust are silent ın regard to trivial matters con-
cerning those men on whose biographies they have
laid hold? For mstance, we do not know of what
breed were the mules of Clodius? or the she-mules of
Titus Annius Milo, or whether the horse that Catiline
rode was a Tusean or a Sardinian, or what kind of
purple Pompey used for his cloak. Therefore we
will make an end of Firmus and pass on to^ Satur-
ninus, who seized the imperial power in the regions of
the East in opposition to Probus


VII. Saturninus? was a Gaul by birth, one of a
naton that is ever most restless and always desirous
of creating either an emperor or an empire.* To this
man, above all the other generals, because it seemed
certain that he was truly the greatest, Aurelian had


hum governor of Syria. He seems to have been declared em-
peror at Antioch (cf. o. ux. 2-3), and, while he was recognised in
Jigypt, as the coin bearing his name shows, there 1s no reason to
connoct that country with his revolt; his attempt to rule is cor-
rectly enough described in Prob., xvii. 4 as orentis vmpervum.
arripuerat. The order of events in Zosimus places the revolt
early m Probus’ reign, Tf 16 was crushed by Probus m person,
this must have been 1n 280, when Probus was 1n the Hast.
5 Of, Tyr, Trig., ui. T.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


limitis orientalis ducatum dedit, sapienter praecipiens
3ne umquam Aegyptum videret. cogitabat enim,
quantum videmus, vir prudentissimus Gallorum na-
turam et verebatur ne, si perturbidam civitatem
vidisset, quo eum natura ducebat, eo societate quoque
4hominum duceretur. sunt enim Aegyphi, ut satis
nosti, viri! ventosi, furibundi, iactantes, iniuriosi, atque
adeo vani, liberi, novarum rerum usque ad cantilenas
publicas cupientes, versificatores,  epigrammatari,
5 mathematici, haruspices, medici. nam in eis? Chris-
tiani Samantae, et quibus praesentia semper tempora
6cum enormi hbertate displiceant. ac ne quis mihi
Aegyptiorum irascatur et meum esse credat quod m
litteras rettuh, Hadriani epistulam ponam ex libris
Phlegonts liberti eius proditam, ex qua penitus
Aegyphorum vita detegitur '

VIII. “ Hadrianus Augustus Serviano consuli salu-
tem. "Aegyptum, quam mihi laudabas, Serviane- caris-
sime, totam didici levem, pendulam et ad omnia famae


Tu X, editors ; went, P; vnuenis Walter, Hohl. 217 ess
cea Hohl; eas P; suni Peter. 3 allze Cas; alla D;
alle 3.


1 See note to Tyr. Trig., xxu. 10.
2 A similar characterisation is given iu Tyr, Trga xxii. 1-2.
? Seo Hadr., xvi, 1, Sev., xx, 1.


AND BONOSUS VII. 3—VIII 4


given the command of the Eastern frontier, wisely
charging him never to visit Egypt. For, as we see,
this far-sighted man was well acquamted with the
Galle character and feared that if Saturninus visited
this turbulent land he might be drawn by association
with the inhabitants to a course toward which he was
by nature inclined For the Egyptians, as you know
well enough, are puffed up, madmen,” boastful, doers
of mjury, and, in fact, liars and without restraint,
always craving something new, even in their popular
songs, writers of verse, makers of epigrams, astro-
logers, soothsayers, quacksalvers. Among them, in-
deed, are Christians and Samaritans and those who
are always ill-pleased with the present, though en-
joying unbounded liberty. But, lest any Egyptian
be angry with me, thinking that what I have set
forth m writing is solely my own, I will cite one of
Hadrian's letters, taken from the works of his freed-
man Phlegon,? which fully reveals the character of
the Egyptians.

VIL. From Hadrian Augustus to Servianus * the
consul, greeting. The land of Egypt, the praises of
which you have been recountmg to me, my dear
Servianus, I have found to be wholly light-minded,
unstable, and blown about by every breath of rumour.
There those who worship Serapis are, m fact, Chris-
tians, and those who call themselves bishops of Christ
are, in fact, devotees of Serapis. There is no chief
of the Jewish synagogue, no Samaritan, no Christian
presbyter, who is not an astrologer, à soothsayer, or
an anointer. Even the Patriarch himself, when he
comes to Egypt, is forced by some to worship Serapis,


* Hadrian's brother-in-law (see Hadr., i. 2) whom Hadrian
compelled to commit suede in 136; see Hadr., xv. 8 5 xxu. 8.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


1 aui ms. by Hohl; om. in P; «al lnafiones, omnes cerie


Salm., Peter. ?esse Editor, et P, et uidentur ei habentur.
Peter. 3 wraecyst Hohl; ees» P, ces . . . habent del. by
Salm. and Peter. 4 nummus Vossius, Peter; nullus P,


1The three most famous products of Egypt; sea Aur., xlv. 1

*4,0., L. Aelius Caesar, whom Hadrian adopted im 186; see
Hads.,xxiu 11. As Hadnan wasin Alexandra m 190 (see note
to Hadr., xiv. 4), and as his sister Paulina, the wile of Servianus
(8 10), died about 130, this letter 1s clearly not genuime,


AND BONOSUS VUI. 5—IX. 1


by others to worship Christ. They are a fclk most
seditious, most deceitful, most given to injury ; but
their city is prosperous, rich, and fruitful, and in it no
onc ıs idle. Some are blowers of glass, others makers
of paper, all are at least weavers of men ! or seem to
belong to one craft or another; the lame have their
occupations, the eunuchs have theirs, the blind have
theirs, and not even those whose hands are crippled
are idle. Their only god is money, and this the
Christians, the Jews, and, in fact, all nations adore.
And would that this ety had a better character, for
indeed it is worthy by reason of its richness and by
reason of its size to hold the chief place in the whole
of Egypt. I granted it every favour, I restored to it
all its ancient rights and bestowed on it new ones
besides, so that the people gave thanks to me while
I was present among them. Then, no sooner had I
departed thence than they said many things eyainst
my son Verus, and what they said about Antinous ?
I believe you have learned, I can only wish for
them that they may live on their own chickens, which
they breed ın a fashion I am ashamed to describe.*
I am sending you over some cups, changing colour *
and variegated, presented to me by the priest of a
temple and now dedicated particularly to you and
my sister. I should like you to use them at banquets
on feast-days. Take good care, however, that our
dear Africanus * does not use them too freely."

IX. So then, holding such an opinion about the


3 Seo Madr., xiv. 5-6 and notes.
^ According to Anstotle, Hist. Anim., vi, 2, they hatched the
eges by burying them in dung-heaps.
5 4.0., dAAGTOOVTES.
6 Unknown and probably fictitious.


VOL. II. DD


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


METTI e m E RT i e iir A


1 See note to Tyr. Trig., xxv. 8.
? An allusion to the well-known story of Dionysius of Syra-
ee and his courtier Damocles ; see Cicero, Tuse. Disp., v. 61-


AND BONOSUS IX. 2—X, 3


Egyptians Aurelian forbade Saturninus to visit Egypt,
showing a wisdom that was truly divine. For as soon
as the Egyptians saw that one of high rank had ar-
rived among them, they straightway shouted aloud,
“ Saturninus Augustus, may the gods keep you!”
But he, like a prudent man, as one cannot deny, fled
at once from the city of Alexandria and returned to
Palestine. There, however, when he had begun to
reflect that ıt would not be safe for him to remain
a commoner, he took down a purple robe from a statue
of Venus and, with the soldiers standing about, he
arrayed himself in a woman’s mantle and then re-
ceived their adoration. I have often heard my
grandfather! tell that he was present when Satur-
ninus thus received adoration; “ He began to weep,”
he would tell us, “and to say, ‘The commonwealth
has lost an indispensable man, if I may say so with-
out undue pride. I have certainly restored the pro-
vinces of Gaul, I have recovered Africa, seized by the
Moors, I have brought peace to the provinces of Spam.
But what does it all avail? For all these services
go for nothing when once I have claimed imperial
honours.’ "

X. Then, when those who had clothed him with
the purple began to hearten him, some to defend his
life and others his power, he delivered the following
speech: * My friends, you do not know what an evil
thing it is to rule. A sword suspended by a hair
hangs over your head,? on all sides there are spears,
on all sides arrows. You fear your very guards, you
dread your very attendants. Your food brings you
no pleasure, your journeys no honour, your wars do
not meet with approval, your arms eall forth no en-
thusiasm. Remember, moreover, that they find fault


pp 2


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


ladulescens ins. by Peter; om. iu P and Z. 2So Ellis;
additur his et furore P; est furiosus Peter. * cum ins. by
Salm. å magistrales X Peter; ministrales P. $ poenam
Editor; poene P; paene editors.


1 Unknown.

3 See Tyr. Trig., xxiii. and note,

3 The statement of Probus’ reluctance is probably due to the
general tendency of the &uthor to praise him in all respects.


AND BONOSUS X. 1—XI. 4


with a man of any age as ruler. Is he an old man?
He is deemed incapable Is he young? They go on
to say that he is mad as well. Why should I now tell
you that Probus is beloved by all? In wishing me
to be a rival of his, to whom I would gladly yield
place and whose general I desire to be, you do but
force me to an unavoidable death. One solace I have
for my death: I shall not be able to die alone."
This speech, according to Marcus Salvidienus,! was
really his own, and, in fact, he was not unlettered,
for he had even studied under a rhetorician in Africa
and attended the schools of the teachers at Rome.

XI. Now, not to proceed at too great length, 1
must say one thing which particularly concerns this
man, namely, that many wrongly believe that he was
the Saturninus? who seized the imperial power in
the time of Gallienus, whereas, in fact, he was alto-
gether a different man, for he was put to death under
Probus who did not desire his punishment. It is
said, moreover, that Probus often sent him a letter
offering him mercy and promised him pardon, but the
soldiers who were with him refused to believe it. So
at last he was seized in a certain stronghold and
stabbed by those whom Probus had sent, though it
was not at Probus’ desire.?

It would be too long to include every trivial thing
and tiresome to tell of his stature, his person, and his
comeliness, or how much he could eat and drink.
Let others describe these things, which have almost
no value as an example, and let us return to what we
should tell.


According to the vewion given by Zosimus, Saturninus was
killed by his own soldiers,


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,

2abduxerant satis dives. fertur denique eo tempore
quo sumpsit imperium duo milia servorum suorum ar-

7 “Proculus Maeciano adfini salutem dict. centum
ex Sarmatia virgines cepi ex his una nocte decem
inivi; omnes tamen, quod in me erat, mulieres intra
dies quindecim reddidi."

8  Gloriatur, ut vides, rem ineptam et satis libidino-


! His revolt is mentioued also in Prob., xvii. 5; Eutropius,
ix. 17,1; Hpi , 87, 2, but no details are given. In all these
passages 16 1s said to have taken place at Agrippina (Cologne),
whereas in c. xui. 1 we are told that 16 was at Lugdunum
(Lyons) If the statement in c. xni, 4 and Prob., xvin. 7 that
he attempted to combine forces with the Franks be correct, tt
may be that he began the revolt in Gaul but was forced to
retieat to northern Germany, where he was finally defeated.
The date was probably 280; see note to Prob., xvii, 1.


AND BONOSUS XII. 1-8


XII. Proculus t was a native of Albmgauni,? situated
in the Maritune Alps. He was a nobleman in bis
native place, but his ancestors had been brigands,
and thus he was very rich in cattle and slaves and
all that they had carried away. n fact, it is said
that at the time when he seized the imperial power
he armed two thousand slaves of his own. His wife,
who drove him to this act of madness, was a masculine
woman ealed Samso—though this name was given
her in her later years, for originally she was called
Vituriga. His son was Herennianus, whom also he
would have dedicated to the imperial office—for that
was his way of speaking—had he but completed his
fifth year. The man himself, it cannot be denied,
was ... and at the same time most valiant; though
accustomed also to brigandage, he yet lived his whole
life in arms, for he commanded many legions as tri-
bune and did courageous deeds. And now, since all
the most trivial things are interesting and brmg some
pleasure when they are read, I must not fail to men-
tion an incident of which he himself boasts in one of
his letters, deeming it better to quote the letter itself
rather than to speak about it at length.

“ From Proculus to his kinsman Maecianus,? greet-
ing. I have taken one hundred maidens from Sar-
matia. Of these I mated with ten in a single night ;
all of them, however, I made into women, as far as
was in my power, in the space of fifteen days."

He boasts, as you see, of a foolish and a very licen-
tious deed, thinking that he would be held a brave


? Mod. Albenga, on the Riviera, di Ponente, about 50 m. S. W.
of Genoa.
3 Uuknown.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


sam atque inter fortes se haberi credit, sı crmmum
densitate concallescat.!


1 concallescai Damsté, Hohl; coalescat P, Peter. 2 cum 8e
P, ? gereret Baehrens, Peter? ; regeret P.


l Perhaps durmg his stay in Gaul in 274-275, see Aur.,
xxxv. 4,

? Cited 1n c. xiv. 4 as the author of a hfe of Probus, and also
in Car., 1v. 2; vi. 8; xvi. 1, xvn. 6. He is perhaps to be
identified with an “ Onasimos" hsted by Suidas (s v.) as an
lorropinds Kat codíoT)s and writer of encomia, who ted under
Constantine.

TA game resembling chess, but apparently with thirty pieces


AND BONOSUS XIII, 1-5


man if he grew callous through repeated acts of
crime.

XIII. And yet this man, who, even after his mili-
tary honours condueted himself with depravity and
lustfulness but, nevertheless, with courage, at the
bidding of the people of Lugdunum, who seemed to
have been harshly put down by Aurehan? and were
in the greatest fear of Probus, was called to take the
imperial power. This came about through what
was almost a game and a jest, as Onesimus? tells,
though I know that I have not found it m any other
writer. For when once at a banquet they were play-
ing a game of “ Brigands "? and Proculus had ten
times come out as “ King,” a certain well-known wit
cried out, “ Hail, Augustus," and bringing in a gar-
ment of purple wool he clasped it about Proculus’
shoulders and then bowed in adoration. Then fear
fell upon all who had had a part in the deed, ànd so an
attempt was then made to gain both the army and
the imperial power. He was, nevertheless, of some
benefit to the Gauls, for he crushed the Alamanni—
who then were still called Germans—and not without
illustrious glory, though he never fought save in
Lrigand-fashion. He was forced by Probus, however,
to flee to distant lands, and when he attempted to
bring aid to the Franks, from whom he said he de-
rived his origin, Probus conquered and slew him ; for
the Franks themselves betrayed him, whose custom
it is to break faith with a laugh. Hus descendants *
still live at Albingauni, and they are wont to say in


on each side. It is frequently alluded to by ancient authors,
and an elaborate account of 16 1s given in the anonymous poem
Laus Pisonis, ]1. 192-208.

3 See note to Z'yr. Trg., xiv. 8.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


solent dicere sibi non placere esse vel principes vel
latrones.

6 Haec digna memoratu de Proculo didicisse me
memini vemamusad Bonosum, de quo multo minora
condidi.


1 malstas P.


! His revolt ıs mentioned briefly in Prob., xvii. 5; Aur.
Victor, Caes., 37, 8; Epit, 87, 2, Eutropius, ix. 17, 1, and
attested by coms struck by him with the legend Paw August: ;
see Cohen, vi?. p. 349, All authors agree that 14 took place at
Agnppina (Cologne). The date was probably 280; see note to
Prob., xvui. 1. It would appear from § 2 and c, xv. 1 that he
had been left in charge of the Rhine-frontier by Probus when
after his victories over the Germans he set out for Illyricum
and the East in 279; see Prob., xin. 7-8 and xvi. 1 and notes,


AND BONOSUS XIII. 6—XIV. 5


jest that they do not desire to be either princes or
brigands.

This 1s all that I remember having learned about
Proculus that is worthy of mention. Let us now pass
on to Bonosus, concerning whom I have written much
less.


XIV. Bonosus! was a Spaniard by birth, but in
descent a Briton, though he had a Gallic ‘mother.
His father, so he himself used to say, was a rhetori-
cian, but I have learned from others that he
was only a teacher of letters. He lost his father
when a child, and being reared by his mother, a very
brave woman, he learned nothing of literature., He
served in the beginning as a legionary centurion,?
and next in the cavalry; he commanded im the ranks,’
he held tribuneships, he was general ın charge of the
Raetian frontier, and he drank as no man hàd ever
drunk. In fact, Aurelian used often to say of him,
“He was born, not to live, but to drink," and yet,
because of his prowess in war, he long held him in
honour. Indeed, whenever the envoys of barbanan
nations came from any place, they were pled
with wine m order that he might make them
drunken, and when they were in wine learn from
them all their secrets. But however much he drank
himself, he always remained calm and sober, and, as
Onesimus,* the author of a Life of Probus, says, when
in wine he was all the wiser. He possessed, further-
more, a marvellous quahty, namely, that he could
always discharge all he had drunk, so that neither his


“See note to Cl, Alb., xi, 6
? Soo note to 4c. Cass., 1. 1. 5 See note to c. xin. 1.


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


mingeret, neque umquam eius aut pectus aul venter
aut vesica gravaretur.

XV. Hie idem, eum quodam tempore in Rheno
Romanas lusorias Germani imnceendissent, timore ne
poenas daret sumpsit imperium, idque diutius tenuit

š cuncta cognosceret. erat enim illa virgo regalis. ex-
stant leterae ad legatum Thraciarum seriptae de his
nuptiis et donis, quae Aurelianus Bonoso darı nuptia-
rum causa iussit, quas ego 1nserui:

7 parum sumunt et res publica plurimum perdit, nune
tamen, quoniam placuit Bonoso Hunilam dari, dabis ei
iuxta brevem infra scriptum omnia quae praecipimus ;
sumptu etiam publico nuptias celebrabis."'


! See note to Tyr. Trig , xxv. 8.
* Or Heraclea, now Esk: Erogh, on the north shore of the
Sea of Marmora.


AND BONOSUS XV. 1-7


stomach nor his abdomen nor his bladder ever felt any
discomfort.

XV. He, then, at the time when the Roman galleys
on the Rhine were burned by the Germans, fearmg
that he might have to suffer punishment, seized the
imperial power. This he held longer than he deserved,
for he was finally defeated by Probus only after
a lengthy and difficult struggle, and he then put an
end to his life by the noose, which gave rise to the
jest that 1t was not a man Lhat was being hanged but
a wme-jug.

He left two sons, both of whom were spared by
Probus, and his wife, too, was treated with honour
and given an allowance as long as she lived. She was
in fact, as my grandfather also used to declare,!
a woman of unequalled excellence and also of noble
family, though by race a Goth ; for Aurelian had given
her to him as wife in order that through lus lfelp he
might learn all the plans of the Goths, for she was
a maiden of royal blood. There is still in existence
a letter addressed to the governor of Thrace concern-
ing this marriage and the gifts which Aurelian wished
Bonosus to receive on the occasion of his wedding,
and this letter I have mserted :

“From Aurehan Augustus to Gallonius Avitus,
greeting. Ina previous letter I wrote you to establish
the Gothic noblewomen at Perinthus,? and I assigned
them rations, which they were not to receive singly,
but seven of them together sharing one meal, For
when they receive them singly, they get too little and
the state loses too much, Now, however, since it is our
wish that Bonosus take Hunila to wife, you will give her
all we have ordered in the subjoined list, and you will
celebrate the marriage at the expense of the state.”


FIRMUS, SATURNINUS, PROCULUS,


8 Brevis munerum fuit: * Tunieas palliolatas wnthinas
subserieas, tunicam auro clavatam subsericam librilem
unam, interulas dilores duas, et reliqua quae matronae
conveniuni. ipsi dabis aureos Philippeos centum, ar-
gentos Ántonmianos mille, aeris sestertium decies."


! See Claud., xiv. 8 and Aur., ix. 7 and notes.


AND BONOSUS XV. 8-10


The list of gifts was as follows: “ Violet tunics of
part-silk provided with hoods, one tunic of part-silk
with a golden stripe, to weigh a pound, two double-
striped under-tunies, and all the other things that are
befitting a matron. To Bonosus himself you will give
one hundred Philips of gold, one thousand silver
Antonines, and ten thousand bronze sesterces." !

This is what I remember having read about Bonosus.
I might, indeed, have omitted the lives of these men,
concerning whom no one has ever inquired, but, in
order that there may be no lack of accuracy, I have
taken care to make known what I have learned about
these also There still remain for me Carus, Carinus
and Numerian; for Diocletian and those whe came
after him must be described in a grander style.


CARUS ET CARINUS
ET NUMERIANUS


FLAVII VOPISCI SYRACUSII


! senatus ac populo after gubernacula m P.


! On the tendency of the author of this group of biographers
to eulogise Probus sce note to Prob., 1. 8.


CARUS, CARINUS
AND NUMERIAN


BY
FLAVIUS VOPISCUS OF SYRACUSE


I. That itis Fate wluch governs the commonwealth,
now exalting 1t to the heights and again thrusting it
down to the depths, was made very clear by thé death
of Probus, For the state, in its course through the
ages, was by turns raised up and dashed down by
divers commotions, and, in the changes wrought now
by some tempest and again by a time of prosperity, it
suffered well nigh all the ills that human life may
suffer in the case of a single man; but at last, aftera
diversity of evils, it seemed about to abide in assured
and unbroken felicity, when, after the reign of
Aurelian, a vigorous prince, both the laws and the
helm of the state were directed by Probus in accord-
ance with the wish of the senate and people.!
Nevertheless, a mighty disaster, coming like a ship-
wreck or a conflagration, when the soldiers had been
fired with a fated madness and this great prince had
been removed from our midst, reduced the hopes of
the state to such despair that all feared a Domitian,


VOR. Hl,


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


4Nerones. plus enim timetur de incertis moribus prin-
cipis quam speratur, maxime in ea re publica quae
recentibus confossa vulneribus Valeriani captivitatem,
Galieni luxunam, tnginta etiam prope tyrannorum
caesa civium ! membra sibimet vindicantium imperia ?
perpessa maeruerit.


! crurum Editor; evum P, editors, ? imperi ins. by
Walter; om. m P; coluwonem ins. after tyrannorum by
Richter, foll. by Peter. 3 Here follows in P & inisplaced
portion, consisting of c. xiii., 1 Augusinm to c. xv. 5 fuisse,
see Intro. to Vol. L, p. xxxni. f. 48o Editor; tumebat bona
P; habuerat bons Peter; tvmobant bone Hohl (from 2).


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN I. 4—III 1


or a Vitelhus, or a Nero. For they felt more fear
than hope from the ways of a prince yet unknown,
especially smce the common wealth, stricken by recent
wounds, was stil in a state of sorrow from having
endured the capture of Valerian, the excesses of
Gallienus, and also the power of well nigh thirty
pretenders, who could lay claim to naught but the
mangled limbs of their fellow-citizens.

II. Now if we should wish, beginnmg with the
origin of the city, to review all the changes that the
Roman commonwealth endured, we shall find that no
state abounded more in blessings or suffered more
from evils. For, to begm with Romulus, the true
father and founder of the commonwealth, what
feliaty was his, who founded, established and
strengthened this state, and alone among founders
left a completed city! Why should Ispeak of Numa,
the next in order, who by means of religious Sbserv-
ances safeguarded a state which resounded with wars
and was swollen with triumphs? From then on,
therefore, our commonwealth prospered until the
time of Tarquimus Superbus, when it endured a
tempest arising from the evil ways of the monarch
and avenged itself only at the cost of grave disaster.
Then it increased in strength until the time of the
Gallic war, when it was overwhelmed, as it were, by
shipwreck, the city, save only the citadel, being cap-
tured, and it suffered evils greater, indeed, than the
prosperity with which it was swollen. Again it re-
turned to its former strength, but was brought so low
by the Punic Wars and the terror caused by Pyrrhus
that in the fear of its heart it came to know all the
ils of human life. IIL Next, having conquered
Carthage and extended its empire over the seas, it


EE 2


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


IV. Cart patria sic ambigue a plerisque proditur, ut
prae summa varietate ? dicere nequeam quae illa vera


150 Lenze and Tidner; prope et semper P, Hohl, semper et
prope Peter. *So Obrecht foll. by Peter; praesumplae
graurtate P.


! 1,e,, the Julio Claudian emperors,
? See Tac., xni., 5 and note.
3M, Aurehus Carus Augustus (282-283).


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN III. 2—IV. 1


waxed great, but afflicted by strife with allies it lost
all sense of happiness, and crushed by eivil wars it
wasted away in weakness until the time of Augustus.
He then restored it once more, if indeed we may say
that it was restored when it gave up its freedom.
Nevertheless, in some way or other, though mourning
at home, it enjoyed great fame among nations abroad.
Next, after enduring so many of the house of Nero,!
it reared its head again under Vespasian, and though
having no joy from all the good fortune of Titus and
bleeding from Domuitian’s brutahty, it was happier
than had been its wont under Nerva and Trajan and
his successors as far as Marcus, but was sorely stricken
by the madness and cruelty of Commodus. There-
after, save for the diligent care of Severus, it knew
naught that was good until Alexander, the son of
Mamaea, Al that ensued thereafter is too long to
relate; for it was not permitted to enjoy the tule of
Valerian and it endured Gallienus for fifteen years.
Then Claudius was begrudged a long-lasting rule by
Fortune, which loves a change and is almost always
a foe to justice. For in such wise was Aurelian slain
and Tacitus carried off by disease? and Probus put
to death, that 11 became clear that Fortune takes
pleasure in nothing so much as in changing, by means
of a varied succession of events, all that pertains to
the publie business. To what end, however, do we
dwell on such lamentations and the misfortunes of
the times? Let us, rather, pass on to Carus,? a
mediocre man, so to speak, but one to be ranked with
the good rather than the evil princes, yet a better
ruler by far, had he not left Carinus to be his heir.


IV. In regard to Carus’ birthplace there is such
divergence of statement among the various writers


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN

4bus adserit natum. in ephemeride quadam legisse
ie 1 memini Carum Mediolanensem fuisse, sed albo

6 Epistula Cari:

7publictm delegabant. ego vero, si ita non esset,

aliter non fecissem ; nec feci aliter, si? te iuvante non

8 Vides tota epistula maiores suos Romanos illum

V., velle intellegi. indicat et oratio eius ad senatum

data istam generis praerogativam. nam cum primum


ime ins. by Lessing and Hohl; om. in P and by Peter.
2 albo curiae Madvig, Hohl; auo uriw P, auo were Peter.
3 So Bitschofsky ; fecr alat $ P, 2, specialiter Peter.


1 See note to Firm., xui. 1.
* Unknown.
3At Narbona (more correctly Narona), now the ruins of Vid
in Dalmatia, near the mouth of the river Naretva, according to
ae 88, 1, probably the most correct version (seo note to Aur.,
b-i):


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN IV. 2—V. 1


that by reason of the very great difference among
them I am unable to tell what it really was. For
Onesimus,! who wrote with great dibhgence a Life of
Probus, mamtams that, whereas Carus’ parents were
Illyrians, he himself was both born and educated at
Rome Fabius Cerylhanus,? however, who has described
with the greatest skill the period of Carus, Carinus
and Numerian, declares that he was born, not in’
Rome, but in Illyrieum,? and that his parents were not
Pannonians but Carthaginians. I myself remember
having read in a certain journal? that Carus was born
at Milan but enrolled in the official hst of the council
of the city of Aquilea. Carus himself, it cannot be
denied, wished to appear a Roman, for this 1s shown
by a letter of his, which he wrote when proconsul to
his legate, urgmg him to a faithful performance of
duty.

The letter of Carus:

“ From Marcus Aurelius Carus proconsul of Cilicia ? to
Junius his legate. Our forefathers, those great men
of Rome, in choosing their legates observed the follow-
ing principle, namely, to display a sample of their own
characters in those to whom they delegated the conduct
of public affairs, And even if this were not so, I my-
self should not do otherwise; and, mdeed, I have not
done otherwise, if by your aid I shall make no mistake.
Wherefore look to it that we may not be found to
differ from our forefathers, that is, the men of Rome."

You see that throughout this letter he wishes it to
be understood that his forefathers were native Romans.
V. A speech of his, moreover, addressed to the senate,
affords this same assurance regarding his birth. For


4 Fictitious, ike most of the author's ‘‘ sources.”
5 There was no such office in his time; see note to Aur., xlii. 2.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN

gud autem de eo Probus senserit indicant litterae de
eius honoribus ad senatum datae :

gplures haberem in actibus conlocatos. quare eques-
trem statuam viro morum veterum, si vobis placeat,
decernendam censeo, addito eo ut publico sumptu
eidem ? exaedificetur domus marmoribus a me delatis.


! e£ om. in P. 2 quod P. ? So Zand Cas., foll. by
editors ; wel eidem P.


1 None are known to us. ? See note to Frob., xxi. 8.
4924.


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN V, 2—VI. 3


when he was first made emperor, he wrote to the
senatorial order among other things the following:
“And so, Conseript Fathers, you should rejoice that
one of your own order and your own race has been
created emperor. Wherefore we will do our best that
no foreigner shall seem to be a better man than one
of yourselves." This passage also makes it sufficiently
clear that he wished to be thought a Roman, that is,
one born in Rome.

He, then, after rising through the various civil and
military grades, as the inseriptions! on his statues
show, was made prefect of the guard by Probus, and
he won such affection among the soldiers that when
Probus, that great emperor, was slain, he alone seemed
wholly worthy of the imperial power.

VI. I am not unaware that many have suspected
and, in fact, have put it into the records that Probus
was slam by the treachery of Carus. This, however,
neither the kindness of Probus toward Carus nor
Carus’ own character will permit us to believe, and
there is the further reason that he avenged the death
of Probus with the utmost severity and steadfastness.
Probus’ opinion of him, moreover, is shown by a letter
written to the senate with regard to the honours con-
ferred on him:

“From Probus Augustus to his most devoted senate,
greeting" Among other recommendations: * Happy,
mdeed, were our commonwealth if I had more men
engaged in the public business similar to Carus or, in
fact, to most of yourselves. Wherefore I recommend,
if ıt be your pleasure, that an equestrian statue be
voted to this man of old-tume character, adding the
further request that a house be erected for him at the
publie expense, the marble to be furnished by me.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


decet enim nos talis integritatem remuneran viri” et
reliqua.

VIII. Ingenti apparatu et totis viribus Probi profli-
gato magna ex parte bello Sarmatico, quod gerebat,


leiam Oas.; sam P.


l See Prob., xx. I.

?'The titles Nobuissomus Caesar and Princeps Tuventutis
appear on their coms minted before they were entitled Augustus.

* Ot. o. xvn. 6.

*See c. 1x. d. This war scems to have meluded a campaign
agaist the Quadi also, for Numerian (as Augustus) issued corns
with the legend TT) unu. (svc) Quador(un) and a representation
of hus father and hunselt m a quad»igà with an attendant
Victory and captives; sce Colon, vi, p. 878, no. 91. It would


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN VII. 1—VIIL 1


For it behooves us to reward the uprightness of so
great a man," and so forth.

VH. And so-—not to include what is of httle im-
portance or what can be found in other writers—as
soon as he received the imperial power, by the
unanimous wish of all the soldiers he took up the war
against the Persians for which Probus had been pre-
paring.” He gave to his sons the name of Caesar,”
planning to despatch. Carinus, with some carefully
selected men, to govern the provinces of Gaul, and
to take along with himself Numerian, a most ex-
cellent and eloquent young man It is said, more-
over, that he often declared that he was grieved
that he had to send Carinus to Gaul as prince, and
that Numerian was not of an age to be entrusted
with the Gallic empire, which most of all needed a
steadfast ruler. But of this at another time; for there
is still in existence a letter of Carus’, m which lie com-
plains to his prefect about the character of Carinus, so
that it seems to be true, as Onesimus says, that Carus
intended to take from Carinus the power of a Caesar.
But of this, as 1 have already said, I must tell later on
in the Life of Carinus himself? Now we will return
to the order of events.

VIII. With a vast array and all the forces of Probus
he set out against the Persians after fmishing the
greater part of the Sarmatian war,’ in which he had


appear that Carus fought this war on the Danube and then set
out for the East without going to Rome. We are told by
Zonaras (xi. 80) that he defeated the Persians and then re-
turned to Rome, whence he set out against the Sarmatians but
was killed during a campaign against the Huns, or, as some
say, on the mver Tigris, as the result of & stroke of hghtning;
but this can hardly be correct, as his reign of one year was not
long enough to permit of so much activity.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


contra Persas profectus nullo sibi occurrente Meso-
potamiam Carus cepit et Ctesiphontem usque pervenit
oecupatisque Persis domestica seditione imperatoris

tempestate inmani coruscatione, inmaxuore, ut dixi-

4mus, tonitru exanimatus est. lulius Calpurnius, qui
ad memoriam dictabat, talem ad praefectum urbis
super morte Cari epistulam dedit :

5 Inter cetera “Cum,” inquit, “ Carus, princeps
noster vere carus, aegrotaret, tanti turbmis subito
exorta tempestas est ut caligarent omnia, neque
alterutrum nosceret ; coruscationum demde ac toni-
truum in modum fulgurum igniti sideris continuata
vibratio omnibus nobis veritatis scientiam sustulit.


1 urgente Hyssenhardt, Peter; wu gante P. ? filis Hohl;
fiw P, X, fho Peter.


! He captured 1t, according to all our authonties, and also
Seleucia, according to Zonaias, and Coche, according to
Eutropius. The importance of his suecesses—-aided by the strife
between Bahram II., the Persian king, and his brother Hormizd
-—Àis shown by the fact that ali Mesopotamia was undo Roman
sway at the accession of Diocletian , seo Momingon, Lst Sion.
Prov, (Eng. Tians.), n. p. 123.

* He beais the title of Persicus Maxiuus ui bus mserptions,
and on his coms (after dethcation) those of Pemieus and
Parthicus.

JÁper; see c. Xi.


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN VIII. 2-5


been engaged, and without opposition he conquered
Mesopotamia and advanced as far as Ctesiphon!; and
while the Persians were busied with internal strife he
won the name of Conqueror of Persia But when he
advanced still further, desirous himself of glory and
urged on most of all by his prefect,? who m his wish
to rule was seeking the destruction of both Carus and
his sons as well, he met his death, according to some,
by disease, according to others, through a stroke of
hightuing.* Indeed, ıt cannot be denied that at the
time of his death there suddenly occurred such violent
thunder that many, ıt 1s said, died of sheer fright. And
so, while he was Ul and lying m his tent, there came
up a mighty storm with termble lightning and, as I
have said, still more terrible thunder, and during this
he expired, Julius Calpurnius, who used to dictate for
the imperial memoranda,’ wrote the following letter
about Carus’ death to the prefect of the citysesayimg
among other things:

“When Carus, our prince for whom we truly care,
was lymg ill there suddenly arose a storm of such
violence that all thmgs grew black and none could
recogmze another; then continuous flashes of lightnmg
and peals of thunder, like bolts from a fiery sky, took
from us all the power of knowing what truly befell.


This is the story given by all our authonines, meluding
Zonaras, though he gives an alternate version; see note to 8 1.
The rationahzed version that he died of disease occurs only in
this viia. His death seems to have taken place not much later
than 29 August, 983, as there are no Alexandrian coins beyond
lus first year; see J. Vogt, Die Alexandr. Münzen, i. p. 220 t.
Tins would agree with the rule of ten months and five days
assigned bim by the ** Chronographer of 354."

ë Neo Pesce, Nig., vii. 4 and note. Julius Calpurnius is other-
wise unknown and, like the letter, probably fictitious.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN

7ruerat! his accessit quod cubicularii dolentes prin-
cipis mortem incenderunt tentorium. unde unde fuit?
fama emersit fulmine interemptum eum quem, quan-
tum scire possumus, aegritudine constat absumptum.”


quod . . . terruerat Purser, Hohl; quo . . . tesvuerat D;
quo... terribli erant Peter, 2 unde unde furt Purser; unde
fu P; unde subito Peter, Hohl. Sat 2, foll by Peter ;
om. in P, * 8o Madvig, foll. by Hohl; see inter bellu
parendi P.


AT aaan aa aaa aaa ANOO eee e mi rd P EU ren rri


is ! He was warned by an oracle according to Aur, Vietor, Cacs.,
38, 4
; L4


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN VIII. 6—IX. 4


For suddenly, after an especially violent peal which
had terrified all, it was shouted out that the emperor
was dead It came to pass, in addition, that the
chamberlains, grieving for the death of their prince,
fired his tent; and the rumour arose, whatever its
source, that he had been killed by the lightning,
whereas, as far as we can tell, it seems sure that he
died of his illness."

IX. This letter I have inserted for the reason that
many declare that there is a certain. decree of Fate
that no Roman emperor may advance beyond Ctesi-
phon, and that Carus was struck by the lightning
because he desired to pass beyond the bounds which
Fate has set up. But let cowardice, on which
courage should set its heel, keep its devices for itself.
For clearly it is granted to us and will always be
granted, as our most venerated Caesar Maximian has
shown,’ to conquer the Persians and advance Beyond
them, and methinks this will surely come to pass if
only our men fail not to hve up to the promised
favour of Heaven.

That Carus was a good emperor is evident from
many of his deeds but especially from this, that as
soon as he received the imperial power he crushed
the Sarmatians, who were so emboldened by Probus'
death that they threatened to invade not only Ily-
ricum but Thrace and Italy as well and he showed
such skill in breaking up the war that in a very few
days he made the provinces of Pannonia free from all
fear, having killed sixteen thousand Sarmatians and
eaptured twenty thousand of both sexes.


* An allusion io the successes of Galerius Maximianus against
Narses, the Persian king, m 296-297,


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


! quant hie Editor; quae P; quam Numenanus Pete’, Hohl,
* quique P corr, Hohl; quinque P! , inque Peter.


1 Coins with the legends Divo Caro and Consecratio show
that he was deified ; see Cohen, vi*. pp 359-353, nos. 14-24.

*M. Auielius Numerus Numerianus Augustus (283-984).
He seems not to have borne the ile of Augustus until after
Carus’ death, when he and Carmus held i$ eonjanüly, see
Cohen, vi*. p. 404.

"The author of four Eicloguos written m tho manner of
Vergil. Of the poems cited here we have only 325. lines of his


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN X.—XI 3


X. This I beheve to be enough about Carus!; let
us now pass on to Numerian. His history seems to
be more elosely connected with that of his father and
to have become more noteworthy because of his
father-in-law ; and although Carmus was older than
he and received the title of Caesar before hum, it is
necessary, nevertheless, for us to tell first of Numerian,
whose death followed that of his father, and after-
wards of Carmus, whom Diocletian Augustus, a man
indispensable to the state, met in battle and put to
death,


XI. Numerian,? the son of Carus, was of excellent
character and truly worthy to rule; he was notable,
moreover, for his eloquence, so much so, in fact, that
even as a boy he declaimed m publie, and his writings
came to be famous, though more suitable for declama-
tion than in keeping with Cicero's style, Int verse,
furthermore, he is said to have had such skill that he
surpassed all the poets of his time, In fact, he com-
peted with Olympius Nemesanus,? who wrote O»
Fishing, On Hunting, and On Seamanship, and shone
with conspicuous lustre in all the colonial towns ; and
as for Aurelius Apolhnaris,* the writer of iambics,
who had composed an account of his father’s deeds,
Numerian, when he published what he bad recited,
cast him into the shade lke a ray of the sun. The
speech, moreover, which he sent to the senate 1s said
to have been so eloquent that a statue was voted him
not as a Caesar but as a rhetorician, to be set up in


Cynegetica, composed after the death of Carus but before that
of either of his sons, whose deeds he promises to recount (see
1, 63 1.).
? Unknown.
VOL. M, FF


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


Caesari sed quasi rhetori decerneretur, ponenda in
Bibliotheca Ulpia, cui subscriptum est: * Numeriano
Caesari, oratori temporibus suis potentissimo."

XII. Hie patri comes fut bello Persico. quo
mortuo, cum oculos dolere coepisset, quod illud
aegritudinis genus nimia utpote vigiha! confecto
familiarissumum fuit, ac lectica portaretur, factione
Apri soceri sui, qui invadere conabatur imperium,


langilia added in P corr 2In P the portion of the veta
which begins with Augustum and ends with fuisse in o. xv. 5
is transposed and inserted in oc. ii. 2; in the 2 codices it 1s in
its proper place.


1 See note to Aur., 1. 7.

? He was defeated by the Persians, according to Zonaras, xii,
30 The biographer omits the account of lus homoward march
across Asia Minor, im the course of which he was killed. His
death seems to have been discovered at the Bosphorus: as there
are Alexandrian coms of his third year, 16 could not have taken


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XII. 1—XIII. 1


the Ulpian Library! with the following inscription:
“ To Numerian Caesar, the most powerful orator of his
tune."

XII. He accompanied his father m the Persian
war, and after his father's death, when he had begun
to suffer from a disease of the eyes—for that kind of
ailment is most frequent with those exhausted, as he
was, by too much loss of sleep—and was being carried
in a litter, he was slam? by the treachery of his
father-in-law Aper, who was attempting to seize the
rule. But the soldiers continued for several days to
ask after the emperor’s health, and Aper kept ha-
ranguing them, saying that he could not appear before
them for the reason that he must protect his weakened
eyes from the wind and the sun, but at last the stench
of his body revealed the facts. Then all fell upon
Aper, whose treachery could no longer be hidden, and
they dragged him before the standards in front’ of the
generals tent. Then a huge assembly was held and
a tribunal, too, was constructed. XIII. And when
the question was asked who would be the most lawful
avenger of Numerian and. who could be given to the
commonwealth as a good emperor, then all with a
heaven-sent unanimity, conferred the title of Augustus
on Diocletian,? who, 1t was said, had already received
many omens of future rule. He was at this time in
command of the household-troops, an outstanding man
and wise, devoted to the common wealth, devoted to
his kindred, duly prepared to face whatever the


place until after 29 August, 984. He was deified, evidently by
order of Carmus; for there are coins of his with the legends
Dwo Numeriano and Consecratio, see Cohen, vi*. p. 869, nos.
10-12,
$(), Aurelius Valerius Diocleianus Augustus (284-305).
FE 2


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


leffroniis editors; frontis P; efroniis X. ? foeda. urta
Eyssenhardt, Hohl, foedaurt P; foedstaie Peter. 3 plane
scram Paucker, Peter*, plus quam P, X. * ahaque Peter?;


aaa quae P.


1 See note to Tyr. Trig , xxv. 3. * Aeneid, x. 830.

? The quotation is from Terence, Eunuchus, 426, but as itis
described in the context as a vetus dictum, 16 may well have
come from a comedy of Livius Andronicus. It is evidently
an adaptation of the saying recorded by Diogemanus (in


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XIII. 2—XIV. 1


occasion demanded, forming plans that were always
deep though sometimes over-bold, and one who could
by prudence and exceedmg firmness hold m check
the impulses of a restless spirit. This man, then,
having ascended the tribunal was hailed as Augustus,
and when someone asked how Numerian bad been
slun, he drew lis sword and pomtmg to Aper, the
prefect of the guard, he drove it through him, saying
as he did so, “It is he who contmved Numerian's
death." So Aper, a man who lived an evil life and
in accordance with vicious counsels, met with the end
that his ways deserved. My grandfather used to
relate! that he was present at this assembly when
Aper was slain by the hand of Diocletian; and he
used to say that Diocletian, after slaying him, shouted,
“Well may you boast, Aper, ‘’Tis by the hand of the
mighty Aeneas you perish? "? I do, indeed, wonder
at this in a military man, although I know perfectly
well that very many soldiers use sayings ın both Greek
and Latin taken from the writers of comedy and other
such poets. In fact, the comic poets themselves fre-
quently introduce soldiers in such a way as to make
them use familar sayings ; for “ You are a hare your-
self and yet are you looking for game?” is a saying
which is taken from Livius Andronicus,’ and many
others were given by Plautus and Caecilius.

XIV. I do not consider it too painstaking or yet
too much m the ordinary manner to insert a story
about Diocletian Augustus that seems not out of place
here—an incident which he regarded as an omen of


Corpus Paroemiographorum Graecorum), iv. 12: Agaoúrovs
Kpe@y émiüuuet^ émi vy map arwr Émi(myrosvror & map éavrüv
Üxouciw.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


2 mihi rettulit ab ipso Diocletiano compertum. “Cum,”
inquit, “ Diocletianus apud Tungros in Gallia in qua-
dam caupona moraretur, in minoribus adhuc locis
militans, et cum Druiade quadam muliere rationem !
convictus sui cottidiani faceret, atque illa diceret,
* Diocletiane, nimium avarus, nimium parcus es, ioco
non serio Diocletianus respondisse fertur, «Tunc ero


XV.eris imperator cum Aprum occideris.’” semper in


1 curationem P. — ? With fasse ends the portion of the vita
transposed ın P toc, 1. 2.


! Around mod. Tongres 1n eastern Belgium.
2 For prophecies by Druid women seo Aur., xliv. 4 and note,


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XIV. 2—XV. 6


his future rule. This story my grandfather related to
me, having heard it from Diocletian himself, “When
Diocletian,” he said, “while still servmg in a minor
post, was stopping at a certain tavern in the land of
the Tungri! in Gaul, and was making up his daily
reckoning with a woman, who was a Druidess, she said
to him, * Diocletian, you are far too greedy and far too
stingy, to which Diocletian replied, it is said, not in
earnest but only in jest, ‘I shall be generous enough
when I become emperor. At this the Druidess said,?
so he related, ‘Do not jest, Diocletian, for you will
become emperor when you have slain a Boar (Aper). "
XV. Now Diocletian always had in his mind a desire
to rule, as Maxunian? knew and my grandfather
also, to whom he himself told these words of the
Druidess. Then, however, reticent, as was his wont,
he laughed and said nothing. Nevertheless, in his
hunting, whenever there was opportunity, he- always
killed the boars with his very own hand. In fact,
when Aurelian received the imperial power, then
Probus, then Tacitus, and then Carus lumself, Diocle-
tian remarked, “I am always killing boars, but the
other man enjoys the meat.” It is now well known
and a common story that when he had killed Aper,
the prefect of the guard, he declared, it is said, ** At
last I have killed my fated Boar.” My grandfather
also used to say that Diocletian himself declared
that he had no other reason for killing him with his
own hand than to fulfil the Druidess’ prophecy and
to ensure his own rule. For he would not have
wished to become known for such cruelty, especially
in the first few days of his power, if Fate had not
impelled him to this brutal act of murder.


$4,¢., Diocletian’s co-ruler.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


7 Dictum est de Caro, dictum etiam de Numeriano,
(VI. superest nobis Carinus, homo omnium contaminatissi-
mus, adulter, frequens corruptor iuventutis (pudet
dicere quod in litteras Onesimus rettulit), ipse quoque
2male usus genio sexus su. hie cum Caesar decretis
sibi Gallus atque Italia, Illyrico, Hispaniis ac Britan-
nis et Africa relictus a patre Caesareanum teneret
imperium, sed ea lege ut omnia faceret quae Augusti
faciunt, enormibus se vitiis et ingenti foeditate macu-
3lavit, amicos optimos quosque relegavit, pessimum
quemque elegit aut tenuit, praefectum urbi unum ex
cancellaris suis fecit, quo foedius nec cogitari potuit
4aliquando nec dici. praefectum praetorii quem habe-
5bat occidit; in eius locum Matronianum, veterem
conciliatorem, fecit, unum ex suis! notariis, quem
stuprorum et libidinum conscium semper atque
62diutorem habuerat. invito patre consul processit.
superbes ad senatum litteras dedit. vulgo urbis
Romae, quasi populo Romano, bona senatus promisit.


1 suas suggested by Peter; his P, Hohl.


1 M. Aurehus Carnus Augustus (283-285). His debauchery
and cruelty are emphasised by all the sources, but this judge-
ment may be due, at least in part, to the desire to flatter the
dynasty which succeeded him ; of. note to Gail, i. 1.

? He held the title officially duxmg Carus’ hfetume, for 16
appears in their insctiptions and on coms issued under their
joint names; see Cohen, vi", p. 864 f, nos. 2 and 5-11. The
division of the empire between the two seems similar to that
between Valerian and Gallienus, and 16 probably was not with-
out influ: nce on the subsequent similar partition of powers by
Diocletian and Maximian.

?'The ttle of an official of considerable umportance at the


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XV. 7—XVI. 6


We have written of Carus, we have written, too, of
Numerian, and now there still remains Carinus.!
XVI. He was the most polluted of men, an adulterer
and a constant corrupter of youth (I am ashamed to
relate what Onesimus has put into writing), and he
even made evil use of the enjoyment of his own sex.
He was left by his father as Caesar in Gaul and Italy
and in Illyricum, Spam, Britain, and Africa, all of
which had been voted to him, and he exercised there
a Caesar's powers, but with the permission to perform
all the duties of an Augustus.? "Then he defiled him-
self by unwonted vices and inordinate depravity, he
set aside all the best among his friends and retained
or picked out all the vilest, and he appointed as city-
prefect one of his doorkeepers,? a baser act than
which no one can conceive or relate. He slew the
prefect of the guard whom he found in office and put
in his place Matronianus, one of his clerks and àn old
procurer, whom he had always kept with him as
accompliee and assistant in debaucheries and lusts.
He appeared in pubhDe as consul contrary to his
fathers wish. He wrote arrogant letters to the
senate, and he even promised the senate's property
to the mob of the city of Rome, as though it, forsooth,
were the Roman people. By marrying and divoremg


Byzantine court. The fact that there is no mention of an
imperial cancellarius prior to the fifth century has been used
by Seock as an argument for his theory that the Ast. Aug
is the work of a fifth-century ''forger"; see Vol. n. Intro.,
p.x. The point of the present passage, however, seems to he
in the low position of the cancellarius, 2.¢., as actually a door-
keeper,

à Since he was consul ordinaris conjomntly with Carus in
288, this statement is hardly credible.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


7uxores ducendo ac reiciendo novem duxit pulsis
plerisque praegnantibus. mimis, meretricibus, panto-
mimis, cantoribus atque lenonibus Palatium replevit.
8fastidium subscribendi tantum habuit ut impurum
quendam, cum quo semper meridie iocabatur, ad sub-
scribendum poneret, quem obiurgabat plerumque
XV I. quod bene suam imitaretur manum. habuit gemmas
in calceis, nisi gemmata fibula usus non est, balteo
etiam saepe gemmato.! regem denique illum Illyrici
2 plerique vocitarunt. praefectis numquam, numquam ?
consulibus obviam processit. hominibus improbis
plurimum detulit eosque ad convivium semper vocavit.
3centum libras avium, centum piscium, mille diversae
carnis in convivio suo frequenter exhibuit. vini pluri-
mum effudit. inter poma et melones natavit. rosis
4 Mediolanensibus et triclinia et cubicula stravit.  bal-
neis ita frigidis usus est, ut solent esse cellae supposi-
5toriae, frigidariis semper nivalibus. cum hiemis tem-


1 So Petschenig, Hohl; balteum . . . gemmatum P, Peter.
23 numquam ins. by Gruter; om. in P. 3 praeparastis
Petschenig, Hohl; praeparatis P, Z, Peter.


! Only one is known, Magni& Urbica Augusta, whose likeness
appears on Carinus’ coins as well as on her own; see Cohen
vi?. p. 405-408.


44.2


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XVI, 7—XVII. 6


he took nine wives in all! and he put away some
even while they were pregnant. He filled the Palace
with actors and harlots, pantomimusts, singers and
pimps. He had such an aversion for the signing of
state-papers that he appointed for signing them a cer-
tain filthy fellow, with whom he used always to jest
at midday, and then he reviled him because he could
imitate his writing so well. XVII. He wore jewels
on hus shoes,? used only a jewelled clasp and often
a jewelled belt also. In fact, im Illyricum most
people hailed him as king. He would never come
forward to meet the prefects or consuls. He granted
favours most of all to the base, and always invited
them to banquets. At one of his banquets he often
served one hundred pounds of birds, one hundred of
fish, and one thousand of meat of different kinds, and
he lavished on his guests vast quantities of wine.
He swam about among apples and melons and
strewed his banqueting-halls and bedrooms with
roses from Milan. The baths which he used were
as cold as the air of rooms that are under the
ground, and his plunge-baths were always cooled
by means of snow. Once, when he came in the
winter to a certain place ín which the spring-water
was very tepid—its wonted natural temperature dur-
ing the winter—and he had bathed in it in the pool,
he shouted to the bath-attendants, it is said. “ This
is water for a woman that you have given me " ; and
this is reported as his most famous saying. When his
father heard of all that he did, he exclaimed, “ He is
no son of mine," and at last he determined to appoint


? Also told to the discredit of Elagabalus, as it was to tho
credit of Severus Alexander that he removed them ; see Heliug.,
xxii, 45 Alex., iv. 2,


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


statuerat denique Constantium, qui postea Caesar est
factus, tunc autem praesidatum Dalmatiae adminis-
trabat, m locum eius subrogare, quod nemo tune vir
melor videbatur, illum vero, ut Onesimus dicit,
7occidere. longum est si de eus luxuria plura velim
dicere. quicumque ostiatim cupit noscere, legat etiam
Fulvium Asprianum usque ad taedium gestorum eius
universa dicentem.
XVIII. Hic ubi patrem fulmine absumptum, fratrem
a socero interemptum, Diocletianum Augustum appel-
latum comperi, maiora vitia et scelera edidit, quasi
iam liber ac! frenis domesticae pietatis suorum
2 mortibus 2? absolutus. nec ei tamen defuit ad vindi-
candum sibimet imperium vigor mentis, nam contra
Diocletianum multis proeliis conflixit, sed ultima
pugna apud Margum commissa victus occubuit.


lac Lenze, a P, Peter, Hohl. ? joi libus Cas ; moribus
P, X. 3 da ins, by Egnatius , om, m P and X.


14e., Constantius L. (Chlorus). There seems to be no reason
to believe this statement,

? Otherwise unknown

*The vita omits all mention of his campaigns against the
Germans and in Britain, as the 1esult of which he assumed the
cognomina Germanicus Maximus and Britannicus Maximus

* After being called from Rome by the news of Diocletian's
assumption of the power he overthiow near Verona a usurper
named M. Aurelianus Julianus (so his coms, Cohen, vi*. pp. 410-
98) Sabinus Julianus according to Emt., 38, 6 and Zosimus,
1, 73).


CEEI


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XVII. 7-XVIII. 3


Constantius !—afterwards made Caesar but at that
time serving as governor of Dalmatia—in the place of
Carinus, for the reason that no one even then seemed
to be better, and he even planned, as Onesimus relates,
to put Carinus to death. It would be too long to tell
more, even if I should desire to do so, about his excesses.
If anyone wishes to learn all in detail, he should read
Fulvius Asprianus ? also, who tells the whole tale of
his deeds even to the point of boredom.?

XVIII. When he learned that his father had been
kiled by lightning and his brother slain by his own
father-in-law, and that Diocletian had been hailed as
Augustus, Carinus committed acts of still greater vice
and crime, as though now set free and released by
the death of his kindred from all the restraints of
fihal duty. He did not, however, lack strength of
purpose for claiming the imperial power.* For he
fought many battles against Diocletian, but "finally,
being defeated ın a fight near Margus,’ he perished.


We have now come to the end of the three em-
perors, Carus, Numerian and Carinus, after whom the
gods gave us Diocletian and Maximian to be our
princes, joining to these great men Galerius and Con-
stantius, the one of whom was born to wipe out the


5 At the mouth of the river of the same name (mod. Morava),
& tmbutary of the Danube below Belgrade. The scene of the
battle ıs described in Eutropius, ix. 20 as between Viminacium
Kostolacz, near the mouth of the Morava) and Aureus Mons
Oresac) about 25 m. further west. According to the Epitome
and Zosimus, Carmus was killed by a tribune whose wife he had
seduced, according to Eutropius, he was betiayed by his army.
As he assumed the consulship (for the third time) on 1 Jan.,
285, the battle was after that date.


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


acceptam ignominiam Valenani captivitate deleret,
4alter, qui Gallias Romanis legibus redderet. quattuor
sane primcipes mundi fortes, sapientes, benigni et
admodum liberales, unum in rem publicam sentientes,
perreverentes! Romani senatus, moderati, populi
amici, persancti,? graves, religiosi et quales principes
Ssemper oravimus. quorum vitam singulis libris
Claudius Eusthenius, qui Diocletiano ab epistulis
fuit, scripsit, quod idcirco dixi ne quis a me rem
tantam requireret, maxime cum vel vivorum principum
vita non sme reprehensione dieatur.

2circa porticum stabuli pictos vidimus. nam et neuro-
baten, qui velut m ventis eothurnatus ferretur, ex-
hibuit, et toichobaten, qui per parietem urso eluso
cucurrit, et ursos mimum agentes et item centum
salpistas uno crepitu concinentes et centum cerataulas,?
choraulas centum, etiam pythaulas centum, panto-
mimos et gymnicos mille, pegma praeterea, cuius
flammis scaena conflagravit, quam Diocletianus postea


1 perreuerentes Petschenig, Hohl; spe reuerent P, semper
?euerenies Gruter, Peter. ? persancí, Gruter ; pescate P.


3 cerataulas Salm. ; capiaulas P.


i By his victories over the Persians; see note fo e. 1x. 3,

? By his victories over the Franks and the Alamani and other
Germans and his suppression of the revolts of the British pro-
tenders Carausius and Allectus.


? Unknown.
* Otherwise unknown, unless 1t be the place that is mentioued


in the title Comes domesticorum et stabuli serrin an mseription
2 n cm from Rome ; see C. 1. Ja, vi, L731 = Dessau, fis. Sela


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XVIII. 4—XIX. 2


disgrace incurred by Valerian's capture,! the other,
to bring again the province of Gaul under the laws
of Rome." Four rulers, indeed, of the world were
they, brave, wise, kindly, and wholly generous, all of
one mund toward the commonwealth, very respectful
to the Roman senate, moderate, friends of the people,
revered, earnest, and pious, and, in fact, such em-
perors as we have always desired, Their lives have
been related, each in a separate book, by Claudius
Eusthenius,? imperial secretary to Diocletian—a fact
which I mention in order that none may demand so
great a work from me, especially since the biographies
even of living emperors cannot be written without
ineurring blame.

XIX, The most noteworthy event of the rule of
Carus, Carinus and Numerian was the series of games
that they gave the Roman people, distinguished by
some novel spectacles, a painting of which wé have
seen in the Palace near the portico of the stables.*
For there was exhibited a rope-walker, who in his
buskins seemed to be walking on the winds, also a
wall-climber, who, eluding a bear, ran up a wall, also
some bears which acted a farce, and, besides, one
hundred trumpeters who blew one single blast to-
gether, one hundred horn-blowers, one hundred
fute-players, also one hundred flute-players who
accompanied songs, one thousand pantomumists and
gymnasts, moreover, a mechanical scaffold,’ which,
however, burst into flames and burned up the
stage—though this Diocletian later restored on a


5A scaffold suddenly raised aloft and opened to exhibit per-
formers; they are described ın Seneca, Hpest., 88, 22 and
Juvenal, iv. 122,


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN

4 Legat hune locum Iunius Messalla, quem ego
libere eulpare audeo. ille enim patrimonium suum
scaenfeis dedit, heredibus abnegavit, matris tunicam
dedit mimae, lacernam patris mimo, et recte, si aviae
palho aurato atque purpureo pro syrmate tragoedus

5 uteretur, inscriptum est adhuc in choraulae pallio
tyrianthmo, quo 1lle velut spolio nobilitatis exsultat,


$


ladornatum P. ? usus est liber alitate Z; ausus liber tate
P, est usus liberalitate Peter.


? Probably in celebration of Caius’ victory over the Sarma-
tians (see c, vi. 1, ix. 4), but the wrrter seems io be thinking
of the Ludi Satmatıcı which, according to the Calendar of
Philocalus of a D. 354 (see C.7. Ta., 12 p. 976 L), wore held regu-
larly on 25 Nov.-1 Dec., in honour, appatently, of the victories
of Constantine I. or Constantius TI,

2 See note to Gall., vin. 3.


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XIX. 3—XX. 5


more magnificent scale. Furthermore, actors were
gathered together from every side They were given
also Sarmatian games, than which nothing affords
greater pleasure, and, besides, a Cyclops-performanee.?
And they bestowed on the Greek artists and gym-
nasts and actors and musicians both gold and silver
and they bestowed on them also garments of silk

XX But although all these thmgs have a certain
charm for the populace, they are of no importance in
a good emperor. In fact, a saying of Diocletian’s is
current, uttered when one of his treasury-officials ?
was speaking to him with praise of Carus’ exhibition,
saying that he and his sons, while emperors, had
gained great favour by means of theatrical spectacles
and spectacles in the circus, “ And so," he remarked,
“Carus caused great laughter during his rule" In
facet, when Dioeletian himself presented spectacles,
after inviting all nations thereto, he was most sparmg
in his liberality, declaring that there should be more
contmence in games when a censor was looking on.

I should like this passage to be read by Junius
Messalla,* with whom I will dare to find fault frankly.
For he has cut off his natural heirs and bestowed his
ancestral fortune on players, giving a tunic of his
mother’s to an actress and a cloak of his father’s
to an actor—and rightly so, I suppose, if a gold and
purple mantle of his grandmother's could be used as
a costume by a tragic actor! Indeed, the name of
Messalla's wife is still embroidered on the violet
mantle of a flute-player, who exults in it as the spoils


*The term largitiones came to mean, in the later empire,
the public treasury, since largesses from pubhe funds depended
entirely on the emperor's generosity.

t Unknown.

VOL. III. GG


CARUS, CARINUS AND NUMERIAN


Messallae nomen uxoris. iam quid lineas petitas
Aegypto loquar? quid Tyro et Sidone tenuitate per-
lueidas, micantes purpura, plumand: difficultate per-
6nobiles? donatı sunt ab Atrebatis birr1 petiti, donati
birn Canusmi, Africani, opes in scaena non prius
XXI. visae. et haec quidem idcirco ego in litteras retiuli,
quod futuros editores pudore tangeret, ne patrimonia
sua proscriptis legitimis heredibus mimis et balatroni-
bus deputarent
2 Habe, mi amice, meum munus, quod ego, ut saepe
dixi, non eloquentiae causa sed curiositatis in lumen
edidi, id praecipue agens ut, si quis eloquens vellet
facta principum reserare, materiam non requireret,
3habiturus meos hbellos ministros eloquii. te quaeso,
sis contentus nosque sie voluisse scribere melius quam
potuisse eontendas.


——(————(^———————————————————


! See Gall., vi. 6.

? Mod. Canosa in Apulia The wool of this region was
famous, and a Blppos Kavveeivos 18 valued m the Edict of Dio-
cletian at 4000 denaru (about $25).


CARUS, CARINUS, NUMERIAN XX. 6—XXI. 3


of a noble house. Why, now, should I speak of those
linen garments imported from Egypt? Why of those
garments from Tyre and Sidon, so fine and trans-
parent, of gleammg purple and famed for their
embroidery-work? He has presented, besides, capes
brought from the Atrabati! and capes from Canusium ?
and Africa, such splendour as never before was seen
on the stage. XXI. All of this I have put into
writmg in order that future givers of spectacles may
be touched by a sense of shame and so be deterred
from cutting off thew lawful heirs and squandering
their inheritances on actors and mountebanks

And now, my friend, accept this gift of mine,
which, as I have often said, I have brought out to the
light of day, not because of its elegance of style but
because of its learned research, chiefly with this pur-
pose in view, that if any gifted stylist should wish to
reveal the deeds of the emperors, he might not lack
the material, having, as he will, my little books as
ministers to his eloquence. I pray you, then, to be
content and to contend that in this work I had the
wish to write better than I had the power.


GG 2


INDEX OF NAMES


ABBREVIATIONS


A Aurelian
AC Avidius Cassius.
Ae. Aelius.
AP .. Antoninus Pius
C . Commodus
CA Clodius Albinus
Ca Carus
Cc Caracalla
Ql laudius
D Diadumenianus


Dj .. Didius Julianus.
E . Elagabalus
F Firmus, Saturninus, Pio.
culus, Bonosus
Ga. Galhenus
Ge . Geta


Names of Roman emperois and pretenders are in capital letters


Go Gordian.


H . Haduan
HP.. Pertinas
M . Maximinus


MA : M. Aurelius Antoninus,


M.B . Maximus and Balbinus
OM Opellius Macrinus
P. Probus.
PN. Pescenmus Niger
S Sepumius Severus
SA Severus Alexander
T l'acitus


TT Tyianm Triginta
V . Lucius Verus
Valerian


The


words Roma, Romanus, Graecus and Graecanicus have been onutted.


Ababa mothe: of Maximinus M 1, 6

Abgarus, King (pretende:) of Osrho-
ene, relations of Antoninus Pius
with AP 9, 6

Abgarus IX, King of Osrhoene con-
dueed by Severus S 18, 3.

Ablavius Mumena, prefect of guard
letter of Valerian to Cl 15

Abraham: statue of in chapel ot
Severus Alexander SA 29, 2.

Academia place in Hadran's villa
near Tibur H 26, 5

Achaia Hadiianin H 13, 1-2 revolt
of quelled AP 5,5 Annia Paustina
killed in C 7, 7* Valens proconsul
of Ga2,2, TT 19, 1 Piso in Ga
2,2 pestilence in cities OF Ga 5,
5 Goths defeated in Ga 6,1 1n-
vaded by Goths Ga 13,8 Messalla
governor of Cl 16, 1.


Achillets poem of Stauus, imitated
by Gerdian I Go 3, 3

Achilles statue of in chapel of Sev-
erus Alexander SA 31, 4 Maxi-
munus likened to M 4,9, Aleaander
at tomb of P 1, 2

Achilleus relative of Zenobia, made
ruler of Palmyra A 31, 2.

Achohtus maste: of ceremonies under
Valerian A 12, 4. work on Severus
oe cued SA 14, 6, 48 7,

4, 5.

Adiabent conqueied by Severus S
9,9 made tributary S 18, 1.

Adiabenicus | cognomen borne by
Seveaus S g, 10. by Auielian A
39, 5.

Aebutianus pretect of the guard,
killed by Commodus C 6, 12.


INDEX OF NAMES


Aelia, Pons, at Rome: built by
Hadrian H r9, 11.

Aehanus see Celsus

Aelius name given to month C 12,2.

Aehus Aurelius Apolaustus Mem-
phius, L  (Agiuppus), actor
brought by L. Verus from Syria V
8, 10, killed by Commodus C 7, 2.

Aelius Bassianus proconsul of Africa,
letter to CÀ 4, 5-7

Aelius Celsus killed by Severus S
I3, 2-

Aelus Cesettianus,
speech of T 7, 2-3.

Aelus  Corduenus succeeded in
command by Niger PN 4, 4-

Aelius Decms Triccianus accom.
phce in murder of Caracalla Cc


city-piefect


t 7

Aelius Gordianus counsellor of
Severus Alexander SA 68, 1

Aelus Hadrianus great-uncle of
Hadrian, prophesied his rule H 2, 4.

Aelius Hadrianus Afer, P. father of
Hadnan H 1, 2,

Aelius lumus Cordus cited CA 5,
10, 7,2 11,2, M 4, 1, 6, 8, 12,
7, 27, 7; 28, 10, 29, 10, 31, 4, Go
4,6, 556, 32, 3, X4, 7; 17, 3, 19,
8, 21, 3-4, 22, 2, 26, 2, 31,6, 33,
4, M-B4, 2, 12,4 criticized OM
I, 3-5, M.B 425

Aehus Lamptidius
imatate P 2, 7.

Aehns Maurus cited S 20, x

Aehus Sabinus cited M 32, 1.

Aehus Scorpianus, consul speech of
ae

Aehus Serenmianus counsellor of
Severus Alexander SA 68, 1

Aehus Stilo killed by Severus S


13, 5.

AELIUS VERUS original names
H23,10-311, Ae 2, 1 6, 6,6 an.
cestry Ae2, 7-8, V 1, 7 9 adopted
by Hadrian H 23, 10-11, Ae 1, 2,
2,2,6, 3 L 8, AP ducta V X D.
CA 2, 5 honours and offices, H
23, 12-13, Ae 3, 2-3, 6, x, V 1,8
first to 1eceive title of Caesar Ae
1, 2, 2,7, V 1, 6 Hadrian's
attection for Ae 3, 4 prowess in
province Ae 3, 5-6 Hadrian's
regret for adoption H 23, 14, Ae
3,7, 4, 1-6; 6, 23 dul-health and


454.


Vopiscus will


Aehus Verus—contenued,
death H 23, 15-16; Ac 4, 7-8, 6,
5-6 appearance and accomplish.
ments Ae 5, 1-2. pleasuies Ae 5,
3-311. futher of L Verus. Ac 2,9,
5,12, 6,9, 7,2, AP 4,5, V 1,6
statues and temples for Ae 7, 1
daughter betrothed to M. Auieltus
MA 4, 5, 6, 2 buial V ri, I
received purple robe from Hadrian
CA2,5 reviled by Egyptians F
1 -

Aeltus Xiphidius, prefect of treasury
letter of Valerian to A 12.

Aemilia, Via supplies of in charge of
Pertinax HP 2,2

Aemiha Clara mother of Didius
Julianus DJ 1, 2.

AEMILIANUS seized 1nlein Egypt
Ga 4,1, 5,6, 6,4 TT 22, 37
defeated and killed Ga 4, 2, TT
a2, 8, 26, 4 supported at Rome
Ga 9, I planned expedition
against Indi TT 22,8 called Alex-
ander: or Alexandiinus TT 22, 7.

Aemilianus see Asellus Casperius
Cornehus Scipio.

Aemilus, Pons, at Rome Elaga.
balus’ body thiown from E 17, 2.
Aemihus Inneus consul, exiled by

Commodus C 4, 11

Aemilius Laetus, Q prefect of the
guard, dissuaded Commodus from
burning Rome C 15,7 accomplice
in murder of Commodus C 17, r-2,
HP 5,1 made Perunas empero
HP 4, 5-6, 5, 1-2 conspired with
soldiers to kill Pertinax HP 10, 8~
rr, I3 saved Didius Julianus from
Commodus DJ 6, 2 death D] 6,
2 had Severus appointed to com.
mand of army in Germany S 4, 4.

Aemilius Papinianus friend or rela-
lative of Severus Ce 8, 2-5. con-
silium included Ulpan and Paulus

N 7, 4, SA 26, 6 Caracalla
entered Palace leaning on aim of
Ce 3,2, advised harmony between
Caracalla and Guia Ce 8, 3. advised
against muda of Geti Cc 8, 4
refused to write speech for Caracalla
excusing murder of Geta Cc 8, 5-6;
murder of S 21, 8, Ce 4, 1; 8, 1-8;
Ge 6, 3* murder of son of Cc 4, 2


INDEX OF NAMES


Aemihus Paithentanus, historian
cited AC 5, 1.

Aeneas Diocletian likened himself
to Ca 13, 3

Aeneid quoted H 2, 8, Ae 4, 1-3,
CA 5,2 4, OM 12,9, D8,7, SA
4,6, M27, 4, Go 20, 5, TT 24,
3, Cl 10, 4-6, T 5,1, Ca 13, 3
unitated by Goidian I Go 3, 3

Aethiopia omen given by soldier
hom S 22, 4-5, women from E
32; 5

Aetius son-in-law of Severus, en-
uched and made consul S 8, 1-2

Aetna ascent of by Hadrian H 13, 3.

Afer used by oracle to designate
Severus PN 8, 1.2

Afer see Aehus Hadnanus
mius "Terentius

Aframus Hanmbahanus trained by
Probus P 22, 3

Africa Hadrian in and generosity to
H 13,4, 22,14 pretended journey
of Commodus to C 9, 1 Pertinax
oo of HP 4, 1, DT 2, 5,

idius Julianus proconsul of DJ

2,53 Severus a native of S Iz, 1,
CA 5,5 Seveaus in S 2, 2-9
legions sent to by Severus in fear
that Niger would seize S 8,7, PN
5, 4-5; people of honoured Severus
as god S 13,8 Severus had accent
of S 19, 9. Sepuzonium visible to
people coming fiom S 24,3 Al.
binus a native of CA 1, 3, 10, 6,
12,8 spent boyhood in CA 5, 1
Aelius Bassianus proconsul of CA
4, 5 originally conquered by the
senate CA 13,6 Macrinus in OM
4, 3-5 Caehanus a native of D 8,
9 revolt and defeat of Gordians 1n
M 13, 6, 14, 2-4, IQ, 2-3, Go 7:
2—9,8,10, I, II, 4, 15—16, 17, 1,
20, 4, 54, 1, M-B 9, 5. anger of
Maximinus at people of M 17, 7,
IB, 1. 3, Go 13, 3-4, 14, 1-3. 7
Gordian I. proconsul of M 13, 6,
tf, 2, 16, 1, G6 2, 4, 5, 7, 2, IJs
x Balbinus proconsul of M-B 7,
2 revolt against Gordian ILI, sup-
pressed Go 23, 4-5 people of
subject to Romans Var, 4 desued
rescue of Valerian Va 3, 2 Mac-
nanus’ valou in TT 72,17 Vibius
Passienus proconsul of, made Celsus


Septi-


Afiica—continued
emperor in TT 29, 1-2 clothing
supplied to proconsul of allotted
to Claudius Cl 15, 4 carpets from
À12,1 linen tumes from A 48, 5
danger of revolt in after Aurelian’s
death T 3, 6 Roman emperor
destined to drive barbarians from
T x5, 2 Probus’ victouies in F 9,
1-2, 12,3 Firmus 1n command ot
frontier of F 3, 1 recovered by
Saturmnus F 9, 5 Saturninus
studied in F 10, 4 under rule of
Carinus Ca 16, 2 capes from Ca
20, 6

Africana, Classis organized by Com.
modus C 17, 7 names given to C


17,

Afucanus  Hadrian's caution for F
8, IO

Africanus bestowed as cognomen on
Gordian Y Go 9, 3-4, 17,2

Africanus see Cornelius Scipio

Agaclytus — 1nfluencial freedman of
M. Aurehus and L Verus MA 15,
2, V 9,3 married to widow of
LiboV 9,4 alleged conspiracy of
L Verus against M Aurelius re-
vealed by V 1o, 5.

Agncola see Calpurnius

Agrippa see Marcius

Agrippae, Lavacrum, at Rome re-
stored by Hadran H 19, r0

Agrippae, Templum, at Rome re-
paired by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 2.

Agrippianae, Saepta, at Rome
restored by Hadnan H 19, 10
Basilica Alexandrina near SA 26, 7

Agrippina (Cologne) Victorinus and
son hulled at TT 6,3 their tombs
at TT 7,2 Proculus and Bonosus
seized power at P 18, 5

Agiippinus see Caspers

Agrippus see Aehus Aurelius
Apolaustus Memphuus, La

Ajax Maximinus likened to M 4, 9.

Alamannm conquered by Caracalla
Ce ro, 6 Roman emperor destined
to rule T 15, 2 duven back by
Probus P 12, 3 by Pioculus F
13, 3-

Alamanma
TT 8, Ir.

Alamanmeus cognomen assumed by
Caracalla Cc 10, 6.


made to fear Romans


INDEX OF NAMES


Alani defeated undei Antoninus Pius
P 5,5, waired against Rome MA

22, 1 Maauminus’ mother one of
M zx 5 friendly relations with
Maximinus M 4, 5 defeated
Gordian IH. Go 31,4 led as cap
tives in Áurelan's tuumph A 33,
4 booty taken from by Piobus P


(3.

Alba, town in Italy villa of M.
Aurelius at AC 9, 8 rı soldiers at
angered by murder of Geta Cc 2,
7-B, Ge 6, 1-2.

Alba, district of Germany Germans
dnven beyond by Probus P x3, 7.

Alban, people of Transcaucasia
Hadnan's friendly relations with
H 20,13 offered aid for rescue of
Valerian Va4,i revered Aurelian
A 41, IO.

Albanus, Mons, in Italy soldiers
from killed Maximinus and son


M 23,6
Albingaum, town in N.W., Italy
Proculus born m F :2 i bs
descendants lived in F 13, 5.
Albini, family of Clodius Albinus
descended from CA 4, 1 7 prowess
of during the Republic CA 13, 5.
Albinus ‘see Ceionms Clodius
Nummus Pescennius.
Albis, river of Germany Chauci
lived on DJ 1, 7.
Albus used by oracle to designate
Clodius Albinus PN 8, 1.3,
1, 4
Alcyonae poem of Cicero, imitated
by Gordian I. Go 3,2
Alexander name given to Aem.
lanus TT 22, 7
Alexander of Cotiaeum, grammartan
teacher of M. Aurehus MA 2, 3.
Alexander the Great died without
naming successor H 4,9, opinion
of Philip concermng MA 27, 11
admired by Caracalla Cc 2, 1-2
Severus Alexander born in temple
of and on date of death of SA 5,
r2, I3,I1 called Magnus after
many achievements SA rr, 4
paients of SA 13, 3-} Severus
Alexander ın costume of SA 25, 9
life of studied and mutated by
Severus Alexander SA 30,3 statue
of in ptivate chapel of Severus


Alexander the Cn eat — continued
Alexander 5A 31, 5. parses of en-
joyed by Severus Alexander SA
35,1 contest in honour of SA 35,
4 dunking in honour of SA 39, 1.
Seveius Alexandei's desne to outdo
SA 50, 1. died violent. death SA
62,3 Severs Alexander ciiücized
for desne to inutate SA 61,3. por-
irat of warn by descendants of
Macranus TT 14, 3-5 efficacy of
portrait of TT 14, 6 at tomb of
Achilles P 1, 2

Alexander see lulius.

Alexandria daughter of  Avidtus
Cassius, allowed to go flee by M.
Aurelius MA 26, 12, AC 9, 3.

Alexandra. nots at H 1i2, I
Museum at H 20,2 Maecianus
slain at MA 25, 4, AC 7, 4
leniency of M. Aurelius to MA 26,
I, 3 crystal cups from used by
L. Verus V 5,3 actors and musi.
cians from V 8, 11. grain from C
17, 7 Severus at and granted
nghts to S 16, 9, 17, 2-3 Cara-
calla's cruelty at Cc 6, 2-3 people
of ridiculed Severus Alexander SA
28, 7, riot at caused Aemulianus to
declare himself emperor TT 22, 3
fasces not allowed to be brought
into TT 22,:0-11 Zenobia versed
in history of TT 30, 22 letter ol
senate to council of T 18,6 seized
by Firmus F s, i Hadrian's
opimon of F 8, 5-8 Satuuninus
acclaimed emperor in F 9, 1-2

Alexandra name given to Carthage
by Commodus C 17, 8

Alesandriana, Aqua brought into
Rome by Severus Alexande SA
25, 5

Aleaandriana, purpura used by
Severus Alexander SA 40, 6,

Alexandrianae, ficus showed omen
DE death of Severus Alexander SA

O, 4

Alesandnan, Sodales | decieed for
Severus Alexander SA 63, 4.

Alesandrias poem in praise of
Severus Alesander, umtated by
Gordian I Go 3, 3.

Alexandiina, Basilica; begun by
Severus Alexander SA 26, 7.


INDEX OF NAMES


Alexandrinum, opus first used by
Severus Alexander SA 25, 7.

Alexandrinus name given to Aenuli.
anus TT 22, 7.

AS oo killed by Commodus

7;

Alma Mons planted with vines by
Probus P 18,5

Alpes Cottae added to Empne
under Nero A 21, 11.

Alpes Maritimae Proculus a native
of F 12, 1

Alps cheese from AP 12,4 crossed
by M Aurehus and L. Verus MA
Ih 6; V 9, 7. crossed by Mart
minus and mmy M 21,3 Maxi-
mus planned to defend country as
far as M.B 12, 3 vines planted
as far as A 48,2

Alünum, town in Italy L. Verus
died 1n V 9, 11

Amazon Commodus and Marcia in
garb of C 11, 9. signet of Com-
modus CA 2, 4 Gothic women
diessed as A 34, L

AÀmazonius name given to Com-
modusC 11,9. to month December
C rr 8

Ambarvaha celebration of A 19, 6,
20, 3.

Ambtbulus see Eggius

Amburbium celebration of A 20, 3

Aminmae, name of grapes omen
given im T 17, 3.

Ámphitheatum at Rome (Colos-
seum) restored by Antoninus Pius
AP 8,2 by Elagabalus E 17, 8
by Severus Alexander SA 24, 3
women fom E 32, 9 repair of
discussed in senate M-B 1, 4
spectacle of Probus 1n P 19, 5-7

Anacharsis famed for philosophy A


3; 5-

Ancharius, Q , governor of the East
with Valeian at Byzantium A 13,

Anchialus, city on Black Sea Goths
attempted to plunder Cl 12, 4

Anttha plan to remove to temple of
Iagabalus E 3, 4

Andro teacher of M. Aurelius MA
2,2

Andronicus seg Livius

Aninius Macer, orator > teacher of M.
Amelus MA 2, 4.


Anna Cornificia Faustina: sister of
M. Aurelius MA 1, 8.

Anna Faustina daughter of Antoni-
nus Pius Ae 6, 9, AP 1, 7, 10, 2
betrothed to Lucius Verus Ae 6, 9,
V2,3 marrnedto M Aurelius AP
1,7, 10,2, MA1,8, 6,6, V 2, 3
received title of Augusta MA 20, 7
unwilling to have Lucilla mamed
to Claudius Pompeianus MA 20, 7
accused of having encouraged
Avidius Cassius to revolt MA 24, 6 ;
AC 7,1, 9,9, x3, 1. death MA
26,5 honours after death MA 26,
6-9 reputed amours and lovers
MA, 19, 1-7, 23, 7, 26, 5, 29, 1-2,
C 8, 1 M, Aurehus refused to
divorce MA 19, 8-9 refused to
beheve rumours about MA 23, 7,
26,5 alleged amour with L Verus
and murder of Verus V 10, I
frustrated alleged conspiracy of
Verus against M. Aurelius V 10, 5
correspondence with M. Aurelius
concerning revolt of Avidtus Cassius
AC 9, 7-8, 9, 11—10, 10; 1r, 3-8
dream at birth of Commodus C 1,
3 temple abolished by Caracalla
Cc 11, 6-7. *

Annia Fundania Faustina cousin of
M Aurelius, killed by Commodus
C^7

Annia Galeria Faustina wife of
Antomnus Pius AP 1, 6 aunt of
M Aurehus MA x, 8 stories con-
cernng character of AP 3, 7 re-
ceived ttle of Augusta AP 5, 2
death and honoms AP 6, 7-8
orphan girls endowed in memory
of AP 8, 1 urged Antoninus Pius
to protect his family AC ro, 1

Annia Lucilla, daughter of M. Aure-
lus married to L. Verus MA 7,7,
9, 4-0, V 2,4, 75,7 married to Ti.
Claudius Pompeianus after Verus'
death MA 20, 6: received title of
Augusta MA 20, 7' said to have
murdered L. Verus V 10,3 jealousy
of Fabia V 10, 3. in conspiracy to
kil Commodus C 4, 1, 8,3 e&xiled
C4,4 killed C s, 7.

Annus Árnanus, L -
Go 29, 1.

Annus Cornicula praised Gallienus


Ga 17, 2.


consulship of


INDEX OF NAMES


Annius Florus, P, Hadiian’s ex-
change of epigrams with H 16, 3-4
Annis Fuscus father of Pescennius
Niger PN 1, 3.
Annus Libo, M.
Aurelius MA x, 3
Annius Libo, M. cousin of M.
Aurelius, legate of Syria, said to
have been Killed by L. Verus V 9,
2 widow married to Agaclytus V


9; 3-

Annius Milo, T * mules of F 6, 4

Annius Severus consul, fathei.in-law
of Gordian I. Go 2, 2; 6, 4.

Annis Verus great-grandfathe: of
M Aurelius MA 1, 4

Annius Verus orginal name of M.
Aurelius MA 1, 10, 5, 5.

Annius Verus, M. father-in-law of
Antoninus Pius AP 1, 6 grand-
father of M. Aurelius MA z,2 M
Aurehus born in second consulship
and reared in house of MA 1, 5-7,
consulship of HP 15, 6

Annius Verus, M. father of M.
Aurehus MA 1, x.

Annius Verus, M sonof M. Aurelius,
received title of Caesar MA 21, 3,
C r, 18

Antaeus Maaiminus likened to M


uncle of M.


Antimachus poet imitated by
Hadrian H 16, 2
Antinous, favourite of Hadrian


death and consecration of H 4, 5-
8 reviled by Egyptians F 8, 8.
Antioch, city in Syma Hadrian at
H 5, 9-t0 people of hated by
Hadrian H 14, 1 fireat AP 9, 2
L Verus at MA 8, 12, V 7, 143
Claudius Pompeianus a native of
MA 20, 6 loved and supported
Avidius Cassius AC 6, 6, 7, 8, 9,
1 punished by M  Áurelius MA
25, 8rr, AC 9,1 M Aurelius at
MA 26,1 Pertinax at HP r, 6
punished by Severus for support of
Niger S 9, 4-5, Cc 1, 7. Severus
at S 16,8 rights restored to Cc 1,
7 Macrinus overthown at OM
8, 4, 10, 1 coins with name of
Diadumenianus stuck at D 2, 6
people of ridiculed Severus Alev-
ander SA 28, 7 Alexander sup-
pressed mutiny at SA 535—354


Antioch, city in Syna-—confinneil.
Alexander retuned to SA 55, 2
recaptured from Pesians by
Gordian TIL Go 26, 5-6, 27, 5
captured by Cynades TT 2, 2
Aurelian at A 5, 3 captured by
Aurelian A 25, 1 letter of senate
to people of T 18, 6.

Anuochtanus prefect of the guard,
prevatled upon soldiers not to kill
Elagabalus E r4, 8.

Antiochtanus see Flavius.

Antipater sez Caelius Gallus,

Ántstus favourite slave of Amelan
A 50,3

Antistius Burrus, L, nephew of Com-
modus accused by Pertinax of
eon HP 3,7 killed by Cleander

Me

Antistrus Capella
modus C 1,6

Antium, town in Italy aqueduct in
repaired by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 3

Antius see Antonius

Antonini Severus dreamed of being
placed among S 22, 2. Nige: be-
loved by PN 12,6 Albinus :ntro-
duced to CA 6,1 list of OM 3, 3-4
Caracalla given by gods in the
place of OM 6,2 revered above
gods D 7, 4 Elagabalus last of
and disgraced name of OM 7, 8,
E 1, 7, 2, 4, 18, 1, 33, 8, 34 6,
SA 2,2 name of revered by Con-
stantine E 2, 4 temples of to he
dedicated by Severus Alexander
SA 7,5, 8,3, 10,7 admued and
praised. by Gordian I Go 4, 7
Claudius more beloved than Cl 18,
4 Probus to be prefered to T 16,
6, P 22,4 under Probus no longe:
desired P 12,2

Antonintanae, caiacallae presented
by Caracalla to populace S 21, 11,
Cc9, 7-8, D2,8

Antommianae, paenulae presented
by Macunus to populace D a, 4,

Antommanae, Plateae, at Rome
paved by Elagabalus E 24, 6.

Antonimanae, Thennae, at Rome
bult by Caracalla S 21, 11, Cc Q,
4.5 9, E 17, 8-0. pouco of begun
by Elagabalus E 17,9 completed
by "rin Alexander Is 17, 9; SA
25, 6.


teacher of Com.


INDEX OF NAMES


Antoniniam (-ae), puer and puellae
endowed by Macrinus D 3, 10

Ántoninan Sodales decreed for
Antoninus Pius AP 13, t, MA 7,
u (wrongly called Aurelan:) for

. Verus MA 15,4 for M Aure.
hus MA 18, 8, HP r5, 4 (wrongly
called Marciani) called Helviam
in honour of Pertinax HP 15, 4,
S ze decreed for Caracalla Cc
II,

Antonimanus name given by Mac-
rinus to edict D 2, 9. to military
standards D 3, 1

Antonimanus name of coin A 9, 7,
I2,1, P4, 5) E15,

Anionimias, poem written by Gord-
ian 1. Go 3, 3

Ántoninoium, Sepulchrum See
Hadrian, Sepulchium.

Antoninus son of M, Aurelius, died
at age of four C 1, 2-4.

Antoninus — plebian, had omen of
death of Geta Ge 3, 5.

Antoninus boy who gave omen of
death of Geta Ge 3, 8

Antoninus (as impenal name) re-
garded as impezal title OM 3, 7.9
assumed by M Aurelius MA 7, 6,

M 3,4, D6,5, SA 19,5 by
Verus (incorrect) MA 7, 7, OM
3,4, D6, 6, SA 10,5 by Severus
(nconect) OM 3, 6, D 6, 3
Perunas (incorrect) OM 3, 6,
6,3 by Didius Julianus (1ncorrect)

3, 6; 6, 3 conferred on
Caracalla S 10, 3-6, PN 8, 5, Cc
1,1, Ger,4, OM 3, 4, D6, 8,
SA 10,5 on Geta (incorrect) S 10,
5, 16, 4, 19, 2, Cc 1, 1, Ge 1,
5-7, 2, 2-3, 5, 3, OM 3,4, D 6,
9 Severus wished to make equi.
valent of Augustus S 19,3, Ge 2,
2 cherished by all like Augustus
Cc 9,3 borne by four emperors
hefore Geta Ge 2, 5 assumed by
Macrinus OM 2,1, 3,6 bestowed
on Diadumemanus Cc 8, 10, OM
2,9—39.5:1, 5, 6, 7,5, IQ, 6,
14,2-3, D 1—2, 6,10, 7,1. 5-7, 8,
1, E 0,4, 37, 84, 9A 9, 3, 10,
5 assumed by Elagabalus Cc 9,
2, OM 3,4, 7,6, $4, 9,6, D9,
g E:1,57,3,1, 9 2; 17, 4 re
used by Severus Alexander SA 5,


Antoninus——continued
3, 6, I—II, 2, 12, 4 wrongly
supposed to have been borne by
the Gordians OM 3,5, D 6, 3,
E 18, T, 34, 6-7, Go 4; 78, 53,
9,5, 17,2 5 declined in greatness

7, 7-8. a beloved and revered
name S 20, 3, 21, x1, OM 6, 7,
^7 D 6, Il-2, 7,1, E I,5 gen-
eral desire for emperor of the name

M3,9, Dx,2 4

Antoninus proposed as name for
September AP 10, 1.

Ántoninus, Temple of, at Rome
built AP 13, 4 Patruinus mur-
dered near Cc 4, 2.

Antoninus Gallus, consul
Valerian to A 8, 2-5.

ANTONINUS PIUS names H 24,
1, AP r,r family and birth AP
1, 1-8 childhood AP 1, 89 char-
acte AP 2,1 2 7.8, 13,4, MA
29,6, D7,4 cognomen Pius and
reasons for bestowal H 24, 3-5, Ae
6,9, AP 2, 3-8, 5,2, PN 8, 5, E
7,10, SA 9, x early career AP z,
gair omens of rule AP 3, 1-5
proconsul of Asia AP 3,2 3. 6, 4,
3 death of daughter A? 3, 6 ın
Hadnan's consilium AP 3,
adoption by Hadrian H 24, 1, Ae
6,9, AP 4, 1-6, MA 5,1, V 2, 2,
A 14, 6 adopted M  Aurebus
and L Verus H 24, 1, Ae 2,9,

5,12, 6,9, 7,2, AP 4,5, MA s,

1-7; V 3, 6, S 20,1, SA 10, 5

colleague of Hadrian in imperial

powers AP 4,7 largesses to people

AP 4,9, 81.11, V3, 1 remitted

cown-gold AP 4, ro deference

to Hadrian AP 5, 1. second consul-
ship MA 5, 6- honours for Hadrian

H 24, 5, 27:2-3, AP 2, 5, 5, 1-2,

8,2, ¥ 3,2 honours for wife and

relatives AP 5,2 accepted honor-

ary races AP 5, 2 continued offi.
cials in posts AP 5,3, 8, 6-7 con-
quests and suppression of revolts

P 5, 4-5, 12, 2 repressed pro-
curators AP 6, 1-2 clemency AP

6, 5, AC xr, 6 moderation AP

6,4 deference to senate AP 6, 5,

8, 10 accepted ttle of Pater

Patrac AP 6, 6 honours for

Faustina AP 6, 7-8 offices for sons


letter of


INDEX OF NAMES


Antoninus Pius—con£itued,
AP 6, 9-10, 10, 3° consultations
with hiends AP 6, 11-12. care fm
provinces AP 7, 1. 2 17, 10, 7
treatinent of cunspuators AP 7,
3-4 unplicity of lle AP 7, 4-6
administration of hnances AP 7,
7-10 m Campania AP 7, 11 pres-
tge abroad AP 7, r2 donatives
to soldiers AP 8, 1, 10,2 endow.
ment for orphans AP 8, Iı public
works AP B, 2-4 declined legacies
AP 8, 5: prefects of guard undei
AP 8, 79 disasters and prodigies
during principate AP 9, i-5*
foreign relations AP 9, 6-10. re-
fused honorary names of months
AP 10, 1 remark conce: ning Apol-
lomus AP 10,4 affection for M.
Aurehus AP 10,5, MA 6, 7.10
relations with L. Verus V 3, 6-7
rewaids for prefects AP 10, 6
spectacles AP 1o, 9 treatment of
friends and freedmen AP iy, t
amusements AP 11, 2
oratory and philosophy AP 11,
2.3 affabhty AP 11, 4-3 legisla-
tion AP 12, I  admimstrative
measures AP 12, 3 death AP 12,
4-7 commended Empire to M.
Aurelius AP 12,5, MA 7,3 will
P 13, 1-2 burial, deificanon and
honours AP 13, 3-4, MA 7, 10-11
conspiracy of Avidius Cassius
against AC 1,5 could not be over-
thrown by rebels AC $,6 Peitinax
under rule of HP x,6 example of
good son by adoption S 21, 4
adnured by Niger PN 3x2, 1 ad-
vanced Severus and admired by
him Ge 2, 3-4 details conceining
related by Cordus OM 1,4 sup-
posed oracle concerning OM 3, 1-2
Diadumenianus born on birthday
of D 5, 4 example of good ruler
E 1,2, À42, 4 revered by Con-
stantine E 2, 4 praised in poem
by Gordian I Go 3,3 old when
made emperor T 5, 1
Antoninus see Arrius
Petromus
Antonius Antius Lupus, M
by Commodus C 7, 5
tonus Balbus killed by Seveius
13, 2.


Aurelius


halled


3 Ápis


interest in '


Antonius Saturninus, L acclaimed
emperor by soldicis PIN 9, 2, 8A 1,
7 no hfeof wiitten. by Suctonius
Drs

Anubis statue of carried. by Com.
modus € 9, 4 6, PN 6,9, Cc 9,
I1 Statue of showed prodigy C
16, 4.
Apes city in Syna grapes from
$21,2 .
Aper father-in-law of Nuinetrian,
killed him Ca 12 kiled by Dio.
Cletian Ca 12, 2-13, 3, 15,4. pres
fect of guard Ca 13,2, 15, 4.

Aper see Flavius, Septimius.
Trosius, Vectius

Apicius Caehus works read by
Aehus Verus Ae 5, 9; banquets
imitated by Elagabalus k 18, 4;
20,5, 24,3

appeared after
many years H 12, 1

Apolaustus see Aelius Aurelius,

Apollinares, Ludi banquet of
Severus Alexander on SA 37, 6,
meeting of senate on M.B r, r.

Apolhnans see Aurelius Sulpicius

Apollo. statue of MA 6,9 temple
otin Babylonia V 8, 2, oracles of
PN 8, 1-6, CA 1, 4, 5,4, said by
Maaiminus’ soldiers to have fought
against them M 22,2 thanks
rendered to M 26,2 ard of sought
A 19, 4 omen given by-statue of
T1755

Apollo, Temple of, in Rome senators
acclaimed Claud usin Cl 4, 2


interval of


Apollodorus, architect designed
Colossus et Luna tor Hadin H
19, I3


Apollonius, ihetorician teacher of
L. Verus V 2, 5

Apollontus of Chalcedon, philoso.
pher patience of Antoninus Pius
with AP ro, 4 teacher of M,


Aurelius MA2,7,3, 1 otL Verus
2, 5
Apollonius Syrus, philosopher — Gited


2,9

Apollonius of Tyana. stave of in
puvate chapel of bevans Alev-
ander SA 29, 2. appearance of to
Aurelian made hin more mecitul
A 21, 3-6, 25, 1. greatness of A
21, 7-0.


INDEX OF NAMES


Appenninus, Mons, in Italy Pe-
unaa born on HP 1, 2 oracles
given to Claudius on Cl 10, 4-5
to Aurelian on F 3, 4.

Appia, Via Geta bured on Ge 7, 2

Apuleius, L writer of Milesiae CA
I2, 12,

Apuleius. Rufinus
verus S 4, 4

Apulia, district of Italy L. Verus in
V6,9 Tetricus superviso of TT

Aquileia, city in Italy M. Aurelius
and L Verus at MA t4, 2, V 9,
7-10 resisted siege by Maximinus
M 21, 6—22, 6, 28,4, 33, 1, M-B
11, 3, 12, 23, I5, 4, 16, 5 7
Maximinus hiled at M 23, 6,
M.B 1:1, 3. army fed with provi-
sions from M 24,3 news of Maat
minus' death sent from to Rome
M 25, 2 memorial of Maximinus
near M 28, 8 question whether
Maximus went to M 33, 3 letter
of senate to council of T 18, 6
Carus tn Itst of council of Ca 4, 4

Áquihus centunon, sent to kill
Severus DJ 5,8, PN 2,6

Aquilo name given by Aelius Verus
to messenger Ae 5, 10

Aquinum, town in Italy grandfather
of Pescenntus Niger official at PN


consul with Se.


Arabia *Haditan in H r4, 4 pro-
digies in AP 9, 4-5 pestilence in
AP 9,4 victory of Avidius Cassius
in AC 6, 5, Severus in 8.9, 9
legion in declared for Albinus S
i2, 6 governor of implicated in
conspiracy but pardoned D 8, 4.

Arabianus punishment of urged by
Diadumenianus D 9, 1.

Asabianus see Claudius Claudius
Severus Flavius Septimius.

Arabicus cognomen conferred on

S 9, t0, assumed by Cara-
calla Cc 1o, 6.

Arabs conquered by Severus S 18,
x. war of Macrinus against Eudae-
mones OM r2, 6 subject to Zen-
obia TT 30, 7: served under
Aurehan A mz, 3 Eudaemones
marched in Aurelian's tnumph A


33; 4.
Aradio killed by Probus P 9, 2,


Auatus | Cicero's translation of 1mita-
ted by Gordian I Go 3, 2 ;

Árca Caesarea, city in Syria. Severus
Alexander born at SA 1,2, 5, 1
omen at SA r3, 5

Aichimea omen at M 31, 3

Aichontius Severus conversation
with F 2, 1

Arcia, town 1n Italy memorial of
Maximinus near M 28, 8.

Arelhus Fuscus speech of TT 21,
3-4 proconsul of Asia A 40, 4

Arellius Fuscus cited TT 25,2


Areopagus Gallienus wished to join
Ga 11, 5
Argunt (?) King of Scythians,


attacked neighbours Go 31, I

Arstomachus tribune, withheld
colours when soldiers wished to
lil Elagabalus E 14, 8

Austotle works of studied by Gor.
dian J Go 7, 1 famed for philo-
sophy A 3, 5

Armema victory of Priscus in MA
9, I 1ecovered by generals of
L Verus V 7, 1 victory of Avidius
Cassius in AC 6, 5 victory of
Palmatusin SA 58, L «

Armentacus cognomen borne by
M, Aurelius and L Verus MA 9,
1, V7,2 by Aurelian A 30, 5.

Armenians permitted by Hadrian
to have king H 2r, 11 saved by
Antoninus Pius from Parthian 1n-
vasion AP 9, 6 served under Niger
PN 4,2 war of Caracalla against
Cc 6,1 war of Macrinus against
OM 12, 6 in army of Severus
Alexander SA 6r, 8, TT 32, 3
letter of king of Va 3 subject to
Zenobia TT 30,7 Zenobia drank
with TT 30, 18 hated by Maxi-
minus made Titus emperor TT 32,
3 served under Aurelian A xr, 3
sent aid to Zenobia, intercepted by
Aurehan A 27, 4, 28, 1. 4. revered
Aurelian A 41, 10.

Arra Fadila mother of Antoninus
Pius AP r1, 4.

Arrianus” see Annius  Herodianus.

Arius Augur consulship of MA
f: 5.

Arrius Antoninus grandfather of
Antoninus Pius AP 1, 4.


INDEX OF NAMES


Anius Antoninus, C . accused of
treason by Pertinax HP 3,7 killed
by Cleande: C 7, 1

Artabanus V., King of the Parthians
avenged slaughter of Parthians
and granted peace to Romans OM


Li

Artabassis delivered company of
Persians to Romans P 4, 1.

Artavasdes letter of Va 3

Artaxanses recaptured fiom Persians
by Gordian III Go 26, 6

Artaxata, aty in Armenia captured
by M. Statius Priscus MA 9, x.

Artaxerxes, Mang of the Persians
defeated by Severus Alexander SA


55, 1, 56, 7.


Articulerus Paetus, Q consulship
of H 35, 1.
Ascanius Diadumenianus hkened to
B. T.


Asclepiodotus see Julus

Aselio see Marcius

Asellus Àenuhanus general of Niger
declared a public enemy S 8, 13
PN5,7 defeated PN 5,7 Severus
refused to pardon S 8, 15 defeated
and killed S 8, 16

Asellus Claudianus killed by Se.
verus S 13, 1.

Asia Hadnanin H 13,1 6 Antoni
nus Prius proconsul of AP 3, 2.3. 6,
4,3 emthquake in AP 9, 1
Verus in V 6,9 Arius Antoninus
proconsulofC 7,1 Sulpicius Cras-
sus proconsul of C 7, 7 persons
killed in by Commodus C 7,7
Caracalla in Cc 5,8 legate of um.
plicated in conspiracy but par-
doned D 8,4 Balbinus proconsul
of M-B 7,2 subject to Romans Va
1,5 Macrianus in Ga 2,5 earth-
quake in Ga 5, 3, 6, 5 invaded
by Goths Ga 6, 2 5, 7, 3, 13, 8,
Ci 8, r Faltomus Probus and
Arelhus Fuscus proconsuls of A
40, 4.

Asinus Lepidus Praetextatus, C
consulship of Go 26, 3.

Áswuus Quadratus, historian, cited
V8,4, ^C 1,2

Asprianus See Fulvius.

Assyiu. Constantina wife of tuhune

of Cl 13, 3,


Astacus old name of. Nicomedia Ga


thy 8
Astyanas see Maganius,
Ateius Sanctus, Orator

Commodus C 1, 6.
Atellanae, | fabulae

Hadrian H 26, p
Athenaeum, placein Rome Pertinax"

visit to interrupted HP rr, 3

visited by Severus Alexander SA

35, 2 Gordian I debated in Go


3 4

Athenaeus ^ defended Hyzantnum
against Goths Ga 13, G.

Athenio Maximinus hkened to M


9, 0.

Athens Hadrian's generosity and
offices held in 13, 1; IQ, 1-2
Temple of Jupiter Olympius and
alta: to Hadrian H 13,6 part of
named Hadnanopohs H 20, 4
M Aurehusat MA27,1 L Verus
at V 6,9 Severus at S 3, 7
Gallienus at Ga 11, 3-5 people of
defeated Goths Ga 13, 8 Plato
born atA3,4 amnesty proclaimed
by people of A 39, 4 letter of
senate to council of T 18,6

Atherianus see Iulius,

Anhus Severus consul, evled hy
Commodus C 4, 11

Atlus Tinanus  conspued agaist
Antoninus Pius AP 7, 3

Atrebati, in Gaul cloaks from Ga 6,
6 capes hom Ca 20, 6

Attalus condemned by Ainus Are
tomnus C 7, 1

Atuanus see Cachus,

Atticus see Claudius Vettius l

Attidius Cornelhanus governar of
rne, defeated by Vologaesus MA


teacher of


produced by


Aufidius Victorinus, C., fellow.
student of M Aurelius MA 3, 8
sent to repel mvasion of Chatu

E]

Augur see Airis,

Augusta (as impen name)’ con-
fei1ed on Faustina the elder AP 5,
2 on Blavia Tina, but seftased
by Pertinas HP 5, 4 6,9 on
Manha Seantlla and Didi Clara
D] 3 £, 4, 5. taken from Dara
Clara DJ 8, 9 held by Victoria

T53


INDEX OF NAMES


Augusta, Historia
‘Lacitus T 10, 3
AUGUSTUS title of Pater Patuiae
granted to hım late H 6,5 military
discipline relaxed after H 10, 3
temple of at Tarraco restored by
Haduan H 12, 3 could not be
overthiown by rebels, according to
Marcus Amelius AC 8,6 clemency
of AC 11,6 temple of at Tarraco
dreamed of by Severus S 3, 4
donative of to soldiers cited as
precedent by tioops of Severus S
7, 6 unsuccessful in adoption of
son 521,3 admired by Niger PN
12, 1 example of good ruler E r,
2, A42, 4 gave name to all later
emperors SA IO, 4 erected statues
of tamous men SA 28, 6 resem-
blance of Gordian I to Go 21, 5
equalled in moderation by Claudius
12,3 pomerum extended by
AZI, xi list of emperors after A
42, 3-4 Probus compared with P
22, 4 Rome weakened until time
of, made stiong by Ca 3, 1
Augustus (as umperial name) held
conjointly by M. Aurehus and L
Verus H 24, 2, Ae 5, 12-33, MÀ 7,
6, conferred on L Verus MA 7,5
held by Antonines SA 10,4 con-
fened on Pertinax HP 5, 5 on
Didius Julianus D] 4,5 on Cara-
calla $ 18, 9, Cc 11, 3 not held
by Diadumenianus D 10, 4 con-
ferred on Severus Alexander SA 1,
3, 8,1 on Maximinus M 8,1 on
Gordians M 14, 3-5, 15, 7, 18, 2,
Go 4, 2, 11, 10, 16, 4, 17, 1, IQ
7, 34 1, M-B x, 1 on Maximus
and Balbinus M 20, 2, Go 22, 1,
on Gordian III Go 22,5 on Philip
eon 3 held by Decu Va 6, 8,
conferred on Valerian the younger
Va8,1, Gax4,9 on Odaenathus
Ga 12, 1 assumed by Cyriades
TT 2,3 conferred on Postumus
the younger TT 4,1 on Tetricus
TT 24,1 on Tacitus T 4,3 on
Probus P 10, 4, 11, 4, 12, 8 on
Fnmus P 2,1 on Diocletian Ca
13, 1-2, 18, 1.
Aureha, Via Lorum situated on
I, 8 vines planted along A
48, D


written by


Aureha Fadilla, daughter of M.


Aurelius illness of AC 10,6


Aurelia Messalina mother of Clodius


Albinus CA 4, 3


AURELIAN foremost of emperors


E35,2 extended Empire SA 64, x,
bravest of emperors T 4,5 restored
world to Roman sway A 1, 5, 32,
4, 41,7 lileofwritten by Vopiscus
1,5, F i4 hfe of little known
A I, 5-9, birthplace and parents A
3, 4, 1-2, 24, 3 omens of tuture
rule A 4, 3-5.6 legate to King of
Persians A 5, 5 appearance and
habits A 6, 1 severity to soldiers
A 6,2, 7,3—8,5 military posts
and campaigns under Valerian A
6, 2, 7, I, IO, 2-3, 11, 1-7 wars
against Sarmatians A 6, 3-4, 7,2,
IB, 2 against Franks A 7, 1-2
against Persians, A 7, 2, 35,4, 41,
9, T 13,3 greatness A II, IO
feared by Valerian A8, 5 allow.
ance, supplies and gifts to A 9, L
6.7, 12, I-2, 13, 2-4 deputy of
Uipius Crimtus and adopted by
him A 10,2-3, II, I-2, 12, 3— 185,2,
38, 2 consulship A i1,,8, 12, 1,
15, 3, victories over Goths A 13, 2,
10,1 4, 17, 1—18, 1, 22,2, 41, 8,
P6,6 interview with. Valerian at
Byzantium A 13, I—15, 1, com-
mander of cavalry under Claudius
Az8,1 letters of A 7, 5-8, 20, 4-8,
23, 4-5, 26, 3-0, 31, 5-9, 3B, 3-4,
42, 2-4, P 6,6, F 15,6-8 message
to senate TT 30, 4-xi letters ot
Valerian concerning A 8—9, 12,
letters of Valerian and Claudius to
A II, 17,2-4 made emperor A 16,
r, 37, 6, Ca 15, 2 said to have
killed Aureolus À 16,2 waragainst
Sueb: A 18,2 repelled invasion of
Marcomanni: A 18, 3~-21, 5, 41,8
ordered consultanon of Sibylline
Books A18,5-—20, 8 cruelty A 2x,
$-9, 31; 4-5; 36, 2, 39, 8, Ads 1-2,
P8,x relations with senate A 23,
6, 37, 4, 39, 8. extended walls of
Rome and pomerium A 21, 9, 39;
2' marched through Byzantium
and recovered Bithynia A 22, 3
captured Tyana A 22, 5—24, 3, 25,
1, Apollonius appeaied to A 24,
2.6, 25, 1 matchless purple gar-


INDEX OF NAMES


Amehan— continued.


mentreceived by A 20. wa against
Zenobia TT 40, 35 A 22, 1; 25, a~
28,4, 35, 4: 41,9 letters and cut-
versation with Zenobia TT 30, 23,
A 26,6—27, 6 granted Zenolna's
life TT 30, 27, A 30, 2 hulled
Longinus A 30,3 defeated Carpi
À 30,4 cognomina A 50, 4-5*
victories in Thrace, Hiyncum and
Europe A 22,2, 31, 4, 32, r-2,
41, 8, F 5, 1 crushed ievolt of
Palmyrenes A 31, 1-6 restored
Temple of Sun at Palmyra A 31,
7-9 defeated Tetricus in Gaul TT
24, 23, A 32,3341, 8 niumph
over Zenobia and Tenicus TT 24,
4-5, 25, 2, 30, 3-4. 24-26, A 30, 2,
32, 4—34, 6, 39, 1, spectacles given
by A 34,6 honoured Tetnc and
friendship for them TT 24, 5, 25,
4-4, A 39, 1-2 Firmus revolted
against in Egypt A 32, 2-3, Fr, 4,
2, 163, 3, 1, 5 gifts, food, wine
and clothing for populace A 35, I~
2, 47, 48 built Temple of the
Sun at Rome and enriched it A r,
x 25,45: 35, 3, 39, 26 good
egislation A 35,3 in Gaul A 35,
4 saved Vindeha fiom invasion
A 35, 4, 41,8 in Hiyrncum A 35,
4 killed A 35, 5—37, 2, 40,2, t1,
t 12, T2, 4, P 13, §, Ca 4, 7
tomb and temple A 37, 2-3 mur-
derers of punished A 37, 2-3, T 13,
I, P 33,2 genetal grief at death
of A 37,3 length of reign A 37, 4
deified A 37, 4, 41, 2 1:3 freed
world from crime A 37, 7 mu-
dered niece (or nephew) A 36, 3,
39,9 revolt of mint-workets under
A 38, 2-4 burned 1ecords of debts
and punished false accusers and
dishonest officials A 39, 3-5 formed
province of Dacia Transdanuvina
A 39,7 interregnum after death
of A 40, T 1,1,2, 14,5 noone
more fortunate or useful than A
41, 6 revered by eastern nations
Å 41, I0. enriched temples A 41,
IY descendants À42,1-2 example
of good ruler A 42,4 neither good
nor bad ruler A 44,1 Diocletian's
opinion of A44,2 prophecy given
to related by Dioclenan A 44, 3-5.


464.


Aw ehan continued,
used taxes from Egypt for food of
Rome A j5, 1, 47, 1. public works
A 45, 2, $0 2 generosity to
fiends A 45, 5.  *sumptuay
measures A 15, 4-46, 6, 49, 7-8, T
rx, 6 incieased boatmen A 47,3
promoted viticulime A 48, 2
residence A 19, I harshness to
servants A 49, $5 established
senaculum A 49, 6, simpheny of
life A 49, 9-50, 4 ule fortunate
A 50,5. heloved by people, feared
by senate A 50, 5° disapproved of
statue of Gallienus Ga 18,
honows fo: proposed by Tacitus
T 9, 2 5 Prabus to be preferred
to T 16,6 Probus’ achievements
under P 6, 1 5 planned to make
Probus empe P 6,7 unda
Probus no longer desired P 12, 2
planned to make thione for Jupiter
F 3, 4 Fumus competed in
drinking with generals of F 4, 4-5
proclamation of concerning Pirmus
F 5, 3-6 made Satuininus com-
mander of eastern fronte: and
forbade to visit Egypt F 7,2, 9,1
knew character of Gauls E 7, 3
put down people of Lugdunum P
I3, remuk of conce ning
Bonosus b Ip 3 gave wife and
wedding-gitts to Bonasas I t5, 1-5
a vigorous prince Ca 1,2 ^
Aurehanus influenced Nige to per-
sist in rebellion PN 7, 1
Aurehanus tribune, captured. with
Valerian A 6, 2
Aurehanus proconsul of Crheta,
gieat-grandson of Auselian A 42, 2.
Aurelianus see Pescennius
Aurelianus name of com P 4, 5
AURELIUS ANTONINUS, M,
pie-eminent in purity of hfe MA
1, x devoted to philosophy MA
I, fi, 43 10, 6, 5, B, 3, 16, $5 AC
3, 67, 14, 5: D 7, 4, SAQ 1
family and bnth MÀ r, r-6; edu-
cation and teacheis AP xo, 4, MA
I, 7, 9, Teg, Q Sister MA 4, 8
married to Fausuna AP 1, 7, 10,
2, MAr, 8; 6,6, Vi2,3  ongsnal
names MA x, gio  atiertion of
Hadnan for MA 4, 1-2, 16, 6.77
early bonows MA 4, 2-6. betrothal


INDEX OF NAMES


Aurelius Antoninus—continued,

to daughter of L Ceionms Com-
modus MA 4, 5, 6, 2. generosity
to sister and he son MA 4, 7, 7,4

amusements MA 4, 8-9 adopted
by Antoninus Pius H 24, x, Ae 5,
12, 6, 9, 7, 2, AP 4, 5, MA 5,
I-7, 19,9, V 2, 2, S 20,1, SA 10,
5 relations with. Antoninus Pius
AP 1o, 5, MA 5, 7-8, 6, 7-10, 7,
2-3 career of office AP 6, 9, MA
5,6, 6,1 3 4 colleague of An-
tonnus Pius in imperial powers
MA 6,6 birth of daughter MA 6,
6 lack of greed MA 7, 1 made
emperor AP 12, 5, MA 7,3 made
L "Verus co-emperor MA 7, 5-6,
V 3,8—4,3 assumed name Anton.
inus MA 7, 6, OM 3, 4, D 6, 5

added honour to name OM 7, 7

married Lucilla to L Vems MA
7,7, 94-0, V2, 4,7, 7. endow-
ment for orphans MA 7, 8 dona.
tive to soldiers MA 7,9 honours
for Antoninus Pius MA 7, ro-xx

leniency MA 8, 1, 13,6 overflow
of Tiber under MA 8, 4-5 wars
and invasions MA 8, 6—9, I, 21, I~
2, 22,1 10 II consideration for
L. Verus MA 8, 10 x1. 13, 15,3,
V 4,11, 5,0, 6, 7 cognomina
MA 9, 1-2, 12,9 hinally accepted
title of Pater Paniae MA 9, 3, 12,
7 care for status of citizens MA
9,7-9 deference to senate MA I0,
I-I0, 12, 7, 29,4 legislanon MA
9, 9, 10, 2, 11, 810 admunistra-
tive measures MA 10, 10—I1, 7, 23,
I—24, 2, 27,6 moderation MA 12,
1-7. 9 I2 offered the corona civica
MA 12,8, triumphs MA 12, 811,
16, 2, 17, 3, 27,3, C 2,4 wars
with Marcomanm MA 12,13—14, 7,
17, 1-4, 21, 6—22, 2, V 9, 7-10, C
2-5, E 9, 1-2 pestilence MA 13,
3-0, 17, 2, 21, & criticism and
slande: of MA 9, 5, 15, x 5.6, 22,
5, 23, 5; 20, 3-7, V 10, 2, 11, 2-3

relations with freedmen MA. 15, 2;
Vg 6 honours for L Verus MA
15, 3-4, 20, 1 honours foi rela.
uves MA 16, r, 20, 5, 29, 8

honours for Commodus MA 16,
1-2, 17, 3, 22, 12, C 1, 10—2, 5

virtues in rule as sole emperor MA


VOL, Wi,


Aurelius Antomtnus—comtinued


16,3-5 care for provinces MA 17,
I, 22, 9 auction to replenish
treasury MA 17, 4-5, 21, 9, E 19,
I granted pomp to commoners
MA 17,6, E x9,1 spectacles MA
17, 7, 27, 5 refused to divorce
Faustina o: believe rumours con-
cerning her MA 19, 9, 23, 7, 26,
5. regard for reputation MA 20, 5,
22, 5, 29, 5 mared Luolla to
Claudius Pompeianus MA 20, 6-7

loss of son. Verus aud honours for
him MA 21, 3-5 settled Marco-
manni in Italy MA 22, 2, 24, 3

consulted with fnends MA 22, 3-4

erected statues of nobles MA 22, 7

largesses to people MA 22, 12, 27,
5.8 planned to make new provin-
ces in north MA 24, 5, 27, 10

revolt of Avidius Cassius MA 15,
6, 21, 2, 24, 6—25, 4, AC 7, 1-9,
C 2,2, Fx, 1r lemency to parti-
sans and children of Cassius MA
25, 5-10, 26, 3 1o-13, AC 8, 2—9,
4, 11,4—12, 10, 13, 6-7 in Syna
MA 25, 11—26, 1, C2, 3 negotia.
tions with oriental kings and
beloved in eastern provifices MA
26, 1-2 in Egypt MA 26, 3, C 2,
3 honours and temple for Faustina
MA 26, 5-9 at Athens, initiated
into Eleusiman Mysteries MA 27,
Ói1, Ga i1, 4 assumed toga in
Brundisium MA 27,3 at Lavinium
MA 27, 4 made Commodus col-
league in tribunician power MA
27,5, AC 13, 4 opinion concern-
ing Commodus MA 27, 11, 28, 10

quoted Plato MA 27, 7  marned
Commodus to daughter of Bruttius
Praesens MA 27, 8 death MA 18,
1, 27,9 11-12, 28, 1-9 beloved
and honoured MA 18, 2-8, 19, 10-
12 patience toward Faustina’s
lovers MA 29, 1-3 Fabia tried to
marry MA 29,10 rumours of dis-
sensions with L Verus V 9, 1-2,
correspondence concerning 1¢volt
of Avidius Cassius AC 1, 6—2, 8,
5, 5-12, 9, 7-8, 9, 11—10, IO, 11,
3-8 speech to senate and acclama-
tions AC 12, 1—13, deemed
happy had he not eft son like
Commodus MA 18, 1, S 2%, 5


HH


INDEX OF NAMES


Awelius Antoninus — coniuued
suspected, then promoted Pertinax
ELL’ 2, pg. promoted Didius Juli
anus D] 1, 4 promoted. Severus
Sa, 5; 42 3 cexatuple af good
sun by adoption & 21, p letter
concamug Niger PN 4, 1,
Niger's advice to PN 9, 2-4. ade
mired by Niger PN 12,1 details
concerning related by Cordus OM
1,4 eAumple of good rule E x,
2; A 42,4. revered by Constantine
E 2,4 wong done to by Elaga-
balus SA 7,3 praised by Gordian
I Go 3, 3. equalled in kindness by
Victoiinus TT 6,6 in righteous-


ness by Claudius Cl 2, 3 Rome
happy under Ca 3, 4.
Awelins Antonnus, M. see Caa-


calla Elagabalus

Aurehus Apolhnaus | accomphce in
murder of Caracalla Cc 6, 7.

Aurehus  Apolhnaris poetry of
echpsed by Numeuan's Ca 11, 2

Aurelius Cleander, M., chamberlain
of Commodus influence over Com-
modus C 6,3 5-12 appointed pie-
fect of the guard C 6,12 death C
7,1 Gebaucheries C 7,3 public

bath built by C 17, 5

Aurelius Festivus, Aureltan's freed.
man cited F 6, 2

Aurelius Fulvus father of Antoninus
Pius AP 1,5

Aurelius Fulvus, T. grandfather of
Antoninus Pius AP 1, 2.

Amelus Gordianus, consul — pie-
sided over meeting of senate A 41,3

Aurelius Nemesianus accomplice m
murde: of Caracalla Ce 6, 7

Aurelius Olympius Nemesianus, M
Numerian competed with Ca rr, 2.

Aurelius Philippus teacher of Sev-
erus Alexander SA 3, 2

Aurelius Probus superintendent of
imperial dye-works SA 40, 6

Aurelius Verus, biogiapher of Trajan
cited SA 48, 6.

Aurelius Victor. (with cognomen
Pimus) historlan statements of
concerning Macrinus OM 4, 2-4.

Aurelius Zotcus power of under
Elagabalus E 10, 2.5

Aureoli, Pons, place in Italy Aure-
olus killed and buried at T T 12, 4-5.


AURLOLUS iebellion agamst Gal.
lepus Ga 2,6, 4, 1; 15 0-7, PI
11, P; ta, 2. tough over amy of
Macarius ia 2, 7, Tb 11, 2, 14
14, 14, 1. held Hiyiicum inm 5 3,
s, 6. Callies made peace with
Ga $6531.95, TT 11, 3; byt,
A 16, 1. aided Gallienus against
Postumus Ga 7, Y. supported at
Rome Ga 9, 1' promoted by Val-
etian TT 10,14. found favour with
Gallienus Cl 5, 1 defeated by
Claudius, hilled and bured TT 13,
4.5, Cl 5, 1-3, A 16, 1-2. Domiti-
anus general of TT 12, 14 not
trusted by Balhsta TT 18, 1
soldias sent by to selve Quietus
killed Ballista TT 18,3 Zenobia's
contempt for TT 30,23 Claudius
besought to save fiom Cl 4, |
praised by Gallus Antipater CI 5, 4

Auranculerus Corneltanus killed by
Seveius $ 13,2

Austrogoth: — invasion — of
Claudius Cl 6, 2,

Auiromus lustus

Autronius Tibenuanus


19, 1-2.
AVIDIUS CASSIUS ancestry AC
t,i-4 hatred for principate AC J,
4 alleged conspracies agast
Antoninus Pius and L Verus AC
1,56 character AC 3, 4-5, 13097
IO seventy in nulitary eliscipline
AC 3, 8—6, 4 in command of army
m Syua AC 5, 1-60, |. as legate of
L Venus sictorious. against Pa-
thians V 7, Y. stormed Sclencia V
8, 3-.(. Victorious in Armenia,
Arabia and Ikaypt MA 21, 2, AC
6, 5-7 beloved and supported by
people of Antuxh MA 25, 8,
AC 6, 5-0, 7, 8, à, 1 attempt to
seize the uperi power MA 15,6;
21, 2, 24, 6—23, 4, AC 7, 1-5, C
A 6, 2, 10, 9-10, SÀ 1, 7,
b rri death MA 25, 2.3, AC 7,
8-9, &, 1 lemeney of M. Auiehius
toward MA 25, 5--26, 1, 26, 10.
13, AC 8, 2—9, 4, 11, 4-712, 10,
13, 7 descendants of killed by
Commodus AC 13, 7° correspond.
ence of M Aurelius concerning
revolt AC 1, 6—2, 56, 5, 5-12, 9, 7-
8, 9, 11—10, IO, 13, 3-b. speech


unde:


Jette: to T 19, 1-2.
letter ot 'E


A &
ree ae


INDEX OF NAMES


Avidius Cassius—contuiued.
of M. Awelus in the Senate con-
cerning partisans of AC 12, 3-10
lette! to son-in-law AC :4, 2-8
Pertinax in Syria dwing revolt
of HP 2, 10. senators opposed to
CA i2, i0 hfe of witten by
Marius Maximus F I, 1

Avidius Hehodorus son of Avidius
Cassius, banished by M. Aurelius
MA 26, 11.

Avidius Nigrinus, C conspiracy
against Hadrian and death H 7,
1-2 father-in-law of Aehus Verus


H 23, zo

Avidius Severus — giandfather of
Avidius Cassius AC 1, I.

Avitus see Elagabalus | Gallomus
Lollianus

Avulnius Saturninus, commander of
Scythian frontier with Valerian at


Byzantium A 13, 1

Axomitae marched in Aurelhan s
triumph A 33,4 revered Aurelian
A 41, IO


Babylon captured by generals of
L Verus V 7, x.

Babylonia pestilence said to have
originated in V 8,2 Caracalla im
Ce G,

Bactnam kings of sent envoys to
Hadimn H 21, x; offered aid for
rescue of Valenan Vag, I marched
in Xurehian's triumph A 33, 4.
revered Aurelian À 41, 10.

Baebius Longus  fellow-student of
M. Aurelius MA 3, 8

Baebius Macer, prefectofcity spared
by Hadnan H 5, 5.

Baebius Macer, pretect of guard with
Valerian at Byzantium A 13, 1

Baebius Macrianus, rhetoucian tea-
cher of Severus Alexander SA 3, 3.

Baebius Maecianus introduced Al-
binus to Antonines CA 6, 1

Baetica. see Hispania.

Bate, town in Italy — Celsus mur-
dered at H 7,2 Hadrian died at
H 25, 5-6, AP 5,1, MA 6, 1
buildings of Severus Aleaander at
SA 26,9-10 Tacitusat when made
emperor T 7, 6  senatoi's retire-
ment to T 19, 5.


BALBINUS origin M-B 7, 1 3;
16, 1 career ot ofhce M.B 7, 2,
15,2 appearance and tastes M.B
7,4-5 character M 20,1, M-B x,
2, 2, 7, 7, 6-7, 15, 1, 16, 4 on
commnnssion of twenty to oppose
Maximinus, made emperor with
Maximus M 20, 1-3 8, 32, 3, 533
3, Go ro, 2, 19, 9, 22, 1, M-B
1, 2-~3; 3, 8, I, 135 2, 15,5, 16, 6
riots in Rome against M 20, 6, Go
22, 7-9, M.B 9, 1-4, 10, 4-8 re-
ceived news of death of Maxinunus
M 25, sacrifices on news of
death of Maximinus M 24, 7, M-
B 11, 4 acknowledged by army
of Maximinus M 24, 2-3 jealousy
of Maximus M.B 12, 5 honours
and acclamations in senate M 26,
M-B 12, 9, r3, 1-2 established in
Palace M 24, 8, 26, 7 il will of
soldiers toward M-B 12, 9, 13, 2-3
5 eacellent rule of M-B 13, 4, 15,
I-2 plan for campaign against
Germans M-B 13, § quarrels with
Maximus M-B 14,1 Milled by
soldiers Go 22,5, M-B r4, 2-8, x5,
4, 16, 4 length of rule Go 22, 5,
M.B 15,7 house of at Rome M-B
16,1 lette: congratulating MB 17.

Balbus see Antomus Cornelius
Iunius

BALLISTA  Valerian's prefect TT
12, 1 defeated Persians Va 4, 4
helped to make Macrianus and sons
emperois Ga 1, 2, TT 14, I
Macrianus' prefect Ga 3,2, TT 12,
6, t4, I betrayed Quietus Ga 3,
2-4 seized imperial power TT 15,
4, 10, 1. 3. speeches of TT 12, 3-6.
9-10. pardoned after Quietus!
death TT 18, r did not trust
Gallienus, Aureolus or Odaenathus
TT 18, 1 killed TT 15, 2-3. 12
character TT 18, 4. opimon of
Valenan concerning TT 18, 5-11.

Bardatct hooded cloaks from HP

13s

Bassianus see Aelius Caracalla
Valerius,

Bassus prefect of the city, successor
appointed by Severus 5 8, 8

Bassus consulship of TT 9, 1.

Bassus’ Lives of Firmus, etc, ad-
dressed to F 2, L


HH 9


INDEX OF NAMES


Bassus seg Cerionius.

Bastunaes war against Rome MA
22,1 settledin Thrace by Piobus
E151

Belenus, god worshipped at Aquileia
prophecy of M 22, 1.

Belgica see Galha

Bellona worshippers maltieated by
Commodus C 9,5 omen at temple
of S 22,6

Benacus (Lake Garda) descendants
of Probus lived near P 24, 1.

Bess wairedagainst Rome MA 22, 1.

Eithyna Didius Juhanus governor
of D] 2,2 Heraclitus sent to take
possession. of PN s, 2, troops in
commanded by Albinus CA 6, 2
Macrmus and Diadumenianus
kılled in OM 10,3, 15, 1 Maximus
proconsul of M-B 5, 8 Balbinus

governor of M-B 7,2 invaded by
Scythians (Goths) Ga 4, 7, It, I
descendants of Censorinus lived in
TT 35,5 recovered by Aurelian
A. 22, 3. .
Blemmyae(-es) marched in Áurehan's
triumph A 33,4 revered Aurelian
A 41, 10, defeated by Probus P 17,
2-3.6 Probus’ triumph over P 19,
2.8 Firmus’ relations with F 3, 3.
Boeotia Goths retreated through Ga


13, 8.
Boiona Proclla grandmother of
Antoninus Pius AP I, 4.
Boius see Fulvius
Bona Dea, Temple of, at Rome
built by Hadrian H 19, 11.
Bonitus reported favourably about
Regalianus TT 10, 11.
Bononia (Bologna) tomb of Censor-
inus near TT 33, 4
BONOSUS Vopiscus will wiite life
of P 18, 6, 24, 7, F x, 4, 13, 6
origin and parentage F 14,1 early
career and habits F 14, 2-5 seized
imperial power 1n Germany, de-
feated by Probus, committed suxcide
P 18, 4.5. 7, F 15, 1-2 wife and
sons F 15, 3-8.
Bonus see Rupilius
Boreas name given by Aelius
Verus to messenger Ae 5, 10.
Bosphorus (Ciummeuan) Rhoe-
metalces restored to hingdom of
AP 9, 8.


Britain Hadrian imn Hirt, @ wall
buut in EE 12,2 waan undei M
Aurelius MA 22, 1 unde Com.
modus C 6, 2, 13, 5 Pertinax
seived in TIP 2, t revolt in
checked by Perunax HP 3, 5-10
Albinus commander of troops in
CA 13,4 troops in not feared by
Julianus D] 5, 1 Heraclitus sent
to hold S 6, ro wall built in by
Severus S 18,2 tribes in subdued
by Severus S 19, r Severus died
in S 19, 1; 24, 3° omen in S 22,
4-5 peace established in S 23, 3
conqueed by Juhus Caesar CA
13, 7 Severus Alexander hulled
im (incorrect) SA 59, 5 stags frum
painted in Domus Pompeiana Go
3, 7 seized by Proculus and
Bonosus P 38, 5 under rule of
Carinus Ca 16, 2.

Britannicus cognomen given to
Somos C 8,4 to Severus S
18, 2.

Britons revolts of H 5, 2, MA $,
78, 06,2 Hadrian among H 16,
3 defeat of and turf wall built


P 5, 4 allowed by Probus to
plant vines P :8, 8 Bonosus
descended from F 14, x.

Brocchus see lunius
Brundisinus | sez Maecius
Brundisium, town in Judy — M


Aurehus accompanied. daughter to
MA 9, 5 M. Auielus assumed
toga and ordered soldiers to do so
at MA 27,3 Severus at on way to
Syna S 15, 2

Bruttu, district of Italy Tetricus
supervisor of TT 24, 5.

Biuttuus Praesens, C. — danghtei
married to Commodus MA 27, 8.
second consulship C z2, 7.

Bucolici, tribe in Egypt attacked
Egypt and defeated by Avidius
Cassius MA 21,2, AC 6, 7.

Burburus challenged Furnius to
contest in drinking F 4, 5.

Buu wared against Rome MA
25. d

Bunus see Antistias

Batis . Maaimuinus likened to M
15s


INDEX OF NAMES


Byzantium occupied by Niger S 8,
12 punished by Severus for
support of Niger, rights iestored
through intervention of Caracalla
Cc 1,7 Gallienus! soldiers plun-
dered and were punished Ga 6, 8-9,
7,2 4 keyof the Pontus Ga 6, 8:
people of defeated Goths Ga 15, 6,
Clo,7 Valerian's interview with
Ulpius Crinitus and Aurehan at A
10, 3, 13, 1—15, 1 AurehanatA
22, 3 Àureban murdered near A
35 5


Cadusu, tribe of Media
among Cc 6, 4
Vaa

Caecihus


Caracalla
letter of King of


eunuch of Faustina AC


XO, 9

Caecius Metellus Numidicus, Q
example followed by Hadrian
H 10, 2.

Caecilius Metellus Pius, Q. example
of loyalty SA 8, 5.

Caecilius see Statius.

Caelestinus cited Va 8, 1

Caelestis, goddess oracles given by

P4,2, OM 3,1 Celsus made
emperor in robe of TT 29, 1.

Caelanus, rhetorician teacher of
Diadumentanus D 8, 9.

Caehus see Apicius.

Caelius, Mons,at Rome M Aurelius
borneon MA 1, 5 Commodus
moved to C 16, 3 dinner served
to Elagabalus on E 30, 4 house
of Tetrici on T T 25, 4.


Caehus Antipater, L, historian
preferred to Sallust by Hadrian H
16, 6.

Caelius  Attanus guardian of
Hadnan H 1,4, 9, 3 friendship
for Hadian H 4, 2 advice to


Hadiian on his accession H 5, 5
escorted ashes of Tiajan H 5, 9
promoted by Hadrian from prefect
of guard to senator H 8, 7
Hadrian's jealousy of and deposi-
tion H 9, 3-4 Hadiian owed his
pnncipate to HI 9, 6 1egaided as
enemy by Hadrian H 13, 2
Caelius Felix killed by Commodus


+ = E
Caenophiuuum, place in Thrace
Aurelian murdered near À 35, 5.


Caesar (as impenal name). origin
Ae 2,3 used for heir of emperor
Ae I, I, OM 1, 1. conferred on
elus Verus H 23,11, Aer, 2, 2,
16 AP 4,1, V1, 6 on M
Aurelius MA 6, 3 on L. Verus
MA 7, 5 on sons of M. Aurelius
MA 12, 8, C r, 10 on Commodus
MA 16, 1, 17, 5, C t, 10, x1, 13
refused by Pertinax for son HP 6,
9 conferred by Commodus on
Albinus S 6,9, CA 2, x—3, 3, 6,
4-5, 13, 4-10. conferred on Cara.
calla S 10, 3, 14, 3, 16, 3 on
Geta S 16, 3, Ge 5,3 offered by
Severus to Albinus CA 1,2, 7, 3-4,
10,3 conferred on Diadumenianus
OM 10, 4, D2, 5 on Severus
Alexander OM 4,1, E 5,1, 10, 1,
SA 1,2,2, 4, 8, 1,04, 4 taken
from Alexander E 13, I given by
Alexander to father-in-law SA 49,
3 conferred on Gordian III M 16,
7, 20, 2, Go 22, 2-5, M-B 3, 3-5,
8, 3 on Maaiminus the younger
M 22, 6 on Valerian the younger
Va8,1,Gari4,9 won by Cyriades
TT 2,2 conferred on Postumus
the younger TT 4, 1. or$Victorinus
the younger TT 6, 3, 7, I on
Tetricus the younger TT 24, I,
25,1 Valerian planned to appoint
Ulpius Crinitus as A 10,2 con-
fared on Probus P 132, 8 on
Cannus Ca 7, 1, 10, 16,2 Carus
planned to take powers of from
Carinus Ca 7, 3, 17, 6 conferred
on Numerian Ca 7, I, 10 on
Constantius Ae 2, 2, Ca 17, 6 on
Galerius Ae 2, 2.

Caesarea, city 1n Cappadocia
tured by Cyriades TTI 2, 2
Caesars custom of family of CA 5,
G Theochus writer of times of A

B, 4e

Caesomm Calpurma
from TT 32, 5,

Caesomus Vectihanus
M, Aurelius AC 5, 5

Careta, town in Italy harbour re.
paired by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 3
reputed amours of Faustina at MA


cap-


descended


report of to


Ig, 7.
Calabria, district of Italy. Tetricus
supervisor of TT 24, 5.


INDEX OF NAMES


Calenus tellow-student of M. Aure-
lius MA 3, 8.

CALIGULA: M. Amelims feared
that Commodus would resemble
MA 28,10 L Veusunitated vices
of V 4,6 deserved to die, accord.
ing to M Aurelius AC 8, 4 bio-
graphy by Suetonius C 10,2 man
who had same birthday as killed
by Commodus C 109,2 example
of evil ruler E x, 1, A 42,6 vices
of practised by Elagabalus E 35,
I removed by tyrannicide E 34, I.

Calhcrates of Tyre ated A 4, 2.

Calpurnia nie of pretender Titus

2, 5-6.
Calpurnius wrote letter to Faustina
16, 9.

Calpurnius Agricola sent to quell
revolt in Britain MA 8, 8

Calpurnius Crassus Frugi Licimanus,

spared by Hadrian H 5, 5
murdered H 5, 6.

Calpurnius Piso, C attempt to
seize principate now forgotten PN
9,2 conspiracy of suppressed CA
12, 10.

Calpurnius Piso, L.
C 12, 1-5

Calpurnius Scipio Oifitus, Ser.. con-
sulship of C rx, x4.

Calpurnius see lulius

Calvisius Tullus, P. twice consul,
grandfather of M. Aurelius MA r, 3

Camilh Claudius resembled Cl z, 3

Camillus see Funus Ovinius.

Campania Hadrian’s visit and gen-
erosity to H 9, 6 visit of Anton-
inus Prus to AP 7,11 M Aurelius
in MA 10,7 apecracies given by
Gordian l in Go 4, 6 peaches
from CA 11,3. Tetricus supervisor
of TT 24,5 Tacitus in when made
emperor T 7, 5.

Campus Martius, at Rome theatre
in destroyed by Hadrian H 9, I
a lunatic's harangue in MA 13,6
Bashca Alexandrina near SA 26,
7 heads of Maximinus and son
burned m M 31, 5 portico in
planned by Gordtan III Go 32, 6


consulship of


ublic meeting in T 7,2 spectacle
in Cl 13, 7.
Camsisoleus general of Gallienus,


defeated Trebethanus TT 26, 4.


Candidus see luhus Vespronius.

Camnia, Lex observed by Tartus
T 10,7

Caninius Celer, orato:
M. Aurelius MA 2, 4


teache of
of LI. Verus


2, 5.
Cannabas (or Cannabaudes) leader of
Goths, killed by Aurelian A 22, 2.
Canopus place in Hadrian's villa
near Tibur H 26, 5.

Canus see Sulpicius

Canusium, town 1n Italy. L. Verus
il at MA 8, rz, V 6,7 capes
from Ca 20, 6.

Capelianus defeated Gordians in
Africa M 19, 20,7, Go 15—16.

Capella see Antistius.


Capito, prefect of guard letter: of
Probus to P 1o, 6-7.

Capito see Egnatius.

Capitolinus see Cornelius Iulius


Capitolium, in Rome oath sworn in
by M. Aurelius MA 29, 4 vows
fulfilled in by Pertinax HP 5, 4

` visit of Didius Juhanus to DJ 1,6
visit of Severus to S 7, 1. visited
by Severus and Plautianus 5 14, 7
by Caracalla Co 3,2 by Elaga-
balus E is, 7 dinner served to
Elagabalus on E 30, 4 ceremomal
robes of emperors kept in SA 40,
8 Go 4,4, P 7, 4-5 visited by
Severus Alexander SA 13, 5, 57,1
soldiers killed on Go 22, 8 ^ visited
by Maximus and Balbinus M.B 3,
2, 82 4 by Galhenus Ga 8,1 5
statue of Claudius on Cl 3, 4
temple of Jupiter on A 20, 1 Aure.
han's triumphal procession to A
33,3, 34, 5 fled with gifts by
Aurelian A 4x, rr statue of Aure-
han voted for T 9,2 Tacitus’ en-
dowment for repan of T ro, 5
amphora kept on M 4, 3.

Cappadocia slaves from used by
Hadran H 13, 7 horses from
given away by Gordian I Go 4, 5°
invaded by Scythians (Goths) Ga


II, I

Capese Lucilla killed in C 5, 7.

Capua, town in Haly: M, Aurelius
escorted L. Verus to MA 8, ro:
V 6,7 journey of Faustina to
AC 10, 7 plan to atm gladiators
at DJ 8, 3.


INDEX OF NAMES


CARACALLA (L. Septimius Bas-
sanus, M. Aurelius. Antoninus)
origin of name S 21, 11, Cc 9, 7-8,
D 2, 8 Severus deemed happy
had he not had son like S 21, 6
buth and parentage S 3,9, 20, 2,
21, 7, Cc 6, 6, 10, I childhood
S 4,6, Cc 1, 3.8. character S 20,
3. Cc ?, I-3, 5: 2, 9, 3, II, 53
Ge 7, 4-6, SA Q, I 1eceiwved title
of Caesar 5 10, 3, 14, 3, 16, 5
received name Antoninus S ro, 3-
6, PN 8,5, Cor, 1, Ger, 4, OM
3, 4, D 6,8, SA 10, 5 received
umperial insignia fiom Senate S 14,
3 married daughter of Plautianus
SI4,8 made consul S 14, 10, 16,
8 acclaimed colleague of Severus
S 16,3, Ge 5,3 received triumph
over Jews S 16, 7 attempt of
soldiers to make emperor S 18, 9-
Ift, Cc ir, 3-4 omen given by
statue of S 22,3 sent greetings to
Albinus CA 7,4 Severus planned
to make joint rule: with Geta S 20,
1-2, 23, 3-6, CA 3, 5, 7, 2, Ce 2,
7, Get, 3-7, 6,1 caused Severus
to be deified S x9, 4 murdered
Geta S 20, 3, 21,7, 23,7, Cc 2,
4-6, 8, 5, 10, 4-6, Ge 2, 8, 6, 1
asked Papimian to have murder of
Geta excused Cc8, 5-6 opposed by
soldiers at Alba Cc 2, 7-8 , Ge 6, 1-2
donataves to soldiers, Cc 2,8, Ge 6,
2 appearance before senate and
first acts of rule Cc 2, 9—3, 2
murders $ 21,8, Cc 3, 3—4 9, 5, 1,
8,1.4.8, Ge 6,3-6, 7,6 aniogance
Cc4,10 actsofcruelty and oppres-
sion 821,9, CC 5, 3. 7, Ge 4, 2. 5
hated S 21, 11, Cc 5,2, 9, 3, OM
2, 3-4, 7, 123 journey thiough
Gaul, Raeta, Dacia, Thrace to
Asia Cc 5, i-8 cognomina Cc 5,
5-6, 6,5, 10, 5-6, Ge 6,6 love of
hunting Cc 5, 9 war against
Parthians Cc 6, 1-6 cruelty at
Alexandria Co 6, 2.3 murdered
Ce b, 6—7,2, 8,9, OM 2, 1.5, 3,
8,4,7-8, D1, E2,3, Maa
length of hte and rule Cc 9, r
publie works S 21, 13-32, Cc 9, 4-
9, E 17, 8-9, gifts to populace S
21,1, Ccg, 7-8, OM 5,3 interest
in cult of Isi Cc 9, ro-11 bunal


Caracalla—ionisnued
Cc 9, 12. detfication and other
honours Cc ir, 5-6, OM 5, 1-3,
6,8, D s, 1. relations with Juha
Domna S 21,7, Cc 3, 3, 10, 1-4,
Ge 7, 3 gave omen of death of
Geta Ge 3, 3 seemed to mourn
Geta's death Ge 7, 5 a disgrace to
name Antoninus OM 7, 8 deci-
sions not worthy of becoming
law OM 13, 1. relations with Julia
Soaemis E2,x Elagabalus called
son of Cc 9, 2, 11, 7, OM 7, 6,
Bit Ord y Becky 44 9 1, 3, T. 17
4, M 4,6 wrong done to by Hla.
gabalus SA 7, 3 aximinus' mili.
tary service under M 4, 4, remark
concerning Maximinus the younger
M 30,6-7 consul with Gordian I,
envied him Go 4, 1. 3

Carinae, place in. Rome
Balbinus in M-B 16, r

CARINUS older son of Carus Ca
IO Carus better had he not left as
heir Ca 3, 8 evil emperor P 24,
4-5, F 3, 5-6 presented conse-
crated ivory to woman Ca 3, 5-6
vices and evil friends of Ca 16, 17,
2, 18 1. made Caesas sent to
rule Gaul and western provinces
Ca 7, 1-2, 10, 16,2 Carus planned
to take powers of Caesar from Ca
7,3, 17,6 attitude toward senate
Ca 16,6 indifference toward duties
as ruler Ca 16, 8 arrogance and
luxury Ca 17, 1-8 defeated and
killed by Diocletian Ca ro, 18, 2

Carnuntum, townin Austria Severus
acclaimed emperor at S 5, 1

Carpi war of against Moesia. M.B
16,3 defeated by Aurelian A 30, 4.

Carpicus cognomen bestowed on
Aurelian A 30, 4

Carpisculus cognomen proposed in
jest by Aurelian A 30, 4.

Carrhae, city in Mesopotamia Cara-
calla murdered near Ce 6,6, 7, 1°
Lunus worshipped at Cc 7,3 re-
captured from Persians by Gordian
Hl Go 26, 6, 27, 6 captured by
Odaenathus Ga to, 3, 12, I.

Carthage renamed Hadrianopolis
H 20,4 fire at AP 9, 2. called
Alexandria Commodiana Togata
C 17, 8, oracle of Caelestis at OM


ATI


house of


INDEX OF NAMES


Carthage continued,
3,1 Gordian Jat M 4,4 Gog,
6, 11, 5. Gordian I] defeated and
killed near Go 4,2, 15 prayer of
Scipio, conqueror of M-B 17, 8
submission of rebels at Go 23, 4
letter of senate to council ot T 18,
2-4 saved from rebels by Probus

Kome grew after conquest


CARUS Vopiscus will write life of
and of sons P 24,8, F 1,4, 15, 10°
lives of written by Fabius Cerylli
anus Ca 4, 3 a good emperor P
24,4, Ca 3, 8, 9,4 tramed by
Probus P 22, 3 birthplace Ca 4,
1—5, 3 early career Ca 4, 6, 5,
4 made emperor P 24, 4, Ca 5,
4, 15,2 said to have caused death
of Probus but punished his slayers
Ca 6, 1 opinion of Probus con.
cerning Ca 0, 2-3 gave sons name
of Caesar Ca 7, 1, sent Carinus to
rule Gaul Ca 7, 1-2. deplored ways
of Carinus and planned to take
from him powers of Caesar Ca 7, 3,
17,6 made war on Persians Ca 7,
I, B, r, 12, 1 defeated Sarma-
tians C2 8, 1, 9, 4. death Ca 8, z—
9,2, 18, x. letter of Ca 4, 6.7
message to senate Ca 5, 2 spec-
tacles given by Ca 19, 20,2 Dio-
cletan's saying concerning Ca
20, 2.

Carystus, place in Euboea marble
from Go 32,2

Casius, Mons, mountain in Syria
ascended by Hadrian H 14, 3


Casperius Aemilianus killed by
Severus S 13, 4

Caspertus Agrippinus killed by
Severus S 13, 3

Cassu murderers of Julius Caesar,


supposed ancestois of Avidius
Cassius AC 1, 4

Cassius, L. (C *) name of borne by
Avidius Cassius AC r4, 4.

Cassius Longinus teacher of Zen.
obia, killed by Aurelian A 30, 3.
Cassius Papirius. Albinus to succeed

in consulship CA 10, 10.12,
Castor and Pollus, Temple of, at
Rome meeting of senate in M 16,


i 1 Va 58, te
Catilina see Sergius.


Catlins Severus. onginal name of
M Auwelins MA 1r, 9

atilius Severus counsellor of Sev-
wus Alexander SA 68, t

Caulius Severus, L  appornted
governor of Syria by Hadiian FH 5,
10, attacked by Fladrian II 15,7
angered by adoption of Antoninus
Pius H 23,6 deposed by Hadrian
from prefecture of city H 24, 7
colleague of Antoninus Pius in
consulship AP 2,9 ereéat-grand-
father of M. Aurelius MA 1, 4. 9.

Cato see Porcius.

Catos left no sons S 21, x.

Catuhnus see Valerius

Catulus grandfather of Memmia,
wife of Severus Alexander SA 20, 3.

Catulus see Cinna

Cecropius (or Ceronius) murdered
Gallienus Ga 14, 4-9

Cecropius trained by Probus P 22, 3.

Cetonia Fabia ster ofL, Verus V
Io, 4 influence over Verus V 10,
3-4 attempted to many M. Ame-
hus MA 2y, 10 3n conspiracy to
kill M, Aurelius V 10,4 a self.
styled son of HP 1o, 2.

Cenn, family of Clodius Albinus
descended from CA 4, 1, £0, 6,
12,8 later umportance of CA 4, 2
prowess of under the Republic CA


I3, 5
Ceiontus Albinus killed by,Severus


£3, 3

Ceionius Albinus, city-prelect letter
of Valerian to A 9.

Ceionius Civica Barhaus, M., uncle
of L. Verus, sent to Orient to join
him MA 9, 4

Ceionius Commodus father of Aelius
Verus Ae 2,7, also called L Autre.
hus Verus and Annius Ae 2, 7.

Ceionius Iulianus. conversation with
F 2, x.

Ceronius Postumuanus introduced
Albinus to Antonines CA 6, r,

Ceionius Postumus father of Cludrus
Allinus CA 4, 3. letter of CA 4,


5-7.

Celer Verianus letter of Gallienus
to TT 9, 5-9.

Celer. see Cammus.

Celeiinus see Cusprdins

Celsa. see Nonta.


INDEX OF NAMES


Celsinus counsellor of Diocletian A


44, 3.
Celanus Life of Probus addressed


to P x, 3
Celsinus see Clodius.
CELSUS formerly tribune, made


emperor in Africa, murdered TT 29,
r4 C17, 4

Celsus revolted against Antoninus
Pius AC 1o, 1

Celsus reported favourably about
Regalianus TT ro, x1.

Celsus Aehanus consul, sent dectee
of senate to colleague M.B 17,2

Celsus see Aelius Funus Heren.
mus Juventus Publius Rag-
omus Rufus

Celts aided Postumus Ga 7, 1

invasion of under Claudius Cl 6,
2 mates of captured Cl 9, 6.

Censorini family of Censorinus TT


33, 5.

CENSORINUS good quahties and
honours of TT 32, 8, 33,1 made
emperor in reign of Claudius ana
killed TT 31,7. 12, 33, 2-3 tomb
of TT 33, 4-5.

Centumcellae, town in Italy cruelty
of Commodus at C 1,9

Cereius Maecianus letter to T 19, 3-5.

Cerelhus Faustimanus killed by
Severus S 15, 6

Cerellus Iulianus. lulled by Severus


S 13, 64

Cerelhus Macrinus killed by Sev.
erus S 13, 6.

Caes rites of, see Eleusinian


Mysteries statue of consecrated by
Aurelian A 47, 3
Ceirontus Bassus letter of Aurelian
to A 31, 5-10
Cervidius Scaevola, Q. consulted
by M. Aurelius MA ir, ro teacher
ot Septimius Severus and Papinian
c B, 3.
Cervonius Papus, C. consulship of
Go 29, I.
Ceiyllhanus see Fabius
Cesettianus see Aelius
Chaeionea, town in Greece’ home
of Sextus, teacher of M, Auiehus
À 3,2.
Chalecdon, city in Asia home of
Apollonius, teacher of M. Aurelius
MA 2, 7.


Chalcis home of Apollonius (in-
correct) AP ro, 4.

Chaldaeus (-1) consulted by M.
Áurehus MA xg, 3, E 9, x by
father of Pertinax HP 1, 3 by
Severus S 4, 3 those who con-
sulted killed by Severus S 15, 5.

Chanoviscus served under Am ehan
À 11, 4.

Chattu invaded Germany and Raetia

A 8, 7 defeated by Didius
Juhanus Dj r, 8

Chauci defeated by Didius Julianus
DIz,

Chilo see Mallius

Christ statue of in private chapel
of Severus Alexander SA 29, 2
Hadrian and Alexander wished to
build temples to SA 43,6 bishops
of worshipped Serapis in Egypt
F 8,2 patriarch forced to worship
in Egypt F 8, 4.

Christians persons forbidden to be-
come S 17,2 plan to amalgamate
religion of with cult of Elagabalus
E 3, 5 tolerated by Severus
Alexander SA 22,4 danger of all
persons becoming SA 43 7 Cus-
tom of 1n choosing priests imitated
by Alexander SA 45,7 dispute
settled in favour of by Alexander
SA 49, 6 precept of adopted by
Alexander SA 51, 7-8 meeting of
senate compared to gathering of A
20, 5 bad character of in Egypt
F 7s 5) 5, 2-3; 7-

Christologus | mchname
Pertinay HP 13, 5.

Cicero see Tulhus.

Cihicia IL. Verusin V 6,9 Trebel-
lianus ruled over people of TT 26,
3 Claudius planned to remove
Isaurians to TT 26,7  Aurelanus
proconsul of A 42, 2 Carus pro-
consul of Ca 4, 6

Cio see Fabius Mallius

Cincinnatus see Quinctius,

Cincius Severus protested against
burial of Commodus C 20, 3-5
killed by Severus S 13, 9.

Cinna Catulus, philosopher
of M Aurelius MA 3, 2

Circeius name given by Aelius
Verus to messenger Ae 5, 10.


given to


teacher


INDEX OF NAMES


Cnucesium, place m Mesopotamia
Crordian ILI buned near Go 51, 2.
Cucus Maximus, in Rome wild
beast hunts in H 19,7. collapse of
AP o, ır M Aurelius in MA 16, 2
Commodus wished to drive in C 8,
8, prodigy in C 16, 2* benches in
filled PN 3, 1r ' acclamations in OM
12, 9 performers from favoured
E 6,4 Elagabalus’ body dragged
through E 17, 3 women from E
26,3 32,9 Elagabalus drove in
E23,1 restored by Severus Alex-
ander AS 24, 3 races of Furius
Placdusin A 15, 4-5 spectacle of
Probus m P 19, 2-4.
Civica see Ceionius,
Clara see Aemiha Didia.
Claiissimus see Severus.
Clarus see Erucius Iulius Eru-
cius Ragonimus Septicius,
Claudia neice of Claudius, mother
of Constantius Cl 15, 2. 9.
Claudia sister of Probus P 3, 4
Claudia, Aqua drunk by Severus
Alexander SA. 30, 4.
Claudianus see Asellus.
Claudianus, Mons, in Egypt marble
from Go 32, 2.
Claudii ancestors of Constantine,
revered by him E 2, 4.
CLAUDIUS glory of all emperors
and founder of Constantine's family
E 35, 2 family of revered and
noble TT 32,7. ancestor of Con.
stanaus Ga 7, 1, 14.5, Cl x, 1. 3,
9,9, 10,7, À 44, 5 set up inscrip-
tion to Valerian the younger Va
8,3 atded Gallienus against Post.
umus Ga 7,1 native of Dalmatia,
said to be descended from kings of
Troy Cl 11,9, native of Illyricum,
tribune of Fifth Legion Cl r4, 2,
I5, I1, 16, I ın command of
Illyricum Ci 15, 2. in command of
Peloponnesus Cl x6, 2 excellent
character of Ga 14, 2, 15, 3, Cl 1,
3, 2, 1-8, 3, 2-7, 7, 6-8 dis-
approved of statue of Gallienus Ga
18,4 approved ot Regalianus TT
I0, 9-13 promoted by Valerlan
TT 10, 14° made empeior Ga 14,
2, 15, 3, Cl 4 defeated, killed
and buried Aureolus TT 11, 4-5,
Cl5,1-3, 4.16, 2 planned to re.


ETA


Claudius coututted,
move Ísauians to Cilicia. TT 26,
7 allowed Zenobia to rule TT 30,
3. Irs victory over Goths with
Marcianus Cl 6,1; 18,1 Censor.
inus pretender in time of TT 31, 7
12 Gothic war TL 30, 3. rr, Cl
1,3, 2, 65 6—93; 11—12, 1. sent
Aurehan against Goths A 16, 1,


17, a4 removed Gallienus from
rule Cl r, 3 scorn for Gallienus
Cl 5,2 letters of Cl 7, 1-5, 8, p


9, 2; A 17, 24 oracles given to
Cl 10, 1-5. wished to make Quin.
tillus associate in power Cl 10, 6
Egyptians faithful to Cl xr, 2
disobedient soldiers of defeated and
sent to Rome in chains Cl 11, 5-8,
A 18, 1 pestilence during reign
of Cl 12, 2 death CI 12, 2
brothers and sister of Cl 10, 6, 12,
3, 13, 1-3 had no childien Cl 13,
9 habits, appearance and strength
113, $8 received soldier's re-
wards from Decius Cl 13, 8 letters
of Valenan concerning Cl 14—15
letter of Decius concerning Cl 16
letter of Gallienus concerning C!
17 acclamations for 1n senate after
victory in IHlyricum Cl 18, r.3*
more beloved than Trajan and
Antonines Cl 18, 4 importance of
Aurelhan unde A 16, 1, 17, 4,
P 6, 46 example of good emperor
A 42, 4 witticism of jester of A 42,
5 fame of descendants of A 41, |
Piobus to be preferred to T 16, 6
Probus said to berelative of P 3, 3
Probus’ achievements unde: P 6, 1
opinion concerning Probus P 7, 1
under Probus no longer desued P
12,2 fortune begrudged long rule
to Ca 3, 6.
Claudius barber, made prefect of
grain-supply by Elagabalus R 12,


t

Claudius Arabianus* killed by Sev.
erus S 15, 7.

Claudius Atticus Herodes, "Li, ora-
tor teacher of M. Aurelius. MA 2,
4 ot L. Verns V 2, 5.

Claudius Eusthemus wrote lives of
Diocletian and associutes Qa 18, 5,

Claudius Iuhanus. lett] to Mavi-
mus and Balbinus M.B 17,


INDEX OF NAMES


Claudius Livianus, Tr
for Haduan H 4, 2

Claudius Lucanus
modus C 7, 7

Claudius Marcellus, M — piophecy
that Severus Alexander would re-
semble SA 4, 6.

Claudius — Maximus, philosopher
teacher of M, Aurelius MA 3, 2.
Claudius Pompeianus son ot Ti
Claudius Pompeianus, killed by

Caracalla Cc 3, 8,

Claudius Pompeianus Quintianus
relative of Commodus, attempted
to kH him C 4, 2-3, 5, 12 lilled
C 4, 4, 5, I2 (incorrect)

Claudius Pompeiranus, Ti — marnied
to Lucilla MA 20, 6, Cc 3, 8
twice consul MA 20, 6 Cc 3, 8
consulship of AC zr, 8, 12, 2
advanced in years AC 10, 3 ap-
pointed Pertinax to a mihtary
command HP 2, (. urged by Per-
tinaa to take principate but refused
HP 4, 10 invited Didius
Julanus to share principate but
refused DJ 8, 3.

Claudius Rufus killed by Severus


friendship
killed by Com.


I3 i
Claudius Sapihanus letter of T 19,


3-5
Claudius Severus, philosopher
teacher of M Aurelius MA 3, 3.
Claudius Severus Arabianus, Cn
consulship of S r, 3


Claudius Sulpicianus killed by
Severus S 73, 4.
Claudius Venacus counsellor of


Severus Alexander SA 68, 1.

Cleande see Aurelius

Cleodamus defended Byzantium
against Goths Ga 13, 6

Cleopatra claimed by Zenobia as
ancestress TT 27, 1, 30, 2, Cl 1,
i gold dishes of used by Zenobia
TT 30, 19; pearls of owned by
Calpurnia TP 32, 6 preferred
death to captivity A 27, 3.

VER name given to Zenobia
Z ES

Clodia, Viat villa of L. Verus on V


b

CLODIUS ALBINUS: family and
birth CA 1, 3, 4, 1-7 older than
Niger CA 7, 1* education CA 5,


Clodius Albinus—continved.
1-2, omens of rule CA 5, 3.10
oracles concerning PN 8, 1-3, CA
1,4 early caree: CA 6, 1-7. ap-
pointed governor of Britain by
Commodus CA 13,4 offered title
of Caesar by Commodus S 6, 9,
CA 2, 1—3; 3, 6, 4-5, 13, 4-10
letter of Commodus to CÀ 2, 2-5
made consul by Severus CA 3,5,
6, 8 offered title of Caesar and
share in principate by Severus CA
I, 2, 7, 2-6, I0, 3. speech to
troops accepting imperial power
A 3,3 considered as successor
by Severus S 6, 9, PN 4, 7; CA
3, +53 6, 8, 10, 3 popularity of
S 11,3, CA 3, 53 7, 24, 9, 6,
I2, I-I2; 13, 33 14, 2 Severus
tried to murder CA 8, x-3 revolt
DJ 5,1, 8 to,1, PN 2, 1; 6, 2,
9,3, CA 11; B, 4, SA 5, 7
measures taken pam by Severus
$6,10, 10,2, PN 5,2, CA 9, 1
revolt suppressed S 10, 7—11, 6,
CA 9, 1-3, 12, 13 death S xz,
6-9, CA 9, 3-7, 12, 3 prophecies
concerning death S 10, 7g CA 9,
2-4, family and partisans punished
S 12, 1. 5 75 CA 9, 5, 12, 2-4
characte CA to, 1; 11,5 letters
of M Aurehus concerning CA 10.
4-12 habits and tastes CA r1, 2-8,
I3, I-2 generosity CA Ir, I
letter of Severus concerning CA
12, 5-12 appearance CA I3, I
speech to soldiers CA 13, 5-10
anger of Commodus at CA 14, 1-5
Pertinax advised to take as asso-
cate CA 14, 2 Peitinax’ hatred
for CA 14,6 influenced Julianus
to kill Perünax CA 1, 1, 14, 2. 6
life of wiitten by Marius Maximus


LI
Clodius Celsinus praised by senate


S 11, 3.
Clodms Pulcher, P. mules of F 6, 4.
Clodius Rufinus killed by Severus


S 13, 5-
Cobotes warned against Rome MA
22, T
Cocceius Verus killed by Severus


S 13, 4
Coedes influential freedman of L.
Vetus V 9, 5.


INDEX OF NAMES


Comagena, town in Austria oracle
given to Claudius at Cl 10, 1-3.
Commodianus name given to Rome
C8,6.9 10 the senate C 8,9 to
the Domus Palatina C 12,7 to
the age C 14, 3 to the Roman
People C 15,5 to Carthage C 17,
8 tothe African fleet C 17,8 to
flamen of Commodus C 17, 11.
COMMODUS M Aurelius deemed
happy had he not had son like MA
18, 1; S21, 5. a disgrace to name
Antoninus OM 7, 7, SA 9, 2
parentage and birth MA 19, I. 4-7,
C x, 2-4 education and teachers
C r, 5-6 evil and muel in youth
MA 16,1, 27,912, C 1, 7-9, 10,
1-2 opinion of M Aurelius con.
cerning MA 27, 11, 28, 10 early
honours MA 16, 1-2, 17, 3, 22,
iz, C x, 10—2, 53 II, 1312, 7.
in Marcomannic war C 2, 5, 12, 2.
6 iri dm of father 1n tribunician
power MA 27, 5, AC 13,4 dis-
missed father's councillors C 3, I
3 killed family of Avidius Cassius
AC 13,7 abandoned war against
Marcomanm C 3,5 triumph C 3,
6 debauchenes C 2, 7.9, 3, 6-7,
5, 4 8-11, 1o, 8-9 bad appoint-
ments to provinces C 3, 8 hostile
relations with senate C 3, 9, DJ
2,1 conspiracies against C 4, 1-3,
15, 2, 17, I murders and exiles
C 4,4 b-1r, 5, 7. 12-14 , 7, 1-2.
4-8, 9, 1-3, 9, 2-3, IO, 7, 14, 5,
15, I influence of Saoterus C 3, 6,
4, 5-6 influence of Perennis C 4,7
5, 1-6. 13, 6, 1-2. prowess as gladi-
ator MA 19, 4-6, 0 1,8, 5, 5, 8,5,
II, IO-I2, 12, 10-12, 13, 3, 15, 3 8,
CA 6,7 extled and killed wife C
5,9 wars C 6, 1-2, 13, 5-6 influ-
ence of Cleander C 6, 3. 5-12
cognomina C 8, 1-5 9, 1x, 14, Cc
5,5, D 7, 2-3 folly and cruelty
C 8, 0-9, 9; 6, IO, 2——11, 9, 15;
4, 15, 4-7, Ca 3, 3 took part m
foreign cults C 9, 4-6, PN 6, 8.9,
Ceg, Ir vows made for C 12,9*
appearance C 13, 1; 17, 3. negli-
gent as ruler C 13, 7—14, x. fanune
C r4,1-3 official corruption under
C id, 4-7 death C i7, 2, HP 4,
45.7, 5,1, 85,1; 14, 3, PN 1, 5,


Commodus— contumud,
2,1 prodigies C yO, 17 largess
and spectacles C 16, 8-9. buried C
17,4, 20, 1-5 hatred fox C 12, 4,
S 4,3, CA 3, 1. public works C
17, 5-7, 9-10. organived African
gtain-fleet C 17, 7-8 honoured by
Severus C 17, 11-12, S 11, 3-4, 12,
8 sisters C 17, 12 outciies in
senate after death C 18-19, HP 5,
i promoted Pertinax HP 3, 5
accusations made to by Pertinax
HP 3, 7 pleased by Pertinax as
city-prefect HP 4, 3° statues over-
thrown HP 6,3 property sold by
Pertinax HP 7, 8-10, 8, 2-7 ser.
vants of tned to murder Pertinax
HP 12, 8 freed Didius Julianus
from charge of conspiracy DJ 2, 1,
6,2 Didius Julianus promised to
restore to honour D] 2,6 appoin-
ted Severus consul S 4, 4 planned
to make Albinus a Caesar S 6, 9,
CA 2, 1—3, 3, 6, 4-5, 13, 4-10
appointed Niger consul and gov.
ernor of Syria PN 1, 5, 1, 6. letter
concerning Niger PN 4, 4 Niger's
advice to PN 7, 2-3 military dis-
cipline relaxed under PN 10, 8
painting in gudens of PN 6, 8
letter to Albinus CA 2, 2.5 ad.
vanced Albinus 1n ofhce CA 6, 3-7,
14,3 replaced Alhinus as governor
of Britain CA 14,1, better had he
feared the senate CA 13,7 lette:
concerning Albinus CA 14, 3.6
decisions unworthy of becoming
law OM 13, 1 verses dnected
against D7,2-4 Elagabalus worse
than SA 7, 4, 9,4 example of evil
ruler T 6, 4 called Incommodus
T 6, 4.

Commodus name given to month
August C 11, 8, 22, 6.

Commodus see Aelius Aurelius
Ceionius,

Concha, place int Italy: Zenolna lived
neat T'T 30, 27

Concordia appealed to P re, 7,

Concord, ‘Temple of, at Rome
Pertinax waited in before acclama.
uon as emperor HP 4,9. meetings
of senate in SA 6,2, M-B r1, P


TO, 5.
Condianus* see Quintilius


INDEX OF NAMES


Constanti ancestors of Constantine,
revered by him E 2, 4.
Constantina sister of Claudius Cl


I3, 3.

CONSTANTINE addressed CA 4,

E 34, 1-5; 35,
65-67, 1, 1-3, Go t, 34, 6
elevated family of Ceionii CA 4, 2
revered Ántoninus and M. Aurelius
with own ancestors E 2, 4,

CONSTANTIUS received ttle of
Caesar from Diocletian Ae 2, 2,
Ca 17, 6* son of Eutropius and
Claudia Cl 13, 2. descendant of
Claudius Ga 7, x, 14, 3, Cl x, x1
3, 06,9; I0, 7, A 44,5  Trebellius
Pollio suspected of seeking favour
of Cl 3,2 ancestor of many Aug-
usti with all loyalty to Diocletian,
Maximian and Galerius Cl 10, 7
descendants of glorious A 44, 5
trained by Probus P 22, 3 gov-
ernor of Dalmatia, Carus planned
to put 1n place of Carinus Ca 17, 6
restored Gaul to rule of Rome Ca
18,3 character of Ca 18, 4.

Coptos, city in Egypt recovered
from Blemmyae by Probus P 17,
2. 6.

Cordius chariotee, favounte of Ela-
gabalus E 6,3 appointed prefect
of the watch E 12, 1 removed
from power at demand of soldiers
E 15 3^

Corduenus see Aehus

Cordus see Áelius Iumus Valerius.

Corfulenus see Staulius.

Connth L Verus at V 6,9 letter
of senate to council ot T 18,6

Cornolanus see Marcius

Cornelia Salonina, wife of Gallienus
mother of Saloninus Ga 21, 3.

Cornehanus see Attdius Aurun-
culeius.

Cornehus Balbus letter of M Au-
rehus to PN 4, 1-3.

Cornelius Balbus Theophanes (in-
correct), historian received cin.
zenship from Pompey, claimed as
ancestor by Balbinus M.B 7, 3.


Cor Bellas Capitolinus cited TT
15, 8.
Cornelius Dolabella Petronianus,


Ser. . consulship of AP 1, 8


Cornelius Fronto, M., orator teacher
of M Aurelius MA 2, 4-5 of
Lucius Verus V 2, 5

Coinehus Macer descendant of
Macrianus TT 34, 5

Cornelus Palma, A. enemy of
Hadnan H 4,3 fell from favour
of Trajan 4 3 conspiracy

against Hadrian and death H 7,


1-2,

Cornelius Repentinus son-in-law of
Didius Juhanus, appointed prefect
of the city DI 3,6 remained loyal
to iur on ianus Dj 8, 6

Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus, P.
example followed by Hadnan H
10,2 saying of AP g, ro left no
sons $ 21,1 Elagabalus professed
to imitate E 26, 2 Gordian I.
likened to Go 5, 5 7 prayer of
M-B 17, 8 praised by Cicero Cl


2, 5

Cornehus Scipio Africanus, P
praised by Enmus Cl 7,7 by
historians P 2, 4.

Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus, L, re-
semblance of Gordian [II to Goat,
5 praised by historians P 2, 4

Cornelius Scipio Nasica, P. 9? praised
by historians P 2, 4

Cornelius Scipio Orfitus, Ser.
sulship of C 12, 6

Cornelius Sulla, L. | Commodus
likened to C 8, xı Severus hkened
to PN 6, 4 lauded by Caracalla
Cc2,2 Caracalla showed himself
a future Cc 4, 10. soldiers of Cara-
calla rewarded like those of Cc 5, 4

Cornelius Tacitus, P.. inaccuracy of
42,2 interest of Emperor Taci-
tus in T 10,3 Vopiscus will not
imitate P 2, 7.

Cornelius: see Fabius

Cornicula see Annus

Cornificia mistress of Pertmax HP


con.


4 a
Cornificia see Annia.
Cornificius see Velius
Corvini Aurelian comparable to A


9,4. |
Costoboci warred against Rome
A 22, Y,
Cotaeum, town in Asia home of
Alexander, teacher ot M. Aurelius


MA 2, 3.
ATT


INDEX OF NAMES


Crassus see Calpurnius: Sulpicius,

Crete, Scythiains (Goths) attempted
to aie Cl:2,: bowmen fom
under command of Claudius Ch
16, 2.

Cruutus see Ulpius.

Crispinus defended Aquileii agattist
Maximinus M 21, 6, 22, 1, M.D
12, 2.

Crispinus see Tullius.

Crispus. brother of Claudius, father
of Claudia, mother of Constantius
Cl 13,2 9.

Croton, city in Italy Milo a native
of M 6, 9.

Ciesiphon, city in Mesopotamia’
captured by Severus § 16, I
Gordian III hoped to reach Go 27,
6 attacked by Odaenathus Ga 1o,
6, 12,1, TT 15,4, 30,6 reached
by Carus Ca 8, 1. ordained that
Roman emperor should not pass

Ca g, I.

Cumae, city in Italy
Apollo at CA 5, 4.

Cues, town in Italy
Aenerd VI BII

Curius Fortunatianus wrote history
of Méximus and Balbinus M-B


oracle of


H 2, 8 citing


MD

Cuspidius Celerinus proposed hon-
ours for Maximus, Balbinus and
Gordian II M 26, 5.

Cyclopea performance of Ga 8, 3,

a 19,3

Cyclops Maximinus likened to M
8,5, M.B 11, 1 name given to
Firmus b 4, x.

Cyprus bulls from painted in
Domus Pompeiana Go 3,7 Scyth-
ians (Goths) attempted to plunder

l zz, 1 clasp with pin from Cl
14,5 couch-covers from Cl 14, 10
table.covers from A 12, 1.

Cyrillus see Tatius

CYRIADES fled to Persians,
watred against Romans TI 2, 1.2
called Caesar and Augustus IT 2,
2 killed father TT 2, 3-4 killed


Cyriades father of pretender Cyi1-
e robbed and murdered by him
2.
Cyrrhus, town in Syria birthplace
of Avidius Cassius MA 25, 12.


Cyzicus, uty m Asa omen tor
Antonius Pius at AP 3, 4. Aen
hanus fed to 5 8, 16 Niger de.
feted at So, 1, PN 5, 8. attached
by Goths Ge ty, $


Daca, campaigns of "Trajan and
Hadnan in H 3, 2-3.6 Turbo in


command of H 6,7. 7,3 revolts
in quelled AP 5, 4, C 13, 5 Per-
tinas procurator of HP 2,4 Pere


tinax governor of HP 2, 10* Cara-

calla in Cc 5, 4  Regahanus a

native of TT 10, 8. troops m under

command of Claudius Cl 15, 2

troops in disatfected Cl 17, 3

o &om killed 1n revolt of mint-

workers A 38, 4 established as
province by Trajan, given up by
Aurelian A 39, 7

Dacia Ripensis
A 3, 1.

Dacia Transdanuvina
Aurelian A 39, 7.

Dalmatia bandits of emolled as
soldiers MA 21,7 Didius june
governor of DJ 1,9 cavalry from
commanded by Albinus CA 6, 2
by Cecropius (or Ceionius) Ga 14,
4.9 Macnanus' valour in TT 12,
17 Claudius a native of Cl 11,9.
valou of cavahy from Cl 13, 9
tunics hom C 8, 5, HP 8,2, kh 26,
2, Cl 17, 6 troops in unde
command of Claudius Cl 15, 2
Constantius governor of Ca 17, 6.

Danube  Marcomann defeated on
MA 21,10 Sarmatae slaughtered
on AC 4,6 guarded by Pertimas
HP 2,10 Awelran’s victory north
of A 22,2 Probus’ achievements
north of P 5, 1.

Daphne (Daphnis) town in Syri
L Verus at MA 8, 12, V 7, 3
demoralwation of Roman legions
at AC 5, 5, SA 54, 7 salchers
found at disciplined by Avidius
Cassius AC 6, : Ballista killed
at TT 18, 2 battle fought by
Aurelian at A 25, 1.

Dardama, district an Jugoslavia
bandits of enrolled as soldiers MA
21, 7. Eutropius a native of Cl


Aurelian. born in


formed by


INDEX OF NAMES


dardania contuited.

13,2 loops from under command
of Claudins Cl 10, 2 great-coat
from CI 17, 6

hudan, distiict mo Asta Miner
Claudius said to be from Cl 11,9

Jardanus, King of ‘Troy Claudius
said to be descended from Cl 11, 9.

Jasuminus father of Malemnrus,
hing of the Sallenuno: MA 1, 6.

Jecebalus Regalianus a kinsman
of LT 10, 8

Jeu: consulship of Va 5, 4 left
choice of censor to senaie Va 5,4
had tile of Augustus Va 6,
hves and deaths like those of the
ancients A 42, 6.

DECIUS Valerian in service of Va
5, } speech of Va 6, 1-6 gave
soldier's rewards to Claudius Cl
15,8 letter ot Cl 16.

Jecius see Aelius.

Jecuanus, architect Colossus of
Nero moved by H 19, 12.

Jelphi oracles of Apollo at PN 8
1-0, CAI, 4

Demosthenes left no sons S 21, 2
died violent death SA 62, 3.

Jexippus see Herenntus,

Jester see Domitius.

Dadematns original name of Dia.
dumentanus D 4, 4

JIADUMENIANUS associated
with Macrinus in imperial power
OM 5,1, D 1, 1t, E 1, 4, 2; 3
called Caesar, not Augustus OM
10,4; D2, 5 received name An-
toninus Cc 8, 10, OM 2, 5—3: 9,
5,1, 6,6 7,5. 8, 10, 6, 14, 2-3,

) 1-2, 3, 1, 6, 10, 7, 1. 5-7, 8, 1,
E 1,4, 3,2, 8,5, SÁ 9, 5, 10,5.
a spurious Antoninus OM 10,
harangue to troops D a, 2-4 an-
nouncement of name of to senate
OM 6, 6.7, D 2, 7 coins struck
with name of D 2,6 gifts to people
in honow of D 2, 8-10 appearance
D 3, 2-3. omens of rule D 3, 4—
5,6 cruelty D $, 2—9,3. £2, 3
killed with Macrinus OM 10, 3. 5;
14,2; D2,5, 9, 4; E 1x, 4, M 4,
6. verses concermng OM 12, 9
vihed at accession of Elagabalus


E33:8 43.


Diana statues of at Laodicea and


other places E 7, 5-6.


Diavolenus (perhaps — Iavolenus)


jurist consulted by Antoninus Pius
AP 14,1.


Didia Clara daughter of Didius


ulianus, received title of Augusta
] 3.4; 45 5, deprived of utle DJ
8,9 buried Julianus DJ 8, 10


DIDIUS JULIANUS ancestry D]


X, 1-2 education D] 1, 3 early
career DJ x, 4—2, 2 consul with
Pertinay and successor in Africa
HP 14, 5, DJ 2, 3 omen of rule
HP 11,4, D} 2,3 made emperor
2, 4—3 5; PN 2,1, CA x, 1
donative to soldiers D] 3,2 un-
popular with people DJ 3, 7-8,
4, 2-10, PN 2,2-3, 3, 1-2. restored
Commodus’ memory and acts pi
2,6, 4,8 simplicity of habits D
3, 9 regarded as responsible for
murder of Perna DJ 3,7 buried
Peitinax. HP 14,9, DJ 3, 10
silence concerning Pertinaa HP
14,10, D] 4, 9-10 relations with
senate DJ 4, 1.5, 6, 7-9, 7, 3.
SA 1,7 revolts of Albinus, Sev-
erus and Niger against pI 5, I-2,
$5,1.8, 6,7, PN2, 1, CAII
measures taken against Severus
DJ 5, 3—8, 5, $5, 5-9, PN 3, 5-7
attempt to kill Niger DJ 5, 1, 55,
8, PN 3,4 omen of downfall DJ
7, 1-2. deposition and death Dj 8,
6.8, S95, 10, PN 2, 1 burial DJ
8, 10 criticisms of DT 9,3. 4. good
quahties DJ 9,2 length of life
and rule D] 9, 3 consul with
Severus and predecessor in pro-
consulship S 2, 1 supporters of
hulled by Severus S 8,3 influenced
by Albinus to kill Pertinax CA 1,
I, 14,2 6 assumed name Anton-
inus (incorrect) OM 3,6, D 6, 1.3.


Didius Proculus: brother of Didius


Julianus DJ 1,2.


Didius. see Petronius. :
Dido cited as precedent by Zenobia


T 27, 1. robe of worn by Ze-
nobia T'T 30,


2.
DIOCLETIAN. biographies dedi-


cated to Ae 1, 1, AC 3, 3, OM 15,
4. conferred title of Caesar on
Maximuan and Constantius Ae 2,


INDEX OF NAMES


Diocletian—-contutued,
2. revered M. Auielius as divine
MA 19,12. compared to M. Auie-
hus Vir, 4 discourses addiessed
to S 20, Una. 12, PN 9, r4.
father of the golden age E 35,4
loyalty of Constantius toward Cl
10, 7' tried to match purple gar-
ment of Aurelian A 29,3 1eview
of emperors as far as A 42, 3-4
sayings of A 43, 25, Ca 20, 2

opinion of Amelan A 44, 2 pro-

bbecy related by A 44, 3-5  Vopis-
cus planned to write hves of em-
perors as fa as P 1,5 trained by
Probus P 22, 3 life of to be
written in grander style F 15, 9
defeated and lulled Carinus Ca
10, 18,2 killed Aper Ca r5, 2-3,
15, 4° bailed as Augustus Ca t3,
1-2; 18,1 prophecy given to and
fulfilled Ca 14, 1—15,5 desire to
rule Ca 15,1 character of Ca r3,
1, 18, 4 cruelty of Ca 15,6 given
as emperor by gods Ca 18, 3
Eusthenius secretary of Ca 18, 5
stage restored by Ca 19, 2 spec-
tacles given by Ca 20, 3

Diocletianae, Thermae built TT 21,
7 Ulpian Library in P 2, x.

Diogmitae used as soldiers by M
Aurelius MA a1, 7

Diognetus teacher of M Aurelius


4, 9
Dolabella see Cornelius
Domitia Lucilla mother of M Aue-
hus MÀ 1,3, D] 1, 3 slandered
by Homullus MA 6, 9 Didius
Julianus reared in house of DJ rz,


3-4.
Domitia Paulina mother of Hadrian
1,23
E nae Paulna sister of Hadrian
1,2
Domutiae, Horti Hadrian buried in
AP 5,1 Aurelian lived in A 49, L
DOMITIAN period of H2, 3 fate
feared by Hadrian H 20,3 reth
consulship of AP 1,8 M Aurelius
feared that Commodus would re.
semble MA 28, 10 quoted ın lette:
attributed to M. Aurelius AC 2, 6
Commodus more cruel than C xg,
2 revolt of Saturninus against PN
9, 2 had the repubhe endured


Domitian—continiued
Rome would not have come under
the power of CA 13,5 1euxulk. of
Homullus concaume SA 65, 5
Donutianus descendant ot 111 12,
14 Gentes Flaviae formerly house
of Cl 3, 6 another feucd by all
Ca 1,13. Rome lacerated by Dru-
tahty of Ca 3, 3.

Domitianus general of Aureolus,
defeated Macrianus Ga 2, 6, TT
12, 14, 13, 3° descendant of Domi-
tian and Domitila TT 12, 14

Domtlla Domuittanus descendant
of TT x2, 14

Domitius Dexter, C. appointed pre.
fect of the city by Severus S 8, 8

Domitius Ulpianus. in consilium of
Papinian PN 7,4, SA 26,6 sec
retary of petitions PN 7, 4 prefect
of the guard PN 7, 4, SA 26, 5
removed from office by Elagabalus

16, 4 addressed works to
Sabinus E 16, 2 trusted official
and counsellor of Severus Alex-
ander SA 15, 6, 26, 5-6, 27, 2,
31, 2-3, 51, 4, 67,2, 68, x. invited
to dinner by Alexander SA 34,6
attitude of Julia Mamaea toward
SA 51,4 protected from soldiers
by Alexander SA 51, 4

Domna sge lula

Druid prophecy given by to Se-
verus Alexander SA 6€, 6 to
Aurelian A 44, 4-5 to Diocletian
Ca 14, 2-5.

Druncranus son-in-law of Avidius
Cassius, allowed to go free MA 26,
12, AC 9,3

Dulus Silanus killed by Commo-
dus C 7, §


Eboracum, town in Britain Severus
_ died at S 19, x

Eclectus | influential freedman of L
Verus V 9, 5 retained hy M
Aurelius V 9, 6 accomphce in
murder of Commodus V 9, 6, C
15, 2 helped to make Perunas
emperor HP 4, 5-6 murdered

P xx, Il.

Edessa, city mu N. Mesopotamia

Caracalla wintered at Cc 6


* *
murdered near Ce 7, i,


INDEX OF NAMES


feminatus name given to Com-
modus C 17, 10.
£gius. Ambrbulus, C
of HP 15, 6
natius Capito
modus C 4, 10
znatuleus Honoratus
Severus S 13, 5.

zypt revolt in H 5, 2 Hadrian
in H r4, 4-6 revolt in quelled AP
5,5 ravaged by Bucolict MA 21,
2, AC 6,7 M Awelhus in MA
26, 3-4, C 2, 3. victories of Avidius
Cassius in AC 6, 5. 7 Severus
feared that Niger would seize S 8,
7, PN 5,5 Severus in S 17, 2-4
soldiers in rebuked by Niger PN
7,7 Niger terra of soldieis 1n
PN 12, 6 animals fiom owned by
Elagabalus E 28,3 revolt of Ae.
milianus in Ga 4, 1, 5,9; 6,4, TT
22, 3-6 Theodotus in command of
Ga 4,2, TT 22,10 linen from Ga
6,4 troops in hated Gallienus TT
22, 5 freed when fasces brought
into it TT 22, 13 Camsisoleus a
native of TT 26, 4 supplies of
prefect of allotted to Claudius Cl
15,4 cups from Cl 17,5 linen
clothing from A 12, 1, 48, 5, Ca
20, 5. Muirentius Mauricius. gov-
enor of A 13, 1. revolt of Fumus
in crushed by Aurelian A 32, 2-3,
33,5, F 2, 3, 3, t, 5 I, taxes
from used for food-supply of Rome
A 485, I, 47, I boatmen of in-
creased A 47, 3 danger of revolt
in afte: Aurelian's death T 3, 6
Probus’ father served in P 3, 2
public works of Probus in P 9, 3-4
defended against Palmyienes by
Probus P 9, 5 books from cited
F 2,1 aptefect of named Fiimus
T3,1 Fumus a bigand of F 5,
5  guun-supply from F 5, 4
Saturninus forbidden to visit F 7,
2, 9,1 Hadrmn's opinion of F 8,
I patumch foiced to woiship
Seapis in F 8, 47. Alexandria
chief city in F 8, 7

&gyptans: M. Aurelius’ conduct
among MA 26, 3 worshipped
Luna Ce 7, 5 itdiculed Severus
Alesander: SA 28, 7. inscriptions


consulship
killed by Com
killed by


VOL. III.


Ecyptians—coniuiued.


in language of Go 34,2, TT 22, 13

characte: of TT 22, 1-3, FF 7, 1-5

feared Zenobia 1 T 30,7 language
of spoken by Zenolia TT 30,21

resisted invasion of Palmyrenes,
loyal to Claudius Cl rr, x-2 led
as captives in Áurelian's tiiumph
A 33,5 Firmus incited by mad.
ness of F 3,1 Hadrian's opinion
of I? 7, 6—8, 10 Aurelian's opinion
of F 9,1 acclaimed Saturninus
emperor F 9, 1-2


9,
ELAGABALUS (Varius Avitus, M


Auieltus Antoninus)" a disgiace
to Roman Empire OM 15,2, D 9,
5, SÀ 2,2 names OM 8,4, EI,
I 6,2,1-2 ancestry and parentage
OM 7,6 9,2, E 2, 1-2, 10, I

priest of Elagabalus at Emesa OM
9,3; Do, 5, E 1, 5-6 took 1efuge
in temple of Elagabalus E 2, 3

decku ed son of Caracalla and called
Antonmus Cc 9,2, 11,7, OM 3, 4,
7,6,8,4,946, D 9, 4-5, E 1,
4 57,2, 13, 3 1, 175; 4, SA 5, 3,
M 4,6 a disgrace to name OM 7,
8, E2, 4, 9, 2, 1^, 9, 3 8, SA
1,1, 2,2, 7, 2-4, 9, 4. Made em-
peor OM 8,2. 4, 9, 4—10, 3, I5,
1-2, Do, 4, E 1,4, 5, 1* accepted
at Rome E 3, 1-3 established cult
of Elagabalus at Rome E 1, 6, 3,
4-5, 17, 8 rededicated temple of
Faustina to Elagabalus MA 26, 9,
Cc ir, 6-7 admitted mother and
giandmother to senate E 4, 1-2,
12,3, 18, 3. established senaculum
E 4,3 gave title of Caesar to
Severus Alexander OM 4, 1, E 5,
r, 10,1 unpopular with soldiers
E 5,1, 10,1 wished to make war
on Marcomanni E g,1-2 debauch-
eries E 5, 1-5, 8, 6-7, 9, 3; X0, 5-7,
24,2, 31, 6-7, 33, 1. evil favourites
in power E 6, 1-5, 10, 2-5, I1, I,
I2, I-2, 20, 3, SA 15, I, 23, 6*
profaned Roman cults E 6, 6-9

practised foreign rites B 7, 1-5, 8,
1-2. largesses to people E 8, 3,
22, 24 maladministration of pub-
lic grain and oil E 27, 7, SA 21, 9,
22, 2. vihfied Macrinus and Dia.
dumemanus E 8, 4-5 tried to de.
pose and murder Alexander: E 13,


H


INDEX OF NAMES


Elagabalus-—contouttied,
114,1, SA 2, 4, 4,6 revolt of
soldiers against E r4, 2-8 forced
to give up evil favourites IÈ 15, 1-4.
forced to a reconcthaton with
Alexander E 15, 5-7 ordered
senate to leave Rome E 16,1 re-
moved from office o1 murdered
prominent men E i6, 2-4 lement
to ihe dishonest SA 17, 3 killed
E 16,5, 17,1, SÁ x, I;
disgraced after death T
18, 1, 33, 7, SA 1, 2, 6, 4-57 pub-
hc works E 17, 8.9, 24, 6-7. extra-
vagance E 30,7, 31, 1-5 8, 32,
I-3, SA 33, 3 extravagance in
banquets E 18, 4—19, 9, 20, 4-7,
21, 2—22, 1, 23, B, 24, 3-4, 28,
5-6, 29, 3—30, 6, 32,4, SA 37, 2
I2 relations with senate and pub-
hc ofhcials E 20, 1-3 jests and
amusements E xi, 2-6, 21, I, 23,
X. 2 7, 24, I. 5, 25, 1-9, 26, 3—
28, 4, 29, 1-2, 32, 5-9 eAtrava-
gance in clothing E 23, 3-5, 26,
I-2, 32,1, SA 4,2 wished to be
worshipped SA 18,3 preparations
for death E 33, 2-6. vilified to gain
favour of Alexander E 30,8 worse
than Commodus SA 7, 4, under
control of eunuchs SA 23, 5, 34, 3,
45, 4 permitted promiscuous
bathing SA 24, 2 taxes imposed
by reduced by Alexander SA 39,
6 coinage SA 39,9 lack of mihi-
tary discipline SA 59, 5-6, M7, 2
treatment of Maximinus M 4, 6—
5, 2 furthered career of Gordian
II Go 18,4 example of evil ruler


2 4
Elagabalus (deity) temple of Faus-
tina at Halala rededicated to MA
26,9, Cco1I,7 name piven to Sol
by the Phoenicians OM 9,3 Ela-
gabalus piiest of OM 9,3, Da, 5,
E 1, 5-0 at temple of E 2, 3
brought from Syra and given a
temple at Rome E 1, 6, 3, 4-5, 17,
8 plan to have worshipped every-
where as sole deity E 6, 7 plan
for statue of on column E 24, 7
temple of at Einesa visited and en-
_tiched by Aurelian A 25, 4-6
Mea, town in Italy Zeno born in
A385


Eleusiman Mystunes Hadrian inti.
ated into bi I} I Aurehus
imitiated into MA 97, 1. only those
conscious of innorence admitted
SA 18, 2.

Emesa, city in Syua Julia. Maesa
from OM o,r people of killed by
Ballista Ga 3,4 Aurelan’s victory
at A 25, 2-3 Aurelian in teniple
of Elagabalus at A 25, 4-6.

Emona, town in Caimola, taken by
Maxiumnus M 21,1 5, omen at
M 31, 3.

Encolpius, biographer of Severus
Alexander cited SA 17, 1, 48, 7.
Ennms, Q. preferred to Vergil by

Hadrian H 16,6 quoted in letter
ascribed to M Amehus AC 5, 7,
praised Scipio Africanus the elger

Cl 7, 7.

Ephesus, city in Asa L. Verus
received Lucilla at V 7,7 temple
at destroyed by Goths Ga 6, 2

Epictetus, philosophe — Hadirín's
&iendship for H 16, 10.


Epirus Goths retreated through Ga


13,

Erucius Clarus, Se» consulship of
S 1, 3.

Bri invasion. of under Claudius


Esquiliae,at Rome statue of Galli-
enus on Ga 18, 3 "

Etruria, district of Italy Hadrian
praetor in H 19, 1. origin of family
of Aelius Verus Ae 2, 8, V 1, 9
omens for Antoninus Pius in AP
3,5 spectacles given by Gordian
lin Go 4,6 Tetricus superviso:
of TT 24,5 vines planted in A 48,
2 horse from F 6, 4.

Eudaemon arded Hadrian to obtain
principate and later reduced by
bim to poverty H 15, 3.

Eudaemones see Arabs

Euergetes see Ptolemaeus

Enugamuus, rhetoriciin teacher of
Maxinunus the younger M 27, 5.


luphouon teacher of M. Aurelius
A2,?
Puphiates — territory acioss retin.
quished by Haduan IE 5, 3


journey of L. Verns to V 2, 6,


INDEX OF NAMES


kurope plundered by Goths A r7,
2 Auwrelhan returned to from the
East A 30,4 Aurelian busy with
affans of A 31, 1. defeated enemies
in A 32, I-2 armies of made
Florian emperor and killed him P


13,4
Eurupianus seg Laicius
Eusthentus see Claudius
Eutropius — husband of Claudia,


father of Constantius Cl 15,2
Eutychius Proculus, grammarian
teacher of M, Auelius MA 2, 3
proconsul MA 2, 5
Euxinus (Black Sea)  Scythians
(Goths) sailed across Ga 13, 6
Exsuperatortus name given to No.
vember C zz, 8, 12, 4.


Fabia Orestila wife of Gordian I
Go 17, 4.

Fabia see Ceionia.

Fabianus, Arcus, at Rome statue of
Saloninus near Ga 19, 4.

Fabianus. see Masticius.

Fabillus teacher of Maximinus the
younger M 27, 3.

Fabius Cei yllsanus

Fabius Cio, L buried body of
Commodus C 20, 1 Caracalla
entered Palace leaning on arm of
Cc 3, 2. twice prefect of the city
and cofsul tried to reconcile Cara-
calla and Geta Ce 4,5 attempt to
kall Cc 4, 6.

Fabius Cornelius Repentnus  pre-
fect of guard under Antoninus
Pius AP 8, 8-0.

Fabius Marcellinus, biographer of
Trajan: cited SA 48,6 Vopiscus
will imitate P 2, 7.

Fabius Maximus Gurges, Q.* Elaga-
halus professed to mutate E 26, 2
Fabius Paulinus killed by Severus

S 13, 3.

Fabius Pompomanus commander of
Libyan frontier, made Celsus em-
peror TT 29, 1.

Fabius Quintilbanus, M — Contiouer-
siae af TT 4,2

TYabns Sabmus' counsellor of Se.
veras Alexander SA 68, 1.

Fabius Sossanus conversation with
E 2, 1;


cited Ca 4, 3


Fadilla see Arma Aurela  Iuha
Tunia

Falco see Sosius

Faltonius Probus
of Asta A 40, 4.

Faltonius sce Maecins

Fausianus consulship of Ga 5, 2

Faustina, Temple of, at Rome statue
of Saloninus near Ga rg, 4.

Faustina see Anna’ Maecia Ru-
piha Vitrasia

Faustinianae, puellae endowed b
Antoninus Pius AP 8, r by M.
Aurehus MA 26,6, SA 57,7

Faustinianus * see Cerellius

Faustinus praetor read aloud cog-
nomina of Caracalla Ge 6, 6.

Faustinus proposed as name for
October AP zo, 1

Faustus see Papius

Faventia, a town in Italy Nigrinus
murdered at H 7,2 home of
family of Aelius Verus Ae 2, 8, V


made proconsul


1,9

Favorinus, philosopher debate with
Hadrian H 15, 12-13 Hadrian's
friendship for H 16, ro.

Felicio unworthy favourite of Gor-
dian III Go 25, 2. o

Felicissimus leader of revolt of
nunt-workers under Aurelian A 38,
2-3

Fehx name given to Commodus C
8, 1-2 to Macrinus OM 7, 5, IL,


2-4

Felix see Caehus.

Festivus see Aurelius

Festus aided Macrinus in his career

4,4

Festus see Pescennius.

FIRMUS Vopiscus will write life
of P 24,7, EF 1,4 discussion con-
cerning powers of F z revolt of
in Egypt, crushed by Aurelian A
32, 2-3, F 2, 1, 3, I, 5, x. brth-
place F 3,1. ally of Zenobia F 3,
i, 5,1 wealth and irade of E 3,
2-4 appearance and habits of F 4,
6, 1-2° death of F 5,2-3.  Aurchan's
proci ton cu ie mrz F 5, 3-6.

bises paecuoflayptl 3,2

lums proco wel, m command of
African frontier F 3, 1

Flaccinus see Valerius

Flaccus see Horatius Persius,


n2


INDEX OF NAMES


Flaminia, Porticus planned by Gal-
lienus Ga 18, 5

Flamma, Via, im Italy spectacles
given by Gordian J in cities of Go
4,6 Tetucus supervisor of district
of TT 24, 5.

Flavia Tiwana, wife of Pertinax
offered utle of Augusta HP 5, 4
title relused by Pertinax HP 6,9
daughte of Flavius Sulpicianus
HP 13,7 amours of HP 13, 8

Flaviae, Gentes, in Rome Censo-
unus house near TT 33,60 en-
larged by Claudius Cl 3, 6.

Flavius Antiochianus consulship of
CI rr, 3

Flavius Aper, M
2, 4, 12, 4-3

Flavius Arabianus, piefect of giain-
supply letter of Aurelian to A 47,
2.4.

Flavius Gemalis, T appointed pre-
fect of the guard by Didius Juh-
anus DJ 3, x remained loyal to
Didius Juanas DJ 8, 6

Flavius Iuvenalis appointed prefect
of the guard by Didius Juhanus
and bg Severus S 6,5 remark of
Severus to Ge 2,7 encouraged
Severus in murder Ge 4, 4

Flavius Sulpicianus, T — father-in.
law of Pertinax, made prefect of
the cty HP 13,7 tried to seize
principate DJ 2, 4 6-7 removed
from prefecture of the city DJ
3, 6

Floraha alleged
Elagabalus E 6, 5

FLORIAN brother of Tacitus T 9,
6, 13, 6 Tacitus faled to obtain
consulshtp for T 9, 6 seized im-
peral power T 13,6, r4, 1, P zo,
i 8,11,3-, length of reign T r4,
2 5 kled T r4, 2, P 10, 8
character T 14,4 Hike interes T
11,5 Statue and cenotaph of T r5,
rt descendants of and prophecy
concerning them T r5, 2-1, 16,4
mothe: of appeared as omen of
death T r7, 1 Tafe of witten hy
Vopiscus T 16, 5, P 1, 5. asso.
ciates of spared by Probus P 13,
3 made emperor and killed by

armues of Europe P 15, 4 i


consulship of C


celebration by


Flouanus, P, tubune of the guard,
urged Didius Juhasus to seme
pimcpate DJ 2, 4

Ploius see Annius,

Fouteus, Mo niantuned that Pir-
mus was a bandit k 2,

Formiae, town in Italy villa of M
Aurelius at AC 10, 6.8 11, 3

Fortuna golden statue of kept m
emperor's bedioom AP 12, 5, MA
7,2,923, 5-6 Nemesis the power
of M.B 8, 6.

Foitunatianus’ see Curis

Forum August, al Rome  iestoied
by Hadiian H 19, xo’ statues
erected in by Augustus SA 28, 6.

Forum Nervae (lorum Tiansito-
rium) statues erected in by Severus


Alexander SA 28, 6 — Tuunus
buined 1n SA 36, 2
Forum Traiani at Rome burning


of promisory notesin H 7,6 auc-
tion in MA 17, 1-5, 22,9 statues
of nobles who fell in war erected in
MA 22,8 Aurelian burned records
of debts in A 30,3 statue of An-
relian in T 9, 2
Francicus cognomen conferred on
Probus P to, 9
Franks aided Postumus Ga 7, 1
1n procession at Rome Ga 8,7% an-
vasion of repelled by Aurelian A
7, 1-2. led as captives 1n Aurehan's
trumph A 33, 1. Romafi empero
destined to rule T 15,2 defeated
by Probus P 12,3 Proculus going
to aid of, betrayed by F 13, 4
Fiontinus see Iulius.
Fronto see Coinelius
Frugi see Calpurnius Crassus
Fucinus, Lacus, in Italy drained by
Hadrian H zz, 12
Fufidius Pollo, L
11, 13
Fulvia Pia mothe: of Severus S r, 2,
Fulvius Asprianus cited Ca 17,7
Fulvius Bois commander of frontier
of Raetia, with Valerian et Dyzan-
tum A r3, 1.
Fulvius Pius grandfather af Severus
SIS
Pulvis Plantuunns, C sent 14
Severus to seve Niger's children
$6,109, PN 5,5. Severus! iiend.
ship for turned to enunty S rq, 5


consulship of C


`


INDEX OF NAMES


Iulvius Plautianus, C,-—contznue,
frrendship renewed S i4, 7. 9
daughter of maned to Caracalla
S14,8 urged pursuit of partisans
of Niger 515,4 hated by Cara-
calla fo. cruelty Cc r, 7 encour-
aged Severus in murde Ge 4, 4.

Fulvius Sabinus, city-praeior speech
ot A 19, 1-2

Tulvus see Aurelius

bundanius see Hercules

Lurus Camillus, M — left no sons
lle himself S 2:, 1. admired by
Niger PN 12, 1.

Funus Celsus victory m Mauretania
SA 58, 1

Furius Placidus extravagance of as
consul A t5, 4-5.

Fumis Sabinius Aquila Timesitheus,
C. (Misitheus), prefect of the guaid
daughter married to Gordian III.
Go 23, 6 aided Gordian by his
advice Go 23, 7, 25, 5-7, 27, 2,
31,1 correspondence with Gordian
Go 24-25 speech of Gordian in
praise of Go 27, 4-8 honours con.
ferred on Go 27, 9-10 death Go
29,1 §-6 excellent administration
of Go 28, 2-4, 2y,2 baths planned
by Go 32, 7.

Purus Victounus prefect of guad
unde: Antoninus Pins AP 8,8 de.
teated and killed MA r4, 5

Lusciinus see Seius

Fuscus used by oracle to designate
Pescennius Niger PN 8, 1-2.

Fuscus sce Allus Annius Ael-
hus Pedanius.


Gabinius, A. Cicero's speech against
cited TT 22, 11.

Gades, town in Span bnthplace of
Hadiian’s mother H 1, 2

Galatia Balbinus governor of M.B
7,2 rich in grain TT 18, 8.

GALBA  cenuazed for avarice AC
8,5 killed by soldiers Cl 12, 5.

GALERIUS received title of Caesa
from Diocletian Ae 2,2 loyalty of
Constantius toward Cl 10,7 war
of against Persians Ca 9,3 wiped
out disgrace of Valeiian's capture
Ca 18,3 character of Ca 18, 4

Galh. see Gauls.


Galli (priests of the Mater Deum)
ae of performed by Elagabalus

Gallia ses Gaul

Gallia Belgica governed by Didius
Iulianus DJ 1,7

Gallia Bracata sered by Pioculus
and Bonosus P 38, 5.

Galha Lugdunensis Severus gov-
ernor of $3, 8, PN 3,3

Galha Narbonensis proconsul of
killed by Camacallaà Cc 5,1. Mas-
mus proconsul of M.B 5,8

Gallia Transalpina family of Anto-
minus Pius trom AP 1, r.

Galhcanus two soldiers killed by

20,6, Go 22, 8


Gallicanus see Moesus Mulvius
‘Lurdulus
Galhena cousin of Emperor Gal-


lenus, muidered Celsus TT 29,

3-
GALLIENUS elevated famıly of
Ceionu CA 4, z2 half-biother of
Valerian the younger Va 8, I
father of Salomnus Va 8, 5, Ga 19,
r, TT 3, I rejoiced in father's
captivity Ga 1,1, 35, 8. evil char.
acter of Ga 1,1, 3,6. 9, 9, 3, 14,
1,5. TT 14,8 II, 30,1, 31,1 7,
P 6,4 evilruleof Ga 1, 2, 3, 1,
4,3, 13, 5, TT 10, 9 17, 12, 10,

l 1,2-3, 7, 3, 9, 1, Å 41, 7, Ca
3,5 consulships Ga 1, 2, 5, 2, 10,
1, A ir, 8 ievolt of Macrianus
against Ga 1, 2-3, 2, 1, TT 11,2,
12, I2, I5, 4 1evolt of Aureolus
against Ga 2, 6, 14, 06.7, TT 11,1,
supported by Rome Ga 3, 3,
Odaenathus subordinate of Ga 3, 5
I0,4 spectacles given by Ga 3,7,
15,5 Theodotus a general ot Ga
4,2, TT 22, 8. 10 contempt for
Ga 5, L7, 10,3, 21, 1, TT 1, 1,
I1, 1, I2, I campaigns against
Postumus Ga 4, 4-6, 7, 1, 21, 5,
TT 3,5, 6, 1, 11, 3 made peace
with Aureolus Ga 4,6, 21,5; TT
11,3, Cls,r, Á 16,1 earthquake
n eign of Ga 5, 2-4 pestilence in
reign of Ga 5, 5-6 jesis of Ga 6,
3-7, 9: 3-4, 12, 2-5, 17, T. 9
soldiers plundered Byzantium and
were pumshed Ga 6,8, 7,2 4
decennial games of Ga 7, 4—8, 7.


INDEX OF NAMES


Gallienus— continued.


21,5 vices and follies Ga 9, 1 , 19,
1j 12, 6, 16, 1, 21,6, TT 5, 4,
PES 8, 9,9, 1, 23 2, 26, D, 20,
1; Ca r, 4. cruelty Gag, 7, 31,2,
18, 1, TT 9, 1-95 10, r-2, 26, 1, 4:
triumph ove: Persians Ga 10, 5'
archon at Athens Ga tr, 3° wished
to he initiated into mysteries and
enrolled in Areopagus Ga x1, 3-5
teary gifts Ga ir, 6.9 gave
Odaenathus power and ttle of
Augustus Ga r2, 1 made peace
with Odaenathus Ga 21, 5 sent
Heraclianus against Persians Ga
13, 4 arranged for defence of
Byzantium Ga 13, 6 deteated
Goths Ga 13,9, 21,5 murder Ga
14, 4-9, 15, I declared usurper
after death Ga 15, 2 amusements
and appearance Ga 16, 2-5, 17,
2-9, 21, 4 bounties Ga 16, 6,
court Ga 16,6 praised by Annius
Cormecula Ga 17,2 public works
Ga 18, 2-5 length of reign Ga x9,
5,21, 5, Ca 3, 5 rebellions and
pretenders under Ga rg, 6, 21, I,
TE 1, 1, 30,1, 26, 1, F 1,3
loved Cipaia Ga 21, 3 campaign
against Lollianus Ga 21, 5 en-
trusted Salomnus to Postumus
{incorrect} TT 3, 1 entiusted by
Valerian to Postumus (incorrect)
A82 hated by Gauls TT 3, 3
campaign against Ingenuus TT 9,
3 suspected Regahanus TT 10, 5
letters of TT 9, 3-9, Cl 17, P 6,
2-3 good generals not appointed
by TT ro, r4 not trusted by
Ballista TT 18, r Balltsta killed
to please TT 18,12 made Valens
proconsul of Achaea TT 10, r
approved honours for Piso TT 2r,
4 hated by troops in Egypt TT
22, 5 Saturninus best general of
and revolted against TT 23, 1,
ir, r sent Camsisoleus to con-
quer Trebelhanus TT 26, 4 people
of Sicca faithful to TT 20, 4
Zenobia ruled during reign of TT
30,3 Zenobia's contempt fo. TT
30, 10 23 removed from rule by
Claudius Cl 1, 3 despised by
Claudius Cl 5, 2. Germans invaded
Italy under A 18, 4, 21, 9. letter


Gallienus —continued.
of Valerian to P 3, 6- 4,2 Probus’
achievements under P 6, r,

Galienus grandfather of Empero
Gallienus Ga 19, 3.

Gallonius Avitus, legate of Thrace
letter: of Aurelian to F 15, 5-8.

Gallus (P) H5, 7.

Eo Antipater prased Aumeolus

5s 4s

Gallus see Antoninus,

Gargihus Marualis cited SA 37, 9
Vopiscus will imate P 2, 7.

Gaudianus favourite of mother of
Gordian IHI. Go 25, 3.

Gaudiosus trained by Probus P 22, 3.

Gaul (country) Hadrian in H xo, 1;
12, 1-2 involved in Marcomanni
War MA 22,1 Severus suppor ted
by troops inS 5,3 Albinus saved
in CA 6, 3 i1evolt of Albinus in
S1o,1,PN2,1, CA r,1. Seveius'
victory in S 11, 1. gold in seized
by Severus S 12, 3 1avaged by
deserters PN 3,4 Ragonius Celsus
governor of PN 3,9 tiibes in con.
quered by Albinus CA 5,5 origin-
ally conquered by senate CA 13,
6 Caracallain Cc 5, 1-2. plundered
by Geimans SA 59, 3 Severus
Alexander killed by troops in SA
59, 5-6, M 7, 4-6 cenotaph of
Alexander in SA 65, 35. Balbinus
governor of M.B 7, 2' desned
rescue of Valerian Va 3,2 Postu-
mus governo: of TT 3, 1 9 po-
tected against barbarians by Postu-
mus Ga 4,5, TT 3, 4.6 revolted
under Postumus Ga 6,6 revolt of
Lolhianus in TT 5,1 ruined by
Gallienus’ excesses TT 5, 1. cites
of restored by Lolianus TT 5, 4.
Macnianus’ valour in TT i2, 17
Ragonus Clarus prefect of TT 18,
5 Yetricus governor of TT 24, x.
4 seized by pietender TT 29, 1
held by Tetricus as pretender Cl 7,
5, A 32, 3 Amelan sived from
invasion of Franks A 7, 1-2, 9,4
Tetneus dressed in trousers hom
A 34, 2  Teuicus the younge
made emperor in A 31, 2, Aurelian
nA 35,4 recovered by Aurelian
Á 41 8 Duuds fiom A 44, 3
cloaks from P 4, 5 German m-


INDEX OF NAMES


3aul--contiued
vaders diiven fiom by Probus P 13,
5-7, 15 Proculus and Bonosus
seized power at Agrippina in P 18,
5 Satuninus a native of I 7, 1
restored by Saturninus F 9, 4
Bonosus' mothei a native of F 14,
I Carimus sent to rule Ca 7, 1.2,
10, 2 Numerian not old enough
to rule Ca 7, 2 Tungui lived in
Ca14,2 restored to rule of Rome
by Constantius Ca 18, 3.

Gauls (people) Severus beloved by
S 4,1 nobles of lilled S12, 1. in
ievolt CA 1, 2, 5, 4. prophecy in
language of SA 60, 6 subject to
Romans Va 1,4. made Postumus
empero: and supported him Ga 4,
3-4 TT 3, 3-6 war among Ga 5,
6 hated Gallienus TT 3, 3. char-
acter of TT 3,7 9, F7,1.3 letter
of Valerian to TT 3, 8-11 made
Lollianus emperor TT 4, x hitrle
authority of Lolhanus over TT 5,
2 terrihed bv Aurehan A 32, 4
invasions of had no such hero as
Probus P 1,4 served under Probus
P 4,1 allowed by Probus to plant
vines P 18,8 delrvered from Ala-
manni by Proculus F 13, 3 Rome
overwhelmed by invasion of Ca 2, 5

Gavius Maximus, M, prefect of the
guard under Antoninus Pius AP


Gellia “addressed in epigram of
Martial SA 38, 1.2

Gelhus punishment urged by Dia-
dumemanus D 9, r.

Gellius, Aulus cited P rz, 1

Gemunas influential freedman of M
Aurelius and L Verus MA 15, 2,
V 9, 3.

Geminus* of M. Aurelius
MA 2, 2.

Gemahs see Flavius.

Gentnanus, see Hedins Terentius,

Georgia written by Albinus CA x2,


teacher


Pa

Gepedes invasion of under Claudius
Cl6,2 settle in Thrace by Probus
but left lands P 18, 2.

Germama Transrhenana ravaged by
Maaumnus M 12, I

Germanica, Classic Perunaa incon
mand of HP 2, 2


Germanicus’ cognomen assumed by
M. Auehus MA 12, 9 by Com-
modus C rr, 14 by Caracalla Cc
6, 5, 10,6

Germans king of appointed by
Hadrian H 12, 7 defeated AP 5,
4 wars of M, Aurelius and L.
Verus against MA 12, 14, 17,1,
20, 6, 21, 7-8, V o, 7 (see also
Marcomann1) Roman nobles fell
in war against MA 22, 7 wai of
Commodus against C 2,5 defeated
by Caracalla Cc 5, 6 soldiers’
anger directed toward SA 53, 9
war of Severus Alexander against
SA 59,1, 63,5 ravaged Gaul SA
59,1 Alexander killed by one of
SA 67, 3-6 war of Maximinus
against M ro, 2, ir, 8—12, 7
served under Maximus against
Maximinus M 24, 5-6 defeated by
Maximus M.B 5, 9  Balbinus
planned campaign against M-B 13,
5 company of attended Maximus
and Balbinus at Rome M.B 13, 5,
14, 2-8 Gordian IIL victor over G
34,3 driven out of Gaul by Postu-
mus TT 3, 6 attacked Romans
after death of Postumus TI 5,4 6
aided Postumus against ‘Gallienus
TT 6,2 led as captives in Aure-
lian’s triomph A 33,4 invasion of
after Aurehan’s death T 3, 4, P 13,
5 invasion of repelled by Probus
P12,3 Probus’ campaign against
P 13, 6—15, 7 loyal to Probus
against Proculus and Bonosus P 18,
7 Probus’ trrumph over P 19,2. 8
Alamanni called F 13, 3 burned
Roman galleys F 15, x.

Germanus assumed às cognomen by
Caracalla Cc 5, 6

Germany Hadrianin H 2,5, 10, 2
invaded by Chatti MA 8, 7-8
Commodus set out fo. C r2, 2-6
people in refused to submit to
Commodus’ rule C 13, 5 Pertinas
and mother in HP 2, 2-3 Didius
S R^ in command of troops in

J 1, 6 Chauci, a people of, de-
feated DJ x, 7 Didius Juhanus
governor of G Infertor DJ 1,9
Severus ın command of troops in
S 4, 5 7 acclaimed emperor by
legions of S 5, 1 troops of refused


INDEX OF NAMES


Gei many-~continted,

to recognize Albinus. as empero

CA 1,2. cunpaugn of Maximinus

in SA 61, 8, M 312, 1-0, 13, 3; Go

14,1 made to tear Romans TT 8,
if subdued and hope of making

province of P 14, 5, 15, 2. 7.

Gessaces, Mons Scythians. (Goths)
ieteated over Ga 13, 9.

CETA buth S 4,23, Ge 3, 1
horoscope Ge 2, 6-7, omens of early
death S 21, 3, Cc 11,1, Ge 3, 2-9,
4,5 chiiacter and tastes Ge 4-5
early honours S r4, 8 ro title of
Caesar conferred by soldiers S 16, 3;
Ge 5,3 name Antoninus given by
Severus S10, 5, 19, 2, Ge 1, 5-7, 2,
2-5, OM 3, 4, D 6,9 by soldiers
$ 16,4, Cc x, 1, Ges, 3 named in
honour of Marcus Aurelius or of
Antoninus Pius Ge 2, 2-3 men-
tioned 1n Severus’ letter to Albinus
CA7,4 Severus planned to make
jomt ruler with Caracalla S 20, 1.2,
23, 3-6, CA 3, 5, 7, 2, Cc 2, 7;
Ge 1, 3-7, 6, 1. obtained deification
for Severus S 19, 4 murdered by
Caracalla S 20, 3, 21, 7, 23, 7,
Cc 2, 4-6, 8, 5, 10, 4, 6, Ge 2, 8
6,1 burial Ge 7, 1-2, mourned for
because of Caracalla's cruelty Ge 7,
6 games on birthday of M 2, 4,

Geta see Septimius.

Getae also called Goth: Cc zo, 6*
Maximinus beloved by M 4, 4
tribes of subdued by Probus P 16, 3.

Geticus cognomen proposed in jest
fo: Caracalla Cc 10, 6, Ge 6, 6

Gillo favourite slave of Aurelian
A 50, 3

ie: in Tunisia purple from Cl 14,


Gladiatorius name given to Com-
modus C 17, 10

Gordiana see Ulpia

GORDIAN I descent Go 2, 2, 9, 4,
17,3 possessions Go 2, 3, 17, 2
hterary tastes Go 3, t-4, 7, 1
career of ofhce Go 2, 4, 3, 5—5, I
spectacles and gifts to the people
G0 3, 5-8, 4, 5-0 children SA 68,
1, G0 1,2 8, 17, 4 poconsul ot
Aftica M 13, 6, 14, 2, 16,1, Goa,
4, S, 7,2, 17, 1 personal appeur-
ance Go 6, 1, 21, 5 chaiacter and


Gordian L -c(ondtiutied


habits Go 6, 2-7 revolt in Ahia
under M 13, 6 -14, 4, Go 7, 2 9,
6, r1, 5, 17, 1; 92,0 ac lamel
Augustus by senate M ih 5, 15,
6.7, 16, 3-0, Go 11, 10, 4, 12, 1,
M-B 1,1 letter of to senate M 16,
1-2 attacked in speech by Mami
minus M 17, 7, 18, Go Lh 2
envoys at Rome Go y, 7-85, 10, 4.
8, xx, 8: defeated and comnntted
suicide in Africa M 19, 1-4, Go 10,
I, 25-16; 22, 6, 34, 1; M-B 1,
Y:4,3,9, 5, 106, 6. dethed M 21,
2-3, 26, 2. 5, Go 16, 4, M-B 4,
1-2. received cognomen Atricanus
Go 9, 3-4; 17, 2 bore cognomen
Antoninus (incorrect) Go 5, 3, 17,
2 prophecies concerning son Go
19, 6, 20, 5-6 excitement in Rome
afte: death of Go 22, 1


GORDIAN II son of Gordian I.


Go 4, 2, 17, I 4 received name
Antoninus (incorrect) Go 4, 8, 17,
5 education Go 18, 1-3 career of
office Go 4, 2, 18, 4-5 legate of
father in Africa Go 7, 2, 8, 3, 11,
4, 15,2, 18, 6 acclaimed emperor
with father M 14,3, Go 8, 3-4, 11,
4-5, 17, 1 acchumed Augustus by
senate M 14, 5, 15, 6-7, 16, 6, 18,
2, Go 11, 16, 4, 17, 1, 19, 7, M-B
I, attacked in speech by Max-
munus Go 14,2 defeated apd killed
near Carthage Go 4, 2, 15, x6, 1,
22,6, 34,1, M-B 1,1, 4, 3, 0,5,
16,6 tastes and habits Go 19, 1-5,
21, I-4 pruphecres concerning
future of Go 20, 1-5. literary works
Go 20, 6 appearance Go 21, 4
deified M 24, 2-3, 26, 2 5, Go 16,
4, M-B 4, 1-2 excitementin Rome
after death of Go 22, 1.


GORDIAN HL. relationship to


Gordian I and Gordian IL M 16,
7, Go 19, 9, 22, 4.6, 23, 1, M-B 3,
4, 8, 3 education Go 22, le-
ceived title of Casar M 16, 7, 20,
2, G022,2,3 5, MB 3, 3-5, 8, 3,
16,6 acalarmed in senate M 20, 8,
26, p5 acknowledged by army of
Maximinus M 24, 3-3. demanded
as emperor hy soldiers Go 22, 6-- 23,
1, M.B 9, 4, r5, 6 established in
Palace M 21, 9, 20, 7. 1ecerved


INDEX OF NAMES


Gordian IT, -— ontinmued.

news of death of Mixtiinus M 25,
3 went forth to meet Maximus
M.B 13, 1. wrongly said to have
been prefect of the guard M-B 15,
6 plan to remain in Rome duung
campaigns of colleagues M.B 33,
§ made emperor on death of Maxi-
wus and Balbinus Go 22, 5, M-B
14, 7 consulships Go 23, L 5

omen of shortness of rule Gro 23, 2

appearance Go 21, 5 age at acces-
sign and at death Go 22, 2 revolt
against in Atuca suppressed Go 23,
4-5. war against Persians Go 23,
5,26, 3-6, 27, 1-B* mariage Go 23,
6 aided in 10ling by Timesitheus
Go 23,7, 25, 5-7, 27, 2. freed him-
self fom eunuchs and comtes
Go 23, 7, 24, 2-3, 25, I-3 corre.
spondence with Timesitheus Go 24.
25 earthquake during reign of
Go 26, 1-2 speech to senate thank-
ing Timesitheus Go 27, 4-8 triumph
over Peisians Go 27, 9, 33,2 plots
of Phihp against Go 29 attempt
to hee himself hom Philip Go 30, 1-
7 death Go 30, 8-9, 31, 2, 33. 5,
34, 4 length of reign Go 31, 1.
deiicaton Go 31, 3. 7, 34; 3

character Go 31, 4-6 privileges for
descendants Go 32, 4 public works
Go 32, 5-8 wild beasts at Rome


Go 33, 1 tomb and inscription
EN 34, 2-3 defeated by Alani


,

Gordsan elevated family ot Ceionu
CA 4, 2 wiongly supposed by
many to have borne name An-
tonus but in reality Antomi
OM 3, 5, D 6, 3: E 18, X, 34: 0-7,
Go 4, 7-8, 9, 5. three included in
one book Go r, 4. ihree in all Go 2,
1 house and villa Go 32, 1-3 all
entitled Augustus Go 34, 1

Gordianus sse Aelhnus Aurelius:
Maeers Velius Coimfiecius

Gotha — Maximinus! father: a native
ol M 1, 5.

Gothicus cognomen proposed im
jest for Caraculla Ge 6, 6, borne by
Aurehan A 30, 5. by Probus
I 159g

Goths. also called Getae Cc 10, 6
Maximinus! dealings with M 4, 4,


Goths—contimied.
Gordian III, victor over Go 34, 3!
invaded Thrace and Macedonia
Ga 5, 6 defeated by Marcianus
Ga 6,1, Cl 6, 1, 18, 1 invaded
Asia Ga 6, 2, 13, 8, Cl 8, x m
procession at Rome Ga 8, 7 at.
tacked Cyzicus Ga 13, 8 invaded
Achaea, defeated by Athenians
Ga 13,8 retreated through Epirus,
Macedonia, Boeotia Ga 13, 8 de.
feated in lllyncum by Galhenus
Ga 13,9, 21, 5. invasions of worse
than Germans’ TT 5, 7 Claudius’
wars against TT 30, 3. rr, Cl x,
3, 3, 6, 6-9 invaded Thessaly
and Greece C18, 1 became settlers
in Roman territory Cl 9, 4.5
battles with at Byzantium and
Thessalonica Cl 9, 7-8 suffered
from famine and pestilence at Hae-
mimontum Cl ix, 3-4 attempted
to take Anchialus and Nicopolis
Cl r2, 4 defeated by Aurelian A
13, 2 Aurelian sent by Claudius
to war against A 16, 4, 17, 2-4
leader of killed by Aurehan A 22,
2 chanot of king of in Aurelian's
triumph A 33,3 led as &iptives in
Aurelian's triumph A 33, 4, 34, I
defeated by Probus P r2, Bono-
sus' wife of the race of P 15, 4
Aurelan used Bonosus to leain
secrets of F 15, 4 noblewomen of
settled at Perinthus F 15, 6.

Gracchi Gordian I descended from
Go 2, 2.

Gracchus see Nonius

Gratus Claudius to be appeased by
Cl 17, 3

Greece Severus sent troops to S 8,
12, PN 5, 6 Maximus proconsul
of M.B 5, 8 invaded by Goths
Cl 8, r

Graecostadium, at Rome restored by
Antoninus Pius AP 8, 2


Graeculus name given to Hadrian
Hrs.

Granianus see Iulius.

Gieuthungi — invasion of unde:
Claudius Cl. 6, 2 settled in


Thrace by Probus but left lands
P x8,2
Gurges, see Fabius Maximus.


INDEX OF NAMES


Hadria, town in Italy: origin of
Haduan's family H 1, r. office
held in it by Hadrian H 19, r,
HADRIAN: Autobiography of H
1, 1, 7, 2, 16, 1, S 1, 6 other
writings H 14,9, 16, 2-4; 2. 5 9-10
ancestry, birth and guardians H 1,
I-4 early studies H 1, 5 early
career H 2, 1-5, 3, 1 2 5 8,
prophecies of rule Ha, 8 9, 3,5
relations with Trajan H 2,6 7 10
3, 37 i manage H 2, xo
campaigns in Dacia H 3, 2 3. 6
quelled revolt of Sarmatians H 3,
9g consulships H 3, 10, 4, 4, 8 5:
adoption by Tigan H 3, 10, 4, 4.
6. 8. rio, A x4, 6 favoured by
Plotina H 4, x. 4. 10 im campaign
against Parthians, H 4, I at
Trajan’s comt H 4, 5. legate of
Syra H4,6 made emperor H 4,
7 policy of peace H 5, 1. revolts
under H 5,2. pohcy in the Orient
E 5, 3-4 9, I, 12, B, 13, 8-9, 21,
rO-r4 Clemency H 5, 5, 17, I
donatives to soldiers H 5, 7, 23, 12,
Ae, 3, 3, 6, x. appointed provin-
cial governors H 5, 8 10, 6, 7, 7,
3 honcarsfor Trajan H 5,9, 6, 1
3 amval at Rome H 5, 1o
apologies to senate H6, 2. deferred
title of Pater Patriae H 6, 4 re-
mitted crown-gold H 6, 5 cam.
pagn against Saimatae and
Rosolani H 6, 6-8 murdered four
consulars H 7, 1-2, 9, 3 returned
to Rome H 7,3 largesses to people
H 7, 2, 23, 12, Ae, 3, 3,0: I
promised not to kill senators H 7,
4 instituted imperial post H 7, 5
remitted debts to fiscus H 7, 6
grant to aerarium H 7, 7 endow.
mentfo orphans H 7,8 geneiosity
FE 7, g-11, 15, 1, 17, 2-5, 22, 9
spectacles H 7, 12, 19, 2-8, 23, IŻ,
Àe,3, 3 advisory consthum H 8,
x, 18,1, 22,11, AP 3,8 modera-
tion in honours and powe: H 8,
2-3, 9, 7-8 generosity in giving
consulships H 8, 4 deference
toward senate H 8, 6-10 towaid
Servianus H 8, ir pretended
fulfilment of Tiajan’s commands
but destroyed hus theatre H 9, 1-2
jealousy and deposition of Attianus


Hadrian—con£tnued,


and Sumilis Hog, 5-5. made Turbo
and Clarus prefects of guid. IL 9,
15) visit and genetosty to Cam.
pama H 9,0 honours for moth-
in-law H 9,9, 19, 5 m Gaul H
10, I, 72, 1-2, in Germany H ro,
2 discipline and care of army H
10,2—11,:, P4,3 economy H 11,
io m Britain H r, 2 disnussed
Septicius Clarus and Suetonius H
11,3 thought of divorcing Sabina
H ir, 3° spy-system H ix, 4-6

amours H rr, 7- built basilica in
honour of Plotiun H 12, 2' in
Spain H 12, 3-6: restored temple
of Augustus H 12, 3 appointed
king in Germany H 12,7. checked
revolt in Mauretania H 12, 7 wes
granted supplicatio by senate H
12, 7 m Asa H 13, 1.6 m
Achaea H 13, I2  inteiest in
Athens and initiation into mysteries


H 13,1 6, 19, 1. 4, Ga 11, 4 in
Sicily H 13, 3. in Africa H 13,
4-5, 22, 14 used Cappadoman


slaves H 13, 7 severity toward
provincialofücials H 15, ro kaned
for Antioch H 14, 1 planned to
sepa1iate Syria and Phoenice H 14,
I ascended Mons Casius H 14, 3

in Arabia H 14, 4 rebuilt tomb of
Pompey H 14,4. mourning for and
conseciation of Anunous H r4,
5-8 interest in arts, sciences, and
literature H 14, 8.9, 16, 5-7, 26,
4, Ae 3,9 complex character H
I4, II knowledge of war and
arms H 14, x0, 26, 3 suspicions
and murders H 15, 2-9, 23, 2-8,
25, 8 association with learned
men and artists H rs, 10-13, 16,
S.x1 retort to Florus H 16, 5-6

in the pubhe baths H 17, 5-7

love for plebs H 27, 8 love of
travel H 17, 8. endurance H 17,
9 gifts to hings H 17, 10-r2

administrative measures H 18, 2-11,
22, 6.8  ofhces held in various
anes H ro, 1r. publi works at
Rome H ry, 9-13, 20, p5 athi-
bility H 20, 1-3. instituted post of
advocatus fisci H 20, 6 memory
and other talents H 20, 7.11* Care
of public finances [120,22 interest


INDEX OF NAMES


Hadtitan—con£vured.
in hunting H 20, 12-13; 26, 3
supervision of jurisdiction H 21,
I, 22, Il treatment of freedmen
and slaves H*21, 2.3 liking for
tetrapharmacum H 217, 4, Ae 5, 4,

30, 5-0 disasters during
piincipate H ar, 5-6 granted Ius
Latium and remitted tribute H
21, 7 wars H, 21, 8-9 enforced
laws and customs H 22, 1-5. care
for state-religion H 22, 10 ap-
pointed governors for Italy H 22,
13, AP 2, xr. last illness H 23,
1, 24, 8—25, 4 plans for successor
H 23, 2-6 adoption of Aehus
Verus, honouis and offices for him
H 23, 10-13, Aer, 2, 2,6, 3, 1-3,
7,1, CÀ 2,5 remarks concerning
Aelius H 23, 14, Ae 4, 1-7; 6,2 3.
7 adoption of Antoninus Prius
24,1, Ae6, 9, AP 4, 1-6, MA 5,
1-7, V2,2, A 14,6 plan to kill
senators frustrated by Pius H 24,
4, 25,8, AP2,4, E7,9-10 death
H 25, 5-6, Ae 6, 10, AP 5, 1, MA
6, x buned H 25, 6, AP 5, 1
age H 25,1r appearance H 26, 1
vila near Tibur H 23, 7, 26, 5,
TT 30,27 omens of death H 26,
6-10 hatred for after death H 25,
0, 27, 1-2 honours for H 24, 5,
27, 2-3, AP 2, 5, 5,1-2 prevented
hom ssuicide H 21, 9, AP 2, 6
temple to AP 8, 2, V 3, x atfec.
tion for M, Ameliuns MA 2, 10,
4, I-2. treasures of sold by M
Aurelius MA 17, 4, quoted in
letter of M Aurelius AC 2, 5
could not be overthrown by rebels
AC 8, 6 gave commands only to
tested officers PN 4, 3, example of
good inler E 1, 2, & 42, 4; T6,9
named Oresta in Thrace after
himself J. 7, 8 extravagance in
banquets SA 37, 2 temples buit
by, supposedly to Christ SA 43, 6
oid when made emperor T 5, I
Probus to be preferred to T 16, 6,
P 22, 4° lette; concerning Egyp-
tans F y, 6—8, 10.

Hadrian Sepulchium, at Rome
bult by Hadrian H 19, 11 re-
paned by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 2.
Aehus Verus buned in V rr, r.


Hadriani—continued.
Antoninus Prus buired in MA 7,
i0 L, Verus buried in MA 20, x
V ir Commodus buried in C
17, 4 Severus buried in S r9, 5,
24, 2 Caracalla buried in Cc 9,
i2, OM 5,2

Hadrianopolis | name given by Had-
rian to Carthage and par. of Athens
H 20, 4.

Hadrianotherae, city in Asia
founded by Hadrian H 20, 13.

Hadrianus see Aelius.

Hadrumetum, city in Africa grand-
father of Didius Julianus from DJ
1,2 Clodius Celsinus from S rr,
3 Clodius Albinus from CA 1, 3,
4,1, 12,8

Haemimontum Goths attacked at
by famine and pestilence Cl ir,
8-4 plundered by Goths A 17, 2,

Halala, town in Cappadocia
Faustina died in MA 26, 4, 9
made a colony MA 26, 9
of Faustina at MA 26,9, C
temple abolished by Caracalla Cc
xx, 6 temple re-dedicated to god
Elagabalus MA 26, 9, Cc 13, 7

Piane served unde® Aurelian

Ina
Hannibal admured by Niger PN 11,


Hanmbalanus see Afranius.
Haromundus served unde: Amelan
A 11,4


Harpocratio, grammarian teacher
of L Verus V 2, 5
Hebrus, river in Thrace Orestes


purified near E 7, 7

Hedius Rufus Lollianus Gentianus
criticized Pertinax HP 7, 7.

Hehodorus, philosopher attacked
by Hadrian H r5, 5. Hadrian's
friendship for H, 16, xo.

Heliodorus see Avidius.

Hellespontus — Aemilianus defeated
at S 8, 16.

Helvius Pertinax, P. sea Pertinax.

Helvius Pertinaa, P, son of Em-
peror Pertinax title of Caesar
offered to but refused by father
HP 6,9 made flamen of father by
Severus HP 15,3 killed by Cara.
calla Ce 4, 8, Ge 6, 7 jest con.
cerning Caracalla’s cognomina Cc


INDEX OF NAMES


Helvius Pertinax P.—contwitied.

10, 6; Ge 6, 6 suspected by

Caracalla of designs on principate

Ge 6, 8

Helvius Successus father of emperor
Pertinax HP 1, x.

Hephaestio, grammai1an
L. Verus V 2, 5

Heraclammon betrayed Tyana to Au-
rekan and punished A 22, 6—24, I.

Heraclea, city 3n Bithynia attacked
by Scythians (Goths) Ga ra, 6.

Heraclea, city in Thrace Aurelian
murdered near A 35, 5.

Heraclianus in waragainst Pasians,
defeated by Palmyrenes Ga 13, 4-5
in plot to kill Gallienus G 14, 1

Heraclitus sent by Severus to tale
possession of Britain $ 6, 10 of
Bithynia. (incorrect) PN 5, 2

Herculaneus title given to flamen of
Commodus C 17, 11, name of a
kind of sword HP 8, 4

Herculea name given to African
fleet C 17, 8.

Hercules initiation into Eleusinian
Mysteries imitated by Hadrian H
13, I Commodus in gab of C,9,
2 favouzite of Commodus made
priest of C 10, 9 statue of showed
prodigy C 16,5 Caracalla likened
himself to Cc 5, 9 Maximinus
hkened to M 4,9, 6,9

Hercules name given to Commodus
C85 9, Cc5, 5, D 7,2-3 given
to month September C xi, 8 to
October C 8, 13. 14

Hercules, Temple of banquet in TT


teacher of


Hercules Fundanimus, Temple of
omen in T 17,2
Herculeus, Agon contest in honou:
of Alexander the Great held by
Severus Alexander SA 35, 4
Hercultanus name of hind of lance
Ci x4, 6
HERENNIANUS with Odenaethus
m Persian War TT 15,2 Zenobia
ruled in name of Ga 13, 2, '1T 27,
1, 30, 2, Zenobia did not irule in
name of A 38, I Zenobia wished
to make prince TT 17, 2 led in
triumph by Aurehan TT 24, 4
ue to have been killed by Aurehan
27, 3.


Heienninus Claudius to be ap-
peased by Cl 17, 3

Hoennanus named by Probus P
22, 3.

Herenmanus
12, 3.

Herennianus see Verconmus

Herennins Celsus sought consulship
TT 22, 12.

Heiennus Devxippus, P., historian
cited. SA 49, 3, M 32, 3-4, 331 3,
Go2,1,9,6, 19, 9, 22 1; M-B t,
2, 15,5, 16, 3-6; TT 32, 1; Cl 12,
6 defeated Goths Ga 177 8.

Herennius Modestinus, jurist teacher
of Maximinus the younger M 27, 5.

Herennius Nepos killed by Severus
S 13, 7

Hermundur: warred against Rome
MA 22, 1. plan of M Amehus to
make a province of MA 27, 10

HERODES son of Odaenathus’ first
wife, dishked by Zenobia TT 16,
I 3, 17, 2. with. Odaenathus in
Peisian wai TT 15, 2 made em-
peior by Odaenathus Ga 13, 1, TT
15,5, 16, 1. luxury of and indul-
gence of Odaenathus toward TT 16,
I-2. killed with Odaenathus Ga 13,
I TT15,5 areproach to Odaena
thus TT 17, 1

Herodes see Claudius Atticus

Herodianus, historian (also called Ar-
uanus) cited CA 1,2,12, 4, D 3,
5, SA 52, 2, 57,3, M 13, 4, 33,3
(Avrianus), Go 2, 1 (Avrianus), M.
B r, 2 (Aurianus), 15, 3 5, x6, 6,
Ti 32,1

Hiber, people ot "Tianscaucasia
Hadrian's gifts to hing of H 17, x1
fnendly iclations with H 20, 13
offered aid for rescue of Valenan
Va 4, I marched in Aurelian's
triumph A 33, p revered Aurelian
A 41, 10

Hierocles — favourite. of Klagabalus
E 6,5 removed hom power at
demand of «soldiers E 15, 2 x.
stuled I 15, |

Hilana binquets of Scverus Alex.
ander on SA 37, G conversation of
Vopiscus on A 1.

Hildomundus served under Aurelian
À 1, 4.

Hispauta: seg Spain.


son ‘of Proculus F


INDEX OF NAMES


Hispania Baetica. quaestorship ofas.
signed to Severus $ 2, 5-1. invaded
by Mauri $2, |

Hista (Danube) Scythians (Goths)
sailed mto Ga 13, 6

Home: Hidiuns knowledge of H
66, 6. left no sons S 27,2 works
of given to Maximinus the youngei
M 30, + made Achilles famous P


1,2

Homullus remak to Trajan con-
cerning Domitian SA 65, 5

Homullus see Valerius.

Honoratus see Egnatulewus

Horatius Flaccus, Q cited AC 11,
8 works ofiead by Severus Alex-
ander SA 30,2

Hortensius of Cicero cited Ga 20, I.

Humla wife of Bonosus E 15, 7


fanus showed prodigy C 16, 4
gates of opened by Gordian III.
Go 26, 3

Uyricum Hadianin H 5,10 plans
fo. defence of MA 14, 6 1n Mar-
comannic War MA 22,1 Severus
made emperor in DJ 5, 1-2, S 5,
3, CA x, 1 victory in SA 58, 1
protected by Maximinus Go 14, I
Sarmatae defeated in M-B 5, 9
desned rescue of Valerian Va 3, 2
Macianus defeated and killed in
Ga 2, 4-7, TT 12, r3 troops m
made“Aureolus emperor TT ir, x
held by Aueolus Ga 3, 3, 5, 6
Gallienus defeated Goths 1n Ga 13,
9 Regahanus general in TT 10, x
Qo Macuianus'! valour im TT 12, 17
Ragonius Clarus prefect of TT 18,
5 richingran 11 18,8 Valens
the elder seized power 1n TT 20, 3
served by pretender TT 29, 1
victory of Marcianus and Claudius
in Cl 6,1, 158, 1 Iunius. Brocchus
governor of Cl 8, 3. Claudius a
native of Cl r4, 2 Claudius com-
mandet ot Cl 15, 2. procurato: of
mines in Cl rs, p, mantle from CI
17,6 Aureltan deteated Samatians
mA 6, 3,9, 4 Ulpius. Cunitus
coamniakde of fhontier of A r5, 1
Amelan im command of troops m
A 17,2 Aurelan's victories in A
22, 2, 41, 8* Amelan in A 35, 4
devastated: A 39, 7 danger ofre


Illy1icum-—-continued
volt in after Aurelian's death T 3,
6 Gallenus' letter to tiibunes of
aimmryinP6,2.3 Probus’ victories
m P 16, 1-2 Alma Mons in planted
with vines P r8, 8 Probus killed
in P20,1 Carus’ parents from Ca
4, 2 Carus born in Ca4,3 Sa-
matians threatened after Probus'
death Cag, 4 under rule of Carinus
Ca r6, 2 Cartnus called king in
Ca 17,1

Ilus, King of Troy Claudius said
to be descended from Cl rz, 9

Impurus name given to Elagabalus
E 17,5

Incommodus' name given to Com-
modus T 6, 4.

Ind: expedition of | Aemilianus
against TT 22, 8 marched in
Aurehan’s triumph A 33, 4 re-
vered Ámelan A 4r, 10 Firmus!
trade with F 3, 3.

India  peifumes fiom E 31, 4
DIR from A 29, 2-3 1vory from


INGENUUS governor of Pannonia
TTo, xı made emperonby troops
in Moesia TT 9, 1.9, Cl 7, 4
supported by Pannomans TT 9, I
character. IT 9, 2 Gallenus’
campaign against TT 9, 3, 10, 1
killed TT 9, 3-4 promoted by
Valerian TT 10, 14.

Infai place in Hadrian's villa near
(Tibur H 26, 5

Insubies, tribe in. N Italy grand-
father ot Didius Juhanus from D]
1,2

Inteiamna, town 1n Italy envoys of
senate met Severus at S 6, 2
statues of Tacitus and Florian at
T 15,1

Invictus name given
October C 11, B, 12, 1.

lovis, Campus, 1n Rome. house of
Niger in PN 12, 4

Iovis Cenatio, place in Palatium at
Rome  conspuatois against Per-
tinax in HP rr, 6.

Iovis, Epulum banquet of Severus
Alexander on SÁ 57, 6

I«auiii victory m SA 58,1 Tie
belhanus made empero: in TT 26,
2-3 people of iefused to leave


to month


INDEX OF NAMES


Isauria-—coniumned.
mountains TT 26, 5-6 Claudius
planned to remove people of TT
26, 7 campaign of Probus in P
16, 4—17, I brigands from in
Probus’ titumph P x9, 8.
Iseum, at Rome  beautified hy
Severus Alexandei SA 26, 8.
Iseum Metellinum, at Rome. house
of Tetrici nea: TT 25, 4
Isis cult of practised by Commodus
C9, +, PN 6, 8 worshippers of
maltreated by Commodus C 9, 6
said to have been brought to Rome
by Caracalla Cc 9, 1o-1x.
Istria, city on W coast of Black
Sea, destruction of M-B 16, 3.
itahca, town in Span home of
Hadrian’s family H r, 1: office
held in it by Hadrian H 19, I.
Italici in Spain objected to conscrip-
tion H 12, 4.
Italy four judges for appointed by
Hadrian H 22, 13, AP 2, zr,
ii, 6 towns of aided by M.
Aurehus MA 11, 3 judges for
appointed by M Aurelius MA 13,
6 foresgn-born senators required
to hold’ land in MA 11, 8 plans
for defence of by M Aurelius and
L Verus MA 14, 6 food.supplies
of administered by Didius Julianus
Df 2,1 gold n seized by Severus
S 12,3 boys of noble birth sought
m as sacnficil vecums E 8, I
toga worn in by M. Aurelius and
troops MA 27, 3 by Hadrian H
22, 3 by Severus Alexander SA
10,7 Persians feared 1n Go 27, 3
desired rescue of Valerian Va 3, 2
Macrianus’ valour in TT 12, 17
Tetricus supervisor of TT 24, 5
freed from Marcomanni A 41, 8
army of forestalled by troops of
Probus P ro, 3 descendants of
Probus lived in P 24,1 threatened
by Saxmatians after Probus’ death


Cag,4 under rule of Caiinus Ca
16, 2

Ítuiaeans served under Aurelian. A
Ir, 3.


Iulia Domna native of Syria $ 5,9
mariied hy Severus because ot her
horoscope § 3, 9, Ge 3, 1, SA 5,
4 called (incorrectly) stepmother


4 9 4.


Iulia Donmna--continued.

of Caracalla S 20, 2, 21, 7, Ce 10,
r sister of lula Maesa OM 9, 1

influenced Severus to leave princi-
pate to sons CA 3, 5. influenced
Severus to give name Antoninus to
Geta Ge x, 5. 1eproof to Caracalla
as omen Ge 3,3 Geta killed in
arms of S 21, 7 Caracalla wished
to kulf Ce 3,3, Ge 7, 3° amours
and conspiracy of S 18,8 relations
with Caracalla S 21, 7, Ce 10, 1-4

mentioned in letter of Severus to
Albinus CA 7, 5.

Iulia Padilla: stepsister of Antoninus
Pius AP x, 5

Iulia Maesa (Varia) sister of Julia
Domna, driven fiom Palace by
Macrinus after Catacalla’s death
OM 9, 1% anative of Emesa OM
9, x mother of Juha Soaemias
and julia Mamaea OM 9, 2
grandmother of Elagabalus and
Severus Alexander E xo, 1, SA 1,
2 wealthy OM 9, 5 caused
Elagabalus to be declared emperor
by the soldiers OM 9, 4-6 taken
by Elagabalus to camp and senate-
house E 12,3 left by Elagabalus
in Palace, taken by soldiers to
camp with Alexander E 13, 5; 14,
3 protested against Elagabalus'
extravagance E 31, 4.

Iulia Mamaea daughter Sf Juha
Maesa OM 9,2 mother of Severus
Alexander SA 3, 1 taken to camp
by soldiers with Alexander E 14,
3 character SA 14, 7 greed SA


I1, 7, 50, B. reproved Alexander
for aftabihty SA 20, 3 power of
SA 14,7, 60,2 devotion of Alex-
ander to SA 26, 9 buildings
named after SA 26, 9 attitude
toward Ulpan SA $1, 4 death
SA 60,2, M 7, 4. festival in
honour of SA 63, 4 ‘wished
Alexander: to abandon German


war SA 63, 5, 7, 5 wise
counsellor of Alexander SA 66, 1
letter of Alexander to M 29, 1-1.
Iulia Soacmias (Symiamiua)  daugh-
ter of Julii. Masa OM 9, 2
mother of Ilagalalus OM yg, 2;
£2, Y» relations with Caracalla
I, 2, 1, character OM 7,6; [ 2
t


INDEX OF NAMES


Iulia Soaemias—-coti£inted
1-2, 18, 2 influence over son E
2,1 adnutted to senate E 4, 1-2,
18,3 social regulations established
under influence of E 4, 4 left by
Lligabalus in Palace, accompanied
Alex inder and soldiers to camp E
15, 5, 14, 4 hied with son E
18, 2

luhanus prefect of the guard, killed
by Commodus C 7, 4 maltreated
by Commodus C 11, 3-4


Iuhanus see Ceionms — Cerellius
Claudius — Didius Pescennius
Salvius Ulpius


Tulus Alexandet
Commodus C 8, 3

Iuhus Asclepiodotus cited A 44,
2-3 tamed by Probus P 22, 3

Iulius Atherianus quoted TT 6, 5.7.

Iulus Calpurnius: letter of Ca 8,
4-7

Iulius Candidus Marts Celsus, Ti 5
second consulship H 3, 4

Iulus Capitohnus, Vopiscus will
imitate P 2, 7.

Iulus Erucius Clarus, C. consul-
ship of HP 15, 6° killed by
Severus S 13, 4.

lulius Frontinus, rhetorician teacher
of Severus Alexander SA 3, 3.

Julius Granianus, rhetorician teach-
er of Severus Alexander SA 3, 3

luhus Laetus advised murder of
Tullius Crispinus DJ 8, 1.

Juhus Lupus, P — stepfather: of
Antoninus Pius AP 1, 6.

lulus Martialis murderer of Cara-
calla Cc 6, 7, 7,2

Iulius Paulus in consthum of
Papman PN 7, 4, SA 26, 6 pre-
fect of the guard PN 7, 4, SA 26,
5 trusted official and counsellor
of Severus Alexander SA 26, 5,
27,2, 68,1

Iulius. Pioculus
modus C 7,7

ius Quadratus, A consulship of

bd.
luhus Ruins


revolted against


killed by Com.


killed by Severus S


1}, 2

fulius Titninus author of a work on
the provinees, called the ape of his
age M 27, 5.


Iulus Trypho commander of fion-
tier of the East, with Valerian
at Byzantium A 15, I

Iuhus Ursus Servianus, L brother-
in-law of Hadiian H r, 2, 8, 11
early enmity fo. Hadrian H 2, 6
second consulship H 3, 8 defer.
ence of Hadrian toward H 8, rx
third consulship H 8,11 compelled
by Hadrian to commit suicide H
15, 8, 23, 2 8, 25, 8 considered
by Hadrian as successor H 23,
2 letter of Hadrian to F 8,

Iulius Vindex, C attempt to seize
principate now forgotten PN 9, 2
acclaimed emperor by soldiers SA
1,7 nohfeof written by Suetonius

LG
fale Diadumenianus likened to D
» 7

Iuncus see Aemilius

luna Padila great-granddaughter
of Marcus Aurelius, betrothed to
Maximinus the younger, later
married to Toxotius M 27, 6.8

lumor see Petronius

lumus, legate of Carus

Carus to Ca 4, 6-7 &

umus Balbus son-in-law of Gordian
Go 4, 2.

Iunius Brocchus letter of Claudius
to C18, 3—9, 2.

Tumus Messalla
Ca 20, 4-6

Iunius Palmatus
Armenia SA 58, r,

Iunius Rusticus, Q, philosopher
teacher of M. Aurelius MA 3, 2-4.

Iunius Severus, appointed successor
to Albinus by Commodus CÀ 14, 1

Iunis Silanus. consul, read pro.
clamation of Gordian I M 16, 1.

Iunius Tiberianus, city-prefect’ con-
versation of Vopiscus with A 1.2.

lustus see Autronius,

Iuvenaha celebrated by Gordian I,
Go 4, 6.

Iuvenalis see Flavius

luventius Celsus
consilium H 18, r

luveina (Ireland) Roman emperor
destined to send governor to T 15, 2,

lxiones name given by Klagabalus
to parasites E 24, 5.


letter of


extravagance of


victory of in


in. Hadrian's


INDEX OF NAMES


Jews’ revolt quelled by Turbo H 5,
8 inrevolt H 14,2 revolt quelled
AP 5,4 triumph over gianted to
Caracalla S 16, 7 persons for-
bidden to become S 17, 1 child
punished fo. adherence to 1eligion
of Cc x, 6 plan to amalgamate
religion of with cult of Elagabalus
E 3, 5. ordered to eat ostiiches E
28, 4 privileges iespected by
Severus Alexander SA 22, 4
custom of in choosing priests
imitated by Alexander SA 45, 7

recept of adopted by Alexander
A 51,7-8 inscription in language
of Go 34,2 sacred books of Cl 2,
4 bad character of in Egypt F 8,


3 7.

JULIUS CAESAR  clemency of
AC 11, 6 left no sons S 21, 2
conquered Britain CA 13, 7 died
violent death SA 62, 3 killed by
senators M 18, 2 contrasted with
Cato by Sallust M-B 7, 7 mur.
derers died violent death Go 33,


4-5
]uno appealed to D 7, 7.
uno Regina appealed to P 12, 7.
upiter Severus dieamed of being
called by S 22,2 appealed to SA
17,4 thunderer Ga 5, 3
Jupiter Consul (a:  Consulens)
statue of planned by Aurehan F


3, 4
Jupiter Nicephorius oracle of H


2,9
Jupiter Olympius temple at Athens
dedicated by Haditan H 13, 6
Jupiter: Optimus Maximus games
for MA 21,5 appeals to C 18, 7,
D1,7 thanks rendered to M 26,
2 - Maximus and Balbinus called
to empire by M.B 17, 2 statue
of Claudius before temple of Cl 2,
4 purple garment in temple of
A 29, 1. thanks and appeul to P
12, 1.7 senate ordered to conse.
crate crowns to P 15, p ivoiy
consecrated to P 3, 6.
Jupiter Praestes omen at shrine of
M.B 5; 3
Jupiter Salutas sacrifice to Ga 5,5
Jupiter Syrius, identihed with Sol
and Elagabalus temple of Faus.
tina at Halala 1ededicated to him


Jupiter Syrus —conutuued.
by Elagabalus MA 26, 9; Cc 11, 7
Elagabalus priest of B 1,5. temple
of at Rome E 1,6, 3,4, 17, 8.
jJupita Ulto— Pertinas piayed to
HP ry, 10.


Laberius Maaunus, M' spared by
Hadrian H 5, 5.

Labicana, Via Dulus
buried on DJ 8, To

Labici, town in Italy. grapes fiom

A II, 3.

Labyrinth, ım Egypt
Severus S 17, 4

Lacedaemon marble from FE 24, 6,
SA 25, 7.


Julianus


visited by


Lacinges | warned against Rome
MA 22, 1.
Laeltus, C Gordian I. likened. to


Go 5, 5.
Laetus responsibility foi death of
denied by Severus $ 15, 6.
Laetus see Aemthus Iulus Mae-
clus

Lamia Silanus son-in-law of An-
toninus Pius AP 1,7

Lamprdia mother of Pescennius
Niger: PN 1,3.

Lampridius see Aclius

Lanuvium, town in Italy bnthplace
of Antoninus Pus AP 1,8. temples
at repaired by Antoninus" Pius AP
8,3 birthplace of Commodus C 1,
2 wild.beast fights of Commodus
atC8,5 prodigy at C 16, 5.

Laodicea, city in Syria. L Verus at
V7,3 shrine of Diana at E 7, 5

Lareius Eurupranus killed by Com-
modus C 7,6

Larius (Lake Como) descendants af
Probus lived near P a4, L

Lascvius see "Triarius

Lateranus house of MA r, 7.

Lateranus see Sextius

Latinae, Feriae M. Aurelius protect
of MA 1,6

Latum, distuct of Italy otfux s held
by Eladzuin in towns of H ig, t,

Latium, Ius wiven by Hadrian to
many cites LE 21, 7,

aamensys sgg Dasius

Lavinium, town m Italy
lus aj. MA ^7, |


M. Aute,


INDEX OF NAMES


Last, people in N.E Asia Minor.
ling of appointed by Antoninus
Pius AP 9, 6


Legio I Pertinax in command of
HP 2, 6 Altius in command of
CA 6,2


Legio I Minervia Hadrian in com-
mand of H 3, 6.
Legio H Adiutri& Hadrian tribune


O 2,2
Legio II Parthica prefect of an ac-
complice in murder of Caracalla


Legio III eagle-bearers of plundered
temple of Sun at Palmyra A 31, 7.
Legio IJI Feli. served under Aure-
han Ari, 4 Probus in command
of P 5, 4-7.
Legio IV Albinus in command of
CA 6,2 Maximinus tribune of M 5,
5 Serapammon in command of


Go 25, 2.

Legio IV Scythica Severus in com-
mand of at Massilia S 3, 6.

Legio V Martia Claudius tribune
of Cl 14, 2

Legio VI Galhcana Aurehan tri-
bune of A 7, L

Legio XXII Prmugena — Didius
eae in command ofin Germany

1, 6.

Leonides
22, 3.

Leptis,etown in Africa home of
family of Severus S 1,2. man from
beaten by Severus S 2,6 Severus’
Siste came from S rs, 7.

Liber Elagabalus anayed as E 28, 2.

Libo see Ánns.

Libya revolt in H 5, 2 Severus
feared that Niger would seize 5 8,
7, PN 5,5 °° procurator of Maxi-
minus killed in M 14, 1 wild
beasts from at games of Gordian I.
Go 3, 6 earthquake in Ga 5, 4
Fabius Pomponianus commander
of frontier of, made Celsus emperor
TT 29, 1. beasts from 1n Aurelian’s
triumph A 33, 4: Probusin P 9, r.
leopards from in spectacle of Probus
P 19, 7.

LICINIUS. conquered by Constan-
tine E 35,6 claimed descent from
Philp Go 34, 5.


trained by Probus P


VOL, HI.


Licnimus Sura, L promoted friend.
ship between Trajan and Hadrian
2, 10 informed Hadrian of
adoption planned by Trajan H 3,
10 death H 3, x1.
Liguria, district of Italy Perunan
in HP 3, 3-4
Livianus see Claudius
Livius, T. inaccuracy of A 2, 2
wrote of Pompey P 2,3 Vopiscus
will not imitate P 2,7 did not
record trifles F 6, 3.
Livius Andronicus
from Ca 13, 5.
Livius Lanrensis, P. gave body ot
Commodus for burial C 20, 1
LOLLIANUS instrumental in kill.
ing Postumus TT 3,7,5,1 made
empero: 1n Gau] TT 4, 1, 5, 1. 5,
17, 4. campaign of Galhenus
against Ga 21,5 small prestige of
in Gaul TT 5,2 killed TT 5, 3-4,
6,3,8,1, 31,2 benefits to Gaul
He 5,4 life of little known TT


saying taken


8,

Lolhanus see Hedius

Lollianus Avitus, L aided Pertinaa
to secure post of centurion HP 1, 5

Lolhanus Titanus ordered to arm
gladiators at Capua DI 6, 3

Lolltus Professus killed by Severus
S 13,2.

Lolhus Serenus introduced Albinus
to Antoninus CA 6, x.

Longinus see Cassius,

Longus see Baebius

Lollius Urbicus, historian cited D


9, 2.

Lollius Urbicus, Q. conquests of in
Britain AP 5, 4.

Lorum, town in Italy Antoninus
Pius reared at AP x, 8 died at
AP 12, 6. =.

Lucani  Caracalia's joke concerning
Cc 5,6 .

Lucania, district of Italy: Tetricus
supervisor of TT 24, 5; A 39, 1.

Lucanicus Caracalla threatened to
assume as cognomen Cc 5, 6.

Lucanus see Claudius.

Luccems Torquatus killed by
Commodus C 7, 6,

Lucilius, C., poet’ verse of quoted
against Pertinax HP 9, 5.

Lucilla see Anma. Domitia.


KK


INDEX OF NAMES


Lucdlus consulship of Ga 19, x.
Lugdunensis see Galha Lugdun-
ensi^5,


Lugdunum (Lyons) Albinus died
at CA 12, 3 people of put down
by Amelan, feuing Probus, made
Proculus emperor F 13, 1-2,

Luguvallum, place im Britain
at S 22, 4

Luna colossus of planned by Had-
nan H 19, 13 worship of Cc 7,
3-5 temple of at Ephesus de-
stroyed by Goths Ga 6, 2

Lunus. worship of at Carrhae Ce
6,6, 7,3

Lupe, town 1n Italy , founded by
Malemntus MA x, 6

Lupus see Antonius Antius Iulius

Lusitania revolt in MA 22, 10

Lusius Quietus deprived of com-
mand H 5,8 plotagainst Hadrian
and death H 7, 1-2

Lustralis see Sergius.

Lyceum place in Hadrian's villa
near Tibur H 26, 5,


pme


Macaus Plautus, T, writer of con-
edies left no sons S 21,2 sayings
tahen ffom works of Ca 13, 5.

Macedona opinion of Cato con-
cerning H5,3 Severus sent troops
to hold against Niger PN 5, 6
invaded by Goths, Ga 5,6 Goths
retreated through Ga 13, 8

Macedontus murdered Titus Quai.
tinus, killed by Maximinus M 11,


+5
Macellinus name given to Macrinus
OM 13,3.
Macer grandfather of Severus S 1, 2
Macer see Ammus Baebius Cor-


nelius

MACRIANUS foremost of Va-
leiian's generals TT 12, x made
emperor Ga 1, 2-3, TT 12, 2-12
qualifications of Ga r, 4-5, TI 12,
5-6 campaign Ga 2, 1-6, TT r1,
2,12,I2, 15, 4. troops surrendered
to Aureolus Ga 2, 7, TT 11,2, 12,
14, X4, I  deleated and killed Ga
2.7453: b Oy TT I9, 13-34, Ed; I,
15,4 made Ballista prefect Ga 2,
7 soldiers of in. Emesa Ga 3, 4
promoted by Valerian TT 10, 14.


Macnanus- contented. f
woithy to fill. Valerian's place TP
12,5 Valerian's opinion ot PT :2,
15.18 speeches of TT 12, 7-8. 11


descendants of Wh ij, 3-5 (cared
Valens TT 19, 2.
MACRIANUS the younger made


titbune by Valermn 11 12, 10
made empeim, TY 12, 12, 13, 1
defeated and Milled with his father
Ga2,7, 35, 1,6, TT 11, 2, 12, 13,
I3; 1-3, Ih I
acrianus See Baebius.
MACRINUS orn and early
career OM 2, 1, 4, 1-0, 5, 6; 8, 1,
Dzi4,1 prefect of guad Ce 6,6,
OM 2,1, 4,7 murdered Caracalla
Cc 6, 6-7, 8,9, 115, 5, OM 2, t. 5,
5,8, 4,78, D 1, 1, E 2,3, M 4,
4 Seed principate OM 2,1, 5,1,
E 2,3 accepted by senate OM 2,
3-4, 5, 9—7, 4. caused Caracalla to
be dethed and buried Ce ir, 5,
OM 5, 1-3, 6,8, D 3, r assumed
names Severus and Antoninus OM
2,1, 3,6, 5,7, 13, 2 name Per.
tnax OM 11, 2 gave name An.
toninus to son Diadumenianus Cc
8, 10, OM 2, 5—3, 9, 5 1, 75 5,
D I-2, 31, 6, TO, " i S-7: 8, 1,
E r 4, SA 9, 3 feared soldiers
OM 3,8, 5,4 donative to soldiers
OM 5, 7-$, D 2,1 hated for OM
5,5,14,I-2 refused cognomen Pius
M 7, 2, 11, 2-1, 14,2 "iccepted
cognomen Fehl OM 7, 5, 11, 294.
war against Parthians OM 2, 2, 8,
1-3, I2, 6. against Aimenians and
Arabs OM 12,6 deserted by oops
and killed OM 8,2 1,9, 5, 10, 1-3,
11,2, 15, I, D 9; H. ly 7, 4, 5,20,
M 1,6 severity and cinelty OM 11,
1-2, I2, 1-12, 15, 3, DD8, 1. planned
iefoim of laws OM 13, 1, financial
policy OM 13,2. habits and tastes
OM 13, 4-5. verses conceining and
by OM If, T2. 12, o, an art.
harangues to soldiers and thei ac.
clamations D i, qe- Y  honenms
for Diudumemanus and gits to
people D 2, 6-10 pardoned con
spirators, iemonstrated with hy
Diadumenmanus D 8, 4-8, 6, :
drove Juha Maesa trom the Palace
OM 9, 3 vihhed at accession of


INDEX OF NAMES


Maciinus—~conturtued
Klagabalus OM 4, 1, E35, 3, B, 4-
hated hy Maxinunus M 4, 4.
Macuinus father-in-law of Severus
Alexander, named Caesar and put
to death SA 19, 3-4.


Maciinus see Cerellius— Varius
Veturius
Maecenas two soldiers killed by M


20,6, Go az, 4

Maeua Faustina. daughter of Go-
dian I Go 4, 2.

Maeuanus’ partisan of Avidius Cas-
sins, Slain at Alexandria MA 25, 4,


AC 7, 4.

Maecianus letter of Proculus to F
12, 0-7.

Maecinnus see Baebius Ceres
Volusius

Maectus Brundisinus prefect of


grain-supply, with Valerian at
Byzantium A 13, 1.


Maecius Faltonis Nicomachus
speech of T 6
Maeaus Gor dianus kinsman of


Gordian III. Go 30, 1
Maecrus Laetus advised murder of
Geta, killed by Caracalla Cc 3, 4.
Maeuus Marullus father of Gordian


I. Go 2, 2.

MAEONIUS Odaenathus’ cousin,
killed him and Herodes, sered
power and killed TT 15, 5, 17, 1-3.

Maeontug Astyanax cited TT 12, 3.

Maeotidae (Goths) Aurehan sent by
Claudius to war against A 16, 4
invaded Roman terntory under
preicxt of summons from Aurelian


I3, 2

Maeotis babanans fiom invaded
Roman tenitory T 13,3-

Maesa see Iulia

Majgirus name given to Zoticus by
blagabalus E 10, 5

Magnus conspired against Maxi-
munus and killed M 10, TT 32, 1.

Magnus cognomen offered to Severus
Alexander but refused SA 5, 5, 6,
I, I1, 2-5, 19, de

Magnus’ see Pactumeius : Pomperus.

Malemnius king of the Sallentini
from whom family of M Aurelius
claimed descent MA 1, 6.

Malls Chilo. letter of Aurelian to


A 23, 4-5.


Mameitinus seg Petronius Sura

Mamaea seg lulia.

Manieani (-3e), pueri and puellae
endowed by Severus Alexandei SA


Mammam, ad building in Rome built
by Severus Alexander SA 26, 9.
Mamurius name given to Matus TT


Manla Scantüla wife of Didius
pans received title of Augusta
J 3:4, 45 buned Juhanus D]
, IQ.

Manlius Statianus speech of P 12.
Marcelli, Theatrum  Seveius Alex.
ander wished to restore SA 44, 7.

Marcelhna see Pescennia


Marcellinus see Fabius Valerius,
Marcellus see Claudius Publicius
Quintius | Ulpius


Marcia, concubine of Commodus
abetted folly of Commodus C 8, 6
in garb of Amazon C 11, 9 ac-
complice 1n murde of Commodus
C 17, 1-2 helped to make Pertinaa
emperor HP 5,2 death DJ 6, 2.

Marcia frst wife of Severus S 3, 2

Marcianopolis, city 1n Bulgaria
battles with Goths at Clg, 3.

Marcianus defeated Goths Ga 6, 1
warred against Scythians (Goths)
Ga 13, 10, Cl 6, x, 18, r in plot
to kil Gallienus Gaz4,1 7 bribed
troops to declare Gallienus a usur-
pei Ga 15,2.

Marcius Agrippa accomplice in
murde: of Caracalla Ce 6, 7

Marcius Asellio killed by Severus

13,7

Marcius Coriolanus, Cn admired
by Niger PN 12, x.

Marcus Quartus prefect of the
guard under Commodus C 6,@.

Marcius Turbo, Q. friendship for
Hadran H 4,2 transferred from
Judaea to Mauretania H 5,8 trans-
ferred from Mauretama to Pannonia
and Dacia H 6,7; 7,3 appointed
prefect of the guard H 9,4 at-
tacked by Hadrian H 15,7

Marcomanni wars with, waged by-
M. Aureltus and L Verus MA 12,
13—14, 7, 17; 2-4 , 21, 6—22, 2 8;
27,10, VQ, 7-10, Eg, 1-2. settled
in Italy by M Aurehus MA 22,2,


KK 2


INDEX OF NAMES


Maicomanni-~continsued,

44, 3 Roman nobles fell in wa
against MA 22, 7 plan of M.
Aurelius to make a province of MA
24, 5, 27,10 war against left by
M. Aureus MA 25,1 war resumed
MA 29, 4, C 2, 5* Pertinax m war
against HP 2,6- Elagabalus wished
to make war against E 9, x-2 in-
vasion of repelled by Aurelian A 18,
3—21, 5.

Marcus addressed in epigram of
Martial's SA 58, 2.

Margus, place in Jugoslavia. Carinus
defeated near Ca 18, 2,

MARIUS formerly a worker in iron
TT 8,1.6 made emperor m Gaul
by Victoria TT 5, 3.5, 8, 2 6
killed TT 8, 2; 31, 2 called Ma-
murus and Veturius TT 8, 3
strength of TT 8, 4-5 speech of
TT 8, 8-15.

Marius, C. Avidius Cassius hkened
himself to AC 3,8 Severus likened
to PN 6, 4 admiration of Niger
for PN 11, 3-5, 12, L

Marius poem of Cicero imitated by
Gordian 1. Go 3, 2.

Marius Maximus, L., histouan cited
H 2, 10, 12, 4, 20, 3, 25, 4, Ae

II, 3, MÀ x, 6,
25,10, AC6,6-7, 9,5.9, C 15,2,
I5, 5, 18, 2, HP 2,8, 15,8, S 15,
6, CA 3, 4, 9,2 5; 12, 14, Ge 2,
T, E 11, 6, SA 5: 4, 21, 4, 30, 6,
48,6, 65,4 Vopiscus will imitate

2, 7 most wordy of writers,
wrote hives of Avidius Cassius,
serine Niger, Clodius Albinus

I, 1-2

Marmandae defeated by Probus P
9,7 , 12, 3.

Marna appealed to SA 17, 4.

Maro see Vergilius

Mais believed to have placed wreath
on head of M. Aurelius MA 4, 3
spectacle 1n honour of Cl 13, 6

Marsi, people of Italy priests of E
23, 2.

Martials see
Valerius

Martis, Sacrarum: Claudius! elec.
tion as empeioi announced in Cl

di


Gargihus — Iulius:


Martius Verus, Pet as legate of L.
Verus victoriQus in war against
Parthians V 7, 1.

Marulinus ancestor of Hadrian H
1, 2. ‘

Mai ullus, writer of nimes attached
M. Aurelius and L Verus MA 8, 1.

Marullus see Maecius.

Massiha Severus in command at
legion at S 3, 6

Mastcius Fabanus killed by
Severus S 13, 3.

Mater (Deum) plan to remove
symbol of to temple of Elagabalus
E 3, 4 ntes of performed by
Emperor Elagabalus E 7, i3"
Elagabalus arrayed as E 28, 2'
Hilaria festival of SA 37, 6.

Matenanus see Pescennius,

Maternus see Triarius.

Matidia, mother-in-law of Hadrian
escorted ashes of Trajan H 5, 9.
honours for H 9, 9, 19, 5.

Matromanus made prefect-of guard
by Carinus Ca 16, 4

Maurentius aided Didius Julianus
to seize principate DJ 3, 1.

Mauretania revolt in quelled by
Marcius Turbo H 5, 8, 6, 7
governor of quelled revolt Go 23, 4
purple from Cl 14, 8 couch-covers
from A 312, 1  possesstons of
Tacitus 1n T 10, 5.


Mauretania 'Tingitana vigtory in
SA 58, 1
Mauri attacks made by H 4, 2


Lusius Quietus deprived of com-
mand against H 5, 8 revolt of
quelled H 12,7 name Caesar tahen
from language of Ae 2, 3 forced
to sue for peace AP 5, 4 invaded
Span MA 21, 1 S 2, 4 con.
quered C 13,5 1n aumy of Severus
Alexander M 11,7 Capelianus 1n
command of M 19, 1, Go 15, 1
ostriches from painted 1n. Domus
Pompeiana Go 3, 7, Titus tibune
of TT 32,1 invaded África F 9, 5.

Mauricius = aroused — Afiicans to
acchum Gordian I emperor Go
7; 4—8, 4.

Mauncus* see Murrentius.

Maurus see Aehus,

MAXENTIUS conquered by Con.
stantine E. 35, 6,


INDEX OF NAMES


MAXIMIAN father of the iron age
E 35, 4 loyalty of Constantius
toward Cl 10, 7* review of
emperors as far as A 42, 3-4
Vopiscus planned to write lives of
emperors as fm as P x, 5 Dio-
cletian's desire to rule known to
Ca 15, I given as emperor by
gods Ca 18, 3 character of Ca


18, 4.

MAXIMINUS origin M rz, 5-7, 2,
1, 8, 0-11, 9, 5, appearance and
habits SA 63, 2, M 2, 2, 4, 1-5,
6,8-9, 28,8 admitted to military
service by Severus M 1, 4, 2, 3—3,
6, 4, 6, 5, 4 career unde
Caracalla, Macrinus and Elaga-
balus M 4,4—5,2 military service
under Severus Alexander M 1, 4,
5$,3—0,7,7, 1-2 incited troops to
kill Alexander SA 50, 7, M 7, 4;
10, 3, Ir, I made emperor by
noops M 7, 4, 8, 1, M.B 15,2

severity in military discipline M
6, 1-7, 10, 4 won favour of
troops M8, 2-4' cruelty M 8, 5—
9, 8, 10,1 5 6, 11,6, 13, 5, 22,7,
24, Y treatment of servants and
fnends of Alexander M 9, 7.8

feared and hated at Rome M 8,6,
13, 5, 20, 1, Go22, 1. suppressed
conspnacy of Magnus M ro, TT
32, 1 suppressed conspiracy of
Titus M 1x, 2-5, TT 31, 7. 12, 32,
1-3 knowledge of warfare M 10,
3 desired to surpass Alexander
M 10,3 war against Germans SA
01, 8, M I0, 2, II, 7-—12, 5, 13,3
Go 1x4, 1 announced victones M
12, 5-0, 13, 1-2 plans for further
conquests M 13, 3 revolt of
Goidians against M 13, 6—314, 5,
19; 20, 7, Go 7, 2—9, 8, 15-16,
22, 6 adherents at Rome killed M
15, I, Go 10, 5-B, 15, 7-9 de-
clared public enemy together with
son M 15, 2—16, 6, Gori, 13, 6,
M.B 1, 4° behaviour on hearing
declaration M 17-18; Go r3, I-
4 Maximus and Balbinus ap-
pointed emperois against M zo;
314 3, Go 10, 1-2, 22, x; M-B x, x
3, 3, 15, 5, 16,6 donative to
soldiers M 18, 4. envoys sent to
Rome Go ro, 3. marched on Italy


Maximnus—contintied.


M 18,4, 20,7—21, 5, Go 14, M-B
10, 1-3, 15, 5 besieged Aquileia
M 21, 6—22,6, 28, 4, 33,1.3, M-B
12, 2, 15, 4, 10, 5. 7, 18, 2

anger of soldiers az M 21, 3-4, 23,
r-2 killed M 23, 6-7, 32, 4-5, M-
B rr I army brought to Rome
by Maximus M.B 12, 7-8 rejoicing
at death and condemnation of M
24, 4—26, 6, 31, 5, M.B IX, 4, 12,
i refused adoration M 28, 7

memorial of near Aquileia M 28,
8-9 made son Caesar M 22, 6

made son co-emperor M 29, 6-7

omens of 1ule and of death M 30,
1-3, 31, 1-3  Gordians sent to
Africa under Go 18, 6 Alexander
vilified to please SA 63,6 favoured
by Herodian out of hatred for
Alexander M 13, 4. length of rule
M.B 15,7 example of evil ruler


A 42, 6.
MAXIMINUS the younger  ap-


pearance M 22, 7, 27, 1-2, 28, 3,
32, 6 education M 27,2-5 be.
trothed to Juma Fadilla M 27,6

Character and tastes M 24,1, 28,
ag,8.10 Severus Álexaftder wished
to marry sister to M 29, 1-5 re-
ceived title of Caesar from Maxt-
minus M 22, 6 made emperor
with Maximinus M 8, x, 29, 6-7

declared public enemy with father
M 15,2. 9, 16,4, Go 11,9 with
father on march to Italy M 17, 2-3,
22,6; 28, 4, Gor40 killed with
father M 23, 6, 32, 4-5 dis-
honoured after death M 26, 5,
31, 5 omens of rule M 30, 4-7

sorrow at death of M 32, 2.


Maximinus, actor“ brought by L.


Verus from Syria V 8, 7.


MAXIMUS: also called Puppienus


M 24, 5, 33, 3-4; Go 10, 1, 19, 9,
22, x, M-B, 1, 2; II, 1; I5, 1. 4-5,
16, 2 7, 17-318. parentage M zo,
t, M-B, 5, 1-2, 16,2 omens of
rule M-B 5, 3-4 education M-B 5,
5-6 ray career M.B 5, 7-9
prefect of cy M 20, 1, M-B 5,
I0, 15,2 character and appear-
ance M 20, 1. 4, M-B 1,2, 2, 1. 7,
6,7, 7, 15, 1, 16, 2 4. on com-
mission of twenty to oppose


INDEX OF NAMES


Maximus —condumted.
Maximinus, made emperor with
Balbinus M 20, 1-3. 8, 32, 3, 3%
3, Go Io, 1-2, 19, 9, 22, 1, M-B
I, 2—3, 3, 5, II, 8, 1, Ih 2,
I5, 5; 16, 6 demonstration in
Rome against M.B 3, 3.5, 8, 2-3
campaign ayainst Maxuninus M
20, 5-6, 21-22, 24, 2-6, 33 3,
M.-B, 8, 4, 10, 1-3, 11, 1-2, 12, 3,
15, 4-5, 18,2 return to Rome M
24, 8, M.B 12, 1 7 honours
decreed fo. M-B 12, 4. 6 Bal.
binus jealous of MB 12,5 honours
and acclamations in senate M 26,
M-B 12,9, 13, 1-2 established in
Palace M 24, 8, 26, 7 1i-will of
soldiers toward M-B 12, 0, 13, 2-3
5 excellent rule of M-B 13, 4,
15, 1-2 plan fo. campaign against
Parthians M-B 13, 5 quarrels
with Balbinus M-B ij, r killed
by soldiers Go 22, 5, M-B 14, 2-8,
15, 4. length of rule Go 22, 5,
M-B 15,7 letter congratulating
M-B 17

Maximus father of Emperor Mas-
mus M.B 5, 1.

Maximus fathe: of Probus P 3, 2


Maximus see Claudius — Gavius
Labertus Marius — Quintilius
Tattius


Media conquered by generals of L
Verus V 7,1

Medicus cognomen assumed by M
Aurelius and L Verus V 7, 2

Mediolanum (Milan) giandfathes of
Didius Julianus from DJ 1, 2
Geta born at Ge3, r Valerian the
younger killed and buiied near Va
8,5, Ga 14, 9 Gallienus. killed
ne Ga r4, 9 Ameolus Milled
near Cl5, plondered by Marco-
mann: A 1:18, 3 letter of senate to
council of T 18, 6 Carus said to


have been native of Ct p |. roses
from Ca 17, 3
Megalensia date of bnth and of


death of Caracalla Co 6, 6
Memmia wife of Severus Alexander,
repioved him for ifaluhty SA


oO


MS NI
Memmius Ruhnus killed hy Severus
213, il


Memnon, statue iu Ineypt visited
hy Severus S 17, 4,
Memphis, city in Egypt. visited. by


Severus S17, 4. viscription at TT


22, 13.

Memplnus see Aelius Aurelius
Apolaustus.

Menophilus see Tullius

Mesomedes salary of reduced by


Antoninus Pius AP 7, 8
Mesopotamia, tribute uuposed by
Trajan remitted by Hadnan H ar,
I2 reconqueired by Severus Alev-
ander SA 56, 6 by Odaenathus
Ga 12, 1, TT 15, 3. troops from
served under Aurelian A rr, 3°
conquered by Caius Ca 8, t.
Messalina see Aurelia
Messalla suggested as husband for
Theocha by Severus Alexander M
29; 4
Messalla governo: of Achaea, letter
of Decius to Cl 16
Messalla see Iunius
Metetl Severus Alexander claimed
descent from SA 44, 3.
Metellus see Caecilius
Mezentius — untated
OM 12, 8-9
Micca father of Masimunus M 1, 6
Maeipsa speech of sent by Severus
to Caracalla S 21, 11
Mesiae, fabulae written by, Albinus
CA 11,8 by Apuleius CA ra, 13
Milo of Croton, athlete Maximinus
hkened to M 6, 9
Milo see Annius
Minerva appealed to P r2, 7.
Minucia (Porticus) statue of Hei-
cules in C 16, 5
Mirissimus. favourite of Elagabalus,
dismissed by him Iz 15, 2
Misitheus see Furius Sabinus.
Mitma nws of polluted by Coum-
modus C 9, 6
Mithiadates, Kung ob Pontus cün.
queicd. by Romans ba rd, 5
Pompes in war auunst P 2, ;
Moesthens made plot to kill Aures
han A 56, j-6.— punished A yy, 2
Moderatus reputed lover of burtsa
tina, promoted by Marcus Are.
lings MA 20, 1.
Mudesumus’ see Horeunnis,


hy Macunus


INDEX OF NAMES


Moesa Hadnuan in H 2, 3, 6, 6
prodigy in AP 9, 4 Pertinax
served iu HP 2, 2 Pertinas
governor of HP 2, 10. Gordian
HT m Go 20, 4 people of attacked
by Carp: M.B 16, 3 Ingenuus
made emperor by troops in TI


9, I cruelty of Gallienus to
people in TT 9, 3, 10, Xx
Revalianus made emperor by


troops in TT 10, 2 battle with
Goths in Cl 9, 3 troops in under
command ot Claudius Cl 15, 2
Aurelian bonm A3,2 anruinous
condition, settled with people from
Dacia A 39,7

Moesius Galhcanus, prefect of guard
speech of T 8, 3.4

Moguntiacum (Mainz)
victory al A 7, L .

Montanus = favourite of mother of
Gordian III Go 25, 3.

Moses , lived 125 years Cl 2, 4.

Motdenus prefect of the guard,
poisoned by Commodus C 9, 2

Mucapo:  Aurehan's letter to A 26,
3-5 Aurelian murdered by A 35, 5.

Mucius Scaevola, Q Gordian I,
hkened to Go 5, 5.

Mulvius, Pons portico extending to
planned by Gallienus Ga 18, 5

Mulvius Gallicanus prefect of guard,
letter of Valerian to P 4, 3-7,

Mumnfius Secundinus killed by
Severus S 13, T

Murcus see Nonius

Murena see Ablavius

Murrentius Mauricius. governo). of
hgypt with Valerian at Byzan-
tum A 13, I

Museum at Alexandra — Haduan
held discussions with schol rs in
H 20, 2


Aureltan's


Nabo, erty in Gaul’ fie at AP 9,2

Natbona see Gallia Narbonensis

Natbenensis see Gallia Narbonensis,

Narcreus strangled Commodus C
175,1, Sitar, PN 1,5. killed by
Severus S 11, X.

Narseus, hing of Persians. Probus’
negotiations with P 17, 5-6

Nasica’ see Cornelius Scipio,

Naso : see Ovidius,


Neapolis (Naples) office of demar-
chus at held by Hadrian H 19, 1.
Neapolis, city in Palestine punished

Ly Severus for support of Niger
9.5;
Neho, giammarian "teacher of Sev.
eius Alexander SA 3, 3


Nemausus, town in Gaul basilica
in honour of Plotina built by


Hadnan H 12,2 ancestral home
of Antoninus Pius AP 1, r,

Nemesianus see Aurelius
Olympius

Nemesis appeased by sacrifice of
ciaüzens M.B 8, 6,

Nepos see Herennius Platorius

Neptun, Basilica, at Rome restored
by Hadrian H 19, 10.

Neratius Priscus, L considered as
successor by Trajan H 4, 8 in
Hadrian’s consiliuin H 18, x

NERO Colossus of moved by
Hadrian and re-dedicated H r9,
12-13 M. Aurelus feared that
Commodus would resemble MA
28, ro Lucius Verus born on
birthday of V 13, 8. Verus imitated
vices of V 4,6 — Verus! resemblance
to him V 8, 8 desefved to die
according to M Aurelius AC 8, 4
Colossus of altered by Commodus
C 1:7, gto Commodus more evil
than C 19, 2 had the republic
enduied Rome would not have
come unde: the power of CA 13, 5
senate's power over CA 13,8 ex.
ample of evil iule E z,x, A 42, 6,
T 6,4 luxuryof E 31, 5. vices of
practised by Elagabalus E 33, x
removed by tynianicide E 34, T
Elagabalus worse than SA 9, 4
pomerium extended by Agr, II
provinces acquired under A 21, II
anothe: feared by all Ca 1, 3
Rome suffered much from house of
Ca 3,2

Neronianae, Lhermae, in Rome
baths built near by Severus Alex-
ander SA 25, 3

NERVA adopted Trajan H 2, 5,
Ae2,2; Ar4,6 death of H 2, 6
gave ring to Trajan H 3,7 pitied
by Arnus Antoninus AP 1, 4
equalled in dignity by Victoiinus
TT 6, 6 example of good rule


Aurelius


INDEX OF NAMES


Nerva—-cont ttuced.
A 42, 4, 1 6, 9 Rome happy
under Ca 3, 3
Nicer, river of Germany: Germans
driven beyond by Probus P 13, 7.
Nicomachus cited A 27, 6.
Nicomachus see Maecius Faltonius.
Nicomedes tutor of L. Verus V 2, 8.
Nicomedia, city in xu e Elaga-
balus at E s, 1i plundered by
Scythians (Goths) Ga 4, 8
Nicopolis, city in Bulgaria Goths
attempted to take C] 12, 4 Áure-
han ordered to Arr, 2.

Niger  prefect of the guard under
Commodus C 6, 6

Niger. see Pescennius.

Nignnus, see Avidius

Nie Antinous drowned in H 14, 5
soldiers ordered by Niger to dunk

N 7,7 boatmen on increased A
47,3 works of Probus on P 9, 3.

Nilus poem of Cicero, imitated by
Gordian I Go 3, 2.

Nisibis, city ın Mesopotamia re-
captured from Persians by Gordian
Tif Go 26, 6, 27,6 captured by
Odaenathus Ga ro, 3, 12, 1,
15,3 €

Nona Celsa wife of Macrinus D 7,
5. amours OM 14,2

RE Gracchus killed by Severus

13, 3.

Nonus Murcus spoke ill of Com.
modus to soldiers CA 2, 3.

Norbana killed by Commodus C 4, 4.


Noibanus killed by Commodus C
Noricum cleared ot enemies by


Pertinax HP a, 6,

Notus name given by Aelius Verus
to messenger Áe 5, 10,

Mun Rufus, L killed by Severus

13, 7.

Numa Pompihus Antoninus Pius
compared with AP 2, 2, 13, 4
amiy of M. Aurelius traced
descent hom MA 1, 6 left no sons

21, I. strengthened Rome hy
religion Ca 2, 3

NUMERIAN made Caesar Ca 7,
r, IO excellent and accomplished
a 7, I, I1 not old enough to
rule Gaul Ca 7, 2 with Carus in
war against Persians Ca Ig, r.


Numerian continued
killed by Aper Ca 12, 1-2, IB, 1
avenged by Diorletian Ca 13, 1-3.

Numidia marble fom Go 32,2, T
10,

E Albinus brother of Didius
Julianus DJ 1, 2. i

Nummius Tuscus, M. consulship
of TT 9g, 1 with Valetian at By-
zantium A 13, I.


Oceanus wall in Britain built as
far as 818,2. Maximinus planned
to extend Empire to M 13, 3
morning-star rising from M 27, 4
Roman emperor destined to 1ule
lands surrounded by T 15, 2.

Oceanus name given to bath by
Severus Alexander SA 25, 4.

Octavianus see Áugustus

ODAENATHUS prince of Palmyra
TT 15,1 defeated Persians Va 4,
2-4, TT 15,r a1uled in the East
Ga I, 1, 3 3, 10,1, TT ra, x
campaign against Quietus Ga 3,
1-2, TT 14,1, 15, 4, 18, 1 sub-
ordinate of Gallienus Ga 3, 5, I0,
4 threatened war on Rome Ga 5,
6 king of Palmyrenes Ga 10, 1,
TT 15,2 war against Persians Ga
JO—1I,1, 12,1 6, TT 15, 2-4 8,
30, 6 received imperial power
and title of Augustus Ge 12, 1;
TT 15,5 murder of Ga 13, L 4;
TT 15,5 Galienus made peace
with Ga 21, 5 great qualities of
TT xs, 6.8 attempted to crush
Macrianus TT 15, 4 indulgence
toward Herodes TT 16, 2 not
trusted by Ballista TT 18, x. Dal.
lista hilled to please TT 18, 12
chariot of in Aurelian’s tuumph
A 33, 2 adherents of in Egypt
defeated by Probus P 9, 5.

Odomastes persuaded by Cy 11ades
to make war on Romans TT 2,2

Olbiopolitae, in S W. Russia atded
against Tauioscythae by Anto.
ninus Pins AP 9, 9

Olympias nurse ob Severus Alen.
ander SA 15, 5,

Olympus, see Aurelius

Onesicrute, teacher of Commodus
D L5.


INDEX OF NAMES


Oneumus cited F 13,1, 14,4; Ca
a, 2; 733, 16, ly 17, ki

Onus name given by Commodus to
favourite C 14 9.

Opellhius Macrinus, M, see Macrinus.

Optatianus see Suetonius.

Orci, Aedes, at Rome temple of
Flagabalus built on site of Ei 1, 6,
Oresta, city in Thrace: founded by
restes renamed by Hadrian E 7,

7-5,

Orestes established cults of Diana
E 7,6. founded Oresta E 7, 7.

Orestilla see Fabia

Orfitus prefect of the city under
Antoninus Pius AP 8, 6,

O:rfitus reputed lover of Faustina,
promoted by M. Aurelius MA 29, 1.

Orfitus, see Calpurnius Sapio Cor-
nelius Scipio Virius.

Orpheus statue of in private chapel
of Severus Alexander SA 29, 2

Os: warred against Rome MA 22, 1

Osrhoent, tribe of N.W. Meso.
potamia im army of Severus
Alexander SA 61, 8, M ir, 7
deserted Maximinus M Ir, r.

Osrhoes, King of Parthians Hadrian's
negotiations with H 15, 8,

Ostia, town in Italy bath at repaired
by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 3 melons
from CA 11,3 forum built at by
Aurelian A 45, 2, columns pre.
sented by Tacitus to people of T


10, 5

OTHO had no desire to be emperor,
according to M Aurelius AC 8, 4
pi of mutated by Elagabalus

a i L] he

Ovidius Naso, P. works read by
Aelius Verus Ae 5, 9.

Ovinius Camillus tried to rebel
against Severus Alexander, pun-
ished SA, 48, 1-6,


Pax, Temple of, at Rome, critics in
TT 31, 10.

Paetus: see Articuleius. :

Pacorus, appouited king of the Lazi


9,9.
Pactumeis Magnus, T.: killed by
Commodus C 7, 6.
Paenulanus name proposed for
Diadumenianus D 2, 8.


Paenulius name proposed for Dia.
dumenianus D 2, 8.

Palatinus, Mons. temple of Elaga-
balus on E 3, 4.

Palatum, m Rome — Apollonius
would not come to? AP 10,4 low
resorts in palace of C 2, 7 Sao.
terus taken from C 4, 5 revels of
Commodus in C 5, 4 Commodus
established 1n palace of C 12, 7.
Commodus moved from C rö, 3
Pertinax moved to HP 5,7 Las.
civius fed to HP 6,5 concubines
brought to by Commodus HP 7,
8 pretender claimed palace of HP
10, 2 murderers of Pertinax in
HP x11, 4.6 chamberlains of fled
HP ir 12 Pertinax refused to
have children reared in. HP 15,4
body of Pertinax found in HP 14,
9: Didius Julianus moved to DJ
3,5  ]ulanus held audience in
Dj 4, 1 qunenes left alone in DJ
8,6 Julianus killed in Dj 8, 8
Severus proceeded to S 7, x
soldiers quartered in palace of S
7,2 Severus wished to make en.
trance in palace of S 24, 4 Geta
killed in Cc 2, 4 Caracalla pro.
ceeded to Cc 3, 2. Papinian haled
to Cc 8,8 posts in sold by Llaga-
balus E 6, 2. Elagabalus moved
from E x3,5 attacked by soldiers
E14,2.3 banquets for attendants
in E 20, 6° porphyry pavements
in E 24, 6, SA 25, 7. retinne in
reduced by Severus Alexander SA
15,2 men of rank in consulted by
Alexander SA 19, 3 eunuchs re-
moved from by Alexander SA 23,
5 apartments for Mamaea 1n SA
26,9 Alexander kept birdsan SA


41, 6 Alexander in bathing-
costume in SA 42, x physician
attached to SA 42, 3 Alexander


summoned Camillus to SA 48, 1.2
sentiment inscribed in by Alex.
ander SA 51,8 Alexander paraded
to SA 57,4 audiences of Alexan.
der in SA 67,2 Maximus and
Balbinus proceeded to M 24, 8,
26,7; M-B 8,3 gold-embroidered
toga from Go 4, 4" Maximus and
Balbinus killed in M-B 14,2. 3 5

Valerian to be censor of Va 6,6


INDEX OF NAMES


Palatium —con£uuted.
staff of followed Gallienus to gar-
dens Ga 17,8 difficulty of finding
anything in palace of Ga 20, 3
ride of Vopiscus hom A rz, 2* spoils
placed in by Aurelian A 10, 2
staff of in audience of Valerian A
13, I Aurelian returned to from
trmmph A 34,5 Aurehan disliked
to reside in A 49,1 Probus pro-
ceeded to P t0, 5. filled with evil
people by Carinus Ca 16,7 spec-
tacle of Carus pictured in Ca 19, 1.
Palestine 1evolt in H 5,2 Neapolis
town in punished $ 9, 5 penalty
remitted to S 14,6 xiights granted
to by Severus 5 17, 1 people of
rebuked by Niger PN 7,9 beasts
from in Áurehan's triumph A 33,
4 Saturninus made emperor in
s 9 2-5.
Palfuerius captured and killed by
Probus P 16, 4.
Palfunus Sura cited Ga 18, 6
Palladium plan to remove to temple
of Elagabalus E 3, 4 supposed
one removed E 6, 9
Palma $e Cornelius
Palmatus see Iunius
Palmyra Odaenathus a native of
Va4,2 Aurelian’s march to A 26,
1 siege of A 38,1 temple of Sun
at restored by Aurelian A 31, 7-9.
Palmyrenes Odaenathus prince and
king of Ga 10, z, TT 15, 1-2 de.
feated Herachanus Ga 13,5 1uled
by Zenobia Ga 13, 5. Claudius be-
sought to save hom Cl 4, 4 at-
tempt to conquer Egypt Cl rr, 1-2
Aurehan's wars against A 22, I,
25, 228,2 revolt and punish.
nant of A 31, 1-6. tieasure of used
in restoration of temple of Sun A
31, 8-9 foremost of led as captives
in Áurelian's ninmph A 33,5 de-
teated in Egypt by Probus P 9, 5.
Pamphyla L Vetus in V 6, 9
subdued by Probus P 17, 1
Pannonia "Turbo :n command of IH
6,7 Aehus Verus in command of
H 23,13, Ae3,2 Hadrian's visitor
from F125, 1. fieed from invaders
by M. Amelius MA 17, 3, V 9,
IQ Order re-established C 13, 5.
Severus governor of S 4, 2. pu-


Pannonia--continiuudt.


phecy of augus hom S 10, 7*
augurs fiom surpassed by Severus
Alexander SA #7, 6. Ingenuus
governor of and supported by
people of Tf 9, 1. troops in under
command of Claudius Cl 15, 2
Aurelian a native of A 24, 3
Probus a native of P3, 1. Carus’
parents not from Ca 4, 3 saved
from Sarmatians by Carus Ca 9, 1


Pantheum, at Home: restored by


Hadiian H 19, 10.


Papinianus see Aemilius,
Papinius Statius, P., poet AcAzllets


of imitated by Gordian I. Go 3, 3.


Papirius see Cassius
Papius Faustus killed by Severus


S 13, 2.


Papus see Cevvomus Sosius


Paiahus killed by Commodus C
4,4

Parla worship of deitied, emperors
on 19,5

Paris nime given by L Verus to
actor Maximinus V 8,7


Pans story of acted by Plagabalus
E 5, 4.
Parthamasuis (Pu thamaspates)


made bmg by Hadnan H 5, 4
Parthemanus see Aemilius
Parthians campagn of Trajan

against H 4, r war with avoided

by Haduan H 12, 8 Hadrian's

negotiations with king of H 13, 8

Hadnan's friendly relations with

H 21, 10 pohcy of Antoninus

Pius towaid AP 9, 67 defeated

governor of Syria MA 8, 6 wa

against, conducted by I, Verus

MA 8, 9-I,f, 20,2, 22,1, V 5: 8,

6, 7—7, 10, 8, 6 1r pestilence

among V 8,2 Quadiatus historian

of wat with V 8, 4 Pertmas in
war against HP 2,1 /— defeated by

Severus S 9, gett Severus! wal

agaist S 14,4 11, I5, 1-1, 16,

1-6, Ge 5, 5 Rotuc's attempt to

conquer during the Repubhe CA

13, b Coraealla’s war against Cc

6, 1-6 hope that Severus Ales.

ander might conquer SA 7,5 de.

fcated by Severus. Alexander. SA

50, 3 in army of Aluxander SA

6:,8, M 11,7. Maximus pannei


INDEX OF NAMES


Dai thians—-comfinued,
tamparen against M.B 13,5. kings
of valued concitbines more than
teastue Va |, 3 attached by
Odaenathus Gi 16,6 shoes fiom
Cli7,6 Roman emperor destined
torule T 15,2. defeated by Probus
P32, | sent envoys to Probus P


17, 4

Parthi us. cognomen assumed hy M,
Aurehus and L. Verus MA 9, 2,
V 7,2 confened on Severus but
refused S 9, 1o- baine by
Severus S 16,2. 6 by Caracalla
Cc6,5, 10,6, Ge6,6, by Severus
Alexander SA 56, 9 by Amelan
A 30, 5 conferred on Probus P


TÉ, Oi
Passienus see Vibius,
Paternus see Tariutemus


Patruimus see Valerius

Paulina see Domita

Paulinus see Fabius

Paulus see Iulius.

Pedamus Fuscus compelled by
Hadnan to commit suicide H
$3, 3

Peloponnesus people of unde: com-
mand of Claudius Cl 16, 1

Pelusium, city in Egypt tomb of
Pompey at rebuilt by Hadrian H


14, t dehled cult of Seapis MA
23, va

Perennis see "Tigidius

Perennitas vows to made by


Aurelian A 47, 3

Penmnthus, city in Thiace a00ps at
attacked by Niger S 8,13 Gothic
noblewonen settled at F 15, 6

Persia perfumes hom Ae 5,7. jewels
fom E 23,3 victories of Severus
Alexander in SA 50,5 Goidian ITI,
kiled and buried in Go 34, 12
Valerian a captive in Ga 1, 1
message of Valenan sent fom TT
12, 15. Odaenathus in TT 15, 5
golden chain borne by man fiom
YT 30, 26,

Persians sent envoys to M Aurelius
MA 26, r* hing (incorrect) of con-
quered by Severus S 18, 1. lusymy
of hing of E 31, 5. lang of wor.
shipped SA 18, 5,, TT 30, 13
hope and prophecy that Severus


Peisians—comnfonaued.
Alexandei would conquer SA 7, 5,
13, 7. de'eated by Alesander SA
50,5, 54,7; 55,1--57,1 eunuchs
wished empeiois to live ltke kings
of SA 66,3, war of Gordian HMI,
against Go 23,5, 26, 3-6, 27, 34,
3 feared in Italy Go 27,3 triumph
of Gordian III ove: Go 27, 9, 33,
2 inscription in language of Go
34,2 Valenan’s war against TT
I, I, 2, 3, I2, 16, 33, 2 held
Valeiian captive Va 4, 2, 8, 3,
TT 12, 1, P 6, 2 defeated by
Odaenathus Va 4, 2-4 i pro-
cession at Rome Ga 8,7, 9,5 war
of Odaenathus against Ga 10, 1—
Ir, I, 12,1 6, TT 15, 2.4, 8 30,
6 campaign of Herachanus against
Ga 13, 4-5 Cyriades fled to TT 2,
1 invasions of worse than Germans‘
TT s, 7 luxury of imitated by
Herodes TT 16, 1 by Zenobia
TT 30, 13 Zenobia drank with
TT 30, 18 Censonnus envoy to
TT 33,1 Aurelian envoy to king
of A 5,5 Aurehan's wars against
A7,2, 35,4, 45,9, T 43,3 sent
aid to Zenobia, inteicepted by
Aurelian A 27, 4, 28,2 4 Zenobia
tried to flee to A 28, 3° flags and
head-dresses of captured A 28, 5
purple presented to Anrelian by
ling of A 29,2 chauot presented
to Aurehan by hing of A 33, 2
maiched in Aurelian's tnumph A
33, 4 refrained from attack after
Auehan's death T 3, 5 Roman
emperor destined to rnle T 15,2
company of delivered over to
Romans P 4, 1 defeated by
Probus P 12, 4 Piobus' rægotia-
tions with P 17, 4-18, 1 Probus
planned war against P 20, 1, Ca
7,1 Carus’ war against Ca 7, 1,
8,17, 12,1 Galerius’ war against
Cao,3 See also Parthians.

Persicus cognomen bestowed on
Severus Alexander SA 56,9 won
by Carus Ca 8, 1.

Persius Flaccus, A, poet cited SA


44,9
PERTINAX: father HP 1,1 birth
and omens HP r, 2-3 education
1, 4 early career HP


INDEX OF NAMES


Pertinax—confurued. se lei
I, $—4, 3 suspected of complicity
in murder of Commodus HP 4, 4.
accession to principate C 18.19;
P4,5—5,7, 3923, 4" unpopular
with the soldiers HP 5, 7—5, 3
attempt at conspiracy against HP
6, 4-5 buried body of Commodus
C 17,4, 20, 1 largesses to soldiers
and people HP 6, 6, 7, 5. 11, 15,
7 deference to senate HP 6, 2. 7,
9,9, 13, 2 recalled exiles HP 6,
8 refused titles for wife and son
HP 6, 9, administrative measures
HP 6, 10-7, 4 financial policy
HP 7, 6—~9, 3 accused of greed
HP3,1,9,4-8, 13, 4-6. affability
HP 0, 9 saved those condemned
on false testimony HP 9,10 con-
spiracy of Falco against HP ro,
1-7 conspiracy of Laetus and
soldiers against HP ro, 8-10, Dj
4,8, PN 2, 3: murdered HP 11,
Ci 12, 5 appearance HP 12, 1
simphcity of habits HP i2, 2.7
retained Commodus' officials HP
12, 8 unwilling to rule HP 13,
1-3, 1548 wifeand family HP 73,
7 amours HP 13, 8 repressed
palace.servants HP 13, 9 omens of
death HP 14, 1-5, D] 2,3 treat-
ment of body HP 14, 6-7 burial
HP 14, 7-9, DT 3, 10 deificanon
and honours HP r4, 10—15,5, S
7,8 name taken by Seveius HP
15,2 57,9,14,I13, 17, 6. desired
by Macrinus OM 11,2 length of
life and of rule HP 15,6 expected
to remedy evils of Commodus'
rule Dj 3,7, 4, 8 murder of at.
tributed to Didius Julianus DJ 3,
7 efulianus influenced by Albinus
to hill CA I,1, 14, 2 6 Severus
d deua as avenger of S 5, 4
affection of populace for PN 3, 1
advised to take Albinus as associate
in power CA 14, 2 hatred for
Albinus CA 14,2 assumed name
Antoninus (incorrect) OM 3,6, D
6, 3 equalled in severity by
Victorinus TT 6, 6
Pescennia Marcelina paid costs of
Maximus" praetorship M-B 5, 7
Pescenniana, Domus, in Rome home
of Pescennius Niger PN 12, 4.


Pescennius Albinus killed by Seve.
rus S 13, 6. Tos

Pescentuus Aurelianus killed by
Severus S 334 0 e

Pescennius Festus killed by Severus
S 13, 6.

Pescenntus Tuhanus kiled by
Severus S 11, 6.

Pescennius Materianus killed by
Severus S 13, 6,

PESCENNIUS NIGER ancestry
PN 1,3 character PN 1, 4, 6,16
early career PN 1, 5, 4, 6 ac-
claimed emperor by troops in
Syria DJ 5, 1; 85, 8, 06, 7; PN
2, 1; CA x, 1, SA 1,7. demanded
by populace in Rome DJ 4, 7, PN

2, 2-3; 3, I attempt of Didius

o to kill DT 5, 1; $ 5, 8,
N 2,4 communications of to
senate and people seized by
Severus $ 6, 8. relations with
Severus PN 3, 3-5, 4, 6:8, 5, x.
severity im military discipline PN
3, 6-8, 7, 7-9, 10, 1——11,2 letters
of Severus, Marcus Aurelius, and
Commodus concerning PN 3, 9—4,
4 revolt of suppressed by Severus
S 6, ia, 8, 6—9, 1,15; 4; PN 4,5,
5, 2-8, CA 7, 2. 4, 12, 13 death
So, 1, PN 5, 8; 6, 13, CA 12,7

treatment of family and partisans
of S 8, 11, 9, 2.8; 10, 1, 14, 6,
PN 6, r2, Cc 1, 7 appearance
and habits PN 6, 5-8 influenced
by Aurelianus PN 7, 1° care for
provinces PN 7, 2-6 oracles con-
cerning PN 8, 1.3, 1, 4
likened to Clodius Albinus PN 9,
3-4 opinions concermng former
generals and emperors PN 11, 3-~
12,2 hope of reforms by PN 12,
3' house and statue PN 12, 4
epigram and Severus’ xemark con-
cerning PN 12, 5.8 ill-treatment
of certain cites CA 11,1 dislike
of panegyiics umitated by Severus
Alexander SA 35,1 feof written
by Marius Maxinus F r, 1

Pescennius Picus son of Clodius
Albinus CA 7, 5.

Pescennius  Veiatianus.— lalled by
Severus S 13, 6

Petronius Antoninus, nephew of Cant
modus killed by Commodus C 7, 4.


INDEX OF NAMES


Petronius Didius Severus father of
Didius Julianus D] 1, 2

Petronius Tumor killed by Severus
wy 13,

Petionus Sua *Mamertinus, M.
killed by Commodus C 7, 5.

Petiomus Sura Sepiumanus, M,
killed by Commodus C 7, 5.

Petromus Tamus Volusianus, T.
consulship of Ga 1, 2.

Peucin — warred against Romans
MA 22, i: invasion of under
Claudius Cl 6, z,

porem Maximinus likened to M
95 Je

Pharasmanes, King of the Hubert.
refused Hadrian's invitation to
conference H 13, 9 gifts to
Hadrian H r2, r2 deference to
Antoninus Pius AP 9, 6.

Pharus repaired by Antoninus Pius
AP 8, 3.

Philemon, grammarian, teacher of
Maximinus the younger M 27, 5.
PHILIP enactment against vice E
32,6, SA 24, 4* Domus Pomperana
taken by imperial treasury under
Go 3, 6 plotted against Timesi-
theus Go 28, 1 5-6, made piefect
of guard Go 29, I arrogance Go
29, I, 30, I plotted against
Gotdtan tti. Go 20, t-1. made ca-
ruler with Gordian Go 29, 5-6
killedeGordian Go 30, 8-9, 34, 4
declared emperor Go 31, 2-3
henoured Gordian after death Go
31,7 held Ludi Saeculares Go 33,
1.2 consulship Go 33,2 murdered
Go 33,5 Lictmius claimed descent
from Go 34, 5 example of evil

ruler A 42, 6

Phihp, King of Macedonia initia-
ton into Eleusinian Mysteries
imitated by Hadrian H 13, 1
opinion Concerning his son Alex-
ander MA 27, 11.

Philippens’ name of coin Cl 13, 3;
AQ, 7, 1251; P 4 5, P 15, 8

Philippi, city in Macedonia Gordian
ILI. defeated at Go 34, 4-

Philippies of Cicero cited A 39, 4.

Philippus. fostei-father of Severus
_ Alexander 5A 13, 4.

Philippus: see Aurehus Valerius.


Phlegon’ freedman of Hadrian S 20,
1 autobiography of Hadrian
attributed. to H 16, x letter of
Hadrian taken fiom F 7, 6.

Phoenice Hadrtan’s plan to separate
from Syua H z4,.: people ot
gave name Elagabalus to Sol OM
9, 2.

Pia see Fulvia.

Picenum, district of Italy origin of
Hadrian’s family H1,1 spectacles
given by Gordian I. m Go 4, 6
Tetricus supervisor of TT 24, §.

Pinarius Valens made prefect of the
guard M-B 4, 4, 5, 5 Maximus
reared 1n house of M-B 5, 5.

Pimus see Aurelius Victor

Pipara beloved by Galienus Ga
21, 3


iic physician of Faustina AC

10, B.

PISO sent by Macrianus to kill
Valens, withdrew to Thessaly,
assumed cognomen  Thessalicus,
declared emperor, slain Ga 2, 2-4,

T 19,2, 21, 1-3 good qualities
of TT 21, 1-2 descendant of Pisos
TT 21,2 honours for TT 21 3-6.

Piso see C ilpurnius

Pisonianus trained by Probus P
22, 3.

Pisos Piso a descendant of TT, 21,
1 Caesonim a branch of TT 32, 5.

Pius (as impertal name) reasons for
bestowal on Antoninus Pius H 24,
$5, Ae 6,9; AP 2, 3°83 5,2 be-
stowed on Commodus C 8 1
offered to but refused by Macrinus
OM 7,2, II, 2-4, 14,2 given by
some to Severus Alexander 5A 4, 5

Pius: name given to month C, 12, 9.

Pius see Fulvius. mJ

Placentia, city in Italy Aurelian de-
feated at A 21, x.

Placidus see Furius

Plato Hadrian’s knowledge of H
16, 6. M. Aurelius compared with
MA 19, 12 quoted by Marcus
Aurelius MA 27, 7 Republic of
read by Severus Alexander SA 30,
i. Vergi hkened to by Severus,
Alexander SA 30, 4. works ot
studied by Gordian I. Go 7, 1
famed for philosophy A 3, 4.


INDEX OF NAMES


Platonus Nepos, A tmendship for
Hadnan H4, 2 hated by Hadilan
H 15,2, 23, h


Plauuanus see Fulvius.

Plautllus father-in-law of Allunus
CA 10, 6.

Plautum, Lavacrum, at Rome


opened to the people by Elaga-
balus E 8, 6.

Plautius Quintillus, M. opposed
sending priests to appease Severus


Plautus see Maccius.
Plotina see Pompeia
Plutarch, biographer grandfather of
Seatus, teacher of M. Aureling MA
3, 2.
Poecile placein Hadman’s villa near
Tibur H 26, 5
Poena urbs. used by oracle to de-
signate Leptis PN 8, 3
Poeni im verse from Aene inter-
preted as allusion to Severus CA 5,
4-5 Carus’ parents said to have
been Ca 4, 3.
Polaenus compelled by Hadrian to
commut suicide H 15, 4.
Pollio, grammarian teicher of M.
Aurelius, MA 2, 3
Polho see Fufdius
Trebelhu:.

Pompea Plotini, wife of Trajan
urged marrage of Sabina to
Hadrian H 2, 10  favomed
Hadnan H 4, I 4. io escorted
ashes of Trajan H 5,9 basilica in
honou: of buit at Nemausus by
Hadrian H 12, 2

Pompeiana, Domus, at Rome pio-
perty of Gordian I. Go 2,3, 3, 6,


Pomponius


6, 5, 17; 2.

Pompetanus consulship of Go 23,
5. m

Pompeianus see Claudius


Pompeius Magnus, Cn tomb at
Pelusium iebult by Hadnan H
Ty, 4 called Magnus after many
tuumphs SA ir, ¢ died violent
death SA 62,3 house ot at Rome
belonged to Gordhan I. Go3,6 re-
semblance of Gordian II. to Go ar,
5 gave citizenship to Theophanes


M.B 7,3 written of by Livy and
Cicero P 2, 5. purple cloak used
by F 6, 4.


Pompens Tiogus inacemacy af A
2,2  Voptscus will not imbue P


2.
Pompiliana, Cuita, at Rome mert-
ing of senate im À pr, 4, 0T 3,2

Pompilius see Numa

Ponmponianus' see Fabius

Pomponius Proculus Vitiasims Pollio,
T. consulship of C 2, 4, 12, 5.

Pons Subliius, at Rome repaned
by Antomnus Pius AP 8, 2

Pontus Balbinus governor of M.B
7,2  Muthiadates hing of Var, 5
tubes of V4 2, 3. desired rescue of
Valerian Va 3, 2, seized by pre.
tender TT 29, 13. wars against had
no such hea as Probus P 1, 4

_ victory of Probus in P 12, 4.

Pontus (Black Sea) troops sent there
to aid Olbiopoltae AP 9, 9 By-
zantium key of Ga 6, 8 battle
against Goths on shore of Ga 13,6

Pontus Polemomacus added to lm.
pire under Nero A 21, II ,

Porcius Cato, M, opinion concen-
ing Macedonia H 5, 3 prefered
to Cicero by Hadrian H 16, 6
cited. as example by Avidius
Cassius AC 14,4 Fabius Sabinus
likened to SA 68, 1, Gordian I
likened to Go 5, 5 contrasted
with Caesat by Sallust M.B 7, 7
cited Pr, 7.

Porphyretica, Porticus, in „Rome
registers kept in P 2, 1

Porphyiius name given to Clodius
Albinus CA 5,9

Posidippus, physician said to have
caused death of L Verus MA 15, 6.

Postumianus see Ceiontus

Postumu, family of Clodius Albinus
EX signe prowess
t) So Xi. IES

"jeg. ariel v Severus
S 13, 2

POSTUMUS in Gaul TT 3, 1 9
made empeior and supported by
Gauls Ga 1, 3-4, A TT os $4


re A


6, 5, 5, 6, 6, Cl 7, 4 1e1gned
seven yeus Ga 4, 5, TT 3, 45
5, $ protected | Gaul — against


habars Ga 4, 5, TL 3, 10
Ciiipatgns of Crlbicnus aganit
Ga. fy pO, 7, 1, Si, 5, "o ^j
v, I, II, 3 Sttpported at Rome


INDEX OF NAMES .


Postumus- -continued
Ga 9, t Galenus entrusted
Saloninus to (iucomect) TT 3, 1
Vuerian entrusted Gallienus to
(incorrect) A 8.42 killed Saloninus
TI 3, 2 hulled TT 3 7, 5, 1,
8, 1, 31, 2, P 13, 5 Lollianus
made empero: in place of TT 4, 1
lette of Valerian concerning TT
built camps in Germany
TT 5, 4 Germans invaded after
death of TT s, 4 hie of httle
known TT 5, 8. called Victorinus
to share ın powe TT 6, t pro-
moted by Valerian TT ro, 14.


POSTUMUS the younger son of
Postumus TT 5,11 made tribune
of Vocontu TT 3, ir: named


Caesa and Augustus TT 4, I
hulled with fathe TT 4, x de-
clamations of TT 4, 2

Postumus see Ceionius

Praeneste, town in Italy death of
Verus, son of M Aurelius, at MA
21,3 Oracle in temple at SA 4, 6.

Praenestina, Via villa of Goidians
on Go 32, 2.

Praesens see Bruttius

Praetextatue see Asinius Lepidus

Priam Gordian II, likened to Go


I9, 4.
Priapus Gordian IL, hkened to Go


19, 4.

Puma mothe: of Emperor Maximus
M-B 4 2,

Piineus see Pescennius,

Priscianus conspired against
Antoninus Pius AP 7, 4


Priscus see Neratius Statius,

Piobatus leader of bgyptians
against  Paliyrenes, killed Cl
I I, 2.


Proliana, purpura name for pur-
pura Alexanditana SA 40, 6
PROBUS Vopiscus will write lite
of T 16, 6, 17, 5, P 1, 5 hfe of
wniiten by Onesimus F Iq. 4, Ca
4, 2 desired as emperor by all
T org 3 better than all Roman
muperots T 16, 6, Pea, 1-2 dear
to all F i0, 3. promised by
Sibylline Books T 16, 6; brought
whole world to safety T 16, 6,
Pr, 3 ruled in acca d with wish
of senate and people Ca 1, 2 fame


Piobus—co nl uiuted.

and conquests of T 16, 6, P 3, 1,
I2, 1-0, 22 pun on name of T 16,
6, P 4,4, 10, 4 birthplace and
family of P 3, r-4, 21, I career
under Valeuan and Gallienus P 3,
5—6, 4 under Clatidius, Aurelian
and Tacitus P 6, 5—7, 4 omen of
rule P 7, 5 beloved by soldiers
P 8 kept Aurehan from cruelty
P 8,1: campaign of in Africa
P9,1:-2 public works of in Egypt
P 9, 3-4 defended Egypt against
Palmyienes P 9, 5 made emperor
T 14, 2, 16,6, P 10-12, Ca 15,2

younger than Tacitus P ir, 7

powers conferred on P 13, I

punished murderers of Aurelian
and Tacitus P 13, 2-3 spared
associates of Florian, acknowledged
by his oops P 13, 3-4 campaigns
ot in Gaul and Germany P 13,
5$—158, 7 victories of in Raetia
and Ilyricum P 16, 1-2 subdued
Getae P 16, 3 campaign of in
Isauria and Pamphyla P 16,
4—17, I campaign of against
Blemmyae P 17, 2.3 6 negotia-
trons of with Persians BD, I7, 4-6,
18, x settled barbarians on Roman
soil P 18, 1-3 revolts of pretenders
against P 18 2. 4-7, E 7-15

encouraged viticulture P 18, 8

spectacles, largess and triumph of
Pig planned waragainst Persians
P 20, 1, Ca 7, 1. death of P 20,
1-2, 21, 13, Ca I, 1, 3, 7, 5 4.
6, x buried by «ster P 3, 4

death avenged by Carus Ca 6, 1

said there would be no need of
soldias P 20, 3-6, 22, 4; 23

length of reign of P 21, 3, 22, 2

tomb of P 2r, 4° descendamm of
P 24, 1-2 statue of P 24, 2

mourned by senate and people
P 23, 3 letter of P xo, 6-7

messages of to senate P 11, 2-4,
15, Ca 6, 2.3 Carus inferior to
P 2h 4 unwilling to have
Saturninus killed F rr, 1-3 feared
by people of Lugdunum F 13, x

made Carus prefect of guard Ca
5, 4° opinion of concerning Carus
Ca 6, 2-3 forces of used by Carus
Ca 8, x invasion of Sarmatians


oll


INDEX OF NAMES


Probus—contyiued,
after death of Ca 9, 4. tued to
mateh purple garinent of Aurelian
A 29, 3

Inobus 3 son-in-how of Severus,
enriched and made consul S 4, 1-2.

Probus name of four soldhers in
Probus' army P 8, 5.7.

Probus see Aurelius  Paltonius.

Procida see Boiona.

PROCULUS Vopiscus will write
hfe of P x8, 6, 24, 7, F 1,4
birthplace and family of F 12, 1-4
character of F 12, 5.8 made
emperor P 18, 4 5. 7, F 13, 1-2,
victories of F 13, 3 defeated and
kiled by Probus F 13, 4, descend-
ants of F 13, 5.


Proculus, grammarian cited TT
22, I4. .
Proculus see Didius — Eutychius.

ultus.


Professus see Lollius.

Protogenes cbarioteer, favourite of
Elagabalus E 6 3.

Protrepticus smatated by Cicero Ga
20, X.

Prytaneum. place in Hadrian’s
villa near Tibur H 26, 5.

Pseudo~Antoninus name given by
paca to Diadumenianus


Ptolemaeus  Euergetes, King of
Egypt cruelty of imutated by
Caracalla Cc 6, 3.

Ptolemais, city m Egypt recovered
Eo Blemmyae by Probus P 17,


Ptolemies splendour of rmitated by
Maximinus the youngei M 29, 8
Zenobia claimed descent from TT


30, 2

Pubttius Marcellus, C. ordered by
Hadrian to commit suicide H 15, 4

Pubhitus Celsus L enemy of
Hadrian H 4, 3 fell hom favour
of Trajan H 4, 3 conspiracy ot
against Hadiian and death H


9, Id

Pudens see Servilius.

Pulcher see Clodius

Punic Wars slaves enrolled as
soldiers in MA 21,6 had no such
hero as Probus P 1, 4 Rome
brought low by Ca 2, 6.


Punica files shown by Abiwans Go
ibe E, I5, hy 0,3

Pumeae team applied to works of
Apulews CA 12, 12.

Punicus, Sulla Severus called a PN


b, 4.

Pappu see Maximus

Puteoh, town in Italy. Hadrian
buned in Cicero's villa at H 25, 7.
temple for Hadiian at consecrated
by Antoninus H 27, 3. senator's
retirement to T 19, 5.

Pyramids visited by Severus S


17,4.
Pyrrhus: fear inspired by Ca 2, 6.


Quadi. revolt of MA 22, 1. defeat
and submission of MA 14, 5; 17,3
plan of M. Amelins to make a
province of MA 27, ro Valerius
Flaccinus rescued from P 5, 2.


Quadratus: see Asitius. Iulius:
Ummidius

Quartus’ see Marcius. "
QUIETUS . made tribune by
Valerian TT 12, 10 son of
Macrianus, made emperor, de-


feated and killed Ga 3, 1—4, 6;
TT xz, 12, 14, I, I5, 4, 18, I
good qualitzes of TT r4, Z.
Aureolus sent soldiers to seize TT
18, 3.

Quietus see Lusius

Quinctius Cincinnatus, L, Jadmured
by Niger PN 12, 1

Quintilianus see Fabius

Quintlu family exteinunated by
Commodus C 4, 9.

Quintioram, Domus, at Rome
statue of Tacitus m T 16, 2.

Quintilus Condianus, Sex. escaped
fiom Commodus C 4, 9.

Quintiltus Marcellus counsellor of
Severus Alexander SA 68, 1.

Quintihus Maximus consulship of


C r1, r4.
QUINTILLUS brother of Claudius
l 10, 6,12, 3, 13, 2, ÅA 37, 4
Claudius wished to make associate
in power Cl 10, 6 oracle given to
A i0, 6 chatacters of Cl i2, ;
made emperor Cl is, 5, À 42, 4
invasion of Goths during cule of
Cli2, 4 length of rule of CL ra,
5, 437, 6 death of CI ra, 5-0;


INDEX OF NAMES


Quinuims - contented,
A 16,1, 37,6 lett twochildien Cl


13,9 served with Aurelian A 17,
3 an command of garison im
Haly A 5,5 *

Quintiliis see Plautius.

Quumals, — Colhs, at Rome


senac ulum established on E 4. 3.

Quiites. soldiers addressed as SA
52, 3, 5* 10, 54, 3 Citizens
addressed as SA 57, 1, T 7, 3,
F 5, 4. 6.


Raetta invaded by Chatti MA 8,
9-8 clemed of enemies by Pertinax
HP 2, 6 tithes in defeated by
Caracalla Ce 5, 4 Fulvius Borus
commander of frontier of A 13, I
peace established in by Probus P
16, 1 Bonosus commander of
frontier of F 14, 2.

Ragonius Clarus lette of Valerian
to TT 18, 5.11
Ragonius Celsus
to PN 3, 9-12.
Ravenna, city m Italy Maximus at

in war against Maximinus M 24, 5;
25, 2, 33, 3; M-B 11, 1-2, 12, 1
5, 16, 7. !

Ravennas, Classis seized by Severus


6, 3.

RÉGALTAN US supported at Rome
Ga 9, 5 general in command of
Ilyiagun TT 10, rx. 9. made
emperor by troops in Moesia. TT
IO, x. 7, Cl 7, 4" wared against
Sumatians TT 10, 2: killed TT
10,2 ule of due to a jest TT ro,
3-7 suspected by Galhenus TT
10,8 a Dacian, kinsman of Dece.
balus TT 10,8 opinion of Claudius
concerning TT 10, 9-13. promoted
by Valerian TT ro, 14.

Regulus’ pretect of the guard, killed
by Commodus C 7, 4

Remus. Severus' dream of S 1, 8.

Repentinus. see Cornelus. Fabius
Cornelius.

Reverendus favourite of mother -of
Gordian TI]. Go 25, 3.

Rime, campaign of Maximus on
M-B 5, 9. Germans driven back
from by Probus P 12, 3° galleys
burned by Germans F 15, 1.

Rhodes earthquake at AP 9, x,


letter of Severus


VOL, III,


Rhodope, im: Thace Amehan re-
tui ncd to the Last hom A 31, 3.
hhoemetalces restored to kingdom

by Antoninus Pius AP 9, 8.
Rhone Albinus’ body cast into S


I1, 9 ;
Ripensts see Dacia,
Romanus name given to month C


I2, 8.
Romulet Romans addiessed as F


5; 4.

Romuleus, Mons, at Rome statue of
Saloninus near Ga 19, 4

Romulus vanished from the earth
C2,2 Severus’ dream of 81,8
left no sons S 21, 1i killed by
senators M 18, 2 interregnum
after death of T 1, t-3 founder of
the commonwealth Ca 2, 2.

Rostra, mm Rome Antoninus Pius
eulogised on MA 7, 11. people on
reviled Didius Julianus DJ 4, 2
people summoned to M.B 5, 3
statue of Claudius on Cl 3, 5

Roxolan revolt and subsequent
race H6, 6.8  waragainst Rome

A 22, 1 . mstrumental in killing

Regalianus TT 10,2 led as cap-
tives in Aurelian’s triumph A 33, 4.

Rufinus. see Apuleius Clodius
Memmuus.

Rufus Celsus’ conversation with F


2, I.

Rufus see Claudms Iulus: Novius:
Rutilius  Velus.

Rupa Faustina grandmother of M
Aurelius MA. 1, 4.

Rupilius Bonus: great.grandfather
of M Amehus MA 1, 4.

Rusticus. see Iunius.

Runühus Rufus, P. Godan I
likened to Go 5, 5.


Saba’ see Zabdas .

Sabina wife of Hadrian H rz, 2;
2, X0. treated with undue famil.
arity by Septicius Clarus and
Suetonius Hir, 3 Hadman’s plan
to divorce her abandoned H rz, 3°
death H 23, 9. .

Sabinianus. led revolt against
Gordian IIT. Go 23, 4. ©

Sabinus Elagabalus attempted to
lall E 16, 2-3.


LL


INDEX OF NAMES


Salinus father of Fabius Sabinus,
counsellor of Severus Alexandet
SA 68, 1

Sabinus, prefect of the uty, billed
by opponents of Maximmus M 15,
1, Go 13,9 absent from meeting
at which Gordians were acclaimed
emperors Go 11, 3. lette of Maxi.
minus to Go 13, 2 addressed
populace and soldiers Go 13, 5.

Sabinus consulship of Go 23, 4.

Sabinus sce Aelius. —FPabws
Fulvius Vettius.

Sacra Via statue of Saloninus on


Ga 19, 4.

Saeculares, Ludi held by Philip
Go 33, 1-2

Saepta, at Rome see Agrippiana,
Saepta.

Salambo mites of peformed by


Elagabalus E 7, 3.

Salu M. Aurelius enrolled among
MA 4, 2-4" hymn of to include
name of Verus, son of M. Amelis
MA, 21, 5. decreed for Caracalla
Cc 11, 6.

Sallentim, peoplein S Italy Malem.
nus early king of MA x, 6.

Sallustu, Horti Aurelian hved in
and built portico in A 49, 1-2.

Sallustius Crispus, C Caelius Ánti-
pater prefeiied to him by Hadrian
H 16, 6 left no sons S 21, 2
speech of Micipsi by S 21, 10
contrasted Caesar and Cato M-B
7, 7 inaccuracy of A 2, 2 cited
P 31,1 Vopiscus will not imitate
P 2, 7 did not recoid tiifles F


6, 3.

Salonae, city 1n Dalmatia. Saloninus
born at Ga 19, 3

Salonma see Cornelia.

Salom@ianus name of coin Cl 17, 7

SALONINUS son of Gallienus Va
8,5 Garg, I names of Vað, 5,
Ga 19, 24, 20, 3, 21, 3 born at
Salonae Ga 19, 3 entrusted to
Postumus TT 3, I statue of Ga
19,4 trick of Ga 20, 2-4 son of
Salomna Ga 21, 3° death of (1n.
correct), TT 3, 2-3 approval of
honours for Piso T'T 21, 4

Salvidienus, M. cited F 10, 4.

Salvius Iuhanus in Hadrian’s con-
sium H 18,1: twice consul and


Salvius Iulianus. contented
preiect of the city. Df 3, 0. gieats
gandfather of Didius [uhanus DJ
1, 1 Severus tued to set aside
decisions of S 17, 4

Sdvius fulianus, P in command of
armies of Commodus C 3, 2
plotted against by Commodus C
3, ? conspiracy against Com-
modus C 4,8, D] 2,1 killed C
4,8 consulship of C ra, 1-3 uncle
of Didius Juhanus DI 1, 2 son
debauched by Commodus C 3, 1
son betrothed to daughter of
Paternus C 4, 8

Salvius Valens just consulted by
Antoninus Pius AP 12, 1.

Samaritans plan to amalgamate re-
hgion of with cult of Elagabalus
E 1,5 bad characte, of in Egypt
F 7,5, 8, 2

Sammonicus see Serenus

Sammum, district of Italy, under
administration of Tetricus TT 24,
5 pots from HP 8, 5

Samso name given to Vituriga wife
of Pioculus F ra, 5.

Sanctus see Ateius.

Sandario killed by Palmyrenes A
81, 2.

Saoterus, favourite of Commodus *
with Commodus m triumph C 3, 6
killed by prefects of the guard C
h5 |

Sapihanus see Claudius


Sapoi I, fing of the Persians de-
teated by Gordian III. Go 26, 6
letters to and from Va 1-4, 1 de-
feated by Odaenathus Va 4, 4,
TT 15, +, 30, 6 persuaded by
as to make war on Romans
TY 2,2

Sarabda, city in Phoenicia
kerchiefs from Cl 17, 7.

Saraceni. soldiers defeated by re-
buked by Niger PN 7, 8 subject
io Zenobia TT 30,7 . served under
Aurelian A 11, 3 sent aul to
Zenobia, intercepted. by Aurehan
A 27, 4, 28, 2. 4. marched in
Aurelian’s triumph. A 33, 4. re
vered Autelun A 4r, 10 server!
under Probus P p, 1. F'nmus! rg
lations with If 3, 3.


hand.


INDEX OF NAMES


Sudima Severus quaestor of S 2,
4-5 horse from F 6, 4

Sarmatae — 1evolt of «quelled Ly
Hadiian H 3,9 revolt of H 5,2,
6, G imvasion of repelled by M.
Aurelius MA 17, 3 war against
Rome MA 22, 1, 27, 10. plan of
M “Aurelius to make a province of
MA 24, 5, 27, 10 war against
left by M. Auehus to proceed
against Avidius Cassius MA 25, I
slaughtered on Danube AC 4, 6
successes against under Commo-
dus C 6, x company of under
command of Niger PN 4,2 sol-
diers' anger directed toward SA
53, tO Maxinunus planned war
against M 13, 3 defeated in
liyricum by Maximus M.B 5,9
Gordian IIl victor over Go 34, 3
in procession at Rome Ga 8, 7
invasion by TT 9, 1 war of Re.
galianus against TT ro, 2 bows
rom TT 10,12 Censonnus envoy
to TT 53, 1 Aurelan's victories
over A 6, 3-4, 7, 2, 18, 2 led as
captives in Aurehan's triumph A
33, 4 Roman emperor destined
to rule T 15,2 Probus in wa
against P 5, 1-2, 12, 4, 16,2 led
as captives in Probus’ triumph P
19, 8 defeated by Carus Ca 8,1,
9, 4 invaded Roman provinces
after Probus’ death Ca 9, 4

Sarmatia: maidens from taken by
Proculus F r2, 7.

Sarmaticus cognomen borne by
Caracalla Ge 6, 6, by Aurelian
A 30, 5, conferred on Probus P


Saimaticus, Ludus. given by Carus
Ca r9, 3.

Saturnalia: gifts given and received
at by Hadrian H 17, 3 slaves
admitted at by L. Verus V 7,5.
crgo of Severus Alexander at

37, 6.

Saturni, Aerarium,at Rome registry
of free-born 1nfants at MA 9, 7.

SATURNINUS best of Gallienus'
genelals, appointed by Valerian,
declaied emperor, hulled TT 23,
I-4. supported at Rome Ga 9, 1.
diferent from Saturninus, rebel
under Probus F rx, I.


SATURNINUS, Vopiscus will
wiite life of P 18, 6, 24,7, F 1, 4,
6,5 native of Gaul F 7,1 made


commander of eastein frontier by
Aurelian, forbidden to visit Egypt
F 7, 2, 99,1 rewolted against
Piobus in Egypt P 18, 4.57, F 6,
5, 9, 1-2 made emperor 1n Pales-
tine, F 9, 2-3 victories of F 9, 5
speeches of F 9, 5, 10, 1-3 studies
of F ro, 4 different from Satur-
ninus, rebel under Gallienus F 11,
I killed contrary to wish of Pro-
bus F 11, 1-3

Satuintnus consulship of Ga 10, 1.

Saturninus see Antomus Avulnius.

Savus, river in Pannonia canal into
dug by Probus P 2r, 2.

saxa Rubra, place in Italy mutiny
of troops at S 8, 9.

Scaevola see Cervidius Mucius.

Scantila see Manlia.

Scaurinus see Terentius.

Scaurus see Terentius

Scipio see Calpuinms Cornehus.

Scipios period of H x, x Niger's
opinion of PN 12, 2 mentioned
in speech by Gordian I Go 5, 7
Gordian I. claimed des@ent from
Go 9, 4 example of followed by
Gordian I. Go 9, 6 Africanus
bestowed on Gordian I. as cog-
nomen of Go 17, x Claudius
resembled Cl r, 3 Aurelian com-
parable to A 9, 4. praised by
historians P 2, 4.

Saron Maximinus hkened to M


Scorpianus see Aelius.

Scupi, town in Jugoslavia battle
of Regalianus at TT ro, 11.

Scythia winters of H 16, 3, Ana.
charsis a native of A 3, 5, Avulnius
Saturninus commander of frontier
of A 13, 1.

Scythians(ssGoths) king ofattacked
neighbours Go 31,1 war of Max-
imus and Balbinus against M.B
16,3 invaded Bithyma Ga 4,7,
11,1 invaded Asia Ga 6, 2. 5,
7,3 invaded Cappadocia Ga rr,
I attacked Heraclea and defeated
in naval battle Ga x2, 6 landed
at mouth of Danube Ga 13, 6
retreated over Mt. Gessaces Ga


LL 2


INDEX OF NAMES


Scythians —continued,
13, 9° geuneial rebellion among
Ga 13, rọ invasion of unde
Claudius Cl 6,2 became farmers
in Roman temtoy Cl 9, 4
attempted te plunder Crete and
Cyprus Ci 15, x.

Secundinus see Mummius.

Secundus sec Vitruvius

Seius Puscianus fellow-student of
M. Aurelins MA 3,8 second con-
sulshtp of C x2, 9 succeeded as
prefect of city by Pertinax HP 4, 3.

Seleucia, city in Babylonia stormed
by Avidius Cassius V 8, 3-4.

Seleucia birthplace of Firmus F
3, T.

Semiramis, cited as precedent by
Zenobia TT 27, 1.

Septicius Clarus, C. appointed
prefect of the guard H 9, 5 de-
pu H Ir, 3 regarded as enemy

y Hadrian H 15, 2.

Septimius, biographer of Severus
Alexander cited SA 17, 2, 48, 7.

Septimius Áfer cousin of Caracalla,

illed by him Ce 3, 6.7.

Septimius Aper, P. great-uncle of
Severus S 1, 2

Septimius — Árabianus dishonest
senatoi, reproved by  Seveius
Alexander SA 17, 3-4.

Septunius Bassianus see Caracalla,

Septumius Geta, P. father of Sev.
erus Sx, 2 Severus named son
after Ge 2, 1

Septimius Geta, P brother of Sev-
erus, ordered to govein province
S8, 10 hopes of principate ended
S 10,3 promoted by Severus S
I4, 2X1 Severus named son after


Ge 2, L

SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS, L autc-
biography 83, 2, 18, 6, PN 4, 7;
CA 7, r ancestry and birth S 1,
I-3 education S 1, 4-5; Cc 8, 3.
omens of iule S r, 6-10, 3, 4-5
early career S 2, 1-~4,7, Cc 8, 3,
Ge 2, 3-4; 3, 1 married Juha
Domna $3,9, Ge 3, 1; SA 5, 4
skilled in astrology $ 3, 9; PN 9,
6, Ge 2, 6: made emperor by
army DJ 5, 1-2, S 5, 1, CÀ x, 1,
SA 1, 7 march on Rome Dj 6,
3-4, S 5 3-4


declaed public


Septimius Severus, Ia- continued.
enemy by senate DT 5, 34, 9.5,
5, ?, 2 measuies taken by
Julianus against, D] 4, 6-6, 9,
73 4-6, 33 S 51 6-8, PN 2, 5-7.
3, 2. general submission to DJ 8,
4-8, $ 5, 9—6, x1: relations with
Niger and Albinus S 6, 9, PN 3,
3-5, 4, 6-8, CA 1,2, Ep $6, 6, 8,
7, 26, B, r.3 measures taken
against Niger and Albinus 8 6,
7.10, PN 5,2 entry into Rome
S 7, 1-3, 17, 7-8 appearance
before senate S 7, 4-5  donatives
to soldiers $ 5, 2, 7, 6-7 12, 2,
16, 5.9 honours for Perunaa HP
15, 165, 8 7, 9, 17, 5 assumed
but discontinued name Pertinax
HP x5, 2, 8 7, 9, 14, 13, 17, 6.
assumed (incorrect) name Anton-
inus OM 3, 6, D 6,3 riches and
honours for relatives and friends
S 7, 9; 8, 1-2, 14, 4 11, 15, 7
killed friends of Julianus S 8, 3
care for provinces and grain-supply
$8, 4-5, 23, 2, PN 7, 4, CA 12,
7, E 27, 7, 1evolt of Niger S 8,6
—, I, PN 4, 31 3» 2—0, 1, CA
12, 7 13 i, 1 treatment of
Niger’s family and supporters 5
9, 2-8, 10, 1, 14, 6, x5, 4, PN 6,
1-2, Cc 1,7 conquests in Oiient
S 9, 9-11, 18, 1 cognomina S 9,
IO-i1, 16,2 6, 18, 2 volt of
Albinus S to, r—11, 9, CA 8, 4—
0,7, 12,13, Fr, 1 prophecies
S 10, 7, PN 5,9, 5-6, CA 1, 4,
5; 4-5, 0, 2 gave title of Caesar
to Caracalla S 10,5, 14, 3, 16, 3
gave name Antoninus to Caracalla
S 10, 3-6, PN 8, 5, Ce 1, r, Ge
1,4, D 6,8 to Geta S 10,5, 19,
2, Ge 1, 5-7, 23, 2-5, D 6, 9:
honours foi Commodus C r7, rr.
I2, S 11, 3-4, 12, 8, 19, 3 purn-
ished partisans of Albinus S 12, 1
5.7; CA 0, 5; 12, 2-1. wealth
and establishment of res privatae
$12, 3-4 murdeted senators and
others S I2, 9-—1(, 1; Lj, 12-13,
15, 5-6, 17, 7-8, PNG, jot, Ce 4,
2-3' relations with Plautianus S
14, 5. 7-0' made sons consuls S 14,
10, 16, 8, spectacles and gifta to
people S r4, r3 Wars against


INDEX OF NAMES


Severus Alexandei—coinfutued.
soldiers under Elagabalus L 5, 1,
10, 1, 13, 3 saved fiom murder
ky 13,1—15,3, SA 2, 4, 4, 6 _ Tee
conciliation with Elagabilus E 15,
5-6 omens and prophecies of 1ule
SA 13, 1—14, 6: made emperor by
senate SA 1, 24, 2, 1-4, 8, 1
refused names Antoninus and
Magnus when acclaimed by senate
SA 5, 3—12, 4 character E 13, 1,
A 4, 5-6; 39,2, 44, 1-2, M 7,3
5 i ahaa SA 4, 4, 14, 6 sim.
pheity in clothing and conduct
SA 4, 1-3, 18, 1-3, 20, 33, 3-4,
37, 1, 40, I, 41, 163, 42, I-35 55
I-3 seveiity in military discipline
SA 12, 4-5, 25, 1-2, 50, X; 51, 5-
8, 52, 1. 31 $3. 54, 59, 4-5, 64,
3, M 7, 6. called Severus by
soldiers SA 12, 4, 25, 2 relations
with mother SA 14, 7; 26, 9, 57,
7, 60,2 early reforms in govern-
ment, palace and army SA 15°
legislation and legal decisions SA
16 severity toward the dishonest
SA 17; 18, 4-5, 23, 8, 28, 2-5, 35,
5—36, 3, 67, 2-3 deference to
senate SA 19, 2I, 3-5, 52, 2
leniency SA 21, I economic
measures SA 21, m2, 24, 3, 26,
2-3, 32, 4-5, 39,5, 41, 3-1, 64, 3
care of army E 29, 5, SA 21, 6-8,
45, I3, 47, 52, 3-4 care for food.
supply of Rome SA 21, 9--22, 2,
22, 7-8 carefor administiation of
justice SA 22, 3, 23, I-2* treat.
ment of slaves, fieedmen and
eunuchs SA 23, 3-7, 34, 2-31 45
t, 66, 3-4 care of provinces SA
22, 6, 24, 1, 45, 6-7, 46, 5 care
for public baths SA 24, 2-6, 30, 4
treatment of priests SA 22, 5, 49,
2 attitude toward foreign religions
SA 22,4, 43, 6-7, 49, 6 care for
public morals SA 24, 4; 25, 10,
34, 2-45 39,2 public works S 24,
5, E 17,9, SA 22, 4, 25, 3-8,
20, 4. 7-11, 28, 6, 44, 7 coinage
SA 25, 9, 39, 7-10, speeches to
people SA 25, 11, 57, 1. lngesses
to people SA 26, 1, 57, 1. 6. guided
by counsellors SA 26, 5-6, 27, 2,
31, 2-3; 51, 4, 67, 2; 66, 68 re
gulations concerning clothing SA


Seveius Alexander —-contintted.


27, 1-4; 40, 3 FL, ft, Y tastes
and amusements SA 27, 5-10; 20,
3, 30, 31, 45, 34 7; 34, I$,
4t, 5-7 consulshits SA 28, 1, Go
2,4, 4, 2 disliked being called


Syrian SA 29, 7, 44, 3, 64 3
devotion to religious duties SA 29,
2, 134 5 devotion to public
business SA 20, 4-6, 31, 1-3 re
lations with public officials SA 32,
I-4, 42, 4, 43, 2; 46, X. 4-5, 49,
x administration of Rome SA 33,
I-2, 43, X. simplicity of banquets
SA 34, X. 5-B, 37, 2-12, 39, I
verses SA 38, 4-6 measures for
public welfare SA 39, 3. generosity
SA 39, 5, 49,2, 44, B, 46, 2-3
spectacles SA 43, 2-4, 44, 6, 57,
1.6, Go 33, 1° encouagement to
men of learning SA 44, 4.6 gifts
to temples SA 44, 9, $1, I treat.
ment of Ovinius Camillus SA 48
treatment of Macrinus SA49, 3-4
beloved by soldiers SA 48,5, 50,
5, M irn 1 campaigns agaist
Persians (Parthians) SA 50, 54, 7,
55, 57 speech and acclimations
in senate SA 56 triumph and
games SA 57, 4-6 victories in
Mauretania, iliyricum, Armenia
and Isaura SA 58 war against
Germans SA 59, 1-4, 61, 8, 63, 5,
M 7,5, 11, 7-9 unpopulà with
troops SA 59, 5, 63, 5 death SA
59; 0-8, 6t, 1-2, 63, 34 M 7 4-0,
10, 3, 12, 1. length of hfe und rule
E 35,2, SA 00, 1 omens of death
SA 60, 3-B contempt for death
SA 602 mourming and honouis for
SA 63 criticisms of SA 61, 3;
Elagabalus vilified to gain. favour
of E 30,8 vilhed to gain favour
of Maximinus SA 63, 6. nulitary
career of Maximinus under M y,
4, $3 3—06, 7, 7; 1-3: treatment
of servants and friends of by Max.
iminus M g, 7-8 hated by Herod-
iin M 13, 4 Gordian I. made
proconsul of Africa by M r4, 2,
Go 5, 1.3 lette concerning Mas.
mimus the younge M 29, r5.
gave omen to Maximinus the
of Gordian I Go 18, 5-6. example
younger M 30, 5: fui thered enre


INDEX OF NAMES


Severus Alexandei—contanued.
of good emperor A 42, 4 Probus
to be preferred to T 16, 6 unde
Probus no longer desired P 12,2
Rome happy "inder Ca 3, 4.
Severus Clarissimus * accused Didius
Julianus of conspiracy DJ 2, 1
Seveaus see Annus Archontius
Atilius Avidius Catihus Cin.
aus Claudius Tunius Petronius
Didius Postumius Septimus.
Sestius Lateianus, T, consulship of


V 3,3

Sextus of Chaeionea, philosopher
teacher of M Aurelius MA 3, 2
of L. Verus V 2, 5

Sibyline Books consulted fo
remedy for earthquake Go 26, 2,
Ga 5, 5 consulted by order of
Aurelian A 18, 5—20, 8 Probus
promised by T 16, 6.

SEXE Versus, prophesied rule
of Hadrian H 2, 8.

Sicca, town in Africa home of
Eutychius Proculus, teacher of M.
Aurehus MA 2, 3 people of,
faithful to Gallienus, maltreated
Celsus' body TT 29, 4

Sicha, place in Germany Severus
Alexander killed in SA 59, 6

Sicilia, place in Palatium at Rome
conspuators against Pertinax in
HP 17,6,

Sicily, Hadrian in H 15, 3* Severus
proconsul of S 4, 2.3 horses from
given away by Gordian I. Go 4, 5
plundered by bugands Ga 4, 9
Aurelianus lived in A 42, 2

Sidon, city m Phoenicia
cai ments fiom Ca 20, 5

Sigillaria gifts given and received
at by Hadrian H 17, 3. by Cara-
calla Ce x, 8,

Silanus. see Dulus Iunius. Lanna
Servius Ulpius.

Silvanus, Temple of omen in T


purple


X 75 I LÀ
Silvinus, rhetoncian teacher of
Severus Alexander, killed by


Elagabalus E 16, 4.


Similis see Sulpicius.
Sinon known to leter generations
ALS


Snimum, town 1n Jugoslavia’ Masi-
S T n Jugoslavia* Masi
minus at M 13,3 Amelan born


Sumium—coantuited,
at A3,1 Probus born at P 3, 1,
21, 1, Alma Mons near planted
with vines P 18, 8 district of
diained by Probus P 21, 2.

Sol Colossus of Nero rededicated
to by Hadrian H*19, r3 temple
of Faustina rededicated to him,
as Elagabalus or Jupiter Syrus,
by Elagabalus MA 26, 9, Ce x1,
7. called Elagabalus by the
Phoenicians OM 9,3 Elagabalus
priest of E 1,5 temple of at Rome
built by Elagabalus E r, 6, 3, 4,
17, 8 statue of Gallienus attired
as Ga 18,2 temple ofin Aurelan’s
native town A 4, 2 5, 5,5 temple
of at Palmyra restored by Aurelian


A 31, 7-9

Sol, Temple of, at Rome built by
Aurelian Az, 3, 25, 5, 35, 3, 395
2 Aurehan and Ulpius Crinitus
pictured in A 10,2 spoils dis.
payed mn Å28,5 Aurelian estab-
ished priests for A 35, 3 riches
of A 39,6 wine stored in porticos
of A 48, 4 statue of Aurelian in
T 9,2 Statue of Jupiter to be
placed in F 3, 4.

Sosius Falco, Q. invergfed agaist
Pertinax 1n senate HP 5, 2.3
accused of conspiracy against Per.
tinav but pardoned HP ro, 1-7
consulship of HP 15, 6

Sosius Papus friendship of for
Hadrian H 4, 2.

Sossianus see Fabius

Soteridas physician of Marcus
Awielius AC 10, 8

Spain home of Hadrian’s family H
I Hadrianin H 12, 3-5 home
of family of M Aurehus MA 1,4
relieved fiom conscription MÀ TI,
7 invaded by Mauri MA 27, x
revolt in checked MA 22, 11. Sev.
erus in S 3, 4-5 leading men of
killed by Severus S r2, 1. gold in
seized by Severus S 12,3 origin.
ally conquered by the senate CA
13, 6 augurs from suipassed by
Severus Álexandei SA 27, 6 de.
sired rescue of Valerian Va 3, 2
people of fond of hunting TT 30,
18 held by Tetricus as petender
C17, 5 wars against had no such


INDEX OF NAMES


Spain—contutued.
hero as Probus P r,4 sexed by
Proculus and Bonosus P 18, 5
prope of allowed to plant vines
18, 8. peace restored in by
Satmmnus F o, 5, Bonosus born


in F x4, 1° under rule of Carinus
Ca 16, 2 See also Hispania
Baetica.
Spaitacus Maximinus likened to


9;
Spei Veteris Horti,at Rome Bilaga-
balus retired to E 13, 5.
Speratus demand for death of C
18, I0. ;
Stagira, town in Macedonia. Aris-
totle born in A 3, 5

Statianus see Manlius

Statilius Corfulenus proposed hon.
ours for Albinus and brother CA
12, II

Statius Caecilius, writer of comedies
sayings taken from works of Ca


13, 5.

Statius see Papinius,

Statius Priscus Licinius Italicus, M,
victorious in Armenia MA 9, I
in war against Parthians V 7, 1.

Statius Valens, biographer of Trajan
cited SA 48, 6.

Stilo, philosopher teachei of Sev-
erus Alexander SA 3, 3.

Stilo see Aelius.

Suburanus second consulship of


3;
Successus see Helvius
Succuba, town in Spain home of
great-grandfather of M Aurelius


22,1 defeated by Aurehan A r8,
2 led as captives in Aurelian's
triumph A 33, 4

Suetonius Optatianus cited T 11, 7.

Svetonius Tranquillus, C. deposed
by Hadiian fiom post of magister
epistularum H rx, 3 biography of
Caligula C 10,2 method in narra-
tion M-B 4, 5 Vopiscus will
imitate P 2, 7 did not write lives
of pretenders F r, 1.2.

Sulla see Cornelius.

Sulpicianus see Claudius | Flavius.

Sulpicius father-in-law of Severus
Alexander SA 20, 3.


Sulpicius, Vicus, at Rome, Therinae
Antonimanae in Lt 17, 8,


Sulpicius ape 1, C teacher of


Pertinax Ijd
Sulpicius Canus  kfiled by Severus
S 13, 7.


Sulpicius Crassus proconsul of
Asta, killed by Commodus C+7, 7

Sulpicius Similis, C. deposed from
prefecture of the guad H 9, 5
Hadrian owed his pincipate to
him H 9, 6.

Superbus. see Tarquinius. — [1onius,

Sura see Licimus. Palfurius Pet.

Sybaritae, people of Italy dish in.
vented by E 30, 6,

Symuamira see Iulia Soaemias.

Synnada, cityin Asia marble from
Go 32, 2.

Syria’ Hadrian governor of H 4, 6
Catulius Severus governor of H 5,
IO plan to separate from Phoenice

H 14, r: governor of routed by
Vologaeses MA 8,6 L. Verus in
MA 8, 12, V 4, 4-6, 7, 1x10. M.
Aurehus in MA 25, 11, C 2, 3
actors and musicians from V 8, 7.
o-r Labo governor of V 9, 2
demoralization of legions in AC 5,
5-12. Avidius Cassius in command
of AC 6, 1-4 Perünax served in
HP 1,6, 2,10 Pertinax governor
of HP 2, 11, 3,2 Juha Domm a
native of S 3,9 Niger m com-
mand of army in PN r, 5 Niger

made emperor by troops in D] 5,

133, 8.4, 8, 6, 7, PN 2, r Sev.
eius in S I5, 2-3, 16, 6.8 god
Elagabalus brought to Rome from
Ezx,6.1:65 from E 7,3 priests
from foretold death of Kiagabalus
E 33,2 Severus Alexander a
native of SA 28, 7, 38, 4, 44, 3;
64, 3, 65, 1, 68, 4 victories of
Gordian III m Go 26,5 Zosimio
procuator of Cl 14,4  Aureltin's
army attacked by bandits of A 26,
I, 27, 5 Artabasss a native of
P 4,1 leopards fiom m spectacle
of Probus P 19, 7.

Synans planned revolt V 6, y.
ridiculed T, Verus V 7, 4. 10

Zenobu's letter to Aurelian in
language of A 27, 6, jo, ge daith
lessness of À 31, 1, T 3, 5.


INDEX OF NAMES


TACITUS punceps senatus T 4, 3
made emperor by senate A 41, 4.
14, T 3i 1—7,2, 18-19, Py, I. 3,
Ca 15, 2 acclaimed by people T
7,2-4 acknowledged by army T
8, 3-5 absent in Campania or
DBaae T 7, 5.7 decree of senate
signed by T 8, 1  donative pio-
mised T o, r speeches of A 41,
4-14, T 4, 5-8, 8, 5, 9, 1 letter
of P 7, 2-5 proposed honours for
Aurelian T 9, 2. 5 failed to obtain
consulship for his brother Florian
T9,6 forbade alloying of metals
T 9, 3 forbade slaves to testify
against masters T 9, 4 proposed
worship of deified emperors T 9,
5 used his private property for
pubhe purposes T 10, 1-2. 6
private life and habits T ro, 1,
IY measures for public welfare T
10,2 interest in historian Tacitus
T 10, 3 sumptuary measures T
10, 4, 11, 6 manumutted slaves
T 10,7 public works T ro, 4-5
advised Aurelian in sumptuary
measures T rr, unished
murderers of Aurelian 15, 1,

13, 2 checked invasion of
Maeotidae (Goths) T 13, 2. glory
of T 13, 4 death T 13, 5, P ro,
1, Ca 3,7 swore he would not
make sons emperors T 14, 1
length of rule T r4, 5' like
mice. T i4, 5 statues and
cenotaph of T 15, 1, 16, 2-3;
prophecy concerning descendants
of T 15, 2-4, 16, 4 largess to
populace T 16, r omens of rule
and death, T 17 hfe of written by
Vopiscus T 16,5, P 1, 5. opinion
of Probus P7, 1. Probus younger
than P rr, 7 murderers of
punished P r3, 3.

Tacitus name given to September
T 13, 6

Tacitus. see Cornelius.

Yaprolune (Ceylon) Roman em-
pero. destined to send governor
to T 15, 2.

"larquinus Superbus, L . Rome
sutfeied from evil ways of Ca 2, 4.
Tarraco, town in Spain. Hadrian at
I:2,5-5 temple of Augustus at

H 12, 4, $3, 4


Tairutenius Pateinus prefect of the
guard, in conspiracy to hill Com-
modus C 4, x. 7 helped to kill
Saoterus C 4, 7 removed from
office C 4, 7; 14,8 killed C 4, 8
daughter betrothed to son of
Juhanus C 4, 8.

Tatius Cyrillus cited M 1, 2.

Tattius Maximus, C. prefect of
pd under Antoninus Pius AP


Tauroscythae defeated under An-
toninus Pius AP 9, 9 offered aid
for 1escue of Valerian Va 4, 1.

Taurus, Mons Faustina died in
foothills of MA 26, 4 temple of
Faustina in abolished by Caracalla,
rededicated by Elagabalus to
Jupiter Syrius or Sol Cc 11, 6-7

Tausius murdered Pertinax HP
II, 9.

Telephus, grammarian
L. Verus V 2, 5

Tempe place in Hadrian's villa
near Tibur H 26, 5.

Terentianus see Vulcatius

Terentius Afer, P, writer of comedies .
left no sons S 21,2

Terentius Gentianus, D. *suspected
by Hadrian because beloved by
the senate H 23, 5.

Terentius Scaurinus
Verus V 2, 5, SA3, 3.

Terentius Scaurinus teacher of
Severus Alexander SA 3, 3

Terentius Scaurus, Q grammarian
of Hadrian V 2, 5

Terentius Varro, M. example of
learning SA 8, 5 cited F 4, 2.

Terracina, a town in Italy Palma
murdered at H 7, 2 harbonr rẹ-
paired by Antoninus Pius AP 8, 3
Claudius Pompeianus called from
to share principate DJ 8, 3.

Terangi . invasion of under Claudius

6, 2.

Tertullus ieputed lover of Faustina,
promoted by M Aurelius MA
20, 1-2.

Tetrici house of at Rome TT 25, 4
invited Aurelian to banquet TT


25, 4-

TETRICUS governor of Gaul TT
24, 1. 4 made emperor in Gaul
by Victoria TT 5, 3. 5, 24, I,


teacher of


teacher of L.


INDEX OF NAMES


"Tett icus -continued
31, 2 held Gaul and Spain CI
7, 5; A 32, 3 received title of
Augustus TT 24, Y good rule of
TÉ 24, 2  Victona died during
rule of TT 33, 4 surrendered to
Aurelian. TT 24, 2-3; A 32, 3
led in triumph by Aurehan TT
24, 4, A 32, 4, 34 4; 39, i
made supervisor of Italy TT 24, 5
of Lucania A 39, 1 honoured by
Aurelian TT 24, 5 said to have
accomplished nothing Cl 4, 4.
TETRICUS the younger made
Caesar by Victoria TT 24, 1,
25,1 led in trrumph by Aurehan
and later honoued by him TT
25, 2-3; A 34, 2, 39, 1 made
emperor by father A 34, 2.
Thebas, in Egypt marble from
N 12, 4, E 24, 7 king of PN
1a, 4 Niger ally of PN 12, 6
soldieis from punished Ga 4, 2
Aemilanus in TT 22, 6.
Theoclia. sister of Severus Alex.
ander suggested as wife for
Maximinus the younger M 29,


I-4,

Theocliuse, cited A 6, 4.

Theodotus general of Gallienus,
defeated Aemulianus, received
command of Egypt Ga 4, 2, TT
22, 8 ro, 26, 4 Camsisoleus
brother of T'T 26, 4.

Theophanes see Cornelius Balbus.

Thermopylae Claudius ordeied to
Cl 16, 1

Theisites known to later genera.
tions AT, 5

Thessalicus name taken by Piso Ga
2,4, TT2 L

Thessalomca attacked by Goths Ga
5, 6^ Clo, 8 letter of senate to
council of T 18, 6

Thessaly Piso hulled m Ga 2, 3-4


TT 21, 1 invaded by Goths Cl
L
Thrace troops sent to by Severus


to hold against Niger S 8, 12, PN
5, 6* Caracalla in Ce 5, 8: Maa.
minus a native of M i, 5; 2, 5,
4; 4, 9, 5 his possessions m M
1, f Victories of Gordian IH. m
Go 26, 4 Dalbinus governo: of
M.B 7,2 invaded by Goths Ga


Thrace—confintedd.

5, 6 Macnanus defeated and
killed in TT :2, 13 Macnanus’
valour in TE 12, 17. rich in gran,
suited for cavah y ET 18, 8 «ced
by pietendei TL 29, 1 descend.
ants of Censoinus hved in TT
35, 8. tioops in under command
of Claudius Cl 15, 2 enriched
with spoils by Aurelian. A 10, 2

Ulpius Crinitus commander of
frontier of A r3, 1 Aurelian sent
io chive Goths out of A 17, 2.3

Awuiehan's victories in A 22, 2,
32, 2, 41, 8 Probus’ victory in
P 16,3 barbarians settled in by
Probus P 18, x Gallomus Avitus
legate of F 15, 5-6. threatened by
Sarmatians afte: Probus’ death Ca
9,4

Thraciscus name given to Mari.
minus by Severus M 3, 3.

Thrasybulus astrologer, predicted
death of Severus Alexander SA
62, 2.

Thysdrus, town in Áfiica Gordians
acclaimed emperors at M 14, 3,

Go 7, 4, 8, 5,13 5.

Tiber Tomb of Hadiian near H 19,
ii overflow of H 21,6, AP 9, 3;
MA 8, 4. Commodus! body thrown
into C :7, 4 Elagabalus body
thiown into E 17, 2-3 6, 33, 7
banquet served to Elayahalus on
other «ide of E 30, 4. banks and
bed of improved by Aurelian. A
47, 3.

Tibenana, Domus, in Rome res-
dence of Antoninus Pius AP 10, |
residence of M. Aurelius MA 6, 3
of L. Verus V2, 4; 6,4 books in
used for Life of Piobus P 2, r

Tibertanus see Autronius Iunius,

Tiberinus name given to Elagabalus


E 17,5

TIBERIUS lauded by Caracalla
Cc 2, 2. vices of practised hy
Elagabalus E 33, 1.

Tibur, town in italy Hadrian's
villa near FL 23,7, 26, 5, TF 30,
27° Zenobia lived in TT 30, 27.

"uetdius. Perenms persuaded Com.
modus to remese Pateinus. fiam
prefecture of the euard C p”


prefect of the guard C ip ^


INDEX OF NAMES


Tigadius Perennis-—continued
influence over Commodus C 5, 1.6
13 claimed military achievements
for his son C 6, x. disgiace and
death C 6, 2,*14, 8 acts rescinded
after death by Commodus C 6, 4
at hus death name Felix given to
Commodus C8, 1 ordered Perti-
nar to leave Rome HP 3,3 Pert.
na» promoted afte: death of HP


3; 5-

Tigris  teiirtory across 1ehnquished
by Hadrian H 5, 3

Timagenes led Palnyienes in at.
tempt to conquer Egypt, lulled
Probatus Cl r1, 1-2,

Timestheus see Furius Sabinius.

TIMOLAUS with Odenaethus in
Persian war TT 15, 2 Zenobia
iuled in name of Ga 13, 2, TT 27,
I, 30,2 Zenobia did not rule in
name of A 38, 1. Zenobia wished
to make prince TT 17, 2 led in
triumph by Aurelian TY 24, 4
said to have been killed by Aurelian
TT 27,2 proficiency in Latin
Studies TT 24,

ÜTinurtum, town in Gaul Severus
defeated Albinus at S 12, 1.

Tinana see Flavia.

Titianae, Thermae, at Rome dis-
cussion concerning 1n senate M-B,
I, 4-

Tiaras suspected of conspiracy by
Hadrian and put to death H r5, 6.

Titanas, oratoi teacher of Mawi-
minus the younger M 27, 5.

Titianus see Atlus Iulius Loll-
anus.

TITUS. consulship of H x, 3
censorship MA z, 2 admired by
Niger PN 12, 1. example of good
ruler E x, 2; A 42, 4 name of
compared to name Antoninus SA
10, 2 Gentes Flaviae formerly
house of TT 33,6 C13,6* Rome
had no joy in good fortune of Ca


5,3»

TITUS — acdauned emperor by
soldiers against Maximinus, killed
hy one of his followers M rr, 2-1,

TY 31,7. 12, 32, 1-3.

Torquatus seg Luccems.

''oxotius maxed luna Fadila M
27, 6G.


Tractaticius name given to Elaga-
balus E 17, 5

Train; Basilica, in. Rome
modus presided in C 2, I.

TRAJAN guardian of Hadrian H
1,4 favoured Hadrian H 2, 2-5.
7 10, 3, 1x adopted by Nerva
H 2,5, Àez,2, A14,6 reluctant
to many Sabina to Hadrian H 2,
10, consulship of H 3,1. campaigns
in Dacia H 3, 1, 6. gave money to
Hadrian for praetorian games H 3,
8 campaign against Parthians H
4, I adoption of Hadrian H 4, 6.
10, Å 14,6 death H 4, 7, plans
for succession H 4, 8-9 appointed
Partomasiris king of Parthia H 5,
4' ashes brought from Syria to
Rome H 6, 9-10 divine honours
H 6,1 posthumous triumph H 6,
3 endowment for orphans H 7, 8,


Com-


pieitiue by Maurian M 9,2  ev-
ample followed by Hadrian H 1o,
2 captured daughter and throne
of Osroes H 13,8, AP 9,7, honours
in theatre for Hi 19, 5* temple at
Rome H 19,9 eastern policy H
21, I0-I2 conscription in Spain
MA 11,7 could not be overthrown
by rebels, according to Marcus
Aurelius AC 8,6 erred in adop-
uonofsonS21,3 gavecommands
only to tested officers PN 4, 3. ad-
mned by Niger PN x2,1. senators
grateful for CA 12, r0 trivial de-
tails concerning narrated by Cordus
OM 1, 4. policy concerning re-
scripts OM 13,1 example of good
ruler È 1,2, A42,4, 16,9 care
for gram-supply E 27,7 "name of
compared to name Antoninus SA
I0, 2 portrait of gave omen SA
13,2 assigned baths for different
days SA 25, 5 bridges built by,
restored by Severus Alexander SA.
26, 1x custom of in drinking SA
39, 1 punishment of Ovinius
Camillus attributed to SA 48, 6

remark of Homullus to conceining
Domiti SA 65, 5 Gordian I.
descended from Go 2, 2 equalled
in comage by Victoxinus TT 6, 6,


INDEX OF NAMES


Trajan—costtoned.

by Claudius Cl 2, 3 Claudius

moie beloved than C118, 4 Ulpius

Crinitus of family of and like A 10,

2 Avrelian compared to À 11, 7.
DOCU. extended by A az, II
acia made a province by A 39,

7 old when made emperor T 5, 1,
8,5 Probus to be preferred to T
16, 6; P 22, 4° under Probus no
longer desired P 12, 2. Rome happy
under Ca 3, 3.

Tralles, city in Asia omen for
Antoninus Pius at AP 3, 3,

Tranquillus see Suetonius,

Transdanuvina see Dacia.

Transitorum, Forum see Forum
Nervae.

Transrhenana see Germania

Transrhenam: defeated by Albinus
CA 6,3 provided with farms by
Probus P r4, x.

Transrhenanus, Limes Postumus in
command of TT 3, 9 Germans
broke through T 3, 4.

Transtberina regio, in Rome
buildings of Severus in S 19, 5
baths built by Aurelian in A 45, 2.

TREBELZIANUS made emperor
in Isauria and Cilicia, defeated and
killed T T 26, 2.6

Trebelhus Pollio wrote lives of
emperors, criticised A 2, 1, wrote
lives of Thirty Pietenders F 1, 3.

Trevi: — Victoria's coins Current
among TT 31, 3 letter of senate
to council of T 18, 5

Tria Flumina, place in Thrace
Orestes puxitied at E 7, 7.

Titarius Maternus Lascivius soldiers
attempted to make emperor HP


? 4 -—
Triccianus see Aelius Decius.
Tripolis, district of Africa rendered
safe by Severus S 18, 3.
Tutannus surpassed by Fumus F
4: 3
Trogus sege Pompeius,
Trojans Claudius said to he de-
scended from kings of Cl 11,0
Trosius Aper teacher of M Aurehus
MA 2, 3
Tiypho see Iulius
Tullius Cicero, M. Cato preferred
to bim by Hadian H 10, 6, villa


Tullius Cicero—contuied,
at Puteoh 11 25,7 happier had
he had so son S ar, 2 example of
eloquence SA 8, 5°, works of read
by Severus Alexander SA 30, 2.
statue of in chapel of Alexander
SA 31, 4 — advice concerning
officials in. provinces SA 42,9 |
died violent death SA 62, 3
poems of imitated by Gordian I
Go 3, 2 works of studied by
Gordian I. Go 7, 1. Hortensius of
ated Ga 20, 1 jest of TT 8,2
alhed himself with Prsos TT 21.1
speech of against Gahinius cited
TV 22,11. praised Scipio Africanus
the younger Cl2,5 Plhihppis of
cited A 39,4 cited T 13,4^ wrote
of Pompey P 2, 3 Numexrian's
writings not 1n style of Ca xz, x.

Tullius Citspinus appointed pre-
fect of the guard by Didms
Juhanuus DJ 3, r: tried in vain
to turn fleet against Sevefus D
6,4 sent as envoy to Severus D
7,4 suspected of intention to kill

Severus DJ 7,6 killed DJ 8, x.

Tullius enophilus defended
Aquileia against Maximinus M 21,
6, 22, 1, M.B 12,2.

Tullus see Calvisius.

Tungri, tribe of Belgium one of
murdered Pertinas HP ir, 9

Diocletian in couatry of Ca $4, 2

Turbo see Marcius

Turdulus Gallicanus journal of P
2,2

Turtnus see Vercomus

Tuscus punishment of weed by
Diadumemanus D 9, 1,

Tuscus see Nummuus,

Tutius Pontianus. Gentianus, L +
reputed lover of Faustina, pio.

moted by M Aurelius MA 29, f

Tyana, town im Cappadorii — cap.
tued by Aurelian A 22, 5- 24, 3;


25, I Apollonmus a native of A
24a. 3
Tynchanius attendant ot Maw-


, munus Go E

Typhon Maximinus themed to M
S, 5.

‘Tyre, cns on. Phoenita? heme of
Calli aates, winter ÁA p 2, pui ple
gat ments from Ca 20, s.


INDEX OF NAMES


Ulpia, Bibliotheca, at Rome books
in used for Life of Aurelian A 1,
7. 10, 8, 1, 24, 7 senatus con.
sulta in T 8, 1-2 books in used
for Life of Probus P 2, x statue
of Numerian to be placed in Ca


11, 5.
ic Gordiana mothe: of Gordian
02,2

Ulpianus (?) = Life of Amelan
addressed to AL, 9

Ulpianus see Domitius,

Ulpi Vettius Sabinus from family
of M.B a, x.

Ulpius Crinitus of the family of
Trajan, Aurelian deputy of A ro,
2-3, II, 1-2 7 adopted Aurelian
A 10, 3, II, I, 12, 3—15, 2, 38, 2
Valeiian planned to make Caesa:
À10,2 commander of frontier of
Thiace and Illyricum A 13, 1
consulships of A rr, 8, 38, 2
interview with — Valerium at
Byzahtum A 10, 3, 13, 1—15, I
letter of Aurelian to A 38, 3-45

Ulpius Iuhanus prefect of the guard
sent by Macrinus against revolters
and killed OM zo, 1-2.

Ulpius Marcellus jurist consulted
by Antoninus Pius AP 12, L

Ulpius Silanus speech of A 19, 3-6

Umbria, district of Italy soldiers in
deserted to Severus DJ 8, 4
spectacles given by Gordian I. in
Go 4, 6 Tetricus supervisor of
TT 24, 5.

Umnudius Quadratus 1n conspirac
to hill Commodus C 4, 1. killed


nm
Ummidius Quadratus, C. attacked
by Hadrian H 15, 7.


Ummidius Quadratus, M nephew
of M. Aurelius MA 7, 4.

Urbicus see Lolhus.

Urbs Roma, Temple of Colossus


of Nero moved from site of by
Hadrian H rg, 12.

Ursimanus trained by Piobus P
22, 3.

Uxorws * poem of Cicero, imitated
hy Gordian I. Go 3, 2.


Vahallathus son of Zenobia, who
ruled in name of A 38, I


Vada Sabatia, town in Italy: posses-
sions of Pertinas at HP 9, 4,


13, 4

VALENS proconsul of Achaea, de-
clared emperor, lille 2, 2-3,
TT 19, 1-3, 20,72, 21, 3 cam-
pugn against Piso Ga 2, 4, TT
19, 2, 21, 1-2 Character TT 19,
2 feared by Macrianus TT 19, 2.

VALENStheelder uncle of Valens,
seized power, killed TT 20, 2-3.


Valens see Pinarius — Salvius
Statius.
VALERIAN received embassy of


Gordian L Go 9, 7 merits of Va
5 made censor Va 6 confused
with son Va 8, 3 war against
Persians TT 1, 1, 2, 3, 12, 16,
33,2 captured by Persians Va x,
1—4, 2, 8, 3; Ga I,E, 5, 6, 9, 2,
I4, IO, TT 12, 1. 8, 15, I, A 6,
2, 41, 7, 42, 4, P 6, 2, Ca t, 4,
18,3 Odaenathus sought to rescue
Ga 10, 2 8 killed TT 15, 6, A
41,9 deified Ga 10, 5 length of
rule Ga 2r, 5 speeches of Va ô,
7-0, A 13, 2-4 letters of TT 3,
BII; 18, sexx, Cl 14-15, A 8-9,
11-2, P 4, 5, 5-8 gocd generals
appointed by TT ro, 14-15 last
good emperor TT 10, 17 made
Balhsta prefect TT 12, : Mac-
nanus worthy to succeed TT 12,
§ message of concerning Macri-
anus TT 12, 15-18 approved
honours for Piso TT 21,4 ap-
pointed Saturninus TT 23, 1 ex-
haustion of state after Cl 7, 4
entrusted Gallienus to Postumus
(incorrect) A 8,2 feared Aurelian
A 8,5 planned to make Ulpius
Crinitus a Caesar A 10, 2, anter-
view with Crinitus and Aurelian
A 30, 3, I3, I—15, I booty
brought to villa of A xo, 2* Acho-
lius master of ceremonies under
A 12,4 ordered Crinitus to adopt
Aurelian A 15, 2 promoted and
rewarded Probus P 3, 5—5, 8
pretenders under F 1, 3. Rome
could not long enjoy Ca 3, 5.
VALERIAN the younger’ parent-
age and character Va 8, 1-2
called Caesar and Augustus Va 8,
1; 14, 9. imperator Ga 14, I0


INDEX OF NAMES


V aleviau—con£tonued.
tomb of Va 8, 3 confused with
father Va 8,3 consulships of Ga
x2, 1, 14, 10, A 11, 8. Milled nea
Milan Ga 14, 9
Valerianus friend of Pertinax HP
12, 7.
Valenanus name of cain Cl z7, 7.
Valents Bassianus killed by Com.
modus C 7, 6.
Valerius Catulhnus* appointed by
senate successor to Severus D] 5,
7 kiled by Severus S 13, 7.
Valerrus Cordus. teacher of Severus
Alexander SA 3, 2
Valerius Flaccinus
Probus P 5, 2.
Valerius Homullus. patience of
Antoninus Pius with AP rr, 8,


rescued by


MA 6, 9.
Valerius Marcellinus, histouan
method of narration M-B 4, 5.


Valerius Martiahs, M. called by
Aehus Verus bis Vergil Ae 5, 9;
cited SA 38, 1-3

Valerius Patruinus killed by Cara.
calla Ce 4, 2.

Vandals invasion of repelled MA
17,3 leđas captives in Aurelian's
triumph À 33, 4* settled in Thrace
by Probus but left lands P 18, 2.

Varia see Iulia Maesa.

Variani, Hort, at Rome conversa-
tion held nem A x, 2.

Vaunustae warred against Rome MA


2, I.
Vanus father of Severus Alexander
(incorrect) SA 1, 2
Varius Avitus see Elagabalus
Varus Macrinus victory of m
Illyricum SA 58, x.

Varro see Terentius.

Vascones swuipassed in divination
by Severus Alexandet SA 27, 6
Vaticanus, Mons tace-horse of L.
Verus buried on V 6, 4 Elaga-

balus drove chariots on E 23, 1

Vectilianae, Aedes, at Rome Com-
modus moved to C 16,3 murdered
in HP 5, 7.

Vectilianus* see Caesoníus.

Vectius Aper, tribune of the guard,
urged Didius Julanus to seve
princtpate DJ 2, 4.

Velenus letter of Va 2,


Veluwe Cornificnis Gordianus, con.
sul speech of T 3, 2-7.

Velins Rufus, D. killed by Com.
modus C 4, r0 censulship of C


12,6.
Venacus see Claudius. :
Venerianus defeated Goths Put


killed Ga 13, 7.

Venus Elagabalus as E 5, 4-5
gift of Severus Alexander to SA
51,3 Satuininus made emperor
in robe of F 9, 3.

Venus, Temple of, at Rome. statue
of Calpurnia in TT 32, 5.

Venus Calva, Temple of, at Rome
built 1n honour of matrons M 33, 2.

Venustus consulship of Go 23, 4.


Venustus letter of Gallienus to Cl
17.
Veratianus see Pescennius


Verconius Turinus dishonesty and
punishment of SA 35, 5—38, 3,
67, 2. :

Verconnius Herennianus, prefect of
guard cited A 44, 2

Vergthanae Sortes. prophesied 1ule
of Hadiian H 2, 8 of Severus
Alexander SA 14, 5

Vergilus Maro, P Ennius preferred
to him by Hadrian H 16,6 Mar.
tial read instead of him by Aelius
Verus Ae 5,9 left no sons S 21,
2 admured by Severus Alexanderi
SA 31, 4 Aeneid of rmitatfid by
Gordian I Go 3, 3 works of
studied by Gordian] Gu7,1 Sve
also Aeneid

Verranus see Cele

Verissimus name given to M Auru-
hus by Hachian MA 1, 10, f, 1,
orginal nime of M  Amelus D


Probus
statue of Pro.


> Se

Veiona descendants ot
hved ner P 24, 1
bus at P 24, 2

VERUS, L  .ncestty and parept-
age Ae 2, 9, 5, 12, 7, 9; AP 4,5,
V 16.7 9 wien names MA
7,5. 7, V 1, 3, 4 2 received
name of Antoninus (incoriect) MA
7,5, OM Jed, Dob, SA ro, a
buth Vit, 8 chatacters MA 16, £f,
20, 6, V 1, j-5, 2, 0-165 10, M,
Dy, 3, 9549, 1 in ILuhun'«s
houschold V 2, 1i. adopted by


INDEX OF NAMES


Veus, Lie continued.
Antomnus Pius H 24, 1, Ae 2,9;
5, 12, 06,9, 7, 2, AP 4, 5, V 3, 6,
$ 20,1, SA go, 5 adopted by
M. Amelius (1nconect) Ae 5, 12,
MA 5,1 bethrothed to Faustina
Ae6,0, V 2, 3 mairied Lucilla
MA 7,7, % 4, V 2, 4, 7, 7
education and teachers V 2, 5. 6
8 talents V 2, 6-8 amusements
V 2, 10, 3 6, di 4—6, 6, 5, 7-1I,
10, 8-9 career of office AP 6, 10,
10, 3, V 3, 2-5 i1elations with
Antoninus Pius V 3, 6.7 made
emperor MA 7, 5-7, V 3, 8—4, 3
hist acts of rule MA 7, 8-11, 8, x
wai against Paithians MA 8, 9-
14, V 4, 4. 6, 5, 8; 6, 7—7, 19.
cognomina MÁ 9, 1-2, V 7, 2. 9
retuin to Rome and triumph MA
12, 7-8, V 7,9 brought pestilence
from Orient V 8, 1-4 influence of
freedmen MA 15, 2, V 8,6, 9,
3-5, fondness for actors and musi-
cians V 8, 7 10 ir said to have
muidered Libo V 9, 2 war
against Marcomann: MA 14, 1-6,
death MA 14, 7-8,
V 9o, x1. alleged amour with
Faustina V 10, 1' gossip concern-
ing death MA 15, 5-6; V 10, 2 3,
11, 2. 3 influence of Fabia over
V 10, 3-4" conspiracy against M.
Áurehus, frustrated by Faustina
V xo, 445 honours after death
MA 15, 3-1. bunal MA 20, r, V
11, 1 length of life and of rule V
Il, Y appearance V io, 6-7 re-
lations with M. Aurehus MA 8, 15,
15, 3, 16, 4, V 4, 11, 5, 6, 6, 7,
8,9, 9, 1-2. conspiracy of Avidius
Cassius against AC 1, 6, lettei
concerning Cassius AC 1, 6-9,
0,7 wrong done to by Elaga-
halus SA 7, 3° lowered honour of
name Antoninus OM 7, 7.
Verus . see Aehus Anmus Aurelius
Cocceius Martius. Vindius.
VESPASIAN consulship of H x, 3
censorship MA r, 2 admired by
Niger PN 12, 3 example of good
ruler E i, 2, A 42, 4: name of
compared to name Antoninus SA
210,2 equalled in care of treasury
by Victounus TY 6, 6 Gentes


NS ee

Flaviae formerly house of Cl 3,

6 Rome reared its head under
Ca 3,2

Vespronius Candidus, L. envoy
5 by senate to Severus’ army

5,6

Vesta plan to remove fire of to
temple of Elagabalus E 3, 4
sanctuary of profaned by Elaga.
balus E 6, 7-9.

Vesta, Temple of, at Rome statue
of Saloninus near Ga 19, 4.

Vestales, Virgines. went forth to
appease Severus Dj 6, 5 one of
violated by Elagabalus E 6, 5
exempt from power of censor Va

>? *

Vetrasinus patience of M. Aurelius
with MA 12, 3.

Vettius Atticus Sabimanus, C. con.
sulship of Go 26, 3.

Vettius Sabinus speech of in senate
M-B 2, 1-9 made prefect of the
city M-B 4, 4

os name given to Manus TT


Vetuiius, T. teacher o% Severus
Alexander SA 3, 2.

Veturius Macnnus^ appointed pre-
fect of the guard by Didius Julianus
and promised continuance in office
by Severus D] 7, 5.

Vibius Passienus proconsul of
Afica, made Celsus emperor TT
29, T.

Victor see Áurehus — Vitahus.

VICTORIA (or VITRUVIA)
mother of Victormus TT 5, 3, 6,5
had titles of Augusta and Mater
Castrorum TT 5, 3, 6, 3,.25, I,
31, 2. made Marius and "fetrici
emperors TT 5, 3, 24, X, 25, 13
31, 2 gave grandson title of
Caesar TT 6,3 minted coms TT
31, 3' Zenobia wished to divide
empire with TT 30,23 death TT
31, 4 Claudius besought to save
from Cl 4, 4.

VICTORINUS. son of Victoria TT
5,3, 6,3, 24,1 aided Postumus
Gay, r; TT 6, 1+ killed Lollianus
TT 5,3. became emperor in Gaul
TT 5, 5: 6,3.6 killed TT 6, 3;


INDEX OF NAMES


Victorints--Loníunued.
7,1, B, 1; 24, 1, 31, 2 characte
of TT 6, 4-8: tomb of TT 7, 2
VICTORINUS the younger son of
Victorinus, grandson of Victoria,
received title of Caesar, billed with
father TT 6,3, 7,1, 24, 1, 3%, 2
tomb of TT 7, 2.
Victorinus See Àufidius Furius,
Victuali warred against Rome MA
14, I, 22, X
Viminactum, town in Moesia title
of Caesai conferred on Caracalla at
S 10, 3.
Vindelict delivered from invaders
by Aurelian A 35, 4, 41, 8.
Vindex see luhus.
Vindius Verus, M. jurist consulted
by Antoninus Prus AP 12, 1.
Virtus Orfitus consulship of Cl ir, 3
Visi invasion of under Claudius Cl


3 De

Vitalianus prefect of guard, killed
by opponents of Maximinus M 14,
4, Go to, 5-8.

Vitalius Victor killed by Severus
S I3, I

VITELLIUS  L. Verus imitated
vices of V 4, 6 had no desire to
be emperor, according to Marcus
Aurelius AC 8,4 had the republic
endured Rome would not have
come under the power of CÀ 13, 5
example of evil ruler E 1, 1; A
42, 6 banquets of mnvalled by
Elagabalus E 18, 4, 24, 3 re
moved by tyrannicide E 34, x
Elagabalus worse than SA 9, 4
another feared by all Ca x, 3.

Vitelhus consulship of Ge 3, 1

Vitrasia Faustina killed by Com.
modts C 4, Io

VITRUVIA see VICTORIA,

Vitruvius Secundus imperial secre-
tary, killed by Commodus C 4, 8

Vituriga wife of Proculus F 12, 3

Vocontu Postumus the younger
made nibune of TT 3, 11.

Vologaeses IIL, King of the Par.
thians: policy of Antoninus Pius
s AP 9, 6-7 1mnvaded Syna

3 6,

Volones name given to slaves en.

rolled as soldiers MA 21, 6,


Volucer name given by L Verus to
race-horse V 6,3 , 8, 9.

Volusianus see Petromus.

Volusius Mae minus Fae purist con.

ONE ,

sulted by Antomnüs Pius AP 12, 1
teacher of M Aurelius MA 3, 6

Vota worship of dehed emperors


won 75 : : D
Vuleatins Teientianus, § historian
cited Go 21, 5,


Xerxes large army ot Cl6, 5.
Xiphidius see Aelius


Zaba :sea.Zabdas

Zabdas led Palmyrenes 1n attempt
to conquer Egypt Clix,: de.
feated and iouted by Aurehan A
25, 3-4.

Zeno famed for philosophy A 3, 5.

ZENOBIA after Odaenathus’ death
ruled Palmyra Ga 13, 2-3: 5, TT
27, I, 30, 2-3, A 22, 1 with
Odaenathus in Persian Wai TT
15,2 aided Odaenathus 1n 1estor-
ing East TT 15, 7 noble qualities
and beauty of TT 15, 8 not the
mother of Herodes, disliked him
TT 16, 1.3, 17, 2. wished own
sons to be princes TT 17, 2
claimed descent fiom Cleopatra
and Ptolemies TT 27, 1,930, 2;
Clr,ri imitated Dido and Semir-
amus TT 27,1, 30,2 allowed by
Claudius to rule Ti 30, 3 zn
ruled in name of son Vahallathus


A 38, 1 war of Amelan against
TT 30,3, A 22, 1, 25, 2—285, 2


inter change of letters with Aurchan
A 26, 6—27, 6 captured A 28,
3-4, 35, 4, 42, 9 led in tiiumph
by Aurelian TT 24, 4, 30, 3-4
21420, A 30, 2, 532, 4. 31, 4 letter
of Aurelian concerning TT 30,
str feared by Egyptians, Arabs,
Saracens, Armemans TT 30, 7
aided by Persians, Saracens, Ar.
memans A 27,4, 28,2 contunence
of TT 30, 12. pomp and appear-
ance of TT 30, 13-215* chara ter
and habits of "IU 30, Ito aes
complishments of TP 40, 20.22,
conversation with Amelan after


INDEX OF NAMES


enobia--contutiued

capture T'T 30,23 hfe granted by
Aurelian, lived in Tabur TT 30,
a7, A 10, I-2a descendants at
Rome TT 27, 2 Claudius be.
sought to save from CI 4, 4 had
bowen C17, 5 had Longinus as
teacher A 30, 3 Achilleus relative
of A 31, 2 chariot of in Aurelian's


Zenobia—continued.
tiumph A 33,2 adherents of in
Egypt defeated by Probus P 9, 5
Firmus ally of F 3, 2, 5, 1.

Zenobia place in Tibur, Zenobia
lived in TT 30, 27. è

Zosimio, procurator of Syria letter
of Valerian to Cl 14.

Zotcus see Aurelius
