The Heetopades of Veeshnoo-Sarma
Translated by Charles Wilkins (1787)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of the Hitopadesa in Charles Wilkins's 1787 translation — the FIRST English translation of the Sanskrit fable collection. Raw OCR via Internet Archive (bim_eighteenth-century_the-heetopades-of-veeshn_1787, 1787 first edition); notes removed. This 1787 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

wW wW — — —


FEESHNOO-SARMA.


*
fu 1


THE
2 —


HE ET GPAD E S
VEESHNOO-SARMA,
F A 1 Ss %


INTERSPERSED WITH


MORAL, PRUDENTIAL, ax D POLITICAL


M A X I M 8


TRANSLATED FROM AN ANCIENT MANUSCRIPT


IN TRE


SANSKREET LANGUAGE.


w 1TH
EXPLANATORY NOTES,


8-7


CHARLES WILKINS,


S AT: Bt


PRINTED BY R. CRUTTWELL,
AND SOLD BY C. NOURSE, IN THE STRAND, LONDON,


AND


J. MARSHALL, MILSOM-STREET, BATH,


M DCC LXXXVIIs


*
o W
2 a.
1974 *
wo —


NATHANIEL SMITH, Es.


SIR,


HILST I comply with the
dictates of propriety in placing


under your protection this work, fo
replete with the maxims of an ancient
people, whoſe preſent and future wel-
fare depend upon the wiſe determi-
nations of that body, of which, as well


by eminent virtues and great abilities


as by exalted ſtation, you are a diſtin-
guiſhed member; I gladly embrace
the opportunity it affords me to ex-


b preſs,


DEDICATION.


preſs, in a public manner, my obliga-
tions to you, and, through you, to my
late Honourable Maſters, for your moſt
liberal patronage of the GzzTa, my
firſt eflay in Sanſkreet Literature.


I have the honour to ſubſcribe
"myſelf,


SIR,
Your moſt faithful,


And obliged humble ſervant,


CHARLES WILKINS. .


Queen s- Square, Bloomſbury,
iſt November 1787.


5


F.


HE following tranſlation, begun and
compleated this ſummer during a
temporary reſidence at BATH, 1s a faithful
portrait of a beautiful work, which in the
opinions of many learned men, Natives and
Europeans, with whom I had the honour to.
converſe upon the ſubject before I left Bengal,
is the SANSKREET original of thoſe celebrated
fables, which after paſſing through moſt of
the Oriental languages, ancient and modern,
with various alterations to accommodate
them to the taſte and genius of thoſe for
whoſe benefit or amuſement they were de-
b 2 ſigned,


viii PREFACE.


ſigned, and under different appellations, *at
length were introduced to the knowledge of
the European world with a title importing
them to have been originally written by
 Piteay, or BipPaAr, an ancient Brahman;
two names of which, as far as my enquiries
have extended, the Brahmans of the preſent
times are totally ignorant. Sir WILLIAM
Joxes, whoſe ſurpriſing talents are ever em-
ployed in ſeeking freſh ſources of knowledge,
and promoting their cultivation, in an ele-
gant diſcourſe delivered by him the 26th of
February 1786, ſince my return from India,
at a meeting of the Society for inquiring into
the Hiftory, civil aud natural, the Antiquities,
Arts, Sciences, and Literature of Afia, ex-
preſſes his ſentiments upon this ſubject in
the following words :


* Their (the Hzindoos) Neetee-Saftra, or
« Syſtem of Ethicks, is yet preſerved, and
* the fables of Yeeſhnoo-Serma, whom we ri-

diculouſly


PREFACE: ix


** diculouſly call Pilpay, are the moſt beauti-
« ful, if not the moſt ancient, collection of
ce Apologues in the world: They were firſt
ce tranſlated from the Sanſereet in the ſixth
te century, by Buzerchumibr, or bright as the
* ſun, the chief phyſician, and afterwards the
c Vizeer of the great Anuſhirwan, and are
* extant under various names in more than
* twenty languages, but their original title
« 1s Hitopadeſa, or amicable inſtrufion ; and
<* as the very exiſtence of Æſoß, whom the
e Arabs believe to have been an Abyſſini an,
ee appears rather doubtful, I am not diſin-
© clned to ſuppoſe, that the firſt moral
ce fables which appeared in Europe were of
* Indian or Ethiopian origin.“


Granting the Heetopades be the work it 1s
ſuppoſed to be, to ſave the learned reader the
trouble of referring to other books to trace
its hiſtory, I have here brought all I have
collected upon the ſubject under one view.

The


X PREFACE.


The learned FrasrR, in his catalogue of
Oriental manuſcripts, under the article Ayar
Daniſh, ſpeaks thus: The ancient Brah-
« mins of India, after a great deal of time
* and labour, compiled a treatiſe, (which they
te called Kurtuk Dumnit, ) in which were
ce jnſerted the choiceſt treaſures of wiſdom,
c and the perfeckeſt rules for governing a
* people. This book they preſented to their
* Rajahs, who kept it with the greateſt ſe-
te crely and care. About the time of Ma-
cc hommed's birth, or the latter end of the
e ſixth century, Noiſbervan the Juſt, who
* then reigned in Perſia, diſcovered a great
„ inclination to ſee that book: for which
e purpoſe one Burzuvia, a phyſician, who
had a ſurprizing talent in learning ſeveral
languages, particularly the Sanſterrit, was
*© imtroduced to him as the propereſt perſon
* to be employed to get a copy thereof. He
* went to India; where, after ſome years


The Karittaka and Diminiki of the following work.
| « ſtay,


PREFACE. X1


ce ſtay, and great trouble, he procured it, It
« was tranſlated into the Pebluvi language
te by him, and Buzrjumebr the vizir. Noiſb-
* ervan ever after, and all his ſucceſſors, the
* Perſian kings, had this book in high
c eſteem, and took the greateſt care to keep
« jt ſecret. At laſt Abu Taffer Manſour zu
« Nikky, who was the ſecond Khahff of the
% Abaſſi reign, by great ſearch, got a copy
* thereof in the Pehluvi language, and or-
* dered Im4m Hoſſan Abdal Mokaffa, who was
* the moſt learned of the age, to tranſlate
it into Arabic. This prince ever after
e made it his guide, and not only in affairs
e relating to the government, but in private
life alſo.


In the year 380 of the Hegira, Sultan
«© Mahmud Ghazi put it into verſe. And
* afterwards, in the year 515, by order of
© Bheram Shah ben Maſſaud, that which
* Abdal Mokafſa had tranſlated, was re-

tranſlated


X11 EE F ACE.


ce tranſlated into Perfic, by Abul Mala Naſſer
te Allah Muſtofi; and this is that Kulila
e Dumna which is now extant. As this
te latter had too many Arabic verſes, and ob-
te ſolete phraſes in it, Molana Ali ben Hoſſein
* Yaez, at the requeſt of Emir Sobeli, keeper
ce of the ſeals to Sultan Hoſſein Mirza, put it
ce into a more modern ſtyle, and gave it the
e title of Anuar Soheli.


* In the year 1002, the Great Moghol
* Jalal © Din Mahommed Akbar ordered his
* own ſecretary and vizir, the learned Abul
Fal, to illuſtrate the obſcure paſſages,
e abridge the long digreſſions, and put it
* into ſuch a ſtile as would be moſt familiar
* to all capacities; which he accordingly
* did, and gave it the name of Ayar Daniſh,
* or the Criterion of Wiſdom.”


From other ſources J have drawn the fol-


lowing concluſions :;—That in the year 1709,
the


PREFACE: X113


the Kulila Dumna, the Perſian verſion of
Abul Mala Naſſer Allah Muſiofi made in the
515th year of the Hegira, was tranſlated into
French with the title of Les C:nſeils et les
Maxi mes de Pilpay Philoſophe Indien ſur les di-
vers Etats de la vie. This edition reſembles
the Heetopades more than any other I have
ſeen, and is evidently the immediate ori-
ginal of the Engliſh Inſtructive and entertain-
ing Fables of Pilpay, an ancient Indian Philo-


ſopher, which in 1775 had gone through five
editions.


The Anuar Sobeli above-mentioned, about
the year 1540 was rendered into the Turkiſh
language; and the tranſlator 1s ſaid to have
beſtowed twenty years labour upon it. In
the year 1724, this edition M. Galland began
to tranſlate into French, and the four firſt
chapters were then publiſhed : but in the
year 1778 M. Cardonne compleated the work
in three volumes, giving it the name of Contes

ef


xiv PREFACE.


et Fables Indiennes de Bidpai et de Lokman ;
traduites d Ali Tchelebi-ben Saleh auteur Turk,


If the Heetapades of Veeſhnoo-Sarma be, as
we have every reaſon to conclude, the proto-
type of the ſeveral compoſitions which have


been mentioned, its age 1s tolerably aſcer-
tained to be upwards of eleven hundred years.
Few Sanſkreet books bear either the name of
the real author, or the date of the year in
which they were written; and it is to cir-
eumſtantial evidence we muſt generally truſt
for the proof of either.


In executing this work I have fcrupuloully
adhered to the text; and I have preferred
drawing a picture of which it may be ſaid
I can ſuppoſe it a ſtrong likeneſs, although I am
 anacquainted with the original, to a flattering
portrait, where characteriſtic features, be-
cauſe not altogether conſonant to European


taſte, muſt have been ſacrificed to the har-
mony


PREFACE. xv


mony of compoſition. I have even attended
to the form of my model, and have preſerved
what was originally in verſe diſtinct, by in-
denting every line but the firſt of each diſtich.
With reſpect to ſuch proper names as are
left in their original ſtate, and which I did
not tranſlate, becauſe I thought they would
appear always awkward, and often ridiculous,
in an Engliſh dreſs, they are ſpelt according
to one uniform plan; to which if the reader
will pleaſe to attend, he will be enabled to
pronounce them with great facility, and, I
flatter myſelf, have but little cauſe to com-
plain of interruptions from hard words.


g has always the hard ſound of that
letter in gun.


(/) the ſoft ſound of (g) in gin, or (J


in James.


(y) 18 generally to be conſidered as a con-
ſonant, and to be pronounced as that letter
before a vowel ; as in the word yarn.


V preceded


= FELBFACKE


Y preceded by another conſonant only
denotes that conſonant to be ſtron gly aſ-
pirated,


(4) is always to be pronounced as ſhort as
poſſible, and with the obſcure found of (u)
in butter.


(2) long and broad, like (a) in all, call.
es) ſhort like (i) in it, fie.

(ze) long, as (ee) in feel, feeble.

(09) ſhort, like (oo in foot.

(99) long, as (00) in cool.

e) open, and long, like (e) in ere.


(7) long, and as (i) is pronounced in re-
peating our alphabet, and as in the words
ire, fire, time.


(5 long, like (o in over, Dover.
(ow) long, like (ow) in how.


I regret


PREFACE. xvii


I regret that the want of Sanſkreet Types,
to deſign and ſuperintend the execution of
which I have not yet found leiſure, precludes
the poſſibility of accompanying the tranſla-
tion with any part of the original.


Ee. W.


—


E R RAT A.


Page 10, line 10, for PAndEtt read Pänd&&t.
20, I. 23, after chace inſert 39 as a reference to a note.
G3, 1. 12. for hauuted read haunted.
67, L 6, dele (94) after ſpirits.
68, 1. 8, dele (.) after is, and inſert a comma.
69, 1. 1, dele (9g) after philoſophy.
—, I. 7, for HEeranyaki read HEErinyAki,
So, I. 2, for Livinyivitee read Lavinyavitee,
—, 1, 10, for atchieved read achieved.
— 1. 16, for Brihmirinyi read Brihmirinyd,
$6, 1. 13, dele of after ſprings.
97, I. 8, for Vögẽ t read Yogee,
123, I. 2, read Sing-jeevaks.
146, I. 1, after diſſentions dele ().
149, I. 22, read Sakiti.
159, 1. 19, after grain dele (:)
194, I. 8, after beſt ſupply of ſtores.
236, 1. 16, for confidered, read conſidered,
258, 1. 25, for enemies“, read enemy's.
269, 1. 10, for I snot, read Is not.
324, I. 10, for ſerm, read term
307, I. 23, for das *phalinee, read das3-phalinee; and obſerve, that for
want of the marks of quantity generally uſed in this work, in this place
the long vowel is diſtingulſhed by a circumflex accent.
321, I. 32, for Sree-ragara, read Sree-nagara,
327, |. 19, for the r , read they never,


C.


1 Page.
NTRODUCTION — — t


| CHAP. I.
Tax AcquisITION OF A FRIEND. 11


FABLE I. The Story of the Pigeons, the Crow, the
Mouſe, the Tortoiſe, and the Deer 12
II. The Traveller and the Tiger 14
III. The Deer, the Jackal, and the Crow 30
IV. The blind Jackal, the Cat, and the Birds 32
V. The Hiſtory of Heeranyaki the Mouſe 50
VI. The old Man and his young Wife 52

VII. The Huntſman, the Deer, the Boar, the

Serpent, and the Jackal 66
VIII. The Rajah's Son and the Merchant's Wiſe 77


IX. The Jackal and the Elephant 80
HAF. I.
THE SEPARATION OF A FAVOURITE. 89
FaBLE I, The Story of the Bull, the two Jackals,
| and the Lion — 90
II. The Ape and the Wedge — 98
III. The Thief, the Aſs, and the Dog 99


IV. The Lion, the Mouſe, and the Cat 117
V. The poor Woman and the Bell — 121
VI. The Adventures of Kandarpakẽtoo,
compriſing the ſtory of the Cow-
keeper, the Barber, and their Wives;
and the Hiſtory of the Merchant whoſe
Avarice occaſioned the loſs of all his
Wealth — — 129
VII. The Farmer's Wife and her two Gallants 136
VIII. The Crow, the Golden Chain, and the
Black Serpent — — 138
IX. The Lion and the Rabbit ⁵ä— 139
X. The Partridges and the Sea — 130


XX CONT ENT 8.


FABLE I.
III.
IV.
VI.
VII.


VIII.
IX.


Page

CHAP. III.
Or DisPuTING. 167
The Hiſtory of the Geeſe & the Peacocks 168
The Birds and the Monkies 170


The Aſs dreſſed in a Tiger's Skin — 173
The Elephants and the Rabbits 175
The Gooſe and the Crow 181
The Varttaka and the Crow — 182
The Wheelwright and his Wife — 184


The blue Jackal 195

The Man who ſacrificed his own Son 208

The Barber who killed a Beggar 216
CHAP. IV.

Or MarinG PEACE. 2.32


Continuation of the Hiſtory of the Geeſe


and the Peacocks — 233
The Tortoiſe and the two Geeſe 2.34
The three Fiſh — — — 235


The Merchant and his artful Wife 236
The Boobies and Weaſel — 239
The Mouſe and the Hermit —— 243


The Booby and the Crab 244
The Brahman who brake the Pots & Pans 247
The two Giants — 250


The Brahman and his Goat — 261
The Camel, the Crow, the Tiger, and
the Jackal | — 262
The old Serpent and the Frogs —— 267
The Brahman and his Weaſel — 277
NoTEs 291


-


%


as, |


THE AU THOR!


INTRODUCTION.


Reverence to Gines!'


Reverence to Siriſwitee!*


AY the completion, through the mercy

of Dhoorjitee,” on whoſe head is plant-
ed a creſcent among the frothy ſtreams of
Janhivee,” be for the edification of the
worthy !

This work, entitled Heetopides,* affordeth
elegance in the Sanſkr&ët' idioms, in every
part variety of language, and inculcateth
the doctrine of Prudence and Policy.


_
— I


1 The God of Prudence and Policy,
2 The Goddeſs of Harmony and the Arts.
For the reſt of the Notes, referred to by figuret, ſee the end of the work.]


B The


1


The wiſe man ſhoukd ſtudy the acquiſition
of ſcience and riches, as if he were not
ſubſe& to ſickneſs and death; but to the
duties of religion he ſhould attend, as if
death had ſeized him by the hair.

Knowledge produceth humility; from hu-
mility proceedeth worthineſs; from wor-
thineſs riches are acquired; from riches
religion, and thence happineſs.

Of all things Knowledge is eſteemed the
moſt precious treaſure; becauſe of its in-
capacity to be ſtolen, to be given away,
or ever to be conſumed. |

Knowledge introduceth a man to acquaint-
ance; and, as the humble ſtream to the
ocean, ſo doth it condu& him into the
hard-acquired preſence of the Prince,
whence fortune floweth.

There are two ſpecies of Knowledge in uſe:
—the knowledge of arms, and the know-
ledge of books. The firſt is the ſcoff of
the wiſe, whilſt the laſt is for ever ho-
noured. | |

As the impreſſions made upon a new veſſel
are not eaſily to be effaced; ſo here youth
are taught Prudence through the allure-
ment of fable.


This


1


This work is divided under four heads:
The Acquiſition of a Friend. The Separation of
a Favourite. Of Diſputing. Of making Peace.
And it 1s, chiefly, drawn and written from
the Tintri and other Siſtris.”

On the banks of the river Bhageerithee”
there is a remarkable city called Patinee-
pööträ, where there was formerly a Raja,
endued with every noble quality, whoſe
name was S66dirsini., One day he heard
the two following verſes, as they were re-
peating by ſome one:


He who is not poſſeſſed of ſuch a book as
will diſpel many doubts, point out hidden
treaſures, and is, as it were, a mirror of
all things, is even an ignorant man.

Youth, abundant wealth, high birth, and
inexperience, are, each of them, the ſource
of rain. What then muſt be the fate of
him in whom all four are combined?


The Raja had no ſooner heard theſe lines
than he began to conſider, with an afflicted
heart, the ſituation of his ſons, who were
yet unacquainted with books, and wander-
ing in the paths of error.

B 2 What


11


What benefit is there in a ſon who is nei-
ther learned nor virtuous! Or, of what
uſe is a ſightleſs eye? Such an eye is but
pain!

Again:

He is truly born, by whoſe birth his genera-
tion is exalted; or elſe, who is there in
this tranſitory life, who being dead, is not
born again?

So it is ſaid,

Of the child unborn, the dead, and the fool,
the two firſt, and not the laſt, are the
leaſt to be lamented; for the two firſt
cauſe but a tranſient ſorrow, whilſt the
laſt is an eternal plague.

Again :

One child of genius is a bleſſing; not ſo even
a hundred fools: A ſingle moon diſpelleth
darkneſs better than a hoſt of ſtars.

The child of him, whoſe tranſgreſſions are
expiated by penances performed at places
of holy pilgrimage, ſhould be obedient,
proſperous, virtuous, and happy. |

And it is ſaid alſo,

An influx of riches, and conſtant health; a
wife who 1s dear to one, and one who 1s
of kind and gentle ſpeech; a child who 1s

| obedient,


1


obedient, and uſeful knowledge, are, my
ſon, the ſix pleaſures of life.

A father who contracteth debts is an enemy,
and a mother falſe to her bed; a beautiful
wife is an enemy; an ignorant ſon is an
enemy. |

Learning to the unexperienced 1s a poiſon;
eating upon a full ſtomach is a poiſon;
the ſociety of the vulgar 1s a poiſon; a
young wife to an old man 1s a poiſon.

A man 1s reſpected, even for the merits of
his ſon. Let the cane“ of the bow be
ever ſo clean, deficient in other qualities,
what will it do?

Alas! my ſon, that ſo many nights have
ſweetly paſſed away, and thou art till
untaught ; wherefore, in the ſociety of the
learned, thou ſinkeſt like an ox in the mire.


Then how ſhall theſe my ſons be now
rendered accompliſhed ? when it 1s ſaid,


The age, the actions, the wealth, the know-

ledge, and even the death, of every one is
determined in his mother's womb.

The determined fate of all beings, let them


be ever ſo great, inevitably happeneth :
B 3 Naked-


161


Nakedneſs is the fate of Neelakint, and
of Hiree ſleeping on a great ſerpent.

What is not to be, that is not to be; if it
be to come to paſs, it cannot be otherwiſe.
This reaſoning is an antidote. Why doth
not the afflicted drink of it?


But ſuch are the idle ſentiments of certain
men who admit nat of works; for,


Whilſt a man confideth in providence, he
ſhould not ſlacken his own exertions; for
without labour he is unworthy to obtain

the oil from the ſeed. |

Fortune attendeth that lion amongſt men

| who exerteth himſelf. They are weak
men who declare fate the ſole cauſe.

Subdue fate, and exert human ſtrength to
the utmoſt of your power; and if, when
pains have been taken, ſucceſs attend not,
in whom is the blame?

As the chariat will nat move upon a ſingle
wheel; even ſo fate ſucceedeth not with-
out human exertion.

It is ſaid, fate is nothing but the deeds com-
mitted in a former ftate of exiftence;
wherefore, it behoveth a man vigilantly
to exert the powers he is poſſeſſed of.


As


1 2 1


As the potter formeth the lump of clay into
whatever ſhape he liketh, even ſo may a
man regulate his own actions.

Again:

Although, in the ſtory of the Crow and Tal“
fruit, one was ſeen to have found a trea-
ſure before him, fate of itſelf did not pre-
ſent it: ſome exertion was ſtill expected.

Good fortune 1s the offspring of our endea-
yours, although there be nothing ſweeter
than eaſe. The deer are not wont to pre-
cipitate themſelves into the mouth of the
ſleeping lion.

The boy who hath been exerciſed under his
parents' care, attaineth the ſtate of an ac-
compliſhed man; but the child becometh
nat a Pindeet whilſt in the ſtate he drop-
ped from the womb.

That mother 1s an enemy, and that father a
foe, by whom nat having been inſtructed,
their ſon ſhineth not in the aſſembly; but
appeareth there, like a booby among geeſe.

Men deficient in learning ſhine not, al-
though they may be poſſeſſed of youth
and beauty, and of a noble race: They are
like the flower KEtns66k, deſtitute of fra-
grance.

A fool,


11


A fool, too, may ſhine in the aſſembly, dreſ-
* fed in fine garments; but the fool ſhineth
no longer than he holdeth his tongue.


The Rija having thus meditated for a
while, convened a council of Pindeets, whom
he addreſſed in the following words:“ Ye
learned men, attend! Is there a man to be
* found who ſhall, by precepts drawn from
te Neetee-Saſtris, be able to perfect the
e birth of my ſons, who are yet uninformed,
* and conſtantly wandering in the paths of
« error? For, |


As a piece of glaſs, from the vicinity of gold,
acquireth the colour of a topaz ; ſo a fool
may derive ſome conſequence from the
preſence of a wiſe man.

Again:

The mind is depraved by the ſociety of the
low; it riſeth to equality with equals;
and to diſtinction with the diſtinguiſhed.”


Of this aſſembly there was a great Pin-
deet by name Veeſhns6-Sirma,” well verſed
in the principles of all the Neetee-Saſtris,
as it were another Vr&chäſpätéè, who re-

plied,


FT:
plied, —*© Theſe young Princes, O mighty
« Rija! being the offsprings of an illuſtrious


* race, are capable of being inſtructed in the
« Neetee-Saſtris; but |


Labour, beſtowed on nothing, is fruitleſs :
With infinite pains a booby will not, pre-
ſently, talk like a parrot.

In a noble race, levity without virtue 1s ſel-

dom found. In a mine of rubies, when

ſhall we find pieces of glaſs ?


« Wherefore, I will engage, that in the ſpace
t of fix months, I will render thy ſons well
« acquainted with the doctrines of the Nee-
ce tee Saſtras.”

The Raja then reſpectfully faid :


Even a reptile, when attached to a flower,
may mount upon the head of the holy;
even a ſtone, when ſet up and conſecrated
by the great, attaineth divinity.

For it is ſaid,

As a thing on the eaſtern mountains ſhineth
by the preſence of the ſun; ſo one of
humble birth, even, may be enlightened
by the allurements of good books.


Men


=


Men of good or evil birth may be poſſeſſed
of good qualities ; but, falling into bad
company, they become vicious. Rivers
flow with ſweet waters ; but, having joined
the ocean, they become undrinkable.


Then be thou an example ta theſe, my ſons,
for the acquiſition of virtue. Having faid
this, he reſpectfully delivered his ſons into the
charge of Veeſhnos-Sarma; and that learned
Pindeet, ſoon after, ſeized the opportunity,
when they were, for amuſement, fitting to-
gether upon the terrace of their father's pa-
lace, to introduce his advice to the young
princes in the following lines:


Learning to a man is a name ſuperior to
beauty; learning is better than hidden
treaſure. Learning is a companion on a
Journey to a ſtrange country; learning is
ſtrength inexhauſtible, Learning is the
ſource of renown, and the fountain of
victory in the ſenate. Learning 1s a fu-
perior fight; learning is a livelihood ; and

a man in this world without learning is

as a beaſt of the field.


A country


ul


A country deprived of the Ganges is ſmitten ;

a family without learning is ſmitten; a
woman without a child is ſmitten; a ſa-
crifice without the Brahmin's rights is
ſmitten.

Wiſe men paſs their time in amuſements
drawn from the works of the poets; whilſt
fools ſquander theirs in uſeleſs purſuits,
ſloth, or riot.


For your amuſement, therefore, ſaid he, I
am going to relate ſome curiqus ſtories of a
Crow, a Tortoiſe, and other animals.


C H A P. J.
Tux AcursITION OF A FRIEND.


Eefhne6-Sirmi then told the young

princes to attend, and ſaid,.— The
preſent ſubject to be diſcuſſed is, The Acqui-
ſition of a Friend; to which theſe following
lines are an introduction:


BE


Wiſe and ſincere friends, although poor and de-
ftitute of implements, may ſpeedily effeft our
purpoſes; as in the inſtances of the Crow, the
Tortoiſe, the Deer, and the Mouſe.


The young princes demanded how this was;
and Veeſhno6-Sirma related as follows:


FaBLE I.

ON the banks of the river Godavaree
there was a Silmilee* tree, to whoſe ſpread-
ing branches birds of various ſpecies were
wont to flock, from every quarter, to rooſt.
Early one morning, when darkneſs was dil-:
perſing, and the moon, whoſe emblem is the
flower Ko6mo6dEnte-nayiki, was recli-
ning upon the ſummit of the mountain
Chirami, a certain Crow, whoſe name was
Läghööpätänäkä, being awake, chanced to
eſpy a fowler coming that way, who appeared
to him as another angel of death. Having
regarded him, and confidered for a moment,
he ſaid to himſelf, —This unwelcome viſit
happeneth to day very early, and I know not
what may be the conſequence. So, ponder -
ing upon what he ſaw, he was ſeized with a


panic, and flew out of the way; for,
| A thouſand


1


A thouſand occaſions for ſorrow, and a hun-


dred for fear, day by day aſſail the fool;
not ſo the wiſe man.


Yet, it is ſaid, that men of the world muſt
abſolutely act according to theſe lines :


Every time we riſe, great fear is to be appre-
hended; for, to-day, of death, ſickneſs,


and ſorrow, who knoweth which oe fall
upon us ?


The fowler, having firſt ſtrewed ſome
rice upon the ground, ſpread his nets; and
whilſt this was tranſacting, it happened that
Chettri-greeva,” the chief of a flock of pi-
geons, was in the air flying about with his
attendants, He ſaw the grains of rice upon
the ground ; and perceiving that his flock
ſhewed an inclination to partake of them, he
addreſſed them thus :—Beware, my friends !

Whence, think you, ſhould rice be produced
in a place like this, void of inhabitants ? Let
this, therefore, be inveſtigated ; for I con-
ceive no good can come of it, leſt we ſhould


experience a fate ſimilar to what is mentioned
in the following lines :


A Traveller,


14 J


A Traveller, through luſt xvid, being plunged
into an inextricable mire, is killed and de-
voured by an old Tiger.


How did this happen? demanded the
Pigeons, and their chief related as follows:


FaBLE II.

AS I was travelling on the fouthern road,
once upon 'a.time, I faw an old Tiger ſeated
upon the bank of a large river, with a bunch
of K&öòsâ graſs in his paw, calling out to
every one who paſled, —Ho ! ho! traveller,
take this golden bracelet. But every one was
afraid to approach him to receive it. At
length, however, a certain traveller, tempted
by avarice, regarded it as an inſtance of good
fortune; but, ſaid he, in this there is per-
ſonal danger, m which we-are not warranted
to proceed.


Confidence ſhould not be put in rivers; in
animals which have claws or horns; m
men with weapons in their hands; nor in
women; nor in thoſe of royal birth.

It is not good to paſs by that we diſlike,
even to gain that which we like ; for the
water of life becometh mortal when mixed
with a poiſon.


( is 1


Yet, ſaid he, there is riſk in every under-
taking, for the acquiſition of wealth: Hence,
it is faid, Y


No man beholdeth proſperity who doth
not encounter danger; but having en-
countered danger, if he ſurviveth, he be-
holdeth it.


This 1 have confidered, and now let me aſk
thee plainly, where is thy gold? But top,
Tigers eat men, and the opinion of the
world is hard to be defeated ; for,


The people, mere followers of one another,
hold up a bawd and a Brahman who is a
cow-killer, as examples in our religion.“


I too, replied the Tiger, have read religious
books : Hear what they ſay,


In granting and in refuſing, in joy and in
ſorrow, th liking and in diſliking, good
men, becauſe of their own likeneſs, ſhewy
mercy unto all things which have life.

As their own lives ate moſt dear to them, ſo
alſo are thoſe of all creatures. Good men,

| becauſe


19


becauſe of their own likeneſs, ſhew mercy
unto all things which have life.

A man, becauſe of his own likeneſs, ſhould
learn this ſaying:—As rain to the parched
field, ſo is meat to one 3 with
hunger.

Charity is to be given to the poor, and 1s
fruitful : O joy of the houſe of Pando.”


The Traveller then aſked him, where was
the bracelet; and the Tiger having held out
his paw, ſhewed it to him, and ſaid, Look
at it, it 1s a golden bracelet. How ſhall I
place confidence in thee? ſaid the Traveller;
and the Tiger replied, —Formerly, in the days
of my youth, I was of a very wicked diſpo-
ſition, and as a puniſhment for the many
men and cattle I had murdered, my nume-
rous children died, and I was alſo deprived
of my wife; ſo, at preſent, I am deſtitute uf
relations. This being the caſe, I was ad-
viſed, by a certain religious perſon, to prac-
tiſe charity and other religious duties; I am
now grown extremely devout : I perform
ablutions regularly, and am charitable. Why
then am I not worthy of confidence ?


The


3

The ſtudy of what is ordained, charity,
mortifications of the fleſh, and ſacrifices;
fortitude, forgiveneſs, rectitude, and mo-
deſty, form the true way, and are recorded
the eight-fold diviſion of our duty.

Of theſe, the firſt claſs, conſiſting of four, is
attended to for the ſake of hereafter; and


the latter claſs of four, preſideth in every
great mind.


So far, you ſee, continued the Tiger, I
have an intereſt in wiſhing to give away, to
ſome one, this golden bracelet from off my
own wriſt; and as thou appeareſt to be ra-
ther a poor man, I prefer giving it to thee,
according to this ſaying :

Make choice of the poor, O ſon of Koontee,”
and beſtow not thy gifts on others. Me-
dicine is to be adminiſtered to the ſick ;

for of what benefit is phyſic to thoſe who
are in health?

And this

The gift which is to be given, ſhould be
given gratuitouſly ; in time, in place, and
to a proper object; and ſuch a gift is re-
corded a righteous gift.

C Then


[ 18 ]


Then go, and having purified” thyſelf in this
ſtream, take the golden bracelet. —The Tra-
veller no ſooner begins to enter the river to
purify himſelf, than he ſticks faſt in the
mud, and 1s unable to eſcape. The Tiger
told him he would help him out ; and creep-
ing ſoftly towards him, the poor Traveller is
ſeized, and inſtantly exclaims to himſelf, —
Alas! the career of my heart is cut ſhort
by fate !


The natural diſpoſition of every animal con-
quereth, and preſideth over his qualifica-
tions; for from that nature he paſſeth
not, either for qualifications or ornamen-
tal accompliſhments. |

He readeth not the Dhirmi-Siafſtri, *—1s this
the cauſe ; or doth he not ſtudy the Vẽds?
In this matter the natural diſpoſition of
his wicked ſpirit prevaileth, even as the
milk of the cow is by nature ſweet,” _

What is done for thoſe who have not their

paſſions in ſubjection, is like waſhing the

elephant.“ Service rendered to the un-
fortunate is, for the moſt part, like know-
ledge without practice.


T did


1


I did. not well in that I placed confidence in
one of ſuch an evil diſpoſition ! for it is faid,


The natural, and no other qualities ſhould be
examined; for the natural qualities paſs
over all others, and mount upon the head.


But whilſt the unfortunate Traveller was
thus meditating on his fate, he was devoured
by the Tiger. I have ſaid, therefore, Through
the luſt of a bracelet, &c. and hence alſo, it is


at no time proper to undertake any thing
without examination; as in the following


ſaying:


Well-digeſted food, a well-diſcerning child,
a well-governed wife, a prince well ſerved,

a ſpeech well conſidered, and an action well
weighed, are not, even in very long time,
attended by diſagreeable conſequences.


One of the pigeons, who was of a haughty
ſpirit, having heard what had been ſaid, ex-
claimed, —Ha! what is this? Is it not ſaid,


In times of neceſſity the words of the wiſe
are worthy to be obſerved; by whoſe de-


C 2 termination -


4 w 1


termination we may freely engage in all
things, even in eating.”

All things upon the face of the earth, our
meat and our drink, bear cauſe of ſuſpi-
cion; then how is forbearance to be exer-
ciſed, and life to be ſupported?

Again it is ſaid,

Theſe ſix—The peeviſh, the niggard, the diſ-
ſatisfied, the paſſionate, the ſuſpicious, and
thoſe who live upon others means—are
for ever unhappy.


So having heard theſe words, the whole flock
flew down upon the grain.


Thoſe, even, who poſſeſs very many Saftris,
are learned in the Veds, and are the diſ-
pellers of doubt, experience trouble, when
their reaſon 1s blinded by avarice.

From covetouſneſs proceedeth ill- nature, and
of ill- nature is born ſtubbornneſs; from
ſtubbornneſs is created a deluſion of rea-
ſon,“ and that deluſion is the cauſe of ſin.

The birth of a golden deer is impoſſible;
nevertheleſs Ram longed for the chace.
In times of misfortune, men's underſtand-
ings even are ſullied.


At


8 3


At length they were all, in conſequence of
their covetouſneſs, confined by the threads
of the net ; and they preſently began to lay


the blame upon him, by whoſe advice they
had deſcended. So it is ſaid,


A man ſhould not ſtrive to precede his fel-
lows; for, ſhould the work ſucceed, the
booty is equal, and if it fail, the leader
is puniſhed.


Cheetra-greeva hearing their reproaches,
ſaid, It is not his fault. It is ſaid,


To thoſe who are fallen into misfortunes,
what was a bleſſing becometh an evil: To
a child in confinement, its mother's knee
is a binding poſt.

He who hath the reſolution to extricate one
from his misfortunes, who 1s fallen into
difficulties by another's fault, is a Pandeet;
not he who heſitateth about the means he
ſhould employ for the deliverance of the
diſtreſſed.


Heſitation, in times of misfortune, 1s the
mark of a coward ; wherefore, depend upon
reſolution,


[ 22 1


reſolution, and let a remedy be thought of;
according to theſe lines,


Fortitude in adverſity, and moderation in
proſperity; eloquence in the ſenate, and
courage in the field; great glory in re-
nown, and labour in ſtudy; are the natural
perfections of great minds.

Again: |

There are here ſix faults, which a man ought
to avoid: The deſire of riches, drowſineſs,
ſloth, idleneſs, tediouſneſs, fear, and anger.


Let this be done immediately: Let us all,
with one accord, take up the net, and fly
away with 1t ; according to theſe lines:


Combination is beſt for men, either with
their own tribe or with ſtrangers; for even
a grain of rice groweth not, when divided
from its huſk. |

A combination even of ſmall things ſerveth
an occaſion: An intoxicated elephant may
be bound with a few ſtraws, when formed
into a rope.


Having conſidered this, the pigeons, with
one accord, took up the net, and flew away
with


L 23 *


with it. Preſently the fowler, ſeeing the
robbers of his net at a great diſtance, pur-
ſued them; and as he ran, theſe were his
thoughts:


Theſe travellers of the air have combined to
rob me of my net; but when they ſhall
fall down, they will come into my power.


But ſoon finding they had paſſed the confines
of his ſight, the poor fowler turned back
from the purſuit.


The pigeons now demanded what was to
be done; and Chettri-greevi replied,


A mother is a friend, and a father is a friend;
but both theſe are from nature kind; but
there are others who are benevolent from
caſual motives.


Our friend Heerinyiki,” the noble mouſe,
lives upon the banks of the Gindikee. He
may be able to gnaw our ſnare aſunder with
his teeth. Having conſidered this propoſal,
they all flew to the reſidence of Heerinyaki,


who, from his conſtant dread of the Crows,
had


|
i
f
1
;


1 24 J


had made himſelf a hole with a hundred out-
lets, wherein he remained ſecured, according
to this verſe:


There was an old mouſe, well read in the
| Neetee-Siſtris,” who, before the approach
of danger, kept himſelf within a hole with

a hundred doors. | |


He was ſtartled with fear at the deſcent of
the Pigeons, and ſtood filent; upon which
Cheetri-greevi called out, —Friend Heerin-
yaka! what, wilt thou not ſpeak to us? And
Heeranyaka, upon recollecting his voice, ſhp-
ped out of his hole, and exclaimed, — O how


happy I am, that my dear friend Cheetri-
greeva is arrived!


There 1s not-in life a man more happy than
he who hath a friend to converſe with, a
friend to live with, and a friend to embrace.


But when he ſaw that they were confined in
a net, he ſtood amazed for a moment, end
demanded what it meant. Cheetri-greeva


' replied, —What elſe, my friend, can it be,


but the effect of the evil committed in a prior
exiſtence?


1


exiſtence? Seeing thou art endued with
great wiſdom, what was the uſe of thy queſ-
tion? For is it not ſaid,


Whatſoever cometh to paſs, either good or
evil, is the conſequence of a man's own
actions, and defcendeth from the power of
the Supreme Ruler.”
Sickneſs, ſorrow, and diſtreſs; bonds and
puniſhment to corporeal beings, are fruit
of the tree of their own tranſgreſſions.


Heerinyiki having heard theſe words,
quickly ran to gnaw aſunder the cords by
which Cheetri-greeva was confined. Not ſo
my friend, ſaid Cheetri-greeva, until thou
haſt cut aſunder the bonds of theſe who are
under my protection. Heeranyiaki then ſaid,
I am weak, my friend, and my teeth are but
delicate; how then am I able to bite open
the ſnares which entangle them? As long
as my teeth ſhall not break, ſo long will I
gnaw thy ſnares ; and afterwards, if it ſhould
be in my power, I will divide the cords which
confine the reſt, Let it be as I ſay, replied
Cheetri-greeva; and to the utmoſt of thy
power try to ſubdue their bonds firſt. Thoſe,

5 ſaid


U 26 ]


ſaid the Mouſe, who are acquainted with the
rules of prudence, do not approve, that for
the preſervation of thoſe who are under our
protection, we ſhould abandon ourſelves.


A man ſhould keep his riches againſt acci-
dents, and with his riches he ſhould ſave
his family; but he ſhould, on all occa-
ſions, ſave himſelf, both with his family
and his riches.

Our lives are for the purpoſes of religion,
labour, love, and ſalvation. If theſe are
deſtroyed, what is not loſt? If theſe are


preſerved, what is not preſerved ?


This may be ſo, replied Cheetri-greeva ; but
I am not, by any means, able to ſuffer the
afflictions of thoſe who are here under my
Protection.


A wiſe man ſhould relinquiſh both his wealth
and his life for another: All is to be ſur-


rendered for a juſt man, when he is re-
duced to the brink of deſtruction.


Here is another unparallelled argument:


In


1


In birth, ſubſtance, and quality, they are like
unto me; ſay then, what will ever be the
fruit of my ſuperiority ?

Aga : |

Without misfortune, they will not forſake
me; then I will protect theſe who have
taken ſanctuary with me, even with the
loſs of my life.

Why doſt thou heſitate over this periſhable
body compoſed of fleſh, bones, and excre-
ments? O my friend, ſupport my repu-
tation | |

Another:

If conſtancy 1s to be obtained by inconſtancy,
purity by impurity, reputation by the
body, then, what 1s there which may not
be obtained ? .

The difference between the body and the qua-
lities is infinite: The body is a thing to
be deſtroyed in a moment, whilſt the qua-
lities** endure to the end of the creation.


Heeranyaka having been attentive to what
had been ſpoken, and being exceedingly
pleaſed, exclaimed, Nobly ! nobly ! my
friend. By ſuch generoſity to thoſe who are
under thy protection, thou art worthy to be

elevated


CW 1


elevated to the ſupreme command over the
three regions of the world.” Having ſaid
this, Heerinyaki gnawed aſunder their
bonds; and when he had addreſſed himſelf
to all in reſpectful compliments of congra-
tulation, he ſaid, —Friend Cheetri-greevi,
always when you ſee a net, ſuſpect great
harm will come of it; and learn not to think
meanly of yourſelf. But, alas!


A bird who ſeeth her prey before her, even
at the diſtance of a hundred yojin,* per-
ceiveth not, if her time be come, the ſnares
which are laid to entrap her. |
When I behold in eclipſes” the diſtreſs of the
moon and the author of day; elephants
and ſerpents in confinement; and the
worthy in indigence; alas! in my mind,
deſtiny is all-powerful. -
Birds meet their fate whilſt ſporting in the

air, and fiſhes, by artful means, are de-
{troyed from the bottomleſs waters of the
ocean. |

When laws are ill-enforced, where are their

good morals? To whom is the mere

glare of the fire a virtue? Time is trouble,
and the author of deſtruction; he ſeizeth
even from afar.


1 9 ]


The mouſe having taught this, and per-
formed the duties of hoſpitality, Cheetri-
greeva took his leave, and with his flock
departed for that country his inclination


led him to; and HEeErinyaki retired into
his hole.


The Crow, Ligh66-pitiniki, having been
a ſpectator of all which had paſſed, now pre-
ſently appeared, and called out—What ho!
Heerinyaki ! Thou art worthy to be praiſed,
to be adored, and to be a place of refuge,
throughout the three regions of the world !


Behold how many Pigeons, his friends, even
hundreds, have been delivered by om
friendſhip of a Mouſe !


In conſequence of this, I too am anxious to -
form a friendly acquaintance with thee.—
Then favour me with thy friendſhip. Hee-
ränyäkä having heard him, called out from
the inſide of his hole, Who art thou? and
he replied, I am a Crow, and my name 1s
Läghöö-pätänäkä. Heerinyaki, upon hear-
ing who he was, laughing ſaid, —Having ſeen
thy complexion, like broken Anjän, a beetle,

a wild


—— —— — ̃ — — — — — —


1


a wild ox, a buffaloe, or a woman's hair,
what friendſhip can I have with thee?


The wiſe man is united with that in this
life, with which it is proper he ſhould be
united. I am bread, thou art the eater.
How then can harmony exiſt between us?


As may be ſeen in a certain ftory, of which
the following verſe is the introduction.


Harmony between the food and the feeder is the
forerunner of misfortune :—A Deer, through
the artifice of a Jackal, is caught in a ſnare,
but is preſerved by a Crow.


| How did this happen? demanded Läghöö-
pätänäkä; and the Mouſe, Heerinyaka, re-
lated as follows: |


FABLE III.


In Mägädhä-dẽsä' there is a foreſt called
Chimpikivitee, and under the branches of
one of the Chimpiki*® trees there dwelt, in
great good fellowſhip, a Deer and a Crow.
One day, as the Deer, who was plump and fat,
was freely roaming about the woods, he was
ſpied by a certain Jackal, who having ex-

| amined


1


amined him, ſaid to himſelf,—Ah! with
what exquiſite pleaſure could I feaſt upon
his fleſh!—Be it ſo; but firſt let me remove
all ſuſpicion. So having thus reſolved, he
advanced towards him, and ſaid, - Peace be
with thee, friend! Who art thou? ſaid the
Deer. I am Kſh66drib66dhee,” the Jackal,
ſaid he; and being without relations, I dwell
here in this foreſt, as it were, like one dead;
but now that I have fallen in with a true
friend, I am no longer deſtitute of con-
nexions, and am again entered into the land
of the living; and henceforward it ſhall be
my duty to attend thy ſteps.

Accordingly, as ſoon as the ſun had re-
tired to the weſtern mountain, the Jackal
followed the Deer to his place of reſidence,
beneath the branches of the Chimpaka tree,
where with him lived alſo his friend the Crow,
whoſe name was S66-boodhee.” Upon ſeeing
him, the Crow ſaid, Who 1s this ſecond?
and the Deer replied, It is a Jackal, who is
come here deſirous of our friendſhip. Friend,
ſaid the Crow, it is not proper to place con-
fidence in one who cometh without any ap-
parent cauſe, It is not well done, for it
is ſaid:

To


|
|
5
|
|
'
1
.


— — —
2 — — — eat — — —


.
4 SW
K i
—_—
* *
*


1


To one whoſe family and profeſſion are unknown,
one ſhould not give reſidence : The Fackal
Tarad-gava was killed through the fault of
4 Cat.


How was this? ſaid they; and the Crow
related as follows:


FABLE IV.


On the banks of the river Bhãgẽẽräthẽẽ,
and upon the mountain Greedhri-koota,
there is a large Pärkättẽẽ tree, in the hollow
of whoſe trunk there dwelt a Jackal, by name
Jarad-gava, who, by ſome accident, was
grown blind, and for whoſe ſupport the dit-
ferent birds, who rooſted upon the branches
of the ſame tree, were wont to contribute a
trifle from their own ſtores, by which he
exiſted. It fo fell out, that one day a cer-
tain Cat, by name Dtergi-kirni,” came there
to prey upon the young birds, whom per-
ceiving, the little neſtlings were greatly
terrified, and began to be very clamorous ;


and their cries being heard by Jarid-givi,


he aſked who was coming. The Cat Deergi-
kärnä, too, ſeeing the Jackal, began to be
alarmed, and ſo cried to himſelf, —Oh ! I

{hall


11


ſhall certainly be killed, for now that I am
in his ſight, it will not be in my power to
eſcape! However, let what will be the con-
fequence, I will approach him. So having
thus reſolved, he went up to the Jackal, and
fard, —Maſter, I ſalute thee ! Who art thou?
demanded the Jackal. Said he, I am a Cat.
Ah! wicked animal, cried the Jackal, get thee
at a diſtance; for, if thou doſt not, I will put
thee to death. Hear me for a moment, re-
plied puſs, and then determine whether I
merit, either to be puniſhed, or to be killed.


What, is any one, ſimply by birth, to be pu-
niſhed or applauded? When his deeds
have been ſcrutinized, he may, indeed, be
either praiſe-worthy or puniſhable.

Men are the ſame as other animals, in eat-
ing, fleeping, fearing, and propagation :
Reaſon, alone, is man's ſuperior diſtinc-
tion. Deprived of reaſon, he is upon an
equality with the brutes.


The Jackal after this deſired the Cat to
give ſome account of himſelf, and he com-
plied in the following words: — I am, ſaid he,
in the conſtant habit of performing ablu-

D


tions


I 34 ]

tions on the ſide of this river; I never eat
fleſh, and I lead that mode of life which is
called Brihmi-chiryi.” 80, as thou art
diſtinguiſhed amongſt thoſe of thy own ſpe-
cies noted for {kill in religious matters, as a
repoſitory of confidence; and as the birds
here are always ſpeaking before me in praiſe
of thy good qualities, I am come to hear
from thy mouth, who art ſo old in wiſdom,
the duties of religion. Thou, maſter, art
acquainted with the cuſtoms of life ; but
| theſe young birds, who are in ignorance,
would fain drive me, who am a ſtranger,


away. The duties of a houſekeeper are
thus enjoined :


Hoſpitality is commanded to be exerciſed,
even towards an enemy, when he cometh
to thine houſe. The tree doth not with-

draw its ſhade, even from the wood-cutter.


And if there be no bread, the ſtranger ſhould
be entertained with kind words, and what-
ever can be ſpared, as in theſe lines:


Some ſtraw, a room, water, and in the fourth
place, gentle words: Theſe things are
never to be refuſed in good men's houſes,


3


And in another verſe it is ſaid:


The ſtranger, who turneth away from a
houſe with diſappointed hopes, leaveth
there his own offences, and departeth, ta-
king with him all the good actions of the
owner.“

Again:

Fire“ is the ſuperior of the Brahmins, the
Brahmin is the ſuperior of the tribes, and
the huſband 1s the only ſuperior of wo-
men; but the ſtranger is the ſuperior of all.

Good men extend their pity, even unto the
moſt deſpicable animals. The moon doth
not withhold the light, even from the
cottage of a Chindali.”*


To all this the Jackal replied, Cats have

a taſte for animal food, and above 1s the re-
ſidence of the young birds: It is on this
account I ſpeak to thee. The Cat having
touched her two ears, and then the ground,
exclaimed,—I who have read books upon
the duties of religion, and am freed from
inordinate defires, have forſaken ſuch an evil
practice; and, indeed, even amongſt thoſe
who diſpute with one another about the
_. authority


1


authority of the Siſtris, there are many by
whom this ſentence, Not to kill is à ſu-
preme duty, is altogether approved; as in this
at. --.- 5


Thoſe who have forſaken the killing of all;
thoſe who are helpmates to all; thoſe
who are a ſanctuary to all; thoſe men are
in the way to heaven.

Again:

There is one friend, even Religion,“ who
attendeth even in death; whilſt all things
elſe go to decay with the body.

Behold the difference between the one who
eateth fleſh, and he to whom it belonged!
The firſt hath a momentary enjoyment,
whilſt the latter is deprived of exiſtence!

So it is ſaid,

A fellow-creature ſhouid be ſpared, even by
this analogy: The pain which a, man ſuf-
tereth when he is at the point of death.

Hear this alſo:

Who would commit fo great a crime againſt
a poor animal, who, is fed only by the
herbs which grow wild in the woods, and
whoſe belly is burnt up with hunger?


The


LF]


The Cat by theſe means having ſatisfied
him, he remained in the hollow of the tree
with the Jackal, and paſſed the time in amu-
ſing converſation; and the Jackal told the
young birds that they had no occaſion to go
out of the way. After this, when many
days had paſſed, it was diſcovered that the
Cat had, by degrees, drawn the little - birds
down mto the hollow of the tree, and there
devoured them; but when he found enquiry
was about to be made by thoſe whoſe young
ones had been eaten, he flipped out of the
hole, and made his eſcape. In the mean
time, the bones of the young ones having
been diſcovered in the hollow of the tree by
the birds, who had been ſearching here and
there, they concluded that their little ones
had been devoured by the Jackal, and ſo,
being joined by other birds, they put him
to death. Wherefore I ſay,—To one whoſe
family and profeſſion are unknown, &c.

The jackal having heard all this, replied in
anger, Hear me, thou fool! The firſt time
thou waſt ſeen by the Deer, thy family and
profeſſion were unknown. How 1s it then
that your mutual kindneſs and attention grow
higher and higher ?

D 3 Is


E:$ 3


Is this one of us, or is he a ſtranger? Such is
the enumeration of the ungenerous ; but
to thoſe, by whom liberality is practiſed,
the whole world is but as one family.


Wherefore, I ſay, be thou my acquaintance
in the ſame manner the Deer is. What is
the uſe of all theſe replies? obſerved the Deer,
Let us dwell together, and ſpend our time
happily in agreeable converſation.


There is no one the friend of another; there
is no one the enemy of another: Friends,


as well as enemies, are created through our
tranſactions.


So, at length, the Crow ſaid, Let it be ſo.


Early in the morning they uſed to go
abroad to thoſe parts they liked beſt, One
day the Jackal ſaid to the deer, in great ſe-
creſy,—In a particular part of this wood, my
friend, there is a field full of corn, to which I
will conduct thee; and which being per-
formed accordingly, the Deer uſed to go there
every day to feed upon the corn; but, in
time, this being diſcovered by the maſter of

the


[ 39 J


the field, he laid ſnares for him. After this,
the Deer coming there again, and being con-
fined in the ſnares, thus reaſoned to himſelf:
Who but a friend can deliver me from theſe
ſnares of the huntſman, ſo like the ſnares of
death? In the mean time, the Jackal, having
arrived at the ſpot, ſtopt ſhort, and began to
conſider what he ſhould do: So far, ſaid he,
my ſcheme has ſucceeded, and by means of
theſe deceitful ſnares, my wiſhes will be ac-
compliſhed in great abundance; for when he
1s cut up, I ſhall get his bones all covered
with fleſh and blood. The Deer was ex-
ceedingly glad to ſee him, and called out to
him,—Friend Jackal, pray gnaw my bonds
aſunder, and ſpeedily deliver me!


A friend may be known in adverſity, a hero
in battle, an honeſt man in a lone, a wife
when riches are ſpent, and a relation in
trouble,


The Jackal eyed the Deer in his confine-
ment again and again, and conſidered whe-
ther the knots were ſecure. Theſe ſnares,
my friend, obſerved he, are made of leather
thongs, and it being Sunday, how can 1

touch


[ 40 J


touch them with my teeth?“ But, if it will
ſuit thee, my friend, early in the morning I
will do whatever may be thy wiſh. So ha-
ving made this propoſal, he went on one fide,
and laying himſelf down, remained filent.

In the mean time the Crow, Soobooddhee,
finding the Deer did not come home, had gone
about in ſearch of him. At length he found
him in this condition, upon which he ex-
claimed, What, my friend, is this the pro-
miſe!—Is this the fruit of the word of afriend!


He who doth not hearken to the voice of a
friend and well-wiſher in adverſity, 1s the
. delight of his enenues.


But where 1s that Jackal? added the Crow.
Alas! ſaid the Deer, he is here anxiouſly
waiting for my fleſh! My friend, obſerved
the Crow, I foretold this from the beginning.


I am not to blame: He was not a ſubject for
confidence. From the cruel, even the vir-
tuous have cauſe for apprehenſion.


Saying this, he heaved a deep ſigh, and cried,
O deceitful wretch! what hath been brought
to paſs, by thee, thou agent of wickedneſs!

| | How


BE


How hard 1s diſappointment in this world,
to ſuch as have been deluded by fair words;
to thoſe, who by pretended ſervices have
been ſeduced into the power of their ene-
mies; to the hopeful; to thoſe who have
faith, and to expectants!

A man ſhould forſake ſuch a friend as ſpeak-
eth kindly to his face, and behind his back
defeateth his defigns : He is like a pot of

poiſon with a ſurface of milk.

O goddeſs Vas66dha ! How ſupporteſt thou
that treacherous man, who exerciſeth his
wickedneſs upon his innocent and confi-
dential companion!


Is not this, continued the Crow, the cha-
rater of bad men?


A man ſhould not form any acquaintance,
nor enter into any amuſements, with one
of an evil character: A piece of charcoal,
if 1t be hot, burneth; and if cold, it
blackeneth the hand.

Although one of an evil character ſpeak
kindly, that is no motive for his being
truſted : The ſerpent is ornamented with
a Gem, but is he not to be dreaded ?

Before


L 42 ]


Before one's face, he falleth at one's feet;
behind, he biteth the fleſh of one's back.
In one's ear, doth he not ſoftly hum his
tune with wondrous art! And when he
findeth a hole, fearleſs, he boldly entereth.
Thus doth the gnat“ perform the actions
of a deceitful man


About this time the owner of the field was
ſeen coming, with a ſtaff in his hand, and
his eyes red with anger. So the Crow, ha-
ving conſidered what was to be done, ſaid,
Friend Deer, feign thyſelf dead, and ſtay
quiet till I make a noiſe, and then get up
and run away as faſt as thou canſt. The
Deer was now perceived by the maſter of the
field, whoſe eyes ſparkled with joy ; but upon
his approaching nearer, and thinking him
dead, he exclaimed, —Ha! thou art dead of
thyſelf from confinement, art thou ? and ha-
ving ſaid ſo, he began to employ himſelf in
collecting and bundling up his ſnares ; and
upon his moving to a little diftance, the
Deer hearing the voice of the Crow, ſtarted
up in great diſorder, and ran away. The
maſter of the field, upon ſeeing this, flung
his ſtaff at him, which, by chance, ſtruck the

Jackal,


[ 48 1


Jackal, and ſo he was killed, and not the
Deer. It 1s ſaid, that


A man reapeth the fruit of any extraordinary


good or bad action in the ſpace of three
years, three months, three fortnights,” or
three days.


Wherefore I repeat, Harmony between the food
and the feeder Sc.


To all this the Crow replied,


In eating thee, I ſhould not enjoy a plente-
ous meal. But, like Chettri-greevi, I live
but in thy life.

Even amongſt brutes, confidence is perceived
in thoſe, in whoſe every action there is
innocence : The innate diſpoſition of the
good doth not vary from the principles of

integrity.

The mind of a good man doth not alter,
even when he is in diſtreſs: the waters of


the ocean are not to be heated by a torch
of ſtraw,


But friend Crow, obſerved the Mouſe
Heerinyaki, thou art an unſteady and in-
conſtant


1 44 J


conſtant animal, and one's affections ſhould,
on no account, be placed on ſuch a charac-
ter; as is declared in theſe lines:


A cat, a buffaloe, a ram, a crow, and a man
of weak judgment, are excluded from con-
fidence: It is not expedient to put any
truſt in them.


Beſides, thou art on the ſide of our enemies,
and on this head they ſay,


A man ſhould not enter into alliance with
his enemy, even with the tighteſt bonds of
union: Water made ever ſo hot, will ſtill


quench fire.

And again:

That is not poffible which is impoſſible.
That which is poſſible is ever poſſible: A
cart moveth not upon the waters, nor a


boat upon dry ground.


I have heard every book upon theſe ſub-
jects, ſaid the Crow Läghöö-pätänäkä, never-
theleſs my mind is impreſſed with this idea,
that I muſt abſolutely form a friendly ac-
23 thee; but if I ſhould fail,

after


[ 45 J


after our ſeparation I ſhall deſtroy myſelf.
It is ſaid, that thoſe of evil character are like
an earthen pot, —eaſy to be broken, but hard
to be re-united; and that thoſe of a good
character reſemble a veſſel of gold, which,
though difficult to be broken, may eaſily be
joined again. It is ſaid,


Metals unite from fluxility; birds and beaſts
from motives of convenience; fools from
fear and ſtupidity; and juſt men at ſight.

Although friendſhip between good men be
interrupted, ſtill their principles remain
unaltered: The ſtalk of the lotus may be
broken, and the fibres remain connected.

The qualities of a friend ſhould be, ſincerity,
liberality, bravery, conſtancy in joy and
ſorrow, rectitude, attachment, veracity.


Whom, then, but thyſelf ſhall I find endued
with all theſe ?


Upon hearing this, Heeranyakia ſlipped out
of his hole, and ſaid, —Well, by the immor-


tal water of thy words, I have even ventured
out; for it is ſaid,


Nor


[I 1


Nor bathing with cool water, nor a necklace
of pearls,” nor anointing with ſanders,”
yieldeth ſuch comfort to the body op-
preſſed with heat, as the language of a
good man, cheerfully uttered, doth to the
mind. To be ſurrounded with a good
connexion 1s, amongſt men of fair cha-
racter, equal to the charm of attraction.”

And in another place:

Betraying a ſecret, inſolicitude, ſeverity, in-
ſenſibility, anger, want of veracity, gaming:
All theſe are faults in a friend.


But of all theſe faults in due order, not one
is to be found in thee. It is ſaid,


Eloquence, and veracity of ſpeech, are to be
diſcovered by converſation ; the being ini-
mical with inconſtancy or unſteadineſs,
may be perceived at fight.

The friendſhip of thoſe who are of a pure

and gentle diſpoſition, acteth one way ;

and that of thoſe whoſe hearts are affected


with hollowneſs and deceit, another.


Then, as long as we both ſhall live, ſo long
let this our friendſhip be nouriſhed, like that
which exiſted between Rami and S56greevi.”

80


1


So Heerinyiki having promiſed his friend-
ſhip, and entertained the Crow with ſuch
proviſions as he had, retired into his hole;
and the Crow alſo retired to his uſual place
of abode.

From that time there exiſted a mutual
friendſhip between them. Day after day
paſſed away in making preſents to one an-
other'of proviſions, and the like ; in recipro-
cal enquiries after each other's health, and
in amuſing converſation. One day the Crow
ſaid to the Mouſe, Friend Heerinyiky, pro-
viſions are very difficult to be procured in
this place, wherefore I am about to aban-


don it, to repair to ſome other, Heerinyikis
replied,


Teeth, hair, nails, and the human ſpecies, -
proſper not when ſeparated from their
place. A wiſe man being informed of


this, ſhould not totally forſake his native
home.


Friend, obſerved the Crow, this is the ſen-
timent of weak men ; for it is ſaid;


Wiſe men, lions, and elephants, quit one
place and go to another; whilſt crows,


weak


[ 48 J


weak men, and the deer ſpecies, meet death
in the ſame place.


Then, whither ſhall we go? demanded
Heerinyaki. They ſay,


A wiſe man moveth with one foot, and
ſtandeth faſt with the. other. A man
ſhould not quit one place, until he hath
fixed upon another.


Said the Crow, There is a place well thought
of. Where is it? replied the Mouſe; and
the Crow replied, —In Dändäkäränyäa there is
a river celebrated by the name Kirpoorigow,
where there reſides my friend, by many years
accumulated kindneſs, a Tortoiſe of innate
virtue, whoſe name is Mänthärä. It is faid,


In giving advice to another, the experience
of every one may be beneficial; but in re-
ligion, the proper example of ſome one of
a very exalted mind.


He will treat us, added the Crow, with a va-

riety of choice fiſh. Heerinyaki then faid,

If I ſtay here, what ſhall I do? It is ſaid,
A man


[ 49 J


A man ſhould abandon that country, wherein
there is neither reſpe&t, nor employment,
nor connexions, nor the advancement of
ſcience.

Again:

A man ſhould not reſide in a place, wherein
theſe five things are not to be found: weal-
thy inhabitants, Brahmins learned in the
Veds,” a Raja, a river, and, in the fifth
place, a phyſician.


So conduct me there alſo, added the Mouſe,


The Crow accordingly ſat off with his
friend, and as they amuſed the time by con-
verſing upon a variety of pleaſing ſubjects,
they arrived with eaſe upon the banks of the
river. They were perceived at a conſiderable
diſtance by the tortoiſe Minthiri, He roſe
to receive them, and having firſt performed
the duties of hoſpitality to Ligh66-patinika,
he next extended them to Heerinyaka; ac-
cording to theſe lines:


Whether a child, or an old man, or a youth,
be come to thy houſe, he is to be treated
with reſpect; for of all men, thy gueſt is
the ſuperior.

= Fire


[ 50 J


Fire is the ſuperior of the Brähmäns, the
Brahmin 1s the ſuperior of the tribes, and
the huſband is the only ſuperior of women;
but the ſtranger is the ſuperior of all.

Whether he who is come to thy houſe be of
the higheſt, or even of the loweſt rank in
fociety, he is worthy to be treated with
due reſpect ; for of all men thy gueſt is
the ſuperior.


Friend, ſaid the Crow to the Tortoiſe, pray
pay attention to this ſtranger ; for he is the
very axis of thoſe who are famed for virtuous
deeds. His name is Heerinyaka, the prince
of mice, to celebrate whoſe great qualities,
the chief of ſerpents” may, ſometimes, have
occaſion to employ aſecond thouſand tongues.
Having ſaid this, he related the ſtory of the
Pigeon Chettri-greevi, The Tortoiſe Min-
thiri, having made reſpectful enquiries after
his health, ſaid to the Mouſe, —Be pleaſed to
inform me of thy motives for quitting thy
own uninhabited wilds; and Heerinyaka re-
plied, I | wal recount them.


; FaBLE V.

BE it known, ſaid he, that there is a city
called Chimpikivitee, where many mendi-
cants


„


cants are wont to reſort. Amongſt the reſt
there was one whoſe name was Choorakirni.”*
This mendicant, having placed the diſh con-
taining what was left of the alms he collected
upon a forked ſtick fixed in the wall, uſed to
go to ſleep, whilſt I, every day, contrived to
jump from a diſtance and devour the hoard.
At length, one day his friend, another men-
dicant, whoſe name was Veenakirni, came in,
and whilſt he was engaged with him talking
over various ſubjects, Choorakirna, in order
to frighten me away, ſtruck the ground with
a piece of a bamboo. 'This being obſerved
by Veenakarna, he ſaid, —What, at preſent,
thou art inattentive to my ſtory, and em-
ployed about ſomething elſe? It 1s ſaid,


A pleaſant countenance, and a mien with-
out pride; great attention to what is ſaid,
and ſweetneſs of ſpeech; a great degree
of kindneſs, and the appearance of awe;
are always tokens of a man's attachment.

SO,

Giving unwillingly, rendering void what

he did before, diſreſpectful behaviour, un-

kind actions, praiſing others, and, by the
aſſiſtance of tales, calumniating behind
E 2 one's


[ 52 J
one's back, are the ſigns of one who is
not attached,


To all this Choorakirni replied, I am not
inattentive to thy ſtory. Behold what it 1s!
This Mouſe is my plunderer. He is for ever
devouring the meat I get by begging, out of
that diſh. Upon this, Veenakirna having
examined the forked ſtick in the wall, ſaid, —
What, is it this little weak-looking Mouſe
who contrives to jump ſo very far? There
muſt be ſome reaſon to account for this; as
in the ſubject of theſe lines :


Without an apparent cauſe, a young woman by
force draweth an old man to her, and kiſſeth
him. When a huſband is embraced without
affettion, there muſt be ſome reaſon for it.


Choorikirni having demanded what this


meant, Veenakarni related the following
ſtory:


FABLE VI.


IN the country which is called Gowr,”
there is a city, by name Kowsamvee, where
dwelt Chindina-dami, a merchant of im-


menſe


1 53 J


menſe wealth. When in the laſt ſtage of
life, his underſtanding being blinded by de-
ſire, by the glare of his riches he obtained
for his wife Leelavitee,” the daughter of an-
other merchant. She was youthful, and, as
it were, the victorious banner of Makiri-
kẽtõõò, the god of love; ſo her aged partner
was ill calculated to be agreeable to her; for,


As the hearts of thoſe who are pinched with
cold, delight not in the rays of the moon;
nor of thoſe who are oppreſſed with heat,
in the beams of the ſun; ſo the heart of
a woman delighteth not in a huſband
ſtricken in years.

Again:

What name ſhall we give to the paſſions
of men, when their hairs are turned grey;
ſince women, with their hearts fixed on
others, regard them as a nauſeous drug?


But her old huſband was exceedingly fond of
her; according to theſe ſayings :


The luſt of wealth, and the hope of life, are
ever of importance to man; but a youth-


ful wife to an old man is dearer than life
itſelf. E 3


E
one's back, are the ſigns of one who is
not attached.


To all this Choorakirni replied, I am not
inattentive to thy ſtory. Behold what it is!
This Mouſe is my plunderer. He is for ever
devouring the meat I get by begging, out of
that diſh. Upon this, Veenakirni having
examined the forked ſtick in the wall, ſaid, —
What, is it this little weak-looking Mouſe
who contrives to jump ſo very far? There
muſt be ſome reaſon to account for this; as
in the ſubject of theſe lines :


Without an apparent cauſe, a young woman by
force draweth an old man to her, and kiſſeth
him. When a huſband is embraced without
affettion, there muſt be ſome reaſon for it.


Choorakirni having demanded what this
meant, Veenakirni related the following


ſtory:


FABLE VI.


IN the country which is called Gowr,”
there is a city, by name Kowsamvee, where
dwelt Chindini-dami, a merchant of im-


menſe


18


menſe wealth. When in the laſt ſtage of
life, his underſtanding being blinded by de-
fire, by the glare of his riches he obtained
for his wife Leelavitee, * the daughter of an-
other merchant. She was youthful, and, as
it were, the victorious banner of Mäkärä-
kẽtõò, the god of love; ſo her aged partner
was ill calculated to be agreeable to her; for,


As the hearts of thoſe who are pinched with
cold, delight not in the rays of the moon;
nor of thoſe who are oppreſſed with heat,
in the beams of the ſun; ſo the heart of
a woman delighteth not in a huſband
ſtricken 1n years.

Again:

What name ſhall we give to the paſſions
of men, when their hairs are turned grey;
ſince women, with their hearts fixed on
others, regard them as a nauſeous drug?


But her old huſband was exceedingly fond of
her ; according to theſe layings :


The luſt of wealth, and the hope of life, are
ever of importance to man; but a youth-


ful wife to an old man is dearer than life
itſelf. E 3


L584 ]
%* %* R X RX XM M ͤ * M XM XM * Vw
% # # # |
XR X R RM XM M % Xx X x % % % *
n


Nevertheleſs, Leelavitee, through the intoxi-
cation of youth, broke through the bounds
of the honour of her family, and attached
herſelf to a certain merchant's ſon.


Too much liberty whilſt reſident in her fa-
ther's houſe, attending feſtive proceſſions,
appearing in company in the preſence of
men contrary to propriety, the ſame in
by-ways, and aſſociating with women of
bad character, are the immediate deſtruc-
tion of innate morals. Sporting with
their huſband's infirmities, too, is to wo-
men the cauſe of ruin.

Again:

Drinking, keeping bad company, ſtaying
away from her huſband, gadding about,
ſlothfulneſs, and living at another's houſe,
are ſix things injurious to a woman.

Be there no place, be there no time, be there
no one to tempt them, then, O Narids, *
doth women's chaſtity appear.

* *


"i
2
£7
E
42
A
4
_
X
YL
*
1
.
5
F
15 L
=_ -
3
Oy
AJ
1
* *
74
1
4
*
os +


1 55 J


„eee + *%* * eee


+ * * „ „„ „ „ „„ „„ * * 9


Women, at all times, have been inconſtant;
even amongſt the celeſtials, we are told.
Happy is the portion of thoſe men whoſe
wives are guarded from error!

Women's virtue is founded upon a modeſt
countenance, preciſe behaviour, rectitude,
and the want of ſuitors.

They ſay,

Woman is like a pot of oil, and man a burn-
ing coal: A wiſe man will not put the oil
and the fire together.

In infancy the father ſhould guard her, in
youth her huſband ſhould guard her, and
in old age her children ſhould guard her;
for, at no time, is a woman proper to be
truſted with liberty.


K R M M M M AU % % * + + + %* + #* n * X * *
* * * * SSA EEE + +


One day, as ſhe was careleſsly fitting with
the merchant's ſon, in agreeable converſa-
tion, upon a ſopha white as camphire, and
fringed with ſtrings of gems, having unex-
pectedly diſcovered her huſband coming to-
wards them, ſhe roſe up in a great hurry,

ſeized


6. 6
ſeized him by the hair, and eagerly em-
bracing, began to kiſs him; whilſt the gal-
lant found means to eſcape. At the ſame
time, a certain procureſs, employed by the
young merchant, being by, ſaw her embrace


her huſband, and underſtanding her motive,
Leelavitee was corrected by a hidden rod.


Every book of knowledge which 1s known to
Oosina, or to Vreehiſpatee, is by nature
planted in the underſtanding of women.


Upon the whole, I ſay, Without a cauſe a
young woman &c. And hence there muſt be
ſome hidden cauſe for the extraordinary
ſtrength of this mouſe. He conſidered for a
moment, and at length determined that the
reaſon muſt be in a hoard of wealth: for,


In this world the wealthy are, every one,
every where, and at all times, powerful.
Riches are the foundation of preferment,
and an introduction to the prince.


Having ſaid this, a ſpade was brought, and
my hole being dug open by that mendicant,
the hoard which I had been accumulating

fox


11


for many years was carried away! After
this, day by day, my ſtrength decreaſed, and
having little power to exert myſelf, I was un-
able to procure even ſufficient to ſupport life;
and in this condition, as I was fearfully and
feebly ſculking about, I was obſerved by
Choorakirna, upon which he repeated the
following lines:


With wealth all are powerful ; from wealth
a man 1s eſteemed learned. Behold this
wicked mouſe! ſee how he 1s reduced to
the natural level of his ſpecies !


Deprived of riches, all the actions of a man
of little judgment diſappear, like trifling
ſtreams in the ſummer's heat,

And again:

He who hath riches hath friends, he who
hath riches hath relations; he who hath
riches 1s a man of conſequence in the
world; he who hath riches is eſteemed a
learned man.

The houſe of the childleſs is empty; and fo
is the heart of him who hath no wife.
The mind of a fool is empty; and every
thing is empty, where there is poverty.


They


( 38 ]


They fay alſo, 1
« Thoſe faculties are not injured.” This is a
mere ſaying. © That judgment is unim-
paired.” That alſo 1s but an expreſſion;
for the moment a man is deprived of the
comfort of riches, he is quite another,
Is not this curious ?


Having heard all this, I looked about me,
and reſolved that 1t would not, by any means,
be proper for me to ſtay there: Neither by
the bye is it proper that I ſhould communi-
cate my affairs to others ; for,


A wiſe man ſhould not make known the lots
of fortune, any malepractices in his houſe ;
his being cheated, nor his having been
diſgraced,

They ſay, likewiſe,

When the frowns of fortune are exceſſive,
and human endeavours are exerted in vain;
where, but in the wilderneſs, can comfort
be found for a poor man of ſenſibility ? |

A man of nice feelings willingly encountereth
death, rather than ſubmit to poverty : A
fire meeteth extinction, before it will yield
to be cold.


Again:


=


Again:

The fate of a man of feeling is, like that of
a tuft of flowers, two-fold : He may either
mount upon the head of all, or go to de-
cay in the wilderneſs,


To live deſpiſed is reprobated exceedingly,

Hence, |

It is better that the (funeral) fire ſhould be
blown up by the breath of life of a man
deprived of riches, than that he ſhould be
ſolicited by the poor, when deſtitute of
the means of relief.

Again:

From poverty a man cometh to ſhame; and
being overwhelmed with diſgrace, he is to-
tally deprived of power. Without power
he is oppreſſed, and from oppreſſion cometh
grief. Loaded with grief, he becometh
melancholy ; and impaired by melancholy,
he is forſaken by reaſon; and with the
loſs of reaſon, he goeth to deſtruction.
Alas! the want of riches is the founda-
tion of every misfortune.

Again :

It is better to guard filence, than that the

words which are uttered ſhould be untrue.


It


1 60 ]


It is better to be nothing, than to ſeduce
the wife of another. It 1s better to aban-
don life, than to delight in cruel conver-
ſation. It is better to live by begging
one's bread, than to gratify the mouth at
the expence of others.


Want maketh even ſervitude honourable;
light, total darkneſs; beauty, deformity; and
even the words of Hiree, with a hundred
good qualities, crimes. What then, ſhall I
nouriſh myſelf with another's cake? This
would be to open a ſecond door to death.


For,


When a man 1s in indigence, picking herbs 1s
his philoſophy ;* the enjoyment of his wife
his only commerce, and vaſſalage his food.

Again: =

Death is life to him who is ſubject to ſick-
neſs, who hath been long an exile, who
liveth upon another's bread, or ſleepeth
under another's roof; for death eaſeth
him of all his pain.


Having conſidered all this, I have again,


through covetouſneſs, made up my mind to
accept


4 ©


1


accept of ſome of thy proviſions. But it
is ſaid,


With covetouſneſs reaſon departeth: Covet-
ouſneſs engendereth avarice; and the man
who is tormented with avarice experien-
ceth pain, both here and hereafter.


Hence, after I had been ſtruck with the bro-
ken piece of bamboo by Veenakirni, I began
to conſider, that the covetous were unhappy,
and aſſuredly their own enemy. It is ſaid,


He whoſe mind is at eaſe is poſſeſſed of all
riches: Is it not the ſame to one whoſe
foot is incloſed in a ſhoe, as if the whole
ſurface of the earth were covered with
leather?


Again:
Where have they, who are running here and
there in ſearch of riches, ſuch happineſs as
thoſe placid ſpirits enjoy, who are gratified
at the immortal fountain of happineſs?
All hath been read, all hath been heard, and
all hath been followed by him, who ha-
ving put hope behind him, dependeth not
upon expectation.


Fortunate


1 62 J


Fortunate is the life of that man, by whom
the door of the noble hath not been at-
tended; by whom the pain of ſeparation
hath not been experienced; and by whom
the voice of an eunuch* hath not been
heard.

Again:

To one, O Naridi,* borne away by the thirſt
of gain, a hundred Yojana appear not far;
even after he hath the treaſure in his hand.


It is good, then, to be entirely ſeparated far
from the uſual occaſions of life.


What 1s religion ? Compaſſion for all things
which have life. What 1s happineſs? To
animals in this world, health. What 1s
kindneſs? A principle in the good. What
is philoſophy ? An entire ſeparation from
the world.

It is ſaid,

A man may forſake one perſon to ſave a fa-
mily; he may deſert a whole family for
the ſake of a village; and ſacrifice a vil-
lage for the ſafety of the community; but
for himſelf he may abandon the whole
world.


But,


( 63 J


But,

To thoſe who ſeek employment, it is eſteemed
a favour to be an appendage only. of a
great man's ſtation. The ſerpent Vais66-
kee* is contented to feed on air, whilſt
hanging to the neck of Härä.“

It is, either water without labour, or ſweet
bread attended by fear and danger. I have
examined this; and I plainly fee, that is
happineſs wherein there is eaſe,


80, having conſidered all this, I am come to
an uninhabited wilderneſs ; for,


It 1s better to dwell in a foreſt hauuted by
tigers and lions, the trees our habitation,
flowers, fruits and water for food, the
graſs for a bed, and the bark of the trees
for garments, than to live amongſt rela-
tions, after the loſs of wealth.


Wherefore, as long as the ſtock of virtue ac-
quired by birth ſhall laſt,” I will, with this
true friend, be attached to thee by kind ſer-
vices; and by this ſingle virtuous act, I may
obtain that place in heaven which is conſe-
crated to friendſhip.” They ſay,

Ot


— 64 ]


Of the poiſonous tree, the world, two ſpecies
of fruit are produced, ſweet as the water
of life : Poetry, whoſe taſte 1s like the im-
mortal juice, and the ſociety of good men.

Again:

Society, faith in Kesivi,”* and immerging in
the waters of the Ganges, may be eſteemed
three very eſſential things in this tranſitory
world. |

Riches are as the duſt of the feet, youth like
the rapidity of a river flowing down a hill,
manhood like a drop of water, tranſient
and unſteady; and human life like froth.
He who doth not perform the duties of
religion, with a ſteady mind, to open the
bars of heaven's gate, will, hereafter, when
ſmitten with ſorrow, and bent down with
old age, burn with the fire of contrition.


To all this the Tortoiſe Mänthärä replied,
Sir, your fault was this: You laid up too
large a ſtock. It 1s ſaid,


Giving away 1s the inſtrument for accumu-
lated treaſures : It is like a bucket for the
diſtribution of the waters depoſited in the
bowels of a well.


He


3


He who, in oppoſition to his own happineſs,
delighteth in the accumulation of riches,
carrieth burthens for others, and is the
vehicle of trouble.

Another:

If we are rich with the riches of which we

neither give nor enjoy, we are rich with


the riches which are buried in the caverns
of the earth.


Without enjoyment, the wealth of the miſer
is the ſame to him as if it were another's.
But when it is ſaid of a man, he hath ſo
much, it is with difficulty he can be induced
to part with it.


They ſay,

The wealth of the miſer goeth neither to the
celeſtials, nor to the Brahmins, nor to
his kindred, nor to himſelf; but to the
fire, the thief, and the magiſtrate.

And,

He who eateth. by meaſure, whilſt his trea-
{ure is buried low in the ground, is pre-
paring for a journey to a manſion below.”

So,

Giving with kind words, knowledge without
pride, heroiſm accompanied by clemency,

| F and


1 66 ]


and wealth with liberality, are four excel-
lencies hard to be found.


A


It is ſaid,
hoard ſhould always be made; but not too


great a hoard. A Jackal, through the fault
of hoarding too much, was killed by a Bow.


How was this? demanded Heeranyakaz;
and Manthiri related the following ſtory.


FABZTE VII.
A certain huntſman, by name Bhurivi, an


inhabitant of Kilyani-kittiki,” being fond


of


fleſh, once upon a time went to hunt in


the foreſts of the VEEndhyi mountains,” and
having killed a Deer, as he was carrying him
away, he chanced to ſee a wild boar of a
formidable appearance. So laying the deer
upon the ground, he wounded the boar with
an arrow; but, upon his approaching him,
the horrid animal ſet up a roar dreadful as
the thunder of the clouds, and wounding him


in


ax.


the groin, he fell like a tree cut off by the
At the ſame time, a ſerpent, of that ſpe-


cies which is called Ajigari, preſſed by hunger
and wandering about, roſe up and bit the


boar,


1


boar, who inſtantly fell helpleſs upon him,
and remained upon the ſpot. For,


The body having encountered ſome efficient
cauſe, water, fire, poiſon, the ſword, hun-
ger, ſickneſs, or a fall from an eminence,
is forſaken by the vital ſpirits.”


In the mean time, a Jackal, by name
Deerghi-rivi,” prowling about in ſearch of
prey, diſcovered the deer, the huntſman, and
the boar; and having obſerved them, he ſaid
to himſelf, —Here is a fine feaſt prepared
for me.


As, to corporeal beings, unthought-of trou-
bles arrive; ſo, in like manner, do bleſ-
ſings make their appearance, In this, I
think providence hath extended them far-
ther than uſual.


Be it ſo, as long as with their fleſh I ſhall
have food to eat. The man will laſt me for
a whole month, and the deer and the boar for
two more; then the ſerpent will ſerve me a
day; and let me taſte the bow-ftring too.
But, in the firſt place, let me try that which
is the leaſt ſavoury. Suppoſe, then, I eat this

F 2 catgut


191


catgut line which is faſtened to the bow:
Saying ſo, he drew near to eat it; but the in-
ſtant he had bit the gut in two, his belly was
ripped open by the ſpring of the bow; and
he was reduced to the ſtate of the five ele-
ments. I ſay, therefore, A hoard &c.


That I eſteem wealth which 1s given to the
worthy, and what 1s. day by day, enjoyed ;
the reſt is a reſerve for one knoweth not
whom.


Then, at preſent, what is the purport of this
exceſſive uſe of the force of words to exem-
plity ?


Men of philoſophic minds do not long for
what is not attainable, and are not willing
to lament what 1s loſt; neither are they
wont to be embarraſſed in times of ca-
lamity.

Thoſe who have even ſtudied good books,
may ſtill be fools. That man is learned,
who reduceth his learning to practice.
That medicine is well imagined, which
doth, more than nominally, reſtore the
health of the afflicted.

The


[ 69 J
The precepts of philoſophy* effect not the
leaſt benefit to one confirmed in fear. To


a blind man, of what uſe 1s a lamp, al-
though it be burning in his hand ?


After all, added the Tortoiſe, it is beſt to be ſa-
tisfied in this region of good and evil deſtiny.


I cannot agree to that, replied Heerin-
yaka ; for,


To a hero of a ſound mind, what is his own,
and what a foreign country? Wherever
he halteth, that place is acquired by the
{ſplendor of his arms. He quencheth his
thirſt with the blood of the royal elephant,
even in the foreſt which the lion teareth
up with his teeth, and his claws the wea-
pons of his feet.

Again:

As frogs to the pool, as birds to a lake full
of water; ſo doth every ſpecies of wealth
neceſſarily flow to the hands of him who
exerteth himſelf.

They ſay,

When pleaſure is arrived, it is worthy of at-

tention; when trouble preſenteth itſelf,
FE F-43 the


1


the ſame: Pains and pleaſures have their
revolutions like a wheel!
Again:

Likſhmee” herſelf attendeth a man in ſearch
of a reſidence, who is endued with reſolu-
tion, of noble principles, acquainted with
the rules of action, untainted with law-


leſs pleaſures, brave, a judge of merit, and
of ſteady friendſhip.
Again:

A wiſe man, even deſtitute of riches, enjoyeth
elevated, and very honourable ſtations;
whilſt the wretch, endowed with wealth,
acquireth the poſt of diſgrace.

One, although not poſſeſſed of a mine of gold,
may find, the offspring of his own nature,
that noble ardour, which hath for its ob-
ject the accompliſhment of the whole aſ-
ſemblage of virtues.


Hear this, my friend, replied the Tortoiſe.


What, though thou wert rich and of high
eſteem, doſt thou yield to ſorrow, becauſe

of thy loſs of fortune? The riſings and
ſinkings of human affairs are like thoſe of
a ball which is thrown by the hand.


Obſerve,


1


. Obſerve, |

The ſhadow of a cloud, the ſatisfaction of
the vulgar, new corn, women, youth, and
riches, are to be enjoyed but for a ſhort
time.

Again:

Man ſhould not be over- anxious for a ſub-
ſiſtence, for it is provided by the Creator.
The infant no ſooner droppeth from the
womb, than the breaſts of the mother be-
gin to ſtream.

My friend:

He, by whom the geeſe were formed white,
parrots are ſtained green, and peacocks
painted of various hues, — even he will pro-
vide for their ſupport.


Attend alſo, my friend, to theſe ſecrets of
the wiſe men.


How are riches the means of happineſs? In
acquiring they create trouble, in their loſs
they occaſion ſorrow, and they are the
cauſe of endleſs diviſions amongſt kindred!

It were a bleſſing, for the ſake of virtue, if
he who hath a luſt of gain were deprived
of deſire. Where there is a ſplaſhing of

dirt,


72 J


dirt, it is good not to meddle, — to "A
far away.

As meat 1s devoured by the birds in Uh alr,
by the beaſts in the field, and by the fiſhes
in the waters; ſo, in every ſituation, there
is plenty.

The rich man hath cauſe of fear, fre the
magiſtrate, from water, from fire, from the
robber, not leſs from his own people, even
as from death the living. |

In this life of many troubles, what pain 1s
greater than this?—Defire without nk
when that defire turneth not away !

Man ſhould conſider this: That riches are
not eaſily acquired; when acquired, they
are with difficulty preſerved ; and that the


loſs of what hat been acquired 1s like
death.


So allo :

Were the thirſt of gain entirely forſaken,
who would be poor? Who would be rich?
It way were given to it, ſlavery would
ſtand upon the head.

Whatever a man ſhould long for, from that
his inclination turneth away. He whoſe
inclination turneth away from an object,

may be ſaid to have obtained it.


But


8-3


But why ſo much upon this ſubject? Let us
beguile the time together in amuſing con-
verſation.


Men who are acquainted with their own na-
ture, paſs their days, until the period of
death, in gladneſs, free from anger, in the
enjoyment of the preſent moment, un-
mindful of the world, and free from ap-
prehenſion.

Again:

The life of an animal, until the hour of his
death, paſſeth away in diſciplines, in ele-
vations and depreſſions, in unions and
ſeparations.


O! thou art a worthy perſon, Mänthärä,
obſerved the Crow ;—a place of confidence,
and a being for protection !


The good are always ready to be the up-
holders of the good in their misfortunes.
Elephants even are wont to bear the bur-
thens of elephants, who have ſunk in the
mire.

SO,

The virtuous delight in the virtuous ; but he
who is deſtitute of the practice of virtue,

delighteth


11


delighteth not in the virtuous. The bee
retireth from the foreſt to the lotus, whilſt
the frog is deſtitute of a ſhelter.
Again : |

He is one in this world worthy to be praiſed
of mankind, he is a great and a good man,
from whom the needy, or thoſe who come
for protection, go not away with diſap-
pointed hopes, and diſcontented counte-
nances.


In this manner did they paſs their time;
and, contented with their particular food,
they dwelt happily together.


After a while, one day a certain Deer, by
name Veecheetrangi, who had been alarmed
by ſome one, came there with his heart pant-
ing with fear, and was joined by the reſt;
but as they expected that he was purſued by
ſomething which had been the cauſe of his
apprehenſions, Minthiri went into the wa-
ter, the Mouſe into a hole, and the Crow
flew to the top of a tree. Ligh66-patanaki
looked on all ſides; and being ſatisfied re-
ſpecting their fears, they all joined company
again. Health! friend Deer, ſaid the Tor-

toiſe,


v "4 7 N — . — * Ms * "OE" W S N h * * ,
n * ps” abs — V r N „ ² A ˙ ¹ T ²˙mm WS" . *
— EAST OI OTE ON ge RET 0 r I nt COPEL EG ECT TO EWING" wry


1


toiſe, thou art welcome. Mayſt thou find
proviſions to thy heart's deſire in this ſitua-
ation! May this foreſt never be rendered the
property of a maſter!


To this the Deer Cheetranga replied, —I
was alarmed by a huntſman, and I am come
to you for protection.


It is declared by the wiſe men, that the crime
of him who ſhall forſake one who, through
want or danger, may come to him for pro-


tection, is the ſame as the murder of a
Brahman.


And I wiſh alſo to cultivate a friendſhip with
you, Sir, ſaid the Mouſe, —Your friend-


ſhip with us is accompliſhed without much
trouble; for,


Friends are ſaid to be of four diſtinctions:
one's own offspring, a connexion, one de-
ſcended from the ſame genealogical ſeries,


and one whom we may have preſerved
from misfortunes.


So let us dwell together, added the Mouſe,
without diſtinction.


The


I 90 }


The Deer, upon hearing this, was ren-
dered happy. He ate of what was his uſual
food, and having drank ſome water, he laid
himſelf down in the ſhade of a tree which
grew in the ſtream.


Well water, the ſhade of a Bitti tree,” a
ſwarthy woman, and a brick houſe, ſhould
be warm in the cold, and cool in the hot
ſeaſon.


Friend Deer, ſaid the Tortoiſe Minthiri,
by whom wert thou alarmed? What, are
there huntſmen coming to this deſolate fo-
reſt? There is ſome very important news,
ſaid the Deer, which I will communicate.
In the country which is called Kilzenga”
there is a prince whoſe name is Reo6kman-
gidi, He is juſt returned from his con-
queſts of the countries about him, and his
anger being altogether appeaſed, he has taken
up his refidence upon the banks of the river
Chindri-bhiga, To-morrow early he has
reſolved to come to fiſh in the river Kar-
phoora. This I overheard from the mouth
of one of the ſportfmen. Having inveſti-

gated this affair, ſo much to be dreaded, let
| the


1


the neceſſary means be purſued for our ſafety.
The Tortoiſe upon hearing theſe words, fear-
fully exclaimed, —I will flee to the water for
protection! The Crow and the Deer ſaid, —
Be it fo. The Mouſe, Heerinyiki, conſi-
dered for a moment, and ſaid,


When Mänthärä ſhall be in the water, it will
be good for him. It appeareth to me im-
proper that he ſhould be found crawling
upon dry ground.

They ſay,

The ſtrength of aquatick animals is the wa-
ters; of thoſe who dwell in towns, a caſtle;
of foot ſoldiers, their own ground; of
princes, an obedient army.


But, friend Läghöö-pätänäkä, I hope by
this advice, he will not ſuffer the regret ex-
perienced by a certain Merchant.


How was this? faid they ;—and Heeran-
yaka recounted as follows:


Fapre VIII.
IN the country of Kanyi-koobya there was
a Raja, whoſe name was Veeri-sni, | by
whom


13


whom his royal ſon, by name T66nga-vila,”*
had been appointed Y66vi-raja * over the city
of Veeri-poora, He was young and poſſeſſed
of great riches. Once upon a time, as he was
walking about his own city, he took notice
of a certain merchant's wife, who was in
the very prime of youth, and ſo beautiful,
that ſhe was, as it were, the ſtandard of
conqueſt of Mikiri-ketsd. * She alſo, whoſe
name was Lavänyävätẽẽ, having obſerved
him, her breaſt was rent in pieces by the
deſtructive arrows of the god of love, and
ſhe gladly became of one mind with him.—
It is ſaid,


Unto women no man is to be found diſ-
agreeable, no one agreeable. They may
be compared to a heifer on the plain, that
ſtill longeth for freſh graſs.

Infidelity, violence, deceit, envy, extreme ava-
riciouſneſs, a total want of good qualities,
with impurity, are the innate faults of
woman-kind.


The young Raja being returned to his pa-
lace, with a heart quite occupied with love,
ſent a female meſſenger to her, to whoſe
words


11


words having attended, Lavinyivitee made
ſuch a reply as was calculated to deceive.
Said ſhe,,—I am faithful to my huſband, and
I am not accuſtomed even to touch another
man ; for,


She 1s not worthy to be called a wife, in
whom the huſband delighteth not. The
huſband 1s the aſylum of women ; and of
his honour the fire beareth teſtimony.”

The beauty of the Kokeeli'® is his voice;
the beauty of a wife 1s conſtancy to her
huſband ; the beauty of the ill-favoured is
ſcience; the beauty of the penitent is
patience.

She 1s a wife who 1s clever in the houſe; ſhe
is a wife who is fruitful in children; ſhe
is a wife who is the ſoul of her huſband ;


ſhe is a wife who is obedient to her huſ-
band.


And according: to this doctrine, I make it a
rule to do whatever the lord of my life di-
rects, without examination. To this the
meſſenger replied, —It is right; and Lavin-
yavatee obſerved, that it was even ſo.


The


80 ]


The meſſenger having heard the whole of
what Livinyivatee had to ſay, reported it to
Toongavala, who obſerved, that he would
invite her with that dear huſband of hers,
and, in his preſence, pay her great attention
and reſpect. To this the meſſenger replied, —
This is impracticable. Let art be uſed; for
it is ſaid,


That which cannot be effected by force may be
atchieved by cunning. An Elephant was killed
by a Jackal, by going over a ſwampy place.


How was this? demanded the Raja's ſon.
And the meſſenger related the following
ſtory.


FaBLE IX.


IN the foreſt Brahmiranya there was an
Elephant, whoſe name was Kirphoora-
t&Eliki, who having been obſerved by the
Jackals, they all determined, that if he could
by any ſtratagem be killed, he would be
four months proviſions for them all. One
of them, who was exccedingly viciouſly in-
clined, and by nature treacherous, declared,
that he would engage, by the ſtrength of his

own


81 ]


own judgment, to effect his death. Some
time after, this deceitful wretch went up to
the elephant, and having ſaluted him, ſaid,
Godlike Sir! Condeſcend to grant me an au-
dience. Who art thou? demanded the ele-
phant, and whence comeſt thou? My name,
replied he, is Kſhõõdrä-böòòddhèe, a Jackal,
ſent into thy preſence by all the inhabitants
of the foreſt, aſſembled for that purpoſe, to
repreſent, that as it is not expedient to reſide
in ſo large a foreſt as this, without a chief,
your Highneſs, endued with all the cardinal
virtues, hath been ſelected to be anointed
Raja of the woods.


It is ſaid,

He who, by walking for ever in the ways of
thoſe who are preferred, is exceedingly
pure, of a noble mind, virtuous and juſt,
and experienced in the rules of policy, is
worthy to be choſen maſter of the earth.


Again:
The lord of the land, like the clouds, is the


reſervoir of the people; for when the


clouds fail, do they not find ſuccour in
their king?
G But


1 2 3


But,

In this world, which is ſubject to the power
of one above, a man of good principles is
hard to be found living in a country, for
the moſt part, governed by the uſe of
the rod.

From the dread of the rod, like a woman of
good repute unto her huſband, he will
repair for protection, even unto the
weak, or unfortunate; to the ſick, or to
the poor.


Then, that we may not loſe the lucky
moment, continued the Jackal, be pleaſed to
follow quickly. Saying this, he cocked his
tail and went away. The Elephant, whoſe
reaſon was perverted by the luſt of power,
took the ſame road as the Jackal, and fol-
lowed him ſo exactly, that, at length, he
ſtuck faſt in a great mire. O my friend!
cried the Elephant, what is to be done in
this diſaſter? I am ſinking in a deep mire!
The Jackal laughed, and ſaid, —Pleaſe your
divine highnefs, take hold of my tail with
your trunk, and get out! This ts the fruit
of thoſe words which thou didſt place con-
fidence in.


They


=


They ſay,
As often as thou ſhalt be deprived of the ſo-
ciety of the good, ſo often ſhalt thou fall
into the company of knaves.


After a few days, the Elephant dying for
want of food, his fleſh was devoured by the


Jackals. I ſay, therefore, That which cannot
be effected by force, &c.


The young Raja, by the advice of his meſ-
ſenger, ſent for the huſband of Lavinyivates,
and having treated him with great marks of
attention, took him into his ſervice, and em-
ployed him in the moſt confidential affairs.
One day, when the young, Raja had bathed
and anointed himſelf, and was cloathed in
robes of gold, he ſaid to the huſband, —
Charoodanti, I am going to give a feaſt to
the goddeſs Gowree, which will laſt for a
month, and this evening it ſhall commence.
Go then, and, juſt before night, bring to me
a young virgin of ſingular beauty ; and when
{he hath been preſented, ſhe ſhall have due
reſpect paid to her, according to what is or-
dained. Charoodanti did as he was com-
manded, and brought to his maſter ſuch a
G 2 young


L 84 ]


young woman as he had deſcribed; and ha-
ving delivered her, he privately reſolved to
find out how ſhe was treated. The young
Raja, Toongavala cauſed the young woman
to fit down upon a rich ſofa ; and having
entertained her with coſtly preſents of cloth
and garments, and given her a keepſake, he,
that inſtant, ſent her to her own houſe.
Charoodinti having been a ſpectator of all
which had paſſed, ſaid to himſelf, - This is a
man of ſtrict principles, who regardeth the
woman of another as his own mother. So
after that, through the confidence created by
this ſtratagem, his mind being biaſſed by
the luſt of gain, he fetched his own wife and
preſented her; and the young Raja upon be-
holding Lavanyavatee, the delight of his
heart, exclaimed, Dear Lavinyavatee! whi-
ther art thou going? Saying this, he got
up from his ſeat, and, quite forgetful who
was preſent, began to embrace her; and at
length, with his eyes half cloſed with ex-
treme happineſs, he led her to a ſofa richly
ornamented with ſtrings of precious gems ;
whilſt Char66dinti, the miſerable huſband,
- ſtood gazing at her, motionleſs as a ſtatue.
And thus was a fool, by his own contrivance,
plunged


l


plunged into the greateſt diſtreſs. Now, I


fear leſt a ſimilar fate ſhould befal thee, con-
cluded the Mouſe.


Mänthärä having attended to what had
been ſaid by the Mouſe, in great fear cried
out, My friends, I muſt go for ſecurity into
the water. Saying this, he marched away,
and Heeranyaki and the reſt followed him;
but they had not gone far, before Mänthära
was ſeized by a certain ſportſman, who
chanced to be hunting about in that foreſt,
and who, finding himſelf hungry and fa-
tigued, immediately faſtened his game to the
end of his bow, and turned his face towards
home. The Deer, the Crow, and the Mouſe,
were exceedingly ſorry for this event; and


Heeranyaka expreſſed his lamentations in
theſe lines:


Before I have attained the end of one trouble,
boundleſs as the great ocean, ſtill a ſecond
is ready to ſucceed! How many misfor-
tunes come upon me for my faults !

A friend, who is ſo by nature, is the gift
of providence. Such unfeigned friendſhip
1s not extinguiſhed, even in misfortunes.

G 3 Men


1 36 ]


Men have not that confidence in their mo-
thers, in their wives, in thoſe of the ſame
womb, nor in their own offsprings, as in
one who is a friend in principle.


In this manner having lamented the fate
of the Tortoiſe, the Mouſe continued, crying
out, —Oh ! how hard is my fate! in the fol-
lowing words :


By me have been experienced, even here, as
the fruits of the ſtate of exiſtence, in ſome
certain birth, the good and evil ſhut up in
time, which are the ſeekings of the off-
ſprings of our own works.

The body is compounded with diſorders, the
ſtate of opulence with calamities, advan-
tages with diſadvantages! Thus every


thing is produced with a companion who
ſhall deſtroy it.


Having again pondered for a while, he ex-
claimed, |


By whom was conſtructed that jewel of a
word, the monoſyllable FRIEND, that diſ-
peller of fear the harbinger of grief, and


the confidential repofitory of our joys?
But,


11


But,

A friend who is a pleaſing collyrium to the
eyes, the delight of the heart, and a veſſel
in which may be depoſited both joy and
ſorrow, is hard to be found by a friend.

All other friends, tainted with the luſt of
gain, are every where to be found in times
of proſperity; and adverſity is their touch-
ſtone.


Heeranyaka having in this manner greatly
lamented the fate of his friend, ſaid to the
Deer Cheetranga and the Crow, Let our
efforts be exerted for the deliverance of Min-
thira, before the hunter departs from the
foreſt. Let us, ſaid they, be inſtructed in
what we ſhould do. Let Cheetrangi go near
the water, faid Heeranyaki, and feign him-
ſelf ſenſeleſs and dead, and let the Crow ap-
pear as if he were pecking at him; when the
hunter, ſpying a Deer, and longing to taſte
of his fleſh, will be overjoyed, and ſo laying
the Tortoiſe upon the ground, will run to
ſecure him. In the mean time I will gnaw
aſunder the cords by which Mänthära is con-
fined. The Deer and the Crow did as they
were inſtructed immediately, The hunter
being


1


being thirſty, laid the Tortoiſe upon the
ground, and having drank ſome water, ſat
down in the ſhade of a tree, when he diſco-
vered the Deer in the ſituation above de-
ſcribed. He concluded that he had been
killed by ſome ſportſman, and pleaſed with
his good fortune, went towards him with a
knife in his hand. In the mean time Hee-
rinyaki contrived to looſen the cords by
which Mänthärä was held; who finding him-
ſelf at liberty made haſte into the water;
whilſt the Deer ſeeing the huntſman ap-
proaching, ſtarted up and ran away. The
huntſman then turned back, and repairing
to the foot of the tree, and not finding the
Tortoiſe there, he began to reflect in this
manner: — I have been ſerved right, ſaid he,
for not having been more circumſpect.


He who forſaketh a certainty, and attendeth


to an uncertainty, loſeth both the certainty
and the uncertainty together.


So, having ſaid this, he returned home
diſappointed by his own folly; and the
Tortoiſe with the reſt remained together in
mutual happineſs,


The


1


The Rija's ſons, then ſaid, —We have all
been greatly entertained; and now is com-
pleated what we firſt wiſhed for. May every
other of your Highneſles inclinations, re-
plied Veeſhno6-Sarma, be accompliſhed like
this !


May you, ye good! find friends in this world!
May Likſhmee be for ever to be found!
May Princes, reſting upon their particular
duty, govern and protect the earth!

May the conduct of thoſe who act well afford
pleaſure to the mind! By words alone no
one is great. May he on whoſe diadem is
a creſcent, * cauſe proſperity to the people
of the earth !


CHAP. IL


THE SEPARATION OF A FAVOURITE.


AVING, Sir, ſaid the young Princes,
1 heard The Acquiſition of a Friend, we

are now anxious to be informed of what re-
ſpects The Separation of a Favourite.


Attend


90 J


Attend then, anſwered Veeſhn85-Sirmi,
and you ſhall hear concerning the Separation
of a Favourite; of which theſe lines are an
introduction:


In à certain foreft there ſubfiſted a great and in-
creaſing friendſhip between a Lion and a Bull,


which is defiroyed by a cruel and very envious
Jackal.


How was this? demanded the Raja's ſons;
and Veeſhnoo-Sirma relates the following


ftory :
FABLE I.


ON the ſouthern road is a city, by name
Rätnävätẽẽ, where uſed to dwell a mer-
chant's fon, who was called Varddhimana, *
though poſſeſſed of abundant wealth, ſeeing
others his relations very nic his reſolution
was, that his own greatneſs ſhould (till be


increaſed, They ſay,


Greatneſs doth not approach him who is for
ever looking down; and all thofe who are
looking high are growing poor.


Again:


18 1


Again:

Even a man who hath murdered a Brahmin
is reſpectable, if he hath abundant wealth.
He may be of a race like that of the
moon, ' ſtill, if he be without riches, he
will be deſpiſed.

Lakſhmee, like a young woman an old huſ-
band, doth not hke to take unto her one
without energy, the idle, him who truſteth
in fate alone, or the man who 1s become
deſtitute by his own extravagance.

Idleneſs, the worſhip of women, the being
afflicted with diſorder, a fooliſh partiality
for one's own native place, diſcontented-
neſs, and timidity, are ſix obſtructions to
greatneſs.

It is alſo ſaid,

A man ſhould try to obtain what he hath
not, having obtained it he ſhould keep it
with care, what hath been preſerved he
ſhould increaſe, and being increaſed he


ſhould give it away at places of holy viſi-
tation. |


He whoſe days are paſſed away without giving
or enjoying, puffing like the bellows of a
blackſmith, liveth but by breathing.


From


1


From the endeavours of one who longeth
for what he hath not got, reſulteth the acqui-
ſition. Property which hath been acquired,
not being taken care of, waſteth of itſelf.
Riches which are not recruited, like a colly-
rium, by ever ſo ſmall an expenditure, are
in time reduced to nothing; if they are not
appropriated, they are uſeleſs.


What hath he to do with wealth, who neither
giveth nor enjoyeth? What hath he to
do with ſtrength, who doth not exert it
againſt the foe? What hath he to do with
the holy law, who doth not practice virtue?
What hath he to do with a ſoul, who doth
not keep his paſſions in ſubjection?

Again :

Having beheld the decreaſe of a collyrium,
and the collected heap of the white ant,
a man ſhould ſpend his days, which are
not to be retarded, in acts of charity, and
the ſtudy of virtue.


By the fall of drops of water, by degrees, a
pot is filled. Let this be an example for
the acquiſition of all knowledge, virtue,
and riches.


Theſe


[93]


Theſe were the cogitations of the mer-
chant; who, accordingly took two bulls, the
one called Sing-jeeviki, the other Nän-
dini, and having yoked them to a cart
loaded with ſundry precious articles, departed
for Kaſmeeri, * for the purpoſe of trade.


For,

What 1s too great a load for thoſe who have
ſtrength? What 1s diſtance to the indefa-
tigable? What 1s a foreign country to
thoſe who have ſcience? Who is a ſtranger


to thoſe who have the habit of ſpeaking
kindly?


As they were going over the mountain which
is called S56d6orgi, * Sing-jeeviki fell down
and brake his knee; ſeeing which, Varddhi-
mana meditated in this manner :


One acquainted with men and manners may
exerciſe his endeavours here and there; but,
after all, the fruit will be whatever is in
the will of providence.

But,

Heſitation ſhould be abandoned as the op-
ponent of every action; whence, having

forſaken


94 J


forſaken heſitation, let ſucceſs attend the
performance.


Having thus determined, Varddhimini
quitting Sing-jeevaki, purſued his journey;
and the poor bull by reſting his whole weight
upon three feet contrived to get up; for,


The deſtined age of every one defendeth the
vitals of one plunged into the water, fallen
from a precipice, or bitten by a ſerpent.


In a few days, by feeding well upon what
was moſt agreeable to him, he grew plump
and full of ſpirits ; and as he wandered about
through the tracks of the foreſt, he made a
great beHowing. In this ſame foreſt there
reſided Péëngäläkä, a Lion, in the full
enjoyment of the pleaſures of a dominion
acquired by the ſtrength of his own arm;
for it is ſaid,


There is no ceremony of anomting, or inau-
guration, performed by the other animals
upon the lion. To be head of the beaſts
is the natural right of him who ſubdueth
the kingdom by his proweſs.

| One


.


90 1


One day, the Lion being thirſty, went to
the river ſide to drink of its waters; when,
hearing the bellowing of Sing-jeevaka, a kind
of noiſe he had never heard before, and which
to him appeared as dreadful as the unſeaſon-
able roaring of a cloud, he turned away
without drinking, and went back to his
abode trembling with fear; where he ſtood
ſilently meditating what it could be. In this
ſituation the Raja having been diſcovered by
two Jackals of his council, Kirattiki and
Diminiki,* the latter ſaid to the former, —
How 1s this, my friend, that the Lion, al-
though thirſty, has not drank his uſual
draught, and ftays at home ſo dull and de-
jected? Friend Dämänäkä, replied Kirat-
tiki, in my opinion we ought not to ſerve
this ſame Raja any longer; and that being
the cafe, for what purpoſe ſhould we inveſti-
gate his motions, when we have ſerved him


ſo many years and experienced nothing but
trouble ?


See what is done by ſerving by thoſe ſlaves
who are covetous of wealth! And ſee alſo


what liberty the body is n of by
thofe fools !


Again :


— wy *
_ N


. Py 2
3 1 *
— — 5 - 4 a= — = *
r BL _— |
fy 4+ = © - * —


d er 2


=
|
|


1 96 (


Again:


Thoſe who are the dependents of another


ſuffer cold, and wind, and heat, and fa-
tigue! A wiſe man with a portion of it
could do penance and be happy.

So far life is worth having: To poſſeſs a
livelihood without conſtraint ; for if thoſe
who dwell under the authority of others
live, pray who are the dead ?


Work, go, fall, riſe, ſpeak, be ſilent! In
this manner do the rich ſport with thoſe
needy men, who are held by _ gripe of
dependence


Fools for the ſake of gain, as harlots do,
dreſs themſelves, and dreſs themſelves, to
become the implements of others


Here is another very particular picture of
a ſervant:


He humbleth himſelf to be exalted ; for a
living he expendeth his vitals ; he ſuffereth
pain to acquire eaſe. Who is there fo
great a fool, as he who ſerveth ? )


If he is ſilent, he is ſtupid ; z 1f rich in words,
an empty Prattler; by patiently ſubmiting,
he


1


he is a coward; and if he will not ſuffer
patiently, for the moſt part, he is not
preferred.

Seen on one ſide, he is, undoubtedly, ſitting
down; and if ſtanding at a diſtance, he is
not to be found. The duties of ſervitude
are extremely profound, and impracti-
cable, even to Yogees. *


What thou propoſeſt, my friend, ſaid
Dämänäkä, is by no means to be put in
practice.


How! are not the mighty lords to be dili-
gently ſerved by thee, who, without delay,
gladly fulfil the defires of the heart?

When do thoſe without employ enjoy thoſe
elevated ſtations diſtinguiſhed by the Chã-
miri,” the white umbrella ſpread upon a


lofty pole, the horſe, the elephant, and the
ſplendid litter?


Notwithſtanding all this, obſerved Kirit-
tiki, what have we to do with this affair?“
One ſhould always avoid meddling with other
folks' buſineſs. See what is ſaid upon this


occaſion :


11


The nan tvho twill have to do in matters with
which he hath no buſineſs, may be repulſed and
fleep upon the ground; like the Ape who drew
out the Wedge.


How was that? demanded Dimiiniki; and
he related the following ſtory :


FABLE II.


IN the country which is called Mägädhä,
S66bhi-dinti, a man of the Kayaſthi tribe,
had begun to build a theatre for an enter-
tainment, One of the carpenters having
with his faw cut ſome way through a piece
of timber, put a wedge into the flit. A troop
of Apes coming that way in ſearch of their
uſual food; one of whom, as if directed by
the wand of Time; took hold of that wedge
with his two hands, and fitting down; his
lower parts hung within the ſlit. At letigth,
from the natural giddineſs of his ſpecies,
with great difficulty he drew out the wedge,
ſo that the boards cloſilig, what was between
them was entitely deſtroyed; arid he deprived
of his life. Whetefote; I fay,


7 he man who will Se.
For


99 J


For all this, ſaid Diminiki, the concerns
of the maſter ſhould certainly be looked into,
even by the ſervant. The prime miniſter,
obſerved Kärättäkä, being employed in the
ſaperintendence of all affairs, let him do it.
An inferior ſhould, on no occaſion, interfere
with the department of another; for,


He who ſhall meddle with the department of an-
other, out of zeal for the welfare of his maſter,
may repent ; like the Aſs who was puniſhed


for braying.


Dämänäkä enquired how that happened;
and Kirattaki recounted the following ſtory:


FaBLE III.


At Varaniſee** there lived a Waſherman,
whoſe name was Kärphöörä-pättä: Once
upon a time, having ſpent the evening until
it was very late in the agreeable company of
a young woman, he went to bed fatigued, and
ſlept ſoundly. In the mean time, a thief got
in with an intention to rob the houſe, In
the court there were an Aſs and a Dog. The
aſs ſaid to the dog, upon hearing the thief, —
This is thy buſineſs; then why doſt thou

H 2 not


1


not get up, and by barking contrive to rouſe
thy maſter? What haſt thou to do with my
department? replied the dog. Thou knoweſt
full well how I watch and guard this houſe,
and yet this maſter of ours doth not conſider
my merit; and I am even ſtinted in my al-
lowance of proviſions. Now maſters in ge-
neral, without ſpying ſome fault in their
ſervants, are not wont to ſhorten their allow-
ance. Hear me, barbarian!“ exclaimed the
aſs. The dog ſpecies, from their nature, are
not to be touched. But learn once more
what 1s the duty of a ſervant:


Is he a ſervant, is he a friend, who heſitateth
at the time of action? Should the buſineſs
be ruined, could it be occaſioned by a
ſervant, or by a friend ?


The dog replied,,—Hear me for a moment.


Is he a maſter who, at a proper ſeaſon, doth
not conſider his ſervants? Are not they


who keep ſervants on all occaſions to che-
riſh them ?


Do they not alſo ſay,
Dependants ſhould have no interrupters in
their meals, in their amuſements, in the
execution


11


execution of their duty, in their religious


ceremonies, nor in doing good for the
ſake of virtue.


The aſs in a rage exclaimed, — Villain!
thou neglecteſt thy maſter's buſineſs. Be it


ſo; but it is my duty to do ſomething that
ſhall wake him; for,


The ſun ſhould be worſhipped on the back,
the god of fire on the belly, a maſter in


every way, and the world above without
deceit.


Having repeated theſe lines, he began to
make a great noiſe by braying; ſo that the
Waſherman was alarmed; but, although ex-
ceedingly drowſy, he got up and gave the


aſs a good beating with a large ſtick. I re-


peat, therefore, He who ſhall meddle &c.


Obſerve: Our employment 1s ſearching
for game; then let us attend to our proper
buſineſs. But now I have conſidered, I think
there is not any occaſion for our doing that
to-day; for there is plenty of proviſions for
us, and ſome to ſpare,


H 3; Dämänäkä,


7 1 P 34
— 7


* . * E . - . * 4
. . . \ = "—_— 7 Sz -
—_- PS: l 4 - - l * -” —


- = __ * EY
> — 62 4 ©
. 1 * PL I
: ts
2 ns F * a


U
i
4
A
5
1
*
Ul
4
(
*
Ul
*


ET,


Diminiki, diſpleaſed at this obſervation,
exclaimed, —What! Doſt thou ſerve his
Highneſs, the Rija, merely for the ſake of
food? This is very unwiſe ; as is declared
in theſe lines:


By the wiſe the patronage of princes is ſought
to gain the aſſiſtance of friends, as well as
aid againſt the treachery of enemies; for,
who doth not ſimply fill his belly ?

They ſay,

Let him live, in whom living many live.
Doth not even the booby fill his belly with
his bill?

Obſerve:

What man with five Poorans is reduced to
ſervitude? Who upon a parallel with
riches is not found by riches ?'*

Mankind being by birth upon an equality,

the ſtate of ſervitude is reproachful. He

who is not the firſt of his ſpecies, 1s

counted among thoſe who are dependents.
It is ſaid alſo,

The difference which is between horſes, ele-
phants, and vehicles; wood, ſtone, and
cloth ; women, men, and water, is a very
great difference.


For,


1


For,

A dog having found a bone with a few ſinews
ſticking about it, dirty, loathſome, and
without a bit of meat upon it, is rendered
exceedingly happy, although it be not ſuf-
ficient to ſatisfy his hunger.

Whilſt,

The lion permitteth the jackal to come
near and eſcape, and killeth the elephant.
Every man, although reduced to diſtreſs,
longeth for fruit ſuitable to his ſtrength,


Obſerve the difference in the behaviour of |
him who ſerveth, and of him who is ſerved:


Shaking the tail, falling down at the feet,
and, proſtrated upon the ground, looking
up at his face and ſtomach: all this the
dog performeth to his maſter who feedeth
him. But the noble elephant looketh
boldly, and eateth not, unleſs he liketh,
with an hundred kind entreaties.

But, _

That life, although it endure but for a mo-
ment, which is celebrated by mankind, as
being attended by knowledge, valour, and
renown, is, by thoſe who know it, alone

diſtinguiſhed


IL 104 ]


diſtinguiſhed by the name of life. A crow
liveth a long time, and a raven eateth.
For,

How is that brute-like man diſtinguiſhed
from a beaſt, whoſe underſtanding 1s void
of the power to diſcriminate between good
and evil, who 1s deſtitute of the many be-
nefits of the ſacred records, and whoſe only
inclination is the filling of his belly?


But what have we, interrupted Kärättäkä,
to do with theſe reflections; we, who are of
little power, and not the principal? Ina
very ſhort interval of time a miniſter may
enjoy the principal ſtation, or the reverſe,
replied Diminiki; for, they ſay,


No one is, by nature, noble, reſpected of
any one, nor a wretch. His own actions


conduct him either to wretchedneſs, or to
the reverſe.
Again:

As by repeated efforts, a ſtone is mounted
upon the ſummit of a hill, and inſtantly
thrown down; ſo may we ourſelves, by
our virtues and our vices, be elevated and
caſt down.


But


ö *.


105 1


But after all, obſerved Kirittikis, what is
it thou art ſpeaking of? The curious ſtory,
replied Daminiki, of his highneſs Péëngä-
liki's returning without drinking, and ſtay-
ing at home. What! demanded Kärättäkä,
art thou acquainted with it? Is there any
thing, ſaid Dämänäkä, unknown to a wiſe
man? It is ſaid,


A declared meaning is comprehended even
by brutes: Horſes and elephants under-
ſtand when they are told; but a wife man
findeth out even what is not declared.
The advantage to be derived from our


ſenſes 1s to conceive what 1s only ſignified
by another.


Then, I will now, through the opportunity
given by his fears, turn the fault to my
own advantage, with the ſuperiority of wiſ-
dom ; for,


He is a wiſe man who knoweth, that his

words ſhould be ſuited to the occaſion, his

love to the worthineſs of the object, and
his anger according to his ſtrength.


Friend,


„


Friend, ſaid Kärättäkä, thou art unac-
quainted with the ways of ſervice.


He who entereth uncalled for, unqueſtioned
ſpeaketh much, and regardeth himſelf with
ſatisfaction, to his prince appeareth one of
a weak judgment.


How am I therein ignorant of the ways of


ſervice? demanded Diminiki ; for,


Is there any thing of its own nature beauti-
ful or not beautiful? The heauty of a
thing is eyen that by which it ſhineth.“

One of a ſound judgment having purſued a
man with thoſe very qualities of which he
is poſſeſſed, may preſently lead him into
his power.

Again :

Upon hearing, Who is bere? he ſhould an-
ſwer, 1/—pleaſe to command. And he
ſhould execute the orders of his ſovereign


to the beſt of his abilities.


It is faid, |
Diſobedience _f orders to the ſovereign, c diſ-


reſpect to the Brahmins, and a ſeparate
bed


107 |


bed to women, is death without the appli-
cation of a knife.
Again:

He who is ſteady in trifling matters, wiſe,
like a ſhadow conſtantly in attendance,
and who being ordered may not heſitate,
is a proper perſon to dwell in the court of
a prince.


Sometimes, obſerved Kirittiki, thy maſter
is difpleaſed with thee for thy unſeaſonable
intruſions. It is true, replied Diminiki ;
nevertheleſs, attendants muſt, unavoidably,
make their appearance. They ſay,


The non-commencement of any thing, from
the fear of offence, is the mark of a weak
man. Who, brother, leaveth off eating
entirely, from the dread of indigeſtion ?

Obſerve :

The ſovereign ſerveth the man who is near
him, although deſtitute of learning, of no
family, or without acquaintance. Princes
often, like women and vines, twine about
him who fitteth by his ſide.


3


Well, ſaid Kärättäkä, if thou go there, what
wilt thou ſay to his highneſs? Attend, re-


*


plied


[ 108 }


phed Diminiki: Firſt of all I will find out
whether he 1s attached to me, or not attached.


What ſigns, demanded Kärättäkä, are there
of ſuch a diſcovery? I will tell thee, ſaid
Dämänäkä; the ſigns of attachment are,


Joy at diſcovering at a diſtance, great atten.
tion and reſpect in enquiries, commending
qualifications in abſence, and remember-
ing in thoſe things which are favourites.

Such knowledge of attachment, even in a
ſervant, is an addition to one's happineſs,
The marks of attachment, even to a fault,
are an accumulation of virtues.

A wiſe man may alſo diſcover theſe ſigns in

' thoſe ſervants who are not attached:
Squandering of time in idleneſs, increaſing
of hopes, and deſtroying the fruit.


When I have made this diſcovery, J will de-
clare what my purpoſe ſhall be. Karattaki
then ſaid, —Notwithſtanding this, it doth
not'behove thee to ſpeak until thou haſt
found a proper opportunity. For,


Even Vreehiſpitee,'* ſhould he utter words

unſeaſonably, would incur contempt for

his underſtanding, and eternal diſgrace.
als Do


4.109


Do not be alarmed, my friend, cried Di-
miniki, I ſhall not ſpeak unſeaſonably ; for,


In misfortune, in error, and when the time
appointed for certain affairs is about to
elapſe, a ſervant, who hath his maſter's
welfare at heart, ought to ſpeak unaſked.


Indeed, if I were not to give my counſel
whenever I find an occaſion, my office of
counſellor would be uſeleſs.


The qualification by which a man earneth
his bread, and for which he is celebrated


in the world, ſhould be nouriſhed and im-
proved.


Then, peace be with thee! for know that I
am going, concluded Daminiki. And may
ſucceſs attend thy deſign! replied Kärättäkä.


Dämänäkä, accordingly, repaired into the
preſence of PEEngiliki, with heſitation, as it
were; but as he was diſcovered by the Raja
at ſome diſtance, he entered with great marks
of reſpect, and having performed that mode
of proſtration which is called Aſhttangi-


pata,


3
patä,“ he drew near; and the lion, ſtroking


him with his right paw, the toes of which
were diſtinguiſhed by ornaments, accoſted
him in the following words, which were pre-
ceded by a great many compliments: It is
long ſince I have ſeen you, Sir!


Dämänäkä replied, —I have not the leaſt
occaſion to attend your divine feet; never-
theleſs, a ſervant ſhould indiſpenſably attend
the preſence at proper times; and thence it is
that I am now here.


Thoſe who are penetrated with the timid
principles of their inſtructors, deſpiſe the
ſpeeches of thoſe, when approaching the
preſence of the ſovereign, by whom, in
wars, S66rabhee'** of ponderous form and
tall, the earth everlaſtingly to be adored,
hath been pierced by the fall of an hun-
dred weapons.

Another poet ſays:

The man whoſe heart is tainted with fear,
although profuſe of ſpeech, in the preſence
of the king, amongſt learned men, or in
the company of women well inclined for
a huſband, is a coward.

There


E642 1


There is a uſe for the moſt trifling imple-
ments; as is mentioned in theſe lines:


Sovereigns, O prince, have occaſion even for
ſtraws, and things to rub the teeth, or
pick the ears; but how much more for an


able ſpeaker, and a dexterous obviator of
difficulties?


Perhaps my noble maſter ſuſpects, that being
oppreſſed with years, my underſtanding is
loſt 3 for,


Thoſe who are poſſeſſed of good or bad qua-
lities are not ſenſible of it themſelves.
The good traveller doth not perceive that
the Kaſtõõr&kã hath any enjoyment of
her precious perfume.

Nevertheleſs,

Although a gem may tumble at the feet,
and a piece of glaſs be worn upon the
head, yet, at the ſeaſon of buying and
ſelling, glaſs is glaſs, and gems are gems.

It ſhould not be ſuſpected of a man, whoſe
life hath been ſpent in noble deeds, that


his reafon is loſt, when he is only in-


volved in trouble. A fire may be over-
turned, but its flame will never deſcend.
Pleaſe


\
1
*
\ 4
4
5
*
$0
fi ,
S,
*S :
.
*
5
*
* 0 þ
Fa 4
$4 J
4
— a
"=
't ,
* 4
«
SS -
, '
1 .
1 4
- t
nd >
bs |
|
=
f
k 4
Jy 4
—

L
=>}
bo
N 5 1

Ta
4418
iy
S7Y
1 1

4
1
=

1

SE]
TN


7
1


F316 ]


Pleaſe your divine highneſs, the maſter
ſhould conduct himſelf with diſtinction ; for,


When the maſter paſſeth over all alike, with.
out diſtinction, then the endeavours of
thoſe who are capable of exertion are en-
tirely loſt,

There are, O Raja, three degrees amongſt
mankind: the higheſt, the loweſt, and the
middling; and accordingly, they ſhould
be engaged in three degrees of employ-
ment.

Servants and houſes ſhould be ſuited to the
ſituation. A gem ſhould not be placed at
the feet. The ſame is to be underſtood of
an able man.

Thus:

If a gem be diſcovered at the feet, which is
worthy to be worn in an ornament of
gold, and it doth not complain, and it
doth not alſo appear with ſplendour, he
who placed it there 1s to be ſpoken to.

Obſerve: |
This is @ man of judgment, and attached; and
this a giddy fellow, and undiſciplined. The
chief, who knoweth how to judge of ſer-
vants in this manner, is well ſerved.
They


1
They ſay,


2 — 8
A horſe, a weapon, a book, a Vẽẽnã, a
ſpeech, and a man or woman, are, or are


not, to be employed, when their merits
have been examined,


\


Again :


What is to be done with a faithful ſervant


who is without ability; or with an able
man who 1s an opponent? It doth not
behove thee, O Raja, to deſpiſe either the
one or the other.
„
The attendants of a prince, becauſe of his
diſreſpect, grow thoughtleſs; and by that


example, men of judgment forbear to go
near him.


When a kingdom is forſaken by its wiſe
men, the adminiſtration ceaſeth to be effi-
cacious; and for want of good regulations,


the whole nation ſinketh, without power
to reſiſt.


Again:


Mankind are for ever wont to reſpect him


who is reſpected by the prince; for he who


is in diſgrace with the ſovereign is diſre-
ſpected by all.


1 What


| »
4 4
4
F


_ - _ _
22 4 « 1
. OR”. RR
w__


4
|


2


. ——


* 3


E


What wiſe men have declared proper, may
be received even from a child. When the
ſun is inviſible, how uſeful is the appear-
ance of the lamp?


We are your faithful ſervants, attached to
your highneſs's feet; and we have no other
place of refuge.


It is good, replied Peengilaki; but what
of all this, Diminiki? Thou haſt been
for a long time our head Mintree-poctri;
whither, then, haſt thou been wandering in
purſuit of vulgar ſayings? Thou art now
even prime miniſter,


Dämänäkä then ſaid, May it pleaſe your
divinity, I am about to propoſe a queſtion :
What was the reaſon your highneſs, when
oppreſſed with thirſt, refuſed to drink, and
now remains at home in a ſtate of amaze-
ment ?


It is well ſpoken, anſwered Peengiliki.
How pleaſant it is to repoſe a ſecret in a
place of confidence! I am about to tell thee.
Attend! Know that this foreſt is infeſted


by


E


by ſome beaſt, before unknown to us; where-
fore it behoveth us to abandon it. Haſt
thou not heard a ſtrange loud noiſe? To
judge by his voice, the ſtrength of this mon-
ſter mult be exceſlive !


Pleaſe your divinity, replied Dämänäkä,
there 1s indeed great cauſe for apprehenſion.
We too have heard the voice; but he is un-
worthy to be a miniſter, who, in the firſt in-
ſtance, adviſeth either to quit the field, or to
fight. Beſides, your highneſs has now an
opportunity to experience the uſe of your
ſervants; for,


By the touchſtone of misfortune a man diſ-
covereth the quality of wife, relations, and
ſervants; and of his own ſtrength and
judgment.


It is good, replied the lion; but I am pre-
vented by my great apprehenſions.


Dämänäkä having conſidered what he
ſhould do, at length ſaid, What! doſt thou
ſpeak to us about a total abdication of the


enjoyment of thy dominions? I tell your
I 2 highneſs


1 116


highneſs plainly, that as long as I live, I
ſhall not be afraid; but it is neceſſary that
the minds of Kirittiki and the reſt ſhould
be pacified alſo; for in times of neceſſity, it
is difficult to aſſemble people together.


Aﬀter that Kirittaki and Diminiki to-
gether, having received their ſovereign's
gracious commiſſion, promiſed to defeat
the threatened danger, and departed accord-


ingly.


As they were going along, Kirittaki ſaid
to Diminiki,—lIs the cauſe of apprehenſion
poſſible to be defeated, or not poſſible? Till
this had been determined, why did we, in
promiſing to apply a remedy, accept of this
great appointment? For it is ſaid, that no
one, unleſs he hath the power to perform,
ſhould accept of any one's commiſſion, and,
in particular, that of a king.

Obſerve,

He is all-glorious, on whoſe pleaſure for-
tune waiteth, in whoſe valour victory, and
in whoſe anger death.

The ſovereign, although but a child, is not
to be deſpiſed, but to be reſpected as a

man;


1


man; or as a mighty divinity, who pre-
ſideth in human form.


Dämänäkä, laughing, ſaid, —Hold thy
peace, friend; I am acquainted with the
cauſe of this fear: It is only the bellowing
of a bull, our proper food, as well as that of
the lion. If this be the caſe, obſerved Ki-
rättäkä, why were not his highneſs's fears
inſtantly appeaſed? If, replied Dämänäkä,
they had been ſatisfied immediately, how


would this great commiſſion have been ob-
tained? They ſay,


The maſter ſhould never be rendered free from


apprehenſion by his ſervants; for a ſervant
having quieted the fears of his maſter may
experience the fate of Dadb##karna,*


How was that? demanded Kirittiki; and
Dämänäkä related the following ſtory.


FABLE IV.

UPON the mountain Arboodi-scekhari,
there was a Lion, whoſe name was Mihi-
veekrimi, * the tips of whoſe mane a Mouſe
was wont to gnaw, as he ſlept in his den.

I 3 The


8


——


-_
*
4 -


* 1 " j
— —
oa 4 *
—


4 EP
Lo


P


*
—


2 < IS
2 — - - #44
o


© 2360- }-


The noble beaft, having diſcovered that his
hair was bitten, was very much diſpleaſed;
and as he was unable to catch the offender,
who always ſlipped into its hole, he medi-
tated what was beſt to be done; and having
reſolved, ſaid he,


Whoſo hath a trifling enemy, who 1s not to
be overcome by dint of valour, ſhould em-

ploy againſt him a force of his own like-
neſs.


With a review of this ſaying, the lion re-
paired to the village, and by means of a piece
of meat thrown into his hole, with ſome
difficulty caught a cat, whoſe name was Did-
heekirni. He carried him home, and the
mouſe, for ſome time not venturing out for
fear, the hon remained with his hair un-
nipped. At length, however, the mouſe was
ſo oppreſſed with hunger, that creeping
about, he was caught and devoured by the
cat. The hon now no longer hearing the
noiſe of the mouſe, thought he had no fur-
ther occaſion for the ſervices of the cat, and
ſo began to be ſparing of his allowance;
and, in conſequence, poor puſs pined away
and


19 1]


and died for want. Wherefore, I ſay,—The
maſter ſhould never be rendered &c.


After this Diminiki and Kirittiki ad-
vanced towards the bull Sing-jeevaki ; and
Kirattaki ſeated himſelf in ſtate at the foot
of a tree, whilſt Daminiki addreſſed the bull
in theſe words :—Friend bull, ſaid he, he
who is fitting there is appointed General for
the protection of theſe foreſts, by Raja P&ën-
gäläkä. Then Kärättäkä gravely ſaid, —
Come here directly, or elſe retire at a diſtance
from theſe woods, otherwiſe the fruits of
thy diſobedience will be painful. The poor
bull, ignorant of the affairs of the country
he was in, fearfully advanced towards Ki-


rättäkä, and made him a profound reverence.
It 1s ſaid,


Wiſdom'is of moreconſequence than ſtrength.
The want of 1t 1s a ſtate of miſery. The
Deendeemi © proclaimeth this, ſounding,
The miſerable are defeated,


Sing-jceviki, with a loud voice, ſaid, —
What, O General, am I to do? And Ki-
rattaka replied, —If it be thy wiſh to remain

| in


L 2120 J


in theſe foreſts, bow down to the duſt of his
highneſs's feet. Give me thy word, that
there is no danger, ſaid Sing-jeevaki, and
upon thoſe terms I am ready to go. Theſe
ſuſpicions, obſerved Kärättäkä, are unne-


ceſſary; for,


The tempeſt never rooteth up the graſs,
which 1s feeble, humble, and ſhooteth not
up on high ; but exerteth its power even to
diſtreſs the lofty trees; for the Great uſe
not their might, but upon the Great.


Saying this, leaving Sing-jeevikai at a little
diſtance, they repaired unto the preſence of
the hon, by whom having been received with
attention, they made their reverence, and fat
down; and the Raja was well pleaſed —
Know, your highneſs, ſaid Dämänäkä, we
have ſeen this animal, and he is humbled;
nevertheleſs, he is of amazing ſtrength!
According to your divine commands, he 1s
deſirous of viſiting your highneſs's feet,


wherefore, arm yourſelf, and let him draw
near; for, F


The bank is penetrated by the waters, al-
though protected by a charm ; friendſhip
18


1


is broken by maliciouſneſs, and a coward
is to be overcome by words alone.


By this it is ſeen that one ſhould not be
alarmed at a mere ſound; for, it is ſaid,


It is not proper to be alarmed at a mere ſound,
when the cauſe of that ſound is unknown, A
poor woman obtaineth conſequence for diſ-


covering the cauſe of a ſound.


The hon aſked how that was; and Dimi-
naka recounted the following ſtory.


FaBLE V.


BETWEEN the mountains Sree-pirvita
there is a city called Brihmi-povoree, * the
inhabitants of which uſed to believe, that a
certain giant, whom they called Ghintta-
kirni, © infeſted one of the adjacent hills.
The fact was thus: A thief, as he was run-
ning away with a bell he had ſtolen, was
overcome and devoured by a tiger; and the
bell falling from his hand having been picked
up by ſome monkeys, every now and then they
uſed to ring it. Now the people of the town
finding that a man had been killed there,


and,


1


and, at the ſame time, hearing the bell, uſed
to declare, that the giant Ghintta-kirna be-
ing enraged, was devouring a man, and ring-
ing his bell; ſo that the city was abandoned
by all the principal inhabitants. At length,
however, a certain poor woman having con-
fidered the ſubject, diſcovered that the bell
was rung by the monkeys. She accordingly
went to the Raja, and faid, —If, divine Sir,
I may expect a very great reward, I will en-
gage to ſilent this Ghinta-kirna, The Raja
was exceedingly well pleaſed, and gave her
ſome money. So having diſplayed her con-
ſequence to the prieſthood of the country,
to the leaders of the army, and to all the reſt
of the people, ſhe provided ſuch fruits as ſhe
conceived the monkeys were fond of, and
went into the wood ; where ſtrewing them
about, they preſently quitted the bell, and
attached themſelves to the fruit. The poor
woman, in the mean time, took away the
bell, and repaired to the city; where ſhe be-
came an object of adoration to its inhabi-
tants. Wherefore, I ſay,


I is not proper to be afraid of a mere ſound, &c.


Having


( 123 J


Having concluded his ſtory, Diminiki
and Kirittaki brought Singjee-vaki, and
introduced him to the lion; after which the
bull reſided in that foreſt in great good fel-
lowſhip.

Sometime after, a brother of the lion's,
whoſe name was Stäbdhä-kärnä, coming to
ſee him, Peengalaki having entertained him,
they went forth to hunt for prey. Upon
their return, Sang-jeevaki aſked the lion
what was become of the fleſh of the deer
which had been killed that day; and the
Raja told him that Dämänäkä and Kirittiki
knew. Let it be underſtood, ſaid Sing-
jeevaka, whether there is or is not any.
There is not, then, replied the lion, laugh-
ing. What! ſaid Sing-jeevaki, has ſo much
fleſh been eaten by thoſe two? Eaten, waſted,
and given away, anſwered the lion; and this
is what happens every day. How are ſuch
things tranſacted, demanded the bull, with-
out the knowledge of your highneſs? Why
not? ſaid the lion. Becauſe it is not proper,
obſerved the bull: for it is ſaid,


A ſervant ſhould never do any thing of him-
ſelf, without having informed the ſove-
reign


[14]


reign his maſter ; except it be what he may
do to prevent a misfortune.


Again:

The miniſter ſhould be like a Kimindilss,”*
in which there is depoſited a vaſt collection.
Of what uſe to a ſovereign 1s a poor idle
fool, or a mere empty hull ?


For,

He is the beſt miniſter who enricheth the
ſtate but a Kikeenee.*” The treaſury is
the vitals of him who hath a treaſury.“
The animal ſpirits are not the vitals of
Princes.


For a man will not arrive at the ſtate of be-
ing reſpected by any other means. When
a man 1s deſtitute of riches, he is ſome-
times forſaken, even by his wife, and how
much more by others!


What great evils theſe are alſo in a ſtate!


Obſerve:


Great expenditures, and the want of inſpec-
tion; ſo, unlawful accumulation, plun-
dering, and a diſtant ſituation, are called
the evils of the treaſury,


The


1


The rich man ſpendeth like Viſrävänk, who
ſquandereth, according to his inclinations,
his income immediately, without regard to
its amount.


Stibdhi-kirni the Rija's brother having
attended to theſe words of the bull, declared
his ſentiments as follows :

Hear me, brother; It 1s my opinion, that
theſe two, Kärättäkä and Dämänäkä, being
employed in the ſuperintendance of the affairs
of peace and war, are improper perſons to
preſide at the head of the treaſury. I wall
juſt repeat what I myſelf have heard upon
the ſubject of perſons to be employed.

Attend then:

A prieſt, a ſoldier, and a relation, are not
proper to be employed at the head of
affairs. The prieſt, even when the object
for which he was engaged hath been com-
pleated, refuſeth to reſign.

If a ſoldier be employed in an affair, he di-
rectly ſheweth his ſword; and the rela-
tion, preſuming upon his relationſhip,
{walloweth up all the profits.

If an old ſervant be appointed, he will be

fearleſs, even in the commiſſion of crimes;

and,


os ae a


2


2
_ —


— te”
„ 1


A
9
!
7
4
.


2


S— 1
* — -
—


EE


e
1 }y BPR” =. wp


»
12 >> 5:
* — ”


o . 2
—
— —


”
— — * * z = - : * 1

£48 — 1 R CE 22 — —
—> . - - = ICT Lag! 7 2

— 12 e 2 N 2


1


and, in deſpite of his maſter, he may quit
his ſervice without reproof.

One who hath been uſeful, in offending, pay-
eth no attention to his offence. He maketh
his ſervices a ſtandard, under which to
plunder and deſtroy.

What miniſter is inattentive amongſt riches?
The man forceth himſelf to be attached;
and from intimacy he is for ever ſure to
behave with inſolence and contempt.

A miniſter 1s always incorrigible, when he
ſhall be grown too great. It is a maxim
of thoſe who are eſteemed perfect, that
abundance 1s the perverter of reaſon.

The man who thinketh of nothing but the
acquiſition of wealth, always devoureth
the whole without reſerve. The eagle and
the vulture may ſerve a prince as examples
of ſuch a miniſter.

Not taking the advantages which are found,
concealing the expenditure of things, in-
attention, want of judgment, and the be-
ing addicted to pleaſures, are all faults in
a miniſter,

The collection of the revenues is the buſineſs
of the officers; but a conſtant circumſpec-
tion, the payment of ſtipends, and of the

return


162


1


return for labour, are the duties of the
ſovereign.

Until they are preſſed, they will not diſgorge
the royal treaſures they have embezzled;
for the officers of revenue, for the moſt
part, are a corrupt claſs.

And the compulſive power of the ſovereigns
of the earth ſhould be exerted repeatedly
upon their officers? for will a piece of
cloth, by being once ſqueezed, yield up ail
the water 1t may have imbibed ?


The whole of this advice, concluded the
lion's brother, ſhould be put in practice, as
often as there 1s found occaſion.


The Raja then ſaid, —It is even fo, that
theſe two are not always ready to obey my
commands. And that, replied his brother,
is at no time becoming in them: for,


A ſovereign ſhould not forgive thoſe who
diſobey his commands, although they were
his ſons. Eſpecially if it be to the hurt
of the revenue, or relative to any thing he
may have fixed his heart upon.


Particularly as it is declared,
The


1


The Raja ſhould, like a father, protect his
ſubjects from robbers, from the officers of
government, from the common enemy,
from the royal favourites, and from his
own avarice.


Brother, continued he, let my advice be
followed: We have made our meal for to-
day. Then let the bull, Sing-jeeviki, who
eats nothing but graſs and corn, be appointed
to ſuperintend the proviſions.


After that, he being appointed accord-
ingly, the lion and the bull paſſed their time
together in great mutual kindneſs. But the
two jackals, upon experiencing a relaxation
in ſerving out the proviſions to the officers
and dependants, began to conſult together
what was to be done. It is an evil of our
own ſeeking, ſaid Dämänäkä, and it is not
proper to lament about a misfortune of one's
own making.


I. fer having touched Swirni-rekha;”* the
barber's wife, for having bound herſelf; the
merchant, for having attempted to ſteal a
Jewel : All theſe ſuffered for their own faults.


How


11


How was this? demanded Kirittika; and
Dimaniki related the following ſtories :


FABLE VI.


IN the city which is called Kinchini-
poori * there was a Raja, whoſe name was
Veeri-vEEkrimi.”* Once upon a time, as
his chief officer of juſtice was conducting a
certain barber to the place of execution, one
Kindarpa-ketoo, who was a traveller, accom-
panied by a merchant, taking him by the
irt of his garment, cried out, — This man
is not guilty! How ſo! ſaid the king's offi-
cers; not guilty, ſayeſt thou? Hear me! ſaid
he, and he immediately began to repeat theſe
lines: Having touched Swarnd-rehha, &c.
What does this mean demanded the officers;
and the traveller recounted the following
adventure :—


The king of Scénghälä-dwẽẽpä, whoſe
name is Jeemoota-ketos,”” hath a ſon called
Kindirpi-ket66,” and I am he. One day
a boat-man, who attended in the pleaſure
gardens, told me, that on the fourth day of
the moon, there was to be ſeen in the ea,
which was near, under what had the ap-

K pearance


T
i
Re

*
*
1
*
a
'


— —


— —
2 .


A - .
”


= 2 - I *
* ho _ 2
= 8 _— A . g —
= ERR o—_— ccc


EF


pearance of the Kalpa-tiro6, or tree of
thought, ſeated upon a ſilver ſofa, orna-
mented with a fringe of precious gems, a
certain nymph playing upon a Veena,”” as it
were the goddeſs Likſhmee.” At the pro-
per time I ſent for the boat-man, and getting
into the boat, ſet ſail for the appointed place;
and there I beheld a damſel, with only one
half of her body appearing above the ſurface
of the water. In ſhort, attracted by the
beautifulneſs of her appearance, I gave a
jump with intention to catch her; but fail,
ing, I laid hold of a branch of the tree of
thought, and was immediately tranſported to
her golden palace ; where I found her wait-
ing in an apartment of gold, ſeated upon a
bed of the ſame materials, attended by Veed-
ya-dharees.” I no ſooner ſaw her, than,
ſpying me at a diſtance, ſhe addreſſed me
with reſpect, and offered to be my bride, to
which I conſented with my eyes; and we
were immediately united by that mode of
marriage which is called Gindhirvi-vee-
vahi.” Her name was Ritni-minjaree,
and ſhe was the daughter of Kindirpi-
kẽlẽẽ, the king of the VeEedyi-dhira.””* One
day, as we were in private together, ſhe ſaid,

— Huſband,


n


— Huſband, thou mayſt enjoy every thing
which 1s here according to thy wiſh, except
it be the beautiful Swarni-rekha, a certain
Veedya-dhiree, who is not to be touched of
any one. Sometime after this, at an enter-
tainment, being in a merry mood, I was
tempted to touch the orbs of her boſom, and
for my preſumption ſhe ſpurned me with
the ſole of her foot; after which I found
myſelf in this country ; and at length travel-
ling about in great diſtreſs, I chanced to diſ-
cover this city, and having wandered about
all day, I went to ſleep at the houſe of a cer-
. tain cow-keeper. This man, too, perceiving
the ſeaſon for the commiſſion of crimes was
approaching, prudently quitted the converſa-
tion of his friends, and came home, where
he found his wife conſulting with a pro-
cureſs. So, having given her a good beat-
ing, he made her faſt to a poſt, and went to
ſleep. About midnight, the ſame procureſs,
who was the barber's wife, returning, ſaid to
the cow-keeper's wife, —Such an one, burn-
ing with the fire of ſeparation, is ready to die
for thee. Go, then, to ſpeak to him, and
return quickly ; and in the mean time, I will
bind myſelf to the poſt, and ſtay till thou

K 2 ſhalt


.


2
==... -


bs,
1050
WW.
"uy
j
b |
1 l
Io
4
«

fl

*

0

;

**

10
1
14
N
. fl
1
1
1


1


ſhalt come back. Things having been thus
managed, it ſo fell out, that the cow-keeper
waked. Why doſt thou not now go to ſee
thy gallant, my dear? ſaid he; to which no
anſwer being made, he continued, ſaying.—
Pray who has taught thee to be ſo proud,
that thou wilt not deign to give me an an-
ſwer? and, ſaying this, he got up in a great
rage, cut off her noſe, and lay himſelf down
to ſleep again. After a while, the cow-
keeper's wife returning, aſked the procureſs
what news. What news! ſaid ſhe; look in
my face, and ſee what news! The cow-
keeper's wife now takes her place, and binds
herſelf to the poſt as before; and the barber's
took up her noſe and repaired to her own
houſe. In the morning early, when the
barber was hunting about for his razor caſe,
his wife ſaid, —here 1s a razor, putting one
into his hand; but as it did not chance to
pleaſe him, he threw it in a paſſion upon
the ground ; upon which his wife ſeized the
occalion to cry out, Oh! without the leaſt
provocation, he hath cut off my noſe! And

away ſhe went to the officer of juſtice.
In the mean time, the cow-keeper's wife,
being queſtioned by her huſband, exclaimed,
— Who


+ 233 7


Who, guilty wretch, thinkeſt thou, is able
to disfigure one ſo very chaſte as I? The
eight guardians of the univerſe” are ac-
quainted with all my actions! Is it not ſaid,


The ſun and moon, fire and air, heaven,
earth, and water; the heart, and con-
ſcience; day and night, with morning and
evening; juſtice and all, are witneſſes of a
man's actions?


Then, let this be the trial of my innocence:


175


Ye mighty angels who guard the univerſe
if I am a chaſte and virtuous wife, let this
my countenance remain no longer with-
out a noſe!


Now, ſaid ſhe, look at my face! Accord-
ingly, her huſband, having brought a light,
examined her face; and when he beheld that
it was free from any appearance of having
been wounded, he fell down at her feet, and,
with a joyful heart, releaſed her from her
confinement, and put her into bed. And now
I have laid before you all this, I cannot help
meditating upon the circumſtance of the
bawd's having bound herſelf ; but,

K 3 Every


= - — — —


:
[
N
+
t
:
:
I!
7


165
IH
A1
*
Wy
j
yl
| |
Ii 'yis
* |
WW
1:1
Pl,
14
3
x4
*
_ 7.
[i *
1


11


Every book of knowledge which is known
to Oòsänä, or to Vré&chäſpätéé, is by
nature planted in the underſtandings of
women.

Honey dwelleth upon a woman's ſpeech;
but in her breaſt there is nothing but
poiſon.


Now attend to the hiſtory of the merchant:
He left his own houſe, and after an abſence
of twelve years, he returned to this city, hav-
ing brought with him, from Manisotkin-
thi,” a great many jewels, and went to
ſleep at a houſe of ill fame. The miſtreſs of
the houſe had made a wooden image of a
certain ſpirit, on whoſe head ſhe had placed
a valuable gem. This being told to the
merchant, inſtigated by avarice, he got up in
the middle of the night; but juſt as he had
put his hand to the jewel, he was caught be-
tween the arms of the image, which were
hung by wires, and ſqueezed very cloſely, fo
that he cried out with pain. The miſtreſs
of the houſe got up immediately. Ho, ho!
maſter merchant! Thou art come from
Manisotkintha! Then deliver all thy jewels,
or elſe thou wilt not be releaſed from thy

preſent


1


preſent confinement. In ſhort, he was help-
leſs, and ſo ſent for all his treaſures, and
made an offering of them for his enlarge-
ment; ſince which, having been thus plun-
dered of all his wealth, he has joined our
party of pilgrims.


The traveller having thus concluded the
ſtory of the merchant, the officers of juſtice
releaſed the poor barber. I repeat, there-
fore, — I for having touched the damſel Swarna-
rekha Sc. Now, continued Diminiki, as
this alſo 1s an evil of our own ſeeking, it
does not become us to grieve about it. And
having conſidered for a moment, he added, —
Friend, the friendſhip which ſubſiſts between
them was brought about by me; and, by me,
that friendſhip may be diſſolved; for,


Skilful men make falſehood look like truth;
and thoſe acquainted with the painter's
art, make an even ſurface appear uneven.


The underſtanding which, upon unexpetted occur-
rences, remaineth unaſfected, may paſs through
the greateſt difficulties; like the farmer's wife
with her two gallants.

How


1


How was that? demanded Kärättäkä; and
Diminiki recounted the following ſtory :


FaBLE VII.


AT a place called Dwirivitee,”* a certain
farmer had a beautiful wife, who uſed to
keep company with the ſon of the magiſtrate
of the place; according to theſe ſayings :


The fire is never ſatisfied with the addition
of fuel, the ocean with the influx of rivers,
the angel of death with the mortality of
all things which have life, nor a beau-
tiful woman with the conqueſt of all man-
kind!

Women are never to be rendered faithful and
obedient; no, not by gifts, nor by ho-
nours, nor by ſincerity, nor by ſervices,
nor by ſeverity, nor by precepts !

Women will preſently forſake a huſband,
who is poſſeſſed of every good quality; re-
putable, comely, good, obſequious, rich,
and generous, to ſteal to the company of
ſome wretch, who is deſtitute of every ac-

compliſhment and virtue!

Warmed with the heat of the fire of a highly
inflamed paſſion, c.


A woman


E


A woman ſleeping upon a painted bed at eaſe
doth not experience ſo much delight, as
upon the bare ground ſtrewed with impu-
rities, when ſhe goeth to the enjoyment of
the ſociety of a ſtranger.


One day, as ſhe ſtood playing with the
magiſtrate's ſon, ſhe happened to ſee his fa-
ther coming towards them ; upon which,
hiding the young man in the barn, ſhe be-
gan to amuſe herſelf with the juſtice himſelf.
In the mean time, however, the huſband
making his appearance, ſhe haſtily told the
magiſtrate to take a ſtick in his hand, and
depart in a hurry, and with his eyes flaming,
as 1t were, with anger. This being done
accordingly, the farmer came up to his wife,
and aſked her what had occaſioned the juſ-
tice to be there in ſuch a paſſion. Why, ſaid
the artful woman, you muſt know, that, for
ſome cauſe or other, he is angry with his
ſon, who flying here for protection, I con-
cealed him in the barn; but the father com-
ing, and not finding him, is gone away
in a rage. Saying this, ſhe conducted her
young gallant from the barn, and introduced
him to her huſband ; according to this ſaying :


What


L 138 ]


What women eat, we are told, is two-fold;
their cunning four- fold; their perſeverance
ſix- fold; and their paſſions eight- fold.


Wherefore, I repeat, — The underſtanding &c.


Be it ſo, replied, Kärättäkä; but how will
it be poſſible to diſſolve the ingrafted friend-
ſhip which ſubſiſts between them. Some
artifice muſt be thought of, replied Dimi-
naki; according to this ſaying:


That may be effected by ſtratagem, which could
not be effected by firength. A female Crow,
by means of a Golden Chain, cauſed the death
of a Black Serpent.


How was this brought about? demanded
Kirittaki; and Dämänäkä told the following
ſtory.


FABLE VIII.


THE female companion of a crow reſided
in a certain tree, where ſhe had young ones;
but they were all devoured by a black ſer-
pent, who concealed himſelf in the hollow
of its trunk. Now, finding herſelf breeding


again,


1


again, ſhe ſaid to her mate, —My dear, let us
abandon this tree; for we ſhall never be
able to raiſe any of our offsprings, becauſe
of that vile black ſerpent ; for, you know,


A bad wife, a falſe friend, ſervants who give
pert anſwers, and living in a houſe in-


feſted by ſerpents, 1s death, as it were,
inevitable. -


My dear, replied the crow, thou ſhalt
have no farther cauſe to be alarmed. I have
pardoned his offence again and again ; but
this time he ſhall be prevented. How, huſ-
band, ſaid the female, wilt thou be able to
contend with one ſo powerful? Never fear,
anſwered her mate;


He who bath ſenſe hath firength. Where hath
he ftrength who wanteth judgment? See how
a Lion, when intoxicated with anger, was


overcome by a Rabbit,


How was that? demanded the female;
and the crow related the following tale :


FABLE IX,


Upon the the mountain Mindiri,”* there
lived a lion, whoſe name was Döͤörgantä,
who


IL 140 ]


who was perpetually complying with the
ordinance for animal immolation; ſo that,
at length, all the different ſpecies aſſembled,
and, in a body, repreſented, that as by his
preſent mode of proceeding, the foreſt would
be cleared all at once; if it pleaſed his high-
neſs, they would, each of them in his turn,
provide him an animal for his daily food;
and the lion gave his conſent accordingly.
So every beaſt delivered his ſtipulated pro-
viſion, till at length, it coming to the
rabbit's turn, he began to meditate in this
manner: Policy ſhould be practiſed by him
who would fave his life; and I myſelf ſhall
loſe mine, if I do not take care. Suppoſe I
lead him after another lion? Who knows
how that may turn out for me? Then I
will approach him ſlowly, as if fatigued,
The lion, by this time, began to be very
hungry ; ſo, ſeeing the rabbit coming to-
wards him, he called out in a great paſſion, —
What is the reaſon thou comeſt ſo late?
Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid the rabbit, as I was
coming along, I was forcibly detained by
another of your ſpecies ; but having given
him my word, that I would return immedi-


ately, I came here to repreſent it to your
highneſs.


1


highneſs. Go quickly, ſaid the lion in a
rage, and ſhew me where this vile wretch
may be found! Accordingly, the rabbit
conducted the lion to the brink of a deep
well, where being arrived, There, ſaid the
rabbit, look down and behold him; at the
ſame time he pointed to the reflected image
of the lion in the water; who, ſwelling with
pride and reſentment, leaped into the well,
as he thought, upon his adverſary; and thus
put an end to his life. I repeat, therefore,
He who hath ſenſe &c,


I have attended, ſaid the female, to all this;
and now, do as thou ſhouldeſt do in this
matter. Every day, obſerved the crow, the
king's ſon comes to bathe in the adjacent
river. I mean to take away a golden chain
he wears, when he ſhall take it off, and to
put it into the hole where the ſerpent is;


and when thoſe who ſhall be employed to
hunt after it ſhall ſearch for it in the hollow


of the tree, and ſhall ſee a black ſerpent,
they will preſently deſtroy it. Some time
after, when the king's ſon was bathing in
the river, the crow executed his plan; and
the people ſent to look after the golden chain

found


#


N A
W
.

| 1

15

15

*

2

18

[

ö *

1

l

1

T7

*

y
$'

;

{4M

4


| rr


1


found it in the hole, and killed the ſerpent,
Wherefore, I ſay, That may be effected by ſtra-
tagem, &c. If it be ſo, replied Kärättäkä, 80,
and may thy ways be proſperous!


Diminiki, accordingly, went into the
preſence of Peengilaki; and having reſpect-
fully bowed, he addreſſed him in theſe words:
Pleaſe your highneſs, I am come upon an
extraordinary piece of intelligence, which, in
my opinion, is not auſpicious: for,


He who hath another's welfare at heart
ſhould, in caſes of calamity, erring from
the right path, or when time and oppor-
tunity are paſling away, declare his whole-
ſome counſel, even unaſked.

Again:

The ſovereign being a veſſel for the diſtribu-
tion of happineſs, and not for the execu-
tion of affairs, the miniſter who ſhall bring
ruin upon the buſineſs of the ſtate is a
criminal.“


They ſay alſo, ſpeaking of miniſters:


Cutting off the head, or forſaking life, is
better than negligence, from the wicked
luſt of obtaining the ſtation of the maſter.

The


1 143 J


The lion then graciouſly aſked him, what
it was that he wiſhed to repreſent; and Di-
mänäkä replied, —Pleaſe your highneſs, this
ſame Sing-Jeevaki is not ſuch a faithful ſer-
vant to thee, but that he can ſpeak diſreſpect-
fully of thy three powers'? in my preſence;
and I know he has even an inclination for
the ſovereignty. Upon hearing theſe words,
the lion was greatly alarmed, and remained
in ſilent aſtoniſhment; whilſt Daminiki con-
tinued thus: Your highnels, in diſmiſſing all
your miniſters, and appointing this bull to
the ſuperintendance of all affairs, has com-
mitted a great error. It is ſaid,


When both the ſovereign and the miniſter
are very highly exalted, Srẽẽ ſtandeth
tottering with both her legs. That fe-
male, by nature, being unable to ſupport


ſo great a load, is obliged to forſake one
of the two.


And again:

When a ruler of the earth maketh one man
the prime and only miniſter of his domi-
nions, and weakly confideth in him, he
becometh intoxicated with power, and 1s
baniſhed for negligence. The deſire of


liberty


"= C mung, I - £ ”


L 144 J


liberty maketh an impreſſion in the breaſt
of him who hath been expelled; and at
length, with that wiſh of liberty, he medi-
tateth the death of his ſovereign.

They ſay,

It is beſt to tear up by the roots, a rotten
tooth, a faithleſs ſervant, and a wicked
miniſter.

And that

The ſovereign who ſhall make fortune de-
pend upon the miniſter, will, upon an
emergent occafion, be at a loſs, like a
blind man without a guide,

Particularly as,

A miniſter who 1s grown too great 1s never
to be corrected; and men who are eſteemed
perfect have declared, that exaltation is
an intoxicater of the mind.


The bull proceedeth in every affair accord-
ing to his own inclinations; and your high-
neſs knows what is ſaid upon ſuch an occaſion,


There 1s not that man in the world who doth
not long for fortune; and who doth not
look at another's wife, if beautiful and
young, with a degree of deſire to poſſeſs


her. The


LC Ms J


The lion having conſidered for a moment,
replied, — Tis well; but provided it be as
thou repreſenteſt, ſtill IJ have a great regard
for Singjcevaki ; and obſerve, that


He who 1s dear to one, 1s dear even in the
very commiſſion of a fault. When the


materials of a houſe are burnt, upon whoſe
fire falleth diſgrace?


Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid Daminaki, that
even ſhould not be; but it 1s true, that


The man on whom the ſovereign placeth an
extraordinary degree of regard 1s the fa-
vounite of fortune; whether he be a ſon;
a miniſter, or a ſtranger.


And pleaſe to obſerve,
To the unkind the ruin of the worthy bring-
eth delight. Fortune delighteth to be
where there is a babbler, and a liſtener.“


And thus a primitive ſervant is neglected,
and a ſtranger promoted. They ſay,


A prince ſhould not, becauſe of the offence
of an old ſervant, entertain a ſtranger, leſt,
L between


L 146 J


between them diſſentions, be created in
the ſtate.


Thy words, exclaimed the lion, fill me
with aſtoniſhment! Didſt thou not thyſelf
quiet my apprehenſions, and preſent him to
me? How then, now he 1s promoted, can
he meditate evil ?


Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid Diminiks,


The wicked, even whilſt receiving favours,
incline to their natural diſpoſitions, as a
dog's tail, after every art of anointing and
chaffing, to its natural bend.

A cur's tail may be warmed, and preſſed, and
bound round with ligatures, and, after a
twelve year's labour beſtowed upon it, ſtill
it will return to its natural form.

Again:

In gratifying the wiſhes of men of vicious
Principles, when ſhall we find improve-
ment, happineſs, and purity? If the tree
be poiſonous, the fruit is unwholeſome,
although ſprinkled with the water of im-
mortality.

Wherefore, I ſay,


He


1 147 J


He who doth not wiſh another's ruin, ſhould,
even unaſked, ſpeak to him for his good.
This 1s a ſupreme duty, and the contrary
1s the opinion of bad men. |

For it is declared,

He is kind, who guardeth another from mis-
fortune; that is an action, which is free
from impurity; ſhe is a woman, who can
command herſelf; he is a worthy perſon,
who is much reſpected by good men; he
is a miniſter, who doth not behave with
inſolence and pride; he 1s happy, who is
forſaken by his paſſions; that 1s friendſhip,

which is not feigned; he is a man, who
doth not ſuffer his members and faculties
to give him uneaſineſs.


But if when all the inconveniences reſpect-
ing Singjeevaka have been pointed out, your
highneſs does not abandon him, there is no
blame in your ſervant, It is ſaid,


When a prince is attached to his inclinations,
he neither counteth the buſineſs which
ſhould be done, nor his own benefit. He
proceedeth at liberty, wherever his paſſions
lead him, like an intoxicated elephant.

e At


[ 148 J


At length, when puffed up with pride, he
falleth into a profound melancholy, he
throweth the blame upon his ſervants, and
doth not diſcover his own miſconduct.


To all this the lion obſerved, —'Ti1s ſaid,


One ſhould not lift the rod againſt our ene-
mies upon the private information of an-
other; but having, by ourſelves, made in-
quiry, we may either puniſh or commend.

They ſay alſo,

To ſeize and puniſh, before due inveſtiga-
tion, may tend to our own deſtruction.
It is like raſhly forcing one's hand into
the mouth of a ſerpent.


It ſpeaks plainly; nevertheleſs, ſhall pro-
clamation be made that Singjeevaki is guilty
or death?


Dämänäkä, a little confounded at this, re-
plied, —Pleaſe your highneſs, not ſo by any
means; for by ſuch procedure a breach is
produced in our ſecret council; and they ſay,


Having ſown the ſeed of ſecrecy, it ſhould be
properly guarded, and not in the leaſt
broken;


149 ]


broken; for being broken, it will not
proſper.
Bur, | |
Time drinketh up the eſſence of every great
and noble action, which ought to be per-
formed, and 1s delayed in the execution.


This being the caſe, what hath been begun
ſhould certainly be proſecuted with the ut-
moſt vigour ; for,


The reſolutions of counſel are like a timid
warrior, who, although attended by all his
troops, beareth not to ſtand long, for fear
of being defeated by the enemy.


But after all, if when his offence ſhall be
proved, he ſhould be pardoned, and {till re-
tained, 1t will be exceedingly improper; for,


He who wiſheth to keep a friend after he
hath once offended, receiveth death, as the
Aswätärẽẽ the belly.“

When a bad man is employed near one,
whatever he doeth is unprofitable. The
Sikoonee and the Sakiti ** may here ſerve
a prince for emblems of ſuch an one.

L 3 Let


L 150 J


Let me underſtand, ſaid the lion, what it
is he may be able to do againſt us; and Di-
miniki replied in the following lines:


Not knowing the nature of a man's connextons,


how ſhall we diſcover what. he is able to do?
The Sea was once got the better of by a ſimple
Partridge.”


How was that? demanded the lion; and
Diminiki related the following ſtory :


FABLE X.


ONCE upon a time a female partridge,
who reſided upon the ſea ſhore, finding her-
ſelf pregnant, ſaid to her mate, - My dear,
pray let a private place be ſought convenient
for me to be brought to bed in. Is not this
where we are a proper place for that pur-
poſe ? demanded the partridge. No, replied
the female, becauſe it is frequently over-
flowed by the tide, What! exclaimed the
male, am I ſo much leſs powerful than the
ſea, that I ſhould ſuffer myſelf to be inſulted,
even in my own houſe? My dear! replied
the female, laughing, there is a great diffe-
rence between thee and the ſea; otherwiſe,

He


A.


tn 1
He whoſe underſtanding can diſcern what is,
and judge what ſhould, or ſhould not be


applied to prevent misfortune, never ſink-
eth under difficulties. |


After this, however, and in obedience to
the commands of her mate, ſhe laid her eggs
in the ſame place; and the ſea, to try the
power of the partridge, came and carried
them off in triumph; whereupon, the poor
female, overwhelmed with affliction, ſaid to
her huſband, O maſter of my heart, what a
misfortune has befallen us! The ſea has
ſtolen all my eggs! My dear, replied the
partridge, do not be alarmed ; but wait and
ſee what I am capable of doing. So, upon
ſaying this, he aſſembled all the other birds,
and having informed them of what had hap-
pened, one of them ſaid, —We are not power-
ful enough to contend with the mighty ocean;
but I recommend, that at a proper time we
ſhould go in a body, and repreſent the affair
to the eagle, who will eaſe us of our trou-
bles. Having conſidered this propoſal, they
all repaired into the preſence of the king of
birds, and laid their grievance before him ;
who, having heard it, conſidered for a mo-
ment


3


ment what he ſhould do: — I will, ſaid he
to himſelf, ſtate the caſe to the great and
mighty lord, Narayana, the author of crea-
tion, preſervation, and deſtruction, and he
will wipe away our ſorrows. Accordingly,
the eagle, attended by the reſt of the birds,
addreſſed their complaint to Narayana, ſay-
ing, —O Lord! Even whilſt thou art maſter,
the ſea hath dared thus to overwhelm us!
The Deity having conſidered their complaint,
commanded the ocean to ſurrender the eggs;
and the king of waters placed the high decree
upon his crown, and delivered up the eggs
accordingly; and the birds having gained
what they wanted, returned thanks, and re-
tired to their own abodes. I repeat there-
fore, Not knowing &c.


The enemy who commenceth hoſtilities,
without having conſidered the tranſgreſ-
ſion of the law, meeteth a defeat, like the
ſea from the partridge.


How ſhall we diſcover, ſaid the lion, when
the bull is maliciouſly inclined ? Your high-
neſs, replied Diminiki, will know when you

ſhall


1


ſhall behold him coming, with thoſe wea-
pons the tips of his horns pointed towards
you, looking as if alarmed. Having ſaid this,
he went where Singjcevaki was; and being
in fight of him, he advanced by ſlow degrees,
and made himſelf appear as if agitated by
ſomething. Health and happineſs attend
thee! ſaid Siangjeevaki, with great marks of
politeneſs. Alas! replied Diminika, where
is there any happineſs for thoſe who are in
a ſtate of dependance? For,


The fortunes of thoſe who ſerve princes are
in the power of others; their minds are
never at eaſe; and they have no confidence
even in their own lives!


Again:

Who, having obtained riches, 1s not proud?
From whoſe misfortunes do the luxurious
become ſo? Whoſe heart hath not been
tormented by women? Or who 1s dear to
a king? Who is there not within the
arms of Time? What beggar ever arriveth
at conſequence? Or what man who hath


fallen into the ſnares of the wicked hath
eſcaped in peace?


Pray,


1 154 J
Pray, friend, ſaid the bull, inform me
what all this means! Oh! my friend, re-


plied he, what ſhall I ſay, but that I am
very unfortunate!


I am now like one plunged in a deep water
calling out for help, who findeth many
things hanging down to aſſiſt him, which
he neither quitteth nor taketh hold of.

Confidence in the prince, all at once, ruineth

one friend or other: What ſhall I do?

Whither ſhall I go? I am fallen into a

ſea of trouble!


Having ſaid this, he heaved a deep ſigh,
and fat down; when Singjeevaki deſired
him to relate, more fully, the cauſe of his
uneaſineſs; and Diminika with great ſhew
of ſecrecy ſaid, —Although it be highly im-
proper to abuſe the confidence of one's ſove-
reign, yet, as it was at our inſtance thou
cameſt, it behoveth me, as I hope for wel-
fare myſelf hereafter, to inform thee of what
concerns thy own welfare. Attend then :—
His highneſs is very much enraged againſt
thee, and has declared in private, that he will
have Singjcevaki killed; and that he will

treat


in}


treat his attendants with his fleſh. The
bull, upon hearing this, became very ſor-
rowful ; whilſt the artful Daminiki cried, —
It is in vain to be melancholy; rather let
ſomething be purſued ſuitable to the occa-
ſion. Singjeevaki was thoughtful for a mo-
ment, and then calmly ſaid, —Theſe lines are
uttered from a pious mouth :


Unworthy to be found by bad men, ſove-
reigns, for the moſt part, are cheriſhers of
the undeſerving. Riches are attendants
of the miſer; and the heavens rain plen-
teouſly upon the mountains !


What is my own opinion? I know not! nor
is this an affair to be diſcovered.


The unfortunate man who poſſeſſeth ſplen-
dor from the glory of him on whom he
dependeth, will find it as fatal as a foul


collyrium put into the eye by the hand of
imprudence.


But when I reflect, how hard is the ſentence
which hath been pronounced againſt me!


The


TL 190 1


The king hath been courted with unremit-

ting pains; why then is he not pleaſed ?
Herein 1s the wonder! This too is a cir-
cumſtance before unparallelled: one whilſt
he is ſerved 1s about to be an enemy!


Then, this may be deemed ſomething in-
explicable; but,


The man who, having diſcovered ſome un-
favourable token, giveth way to his paſ-
fions, will certainly fail in the purſuit of
it. How ſhall one give ſatisfaction to
him, whoſe mind is diſpleaſed without a
cauſe?


Have I offended the king by taking grain;
or are princes apt to become enemies with-
out ſufficient cauſe ?


Dämänäkä replied, — Thus it is! Hear me:


Some are diſcontented, even with the aſſiſt-
ance of the whole body of able men; whilſt
others are pleaſed when offences are com-
mitted in their fight. The duties of ſer-
vitude are e gly profound: They are

impracticable,


11


impracticable, even to thoſe who are in
the habit of doing penance; becauſe thoſe
who are not ſervants for one thing alone,


muſt ſubmit to be directed by the eye at
the ſovereign's will.


Again:

Virtues amongſt thoſe who know what vir-
tues are, are virtues; but when they meet
with a ſubject deſtitute of good qualities
itſelf, they become faults.” Rivers flow
with ſweet waters; but having joined the
ocean, they become undrinkable. :
A hundred good actions are loſt upon the
unworthy ; a hundred fine ſpeeches are
loſt upon the 1gnorant; a hundred good
qualities are loſt amongſt men who are
deſtitute of good qualities; a hundred times
ſpeaking 1s loſt upon thoſe who are not
inclined to converſe; a hundred under-
ſtandings are loſt upon the inſenſible.”?


It is true, replied the bull, that


Serpents are found upon the ſanders tree; in
the waters the lotus flowers with alliga-
tors; and in the midſt of full enjoyment
thoſe who diſpute about the quality.”

| Away


158 J


Away then with uninterrupted happineſs!


If the deſerts were made liquid, and the wa-
ters rendered ſolid; I aſk if the former
might not be paſſed in boats, and the latter
be called dry land?”

He who ſerveth an unreaſonable man, acteth
as much in vain, as he who ſoundeth a
trumpet in the ears of the deaf, or pre-
ſenteth a mirror to the blind.

The root is infeſted by ſerpents, the flowers
by bees, the branches by monkeys, and
the leaves by inſects ; in ſhort, there is not
a ſanders tree which 1s not ſurrounded by
the vileſt impurities.” *

Our maſter, obſerved Diminiki, is one of
thoſe who carry honey in their ſpeech, and
poiſon in their hearts; according to this de-
ſcription:


He holdeth out his hands at a diſtance ;*** he
appeareth with a wet eye; he relinquiſheth
one half of his ſeat; he is fond of cloſe
embracing; his words in converſing are
kind and gentle; he beſtoweth compli-
ments; his inſide is naught but poiſon,

whilſt


E


whilſt without he is covered with ſweets;
and he is rich in extreme deceit. What
name is there for this before unheard-of
mimick art, which is inculcated by wicked
men?


It is ſaid,

The boat was invented upon croſſing pieces
of water which were difficult to paſs; the
lamp, upon the approach of darkneſs; the
fan, upon a defect of wind; and injuries,
to gratify the pride of men blinded by in-
toxication! In ſhort, there is not any thing
in the world, wherein the idea of inven-
tion was not ſuggeſted by Providence.
But, in my opinion, Providence itſelf would
fail in its endeavours to prevent what paſs-
eth in the minds of wicked men.


How hard it 1s, exclaimed Singjeevaki,
that this poor feeder upon graſs and grain :
ſhould be an object worthy to be ruined by


a lion!


The diſputes of two of equal ſtrength and


fortune are worthy of attention; but not


of two, the one great the other humble.
| What


17
|

7
nl


9 Cs. ee one s A .Ft wa.
* — * — a. £2 _ Fo — R292
* r 1 "xz


[ 160 J


What animal, being athirſt, from its clear-
neſs willingly attempteth to enter the ſun
when ſtanding upon the ſummit of the
weſtern mountains? The bee flyeth to
the lotus.

Exulting with the rage of madneſs he ſpring-
eth upon the noble elephant; or elſe, hav-
ing quitted him without pity, he 1s engaged
by his people amongſt vagabonds.

The tree is broken down by the abundance
of its fruit, and walking groweth tireſome
to Seckhindees.”*

The miniſter is like a beaſt of burthen, who
ts led by ſweet words. Good qualities in

a virtuous perſon, for the moſt part, are
his enemies.

Princes, in general, alas! turn away their
faces from a man endued with good qua-
ities. Women too, often delight in thoſe
who are fond of delight. This is a falſe
poſition, that virtue leadeth to the ſociety
of men; for mankind, generally, do not

reckon this a noble principle.


It is well ! continued Singjeevaka, ad-
dreſſing himſelf to Daminika, this poor at-
tendant is of no eſteem with the Raja


It


[ 161 1


It is better that the vulture ſhould be followed
by geeſe, as miniſters and attendants; than
that the gooſe ſhould be purſued by the
birds of prey which attend the offerings
made to the manes of the dead. An at-
tendant being angry may uſe even a hun-
dred harſh expreſſions; but a virtuous man
is not to be deprived of any of his good
qualities by his feeble aſſiſtants.


The bull having again conſidered a while,
continued fſaying,—I know not by what
fault of mine the Raja has been injured, that
he ſhould be at variance with me! It is beſt
therefore to be for ever jealous of a prince.


If ever the mind of a king, which is like a
bracelet of ſolid cryſtal, is injured by his
miniſter, who is the artiſt that can re-
pair it?“

A thunderbolt, and the power of kings, are
both dreadful! But the former expendeth
Its fury at once, whilſt the latter is con-
ſtantly falling upon our heads.


Having pondered for a while, he ſaid to
Diminiki,—lIt behoveth thee, my dear friend,
M | to


n


ITE 1 -


2 —


= 27 ** = ae Tn * a, L .
* Cz, +> — — , F< 3 a ALT. ———- -
— K STII JOSE


Ds 2
_ = * © Ib * —
— -—- 3 — * = :


1 162 J


to afford me ſuch advice on this fatal occa⸗
ſion, as the nature of the caſe ſeems to de-
mand. What hath been the practice of
many, flouriſheth in misfortune. Although
it be as thou obſerveſt, replied Diminiki,
yet thoſe acquainted with the rules of pru-
dence ſay,—The 1% of one's own life Sc.
May this happen to me, exclaimed Singjee-
vaki, in the field of battle; for death would,
in my mind, be preferable to the imputa-
tion of fear: At preſent that doctrine is
not ſuitable.


Or dying, he obtaineth heaven ; or having
killed his enemy, the enjoyments of life,
Both theſe hard-to-be-acquired bleſſings
are the rights of heroes.

As out of battle death is certain, and in the
field life doubtful, the learned call it /e
only time of battle.

When out of battle he beholdeth no happi-
neſs for himſelf, the wiſe man embraceth
death fighting the foe.

In victory he obtaineth fortune, and in death
celeſtial beauty. Seeing that our bodies

are fo very fragile, why ſhould we heſitate
about dying in the battle?

| Let


1 163 J


Let me clearly underſtand, my friend, how
I am to diſcover when he is determined to
put me to death. When the Raja ſhall cock
his tail, lift up his paws, and look at thee
with his mouth open, replied Dimiinaki,
then will be the time for thee alſo to diſplay
thy proweſs.


Strong even without vigour, who may not
experience the ſituation of being defeated?
Obſerve how fearleſly people put their feet
upon a heap of aſhes!


But it 1s neceſſary that every thing be con-
ducted with the greateſt privacy. Having
ſaid this, Daminaki went to join Karittaki ;
who aſked him what was effected. Why,
replied the former, a reciprocal breach hath
been effected between the two. What doubt
of it? cried Karittiki; for they ſay,


What a name is relation amongſt wicked
men? Who will not be angry when over and
above ſolicited? Who groweth ſatisfied

with riches? Who, being attentive, may
not be learned?


M 2 A man


2 "= — —
—_ g


—_—_— OE


1 — 2
— TE mas


5


—_—_—


. #
SP

= . * - ®

- ve 26 EL ELE > _— AY ”

n — 1 -

q = — 1 bg
— n *
— PEST _ pod Pp. 4 \


l 264 J


Likewiſe:

A man is rendered miſerable by artful people,
and proſperous from the greatneſs of his
ſoul. What, doth not a troop of villains
act like the fire, (whoſe epithet 1s deſtroyer
of that which is intruſted to him?)


After this Dimiiniki went to the lion, and
cried out,. — Pleaſe your highneſs, that veſſel
of iniquity is coming! Prepare thyſelf, and let
him approach! Having ſaid this, he cauſed
the lion to put himſelf in the attitude before
deſcribed; and Singjeevaki being arrived,
upon ſeeing the lion with his countenance
thus altered, began himſelf to diſplay a cor-
reſponding ſhow of defiance. At length
there enſued a furious battle, in which the
poor bull having been killed by the lion, the
latter overcome with fatigue, and ſtanding,
as it were, full of affliction, exclaimed, — Alas!
what a cruel action have I been guilty of !


If the dominion be enjoyed by others, he
himſelf is the veſſel which containeth the
fault. Should a prince tranſgreſs the law,
he is like the lion after the murder of the
elephant. ö


The


M4


The loſs of territory, or of a wiſe and virtu-
ous ſervant, 1s a great loſs. The loſs of
ſervants 1s death to ſovereigns, and the


loſs of empire; for ſervants are not eaſily
to be found.


What novelty is this? cried Dämänäkä.
It is very unuſual for one to lament having
put a faithleſs enemy to death; and indeed it
is very improper to do ſo.


Or father, or if a brother; or ſon, or if a
friend, be a conſpirator againſt his life, he
ſhould be put to death by a prince who
wiſheth his own welfare.

One acquainted with the principles of juſtice
and political intereſt, ſhould neither be
haſtily ſevere; nor ever ready to pardon,
although money be in the hand. It is
proper to ſwallow mercy.

It is a virtue in hermits to forgive their ene-
mies, as well as their friends; but it is a
fault in princes to ſhew clemency towards
thoſe who are guilty.

There is no other but one expiation for him

who, from pride and the luſt of power,


ſhall wiſh for his maſter's ſtation, and that
1s death !


M 3 A meek-


1
. f !
4.
4 [ 4
=
1 *
7
\ (
i
5
u
*
A
15
*
| |
5 +4
F'y
Wy
11
— 4 's
„
s
.
7


IL 166 ]


A meek-hearted prince, a Brahmin who eat-
eth of all things alike, * an unruly wife, a
bad-principled compamion, an unfaithful
ſervant, and a preſumptuous ſuperinten-
dent, ſhould all be put away: They are
not worthy to be tried ſeven times.


But the following lines give a very parti-
cular picture of the behaviour of princes :


The conduct of princes, like a fine harlot, is

of many colours: True and falſe ; harſh
and gentle ; cruel and merciful; niggardly
and generous; extravagant in expence, and
ſolicitous of the influx of abundant wealth
and treaſure.


The lion having been thus compoſed by
the arts of Daminaki, at length recovered
his natural temper of mind, and ſeated him-
ſelf on his throne ; and Diminiki, with his
heart full of exultation, having wiſhed vic-
tory to the mighty king, and happineſs to


all the world, lived ever after according to
his wiſh.


Veeſhnd6-Sirmi having thus concluded


his ſecond head, The Separation of @ Favourite,
gave


1 r


gave notice to the young princes; who de-
claring they were well pleaſed with it, he
gave them his bleſſing, and repeated the fol-
lowing lines:


May ſuch a breach between friends happen
but in the houſe of your enemies! May
traitors, day by day, be led by Time to
their deſtruction ! May the people be per-
petual poſſeſſors of abundance, and all the
bleſſings of life! And may youth for ever
find amuſement here in this pleaſant gar-
den of fable!


Br 2


C HAP. III.


Or Dis puriNs.


HE time ſet apart for hearing theſe ſto-

ries being arrived, the young princes
reminded V&ëſhnòò Sirma in theſe words :—
Worthy Sir! As we are the ſons of a prince,
it will afford us very great amuſement to hear
what relates to Diſputing. And Veetſhnoo
Sarmã


,
6


==


may. * =»
RV Fa
OE


Eee P * ** Ea -
prom ——— „% a 7 AA


2 EEILETE Gon


+ >. ”_
* N —— +> ſo
* — 1
* —— —
4 11 = 22 8


wy a * a
= Fs —
0


1
„ - > — ww
- ——- A — -


* . 8 — -
N -_ ——
* L


1 168 ]


Sirmi replied, If it will give you pleaſure I
will proceed to recount what is connected
with that head, to which the following verſe
is the iatroduction:


1 2 quarrel between the Geeſe and the Peacocks,

2 which ts diſplayed equal valbur; the Geeſe,

aving truſted them, are betrayed by the Crows
who were in the camp of the enemy.


How was this? demanded the young
princes; and Veeſhnoo Sirma related as fol-
lows :

FaBLe I.

IN Kirpoori-dweepi”” there is a famous
lake which 1s diſtinguiſhed by the name of the
Pidmi-netliya, where uſed to reſide a royal
gooſe, whoſe title was Heerinyi-Girbhi,”*
and who had been anointed their king by all


the birds who are wont to frequent the waters.


If there were no king, the people would
thence be entirely ruined: they would be
here like a boat in the water without a
pilot.

The king protecteth the people; and they


ſupport the greatneſs of their ſovereign.
But


[ 169 |]


But protection is better than greatneſs ,
for the one cannot exiſt without the other.


One day as the royal gooſe was fitting
upon a bed of lotus flowers finely ſpread,
ſurrounded by his attendants, there arrived
from ſome diſtant country a certain booby,
whoſe name was Deerghi-mookha, who, ha-
ving made his obeiſance, drew near. Deer-
ghi-m6okha! ſaid the king, thou art lately
come from foreign countries: pray inform
me what news. -Pleaſe your highneſs, replied
the booby, I have ſome very important news,
anxious to relate which I made haſte to come
here. In Jimbo6-dweepi, there is a moun-
tain called VEendhyi, * where reigns Chëtrã-
varni, * a peacock, who is there king of
the winged tribes. As I was walking one
day over a place where the graſs and under-
wood had been burnt down, I was diſcovered
by ſome of his attendants who were paſſing

by; and upon their aſking who I was, and
whence I came, I replied, that I came from
Kirpdori-dweepi, that I was an attendant of
the royal gooſe, king Heeranya-Garbhi, and
that I came there out of curioſity to ſee fo-
reign countries, They then aſked me which


of


[ 170 J


of theſe two countries I thought the beſt,
and I ſaid, -O what a queſtion is this! There
is a vaſt difference between them: Kärpòòrä-
dweepa is a heaven of a place! Then what
do you do in ſuch a barren country as this?
Come away, and accompany me into our
country. But upon hearing me talk in this


manner, they ſeemed to be very much diſ-
pleaſed. They ſay,


A draught of milk to ſerpents doth nothing
but increaſe their poiſon. Good counſel


beſtowed upon fools doth rather provoke,
than ſatisfy them,


A wiſe man is worthy to be adviſed ; but an ig-
norant one never. Certain birds, having
given advice to a troop of monkeys, have their
neſts torn to pieces, and are obliged to fly away.


The royal gooſe demanded to know how
that was; and the booby repeated the follow-
ing ſtory:


FaBLE II.


ON the banks of the river Nirmiids,”.
upon a neighbouring mountain, there was a
large


171 J


large Sälmälẽẽ tree, wherein certain birds were
wont to build their neſts and reſide, even
during the ſeaſon of the rains. One day,
the ſky being overcaſt with a troop of thick
dark clouds, there fell a ſhower of rain in
very large ſtreams. The birds ſeeing a troop
of monkeys at the foot of the tree, all wet,
and ſhivering with cold, called out to them, —
Ho, monkeys! why don't you invent ſome-
thing to protect you from the rain?


We build ourſelves neſts with ſtraws collected
with nothing elſe but our bills. How is
this, that you, who are bleſſed with hands,
and feet, yield to ſuch ſufferings ?


The monkeys hearing this, and underſtand-
ing it as a kind of reproach, were exceedingly
irritated, and ſaid amongſt themſelves, —
Thoſe birds there, ſitting comfortably out of
the wind within their warm neſts, are laugh-
ing at us! So let them, as long as the ſhower


may laſt. In ſhort, as ſoon as the rain ſub-


ſided, the whole troop of them mounted into
the tree, where tearing all the neſts to pieces,
the eggs fell upon the ground and were
broken. I ſay therefore, A wiſe man is wor-
thy to be adviſed ; &c.

Well,


- 9 — == *-- — - = —
- Fx: - — 1 7 e
- WW *


, ne ͤ ˙—————*»• 2327


.


e
2 —


FF ory — Fo


oo


;


”,
ö f
4
Ti.4
bY
* |
7 9
14
5 +
!
.


( 172 ]

Well, ſaid the royal gooſe, what did the
birds ſay after they had heard this ſtory?
Why, pleaſe your highneſs, they were in a
great paſſion, and aſked, who made that ſame
gooſe a king! In anſwer to which, I too, in
the anger which ſuch a queſtion created, cried,
—By whom was this ſame peacock made a
king? and, upon my ſaying this, they tried
to kill me, and in return, I diſplayed no little
valour.


An occaſional dreſs to a man is as forgive-
neſs and modeſty to a woman. Courage
when ſurrounded 1s hke being captive
amongſt men endued with clemency.


The royal gooſe ſmiling at this, ſaid,


A man who, having well compared his own
ſtrength or weakneſs with that of others,
after all, doth not know the difference, 1s
eaſily overcome by his enemies.


A fool is always diſcovered if he ſtayeth too long;
like the Aſs dreſſed in a Tiger's ſkin, from his
voice. |
How was this? ſaid the booby ; and the


royal gooſe related the following tale :
FABLE


1

FaBLE III.
A Hiſte&enapoori® there lived a certain
dier, whoſe name was VEtlasi.* He had a
jack aſs who was grown exceedingly weak
by carrying burdens too great for his ſtrength,
and, as it were, almoſt at the point of death.
In this condition the dier dreſſed him up in
a tiger's ſkin, and let him looſe in a field of
corn; ſo that the people belonging to the field
having obſerved him at a diſtance, ran away
with the idea of its being a real tiger. After
a while, however, a man whoſe buſineſs was
to watch the field, having dreſſed himſelf in
a kind of armour made of an aſs's ſkin, and
furniſhed himſelf with a bow and arrows,
ventured to approach him; and the ſuppoſed
tiger, who was now grown plump and fat,
ſpying him at a little diſtance, and thinking
it was a female of his own ſpecies, began to
welcome her by ſetting up a loud braying,
and immediately trotting up before her. But
the man having diſcovered from his voice
what he really was, the poor aſs was ſoon
overcome for his love. I ſay, therefore, A
fool is always diſcovered &c.

After that, ſaid the booby, the birds called
out to me,. - Raſcal! vile booby ! Doſt thou


dare


274 ]


dare ſpeak thus ſlightingly of our ſovereign?
This is not to be ſuffered by us preſently !
And, ſaying this, they began to attack me
with their bills, and to brave me in this man-
ner:—Obſerve, thou ſtupid animal! thy gooſe
is always a ſoft ſpiritleſs creature; although
he is by no means ſo very mild in the go-
vernment of his dominions ; but he is inca-
pable of poſſeſſing as much wealth as would
lie in the palm of one's hand; how then ſhall
he command the univerſe? As for thyſelf,
thou art like an angry frog; but he 1s thy
ſuperior, Hear this:


A large tree, which yieldeth both fruit and
ſhade, is highly to be eſteemed; but if Pro-
vidence, per chance, may have denied it
fruit, by whom is its ſhade refuſed? *

And, that

Court ſhould not be paid to the indigent;
but to him on whom there 1s great depen-
dance. The elephant obtained the title of
Varöönẽẽ from his carrying water in his
trunk. For,

Even the greateſt are reduced to littleneſs,
and thoſe of abundant qualities to inſig-
nificance, by the properties of that by

which


75 J


which they are oppoſed; like the roar
elephant in the mirror,


Beſides,


Great things may be 2 by wiſe counſel,
when a ſovereign enemy may be too powerful,
Certain Rabbits were enabled to live in com-


fort, through the policy of one of their brethren.


I aſked them how this was? And the birds
related as follows:


FABLE IV.


ONCE upon a time, for want of rain in
due ſeaſon, a troop of elephants being greatly
diſtreſſed for water, addreſſed their chief in
theſe words: What reſource have we, ex-
cept in that hollow ſinking ground inhabited
by thoſe little animals! but deprived of that
too, whither, Sir, blinded as it were, ſhall we
go? What ſhall we do? Upon hearing their
complaints, their chief, after travelling with
them a great way, diſcovered a fountain of
clear water. But as many rabbits who hap-
pened to be in their burrows were cruſhed to
death under the feet of ſo many elephants
trampling over their warren; at length, one

of


2 n


5 4 : "x * e - 1
Te. 7 A  v-y ey oo To— i
* a .


4 :
—_
* - - — =
org us. 2


" | _
1 Une, A A


A. AS. * —_ 1


1
1
|
|
|
1
*
164


— — —— DH ———


1


of them, who was called Seelee-Mookhi,”*


reflected in this manner: This troop of ele-


phants, oppreſſed with thirſt, will be coming
here every day to drink, and, at length, our
whole race will be deſtroyed! But an old
buck, whoſe name was VEtjaya, * faid to him,
Brother, don't be uneaſy; for I am going
to prevent what thou dreadeſt. Saying which,
he ſet off to try how he could oppoſe them;
but as he went along, he began to conſider
how he ſhould approach ſo formidable a
troop; for, obſerved he, they ſay,


An elephant killeth even by touching, a ſer-
pent even by ſmelling, a king even by ru-
ling, and a wicked man by laughing at one,


Wherefore, I will mount the ſummit of a
rock to addreſs the head of the troop. This
being put in execution accordingly, the chief
elephant aſked him who he was, and whence
he came. I am, he replied, an embaſlador
ſent here by the god Chindri.** Declare the
purport of thy commiſſion, ſaid the elephant.
Sir, replied the rabbit, as


Embaſſadors, even when the weapons of war


are lifted up, ſpeak not otherwiſe than for
| the


I
the benefit of their ſtate; and although


they ſpeak boldly according as it is their
advantage, they are not to be put to death.


Then I will declare what are the commands
of the god Chindra, He bade me ſay, that
in driving away, and deſtroying the rabbits
who are appointed to guard the fountain
which 1s conſecrated to that Deity, you have
done ill; for, ſaid he, they are my guards,
and it 1s notorious that the figure of a rabbit
is my emblem.“


The head elephant, upon hearing this be-
ing greatly alarmed, declared that they had
offended through ignorance, and would never
go to the fountain again. If this be your
reſolution, ſaid the embaſſador, go this once,


and make your ſubmiſſions before the Deity


himſelf, whom you will ſee in the fountain,
quite agitated with anger; and when you have
pacified him, you may depart.—Accordingly,
as ſoon as it was night, the embaſſador VEE-
Jaya having conducted the chief of the ele-
phants to the fountain, there ſhewed him the
image of the moon, trembling, as it were,
upon the ſmooth ſurface of the water ;

N and


_— - <—_ — —
— —— —
2 —


—


— —


————ͤ— r D


— . — -
. 6 -* - I
— —_ —


a”


— ©


"= ane a 3 7 4 = 23 r


1 76 ]


of them, who was called Sëlẽẽ-Möökhà,“
reflected in this manner: This troop of ele-
phants, oppreſſed with thirſt, will be coming
here every day to drink, and, at length, our
whole race will be deſtroyed! But an old
buck, whoſe name was Vetjayi, * faid to him,
Brother, don't be uneaſy; for I am going
to prevent what thou dreadeſt. Saying which,
he ſet off to try how he could oppoſe them;
but as he went along, he began to conſider
how he ſhould approach ſo formidable a
troop; for, obſerved he, they ſay,


An elephant killeth even by touching, a ſer-
pent even by ſmelling, a king even by ru-
ling, and a wicked man by laughing at one,


Wherefore, I will mount the ſummit of a
rock to addreſs the head of the troop. This
being put in execution accordingly, the chief
elephant aſked him who he was, and whence
he came. I am, he replied, an embaſſador
ſent here by the god Chandra. Declare the
purport of thy commiſſion, ſaid the elephant.
Sir, replied the rabbit, as


Embaſſadors, even when the weapons of war


are lifted up, ſpeak not otherwiſe than for
| the


( 177 ]
the benefit of their ſtate ; and although


they ſpeak boldly according as it is their
advantage, they are not to be put to death.


Then I will declare what are the commands
of the god Chindri, He bade me fay, that
in driving away, and deſtroying the rabbits
who are appointed to guard the fountain
which 1s conſecrated to that Deity, you have
done ill; for, ſaid he, they are my guards,


and it is notorious that the figure of a rabbit
is my emblem.


The head elephant, upon hearing this be-
ing greatly alarmed, declared that they had
offended through ignorance, and would never
go to the fountain again. If this be your
reſolution, ſaid the embaſſador, go this once,
and make your ſubmiſſions before the Deity
himſelf, whom you will ſee in the fountain,
quite agitated with anger; and when you have
pacified him, you may depart.—Accordingly,
as ſoon as it was night, the embaſſador V&&-
Jaya having conducted the chief of the ele-
phants to the fountain, there ſnewed him the
image of the moon, trembling, as it were,
upon the ſmooth ſurface of the water;


N and


Vo ———
— —
GY 1 -4
7 — — 5 a —
- - — 8 — brag .. =
2 > = 22 L


n


= F a =
= »
—


— —— — — -
ͤ—ᷓ— *
= ” — * 7 2
V A —


. = ” _
——— — ÜQñũ4—ẽ—— —


|
*
5
|


|
|
|
|


199 1


and when he had made him bow down to it,
in token of ſubmiſſion, he ſaid, —Pleaſe your
divinity! What hath been done having been
done through 1gnorance, I pray thee pardon
them! and upon ſaying this, he cauſed the
elephant to depart. I repeat therefore, Grea:
things may be effected &c.


After that, continued the booby, I ventured
to ſay, that our king too was powerful and
valiant, upon which they laid hold of me
with their beaks; and, aſking me what bu-
ſineſs J had in their country, they carried me
before their chief Cheetri-virnia ; and when
they had ſhewed me to him, bowing to their
king, they ſaid, —Pleaſe your highneſs, let
this guilty booby be confined ; for he dares,
even whilſt he 1s travelling in our land, to
treat with contempt your royal feet! The
king, in anger, demanded to know whence I
came; and they informed him, that I was
the ſervant of the gooſe HeEerinyi-garbha,
and that I came from Kirpoori-dweepi.—
After that, the miniſter, who was a vulture,
aſked me who was the prime miniſter in this
country, and I told him, a Chikri-vaki
whoſe name was Know-all.” You eſteem

him,


—


DEL


t 0 4


him, replied the vulture, becauſe he is your
countryman ; they ſay, indeed,


= , *
P a 7 CT -
——_—


8
* 8 4 - — —


— = 2
1 _
— 43 *


A king ſhould engage for his miniſter one
who is a native of his own country; pure
in all his ways, and cleanly in his dreſs;
not one who is an outcaſt, addicted to idle
pleaſures, or too fond of women; but one
of good repute, who is well verſed in the
rules of diſputation, is of a firm mind,
and expert in raiſing a revenue.


8 — — 0 —
— Ce e _ — — *
— 3
— — — — — —
A —
n 22 2 + 4s


A parrot next ſpoke, and obſerved, that
as Kirpoora-dweepa was comprehended in
Jambo6-dweepa, the authority of his Ma-
jeſty's feet certainly extended over that coun-


try alſo; to which the king of the birds
replied, —Thus it 1s !


Sovereigns, the libidinous, and children, with
madmen, and ſuch as are made vain by
riches, are over anxious for what 1s not
attainable, and how much more ſo, for
what 1s to be procured !


+ os


|
f j

*
14

|

;

4


Upon this, I ſaid.— But that too large a


government do not proſper, our ſovereign
N 2 has


— _
2


20 2 -—— * 4 o


L 180 J


has a territorial right, even over Jimb66-
dweepa.,—Let it be declared how, ſaid the
| parrot, and where he will give proofs of it!
And I replied, —In battle! At this their
king laughing, ſaid, —Go to thy maſter, and
tell him to be well prepared; and upon that,
I defired him to ſend his own embaſſador
alſo. Who ſhall go? ſaid the king; for an
embaſſy ſuch a perſon is required as is de-
ſcribed in theſe lines :


An embaſſador ſhould be a truſty ſervant,

. endued with good qualifications, pure in
his principles, clever, agreeable, unad-
dicted to fruitleſs pleaſures, patient, and,
with all, a Brahmin”? who is well ac-
quainted with the moral and religious
cuſtoms of ſtrangers, and the nature of
oppoſition.


Although there are many ſuch to be found,
{till a Brahmin 1s to be preferred ; for,


He acteth according to the pleaſure of his
employer ; he ſeeketh not wealth, and doth
not withdraw himſelf from the preſence of


his lord, even in the hour of misfortune.
| This


l 187


This being the caſe, let the parrot go. Go,
parrot, added the king, along with this per-
ſon; and, upon thy arrival, make known our
will. It ſhall be according to your high-
neſs's commands, replied the parrot; but this
booby 1s a vile animal, and I am not uſed to


go any where with a perſon of bad character.
They ſay,


A villain is ſure to commit ſome evil action,
and he ſucceedeth amongſt good men.
Sẽẽtã was ſeized by Rivini.** The ocean
may have bonds.


I is not proper either to lay, or to go any where,
along with an evil-diſpoſed perſon. A Gooſe
ſuffered for laying with a Crow, and a Varte
tat for going with him.


How was this? demanded the king; and
the parrot recounted the following ſtory:


FazIE V.

ON a private road in Oojjãyënẽẽꝰ there
was a large PEEppili tree, where lived toge-
ther a gooſe and a crow. Once upon a time
in the cold ſeaſon, a traveller came there,
and having placed his bow and his arrows


dE


HOES


az.


þ1
jt
1
1
15


= — , —
* — 222 2 — =


-— . 2
- — — 2221 —
©. 2 —
5 r —— — + Sis
=—_— 1 — * any
PF: — A” - > Py


——— =
= -< wy ty © 5


— — > 7
= Een


a — RT


- — — o
- -
o — —


<4


—
b


| --


*
= _— * — a 3 * 2
* E 1 —
— * # —
4 J - 22
— ** * ——_—


4 *
— aa 7
—_ - r Kh


o — — SN
_ —
. * 24 — — —


* 5 hy
hd
— —


2


PPP


WE VET” . WS. .—qC Wwe.


—
—


== > —


wo RISE


|
|
|
|
|


4-208 }


ſafe away under the tree, he went to ſleep,
A few minutes after, the ſhade of the tree
paſſed away from his face, and preſently it
was covered by the ſcorching rays of the ſun;
upon ſeeing which, the gooſe, who was in
the tree, expanded his wings, and again a
ſhadow was formed as before. A little while
after, in the enjoyment of a ſound nap, the
man happening to open his mouth, the crow
dropped his excrement into it, and flew out
of the way. But the man waking, and ſee-
ing the gooſe upon the tree, concluded that
it was he; ſo, being in a paſſion, he took
his bow, and with an arrow drawn home to
his ear, ſhot him dead upon the ſpot. I ſay,
therefore, It is not proper to flay, Sc. I will
now relate the hiftory of the Varttaki, con-
tinued the parrot.


FaBLE VI.


ONCE upon a time all the birds of the
air went in a body upon a pilgrimage to the
ſea fide in honour of the eagle; and amongſt
the reſt, the crow went accompanied by a
Värttäkä.“ As they flew along, the crow
repeatedly ſtole and ate of ſome curds out of


a pot which a farmer was carrying upon his
head;


1 J


head; but as ſoon as the man put the pot
upon the ground, and ſaw the crow and the
Värttäkä together in the air, the former,
being guilty, flew out of the way; but the
latter, being but ſlow of flight, was caught
and inſtantly killed. I fay, therefore, —It 7s
not proper either to ſtay, or to go &c.


I then ſaid, —Brother parrot, what is the
reaſon thou raileſt thus againſt me? I eſteem
thee, nevertheleſs, as the feet of his highneſs!
Be it ſo, replied the parrot; but,


When ſincere and beloved friends are courted
by thoſe of bad character, it createth in
me as much dread, as the ſight of flowers
out of ſeaſon.


Thy being a raſcal is made evident to me
from thy converſation; for if there ſhould be
any falling out between our two maſters,
thy tongue will be the cauſe.


Obſerve:

A fool will rejoice and be happy, even when
offences are committed before his eyes. A
certain Wheekoright put his own wife with
ber gallant upon his head.

How


FCC NE—— wr


-
- — — —
1 my —_— ——_ Wu, i 1 * _ *
- — : 9 we. SE + <2 N =”


FE SHE, eo


”"Y =. — - 4
— _ —— — — 6ꝙ6ꝛLga43.ʃ —ʃ
—— — *
-


— —
_ — — 2 *
—
© +
— — » s
2 *
A * — L


" 9
.
1
: 4 þ
- N

2”,

8 0

: .
F —


——— — —


1 1384 ]


. How was that? ſaid the king; and the
parrot related the following ſtory:


FaBIE VII.


IN Sree-nigiri'” there lived a wheelwright,
whoſe name was Dull-wit;“ who, though
he believed his wife was falſe to his bed, had
never, with his own eyes, ſeen her with her
gallant. So he pretended that he was going
out of town, but after he had gone a little
way, he returned home, and privately hid
himſelf under the bed. In the mean time,
the gallant, ſuppoſing the wheelwright was
actually gone out of town, made his appear-
ance; and, ſoon after, the wife retired with
her lover to the ſame bed; where they began
to converſe without reſtraint. But juſt now,
from the feel of ſomething touching the
under part of the bed, ſhe concluded that her
huſband was beneath, and ſo was a little diſ-
concerted; upon which her gallant ſaid,—
What 1s the reaſon thou doſt not enjoy the
preſent moment free from care? Thou ap-
peareſt as if thou wert alarmed at ſome-
thing! Alas! replied the artful woman, he
who 1s the lord of my life is gone abroad to-
day; wherefore the city, though ever ſo **

0


1 185 J


of inhabitants, to me appeareth a mere de-
ſert! Then is thy wheelwright, ſaid the
gallant, a ſubject worthy of all this tender-
neſs? he who calls thee whore, and ſtrum-
pet? Villain! exclaimed ſhe, what is this
thou ſayeſt? Hear me!


She is a virtuous woman, who, when ſpoken
harſhly to, and viewed with angry eyes,
appeareth before her huſband with a mild
and placid countenance.


The regions of eternal happineſs are provided
for thoſe women, who love their huſbands
the ſame in a wilderneſs, as in a city; be
he a ſaint, or be he a ſinner.


A huſband is a woman's firſt ornament, al-
though himſelf be unadorned; but when


ſhe is without one, be ſhe ornamented, ſhe
is not adorned.


Thou art very fine, to be ſure, and haſt
the appearance of a figure made up of gar-
lands and flowers. Pray do people ever wor-
ſhip thee? My huſband, if he chooſes,
can ſell me to the gods, or give me to the
Brahmins; * but what of that?


I live


:
9
.
i
7
5
U
1
by
©
*
' p
12
i
1
*
1
7
1.
SY
4 8
5
1
1
f
1


4
q


*
A
7


LEES ———


| 2


"Ix d 5
R 6 TREPIT


— —


22
rar TRY
— — — <


[ 186 ]


I live in him living, and in him, my beloved,

will I live when dead; for upon his death,
to die after him 1s my firm reſolve.

For,

The woman who followeth her huſband
may remain in heaven for a million and a
half of years, or for as many as there are
hairs upon the body.

As the ſnake-catcher by force draweth up
the ſerpent from its hole; ſo, having
taken her huſband, ſhe 1s to be raiſed into
heaven.

Him ſhould ſhe attend whilſt living, and him
ſhould ſhe ſleep with when dead, to whom
her father may have given her, or her bro-
ther according to her father's will.“


259


The fooliſh wheelwright, upon hearing all
theſe fine ſpeeches, ſaid to himſelf, —O what
a lucky fellow I am, to poſſeſs a wife who
can ſpeak of me with ſuch tender love and
affection! and, ſaying this, he roſe with the
bed and its contents, and began to dance for
Joy. I repeat therefore,— foo! &c.


After this, continued the booby, as ſoon


as the king had paid me the uſual compli-
ments,


1


ments, I was diſmiſſed, and the parrot is
coming behind. And now that I have ap-
prized your highneſs of all this, let that
which is moſt proper be purſued. What!
exclaimed the miniſter Chikri-vaki, the
king's affairs have been forwarded, to the
utmoſt of his abilities, by a booby, who hap-
pened to travel into a foreign country! But,
pleaſe your highneſs, he has acted according
to his nature.


One may give him a hundred inſtances from
holy writ, that he ſhould not diſpute; ſtill,
it is the character of a fool to make a diſ-
turbance without a cauſe.


Have done with theſe reproachful ſayings!
ſaid the royal gooſe, and attend to what has
been reported. Pleaſe your highneſs, replied
the miniſter, I will ſpeak to you in private;
for,


Thoſe who are aware of it can interpret the


mind from the changes of the eyes and


other members; and even by the report of
ſhape and complexion.


And upon this, the reſt withdrawing, the
king and his miniſter were left by themſelves.
I think,


— 1 — = : = a.” — 2
A ul eMail GED GOA Th. IE .... . . .
- CT — - CET — — -—r + :
* = — 232 _ a »
_ + . 2
J * - 2
* - — 1 *


2 — — — —— — — — _ _
WW s _ N — *
1 «+ -
* — 10 *
,
1544 dx 2.4 — = F 1 a 2
* r cw,” : 4 _


234 1 ** 7 bo b
— WW a - 4 N. n


|
:
:

4


1
*
'Y
2
;
1
»
.

: *


D 7


— — — *-


4 — 2


äœVü—ä—  __- —— 2 —


LEI ES TITLES


n


1
ET
= |
+
FRY
ke
. ==
c
+
* 1
194
*%
=
9 1
*
1
1
1 |
„
4


1 188 J


I think, ſaid the miniſter, that this has been
brought about by a ſpy ſent by ſome officer
of our government. They ſay,


A ſick man is the beſt ſubject for a phyſician,
and an active emiſſary for the officers of
government; fools are the ſupport of the
learned, and a man of ſecrecy ſuits a king.


Let the cauſe alone, ſaid the king; at pre-
ſent it ſhould be determined what ought to
be done; then ſay! Firſt, pleaſe your high-
neſs, replied the miniſter, let a ſpy be ſent,
and then we ſhall learn the ſituation of the
country, with its ſtrength and weakneſs; for
they ſay,


A prince ſhould have a ſpy to obſerve what
is neceſſary, and what 1s unneceſlary, to
be done in his own, as well as in his
enemy's country. He 1s the king's eye;
and he who hath him not 1s blind.


And let him take a ſecond perſon with him,
in whom he can confide; whom he ſhall ſend
back, well diſguiſed, charged with ſuch ſecrets
as are worthy to be communicated; whilſt
he himſelf remains upon the ſpot, ;
He


1 189 J


He ſhould command his emiſſaries to go dif-


guiſed in company with thoſe penitents,
who travel with beards under pretence of
ſtudying in the courts of temples, and
places of holy viſitation.


The emiſſary we ſend ſhould be one who
will go about privately, and who will paſs
through land and water; and I know of no
one, except the booby, who is endued with
both theſe requiſites ; wherefore, let him be
appointed. In the mean time, let all the in-
habitants keep within our caſtle; and, till


the meſſenger return, let profound ſecrecy be
purſued; for


The deliberations of council are diſcovered
if heard by fix ears, as well as any private
information; wherefore, a king ſhould en-
truſt his counſels only to himſelf and a
ſecond perſon.

The injury which is done to princes, from
their counſels' being diſcovered, are not to
be repaired, ſay thoſe who are acquainted
with the rules of policy.


Well, ſaid the king, now 1 have found
ſuch an excellent emiſſary, what next?—Your
highneſs,


— —


n a — . —_ — n_
— Mire =


: 5 $ «+ WF PF -_
= "ET IF * — 8


—— —— — Tc i
. P EEE oa


_—_——


[ 190 J


higaneſs, rephed the miniſter, hath but to en-
ter the field of battle, and victory will follow,


They were now interrupted by the entrance
of one of the guards, who informed them,
that there was a parrot waiting at the gate,
juſt come from Jimboo-dweepi. The king
looked at the miniſter, and the miniſter ſaid,
Lead him into a ſeparate apartment, and
ſometime hence he may be admitted. Ac-
cording to the commands of his highneſs! ſaid
the guard; upon which he went away, taking
the parrot with him.


So, ſaid the king, Diſcord is arrived, and is
in attendance! Yes, pleaſe your highneſs,
replied the miniſter ; but diſcord is not ne-
ceſlity. *


ls he a miniſter, or a counſellor, who, upon
the firſt alarm, and without due conſider-
ation, adviſeth his ſovereign either to com-
mence hoſtilities, or to quit his ground?

A wiſe man may ſtrive to conquer, but he
ſhould never fight; becauſe victory, it is
obſerved, cannot be conſtant to _ the


combatants.
A man


E


A man ſhould never diſplay his bravery who
is unprepared for battle; nor bear the
marks of defiance, until he hath experi-
enced the abilities of his enemy.

Not more eaſily is a houſe ſupported by
mankind with a prop, than great achieve-
ments from triflng means, This is the
great fruit of councils.


But when we perceive that we are threatened
with war, let preparations be made; for


The field is fruitful from having been culti-
vated in due ſeaſon, It 1s the ſame with
political meaſures; but theſe too advance
ſlowly, not inſtantly, to maturity.

When the quality of bravery 1s near, a great
man's terrors are at a diſtance, In the
hour of misfortune ſuch a great man over-
cometh bravery.

Great warmth, at firſt, is the certain ruin of


every great achievement, Doth not water,
although ever ſo cool, moiſten the earth ?


Beſides, an' pleaſe your highneſs, King Chee-
tra=varna 1s very ſtrong; and,


There is no ordinance obliging us to fight
thoſe who are ſtronger than ourſelves,
| Such


*


Pre ßãꝗ ... — —— —


:

:

|

4 .
*
15
F

4


— — —t
5 0X —


— — — -— Sz
3


— z


= > 28


— —
_ —


:
Fn  * " Þ has + b Me fas


5 5 — —
. 1 - _— —_ — 2 —
— — —  —— AX — 2


_— rn n —
- — Sous, — : » «IT ” #
A ²˙ A Ur


— — 2 -
* o


* ® # = 4 1 v WP EY
X — F = 3 = of
. 1 r A


[ 192 }]


Such fighting, as it were, with an elephant,
is the ſame as men's fighting againſt rocks.

He is a fool who turneth upon his opponent,
before he hath found a proper opportu-
nity. The efforts of him, who contendeth
with one ſtronger than himſelf, are as
feeble as the exertions of an inſect's wings.

A prudent ſoldier, keeping within his tor.
toiſe-like ſhelter, may, indeed, ſuſtain
the force of arms; and when occaſion may
ſuit, he may ſally forth like an enraged
ſerpent.


Pleaſe your highneſs, attend to this:


One who is maſter of ever ſo little art may
be able, on a great occaſion, to root up
trees with as much eaſe, as the current of
a river the reeds and graſs.


Then let this embaſſador, the parrot, be de-
tained and amnſed, until we ſhall have put
our fortifications in good condition.


A ſingle bowman ſtanding upon the battle-
ments fighteth a hundred; and a hundred
ten thouſand: wherefore, a caſtle is to be
preferred,

What


1 3 J


What ſovereign, whoſe country is furniſhed
with ſtrong holds, is ſubject to defeat?
The prince of a country, without ſtrong
holds, is as a man who is an outcaſt of his
tribe.

He ſhould build a caſtle with a large ditch
and lofty battlements, and furniſh it with
machines for raiſing water; and its ſitua-
tion ſhould be in a wood upon a hill, and
where there are ſprings of freſh water.

It ſhould be ſpacious, but very uneven; and
ſupplied with large ſtore of liquor, grain,
and money; and with gates and fally-
ports; for theſe are the ſeven treaſures of
a caſtle.”

Who, demanded the king, ſhould be ap-


pointed to prepare our caſtle? The mini-
{ter replied,


Every one ſhould be employed in that buſi-
neſs he 1s beſt acquainted with. One who
hath had no experience in civil affairs, al-
though he may be a good ſoldier, would be
at a loſs in buſineſs of that kind,


Then let the Sãräsà“ be called, concluded the
miniſter. This being done accordingly, and
the Sarasi arrived, the king gave him en-
O couragement,


S ᷣͤ er I -


*


n


CE” ERS. bo —
— = — 8 — f Y — = 4- » . > 12
— . DAI — —„—¼ FE 32 3
8 bd - Si < 1 - —


— .
0
— n
2


—


*

5 a

Il

i

*
”Y |
wy :
4
15
ty *

. 1
f
,
alli
1
5

4


n of = —
—
- wy — — 1


1 194 J


couragement, and told him to put the caſtle
in good order. The Sarisi, bowing, replied,
Pleaſe your highneſs, the caſtle has lately
been well examined. There is a large re-
ſervoir in it, in the center there is an iſland,
in which it is proper that there ſhould be a
ſtore of grain laid up.


A ſtore of grain, O king! is the beſt o es.
A gem caſt into the mouth will not ſup-
port life.

Of all ſapid things, ſalt being eſteemed the
firſt, ſome ſhould be laid in; for without
it the beard is bedaubed.


Go then, ſaid the king, and attend to what
is neceſſary to be done. Juſt now a door-
keeper came in, and ſaid, —Pleaſe your high-
neſs, one Cloud-colour,” a crow, is juſt
arrived from Sèènghälä-dwẽẽpä, who, with
his attendants, deſires to behold the foot of


your highneſs. A crow, ſaid the king, is a


wiſe bird, and a great obſerver of things;
and that being the caſe, let him be received.
He 1s ſo, replied the miniſter; but a crow 1s
a land bird, and conſequently of a different
party to us; how then can he be received in
contempt of our own party? It is faid,


The


t


The fool who forſaketh his own party, and delight-
eth to dwell with the oppoſite fide, may be killed
by them ; as was the caſe with the blue Jackal,


How was this? demanded the king; and
the miniſter related as follows:


FABLE VIII.


A certain jackal, as he was roaming about
the borders of a town, juſt as his inclinations
led him, fell into a dier's vat; but being
unable to get out, in the morning he feigned
himſelf dead. At length, the maſter of the
vat, which was filled with indigo, came, and
ſeeing a jackal lying with his legs uppermoſt,
his eyes cloſed, and his teeth bare, concluded
that he was dead, and ſo, taking him out, he
carried him a good way from the town, and
there left him. The fly animal inſtantly got
up, and ran into the woods; when, obſerving
that his coat was turned blue, he meditated in
this manner: Il am now of the fineſt colour!
what great exaltation may I not bring about
for myſelf? Saying this, he called a number
of jackals together, and addreſſed them in the
tollowing words:—Know that I have lately
been ſprinkled®* king of the foreſts, by the

O 2 hands


196 ]


hands of the goddeſs herſelf who preſides over
theſe woods, with a water drawn from a va-
riety of choice herbs. Obſerve my colour,
and henceforward let every buſineſs be tran-
ſacted according to my orders. The reſt of
the jackals, ſeeing him of ſuch a fine com-
plexion, proſtrated themſelves before him,
and ſaid, — According as your highneſs com-
mands! By this ſtep he made himſelf ho-
noured by his own relations, and ſo gained
the ſupreme power over thoſe of his own
ſpecies, as well as all the other inhabitants
of the foreſts. But after a while, finding
himſelf ſurrounded by a levee of the firſt
quality, ſuch as the tiger and the like, he
began to look down upon his relations; and,
at length, he kept them at a diſtance. A
certain old jackal perceiving that his bre-
thren were very much caſt down at this be-
haviour, cried, Do not deſpair! If it con-
tinue thus, this imprudent friend of ours
will force us to be revenged. Let me alone
to contrive his downfall. The lion, and the
reſt who pay him court, are taken by his out-
ward appearance; and they obey him as their
king, becauſe they are not aware that he is
nothing but a jackal: do ſomething then by

which


1


which he may be found out. Let this plan
be purſued: Aſſemble all of you in a body
about the cloſe of the evening, and ſet up
one general howl in his hearing; and III
warrant ye, the natural diſpoſition of his ſpe-
cies will incline him to join in the cry; for,


Whatever may be the natural propenſity of
any one, is very hard to be overcome. If


a dog were made king, would he not gnaw
his ſhoe ſtraps ?


And thus, the tiger diſcovering that he 1s
nothing but a jackal, will preſently put him
to death. In ſhort, concluded the miniſter,
the plan was executed, and the event was
juſt as it had been foretold. They ſay,


_— i. — — , — 1 3 - - —
„ eco wer erg nt n 2 — n - *


2
7” ET


An intimate enemy 1s acquainted with every
thing which relateth to one: our blemiſhes,
our hearts, and our degree of courage.


I repeat therefore, The fool &c.


Although it be thus, replied the king, {till
as he is come a great way, let him appear;
for ſuch is the reſolution of enquiries made
reſpecting whom we ought to entertain.—

O 3 Pleaſe


11


Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid the miniſter, the
ſpy is diſpatched, and the caſtle is put in com-
pleat order, wherefore the parrot ſhould re-
ceive aſſurances of our pacifick diſpoſition,
and be permitted to depart. But,


As it is poſſible that the revolutions of coun-
cil may be defeated by the deſigns of a
ſharp embaſlador, a ſovereign ſhould al-
ways regard him as a ſpy.


After this a council was formed, and both
the parrot and the crow were deſired to at-
tend. The parrot, with a flight inclination
of his head, ſeated himſelf upon a ſtool which
was preſented to him, and then delivered his
commiſſion in the following words: Sir, the
moſt illuſtrious Mihi-raja” Cheetri-virni
commandeth thee, Heeranyi-garbha, if thou
haſt any occaſion for life or fortune, inſtantly
to repair into his preſence, and proſtrate thy-
ſelf at his feet; or elſe, to think of retiring
to live in ſome other country! The king, in
anger, exclaimed, —Ha! have we no one
about us? The crow, Cloud- colour, in-
ſtantly roſe up and cried out, Give but the


word, and I will kill this infamous parrot !
In


[. 199 ]


In the mean time, the miniſter, who was
engaged in pacifying the king, repeated theſe


lines :


That 1s not a council, wherein there are no
ſages; they are not ſages, who do not de-
clare men's duty; that is not a duty, in
which there 1s not virtue; and that is not
virtue from which fear approacheth us.


The law ſpeaks thus : but, moreover, this
parrot is a Brahmin ; and they ſay alſo,


An embaſlador, although he be a barbarian,
is not to be put to death; for he is only
the mouth of his maſter: no, not even
when the weapons of war are lifted up;
and how much leſs, if he be a Brahmin!

An embaſlador never payeth any regard ei-
ther to his own inferiority, or other's ſu-
periority ; but under the decree of fate,
that he is not puniſhable, he ſpeaketh
without reſerve.


Upon hearing theſe maxims, both the king
and the crow were pacified; and the parrot


got up and went away. But upon a motion
. of


* 2 — 1 _ 4 - Te -
= | a — —— _ e — W
RR} rr ʒm= Uli ͤ cc. So + SI ,


—


©
4
*
4
1
q
2

1
p
2
-
of


200 ]


of the miniſter's, things having been ex-
plained to him, he was brought back, and


diſmiſſed with preſents of golden ornaments,
rich dreſſes, and the like.


The parrot returned to the Veendhyi
mountains, where paying his reſpects to
Cheetri-virni his own ſovereign, the king
no ſooner perceived him, than he called out,
Well, parrot, what intelligence haſt thou
brought me? What ſort of a country is it?
Pleaſe your highneſs, replied the parrot, the
ſum of my intelligence is this, Let prepa-
rations be made for war! As to the country,
it is a portion of the heavenly regions; then
how is it poffible to deſcribe it? The pea-
cock king, upon hearmg this, ſent for his
chiefs, and ſat down to confult with them.
On the ſubject of the war, ſaid the king,
which is preſently to be entered into, adviſe
what is proper to be done; for, again I ſay,
war is abſolutely reſolved upon. They ſay,


Brahmiins are ruined when diſcontented, like
ſovereigns when contented. Modeſty is
ruin to a harlot, and immodeſty to women
of good repute. |


Amongſt


1


Amongſt the reſt, there was a vulture whoſe
name was Far- ſee, who aroſe and ſaid.—
Pleaſe your highneſs,.— Fate would not be
idle in fighting with thee; for


When ſons, with friends and attendants, are
firmly attached, and in oppoſition to the
enemy, then war may be commenced.


Let my miniſter obſerve what I am about
to order, ſaid the king ; let the ſervices of
theſe my officers be engaged by an advance
of a part of their pay; and then let the
ſoothſayer be called, and let him fix upon a
lucky moment for us to begin our march,
Yet, pleaſe your highneſs, obſerved the mi-
niſter, it is not proper to march raſhly ; for
they ſay,


Thoſe fools who raſhly, and without inveſti-
gation, ruſh upon the forces of the enemy,
will doubtleſsly be embraced with the edges
of their ſwords.


Miniſter, replied the king, thou ſhouldeſt not
endeavour to break the force of my ardour.
Tell me rather how one who wiſhes for
congqueſt


1
fy
k
"
i
| 1
*
1
i
[
1
>
3
1
lt
7
11
*
*
,
.
"
4
*


1


conqueſt advanceth into the country of the
enemy. Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid the mi-
niſter, this ſubject too if purſued may yield
fruit; for they ſay,


What is the uſe of advice given to a ſove-
reign according to the authority of books,
if it be not followed? A patient will never

recover his health merely from the deſcrip-
tion of a medicine.


But as the commands of majeſty are not to
be neglected, I will proceed to repeat what I
have heard upon the ſubject of war. Pleaſe
to attend, your highneſs:


Troops, with every thing which can make
them formidable, ſhould be ſtationed upon
the rivers, upon the mountains, in the
woods, in the ſtrong holds, and wherever
elſe there 1s danger.

The Adhyikſhi” ſhould march before ac-
companied by the braveſt men; in the
center the ſeraglio, the ſwamese, the
treaſure cheſt, the magazines of provi-
fions, and every thing elſe which may be


valuable.
On


„

On each flank the horſe, on the two flanks of
the horſe the chariots, on the two flanks
of the chariots the elephants, and on the
two flanks of the elephants the foot.

In the rear ſhould march the Sena-pitee**
occaſionally encouraging ſuch as ſeem to
be melancholy. And the king ſhould take
the field accompanied by his counſellors
and choiceſt heroes.

The uneven ground, ſwampy places, and hills,
ſhould be cleared by the elephants; the
plains by the horſe, the rivers by boats,
and the foot ſhould be employed every
where.

Upon the arrival of the rains it is beſt to
march with elephants only, they ſay; but
at other times, with all the four diſtinc-
tion of troops.

Amongſt hills, and in narrow paſſes, it 1s
proper that the chief ſhould be guarded
by ſome of his beſt troops; and the ſame
when he is aſleep, with watchful care.

The army ſhould ſtrive to deſtroy, and diſ-
treſs the enemy by rolling ſtones down
from the tops of ſteep places; and as
ſoon as they enter the enemies' country,
the Attiveeka * ſhould be formed before.

Where-


= - — —2 — —e—ꝓ - — © - =
Ee + oe fo dt fb gat YAIRI OO En ar ng rn 63— . .


[ 204 ]


Wherever the chief is, there ſhould the trea-
ſure cheſt be; for without treaſure there is
no ſuperiority. And ſome of it ſhould be
diſtributed amongſt the principal officers;
for who will not fight for one who giveth
freely ? |

Man is not a ſervant for the man, but for

the thing. A chief's conſequence, or in-

ſignificance, dependeth upon his having
wealth, or no wealth.


The troops ſhould fight without breaking ;
and they ſhoud defend one another. What-
ever military ſtores there may be ſhould be
put 1n the center of the ranks.


And when the chief hath given check to the
enemy, he ſhould endeavour to diſtreſs the
country. Upon level ground he ſhould
fight with chariots and his horſe; and in
places overflowed with water, either with
boats or elephants.


Amongſt trees and buſhes he ſhould fight
with bows and arrows; and upon open
ground, with ſword and ſhield: And he

ſhould always endeavour to deſtroy, or
render uſeleſs, the enemy's ſtraw, corn,


water, and fire wood,


He


MIS


He ſhould deſtroy likewiſe their reſervoirs,
their ramparts, and their ditches and
trenches. The chief's elephants ſhould
be the firſt in the army, and not diſor-
dered.

They ſay, he who fighteth with elephants
and camels, fighteth, as it were, with his
own arms. The horſe is the ſtrength
of the army, The horſe is as a moving
bulwark.

Wherefore, the chief who hath moſt horſe in
a land fight is victorious. Thoſe who
fight mounted on horſes are hard to be
defeated, even by the hoſts of heaven; for
let the enemy be at ever ſo great a diſtance,
they are, as 1t were, in their hands.

The chief employment for the foot is fight-
ing, guarding the whole army, and clear-
ing the roads about.

The beſt kind of troops are declared to be
thoſe who are naturally brave, ſkilled in
the exerciſe of arms, attached, inured to
fatigue, renowned, and ſoldier-like.

Men, O prince, do not fight ſo well in this
world, even for very large pecuniary re-
wards, as for honours beſtowed by their
commander,

A mall


„


A ſmall army conſiſting of choſen troops is
far better than a vaſt body chiefly com-
poſed of rabble; for when the bad give
way, the good are inevitably broken in
conſequence.

He who wiſheth for victory ſhould endea-
vour to harraſs the enemy without diſtreſs.
ing his own troops. An enemy's army
which has been harraſſed for a long time,
may be eaſily defeated.

There is not a better counſellor than a com-
petitor for the overthrow of an enemy;
wherefore great pains ſhould be taken to

raiſe ſuch a claimant.

Having entered into a confederacy with ſome
one amongſt the chief's ſons, or with one
of his principal counſellors, at length, it
will be proper, with a firm reſolution, to
provoke him to fight.

And when a chief ſhall have given him an
overthrow by means of his neareſt friends,
he may put his enemy to death.


What is the uſe of ſaying ſo much upon
the ſubject? ſaid the king, interrupting him:


One's own exaltation 1s another's tribula-
tion, and both, they ſay, is policy. Hav-
| ing


41 1


ing granted this, our fine language is
contradicted by our actions.


The miniſter ſmiling at this, replied, lt
is entirely ſo; but,


One 1s lofty, powerful, and a villain; whilſt
another 1s guided and reſtrained by moral
laws. When ſhall we find the ſame ſu-
periority in light and darkneſs ?***


At length the king got up and reſolved to
march at the time appointed by his aſtro-
loger; but juſt now the P&6roheeti'* met
him, accompanied by a ſpy, and told him,
that king Cheetri-virni was almoſt arrived,
and that at preſent he was near the Maläyä“
mountains; that the conſtruction of a caſtle
was inſtantly to be reſolved, for the vulture
was a very wiſe miniſter; and that from the
tenor of his converſation there was reaſon to
believe, that he had a ſpy even then within
the caſtle. To all this the miniſter replied,
that if there was a ſpy, it could be no one
but the crow, whom they had entertained.
That can never be, replied the king; for if
he had been fo, how came it to paſs that he

ſhewed


268 |]


ſhewed ſuch readineſs to puniſh the parrot?
And beſides, war was not reſolved till very
lately upon the return of their embaſſador
the parrot. Nevertheleſs, anſwered the mi-
niſter, it is proper to ſuſpect one who came
to us as he did. True, replied the king, pro-
vided he be guilty of any improper action;
but,


A ſtranger, if well diſpoſed, is a friend; but
a friend, if ill-diſpoſed towards one, is a
ſtranger. A diſtemper, although generated
in the body, is malignant; whilſt a drug
produced in the woods proveth ſalutary.


King Soobbraka had a ſervant, by name Vetra-
vere, who in a very ſhort time offered up his
9wn ſon.


How was that? ſaid the miniſter ; and
the king related the following tale ;


FaBLE IX.


IN former days I uſed to amuſe myſelf
with a certain female of my own ſpecies,
whoſe name was Kirpoori-minjiree,”* and
who was the daughter of the royal gander

| Kirpoora-


[ 209 ]


Kirpoora-kelee, in a pleaſure lake belonging
to king Sööbhräkä. One day a young man,
whoſe name was Veeri-vari, and who proved
to be a Riji-pootri”” come from ſome diſtant
country, preſented himſelf before the porter
who ſtood at the king's gate, and addreſſed
him in the following words :—I am a ſoldier
in ſearch of employment; pray procure me a
ſight of the king. The porter went to his
maſter, and, bowing, told him that there was
a ſoldier at the gate, juſt arrived from ſome
diſtant country, who ſaid his name was
Veeri-vara ; and the king commanded him to
be introduced. Accordingly the porter con-
ducted the ſtranger into the preſence of his
maſter ; to whom, reſpectfully bowing, he
addreſſed himſelf as follows: Sir, if thou
haſt any occaſion for my ſervice, let my pay
be fixed. The king aſked him, how much?
and he replied, four hundred ſöövärnäs“ a
day. What weapons haſt thou? demanded
the king. My two arms, replied the ſoldier,
and my ſword, which makes a third. This
will not do, concluded the king; upon which
the ſoldier bowed, and took his leave. The
miniſter happening to be preſent, ſaid.—
Pleaſe your highneſs, give him four days' pay,

Rs P and


[ 210 ]


and learn what ſort of a man he is, and what
aſſiſtance he can be of. According to the
miniſter's advice, the man being called back,
they gave him Tamb6ols,” and four days'
pay in advance; to the expenditure of which
the king very privately attended, and found
that he gave one moiety to the gods and the
Brahmiins, one-fourth to the poor, and ſpent
the remainder in food and amuſements; and
that after performing theſe ſeveral praiſe-
worthy actions, he attended ſword in hand
at the king's gate day and night, and never
went to his lodgings without his maſter's
expreſs permiſſion.


On the fourteenth night of what 1s called
the dark fide of the moon, the king heard
a noiſe like one bitterly crying, upon which
he called ont to know who was waiting at
the door, and his faithful Veeri-vari anſwer-
ing that he was there; he ordered him to pur-
ſue the crying which they heard; ſo, ſaying,
T obey your highneſs's commands, away he
ran. In the mean time, the king reflected
in this manner: I have done wrong to ſend
this ſoldier away by himſelf in ſuch a dark
cloudy night. I will even go too and ſee

what


1


what is the matter. So ſaying, he took his
ſword, and thus followed till he got without
the city; and preſently after he ſaw the ſol-
dier with a female endued with perfect youth
and beauty, and richly attired, who was
weeping. Who art thou, and why doſt thou
weep? demanded Veeri-vari. I am, ſaid the
female, the goddeſs Srẽẽ, the fortune of king
So0bhraki's dominions, who hath long dwelt
happily under the ſhadow of his wings;
but, alas! I am now about to flee to ſome
other place of refuge. What, O goddeſs, ſaid
the ſoldier, will induce thee to tarry ſtill
longer here? If, replied the goddeſs, thou
wilt offer up thy own ſon Siktee-vira, who
is diſtinguiſhed by two and thirty marks,
to the goddeſs who preſideth over the welfare
of all nature, then will I remain here for a
much longer period of time; and ſaying this,
ſhe vaniſhed from his ſight.


Veeri-vari now went home, and called up
bis ſon and his wife, who were both aſleep ;
who having rifen accordingly, he related to
them every thing which had paſſed with the
goddeſs. His ſon, the moment he had con-
cluded, exclaimed in a tranſport of joy,—O
P 2 how


1


how fortunate I am, who can thus be the
means of preſerving my ſovereign and his
dominions! Then, O father, what occaſion
is there for any further heſitation or delay;
ſince the aſſiſtance of this body is at all times
ready upon ſuch an occaſion as this? For
they ſay,


A good man ſhould forſake wealth, and even
life itſelf, for another. It is good to ſa-
crifice one's ſelf for a holy perſon upon
the approach of his deſtruction.


This ſimple ſaying belongs particularly to
our tribe; then if I am not permitted to do
ſo, by what other act will the preſervation of
the proſperity of this great country be pre-
ſerved? Having conſidered this propoſal,
they all went to the temple of the goddeſs ;*
and when they had worſhipped her image,
the father Veeri-viri addreſſed her in theſe
words:—O goddeſs ! let S60bhraki our ſove-
reign be proſperous ! and let this victim be
accepted! Saying which, he cut off his ſon's
head. Thus, ſaid he to himſelf, have I
earned the wages which I received from my
ſovereign ; and now let me pay the forfeit of

my


[ 213 J


my ſon's life! and inſtantly he cut off his
own head. His wife too, overpowered with
grief for her huſband and fon, followed their
example. The king, filled with aſtoniſh-
ment at the ſcene before him, ſaid to himſelf:


Such little animals as myſelf come into life,
and die away without end; but there never


has been, nor ever will be, in this world
one like unto him !


Oh, I can have no further enjoyment of theſe
my dominions! Saying this, he lifted up
his ſword to cut off his head alſo; but on
the inſtant, ſhe on whom dependeth the
happineſs of all, making herſelf evident un-
der human form, ſeized him by the hand,
and ſaid, —My ſon, forbear this raſhneſs!
At preſent thy kingdom is not ſubdued !'*
The king proſtrated himſelf before her, and
ſaid, =O goddeſs ! of what uſe to me is do-
minion, or even life? If thou haſt any com-
paſſion for me, O let Veeri-vari, with his
family, be reſtored to life ; or if it be not thy
will, permit me to purſue the path wherein I
was found by thee! The goddeſs replied, —
Jam well pleaſed with this thy noble gene-


P 3 roſity


L


roſity and tenderneſs; then go thy ways,
and proſper; and let this man, his wife, and
fon, all riſe up and live! The king rendered
thanks, and returned unobſerved to an apart-
ment of his palace to ſleep. Veeri-viri too
being reſtored to life, together with his wife
and ſon, he conducted them home.

Veeri-vari being again on guard at the
king's door, and being queſtioned by him
reſpecting the perſon who was heard crying,
replied, that upon her being ſeen ſhe became
inviſible, and that there were no further ti-
dings of her“ The king was exceedingly
well pleaſed at this, and ſaid within himſelf,
hat a praiſeworthy man he was, repeat-
ing theſe hnes:


He ſhould ſpeak kindly, without meanneſs;
he ſhould be valiant, without boaſting; he
ſhould be generous, ſhedding his bounty
into the diſn of the worthy; he ſhould be
reſolute, but not harſh.


This is the character of a great man! In
this there is all!
In the morning early the king aſſembled a


ſpectal council; and when he had publickly
proclaimed


1


proclaimed the proceedings of the night, he
beſtowed the government of Kärnãttà upon
his generous deliverer. After this, concluded
the royal gooſe, muſt every one who cometh
unaſked be a villain? The truth is, there
are three ſorts amongſt ſuch too: good, bad,
and indifferent.


The miniſter replied,


Is he a miniſter who, in obedience to his
ſovereign's pleaſure, payeth attention to
what ſhould not be done, as if it were
proper to be done? It is better that the

heart of the maſter ſhould ſuffer pain, than
that he ſhould be ruined by doing that
which ought not to be done.


Hear this, pleaſe your highneſs:


The. good which:hath been gained by one will alſo

be gained by me. But the Barber who wiſhed
for wealth, having through his infatuation
tilled a Beggar, is put to death himfelf.


How came that about? ſaid the king; and
the miniſter related the following ſtory :


FABLE


5


FABLE X.


IN the country of Ayõdhyã“ there was a
man, by name Choora-minee,” who, being
exceedingly anxious for the acquiſition of
wealth, offered up his prayers, with great
fervour, to him in whoſe diadem is a creſ-
cent; and at length, one night, when he
had been purified of his ſins, that deity ap-
peared to him in his ſleep, and addreſſed him
in theſe words: In the morning early, having
ſhaved thyſelf, ſtand out of fight with a ſtick
in thy hand; and when thou ſhalt ſee a beg-
gar coming into the yard, thou wilt beat him
with thy ſtick without mercy; for the ſaid
beggar will have with him a pot of gold,
which may ſerve to make thee as happy as
thou canſt wiſh for the reſt of thy life. —
The inſtructions of the god were followed,
and ſucceſs attended; but the whole tranſ-
action having been obſerved by the barber,
who came to ſhave the man, ſaid to himſelf,
—Ho, ho! this is the way to get money is
it? Why then may not I do the ſame? From
that moment the barber uſed every day to con-
ceal himſelf with a large ſtick in his hand,
waiting for the coming of a beggar ; and at

length,


E


length, when one came, he beat him ſo un-
mercifully, that he died; and the conſequence
was, that the barber was put to death by
the officers of juſtice for the crime. — !] ſay,
therefore, The good Ec.


The king replied,


How 1s a ſtranger to be found out by the
repetition of a parcel of old ſtories, whe-
ther he be one who hath no motive, or a
friend, or one who would betray one's
confidence?


Let the crow alone, and let us purſue
what we have to do. Chettri-virni is now
in the neighbourhood of Maliya. What is
to be done? The miniſter replied, — Tis
true he 1s come ; but I have heard from the
mouth of a truſty ſpy, that Cheetra-varna
hath treated the wiſe counſels of that great
miniſter the vulture with contempt; and


therefore the fool may be defeated ; for they
ſay,


The enemy who is either avaricious, ſub-
ject to paſſion, unruly, treacherous, vio-
| lent, fearful, unſteady, or a fool, is eaſily
to be defeated, we are told.

N Then,


i 218 }


Then, before he ſhall have given orders to
inveſt our caſtle, let the Sarisa and other ge-
nerals be ſent out upon the rivers, into the
woods, upon the mountains, and through
the paſſes, to deſtroy his forces. They ſay,


If an enemy's army be fatigued by a long
march, confined by rivers, hills, or foreſts;
terrified by the apprehenſion of dreadful
fires,” diſtreſſed by hunger, thirſt, and
the like;

With their beſt proviſions ſpoilt, afflicted with
peſtilence and famine, not ſteady, not nu-
merous, embarraſſed by rains and winds;

Incommoded by dirt, duſt, or water, or deſti-
tute of good quarters; a prince may defeat
it, and under any circumſtances like theſe.

Or if an enemy be found ſleeping in the day,
from the great fatigue of watching for fear
of a ſurprize, thus overpowered for want
of reſt, one may at all times eaſily defeat
him.


Wherefore, let theſe generals march againſt
the forces of that impetuous peacock, and
fight them, either by day or night, as they
may find it moſt expedient,


This


[ 219 J


This advice being executed accordingly,
the army of Cheetri-varni was overthrown,
and a great many of its principal leaders fell
in the battle. Cheetri-virni was exceedingly
caſt down at this event, and ſaid to his mini-
ſter the vulture, —Has this happened through
neglect; or have I been wanting in conduct?


Never before now was empire gained, thus
to be loſt! The want of prudence deſtroy-
eth fortune, even as fickneſs the greateſt
beauty.

One who 1s expert gaineth fortune; he who
eateth but what is wholſome, health; and
the healthy, eaſe; the diligent, the end of
knowledge; and he who is well diſciplined,
virtue, profit, and reputation.


The vulture replied, Pleaſe your highneſs,


A king, although he be not himſelf experi-
enced, may, if he has one old in wiſdom


about him, deprive another of his good
fortune; Hike a tree which groweth by the
water's fide.

Drinking, women, hunting, gaming, fond-
neſs for dreſs, harſhneſs of ſpeech, and ſe-
verity, are great blemiſhes in a prince.

Riches


L220 ]


Riches and proſperity are not poſſible to be
acquired by ſuch as purſue power with
ſudden violence, nor by thoſe whoſe minds
are at a loſs for- the means; for fortune
dwelleth in good conduct and noble re-
ſolution.

Beetle is pungent, bitter, ſpicy,“ and ſweet;
it is alkaline and aſtringent; it expelleth
wind, deſtroyeth phlegm, killeth worms,
and ſubdueth bad ſmells; it beautifieth the
mouth, removeth impurities, and kin-
dleth the fire of love. Beetle, my friend,
poſſeſſeth theſe thirteen qualities, hardly to
be found, even in the regions of heaven.“


But, continued the vulture, your highneſs,
truſting to your own ſtrength and courage,
and from mere raſhneſs, paid no attention
to the counſels I laid before you, and treated
me with harſhneſs of ſpeech.


Upon what miniſter do not the errors of con-
duct fall? What ſore arm is not fretted
by a garment of hair?” Whom doth not
fortune make proud? Whom doth not
death deſtroy? To whom. do not the


things which women do, give cauſe of
| great uneaſineſs ?


1


A brave man deſtroyeth his enemies, be they
ever ſo great; even as prudence overcometh
misfortune, an enlightened underſtanding


grief, the ſun darkneſs, and ſorrow hap-
pineſs.“


But, at that time, I ſaid within myſelf,—
This my maſter is certainly deſtitute of wiſ-
dom, or elſe he would be guided by my coun-
ſels; for they ſay,


What will the wiſe precepts of books do for
him who is deſtitute of natural wiſdom?
What will a mirror do for him who hath
no eyes?


And, for theſe reaſons, I remained filent,—
The king, upon hearing this, joining his
hands, ſaid, —I agree that the fault was all
my own! But, in our preſent diſtreſs, thou
ſhouldſt inſtruct me how I ſhall be able to
retreat, with the few troops I have left, to the
Veendhya mountains! The miniſter now re-
ſolved, within his own mind, that he ought
to be reconciled to his maſter, recollecting


this ſaying:

Anger ſhould always be reſtrained in the

| Preſence of the gods, before one's maſter,
9 ſovereign,


7 4
„


ſovereign, or a Brahmin; in a cow-houſe;
and not leſs where there are children, and
aged or ſick people.


Do not be alarmed! ſaid he to the king, ſmi-
ling as he ſpoke; be comforted! They ſay,


The wiſdom of miniſters ſhineth moſt upon
the breach of concord, and when affairs
arefallen into confuſion. In peace, who
is not wiſe ?


If fools undertake ever ſo little, they wil-
lingly become independent ; whilſt thoſe
who perform great actions, and are men
of wiſdom and experience, remain attached.


This being the cafe, when by thy valour
thou ſhalt have penetrated the caſtle of the
enemy, I will, without delay, conduct thee,
together with honour, glory, and thy army,
ſafe back to the Veendhyi mountains. How
ſhall this be accompliſhed, ſaid the peacock
king, with ſo ſmall a force? Pleaſe your
highneſs, replied the vulture, the whole ſhall
come to paſs. But as the oppoſite of dila-
tormeſs is a quality abſolutely neceſſary for a


conqueror


4 223 J


conqueror to inſure ſucceſs, let inſtant orders
be given for the blockade of the enemies caſtle.


Soon after this reſolution, a ſpy came to
the royal gooſe Heeranya-garbhi, and told
him that the peacock king, by the advice of
the vulture his miniſter, ſmall as his army
was, had reſolved to march and block up the
caſtle gates. What is to be done now? ſaid
the king. Let our army, replied the mini-
ſter, be divided into good and bad, and let
preſents be made to the whole, according to
their deſerts, of money, cloth, and the like ;
for it is ſaid,


Fortune never forſaketh the prince who
ſtandeth with an open hand in the ſquares
and public places.—A trifle, thus acquired,
is eſteemed far above a thouſand pieces of
gold found by chance in the road.

A prince ſhould be at an extraordinary ex-

pence on eight occaſions: at a ſacrifice, at

a wedding, in times of diſtreſs, after the

overthrow of an enemy, in any meritori-
ous work, in entertaining friends, upon
women who are dear to him, and in reliev-
ing relations who are in want,


A fool,


Ta »


L 224 ]


A fool, from the dread of ever ſo trifling ex-
pence, ruineth every thing he undertaketh.
What wiſe man would, from extreme ſcru-
pulouſneſs, entirely forſake a clean pot?“


How, demanded the king ; 1s it proper to
be extravagant on any occaſion, when they
ſay,—4 man ſhould keep his riches againſt acci-
dents, &c? How can one who is fortunate,
ſaid the miniſter, meet with accidents? Be-
cauſe fortune ſometimes leaves one, replied
the king. Hoarded treaſure, obſerved the
miniſter, is often loſt; then away with par-
ſimony, and let thy brave ſoldiers be diſtin-
guiſhed by gifts and honours.


Thoſe who have been preferred, and are well
contented; ſuch as are regardleſs of life,
and have been proved ; with thoſe of no-
ble birth, who have been treated with

marks of diſtinction; will, all of them, be
victorious over the forces of the enemy.

A trifling force, conſiſting of only five hun-
dred heroes, who are good ſoldiers, well
experienced in the art of war, and reſolute,
when formed into a compact body, will
boat a whole army of their enemies.


The


11


The greateſt qualities for a prince are, vera-
city, courage, and generoſity. If a ſove-
reign be deſtitute of theſe, he will certainly
acquire the ſtate of being talked of with
contempt.


Miniſters, likewiſe, ſhould be diſtinguiſhed
and promoted ; for, |


He ſhould be employed in affairs of life and
fortune, with whom is our protection, and
with whom is confided our income and
expence.“ |
For,

The prince who hath for his adviſers, knaves,
women, children, or fools, neglecteth the
purification of imprudence, and is over-
whelmed in the hour of neceſſity.


Obſerve, your highneſs, that


The earth is bountiful unto him who hath
neither extreme joy nor anger in his breaſt,
who hath a treaſure with but little ex-
pence, and who hath ſervants who are al-
ways vigilant.

A prince who is well furniſhed with trea-
| ſures, and other means, ſhould never neg-

lect or deſpiſe his miniſters.


* For,


a — — —— — a ws + — — — — —
—


1 226. J


For,
When a king, blinded by his raſhneſs, is
about to be overwhelmed in the ocean of
his affairs, a friendly miniſter ſtretcheth


out his hand from the dry land to aſſiſt
him.


Juſt now the crow Cloud- colour came in,
and, bowing, cried, —Pleaſe your highneſs,
look yonder! The enemy is at the gate an-
xious for battle. But iſſue your commands,
and I will ſally forth and diſplay my proweſs,
by which action I ſhall pay the debt I owe
your highneſs! Not fo, not fo! replied
Know-all; it is by no means proper to go
forth to fight; if it were, there would have


been no occaſion for our taking ſhelter in
the caſtle! |


The alligator, matchleſs as he is, when he
quitteth the water, 1s without power,
Were even the lion to forſake the foreſts,


he would doubtleſs be upon a level with
the jackal,


Pleaſe your highneſs, ſaid the crow, go your-
ſelf, and ſee the battle.


A king


1

A king having advanced his forces, ſhould
fight, overlooking them; for who will not
truly act the lion, when his maſter ſtandeth
over him?


After this, they all marched to the caſtle
gate, and fought a great battle. In the mean
time Cheetra-virni, the peacock king, ad-
dreſſed his miniſter to fulfil his promiſe im-
mediately, who replied, —Attend, pleaſe your
highneſs:


A fortification 1s declared to be weak, when
it is unable to hold out a long time, is ex-
tremely ſmall, and very much expoſed; or
when commanded by a weak and unfor-
tunate officer,


But ſeeing that is not the caſe here,


There are four ways to take a fort, which are
theſe: creating diviſions, long blockading,
ſurpriſe, and ſtorming.

At preſent, only let the battle be maintained


to the utmoſt of our power, concluded the
vulture,


22 Early


228 ]


Early in the morning, even before the ſun
was up, when the battle had commenced at
all the four gates of the caſtle, the crow, who
was in the inſide, contrived to ſet fire to every
houſe. There was now a confuſed rumour,
that the enemy had got poſſeſſion; hearing
which, and, at the ſame time, ſeeing a vaſt
number of houſes in flames, the troops of the
royal gooſe, with all the private inhabitants,
fled to the waters for ſecurity ; according to
this ſaying :


Whatever hath been well conſulted and well
reſolved, whether it be to fight well, or to
run away well, ſhould be carried into exe-
cution in due ſeaſon, without any further
examination,


The king having been thus abandoned by
all but the Sirisi, and being by nature a flow
walker, was made priſoner by the cock, who
was the peacock's general; upon which he
addreſſed the Sarisi in theſe words: General
Sarisi, when I ſhall be no more, thou muſt
not deſtroy thyſelf; but as thou haſt it ſtill
in thy power to make thy eſcape, then go
upon the waters, and, with the will of the

Omniſcient,


1 9 ]


Omniſcient, place Choori-kirni my ſon upon
the throne. O my royal maſter, replied the
Sirasa, do not talk thus, for it is more, than I
can bear. May the king ſtill triumph over his
enemies as long as the ſun and moon ſhall
laſt! I will again aſſume the command of
the caſtle, and then let the foe enter be-
ſmeared with my blood!


A maſter is hard to be found, who is patient,
generous, and a judge of merit; or a ſer-
vant, who 1s honeſt, clever, and attached.


Attend to this, pleaſe your highneſs: If
after having quitted the field of battle there
were no fear of death, 1t would be proper to
go hence; but 1s not death inevitable to all
things? Beſides, it would tarniſh my repu-
tation to quit thee now,


In this world, raiſed up for our purification,
and to prevent our wandering in the re-
gions below, the reſolution to ſacrifice
one's own life to the ſafety of another is
attained by the practice of virtue.


Beſides, thou art the ſovereign and maſter,
who is always to be guarded and protected.
os Q 3 When


FE ae |


When Prikreetee is forſaken by her lord,
great as ſhe is, ſhe doth not ſurvive it.“
When life hath taken its departure, though
Dhänwäntäréé“ be the phyſician, what
can he do?

In the ſovereign the whole world openeth

and ſhutteth its eyes. Thus the lotus of
the waters, upon the riſing of the ſun, re-
viveth upon his revival.

The ſovereign, the miniſter, territory, ſtrong-
holds, treaſure, forces, and friends, are the
members of government; alſo the nobles,
and the order of citizens.


But, of all theſe, the ſovereign 1s the principal
member. Here the cock flew upon the royal
gooſe, and began to wound him with his bill
and claws ; but the Sarisa ſcreened his maſ-
ter under his own body; and although he
himſelf was torn almoſt to pieces by the
cock's beak and ſpurs, he {till covered him
till he got him ſafe into the water. Imme-
diately after, the Saris: pecked the cock to
death ; but, at laſt, being attacked by a large
party of birds, he loſt his own life. Cheetri-
värnä, the peacock king, now enters the
caſtle, and having plundered it of every thing

that


1


that had been left in it, he marched out
again, ſaluted by his followers with ſhouts
of victory!


The young princes now ſaid to the Veeſh-
no0o6-Sirma,—In our opinions, the Sarisi, in
having thus preſerved his maſter, at the ex-
pence of his own life, was the moſt virtuous
bird in the army.


Cows bring forth young, all of the ſame
ſhape of their parents ; but few produce a
king of the herd whoſe horns ſtroke his
ſhoulders.**


May the exalted being, replied Veeſhno6-
Sarma, who, of his own accord, purchaſeth
the regions of happineſs with his own body,
enjoy them, and be attended by Veedhya-
dhärẽẽs!“ They ſay,


Such brave men as ſhed their blood in battle
in their ſovereign's cauſe; and ſuch men
as are faithful and grateful to their maſters,
are thoſe who go to heaven.“

Whenever a hero is killed, ſurrounded by


the enemy, he obtaineth for, himſelf thoſe
regions


1


regions which are without decay; provided
he doth not ſhew cowardice.


You have now, Sirs, heard every thing which
relates to Diſputing, concluded Veeſhn&5.
Sirma. We have, replied the young princes,
and are exceedingly well pleaſed. May that
which follows, ſaid Veeſhno6-Sarma, produce
the ſame effect!


May no poſſeſſor of the earth ever have occa-
fion to diſpute with elephants, horſes, and
foot ſoldiers? May his enemies, defeated
by the cleanſing counſels of policy, take
ſhelter in the caverns of the mountains!


CHAT. Iv;


Or MAKING PEACE.


OW, ſaid the young princes, pleaſe to

inform us of what relates to making
peace. Attend then, replied Veeſhn66-Sirma:
This 1s the introduction to it.


Af


1


At the concluſion af a great battle, in which the
troops of both kings have ſuffered, a treaty is


preſently brought about by the two miniſters,
the Vulture and the Chakra-vakd.


How was this? demanded the young
princes; and Veeſhn66-Sirma related as
follows:


FABLE I,


The royal gooſe, after his eſcape, aſked who
it was that ſet fire to the caſtle; whether one
of the enemy, or ſome of their own party? and
his miniſter, Chakri-vaki, replied, —Pleaſe
your highneſs, that unneceſſary connexion of
your's, the crow Cloud-colour, together with
his attendants, is no longer to be ſeen; where-
fore, I conclude that it was contrived by him.
The king, after a few moments conſideration,
exclaimed,—It is even ſo! It is my own
evil ſeeking !


The fault ſhall be for ever his, and no more
the miniſter's, by whom I believe our af-
fairs, ſo well deſigned for our own advan-
tage, were ruined.


They ſay, replied the miniſter, that


The


— — Ez AC = =
—— —
——


—
— — —


—
2. —


224 —


- "2-6 TI” 2


ab 4 — td 4


. — 1
P __ » = .
- r


5 ** 22


4-234 13


The man who meeting with-the rugged paths
of liſe, doth not know that they are evils
of his own ſeeking, is no philoſopher.


He who doth not pay due regard to the advice of
fuch friends as have his welfare at heart, may
ſuffer far it; like the fooliſh Tortoiſe, who fell
from a piece of wood and was killed.


How was this? demanded the king; and
his miniſter related the following ſtory:


FABLE II.

IN Mägädhä-dẽsä' there is a large piece
of water which 1s diſtinguiſhed by the appel-
lation Phööllötpälä, where lived together
for a long time two geeſe; and they had a
tortoiſe for their friend, who dwelt with
them. Some fiſhermen coming that way, ſaid
to themſelves, —To-morrow early we muſt
contrive to catch ſome turtle, and other fiſh.
This having been overheard.by the tortoiſe, he
{aid, —My friends, you have heard the con-
verſation of theſe fiſhermen, then what do you
think I had beſtdo? The two geeſe replied,
—We ſhall know by and by what is fit to be
done. Not ſa! what is conceived proper,
that ſhould be done immediately,


Theſs


by


l


Theſe two, Fate-not- come, and Wit- againſt-
it-when- come, both of them happily flouriſb;
whilſt What-will-be /oſeth his life.


How was that? demanded the two geeſe ;
and the tortoiſe related the following ſtory :


FABLE III.


Formerly, in this very piece of water, when
the ſame danger threatened them, as now


threatens us, it was foreſeen by three fiſh.
One of them, whoſe name was Fate-not-
come, ſaid,—I will ſink deep in the water
for ſecurity ; and, ſaying ſo, down he went.
The ſecond, who was called Wit-againſt- it-
when=-come, ſaid, —In an affair which is
about to come to paſs, one ſnould not pro-
ceed without an authority; now it is ſaid,


He is a wiſe man who can conquer an acci-
dent when it happeneth. A Merchant's Wife


charged her Gallant with theft, before her
Huſband's face.


The third fiſh, who was called What-w:ll-


be, aſked him how that was; and the ſe-
cond fiſh related as follows :


FABLE


1 236 J
FaBLE IV.

AT Vèèkrämä-pöörä“ there lived a mer-
chant, whoſe name was Sämöödrä-döötä,“
and his wife, who was called Rätnä-präbha,“


was always amuſing herſelf with one or other
of the ſervants; according to theſe ſayings:


They do not carry their obſervations ſo far
as to examine limbs and features; for,
whether handſome or ugly, it is all the
ſame to them, provided he be a man.

Again,

Unto women no man is found diſagree-
able, &c..

In another place they ſay,

A ſacred law which hath been ever ſo well
conſidered, is ſtill to be reconfidered; a
king who hath been ſatisfied is ſtill to be
apprehended; a young woman, al though
in our arms, is altogether to be ſuſpected.

What ſatisfaction then can there be in the


ſacred law, in princes, or in women?


One day it ſo fell out, that being ſeen by her
huſband kiſſing one of the young men of the
houſe, ſhe ran inſtantly towards him and
cried, My dear, this ſervant muſt be ex-

ceedingly


> 4
— —


— .


| 237 1


eeedingly diſtreſſed for food, for he has been
eating ſome camphire which I had brought
home for thy uſe; and even now I have
ſmelt to him, and find his breath ſcented
with it!


* E —_—  — - *


- 8 — —; 1 — —
ot — * * 5 — 2 _ - — 4 b 4 * —_
. r Moo Cox Co ie —ãů0WBv = —˙ cavooc>_


It is truly ſaid,


What women eat is two-fold ; their cunning
four-fold, &c.


The ſervant, upon hearing the woman ac-
cuſe him thus, appeared to be offended, and
exclaimed, What man can ſtay in a place
with ſuch a miſtreſs as this, who 1s every mi-
nute ſmelling the ſervants' mouths ? ſaying
which he went away ; but his maſter ſent for
him back, and, with ſome difficulty, pacified
him, and induced him to ſtay. I ſay there-
fore, He is a wiſe man &c. To this What-


will- be replied, hat is not to be which is not
to be c.“


—


Early in the morning Vit-againſt-it-uben-
come, being caught in a net, feigned himſelf
dead, and remained quiet; but he was no
ſooner thrown out of the net, than he ſprang
into deep water, and thus made his eſcape;
whilſt


238 J


whilſt Nhat-will-be was taken by the fiſher.


men, and ſo loſt his life. I repeat therefore,
Theſe two, Fate-not- come, &c.


Then, concluded the tortoiſe, let it be con-
trived how I am to get to another lake,
Where, demanded the two geeſe, will be the
advantage of thy going to another place?
Pray, replied the tortoiſe, only contrive the
means, and I will go through the air along
with you. How, ſaid the geeſe, are we to
contrive the means ? Why, obſerved the tor-
toiſe, you muſt get a piece of wood, and take
each of you one end of it in your beaks, from
which I can ſuſpend myſelf by my mouth,
whilſt you carry me along by the force of
your wings. This contrivance will thus do,
replied the geeſe ; but,


One who is wiſe, in contriving the means, ſhould
confider the conſequence. Some fooliſb Boobies
young ones were devoured by a Weaſel” before
their faces. |


How did that happen? demanded the
tortoiſe; and one of the geeſe related as fol-
lows; \

FARLE


11


FABLE V.


IN the north there is a mountain called
Greedhri-kootta, near which, on the banks
of the Rẽvã, there uſed to be many boobies
in a certain tree; and at the foot of the ſame
tree a ſerpent lived in his hole, who uſed to
devour the young boobies. An old bird hear-
ing the lamentations of the afflicted boobies
for the loſs of their little ones, addreſſed them
in theſe words: You ſhould do thus;—Get
ſome fiſh, and draw them along upon the
ground from the hole of a weaſel, as far as
the ſerpent's hole, where you will leave them.
Preſently, the weaſels, attracted by the ſcent
of food, will go to the ſerpent's hole, and thus
he is certainly to be diſcovered, and, from
there being a natural enmity between them,
thus to be deſtroyed. The plan was accord-
ingly executed, and the ſerpent was diſcovered
and eaten by the weaſels, as they were hunt-
ing about the hollows of the tree for the fiſh;
but ſoon after, the cries of the young boobies
being heard by them, they mounted the tree
and devoured them alſo. We repeat there-
fore, ſaid the two geeſe, One who is wiſe, in


contriving the means, &c, The people ſeeing
us


[ 240 J


us carrying thee along will cry out, What
a curious ſight! upon hearing which, if thou
makeſt any reply, thou wilt certainly loſe
thy life; wherefore, upon all accounts, it is
beſt to ſtay where we are. I will not ſpeak
a word, ſaid the tortoiſe ; what, do you take
me for a fool?


In the manner deſcribed, at length, the
geeſe took up the tortoiſe, and flew away with
him, hanging to the piece of wood; and pre-
ſently, being diſcovered in that fituation by
ſome cow-keepers in the fields, they purſued
them, crying out. When he falls down, we
will dreſs him and eat him upon the ſpot;
no, ſaid one of them, let us carry him home!
upon hearing which, the tortoiſe fell into a
paſſion, to think how they intended to diſ-
poſe of him; and whilſt he opened his mouth
to ſay, —You ſhall eat duſt firſt ! down he
dropped, and was preſently put an end to by
thoſe herdſmen. I therefore repeat. He who
doth not pay à due regard to the advice &c.
concluded the miniſter,


One ſhould always guard our ſpeech; for


from ſpeaking ruin often enſueth ; as in
the


1
5
q
1 '
£
6
=


[ 21 1


the downfall of the tortoiſe, who was car-
rying along by two geeſe.


The booby, who had formerly been ſent as
a ſpy, having returned, addreſſed the royal
gooſe in theſe words:—Pleaſe your highneſs,
at the very beginning I repreſented, that it
was neceſſary inſtantly to clear the caſtle ;
but that not having been done, this is the
fruit of your neglect ; and I have learnt, that
the burning of the caſtle was effected by the
crow Cloud-colour, who had been employed
for that purpoſe by the enemy's miniſter the
vulture. The king, ſighing, ſaid,


He who placeth confidence in an enemy, ei-
ther from inclination or neceſſity, awaketh
from his deluſion, like one who hath fallen
from the top of a tree in his ſleep !


And when Cloud-colour, continued the ſpy,
had effected the burning of the caſtle, he went
to king Cheetri-virni ; who being well ſa-
_ tisfied with what he had done, ſaid, Let
this Cloud-colour be appointed governor of
Kirpoori-dweepa ; for, it is ſaid,


R One


- © .
—— - — — — ———— — — _ — _


L 242 J


One ſhould not forget the labours of a ſer-
vant who hath performed his duty; but
ſhould encourage him with rewards, with
our hearts, with our ſpeech, and with our
eyes.


Then the vulture, who is the prime-miniſter,
continued the ſpy, ſaid, —Pleaſe your high-
neſs, let ſome ſtation be given to him infe-
rior to that of the principal one : for,


How is it poſſible to puniſh one who hath
been raiſed to a ſuperior ſtation? The
aſſiſtance, O king, which is rendered to
thoſe of low degree, is like endeavouring
to pleaſe bears.


A low perſon ſhould never be placed in the
ſtation of the great.


One of low degree having obtained a worthy ſta-
tion ſeeketh to deſtroy his maſter; like the
Mouſe, who, having been raiſed to the ſtate of
a Tiger, went to kill the Hermit.


How was that? ſaid the peacock king;
and the miniſter related the following ſtory:


FABLE


l 243 J


FABLE VI.


IN the foreſt of the prophet Gowtimi,*”
which is dedicated to acts of penitential mor-
tifications, there was a hermit, whoſe name
was Miha-tipa. One day ſeeing a young
mouſe fall from the mouth of a crow near
his hermitage, out of compaſſion he took
it up, and reared it with broken particles of
rice. He now obſerved, that the cat was
ſeeking to deſtroy it; ſo, by the ſacred powers
of a ſaint, he metamorphoſed his mouſe into
a cat; but his cat being afraid of his dog, he
changed her into a dog; and the dog being
terrified at the tiger, at length he was trans-
formed into a tiger. The holy man now
regarded the tiger as no ways ſuperior to his
mouſe. But the people who came to viſit
the hermit, uſed to tell one another, that the
tiger which they ſaw there had been made ſo,
by the power of the ſaint, from a mouſe; and
this being overheard by the tiger, he was very
uneaſy, and ſaid to himſelf, —as long as this
hermit 1s alive, the diſgraceful ſtory of my
former ſtate will be brought to my ears; ſay-
ing which he went to kill his protector; but
as the holy man penetrated his deſign with

N 2 his


L 244 J


his ſupernatural eye, he reduced him to his iq
former ſtate of a mouſe, I repeat therefore, 4
One of low degree &c. Pleaſe to attend to ;
this alſo, ſaid the miniſter : 4


A certain Booby after having devoured fiſh of
every fize and quality, at length is killed from
his attempting a crab out of mere gluttony.


How was that? demanded Chettri-varni;
and his miniſter related the following ſtory :


FABLE VII.


IN the country of Malivi there is a lake
diſtinguiſhed by the name of Pidmi-garbhi,
where lived an old booby, who, being de-
prived of his former abilities, ſtood and
feigned to appear like one who was troubled
in mind; in which ſituation being obſerved
by a crab at a diſtance, the latter aſked him
why he ſtood there, and did not look for food.
You know, replied the booby, that fiſh is
what I live upon; and I know for certain
that fiſhermen are. coming to catch them all;
for, as I was looking about the ſkirts of the
next village, I overheard the converſation of
ſome watermen upon that ſubject; ſo this

being


( 09 1


being the caſe, I have loſt my appetite with
reflecting, that when our food is gone, death
will ſoon follow. This being overheard by
all the fiſh, they obſerved to one another, that
it was proper to look out for aſſiſtance whilſt
they had time; and, ſaid they, let us aſk the
booby himſelf what is beſt to be done; for,


One may better form a connexion with an
enemy who will render one aſſiſtance, than
with a friend who would do one an injury:
Theſe two ſhould rather be diſtinguiſhed


according to the good or injury they do
to one.


Accordingly, the fiſh accoſted the booby,
and ſaid, Pray, maſter booby, tell us what
means can be deviſed for our ſafety upon this
occaſion ? There is one way to be ſafe, re-
plied the artful booby, and that 1s, going to
another pond, whither I am willing to tranſ-
port you. The fiſh, in the greatneſs of their
fears, conſented to this propoſal; and their
treacherous deliverer devoured them all one
by one, as he took them out of the water.
At length, the crab aſked him to take him
alſo; and the booby, although he had never

— 3 before


11


before had any inclination to taſte one of his
ſpecies, took him up with great marks of re-
ſpect, and carried him aſhore; when the crab
ſeeing the ground covered with the bones of
the fiſh which the booby had deſtroyed, cried
to herſelf, —Alas, how unfortunate! TI ſhall
certainly be killed too, unleſs I can contrive
ſome means of eſcaping. Let me try imme-
diately what the occaſion requires, They ſay,


In times of danger it 1s proper to be alarmed
until danger be near at hand ; but when
we perceive that danger 1s near, one ſhould
oppoſe it as if one were not afraid.

When one attacked beholdeth no ſafety for
himſelf, if he be a wiſe man, he will die
fighting with his foe,

It is alſo ſaid, that
As out of battle death is certain, &c.


The crab having come to this reſolution,
he ſeized the opportunity when the booby
ſtretched out his neck to devour him, to tear
open his throat with the pincers of his claws.
Wherefore I repeat, A certain booby &c.


Attend, ſaid the peacock king, to what I


Have been thinking of: That if Cloud · colour
be


„ e e 2
4 N


* of *
4 1
r
2

1
-
3,
=
FR.
2
n
A 5 *
p
24
y 4
*


[ 247 J


be left governor here, all the choice things
which Kirpoora-dweepa produces may be
ſent to us to enjoy in great luxury, when we
ſhall be returned to the VEendhyi mountains.
The miniſter, laughing at the king's propo-
ſal, replied, —Pleaſe your highneſs,


He who rejoiceth over an unaccompliſhed deſign,
may meet with diſgrace ; like the Brahman
who brake the pots and pans.


How did that happen? demanded the king;
and the miniſter related the following ſtory :


FaBLE VIII.


IN the city of Dẽvẽẽ-kõttà there was a
Brahmin whoſe name was Devi-Sirma."*
One lucky evening he found a curious diſn,
which he took with him into a potter's ware-
houſe full of earthen-ware, and throwing
himſelf upon a bed which happened to be
there, it being night, he began to expreſs
his thoughts upon the occaſion in this man-


ner: If I diſpoſe of this diſh, I ſhall get ten


Käpärdäkäs for it; and with that ſum I


may purchaſe many pots and pans, the ſale
of which will increaſe my capital ſo much,
that


1 248 ]


that I ſhall be able to lay in a large ſtock of
cloth and the like; which having diſpoſed of
at a great advance, I ſhall have accumulated a
fortune of a lack of money. With this I
will marry four wives; and of theſe I will
amuſe myſelf with her who may prove the
handſomeſt. This will create jealouſy; fo
when the rival wives ſhall be quarrelling,
then will I, overwhelmed with anger, hurl my
ſtick at them, thus! Saying which, he flung
his walking ſtick out of his hand with ſuch
force, that he not only brake his curious diſh,
but deſtroyed many of the pots and pans in
the ſhop; the maſter of which hearing the
noiſe, came in, and diſcovering the cauſe,
diſgraced the Brahmin, and turned him out
of doors. I have ſaid, therefore, concluded
the miniſter, —He who rejoiceth &c.


At the concluſion of this ſtory the king
took the vulture aſide, and deſired him to


point out what he ought to do; and the mi-
niſter replied,


The conductors of princes intoxicated with
power, as well as of wounded or reſtiff
elephants, get nothing but diſgrace!


Pleaſe


249 J


Pleaſe your highneſs, continued he, the caſtle
hath been deſtroyed by us in the pride of
ſtrength; or rather, was it not by a ſtrata-
gem dictated by your own glory? No, re-
plied the king, it was thy own ſcheme. If
my advice were to be followed, ſaid the mi-
niſter, we ſhould now return to our own
country; for upon the return of the rainy
ſeaſon, ſhould we have to fight the enemy
again, with an equal force, in their own
country, we ſhall find it extremely difficult
to retreat home 1f we ſhould have occaſion.
Then, for the ſake of peace and glory, treat
with the enemy, and let us depart! We have
taken their caſtle, and gained renown. This
is the extent of my opinion,


He is the companion of a prince, who, placing
his duty before him, payeth no regard to
his maſter's likings or diſlikings, and tells
him unwelcome truths.

When victory in the battle is doubtful, one
ſhould wiſh to treat, even with an equal:
One ſhould not heſitate; for thus Vreehilſ-
PatEE'® hath declared. :

Who, except a child, would place his friends, |
his army, his kingdom, himſelf, and his I

reputation,


1 2560 ]


reputation, in the doubtful balance of a
battle?
Beſides,
Sometimes the overthrow of both happeneth ; for
were not Soonda and Oipasonda, two giants


of equal ſtrengtb, killed by one another?


How was that? ſaid the king; and the
vulture relateth the following ſtory :


FaBLE IX.


IN former times there were two giants,
the one called Soondi, and the other Oopi-
sööndä, who wiſhing to conquer the three
regions of the univerſe by the great exertions
of their bodies, for a long time petitioned the
deity with the creſcent on his head to be
propitious to their deſign. The god, pleaſed
with their prayers, told them to aſk a boon;
but as the goddeſs Säräſwätẽè had the con-
troul of theſe two of dreadful forms, both
their original wiſh and deſign were changed,
and at length they ſaid, If the diſpoſer of
fortune be pleaſed with our prayers, give us,
O Supreme Being, Parvitee thy own conſort!
Accordingly, the deity, although diſpleaſed
at the requeſt, from the abſolute neceſſity of

granting


[ * ]


granting boons, and from a kind of infatua-
tion, gave them Parvitee.


Having obtained her, they were preſently
inflamed by the beauty of her perſon, and
eager for the ruin of the mother of the uni-
verſe ;** for they were involved in the dark-
neſs of fin. But as they.were jealous of one
another, they reſolved to call upon ſome man
of authority to determine which ſhe ſhould
belong to; and inſtantly the deity, her lord,
ſtood before them under the diſguiſe of a ve-
nerable Brahmin. We have obtained this
female, ſaid they, as a boon, and wiſh thee to


determine which of us ſhe ſhould belong to.
The Brahmin replied,


A Brahmin is reſpectable becauſe he is of a
tribe the firſt in rank, a Kſhatrèẽyà for


ſtrength, and a Viſyz'* if he be poſſeſſed of
wealth and grain.


Now, ſeeing you twoare of the ſecond, or
military order, your duty is fighting. Theſe
words made a due impreſſion upon their
minds; they fell upon each other, but as
they were equal in ſtrength and courage,

they


- — —UNU—U—— —2—d! —


1


they died at the ſame inſtant from the blows
they received from each other. I ſay, there-
fore, one ſhould be inclined to treat even
with one of equal force, concluded the vul-
ture. Haſt thou not told me this before?
ſaid the king. What, ſaid the miniſter, did
your highneſs then comprehend the full ex-
tent of what I ſaid ? According to my opini-
on, this is not a proper time for the renewal
of hoſtilities. King Heerinyi-garbhi is en-
dued with thoſe qualities which render him a
proper perſon to treat with, and not to quar-


rel with. They ſay,


There are ſeven deſcriptions with which it is
deemed proper to form an alliance: Men
of veracity, men of family, men of juſtice

and virtue, men of low degree, ſometimes;
ſuch as are heads of a great fraternity,
ſuch as are powerful, and thoſe who have
been ſucceſsful in many battles,


He who formeth a connexion with an honeſt
man, from his love of truth, will not ſuffer
thereby. And the man of family, it is
very certain, will not be guilty of an un-


worthy action, even in the defence of life.
To


*


To the ſtrictly juſt and virtuous perſon,
every thing is annexed. The virtuous man,
from his juſtice and the affection he hath
for mankind, is the diſpeller of ſorrow
and pain.

It is expedient to form connexions even with
one of low degree, upon the approach of
our own deſtruction, and when, without
his protection, a worthy perſon might be
ruined.

He who 1s the head of a confederacy of bro-
thers, from their compactneſs, is as difficult
to be rooted out as a bamboo ſurrounded
by impenetrable thorns.

There is no ordinance for our contending
with the ſtrong: The clouds never paſs
againſt the wind.

From the glory of him who hath been vic-
torious in many battles, as from the glory
of the ſon of Jimidignese,” all, at all
times and every where, 1s enjoyed.

Seeing he who hath been victorious in many.
battles meeteth not death, his enemies are
captivated by his glory.


Then I repeat, that the royal gooſe, being
endued with many. of theſe qualities, is
worthy


( 254 J


worthy to be treated with. The miniſter
now orders the booby to go to the enemy's
camp, and to return with what further in-
telligence he could pick up.


I now wiſh thee, ſaid the peacock king,
to inform me how many there are with whom
it may be improper to enter into an alliance;
and the vulture miniſter replied, —I am about
to tell your highneſs, repeating the follow-
ing verſes:


The young, the old, the long afflicted, and
ſuch as have been excommunicated by their
tribe; the fearful, and thoſe whoſe fol-
lowers are timid; the covetous, and thoſe
whoſe followers are covetous;

Thoſe whoſe principal officers are void of
attachment, he who poſſeſſeth too much
power in affairs, one who in his counſels
is of many opinions, and he who ſpeak-
eth diſreſpectfully of the Gods or the Brah-
mans z | |

He who 1s naturally unfortunate, and he who
is always conſulting fate; one afflicted with
famine and peſtilence, and he who poſſeſs-
eth a diſorderly army ;

One


N


L 255 J


One who doth not ſtay in his own country,
one who is beſet with many enemies, he
who hath an army out of time, and one
who hath departed from the true reli-
gion: Theſe make twenty deſcriptions of
perſons,

With whom it is not proper to enter into
alliance, and whom one ſhould do nothing
but check ; for if ſuch as theſe go to war,
they preſently fall into the power of their
enemies.

If he be a child, his people are not ready to
fight, becauſe of the inſignificance of his
nature, and the inability of an infant to
pay the reward, or puniſh, for fightin g or
not fighting.

Be he one oppreſſed with age, or with ſome
tedious infirmity, deprived of the power
of exertion, he is inevitably overcome of
himſelf.

He who hath been expelled by ail his kindred
is eaſily to be defeated : for his relations
too, out of reſpect for themſelves, are ready
to deſtroy him.

Be he a coward, he himſelf will flee to avoid
the battle ; and if his troops are daſtards,
they will forſake him in the field.


The


„


The followers of the covetous refuſe to fight,
becauſe there is nodiſtribution of the ſpoils;
and where the attendants are ſo, they mu-
tiny for pay, and murder their leaders.

If the principal officers are not attached,
their chief is forſaken by them in the midſt
of the battle; and if he be one who hath
too much power in affairs, he expecteth
ſuperior attention.

He who in his counſels is of many minds, is
hateful to his miniſters; and becauſe of
the unſteadineſs of his mind, he is neg-
lected by them in his neceſſary affairs.

As religion is always moſt powerful, ſo he
who deſpiſeth the Gods or a Brahmin, of
himſelf goeth to nought ; and ſo doth he
who is ſmitten by fate.

Thoſe who firſt ſtudy fate, and ſay,—Fate is
the only cauſe of fortune and nusfortune,
terrify themſelves.

He who is ſurrounded by famine and peſti-
lence, of himſelf yieldeth; and he who hath
a diſorderly army, hath no power to fight.

One who 1s out of his own country 1s de-
feated by a very trifling enemy : the ſmall-
eſt alligator in his own element gripeth


the largeſt elephant.
5 He


257 1


He who hath many enemies is like a pigeon
amongſt kites: whatever way he turneth,
he is encountered by misfortune.

If he be one who marcheth his army out of
ſeaſon, he 1s deſtroyed by fighting againſt
the weather. He will ſuffer like the crow,


who, venturing out at midnight, had his
eyes picked out by an owl.


One ſhould, on no account, enter into any
connexion with one who hath departed
from the faith; for although he be bound
by treaty, he will, becauſe of his own un-
righteouſneſs, break his engagement.


In addition to all this, continued the mi-
niſter, I ſhall remind your highneſs of the
following particulars: Unz:zing, diſputing, halt-
ing, marching, ſurrendering, ſeparating, are
denominated the fix modes. For the com-
mencement of an expedition the neceſſaries
are, men, ſtores, treaſure, time, and place; the
poſſeſſion of which 1s proper, as a protection
againſt misfortune, as well as for the accom-
pliſhment of a deſign: They are called Zhe
ſecret of five members.” Pacifying, giving,
dividing, puniſhing, are diſtinguiſhed by the
appellation of zhe four means. Reſolution,

8 authority,


1


autherity, good counſel, are denoted the three
powers.” Thoſe ſovereigns who attend to
all theſe things, are always victorious ; for,


they ſay,


The ſucceſs which 1s to be acquired by thoſe
who are acquainted with the rules of po-
licy and prudence, 1s not to be gained by
the price of abandoning life; for ſuch
knowledge cauſeth jirreſolution to fly from
the body.

He is always poſſeſſed of riches, whoſe fol-
lowers are well attached, whoſe ſpies are
concealed, and whoſe counſels are kept
private; and he who doth not ſpeak with
unkindneſs to his fellow-creatures, may
govern the whole world to the extremities
of the ocean.


But pleaſe your highneſs, continued the mi-
niſter, although peace has been propoſed by
that great ſtateſman the vulture, {till his
maſter will not conſent to it, becauſe of his
recent ſucceſs. Then let this be done: The
king of Séënghälä-dwẽẽpä, the Sarisa Mi-
habili,** is our friend; let him raiſe a diſ-
turbance in Jimb66-dweepi, the enemies
country, |


1 259 J


A wiſe man having practiſed great ſecreſy,
marching with a well-compoſed army, may
alarm an opponent; and he who 1s alarmed
will make peace with him with whom he
hath been at variance.”


The royal gooſe having conſented to this
propoſal, one Veetcheetra a booby was diſ-
patched to SEEnghali-dweepa with a very
private letter.


In the mean time the ſpy returning from
the peacock's camp, ſaid, —Pleaſe your high-
neſs, attend to what I have to inform you of.
The vulture miniſter ſaid to the peacock
king, —Although Cloud-colour the crow was
ſo long in the enemy's caſtle, what if he doth,
or doth not know whether the royal gooſe,
Heeranyia-garbha, be poſſeſſed of thoſe quali-
ties which are neceſſary towards our treating
with him? After this, continued the ſpy,
the peacock king having called Cloud-colour
before him, aſked him what ſort of a charac-
ter that ſame royal gooſe, Heerinya-garbha,
was, and what ſort of miniſter he had.
To this the crow replied, —Pleaſe your high-
neſs, Heerinya-garbhi is as noble as king

© Yoodhee-


_ — — 1 ——
79nd: ͤ——ͤ—T—T—[ —


|
|


= — ——
n


—_ _ — — —


— — — — —
—U— _— ——— —— — — —


—


1


Yoodhee-ſhteeri,*” and a perſon of great ſin-
cerity; and as to his miniſter, his likeneſs is
no where to be diſcovered. If he be as thou
haſt deſcribed him, obſerved the king, how
was it that he was deceived by thee?


The crow replied,


What great ingenuity is there in deceiving
him whoſe confidence one hath gained?
Is the term manhood his who mounteth


upon the bed, and deſtroyeth thoſe that are
aſleep ?


Attend, pleaſe your highneſs, — I was diſco-
vered by the miniſter from the beginning;
but the king his maſter, being himſelf one in
whom the greateſt confidence may be placed,


was eaſily impoſed upon by me; according
to the following ſaying:


He who, judging by what paſſeth in his own
breaſt, believeth a knave to be a perſon of ve-


racity, is deceived; as the Brahman was con-
cerning his Goat.


Pray how was that? demanded the king;
and the ſpy told the following ſtory :


FABLE


1


FABLE X.


IN the foreſt of the prophet Gowtämà“ a
certain Brahmin, having determined to make
an offering, went to a neighbouring village
and purchaſed a goat, which having thrown
acroſs his ſhoulder, he turned towards home.
As he was travelling along, he was perceived
by three thieves. If, ſaid they, we could by
{ome artifice get the goat from that man, it
would be a great proof of our addreſs. Say-
ing this, they agreed upon their ſtratagem,
and executed 1t in this manner: They ſta-
tioned themſelves before the Brahmin, and
{at down under the trees in the road which
led to his habitation, till he ſhould come up
to them. Soon after, he was accoſted by one
of them in this manner:—lIs not that a dog?
Brahmin, what is the reaſon thou carrieſt it
upon thy ſhoulder? The Brahmin replied,
— No, it is not a dog—it is a goat, which
I have purchaſed to make an offering of.
About a mile further on he met another of
them, who repeating the ſame queſtion, he
took the goat from his ſhoulder, and put-
ting it upon the ground, examined it again
and again; and at length, replacing it upon

8 3 his


0 7}


his ſhoulder, he went on, quite ſtaggered
as it were.


The minds even of good men are Paggered by the
arguments of the wicked ; but thoſe who place
confidence in them may ſuffer by it ; like the


Camel Cheetra-varns.


The king aſked how that was ; and the ſpy
tells him the following ſtory:


FABLE XI.


IN a certain foreſt there was a lion whoſe
name was Midotkitti,” and he had three
attendants; a crow, a tiger, and a jackal.
One day, as theſe three were roaming about,
they met with a camel. They aſked him
whence he came, and whither he was travel-
ling; and after he had given an account of
himſelf, they introduced him to the lion;
who, having given him aſſurances of protec-
tion, and determined that he ſhould be called
Chettri-varni, retained him in his ſervice.


Sometime after, when the lion was out of


order, his attendants were exceedingly at a
loſs for proviſions, becauſe for ſometime it
had rained violently. So the crow, the tiger,

and


-
- :
N 2 1 : *
1 — Fob" - vibe gr 100 on 8 n * N 2 n . 4 N .
8 Eg S1 5 0 . 4 8 > F WF 4 £5 : . T wk 4, 14 d 45 7 * Tx 2 9 4 2 *
oy h . *
9 2 "1 8


ST =


and the jackal, agreed amongſt themfelves to
contrive fome way for the hon to kill the
camel; for, ſaid they, what is that thorn-
eater to us? Our maſter, obſerved the
tiger, having given him aſſurances of ſafety,
and taken him under his protection; then
how can this be brought about? To which
the crow rephes,—At ſuch a time as this,
when our maſter's health 1s upon the de-
cline for want of food, he will not ſcruple to
commit a fin; for they ſay,


A mother, when oppreſſed with hunger, will
abandon her own offspring; a female ſer-
pent, when diſtreſſed for food, will devour
her own eggs. What crimes will they not
commit who are pinched with hunger!
Men pining for food become deſtitute of |
pity and compaſſion. f

Thoſe who are intoxicated either with liquor ö
or pleaſure, the lazy, the paſſionate, the
hungry, the covetous, the fearful, the |
haſty, and libertines, have no knowledge
of juſtice.


This being proved to the ſatisfaction of all
parties, away they went to the lion; who,
the


I 264 J


the moment he ſaw them, demanded if they
had brought him any thing to eat. The
crow replied, Sir, with all our endeavours,
we have not been able to procure the ſmalleſt
trifle. Then what means are there now left
for my ſupport? cried the lion. Sir, replied
the crow, from your refuſing the food which
you have in your power, we are all like to
periſh. What 1s there here for me to eat?
eagerly demanded the hon. The camel! re-
plied the crow, whiſpering it in the lion's
ear. The noble beaſt at this propoſal, touch-
ing the ground, and then his two ears, in
abhorrence, exclaimed, Having, at our firſt
interview, given him aſſurances of my pro-


tection, how can he now be treated thus?
They fay,


Nor the gift of cattle, nor the gift of land,
nor the gift of bread, nor the gift of milk,
is to be compared with that which men
call the greateſt of all gifts: The gift of
aſſurance from injury!

Again:

He who hath defended one who had claimed
his protection, receiveth the full reward
which is the fruit of an Aſwi-medhi ſacri-

fice,


*
*
3
,
0
*
wy
1
[1
4
4
»
74 1
W
*
= '
5
%
9
;
E
5


Fl

-

* L
a

H

*

* 5
bs

4

K.

*

5 4
5 ]
E

>

|


{ 265 J


fice,** rendered more worthy by the addi-
tion of every thing which 1s eſtimable!


The crow replied, —Under theſe circum-
ſtances it is not proper that your highneſs
ſhould put him to death; but ſuppoſe we ſo
contrive, that he ſhall conſent to offer his
own body? The lion hearing this, remained
ſilent; but the crow, finding an opportunity,
made a pretence to carry all his friends and
the camel before him; when he addreſſed him
in this manner: — Pleaſe your highneſs, as
we can find nothing for you to eat, rather
than my maſter ſhall faſt, let him ſatisfy his
hunger with all the fleſh upon my poor
body; for,


When nature 1s forſaken by her lord, be ſhe
ever ſo great, ſhe doth not ſurvive. Al-
though Dhinwintaree be the phyſician,
when life is departed, what can he do?“

All honours and endowments have their
foundations in the ſovereign ; but although
trees have their roots, their being fruitful
dependeth upon man's exertion.


The hon nobly replied, —It is better to
abandon life entirely, than to proceed in ſuch


an


1


an act as this! The jackal next offered him-
ſelf; but the lion generouſly refuſing; the
tiger ſaid, Live, O maſter, by my body! This
never can be proper ! ſaid the noble beaſt;
and, laſt of all, the camel, in whom was
created the fulleſt confidence, offered himſelf
as the reſt had done; and inſtantly the tiger
tore open his ſides; and being thus cruelly
murdered, he was devoured by them all. I


fay therefore, —The minds even of good men &c,


At length, faid the ſpy, concluding the
ſtory of the three thieves, the Brahmin hav-
ing heard the third thief, like the former two,
inſiſt upon it, that he had a dog upon his
thoulder, was convinced that it was a dog;
and fo, leaving his goat behind him, which
the thieves preſently took away and made a
feaſt of, the good man waſhed himſelf and
went home. Whence, I ſay, —He who, judg-
ing by what paſſeth in his own breaſt, &c.


Cloud-colour, ſaid the peacock king to the
crow, thou wert a long time amongſt the
enemy,—pray how are their orders executed?
Pleaſe your highneſs, replied the crow, what
is there not done by ſervants who have their

maſter's


o
5
PR.
t
4 l
1
*
4
4 a -
A
9
1
*
7
5 :
*
*
4 k
\ 0
4% *
;
| o
\
* q


22 W


E
1
4
|
4
:


1 267 J


maſter's affairs at heart, or from a power de-
rived from one's own neceſſities?


Do not men, O king, bear burning wood
upon their heads; and the force of rivers,


ſimply by waſhing their roots, ſweep trees
away?


When a wiſe man findeth an occaſion, he may bear
away his enemy upon his ſhoulder, as it were;
Juſt like the old Serpent who killed the Frogs.


How did that happen ? ſaid the peacock


king; and the crow related the following
ſtory:


FaBLE XII.


THERE was an old ſerpent, by name
Mindi-veesirpi,” who, becauſe of his great
age, being unable to ſeek food for himſelf,
threw himſelf down the bank of a pond, where
he remained, till a certain frog ſeeing him at a
diſtance, aſked him what was the reaſon he
did not hunt about for food? Leave me!
cried the ſerpent, what occaſion haſt thou to
enquire into the ſtory of ſuch an unfortunate
wretch as 1? , The frog, who was not a little

pleaſed


2686


pleaſed to find his enemy in diſtreſs, deſired
him, by all means, to make him acquainted
with the cauſe of his trouble. You muſt
know then, ſaid the ſerpent, that here in the
town of Brahmi-poora, the ſon of one Kown-
deenyi a Brahmin, in the twentieth year of
his age, and endued with every virtue and
accompliſhment, by the will of fate, was
ſometime ſince bitten by cruel me! His fa-
ther beholding his beloved ſon Soosceli, for
that was his name, lying dead, fell mad for
grief, and rolled himſelf upon the ground.
In the mean time, the people of the city, his
kindred, friends, and connexions, all came
and fat down upon the ſpot where he lay.—
They ſay,


He is a friend who attendeth one at a feaſt,
in affliction, in famine, in diſputing with
an enemy, at the king's gate, and in the
cemetery.


Amongſt the reſt, there was a certain pil-
grim, whoſe name was Kapèslü, by whom
the father of the youth was thus addreſſed:
Art thou deprived of reaſon, Kowndeenya,
that thou thus lamenteſt the dead? Hear me!

Where


[ 269 ]


Where are thoſe ſovereigns of the world, with


all their numerous armies and ſplendid
equipage, of whoſe departure the earth,
even now, beareth teſtimony ?

In the body 1s concealed its decay, proſperity
is ſucceeded by adverſity, and our meetings
are ſoon followed by ſeparations. Thus


every thing in nature 1s produced with that
which will deſtroy it!


I snot this body ſeen to waſte, perceptibly,
away? Is not its gradual conſumption
plainly to be diſcovered, as of water ſtand-
ing in a crude veſlel ? |

Youth and beauty, riches and ſtores of
worldly goods, with the ſociety of thoſe
we love, and even life itſelf, are all of ſhort
duration! Then let not the wiſe man
therein be faſcinated.

As two planks floating on the ſurface of the
mighty receptacle of the waters, meet, and
having met, are ſeparated for ever; ſo do
beings in this life come together, and pre-
ſently are parted.

Upon the reduction of a body compoſed of
five elements to thoſe five principles, and
each of thoſe elements to its own womb,
what cauſe is there for lamentation?“


As


ee

As many tender connexions as the animal
man formeth for himſelf, ſo many thorns
of ſorrow are there ingrafted in his heart.

This is not a place for any one long to co-
habit with another; nay, not even with
his own body: Then how can he expect it
with another?

The diſſolution of a body foretelleth a new
birth: thus the coming of death, which is
not to be paſſed over, is as the entrance
into life.

The diſſolution of the delightful connexions
we form with thoſe we love, 1s as dreadful
as the total change to thoſe who are be-
come incurably blind.

But as brooks run on to join their rivers,
and do not turn back; ſo the days and
nights ſeize mortals' lives, and proceed
eternally.

The ſociety of the good, which contributeth
ſo much to the reliſh of happineſs in this
world, 1s joined in the yoke of troubles,
becauſe 1ts end 1s ſeparation.

Hence it is that the wiſe avoid the acquaint-
ance of good men ; for there is no remedy
for the mind afflicted with the ſorrow of
ſeparation,

Many


-
*
* * —_ A 1 „ * — 3 2 oo bl * * £ * < $ —
ene . n dy. N <2 x Se j 1 . _ 22 8 2 : "YT FY . N K n . " 5 * . 3 = .
* s 0 be, \ ; an 5 , Ep i - [ , ] N
N - % 4 a 2 by Mz 1 y uf 7 = & 3 8 s * 2 1 4 1 * A * P r WI Fs * y 8 ” =
* { . is % K XY ** 8 vw >> yp Wo wy a 4 .
N 5 , aac . : x ; . j X q . :
S , * 1 6 2 A , * 4 - 1 x y _
5 : 8 : L n l R 1 : 7 8 %
— — on = WF 1


2
*
4
b 4
, N
\
*
1
-
1
*
” F of {
I
4
* -
8
8
1
*
*
ws ;
«
"LR
G *
» I
57
%
oY
1
\
5
4
7
1
©...
7.
7 g
*
.
Co
1
5
*
A *
E
5
*
*
I
*
„
-
*
„
F »
"1 x 2
ö
*
.
*T"
7
I;
4 Y
„
.
—
»
-
4
iÞ
8
a
.
WW \
*
*
o
f |
'»
$4
.
” f
9
*
be
by
— 0
p;
|
s :
*
*
7
| -
|
* *
7
Fo
EY
&
Ld
1
8


( 271 J


Many noble and pious works were performed
by Sägärä and other ancient kings; but,
alas! both they and their works are gone
to decay.

When he hath conſidered, and reconſidered,
that ſevere puniſhment death, all the en-
deavours of the wit of man become as lax
as ſkins of leather ſprinkled by the rain!

Every hero of the human race, from the firſt
night of his reſidence in the womb, day by
day approacheth death.


Then pay no attention to this world, conti-
nued the good pilgrim; for ſorrow is a proof
of ignorance. Obſerve,


If ſeparation be the cauſe, and ignorance be
not the cauſe, how is it, that after days


have paſſed away, ſorrow is changed into
childiſhneſs ?


Wherefore, compoſe thy troubled mind, and
and diſpel all thought of grief; for they ſay,


Not to think is the grand remedy, when our
children are untimely born, and againſt
thoſe weapons of deep ſorrow, which pe-
netrate the heart,


The


L 272 1


The afflicted Kowndeenya, rouſed by theſe
words, got up as it were from a trance, and
cried, —Since it be ſo, enough of dwelling in
the hell of houſes! I will preſently retire into
the wilderneſs!“ Hold, my ſon, replied the
benevolent Kapeela.


Thoſe who yield to their paſſions will expe-
rience evils, even in the wilderneſs. To
reſtrain the five organs of perception,
even in a houſe, is doing penance. The
habitation of him whoſe paſſions are well
regulated, and who proceedeth but in ſuch
actions as are irreproachable, 1s as the wil-
derneſs of penitence.

For they ſay,

The afflicted even ſhould practiſe the duties
of religion, whatever mode of life they
may chooſe, and wherever their abode may
be; and our conduct ſhould be equal unto

all beings; for diſtinctions are not autho-
riſed by religion.

Again:

Thoſe who eat but to ſupport life, who co-
habit but for the ſake of progeny, and who
ſpeak but to declare the truth, ſurmount
difficulties. |


Again:


=O


Again : 5
Suppoſe thyſelf a river and a holy pilgrimage
in the land of Bhariti,”* of which truth
is the water, good actions the banks, and
compaſſion the current; and then, O ſon
of Pãndòò,“ waſh thyſelf therein, for the


inward ſoul is not to be purified by com-
mon water.


And thou ſhouldſt pay particular attention
to this ſaying:


There is eaſe for him who quitteth this
world, which is totally deſtitute of good,
and overwhelmed with birth, death, old
age, ſickneſs, and ſorrow. Pain is a thing
of certain exiſtence, but not eaſe; whence
it is obſerved, that the term eaſe is applied
as a ſort of remedy for one in pain.“


To all this, continued the ſerpent, the
afflicted father only replied, —Even ſo it 1s !
but preſently after the poor Brahmin in the
height of his ſorrow denounced this curſe
againſt me, the author of his trouble,—that
henceforward, I ſhould be doomed to carry
frogs about upon my back as a beaſt of
T burden !


L 274 J


burden! After that, another Brahmin who
happened to be by, obſerving that Kown-
deenyi was greatly revived by the whole-
ſome doctrines of the pilgrim, addreſſed him
in theſe words :


Society ſhould be avoided with all the efforts
of the mind; but if it be not in one's power
to avoid it, acquaintance ſhould be formed
with the good alone, for the company of
good men is the remedy.

Again:

The tender paſſion ſhould be avoided with all
the reſiſtance of the mind ; but if it benot
poſlible to conquer it, it ſhould be in-
dulged towards a wife alone, for ſhe is the
proper remedy.


Kowndeenya having heard this, and being
by the ſalutary counſel of Kipetli quite cured
of his affliction, took the ſtaff according to
the uſual forms; and poor I, concluded
the ſerpent, lie here under the power of a
Brahmin's curſe ready to carry any frog that
ſhall chooſe to mount upon my back !


The frog who had been attentive to this
long ſtory, upon hearing the laſt words of
the


[ 275 J


the ſerpent, went away to inform the chief
of the pool of it, who ſoon after making his
appearance, the ſerpent placed him upon his
back and carried him about, keeping a gentle
eaſy pace. The king of the frogs was ſo
pleaſed with his ride, that he came again the
next day ; but upon finding the ſerpent un-
able to carry him, and aſking him what was
the cauſe of his weakneſs, the artful animal
replied, that he was totally deprived of his
ſtrength for want of food. Upon this the
frog ordered him to be fed, every day, with
as many of his ſubjects as he might chooſe ;
and the ſerpent having, by degrees, eaten all
the frogs which were to be found in the
pond, at length devoured his benefactor.
I repeat, therefore, ſaid the crow, ben a
wiſe man Gc.


Let us have done with the repetition of
old ſtories, obſerved the miniſter. In my
opinion, ſaid he, H&èränyä-gärbhä is worthy
of our alliance, and therefore I adviſe, that a
treaty be formed with him. Sir, ſaid the
king, is this your opinion ? He has been de-
feated by us, and therefore he is at liberty to
remain where he 1s, provided he conſent to

T 2 be


276 ]


be our vaſſal; otherwiſe I command him to
be attacked! Juſt as the king ſaid this, the
parrot came in from Jimboo-dweepa, and
informed his maſter the peacock, that the


379


Saräsä, who was king of Seenghili-dweepi,
had lately invaded his country, and was ſtill
there. What is it thou ſayeſt? cried the
king in great confuſion. Art thou too re-
peating ſome old ſtory ? ſaid he. Well done,
miniſter Chikrivaki ! exclaimed the vulture,
well done! Whilſt the peacock in great an-
ger cried, —Let him ſtay there till I come,
and I will extirpate him with his whole ge-
neration! To which the miniſter Far-/ee,
{miling, replied,


There is no neceſſity for imitating an au-
tumnal cloud ! The thunder of the hea-
vens our chief diſplayeth, whether on ſome
account, or on no account, is of equal
inefficacy. |

They ſay,

A king ſhould not diſpute with too many
enemies at a time; for even the proud
ſerpent 1s inevitably deſtroyed by large
{warms of waſps.


Are


13
Are we then, Sir, continued the miniſter, to


march back without concluding a peace? If


we do, ſaid he, I think we may have occaſion
to repent.


He who falleth into the power of anger before
he hath made himſelf acquainted with another's
merits, may have cauſe to be ſorry for it ; like
the fooliſh Brahman after he had killed his
Weaſel.


How was that? demanded the king and
his miniſter Far- ſee related the following
ſtory:


FaBLE XIII.


AT Ovpaycente there lived a Brahmin
whoſe name was Mahdhiva. His wife having
been lately brought to bed, left her huſband
in charge of the infant, whilſt ſhe went to
perform her ablutions.” As ſoon as ſhe
was gone, the Brahmin, recollecting that the
king's offerings to the manes of his anceſ-
tors were about to be made, and ſeeing
other Brahmins going to attend them, was
prompted by his natural avarice to reflect in
this manner: If I don't go directly, ſaid he,

T4 {ome


rr — .. ⏑‚§˖«ͤÜ˙ 1 ô A —— - - ꝗ— — - — = © — — -


— un -


[ 298 J


ſome one elſe, having heard of it, will go and
take away my ſhare of the good things.—
They ſay, |


Time drinketh up the eſſence of every work
which ſhould be done, and 1s not done
quickly, whether it be an act of receiving,
or an act of giving away.


But, continued he, I have no one to take
care of the door, then what am I to do, un-
leſs, indeed, I place this my long- beloved
weaſel there, who 1s as dear to me as the child
itſelf, and then venture to go? In ſhort,
he did ſo, and went his way to the king's
feaſt. It happened that ſoon after the Brah-
min left the houſe, as the weaſel was paſſing
near the child, he ſaw a black ſerpent gliding
towards 1t, which he killed, and partly de-
voured; and when he ſaw his maſter return-
ing, the affectionate little animal ran to meet
him, with his mouth and legs all covered
with blood; and he rolled himſelf upon the
ground at the Brahmin's feet in a very ex-
traordinary manner; but the good man ſee-
ing him in ſuch a condition, and haſtily
concluding that he had murdered his child,

without


L 279 J


without further enquiry, put the poor weaſel
to death. In ſhort, when the Brahmin went
towards his child, and found it alive and
well, and, at the ſame time, diſcovered the
mangled remains of the black ſerpent upon
the floor near it, the proofs of his weaſel's
merit and fidelity were ſo evident, that he
ſuffered the molt bitter pangs of ſorrow and
remorſe. I repeat therefore, continued the
miniſter, —He who falleth into the power of
anger, &c. They ſay,


A man ſhould avoid theſe ſix evils: Luſt,
anger, avarice, pleaſure, pride, and raſh-
neſs; for, free of theſe, he may be happy.


The peacock king replied, —So, miniſter,
this is thy determination, is it? They ſay,


The beſt qualities for a miniſter are, juſtice,
thorough inveſtigation, wiſe determina-
tion, firmneſs, and ſecreſy.


Sir, ſaid the miniſter in reply,
Raſhneſs in any undertaking ſhould not be


permitted; for the want of due inveſti-
gation


I 28 ]


gation is the foundation of the greateſt
misfortunes. 'That ſucceſs which merit
is deſerving of, attendeth of itſelf upon
him who acteth with due deliberation.


Then, if what I ſay is worthy of attention,
peace ſhould be concluded; for,


Although four means are mentioned“ for
the accompliſhment of the work, the re-
ſult of the whole number 1s uniting in


peace.


But, ſaid the king, how may that be pre-
ſently effected? Pleaſe your highneſs, re-
plied the miniſter, it ſnall be brought about
ſpeedily. They ſay,


A bad ſubject is like an earthen veſſel, eaſily
to be broken, and hard to be united; and
a good one like a veſſel of gold, not eaſily


to be broken, and not difficult to be re-
united.


Eſpecially, continued the miniſter, as both
the king and his miniſter are exceedingly
well informed of things in general; for this I
knew from the beginning, as well from the

reports


*

Y $
2
* #

1
<
= i
By *

95

FEM
FR
4 '# hag”
C3
*
*

I
2


1 4


reports of the crow Cloud- colour, as from
a ſingle review of their conduct.


The virtue and conduct of an abſent perſon
are, on all occaſions, to be eſtimated by
his works; wherefore one ſhould weigh


the actions of thoſe who are out of ſight
by the effect.


Let us have done with theſe anſwers and
replies, cried the king, and let that which is
moſt preferable be purſued. At length the
miniſter, agreeable to his own counſel, went
forth and waited near the caſtle, whilſt a
meſſenger ran to the royal gooſe Heerinyia-
garbha, and informed him, that the miniſter
of the peacock king was coming to treat for
peace; but the former, ſtill ſuſpecting ſome-
thing, ſaid to his own miniſter, Know-all,—
This again muſt be ſome ſpy or other coming


to impoſe upon us! Pleaſe your highneſs,


replied Know-all, laughing as he ſpoke, there
is great room for ſuſpicion, for this ſame
noble perſon who is coming, is one who can
ſee a great way; elſe ſuſpicion, which is
the proof of a weak mind, ſhould never be
indulged,

A wary


*


1 |


A wary gooſe having been once deceived by
an enemy, whilſt ſitting in a very thick
ſhade, in a lake, looking after the lotus
plant, no more regardeth the cooling
flower which is diſtreſſed by the appear-
ance of day, and afraid of the ſtars.
Thus it is with the people of this world;
having been once deceived, they ſuſpect
deceit in truth itſelf !


Then, continued the miniſter, let a preſent,
conſiſting of jewels, rich dreſſes, and the like,
the beſt we can afford, be provided for him
as a compliment. This being done accord-
ingly, the miniſter, Know-all, went out and
received the vulture, Far-ſee, in front of the
caſtle, with every mark of reſpect ; and pre-
ſently conducted him into the preſence of the
royal gooſe, where he was permitted to be
ſeated in a chair of ſtate. Great miniſter,
ſaid Know-all, addreſfing himſelf to the vul-
ture, now diſpoſe of theſe your dominions
according to your wiſh! Even ſo! added the
royal gooſe. So be it! replied the vulture;
but, ſaid he, at preſent much negociation is
unneceſſary; for they ſay,


One


283 J


One ſhould receive the covetous with gifts,
the proud with joined hands, and the like
tokens of ſubmiſſion, the ignorant with
paſſages of poetry, and the wiſe and learned
with whatever is ſuitable to their character.

Again:

A friend ſhould be received with ſincerity,
relations with reſpect, women with gifts
and compliments, and others with what-
ever is proper.


Then let peace be preſently concluded, that
the moſt illuſtrious king Chetetri-virni may
depart, added the vulture. Inform us, ſaid
the miniſter Know-all, how peace 1s to be
made. How many ſpecies of connexions
and alliances are there? demanded the king.


I am about to tell you, ſaid the vulture, fo
pleaſe to attend:


When a king hath been overcome by one
ſtronger than himſelf, no further oppoſi-
tion ſnould be made; and the unfortunate
party ſhould ſue for peace with all —

expedition.
Thoſe who are acquainted with the nature
of forming connexions and alliances, de-
clare,


L 284 ]


clare, that there are ſixteen ſpecies, thus
denominated:


Käpälä, Adreeſhtta-nari,
Oopihari, Adetſhtta,
Sintana Atma-decſhtti,
Säng-gätä, Oöpägrähä,
Oopinyasa, PareEkriya,
Prateckara, Occh-cheEenni,
Säng-yögä, Paribhooſhinia,


Poorooſhantara, =Skindopineyi,


The Kipalia union is underſtood to be that
where the parties ſimply form a connexion
upon an equal footing. The O6pihari is
when there 1s a gift from one of the parties.

The Sintani union is conceived to be that
in forming which one of the parties de-
livereth up his family as a preliminary.
The Säng-gätä alliance is declared to be
that which is formed with worthy men
upon the foundation of friendſhip,

Which 1s not to be broken by any accidents,
whoſe purpoſes are the ſame in proſperity
and adverſity, and the meaſure of whoſe
duration is the length of life.

This Säng-gätä union, becauſe of its ſupe-
rior excellence, may be compared to gold ;

and


39 r N 1 : * br „
1 * >


[ 233 J


and by others, who are acquainted with
the doctrine of forming connexions, it is
called the golden union.


The 60pinyasa alliance is declared, by thoſe .


who are acquainted with that mode of uni-
ting, to be that which is concluded upon
terms pointed out by one of the parties.

The alliance which 1s formed upon this prin-
ciple, I have formerly rendered him aſſiſtance,
be ſhall now do ſo to me, is denominated the
Priteekara mode.

This alſo is called Prateekari: I will render


him aſſiſtance, and he ſhall do the ſame to me.
Such was the alliance formed between
Rami and S66greevi.*”

It having been made to appear, that an ex-
pedition hath but one object, and upon
theſe grounds a treaty 1s entered upon with
united authority, it is called Sing-yoga.

The Poorooſhantira is an alliance formed
upon this principle,. Let my purpoſe be
effefted by the prime of both our armies; and
in ſettling which there 1s a price fixed.

The adreeſhtta-nara is, when a treaty is
formed on ſuch a propoſal as this:


purpoſe is to be effetted by thee alone; in which
alſo there is a price fixed.


When


— >


;
'
|
1
1


[ 286 ]


When a treaty is formed upon one party's
quitting his enemy for a fine of a portion
of his lands, it is denominated adeecſhtti.

The conjunction formed with one's own
army is called itma-deeſhtti; and that
for the preſervation of life, 1s denominated
oopagraha.

When a moiety, or even the whole, of the

treaſure is ſurrendered to ſave the reſt of

the property, the treaty is ſtiled Pareck-

riya; and when the conſideration be the
molt valuable part of the lands, the term
is ööõch-chèënnä.

When the purchaſe of peace is made with
a gift of the whole of the fruits of the
earth, it is called Parabhooſhina; and,
laſtly, when by a gift of the fruits which
have been gathered, willingly born upon
the ſhoulder, Skindhopaneya.

There are alſo theſe four diftinctions of al-

liance: That of reciprocal aſſiftance, that of

Friendſbip, that of relationſhip, and that wwhich
is purchafed with a gift.

It is the opinion of Goors6, that alliance
and aſſiſtance mean the ſame. There are
many modes of alliance by gifts ; but theſe

are all rejected by friendſhip.


388


The


L 287 J


The conqueror, from his being the ſtrongeſt,
is not wont to retreat without having
gained ſomething; whence no other mode
than the 60pihari is known to him.


The miniſter Know-all replied, —Hear this!


To ſay, This is one of us, or this is a ſtranger,
is the mode of eſtimating practiſed by tri-
fling minds. To thoſe of more generous
principles, the whole world 1s but as one
family!

Again:

He who regardeth another's wife as his mo-
ther, another's goods as clods of earth, and
all mankind as himſelf, is a philoſopher.


Vou are a philoſopher, ſaid the royal gooſe
to the vulture, and therefore I deſire you will
point out what is to be done in this affair.
Your highneſs is pleaſed to compliment, re-
plied the miniſter Far- ſee. The poet ſays,


What name ſhall we give to him who inha-
biteth a body deſtitute of juſtice, when
that body, to-day or to-morrow, is ſubject
to death by the fever of ſickneſs or ſorrow?


When


W 208 ]


When we conſider this world in the light of
a thirſty deer in a moment to be de-
ſtroyed, it is proper to form connexions
with good people, for the ſake of virtue,
and for the ſake of happineſs.


Then, continued the vulture, the buſineſs
ſhould be ſettled according to this ſaying,
which correſponds with my own opinion.


Truth being weighed againſt a thouſand
Aſwi-medhi ſacrifices,” was found to be
of more conſequence than the whole thou-
ſand offerings.


Wherefore, let the name of TrxuTu be the
divine precedent for both, and each of us;
and let the alhance between us be that which
is diſtinguiſhed by the title of THE GOLDEN
Union!”


The miniſter Know-all having ſignified
his approbation of the propoſed terms, Far-
ſee was complimented with a preſent of rich
cloth and jewels; and being exceedingly re-
Joiced at the event of his negociations, he
took his leave of the royal gooſe, and re-

turned


L 289 J


turned with the miniſter Know-all, into the
preſence of his own ſovereign. The peacock
king ratified the peace, and, at the inſtance of
the vulture, entered into a converſation with
Know-all, in which he paid him many com-
pliments; at the concluſion of which the
latter had leave to depart, and he preſently
repaired to the camp of the royal gooſe.


The miniſter Far-ſee now tells his maſter,
that as their deſigns were happily accom-
pliſhed, it was adviſable to direct their march
towards home, the mountains of Veendhya.
His advice was followed, and the whole army
arrived at their reſpective habitations to en-
joy in peace thoſe fruits their hearts moſt
longed for.


Now declare, ſaid Veeſhn606-Sarma to his
royal pupils, what more I am to tell you!
Through the great condeſcenſion of our re-
verend maſter, replied the young princes, be-
ing made acquainted with every thing which
relates to the royal department of negocia-
tion, we are ſatisfied. May this concluſion
render you equally ſo! ſaid Vèëſhnòò-Särmã,
repeating theſe lines:

U May


. .


1989 7


May peace for ever yield happineſs to all the
victorious poſſeſſors of the earth! May
juſt men be for ever free from adverſity,
and the fame of thoſe who do good long
flouriſh ! May prudence, like a glorious
ſun, ſhine continually on your breaſts!
May the earth, with all her vaſt produc.
tions, long remain for your enjoyment!
