PHILOSOPHICAL RUDIMENTS CONCERNING GOVERNMENT AND SOCIETY (DE CIVE)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/hobbesgovernmentandsociety): the 1651 first English edition of De Cive (London), translated from Hobbes's Latin.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Philofophicall Rudiments} —
CONCERNING ©
Government and Society,


je


, OR, ‘
|A DISSERTATION
Concerning M4 N in his {everall
habitudes and refpects , as
the Member of a Society, fit ’
Secular, and then Sacred.
Containing


The Elements of Civill Politie in the
Agreement which it hath both with
Naturail and Divine Lawes.


Tnwhich ts demonftvated,


Both what the Ovgige of Juftice is,
and wherein the Effence of Chriftian


Y


Religion doth confift, Pas
ee
Together with Pte


The Nature, Limits, and Qualiftcati-
onsboth of Regiment and Subje@tion, ©


By Tuo: Hos ses. ty


. ie
LONDON, o


Printed by 7. G, for. R. Roy ston,


at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1 6 5 3,


ee M? GOUSIN


SheeheRs eee
Sp poeeee ee
either trig Shee

Right Honourable ,
WILLIAM,
Earle of Devonjhire ,

My moft honoured Lord.

ay it pleafe your Lordfhip,

gH T was the fpeech


SS


zt 4 ‘people (to whom
Y OM, thename of King
/ had been render’d


of)


odious, as well by the tyrannie
of the Tarquins,as by theGenins
and Decretals of that City)
Twas the fpeech I fay of the
‘Publick, however pronounced
from a private mouth, (if yet
‘Cato the Cenforwere no more

A 3 then


z|


= SSS


then fuch) That all Kings ave to
be reckon’d amongst ravenous
Beafts. But what a Beaft of
Prey was the Roman people,
whilft with itsconquering Ea-
gles it, erected its. proud Tro-


_ -phees'fo far atid wide over the


world , bringing the Africans,
the Afiaticks:, the ‘Macedoni:
ans, and the-Achxans, with
many other defpoyled Nati-
ons, intola fpecious bondage ,
with'the pretence of preferring
them tobe Denizons of Rome?
So that if Cate’s faying. were a
wife one, .’twas every whit as
wife that of Postive Telefinus 5
who flying about ‘with open —
mouth.through all the Com-
panies of his Army, {in that fa-
mous encounter which he had
with Sya) cryed out, That
Rome her felfe, as well as Sylla,
twas to be.raX-d;- for that there
would alwayes be Wolves and
Depradatours of their Liberty,
ei un-


unleffe-the Forreft that lodg’d
them’ were grubb’d. up: by the
roots, . To {peak impartially,
- both fayings, are very; trues
That Manto Man isa kind of
God, and that Man to Man ts an
arram Wolfe z, The firkt isitrue, —
if owe compate: Citizens _ a-
_ mongft themelves , and the,fe-
cond, if we compare Gities, In
the one, there’s fome analogie
of fimilitude wich the Deity,
to wit, Jufticeand Charity, the
twin-fifters of peace: But inthe
other, Good men muft defend
themf{elves by taking to them
for a San@uary the two daugh-
tersof War, Deccipt'and Vioz
lence : that 'is in iplaine termes
ameer brutall Rapacity : which
althongh men objec to onéa-
nother as a reproach, by an ins
bredicuftome which:they have
of beholding their own actions
in the perfons of other men‘,
wherein ; as in a Miroir, all
oof Aa things


The Epi “A = |
things on the left fide appeare
tobe onthe right, & all things
onthe right fide to be as plain-
ly on the left’; yet the natural
right of Prefervation ‘which we
all receive fromthe uncon-
troulable DiGates of Neceffi- "
ty’, will not admit it to be a
Vice, though it confeffe it to be
an Unhappineffe.. Now. that:
with Cato himfelfe, (a Perfon
of fo great a renowne for wif-
dome) Animofity ihould fo
prevaile inftead of Judgement;
and Partiality inftead of Reas
fon, that the very fame thing
which he thought equalt in his
Popular State, he fhould cen:
fure as unjuftin a Monarchical,
other men perhaps may have
leifure to admire. But I have
been long fince of this opi-
nion, That there was never
yet any more-then-vilgar-pru-
dence that had the luck of be-
ing acceptable to the Giddy
egnisls Peo:


Dedicatory.

People; but either it hath not’
been underftood, or elfe having”
been fo, hath been levell’d and
cryed downe. The moreemi-
nent Aétions and Apothegms
both of the Greeks and Ro-
mans have been indebted for
their: Eulogies not fo much to
the Reafon, as to the Greatne(fe
of them, and very many times
to that profperous ufurpation
. (withwhich our, Hiftories doe
fo mutually upbraid: cach o-:
ther) which as’ a conquering:
Torrent carryes all before ir,.
as well publick Agents as pub-
lick Actions, in the ftreame of
Time. Wifdome properly fo
call’d is nothing elfe but this,
The perfect knowledge of thes
Trath in. all matters whatfoever.
Which being derived from the
Regifters. and Records of
Thiags, and that as “twere
through the Conduitof certain:
definite Appellations, cannot:

A


iS: pot


~~ SC ——- 97


The Epifle '
poffibly be the work of a fud-
daine Acuteneffe, but of a well.
ballanc’d Reafon, which by the
Compendium of a word, we call,
Philofophy. For by this it is ,
that'a way is open’d to us, in”
which we travell from. the con-.
templation of particular things,
to the Inference or  refult of
univerfall Adtions. Now look
how many forts'of things there:
are which properly fall. within
the cognizance of humane rea-
fon, into fo many branches does,
the tree of Philofophy divide it
felfe. And: from the diverfity.
of the matter about which'they
are converfant, there hath been
given tothofe branches a diver-
fity of Names too: For treat-
ing of Figures, tis callid Geame-
try of motion, Phyfick , of nas
turall right, Morals, put all
together, and they make up
Philofophy.  Juft as the Britith,
the Atlantick, and the Indian —

| Fs. Seas,


Ae ana cent es


fervation of the Heavens, or
from the defcription of the


Earth, from the oration of.
Times, or fromthe semorett:
Expetiments of : Navigation:


Finally, whatfoever th ngs they:
are in which chis prefent Age
doth differ from the rude fim~


leneffe of Antiquity, we mutt


acknowledge ‘to »bt:.a debt


which we owe meerly | to'Geo- -


metry. » If the Morall Philofo-


phers hadasihappily. dife hei
wnat


theinedupy, Ivknow nti
could’have: beet: added: by hu«
mane Induftry to the comple-


tiomof thavhappineifle,whichis
aie cone.


‘The Epiftle


confiftent with humane: life:


For were the nature of humane:


A&tions as diftin@ly knowne,:
as the nature of Quantity in Ge.


ometricall Figures,the ftrength, |


of Avarice and Ambition, which:


is fuftained by the erroneous o-: |


pinions of the Vulgar,as touch-:
Ing the nature of: Right and)
Wrong , would prefently. faint
and languith ; And Mankinde


fhould enjoy fuch an. Immor-


tall Peace, that (unleffe it were
for habitation , onfuppofition


thatthe Earth fhould grow too


marrow. for her: Inhabitants:),
uliere would hardly be left any,
pretéce for war. But nowon:the
contrary,that neither theSword
nor-the Pen fhould be allowed
any-Ceffation., That the know-
ledge: of the Law of Nature
fhould lofeits growth, nor-ad-
vancing: a whit beyond its. an-
tient ftature; thar there fhould


Rn cei STI


#ill be fuch. fiding withthe fe-


4 verall


Dedicatory.

verall faGtions of rae Ih
that the very fame Action
fhould. bee decryed by fome,
and as much -elevatediby o-
thers;-that the very fame man
fhould. at feverall times: em-
brace his feverall opinions, and
eftcem’ his own Actions, farre
otherwife in himfelfe then he.
doesinothers; Thefe I fay are
fo many fignes , fo many ma-
nifeft Arguments, that what
hath hitherto been written by
Morall Phitofophers ,. hath not
made any progrefs in the know-
ledge of the Truth;but yet have
took with the world, not fo
mutch by giving any light to the
underftanding , as entertain-
ment tothe A ffections, whileft
by the fucceffefull Rhetoricati-
ons of their fpeech they have
confirmed them in their rafhly
received opinions. So that this
part of Philofophy hath fuffe-
ted the fame desfiny with the

; ; publi


The pile,
publick Wayes , which lye open:
tovall paffengers totraverfeup
and down or the:fame lot with —
high wayes: and: open fireetss —
Some ‘for divertifement , and
fome. for: bufineffe 5: fo that
what with the Impertinencies of
fome yand athe Altercation of
others, thofe wayes haveynever.
a feeds-time,and therefore yield
neveraharveft, The oncly:rea-
fonof which unluckines{hould
feemtobe this; Thar among:
all the writers of that! part of
Philofophy, there-is not one: —


that shath ufed .an idoneous.


Principle of Tra@ation. . For
we may not,as in.a-Circle|, be:
gin the handling of a>Sciénce.
rom what point» we pleafe,
Thereis a certain Clue of Rea:

fon, whof-beginning isinxhe -
@atk, sbut bythe benefitiof
whofe Coddu@, wee aveted
as ‘twere by the Hand intathe
elearefdight ) fo chat the Prine.


ciple 4


Dedicatory. ;
ciple of Trattation is to be ta-
ken from that Darkneffe, - and
then the light to be carried thi-
ther for the irradiating ics
doubts. As often therefore as.
any writer, doth either weakly
forfake that Clue , or wilfully
cut itafunder, he defcribes the
Footfteps, not of his progreffe
in Science, but of his wandrings.
from it. And upon this it was,
that when. «TI applyed my
Thoughts to the Inveftigation
of Naturall Juftice , Twas pre-
fently advertifed from the very
word Fuftice, (wich fignifies a
fteady Will of giving every one
his Owne), that my firlt aileuiry
was to be , from whence it pro-.
ceeded , that any man fhould
call any thing rather his owne,
then another mans. And when
I found that this proceedednot
from Nature, but Confent, «
(for what Nature at ‘firft laid:
forth in common, mon did af

tecwards. ©


The Epiftle
terwatds diftribute into feve. —
rall Impropriations , l was.con-
duéted from thence to a- |
nother Inquiry, namely to
what end, and upon what Im- —
pulfives , when all was equal-
ly every mans. in common,
men did rather think it ficting, —
that every man fhould have
his Inclofure; And I found:the —
reafon was , that from a Com-
munity of Goods , there muft
needs arife Contention whofe —
enjoyment fhould be greateft,
and: from that Contention all
kind of Calamities muft una-
voydably enfue , which by the
inftin& of Nature , every man
is taught to fhun. Having there-
fore thus arrived at two ma-
ximes of humane Nature, the
one arifing from the ‘concupifci-
ble patt,which defites to appro-
~ priate toitfelfe the ule of thofe

things in which all others have
a joynt intereft., the.orher pro-
; ceeding


~ Deaicatory.
‘ceeding from the rational ;
which teaches every man to fly
a contre-narurall Diffolution,
as the greateft mifchiefe that
can afrive to Nature; Which
Principles being laid down, I
feem from them to have de-
_ monftrated by a moft evident
connexion, in this little work of
mine , firft the abfolute necef-
fity of Leagues and Contraéts,
and thence the rudiments both
of morall and of civill Pru-
dence. That Appendage which
is. added concerning the Regi-
| ment of God, hath been done
with this intent, that the Di-
ates of God Almighty. in the
Law of nature , roiabs not feem
repugnant;to the written Law,
revealed:to us in his word. I
have alfo been very wary inthe
whole tenour of my difcourfe,
not to meddle with the civill
Lawes of any particular nation
whatfoever , That is to fay 5 I
ave


haveavoydedicoming a ‘fliore


_fefted both with thelves, and
~ Tempefts. At ‘what -expeno


" -ourfelyes, welay’a partial efti


which thofe: Times have'fo in.


of ‘time; and: induftry I shave
beene in ‘this ferutiny © aftet
Truth, lam not ignorant ; but
to what purpofe, I know non
For being partial’ Judges


mate upon-our own produat
ons. I therefore offer up 1
Book to’ your Lordfh'ps ,:m
ee burcenfiiie fir , asha
ving found: by: many tie
stieits; that isborhoceall
of the Author, nor the nei

‘ effe of the work ; nor yet the
ornanientof the ftyle; but only
the weight of Reafon; which te
commends any Opinioz to yout
Lordfhips Favour and Appro-
bation. ' If it fortune to pleale,


thatis to ‘fay’, iPirbe found,


ifit be ulefull , if it'be vulgar,
I humbly offer it royour Lord:
Svan fhip


|


|


fhip as both my Glory,and my
Prote@ion ; But ifin any thing
T have erred, your Lordthip
will lyet accept itas a Teftimo-
ny of my Gratitude , for that
the means of ftudy which I
enjoyed by your Lordfhips
Goodneffe , I have employed
to the procurement of your
Lordfhips Favour. The God
of Heaven crown your Lord-


fhip with length of Dayes in


this earthly Station, and in. the


heavenly Ferufalem , with a


crown of Glory.
Tour Honours molt


bumble, and moft
devoted Servant,


Tuo. Hoss S.


ee


LEE SESES OO EGE


THE


HEADER, I pro-
SI wife thee here fuch
things, which ordi-
narily promifed , doe
feeme to challenge
the greatef? atten-


finde briefly decribed the \duties of


men, Firft as Men , then as Subyetts,
; t Laftly,


: The Preface
Laftly, as Chriftians; under which due
ties are contained not only the elements
of the Lawes of Nature, and of Netiz
ons, together with the true original and
power of Fuftice , but al/o the very ef-

fence of Chriftian Religion it felfe , fo
farre forth as the meafure of this my
purpofe cold well bear it.

Which kinde: of dottrine (excepting
what relates to Chriffian Religion) the
moft antient Sages did, judge fitteft to
be delivered to pofterity , either curi-
only adorned with Verfe, or clouded
with Allegories , asa moff beautifull
and hallowed mj [tery of Reyal-authoris
1s left by the disputations fap | |
men, it might be defiled ; Other Philo
fophers inthe mean time, tothe advan
rage of mankinde , did contemplate the
faces, and. motions: of things-s-others,
Without difadvantage ; their natures, —
and caufes » But in after times; Socta-
tes is [aid tohave been'the firft , who
truly loved this civil Science, although —
bitherto: not:throughly under Stood ; yet
| tegen forth a tbrovghacloudin’

3 reggie the. Comnson-Weale,
and thathefet fagneat a udlie'on this,
that utterly abandoning. ; and defpifing
allather parts of Philofopy , he wholly
embraced —


to the Reader.

embraced this, as judging it onely Yrors
thy the labour of hismande. Afier him
comes Plato » Ariftotle, Cicero, and
other Vhilofophers , as well Grecke's as:
Lavine, and novi at length all men of
alt Nations, not only Philofophers, but
even the vulvar, have , and dow ill
deale With this as a matter of eafe , exe
poled and proftitute to every Alother-
Wit , and to be attained without any
great care or frudy , and which makes
mainly for its dignity ,’thofe who fup-
pofethemfelves to have it, or are in
fach employment, as they ought to have
it, doe fo Wonderfully pleafe themfelves
in. #8 dea’, as “they eafily brooke the
followers of other arts to‘be efteemed ~
and fiyled ingennows , learned, skilfull,
| what you will; except prudent: for thes
Name, in regard of civil knowledge,
they prefume to be due to themfelves
onely, Whetber therefore the Wworsh of
urts ts to be weighed by the Wworthinelfe
of the Perfons who entertain them , or
by the number of thofe who have writs
ten of them, or by the® jadgement of the
Wift?'s certainly this muff carry it,
‘which foneerly relates to Princes, ‘aiid
others ‘engaged in the govermnent of
| mankinde , 1 whofe adalterate Species
Lae ar


The Preface
alfo the moft part of men ‘doe deligh
themfelves. hres ce the ae ;
cellent wits of Philofophers have beer
converfant. The benefit of it when,
vightly delivered (:hatis), Vehen deri.
ved from trae Principles by evident
connexion, we foall.then bef difcerne,
when We fhall but Well have confidered
the mifchiefes that have befallen mane,
hinde in its comnterfeit and, babling,
form; for in [uch matters as are-[pech.
lated for the exercife of our. wits , ie ;
any errour efcape ws, it 1s without hurts
neither is there any loffe, but of time
onely :. but in thofe things which every
man ought to meditate for the feerage
of his life, it.neceffarily happens, that
not onely from ervours., but even from
ignorance it felfe , there arife offences,
contentions, nay even flanghter i felfe, |
Look now,.bow great a prejsdice thefe
are, uch, and fo great isthe benefit art:
fing from this dottrine of morality;truly
declared. How many Kings (andthofé
good men too)hath this one evrour,T hat
a Tyrant King might lavofully be put

- jedeath,, been the flcaghter of ? How
many throats bath this fale poftion
“cut, That a Prince for fome caufes may

by fome certain nen be depafed ? aed |
; wi


Oey


|


Becsee 2
to the Reader.


what blood-foed hath not this ervone-
ous dothrine canfed , That Kings are
not fuperiours to, but adminiftrators
for the multitude ? Laftly, how many
“yebellions hath this opixion been the
cafe of, Which teacheth that the kuow-
dedge whether the commands of Kings
be juft or nnjaft, belongs to private
men, and that before they yeeld cbedi-
‘ence, they nat only muy , but ought to
difpute them? Befides , in the morall
Philofophy now commonly received ,
there are many things no lelfe dangem
‘vous then thoféswhich it matters not now
toresite. I uppofe thofeantients fore~
fale this, whorather chofe. to have the
Science of Fuftice wrapt up in fables,
+ then openly excpofed to disputations : for
before (ach queftions bega to be moved,
Princes did not {ae for,but alreadyexere
cifed the fupreme pawer.T hey kept their
Empire entire, not by arguments, but
by punifoing the wicked, and protett
ing the good ; likewife Subjects did net
meafure what was juft by the fayings
and. jsdgements of private men, but
by the Lawes of the Realme ; nor were
they kept in peace by difputations , but
by power and authority : yea they re-
verenced the fupreme power, whether
sieadt Bi - refiding


“The Preface’
refiding in one-man or ina councellyasa
certain vifible divinity 5 therefore they |
Viele ufed-asin onr dayes;to jaye theme |
feloresmith ambitious and bellifh pie
wits: to the ntter raine of their States
for-they could not entertain fo firange
‘a iphanfie as not to defire the preferva-
tion of that by which they Were prefere
ved; in truth, the fimplicity of thofe
times wasnot. yercapable of fo.learned
apiece of folly, Wherefore st was peace,
and agoldenvage , Which ended not-be-
fore that Saturn being expelled, it Yas
‘taught lawfull totake ap aries againgt
“Kings, This T fay the Antients not
only themfelues fave, bucinone of their
fables , they Seem very aptly to have
‘fignified 4220.0; for they fay, that
when Ixion was invited by Jupiter
to abanguethe fellin love, and began
‘to court Juno her felfes offering to ems
brace her, »he-clasp’t a ond 5 from
whence the Centaures proceeded, by
nature balfe men, balfe horfes, a fierce,
‘a fighting , and unquiet generation;
cwehich changing thenames only, 1sab
much vas if they frould have faid , that
private men being called to Counfels
‘of State defired to proftitute juftice, the
venely fifter and wife of the a
3 4 thew


to the Reader.
their own judgements, and apprehenfi-
ons y jonduhedeg a fale. rst si
Shadow inftead of it, they have begotten
thofebermophrodite opinions of morall
Philofophers , partly right and comely, -
partly brutal and wilde , the caufes of ©
all contentions, and blood-sheds. Since
therefore Juch opinions are daily feen
to avife, if any man now fhall difpell
 thofeclowds , and by moft firm realons
demonftrate that there are no authenti-
call dottrines conccening right and
wrong, good and evill, befides the cons
frituted Lavves in each Realme,and go-
wernment ; and that the queftion whe-
ther any future attion will prove juft
or unjujt, good or ill ts to be demanded
of one, but thofe to whom the fupreme
hath committed the interpretation of
bis Lawes ; furely be will not only foew
14s the high Way to peace , but Will alfa
teach ws how to.avoyd the clofe, darke,
and dangerous by-paths. of faction and
Sedition,then mbich Iknow not what cdr
be thought more profitable.
Concerning my Method, I thought -
atnot fufficient toufe a plain and evi-
dent fiyleinwhar I had to deliver, ex
cept I took my begining from the
very matter of civill goverment , and
tibia Ba thence


9 The Preface :
thence proceeded toits generation , and
form, and the firft beginning of jaftices
Yar every thing is beft under{tood by its
conflitutive canfes , for asin awatomy
or [ome fuch [mall engine , the matter,
figure, and motion of the wheeles , can-
not well be known, except it bétaken
in fander , and viewed in parts ;\ foto
make a more curious fearch into the
rights of States,and duties of Subjetts, |
it is nece(fary , (I fay not to take them
in funder ,bat yet that) they be fo confi-
dered , as if they Were diffolved, (i.e.)
that wee rightly wnderftand what the
quality of humane nature is, in What
matters it i, in what not fit to make ap
acivill government,and how men muft
be agreed among themfelves , that in-
tend to grow up into a well-grounded
State. Having therefore followed this
hind of Adethod; Inthe firft place I fet
down for a Principle by experience
known to all men , and denied by none,


““powit , that the difpofitions of men are


naturally (uch, that except they be re-


* trained through feare of [ome coercive


powcr, every man will diftrwSt and

dreadeach other, and as by natarall

right he may , (0 by acceffity he Will be

forced to make ufe of the ftrength hee
' bath,


to the Reader.

hath,toward the prefervatio of himfelf.
You will object perhaps , that there are
forme who deny this, truly fo it happens,
that very many do deny it. But foall
Ltherefore feems to fight againft my felf
becaufe Laffirm that the fame men conn
feffe, and deny the fame thing ¢In truth
I do not, but they do,whofe aitions difa-
vow what their difcourfes approve of
We fee all countries though they be at
peace with their meighbours, yet gnar-
ding their Frontiers With armed mens
their Townes with Walls and Ports,
and keeping conftant Watches. To what
parpofe 7 all this, if there be no feare
of the neighbouring paver? Wee [ee
eveninwell-governcd States, where
there are lawes and punifoments ap-
pointed for offendors , yet particular
men travell not without their Sword by
their fides , for their defences , neither
fleep they Without [butting not only their
doores againft their fellow Sebjetts,brt
alfo their Tranks and (offers for feare
of demsftiques. (an men give aclea-
rer teftimony of the diftrnjt they have
each of other , and all, of all? How
fince they doe thus, and even Coun-
treyes as Well as men , they publiquely
profelfe their mutuall feare and diffi-
B 3 dence


ee The Preface’ J
_ dence; Butin difputing they deny ity.

thats as mol as ieee ad a of a’

defire they have to contraditt others,
they gainfay themfelves. Sonse objeth

thar this principle being admitted,

it Would needs follow, not onely that all

men were witked ( which perhaps

though it feemse hard, yet we muf? yeeld

to, fince it ts fo clearly declar'd by

holy writ) bus allo wicked: by nature

(which cannot’ be granted: without im-

pitty) Bur this, that men areevill by

nature, followes not from this princi«

ple for thongh the wicked were fewer

ke: then the righteous, yet becanfe we cans
Fr | not diftingnifh them,there is aneceffiry
of fiafpetting , heeding, anticipating,
Subjugaring, felfe- defending, ever inci
to the wsoft honeft, and fairelt cone
dition'd ; nsvach leffe do's it follow thas
thofe who are wicked are fo by nature,
for though from nature, that is from
\ thedr firft birth,as they ave meerly [enfi-
ble Creatures,they have this difpofitiony
that immediately as much as mw them
hes, they defire and doe whatfoever
beft pleafing to thens,that either through
feare they fly from, or through hard=
nelle repell thofe dangers which ap-
proach them, yet are they not for this

‘ reafon


tothe Reader.
- yeafentobe accounted Wicked forthe
affettions: ofthe minde which arifer
onely from the: lower parts of the foule
are not wicked themfelves , but the
ations: thence. proceeding» may. be [a
Sometimes, as when: they. are either
offenfive, onagainff duty. Unleffe yor:
giveChildren:all they: aske for, they.
are peevifi, and ory, Land firike their
Patents fometimes, and: all this they.
have from natare, yet ane they frde,
guild; neither: maywe: properly.
‘call themmwickéa; firft, becanfe: they


cannov hurt; next, becaufe wanting


the free ufe of reafonthey are ex= -


empted from all duty. ;thefe when they.
cometo riper yeares having acquired
power whereby they may doe hurt, if
they foall continue to doe the fame
things then truly they both begin to bey
and are properly accounted wicked ; In
fonsuch as avicked mani almoft the
fame thing with achilde grewne ftrong
and fiurdy, ora man of a: childifh di-
fpofition ; andmalice the fame With a
defect of reafenin that age, When na-
tare ought tobe better gaverned
through good education apd experi-
ence. Unleffe therefore Wwe will fay
‘that men are naturally: evill, becanfe
TO ae B. 4, they


r


as
5


fe of reafon from We
needs acknowledge that men may
rive defire, feare, anger, and oth
paffions from nature, and yet not ime
pute the evill effetls of thofe-untona
tures The foundation therefore which
Thave laid Banding firme, I demone
Siratein the firft place, that the flate
of men without civill fociety (which
State we may properly call the fate of
nature) is nothing elfe but a meere. |
warre of all againft all; and in that |
Warre all men have equall right unto
all things ; Next, that all men as -foone. |
as they arrive to under ftanding of this
hatefiull condition , doe defire (even
natare it felfe compelling thenr)-to be j
freed from this mifery. But that this
cannot be done except by compat, they |
all quitt that right which they have
unto all things.Furthermore I declare,
and confirme What the nature of com=
pacts % ; how and by what meanes the
right of one might be transfer'd unto
\ another to make their compacts valid;
alfo What rights, and to Whos they
manft nece([arily be. granted: forthe
" eftabifbling of Peace, I meane Wwhat
‘thofe dictates of reafon are, which may
weet £8 Properly


oi


to the Reader. ~
“properly be serm’d the Lawes ‘of na
tare; and all thefe are contain’d in


_ that part of this booke which I entitle


Liberty.

Thefe grounds thus layd , I foew
farther What civill government, and.
the fupreme power in it, and the divers
hinds of it ares by what meanes it be-
comes [o,e what rights particular men,
who intend to conftitune this civill go-
vernment, muft fo neceffarily transfer
fromthemfelves on the upreme power,
whether it be one. manor an alfembly of
men thar exccept they doe fo it Will evi-
dently appeare tobe no civil govern«
ment, but the rights Which all men
bave toall things, that is the rights of
Warre will till remaines Next, L
diftinguifh the divers kindes of it, to
wit, Monarchie, Ariftocratie, Deme-
cratie, and paternall Domintow, and

_ that of Adafters over their Servants,
Ideclarehow they are conftituted ,and
I compare their feverall conveniences
and-inconveniences each with other:
farthermore,I unfold what thofe things
are which deftroy it,. and what his or

“their daty is who rule in chiefe. Laft
of al, I explicate the natures of the
Loan, and of inne} and I digingusls

, BRS Law


| Law‘ from Counfell, from compattx


from that which I call Right ; ally
which I comprehend: under the title
of Dominion. Andy


ding


|


Pe. tOtIRRRCAReR =:
ding to the interpretation made ;
Tein divbedonn which hee ;
affirm'd to be due frons particular’
Chriftian Subjetts: anto their Chri-
ftias Princes cannot poffibly in the
leaft fort be repugnant sento Chrsftian
Religion. You have Scene my Method,
receivemow the reafon which mov'd -
me to write this ; F was ftadying:
Philofphie for my minde fake, and F
bad gathered together its firft Ele-
mentsin all kinds, and having digeft-
edthem into three Sebtions by de-
rees, 7 thought to have writtemthens
{ors in the firft I would have treated
of abody; andits ganer all propertiess
inthe fecond: of man and his {peciall
faculties, and affettions; inthe third,
 ofcivill government and the duties
* of Subjetts : Wherefore the firft Sect
on would. have contained the firft
Philofophie, and certaine elements
of Phyfick; in it we would have con
fidered the veafons of Tims, Place;
Caufe, Power, Relation, Proportion,
Quantity, Figure, and motion Fa
thefecond we world have beene.con-
verfant about imagination, Memory,
intellett, ratiosinatiow, appetite, Will,
goodand Evil , hone(t meme
ik . aN


aa


es


The Preface |
and the like; what the laf Settion.
handles, } have now already foewed

tt» Whiles F contrive, order, pen-
fively and flowly. compofe thefe mat-
ters, for F onely doe reafon, 7 difpute.
not, Ft fo bappen'd in the interim ,
that my Country fome few yeares be-
fore the civill Warres. did rage, was.
bogling hot. with questions concerning
the rights of Dominion, andthe obeo
dience die from. Subjetts, the true
forerunners of an approaching War ;
And was the caufe which (ak thofe om
ther matters defer d ) ripen’d, and
_ placks from me this third part.T here=
Sore it happens that what was lafhin
order, 1s yet come forth firft. in time,
and the rather, becanfe F [aw rhat
grounded om its owne principles
Sefficiently knowne by experience it
would not ftand in need of the former
Setions. Fhave not yet made it ont.
of a defire of praife (. although if F
ad, I might have defended my felfe
with this faire excufe, that very few
doe things laudably, who are wot af:
fetted with commendation) but for
jour fakes Readers, whol perfwaded
my felfe, when you fhould rightly aps
Prebend and throughly underftand
this


tothe Reader.
this Dotrine I here prefent you with,
would rather chufe to brooke with
patience fome inconveniences under
government (becanfe humane affairs
‘cannot poffibly he without fome) then
felfe opiniatedly difturb the quiet of
the publique; That , weighing the
jusfiice of thofe things you are about,
not by the perfwafion and advifeof
private men, bat by the Lawes of the
Realme, you will no longer fuffer am-
bitions mes through the frreames of
your blood to “wade to their owne
power; That yourwill efteeme it bet-
ter to enjoy your felves in the prefent
flate,theugh perbaps not the beft, then
‘by waging Warre, indeavour to pro-
| Gare areformation for other men in
|. another age, your felvesin the meane
while either kill'd, or confumed with
age ; Farthermore, for thofe who will
not acknowledge themfelves Subject
tothe civill Magiftrate, and will be
exempt from all publique burthens,
and yet will live under bis Furi[dicti-
«on, and tooks for protection from the
violence and injuries of others, that
| you would wot looke on them as fel-
| dow Subjects, but efteeme them for
enemies, and, [pies , and that .

; r


bia


a The Preface
vafoly admit not for Gods Word all
~ Which either openly. or privately they

foal pretend to.bee for I fay more


or CafiiSt, foal but fay that this dotivin
is agreeable with Gods word ywamely,
That the chief ruler, nay any prie
vate nan may lawfully be put to death
without the chiefes command , or that
Subjects.may refit, con[pire , or-coves
nant againft the fapreme pswer, that.ye
by nomeans beleeve rhem,but inftantly
declare their names. He who approves
of thefereafons, sill alfo like my inten.
tienin writing this book,
Laf of al,Thave propounded to my felf
~ this rule through this whole difcour/es
Firft,not to.define ought which concerns
» the juftice of fingle attions , but leave
thé tobe determined by the laws, Next
not todifpute the laws of any govern.
ment in {pecialsthat és,not-to pointwhich
are the lavs.of any country , but to dee
clare what the laws of all.countriesare.
"Thirdly novtofoem of opinion;thatthere
~% aile([e proportion of obedience. dite to
an eiftocraty or Democraty, then a
Monarchy ; for though L-bave.endea-
uorired by urguments in my tenth{ bap.
‘ter to gain a-bcbefin men ,. that Mo-
5) Sa anarchy


"oto the Reader.”
warchy is the moft-commodious govern.
ee anaes thing alone.I confeffe
in this whole book, not to be demonfira-
ted pbationly probably Stated) yet every
where Tecprefly fayythat inall kind of
Government Whatfoever , thereought
to be-a fupreme and equall power.
Bourthly;not in any wife to difpute the
\peftions of Divines, except thofe which
“frip Subjetts of their obedience, and
“Poke the foundations of civill.govern-
mont, Luftly, left 1 might impradently
\(et forth fomewhat of which there would
~beno need, what 1 had thus written,
\wonld.not prefently expofe to publique
Sintereft’y wherefore I-got fome few co-
pies privately difperst among fome of
(my friends ,thatdiforying the opinions
| oforhersyifiany things appeared errone=

‘ons, hard, or-ob/cure 5 I might cornet,
feftenyand explain them.

“Dhefe things I foandusoft bitterly
‘excepted againft : that I'hadmade the
‘civill powers too large , but thisby Ec.
‘clefinfticall Perfons; thar Thad utterly
“taken away liberty “of confeience, but
“thishy Settaries;that Thad fer Princes
‘above the civil Lawsibut.thishy Law-
‘yers; wherefore I was nat much moved

by thefe mens reprehenfions, (as whoin
AGL doing


. thority. or right of nature, the nature of


\ Gnding fanle: they: have not fo much
followed their Pafsions 5 as their com-


The Preface, 8c. a
doing this did but do their own brifine/i)
except it.were tye thofe knots fomewhat
faster. . eho va

But for their fakes who have a litle
been flaggered atthe Principles them
Selves, to wit the nature of men,the au-.


compatts and contratts andthe origi-
nall of civill government , becaufe in


mon fenfe, Ihave therefore in fome


' places added forse annotations Wher eby
\ L prefiumed I might give. fome fatisfae


tion to their differing thoughts; .Laftly
Shave exdevoured to offend none befide
thofe whofe Principles the[e contradifl,
and Whofe tender mindes are lightly
offended by every difference of opinions.
Wherefore if ye foal meet With fome
things Which have more of foarpue(fe,


vand leffe of certainty then they onight to
have, fince they are not fomuch {poken |


for the maintenance of parties, asthe


veftablifoment of peacesand by one whofe —


jolt grief for the prefent calamities: of


ois country, may very charitably be al-
-lowed fome liberty,it is his only request
\toye Readers, ye will deign to receive
them with an equall mind. re


The Index if the i heseer under


the titlesof LIBERTY,
Cuarl
F the State of men without
civill fociety. I
Cuar. IL
‘Of the Law of nature concerning
contracts. » 16
‘  CHap. Ill.
Ofthe other Lawes of nature. 34
CuHap. lv.
That the Law of nature is a divine
Law. 58
EMefrti na E.
CuHuap,


OF the caufes, soit firft Original,
of civillgovernment. 73
Cuarp. VIL
Of the right, whether we confider it
inan Affembly, or in one Perfon,
® which he hath who is endued
with fupreme authority, 82
i Crap, VII
~ Ofthe three kindes of government,
/Democraty, Ariftocraty , and. Afo~
narehy. 100.
Cuap. VIII.
OF the right which Lords and Ma-
~ fters have over their Servants, 126
; Cuap, IX
0} the rights which Parents have


= yse
Pe


INDEX.
over their children ; and of a
Kingdome Paternall. 173 |
CuHarp. X

A comparifon of the three kinds of
government each with other , ac-
cording to the. inconveniences of
each one. 146

Cuar. XI,

The places and examples of Scrip- _
ture concerning the right of go- .
vernment, which make for proof
of the forefaid Doétrines... . 165


Cuar. XII.)
Of the inward:caules which: diffolve
all civill government. 173
Cuapr, XIIL
Of the duties of thofe men who fic
at the Helm of State, 189
_Cuarp. XIV.
OF Lawes, and. Sinnes. ° 208
RELIGION.
Cuap. XV. j
F Gods government by nature..


g 135
Cuap. XVI. OF his govern. -
ment by the old Covenant. 261.
Cuap, X Vif. OF his govern-
ment by. the new Covenant. 287
Cua rp. XVIII. OF thofe things
, which are neceffary for our en. .
trance into the Kingdom of Heas
Ven. 239 DOMI-


Pex est Aine ofuit metus}


t din ma
Quem non am


ecto ris?
thio pinpotens


Et nun guar ft fabs fi faa or
Valgi praciphs seat,
Quit tuto p oft ofits loco


Infra.) fe videt. gmnt a


=|
|
=


SpSlo So ocRo Se Se Keste Sea Soca

03 20-03 19-03 30-03 $905 Joos:

PeeeseeT sees

Philofophicall Elements
“OF


cd tree Citixen.


Wa BERT: Y.


‘ Cuar
“Of the fate of men without
— Civill Society.


| L The Introduttion, U1. That the be-
ginning of Civill Society % from
mutwall fear, TI. That men by nce

~ ture ave all equall. 1V. Whence
~ the will of Aifchieving arifeth.
V. The Difcord arifing from. com-
parifon of Wills. V1. From the Ap-
‘petite many have to the fame
thing. “VII. The definition of
Right. VIDL A right to. the end
gives aright tothe means neceffary
C2 te


the Inire- 1. BRE


duition.


. - finitions of Peace-and Warre.


Liberty. Chap. 1
to that end. 1X..By.the right of |
nature every man w qadge of the |
means Which tend to bzs own prefer= |

- vation. X. By Nature al men?
have equal right to all things.

» XI. This right which all men have’

* t0 all things 1s anprofitable XIL.T he
frate of men Without civill fociety ws
ameere State of Warre; The de-


XI. War % an adverfary to mans
« prefervation.: XIV, Ie w lawfull |
for any man by naturall right to
compell another whom he hath gote
ten inkis power to:give caution of
his future obedience, XV. Nature
dictates the fecking after Peace.


BP He faculties of Hue
WA mane nature may
¥ be reduc’d unto
% four kinds; Bodily
Vy ftrength, Experi-
ve ence, Reafon, Pal- |
VA fion. Taking the
beginning of this following Doétrine from
thele, we will declare in the firt place
what manner of inclinations men who are
endued with thefe faculties bare towards
each othér, and whether, and by what fa-
culty they are born, apt for Society, and fo
preferve themfelves again mutuall vio-
lence; then proceeding, we will thew bi
advi


‘Chaps. Liberty. 3
advice was neteffary to beraken forthis bu-
finefle, and what ave the conditions of S: =
ciety, or of Humane Peace 5 that is to fay,
(changing the words onely) what are the
fundamentall Lawes of Nature. 4
_ IL, Thegreateft part of thofe men: who
have written ought concerning: Coramon-
wealths, either {uppofe, or require us, or *} mural
beg of usto beliéve, That Manis a Crea- ache
ture (*) born fir for Society ; The Greeks from fear.
call him Zdoy woartixoy3and on this foun~

dation they fo build up the Doésine of Ci-

vill Society, as: if for the prefervation of

Peace, andthe Government. of Man- kind

there were nothing elfe neceffary, then thar

Men fhouldagree to.make certaine Cove-

nants and Conditions tog¢ther , which

themf ves fhould then call Lawes. Which

Axiom,, though received by. mott, is. yet

certainly Falfe, and an: E:rour proceeding
_ from our too! flight contemplation of Hu-

ghane Nature; for they who fhall more

natrowly look into the Caules for which

Men come together, and delight in each

others company; fhall eafily. find thar this

happens not becaule naturally it could hap-

pen no otherwife,, but by Accident :. For if

by nature one Man fiould Loye another
"(that is) as Man, there could. noreafon be

return’d why every Man fhould not equally

Love every Man, ‘as being equally Man, or

why he fhould rather’ frequent thofe whofe

Society affords bim Honour or Profit.. We

doe not therefore by nature feck Society for

its own'fake, but that we may receive fome

Honour ot Profic from it 5. thefe we defire
Djimarily, that, Secondarily : How by what

4 igs Oe advice


That the
beginning.


Bi


Liberty. Chap.)
advice Men doe meet, will be bet kriown
by obferving thofe things which they doe


‘when they are met : For ifthey meet for


Traffique, it’s plaine every man regards
not his Fellow, bur his Bufinefle3 if to
difcharge fome Office, acertain Marker-
friendthip is begotten, which hath more of
Jealoufie initthen True love, and whence
Factions fometimes may arife, bur Good
will never; if for Pleafure, and Recreation


- of mind, every man is wont to pleafe him=
» felfmoft with thofe things which fticre up


laughter, whence he may (according to the
mature of that which is Ridiculous) by com-
parifon of another mansDefe@s and Infir-
mities, paflethe more currant in his owne
epinion ; and although this be fometimes.
innocent , and without offence; yet it is
manifeft they are not fo much delighted
with the Society, as their own Vain glory.
But for the moft part, in thefe kind of meet= _
ings, we wound the abfent, their whole life,
fayings, ations are examin’d, judg’d, con
demn’d; nay, it is very rate, but fome
prefent receive a fling before they part, fo
as his reafon was not ill; who was wontala
wayes at patting to goe out laft. And thefe
are indeed the true delights of Society, unto
which we are carryed by nature. (i.¢.) by
thofe paflions which are incident to al
Creatures, untill either by fad experience,
or good precepts, it fo fall out (which in
many never happens) that the Appetite, of
prefent matters, be dul’d with the memor
of things paft, without which, the difcourfe
of moft quick and nimble men, on this fube
je&, is bur cold and hungry, :

. fe we


Chap. T2 Liberty. |
~ Bat ifitfo happen, that being met, they
fle their time in relating fome ‘Stoties,.
and one of them begins to'tell one which
concernes*himfelfe ;. inftantly every one of
therelt molt greedily defires to {peak of
himfelf ‘too 5 if one relate fome wonder,
the reft will tell you miracles, ifthey have:
them, ifnor, they’] feinthem: Laftly, that
T may fay fomewhat of them who pretend
to be wiler then others 5. ifthey meet to'alk.
of comorte me look how many men, fo ~
many would be efteem’d Majters, or elfe
they not only love not their fellowes, but
even perfecute them with hatred: So clear is
itby experience to all men who a little more
narrowly conGder Humane affaires, that all
frée congrefs arifech either from mutual po~
verty,or from vain glory,whence the parties
met, endvavour'to carty with them eithet.
fome benefit, or to leave behind them that
fame éudbueuety fome efteem and honour
with thofe, with whom they have been cons
yerfant: The fame is alfo colle&ed by rea-

. fon out of the definitions themfelves, of
Wilt, Good, Hoxoxr, Profitable, For when we
voluntarily contragé Society, in all manner
of Society we look after the objec of the
Will, 7.e.that, which every one of thofe,who: °
gather together, propounds to himfelfe for
good; now whatfoever feemes good , is-
pleafant, and relates either to the fenfes, or
the mind, bat all the mindes pleafure is ei-
ther Glory, (orto have a good opinion of
ones felfe) ot referresto Glory inthe end 5
thereft are Senfuall, or conducing to fenfu-
ality, which may beall comprehended un-
der the word Conveniencies, All Society:

; C4 theres


eAnnota-
B08,


Liberty, Chap, no
therefore is either for Gain, or for Glory,
G.¢.) not fo much for love of our Fellowes,
as for love of our Selves: bur no fociety
can be great, orlafting, which begins from
“Vain Glory 3 becaufe thar Glory is like
Honour, if all men have it, no man hath it,
for they confift in comparifon and precel-
lence 5. neither doth the fociety of others
advance any whit the caufe of my glorying
in my felfe; for every man. muft account


~ bimfelf, fuch as he can make him(felfe, with«


out the help of others. But though the be-
nefits of this life may be much farthered by
mutuall help, fince yet thofe may be berter
attain’d to ‘ Dominion, then by the fo-
ciety of others : I hope no body will doubt
butthat men would much more greedily
be carryed by Nature, ifall fear were ree
moved to obtain Dominion, then to gaine
Society. We mut therefore refolve, that
the Originall ofall great, and lafting Soci-
eries, confifted nor in’ the mutuall good .
will men had towards each other, but ia
at (7) mutuall fear they had of eacho- .
pcr.

Born fit] Since we now [ce afually a con-
flitured Society among men, and itone living
cut of it, fiuce we difcern all. dofirous of con
Sree, and mutual correfpoudence, it may. fecme
4 wonderfull kind-of ftupidity, to lay iu the very.
threfhold of this Doétrine, fuch a ftumbling
block before the Readers, as 10 deny Manto
be born fir for Society: Therefore I muff
moreplainly fay, That it is true indeed, rhat to
Man, by nature, or as Man, that is, ap foone
4 bets born, Solitude is an enemy 5 for In=
fants bave_uced of others to belp them to tive,
‘ and.


Ehapits = Liberty. YF
and thofe of ‘riper years to help them to live
well, wherefore deny nor that men (even n2-
surccompelling) dofire to come together. But
civil Societies arc not meer Mectings , but
Bonds, torbe making whereof,F aith and Com-
ds are neceffary s the Vertue whereof to
Children, avd Fooles, and the “Profit whereof
ro thofe who have not yet tatted the miferies
which accompany its defects, is altogether un-
known 5, webexce it happens, that thofe, becaufe
they know not mobat Society is, cannot enter inte
itsthefesbecanfe ignorant of the benefit it brings,
care not for it, Adanifest therefore it 7, that
allemen, becaufe they are boru i Infancy, are
born unapt for Society. Many alfo (perbaps moft.
men} cithor through defett of minde,or want of
education remain unfit during the whole courfa
of their lives 5 yethave they Tufants,as well as
thofe of riper years, arrbumane narure s where>
fore Mhan ts made fit for Society not by Nature,
but by Education : furthermore, although Man
mere born in fich acondition as to defire it, it
follocoes uot, that be therefore were Born fitto.
enter into it; for it is one thing to defire, ano=
ther to be in capacity fit for what me defire 5 for
even they, who through their pride, will not
fivop to equall conditions ; without which there.
can bexo Society, do yet defire it. .
The matuall fear) Teis objéted : Ieis (0 eAunota-
improbable that men [bould grow: tito civill tion. |
Societies out of fear, thar if they bad been a=
fraid, they would nor bave endur’d each orbers .-
looks = They prefumes I believe, that.to fears:
nothing elf then ro be affrdghteds I compre~
head inthis word Fear, a certain forcfigit of ‘*
future cvill ; rieither doc I conceive flight the
{ole property of fear, bar to dijtruis uped s,
= ces C. 5 take


- Eiberty. Chapt,


take heed provide/othatthey may tot fear,is ale
fo incident to the foarfull.They who go to Sleep,
fhut their Dores , they who.Travell carry their


Swords with them, becaufe they fear Theives,


Kingdomes guard their Coafts and Frontiers.


with Forts, and Caftles, Cities are compaft


with Walls, and all for fear of ncighbonring


Kingdomes aud Townes; even the Sron
Armies, and moft accomplifhr for Fight, yet


fometimes Parly for peace, as fearing-cacho-


thers power, and left they might be overcome,
Itis through fear that men fecure themfelves,
by flight indeed, aud in corners, if they think.
they cannot cfeape.othermife, but for the mo}
partby, Avmes,and Defeufive Weapons ; whence.
it happens , that daring to come forth, they
kaow each others Spirits 5 but then, if they.
fight, Civill Society arifeth from the Victory,
if they agree, fromrheir Agreement.

Iff. The caufeof muruall fear confifts
partly in the naturall equality of men,partly
intheir mutuall willof hurting : whence
it comes topafle that we can neither expe&


from others, nor promife to our felves the:


leaft fecurity : For if we look.on men full~
grown, and confider how brittle the frame


of our humane body is, (which perifhing, ©
all its ftrength, vigour, and wifdome ir felfe-
perifheth with it) and how eae a matter.it-
is, even for the weakeft-man to. kill the.


flrongeft, thereisno reafon why any man.
trufting to his own ftrength fhould conceive
himfelf


made by nature above others : they.


are equalls who can doe equall things one


againit. the other ; bur they who can do the _
greateft-things, (namely kill) can doee- —
guall things, All men. therefore among


the,


Ke


“Chapt Liberty’.


themfelves ate ae nature equall;the inequa-.
lity we now difcern, hath its {pring from
ahe Civill Law.

IV.All men in the State of nature have a Whence the
defire, and willto hurt, but not proceeding wil of mif-
from the fame caufe, neither equally to be chievinz.
condemn’d, for one man beesrdieigts that each other
naturall equality which is among us, per- arifeth.
mits as much to others, aS-he affumes to
himfelf (which is an argument of a tempe-
rate man, and one that rightly values his
power) another fuppofing himfelfe above.
others, will have a Licenfe. to doe what he


’ lifts, and challenges Refpe&, and Honour,


asidue to him bcfore others, (which isan
Argument of a fiery fpirit:) This mans-
willto burt arifeth from Vain glory, and.
the falfe efteeme he hath of bis owne
ftrength ; the others, from the neceflity of
defending himfelfe, his liberty, and his.
goods ag init this mans violence.

V. Farthermore, fince the combate of The difcord:
Wits is the fierceft, the greareft difcords from com-
whichare, muft meceffarily arife from this parifon of
Contention § for in this cafe it is not only wits,
odiotis to contend againft, but alfo not to
éonfent ;. for not toapprove of what a man
fai h isnoleffe then tacitely to accufe him:
of an Errour in that thing which he {peake
eth; asin very many things to diflent, is
as much as-if you accounted him a fool:
whom you diffent from ; which may appeat
hence, that there areno Warres fo fharply
wag’d as between Sets of the fame Reli-
gion, and Factions of the fame Comnon-


 weale where the Conteftation is: Either


concerning Dogrines, or Politique Pru-
§ dence


fo. Liberty. Chap.
dence. And fince all the pleafiire, and jole
licy of the mind confifts inthis ; even to
get fome, with whom comparing it, may |
tind. fomewhat wherein'to Tryamph, and
Vaunt it {elf 5. its impoflible but men must
declare foinetimes fome mutuall {corn and
contempt either by Laughter,.or by Words,
or, by Gcfture , or fome figne or other ;
then which there is no greater vexation of
mind; and then from, which there cannor
poflibly arife a greater defire to doe hurt.
Erom the . VI. But the moft frequent reafon why
Appetite men de fire to. hurt each other, arifech hence,
many have that many.menat the fame time have an
tothe fame Appetite to the fame thing; which yet ve- |
thing. ry often they can neither enjoy,in common,
nor yet divide it, whence it followes that
the ftrongeft_ muft have it, and who is,
itrongeft muft be decided by the Sword.
The defini-  V11. Among fo many dangers therefore,
tion of as the naturall Jufts of men do. daily threas
Right ten each other withall,to have a care of ones
felfe is not a matter fo {eornfully.to be looke
; upon, as.if fo be thete had not been a
fae power and will left in oneto have done oe
therwile 5, for every man_is defirous of
whatis good for bim, and fhuns whatis
evill , but chiefly the chicfeft of natural
Fi: evills, which is Death $ and this he doth,
by a certain impulfion of nature, no leffe
, then that whereby, a Stone moves down-
ward: Itis therefore neither abfurd, nor
Ef P Sprhenhil 3. neither againft the di@ates
of true, reafon.for a manto ufe all his cn-
deayours to preferve and defend his Body,
pesshe Members thereof from dearh and
lorrowcs 5 but that which ig-not contrary,


ade ds


5 to,


penn


| eo'right reafon, that all men account to be


Ghapire — Liberty,


oe


- done juttly, and ‘with right 3; Neither by.


the word Right is any thing elfe Ggnifieds Spee


| thenthat liberty which every man hath to:


make 1fe of his naturall faculties. according
toright reafons Therefore the firft foun-
dationef naturall Right is this, That every
man as much asin bim ties endeavour to protect
bjs life and members.
~ VILL. But becaule it isin vaine for a A right to’
man to have a Right co the end., if the to the end
Right to the neceflary. meanes be deny’d gives alfa
hin; it. followes, that fince every man 4 right to.
hath a Right to preferve himfelf, he mult the means,
alfo beallowed a Right to ufe allthe means,
and do.allthe aétions, without which be cannot
preferve bim/elf.
_- IX, Now whether the meansiwhichheis By the
abouc to.ufe, and the aG@ion he is pecfor= right of na~.
ming, be neceflary to the prefervation.of his ture every
Life, and Members, or not, bebimfelf, by maycis
the right natureymult be judg; for fay anom jadgeof .
ther man, judg that it is contrary.co right the means
reafon that 1. thoald judg. of mine own which tend
perill: why now,becaule he judgeth of what to his pre~
concerns me, by the fame reafon;becaufe we [ervation.
are equall by nature, will I judge alfo of
things which doe belong to him 3 there=
fore it agrees with right reafon. (that is) it
isthe right of nature that I judge of his
elon (i. €.) whether it conduce tomy
prefervation, or not. 9 ‘
»=to. Nature hath given to every. onea By sigh of
tight toall (That as ic was lawfull for every yy pave
man inthe (*) bare {tate of nature, or be= re pintaiie:
fore fuch time as men had engag’d them- a all 8
Kelves by any Covenants or Bonds, to dot spine,

e what "5%


_ Atnoration
E


» taufe incertaine cafes the a
_ dufion makes us forget the premifes, I will
contrat this Argument, and make it moftes


Liberty. Chap, ff
what hee would , and againft whom he
thought fit, and to pofléffe, ule, and enjoy
all what he would, or'could get. Now bee
caufe whatfoever a man would, it therefore
feems good to him becaufe he wills it, and
either it really doth, or at leaft feems to him.
to contribute, toward his prefervation, (bat
we havealready allowed him to be judge
in the foregoing Article whether it doth or
not; in fo much as we ave to hold all for ne-
ceffary whatfoever he fhall efteeme fo) and
bythe 7.Article ic appeares that by rhc right
of Nature thofe things may be done, and
muft-be had, which neceffarily. conduce to.
che protection-of life, and members, it fole
lowes, that in the flare of nature, To have
all, and do all is lawful for all. And thisis
that which is meant by that cémon faying,.
Nature hath given allto all, from whence we
underftand likewife, thar in the fate of
nature, Profit is the meafure of Right.

Inthe meere ftare of Nature} This is thus:
to be underSlood: What any man does inth: bare
fate of Nature is injurious to no max + not that
infuch a Statcbe cannot offend God, er break:
the Lawes of Nature; for Tujuftice again(t
meu prefuppoferh Humane Lawes, uch, asin
the State of Nature there are none: Now ibe
truth-of this propofition thus concehued is foffici=
ently demonfirated to the mindfull Reader in:
the Articles immediately foregoing 5 but be=

feat of the cons


vident to afingle view 5° every man hath right
toprotett hem/clf,as appears by the feveuth Ar-
Hitle. The famexan.sherefore hath avight ro: \


|


Chap. 1. ‘Liberty. TR
‘nfe all the means which neceffarily conduce to
this end by the cight Article: But thofe are
shenoceffary. means which he fhall judge vo be
fuch bythe ninth Article. He therefore bath a:
right 10 makeufe of, and to doe all wharfoever _
he fhall judge requifite for bis profervation :
emberefore by the judgement of bim that doth it,
the thing done is cither right, or wrong ; and:
therefore right» True it is therefore in the
bare State of Nature, ¢c but if any man pre~

_ tend [amewhat to tend neceffarily to bis prefer=
vation, which yet be bimfelf doth not confident
ly believe fo, he may.offend againft she Lawes.
of Nature, as in the third (/hapter of this
Baok is more at large declar'd It hath been
objected by ome : Tf aSoune kill his Farber,
doth hebim no injury ? I have aufwered, That
aSoune cannot be underftood to be at any time
in the Statc of Nature, as being under the
power and command of them to wbon heownes
his prose tion as foon as ever he i bora. namely
tither his Fathers, or his Mothers, or bis that
nourifot him, a5 % demonfirated inthe uimh ~
Chapter, :

XI. But ic was thé leaft benefit for men The right

thus to have acommon Right toall things 5 of all to alt
for the effets of this Right are the fame, is unprofi-.
almoft, as if there had been no Right-avall 5 table.
for although any man might fay of every
thing, This is mine, yer could he not enjoy
it, by reafon ofthis Neighbour, who having,
equall Right, and equall powzr, would pre-
tend the (ame thing thing to be his. The fate of
_ XIL. Ifnow to this naturall proclivity of men with-
men, to hurt each othtr, ~whichthey derive out Society
from their Pafions, bur chiefly froma vain is a flate of

_ @ileeme of, theimfelves :. You adde, - War,

ce oe right


th. Liberty. Chap, i
right ofall to all,wherewih one by right ine,
vades, the other Ly right refifts, and whence |
arife perpetual jealouties and fufpicions on
all hands, and how hard a thing it is to Pros
vide againft.an enemy invading us, with

;_ an intention to oppreile, and:ruine, thorgh
The defini- he come with a {mall Number, and no


tin Of or iGon, i be deny’d b
- great -Provifion, it cannot be eny’d bur
Oe and thatthe naturall ftate of men, beforethey


ented into Society, was.a meer War, and
that not fimply, but. a War of all men, a
gainftall men 5. tor wharis WAR, but that
ame time in which the will of contefting
by force, is fully declar’d either by Words,
vor Deeds ?. The time remaining;!s termed,
PEACE, :
Waris an, © XI .Burit is-eafily judg’d how difagrees
. adverfary able athing to the prefeivation either of
to mans Man-kind, or ofeach fingle Man, a perpe=-
freferva~ . tuall War is: Bur it is perperuall in its-own
tio. nature, becaufein regard of the equality of
thofe thar ftrive , ir cannot be ended by
* ViGory s for inthis fate the Conquerour
is fubjeét to fo much danger, as it. were to
¢ be accounted a Miracle, if, any, even the
: moft {trong thould clofe up: his life with
“i many years, and old-age. They of Ame-


fs riaare Examples hereof, even. inthis pres-
fent Age: Other Nations: have been in
e former Ages, which now indeed are become


~ Givill, and Flourifhing ,»bue were then


few, fierce, fhort-lived, poor, nafty, and.


Basis) deftroy’d of all that Pleafure, and Beauty
fet of lifes which: Peace. and Society. “are
-)-* swont toi bring with them. » Whofoever
Piste in: aherefere holds, that ir had been beft ‘to
have continued in chic ftave. in which all

nig things.


a
mF |
i
|


|


things were lawfull for all men, he contra=
| @s bimfelf ; for every. man, by natural
necefliry defires that which is good for
him: nor is there any that efteemes.a war,
ofall-againit all, which neceflarily adheres
to fuch a State, to be good for him,and fot
happens that through teare ofeach other we
think ic fit to vid our felves of this conditi-
onsand to get fome fellowes;. that if there
needs thuft be war,it may-not yet be againik
all men, nor without fome helps.
_ XV. Fellowes are gotten either by con= Thar by the
Braint, or by confent; By Conftraint,when right of na-
after fight the Conqueror makes the con-rure it is
ered ferve him either through feare o: ull for
| death, or by laying fetterson him : By com- ay man to
fent, when men enter into fociety to helpe compell bim
each o:her, both parties conftnting without whom he
any conftraint. Bur the Conqueror may by, bath in
right compell the Conquered; or the ftron- bis power
_gelt the weaker, (as a manin health may-to give
onethat is fick, or he that is of riper yeates him camion
achilde) unlefle he will choofe to die, to for his fu-
ive caution of his future cbedience. For wre obedie
ince the right of protedting our felves ac- e1ice.
' cording to.our owne wills ‘proceeded from
our danger, and our danger from our equa~
lity, its more confonant to reafon sand more. .
-certaine for our confervation », wling the
prefent advantage to fecure our felves by
taking caution 5 then, when they fhall be
full growne and ftrong, and got out: of
our power, to endeavour to’ recover that
power againe by. doubrfull fight. Andon
the other fide, nothing can be thoughtmore
abfurd, then by difcharging whom you al-.
teady have weak in your power , to oie
Say 9 my ayiees


him at once both an enemy, and a y
one. From whence we may under
likewife as a Corollarie in the natural
of men, That afare and irrefiftible p
confers the right of Dominion, and ruling over
thofe who cannot refift ; infomuch , as the
right of all things, that can be done,adheres.
cliuieistiy; and immediately untothis om.
nipotence hence arifing. ;
XV. Yet cannot memexpeG any pie
prefervation continuing thus in the {tare of-
"nature (ie:) of War,byveafon of that equa-
lity of power, and other humane facakies.
they are endued withall. Wherefore to feck
Peace, where thert is any hopes of obtains
~~ ing it , and where there is none, to enquire
out for Auxiliaries of War, isthe dicate of
tight Reafon 5. that is, the Law of Nature,
as fhall’be thewed:in the next Chapter,


Cuap. It.
Of the Law of Nature concer
_ ning Contracts.
I, That the Law of Nature is not an
Agreement of Men, dat the
Dittate of Reafon. 11. That the
fundamentall Law of Nature cto
feck Peace Where it may be hadyand
Where not, 10 defend our felves.
ILI, That the firlt fpeciall Law of
Nature 1s not toretain our Right to


‘Chip. 3. Liberty. 5
all things. 1V. What it is to quit
our Right, what to transfer it.
- ¥. That in the transferring of our
right the will of him that reccives
it is neceffarily required. VI.No
words but thofe of the prefent
tenfe transferre “any right.
VII. Words of the future, if
there be fome other tokens to
fignifie the will are valid ia the
tranflation of Right. VIII. In
matters of free gift our Right
paffech not from us, througa any
words of the future. IX. The de-
finition of Contratt, and Compatt..
X. In Compatts our Right pajferh
from ws, through words of the
future. XI. Compafts of mutuall
faith in the State of Nature are of
no effec, and vain; but not fo in
Civill Government. XII. That
© nomancan make Compatts with
© Beafts, nor yee with God without
Revelation. XIII. Nor yet make
a Vow to God. XIV. That
Compatts oblige not beyond our
outmof endeavour. XV. By
what meanes weare freed from.
_ ovr Compatts. XVI. That promi-
_ fés extorted through feare of
fe death


a8 , Liberty. Chap,

~ death inthe State of Nature are!

valid. XVII.A latter Compa®-con.

tradicting the former, is invalid,

+ XVIUOL 24 Cowpalt not to refill

 himthat fhall prejudice my Body,

is invalid. XUX..4 Compatt toac.

cife ones felf is invalid. XX. The

definition of Swearing. XX1. That

Swearing is to. be conceived in

eal » that forme which he ufeth that

takes the Oath, XXII. 4a Oath

fuperaddes nothing to the Obli-

-gation which is made by Compatt,

XXIII. An Oath onght not tobe

preft; but where the breach; of

| Compaéts may be kept private,

or. cannot be punifhe,. but. from
God himfelf. : :


That the T, & LL Authors agree not concerning,
Law of tia- ° Ate definition ofthe Naturall Law,
sureistot who notwithitanding doe very: often make

~ 4h agree afeof thisterme in their Writings. The
ment of Method therefore, wherein we begin from

_ men, but definitions, and: exclufion of all equivoca-

| theDittates tion, is only proper tothem who leaveno

: of Reafon, place for contrary Difputes's- for the reft, if
ee any man fay, that fomwhat is done againk |

* the Law of Nature, one. proves: it hence, |
becaufe it was done againft, the generall A-

ne reement ofall the moft wife, and learned

i Rone: But thi declares not who hall

he the judg of the wifdome and learning of


“Chap. 2. Liberty.”
all Nations: Another hence, That it was
done againft the Generall confent of all
Man-kind 5; which definition is by no
means to be admitted for then it were
| impoffible for any but Children,and Fools;
tooffend againft fuch a Law's for fare, un=
| dérthe notion of Man-kind, they compre~
“hend all men a@ually endued with Reafon.
| Thefe therefore’ either doe Naught againit
it,orifthey doe Ought, it is withour their
joint accord, and therefore ought to be ex-
cus'd; bir toireceivethe Lawes of Nature
ftom the Confents of them, who oftner
Preak, then Obfervé them, is in “trath un
feafonable: befides', Men condemne the
fame things in others, which they approve
in themfelves 5 on thé other fide, they pub=
ickly commend ‘what they privately con-
| demne 3 and*they deliver their Opinions
more by Hear-fay, then any Speculation
of their own ; and) they’ accotd more.
through hatred of fome objec , thtough
fear,hope, love, or fome other perturbation
of mind, then true Reafon. And therefore
it comes to paffe ; that whole Bodyes of
people often doe'thofe things by Generall
accord, or Contention, which thole’Wri-
‘tets moft willingly acknowledge to be’
fainit the Law of Nene. But fince all doe
grant that is done by RIGHT, which is
not done againft Reafon, we ought to judg
 thole A@ions onely wrong, which ate re
pugnant to tight Reafon, (7.¢,) which con"
tradi€ fome certaine Fld colleéted by
tight teafoning from true Principles; but
‘that Wrong which is done, we fayit is done
- againkt fome Law ; therefore True Reafow is
a


oe)


Liberty Chapa


acertaine Law, which (fince it is no leffeg
part of Humane nature, then any other fs
culty, or affection of the mind). is.alfo te


~ “med naturall.. Therefore the Law of Na


 pAnnotae
tion,


ture, that I may define it, is the DiGate of
tight (*) Reafon, converfant: about. thole
things. which are either to be done, oro
mitted: for the. conftant , prefervation, of
Life, and Members, as: much as in us


lyes. } F
: Right Reafon.] By, Right Reason. in the
naturall fate of men, Tunderftand. nots as man
ny doe, an infallible facclty, but the aét of reas
fouing, that t rhe peculiar. and tree vatiocings
tion of every:man concerning:thofe actions of bis
which may enberredound tothe dammage, on
benefit of bis neighbours, Lcall it P eculiar,ben
caufe altbough ina Civil. Government the rete
Sowofthe Sapreme (i.e. the Civill Law). is 9
be received by each fingle fubjeit for: tho right s
yet being withour this, Givill Goverrment, (a
which ftare-10 man can know right reafen from
falfe, but by comparing it with his ovenc) cuery
mans ovenercafon is to be accounted not. onely
the rule of bis omne ations which, arc done ab
bis oveneperill, butvalfofor the meafiere of ano~
ther mans reafon,in fuch things as. doe conccrne
him. call.it Trye 5 that is, eoncluding from
true principles rightly fram'd, becanfe that the
whole breach of the Lawes of Nature confids is
the fall reafoning or rather filly oftofe mee
who feenot thofe duties they are neceffarily ta


performe toward others in order to sbeir owt


confervation ; but. the Principles of Right rede
foning about fuch like duties are thofe which are
ray i 23049536, 0d 7. Articles of
the firft Chapter. ‘dies sl

ei : IL ae


hap.2. . Liberty. ar
eee Rasiatee and nea we ~ That is the
of Nature ts, That Peace isto be fought after fundamen.
oo be found 5 and where not, thereto on Law of
provide our felves. for helps of Wars For we Nature to
| thewed in thelaft Article: of the foregoing feck Peace
"Chapter, that thisiprecept is thediGate of where ip
‘tight reafon's but thar the DiGates of right may be hady

| weafon are naturall Lawes, thar hathbeen and where
| newly prov’d.above ; Bur this is the firft, nor, to dew
| becaule the reft are. deriv’d from: this, and fend oux,

| they dire the wayes either to Peace, or felues, « ”
faudslence.

IIL, But one of the NaturallLawes de- The frft
siv’d, from this fundamentall one is, this, fpecial Law
har she right of all men, ro-allthings, ought of Nature
tot to be sees ae that fome — — is, That our

ight to be trausferr’d, or relinguifbt : forif Rights to
~ one fhould retain. his. right to all ail ings

shings, ic mutt neceflarily follows thatfome ought not
| byright might invades and others, bythe to be re
fame right,might defend themfelyes againft taju’d,
them, (for every man, by naturall necefli-
‘ty, endeavours to defend his Body, andthe
things which-he. judgeth neceflary towards
‘the prote@iion of his Body). therefore War

would follow. He: therefore a@s againit
thereafon of Peace, (é.¢.). againft the Law
of Nature, whofoever he be, that doth not :
part wich his Right to.all things.

IV. Butheis {aid to part withbisvight, What iris’
who eicher abfolutely renounceth it, or con- to quit our
veysitto another, He abfolutely renoun- right,what
ecth it, who by fome {ufficient Signe, or so convey.
meet Tokens, declares that he is willing it, ”
osetia ner % eral Sieh him to ee ; :

‘that again, whi ore, by Right,he might
‘Rave done s; bus he conveys it co another


| who
mid ‘a


22 Liberty, . Chap,
who by fone fufficient Signe, or meet *

kens, declaresto that other, that he is wil

ling it fhould be unlawfull for him tore!

him, in going about ga do fomewhat in the

= pefformance mire might before, with

ee Right, have refifted him; but that the

i conveyance of Right confifts meerly in not}

refifting, is underftood by this, that before

=: it was convey’d, he, to whom he convey'd

| it, had even then alfo aright to all, whence

he could not’ give any new Right: But the

refifling Right he had, before he gave it, by

reafon whereof the other could not freely

enjoy his Rights, is utterly abolifht : Who-

foever therefore acquires fome Right inthe

naturall ftate of men, he onely procures

- himfelf fecurity , and freedome from juft

moleftation in the enjoyment of his Primis

tive Right: As for example, if any'man

fhall fell, or give away a Farme, he urtet-

‘ ly deprives himfelf only from all Rigbtto

this Farme, but he does not fo from others

| wh, yi of alfoe

i ett V. But in the conveyance of Right the

| malt novel willis requifite not onely of him thar con

a farily be X°YS> but of him alfo that acceprsit. IFet-

| “Aeclar'd be. thet be wanting, the Right remaines: fot

) if 1 would have given what was mine, to


Ts ? 2 one who refus’d. to accept of it, I have not
| aig’ 7, therefore either’ fimply  renounc’d my


~*~ Right, of convey’d it to any man 5 for the
| Words con- caufe which’ mov'd me to part with it to
‘vtynot, ex- this’ Man was in him onely, ‘not in 0+

_ cept they “thers'too. i eels i
relatetothe~ Vs Burif there be no other Token ee
time pro= “tant of our will either to quit, or ne
fem. our Right, but onely Words 5 thofe words


Pe


= ” = Sy. aang

Chapez.) Religion. .

-muift either relate to the prefeut,or time paft 5

forif they be of the future onely, they con-.
yey nothing: for example; he that {peaks

thus of the time.to'come, I will give to


“oo
er het.


"morrow ; declares openly that yet he hath


norgiven ic ; fo tharall this day his right
remains, and abides to morrow too, unleffe
inthe interim he aGtually beftowes it : for j
what is mine, remains mine. tiJl I have |
parted with it. But if I hall fpeak of the
time prefent, fappofe thus 5 I doe give, ox
have given you this to. be received to mor-
row; by thefe words is fignified that I have
alrcady given itsand that his Right to receive
it 10 morrow, is conveyed to him by me
40 day. .
VII. Nevertheleffe, although words a- 1ords of
Jone are not fufficienttokens to declare the phe future
Wills if yet to words relating to the future, fuffice to
theré thal ome other fignes be added, they convey, if
may becomes valid, asif they had been other zc(fi-
fpoken of the prefent: If therefore, as by monies of
reafon of thofe other fignes, it appear, that our will
he that {peaks of the furure, intends thofe be nt ,
words thould beeffeétuall toward the per-. wanting.
fe transferring of his Right, they ought to
be valid 5 for the conveyance of right depends
not on words, byt (as hath been inftane’d
ae Article) on the declaration of the

ill.
VIL Ifany man conveigh fome part In matters:
ofhis right to another, and-doth not this of free gifs
for fome certain benefit received, or for words. of
fome compact, aconveighance in thiskind rhe furure
is called a Gift, or frce Donation, But in comveigh ne
free donation thofe words onely oblige us Right.
which fignifie the p:efent, or the time paft 5
Bit D for


ee


The defiuie 1X. But the a@ of two, or more; me
- sionof Cox- tually conveighing their Rights, is call’d’
— arakt, and Contralf, But im every Contra& , eithe
Fovcnant, boch parties inftantly performe what


e.g

Liberty. Chap. 2,

for if they refpec the future, they oblige not
as words, for the reafon given in the fore~
‘oing Article : Tr mnft needs therefore be,

that the Obligation arife from fome other
tokens of the Will: Bur, becaufe whatfos
ever is voluntarily done, is done for fome
good vo bim that wils it; there can no ocher
token be affigned of the Will to give it, ex
cept (ome benefit either already receiv'd; or
to be acquix’d 5 but is fuppos’d, thar no
fuch benefit is acquired, nor any compact
in being 5 for if fo,.it would ceafe to bea
free gife : Irremains therefore, that amu- |
zuall good tame without agreement be exe
pected; but no figne can be given, that
he, who us’d future words toward him
who wasin no fort engag’d toreturna be-
nefit, fhould defire to have: his words fo
underftood, as to oblige himfelfe thereby:
Nor is ic fuitable to Reafon, that thole
who ate eafily enclined todoe well too
thers, fhould be Lath by every promile,

reftifying their prefent good affection:
And for this caufe, a promifer in this kind,

muft be underftood to have time to deli«

berate, and power to change that affe&ion

as well. as heto whom he made that pro=

mife, may alter hisdeferr, But hethat de+

liberates, is fo farre forth free, nor ican be

faidto havealready given: But if he pros

mife often, and yet give feldome, hee

to be condemn’d of levity, and be cal od

not a Donour, but Dofon. :


Es


contrat


rae
| Chap. 2. Libertys 35
| contraG for, infomuch as there is no trufe
had from either to other 5 or the one pet=
forines, the other istrufted, or neither pei
forme, Ecither both parties performe pre~
fently, there the Contraé is ended, as foon
as'tis ‘performed 5 but where there is cre-
ditgiven either toone, or both, there the
patty trufted promifeth after-performance ; all
and this kind of promife is called a CQ- By
VENANT.
" -X, But the Covenant made by the party Z# Cove-
tufted with him, who hath already perfor- amts we
med, although the promife be made b: paffe away
words pointing at the future, doth no leffe our Rights
transfer the right of future time,thé if ichhad by words
been made by words fignifying the prefent, fignifying
ottime paft : for the others performance is the future.
amoft manifeft figne that he fo unde:ftood
the fpeech ofhim whom he trufted, as that
he would certainly make performance allo
| atthe appointed time 5 and by this figne
the party ctufted knew himfelfe to be thus
undetftood, which, bécaufe he hindred not,
‘twas an evidence token of his Will to per-
forme. The promifes therefore which are
inade for fome benefit received (which are
| alfo Covenants) are Tokens of the Will 5
| thatis, (as in the foregoing SeGion hath
| been declared) of the laft a& of delibera-
ting, whereby the liberty of non-perfor~
thance is abolifht, and by con{cquence
are obligatory; for where Liberty ceaferb,
there beginneth Obligation. ae :
XI. Bur the Covenants, which are Covenants
made incontraG of mutual. rruft, neither ¢n the fate
arty performing ow of hind, if there of mane
(*) arifea jul fulpicion im Fhe ofsb yas
weg se :


2


26 Liberty. Chap, 3)
and of notte ate in the ftate of nature invalid: for he
effedt.not fo thar firft performes by reafon of the wicked
in Givill difpofition of the greateft part of men fis
Govera- dying their owne advantage, - either by
Gitte right, or wrong,expofeth himfelf to the pets

’ ~ verfe will of him with whom he hath Con
tracted 5 for it fuites not with reafon, that

. any man fhould performe firft, ific be not

likely that the other will not make good his

romife after ; which, whether it be proe

Ties or not, hethat doubts it, mult be

judge of, as hath been fhewed inthe fore.

ing pach the 9. Article. Thus,1

oe things {land in the {tate of nature, but

in a Civill State, when there is a power

which can compell both parties, he that

hath contracted to perform firft, muft fir

performe; betaufe, that fince the other

may becompell’d, the caufe which made

him fear the others non-performance, cex

| feth. : vd
iotation  Arife] For, except there appear (ome nem

i ie caufe of a either sie ee ee or
ee fome other token of the Will not to perform
from the other part, it caxnot be judg’d tobe),
ajuft fears for the caufe which was not fufe
ficient to keep bim from making Compatt, mut |
uot fuffice to authorize the breach if ity being
} That no made.


man can  X% J. But from this reafon, thar inall
make Com- Free-gifts, and Compacts, there is an accep
| pasts with tance of the conveighance of Right requi-
_-Beasts,nci- red: it followes, that no man can Compad
ther wiih withhim who doth not declare his —


God wiih tance 3 and therefore we cannot compact
out Revela~ with Beafts, neither can we give, ot fe
sot. fom them any manner of Right, bys


Chap.2. Liberty.

of their want of {peech, and underftanding.
Neithercan any man Covenant with God,
orbeoblig’d to him-by Vow, except fo far
forthas it appearesto him by Holy Scrips
tres, that he hath fubftitured certaine
men who have authority to accept of fuch
like Vowes and Covenants, as being in Gods


ead.
XII. Thofe therefore doe vow in vain, Nor yet’
who are inthe ftate of nature, where they Vow to:
are not tyed by any Civill Law, (except by God.


moft certain Revelation the Will of God
to-accept their Vow, or ‘Pad, be made
known to them). for if what they Vow, be
‘contrary to the Law of Nature, they are
not tyed by their Vow, ‘for no man- is tyed
to perform an unlawfull a&, bueif what
isvowed, becommanded by fome Law of
fature, itis not their Vow, bur the Law.it
felf which ties them ; bur if he Were free be-
fore his vow, either to doe it, or not doe
it, his liberty. remaines, becanfe that the
openly declar’d Will of the obliger is re~
quifice to make an obligation by Vow,
which in the cafe propounded is {uppos’d
notto be : Now Icall him the Obligerto
whom any oneistyed, and the Obliged him
who is tyed.


XIV. Covenants are made of fuch Compacts
things onely as fall under our deliberation, oblige nor
for it can be no Covenant without the Will beyond eur
ofthe Contraétor, but the Will is the lat utmoft ci~
a&of him who deliberates 5 Wherefore they deavours..


-encly concerne things poffible, and to come ; no
“man therefore, by his Compaét, obligeth
himfelf to an impoflibility. Bur yet,though
‘weoften Covenant to doe fuch things as


ha D3 then.


*


oes


“38 Liberty. Chap. 3)
then feem'd pofftble when we promis'd
them , which yet afterward appear to be
jmpoffible, are we therefore freed from all
abhgation ? the reafon whereof is, thathe
who promifeth a future, incertainty receives
a prefent benefit ; on condition, that he re-
turn another for ir: for his Will, who pet-
formes the prefent benefit hath fimply be
fore it; for its obje&, 4 certain good value
able with the thing promifed 5 but the thi

it felfe not fimply, but with condition ifir
could be done ; but if itfhould fo happen,
that even this fhould prove impoffible, why
then he mult perform as much as he can,
Covenants therefore oblige us not to perform
juft the thing it felfe covenanted for, but
our utmoft endeavour; for this onely is,
the things themfelyes are not in our po


wer.
Tn what = XV. We are freed from Covenants two
manner we wayes, either by performing, or by being
are freed forgiven : By performing, for beyond that
_ from Com we oblig’d nor our felves. By being for-gi
pacts. yen,.becaufe-he whom we oblig’d our (elves
to by forgiving, is conceiv’d to return us)
that Right which we paft over to hims for,
forgiving, implies gzving: that is, by the
fourth Article of this Chapter, a convey.
ance of Right to himto whom the gifts


= made.
2 bee iin XVI. Its an ufuall queftion, Whethtt
Atk p Compatls extorted from us, through fear, do
pire of oblige, or not: For example, If to redeem
death are ™Y life, from the power of a Robber, « pro:
valid, MUe to pay him rool. next day 3 and that!
ate fate will doe no aét whereby to.apprehend, amt
of natures bring him:to Juitice, whether J am tyedtd


Chap. 2. Liberty. 29'
keep promile, or not ? but though fuch’ a
-Promife mult fometimes be judged to be of
fio effedt, yet itis not tobe accounted fo,.
becaufe ir proceeded from fear, for rhen it
would follow that thofe promifes which re-
-duc’d men to a civill life, and by which
Lawes were made, might likewile be of
none cfhe&, (for it proceeds from fear of
mutual flanghter, thar one man fubmits:
himfelfe to the Dominion of another :)
And he fhould play the fool finely, who -
fhould trnft his captive covenanting with
the price of his redemption. It holds-u-
niyerfally true , that promifes doe oblige
when thereds fome benefit received; and
thatto promife, and the thing promifed, be
lawfull ; But itis lawfull, for the redemp-
tion of my life, both to promife, and to give
what I will of mine owne to any mans:
eventoa Thief, We are-oblig’d therefore.
by promiles proceeding from fear, cx-
cept the Civill Law forbid them, by vertue
whereof, that which is promifed becomes.
volawfull. —«

XVII. Whofoever fhall contra& with ,4 laser
one to doe, or omit fomewhar, and thall Compact
after Covenant the contrary with another $ conradiéf=
he maketh not the former, but the latter jng the for
Comrat unlawful : for, be hath nolonger yey js in
Right to doe, or to omit ought, who by- valid,
former Comtraffs hath conveyed it to ano- :
ther; wherefore hecan convéigh no Right
by latter Conrratts, and what is promifed sis
‘promis'd without Right: He is therefore
baie nie es firlt Coutraét 5 co break
owhich is unlaw +

POS ae salen oA promife

XVIII. No man is obtig’d gee: not 10 rift


30
him that
prejudices
my Body
i invalid.


where the Right of life, and death, and rr


Liberty, Chap 3.
Contrads whitfoever not to vefift himywho |
fall offtr to kill, wound, or any-orherway
hurt his Body; for there is invevery mana
certain high degree of fear, through which
he apprehends that evill which is. doneto
him-to be the greateft, and therefore by na.
tural] -neceflity hefthuns ir all he can; and
*tis fuppos’d “he can »doe no: otherwife:
When aman is: arriv’d'to this: degree: of
fear, we cannot expect but he will provide
for him(elf eicher by flight, ot fight. Since
therefore no man is tyed to impofpbilities,
they: who are threatned -either with death,
(which is the greateft evill to nacure), ot
wounds;or fome'other bodily hurts, and are
not {tout enough tobearthem, are not obli-
ged to endure them, Farthermore, he thatis
tyed by Contradis trufted, (for Faith on-
ly is the Bond of Contraéts) but they who
are brought to punithment, either Capitall,
or more gentle , are frttered, or. ftrangly
guarded, which isa molt certain figne that
they feem’d not fufficiently bound from
non refiftance by their Contracts. Its.one
thing if Ipromife thus.: If Vdoe it not at
the day - ointed, kill me. Another et
if thus : fy doeit not, though you thoul
offer co kill mes I will nor refift; All men,
if need be, contrat the firft way 5 but
there. is need fometimes. This fecand
way, none, neither is it ever needfull 5 for
inthe meer {tate of nature, if you havea
mind to kill, that ftace it {elfe affords you
a Right » infomuch ‘as you need dot kit
tenft him if for breach of truft you willal
rerward kill him, Burin a: Civill»-State,


| 5 a ee aS eek oy art US Ot
Chap. 2. Liberty. Bln
all corporal! punifhment is with the Sue
preme 5 thar fame Right of killing cannot
begranted to any private perfon. Neither
need the Supreme himfelfe contra@ with :
amy man patiently to yeeld to his punithe
«ment, but onely this, that no man offer te»
defind others from him. If in the ftate of
nature, as between two Realmes, there
fhould a Contra& be made, on condition -
of killing, if ic were not perform'd, we
muft prefuppofe another Contra& of not
killing before the appointed day.. Where-
fore.on that day,if there beno performance,
the right of Warre returnes; thap is, an
hoftile ftate, in which all things are law=
fall, and therefore reGiftance allo, Laftly,
bythe contraét of not refifting, we are oby
lig’d of two Evills to make choice of that
which feemes the greater 5 ‘for: certaine
Death is a greater evil then Fighting ; but
of two: Eviils it is impoflible not to chufe
the leaft: By fuch a Compa& ‘therefore
we fhould be tyed:to impoflibilities, which
is contrary to . the yery nature of. come


acts,

XIX. Likewife nomanis tyed by any rhe Com--
Compaéts whatfocver to accufe him(elf, or pact of (clf-'
any other, by whofe dammage heis like to accufarion *
procure himfelfe abetrer-life 5 . wherefore és jnval:d.-
neither is a Father oblig’d to bear witnefle
againft his Sonne, nor a Husband againit
his Wife, nora Sonne againft his. Farher 5
Nor any man againft any one, by whofe |
meaneshehath his fubfiftance; for invain —
isthat/teflithony which is prefum’d to be
Aut eg from nature; ‘but although no
man be tyed to accufe him(elf by any com

a Ds pad,


Peghe Eiberty, Chap,
pact, yetin apublique tryall he may, by.
torture, be fore’d to make anfwer 3 but
fuch an{wers are no teftimony of the faé,
but helps forthe fearching out of truch;,
infomuch as whether the party tortur’d his
anfwer be true, or falfe, or whether he an-
{wer noe at all, whatfoever he doth, he doth,

. itby Right. é
Tie defisi- Bi oeniie is a fpeech joyned toa.
oh At promife, whereby the promifer declares his.
a renouncing of Gods mercy; unlefle he per
form his word; which definition is contai
ned in the words themfelves, which have in.
them the very eflence of an Oath, to wit, fa

God helpme,or other equivalent, as with the

Romans, Dee thou Fupitcr (o destroy the den.

Seivtr, mI flay this fame Beaft: neither is

this.any let, bur that an Oath may as well:

fometimes be affirmatory, as promiffory;
for he that confirmes his affirmation with,

f an Oath, promifeth that he {peaks truth,

Bat though. in fome places it was the fathi-

‘on for Subje&s to Swear by their Kings;.

that cuftome took its Originall hence,

"Phat thofe Kings took-upon them Divine.

Honour 3 for Oaihes were therefore introe

duc’d that by Religion, and confideration

cof the Divine Power men mighthave a

greater dread of breaking their Friths, then.

Pe _ thatwherewith they fear men, from whele

| Phe Swed. eyes their aGfions may lie hid,

| ving muft. ~~ KX. Whence it followes, that an Oath:

Beconsen'd mutt be conceived in that forme which he

i that fa- ufeth, who takes ic 5. for in vain is any

| fhion which man brought to Swear by.a God whom he

he ufes,who.beleeves not, and therefore neither feares.

“wékesit, him. For though bythe light of satureit


*


Chap.2. Liberty.” a
‘may be known that there is a'God, yetno

man chinks heis to Swear by him in any

other fathion, orby any other name then

what is contain’d in the precepts of his

own proper, that is, (as he who Swears
- imagines) the true Religion. _

XXIL. Bythe definition of an Oth we Swearing

may underftand, that a bare Contract ob- addes no-
‘ligeth no left, then rhat to which we are rhing to the
Sworn 5 for it is the contract which binds Obligation:
us, the Oath relates tothe Divine punith- which is by.
ment, which it could not provoke, if the (ompaéh..
breach of contrac were not in its felfe un-

lawfulls but ic could not be unlawfull if

the Comtraéd were not obligatory. Further-

more, he that renounceth the mercy of

God obligeth himfelfe not to any punifh-

ment, becaufe ic is ever lawfull to.dépre-

cate the panifhment howfoeyer proyok’d,

and to. enjoy Gods Pardon if it be granted.

The onely effe& therefore of an Oath is

this, Tocanfe mén who are naturally in-

clin’d to break allamanner of faith,thsough

fear of punifhmenc , to make the moie.
Gontcience of their words and ations.

XXIIL. To exa&-an Oath, where the An Oath as-
reach of contrat, if any be made, cannot not to be
but-be known, and where the party com- pref burs
paced, withall wanis not power to punith,is where the.
to. do fomewhat more then is neceflary unto breach of
Jelf-defence,and thewes a mind defirous not Contract
fo much to benefir it felfe, as to prejudice can. either
another. For an Oath, out-of the very-form be kept pri--
offwearing, is takem:inorder to the pro- uate, or 10k
‘Moration of Gods anger 5 that is to fay, be punifbe
ofhim that is Omuipotent azainfe rhofe who but from
therefore violate their Palpiys Betis ny God alent,
“Se = fate think. 3


aA


Liberty, Chap. 3;
think, that by theirown ftrength they cal
efcape the punifhment of men ; and of him.
that is Omnifcienr againft thofe, who there
fore ufually break their truft, becaule
they hope that no/man fhall fee them,


Cuar. Tih .
Of the other Lawes of
Natures.


Ti The fecond Law. of Nature # 1
perform Contracts. EI. That
traf? is to be held with all men with-
out exception, IL]. What injury
te IV. Injury canbe done to none
“but thofe with whore we Central,
V. The diftinftion of Jultice inte
that of men, and shat of Attions,
VI. The diftintlien of commuta.
tive, and dilteibutive Pr/tice exa-
mind, VII. Ro injury can be done
to him that 1s Willing. VII. The
third Law of Nature concerning
Ingratitude. 1X. The forth Law
of Nature, That-every man render
himfelfe nfefull, X. The fifth
Law, Of Mercy. XI. The fixth
Law, That.punifhments regard’
the future only. XII. The feventh
Law, Againit reproach. XIILThe
eighth Law,  Againf pride.


|
|


Sete? A. mergestae rns teetan tars = eet eee
Chap. 3. Liberty,
XIV. The ninth Law, Of humility.
XV. The tenth, Of equity, or.
_ againft acceptance of — perfonse
XVI. The eleventh; OF things to
be hadin common. XVII. The
twelfth, OF things to be divided.
byLot. XVIII. The thirteenth,
Ofbirthright, and firft pofleffion. :
XIX. The fourteenth, OF the fafe-
guard of them who areMediators
for Peace. XX. The fifteenth, OF
contticuting an Umpire. XXLT he
Gixteenth, That no man is judge in
his own Caufe. XXII. The feven-
teenth, That Umpires. mult be
without all hope of reward from
thofe whofe: Caufe isto be judg-
ed. XXIIL The eighteenth, Of
witnefles. XXIV. The nineteenth,
That there can no Contract’ be
made with the Umpire. XXV.The
twentieth, Again{t.Glucony ; and
all fuck things as hinder'the ule of
Reafon, XXVI.The Rale by which
Wwe may prefently know, whether,
what Weare doing, beagainft the
Law of Nature, or not.XXVIL.The
Lawes of Nature oblige only inthe .
- Court of Confeience. XXVIULThe.
Lawes of Natere are fomtimes.
; broke. .


- Liberty. Cha
broke by doing things anfwerable
thofe Lawes. XX'X. The Lave
Nature are unchangeable,
XXX. Whofacver endevours to
felfill the Lawes of Nature ts a
yuft man, XXX, The naturall and
morall Law are one. XXXII. How
it. comes to paffe , that. what hath
been {aid of the La\wes of nature is
_ not the fame with hat Philfo-
phers have delivered concerning the
vertues, XXXUI. The Law of
Nature 1s net properply a Lim,
but as it. is delivered. in Holy
Writ.


The fecoud 7, Nother ofthe Lawes of Nature is,
Law of na- "A toperforme Contradis, orto keep traf;
|. bre toper- for ir hath been fhewed in the foregoing
form Cou. Chaptce that the Law of INature com
| halt. mands every man, as athing neceflary; to
obtain Peace 3 to conveigh certain rights |
from each to other, and that this (asofren

asitfhall happen to be done) is calleda

Gontraii : Buc this is fo farre forty onely:
conducible to peace, as we fhall performe
our felves, what we contraé with others,
fhall be done, or omitted; and in vaine
would Contraés be made, unleffe wedtood
-to them. Becaufe therefore, to flarid 10 oi
Govenanis, orto kecp faith, isa thing necel-

fary. for the obtaining of peace, it Wi


prove bythe fecond. Article of the fecond:
See ee Che


 Chapiz:. Liberty,

Chapter to be aprecept ofthe natural Law.

either is there in this matter, any ex-
ception of the perfons,with whom we Gon-
trad, asif they keep no faith with others 5
othold, that none ought to be kept, ot are
guilty.of any other kind of vice: for he
that Contraéts, in that he doth contra,
denies that a€tion to bein.vaine, and itis
again{t reafon for a knowing mano doea
thing in vain 3. andifhe think himfelf not


That Faith
# 10 be kepe
with all
men with
Out Excepe
tithe


bound to keep it, in thinking fo, he affirms.


the Contra& to be made in vain: He
therefore, who Contra@s with one with
whom he thinks he is not bound to keep
faith, he doth at once think a Contraét.to
bea thing done in vaine, and not in vaine,
which is abfurd. Hither therefore we muft
holdtruftwith all men, or elfe not bargain
with them ; that is, either there muft bea
te Warre, or a fare and faithful
eace,


IIL. The breaking of.a Bargain, as.al(o Fjyry den |
the taking back ofa gift, (which ever con- find.


filts in fome aGtion, or omiffion) is called.
an INJURY-: But that a@ion, or omif-
fion, is called unju/t, inforuch as an injury 5 -
and an wnjufé ation, or omiffion, fignifie |
the famething, and both are the fame wich
breath of Conzract and truft: And it feemes.
the word Ininry came to be given to any
action, or omiffion, becaufe they were with
out Right 3 he that a&ed, or omitted, ha-
Ying before conveyed his Right to fome o-
‘thet. And'thereis fome likeneffe between,
that, which in the common courfe of life
"we call Injury 5 and that, which in the-
Schools is ufually called Abfurd,Eor even as.


be),


ty


Bin Liberty.” Chap. 3.
he, whoby Arguments is driven to deny ,
the Affertion which he firft maintain’d, is
faid to be brought-to an Abjurdity 5 <in like
manner, be who through weaknefle of
mrind does, or omits that which before he
had by {ontract promis’d not to doe, or o-
mit, cOmits an Iniury,and falls into no lefle
contradiGion, then he, who in the Schoo's
is reduc’d co an Abfurdity. For by cons
tra@ing for fome fucure action, he wills it
done; oy not doing it, he wills it not done,
which is to will a thing.done, and not done
at the fame time,, which is a contradi@ion,
An Injury therefore is a kind of abfurdity in
converfatica; as an abfurdity.is a kind of
injury in dilputation..

oa IV. From thefe grounds it followes,that

An 7HY a9 (*) injury can be done tono man bit
at OnCY bins with whO.we enter Covenatt,or to who
Be done i fomewhat is made over by deed of gift, or
him with 54 whom fomwhar is promis’d by way of
whom we bargain, and therefore damaging and iijue

Contract, ring ace often disjoyn’d: for if a Malter

command his Servant, who hath promis'd

to obey him, to pay aftimme of money, or
carry fome. prefentto.a third man 5 the Ser=
vant, if he doe it not, hathindeed damag’d
this third party, but he injur’d his Matter
onely. So alfoin a civill government, if
any man offend another, with whom he
hath made no Contra@, he damages him
to whom the evill is done, bur. he injures
none but. him to whom the. power of go-
yernment belongs : for if he, who receives.

the hurt, fhould expoitulate the milchief 5

and he that did it, fhould anfwer thus,What

art thoutome ?. Why fhould I rather doe
eae et : according


“Chap. 3 Liberty.


‘according to'yours, hen mine owne will,
ofince Ido not’binder, but you may do your
own, and not my mind? In which fpecch,
where there hath no manner of pre-con=
watt paft, Ifeenor, I confefie, what is re-
prehenfible. °


«Injury can be done againft no man] Aymotg-
The word injuftice relaresto fone Laws In~ rion,


jury to fome Perfon, as well as fome Law. For
wharsunjuft, i unjuft to all ; but there may
aninj.ry be done, and yet net again[t me, nor
thee, but fome other 5 and fometimes againft


- noprivate per[ow,but the Magiftrate only; (ome=


‘times alfo neither againft the Magiftrare, ‘nor
ay private man, but onely again(tGod ; for


“through Contract, and conveighance of Right,


we fay, that an injury is done again{t this, or
that man. Hence it is (vobich we fee in all kind
of Governnent) that what privare men con


 wact between themfelvcs by word, or writing,


a releaft againe at the will of the Obliger. But
thofe mifchiefes which are done again the
Lawes of the Land, as theft, homicide, and the
bike, are punifhenot as he wills, to.wbhom the


|' hurts doue,but according to the will of theda-


giGrate ; thatis, the conftituted Lawes,
| V_ Thele words juft, and wajudi, as alfo
juftice, and injuftice, ave espinal 3 -for they
fignifie one ching when they are attributed
to Perfons,another when to. a@tions : When
they are attribured to Actions, Fuft fignifies
asmuch as what?s done with Right, and
injuft, as whar’s done with injury : he who
uh donefome jus thing is not therefore
hid to be ajuft Pecfon, but guiltleffes-and
hethat hath done fome unjuft thing, we doe
Hobtherefore fay he isannnjeft, bur guilty
a . man


=


The. di-


flinttion of
Fultice into
that of men.
and actions, —


. todoe righteoufnefle, or to indeayour in all


The di-


-Perfons; to be ju, fignifies as much asto


.my contra&, but fome prefent benefit 5 fo


man. But when the words are applyedtp
be delighted in jutt dealing, to ftudy how


things to doe that which is jut  andvobe
unjnft, isto negleé righteous dealing, or to
think itis to be meafured not according.to


as the juftice or injuftice of the mind, thein-
tention, or the man, is one thing ; that jof
an aGtion, or omiffion, another ; and in-
numerable aétions of a juff man may be)
wajuft, and of an unjuft man, just; Bur that
man isto be aceounted ju, who doth jut
things becaufe the Law commands it, un-
juft things only by reafon of his infirmity ;
and he is properly {aid to be unjuft who doth
righteoufnefs for fear of the punifhment an-
next unto the Law, and unrighteoufnefle
by reafon of the iniquity of his mind.

VI. The juttice of a@ions is common-
ly diftinguitht into two kinds 3 Commuta-


- fiinétion of tive, and Diftributive, the former whereof
commnta- they fay confifts in Arithmeticall, the lat-


terin Geometricall proportion, and that is
converfant in exchanging, in buying, fel-
ling, borrowing, lending, location , and
condu@ion, and other aéts whatfoever bee
longing to Contraters, where, if there be
an equall return made, hence they fay
Springs a commutative juftice ; But this is
bufied about the dignity, and merits of
men 5 fo asif there be rendred to every.
man xe7d TAv &fley more'to him who is”
more worthy, and leile to him that deferves-
lefle, and thar proportionably, hence they
fay arileth diftributive juftices I pei


‘|


nap. 3. Liberty.
= here fome certaine diftin@ion of e-


ity; to wit, that one is an equality

ly fo called, as when two things of e-

‘i value are compar’d together , as a
pound of filver wich twelve ounces of the
fame filver 5 the other is an equality, fecutt=
dum quod, ag when a 1000. pound is to be
dwided to an hundred men, 600, pounds
are given to 60. men,and 400, to 4 where
there is no equality between 600. and 400.
put when it happens, that there is the fame
inequality in the number of them to whom
itis diftributed,every one of them fhall take

| anequal! part, whence ir is called an equall
| diftribtion : But fuch like equality is the
fame thing with Geometricall proportion.
But what is all this to Juftice? for neither,if

I fell my goods for as much as I can get for
them, doe I injure the buyer, who fought,
and defir’d them of me? neither if 1 di-
_-yide more of what is mine to him who de-
ferves lefle, fo long as I give the other what
Thave agreed for, dol wrong to either ?
which truth our Saviour himfelf, being
God, teltifies inthe Golpell. This there-
fore isno diftin@ion of Juftice, but of e-
quality ; yet perhaps it cannot be deay’d,
bus that ToAlce is a certain equality, as
confifting in this oncly; that fince we are
allequall by nature, one fhould not arro-
gate more Right to himfelfe, then he grants
toanozhers unleffe he have fairly gortes it
by Compaé. And let this fuffice to be
_~ againft this diftinGion of Fuffice,
although now almoft generally receiv’d
by all, left any man thould conceive
an jury to be fomewhat elfe, then the


breach


42 -— Kiberty. » Chap, 3),
breach of Faith, or Contract, as hath been
defin’d above. f

No injuy — VII. It is an old faying, Volenti non

can. be done fit iniuria (the willing man receives no in-

tohim that jury) yet the truth of itmay be deriv’d

% willing, from: our Principles. For grant, that a

man be willing that that fhould be done;
which hé conceives to be an injury to him;
why then that'is done by his will, which by
Contraé& was not lawfull to be done 3 bur
he being willing that fhould be done, which
was not lawfull by Contract, the (outratt it
felf (by the 15 Article of the foregoing
Chapter) becomes void: The Right thete-
fore of doing it retucnes , therefore it is
i done ‘by Right; wherefore it is no in


1s
The third VIII. The third precept of the Naturall
Law of na- Lam, is, That you fuffer not bim t0 be the worfe
ture of in- for you, who ont of the confidence he bad tn
" gratirude, YousfirS did you a good aturns or that you accept
not a gift, but with a mind to endeavour, that
the giver fhall have no juft occafion to repent
him of bis gift. For without this he fhould
aG& withour reafon that would conferre a
benefit where he fees it would be loft ; and
by this meanes all beneficence, and truft,
together witlvall kind of benevolence would
be taken from among men, neither would
there be ought of mutuall affiftance among
them, nor any commencement of gaining
grace and favour ; by reafon whereof the
ate of Warte would neccffarily remain;
contrary to the fundamental Law of Nature:
But becaufe the breach of this Law is not
a breach of truft, or contract; (for we fap
pole no Contrasts to have abe |
~ them


Chap. 3. Liberty. . 8B
them) therefore is it not ufually termed an

« iniury, but becaufe good turns and: thankes
havea mutuall eye to each other, it is called
INGRATITUDE, :

IX. The fourth precept of Nature, is, The fourth
That every man ain bimfelf ufefull unto Law of nas
ohers: which , that we may rightly in- ture, that
derftand, we muft remember that there is every man
inmen, a diverfity of difpofitions to enter render him-
into fociety,  arifing from the diverfity of (elf ufefill.
their affe€tions, not unlike that which is 5
found in ftones, brought together in the
Building, by reafon of the diverfity ot theit
matter, and figure ; for as a ftone,which in
regard of its fharp and angular form takes
up more room from other dtones then it fils
¥ itfelfe, neither becaufe’of the hardneffe
ofits matter cannot well be preft together,
oreafily cut, and would hinder the build-
ing from being ficly compacted, is caft
away, a5 not fit for ufe: fo aman, who for
the harfhnefs of his difpofition in retaining
fuperfluities for Simile and detaining of
neceflaries from others 3 and being incor-
tigible, by reafon of the ftubbornne fle of
his afféGtions, is commonly {aid to be ufe~
Iefé, and troublefome unto others. Now;

‘becaufe each oge not by Right onely, but
even by natwrall neceffity is {uppos'd, with
hismain might, to intend the procure-
Mnent of thofe things. which are neceffa~)
ty to his own prefervation ; if any man
will contend on the other fide for fuperflui-
po by his default there will arife a Warre,
becaufe thar on him alone there lay no
Receflity of contending, he therefore a@s
“*Rgainft the fundamental Law of Nature :
oan Whence


The fift
Law of
nature of
merciful.


nelfes


PS) —


| The fixth
| Law zhat
| puxifbmen
onely re~

| gard the

tires


” properly peace but feare, and therefore is not
isnot pleafings which is contrary to the nas


15 we muit have our eye not at the evill pafts


Liberty. Chap. 3,
Wherice it followes ( which wee were to
thew) that itis a precept of nature 3 That
every man accommodate himfelfe to-others,
But he who breaks this Law may be called
ufeleffe, and troublefome, Yet Cicero oppo-
feth inhumanity to this ufefulneffe, as having
regard to this very Law.

X. The fift precept of the Law sof nature
is : That we muft forgive him who repentsyand
asketh pardon fie what is paft 3 having firft
taken caution for the time to come, “The pardon
of what is paft , or rhe remiffion of an of.
fence, is nothing elfe but the'granting of
peace to him that askech it, after he hath
warr'dagainit us,& now is become penitent
But Peace granted to him that repents not,
that is, to bim that retains an hoftile mind,
or that gives not caution for the futures
that is, feeks not peace,but oportuniy, is not


commanded by nature. Now to him that
will not pardon the penitent , and thit
gives future camion, peace it felfe it feems


XL. The fixth precept of the naturall
Law is , That in revenge and punifiments


but-the futare good. That is : It is not
lawfall to infli@ punifhment fot any othet |
end, but chat the offender may be corrected,
or that others warned by his punifhment
may become better, But this is confirmed
chiefly from hence, that each man is bound
by the law of nature to forgive one anothers
provided he give caution for the future, a8
hath been fhewed in the foregoing or |


hap. 3«
je. Furthermore » becaafe revenge , if che
‘paft be onely confidered , is nothing.
qe bue a certain triumph and glory of
| ininde, which points at no end, (for it con-
emaplates onely what is pa sbut the end is a
thing to come) bur that which is directed to
| poendis vain; That revenge therefore which
| regards not the future, proceeds from vaine
| glory, and therefore without iteafon. But, to
| hure another without reafon introduces. a
worre, and is contrary tothe fumdamentall
Lavo of Nanire ; Ic is- therefore a precept of
the Law of nature, that in| revenge wee
Jook not backwards but forward. Now the
breach of this Law , is commonly called
GRHELTT.
» XII. But becanfe all fignes of hatred, the feventh
and contempt prevoke moft of all to braw= Lay of na-
jingand fighting , infomach as mo men zyre againff
would rather lofe their lives, (thar I fay not flander.
their Peace) thenfuffer flander it followes
inthe feventh place , That it is prefcribed
by the Law of nature, that no man either
by deeds, or words, coutitenance , or laughter,
doe declare bimfelfe to bate , or foorne another.
The breach of which Law is called Re=
proach. Bur although nothing be more free,
quent then the {cofles and jeers of the pow-
erfull againft the weak , and namely of
Judges againft guilty perfons,which neither o-
tothe offence of the guilty , nor the
duty of the Judges,yet thefe kind of men do”
ad i the Law of nature , and are to
be efteemed for contumelious.
~ XLIL. The queftion whether of two Theeight”
ten be thé moxe worthy , belongs not to Law a-
the naturall, but civill are, for it Lm gainft prid
es een


46


© dingas not to judge it better to be ruled by


The ninth


Liberty. Chap, 4)


been fhewed before, Chap.1. Art. 3. thatall
men by nature are equall , and therefore tht
inequality which now is , fuppofe from
riches; power, nobility of kindved, is :come’
from the civil Law. I know that Ariffotlein
his firt book of Politiques aflitmes asa
foundation of the whole politicall fcience,
that fome men by natute are made worthy
ro'command., others onely to ferve, asif
Lord-and Matter were'diftinguithed not by
confent of men’, but by an aptnefle, thar is,
acettain kind of nacurall knowledge, or igs
norance; which foundation is not onelj
againft reafon /as but now hath been fhewe|
ed) but alfo againft experience ; for nels
ther almoft is any man fo dull of underftan:


himfelfe , then to yeeld himfelfe tothe go
vernment of another 5 neither if the weaktt
and ftronger doe conteft , have thefe ever,
or after the upper hand of thofe. Whether
therefore men be equall. by nature, the equa:
lity is to be acknowledged, or whether, une|
quall, becaufe they arelike to conzeft for'do-|
minion , its neceflary: for the caine
Peace, that rhey be eftecmed as equall , ant
therefore it isin the eight place a precept
of the Law of nature, That cvery man bed)
counted by nature equall to another, the conti
ry to which Law is PR IDE.
X IV. Asit was neceflary to the conleh)
vation of each man, that he fhould part wi
fome of his Rights; fo itis no leffe necefit
to the fame confetvation,that he retain fom
others , to wit the Right of bodily procettis
on, of free enjoyment of ayre, water, anda
neceflaries for life. Since therefore
comm


Chap 32 Libers
common Righty are retained by thofe who
" eiiter into a pewceable ffare, and that many
peculiar ones’ are alfo acquired , hence ari=
eth this ninth di@ate of the maturall Law,
10 Wit, That whut Rights foever any man chal~
lenges to bimfelfe, ‘be: alfa grant tbe fame as
dveto allehe réft  otherwite. he fruftiates che
equality acknowledged in the former Atti«
de, For what is “it -elfe to acknowledge an


MEEKNES, the violation mAgovetiy
the breakers by the Latines are’ ftyled Im


cn Weposmaonnl dees E XVI,


47.


to be had,
in commott.


IES Bes nt aaa


43 Liberty. Chap.3)
The 11. X V1. From the foregoing Law. iscol-
law, of  le&ted this eleventh, Thofe things which can.
things to not be divided , muft be ufedincommot y (if
hebadin they can) and. (shat abe quantity of the matter
commen — potmit ) every man as much ashe lifts ,, butif

the quantity permit n0t 5, then'with limitation,
and proportionally, to the nunsber,.of the ufers:
for otherwife that equality can by no means
be obferved, which we have fhewed in the
forgoing Article to be commanded by the

Law of Nature. = '
The 12. XVI, Alfo what cannot he divided,not
law, of hadincommon , itis provided: by the Law
things to be ef mature (which may, be the twelfth Pre. |
divided by; cept) thar rbe ufe. of that thing be cither by
lot. * qurns, or adjudged. to one ovely by lor 5 and that
- jntheufing it bytnrns , it be alfo decided by
- Jot who {hall have abe first wfe of it ; For here
alfo regard is to be had unto equality + but
: no other can befound, but that of lor.
| The 13. X VL14. Bur all lot is twofold 5 arbie
tow’, of trary, ox maturall 5 Arbitrary is that, whi
birth-right; is caft by the confent of the Contenders,
and firft andirconfilts in meer chance (as they fay)
 poffeffion. or fortune, Naruvall is primogeniture (ia
Gicek ranpovoustars as it were given by lot)
or firkipofle/sion. Therefore the things whi
can neither be divided, nor had incom
mon. muft be granted to the firft poll
“four, asalfothofe things which belon
to the Eather-ove due to the Sonne , unlell
the Further bimfelfe have formetly com
weighed away that Right to fome other Is
this therefore fland. tor the chirteenth Lat
of Nature. * ~
The 14. X 1X. The 14 Precept of the Lawd
law,of the nature is, That fafery monfi be aiured 201
macdaae


*


jis
Chap. 3. Liberty. 49
Mediators for Peace. For the reafon which fafety of
commands the end, commands. alfo the thofe who
means neceflary to the end. But the firft are Media-
di@ate of Reafonis Peace s All the reft are tors for
means to obrain ic, and without which Peace.
Peace cannot be had. But neither can Peace
be had without mediation , nor mediation
without fafety; ir is therefore a dictate of
Reafon,that is,aLaw of nature, Thatwe mult
give all fecurity to the Mediators for Peace.

X X. Furthermore, becaufe, although The 15.
men fhould agree to make all thefe, and /42;0f ap=
whatfoever other Lawes of Nature, and Ponting av
fhould endeavour to keep them, yet doubts, #™pere.
and controyerfies would daily arife con-
cerning the application of them unto their
ations, to wit, whether what was done,were
againft the Law, or not, (which wecall, the
Queftion-of Right) whence will follow a
fight between Parties, either fides fuppo-

_ fing themfelves wronged; it is therefore
- neceflary to the prefervation of ‘Peace (be-
caufe in this cafe no other fit remedy can
poflibly be thought on) that both the difa-
grecing Parties refer the matter unto fome
third, and oblige themfelves by mutuall
compacts to ftand to his judgement in deci
ding the controverfie. *And he to whom
they thus refer rhemfelves is called an Ar-
biter, Ic is therefore the 15. Precept of che
naturall Law , That both parties difjuting
concerning the mater of right fubmit them- The 16.
felvee mito rhe opinion and judgement of (ome law,that 10
third. : . man mult
_ XXT.Bat from this gtound,that an Ay biter be judge in
“or Fudge is chofen by the differing Parties to his owne
determine the controverfie, we gather,that carife.
iri’, Ez the


. |
50 Liberty. Chap. 3;
the Arbiter muft not be one of the Parties :
for every man is prefumed to feek what is
good for himjelfenaturally , and what is juft,
onely for Peaces fake, and accidentallyjand
therefore cannot obferve that fame equality
commanded by the Law of nature fo exactly
_ asathird man would dot It is therefore in
the fixteenth place contained in the Law
of nature , That to man must be Sfudge or Ar-
biter in bis ovoncanfe.
The 17. X X11. Fromthe fame ground followes
dam, that ia the feventeenth place , Thar wo man mut
Arbivers be Fudge who proponnds unto bimfélf any hope of
muft be profit, or glory, from the victory of either part =
without all for the like reafon fwayes here asin the
hope of re- foregoing Law.
ward from XXIII. But when there is fome contto-
the partics verfie of the fa@ it felfe, to wit, wheter
whofe canfe that bee done or not , which is faid to bee
#to be done, the naturall Law wills, that the Arbi-
judged. —_ tex cruft both Patties alike, that is, (becaufe
The to. they affirm contradi@ories ) that hee be.
tim ,of wit- lieve neither: He muft therefore give cre-
nefses, dit to a third, or a third and fourth, or
: more, that he may be able to give judge-
ment of the fad, as often as by other fignes
he cannot come to the knowledge of it.
The 18. Law of natare therefore injoynes
Arbitcrs , and Indges of fa& , That where
firm and certain fignes of the fat appear not,
. there they rule their fentence by finch witneffes,
Phe 19. 9 seem to be indifferent to borh Parts.
Hamthat no X X1V. From the above declared defi.
| contraéé is ition of an Arbiter may be furthermore
ltobe made Underftood , That no contract or promife mut
with the paffe bctmecn bim and the parties whofe Tudge
judge. bes appointed, by vertne whereof he may be cn-
ae gaged
t |


id i 2
Chap.3. = Liberty, -§I
~giged to peak in. favour of cither part, nay, or
Feoblig +0 judge according to equity, or to
protounce fuch [entence as he Pal truly judge to
becquall, The Fudge is indeed hound to
give fuch fentence as he fhall judge. to be
equall by the Lzw of Nature re-counted in
the 15. Article, To the obligation of which
Law nothing can be added by way of
Compa&. Such compaét. therefore would.
be in vain. Befides, if giving wrong judge-
ment, he should contend for the equity of
it, except fuch Compact be of no force,
the Controverfie would remain after. * > 4.
Judgement given,- which is con‘rary tothe
aeyetion of az Arbiter, who is fo chofen,
asboth parties havc oblig’d themfelves to
ffand to the judgement which he thould:
pronounce, The Law of Nature therefore
commands the Fudge be to difengag’d ,
whichis its 49 precept. ‘
XXV. Farthermore, forafmuch asthe phe 40,”
Lawes of Nature axe noughs elfe bur the Law, a.
diGates of Reafon, fo as; unlefle a man grin 3
endeavour to preferve the faculty of right Gluttony,
teafoning, he cannot obferve the Lawes of gq fuch
Nature, ic is manifelt, that he, who know- things as
ingly, or willingly, dotlt ought, whereby the hinder vhe
rationall faculty may be deftroyed, or weak- ufé 0
ned, he knowingly,-and willingly, breaks a
the Law of nature : For there is no diffe
tence between aman who. performes not
his Duty, and him. who does fuch things
willingly, as make it impoflible for him to
loeit. But they deftroy. and weaken. the
teafoning faculty, who doe that which dis
ftucbs the mind from its narurall ftate ;
that which moft manifeftly happens co
‘ E3 Drunkards


igs EaY Te |
BRS. - » Enberty. Chap. 3.
Drunkards and Glurtons 2 we therefore finin
the 20 place againft the Law of Nature by
Drunkenne[fe.

Tene XXVI_ Perhaps fome man, who fees all
4 cb thefe precepts ef Navure deriv’d by a certain
by whic 4 acsifice fiom the fingle diétate of Reafon
pa ng advifing us to look to the prefervation, and
prefem Y  fafegard of our felves, will fay, That the de-
: bg i - ay @ion of thefe Lawes is fo hard, thatit is
eee ib at nor tobe expeéted they will be vulgarly
be a s known, and therefore neither will they
ce *h rove obliging: for Lawes, if they be
againft the not known, oblige not, nay , indeed ate
law of 14 sor Lawes. Yo this I anfwer, it’s true,
lure, OT "Thar hope, fear, anger, ambition, covetouf-
BY; meffe, vain glory, and other perturbations 0}
mind, doe hinder a man fo,as he cannot at»
taine to the knowledge of thefe. Lawes
whilft chofe paffions prevail in him: But
there ig noman whois not fomettmes ina
quiet mind 3 At that time therefore there is


nothing eafier for himto know, though be |


benever fo rude and unlearo’d,then this on-
ly Rule, That when he doubts, whether
| what he is now doing to another, may be
done by the Law of Nature, or not, he con-
ceive himfelfe to be in that others ftrad.


Here inftantly thofe perturbations which


ee: perfwaded him to theta, being now
into the other {eale, diflwade him.as much:
And this Rule is not onely eafie, butis
Anciently celebrated in thefe words, ;
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ue feceris : Do nots i
10 others, you would not have dove to yoxt


E: _ felf. a
‘The lawes XXVII. But becavfe moft men, by
of nature seafon of their perverle defire of a


= ‘| eet ‘ th s
Chap: 3° Liberty. 53
profit’, “ate very unapt to obferve thele oblige only
awes, although acknowledg’d by them, in tbe

if perhaps fome others more humble then comr of
the reft fhould exercife that equity and Confciexce,
ifefiilneffe’ which Reafon'diGates, thofe

not pradtifing thefame,' furely they-would

‘not fallow Reafon in fo doing 5 nor would.

they hereby procure themfelves peace, bata

more certain’ quick deftruGion , and the

keepers of the Law become a meer prey to

the breakers of it. Tt is not therefore to be
imagin’d, that by Nature, (that is,by Rea-
fon)mnek ate cblig’d to the (*) exercife of
all thefe Lawes in that flate ot men whereitt

they ate hot praétis’d by others. Weare

oblig’d yet inthe interim'to a readinefle of ©

mind to obferve them whenfoever their
exvation fhall feeme to conduce to the

end for ‘which ‘they were ordain’d. We

muft therefore conclude, thar the Law of

‘Nature doth alwayes, and every where ob+

lisein the ixterwall Court, or that of Con~

feiexe,’ but’ not alwayes in the exrernall

Court, bit then onely when it may be done

‘with fafety. ‘

©The ‘exercife. of ‘all thefe Lawes] Nay Armuota= ~
‘mone thefe Latves fome thitigs there are,the 0- tion.
‘miffion wobéreof (provided it be done for Peace;

oF Self prefervation) feemes rather to be the
fulfilleng, then breach of the’ Naturall Law 5

forhe thar doth al things again{t thofc that

doe all vhings, an phiniders planderers; doth e-

ogiity ‘bite on the other fide, to doe that which

anpeace isanhund(ome aétion, and becomming

‘an bonelf man, is dejectedieffe, and poornelfe of

fpivis, anda betraying: of ones (olf in the time

of War; Burthere are certain naturall Lawes ,
Sbar E4 whofe.


355


Liberty. — Ch
whofe exercife ceafeth not even in the rime
War it (elf; for 1 cannot underftand what
; drankenneffe, or cruelty (that is, Revenge
\ which refpects not the Ppa) Sood) can ads
: vance toward peace, or she preforvacion. of any
man, Briefly, inthe ftate. of wature, vl at's
Jufh,, atid unjust, is not t0 be effcem'd by the
Adions, but by the Counfell, and Conftience of
the Aldor. That which is done out of neceffity,

\ gut of exdeavenr for peace, for the prefervation
of our felves, is done with Right 5 otherreife
every damage done to a man would be 4 re
of a6 natirall Law, and qn injury again
God. :

Praee XXVIII But the Lawes which oblige
are fome- Confcience, may be broken by an adt, not
times bro» Onely contrary tothem, butalfo agreeable
ken by an With them,if{o be that he who does it be of
ad agree. 200ther opinion:for though the a& it felf
ableto thee aa'werable tothe Lawes, yerhis Conf,
Lawes.  eceis againftrhem. ais:
: XXIX. The Lawes.of Nature are immye
aud. eternal: What they forbid, can
+ be lawful whac they command, can
~ pever be unlawfull: For pride, ingratitude,
"breach of Contradts, (or injury) ae
wo contumely , will never be Tavwall nox. the
contrary vertues to thefe ever unlawfull, as
we take them for difpofitions of the mind,
that is, asthey are confidered in the era
of Confeienge, where onely they oblige, and
F are Lawes. Yetactions may be fo diverfic
f fied by cireumftances, and the Civill Laws
Fe that what’s done with equity-at one time, /
‘d is guilty of iniquity at anothers and what
fe” fuits with reafon at ene time, iscontraty.to_


another, Yet Reafon is fill he fae
rae and:


a


}


"and changeth not her end, which is Peace,


and Defence; nor the meanes to attaine
them, towit, thofe vertues of theminde


| which we have declar’d above, and which


cannot be abrogated by any Cuftome, or
Law whacfoever. ; i; ;
XXX. It’s evident by what hath hither- He who en-


' to been faid, how eafily the Lawes of Nature deavours to.


areto be oblérv’d, becaufe they requirethe fulfill the
endeavour onély, (but that muft be true Lawes, of
and-conftanr) which who fo fhall performe, Nature, i
wemaytightly callhim JUST. For he juft.
who tends to this with his whole might,
namely, that his ations be fquar’d accor-
ding to the precepts of Nature, he thewes
dearly that he hath a minde to fulfill all
thofe Lawes, which is all we are oblig’d ro:
rational natuce, Now he that hath done.
all heis oblig’d to, ic a fut Man, :
XXI. All Writers doe agree that the The mat2.
Naturall Lawis the fame with the Moral]. "all Law is
Ler us fee wherefore this is trae, We muft the (ane.
know therefore, that Good and Evill are with the.
fumes given to things to fignifie the in- morall.
clinasion, ot averfion of them by whom
they were given, But the inclinations of
men are diverfe, according to their diverfe
Conftitusions, Cultomes, Opinions ; as.
Wemay {ee in thofe things we apprehend by,
& as by tafting, touching, {melling 5.
butmach more in thofe which pertain to
the ‘common adtions of life, where what
this man. commends, (that isto fay, calls f
rng thelother wwdervalies as being Evil 5
Y; very often the fame man ar diverfe-
tittes, praifes, and difraifes the (amveching.
Wait thus they.doe, neceflary itis there
Ne si Es fhou!d


jo seats 2:


Sia


Whence it:
comes ‘e
affe, that
oe hath
been faid
 comcerning
the Law,


| Fertucs.


hb ture, to wit, in what each of. them doth


+ are ever entituled to fome Vercue; whentt


thould, be difcord, and ftrife: They
ther fore fo long in the fate of War, as
reafon of the diverfity of the prefent ap.
petites, they mete Good and Evill by die
yerfe meafures, All men eafily acknowe
ledge this ftate as long, as.they ave init, to
beevill, and by confequence that ‘Peace is
good. They therefore who could not agree
concerning a prefent , doe agree concet-
ning a fucure Good, which indeed is 3
work of Reafon 3 for things prefent are ob-
vious to the fenfe, things t0 come to out
Reafon only. Reafon declaring Peace to be
good, it followes by the fame reafon,that all
the neceflary means to Peace be good allo,
and therefore,that Mode/ty,Equity,Truff,Hts
manity,Mercy (which we have demonftrated
to be neceffary to Peace) are good Mate
ners, or habits, (that is) Vertues. The Law.
therefore, in the means toPeace,commands
alfo Good Manmers,or the practife of Vertis,
And therefore it is call’d Moral.

XXXIT.But becaufe men cannot put of
this fame irrational appetite, whereby they.
greedily prefer the prefent good (to which,
by ftri conféquence, many unfore-feen-
evills doe adhere) before the future, it
happens, that though all men doeagreein
the commendation of the forefaid vertues,
yetthey difagree fill concerning their Nx


confift ; for a8 oft as anothers good action
difpleafeth any man, that aétion bath th
name given of fome neighbouring vice
likewife the bad a@ions,which pleale them,


it comes to paffe that the fame A G@ionis
praisid by thefey and call’d Vertue, 2


difprais'


1 ie ee “4 “4 \IEx»
Chap. 3. Liberty. 57
difpraifed by thofe, and termed vice, Nei
ther is there as yet any remedy found by
Philofophers for this matter 5° for fince they
could» not obferve the goodnefle of ations’
to confift in. this’, that i¢ wasein order to
Peace’ :and the evill inthis,that it related to
difcord; they buile'a moral Philofophy wholly
eftranged from the morall Law, and uncon--
ftant to it felf ; for they would have the na-
ture of: vortves {eatedvin a certain kind of:
mediocrity berweene® two extremes, and the
vices in the extremes. themfelves's which is
apparently falfe: For to dave is commen=
ded, and under the name of fortitude is ta-
ken fora vertue, although it bean extreme,
ifthe caufe be approved. Alfo the quantity,
ofa thing givens; whether it “be great, or
little, or between both’, makes-not liberali-
y, but the cauleof giving it. Neither is*ic
 gnjuffice, “if 1 give any man more, of what is
mine own, then Powe him. The. Lawes of;
Nature therefore are the fumme of Moralt
Philofopby', whereof T have onely delive-
ted fucheprecepts in this.placey‘as‘appertain.
to the:pzefervation of our elves againkt :
thole:dangers'which arife from difcord. But ®
there are other: precepts of ratienall nature,
from whence:fpring other vertues: for tem-
perancealfois.a. precept of Reafon , becaufe
Antempetance tends to ficknefle,-and'death.
Ando forritade'too, (chat is): thar-fame fa-
culty of refifting ftoutly. in prefent dangers,
(and'which aye more hardly‘declined then
overcome) becaufe 1¢ isa means tending to
the prefervation of him that refifts.
XXXIIL. Bur thofe which we call the The Law
Lawes of nature (Gnce they:are nothing elle of ndsure is
HBS bur


at


>


58 Liberty Chap
NOt proper but certain conclufions undetftood by Rea
4y @ law, (on,of things to be done, and omitted; bur
_ but asitis a Law to {peak properly. and accurately , is
_ delivered the Speech of him, who -by “Right commands
in holy . {omewlhat.to-others to-be done yor omitted):
Scripture. ave not (in: propriety of {peech) Lawes, as
: they proceed from nature 3. yet as they are
delivered by God in. holy Scriptures; (as.
we thall fee in the Chapter following) they
- are moft properly called by the name of
Lawes : for the: facred Scripture is the {péech,
of God. commanding» over-all things: by


greatelt Right.
Cuarv. TV:


That the Law of Nature isa
Divine Lam.


The natu- Iwy>H E fame Law which is Naturally
ral, and and Moral, is alfo wont tobe called
moral law Divine, nor undefervedly , aswell:becaule
vuinc.  Reafon, which is the law of Nature , is given
by Godto every man for theirule of bis
ations 3.as becaufe the precepts of living
which are thence derived, are the fame with
thofe which have been delivered: fromthe
divine Majefty , for the L'A WE Sof his.
beavenly Kingdome, by our Lord Tefus Chrift,,
and his holy Prophets and eApojtles.. What
therefore by, reafoning we have underftood
» above concerning the law of nature, we will
= endeavour to confirme the fame in this
Pei Chapter by holy writ, Sok


Chipeg) . Libertys = i 5D
I. But firft we will thew thofe places in Which %
which it is declated, that the Divine Law is confirmed .
featedi in right reafon. \\Pfalm 37. 31, 32. im Scrip-
The mouth ; the righteous will be excrcifed turc it ge~.
in wifdome., and his tongue will bevalking of ueralt.
Tudgement : The law of God is in bis heart..
Jerem. 31. 33. FE will pur my lav in their in«
ward parts , and write it ix their bearts. Pfal.
19.7. The law of the Lord is an undefiled:
law, converting the foule. ver. 8. The Com=
mandement of the Lord is pure, and giveth
light nuto the eyes. Deureton. 30. 11. This
Commandement vobich I command thee this day,
it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far of,
&c verl. 14. But the word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart ; thar.
thou maift doe it. Plal.t19. 14. Give me una
derftanding and I fhallkeep thy law. verl. 105. f
Thy word zs.a:lamp unto my fect, and a light
unto my paths. Proverbs 9.10, The know
ledge of the boly. isunderftanding. John x. t.
Chrift the Lawagiver himfelfe is called the
word, ver{. 9. The fame Chrifl is called the
| ayne light that lighteth every man thar cometh: wy
inthe world. Al which are’ defcriptions of
righoreafon, whole digates, we have fhew= =
ed before, are the lewes of nature. gees :
TIL. Bat that which wee fet -downe Specially —
for the fundaimenrall law of natave, namely, 7 regard’
that Peace-was to be (ought for, is alfo the of the fur
fomme of the: dévine law., will'beimanifel damentale
by thefe'places,) Romy 31 17, Righredufneffe, aw of na,
(which is thefumime of thelaw)is'called ture im
thevoay of Peace. Pal, 85. 10, Rightcoufielfe Secking of
and Peace have kiffed each orber. Matth. 5. 9. peace,
Bleffed arg the “Peace-makers , for they foall be
_ Galled the’ children of Gods. And after a


{


60


Liberty. Chap. 4)
Paul in his 6. Chapter to the Hebrewes, °
and the laft verfe had calted Chrift (the Les.
giflator of that law we trearof) an High-|
Prieft for cver after the order of Melehize=

’ deckshe addes in the following Chaprersthe\
firft verfe , This Melchizedeck was King. of
Salem, Prieft of che moft highGod, 8c. veri.1.
Firft being by interpretation King of Rightes
oufuelfe, and after thar ‘alfo King of Salem,
which is, King of peace. Whence -it is cleare,’
that Christ the King in his Kinedomeplar
ceth Rightcoufne/se and: Peace together. .Pfal.
34. 13,.E/chue evill and doc goad, feck peace
and chfue it. Ufaiah 9.6, 7. Unto us a childs.
born, untos a Soune is given ,.and'the gon
vernment. {hall be upon bis fhoulder , and bis
name foall. be called Wonderfull, Counfellour,,
the mighty God, the everlafting Farber: the
Princoof peace. Maiah 52. 7. How beautifull:
upourthe mouneaines are rhe fect of him thar:
bringesh goo ridings 5 chat publifherh peace,
shat bringeth good tidings of good , that publi-
footb falvation 5 that faith mito Sion, thy God:
reigneth? Luke 2.14. In the Nativityoof
Ciorift.; the voice.of them, that praifed Gods
faying s Glory be t0-God'onbigh:, andimearth:
peace, good will towards men, And. I/aidb $30
5. The Gofpell is called the cha/tifement of
our peace, Uay 59: 8. Righteoufue(Se is-called |
the way-of Peace. Theiyway of peace they know:


©\, notsand thereis,no judgement. ix their comer.
vs Micah §4.4,:5 {peaking ofthe Mefsias ihe


\faith thus, Hee: fhall ffand and feed. in she


Ae Ufbrength of the Lord; im theadajefly of abe


name of the Lord his God, and they fhallvabides,
for now: foall he be great -wnto the end of the
earth; eAnd this man foall be your Peace, Ken

at Prov,


¢ Chap. 4. Liberty. 2

| Prov. 3. 12. My foune forget not my law , but
let thine heart keep my Commandements , for
length of dayes, aud long life, and peace , {ball
they. adde to thes, :
_ 1V, What appertains to the firft law of eAl/o in
abolifbing the community of all things, or con- regard of
cerning the introduGtion of meum to tuum, the fir
We perceive inthe firft place how great an law of a~
adverfary this {ame Community isto Peace, ture ix abo~
byrhofe words of Abraham to Lor,.Gene.13,. tfhing all
8, Let there be no fivife I pray thee, between thingsto
thee and me , and between thy heard-men, and be bad in
my heard-men , for we be bretbren, Is net the common.
whole land before thee? Separate thy. (elfe X
pray thee from me. And all thofe places of j
Scripture by which we are forbidden to =
trefpafle upon our neighbours , as, Thou ;
fhalt not kill , thou Qhals net. commit adultery,
thou fhalt not ftcal, &c. doe confirm the law.
of diftinGion between Mine, and Thinc3 for
they fuppofe the right of all mento all things i
40 be taken away. c

V. The fame precepts eftablith the fe- Alfo the

condlaw of nature of keeping truft.s for fecond law
what doth, Thou fhalt not invade anothers of nature,
right,.import, but this? Thou fhalt-nor take concerning
poffelsion of that , which by thy contratt ceafeth faith to be |
to betbines but expreflely fet down, Pfal.15. kept.
verf.t. Tohim that asked , Lord who {hall
dwell inthy Tabernacle? Iv is anfwered,verf.5.
He that fovcareth unto bis neighbour , and dif-
appointeth him not; and Prov. 6. t, ddy forte
if thou be furety for thy friend , if thou have
firicken thy hand with a Sranger , Thou art Alfe of the
fiared with the words of thy mouth, thitd lanes
_ WI. The third Law concerning gratim (espana
tude is proved by thefe places, Deut. 25. 4 fulnefier
} Thou! ois


’


62 Liberty. Chap 3 |
Thou fale not muyle the Oxe when he tread=
eth out the corns which Saint Paul 1.Cor.9. 9»
interprets to be {poken of men, not Oxen |
onely. foligt a 3. Who fo rewardeth evill
for good, evill fhall not depart from bis bonfe,
‘And Deut.20, 10, £1. When thon comeft
nigh unto rcity to fight againft it, then pro
claim peace unto it. eAud it foall be if it make
' thee anfwer of peace sand open unto thee , then
it fhall be thar all the people that is fo:nd there.
tii, hall be tributaries unto thee , and they foal
ferve thee. Proverbs 3. 29. Devife nor cuill
agaiuft thy neighbour , fccing he dyvcllcth fos
curely by thee. - : 4
eAlfo the VII. Tothe fourth Law of accommoda.
fourth law, ring our felves, thefe precepts are conforma=
of revdring ble, Exod. 23. 4,5. If thou meet thine cne-
our felucs mies Oxe, or bis Affe going aftray ; thou halt
ufefull, —_furely bring ix back to bim agarns if thon feethe
Affe of him that haterh thee lying under bis
burden, and wouldeft. forbear tohelpbim , thow
fhalt furely help with him, ver{. 9. Alfo, thin
foalt not paiila firanger. Prov.3.30, Strive
not with a man without @ caufe , if he have
done thee no barme, Prov.t 5. 18.4 wrathfull:
man flirreth up firife, bus be that is.flow to a
Ler, appeafeth firifc. 18. 246. There isa friend
that fticketh clofer then a brother. The fame
is confirmed,Luke 10, By the Parable of the
Samaritan, who had compaffion on the Jew
that was wounded by theeves , and by
Chrifts precept, Marth.5. 39, But I fay anito
You, that ye refift not evill , but whofoever fhald
Alfo of the fmirerbee on the right check , turn to bin the


'


fifth law, other alfo, Bec.

concerning VIII... Among infinite other: places.

MET Yn which provethe fifth law., thefe are re
; Matte


Chapa — Liberte


afaitb.6, £4. Tf you forgive men their trefpaf=


fe your bexvenly Father will allo forgive yous

t if you forgive not men their trefpafses, nei-

er will, your Father. forgive your trefpalses.

| Math, 18.21, Lord, bow oft. fhall my Broe
ther finne again{f me and I forgive bima ? ilk
feven times? sfefus (aith unto him, I fay not ill
feven times, bur rill feventy rimes feven
times : that is, toties quoties.


1X, For the confirmation of the fixth fo ofthe
law, all chofe places are pertinent. which frxrh law,
command us to fhew mercy 3 fuch as at that punifh-
$7, Blofied are the mercifull , for they fhall ment onely
obtain mercy, Levit. 19. 18. Thou fhalt tot Jooks at
avenge , nor bear any grudge, againft tbe chil- the future.


dren of thy poople. But) there are, who not
onely think this law is not proved by Scrip.
ture, bur plainly difproved from hence, that
shere is an, eternall punithment referved for
the wicked after death , where there is no
lace either, for amendment, or example.
“Some refolve this objection by anfwering,
That God,whom no law reftrains, refers all
tohisclory, bur thar man muft not doe fo5
as if God fought his glory, (that is to fay
pleafed him(elfe in the death of a finner. Ic


_ is more rightly anfwered, that the inftity-


tion of eternall punifhment was. before fin,
and had vegard to this onely, that men
might dread to commit fiane for the time
to,come.


X. The words of Chrift prove this fe 416 of th
wenth, Matth,5. 22, But I fay unto you, That pe


whofocver is angry with bis brother without a


Aifey fall be im danger of the judgement, aid flander,


whofoever fhall fay unto bis Brother Racha,


Mall bein danger of the Goxnfell » but vbofoe~
¢ ver


i


Liberty.
ver fhall (ay ,tbou foble, hall be in’ danger
Bell fire, Proy. ath ie rhe that water }
Slander isa foole. Prov. 14. 21. Hee that de
Pifeth his neighbour, finneth. 15.1. Grievoa
words Sir up anger, Prov.2 2.10. Caft wee
Seorner , and contention foall goe out, and res
proach fhallcea'e. yee, oa


Al’ ofthe’ XT, The eighth law of acknowledging
eighth, a~ ae of nature, that is, of humility, is


Sainft pride


equity.


ablithed by thefe places. Mat. 5. 3. Blefsed
are the poor in Spirit , for theirs % the King.
dom of heaven. Prov. 6. 16, 19. Thole fix
things doth the Lord hate ,yca feven are dn
abomination unto him: A proud look , &c,
Prov. 16.5. Every one that is proud is an abjn
mination unto the Lord , though hand joyne th
handy be {hall nos be unpunifbed. 11. 2. When
pride cometh, then comerl foarce , but wish the
lowly, is wifdome. Thus Tfay 40.'3.° (where
‘the comming of the Meffias is fhewed forth,
‘for preparation towards his Kingdome
The voyce of him that cryed inthe wildernepe,
was this + Prepare ye the way of the Lori,
make firait inthe de‘art a bigh way for ot
God. Every valley fhall be exalted , and every
moiinitain , aud bill, (hall be made low ; which
~doubilefle is fpoken'to men, and not to
ountains, hen


: re if
(Alo of the’ XI. But thar fame Equity which we
ninth, of prov'd in the ninth place to be a Lawof


Nature , which commands every man to
‘allow the fame Rights to’ others they-would
be allow’d themfelves, and which conraines
init allthe other Lawes befides,is the {ame
which Mofes {ets down, Levit.19.18, Tho
Shale Love thy neighbour as thy felf 5 and our
Saviour calls it the fumme of the morall Fr
sia fs


|


Thou halt love the Lord thy God with all thine

heart, and with all shy (oul, and with all thy

mind this i the fir(t and great Commandement,

andthe fecond és Like anto it, Thou fhale love thy

neighbour as thy (elf. On thefe tro Commande-
mensbang allthe Law and the Prophets. But

tolove our neighbor as our felves,is nothing

tlle, but to grant him all we defire to have
granted to our felves. t Allo th

XIII. By the tenth Law refpett of per/ons ifee
isforbid; as alfo by thele places following, a e of
Mat.s.45. That ye may be children of your Fa- P f
ther which is in Heaven 5 for he makerh the fur orf
wrife om the Evill, and on the Good, ere.
Collof.3.11. There és neither Grreck,nor Few,
tircumeifion, nor tecircumcifion, Barbarian, or
Sothian,bondorfree,but Chrift is alley? in all.

AGs 10. 34. Of atruth, I perceive, that God

is wo refpeticr of Perfons. 2Chron.T g.7.There

is no intquity with the Lord our God, nor re-

Shell of perfons, nor taking of gifts. Eccluf, B
35.12. The Lord is Fudge, and with him”

isno reffelt of Per(ons. Rom. 2.tt. For Alfo of the |
there is no respect of perfons with God. ii Lam,

XIV. ‘The eleventh Law, which com- Of baving
mands thofe things to be held in common which thofe things
camiot be divided, 1 know not whether there #60 amon
beany expreffe place in Scripture for it, or which canh~
not s but the pratife appears every where in Me? be di-
the common ule of Wels,Wayes,Rivers,[a- videde
cred things,8c.for elfe men could not live.

XV, We faid in the twelfch place, that Alfo of the
twas a Law of Nature, Thatwherethings 12. OF
could neither be divided, nor po(fe(s? din cOmon, things t0 be
ibe: (bould be difpos’d by.lar, which is con- divided by

ws firm’d Lot.


ee


: Liberty. Ct
“ firm’d.as by the example of Hofis, wt
Gods command, Numb.6. 34. divid
feverall parts of the land of promife
the Tribes by Lot : So Aéts 1.24. by th
"ample of the Apoitles, who. receiy’d d
thias, before Fuftus, into their number, |
eaftingLots,and {aying, Thon Lord, whok
| eft the hearts of all men, flew whether of the
- tao thou halt chofett, tore. Prov. 16. 33..
| ; Lot % caft imto the Lappe, but the whole di
fr fing thereof s6f the Lord, And which ist
thirteenth Law the Succeflion was dive un
to Efa, as being the Firft-born ‘of I fa,
ifbimfelf bad not fold it, (Gen, 25.3
or that the Father had not onc
ointed. 4 , *
Alfo o XVI. Saint Pawl writing to the Corite
“eg shians, Bpitt, x, Chap. 6. reprehends the
Fudge, Coriusbiaus of that City for going to Lay
E a one with another before infide Judges
who were theirencmies, calling it a fault,
that they would not rather take wrong, and
fuffer themfel ves to be defrauded; for thatis
againft that Law,whereby we are comman:
ded ta be helpful to cach other.Bur if it happen
» the Controverfie be concerning things ne
ean A whatis to be done ?. Therefore the
Apoftle, Ver. 5. {peaks thus, I peak 10 yom
foame. Isit fo that there is not one wife man
among you, no, not one that fhall be ablet
Judge between bis brethren ? He therefore, by.
thofe words confirmes that Law of Nature.
which wecall’d the fifteenth, to wit, Where |
Controverfies cannot be avoided, there by
the confent of Parties to appoint fome Ar
biter, and him fome third 3 fos
{which is the 16 Law) neither fhe Pate


es


epi
Liberty. 67
ties a, be judgeinhisown Canfe,
“XVIL. But thatthe fudge, or Arbiter, Alfo of the
tuft receive no reward for bis Sentence, 17. Law,
(which is the 17,Law ) appears, Exod. That the
| 23.8, Thou (hale take no gift 5 for the gift Arbiters
Hinderh the wife, and perverteth she words of mujt re~
the Fighteows. Beclus. 21, 29. Profents and ceive no
aif. lind the eyes of the wife. Whence it reward for
followes, that he muft not be more-oblig’d their sem-
toone part then the other, whichis the 19. rciie,
Law, andis alfo confirm’d, Deut. 1.17. Te
fiall not refBett perfons in gudgmen:, ye Shall
hear the finall as well as the great 3 and invall ~
thot places which are brought againft re-
fpeét of Perfons. y
XVIII. That in the judgement of Fait, Alfo of the
witneffer muft be had, (which is the 18, 18, conccr~
Law) the Scripture not only confirmes, bur wing Wits,
yequires more then one, Deus. 17. 6. At the neffes.
mouth of two witnelfes, or three wittteffess halt
hevhat is worthy of death be put to death. ‘The
bos is repeated, Devt.19.15.
1X. Drunkennefe , which we have :
therefore in the laft =e numbred amon Alt aes
the breaches of the Narurall Law, becaule gegink
ithinders the ule of right Reafon, is alfo Drunken
forbid in faced Scriptute for the fame yege,
teafon. Prov, 20.1, Wine is a mocker, {trong ‘
drink is raging, whofocver is deceived thereby
is not wife, And Chap. 31. 4, 5. Ibis mot
for Kings to drink wine, Ics they drink, and
forger the Law, and pervert the jrdgement
of day of the afflicted; but that we might
fnow that the malice of this vice confitted
not formally in the quantity of the drink,
but in that it deftroyes Judgement and
Reafon, it followes in the next Verfe,
3 F Give


Liberty.
Give flvong drink to bim that is;
rifb, and wine to thofe that be heavy
» Let him diink, and forget bispoverty, a

member his mifery no more. Cbrift uted
fame realon in prohibiting drunkeneffe,Li
21.34. Takeheed to your felves, - left
time your hearts be overcharg’d with fi
ting and dyunkenneffe. : |
Alfo inve- XX. That we faid in the foregoin
ct of Chapter, The Law of Nature is etcrnall, i
that which alfo prov'd out of the fifth of S. Marth. 1
path been Verily I fayunto yeu, till Heaven and Ew

. faid, that paffe, one jot, or one ritele, fhall in na wife
the Law of fro the Law,and Pfal.119.v.160, Euay

| Nature of thy vightcous judgements enduveth for eve,
etervall. -  XXI. Wealfofaid, Tharthe Laws
 Alfo thar Nature bad regard chiefly unto Confciens;)
the Lawes thatis, that he is juft, who by all poffibl|


bt
ee


on bim,and to our God, for he will ab
pardon, Exck. 18.37. (aft away fic
allyour tran/greffions whereby you bavet
Sref[ed. make jou anew heart,and anc

_ its for why woill you die O houfe of Ifracl 2 By
_ which, and thelike places, we may
ently underftand that God willnot
_ their deeds whofe heart is right. The


ape4. Liberty, «69
‘out ofthe 29. of Ufay:t3. The Lord /aid,F or= i
pie as this people draw near me with their
mouth, and with their lips doc honour me, but
have removed their heart far from me, there-
fore Twill. proceed, ¢o°c. Mates. 20. Exccpt
your rightcoufae|fe. Joall exceed. the righteou/= pe
neffe of the Scribes and Phari[ees yc-foall in no x
cafe cuter into the Kingdom of Hesven; and in
the following verfes our Saviour explains to
them how. thatthe commands of God are
broken, not by Deeds only, but alfo by the
Will ; forthe Scribes and Pharifes didin
outward a&t.obferve the. Law moft exadly,
| but for Glories fake onelys elfe they her
‘agrtadily have brokenit. There are innu=
merable places of Scripture in which is
moft manifeftly declar'd that God accepts Alfo that
the Will for the Deed, and that. as well in the Lawes
good, as in evill actions, of nature
XXII. Thar the Law of Nature is are eafily
cafily kept, Chrift himfelf declares in the obferv'd.
_11, Chapter of Saint Matthew 28, 29,30. Laftly in
Come unto me, tee. Take my yoke upon you, refpect of
and learn of me, (gc. for my yoke iseafie, and the Rule by
my burihen light. which a
XXIII. Laftly,the Rule by which J faid man may
any man might know whether what he was prefently
doing, were contrary tothe Law, or not, to know whe=
wit, what'thou wouldft not be done to, ther whar
- “doe not that to another, is almoft in the heis about
{elf fame words delivered by our Saviour, to aff be a=
Mat.7.1 2. Therefore all things whatfoever ye gainft the |
would that men fhould do unto you, do yor even law of a= *
0 to them. ture, or or,
XXIV. As the law of naturcis all of it The law of
Divine, fo the Law of Ghrift by converfion, (brift is
(which is wholly explain’d in the 5, 6, thelaw of
oom and nature.


ae - Libivey: coupe


and 7. Chaptet of Seaturthemés Gopal)
all of it ay eso that one Sonal
ment of not marrying her who is put. away,
for adultery, which Chrift brought for ets,
plication of the divine pofitive Law,againk
the Jowes, who did ‘nov’ rightly interpret
the Mofaicall’ Law) thedo rine of Nature:
I fay the whole ‘Law of ‘Chrift is en
plain’d in the fore-named Chapters, fot
the whole Do@rine of ‘Chrift ; for Fidih
is apart of Chriftian Do@rine, which is
not commprehended under the title of 2
Law ; for Lawes ate made, and given, in
reference to fuch aitions as follow-out will,
Hot in’ order to our Optitions, and Belitf,
which being out of our power, follow not
- the Will, :


| Quifquamnereguo gandet ? O fallax bonnm 1
Quantum malorum fronte quam blanda tegist

| Decelfe eft ut multos timeat, quem mules timems
| euro vencnum bibitur : expertis loquor,


ii


| SoBe Sooke Shi PaO rn
SEEESESE EER


DOMINION.
Cuar. V. oe ‘


Of the caufes, and firft begin-
ing of civill Government.


I. That the Lawes of Nature ave
not fufficient. to preferve Peace.
TI. That the Lawes of Nature, iz
the {tate of nature, are filent.
TIN. That the fecurity of liviag
according to. the Lawes of Nature

_ confiftsin the concord of many Per-
fons IV. That the concord of
many Per{ons ts not constant enough
for alafting Peace. V. The rea=

- fon Why. the government of certain
bruit creatures fPands firm incon
cord onely, and why wot of mer.
VI. That not onely content, but
union alfa, is required to eftablifo

_ the Peuce of men, VII. What

F2 unien


73


<>


74° ~ Dominion. | Cun
union 4 VIII. Iz union the
Right of all men w conveighed to
one. 1X. What civill foctery i
X. What a civill Perfon XL wha.
it is to have the {upreme power,
and what to be a fubje. X11. Tivo
kindes of Cities, naturall, and by


inftitution,

T is of it (elfe manifeft,

That the thar the ations of mea

' Lawes of proceed from the will,
nature [uf- and the will from hope,
fice not for and feare , infomuch as
the couer- when they fhall fee a
vation of greater good , ot lefe


Peace. evill, likely to happen to
them by the breach, then obfervation ofthe
Lawes, they’] wittingly violate them, ‘The
hope therefore which each man hath of his
fecutity , and felf prefervation , confilts in
this,that by force or craft he may difappoint
his neighbour,cither openly , or by ftrata-

. gem. Whence we may underftand., thatthe
yaturall lavees, though well underftood , dot
not inftantly fecure any man in their pra-
ile, and confequently,that as long as thet¢

. is nocaution had from the invahon of o
thers, there remains to everyeman that fame
primitive Right of felfe-defence , by fuch
means as either he can or will make ule
(that is) a Right to all things, or the Right
of warre; and it is fufficient for the fulflk
ing of che naturall Lavy; that aman be prepe
red in mind to embrace Peace when. it m
be had. * if


“Chap. §: Dominion,


eo Oe ee 4


7S
» IE. Icisafondfaying , That all lawes Thatrbs
are filent in the time of warre , and it is atrue Lawes of
one, not onely if we peal: of the civild , but nature, im
alfo of the natttall Lawes , provided they be xbe fiate of
referr’d -not ro the mind, but ro the a€tions nature,are
of men, by the third Chapter, 44. 29. and filent.
we mean fuch a war as is of all men againit
allmen 5 fuch as isthe meer (fate of natures
although in the warre of nation againft na-
tion a certain mean was wont to be obfer-
ved. And therefore in old time there was a ~
manner of living, and as it were a certain
cesonomy » which they called auspixiy;li=
ving by Rapitie, which was neither azainit the _
law of nature , (things then fo ftanding) ~ g
norvoyd of glory to thofe who exercifed it
with valour , not with cruelty, Their cu-
ftome was, taking away the reft, to {pare -
life, and abltain from Oxen fir fo" plouzh,
and every inftrument ferviceable to hushane
dry, which yet is:not foto he taken, as if


” they were bound to doe thus by the law of


nature , but that they had regard to their

own glory herein, left by too much cruelty,

they might be fulpeGed guilty of feare.

/ ELT Since therefore the excrcife of the Tht the


natural Liw is neceflary: for the prefervarion fecurity of


jie


of Peace, and thar for the exerciferof the “UMS 4° |
naturall law fecurity is no leile neceflary , it Pag Me
is worth the confidering what thar is which ue Lae
affords {uch a fecurity : for this macter no=’ of manure,
thing elfecan be imagined, buc that each sna fete
man. provide him(elfe of fuch meet helps, as ies
the invafion of one on the other may bee Mg e
rendered fo dangerous , as either of them ey:
may think it beter torefrain, then.o med

die. But frft it is plain, that the con-

us F3 fehigs 2


NY


re


: 76


Dominion ~ Chap,
fent of two or three cannot make good fuch_
afecurity 3 becaufe that the addition but of


~ one, or fome few on the other fide,is fuffis


Thar the

_ agreement
of many is

_ not conftant
enough to
prefervea
lafting
Peace.


cient to make the viGtory undoubtedly fure,
and hartens the enemy to attacque us, Itis
therefore neceflary, to the end the fecurity
fought for may be obtained , that the num-
ber ofthem who confpire in a mutuall af
fiftance be {6 great, that the acceffion of
fome few to the enemies party may not
proveto them a matter of moment fufficie


-ent to afsure the vidtory,


IV. Farthermore, how great foever the
number of them is who meet on felfe-de«
fence, if yet they agree not among them:
felyes of fome excellent means whereby to
compafle this, but every man after his own
manner fhall make ufe ofhis endeavours,
nothing will bedones becaufe that divided:
in their opinions they will be an hinderance
toeach other , or if they agree well enough
to fome one action through hope of victory,
§poyle , or revenge, yet afterward through

iverfity of wits, and Counfels , or emulas
tion and envy, with which men naturally
contend, they will be fo rorne and vent, as
they will neither give mutuall help, nor-des
fire peace , except they be conftrained to it
by fome common feare, Whence it fol
lowes, that the confent of many, (which con:
filts in this onely , as we have already defi-
ned in the foregoing fe@ion , that they dis
re@ all their adtions to the fame end, and
the common good) that isto fay , that the fo-
ciety proceeding from mutuall help onely,
yeelds not-that fecurity which they feck fory
who meet, and agree in the exercife of the —


bove:


"cmp: ——  Doninion.
‘above-named Mawes of natiire; butthat fome-
what elfe muft be done;thar thofe who have

“nce confented for the common good, to
csi ‘mutuall ey may by fear be re-
fmined , left afterward they again diffent,
when cheit private Tetereft thall appear dif-
ap from the common good.


97


Ariffole reckons among thofe ani- yppy y
mals which he calls Politique, not man on- pil
ly, bat divers others ; as the Art, the Bees ment of
&e. which though they be deftitute of rea- (ome byyig


fon, by which they may contract, and fub- crear ures


mit co government, notwithftanding by funds firm
‘confenting , (that is to fay) enfuing 5 OF 7% concord
chewing the fame things, they fo dire® gine, and
their a€tions to a common end y ‘that their joe / of
meetings are not obnoxious uato any fedi- inex,


tions. Yet is not their gathering together a
Civil government , and therefore thofe ani=
mals not to be termed political , becaule
_ their government is onely a confent, or ma-
ny wills concurring in one object, not (as
is neceffary in civill government) one ‘will.
Tris very true that in thofe creatures, livin
only by fenfe and appetite , their confew o
minds is fo durable,as there is noneed ofany
thing more to fecute it,and{by confequence)
to preferve peace among thei ; then barely
their ‘natural inclination. But among men
the cafe is otherwife. For firft among them
there is a conteftation of honour and pre~
ferment; among beafts there is none:
whence hatred and envy’, out of which arife
fedition and warre, is among men, eine
bealts no fuch matrer. Next, the nacurall
appetice of Bees, and the like creatures, is
conformable , and they defirc the common
a, ' F4 good


2


78


~ he fometimes by his eleganc {peeches thun-


Dominion, Cha
good which among them differs not ftom
their private 3 bur man {carce eftecms a
thing good which hath not fomewhat of
eminence in the enjoyment, more thenthi
which others doe poflefle, Thirdly , thofe
creatures which are yoyd ofreafon, fee no
defect , or think they fee none,in the admi-
nifttation of their Common-weales; but in
a-multitude of men there are ‘many who
fuppoling themfelves wiler then others , ene
deavour to innovate, and divers Tanovators
innovate divers wayes , which is a meer di-
ftra@ion , and civill warre. Fourthly, thefe
brutecreatures » howfoever they may haye
the ule of their voyce to fignify their affe-
ions to each other » yet want they that
fame art of words which is neceffarily requi-
red to thofe motions in the mind , whereb
good is reprefented ro it as being better, -
evill as worfe then in truth icis; But the
tongue of man. is a trumpet of warre , and
fedition ; and it is teported of Pericles, that


dered, and lightened , an confounded
whole Greece it felfe. Fiftly , they cannot
diftinguith between injury and barmes
Thence it happens that as long as itis well
with them , they blame not their fellowes:
Bur thofe men are of moft trouble to the r
Republiqae » who have moft leafure to be
idle for they ufe not to contend for pub-
lique places before they have gorten the vi-
Gory over hunger, and cold, Laft ot all,
the confent of thofe brutall creatures is nae
turall, that of men by compaét onely, (chat
isto fay) artificial ; it is tee no mate
ter of wonder if fomewhat more’ be ba)
u


Pears ~ Deminion 9
full for men to the end they may livein


i


peace. Wherefore confeut , ot contraéted fo-


Giety, without fome comnion power whereby
particular men may be ruled through feare
of punifhment, doth not ae to make up
that fecurity which is requifite to rhe exer~
cile of natural ju ‘tice. .


- V1. Since therefore the confpiring of ma- That noe ~
‘ny willsto the fame end doth not fuffice to onely Con=


referve peace and to make a lafting de- fenr , but
fence, it is requifite that in thofe necellary ‘ynion alfa
matters which concern Peace and felfe-de= js required
fence, there be burone will of all-:men. Bat to eftablifh


fo ubje& his will to fome other one . to wit, men.


* either Man or Counféll , that whatfoever his


willis in thofe things which are neceflary to
the common peace, it be received for the


_ wills of all’ men in generall , and of every


_ ufeofhis wealth , and ftcength, againit any
“ohers wharfoever (for he is fuppofed ftill


one in particular. Now the gashering to-
gether of many men who deliberate of what


‘isto bedone, or not to bedone, forth:


common good of all men, isihat which
Toalla COUNSELL. %
VIL This fubmiffiion of the wits of all thofe What Unie

mentothe will of one man , o: one Courfell, on is.

is then made, when eaclffone of them obli-

geth himfelf by contra& to every one of

the reft, nar to refift the will of that one

man, ox counfell, to which he hath fubmitted

him(elfe; that is, thar he refufe him not the


to retain a Right of defending himfelfe is
againfk violence) and this is called #NI-


_ ON. But we underftand thar to be the will


Of she counfell, which is the will of the major ~
Fs part


this cannot be done, unlefle every man will the peace of


a
part of thofe men of whom the Counfell.


confitts. |
VIIL.But though the will it felf be not yo.
luntary,but only the beginning of voluntary
actions (for we will not to will, but to aé)
and therefore falls leaft of all under deli.
beration, and compact 5 yet he who fubs
mits his will to the will of = a cone
veighs to that other the Right of his fir
and faculties ; infomuch as when i
have done the fame, he to whom they have
fubmitted hath fo much power, as by. the
terrour of it hee can conforme the wills
of particular men unto unity, and cone
cord.
1X. Now union thus made is ca led aciyy,
orcivill focieiy, and alfo acivill Perfon 3 for
when there is ove will of all men, it is to be
eftecemed for one Perfon, and by the word
(one) itisto be knowne , and diftinguithed
from all particular men as having its own
Rights and properties; infomuch as nei-
ther any one Citizen , nor all of them to-
ether (if we cxcept him whofe will ftands
for the will of all) is to be accounted the
Ciy. A CITT therefore (that we may
define it) is one Pérfon , whofe will, by the
-compact of many men, is to be received for’
the will of them all; fo as he may ufeall
the power and faculties of each particular
perfon, tothe maintenance of peace , and
for common defence. Hi
X. But although every City be a civill
Perfon, yet every civill Perfon is not a Cis
for it may happen that many Citizens, by
the permiffion of the City, may joynete-
gether in one Perfon,for the doing of cettain
things


things. Thefe now will be civild Perfens, as
the companies of Merchants, and many
other Convents; but Cities they are hor,
beeaule they have not fubimitted themfelves-
zo the will of thécompany fimply , and in
allthings , but in certain things onely de+
~ tettnined by the Citys and on: fuch termes
as iris lawtull for any one of chem to con-
‘tendin judgement againft the body it (élfe
of the fodality, which is by no means al-
lowable to a Citizen againft the City: fach
like fociteies therefore ave civill Perfons fub-
ordinate ro the City.

“XI Anevery city; Thar Mav, or Com= What iris
fel, co whofe will each particular man hath ro have the
fubje&ted his will (fo as hath been de- fupreme
clared) “is faid to have the SH PREME power,
POWER, or CHIEFE (OM: what tobe
MAND, ox DOMINION 5 which fubjedt.
power, ahd Riaht of commanding, conGtts in
this, thar each Citizen hath conveighed all
hisitrength and power to thar man, or
Counfell; which to have done (becaule tio
man can transferre his power in a naturall
manner) is nothing elfe then to have patted’
with his Righvofre(ifting. Each Citizen, as
allo every fubdrdinate civil! ‘Perfon, is called
the SH BFE CT of hiv who hath the
chiefe command.

X IL. By what hwh been fayed, itis ful Tws kinds
ficiently thewed 5 in whac manner 5 and by of Cities,
what ‘degrees many natural perfous , thcough natural,”
defire of prefertiny’ ‘themfelves, and by mus ard by inm
mutuall feare,have growne together into @ jfiturion,
sivill Perfon, whom we have called a City; J
Bur they who fiibmit themlelves ‘to another
for feare , either {ubmit to-him whom they

fear,


ee Se Saal . Mite.
Dominion. Chap.
feare , or'fome other whom. they confide in
for protection ; They a& according to the
firlt. manner who. are vanquilhed in warre,
that they may not be flain; ‘hey according to
the f.cond whoare not yet overcome, that
they may not be overcome, The firft man-
fer receives its beginning from neturall


" power, and may be called the natural be


Sinning of a City 5 the latter from the
Counfell and conftitution of thofe who meet
rogether, whichis a beginning by inftitution,
Henceit is, that there aretwo kinds of (i= ~
tics, the one natural, {uch as. is the, paternall,
and defpoticall; che other inffitutiue’, which
may bealfo called politica/l. In the firlk
the Lord acquires to himfelfe fuch Citizens
as he will, inthe other the Citizens by their.
own wills appoint a Lord over themfelyes,
whether he be oe man, or one company of
men endued with the command in. chicfer
But wewill (peak in the ficlt place of a (iy.
politicalh or by injbiqution, and next of a Ci
natarall,


Crap. VI.


Of the right of him , whether
Counfell , or one Man onely,
who hath the fupreme pow-
er in the City.


I. There can nogRight be attributed to
a multitude ont of civill feciety, nor
i any


Chap. Dominion.


ny atlion to which they have not
under feale confented. Il. The
Right of the greater number con-
fenting , 23 the beginning of a City
“ILL, That every man retains @
Right to protett himfelfe according

10 bis own dee will , fo long as there
ts no fufficient regard had to his fe-
curity, 1V. That a coetcive pow-
er 4 weceffary to fecure us, V.What
the Sword of Jaltice is.. VI.That

_ the Sword of Jultice belongs to
him who hath the chiefe com-
mand. VII. That the Sword of

» War belongs to bins alfo. VIII Ad
Judicature belozgs to him too
1X. The Legiflative power is his
-onely. X. The naming of Magi«
firates and other Officers of the Cé-
ty belongs to him. XI. Alfa the
Examination of all doctrines.
XI whatfoever he doth is wapur
nifhable. XIII. That the com-
mand his Citizens have granted is
abfolute, and what proportion of
obedience is dueto him. XIV.The
Lawes of the City bind him not.

_ XV. That no man caw challengea
© propriety to any thing againft his
Wi, XVI By the Laiwes of the
ee Cy


Beinn te
City onely re come ta know Why
theft, murder, adultery, and in.
juty es. XVID. The opinion of thofe
Who would conftitute a City, where
there 7% no body - Gould have an
abfolure power, XVID The
marks of Supretm® ‘ Anthority,
XIX. Ifa City be compar’d with q
Man, he that bath the Supreine
Power ‘#5 in order 16. the City, as

2 ~ the humane [oul is in relation to the.
Man XX. That the “Supreme
Command cannot by Right be dif.
fold through their confents by
whofe Compatts it was ft conffi=
tuted,


There can PATS ® muft confider firft of all
_ wo Right be what‘ a (*) multitude of men
attributed (gathering themfelves “of theit owne free
40 @ multi~ wills into fociety) is, namely, that it is not
| tudecoufi- any one body, but many men; whercof each
dered cut of one bath his owne will, and his peculiar
| sivill foci- judgment concerning all things that may
| ey, nor any be propos’d. And though by particular
 aétion to Contraéts each fingle man may have his
| which they own Right, and Propricty,fo 25 one may fay
| have not Thiris inine, the orher, That is his 5 yet will
| Given theiy there not be any thing of which the whole
| particular multitude ,« 9s a Perfon diktin& froma a
|-éonfents. fingle man, can tightly fay, This is ming,
f more then anothers. Neither muft we a
Scribe any a@ion to the tuliitude, a3 it's
one


|


1D. 6» i
one, but (if all, or more of them doe agree)
jt will not bean AGion, but as many atie
ons, as Men, For although in fome great
Sedition ; it’s commonly faid, That the
People of that City have taken up Armes}
yet is it true of thofe onely who are in
Armes, or who confent tothem. For the
City, which is one Perfon, cannot take up
Armes againtt it felfe. Whatfoever there-
fore is done by the multitude, maft be un=
derftood to be done by every one of thofe
by whom it is made up 5 and that he, who
being inthe Multitude, amd yet confented .
‘not, nor gave any helps tothe things that ~
weredone byit, muft be judg’d to have
donenothing. Befides, ina mulitude not
yet reduc’d into one Perfon, in that manner
as hath been (aid, there remaines that fame
flare of nature in which all sbings belong to all _
men, and there is no place for Menm to Tut=
um, which : call’d Dominion, and Proe-
iety, by reafon that that fecurity is not yer
nncghiys we have declar’d ovale
neceffarily requifite forthe practife of che
Naturall Laws. , 4
Multitude, &c.] The Doffrine of the Anttota~
fower of a City over it’s Citizens , almoft tion.
wholly depends onthe under(landing of the dif-
. ference which is between a multituce of men
vuling, and a multitude ruled : For fuch is the
native of 4 City, That a multitude, or company |
Of Citizens, not onely may have command, but -
may dl(o be fubicé to command, but in diver[e
‘forfes ; which difference I did belecue was
clearly enough exptsined in this firft Articles
bat by the chjeMisasofmany azaingl thofe things
which follow,t difcern orborwifes, wherefore 16
: : (comed,


feemed good to me, to the end Lmight mal
fuller explication, to adde thee few things,
By Multitude,becaufe it is a colletti-ve wor |
we underftand morethcn one, [005 a.multizule
of men is the fame with many mens The fane
word, becaufe it is of the fingular number, fig-
nifies one thing, namely, one multitude but ju
neither {cxfecan a multitude be unterfteod to
have one will given to it by vature, but to either
afeverall ; and thercfore neither i any one attia
on whatfoever to be attributed to it : Wheres
fore a Multitude carmot promife, coutratt, ac»
quire Right, conveigh Right,a, bave, poffefe,
and the like, unlefle it be cvery one apart, and
Man by d4an 5 fo as there suf be as many
promifes,compatts, rights, and aéfiows, ax Men,
Wherefore a Multivude is no naturald Perfons,
"but if the fane Multitude doe Contraét one
with another,. thar the will of one many.or the
agrecing wills of the majer part of them, foalt
bereceived firthe will of all; then it becomes
oxe Perfon-5 for it is endwd. witha wall, and
therefore can doe voluntary ations, (uch as are
Conmanding, making Lawes, acquiring and
travsferring of Right, and (0 forth ; dn it is
oftner call’d the People; thew the ddulritude,
Weimuft therefore dijtinguifhthys. When wee
{2y the People, or Mubsitude, wills, commands, —
or doth any thing , it is unierftood that the
Gity which Commands, Wills and Aas by
the will of one, or the Concurring wills of more,
which carnot be done, but in an Affomblys —
But as oft as any thing is faid to be donc by a
Multitude of Men, whether grest, or fmall,
without the will of that man, or affenbly of
men; that's understood to be done by a fubjetted
~ People, tharis, by iaany fingle Cinixens 10"
wn shor,


Tompié. Dominion = BF

| gether, and not proceeding from onte Will, but

‘fiom diver(e. wills of diver/e men, who are

Citizens, and Subjects, but not a City.

LL. Next, wemuft confider thatevery The begit
‘one of the Multitude ( by whofe meanes ning of 4
‘there may be a beginning to make up the City is she
City) muft agree with the reft, chat in thofle Right of
smatters which fhall be propounded by any the major
oneia the Aflembly, that bereceived for part a-
the will of all which the major part thall greeing,
approve of ; forotherwile there will be no

wi at all of a Multitude of Men, whofe

Wills and Votes differ fo varioufly. Now

ifany one will not confent, the reft not-
withitanding fhall among themfelves con-

fticute the City without him: Whence it

will come to pafle, that the City retaines .

its primitive Right againft the Difltn-

tour, that is, the Right of War, as againit

an Enemy.

_ LIT. But becaufe we faid in the forego pha¢ every
ing Chaprer, the fixch Article, That there jay retains
was requir’d to the fecurity of men, not g right of
-onely their Confent, but alfo the Subjecti- pyorecting
on oftheir wills in {uch things as were ne- hanfelf aoa


ceffary to Peace aad Defence 5 andthatin cording to


that Anion, and -Subjedtion, the nature ofa pir owne


City confifted’; We muft difcerne now im judgement,


this place, out of thafe things which may be as long as
propounded , difcufs’d, and ftated in an he is not
Affembly of men, (all whole wil's are /ecured.
contain’d inthe will of the major part) id
what things are neceffary to Peace, and com-
mondefence : But firft of all, it is neceflary

to Peace, rhata man be fo farre forth pro~
tedted-againft the violence of others, thar he

may live fecurely, that is, that h: may have
“cy ao $ ne


.


tes


That aco-
crcive po-
wer is uta
ceffary for
foourity.


‘


What the
Sword of
Fuftice 1s.


to fieal, nor'tokill, and to obferve the like
Lawes 3 for the pravity of humane difpo-

fition is manifeft to all, and by experience
too well known how litle (removing the


V. Now the tight of punifhing is then
underftood to be given to any one, whefl


cons


i contracts men obferve well enough , forthe -
moft)part, till either themfelves , or their
near friends are to fuffer.


eigalar men, and, by confequence for Sword-of
the common peace, it is #eceffary that the suffice be=
right of uling the Sword for punifhment, be longs to -
pransferred to fome Man or Counfell, that him who
Man or Gounfell is necefsarily underftod by hath the


Forhe that by Right punifheth at his own mand.
difctetion , by Right compells all men to
all things which be himfelfe wills 5 ,then
which a greater command cannot be ima-


VII. But in vain doethey worlhip peace rhage the
athome, who cannot defend mag so Sword of
spainft forrainerss neither is it poflible for yyarre be-
them toprocea& themfelyes againit forrai- longs 10 :
ners, whofe forces are not uniteds and there- jm alfo.
fore itis mcceffary for the prefervation of par- ;
ticulars, that there be fome one Counfell , or
‘one man, who hath the Right to arm , te ga=
ther together , to unite fo many Citizens in
all dangers, and on all occafions , as fhall be
needfuil for common defence againft the
certain number, and ftrength of the enemy
and again , (as-often as he fhall finde it ex-

" pedient) to make peace wich them. We muft

_ underftand therefore’, that particular Citi-

zens have conveighed their whole Right of
Warre, and Peace, unto fome ove Man ox
Counfell; And chat this right (which we
may cali he Szordof Warre) belongs to the
fame Man, or Gonnfell, to whom the Sword
of Fuftice belongs; for no Man can by Right
Gompell Citizens to take up armes, and be
at


ae ans Coe se eee


& Downe «=


VI. Becaufe therefore for the fecurity of That the


Risht to have the fupreme power in the City. chiefe com=


at the expences of Warre, but he who.
= Right can punith him who doth nor obey,


as that of sfuffice, even by the conftitution
it felfe of a City , and effentially ; doe bee
long to the chiefe command.


The power ’ VIII. Burt becaufe the right of the


of Fudica-
ture belongs


36 bi: lowes, that the judgement of its right ule


pertaines to the fame party*: for ifthe pow.
er of judging were in one, and the power of
executing in another 5 nothing would be
done. For in vain would he give judge.
ment,who could norcxecute his commands,


or if h¢ executed them by the power. ofano- |


ther, he himfelfe is not {aid to have the
power of the Sword, but that other, to whom
he is onely af Officer. All judgement there«
fore in a City belongs to him who hath the
{words 5 (é.e.) to him, who hath the fu

k preme authority. » i
# The Leei., 1 X+ Furthermore, fince it no leffe , nay
a. o" it ranch, mdse-conduceth to Peace to pre
pes fag, Went brawles from arifing , then to, ap-
peafe them being rifen; and that all con-


fi opinions of men difftr concerning Mean


& Tuwn , ju and unjuft, profitable and


unprofitable, good and evill , honeft and difho-
ne(f, and the like which every man eftecms
according to his own judgement; it belongs
tothe fame chiefe power to make fome come


mon Rules for all men, and to declare them


publiquely, by which every man may. kaow
3 what may. be called his, what anochers , what


Jufk , what unjuft , whac hous, what Bt 4


Boch Swords therefore, as well this of War,


troverfies are bred froin hence, that the.


Sword is nothing ele but to have power by —
right to ufe the {word at his ownwill, it
fo)


awk ee


Dominion. — ot
act, what good , what evill ,° that is fumma-
ily, what is 0 be done , what to be avoyded
jn our common courfe of life. But thofe
Rules and meafures are ufually called the
tivill Lawes , or the Lawes of the City, as be-
ing the Commands of him who hath the fu-
preme power in the City.And the CEVIL L
LAWES (that we may define them) are
nothing elfe but the commands of him who
hath the chicfe authority im the City , for di-
tettion of the future ations of his Citi-
zens.
X. Furthermore, fince the affaires of That the
the City, both thofe of Warre , and Peace, taming of
“cannot poflibly be all adminiftred by one Magiftrats
man, or one Counfell , without Officers and and Offi-
fubordinate Magiftrates 5 and that it apper- cers,belongs
tains to Peace, and.common defence, that to hist alfo.
they to whom it belongs juftly to judge of 4
_ cOntroverfies , to fearch into neighbouring
counfels, prudently to wage wary and on all
hands warily to actend the benefit of the Ci-
ty,fhould alfo rightly exercife their officessit
is confonant to reafon, that they depend on,
and be chofen by him who hath the chicfe 4
command both in War, and in Peace. ! ig
X IIe is alfq-manifeft , that all voliin- pp, Exa.
tary ations have their beginning from, and. jnarion of.
neceflarily depend on the will, and that the go gyjnes
will of doing, or omitting ought , depends belongs to
onthe opinion of the good and evill of the pin jike= °
reward or punifhment,which a man conceives wife. “e
he thall receive by the a, or omiflion3fo as
the ations of ali men are ruled by the opi-
“tions ofeach; wherefore by evident and
Neceflary inference, we may underftand:
that it very much concerns the intereft of:
Y ; ~s» Peace


i
+


cane


maines for him that denies, then him that
yeelds obedience, For if one command


any ‘Principle , neither in the wor bip of Gods


| nor huriane (ciences, from wobence there map


not fpring diffestions, difcordsreproaches 5 and


» by degrees mar ix: (ibfesneithor dith this happen”


(om of th d of the Principle, buc of
te dipetlon pe Lee


» them/elues; will weeds appear fuch to all others:
“But; though fuch diffentions canner be bindes


red from arifing, yet may they. be. refrained


the excreife ofthe fupreme porver;thar they prove


ap. 6- Dominion, one
ty hinderance to the publique peace. Of thefe
find of opinions therefore 1 have not spoken of
iashis place. There are certaiudoctrines where
with Subjedts being tainted , they verily bea
lieve that obedience may be refufed to the City,
aad that by Right they may , nay ought, to op-
Mes aad fight againft. chiefe Princes, and dig~
wities. Such are thofe, which whether directly,
and openly , or more obfcurely , and by-conft=
require obcdicnce to be.given to others
Wife shen towhom the fuprene authority i,
‘committed. I deny not , but this reflects.on that
power which many living under other goveru=
ment , afcribe to the chiefe head of the Church
sf Rome, and al/o on that, which elferchere out
ofthat Church, Bifhops require in theirs , to be
given to them ; and LaSt of alt , on shat Liberly
which the lower fort of Citizens under pretence
| of Religion doc challenge to pati) for
at. civill war was there ever inthe Chriftran
world, which did not cither grow from,or was
nourifbt by this Root ? The judgement there-
forcof doftrines , whether they be repugnant,
tocivill obedience or not , and if they be repug-
uantsthe power. of prohibiting them to be taught,
T doc here attribute to tbe civill authority; for
fiice therets xo man who grants not to the Ci-
tythe judgement of thofe things which belong to
| its Peace,and defence,ana it-is manifeft tbat the
spinious webich T have already recited do relate 10
its Peace, it followes nece(Sarily , thas the exa-
mination of thofe..opinions, , whether. they. be
ich, or not, muft be referred. to. the City , that
| Bt0 bim who bath the fupreme authority. Whatfoe-
_XIL Laft of all , “from this, confidera- ver be doch
tion , that each Citizen hath fubmitted his # anputit.
Willto his who hath the Supreme, Command. fhable,
Beats st ; Rub


jeoe


4 Dominion “chapel


inthe City, fo as he may not employ: his
ftrength againft him sic followes manie
feltly,that whatfoever fhall be done by bim
who commands, muit not be punifhe3 for
as he who hath not power enough,’ cans
not punifh bim naturally ; fo neither can
he punith him by Right , who by Right
hath not fufficient power,

That be ~~ XIII. tis mot menifett by what hath


hath anab- been faid, That in every perfe City.


folute do- (that is, where, no Citizen hath Rightto
minion ufe his faculties, at his owne difcretion, for
Sranted the prefervation of himfelfe, or where the
him by bis Right of the private Sword is excluded )
Citizens, there is a Supreme power in fome one, greater
aud what then which cannot by Right be conferr'd
proportion by men, or, greater then which no
of ebedicuce mortall man can have over him(elf. But


is ducunto that power, greater then which cannot by’


bim, men, be conveigh’d on aman, we call vi
ABSOLUTE: for whofoever hath fo
fubmitted his will to the will of the City,

bat be can, wnpunifht, doe ang thing, make
Lames , judge Controverfies , fet Penalties ,
make ufe,at his own pleafure,of the /trength,
and wealih of men, andall this by Right,
truly he hath given him the greateft domi«
nion that can be granted. This fame may

e confitm’d by experience in all the Gi-


ties which are, or. ever have beene$ for |


though it be fometimesin doubt, what Man,
or Counfell, bath the Chief Command, yet
ever there is ‘fuch a Command, and al-


wayes exercis’d, except in the time of Se-”


dition, and Givill War, and then there are
two Ghtefe Commands made out of one:
Now thofe feditious perfons who difpute
: agai


ap. 6. Dominion.
again abfolute Authority, doe not fo
- much care to deftroy it, as to conyeigh ic
- onothers 5 for removing this power, they
together take away Civill Society, and
aconfufion of all things rewurnes. “There is
fomuch obedience joyn’d to this abfolure
Right of the Chief Ruler, as is neceflarily

- yequir’d for the Government of the City ,
tharisto fay, fo much as that Right of his
may not, be granted in vaine. Now this
kindof obedience, although for fome rea-
fonsit-may fometimes, by Right, be de-
ny’d, yet becaufe a greater cannot be per=
form’d, we will call it SIMPLE. But the

| obligation to performe. this growes not
"immediately from that Contraé by which
“webave conveigh’d all our Right on the
City , but mediately hence, That,
without obedience, the Citics Right would
be fruftrate, and by confequence there
would be no City conftituted. For it is
one thing if I fay, I give you Right to
Command what you will; another, if I
fay, I will doe whatfoever you Command 5
and the Command may be fuch, as. I would
rather die then doe it’; forafmuch therefore
#8 no man can be bound to will being
KilP'd, much leffle is he tyed to that, which
tohimis worfe then death: if therefore I


be commanded to kill my felf, Iam not -


bound to doe it 5 for though Ideny to doe
it; yetthe Right of dominion is not fiu-
ftrated, fince others may be found, who
being commanded, will not refufz to doe
it; neither doe I refufe to doe that which I
have contraGted ro doe. In like manner, if
the Chief Ruler command any man to kill
Wee G him,
ies


96


sw


Dominion, Cup


. him, he is not tyed to doe it, becaufe it cane


not be conceiv’d that he made any fuch
Covenants nor if hecommand to execute
‘a Parent, whether‘he be innocent,or guilty,
and condemned by. the Law, ‘fince there
are others ; who, being commanded, will
doe that, anda Son will rather die, then
live infamous, and hated’of all the world,
There are many other cafes, in which, {ince
the Commands are fhamefull to be done'by
fome, and not by others, Obedience may,
by Right, beperform’d by thefe, and re
fus’d/by thofe; and this, without breach of
that abfolute Right which was giveno the
ChiefRuler. For inno cafe is the Right
taken away from him, of {laying thofe who
fhall refule to obey him. But they who
thus kill men, although by Right -given
them from ‘hing that hath it, yet they ule
that'Right otherwife then right Reafon re-
quires, they fin againft the Lawes of Nas
ture, (that is) againft God. -

Abfolute] 4 popular flate openly chal
geth abjolute dominion, and the Citizens op
pofe a not, for in the gathering together of
many men,they acknowledge the face of a (ity s
and eventhe uns kilfull underftand, that manters
there are rul’d by Counfell. Yet Monarchy is
no leffe a City, then Democraty, and abjolute
Kings have their Counfellours , from whoa
they willtake advice, and fuffer their powtt,
in matters uf greater confequence, to be guided,
but nor recall’'d, But it appears not ro oft mea
how a City is contain’d in the Peorfon of 4
King 3 and shercforc they objet againft Ab.
folute Command: Firft, that if any man bad
[uch a Right , the condition of the Citizens

would
el


Chap. 6. Dominion.
‘would bemiferable: For thus they think, He
will take all, foil all, kill all ; and every man
counts ibis onely happinieffe that be is not al~
ready fpoil’dand kil'd, But why Prould be
doc thus? not becanfe he cam; for unleffe he
havea — Si be we not doe it, sec be;
topleaicone, or fome few, fpoil all the reff?
Bap dgh by Right, that ts, without po
torher, be may doe it, yer can he not doeit
joftly, that ds, without breach of the Naturalt
Lames,and injary againft Ged. And therefore
there is {ome fecurity for Subjetts in. the Oarhs
which "Princes take. Next, if he could juff-
¥y doe it, or that he made no account of bis
Oath, yot appeares there uo reafon why he
fould defive it’, fince be findes no good in
it, Buti cannot be deny’d but a Prince may
fomctimes bavean inclination to doe wickedly 3
but grant then that shou bad@ given hiw a
power which were not abfolure, but fo much
onely an /riffic'd to defend thee from the injuries
_ of others, which, if shou wilt be fafe, is nem
fing for thee to grve 5 are not all the fame
tnestobe feared ? forbe thathath Strength
‘enough to protect all, wants not fufficiency ro op
pefeall. Here is noother dificulty then, but
that humane affaires cannot be wishout fome in=
Sonvenionce. wAnd this inconvenience it felf is
inthe Citizens, not in she Government ; for if
men could rule themfelues, every mau by his
On cominand, that’s tofay, could they live ac~
| cording v0 the Lawes of Nature, there would
bene wed. at-all ofa City, nor of a.common ca
“ertive power, Secondly, they objedty That there
uno Dominion ix the Chriftian world Abfo-
line ; which inileed is not true, for all Monar-
dies aud all orber States, are fo for although
iggk Ga they.


97


TT


=a


Dominion. Be |


ibey, who have the chief Command, doe rotall
thofe things they would, and what they know
profitable to the City, she reafon of thar ts not
the defect of Right in them, but she confideratix
on of their Citizens, veho bufied> about their
private interet, and careleffe a wohiat tends to
the publique, cannot fometimes be ravwn to pera
forme their dusies without the baxard of the
City, Wherefore Princes fometimes forbear
the exercife of their Right, and prudently remit
fomewbat of the aét,but noxbing of their Right,

XIV. Neither can any man. give


That he % fomewhat to himfelfe; for he is already:
not tied to fappos'dto have. what he cari give himf{elf;
obferve the nor can he be oblig’d to himfelfe,, for the
_ Lawes of fame Party being both the obliged, and the


the (ity.


Obliger, and the Obliger having power to
releafe the obliged,it were meerlyin vain for
aman tobe obliged ‘te: himfelfe; becanfe
he can releafe himfelf -at his own: plea


* fure 5 and he that can doe this; is already


actually free. Whence its plaine, that the
City is not tyed to the Civil! Lawes 5 for
the Ciyill Lawes are thé Lawes of the
City, by which, if the. were engag’d, the
fhould be engag’d to her felfe. Neither can
the City be oblig’d to her Citizen;becaule,
it he will, he can free her from her obliga
tion; and he will, as oft as the wills, (it
the will of every Citizen isin all things

comprehended in the will of the City) the

City therefore is free when the: pleateths

thee is, the is now. adtually frees butthe

will of a Cozncell, or one who hath:the Si
preme Authority given him,is the will ofthe |
City ; he theretore containes the wills of al
particular Citizens : Therefore neither is


Chapeé: — Deminions
“pebound tortlie Civill Lawes (forthisisto ©
| bebound to-himfelf) nor to any of his Ci- eta


Zens.
Oxy. Nowbecanfe (as hath been (hewn That no
above) before the conttiturion of a City al? man can
things belong’d.to all men, nor is there that challenge a
| thing which any man can focallbis;: as any propriety in
~ othermay not, bythefame Right, claime oyehr a-
ashis own, (for where all things are com- gaint bim
mon, there can be nothing proper to any who hath
man), it followes, that (*)ipropréety receiv’ d the supreme
itsbeginning when Cities: receiv} ditheirsy Peyer,
and. that that. onely is properto each man
_ which he cankeep by the Lawes, and the®
power of the whole City, (that is) of him
on whom its chief command is conferr’d.
Whence we underftand, thac each particu-
lar Citizen hath apropricty, to which none ;
of his'fellow- Citizens hath Right, becaufe 4
they are-tyed to the fame Lawes 5 but he”
bath no proprictycin which the Chief Ruler
(whofe Comands are the Lawes,whofe wil.
contains the will of each man, and who, by
every fingle perfon, iseonftitured the Sw-
‘preme Fudge) hath not a Right. But al-
though therecbe many. things -which ‘the
City petmits roits Citizens, and therefore
they: may fomerimés goe to Law againft
their Chief. yet is not that adtion belong-
| ing to Civil! Right, butto Natural Equity ;


neither is in concerning what (*) by Right) - j
he may-doc who-hath the Supreme Power but’ :
what, he hath : been avilling: | ‘bedonc, a
_ and therefore he fhall be yudgehimfelfj as.
- thotgh (che equity of rhe caufe being well ; Aa
| underftood) he could not give wrong judg- aa
BAS spay <3\'T Saline 2d 02 |
i ev “ G 3 Pros 1
| . E35 : Pe


_ Awnota-


aaa


‘109


tit.


Tt is known


Dominion. — Ch


__ Propriety veceiv'd its beginning, &e.7
yA


What's objected by fome, That: th


of goods, cven before the conftitution of Cities,


was found in Fathers of Families, that objeftin
on is vaine, becaufe I have already declard,
Thar a Family is alittle City : PP ection:
of a Family havea propricty of their

granted them by their F ather, dshingsiheine
deed from the reft of the Sons of the fame Fan


mily, burnot fym the propriety of the Father |


bimfelf , but the Bathers of divere F amities,
who are fubject neither to any common Fda
ther, nor Lord; have common Right in alt
gs.
What by Right he may doe, &e.] As
often asa Citizen is grautcd to have an adtion


of Law againft the Supreme, ice. againfi the


City, the-queftion is not inthat action, whee
ther the City may, by Right, keep poffeffion of
the thing in coutroverfie , bit whether by the
Lawes formerly made the would keep it ; far
the Law is the declared will of the Supreme:
Since then the City may raife money from the
Citizens under rwo Titles either as Tribute, or


4 Debt’, in the former cafethere is no action of”


Law allowed ; for there cam be to queftion whe=
ther the City have Right to require ‘Tribue s
poy ney learn sig
sake nothing from its Citigens. by fraud, of
cunning: and yer if needorequire, all they have,
openiy s and therefore he that condemnes this
place, faying, That by this doctrine it is cafe for
Priases to freethemfclves- from wbeir Debtty
he doesit impertinently. 2
X VI. Theft, Murther, Adultery , andalt


by the civill injuries ave forbid-by the Lawes of nanure,


Laws what bur what is tobe called Theft, rie


>


fie!


ther, what Advltery , what injury in a\Cici- theft, mura
zen, this isnotto-be determined by the na- zher,adul-


wrill,but bythe ciuill Law: for not every tery, and


taking away of the thing. which anotber djur
plleleds, but 0


nely aneiber mans goods is


s but whatis ours, and what anorthers,-


4s a. queftion belonging tothe civill Law.
In like manner; not every killing of aman
is Morther , but onely that which the civil’
Law forbids ; neither is allencounter with


women Adxlteyy, but onely that which the '


Guill Law prohibits. Laftly’, all, breach of
promile.is aninjury, where the promile ic
felfeis lawful, but: where there: is no Right
to make any compaét, therecan be no con-
veighance of it, and therefore there can. no
injury follow, as hath been {aid in the fe-
cond Chapter, Artic.n7.Now what we may
contraét for, and: what nat,. depends whole
ly upon the-civill Lawes. The City of La-
sedemon therefore righ! ordered that thofe
“ young mem whocould PA take away certain
goodsfrom others as not to be caught;(hould
goe unpunifht;for it was nothing <lfe,but to
make a Law that what was: fo acquired
Mould be their own,and not anorbers, Right~
ly alfois thar man every where flain, whom
we kill in: warre, or by the neceffity of felfc~
defence, So -alfo that copulation whichin
one City is Matrimony , in another will be
judged Adultery, Alfo thofe contraéts which
make up Marriage in one Citizen’, doe nct:
fo in another, althouglt of the fame Citys
becaufe that he who is forbidden by the Ci~
ty (that is by that ome man,or Counsell, whofe:

4 ipreme povecr is) to contraé ought,hath
no Right to makeany conttaé’, and there~
ius : G4 fore


ic argo


be For ys ‘Dominion. f
© fore having made any , it is not valid, and
F : by confequence, no Marriage. But his con.
“ : tract which received nd prohibition , was
Saas therefore of force, and fo was Matrimony:
neither addes it any force to any unlawful
‘conttaces, that they were made by an Oath,
'€*) ot Sacrament,for thofe adde nothing to
the ftrenghning of the contraé,as hath been
faid above Chap.2. Artic.22. What therefore
Theft, what Murther, what Adultery, and in
: -generall what ivjury i, muft be known by
te the efuill Lawes, that is, the commands of
him who hath the fipreme aushority. ‘
: That they were made by an Oath or Sa
eeeion crament, &c.] Whether Y Mave bee 4
Sacrament (in which fen{e that word is ufed by
fome Divines) or nov, it is uot my pupofero
difpate ; Onely I fay, tbat tbe legitimate ote
wralt of. man and woman to live together; ie.
granted by the civill Law, whether t bea Ste
~ Grament, or not  % furely a legitimate Martie
age; but that copulation which the City hath
prohibited is no marviage , fice it is of the c=
fence of Marriage tobe a legitimate contrat,
There were legitimate marriages in many pla-
ces, de amoug the Fewes, the Grecians , the
Romans, whtch yer mighs be diffolved; but with
‘whofe who permit no fuch contraits , but by a
Law that they fhall never be. broke , Wedlock
sannorbe diffolved, andthe reafon is, becaufeshe
City hath commanded it to be indiffoluble, wot
becaufe Matvimony, is a Sacrament. Where
fore the ceremonies which at weddings. are to
be performed in thcTemple,to bleffc,or(if I may
| fy ‘D) to confecrate ee eis ye wife, will
Be perhaps belong only to the office of (lergy-men ,
kee. all the reft, namely who, whet 5 aud by what —
( ; contraits


— contratts Marriages may. be:
tothe Lawes. of the City. ; 4 Be
 X VIL This lame fipreme commandjand The opinion
abfolute power, feems fo harfh to the greatett of zhu/e”
part of men,ias. they: hate the very naming who would
of thems ‘which -bappens chiefly through conftitute a
want of knowledge; what humane nature,and Gity where.
the civil! Lawes are, and partly alfo throughs there fhould ©
their default, who when they areinyefted not be any
with: fo great authority , abufe their power ove endued
totheir own luft.. ‘Thar they may therefore with abfo-
avoyd this kind of: fupreme authority, fome tute power. -.
ofthem will have: a City well enough con-
Rituted , if they who fhall be the Citizens
convening:, doe agree Concerning certaine
Articles propounded and in that convent
agitated and approved 5 and doe command
them tobe oblerved; and punifhmentspre=
feribed tobe. infli@ed on them who fhall
breakthem : to which: purpofe, and -alfo to.
the repelling of a forraign enemy , they ap-
point a certain and limited return, with this
condition; that if that fuffice not, they may
calla new convention of eftates, Who fees
_ fovinca City thus conflitured, thar the Af- :
fembly who preferibed thofe things had an i
abjolute: power? \ If therefore. the Affembly =|
continue, or from time ‘to’ time: have a cer-
tain day ; and place of meeting, that iced
will be perpetnall. But if they wholly dif-
folve, ‘either the City diflolves with them,
and fo allisiveturned to the-fhate. of War, or
clfe thereiis fome where aypower left-to pu-
nifh thofe who! fhall tranfarefse the Lawes,
whofoevir,or how many foever they bethac
have it,which cannot poftibly be withouran
 abfoluse powers for be that by right hath this
38 G5 might.


8 :
mdde , pertains


Di a. o a
might given, by punifhments to reftrain


_ what Citizens he pleafeth, hath {uch a pow,


rs a8 a greater cannot poflibly be given by
any Citizens. ‘ ia
X VILL Ieistherefore manifett',, thay
in every City there is fome one manor Cum.
orll, or Courts who by Right hath as greata
power over each fingle Citizen,as each man
hath over himfelfe confidered out of that ci
vill fate; that is, fupreme and abfolute ,. to be
limited onely by the ftrength and forces. of
the Cityit felfe , and by nothing elfe in the
world for if his power. were limited, that
limitation muft necefflarily: praceed from
fome greater power 5. For he that prefcribes,
limits., muft have a greater power then he
who isconfin’d by them 5. now. that confi«
ning: power is. either without limit,or is:ax
gain reftrained by fome other: greater then
it felfe, and fo we fhall at lengehyarrive to
power which hath. no other limit , bur that
which. is the terminus ultimus of the forces
ofall the Citizens together. That. fame is
ealled:the fupreme command, and if it bee
sommitted to. a.couucell, a fupreme councells
but ifto-one man, the fupreme Lord of the:
City, Now the: notes of fupreme command
are thele, To make and. Ain Lavoes,Tode>
termine Way,aud Pesce;to know, and jus
of henna either by gore :
fudges appointed by hims to eleG all Mae
giltraces, Miniffersy and Counfellors, ‘Laftly,
ifthere be any. man who by Right: can doe
forme one ation whichis not law full for any
Citizen or Citizens to doe befide himfelfe;.
that man hath obtained the fupreme power?:
Foy tole. dhings. which by, Righe mayne ;


’ 1 a=


PR S. : ria oe
| @hap. 6. Dominione Tos
_be done by any one or many Citizens; the:
City it felfe can onely doe : He therefore
that doth thofe things ufeth the Cities
Right, which is the fupreme power.

ai X. They who compare a City and If the City
its Citizens, with aman andhis members, be compared
almoft all fay, that he who hath the fupreme with a.
power inthe City,isin relation tothe whole man, bee
Ciry, fuch as the head isto the whole mans who barb»
Bur it appeares by what hath beeralready zbe fupreme.
faid, that he who is endued with fucha command,is.
power, (whether it beaman, or a Court) inorder to:
Hath a relation to the City, not as that of the the City, as:
head, but of the foule to the body. For it is the bumane.
the foule by which a man hath a will,that is, foule is to
can either will, or nill; fo by him who hath the many.

__ the fispreme power, and no otherwife,the Ci- By Chap...
ty hath a will, and can either will ornill. A Artic.
Court of Counfellors is rather to be compa-
red with the head,or one Counfellor,whofe
only Counfell if of any one alone) the eae ‘

Ruler makes ufe of in matters of greateft:
moment: for the office of the head isto.
counfell , as the foules isto command.

X X.Forafmuch as che fipreme command phar she-
is conftituted by vertue' of the compacts’ fupreme ~
which each fingle Cisizen, or fabje, mu- power Gate
tually makes wich the other 5. but all com~ top byRigho:
ttadts, as they receive their force from the bedifvol-
contractors , fo by their confent they lofe’ yed by their:
itagain, and ave broken; perhaps fome may confente, by,
inferre hence, thar by the confent of albthe whofe com=
fabjects together, the ey pi May pats it
be wholly taken away. Which inference if it yas conftie.
were true, E cantor difcerne whardanger pyrqf,
would thence by Right arife to the fupreme :
Commanders, Por fince it is fuppofed , 3

4 acc sega yeaa


“406 Dominion. =~ Chap
~ each one hath obliged himfelfe to each .


ther, ifany one of them fhall refufe, what(g,


ever the reit fhall agree ro doe , he is bound


notwithftanding s neither can any mag
without injury to me, doe that whichb
contrac: made with me, he hath oblige
himfelfe not to doe. But it is not to’be ima-
gined that ever it will happen , thar all the
fubjects rogether , net fo much as one ex.
cepted’, will combine againft the fapreme
power, whereforethere is no. feare for Rue
Jers in chiefe, that by any, Right they canbe
defpoyled of thelr authority. If notwith.
ftanding it were granted,th1t their Right de»
pended onely on that conttaé which each
man makes with his fellow-citizen,it might
very eafily happen,that they might berob
ef that Dominion under pretence of Rights
for fubjeGs being called either by the coma
mand of the City,or feditioufly flocking tox
gether, moft men think that the confents of
allare contained in the votes of the. greater
partswhich in truth is-falfesfor itis not from
nature thatthe confent.of the major pait.
thould be received for the confent of all,nei-
ther isirtrue in tumults, bue it proceeds.
from civillinftitution , and is then onely
true, when that Man or Court which hath the.
fupreme power, affembling his fubje&s, by.
reafon.of the greatneffe of their number, ale
lowes thofe that are eleéted a power of fpeae
king for thofe who eleGted them, and will
have the major. part of voyces, in fuch mate
ters as.are by him propounded to be dilcutt,
to beas effeGtuall as the whole, But we cans
not imagine that he who is cbiefe , evercon«
ened his fubjeéts with intention. that then
; ee


3 ee ~ wae a a ee
* Chap. 6. Dominion. : 107
foould difpute his Right, unlefse, weary’ of
the burthen ‘of his charge, he declared in
lain termes , that he renounces and aban-
Heat his government. Now becaufe moft
men through ignorance efteem not the con~
fent of the major part of Citizens only, but
even of avery few, provided they be of their
opinion , for the confent of the whole City,
it may very well {eem to them, that the
fupreme authority may by right be abrogated,
fo it be done in fome great Afsembly of Ci-
tizens by the votes of the greater numbers
But though a government be conftituted
by the contraéts of particular men with par-
ticulars , yet its Right depends not on that
obligation onely , there is another tye alfo
toward him whocommands ; for: each Ci-
tizen compacting with :his fellow, fayes
thus, I conveigh my Right on this Party, upon *
condition that you paffe yours to the fame 3 by
which means, that Right which evety man
had before to ufe his faculties to his own ad=
vantage, is now wholly tranflated on fome
-. certain man, er Councell, for the common é
benefits wherefore what by the mutuall con-- .
traéts each one Hath made withthe other,
_ what by the donation of Right which every
man ig bound to ratifie to him that com- :
‘mands, the government is upheld by a dou- <s
' ble obligation from the Citizens, firft hat c
which is due to their fellow citizens, next :
that which they owe to their Prince. Where-
fore no fubjeds how many foever they be,
canwith any Right defpoyle him who bears
the chiefe Rule, of his authority, even withs
‘out his own confent,


‘CHAP,


Cua, VIER Soe
Of the three kindes of Govern.
ment, Demosraty, Arifto-
craty, Monarchie>,


I, That there are three kindes of Ga-


wernmeat onely, Democtraty, Ari«
rillocraty, Monarchie. IT. That
Oligarchy is not a diverfe form of
Lovernment diffink from Ariffon
craty, nor Anarchy any Forme at
alt. L111. That a Tyranny is nora
diverfe flate from a legitimate
Monarchy. IV. That there cane
not be amixt fate fafbioned out of
thefe feverall fpecies. V. That Den
moeraty, except there be certain
times and places of meeting prefixt,
tsdiffolv'd. VI. In a Democraty
the intervalls of the rinses of mette
ing muft be fhort, or the. admini-
{tration of Government during
the intervall committed to ome
one. ‘VII.JnaDemocraty pare
ticulars Contratt with particulars
to obey the People ; the People #
oblig'd to-no man, VIII. By what?
atts Ariftocraty. is conflituted.
IX. Jn an Ariftocraty ihe Nobles:
n> make


”


re


Chap. 7. inion,


| make no Compatt, neither are they


oblig’a to any Citizen, or to the
Whole People, X. The Nobles muff
neceljarily have their fet meetings,
XL. By what aéts Monarchy is con=


ftituted. XTY. Monarchy a by


Compatt oblig'd to none for the Au=


thority it hath-receiv'd. XII. Mo-
narchy 4 ever tathe readicff capa
city to exercife all thofe atts Which
are vequifite te good Governments
XIV. What kind of fin that ts, and
what fort of mem are guilty: of it,
When the City performes not its
office towards the (itizens, nor the
Citizens tovards the City. XV..A
Monarch made without Hmitation
of time hath power to elett his face
ceffor, XVI. Of limited Monarchs.

VII. AMonarch retaining his


- Right of Goversment, cannot by


any promife Whatfoever'be concei=


_ vedto have parted with his Right to


the meanes neceffary to the exer


» 6ife of his, Authority. XVII. How


Li


4 Citizen 1s freed. from. file


jeltion.


VVE have alteady fpoken ofa There are:


Gity: by: inflitwtion in. irs Ge» three kinds:


ee eee eee ere ot ri Cra


s


oo


TIO  ——s Donsrnion,
onely. {pecies. As for the difference of Citi
joi i taken from the difference of the Peifer sy)
Ariftocra- to whom tke Supreme Power.is committed 5
‘ty, and Mo- this power is committed either to one Many
narchy, ot Gowncell, ‘or fome one Court confilting
: of many men, Farthérmore, a Couricell o
b many men, confilts either of all the Citi-
J zens, (infomuch as every man of them hath
a Right to Vote, and an intereft in the
ordering of the greatelt affaires, if he will
himfelfe).ox.ofa part onely 5 from whence
there arile three forts of Government: The
one, when the Power. is in a Corneell ,
where every Citizen hath'a tight to Vote,
and ivis call'd aDEMOCRATY. The
other,: when\it is ina Courcell, where not
all; but fome pact onely have their fuffia-
ges, and we calli an, ARISTOCRA.
TY. The third sis . thar, when the Su-
prome Authority refts onely in one, and itis
itiled a MONARCHY. ‘Tn the firlt, he
that goverties is called ‘Aijuos, The
PEOPLE. Inthe fecond, the N O-
BLES. in the third, the-MO-
eine of NE age Som ee :
| Oligarchie — 11+ Now, although Aincient Writers of
eS he Politiques. ‘have jmodiicd three “other
of a Ciy indés of Government oppofite to thefe,
| diftintt == ©. Wit, Anarchy or confuGon to Democraty,
‘from Ari. Oligarchy , that is, the command. of fome
“flocratie s few; to Ariffocrayy,and Tyranny to Monarchy,
“meither is Yet axe notthefe three ‘diftin@ formes of —
anarchic Government, but three diverfe, Titles
lany Sate §iven by thofe who were either difpleas’d
“at all, with that prefenc Government’; ‘ory thiofé
a that bare Rule, For men, by giving nimesy
doe ufuailys not onely fignifie a |
. : theme-


@y


Chap.7)— Dominioiis a ae
themfelves 5 but alfo their own affettions, ies
as love, hatred, anger, andthe like, whence Pas |
irhappens thac what one man calls a De~
mocraty » another calls an Anarchy 3 what
one counts.an Ariftocraty, another efteemes
an Oligarchie ; and whom one titles a King,
another files hior a Tyrant; fo-as welee
thefe names beroken not adiverfc kinde of
Government, but the diver/é opinions of the
Subje@s concerning him who hath the
Supreme Power, For firft, who fees not |
that Anarchy is equally oppofite to all the:
forenam’d Formes ? For; that word figni«
fies that here is no Goverhment at all, that
is, notany City. Buthow isit poffible
that ne City fhould bethe {pecies of @ City?
Farthermore, what difference is there be- .
tween an Oligarebie, which fignifies the
Command of a few, or Grandecs, or an
AviGoctaty, whicl is that of the Prime, or
Chief Heads, more then that men differ
foamong themfelves, thatthe fame things
feeme not good to'all men ? whence it hap-
eo that thofe perfons, who by fome ate :
‘aok’d on asthe be8t, are dy others efteem’d
to be the wor/t of all men.

III, But men, by reafon of their pafli- That aTy- *
ons, will very hardly be perfwaded that a rauuy 5 noe
Kingdome, and Tyranny , are not diverfe a diverfe
kindes of Gities, who though they would State from =
rather have the City fubjeét to one, then alegitemate
many, yee doe’ they not beleeve it to be well Monarchy.
govern’ d unleffe it accord with: their judge- |
ments: Bat we mult difeover by Reafon,
and not by Paflion, what the difference is ia
between a King, and a Tyrant: but firkt, .
they differ not inthis, Thac a Tyrant oe t Bey

‘ tae


‘


| That there


pe


Dominion.


the greater power, for greater then the.
premecannot retabscR. 5 nor in this, Thay
one hath alimited power, the other noty
for he, whofe authority is limited, is uo King,
but his Subjed that limits him, L
neither diffcr they in their manner of ace
uifition’; for ifin a Democraticall, ot Atix
call. Government fome one Citizen |
thould, by force, poffefle himfelf of the Sym
preme: Power,if he gain the confent ofall the
Citizens,he becomes.a legitimate Monarch;
ifnot, heis:an Enemy, nota Tyrant, They
differ therefore inthe fole exercife of their
command, infomuch ag he is faid tobe a
King,who governs wel,and he a/Tyrant that.
doth otherwife. The cafe therefore is brought
to. this paffe, That a King pram
ly conftituted im his Government, if he feeme


. tohis: Subjeéts: to Rule well, and tov their’


liking; they afford:him the sppellarionofa
King, ifnor, they count fim: a: Tyrants
Wherefore we fee a Kingdome, and Tyran
ny, are not diverfe Formes of Govern
ment, but one and the felf-fame Monarch —
hath the name of a King given him-in
point of Honour, and Reverence to him, —
and of a Tyrant-in way. of contumely, and —
reproach, Bur what we frequently findein
bookes aidagain(t Tyrants, took its-origi«
nall from Greek, and Roman Writes,
whofe Government was: partly Democratie
call,and partly Ariftocraticall, and theree j


. fore not Tyraits onely , bur even King


were odious to them.
TV. There are, whio indeed doe think it


 canno mixt neceffarily, Thac a Supreme (ommauk


| flate be
|
BS.


fhould. be fomewhere extant in a oo


ap.7. Dominion. : "ng
| bubific fhould bein any one; either Man, form'd out
oot would follow (they: fay) = thee —
allthe Qitizens muft be flaves. Avoiding fore-nam’d.
thiscondition, they imaginethat there may kindes of
bea certaine Form: 8f Government som- Govern-
pounded of thofe three kinds we have fpoken ment,
of, yet different from. each: particular,
which they calb azmixe Atonarchie, or mixt
Ariftocraty, or mixt Democraty, according
as any one of thefe three forts fhall be
more eminent then the reft : For example,
if the naming of Magiftiates, and the arbi«
tration of War, and: Peace, fhould’ belon
tothe King, Judicature tothe Lords, and:
contribution of Monies to the People, and
the power of making Lawes tooaltegether,
this lind of State would they call amit
' Monarchie forfooth, Bur if ir were poffix -*
ble thar there could: be:fuch a Ssate:, it
would no whit advantage: theiliberty of the
fubje€& 5 for as long as. they all agrees
ach fifigle Citizen is as much fubjett as
poflibly he can be; but if they difsgree,
the State returns to a Civill: War, and the
Right of the private Sword, which certainly
is: much worfe then any fubjeétion. whatfo-
ever: (*): Bue that there can be no: {uch
kind of Government hath been fufficiently
demonttrated in the foregoiig’ Chapters
Artic: 647,8,9,10,11,12.
+ Burthar there can be'no fuch kinde of Annota-
Government] Moi men grant, That a Go~ tion.
vernment onght norto be divided, but. they
would have ix moderaed, and bounded by fome
_— Uinaits. Truly iv. is'very reafonable it fhould be
(bs, bat if thefemen, when they sheak of mode~
tating and limiting, do underftand dividing i
Sed u cy


they make'a very fond diftinétion. Truly,
"my part, Twifh that not onely Kings, but
other Perfons endued with Supreme Authority.
would fo-temper. themfelves as to commit ny
wrong, and onely minditigtheir charges coxtain.
themfelves within the limits of the naturall,and
divine Lames «But they who diftinguifh thus,

they would bave the chief power bownded, and
reftrain’d by others ; which, becaufedt caxnot. ~
be done, but that they who doe fetthe limirs,
mu needs have fome part.of the power, whercm
by they may be enabled 10 doc its the Gow |
“vernment % properly divided y not modcras
wed. |


That De- V.Letus fee alittle now inthe confti- —
| mocraty, turing ofeach Form of Government, what
excopt it the confticntours doe. Thofe who met |
bave.cér- together with intention to ere& “a Citys
_ tain times -were almoft in the very ad of meetinga
and places Democraty ; for in that they willingly mety
of meeting they are fuppos’d oblig’d to the obfervae
| prefcrib'd, tion of what fhall be determin’d ‘by the
‘& diffolv’d, major part: which’, while that convent —
lafts, or is adjourn’d to fome certain dayes,
and places, is aclear Democraty; for that
conyenty whofe will is:the will ofall the —
Citizens, bath the Supreme Authority ;-and
becaufein this Convent every: man ig
{uppos’d to havea Right to give his voice,it
followes,that it is a Democraty by the defini —
* tion given inthe firft Article of this Chap,
, Burifthey depart, and break up the:Con-)
vent, and appoint no time, or places where,
and when they thall meet again, the publick:
weal returns to eAnarchy, and the fame ftate
it ftood in before their meeting, that, is)”
tothe flate of all men watring ‘eine


People: therefore retains the fupreme
passer no longer then: there is a certain day
Jace publiquely appointed,and known,
which whofoever will , may refort. For
except that be known and-detetmined, they
~ gay either meet atidivers times , and places,
that is in fa@ions, or norat all; and then it
is no longer Sij.@-;the People bur a diffolure
mnultitude; to er we can neither attribuce
any Aétion , or Right : Two things therefore
- frame a Democratie , whereof one (to wit the
uall pre(cription of Convents) makes
dior 5 the: People, theother (which is a
plurality of yoyces) 70 xpeizoe or the power. aha
_ | WA. Furthermore, it will not be {uffici- In Demo= ;
* ent forthe People , fo as to maintain its fu- “ratie,the
premary, to have fome'certain known times, Zatervals
and places of meeting 5 uniefle that either oftberimes
theintervals of the times be of leffe diftance, of conve
then that any — may in the mean time #"g ™ufE
happen. whereby (by reafon of the defeét of be fort, or
power) the City may be brought into fome *he admi=


danger, or at leaft that the exercife of the nifirarion. —


_ fipreme authority -be, during the intervall, °f the g~
gtanted to forme. ome man, or Courtcell.\ For vermment


_ Peace of fingle men which ought to be,and
_ therefore will not deferve the name cf a Ci+
ty» becaufe chat in it for want of fecurity,
every mans Right of defending himfelfe at
his own iataeassrains to him again. .
WA. Democraty is not framed by con-
traGof particular Perfons, with the People, \. >”

_ but by mutuall.compaéts of fingle men each
- with others Bur hence it appears in the firft
place, that the Perfons contraGing, muft be

in’


unleffe this be done , there isnor that wary committed —
care, and:heed taken for the defence and ’/ame dit.


|


|


. 116 D inion.


‘wherefore there could then no contrad pafle.
between the People-and the Subjelt. Now,
ifafter that government is framed, the fib-
je@ make any contrad with the People,ic ig
in vain, becauferhe People contains within
its will , the willof that fubje&. to whom it
is fuppofed to be go 3 and therefore
may at its own will and pleafuce difengage
at felfe, and by confequence is now a@aally
free. Butrin the’ fecond place , that fingle
Perfons doe contrad each with other may
be inferred from hence, that in vain fure
would the City have been conftitured, if the
“Citizens bad been engaged by no conwaas
todoe , or omit what the City thould :com-
mand torbe done or omitted. Becaule theres }
fore fiuch kind of compas muft be under
ftood to paffe as necefsary tothe making
up of aCity, but none‘can be made (asis’
already thewed) between: the Subjed and
the People , it followes,that they muft be
made between fingle Citizens, namely chat
each man-contracét to fubmic his will rorhe
will of the majorpart, on condition tharthe
reft alfo doe the like, as if every one fhould
fay thus , I giveup my Right unto the Peo»
ple for your fake, on condition, that you ale
fo deliver up yours, for mine visite |
By whet. WE LTCKH “Aeiocpaty 4a ChihOM Gh
aéts at A- Nobles endued with (prone anthovitie, res
tiftocraty is ceives its originall from aDemocraty, which
dramed. gives.up ‘its Right unto ic, where we mu
underftand that certain men on i
rom


“Gan rf Do ttn
“from others 5 either by eminence of title,
blood , or fome other Character, are pro-


poundedito the People, and by plurality of
yoyces are eleéted , and-being elected , the
whole Right of the People , or City,iscon-

i onthem , infomuch as whatfoever
the People might doc before, the fameby
Right may this Court of elected Nobles now
‘doe; which being done , it is clear that the
People , confidered. ‘as one Perfon, (its :fute
preme authority being already twansferredon
thefe) is no longer now in being.

» IX. Asin Democraty che People,foin.an ry an Apis
Ariftooraty che Court of Nobles isfreefrom ffocyazy she
all manner of obligation;for feeing fubje&s Nobles.
‘hot contraéting with the ‘People,but by mu- make no
tuall compacts among themfelves,were tyed contract,
toall that the People did , hence alfo they nor arethey
were tyed to that act of the People in refign- obliged to
ing up its Right of government into the any citizen,
hands of Nobles. Neither could this Gourt, or tthe
although'eleéted by the People, be byitob- whole Peo,
ligedto any thing; for being ereéted, the ple. =
People is at once difsolved , as wasdeclared
above, and the authority it had as beinga
* Perfowutterly vanifheth. Wherefore the ob-
ligation which was due to the Perfon muft

‘o vanifh, and perifh together with ir,

X. Ariffecraty hath thefe confiderations, No-
together with Democraty; Firft, thar without 47, muff
@nappointment of fome certain times, and neseffarily
Places , at which the Court of Nobles may pavesheie

"Meet, itis no longer a Court, or one Perfon, fet mect~.
but a difsolure multirude without any fu- ings,
preme power 3 Secondly , that the times of > *
their afsembling cannot be disjoyned by _

_ lopg intervalls, wichout prejudice to the fu

[ wih preme


iar 4 AW ~

2 - Dominion. :

- preme power  unle(s¢ its adminiftration be
» transferred to fome one man :' Now the reas
~ fons why this happens, are the fame which,

; we fer down in the fifth Article. b,

_ Bywhit — XT. AsanAriftocratie,{o allo a Moxany.
alts a00- is derived from the Power of thePeople,
narchy # transferring its Right, (that is) its Authorie,
framed, — siegon one man: Here alfo we :muft under

ftand, that fome one man, either by name, or

fome other token, is propounded to be taken,

notice of above ail the reft , and that by a

‘plurality of voyces the whole Right of the

Pople is conveighed on him , infomuch as

wharfoever the ‘People could doe before he,

were. elected , the fame in every Refpet
may he by Right now doe, being elected?
which being done, the People is no longer
one Perfox, but arude multitude, as being

a only one before byvertue of the fiupreme come
Bagh mand, whereof they now have made a cons
That the yeyance from themfelves on this one Man.
‘Atonarch #2 <2 T. And therefore neither doth the

by compat Monarch oblige himfelfe to any for the com-

_ obliged 40 mand he receives, for be receives it fromthe

We ene for Peoples but as hath been fhewed above 5 the

“ People, as foon as that at isdone, ceafeth
to be a Per/on, but the Perfon vanithing,
obligation to the Perfon vanifheth, The fub-
jeéts therefore are tyed to perform obedi- -
ence,to the Monarch 5 by thofe compacts on-
ly by which they mutually obliged them-
felves to the obferyation of all rhat the Pete

¢ ple thould command them, (thavis) to obey _
. _... that Monarch, if he were made by che ,

—AMonarch — KILI. But a Monarchy differs as well
ever in from an Ariftocraty, asa Democratic, inthis

 thereadier chiefly , that in thofe there mult be a

“le , et


PePany


Cc ‘Dorinion,. 119

| for times and places for deliberation, and capacity to
contultation of affaires chat is, for the a@u- exercife all

* all exercife of it in all times, and places;Eor thefe aifs
die ett or the Nobles not. .being oe 1d= which are
wurall Berfon. mai nectfsarily have their requifite to
meetings. The Monarch whois one by na- weld go~
ture, isalwayes.in a/prefent capacity to ex= verning.
ecute his authority,

XIV,B caufe we have declared above What kind
inthe 7-9.and 12. Articles , that they who of fin shat
have gotten che fuprome command are by no is,and what ;

¢ompacts obliged to any man, it necellarily fort of men -
ven that they. cin.doc no injury to the are.guilty
fubjeds 5 for injury according to the def- of it,when
nition made in the third Article of the the City
third Chapter, is nothing elfe but a breach performs
ofcontraé: and: therefore where no con- zor its of=
trads have part, there cam be no injury. Yet ficeto the
the People,the Nobles,and the Monarch may (itizens,
diverfe wayes tranfgreffe againft the othet not theCe-
"Lawes of nature, as by cruelty, iniquity . con- rigens to~
tumely,and other like vices, which come not wards the
_ under this ftriG, and exa& notion of injury. City.
Bur if the fubjeét yeeld not obedience to the
" fupreme , he will in propriety of fpeech be
Anid to be injurious as ce to tii fellow fub-
jes, becaufe each man hath compaéted
with the other to obey , asto his chief Raler
inreluming that Right, which he bach gi-
ven him, without his confent. And in a
“Democraty, or Ariftocracy,if any thing be dee
teed againft any Law of nature, the City
‘it felfe (i, fp the; civill Perfon finnes not,
Dut thofe fubjc&s only by whofe votes it
Was decreed for finne, is a confequence of
- the natural exprefle will , not of the politi-
tall, which is artificialls for ifit were other=
H wile,


[
A
ee.


‘ Fall are all one.


. - oa
‘Deminion. — Chap.7,


; Wifes they would be guilty, by whom the de.


tree was abfolucely difliked : But in a afoe
narchie , if the Monarch make any decree
againft the Lawes of nature, he fins himfelfe,
becdufe in him ‘the civill will and the natu


AMonsrde ~ XV.The people wiio are’abour to make
_ made with- a Monarch,may give him the fupremacy either
out limita- {imply without limitation ot time; or fora


tion of.


certaine feafon,and time determined;if fim.


time may ply , we mauft underftand that he who ‘re.


elelt his


ceivesit | hath'the felfe-fame power ‘whith


fucceffors. they had, who gave it,on the fame grounds;


therefore thar the “People Ly Right could
make hima Monarch, may he make anorber
Monarch: infomuch as the Monarch to whom
the command is fimply ‘given, receivesa
Right not of poffefsion ony >. but of j t
fion allo, fo as‘he may declare whom
leafeth for his fiucceffor, .


Of limited ~ X VY. But-if the power be given fora
Mongrchs, time limited , we muft have regard to fome-


what more then the bare gift onely : Fir,
whether the “People conveighing its autho-
rity, left ir felfe any Righe'to meer at certain
times, and places,’ or not. ‘Next, ifit
“have referved this power, whether ir wele
done y fo as they might meet before tht
time were expiréd’, which. they prefcribed
‘to the Monarch. Thirdly , whether they

“were contented to meet onely at the will
‘that temporary Monarch ‘and not otherwile.
‘Suppofe now the Pecple had. delivered wie

“poswer to fome one man for term of life

3 which being done , let us fappofe inthe
ft place,that every man departed fiom the
Counfell withour making any order ar all
concern-


Fa Dominion,

eoncerning the place whete(after his death)
they fhould meet again to make anew:cle=
fon. In this cafe ivis manifeft by the fifth
Article of this Chapter, that the People cea-
fethto be a‘Perfon, and is become a diflo~
Jate multitude , every one whereof harh an
equall , to wit, a naturall Right to meet
with whom he lifts at diverstimes , and in
what places fhall belt pleafe him; nay,and if
hecan, en: roffe the fupreme power to him-
felfe, and fereleit on his own head. What
Monarch foever therefore hath» a command
in fach a condivionshe is bound by the Law
of nature (fet down in the Article of the
third Chapter of not returning evill for
good) prudently to provide,that by his death
the City fuffer not adifsolution,, either by
appointing a certain day, & place, in which
thofefubjects of his who havea mind to it
mayafsemble themfelves,or elfe by nomina=
ting afuccefsor : whether of thefe fhall to
him feem moft conducible to their common
benefit. He therefore who on this forefaid
manner hath received bis command during
life, hath an abfolute power, and may at bis
difcretion difpofe of the fuccefsion. In the
next place, if we grant that the people depare
| ted nor from the ele&tion of the temporary
Mmarch, before they decreed a certain time
and place of meeting after his deach then
the Monarch being dead, the authoricy is
confirmed in the people, not by any new acs
of the fubjects, but by vertue of the former
Right,for all the /upreme command. (as Domi-
tion) was in the People, but theufe, and ex=
troife of it was only in the ten pordry Monarch,
‘Win one that takes the benefit , bur barb not
| cad 3 Hz the


121


Dominion. Chap,7_
che Right. But if the Pecple after the eleai-
on of a temporaric Monarch, depart not from
the Court before they have appointed cet=
raincimes , and places to.convene , during
thetime preferibed him. (as the Didasors
inancient times were made by the People of


_ Rome) {uch an one is not to be accounted


aMouarch,but the Prime Officer of the Per
ple and if it thall feem good , the People
may deprive him of his office even before
that time, as the People of Rome did , when
they conferred'an equall power on Afinutins
Matter of the horfe , ‘with Quintus Fabius
Maximus, whom before they had made Di-
éator. The reafon whereof is , that it is not
to be imagined,that,whether Man orCouns
fell who bath the readieft,and moft immedi=
ate power toad; fhould hold his command
onduch termes as not to be able aéuall
to execureit 5 for command is noching ale
but a Right of commanding, as oft as
nature allowes it poflible. Laftly , if the
“People having declared a temporary Monarih,
depart from the Court on fuch termes, asit
fall not be lawfull for them to meet with-
out the command of the Monarch, we mut
underftand the People to be immediately
difsolved, and that bis authority who is thus
declared, is abfolure ; forafmuch as it isnot
in the power ofall the fubjeéts to frame the
City anew,unlefse he give confenc who hath
now alone the authority. Nor manters itythat
he hath perhaps made any promile to alsem-
ble his Subjeé&ts on fome certain times
fince there remains no Perfor now in being,
butat his difcretion , to whom the promi
was made. What we have fpoken of a
‘ure


Chap. 7. Dominion.
four cafes of a People eleGing a Temporary
Monarch will be more clearly explain’d. by
comparing them wich an iihie Monarch,
whohath no heit apparent 5 for the People
is Lord of the fubje@t in fuch amanner as
there can be no Heir but whom it. felf doth
appoint. 'Betides, the {paces between the
times of the fubje@ts meeting may be firly
compar’d to thofe times wherein the Mo-
warch fleepes, for in either the 4s of come
manding ceafes, the Power remaines : Far=
thermore, to diffolye the conyent, fo asic
wake more, is the death of a man: As
therefore a King, who hath no Heir, going
to his rcft, fo as never to rife again, (7.¢.)
dying, if he commit the exercile of his Re-
all Authority to any one till he awake,docs
Sune give him the Succeflionsthe
People
not referving a power to convene, delivers
upto him the wholeDominion of theCoun-


_ try: Furthermore, as a King going to fleep


for ome feafon, entrufts the adminiftra-
tion of his Kingdome to-fome other, and


waking takes it again 5 fo the people dating


deéted a Temporary. Monarch » and witha

retaining a rightto meevat a certain day,
and place, at that day receives its fupre-
macy again, And as a King who hath
sommitied the executidn of his Au hovity
toanother, himfelfin the mean while wa-


‘king, ean recall this commiffion againe


when he pleaferh; fo the People,who during


the time prefcribed to the Temporary Mo-


march, doth by Right convene; may if they
as H3


pleafe,


cledting a Temporary AMonarch,and ©


123


324 Deminion. Chap.7,
pleafe, deprive the Monarclr of his Autho.
rity. Laitly, the King, who commits his
Authority to another while himfelf fh
not being able to wake againe till he whom
‘the entrufted , give confent, lofes atonce
both his power, and bis life ; fo the people,
who hath given the Supreme Power toa
‘temporary Monarch in fuch fort as they
cannot allemble without his command
is abfolutely diffolv’d, and the power re-
maines with him whom they have
chofen. xe

whe Monarch. rewale ean ate
of Govern- power may fulfer prejudice, that Promife ot
ment, can- Conpac? whether made by Oath, or with-
ot by any ourir,is null : for all Compadtis a convey.
promife ance of Right, which-by what hath been
wheifoevcr, faid in the fourth Article of the fecond
beconceiv’d Chapter, requires meet y and proper fignes
to have of the Will-inthe conveyer. But he who
paricd with fafficiently fignifies his will of retaining the
bis Right end, doth allo fufficiently declate’that he
to the quits not his Right to the means neceffary’
mesns ne- tothat end. ‘Now he who hath promisd to
teffary to part with fomewhar neceflary to the Su °
the cxercife preme Power , and’ yer‘retaines the Power
of bis Au- it felfe, gives fufficient tokens, ‘That he no
thority. otherwife promis’d itthen fo farre forth as
: the power might be retain’d without’ it.
Whenfoever therefore it thall appear that
what is promis’d cannot be  perform’d
without prejudice to the power, the promile
mutt be valued as not made, (ice.) ofnd
my what effed. r ;
Beaues a — -XVITL, We have feen how Subjeds,
: AS anaes


“Chap. are


125


iGacings. haye obligid chem {elves Subjelt és
bpm Compacts to obey the Supreme freed from
Power. We willfec, now by what meanes his fiub-
is comes, r6palle that theyeare releas 4 jettion


rbonds.of obedience, And fir
ae na by:rejedtion, namely, ifa
man cat off, oy forfake,-bux conyeigh, nor
Right vf, ris. Command, on, fome other 3
whats thus réjeCted, is openly expos’d
toallalike, icatch who catch can 3 whence
again, by the Right of nature, every. fubs


j ‘ ation of himfelfe
Je6 may bed the pret uoyement, In the


the.
power of the enemy, fo as there canno
more oppofition be made againkt them, we


_ muft underftand that he, who before had


the. oritys hath: now: loft it :
For’ ci Sehr doe he
indeavour 16 jseévent\theié falling into the
enemies bands, they haye fulfill’d thofe
Conwats of obedience which they made
each wich other,-and what,being concuer'd,
they promife afterwards , to avoid death,
they muft, with no lege endeavour, labour
toperforme.. ‘Thirdlyjin ‘9 Afonarchy; Yfor.
a Donveraiy, and Ariftocrary cannot »fail)
if, thére be\ no, {ucceffour,y all. the, fubje@s
ate difcharg’d, fiom their obligations 3 for
fo man is. fuppos'd to.be tyed he knows
Not to whom, for in (uch 4 cafe it were ini-
Poffible to perform ‘ought. \ And by thele
three waves: alh fubjedtsare reftér'd from


emhaye toall things, to wit natural
and falage, (et the natutall face hath che
fame \propottiort to the: Civill, Emean li.


: Ha | ~ berty,.


anc ufubjection to tharlibesty, which:


126


. - ae

Dominion. Chap, 7,
berty ‘to ubjeétion; which Paffion Kath to
Reafon, or a Beaft to a Man). Euttherd
more, cach fubje& may lawfu ly be freed
from his fubje@ion by the will of him who
hath the Supreme Power , namely, if he
change his foile, which may be done two
wayes, either by: permiffion, «as he,’ who
gets licenfe to dwell in another Country 5
os Command, as he, who is Banifht : In
both cafes he i8'free from the Lawes of his
former Country, becaule he istyed to-obs
ferve thofe of the latter, : (id


vu


Gpaien WAT


of the Rights of Lords over,
» their: Servants.


J. What Lord and Servant: fignifie,
Il. The diftinttion of Servants sto
Sich as upon traft enjoy their nata-
rall liberty , or flaves ,.and_ [uch
as ferve, being imprifon'd, or bound
in fetters. LIT, Fhe Obligation of
a Servant arifes from the liberty
of body allew’d bim by bis Lord.
TV. Servants that are bound are
not by any Compacts' tyed :to their
Lords. Nba sali 6

riety in their goods againf thes
Ford. Vind aan He a


F eiap®? Dominion. 127
~ Servant, or alienate him by Tefta-
ment. Vil. The Lord cannot injure
his Servant, VIII. He thatis Lord
of the Lord, is Lord alfo of his Sex-
vants. 1X. By what means Servants
are freed. X. Dominion over
Beafts belongs to the Rights of na-


ture.


I. JN the two fore-going Chapters: we What Lord
Tie treated of an in(lilutive,or fram’d and Scr-
Government, as being that which receives’ vaue arc.
its original from the confent of many,who
by Contra& and Faith mutually given,
have oblig’d each other. Now lace
what may be faid , concerning a maturall
Government, which may alfo be call’d, Ac-
quired,*becaufe it is that which is-gotcen
by power, and naturall force. But we muft
knowin the firftiplace by what means the
Right of Dominion may be gotten: over
the Perfons of men. Where fuch a Right is’
gotten, there isa kind of alittle Kingdome 5
forto be aKing, is nothing elle bar to/have!
Dominion over many ‘Perfons ; and thusa
Great Family isa Kingdom, &-a Little King=
domea Family, Lewus return again co the
ftate of nature, and comfider men as if
but even now,{prung out of the earch; andi
fuddainty (Gi ¢ Mathromes) come'tofull ~) *
maturity without all kind of engagement to, ° ae
each other ; There are bur three wayes only: »
whereby one can have the Dominion over»
the Perfow-of anocher 3: whereof the firftis,:
if by mucuall Contraét made begweem,
: Hy thems


728 Dominion. il
' theinfelves(for Peace, 8 felf-defences fake

E they have willingly given up themfelves to
F . the Power and Aur rity of forme ‘man, or
f Councel of Men, & of this we have already
F ‘si fpoken. The 2a is, Ifa man taken Prifoney
i in the Wats, or overcome 3 or elf diftrud..
; ing his own forces,(to avoid Death)promi-
E {es the Conquerout , or the fronger Party,
his Service, i.e. to do all whacfoever he fhall
command him 3 in which Contra the:
good which the vanquitht, or inferiour, in
| 5) dtrength doth receive, is the gtantiof hig.
ae life, which bythe Right of War in the na-
~ a. pturall ace of men he might have depriv’dé
him of, but the good which he promifss, is
his fervice and obedience, By vertue there=
fore of this promile, there is as abfolute.
fervice and obedience due from the -yan-
quitht, to the vanquither, as poflibly can:
be, excepting what repugns the Divine
Eawes 5 for he whois oblig’d to obey the
Commands of any man before he knowes.
what he will command him, is fimply,. and.
without: any reftriGion tyed to the perfor=
tance of all Commands whatfoever. Naw
he that is thus tyed, is call’d aSERVANT,
he to whom heis tyed; a LORD, Thirdly,.
there is a re acquir'd over the Perfon of
aMan, by Generation s..0f which kind of
Acquificion fomewhat fhall be {poken inthe
follewing Chapter... fet d
‘The di | TT; Every-one that is taken in the, War,’
flinition of andhath his life {par’d -him;.is nor fapposid:
Servants — t9 have Contradeed with his Lord; for every»
unto fuch one is-not wifted: with fo much of his na=-
‘5 upon — tural liberty, as to beable, if he defir'd ity.
Mf rity. cicheseto fie aways.or. quit his fervice, of

ots Hi Comte

an


wen


Chaps8.. —- Dautivioa, . deo.
‘conttive-any’mifchief to bis Lord. And their natu-
thee ferve indeed but within Prifons, or rall libereys
bound within Irons, and therefore they or Slaves,
-were call’d not ‘by rhe. common; name of and fuch as
(Servant onclys, buoby the peculiar name of ferve, being
Slave, cvemas now av this day un ferviteur, imprifon'd
cand uniferfs or unefilaue have diverfefigni- or fetrered,
Sications.« 9 wiEDy
. The obligation. therefore of a Servant The obligas
tohis Lords arifteh: not from, a fimple grant tion of a
-ofihiis lifes bur frorn'hence rather, Thar be Servant a-
keeps him not bound, orimprifon’d,for all rifeth from
obligation derives fromm Contra& 5 but that frece
-whete’s no truft,therd can be no Contraét, dome which :
‘asappears: bY the 2.Chap. Artic. 9. where is granted
-a Compadhis defin’d to be the promife of bir by his-
chim who is trufted, There is therefore a Lord.
Sconfidence and truft which:accompanies the ‘
~bentfit of patdon’d:ilifey whereby the Lord
affords Him his:corporall liberty 5» fo chat if
‘no obligation; :nor bands.of Goneract had :
happen’d,. hemight not onely: have made
his efcape, but alio have kill’d his Lord,who -
owas the preférvér of bis life. ;
OLRM: Wherefore {uch kindof Servaits Servants.
yasarercthiain’d byioiprifonmtnr,o;bonds, tat are
-are:not comprehended in that definision bound are,
Job Servarssgivert above, becaie thole ferve 10+ obliged
dnovfor: the ContraGs fake, butte theend #0 . their
~theymay nét fuffer ; arid therefore if they Lord by
_ flie, ow kilb icheic- Lord, :theys offend: nona- 44 CONe-
 ogainktithe! Lawes of Nature; ‘fod to’ bind trae» «
fanyunan is:aplainofignes that the bindér 9) 55
 afuppofes him thacissbound nova be fafme 05
~ 2 ficiently:tyed by any other obligations), © 8
"ye M.Dhe:Lorit therefore hathino lefs Domt- Servants »
“inion over'aSérvant that fs nor,then overone have M0
_ lng ; that |


eo |


| S30. Dominion, Chap! 3.
propriety in thavés Gound, for he' bath Supreme Power
their goods over both, and may fay of his*Servazt no
againft leffe then of another thing, whether ani-

_ their Lord, mate, ot inanimate, This is mine 3 whence

-.)  * Ge followes, that whatfoevet the Servaue had

before his fervitude, that afterwards be~

comes the Lords and-whatfoever he hath
gotten, it was gotten for his Lords for he

that can by Right difpofe of the Perfon of a

Fe man, may furely difpofe'of all: thofe things.

Ba which that Per(an could difpofe of: There
; is therefore nothing which the Servant may

retaine ag "his'own againit the willof his

Lord 3 yet bath he,’ by his Lords diftriburi-

on,a propricty, and. Dominion over hisown

chal goods, infomuch as one Servant may keep,

and defend:them againit the invafion of his.

fellow Servant, in-the fame manner as hash

been fhewed before, that afubjeéb hath no-

thing properly bis owne, againft the will of

the Supreme Authority , but every! fubje&

hath a. propriety againft his fellow fub-
jet.


i
|The Lord VI. Since therefore ‘both the Servant:
| may felt bis himfelf, andvall that belongs to himmare his
Servant, or Lords , and by. the Right of Naturecvery
alienate — man may dilpofe of-his ownein whatman-
‘bim by Te- ner he pleafes 3 the Lord: may either? fell,
flancnt.. lay to petty or by Teftament conveigh:


the Dominion he hath over his Servant; ace
cording to his.own will and pleafure.

Lord © V1. Farthermore, what! hath’ before.
ot be been. demonftrated: concerning: fubjeéts in:
rious to-an inffitutive Goucrnment, | namely; thavhe

Ser- who -hath the Supreme Power: can doe his.
y © fubje&no injury; is true alfo concerning,


on eae
ant will


| chp. 8 Dominion. 131
_-willto the will of the Lord 5 wherefore;
| whatfoever he doth, iris done with their
| wills, but ‘no injury can be done to him
thar willeth ic. p52 e, .
VIII. Butif it — that the Lord He that is
either by captivity, ior voluntary fubje@ion Lord of the
doth become a Servant or Subject to an- Lord; is
other, that other fhall not onely be Lord of Lord alfo
him:, buc alfo of vhis Servants , Supreme of the Sera.
Lord over thefe, immediate Lord over him. VANES,
‘Now becaule not the Servant only, but alfo :
all he hath are his Lords ; therefore his Ser=
vants now belong to this man, neither can
the mediate Lerd difpofe otherwife of thens
then hall feeme good to the Supreme. And
therefore, if fometime in: civill Governe
-mhents, the Lord have an abfolute power
‘over his Servants, that’s fuppos’d to be dee
tiv’d: fromthe Righoof Nature, and:not
sonftitured,, but flightly:palS*d. over by the
Civil Law.
oIX..A fervant is. by the fame manner freed By whar
from his fervitude , that a Subjeét in an int meanes fers,
flitutioe government . is freed: from his Gub= vants are vii
jeGion; Firkts if bis Lord enfranchize hims freede 2 :


for theRight which, the feevatit transferred’

tohis: Lord.ower: himfelfe, the fame may ~ i

the Lord reftore to: the: fervant'again.. And SEC

this manner of beftowing of liberty is called Z

MANWMISS EON 5:which is juftas. a


if a City thould. permit'a Citizento con-
veigh: himfelfe’ under. the. jurifdi@ion of
dome other Citys Secondly. iif che Lord caft
pi iforudeafeom him; hich: imaCiry is.
ifpments neither differsit fom Manumife pe
fon in. ofe&., bur inmanner.onely : for |


there. liberty is granted a1 8 favour , tiere,,
Diad a


19ge Domifiion. - Cinped,
». asa punithment:\Tn'bash ' the Domiuionis

" ‘renounced. Thirdly, if the fervantibe taken

prifoner,s the old fervirude is: abolifhed
the new ; for as all other things, fo
> alfolare'acquired by warte, whain-in <<
‘04 the Lord muftprove@ scif hewillghave: ther

»\ tobechiss: Boutthly 5 the fervznt is freed for
; , want denion ofa ce
Pert 9 dying (fi ) Without any Teftament, of
i 7 Heire, pe ee underftood to be ob-
liged, unleffe he know t6 whoavhe is topet-
Fr form: the obligation.» Laftly,- the férvime
E ; that is putin bonds, or by any other means
deprived: of his corporal liberty, ig freéd

from that other obligation of contrat 5 for

there'can be no contra& where’ there is:no

teuft, nor can that: faith’ be broken which'is

. . not given, bur the Lord: who ‘himfelfe ferves

another, cannot fo fves his! fervams,but thar

they nut fill continue under. ithe homed

: of the fupreme , for, as hath been {hewed
3 ‘ before, fuch fervauts ave notvhis:; Bus'the
Beaes)\ 22 neme Lords,’ : eauitk pet
- The Domi-. - We ger aright over irrational: Creas-
_ niott over. tures inthe adechanbed tsheee doe aver.
| beafts is by the Perfons ofmen, vo:win} by forcé and nae
» the Right tural ftrengths for ifinithe-ftace off mature:
| of nature, ivis lawful for everyones by reifon of that
lia = warre which ds ofvall again®alb 5 toifubdues
and alfo to kill men‘as: oft as iit ‘fall’ feerh:
toconduceunto their:good, much mote will.
the fame be lavfull againft Bruress(namely
‘attheir own Wilcretion “tor teducelth :
fervitude which byavelmay betaried4 ‘ani.
fiaredifob ufe;: ard 10 perlecure andideltroy:
‘the reft by aperperall warre yas dangerous


belts


Paste!


Chap. 9 Dominion,

beafts,hath its original from the right a tt
ture, not from divine pofitive Right : for if
fuch a Right had not been before the publi-
fhing of | s. facred Scriptures., no man by
tight might have killed a beaft for his food,
but he to whona the. divine pleafure was.
made manifeft by Holy Weit 5. a moft hard
condition for men indeed whom the beats
might devoure without injury, and yet they
might not deftroy them : Forafmuch there=
fore as it proceeds from the right of nature,
that a beaft may kill a man3. ir ts.alfo.by the
fame Right,that a man may flay a bealt.


Cuae. IX,


of the right of Parents. over
their children , and of here-
ditary Government.


I, Paternal! Dominion avifeth sot
» from generation. 11. Dominion

over Infants belongs to bim or her-

who fir bath them in their power.
‘ FIL. Dominion over infants, %:
» originally the Adothers, 1 W.The-
' expofed infants his from Whom he
« veceives bis prefervation NicThe
« child that hath one Parent aSub-
\\ je8ljand the ether a Soveraign, \be-
\ bongs: to him, ov bervin asthority,
| MI Iu-facls a conjeiaStion of man


and:


133


434


Dominion, Chap, 9,


- and woman , as neither bath com.


mand over the other , the children
are tke Mothers, wnleffe by come
pact or civill Law, st bee other,
wife determined, V 11. Children
are no leffe fubje¥ to their Parents,
then Servants to their Lords, and
Subjects to their Princes. VELL, Of
the honour of Parents , and Lords,
IX. Wherein Liberty  confifts,
and the difference of Subjeéts and
Servants, X. There is the fame
Right over Subjects-in an he.
reditary Government, Which there
% an inflitutive Government,
XI. The question. concerning the
right of Succeflion, belongs only to
Monarchy, XiI..4 Monarch may


« -byhis Will and T eftamend, difpofe


of hes fapreme authority. XII,Or
Give itor fell it, XIV. Monarch


dying without Teftament , 1 ever


Suppofed to will that a Monarch
Should fucceed him. XV. And fone


«one of bis children. XVIAnd a


male rather then female. XVI.
end the eldelt rather then the


‘yonger. XVIII. end his Bro.
- ther if he want iffue before allo


thers. XIX, Jn the fame a
: that


; Chap.9. Dominion.’
“that men faceeed to'the power, doe
they alfo fucceed to the right of
fucceffion.


1, COcratev is 2. man, and therefote'a living Paternal
© Qoreatures is aright feafoning, and thar Dominion
moft evidentbecaufe there is nothing need- riferh 0b.
fill to the acknowledging of the truth of the fromgenes.
confequence, -but thar the word Man, be ratiot.


underftod, becaule a living creature is in the
definition ic (elfe ofa Man , and every one
namely this, ‘Manis a living Creature; And
this, Sophy oni(cus is Socrates his Father 5
therofore his Lord, is perhaps a true infe-
rence 4 but not evident, becaufe the word
Burd ig onot in the definition of a Fathers
wherefore it is necefsary. to make it more
evident, that the connexion. of Father and
ort be Tomewhat unfolded, Thofe that
have hitherto endeavoured to prove theDo=
_ miniowof a Parent over his sbildren , have
brought no other argument then that of gee
neration , as if ic were of -it felfe evident,
that what is begotten by me 5 is mine 5 J
asifaman (hould think, that becaufe there
isa ttiangle , it appeates prefently without
vany. farther difeourfe., thar. its angles. are
equall totwo Rights. Befides > fince Domi-
xion (that is) fupreme power is indivilible,
_ infomuch as no man can ferve two Matters,
uit two Perfons male and female, muft.con-
‘currein the aét of generation , its impoltt~
‘ble that Dominion (hould. at ‘all be acquired
by: generation onely. Wherefore we will
with the more diligence in this place», en-
iS quire


Dann TT a cetera
Eiger Te tate of nature, in which , by reafon of ‘he
fants be- equality of nature allen‘ of riper yeaces
; _. *reto be accounted equall; There by right
“> of tatinvethe Conqueror.is Lord of the cons
M sain 3 bp the Right cherefore of nature, the
| Mominion overithe: Infene fick ‘belongs: to
aw his pow him who fir hath him in his powersbut it’s
er. manifeft that be whois newly born isin the
*orhers power before any others , infomuch
: as the may rightly,and-a her own, wilscither
Wommen bset Tt thesefore the breed him Cbecauk
‘ever It yy fate of hatureiis'the flate of warte) the
Fans is ori 5, fuppofed to bring him up on this condi
Siudlly the Gor cade being grown.to fi Lage he become
Morbits woe hes enemy3 (which is) that he obey hes,
‘Por fince by natural necefiiry we alk defire
that which\ ears: ‘uute WSs it cannot
~ belunderftood shige ‘any: mary. hath on fac
termes’ afforded ‘life to another >! thaw he
might both ger ftrength by his years, and at
‘orice become an enemy ; buteachman isan
enemy “to that other whom he neither obeys.
Not commands.”“And thus in! the ftate of
Mature,€vety woman thar bears. childver,
‘Beconies borh a Mother » anda Lord, Bur
what (ome fay, chat im this cafe ,. the Facher
by reafon of the preeminence of fexe , and
Hot the Mother; becomes Lord, fignifies no-
thing , for both reafon thewes the contrary,
becaule the inequality ‘of their nzturall fo.
Cesisnot fo great, thas the man could ger she
Dominion over the woman without warre,


and cufteme’alfo conteadi $ not 3 for wah
times


men, namely Amey ous shave in former nes.
oes . _ waged.


OE ET TT


ye


En Vale SES - ee A ieic | Svs mt
aged waragainft theit adverfitiesand dif. +
be rere children at their own wilsvand
isday in divers places, women are inve- i
< senor principal! authority.Neither idee 2) sista
their husbands difpofe of their ebildren , baer. -scotls
shemfélvesswhich in truth they dobytheright =
of nature; foralmuch as they who have the fu.
preme power,are not tryed at all (as hath bin
thewed)to the civill lawes. Adde alfa that
in the fate of nature it cannot be knowm
whois the Father, but by the reftimeny of
the Mtorher 3 the child therefore is his whofe
the Mather will hevedtt __ and therefore hers= _——
longs tot lother,and among men:
no lefse then other creatures; The bir
followes the belly. ? :
TV. The Dominion pafses from the Mo- The expo=
ther to others, divers wayes; firft, if fhe quit (ed Infant
and forfake herRight by expofing he childithe is his that
therefore that fhall bein; the childe thusipre/erves
expofed ; ‘fhall have the fame Dominion bin. 4
over it, which the Mother had- Bor that life
_ whichthe Mother had given it (not by get
i Aa nourifping it) (he now: ests
from it; Wherefore che obligation ‘
fo'which arofe from the benefir ef life, is by
this expofition ‘made voyd. Now the pres
ferved 5 oweth all'to the preferver » whether
in regard of his education as to a Mother, or
of his fervice, as to a Lord; for although the:
Mother in the ftate of nature, where all men
have atightto all thirigs., may recover fer)
fonne again (namely by che fame Right
- that any body elfe might: doe it) yet mays
not the Siane rightly twansferre himfelfe’
again unto his Mothers ‘


=


v. Secondly,


138 Dominion. Chap. 9,
The fore V. Secondly , if the Mother be taken pri.
ofa Sub. fonéry her Sonwe is his that took her, becaufe
jet ang — that hewho hath Dominion over the Per/on,
_ thiefesis bis hath alfo Dominion over all belon ing to
that com. the Perfon; Wherefore over the Senne alfo, ,
mands, 48:-hath been fhewed in the foregoing Chapa’
ter, in the fifth Article, Thirdly, if the Moe
ther be a fubje& under what government
foever, he that hath the fupreme authority in
that government, .willalfo have the Domia
siontover him that is born of her 5 for he is


k Lord alfo of the Mother s who i
k fortociere yaKe give Mer tere 0, is bound ae r


this condition; that be thall bear the (way;

he thatreccéves bis being from the contribue

tion of both Parties, is the Fathers, in regard

of thecommand he hath over the Mother;

but if woman bearing rule thall; have chile

es dren by a Subjet , the children are the Mo-
Es thers : for otherwile the woman can have”

» nochildren without prejudice to her autho.

rity. And univerfally , if the fociety of the
E male and female be {uch an union, as che one
: have fubje@ed himfelfe to the other, the
Et fiucha children belong to him or her that eommands.
| Conjuntion — V1, Butin the ftate of nature, if aman,
| Of male and and woman contraé fo, as neither is {ubje@
male tothe command of the other, the children
weither are the Mothers for the reafons. above given
‘bath the inthe third Acticle, unletse by pads it be
fommand- orherwife provided. For the Mether may by
power. pack difpole of her Right as the lifts , as
everthe heretofore hath been done by the Ama-
\ether,the —zons,who of thofe children which have been
“obildren begotcen by their neighbours , have by pa&
(are theAe- allowed them the males, and rere
le ’ iV cinales.


iF


lhe


ee ee ae eh ee


~ Chap.9. Dominion, 139
Females to themfelves 5 but in-acivill go- thers,cx- ~
ae » ifthere be a contract of Te cept by patty
age between a man and woman, the children or civill
are the Fathers 5 becaulein all Cities, viz, law,it be
‘conftituted of Fashers, not Mothers govern. otherwife
ing their families,che domefticall command determined.
belongs tothe man, and fuch a contra,
if it be mad¢ according to the civill Laws,is
called MATRIMONY 3 but if they agree
only to lye together, the children are the Fa-
* thers, or the Mothers varioufly, according to
the differing civill Lawes of divers Cities.

VIL. Now. becaufe by the third Article (hildron
the Mother 2s originally Lord of ber Chitdren, are no leffe
and from her theFather,or fome body elfe by /ubject to -
derivedRight,it is manifeft that the Children their Pa=:
sareno leffe fubjeé to. thofe by whom they rents,then ,
ate nourifht, ‘and brought up, then Scr- fervauts to

_ vants to their Lords, and Subjeds to him theirLords,
who beares the Supreme Rule, and that.a and fubjeits
Parent cannot beinjurious to his Sonne as 40 their
long as heis under his power. A Son alfo City. _
is freed from {ubje€tion on the fame man-
ner asa fubjeft and fe:vant are, For eman= iq
cipation ts the {ame bin manumiffien,


oy *


. and abdication with banifhment. 3
VIII. The enfranchifed fon, ox releafed Of the bo2
~ forvant, doe now ftand in leffe fear of their nowy due 10
Lord and Father being deprived of his natu- Parents
ralland lordly power overthem, and (if and Lords.
regard be had to true and inward, Honour) it
doe Hovour him lefle, then before, For Ho- |
nour (as hath been {aid in the fection a- |
bove/is nothing elfe bus the eftimation of
anothers power s and therefore he that hath _
leaft power, hath alwayes leaft Hononr. But
it isnot co beimagin’d that the enfranchifer:
} , ever


Wherein


: Dowiiniis: §~— Gaaplg,
ever intended foto‘mateh the-enfranibifed


~ with himfelf, as that he-fhould not fo much


as acknowledge a benefit , but thould fo
carry himfelfin all things, asif he were be-
some wholly his equall 5 It-mutt therefore
be ever underftood, That ‘he who is freed
from fubje@ion, whether he be a fervant,
forne; or fome colony, doth promife all thole
externall fignes, at leaft whereby Superiours
ufed to be Horiour’d by their inferiows,
From whence it followes, That the pre-


_ Sept of honouring our Parents, belongs to


the law of nature, not onely under the title
of Gratitude, but alfo of Agreement.
1X. What then, will fome one demand,


Uberty doth is the difference between a fonne,or between
_ confift,and’ a fubjett , anda fervant? Neither doe I
‘che diffe know that any Writer hath fully declared


‘rence t


Pe id fib what ‘liberty, and what flavery is, Com=


monly to doe all things according to our


Jets and own phancies , and that without punifhe


 fervauts.


“is mad


‘iskeptin aclofe prifon. Andaman 7 |


ment, is efteem’d to be liberty ; not wo be
able to doe this, is judg'd bondage ; which
ina Civill Government, and with the
eace of mankind cannot poflibly be done,

caufe there is no City without aCom-
mand,and a reftrainingRight LIBERTY,
that we may define it,is nothing elfe bur an
abfence of the lets, and hinderances of motion,
as water fhut up in a vellell is therefore not
at liberty, hccaufe the veflell binders it from
running out,which the veflell being broken,
lefre. And every man hath mere

‘or lefle diberty,as he hath more or lefte {pace


_ ‘in which he employes himfelf: as he hath
“mare liberty, who is in a large, then he that


ad


Chap. 9. Dominion,

“be fieetoward one part, ’and yer not toward
besten as the nti 5 bounded on this,
and that fide with hedges, or {tone walls,


lelthe fpoyle the vines; or corne, neighbou- -


ring onthe high way: And thefe kinde of
lets ave externall , and abfolure’s in which
fonle all Servants, and Subjedts are free, who
‘are not fetter’d andimprifoned. There ave
others which are arbitrary , which doe not
abfolutely binder motion, ‘but by accidents


‘towit, by our own ghoyce, as hethat ising _


hhip isnovfo hindered but he may caf bim="
felteineo the'Sea', if he will: and ‘here al(o
‘the more wayes a man may move him(felfe,
"the more Liberty he hath, and herein confifts
‘civill liberty 5 for no man, whether fubjedt,
fonue, or fervent, is fo hindred by the pu-
“nifhments appointed bythe City 5 the Fa=
ther, or the Lord, how ceuell foeverjbut thar
‘he'may'doe all chings', andmakevufe of all
meanes necefsary to the'prefervation of his
life and health s for my pact therefore I can-
‘not finde what reafon a meer fervant hath
to make complaints, if they relate onely to
want 6f Jiberty,-unlefse he count it amifery
“to bereftrained: from hurtin himfelfe, and
{0 receive thar life, (which by warre , or


“misfortune , of through ‘his own idlene(se’


_ was forfeited) together with all manner of


\faftenance , and all things necefiary to the”


| cpnfetvation of health,on this condition on=
(that re will be ral'd 2for he thae is\ kept


inby punithments: Jayd ‘before him’, foas
te not let loofe the'reines to his -will
‘in :
veined and fuftained. But this privis
edge fee jets anid ones of @ family,


have


ll things; is nor oppreft by fervitadetbur


T4r


cs oa a a


Pace


142 Doiminion.. ‘Chapyo,
have above fervants, (in every gov

and family ; where {ervants, are) that they

may both jundergoe the more honourable

offices of the Gity-orfamily, and alfo enjoy

ia larger poffeflion. of things fuperfluous,

And herein layes ‘the, difference between a

free fubjedt, and a} forvant,tharhe is FREE

indeed, who ferves his City onely 3 but a

SERVANT is he who alfo (erves his

fellow fabje@:all other liberty isan exem-

ption from the Lawes of the City.; and.

Thereds the proper only-to, thofe shat bear Rule...

fame Right. X. A) Father , with; his fonnes and fer.

in an bere- yants grvowne into a.civill Pexfon by verue

ditary, of his paternall jurisdi€tion.,, is called:a

which there F eA 1 LY. This. family,if.chrough mal-

% in an in- tiplying of children , and acquifition, of fer-

flitutive .yants ; it becomes numerous infomuch as

govert- without cafting the. uncertain dye of watre,


Mette. it cannot be fubdued.,. will’ be, termedan


Hereditary Kingdome; which though ic differ
from an inflitutive Moxarchy, being acquired
by force in the original, & manner ofits con-
fitutionsyet being conftizuted, ic hath al the
- fame properties, andthe Right of authority
is every where the fame, infomuch as it is not

needfull to {peak any thing of them apait,
The que- X 1. Iehath been {poken, by what Right


_ fiion con. fupreme authorities are confticured. Wee


cerning the muft now brictly. tell you by what sight they
Right of ~ may be continued, Now the Right by which
fuccefion, - they ave continued , is thay whichiscalled
belongs. the right of SHC,CES S10 N, Now


~ onelyto _ becaule in a. Democratic, the upreme autho


Mowaroby. rity is.wich the People, ,.as long as there be
: any fubje@sin bein, » folong fe velts with

the fame Perfons fur the People hathno

te “Sisco


Chap. 9. Dominios 143
Sueceffovr. Tn like manner in an Ariffocraty,

one of the Nobles dying, fome other by the

teft is fubftituted in his place, and theres

foge excepethey all dye together, which £

fuppofe will never happen, there is no fuc=

cofston,. The Querie.thercfore of the Right

of Succeffion takes place onely in an ab~

folute Mouarchy,. For they who exercife the
‘fupreme power for atime onely, are them-

felves no Monarchs, but Miniffers of ftate- :
i XT, Bur fickt, if a Monarch thall by Te- 4 Monarch
fiament appoint. one to. fucceed him, the may difbofe
Perfon appointed thall fucceed 5 for if he be of the com-
appointed by the ‘People, he thall have all the mand of
Right over the City which the People had, his govern
as hath been fhewed in the 7, Chap.Arcr ry ment by Te=
‘but the People might choofe him , by the ftament.
fame Right therefore may he choofe ano-

ther 5 butin an. hereditary Kingdome there

are the fame Rights as in an inflitutives

wherefore, every Monarch may by his will

make.a fucceffour,

XIII. But what a man may transferre Onehiees
on another by Teftament, that by the fame O7 S/ve
Right may he yer living, give, or fell aways ae %

To whomfoeyer theréfore be fhall make /4#.
‘over the fupreme power, whether by gift, or |
fale, itis tightly made. : A Monarch

XLV. Butif living , he have not decla- dying withe
ted his will concerning his fucccfour by Te~ out Teffa.
fament, not otherwife, itis fappofed, Bilt, sacnt, is
that he would not have bis Goyernmen: re= ever uader~
duced to an Anarchy; or the ftate of warre, flood xo
(thatis) to the deftrnaion of his fubje€ts will, that «
aswell becaufe he could not doe tharwith- Monarch
out breach of the Lawes of nature, where- fhould fic.
by he was obliged rothe performance’ of all ceed hint.

a: I : things


144


Dominion. Chap, 9,
things neceflarily conducing to the prefer.
vation of Peace , as alfo becaufe iftthat had
been his will, it had nor been hard'for him
to have declared that openly. Next, becaule
the Right paffeth according to the will of
the Father, we muft judge of the fuccefour
according tothe fignesof his will. Tt is un.
derftood therefore , that he would havettiis


sie


- fubje@s to be under a Monarchicall Govern. *


And fome
one of bis
children.


ment rather then any other, becaufe he hit.
felfe in ruling , hath before approved of
that ftate by his example, and hath not af-
tecward either by any word or deed con-
demned it. *

X V. Furthermore , becaufe by naturall
neceffiry al! men wifh them better from


whom they receive glory, and honour, then


others 3 but every man after death receives
honour and elory from’his children, fooner
then from’ the power ‘of any other men:
hence we gather, that a father intends: bet«


ter for his children, then any other perfons.
Tt is to be underftood therefore’, thatthe +


will of the father,dying withoat Teftament,
was, that fome of his children fhould fuc-


ceed him , yet this is to be underftood with


this provifo , that there be no more appa
rent tokens tothe contrary: of whichkind, |


afer many fucceffions, cuftome may beont,
for hethar makes no mention of ‘his Shi
fon, is {uppofed to confent to the cultomss
of his Realme. :


Andamate X V1. Among children the Males cate
vather then ty the preheminence, in the beginning per


female.


“haps, becaule’ for the moft pact (although


not alwayes) they are fitter for the admin :


firation “of greater matters, but fj
: o


Chap. 9. Dominion. 145


of wars; but afterwards, whenit was grown
acuftome ,* becaufe that cuftome was not
contradicted and therefore the will ofthe
Father , unlefie fome other cuftome or figne

doe —, repugneit , isto be interpreted

in favour of them.

eviL Now becauie the Somes are Ald of the
equall, and the power cannot be divided, 4/08, the
theeldeft thall fiucceed ; for if there be any “44 ra~
differenee by reafon of age, the eldeft is fup- ber then
pofed more worthy, for nature being judge, M°7"gers
the moft in years (becaufe ufually it is fois
thewifeft.But other judge there cannot be
had. Bur if the Brothers muft be equally
valued, the fucceffiow (hall be by lot , but pri-
mogeniture is a naturall lot , and by this the
eldett is already prefer'd , nor is there any
that hath power to judge, whether by this,
orany other kind of lots the matter is to be
decided, Now ‘the fame reafon which con-
tends thus for the firft-born fonne , doth no
leffe for the firft-born daughter.

XVILLBut if he have no children,then the Azd this
command fhall pals to hisBrochers & Sifters, Brother if
for the fame reafon, that the children fhould be wane
have fucceeded if he had had them : for thofe iffue before
thatareneareft to usin nature , are fuppo- all others. °
fed to be neareft in benevolence; and to his
brothers, fooner then his fiftérs , and to the
elder fooner then the yonger; for the reafon
is the fame for thefe which ic was for the
children.

XIX, Furthermore , by the fame reafon In the fame
that men ficceed to the power, doe they alfo manner
fucceed tothe Right of fucceffion ; for if the that men
firft-born dye before the Farher , it will be /icceed zo
judged, that he transferred his Right of fic the pawer,

Ta ceffion ;


146 Dominion. Chapito,
oe they al- ceffion unto his children, unleffe the Father
fofucceed have otherwife decreed it , and therefore the
to theRight Nephewes will have a fairer pretence to the
of Succeffi- fuccefsion , then the Uncles. I fay all thefe
Olt, things will be thus, if the cuftome of the

place (which the Father by not contradi-
Ging will be judged to have confented to)
doe not hinder them, :


Cuar. X.


A comparifon between 3. kinds
of government , accord-
ing to their feverall

inconveniences.


» — L, eh comparifon of the natural fate
with the civill. 11. The convenien-

_ ces and inconveniences of the Ruler
and his SubjeCts are alike. W1.The
praife of Monarchy, IV. The Go.
vernment under one cannot be faid .
to be uvreafonable ia this refpelt,
namely. becaufe one hath more poWw-
er then all the refi. V.A Rejetlion
of their opinion,who Jay that a Lord
with bis Servants cannot make 4
City, VI. Exattions are more grit
vous snder a popular State, then a
Monarchy. VII. Jnnocent Sub-

: jects


i.%


Chap. 10. Dominion.”


4etis ave lelfe expofed to penalties
‘under a Monarch , then under the
People. VIII. The liberty of fix-


gle Subjects is not leffe under a Mo-


reafon of the unskilfulnesof the mofé *


natch, then under a People. IX. Jt
ts no difadvantage to the Subiccts,
that they are not all admitted to
publick, deliberations. X. (ivill
deliberations are unadvifedly con-
mitted to great eAffemblies , by


part of men. X1. Inregard of elo-
quence. XII. Jn regard of faction.
XII. In regard of the unftablenes
of the Lawes. X1V.In regard of
the want of fecrecy. XV.T hat thefé
inconveniences adhere to Democra-
ty,fora/much as men are naturally
delighted with the effeeme of wit.
XVI. The inconveniencies of a
City arifing from a King that 1s a
childe. X VII. The power of Gea
neralls,is an evident fign of the ex-
cellence of Monarchy. XVIII. The
beft State of aCity % that, Where
‘the Subiects are the Rulers inbe-


~ vitance. XUXS The nearer Ari-
— focraty drawes to Monarchy , the


better it is, the further it keeps
from it, the worfe.
13. T. What


147


PSS =
7148
A compa-
ving the
fiate of
“nature
with the
sivill,


.


' Dominion. Chap.


° .
i T Hat Democraty, Ariffocraty, and
V V viinercy are , hath already been
fpoken, but which of them tends moft to the


prefervation of the fubjeéts Peace, and pro.


turing their advantages, we muft fee b

comparing them togethers but firft let us fet
forth the advantages , and difadvantages of
a City in generall, left fome perhaps fhould


think it better, that every man be lett to live _


at his own will , then to conftieute any civill
fociery at all. Every man indeed out of the
ftate of civill government hath a moft en-


. tire, but unfruitfull liberty 3 becaufe that he


The gains
and loffes
of the


who by reafon of his own liberty aés all at
his own will,muft alfo by reafon of the fame
liberty inothers,(uffet al at anothers wilsbut


inaconftituted City, every fubje& retains’


to himfelfe as.much freedom as Juffices him
to live well,and quietly,& there is fo much


taken away ftom others, as may make them


not to be feared. Out of this ftate, every
man hath fuch a Right toall , as yet hecan
enjoy nothing in it ,.each one fecurely en
joyes his limiced Right ; Out of it, any
man may rightly {poyle, or kill one anothers
in it, none but one. Out of it we are prote-
Ged by our own forces; init, oF the power


ef alt. Out of it no man is fare of the fruit of


his labours; in ir, all men are. Laftly, out of
it,there is a Dominion of Paffions,war,fear,
poverty, flovinlineffe, folitude, barbarifme,
ignorance, cruelty, In it, the Dominion of
reafon, peace, fecurity, riches, decency, foci~

ety, elegancy, {ciences , and benevolence.
I, Arifforle in his feventh book, and
fourteenth Chapter of his Politiques faith,
that there are two forts of pre
ae ee where=


whereof the one relates to the benefit of the
-Riler, the other'to that of the Subjeé#s; as if
where Subjeéts are feverely dealt wich, there
- were one,and where more mildly, there were
quoter form of government § which opini-
onmay by no means be fublcribedi to, for
all the profits and difprofts arifing from
ernment ‘are the fame, and common
hoth to the Ruler, and the Subject 5 The
Dammages which befall fome particular
fabjeGts. through misfortune . folly, negli.
nde; flotly, or his own luxury, may very
well be fevered from thofe whichiconcei'n
the Ruler, but thofe relate: nor to the ga-
vernment it felfe, being fach: as may hap+
nin any form of government whatlosyer.
f thefe ene happen: fromthe firft inftitu--
tion of the City, they will. then be truly cal-
led the inconveniencies of government, but
they willbe common to the Ruler with his
fubjeéts, as their benefits are commons but
the firft-and greateft bencfit, Peace, and de=
fence , is common to both, for both he that
commands , and he who is commanded,
tothe end that he may defend his lifeymakes
ufe at’ once of all the forces of his fellow-
fabjeé&ts and in the greateft inconvenience
that can befall a Ciry, namely the flaugh-
ter of fubje@s, arifing from Anarchy, both
the Commander, and the Parties comman-
ded, are equally concerned. Next,if the Ru--
ler levie fuch afumme of vaft monies from


hisfubjedts, as they are not able to maintain:


themfelves, and their families, nor conferve .
their bodily ftrength, and vigour , the dif-


advantage is as much his , as theirs , who.


wish never (o greara ftock,, or meafure. of
; 14 riches,


149


The praife


of 2fonar-
chy.


.


Dominion. Chap. 10,
riches 5 is not able to keep his authority or
his riches without the bodies of his fubjeGts; _
bur ifhe raife no morethen is fufficient for
the due adminiftration of bis power, that is
a benefit equall to himfelfe and his:fubjeGs,
tending toa common Peace, and defence;
nor isit imaginable which way publick trea»
fures can bea grievance to private fubjeGs, .
if they be not fo exhaufted , as to be wholly
deprived from all poffibility to acquire,even
by their induftty , neceffaries to fuftain the
Strength of their bodies, and mindes $ for
even thus the grievance would concein the
Ruler,nor would it arife from the ill inftitu-
tion,or ordination of the government, (be-
caufe in all manner of governments fub-
je&ts may be oppreft) bur from the ill ad-
miniftration of a well eftablifhed govern:
ment, af rbsl.

LIL Now that AMfonarchy of the forefaid
forins, of Democraty, Ariffocraty, and Monar=
chy, bath the preheminence, will beft appear’
by comparing the conveniences. and incon-
veniences ariling ineach one of them. Dhofe
arguments cherefore that thewhole univerle is
governed by ove God; chat the Ancients pres
ferr’d the Monarcbicall {tare before all others,
afcribing theRule of theGods to one fupiters
that in the beginning of affairs,and ot Nati-
ons,thedecrees of Princeswere held forLaws3


* that pateriall covernment inftitined , by God


himfelfein che Creation, was Monarchicalls
tbat other governments. were, compacted


_* by the artifice of men out of the aihes af


Monarchy, after it had been ruined wich fedi.
tions; and that the people of God were une


der the jurifdi@ion of Kings , alchongty G
i : a


"Chap. 10. Dominion. Ist

fay thefe doe hold forth Monarchy as the

eines tous, yet becaufe they doe
it by examples and teftimonies,and not. by
folid reafon, we will paffe them over.
~Compatted by the artifice of men, &c.], Annotation
Te eems the Ancients who made that fane fa~
Hoof Prometheus pointed at thiss They [ays
thar Prometheus having ftolne fire from the
Sumie, formed &man out of clay , and that for
this deed he was tortured by Jupicer with @
perpetuall guarving in bis liver » which is, that
by humane invention (which is fignified by Pro-
metheus) Laws and Faslice were by imitation.
taken from M onarchy , by vertuc whereof (as
by fircremoved from its naturall orbe)the mul=
titude (as the durt and dregs ‘of men) was as it
wore quickned aiid formed mio a civall Per[on,
which is termed Ari/tocraty or Denocratys bft
the Ambours and Abettors being found , mba
might feusrely and quactly have lived under the
natura’. juri(-Lidtion of Kings , doe thus [nave
for ity that being expo/ed fill toalteration, they -
aretormenred with perperuall. cares, furfpitions,

» and diffentions. y :

LV, Some there are who are difconten- The ge-

ted with the government under one , for no verinent
other reafon, but becaule it is under one 5. as of ome can-
ifit were an unreafonable thing that one man not be faid
among fo many ; fhould fo farre excell in to be evill
power , as to be able at his own pleafure to ia this re-
dilpofe of all the cefts thefe men ure,if they (pect name=
couldywould withdeaw them(elves from ua- Yy becaufe
det the Dominion. of ove God. But this ex- ome hath
ception againik ove is fuggefted by envie, more power
while they fee one man in pofselsion of what then all the’
alldefire: for the fame caufe they would rei.
judge it to be as unreafonable,if 4 few com-
Tiss Vy


manded,,


.


152. Deminion, — Chap.t6,

“ " manded, unlefse they themfelves either.

_ were, ot hoped to be of the numbers for if jt

‘be an unreafonable thing that all men haye

not an ¢quall Right, furely an Ariftocraty

-muft be unreafonable alfo 5 but becaule we

have thewed that the ftate of equalityis the

ftate of warre, and that therefore inequali-

ty was introduc’d by a general confentsthis.

inequality whereby he , whom we haye yor

luntarily given more to, enjoyes mote,is no

longer to be accompted an unreafonable

thing. The inconveniences therefore which,

attend the Dominion of one mar, attend his.

Perfon , not his Unity. Let ustherefore fee

- whether brings. with it the greater grievan-

ces tothe fubjeG, the command-of one man,

Dur f(t we amu

sits, . But firft, we muft-remove their-opini-
Bes i on who deny that to be anyCity at alljnbich
ion, who. compacted of never fo great a number
fy tharg %fetvants under a common Lord. Inthe
Lord with 9° Attic. of the 5. Chapter, a City is defined:
his fervants °° be one Perfon made out of many men,
east, 3 whofe will by their owa contracts isto be

B ‘ efteemed as the wills of them. ail, infomuch
maR€ & — a¢he may ule the ftrengch and. faculties of

5 Gs each fingle Perfon for the publick Peace and’
fafetys and by the fame-article of the fame.
Chapter ; One Perfonis thar, when the wills
of many are contained in the will of one,.
bur the will of each fervant is contained in:
the will of his Lord , as hath been declared.
inthe s. Article ofthe 8, Chapter, {02s he
may employ all their forces, and faculties.
according to hisown will, and pleafures it
followes therefore that thar muft needs bea.
city., which is conftiruted by a. Lord, and:
; . mai.


.


:


— Chap.to. =» Dorwinion. 153,
many fervants 3 neither can any reafonbe -
brought to contradi& this which doth nov.
equally combat againft a Ciry conftirured
by a Father, and his Sonnes 5, for toa Lord
whohath no chrLiren,./ervauts ave in the nas
sure of formes; for they are both his honour,
gad fafeguard 5 neither are fervants more
fubjec& to their Lords, then childrcr to their
Parcms, as hath been manifefted above in.
the 5. Article of the 8, Chapter. P
V1. Among other grievances of fupreme The exadti-
authority one is,that the Ruler, befide thofe ons are
monies necefsary for publick charges, asthe morc gric~
” maintaining of publick Minifters, building, vows under»
and defending of Caftles, waging warres, command -
honourable fuftaining his own houthold, of the peo
may alfo,if he will, exa@ others through his ple, ther
lua, whereby to enrich his fonnes , ‘kindred, under the:
favourites, and flarterers too. I confelse this Mamarcb».
- tgagtievance , bat of the number of thofe
which accompany all kindes of government,
> burare more tolerable in a Monarchy chen
in a Domocrary; for though the Monarch»
would enrich them, they cannot be many,
becaule belonging but co one, but in aDemo-
G:aty, look how many Demagoges, (that is)
_ how many powerfull Ordtours there are with:
the people (which ever are many, and daily
new ones growing) fo many (hildren»Kiaf=
mei friends ,& Flarscrers,axc to be vewaxdeds
for every of them defire not’ onely to make
their families as potent, as illuftxious in |
wealth; as maybe, but alfo to oblige others
tothem by benefits for the better ftrength--
ning of themfelyes. A Monarch may in -
great part faiishe his Officers and Friends, ,
_ becaufe they are not many, without.any cou
to,


ae


Banovent
Subjetts


are leffe


Dominion, — Chap.to}
to his Subjects, I mean, without robbin,
them of any of thofe Treafures given infor
the maintenance of War, and Peace; ‘Ing.
Democraty, where many are to be farisfied,
and alwayes new ones, this cannot be done
without the Subjets oppreflion. Though a
Monarch may, promote unworthy Perfons,
yet oft times he will not doe it butina
Democraty all the popular men are therefore
fuppos'd todo it, becaufe it is neceflary 5
for elfe, the power of‘them who did it
would fo encreafe, as it would not ‘onely
become dreadfull to thofe others, butéven
to the whole Citysalfo. é

VIE. Another grievance is , that fame.
perpetual fear of death which every man
mutt neceflarily be in, while he confiders


obnoxious with himflf that the Ruler hath powee
40:punifh- not onely to appoint what punifhments he
mene undev lifts on any Tranigreffions , but’ that he
a Mouarch. may alfo in his wrath, ‘and fenfuality,
when under flaughter his innocent Subjects, and thole
the People. who never offended againft the Lawes.


find truly this is a very great grievancein
any forme of Government wherefoever it
happens : (for it is therefore a grievance
becaufeit is ; not, becaule it may be done).
but it is the fault of the Ruler, not of the


“Government; For all the ats of Neroare


not effentiall to Monarchie 5 yet Subjects
are lefle often undefervedly condemn’d
under ove Ruler, then under the ‘People =
For Kings are onely fevere againft thole
who cither trouble them with: impertinent
Counfells, or oppofe them with reproach«
full words, or controule their Wills 3 but
they are the caule that that excefle of power

which:


Chap.to. = Dominion. £55
‘which one Subjeét might have above ano=
ther becomes harmlefle 3 wherefore fome
Nero or Caligula reigning, no men car
undefervedly fuffer, ‘but fuch’ as are known.
rohim, namély Courtiers, andfuch as are
yemarkable for fome eminent Charge,
and not all neither, but they onely who
are poffeffed of what he defires to ene for
they that are offenfive, and contumelious,
are defervedly punifht ; whofoever thete-
fore in a Monarchy will leadia retired life, let
hinv be what he will that Reignes, he is out
of danger : forthe ambitious onely fuffers ”
the relt are protected. from: the injuties of
the more potent : butin a popular Dominion’
there may be asmane Neyo’s, as there are
Osatours who footh the People 5 for each:
oneofthem can doe as much as the People,
and they mutually give way-to each others
appetite (as it were by this fecret pact,
Spare me to day, aud Ile SHare thee to morrow)
while they exempt thole from punifhment,
whoto fatisfie their luft,and private hatred,
faveundefervedly flain their fellow-fub-
jeds, Furthermore, there is a certain limit
in private power, which if it exceed, it may
prove pernicious to the Realme, and by
reafon whereof it is necefsary fometimes
for Monarchs ro have a care that the com-
mon-weale do thence receive no prejudice. »
When therefore this power -confitted in the: -
multitude of Riches, they lefsened it by'di-’
minifhing their heaps, but ifit were in po-”
pular applanfe', the powerfull party without:
any other crime laid to his charge , was ta~
ken from-among thetn, The fame was ulu-’
allypraGiled in Democraties;for the Athe=
alans.


e ot


aaa me |


nians infli@ed’apunifhment of ten yeares
banifoment on thofe. that were powerfull _
meerly becaule of their powers, without the
guilt of any other crime , aad chole who by
liberall gifts did feek che favour of the eom-
mon people, were put 10 deathvat Rome yas
men ambitious of a Kingdome. In this De-
mooraty.and Monarchy were eaven ; yet dif-.
fixed they much in fame 5 becaufe. fame de~
rives from the People, and what is done by
many, is commended by many : and there-
fore what the Monarch does, is faid tobe
« done out of envie to their. vertues, which if
ir were done by the People, wou'd be ac-
counted Politie.
Single V IIL, There are fome who therefore
Pesfons imagine Aovarcly to bee more griey
pave no then Democraty, becaute there is leise fiber
deff liber- *Y in that, then in this. If by dsbony they
vy under a mean an cxemption from-that fubjedion
Monarch, Which is due tothe Lawes (i. ¢.) the com-
thea under ™ands of the People , neither iri Democratp,
the People, 29% in any other ftate of government what-
a foever, is there any fuch kind of Libentye If
they-{uppofe liberty to confit in this, that
_ there be few lawes ; few prohibitions, and
thofe too {uch, thar excep: they were forbid-
deny there could be no Peace 3. then I deny
that there is more liberty in Democraty then
Monarchy 5 for the one as truly conffteth
with fuch a liberty, as the others for al-
though the word liberty, may in large, and
ample lesters be written-over the gates ¢
any City wharfoever, yet is it mos meant:
the Sudjcéts, but the Cities liberty , neither
can that word with betrer Right be inferi-
F bedon a City.which is governed by the
t penples


"Chap. 10. Dominion. 157:
‘people,then that which is ruled by a Mdowarchs
"but when private men or. fobjects demand.
Uiberty, under the name of liberty 5 they ask.
not for Liberzy, bur daminion , which yet for
want of underftanding, they little confiders
for ifevery man would grant the fame liber-
ty to-another, which he defires for him(elfe,
as is. commanded by the law of nature, that
fame naturall fate would return again, in
whichall.:men may by Right doe all chtngs,
which if they knew, they would abhor, as
being. worfe then all kind of civill fubje@ti-
on wharfocver s. bur if any: man defire to
have his fingle freedome, the reft being
bound, what does he elfe demand bur to
have the Dominion 2. for who fo is freed
from all bonds, is Lord over all thole that
“Rill continue bound. Subjeéts, therefore
havéno greater liberty in a “Popular, thenin
a Menarsbical State, That which deceives
them,is rhe equall participation of command,
and publique placessfor where the Authority
isinthe People; fingle fubjets doe fo fay
forth hare in it as they- are parts of the
People ruling 3 and they equally pavtakein
publique Offices fo far forth as they have
equall voices in choofing Magiftrates, and:
publique Minifters. And this is that which.
Ariffolz aim'd at, himfelf alfo, through.
the cuftorhe of thar time, mif-calling Do--
minion lib-rty,in his fixthBoolt,and {econd
Chapter of Poli. In a popular State vhore
_ as liberty by fiuppofition; which is a Specch of the
ulgar, as if no man were free out ki this States.
Brom whence, by the way, we may colleéy
That thofe Subjects, whoin a Monarchy:
deplore, their loft. liberty , doe onely. fto-
‘ : ~ mack»


153° Dominions —-Chapire,
mack this , that they are not receiv’d tothe —
fteerage of the Common-weal.:: Y ge
qrisnodif- IX. But perhaps for thi§ very: reafon’
“duantage fomewillfay, That a Popular State is'mucht -
to the Sub- to be preferr’d before aMonarchicall; be~
jefts that caufe that, where all men have a.hand in’
they are not publique bufineffes,there all have an oppor
all. admit- tunity to fhew their wifedome, knowledge,
ted tothe and cloquence, in deliberating matters of,
ubligne the grearcft difficulty and moment, which
deliberati- by veafon of that defire of praife whichis
ons. bred in humane’ nature, is to them who
excell’ in fuch like faculties; and feeme to
themfelves to exceed others, the moft de
lightfull ofall things ; but in a Monaichy,
this fame way to obtain praife, and honour, _
is fhur up to the greateft part of Subjedts 5
and what is agrievance, if this benone ?
Tie tell'you :.To'fee his opinion whom we
{corne, prefer#’d: before ours 5 to have our
wiledome undervalued before our own fa-
cess by an uncertain tryall of a little vaine
glory, to undergoe molt certaine enmities
(for this cannot be avoided, whether we,
have the better, or the worfe) to hate, and
to be hated, by reafon of the difagreement
of opinions ; to lay open our fecret Couns
fells, and-advifes to all, to no purpole, and
without any benefit 3 to neglect the affaires
of our own Family: Thefe, 1 fay, are gtie-
vances. But to beabfent froma triall’
wits, although thofe ttialls ave pleafant 10
the Bloquent, isnot therefore a grievance
to them, unlefle we will fay, that it isa
grievance to valiant men to be reftiaie
ned from fighting  becaufe they delight
4 Its. 24 Cap


ie : x: Bee


Chap.10.: - Dominion. 159
"X) Befides, there are many reafons why (ivill delé-
deliberations are lefle fucceflefull ingreat berations
Aflemblies, then in leffer Councells 5 are unadve=
“whereof oneis, thar to adviferightly ofall fedly com=
things conducing to the preferyation of a mitted 10
Common-weal,.we muft not onelyunders mary, ly
fland matters at home, but Fortaign Af- rea/on 0
frites toos at Home, by what~goods the the wnskit-
~ Country is nourifhed, and defended, and fulneffe of
whence ‘they, are fetched 5. what places are most men.
firto make “Gsarrifons of ; by what means
. Souldiers’ are beft to be raifed, and main-
tained what manner of affections the Sub-
jets bear toward: their Prince, or Gover-
nours of their Country , and many the
like: Abroad , what the power of each
neighbouring Country is, and wherein it
confifts ; whatadvantage, or difadvantage »
we may receive from them; what their
difpoGtions are both to us-ward, and how
affe@ied to each other among themfelves,
and what Counfell daily paffech among
theme. Now, becaufe very few in a great
_Affembly of men underftand thefe things,
being for. the moft, part: unskilfall (thar d
fay not incapable) of them, what’ can that
fame number of advifers with their imper+
tinent Opinions contribute to good Coun-
felis, other then meer letts and impedi-
ments? - 3 ¢ E
_ XI. Another reafon why a great Aflem- By reafon
bly isnot fo fic, for confulcation is, becaule of their E-
eyery one who delivers his opinion holdsit Joqueuce.
-neceffary to. make a long continued Speech,
andtogain the more efteem : from his Au~
ditours, she polithes, and. adornes it with
the belt, and, {mootheft language, now the
wat : nature


of


Dominion, Chap,
nature of Eleguence is to make ;


and
Buill, Profitable and anpeoptableeeopend


Difhoweft,appear to bemore or leffe thenins
deedithey are, and to make that feem ji


» which is unjufl,according asit fhall. belt fui
* with hisend thac fpeaketh, For this isto


perfwade3 and though they-reafon, yer take
they not their rife from true Principles, but
from vulgar received opinions, which, for
the moft part, are erroneous 5. neither en-
deayour they fo muchito. fir their fpecch.zo
the nature of the things they. {peak of, asto
the Paffions of their mindes: to whom they
fpeak, whence it happens that opinions are
delivered not by sight reafon, but by acer-
tain violence of mind. Nor is chis faulein


the Man, butin the navare it (clfe of Ele.


veafort


Faction,


quence , whofeend (as all che Mafters of
Rhetovick teach.us) isnot truth (except by
chance) but vidtory, and whofe property is
Rot to inform, but to.allure.

XII. The third reafon why men advile
leffe fuccefully in a great convent is, be-
caufe that thence arife Fations in a come
mon-weal, and out of Fadtions, Seditions,
and Civill War; for when equall Ora--
tours doe combat with contrary Opinions,
and Speeches, the conquered hares the:
Conquerour, and all thofe that were of his
fide, as holding his Counfell , and: wife.
dome in {corne: and ftudyes all meanes.
ees the advile of his adverfaries pre-
jadiciall>to the State, for thus he —


fee the glory takenfrom him, and


unto himfelf : farthermore,where the Votes
ave not fo unequal}, but that th® conque-
red. have, hopes by the acceflion of ra
fussiny Seabs ew.


| jy oi saith
Chap. r0. Dominion. — 161
few of their own opinion at another fitting
tomake the Rronget Party , the chief heads
dovcall the ref togecher, they advife a part
how they may abrogate the former judg-
ment given, they appoint to be the firft and
eatlieft at the next convent, they determine
what, and im what order each man fhall
{peak that the fame bufineffe may again be
brought to agitation, that fo what was con-
firmed before by the number of their then
prefene adverfaries , the fame may now in
fome meafure become ‘of no effeét to them;
being negligently abfent,and this fame kind
of induftry and diligence which they ufe co
make a people, is commonly called a fattions
but when a ftdtion is inferiour in votes, and >
fuperiour , or not much inferiout in power,
then what they cannot obtain by craft, and
language . they attempt by force of armes,
and fo it comes to a civill warre. Bur fome
will fay, thefe things doe not neceffarily,nor ©
often happens he may as well fay, that the
chief Parties aré not necefsarily defirons of

-yain glory ; and that the greareft of thent
feldom difagree in great marters. By reafon

XIII It followes hence,that when the o¢ she un=

legiflative power refides in fuch convents as feledneffe
thele, the Laws muft needs be inconftant, of tbeLaves.
an change , not according to the alterati-
onof the itate of affaires , nor according to
the changeablenefse of mens mindes, but as
the major part,now of this,then of that fudfé-
atydo convenesinfomuch as the Laws do flore
here, and there, as ir were upon the waters.

XIV. In the fourth place , the coun (els For watt
of great afsemblies have this inconvenience, of fecrecy.
that whereas itis oft of great etiapee

: : that.


Dominior. Chap. 10,
that they fhould be kept fecret , they are for
the modt part difcovered to the enemy bee
fore they can be brought to any effe€ , and
their power; and will, is-as foon known -
abroad; as to the People it felfe commanding
at home. 2 ‘

Thefein- XV. Thefe inconveniences which are
conveniet- found in the deliberations of great aflem-
ces doad- blies do fo farre forth evince Monarchy to be
bere to De- better then Democraty,as in Democraty affairs
mocraty, of great confequence are oftner trufted to be
forafmuch diftruft by fuch like Committees , then in-
as men are a Monarchy , neither can it ealily bee done
naturally — otherwayes} for there is no reafon why evety
delighted man fhould not naturally rather «minde his
with aw own private, then the publique bufinelse ». but
opinion of that here hefecs a means to declare his elo-
wit, quence, whereby he may gain the reputa-
tion of being ingenuous, and wile , and ie-
turning home to his friends, to his Parents,
* to his wife, and children, rejoyce, and tti=
umph in the applaufe' of his dextcrous bela.
viour : As of old all the delight Maicus (a-
viclanus had in his warlike aétions , was, to
» fee his praifes fo well pleafing to his Mo=
ther. But if the People in a.Democraty would
beftow the power of deliberating in matters!
of Warre, and Peace, either on one, or fome
very few, being content with the nomina~
tion of Magiftrates,and publique Minittew,
that is to a » with the authority without
the miniftration, then it mutt be confelt,
that inthis particular , Democraty and Mo-.
uarchy would be equall. sna
The incon- XV I.Neither do the conveniencies orine
“wengences — conveniences which are found to be more in,
of goverd= ne kind of government then another, gah
: ‘om


| eS _ Dominion "“ 163
| fomhence,namely,becaufe the government mentr pro-
it (elfor the adminiftration of its affairs,are ceeding
petter commicted to one, then many; or on from @
the other fide,to many,then to fome Fewsfor King who
Government, is the power, the adminiltrati- # a childe.
on of it, is the ad, now the power in all kind
of government isequall ; the aéfs only dif-
fer, thatisto fay theadtions , and motions of
acommon-weale, asthey flow from the de~
liberations of many , or few, of skilfull, or
impertinent men. Whence we underftand,
that the conveniences, or inconveniences of
any governmert , depend nor on him in
whom the authority refides,but on his Offi-
cers,and therefore nothing binders, but that
the common-weale may be weil governed,
although the Mfonarch be a womanor youths
orinfant , provided that they be fit for af=
faites, who are endued with the publique
Offices, and charges.5 And that which is
hid, Woetorhe land whofe King is.a childe,
doth not fignifie the condition of a Movar-
dy to beinferiour to a Popular ftate, but
contrariwife , that by accident it is the grie-
_ yance ofa Kingdome, that the King being a
thilde, it oft¢n happens, that many by am -
bition, and powersintruding themfelves in-
to ao counfels,the government comes
tobeadminiftred in a Democraticall man-
ner, and that thence arife thofe infclicities
which for the moft part accompany the Do- The power
minion of the People. - of Gene-
XVII, But itisa manifeft fign, that ralls % an
the moft abfolute Monarchy is the belt ftate argument”
of government, that not onely Kings, of the cx
but even thofe Cities which are fubjeét cellency of
to the people , or to Nobles, give the whole Afonarchy.
command


err


Sa Dominion. | Chap.to,
command of warre to one only, and'that fo
abfolute, as aeiine can be more (wherein
by the way this muit be noted alfo, thar no
King cangive a Generail greater authority
over his army , then he himfelfe by Right
may exercife over all hisfubjeGs) Monarcly
therefore isthe beft of all governmentsin

_ the-Camps. But what elfe , are many Com.
mon-wealths, then fo many Campsdtreng-
thened with armes, and men againfteach
other, whofe ftace (becaule not reftrained
by any common power , howfoever aa u-
certain peace, like a fhort truce, may paffe
between them)is to be accounted forthe
ftate of nature , which is the ftare of War.

The belt XVILI. Laftly, fince it was neceflary
flate of 4 forthe prefervation of our felves to be fubs
Common= je to Lome Man, or Conncell, we cannoton
weale,is better condition be fubje& to afy then one
that where whole intereft depends upon our fafery,and
she fubjedts welfare 5 and this then comes to'pafie when
are the Ru- we ave the inheritance of the Rulers for
lers iubcrie every man of his own accord endeavours
tance. the prefetvation of his inheritance. But
the Lands, and Monies of the Subjeds are
not onély the Princes Treafure, buttheit
bodies, and-wildy minds ; which will be
eafily granted by thofe who confider at how
great rates the Dominion of leffer Coun-
triesis valued, and how much ealier itis
for men to procure” mony 5 then moncy
men} nor doe we readily meet with any
example that fhewes us when any fubjedt,
withoutany default of his owns hah by
his Prince been defpoiled of his life,  »
goods, through the fole licencioulnelte
his Authority. :
XIX. Hi


| Ohap.1t. Dominion. 165
XIX. Hitherto we have compared a Ariffocraty
Monarchicall, with a Popular State; we have é fo much
faid nothing of cAriftocracy; we may con- better by
clude of this, by what hath been (aid of how much
thofe, that, that which isheredicary, and i approa-
content with the-eleGion of Magiftrates 5 ches nearer
which tranfmits irs deliberations to fome to Afouar-
fowjand thofe’moft'able; which fimply imi- chie, \zhe
tates the government df Monarchs moft,and worfe by
the People leat of all, is for the Subjeats how mush ~
" both’bertér, and more ‘lating then the i % more
reft. : diftant
: fromit,


-  Cuae. XI
Places and Examples of Scri-
-pture of the Rights of Go-
' wermment agreeable 0 ‘
what hath beene rid
before.


I, The beginning of inftitative Go-
ernment from. the confent of the
People. Li. Judicature and Wars
depend on the will of Supreme Com-
manders. V1. That they whohave
the Chief Authority are by Right
- wnpunifhable, Ve That without
© aSupreme Power there 1s no Go-
" vernment, 6a Anarchy. V. That
from Servants and Sons there is a


fimple


166
aie Fat oAbfelute Aus
thority proved by moft evident pla.

ces as welliof the New. as von
Leftaments sot


The ‘begin- 1, Bhove in the.6:Chapeer, and
wing ofine V View Article, fo pe the
~* ftitutive’” Osiginall of inftitutive, or politicall Go=
Govert- — ‘yeroment from the confent of the Mulii-
ment from tude, that it appears they muft eitherjall
the confent. con{ent, or be elteem’d ss Enemies, Such
of the was the beginning of Gods Government
People. over the Jewes. inttituted by, Mofes , If ye
ill obey my voice indecs, (°c. Te (hall be unto
me. aKingdome of Pric(ts, °c. And Mofes
came, and called re Elders* of tbe People, Oe
Aid all tbe people anfwered,, and. Fa
that the Lord hath Spoken we will do,Bxod.t9.
ver. $565798- Such alfo was the beginning
of Majfes hiis power under-God-; orof his
* Vicegerency. And allahe people fier the thin.
derinigs and lightenings , and the noyfe of the
Trumpet, Sew And they -(aid unto Moyles,
fheak thou unto us, and we will hear, Exod.20,
18, 19. Thelike becisihihg, alfo ‘had Sauls
Kingdome, When yce fare that Nae
of the children: of Ammon. ‘came ost faut
you, yee (aid unto me,nay, but a Kuig {hall vaign
overus, when the Lord your God was you
Kings Now therefore bebold the King wohomnyee
have chofen, and whoin yee have dofired. Sam.
12.12. Bur the major part only confeating,
and nor all (forthere were certain Sons op
“Belial, who {aid, How hall this math fave ws?
and they difpifed him, x Sam. 10.27.) thole
: “iia


‘fimaple obedience due to then Bs,


Pritt if


C


| Chap.01. Dominion, 167

| who did not. confent were putto death ag,
Enemies, And the people faid unto S4-
ammel, Who % he that (aid, fhall Saul reign
over us? Bring thowmen tbat me may put them
todeth. « Sam.v1.22. e :
ood. Tn the fame 6. Chapter, the 6, and es
7, Asticles, I have fhewed,that all Fudgment of ee
and Wars depend upon the will and plea- 7" 4M
fure of him. who beares the Supreme Aue


e
i“
8
q)
my
.
2


oe out before us, eng
mi felt or BATTE bs. tie 8 Officer.
20, Aud what pertaines to Fudgements,
and. all. other matrers x Whereof there is .
any controyerfie,,, whether they be Good, or
vill, is confirmed by the teftimony of


‘


ALT, That Kines may not be punifhed ‘pp bo
by their fabjets as hath been thewed a fy, Oahe


Lords Anointed and be innocen? 1Sam.22.v.9,
Andwhen he had cutoff the skirt of his gar-
nent The Lord. forbid (faith he) thar r
Prat Aue this shing sto my Hasler the Lords, :
Rio K Anojnted, : x


68 Dominion, Chapin
sAnioinved’, 10 firerch fortb mnie band agai
bim. 1 Sam. 24> 7: And commanded the -
‘Amalekite, whofor his fake had flain Saul,
tobe pute oe aid 7935 SH

That with- TV. That which is {aid in the 17.Chap*
out afu- ter of sfudges, at the 6. verfe. Inthofedayes
preme pow - there was no King ix Tfrael , but every
er there % shat which was right i his own eyes (as though
no gover where there were not a Monarchy, there were
men an Anarchy ox confusion of all things) may
fifufion, be brought as. teftimony to prove the ex-
excellency of Monarchy above all othet :
4 forms of government 5 unleffe that by the
word Keng may perhaps be underftood, not
one manonely , butallo aCourt 5 provided
that in it there refide a fupreme power,
. which if it betaken inthis fenfe, yet hence
it may follow, that without @ fapreme and
abfolute power (which we have endeavour
red to prove in the Gxth Chaptex) there
will be a liberty for every man t0 doe what
hee bath a minde , or whatfoever shall
feem right to him(felfe; which cannot
with the prefervation of mankinde , a0¢ _
therefore in all Government whatfoevers
there is ever a fupreme power, underftoo
to “3 ema soca sabes
We have in the 8: hapter,the 7 an
That fer- 3, Article, {aid that erveeie mult -yeets
vate ard 4 imple obedience to their Lords,and in the
fonnes, m6 9, Chaptet , Article 7: that Sonmes owe
their Lords fame obedience totheit Parentss Saint Pal
Se fayes the fame pot concetning’ Servants,
am cobe- Servants obey in all thangs yeu afaftors act's
trees ding ro the flesh, ot with eye. ference, armen
Ps igen of ere, farm
Colof. 3: 22 Concerning Sonness al


— Chapt. = Dominion, : 369

" obeyyour Parents in all things for this Hwe ~ ‘
- -pleafing unto the Lord. Colof. 3+ 20. Now
as wee by fimple obedience underftand
ALL THINGS which are not con=
trary to the Lawes of God 3 forin thofe ci-
ted places of Saint Paul, after the word
_ALL THINGS, we muft fuppofe,
one thofe which are contrary tothe Lawes

God.


VI. But that I may not thus by peece- The abfo-
meale prove the right of Princes, I will now ute power
inftance thofe teftimonies which altogether of Princes
eftablith the whole power, ( namely thar proved ly
there is an abfolute' and fimple obedience moft evi-
dueto them from their fubjefis ) And firft dent tefti-
out of the new Teftament. The Scribes and monies 9
Pharifees fit in Moyes feat 3 all. therefore, the Stripe
whatfocver they bid you obferve , that obferve, ure, as
and docs Mat.23. 2. Whatfocver they bid you; well new as
(layes he) obferve , that is tofay, obey fim old.
py. Why? Becaufe they fir in Moyfes feats
namely, the civill Magiftrates , not Aaron,
the Priefts.-Lee every foule be fubjett to the
higher powers , for there és mo power but of
Ged , the powers that be are ordained of Gods
whofoever therefore refiftesh the power, refiftcth
the ordinance of God , and they that refit hall
receive to themfclves damnation. Rom. 13. 1.
Now becaufe the powers that were in Saint
Pauls time were ordained of God, and
all Kings did at that time require an ab-

olute entire obedience from their fub.
Jes , it followes that fuch a power was
ordained of God. Submit your felves unto
very ordinance of manfor the Lords fake,
whiber it bee to the King as fupreme, or
Mite Governours 5 as unto them that are
fF Hes K 2 ‘ fent


a
Dewiiniod — Chap;


- font y him, for the punifoment of wicked


doers, and fur the praife of them that doe
well , for fo is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13,
eAgain Saint Paul to Titus Put them
mind to bee fubjedt to Principalitiies and
Powers , to obey Magifirates , (6. Chap.3e
ver 1. What Principalities ? Was it not
to the Principalities of thofe times 3 -which
required anabfolute obedience ? Furthere
more , that we may come to the example of
Chrift himfelfe , to whom the Kingdome
of the Jewes belonged by hereditary Right,
derived from David himtlfe 3 He when he
lived in the manner of a fubje& , both paid
tribute unto Cafar, and pronounced it to be
due to him, Give uno Czefar (faith he) the -
things wbich are Caefars , and unto God , the
things which are f ods. Mat- 22.21, Whenit
pleafed him to thew himfelfe a King, here-
quired entire obedience. Goe ({aid he) ino
the village over againft you» and. firaightway
yee {hall finde aneAffe tyed , and a Colt with
her,loofe them , and bring them vato me; and
if any man fo onght wato you y yor [hall fy
the Lord hath need of shem. Mat.14. 2+ This
he did therefore by the right of being Lord,
ora King of the Jewes. But to takeaway
a fubje@s goods on this pretence onely be«
cauife the Lord hath need of them , is an abfo-
late power. The moft evident places inthe
‘old Teftament arethele, Goe thou near, 4
heave ALL thatthe Lord our God (hall ay,etd
fpeak thowumto us all that the Lord ourGot alt
speak unto theeand we will hear it, asd doo ite
“Deut.s, 27. But under the word.all, is con~
tained abfolure obedience, Again to follies
eAnid they anfrvered Joshua fying » A i
a q


that thou commandefE us, we will doe, and
whitherfoever thou fendeft us, me will gocs ace
cording a6 we bearkened unto Moyfesix AL Z
things, fo will we hea: ken unto thee , onely the
Lord thy God be with thee, as be was with
“Moyles ; whofocver bee be that doth rebell
againft thy Commandement, and will not hear=
. ken unto thy words in ALL that thou com-
mandeft bim, be fhatl be put to death.Jofhua x.
16,17, 18, And the Parable of the Brame
ble. Then faid all the trees unto the Bramble
Come thou, aud reign over us; And tbe Bram=
ble (aid ynto the trees, If in truth. yee anoint
me King over you, then come and put. your wus
inmy fhadows and if not , let fire come out of
the Bramble,and devoure the Cedars of Leba-
non, fudges9. verl.14, 15. The fenfe of
~ which words is , that we muft acquiefe to
| their fayings ; whom we have truly confti-
| tutedto be Kings over us, unlefse we would
chufe rather to be confumed by the fire ofa
civill warre. But the Regall authority is
more particularly defcribed by God him-
filfe, in the :.Sam.8. verf.9. &c. Shew them
the Right of the King that fhall reign over
them,¢e'c. This (hall be theRight of the King that
foal reign over yous he will take your Sons, and
appoint them for bimfelf,for bis Chariors,and to
be his horfemen, and fome fhall rune before his
Charists toc. And he will take your daughters =
to beconfectionarics,¢gc, And be will takeyour *
vineyards , and give them to bis Servauts, Sec.
Isnot this power abfolute? And yer itis by
God bimfelf ftyled the KINGS. RIGHTS
neither was anyman among the Jewes , no
Rot the High Pric® himfelfesexempted from
this obedience, For whem the King(namely
mar K 3 Solomon).


© @hap.it> == Dominion, =" B


Solomon) ‘faid to Abiathar the Prieft , Get

thee to Anathoth wito tine own fields , for
thon art worthy of dear , bt X will not ab this
time put thee to death , becaufe thom bareft tbe
Atk of the Lord God before David my fa
ther; and becaufe thon baft been afflicted in a
wherein my Father was afflitted. So Solomon
shruft out Abiathar from being. Pricft sata
abe Lord. r Kings, 2. 26. Tt cannot by any
pone be proved, that this a& of his
difpleafed the Lord 5 neither read we , that
either Solomon was reproved , or that his
Perfon at that time was any whit leffe ac-


~teptable to God.


a


Cap. XII.


of the internal canfes , tending
to the diffolution of any
Government,


I. That the judging of good and evill
belongs to private Perfons, 4 #
feditious opinion, i. That. fub-
je@ts doe finne by obeying their
Princes , 2 a [editions opinion.
ILI. That Tyrannicide is lawfull,is
4a [editiows opinion, 1 V. That thole
who have the fupreme power, are
fubject to the civill Lawes, # 4
[editio ws opinion. V. That the fa- *
preme power may be divided, és 4

editions.


© Chap.rz Dominion, 3
wofeditiows opinions “V1, That faith;
aid fanGtity, até hot acquired by
“ftudy and reafon , but alwayes fu.
-pernaturally infufed, and infpiredy
visi @feditions opinion, V Ls That
reach fubje& hath a propriety , of
“‘abfolute Dominion of this owie
“goods ,. is a feditious opinions
VILLI. Dot to under ftand the dif-
“ference between the People and
thé Miltitade , preparés toward
fedition, 1X. Too great aT axe of
_ monies, though never fojeft and nea
ceffary 5 prepares toward fedition.
 X. eA mbition difpofeth us to fedi-
tom, XI. So doth the hope of fuc-
eff. KIT. Eloquence alone.Wwithe
ont Wifdom, is the only faculty need~
full to raife feditions, XIVT. How
the folly of the common people , and
the eloguntion of ambitious men,
concur to the deftruttion of a Come
mon-weale, ‘
peaauno-¥ That the
"Ae hatlybeen fpokent by what sydgement
caufes, and Pa@s, Corhmon-weals 5 good and
ate conftitured 5 and what the Rights of eyji) be.
Princes are over théir fubjea&ts'; Now We Jongs to:
Will briefly fay fomewhat concetning the pyivare
caufesiwhich difulve thetn , or the teafons Perfons,is
Of feditions. Now as in tHe thorioti “of na- 4 /edirious
tutall bodies, three thitigs are to be confi- opinjon,
~~ Keates. dered, . By,


94


- Dominions. i
dered, namely, iuteynall diSpofition, char '
be fi afceprible ofthe pes res
the external Agent, whereby a. certain and
determined motion’ may in a& be produ-
ved 3 and the adtion it felfe: So alfoina
Conamon-weale where the fubjeéts begin
to raife tumults, three things prefent them-
felves to our regard 5 Firkt the Dodtrines and
the Pafsions contrary to Peace, wherewith
the mindes of mem are fitted and difpofed;
next their qualicy and condition wha folli-
cite, affemble, and-dire& them already thus
difpofed, ito take up armes ,:and quit their
allegiance, Laftly, the manner how thisis
done, or'the faltion it felfe: But one, and
the firft which difpofeth them to fedition, is
this, That the knowledge. of good and evill bes
longs to cach fingle man, Inthe ftate, of na-
ture indeed,where every man lives by equall,
Right , and have not by any mutuall Pads
fabniitced to the command of others, ‘we »
haye granted this to be true, “nay in the fir
Chaptér, Article.9 that the civill Lawes
were the Rules of good and evill , juft and
unjuft, boreft and difboneft ; that therefore
what the Legiflator commands , muft be
held: for. good, and what he forbids for evills
andthe Legiflacor is ever that Perfon who
hath the fupreme power in the Common-
weale, chat isto fay, the Monarch! ina Mo-
narchy. We have confirmed the fametruth
in the eleventh Chapter , Article 2, ontof
the words of Solomon's. for if private men
may purfue that as. good , and (hum that as”
evill which appears, to, hem: to. be fo} to


_ what end ferve thofe words of his 2 Give


therefore wre thy fervant an ioe


, “Chap. Dominion.


heart to judge thy People , thar I may difcern


between good and-evill. Since therefore it
belongs to Kings to difcerne betweene
good and evill , wicked are thole, though:
ufuall fayings, that be ouely i a King who
doce righteou/ly , and: that Kings muft not be
obeyed, unteffe they command ns juft things,and
many other fuch like, Before there was any
government, juffand nnjuit had no being,
theit nature onely being relative to fome
cOmand,and every aétion in its own nature
isindifferenits tharit becomes juff, or ui
jul, proceeds from the right of tke Magi-
ftrate : Legitiniate Kings. therefore make
‘the things they command, jult;by comman~=
ding them , and thofe which. they forbid,
unjuft, by forbidding them ; but privare
men while they affume to themfelves the
ee a of good and evill, defire to be
evenas Kings , which cannot be with the
fafety of the Common-weale. The moft
ancient of all Gods comnrands is, Gei.2


_ 15. Thou (halt not cat of the tree of knowledge


of good and cvills.and the moft ancient of.
alldiabolicall tentations , Chap. 3. verf. 5.
Tee fhall be as Gods, knowing good and evill 5
and Gods firft expoftulation with man,
ver, tr. Who told thee thar thou wert naked?
Haft thou caten of the tree, whereof I comanded
thee that thom fhoulde(t not cat? As if hebad
faid , how comeft thou te judge that naked=
nels, wherein it feemed good to me to create
thee, to be fhamefull,except thou have:arto-


fo,


he


ged to thy felfe the knowledge of good.and .
evil! 2 y


5


TI. Whatfoever any-man doth, againit. Thar fub-
tisconfcience isafinne, for he who doth jeéts duc fin
bet K.5


176


jnt obeying fo, contemns the Law. But we muftdiftine —


guith 5 “Fhat is my finne indeed, which —
committing 5 I doe beleeve tobe myfinne,
but whit f beleeve to be another mans fin,
TE may fomterimes doe that withour any fin
of mines for if I be commanded to doethat.
which is a fin in-him who commands me;
#1 doeit , and he that commands me be
by Ri ght,Lord over me,E finne not3for if T
wage watre at the Commandement of my
‘Prince 5 conceiving the warre to be unjuft~
ly undertaken, Tdoe not therefore doe un-
juftly, but rather if I refuleto doe it, arro~
gatingito my-felfe the knowledge of whatis
jut and unjutt , which pertains onely tomy
Prince. Fhey who obferve not this diftinat-
ont,will fall into a neceflity of finning,as oft
as any thing is command them, which
either is, or (eems to be unlawfull to thems
for if they obey , they fin againft their con=
(cience, and if they obey not, againft Right.
Tf they finagainft their confciences they dee
glare that they fear not the paines of the
world to come ; if they finne againit Right,,
they doe as much as in them lyes 5 abo
humane fociety , and the civil life of the
prefent world. ‘Their opinion therefore who
reach, that fubjetts finne when they. obey. their:
Princes commands, which vo them feen anjufts
ig both erroneous , and to be reckoned a=
mong thofe which: are contrary to civill
obediences-and ic depends upon that origi«
nall errour which we have obferved above
in.the foregoing Article ;. for by our taking.
upon us.to judge'of good and evill,we are the
oceafion , that as well our obedience, a
difobedience, becomes fin unto us. 4
: LUI, The


al


‘Chapexd — Dominions§ 07
ODT LThe third feditions doGsine Springs That Ty
frou the fame roo Tae a Ty ranmicide Law. rannicide i
fudsMay,at-chis day it is'by many Divines; lawfull, 6
aid of old: iv was by all'the Philofophets;.a [editions
PlatoyAriftorte, Cicero, Senecay Plutarch, and opiviots
theweft of the:mdintainets of the Gréekjand ©
Roman‘Anarchies held Aidt only unlaw=
full’; but 'eveéh worthy of the gteateit con-
tempt, And under the title of Tyrants, the
mean’ not onely. Monarchs’, but’ all thofe
who bear the chief tule in’ any Gayern-
mentwhatloevers for nor Piffirats onely
avAthens; butithofe thirey alfo who fliceee~
ded him, and ruled:tbgecher, were all called
Tyrants. Buc hey whoai meti require to be
putto death as being a Tyraut , commands .
either by Righr, of without Right 3 ifwith-
out Right, heis an enemy , and by Right -
tobe pur todedth 5 but then this niu noe
becclled the killing a Tyrant 3 but atv enemys
ifby Righe , then the divine’ inter?ogation
takes place, Who hath téld thee vbat he was a
Tyraxt 5 baft chow caten: of the ree whereof L’
commanded ree thar shou fhoukdelt not cat? For
why doeft thow.call Him a! Tyrant , whom
God. hath made aKing , except that thou
being aprivare Perfon', ufarpett to thy. felf
the knowledge ofigoed-and ovill'? But how.
pernicious this opinion’ ig to all governs
ments j butvefpeially to that which is dfonat-
~ »we may henge difcerne, a
by ivevery Kingywhether good of ill, ands
expat! co Be be caine by: the’ judge-
ment, and flaif: by thie hand of every wit
‘thetous villainy! ‘ ;

‘IVE The fourth’ adverfary opinion to Thar even.
Givill: Society, is-theits, who hold, “a they who
ane er tne.


98) Dominion =—- Capra)
Have the they who bear Rule are Subjedt alfo to the civill
Supreme . Lawes 3 which hath been {ufficiently proved
power are. before not to be truein the 6.\Chap. Attics
fubjet to. 14. from.chis Argument, That a! City cat
the Civill.. neither even oe infelf,, norte any fub>
‘Lawes, 44 je& 5. nortoit felfe; becaufe no.man can be
fediciows obliged except it, be to. another 3 notrtoany
Opiuion,. Subyea, becaule the fingle wills.of the Subs
_ jets are contained, in the will ofthe City,
infomuch, that. if the \City willbe free
from all,fuch. obligation;. the Subjeds will
fo too3,,and by -confequence the’ is:fos
But, that which, holds. trueiin. a City; thar
mutt, be fuppofed to-beitrae: in aman, on
anaflembly of men, who haye the Supreme
Authority, for they makea City, which
haih.no being but by their Supreme Power.
Now that this Opinion. cannot confit
-with the very being of Government; is evi-
dent from hence, that by it the knowledge
pof what is Good and Evil, that is to fay, the
definition of what. is, and what is nota
inft: the Lawes, would return to each
ngle Perfon: Obedience therefore will
-ceale-as oft. as,any thing feemes to be com=
manded contrary tothe ,Civill Lawes, and
together, with, it, all coercive jurifdiction,
which; cannot, poflibly, be without the de-
StruGion.of the very effence of Govern-
ment 3. Yetthis Errour hath-great props
Aviftotle, and others; who, by reafon of
humane infirmity, fuppofe the Supreme
Power to be Pee with-moftfecurity
to the Lawes onely 5, but they feem-to have
lookt very. fhallowly into the nature of Go-
vernment, who thought that the conftrain-
ning Rower, the. interpretation of ie


v)


© Chaps 13% Dominion, 179
andthe making of Lawes, (all which are’ }
powers neceffarily belonging to Govern=
ment) thould be left wholly to the Lawes
themielves, “Now although particular Sub-
jets may fometimes contend in judge-
ment, ‘and goe to Law'with the Supreme

so oge yet this is onély then; when the

queition isnot what the’ Magiftrate may,
but what by a certainRule he hath declared
he would doe 5: As, when by any Law the
Judges fit Wpon'the lifeof a Subje&, the

fon'is not whether the" ‘Magiftrare
could by his abfolute Right deprive him of
his life ; but whether by vhat-Law ‘his will
was that he fhould’be deprived of it 5 but
his will was. he fhould, if he brake the
Law, elfe, his will was He fhould not : This
thetefore, that a Subje@ may have an aGti=

"on of Law againft his Supreme Magiftrate,
isnot ‘ftrength of Argument fufficient to
prove that ‘ie is tyed'to-his own Lawes.On
the’ contrary, it is evident, that he is not
tied to his owne Lawes, becaufe no man is
bound to himfelf. Lawes therefore are fet
for Titims, and Gaius, not forthe Ruler:
however,by the ambition of Lawyers,it is fo

ordered; tharthe Lawes, to unskilfull men

* feeme ‘not to depend on the Authority
ofthe Magiftrate, but their Prudence.

V. Inthe fifth place, That the Supreme That the. .
Authority may be divided; is a moft fatall Supteme —
pinion to all’ Common-weales. But di- Power may
Verle men: divide ic’ diverfe wayes, For bedtvided
omedivide it fo as to grant a Supremacy % 4 fediti-
tothe Civill Power in matters pertaining to ous opinioi.
Peace, and the benefits of this life; bur in ¢
things concerning the falvarien of the 5 es
‘ they:


they transfer it on others; Nows becaufe.
juttice is of all things moft neceflary to Sal
vation , it happens, that Subjects meafu.
ing juftice » . not as they ought, by-the Ci.
Sigg es, but by the: precepts and.do-
Gitines of them; who. in regard of ,the Mae
giltrate, are. either private mény,or/ftrans
gers, through aifuperftitious fear dare not
perform the obedience. due to theit Princess
through fear falling into that. which. they
moft feared Now what .can-be more pers
nicious to,any dtate,then- thar men fhould,
by. the  apprehenfion., of jeverlafting tor
laburan from obeying their Prins
ces, that is to fay, the Lawes; or from
being juft? There are alfo fome who divide
the Supreme Authority fo as, to allow. the
er of War,and Peace, unto one;(whom:
they call aM@onarch) but thevright oftaifing.
Monies they give to fome. others, ‘and.not
tohim : Bat becaufe monies arethe finewss:
of War, and Peace’, they who thus divide
the Authority, doe either really not divide
it at all, but place it wholly in) thems in»
whofe power the money:is,. but. give the
fame of it to another 5 or if they doe,really-
divide iv, they diffolve the; Government ¢
for neither upon neceffity can War bewa- |
ged, nor.can the publique Peace. be prefer--
ao
? wie Mis Ttisa common do@rine, Thar faith:
_ ard boline[s and holineffe are nor acquired by. ftudy, ‘I
“ate NO dim natural reafon, but are. alwayes, fuperustiarally.
wired. by- infused, and. infpired. into mews -whiehy-if it
fudy. and were true, 1 underftaad. not why we fhiould:
reajon, but be commanded: to give .an account of out
arc ever fi faith 3.0r why. any!.oan, who is-oruly @
“+ Chriftian;.


Chap. Dominion. 181.
Chriftian, (ould not be a Prophets orpernaturally
laitlys why every man fhould not judge infufed aud
what’s fit for him todoey what to avoid, inpired,is _
rather out of his own infpiration, then by a feditiows
the precepts. of his Superiours, or right Opinion.
Reafon. A returmtherefore muft be made
tothe private knowledge of Good and Evil 5
which cannot be granted without the ruine
of all Governments. This Opinion hate
arte {elf fo largely through the whole
riftian world, that the number of Apo=
flates froin natural reafon is almoft become
"infinite, and it (prang fron fick-brained
men, who having gotten good ftore of Holy
Words by frequent reading of the Scri-
ptures, made fuch a corinexion of them.
ufually in their preaching:, that their Set
mons fignifying juft nothing, yet to un-
Yearned. men feemed moft divine 5. for he
whole non-fenfe appears to: be a Divine
eech,muft neceflarily feeme to be infpired.
om above. :
VII. The feventh Do€rine oppolite phar fingle
to Government, is this, That cach fubje® subjctts
bath an abfolute Dominion over rhe goods be % have any
~ inpoffeffion.of. That isto fay, fucha propriety propriety,
asexcludesinot only the right of all the reft oy  abfolute
of his fellows fubjeéts to the fame goods,but Dominion
. allo ofthe Magiftrate himifelf, whichis not over sbeir
true; for chey who have a.Lord over them own goods,
have themfelves. no. Lord hip; as hath been js ¢fediti-_
proved , Chap. 8. Artic, 5. Now the Mar gysOpitiotte-
giftcae is Lord of all his Subjects, by the 2
conftitution of Government. | Before the
yoke of Civill Society was undertaken, no
man had any proper Right 5. all things were
commento ail men; tell me therefore, how
; : gortelt:


16d Dominion —— Chap.r3)
‘gottelt’ thou this propriety: Bi fiom the
‘Magiftrate ? How got the Magiftiate it,
but that every man transferred his Right

‘on him 2. and thou therefore haft alfo gi
ven up thyRight to him;thyDominjon theres
forey and Propriety, is jult fo much as he
will,and fhall lat fo long as he pleales;
€ven as in\a Family, each Son hath fuch
Proper goods , and fo long lafting,as feeme
good-tothe Father. Butthe greateft part
of men who. profeffe Civil Prudence,
reafon otherwife 5- we are equall (fay they)
by nature; there is no reafon why any
man thould by better Right rake my goods
from me, then I his from him 5 ‘we know
that mony fometimes is needfull for the
defence and maintenance of the publique ;
but let them, who require it, thew us the
prefent neceflity, and they thall willingly
receive it. They:who talk thus, know not,
that what they would have, is already done
from the beginning in the very conftitution
of Government, and therefore {peaking as

3 ina diflolute multitude, and yet not fathi-

= fhioned Government, they deftioy ‘the

E. frame,

Not to VIII, In the laft place, it’s a great
know the hindrance to Civill Government,efpecially
difference. Monarchicall, that men diftinguifh not

| between a enough between:a People and a Multitude.
People and Vhe ‘People is fomewhat that is one, having
Multitude one will, andto whom: one aéion may be
prepares to attributed’; none of thefe can properly be
Sedition, {aid of a Multitude; ‘The People rules in
s all Governments;for even in Afonarchies the

People Commands; forthe People wills by
the will of one man 5 but the Multitude are

Sg reer Citizens,


Snes | i


Dominion. 18z
‘that is'to fay; Subje@s. Ina
‘Democraty, and Ariffocraty, the Citizens
ate the Multitude, but the Court is the
People. And ina Monarchy, the Subjects
are the Multitude, and (however it feeme a
Paradox ) the’ King is‘the People. The
conimion fort of men, and’others who little
confider thefé triithes,do alwayes {peak of a
great number of men, as of the People, that
is to fay, the City ; they fay that the City
hath rebelled againft the King (which isim-
poflible) and that the People will, and nill,
what’ murmtiring ‘ahd’ difcontented Sub-
jets would have; or would not have, under
pieterice of the People, ftitring “up the Citi=
yous againft ‘the City, that is to fay, the
Multitude againft the "Peopler And thefe
até almoft all the Opinions wherewith
Subje&s being tainted doe eafily Tumult.
And forafwuch’ 2s in all manner of Go-

veifiment “Majefty is to be preferv’d by

him, or them’ who have the Supreme Au-

thority, the vvimen lefce’ Maje(fate naturally

cleaves to thefe Opinions.

AX: Thereiis nothing more affliGts the 00 great
mind of man then Poverty, ‘or the want of a Tax of.
thofe'things ‘which-are'neceflary for the Money,
piclérvation °of life’ and’ honour 3 and zhough
though there bé no man but knowes that never /o
Yiches are gotten-with induftry, and kept by jut and
frugality, yet all the poor commonly lay the neceffaryy

ame on the Eyill Government, excufing difpofeth .
their own floth , and luxury, as if their men. to

tivate goods for footh were wafted by pub-' Sedition,
ique'exaGions 3 Bur men muft confider,’ ~
that they who have no patrimony, muft not

axely labour that they may live, but fight
tu. t00,


134, Dominion. Snapagy
— t00,:that they may labour: Every one of,
the ewes soho ia ies Cncinee aime
Walls.of ferufalem, did the work with one.
hand, and held the Sword in th¢ other, In
all Government. we mutt conceive. that the
hand which holds the Sword is the King,
or Supreme Councell, which is noleileto,
be fuftained, and nourifht , by the ‘Sub-
jets care and induftry, then that where.
with each man procures him(elf a private
fortune 3 and that Guftomes, and Tributes,
are nothing elfe but their. reward who
watch in Armes for us, that the labours and.
endeavours of fingle men tay not be mo~
lefted by the incurfion of enetnies 3 and,
thac their complaint » who impute their
poverty to publick Perfons, is not more
juft, then if they fhould fay that they are
become in want by paying of their debts:

ut the moft part of men confider nothing
of thele things , for they fuffer the fame’
thing with them who have a difeafe they
call an Incubus, which fpringing from
Gluttony , it makes men believe Say are
invaded, ‘oper and ftifled. with apieat
weight: Now itis. athing. manifeltof it
felfe, that th ey who feeme to themfelves to-
be burthened with the whole load of the
Common-weal, are prone to be Seditious 5
and that they: are affeéted with change’s
who are diftafted ac the prefent ftate of


ning é

. Another noxious difeafe of the

mind is theirs , who having little employs

ment; want Honour and Dignity. All met

naturally ftrive for Honour , andPrefer

ment, but cheifly they who are lealt ied
ade


12. Domini — 785
roubled with caring for neceffary things s ;
for thefe men are invited by their vacancy
fometimes to difputation attiong themfélves
concerning the Common-weal, fometimes
toan eafie reading of Hiftories, Politiques,
Orations,Poenisjand other pleafant Books;:
afd it happens; that hence they chink
them(elves fufficiently furnifhe both with
Wit, and learning, to adminifter matters of
the greateft confequence. Now becaufe all
then are not what they appear to them
felves, and if they were, yet all (by reafon
of the multitude ) could not be received to
Sig Offices), its neceflary thac many
mult bepafled by. Thefe therefore con-
ceiving themfelves affronted , can defire
nothing moxe, partly out of envy to thofe
Who were preferred before them, partly out
of hope to overwhelm them,then ill fucceffe
tothe publique Confultations 3 and there=
fore its no rharvell if with greedy. appe--
tites they feek for occafions of innovati-


OXI. The hope of overcommiug is alfoto be So doth the
mimbred among other feditious inclinati- hope of (uss
ofs3for let there be ds manymenas you wil, ceffe.
ifeted with opinions repugnant to Peace,
and civill Government,let there be as many
asthete can, never fo mtich wounded and
torfie with affronts, and calumnies, by
them who arein Authority, yet if there be
10 hope of having the better of then, or it
appeat not {ufficient , there will no fediti-
on follow; every iman will diffemble his

thoughts; and rather content himfelf with -
the prefene burthen, then hazard an hea-
Wer weight 5 There are four things —
rily


ie


186 Dominion. — Ch
tily requifite to this hope. Numbers Inftru.
menis,mutuall truft,and Commanders. To
refift publique Magiftrates wichour a great
number; is not Sedition, but Defperation,
Inftruments of war I mean all manner
Of ares, munition, and other necé(sary pro.
' vifion, without which Number can doe now
thing » nor Arms neither without mumall
éruft ; Nor all thefe without union under
under fome Commander, whom of theit
own accord, they are content to obey ; not
as beingengaged by their {ubmiflion tohis
command (for we have. already in this veiy
Chapter, fuppofed thefe kind of men notto
underftand, being obliged beyond that
which feems right and good in their own
eyes) but for fome opinion they have of bis
vertue, or military skill , or refemblance of
humouis. If thefe four be near at hand to
men gricved with'the prefent ftate,and mea
furing the jultice of their aGtions by theit
own judgements, there will be nothing .
wanting to fedition and confafion of the
Realmé , but one to ffivre up and quicken


bs them.

— Eloquence. XT \. Satu his, Charader of Cataline,
_ alone with- (then whom there-never was.a geeater Ar-
out wifton tilt in eaifing {editions)) is this, That be bal

| tthe oucly greas eloquence 5 and little wifilome 3 he fe
faculty parates wifdome fom. eloquence , atcribu-
weedfull ting this as. neceflary to a man born for
toraife (e-_ commotions adjudging that. as an inftru-
ditions, — @refse of Peace, and quietnefse. . Now,
eloquence is twofold, The one isan ele

~ gant’; and ‘cleare expreffion of the con- .

ceptions of the mind, and rifeth partly from

the conemplation of the things themfelves,


f | partly 4


Fights a
‘ip 12,  Dominiow.
‘partly from an underftanding of words ta=
in their own proper, and definite figni-
fication 5 the other is acommotion of the
Paflions of the minde (fuck as are hope,
fesse, pity) and derives from a metas
phoricall ufe of words fitted to the Paffions:
Thatforms a {peech from true Principles;
this’ from opinions already received , what
nature foever they are of, The ‘art of that is
Logick, of this Rhetorick, the end of that is
truth,of this viGory. Bach hath its ufe, that
in deliberations , this in exhortations; for
that ig never disjoynedfrom wifdome, but
thisalmoft ever. Bur that thiskind of pow=
erfull eloquence , ‘feparated from the true
Anowledge of things, that isto fay , from
wildome, is the true charaéter of them who
follicite, and ftirre up. the people to inno-
vations, may eafily be gathered out of the
work it felfe which they have to. doe 3 for
bi could not poyfon the people with thofe
abfurd opinions contrary to Peace and civill
focicty, unkefse they held them themfelyes,
which fure is an ignorance greater then ¢an
well befall any wife man, ri he thatknows
“not whence the Lawes derive: their’ powers
Which are che Rules of juft and-yzjuf; bone|t
and difhonef , good and evil , what makes
and prefezves Peace among men what de~
‘ aes it, what is his, and what anosberss
Laitly, what he would have done to him=
Kelfe (that he may doe the like:to others) is
firely to be accounted but meanly wife; but
that they canturn their Auditors out of fools
into madmen 5 that they can make things
to them who are ill-affe@ed feem worle,
‘tothem who are well-afleéted feem cpa
\ ; they


187


188


How the


x

Dominion. Chap.13:

they can énlarge their hopes  lefsen their.
dangers beyond reafon : this they have from
that fort of eloquence, not which explaing
things as they are, but from that other,
which by: moving their mindes , makes all
things to appear to bee fuch as they in
their mindes prepared: before 5 had already
conceived them. Nia
X ILI. Many men who are themfelves


folly of the very: well affedted to civil fociety, doe


common


people, and the di


the elo-
quence


of ambiti- Schooles , and allthepeople intheir Pule


ous men,


through want of knowledge , cooperate to

juiesiong of fubje&s mindesto fedition,
whilft they teach young men a dogtring
conformable to the faid opinions in their


pits : now they who defire to bring this dife


coucurre t0 pofition into AG , place their whole endeae
the diffalu- your in this , Firft, hac they:may-joya the


tion of 4


ill affegted together into fattion and confpitas


Common cy 3 next , that themfelves may. have the


Weddle.


~ greateft ftroke in the faétion: They gather


them into faétion, while they make thems
felves the relatots , and interpretors of the
counfels and aétions of fingle men , and
nominate the Perfons and Places, to affems.
blevand:deliberate of fuch things where

the prefent government may be reformed,
according as it fhall feem beft to their inte.
refts. Now tothe end that they themfelves
may have the chief ruleinthe faétion, The’
fadion mutt be kept in a’ faition, that isto
fay, they muft have their fecret meetings
apatt with afew , where they may order
what hall afterward be propounded in a
a meeting,and’ by whom,and on what
ubje& 5 and in what order each of them


“thal {peak , and how they may draw the |


powers


hap. 13. Dominion.
p left , and moft popular men of the
jadion to their fide ¢ and: thus.when they
we gotten. faGtion big enough , ia which
‘they may rule by their eloquence, they move
jrtotake per it the managing of affaires,
‘and thus they fometimes oppreffe the Com-
mon-wealth,namely where there is no other
fa@ion to. oppofe them , but for the moft
te they rend it, and introduce a civill
atte, for folly and eloquence concurre in the
fubverfion of government inthe fame man-
ner(as the fable hathit) as heretofore the
daughters of Palias King of Theflaly, con-
Spived with Medea againit their fathers T hey
ning to reftore the cparpit old man to his
“ th again, by thecounfell of Medea , they
sega peeces , and fet him in the fie
to boyle , in-vain expe&ing when he wou!
Uieagain 3 So the common people through
their folly (like the daughters of Palias)


ol!
defiring to renew the ancient government,
being drawne away by theeloguence of am-
bitious men, as i were by the witchcraft of
Medea, divided into faction, they confume
ie by thofe flames, then they t¢-

ME Ife { r


d Cuae. XIIL


Concerning the duties of them
who bear Rule.


UThe Right of fupreme authority is ;


my J IL The


a diftingwsfhed from ‘its exercifer


184


TTT


igo


“efit of many ; not tbe pro iety 6
2 i at iden he
Safety sis underftvdd: all: manner of


jects Soules, as they foall jedge bef


Stording ‘to shatevery. mar {pends,


Dominion. Chapin,
11. The fafety of the people. is the
Supreme Law > 1b. Te beboves
Princes to regard the :common ben


conveniencies.’Vi A Quevie, Whes
ther it be the duty: of Kings to pro |
vide for the falvation of their Sub.


according to their owne confciences,
Vii Wherein the fafety of the peo
ple confifis, V VY. That diftoverers
are neceffary Je the defence of the
people. VIL. Lhat.tohave foul.
diers.armes, Zarrifons, and monies in
@ readine{se’, intime of Peace, is
“alfo necefsary for the defence of the
People, 1 XveA right infiruction of
Subjectsincivill doctrines, is necef-
Sary for’ the preferving of Peace,
X. Equall diftributions of publick
Offices , conduces much to the pre
Servation of Peace. X% le It is nathe
rall equity that*moniesbe taxt a-


not whet he pofsefsess K11, Lt con
ducext to the prefervation of Peace,
to. keepe downe ambitious wath
XII And to breake faction.

Z “XIV. Lawes


Chap.t3. Dominion, =e 19r
XLV. Laws whereby thriving Arts
are cherifot and Lreat cofts ree
| firained, conduce to the enriching of
the Subiect. XV.T hat more onght.
no to be defined by the Lavves, then
the benefit of the Prince and his
Subiects requires. XV. That
| freater punihments muft not bee
inflicted y then are preferibed by the
Lawes, XVII. Subiects muft
have Right done them again? cor.
_ wage Pudges,
“oy what. hath hitherto been faid, The Right
» Mthe dutics of Citizens and Subjects of fupreme


* inany kind of government wharfoever; and authority
| the poser of the fupreme Ruler over them js digin-


ae apparent ; but we have as yet {aid no- guifht fron


"thing of the duties of Rulers > and how they yrs oxcrcifes
| ought to. behave themfelves towards sheir
Sibieds; We muft then diftinguifh be-
tween the Right, and the exercife ot (upreme
authority, for they can be divided; as Ee x=
anple, when he who hath the Right , either
finnot 5 or will not be prefent in judging
tclpaffes 5 or deliberating of affaires 5 For
ings fometimes by reafon of their age can-
‘Not order their affaires » fometimes alfo
though they can doe it themfelves > yet they
Ndgeit fitter 5 tbeing (atisfied in the choyce
oftheir Officers and Counfellors, to exr=
tile their power by them. Now where the
# and exercife are fevered, there the go~
thment of the Common-weale,is like the
ary government of the world,in which
Staite God.


q


192


_ fuch, as if God beyond the ordinaty courle


rhe fafery


of the Peo of the peoples the fupreme Law; for altho rh


- ple is the
_ fupreme
«Law


Dominions — Chaps
God, the mover of all. things, produceth na=
turall effects by the means of f
caufes; but where he , to whom the ight
of ruling doth belong , is himfelfe prefent
in all judicatures , confulrations, and pub-
lique aétions, there the adminiftration is


of nature, fhould immediately apply him-
felf unto all mateers 5 we il cherelonein
this Chapter fummarily and briefly {peak
fomewhat concerning their duics who ex- |
ercife authority, whether by their own or
others Right. Nor is it my purpofeto de-
fcend into thofe things which being di-
vers from others, fome Princes may doe,for
this is to be left to the Political! Prattices of
each Common: weale.

TI. Now all the duties of Rulers are
contained in this one fentence » The fafety


they who among men obtain the chie
Dominion, cannot be {ubjeé& to Lawes
properly fo called, that is to fay, to the wi
ofmen , becaufe to be chief , and fubjed,
arecontradidtoriess yet is it their day io
all things, as much as poflably they can» (0
yeeld obedience unto right reafon , whi is
the naturall, morall, and divine Laws But
becaufe dominions were conttituted
Peaces fakes and Peace was foughe after for
fafeties fake, he,who being placed in autho
rity, thall ule bis power otherwife then 0
the fafety of thepeople , will act againft the
reafons of Peace , that is to fay aga the
Lawes of nature 3 Now as the fatety
People digtates 2 Law by which 1
jenow their duty  fodork iealfo reach


«


ieee? that power unto them) if they ~


Cup). Domina. 193


an art how to procurethemfelves a benefits
for the power of the Citizens,isthe Power of
the City’, that is tofay, his that bears the


chief Rule in any ftate,
TT 1. By thepeople'in‘this place wean: It isthe


_ derftand, nor onecivill Petfony namely the duty of


City it felfe which governs, but the mulei- Princes x0.
tude ‘of fubje&s which are prrcineds for r¢/peé the
the City was not inftituted forits own, but common

for the fubjeéts fakes and yet a particular benefir of
Cate is not required ‘ of this or that man 3 for many, not
the Ruler (as fuch) provides no otherwife the peculiar
for the fafety of his: people, then by his intercft of
Lawes; which are univer{all 5 and therefore this.or that
he hath fully 4:/cbarged bimfelfe, ifhe have man,


-. throughly endeavoured. by wholefome con-


Ritutions;co eftablith the welfare of the moft
Part, and made it as lafting as may:be; and
thatno man fuffer ill , but by: his own de:
faule ; or by fome chance which could not
beprevented 5 but it fometimes conduices to -
the fafety of the moft part, that wicked
men doe fuffer, :
“TV. Bat: by fafety mult be underftood, By fanfety is
fot the fole prefervation of life in what con= wderffaod
ition foever , but'in ordet to its happines. 4! manner
For to this end did men frecly aifemble of benefits,
themfelves, and a/titute a government, that
ley might,as much as their humane condi=
in Would afford, live delightfully. They
therefore who had undertaken the admini-
ion of power in fuch a kinde of govern-
Ment, would finne againft the Law of na-
ttte (becaufe againft their truft who had


ld not ftudy, as much as by good Laws
be effected, to furnith: their fubjedts -
Beets: L2 abun--


194 Dominion. Chap.
abundantly not only with the good things
acne lite, echt with ri ae
advanceto dele@ation. They who have ac«
quired Dominion by arms5, doe all defire
that their fubjeéts may. be, Trcong in body
and mind, that they, may ferve them the
better , wherefore if they (hould not endea-
your to provide them, not only with fuch
things whereby they may live, but alf with
{uch whereby they may grow. {trong and
Jukty, they would, a@:againft their own
{cope and end. ; ;

Query, V. And firft of all, Princes doe beleeve
Whether it that ic mainly concerns evernall falvation,
be the duty what opinions are® held of the Deity, and
of Kings what manner of worfhip he is to be adored
toprovide with; which being fuppofed , it may be de>
for the (il manded, whether chief Rulers, and wholo-
‘yation of ever they be, whether one or mores who ¢x-
their fub-  ercife fupreme authority, fin not againft the
| jets oulesy Law of nature, if they caule not {uch a do-
“as thy fall @rine, and worlhip , to be taught and pra-
judge beft Gif eer permit a contrary to be taught and
“mbeir —_ pradtifed) as they beleeve neceflarily con-
“own cot-  duceth to theceernall. (alvation of their fub-
_feicnces. — je&s? Ibis manifeft that they a& againit
; _ their confcience, and that they will,as much
E as in them lies, the eternall perdition of
their fubjedts; for if they willed it not , 1 fee
no reafon why they fhould {ufler, Cue
E@ being fupreme they cannot be compel! )
fuch things to be taught. and done, for
which they beleeve them.to bein a damma=-
Wherein _ ble ftae. But we will leave this difficulty. in
the fafety fufpencee z ica ar
of the Pee VI. Thebenchits of fubjedts refpecting
ple confifts. this life only, may be diftribured into foure
mn ; 3 ~~ inde


5.
Sis


 Chap.13. = Dominion. 195

‘kindes, 1. That they be defended againft i
forraign-enemies. 2, That Peace be pre=

ferved at home, 3. That they be enrich’t

as much as. may confift with publique fe-

curity. 4. That they enjoy a harmeleffeli-

‘berty 5’ For Cupreme Commanders can con-

‘ferre no more'to their civill happinefle, then -

that being preferved from forraign and ci-
vill-warres', they may quietly enjoy that

wealth which they have purchafed by their

own iuduftry.

VII. There are two things neceflary That difco«

forthe Peoplesdefence ; Tobewarned, and verers are

w be forearmed ; for the ftate of Common- verohog
wealths confidered in them(elves,is natural, for the de-
thatisto fay, hoftile 5. neither if they ceale fence vf rhe
from fighting., is it therefore 10 be called ‘People.
Peace, ie rather a breathing time,in which

‘oneenemy obferving the motion and coun-_

tenance of the other, values his fecurity nct

according to the Pa&s', but the forces and

counfels of his adverfary 5 And this by'na-

turall Right, as hath been fhewed in the fe-

cond Chapter, 10, Artic, from this that a
contradts are invalidin the ftate of nature,
ag oft as any juftfear'doth intervene’; Itis
therefore neceflary to the ‘defence of the
City, Firft, that there be fome who may as
‘near as may be, {earch into , and difcover the
counfels and motions of all thofe who may
: shkeniy it 3 for diftoverers to Minifters of
Stateyare like the beames of the Sunne to 4
the humane foule, and:we may more truly
‘fayin viGon pdliticall:,. then naturall , that
the fenfible; and intelligible Species of our-
‘ward things, not well confidered by others,
are by the ayre tranfported to the foule,
uae Tey (that


106 Dominion. Chapin,

: (char is ‘to fay rochem’ who have the Su.
preme Authority) and therefore are ¢
no leffe neceflary to the prefervation of the
State, then the rayes of the light ate to the
confervation of man 3 or if they be coms
pared to Spiders webs, which extended on
call fides. by the finelt threds, doe warn
them, keeping in their {mall holds,'of-all
outwatd motions; They who bear Rule
canno more know what is neceffary to be
commanded for the defence of their Sub-
jects without Spies, then thofe ’ Spiders
can when they flall goe-forth, and whether
they fhall repair, without the motion of
thofe threds. i

To have . VILLI. Farthermore, its neceffarily requi-

Souldiers, fite to the peoples defence, that they be

Armes, — fore-armel. Now to be fore-armed is to be


art of Fencing; with their Bucklers gall
thofe patrs of the body where they farft.£ lt
the fmart of the: ftrokes.. Bur they who
think ir then feafonable enough to raile
Monies for the maintenante of Souldiets,
and other Charges of War, when the dan-

» ger begins:to thew it felf, they confider not
furely how difficult ‘a mateer it is to wring
fuddainly out of clofe-fitted. menifo valta
proportion of Monies ; tor almoft all oy

waa


>i fiee


Chap.13. — Dominion.
‘what they once reckon in the number of


fuch a right and propriety in ic, as they con=
ceive themfelvesto be injured whenfoever

ae forced to imploy but the leaft part
of it for the publique good, Now a fufficient
flock of monies to defend the Gountry
with Armes, will not foon be raifed out of
the treafure of Impofts , and Cuftomes 5
we muft therefore, for fear of War, in time
of Peace hoord up good fumms,if we intend
the fafery of the Common-weal. Since
therefore it neceflarily belongs to Rulers
forthe Subjeéts fafety to difcover the Ene~
mies Counlell, tokeep Garrifons, and to
have Money in continual! readinefle, and
that Princes are by the Law of Nature
bound to ufe their whole endeavour in pro-
curing the welfare of their Subjects, ic
fellowes, that ics not onely law full for them

to fend out Spies, to maintain Souldiers, to
build Forts, and to require Monies for
thefe purpotes, but alfo, not to doe thus, is
onlay full To which alfomay be added,
whatfoever fhall feeme to conduce to the
Iefning of the power of forraigneis whom.
they fulpe@, whether by flcighc, or force.
For sales are bound according to their
power to prevent theevills they fulpect, left


~ theit goods, doe judge themfelves to have _


‘ 197 P


petadventure they may happen through ef right


their negligence,


inftruttion
IX. Bur many things ave required to of Subjeds
the confervation of inward Peace, becaule in civil —
many things concur (as hath been fhewed doérines #


inthe foregoing Chapter) to its perrurba= necefary
tion. We have there fhewed, that fome fir the pres


$te


ku:


things there are which difpofe the minds of ferving of
. L4 of Peace,


Dominio — Chap.x


drawn,


apit3. - Dominion.

drawn by chance out of an urne, by reafon
| ofthe frequent ufe of hearing them; how
much mote would they forthe {ame reafon
entertain tiue doctrines fuitable to their
owa’ underftandings, and the nature of
things ? 1 therefore conceive it to be the
duty of Supreme Officers to’ caufe the true
elements of civill Dodtrine tobe writen,
and tocommand them to be taught in all
the Golledges of their feverall Dominions.


X. In the next place we thewed that xrayaf di-
grief of mind asifing from want did difpofe Auibusion
the Subjegts to Sedition, which want, al- of yblique


199


though deriv’d from their own luxury, and pyrshens


floth, yet they impute itto thofe who go- condyceih

yern the Realm, as though they were drai- mych to the

ned and oppreft by publique Penfions. preféruzti-
| NotwithRanding iemay fometimes happen on of peace.


that this complaint may be juft, namely,
-when the burthens ofthe Realm are une-
qually impofed on the Subjects 3° For that
which to all together is bata light weaght,
ifmany withdraw themfelves,it wil be very
heavy, may, even inrollerable tothe reft
Neither are men wont fo much togrieve at
the burthen ic felf, as at the inequality. With
~much earneftnes thetafore men. ftrive to be
freed from taxes, &.in this conflié the lefle
happy; as being overcome,do envy she moe
fortunate. To remove-thereforeall juft com-
plaint, its the inteceft of the publique quier,

‘ and by. confequence it concernes the duty of
the Magiftrate,to fee thar the publique bur-
thens be equally born.) Furthermore; fince
What is brought by the fubjects to publick
ule, is nothing elfe bur the price of their
bought Peace, its reafon good, thar they:
who equally thare in the peace, should alfo
me Ge Ly pay


_ what every confume lefle , others more, It ma


| tot 40 wha ought to contribure to the publique 5 ac=


|


Dominion, — Chap.ry,
‘an equall part either by. conttibuting —
ie cue = their labours tothe Cae
mon-weal ; now itisthe Law of Nature
(by the 15. Article of the 3. Chapter) that
every man in diftributing righe to others,
doe carry himfelf equall tolls wherefore
Rulers are by the natural Law obliged to
lay the burthens of the Common-weal
equally on their Subje&s.

- XI. Nowin this.place we underftand
an equality, not of Money, buriof Burthen,
that is to fay, an equality of reafon between

Tis naturall the Burthens , and the Benefits, For al-

equity that thongh ali equally enjoy Peace , yet che

Monies be benefits {pringing from thence, are not

taxt accor equall to all 5 e fome get, greater pof=

ding to feffions , others lefle; and againe, fome


206


man fpeuds, therefore be demanded whether Subjeas


be poffef- cording to the rate of what they gain , or
eth, of what they {pend, thatis to fay, whether
the perfons muft betaxe, fo.as to pay cone
tribution according to their wealth, or the ’
goods themfelves, that every man contri-
bute according to what he fpends. Butif
we confider, where Monies are raifed ace
cording to wealth, there they who have
made equall gain, have not equal poflel
fions, becaufe that one preferves whar he
hath got by frugality, another waftes it by
luxury, and thereforeequally rejoycing in P
the benefit of Peace, they doe nor equally
faftaine. the Burthens of the Common-
weal; and on the other fide, where the’
goods themfelves are taxt, there every mam)
while he fpends his private goods, in the ©
very ac rs confuming them he <a
nably


| Chap. 73. Dominion. yeas
_ ably payes part due to the Common-weal,
‘according to , not what he hath , but what
bythe benefit of the Realm be hath had;
itisno more tobedoubred , but that the
former way of commanding monies is a-
gaint equity, and therefore againft rhe duty
of Rules, thelatter is agreeable to reafon,
and the exercife of their authority. "
XTI. Inthe third place , we. faid that ry conduces
that trouble of minde which rifeth from to the pre~
ambition was oftenfive to publique Peace. feruation of
For there are fome who pene to them= peace,to de~
felves to be wifer then cthers , and more pyefe the
fufficienc for the managing of affaires then ambitious.
they whoat prefent doe govern , when they
can'no ptherwlfe declare how profitable
their vertue would prove to the Common-
weale, they thew it, by harming it; but be-
caule ambition and greedinefle of honours
~ cannot be rooted out of the mindes of men,
its mot the duty of Rulers to endeavour ir3
but by conftant application of rewards, and
puniihments , they may fo order it, that
men may know that the way to honout is,
not by coprempt of the prefent government,
nor by faétions, and the popular ayre , but
by the contraries) They are good men who
obferve the Decrees rhe Lawes and Rights
of their Fathers; if with a conftant order we
faw thefe adorned with honours, but the
factions punifht , and had in contempt by
thofe who bearcommand , there would be
more ambition to obey, then withftands
~ notwithftanding iv fo happens fometimes, by
that as we muft itroke a horfe by reafon of
his too much fierceneffe , fo a ftiffe-neckt
-— fubjec& mutt be flatter'd for fear of his pow-
er,


,


202 | Dominion, — Chapaz


er; butas that happens when therider fo.


this, when the Commander is in danger of


falling, But we{peak here of thofe , whole |


authority. aund power isintire. Their duty
(I fay) it is to cherith obedient fubjeas,
and to depreffe the fa@ious all they cans.


nor cin the publique power be otherwife _


‘ preferved , nor the fubjects quiet without it,
Andtodif- XII. Burificbe the duty of Princes
folue facia to teftrain the fagtious, much more does it

concern them to diflolve and diffipate the
fadtions themfelues. Now 1 call a faétion,
amultitude of fubje@s gathered together,
either by mutual contrafts among them-
felves, or by the power of fome one,without


OMS.
r


his or theirs who bear the fupreme Rule: _


A. fattion therefore is as it were a City ina
City 3 for as by an Union, of men in the
State of nature a City receives tes being , fo.
bya new union of fubjedts , there arileth a
fadtion. According to this definition, amuls
: titude of fubje&s who have bound them=
[ {elves fimply to obzy any forreign Prince,

or Subje@ , or have made any Pads, or


Selves againft.all men , not excepting thofe
who have the fupreme power in the City,
: isa faition, Alfo favour with the vulgar if it
; be fo great,that by itanArmymay be rais'd,
except publique caution be given, either by
hoftages, or fome other pled, es contains,
fattion ia ic The fame tnay be faid of pri
‘vate wealth, ifit exceed , becaufe all things
obey mony. Forafmuch therefore as it is
true, thar the ftate of Cities among them-
felyes is naturall, and hoftile, thofe Princes
awho permit factions, doeas much as.if they”
. : received


Leagues.of mutuall defence between them=


|


' Chap. 13. Dominion, , 203
received an enemy within their walls,which

_ Gs.contrary to the fubjeéts fafety,and there-
fore alfo againft the Law of nature.

XIV. There are two things neceffary Lawes
tothe enriching of Subjects , Laobur and whereby.
wbrift; there is alfo.a third whichhelps , to gaining
wit the narurall increafe of the earth, and wa- arts are
ter, and there is atourth too, namely the cherifhtand:
Militia, which fometimes augments, but great ex~
more frequently leffens the fubje@s ftock, pences re=
The two firft are only neceflary.For a City firained,
conftituted in an Tfland of the Sea, no doe conduce
greater then will ferve for dwelling, may much to the
grow rich wichout fowing , or fifhing , by enriching
merchandize, and handicrafts only 5 but of the {ub=
there is no doubt if they havea territory,but ject.
they may be richer with the fame number,
or equally rich, being a greater number; but
the fourth, namely the Militia, was of old
reckoned in the number of the gaining
Arts, under the notion of Booting or taking
‘pres and it was by mankind , (difperit by
familjes) before the conftitution of civill fo-

Cicties, accounted juft.and honourable 5 for
preying, is nothing-elfe but a warre waged
with {mall forces; And. great.Common=.
weales,namely that of Rome, and Athens,
bythe {poyles of warre, forraigne tribute,
and the territories they have purchafed by
their armes 5 have {ometimes fo improved
- the Common-wealth , thar they have not
onely, not required any publique mo~ .
hi¢s fromthe poorer fort of fubjects, but
have alfo divided to each of them both mo-
ties and lands, But this kind of increafe of
tiches, is not to be brought into rule aud fa-
Mion : For the Militia in order to profit,
is.


is like a Dye wherewith many lofe their
eftates, bur few improve them. Since there-
fore there are three things only,the fruits of
the earth and water, Labour and Thrift, which
are expedient for the enriching of fubjeés,
the duty of Commanders in chief, thall be
conver{ant onely about thofe three. For the
firft,thofe lawes will be ufefull which comn-
tenance the arts that improve the increafe
of the earth, and water , {uch as are bushat
dry, and fifbing. For the fecoud , all Lawes
againft idleneffe, and fuch as quicken indu-


\ thane profitable; the art of Navigation(by
be’


That more
ought not
to be deter-
mined by
the Lawes,
then the
bencfit of
Prince and
Subjetts
“require,


p whereof the commodities of the whole
world, bought almoft by labour only, are
brought into one City ) and the Mechi-
aioks 5 (ander which 1 comprehend all the
arts of the moff excellent werkmen)and the
Mathomacicall foienees , the fountains of na.
vigatory and mechanick employments , are
held in due efteem. and honour. Bor the
third , thofe lawes are ufefull, wherebyall
inordinate expence, as well in meats ,. as in
clothes, and wniverfally in all chings which
are confumed with ufage, is forbidden. Now
becanfe fuch lawes are beneficiall to the
ends above (pecified , it belongs alfoto the
Office of fupreme Magiftrates, to eftablilh
them.

X V. The liberty of fubjects comfitts not
in being exempt from theLawes of theCity,.
or that they who -have the fupreme power
cannot make what Laws they have a mind
to5 but becaufe all the motions and actions.
of fubje@s, are rtever circum({cribed’ by
Lawes, nor cam be, by reafon: of their vati-
ety , iis neceflary thar there esi


a


“Chap. 13. Dominion.

-_ {es which are neither commanded, nor pro-
hibited , but every man may either doe, or
not doe them, as he lifts himfelfe. In thefe,
each man is {aid to enjoy his liberty, and in
this fenfe liberty is to be underftood in
this place, namely, for thar part of natural
Right, which is granted and left to SubjeQs
bythe civill Lawes. As water inclofed omall
hands with banks, ftands ftill and corrupts3
having no bounds, it {preds too largely, and
the more paflages it findes, the more freely
in takes its current; fo fubjeGs, if they
might doe nothing without the commands
ofthe Law would grow dull, and unwildly;
ifall, they would be difperft , and the more
is left undetermined by the Lawes, the
more liberty they enjoy. Both extremes ate
faulty, for Lawes were not invented to take
away, but to direé& mens ations , even as
nature ordained the banks, motto ftay, but
to guide the courfe of the ftreame, The mea-
fare of this liberty is to be taken from the
fubje&s , and the Cities good 3 wherefore
inthe firft place icisagainft the charge of
thoft who command,and have the authority
of making lawes 5 that there fhould be more
lawes then neceflarily ferve for good of
the Magiftrate , andshis Subjedtss for fince
menare wont commonly to debate what to
do, or not todo, by naturall reafon, rather
then any knowledge of the Lawes, where
there are more Lawes then can eafily be ree
membred, and whereby {uch things are for-
bidden., asire2fon of it felfe prohibices not
of neceffity , they muft throughignorance;


without the leaf evilliuzention , fall-with- -


inthe:compafle of Lawes, as ging laid to
cea - enttap-


206 =—— Dominion. ~——.Char
entrap their harmelefle liberty , which fue
preme Commanders are bound to preferve
for their fubjects by the Lawes of nature, ©
That gret- XVI Irisagreat of that liberty which
ter punifh- is harmleffe to civill government,and necef=
ments mu ary foreach fubject to livehappily, that
not beinfli- there:be no penalties dreaded, but what they
| Ged, then may both forefce, and look for; and thisis
ave proferi--done,where there are either no punifhments
bed by the at alldefined by the Lawes , or greater not
Lawes. required then are defined 5. where there are
none defined, there he that hath firkt bros
ken the Law, expects an indefinite or arbi-
trary punifhment , and his feare is fappofed
boundlefse, becaufe ic relates to an nnboun=
ded evill; now the Law of nature coms
mands them who are not fubject to any cis,
vill Lawes, (by what we. have {aid in the
third Chapter, Artic. 11.) and. therefore
fopreme Commanders , that in: taking ree
venge and punithing,they muft not fo much:
regard the pait evill, as the future good,
and_they fin. if they entertain any other
mea(ure in arbitrary puni(hment , then the
publique benefits. but where the punifh-
ment is defined, either by a Law prefcribed,
as when it is fet down in plain words , thar
be thst fhall doetbus 5 or thus.,. fall fuffer fo
and {05 or by praétice; as when the penalty,
| (not by any Law preferibed , but arbitrary.
f fcom the beginning) is afterward determi-
: ned by the punifhment of the firft delin«
quent (for naturall equity commands that —
‘equall tran{grefsors be equally punithed J
\there to impofe a greater. penalty then is
\defined by the Law, is againft the Law «
nature. For the end of punifhment isnot
~ com)


\


“Chap. 3-. “Dominion, = os pai
‘compel the will of man, but to fafhion it, &
make it fuch as he would have it who Hath _
ferthe penalty. And deliberation is nothing
elfe but a weiging , as it were in {cales, the
conveniencies , and incorfveniencies of the
fa we are attempting; where, that which is
more weighty, doth neceflarily according
to its inclination prevaile with us. If there=
fore the Legiflator doth fet a leflé penalty
onacrime , then will make our feare more
confiderable with us, then our lufts that ex-
cefle of uit above the feare of punifhment,
whereby finne is committed , is to be attri-
buted to the Legiflator (that is. to fay) to
. the fupreme and therefore if he infli@a
gteater punifhment , then himfelfe hath de-
termined in his Lawes, he punifheth.that in
another, which he finned himfelfe. ‘
XVII. It pertaines therefore to the Subjetts
Harmleffe and necefsary Jiberly of fubjeGs, Mt have
that every man may jwithout feare , en- ight refio- ji
joy the sights which are allowed him by 7éd tothem
th: Lawes; for it is in vain to have our own 4g4in/t cor
diftinguitht by the Lawes from anothers , if TPE fudger
by wrong judgement , robbery , theft, i
‘they may bee again confounded s but it
falls out fo, that thefe doe happen where
Judges ate corrupted 5: for the fear where=
bymen are deterred from doing evill , ari-
feth not from hence , namely , becaufe pe-
nalties are fet, but becaufe they are execu~
ted s for We efteeme the furure by what is
patt, feldome expe@ing wha feldome hap -
ens. If thérefore Judges corrupted cither
U Gils, Fayour, or.even by pitty icfelf,
‘often forbear the execution of thePenal=
tigsdue by the Law,°and by that meanes


; pur
bees


208


Deminion - Chapag,
put wicked men in hope to pallens :
honeft Subjeés encompait with murthe-.
rers, theeves and knawes, will not have the
liberty to converle freely with each other,
nor {earce to ftirfe abroad without hazard 3
nay, the City it {elf is diffolved, and every
mans right of proteéting him(elf at his own
willreturnes to him. The Law.of Nate
therefore gives this precept to Supreme
Commanders, that they not onely doe
righteoufnefle themfelves , but that they
alfo by penalties caufe the Judges, by them
appointed, to doe the fame 3 that is to fay,
that they hearken to the complaints of their
Subjeéts 5 and as oft.as need requires, make
choice of fome extraordinary Judges,
may hear the matter debated concerning
the ordinary ones.


Cuap. XIV.
Of Lawes aud Trefpaffes.

I. How Law differs from Countell,
IL. How from Covenant. 111. How
from Right. IV. Divifion of Lawes
énte Divine and Humane; the Di-
‘vine into Natural ad Pofitive;
and the Naturall. into the Lawes of
fingle-men,and of Nations. V.The
Divifion of bamane, that is to fay,
of Civil Lawes into Sacred and Se-
cular. Vi. Tato Diftributive axd
Vindicative, VII. That Difrt-
- butive, |


ia


‘Chap.14. Dominion.


be


~ butive , and Vindicative , are sot
fpecies, but parts of the Lawes.
VIN..Au Law os fuppofed tohave a
» penalty annext to it. 1X.T he precepts
of the Decalogue of honouring Pa-


* vents, of murther, adultery, theft, °


fulfewitneffe, are Civil Lawes.
XK. Tes iempoffible to: command ought
~ by theCivil Law contrary to the Law
of Nature. X1 Its effential te aLaw,


- both that it felf,and alfo the Lawgs-


ver be known XL Whence theLaw-
» River comes tobe kuovwn XIII. Pud-
» |ifhing, and Interpretationare nes
‘ celfary to the kuoWledge of a Lav.
“XIV. The Divifion of the Civil
Lew into written, and unwritten.


“OXV. The Naturall Lawes. are not


written Lawes; ieither are the
wife Sentences of Lawyers, xor

- Cultome, Lawes of themfelves,but
» by the confent of theSapreme Power.
XVI whut the word? Sinne moft
‘largely taken, fignifies, XVII. The
definition of Sin. XVII, The dif=
ference bet Ween a Sin of Infirmity,
© and Malice. X UX. Under what
~ Rind of fnne Atheifme és contained.
“XX. What Treafon #. XXI. That


| by Treafen, nat the Civill; bat the


Natu-


"209


»)
iI
o


How Law
differs from
Counfell.


Dominion. Chap. 14,
Naturall Lawes are» breken,
XXII. end that therefore it ts 10
be punifht not by the right of Do
minion, but by the right of War,
XXII. Phat obedience ts not right.
Ly diftinguifht into ative, and pat.
five,
TL. 9 Hey who leffe'{erioufly confider-the
21 Reve of words, doe fometimes con-
found Law. with Counfell, fometimes with |
Covenant , fometimes with Right. They
confound Law with (/ounfcl, who think, that
it is the duty of Monarchs not onely togive
earto their. Counfellours, ‘buc-alfo'to obey
them, as though it were in vaineto take
Counfell} unlefie ic were alfo followed. We
muft fetch the diftin@ion between (oun/el,
and Law, from the diderence’ between
"onnfell, and Command. Now COUN-
ELL isia precept in which the reafon of
my obeying it, istsken from the thing it [olf
which is advifed 5 bur COMMANDisa
precept in which the caufe of my obedience
depends on the will of the Commandcr. For
it is not propertly faid, Thys I will, and thus
TCommand, except the will ftand for a Rea-
fons Now-when obedience is yielded to
the Lawes, not for the thing it (al, but by.
reafonof the advifers will, the Law is not
a Counfell, but a Command, andis defined
thus, LAW 4s che cormmandof that Perfon
(whether Man, or Court mbofe precept con
taines in it the rcafon of obedience 5. as-the
Precepts of God in regard'of Men, of Ma-
giftrates in relpedt of their Subjects, and
( uni-


Be |


rt ce “"S a hae


Dominion. ak


AD.14. : ; ;
ere ofall the powerfull in refpe& of :
them who cannot refift, may be termed ,


their Lawes ; Law and Counjell therefore
difer many ways; Law bélongs to him who
ath power over them whom he advifeh,
Counfell to them who have no powers
To follow what is prefcribed by Law, is
‘duty, what by Cownfell, is free-will. Connféll
isdirected to his end that receives it , Law,
to his that gives ic.” Coriell is given to
none but the willing , Law even to the um-
willing. To conclude , the right of the
Counfellour is made void by ‘the will of him |
towhom he gives Counfell, the right of the

Law-giver isnot abrogated at the pleafure

ofhim who hath a Lawiimpofed.

II. They confound Law, and Covenatt, proyy jt
who conceive the Lawes to be nothing elle 4; tons
butcertain Sxorcyhuare » or forms of lix From ¢
ving, determined by the common conlent ‘Geyenayt,
of men: Amongft whom is eArifforle, who
defines Law on this manner, Népbs ere
MyG- dercussos x29 suorryiar norte
martos unvaraas DA-redr ity tuase,
thatis to fay , Law a Shecch limited ac-
cording 10. the common confet of the City, de-
daring every thing that we eught to does
which definition is not fimply of Law, but
of the Civill Law 3. for it is manifeft that
the Divine Lawes {prang not from the con-
dent ofmen, nox yet the Lawes of Nature; .
for iftthey had. their original from the con-
fentof men; they might alfo by the fame
confent be’abrogated 3 but they areun-
Changeable. But indeed that’s no right de-

Anition of a Givill Law 5 for inthat place
‘a Cityris faken either for one civill perfon,
ae : a having


=


we


Dominion. 14,
one will, or for a multitude of men who
have each of them the liberty of their pri-
vate wills if for one perfon, thofe words,
common confent, vare ill placed here, for one
perfon hath no common confent 5 neither
ought he to have faid, (declaring what was
necdfull tobe done) but commanding 5 for
what the City declares, it commands its
Subjes. He therefore by a City under
flood a multitude of men declaring by
common confent (imagine it a writing
confirm’d by Votes) fome certain formes
oflivings bur thele are nothing elfe but
fome mituall contracts which oblige not
any man (and therefore are no Laywes)
before that a Supreme Power being confti-
tuted which can compell , have fufficien
semedy againit the reft, who otherwile are
not likely to keep them. ‘Lawes therefore,
according to this definition of Ariftotle, are
nothing elfesbu: naked,and weak contraas,
which then at length, when there is one
who by tight doth exercife the Supreme
Power » thall either ‘become Lavecs, of: 0
Lawes, at\his will and pleafures Wherefore
he confounds ‘Coutradtswith Lawes; which
he oughtnor to have done 5 for (/ontrallis
4 promi{e, Law acommand. InContratis we
fay I willdo this; In Lames, Doe thin
(*) Contrads oblige us, Lawes vie us fatt,
being ‘obliged, A Contradt obligeth of it
felf, The Law holds. the party obliged by
vertue of the univerfall Contract of yeelding
obediences Therefore in(-ontra? its firit de-
termined whatisito be done, before we are
obliged todocic ; Butiin Law we are'firlt
obliged to’ performe; and ‘what is — t

“ one


hap eid 213
done, is determined afterwards. Arifforle
therefore ought to have defined a cévill law
thus, 4 civill law is-a fpeech limited by the
will ofthe City , commanding every thing be-
hoofefull robe done , which is the fame with
that we have given above in the 6. Chap. _
att. to wit, thatthe civill lames arg the
tonmand of bim (whether man , or Court of
men) who is endued with fupreme powerin the
ity concerning the future actions of hisSubjetts.
Contras oblige us.] To be obliged, Atmorarion
dul to be tyed being obliged, feems ro fome
mentobe one , and the fame thing, and shat
therefore here feems to be fome d:(tinition in
words, bit none mdeed. More cleerly therefore,
I fy thus , That a man is obliged hy bis con-
inadls, that 7, that he ought to performe for his
promife fake ; but thas ibe Law tyes him being
obliged , that isto [ay, it compells him romake
gud his promife, for fear of the punifhment ap-
pointed by the Law. ‘
ITI. They confound Lawes withRéghe, Boy
who continue {till to doe whac is permitted differsfrom —
bydivine Right , notwith{tanding it be for- Right.
bidden by the civil! Law: ‘That whichis :
prohibited by the divine Law, cannot bee 4
permicted by the civild, neither can. that
which is commanded by the divine Law, be
prohibiced by the civil, notwithftanding .
that which is permitted by the divineRighe,
that is to fay, that which may be done by di-
‘vine Right , doth no whic hinder why the
fime may fof be forbidden by the efvill
Lawes 5 for inferiour Lawes may reftrain the
liberty allowed by the fuperiour, although
theycannot enlarge them now materall 1i-
_berty is a Right nox conftivured, but allowed


ie by


Ce ea Dominion, Chap. 14.
by the Lawes, For the Lawes being remo-
ved, our liberty is abfolute 3 This is firkt ree
ftrained by the naturall , and divine Lawes,
the vefidue is bounded by the cfvill Law, and
what remains may again be reftrained by
the conffitutions of particular Towns, and
Societies; There isgreat difference theres

3 fore between Law, and Right. For Lay
isa fetter, Right is freedeme,and they differ
like contraries. : i
The divifi- 1 V. All Law may be divided ,firft accor-
on of lames ding to the diverfity of its Authors into Dj-
into divine Vine and humane, the Divine, according to
and hu-. the-two wayes whereby God hath made
mane, and knows bis will unto men, is twofold, natu- |
- of the di- Tall (or moral!) and pofitive 5 narurall is that
vine into which God hath declared to all men by his
_vaverall — eternal word borne with them, to wit, their
aud pofi- —naturail Reafon; arid this is thar Law which
tive, and of in this whole book I have endeavoured to
thexaturall unfold; Pofitiveisthat , which God. hath
‘into yhofe revealed to us by the word of Prophefic,where-
mesof  inhehach{poken unto menas aman: Such
‘fingle mct, arethe Lawes which he gave to the fcmes
| and thofe «f concerning their government , and diyine —
Nations, worlhip, and they may be termed. the Di-
: vine civill Lawes, becaufe they were peculiar
to the civill government of the Fewes , his
E peculiar people. A gain, the naturall Law may
be be divided into that of Mca, which alone
f hath obtained the title of the Taw of nature, —
and that of Cities, which may be called that
of Nations , but vulgarly ie is termed the
Right of Nations. The precepts of bothare
alike, but becaufe Cities once inftituted doe
put on the perfonall propricties of men, that
Law, with {peaking of the duty of Gngle
men, |


|


Chap.14. Dominion. i SES
men, we ‘call naturall , being applyed to

whole Cities, and Nations, is called the

Rightof Nations, And the-{ame Elements,

of narurall lax, and Right,which Have hither=

to been fpoken of, being transferred ta

whole Cities and Nations, may be taken for

the Elements of the Jawcs and Right of
Nations. : :

V. All humane Liw ig civill. For the The divi-
flate of men confidered out of civill focietys fron of hit-
is hoftile, in which, becaufe one is not {ub- mane,that
je@toanother , there are no other Lawes, ;, to fay,ci-
befide the di€tates of naturall reafon, which vill lawess
isthe divine Law. But in civill government ;
the City onely, that is to fay, that many or 44° I,
Court, to wl the eas power of the ——
City is committed, is the Legiflator , and”
the Lawes of the City are civill, The civill
Limes may be divided according to the di-
Yetlity of their fubje@ matter,into facred, or
feculars facred are thole which pertain to Re-
ligion, that is to fay, to the ceremonies,and
worlhip ofGod(to wit what Perfons,things,
places , are to be confecrated > and in what
fihion, what opinions concerning thé Dei-
yate to be taught publiquely , and wich
What words, and in what order Cupplicati-
ons areto bz made, and the like) and are
‘ot determined by any divine pofitiveLaw. .

or the civill facred Lames are the humane.
Lawes (which are alfo called Ecclefiafticall)
Concerning things facred ; but the fecular
Under a general! notion , are ufually called ”
the civil Lawes,

VI Again, the civil Law (according to Into diffri-
the two o ices of the Legiflator , whereof butive and
OME IS 10 judgo; the other to confirain. men vindicative


“a te


ato fecular


\


216


Bio]
Deminion. Chap.14,
to acquiefce to his judgements) hath two
parts; the one diftributive , the other wittdé~
cative, ox penal. By thediSiribmeive it is, that
every man hath his proper Right, that isto


. fay, it fers forth Rules for all things, where-


Difiribu-
tive and
vindicative
are nok two
Species of
the Lawes.


by we may know what is properly ours,what
another mans 3 fo as others may not hinder
us from the free ue and enjoyment of ou:
own and we may not interrupt ochersin
the quiet pofftffion of theirs 5 and whatis
lawfull for every man to doe or omit, and
what is not lewfull. Pindicarive is that
whereby icis defined what punithment fhall
be infli@ted on them who break the Law.
VIE. Now difributive, and vindicarive,
are not two feverall Species of the Lawes,
but two parts of the fame Law. For ifthe
Law fhould fay no more; but (for ras


mbatfocver you take with your net in the Sea,


ibyours, its in vain 5 For although another
dtakethat away from you which
have catight, it hinders not 5 bus chat it
remains yours; for in the ftate of nature
where all things are common toll yous,
and others, are all one, infomuch as what
the Law defines to be yours , was youtt
even before rhe Law, and after the Law
ceales not to bee yours, although in ano-
ther mans pofleflion. Wherefore the Law
doth nothing , unleffe it bee underftood
to bee fo yours as all other men be for
bidden to interrupt your free ule,
cure enjoyment of ic at all times, according
to your own Will, and pleafure, For this


‘ig thar which is required to a propriety


goods, not that .a man may beableto ule


them, but to ufe them alone ; which is‘doat


4


=


E Chap. 14: - Domizion, 317
. rohibiting others to be an hinderance

a But in vain doe they alfo prohibie
any men,who doe nat withall Rrike a fear o
5 i tinto them; in vain therefore is
the Law, unle(se it contain both pares, that
which forbids injuries to be done, and that .
which puaifheth the docrs'of them. The firft
ofthem which is catled diftributive, is Pro-
bibisox, and fpeaks to all; the fecond which
isityled vindicative, ov panary , is yp, X
and onely fpeaks to publique Minifters, i
VIY.From hence alfo.we May underftand, All Law is
that every civill Lave hath a parialty annexed o fuppoled to.
it, cither explicitly,or implicitly; For where have a Pe.
thepenalty is not defined , neither by any malty ana
witing , nor by example of any one who wext to it,
» hath {uffeved the punifhment of the tranf-

gelled Law,there the pecaltp isunderftood
tobearbitrary , name! Y¥> todepend onthe 4
| will of the Legiflator, that is to fay» of the |

4 Commander. For in vain is that

Which may be broken without pu-
nt.


IX. Now becanfe it comes from the ci-
aerate 2 bail vgs every oes — his
Pher Right, and diftineuith from dhothers, he
and aller that he is forbidden toinvade a- he

Hothers Rights, it follawes, that the(e Pre. ¥4
pts (Thou fale not refufe t0 give the henour
i'ey the Lawes yuto thy dees Thon Pe a
Palenes kill the man whom ihe Lawes forbid inp
| Heeto kil: Thou fhalt avoid alhcopuasion form shefy. fatfe
‘iden by the Lams : Thou {halt nor take amay ke
ers Zoods againft the Lords will: Thox are the ci-
tot fruftvare theL aws and Fudgements by iy Lawis;
Wie teftimony ) are Civill Lawes, The na-
Mell Lawes command the fame things but
ees eS implicitly, : a


The Pre-


‘

218 Dowsinion. Chap.14,
implicitly ; for the law of nature (as hath
been faid in the 3.Chap, Art.2.)commands
us to keep comraéts, and therefore alfoto
performe obedience when we have covenan.
ted obedience, and to abftaine from ano-

. thersgoods when it is determin’d by the
civill Law what belongs to another 3 but all
Subjects (by the 13. Art. of the 6. Chap.)
do covenant to obey his commands who
hatlthe fupreme power 5 that is to fay thé
the civéll Eins > in the very conftitution
of government,’ even before'it is poflible to
break them 3 For the Law of nature did ob-
ligein the ftate of nature 5 where firft (be-
caufe nature hath ‘given all things to all
men) nothing did properly belong to afto-
thet, and therefore it was not poflible to in: '
vadeanothers right; next’, where all things
were common’, and therefore all carnal
copulations lawfull ; Thirdly 5 where was
the Rate of Warre,and therefore lawfull to
kill; Fourthly ; where all chings were de-
tecmined by every mans own judgement,
and therefore paternall re{pects alfo:Laftly,
where there were no publique judgements,
and therefore no ufe of bearing wicnefle,
either true, or falfe. ;

X) Seetng cherefcre our’ obligation to


* ates obferve thofe Laws, is more ancient then the
tee promulgation of the Laws themfelves,as be-
et ing contained in’the very eonftt ‘ti6n ol
4 hecivil the City,by the vertue of the natural! Law
Sew cn ee forbids breach of Covenant 3 the
iid fo the Law -of nazure commands us ‘to keepiall the
“Lamers of civill"Laws 3 tor where we a’e 'tyed to obt-


paturce dience, before we know what will be com
‘> manded us, there we are univerfally ce to
: obey


aS


' Chap.74. Dominion, 219
* obey .in all things; whence it: followes, that
no civilLaw whatfoever,which tends not to
areproachof theDeity(in refpe& of whom,
“Cities themfelves have no right of their
own, and cannot be {aid to make Lawes)
can poffibly be againft the Law of natures
forthough the Law of nature forbid theft,
adultery, &c. yet if the -civill Law come,
mand us to invade any thine,'that invafion. '
is not theft , adultery, &c:, For when the
Lacedemonians of old permitted their
youths bya certaine Law, to take away
other mens goods , they commanded that
thefe goods fhould not bee accounted o-
thermens , but their.own who tock them;
and therefore {uch furreptions were no
thefts. .In like manner , copulations of hea-
then Sexes , according to their Lawes,were,
ot matriages.
» Xd, Its necefsary to the efsence of a Ty iy effene
Law, chat the Subjects be acquainted with pif 49 @
two things.» Firlk, what man or Court pay,thar »
‘bath the upreme power , thar is to fay, the Bovh it and.
Right of making Lawes. Secondly , what. phe Legi-
the Law ir {elf fayes ; for he that neither flavor be
Anew either to whom, or what heis tyed to, “knowne,
cannot obey, and by confequence isin fuch :
acondition , as if he were not tyed at all. I
fay not that it isneceflary to. the elsence of
a Law, that either one, or the other be per-
pocelly known, but onely that it be once.
knowne 5 and ifthe SubjeG afterward for-
f either the Right he hath who made the
aw, or the Law it felf, that: makes him no.
lefsc tyed'to ohey , fince he might havere-, Whence the
_ membred it, ha fie had awillto obey... Logi/lator
_ X11. The knowledge of the Legiflater,de- is kuowne.
Bio 1 AM3 pends.


229 Dominio, — Chapt
nds on the Subje@ himielfes forthe ti
bf making Lawes could not be conten CK
any man without his owne confent, and
gs covenant, either expreft, or fuppos’d; ex-
| preft, when from tlie beginning the Chit
‘zens doe themfel ves toubseae a’ forme!-of
governing the City, or when by promilt
they fubmit them(elves to the Dominion
ofany one 5 or fuppos'dar Jeaft, as when
pe make ufe of the benefit of rhe Realine,
and Lawes ,for their prote@ion ‘and con-
fervation againft others 3 for to whofe Dow
minion we require our fellow SubjeQs to
yeeld obedience for our good, his Domini
on we acknowledge’ to be legitimate by that
very requeft 5 and therefore ignorance of
the power of making Lawes, can never be 2°
fafficient excufe every man knowes
2 Mee he hath near ea . k
Prowulgs- e knowledge of the lawes depends on the
701 nie Legiflaor , who muft publith them, for o«
erpreration therwife they arenor Lawes; fot Law isthe
\are neceffae command of the Law-maker, and his coms
lryto the =mandisthe Declaration of his Will 5 it is
‘kxowledge not therefore a Law, except the will of the
ofalew. Law-maker be oe which is done by
promulgation, ow in mlgation two
things mutt be snanifell, whetof oneis,
that heer rhey who publifia Law , ¢ither
have a right themfelves to make Lawes; or
that they doe it by authoricy deriv’d from
him or rhem who have it; the ocher isthe
fenfeof the Law it felfe. Now,chat the firlt
namely publitht Lawes proceed from him
; veo hath the fupreme command, ‘cannot
be manifeft ((peaking exadtiy and philee
fophically) to any, butthem who pens
é eee cely


‘Chap.14. Dominion.
" eeived them from the meuthof the Com-
mander, the reft beleeve, but the reafons
of their-beliefe are fo many, that it is (caroe
poflible they fhould not believe. And truly
in aDemocratical City where every one may
beprefent at the making of Laws if he wilt,
hethatthall be abfent , muft beleeve thofe
that were prefent ; but in Monarcbies and
Ariflocraries becaule its granted but to few
*to be prefent, and openly to heare the com-
mands of the Monarch ox the Nobles; it was
neceflary to beltow apower on thofe few
of reread them to the reft;And thus we
beleeve thole to be the Edidts and Decrees of
"Princes, which are propotided to us for fuch,
-tither by the-writings , or voices of them,
whofe office it is to publith them 5 But yet
when we have thefe-caufes of beliefe, rhat
we have {een the Prince, or fupreme Coun-
tell conftantly ufe fuch Gounfellors, Secres
unvies, publifhers, and feales, and the like ar=


." for the declaring of his will 5 chat”
n


ever took any authority from them;thac
they have bin punitht who not giving credit
to fiich like promulgarions have tranfgrelt-
the Law 3 not onely he who thus believing
fhall not obey the Ediéfs and Decrees fer
forth by them is every where accus’d, but
hethgt not believing, fhall not yield obedi-
ence, is ifthe 3 fer the conftant Pee
miffion of thefe things is a manifelt figne


Bat:


‘225


222


The civill
Law divi-
ded into


-  Daminion, ——- Chap.143
his Officers as long as he retaines @ willto,
governe. Now the fénfe of che Jaw, when
there is any doubt made of it,isto be taken
from them to whom the fupreme authority
hath committed the kuowledge of caufes, or

ndgements3 for to judge is nothing elfe then

xy interpretation to apply the Lawes to parti«
cular cafessnow we may know wha they are
that have this Office granted them, in the
fame manner,as we know who they be that»
have authority given them to publith Laws,

_ XIV, Againe the civill law according to
its two fold manner of pubiifhing, 18 of two
forts, written & unwritten; By written,I un-


written and derftand that which wants a voice,or fome *


wuwritten.


other figne of. che will of the L egiflator that ,
it. may becomea Law: For all kind of Laws
are of the fame age with mankinde, bothin
nature, and time, and therefore of more
antiquity then the invention of letters, and
the Act of writing ; wherefore not a mri«
ting, but a voice is neceflary for a written
saw, this alone is requifire to the being, that
to the Remembrauce of a Law ; for we reade,
that before letters were found out for the
help of memory, that Lawes contra@ed in=
to Meetre; were wont-to be fung. The uti-
written is that which: wants no other pub: _
lithing then the voice of nature, or natutall
reafon, fuch are the lawes of nature. For the
naturall Law although ic be diftinguitht
from the civill, for as much asit commands
the Will, yet fo farre forth as it relates to
our actions itis civills for example, this
fame, Thou fhalt not covet, which onely ap=
pettaines to the minde, isa naturall Law
onely, but this, Thou fhate wor invade,is both
naturall:


Mchap.24.. — ominion. « aLy
aural and civills: for feeing it is im-
poflible to prefcribe fuch univerlall Rules,
whereby all fature contentions which per-
hapsare infinite, may be determined , its
to beunderftood that in all cafes not_ men
‘tioned by the written lames the law of maty-
rall equity isto be. followed, which com-
gmands us to diftribute equally to equals 5

and’ this by the vertue of the cévill law,

which alfo punifheth thofe who knowingly’

and willingly doe a@ually. tranigrefle the

dames of nature. EE
X Ve Thee things:being underftood, ye

ivappeares fir, Tha tthe Lawes of Nature;

although they were de(crib’d in the Books That the

of fome Philofophers, are not for that rea- garurall

| fontobe termed Written lawes : and that laws are-
the Writings of the: Interpreters of the not written.
Lawes, wereno Lawes, for want of the Jaws,nei-
Supreme Authority3nor yet thofe orations of ther ate

“the Wie, (that is to fay) Fudges, but fo the fentetta-
' Give forth as’by theconfent of the Supreme ces of lama
power they part into cuftome,and that then gers, or CH=.
they are to be: received among the Written (tome, laws”
lawes , not for the: Cultomes fale (which’ of them
by its own force doth nor conftitute a Law) hee but.
but for the Will of the Supreme Comman~ by rhecon=
der; which appeares in this, that he hath fent of the
{ufter’d his Sentence, whether equall, or un= fnpreme
equall, to paffe into cuftome- power.
XV. L, Sinne,in its largeft fignification, What the
comprehends, every deed, word and thoight, word Sin:

. againft right reafon; for every man. by cea~ taken in its
foning feeks out the meanes. to the end argeft fenfe
which he propounds to himfelfe. If there- fignifies.
fore he reafon right (that isto fay, begin- :

*ning from molt evident principles > he
Ms makes.


a.


Ke y a!

-makes a difcourfe out of confequences
, tinually neceffary,) he will proccede

"-moft direét way 3 ocherwife hee? goe a.

Atray, tharis vo fay, he will either

or endeavour, fomewhat againtt his proper

end, which\when he hath: dene, he willin.

deed in reafoning be ffaid to have erred, bur


“flanding = And this is the moft generall)
acception of the word, ander which is cons,


tain’d every imprudent ation, whether 9.
gaint the Law, as-to overthrow another
| mans houfe, or not againit the Law, as. ta.
. build his owne uponithe Sand.
| Tbe defni- XVII. But when we fpeak ofthe Lawes,


| ttowof Sin, the word Sinne is


I fenfe,.and Gignifi


tiken in a more ftri@


es not every thing doneas.


F 2 inft right reafon, but that onely whichis
3 Fiameabis » and therefore ds call’d smalung,
| a culpa, the evil of faultsbut yet if an:


ee,


y thing
culpable it is not prefently to be hears
afinne, or fault, butionely if it be blameable
with reafon. We muft therefore enquire.
whatis to be blameable with veafon, what a-
gainit reafon. Suchis the nature of man).
that every one callsthat good which he de»
fires: and evill which he efchewes :» and,
therefore through the diverfity. of our af.
feGions , ic happens thac one‘counts. that
2 Which another counts evil ; andthe
"man what now he efteem’d for good;
‘heimmediately looks on as evil! 3 and the
fame thing which he calls good in himfelfe,
he-tearmes evil/ in another for we all meas
fure good and evill by the pleafure or paine:
We cisher fecle at:prefent, or expeét hereaf- *


~ ORE


" Chapst4. Dominions 225
ter; Now feeing the profperous ations of ©
enemies (becaule they increafe rheir ho="

“nous, goods,and power)and of equalls,(by
reafon of that. firife of honours which is
among them) both feeme and are irke-
fome,and therefore evill to alls and men
ule to repute thofe ¢vill, that is to fay, to
luyfome fault to their charge from whom
they receive evill; itsimpoflible to be de-
termined by the confent of fingle men
whom the fame things doe not pleafe and
difpleafe, what ations are, and what nor
tobe blam’d. They may agree indeed in ’
fome certaine general things, as that theft,
sdulsciy, and the like are finnes , as if they
fhould fay that all men account thofe things
euillto which they have given names which
aeufuallytakenm an evill fenfe 5 but we
demand not whether theft be a Sinne, bit
whatis to be term’d theft, and fo concern-
ing other in like manner. For as much |
thereforeasin fo great adiverfity of cenfu-
rets, what is by reafon blameable , is not to
‘bee meafur’d by the reafon of one man.
mote then another, becaufeof the equality
of humane nature, and there areno other

_ teafons in being, but onely thofe of parti~
tular men, and that of the City, ic followesy
thatthe City is to determine what with»
‘voafonds culpable : fo as a fitult, that isto fay,
aS IN NE, is*that, ae — :
omits, fayes, or wills, againft the rea a
the Chyg that is, contrary tothe Lawes. The dif

XVIIT. Buta man may-doe fomewhar "M66 2
againitthe Lawes through humane infir= WPCcne#
mityalthough he defire to fulfill them,and fines
yet his a€tion as being againft the Lawes, 277


is aud malice


26 Dominion. Chap.14,
igtightly blam’d, and call’d a Sine: Bu
: ae are fome , who vegleét the Lawes, and
as oft as any hope of gain and impuni
doth appear to them, no conlcience of con,
traG@s and betrothed faith can withhold
_ them from their violation, Nor only. the
deeds, bur even the mindes.of thefe men are
againft the Lawes. They who finne onely
through infirmity, are good mca even when
they finne 3 but thefe even when they doe
not fin, are wicked ; for though both the
adtion , and the mind be repugnantto the
Lawes , yet thofe repugnancies are diftin.
guitht by different appellations, for the irre.
gularity of the aGion is.called adducts ttt
foft deeds. rhat of the mind. eddete, and
Keutheey iui and malice that is, the ite
firmity of a difturbed foule , this the pravity
of a {ober mind.
aght ” XIX. But fei there is. no fin which
Atheifine is is not again fome Law , and that theres
contained, 7° Law which is not the command of bim
| ig * who hath the fupreme power » and that no
man bath a fupreme power which is not be=
ftowed on. him by. our own confent; in
what manner will he be {aid to finne, who
either denies that there isa God, or thathe
governsthe world, or cafts any other ree”
proach.upon. him ? for he will fay, that he
never fubmitsed bis wil to.Geds will , not
conceiving bin fo much as to have.any being,
And granting that his opinion were erroneous,
smd thercfore alfy a fin. yer were it to be nume
bred among shofe of imprudence or dgnoyance
which by right cannot be punifhed. This Ipeech
‘feems {0 farre forth to be admitted , that
though: this kind of &n be the greateft and


.


4 molt
a


“Chap. 14. — Dominion. 327

- moft burtful,yet is it to be refer’d(*)to fins

bf imprudence 5 but that it fhould be excu-

fed by imprudence or ignorance , is abfurd.

For the Atheift is punifht either immedi-

ately by God imide, or by Kings confti- _

tured under God; not as a Subjeé& is pu-

nifhed by a King, becaufe he keeps not the

Lawes, but as one enemy by another, be=

caufe he would not accept zt the Lawessthat

isto fay,by the Right of warre,as the Giants

warring againft God:For whofoever are not

fubjeét either to fome commonLord,or one

toanother,are enemies among them{clves. :
(Yer is it to be referred to fins of impru- eanotation.

dence) Many find fanlt that I have referr'd

Viibeifme to imprudence , and not ro injuftices

yeaby [ome it is taken fo , as if I bad-not decla-

ndmy felfe an enemy. bitter enough agains

Atheifts : They objeét farther, that ‘Face I bad

tlewhere aid that it might be knowne there is

aGod , by natural reafongT ought to have ac-

hwwledged that they finatleaft againft theLave

ifrature,and threfore not. only guilty of impri

dence, but injuftice too 5 but kam {o much an

tnemy to Atheifts , that I bave both diligently

fough: for, and vehemently -defired to find fone

Law whoreby I might contemne them of inju=

flices but when Tfound none, I enquired next

what name God bimfelfe did give tomen fo de=

ie by him, Now God Sheaks thus of the A~

ibeift; The fool hath {aid in his heart, thete

isno God. Wherefore I placed their femein

that rank which God bimfelfe rcferves to; next,

1 fers them to be enemies of God. But I con-

tive the name of an enemy ro be fomctimes

Jomevobat fharpcr , then that of an unjuft mas.

Lal, I if that they may under sbat nox

tion.


328


- What the
fiane of


inion, — Chap.14,
sion be july pnnifix both by God, and fupreme


Treafon i. the ocher to perform abfolure and univerfall


obedience (fuch as is defined above Chap,
6. art. 13.) to the City, that isto fay, to the
Soveraign power, whether that be one man
orCouncel,there is an obligation derived to
obferve each one of the civill Lawes, forthat
thatCovenant contains in it felf alitheLaws.
ationce; it is manifeft that the fubje& who:
fhall renounce the general! Covenant of
obedience, doth at once renounce all the
Lawes 5 which trefpaffe is fo much worle
then any other one {inne , by how much to
firme alwiyes , is worfe then to finne one;
And this is that fin Which is called TREA-
SON 5 and it is'a word or deed whereby
the Citizen , or Subje@ , declares that he |
will no longer obey that man or Gourt to”
whom the {upreme power of the City ee.
! pruleed,
ad


| Gl reagan
tufted, and the Subje@ declares this fame
will of his by deed , when he either doth, or
endeavours todo violence to the Soveraigns.
Perfon, san eg who execute his com=
mahds of which fort are Traytors, Regi«
ides, and fuch as takeup armesppcinlt che
City, or during a warre, flyeito the ene=
mies fide; and they thew the fame-willin
word, who flatly deny that themfelves or
other fubjeGs are tyed to anyfuch kind of
obedience , either in the whole > as he who
Id fay that wee mu not obey him
fkeeping the obedience which we owe to.
God intire) fimply. , abfolutely , and uni-
ally or impart, as hewho thould fay,
tiathe had no Right to wage watre at his
own will, to make Peace,lift Skid, levie
‘monies, cle€ting Magiftraces, and publique
Minifters, enacting 5 ssa > deciding con-
toverlies, fetting penalties , or doing ought
ale, without which the State cannot ‘ftand,
andthefe and the like words and deeds are
Treafon by the natarall, not the civill Law.
Bitit may fo happen , that fome aGion
which before the civill Law was made, was
aot Treafon, yet will become fuch ,) if it be
done afterwards. As if it be declared bythe
Law, that it thall be accounted for a fignof
Knouncing* publique obedience (thatis to.”


tits, or forge the Privie, Seale, he that after
ttat Declaration hall doe this 5 will be no
guilty of Treafon then the other, yet he
lefle, becaufe he breakes not all the
“tWS.at oncesbut oneL.aw-onlysfor the Law
og that Treafon which. by nature és-
"ldo indeed by Right fe: a more oi-


for Treafon) iftany man thall coynmo- ~


ees nus


gveafon =. X XI, Bucthar finne which by the Law


30 Dominion. Chap. t
«ous name, and perhaps a more grivv
punifhment on the guilty perfons but it
makes not the finneit felfe more grievous, |


et


breaks not of nature is Treafon, is a Tranfgreffion of

thecivill, thenaturall, notthe civill Law 5 for fince

but the na- our obligation to civill obedience, by vertue

tural Law. whereof the civill Lawes are valid, is before

all civillLaw;and the fin of ‘Treafon is na

turally nothing elfe but the breach of that

obligation; ,it followes: that: by “the fin of

+ ‘Treafon, that Law is broken which prece-

ded:the civillLaw,to wit,the ‘naturall,which

forbids us to violate Covenants and be-

trothed faith. But if lome Soveraign Prince.

fhould fer forth a Law on this manner,

Thou {hale not rebell, he would-effeé juft no.

thing : For except Subjeats were” before

obliged to obedience. ‘that is: to fay, notto

rebell, all Law is.of noforces now thewbli-

ation which -obligetto what we were be

ore obliged to, is fuperfluous. ’

And theres %& Xt 1. Hence it followes', that Rebelt,

fore is pu- Traytors,and all ethers convitted. of Treafim,

rift nor by, are punitht:not by civill, but naturall Right

the Right that isto: fay, not. as civill Subjeds » but a

of Sove- Enemies to the Governncnt, not by the Right

raignty, of Soveraignty 5 and-Dominion, but by tht

but by the Right of Warre. } y ‘ea

Right of XX 111) There are fome who-thiak

Warre. that thofe a&s which: are done againit the
Obcdiexwce’ Law, when the punithment is determine
not rightly by theLaw it felfe,ate expiated,if the punifh

dislingui(bt ed willing!y undergoe the punithiments:
Gnto Adtive that they are noc guilty Sbefore God

and Paffive. breaking the paturall Law (alhough by

: bscaking the civill Lawes, we byeak |
* Fei furan


TAs Dominion.
too, which corhmand us to keep the
who have fuffered the-punifhment
hich the Law required , as if by the Law,
pe faGt were not prohibited , ‘ bura punifh=
ment were {et inftead of a price, whereby a
licence might be bought of doing what the
Law forbidssby the fame reafon they might
|jnfetre tooythat no tranfgreflion of the Law
yereafin, but that every man might enjoy
the liberty which he hath bought by his
qyn perill. But we muft know that the
yordsof the Law may be underftood in a
twofold fenfe, the one as containing two”
parts (as hath been declared above in the fe-
yenth Art.) namely, that of abfoluccly pro=
tibiting, as, Tbou fhalr not doe this; and re-
yenging, as, be that doth this, fhall be pun iftts
The other, as containing a condition, for
qxample, Thos shale not doe this thing, unleffe
thou wilt (uffer punifoment 5 and thus, the
Taw forbids not fimply , but conditionally.
Ifit be underftood in rhe firft fenfe, he that
“dethit, fins, becaufe he doth what the Law
‘fotbids to be done , ifin the fecond, he fins
not, becauife he cannot, be {aid to doe what
isforbidden him , that performs the condi-
“tion; For in the firft fenfe, all men are fore
“fidden to doe it. in the fecond , they only


‘Inthe fir fenfe, the vindicative part of the
law obligeth not the guilty, but the Magi-


‘Wehim(elfe har owes the punifhment is ob-
“Tiged to ex Git, to the payment whereof, if
‘itbe capitall, or otherwife grievous, he can-
“not be obliged. But in what fenfe the Law
‘| to be taken, depends on the will of him
| a “ae


. fr é bay


iho keep them(elves from the punithment, -


trate to require punifhment; in the fecond, |


- Dominion, Cha . ,
who hath the a When thee ig |
therefore any doubt of the meaning of the |
Law, fince we are fure they finne not who
doe it not, it will be fin if we doe it, howfo-
ever the Law may afterward be explained;
for fo to doe that which a man doubts whee
ther it be a fin or not , ‘when he hath free
dome’ to forbear it, is a contempt of the
Lawes, and therefore by the 28. Art. of the
third Chapter, afin againft the Law of na
ture. Wain therefore is that fame diftinGion
of obedicwe into Adtive and Paffive, as if

“that could be expiated by penalties confti-
tated by humane decrees » which isa finne |
ps at the Law of natyre,which is the Law
e 3 or asfthough they finned not , who
finne at their own perill, P


RELIGI-


Integer vite feelerifaue puras

Now eget Mauri jacutis nec aren,

Nee venenatis gravida (agittis
Fufce pharetra.

Siveper Syrees iter aftuofas,

Sive fatturus per inho[pitalem

Ctucafum, vel que loca fabulofus
Lambit Hidapis.


Besshegeehess
Weesdonaenese sense
RELIGION.


Cinigit XV.


0 the Kingdome of God,
by Nature,


LT Propofition of the following
“contents. 11. Over whom God w


‘A of God three-fold;Reafon,Re-
elation, Prophefie, IV. The King-
e of God two-fold ; Natural,
nd Prophetique. V. The Right
+ whereby Godreigns , w feated in bis
- Omnipotence. VI, The fame pra-


- ligation of yeclding obedience to God,
proceeds from. humane infirmity.
VIII. The Lames of God in his
natural Kingdome, are thofe which
\arévecited above in the 2. and 3.
_ Chapter. 1X. What Honour and
~ Worthip, is. X. Worthip confifts

either in attributes’, ar in actions.
’ ’ XI. e4nd


_ Said t0 rule by nature 113. The ~


© ocd from Scripture. V11. The ob-


235


236 Religion. = Cha y

cee XI And there is one fort naturalf,
another arbitrary, X11. One come
manded, anether vol
What the end , or (¢ eof Wor pin |
#%. XIV. What the sth tat
are, Concerning Gods attributes,

“XV. what the a@ions are, where,
by naturally wee doe Sive workhip,
XVI. LnGods naturall Kingdome,
the City may appoint what worthip
of God it pleafeth. XVII. Gal
ruling by nature only the City, that
#5 to [ay, that mean or Court wha me
der God hath the Soveraign authori.
ty of the Cisy, x3 shelnterpreter of
allthe Lawesy X VIII. Certain
doubts removed. XIX, what Sin
% in the naturall Kingdom of God;
and what Treafon again{t the di-
vine Majefty, :


ae =n 1
option 0;

} ae follow.

| ing contents


.

Pe EE have already in

Sm the foregoing Ghap.
ters, proved both by
reafon , and teftimo:
nies of holy Writ,that
ENED the cftate of nature,
that is to fay, of abfolute liberty , fuch as is
theirs, who neither govern , nor, are govet~
ned, isan Anarchy , or hoftile face 5 that
the precepts whereby to avoyd this fate
are = Lawes of nature; that there canbe er
UA we ¢


Chap.15s Religion. ae 237
drill government without a Soveraigne ;
andthat they who have this Sove=

nigne command muft be obey’d-fimply;,

that isto fay, im all things which repugne

gor the Commandmenss. of God: “There

isthis one thing only oe to the come

plete undeftanding of all civill duty, 88 that

is, to know which are the Laws and Com-
mandments of God; for elfe we cannot tell

whether that which the civil!.power com~

mands us, be againgt the Lawes of Gad, or

not; whénce it muft neceflarily happen,that
ther by too. much obedience to the civill,
authority, we become’ ftubborne againft
thedivine Majefty ; or for feare of fnning ’

ink God, we runne into. difobeditnce

inft the civill power: To avoid both
thefe rocks, its neceflary to know the Di-
vine Lawes 3 now becaufethe knowledge
ofthe Lawes, depends on the knowledge
ofthe Kingdome , we muft in what fol-
loves, fpeak fomewhat concerning the
Kiugdome of God.

Il. The Lord is King, the earth may be Over whom
gléd thereof, faith the Plalmift, Pfal.97.. 1. God is (aid
And againe the fame Pfalmift, Pfal.o92v.1. ta raign,
The Lord is King, be vhe People never fo
inpatient, he fisteth berweene the Cherubins,
bethe Eareh never} fo unquier, to wit, whe~
ther men will, or not, Godis THE King
over all the Barth, nor is he mov’d from
bis Throne, if there be any who dany ei-
ther his exiffcuce, or his providence. Now
akhough God governe all men: fo by his
power, that none can doe any'thing which
he would not have done, yet this, to fpeake
properly,'and accurately, is not to ——
is : : ‘oO

|


338 Religion. Chap.ty,
for he is fayed:to reigne, who rules not by
atting, but speaking, that isto fay, by pres
cepts and threarnings 3 And therefore we
account not inanimate, nor irrational bo.
dies,for Subjéés in the Kingdome’of God,
although they be fubordinate to the Divine
power ; becaufe they under ffand not the com
mands, and threats of God 5 nor yet th
Atheifts, becaufe they beleeve not that there
is a God, nor yet thofe who beleeving thee
is a God 3 doe not yet beleeeve that he rules
thefe Inferiour things ; for eveti thefe;
although they be govern’d by the power of

d, yet doe they not. acknowledge anyof
‘ his Commands ,. nor ftand in awe of his
» threats. Thofe onely therefore are fuuppos,
to belong to Gods Kingdome, who at
knowledge him to be the Governour ofall
things, and that he hath given bis Commands
to men, and. appointed pulse for
the tranfgreffours ; The reft, we muft not

call Subjeéts, but Enemies of God.
The word 111. Butnoncare faid to governe by
of God — commands,but they who openly eclare them
dhree fold, to thofe who are govern’d by them, forthe
Reafon;Re= Commands of the Rulers are the Lawes of
welarion, the Rul’d, but lawes they are not, if not
Prophefy. Pétlpicuoufly publithe, in fo much as all
excufe of Ignorance may be taken away:
Men indeed publith their Lawes by wird
Or voice, neither can they make their will
univerfally' knowne any other way. But
Gods lawes, are declar’d after a threefold
manner : firft, by the tacit. dictates of Righ |
reafon, next, by immediate. revelarion, which
is fuppos'dto be done cithey by 4 (ope


tarall voice, or by a vifiod or arcame, or ¢


Chap..ts Religion. 239
vine intpiration: Thirdly, by the voice of

me man whom God recommends to the reft,
as worthy of beliefe, by theworking of rrue
mitacles 3. Now:he whole voice? Godstins
makes ufe ofto fig nifie bis will unto others,
iscalled-a (PYRO. P HET. ‘Thefe: three
manners: may-be term’d rhe threefold word
of God ,,to wit the Rationall word, the fenfi=
ble word and the word of ‘Prophecy: To which
an{wer, the three nanners. whereby we are
hidtocheate God; Right reafoning, senfe,
| and faith. Gods fenfible word hath come but:
tofew3ineither hath God fpolsen to men by»
Revelation except particularly to fome, and»
fo diverle _diverfely 5. neither have any
Lawes of his Kingdome. beene publitht on
this manner-unto any people. 2:1: | }
LAY. And, according: to thé difference "The King-
which) is: between the: Rationall word and: Mand i
the word of Prophecy, .we attribute «a two- Bad tae
fold Kingdome unto God: Naturall, in fold: Naw
which he reignes by the dictates of right ivall ane
reafon, and which is univerfall over all who Srghtiae
atsnowledge the Divine power, by reafon ‘i ;

ofthat rationall, nature which is common des
toalls and Propheticall, in-which he rules
alfo by the word of Prophecy; which is pe-
culiar, becaufe he hath not given pofitive
Lawes to all men;but'to his peculiar people,
| and fome.certaine men eleéted by him.

_V. God in his natural Kingdome hath a The Right
| Right to xule, and:-to punifh: chofe who whereby

| break -bis Lawes, fromhis folenrrcfifable Ged go--
powers for all Right over others is either veras
ftom.nature., or from Contra, How the feated im
Right of governing {prings from. Contrad, his omu pa-
Wehaye already, hues, inthe 6, Chapter, tence.


ye : - And


)


With, joyiied forces; could *norlhave refilled


“killing, depends nos on divine'power, buton
* Neg Vi. Ths


a
si


Religion. Chapsag
And the fame Rightis derived from mange,
in this.very Nae chat: it is pa
taken away3for when by nacure all menihad
a Right overall things ; every man: bad 4
Right of ruling over: all as ancient apne
ture it felfesbut che téafon why this was aba.
lifht among men, ‘was no other barmutuall |
fear, as_hath been declared above in the
fecond Chapter, the 3y art. reafon namédy
diGacing thac they muftforegoe thar
for the preferyation. of mankinde x beeaule
the equality of mem athong themfelyes ac |
cording to theirftvength and nativall pow.
ets was neceflarily accompanied with warre,
and with warre joyrtes the deftrudion of |
mankinde. Now if any mah hadfofare
exceeded the reft impower 5 thar all/of them |


him; there hadbeén no caufe why hie thould
part with that Right which nature Badge
ven him 3: The Right therefore of Domini-
onover all che teft ; Wwould*have Yrémained
with him, by reafon’ of thavexcefte ‘of'pow-
ex whereby he could have ‘prefeived’ both
himfelfe and them. They Heetoie whole
Power cannot be refifted, and by conte
quence God eAlmighry, derives his Right
of Soveraignty from the power iv'felfe. And
asoftas God punitherh’, or flayes afinney
although ‘he therefore punith him’ becaule
he finned, yer may we not fay that ie could
not juitly have ‘punitht of ‘Killed him a
though he had noe finned. Neither: if ‘the |
will of Godin punithing, may perhaps hive

regard to fomefin antecedent, doth iether |
fore follow, that the Right of ire


mens fis,


Y


Gaps: Religie 241
VI, That queftion made famous by The fame
the difputations of the Antients , why. evill proved
things befell the good , and good things the from Scvi-
qvill, is the fame with this of ours, by what prure.
Right Ged difpeuferh good and evill things
mito men, anid with its difficulty, ic not only
flaggers the faith of the yulgar concerning
the divine providence , butalfo of Philofo-
phers, and which is more,even of holy men.
Pfal.73. v.52, 3.T7uly God % good to Tfracl,
tven to fuch as are of a clean heart ; but as for
me, my feet were almoft gone , my fleps bad
well nigh flipt. And why? I was gricved at che
wicked , I doe alfo feetbe ungodly in fuch pra-
far. And how bitterly did Fob expoftu-
ate with God, that being ju/t, he fhould yec
be affli&ted with fo many calamities ? God
himfelfe with open voyce refolved this dif-
ficulty in the cafe of ob, and hath confirm=
ed his Right by arguments drawn not from
fobs Gnne, bur from his own power. For
gob and his friends had argued fo among
them(felves, that they would needs make him
guilty,becaufe he was punifhtsand he would
leprove their accufation by arguments fetcht
‘from his owninnecence: But God when
hehad heard both him and them, refutes his
éxpoftulation , not by condemning him of
injuftice , or any fin, but by declaring his
own power, Fob. 38. v. 4. Where waft. thou
(fayes he) when Ilaid tbe foundation of rhe
earth, &c. And for his friends, God pro-
nounces him(elt angry againft them,F6b.42.
¥.7. Becaufe they bad not fpoken of him the
thing that is right , like bis fervant Job. A-
greeable to this is that peech, of our Savi-
ours inthe mans cafe who was born blind,
Be N2 when,
e


|
|


242


Religion, Chap,:
when, his Difciples asking him whether he
or his Parents had finned, that he was born
blind, he an{wered , Fobn 9. v. 3. Neither:
bath this man finned, nor his Parents , but shat
the works of God fhould be manifeft iu hims
for though it be faid,Rom. 5.12. That death
entred into the world by fines it followes not,
but that God by his Right might have
made men fubje& todifeafes , and death,
although they had never finned , everras he
hath made the other animalls mortall , and
fickly, although they cannot fine.


The obliga- _ V LI. Now if God have the Right of


tion of
yeclding
obedience
unto God,
proceeds
from lu-


mane in-
firmity-


Soveraignty from his power, it is manifelt,
that the obligation of yeeldirg him obedi-
ence lyes on men by reafon of their *weake
nefle 5. for that obligation which rifes from
Contraa, of which we have {poken in the
fecond Chapter, “can have no place here,
where the Right of Ruling (no Covenant
paffing between ) rifes only from nature
But there are two Species of naturall obligte
tion, one when liberty is taken away by cot-
porall impediments, according to which we
fay that heaven. and earth, and all Crea
turcs, doe obey the common Lawes of their
Creation : The other when it is taken away
by hope , or fear, according to which the
weakcr defpairing of his own power tore:
fift, cannot but yeeld'to the ftronger. From
this lait kinde of obligation , that is to fay
from fcar , ot con(cience of our own weike
nefle (in refpe& of the divine rape
comes to palle , that we are obliged to obey
God in his naturall Kingdome ;  reafon
diGating to all, acknowledging’ the di-
Vine power’and providence , that Base


sae


| chapits: Religion 5a


10 sigh Praca the pricks.
; y reafon of their weakneffe) If this it
fal. feem hard to any man, I defire him pas 4 ma
filent thought to confider , if there were two
Omuiporents, whether were bound to obcy; T-be~
Ioeve he will confeffe that nett! er is bound: if
thisbetrue, then i is alfo true what have fet
down , that men are fubjett wero God becaule
they are not onniporent. And truly our Saviour
simonifhing Paul (ho at that time was an
temy to the Church) that he fhould not kick
againft the pricks {coms to require obedience
om him for this caufe , beeanfe be had or
power enough to refit. : :
VIM. Becaule the word of God ruling by he tawes
nature onely , is fuppofed to be nothing of God in
elle but right reafon, and the Laws of Kings pi; neturall
can be known by thei word only,its mani- x75 gdome y
feft that the Laws of God ruling by nature gre thofe
alone, are onely the naturall Lawes, name= which are
lythofe which we have fet down inthe fe- ghove fet
cond and third Chapters,and deduced from down in
the diGtates of reafon, Humility, Equity, Fu- rhe (ccond
fice Mercy, and other Morall vertucs be- and thind —
friending Peace , which pertain to the dil- Chapters.
charge bike duties of men one toward the h
other , and thofe which right reafon fhalk Be
diGate befides, concerning the honour and
worlhip of the Divine Majelty. We need
Not repeat what thofe Naturall Laws, or Mo~
vall vertues are , but we muft {ee what ho-
nours, and what divine worfhip , that is to
fay, what facred’ Lawes,, the fame naturall
reafon: doth diate,
“1X. Honour, ro fpeak properly ,. is: no- Whar ho-
thing elfe but an opinion of anorhers power nour and”


_ Joyned with goodueffe, andto honsura man worfhip are,
% N i


3 is


244 Religion, Chap.as,,
is the fame with highly efteeming him, and
fo honour is not in the Party honoured, pee
the honourer;now three Paffions do necef
follow honour thus placed in opinion s Love, |
which referres to goodneffe 5 hope, and feare,
which regard power. And from thefe arife”
all outward agtions ,_ wherewith the powers
full are appeafed, and become Propitious,
and which are the effets, and ther Pele
the natural fignes of honour it felfe. But the
word honour is transferred alfo to thofe out-
ward effects of honour, in which fenfe, we are
faid to borteur him , of whofe power wete-
ftifie our felves, either in word , or deed, to
have a:very great refpeét 5 infomuch as be
nour is the fame with worfhip. Now WOR.
SHIP isanoutward a, the fign of ine
ward honour 5, and whom we endeavour by
our homage to appeafe, if they be angry, or
howfoever to make them favourable to us,

_. . we ate faid roworfhip. :

Worfhip —  X. All Ggnes of the mind are eicher words
confijts ei- ov deeds, and therefore all aay confifts
ther in at- eicher in words or deeds; now both theone

tributes, and the other are referred to three kindes;

or in abtim whereof the firlt is Praife , or publique decla-

ons, tation of goodneffe; The lecond, a ete de.

slararion of prefent power, which is to magnify

seyarvyoicy The third, is a publique declara-

tion of happineffe , or of power, fecure Hp 5

the future, which is called pecyeeroyds. 1 lay,

that all kiades of honour may be ‘ieee

not in words only , burin deeds too; but we

then praife, and celebrate in words, when we

doe it by way of Propofition , or Dogmati-

cally, that is to fay by aAttribures 5 or Titlet,

which may be termed prayfing , and cele+

% brating


ti
i


Chap.t5. Religion. ads
" pratidg,caragorically and plainly, aswhen we 9)
aetna whom wesboneuttd be Wiberg,
rong, wifes Andichen, in deeds, when it is
oo epi its 5 ot by hypothefis Sot
{uppofition; as by Thaukseivine, which fup-
pofsch Se ori by Obedience’, which
eth powers! or by. Congratulation; ch


fet: happineffe. 26) Yue
XLNow whether'we defiretopraife'aiman And there
inwordsyor deeds, we fhall find fome things i ove fort
which fignify honour with allmen-, fach as naturall,
among:attvibutes ate the genetall words of ad another
uettnes:and powers y which cannot be taken arbitrary.
inill fenfe., ‘As Good; Raive, Strong) Full,
- and thelike 5, and anvong’ aétions 5 Obedi~
me , Thankigiving , ‘Prayers’, and others
. of thatkinde, by which an acknowledge~
ment of verttie and power is ‘ever under-
flood): Others, which fignify honour , but
with fome , and {corne with others, or elfe
Atiher s:-fuch» as in Arwibures, ‘are thole
_ words. which according ‘to’ the “diverfity “of
opinions, are diverfly referred to vertues or
‘vices, to-honelt or difhoneftthings ; As that
_ aman flewhis enemy, that he fled:, thar he
isa Philofopher, or an Orator,and the like,
\ which wich! fome ave had inshonour y with
othersiin conrempt. Tndeeds, fuch'as depend
~ onthe cultome ofithe place; of prefetiptions
ofcivill Lawes, as in falutiag to be bare-
headed; to put off the floes, to bend the bo-
dy5 to petition forany thing ftanding, pro-
firateykneeling, forms of ceremony; and the
like, Noowithat wor hip which is alwayes,and
| by all men’accounted honourable;" may be
led: Warrall 5 the other ‘which followes
places jand caftomes; Arbitrary.
is Na, -  SI1-Fure


Ee 246 } . o Religion, a
One com- . X LY, Furchermores'werfhip may be
_ manded, —Soyned , to.wit,by the command of him tha
another vo-is worthiped and it may ‘bee wolumray ;
_ &imary. namely fuch as feems good ‘to ‘the Worthip.


per: [fit be enj noe ye


it, do not fignify, honour’, pia. if
actions, but as they. ave enjayned'y for hey fig
nify obedicnce immediately; obedieaice re
infomuch as-worfhip énjoyned Con Gifts in oben
dience ; voluntary is honourable onely in
the nature of the a@ions y which if they doe
Sgnify honour to the bebolderssic isworfhipy
if not, isis Reprodch.' Again: worfbip may be
either publique or private, but publique, relpe
Ging each Gingle wowhipper , may tiotbe
uoluntary , refpeding. ‘the a it may 5 for
feeing that which is done voluntatily , dew
pends on the will of the Doer > there
would not one worthip be given, but as ma.
ny woxthips as worfhippers,except the williof
all. men were Huang by ‘the command , of
~ ane; but Private worlhip may be! voluntdey,if
it be done feccetly; for what is donz openly
is reftrained , cither by Lawes y of through
modefty , which is contrary to the nature of
a voluntary action,» , hodi@’ ti ee
“what the <> L141, Now that we may' know what”
end or aim “He {60pe and end of wopfhipping others is, we
4 of voor mutt confider the caule why, men delight in
 Saebiadd worthip : And we muft grant what!we have,
ee thewed elfewhere , that oy confits inthis,
that a. man contemplate vertu, ftreng
{cience, beauty, friends, or any power. what!
foever,y,as being , or. as though ic were bis!
own, anditis nothing elfe but a Glory , ot
‘Triumph of the mind. conceiving it felfe:
le. honoured that is to fay, lov’d and —
k i tha


crs? | Religion: ee) cater |
visto fay, having the fetvices' amd afti- ‘]
fiances of menin readinefle. Now becaufe
men ‘beleeve him to: be powerfull whom Re |
they fee honoured (that is to fay) efteemed S|
owerfull by others, ic falls out that honour
isinereafed by worfhip, and by the opinion
ofpower, true power is acquired 5 His end
therefore who either commands, or fuffers
himfelf co be worfhipt, is,that by this meaus
fe, may acquire as many as he can, either
‘through love,orfear,to be obedientuntohim.

¥1 V. But that we may underftand ;
what manner of Worfhip of God naturull pat the.
tufor doth afligne us, let us begin from his yaryrall
Attributes : where, firftit is manifelt, that payes are
eifence isto allowed him 3 for there can concerninz
beno willto honour him, who, wethink, Gods 7
lath nobeing. Next, thofe Philofophers-rjpyres,
Whofaid, that’ Godivas the World, orthe “7
worlds: Soul; (that is-to fay, a part of it)? |
{uke unworthily of Gods for they attribute. ; 2]
nothing to him, but wholly deny his being,

tby the word God we underftand the-
Worlds caufe ; borin fayinz that the World:
ipGod; they fay, that it hath’ no caufe, thit
isas much, as there% no God. In like man-
net, they who maintain the world not-to be’
treated, but eternall ;becaufe there can be!
no caufe of anerernall thing ; In denying
he world 10 have a (aufe; they deny alfo:
that there is a God. They alfo have a:
Wetched apptehenfion’of God, who im-*
piting idleneffe to him, doe take from him

Government of the world, and of man-:
Kind $ for fay they fhould acenowledge him :
Omnipotent, yerif he minde not thefe in-:
fttiour things , that fame thred -bare Sen~

' Ng ; tence «


sales


” conceive is finite : And although this word,


_ for an Idea is our conception, but cons


_ hath bounds and limits of its greatnelle


Religiom Cha
tence will take place with them , Quod i
nos, nibiladnos ; What is above us, doth
not concern us 3, and feeing there is no-
thing for which they fhould either love, or
fea him, truly hewill be to them as thouch _
Ke were not at all, Moreover in eAttribytes
which fignifie Greatneffe, or Power, thole
which fignifie fome finite, or limited thing,
are not fignes atall of an honouring mids
for we honour not God worthily if we
afcribe leffe power, or greatneffe to him then,
poflible wecans but every finite thing js
leffe then wecan,, for moft eafily wemay ’
alwayes affigne and attribute more to.
a finite thing; No fbape therefore mut
be affigned to God, for all fhape is finite;
nor mufthe be faid to be conceived, or
comprehended by imagination, or anyo-
ther faculty of our foul for whatfoever we


Tafinite Ggnifie a conception of the mind, _
yet it followes not, that we have any con-
ception ofan dfinite thing : For when we
fay thit a thing is dafinite, we figaifie no-
thing really, but che impotency in our owne
mind, as if we fhould fay weknow not’
whether, or where it is limited ; Neicher
{peak they honourably enough of God,who.
fay we have an Idea of him in our mind;


ception we have none, except of a finite

thing: Nor they , who fay that he hath’
Parts , or that he is. fome certainie imire
thing, which are alfo attributes of finite
things: Northat he is in any placesfornc
thing can be faidto bein aplace, butw


‘places; Nor thar there are more Gods , be- °
-ufe nor more infinites. Farchermore con-
- cerning attributes: of bappineffe, thofe are un=
- worthy of God-which Signify forrow-(unleffe
"they be taken not for any Paffion., but by a ;
Meronomy forthe. efle&) fuch as. Repen-
uc, anger, Pi: Or IWant, aseAppetite, .


alfo called uj forthey are fignes of Poverty,
finceit cannot, be underdtood., that aman
hould.defixes bope,.and. wif for ought , but
What-he wantsand. (lands im need of ; Ox any ¢
Pofsive- fie for fuffering belongs toa
limited. power » and which depends upon
another. When we therefore attribute a will \
to God irisnotto be conceived like unto .


- God defiros, he wants, which for‘any man to
-faysis acontumelie 3 but.we mult fuppofe
fome refemblance which we cannot con=
“es Tn like pene ptg wee attribute
and other adi of the stohim , or
knowledge, or eae se: in usare
» nothing elfe but acumule of the minde rai-
fed from outward objeGs prefling the Or. -
ganes\,, Wee. muft mot think ‘that any-fach .
thing :befalls’ the Deity 5 foric is afigne of
power depending upon fome other , which is .
not the »moft--bleffed« thing. He therefore
- Who! would or alcribe any other tirles to
God; then what reafon, commands  : mutt:
fe fuch:asiane either Negative , as infinites
_ ettetnallFncamprebkepible.s <8evlor /uperla~
_ Hive, asmoft good; moftigrear , meft powerfull,
E &evor Ludepinite, as good, juft, frong, Crea.


t0hity, *


fides Nor that he is moved, or isatrells
r either of them {uppofe.a being in fome. —-


Hope , Concupifcence 5 and thatlove which is . «


ours, which is.called a rationall.defire; for if


290:


What thofe
ations are,
whereby.
aturally


tour King; and the likesin Sach fenfe,as noe.
deficing to declare what he is (which were


“to circumfcribe him within ‘the Narrow,


limits of our phantafie) but to confelle his:
ownadmiration, and obedience , ‘which is
the property’of humility , and<ofa minde
yeelding aliithe honour it poffibly can doe
For Reafonditates one’ name alone, which
doth fiznify the mature of God (ie.)Exijten,
or fimply,that be iss and one in order to,and
in relation tous,namely God, under which is
contained:both Kiug,and Lord;and' Father,
X V..€oncerning ‘the: outward ‘actions:
wherewith God is to be wotfhipped (asalfo
concerning his Titles) its a: moft- generall
command of Reafon, that they’ be ones of


we de give a mind ycelding honour 5 under which are


worfhip.


contained in the firftplace 5 “Prayers,
Qui fingit (4sros auroyvel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos; qui vogat, ile facit,
For ‘Prayers ave the fignes of hope, and’
hope is anacknowledgement of the divine
powers or goodneffe. i 09
In the fecond place, Thansgiving; which
is afigne of the fame affection, but that
Pravers. goc’ before. the benefit, and: rhanks
(Nomi. ocittig +: t mow
» Enthe third, Guiftsy:tHae is tofay.oblatis
ous and facrifices; for thefe axe thanksgivings.
Anthe fourth , 202 £0 fweare by any others)
Fora mans Oath is an Imprecation ‘of his
wrath. againft him if he deceive, who both
knowes whether he does or not sand cant
punifh bim if hedoe, though he benever fo
powerfull; which only belongsto God: for »
if there vvere any man: from whom bis
Subje&s malice could nor lye.hid,‘and.whont |
: mee


, no humane power could  refift 5 pligh-
ted faith would fuffict without (wearing,
which, broken, might be punifhe by thap
' Man; and for this very reafon there would
benoneed ofan Oath, ©
_An-thefifth place, To [peak warily of
Gods for that iga fign of fear, and feareis
an acknowledgeme ntiof power. It followes
from this precept That we may not take rhe
name of God in vain, or nfé it rafbly; for either
ateinconfiderate. That wee muft not fwear
where there is no needs for that isia vain
bur need there is none,unleffe it be between
Cities to avoyd or take away contention by:
force , which. neceflarily muft arife , where
there is no faith Kept in promifes,or in aCi-
ty, for the better certainty of Judicature,
dive 2 That we muft not difhute of the Divine
wature : For itis fuppofed hat all things in
the naturall Kingdom of God are enquired imo
hy reafon only, that isto fay, out of the Prin-
ciples of navurall Science 3: but we are fo far
offby thefe to attain to the knowledge of the,
nature of God , that we cannot: fo much as
teach to the full underftanding of: all the-
qualities of our own bodies, or of any other
Creatures) Wherefore there’ comes nothing:
from thefe difputes, but a ralhrimpofition:
ofnames to the divine Majefty, according
tothe mall meafure of our conceptions? It-
followes alfo (which belongs. to the Right


of Gods Kingdome) that their fpeech’ is: ~


- inconfiderare, and. rath who-fay., (That thie,
omithat , doth nor: ftand. withiivine juftice’s:
for even omen -count sit \!anafftont ‘thar:
their: children. fhould difpute! their Right,

- ® meafure their juftice otherwife then wr

dive cK


ee


_ then.co. worthip Godin an image's yet: was


_ rative of benefits veceiveds forall thefe proe


the tule of their, Commands)... .,
Anche fixth. Whatfoover t offered up in
prayers, thanksgévings,and [acrifices, rauft in
its kind be the bet, and moft Gctokening honours —
namely,Prayers mutt not be:rafh,or lightor
vulgai,;-but beautifull, and well compoled,
though it were abfurd. in! the Heas


it not againft reafon ito ule Poewry, and
Mufick, in cheir Churches, :
. Alfo Oblations muft be clean, and Profents.

_{umptuons,and fuch as are figniticative either
of fubmiflion, or gratitude , orcommiemos


ceed froma defire of honouring. |.
In the feventh. That God mift be worfhipt
not privately oncly, but openly, and publiquely in
the fight of a'l men; becaule that worthip dglfo
much more acceptable, by how much inbes
gets honour, roa eftcem in orhers(assharte
been declared before inthe 13. ates) unleffe
other's therefore fee it y-that which is mot
pleafing in our worthip; vanifheth. |);
Tnthelatt place. That ove ufe our bell oe
deavour to keep the Lawes. of Nature. Bor the
undervaluing of our Mafters. command,
exceeds all other affrons whatfoeversas.on
thejoiher-fide,O bedience is;more acceptable
then all other Sacrifices. And thefe are prine
cipally the naturall Lawes concerning the
‘worlhip of God,thole Imean which Realon
dictates to every Mansbut to.whole Cities,
every one whereof is one Perfonsg the fame
nacurall Reafon\farhercommands an\wtls
‘ormity., of publiquesworfhip. Forithe aGions.
done’ by. particular’ Perfons , according 10)
their private Reafons ,\are not) the Ge ‘
oils a :


Chap. 15. Religion. 253
-aétions , and therefore not-the Gities wor-
| fhip; but what isdone by the City, is un~
| derftood to be done. by the command of
of him, or them who'have the Soveraignty,
wherefore alfo together withthe confent of
allthe fubjeGts, thatis to fay, Huiformly. —-
' XVI.The naturall Lawes fet downin In the'na-
the foregoing Article concerning the divine turall king-
worthip, only command the giving ofnatu- dom ofGoL
all fignes of honour;but we mutt confider the City -
that there are two kindes of fignes, the ome may ap- »
naturall, the other done uponagreement, or poine what
by expreffe, or racite compofition. Now be= worfbip it
caule in every language , the ule of words; pleafeth,
and ames, come by appointment, it may
_ alfo by appointment be altered 5 for that
which depends on, and derives its force
from the will of men, can. by the will of the
fame men agreeing be changed again, ot I
abolitht. Such wames therefore as are attribu-
ted to ‘God by the appointment of men, can.
by the fame Lire: be taken aways
_ flow what can be done by the appointment
ofmen, that the City may doe; The City
therefore by Right (that isto fay, they who-
have the power of the whole City) thall
judge what wanes. or \appellations are mote,’
what leffe honourableforGod., thatis fay,
what do@rines are tebe held and profeft-
concerning the nature of God,and his ope-
rations, Now aétions: doe fignify not by
mens appointment, but naturally, even as
the effedts are fignes of their caules,whereof
fome ate alwayes fignes of fcorn to them
before whom they are commicredy as thofe,)
- whereby the bodies uncleannefle is difco-
 . Yered, and whatfosver men‘are athamed -
} ~ doe


Religion. Ch
doe before thofe whom they tefpeds Others
are alwayes fignes of honour, as ro dray
near, and difcourfe decently and humbly, —
to give way orto yeeld in any matter of —
private benefit: In thefe actions the City
can alter nothing but there are infinite
others ,which,as much as belongs to honour,
or teproach, are indifferent; now thele, by
the inftitution of the City , may both be -
made fignes of honour, and being made fo,
doe in very deed become fo. From whence
we may underftand, that we muft obey the
City in whatfoever it fhall. command to be
uled for a Gen ‘of honouring Gody that isto
fay, for Worfhips provided-it can be inftitu=
ted for a fign of honour, becaufe tharisa ’
fign of honour , which by the Cities com-


fi:
&
.
t :
a mand is us’d for fuch.
od ruling © XVITs We have already declared which
| by nature were the Laws of Gad,as wel facred as fecu-
‘onclysthe _lar,in his government by the way of Nature ~
City,that is Onely. Now becaufe there is no man but
ty. that . Maybe deceived inreafoning , and that it
‘man or fo falls.our, that men-aré of different opini-
Court ons concerning the moft actions, ic may be
which un. demanded farther, whon» God would have:
\der God to be the Inserpreter of right Reafou,thar is to
ath the fay, ot his Lawes. And as for the Secular
Soveraign- Lawes, 1 mean thofe which-concern justice,
ty, the and the’ carriage of men towards men, by
(Interpreter what hath been {aid before of the conftitu-
Fall the tion of a City, we have demonftratively
fhewed it agreeable to reafon,, that all fudie!
catuve belongs to th2-City, and that sfudiea-|
cature is. nothing elfe but an Inserpretasiom
ofthe Laws, and by confequence, that every=)
where Citics, that.is tofay, thole who i ae
the:


“Religion,


So
Lavice, As fo the Sacred Lawes, we mult
| confider what hath been before demonftra-
tedin the fifth Chap. the 13. art. that every
Subje€t hath transferr’d as much right as he
‘eolld on bit, ar them,who had the fupreme
aithority; but he could Have transferred his
tight of judging the manner how God isto.
behonoured;and therefore alfo he fiath done
ity; That he could, it appeares hence, that
he manner of honouring God’ before the
conftitution of a City was to be fetcht from
trery mans’ piivate Reafon ; but every man
aa fibje€& “his private Reafon to she Rea®
[it ‘of the whole City : Moreover , if each
‘Man thould follow his own reafon in the
wmfbipping of God , in fo. great adiver-
fity of worthippers , one would be apt to
judge anothers worfhip incomely , or im=
fiows's) neither would the one etm to the
aihét? to honour God : Even that there-
foe which weie'moft confonant ro reafon,
| would'not be'a worfbip, becaufe tha: the na-
ture of worfip coniefts in this, that it be the
sn Of inward honours but there is'no fign
bur’ whereby: fomewhat becomes known to
others, and therefore is there no fign of ho-
four -bué what feems fo to’ others 5 Again,
that'gatrue fignwhich by the confent of
men becomes afien y therefore alfo that is
honourable 5» which by the confent of men,,
that is:to fay y by the command of the City,
comes4 fig of honor, It is not there~
foce againft the'will of God, declared by the
Way of réafon’onély, to.give bim fuch figns’
of horiottr’ as ‘the City: fhall’ Commands’
ee Subje&s cam transferre their
id


Right


‘ass


ower, ate the Titerpreters of —


236


Certain
doubts re-
moved.


Religion —— Chapars


Right of judging the manner of Gods wor.


fhip on him or them who haye theSovecaign
power; nay, they muftdoe it , for elfe all
manner of abfurd opinions, concerning the
nature of God and all ridiculous ceremos
nies which have been ufed by any. Nari

will bee {een at once in the fame Ciyy,
whence it will fall our, that every Bs
beleeve that all the reft doe offer God anaf.
front; fo that itcannor be truly faid of any
that he worfhips God; for no man wot.
fhips God, that is ro fay ; honours him
outwardly , but he who doth thofe things,
whereby. hee appeares. to others -for to ho»
nour him, It may therefore. bee conclue
ded, that the Interpretation of all Lawes,
as well Sacred, as Secular, (God ruling by


the way of nature only) depends on theaue
thority, of the City. that isto fay; that many
or councell,to whom the Soverafgn.poweris |


committed, and that wharfoever God coms
mands, he commands by his -voyce; And on
the other fide, thar wharfoever is comman
ded by them, both concerning the manner
of honouring God , and concerning feculat
affaives, is commanded by, God himfelfe.

XVITL, Againft this; fome Man.may;
demand, firft Whether it doth not follows
that the City muft be obeyed if it coms
mand us direétly to affront God, or forbid.
us to worlhip him? I fay, it does notfole
‘low, neither muft we obey ; for ro affront
©r not to worfhip,at.all, cannot by any Mani
be underftood for a manner jof- woulhip:
ping 5 neither alfo had any one, before the
conititution of a City, of .thofe who ace
knowledge God, to rules,a Riahnigae

i


pts. Religion
nthe honour which was then due unto
| him 3 nor could he therefore rransfer a
ight on the City of commanding any
| fich things. Next, if it be demanded whe~
ther.che City mult be obeyed if it.com~
mand fomewhat to be faid, or done, which
isnot a dilgrace to God direGtly, but from
whence by xeafoning difgraccfall conle-
mences may be derived : as for example,
it were commanded toworfhip God in,
“an image, before thofe who account that
honourable ? Truly icis to be (*) done,
For Worthip is infimeed in figne of Ho=
nour, but to Worlhip him thus, is a figne
of honour, and increafeth Gods Honour


ithe commanded to call God by a name
which we know not what ic fignifies, or
how it can agree with this. word , God ®
That alfo mutt be done; for what we do for
Honours fake, (and we &now no better) if
itbe takcnfor a figne of Honour, it isa
figne of Honour, and therefore if we refufe
todoe it, werefule.the enlarging. of. Gods
Honour... The fame judgement muft, be


may be contcoverted , and, difpured 5 for
though thefe kind of commands may be


- therefore fins inthem who command them,
yetare they nor againft right reafon y nor
fins in Subjeéts whofe right reafon in
points of Controyerfie is that,: which {ub-.
mits its felfe to the reafon of the. Citys

Laftly, if that Man,.or Councell ,who hath


ie


among thofe who do fo account of it; Orif -


had of all the Ateributes and Aétions about ,
the meerly rationall Worthip of God which.


fomctimes contrary to. right xeafony and,


the Supreme Power, command himifelfe i


Religion, Chap.
be Worthipt with the fame Attributes, and.
Ailions, wherewith God is to be Worthipr,
the queftion is, whether we muft obey?

There are many things which may be com.

monly artributed both ro God, and Mens

for even Men may be Praiféd, and Magni-

fied; and thereare many ations whereby _
God, and Men, may ‘be Worhhipt 5 Bur

the fignifications of the Aveributes, and

AGions, sxe onely to be regarded: Thole
Attributes therefore, whereby we fighify our
felves to be of an opinion, ‘that there is any

man endued with a Soveraignty ia
dent from God, or that he is immortall,or’

of infinite power, and the like 5 though:

Sothenitided by Princes, yet muft they & ;
abftained from 3 as alfo from thofe Adfions

fignifying the fame, as Prayer to theabe
fent ; toaske thofe things which God alone
can give, as Rain, and Fair weather to
offer him what God can onely accept, a
Oblations, Holocauft:; or togivea te
fhip, then which a greater cannot be given,
as Sacrifices for thefe things feeme to
tend to this end, chat God may not be
thought to rule, contrary to what was fup-
pofed from the beginning ; but genufleéti-
on, proftration,or any other a€ of the body
whatfoever , may be lawfully ufed even in

civill Worthip 5 “for they may fignifie ar
acknowledgment of the civill power onely 5
for Divine Worthip: is diftinguithe from
civill, not by the motion, placing, habit, or
geftureof the Body, but by the declaration
of our opinion of him whom we doe V ore
thips asifwe caft down our félves efor
any man, with intention of declari ae


P.l5e Religion, 259
at Signe that we efteeme him ag God, it
| is Divine Worthip 5° if we doe the fame
thing as a Signe of our acknowledgment of
‘the civill Power, it is ciyill Worhhip, “Nei-
ther is the Divine Worfhip diftinguithed from.
Civill by any aGtion ufually, underftood by
bythe words Awrecia and Asreie 5 where-
of the former marking out the Duty of
Servants, the latter their Deftiny, they are
words of the fame ation in degree,

Truly itis tobe done] fuid in the
14. eArticle of this Chapter, That. they who
tivibuted limits to God, tranfgreft the natu=
tall Law concerning Gods Worfbip s now they
who worfhip bimim an Image, affignc bimli=
| mits, wherefore they doe that which they ought

tobto doe, and zbis place feemes to contradié
the former. “We mufE therefore know fitft that
the who are conftrained by Authority, doe not
ft God any boonds, but they who command
then s for they who worfbip unwillingly, doe
wonfbip in very deed, but they cither ftand or
fulthere, where they are commanded toftand
fall by a lawfull Soveraign 3 Secondly; £ fay
itmuft be done, not at all times, and every.
where, but on fuppofition that there # no other
“tile of worfhipping God befide the digtates of
humane reafon ; for then the will of the City
Hinds for Reafons but in the Kingdome of What is fa
God by way of Covenant, whether old or new, in the wath=
where idolatry is expreffely forbid, though the yall King
City commands us to wor fhip thus, yet muft me dom ofGody
not do its whichif be foall coufider, who concei- and reba
ued fome repugnancy berwoeen this. and the t 4. Treafon
Article, will furcly ccafe to think [o any longer. againft the
XIX. From what hath been faid may be divine Ma-
gathered, that God reigning by che way of jefty,
naturall


Aimoration


Religion, Chip. 15:
naturall'reafon onely, Subjeéts doe ths
Firft; iftthéy break the morall Laws, which
are unfolded in the fecond and third Chap:
ters. ca if es break the Lawes, or
commands of the City in thofe things
which pertain to’ Juftice. Thirdly, if they
worthip «not God , xute Ta yoUulia,
Foutthly, if they confeffe not before men,
both in words, and deeds, that there is one
God moft good, moft great, moft blefled,
the Supreme King of the World, and ofall
worldly Kings, that is to fay, ifthey doe
nor worfhip God. This fourth finne in.
the naturall Kingdome of God , by what
hath been faid in the foregoing Chapter,
in the fecond Article , is the fiaue of Tre-
fon againft the Divine Majefly ; for iris a
denying of the Divine Power or Aibeifme;
for finnes proceed here, juft as if we fhould
fuppofe fome man to be the Soveraign ,
King, who being himfelfe abfent, thould
eile 3) his Vice-Roy , againft whom fue
they would tranfgrefle who fhould not obey —
his Vice-Roy in ali chings, except he ulurpt
the Kingdome to himfelf, or would giveit
to fome other , but they who fhould fo
abfolutely obey him , as not to admit of
this exception, might be faidto be guilty of
‘Treafon,


C)HAP.


Capit.’ Rebigione


Wek co Cx de Me yore
‘of the Kingdome of God under
© she old Covenant.


1) Superftition peliefing Forrain Na-
“tions , God institued the true Reli-
‘gion by the means of Abraham.
‘TI. By the Covenant between God
“and Adain, all difpute 2s forbidden
“concerning the Commands of Su-

riowrs. II, The manner of the Co-
" -yenant between God and Abraham.
IV. In that Covenant % contained
“an acknowledgement of God , not
“fimply, but of bim. Who appeared
#ato Abraham, V. Zhe Lawes
\ wnto which Abraham was tyed,
“were no other befide thofe of Na-
“tite, ‘and the Law of Circumcifon.
“VI, Abraham was the Interpreter

of the Word of God, and of all
_ Lawes among thofe thar belongedta
him. Nie) Abrahams. /abjeds
~ could ‘not sfiane by obeying bin’

VIL. Gods Cavewant wih the
“Hebrews “at CVoant . Sinai.
AX: Fron thence, Gods Governmsent


X. What


took the name. of a Kingdome.:


262 Religion. Chap,
X. What Lavves were by Gud
Siven to the ewes, XU. what the
ies lof God. 2, . atid how to be
RaoWn. XID. What w0as hye ld. the
written Word of gatas
fewes. XIII. The power of in.
terpreting the Word of Godand_
the {upreme civill power were unis

ted in, Moifes  shile he. lived,
» XIV. They, were a ‘seated wii the


© High Priclt , during the life ‘of Joe
- fhuah. XV. They were anited to
in the Hiigh Prieft wntill King Sauls
_ootime, XVI, They mere alfa ynited
|. in the Kings until. the captianty,
. XVI. They. were fo in the’ High
“Priclts after the . captivity, |
XVII, Deniall of the Divine Provi.
dence, and Idolatry, were the onely
| ‘Treafons againftthe Divine Mae
Jelly among the Jewes, in all things
\elfe they ought to obey their Prin.


CES *
|- Superftiti- fs 88 S rOVV" ode
on pofef- I Ankind,from'confeietice of its own
fig for. weaknefle y: dnd admiration of ne«


p tagn Na oat eventsshath this,.that moft men be
a infil leeve God to. be the invitible Maker ofall


“the twueRe- ‘invifible things, whom they alfo <inte |


Be?)  acioatinmantiva poupticnand ule
a 2 > bur the imper! ae
Patcctine they shad of their Reafon., nae s


pré. Religion.
“theic Paffions did fo clowd them, that they
| could naz rightly worthip him, Now the fear
of invifible things , when it is ever’d from
tight reafon is fuperftition. Ir was there~
almoft impoflible for men without the
the fpeciall affiftance of God*to avoyd
both Rocks of eAtheifme and Superftition :
- for this proceeds from fear without right rea
fon;that,from an opinion of right reafon,witk=

out feare, — ;

«Adolatry. cherefore did eafily faften upom
 greatelt part of men, and almoft all na=
tions did worthip God in Images , and re-
fomblances of fiaite things s and they wor-
hipt fpirits , or vain vifions, perhaps out
of tear calling them Devils. But ic pleae


tenin the facred hiftory) out of all man--
kind to call forth.brabam,by whole means
hemight bring men to, the true worthip of
bim 5: andto reveal himfelfe fupernaturally
to him, and to make thar molt. px at Co-
Yenant with him and his feed, which is cal-
led the old Covenant, ot Teftaments He chere-
bed isthe head of true Religion; he was the
int that. after the Deluge tanght, that there
us one God the Creatour of the Univerfe;And


Covenants, rakes its beginning, Fofeph. An


ape indeed, not oncly naturally, bur al-
Das itfeems he would have no obedience
yeelded to him; befide chat which natural]


Reafon thould ditates but by the way of Co-


iB; Oo themfelyes,


fed the Divine Majefty (as we read it writ- _


from him the Kiigdome of God by way of By the Co-


i siewes.1ib1.<ap.7 veudis be-
tig. Fewes. Lib.1.cap.7. tween God.
~ Tl, Inthe beginning of the world God iat


Ped Ao Mall dispute
way “of Covenant, over Adam, and Eve, 7, fake
den concer

ning the
: commands — —
Viiant, that is to fay, by the confent of men of fuperiars


Ath G8


263.


Religiaws. Chap, 16,
themfelves«: Now. becaule this Covenant was
prefencly made void, nor ever afterrenew-


‘ed, the originall of Gods Kingdom (which


we treat of in this place) is not: to be taken
thence. Yet this isto be noted by the w


that by that precept of notieating of the tree


of the knowledge of good and evil: (whether
the judicature of good andevill, or the


. eating of the fruit of fome tree were forbid.


‘The man~
ner of the
Covenant
— -benween
~ God and
|. Abraham.


den) God did require a moft fimple obedi+
ence to his commands , without: difpure
whether that were good; or evill, which was
commanded; for the fruiv of the tree, ifthe
Command be wanting,’ hath nothing inits
own nature; whereby the eating of it conld —
be morally evill, that isto fay, a,finne, -
III. Now the Covenant between God
and Abrahan,was made in-this-mannenGo
17.¥.758, 1 will Stablifh my Covenant between
me and thee, andthy feed afterthee-in their ge-
nerations, for an-everlafting Covenant, tobea


. Goduato rhe, and to thy feed afser thee, And


I will give unto thee, and rothy feed after thet,
the Land whercinthou art a firanger, allibe
Land. of Cawaan , for an everlafting poffelfio,
and.T wilt be their'God, Now ‘it\ was nectl


~ fary to inftiture fome! fign whereby eAbn


ban and. bis feed fhould retain. the memory

of this Covenant 3 wherefore Ci Is
was added to the Covenant, but yetatt

fign onely. verf.20.Tbis is my Covenant whith
yee. hall keep betvsecn me.and thee, and thy feek
after thee , cvery.man-child among you fbi be
circumcifed, and ye (hall civcumeife the flefp

Your foreskin, and it fhall bea token of the (>
venaut bermeen me and you. It is therefore Co
venanted , that Abraham fhall acknowl


,


| Chap. 16. Religion. Pag
| God to be his God, and the God of his
feed, that is to fay, that he fhall fubmit him-
-felfe to be governed by him, and that God
fhall give unto Abrabam the inheritance of
that Band wherein he then dwelt , butasa
Pilgrim, and that Abrabam for a memorial
fign of this: Cevenant, fhould take care
tofee himfelfe, and his male feed cizcum=
ofed. -
IV. But {ecing that Abraham even before In that Co-
the Covenant acknowledged God to be the vengnt és
Creatour and King of the world, (for he contained
never doubted either of the being , or the an acknow-
Providence of God) how comes it not to be dedgemeut
fuperfluous , that God» would purchafe to of God, noe
himfelf with a price, and by contradf,an obe- fimply,but
dience which was due to him by nature, of him who
namely by promifing Abrabam the Land of appeared
Céaan , upon condition that he would re- unto Abra.
ceive him for his God , when .by the Right ham.
of nature he was already (0? Bythofe words .
therefore, To be a God unto thee and 20 thy
feed after thee, wee underftand not that
Abraham fatisfied this Covenant by a bare
acknowledgement of the power, and Do-
minion which God had naturally over men,
that is to fay, by acknowledging God inde=
finitely, which belongs to maturall reafon,but :
he mut definitely acknowledge him , who nt
fiid unto him, Gen.1 2. v. 34. Get thce out of E
thy Conntry, &c. Gen.13.v. 14. Liftup thine A
§es. &c, who appear’d unto him, Gen, 18, a
Yd. in the thape of three celeftiall men, and
Gon 3.v.1. Ina vifion; and verf. 13. In
adream, which is matser of faith. In what |
jthape God appeared unto eAbraham, by |
hat kinde of found be {pake to him,is not |
; Q2z- exprett


E 286 Religion.  Chapaés
pe expreft, yet it is plain that Abraham bee
Jeeved that voyce to be the vayce of God,
and a true Revelation; and would have
all his to worfhip him, who had fo fpoken
untohim, for God the Creacour of the
3 world, and that his faith was grounded on .
a3 this, «not thathe beleeved God to havea be-
‘ ing, or thas he wf true in bis promifes , that
which all men beleeve but that he doub:ed
* not him to be God, whole voice , and pro-
mifes he had heard, and that the God of
eAbrabam Genified not fmply God, but thar
God rebich appeared unto him,even as the wot:
thip which Abrabara owed unto God in that
notion, was nor the worfhip of rea/oz,but of
Religion, and Faith, ae: that, which not
reaton, bitGod had fupernaturally revealed.
E V.But we readof no Lawes given by
~ Tle Lawes God to Abraham , or by Abrabam to his fi-
a which mily, either then, or after, fecular, ot facred
|. Abraham (excepting the Commandement of Circim-
 wastye}s cifion, which is contained in the Covetiant it
were M) —(elfe’) whcnce it is maniftdt, that chere were
-other;but 9 other Lawes, or worfhip,which Abraham
_ thofeof tia- was obliged to, but the Lawes of natute,
- twe,atd — earionall worfhip, and circumeifion.
thar of Cir- WL, Now Abraham was the Interpreter
Cumeifion. — 6F all Lawes,as well facred as fecular,among
Abraham thofe that belonged to him , riot meerly na
among bis tuvally , as ufing the Lawes of nature onely,
“Onn was bur even by the form of the Covenantit
the Tuter- 'jfe , in which obedience is promifed by
preter of Abraham not for bimfelfe onely, but for hs
the word Of feed alfos which had been in vain,except his,
God,and of children had been tyed to obcy bis Com-
ali Lawn. mands : And how can that be underftood, |
. which God fayes Geng 8.verk 18. 19. (fF


se |)


oe


£


Chap. 16. - Religion.
the Nations of the carth fhall be bleffed in
‘him; for T know him , that he will command
his childrcn, and his houfhold after him, and
they foall keep the way of the Lord to dic
pufttce , and judgement) unleffe his children
and his houfhold were fippofed to be obli-
ged to yeeld obedience unto his Com-
mands. is
VII. Hence it followes, that Abrabims Abrahams
fubje€s could not finne in obeying him, fubjedts
provided that Abraham commanded therh could nor
not,to deny Gods Exiftence, or Providence, fin inoby~
orto doe fomewhat exprefly contrary to the ing him.
bonour of God. In all other things, the word
of God was to be fetcht from his lips only,
as being the Interpreter, of all the Lawes,
and words of God. For Abraham alone
could teach them who was the Gol of
Abraham, and in what manner he was to be
worfhipped. And they who after Abrabams
death were fubje€ to the Soveraign:y of
Tfaac or Tasob , did by the fame reafon obey
them in all things without fin, as long as
‘they acknowledged , and profeft the God of
Abraham to be their God for they had {ub- :
‘mitted themfelves to God fimply,beforethey =
diditto Abraham, and to Abraham before |
- ‘they did ittothe God of Abrahams againe,
to the God of Abraham betore they did it to
Tfaac: In cAbrakams fubje&s therefore, To
deny God.was rhe only Treafon againft the
Divine Majefty, but in their pofterity it was’
alfo Treafon zo deny the God of aaa,
that is to fay,to worfhip God otherwife then
“was inftitured by Abraham, to wit, in Ima-
: ace (*) made with hands, as other Nations
did, which for that reafon were called Idola-
(i: 03 bors.


968 Religion. Chap.
tors. And hitherto fubje&s might eafily e.
nough difcern what was to be obferved, what

? avoyded in the Cominands of their Princes,
Annotarion _ [in Images made with hands] In thers,
; ap.14. Article , There! wee have fhe

uch a kinde of worfbip to be irrationall 5 bus if
at be done by the command of a City to whom
she written word of God is not known, nor
received, we have then flewed this worlhipin
the 15. Chap. art. 18. to be rationall. Byt
where God reigns by ray of Covcnant , in
which it i exprefly warned uot to worfbip thus,
as inthe Covenant made with Abraham, there, —
whether it be with, or without the Command of
the City, 4 ae done. - “ty
VIII. To goe on now, following the
ee guidance of a holy Scripture ; The fame

‘with the Covenant was renewed , Gen. 26. verl 3, 4.

Hebrewes With Ifaac, and Gew,28,verf.14, with Tash,

at Moyne where God ftiles himfelfe not {imply God,

Sinai, ~ Whom nature doth dicate him to be, but

diftinGly the God of Abrahant and Ifts,

afterward being about to renew the fame

Covenant , by ALoyfes, with the whole People

of Iftael, Exod, 3. v. 6, I am faich he the

God of tly Father, the God of Abraham , the

God of Uaac, and the God of Jacob. After

ward when that People, aot only the freeft,

but alfo the greateft enemy to humane fub-
jeGion, by reafon of the frefh memory of
their eZ egyptian bondage, abode in the
wildernefle near mount Sinei, that asti-
aut Goverant was propounded to them allto
be renewed in this manner, Exod.19. vers

Therefore if yee will obey my voice indeed , and

Keep my Covenant, (to wit, that Cove

nant which was made with Abraham y Lert

an


apt6. Religion, ee


a ed vogether, and fai, All tbartbe

ord bath fboken , will we docs vert. 8.
SUM.) In. this’ Covenant; among ‘other

car we maft'confider well ‘the appellaci- From

oniof Kingdom noruled before; for although thenccGods

‘God both by narnres&cby Covenarit madewith government

Abraban, was their King,vet owed they him was called

anobedience:and worhhip only naiurall, as @Kingdon

* being his (ubjects; & religious (uch'asAbra-
bam infticured)as being theSubjetts ofA bra
ham Ifdacy& Tacdb cher navuvall Princes; Por
they had received no word of God befide the
‘haturall word of right reafon , neither had
aby Covenant patt berween God and them,
oherwile then as theit wils wete included in
the will of Abrabartjas their Prikce; Bur ABW
bythe Covendnrtade at mount Sinai, the
confent ofeach man being had, there be-
comesan inftitusive Kingdome of God over
them, That Kingdom of God fo renowned
in Scriptures and writings of Divines;took
its beginning from this time, and hither
tetids that which God faid to Samucl , when
the Ifraclites asked a King, 1. 8.8.7. They
hitwe not rejected theesbut they baue rejected te,
Uhar E fhould not reign ovcr them 5 and that

"which Samuel told the Hraclites, t. Sant. 12.
12. Yee faid unto mes nay; but a King fall

ign over aj when the Lord. your God was
your Kiug , and chat whichis aids fer. 31+
veil. 31. I will make 2 new Covettatt, &c. .

Although I was ah husband unto. thems

And the dodtine alfo of Fuilas Galileus,

GG O 4. where


270 Religie, Cha
where mention) is made in Tofeph. Autiquof
the Tewes, 18. Book, 2. Chap. in thefe words.
But Judas Galileus was Tiernan |
this fourth way of thofe who followed the Indy
of wifdome. Thefe agrec in-all the reft: with the
Pharifees, excepting that they burn with a moft
conftant defire of liberty, beleeving God alone
to be held for their Lord and‘P rince,andwill [005
ner endure even the moft exquifite kinds of tor
ments togetber with their kinsfolks and deareft

’ friends, then call any mortal. man their Lord,
What lawes %. The Right of the Kingdome being _
were by thus conftituted by way of Covenant, letus ©
God given feein the next place, what Lawes God pro-
do tbe pounded tothem ; now thofe are knowne
Jewes. toll, to wit, che Desalogue, and thofe other,

as well judicial as, ceremoniall Lawes, which
we find from the 20. Chup. of Exodus to the
end of Deuteroxomie, and the death of
Mayfes. Now of thofe lames deliver’d in
generall by the hand of Moy/es, fome there
are which oblige uaruratly; being made by
fits as the God of nature, and had their
rceever before Abrahams time 3 others
there are which oblige by yertue of the Go-
veuant madewith Abrabam, being made by
God as the God of Abraban, which had
their force even before Moy/es his tims, by
reafon of the former Covenaat 3 but there
are others which oblige by vercue of that
Covenant onely which was made laft with
the people.themfelves, being made by God,
as being the Peculiar King of the t/raelites,
Of che firft fort ave all the Precepis, of the
Decwlogue which, pertaine unto manserss
fuch as,Honour thyParentssthou shalt notKill,
thou fhalt not commit: Aduleery, thon halt mot
; : i Stealiy


16. Religion,
Sieale, thou fale not beare falfe witneffc, thou.
‘fale not Covet ; For they are the Lawes of
‘ature 3 Alfo the precepe of nor taking:
Gols name in vaine, for it isa part of mru-
tall worfhip, asKath beene declar’d.in the
foregoing Chap. Art. 15. In like manner
| the fecond Commandement of not wor”
ipping by way of any Image made by
temfelves ; for this‘alfo is a part of na-
tall Religion, as hath beene fhewed in
the fame Article. Of the fecond fort is the
fit Commandment of the Decalogue ,


Ofnot having any other Gods; for in that —


tonfifts the eflence of the’ Covenant made
with Abraham, by which God requires no-
thing elfe, bur that he fhould he his God,
andthe God of his feede: Alfo the Precept
ofkecping holy the Sabbath ; for the San@il: -
tation of the feventh day is inftitued in
memoriall of the fixdayes Creation, as ap-
perres out of thiefe words, Exod. 3 t.ver.1 6,
17, It @ perpetuall Coucnant, (meaning,
the Sabbath) and a figue betwee me, and the
Children of Ifcael for ever, for-in fixe dayes
the Lord made Heaven, aid Earth, and on che
fevemh day he refted; and was refrefhed. OF
thethird kind are the Politique,jadiciall ant’
Coremoniall Jawes, which.onely belong’d
tothe Fewes. The laves of the fit and’
fecond fort written in Tubles of floc, to,
wit the Decalogue, was kept in the Ark it
felfe. Fhe reft written ia the volu ne of the
whole Law, were laid i) the fide of the
Arke. Deut. 3. ver. 26. For thefe retaining.
thefaith of eAbrabam- might be chang’ d,.
thofe could noe.

XI. All Gods Lawes are Godt Word's


bus:


Mets of eet on 5
272 : Religion. Cha ¢
What the butall Gods Word is not his Lam. Lam the
word of — LordthyGot which brought thee out of the
God is,and Land of eAZgypt, isthe word-of God, itis.
bow to be no Law: Neitheris all thar which for the
Rnowae,  betver declaring of Gods Word is pros
nounc’t, or written together with it, in
Atantly to be taken tor Gods Word: For,
Thus (aith the Lord,is not the voice of God,
but of the Preacher or Prophet 5 All that,
and onely thar, is the word of God whicha
true Prophet hath declar’d God to have
fpoken. Now che writings of the Prophets
comprehendng aswell chofe things which
God, as which the Prophet himfelte {peaks,
are therefore called the word of Gol, bee
caufe they containe the word of God. Now
becaufe all that, and that alone, is the
Word of God which is recommended tous
for fuch, bya true Prophet, it cannot be
knowne what Gods Word is, before we know
who isthe true Prophet ; nor can we be
feeve Gods Word, before we beleeve the
Prophet. Moyfes was beleev'd. by the Peo-
ple of Ifracl for twothings, His Miraclesand
his Faith 3 for how great, and moft evident .
Miracles foever he kad wrought, yet would
they not have trufted: him, ‘ar leaft he was
not to have beene trufted, ifhe had call’d
them out of e4Z@ypt to any other worthip—
then the worlhip of the God of eAbrabam,
Ffaacy and facob their Fathers. For it had
beene contrary to the Govenant made by
themfelves with God. In like manner twa
things there are, to wit, fupernarurall Pra-
diction of things ta come, which is a mighty
miracle, and Faith ia the God of Abraham
their deliverer out of edz gypty which God
pros


jatks of a true co He thie wants
‘tither of thefe is'no Prophet, nor is it to be.
reeeiv'dfor Gods word . whichihe obtrudes
forfucks Tf Faith be wanting; heis reject.
jnthefe wordls5) Dent Pzuwer. 15°25 2, 45 5.
Iftbcre arifé among you @ Prophet, or a dred»
mor of drcams, ani’ giveth thee a figne, or a

ndor, and the figne or the wonder come to


gocafeor orber Godes (9%: That Prophet, or
that decanter: of dreames hall: be - put to
death? If PrasdiGtiomof events be wanting,
hieiscondemn’d-by thele, Degt.rS.vcr.21,
ot) And if thou fay in thine bear, bow fhall
we nove the word: which the Lord bath ner
ffoken? “When a Proplict fpeaketh. in the tame
ofthe Lord, if the vbing follow nor, nor come
topaffe, that % the thing “which the Lord bath
not (poken, but the Prophet bath fpoken' it pre~
fonprmorly. Now; that that isthe word of
God which is publitht for fuch by a true
_ Prophet, and that he was held to be a true
Propbet'among the Fewer, whofe faith was
true; andto whofe prediGions the events
an(wer'd 5 is withour ‘contreverfie 5) but
what it is to follow other Gods, and whe-
_ ther the evetits, which ate affirm’d to an-
fwer their’ predictions , doe truly anfwer
| them, or not, may admir’ many controver=

fies;(pecially in praediGtions which obfeures


“phetsare’s ‘as who fa not God apparently
_ Tiketinto Mtoyfes, but ia darke fpeeches, and in
es, Numb: £2, ver. 8, But of thefe we


_ Caniiot judge ocberwife xben by: rhe way cf


mararall


ae


postdtdeall sche Foes to: be kept for -


paffe, whereof be Spake unto thee, faying, Let ws »


lys8e-enigtarically foretell che vent firch, .
_ asthe” pr aditions) of almoft all the Pro- —


boll soll


273


et lige Chaar
warural rcafon 5 becaufe that Judgment des
pends on the Prophets interpretation, and:
onits proportion with the Byent..)
Wharwas © XI Se The fewmes didhold the booke.of
beld for the the whole‘Law which was called Dewterano=.,
written mie, for the written-word of Go, and thar,
word of  onely, (forafmuchas canbe collected out)
God among of facrec hiftory) untill the Caprivity, for
the Fewes. this booke was deliver’d by Aoy/es himfelfe.
tothe Priefts to be kept, and layd up iin the
fide of the Ark of the» Covenant; and to
be copyed out by the Kings’; and the fame
along time after by the authority of King,
Fofizh acknowledg’d againe for she Word of
God. 2Kings 23.ver. 2. Bacit is nor ma-
nifeft when the reft of the books of the Old
Teftament were. firft receiv’d into Caz
non, but what concernes the Prophets,
Haiab and the veft, fince' they foretold no.
‘ other things. then what were to come to
pafle, either in or after the Captivity, theit
writings could not at that:time be held for
Prophetique, by reafon of the Law cited a-
bove. Deut. 18. ver, 21, 225 Whereby the
Afraclites were commanded not ro account
any man fora true Prophet but him whofe
E Prophecies were an(wer'd by the events §
ig And hence peradyentute ic is that the Fews
F efteem’d the writings of thofe whom they _
L flew when they: Prophefied; for Prophetique
f ' _afterward,thatis to fay,for the wordof God.
_ Thepower . XUL1 It being known, what, Lawes
f of iuterpre~ there were under the old Covenant, and that
| ting the Word of God-receiv’d from the beginning ;
_ word ef we mult farthermore confider with whom
| God,and the authority of judging, whether the wri-
© be fupreme tings of the Prophets arifing afverward ,
z cwere:
iF


ap.16> Religion, oe as
_wereto be receiv'd for the Word of God, civil porece
~thatis tofay, whether the Events did an- were united’
{wer their prediions or not’, and with in Mo {es
whom alfothe authority ‘of inrerpreting the while be’
Lawes already veceiv'ds, and the written Word lived.
of God, did'xefide 5 «which thing dis to be °
‘ttae’t through “all the'times , and feverall
changes of the Commonwealth of Tftael.
But it is manifeft that this power during
| the'life of Moyfes, was intirely in himfelfe 5
forifhe had nor beén’the Interpreter of the
Lawes and Word, that office mutt have be-
long’d either to every private perfons orto 3
songregation , or Synagogue o many,’ or to
the High-Pric/t,or to other Prophets. Firfk,
that that office belong’d not to ‘private
men, or any Congregation made of them,
appeares hence., that they were not admit= Be
ted , nay theywere prohibited, with moft
heavy threats, to heare Ged fpeake, otherwile
then by the ‘means of Moy/es 5 for it is writ
ten, Let nor the Priefts and the people breake
' through t0 come up unto the Lord, left be bresk
forth upon ihem. So Moyfes went downe uno
the peoples and [pake unto them. Exod. 19.
“a4y25.Te is farther manifeftly, and ex-
prefly declar’d, upon occafion given by the
Rebellion of ¢ore,;Darhan and eAbiram,and
_ thetwo hundred and fifty Princes of the fs
Affembly, that neither private men, nor 5
the Congregation fhould pretend that God
had fpoken by them, ‘and by Confequence
that they had the right of inerpreting Gods
Word 3 tor they contending,that God {pake
no leffe by them then by Moyfer, argue
thus, Yeerake too.much upou you, fecing at
the Cougregation. are boly, every. one of a P
< w


Senn?


VEX


a Be a cad


~ and the Lord is among them 3 wherefore them


Lift yee up your (elves above the Congregation


of the Lord? Numb.16. ver. 3, But how
God-determin’d this ¢ontroverfie is. eafilyy
underftood -by the 33. nd 35. verfesof the!
fame Chaptet, where Corab, Dathaiiy and:
eAhbiram went downe alive into the Pit, sand:
there cane ous fire bre the Lord , and cons
fumed thetmobundred and fifty men that of%
Ferd Incenfe, Secondly, that Aaron thé:
high Prieft hadinot this authority, is mani~
feit by the’ like cotitroverfie ‘betweene him
(together withwhis Sifter Miriam) and).
Moyfes'; For the Queftion wasy whether:
God fpake by f07(és only, or by them alfo,
that is to fay, whether Moyfes alone, or whe-
ther they al fo were interpreters of the Wordof
God.: For thus:they faid ,Havh the Lord:
indeed fpoken onely by Moyfes.? Hath’ be not:
alfofpoken by vs? Numbi 12. ver, 2. But
God.veproy’d them and made a diftin@ion
berweene Mayes’ and otter Prophets, fay=
ing, If there-be a Prepher among yon, I the:
Lord will make my felfe\ kuowne unto him twa
vifion, andiwillfpeake unto hinin a dreanes
My Servant Moylesis uot fo, tore. For with
bin will I fpeake mouth to mouth, eves appa
rently, and nos in darke {péeches, aud the Simi
limde of the Lord fball he bebold, wherefore


then were yce not afraid to [peake again(t my.


Servant Mayfes? Abid. ver. 6, 758. Laltly;
that, the interpretation of the Wordcof Gal
as long asMeferliv’d; belong’d ‘not to any
othier Prophets whatfoevers is colleeed ott
ofthat place which we now’ cited concer
cerning his eminency above all’othérs,. and


out of natural veafon} for as usuchiasit be


oe longe.


4


|


1ap.16. Religion. ae

to the fame Prophet who brings the

Commands.of God to unfold them too

but there was then no other Word of God,
belide that which: was-declar’d. by. Moyfes 5,

and out of this alfo, that chere was no other

‘Prophet extant atthat time, who Prophe«
fied to the peopie, excepting the 70. Elders

who Prophefied bythe Spirit of Mogess and

even that Fofbuah, who was chen Moyfes his

Servant, hisfucceffour afterward, beleev’d
tobeinjurioufly done, till he knew it was

by Moayfes his Confent , which thing. is

manifeft by Text of Scripture, And the

Lord came downe in a clowd, ¢g°c. and tooke

of the {pirit that was upon Moyles, and gave

it unto the 70, Elders... Numb. EX. ver. 25

Now after ic was told thar they Prophefied,

Fofbuah {aid unto Moyes, Forbid them my

Lord: Bur Moyfes anfwered , Why envic[E

thou for my fake? Secing therefore Moyfes er |
alone was the Meffenger of Gods Word, and 5 |
that the authority of interpreting it pertain’d :
Neither to private men, nor to the Synagogue,
nor to the High ‘Prieff, nov to: other Pre=
phets, icremaines, that Moy/es alone! was

~the Iuterpreter of Gods Word, who alfo. had
the fupreme power in civill matters ; and
that the conventions of Corzb with the reft

ofhis complices againftMofes, and Aarow,

and of Aaron with his Sifter againit Moyfess
were rais’d , not for the falvation of their
foules, but by reafon of their ambition,and
deGire of Dominion over the People.

~X1V. In Fofbuahs time the: interpreta-

"tion of the Lavwes,and of the Word of Godsbe
long’d to Eleagar the High Prieft, who was
alfo under God their abfoluce King ; which

is


SI)


They were
alfo united
in the High
Pricft dus


» sraty; or Democraty.) and have all that power


for the prefent, which he is beftowing on:
others Pr the future ; Now, that Eleaear:
the Prieft, had not onely the Prieftheod, but

alfo the Soveraigmty, is expreflely fer downe

in Fofhuabs call to the adminiftration’s for

thus s is written. Take thee Jofhuah the Sow

of Nun, @man in whom is the Spirit, and lay-

thine hand upon bims and fer him before Blea-

zer che Prieft,and before all the Congregation,

and give bim a charge in their fight, and thou

(halt put fome of thine bonour upon him, that alt

the Congregation of the Children of Lfvael may
be obedient, andhe (hall ftand before Bleazir

the Pricft, who fhall aske Counfell for bim af
ter the judgment of Urim, before the Lord, at

bis word Jhall they goe out, and at his word

Soalltheyione in,and allehe Cbildven of Uicael
with hima, even aldshe Congregation. Num.27.
ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. where to ake Counfeld

¢f God for whatfoever és 10 be done, (that is) to
wircrpretGods woi'd and in che name of God
10.


up.16- Religion.

smmand-in all mattets, belongs to
eazan3 and to gee out, and to come in at
bs word, that is to {ay,to:obey, belongs both
ages and to all thePeople. Its to be
gblerv’dalfo, that thar {peech,: Pare of thy
gloty3clearely denotes that Ffofhwab had not a

ev equall-with that which Moy/es hads

is imeane time it is manifeft, that even”
in Tofruabsrime, the Supreme power and
quthority of interpreting the word of God,
were both in one Perfons i?
XV. After Tofbuabs death follow the
times of the Iudges untill King Sau, in
whith it is manifeft that the right of the
Kiigdome infticuted by God, remained with
the High Prieft 5 forgthe Kingdome was by
Covenant Prie/tly, that isto fay, Gods go-
yeanment by Priefts ; and fuch ougheit ro
have been untill that form with Gods con-
feat were changed by the people chemfelves,
which was not done,before that requiring a
King God confented unto them, and (aid
‘unto. Samuel , Heavken unto the voyce of the
feople in all that they [ay untothee ;, for they
have not rejected thecy but they have rejected me
that Lfhould not reign over them. 1.Sam. 8.7.
The fapreme civill. power was therefore
Righily due by Gods own inftitution to the
High-Priefts but a€tually that power was in
the Prophets, to whom (being rayfed by
God inan extraordinary manner) the I(ra~


“mitted them{elves to be protecte and judg=
% by reafon. of the great_efteem they bad
of Prophecies 3) The Reafon of thisthing,
was , becaule that though penalties were-fer,
and Judges appointed in the inftitution of


They were
alfounited
in the High
Pricft, un-~


til King


Saulstime. .


“dites (a people greedy of the Beaghest) fub-~


Gods,


Ts iain aa


—  Rebigion,

Gods prieftly Kingdomie, yet , the Light of
infliing punifhment,depended wt ron
private judgement, and it belonged tog
‘diffolute multitude,and each fingle Perfon,.
to punith or not to punith according as their
private: zeale fhonld: ftirre them up. And
therefore Moy/er-by his owncommand |
nifht no man’ with death; but wher any
man wasto be put to death , one or
ftirred up’ the multitude againtt hina ot
thems by divine authority, and faying Thm
faith the Lord. Now ‘this was conformable
tothe nature of Gods peculiar ‘Kingdome,
For there God ‘reignes indeed Where ‘his
Lawes are obeyed, not for fear of men > but
for fear of him(elfe; and truly , if men were


“fuch as they thould be, this were an excellent ~


ftate of civill government, butas men are,
there is a coercive power (in which I cont
prehend both right and might) neceflaty to.
rule thems and therefore alfo God fiotn the
beginning preferibed Lawes by Moyles for
the firure Kings. Deut, 7 over 14. ahd Mipe
fes foretold shisiin his lait words to the peo
ple, faying, 1 know thar after my death ye wit
utterly corrupt your elves 5 and iurn aafide from
the way that I have commanded You, &e.Deut,
3%. 29. ‘when therefote according to this
prediGion there arofe another generation
who knew not the Lord, nor ‘yet the works whith
behad done for Ifpzet, the childyen of Tfruel
did evillin bbe fight of sbe Lord (tod fered
Bailaam; Td. 210, 51: t0 wir, they caft of
Gods government,that isto fay; that of the
‘Brief, by whom God tuled 3 and afterward,
when they were overcome by their enemies,
and oppreft with bondage, they anlar
4 104


Br


willnot at the hands ofthe Pricff any —
re» but of the Prophets. Thefe therefore
lly judged Ifracl , but cheit obedience _
wastightly due to the High Prieft; Alchough
therefore the Prieftly Kingdome after the
death of Loyfes,8cLofbuah,was wichout power,
was ic nor without Right. Now that the
inerpretation of Gods word did belong to the
fame High Priett, is manifelt by chis, That
God,after the T'abernacle,&& the Ark of the
Covenanc was confecrated , fpake no more
inmount Sizaé , but in the Tabernacle of
the Covenant, from. the propitiatory which
was between the Ghernbims , whether. ic was
not lawfull for any to aproach except the
High Prieft ; Iftherefore regard be had to
the Right of the Kinedome, the fupreme civill
juwer, and the autbority of incerprering Gods
word, were joyned in. the High Prieft; If we
confider the fad, they were united inthe
Prophets who judged I/rael 5 For as Iudzes,
‘they had the civill authority, as Prophets,
they interpreted Gods word, and chus every
way hitherto thefe two powerscontinucd in-
rable, ‘
X VI. Kings being once conttituted, its They were
no doubt bur the efuill aurbority belonged united in
tothem , for the Kingdome of God by the the Kings
way of Priefthood, (God confenting tothe wilt the
requeft of the I/raclites) was ended, which Captivity.
Hisrom al(o marks {peaking of the babks of
Samuel , Samuel Cys he) Eli being dead,
and Saul fain, declares the old Law abo-
litht ; Furthermore the Oaths of the new
Priethood, and new Soveraignty in Zadok,
and David, do teftifiethat the Right where-
bythe Kivgrdidrule, was founded ia the
4 very


~
*


Religion. Chap. 16,
very conceffion of the People. The Priet
could Rightly doe what(oever every man
could righrly doe'himfelfe; for the I fraclites
granted him a Right to judge of all things,
and to wage warre for all men3in which two
‘ate contained all Right wharfoever can be
“conceived ftom man to man.Our King (fay
they) foall judge ws, and goe out before us, ant
fight our bartails , 1.Sam. 8, 20. Tullicature
therefore belonged to the Kings, but ta
judge is nothing elfe then by interpreting
to ‘apply the: fats to the Lawes ; to them
therefore | belonged ‘the -inrerpretanion of
Lawes too: and becaule there was noo-
ther written word of God acknowledged
befide the Law of Moyfes, untill the Cape
tivity , the authority of interpreting Goti
word, did alfo belong to the Kings; Nay,
forafmuch as the word’ of God mult be


- taken fora Law, if there had been ano«


ther written word befide the MofaicallLaw,
feeing the interpretation of Lawes belonged
tothe Kings, the interpretation of it mutt
alfo have belonged to them. When the book’
of Deuteronomie (in which the wliole Mo«
faicall Law was contained) being a long


time loft, was found again , the ‘Priefsin- ©


deed asked Counfell of God concerning


that book , but not by their own autliority,


but ee Commandement of Iofiah, and
not immediately neither, but by the meanes
of Holda the Propheteffe; whence it appea's
thar the authority of admitting books for
the word of God , belonged’ nor to the
Priefts neither yet followes it thac that au-
thority belonged to the Prophetefle, be
caule others did judge of the Prophets c


|


1ap.16- Religion, 233 4
they wete to be held for true 5 or nots
r to what end did God give fignes , and
thkens to all the People, whereby the true
Trophets might be difcerned from the falfe,
gamely, the gvent of prediGions, and con-
fomity with the Religion eftablifht by
Moyes, if they might not ule thofe marks ?
The authority therefore of admitting books
forthe word of God belonged to the King,
& thus that book of the Law was approved,
and received again by the authority of King
Iifiah , as appears by the fourth book of the
Kings, 22. 23. Ghap, where it is reported
that he gathered together all the feverall de-
ie of his Kingdome, the Elders , Priciis,
opbets, and all the people, and he read in their
thtes all the words of the Covenant , that is to
fy , he caufed that Covenaut to be acknow-
edged for the Mfo/aicall Covenant}, that is to
fy, for the word of God, and to be again re- ee
teivedyand confirmed by the I/raclites; The ee
civill power therefore, and the power of
tifcerning Gods word from the word of men,
and of interpreting Gods word even in the
dayes of the Kings was wholly belonging to
themfelves. Prophets were fent not with au-
thoritysbut in the form, and by the Right of
Proclaimers, and Preachers , of, whom the
earers did judge} and if perhaps thefe were
punifht who did not liften tothem plaialy,
teaching eafie things , it doth not thence
follow, that the Kings were obliged to fol-
_ low all things which they in Gods name
did declare, were to be-followed: for though
Tofiah the good King of Iudah were flain
becaufe he obeyed not the word ofthe Lord
| from the mouth of Necho King of e£gypt,
; that


|
|
|


,


84


Religion: Chap ie
that is to fay, becaufe he rejected good
Counfell though it feemed to come from an
enemy , yet noman TL hope will fay thar


‘ Fofiah was by any bond either of divine, or


humane Lawes obliged to beleeve Pharoah
Necho King of ed gypr 5 becaule he faid
that God had fpoken to him. But what fome
man may obje& againft Kings., that for
want of learning, they are {eldome able
enough to interpret thofe books of antiqui
in the which Gods word is contained, an
that for this caufe it is not reafonable that
this office fhould depend on their authority,
he may objeét as much againft the Priefts,
aod all mortall men, for they may erresand
although Priefts were better infiruGed in
nature,and arts then othermen yet Kings
are able [enough to appoint fuch interpreters
under them; and fo, though Kings did. not
themfélves interpret the word of God, yet the
office of interpreting them might depend
on their authority; and they who therefore
refufe to yeeld up this authority to Kings,
becaufe they cannot.praétile the office it
felfe, doe as much ag if they fhould fay that |
the authority of teaching Geometry mult not
depend upon Kings,except they thenifelves
wereG cometricians.We read that Kings have’
prayed for the People , that they have bleft
the people , that they have confecrated the
‘Temple, that they have commanded the
Priefts, that they haveremoved Priefts from
their office, that they have conltituted o-
thers : Sacrifices indeed they have not of
fered, for thar was hereditary to Aare, and
his fonnes; but it is manifelt, as in Moyes
his life time, fo throughout all ages i ‘
ing


6. Religéon. 285
{ ull to the captivity: of Babylon y that
the Priefthood was nota Maiftry,buc'a Mi- ©


ftry. :
XV ED. After their returne from Ba- The fame:
bylonian bondage , the Covenant being re- were'united


‘himfelfe, “That reformation: feemes rather
‘tobe nothing elfe then the bare promifes,
and vowes of'every man to obfervethofe
things which wete written in the booke of
the Law3 notwithftanding; (perhaps not by
the Peoples intention) by virtue of the (a=
‘vemne- which they then renewed; (for the
Covenant’ was ‘the fame with that’ which
| Wasmade at Mount Sinai): that fame ftare
| was a Pricffly Kingdome, that isto fay; the
fupreme: civill authority, and the facred
were united in the Priefts;’ Now; howfo:
tver through the: ambition ‘of thofé who
frove for the Ptiefthood, and by the inter-
ane of forraigne’ Princesjit was fotrou-
led till our Saviour Fefus Chriffs time, that
it cannot be underftood out of the hiftories
of thofe times,where that authority refided 5
‘yet it’s plaine, that in thole rimes, the pow-
ae interpreting Gods Word was not fevered
om the fupreme civil! power.

XVIII. Our ofall this, we may ea- Among the
i know how the Lewes in all times fom Jewes the
Abraham unto Chri were to behave res denial of
elves


206


é


Religion =


|


the Divite {elves inthe Commands of their Privcess


providence,
and Tdola-


for as in Kingdomes meerly humane men
muft obey a {ubordinare Magiftrare in all


try, were rhe. things,.cxcepting when his Gommands


oncly Trea-


containe in them fome Treafon; fo: in the


fons againjt -Kingdome of God the Temes weze bound to
the Divine» obey their. Princes, eAbrabam, Ifaac 5 Facsh,
Majefty vin Aloyfes, the Prieft, the King, every one, du.


all other
things
they ought
to obey
their Prin-
ces.


LT


ting rheirtime inall things , except. when
theircommands did containe fome: treafon
again{t the Divine Majeffy... Now. trealon
againft che Divine Majefty was » firft th
deniall of bis divine providence, for this was
to deny God to bea King by nature; next; Ido-
latry, or the worlbip not of other (for there
is but one God) but. of ftrange Gods., that ,
is to fay,a worthip though of one'God , yet
under other Titles , ;Attributes , and Rites,
then what were eftablifhr by Abrahams iand
Moyfesy for this was to..deny, the God of
Abraham to be their King by Covenant made
with Abraham , and themfelves 5 in all
other things they were to obeys and ifa
King or Prieft having the Soveraign au.
thority , had commanded fomewhue elle
to be done which was againft the Lawes,
that had been his finne, and sot. his, Sub;
Jeds, whofe duty it is not to difpute, but to
obey the Commands of his {uperiours.


\


hap.t7, Religion’

=

Of the Kingdome of Godby the
new Covenant,


I, The Prophefies concerning Chrifts
Dignity. EI. The Prophefies con.
eerning his Humility and Paffion.
III. That fefas was THAT
CHRIST. IV. That the King.

_ dome of God by the new Cove-
nant, Was not the Kingdome of

_ Chrift sas Chrift,but as God.V. That
the Kingdome by the new Cove.
nant #% heavenly , and fall beginne

from the day of fudgment. VI.T bat
the government of Chrift in this
world , was not a Soveraignty,
but Connfell , or a government by
the way of doctrine , and perfwajion,
VII. What the promifes of the new

- Covenant are , on both parts. VIII. -
That no Lawes are added by Chrif?,
befide the inftitution of the Sacra
ments, 1X, Repent ye, be baptized,
keep the Commandements , and the
like forms of {peech, are not Lawes,
X,. It pertains to the civill authority
to define what the finne of .injuftice
4X1. It pertains to the civill au.


thority


288


Religion, Raapey,
thority to define what conduces to
the Peace, and defence of the City,
XA. dt pertains to the ‘civil ay.
thority t0 judge(whenneed requires)
what definitions , and What inferen.
ces arewrate XI, Le belongs 4
the Office of Chrit to teach moral.
dy,not by the way of (pecubation, but
asa Law; to forgive fianes; andty
teach all things whereof there + m
Jeience properly fo called. XIV. A |
diftinction of things tempurall from
foirituall. XV. In'how many fer.
verall forts the word of God may
be taken. XVI. That all which is
contained in boly Scripture , belongs
not tothe Canon of Chriftian Faith, |
XVII. That the word of a lawful
Unterpreter of holy Scriptures, is the
word of Ged. XVINM. That the an-
thority of interpreting Scriptures, is
the fame with that of determining
controver fies of Faith, X1X:Divers
Significations of aChurch.XX.What
a Church és te which We attribute
Rights, Actions , and the Like perf.
nall Capacites. XXI. A‘Cheiftian
City isthe fame with a \Cheiftian
‘Church. XX. AZany‘Cities do net
‘confiture one Church. XXU1LWin

art


~ Chap.173 Religion, - 389 .
are Ecclefiafticall Perfons, XXIV.
That the Eletion of Ecclefiafti-
call Perfons,Zelungs to theChurch,
their confecration to Paftors,
XXV. That rhe power of remitting
the finnes of the penitent, and retaine
ing thofe (bi smapenitent, belongs
sothe Paltors, but that of jndging
concerning repentance belongs to the
Church, XXVI. what Excommn-
nication %, and on whom it cannot
pales XXVIL That the Interpre-
tation of Scripture depends on the
authority of the City XXVUIL.T hat
a Chriftian city czght to inter-
prez Scriptures by LEcclefiafticall
Papers.


I, “pr Here are many cleare prophefies ex- The Pro-w |
sant invhe old Teflament concerning phefiesof
our Saviour Jelus Chrift,who was to reftore Christy {
the Kingdome of God by a new Covenant, dignity,
artly forerelling his regall Dignity , partly
fis Humility and Paffox. Among others
concerning his Dignity, thefe; God blefling :
_ Abrabam,makes him a :promife of his (onne A
Tfeac, and addes, And Kings of People fhalt
be ofbim, Gen. t7. veil. 15. Jacob ble Ting
bis foune Judah , The Scepter ( quosh be) fhall
mor depart from Judah, Gen, 49.-verf. 10.
God toMoyfes , A Propber (faith be) will
Traife then up fro among thea breshren like
 witotbee, aud Porn words imbis me
me L


4


290 Religion, Chap. in a
_ bud he fhalk fBoak unto them all that I fhalt
command him, aud it fhall come to paffe, that
whofoever will not bearken uxto my words,
which he {hall fpeak in my name, I will vequive
ix. of him, Deut. 18, verf. 18. Lfaias, The
Lord him(felfe {hall give theca figne , Bebold a
Virgin fhall conceive, and bear a Sonne, and
foall call bis name Emanuel, Mai 7.v.14.The
fame Prophet, Hutous a child i born, unto us
a Sonne is given, and the goverument fhall he
uponbis fooulders 3 and his name fball be called
Wonderful, Counfellour, the mighty God , the
Everlafting Fatber,the Privce of Peace, \fai
9. ver{. 9. And again , There fhall come forth
a Rod out of the oon of Jefle, and a branch
foall grow out of bis roots ; the Spirit of the
Lord hall reft xpon him,eo°c. be hall not judge
after the fight of bis eyes , neither reprove after
the hearing of bis eares, but with righteoufneffe
phall he indge the poor, ec. and he (hall fmite
she carth with the rod of bis mouth , and with
the breath of bis lips fhall be flay tbe wicked,
Tfay 11. verf.1, 2, 3, 4,5. Furthermore
in the $1,5 2,53, 5456, 60, 61, 62, Ch. of
the fame Ifay , there is almoft nothing elfe
contained but a defcription of the coming,
and the works of Chrift. Jeremms , Bebold
the days come,faith the Lord,that I will make a
nie Covenant with the boufe of Ucael , and
with the houfe of Judah, Jevem. 31.31. And
Baruch , This is our God. eg. Afterward
did be flow bimfelfe upon earth , and converfed
with men y Baruch 3- verl. 35, 37. Ezekiel,
I will fet up one Shepheard over them y, and he
foait fecd them , even my Servant David, And
Iwill make with them a {Covenant of Peact,
Ge, Bzek.24.verl.2,3,25, Danie, 7 janes


~ Chap.17. Religion, 291%
the night vifions , and behold one like she
Sonne of man came with the clouds of heaven,
and came to the anticut of dayes , and. they
brought him ncar before him, and there was gi-,
ven him Dominion, and Glory , and a King-
~ dome,that all People; Nations, and Languages
fhould jerve: him his Dominion is an everla-
fling Dominion, oe. Dan. 7. verf. 135 14.
Haggai, Yér-once it is~a little while , and E
will fhake the Heaven, and the Earth , and the
_ Sea, and the drye Eand , and 1 will fhake alt
Nations , and the defire of all Nations foalt
ome; Hagoai 2.v.8; Zachariah, Under the
| type of fofhuab the High Priefts 1 will bring’
b my fervane the Branch, ¢o°c. Zach.3.v.8.
And again, Behold the man whofe name és the
Branch, Zach.6. v. 12. And again, Rejoyce
greatly O Daughter of Sion, Shout O Daugh-
ter of Jerufalem , behold thy King cometh to
thee, he és juft paving falvation, Zach 9. v. %
The Jewes moved. by thefe, and other Pro»
hefies , expected Chrift their King to
2 fenr from-God , who fhould redeem.
them , and furthermore bear rule overall
Nations. Yea this Prophefie had {pread
over the whole Roman Empire (which Ve-
fpafian too, though falfly, aes in fa.
‘Vout of his‘own enterprifes) That out of Ju-:
dea fhould come he that fhould have dominion, |
I Now the Propheties of Ghris Humility 1 <p yo.
and Paffion, amongft others are thefe. Ifa. 53+ ‘phefies of
v.i4 He hath born our griefes, and carried our, ChriftsHu=
forromes; yet we dideftcem him firicken, fmit- ily and
ten of God vo afflifted,and by-and by,He was Pafsion
' oppreffed; he was afflicted, yet he opened not his i
mouth; He is brought asa Lamb to the (laugh.
“der yand asa sheep Before ber Shearer is dumb, fo.
; az - opened.


).
3


rat Fefus


was the


Chri.


» thew (deferibing his Genealogie , mati


Religion. Chap,
opened be nor bis mouth , (es verl.7. And
again, He was cut ont of the Land of the lin
ving , for the tranegrefsion of my People was
be fivichen , Gc. vert. 80 Thereforc will I di.
vide bim a portion with the great ns {
divide the fpoyle with the trong , he
bath poured out his foule unto. death,and he was
numbred with the transareffours 5 and he vare
ohe finue of many, and/made inverce(sion for the
sransgreffours ,verf.rz, And that of Zachary,
Heislowly , riding upotaneAffe , and upma
Colt the foale of au Affe, Zach.9. verf. 9,

IIL. Inthe reign of Tiberius Cafar, f E=
SHS ow Saviour a Galilean began to
preach, the fonne (as was fippofed) of *fo=
fepb, declaring to the people of the Jewes;
that the Kingdome of God expected by
them, was now come,arid that him felfe was:
aKing, that isto fay, THE CHRIST:
Explaining the Law, choofing twelve Apex
Hes, and feventy Diftiples , after the number
of the ‘Princes ofthe Tribes, and feventy
Elders (according to the pattern of Moy/es)
to the Miniftrys reaching the way of falvati~
om by himfelfe and them; purging che Tem:
ple, doing great fighes » and fulfilling all’
thofe things which the Prophets. had tote-
told of Chrift to comes That this man, haw —
ted of the Pharifees; (whofe falfe doctrine
atid hypoctiticall fan@tity he had reproved)
and by their means 5 of the People accufed
of unlawfull fecking for che Kingdome,and
critcified , was the true CHRIST, and
King protiled by God 5 and fent from his
fther to renew the new Covenant berween
them arid God , both the Evangelifts doe


vatys


hapsrz. Religion. 19},
tity, life, do€trine, death, andrefurreGion),
aid by comparing’ the things which fie did,
with thofe which were foretold’ of him, all
Chriftians doe'confent to. ;

TV. Now from this, That CHRIST That the
was fent from: God his Father to make a Kingdom
Covenanr between him and thepeople, it is of God by
manifeft, char ehough Chrift were equall to the ncw
hisFather according to his nature,yet was he Covenant
inferior according to the Right of theKing- was not the
domsfor this office to {peak properly,wasnot Kingdome
that of aKing but of aVice-roy,fuch asdfay- of Chrift,
fs bis Government was 3 for the Kingdom 45 Chrift,
was not hisbur his FathersswhichCHRIST bus as God.
himfelfe fignified wher he was baptized as
a fabje&, and openly’ profeft, when he -
taught his Difciples to pray , Our Father,

Kingdome come, &c, "0 when hefaid, -
1 will not drink of the blood of the grape, smtill
that day when I fhall driak zt new with you in
the Kingdome of my Father, Mat,26. verf.29.
And Saint Pawl. As in Adam all die, foin
Chré&t fhall all be made alive 5 but every man in:
bis owen orders Chrift the firft fruits afrerward
they thatarec brifts, who beleeved in his coming;
Then cometh rhe end when be fhall have dlive-
ved up the Kingdom to God even his Father 8c.

1, Corr. verl. 22, 23, 24. Thefame nor-
wichftanding: is alfo called the Kingdome of
Chri: for both che Mother of the fonnes
of Zebedie petitioned Chrift , faying , Grant’
that thefe my too fonnes may. fit , the oneon thy
right band, the other on thy lefr , in thy King-
dome,Mat.20.ver{.z1. And the Theefon the
Crofs,Lord remember when me thou comes itte-
tothy Kingdom,Luke 23.verf.42. And Saint
Paul, For this know yee , that no-whormon-

Bog. Ser,


Ne ON ase Sn et


SS


betas I
294 Religion: Chap,
: ger > &c. fhall enter into the Kingdome of
God, and of Chrift, Ephef. 5. ver.5. And
elfewhere, I chargethee before God, and the
Lord Yefus Chrift, who fhall judge vhe quick
wnd dead at bis appearing, and bis Kingdome,
toc. 2 Tim.4.ver.1.And the Lord fhall deli
- wer me from cuery evill worke, and will pron
forve me uxto bis heavenly Kingdome, ver.18,
Nor is itto be marvelled at, that the fame
- Kingdome is attribured to them both,fince
both the Father, and the Son, are the fame
God, andthe new Covenant concerning
Gods Kingdome, is not propounded inthe
Name of the FA THER, bur in the
name of the FATHER, of the SON, and
of the HOLY-GHOST, as of one God,
V.. But the Kingdome of God, forre-
That the Ritution whereof CHRIST was fent
Kingdome f-om God hisEatlitr, tales not its begin-
of God by ning before his fecond comming, to wit,
the we fom the day of Judgement, when he fhall
COvANT Ee Come “in Majelty accompanied. with his
heavenly, Angels : Forit is promis’d the Apoftles,
andbegius th.Pin the Kingdome of God, they thall
from the Judge the twelve tribes of I/rael. Te which
day of have followed me in the regeneravion, when the
Tudgenem. some of man fhalt fix im the Throne of bis glo-
TY, ye alfo fhall fit upon. twelve Thrones judging
the treelve tribes of Ifracl, Mat. 19, ver. 2
which is not to be done till the day of judge:
ment; (CHRIST therefore is not yet in
the throne of his Majefty, nor is that rime
when CHRIST was converfant herein
the world call’d a Kingdome,but a regeterie
tion, that is to fay a renovation, or reftituy
tion of the Kingdome of God,and a calling
ofthem who were hereafter co be receiv'd
ig “into


~Chap.17. = -Rehigion.
into his Kingdome 3 And whereit is {aid,
When the Son of man fhall come in bis glory,
and all the holy Angels with him, then {hall be
“fe uponthe throne of bis glory, and: before hin.
sfhalt- be gathered all ‘Nations, and he fhall fe~
“parate them one'from another,asa Shepheard:di-
~widerb his Sheep from the Goates; Mate25.
ver. 31, We may manifeftly gathers: thar
there will be no locall {eparation of Gods
_ Subje&s from his Enemies , but that they
‘hall live mixetogether untill€ HRI. STS
fecond comming 5 whichis alfo: confirm’d
by the compatifon’of ‘the Kingdome of
“heaven, with wheat mingled with Darzcll,
and with a net containing all: forts of fith.:
‘But a multitude of men, Enemies and
‘Subye&s, living’ promifcuoufly together,
‘cannot properly be term’d' a Kingdome.
‘Befides, the Apoftles, when they askt our
aviour, Whether ‘he would at that -time
when he afcended into heaven, reftore the
Kingdome unto Tfrael ? did areiceeks
thatthey then, when CH'R1 ST. alcen-
dedsthought the Kingdome of God not
to be yer come. Farthermore, the words
of CHRIST, My Kingdome'is not of
this world; And,T will xordrike, rc, villthe
Kingdome of God cone: And; God hath not
fent bis Son into the World,to judge the World,
bur char the World through bim might be fav'd.
And, If any man beare not my words, and
Reepe.them, Ljidge him’ wuts for 1 came not
| 0 judge the World, bin to fave he World,


295


And; Mant whomade me'd jidge: or divider


bermeeneyon > And the very Appellation of:
the Kingdome of Heaven’ teftifies as much,
The fame thing is! gathered ourvof the


P's wo-ds.


296


The go~


Religie Chaagl,


words of the Prophet fcrcmiah, peaking of
she Kingdome of Gol by the ae
nant, They fall teach xo more every man hig
Neighbour, faying, Kuow.the Lord, for they

L all know me from: aa Re
greateft of them, faith heLord, Jev.3.t.v.34,
which cannot be underftood of a King-
dome in this World. The. Kingdome of
God therefore, for the reftoring whereof
CHRIST came into the world, of which
the Prophets did Praphefie, and. of which.
praying wee fay , Thy Kingdome come,


* Cif it muft have SubjeGs locally. feparated.


from Enemies, if judicature,if Majetty, ace
cording as hath beene foretold,) thal be-
gin ftom that time, wherein God fhall {e-
parate the Sheep from the Goats, wherein,
the Apoftles thall judge the cwelve Tribes
of Ifrael; wherein CH RIS T shall come
in Majefty,ani glory 3 wherein, laftly, all
men fhall fo know God, that they fhall not
need to be taught, chat is to fay, at
CHRIST his fecond comming. or
the day of Judgement 5 But if the King.
dome of God were now already fase
no reafon could be rendered why CHRIST:
having compleated the work for which he
wasfent, fhould come againe, or, why we
fhould pray , Thy Kingdome come,


VI. Now, although the Kingdome of


| vernment God by CHRIST to be cltablite
| of Chriflin with a wew Covenam, were Heavenly, we


t


this world muft not therefore thinke,. that they, who
was nota. beleeving in CHR1IS.T would make


_ Soveraign- that Covenant, were not fo'to be govern'’d
here on the Earth too, as that they (hould,


ty, but
Gowufell, or perfevere in their faith, ‘and obedience


pror


|


ap. 17% Religions — - | apRe

romfs’d by that Covenant. For in vaine @ govert-
fad the Kingdome of heaven-beenepro- ment by
mis’d, if we were not to have been led into:way of do-
its but none can be led, buethofe who are Grinc, an d
direGted in the way. Moyfes, when he had per/yafion
inftitused the Prieffly Kingdome:, himfelfe
though he were no Prieft, yer rul’d, and.
conduéted the People all the time of their
Peregiination untill their entrance into the
promis’d Land; Inthe fame manner is it
ow Saviours office (whom God in this
thing would have like unto Moyfes) as he

was {ent from his Father , fo to governe:

the future Subjets of his heavenly King-
dome in this life , thar they might attaine

to, and enter into thar, although the King-,

dome were not properly his,but his Fathers.

Bur the government whereby CH RIST

sules the faithtull ones in this life ; ig not

properly a’ Kingdome, or Dominio, bur a:

Paftoralt charge, ox the Right of teaching that

isto fay, God the farher gave him nora

power to judge of Meum and Tuum as he

doth to the Kingsof the Earth nor a Co-

ercive power, nor legi/lative; but of thewing

to the world, and teaching them the way, and
knowledge of Salvation, that is to fay, of
Preaching, and declaring what they were -

todoe, who would enter into the King-

dome of Heaven, Thar CHRIST had

recciv’d no power from his farber ro judge
“in Queflions of dfewm and Tune, that is

to fay, in all Queftions of Right among

‘thofe who beleey’d not, thefe words above

cited doe fufficiently declare : Man, who

made me a judge, or divider betweene you >

Anditis confirm’d by réeafon; for (eeing

‘ r CHRIST


298


bee |
Religion, Chap.27;
CHRIST was feat to make @ Covenane .
between God and men, and no man isob-
lig’d to” performe obedience before the
Contra& be made, if he fhould have judg’d
of Queftions of Right, no man had been
tyed to obey his fentence. But that the dif.
cerning of Right was not committed to
CHRIST in this world, neither au
mong the faithfull, nor among infidels, is
apparentin this, that that Right without
all controverfie belongs to Princes as long
as itis not by God himfelfe derogated from
their authority 3 Buc iris not derogated be
fore the day of Judgement, as appeares by
the words of Saint Paul, {peaking of the
day of Judgement, Then commeth the end
when be fall have delivered up. theKingdome
+0 God even the Father, when be hall have put
downeallrule, and all authority, and powit, ;
x Cory 15. ver. 24. Secondly, the words of
our Sauiour reproving Fames , and ohn,
when they had faid , VFils thou that we call
for Fyer from Heaven, thar it may confume
‘them (namely the Samaritans, who had de=
nyed to receivehim going up to ferns
falem)and replying , The Sou of Manis
nor come to deftroy foulcs, but t0 fave them ;
And thofe words, Bebold I fexd you as Sheep
among VVolués 5. Shake off the duff of your
Eeet, and the like 3 And thofe words , God
feut. not bis Son into the world, 20 judge the
world, but that the morld. through him might
befav’d 5. and thofe, If any man. beare my
words, and keep chem not, I judge him not, for
I canenorto judge the world, tgs, doe all
thew, that he had no power given him, to
condemne or punith. any man, We reade
) ~ indeed.


Chap. 17. Religion. 299
indeed that the Father judgeth no Man, bur
hash committed alt judgement’ to the Son, but
fince that both may, and muft be under=
ftood of the day of future judgement, it
doth not at all repugne what’ hath -beene ’
fayed before. Laftly, that he was not fent
to make newLawes,and that therefore by hig
Office , and miffion, he was no Legifla-
tour properly fo called , nor Moyfes nei-
ther, but a bringer and Pubiifher of his
Fathers Lawes, Cor God ‘only, and nei-
ther Mayfes, nor CHRIST, was a
King by Covenant) is collected hence,that
he fayed, I came not to deftroy (to wit the
Lawes before given from God by Moyfés,’
which he prefently interprets) but to fulffilt 5
And, He that fhall break one of the leaft of

 thefe Commandements, and fhall teach men fo,
he foal be called leaft in the Kingdome of
Heaven, CHRIST therefore had nor
a Royall, or Soverdigné power committed
to him from-his Father in this world, but
confiliary , and do@rinall onely ; which
himfelfe fignifies, as well then when he
calls his Apoftles, ‘nor Hunters, but Fifth!
ers of men ; as when Re compares the
Kingdome of God'toa graine of muftard
feed, and toa little Leaven hid in meale.

VII. God promis’d unto Abraham whar the
firft, a numerous feed, the pofleffion of the Promifes
Land of Canaan, and a blefling upon all of the new
Nations'in his feed,on this Condition, that Covenant
he,and his feed fhould ferve him ; néxt un- are on both
to the feed of Abrabam| according to thé parts,
fleth, a Prieftly Kingdome , a Governmient

’ moft free, in which they were to be Sub=
je& to no humage' power, ‘on this Con=


ditions


ene a TY
Religion, = Chapire,
dition, that they fhould ferve the God of —
Abraham on that fathion which Moyfes
fhould teach, Laftly, both to them, andto
all Nations, a heavenly, and cternall Kino.
dome , on Condition that they th
Serve the God of Abraham, on that man-
ner which Chrift fhould teach. For by the:
new, that isto fay, the Chriftian Covenant,
it’s covenanted on mens part, to fervethe
God. of eAbrabam , on shat manner which
JESUS fhould teaeb : On Gods pare,
40 pardon their finnes, and bring them into bis
selejtiall Kingdome. We have already {po~
ken of the quality of the heavenly King~
dome above in the ¥. Article; but it 4s
ufually call’d, fometimes ‘the Kingdome of
Heaven, fometimes the King dome of Glory,
fometimes the life Eternall, What’s required
on mens part, namely to ferve God a§
CHRIST fhould teach, containes two
things , Obedieuce 10 be performed to Gud,
(for this is to ferve God) and Faith in
JESUS, to wit, That we beleeve JE--
SUS TO BE THAT CHRIST
who was promis’d by God: for that only is
the caule why his Doétrine is ta be follows
ed, rather then any others: Nowih holy
Scriptures, Repentance is often putin ftead:
of Obedieuce, becaufe Chrift-teacherh every
where, that with God the Will is taken for
the deed ; but Repentauce is an infallible
soso » ign of an obedient mind. Thele thiags bee
90) yo), img underftood, iz will moft evidenclyap-
i .» Peat out of many places of (acted Scriptures.
thar thofe are the Conditions of the Chri-
ian Covenant which we have nam'd,to wit, |
giving remilfion of fins, and eteraall life
on


aPiT 7. Religion.
on part, and Repenting, and Belee-
vinginJESUS CHRIS T,on Mens
art. Firft, the words, The Kingdom of God
arhand : Repent yeeand beleeve the Gofpell
Mark t.r5. contain the whole Covenant +
In like manner thole, Thy # is writtce, and
thus it behoved Chrift to.fuffer , and to rife
from the. dead the third day 3 and that repen=
tances and remifsion’ of finnes fhould be prea-
shed in bis Name among. all Nations , Gegine
ing at ferufalem, Luke 24. verf. 46,47. And
thofe, Repent and be converted’, that your fins
inay be blotted out, when the times of refrefhing
fall come, c:\ ABs 3. verf. v9. And {ome-
times one part is exprefly propounded, and
the other.underftood , as here, He that belee-
ueth in the Sonne, hath everlafting lifes He thar
beleeveth not the Sonuc, fhall not fee Life, bur the
wrath of Godiabideth on bim, Lohn 3.verl. 36.
Where Faith is. expréfty Repentance not men>
tioned; andin CH RI5 TS preaching;
Repent, for the Kingdome of heaven is at hand,
Mat.4.17. Where Repentance is expreft,Faish
is underftood. But the parts of this ncw Con-
trad are moft manifeftly ,.and formally fee
down there, where avcertain Ruler bars
giining as it were for theKingdonvof God;
askerh our Saviour, Good Majter, what {halt
E-doe to inherit cteruall life, Luke 18. v. 18.
Bur CHRIST fitit \propounds one
part of the price , namely obfervation
of the Commandements ,: or obedience,
which when he anfwered that -he: fiad kepr,
he adjoynes ithe other, faying , \Tet Lackeft.
thou one things Sell all shat thou Lajt , and di
fribute.to the poor , and thou (hale have Trea=
fine in Heaven,and cone, follow mev.2%. This


wag, -


308


302 Religion, Chapa,
was matter of Faith. He therefore Not gi-
ving fufficient credit to CHRIS T, and
his heavenly Treafures , went away forrowe'
full. The :fame, Covenant is contained.in
thefe words : Heethat beleeveth . and i hip
tized, fall be(aved; be shat beleeverh uot, Shalt
be damned, Mark 16. veh, 155 16, Where
Faith is expreft, Repentance is fappofed ‘in
thofe that are baptized 3-and in thefe words,
Exeepta man be born again of veateriy, and the
Holy Ghost, he vqunor. enter intothe Kiigdome
of Heaven, Tohn 3y verf. 5, Where: 20! be born
of mater, is the fame. with regeneration that
is cofay,ConveriontoC H RIS T:Now
that Baptifme is required in thetwo places
Cited juft before, and. in divers others > We
muft:underftand', that whe Circuracifion
was tothe old Gournans , that ‘Baptifme is to
thetiew: Seeing therefore ‘that was not of
the Effence;. bur {érved fot a menioriall of
the old Covenant » asa Céremony ot figne
(and. was omitted in the Wilderneffe) in
like manner this alforis ufed, not as:pertain-
ing to the Effence, but in memory, and for
ahgnes of the: New: (ovenarit which wee
make withGod 3 and provided» the will be
Hot wanting). the Aé through» neceftity
may be omitted’; bur ‘Repentance and Faiths.
which afe.of the Effence of the Covenantare

There are alwayes required. sd
noLawes «MIT. Inthe Kingdome of God aftet
added by this life-there will be no Lawesspattly\ibes
Chrift,be- caule thetesis no rdome:for Lawes’ 3» where
fide the in. there is-sione for Ginnes artly:becauhiLaws
Slitution of were givenus ideas bese directus in
the Sacra- Heaven, buc-unto Heaven. Lee us now there
mets. fore enquire what Laws CHRIS T) —
; if


“hap.17. Religion, 5 303
blithe not himfelfe’, for he would not take —
| upon him any Legiflative authority, as bath
been declared above in the fixth Article,
but) propounded to us for his Fathers. Wee
haye a place in Scripture,where he contraéts
all the Lawes of God publithe till that times -
into two Preceps , Thou fhalt love the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, with allthy foul,
and with all thy minde, this is the greateft, and
fire Commandement, eAnd the fecond ts like
wuto it; Thou {halt love thy Neighbour as thy
fife. Ow thefe two Commandements hangs all
the Lav, and the Prophets, Mat. 22. verf. 37,
38,39,40. The firft of thefe was given be-
fore by “Aoyfes in the fame words, Deut, 6.
verf.s. And the fecond even before Moyfesy
for ic is the naturall Law , ‘having its begin-
ing with rational nature it felfe 3 and both
together is the fumme of all Lawes : forall
the Lawes of divine naturallworfhip, are
contained in thee words, how fhalt love
God 3 and all the Lawes of divine worfhip.
due by the old Coveuant , in thefe words,
Thou fhale love thy God , thar is to fay God,
as being the peculiar King of Abrabam, and
his feed; andall the Lawes natural, and ci- ;
_ vill, in thefe words, Thou fhalt love thy |
Neighbour as thy fees for he that loves |

God and his neighbour , hath a mindeto |

obey all Lawes , both divine, and humane,

But God requires no more then a minde to

obey. Wee have andther place , where

CHRIST interprets the Lawes, name-

ly, the fifth , fixth, and feventh entire
; a of Saint Masthewes Golpell. But
all thofe Lawes are fet down, either inthe
Decalogue, or in the morall Law , ox arc con-

tained


+ Bea Religion. Chapytg.
tained inthe faith of Abrabem, as that Law


of not purting away a wife is contained in)
the fai of ‘alvdeen ? for thar: fame, Two
fail. be: one flefh , was not. delivered either
by CHRIS T fick, or by Mopfes 5 bur


by eAbrabam ,. who frit publithe the Crea
tion of the world. The Lawes therefore


which CHRIST contraéts in one


place, and: explaincs in another , arenog.
ther chert thofe to witch. all Morrall men


are obliged ,. who. acknowledge the God of
Abrabam, thefe , we read not of
Law given by CHRT ST’, befide the
inftitution of the Sacraments of Baptifne,
and the Ewbariff,
 Thatibefe 1X. Wha may be foid chen of thefe
aad the like kinde of Precepts, Repeut, Be Baptized, Keep:
forms, Re- the Commandeménts , Beleeve the Gofpell,


pent, be Come unto me,, Stil all that thou baft , giver


—bapii cd, the poor, follow me, and rhe like? We mutt fay
| keep . that they are not Lawes » buta calling of us


Gomman- to the faith; {ach as is that of Ifa Come,


dements, — buy wine, and milk without monie , aud ywith=
are not out Price, Uaiss, verh 1. either if they
Laws. come not , doe they therefore finne agrinft
any Law, but againit prudence onely 3 nei-


ther fhall their infidelity be punifht,but their


former fines, Wherefore Saint Foba faich


2 of the unbeleever, The wrath of God abides


ow bims he faith not 5 The wrath of God shalt
come upon him ; And, He that beleeveth not, is
already judged ; he faith nor, fhall be judged,


but is already judged, Nay it cannot be well:


Conceived , that yemifsion of finnes fhould.


bea benefit arifing from faith , unlefle we:


underftand alfo onthe other fide, thar the _


punithment of finnes isan hurt proceeding
* from infidelity, X, From.


pity. Religie, = GS


maybe known by Right to belong to the
civer, Invader, or Poffeffour, we muft ne=
ifarily underftamd chat each fingle fubje&
not only with unbeleevers , among whom
CHRIST himfelfe denyed himfelfe to
be a judge and diftvibuter, bur even with
Chriftians) muft take thofe rules ‘from his
City,that is to f2y,from that Man,or Coun-
ll, which hath: the fupreme power 3. Ic fol-
Hires aren thofe seta Thou
nor kills Thoxt {halt nor commit adulsery,
Thou foals nor fteale, Honour thy Father and
Morber, nothing eife was commanded, but
thar Subjeéts., and Citizens, fhould abfos
lately obey their Princes in all queftiong
concerning eum to Tuum , their own and’.
hers Rights for by that Precept Thou fhalt \
we kill, all flaughter is not prohibited ; for
be ttiat faid , Thow fhalt nor kill , faidalfo,
Whofoever deh work upon the Sabbath , fhalt
leput to death , Exod 35. ver. 2. No, nor
lyetall daughter the caufe not being heard;
for he faid Slay every man hisBrother,and every
man his Companion, and overy man bis Neigh=
bowr,Bx0.3 2.v.27.And there fell of thePeo-
pleabout three thoufand men, v.28.Nor yet
il laughter of an innocent PerfonsterZephte
vowed , Whofoever cometh forth , Sc. I will
ifer bim up for @ burn offering _
ord;


=


306


’ Lord y Judea. ver. 31. and his vow.


Religion ;
accepted of God. What then is forbidden?
Onely this: that no man kill another, who
hath not 4 Right to kill him , that is to fay,
that no man kill ,-unleffe it belong to, him
to doe fo. The Law of CHRIS
therefore: coficerning killing:, and confe
quently all manner of hurt'done toanyman,
and what penalties ate to be fet, commands
us to obey the City only, Jn like manner,
by that Precept, Thou foale nor commit adule
tery,all manner of Copulation is not forbids
den, but only that of lying with another mays
wife, but the judgment which is anothe:
mans wife, belongs to the City , and is to
be determined bythe rules which the City
prefcribes: This precept. therefore com
mands both male and female to keep that
faith intire which they have mutually: i
ven, according ‘to the ftatutes of the Ci
So alfo by the precept, Zhou foatt noe fea, al,
manner of invafion , of fecret {{urreptionis
not forbidden, but of another mans only:
The fubjeG& therefore is commanded this |
only , that he invade not, nor take away
ought which che City prohibits to be invas |
ded ot taken away ; and univerfally notto
call any thing murder, adultery pi but
what is done contrary to the civill Lawes.
Laftly, feeing CHRIST hath com
manded us to hononr our Parents, and hath |
not prefcribed, wich what Rites , what ape
pellations , and-what manner of obedienct !
they are to be honoured sit is to be fuppoled
that they are to be honoured with the will |
indeed, and inwardly;- as Kin gs and Lords
over their Children, but outwardly, not ii
yon


hap. 17. Religion. 307
nd the Cities permiffion, which fhall af-
n toeveryman (as all things elfe, fo allo)
‘honour ; But fince the nature of juftice
ofifts in this, that every Man have his
wn given him, its mauifeft; that it alfo be-
ngs to a Chriftian City to determinjwhat
is juftice, what injuftice or a finne again it
juftices Now what belongs toa City , that
muft be judg’d to belong to him or them

ho have the Soveraigne power of the
City. ¢
j x I. Moreover , becaufe our Saviour 7 belongs
hath not thewed SubjeGs any other Lawes fo civill
forthe government of a City beffde thofe authority
ofnature , that isto fay, befde the Com- to define
mand of obedience,no Subje& can private- what cone
lydetetmine who is a publique friend, who dyces to she

enemy, when Warre, when Peace ,when peace and

Truce is to be made, nor yet what Subjects, fafcty of
what authority, and of what men, are com- the City.
‘modious, or prejudiciall to the fafety of the
‘Common-weale. Thefe , and all Tike mat- ©
‘ters therefore are to be learned , if need be,
‘from the City, thatis to fay, from the So-
‘feraign powers, :

‘X I, Furthermore, all thefe things, to bel
build Caftles, Houfes, Tempies 5 to move, It h Kn
carry, take away mighty weights 3 to fend ? ee
ecurely over Scas3 to contriye engines, fer- patter
ving for all manner of ufes 5 to be well ac- #9 S#4g¢ ed
“guainted with the face of the whole world , (bem 10
the Courfes of the Starres, the feafons of the pi 2 2) ;
“yeate , the accounts of the times, and the 74 “a d
Mature of all things; to\underftand perfeGly eo :
all natural, and. civill Rights, ; ‘and all ™ me
"Manner of ‘of Sciences, which (comprehens ake ss
‘dedunder the Title of Philofophy) ‘are ne- "#*t


ccffary


IE ee a ee ee es


308


: _“Werfe conceptions , for’ the figaification


~ diftribusion ‘of right, to be determin’d, the


. mhen’by reafoning doe fearch out fuch kind


Religion: |
ceffary partlyto live , partly to live well;
fay, the wndedtondins ot thefe ( re Hy
CHRI8T hath not delivered it) isto
be learnt from reafoning , that is tofay by
making neceflary confequences baving
firft raken the ‘beginning ‘from experience
uc mens reafonings are fometimes right,
fometimes wrong , and confequently that
‘which is concluded, and held for a truth, is
fometimes truth , fometimes errour ; now,
¢xrours even about thefe Philofophicall
points doe fometimes publique burt, and
‘give occafions of great {editions, and inju.
vies ; It‘is needfull therefore , as oft as any
controverfie arifech in thefe matters contra
ry to-publique good , and common Peace,
‘that there be {ome body to judge ofthe rea-
foning, thar isto fay, whether that which is
inferred, be rightly inferred or not, that {fo
the controverfie may beended; But there
are norules given by CHRIST tothis
purpofe , neither .came he into the world to
teach Logick. It remaines therefore that the
Tudges of fuch controyerfies be the fame
with thofe whom God by nature had infti-
tuted before, namely thofe who in each City
are conftituted by the ‘Soyeraign. More-
over, if a controverfie be raifed of the ac-
curate and proper fignification ¢ i.¢. ) the
definition of thofe names ox appellations
which are commonly us’d, info muchasit |
is needfull for the peace of the City, or the:


determination will! belding to the Citys for
of definitions in sheit cbfevation of di-


whereof,


Chap.17. Religion, 309

whereof, ithofe ‘appellations were us’d at ;

divers times, and for divers caufes; but

the decilion of the queftion whether a.man

doe reafon rightly, ibelongs to the ‘City.

For Example. Ifa woman biing fortha

‘Ohild of an unwonted fhape, and the Law

forbid to-kill aman, the queftionis, whe-

ther the Childe’be aman. Tvis demanded

therefore what a manis, No man doubts,

burthe Ciy thall judgeie, and that.with-

outtaking an account of #riffotles defini-

‘tion, that man isa rationall Creature. And

thele things (namely ‘Right, "Politie, and

natural Sciences) are Subjeets concerning

which CH RIT denies that ic belongs

‘to his Office to give afiy Prarcepts 5 or

teach any thing, ‘befideithis onely , thatin

all Controverties ‘about them, every fingle

Subje& thould obey-the\ Lawes, and-deter-

‘minations ‘of his City. ‘Yet mutt we re-

member thts, that the fame Chrift as God

could not onely have taught, but alfo com .

manded what he would. Ttibelongs ©
XIII. The fumme of our Saviours to the Office

Office was to teach the way, and all the of Chrift 10

meanes of Salvation, and zternall life ; but teach mora-

Tufticeand civill obedicuce, and obfervation lity,notasa

of all the natural Lawes is one of the fpeculation,

“mteanes to Salvation ; now thefe may be but asa
taught two wayes; one, as'Theorems'by the Law; to \-

' Way of natural reafon, ‘by drawing Right forgive fins;
and the natural Lawes'from‘humane Prin- and to teach
ciples, and contra&s 3 and this’ Do@eine all things

|. thus deliver’d is fubje@ to the cenfure-of whereo

__ tivill powers : "The other, as Lawes yby di- there is uo
~-vine Mehortiy in ‘thewing the will of'God (cience pro.
‘to be fach 5 and :thus-to ‘teach, ape perly fo ~

| : # onely call’d,


(310 Religion. Chap,r-
onely tohim to whom the Will of Godis
pe yr om knowne, that is to fay, to
Ghrift. Secondly, it belong’d to the Office
of Gbriftro forgive {ennes to the Penitent,.
for that was neceffary for the’ Salvation of
menwho had already finn’d:5 ueither could
it be done by any other 5 for remiffion of
finnes followes not Repentance naturally,
(asa Debt) bucit depends (asa free gift)
on the will of God fupernaturally to be re-
veal’d. Thirdly, it ot s to the Office of
Chrift to teach all thofe Commandements
of God, whether concerning his worhhip,
or thofe points of faith which cannot beun-
derftood by naturall reafon, but onely by
revelation, of which nature are thofe that
be was the (brift 3 that bis Kingdome was
not terrcftriall, but celeftiall ; that rbere are Ve
wards, and punifoments after this life; thar
the foule is tmmortall ; thar there fhould be
fuch , and fo. many Sacraments , and the

. likes. ;
A diftin- XIV. From what hath beene fayed in
tion of »= the foregoing Chapter, itis not hard to di-
things tem- ftinguifh betweene. things Spirituall, and
porall from Temporall,for fince by Spirituall,chofe things
(pirituall,, ate underftood; which have their founda-
~ tion on the authority, and Office of
CHRIST, andunlefle CHRIS T had
taught them, could not have beene known,
, andvall other things are temporal, it fol--
lowes, that the definition, and determina
tion of whats juft, and unjajt, the cognt-
zance.of all controverfies about the meanes
of Peace, and publique defence, and the Ex-~
amiuation of doétiines, and books in all —
manner of rasionall (ciewce, depends wee


hapi 17. Religion.
mporall Right, but thofe which are my/feries
fait, depending on CHRIT his word,
ee authority onely , their judgements be-
long to fpirtenall Right's Bat itis reafons
jnquiftion,and pertaines to temporal Right
to define what is #pirituall, and what tem~-


that diftinGion 5. For although Saint Pant
in many places diftinguifh betweene sfiri-
mall things, and caraall things , and calls
thofe things Siriuall , which are of the
[pirit, to wit, the word of wifdome , the word
of knowledge , faith, the gift of bealing the


| of tongues, inverpretation of tongues, Rom.8.
: i Cora 2.8, 9, All Tabathteally in{pi-
red by the Holy Ghoft,and fuch as the esrnalt
man underftands not, but he only who bath
known the’mind of CHRIS T,2.Cor.3.
.14;15,16,And thofe things carnall which be-
long to worldlyWealth,Rom.1 5.27,And the
men ¢aixall men , Cor. 3, verf. 1, 25 36 yet
hath he not defined , nor given us any rules
“whereby we may know what proceeds from
naturall reafon, what’ from: fupernaturall
in{piration. :

X V. Seeing therefore it is plain that our
Saviour hath committed to, or rather not
taken away from Princes , aud thofe who in
eachCity have obtained theSoveraignty, the
fupreme'authoricy of judging & decermine-
ing al maniiet of cOtroverfies about temporal
matters, we miuft: fee henceforth to whom
he hath lefethe {ame authority in ‘matters
[picituall, Which becaufe it cannot bee
known , except it be out of the word of God,
and the Tradition of the Church, we mult en~

toes < guire


porall, becaufe our Saviour hath not made”


working of miracles , Prophefie , divers kindes*


Religion Chap.r7,-
quire in the.next place, what the word of God.
is\, what toimerpren it, what a (burch. iss,
and what the will and command, of the Church,
To omis that thermord. of God is inScripture
taken fometimes for the Sonne of God. , itis
edu anne eS Pa Be 3
perly,for thar which God hath fpokea; Thus
whatfoever God fpake unto eAbrabam., the
PBarriarchs., Mofesy and. the Prophets» our
Saviour, to his Difciples.s, or any others ,. is,
the word.of God. Secondly., whatfoeyer hath, -
been uttered, by men on the motion, or,
by.Command, of the Holy, Ghoftsin which,
fenfe we.acknowledge: the: Scriptures to be.
the word of God, Thirdly. in. the, New
Teftamens, indeed the, werd’ of Ged molt
frequently, fignifies the DoGrine, of the:
Golpell., ox, the word. concerning. God, or
the. word “of. the; Kingdome. of God. by.
CHRIST «as, where, it is. faid> than _
CHRIST. preach’s. thetGofpell of the
Kingdome,Mut.g. verf, 23. Where.the Apo-
Siles ave faid,to preach the word. of God Acts
13. verf.46,Where the mord of God. is called,
the word of life, A&s.5, verf.20,.Thermord,
of theGofpell, A &s 15. verf. 7. The word of
faith, Rom. 10, verl. 8, The word oftrub,
thae istofay, (adding an. interpretation)
Th: Gofpel. of falvation, Eph. t, 13, And
where itis called. the word of the Apofiless,
For Saint Paullayes, If any.man obcy not our
wordt. 2. Thefl.3¢ verf, 14. which places:
cannot be orherwife meant then of, the, do-
arine Evangelicall. In like manner where
the word of God is faid te be fowens tobi -
creafe, and to.bemulziplicd, AGS. r2verl24e
and Chap. 13. veil. 49, iteis very hardto

cOmcelye


Chaps17  —- Religion, ects
_ctive thisto be fpoken of the voyee of Goll.

"or of his Apoftles ; butof iit, sett ca

fie. And! imthis third-acception is all that

dodtrine of the: Chriftian faith: which at this

| day is preachtint Pulpits-,.and contained ia

the books of divines; che word of God:

+ XVI. Now the’ facred’ Seriptare is Allehings
intirely the word: of God in this fecond ac» contained
ception’ s.as* being: that’ which we acknow- in Scrip-
boxe to: be:in(pited from Gods and inna ture, belong
merable places of it, in the firft  andifeeing not to the
the greatef pare of it is converfant cither Canon of
in the prediGion of the Kingdome’ of: Hea= chrifiian
vet, or in hs EE eo the iitcat- faith,
tation of CHRIST, or in. Evangeli~

zation’, andexplication after ,» Thefacied
Scripture: is allo the: word! of God, and
therefore the Catonand Ruleofall Bucs ay
gelical. Dodtrine; in thisthird eeibeasiahy |
where-the word of God is taken for the word:

concerning God, thatiis to fay; forthe Gofpel.

But becaufe inthe fame Scriptures we read

many things P oliticall , Hiftcricall, Moral,

Phyficall, and: others: which nothing at all
concermthe Ay/teyées of our faith, thofe pla~

ces although they containtruedoGrine,and!

are the: Canon oft fuch kind of doétrines,

yet camthey not’ bethe Canon’ of the My~

tteries of Chiiftian. Religion:

XV1Te And truly’ it is: novethe dead the word
Voyee, or letter of the word of Gol, which is of g tarpfull
the Canon of Chriftian do@rine , but a Interpreter

tue and genuine determination; For the of Scrip.
inde is not governed by Scripeures,ualeffe sures, is
they be underftood. There’ isineed:there- she word
fore of an Interpreter to make the Scrip- of Gods
tures Canon’, and. hence follewes one of © are
z Q2 thefe


*3I4r


Religion. Chapay:


. thefe ewo things, char either the word of the
ter is the word of God, or that the


Tho aurbo-
rity of in-
terpreting
Scriptures,


with vat
of determi-
ning con-
sroverfics


of faith.


Pena}: ‘Religion,


“ftanid ‘the language wherein’ they {peak.


Neither is every one an authentique Inter-


preter of Scriptures, who writes Comments
on them: For men mayerre, they may
alfo either bend them to ferve their owa


| ambition, or even refifting, drawthem into


bondage by: their foreftallings 5 whence it


will follow that.an erroneous fentence'mult °


beheld for the word of God. But although
this could not happen ,.yet as foon as thele
Commentators are departed , their Com-
mentaries will need explications , and in


‘procefle of time, thofe explications, expofi-


tions 5 thole, expofitions new'Commenta-
ties without any end: fo as there cannotin
any written Interprétation whatfoeve bea
Cifion, ot Rule of Chriftian doGtrine,


_ whereby the. Controverfies of Religion


may be determined. Irremains’, that chere
muft -bee fome Canonicall) Incerpreter


~ whofe legitimate Office it is to end Con=
- “troverfies begun, by explaining the word of


‘God in the judgements shem(clves , and
whofe authority therefore mult be no lefle.
obeyed, then theirs who firlt recommended
the Scripture it felfe to us for a’ Canon of
faiths and rhat one, and the fame Perion be


gn Interpreter of Scripture, and a fupreme


fudge of all manner of dottrines.


X.1X. Whar concerns the word Ectle«. son. fiz


fiz, or Church, originally it fignifies the
fame thing that Concio , ora congregation:
does ins Latins: even 28 Ecclfiaftes, ot
Saket. the fame that concionator;


or Preacher;that is to fay,He who {peaks to


the Congregation: In which fenfe wee
read in the Aas of the Apoftles of.a


>


Ni; cations
0; it |


x


Bi nadia Q3 Church:


"Church confufed 5 and of a Lawful Church,
_ Ads tg. verl. 32,39. That  -takenfora


Concourfe.of people meeting inway-of m-
mult 5 this , a convocated. ‘Aflembiy.
But in ‘holy writ bya €boreb of Chriftiaus,
is (ometimes underftood the Aflembly, and
fometimes the Chriftians themfelves, ale
though not actually aflembled , if they be
permitted to enterinto the Congregation,
and to communicate with them. For exam-
ple. Tell it 10 the Ghurch., Mat. 18.verfst 7,
ds meant .of a Church aftembled; forrother-
wileitisimpoflible to.tell anything to the
Church c: Buc Hee laid wafte, she Church,
eAds 8. ver{. 3.is underktood of a Ghurch


not affembled. Somerimes aChurcbisiaken -


for thofe who are baptized , or for thetpro
feflors of the Chuiftian faith , whethershey
be Chriftians inwardly , or feignedly , as
when we reade of fomewhat {aid oriwnit--
en tothe Ghurch , or {aid or decreed y or
done by.the Church 5 fométimes forthe Bled
onely,as when it iscalled holy 5° and svisbout
blemfh, Ephef. 5. verf. 27. Burthekbee,
as they are militant , arenot properly-called


~ aChurch3 forthey know not bow toaflem-


bles»bur they are a future Church, namely in


that day when. fever’d from whe repror


bate, they ¢hall bee triumphant. Againe
a Church may bee fometimes taken (for
all Chriftians colle@ively , ) as when
ber yo is mag the head of 2 fon
and the head of his 2

5. verf, 23. Colof. Doge ag fometimes
for its parts’, asthe Ghurch of Epbe-
fa, The Church which is inthis boufe , the fe


ven Churober, ogc, Laftly, aChurch asicis”-
talon


_


Chap.17. Religion. 317
taken fora Cotnpany aéually affemnbleu, 3
aceotding to the divers ends ‘of their met-

ing, Ggnifies fometimes thofe Wwhovare'met “
together 'to'deliberate, and judge, in which

fenfeittis alfo called‘a ‘Couneell, & a Synod;
fomerimncs ‘thofe'who meet togecher ‘tate
houfe of prayee toworlliip Gad’, in Which
fignification it is'taken in'the’ 1 Cor, 14.

verl. 4, '54'23. 28, &e, ’


| 9 XK. Now a Church which ‘hath ‘perfo- whar «
|


, wi Rights, and proper ations attribured to Church is
ir, and/of which that fame matt neceffarily 19 whom
be’ waderftood > Tell it “to “the church}, we attri-
and, he ‘hat obeys nov the chnrch, and all bute
fuch lilte Fouttiés of fpeech, is tobe ‘defin’d Rights,
fo, as by that word’ may-be-underftood , A adions,and
Malticude ofmen ‘who have made ’a few the like ape

nant\with God in Chtift, (that isto pelfa:ions. —
fay, a multitude of them who ‘have takén proper toa
upon them’ the Sacrament’ of Baptifine) Perfom
which multitude, may doth lawfully ‘be
eal’ a ‘by fome one into one place,
and he fo calling them, are boundto be | a |
prefent either ‘in Perfon; ‘or by others. For
a'multitude of men, if they ‘cannot meet oH
in affem bly, when need requires, i$ not to j
be call’d 2 Per/on ; Bor'a Church’ can nei-
ther [peak nor difcerae; nor heare, bur ’as
itis acongrégation. Whatfoever is fpoken
by particular men, (to wit, as many opiai-
ons alrnoft as ‘teads) that’s the {peech of
ote man; not of ‘the (burth y farthermore, j
ifan atehably be" 3 “and it Be unlaw- 2a
full, it'fhall be don idered'as niall. Not any
one of thiefe therefore who ate prefent in a

’ tumule (hall be tyed tothe decree ofthevveft,

batipecially i he difffent 5 and therefore
» ig Q4 neither


Religion...  Chap.17;


neither can fuch a (burch make any decree 5
for thena multitude is fayd to decreeifome~
qwhat, when every man is oblig’d by the
decree of the major part. We muft there~
fore grant to the definition of a. Church (to.
whith we attribute things belonging to 4 ‘Per.
{o) not onely = pallsbiiey of affembling,

ut alfo of doing it lawfully. Befides, al-
though there befome oné who may lawfully
call the reft rogether, yet if they who are
called may lawfully not appeare (which
may happen among men whoare not fub-
je& onc to another’) that fame Church is not
one Perfon. For by what Right they, who
being call’dto a certaine time, and place,
doe meet together, are one Church 5 by the
fame, others flocking to another place aps
pointed by them, are’ auother Church. And
every number Z men of one opinion is a
Church, and by Confequence. there, will be
as many Churches as there are divers opinix
ons, that.is to fay, the fame ‘mulitude of
men will at once prove to be one, and ma-


* ny Churches. Wherefore a Church is not


onc, except there be a certaine, and known,
thatistofay, a lawfull power, by meanes
whereof every man may be oblig’d’ to. be
prefent in the Congregation, either him-
felfe in perfon, or by Proxie's and that be-
comes One, and is capable of per/onall fun
ions, by the union of a lawful power of
convocating Synods, and aflemblies of
Chriftianssnor by uniformity of Doftrines
and otherwife, it isa multitude 5 and Per-
fons in.the plurall , howfoever agreeing in


A Chriftd- opinions.


Ci &


X XI. Ir followes what hath beene.
: ~~ already


| Chap.17. Religion. 319
_ already faid.. by neceflary connexion, that the fame
a. City of Chriftian men, anda Church, isal- with a
together the fame thing, ofthe fame men, (‘briftian:
_ tecm’d by wo nam¢s, fortwo caules:For the Church, —
matter of a City & a Church is one,to wit the
fame Chriftian men. And the forme which
confifts ina Lawfull power of aflembling
them is the fame toa ; for ’tis manifeft thac
every Subject is oblig’d to. come thither,
whither he isf{ummon’d by his City, Now
that whichis call’d a City,as it is made up of
men, the fame; as it confifts of Cbrijfiaus;
is ftyled aChurch.
XXII. Thistoo is very cohzrent with ManyCities
_ the fame points, If there be many Chri- doc nor con=
flian Cities, they are not altogether perfonally ftiture one:
one church: they may indeed by mutuall churche. |
confent become one.(,burch, but no other- 3
wife, rhen as they muft alfo become one
City 3 For they cannot affemble but at _
fome certaine time, and to fome place ap-
pointed. “Bur Perforis, places, and times, .
Elaeg to civill Right, neither can any
Subjeé or ftranger lawfully fet his foot on
any place, but by che permiffion. of the
Gity, which is Lord of the place. But the
things which cannot lawfully be done “but -
by the permiffion of the City, fthofe, if ”
they be lawfully done, are done by the -
Cities authority. The Yniver[all church is -
indeed one myfticall body whereof CHRIST
isthe head, butcin the fame manner, that all :
‘men together acknowledging God for the :
Ruler of the world,are one. Kingdome,and :
one City, which notwithftanding is neitter -
one Dele nets it oné common aétion;..
sor determination.. Farthermore where it is. ;
Qs faids


‘ Religion. ‘Chap.17,
faid‘that CHRIST & the bead of bis
body she Church, it manifeftly appeares, thar
that was fpoken by the Apoftle of the
Eleé,who as long as they are in this world,
area Charch onely in potentia, but shall
not a@uilly be fo before they be feparated
from the reprobate, and gather'd together °
among themfelves, in the day of Judge-
ment, The Church of Rome of old was.


“yery-great, but fhe went fot beyond the


bounds of her Empire, and therefore nei-
ther was the Wniverfall, unlefle ic were in
that fenfe, wherein it was alfo faid of the
City of Rome , Orbemjam totum vittor Ro-


manus habebar, when 2 he had not the .
Bu


twentieth part of-ic. But after that the
civill Empire was divided into parts, the
fingle Cities rhence arifing were fo’ many
Churches, and that power which the


- ‘Church of Rome had ‘over them , might


| Who are.
Glergy-
Mee


pethaps wholy depend. on the, authority.
of thofe Churches, who having caft off the
Emperours were yet content to admit the
Doéours of Rome. z

XX LPL. They maybe called Church
men whoexercife a publique office in the
Church But of offices thee was-one a Mini-


fiery, another a Maijtery 5. The office of the.
Minifters was to ferve Tables, ‘to take care.


of the temporal goods of the Church, and.
to diftribute (at that time when all propri-
ety of riches being abolifh:, they were fed.
in common) toeach man his portion 5 The
Maifiers according to their otder , were
called fome Apoftles, fome Bifhops, tome


Preshyters, tharis to fay, Elders 5 yer not ©
fos as that by the name of Presbyter, the-
; Bey.


ry


F Chapit7. —- Resigion, 321
age, but the vffice might be diftinguifht 5
For Timothy was a “Preséyter although a
young man 3 but‘becaufe for the moft part
the Elders were receiv’d into the Maiffer-

afhip the word, denoting age, Was usd ‘to

fignifie «cher office. The fame Maifters,

according ‘o.the diveifity of their ‘employ-

ments were called fone of them Apojfles,

fome Prophets, fome Evangelifts, fome

Paftors or Teachers. And the Apoftolicalt .

worke indeed was univerfall ; the Prophc-

ticall: to declare ‘theit’ owne revelations in

the Churcbs the Evangelical toptéach,or to

bepublithers of the Gopell among the infi-

dels jthavofthe Paffors to teach, confirme,

and rulethe-minds of thofe who already

beleev’d. baal : :
XIV da the Eledtion of Chiveh-men The Electi«

two things ape to be confidered, the Eletfi- om of

von ofthe Perfons ,-and their confecration, Churc:-rmew

or inftitutiony. Which alfo is. called ordina- —_ 2 |

tion. "The fickt twelve Apofties CHRIST the Churchs)

himfelfe both leéfed, and ordain'd, Alter their confer

CHRIST'S afcenfion’ Matthias was “ration 19 4

“eleGted in the roome of \Fuilas the "Trai. *hePaffors.

tour, the Charch (which-ar that time con-: 4

Gited of a Congregation of about one hyn--

idted and twenty men)'¢boofiig two men: -

And they -appoineed “two, sfofeph and’:

Matthias 5 but God himlelfe by tor appro-

wing of Mathias, Sept se ay efe

twelve thesfirft, and great eApof tes, alfo the

“Apoftles Picrmmtek ea were

‘added two-other Apottles SPanl,ind Bartia-

‘bis, ordain d indeed by the DoRours, aad

‘Prophets.of the Church of Antioch, (which :

‘was aparticular Church) by the impoftion

: ; Of:


ee


- Religion =~ Chap.r7,


of hands,but elected by the command of the.
Holy Ghoft. That they were both Apoftles.is
manifelt in the 13. of the As v.2,3, That
they receiv’d their Apoftlethip from. hence,
namely becaufe they were feparated: by
command.of the {pirit for the work of God,
irom the reft of the Prophets,and Do@ours


of the Church of Autioch , Saint Pau hime ..


felfe thewes, who calls himfelfe for diftin-
ions fake an Apoftle feparated unto the Go-
fpeil of God, Rom. % ver. 1. Bur if itbe
demanded , further by whar authority it came
to pafle chat that Was. eeceiv’d for: the come
mand of the Holy Ghoft,which thofe Pro=


phets and Do€tours did fay proceeded from.


him, it muft-neceflarily be anfwer’d ; by the-


Authority of the church of Antioch s for the
Prophets & DoGours muftibe éxamined by
the Church before they be admitted 5 For
Saint Fobn fairh, Belecve not every Spitit, but
ty the Spirits, whether they are of God, be».
canfe many falfe Prophets are gone out into the
world 5 bur by. what Church, but that to.


which that. eee was written’? In like. .


manner Saint ‘Paul reprooves the Churches.
of Galatia, becaule they Judaizes Gal, 2.0.
14, alchough.they feemed to doe: fo by the
Authority.of Peter, for when. he’ had told


-themthat he had reprehended: Peter him-


felfe with thefe words , Ifthou being a Tem,


liveft after che manner of Gentiles, and noe as


_ doe the Lewes, veby' compelle(t rior the Gen-


tiles to live as doe the-Tewes ?-Not long) after
he queftions them, faying , This onely would
eet he + Received ye the Spiric bythe


“morks.of the.Lav, or by.tl hearing of faith?


Gel,-3.ver. 2, Where itis. evident, chat fe
: WAS:


|


|


| Ahap.17. Religion. = 3a


was Fudaifme which bereprehended the Ga- +
__dathians for, notwithftanding that the Apo-
~~ file Perer compelled them to Fudaize.Seeing
-thereforeit belonged-to the Church, and not
“to Peter, and therefore alfonot to'any man,
to determine what Doétors they fhould fol-
- low, it alfo pertained to the authority of the
Church of Anriochto elec their Prophets and
~Do@ors. Now becaufe the Holy Ghott fe-
parated to himfelfthe Apoftles Pau! & Bar~
»naba,by the impofition of hands from Do-
“+ ors thus elvGted, its manifeft,that impofition ~
of hands,to” confecration,of the’prime Doors
-in eachChurch,belongs to che Du€ors of the
"fame Churth. But Bifbops, who were alfo
vcalled Presbyters , althoughall ‘Preshyzcrs
were notBithops,were ordain’d fomrimes by
 Apofiles (forPaul & Barnabas when they had
taught in Derbe, Lyftra and ‘Iccniym,ordai- ine!
ned Elders inevery Church; Adis\14.v.23.) ©
fometimes: by other Bilhops, for Titus was
by Paub left in Crete’, that: he thould ordain, ‘
Elders in every City,Ti.1.¥.5.AndTimotby r
was advifed not ro ncgle the gift thar was im
him, which was. given bita by Prophely with.
the laying on of the bands of the Presbytery,
1, Tim.4:v.t4.And he had rules given bim®
coneerning the Eleéion of Presbyters. But
_ that cannot be untderftood’ otherwife, then of
__ the ordination of thofe whowere eleéted by...
fs the’ Church 3for no'man could conftitute’a
Door in theChurch; but by the Churches
| spermiffion.. Bor ithe ducy" of the Apo/iles
| themifelves was not to-command., but to -
teach; and although'they°who were recom.
mended by the Apoffles , or Presbyters, were
* not rejected, forthe eftcem thar was Ss
aS


I
|


_


The power
of remit-
ting finnes


es


the recommenders , yer feeing they could
not be elected withous the will f rtrd
they were alfo wiper cleGed bythe a.
thority ofthe Church, Un like mannep Mini-
fers, who arc called Descons,weve ordained
by the Apofiles ;. yer eletted by the Church;
for when the even Deacons. were to beecle.
ted, and ordained, the epoffles ele@ied
them not, but look yce aut, (fay they) among.
you Brethren feved men of honeft epart, 8c. -
And they chole Suphen, 8c. And they
feethem before the Apostles, Ags Ger l1Zu6,*
It is apparent therefore by the cuftome ‘of
“the Primitive Church under the misfile,
that the ordination 5” or conficration of all
Church-men, which is done by prayer, and.
impofition of bands, belonged to tie «dpoftler,
and Doéfors ; but the Election of thofe who
were to be confecratedstovheGhurcb..|
XX V. Concerning the power of bint
ing, and loofing , that is to {ay of. nemining,
and retaining of finnes, chere is nodoubt,


20 thepeni- but ic was given by (ili to the Dastors.


tent ', and
retaining


then yer for to come y in thefamemaaner
as.it was to. the prefent -Apoftics s ‘now the


shofe of the Apofiles had all the power of remitting


aimpenitent
belongs to

thePaftors
but judge-


‘of fins
> given them , which Chritt himfelte had
As the Father bath fent-me(fayes Chrift) fo
2 fend Tyou,John.20. vert. a1. and he addes,..
 focver fins yee remit , they are remitteh


mens. of the and ofe focver fins ye-retain,ehey ane retuined. i


repentance
to the


Church.


Verle, 23, fis what wy and: d0ofing 5 ‘or
omitting and retaining of fives ,.is ; admics
of.fome fcvuple. For ine to retain his findtes
whg being baptized: into remiflion of fins; .
nanly peaitent , feems.to be againftithe
wery Coycnanc.it {elf of the new Teftas


ment,


i


gg lees. be done by
-Chrift himfelfe, much lelle by his Paftors,
and to remit the impenitent , feems vo be
apaintt the will of God the’ Father, from.
whomChrift was fent to convert the world,
and to reduce men ‘unto obedience 3 Fur
thermore , if each Paftor had am authority
gtanted him to remit and renin finnesin
is manner , all awe of Primes, and.civill
agiftrates, together with allkind of civill
Government would be utterly deftroyed.
For Chrift hath faid it, nay even nature it
felfe diGcates, that wei foonld not feare them
who flay the body, but cannot kill the foule, but
sather feare dim who can cat both forte and
body into bell, Mat, vo, verl. 28. Neither is
any man fo mad as not ‘to chsofe to yeeld
obedience rather to: then»who can vemitand *
vetain their fines, chento the powerfulleft
Kings. oe omthe ser on itis to be
imagined thatremifston 10 -iginothi
elfe but Lagan 8 ae Ecclefiattic
punifhments ; for whar evill hath excom-
unicationinit, befide theerernall pains
“which ate confequent rai? or what benefit
isit tolbereceived into che Chuych if there
| were falvation out of ic? We mreftithere-
fore hold, Thas Paftors have pomeryeruly, and
abfolutely to ‘forgive finnes, but, ro the poni=
toutyand to rerain them, but, of the impenttent.
But while men think that ro Repents isna-
‘thing elfe bur that every one condemh ‘his
A@ions, and change thofe Counfels which.
aeeediie feem - ; and -blameable,
“theve'is an opinion-ifen , tharthere maybe
 stepentance before any\Confeflion of finnes
- fomeny and ‘that, repemance is ee 3
; : es ey


_ Of the penitent are already forgiven in


fore the fa&.of which we sdoudt whether it


a pees...
feé, but a caufe of Confeffion, and thence,
the difficulty of thofe who fay that the fing _


Baptifme ,.and theirs who repent’not, can-
not be forgiven at al,is again{tScripturejand
Contrary to the words of Chrift, Whofe forver
fins ye remit 8c, Wemutt therefore ro refolve
this. difficulty know in the firft place,thara
true acknowledgement of fin isRepentance,
for he that knows he hath finned, knows he
hath etved; but to will an errour is impoffie
ble,therefore he that knoweés he hath finned,
wifhes he had not done ity which is to ré=
pent. Farther , where it may be doubtful,
whether that which is done be a fin or nots,
we muft confider, that. repentance doth not.
precede confeflion of fins, but is fubfequene
to it:for there is no.repentance but of finnes
acknowledged. The penitent therefore muft
both acknowledge the fa& , and know itto
bea finne, that iscofay:, againt the Laws
Ifa man therefore think, that what he hath
done; is not againft the Law ; its impoflible _
he fhould repent of it. Before repentance,


=


_ therefore, its neceffary there be an-applica-


cation of the faéts unto the Law, buitsin
vain to. apply the fads untothe Law with.
out an Interpreter ;_ for'not the words ofthe
Law , but the fentence of the Law-giver is
the ruleof mens a@ions 3 but furely-either —
one man,or fome men are theInterpreters of
the Law, for every. man isnon judge of his
own fa whether it be afin ot. not, where-


bea finneor-not , muft-be unfolded be t

fome manor men, and the doing of thisiis.

confeflion, Now. when theInterprerer sp d
- Ee ae We


Chap..27. Religion.

Law hath judged the fa@ to bee a’ finne,
ifthe finner {ubmit tovhis judgement , and
tefolve wich himfelfe not to do fo any mores
tis repentance ; and thus, either itis not
true repentance; onelfe it is not antecedent,
but fubfequent to confeffion. " Thefethings
being thusiexplained,, vit is not hard to un=
derftand what kinde of power thar of bind=
ing and loofing is 5 for feeing in remiffion
of finnes there are twa things confiderable,
one the Fudgement or tse a where-
by the fadt'is judged to bea finne 3 the o-
ther, ( when the Party condemned does
acquiefce,and obey the fentence', that is to


fay, Repents) shewenisffion of tbe finne,or, (if
f


he repent not) the Retention: The firlt o

thefe, that is to fay, the Judging whether it
be a finne or not, belongs to the Interpretcr
ofthe Law, thar is, the Soveraign Fudge; the
fecond, nam¢ly Remiflion , “or retention of
|. the finte,ro tbe Peffor 5: and” iv: is that con-
cerning which the power of binding. and,loo-
fing is converfant, And that this was the


tuemeaning of our Saviour Chrift in the ©


infticution: of the fame power , is apparent


in thet &, of Mat, verle19,16,17,18. thus, .


He there {peaking to his Difciples , fayess
thy Brother finne again thee 5 goc, and rell
him his fanle ‘betrecene theeand bin alone,
(where we muft obferve by the way, that if
thy Brother finne againft thee , is the fame
with, ifhe doe thee injury s. and therefore
Chrift{pake of thofe matters which belon-
ed to the civil Tribunall) he-addes., if be
fare thee not. (thatis tofayy if he deny that
hath done itor if having conteftithe fact,
‘he denies it, to be unjuftly done) take “
thee


327


Religie


:


yetione ps a he eo
beare soni toe telLit the Church. Be panies
Churshyexcept ‘thatthe might judge: sr
it werejaifinne or not ? Bur if fe
bear ithe Church, that issif he doe not
roithe Churches fentence , but fhall perce
thattolbe novin, which She’ Judges tobea ,
finne|, thatisto fay, if he ‘repent not (for
cettain it isthat-no. man repencs himfelfeof
eat mpon meer tite ‘bel,
ane) he faith not , Tell itto 0
that we might know:that the definirive fens -
tence inthe queftion , whether itwerea fia
or Mot;\was Mot lef: to them 5:bur to the
‘Chunchis ibuts ter mbeunto rlee'(Cayes tie)
“as tu ‘Heathen , or Publican , chat is, as
one-out ofthe Church, as one ‘that iis not -
‘baptized, thavis to fay, as one whofe finnes
are retained. Bor all. Ghrittians weve 0
zeddnto:remiffion of finnés, Bur
smight:have beet demanded who Yr'wisithiat
‘hail fo great —_ that of with!
the -benefit of: Baprifine. from the impeni-
tent; Christ thewes'thar whe fame panes oo
swhom he had given authosity to
pemets into the.semiffion ate 10
. Brake cherh vof ‘heathen ‘men’, ‘Chrifti
peat yb tovrerain their ‘ins ;

Church bond be adjudged tolbe ine
pene to'make them ‘of ‘Chiriftian


. 3 + Who
foever finns: veo: far upon Earths
Soe I alt ‘bee bound allo sin Fae 5 a
te relat pty scaling

: Loofed alfo tu ‘Heaven: W
ren yond stharthe power of bit


iz ]


apse Refigion. 329
jing, and loofing, .or of remitting, and.re-
saining of.annes, which is called.in another
place, the powerofithekeyés, is not diffe
yentifcomthe power given in another place
inthefe words. Gre, and teach all Nations,
Baprizing thom anthe Name of the Father,
pad.of the Sone, and of the Holy Ghoft, Mar.
| 28. ver. 1g. dnd even as the Paftours
carinot refufe to Baptize him whom the
Church judges:;wasthy, fo neither can they
yoraine his-innes whom the Church holds
fircing to be abfolv'd , nor yet irentit his
finnes Whom:the,Church promounceth dif-
| obedient. Anditis the Churches part to
judge.of the finne;the Paftours, to.caft our,
| or. to weceive into the Church thole that
-meyjudg'’d. Thus Saint Baul to the Church
of Corinth, Domorye judge, faith he, of whofe
that arewithin? Niet he himfelfipronouncie
» the-fentenceiof Bxcommusication againk.
the dnceftuous Perfon, E éndect (faith he) ~
5 abfeut im body, loutprofent iu Spirit, (ic.

XX VA. TheaG of retaining fimnes is What ex-
that «which is.called:by the Church Excom- communi=
munication, and by Saint Paul, delivering cations, —
over £0 Sata, the word  Excovamunication, and on
Bonsiec ok ee oe waged whomit
Doses out-of 4 5 feems cannot pal].
to be/ borrowed from: ee Mocca Law, : Pil
jodged they who ee ne ms
ju leprous, were: led ito 1
‘Kepta part outof the Canip, untill by che
judgementiof the Pricft they wereagaine
 pronounc’rcleane, and by certaine rights

‘(among which ithe wathing of the body

wasone) were purified, Levit, 13. vcr. 46. :

From hence in proceffe of time it became'a
aon cuftome


|


: Religten, ‘Chap.17,


-euftome of the Fewes, not to receive thole
who pafled from Gentili(me to. tfudaifne,


({uppofing themto be uncleane) unleffe
they were firft wafhed, and thofe who dif-
fented from the Doétrine of the Synagogue,
they caft out of the Synagogue; By refem-
blance of this cuftome, thofe that cameto
Chriffianity, ( whether rhey were Fevees,


ot Gentiles) were not recviv’d into the |


Church without Baprifme ; and thofethat


diffenced from the Church were depriv'd
of the Churches Communion. Now, they
were therefore faid to be deliwer'’d over to
Satan ,becaufe all’ that was out of the
Church , was. comprehended. within his
Kingdome The end of this kind: of Difci-
pline was, thar being deftitute for atime


of the graces and fpirituall priviledges of the —


Church, they might be hunbled: to falvati-
on; but the Rea

ters, that being excommunicated, they fhould
not onely be prohibited all Congregations,
or Churches , and the participation of the
myfteries , but as heing contagious they
fhould be avoided by all other Chriftians,
even more then Heathen: for the Apoftle
allowed to accompany with Heathen, but with


4 thefe not fo much as toeate,  Cor.5. ver.T0,


11. Seeing then theefea of Extommuni-
sation is fuch,ic is: manifeft in'zhe firlt place,


in regard of fecular mat"


‘that a Chriftian city cannot be excommunicated, —
fora Chriftian City is a Chriftian Church,


as hath been declar’d above in the 21. Art.
and of the fame extenfion 3. but a Church


. ‘€annot be excommunicated 5 For either the


muft excommunicate. her felfe,which is int
~poflibie 5 or the mutt be excommunjcated ty
. fome.


¢ ae 17. ~ Religion.
9 other (burch; and this, either wniverfall,
r particular, But (eeing an Hniverfall. Church
“is no Perfon, (as hath been prov'din the
22. Artic.) and therefore neither acts, nor
does any thing, it cannot excommunicate any
_man 3 and a particular church by excommung~
“cating another Church do.h nothing ; for.
where there is notone common Congega~
tion, there oat any Exeommunication,
Neither iffome one Church, (fuppofe that
of Ferufalcm) thould have excommunicated
an other ({uppofe that of Rome), would it
any more have excommunicated this , then
her felfe : for he that deprives another of
his Communion , deprives himfelfe alfo' of
“the Communion of chat-other. Secondly,
No mat can excommunicate the fubjetts of any
abfolute government all at once , or forbid then
the ufe of their Temples 5, or their publique wor-
pip af faed 3 for they’cannot be excommunt=
cated by a Church which themfelves doe
conftitute ; for if they could, there would
not onely not remain a Ghurch, but not fo
much as 4 commot=weale, and they would be
diflolved of themfelves 3 and this were not
10 be excommunicated , or probibited : bur if
they be excommunicated by fome other Church,
that church is to efteem them as Heathensbut
no chrifian Church by the doGxine of Chrifl,
can forbid the Heathen to gather together,
and Communicate among themfelves , as it
fhall feem good to their Cities efpecially
if they meet to worfhip Chrift ,’ although tt
be done ina fingular cuftome,and manner:
therefore alfo not the excommunicated , who
areto be dealt with as. Heathen. Thirdly,
4 Prince who hath tbe Soversign power, pct
¢


n°


Religion —— Chaping,


be excommunicated for by the: doarine. of


Cbriffyneither one, nor may fudje@stos


gether can interdiG their Prince: any, pub»
lique., or private places:,. or denyiim en=
tranceinto any Affembly: whatfoever , on
prohibit him: the doing: oft what hee will
within his “are jurildi@ion.; tor iv'is Trea
fon: among?all:Cities, foratty one;.or man

fubjets: fous to: arrogate: vonchenifeleg
any authority over'the whole City; but they.
who atrogate: to themfelves ar authority
over him who hath the fupreme! power: of
the City’,: doe: arrowate’ the fame‘authority
over the City it felfe. Befldes ,. a Soveraign
Prince , ifhe be’aChriftian, hath this far=
ther advantage; that the'City: whbfeWillis
containedin His\, -is thar'verything® which
we'call acbarch stlteGhurch thereforeexcom=
municates'no'man’, .bue whom itexoommn-


nioates*by:the authrity, ofthe Prince: but


the Prince excommunitates nov himfelfe , his


fubjeds therefore cannot doeit. Ir maybe -


indeed that an Affembly of rebellious Ci
tizens or Traytors;may pronounce the fen
tence of excommunicaticn again{t theixPrince,
burnot by Rights Much leffe cat one Prince
de! excommunicared by anorHer’ , for this
would: prove: not an excommunication’, but
a provocation’ to» Warre’ bythe way of
afftont: For fince’ that is not one church
which: is made up’ of Citizens belonging
totwo abfolure-Cities, for want of power
of lawfilly affembling them, (2s bath been


declar’d before inthe 22y Art.) they who ©


areof one: Church’are'not’ bound to obey
another, and therefore cannot be excommu-
nicated fortheii: difobedience. Now, what


fome


‘Chap. 17s Religion, ; 333
fome may fay, that Princes, being they are
members. of thedniverfall.church, may alfa ~
bythe authority of theWniverfall church be
excommunicated, fignifies nothing. becaufe
the Univerfall church (as. hach: beene:thewed
inthe 22, Art-/ isnoo one Pét/fonjofi whony

it may be faid that fheeadfed, decreed, dever-
mind excommunicated, abfolu'd, andthe like,
perfonall: ateributes; neither hath: fhe: any
Goyernour upon Earthat whofecommand’
fhemay, affemble, and. deliberates! For to’ ,
be guide: off che Wnivenfall churchy.and) vot
have the’ pewer of aflembling: her; is the
fame thing-asto-be Governour; and: Lord!
overall the Chriftians in theworld, whicl»
is granted to none, but-God onely.;

X VIL. Ic hath beenethewedabove The inter=
inthe 18. Agr, thatthe: authority’ of iater-' pretation of
preting the. Holy. Scriptures confifted: notin’ Scripture
this, thatthe interpreter:might without pu= depends on
nifhment; expound, and explicate his fens the autho-
tence & opinion taken thence, untovotherss: rity of the
either. by writing; on byhis: owne voices Cily.
but, that.others:have anot Right:to‘doe, or
teach ought contrary: tovhis fentence 5 ins’
fomuch as theinterpretatiom we {peak of is’
the fame with, thepower of defining in all:
manner-of controverfies ‘tobe determined
by facred Scriptures: Now wemuft fhew*
tharthat: power belongs to each Chureh,
and. depends.on his,or their authority who'
haye the Supreme command, provided that’
they be Chriftians ; forif ic depend:noton :
the,civill aushority, it mufteither depend on’
the opinion of each private Subje&’- ot
fome forraigne authority ; bit among o=
ther reafons, theinconveniencies that mult:

ee tollow


334


‘Religion’ : Chap.17.


follow private opinions cannot fuffer its


+ dependance on thems of which this isthe —


chiefe, that not onély all: civill obedience
would betaken: away (contrary to" Chiift
his:pracept) but allchumane fociety and
peace would be’ diffolved (contraty to the
Lawes of natures) for fecing every man is
his owne inrerpretet of Scripture, that is to


fay, fince every man makes bimfelfe judge |


of what is pleafing and difpleafing unto
God, they cannot: obey their Princes be-
fore that they have yude’d whether their
commands be conformable tothe Word of
. Godjor nor;And thus either: they obey nor,
or they obey for their owne opinions'fake,


that is to fay, they obey themfelves, not”


their Soveraignes: ¢ivill obedience there-
fore is lo. Againey when every-man fol-
lowes his owne opinions it’s neceflary that
the» controverfiesywhich rife among them
will become innumerable, and: indetermi-
nable; whence there will breed among men
(who. by their own naturall ‘inclinations
dee account all) diflention an affront) fire
hatred, then brawles: and watres , ‘atid thus


all manner: of peace and fociety would va- -


nifhy We have tarthermore for an example,
shat whichGodunder the old Law required
to be obferved concerning the book of the
Law, namely, that ic thould’be tranferib'd,


and publiquely us’d, and he would have it


tobe the Canon ‘of Divine do@rine , but
the controverfies about it aot to be devermi-
ned by private Perfons., but onely by the’
Priefts, Laftly, itis our Saviours Precept;
that if there be any matter of offence be-


tween priyate Perfons; they fhiould bear the
Wolo} eburdn


Chap.t7, Religion:

Church, Wherefore it is the Churches duty to
define controverfies, it therefore belongs
not to private men, but to the Church, to in-
terpret Scriptures. But, that we may know
that the authority ofamterprering Gods Ward,
that isto fay of determining all queftions
concerning God,and Religion, belongs not
to any forraign Perfon whatfoever, we muft
tonfider firft what efteem fuch a power car=
ties inthe mindes: of the fabje@s, and cheir
civill a@ions: for no man.can be ignorant
that the voluntany. ations of, men by,ana-


turall neceflixy,; doe. follow thofe opinions .


which they have concerning good-, and
evill, Reward; and Punifhment ; «whence


it happens hac neceflavily they would chufe_


rather to. obey. thofe by, whofe judgement
they ‘beleéve that they fhall be.etecnally bap=
pys of iniferable, Now, . by whofe \judge-
mencit is\apipointed whatDo@rines are ne-
ceflary to falvation, by their judgement doe
men expect their eternall bliffe , or perditi~
ditions ‘they will therefore yeeld them obe~
| diencein all things. Which being thus, molt
manifett itlis,that thofe fubje@s who believe.
themfelves bound:to acquielce toa forraign,
authority “in thofe Daétvines which are ne~
ceffary.to falvation , doe not per fe contti-
tua City; but are the fubjeas of that for=
raign power. Nor therefore although fome
Soveraign Prince fhould by: writing grant
fuch an;authority to any ovhery yer. lo, as
hel would be: wnderftood ito have recained
the civill power in his own hands; hall fuck
aWriting be valid, or transferre ought ne-
ceflary for the retaining , or good admi~
Niftration. of his command 5 for by the
dt R a hap,


335


Perfor. Nor contradi@s it this truth that


”


Religion, Chap.t7)


Right , |
declaring his Will to etl cyaoed hewho

bath openly-declaced his will to keep-his |
Soveraigatycannovhave given a fufficient
fign of transferring the means neceflary for
the keeping ‘iti “Chis “kinde’ of Writing
therefore will not bea fign of Will, but of
Ignorance in the contractors. We mu&
confider'nezt how abfutd it is:for ro or
Soveraign, to commit the ruling of his Sub-
jesicon{ciences-to anienemy 5 for they are,
as hath been fhewed above in the 5,Chap.
6. artic, in an hoftile fate, whofoever have
not joyn’d themfelves into the unity of one


they doe not_alwayes fight :(for tuces are
made between enemies) It is fufficientfor
an-hoftile minde, thar there is fufpition,
that the Frontiers of Cities , Kingdomes,
Empires, ftrengrhned with Garifons , doe
with a fighting pofture and countenance,
though they ftrike not , yet as:enemies mu-
tually hchold each other. Laftly , how une-
quall is it to ‘demand that, which by che very
yeafon of your demand , you confefle be-
longs to anothers Right ? I am che Inter-
preter of Scriptures to you who are the Sub+
je&t of anothers Realme. ‘Why ? By’ what
Covenants paft between you and me ? By
Divine authotity. Whence knowne? Out -
of holy Scriptures Behold che Book; read i!
invain ; unleffe I may al(o interpret’the
fame for my (elf; Thatinterpretation there
fove doth by Right belong tome , and the
reft ‘of my privace fellow-tubjedts 5 which
weboth deny: ‘Tevemains cherefore chant
ay dy bis ‘ al


Chapet7e Religion.

all chriftian Churches 5 that is to fay  inall

- chriftiau cities , the interpretation of {acted

" Scripture depend on 5 and derive the

- quthority of that man, OF Councell, which

‘hath the Soveraign power of the City. >
~ XXVIII. Now becaule there are


37


twolkindes of controverfies , the one about city muff
Spirituall. matters, that isto fay, queftions of éaiterpret


_ faith, che truth whereof cannot be fearcht
into by natural reafon, fuch are the quefti-


ons concerning the watureand office of (hrift , mete


of rewards an punifrments vo conte, of the Sa-
éraments , of ourward worfbip > and thelike


fignifications received by ule, and common.


content of words) fuch as are all queftions
of Right ; and Philofophy 3 for example,
when in matter of Right its queftioned
whether there be aPromife, and Covenant,
ot not? that is nothing elfe, but to de-
‘mand, wheher {uch words fpoken in fuch
a manner be by common ufe , and confent
of the Subjedisa Promifc or (Covenant; which
if they be fo called , then it is true thata
Contra@ is made, ifnor then itis falfe =
thar truth therefore depends on the com
- pacts, and confents of men, In like man-
het when it is demanded in Philofophy
whether the fame thing may entirély be in
divers places at once3 the determination of
the queftion depends on the knowledge of
the common confent of men about the fig
nification of the ‘word entire : for if men
when they fay @ thing fs entixelyjifome-
: ees tS wheres


338 Religion, Chap,17, 4
‘ where doe fignifie by common confent thar
they underftand nothing of the fame to be
elfewhere, ic is falfe that the fame thing is
indivers places at.once : that truth there-
fore depends on the confents of men, and .
bythe fame reafon in all other queftions
concerning Right , and Philofophy : And
they who doe judge that any thing can be
determin’d, (contrary to this common.con-
f.nt of men concerning the appellations of .
things) out of obfcure places.of Scripture,
doe allo judge that the ufe of {peech, and at
once all humane fociety,is to be taken a=.
-way 5 for he who bath fold an. whole field,
will fay, he meant one whole ridg>, and
will retaine the. reftas unfold 3 nay, they
take-away reafon it felfe, which is nothin,
elf buta fearching out of the truth made
by fuch confent, Thefe kinde of queftions
therefore need not be determin’d, by the
City by way of interpretation of Scriptures,
for they belong not to Gods Word,in that
fenfe wherein the’ Word of God is taken for
the Word concerning Gad, thatis to fay, for
the Dottrine of the Gojpells neither is he
who hath the Soveraigne power in she Churth,
oblig’d to employ any Beclefaftical Doitoure
for the judging of any fuch kind of matters
as thefe 5 but for the deciding of queftions
of Faith, that. is to fay, concerning God, -
which tran{cend humane capacity, we ftand
in need of a diyine blefling (char we ma
nor be deceiy’d at leaft in neceffary points
to be deriy’d ftom CHRIST. himfelfe by
the impofition of hands. For, feeing to the
end we may attaine to: xternal Salvation,
we are oblig’d toa mame Doe
4 waica ©


| Chap.18. Religion,

which therefore itis impoffible for us to
“underftand, to be left fordefticute, as that
we can be deceiv’d in neceflary points, is
repugnant to equity. This infallibility our
Saviour Chrift promis’d (in thofe things
which are neceffary to Salvation’) to his
Apoftles untill the day of jud, ements, that
isto fay, 10 the Apoftles, and Paffors face
ceeding the Apoffles who were to be con-
fectated by the émpofition of hands. He there-
foe who hath the Soycraigne power inthe
City, is oblig’d as a Chriftian, ‘where there
is any queftion’ concerning she Myfteries of
_ Faith, cointerpret the Holy Scriptutes by
Clergy-men lawfully ordain’d, And thus in
Chrittian Cities the judgement both of
| fpirituatl and temporall matters belongs unto
the civill authority : And that man, or
councell who haththe-Supreme power, is
head both of the Gitysand of the Churchsfor a
Gburch,and 4 Gbriftian City is but one thing,


Cuar. XVIIL
Concerning thofe things which
Are nece(fary for our entrance in-

tothe Kingdome of Heaven.


I, The difficulty proporinded concérning
the repugnancy of sbeying God, and
Men w to be remov'd by the
“diflinftion  betweene the. points *
neceffary and nob wecelfary
to Salvation I, AM things


R3 necefjary


339


a .
340


Religem. Chap.18,
neceffary to Salvation are contain'd
in Faith aiid Obedience, I1L.hat
kind of Obedience that % which
vequir'd of us. 1V. VVbat Faith
is,and how diftingnifot frem pros
feffion, from {cience, from opini.
on. V. VV bat it is to beleeoein
CHRIST, VI. That that ‘Arti-
cle aloneT HAT FESUS IS
THE CHRIST, is neceffary
to Salvation, is prov'd from the
Scope of the Evangelifts. VII. From


the preachings ef the Apoltles.


VIII. From the eafinelfe of Chrie
frian Religion, 1X. From this alfo,
that it is the foundation of Faith.
X. From the woft evident words of.


CHRIST and his Apoftles,


XI. In that Article is contain'd
the Faith of the Old Teftament.
XII. How Faith, and Obedience


~ concar'to Salvation. X 111. Ina.
Chriffian City there % no contra-
diction betweene the commands of


God, and of the City. KIV. The
Doctrines Which this day are contra»
verted about Religion doe fer the
moft part relate ro the Right of Di-
visi ydined ;


i, It


)


|


~Chap.18. Religsons 341
L. FT was ever granted that all authority The diffi-
: I in feenlar matters deriv'd: {vom bim calty pro~
who had the Soveraigne power , whether pounded
he were one Mans, or an, Aflembly of Men, concerning
that che fame im fpirimmall matters depended the repug-
on the authority of the (jburcky is manifeft nancy of
by the next foregoing proofs 5.and befides obeying
this, that‘all Chriftian Cities! are, Churches God, and
endued with this. kind of atthovity : From 7cu,és to be
whence a mam though but dulliof appre: remou’d by
henfion may colléé,thatinia Chvi/tian City, the dijtin-
(shat is to fay, im a City whofe Soveraignty Zion be-
belongs to a Chriftian Prineesor Councell) all rweene the
. power, as well (piritualas fecularie united under points ne-
Ghritt, and therefore itis to be obey’d. in all ceffary, and
things; but on the other fide, becau/e we mug] 102 necelfa~
rather obey God. thew Men,there is a difficulty ry to Sal-
rifen, how obedience may fafely be yeelded vatiow.
tothem,if at any time fomewhat fhould,be
commanded by them to be done which
CHRIST hath prohibited, The rea-
fon of this.difficulty is, that feeing God no
longer {peakesto us by CHR 18ST, and
his Prophets in open voice, but by the bol
Scriptures, which by divers:men are diver{-
ly underftood , they: know indeed what
Princess and a.congregated Church, doe
- commands but whether that which, hey doe
command be contrary to the word of God,
ot not, this they know not, but with a wa-
veting obedience between the punifhments
of temporall, and fpirituall death,as it were.
failing betweene Scilla and Garybdis, they
often run themfelves upon both : But they
who tightly diftinguith betweene thethings
neceffary to Salvation, and thofe which are
not neceflary, can have none of this kind of
i R44  «: doubr,,


342 Religion. Chap, 18.)
= doubt, for if the command’ of the Princes
or City'be fuch; that he can obey it with-
out hazard of his zternall Salvation, iris
unjuft not to obey them, and the eApofites
precepts take place: Servants in all things
obey your Majters according to the flefh. Chile
dren obey your Parents in all things. Col.3y
¥.20,22, And the command of CHRIST,
. The Scribes and Pharifees fit in Moyles
thair yall rhivgs therefore whatfocver they come
mand you, that obferve, and doc. Mat.23.y.2.
On the contrary,if they command us to doe
thofe things which are punifhe with aerernall
death, it were ‘madneffe not racher to chufe .
to dye a natural death, them by obeying, to:
dye eternallysand then comesin that which
CHRIST fayes,Feare not them who kill she
body, but cannot kill the Soule, Mat.t0,v.28.
We mutt fee therefore what all thofé things
are, which are neceffary to Salvation.
rAll shings — LT. Nowall things: neceffary:to Salva’
neceffary to tion are poinpiehended in two vertues,
Salvation Faith, and Obedience : The larter of thele
arecox- if it could be perfe&@ would alone fuffice
tain'din — topreferve us from damnation;but becaule
Faith, and we have all ofus beene long fince guilty of
Obedieme. difobedience againft God in Adam, and
befides we our {elves have fince adually
finned; Obedience is not {ufficient without
remiffion of finmes s bur this, rogecher ‘with
our entrance into the Kingdome of Hea-
ven is the reward of Faith, nothing elfe is
requifite to Salvation $ for the Kingdome
Pr is fhut tonone but finners,that
is to fay, thofe whio have not perform’d due
Obedience to the Lawes ; and not to thofe
neither, if they beleeve the neceffary sane
‘ ol


(Chap.18. Religion. 343
of the Chriitian Faith, Now; if we>fhall- : |
know in what points Obedience doth con- :
fift,and which are the nece{Jary articles of the-

Chriftian Faith, it will ac once be manifett

| what we muft doe,and what abftaine from,

at oe e ois of noe and of Princes. j

TLL Bat by Obedience in this place is- Pr |
fignified not the fact, but the Willand de- Ae ie
fire wherewith we purpofe, and endeavour UR
as much as we can to obey for the future: hip e yee
in which fenfe the word Obedience is equi- 324 of 4
valent to Repentance,for the vertue of repen- eal a
tance confifts notin the forrow which ac~~*
companies the remembrance of finne 3 but
in our converfion to the way, and full
purpofe tofinne no more, without which,
that forrow is faid to be the forrow not of, 4
a Penirent but a defperate perfon : But be- “
eaufe they who love God cannot but defire
to obey the divine Law, and they who love.
their Neighbours cannot but defire to obey :
the morall Law, which confifts as hath i
beene fhewed. above. in the 3. Chapter, in
the prohibition of Pride, ingratitude; contite
mely, inhumanity, cruelty, injury, and thc like
offences, whereby our NeighBours are pre- |
judic’t, therefore alfo Love or. ‘charity, are
zquivalent to Obedience.Juftice alfo (which

_isa conftane will of giving to every man
his due) is equivalent with it. Buc that
Faith and Repestance: are {uffacient for Sal-
vation, is manifeft- by the Covenantit felfe

_ of Baptifme 5. for they who wete by Peter
converted on the day of ‘Penteco/t; demand- |
ing bim what they fhoulduo? He aniwered, |
Repent; and be Baptiz’d overy one of you in the
name of Hfe[us for the remiffion of your Sins.

AG 247.38. There was nothing therefore.to
Rs os be


Li Bi


EF


a aaal


344


»


o % Sars

Religiot® Chap. 1g)
bé done forthe obtaining of Baptifme, that
is to fay, for toenter ts the Kingdome of
God;but vo Repetit; and belecuc in the Name
of FESHS 5. For the Kingdome of Hea
ven is promis’d by. the Covenant which is.
made in Baptifme 3 fatthetmore, by the
words of CHRIST ‘ahfweting the
Lawyer whoaskt hit what he fhould doe


to inherit eternall life, Thou knowelt the


the Commandements, Thou fhalt not Kill,
Thon fale not commit Adultery; (ge. which
refer to Obedience 5. atid, Sel all char thon.
baft, and come, and follow.me, which relates
to faith, Luke 18. vet. 20, Mar.tozver.18,
And by that which is, faid 5 The juft fhall
live by Faith, (not every man; ‘but the jut)
for fajtice is the fame difpofition of Will
which Repentance aud Obedience ate; And by-
the words of Saint Mark, The time % fulfl-
led,and the Kingdome of Gods at band Repent.
yee, and belecve the Gofpell., by which words
isnot obfcurely-fignified that thete is no
need ot other. Vettues, for our entrance in+
to the Kingdome of God, excepting thofe
‘of Répentance and Faith: The Obediense
therefore which is mecef{arily requir’d to.
Salvation is nothing fe bur rhe Will, or
endeavour to a that is to fay, of doing,
according to the Lawes of God, ‘that is the
inorall Lawes, whichare the fame to all
men, and the civill Lawes, that is to fay,
the comrnands‘of Soveraignes in temporall
matters, and the Ecclefiafticall Lawes in
- Abhaed 3 which two kinds of Lawes are
iversin divers Cities, and Churches, and
are knowne by their promulgation, and.
Publique fimeencas ”
BG LV That


| Chap.18.- Religion: 345
IV. That we may underftand what the #barFaith
Chriftian Faith is,’ we muft define Faith in is, and.how
generall, and diftinguifh it from thofe o- diflinguifht
ther a€ts of the minde wherewith common- from pro~—
ly ic is,confounded. The objelt of Faith uni--fefin,
verfally taken, namely for that. which is be- from (ci~
leev'd,is evermore a propofittax, (that is to ence, and
fay a {peech affirmative, or negative) which frovn opini=
we grant to be true: but becaule Propofiti- on.
ons are granted for divers caules,it falls our,
that thefe kind of conceffions ate diverfly ~
called: Bat we grant Propofitions fome-. - {
times which notwithftanding we receive»
not into.our,mindes 5 and this either for a
time, to wit, fo long, till by confideration :
of the confequencies, we have well exa-
min’d the truth of them, which we call: fup-
pofing or alo fimply, as through feare of
the Lawes, which is toprofe/[e, or confeffe by
outward tokeas.3 .or for a’ yoluntary com=
pliance fake, which men nfe out of civility
to thofe whom they refpeét, and for love of
Peace to others , which is abfolute ycetd=-
ing. Now the. Propofitions which we re- |
_ eeive for truch, we alwaies grant for fome
reafons ofour.owne, and thefe are deriv’d
either from the Propofition ic felfe, ox from »
the porfon propounding 5 they are deriv’d «
from. the Propofition it {elfe, by .cal-
ling to minde whar things  thofe words .
which make up the Propofition doe by
‘common confent. ufually fignifie: if fo, .
then che affent, which we give is called
knowledges, or Science : but if we cannot :
remember what is certainly underftood by
~ thofe words, but fometimes one thing,fome-
times another {eeme go,be apprebended by
US>,


346


Religion,
us, then we are faid to thinke's’for exame
ple, ifit be propounded that 1300 and three:
makes fives and by calling to tminde the
order of thofe numeral’ words, that it is
fo appointed by:the common’ canfent of
them who are of the fame lanigtrage with ‘Us,


 Chaperg,


7


Chap.18. Religion.
ule either to‘adornes or deceive, they. are
fowrefted ftom their owne fignifications,
that to remember. the conceptions. for
which they were firftimpos’d on things is
very hard'and not to be maiftered but by a
fharpe judgement,and very-grear diligence,
Te-happens too, that there are: many: words
which’ have no proper; determin’d,, and
every where’ the ;fame fignification 3 and
are underftood, not by their-owne, but b'
vertue ofvorher fignes us’d rogether wit
them. Thirdly, thete: are: fome words of
things unconceivable; of thofe things there=
fore whereof they are the words :theteiis no
conceptions and, therefore. in wwaine: doe
we feeke:for the truth of thofé Propofitions,
which they make ‘out of the words’ thems
felves : In thefe cafes, while by.confidering
che definitions ot words we: fearch our the
truth of fome propofition, ‘according tothe
hope we have of finding it, we thinke it
fomerimes true, and fometimes falfe; ei-
ther of which apart is called. thinking, and
alfo beleeving $ both together, doubting. But
when our reafons for which we -aflent:to
fome Propofition, derive not from the Pro=
pofirion it felfe, bur from the perfon Propoutie
«ding; whom we efteeme fo learned, that he
is not decciv’d, and we fee no reafon why
*he fhould deceive’ us 5 our affenr, becaule
it growes. not from any confidence of our
“-ewne, bur from another mians knowledge,
* lis-called Faith :- Andby theiconfidence of
_ whom, we doe beleeve; we are Laid. 20. aruft
them, ox to:-trujt in them. By what hath been
aid, the difference appeares firit -betweene
Keith, and Rrofeffion 5. for that. is alwaies


joyn'd


De al


347


What itis
30 beleeve
in Gbrift.


CHRIST, namely Hee, who accor-


joyn’d with inward affentsthis not alwayes 5
That is an inward perfwafion of the
minde, this an. outward obedience. Next,
betweene Faith, and Opinion; for thisde~
pends:on our owne reafon, that onthe —
amen on we have of another, | Laftly
etweene Faith and Knowledge 3 for this de=.
liberately takes a Pale, Ie. broken, and.
chewed that fwallowes downe whole and
entite. The explication of words, whereby
the matrer enquir’d after is propgunded; is
conducible to eae e 5 ven the onely
way to know,is ‘ion: but this is pres.
judeciall to Pail fx thofe things which.
exceede humane capacity, and ave propoun-
ded to beleev’d, are never more evident
by explication, bur on the contrary more
be Pp and harder to be credited. And
the fame thing befalls a man who endea-
vours todemonftrate the myjterics of Faith:
by natarallreafon,which happens to a fick
man, who will needs ‘chew before he will
fwallow his wholfome , but bitter Pills,
whence it comes to pafle, that he prefently
brings them 2 aine, which. perhaps
would otherwife, fi he had taken chem well
downe, have prov'd his remedy. © 4.1.)
V. We have feene therefore whatiicis.
to beleeve. But what is ic to beloeve #®
CHRIST. ?. Or what Propolition is
that which is the objeé. of our Faith in
CHRIS T > For whenowe fay, L be-
leevein CH RAST; we -fignifie indeed
Whom, but not Whar. we beleeve. Now;
tobeecve inC ARIST is nothing elf
‘but tobeleeve tha JESUS IS THE


ding ‘


Chapx8s Religion. 349
ding to the. Prophefies of Moyfes, and the
Prophets of Ifracl, was to oe into this.
world to inftiture she Kingdome of Gods And
this (ufficiently appeares our of the words.
of CHRIS T himfelfe to Martha; Lam
Bus he) the Refurrcétion and the life. HE
ae hah oer ik ET ey N
AB, vhoigh be were dead, yet he fh lives
adW HOSOEVER LIVETH,
AND BELEEVETH IN MB,
foall never dye. Bebeeveft shou this? She
faith unto him,’ Tea Lord, I. belecve that
THOUART THB CHRIST
the Sou of God, which should come into the
world, John 11. Vets 255.265 27 In-which
words we fée that the queftion BELEEV-
EST THOUIN ME? isexpoun-
ded by the anfwers T HOU ART
THE CHRIST... To. beleeve, in
CHRIS T therefore is nothing elfe but
to beleeve JESUS HIMSELEE -
fayihg that he is THE CHRIST. |
VE. Faish and Obedience both nec avily That thas.
concurring. to Salvation, what kinde of Obe- article -
dionce that fame isy.and te whom due, hath Jone, that
bent thewed above inthe 3. Article + Bur Zefus isthe
now we muft enquire what articles of Paith Chrift, is
“ave requifite: And (*) I faysthat toa Chri neceffary #0
ftian there is no other atticle of Faith Salvation,
requifite as nece/Sary to Salvaciou, but only # prou'd
this, THAT JESUS IS THE CHRIST. ont of the
Bar we must diftenguith (as we havejal- feope of —
ready done before in the 4+ Article). be- the Evdtte
tweene Faith, and Profeffion. A Profeffion gelifts.
therefore of more articles (ifthey be com- a
manded) may be cceffaty 5 foric is a part
of our obedienve duc co che Lawes but we
ae ebtas enquice


390°


ae ae |


Religion’ Chapi1g,


enquise not_now what Obedience, bur what
Faithis neceffary to falvation. ‘And this is
prov’d firft out ofthe fcope of the Evane
elifts which was by the de(cription of our
aviours life to eftablifh this one’ Article ;


.and-we fhall know that fuch was the fcope,


and counfell of the Evan; elifts, if we! ob=
ferve but the Hiftory ir felfe, Saint Matthew
beginning at his Genealogy thewes that
JESUS was of the linage of David,
borne of a Virgin; (bap. 1. that He was
adored by the Wife men as King’ of the
Hewes; that Herod for the fame caufe fought
to flayhim, Chap. 2. That his Ki dome.»
was Preacht both by Fobn the Bapt sand.”


Himtelfe, Chap. 3,4. That He taught the
Lawes, not as the Scribes,but as one haying


authority , Chap.5,6,7. That he cur’d dif-
eafes miraculoufly, Chap. 8, 9. That He
fent his Apoftles the Preachers of his King:
dome throughout all ‘the parts of fudea, to
ae his Kingdome,¢hap. 10. That

¢ commanded the Meflengets fent from
obn to enquire whether he were the
CHRIST or nor,totell him what they
had feene, namely the miracles. which were
onely competible with CH RIS T, chap.


* a1. That he prov'd and declar’d his King


dome to the Pharifees, and others by argu-
ments, parables and fignes, Chap. 12. and


the-following Chapters to the 21. That


He maintain’d himfelfe to be the Chrift


~ againgt the Pharifces, Thit He was falured


with the title'of King, when he entred into
Ferufalem, Chap. 21. Thar he forewarn'd
others of fulfe (/brifts, and That He thewed-


“in Parables. whit manner of Kingdome. _


his.


|


| Chap. 18. Religion, 351

his fhould be, Chap. 22, 23524525. That

* He was taken , and accufed for:this reafon,
becaufe He faid He was a King 5 and thata
Title was written on his Crofle, THIS 1S
Jesus, THE: KING OF THE
JEWES, Chap, 26, 27. Laftly, that after
his refurce@tion's He told his A poftles that
all power was given unto Him both in
Heaven, andin Earth, Chap,28, All which
tendsto this end , That we fhould beleeve
Jefus to be the Chriff. Such therefore was
the Scope of Saint Matthew in defcribin
his Gofpell; but fuch as his was 5 fuch alfo
was the reft of the Evangelifts , which
Saint.tobn fers. down exprefly in the end of
his Gofpel , Thele things (faith He) are
writcen , thar ye may know that Jefus is the
Chrift, the Sonne of the living God. Lohn
29, verli3t..

- Lfay, «that to a Chriftian.] Although I Arotation
consefve this affertion to be fufficiently proved
by the following reafous, yet I thought it worth
my Labour to°make a more ample explication of
ity becaufe-T perceive that being fomewhat new,
it may polfibly be diftafifull to many Divines.
Fir(t iherefore whew fay this Article , That
Jelus is che Chritts is uoceffary to (alvations
fay uot thai: F ainh onely a necefjary, but Ire=
quiresfisftice alfo,or that Obedience which is due
tothe Lawes of God , that is to fay ,@ Will to
live righteoufly. Secondly » 1 deny not but the
profellion of many Articles, (provided that that
profe(fion be coramax:ted. by the Church) i alfo
nece(fary to falvarions; but fecitig Faith is in-
ternal , "Profefsion externall 5 1 fay thar the
former onely is properly Faith’; the latter a
part of Obedience 5 infomic as_ that ol


352 Religion. = Chap.318)
alone fufficetb: for innrard beltefe, butts wot
fuffectent for the outward profe/sion Of a Chriai
fisan, LaSily, even as if I Lied’ faid shat tue aud.
ttmard Repentance of fines war onely neceffiery
26 falvation, yet were it not robe beld for a Pan
valor ; becanle we fuppofe Fultice, Obedience,
atid a mind reformed in all manner of vertues to
be contained init: fovoben t fay rbat the Faith ‘
of ome Article fufficient te falvation , ix may
well be leffe wondred av, fecing thas in it ‘fo man
ay other Articles ave contained; for thefe words 4:
Jefus is the Chrilt, do feni ¢ that Fofus was
that Petfon whom God had promifed by bis
Prophets. (hould come into the world Ag
bis Kingdom , that toto fay . that Fefus isthe
Sonne of God, the Greatour of Heaven and ,
Earsh, born of a Virgin, dying for the fines of
them who fhould beleeve in Him 3 that Hee
was Chriff, tbat ts 40 fay a King 5 thar He ree
viv'd ( for clfe He were nov like to reign) to.
Judge the world, and.to reward every one accor
ding to bis works , for othermife be canner be
AKing;alfo shat men fhall rife again, for otber=
wife they are not like to come to judgement. The
whole Symbol of the Apoftles is irae ;
tained in this one Articles which notvoith/tand-
ing Tibought reafonable.to contraét. thus , bes
cane I found thar many men for this alone,
without the ref, were admitted into the King.
Home of God, both by Chrift , and his Apoiiles;

w tbe Thief on the Croffe, the Eunuch baptized
by Philip , the two thoufand men converted to
the Charch at once b Saint Perer. But if any
man be sailed at I doe not judge all thofe
eternally damned . who. doe not towardly affent.
to Cuery Article defined by the Church (and yet:
oc nor contradict out if they be i 55
‘ubmit


Chap.2 8 Religion. 353
fubmit) T know nor what I fhalt fay to thems
for the moft evident Toftintonies of Holy Writ
which doe follow, deo withbold me frort alre~
ving my opinion. : ;
VII. Secondly, this is proved bythe By the As
preaching of the Apofties. For they were the pofites
Proclaimers of his Kingdome 5 neither did Sermons.
| Chrift fend them to preach ought but the
Kingdotne of God, Luke 9, vert. 2 Ad.15.
verf.6. Arid what they did after Chrift his
Afeenfion may be wnderftood by theaccu~
fation which was brought againft them,
They dtew Jalon ( faith Saint Luke) and écr=
tain Brethren unto tbe Rulers of the City, cry
ing , Thefe are the mon thar bave turned the
world uppde down , aud are come bither ‘alfo,
whom Jaton hath revetved sand thefe all do con=
trary to the deorees of Cxfar, faying that there
is another Kings one Fefus. Ads 17. verl 6,75
It appears alfo what the fubje@ of the Apo=
ftles Serthons was, out of thefe wotdss
3 and alleadging our of the Scriptures
(to wit, of the old Teftament) that Chrift
riuft needs have (uffered’; andvifen again from
the dead, and that THIS JESUS I$
pce fst Ads 17. verl. 25 36 |
VIII, Thirdly, By the places'in which
the eafinefle of thole things which are re- Pei
quired by Chrift to the attaining of falva~ chviftian
tion, is declared. For ifan internal affent Religivtt
of the minde were neceflarily required to ‘
the truth of alland each Propofition which
‘this day is controverted about che Ghrifti-
an Faith, ot by divers Churches is iy §
defined , there wauld be nothing more di
\ ficult then thie Chriftian Religions and How
then would that be true, My yoke —


354 Religion. Chap. 18,
and ty burthen light? Mat.t 1, verf. 30. and

that litle ones doe sbeleeve in Him? Mat. 18,

ver. 6, and that it pleafed God by the fooliff=

neffe of Preaching , 10 fave thofe that beleeve?.

a Cort. verf 21, or how was the thiefe

banging on the Croffe fufficiently inftr.
&ed to falvation > The confeftion of whofe -

Faith was contained in thefe words , Lord

remember me when thon comeft ttito rby King=

dome or how could Saint Paul himfelfe,

froman enemy, fo foon become a Do@or

of Chriftians : i a ar:

‘ I X, Fourthly, y this, that that Article

”. Le is the foundation of Baith » neither refts it
the foun 9 any other foundation. If any man [ball
dation of [47 wite you, Lae here is Chrift, or He is t] tte
Faith, beleeve it ot, for there fhall aife falfe Chrifts,
aud falfe Prophets, and fhald fhe Breat figues,.

and wonders, &c, Mat.24. verf. 23. Whence

it followes., that for the Faiths fake which

wehave in this Article » we muft not be-


Re) fhould preach to Jou any osher Gofpely,

ct wehat we have preacht, Let him be accurfed.
Gal.t 8 Byreafon of this Articlecherefore
we might not truft the very Apoftles , and
Angels themfelves (and therefore I con-
ceive’ not the Church neither ) if they


Hor Cucty Spirit, but try the Pivits whether they
are of Godsbecayfe ‘many falfe Prophets are gone
eur into rhe world , hereby know yee the Hirit
of God; every ppivit that confe(Setb Fefus.chrif
at come in the fleth , is of God , &c. 1 John
4 verl. 1, 2. That Article therefore is the
micafure of the Spitits whereby the anne
4 > is)


*


p ,
(Chap. 38. Religion, =


ofthe DoGors., is either received; or teje-


Ged. It cannot be denied indeed but that’


vall who at this day are Chriftians, did learn
fromthe Do@ors, that it was: Jefus who
‘did all thofe things whereby he might be


acknowledged to be the Chrifty yet it fol-


lowes not that the fame Perfons beleeved
that Article for the Doors , or the Chur-
ches , but for Jefus his own fake; for that
Article was before the Chriftian (burch, al-
though all the reft were after it ; and the
Church was founded upon it, not itupon. the
Church. Mat. 16.verl. 18, Befides, this Ar-
ticle , thar tfefus is the Chrift; is fo funda-
mencall , thar all the reft are by Saint Pant
faid to be built upon ity For other foundation
canna man lay, then that which is layd , which
is FefueChriff (that isto fay, that Fefu is the
Chrift) nom if any man build upon this foune
dation, gold, filver, precios Hone; wood , bay,
flubble's every mans work, hall be made mani=
felt 5 if any mans work abide which be hath
built tbereupon, he fhall receive d rewards if any
mans work Shall be burnt’, be fall (uffer loffe,
bathe himjelfe fhall befawcd. 1 Cor. 3. vert.


11,1213. &c. From whenceiit plainly ap- -


pears, that by foundation is underftood this
Article, THAT J&SuS IS THE
CHRIST ; For gold , and filver, precious
ftones, wood, hay, ftubble (whereby the
Doétrines are fignified) are not built upon
the Perfon of (/briff; and alfo, thavtalfe
Doétrines may be raifid upon this founda-
tion, yet not fo, as they muft neceffarily be
damned who tcach them. ot
X. Laftly , that this Article alone is


words of
Chrift and
needful to he inwardly beleeved, may el Apokiles

mo! 4


355


ss
By the plaid


|


356


= Religion: Chap.18,
moft evidently proved out of many places
of holy Scriptures, let who will be the Znséy-


apreter : Search the Soriptures , for in them yee


shink yee have ererualt life and they are whey
which teftify of me. John 5. 39. Buc Chrift
‘meant the Scriptures of the ald Teftament
only,for the new was then nos yerwritien,
Now, there is no other teftimony concern-
ing Chriftin the old Teftament , bur shat
an eternali King was to come in fucha
Place, that Hewas to be born: of fuch Pa-
rents , that He was to teach, and doe fuch
things; whereby, as by certain fignes , he
was to be knownes All which teftify this


‘ene thing, thar JESU S who was fo born,


and did teach, and doe {uch things , was


THE CHRIST. ‘Ocher Faith then


“was not required to attain ecernall life , be-
ides this Article. /bofoever liveth and be.
becveth in-me, foal never dye. John 11, verl.
25. Buttobeleevein Jefus (as is there ex-
pe) is the fame with beleeving that JE- .
S WAS THE CHRIST; He there-
fore that beleeves that; thal never dye, and
by confequence , that Article aloneisne-
céffary to falvation: ‘Thefe are wrisven rbat
1 might beleeve that JESUS 1S THE
HRIST the Sonne of God, and that be-
leeving yeo might bave life through bis name. —
Jo.20, vert. 24. Wherefore he that beleeves


‘thus, fhall-haveetcrnall life , and therefore.


needs no other Faith. Euory Spirit shat, com


~ feferb chat fefus Chrift is come inthe flofh, is


of God. 1Jo.4.v.2.And Whofoever.beleever


» that JESUS IS THE CHRIST, is
» born of Gods t Jo. 5. verfs te And , Whois


He vbar overeometh the world but-he thar be-
; : leevah


Chap.18. Religion.


deeveth that TE SUS isthe Son of Ged 21 Jo. -


Ws Se paien oe need to eee
' any thing elfe, tothe end aman may be:

God; born of God , and overcome the world,
then that IESHS IS THE. CHRIST
that one Article then is fufficient to falva-
tion. See, bere is water , what doth binder me
t0 be bapsized ? eAnd Philip faid, If thou be~
lecue with all whinebeart , thou maift. And


be anfovered: and ifaid, T-beletve that LES .


SUS CHRIST: és the Sonue of God.
Ads'8, verl. 36537. Tf chen this Article
being beleeved with the wholeheart, (that
is slp, with inward Faith) was fufficient
for Baptifine, it is alfo fufficient for falva-
tion! Befides thefe ‘places there.are innu-
merableiorhers which doe clearly, andex-
phe the fame thing. Nay, where-

ever wee read that our Saviour com-
mended the Faith! of any one. or rhat he
faid 5 Thy Faith bach faved thee 5 or thar he
bealed any one forshis ‘Faiths fake, there
the Propofition ‘beleeved was noother but
this 5 IESHS IS' THE CHRIST , er
ther'direétly, or confequently.


357


2)


XI. Bur becaule no man: cani\beleeve In this Ars
JESUS TO'\BE THE CHRIST; who, ticle is
when ‘he knowes that by Chrift is under-comained —
food «that fame King who.was promifed the Faith —


from God by Moyfer,:and the Prophets, for of the old
to bethe King, and Saviour of the world, Teftamen


doth notialio beleeveMyfes's andthe Pro-
- phets, neitherican he beleeve thefe ,who bee
leeves not thaeGodis , and that he governs
whe world's iis neceflary that the Faith of
God j.and-oftheold Teftament be contai-


ned in this Faith of che news Seeing there- _


fore


:
|
:


|


358


‘Religion, — --Chapa8.
fore that Atheifme, and the déniall of the
Divine Providence, were the’ only treafon
againfttheDivine Majefty in theXingdome
of God by Nature; but Idolatry alfoin the
Kingdome of God by the Old\Covenant 5
nowin thisKingdome wherein'God-rules by
way of anew ca on Or isalfoad=
ded,or the renunciation of this article once
receiv'’d,that JESUS IS THE CHRIST:


- Truly other: Do€rines; provided they:have


How Faith


aud Obedi~


ence doe
concur to
Salvation,


their determination from a’lawfull ‘Church,
are not to’ be contradiGed 3 -for:that isthe
finne of-difobedience;' but it hath been ful=
ly declar’d/before that they are'not needful
to be beleev’d with an inward Faith. (wo
XL. Faith: and: Obedience: have ‘divers


patts in accomplifhing the falvation’ofca


Chriftiang -for this’ contributes ;thie: powers
of capacity, chat the AG; and. either is-faid
to juftifie initskindes For Chrift forgives:
not the fins of all men; but of the ‘Penitent,
or the Obedient, that is ito fay thejuft, I fay
not the guiltleSe,bur the just 5 for juftice isa
Will ‘of obeying ‘the Lawes, and: mayibe
conGftent witha finnerpand with Chrift
the Will to obey is: Obedience’; fornot


‘ every man, bur oshejuftfhall\ live: by Faiths


Obedience therefore justifies becaufe: it ma-
kethjuftinthefame manner as temperance


© makech temperate, Prudence Prudent.» Cha-
°° fliry chake, namely-eflentially 5 andiiputsa


man in fucha ftate; asmakes him: capable
of! pardon. Againe; (hrifhshath not pros,
mis’d forgiveneffe of finnes torall jufkmeny
but only thofe of them who beleeve Him to be
the Chrift. Faith cherefore juftifies in fuch a
fenfeag.a judgemay be faid to jujtife wha

Pie abfolvee


Chap.18. Religion. 359
abjolves, namely by thé fenterice which 4éftr

ally faves aman; And in this acception’

of juftification (for it is an equivocal:

terme) Faith alone juftifies, bus in the o-:

ther, Obedience onely : but neither Obedi-

ence alone nor Faith alone doe faveus, but».

both together.

X11 [.By what hath been faid hitherto, Ina Chri-.
it will be ealy to difcerne what the duty of ftian City
Chriftian Subjects is. towards their Sove- shere is no
raignes, who as. long as they profefle them- contraricty.
felves Chriftians cannot command their be weene
Subje@s to deny Chrift, or to offer him the Com-
any contumely 5 for if they fhould com- mand of
mand this, they would proftfle themlelves God,and of
to beno Chriftians: For feeing we have the City.
fhewed both by natural reafon, and ourof
holy Scriptures, that Subje@s ought in all
things to obey their Princes.and Gover-
nours, excepting thofe which are contrary ‘
to the command of Gods and that che com- my.
mands of God in a Chriftian Ciry concer+
ning temporall affairs, ( thivis to (ay, thole.
which are to be difeuft by humane reafon ) >
are the Lafves and fentence of che City de="
liver’d from thofe who have receiv’d autho~
rity from the City to make Laws,and judge:
of controverfies 3 but concerning {pirituall
matters, (that is to fay thofe which are to
be defin’d by the holy Scripture) are the
Lawes, and fentences.of the City, that is
tofay the Church: (for a Chriftian City,
anda Church (as hath beeen-fhewed in ‘A
the foregoing Chaprerinthe ro. Arr. ate |
the fame thing) deliv’rd by Paftors law-
fully ordain’d, and-who haye to that end
authority given chem by the City 5 it max

; ; & nifeftly,


nifeftly followes , thar in a Chriftian
€ommon-weale , Obedience is due to the
Soveraign inall things, 46 woell Spirituall, as
Temporall,and thac the {ame obedienice even
from a Chriftian fabje& is duein all tempo~


yall. matters co thofe Princes who are no”


Chriftians, is without any controverfies but

jn matters [piritnall , chat is to fay thofe

things which concern Gods worthip , fome

chriftian Church is to be followed; for it is an

hypothefis of the Chriftian Faith, that God

fpeaks not in things fupernaturall , bur by

the way of Chriftian Interpreters of holy

_ Scriptures. But what? Muft we relift Princes

— when we cannot obey them? Truly no5

for this is contrary toour civill Covenant.

What muft we doe then > Goe to Chrift

by Martyrdome ; which if it feem to any

x man to be an hatd faying, moft certainit is

lye that he beleeves not with his whole heart

THAT ESS IS THE CHRIST’ the

Sonne of the living God (for he would

then defire to bedifsolved, afd to be with

Chrift)but he would by a feigned Chriftian

Faith elude that obedience whith he hath
The Do-- conttaéted to yeeld up unto the City.

} Grins X 1 V. Burfome men perhaps will won-

wich thi der, if , (excepting this one Article, that

| day arecot- TESYS 18 THE CHRIST, which only

[

f


| avouerted is nece(sary to falvation in relation to


_ Figion, doc ence, which may be performed , although a:
~ forthe moft man doe not inreardlpbeleeve 3 (fo he doe
part belong but defire to beleeve,and make an outward
ee the profelsion , as oft as need requires, of what
Right of foever is propounded by the Church) how


ke: Re- jnterhall faith) all the reft belong to obedi-


| Dominiows it comesabouc that there are fo many Tenets


which


460  —_—-—*Religion, ~=— Chapa,


Chap. 18. Religion.
which. are-allheldfo xo concern our Faith,
that; except, a:man doe-inwardly beleeve
them ; He cannot enter into the Kingdome
of Heaven: But if he confider that in moft
controverfies the contention is about hu-
mane Soyeraigntysin fome, matter of gain,
and profit; in others. , the glory of Wits ; he
will,{urely wonder the letse. ‘The queftion
about the propriety of tbe Ghurch,is a queftion
about the Right of Soveraiguty ; for, it being
known what a Church is, it is known at once
to whom the Rule over Chriftians doth be-
long: for if every Chriftian City bethat
Church which, Chri ft: himfelfe hath com--
manded every Chriftia. fubjed tothat city,to
bear;then every. fubjeét is bound to obeyhis
City, that is to fay, Him, or them who have
the fupreme power, not only in zemporall but,
allo in (piritual, matters; but if every Chri-
ftian City bénot that Church, then is there
fome other Church mote univerfall, which
mutt -be obeyed. All) Chriftians therefore
mutt obey thartChirch judt as they would o-
bey Chiift if He came upon Earth. She will
therfore rule either’by the way of Monarchy,
oy by fome Affembly : This queftion then
concerns theRight of ruling. To the fame end
belongs the queftion concerning infallibilitys
for whofoever were truly,and internally be=
leeved by all mankinde ; that he could nor
erre, would be fuye of all Dominion, as well
temporall as spirituall , over all mankinde,
unlefle himielfe would refule it 5, for if he
fay that he muft be obeyed in zemporalis, be-
caufe,it is {uppofed he cannot erre , that
Right. of Dominion iis immediately gran-
xed bin, Hisher alfo tends the priviledge of
5S 2 intet=


36L


pe 36a7. Religion, ~~ Chapin g> \
interpreting Scriptures, “For ‘he to-whom it: |

belongs: to interpree the controverfies aris
fing from the. divers interpretations of Scris
ptures, hath authority alfo fimply: and-abe

folucely to determine: all manner of con |
troverlies whatfoever3 but he whohath this,
hath alfo the command. overallimen whoo {
acknowledge the Scriptures.to be the Word?
of God. To this: end: drive'al] the difputes:
about she power of remitting 5 and retaining
firues 3 ox the authority: of excommunication.
Eor every man,if he be in hiswits,wiil in all:
things yeeld that man an’ abfolute obedi--
ence,by. vercue of whofe fentence he beleeves:
himfelfe to be either faved, or damned. Hi-
ther alfo tends the power of in/lisuting-foci-
etics3 for they. depend on him by whom they’
fubaft., who hath as many fubjeGs as.
Monks , although liviag in-an .Bnemics:
Gity.. To this end alfo refers the queftion
concerning the Indge of Lawfull Matrimony;

for he co whonrthat Judicature belongs , to:
him,alfo pertains. che knowledge of all thole
cafes which concern: the inheticanee, and:
{ucceffion to all the goods, and Rights, not

of private men onely ,: but alfo of Soveraign’
Princes. And hither alfo sin fome-refpe
tends the Virgin-life of Ecclefiaflicall Per=
fons; for unmarried men: have le{se cohe=
rence then others.with divill {ociety:and be--
fides, it is an inconvenience not to be fligh- |

ted, shat Princes muft either necefsarily for=)

* gee the Priefthood (which is a great boad:

_ | _ of civil obedience) or have no heredicary-

i Kingdome. To this end alfo tends the ca

ji norization: of Saints which the Heathen cals.

Ned Apotbeofis 5 for he that can allure for=

i : raign. |


‘Chap. 18. Religion.
raign fubje€ts-with fo great a reward , may
bring thofe who are greedy of fuch glory to
dare,and.doe any thing. For what was it but

‘an honourable Name with pofterity?which
the Decid. and other Romans fought after,
anda thoufand others who caft themfeives
upon incredible perils ? The controverfies
about Purgatory , andndulgencies, are mat=
ter of gain. The queitions of Free-will, Iu-
tification, and the manuer of receiving Chrilt
tithe Sacrament, arc Philofophicall. There
are alfo queftions concerning fomeRites not
introduced, bur left in the Church not fuf-
ficiently purged from gentilifme ; but we
need reckon no more. All the world knows


that fuch is the nature. of men; that diflent- ~


ing in queftions which concern their power,
or profit, or preeminence of W4t, they flander,
and curfeeach other. Ir is not therefore to»
be wondred at , if almoft- all tenets (after
men grew hot with difputings ) are held.
forth by fome or other to be nésefJary; to fal-
vation, and for our entrance into the King-
dome of> Heaven 3. infornuch as 'they who
hold them nor, are not only condemned as.
guilty of difobedience (which in truth they»
are after the Church hath once defined.
them) but of Infidelity, which I have declas-
red above to be wrong out of many evident
places of Scripture 5 to which I adde this-
one of Saint Pauls , Let not him tbat eateth;
delpife bim that earcth not, and let not bim that:
eaieth not, judge bim that careth; for God bath
received him, One man efteemeth one day above
Another, another cBeemeth- every day alike. Let:
cuery man he fully per[waded in bis own mind,
