The Rational Good: A Study in the Logic of Practice (L. T. Hobhouse, 1921)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/rationalgoodast00hobhgoog). Hobhouse's liberal-rationalist ethics: the good as harmony realized through reason.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http : //books . google . com/|


\


J


THE RATIONAL GOOD :

A STUDY IN THE LOGIC OF PRACTICE


BY THE SAME AUTHOR

THE METAPHYSICAL THEORY

OF THE STATE

Demy Svo, 75. 6d, net,

"No modem writer has so clearly worked out the main
theoretical relations of the State to the individual citizen and to
other social forces and institutions. The reasoning is close and
cogent. Prof. Hobhouse is an admirable guide." — Manchester
Guardian,

''The reasoning throughout b lucid and vigorous, and the
st/le a$ non-(echnioal ^s the subject wiU admit*" — Spectator,


THE RATIONAL
GOOD: A STUDY IN

THE LOGIC OF PRACTICE

By L. T. HOBHOUSE, D.Lit.,

LL.D., MARTIN WHITE PROFESSOR OF
SOCIOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.
RUSKIN HOOSE, ^o MUSEUM STREET, W.C. i


•: '' ^ : X


A}


V


\ Vr


• •


. ; . . . ...


First published in 1921


{All rights r^ervi^


CONTENTS

WAOM

INTRODUCTION 9

CHAPTER I

THB SPRINGS OF ACTION 10

(i) Impulse, as opposed to reason, seems to dominate human
action. (2) This view has been fortified by psychological
anal3rsis which sees in the alleged " reasons " for action an
expression for underlying impulses. (3) But, if intellect
without impulse is void, impulse without intellect is blind,
(4) and the intellectual element is not purely derivative but has
intellectual sources. (5) On the other hand, it is a fallacy
to oppose the Practical Reason to the body of impulse as a whole.

(6) In fact intelUgence begins by defining the ends of impulse,

(7) while, as it develops, impulse is transformed. The question
is, what part intelligence (and in particular Reason) plays in
the transformation.

CHAPTER II

IMPULSE AND CONTROL 36

(i) " Bare " impulse involves but is not identical with feeling.

(2) The function of feeling is to guide impulse in adaptation to

the conditions of life. (3) Impulse informed by anticipation

of an end is desire. The term has then a wider meaning than

that of " bare " impulse. (^) The impulse to an inclusive End

involving many related desires is a volition, (5) and the impulse

to an end dominating aU Ufe is the Will. (6) The Will is the

mass of impulse as an organized system (7) resting on feeling

in a generic sense of the term. (8) The principle of Control

then lies not outside, but within the system of impulse-feeling,

and it is here if an3rwhere that practical rationality must be

found.

5


6 THE RATIONAL GOOD

CHAPTER III

fAGK

THE RATIONAL 56

(i) The rational judgment is that which is consistent, grounded
and objective, the first two characters being the test of the third.
(2) The search for grounds leads up to immediate judgments
both particular and general. Particular immediate judgments,
however, are not indubitably true, but are corroborated by
interconnexion. (3) Immediate general judgments likewise
require interconnexion. (4) Interconnectedness is in fact the
rational basis of belief. (5) The grounds on which intercon-
nexion rests are universal relations. (6) The principles of
interconnexion rest on the consilience of all consistent acts of
inference. (7) The rational in cognition is then the effort to
attain truth by the persistent interconnexion of judgments
through univttsal relations.

CHAPTER IV

THE GOOD 65

(i) Is there any reason in the choice of ultimate ends, i.e. is
there a Rational Good ? (a) Generically the Good appears as
a harmony (mutual support) of feeling and effort, (3) or of
feeling and passive experience including, e.g., observation of the
behaviour of another. Generically pleasure is feeling in har-
mony and pain in disharmony. (4) The fact asserted by the
judgment " This is Good " is thus a relation between an experi-
ence and a feeling. Either element may be called good as
pertaining to the whole.

CHAPTER V

THE RATIONAL GOOD 78

(i) The Rational Good must be a consistent scheme of purposes
interconnected by universal relations in which subjective
disturbance is eliminated, (a) This involves a dual harmony
of feeling with feeling and of feeling with experience. (3) There
may be internal consistency from a more partial point of view ^
but rationality involves universalism, i.e. a system compre-
hending the whole world of all minds in a single scheme.
(4) The authority of this scheme rests on the fact that the judg-
ments composing it form a reasonable system, and assert a


CONTENTS 7

FAOB

reality which is not dependent on the opinion of the individual.
Its psychological force is the organization of impnlse-feding
which reason effects. (5) The foundation of the reality which
it asserts is the interconnectedness of all mind& (6) The
elements of impulse-feeling evolve under the conditions of
existence and are of the instinctive type. (7) The impulse
towards harmony is rational though it has not attained finality
but continually corrects itself.

CHAPTER VI

THB REALIZED GOOD 96

(i) Harmony involves the modification of impulses so far as
incompatible. (2) This depends on the development of per-
sonality, (3) and of the social principle. (4) Development is
a progressive harmony (5) which in its matured form may
be described as happiness in the fulfilment of life as a whole.
(6) This definition is not incompatible with the principle that
the individual mind requires an object beyond itself.

CHAPTER VII

APPLICATIONS . . . 120

(i) The recognized moral order contains ..irrational elements.
(2) How are rational principles to be brought into relation with
it ? (3) Different interests must be preserved except so far as
they conflict. (4) Where there is conflict the test is consistency
carried through life as a whole. (5) In developing a rational
order three rules of method are of use, (6) viz. (a) the system
must " work/' (7) (6) must impose no restraint not necessary
for its working, (8) (c) must be impartial. (9) Bearing of the
principle on abstract rights and collective wholes.

CHAPTER VIII

IMPLICATIONS 137

(i) Relation of the Principle of Harmony to Utilitarianism
(2) and to Idealism. (3) Self-sacrifice caumot be resolved into
self-realization. (4) Disparity of values, apparently opposed
to the principle, is found to corroborate it. (5) The sanction
of the principle is internal harmony. (6) It accords with a
spiritual interpretation of the world-process. (7) The anti-
ethical view of development is false.


PREFACE

The following chapters were originally written in 1908-9,
in amplification of a sketch of ethical theory contained
in my Morals in Evolution, which had been published
three years earlier. I was not, however, satisfied with
the result, and put the manuscript aside for several years.
It has now been almost entirely re-written. My obliga-
tions to various writers on Psychology and Ethics will
be manifest, but the general theory which most nearly
corresponds to the central doctrine of the work is
one which I heard expounded in a paper read in New
York in 191 1 by a distinguished lecturer on Ethics,
and have never met with again in print. Mr. J. A.
Hobson kindly read the work in its original form, and
made many valuable criticisms. Mr. A. W. Perris has
performed the same service to the revised work, and
several alterations and additions are due to his sugges-
tions. I have also to thank him for revising the proofs.

L. T. H.

Wimbledon,
October, 1920.


<


■• • • - - , •


• •


INTRODUCTION

What is right, we have often been told, is the easiest
thing in the world to know and the most difl&cult thing
to do. Unfortunately truth will not compress itself into
epigram, and a facile antithesis is usually misleading.
To deal plainly with himself is perhaps enough for a man
in ninety-nine cases, but the hundredth, if he still deals
plainly, will present a real difficulty. Moreover the
ninety-nine cases are, or appear to be, so easy because
the man Uves and moves and acts in a society with defined
standards, estabUshed relations, express or implied under-
standings under which he has himself grown up and to
which his sense of right and wrong has adapted itself.
Hfijcnows in the ordinary case what is expected of him,
and he expects noth ing else of himself. If these standards
are assumed, private conduct becomes a matter of their
application, and it is true that this is, in any ordinary
case, simple enough. But suppose the social standards
themselves to be called in question. By what standard
shall they be judged ? Here is a question which is so
far from simple that the plain man recoils from it. Why
question the wisdom of our ancestors, the system which
has worked — ^not perfectly perhaps, but still has worked
— and has made us what we are ? Let us do our dut v
ip that state of life to wWch it_shali please God to call
us, and be thankful that we are members of a stable
community with stations provided for all respectable
people to fill. Unfortunately we cannot dispose of the
question in this manner. Our standards criticize them-
selves. We have spoken of defined and recognized rulos


10 THE RATIONAL GOOD

which are not difficult to apply. But if we look closely
••into the network of current ideas of conduct we shall
fiftd not -on^* ^tafidard but several. There are codes of
/•. !??1^-*^?4';c0stom, g&od manners and good taste, partly
supplementing, partly correcting one another. In par-
ticular, behind the code of ordinary respectable society
are principles higher and more austere, intolerant of
much which the working standard allows. In large
measure these principles are embodied in the teaching
of the Churches and in that sense belong to the officially
recognized tradition. The shifts and devices by which
they are accommodated to the working standard form
the familiar theme of the satirist, and do not concern us
for the moment. Our point is merely that while it may
be quite easy for a man to apply the everyday standard
to his particular case, and equally easy as an intellectual
exercise to apply an ideal standard, he may find in the
result that what is permitted by one code is repudiated,
if he takes it seriously, by the other, and his real difficulty
is to answer the question : under which Lord ? Now
the same question at bottom confronts society as a whole/
It lives on a certain tradition. It has its network of
institutions, customs, and understandings. But it also
contains germs and possibilities of a different life. The
time is past when men in the mass simply took the
established order for granted. They react upon it freely
and seek avowedly to mould it to their own ideals. But
again, there are more ideals than one, and between them
what is to decide ? The established order sits serene
while the ideals wrangle over the succession. Indeed, to
some of them it may apply the wit of Charles II : " They
will never kill me, James, to make you king." It must
be admitted that ideals may attract the fanatics, the
ill-balanced, and the mischief-makers. Violence is met
by violence, and the question of right and wrong becomes
an issue between numbers and organization, perhaps in
the last resort between the bomb and the machine gun.
Morality itself is as old as mankind, but the moral
ideal seems to be by comparison a recent growth. The


INTRODUCTION ii

question has often been asked whether any tribe, however
primitive, has subsisted without some form of religion,
and the answer depends on what we mean by religion.
But if the question be whether any tribe has existed
without morsdity, the reply can be made more definite;
Investigation has shown that the simplest and most
primitive peoples known have their definite codes of
custom according to which every one knows what he is
to expect and what is expected of him. The code is
ordinarily observed, and it suffices to cover as much as
is essential in the simple relations of primitive life, to
give a certain protection to person and property, and a
certain regularity to sex-regulations. Generally, it has
behind it a certain body of belief, sometimes of religious,
more often of magical, colour. But its real strength is
the force of custom itself and the underlpng fear of
anjrthing that would profoundly change or destroy the
social order. In this sense, then, investigation shows
morality to be universal, and general considerations point
to the same conclusion. For we may well ask how any
number of human beings could live permanently together
unless they understood one another, and how they coidd
understand one another unless they knew what to expect
and what would be expected of them under given con-
ditions, and unless, on the whole, they had confidence that
the expectations would be reaUzed. These things can only
be if men have defined obligations to which ordinarily
they are loyal.

As society enlarges and developes, morality is elaborated
and, on the whole, refined. The code has to deal with
wider and more complex relations, and primitive custom
breaks up into the law which has its definite organs of
enforcement and morality in the narrower sense, which
covers the finer and more personal issues. There is, as
we all know, a rich variety of detail in the legal and moral
codes of various times and places, yet in fundamental
principle there is more agreement in the actual working
codes of society than we of the " higher " civilizations
like to acknowledge. For the working code, we^may say


12 . THE RATIONAL GOOD

generally, is of the nature of a compromise between self
and society . It takes the ordinary man just as he is
with all his confused and often conflicting impulses,
good and bad, social and selfish, and it puts him under
certain restraints. He must not move his neighbour's
landmark, but on the whole he may do what he will
within his own. Life is a kind of game, in which each is
expected to play for his own hand, only he must play
according to rule. But some few centuries before our
era there emerged a very different conception of life and
duty. According to this conception life is not a game
to be played by man against man, or family against
family, or community against community. Life rests
on a secret, profound, yet exceedingly simple once
revealed, which dissipates all its difficulties, puts an end
to strife and sorrow, shows us the way of light, emancipa-
tion, and peace. The secret is to put off self-hood, and
merge ourselves in the life of others, of all living things,
perhaps of the universe, to ask for nothing, to be ready
to give everything.

" Full of hindrances is household life, a path defiled by passion,
free as the air is the life of him who has renounced all worldly
things." »

Such a man is in charity not only with all mankind,
but with all created things.

" And he lets his mind pervade one quarter of the world with]
thoughts of love, and so the second, and so the third, and so the
fourth. And thus the whole wide world, above, below, around,
and everjrwhere, does he continue to pervade with heart of Love,
far reaching, grown great, and beyond measure. Just, Vasettha,
as a mighty trumpeter makes himself heard — and that without
difficulty — ^in all the four directions, even so of all things that
have shape and life, there is not one that he passes by or leaves
J aside, but regards them all with mind set free, and deep, full love." *

How far this Buddhist conception is original and what
elements it may have derived from earUer Brahmanic

' Buddhist Sutias, Sacr$d Books of the East, vol. xi. p. 187.
» Ibid., p 201


INTRODUCTION 13

teaching we need not here enquire. We may remark only
on the striking analogies in the doctrine of Lao Tse : " Tp
joy in conquest is to joy in the loss of human life." " Who-
soever humbleth himself shall be exalted, and whosoever
exalteth himself shall be abased." " I would return
good for good, I would also return good for evil. I
would likewise meet suspicion with confidence." » We
may think also of the doctrine of equal universal benevo-
lence upheld by the philosopher Mih against the protests
of the classical moralists as evidence that wherever or
whenever these conceptions originated they took root in
China as well as in India. Spreading West they inspired
various ethical and religious disciplines, and received one
of their noblest expressions in the Christianity of the
Gospels.*

Vary as it may in detail and in the cosmological ideas
associated with it, the doctrine of the selfless life is one,
and easily recognizable in all its expressions. Its promul-
gation constitutes the one really great epoch in moral
evolution, and is comparable in its effect to the Copemican
revolution in astronomy and the remodelling of scientific
method achieved in the period from Galileo to Newton.
No one who has ever entered at all into the spirit of
the teaching can see life again in quite the same light.
It is one of the revelations, like falling in love, or Uke
parenthood, each of which also puts life on a different
plane. Yet, with all its potency, the alleged simplicity
of the doctrine was a delusion. It has not been foimd
possible for men in the mass to live by it, and its recep-
tion as an orthodoxy has always been a disaster to the
creed. I would not deny that, now and again, we catch
a glimpse of it in our working life, and one or two of us
may have known a woman— or even, rarer exception, a
man — ^whose nature seems by some divine gift moulded
throughout on the lines of the selfless religion. But to
attract numbers, and keep them, the teachers and the

» The Path of Virtue, Tr. by Old, chape, xxii, xxxi, and xlix.
' And let us add, lor the sake of justice, in the Pauline account
of charity.


14 THE RATIONAL GOOD

Churches have striven in vain by asceticisms and brother-
hoods, disciplines and charities. They could enforce
the rules, but not breathe the spirit into the mass.'
Here is the main root of that divided allegiance of which
we have spoken. For all Christian conMnunities the

>laws of God and of man fall asunder and the patchwork
compromises are so often threadbare that we are driven
to wonder whether the franker Paganism did not gain
in honesty what it lost in idealism. But the real trouble
lies deeper even than the diflBculty of forcing too lofty a
creed on imperfect mankind. The doctrine itself is only
one-half of the truth, and, if the Western world has some
hold of the complementary half, the means of fitting
them together are still to seek. For the Eastern doctrine
in itself tends to quietism and resignation, and the truth
that the West has discovered — a truth originating perhaps
with the Greeks, but revived with new meaning in modem

> times — ^points in the most opposite direction. For collec-
tive mankind resignation is not a duty, but a coward's
plea. Its duty is not to do the will of the gods, but to
refashion the world to its own will, whereto, so far as
concerns material things, it is slowly finding out the

« The conversion of the Empire was a pyrrhic victory for
Christiamty. How was communism to be reconciled with pro-
perty, " take no thought for the morrow " with industry and thrift,
non-resistance with the law courts and, above all, with war, the
prohibition of oaths with judicial procedure, and so forth ? On
some points the Church put up a fight, e.g. at one period it actually
secured the suspension of the death penalty, and on the whole
it had its way (whether for good or ill) in the law of marriage and
divorce. But in the main the official churches adopted a question-
able form of compromise, maintaining their principles in the letter
while admitting ingenious devices for nullifying tiieir application,
and thus introducing an element of sophistry into the public ethics
of the modem world which we do not find in antiquity. On the
other hand there have seldom been wanting smaU, unorthodox
bodies which have stood for the Christian ethics in their purity,
and the influence of these bodies has been great and sometimes
decisive. The whole subject has been discussed by Lecky, History
of European Morals^ chap, iv, and in the present writer's Morals
in Evolution (3rd edition, p. 519).


INTRODUCTION 15

way. Of the individual, it is true, the utmost sacrifice
may be demanded, but for a cause, not as an end in itself,
not to destroy individuality. On the contrary the demand
is pervading and universal, for rights, scope, the means
of expression, the conditions of happiness, whether for
the individual, the class, the sex, the nation, or the race.
For every human seed the fullness of its flower and fruit.
This is a creed not of resignation, but of assertion. The
danger is that becoming self-assertion, it may turn to
anarchy, and that is why, if we could but find the way,
it must be welded upon the old lore of the East.

In the meantime men find themselves in a new world
of vast possibilities and increasing power. 'QlfijL.aie
fired with new hopes, and impatifipt nf old re^traip^y.
Often t b^y a^T-e t^mpfpH in fmsi; fn paj;g[gp ffi ther than

r^agon, and sometim es to rely more 01^ fq rfifi ^^^" ^"
justice . In the welter of new elements it is not wonderful
that it should be so. The world was not made in six
days, nor will it be remade in six generations, and mean-
wldle ideals will, if we may so put it, contend with as
much violence and as Uttle scruple as persons.

But is there not, after all, a more excellent way ? Is
there not a method of bringing reason to bear on matters
practical and social as on matters physical and mathe-
matical ? In the world of thought there is a reaUty to
which preconceived opinion and rebellious emotion aUke
must bow. When experiment and calculation have
spoken controversy is put to silence. Is there no corre-
sponding reality, no analogous method in the world of
practice, and of human values ? There is, it may be
said, this essential difference. The ReaUty of Science
recks nothing of human wishes and emotions. But the
values of human life are the objects of our wishes, and
form the very tissue of our emotions. They neithei^^
subsist nor go forward Uke a planet in its orbit without
regard to the human will, but are made and unmade by
that will. They are what we would have them to be,
whereas the reality which science studies is what it is,v
no matter what we would have it to be, Rational proof,


i6 THE RATIONAL GOOD

then, is inapplicable to human ends. Feelings and
desires are not susceptible of truth and falsity, and there
is nothing to be proved or disproved about them.

Such is the first and most obvious retort to the claim
of Reason to govern the world of practice. But a little
consideration suggests some points at which the contrast
between theory and practice is overstated. Is the world
of Values — ^to go to the central point — so completely
shut off from the world of truth and reality as the retort
assumes ? No one would deny that given a certain End,
the means employed to bring it about may be such as
will " really " succeed or " really " fail. No one will
deny that in this respect our judgments about action
may be true or false. But what of our ends when we
have gained them ? Do we not find that some are
" really " satisfying, and others " really " vain and
illusory, and if so, must we not admit that there is a
reality and an unreality in the world of our desire, and
a truth and falsity in our judgments as to what is good ?
Lastly, if A pursues an end which is very satisfactory to
him, but a crushing blow to B, is that end good as A
thinks, or bad as B considers ? Is there no court of
appeal, nothing to determine what is just and fair between
the parties ? A strong and persistent impulse — ^if we
are to appeal only to impulses — ^urges us to " see fair "
in such a case, and that means to find something which
is " really " right no matter what A and B may severally
think. It looks, then, as though right and wrong may
stand to the will much as true and false stand to the
judgment. It would seem that they, too, claim a kind
of validity which is regardless of any individual aberration.
If that is so we shall not be surprised if we find something
analogous to the reason which determines what is true
in the processes which establish what is right.

Whether these things are so is the question to be asked
in this volume. We are concerned with the function of
Reason in practical life. We shall enquire whether
there is a Rational, and therefore a demonstrable, standard
of values to which the actions of man and the institutions


INTRODUCTION 17

of society may be referred for judgment. If we find such
a standard, which we may call the Rational Good, we
shall have to ask in what sort of life inward and outward
is it realized, what authority and power does it possess
to dominate the actual conduct of men, and what Ught
does it throw on the relation between human aspirations
and the cosmic processes among which the life of the
race is numbered. These are all questions of the first
principles of Ethics and Religion. To apply such principles
to the social structure, which is the great need of our
time, requires a systematic study of " axiomata media "
and a concrete enquiry into the actual working of insti-
tutions which cannot be attempted on this occasion.
The connexion of wide generaUties with particular facts
involves the establishment of many intervening links.
These facts must be left to the student of society and
the student of character. But it will be found in the
sequel that our principles involve, as all substantial
propositions must, the general rules and directions for
their application.


THE RATIONAL GOOD


CHAPTER I

THE SPRINGS OF ACTION

I. In the world of turbid feeKng and conflicting impulses
wherein active life moves and has its being, Reason is
a strange, an unbidden and often an unwelcome guest.
A philosophic theory may explain, but seldom guides the
actions of men. An ideal must usually be translated,
perhaps mistranslated, into a symbol ; it must be per-
sonified, perhaps mispersonified, in a leader, before it
will command the devotion of the multitude. Once
woven into habitual modes of feeling, once caught into
the web of daily effort and strife, once entangled in all
the associations of victory and defeat, satisfied ambition
or glow of resentment, it may gain a power to conjure
from the memories it evokes. It will seldom kindle and
sustain by its inherent force and value. The effective/
rules of conduct are rather those which formulate what]
men feel than those which tell them what they ought to '
feel. Indeed, it was the master of thinkers who said
that bare thinking sets nothing moving.

In some directions no doubt the growth of applied
science has extended the sphere of reason in himian affairs.
Yet in the world of mind, which might seem to be her
own domain, reason in these days seems sadly out of
fashion. Psychology, which begins to reduce the play of
mental activity to a science, has not fostered the con-
ception of conduct as a reasoned art. On the contrary,

19


^fSBtvm


I


20 THE RATIONAL GOOD

its tendency is to emphasize the primacy of feeling, the
sway of instinct, the prevalence of the irrational in the
mass movements of mankind. What is still more remark-
able, philosophy itself, once the appointed guardian and
advocate of reason, shares in the irrationalist tendency.
We shall end by defining man as the irrational animal,
and the modern philosopher as his prophet.

2. So far as psychology is concerned the emphasis on
the irrational is easy to understand. When men first
reflect upon their behaviour they naturally start with
things of which they are fully conscious. If I am asked
why I do this or that, my answer is given in terms of
an End. If I cannot state the end clearly I seem to
myself rather foolish, and to my neighbour, perhaps,
insincere. So axiomatic does it seem that — ^to use the
Greek phrase — everj^hing is done for the sake of thew
apparent good that is to come from it. But to Psychology
this mode of explanation will often seem very superficial.
Going behind the ordinary consciousness, -psychology is
very largely concerned in distinguishing the forces operating
in the twilight of semi-consciousness, if not in the dark
of the unconscious, upon which our purposes depend,
and, since new discoveries are very like new toys, it is
not surprising if some psychologists, in their deUght
with the forces that they have laid bare, make of these
the whole of mind, and, while elevating impulse and
emotion to the highest place, regard reason and will as
superficial conceptions. On this way of thinking the
reasons that we give for action are merely ex post facto
formulae for the impulses and emotions that really prompt
the act. The impulses are not based upon the reasons
but the reasons on the impulses. A man ma]^ think
that he loves a woman because she is beautiful,^ but in
reaUty she is beautiful to him because he loves her. He
says, and even believes, that he resents another's claim
V because it is wrong, v In reaUty he finds it wrong because
he resents it. He^does this or abstains from that_m
conscious obedience^ f^ "the ^wiir"^F God. In reality the
effective will of God is the expression of impulses, within


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 21

himself, as modified by social traditions reposing in the
last resort on cognate impulses in the minds of other
men. From this last case it appears that not only does
a man's personal account of his personal nature rest on
his personal impulses, but social theories, traditional
beliefs, ancestral customs, and new departures spring,
not from the reasons given for them, but from impulses,
permanent or transitory, of mankind. Thus, a com-
pletely new mode of explaining social institutions arises.
When it was first discovered that many "primitive"
peoples buried food and implements, perhaps horse and
wife into the bargain, with a dead chieftain, the interpre-
tation was, very naturally, that they believed the dead
man to enjoy a continued existence very similar to his
life on earth, and they buried with him all that he would
most need in the future state. What had to be explained
on this view was the genesis of the belief. That being
given, the funeral practices would follow. But the
psychological methods that we are considering tend to
reverse the order. They suggest that certain emotions
about the dead, a strange blend of fear, regret, and afEec-
tion, prompted the offerings, and the theory came in
afterwards as an explanation. In the Banks Islands they
place a piece of banana trunk on the bosom of a dead
mother. This is to deceive her ghost, which would
otherwise carry off the living child. Could even the
Banks Islander be so childish as to cheat himself with
this reasoning if he were really moved by reasoning
alone ? The truth is that a powerful sentiment urges
him to give the dead woman that which she most cherishes.
A still more powerful sentiment bids him save the baby.
Between the two he devises a compromise of make-believe,
all in logical terms, but full of inconsistencies. The
mother remains alive enough to desire her baby, but not
intelligent enough to distinguish between the baby and
a piece of wood. The compromise could deceive no one,
however savage, if he had not made up his mind to be
deceived. Now the cruder self-deceptions may be only
possible at the lower stages, but, fundamentally, the


22 THE RATIONAL GOOD

same relation between impulse, emotion, desire on the
one side, and explicit purposes, ideals and principles
upon the other, holds for all stages of development. The
wicked do not at bottom fear hell, but Uve in a hell of
fear. We do not punish criminals because punishment
is just, but because we hate or fear them, and out of our
hatreds and fears we weave a system of ideas in which,
as though on impersonal and impartial principles, suffering
is attached to wrong-doing. Our ethical and social
principles are in the same case. The French philosophers -
announce the rights of man, as so many abstract principles
founded on reason and applicable at all times and places
to all mankind. In reality they formulated the resent-
ment of the French bourgeoisie against aristocratic
privilege and monarchical misrule. To the English
Utilitarian democracy — ^which he formulated as a logical
deduction from principles of ethics and psychology —
meant, in fact, the supremacy of his own middle class,
and Liberty meant the plenitude of opportunity for its^-
commercial ambitions. So we might go on with the
religious, ethical, or social principles that the world has
known. The whole may be summed up in this way.
■/(At bottom man is moved, not by ideas or principles,
but by impulses and emotions, or to put them into a ^
compound term — since they are so closely allied — ^by
impulse-feeling. But he is influenced not only directly
but in many subtle ways by the impulse-feeling of others,
and he has to give and receive an account of what he
does and what they do. Hence he formulates his impulses
into ends, and explains them by reasons which are
mutually intelligible. This explanation has a use of its
own. It serves intercommunication and mutual under-
standing. But in the order of causation it arises ex post
facto. The real cause, whether of the personal act or\
the social custom, or the ethical principle, Ues in impulse-/
feeling. To treat the alleged reason as the true groimd
is the fallacy of intellectualism.

In fact it would seem, on this view, that man is not
precisely the irrational animal as suggested above. Still


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 23

less is he the rational animal of his own philosophy. We
might describe him rather as the would-be rational
animal. Among his other impulses he owns this curiosity
among desires — the desire to explain himself to himself
and others. Acting under this impulse he forms theories
of " life and action," and, taking these theories seriously,
he becomes an intellectualist. In reality reason, intellect,
perhaps consciousness itself, are only " epiphenomena."
They are the fly upon the wheel which in reality revolves
on the hub of emotion, or rather of still deeper, perhaps
purely physical, forces, which for some unintelligible
reason have felt emotion as their concomitant — a useless
concomitant, functionless, an effect, but not a cause,
a fly upon the wheel.

3. With the ultimate questions of causation involved
I cannot deal here. I must assume in general terms that
the Ufe of mind has a true meaning and function, that
it is not merely an effect of bodily movements or their
projection, as it were, upon another plane, but takes
part in them, and through them makes itself effective
in the world.' But if that is assumed, the question of
the true relation between the unconscious and the con-
scious, the emotional and the rational, impulse and idea,
still remains, and the question will run all through our
enquiry. Clearly, it is fruitless to speak of a Logic of
Practice if there can be no practical significance in logic.
What may be remarked as a preliminary is that, of the
examples chosen above, the reader will probably have
found some much more convincing than others. Thus,
to take the very first, love is proverbial for its blindness,
and for its power of endowing the loved object with all
lovable qualities. This is perhaps the strongest case for
the theory that the emotion creates its own excuse. But
even Love may, tragically, have its eyes opened. It
could not be maintained that faults never appear till

' For a thoroughgoing defence of this view see Dr. McDougairs
Body and Mind, In excuse for my omission here I may be allowed
to refer to my Mind in Evolution, chap, ii, and Development and
Purpose, Part II, chap. iv.


34 THE RATIONAL GOOD

love is dead. It must be allowed that it is the blemish
that sometimes gives it its mortal wound. Take next,
resentment. If our anger seeks justification, is it not
equally true that to be required to state our case has
its effect upon our anger ? When we lay it before another
in plain language are we not forced to make some dis-
tinction between our personal sources of irritation and
the ofEence which will be recognized as such by an impartial
man, and would it be questioned that the judgment of
our neighbour has its effect, if not on the emotion itself,
at any rate upon its practical expression ? Grant, for
the saike of argument, that legal punishments originate
from emotions of blinded indignation and fear. The
fact remains that, as they stand, they constitute a penal
code formulated in abstract terms, defining impersonally
the crimes for which they are due, the procedure by which
guilt is to be ascertained, and so forth. There is a long
interval between the penalty so inflicted and the direct
emotional expression of resentment by an injured man,
and that interval is occupied by processes of deliberation,
discussion, comparison, by considerations of public
interest, by reflective notions of justice, responsibility
and desert. It riiay be said that, if we take away the
primitive emotion, all this legal mechanism would be as
powerless as the cold gun without the powder. Maybe,
but without law and morals the emotion would be as
ill-directed as the powder without the gun. There are
two elements in human action, and they are necessary
to one another. Whether idea or impulse comes first
i/)may be difl&cult in a specific case to determine, but,
whichever comes first, both in the end are equally essential
to the developed purpose. It may well be that some
sentiment ' about the dead first prompted funeral gifts.
But they could never have assumed their elaborate

' Whether it be fear or love. It looks as though the burning,
burial or destruction of the dead man's belongings were prompted,
at the lowest stage, by a kind of dread expressed, in the first degree
of reflection, in the magical conception of a death infection. The
kindlier feeling is perhaps later.


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 25

development — ^including sometimes the sacrifices of slaves,
and even of the widow, at the grave — ^but from the positive
and articulate belief in survival. Nor would this belief
have arisen out of the sentiment alone if it had not been
favoured by the intellectual situation. The belief in
continuity is founded on a very simple logic, and, for the
simpler peoples, obtained some corroboration from dreams
and an easy explanation from the animistic conception of
soul and body. In fact, when this conception is shattered,
the practices are changed and reduced to a shadow of
themselves. Often we can clearly see that it is the
belief which causes practices that probe the very depths
of human emotional capacity. Take the case of human
sacrifice. Are we to attribute this to a direct delight in
cruelty, or even negatively to a special callousness in
savage peoples ? There is not the smallest reason to
regard agriculturists as inherently more callous than
other men. On the contrary, the manners of a settled
agricultural people are in general milder, if anything,
than those of the herdsman and the hunter. But the
overwhelming majority of cases of human sacrifice are
found among agricultural peoples of the second and third
stages, and the reason is simply the widespread belief,
of magical origin, in the influence of a human victim upon
the crops. We cannot suppose that our ancestors, in
the period of religious persecutions, suddenly acquired
an increment of natural cruelty which they lost again
when the persecutions ceased. These appalling cruelties
began when heresy arose, under the influence of the belief
that heresy put all men who might be influenced by it
in jeopardy of eternal suffering. When this belief began
to be weakened heretics were no longer burnt. Un-
doubtedly the psychologist will trace many unavowed
emotional elements in the work of the inquisitor. In
particular he will realize that it is the inquisitor's own
fear which points his zeal. In exterminating the doubter
he hopes vaguely to extinguish the doubt. Nevertheless
the belief is in the governing fact. The fanatic would
not experience these particular fears in this marked degree


26 THE RATIONAL GOOD

if his imagination had not painted an unjust God in the
image of a Philip II. Still less would he have been able
to persuade the balanced, moderate man to join with
him in burning noble men and women of pure lives had
not one and all been in intellectual agreement on their
theory of the universe.

4. To this the reply may be that, however influential
the conception of God^ of the future life, of the universe
and man's place in it may be, th e^co^ceptiop itse lf rp^ts
nn ^iiman VipnfinTi^ an^ ^xpresses the character of a
ra ce, an af[e. an e poch in civilization. Civilized people
So not tolerate a Moloch. The story of Isaac embodies
the memory of the abolition of human sacrifice under
the influence of a dawning humanity. Plato, with all
his respect for the traditional religion, has to urge a
purgation of the Homeric Olympus. Christian doctrin e
rightly pla ced Charity above Faith, and, if men m genera l
had been m tneir heart as in their profession Christians,
they would never h av e acquiesced in a conception o f.
I)eity ydiicli necessitated per g^cutiffp . Indeed, as manners
grew milder they revolted against it. Thus, if it is con-
ceded that theory influences practice, it will only be on
the understanding that theory is itself determined by
character. But this objection only allows a part of the
truth. When God has become the ideal of goodness —
a position only reached at an advanced stage of rehgious
development — ^it would certainly seem that the character
attributed to God must reflect the essential elements of
perfection as conceived by man. But to frame a consistent
ideal of perfection is itself as much an intellectual as a
moral effort, and to reconcile perfect goodness of will
with the possession of disposing power over the universe
is emphatically a problem for the intelligence, and one
which it could not, in fact, solve. The God of Christianity
was encumbered from the first with remnants of the
Old Testament tradition — ^which to this day are quoted
as an excuse for vicarious punishment — and it was difficult
to get rid of these inconsistencies without shaking the
authority of tradition. What was more serious was


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 27

that — ^to meet purely intellectual needs — God was the
creator of all things and the disposer of the eternal
destinies of men. Hence all the problems of the origin
of evil, of free will, desert, grace, and predestination,
problems of intellectual origin that could neither be solved
nor even discussed Without raising acute moral questions.

To take an illustration from quite another part of our
field, how great has been the influence of biological
investigation on modem social theory. The conception
of natural selection and the struggle for existence has
been used at one time to justify competition and obstruct
the growing sense of collective responsibility, at another
to justify war and conquest, and silence the claims of
personal liberty and international right. Clear thinking
is every whit as necessary as right feeling to the discussion
of the moral issues raised by such theories. It is perfectly
true that they owe their ready acceptance to a favourable
emotional prepossession. It is quite easy to understand
why some of the modem Eugenic arguments are popular
among the classes that are fortxmately circumstanced
and can barely obtain a hearing from the " bottom dog."
But though the desires and emotions of men account for
the popularity or unpopularity of social theories they
do not account for the theories themselves. These arise
out of the intellectual situation, just as the prevalent
attitude towards them arises out of the emotional situa-
tion, and, like all theories, they have in the end to run
the racket of logical and evidential tests. It would,
I admit, be too much to say that a popular theory may
be killed instantaneously by disproof. It dies hard, orr
rather undergoes a process of evanescence, fading away(
first from the discourse of educated and intelligent men, I
becoming a mark of ignorance, of simplicity, and so by
stages dissolving into oblivion while quicker minds are
busied in finding a substitute.

Theories, then, exert a real directive influence, and
theories have their main root in the intellectual world —
in the state of knowledge, the level of intellectual clarity,
the mode in which men conceive the problems of life


aS THE RATIONAL GOOD

and society. The critic of intellectualism can see the
point quite clearly when the deficiencies of theory are
in question. He will show how the abstraction of natural
rights or of popular sovereignty justified some of the
worst mistakes and excesses of the French Revolution,
how ideas of Liberty and Equality overshadowed the
structure of the American Constitution, how weaknesses
in Bentham or in Cobden vitiated much of the work of
English Liberalism. Admitting that theories may be
influential for evil he does not recognize that they can
be influential for good. Yet his whole criticism is an
unwitting testimony to the importance of well-reasoned
ideals. If defects in the theories of Rousseau or Bentham
are seriously chargeable with certain bad results in practice,
it follows that, if these mistakes had been corrected in
good time by a better way, those ill results would have
been avoided. On the whole question of the real influence ^
of social theories — and I would associate religious ideals
with them for this purpose — ^we ought, I would contend,
to keep an open mind and look to careful historical and
comparative investigation rather than to theories of ^
human motive alone to give us the answer. The historic
fortunes of ideals, what has actually determined their
growth, what real influence they have exerted upon
events, how far they have been merely an intellectualized
version, of some process that was going on, and would
have gone on to the end, without them, how far they
have really been effective in altering the face of society
— ^these are questions on which, within certain limits,
general psychology leaves us with an open mind. It
indicates several highly interesting possibilities, and it
is the fascinating, though exceeding difficult, task of
sociology to determine in each case which possibility has
been realized. Was the Stoic philosophy, for example,
a real force in the remodelling of Roman jurisprudence,
or did it merely furnish a convenient formula for changes
necessitated by an expanding civilization, and the needs
of a cosmopolitan empire ? If the mere needs were the
prinaary causes of change, would they have been so clearly


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION t^

felt, or the lines of solution so readily discoverable without
the aid of the larger principles which the philosophy
furnished ? How far, again, in the fourth and fifth cen-
turies was Christianity the conqueror or the conquered ?
Was the world Christianized at bottom, or the Church
paganized ? How far, in modern times, were the theories
to which we have alluded above merely a reflection of
popular movements in the minds of bookish men ? How
far was there an interaction between theory and event,
and would a more adequate theory have had practical
effect in giving increased coherence to the impulses of
men ? These are questions to which, I think, the concrete
answer must be supplied in each case by the social
historian trained in psychological analysis. As we proceed
we shall see, in general, something of what theory can
and of what it cannot do, and for our present purpose
these generalities will have to suffice.

5. One thing we can, in fact, see emerging from the
considerations already reviewed. Much of the prejudice
against reason is due to a misconception for which its
friends are as much responsible as its enemies. By both
alike reason is often taken as a thing apart. On the
side of knowledge it is divorced from experience, on the
side of conduct from feeUng. In both cases the divorce
is fatal to a true understanding. In regard to conduct
the '^ practical Reason " is not a faculty which sits aloft,
issuing impotent orders to a refractory multitude of
impulses and emotions. It is not a faculty concerned
with a system of abstract truths deducible, Uke so many
mathematical formulae, from first principles that have
nothing to do with human feeling. It is rather a general
expression for something which careful analysis reveals
in permanent operation within the emotional fiel3^. The
stupidest human being outside an idiot asylum is not
guided by pure impulse alone. With greater or less
clearness he realizes what he is about, he has an idea of
his immediate end, he can follow the concatenation of
ends and means, and he can weigh the advantages and
disadvantages of one end against another. Irrational as


30 THE RATIONAL GOOD

the average life may seem when tested by comparison
with some all-embracing, self-consistent principle of
conduct, it is orderiy when compared with the chaos
of spluttering impulses which would remain if the element
of reason were once for all abstracted. If a man has no
dominating purpose or creed that effectively directs his
life as a whole, he has as a rule threads and filaments of
purpose running through and connecting branches of
his conduct. He has probably his trade or profession,
his family life and affections, his hobbies, his house and
possessions ; each of these gives a certain order and
consecutiveness to his conduct, and renders it so -far
purposive, continuous, and rational. The total result,
it is true, may be a patchwork rather than a pattern,
and the colours may not always match. One hand may
undo the work of the other, and the contrasts of character
presented by the same being in different relations may
be a legitimate theme of satire ; but it is fair to judge
in the end not only by failures, but by successes, not
only by things done ill, but by iU-doings avoided. There
are elements of order, of restraint, of consecutive pm-pose
in tBe ordinary life, and the starting point of ratiocination
is the conception that these elements are the partial and
imperfect incarnations of a purpose which is comprehen-
sive, self-consistent, and complete. The threads which
string together portions of human conduct are what a
thinker, who was no rationalist, called organic filaments.
They are shreds from the tissue of a higher organism,
which it is the problem of reason to apprehend in its
wholeness.

6. The view thus suggested of the place of thought
in general, and of rational thought in particular, in
ordinary workaday life, is filled in and justified when
we turn to comparative Psychology. The further we go
into questions of origin and development the less we
shall be disposed to admit the abstract and absolute
separation of the worlds of thought and feeling. On
the contrary, the evidence goes to show that intelligence
takes its rise within the sphere of impulse, and has for


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 31

its first function to define the direction of impulse, and^
shape it to a foreseen End. Impulse, informed by aj
definite idea of an End, becomes Purpose, and Purpose
is at least the beginning of rationality in action. The
relation between reason and impulse is fundamental to
our enquiry, and as a preliminary to it let us remark
here that the evolutionary view of purpose is essential ^
to a just understanding of the controversy between the
intellectuaUst and his opponent. For it traces impulse
to deep-seated conditions of life, and finds for it far-
reaching functions in which the interest of the mome nt
is only, a fleeting jhase. But it may be only this interest
that is formulated into a clear purpose. The significance
of the act to the agent may then be only a very small
part of its significance as understood by the psychologist
who traces it to causes of which the agent is unaware
and knows that it performs a function which the agent
does not grasp. At this point the psychologist is tempted
to maintain that the act is irrational unless the reasons
which he sees for it are also those which the agent sees. ^
But this is an arbitrary requirement. The truer inference
is that the sphere of intelligence — ^we will not here say
" reason " — ^in action varies in extent as the bearing
and significance of the act is more or less clearly and fully
understood. It is fallacious to attribute to every agent
a full understanding of all the logical implications of all
that he does. It is equally fallacious to maintain that
he understands nothing on the ground that he does not
understand everything.

To take a simple instance. A mother nurses her
querulous baby to sleep. The plain man regards her
action as purposive and intelligent. She loves the child,
cannot bear to see it fret, knows how to quiet it, and does
so. The ease of the child is her direct purpose, and so
she herself would say. The psychologist descends upon
the plain man, and the mother alike with the intellectuaUst
tallacy. For him her action is instinctive and emotional.
It is the impulsive outcome Tof the maternal feeling
nourished through ages of selection as a means of securing


52 THE RATIONAL GOOD

maternal care for the helpless young. It is rooted in a
hereditary mechanism. The embraces and caresses by
which it is effected are the instinctive, almost reflex,
responses fixed by the inherited machine, and its signifi-
cance is seen in the importance ^f maternal care to the
life of the species. Of all this the mother, as mother,
recks nothing. She is thinking only of the child and its
immediate comfort. She is acting, then, not from reason,
but from impulse. But this account is really the intel-^
lectualist fallacy itself, turned inside out. The mother
is not concerned with all the causes that have made her
what she is, nor with all the effects which will flow from
her actions. But those causes have made her an intelli-
gent being with a certain area of purpose, within which
she consciously adopts whatever means she finds best
suited within that area. If it is an intellectualist fallacy
to say that she acts from a conscious sense of the func-
tions of motherhood, it is another form of the same fallacy
— since it assumes that what is rational in action must
be deduced from abstract principles, independent of
impulse-feeUng — ^to maintain that, unless she does so,
she is acting by pure impulse. The simple truth in that
case Ues with the " plain man." The mother acts intelli-
gently for the purpose that she has in view, not on the
theory which psychologists may frame about the origin
or signification of such purposes.

We may apply a similar analysis to the rise of social
institutions. History will often show that institutions
which play some important part in natural life, and look
as if they had been designed for that part, never were
designed at all. They grew into their mature shape
" from precedent to precedent," each change being,
prompted, not by any general principle, but by the
requirements of some particular situation. If that is so,
there is, at each stage, no consciousness of the remote
and comprehensive end towards which, as we see on
looking back, the society is actually tending, and to
impute consciousness of the end without direct evidence
would be an intellectualist fallacy. But there is conscious-


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION 33

ness at each stage of the immediate concrete or practical
end, and to deny this would be the reverse form of the
same fallacy. If it is often true that men have built
better than they knew, the just analysis of the case is
that, though they were not guided by a conception of
the fabric as a whole, they were well aware of what they
were doing as they added each brick.

7. It is not too much to say that the conception of
purpose as valid and genmne in spite of limitatioeutf
vital to the analysis of reasori/aM]t5"the wTiole'Intefpfe-X
tatiori of mental and "sociaF development. TliS lOWer
forms of action generally serve lunctibns which the
spectator can recognize as useful to the organism or the
stock, but are not determined by any idea of that utility.
We cough not because we are aware that it is desirable
to expel a foreign body from the windpipe, but because
a crumb touches off a machinery which effects a violent
expiration. Again, a dog eats, not that it may sustain
life, but because it is hungry. But here, even at this
low stage, the underlying impulses which do in fact tend
to sustain life begin to force themselves up into conscious-
ness. When the dog begs for a biscuit, or the cat runs
after the person who is carrying a saucer, it is at least
a tenable (if disputed) view that it anticipates this particular
meal, is guided by its anticipation, and adopts accordingly
the behaviour which on such occasions it has found to
f jdeld the required result. Thus, hunger, a feeUng based

I on bodily structure and subservient to vital needs of

the race, stimulates in consciousness the anticipation of
L ^ a certain definite end. That end does not inclu de all *^ -

\ the implications which the biologist sees in it. It is very


4

J


limited an d narr ow, but within its limits it directs action.

>nscious purpose emerges from needs lying below the
threshold, but it is none the less purpose, and conscious.
Were it otherwise there would be no conscious purpose
unless or until we could stand entirely apart from our
hereditary nature.

But, it may be said, it is not awareness of the end
that is in question, but control of the impulse. The

3


34 THE RATIONAL GOOD

irrationalist will admit that, with varying degrees of
clearness and comprehension, we know what we are about,
but he regards this knowledge as a mere " epiphenomenon."
The driving force is still impulse, and our knowledge of
its direction neither adds to its energy nor subtracts
from it. But if knowledge adds nothing to impulse it
does materially affect its execution. Between an impulse ^
acting blindly and the same impulse executing itself on
an intelligent plan there will be a world of difference in
the actual effect upon behaviour. If this is too obvious
to be questioned the reply will be that intelligence may
dictate the means to an end, but not the end itself. In
assigning a purpose we give a reason for the use of this
or that means, but what is the reason of the purpose^
itself ? Is there any but its foundation in feeling or
impulse, which (it will be said) is no reason, but a blunt
psychological fact ? To deal with this objection we «/-
must decide what reason in matters of conduct means,
and that is our main question. But we must remark
at once that as life proceeds and intelUgence expands
there is a transformation not merely of the means by
which impulses achieve their satisfaction, but, to adl
appearance, of impulses themselves. Particular impulses *"
are fitted into a larger scheme, and what is more, are
modified or even suppressed in order to fit the scheme.

Take the case of maternal love again. The animal
mother has the impulse to feed and tend the young,
and protect it from an apparent danger, and it is at least
a tenable view that in so doing she can on occasion act
with some intelligence^ It is a tenable view that the
hen-bird that goes to find a worm and brings it in to the
peeping nestling is not merely prompted from moment
to moment by a series of impidses, but by the purpose of
filUng the yellow beak. However this may be in the
case of the bird, it is quite easy to understand that there
is a stage of intelUgence at which the purpose of feeding
the young when hungry, may be formed without any
clear conception of the good of the young as a being
who is to live and grow, and whose permanent welfare


THE SPRINGS OF ACTION j^

hould govern every temporary service. Now the human
lother certainly can and does form this wider conception,
or her the temporary service becomes either a means
r a constituent element in this wider end, and the wider
id governs the narrower. Her impulse to gratify the
lild may be over-ruled by the advice of the doctor ;
5r desire to soothe it may, if it is ill-tempered, be post-
med to considerations . of discipUne. Her passing
impulses are transformed into an abiding love ; her
temporary and occasional services, each with its own
immediate purpose, become elements in a more permanent,
more comprehensive, purpose. Her action as a whole
is still based on feeling, and the feeling, if you will, is of
instinctive character, but it also involves a wider con-
sciousness, a more reflective consideration of the nature
and bearing of her actions, an increased capacity of
inhibiting immediate impulse, and guiding the behaviour
of the moment by ideas of permanent value. Finally,
if a woman, capable of all the wealth of maternal feeling,
knows herself to be the victim of some fell hereditary
disease, and on that ground renounces the hope of
motherhood altogether, a deliberate consideration of good
and evil results overcomes in her the whole prompting of
instinct, and if her renunciation is still based on feeUng it
is a form of feeling which reflection alone makes possible.
To all this the retort will doubtless be that we are
labouring the obvious and omitting the essential. No
one questions (it will be said) that impulses may be con-
trolled, but they are controlled not by reason, but by
other impulses that happen to conflict with them. In
the last analysis all that " reflection," or anything that
we can call reasoning, does is to trace out consequences
which show the bearing of one impulse on another. It
thus multiplies points of contact, and therefore of possible
conflict. But the conflict once joined, the victory is to
the strong. The most forceful impulse prevails, and the
force of an impulse is something which we may feel, but
which we do not alter by reasoning about it. To test this
account we must enquire further into the meaning of "im-
pulse," the function of feeling, and the nature of control.


CHAPTER II

IMPULSE AND CONTROL

I. The term impulse has a wider and a narrower
signification. In its narrower sense it is opposed to
purpose. An impulsive action, e.g. a blow or a threat-
ening gesture made in sudden anger, has a definite direction
or tendency, e.g. the injury or intimidation of the
antagonist. But it does not involve thought. It does
not wait for the formation of an idea of its own outcome.
On the contrary, the impulsive man acts first and thinks
afterwards. But though in impulsive action we do not
think we seem always to feel, e.g. in our illustration we
feel the hot emotion of anger, and the feeling among
other things distinguishes impulsive action from the
mechanical reflex. Moreover the element of feeling
persists all along the line, and its changes of tone afEect
the impulse. Thus, if the blow gets home it is probable
that the emotion cools down and no further impulse is
formed. On the other hand, if the emotion remains the
impulse continues. The correlation is so close that we
might be tempted to identify them, but we soon discover
discrepancies. Thus extreme emotion tends to paralyse
impulse, while swift and effective impulse seems (to put
it paradoxically) to satisfy emotion before it is fully
excited. Furthermore, if the impulse does not satisfy
the feeling it may be suspended or reversed. When the
timid creature who cannot escape pursuit turns to bay,
the flight impulse is discarded as an unfaithful servant,
and fear itself elects to fight. FeeUng and impulse,
though doubtless rooted in the same fundamental suscep-


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 37

tibilities and requirements, are distinct branches on the
stem, and do not operate on the same lines or on identical
conditions. We can best understand their relations by
considering the conditions of their development.

2. According to the general evolutionary theory, the
structure of an organism grows up under the conditions
of the struggle for existence. That is to say, organs
useful not only to the individual, but to the stock in that
struggle tend to be preserved, and therefore to develop,
while organs that are useless or injurious tend to atrophy
and disappear. What is true of physical organs will
also be true of psychological functions, in as far as
psychological functions determine the behaviour of any
organism. Whatever in an organism tends to govern its
action in relation to its environment must have its effect
upon the fortunes of the organism and upon the question
whether it will survive and perpetuate its stock. Thus
in all the lower ranges of life survival value to the stock
is the governing condition upon which the perpetuation
of a mode of action depends, and this applies to the ^
psychological just as much as to the physical basis of
such action. Some hereditary modes of action seem to
be purely mechanical, like the knee-jerk or the narrowing
of the pupil in bright light. Others are impulsive in
character, devoid of foresight, but informed with feeling
and a certain awareness of the objects which excite them.
Such are the reactions of anger or fear. Whether such
hereditary impulses should as a class be called instincts,
or whether the term should be reserved for certain sub-
classes need not be discussed here. Nor need we go into
the difficult questions of the psychology of instinct. ' We
must, however, note that some hereditary impulses" are
very definite and difficult to modify. They work with
great precision as long as conditions are favourable, but
have little power of adapting themselves to changes or
peculiarities of the environment. Such is the character
of many of the most remarkable instincts of insects.'

< Innumerable iUustrations may be found in the writings of
Fabre and of Mr. and Mrs. Peckham (The Habtis and InsUncts


m


38 THE RATIONAL GOOD

• Others, on the contrary, are plastic and variable. They
^seem to require something to complete or define them,
and they certainly admit of modification. We have now
to ask how this modification arises. Far down in the
animal worid we find indubitable evidence of individual
experience entering in as a factor. We find original
impulses checked or encouraged, as the case may be, by
experience of the results in which they issue, and on the
analogy of our own consciousness — an analogy which
for our purpose we need not criticize with any detail —
we interpret this experience as consisting in a pleasurable
or painful feeUng — pleasurable in the case in which the
impulse is encouraged, painful in the case where it is
inhibited. I The nature of the change may be best under-

of Solitary Wasps), Here is one. The egg of Chalicodoma is
laid in a sealed cell. When the grub hatches out it eats its way
through the cell wall into the outer world. Fabre set it a problem
by lining the cell waU with paper, but the grub ate through paper
and wall. He then varied the problem by leaving an interval
between the paper and the wail. This was too much for the larva.
It ate through the paper and then stopped. It was wound up
to eat once but not twice. It would, however, be a mistake to
infer that all the instincts of the Hymenoptera are of this mechanical
character. On many occasions they show remarkable powers of
varying their behaviour to suit special circumstances. The really
baffling thing about them is the intermixture of the apparently
mechanical with the apparently intelligent. Yet, after all, if they
could observe human behaviour they might be almost equally
f bewildered by the intermingUng of crass inertia with originality
and initiative.

> It is usual to speak of feelings of pleasure or pain. But it
should be understood that pleasure is a character or tone common
to many feelings whidi in other respects are quite distinct. Thus,
there is a pleasure in feeling warm and also in the emotions of a
great success. The feelings are very different, but agree in the
tone of pleasure. If we call them feelings of pleasure that is merely
a linguistic variant for pleasurable feeling. It may be doubted
whether there is any feeling which could be accurately described
as a feeling of pleasure and nothing else, unless it be some dream-
like ecstasy in which all definiteness of content has vanished. Pain
on the other hand is used ambiguously, meaning sometimes the
feeling tone opposed to pleasure, sometimes certain substantive
states, aches, smarts, pricks, etc. Some psychologists on this


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 39

stood from a well-known example. A newly-hatched
chick will peck indiscrinMnately, and with an approxima-
tion to accuracy, at all manner of small objects strewn
about on the ground. This pecking impulse is then
apparently inherited as part of the mechanism with which
the chick comes ready prepared to face the world. But
at this stage the chick will peck with equal avidity at
nutritious and innutritions objects. It will peck at grains
of corn, for example ; it will also peck at small pieces
of orange-peel. But there is a difference in the results.
When it pecks at the com it swallows with avidity ; when
it pecks at the orange-peel it gives signs which we inter-
pret as signs of displeasure, wiping the bill, for example,
and rejecting the morsel ; and after a few experiences

ground object to the use of the term pain as the reverse of pleasure.
They lay stress on the point that the concrete pains are not always
wholly displeasurable, e.g. as counter-irritants or a relief from
boredom. Personally I confess to being satisfied with an extremely
moderate indulgence in this particular kind of satisfaction. In
general the pleasurableness or the reverse of a feehng depends
not only on its character but on its degree. Sweetness is pleasant,
and more and more pleasant to a point, beyond which it cloys
and rapidly becomes disgusting. There is an optimum point at
which the pleasure is at its highest. This is clearly true of sensory
pleasures, and it is on the whole true of emotions, though here
the optimum point is much nearer to the maximum of which our
feeling is capable. On the whole, however, I think the paradox
holds that our moderate joys are more pleasurable than our extreme
joys. How far does pain follow a similar curve ? A smart at
its lowest stage is little more than a titillation and may even be
momentarily agreeable, but it passes so rapidly into the opposite
character that we think of smarts, as such, as pains. The slight
ache of healthy fatigue is not unpleasant, but aches cannot set
in in earnest without being pains. Much the same may be said
of melancholy, grief, anger, fear. All these have a pleasurable
or at least a bitter-sweet phase, while their further developments
are painful in the extreme. It is pretty certain that both sensory
and emotional pain, hke pleasure, have a maximum (which defeats
the ingenuity of torturers), and I incline to think that there is a
point in the intensity of the feehng from which the painful character
undergoes a decline. Whether emotional or sensorial pain seems
to involve some reaction of consciousness on feehng, some dis-
tinctness therefore between the feeling and the residual self. Now


40 THE RATIONAL GOOD

— dL single one is sometimes enough — ^it learns to leave
the orange-peel severely alone. So the chick undergoes
a certain education, the broad effect of which is that its
diffused and undefined impulse to peck is modified in a
way which is very important for the future of the chick
itself. It is defined so that there remains only an impulse
to peck at certain things, while others are spontaneously
neglected. This experience we put down on grounds
which, as I say, we here assume to be sufficient, as con-
sisting essentially in feelings pleasurable or painful. We^
assume, that is, that the chick finds the grain of com
pleasant, and the orange-peel bitter and disagreeable.
Now, if we make this assumption, a consequence of
importance follows with regard to the nature of feeling.
We understand this consequence best if we ask first what
is the value biologically of this new power of the chicken
to learn from experience. The value lies in this, that
it enlarges the possible sphere of action. Organisms,
which are incapable of learning from experience, may
come into the world ready equipped with a structural
machinery which guides them with great precision within^
a certain range. Outside that range they are at a loss
how to act, and, in point of fact, they perish for this reason
in large numbers, and the stock only maintains itself in
virtue of a very high birth-rate. But where learning
from experience becomes possible the instinct itself may
be more elastic. It may afford a basis for action in a
larger variety of circumstances, and if it does not guide

there seems to be a stage at which this distinctness is lost and the
feeling is for the time all reality — " all things were transformed
into the agony I wore." At this stage the feeling is more Uke
an outer object and — ^paradoxically — ^is less felt, or more Uterally
is of diminishing painfulness. The next stage is of course the
confusion, deadening and final loss of consciousness and therefore
of feeling itself.

On this view popular usage calls pains feelings which, over
nearly the whole range of their intensity, have painful character.
I see no reason on account of this usage to expel pain from its use
in psychology as the opposite of pleasure, it being understood
that in psychological nomenclature both terms signify not feelings,
but tones of feelings


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 41

the creature so precisely from the first, it enables it to
be gmded by its own experience of what is useful or
harmful, and so to govern its behaviour as its conditions
require in an extended sphere of action. But this salutary
result depends on one condition. Experience of pleasure
and pain can only aid in preserving the individual or
the stock if the pleasurable feelings are excited by actions
that are upon the whole beneficial, and painful feelings by
actions which are on the whole injurious. The conclusion,
then, to which our evolutionary account forces us is that,
just as impulse must on the whole be beneficial, so feeling
must on the whole run in channels tending to survival.
Two remarks must be subjoined here to avoid misunder-
standing. Pleasure, as we know in our own case, is not
always healthy, either from the point of view of the
individual or society. There may be bad pleasures, and
there may be pleasures which we deem good, but which
have no discernible bearing on survival — e.g. the pleasures
of art. The reason of this is that survival- value is not
the cause of variations, but their Umiting condition. It
secures that the organs, their functions, and, generally,
all that goes to determine the behaviour of the organism
should be on the balance suited to the maintenance of
the stock ; but it does not render it by any means
impossible that organs or modes of behaviour should
arise which are indifferent or even harmful to survival,
provided always that in the normal case the stock-
preserving organs and functions predominate ; and it ^'
will easily be seen that the more highly developed the
organism, that is to say, the greater its power of mastering
the conditions of its life, the greater will be its scope for
indulgence in the impulses and feelings of this kind.
Hence it is that man— of all evolving beings the one
which has greatest control over the conditions of his
life — ^is capable on the one hand of interests extending
far beyond any questions of survival, on the other of
impulses violating on the largest scale the conditions of
a healthy life. We must not therefore exaggerate the
rough and general correspondence between impulse and


* •


42 THE RATIONAL GOOD

pleasure on the one hand, and survival- value on the other ;
nor, to come to the second point, must we unduly limit
the conception of survival-value. That which governs
the formation of primitive strata of impulse and feehng
is their survival-value, not merely to the individual but
to the stock. If the impulse which serves the individual
survives, it is rather because through the individual it
perpetuates the stock than because it serves the needs
of the individual as such. Hence the evolutionary view
is opposed to an egoistic account of the primitive basis
of impulse and pleasure. The logical consequence to be
drawn from biological principles properly understood,
is that from the first both impidse and feeling are directed
to acts in which others are concerned — ^primarily, the
mate and the young, but also in animals that live together,
the flock or the herd, or, in such cases as those of the
social insects, the animal community. Impulse and
feeling alike, then, may to this extent be from their origin
altruistic or social in character.

We are led, then, to conceive of feeUng as a mode of
consciousness, the biological function of which is to
govern impulse. We may regard it as the response of
the hereditary structure, a structure which we are thus
forced to conceive as having a psychical side, i.e. as some-
thing manifesting itself in consciousness, as well as a
physical side, i.e. as something manifesting itself in
movements. What we feel will thus be determined in
the first place by the structure — the psycho-physical
structure, as we may call it, to express its double nature
— ^just as the impulse is determined by the structure,
and the feeUng operates, if painful, by checking the
impulse, if pleasurable, by encouraging it.

3. But impulse, though governed and re-adjusted by the
feeling attendant on its results, does not yet of necessity
imply a conscious purpose. The chick's impulse to peck
at yolk may be encouraged by its past experience. But
this is not a sufficient ground for imputing to it what
we know as a remembrance of that experience, or the
anticipation of another experience of Uke character. In


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 43

ourselves, however, we are aware of such memories and
anticipations, and it is here that what we can fairly call
purpose emerges. In the chick's case all that we know
is that experience leaves a certain effect, leaves a trace
which we know to exist because we see the result in a
change of behaviour, though we may know little of its
nature.^ In our case, as stated, we do know something
of its nature. We know that on the ground of past
experience an idea is formed of a future experience, of
an experience that will be gained by a certain act, and
this idea regulates the act, reinforcing or checking the
impulse to perform it. When an impulse is qualified
by such an idea and directed towards an end so antici-
pated, it becomes purposive in the true sense of the term
and in its first incarnation we may call it a desire. Desire,
then, so understood, will be rooted in impulse on the one
side and in feeling on the other.* The two sources tend

I We speak of it sometimes as a habit, sometimes as a disposition.
Of the precise physical change of tissue involved in the formation
of such states we know nothing by direct observation, and the psy-
chological state involved in a " disposition " is exceedingly dif&cult
to formulate except in terms of the action or state of consciousness
in which in response to the appropriate situation it issues.

* It is natural to say that the end towards which Desire is
directed is the pleasure in the experience. But this does not
conform with psychological analysis. What we desire is the
experience itself, and our desire has a feehng-tone of its own corre-
spondent (not necessarily identical) with the feeling-tone of the
desired experience. In fact our power of representing to our-
selves a past or future feeling as distinctive from the experience
to which it belongs is small and perhaps nil. We can (a) judge
intellectually that such a feeling did or will occur, (6) experience
now a feeling about the past or future experience. Neither of
these is the same thing as the formation of a representative image
of a feeling as adequate as our representative image of, say, a figure.
Hence it is that our most poignant memories are attached to details
— sometimes quite trivial details — ^in the scene in which the
emotional crisis was cast.

Oh, moment one and infinite.

The water slips o'er stock and stone ;

The West is tender, hardly bright :

How grey at once is the evening grown —

One star its chrysolite.


44 THE RATIONAL GOOD

to correspondence, partly because both alike are governed
by the conditions of existence, and partly because the
experience of feeling is always at work correcting the
operation of impulse. At the same time, since desire
is thus doubly rooted, we can never be sure that it will
coincide with the pleasurable experience which is only
one root of the two. They tend to coincidence, but do
not necessarily reach it. Often we still feel impelled
inexorably to an act from which we know that only
disappointment will result. The control of experience
is not strong enough to overcome original impulse, and
we are forced to desire what will only give us pain. Still,
as far as it goes, experience gives unity of direction to
impulse, and adjusts it better to the permanent conditions
of Hfe as attested by the satisfaction felt in its accom-
plishment.

It will be observed that the definition of Desire as
Impulse directed towards an anticipated end conflicts
formally with the narrower usage, which expressly bars
anticipation from Impulse. It is here that the double
sense of the term impulse appears. For in Desire, and
in every action directed towards an end there is precisely
the same impulse-feeling that we find in impulsive action
proper. The difference is merely that in experiencing
the impulse the mind knows what it is about, is conscious
of its direction, and foresees or looks towards its final
issue. For the purposes of this discussion we shall use
the term impulse of this propelling element common to
all forms of action, and when we wish to speak of this
element as denuded of any anticipation of the end we
shall call it *' bare " impulse.^

The picture revives the emotion, not an image of the emotion.
The point is well brought out by Dr. Wohlgemuth, though it
is possible that his generahzation is too sweeping {Pleasure^
Unpleasute, p. 218, etc.). For our immediate purpose the result
is that the driving force in desire is the tone of present feeling
attached to an idea.

> The technical generic term for Impulse, Desire, and V^ill is
Conation. But there does not seem to be an accepted distinctive
tenn for the element which is common to them all.


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 45

4. Desire in its stricter sense seems to be directed to
this or that particular object or event, whether it be one's
dinner, or success in a competition, or a political triumph,
or the possession of a piece of old china. These particulars,
however, are not isolated and casual, but are found for
the most part to range themselves about certain centres
of durable interest. Thus a parent desires a number
of different things for his child according as the circum-
stances and needs of his child vary from day to day,
or year to year. But all the desires alike emanate from
the same centre of emotional interest, and, moreover,
are controlled by it, so that, e.g., a desire to gratify the
child here and now is held back by consideration of some
more permanent effect. The system of emotions that
cluster round an object, such as another person, is now
called a sentiment, and the effect of sentiment on action
is that all the impulses and desires relating to the object
have a certain common tendency, e.g. the good of the
child. In this case the good of the child is an object
of volition, and volition is thus not so much a specific
impulse as a permeating tendency among a body of
impulses and desires, or, if we turn it round and judge
it by its aim, it is the direction of effort towards some
comprehensive end, to which a mass of impulses and
desires are subordinated as being that which makes their
real meaning and value explicit. Thus volition introduces
unity of direction into desire, just as desire introduced
unity into the lower impulses.

5. Now in a normal life there are, of course, many
objects which are such centres of durable interest, and
there would seem accordingly to be many volitions, and
a fair possibility of discord between them. But our
personality is one, and it is driven to find some means
of correlating them. In normal circumstances normal
people can always decide, whether between volitions,
desires, or impulses. This power of decision is what we
ordinarily call the Will, and it seems to postulate a certain
unity of our conative nature, and correlatively some
supreme unifying principle, rule» or end of action, setting


46 THE RATIONAL GOOD

out the real meaning of our life as a whole, just as any
partial volition sets out the real value of the desires and
impulses bearing upon its object. In reality, however,
this unity ^ is achieved with a measure of success, which
varies very materially with the idiosyncracies of the
individual and with the social tradition which supplies
the main outer guidance of his life. Where there is a
genuine religion, some supreme object or governing con-
ception of life so rich and many-sided that smaller things
find their appropriate place under its shadow, the solution
seems near. Where there is a definite and firmly-held
morality there is at least the means of deciding on particular
issues. Even a resolute egoism or the obstinate pursuit
of a limited object gives some unity to life, though a
gaunt and starved unity. If all such governing principles
fail we have a being like Plato's " Democratic Man,"
who decides one thing one moment, and something contrary
the next moment, and though such a being has Will,
in that he does make decisions, he cannot be said to have
Will in the sense of any continuous and consistent
direction. It will be seen that the function of the Will
is to bring unity into our volitions, as the function of
volition was to unify desires.* The relation of will to

' I.e. the unity of consistent action and coherent plan. The
basal unity of the self is the continuous identity of that which
experiences all the impulses, feelings, etc., whether these lead it
to harmonious or distracted and mutually incompatiUe lines of
action.

* This terminology is open to criticism on two grounds, (a) It
may be said that Volition is merely Latin for " willing," and that
I am therefore contrasting willing with will. I might reply that
this is pretty much what I mean to do. Our practical attitude
towards one of the permanent objects of our interest is, I think,
a department of our will, but it is not the whole will. Thus even
in e.g. our devotion to a child we must not be hke ces phres de
families qui sont capdbles de tout. Thus the contrast is, so to put
it, between a will and the will, and since we cannot conveniently
use the term " a will ** in this sense I substitute ** a voUtion."
(h) It may be said that we desire success in many of these permanent
objects. The felt contrast between Desire and Will is that, in
Desire the end is attractive, and in will it may be either attractive
or constrained. This is because Will is concerned with a Whole


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 47

general conceptions has seldom escaped attention. It
has been well understood that in the cool dehberation
which distinguishes voluntary action we bring impulse
and desire to the bar of general rules and permanent
interests. Before being led by impulse we weigh the
result and put a value on the anticipated fruition, and
we value it not merely by measuring the particular satis-
faction which it promises against the frustration of some
other impulse which it may involve, but rather by reference
to some standard of admitted value and of general applica-
tion. We consider its bearings on our permanent interests,
or on the interests of some other person, we ask whether
it conforms to law, morals, or religion, we weigh it by
standards and principles that we apply to others as well
as to ourselves. That is to say, the characteristic of
the deliberate voluntary action which distinguishes
human from animal action lies in the formation of general
principles of action which tend to correlate our behaviour
from moment to moment with the purposes which belong
to our life as a whole and to the lives of others with whom
we are associated. We are able to do what, apparently,
the animal cannot do— to conceive ourselves as a persistent
identity, abiding through the changing experiences of
life, and correspondingly conceive of others as identities
of the same kind, that is — ^in a word — ^as personalities.
We are able at the same time to appreciate as general
truths the rules of action which have grown up in such
a community of persons to determine the character of
their common life. It is accordingly in proportion to
the development of such relatively comprehensive ends

of which only some fraction is for the moment in question and
the interests of the whole overwhehn the attractiveness of the
fraction if there happens to be a coUision. Desire and Will may
therefore coincide or be opposed. There is no objection to the
use of the term Desire in relation to the widest objects, but they
are not objects of Desire merely but of Will as well, because they
are still pursued in the specific forms or particular direction in
which they do not momentarily appear attractive. This holds
not only of governing principles of all life but of any enduring
objects. Such an object is therefore an object of vohtion.


48 THE RATIONAL GOOD

and principles of action that human conduct comes to
form a relatively regulated order, and social life an
organized whole.

7. On the other hand the relation of Will to general
principles has given rise to great difficulties by suggesting
a chasm between Will and impulse-feeling. Will itself
must have impulsive quality (in the general sense of the
terjn), or how could it govern us ? But what impulse
is or can be inspired by general and abstract principles
without reference to the concrete objects in which they
are realized ? The reply is that the real meaning of a
principle Hes in the correlation of a mass of concrete
objects which it effects, and so similarly the strength
or impelling force of the Will lies in the correlation of
the corresponding impulses. Just as the principle expresses
their meaning in general terms, so the Will expresses
their common, combined, or organized force. The
material, so to say, of Will is just the mass of impulse-
feeling, but this mass, instead of acting as a collection
of independent forces driving us hither and thither, is
organized in a clearer conception of results, and more
comprehensive views of life. Out of the original conational
tissue which gave rise to feeling and impulse and desire,
there develops, if the metaphor be allowed, a new and
more precise organ of conduct. Of the original mass of
impulses those elements which conflict are in part worn
away, in part re-moulded so as to fit in with one another.
Others are strengthened and confirmed by practice and
by mutual alliance. All have assumed more concrete
shape as they come into relation with experience. The
total result, so far as the organization of conduct extends,
is a synthesis of conational elements moving as a body
under the guidance of some definite conception. To
picture very imperfectly the nature of this development,
let us first imagine the whole conative force of the soul
dispersed in impulses and desires capable of acting each
only in its own direction, under its appropriate stimulus
of sense-perception or of anticipated fruition. Let us
then imagine in contrast a gathering of all this energy


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 49

of feeling, of emotion, of conation, into an organized
whole, moving in a detenninate direction, and capable
of bringing its whole force to bear at any point. This
is the essential contrast between sheer impulse and fully
developed will. We can conceive that such an organized
psychic movement will present itself rather as the calm
and ordered flow of a deep tide of vital energy than as
the fireworks of emotion or the half-sensual flow of
impulses. Though all these are at bottom one, as manifes-
tations of feeUng or conative energy, they differ in form
and many important consequences flow from their differ-
ence. Those err who attribute to bare impulse, emotion
or will severally, that which is due to the energy within
us which takes all these forms. Will is not emotion,
though it is of the force which, dammed back from its
outlet in ordered activity, forms the emotional flood.
It is not bare impulse, but embodies the active energy
of impulse within it. It is a gathering of much, ideally
of the whole, conational energy of our nature canalized
into a deep and steady stream flowing within determinate
Kmits in ordered activity to foreseen ends

It is then in the construction of broad ends, in which
the otherwise scattered elements of our nature have their
several functions, that the conational synthesis which
we express by the term " will " takes its rise, and that
our nature as a whole tends to acquire the permanent
bent and definiteness of direction which distinguish the
life of will from that of impulse and emotion. But the
wholeness and unity of our nature remain ideals which
are realized in very varying degree. We will, because,
in the main, the forces of our nature set in a given direc-
tion, but we* do not will whole-heartedly because the
synthesis is incomplete. The primary impulses remain,
and the vision of the wider ends is not clear enough, or
not realized with adequate intensity of feeUng. And it
is because, in the conflict between desire and will, we
are urged by massed forces of impulse guided by con-
ceptions which, perhaps, we can only in part make articu-
late, that we have that sense of constraint which is so


50 THE RATIONAL GOOD

conspicuous in the case of felt moral obligation, where
there is a definite tension between the rebellious desire
and the orderly community which we express as " will."
In this tension there is the force of a clearly realized
appealing end on the one hand, and the more massive,
perhaps less intensely and definitely conscious, main
current of our nature upon the other. It diminishes
accordingly as the will acquires full control, though it
can never vanish for the best of men as long as the tragic
complexities of Ufe set duty in opposition to ties of
affection. A moraUty which should be as spontaneous
as instinct implies not only a perfect will, but a perfect
order of life.'

Will, then, is the synthesis of impulsive or conative
elements in man that responds to comprehensive ends
and unif3dng principles, just as desire is the impulsive
element that responds to narrower and more immediate
ends. Though bare impulse is left far behind, the impul-
sive energies, pruned, refined, consolidated, remain 'the
driving force to the end. Just as action always rests
on impulse in this broad sense, so impulse turns on feeUng
in a similarly broad sense. The term feeling so used is to
include the emotion that governs the simplest impulse.
It is to include the interest, the excitement, the emotional
tone which the idea of the end carries in the period of

' Our argument tends to the close correlating of the will with
the self or the personality and to conceive its ends as those of the
self as a whole. This does not imply that the will is peculiarly
moved by the idea of the self, or by sentiments and emotions of
self-exaltation or self-abasement. Such reflective inward-turned
emotions do of course play their part. But to identify the will
with the unity of the self in its conational aspect is not to make
the self the object of the will. The object of the will, the principles
that guide it, are those which interest the self and these are not
(for the normal being) the self again. The self is not its own
exclusive object, but many things — God, humanity, country,
morahty, another person or persons— objects such as these govern-
ing large tracts of Ufe are true objects of, or principles guiding,
WiU. Though some of them may not afPect hfe as a whole they
impart a ias larger measure of unity than would be achieved by
mere impulse or emotion.


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 51

anticipation or efiort. It is to include the gratification
or disappointment which attend upon realization. It is
to range from the simple impulses of sense to the most
refined and complex interests of ethics, art, or religion.
Throughout we may regard an end as the terminal
point of a Une of action upon which, as the resultant of
a thousand tensions and pressures of physical heredity,
of present experience, of social interactions, feeling
moves. So we may conceive it as feeUng crystallized
into something definite and conceptual. In all cases a
genuine end is something about wWch we feel, and there
is no principle of action derivable from thought or
ratiocination abstracted from feeUng.

On the other hand, feeling is modifiable, and the
purposes in which it expresses itself still more modifiable.
I ;e largely remodels impulse, or suggests new

I > the same ends. Divergent ends impinge on

dier, social relations not only define the possi-
3f effective action for the individual, but inter-
te and profoundly modify the whole sphere of
mg itself. Religious and scientific beliefs give the
3 the mass of men's hopes and fears. Hence a
i possibility of thorough modification. In a changed
actual or social situation the same fimdamental
»gs may give rise to a very different body of
ose, while such changes, and even its own internal
^th and interactions, may have far-reaching reactions
up^n feeling itself. In the sense understood, then,
action rests on impulse-feeling, and it is useless to look
for anything, call it Practical Reason, Will, or what we
may, that stands outside the body of impulse-feeling
and controls it. But impulse-feeling is completely trans-
formed by a development, which taken as a whole tends
to combine its centrifugal elements into an organized
body, directed to comprehensive ends which are formu-
lated in large and articulate conceptions of the significance
of conduct. It is within this development, if anywhere,
that we must look for the practical Reason. Our first
step in the search must clearly be to form as precise a


52 THE RATIONAL GOOD

conception as possible of what is meant by the Rational,
and tiie next to apply our definition in the sphere of
conduct*


NOTE

Since this chapter was written Dr. Wohlgemuth's able mono-
graph Pleasure-Unpleasure, has appeared, advocating views of
Feeling which, in some points, conflict with those taken above.
While I am not here concerned with psychological analysis and
do not think that the divergencies in question would sensibly afEect
ethical theory, I feel obhged to explain why I leave my statement
standing, with a modification which I will proceed to state. The
main points are two : (i) As to nomenclature. Dr. Wohlgemuth
treats it as settled that pain is not the true contrast to pleasure,
but is a positive sensation which may be pleasant or unpleasant
feeling-tone. As to this, I am inclined to reply : It is agreed
that we must distinguish between the feeling-tone of an experience
and the whole experience to which the feeling-tone belongs. The
traditional psychological nomenclature, as I understand, used the
terms Pleasure and Pain for this purpose, viz. as names of two great
(if not exhaustive) classes of feeling-tone. But popular language
also uses Pain for the whole experience in certain cases, e.g. aches
and bums, and not in others, e.g. foul smells. Hence there is a
possible confusion which it is certainly desirable to avoid. But
does not very nearly the same confusion arise about pleasure ?
Here it is that I would modify a sentence (p. 38, footnote). It
is true, pleasures do not form so definite a class as pains in popular
speech. Yet a good deal of ethical controversy has turned on
the relation of pleasure and happiness, and on the whole " pleasure,"
in ordinary speech, suggests, if not a defined class, at any rate
a range of experiences centering on the more elementary rather
than the higher side of our nature. Yet to me it seems that the
deepest tranquil happiness (as of assured love or firm religious
^th) has a strong feehng-tone and that this feeUng-tone, with
aU its vast difference of significance, has a point in common with
that of a sensory satis^ction. Be that as it may, there is a clear
distinction between pleasure as a feeling-tone and pleasure as the
whole experience to which the feeling-tone belongs, and when
pleasure is so used the same considerations arise as in the case of
pain. For " pleasures " cloy, i.e. assume unpleasant feeling-tone
just as pains sometimes stimulate, excite, titillate, i.e. assume
more or less pleasurable feeling-tone. Hence, if the argument is
pressed we must abandon pleasure along with pain and find some
quite conventional terms, or perhaps S3nnbols such as P and fl
for the opposed feeling-tones in distinction from the experiences


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 53

which nonnally carry such tones. To banish pain and retain
pleasure seems illogical.

The question of terms, however, runs, as such questions gener*
ally do, into one of substance. Dr. Wohlgemuth maintains (esp.
pp. 2X1, 235) that " there are only two qualities of feeling-elements,
viz. Pleasure and Unpleasure. Any differences except intensity,
duration, and extensity are apparent only and are found to belong
to sensations or other cognitive or (to) conative processes." (I
imagine that under " extensity " Dr. Wohlgemuth intends to
include localization.) It follows that the only feeling^element
common to a burning |>ain and a sickening fear is their unpleasure.
All the rest is sensory (or otherwise cognitive) or conational. I
find it, from my own introspection or retrospection, exceedingly
difficult to accept this. The two states appear to me to agree
in something much fuller and richer than the very attenuated
abstraction of unpleasantness. This something I should call
f eehng, and while in each case the f eeUng has the generic character
of unpleasure, I should say that it also exhibited profound specific
differences. If you ask me to name these differences, I admit
that I find it extremely difficult to do so (apart from localization)
except by reference either to the stimulus (including the general
situation) or some elements of conation. But I accept the view
that the feeling is neither the cognition of the stimulating object
nor the conation. I suppose it to be that which stands between
and connects them, and I take the difficulty of describing it apart
from them as evidence of the intimacy of the union. To a point
Dr. Wohlgemuth would agree in this. His rule on the subject is :

"The feeling-elements are not attributes or functions of sen-
sations or other cognitive processes, but a separate class of conscious
processes. Although generally closely dependent upon the cognitive
and conative processes to which they belong, they often show a
certain degree of independence and detachment."

Now I do not think that any one would deny that analysis is
capable of distinguishing the element of feeling-tone from the
other elements in consciousness along with it. The question is,
first, whether the feeling can exist independently of other elements,
second, whether what can so exist is pure pleasure or unpleasure
denuded of other qualitative content. As to the first point Dr.
Wohlgemuth adduces evidence (e.g. that the pleasure may precede
the sensation). Here he has only one case (p. 184, referring to
exp. Y. 24, see p. 108). What " Y " exactly says is : " First,
feeling-tone of pressture sensation (seemed to be pressure down*
wards) which was not unpleasant. As pressure increased it became
more unpleasant. As the feeling-tone became markedly un-
pleasant sensation of pain arose. The unpleasant feeling-tone
preceded the pain sensation. I can analyse the unpleasant feeling-
tone from the pressure sensation, but not from the pain-sensation.


$$


54 THE RATIONAL GOOD

This passage (which by the way tells strongly against the quali-
tative distinction between Pain and Unpleasure) does not show
that unpleasant feeling-tone arises without any sensation, but
only without that definite sensation called by the writer Pain.
It arose in the first instance with the pressure and, in its higher
degree (as my terminology would put it) became so distinctly
painful as to be recognized as such.

As to pleasure outlasting sensation, every one knows that the
effects of stimuli persist for a little while. The question is in what
form does the feeling persist ? Dr. Wohlgemuth has three in-
stances. The first of these (W. 32, p. 26) concludes : " There
were also organic sensations which seemed to be an integral part
of, or helped to constitute, a mood of repose which was distinctly
pleasant. Pleasure lasted for some time after removal of stimulus."

This speaks for itself. The second case from the same subject
is an olfactory experiment in which, without further detail bearing
on the point, the subject states, " Pleasure persisted for some time
after removal." In fact, scents hang in the nostrils. In the third
case, also olfactory, the subject sa3rs, " After the stimulus had
been removed I had an idea of the act of smeUing, and the idea
had none of the olfactory quahty of the original experience, but
it retained the feehng-tone that had accompanied the sensation."
That is, the feeling-tone is explicitly attached to the idea.

It results that the cases cited do not prove the thesis that feehngs
arise or persist independently of either cognitive or conative
elements.

Secondly, as to what the feelings are. Several statements agree
that they are distinguishable elements in consciousness, but dis-
tinguishable with difficulty. Here is a t3rpical statement (X. loz,
quoted p. 21 1).

" As to the quaUty of the feeling-tones of the sensations, I cannot
compare definitely enough to perceive any quaUtative difference
in them. The difficulty is to distinguish the feeling-tones from
the quality of the sensations on the one hand, and the quality of
the motor reactions excited on the other hand. Allowing for
these differences there seemed to be nothing left except differences
of duration and intensity."

This will obviously be the result if we put all the qualitative
differences into the cognitive or conative elements one or both.
But if we do so all that is left for feeling is something so abstract
that the subjects have difficulty in distinguishing it. They will
agree that it is pleasurable or unpleasurable, because these are
admittedly general (if not universal) quaUties of feeling. But we
are asked to think of this element distinguished so vaguely and
with such difficulty as all that we mean by feeling and as capable
of an independent existence. It is the combination of these pro-
positions which api)eaxs to me so difficult. If you will allow me


IMPULSE AND CONTROL 55

to include within the scope of feeling elements that you insist on
calling cognitive or conative I have no great difficulty in regarding
feeling as independent, i.e. as requiring no further co-present
element in consciousness to complete it. But if you insist on
excluding all these you fall back on what seems to me an abstrac-
tion. The most I can admit (as in the text) is that in extreme
cases the cognitive elements, that is all that is distinguishable,
get merged into one ecstasy of delight or suffering, but I point
out that this is the last stage before the entire loss of consciousness,
and very significantly, it has been recognized as a stage in which
extremes very nearly meet and pleasure and pain themselves are
on the verge of becoming undistinguishable. Perhaps I should
also add that, at the opposite extreme where feeling is minimal,
analysis will find its pleasant or unpleasant character the easiest
point to lay hold of. These extreme cases to my mind rather
strengthen the position that definite pleasures are attributes of
feelings of definite quality other than pure pleasureableness. The
further proof, as I think, is that the intensity of feeling does not
vary uniformly with its pleasantness or unpleasantness. For
example, anger may be very intense but is not proportionately
painful unless thwarted. All states of emotional tension are capable
at a touch of turning to extremes of pleasant or unpleasant feeling,
but while they are themselves very strongly felt the characters
of pleasure or unpleasure are not alwa3rs clearly marked in them.
The conclusions which, as at present advised, I should draw
are that definite feeling is attached to cognitive or conative elements
or both ; that, however, its variations of intensity do not neces-
sarily depend on their variations (in clearness, etc.) and it may
persist with httle or no change through considerable variations
of the other element ; that in consequence (though I have criticized
his evidence) Dr. Wohlgemuth is right in his conclusion that feeling
possesses a partial independence ; that in fact feeling may so
encroach on the other elements as in the extreme case to occupy
the whole of consciousness ; that at this Umit, it would seem, even
the knowledge of the feeling—certainly any power of naming or
classifying it — must disappear. On the other hand, the feeling
which possesses this measure of independence includes elements
which Dr. Wohlgemuth calls sensory or conative ; it exhibits
numberless specific variations, and pleasure and unpleasure are
merely two of its attributes. Pleasure and unpleasure never exist
by themselves but only as characters of some feeling possessed
of other characters, though in very low and perhaps in extremely
high grades of feeling they are the most easily recognizable
characters.


CHAPTER III

THE RATIONAL

I. We have to ask, then, first what is meant by the
Rational, by a rational procedure and a rational order ?
if the question is difficult, it is^ perhaps easier to see what
is meant by the Irrational. In the first place, then,
inconsistency is admittedly irrational. It is irrational
in the field of thought to admit two judgments which
contradict each other, in the field of action to pursue
two purposes which destroy one another, or to accept
and approve a principle of action condemning a purpose
which at the same time we pursue. Conversely the
rational, whatever else it may be, must at least be self-
consistent. Next, though perhaps less obviously, the
arbitrary judgment is irrational. This will be more
readily admitted if for " arbitrary " we substitute
" groundless." It is irrational to form a judgment
without a ground, and whatever else we may say about
** grounds " it is clear from the very fact that a ground
is required, and may not always be f oimd that the ground
contains something which is not within the judgment
that follows from it. If, then, we would avoid a ground-
less judgment we must be able to connect our judgment
with something that goes beyond it, and this work of
interconnexion is the main positive function of . reason.
Thirdly, it is held irrational to base a judgment on emotion
or desire, or, indeed, on any " subjective " attitude, any
impulse that proceeds merely from ourselves. But this
condemnation must be subject to two qualifications.
In the first place the judgment may be about the emotions,
or may be simply an expression of the emotions, e.g. " This

56


THE RATIONAL 57

is revolting," "that is enchanting." For judgments of
this class the emotion itself is the only appropriate ground.
Secondly, every judgment of mine as it issues from me
must in a manner be held to emanate from my subjec-
tivity, to be an expression of my thought working in
accordance with the methods and processes of my mental
constitution. It seems, then, that we cannot mean to
condemn the subjective altogether. What we must
mean is to condenm it in so far as it diverts us from the
objective, and this means something that is, whether
you or I happen to think so, or say so, or not. The
rational, then, is that which deals with the objective
order. But the objective is not unfortunately so plainly
hall-marked that we distinguish it immediately and
infallibly from the subjective, and if we ask how we effect
the distinction the answer is, by the two former require-
ments of rationality. We correct error by the exposure
of inconsistency. We arrive at such exposure by the
interconnexion of one judgment with another. We
support judgments by reference to their grounds, and
then believe that we have obtained objectivity or, more
briefly, truth. Truth, then, is generally the object of
reason or the purpose of the rational procedure, and
interconnexion subject to mutual consistency its method.
2. But now with regard to interconnexion some serious
difficulties arise. J?irst, we have said that we believe
the grounded judgment to be true. But this implies
that the ground is adequate, and we may well ask what
is the test of adequacy. The ground itself, in fact, seems
to require a ground, and this threatens to lead to an infinite
regress. There must, it should seem, be some primary
grounds requiring no further justification, but if so the
judgments affirming them would be isolated judgments,
and so far, apparently, irrational. And must we not,
apart from them, admit other isolated judgments ? I
heard a clap. I can bring no evidence in support of my
assertion, it may be, and yet the fact is that I heard it.
That is of itself evidence. It is an ultimate fact, and
there is no more to be said. Even if others heard it too.


58 THE RATIONAL GOOD

and I bring their evidence in corroboration, is not the
ultimate basis a distinct and ungrounded judgment, just
" I heard it " from each witness ? There seem, then, to
be isolated judgments, itrxara, at each end of the scale —
the most general grounds, and the final particular fact.
With regard to the particular, however, a little reflec-
tion will show that the judgment which we accept as
true is not so isolated as it appears, and that in fact we
finally accept it only as grounded, and well grounded,
on a general principle. If the question is, did a clap
occur, my evidence that I heard it is good in so far,
and only in so far, as I am a credible witness, and as my
subjective hearing is good proof of an objective sound.
In so far as I accept in general the testimony of ni)?^ senses
I assert what they report, so that my particular assertion
has a ground in the sense that it is connected with the
general body of my sensory judgments, and is, in fact,
to be taken as valid in proportion as this body of judgments
is to be regarded as generally accurate, and as it — the
judgment in question — is a normal part of them, and is
not disturbed by anything exceptional. All evidence as
to " particulars " is in fact subject to tests and open to
corroboration on such lines as these. Thus the sensory
judgment, direct and ultimate as it is, is in its way a
grounded judgment. Yet this statement in turn gives
rise to a difficulty. For the ground is in this case another
judgment or body of judgments of the same kind. In
proof of the existence of a sensible object we may appeal
from sound to sight, and from sight to touch, and from
one man's sight or touch to another's, but we are always
appealing from one sensory judgment to another, and if
we appeal to the general credibility of sensory judgments
on what would this rest, except on the credibility of
numbers of particular sensory judgments ? If, therefore,
the intrinsic value of a sensory judgment is nil, and our
confidence in it based only on its grounds, these grounds
turn out to be equally of zero value, and, the sum of
zeros being zero, we get no nearer to any ground of real
confidence. It results that we must not deny all value


THE RATIONAL 59

to a direct sensory judgment; if we are going to tnist
the system formed by such judgments we must allow
each such judgment provisional value, such that when
confirmed by interconnexion with other judgments of
similar provisional value it becomes for us a confirmed
or estabUshed judgment. This principle may be put
generally. A judgment which we form under some
stimulus, but not merely on the ground of some other
judgment, may be called an immediate judgment. Such
judgment has in reason a provisional value, and when
interconnected with other immediate judgments so that
if they are true it is true it becomes a rationally established
judgment.

3. At what point would the process be complete so
that we could take the established judgment as estab-
Ushed once for all, beyond possibility of further question
or need of further proof ? Clearly it would be complete
if we could connect it with some judgments of undoubted
truth, which must, of course, in the end be immediate
judgments. Now immediate sensory judgments, we have
s^en, require grounding, for no matter how clearly and
forcibly their objects seem to impress themselves upon
us we find by comparison that our reports of such objects
are not always self-consistent, and though we may admit
that there is a core of truth in every immediate sensory
judgment, the questions that arise are those of distin-
guishing the hard core from the interpretations that
gather about it, and this it is clear the immediate judgment
does not always effect, since we know cases in which it
is erroneous. Are there, then, immediate judgments at
the other end of the scale, ultimate generalities of un-
doubted truth on which all other judgments may be
grounded, and so estabUshed once and for aU ? Now
there certainly appear to be judgments of a general
character which are as immediate as the judgments of
sense. That is to say, that, contemplating certain ideal
objects, we become directly aware in them of relations
or characters attaching to them. Propound to the
mind the idea of a plane rectiUneal figure of three sides


•• ••


6o THE RATIONAL GOOD

and explain the nature of an angle, and the mind will
readily grasp that the three-sided figure must have three
angles. This is correctly called intuition. In it a character
of an object is discerned by a process of mental inspection^
and the truth asserted may be called self-evident. But
rational criticism will no more let these intuitive judgments
alone than it would let sensory judgments alone. On
the contrary, it will maintain that the self-evident judg-
ment, so long as it is unconnected with others, has only
provisional value, and it will accordingly go on to ask,
as it did of the sensory judgment, what general credibility
is to be attached to intuition. Is every immediate judg-
ment that is formed by every mind to be taken as true,
and so certainly true as to require no proof ? The answer
to this question must be in the negative. It is easy to
produce the illusion of immediate obviousness, e.g. a
non-mathematical person questioned as to the shortest
way from A to B, which is due east of it, will reply as
a matter of course that the route must be due east all
the way, and will resist as sheer nonsense the statement
that a route moving to the north (or south) is in general
shorter. But with the aid of a globe, or even a common
ball, it is easy to convince even the least mathematical
of his error in a couple of minutes. Of course the fallacy
rests on a confusion of different things — a straight line
and a line drawn on the surface of a sphere. But at
what point do we become certain that there are no similar
elements of confusion in any truth which we affirm as
a matter of intuitive apprehension ? Many people would
say that to them the existence of a God is a truth of
this kind. Others would deny that they have any such
intuition. Mathematical axioms that have passed current
for centuries have been called in question, and it has been
shown possible to construct consistent systems of thought
on a basis which involves their negation. Self-evidence
is in fact the impression which a propounded object
makes upon a mind which thereupon delivers itself of
a judgment as to that object, interpreting it after some
fashion. This deliverance is a function not of one variable.


THE RATIONAL 6i

the object, but of two, the object and the mind, with
all its peculiarities of structure and make-up, its instincts,
innate methods, and history by which these methods
have been modified. This make-up may be such that
the deUverance is a judgment asserting tiie object to be
what it is, have the characters which it has, stand in the
relations in which it does stand, or it may be such as to
diverge in some degree or at some point from such corre-
spondence. The test can only lie in consistency with other
judgments. Here, as elsewhere, interconnexion is required.

4. If this view is correct it results that the basis of
certainty and truth is in the end intercoimexion. Any
isolated judgment, though it may of course be quite true
and may be felt to be quite certain, is regarded as pro-
visional and subject to criticism and corroboration by
other judgments. At the same time each immediate
judgment which impresses itself on us as true contributes
its measure of support to the system in which it enters,
and the strength of the system is in the mutual support
or consilience of its component judgments, so that in
this case the ground (by way of exception to our first
statement about grounck) is really internal. True, the
entire system may also be connected with other systems,
but if we could arrive at a system containing all thought
and all experience, it could have no ground and no proof
in anything outside itself, but only in its internal character
as a complete system of interconnected parts. Thus the
principle that ground or proof lies outside the judgment
grounded and proved appUes to the relation of part to
part or to whole, but the ground or proof of a whole lies
equally — ^and in the case of the final ideal whole entirely
— ^in the very coimectedness of parts, each claiming
immediate acceptance, which constitute it. In this
sense the ideal of knowledge is self-evidence, not the self-
evidence of an isolated truth on which the rest depend,
but that of the consiUence of a system of partial truths
completing each other.

5. Judgments asserting facts are connected by the
relations of the facts which they assert. Hence the


62 THE RATIONAL GOOD

demand of reason for the ground of any judgment is at
the next remove a demand for the ground of the fact.
The ground of a fact is such that if the ground exists
we believe that the fact, known as its consequent, exists.
This in other words amounts to the proposition that in
any case where the ground exists the consequent exists.
That is to say, the relation of ground and consequent is
universal. The search for grounds is thus a search for
universal relations underlying or connecting the mass
of facts with which thought is confronted. The activity
of reason consists in the discovery of universal grounds
and their application when ascertained in fresh cases.
So far as we reason about a thing we treat it as having
a ground which connects it with other things, and as this
connection can be constantly extended by repetition of
the process we arrive at the ideal of reason as an order
of reality built up of a system of universals interconnecting
all its parts.

6. We rejected above the view that knowledge could
be made to depend on certain universal first principles
requiring no ground or interconnexion with other truths,
because self-evident. But what, it may be asked, of
the principles of interconnexion themselves ? We inter-
connect one judgment with another by certain methods
which, when we come to analyse them, will be found to
involve some principle. How do we know the truth of
this principle ? It would appear that we cannot prove
it because proof would involve interconnection with
something else, and the interconnection would itself
imply the principle to be proven. The reply is that the
validity of the principle rests on its being a correct analysis
of the processes which we go through in reasoning so
far as they are consistent with one another. In point
of fact we do not always reason correctly, and the nature
of our mistakes and their grounds are brought out when
we analyse the method and formulate its principle. But
if the principle is correctly stated it laj^ down a consistent
method of inference, and every inference that we draw
upon this method implies the principle. Thus, through


I

\


THE RATIONAL 63

the medium of the principle all our acts of inference
necessitate or support one another, and each and all
require the truth of the principle, so that rational method
itself forms a whole of interconnected parts.

7. The conception of reason which thus emerges is
not one of a faculty possessed, prior to and apart from
experience, of certain clear and indubitable universal
axioms with which it confronts a tangled experience
proving and explaining so much as can be brought undfer
these axioms and leaving the rest unrationalized. ODt
is the conception rather of a principle operative within
experience the work of which is always partial and incom-
plete, always extending itself while at the same time
pruning and sharpening its own methods? Neither jwoof
nor explanation consist in the reference of the experienced
order to something outside it, but in the exhibition of
its internal coherence, i.e. the system of universal
connexions in accordance with which its parts do not
merely tolerate one another in mutual consistency, but
require and maintain one another. The provisional and
partial truths are established not merely by deduction
from some special truth taken as known,' but, ultimately,
by the simple fact that they form a whole of consiUent
truths. The isolated and partial fact again is not so
much explained by subsumption under some self-evident
law as by its part in the comprehensive system of universals
which is reality. Finally, as every part- judgment has
its proof in the body with which it is connected, so the
proof of the body of judgments as a whole is in their
standing together as a connected system, and if any part
of reality become intelligible by relation to the remainder
a whole field of reality becomes intelligible as constituting
such a system. Of any part, however great and however
articulate internally, we c?-n, and indeed must always
go on to ask about its connections with further reality.
But if we envisage reality as a whole we can ask no such

I This of course may be the proximate step, but the truth used
as a principle will find its ultimate justification in the manner
denoted.


\

\
\


64 THE RATIONAL GOOD

question, and here intelligibility must mean simply the
internal completeness of interconnexions nmning through
all its elements.

Reason then generically is the principle of interconnexion
persistently applied. Since the whole of Reality does not
fall within our experience, the work of interconnexion
is never complete. Hence reason does not necessarily
claim finality for its interpretations. What is rationally
established is that which is incorporated in a system of
consilient judgments.* If the reflective judgment, " This
is certain," can without contradiction be inserted into
any such system, then the system is rationally held
certain. But in general there is at least a possibility
that further experience may throw fresh hght upon
established interpretations, and yet this does not prevent
them from being the most reasonable interpretation
within our reach. Hence the rational as such is not
an established system, but a process governed by a
principle, the process by which understar dirg deepens,
error is repeatedly eliminated, and truth constantly
enlarged. As operating in the sphere of assertion
(including knowledge, suggestion, and belief), reason is
the use of this principle ^s the discovery of the objective
order, the result of this discovery being truth. As
appUed in spheres other than that of assertion we
have yet to examine what it means. The principle of
interconnexion carried through yields a whole in which
the parts sustain and necessitate one another, or briefly
an organized whole. Thus reason is an organic principle
in thought, and so far as incomplete but progressive
may be termed an organic impulse. So far as reality is
 finally intelligible to reason it must similarly be interpre-
table as an organic whole, so that we may speak of reason
as the ultimate organic principle alike in thought and in
reaUty. Finally, the fact that reason, even as incomplete
impulse, is the endeavour towards the whole which inter-
connects the parts is the basis of its sovereignty over
every partial impulse or isolated belief, whatever degree
of immediate subjective certitude such belief may claim.


CHAPTER IV

THE GOOD

I. We have now to apply the definition of the rational
to the world of practice. The first step in this application
is simple. It is easy to see that when we give a reason
for some act we first connect it with its end or aim, and
that, if we want a reason for this end in turn, we must
connect it either with some further end, or with some
broad principle of action. It is an easy inference that
if there is a rational order of action our purposes must
form an interconnected system. But from this point *^
dijfficulties begin. Any system of action that we can
propound, however consistent internally, will be discovered
to coUide with impulses, desirefe, interests of ourselves
or of other people, and the question of the basis and
authority of our sj^tem will at once arise. An end or
principle of action once assumed, the part of reason is
intelligible enough. It deduces consequences, connects «^

means and ends, shows that such an action follows from
the principle while such another is inconsistent with it.
So far it seems to be just the reason of cognition appUed
to matters of fact, with the difference only that the facts
in question are human actions and their consequences.
But what is to happen if two ends, two principles, or,
in general terms, two (or more) things that we consider
good occur to us, and they happen to be incompatible
with one another ? We are forced to choose between
them. Can reason have anything to do with the choice
of ends or the preference of one sort of good over another ?
Has it anything to do with ultimate choice, or is it confined

5 ««


66 THE RATIONAL GOOD

to the cognitive apprehension of consistency or incon-
sistency between the several things that we may choose ?
Are there ends, or is there some end which must commend
itself to a rational being as good, and as so good that
everything incompatible with it is bad ? Or is the
preference of one thing over another a matter, in the
last resort, of a choice with which reason has nothing
to do ? Is there, in short, a Rational Good, and if so,
how is it to be defined ?

2. We must first be clear as to what we mean by
" good." Our words and our thoughts do not always
coincide, but sincerely to think that a thing is good is
to adopt towards it a certain attitude of mind which
afEects our actions and affects also our judgments of
the actions of others. In so far as we think a thing good
for ourselves here and now — as opposed to merely doing
lip-service to its goodness — ^we are disposed to act in
such a way as to secure or preserve it. Our disposition
may be overborne by some strong contrary impulse.
But if an end is genuinely conceived as good, it means
that we have at least some feeling for it. This feeling
has several consequences. It tends, though not always
with success, to direct our own action towards the end
in question ; to make us approve and support those
who act in a similar way ; to render us sympathetically
interested in anything that promotes it and adversely
affected by anything of a contrary tendency. These
and similar feeUngs and dispositions relative to any given
end make up the practical attitude which the term " good "
expresses. Observe, however, that while the judgment
" this is good " expresses a disposition, it also asserts
a fact. It asserts something to be the object of a favour-
able disposition, and if the judgment is true this relation
is real. The practical attitude or disposition is not,
indeed, the assertion, but it is a part of that which is
asserted. There is thus a double action of the mind
involved in the judgment of value, a practical attitude
and an assertion of fact, and the practical attitude may
be said to express itself in the assertion.


' THE GOOD 67

But it will be objected, I may recognize as good in
some sense much that does not appeal to me. In particular
I may recognize that something would be very good indeed
for another person, but if I am absorbed in my own
interests the knowledge leaves me cold. My attitude
to this " good " is an " intellectual," not a practical
attitude. Be it so. It still remains that, in recognizing
that A B holds this or that to be good for him, I recognize
that there is something about which he, and those
who are interested in him, are feeling, to which he and^
they adopt a practical attitude. Similarly, in admitting
something to be " good " in a conventional sense which
does not in fact appeal to my feielings, I recognize it as
part of that which the general fabric of custom and
social opinion maintains. Thus the individual may
recognize a good that does not directly appeal to him,
and this possibility constitutes an essential part of the
whole moral problem, yet it will remain true to say that,
by the term "good" he signifies something which, in\
the connexion in which it is applicable, moves feeling, ]
and through feeling disposes to action.'

If this analysis is correct a judgment of the form " this
is good " is an assertion, but something more than an
assertion. Unless qualified by some saving clause that
makes it " good for some one else, but not for me,"
" good from your point of view, but not from mine," it
is the expression of a practical attitude or disposition.
It is an acceptance of something propounded to the
mind, an acceptance which may be expressed in the
most general terms by saying that something fits in or
harmonizes with a mentad disposition. This harmony

> It is natural to say that we pursue an object because we deem «/- ^^
it good, but as our whole account of the relation of impulse and r - r.
inteUigence will have shown, it is at least as true to say that we ^ ^ '' ^
deem it good because we have the impulse to pursue it. More
accurately, the idea of good is the definition o' an impulse, or at
least of a practical attitude. What part ideas themselves play
in shaping our practical attitude is a question which runs
through all our discussion. In general the relation is reciprocal.
At lowest in the very act of defining we modify.


I. iv


68 THE RATIONAL GOOD

has, generically, two aspects. It turns on feeling, and
it is effective in action. The two points are readily
observable in the simpler cases. Consider any simple
direct impulse, as the impulse of a Uttle child to grasp
and handle a bright object. The impulse effects itself
in a series of efforts which may or may not culminate
in the momentary seizure of the thing. Neglecting the
latter case, and considering only that in which effort
is so far successful as to achieve contact, we still find
two strongly marked differences of result. If the bright
object is, say, a candle flame, the effort is abruptly broken
off and, so to say, reversed. There is a rapid withdrawal
of the hand accompanied by a cry, which we interpret
on the analogy of our more mature experience as an
«pression of pain. Whether the pain is to be regarded
[strictly as the cause of the withdrawal, as in ordinary
language we always assume, raises a well-worn meta-
physical cjmtroversy which we shall here endeavour
to avoid--^Lfi question whether and in what sense a
feeling as a state of consciousness can be the cause
of a physical changej It will suffice for our purpose
to regard the process of sharp withdrawal, crying, and
other convulsive motor contractions on the one hand,
and the feeling of disappointment and pain on the other,
as a whole of many elements wherein the element of
feeling appears, at any rate on and after a certain stage
of development, to be an integral and essential factor.
The whole phenomenon observed or interpreted by us
on the one side in terms of feeling, on the other in terms
of certain movements of limbs, appears to form a con-
nected totality, and we emphasize the principal differences
of aspect in this totaUty by calling it a psycho-physical
process. In the psycho-physical process, then, of a
baby tr3ang to grasp a candle flame we suppose two
essential characters. On the one hand there is effort
broken off, frustrated in the moment of achievement.
There is, that is to say, disharmony between the effort
and its end. On the other hand there is pain felt in
the moment of disharmony, and essential thereto. Pain


THE GOOD 69

characterizes the feeling involved in disharmony, and the
mental attitude concerned in the process of checking
and cancelling effort.

The inverse case is now readily intelligible. If the
object grasped is neither too hot, nor too sharp, nor too
rough, the first contact is only the beginning of fruitiiMT'-
The little fingers explore the surface, and they close on
it and convey it to the mouth, where, unless the process
is broken off by the arbitrary intervention of a higher
power, a new experience begins, which will differ again,
according as the object turns out to be a sugar plum or
a marble. The effort in the case now under consideration
is not checked in the moment of attainment. The ball
is explored all over, thrown about, and again pursued.
The sugar plum is tasted, sucked, and swallowed. The
series of actions which the effort sets a-going proceeds
to a definite end,» and is encouraged so to proceed in the
successive stages of attainment. There is a harmony
between the effort and its result, and the feeling involved
in the harmony is one of pleasant tone, culminating in
satisfaction. By harmony is meant, in the last analysis,
a form of mutual support. Generally speaking, it is-
that relation of parts in a whole in virtue of which they
maintain and (if they admit of development) further-
one another.* Thus in the case of pleasurable emotion,

I Or, in the alternative, it is continued as long as the interest
is maintained. As this gives way to fatigue the object ceases to
stimulate effort and the effort ceases to yield pleasure. The end
in such a case, though not precisely definite, has its conditions,
either (i) in the nature of the thing which ceases to be interesting
when examined on all sides, when we have, as common phrase
testifies, " exhausted " it ; or (2) in subjective fatigue, any given
faculty of our own being capable of working at its best but for
a Hmited time. In either event the pleasurable activity main«
tains itself till certa n natural limits are reached at which it
gradually or rapidly ceases to be pleasurable, and even becomes
unpleasant.

* The mutual relation is essential to the meaning of harmony
as used here. It is to be carefully distinguished from the mere
subordination of parts to a whole (see below, chap, vi, p. 100 ff).

One of its simplest aad nuMt perfect eaamplea is seen in those


70 THE RATIONAL GOOD

incipient fruition furthers the effort until its achievement
is complete, while the maintenance of the effort is, in
turn, the condition of full fruition.

3. But neither pleasure or pain on the one hand, nor
this internal harmony on the other, have an antecedent
effort as their invariable and necessary condition. If
the candle touched the child's hand accidentally, the
withdrawal would be none the less rapid and the pain
none the less sharp. If the sugar plum was put into the
mouth by maternal fingers it would be sucked with no
less avidity. It takes a philosophic mind to overlook
facts so simple as these. Feeling does not merely super-
vene upon effort, but may initiate effort, and while
pleasure in an experience prompts us to maintain it and
carry it through to some culminating satisfaction, pain
urges us to be rid of it. In the most passive states, such
as enjoyment of warmth or contemplation of a beautiful

efforts of art in wrhich the beauty of parts lends beauty to the whole
and at the same time derives an enhanced beauty therefrom. In

" A voice so thriUing ne'er was heard
In springtime from the cuckoo-bird
Breaking the silence of the seas
Among the furthest Hebrides,"

each line, at any rate each of the three last Hnes, is beautiful by
itself, but much more beautiful when read with the rest, and the
same thing may be said of the four Unes together in relation to
the whole poem. In Helen's lament over Hector the lines

" aXXa av r6v y iirietrtrt 7rapai<f>a^€voc KartpvKec
(T^ T ayayo<f>poo'vyri Ka\ irolg ay^Lyoig iirieirtriy**

stand out from the rest by a beauty of their own, but the higher
values of this beauty they owe to the situation — the tribute to
the habitual gentleness of the fighting chief who Hes dead. These
are good instances of harmony because each part gives something
to and takes something from the remainder. When Abt Voger
boasts that out of three sounds he makes " not a fourth sound
but a star/' the case is not quite so clear, as the separate notes are
of little account in themselves, and seem to be merged in the whole.
I will not here pursue the question of the relation of beauty
to harmony into its intricacies, but will remark only that at any
rate in Ethics it is essential to distinguish between the harmony
of elements and the subordination of one to another. This is a
point to which we shall frequently have to recur.


THE GOOD 71

view, we jdeld ourselves willingly to the experience until
some distraction occurs or strain and fatigue ensue.
That is, the pleasurable state tends to maintain itself
as long as it is pleasurable, while from the unpleasant^
state we recoil.* The pleasurable state, that is, is inter-
nally harmonious, the painful is self-disruptive, even though
conditions of the environment or of the psycho-physical
organization constantly overcome the disruption and
keep us on the rack.

Thus in either case the character of the state gives
rise to a conation if it be only in the form of attention,
tending either to maintain, modify, or annul it. If there
is not defined efiort in the sense of a series of actions so
co-ordinated as to secure an end which was not realized
when the series began, there is the conational force or
stress on which effort rests. In the pleasurable experience,

' It may be objected that there are, e.g. melancholy moods
in which we wilfully persist and are roused to active hostiUty by
cheerful suggestions and hints of consolation. The cause of this
is, sometimes, that we feel the comfort to be unreal, and its false
light only serves to make our darkness more visible. Sometimes
our melajicholy is not very deep and, like most feelings which in
general are of painful tone, a low grade sorrow has its pleasurable
side — it is bitter-sweet —


Yet, Thyrsis, let me give my grief its hour
In the old haunt and find our tree-topped hill.'


Sometimes, on the other hand, in a profound grief we feel that
there is something beyond any suffering of our own that is con-
cerned — ^the payment of an emotional tribute to the lost which
we would not have stayed till it is discharged in full. But apart
from all this, we must distinguish between the inertia of a mood
which seeks (as though it were an independent being) to conserve
itself, and the maintenance of the conditions on which the mood
rests. These, if we see a chance, we are ready enough to remove.
Yet, even so, it will be said there are perverse people who cherish
their grievances and exhibit positive annoyance at their removal.
The explanation here is that the real source of trouble in such
cases is much deeper. It Hes in something of which the unreason-
able being is himself perhaps unaware, and he catches on to this
or that petty annoyance, partly as a counter-irritant, partly (as
the psycho-analysts would tell us) to avert the danger of facing
his real demon.


73 THE RATIONAL GOOD

the incomplete impulse is confirmed, or the inchoate
state maintained. We respond, as we may say, to a
tentative experience with an affirmative. J^ We accept it
and go on with it. Now this is precisely the practical
attitude expressed in the judgment " This is good," and,
in point of fact, pleasurable feeling quite naturally
expresses itself in that form, or in some equivalent. On
the face of the facts, then, we might say that the pleasure
or satisfaction concerned in enhancing an effort, or
prolonging and accentuating an experience is the equivalent
in feeling of the assertion that the object of the effort
or the content of the experience is good. Feeling is the
required element which disposes to action and expresses
itself in the judgment.

But in reality this simple and untroubled identification
of the pleasurable and the good only holds under some-
what narrow conditions. Our first impulsive judgment »
expressing the feeling immediately attending on an
experience, may be corrected by a maturer judgment
expressing the result of a wider experience. Thus, prima
facie, judgment and feeling may fall apart.

But the maturer judgment also rests upon feeling,
though not necessarily a feeling of the same kind. For
example, we flinch from a pain and our sensory feeling

> The relation of desire to assertion is described by Plato
(Republic, Bk. IV, 437, Tr. Davies and Vaughan) :

^' « • . would you not say that the mind of a man under the
influence of desire always either seeks after the object of desire,
or attracts to itself that which it wishes to have ; or again, so far
as it wills the possession of anything, it assents inwardly thereto,
as though it were asked a question, longing for the accomplishment
of its wish ?

I should.

Again : shall we not class disinclination, unwillingness, and
dislike under the head of mental rejection and repulsion, and of
general terms wholly opposed to the former ?

Unquestionably."

* I need not here discriminate the cases of true purposive action
where the end is previously represented in idea, from those of
impulse in which action is directed to an, end which is not formulated.
What I am saying applies to both cases alike.


THE GOOD 73

approves. But immediately upon doing so we condenm
our action as unmanly. This expresses a feeling of very
different origin and significance, but whatever its origin
and significance the points that I would insist on here
are, that it is a feeling ; that it expresses itself in a
judgment ; and that it afiects behaviour, tending to
correct, modify, or reverse action if it is of painful tone,
and to complete and confirm action if it is of pleasurable
tone. Further, the behaviour of others arouses corre-
sponding feelings within us, and our expression of such
feelings has an effect on others comparable to the effect
on ourselves. If we judge an act good, if we praise or
approve it sincerely, it is that it stirs some responsive
feeUng within us, and the effect of the expression of our
approval is to maintain the action so judged, to stimulate
the doer to carry it through, and to persist in conduct
of the same type. If we judge it bad, the reverse tendencies
ensue. Thus, the pleasurable feelings ^ expressed in

> A cynic might sugjg^est here that, if it is a question of pleasure,
many of us derive more satisfaction from the failings and delin-
quencies of neighbours than from their good deeds. The existence
of this serious disharmony in our moral nature cannot be denied.
If we trace it to its roots we find a certain exaltation of self in the
lipectacle of another's weakness and a corresponding depression
in the evidence of his superiority. Hence the joy over the sinner,
not because he repents but because he has occasion for repenting.
But the foundation of this ug^y joy is the knowledge that what
he has done is hateful. It is because his act raises emotions of
aversion — which are disagreeable emotions — ^that he has lowered
himself. It may be objected that the witness who can after
all take secret pleasure in this cannot feel a very whole-hearted
aversion to the act. But if the act was not one to which society
on the whole feels a decided aversion there would be no occasion
for his unholy glee.

There is also a stem satisfaction in the repression and punish-
ment of wrong-doing which, if not the highest attitude conceivable,
is immune to the charge of C3nucism. But the satisfaction here
lies in the active operation against the ugly thing in which the
emotion discharges itself. A bad act, then, excites feelings which
tend to repress or punish it (and so repress acts of that type). This
repressive tendency is indeed as effective in the malicious joy of
the cynic as in the stem reprobation of the just. In every case,
any pleaaurabto satisiactiozi in condenuiatio& is pleasure ezperi-


74 THE RATIONAL GOOD

judgments of approval^ and the displeasurable feelings
expressed in judgments of disapproval, react upon the
modes of behaviour which excite them, tending to
support them in the one case and correct them in the
other. Good and bad« in their moral as in their sensory
application, signify a harmony or dishannony . between"^
feeling and action, and in this relation the feeling of one
man may, through its expression, affect the actions of
another.

What is good, these cases show, must be something
appealing to some one's feeling, whose feeling in particular
there is nothing yet to decide. Only if two or more
people use the word with a common significance there
must be modes of experience (under which generic term
of course observed and reported actions are included)
which appeal to them in the same way, and the feeling
of one person must have some bearing on, or at least
some meaning for, the thought of another. To that
extent the term " good," in its mere usage, seems to
require some objective meaning. What the conditions

enced in repressing the cause of the emotion. Thus there is a
disharmony between the bad act and the feeling that it excites,
less direct than the felt unpleasantness of the act itself, but no
less complete.

It must be added that, apart from the element of pleasure in-
volved in the repressive processes, the emotions of disapproval
are in reality of unpleasant character. This is easily seen when
we contemplate a wrong which we are powerless to avert. The
thwarted emotion then becomes acutely painful. It may be argued
that this is only because it is thwarted, not because it is an intrin-
sically painful emotion. It must be replied that it is only painful
emotions that increase in intensity with thwarting. The thwarting
of a pleasurable emotion is the cancelling of or interference with its
object. This does not make it more pleasurable. The thwarting
of a painful emotion is rather in the maintenance of the object
which excites it and the hindrance of the efforts which it makes
to transform or abolish that object. It is true that the anger
which can express itself adequately is barely a painful state, any
more than the hunger which is not excessive and has the near
prospect of a good meal to stay its cravings. There is none of the
stress which is essential to serious pain. But there is a fount of
painful feeling which rapidly wells up into stress if reUef is


\,


THl^ GOOD 75

and implications of such objectivity are, we shall enquire
later. We have only first to sum up what we have so
far inferred as to the meaning of good. What is good
appears, genetically, as an element of experience which
Is in^harmony with feelings The experience may be
what we calTan impulse or action of our own, or of others,
it may be a sensation or an idea, it may be the experience
of some outer object, of a beautiful scene, a bright warm
fire, an event of public interest. Further, since feeling
too, is an element of experience, it would seem that what
is good may be itself a feeUng. To this point we shall
return immediately. Meanwhile we insist that any act,
or any object, simple or complex, near or remote, which
stirs feeling, may form the content of an " experience "
of the kind which we call good or bad. In judging an
experience good, so far as the judgment is truly our own,
and not a recognition of the judgment effectively passed
by some one else, we express towards it a mode of feeling
which may generically be called favourable ; that is
to say, it has the generic character of pleasure. This

refused. Emotions of which this is true are to be termed generically
painful.

No study of particular men in particular cases, however, gets
to the root of the question. The fundamental point is this. In
so izx as the emotion which the act of another excites is distorted,
whether by self-feeling or any other cross-current, it is corrected
in the normal decent man by the settled principle of the will which
supports the onnmon good as he understands it. At the back
of the will lies (according to our analysis in chap, ii) the system
of feeling in which our permanent happiness and unhappiness are
involved. It is rather to this deeper source of feeling than to
the emotions of the moment that our constant support of the
common good owes its strength. The good act, that is to say,
whether of self or another, is part of the system in which the
happiness of the self is involved. It is at tMs deeper level that
the stable conditions of harmony are reached. Thus the pleasur-
able element in approval is in accord with the permanent body
of feeling and may be said to represent it in consciousness, while
any unpleasurable element is out of harmony with the permanent
conditions of feeling. It is from this point of view, in the last
resort, that we are justified in describing approval as pleasurable,
and disapproval as displeasurable.


76 THE RATIONAL GOOD

feeling, /so far as it finds expression, tends to maintain
the type of experience to which it refers, to carry it on
to completion, to intensify it, and to facilitate its repetition,
and this it does now by its action within the mind of
each person who feels it, and now by the effect of its
expression — ^as praise or blame — on the mind and behaviour
of others. This may be expressed by sajdng that the
experience judged good is in harmony with feeling. What
is judged bad similarly excites unfavourable feeling of
painful tone tending to arrest and annul it. That is, it
involves disharmony with feeling.

4. But we not only judge objects and efforts in terms
of feeUng. We also judge feelings themselves. We call
" bad " not only the thing that gives the pain, but
the pain itself. What does this judgment express ? In the
simplest cases it expresses the conations pivoted on the
feeling, struggling with it or welcoming and surrendering
to it, seeking to avert or procure it. Secondarily, it may
express a feeling about the feeling, and it may be noted
that the second feeling is not always in harmony with
the first. We may rejoice that we have rejoiced, but we
may also be ashamed of having done so, or even in the
present tense of doing so, and we may be glad that we
mourn. /The judgment appraising the feeling, then, is
not the same thing as the feeling itself, but is the expres-\
sion of conations relevant to it or of other feeUngs which/
it excites. Thus, feeling is good or bad according as it
is in harmony or disharmony with conation, or with
another feeling. Thus, in any case, what is good is a
harmony between some element of experience and a
feeling, but where the experience is conational the
relation may be seen from either end. Viewed froms
the side of feeling the experience is held good, viewed^
from the side of conation, the feeling.^

But while either term of the relation may be legitimately
qualified as " good " or " bad," it is a fallacy to treat

> Equally, if both terms are feelings, either may be held good as
viewed from the other. If the " element of experience " is neither
a feeling nor a conation, no such reciprocity applies (see below).


THE GOOD 77

this character as independent of the relation in which
it stands to the other term. The course of action, or,
more generally, the experience which leaves feeling cold
is indifferent. To put a value on it sincerely is to express
a feeling about it. The feeling which stirs no conative
reaction stands in no organic relation to our nature, and<
if such a feeling can be, it is v(ithout significance. It
is the reaction upon the feeling that we express in our
judgments. It would seem, then, that the judgment
always " expresses " one term of the relation, but is
explicitly concerned with^ the other. This prompts us
to look for the essential good now in one term, now in
the other, but not in both. On this line of thought, if
we take the object of feeling as a self-contained good,
we arrive at absolutist systems of ethics which tend
to ignore human happiness, and if we take feelings in the
same way we arrive at hedonistic systems in which
acts, character, and objects of feeling generally sink to
mere means. The nature of the fallacy and the true
solution come into view when we recall that the judgment
" This is good " is not only the expression of an attitude,
but also the assertion of a fact, and the fact which it
asserts is a harmony between an experience and a feeling.
In describing anything as good we are at once taking
up a practical attitude towards it and asserting a harmo-
nious relation of which it is one term. The term may
legitimately be called good as pertaining to this harmony,
but the concrete truth involves both terms in that relation.
"Good," then, is a harmony of experience and feeling
in the generic senses described, and any element — ^feeling
or other experience — that enters into this harmony is
called good by right of membership.


CHAPTER V

THE RATIONAL GOOD

I. If the good is generally a harmony of experience with
feeUng what is the rational good ? In accordance with
our general definition of the rational we shall expect the
rational good in the first place to be consistent throughout.
That is to say, whatever is reasonably held good must
not tend to clash with anything else that is reasonably
held good. Just as two rational judgments must not
contradict one another, so two rational pm-poses must not
conflict with one another, and if two kinds of experience,
both apparently good, are found to conflict, it becomes
necessary to seek some means of reconciling the contra-
. diction. Of the problem thus set to the practical reason
we shall speak presently. But let us observe now in the
second place that negative consistency is not enough.
Whether we think of the judgment "This is Good" as
an assertion or as the expression of an impulse-feeling it
jnust, to be rational, have a ground, and the ground niust
be universal. The end or act or feeling that is good as
such must be good wherever and in whomsoever found,
and that which is good under given conditions must be
good wherever these conditions obtain. But further, if
we have to find grounds for these universals — ^grounds
for our grounds — ^we shall be pushed along the same line
of criticism as before in dealing with cognition. Principles
that figure as immediate and self-evident will be seen
themselves to require a ground,* and the ground which

> If it has to be admitted on the theoretic side that acceptance
of first principles as self-evident is dependent on our mental con*
stitution, it is much more easily seen on the practical side that

78


THE RATIONAL GOOD 79

will be found if they^are Yalid.i&.t]ti(eiact.tliaLiJilfiy.&US\
lipTaid generalize more specific and CQncrete ends so far
as these are mutually consistent. Thus here, as in theory,
we shall look to Interconnexion as itself the rational v
principlfi^ only that here the interconnexion must involve
the practical operation of purposes along with the specu-
lative truth of judgments. For the judgments, being the
expression each of a practical attitude, cannot consist
with one another unless their practical results consist
with one another. Thus in action as in theoretic state-
ment the rational good forms a connected whole, in which
no part is isolated but in the end every element involves
every other. This postulates (i) a harmony of feeling
with Jfifiliog, To be rational all the feelings expressed
in judgments of the good must work together as elements
in a single harmonious body of feeling. And since the
good is generically a harmony of experience with feeling,
it postulates for its achievement (2) a harmony of all
experience * of all sentient beings with this body of
feeling, as \ that which maintains this body of feeUng
and is maintained by it.

Thirdly, the rational good is Objective. The meaning
oflhls requirement is most easily seen in the negative
form that the judgment of the good must not depend on
any peculiarity of the individual who forms it. But here
a caution is required. It is true that to be rational the
subjective factor must be in a sense eUminated. But
even in the world of knowledge we had to be careful in
limiting and defining this sense. Knowledge is and
remains something " subjective " in the sense that it is
enjoyed by '* subjects " and is a function of their nature.
What must be eliminated is any pecuHarity of the sub-
jective factor which disturbs the appreciation, of objective
reality. So here, the feehng expressed in any practical
judgment is the feeUng of a subject. What must be
eliminated is any pecuUarity of feeUng which is incom-

feeling — ^which is admittedly essential to the judgment of value —
is a function of the psychological structure.
' That is, of course, so far as it afiects feeling.


8o THE RATIONAL GOOD

patible with the universal relations involved in the rational
system. .The " objectivity " of the £ood. i§ merely one
aspect of its universality. One feeling is not to be
preferred to another because it is the feeling of this man
rather than that, except in so far as the preference is
required on universal principles which are integral parts
of the general system of harmony. Thus I am justified
in caring much more for my child's happiness than for
that of somebody else's child, if the parental affections
are contributory elements to the rational good. But I
am not justified in carrying the preference to a point at
which it inflicts wrong on another, i.e. violates some rule
equally necessary to the rational good. The body of
feeling that has to be harmonized is the body of feeling
experienced or capable of being experienced in any sentient
beings whose behaviour may affect one another, and the
contradictions and conflicts that arise within this world
of feeling have to be reconciled, explained and resolved
just as in the world of knowledge, before a rational harmony
is reached. Thus the rationaUty of the good involves its
impartial and consistent application to the world of
sentient existence. That is to say, jtJs^ the. function of
the rational impulse in practice to embrace this world in a
single system of purposes, just as it is the function of the
rational in cognition to embrace the world of experience
in a single system of thought. Not merely the recognition
of fundamental similarity in the life of others but the
practical comprehension of all Uving experience within a
single system of purposes is the essential work of the
rational in the sphere of action.

2. This system involves a double harmony, harmony
of the mind with itself and harmony of the mind with the
world, and in both relations the mind has to bend and be
bent in order to attain its good. The nerve of the process ^
is feeling which issues from and into impulses, controlling
and controlled by, supporting and supported by activity,
and the harmony of activity rests accordingly on a harmony,
of feeling. Now each element of activity or experience
which any mind finds good has its harmony within.


THE RATIONAL GOOD 81

sustaining, if only for the moment, and sustained by a
receptive and operative feeling. But harmonious as it
IS within it may be inharmonious without, destrojdng
or destroyed by other activities each equally at harmony
within itself. This contrast may be repeated indefinitely
on a growing scale. A great body of vital activity,
including a large sphere of life and a great number of
beings, may be internally harmonious, and yet hostile
to another such body. Now the rational principle is that>
which persistently extends the harnouony, enlarging the *
view, resolving contradictions, penetrating to deeper/
sources of unity. How this can be we shall enquire further
at a later stage, but unless it can be there is no rational
good and no right. Granting for the moment that it can
be, we find that we mean by "Good" a harmony ofx
vital experience with feehng, that what we so deem good
at one moment or from one point of view, we may also
deem bad at another moment, or from another point of
view, that what we reasonably call good or what is really
good must be a harmony of the totaUty of feehng with the
totality of experience so far as it affects feehng. Thus
the Practical Reason is the effort of the mind towards
harmony within itself, and with nature. This harmony
the mind does not find, but creates, or rather let us say
that it finds it in djdng cadences arid catches of which
it seeks to make a music universal.

3. But, it may be asked, is it clear that the universalism
of the Practical Reason follows from our premisses ?
Might there not be some partial point of view from which
a system answering all our rational tests could be worked.-
out ? For example there is, it may be said, a consistent
egoism. I judge this to be good because it falls in with
my wishes. Something inconsistent with it falls in with
your wishes and is judged good by you. But what is
that to me ? I must admit that if something, x, is really
good it is good universally and, therefore, for you as
well as for me. But this is not as it stands sufficient,
for I might contend that an essential element in x —
essential to its goodness — is precisely that it is mine, a

6


« •


82 THE RATIONAL GOOD

fulfilment of my wishes. Carrying this right through life
I get a consistent order of action and judgments about
action, viz., that all are good which fit into a system,
consistent in theory and practice, of my judgments,
my actions, and my feelings. Thus, ideally, egoism might
be 'internally self -consistent. On the other hand, the
principle of universals — as a merely cognitive principle —
will at least compel me to admit that you will form a
similar system for yourself and that these systems may
clash. If, then, both systems are rational, rational systems
may be inconsistent, which is contrary to definition.
If I hold mine alone to be rational, what is the basis of
the difference which I allege between tWo similar systems ?
If I assert without ground that what I think or feel is
preferable to what others think or feel, that is arbitrary
and, therefore, by definition, irrational. It follows that
there must be a ground for my preference, and if self-
preference is itself a ground, it will justify your self-
preference as well as mine, grounds being universal.
Thus the principle of self-preference — ^whether of an
individual or a group — ^involves inconsistencies and is by
definition irrational.

4. At this point we shall be asked whether, after all,
our demonstrations affect action in the smallest degree.
If there is a consistent egoism regardless of other people's
feelings, or, what is more real, a consistent group morality
indifferent or hostile to outsiders, why should it care
about any proof that its action is inconsistent with some
wider good ? Grant, for the sake of argument, that the
rational good is what we have taken it to be. Still it
may be said it will appeal only to those who happen to
make a rational life their end. If a man cares for none
of these things, who or what shall make him care ? As
to rationality, if a man adopts a certain end as his chief
good and then acts so as to defeat the end, he is clearly
inconsistent and absurd. So much we could probably
get him to acknowledge, and all would claim to be so
far rational that when they have adopted an end they
wish to carry it out and regard actions which conflict


THE RATIONAL GOOD 83

with it as mistaken. Thus, given an end, reason has a
clear function to perform. But in the choice of ends or
principles it is otherwise. One principle, such as that
of harmony, may, indeed, be distinguished from others in
that it carries order and coherence through all Ufe, whereas
other principles only carry them through partially. But
how does this afEect choice ? It still remains open to any
of us to reject the rational, and no proof, except it be by
connexion with some end that we have actually chosen,
will affect our will.

Thus we are brought face to face with the question of
authority and obligation. JVe have to ask not merely
whether there is a rational good and whether we have
defined it correctly, but whether the rational good has
a claim upon us, and an indefeasible claim, over-riding
the promptings of subjective judgment. Now in the
ordinary conception of morality we encounter just sucht^
a claim. The moral judgment imposes on us an obligation. ^
It says that this is right and that is wrong, this is what
you must, that what you must not do. It seems to
state a fact and also to impose a command. What is
the nature of the fact and what the basis of the command ?
Many would deny that the moral judgment makes any
direct statement of fact. True, they would say, it may
take the form " This course of action is right." But what
sort of a thing is rightness ? It is not a quaUty of an
action or a circumstance in the sense in which squareness
is a quality of this table or swiftness of a body in motion.
What the word imports is simply that the thing should
be done, and the proposition is accordingly a command
to do it. There are certainly facts in the background,
e.g. the desire of some one that the thing should be done,
and the possible consequences if it is not done. But the
words themselves are really not a statement but an order,
and even the facts which they imply are of the nature of
desires, resolves, sentiments, bearing upon and tending
to issue in action.

We are, then, on this view, to take the moral judgment
as, in essence, a command. Let us leave for the moment


84 THE RATIONAL GOOD

the question whether it is or is not an assertion of fact,

' and consider it as a command. )^nio, then, commands,

who is commanded, and, above all, on^what authority

does the command repose ? The first two questions were

answered once for all by Kant. In the moral judgmeat

'proper it is the self which both comnmnds and obeys.

Jwhen I do a thing that is right because it is right I do

' it for a reason which I myself acknowledge as good, and

.. binding me because it is good. True, another may tell

me my duty, but if I obey him merely because he commands

that is not in itself a moral ground of action, while if I

conform 4>ecause he convinces me, that again is acceptance

of a principle which I now acknowledge on my own account

as binding me. If this is so we begin to get an answer

to our third and most important question. The principle

whic h I accept as binding must be one that appeals te m^

as a H^ecisive ground of action, that is, one that overcomes^

f other grounds for other actions, it being just this supremacy

'jvhich the term "binding" expresses. \

We become aware of such supremacy through conflict
with some other motive of action, and we are aware of
it not only in the moral but in the prudential sphere, and
indeed, as has been hinted, not only in action but in
cognition. Thus I may be constrained by cogent reasoning
to dismiss an opinion to which I am very strongly incHned.
I am constrained by prudence to avoid a dish which I
find very tempting, just as I am constrained by honesty
to admit a debt which it would be very convenient to
ignore. With essential differences there is also an essential
point of agreement between the three cases. In one I
am convinced that, however strongly appearances may
suggest, say, that the fields are rising and falling, in
reaUty it is the aeroplane that is " banking " while the
fields are stationary. In another I am certain that
the evils of ill health are really so great as to outweigh the
momentary satisfaction of appetite, and I am certain of
this and guided by my certainty, although the felt impulse
^ of appetite may be much keener and more vivid than any
representation of future ill consequences. In the last


THE RATIONAL GOOD 85

case, though I may be just as keenly tempted by oppor-
tunities of evasion, I feel that it would be " really " bad
and not good. What is common to the three cases, then,
is the insistence on something " real " as opposed to
something " apparent " — ^in the case of action on some-
thing " really " bad, though " apparently " good. This
seems to bring us back after all to the view that the moral
judgment does assert a fact of some kind. But again,*-
without pursuing this question, let us try to complete
our analysis of its import as a command. In the first
place it propounds a principle or end or ground of action. •
As a general term for such grounds we have used the term
'* good," since we took it that everything that appears to
us as a motive for action also appears, at least provision-
ally, as good. The moral judgment, then, propounds to ^
me something as good, but it also claims supremacy for
this " good " over any other that appeals to me — even
though that other may admittedly be " really " good,
so far as it goes, or would be good if it did not happen
in this case to conflict with something superior to it.
Further, this supremacy is claimed for the rule of action
as such. The moral principle does not allege that the
actual inclination to obey it is greater than the contrary
incUnation. But it bids us obey, no matter what our>
incUnations may be. Such, then, is the nature of the^
moral command, and the question is whether it is a
reasonable command.

Observe first that there is no more difficulty in applying
the test of rationality to a command than to an assertion.
We can easily see that commands are unreasonable ifi^
they are in conflict with one another or if they are
arbitrary, that is ungrounded. Conversely, commands are
reasonable so far as they are consistent and grounded,
and this, as our analysis has shown, will mean in effect
in so far as they prescribe a harmonious system of ends
to be pursued. Observe, secondly, that there is no
difficulty in the opposition of the command to the felt
incUnation. Even a rule of prudence involves as much
as this, the dull weight of permanent interests overcoming


86 THE RATIONAL GOOD

the vivid inclination of which we are most intensely
conscious in our feeling. Into the psychology of such
struggles we need not enter for the moment. It is suflBcient
that they prove that, by whatever means, the incUnation
which is most intensely felt in consciousness may neverthe-
less be overcome. The more serious diflBculty begins when
we remember that in matters of prudence, incUnation
and interest after all stand on the same platform. Both
appeal to the same self ; nor do they necessarily suggest
any quaUtative distinction between the different interests
of the self. The moral judgment, on the other hand, does--
make quaUtative distinctions. It does not recognize, that
is, that any amount of some other sort of good cancels
the bad involved in infringing its rule, and what is more, *
though adopted and approved as a rule by the self for
the self, it ignores the individuaUty of the self in its
prescription, which maintains the goodness of a rule as
a universal and true for all selves placed in the circum-'
stances, whatever they be, that the rule contemplates.
It is in principle indifferent to its truth whether the person
whom it contemplates accepts it or not. Just as the rule
of prudence holds for you whether you are incUned to
accept it or not — your felt incUnation making no difference
to the working out of causes and effects — ^so the moral
rule holds good independently, not only of your felt '
incUnation, but of your most deUberate decision. It
appUes to you. It holds of you, but it holds independently
of your wiU as well as your desire or your impulse. But
how can anything practical hold '* of " me if no impulse,
no desire, no voUtion of mine urges me to it ? We have
admitted from the first that all actions rest on some
element of feeling. If, then, there is no responsive feeUng i
in me what meaning has moral obUgation for me ? This
brings us finally face to face with the ** fact '* aUeged by
the moral judgment. For the reply must be that it has
not been said that moral obUgation holds *' for " me in
the sense that it does in the case assumed make an appeal
to me. That would be a contradiction in terms. What
has been said is that it holds " of " me, that is, that there


THE RATIONAL GOOD 87

is, in fact, an obligation which in the case assumed I
ignore. The analogy, again, is with the relation between
reality and opinion. A danger, for instance, is equally
there for the man who sees it and the man who does not
see it. It concerns him though he does not know it,
and the only sense -in which we can take obligation to
hold " of " a man who does not recognize it, is that its
validity is independent of his knowledge and concerns^
him' though he does not know it. In what sense, then,
does obligation concern the man who does not appreciate
it ? The reply is that it concerns him as colour concerns
the Mnd man. He misses what is really good, the
goodness which stands the test of rational examination.
To the morally deficient the demonstration no more
brings practical conviction than an explanation of the
colour system gives sight to the blind. The mx>ral impulses
are not created by exposition but must be there beforie
we can appeal to them. In the normal man, however,
such promptings exist, and assert themselves with varying
degrees of actual force against rebellious impulse. Thus
*lhe sense of moral obligation is something real. When
' it is asked whether moral obligation is a fact the question
cannot refer to the existence of this feeling. The question
is whether moral obligation is or is not something morci
than a feeling irregularly diffused, both as to intensity and^
direction among human beings, that is to say whether,
if we regard it as a command, the command is reasonable,
whether if we regard it as asserting a fact, the assertion
is true. Now what the moral law imposes on us as a
command is that we should follow a certain mode of
life as superior to any other so that not only is that mode
of life good, but anjrthing that conflicts with it, however
attractive in itself, is bad, and what the moral judgment
asserts is the same superiority put not as a command,
but as an assertion of supreme goodness. The question
whether the command is valid or the asserHbn true is
the same question differently phrased, and comes back
to this : Is the moral judgment reasonable ? These
questions we have sought to determine by defining


88 THE RATIONAL GOOD

rationality, and we have come accordingly to the conclusion
Ahajjihe beKef thaj: WQ owe qJ^Qfl^pe tOA wid^r life than
^r own is justified in xeason. For we found that a harmony
of feeling with experience extending to all beings that
feel, must be reasonably held good as conforming to the
definition of reason applied to practice. Hence the
feelings, whether they take the form of impulse, volition,
exhortation, or command, prompting to the support or
development of such harmony, are rejasonable. They are
mutually consistent, give each other support and are of
universal application. Conversely, opposed principles are
reasonably held bad. If our argument is sound it follows
thatj:he attitude of will which accepts a moral, obligatioa
is a rational attitude, and the assertion, implied in that
acceptance a true assertion. I would add that even if
'our view of the rational and the good be rejected, I should
doubt whether any other form could be given to the
problem of moral obligation. Is the feeling rational or
not ? Does it rest on reality or not ? All these are the ''
same question in different forms. Possibly others may
suggest other forms which would prove more convenient,
but whatever the form, I suggest that the real issue is
the same — ^the capacity of the feeling of obligation which
we experience to stand the test which proves it reasonable.
The question, it will have been seen, turns on a due
appreciation of the bearing of reason upon action, and
it comes to a head in connexion with the " transpersonal
reference " which is the main theoretical crux, as it is
also the practical difficulty in morals. Some, misled by
an unduly narrow view of rationality, have identified
reason with prudence and conceived all altruism as based
on supernatural motives. Others have identified the work
of the Reason in this regard with the intellectual admission
of the essential identity of human beings and the equal
value of the good which all can enjoy. Others, again,
have seen in the Practical Reason an authority over-riding
mere impulse and impelling the emotional human subject'
to conform to law. On the view here taken every judgment
of the good involves the existence of an impuLse-feeling


THE RATIONAL GOOD 89

directed towards it. To recognize some act or experience
of another as good is, therefore, not merely an intellectual
judgment, but a judgment imbued with a tone of feeling
towards that act or experience. But we recognized among
the mass of impulses a certain correlation which, in its
simplest forms, makes for unitary control and, in its
more rational form, for harmony. This tendency we can
speak of as a specific impulse towards harmony, but we
must note that it is an impulse among impulses, quahfying
and reshaping them. In virtue of this movement our
impulses become an organized body overcoming recal-
citrant movements, however intensely felt, by the power
of an organized mass. This organization, consistently
and intelUgently carried through, is the practical reason
which is the mass of impulse-feeUng harmonized, or in
process of finding harmony.
- 5. But, while the Practical Reason is an impulse and
its work creative, it is also the recognition of a fact and
its creation is soUdly based on a reality. Its effort towards
a harmony of all experience for all mind would have no
meaning if there were not, as matter of hard fact, a certain
unity actually pervading all mind. In requiring harmony \
between any two impulses, the practical reason is assuming/
that there is a relation between the two spheres to which
they belong. If, indeed, they collide in practice so that
in following one we frustrate the other this relation needs
no proof. But the requirement of the reason goes beyond
these cases. As reason its judgments take the shape
of universals and what is good or bad for it is good or bad
universally, that is to say wherever precisely similar
conditions are found. Fundamentally we have seen that
the condition of goodness is harmony between experience
and feeling within a mind, and the universality of this
principle and of every judgment applying it is the assertion
of a certain unity of mind wherever found. This unity
fias two characteristics. On the one hand it includes that
fundamental similarity of character which is the basis
of the universal judgment, on the other hand it includes
the social solidarity which is imphed in any judgment of


go THE RATIONAL GOOD

one man's cQaduct-.hy its effect upon another. The
world of Practical Reason must be of one tissue throughout,
in the double sense that its character is fundamentally
alike all through and that its parts, as far as intercourse
extends, are all interconnected. It is this unity of
which we are obscurely conscious in the sense of moral
obligation. The relation of our individual self, our\
particular act to the whole is what we know as duty?*
Jhe conformity of any .act with the system re quired b y
the whole is what we. know as its rightnesga.and since all
. these terms express or imply actual relations of a real
part to a real whole, the moral judgment is witness to tiig^.

real existence of an order which at the same time it seeks

• • ' • '

, to develop'^ and perfect.

The unity which the Practical Reason finds in existence
differs from the harmony which it seeks to create in two
essentials. In the first place, mere physical barriers
obstruct and may completely sever intercourse, so that
until these are overcome the world in which it moves is
not that of all mind, but only (if the expression be allowed)
of all available mind. Secondly, within the circle of minds
that are in contact, i.e. the . actual xommunity, there is
every degree and kind of conflict and disharmony shot
through the pervading unity. The unity, however, i§.^
always real and always operative in this tangible sense, .
*^at no one part permanently esrapes tha coasaquences ;
of that which affects the rest, and the whole is affected
by the behaviour and suffering of any one part. The
development which each man can achieve is conditioned''
in kind and degree by the development of others. Even
the man who succeeds in putting himself above others
must, willy-nilly, shape his own self accordingly, cherishing
this and oppressing that side of his nature, a truth
depicted in its extreme case by the Platonic tyrant
who turns out to be the sufferer from a tyranny within
his own soul — a description of which biographers of
Abdul Hamid have given vivid contemporary illustration.
Particular acts may not indeed bring their appropriate
reward or penalty upon the doer» but in the main God is


THE RATIONAL GOOD 91

not mocked, and through a thousand subtle interactions
the choice of a hne of Kfe entails the consequences which
it may seek to ignore or defeat. The unity is such that
the parts do and will interact, if not harmoniously then
with a greater or less degree of mutual perversion and
destruction.

6. On the view here taken of the Practical Reason it is
clear that not only the intellect, but the feelings, impulses
and emotions of human beings that make for a harmony
in life as a whole, may all be regarded as rational in char-
acter. But this does not, of course, mean that they are
acquired or even trained or developed by ratiocination.
They grow up originally, as all impulses grow, under the
conditions of heredity as determined by natural selection.
Far down in the animal state impulses appear which have
reference to the welfare of others. The parental instincts,
in fact the sex instinct, and, where it exists, the herd
instinct, are all impulses of this class. The psychophysical
organization grows up under environing conditions, physical
and social, to which it adapts itself in a rough and ready
way by response. These responses must, in accordance
with well-known biological conditions, be on the whole such
as will assist the survival of the individual and the stock.
That stock will survive and increase in which the behaviour
of component individuals is best adapted to the require-
ments of the mode of life which the stock enjoys; this
adjustment of responses impUes an adaptation of organ-
ization and feeling, and this organization as handed on
by heredity is the basis of instinct. In so far as the Ufe
of the stock is social, that is in so far as it depends on
the interaction of individuals, their mutual forbearance
and mutual aid, their relations and behaviour affecting
them will accordingly become subjects of instinctive
feeling. The appreciation of such behaviour, at least as
soon as any complexity arises, will involve inteUigence,
just as the appreciation of the bearing of any single act
on the welfare of the individual may involve intelligence.
Yet the feeling to which the act appeals when its bearings
have been worked out, may be of instinctive origin.


92 THE RATIONAL GOOD

Nor is it to be supposed that the social instincts are
restricted to the human race. Many of the lower animals
live under social conditions, and social, and particularly
parental instincts, are verifiable far down in the scale
of animal creation. Now anything that violates these
instincts is directly felt as bad, and what falls in with them
as good. It is possible that these judgments may be
reversed on appeal, just as the instinctive withdrawal
from physical pain may be overcome, and what we first
feel as bad we may be driven finally to accept as good.
But that is only to say that our immediate and unre-
flective impulse — ^whether we call it an immediate judgment
or a spontaneous reaction of feeling — ^may be overborne
by wider considerations. It does not affect the fact that
the feelings that bind us to others and oyedeap .thfi
boundary of self are jyst as primary psychologically as
those which interest us in our own future. They are
rational in the . seu^e thg,t thsy^.are integral .paits . Qitj>
rational S3aithesis, not in the sense that they are results
reached by a deductive reasoning^ or by any other purely
intellectual process. They do, however, take intellectual
expression in judgments ai value, and accordingly our
primary and unreflective .ideas of what is good or bad
have reference to others as well as ourselves. We arehiofi^ ^
to suppose that either logically or psychologically the
idea of good is first built up for ourselves alone, and then «
transferred by analogical inference to other people. The
idea of good — and for that matter the idea of self also —
is formed by the interaction of mind on mind, and the
emotions and ideas which their play calls forth. The ^ :
" good " is what is accepted, approved or encouraged by •
some one, not necessarSy by self. As soon as the self
clearly recognizes its goodness that is tantamount to a
practical acceptance. To learn the meaning of the word
is to assimilate and fit on to our own feeling ideas that
are moving in the social Hfe around us. Nor again can
we logically consider the good of others as formed
analogically upon the model of our own. What is in the
order of reason to be held good for me» is not finally


THE RATIONAL GOOD 93

determinable apart from the good of others whom it will
afiect. To suppose that I can definitely ascertain my
own good and proceed to the inference that the good of
every other person is like it, is imduly to simplify the
moral problem. As we shall see more fully later, self-
development is not as such an element in the social ideal,
but only such development as contributes to the harmony
of the social whole.

The reason of practice resembles the reason of theory
in that it is the endeavour to establish harmony through-
out its own world. But both in its nature and method >
it differs in accordance with the difference of its problem. '*
Its world is the world of impulses, emotions, fixed purposes,
passions, all the vital activities of men, and it is within
this turbulent mass that it has to establish harmony.
For this purpose it must itself be charged with all the
energy of profound feeling, and its development is as much
a development of feeling as of thought. The preparatory
work is done by that unconscious growth which the con-
ditions of physical and, later, of social life make possible.
The later stages are carried through by an education in
which the conscious appreciation of the significance of
conduct and the bearings of behaviour in its complex
social relations plays an increasing part. But throughout,
the expansion of view and the refinement of ideals must
carry feeling along with them. Without a basis in feeling
the " rationality " of any unselfish action would be a
word without force. Without the notion of rationality,
the mass of social feelings would be without cohesion,'
guidance or unity of aim. Here, as elsewhere, the function"^
of the principle is interpretative. It is to make the impulse
imderstand itself. At the same time here, as elsewhere,
the interpretation deepens and strengthens the very
feeling which it serves. The wider sense of meaning and
purposiveness which the recognition of this rational
coherence lends to the social feelings, becomes the key-
stone of the arch among the feelings themselves. Reasoning
cannot put into men feelings that they do not possess,
but by directing* co-ordinating and giving unity and


94 THE RATIONAL GOOD

stability of aim it may most materially enhance the
working energy of feelings out of which it is itself
engendered.

7. The all-embracing harmony in which we found the
ideal of the practical reason is in strictness incapable of
complete realization. Experience is imlimited, and the
mind with its capacities for feeling is always in process of
" becoming " if not of growth. There is, therefore, so
far as human vision can see, no limit to the work of reason,
and no stage at which it will be able to rest on the
achievement of final harmony. The definition of the
rational good must take this limitation into account.

But once again, the case is closely analogous to that
of rational thought. There, too, we saw that, experience
being unlimited, the body of systenrntic thought is never
complete, and not only is it incomplete, but for that very
reason it is never final within its own sphere. It is always
theoretically Uable to modification by new experiences
and new interpretations of experience. Thus, whUe it is
reasonable to maintain the system established by the
interconnexion of experience so far as it has gone, it is
equally reasonable to hold it liable to modification by
fresh experience, and it is reasonable in forming a con-
ceptual interpretation of reaUty as a whole to be for ever
seeking fresh experience to bring to bear on the thought-
constructions already made, ^^tting all these points
together we found that in the sphere of cognition itself —
though the purpose is not to construct reality, but to
interpret a reality that already exists — ^the reason ulti-«/ V
mately reveals itself as a conation or an impulse. It is the ^ Cj
impulse, not merely to interpret the experience that men h \
have actually accumulated, but to extend the synthesis v4
of thought to all possible experience. It is the organizing i r^
principle in thought. In strict analogy the practical;^
reason is the organizing principle in the actions of men. ^ *


It is the impulse to develop harmony, on the one hand . ^
by extending the control of mind over the conditions of ik
its life, on the other hand by establishing unity of aim
within the world of consciousness itself. The measure


THE RATIONAL GOOD 95

of harmony so achieved at any given stage is not complete,
and its rules accordingly are not necessarily final. But
they are to be modified only in the interests of some
fuller harmony to which such a change will demonstrably
lead. What it is reasonable to hold good under any
given conditions is the harmony which is as perfect and
comprehensive as we can make it under these conditions,
which ignores no element which we can see to be relevant
and admits no conflict of which we are aware. Such a
system it is reasonable to hold good, but it is also
reasonable to recognize that its principles are liable to
revision, the system being one which not merely admits,
of expansion but demands it.

This expansion, we have hinted, follows two main lines.
On the one hand, there is the development of harmony
within the world of f eeUng itself. On the other, there is '
the endeavour through action upon the environment to
bring experience into harmony with the trend of feeling -
as a whole. These two movements, when all their implica-
tions are understood, may be said to involve the whole
sphere of mental activity. They involve the development
of mind in all rational beings, and in all their mutual
relations to the point in which it can work in perfect
concert with itself, and they involve the extension of its
operations on every side in the organization of its Ufe.
These considerations indicate the general direction in
which harmony is to be found, and it remains to follow
them up into some further detail, in order to form a
clearer conception of the nature of harmony, the conditions
on which it depends and the life in which it is realized.


wmmmmmtmmmmmmmmmm


CHAPTER VI

THE REALIZED GOOD

I. To understand the structure of harmony we must
begin with its constituent atoms. That is to say we must
go back to the simple processes by which it is brought
step by step into relation with life as a whole.

We have seen how, in any particular case of its exercise,
an impulse is affected by the feelings to which it gives
rise, how it is furthered by pleasure and inhibited and
perhaps frustrated by pain. Now pleasure and pain have
effects which do not end with the particular experience
in which they arise. They modify our subsequent
behaviour, the pleasurable feeling tending to strengthen
any pre-existing impulse that led up to that feeling or
to create a desire where none existed before. We need
not for the moment enquire closely into the psychophysical
mechanism involved in this process, which is subtle,
complicated and difl&cult to analyse. We note only the
empirical fact. When an impulse results in a pleasurable
experience, the pleasure not only strengthens that par-
ticular impulse and carries it through to its completion,
but has a permanent effect such that when a similar
impulse is again suggested by the circumstances of the
organism, it is stronger than before, and may continue
by the same process to grow in strength till a maximum
point is reached. The opposite pair of effects may be
attributed to pain. Thus in the pleasurable experience
a double harmony is involved. There is the harmony
of impulse with feeling in any single case and the wider
harmony between numerically different impulses and


THE REALIZED GOOD 97

feelings of the same class. The impulse in each case gives
rise to the experience to which the feeling is attached,
and the feeling confirms the impulse. In the case of
pain there is at first sheer disharmony — ^the pain both
arrests the individual impulse which has given rise to it,
and tends to inhibit the subsequent formation of similar
impulses. The efEect of this inhibition, however, if carried
far enough, is to suppress impulses of the type in question
and so reduce conscious disharmony to a minimum.'

These relations suppose something permanent and yet
plastic which the feelings affect and by which the impulses
are formed and reformed. How this permanent element
which we call the self is to be conceived, what is its relation
on the one hand to the body, on the other to the experi-
ences of which we call it the subject, are metaphysical
questions which we shall here as far as possible avoid.
But our account, though it carries us but a very Uttle
way into the life of the self, already forces us to conceive
it as something with a certain constitution or organization
of its own. That, at least, is the phrase in which we can
best sum up the facts. The self feels in a certain way. We
cannot regard this feeling as being put into it from with-
out. Even if we conceive it as due in part to the action
of external things, e.g. the prick of a pin, still the feeling
is the mode in which the self reacts to this stimulus.
It is so organized as to give this response to this stimulus.
The same may be said of its impulses and of the way in
which its impulses are modified by its feelings, and from
this modification it results that its organization is not
something fixed once for all at the beginning of its experi-
ence, but is capable of development. It not only has
impulses, experiences and feelings, but it tends to shape
or organize them into a harmony. So far as there is a
resultant harmony in our actions and experiences it is
the expression of the internal harmony of our organization.
So far as this internal harmony already exists the impulses
that we follow lead to pleasurable enck and these difierent

> It does not, however, follow that all disharmony is overcome,
see below, p. zoo fL


98 THE RATIONAL GOOD

ends are congruous with one another. So far as there is
disharmony between act and consequence there is dis-
harmony in the constitution of the self which the experience
itself tends to annul. The harmony that we express in
the judgment " This is good " even when this is the
immediate and unreflective utterance of feehng, may be
regarded as the harmony of an impulse or experience
with the organization of the self, and in this sense we
were justified in speaking of it as an acceptance. Finally,
this harmony of any act or experience with the inner
organization may be considered as the basis of any
harmony found between it and other acts or experiences.
If hfe consisted in the repetition of certain sets of actions
having nothing to do with one another, the matter would
end here. The questions of moral practice and moral
theory arise precisely because hfe is not so simple. The
experiences that appeal to the natural man are manifold,
and they are not mutually consistent. The life of impulse
viewed as a whole is not one of harmony, but of chaos.
The pleasure of one moment is the pain of another. Even
within the animal world we find this conflict giving rise
in the course of experience to a certain modification of
impulses. How precisely this modification may be brought
about at that stage is a question that need not concern
us here. What is essential for us, is to consider the
conditions of harmony in a mind capable of deliberately
comparing one experience with another, and viewing
them as a connected whole. Let us again suppose the
simplest case. Let us suppose the mind to have to deal
with two types of impulse and their attendant satisfactions,
and to find that in greater or less degree they conflict,
so that indulgence in the one is the destruction of the
other. We are to suppose further, that the mind in
question has no other interest except in these two directions,
so that apart from them we can, for our purposes, say
that it is not. Several alternative possibihties are pre-
sented by the case. \ One impulse may entirely overcome
the other. Its satisfaction is held good, and indulgence
in the rival impulse being an obstacle thereto, is held bad.


THE REALIZED GOOD 99

In fact, the impulse itself by repeated inhibition may be
gradually suppressed. Of the mechanism of this process
I say nothing here, and I must not be taken as impl}dng
that of any two impulses the stronger necessarily prevails.
I doubt whether this is true, except in a sense which
makes it quite valueless. Our object is merely to set
out the alternative methods of deaUng with opposed
impulses. There is, then, in the case supposed, consis-
tency in action but a certain disharmony of feeUng. If
the impulse is relatively superficial the disharmony may
be gradually worn away, though only at the cost of some
curtailment of the self. In proportion as the impulse is
deeply rooted, this process ceases to be possible and we are
left with an underlying disharmony in our Uves.'  Another
possibility is that the two impulses are equally matched,
and that the mind, having no further data to go by, is
unable to make a choice. In this case, harmony appears
impossible. Action must either swing inconsistently from
one pole to the other, or the mind must be reduced to a
kind of paralysis in which all interest and pleasure is
lost. !^ But lastly a third alternative appears in which one
or both forms of impulse undergo a certain modification
whereby they become consistent. One of the impulses
we may suppose, to take the simplest case, is moderated
in intensity or guided towards one class of objects to
the exclusion of another, and so remodelled it is found
not less satisfying in itself, and fully consistent with the
indulgence of its former rival. In this case there is the
beginning of something akin to what we call character.
Conduct and experience react on raw impulse and re-
fashion it. They define its object and so bring it into
consistency, even into co-operation with the work of
other impulses similarly re-fashioned. Each impulse is,
in Aristotelian phrase, brought into the mean. In this
case the result is harmonious. There is restraint but
no excision. Both types of impulse and feeling subsist.
It will be seen that this solution postulates a distinction
between something radical in our impulses and something

I See below, pp. zoo, 103, etc.


-^Ii«» «rv- teiM*-


'^


100 THE RATIONAL GOOD

relatively superficial. It assumes that an impulse which
primarily expresses itself in one form may in interaction
with other impulse-feelings assume a different form, in
which it is fully satisfied. A leading instance would be
sexual feeling which, indiscriminate in its purely animal
phase, is, by a fusion of psychical influences, concentrated
in an impassioned devotion to one person wherein, as
long as the fusion endures, its satisfaction is complete.
It is only so far as some such transformation occurs that
harmony proper between originally conflicting impulses
becomes possible. We cannot a priori assume its possi-
bility, but that it does as a fact play a large part in Ufe
is matter of experience, and recent psychology shows the
converse truth to be equally important. It shows that
the radical impulse which is apparently — so to say,
officially — suppressed, takes its revenge either in distur-
bance of the mental life or in some object or outlet
foreign to its original direction, and perhaps more
fatally, though more subtly, inconsistent with real harmony.
In general what we call the superficial impulse is the
particular apphcation, or else the specific development, of
a generic want. To take a very trivial instance, it makes
very Uttle difference whether I satisfy my appetite with
beef or with mutton, provided that either meat agrees
with me. But whether I am to satisfy my hunger at
all or go famished is a much more serious matter. Again,
an epicure may demand dehcacies. This demand lies
deeper than the requirement of a particular luxury, but
in the normal man is itself a relatively superficial form
of the appetite for anything wholesome and well cooked.
So of the contented man Calverley sings : —

" The grouse, the duck, the early pea
By such, if there, are freely tsiken.
If not, they munch with equal glee
Their bit of bacon."

Thus on a root impulse of hunger which cannot go un-
satisfied, or permanently under-satisfied, without serious
dislocation of our organization, there is an embroidery of


THE REALIZED GOOD loi

more specific desires in a decreasing order of importance.
This conception may, I think, be generalized and we can
then recognize the foundations of inner harmony in the
satisfaction of the deepest impulses for whic&2ttt:th§f moce: :■"
superhcial forms are rightly sacrificed. A jnotal pSychWogy]
is required which should give us the hiel^rcfLyjoftai^iabps:-.: :/'
and show us definitely, what at present' we perKaps fed
rather than scientifically apprehend, which are our deepest
needs and what the conditions of their mutually consistent
satisfaction.

In any case harmony is possible so far as radical impulses
admit of mutual adjustment in their several objects or
expressions, and so far as such harmony is attainable it
forms a rational system in accordance with our previous
definition, and the conception of the good that accords
with it is a rational conception. For by the rational as
we have conceived it, we mean on the side of cognition an
order of thought which forms a coherent whole out of
all available elements of experience. It is to be compre-
hensive as well as consistent. All experience must be
admitted, and no mutually incompatible renderings of
experience can be tolerated. The work of building up
the rational order, however, proceeds piecemeal. Bit by
bit masses of experience are formed into connected groups
by interpretative conceptions, and these conceptions are
in turn brought into relation with one another. If they
conflict, rational thought seeks a modification which will
reduce them to consistency, but it aims at consistency,
not by ignoring any element of experience, but by
remodelling the interpretation of it, and it modifies its
interpretation only so far as the needs of consistency
throughout its interpretation of experience require.
Applying the same conception to conduct, and in par-
ticular to that practical attitude of approval or acceptance
which we speak of as the judgment of the good, we may
say that the rational good must similarl}^ form a coherent
whole in which every element of apparent goodness is
duly weighed, that it is irrational to include in our
conception of the good, elements that conflict with each


102 THE RATIONAL GOOD

other, and equally irrational to exclude any element
except on the ground that it conflicts with some other,
... .and that wh^n.such conflict arises, the problem is to find
\',j^ sjnitlieslS: in: which each element is as far as possible
. . .presfTvp^. ^ It is„ of course, possible that a conflict might
: r-'ittc: iritis fis.f^cnild only be ended by the complete extinction
of one impulse. But supposing that the end could equally
well be achieved by a partial modification not involving
suppression, this would be the more rational course.
We have, in fact, so far seen no reason for inhibiting and
suppressing one kind of impulse, except in the interest
of some other impulse or experience with which it con-
flicts, some disharmony which it causes, and to the extent
which this interest requires and no further. That is
to say, the primary judgment involved in our acceptance
of an experience holds good, except so far as it conflicts
with other elements of satisfaction of similar origin.
We see, so far, no reason in suppressing any impulse
merely for the sake of suppressing it. We see such reason
only in the modification rendered necessary by the
requirement of harmony throughout our practical attitude,
i.e. throughout our ends as a whole. The judgment of
the good expressed our acceptance of an experience and
that we found was the same thing as saying that it har-
monized with a feeling which is a part of our " organ-
ization." Now we find that such prima facie harmony
may lead to a deeper conflict and as rational beings we
seek to overcome this conflict, and seek a harmonious
satisfaction for our " organization " as a whole. At this
stage, then, we judge good that which fits in with this
more comprehensive organization. All that so harmonizes
is good, and nothing else. To reject anything that belongs
to this whole is to lose some element of the good. An
avoidable and therefore an irrational disharmony is
involved in the needless suppression of an impulse which,
if suitably modified, would in fact consist with those
which we cherish.

It is, then, by remodelling and transforming impulse
that the principle of harmony makes for many-sided


THE REALIZED GOOD 103

development iand fullness of life. Outwardly, indeed,
harmony appears most readily attainable through
repression. If a refractory feeling is simply kept under
it fails to disturb the orderly system of conduct. But
there is here a confusion between harmony and order.
The type of feeUng which is merely repressed, and
subsists in the mind as a permanent impulse without an
outlet, is a source of permanent internal disharmony.
It may be that such repression is unavoidable, but if so
the dammed up current remains a permanent menace to
the order of life. The truer solution is always to find the
channel along which it may safely run, in other words,
to train the feeling and direct it towards objects which do
not clash with the other accepted purposes and rules of
life. In the provision of such an outlet there is net gain,
not only in the economy of internal friction which repression
involves, but in the fuller Ufe which the utilization of
each fresh spring of impulse renders possible. The harmony
reached through development is always more complex
and is more diifficult to attain than the order based on
repression, but it is intrinsically good, while repression is
at best a necessary evil.«

I The first announcement of the Principle of Harmony as the
basis alike of personal and social well-being is, I suppose, to
be found in Plato (Republic, bk. IV, p. 443, Tr. Davies and
Vaughan) : "... the just man will not permit the several prin-
ciples within him to do any work but their own, nor allow the
distinct classes in his soul to interfere with each other, but wiU
really set his house in order, and having gained the mastery over
himself, will so regulate his character as to be on good temxs with
himself, and to set those three principles in tune together, as if
^ they were verily three chords of a harmony, a higher and a lower

and a middle, and whatever may lie between these ; and after
he has bound all these together, and reduced the many elements
of his nature to a real unity, as a temperate and duly harmonized
man, he wiU then at length proceed to do whatever he may have
to do, whether it involve the acquisition of property or attention
to the wants of his body, whether it be a state affair or a business
transaction of his own ; in all which he will beUeve and profess
* that the just and honourable course is that which preserves and

I assists in creating the aforesaid habit of mind, and that the genuine

knowledge which presides over such conduct is wisdom; while


* »


104 THE RATIONAL GOOD

2. The process described may be succinctly formulated
as the development of personality. By development is
meant, for our purposes, progressive fulfilment. There
is fulfilment in the realization of any capacity, as in the
active exercise of an organ or the satisfaction of a desire.
There is development in the strengthening of the organ
by exercise or the reinforcement of an impulse by a

on the other hand, he will hold that an unjust action is one which
tends to destroy this habit, and that the mere opinion which pre-
sides over unjust conduct, is folly." This passage, however, must
be read with the earlier description of Temperance (p. 432a) as
a concord between the better and the worse elements as to which
of the two has the right to govern. From this it will be seen that,
in spite of the identity of name and partial agreement of idea,
there is a material difference between this conception and ours.
Plato's harmony is essentially a subjection of the Desires and
Appetites to reason — ^the larger part of the soul, as he himself says,
to the smaller. Reason is a governing principle, and Desire has
nothing to do but obey. The position of the intermediate "spirited "
or emotional element is more honourable in that it is the natural
ally of Reason, but it is still subject to rational direction. The
view here taken is that harmony is not a subjection of any part
to any other, but a process of mutual development, and that reason
does not govern this process ab extra but is the principle of mutuaUty
within it. (It is right to remark, however, that the negative
functio'^ attributed to Desire is partly corrected by many other
passages in Plato.)

The present view of harmony is much closer to the Aristotelian
doctrine. The opHoQ Xoyoc which defines the mean is incompletely
described in the Ethics, but the term is suggestive of a relation
between the means in all cases which would at least 3deld con-
sistency, which is the negative side of harmony. In his description
of the (TTTov^aioc Aristotle describes in his own fashion of half-
conscious humour the Ufe that is internally harmonious in our
sense : " . . . . the good man is of one mind with himself, and
desires the same things with all his soul, and wishes for himself
what both is and seems good. . . . Such a man also wishes to
live with himself ; for his own company is pleasant to him. The
memory of his past hfe is sweet, and for the future he has good
hopes ; and such hopes are pleasant. His mind, moreover, is
well stored with matter for contemplation : and he sjnnpathizes
with himself in sorrow and in joy ; for at all seasons the same
things give him pain and pleasure, not this thing now, and then
another thing — ^for he is, so to speak, not apt to change his mind "
{Ethics, ix. 4, Tt. Peters).


THE REALIZED GOOD 105

satisfactory experience, which makes a still further and,
so to say, fuller fulfilment possible. Every development
is itself a fulfilment, but is also a step to a further ful-
filment, having as its goal a maximum or saturation point
of fulfilment beyond which no advance is possible, but only
the maintenance of that which has been achieved. By
Personality is meant that constitution of the self which
our account has postulated, that operative unity which,
by the continual interrelation of action and experience,
gives to each man's active life whatever cohesion and
whatever individuahty it manifests. If we think of the
outer world as supplying the material of a possible Ufe
to each of us, the impress given to this material is the
impress of our personaUty. This impress differs by shades
if not by deeper contrasts from case to case. In particular
the degree in which interrelation is effected varies very
greatly. If it should fail altogether we should deny that
personaUty existed and the attribute of personaUty is,
in fact, refused to men deemed incapable of appreciating
the permanent bearings of momentary impulse. If the
threads of relation are broken and then spun afresh we
caU it a changed personaUty. If the interrelation is very
incomplete the personaUty strikes us as chaotic, irrational,
inconsistent in varying degrees. On the other hand, in
proportion as it is complete, the personaUty stands out as
a strongly-marked self-consistent individuaUty, imposing
its type upon experience and moulding its fortunes to its
own wiU. Clearly, then, while personaUty interrelates all
partial developments, it itself admits of development,
and it is in general on this central development that the
others depend, since without it they may clash and destroy
one another and life itself.

Now personaUty itself, as we know, may be incomplete
and onesided. It may starve itself of one meat and glut
upon another. It may unify its Ufe by ruthless repression.
There is a " development " of the miser or the ascetic.
But these are not developments of the personaUty as a
whole, but of one part to the prejudice of others.
Development as a whole means development on all sides


io6 THE RATIONAL GOOD

that can in fact be reconciled, and though necessarily
subject to all the limitations of human finitude— even
the restricted quantum of available energy necessitating
the sacrifice of one good thing for another — ^the ideal is
clear and we can set our faces towards it if we cannot
reach it. The development of personality so conceived
will involve (i) a harmonization of impulse-feelings ;
(2) control of the conditions on which the success of every
impulse depends, that is to say, of the world of experience
generally, so far as it affects the individual. This con-
stitutes the harmonious fulfilment required by the rational
good, so far as this can be reaUzed within the life of the
individual. If we mean by the development of person*
ality the estabUshment of the principle of harmony
within us, then that is broadly the psychological condition
of the rational good. If we mean by it the actual
process of the full and harmonious Ufe, then it is the
good itself so far as it can be reaUzed in one human
being. \

3. So ^iifefollowing out the psychological conditions of
synthesikjiffeniave considered the question as though the
individTOBkS^tood alone in the moral world. We have,
indeed, refer^g<LJtc^^ environment, but we have not
assumed Jth^t that environment contained any being
with'claims upon the self. Yet without making any such
assumption we have been able to distinguish an apparent,
or, as we might say, subjective good from a permanent
real or objective good, to identify the one with the
pleasurable feeUng based on a single susceptibiUty of the
self, and the other with the harmony in which the whole
soul is expressed. We have seen that this harmony of
judgment or feeling has as its aim or, to put it otherwise,
its objective expression, the harmony of experience and
action as far as the control of the personaUty can be
extended. We have, in short, been able to conceive the
elements of a rational ethics within the limits of a single
personaUty.

But, of course, this way of regarding the matter is a
mere fiction, introduced for convenience, and as has been


THE REALIZED GOOD 107

said above, we are not to suppose that the ethics of the
self are either logically or chronologically built up first
and then the ethics of altruism added on. Prominent
among the stimuli of the environment upon each indivi-
dual are phases of the behaviour of other people, and
prominent among the susceptibilities, the conations and
the feelings of each are from the first those which have
relation to others. Indeed there is not the slightest
doubt that this altruistic reference begins psychologically
long before the distinction of self and others is clearly
made in consciousness. We can trace it in the organic
world in instincts that arise at a level far below that in
which distinctness of personality is formed. The trans-
personal reference, then, is a constitutive element in the
normal personaUty. Moreover, as has also been said,
these transpersonal references — at least, so far as they
make for co-operation and mutual understanding — may
be collectively regarded as partial expressions and emo-
tional renderings of the truth which is in ethics the most
essential part of the rational principle itself. This is
the truth that each personality is itself but a part of a
whole, and its harmony an element in a wider harmony.
Just as it is irrational to follow a single impulse by itself
without considering its relation to other impulses, so at
a higher remove the irrational in morahty is the practice
of taking the self out of connexion with other selves,*-
or a group out of relation with a wider group as the whole
instead of as the part. We are thus brought from the
psychological to the social synthesis, and to trace its
operation we may start from the individual personality
and follow the same method as before. What falls in
with our approval is prima facie good, and we remodel
our first judgment only so far as the needs of harmony
require. Hence the " good " of each personality — the
development in which a mass of susceptibilities egoistic
and altruistic were harmonized, must be remodelled so
far but only so far as is required by the necessity for
hannony with the effort and aim of others. The end
must now be the harmonious development, not of the


• •


io8 THE RATIONAL GOOD

individual personality as such, but of all that group with
which the individusd can enter into organic relation —
ideally of nothing less than collective humanity.

We might express this result by sa5dng that we apply
to conduct the rational principle that similars must be
treated similarly and that, as a certain development is
good for me, so a similar development is good for others
who are similar to me. But this mode of expression,
as has been shown above, suggests, if it does not actually
involve, more than one element of fallacy. To begin with,
it treats the conception of goodness as formed for self
on one ground and transferred to others by a piece of
intellectual ratiocination. The truth is that the process
is the same throughout and is essentially conative or
practical rather than intellectual. The principle of the
practical reason is that the action of each moment is to
be fitted into the entire scheme of conduct. This is an
abstract or intellectualist expression for the effort towards
harmony, which is common to the whole of the moral
consciousness, which pieces the personality together as well
as binding man with man. This effort is never merely
" cognitive," i.e. it is never confined to the recognition
of something that is already there. It is the element
operative always in the shaping of conduct and character.
It does not begin with the building of the personality
and then proceed to the building of society, for in the
shaping of the personality the transpersonal reference is
abundantly present. Nor, lastly, is it quite true to
conceive my good as a fixed datum from which to infer
that of other people. For no person's good is definitely
fixed till the whole is considered. The datum at any
stage is the prima facie good, and the conclusion at the
full development of that stage is the harmony wherein
the prima facie good is in greater or less degree modified.
Self-development, as such, does not, in short, remain
part of the social ideal. Rather all personal development
is good as long as it is capable of harmony, and given
harmony, the wider the sphere of development, the greater
the good attained.


THE REALIZED GOOD 109

Nevertheless there is a sense in which social development
may be understood as the synthesis of the development
of individuals. So far as the achievement of each man is
truly social, it fits in with and advances the achievement
of others, and the " structure " so built up is a collective
work, " a general deed of man," which grows from
generation to generation. The conditions of this growth,
indeed, differ markedly in the case of different social
products. In the matter of organized knowledge it is
comparatively easy for the more gifted individual to
enter into the heritage of generous social effort. The
young mathematician can soon learn much that Newton
never knew. Thus, placed abreast of the best thought
of the age, it is relatively easy to make an advance which
will definitely carry knowledge a little further. The
body of definite knowledge — eminently a social product —
develops steadily by a kind of mechanical accretion.
The case is much the same with the material capital of
society, its roads and railways, its buildings and labora-
tories, and with the immaterial tradition of industrial
and artistic skill. Such developments may be steady and
continuous, and are rarely arrested or lost except through
some social cataclysm proceeding from other causes. On
the side of conduct, of ethical ideas and practice and of
established social relations, the matter is somewhat more
complex. The established tradition is indeed always of
inestimable value, but it is hardly to be developed and
improved with the same certainty. In ethics and in
religion it is not possible to communicate the whole
meaning of truth by teaching. Each man has to enter
into it anew for himself. The social milieu is much, but
it is not everything. Ideas of Ufe have to be reincarnated
in every fresh living experience, and as each individual
is exposed to his own dangers and temptations, so the
changing circumstances of a people provide new oppor-
tunities, open out fresh dangers, which act as social
temptations and often lower the standard or weaken the
principle which an earlier generation had fought hard to
set up. On the ethical side, therefore, progress is less


no THE RATIONAL GOOD

steady. Yet the whole mass of social institutions, of
philosophical, ethical and reUgious conceptions as well
as the heritage of the imaginative world, of Uterature and
art, must of course rank among social developments and
owe their rise and progress to the action of mind on mind
a milKon times repeated. The harmony that governs
them, that determines their value and ultimately con-
ditions their growth is centred, not in the individual
personaUty, but in that which we call metaphorically the
social mind, an expression for the resultant directive
force of the complex interaction of innumerable individuals
and of successive generations. The supreme develop-
ment — ^that which embraces all that is good in all sub-
ordinate developments — ^is that which, bringing this central
directive force from infancy to maturity, welds all partial
fulfilments into a coherent scheme and moves to the
harmony of experience and feeUng as a whole.

Now the ordinary purposes and impulses of men lead
them along the line of one subordinate development pr
another, but it is only the authority of the moral law that
keeps these various ends from utter divergence, and it is
only a completely rationaUzed ethics that could so direct
them as to estabUsh real harmony among them. The
problems of conduct arise because the different lines of
human development are not naturally harmonious, and
this is why the good as we know it does not appear to
consist in development alone, but involves also much
repression — so much that the negative commandments
often occupy the most prominent place. But here again
the truer view is that repression only exists for the sake
of fuller development, and we may conceive this develop-
ment as the working out in a great variety of forms, and
under much diversity of conditions, of a unitary principle.
' In tracing the emergence of order in the consciousness
of the individual we were led to conceive of the personaUty
as a comprehensive, self-consistent impulse, organizing
the subordinate impulses of the self and the world of
experience with which it comes into contact, into a
harmony. Now extending our view to the whole world


THE REALIZED GOOD iii

of living activity and feeling we have to conceive ^of a
wider impulse similarly related to each separate person-
ality, and thus tending to an organicity of human Ufe
and experience as a whole. The building up of isolated
impulses into the Self or Person, and the union of separate
individuals in a social bond may be regarded as the two
great movements of S3aithesis, which between them bridge
the whole gulf between the isolated impulse and the
complete harmony of activity and feeling. It is, we have
contended, a serious error to suppose that these two forms
of synthesis are separate in their operation, for it is pre-
cisely the same living impulse towards organization and
harmony that runs through both. But they are based on
specific differences of relation within the unity, and
may be briefly designated the principle of Personality and
the principle of Love. The shaping of impulse under the
developing influence of these principles, is, to put the
matter in the most general terms, the condition of
Harmony.'

4. In this account Development figures as a means, and
Harmony as the real end, and this is in a sense the true
relation. But there is another side to the matter.
(a) In any stage short of complete maturity harmony is
as much a cause as an effect of Development. We have
seen the relation at its simplest in the development of a
faculty or susceptibility where feeling is in harmony with
impulse. The satisfaction in each experience confirms

« We set out to enquire into the two departments of Harmony,
that of feelings inter se, and that of feeling in general. Now we
have found two principles of development. The temptation to
pair them oft, one principle for each department, is obvious, but
must be resisted. We naturally indine to make Love the basis
of harmony in feeling, and to see in this principle, taken separately,
the ground of that submissive acceptance of the external order
which becomes religious Quietism. Then again we could see
pushing, self-assertive, practical Personality shouldering the task,
which Love in its gentleness dedines, of subduing refractory
elements in human or external nature. But in fact the " conquest "
of nature is more a coUective than a personal achievement, while
conversely, some unification of impulse-feeling has been shown
to be required by Personality.


112 THE RATIONAL GOOD

the impulse and carries it through to the end. It also
deepens the hold of that type of impulse and so tends to
carry it to its maximum point of strength. It is only
when this maximum is reached that growth ceases.
Similarly, so far as the different powers or susceptibilities
of a man form a harmonious whole, it follows from the
bare conception of such a whole that they tend to strengthen
one another. If it is true, as the Greeks maintained, that
virtue is one, it is because each virtue which, so far as
it is separable, may be regarded as a development of one
side of human nature, is favourable to the corresponding
growth of other virtues. Courage and Temperance, as a
Greek would have said, are conditions of justice, for in
one sort of difficulty it needs a high spirit and contempt
of danger, in another it needs moderation of passions and
self-control to fulfil the demand of duty to our neighbour
or to the community. In the same way the good citizen
is, so to say, essentially a co-operative unit. He contri-
butes something to the common Ufe of society, which
upon the whole tends to raise the standard of the common
Ufe and to assist in the further development of good
citizenship. In each case it is equally true that what is
bad tends to propagate corruption, but if the corruption
goes far enough, death ensues, death of the will in the
individual or of the social structure in the case of the
conununity, and the only growth is of the cancerous type
that must finally destroy the tissue in which it Uves.
Lastly, any purpose recognized as good is necessarily
assisted and carried further by the will which so recognizes
it, and if different purposes ultimately find a harmony
they must similarly tend to mutual assistance and a
common growth. The Umit in every case is fullness of
development. Wherever it is reached, wherever, for
example, a structure has reached the full growth which
the conditions of its existence admit, harmony has its
effect, not in the further development, but in the main-
tenance of that structure at the point of fullest efficiency.
But where the Umits of growth are undefined, harmony
is manifested in development, and wherever there is


THE REALIZED GOOD 113

repression there is pro tanto disharmony. Now the scope
of the mind as an organizing principle in the world has
no limits known to us. We may conceive a heaven in
which mind, having attained its full stature, would find
its good in the fruition of the perfect harmony finally
achieved in an " energy of realization without process of
change." But, short of this heaven, Harmony and
Development continue to support and advance one another.

(b) Of the two it is Harmony, we have granted, which
is the ultimate end. But if we regard Development as
a means, it is partly because it is a process, incomplete
and pointing beyond itself. We defined it as a progressive
fulfilment. Now conversely, we can enlarge the conception
of fulfilment to cover not only its ideal completeness,
but any stage on the way. Fulfilment, then, becomes
another name for Development in its static aspect —
not as something in process, but as something which has
attained a certiain level. Now Fulfilment so regarded has
a higher status in the good than that of a mere means.
It is the fisumd of all that mass of living experience which
has been definitely brought into harmony with feeling.

Harmony of feeUng and experience appears, to begin
with, in the fulfilment of Conation. In the case of clear
purpose this means the attainment of the end with which
the purpose sets out. In the case of the lower grades of
conation it means the removal of the discomfort or lack
from which the conation starts. In the more passive
experiences in which conation plays a secondary part,
there is, where we find harmony, a touching into Ufe of
emotional susceptibility, an active reaUzation of what was
a dormant capacity. Here, too, then, something that is
at first a mere potentiality is completed. A capacity of
reaction finds the object appropriate to it and issues in
activity. This also we may call fulfilment. Thus the
good consists in the fulfilment of vital capacity, but the
rational good cannot consist in the fulfilment of any and
every sort of capacity, since one fulfilment may destroy
another. It can consist only in such fulfilments as are
in mutual consistency. These, when life is considered as

8


114 THE RATIONAL GOOD

a whole, will also yield the greatest sum of fulfilment.*
In fact, so far as our vital capacities attain or approach
'realization as a whole, it can only be through a scheme
which is internally consistent in its practical operation.
The rational good then, as the mode of life sustained by
a harmony of feeling, is a harmonious fulfilment of vital
capacity, or the fulfilment of vital capacity as a whole.
Feeling in harmony with its object is what we call Pleasure.
The body of feeUng in harmony with itself and the body
of its objects is what we call happiness. Viewed as
feeling, then, the Rational Good is happiness, viewed as
the object of this feeling it is the fulfilment of vital capacity
as a consistent whole.* Viewed in both aspects together
it is happiness found in such fulfilment. It is an error
to regard either the feeling as a mere means to the ful-
filment or the fulfilment as a mere means to the feeling.
The fulfilment is the object of the feeling, not in the
sense of its aim, but in the sense of that in relation to
which the feeUng subsists. Finally, the sense of harmony
which is pleasure and happiness does not come into being
first with complete fulfilment, neither does it perish with
fulfilment, as some think, but is active all along the Hne

< For if anything be added it must by hypothesis cancel some-
thing that has been included. That something has been included
either (i) because it harmonized with the rest of the system while
the proposed addition conflicted. In that case to make the addition
would not only cancel one element but the system generally. Or
(2) because it was the more strongly felt, i.e. rested on a larger
energy of impulse or realized a richer feeling. In that case it is
in itself the fuller realization of capacity.

> It may be said that, in the fulfilment of purpose, the point
is not the realization of any capacity but the attainment of an
objective end. In fact neither in loiowledge nor in action can
the conscious mind dispense with an object, but the reason why
we describe the object in terms of mind rather than the impulse
or will in terms of the object is this. The thing to be achieved
is that in which impulses of our own, modified by reflections of
our own, take precise form and direction, and if it is good and
fruitful the thing achieved meets a need of our own, and so returns
into and helps to further the system of impulses and needs, of
each of which in turn the same things may be said.


THE REALIZED GOOD 115

of conation as far as it is working with success. There
is pleasure in pursuit, but if the prize is solid, that is in
harmony with the permanent scheme of vital fulfilment,
as in the fruition of a genuine love, there is equal pleasure
in attainment and possession.

It may be asked whether we ought not to regard
practical rationality still more broadly as an impulse to
harmony in reality as a whole, not merely in the world of
feeling. Harmony as the mutual support of parts seems
in itself to have a wider application, to be realized, in
fact, in every structure, even a purely material structure,
which, as a whole, maintains itself. Thus the keystone
of an arch keeps in place the bricks which keep it in
place. The several parts of the arch maintain one another.
On the other hand, there seems to be nothing " good "
or " bad " about an arch, except the purely external,
human, purpose which it serves. A somewhat more
difficult case is an object of beauty. Here, again,' there
is the relation of harmony, different parts necessitating
one another, and it would not be so easy to say offhand
that the object as a whole has no value in itself. The
mutilation of Rheims Cathedral seemed something terrible,
apart from any injury to feeling or loss to the artistic
enjoyment of human beings. On reflection, however,
I believe that we find an element of illusion in a sentiment
of this kind. A visible world which there is no one to
see is not, in my opinion, as it is in that of many, an
expression without a meaning, because I do not beUeve
that surfaces and colours, Ught and shade, depend for
their existence upon the observer. Whether a beautiful
world which there is no one to appreciate has a meaning
is a point on which, for myself, I am more doubtful,
i.e. I cannot feel sure that beauty is a character of things
independent of their relation to a contemplating mind.

' That is to say, in developed art. The beautiful as such is in
harmony with feeUng, but the question here is of a harmony within
the beautiful object over and above harmony with feeling. Some
of the difficulties in defining the elements of beauty as consisting
in a harmony in this sense have been hinted at above (chap, iv,
p. 69 noU), I cannot examine them here.


Ii6 THE RATIONAL GOOD

But a world in which beauty has value or is good, although
there is none to value it or find the good in it, does seem
to me to contain a contradiction. That is to say, I believe
value and goodness to be conditioned by the life of mind.
This, I think, is the consequence of our original definition.
We found " good " to mean not harmony in general, but
harmony with some disposition of mind, and developing
this we found rational good to reside in a harmony carried
consistently through the world of mind and its experience,
a harmony of mind with itself and with its object. It
is not, then, harmony as such, but harmony in and with
Mind that b good.

Even this formula, however, seems to carry us a step
beyond our original definition. If a beautiful object has
no value apart from mind, is there not a sense in which
it has an intrinsic value for mind ? It is not valued as
a means, but as a joy of itself. Does its goodness, then,
reside only in the activity of creation or contemplation ?
This is surely as one-sided an abstraction as the goodness
of the object apart from the mind. Goodness we found
originally was in the harmony of feeUng and object, and
we granted the validity of the term for each element in
this relation. The object, then, which of itself and not
as a mere means to something else, yields satisfaction,
must be deemed good, and we must extend our definition
of the rational good to include along with the fulfilment
of vital capacity the system of objects which such fulfil-
ment involves, the system, we may phrase it, in which the
mind finds itself at home. This system will include
material objects, all that is beautiful for instance and all
manifestations of structural perfection and vast ordered
energy. But there will always be this distinction between
material things and animate beings, that the " goodness "
of a material thing involves its relation to a mind. It is
good in the sense that it is an indispensable element in
a whole that is good (as contrasted with a mere instrument
which may be indiflterently replaced with another). The
mind, on the other hand, that enjo}^ any harmony is
(to that extent) a good of itself, requiring no further


THE REALIZED GOOD 117

condition to complete it. But this hannony may require
material objects not merely as instruments but as part
of its constitution. To recognize this we should, I think,
define the good as Happiness in the fulfilment of vital
capacity in a world adapted to Mind.

6. In this definition Happiness means Happiness of all
beings capable thereof ; fulfilment of vital capacity means
fulfilment in all Uving beings so far as it can attain har-
monious expression. It is this universal harmony of
feeling and vital activity which is the good, and the end
which each individual is required to serve, not his own
happiness or the fulfilment of his own powers. How the
good of the individual is related to this comprehensive
end has been indicated in the preceding sections. In
general confirmation of that analysis it may be added here
that of empirical truths about happiness, few are more
certain than this — that the individual must find happiness
in objects beyond himself. Neither his own happiness
nor the fulfilment of his own personality is an adequate
statement of an end which will satisfy permanently a
finite individual. Shut up in the self he is stifled and,
whether it be called happiness or self-development, there
is the same stufiiness in the confined atmosphere. The
self must have some other person to care for, even, if it
can get nothing better, some material object to pursue.
It must fasten itself to the larger world by some attachment
that gives a man a reason for continued existence, even
if it be nothing more thrilling than that


:^


" Somewhat completer, he may say.
My list of Coleoptera."


No one is wholly unhappy who finds some external interest
to engage him, but neither is he very happy if his interests
are such as to leave large tracts of his natural capacity
unfulfilled. This fulfilment is material to the happiness
of the individual, but the first condition of any fulfilment
is that he should look beyond himself.

Where, then, is he to look ? According to our definition
he is to look to anything great or small, personal or


ii8 THE RATIONAL GOOD

impersonal, that contributes to the fulhiess of life upon
the whole. Thus, whether he is bringing up his ctdld
or serving the State, or stubbing Thornaby waste, he is
doing his part in a harmonious movement. But, it may
be asked, why should the fulfilment of another personality
(e.g. in the education of the child) be an end of true value
when self-fulfilment is not such an end ? The answer
may be put in various ways, of which perhaps the simplest
is that there is nothing complete without love. Though
one person cannot be happy in himself, two people can
be very happy in one another and as objects to one another
— so happy that they may think that they need no one
and no thing else. This, however, is a fallacy of exaggera-
tion which leads to the igoisme d deux. The pair need
a common object that takes them beyond each other,
and if the child seems to complete this trinity it is because
the promise of its Ufe points them on and on into a vista
which has no closed end.* Even a great community
that cultivates its own life in isolation and indifference
to the rest of mankind is open to the charge of collective
egoism and the danger of ultimate sterility.

Pursuing this line of thought we are forced to ask
whether humanity itself is not subject to the same law.
Can it make its own fulfilment its goal, even if we include
with this the making of the world into a home of order
and beauty ? Would not the whole race be involved
in an egoism and ultimate sterility thus shut up within
itself, and must it not find something entirely outside
itself to serve ? If Humanity is only one incarnation of
Mind this would be in our definition true. It has not

> Compare Ruskin's postulate of some " escape " into the Beyond
as an element of the highest sesthetic efiect in painting. Observe
too that, in his teaching, this condition has to be reconciled with
the still more essential requirement of Repose. This reconciliation
of apparent opposites seems to be the problem both of Ufe and
of art. We demand objects that satisfy, and yet it seems to be
a condition that they should point beyond themselves and thus
not wholly satisfy — a paradox which is resolved if we have the
grounded confidence that what is wholly good breeds more good
and more in unending sequence. Here there is at least a hint
of assuagement for the human lot of " infinite passion and the
pain of finite hearts that yearn."


THE REALIZED GOOD 119

merely to care for the lower forms of life but to enter into
relation with whatever beings have mind. But if we take
Humanity as the head of the only Uving creation that
we know, or if for Humanity we simply substitute Mind,
can we assign for it any object but the self-fulfilment of
our definition ? We can think of the fulfilment of Mind
as having value, we can think of some things other than
minds as having a value conditioned by mind — a value
for mind. Can we think of anything else that has value,
and which could, accordingly, be an object for Mind to
serve ? If not we must keep to our definition, but can
we then avoid the charge of a kind of egoism and ultimate
sterility which has pursued us from the individual onwards ?
The reply, I think, is this. We saw that egoism was trans-
formed by love when only one other person came within
the orbit of interest. But we saw a narrow finitude and
an ugly indifference to the fate of others involved in the
exclusiveness of personal affection. These characteristics
fade gradually away as the circle is enlarged. In par-
ticular in the wider life of a great community nothing
comes to an end. The effects of action, good or bad, do
not cease. The possibiUties of development are without
assignable Umit. Yet still, if there is indifference to a
wider world there is something lacking. Love clearly is
unfulfilled, and there is a limit to the expansiveness of
faculty and achievement where there is no desire to share
the fruits with all who can enjoy them. These Umits
disappear only when we come to the whole world of mind,
aware of itself as a unity bound together by love and
reason. Nothing imagined as of possible value, nothing
capable of happiness or misery is shut out. The distinction
of self and other has vanished, because outside this " self "
there is no other. The ego must find an object because
it needs love, and it needs something to connect it with
the world of mind. But the world of mind is based on
love within, and has nothing without to connect itself
with. Thus its end is the achievement and maintenance
of a harmony within, while to the individual it is an object
in which he may certainly share but which stretches far
and wide beyond his own personality.


CHAPTER VII

APPLICATIONS

I. The rational principle is not only an ideal but a
working impulse in man and society. So far, it resembles
the spiritual principle of Idealism. But it is of the first
importance to make clear that it is an impulse working
under cramping limitations. Idealist writers explain
imperfections by the incomplete development of their
principle. In truth, this is merely a negative condition.
The irrational and immoral elements in Ufe, its cruelties
and injustices and Pharisaisms, have springs of which
Reason, developed or undeveloped, is innocent. They go
back to the man who fights for his own hand, the impulse
that pursues its regardless course, the limiting physical
conditions that bind man to the immediate, a menacing
environment with which reason germinating slowly has
to grapple as best she may. Far from dominating the
actual moral code, reason, as an explicit conception, is
the latest comer on the field. The working code of morals
grows up, as has been shown, out of the countless inter-
actions of man with man, the feelings which they excite,
the kind of Ufe which they make possible or impossible.
Consider, for instance, the genesis of public justice. Follow-
ing an impulse of resentment a man seeks to avenge an
injury. He kills his man, and in turn arouses the wrath
of the victim's son. The son appeals to uncle and cousin,
gets help, and seeks to retaliate. Through such retaliation
the manslayer and his kindred, it may be, learn a lesson
in moderation. Or, perhaps, a woman connected by blood
with one party and by marriage with the other intervenes


APPLICATIONS 121

and makes peace. A settlement is achieved and becomes
a precedent, and there emerges a rule regulating the
occasions and the degree of vengeance, or possibly
prescribing the conditions and nature of compensation
for injuries. Where no such lessons are learnt, where a
tribe proves itself incapable of being taught, it may
disappear through internal anarchy, or become a prey to
a more disciplined neighbour. The actual conditions of
life are there and are sternly operative, whether men have
reason enough to apprehend them or no. They must,
on the whole, operate selectively, giving to those whose
emotions are more nearly attuned to the actual require-
ments of their life-conditions, or who are best able to
modify their passions and direct their actions as the
conditions require, an advantage and an eventual pre-
ponderance over others. The rational mode of feeUng,
the emotion which in kind and degree responds to what is
really good in human Ufe, owes its original growth, not
to the clear apprehension of the fimction which it
performs, but to the bare fact that in performing that
function it helps to keep society together, and to develop
and expand its life. Just as organs and impulses which
serve the individual tend to grow because on the whole
those who possess them thrive and are fruitful and
multiply, so, at a higher remove, modes of feeling, and
finally ideas and thoughts which serve society have this
indirect advantage over others, that in so far as they
predominate the society which they inspire is more likely
to prosper and expand or impose its type upon its neigh-
bours. There are filaments of Reason, as was said at
the outset, but filaments are not the matured structure.
They grow because they do, in fact, correspond to funda-
mental conditions of life, not because the life which they
create is clearly conceived, ^Reason comes by her own,
not because men willingly and consciously accept her,
but because unreason carried far enough produces miseries
and disasters.^ Sufficiently grave departures, whether to
the right hand or to the left, either produce reactions or
lead to social dissolution* Against dissolute practice.


122 THE RATIONAL GOOD

society will perhaps erect the barrier of a stringent theory,
and save itself in turn from the consequences of the theory
by a network of tacit understandings forming a secondary
and more genuine code of conduct beside or behind that
which men outwardly profess. The price of luxury is
disorder, the price of undue strictness is insincerity, and
both prices will be paid until men seek to found conduct
on the dispassionate consideration of what is permanently
in accord with the requirements of human nature under
the conditions of social life.

In the actual formation of the working code the whole
range of human emotions, good, bad and indifferent,
play their part. Not only all that makes us citizens,
but all that makes us men and all that makes us animals
has its share. Take the case of the complex customs
and ideas that in every society cluster round the relations
of the sexes. The function of these customs is to maintain
the family life at its best, and to serve the development
of affections and emotions that are most vital to the
happiness of men and women. But what part has any
clear conception of such a function played in the actual
determination of custom, or law, or sexual morality ?
The actual family morals, that is to say the whole assem-
blage of law, custom and social feeUng regulating the
relations of the sexes and the procreation and rearing of
children in any society, is a complex whole derivable
from a medley of forces, psychological and social, which
it would be exceedingly difficult to analyse in full and
which, moreover, interact with one another in ways which
are never quite the same in any two cases. There is,
first, the mass of feeling that clusters round the sex
relationship. There is conjugal and family affection,
and running across it the yellow streak of mere animal
jealousy. Perhaps underl3dng jealousy itself and almost
certainly contributing to the respect for virginity and
disgust at the unchaste, is the impulse, half physical in
origin, to isolation, the readily awakened feeling of repug-
nance to contact, the antithesis to the sexual passion.
On such primitive material of emotional tendency operate


APPLICATIONS 123

now the self-assertion of the male, leading him to appro-
priate whom he can and guard his own, now the fear of
ridicule and contempt if he fails to hold his claim, now
a more ethical sense of compunction, of justice and of
responsibiUty. Elements of emotion such as these, com-
plex as they are, are only a few among the factors that
go to form the morals of the family. Side by side with
them and interacting with them in subtle ways, we must
place the social relations of the family, the form of
property, the prevailing state of industry, and the religious
ideas acknowledged in the society. Where kinship, for
example, is the basis of mutual protection, the family
will tend to hold together and build up large aggregates
of kinsfolk and neighbours, prepared to stand solidly
together in the blood feud. The joint possession of flocks
and herds, or possibly of agricultural land, may find
for each member the means of sustenance and of useful
occupation under the patriarchal guidance of the oldest
male of the kin, and the common worship of the ancestor
and the performance of the due funeral rites to the dea:d
may strengthen the bond and deepen the sense of per-
manent family unity by all the sanctity of reUgion. At
another stage of development all these forces may have
shifted. The function of protection may have been
assumed by the King or the State, industry may no longer
be confined to pastoral or agricultural pursuits, the worship
of ancestors may be condemned by religion, and offerings
to the dead have lost their significance. The family has
become perhaps a mobile and far smaller unit. It is
reduced to parents and their children, and it may be that
children scarcely remain under the parental roof till they
are grown up, while comparative facility of divorce impairs
the stability of the conjugal relation itself. It is well in
such a case, where the functions of the family have largely
changed, if there is sufiiciently clear understanding of
its permanent function and value to supply the place of
a religious code dating from an earlier sociological stratum.
It is not, however, our business here to discuss the
ethics of family life, but merely to suggest by the very


124 THE RATIONAL GOOD

slightest analjrsis of one example the contrast between
the rational determination of a custom by the function
which it serves, and the actual conditions of its growth,
as dependent on a confused mass of feelings and ideas
played upon by social forces and religious doctrines, and
shaped by traditions which may or may not have outlived
their usefulness.

What has been said of the family appHes with equal
force to any part of the social structure and even to
current moraUty as a system of judgments. Moralists
have concentrated their interest on one fundamental
question about moral psychology. Has it at its core
conscience or self-love, reason or passion, altruism or
egoism ? It is true that any ethical enquiry would start
from this question and take us back to it again, but there
is a circuit embracing questions more psychological than
philosophical which are of extreme interest in themselves
and of great importance when we begin to apply philo-
sophical conceptions to working life. Having made our
view of the core, it is hoped, sufficiently plain we may well
consider the husks which are to be stripped off. Now,
if we look at the actual impulses underlying the moral
judgments that men commonly pronounce and the
behaviour in which these issue, we have to recognize in
them a good deal that is neither very rational nor even
social. In the very essence of moral censorship there is
an anti-social element, a pursuit of the siimer, an exaltation
of self, something at times of the hunting instinct^ some-
thing of " herd " psychology. The contemplation of
exalted virtue may give pleasure, but it is to be feared
that it is a less exciting pleasure and one less consciously
felt than that which the audacious or even the despicable
criminal daily affords to the readers of countless newspapers.
" What's one man's news," said Mr. Dooley, " is another
man's misfortunes," and in particular he might have
added his moral misadventures. The reasons for this
interest are complex. On the one hand there is a kind
of self-exaltation in " damning sins we have no mind to."
Secretly we are rather depressed by the heroic and the


APPLICATIONS 125

saint-like because it makes our own life seem petty and
faintly makes a claim on us which our inertia resists.
The gentleman of easy virtue restores our credit with
ourselves. Anjnvay we are better than he is — and will
prove it by the stones we cast at him. But it is a mistake
to suppose that we do not also damn the " sins we are
inclined to." On the contrary we must damn them to
preserve ourselves from them, to say nothing of our credit
with the rest of the world. The " repressed " criminal
impulses express themselves freely in the discussion and
even in the reprobation of crime. Tn particular} the
omnipresent " repressions " of sex take their revenge in
an extremely vigilant censorship of other peoplel In
this widespread popular diversion with all its moods of
censure from the sniggering to the thunderous, it is the
repressed passion itself that is active, rejoicing in the license
given it for once by the moral consciousness. The virtuous
will not sin, but they will dissect the sin of others with
an insight and particularity made possible only by the
potential sin in themselves. Tn brief, though the moral
consciousness has a core of reason, it is deeply embedded
in husks growing out of all mutual antagonisms of man
and out of repressed impulses twisted into strange shapes^
Religious and ethical teachers have seen this part of the
truth with great perspicacity. They have been perfectly
aware that the function of censorship and punishment is
not to satisfy the judge or critic, but to protect society
and convert the offender. There is little to add to the
Platonic maxim that if justice is good it cannot be its office
to inflict real evil. The Christian teaching on this point is
perfectly plain. Yet it is still uphill work to plead for
the treatment of wrong-doing in the spirit of the doctor
rather than the executioner, still more to convince the
world that restored self-respect and renewed hope are better
medicines than continued self-abasement, pain and fear.<

< The above analysis is the explanation of the moral disharmonies
referred to above (chap, iv, p. 73). It does not alter the fact that
disapproval is essentially displeasurable, but shows that the basis
of approval and disapproval in the working moral code is not
wholly rational.


126 THE RATIONAL GOOD

»

2. The moral consciousness, as we know it, is a complex
result of many imperfectly congruous elements. From
the sifting process of criticism there emerges the rational
order, at once the simplest and the most comprehensive
of all schemes of life. Considered as a whole, it is a S3rstem
of vast complexity, embracing the infinite range of human
activity and every possibility of human development.
No mind could be complex enough, or subtle enough, to
trace out all its possibilities of application. At the same
time, the direct relations of man to man, which, endlessly
repeated and interwoven, build up the life of the whole,
require for their just appreciation mere simplicity,
singleness of aim and the sympathetic understanding of
things that flows from a warm heart. A few very simple
and direct qualities — perhaps in the end they reduce to
the marriage of courage and tenderness — are the elements
of which the whole tissue is woven, and where these
elements are seen in their pure state there in potentia
exists the whole scheme of a rational life. Upon the whole
there is more of them in human nature than can express
itself in human life, and the problem of the practical
reason is not merely to educate individuals, but still more
to shape institutions so that they may form channels
within which these qualities may freely run, and where
their force may be used to build up social ends.

The question may fairly be asked, what thread does
the principle of Harmony put into our hands to guide us
through the maze as it exists here and now ? Does it
yield a complete system of life which he who wills can
live, or does its realization involve the conversion of
society ? If so, does it indicate the orientation which a
better society would assume ?

The questions raised must form the subject of an inde-
pendent enquiry. We are concerned with first principles.
But there are certain general problems of method which
are in place here, and certain difficulties of principle
turning upon them which should be met.

3. ITie general lines of method follow directly from the
principle itself. Every experience involving impulse or


APPLICATIONS 127

feeling, if internally harmonious, is reasonably held good
unless it is incompatible with another such experience
of equally strong claims. Where such incompatibility is
found, modification is necessary, to the point, but only
to the point at which conflict disappears. Thus, to
put it very crudely, the function of our principle is to
" see fair " between the different impulses and instincts
of mankind. If anything appears good it either can or'
cannot be worked into the general scheme of human
requirements. If it can be so adjusted all is well. If not
there must be such re-adjustment as yields consistency
of aim. It is a practical rather than a speculative
problem, a problem, it may be said, of organization. But
the organization in question is very different from the
mechanical contrivances which the term usually suggests.
Thus, to take one example, ingenious writers will show
us how much better the business of life might be conducted,
and how much more efficiently the rearing of children
might be carried out, if separate households were aboUshed
and the State became the universal parent. To such
enthusiasts for social mechanism it is a small matter to
cut the profoundest and most universal of all sources
of human emotion, and they would not hesitate to claim
its rationaUty as the justification of their method. The
Practical Reason, as here understood, is the antithesis of^
any such mechanism. For it the extinction of the family
life and its emotions would be a " repression " of the
most deadly kind, and the simpUfication of the State
which it would involve would be Uke the simplification
of a picture by scraping off the paint. Its method is
the adjustment of the family life to the commimity — ^an
adjustment which may or may not require far-reaching
changes, but would have the aim not of flattening down
divergencies and centres of possible opposition, but of
finding methods of co-operation and thus in the end of
even fuller expression. All toleration of differences sets
a prioblem to the social intelligence, but it is the only
problem worth its solving.
Since all difference is potential antagonismi these


128 THE RATIONAL GOOD

considerations may help to turn the edge of an objection
which many feel to the formula of harmony as a principle.
Is not strife, they ask, necessary to life, and in particular
to development ? Our faculties are called out to their
last reserves only by a contest in some shape or form.
A pleasant, humdrum life might, perhaps, be founded on
pure co-operation, but if development is part of the ideal,
it is contradictory to talk of aboUshing that which
developes men to the utmost. Yet, if strife in turn is
carried to its utmost limit, it means mutual extinction,
or in the alternative, a subjection of one party so complete
that strife ends. Strife, then, if it plays a part in
development, must be conditioned by the requirements
of development, and we have then to ask whether it is
strife within and between the parts of the whole which is
developing, or strife between the whole and external
enemies which is deemed necessary. If the latter the
object of our strife is victory complete enough to end strife.
If the former, then it must be said that the development
of a whole requires that the parts in their growth do not
destroy but maintain and further one another. But this
is the principle of harmony again, and we reach the
paradoxical conclusion that the moral condition of strife
is the service of harmony. But, after all, is not the
apparent paradox a familiar truth ? A game is a contest,
and a good one, if we keep to the rules and play in a
*' sporting " spirit, a bad one as soon as the spirit of strife
runs away. The principle holds through life. To match
oneself, one's side, one's party, one's country against
another is a deep-seated impulse which supplies a wonderful
stimulus to endeavour. But all depends on the rules of
the game. If they are good rules they are founded on an
underlying spirit of common service to broad ends of
humanity. As the game develops the element of com-
petition proper fades into the background. What remains
is rather the sight of what another does or has done as
a standing evidence to us of what we ought to be able to
do ourselves. It is the standard rather than the individual
that we want to beat. Competition is thus an imperfect


V;


APPLICATIONS 129

incarnation of the enthusiasm for progress. The truth
to which it bears witness is the vitality of independent
centres. The spirit of man does not develop equably
from a single centre, but wells up with irregular profusion
in thousands of distinct individuals, groups and interests.
Each centre pursues its own Uf^ and fights for its own
hand. The anarchy may be ended by the steam roller,
but such is not the method of permanent progress.
Progress lies in convincing the separate centres that within
and below their differences there is something common by
the service of which they can best express themselves.

4. But are all forms of life at bottom capable of
harmony ? What ground is there for any such assump-
tion ? Yet, if we do not make the assumption, how can
we go forward ? It may be repUed in general terms that
the rational impulse is to carry harmony as far as is found
possible and constantly to explore the possibility of
carr3dng it still further. With regard to impulses we
have admitted the possibiUty that there may be those with
which it is impossible to make terms, which are in ordinary
phrase radically bad and of the nature of original sin.
Such impulses, if they exist, have merely to be held in
check like any untoward force in external nature. But the
possibility of such a situation suggests a dilemma. It
implies not merely a division, but an irreconcilable division
in human nature. Is such a division compatible with the
scheme of the Practical Reason ? If not, must we take
that scheme to postulate that the whole body of human
impulse is finally amenable to laws of consistency, and
is this postulate warranted either by experience or by
any true axiom ? If yes, what is to hinder us from
supposing that not one impulse alone, but many, might
prove incompatible with a rational scheme of life ? Why
should not the rebeUious ones even turn out to form a
scheme of their own, establishing, so to say, a Sohderbund
in human nature, and if they did so, what would decide
between them and the orthodox constitution ? Would it
be force, that is the abandonment of rationatUty ? Or
would it be a question of the majority against the minority.


130 THE RATIONAL GOOD

a balance that might be precarious and in any case
abandons the pretension to harmony ?

The answer to these doubts Ues in close attention to
the requirements of a rational scheme. Such a scheme
must be carried through Ufe as a whole. Even if incom-
pletely understood — as we must admit any rational scheme
to be — ^it must be something which will work, i.e. by which
we can actually live in self-consistency, not in patches,
but in the whole of our conduct. Such a scheme must
deal with refractory impulses, just as the scheme of
knowledge deals with exceptions and obscurities. Our
knowledge seeks to explain " recalcitrant " facts, and if
it cannot explain them but still rejects them, has reasons
to give for the rejection, which thus, in a manner, does
fit them into its general plan. Similarly the practical
reason does not merely negate the obstinate impulse,
but shows why it is impossible. Now the impulse on
its side, so far as it is isolated, has no claim to rational
support, nor would its alliance with any other impulse
give it such a claim — ^nor even with any number of impulses
— ^unless out of them could be evolved a rival, equally
consistent scheme, professing to cover life as a whole.
We should then have two schemes, both apparently
rational but mutually incompatible, just as in science
we may have two hypotheses both consistent with a
great body of ascertained fact, but irreconcilable with
one another. Now in science we should say without
hesitation that such a position may indeed arise at a
certain incomplete stage of our knowledge, but it cannot
represent the objective truth. The truth must be single
and consistent throughout, so that one or other or both
of the hypotheses must be remodelled before the truth
can be known. Similarly, in practice the principle upon
which reason works is that of a practical consistency
which cannot be broken at any point. Just as a single
impulse requires to be harmonized with others, so does
a body of impulses or a system of conduct deaUng with
any part or aspect of life require to be harmonized with
the rest of life, and there cannot be two incompatible


APPLICATIONb 131

ways of dealing with the same situation which are both
in the end equally rational. So far, then, we conclude
{a) that the existence of one or more disconnected
recalcitrant impulses raises no theoretical (though much
practical) difl&culty ; (6) that there cannot be two
incompatible systems deaUng rationally with life as a
whole.

5. On the other hand — and here we come to a question
of real importance, practical as well as theoretical — it may
quite well happen that at a given stage of development
alternative systems present themselves to us as equally
rational. It is true that as matter of history the contrast
has more often been between a system resting on authority,
tradition, or the bare fact that it does actually work,
and a system derived from reasoned principles. In
such an event the partisans of principle seem to be on the
side of reason, but unfortunately the historian will not
always find in their favour, and the reason of that will
be that authority or tradition had on its side elements
of experience incorporated, perhaps unreflectingly and in-
articulately, in its scheme, but nevertheless incorporated
so that the scheme actually worked, while the principles,
however consistent internally, ignored these elements,
rested on too narrow a basis and so made shipwreck.
It is easily seen that such shipwreck is no condemnation
of rationalism as defined here, but, unfortunately, since
our lights are admittedly imperfect, the difiiculty is to
know when we have attained a visioir broad and clear
enough to guide us unerringly. RationaUsm threatens to
remain an ideal to be reached at some remote time,
but of no use as long as man remains imperfect, that is to
say, during the time when it is really wanted.

We can escape from this dilemma if some principles of
rational living are so far certain that we may take them
as guides to all Ufe, even though we confessedly do not
know the whole meaning of the scheme of life. This,
again, is our procedure in knowledge. We do not possess
all truth but we proceed confidently upon certain
principles, assured that though only a part of the truth.


132 THE RATIONAL GOOD

they are more than partially true. The moral conscious-
ness has generally supposed itself to be in possession
of such principles, sometimes, perhaps, prematurely.
There are, however, three rules of method deducible
from the general conception of a rational order, which
I think go a long way to meet our difficulty, both
theoretic and practical, and I shall content myself with
these,

6. The first of these rules is that any system which we
can accept as a step towards the rational order must be
a system which will " work " under the conditions in
which we live. By " work " I mean maintain itself.
A system works if men Uving under it so far serve
one another, providing for personal and common needs,
that the community is actually maintained. It may be
said that a community may be so bad that it is better
broken up. It needs to be "hatched over again, and
hatched different." Even so, the new community to
be put in its place must, at lowest, be one that will work,
and it is for the revolutionist to show that he can so
reconstruct society from its constituent atoms as to make
a better business of it than it has made of itself. ' Ideal
principles which merely destroy are not right for those
whom they destroy, even though they might, in fact,
" work " with people who should fully understand them,
i.e. see them in relation to other principles equally
necessary to the operation of a rational order as a whole.
Thus our first principle is the truth underlpng philosophic
Conservatism. What is good for us must " work," if
not literally here and now, at least in such continuity

X Of course we are not to require the impossible of the revolu-
tionist. The operation of social institutions caimot be mathe-
matically demonstrated a priori and the only final test is the
experiment itself. What is intended is that the revolutionist must
address his arguments to the problem of practical possibihty as
well as to that of abstract desirability and must give solid grounds
for the faith that is in him. As to the margin of doubt that remains
in all human forecasts he is entitled to say with a great Liberal,
of temper far from revolutionary, " Our hopes are as good as your
lears."


APPLICATIONS 133

with what we are here and now that we can fit ourselves
into it without any destruction.

7. The second rule is that of philosophic Liberalism,
and it is simply an appUcation of the rule that we have
worked upon all through the discussion. A vital impulse
we have seen can only be restrained legitimately on the
ground of incompatibility with the consistent operation of
Ufe as a whole. Now, in the institutions of any society
which works, there are generally a great many repressed
impulses and impoverished personaUties. In any such
case if a means of Uberation is suggested, tending to
show that the sjrstem would still " work " with the new
element set free, the burden of proof is with the adherent
of the estabUshed fact. Life gains in fullness and harmony
by each Uberation, and it is on this Une that the advance
towards a rational order moves. Here it is those who
refuse movement that must produce their reasons.
Provided that it will work, the system which gives larger
scope to faculty is preferable to the system which gives
less scope.

8. The third rule is, I think, the principle underlying
philosophic sociaUsm. We refused to admit that social
obUgation could be founded on an intellectual apprehension
of the " principle of similars." But this is not to deny
the value of the principle as a sign-post. As the social
order actually evolves it is very apt to assume a very
desirable shape for some persons, some classes, some races,
and a much less desirable one for others. From the
point of view of general harmony it is a patchwork, good
in parts, and this very goodness held together by the
badness of the other parts. Against this patchwork
the principle of similars is a protest. According to this
principle what is good for A is good for B, unless essential
differences between the two can be produced. If, say,
nationality has its rights in Central Europe, has it similar
rights in Ireland, and, if not, why not ? If Ireland has
its Ulster so have Bohemia and Roumania. Either treat
these cases on the same broad principle or produce reasons,
appUcable as general truths, for the difierence. If private


134 THE RATIONAL GOOD

property is an excellent institution as an essential instru-
ment of personality, what is the position of classes which
possess no private property, or none such as will serve
the essential function ? What is the duty of the more
fortunate in their regard ? A good must be shared. In
anything that by its nature can only be the privilege of a
few, still more in any gain which by its nature is another's
loss, there is a radical disharmony.

9. These very simple principles contain, I think, the
germ of rational reconstruction. I do not here propose
to trace them further, but I would point out two opposed
dangers against which, as I think, the principle of harmony
is a shield. The first of these is the fanaticism of abstract
right, the fanaticism which sees one wrong and sees it
so big that it overshadows all the world, or that grasps
one right and would wreck society to vindicate it. For
the principle of harmony there is no absolute right short
of the entire system of human well-being, no absolute duty
except to serve that system to the best of our under-
standing. This is not to say that either " rights " or
"duties" are mere instruments of no intrinsic value.
On the contrary, they are constitutive parts of this
comprehending harmony. Each defines the actual Unes
of harmonious co-operation within a certain sector of
life. Unfortunately, as the experience of life teaches us,
these sectors are ragged at the edges, and in the marginal
cases to draw the line with absolute certainty and precision
between them is not within the compass of anything
short of omniscience. What we have to do is to take
the claims and counter-claims and find the workable
system which will most fully meet them both, or rather
meet such elements in both as we are compelled to hold
vaUd. I spoke above of the rights of nationality, but
I should be the last to contend that any such rights may
be legitimately pressed without regard, for example, to
the effect on other nationalities. What the principle of
harmony will tell us is that a national claim, if deep and
generic, will, if not satisfied, contain seeds of disharmony
which repression will not kill. A right, that is to say


APPLICATIONS 135

is a claim founded on some real condition of harmony.
If we find that we cannot admit it without violating
some other right, either our case is very unfortunate or
our practical intelligence is at fault. In either alternative
the disharmony will remain and will do its work.

Opposed to the fanaticism of abstract right stands the
worship of the Institution, the established order, the
State, the Church. What is established is a structure to
which generations of effort, it may be, have contributed,
which, if not pure reason, incorporates many efforts of
reason, more, it may be said, than any individual with
his narrow experience could bring together. These
massive structures of human making, then, seem to acquire
a value of their own which puts them above the life of
individuals. But as soon as their sanctity puts forward
this daim it over-reaches itself. On the principle of^
harmony the test of the value of each structure is that '
it operates continuously in directing the lives of men..
What we seek to build up is something much greater
than any individual, but not something in which the
individual is lost. The relation of harmony gives us the
precise clue that we require. The massive achievement
of the whole must be gained, not at the expense of the
part, but through the development of each summing up/
in the development of all. No doubt there are occasions
when sacrifice is demanded, since there are numerous
untoward contingencies in all relations of Ufe. But the
good of the whole cannot rest on the continuous sacrifice
of the parts. That is the condemnation of the state
system which rests on the perpetual requirement of
miUtary servitude, or of the industrial system, which turns
out an increase of total wealth at the expense of a class
of operatives degraded to the status of machines.

To sum up, the principle of harmony has to be applied
to a social structure which has grown up through the
interaction of many forces in which the rational impulse
is only one element. The result is a patchwork of har-
monious and inharmonious elements. The method of the
practical reason is to foimd itself upon the elements of


136 THE RATIONAL GOOD

harmony that have established themselves and to generalize
them. But in so doing it must not be guided by a single
aspect of the problem to the exclusion of its bearing upon
the social structure as a whole. Nor, conversely, may it
conceive a whole as possessing a value without respect
to its human parts. Its reforms must " work " and in
working must be such as to hberate faculty, faciUtate
co-operation and extend the sphere of fulfilment.


CHAPTER VIII

IMPLICATIONS

The theory of harmony stands in close relation on the
one side to the Utilitarian principle as developed by J. S.
Mill, and on the other hand to the form taken by Ethical
Idealism in the hands of T. H. Green. It will help to a
more concrete appreciation of the present theory to
examine its points of similarity and contrast with both
these famous doctrines.

I. The broad correspondence of the theory of harmony
with that of Utility is readily apparent. The harmony
of experience with feeling is expressed in consciousness in
the form of pleasure or happiness. We speak of pleasure
in ordinary usage when we are thinking of some passing,
temporary experience, some appeal to eye or ear, some
sensory or emotional excitement. We speak of happiness
when we are thinking rather of the state of the whole
man, and of the good or evil fortune, the successes or
failures, that colour a life and affect a career. The popular
usage corresponds to a real distinction which is, perhaps,
easier to draw in thought than to apply in any actual
case. Pleasure and pain, we may say, as they deepen
and broaden their roots in our personaUty, pass gradually
into elements contributing to our permanent happiness
or misery. But, notwithstanding all difl&culties of demar-
cation, there is for thought a clear distinction between
the personality, which is a principle of synthesis, and the
successive impulses and experiences which are the raw
materials of the synthesis. To the first belong the mode
of action that we have called will, and the mode of feeling

137


138 THE RATIONAL GOOD

that we call happiness. To the second, the mode of
conation that we call Desire and the modes of feeling
that we call pleasure and pain. We should, therefore,
diverge from Mill in his definition of happiness as a sum
of pleasures. Happiness and pleasure are states of mind
possessing the same feeling-tone. We may, if we like,
take the term pleasure as generic and say that happiness
is a mode of consciousness dependent on the relatively
stable character and position of the personality as a
whole, and endowed with pleasurable feeling-tone. But
we shall not resolve happiness into a series of pleasurable
states.

Still less shall we accept the analysis which traces all
action ultimately to desire and all desire to an anticipation
of pleasure. Psychologically, the foundation of action
is impulse in which no anticipation of an end is a necessary
element, and impulse is modified but not eradicated by
experiences of pleasure and pain. Further, though this
experience does tend to a coincidence between desire and
pleasure, there is, and would remain, even if this coin-
cidence were far more perfect than it normally becomes,
a serious ambiguity in the theory that pleasure is necessarily
the object of desire. So far as the coincidence extends,
and we may admit that this covers the normal Ufe of
desire in the ordinary sane person, the object of desire
is the experience, the action, the possession that gives
pleasure, but it is not normally the psychical experience
of pleasure which the object will give. Psychologically,
Butler is right as against the Hedonist when he declares
that desire determines upon its object. In other words,
desire is, or tends to be, desire for the pleasant, not for
pleasure. The distinction is not purely verbal, for it
cuts the source of the egoistic tendency in Hedonism.
The object that is pleasant to me, that fills me with delight
to contemplate, may itself be nothing of me. It may
be my child's delight in a Christmas festivity, it may be
the happiness of another man with his child. It is only
if analysis proceeds to the discovery that such sights
are desired as sources of refined pleasure to the man who


IMPLICATIONS 139

seeks to bring them about, that an element of egoism is
imported. If I necessarily desire my own pleasure, then
it would seem that, however refined, however altruistic
the sources of my pleasure, the action that I take to secure
it must always, under one aspect, remain egoistic. If,
on the other hand, all that can be said is that what I
desire is also as a rule pleasant to me to realize, no such
implication remains, and the question whether my aims
will be selfish or unselfish is left entirely open by the
analysis of desire.

With regard to the sources of pleasure Mill himself
diverged from the older Utilitarians by introducing a
distinction of Quality, and admitting one kind of pleasure
to be intrinsically superior to another. The distinction,
while true to experience, is fatal to the maintenance of
simple pleasurableness as the standard of action, and
raises the question what sort of experience it is that will
yield pleasure of the most desirable quaUty. To this,
on our theory, we should reply that it is the harmonious
fulfilment of human powers. The end, as thus conceived,
does not separate happiness from the kind of life in which
it is sought, but treats theiti as two elements in the same
whole, as the experience and the feeling-tone which qualifies
the experience. The rational object of human action is
a type of life, not merely a type of feeling.

Closely connected with the analysis of desire is that of
Obligation. Mill held to the sense of Moral Obligation
as a real psychological force, but whether it had a rational
justification was not so easy for him, on his principles,
to determine. The sense of obUgation he held to be
built up by educative processes and the laws of Association
on the basis of a substratum of sympathy or Social feeUng
which he took to be natural. Given sufficient strength
in these feelings and forces, there is at any rate no con-
tradiction involved in the supposition that the altruistic
action which Mill wishes to explain might become more
pleasurable and the violation of its rules a source of
greater pain to a man than any selfish consideration.
Social and " unselfish " action becomes psychologically


140 THE RATIONAL GOOD

possible on Mill's view, but whether it becomes rationally
imperative is another question. On Mill's account all
action is at bottom founded on intensity of desire. The
stronger desire, and that is for Mill the most intensely
realized anticipation of pleasure, must prevail. If a man
already finds his greatest pleasure in promoting the general
happiness no question of obhgation arises. But if he
feels nothing of the kind, or if he halts between two
decisions, in what sense can we tell him that he " ought "
to decide for one course rather than the other. In any
sense in which it is to express a generic motive for his
action the " ought " should represent some balance of
pleasure which will accrue to him. But can we really
promise him any such balance and is that seriously what
we mean ? What we mean when we assert an obligation
is that there exists a ground for the course of action
recommended which we, the speakers, recognize as a
good ground, and as good irrespectively of the particular
desires or inclinations of the individual whom we are
addressing. We beUeve the end we urge to be intrinsically
or objectively excellent, and we press its claim on others,
not primarily for the pleasure which it will give them to
advance it, but because of its intrinsic goodness. This
is to imply that the end is not merely something which we
desire but something which we beUeve to be rationally
demonstrable as the Good.

To resume, the conception of harmony so far coincides
with the Utilitarian doctrine as to include the general
happiness as an integral element, but differs from it in
making the form of life in which happiness is found equally
essential.! The feeling of harmony is pleasurable, and
in its deeper and wider developments becomes happiness.

« The distinction is more important for the theory of obligation
than for any applications to the social standard. For if the general
happiness be the sole end, yet the means must be sought in a certain
kind of Ufe and this Ufe must be socially harmonious and must
rest for its satisfactions on the control of life conditions by inteUi-
gence. Thus, what we have conceived as the content of happiness
figures in* a reasoned Utilitarianism as the means to happiness.


IMPLICATIONS 141

But pleasurable feeling in abstraction from the experience
which jdelds it is not the basis or standard of action.
Action is not determined solely by desire, nor desire by
anticipation of pleasurable feeUng, but a rational appre-
ciation of an intrinsically good life plaj^ its part, and
this life is not only the basis of happiness but has its own
distinctive character as a harmonious development of
human activities.

2. Ethical Idealism, in the shape given to it by T. H.
Green, was deeply opposed to Utilitarianism, in its meta-
physical presuppositions, but much less alien to it, as
Green recognized, in its practical and humanitarian spirit.
To the conception of developmental harmony it is still
more closely akin. Green conceives the ethical order as
arising from the spiritual principle in man seeking to
realize itself in a Common Good. The several elements
in this conception, if pressed and defined, yield point
by point the principle of harmony in development. The
self-reaUzation which is held out as the goal for each
personaUty cannot be, and is not, of course, intended as,
any sort of reaUzation of any sort of self. The miser may
" realize " his avarice or the vindictive man his vengeance,
but the more the self reahzes capacities of this kind the
worse it becomes. Self-realization must mean (a) not any
kind of experience in which some psychical capacity is
fulfilled, but an orderly development of an organic whole,
and (6) this development, if it is to form part of a
" common " good, must be conditioned by the equally
desirable development of other human beings. But this
is precisely the conception of the good as the harmonious
development of the life of the race as a whole. Apart
from the conception of harmony there is no criterion to
decide between the kind of development that would be
good and the kind that would be bad.

So far the present account appears only as a further
definition of Green's principle. Certain important points
of divergence, however, must be noticed. In the first
place. Green insists on treating the element of pleasure
in the good rather as a secondary consequence than as


142 THE RATIONAL GOOD

an integral and essential element. In this he has as
much over-estimated the part of impulse as the empirical
school over-stated the part of experienced feeling. If
the argument of previous pages is sound, feeling holds the
reins, though impulse is often a refractory steed, and the
more rational we become, the clearer is the coincidence
between the lines of Ufe which we seek to lay down and
those in which, if not actual happiness, at least real peace
and inward satisfaction are found. This view has been
combated generally because it was supposed to be his
own enjoyment or satisfaction which was being recom-
mended as the object to the individual. But for this
Hmitation there is on rational principles no warrant.
What is intended is simply that the harmony of experience
with feeling which is the basis of happiness, is an essential
element in the harmony of experience with experience,
which is the basis of organic development. The good is
nothing if it does not appeal to feeUng, just as feeling is
nothing if there is no object to excite it.

3. A second point to be noted is that the term self-
reaUzation often seems to suggest too optimistic a solution
of fundamental ethical difficulties.

If, indeed, the social harmony were perfect, we might
lay down that the good of the whole would be the synthesis
of the good of each member. For the full development
of every personality is conditionally good — conditionally,
that is, on its capability of harmonization with the
development of others. All that in each individual might
be so harmonized, we include in the term " social
personaUty " and the failure of any social personality to
achieve its full development is a net loss. Thus the most
perfect social harmony must provide the fullest develop-
ment for each social personality, and that is the good
for each. But a social harmony which is only emerging
very gradually from the condition of moral chaos and
has to work itself out xmder the conditions of a non-moral
nature never, in fact, presents so complete a consistency.
The actual needs of the social order at any given time may
thus involve the curtailment of developments for which


IMPLICATIONS 143

a higher harmony might readily find place. The service
of society may require the entire sacrifice of happiness
or life on the part of an individual. To say that the
individual so sacrificed realizes his own highest good in
sacrificing himself is at best a half truth. Taken alone,
it is highly misleading. The individual sacrificed does
not achieve that internally harmonious development in
which his happiness consists, and which, under conditions
of true harmony, would constitute his personal share in
the common good. A society which should uniformly
impose such sacrifice on all its members would not be
making for that development of human powers in which
we have found the rational good. Hence, such a sacrifice
can only be a means and not an end, not a good in itself. <
That the sacrifice should be made is the best thing for
society under the circumstances if it is positively required
to maintain or improve the existing social order. And
if it is the best thing for society, it is also the best, i.e.
the least bad, thing under the circmnstances for the
individual. It is his duty, and the worst thing he can do
is to shirk his duty. It is also, as regards feeling, the
way, not, indeed, of Happiness, but of Peace, i.e. of a
sense of Unity with mankind and with the general end
and aim of life. But it is not the good for the individual
in the sense of that which it is generally desirable that
the individual should attain. It is rather that good of
which unfortunate circumstances alone admit.

It may be asked how, if we admit real self-sacrifice,
we can justify it rationally to the individual. But the
question involves a misconception. The rational good is
not the good for the individual as an independent unit, it
is the good of the whole of which he forms a part. The

I What is good in itself is the sense of one-ness with others and
the desire to serve — ^whether it take the form of Love or Sense
of Duty — ^which make men ready for self-sacrifice. That there
might be some elements of sacrifice beyond the obvious necessity
for self-control in the ideal order is conceivable, but they would
be discords tuned to constitute a higher harmony. The absolute
destruction of hfe, the permanent bhghting of happiness or eradi*
cation of faculty can be necessary only where harmony is imperfect.


144 THE RATIONAL GOOD

governing principle to which the anal3^is of the good and
the reasonable led us was that it is reasonable so to act
as to further the good of the whole. That good if perfected
would not involve such utter sacrifice of individuals as is
here contemplated. On the contrary it would be a
harmony in which the lot falling to eadi individual would
be unambiguously good for him. Yet in the effort to
estabUsh such harmony in a discordant world sacrifice
is often necessary.* The obUgation which, then, lies
upon the individual to sacrifice himself is founded on his
relation to the whole. Psychologically its condition is
that the conational synthesis constituting the main bent
of his personaUty is governed in the last resort by his
conception of the whole or of certain principles which
fashion the life of the whole. The obUgation is rationally
justified, that is to say, it is real or true in the sense in
which any moral judgment can be real or true, as con-
tributing to the rational good. It is psychologically
effective in so far as the practical attitude of the individual
is adjusted to that true good. Thus, even if we insist that
in self-sacrifice the individual is choosing the least bad,
and, therefore, the relatively good, for himself, that is
not the rational motive. The rational motive is that his
action furthers the general good. If we pass from the
question of motive as it presents itself to the agent to
that of actual gain or loss, as it may be judged by a
by-stander, we may say that what a man loses in self-
sacrifice is his own personality — the development of his
own life with its attendant happiness — and what he gains
is the harmony of entire identification with the wider Ufe

< It need hardly be said that morally there is a deep distinction
between voluntary sacrifice and one imposed by the community
on the individual. In the former there is at least a partial
reconciliation, the individual gaining the immense rehef of a har-
mony underlying the disharmony. In the latter there is no such
compensation. It can be justified only as a less evil than social
disorder or the frustration of common effort. It is clear, how-
ever, that a social order which imposes real loss of well-being
on any of its members is far more gravely imperfect than one which
can repose on voluntary self-sacr i fi c e at need.


IMPLICATIONS 145

with its attendant sense of peace. This is " his " good in
the sense that it is that which hard circumstances apportion
to him — " his " good judged from the objective standpoint.
It is not his good either {a) in the sense of that which an
ideal harmony would apportion to him, or (b) in the sense
of that which he would choose if he considered the matter
from his own point of view. If, then, we are asked whether
in self-sacrifice the individual does or does not abandon
his good, we must affirm or deny it, according to the sense
in which the words are taken. The essential points are
(i) that he sacrifices the good of self, so far as it is con-
ceived in antithesis to the good of the whole ; (2) that
the reason for this sacrifice is not that it is a truer good
for the individual, but that it is for the good of the whole ;
(3) that the necessity of such sacrifice rests on existing
disharmonies, that is to say, is bad. The realization of
the common good cannot, therefore, be regarded in an
optimistic spirit as a simple sum of self-realizations.

4. We cannot face the facts of self-sacrifice without
raising once more the question of the effectual force of
the motives which attract us to the rational system.
The part must accommodate itself to the whole or must
be sacrificed. Will it consent ? Let us put the difficulty
first in the form of an objection which may be urged
against all RationaUsm, and which, though perhaps more
often felt than plainly expressed, is the greatest stumbling-
block in its path. It is based on what may be called an
apparent discontinuity of values. To men possessed by
some enthusiasm, some reUgion, some passion, the whole
world seems cheap as the price of their heart's desire.
Such an enthusiasm, it may be said, though justly con-
demned if the object is unworthy, is yet the sole basis of
the higher Ufe of man. Take it out of humanity and Ufe
collapses Uke a pricked bladder, or, to take a more appro-
priate metaphor, ceases to move Uke a mechanism from
which the mainspring is gone. What, then, is to be the
attitude of the rationalist to enthusiasm and passion ?
Is he to accept it as necessary to all movement ? If so,
what becomes of his accurate adjustment of values in

10


146 THE RATIONAL GOOD

presence of a force which over-rides all considerations
but those of its own imperious will ? Is he to reject it
as a disturbing factor ? If so, where is he to look for the
onward impulse in humanity ?

To state the case in somewhat broader and more general
terms. Must we not recognize that there is in the normal
course of human development a phase analogous to what,
in certain forms of religious experience, is called con-
version ? In response sometimes to a personal passion,
sometimes to a social movement or a religious influence,
the outlook on life is immeasurably deepened and widened.
The whole sense of values undergoes a change. The
petty cares and small daily pleasures become so much
dross. What is real, what counts, is the interest of a
deeper, more spiritual life, no fragment of which would be
bartered for all the world outside. But these last words
suggest that we are here abandoning the conception of
life as a whole, for the sake of some one thing that is
worth all others. It may be the fulfilment of a perfect
love : —

I am named and known by that moment's feat.

There took my station and degree.
So grew my own small hfe complete

As Nature obtained her best of me,
One bom to love you. Sweet.

It may be the sense of union with God. It may be the
achievement of self-conquest and the deliberate and final
absorption of self in the cares of Humanity. In each
case, the change seems to constitute a division, a deep
cleavage between the world of real values and the outer
husk of things which are superficially important. Can
such a fissure be justified in reason, and, if so, can practical
hfe form a coherent whole ? Or is it contrary to reason,
and, if so, must we not admit henceforward that the
highest development of the ethical spirit is away from
reason and not towards it ?

The reply that may be made is that it is precisely here
where the difficulty seems greatest that the claim of
reason, rightly understood, is most securely based. For


IMPLICATIONS 147

what, after aU, is the test of this deeper reality ? What
but that it justifies itself in experience taken as a whole ?
The object of our worship may be a false god or a true ;
our love may be deep-rooted in the realities of two natures,
or it may be the froth of physical fascination ; our social
enthusiasm may be groimded in a real relation of our
microscopic selves to the vast life of humanity, or in
sentimentality and verbiage. What test is there but
in the living ? If love is the glamour of a moment, he
who gives the world for it makes a bad bargain. If it
is a premonition of all that a woman can be to a man
and all that she can make of him, if this life-long experience
could be focussed clearly in the prevision of a golden hour,
it would, in terms of cold logic, more than justify the
feeUng of that hour. The time of romance may be that
of tragic self-deception, but it is as often that of the truer
insight, imperfectly sustained in less inspired moments
Between truth and falsity the test comes in the world
of prose. There is a deeper plane of being than that of
our everyday experience, but the relation between them
is not that of two separate orders of reality, but of
underlying forces to the play of their effects. The relation
is equally misunderstood by every form of ideahsm,
supematuralism. Romanticism, asceticism, which dis-
regards the trivial round, and by the Naturalism which
recognizes no spring of deeper forces below the surface.
To recognize a deeper order of reaUty is only the beginning
of wisdom. To see that our dim and emotional appre-
hension of its nature must be brought to the test of hard
fact, and that ultimately this test involves the consiUence
of inferences drawn from the entire realm of experience
is a further step, which restores unity to our world while
providing a means to distinguish truth from illusion.
It is because the deepest truths are illustrated in the whole
texture of experience that, particularly in ethics, those
who have most thoroughly mastered the profoundest
principles can express them in the most elementary
teaching and illustrate them with the simpUcity of child-
hood.


148 THE RATIONAL GOOD

But it may be urged, admitting aU that can be said of
the reasonableness of regarding life as a whole, what of
the actual motive forces. What is there to control passion ?
We have contended above that reason may compel us to
face a r^l and uncompensated self-sacrifice. We are
contending now that it will compel us to review our deepest
impulse in the Ught of Ufe in its completeness. Reason,
the reply will be, may say what she Ukes but has no such
power. The objection has come to the surface at more
than one point and we have staved it ofi by explaming
that for us the practical Reason is not a faculty enthroned
on the judgment seat above impulse, but is the synthesis
of impulse itself, made aware of its goal. But when we
come up against the deepest things in Ufe we cannot be
content with abstractions but are forced to ask, what
goal ? The individual must be anchored on something
outside himself, something greater and more stable if he
is to stand against these triple waves. What allegiance,
then, does Reason offer him as the core or foundation of
that synthesis of emotional interest which is to keep his
life steadily pointed in one direction ? The community, it
may be suggested, offers the required anchorage. Men
will, in fact, offer their Uves and their all for its advance-
ment. But the Ufe of any existent community wiU not
satisfy aU the requirements of the case. The moral
whole is not the same thing as the social. Every society
of any significance is in greater or less degree organized,
but moral relations arise between any two persons that
come into contact however temporary and slight. More-
over, the moral order to which we owe allegiance is at
once wider and more fundamental than any form of
social organization, and is the standard by which we
judge such organizations, not a rule which we submit to
their requirements for criticism. Yet it is eminently
social and prescribes social co-operation wherever this is
physically possible, that is, so far as human beings come
into contact with one another. Can we say, then, that
the whole which it postulates is Humanity, or, conceivably,
the entire sentient creation ? If we do, we are in some


IMPLICATIONS 149

danger, as has been hinted above, of confusing actualities
and ideals. It is the ideal of Harmony that humanity
should become one co-operative whole, but for long ages
humanity subsisted in scattered groups, many not even
knowing of one another's existence, and even now it is
split up into groups sundered by bitter and largely irrational
animosities. We have noticed two forms or kinds of
unity involved in the moral judgment. ' One is the unity
of the universal, which recognizes a fundamental similarity ^
of character in all human beings, and the universal
applicabiUty of the fundamental rules of right and duty
to all who come into contact. * The other is the unity of
co-operation between all who have, in fact, come into »
contact. The first of these principles is clearly the basis .
of the second, and the unity inherent in the moral order
is a principle of development working itself out in a fuller
and more extended social co-operation. By the completion
of this process Humanity would form an actual unity;
but of the present and still more of the past we can only
say that its unity is potential, i.e. that conditions exist
out of which it may arise and among them a germinal
principle which makes for its development. This principle
of concord is the moral order itself.

At this point it will be said, men wiU not recognize
allegiance to anything so abstract and impalpable as the
moral order. Propound this to them nakedly and they
will revolt. They need something concrete and Uving.
In short, they need a Person, and if neither the community
nor Humanity is a person, and still more if Humanity is
but an unrealized ideal, they need a God. A personal
God is the incarnation of the unity which the moral
judgment requires, and without one the moral order falls
to pieces like an arch without a keystone. The argument
recalls that of Kant, in which God and immortaUty were
called in by the moral consciousness to redress the balance
of this Ufe and equate performance with result, virtue
with happiness. In the Kantian form it involved a two-
fold error of logic, contradicting the principle of duty for
duty's sake without question of consequences, and most


150 THE RATIONAL GOOD

insecurely balancing a theory of the actual constitution
and government of the universe on the requirements of
humankind.

It is important to dwell on both of these errors, because
they touch on the fundamentals of the relation between
morals and religion. The first raises the question of a
moral sanction. Is moral obligation enforced or backed
by anything of the nature of reward or penalty ? If not,
can we hold to our position that obligation is a fact, whether
we recognize it or not ? If yes, can we say that the obliga^
tion is genuinely moral and not prudential ? The reply
' to both questions is that moral obligation consists in
the real goodness of the moral order and the real badness
of violating it. Any consideration lying outside this
order, as, e.g., a penalty attached by law, is not of a moral
kind, and the act which it induces a man to perform is
not a moral act. To rest moral obligation, then, on
prudential or, generally, on external considerations is
to annihilate it, as all clear-headed thinkers have realized.
On the other hand, precisely because the moral order is
a coherent whole no violation of it stands alone. It is in
vain that we seek to cheat ourselves. There are some
duties which we like and others which we would gladly
shirk, just as there are some people to whom we wish to
do justice and others to whom we do not wish to do justice.
Now what the rationaUty of the moral order tells us is,
to put it bluntly, that we cannot both eat our cake and
have it. Not only does one false step lead to another
and one faiUng threaten to develop into general weakness,
but even the half-unconscious wrong operates as a centre
of disturbance and disharmony. Psychological analysis in
its more recent form very strongly suggests that that
famiUar figure, the man of smug respectability, conscious
of rectitude, is below the level of his consciousness a very
different being. All the suppressed disharmonies of his
nature are there operative, maintaining a smouldering
disaffection that breaks out sometimes into flashes of
disturbing emotion of which the origin is obscure to the
sufferer himself, sometimes into physical disease. The


IMPLICATIONS 151

fundamental source of these disharmonies is the failure
of adequate and mutually consistent expression for the
radical and insuppressible impulses. Such consistency
could only be attained in completeness in a perfect order
both within and without, that is to say in a full and final
adjustment of the individual to his society, or rather,
let us say, to the universe. Such adjustment is, therefore,
not entirely within the power of the individual. But
there is one great source of disharmony which he can avoid,
namely, insincerity. Insincerity means the nominal and
external acceptance of a principle or a discipline, such,
e.g., as Christianity and its adaptation by various shifts
and devices to normal conduct. These shifts do not touch
the real disharmony, which continues operative below
the threshold of consciousness, always thrust down by the
aid of some plausible phrase, but only to pursue its
machinations with the greater secrecy. It is here that
logic — and not only the deeper logic of ideas but even
the logic of words — plays an effective part in personal
morals. People seldom rebel quite openly and avowedly
to themselves against a principle which they accept.
What they do is to get hold of an exegesis accommodating
principle to desire and custom, which makes for conscious-
ness a sufficient reconciliation. All the time they know
that the reconciliation is hollow, and when a better logic
exposes the sophistication they are forced to reopen the
whole question. Psycho-analysis tells us that the first
step towards re-establishing harmony is to bring the hidden
discrepancies to Ught, and that is the service which a
sound ethical logic performs for the individual.

Now to hold that men are happy in proportion to their
fidelity to the moral law as they understand it would be
a very undue optimism. The psalmist who, having been
young, now was old, and yet never saw the righteous
forsaken nor his seed begging their bread, was playing
just one of those tricks with his own judgment by which
principles are adapted to facts. We cannot have it both
ways, insisting, on the one side, on the reaUty of self-
sacrifice and the supremacy of duty over every selfish


• •


152 THE RATIONAL GOOD

consideration, and on the other hand, comforting ourselves
with the assurance that the good God will make it all up
. to the sufferers and wipe away all tears from their eyes.
We cannot consistently strike a noble attitude pro-
claiming virtue its own reward, and the next moment
begin surreptitiously re-introducing extraneous rewards
for virtue. What we can justly say is that virtue is its
own reward vaUat quantum, while the penalties in which it
involves its adherent — ^up to, it may be, social ostracism
and death — ^are equally real. The " reward " consists
in this, that the moral order is a connected sj^tem which
is the basis of an inward as well as an external harmony.
This inner harmony is a condition of our own happiness
and we cannot, as we are often tempted to think, violate
it when we choose and yet preserve it. It is just to this
extent that moral obligation carries a genuine and com-
pletely moral sanction. At the same time it must be
remarked that the efficacy of this sanction depends on the
close adaptation of the accepted moral code to the real
conditions of harmony. If this adaptation were exact,
if, that is, the traditional morality of any community
were perfectly rational, it would express a perfect harmony
within each of us in congruity with a no less perfect harmony
in relation to our community. Actual moraUty is far
from this, and sometimes the rebel against such moraUty
gets nearer to. the true conditions of harmony, yet at the
cost of sharp divergencies between himself and his fellovrs.
If such a rebel is able to formulate the higher or wider
principle he does not feel this discrepancy so much. He
is consciously the servant of God, or the ideal, or humanity
and his differences with his neighbours fall into their
place in his mind as one of the crosses that he has to bear.
The rebel of a lower order, moved primarily by his own
passions, is in less favourable case. Yet of him, too,
we often feel that he is actuated by what we call human
nature, i.e. by legitimate impulse-feelings for which
society gives no adequate scope. In the moral account
between this man and his community, it is not easy to
say offhand where the balance of debit and credit lies.


IMPLICATIONS 153

The inner harmony, then, which alone is " virtue's
reward," in the genuine sense is partially, but not wholly,
within the power of the individual. But such as it is,
it is an indispensable condition of happiness and cannot
be violated without either a painful process of restoration
or a progressive deterioration avowed or otherwise. On
the other hand it is only one condition of happiness.
It is all very well for the philosopher in his study or the
preacher in his pulpit to rise superior to the " external
goods." Many of these may be dross, but what of wife
and child, the safety and honour of our country, the success
or failure of our cause ? When Epictetus tells us that
these have nothing to do with our good, we can only reply
that the man who wraps himself in his own virtue will
find it threadbare. If we are to weigh the respective
chances of happiness for the good man and the bad,
we must put against the internal harmony of the one the
insensitiveness of the other which protects him from a
thousand sorrows to which a ready S5niipathy and a warm
imagination expose us. It is not because these qualities
bring felt happiness to their owner, but because of their
permanent value to the world that we hold them extremely
admirable. If we could make the world no better than
it is, it would be best to grow a hard outer shell as some
do and retire within it.

5. It results that, though the moral sanction is quite
real and very serious in its own sphere, no consideration
of our personal happiness can be the final basis of obUga-
tion. That basis is the goodness of the universal harmony
and the badness of everything that conflicts with it.
This brings us to the second question whether men can,
in fact, feel an allegiance to an abstraction — ^as this ideal
will be considered — or must personify it in a God before
they can own a duty which will stand up to interest and
passion. Unfortunately we cannot create a God out of
our own needs, and it is not our business to create the
illusion of one. As to the appeal of the rational good,
no one supposes that a philosophic formula, be it universal
harmony or anjiiiing else, excites the imagination or


154 THE RATIONAL GOOD

stimulates devotion. The purpose of these formulas is
merely to express the coherence or common tendency of
all the higher impulses and nobler objects of endeavour.
Each of these has a great and real hold on our allegiance,
and they are fortified if and in so far as they are seen to
be not opposed, but mutually consistent and even mutually
necessary. The abstract terms in which their relationship
may be formulated are not supposed to excite profound
emotions. What they are supposed to do is to provide a
basis on which such emotions already in being and operating
in their several ways may be enabled to substitute co-opera-
tion for conflict. A man loves his country and loves
truth. Many people seem to find great difficulty on
occasion in reconciling these emotions, or, rather, they
reconcile them without admitting the difficulty by the
method described above of degrading the love of truth to
the position of a subconscious rebel. This is weakening
to both emotions which, when reconciled, become steadier
and obtain a firmer hold on us. When patriotism itself
makes us face the truth and tell the truth, perhaps, to
an excited and incredulous mob, it has certainly strength-
ened its hold on us to the point at which we become
indifferent to the inevitable cry of Traitor. So is it,
also, with other emotions and elements of impulse-
feeUng. No formula creates them, but the more we find
for them a Une of harmonious activity the greater their
vital energy and the stronger their hold upon us. The
goodness of the life which our formula expresses, and the
hold that it has on us, do not lie in the formula, but in
all the energy of passion acting in a unison which the
formula expresses. The life so governed is not any the
less good, does not command our allegiance any the less,
because the words in which we seek to express it have all
the coldness of exactitude.

Moral exhortation in its place is a good thing. Cool
enquiry into truth is also a good thing. The mixture
of the two is a bad thing, indeed, sometimes a rather
nauseous compound, and the case is not altered though
the truth that we are enquiring into is the truth about


IMPLICATIONS 155

morals. Our business here is to enquire into the content
and the rationality of moral judgments, and we must try
to keep as closely as possible to the facts, with the least
disturbance from the emotional atmosphere in which
facts of this particular order are steeped. Now we have
conceived the moral judgment as laying down something
that can be regarded as a fact, and the body of moral
judgments accordingly as stating or implying a certain
body of truth, further, if we are right in regarding the
moral system as rationally justified, the assertions or
implications of fact that it contains must be vaUd, that
is to say that what it asserts is real. What, then, precisely
does it assert, or imply, as to the existence of Deity ?
This will partly depend on what is meant by Deity. The
moral system directly or indirectly asserts, we have seen,
a tie which is universal and independent of any particular
social organization between all rational, perhaps all
conscious beings, that come into relation with one another.
As a consequence, it asserts a more concrete unity between
those who stand in permanent relations to one another.
It is essentially concerned with the conditions of harmony
and disharmony among such persons, and thus involves
a unity of a kind that we may fitly call spiritual in their
Uves. The Uves and actions of separate minds, though
seemingly locked up in separate bodies are, in fact, inter-
related just as two magnets, though separate bodies,
are interrelated by definite attractions and repulsions.
We are free to call this a spiritual union, but are we free
to call it God ? If so, to which of the many social unions
shall we apply the term ? Hegel seems to have thought
quite deUberately, and rhetoric apart, that the State
might be so regarded, but the Olympus so constituted
has not proved a very happy one. On our principles it
is clear that if we are to find God in this line of search at
all it will be not in any minor or more partial association,
but in all Humanity. But as to this we must remark :
(i) Humanity, if a spiritual unity, is not a Person. Per-
sonaUty and sociality may, perhaps, both be regarded as
spiritual principles of unity, but they are not the same


156 THE RATIONAL GOOD

principles. They are species of a genus, but quite distinct
species. (2) Humanity is a growing rather than a matured
unity. There is the basis of this unity in the moral order
and its partial reahzation in social life. We are, in fact,
dealing here with something in change and growth,
something of which the future is even clouded and un-
certain. (3) Humanity is confined to an inconsiderable
member of one solar system. The moral unity of which
the growth of Humanity is itself the outcome appears
to claim a more universal application, provided there be
any beings to apply it to in other worlds and any means
of intercourse. It is a poetical Ucense to say that duty
preserves the stars from wrong, but not to maintain that
duty would apply to any rational beings that may exist
on the surface of a star. Whether such beings exist we
have no direct means of knowing, but it is hardly to be
supposed that the strange and rich development of mind
is peculiar to one Uttle fragment of a single solar system.
The universe, so far as we know it, is of one tissue through-
out, and it is reasonable to suppose that any principle
of universal appUcabiUty is also one of general appUcation.
In any case tbe reahty which the moral order implies is
a spiritual principle, which, from its most salient feature,
we may call briefly the principle of Love, actively operative
in correlating and so determining the activities of all
conscious beings in proportion to the grade of their
development, and by its operation building up commu-
nities of extending scope, culminating in an incipient
union of human-kind.

6. It is here that the real importance of ethical theory
to cosmic philosophy is seen. We said above that if
ethical theory is valid its implications of fact must be
taken as true. Therefore, certain reaUties can be inferred
from ethics. But it should not need to be said that the
moment ethics makes this claim it lays itself open to
the possibihty of contradiction by other investigations.
Thus, if, e.g.. Ethics postulated immortaUty, and any other
branch of science could be held to disprove immortaUty,
one or the other must be xmsound. There would then be


IMPLICATIONS 157

a conflict wherein we should not know what to believe,
but must seek to resolve it, as we do when two physical
sciences come into conflict, by further investigation.
Thus Ethics can no more dogmatize about reality as a
whole than can any special science. It can only propound
a view which, if it is to be finally substantiated, must be
proved consistent with views derived from other methods
of investigation. Now what ethical theory establishes
according to the argument here pursued is (a) that the
Good is a Harmony and (6) that while Harmony is an
unrealized ideal, the ties that make for Harmony are
real and operative. Of these principles the second is
an assertion of fact which accordingly challenges criticism
from the sciences which deal with matters of fact. In
the view briefly referred to below (and explained in the
vniter's Development and Purpose) the ethical claim is
substantiated upon a critical examination of Development.
But conversely, the ethical analysis which identifies the
good with harmony is of the first importance to the
theory of Development. For in this theory development
rests upon a principle making for harmony in a world
of discord. On the view here taken, that is the same
as a principle making for the Good, or, in other words,
a teleological principle. Ethical theory thus sets out
the conditions of a teleological view of reality, defines the
nature of the end, specifies the resistance to be over-
come, and indicates — ^what the theory of development
confirms — that the teleological factor is only one part
of the explanation of the world-process.

In regard to such a principle, two questions arise which
cannot be answered by the practical reason alone. The
first is as to its scope and power, the second as to its
concrete embodiment or real being. The first question
can only find its answer in a general theory of the nature
of reaUty, as to which I must here confine myself to stating
succinctly the view arrived at by an argument from else-
where. On this view ReaUty is an interconnected system
which develops in time, the principle of rational harmony or
Love being the permanent underlying ground of develop-


158 THE RATIONAL GOOD

ment. This principle is not the ground of Reality, but
only of the development which takes place in Reality,
subduing as it advances the equally real and significant
element of disharmony. The scope of the principle is,
therefore, accurately expressed in the formula " uni-
versally applicable " rather than " universal in operation/'
But there should be this rider that the principle, being a
principle of development, is a creative force always at
work in extending its own field of application. Briefly,
if this view is correct the pri dple will ultimately domi-
nate the universe.

What, then, is the nature of its embodiment or concrete
realization ? In its completeness it is clearly not personal
in the simple and straightforward sense. On the contrary,
it includes unnumbered personalities. We may suppose
it to transcend personality as the purest love does in
depth as weU as in extent, and may, therefore, justly
name it super-personal. But what of its incompleteness ?
How does it exist now, and in what form has it maintained

tself in the dark ages of chaos ? We must beware of
too facile an argument. Gravity is a universal principle,
in that all that is material gravitates. But we do not
suppose a God of weight, or that there exists somewhere
concretely embodied a Principle of gravitation, from which
the tendencies of separate bodies towards one another
emanate as though by an efflux. We are not to infer
directly from a potency of love in the universe to a God
of Love from whom it flows. What we may more justly
argue is that once regarding Reality as a whole, we must
look for the principles of its explanation within. It must
explain itself as it cannot be explained by anything
external. From this, if it is a process of development,
it will follow that its maturity or completeness cannot
be regarded as an external or casual result of its initial
condition. The whole is the entire process, and any one
phase, including the beginning and the end, is only a part
of this process, determining, but also determined by the
remainder. A process thus determining and determined

by its own outcome is of the nature of EfEort, and the


IMPLICATIONS 159

world-development must therefore fall under this category.
What we call Time is the common measure of the series
of changes interfused with this effort, and what we call
Eternity is neither the indefinite prolongation of Time nor
the negation of Time, but the co-presence of past and
future in a Reality of which all process is but one facet.
It is an error of the rehgious mind to identif)" Reality as
a whole with God — z, very natural error, a kind of pious
exaggeration which seeks to claim plenitude of Being and
Power together with plenitude of goodness for the object
of its adoration. Nevertheless, it is an error from which
logical and moral contradictions arise. Reality is only
good in so far as goodness prevails in it, and goodness
prevails only through the fruition of the impulse to
harmony accompUshed in the Time process by the sub-
dual of the particularism which is equally real. This
Effort is the creator of gods and men, of beautiful fictions
and of what is noble in fact, of law and morals, of science
and art, perhaps of what is beautiful in nature, certainly
of the significance of that beauty to us. Its operation
is intelligent and purposive and all-embracing. An effort
involving, even one evolving into, purpose implies Mind,
and Mind that makes for harmony must have some
unity throughout, however rudimentary its achievement.
Hence if the world-process is directed towards harmony
we legitimately infer a Mind at its centre, but the form
of unity which such a Mind possesses is less easily
determined. It is possible that personality on the one
hand and the social union of personalities on the other
are rather its creations than adequate expressions of its
substantive essence.

7. This view, true or false, rests admittedly not on
ethical reasoning alone. We are, therefore, bound to
consider the effect on morals if we suppose it false. In
point of fact by those who take a different view of ultimate
reality, the final value of human effort is sometimes
questioned. It is urged that the attempt to make human
life happier or better is futile if not self-defeating ; that
the law of evolution involves struggle and not harmony,


i6o THE RATIONAL GOOD

the sacrifice of the weak to the strong, rather than the
chivaky or justice by which the strong lose the fruits of
their strength ; finally, that evolution itself is but a
stage in the world-process to be succeeded by dissolution
and the subsequent cooUng of the earth and extinction of
the sun itself. On the last point it may be replied that,
if our views of the future of the solar system were as
certain as they are in fact speculative, they might indeed
afEect our estimate of the relative value of different forms
of human effort, but they would not destroy the basis
of rational action. If we find ourselves in a sinking ship
we do not spend our last minutes, say, in studying the
language of the country to which we are bound. This
particular object has lost its value. But it remains worth
while to maintain order, cheerfulness and courage and,
in a word, to die Uke men. Similarly, if a geological
cataclysm were anticipated, not within a million years,
but within fifty, it would render nugatory all effort that
could only bear fruit in the far future. Like any other
condition of the environment it would limit the possi-
biUties of action and affect the direction of effort, but it
would not impair the reasonableness of making life as
good a thing as it could be made for the years remaining
to the human race. The theory of harmony as such does
not depend on an optimistic view of the world-process.
With the conception of Development here deduced from
that of Harmony, however, the case is different. If there
is a term fixed by unalterable conditions to human deve-
lopment, it is clearly futile to make preparations to cultivate
forms of social faculty which could only have their fruition
outside those limits. If we believe the whole course of
human evolution to be without significance for the Real
Order, if it is a process with a set term of beginning,
maturity and decay, Uke the Ufe powers of the individual,
our whole conception of relative values must be gravely
affected. We shall place a lower estimate on all that
makes for the control of natural conditions by the human
mind, and a higher one on all that leads to resignation and
subnnission. The harmony that we shall seek will be that


IMPLICATIONS i6i

of the Buddhist, founded on the impermanence of things,
rather than that of the Greek, founded on the intrinsic
value, the promise and the hopefuhiess of life. What has
here been said of development is coloured, it must be
admitted, by the latter view, and the justification of this
view cannot be sought within ethics alone. If we cannot
infer the existence of God and immortaUty from the moral
requirement that the virtuous should be rewarded, neither
can we assert that human progress is boundless because
its transitoriness would make our ethical system incom-
plete.

It does not follow that ethical analysis has no light to
throw on the final meaning of experience, that is to say,
on the ultimate structure of ReaUty and the place of the
human mind therein. This light, however, as has been
shown, is to be appreciated only by taking the ethical
consciousness in relation to the general theory of evolution.
To what has been already said on this point I will venture
to add one thing which may be afi^med with confidence.
The conception of a '* law " of progress involving essential
ethical disharmonies may be set down as a misinter-
pretation of the truth. The evolution of new t3^es
through a cruel and anarchic struggle in which the majority
of individuals perish prematurely in each generation is
a process which occurs throughout the organic world, but
can in no genuine sense be called a permanent condition
of progress. On the contrary, in proportion as higher
tj^es come intQ being they emancipate themselves in
greater and greater degree from the struggle, substituting
in ever larger measure the principle of co-operation and
the deliberate organization of life. The ethical principle
of harmony here laid down, far from being antagonistic
to this movement, is merely an expression for the goal
to which it tends. It is the principle of true progress
in evolution become conscious and operating with fuU
sense of its own meaning and aim in the higher organiza-
tion of Ufe. There is no abysmal conflict between ethics
and evolution. The flower of the evolutionary process
is the ethical spirit. The rational harmony contemplated

iz


i62 THE RATIONAL GOOD

here means neither more nor less than the more perfect
adjustment and co-ordination of the permanent forces
that make for betterment in the movement in the world,
and which, slowly gathering vitality as civilization ad-
vances, now DMiinly require a fuller and more adequate
expression to secure to them the ultimate control of the
movement of social Ufe.


INDEX


Altruism, 42, 107
Anticipation, 33, 48
Approval, 123
Airutotle, 19, 99, X04
Art, 1 15
Axioms, 60

Beauty, 70, 116
Bentham, 28
Buddhism, 12, 13
Butler, 138

Certainty, 61, 64

Charity, 13

Christianity, 13, 14, 26, 29

Churches, the, zo, 14, 29

Citizenship, iz2

Cobden, 28

Cognition, 54, 55* 94

Conation, 48, 49, 53. 54» 7^

Conception, zz2

Conduct, 19

Consciousness, 23, 33, X51

Conserwitism (philosophic), 132

Consistency, practical, 130

Control, 35, Chap. II, 44

Democracy, 22

Desire, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 104,

Development, 103, Z05, 107, 108,
111-13, 157

and purpose, 23, 157

harmomous, 107, 141

self-, 108

social, 109
Disharmony, 68, 73, 76, 102, 150,

151
Duties, 134

Egoism, 8x, 82

Emotion, 20, 22, 24. 39, 45, 49* 56,
73. 104
and belief, 25* 27
End, 33. 51


1^


Epictetus, 153
Equality, 28
Etiiical idealism, 141
Evolution, 31, 161
theory of, 27, 37
Experience, 42, 43, 44, 51, 79, 80

Fanaticism, 134

Family, Z22,i23, Z27

Feeling, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 49,
50, 51, 52. 53. 54. 55. 68, 69,
70. 72, 73. 74. 75. 76. 80, 88, 95,
96, 97. 98, 99. 100, zoi, 102,
103. 138, 142

First principles, 78

Fulfilment, Z05, Z13, 114, 118,
Z36

God, 26, 60, 149, 153, 155, 159
Good, 17

the, 65, Chap. IV, 78, 8z, 92, zoi,
"6, 145

the rational, 17, 114, zi6, Z17,
126, 143, Z44

the realized. Chap. VI
Greek philosophy, 1J2
Green, T. H., 137, 14Z
Grounds, 56, 62

Happiness, 117, 138, 139

Harmony, 69-70, 71, 75, 76, 77, 79,
80, 81, 88, 89. 93-6. 98. 99.
106, 108, iio. III, 1 13-15, Ii9f
126, Z28, 129, 135, 142-4, 149,

157

and order, 103
Hedonism, 77, 138
Hegel, 115
Heredity, 91

Humanity, 118, 119, 148, 149, 150,
155. 156

Idea and belief, 28
Ideals, 26, 28
Ideas, 43, 67


164


THE RATIONAL GOOD


Impnlse, ao, 22, 29, 32, 34, 35,
Chap. II, 38-9, 42. 49. 50. 67,

89. 97-103. 129. 142
adjustment of, loi
and idea, 67, 88-9, 92
feeling, 29, 44, 48. 106
radical, 99, 100
Instinct, 31, 32, 35, 37, 39, 91.

92
Intellectnalism, 22, 23, 31, 32
Intelligence, 30, 34, 91
Interconnection of judgments, 57,

61, 62, 63, 64, 78, 79, 94
Intuition, 60

Irrational, the. Chap. Ill, lOi, X07
Irrationalism, 20, ^4

Judgment, 57. 62, 79
immediate, 59, 60
of value, 79
sensdry, 58. 59, 60

Kant, I., 149

Lao Tse, 13
Lecky, W. E. H., 14
Liberalism, 28

philosophic, 133
Liberty, 28
Love, 23, 118. 119

principle of, xii, 157

Bftacdougall, Dr. W., 23

Make-belief, 21

Memory, 43

Method, 62, 63

Biih, 13

Mill, J. S., 137, 139, 140

Mind, 117, 118, 119

unity of, 89
Mind in Evolution, 23
Moral judgment, 73, 74, 75, 83, 84,
86, 87

law, no

obligation, 50, 139, 140, 150

sanctions, 150, 151, 152, 153
Morality, 10, 11, 50, 148

group, 82
Morals in Evolution, 14

Nationality, 133

Objective, 57, 79, 80, 106

ends, 114
Obligation, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87
Organism, 37, 40
Organisation, 127

pv^chic, 49


Particulars, 58

Perfection, 26

Personality, 50, 105, 106, no, in,

137
Perversity, 71

Plato, 26, 46, 72, 90, 103, Z04

Pleasure, 76, 114

and pain, 38, 39. 40. 41. 44. 5«.

53. 54. 55. 68, 71, 72. 96, I37#

Primitive customs, 21, 24, 25, 31,

33.34
Principles, abstract, 22

of similars, 108

practical, 131
Progress, 109, no
Prudence, 85
P^chology, 19, 20

comparative, 30, 40

moral, 124
Psycho-physical p r o ces s , 68» 96
Purpose, 31, 33, 34

Quietism, zii

Rational good. Chap. V., 130

impulse, 80, 94, 129

reconstruction, 134

the, Chap. III., 65, 66, 82
Rationalism, 131
ReaUty, 15, 66, 84, 85, 89, 115, 157,

158, 159. 161
Reason, 19, 22. 29, 31, 33, Chap. Ill,
89. 93. 94. 120, 121

and impulse, 93

practical, 16, 51, 81, 88, 89, 90,

91. 115. 127. 1*9. 148
Reflection, 35
Religion, 51
Repression, no, 125
Right and wrong, 83, 90
Rights, 134
Rousseau, 28
Rusldn, 118

Sacrifice, 135
Science, 15

Self, 50, 97-9, 105, in, 117,
119

-assertion, 15

-evidence, 60, 61

organization of, 102

-realization, 141

-sacrifice, 143
Sensation, 53, 54
Sentiment, 45
SeK relation*, \%%


INDEX


165


Social development, 121, 122

inititations, 32

mind, no

solidarity, 89

structure, 124, 135
Socialism, philosophic, 133
Standard, 9» 10

the rational, 16
Stoic philosophy, 29
Strife and development, 128
Subjective, 56, 79, 106
Superficial, 100
Synthesis, 107

Theories, social, 21
Theory and practice, 26
sodal, 27


Thought, 30
Tradition, 109
Transpersonal, 88, 167
Truth, 57, 61, 64

Utilitarianism, 22, 137, 139, i4e
Universals, 62, 63, 78

Value, 116, 119, 145, 146
Vital capacity, 114
VoUtion, 45, 46, 47

Will. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 137
Wohlgemuth, Dr, 44, 52, 53, 54.

55
Wrong*doing, 125


PKDITKD n ORBAT BRITAIN
BT UNWDt BBOXHB88, UKITBO
PBINTEBS, WOKINO AND LONDON


Psyche's Lamp


A Revaluation of Psychological Principles as

Foundation of all Thought
By ROBERT BRIFFAULT

Author of <*The Making of Hnmanttx"

"Dmy %V9. Its. 6d. ngt.

The author discnsses the fundamental probjems of psychology, the
conception of life, feeling, knowledge, free-will, the unconscious, &c.,
from a new and independent standpoint, and advances several new
theories. The last chapter challenges current views of individuality and
offers a new conception.

Modern Philosophy

By GUIDO DE RUGGIERO

Translatid by a. HOWARD HANNAY, B.A„ and
R. G. COLLINGWOOD, M.A,, F.S.A.

Fellow and Lecturer of Pembroke College, Oxford

DmySvp. iSs.mt.

A comprehensive treatment of the whole development of philosophy in
the last ludf-century, by one of the most brilliant members of the modern
Italian school. The author is not only a man of great learning but an
extremely acute and original critic, and the views which he expresses on
the favourite philosophers of the present day will arouse universal
interest. Alike as history, as criticism and as constructive thought the
book is a remarkable achievement.

History of Psychology

Volumes II and III
Demy Sve. By G. S. BRETT, M.A. i6s. net. ttck.

Elements of Constructive

OU • 1 U -.r By J. S. MACKENZIE, Litt.D,

r nilOSOpny (Camb.) ? Hon. LL.D. (Glasg.)

Emeritus Profcttor of Logic and Philosophy in Univcnity College, Cardiff;
formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge

^tmj %v: Seamd Imfnssm i6s.net.

" The book is sufficient. In its pages is all that the educated man
needs to know or is likely to care to know. The arrangement if
methodical ; the style is crisp and conclusive/'— £4r^'tor^ Times,


Introduction to Mathematical

Philosophy Bv BERTRAND RUSSELL,

DeifTf 8r0. SecMd Edition its. 6d. net.

" Mr. Russell has endeavoured to give, in non-technical language, an
account of his criticism as it affects arithmetic and logic. He has been
remarkably successful." — Athtnceum,

The Analysis of Mind

By BERTRAND RUSSELL, F.R.S.
Demy ivt. [In frefaratm.

Pure Thought

and the Riddle of the Universe

By FRANCIS SEDLAK

Demy %vo, i8/. net.

Consistently with the stand-point of Absolute Idealism, the nature of
the Universe admits of k priori determination. In order to vindicate
this, the Hegelian attitude, the author attempts originally to restate the
whole theme of Hegelian Philosophy. That Hegel's own version leaves
room for slight deviations and many-sided amplifications, comes to notice
at once under the head of Quality, but more particularly under that of
Quantity and most conspicuously under that of Measure. Apart from
the immediate connection of this section with physical and chemical
change, the author finds in it a key to a dialectically constructive treat-
ment di the system of Mathematics.

The Mneme

By Professor RICHARD SEMON

Translated by O. SIMON
Demy Spe, 1 8 /. net.

The mnemic theory of the late Professor Richard Semon attempts
to account for the chain of the various physiological processes without the
aid of any vitalistic principle. It traces the identity of the laws under-
lying all kinds of organic reproduction, be they instinct, individual
memory, ontogeny, or the rhythm of life processes. It also throws
a new light on the problem of the inheritance of acquired characters.

LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN ft UNWIN LIMITED
RUSKIN HOUSE, 40 MUSEUM STREET, W.Cl


r' ► 7


'*V


i:


14 DAY USE

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED

LOAN DEPT.

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or

on the date to which renewed.

Renewed books are sub jea to immediate recall.


TI


^ MAY 31 1968 I 8


M 3 '8 8 - 9


m


Loam det^t


\e>'Occ'


4


5N0V


OCT 1 mi


FEB 10


LD21A-45m-9,'67
(H5067sl0)476B


General Library

University of California

Berkeley


H)


h'eoTVIH


05


]9S0


TA


68 ki)


YtitasK


723959


/■


X


^'


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA UBRARY
